THE business of a Prologue, who can say?
I think it has no business in a Play:
For if the Play be good it need not crave it;
If bad, no Prologue on the Earth can save it.
But you plead Custom for this needless Evil,
Custom! why ay, this Custom is the Devil.
For Custom chiefly all our Ills insures;
'Tis Custom makes Men Knaves, and Women -- s.
You know the Rhyme, if not, let each Man ask
His pretty little Neighbour in a Mask.
Custom makes Actors, Poets keep a pother,
And Custom starves the one, and damns the other.
Custom makes Modern Critics snarle and bite,
And 'tis a very evil Custom makes 'em write.
'Tis Custom brings the Spark to Sylvia's Lap,
Custom undresses him, and Custom gives a Clap.
Why Poets write ill Plays, why Maids miscarry,
Ask why Beaux paint, they'll say 'tis Customary.
Custom makes modern Wives break Marriage Vows,
And Custom damns most Plays at the other House.
'Tis Custom makes our Infant Author fear,
And we plead Custom for your Kindness here.

GREAT Joys and Small Allays consumed the Night, And peeping day proved hateful
to the sight. -- Oh Heavens! The inexpressible Pleasure of being with those we
Love -- yet 'tis dangerous to think upon it, a Man may lose himself in thought,
and commit a Rape by the mere force of Imagination -- Hoa! who waits there? --
My Clothes, Sirrah, -- Has Madam Decoy been here this morning?


No, Sir -- would the Devil had her.


Sure I heard a whispering in the other Room an hour ago; you had not a Wench
there?


Yes faith, Sir; Betty came to wait upon you, -- there's a Letter from her
Mistress.


-- Reads. -- Pox on it, 'tis so ill writ a Conjurer could hardly read it.


Sir, if you please, -- I'm perfectly versed in a Woman's way of writing.


No more on it; I hate such nauseous Stuff: -- Does she wait for an Answer?


Yes, Sir; and expects you'll return it in Person.


Then bring her in. --


Well, I bless my kind Stars, I'm now in a hopeful way towards a Reformation,
and, if Timandra prove kind, I shall have no such unwelcome Guests at my Levee:
A Letter from a Stale Mistress is downright Physic to (...) Mind; it puts us
out of all order, and makes us Sick at the heart; (...) grad^ removes the
Disease, and powerfully works us into a Love (...) of better health. --
Fortune's a Bitch that brought her so soon, or (...) me so long at home; for a
Dun of any kind never fails to spoil a (...) Stomach for his Dinner -- well,
Child, thy business, -- I'm (...) ^ste?

You have read the Letter, I hope, Sir John?


Yes, yes; have you any thing else to say?


M^ Mistress, Sir, is almost dead with grief; your unkindness (she says) will
certainly kill her.


Grief's a Disease of which few Women die.


Sure, Sir John, she's --


Very troublesome.


Gad take me, Sir, had you seen how she looked the other day -- Why, Venus was a
Dowdy to her.


She thought Sir John Winmore had been, --


Still a Fool. But she's mistaken; go home and tell her, I'm grown wise.


Lord, Sir, what do ye mean? is this the Reward of constant Love? her heart was
ever yours; and you know when my Lord Wanton offered her two hundred Guineas
for her Maiden-head five years after she had lost it, she refused the offer.
Well, Sir John, I'll say no more; -- But if you knew her heart --


Come, come, pray thee be gone; I have no Money to lay out upon the repair of
hearts, and without that I know I must inevitably lose Possession; if the young
Lord would have bought a Second hand Maiden-head for a new one, she was a
Stubborn Fool that refused so kind a Customer -- Sirrah, guard my doors better
next morning, or --


Well Sir, a good morning t'ye; you may live a hundred years e're you find such
another kind Fool.


I'm glad she's gone; this usage, I hope, will teach her Mistress not to plague
me with her damned impertinent scrawls for the future. A Whore is the most
miserable Creature on Earth; if she's modest, she starves; if impudent, she's
hated.


Lord, Sir, I hope you are not virtuously in Love with some Phlegmatic Wench
or other, whose cold Constitution of Body make^ her honest in spite of her
self.


If I am, what then?


Why then you are lost, Sir, that's all; irrecoverably lost! Lucy's ruined,
Olivia will want a Friend, Mrs. Francklove a Customer, and Madam Caterer the
support of her Family, -- Hang me, Sir, if I could not weep for the sufferings
of so many sweet young Sinners.


Ay, but if thou knew Timandra. -- Oh! she's charming to a miracle!


Ay, Sir, and so is Lucy.


She's witty.


Well, and so is she.


But above all, she's virtuous.


For want of opportunity (it may be) to be otherwise.


However, I love her for that; the word Virtue has a Noble sound in it that
charms my very Soul.


By your leave, Sir, could you love her now if she were ugly?


I think so, -- yet am not sure if my Passion has reached that height. But
Heaven and Nature seldom Jar in the distribution of their Gifts, and the
outside often tells us what to expect within.


Why faith, Sir, and I have known many a Gentleman mistake his Marks, and
undergo the Penance of a Sweating-Tub for his Sin of Ignorance. Have you
considered the state of Matrimony, the Plague of that dull insipid Partner of
your bed, distinguished by the name of Wife; from that charming easy loving
kind thing, called a Mistress?


I'll have no more of your Instructions; honest Love is a blessing that only
attends generous Spirits; such as thou art, cannot know it. -- Ha, my dear
Bellair! by my hopes of good fortune, I'm glad to see thee, -- What news from
the North?


Why faith I've got none; I rid post to York, dispatch't what business called
me thither, remembered I had left the best of Friends behind me, and returned
for London as soon as possible, to enjoy his Conversation.


Use me then like a Friend, and say, had you no other motive, was't Sir John
Winmore only who brought you so suddenly from the Country?


I must confess the Fair Sex shares the Compliment; I left one here, whose
power exceeds that of the World's mighty Conqueror, her Charms are of force to
drag anew Diogenes from his Tub, teach the rugged old Cynic to abandon dull
Philosophy, contemn his Books, and soothing Contemplations, to read his better
Fortune in her Eyes; no wonder then she has so strong an influence on such a
one as I am -- plain flesh and blood, no Philosopher, and a mere Stranger to
Mortification.


Hang Mortification; the old Doatards, whose Veins are frozen, make use on it to
whip themselves into a good humour.


It was always a mortal Enemy to men of thy Vocation.


Pray thee tell me the Name of this Fair One; I know thee a Rover, and sure
she's very beautiful, to whom thou art become so much a Prisoner.


Beautiful! believe me, I think her something more than Humane.


That may be, for some Women have much of the Old Serpent in 'em.


Her Name, Captain!


She's known by the Name of Flora, younger Daughter to Sir Anthony Addle.


Is she kind?


Hitherto I've found no Arguments for despair; but the Old Man guards this
Jewel with more Eyes than Argus e're possessed; and 'tis no less difficult to see
her, than 'twas for Jason to purchase the Golden Fleece.


I'm glad thou hast towr'd in the open air so long, to perch at last upon so
sweet a prey; I'll help thee to a Medea whose cunning Arts shall blind the old
Dragon.


Sir, Madam Decoy waits in the other Room.


Then tell her I wait for her in this -- This, Captain, is the Enchantress I
mentioned, and she's opportunely come.


What is she of Quality? or an honest plain Mother? that helps a distressed
Brother to a charitable Sister in time of Necessity.


No, she's a Woman of a Modern Employment, by some allow'd for honest, but by
the wise esteemed indeed an honourable Baud; 'tis hard to define her business;
she's one who buys and sells Women, is adored by Girls of sixteen, and is the
Coy-Duck that wheedles Youth into the Trap of Matrimony.


Ay, the Devil take her, Pimps starved ever since Bawds, under a new Name,
engrost the whole Trade of the Nation -- But hang her, I must call her in.


She's of an universal acquaintance, can Judge of a Fortune to a Sixpence,
offers her Service frankly, intrudes her self into any Family, scorns the Title
of her Profession, yet takes the Profit, and in spite of her Modesty, owns her
self a -- Match-maker.


I've heard of these Matrimony Merchants, or Marriage-Brokers -- but stay, she
comes.


Madam, your humble Servant.


Yours, Sir John -- have you any Commands for me? You know I'm always ready to
yield a blind obedience.


Madam, I have no cause to suspect your Friendship; but is't not possible for
me to see the Lady this day?


Truly, Sir, I'll do my endeavour. The Alderman is not at home, and I am going
this Instant to Sir Anthony's.


This Gentleman is my Friend, you'll oblige me in serving him, Sir Anthony's
Youngest Daughter is the Object of his Wishes; you know what follows, and pray,
Madam, accept of this; 'tis good to refresh a bad Memory.


I presume to trouble you, Madam, with the delivery of this Billet-deux; I had
it ready writ, but knew not well how to convey it handsomely to her; The
Postage will show how much I value the favour.


O Dear Sir, your humble Servant; your business shall be done. Well, Sir John,
where shall I send a Note to you in the Afternoon?


At the young Devil.


Well then, dear Gentlemen, adieu: Your affairs shall be managed, as if they
were my own.


Damn the old Jade, how easily she gets her Money; would I were beneath a
Petticoat for the sake of her Employment.


This Woman is Alderman Chollerick's House-keeper, particularly acquainted with
thy Mistress, and her service is no less than absolutely necessary; I know 'tis
beneath a Gentleman, to use the Interest of a ragged old Baud to promote his
Suit; but on the other hand I Remember, that the deluded Rabble ne'er relied
more on the Cant and pretended Prophecies of their Phanatick Tub Preachers,
than some young Women do upon these undermining Cheats -- How now, any body
below?


Yes, Alderman Choleric, Sir; he designs to buy this House, and therefore
must survey your Chamber, your Closet, your Dining-Room, and know their
Longitudes and Latitudes.


He's my Mistress's Uncle, though none of my acquaintance.


Shall I leave you then, Sir John?


No, Stay and see this old Curmudgeon, he Courts Sir Anthony's Eldest Daughter,
and plagues the poor Girl with Love and fire, which, in his Mouth, sounds as
unnaturally, as Divinity in the Mouth of an Atheist, Conscience in that of a
Lawyer, or Plain-dealing in a Courtier. Admit him, Sirrah.


Nay now I remember him, and take this for a Mark of my knowledge; he's
covetous to Excess, passionate even to madness, and has been often cudgeled in
the streets by Beggars, who from his Clothes judged him a Brother Mumper.
Nature made him in a freak, when irresolute what to do, she designed a Monkey,
then a Man, at last, (while she laughed too heartily at the wild medley) he
slipped through her tardy fingers, made of both, and started into a Monster, to
promote her mirth -- But see, he comes.


G'morrow, Gentlemen, g'morrow, -- a good House; a large House, well painted,
yet n^t so very convenient as that one I have in the Country.


We'll invite him to a Glass, that we may divert our selves with the old
Churl.


I suppose his Clothes were made in the first year of the last Century.


Let me see, let me see -- I'll give but five Years purchase for it. 'Tis a dear
ground-rent; but no matter -- g'morrow Gentlemen; g'morrow.


Will you be pleased, Sir, to stay and take --


What, Sir?


A Morning's draught.


Where is it? I'm in haste, look ye, do ye see.


Scourer, quick -- a Bottle -- Come, a health to your Mistress, Sir, -- I
presume you're a Bachelor.


It may be I am, and it may be not; what then, Sir, ha?


I hope you're in a good humour, Sir.


Am I, Sir?


I hope So, Sir; I've the good Fortune to be acquainted with a Relation of
yours.


Have you, Sir, pray who's that? Ha, what is he? look ye --


Your Nephew, Sir Thomas Chollerick's Son.


Very good; then look ye, do ye see, Sir, he's one Rogue, and you're another;
and so farewell and be hanged together --


Ha, ha, ha, 'tis a teasty old Fool.


He's a Fool of the last Age; for no man is wise in this, unless he can save
his own Money, and rook his Neighbours into the Bargain, live miserably, and
deny himself the common necessaries for support of life -- Ha, welcome Ned, thy
Uncle is just now gone out.


Is Melintha kind, Ned?


I have as yet found no ground for just complaint.


I suppose thy Uncle is become thy Rival, his Humour speaks him Jealous.


I hope he won't ride thee out of thy Stirrups?


Faith I am not sure, unless I were once in the Saddle.


And if thou art cast then, 'twill speak thee a weak Horse-man.


Yes, and his Head will suffer for the failings of his Body.


Not so fast, Gentlemen; I presume, Captain, you design to have a Branch off
the same Stock with mine; you run the same hazard too.


I do so; and all of us run a hazard; yet for such a Prize as Flora, who would
not venture? I'd do like the Philosopher, who threw himself into the Sea,
because he could not discover the Cause of its Ebb and Reflux.


You're resolved upon a practical discovery of the Terra La then?


And I have known men ruined by such a Voyage; some of 'em return, 'tis true;
but then they're old e're the day of Jubilee arrive; besides, they look like
Skeletons, or that which once was man.


Ay, and so disfigured, you'll hardly find a Nose upon their Faces, unless they
be of the Goldsmith's making.


That is only when there is a non exeal regnum against him.


And that is when he goes abroad, or travels in a strange Country, without a
pass-port from the Church.


And then 'tis reasonable he should be apprehended and committed.


And then some ignorant Quack is Judge, Jailer, and Executioner; and ten to one
has the Cruelty to keep him eight or nine Weeks on the rack.


And when at liberty again, the poor Malefactor is scarce able to hang
together, he totters on the Streets, as if his bones were linked with wires.


Well, after all, 'tis good be wise; we have shared in the follies of the Age
too long, and 'tis fitting we throw off the burden; thy Sister, Ned, has made
me virtuous, for now I love her, I can be no more a Wanderer -- How, Freelove
here too?


I'm your humble Servant, Sir John; and yours, Captain; you're welcome to Town
-- I drunk a Bottle the other day with our Friend Ned here; but he seems so much
inclined to honesty of late, he's scarce fit for this World.


A good Character, and I'm sorry he can't give the same of you.


Nay, Gentlemen, if you are all become honest, I'm too long amongst ye.


How, Jack, going already!


Some unthinking Citizen will be a Sufferer e're night.


I'm afraid I must bid you farewell.


What the Devil is the matter? is this a day of business?


No faith, I've no Plot to carry on, the Women --


Plot for thee and themselves too; they're always good at intriguing.


Gad, 'tis good they are so; for I'm as dull a Dog sometimes, as any in Europe.


And what's become of the Apothecary's Wife?


She's lost; the cunning Jilt betrayed me to her Husband; for one night as in
Bed they lay, she wept, begged Heaven's pardon, and his, and, unaskt, confessed
her lewd Practices; sighed again, and then swore eternal Loyalty; when at the
same time all this was but a fetch to gain more Credit, and make way for a new
Favourite that supplied my place.


Ha, ha, ha!


Is the Goldsmith's Wife lost too, Jack?


Yes faith, after a Month's Trial, she weighed me in the Scales with (that
massy lump of ill-shap'd Clay) her Husband, and finding I was some grains too
light, she threw me aside.


Would she not take thee for Bullion?


No, your married women are always for ready Coin; and my stock being
exhausted, she would not bargain; for the old Fox, her Husband, could lend but
little to my assistance.


Now thou look red and plump, like a young Chaplain after a good Christmas,
or his Lord's Marriage. I hope thou hast got a Mint of thy own.


A large Treasury may soon be spent, when 'tis in the Hands of an Extravagant
Master.


Then the only way is to diet thy self; for while you run from one Ordinary to
another, you are often obliged to spend double; at home you fall not into
Temptation, and your Cash is only laid out upon things wholly necessary.


Besides, you'll have something to spare for a Friend by the by.


Yes, faith, if I confine my self to one dish at home, I shall be able ^o
provide half a Score of my Neighbours with my latter Meat. And ^is but
reasonable, you know, that when my Appetite is cloyed, I ^ould let it be dealt
out amongst those in want.


Your past Poverty, I find, has taught you too much Charity.


Nay rather his past Thefts make him suspect others.


I confess a Shop-lifter, when posted in a House of his own, has most reason to
be afraid of losing his Goods.


The Case alters very much, Jack.


I own it does; for Husbands are ill Book-keepers, rob them handsomely to
night, and they won't find out the loss next morning.


That's only when they have more lying upon their hands, than they can
conveniently make use of.


Ay, there 'tis, many ruin themselves by too much business, and which is worse,
are obliged to take a great Shop at a venture -- And it may be they have little
or nothing to put into it.


In such cases a discreet Landlord will give an ease.


Nay, the only Relief to be found is, when some young Merchant Sets up in the
half of your Shop, and bears an equal share in the payment of the Rent.


Sir John, I'm afraid we shall not have the Honour of a Proselyte.


No faith, Gentlemen, I'm not to be so easily fettered; and then lye grinning
like a Monkey in a Chain, and gnawing the very Clog to which I'm tied -- Can
you instruct me how or where to find the Uncle of your Mistress? I've a Bill of
forty Pounds upon the Caitiff.


You'll find his House-keeper at Sir Anthony Addle's, she no ^oubt can inform
you, -- Let's see thee after dinner, at our usual ^lace of Rendezvous; you know
the Hour?


I will. -- Your Servant, Gentlemen.


Come, my Friends, I love to tred the Mall once a day, let's to the Park then,
and find a Friend or two more to dine with us.


We wait upon you, Sir John.


Pray thee, Sister, let me laugh, ha, ha, ha? Sure this old Lover's Charms are
of force to create thy mirth! 'Twas a lovely sight, when the greasy old Fox,
caught thee in his Arms, me thought you looked like a Lamb in the paws of a
Wolf, and his bristly Beard very much resembled the back of a Hedge-hog -- Do ye
love him, Sister?


What if I do?


Nothing at all! -- A handsome Bed-fellow only, and clean a as Lamp-Scowrer;
bedaw'd with Oil, the Badge of his Office, -- But you rely upon the Nephew.


He's equally indifferent to me, as the Alderman.


Poor Girl, how cold she is! the young, and the old, the ugly, the handsome, the
rich, and the poor, are all one to her, she makes no difference; though Heaven
and Nature have done it before hand! well, Melintha, believe me, I'm of another
opinion, I love the airy, the brisk, the complaisant; in a word, I love Youth
and Wit; and where those are wanting, a Spark may sit whining at home, writing
dull Songs, and playing the Romantic Lover -- I would laugh at his melancholy
madness.


Would you contribute nothing to the increase of his Distemper?


How?


Smile upon him when he entered, frown when he stays, yet give him a
languishing look at parting; tell all his faults to the next cringing Fool that
supplied his place, his to the third, and so go on, till you had acquainted
every Fop with the Qualities of his Brother, while each of them laughs at the
others weakness, without remembering his own.


No, my Father allows me no such Liberties; and though I were this moment
Mistress of my self and Fortune, I'd bestow both on some desering Youth, whose
Merits exceed his Estate. I hate a reserv'dness equal to a Penance; good
Breeding seldom appears, and good Nature for want of use grows rusty.


What think you of Captain Bellair? Sir Harry Bellair's only Son.


I suppose he bears a Commission, not out of mere love to the Profits of his
Post, but to serve his Prince and Country; and has too much of Honour to be
Mercenary.


He's the gay, the airy, the brisk, the Complaisant, the youthful, witty,
Captain Bellair, this is the Man on whom you would bestow your self -- is't not
so?


Why faith, Sister, I own he's a witty Gentleman; but my Esteem is not yet
arrived to Love; and I praised the Man because --


You love him.


No: because I --


Admire his Shape, his good Air, or the like; -- It must be so.


Why, on my Conscience, without further Ceremony, I believe you've hit the
Mark; for I think I do not -- hate him.


And are not you ashamed, Sister, (when you remember your years) to own a
tenderness for a Man? -- Lord bless me, what will this Age come to?


And truly, Sister, you speak as if you had forgot your self; three years are
now gone since I knew you in Love with Ned Choleric, and how much are you
older than I am? -- About a year and and a half.


Occasion's swift, and bald behind,
Let's catch her as she runs along;
She seldom, seldom turns again,
And leaves us always in the wrong.
Then let's be merry whilst we may,
And drive all careful thoughts away,
For Age will ne'er the loss repay.
Enter Sir Anthony.
Ha! My Father here!

I profess the Girl h^s no Taxes to pay, no Family to provide for, and
therefore may be easy in her Mind. -- Well, Daughter, you have seen my
Neighbour the Alderman, he'll prove no doubt a very good Husband.


A very peaceable one I suppose, for if my Sister is good Natured all day,
he'll repay the Compliment at night, and ne'er disturb her rest, unless it be
with unseasonable coughing.


Well, well, Hussy; he's a saving Man, and may in time be Lord Mayor -- I
warrant him worth forty thousand Pounds --


Why, Sir, forty thousand Pounds? -- 'Tis not above three years since he Swore
himself not worth five, to avoid the Expenses and Trouble of being Sherriff.


Ay that might be, because he was not married -- I did so my self.


Well, Sir, and don't you think it a great Crime? -- Bless me, Sir, -- Perjury.


No matter, no matter for that, I say; 'twas to save Expenses, and shun a
troublesome Office; five hundred Pounds is a great Mulct; the Man is nothing the
worse for that; let me see -- He's passionate and addicted to anger, that's
true; but then again he's a Man of Principles, he can pray an hour, nay upon
occasion (though he was not bred a Scholar) he could hold forth two hours -- He's
old, then by consequence wise, for Experience is the Mother of knowledge, --
He's Covetous, why that's a Virtue, Money is the great Machine by which men
mount to Honour; and he that holds most on it gets soonest up -- But if the Man
were Married, he'd mount every day; Women are the f^rerunners of Preferment,
and an handsome young Wife has exalted many a Citizen, since I can remember.


I believe that, Sir; and if he were my Husband, 'tis ten to one I should
prefer him.


How, Hussy! would you be so impudent? Body o'me, the Girl's become wanton;
make an Alderman a Cuckold! Sincerely speaking, this Language is not to be
suffered, -- Let me come at her.


For shame, Sister -- forbear -- my Father's out of humour.


A Saucy young -- But 'tis no matter, the Man is for you, and I say, think well
of him.


Sir, 'twas always my Study to show my self obedient.


Do so, Sister, Marry this old Trunk of a Man, an Alderman in Effigy; Aesop
compared to him appears graceful; the Monster in the Tempest -- why he's a Beau
to him.


Well, Melintha is riper in years, and Mistress of more discretion; she knows
no doubt better how to weigh his Merit -- In the mean time, your Brother Dick
is arrived from the University, and in a few days he shall be Married to the
Alderman's Niece.


I hope you know of a Husband for me too, Sir.


For you, young Gentlewoman! No, you'll prefer him, forsooth -- you shall live
with me, to save the Charges of a House-keeper, and when I die, that is if you
behave your self like my Daughter, that is virtuously, I'll leave you a Fortune
shall prefer you to Quality.


Delays are dangerous, and I'm resolved to be before hand with ye, if my
Captain do not fail me.


Have you allow'd my Brother a new Suit of fashionable Clothes? Timandra, I
suppose, is not of her Uncle's humour.


You say right; and though the young Man looks handsome in any Clothes, I've sent
my own Taylor, Mr. Filcher, to Long-Lane, with Orders to expend five Pounds,
and in an hour's time to fit them exactly for his Body; Clothes ready made are
cheapest.


Ha, ha, ha, five pounds is little enough to provide him in clean Gloves.


Clean Gloves! why what of Gloves! I've worn these a Year and a half.


Sir there are Young Merchants upon the Exchange who have new ones every day.


That may be, and old Merchants pay for them; a young Fellow appears to day,
gay as the rising Sun, trusted by Fools, and admired by those who know him not;
next day he's gone, and hunted (like a Fox) by deep Scented Bailiffs and
incensed Creditors.


Well, Sir, and if old Merchants pay for them, young Lords and raw Country
Esquires make up the loss.


Ay, 'tis so; we owe that to our Wisdom and Experience; a Merchant would know
no more how to live, if young men had the Art of Management, than a Country
Peddler to officiat as Lord Mayor of this City. But to the point, won't five
pounds equip the young Man?


Fifty may do much, Sir, to out-rig this Man of War for a Love Engagement; he
must have a long Wig.


He must change the fashion of his Sword's Hilt once a Month; in a word, Sir,
he must be a Beau.


Body of me, my Son shall be no Monster; ha, Mistress Decoy!


Sir, The Alderman desires you'd be at home -- Madam --


Body of me, I'm at home just now.


He designs to wait upon your Daughter, when he has dispatch't some affairs
that call him abroad. -- The Capt. dyes for you, and --


Had he no other Gommands?


Yes, Sir, he bid me ask if your Son was come to Town, -- The young Lover must
see you.


Then tell him my Son is come -- Daughter go instantly and prepare for his
reception: 'Tis fitting you appear gay before the man I have designed for your
yoke-fellow.


Lincolns-in-fields.


I must go and look after my business, 'tis dangerous to be negligent; and I
remember half a dozen Lines, made by a City Poet of my acquaintance, which are
very much to the purpose: Care in Affairs brings Wealth, then Friends increase.
From Friendship Power, then from our Labour ease.
Thus to be Rich, is to be Honest too,
(For Men in Power are Just what e're they do:)
Poor Cheats, in wanting Riches lose success;
For Art and Money make all Crimes seem less.



Ha! This may be a prize; let me see, I must think, and quickly too; what? or
whom shall I personate? -- I have it, I'll be religious and ignorant, that
never fails to take with those who know not the Cheats of this Age -- Sir your
humble Servant.


I've a Bill here, Madam, upon Alderman Choleric.


Why, truly, Sir, he is not at home at present; he's gone, I suppose, to the
Meeting-house, to hear Mr. Juggler, a man that has coupl'd many a Pair, and is a
most dexterous Joiner.


What a Devil does the Hag mean? -- Well, Madam, but when shall I find the
Alderman at home?


Indeed, Sir, I cannot be positive; but as I was saying, Mr. Juggler is a sweet
Man, he has married forty of my Friends within these late Years -- Are you a
Bachelor, Sir?


I am, Madam, if you please.


Good Lord, if I please! truly, why not, Sir -- But yet, Sir, you must know I'm
sorry to see so fine a young Gentleman without the Comforts of Matrimony; and
out of pure Love to that handsome Face, which speaks so much of good Nature, I
would help you to a Young Lady of my acquaintance, worth twelve thousand
pounds; chaste as a religious Nun, and innocent as a Dove or Lamb, I'm sure she
would be happy with you.


Madam, I can't flatter my self so far as to believe I merit that Fortune you
offer; Beauty is not easily won, and where 'tis supported by Wealth, the
conquest is much more difficult; yet I own my thanks are due.


O dear Sir, no Complements; I am but a plain ignorant Woman, and a Stranger to
the Tricks of the Town, yet you may safely leave the difficulty of the
Enterprise to my care; for though I appear mean in this dress, I keep good
Company, and have an Interest in a great many fine Ladies. Are you acquainted
with Sir John Winmore?


Yes, Madam,


And is not he a very fine Gentleman? He makes use of my Friendship too. But,
Sir, I am obliged by my hard Fortune to let Gentlemen pay all the Expenses
which happen in carrying on Affairs of this kind.


That was a needless caution, Madam; no man can be so much an Enemy to his own
Interest, as to scruple the payment of a trifle on which his Fortune might
depend.


A credulous easy Fool, I find -- indeed, Sir, you say very well, your Face
speaks a great deal of Wit and Judgment -- I hope you know, Sir, where to find
me; I'm the Alderman's House-keeper.


Madam, I'm now in haste, but in the mean time accept of this small Compliment,
and let me hope you won't forget the business you mentioned concerning the
Young Lady.


O dear Sir, do ye think I could forget such a one as you are? Well, adieu --
So, this is a very lucky morning. Sir John, gave me five Guineas, his Friend
three, and this Gentleman two -- I've no less than four Couple of Lovers, and I
must find a Plot that will bring them all together, without the consent of
their respective Guardians. In the mean time, this last Customer shall prove
the Cully, he's a Coxcomb fitted for my purpose, as appears by his liberality
to a Stranger, and I'm resolved how to bestow him.


To deal with Fools, I find's my surest way,
They all believe, and never fail to pay;
But with the wise my Trade would soon decay.
WELL said! well said! very fine! Twelve a Clock was a seasonable hour! was it,
Sirrah? was it? The Constable was a. Rogue, a Villain, and a Rascal, had he
been diligent in his Employment, you had not lodged in my House last night; the
Counter was more fitting for such a Prodigal -- A Fire kindled so late!
besides, Sirrah, a Man may be undone in farthing Candles; but your Uncle's an
Ass! am I, Sirrah? speak.


Pray, Sir --


I am then a mere Ass in your Books; look ye, Sirrah --


Pray, Sir, hear me with patience.


Patience, Sir?


Yes, Patience, Sir.


Ay, Patience you say, Sir? -- Why, Patience is the virtue of an Ass, Sirrah,
-- but, do ye hear? Come me sooner home at Night, go to Bed in the dark, eat
half-penny Rolls and Cheshire Cheese, and drink small Beer; or expect -- I'll
say no more -- you Rogue, expect my displeasure, and consequently to be turned
out of Doors.


I presume I've spent nothing hitherto but my own; my Father left me --


Your Father, Sirrah? -- Why, what of your Father? Would you abuse the dead,
Sirrah? What have you spent, you Rogue you, -- nothing but your own, very good!
wondrous fine! and when did my Money become yours? -- I'd have you know,
Sirrah, I have maintained you these three Years; I've paid a double price for
your Estate; your own, Sir! -- Why look ye now, ye young Dog you, I've lent you
some thousands upon your Estate, even when your Title was by my Lawyer
disputed, for it's -- You're a Rogue, Sirrah, and there's an end on it


I hope the Law will yet allow my Title good to all I once possessed; you know
too, I ne'er spent half the Interest on it.


Why, what an unlucky Rogue this is! Law, Sirrah? -- Why the Law, you Fool,
will allow nothing. Where's your Money? Ay, where's your Money? But you can
have Law without Money -- You mistake the World, young Man, you must pay for
every thing.


I've heard of a Court of Conscience, Sir.


Conscience! -- Why look ye, Sirrah, what have I to do with Conscience, ha?


Very little it seems, Sir.


Look ye, do ye see now, there's a Villain; is your Uncle a Rogue, Sirrah? --
Has he no Conscience? -- What would this young Rake have proved, if I had not
clipped his Wings betimes?


I confess, Sir, my Folly is now evident to my self, the easiness of my Nature
has betrayed my Interest, and I've armed you with my own Weapons, the better to
secure your Victory.


Why what Weapons, Sirrah? -- I profess he would provoke me, and I could swear
bloody Oaths, did not Religion and good Manners restrain me, -- Look ye,
Friend, look ye now, how long will my good Nature last? -- Not very long -- not
very long, Sirrah.


Why, Sir, I hope you don't think of losing what you ne'er possessed?


I've no good Nature then, you say? Very well! I can suffer your frequent
Extravagancies, see you often drive to the Court-end of the Town, pick up a
black-fac'd Whore, but of a blacket -- Conscience, ramble to a Tavern, get
drunk, and then come home at midnight, swear like a Bully, commend an affected
Fop, protest he delivers himself handsomely, and with a good grace, because he
makes mouths when he speaks; swear this a pretty Gentleman, because he sung a
smutty Catch or two; the other a brave Fellow, because he roared over his Glass;
the fourth witty, because he ridiculed things sacred, or towr'd so high, that
he became unintelligible to himself and others; for Madness, Sirrah, goes often
current for the height of Wit.


It does so, Sir.


Does it, Sirrah? The fifth a man of Judgment, because he was a solemn grave
Fool, spoke little, and understood less. The sixth well bred, because he knew
how to flatter, how to dissemble, how to bow and cringe, and at first meeting
to borrow Money, with the same assurance as if you had been his Cash-keeper, or
at least his intimate Acquaintance for twenty years past. Now, you Rogue, I
have no good Nature! yet can suffer all this -- No! no! not a grain of good
Nature! that's very fine! very fine, indeed!


My Judgment informs me in my choice of Friends.


Well, no matter, Sirrah, Judgment or no Judgment, I'll be revenged; I'll have
a Wife, Sirrah, -- Heirs of my own Body, Sirrah; you shall not o're-rule me or my
House, Sirrah, -- No, you shall not, Sirrah. -- Timandra! -- Niece! -- Timandra!


Now for my share in this Morning Lecture -- Sir.


Ay, Sir, come here Sir, -- Look ye here, I've been telling Ned part of my
Mind, but he's too wise to rely upon the Judgment of his Uncle, he has Wisdom
enough of his own, and so I've done with him; but I should be sorry if thou
were lost too, I always had a kindness for thee, and consulted thy Interest as
my own.


So it seems, Sir, and judged my Fortune yours.


How! How! This Rogue's Madness has infected her, I profess ingeniously, he has
debauched her Nature, and o're-turn'd her Obedience, -- But do ye see, young
Baggage, no words! no words! -- I'm your Uncle, nay more, -- I'm Master of your
Fortune.


Sir, I'm sensible of your Power, of which that last Article is the greatest
prop.


No matter! Look ye, I've resolved on a Match between you and my Friend Sir
Anthony's Son, 'tis a virtuous Youth, the Hier of a Rich rather, bend your
stiffn'd Inclinations, and comply with my Commands -- do ye see, expect no mercy
from me else; study how to receive him according to his Merit, for he will be
here this Afternoon -- In the mean time, Sirrah, I'll be your Enemy -- I will,
Sirrah, -- I know how to be revenged -- Sir Anthony's Daughter -- do ye hear
that, Sirrah? -- I'll have a Wife, I warrant you -- A Rogue -- a --


Sir, I've been an Ear-witness of your Uncle's Unkindness, and am sorry the old
Gentleman should be so much a Slave to his Passions; but I hope Fortune will be
more your Friend than hitherto she has been.


Heaven grant it may be so!


He's gone now to Sir Anthony's, to court Melintha; I've plumbed the depths of
that young Lady's Heart, and though she appears entirely devoted to Heaven, yet
she has that esteem for a handsome Young Man, which those of her Years can
hardly avoid: Her Father's Humour keeps her uneasy at home; your Uncle's
Addresses are still more troublesome; and to shun these two Plagues, she'll run
into the Arms of some kind Deliverer: You may be the happy Man, and if you'll
rely upon my Conduct and Skill, the business is already half perfected.


If you assist me in this, you confirm me yours; believe me, 'tis a Service I
never can forget; propose therefore a Reward, and 'tis given as soon as asked.


'Tis not reasonable I should play the Soldier, and take Money e're I actually
serve; but truly I always thought it ill Manners to refuse what any Gentleman
offers; 'tis the duty of poor People to be obedient to their Commands,
especially in such Cases as these; but your business shall be the end of all my
Labours.


Thank ye, Madam, remember my good or bad Fortune depends upon your management.


Where was it you saw Sir John?


At his Lodgings: I stole thither when your Uncle was abroad.


And did he remember Timandra?


Remember you! Why truly he remembers nothing else, he drank your health,
sighed when he pronounced your Name, swore imperfect Oaths, grew silent on a
sudden, and as suddenly started into the other Extreme; I've a Plot, which (if
it succeed) will produce Effects answerable to all your Wishes, -- Really and
fairly speaking, he's a notable Gentleman, he must see you this Afternoon, for
'tis impossible he should live a whole day without you.


I'm obliged to him for his good opinion; but inform me concerning my new
Lover, Sir Anthony's Son.


The Squire, Madam, very much resembles Sancho Pancha in his Shapes, and Don
Quixote in his Intellects; Heaven I hope has designed you, Madam, a better
Husband; for Sir John Winmore (if any man can) well deserves your Love. That
assurance your Uncle has of my Fidelity, gives me an Opportunity of being
instrumental in promoting your mutual Happiness; 'tis in this, as in all other
Affairs, the Weakness of one creates the Power of another.


Your kindness so far exceeds my merit, 'tis in vain to offer payment in words,
and my Circumstances are such, as deny me the liberty of expressing my
Gratitude handsomely: but accept of these few Sentences, and let their
Eloquence atone for the defects of mine.


Truly, Madam, you are charmingly eloquent, and if you always speak so, half
the Beaus in Town would die for you; pardon my abrupt departure, but I am
obliged by my Promise to manage an Affair for a Gentleman that requires
expedition, -- Adieu, Madam. -- Matchmaking is a rare Employment, a Counsellor
takes a Fee from one of the Parties, and I from both; I owe it all to that
mighty Passion Love, that turns the grave Philosopher to Fool, and makes the
saving Wise a spendthrift Ass.


How unfortunate are those whose Stars condemn them to a dependence on those
they hate! this is doubly mine, my nearest Relation is my greatest Enemy, and I
am forced to purchase Liberty from those I scorn, dissemble all my wrongs, and
feign content; I am ignorant of my Lover's real Thoughts, perhaps his Passion
is no more than seign'd, and all his Courtship an effect of Interest; yet to
ease my self from present torment, I think him all Love and Justice, and am
resolved to run the risque of a new Danger yet unknown, to shun immediate ruin.


Happy are those who live and love in Fields,
And seek no more than what a Garden yields;
There Friends ne'er plot to rob them of their own,
No quirking Tricks, or fubtle Arts are known,
And in their Loves blessed Innocence is shown.
Here no such Joys are found, for every Maid
Is lewd or ugly, if to Wants betrayed;
Interest has banished Love, Wealth Beauty gives,
And she's still virtuous, who with Grandeur lives.
Well, and you found Sir John at home?


Yes, Madam; and how do ye think he received your Letter?


Coldly, it may be.


Yes faith, as coldly as a rich Lawyer does his poor Client, and shrugged up
his Shoulders, like a lazy Parson raised from his warm Bed in a snowy night, to
pray with a dying Beggar.


And is he so very indifferent grown? Sure thou art not in earnest?


He ne'er asked me (as he used to do) if his Lucy was in sickness or in health,
asleep or awake; and your Name seemed as hateful to him, as a Quondam Companion
to an upstart Favourite, whose Poverty puts him in mind of his own, and tells
him he grew up from the Dunghill; I forgot nothing a dutiful Servant ought to
have said in such a case; 'twas all in vain, all in vain, Madam; 'twas
preaching Philosophy to the Winds, and attempting by Rhetoric to persuade the
roaring Billows to a calm; we are both ruined, 'tis as easy to reconcile the
jarring Elements, as to recall his fugitive Heart.


Then may I from this moment be ugly as a Monster, Despised by all, and shunned
by every Friend, Contemned by those on whom I placed my Love, And be at last a
Burden to my self, Let me still remember all my pleasures past, That when
compared to this unhappy state, I may augment the number of my Tears.


So, so, this is a sweet comfort, and repays Service past.


Let others from my ruin learn to live, And when they see me naked on the
Shore, Exposed to all the Billows of Contempt, And gazed upon by Strangers from
afar, Let them remember I was once like them, Free from gross faults, and
sailed over swelling Tides, But that my folly dashed me into wreck.


For shame, Madam, so many Tears for one Man? half of that grief was enough for
the whole Sex.


Ah! let me thus consume my years in pain, Let joy be ever banished from my
Breast, No thoughts of Love shall ever enter here.


Pray read this Letter, Madam, 'tis from you Friend Decoy.


Cease, cruel Maid, and let me feel the weight Of this misfortune, which my
faults have brought; Excess of Grief a certain Pleasure gives, And stuns the
weary Soul into a Lethargy.


Pray, Madam, read it; faith I'll cry else, for company's sake.


Speak to Mount Aetna, bid the Sulphur freeze, And turn its fiery Matter into
Ice, Suspend its Motion, and forget its Heat;

The Sparkling Flames much sooner shall obey, Than I can know a respite from my
Grief -- But to please thee, I'll read it.

Madam,

This is to inform you -- ready to serve you -- opportunity -- Mr. Freelove --
Estate 15 hund. yearly -- prepare for his reception -- no Father to over-awe
him -- Love more than Interest -- Speedily Married -- repay the loss of your
old Lover.

Well, Betty, has Mistress Fashion the Manto-maker brought home my new Gown?
Change the Toilet, make up my last lac'd-head suit; Do I look charmingly to
day? are my Eyes in Arms? and may I expect a Conquest? I'm resolved to be
merry, and forget my loss.


Ha, ha, ha; hang me if I don't begin in earnest to believe the Story of the
Ephesian Matron; Good Lord! what weak Creatures we Women are? Why, Madam, we
both wept two minutes ago, and now we are both pleased again.


'Tis sitting it should be so; for Souls subject to passion, cannot be
strangers to tenderness; a Woman should be easie-natur'd, and not bigoted to
any Principle.


Why faith, Madam, you're in the right; let's in and prepare for the arrival of
this new and potent Lover; 'Gad I hope he has a handsome Servant, I have a
strange inclination this Morning to the State of Matrimony, for Executions
always put me in mind of Mortality.


And the losss of Sir John tells me, I ought to be no more what I have been; I
resolve to play honest Game for the future, and that's both the safest and the
surest course to happiness; but 'Tis strange that Precepts seldom reach the
Heart,
Though oft repeated, and expressed with Art;
Nature to Virtue rearely leads the Mind,
Nor was our Judgment for our Guide designed:
Else why so many Laws to rule the Will,
And teach us how to shun bewitching Ill?
Nothing draws back the Soul that wildly roams,
Like adverse Fortune that unlooked for comes.



I profess these Taylors are great Rogues, 'tis hard to know what to make of
'em; they can't endure labour, because their Employment is at best but
idleness; they ne'er make good Soldiers, for generally speaking they are all
Cowards; why truly they are good at nothing but Cheating, they invent so many
Fashions, and have so many tricks to wheedle men out of their Money, Silk,
Buttons, Binding, Buckrum, Canvass, and so forth, that 'tis but reasonable
sometimes to clip half a yard from their Bills; sincerely, I could rail at the
Knaves these eight days -- why, body o'me, Mr. Filsher has spoiled the Lad's
Coat, he looks like a Cock stripped of all his Feathers.


Uds so! or one of the University with his Gown pulled over his Ears, but Satis
est quod Sufficit, that is to say, Sir Father, the Coat is long enough, since
the Fashion has turned them into Doublets.


Sure Timandra must admire that Shape, that Air, and that innocent honest Face.


Why truly the young Man has something of the old World in his Countenance, he
looks like the last Age, a down-right Man, and speaks as he thinks, which
now-a-days is reputed madness. But, come Dick, let me see how you will make
your Court to the Lady, how Salute her. I mean, in a word, let me see how you
can make your Honours, as the modern men of Fashion word it. Flora shall be
Timandra.


Why thus, Sir Father, I pull off my Hat, thus I make a Leg, and by Jupiter
thus I kiss.


Faugh, Brother, what a way there is, -- for shame.


Well that's no matter; stand up Dick, look modest; So! So! hold up your Head,
set out your Breast, hold in your Breath; now observe how I salute you, I saw
my Lord Mayor salute his Lady so, and he has been thrice at the Royal Levee;
thus I pull off my Hat; thus I bow; now by your leave, fair Lady -- Now what
thinks thou on it?


Ha, ha, ha! Why faith, Sir, you have mended the matter very little, that's the
old Elizabeth way; I'm sorry I am not a Man, I should make a Courtly Young
fellow fit for the Ladies.


Dick do as I have done, no matter for Apish tricks, they were invented by airy
Fools, and practised by none of the wisest to this very day.


Why look ye, Sir Father, 'tis a saying in the University, Contraria juxta se
posita majis illucescunt, if there were no Fools, Wit would ne'er be esteemed,
if no spend thrifts, a savingman would not be called virtuous; the Deformities
of one man set off the Beauties of another! and that's the plain English on it.


I'm afraid, Sir, you've spoiled a good Philosopher, 'twas a pity he had not
stayed at the University; for ought I know, he remembers his Logicks better
than his Creed.


Creed! do ye see, Sir Father, -- a great deal better; for we often forget that,
when we study Logicks: I can tell you how many Predicaments there are, how many
sorts of Syllogisms, what's Ens rationis, and Universal a part rei, as
readily as a Carman Counts his Faggots, ay, and make Sophisms as fast as a Boy
would throw Peas into his Mouth.


Look ye now, Daughter, there's a Young-man for ye, I profess sincerely, the
Lad has wounderful parts, and I believe it would be hard to find me such another
between Temple-barr and Aldgate; nay verily, I suppose, I might have included
the other end of the Town, for Courtiers are often great Dunces, but hide their
Ignorance with a Natural stock of Impudence.


By Ovid, so they do.


Yet after all, when I was a Young-man, these things were as familiar to me as
my Name, and I could have told you at first sight, if Entionis was a Grecian or
a Roman Captain, and how many Battles he won, and Sophims and Solims were
always in my mouth, sleeping or w^king; but time, and much business, has
oppressed my Memory -- Age is the Worm of Judgment, that gnaws so hard, it
grinds the wood to nothing.


I thought you had ne'er been at the University, Sir!


Ay, that's true, that's true. -- But I have read tho, hussy.


Why, by Mercury, Sir Father, you understand very little; though a Grecian or a
Roman Captain, quotha! -- look ye now -- but stay -- who's this.


A rogue, -- ay a Rogue -- I'll have a Wife, a Dog, a Villain, a Puppy, an Ass;
you should have your bones broke, Sirrah -- But no matter, I'll be revenged,
I'll have Heirs of my own to enjoy my Estate, not one of my Relations shall
ever possess a Shilling on it, do ye hear that, Sirrah? do ye hear that?


What's the matter, Sir Father, with the old mad Fellow? He grumbles and
grunts, as if he had the Colic, or the great Devil in's Guts, and frisks and
jumps. --


That's your Uncle, and Brother that is to be; the Man no doubt meditates on
some of Mr. Jugler's Sermons.


My Sister is the Text, I suppose, and he designs to enlarge upon her very
shortly.


Your Estate, Friend! -- very well! -- very well! -- why look ye now, that's
nothing; I'm in possession -- Ay, Sir, but it is mine nevertheless -- Is it,
Sirrah? is it? -- Yes Sir -- you lye, Sir, -- Ay, but the Law shall prove the
truth on it -- shall it? -- very fine! I'll Law you, you Dog you, I will, with a
Pax t'ye, Do ye feel that, Sirrah? Law, quotha! do ye feel that, you Rogue, you
Rake, you Son of -- Gad forgive me, what was I going to say?


Truly the Man is strangely agitated, and deep in thought, he has not observed
us all this while.


Hush, Sir, he's at his Soliloquies, I'm informed 'tis his common practice.


You incorrigible Rogue, you Dunce; you Milk-sop, you Sheep's-face -- ' tis
more than I am able to bear; is it, Sirrah? say you so? Yes Sir, it shakes my
Nature, and has banished Duty from my Breast, I'll do my self Justice -- Will
you, will you, Sirrah? Will you lift your Arm against your Uncle? No sure, you
Dog you, you won't; but I shall be before hand with ye; do ye feel the weight of
that again, do ye, Sirrah? I'll handle you with the same hands I use towards my
self, but a little more roughly -- I will, you Rogue you, -- Ha! good morrow,
Sir, good morrow.


Good morrow, Neighbour, good morrow; Flora, call your Sister to me. -- Dick
look Spruce, he's your Mistress's Uncle.


Ay, Sir Father, ay.


This is my son, Neighbour Cbollerick, newly arrived from the University.


Very good, Sir.


Dick, Salute the Uncle of your Mistress.


Why, Sir Father, do ye think I'll kiss this mouldy piece of Antiquity, that
Mummy transported from Egypt, or some Eastern Country, and wafted about from
House to House by the wind within him; -- not I, by Aristotle, Sir Father.


Take him by the hand, Neighbour, the Young-man is bashful, but your Niece will
nevertheless find him a Youth of good Parts.


Lend me your Fist, young Gentleman --


but where's your Daughter? I came to see her, not to fool away time, which is
so precious; for we have undermining Rogues about us.

I've sent for her, -- ay, and here she is.


Daughter, my Neighbour honours you with his best Affections; and 'tis my
Command, you give him a suitable reception.

Sir, I forget not to weigh his Merit; I think him Young and handsome too, if
you say he's such.


Heavens! how handsomely she dissembles! but so it is, your modest, reserved,
thinking Creatures, always Plot best, they wear a double Face, seem one thing,
and design another?


Now look ye, do ye see, Madam, your Honourable Father and I have been upon some
terms about a Match between you and my self; he dislikes not the Propositions
I've made him, and is resolved to double the Knot of this Alliance, by marrying
your Brother to my Niece; now, if you relish the motion, 'tis a bargain.


Sir, my Father no doubt has consulted my interest, and I have that respect for
you, which your Virtues exact even from your Enemies.


Body of me, 'tis an obedient Girl.


Why, Sir Father, what means all this? I hope you don't design my Sister should
marry this old Spawn of a --


Mum, Dick, mum; he's Rich.


But, by Socrates, he is not handsome.


No matter, he has a wealthy Niece, Boy, and thou may come to ride in thy
Coach.


Uds so, that's fine, ride in my Coach! then she shall have him, by Hercules --
Sir, my Sister has e're now I suppose opened the Gates of her heart, that have
been so long barricaded to the God of Love, and given admittance to the Forces
of your Charms, who have entered with bag and baggage.


Ingeniously, the Lad speaks like an Oracle; Joy of my heart, if thou plead
so well for thy self with Timandra, the Cause is won.


The Young-man has sense, and knows how to make use on it; would the Rogue my
Nephew were like him.


I should be heartily sorry for it.


The Monkey and the Bear, or the old Calf doting on the young; would I had
their Pictures drawn, the Alderman would make a handsome piece.


Come, Sir, make up to her; uds so you shall marry her, her Modesty and Silence
are Signa Naturalia of her Consent and good-liking.


Would this Young Fool were in the Indies, he unmans the old People, and fills
their Heads with Chimera's and Windmils, to a degree of madness.


Why, look ye now, Madam, as to what your learned Brother says, about the
Signaralia of your good-liking, I know not; but this I know, I have a kindness
and a love for You, and am willing to join hands with you, if your Honourable
Father and you are both pleased; for I intend to purchase a House in
Lincolns-Inn-Fields, for they say that's a very good Air; and I am not so old,
but I may have Heirs.


The old Stag cast Horns three years ago; (for so long 'tis since his Wife
died) yet once again longs to have the burden renewed, scorns, to be half a
Citizen, and thinks his Head unlike his Neighbours!


Why truly I'm pleased, so your Niece can love my Son.


Love him? -- Why look ye now, she shall -- she will -- she must -- love him --
I'll make the Baggage dote upon him. -- I protest I had almost forgot my self,
my Passion often has the ascendant of my Judgment, but we are all men and
subject to Infirmities -- may I kiss you, Fair Lady -- look ye, Madam, may I
take another, -- oh, what a sweet Breath there was, a sustained Lip, and every thing
so very -- oh -- my lovely young Rosamond, my Cassandra, my -- my --


Pray, Sir, don't squeeze my hand thus; just so a rugg'd Farmer grasps his
Plow.


By Aristotle, he designs to Plow upon your Ground, Sister.


Pray, Flora, relieve me from this insupportable Plague.


You see, Sir, how he handles the Text, I knew what his Meditations would come
to, he scarce has the patience to stay till he's licensed by Ecclesiastic
Authority, but would be in the Pulpit ex tempore.


Mum, Hussy, the Man knows how to behave himself.


Uds so, this is a fine Hilt, finer than my Sir Father's old Oliverian Tilter;
let me see, let me see, by Mars a fine Blade too, why I could fight like
Aeneas, and kill twenty such Pimps as Turnus; the Art of making Arms is very
fine, would I had those Vulcan made for the sturdy Son of that impudent Whore
Venus, when the Poet Sings, Illi inter sese multa vi brachia tollunt. So, so, a
very good Blade.


I am not very old, fair Lady, I can walk like my Neighbours, I go to the
Exchange every day on foot; and last week, when my Friend Mr. Roundhead's
Daughter was Married, I frisk'd and jumped, -- Why I can shake a Leg, Madam,
very nimbly upon occasion, so, -- and so -- For I learnt to dance at thirty
years of Age, to please my Wife whom I then Courted -- Ha! -- Oh! -- What's the
matter with the young Man -- Oh -- Farewell Sir Anthony, Good buoy, Madam, I'm
dang'rously ill on a sudden, but I'll wait upon you when my fit is over, -- A
Pox on the young Rogue, the glances of his naked Sword have cast me into an
Ague.


Dick, Dick, sincerely speaking, Dick, I'm sorry for what I see, Body o'me,
you've frighted the Alderman; I know he mortally hates to look upon shining
Steel, ever since a drunken Bully run him throw the Lungs for a false Arrest at
his instance; put up, Dick, put up; ingeniously I'm heartily vexed, 'twas an
unluky accident, but come along with me, in the Afternoon you shall beg his
pardon, when you wait upon your Mistress.


Well, Sister, and how did the old Fellow kiss -- Ha, ha, -- was it not a lucky
Adventure, that the young Fool chanced to draw his Sword! you know now, if you
lose the Nephew, how to frighten the Uncle into good Nature.


Is this a fit time to make reflections, Flora! 'tis dangerous sporting with
our ruin.


Lord, Sister, what do ye mean? would ye have me melancholy?


No, but let's into my Chamber, and there examine our Circumstances; accidents
unseen may happen (witness the relief I just now obtained) and 'tis necessary
we should lay down a form of management, that every trifle may not put us to a
nonplus -- you know we must see our Lovers this Evening.


Come, Melintha, let no Fears distract your easy Soul, Love ^all inspire
Cunning, besides Necessity has often wit begot,
And racked Man's lazy Soul to form a Plot;
Roused up its sleepy Powers, and taught it how
To encounter danger, and to conquer too.
But when 'tis to a subtle Woman known,
Much more of Art, and Success too is shown.



CAptain, a Health to your Mistress, Cares are from Love inseparable, Wine for
a while may bury half our Pains, let's therefore have a short reprieve from
trouble.


I own the force of the generous Grape, and thought it once omnipotent, it
turns a man inside out, and of a close-minded intriguing Fellow makes a babbling
Fool; it can banish all thoughts of business, but Love still keeps the Field;
'tis a powerful Passion, and those to whom Years and Experience in the World
have justly acquired the name of prudent, are baffled from their surly Precepts
of rigid gravity, and forced to sigh and love, nay dote as we do.


I would not be again at liberty for an Empire; 'tis but a vain boast and dream
of Pageantry! we enjoy the freedom of Salvages, ramble wildly from place to
place, and seek for Shelter beneath the Shade of some deluding Jilt, who when a
Storm approaches flies away, and leaves us naked to the angry Heavens. There's
a Happiness in honest Love, which fickle Wanderers scorn, because they know it
not.


I'm your humble Servant, Gentlemen -- I suppose I've kept my hour.


Thou hast done so, but pray thee tell me, Feeelove, (for Love was again the
subject of our last Discourse) hast thou in earnest kept thy Freedom too? Art
thou not become a virtuous Lover? And weary of thy past Freedom (where every
Port was thy home) now resolved to run with speed to Land, and take the
protection of the Church, that for the future thou may be a lawful Trader in
the state of Love?


I confess I am yet a Pirate, I scour the Seas, fight, and am sometimes
wounded; I encounter Fire-ships and fair Enemies with equal Ardour, but seldom
retire a Conqueror.


On my Conscience I believe thee.


However, Gentlemen, I'm now in a fair way towards a Peace, to morrow Morning I
present my self before my Judge, if she accept my Service I'll enter into Pay,
and list my self a Member of the Matrimonial Commonwealth.


In earnest, Jack? Art thou firmly resolved to abandon thy wonted Freedom, thy
darling Sins, the Follies of thy Youth, and take the Pen^ance of a Wife to
expiate thy Guilt?


What canting Fool has wheedled thee from thy first Principles, and turned the
Perspective, showed thee a distant Happiness at hand, and diminished the
present Bliss? Sure thou won't be so easily fettered!


Believe me, I'm sorry thou keep not better Company, or that thy easy
Nature should be debauched with vicious Morals; why Marriage is a mere
drudgery, the allay of all those Pleasure Life bestows, the reverse of Liberty,
and a Wife the badge of Slavery.


'Tis a promised Heaven ne'er found, a Fire that glides before the credulous
Traveller, leads him from his Road with a show of Light, and leaves him at last
to mourn his Folly in the dark.


'Tis the Lure that serves to cheat an easy Fool,
And stop his happier flights through yielding Air.
A while he soars aloft, and spreads his Wings,
Disdains the Earth below him, and his Keeper;
Proud of his Liberty he flies at all,
And feeds with pleasure on the panting Prey:
But viewing unawares the artful Cheat,
He quits the Air, and fastens on his Ruin.
The gaudy Feathers promised solid Joys,
But were designed at first by subtle Knaves,
To cheat him of his Freedom and his Pleasure.

Gentlemen, you surprise me! I thought to have found you all Penitents,
confessing to one another the madness of past Years, and designing a new course
of Life; but I've judged amiss, and had too much of Charity for my Neighbours;
yet to show myself a good Christian still, I'll own my Inclinations to Virtue,
and surrounded with Enemies, affirm 'tis Wisdom to marry, and convenient both
for the Body and the Estate.


Hast thou spoke the Sentiments of thy Heart?


Yes, by my hopes of better Fortune than hitherto I've known.


Let me then embrace thee. What we said was only designed to try thy Virtue, no
Maxims of ours; and by my hopes of success thou art dear to me as a Brother.


You are of our Society, Freelove.


One of Virtue's Proselytes, Jack.


Gentlemen, I'm glad you are not what at first your Words seemed to persuade,
and that my Judgment, since I saw you, informed me how to choose a way of
living, commended by men of so much Prudence and Merit.


Where has thy wandering Heart fixed it self? is she beautiful? can my Friendship
be of use? for believe me I'll be proud to serve thee.


I have not yet seen her, but am told by others she's handsome to a Miracle,
witty beyond belief, and of a Fortune sufficient to banish want for ever from
my Doors.


Her Name.


Luscinda. My Modesty and Interest are at wars, the last commands me to her,
and the first tells me my Equipage agrees not with my Pretensions; I've Money
too, yet cannot find a Servant.


I have one at your Service, he's a troublesome unmannerly Rogue, and sometimes
possessed with the Spirit of Contradiction, but of undoubted honesty.


Necessity shall excuse his faults; I'm obliged t'ye, Captain, for this favour,
and shall make it my study to deserve and re-pay it.


I'm fortunate to my Wish in having the opportunity of showing that esteem I
bear thee; thou hast pursued extravagant Courses hitherto, and I rejoice at thy
better Inclinations -- hoa -- who waits there?


Do ye call, Gentlemen?


My Footman.


Yes, Sir.


Come here, Willie.


Whaut waud ye say? tell, me, Sir.


Wait upon this Gentleman; serve him honestly, and execute his Commands with
that submission you ever showed to mine.


Aun whau will pay me for my pains, Sir?


Sirrah -- you shall be paid.


Be me Saul I will seir him thaun aus weil as ever he was seir'd in his days,
aun gin he hey mean till a bonny Lass -- ye ken whaut I men, Sir -- I caun get
her brauly for him; Ise staurt her aus soon aus our Meast Johoan waud staurt
his Text whun he has preacht a heal year upon it.


I had these two Letters for you, Gentlemen.


Hear ye me; Me frein, hey ye gotten any thing for me deel be fain; O me gin, I
haud an Letter saun I caume out o me own Kintrey; what think ye o thaut now?


They will -- Lincolns-Inn-Walks -- half an hour -- your friend with you --
yours to command -- Bellair, this Letter concerns thee too.


Gentlemen, you are busy, and I have already told you how I am to be employed
-- Come along, Sirrah.


Sirrau me nea Sirraus, Sir; the Minister bauptized me Wullie Beetlehead, a
Scotlaund-Man.


You Rogue, did the Parson give you all these Names? Willie, honest Willie,
come along Willie.


Ay Sir, whaun I hey tasted the Wine, aun drunken tea yer good health.


This is insufferable Ignorance.


Down stairs ye mangee Rake -- use him thus, and then expect the effects of
good breeding from him.


Wung whaut waud the maun be aut, my arse is na made of Wainscoat, baut gin I
haud ye -- I ken whaur, Sir -- I soud mauke your head as sauft aus an --


In the Walks -- your Sister along -- Sir Jo. Winmore -- Sir A^thony's Son with
her -- weary of his Company -- Come, Gentlemen, let's fly where Love commands,
and so much Beauty waits.


I feel unusual Motions at my heart, 'tis hard to say -- between two different
Passions which of them reigns with greatest Power. Love and Fear divide my
Soul, and whirl my Blood through this disordered frame.


I'i take care to comfort you with Timandra's Presence; I hope, Capt. you have
no such Love-qualms at your heart.


No faith, I go to find my Mistress with that cheerfulness with which I've
encountered my Enemies when Martial heat and honour spurred me on.


Courage in Love has often brought success;
Levelled the Way for wish'd-for Happiness.
The Canting, Whining Fool, young Maids despise,
Whose only Courtship in his Silence lies;
Love, like our Wine, should sparkle in our Eyes.
WEll, Young man, you are very welcome; my Niece shall receive you like the Son
of Sir Anthony Addle.


Uds so, I like that Speech very well -- but by Ovid I know not what to say to
her; for though, upon occasion, I can let my Sir-father see my Parts, and that
his Money is well bestowed upon me in the University, yet to speak to a young
Lady, and a Stranger too -- Why, I can no more do it, than go to bed without my
Supper, or say my Prayers at night without falling asleep.


Come, come, no matter for that, the Woman knows your Errand: bear up to her
briskly, the baggage loves a confident thundering Lover, that deal his Oaths by
dozens.


A thundering Lover, that deals his Oaths by dozens -- By Priam I'll fit her
for that: Hem -- hem -- let me see -- ay, I have it -- Mum Dick Jupiter --
Madam -- by Ovid I've almost forget my Complement -- but stay, I must salute
her first -- Madam, let the Cannon of my Sighs batter down the Walls of your
Resolutions, that my Love may ride in Triumph through the Streets of your
heart, and display the Colours of my sincere affections over the -- Uds so, my
Memory will betray me -- over the -- why Madam -- why Madam, over your Beauty
-- I'm a Beau.


An Eloquent declaration of Love I must confess, and spoke like a Man just
arrived from the Siege of Namure.


Uds so, Madam, why I came but to Town last night, or this morning early from
the University, where we only fight for bloody Noses, or so, and scale the
Walls of a stately Pie -- 'tis a handsome Coat.


And were your Clothes made at the University? Sir, you look like a handsome
Gentleman.


No, Madam, my honourable Sir-father brought them ready-made in Long-Lane; he's
a very Wise man, Madam, though I say it that should not say it; and yet I know no
reason why a man may not commend the Wisdom of his own Father.


I presume he may be wise, for he has dealt little of his Wilt to his Son.


O Lord, O Lord, your Ladyship is merry with your humble Servant -- But uds so,
I forget my thundering Complements: Madam, my heart (like Tinder) took fire
from -- what? -- took fire from the first sparkle your fair Eyes darted upon
me; by this Light I love ye; by this Right-hand I dote upon ye; by Plato and
Aristotle -- I dye for ye, and -- the Waistcoat too is of an exact length.


Dye for me, Sir! Sure ye would not rob the World of its best Jewel!


Uds so, that's true, I'm handsome, and the World is pleased to esteem me, and
so forth: but as I was saying, Madam, dye for ye -- why, I'd fight for ye, and
that's more, if ye consider I'm a Beau.


How, Sir! would Beaus rather dye than sight?


Yes, Madam, he would rather be kicked to death twenty times, than run to death
with a small Sword once; but by Juno I'll box over a Hat with Samson for ye;
and 'tis a bloody dog, Madam, I warrant him; why, he c^n handle a Drey-horse
like a Paper-kite; I can dance too, Madam, Tal-la-ra, ta-fa-la --


Sister --


Lincolns-Inn-Fields! by Vulcan I heard that.


And do ye feel that? Imprimis, So much for ill manners. Ditto, to cure your
madness.


Uds so, your humble Servant, Sir; but by Ovid I don't love your Bills, though of
few Articles; beat a Knight's Son! Uds so, the King shall hear on it, that he
shall.


Are Sir Anthony's Daughters there?


Yes, I just now came from them, after my promise to return in six minutes.


Lead the way then, I'll follow -- your humble Servant Sir, I hope you'll
easily pardon that Affront the Gentleman put upon you; 'twas but a Jest, and
Beaus, such as you are, commonly have such pretty Jests put upon them.


Have they? Uds so, I'll never be a Beau again then; by Pan I courted very
handsomely till that Rascal came in; I never shall forget his Impudence; I've a
good mind now to send him a Challenge that I may cut his Throat civilly, like a
modern Christian: but hang that Thought, Tyburn stares me in the face already;
my Sir-father shall see him find some hundreds of pounds, imprisoned till
payment, and obliged to find bail for his good behaviour for the future; there
would be no living if there were not Law for such Rogues to bind them to the
Peace.


How now? where's my Niece?


Niece!


Ay, my Niece, Sir.


By Ovid, as the Latin Saying is --


I'll have none of your gabling strange stuff; I'll have nothing to do with
Latin, no, not I; I say, where's Timandra? where's my Niece?


Why there was a damned sort of a fellow, I think he's her Brother, at least he
called her Sister; but every Woman may be so to him for ought I know.


Well, and what of him? 'tis Ned; 'tis that young Villain, 'tis; and I'll be
revenged, a knave: well, go on.


And so, Sir, in he comes --


It must be he, that's certain; the graceless young dog is still at a mischief.


Uds so, it must be he then, for he was at a mischief upon sight.


What, he? -- whom do ye mean? -- but go on; what was he that came in?


The Devil, Sir.


Then 'twas Ned; 'twas my sweet Nephew; would the Rogue were fai^ly hanged; I
must be rid of him, that's certain. -- Well, and what say you to this,
Young-man? what say you to it -- To what? -- Why, Sirrah; would you pretend
Ignorance? would you -- Yes Sir. -- Yes, Sir! why look ye now friend, thus I'll
teach you your duty, thus, Sirrah: -- Mercy, Sir; I beg your Pardon: No mercy,
no pardon you dog; I'll have every bone in your skin broke, sirrah; ay, I will
-- I will -- you Rogue.


Uds so; 'tis my safest course to remove my body from this place; 'tis a mad
dangerous Family, and this Old Curmudgeon may be upon me with a new Bill of
Imprimi^'s and Ditto's worse than the former: good buy, Sir, good buy -- Uds
so, let me see; I won't lose my Mistress, I'll follow to the Walks.


Well, and what did the Rogue when he came in? what was't he said? -- Why, this
young fellow is gone too -- Ned has prevailed upon him to affront me; I'll go
and seek the Rascal immediately, and if I catch him -- a -- Villain -- a --


And so she bid me stay in this Room till she came -- Was it not so?


Whaut a deel Sir aur ye deef, shoe baud ye tarry here aun no gang awau till
she caum benn.


Ben -- but 'tis no matter; Willie, you must forget Scotland, and conform
yourself to the Customs of England; learn our Accent.


Nau Sir, sheam fau me thaun, Customs o Englaun quo? Nau, nau, I'se do aus our
Meast Johoan does pray for yer reformaution in good-bred Scots. Aus for yer
accent Sir, I speak as Father Audaum spauke before me.


Then Adam spoke Scotch?


Goad aun thaut he did, Sir.


But to the purpose; to render you a complete Servant, observe these three
things; keep a due distance; speak little, and hear much.


Waud ye learn au Gentleman good manners?


Why, dost thou pretend to quality?


Be my Saul do I Sir, we Scotlaun Lauds aur au Gentlemen whun we come tea
Englaun, thee Waulsh aun Irish aur neathing tea us for quality.


That's good; but remember when the Old Gentlewoman enters, you must be silent
as a Mute; 'tis she that helps me to the Rich Lady I told thee of.


Is't sua? thaun hear ye me Sir; I bid ye hey au care err thaun, he haud need o
au laung Spoon thaut sups we the Deel, I waurren her au aul cheat now before I
see her.


Ha, ha, ha, why so Willie?


I kent au Maun o my Kintrey thaut mairied au aul wuther'd Wife thaut scantly
could tell whilk was the Stool and whilk her Arse whun she saut upon it, aun
sometimes scaurted her Head instead o her Rump; the mairiagemauker swear it she
was worth saux thousaun pund staurling, aun whun the Gentleman caum tea, -- how
muckle do ye think waus o't, Sir?


Two thousand pounds it may be.


Two thousaun pund! wa be my saul shoe had na two hunder Scots Marks, yer
Englis Womaun will trust her person whaur she wonna trust her purse; she may be
a rich Hereiss tea day, and deel a two pennies hey the morn gin ye soud chance
tea tauke her in between yer sheets.


Away fool, some blockhead has inso med the -- Madam, I'm your humble Servant.


Truly Sir I'm yours.


Be me Counscience I waurran her au honourable pick-pocket, for I dinna like
thaut mumping face o hers.


Well Sir, I profess your business has cost me a great deal of trouble; I've
been thrice at her Lodgings, and gave a Guinea to her Maid: In a word, Sir,
I've smoothed the way, and to morrow you may begin an easy Journey to the
Island of Love.


Be my Saul he haus na, a pair o Boots to ride in.


I'm persuaded your Addresses won't be unwelcome, for I have given you a
Character nothing inferior to your merit, and done every thing with that
fervour, as if my good or bad fortune had been inseparably linked to yours.


The deel be fain o yer auld wheedling Snout.


Madam, I'm sensible of your kindness; and thus I express my self. Time, and
future events, shall instruct me how much I'm your Debtor, and how to pay.


Haurk ye Sir, a word we ye in yer lug -- keep yer Siller, I kent the Captain
cheated out o au hunder Guineas by sick anither aul wutch aus this.


Whisper softly sirrah, otherwise ye ruin all.


Ay, ay, Sir -- in our Kintry we never buy au mere till eans we ride upon her;
pay Sir, I say, whun ye get the Lady aun be hanged till her.


Sirrah -- well, Madam, and when shall I have the happiness of waiting upon the
fair Lady?


Sir, she expects you to morrow, I'll be there my self in the forenoon, and
'tis convenient you should come then -- But, Sir, as I hinted to you at our
first meeting, Fortu^e has been very unjust to me, and I'm weary of this trade
of life; 'tis but reasonable then in serving others, I should serve my self,
and better my present circumstances in minding yours; the Lady has Ten thousand
pounds, and I demand your Bond only for One; Truly I was never Covetous, and
such a Service merits a greater reward, but the c^nfidence I have in your
generosity has taught me to use you kindly.


Madam, if I marry the Lady.


O Lord, Sir, it shall be payable upon no other terms.


To morrow you shall have it, in the mean time, Madam, believe me your humble
Servant.


Sir, I'm yours.


Aun the muckle deel thaunk ye, for yer well paid for yer pains; hark ye aul
woman, I hope me Masters siller sall burn the arse out o yer purse before
night, an be me saul aun ye pit au trick upon him this bred Sword sall let the
Sun and Moon shine through ye like a glass-window.


Devil take the Rogue, he has almost frighted me out of my five Senses -- but
hitherto all is well, pray heaven that impudent Sot were out of the way, if he
has any influence upon his Master, my plot on that side is ruined.


Mischief from small beginnings often flows,
But to a Mountain in a minute grows.
I Won't, Madam, offer to measure the Extent of your power, or say I merit; but
I'd have you remember, that the World cannot think it strange, that an
unnatural parent weakens the bond of obedience, or that a violent passion
should be regarded.


Love it seems is a strange passion, that of a Lay-man makes an Ecclesiastic,
and gives you a power to absolve me from that allegiance I owe to my Uncle and
my Guardian -- you'd have me come to Confession too, and say I loved.


If you did, I'd prove a kind Ghostly father, Madam, and enjoin more of the
same Sin for a penance.


Thank ye, Sir; but I'm not resolved to try the experiment; 'tis not the way to
ease the burdened mind; for I'm informed Love begets Fear; that Lovers are
always uneasy, and 'tis hard to set the heart again at liberty; is't so?


'Tis, Madam.


And you'd have me a Companion in misery.


No, Madam; for as in Love there are some pains, so there are pleasures to
balance them; one kind look from the mistress of our Vows, gives a Joy not to
be equalled; and to be beloved is a heaven beyond what dull Philosophers ever
dreamt of.


And if she prove inconstant?


'Tis Hell.


Then why should I run the hazard of a Love-damnation? Men, what e're they
brag, are fickle as the Winds; just now they love, and in a moment hate; yet
know not whence nor how this Change arrives, but lay the stress on Fate or
Nature's weakness: Now if my easy heart should dote on such a man, I've fooled
my self out of a present happiness, and missed the better heaven I aimed at.


Your Charms. Madam, secure you from that misfortune; your Eyes would melt the
heart of a Savage, and turn his fury into love; no man could ever love you
less; for he who once knew you, would with Joy continue your Slave; your words
would call back his wandering thoughts, and fix his nodding virtue to its
center.


-- peeping -- Uds so, here's fine work, my Mistress, by Ovid!


Sir, if you please, we'll take a turn in the other Walk; Sir Anthony's Son, I
find, has dogged me hither.


Every Walk is pleasant when Timandra's there.


By Aristotle I'll place my self behind this Tree, and observe all -- Mum,
honest Dick, here comes another.


Hang me If I'm not sick with these canting words; Flame, Love, Passion, Eyes,
and the like, I always thought a Soldier should be master of more Courage than
to languish for a Woman.


Who would not sigh when so much beauty's nigh? Tantalus never knew pains like
mine; for I view a bliss infinitely beyond his, and find no cause, no hope for
quick relief.


Would you have me believe all you've said, and credit every story for a truth,
without remembering your Complements are the effects of your good breeding? You
love to show your parts, and that in time of peace; you can remove the thoughts
of War's loud alarms, and play with that soft young thing called Love: Men are
subject to more changes than Proteus ere knew shapes.


By Ovid that's very fine. Sir-father, when he knows all will have a trusty
house-keeper of ye.


Who could feign a pleasure on the Rack, or think of Joys when roaring Seas
gaped wide, and threatened present ruin; much less could I counterfeit a
passion, or look and not love; to be insensible of so many Charms, would argue
stupidity; and to yield without terms to so sweet a Conqueror, speaks not want
of Courage, but a generous Confidence.


Uds so, the man is damnably in love.


Nay, now Captain you begin to be serious upon the matter, on my Conscience I
could afford my Pity.


By Hercules, the Baggage begins to yield.


Pity, Madam, has often proved the Mother of Love; if you afford me that, you
advance me one step to happiness.


Poor man! by Apollo I pity him.


Not so fast, Captain; you'd march before Orders are given; 'tis pit y merely
for your weakness: but come, hang this dull serious Love, I hate it; let's
change the subject; I see Timandra in the other Walk, who doubtless desires my
Company, if attacqu'd as I am.


Uds so? So, she hates dull love; 'tis a smart plaguy Wench, all Mercury by
Jupiter -- but mum, Dick.


You know not, Madam, how far this Love-Caprice may hurry the Old man; your
Father's humour is unaccountable, and every thing tends to my speedy ruin, if
Melintha prove unkind.


By Pan this is my Sister too; and this is the Rogue that kicked me before my
Mistress; I begin to shake for fear; if he should catch me, he'd serve me so
again: I'll home and tell Sir-father all; by Juno I will.


Remember, Madam, Fortune does not afford me the happiness every day of
expressing all my fears, and your danger.


To a Soul prepared no accident is of consequence; ill fortune comes with downy
wings, flies gently by, and leaves no marks of sorrow in her flight.


I have not yet, Madam, attained to that height in Philosophy; and Love tells
me, That without you I am for ever miserable.


Well, Sir, shall I wish you Joy of your good success? but I'm afraid my Sister
is for the Uncle; she can digest (it may be) his infirmities for the sake of
those conveniences his money brings.


I'm afraid, M^dam, you've got such another Lover that has possessed the passes
of your heart, and bars admittance to the Enemy.


A Warlike smile, Captain: But I begin to remember we came to hear prayers, and
'tis now past time: besides, I saw my Brother just now going out of the Garden,
who will undoubtedly acquaint my Father with our devotion.


Would you begin our Banishment so soon? 'tis but a minute since we began to be
happy.


Necessity commands a Cessation of Arms; and, Captain, you must be broke.


Yet stay, fair Ladies, let these cool Shades persuade, if Lovers fail.


No, Sir, 'tis fitting we change the Scene.


Well, Ladies, let us hope you inflict a present punishment to give a future
ease; you're afraid too much of Joy should sicken the Soul, and a long Scene of
happiness pale the Appetite: Pain gives a certain relish unto Ease, and makes
it always welcome to the mind.


Ned. Short Pleasures most of solid Joy impart;
And stole with hazard, most affect the heart.
Nature, to what's forbid, is still inclined;
And hopes of Sweets not known, mis-lead the mind.
Thus we run on, and eagerly pursue
What brings destruction, so it shows but New.
In Love there's no such Curse, give all to day;
We still Love on, our Joys know no decay,
And every hour to Pleasure shows the way.
YOur Fears, Madam, are groundless; he's already possessed with an opinion of
your Fortune; naturally credulous, and every way fitted for the Cheat;
dissemble handsomely; seem not overpliant, yet give him store of hopes, because
'tis necessary you should be speedily married.


I still doubt the success; Fifteen hundred a year is a noble prize; nor are
such bubbles often to be found.


You are sure he has so much, Madam.


Yes, yes, Child, very sure, I know most of his Friends and Relations. One
thing I had almost forgot; if his Servant should be rude, take no notice on it;
the fellow will rather speak nonsense than be silent; and I suppose his Master
only keeps him for his diversion.


E^gad, that Character has almost made me in love with him; I admire a
talkative gabling fellow; 'tis a sign of wit, and only speaks his Judgment not
yet ripe enough to bound it.


Well, Madam, I hope you've considered the nature of this Service: Heaven
forgive me, I'm forced to make many a sweet Lye for you.


My gratitude prompts my memory; accept, Madam, of this small Compliment, and
believe me a friend not so able as willing to serve you.


Truly, Madam, I always had a good opinion of you, and am glad to find I have
not deceived my self -- you remember the Bond of a thousand pounds.


Yes, Madam, and own my self obliged to pay a greater Sum.


O, dear Madam, I'm o'rewhelm'd with your Bounty; would to heaven it were in my
power to prefer you to a greater Fortune; your Soul speaks you made for great
things -- I've screwed her finely up if he has any Estate: these two thousand
pounds are good; if not, I'm in nothing poorer than I was -- Well, Madam, shall
I admit the Gentleman? he waits in the next Room.


If you please, Madam.


I swear, Madam, you look charmingly to day.


I ought to pipe with art; for if the fool can be whistled into the Net, I get
a weighty draught -- but stay, he comes.


Swear you have often seen her; and, above all, urge her to a speedy marriage;
delays are dangerous; and she's courted at this very time by a Rich Knight and
two young Citizens of great Credit -- Madam, this Worthy Gentleman, a friend of
mine, has long adored you in secret, and my happy Stars having made me of your
acquaintance; I'm bold to introduce him into the Temple, where he may worship
his Goddess openly, and receive a reward suitable to his Zeal.


The Gentleman, no doubt, knows better where to bestow his Services; and his
Merit may prefer him to the possession of a greater Beauty, and a larger
Fortune.


Be me Saul the Woman speaks very bonnily.


My ambition never taught me to aspi^e to a happiness beyond Lucinda's favour:
I've long loved, but had not the liberty of Complaint allow'd me; and now I've
got it, methinks I could spend an age at her feet, and here for ever fix my
self; gaze on that fatal beauty that has so long banished peace from my Soul,
and almost ^orc'd me to despair.


Pray Sir rise.


That's well; the young Gentleman plays his part to my wish; there's a pleasure
in dissimulation, not to be changed for that dull peace of mind which honesty
and plain-dealing bestow upon their bewitched Votaries.


This is not the first time I presume you've kneeled: Love e're now has been
your Religion, and practice more than innate Zeal has taught you how to pray
with so much ease.


A goad I believe the Lass is a Saint.


No, Madam, false fires can't be of use; and if I should attempt to act the
hypocrite, your Eyes would teach me how to bow.


Deel be fain o me gin thea Englis Women would not mauk au maun's mouth water
at them, aun Go^d sin me new Master is come au Sweethearting tea the Lady; I
think Willie soud woo her Gentlewoman.


And could you become a Convert? Renounce those principles which allow'd you so
much liberty, and confine your self to the precise rules of marriage.


Sir, I beg your pardon --


The deel ride up throw her aun down throw her, aun a haw-thornbuss at his
tail, aun thaun she needs nea Physic. -- Goad I can niver endure thea aulwives
they look sua like wutches, aun she waur i my Kintrey she waud be burnt in a
taurbaurrel presently.


Would I renounce such principles, Madam? by heaven all the pleasures of my
life, whatever I doted upon; and if a darling Sin were riveted in my heart,
with Joy I'd tear the loathsome thing from thence; dash it from me, and abandon
all for the blessing of your Love, that would give a happiness, and in it self
contain more bliss than all the beggared earth could give besides.


Hear ye me, Jo: how waud ye like me for yer good man? I hey a brave Estate in
Scotland.


Like you?


Ay, that is, lye we me au yer days; warm me bed in au caul Winterneight, aun
let me get bairns upon ye.


Is that your way of Courtship in Scotland?


Ay, aun this way tea be me Saul -- we gang red wood upon bonny Lasses. ^


Wuns thauts the way of your Englis Women, she is ready to cry out, whun any
body is near, hand her baut gin she waur at the bauck of au dike whaur deel au
ean sees her, she waud be aus caum as au laum, and let a laud kiss his weam
fou.


But pray thee speak English, else 'tis impossible to comprehend thy meaning.


Goad aun I had ye au mile frea au house ye waud understaun me meaning for au
thaut.


Could you sit, and with a calm brow observe the dear Companions of your past
liberty roving after new Loves? would you not flutter in your Cage and wish for
freedom; envy those who ranged through open air, and curse the hour that fooled
you into prison?


No, Madam, I'd view securely men in Tempests tossed, pity the weary and
misguided Travellers; and when I saw them tracing Danger's road, in search of
Joys that vanish as soon as got, I'd shrink up in silent gladness, and bless my
kinder stars that gave me wealth and happiness at home; I'd bid them be wise,
and learn to love from me; run quick for safety to some constant Fair, whose
charms give ease from all their labours past.


Now deel tauke me gin me Master does na woo aus bonnily aus I waud do me
sell, only he forgets tea kiss her -- Hear ye, Sir, tauke her in yer arms this
way, aun be me saul shoe will grow sua tame, ye may lead her tea the Kirk in au
string, she will gaung wood toe be mairied upon ye.


Sirrah -- Madam, I hope you'll pardon this rudeness.


I love to see the fellow in that antic garb; it puts me in mind of the old
World, when Clothes were used for Necessity, not Orn^ment.


Whaun I was in me own Kintrey, Maudam, the Minister's Wife said I waus the
bonniest Laud in au her good man's parish.


Did she? -- I love the humours of strangers.


Maudam, aun yea hey au mean tea marry me instead o me master, be me saul I
will tauke ye presently, I waud na let a bonny Lass rin wood for waunt o me.


This, Madam, is intolerable Impudence -- to your distance, Sirrah.


Ay Sir, whaut's the matter we ye now? ye look like a Minister whun he has
newly lost his Baunifice.


Have you got a Mistress, Willie, since you came to England?


Nau, Madam; baut I hey gotten ean here aun she aun I caun agree, we may come
tea confirm the bargain between a pair o blankets.


And what would you think of making the bargain there, and confirming on it
afterwards? I've a Maidenhead to dispose of, I assure ye.


Wau thaun we sall save the expenses o'Kirk-fees, aun make the bar gaun like
our for-bearers; I sall gang in to ye aun be acquainted we ye and su^ forth, we
cau thaut only playing a tune without a prelude.


Ay, but Willie, 'tis necessary the Church should give us liberty to play, else
we may come to pay too dear for our Music.


You see, Madam, they have come already to Articles; I can propose none, but
I've a heart at your service, I give it, never to be recalled; for though your
powerful Charms forced me to make the gift, yet my consent soon follow'd; my
Judgment confirmed it, and it will stand good in law.


I'm afraid, though it were sealed and delivered in the Church, you would find
some corner to skulk in, and pretend to other terms; swear the delivery was
conditional, and you gave it with a prospect of possessing another to supply
the want of your own -- but however, my modesty bounds my words, yet I'm
willing my Eyes should express my thoughts, and let you know your addresses are
-- not -- unacceptable.


I've no way left to express my Joy; Silence speaks my Soul o'recharg'd with
sudden happiness; and he who loves like me, must court in dumb show; may all
your hours be a continued scene of gladness, like that which reigns at my
heart; and may each minute of your life produce new Joys, that when you have
run through all the pleasures this world can beflow, death may steal upon you
like a gentle friend, that comes to wa^t you to a better shore -- but rather
than be troublesome to her I love, I choose to inflict a short banishment upon
my self, though I go with all the pains of an absent Lover -- Madam, your humble
Servant.


Aun whaut say ye tea me before I gaung away?


Why nothing, follow your Master.


Aun my Master be in au great haist, he may stay au we bit. Aun he aun his
Lass hey made a bargain sua his nau Wulle too.


Come, pray thee be gone, thou art troublesome.


Be goad aun ye sall ^ee my bauckside presently, troublesome quo; thau't aun
Englis Woman's breeding aun he haunget till her --


Well, Madam, our affairs have put on a handsome face to day; Fortune begins to
smooth her brow, and grace us with her smiles -- 'tis a lusty handsome
Gentleman.


The present prospect shows a long train of coming Joys; Heaven begins to smile
upon me, since I abandoned my old sin of doting; and if I succeed in this
innocent cheat, I shall ne'er tempt its goodness more.


None ere grew virtuous but by just degrees,
Nor traced the road to happiness but with ease.
Custom a second nature oft has proved;
And 'tis with labour and regret we're moved,
To quit those darling pleasures once we loved.
HAve a minute's patience; I say, Neighbour, all is not lost that is in hazard,
as the saying is.


Ay, ay, Sir-father says very well; I had a Latin Proverb to the same purpose,
but by Seneca I've forgot it.


Well, well; I've done, I've done; but that impudent young Jilt -- but I've
done. I'll say no more.


Your House-keeper will set all to-rights again; she shall guard them to night,
and prepare things necessary for this great occasion, that Melintha may be
married like the Daughter of Sir Anthony Addle; your Niece shall lye in my
house too, and the morrow's Sun shall see an alliance confirmed between our
Families, which nothing less than death shall dissolve.


But uds so, I forgot to tell you how the Rogue kicked me before my Mistress,
and would have done the same again in the Walks, had I not been obliged to my
heels that brought me off unseen.


How -- O Lord! that Rogue, I profess, will make me mad.


Make him mad, Sir father? by Venus he's mad already.


That was a --


Ay, was it not? -- a Villain -- I knew he would be graceless; why some months
ago I found him in his Closet a writing of a Play; well, he's a Rogue, a Dog, a
Scoundrel, a Rake, and will dye a Beggar -- but no more on it; only I'm sure my
Brother Sir Thomas Choleric never begot this limb of Satan.


But as I was saying, that was a --


Ay, that's certain, he'll never escape the Gallows; I've known that young --
I'll say no more -- I profess I've known the Rake come home at night with as
many Filders, Hautboys, Starving Poets, and red-fac'd Bullies -- Why the Rascal
has come home with as many empty bellies at his back, as his Majesty's Huntsmen
with all his Dogs after him; and then a Sirloin of Beef, or a Cold pie -- why
'twas no more amongst them than a pennyworth of Cheese to a lusty Porter; but
I'll make him a --


Sincerely speaking, I begin to show my weakness, my blood will rise, and I say
your Nephew --


My Nephew's a Rogue, let him be damned for an unlucky -- he tempts me to
forget my self; and I profess I'm afraid I said too much; did I swear, or not?
ha!


No, no; but by Bacchus --


No matter, no matter, the Rogue would provoke a Saint to wrath; but I'll be
revenged, I will; he shall not o're-rule me, a --


I say your Nephew shall be punished by Law; such affronts as these derogate
from the honour of my house; and 'tis fitting a --


And had the Impudence to serve him so beneath my roof: but no more on it, the
Knave shall pay dear for all.


Sincerely speaking, Neighbour Choleric. I think you are a Madman, and I
ought to have the liberty of Speech allow'd me in my own house.


Uds so, Sir-father, and in your own Cause too.


Cause, as the Young man says? why look ye now, the Rogue has given me cause to
turn him loose into the World, and I'll do'^ I warrant ye.


Ingenuously I'm incensed, I can hold no longer; I say, Neighbour, hear me, or
turn out of my^house; I'm resolved to be master of my own family.


You say right, I've done, I've done.


Well then, I say, a Justice of the Peace shall take Cognisance of this affair
-- but here comes your House^ keeper.


Madam, having taken --

Why look ye, do ye see, we have sent for you to --


Body o'me, the man will never let me speak -- having, Madam, taken --


Uds so, say on Sir-father.


Why sincerely I shall never begin at this rate; having, Madam, taken into our
Consideration the extravagant inclinations of our Children, and those who
respectively depend on us, and maturely considered the sad Consequences that
may attend such courses; and that some who have never shown themselves
affectionate to our Government, signalized themselves yesterday in seducing the
hearts of our Daughters: It is the will and pleasure therefore of your Master,
that by virtue of the authority now given and reposed in you.


Uds so, Sir-father speaks like a Judge.


For the future prevent all such unlawful courses and methods, that no
Correspondence may be held between them hereafter; for we are firmly resolved
by stratagems and new politics to keep these cunning Gentlemen from the
possession of these Lands to which they aspire.


Uds so, Sir-father, that was a thundering Speech; sure the Rogues will never
have the Impudence to make any more addresses -- my Sisters will never accept
of them.


Look ye do ye see, without further ceremony stay here all night, and look to
the young women; my Niece is already here, and to morrow shall be married; in
the mean time 'tis fitting we should provide Counsel; but let that be your
task; and mine, to procure License.


By Ovid here's fine work, we shall all go over head and ears in Matrimony.


Sir, I'll obey your Orders punctually; and to save you the expenses of
Coach-hire, I know of a Lawyer, who will wait upon you when called, and do the
business for a Glass of Wine, without the help of a Fee to sweeten it: I'm
acquainted too with a Nonconformist Parson, who has a wonderful dexterity in
joining hands and hearts.


That's good, that's good; be sure you speak to them.


Well, Neighbour, let's go, every thing shall be in readiness; I'll have a new
Suit too, that I may grace the Nuptials with my gaiety; they shall go no more
to the Walks.


In statu quo prius you mean Sir-father; for if I live, they shall not all carry
their Maidenheads with them; if they do --


Body of me, the boy grows wanton -- but 'tis no matter, a month or so will
tame him; I was young my self, and can remember these things still -- Dick come
along Dick.


Good b'ye, I'll see you again in an hours time.


So this has happened to my wish now the Ladies are committed to my charge; and
since 'tis mine to provide Counsel, 'tis in my power to advance all their Joys:
let me dye 'tis a sweet adventure, and I'm resolved to build my fortune so
strongly (for that will make them liberal) upon the necessities of the young
people, that the frowns of the old can never shake me; 'tis a good foundation,
ay, and here come materials fit for the Structure.


Oh, Ladies! here have been strange doings; Sir Anthony and Mr. Choleric are
acquainted with all that passed yesternight in Lincolns-Inn; the young
Philosopher has played the Conjurer, and infor'd your enemies of all your
designs.

No, he turned spy it seems, but the old man will soon forget it.


Ay, but Madam, you're condemned, and you too Madam; to morrow's marked out for
Execution-day, and I'm your Jailer by special orders from the higher powers --
there's no way left to escape.


And I'm in prison, but not condemned I hope.


And pray thee, Decoy, wilt thou not admit of Bail.


O dear Madam, by no means, in cases of High-treason there's no such thing
after Judgment given.


Sure thou hast not so much of cruelty in thy Nature; to wink at small faults,
speaks thee tender-hearted; a quality inherent to woman.


Self-preservation bars the thoughts of mercy; and if the Prisoners escape, the
Keeper may shift for himself, or stay for certain punishment.


I'm sorry my Judgment and Experience did not sooner inform me of my Error --
What do ye think of this, Madam? I hope 'twill buy off my Chains, if it do not
purchase Freedom.


Truly, Madam, your generosity staggers my strongest resolutions.


Her zeal for my Father's arbitrary Government begins to cool, Sister; ply her
with such another argument as mine, and she'll throw off all Obedience, and
become a rebel like our selves, and fly (though not directly) in the face of all
Authority.


If this can tempt her, She's of our party.


And this shall help to confirm the Convert in her new tenets, that obedience
is an effect of Interest, and 'tis madness to continue allegiance when that tie
is broke, or better secured with the Enemy.


As I live, fair Ladies, you've overcome me, you've Justice on your side; 'tis
impossible to raise any objections against such powerful arguments -- Who's
this?


Be my Saul this is the aul Jaude thaut mumped me new Master out o his Siller
-- Maudaum, I hey brought ye an Letter frea Sir John -- me bonny Lasses how
do ye do, yer Sweethearts aur stauning sighing in the causy, aun look like sua
money clipped sheep; a goad I believe they will gang dauft for want o ye.


Run Ladies into the other room, I'm but Deputy-Governess, and 'tis not safe to
meet with your Lovers, unless I were assured of my Superior's continued
absence.


Well, Madam, remember the weight of our past arguments, and let no new
accident divert your resolution.


Tell the Gentlemen their humble Servant Decoy waits to receive them with all
humility.


Ay, ay, baut ye soud nea hey sent awau the women thaun, for be me saul they
wunnau gaung out o the house till the be as sure o them aus me faither was o me
mither that night Wulle was begotten upon her.


Now for another Cast of my Art; for that Match-maker knows not her own trade,
who fails at any time to make them pay for their hopes; if we are not courted
with as many Guineas as their Mistresses with Oaths, we manage amiss, and lose
our own fortunes, because we have too much of modesty -- Gentlement, I'm your
humble Servant.


I hope, Madam, you know our business.


Goad aun thaut she does, for I tellt her o't.


Alas, Sir, I know too much; for my want of power to serve you in this affair
brings my grief.


You jest, Madam; sure 'tis impossible you should be insensible of our Common
Calamity.


O Lord, Sir! I'm a sharer in all your Fortunes, and would relieve you from
pain with all my heart; but --


You'd run no hazard to serve your friends -- Damn her, she must be bribed,
she's like a new Coach-wheel, often greased before she can run smooth.


Can't this persuade?


Madam, accept of this small Complement.


And I humbly offer these few Yellow-boys to procure your assistance.


Wa Sirs, wa Sirs: are ye reed wood tea gea awau yer siller -- wa goad the
Lasses aur na saunted, ye may get them for the half of this trouble.


I protest sincerely, Gentlemen, I know not what to say t'ye -- but in spite of
danger, you shall once more be happy by my means -- I'll lead the way.


By our Money he would have said.


Wuns cau ye this wooing Alamode! this is an Englis trick indeed, a maun mun
gee siller for an sight o his Sweetheart, aus we do in Scotlaun tea see au
dancing Mere, or au Eape playing on the Bagpipes.


All danger ought to be despised when Love has any share in the action; the
prize before us should give Courage, and spur us on to Victory.


Why you're at your old similes again, Captain, action, prize, and victory;
sure you imagine to your self a formal siege when you attack a Lady; I hope you
don't muster your Company in the Tavern, and ^et the Bottles in battle-array
instead of men.


Be me S^ul he threw ^an o thea men at my head half au yeir seen.


I confess, Madam, a Lady is a strange Enemy; for a Soldier finds it often more
difficult to get access to her Soul, than to throw in provisions to a Town
besieged.


A goad my Master aunt like your Ladyship will storm a Fort we any laud in au
Lonon aun ye will gee him a Commission.


Sirrah -- ha, who's this, Madam?


Thieves! Thieves! Thieves!


Farewell, Captain; remember, a Town once lost has been regained.


How, Sir! -- draws --


Murder! Murder! Murder!


O Lord, I'am murdered auready; whaut a deel brought me in tea this unlucky
house aun (...) sua now?


Body of me, I say, secure the Gentlemen.


Uds so, knock 'em down; by Jupiter we shall all be murdered.


Be me saul I'm a dead man; I will hide me sell beneath this Table.


Come, let's force a p^ssage to our selves.


With all my heart.


And mine.


Good boy, thou won't murder thy Uncle -- O Lord!


I'm dead.


By Vulcan so am I -- knock 'em down, I say knock 'em down; Sirfather shall
keep ye all from harm.


Knock 'em down -- why look ye now do ye see, they are all gone. Ah that Rogue
my Nephew shall be hanged -- a dog, a --


Uds so Sir-father, I scoured 'em off, Rogues, Pimps, Panders, and Scoundrels;
by Aristotle I've frighted them; this Sword did execution; but I'll put it up,
because my Uncle that is to be, is here.


Be me Saul I waud I waur in me own Kintrey again, Englaun soud niver hey the
honour o'me presence aun they waud mauke a King o'me.


Oh, oh, I faint, help me forwards; I'll lean upon this Table, and recover
breath.


Look ye now, do ye see; whow have we got here? another Rogue! the house is full
of them, would I were fairly out on it.


Gaung awau thaun, whau au deel hauds, au grip o'ye -- agoad I believe me
Master has left me here to be hangett.


Stay, stay, let me alone with him; this is Sinon that was to open the
wooden-horse, and let out all the Grecians.


Be me Saul the Englis-men will hey na mercy on me, I fin thaut; baut aun I
could get safe to the door, they soud na ou lay saut I me arse the night again.


Uds so, not so fast, you shall leave your head behind ye.


Body o'me, the boy Dick is bloodily disposed.


Be goad sein na better may be, I will fight for my head first -- I'll gaur ye
au loap like Dinmonts -- I will let ye ken whaut it is tea anger a Scotlaun
maun.


O Lord! O Lord! I'm murdered.


And so are all of us.


Oh, oh, oh.


The muckle deel mauke oar ye waud na be at rest till I dous'd yer doublets
for ye; baut now I hey learnt ye mainers we this bred Sword, I'll gang and seek
my new Master.


Uds so, Sir-father, this was a damned bloody Dog.


Look ye now, I see no heads he has left behind him but our three Calves-heads.


No matter, 'tis a mercy he has left those: but where's Madam Decoy, Body o'me?
Alderman Choleric, I say your House-keeper is nought, and has betrayed her
Trust.


Ay, ay, here she is; look ye now, look ye now, you was brought here to a fine
purpose; you was, a very fine purpose; but 'tis no matter -- I'll be revenged
one day or other.


Heaven knows Sir I knew nothing of the matter till just now I met the lewd
fellows in the streets: I was at Mr. Delay the Lawyer, and Mr. Sigher's the
Nonconformist -- God knows I did it purely for the best, and stole out on foot
to save expenses.


Sincerely speaking, I believe the Woman is innocent.


By Mercury I believe so too.


I've done then, Madam: look ye, look ye to your charge: Farewell, for I've not
yet dispatch'd the business of this day.


Come along, Dick; come along.


The fighting Fool gets Scars; but he that's wise
Preserves his Skin, and from known Danger flies:
Honour's an empty Sound, admired by those
Who have no Brains, or no Estate to lose.
While those by Fortune blessed, look-wisely on,
And see this airy Mistress lost or won;
But without Danger to be got by none.
WIth difficulty I've got out of doors, but the old Lover and the young have
relieved me from my post; my three principal Lovers are uneasy on both sides,
and from the Gentlemen I've received fifty Guineas this morning to complete
their cure; nor have I forgot to squeeze the young Ladies, even to their very
Jewels; I can expect no more than I've already got by both parties; for should
I now baulk them in this Intrigue, they'd never trust me again: I've worn them
almost threadbare, and 'tis time to lay them aside; I'll give therefore the
finishing stroke to this plot, hitherto so well managed, and show my self
honest, because I can find no profit by a longer delay. As for Mr. Freelove's
marriage with Lucy, 'tis easy, their mutual fears will force them to a speedy
obedience, and I'll enjoin an immediate conjunction between them. Mum, here he
comes; I'm glad I have his Bond and hers; 'tis a large Fee for a She-Counsel --
Sir, your humble Servant.


I've punctually obeyed those Orders you sent me this morning; every thing is
in readiness, and I wish the young Lady may --


O Lord Sir, doubt it not, I've dived into her inmost thoughts; but the
business must be speedily dispatch'd, for her friends begin to pry into it.


Begoad Sir I will feght we au her freins, and gar 'em gee conseut, wa I clawed
off three Englis-men yesterday.


Sir, I beg your pardon, the Lady enters -- Madam, for your own sake embrace
this opportunity which now offers it self; his friends are advertised of his
design, and study to break off the Match -- Now I've brought ye once more
together, I know ye both love, and it were a sin to part ye, 'tis hard to
please every body, and I'd have you join for ever, lest you meet no more.


Ay do sua my bairns, agoad I will dance at yer breidall.


Madam, yesterday you taught me to hope; to day brings new alarms, and an hours
delay may bring me years of pain.


Wuns I say tauke him, tauke him, Madam, he will set yer Watermill au gaunging.


Pray, Madam, consider the Gentleman's violent Love, that he hunts not for a
Fortune; and that he prefers your Esteem to his Interest.


Haud yer chau^ts together in au mischanter t'ye, aun let the Lauss answer for
her sell; agoad I waurran, she knes whaut's good for her.


Do, Madam; pity the Gentleman; I'll swear 'tis a shame to be so hard hearted.


Be me Saul thea women hey na mair power cur their tongues than they hey our
their tails, aun thauts no muckle.


I own I'm powerfully assaulted, and modesty only detains me from saying I --
Love.


Now be me Saul she says very weill.


Then thus I render thanks for the mighty blessing; my heart scorns its narrow
bounds, and seeks for greater Joys than e're it knew -- let me kiss this fair
hand, and in that (not words) express my transports.


Hout, hout, Sir, kiss her bonny mouth, whaut a deel will she be the better of
yer kindness aun ye do na mair nor thaut till her.


'Tis rarely acted, they are at no small pains to che^t one another; and both
of them dissemble with as much pleasure, as a lusty Friar would eat a fat Capon
after a tedious Lent -- Well, Madam, a thousand blessings attend you; believe
me, I could weep for gladness to see you thus far on the way to a happi^r state
of life -- Complete the Gentleman's Joys, for 'tis a Sin that two such loving
hearts should be so long divided.


Speak, Madam, speak; he that like me is blessed only by halves in that uncertain
state, finds certain pains; the present pleasure's lost in hopes of more, and
fears of future events rack the Soul.


Sure Mad^m your heart yields.


Come, Madam, lay aside that confounded modesty invented by old decayed
Beauties to torment the young and bar 'em of those pleasures of which their
envious age permitted them not to be sharers -- the Gentleman's addresses are
very honourable.


Ay, ay, Sir, tauke her silence for a grant, come awau tea the K^k we her, she
will gaung we good will I'se waurran her.


I can be no longer obstinate, I'll yield a blind obedience, and ^ye my self
for ever Freeloves.


Goad aun fair fau her for her kindness aun en sua.


Nay, now my Joys are no more to be expressed.


Nau deel be fain of me gin our lords Sister whir I waus born in Scotlaun waud
said sua mickle tea au young maun aun she soud never be maired in her days.
Baut a goad for au that she can play in the dark we young meast Chaplain, au
caunting young loun as is in au the kirk again.


Truly, Madam, I can hold no longer, excess of Joy brings forth my tears: pray
heavens bless you, you are a lovely couple as ever I put together in my life.


Whaut au deel ails the auld wife now, kens any body that?


Well, well, get ye in together, Betty knows where the Parson lives; my
business calls me hence, for this day is Love's Jubilee, and the little Boy is
merry: but come let me first see you into the other Room.


I'll obey, Madam -- I am made for ever.


Run laus will ye rin aun get the Minister tea mairy me Master, aun get
anither to mairy me.


Well, well; Willie, I'll think upon it.


Do sua me Jo -- now Ise gaung in, aun wait upon me master, whau kens baut I
may get the leg of a Capon tea me wauden dinner, shame fa me gin I hea-na
mickle need o't, for I fin a civil war i me guts* aun my puddings are gaunging
tea eat an aunother.


So boy, look brisk, body of me, 'tis a handsome Lad.


Uds so, Sir-father, I'll make ye a Grand-father in nine Months.


Look ye, friend, that part is mine, I was born before you, was I not?


By Jupiter I hope ye would not lye with my Wife.


That's right, that's right, I invited some of my Friends to be merry with us
to night.


And I have invited Mr. Caperer the Dancing master, and Chorus the
Musick-master, the poor Rogues owe me some money, and I'm resolved they shall
dance and sing it out this night; charges upon such occasions are inevitable --
have you invited your Nephew?


A Rogue, a Villain, I'll see him hang first; invite him! why look ye now, do ye
see; --


I say, Neighbour, abandon your wrath, let not your passion banish Reason, I am
not desirous of the young man's Company.


That's true, that's true, I forget my self.


Uds so, I think you have always a damnable memory.


Call my Daughters and Mr. Chollerick's Niece, are the Lawyers come? is the
Parson ready, and every thing in order?


Sir I've forgot nothing.


Call them in.


Yes, Sir.


Uds so, you might have put on a new suit, Uncle; that is, to be for a new
wise.


Body of me, that's true, 'tis an undecent garb for a Bridegroom.


That's nothing: look ye, I love my money, and therefore would not disburse it
for trifles; I'll give my Wife a Complement of five hundred broad-pieces in an
imbroidred purse; your vain Coxcombs, who spend all on Plays, Paints, Presumes,
and long Wigs, have no such gifts to bestow; they bring a pair of laced
breeches to the beds-side, but not one farthing in 'em.


Ladies, be of good courage, I've a plot will save you all, though on the brink
of ruin.


Come, Daughter, let me see no signs of Sorrow in your face, I have provided
for you a wealthy husband -- Dick, bear up to the young Lady.


Look, do ye see, young woman? look kindly upon him, he's a handsome youth;
do it, or expect my immediate displeasure; turn out of doors, run mad for want,
and go to Bedlam at last for shelter, you shall, you -- but I'd almost forgot
my self again, temptation is a dangerous thing, and all men are wise till they
have occasion to show their parts.


Uds so, Sir-father I'll speak to her -- Madam, you and I are like to be good
friends ere to morrow morning; by Jupiter if I had you -- I know where I would
be.


At the University again it may be, Sir.


The University! No, by Aristotle I'm for no such Journeys, I'll teach you
Natural Philosophy here in London. -- Uds so, but Marriage is a damned thing,
that allows me but one Scholar; my Sir-father (when he was a young man) had
forty, I warrant him.


John Winmore, Capt. Bellair, as Lawyers; Ned Choleric like a Noncon-Parson,
and Decoy.


We are now fairly in, Madam, and upon you we rely for a fairer Exit.


I hope the old Gentlemen know us not in our new Shapes.


Leave all to my management, and the event shall answer your wishes.


'Tis he, Mars, appears in Masquerade, and shines throughout musty black.


Gentlemen, you're welcome.


Sir, I've brought two Councellors.


Very well, very well, I can read Noverint universi in their foreh^ads at this
distance -- are the Papers ready?


Yes, Sir -- are you ready, Madam?


Before you make a good Council.


Am I happy, Madam? or doomed to misery? I am a bad Lawyer when my Eyes must
plead my Cause, and I'm obliged without Arguments to refer all to my Judge?


The adverse-party have authority on their fide, which may be much to their
advantage.


Uds so, Sir-father, 'tis a Jolly young Parson: shall --


Presently boy thou shalt be a married man.


By Ovid, Sir-father, I begin to grow proud on it, my head stands just now as
stiff as if the marks of honour already pressed my brow. M^rriage is a notable
trick, that in a minute, of a raw boy makes a grave solid lump of a man.


Is the young Divine, or the old Merchant, the happy Lover? you see love has
transformed me into a new man; I run the risque of Church-censure too in
pretending to marriages without Orders; but I hope that in this Cloak (the
cover of many infirmities) 'twill be easy to escape the inquisition.


Yes, if I am Sinner enough to digest a hypocrite, and take up with a me^r show
of S^nctity and Religion.


Sir, a Gentleman below-stairs waits for ye.


By Vulcan that's some University-acquaintance or other, I'll bring him up, and
show him how happy I am to be in a few minutes.


Now, Gentlemen, let's see the papers -- Mr. Sigher, pray sit down a little,
for the Law must be still before the Gospel -- what's this? read the Contents.


Ay, ay, read the Continents.


This is, Sir, a Settlement of four hundred per annum upon your eldest lawful
begotten Son Richard Addle, out of that Estate lying in the Country of Nullibi,
in --


Pray read it, Sir, word by word.


Faith, Sir, I'm in haste, business calls me speedily hence, and I humbly beg
your excuse, I shall warrant it right -- pox on the Law, I'm wearied on it
already.


Very good; no matter; and what's this large Scroll?


The honourable Sir Anthony Addle bestows upon his Daughter eight thousand
Pounds to be paid the first of January next ensuing.


A long term, the first of January next ensuing! Why look ye do ye see, the
Interest of the money at Six per Cent. comes to -- ay, let me see, comes to --
but no matter, January next, why 'tis a whole year to'r.


Body o'me, the Man is in a passion before all these Witnesses: I say Neighbour
Choleric you love not my Daughter.


No faith, Sir; but your money sets his heart on fire.


Well, well, I've done -- and what have we got here?


This, Sir, contains --


What Sir? let me see what does it contain.


Now, Madam, quick relief, or we're all undone.


Yes, Sir, 'tis a coming.


Oh, oh, I'm frighted out of my Senses, your Son, Sir --


Ay, Body o'me, that's true; where is the young Man?


O Lord, Sir, Arrested, the Bailiffs have got him, 'tis an Action of Ten
thousand pounds: O, Sir, he's almost dead with fear, and e're now he's either
in the Spunging-house, or the Counter.


Look ye now, look ye now, do ye se^, he has played some Rogue's trick, and now
he's caught.


This works rarely.


Thank ye, Madam.


I say, Neighbour, you are -- but no matter -- a Rogue's trick!


Well, well, I've done; no more on it; let's run and Ba^l him.


By all means, 'twas well moved; sincerely 'twas an unlucky accident.


Stop 'em, stop 'em; now's your time to have the Papers subscribed.


Stay, Gentlemen, stay; first put your Hands and Seals to these Papers; you
know we have much business, and can't wait your return.


That's right, one thing should be done before another: which is mine?


This, Sir.


Both these are yours.


Now all's done, let's run, Neighbour, for my Son's relief: the delivery of the
Papers is forgot; but no matter, we'll do it when we come back.


Now, Gentlemen, play your game well; the Stakes lye ready before ye, and here
are no old Bullies to sweep the Table.


Well, Ladies, you see the Common danger (for such I hope you'll own it) our
good Fortune has allow'd this Critical minute for us all: which, if well
employed, brings a continued happiness -- we've been good Counsellors too.


Now, Revenge, Love, and Liberty call aloud: sure such powerful music must
affect the heart, and set the soul afloat.


Come, Gentlemen, Ceremonies are now dangerous, because tedious; I'm fairly
resolved to go with ye.


And I.


You'll stay behind I suppose, Madam?


Why faith, Captain, I doubt whether I shall or not.


If you do, Madam, then I must sleep a Bachelor to night.


No, hang it, that's a dull comfortless life; I'll rather try the Fool's
Paradise, and for once be married.


That's well thought of; the Gentleman in Black, I suppose, has conjured Sir
John already half way into the Circle; let us succeed, and get the second or
third cast of his Office.


Body o'me, the Rogues shall be severely punished; why, they had not a Writ
against the Young-man.


By Ovid I'm sick, the Rogues have frighted me so, I shall not be able to show my
self a man to night again.


Villains, Vagabonds, Rakes, Rascals, Sons of -- G^d forgive me, they had
almost spoiled our mirth; Rogues --


Sincerely 'tis no matter, all's well again: now to our business -- ha! where
are the Lawyers? -- gone -- hoa? who waits there?


Where are the Law^ers? the Parson? and my Daughters?

And my Niece; my Niece I ask?


All gone abroad, Sir.


Body o'me! we're betrayed, cheated, ruined, and undone.


Pox on your House-keepers Lawyers, I say.


'Tis rare work, and Ned has a hand in it; that young Dog must have a finger in
the pie; I'll have him hanged; I'll have him hanged, Tyburn is too good for the
Rogue -- O that Vill^n!


By Jupiter I'm finely served, I've lost my Supper, just when my Appetite had
taught me to long for it.


Run, Sirrah, run; cry, stop the Thieves, the Murderers, the Robbers, the
any-things, body o'me, all's lost.


No Sir, 'tis not lost, that is on a friend bestowed.


So* Sirrah; I knew the Rogue was one at this mischief; I knew't you dog you,
I'll make you -- let me come at him -- this Ca^e and his Shoulders must renew
their acquaintance.


Body o'me, we have entertained Wolves in Sheeps-cloathing.


By Jupiter, two of them were in Fox's Clothing: but uds so, I hope they are
not married, Sir-father.


Thus low I kneel to beg your Blessing: this Gentleman is your Son, and my
Husband.


A damned confounded Rogue, is he?


Body o'me, the young Woman has out-witted me: but since she's married to a
Knight's Son, I forgive her; I ever esteemed your Father Sir Thomas -- Rise,
Daughter; prove an obedient Wife, and my Blessing shall never be wanting.


This sudden Change speaks the goodness of your Nature; nor shall my duty (if
possible) ever show it self less than your kindness -- this Gentleman too
deserves your pardon and esteem.


How! body o'me! Flo. married!


Yes faith, Sir, I longed to taste the sweet Sin of Rebellion: and now the fact
is committed, I want a Remission.


Uds so, Sir father; the Jades are all mad.


Ned, Sirrah, Rascal, are you really married to this Woman? Durst you use your
Uncle thus? -- 'Twas a needless question, the graceless Villain would stick at
nothing; but I'll be revenged, I will, Sirrah; let them all starve.


What's past can't be recalled; the Girl was never (it seems) ordained for a
Nun, and the method she has pursued persuades me she has Wit: I wish you, Sir,
all that happiness you desire; may you be envied by none, and esteemed by all.


This indeed alone could add to my happiness: your friendship and this young
Lady's love exalt me above the reach of F^rtune's malice: should she now ^rown,
I'd laugh at her weakness; she can give no more, for this mighty gift has
exhausted all her treasure.


I've presumed without your Consent to marry your Niece, my --


Well, well, Sir, and starve with her when you've done; my Consent was worth
nothing: the blessing of a thousand pounds was a mere trifle; the Parson's was
enough for you: but no matter, let that buy your Dinner; I'll see you all
starve like so many Rats in a ruinous house.


No, Sir, this secures me from that plague you threaten.


What's that, Sirrah? -- I profess I long to swinge this Rogue.


Ten thousand pounds Alderman Choleric gave me with his Niece; I suppose
'twas all her own.


Oh Dog! oh Villain! oh Wretch! I'm choosed! ruined! and -- but 'tis no matter!
I'll be revenged; I'll have Law; I'll spend all I have in the recovery of my
right, I will -- let me come at him --


Have patience, Neighbour, body of me, I begin to think that I'm no better used
than I should be.


Why faith, Sir, I've made bold with eight thousand pounds instead of that
designed for your Son.


And body of me, I suppose you've been such another Counsellor.


Yes, faith, Sir, I presume ye know these Letters to be of your own making.


Sinceely speaking, 'tis so; I hope however I've got discrcet Creditors who
won't sue a Commission of Bankrupt against me.


Look ye Ned; you're a Rogue, a confounded unlucky Villain.


Uds so, so he is, and used me once very Scurvily; but by Iupiter I dare not
complain, lest he renew his kindness.


I'm now master of Ten thousand pounds; I remember your old Maxim, Law for
Money; and if it hold, you'll add another Ten to it.


Look ye now, the Rogue has me already on the sore hip -- Ned, Ned, why Ned, I
am thy Uncle, and thy best friend; I've a great kindness for thee, and would
not willingly put thee to charges: banish, my dear boy Ned, all thoughts of
Law, and live happy with thy present fortune.


No disputes on a bridal night, the business shall be amicably composed at
another time.


Now, now look ye; whom have we here? if he's one of Ned's Companions, he's a
Rogue, and she a Jilt.


Gentlemen, I wish you much Joy, and you, fair Ladies; I was informed of your
good fortunes, and could be no longer absent; I'm happy too, and blessed as you
are.


This, Sir, is a Gentleman, and my friend.


You're very welcome, Sir; Body of me, my Son ^ in-Law's friend is no less than
a Member of my family, and may confidently claim my Service.


Sir, I'm your very humble Servant.


Uds so, he has got a delicate Wench, would I had married her.


How long, Freelove, hast thou been acquainted with this young Lady?


Not above two days; 'twas by Madam De^c^ys means I had the good fortune to be
beloved, and Marriage soon follow'd.


Then, Jack, thou art abused, I know her Circumstances, and can assure thee she
is not Mistress of a hundred pounds.


Kind heaven bless me with the gift of patience, I m ruined, Fortune has done
her worst; and in be^raying others, I've undone my self.


Thou too art cheated; but to salve this ^ore, ^e give thee a th^usand pounds,
and one hundred yearly during thy (...): forget Sir John (...) and the follies
of thy younger years; be Just to thy husband, and in so doing thou art kind to
thy self and me -- in the mean time, Madam D^c^y has used you unkindly.


She has my Bond too for a thousand pounds.


By heaven, and mine too.


These Bonds, Madam, won't be allow'd of by a Judge; and to evite further
trouble, 'tis fitting you should restore them.


O dear Sir, two thousand pounds! I deserve them very well.


The Pillory you mean, Madam.


Truly, Sir, I scorn your words; I'm an honest Woman, and won't be so abused, I
do every thing above board, and -- and --


You did assist me in my Love, and therefore I'm your friend; give up the
Bonds, and I'll give you a Bill of fifty pounds upon my Goldsmith in Chea^side.


Well, Sir, my duty binds me to obedience; and rather than lose your
friendship, I'll do it.


Come aw^u me Jo, be me Saul we sall be aus merry aus fifty beggars aut au
fair; this letter will gau^ me new Master loup out of his skin for faunness,
baut speak of the meekle deel, aun yer be sure to staurt him -- hey Sir, read
th^ut, aun see whaut it says tea ye yer aul Aunt is aus deed aus au herring,
aun hes left ye au her geer.


Well, Sir John, I hope you'll remember me now I'm married.


Are you her husband? Sirrah?


A goad am I Sirrah, thea English men hey na breeding, shame fau me gin they
sou'd na gang to Holland to learn it. -- But whaut a vengeance is the matter we
me Master, has the aul wutch geen him the wraung sow be the lug, I woner?


It is so, good and bad news come together.


Then Fortune is Just; thou art not, Jack, beholding to thy wife for all, for
now thou hast brought thy share -- now Joy shall shine in every face, and
Music shall elevate the Soul to mirth; let the thoughts of business for a
while be suspended, and Love the only end of all our actions.


Then body of me Mr. Chorus shall give us a Song: Dick call him in presently.


Uds so, Sir-father, I'll sing a Song first, I learned it of my Landlady's
daughter at the Swan, who had the Child by young Hobs the Carrier.


With all my heart boy; Sincerely I'm glad to see thee so merry.


Rogues, Villains, they will be all hanged


Hem, hem, by Jupiter I have a very good pipe upon occasion.


Now, Sir-father, how do ye like it? by Apollo I sung it very well.

I will gee au Scotlaun Dance worth forty o't, baut I waunt a piper.


The Violin, Sirrah, is better.


Play up thaun Fiddlers, aun be haung't tea ye, aut let me hey au ^erray bonny
Spring.


Now me bonny lauds whaut think o't -- be me Saul I waunt me Supper; ^ea ye
neathing amaung ye tea eet? wa in Scotlau^ we eet aun drink three days au on
e^, tea mauke us able to please the Bride aun au her Maidens.

Now let's have another Song.


And as tha^ ends, let the Dance begin.


Now, Gentlemen, let's take another Road to Pleasure, change the Scene of
mirth, and in the next Room (larger than this, and fitted for the purpose) ^oss
a Eumper.

Uds so.


Wine pleasure brings, and Care destroys,
It new creates the Soul for Joys; Ta^ la-ra, ta tal fa-la.
I've lost my Mistress; but by Jupiter I'm ^ to be merry.

Body of me, you're in ^ Boy -- Come, Neighbour Choleric* ^get and forgive,
as the saying is: Sincerely, who knows but I may live to get another Daughter
for ye?


No matter, let Ned, and that Jilt be hanged; let the rest of the Rogues be --
But stay; I will drink with them before I go.


Then, Gentlemen, let's go in.


This day has repaired all our Sufferings past, and we may safely now, without
vanity, believe our selves beloved, if Youth (e're Judgment^ strong) knew all
the Joys, the true content, and peace of mind, which honest Love rewarded can
bestow, they'd envy our happiness, and contemn that uncertain state of life,
which instead of pleasure, gives continued pains.


Love and Ambition, something are a-kin;
But mighty Love is still the nobler Sin;
It wakes the sleeping Soul, and makes it still
Seek greater Goods than purblind Reason will.
We covet nothing, when we all possess;
Our Joys wax greater, and our Fears grow less;
And lasting Pleasures with our Years increase.
YOur Favour's the Reward, I and the Author --
O, stay, no --
The Author and I do jointly seek it;
He finds the Wit, and I -- the face to speak it:
And that we may succeed in our Design,
I come to Court you -- armed with Wit and Wine.
The Fair alone from this Device will shrink;
For as they never Hiss, they never Drink
-- in Public:
Yet these are the terms (the Author's such a Fop)
If you don't Hiss -- I must not Taste a drop.
Then, Friendly Sirs, be to your Servant just,
And Damn the Epilogue to Quench my Thirst.
^ ^ulness so would mutter,
I should not (...) Bottle after Supper --
What not yet, are all against me bent*
Egad, I'll take your Silence for Consent.
-- I dare not venture:
O, so -- very well --
very well:
Nay! Now once more --
Will. Pinkethman begs you to be Civil;
To have Wine by one, and not drink's, the Devil.
You're all Good-natur'd if you're Cross to night,
And you'll oblige your humble Ser^t by it;
For though the Wit is Counterfeit, the Wine is right.
But now for the Epilogue -- Egad this is not the
Paper! What shall I do! Let me see if I can
remem^ it -- Ha! hum! No; well
I'll speak one of my Own. --
But now I think on it, his is very Pretty;
And I'm afraid I shall not be half so Witty:
So if you'll stay till I go find the right,
I'll read it now -- Else call to morrow night.
But hold!
I've something now of Consequence to say,
Good simple Bays on me bestows his Play;
Therefore, dear Friends, come all on the Third Day.
If not to him, to me your Favour show,
And think on poor Will Pinkethman; for you must know,
Your Long Vacations make him very Low.
And now the Fatal time is Drawing on,
When you will all Forsake this Charming Town,
And to the Country for Diversion run.
The Gamesters, They to Epsom take their way;
And while they are with the City-Dames at play,
The Husband's Bowl their Coin and Cares away.
The Masks (Alas, poor Souls!) they must stay here,
And to the ^olly will in Shoal repair,
To feed on Cold stuffed Beef, and drink stale Beer.
The Players; ay, they're left too in the Lurch;
Why, they must even go twice a Day to Church:
For since they're like to live upon the Air,
'Tis fit their Fasting should be joined with Prayer.

