Fly, Fly, Help, Oh! Help, or we dye.

WHat mournful cries are these on every side!
The Winds waft nothing to this Island over,
But the complainings of some Neighbouring Shore,
And all the Echoes are in groans employed.
The fair Augusta too, I weeping see,
Though none so fair, so rich, so great as She;
Alas! my Fears increase:
You gentle Nymphs of Plenty and of Peace,
Shall now go seek some other Shore.
And you that with your Presents wait,
Shall bring your gifts no more.

I to no other Dwelling will betake,

Thy beauteous Streams I never will forsake,

And we our Presents still will make.

We our Presents still will make.

Thy Stores with all my Plenty shall be filled.

My Halcion on thy Banks her Nest shall build.

Thou shalt in all my noblest Arts be skilled.

My Jewels shall adorn no Brow but Thine.

Thy Lovers in my Gold shall shine,

Thou for thy Slaves, shalt have these Scorched Sons of mine.

Thy beauteous streams we never will forsake.

And we our Presents still will make.

We our Presents still will make.

What should so much Beauty fear,
Round this Isle the Heavens appear
Like your own Streams, all undisturbed and clear:

These beauteous Nymphs unfrightned too,
Not minding what on other Shores they do,
Their innocent delights pursue.

See, They (void of grief or fear)
Come to entertain you here.

Oh! now my Spirits I recover,
I've waked the Genius of this Isle, my Warlike Lover.

What cries are these disturb my pleasing Rest?

'Tis I, (my Love) 'tis I, thy Aid request.

Is it my Nymph, what dost thou fear?

Does not my Love, sad cries around him hear?

Wilt thou thy fear at every shriek proclaim?

Am I alone to blame?
Do you not see Augusta, Rich and Fair*
(Though to her Lap, I all my Treasure bear)
Will for no comfort stay her Tears?
Augusta is inclined to fears.
Be she full, or be she waining,
Still Augusta is complaining.
Give her all you can to ease Her,
You shall never, never please Her.

Augusta is inclined to fears, c.

These fears do not belong to Her nor You;
Europe only should lament,
The Nymphs of his fair Continent.
Some Giants now pursue.
But this sweet Isle no Monster can invade.

Oh send those poor distressed Nymphs some aid.

From the mild power of this happy place.
Who is inclined,
To make the World as peaceful as his mind,
They have already gained the grace:
Two Heroes of his own Celestial Race
Are sent; the one to Triumph over the Seas,
And all the watery Divinities.
The other, Monsters of the Land to quell,
And make the Nymphs in safety dwell.

The first, in War has all Perfections gained,
That can by humane Nature be attained:
The second promises, to be
All that in the first we see.

Mars to the first does all his Glory lend:
The second Beauty, Youth, and Love attend.

Both in high perfections shine:
Valor, Glory, Race Divine:
Wait awhile, and you shall see
Both return with Victory.

Hark, hark! the Triumph's near,
And see! they both already Crowned appear.

Rejoice you watery Deities:
The mighty Monsters of the Seas,
This valiant Prince has slain.
The God of this fair Isle shall now
Command (as all his Right allow)
The Empire of the Main.
Ye Gods and Nymphs of Plains and Groves,
Of Springs and Streams, enjoy your Loves;
This youthful Hero has subdued
The Satyrs now of every Wood:
Has killed or ta'n 'em all for Slaves,
And chased the Giants from their Caves.
Let us both their praises sing,
Whilst we both in Triumph bring;
Let us all contend to grace 'em
With our loud and joyfull'st thanks,
Whilst upon the flowery Banks
Of this beauteous Nymph we place 'em.

Now welcome Heroes to my blessed abode,
And to my Nymph beloved by every God.

Welcome to my Love and me,
Now we all shall happy be.

Now we all shall happy be.

Now you whose Valor gives the World repose,
See what Fame on you bestows.
Her shining Temple shall preserve your Names,
And thence her Trumpet your Renown proclaims.

To our Divinity now let us go,
And at his Feet your Crowns and Trophies throw.

I will my thanks in Offerings proclaim.

I'll lend you Spice.

I Gold.

And I the same.

I'll be your Guide.
My Streams beneath his Palace hourly slide.
There it is not far before you,
Pleasure, Arts, Religion, Glory,
Warmed by his propitious Smile,
Flourish there, and bless this Isle.

But stay! what wonder does my spirit seize?
See! here are both the great Divinities.

The God and Goddess too of this blessed Isle!
Chaste Beauty in Her Aspect shines,
And Love in His does smile.

Quickly (Heroes) as 'tis meet,
Throw your Trophies at their Feet.
Fall down, and adore 'em;
Whilst with speed we hither call,
The Gods of Neighbouring Groves, and all
Their Nymphs to dance before 'em.

Now for the Play, the Prologue is done,
The Dancing is over, and the Singers are gone.
The Ladies so Fine, and so Fair, it surpasses,
Are dressed, and have all tak'n leave of their Classes.
Where are the Slaves should make ready the Stage?
Here, here are the Slaves should make ready the Stage.

HOW am I tired, thus vainly to pursue
A Nymph, I cannot keep in view?
I daily through Arcadia rove,
Over every Hill, through every Grove,
But in her Ears to Sigh my Love;
And may as well the Shades and Echoes chase;
The Shades I easier can embrace,
Which grieves me too, whilst I this Maze have trod,
There's none to pity a despairing God.

In these Arcadian Woods I've lost my Heart;
Whilst I the Nymph, by whom I smart,
Pursue, some little Ease to get;
This Jove I've oft a wandering met:
He makes my Jealousy grow strong;
What does he do out of his Heaven so long?
I'm sure on some fair Nymph he has Design,
And all my fear is, lest it should be mine.
Can no soft Beauty be Embraced,
But he must still desire a Taste?
That the Old Titans from his Throne had hurled
This general grievance of the World;
But I too soon to rage am won,
Perhaps there is no injury done;
Another Nymph has snatched his Eye,
I'll go discourse with him, and try.

Ah! Mercury! What Fortune brought thee here?
Thou faithful Envoy of the Gods, Come near;
Plunged deep in sorrow, with despair oppressed:
I now was wishing for some Breast,
Where I my Secrets might repose,
And Fate has sent the best I could have chose.

What wondrous pain
Is it can make the King of Gods complain?

My old Affliction Love!

What do I hear!
This News I did not vainly fear.
Now dare not I what Nymph he loves enquire,
Lest we should both of us the same admire.

Thou seem disturbed, what does thy passion move?

Only my Loyalty for Jove:
And Rage at the Tyrannic Boy,
That dares great Jove's Repose destroy;
His Boldness Jove too mildly bears,
Though us poor Vassal Gods he dares
Into his Chains and Fetters bring,
He is too saucy with our King.
You ought to make his very Godhead cease,
For yours and Heavens universal Peace.

Oh let thy vain Discourses dye!
Loves is delightful Tyranny:
There is more pleasure in his pains,
Than all the Joys our Heaven contains:
If Love I out of Heaven should chase,
It would appear so dull a place,
My self and all the Gods would be,
even tired with Immortality.

I own these Joys, sometimes I try,
To pass away Eternity:
But are they not for Jove too low.

The World must not the Secret know.
We boast great things to be adored and sought;
(There is some Pleasure to be happy thought)
But for all Joys of our abode,
From Earth I would not move;
Nor be content to be a God,
To be deprived of Love.
Without that Joy Two vast Extremes would join;
Things without Sense would equal things Divine:
'Twixt us and Plants there would be little odds,
And saucy Mortals be more Blessed than Gods.

Oh! let not Jove submit to such a Fate
Poorly to envy things he does Create.

No, if to Mortals I present Delight,
I to the Feast will still my self invite.

Yes Yes, we know Joves Appetite;
E're quite abstain from Loves sweet Feasts,
He will humbly dine with Birds and Beasts.

I still provide with care,
We Gods in all Delights should share;
Besides the Loves by us embraced
Would kill a poor weak Mortal, but to taste,
We know what pleasure Love affords,
To Heavy Beasts and Mettled Birds;
Here and there at will we fly,
Each step of Natures Perch we try;
Down to the Beast, and up again
To the more fine delights of Man:
We every sort of pleasure try;
So much advantage has a Deity.

Nay, if Jove Rents the World to Man and Beast,
He may preserve the Royalty at least,
And freedom take to Hunt in any Grounds;
The Pleasures of great Jove should have no Bounds:
This distant talk still keeps me sweating here,
In Agonies of Jealousy and Fear;
And if I do not put an end,
The day he thus will gladly spend:
I'll not torment my self in vain,
I'll boldly ask and end my pain.
All Joys the World must own their Sovereigns due;
But yet the Story does untold remain,
What Beauty did the Glory gain,
Once more the Worlds great Ruler to subdue.

Oh! Mercury! the fairest Nymph of Humane Race!
All former Loves of mine she does so far surpass,
I them for Beauties scarce allow,
And never truly loved till now.

Astonishment!

Did they all live again,
I would not take the pain,
To vex my self into a shape,
For all the pleasure of a Rape;
Except it were to sharpen my desire,
And to return to her with greater fire.

What should she be? and where does she remain?

Oh! that's my grief, she's one of cold Diana's Train.

Oh! I am stabbed! my fear prophetic proves,
I am assured, it is my Nymph he loves.

Thou know what ills of late were done,
In Heaven and Earth, by Phoebus Frantic Son:
I from high Heaven descending to survey
The half-burnt World, and with a God-like care
All ruined places to repair,
Came here to view my loved Arcadia.
As I in every place did pass,
To cloth the withered Fields with Grass,
To all the Woods new Leaves and Shades to bring,
Set Rivers running, fill each empty Spring:
-- I chanced to spy
This Young and Beauteous Nymph trip often by.

And has great Jove her Name yet ever heard*
No opportunity I yet have got,
She swiftly by like some bright Meteor shot
Dazzled my Eye, and straight she disappeard.

And whither ran the vanishing Vision still?

Or to the Woods, or over some Hill,
To Hunt some Dear, or swifter Roe,
Still in her Hand a Dart or Bow:
Her Garb did negligence express;
For oh! she had no need of dress:
Concealed, I oft pursued her, but in vain;
For still at last she mixed with chaste Diana's Train.

Can she be gained?

By no Enchantment can,
She flies the very Shadow of a Man:
She thinks it does her Virtue stain,
If she but sleep where one has lain;
That she is of some purity beguiled.
If she but taste the Air, the Breath of one defiled;
If any wandering Loves by chance
T'approach her be so bold,
Away the naked Cupids dance,
She makes them shake with Cold.

This in my Soul does some small comfort breed,
What then to gain her will ye do?

-- I do not know,
It does the skill of one poor God exceed.
But ha! I see 'em come from yonder Grove,
Diana all the Train, this way they move.

They are preparing for this Mornings Chase.

Let's hide our selves in Clouds apace,
Lest we our being here betray,
And quickly chase 'em all away.

But as they pass I'll watch your Eye,
And your loved Nymph that way descry.

COme! Come away my Nymphs, too long we have reposed,
The Morning has her Golden Doors enclosed,
And there stands blushing on us! -- Come away,
Let us not loose the gentlest part of day;
Princess Calisto, most admired beloved,
The Fairest, Chastest, most approved
Of all that ever graced my Virgin Throng,
You, who of great and Royal Race are sprung,
Born under Golden Roofs, and bred to ease,
To every kind of soft delight,
To Glory, Power, and all that might
A Royal Virgin please.
What could your tender Years to pain so soon enure?
And how can you this hard and toilsome life endure?

Divinest power! Can any pleasures be
Compared to Innocence and Chastity?
From Toils of greatness I discharge my mind,
And only in these Shades true ease I find.

Oh! with what pride! and feigned neglect of Art
This Royal Favourite storms our Goddess Heart,
Conquers it too, and rules her Power Divine,
Whilst all our Merits unregarded shine.

I never such a Victim had before,
Crown Beauty, Youth what all the World Adore,
You bring at once in Sacrifice to me,
The Offering exceeds the Deity.

Our poor deluded Goddess is undone;
This Favourite has her Heart and Empire won.

How am I pleased my Sisters praise to hear,
Though like a little Star I near appear,
Nature and Friendship do enough prefer
My Name to Honour, whilst I shine in her.

The Crown and Glory at your feet I throw,
Are for your favour offering too low;
And giving only what I scorn and hate,
I gain your Service at too cheap a rate.

Oh! how for praise she spreads a spacious Net?
Not one regard to us can passage get:
Our Virtues will not go for Virtues long;
I neither will, nor ought to bear this wrong.

You Princess! do adorn, enrich my Shade,
Ne'er was so great, so early Triumphs made
At once over Beauty, Glory, Youth and Ease
All of 'em fair delightful Provinces.
None e're so young such Courage did express;
The Macedonian Victories were less.
And better to Adorn and Guard my Groves,
This fair young Warrior, against Ease and Loves,
You bring to Train up here, -- before whose Eye
I see already vanquished Cupids fly,
With Wounds a bleeding, and with broken Bows,
A fair Comparison in Arms you chose.

She to much Honour me, in this prefers;
And though my Courage cannot equal hers,
None to your Service shall more zealous be,
Nor still to love a greater Enemy.

Hark how they bandy Praise, and Flattery round!
Each takes her turn to catch it at rebound;
Whilst we desertless Fools must patience feign,
And Praise our selves, if any praise we'll gain.
Our Youth I find we wisely wast,
and are to mighty purpose chaste;
Since these our kind rewards must prove,
I will in pure Revenge go love.
A God-like Youth, and Vassal to my Eyes,
Has long with patience born my Tyranies.
The Humble Slave each Moment I torment,
And Rage which others slight, on him I vent:
But now his Sufferings I'll requite,
I'll go and Love him out of spite.

Now Nymphs before the Rosy Morning fades,
And the days Fury chase us to the Shades:
Let's Hunt the nimble Dear without delay,
We have decreed the Martyrs of the day,
And what you all shall kill together bring,
And meet when Sun declines at yonder Spring.

-- Nor, I'll about another care,
I'll seek my Love, discover me who dare;
On the whole Train the shame shall fall;
I'll swear we are Dissemblers all.
From Men we only seem to fly,
To meet 'em with more privacy:
That I sincerity approve,
And boldly own to all the World I Love.

THanks to the Fates! my Heart is now at ease!
Two different Nymphs our Inclinations please.

Ah! Mercury! what Beauty have I seen?

I have with Jove in equal Raptures been.

I in so hot an Agony did stay
The Cloud, in which I hidden lay,
Dropped, and Melted half away:
That she such Beauty should on Shades bestow,
And careless Love should let her escape his Bow.

And is it she?

Why dost thou so enquire?

Because I one of the same Train admire,

Art thou by these Cold Beauties wounded then?

-- Yes, by the scornful'st of the Train:
Your Nymph is yielding, if compared to mine;
Yours hates she knows not why, mine with design;
Yours only flies you, mine returns and fights;
Yours lets you dye, but mine to kill delights:
You have but One Aversion to subdue,
I Thousands have, which every Hour renew.

Poor Hermes! how are we by Love oppressed?
Two wounded Gods here desolate appear,
Each with an Arrow sticking in his Breast,
Goes wandering round the Woods he knows not where;
Chacing his Nymph, some little ease to find,
And may as well pursue the Fleeting Wind.

Pursue the Wind? rather a Storm I chase,
Which turns to dash her Fury in my Face,
Not in wild shapes, but in all Beauty dressed,
That ever did a Humane Shape adorn.
I've met my Nymph, and have my Love expressed,
And never any thing obtained, but scorn.
She meets me, (true!) but 'tis to mock me still,
And if she ever smiles, it is to kill.

Oh! Hermes! you your self may happy call;
When Maids show scorn, they oft are near to yield,
And they who venture once to fight, may fall;
But mine will not be drawn into the Field:
Could I entice her thither any way,
I only for a little scorn would pray.
I'll not to Heaven, till I obtain some ease,
Let Jealous Juno watch me as she please.

What will ye do? you no attempt must dare.

Prithee, what God or Mortal can forbear?
T'enjoy such Beauty I'd no Shape refuse;
Nay, if I knew what form most pleased her Eye,
I'd not deny
To be that thing, and my whole Godhead loose.

-- O wondrous power of Love!
Too hard for Jove!
I wonder not he baffles my defence*;
He is too Mighty for Omnipotence!

Hermes I've thought! I can my self relieve.

What new Minerva does Joves Brain conceive?

A sure and pleasant Ambush I will lay;
I'll in Diana's shape the Nymph betray:
My wanton Kisses then she'll ne'er suspect,
Nor my design detect.
No Vice but for a Virtue may escape,
If it be acted in a Holy Shape.
Disguised like her, I'll Kiss, Embrace, be free.

Yes, and persuade her too, 'tis Chastity.
All Actions finely gilded over succeed;
Men still the Doers mind, and not the Deed:
The Nymph will all Diana does allow;
Nay think she li^'d in some mistake till now.

'Tis Sacred Truth; then firmly I decree,
I will serve her, as all Mankind serves me.
When on the World they would impose some Cheat,
Most strict Devotion they will counterfeit:
Look grave on all Men, and then whine to me,
With such absurd and apish Mimicry:
I scarce from Laughter, spite of Rage forbear,
And take Diversion in the Villains Prayer:
This Trick of Mortals shall be learnt by me;
I to serve Love will mimic Chastity.
What Form wilt thou assume for thy design?

What better Form than one that is Divine?
In Humane shape no more to her I'll go;
My own true Form I thus attired will show,
When she perceives it is a God does Love,
Perhaps Ambition the proud Nymph may move.
This satisfaction too I shall enjoy:
'Tis not a shape embraces her, but I,
Whilst our delights we in disguises choose,
We half the pleasure of Enjoyment loose.

I like thy plot, thy Thoughts agree with mine,
Come let us each with speed to his design.
Now vanish from my Thoughts all vexing cares,
And rule of Humane, or Divine Affairs.
Let Gods and Mortals what they will pursue,
And Fate and Fortune their own Business do.
Let wrengling Eliments contend their fill,
And all the Wheels of the Worlds Frame stand still;
Let toiling Nature if she please go sleep,
Or for her sport a general Revel keep.
Let trembling Mortals now go curse or pray,
Be good or wicked, which they will today,
I care not what disorders there shall be;
Let Heaven and Earth slide into Anarchy.
All politic Cares of every kind
I'll from my Breast remove;
And will to day perplex my mind,
With never a Thought but Love.

HArk, Hark, I hear the merry Hunters Horn.

The Sound from yonder Hill by Winds is born.

Diana, and her Nymphs are all that way
A Hunting gone.

So soon e're break of day?

Let 'em, let em go.
Lovers, better pleasures know.

Let the cold Nymphs run dabbling in the Dew,
Kind Love to warmer Pleasures us invites.

I do not envy their Delights,
Whilst my dear Strephon does continue true.

Whilst thus severe my Sylvia does remain,
I envy not the Hunters, but the Slain.

Poor Corydon, thy Flame remove,
I pity thee, but cannot love.
Yet I own, I have something in every Vein,
Which moves me to Love, could I meet with a Swain,
Who were to my mind, and would love me again.

See Shepherds, the day is begun:
Come with our Sports let's welcome the Sun.

Kind Lovers, Love on,
Least the World be undone,
And Mankind be lost by Degrees:
For if all from their Loves
Should go wander in Groves,
There soon would be nothing but Trees.

Kind Lovers, Love on, c.

WHen shall I get this Vision in my sight;
She flies from Love, as Shadows from the Light:
Whilst I pursue her, flaming with desire,
And over these Hills roll like an Orb of Fire;
Making the Sun the Rule of Day resign.
To these more bright and piercing Beams of mine.

'Tis folly longer over these Hills to stray:
'Tis noon, and now the Golden Dust of Day
Dissolved, does from the Heavenly Mountains flow,
In fiery Streams, and drowns the World below.
In the Cool Groves our Nymphs we now shall find,
Wading in Shades, and bathing in the Wind:
Whilst Phoebus shoots his Arrows round,
And vainly seeks the Nymphs to wound.
The Groves he vainly does invade;
His fiery Darts are quenched in Shade.
Fit your disguise, and thither let's repair.

At small expense I from the Wealthy Air,
My self with any Figure can supply:
Or I can fix an Image in the Eye.
Come here you wandering Atoms of the Air.
You that are fittest for a Form so fair,
And now my Beauteous Ambuscade prepare.
^nto Diana's Shape your selves Congeal,
Under that Ice the burning Jove Conceal;
There let me all lie covered, like the Brow
Of some high Flaming Mountain hid in Snow.

See! the assembling Atoms do obey;
Or rather the great Jove is fled away:
And the fair Goddess of these Woods is here.
Hail Beauteous! --

Oh! Thou Rallyest now I fear;
But can thou any where
Descry one Beam of Jupiter?

Not one by your own self I swear;
There's nothing but Diana can be seen:
Her Habit, Feature, Shape, Proportion men;
Nay, and your Voice exactly tuned I hear,
And past discovery deludes the Ear.

Now you cool Atoms, from your Ranks disband,
Flow to loose Air again at my command:
Thither return like Rivers to the Main,
And let me now be Jupiter again.

Again the Atoms Loyally obey,
The Snowy shape is all dissolved away.

Poor God! No shape at all thou did descry:
I only Grav'd a Figure on thy Eye:
And the soft Voice which you believe you hear.
Was formed but in the Concave of your Ear.

Ah! Jove! How useful, and of what delight
Is Sovereign Power? 'tis that determines Right.
Nothing is truly good, but what is great:
A Mortal you would punish for this Cheat.

I would, and justly; shall the thing I make
Presume the Freedom of a God to take?
I cannot err, what e're my Actions be;
There's no such thing as good, or ill to me.
No Action is by Nature good or ill;
All things derive their Natures from my will.
If Virtue from my will distinct could be,
Virtue would be a Power Supreme to me.
What no dependency on me will own,
Makes me a Vassal, and usurps my Throne,
If so I can revenge me in a Trice,
Turn all the Balance, and make Virtue Vice.

Jove like himself, with Reasons firm and strong,
Upholds the Port, does to a God belong;
For I have ever of opinion been,
Gods only should be privileged to sin;
We guild sower Virtue with fine Titles still,
To make men swallow the unpleasant Pill;
But from the Sweets of sin they'll ne'er be chased,
E're since the Liquorish Slaves have got a taste:
But let us hasten now to seek our Loves,
And first examine all the neighbouring Groves.

See! something swiftly darted by my sight;
Was it a Nymph, or sudden Glance of Light?

A Nymph I swear!

Oh! whither is she run?

See! See! to yonder Grove she's gone:
There like a glittering Star in Night,
She tempers all the Shades with Light.
Fair Streams of Light seem after her to stray,
Like the bright dawning of some Beauteous day.

It is my Nymph, none else is half so fair.
Fly thou, whilst thither I repair:
Fly, or thou ruin'st my design.

Nay stay, perhaps the Nymph is mine:
If mine, she will to mock me stay.

If mine, thou chacest her away.

I in a Cloud my self will hide.

I'm ruined, if thou art descried.

And I, if mine, discover Jove.

But mine will fly.

But mine may Love.

I'll be so hid, she shall not Jove surprise.

But Jove may peep through his disguise.

It shall no damage to thee bring.

Oh! no one can resist a King.

I will not tempt thy Nymph I swear.

Your Glory will, if you forbear.

Oh! thy Impertinence! the Nymph is gone!
Thy saucy wrangling has my Hopes undone.

For what should all this anger be?
Perhaps 'tis you have ruined me.

Surely you ought at my commands to move;

Love understands not either King or Jove.

What Monarch will endure this from a slave?

What constant lover but is bold and brave?

Begone, thou wilt provoke my rage.
In foolish strife no more engage.

Thrice happy Jove! your Nymph I now espy!

Where, where?

In yonder neighbouring Wood!

So nigh?
Happy Contention which my flight delayed!
For I had lost her if I had not stayed.

To me the Obligation then confess,
And chide no more a Lovers haughtiness.

Be gone, be gone, and thy own Nymph pursue,
Or once again thou wilt thy King undo.
Now all you Troops of Winged Loves, come see
Your selves revenged on your fair Enemy.

Under the days oppression tired I grow;
The Sun to day does no compassion show.
In these cool shades I am compelled to stray,
To shun the merciless fury of the day.
My Goddess up the Mountain's farther gone;
The Nymph's dispersed, and I left all alone:
My hopes to find 'em I will now forsake,
And tired with hunting too, will gladly take
The invitation of this Bed of Flowers,
In soft repose to pass away some Hours:
There lye my Bow, and take thy ease unbent;
Thy weary Arms I'll not this hour torment.
And you my Arrows in your Lodging keep,
And there from mischief lull your selves to sleep.
Mine and your travel for an Hour shall cease,
And now poor Herds go browse awhile in peace.

Oh! Love! what pleasure dost thou here prepare?
Dull Heaven, I shall return to thee no more;
Here is a Pleasure I prefer before:
All the delights I am possessed of there.
Now Juno thy disgrace with patience bear,
And to disturb my Pleasures do not dare:
My former Loves I yielded to thy Rage:
I was contented they should be removed;
Alas! I find I only thought I loved.
No Nymph but this did e're my Heart engage:
Thou might contend for Beauty with the rest;
But this shakes all thy Interest in my Breast.
Keep in thy Heaven, and do not cast an Eye;
There gnaw thy self with rage and jealousy.
Thou art already half undone,
Be glad thou dost enjoy my Throne:
For plague me now, I^le chase thee from my Bed,
And place thy Crown upon thy Rivals Head.
But I have waked my Nymph from her repose,
Her opening Eyes a sparkling Heaven disclose;
Wherein a Thousand Captive Cupids lye,
Oppressed and fettered all with Chastity.
In those Two Temples full of Heavenly Light,
At the bright Crystal Portal of her sight,
Let me in fair Diana's form appear:
And let my Voice dissolve into her Ear;
And thither in those pleasing accents flow,
The Goddess speaks, when she does kindness show.
My Huntress here at her repose? which way
Did you pursue the Chase to day?

My Goddess here so nigh?
Hail Power! more great than Jove, though Jove stood by,
In my esteem!

Till now what Lover heard
Himself with pleasure to himself preferred?
Oh! now my Fire does rage within!
I for the pain,
No longer can my self contain;
Without more forms I must begin.
Princess Calisto, pleasure of my sight!
Grace of my Train, my pride, and my delight;
What Courteous God will lend me Words and Art,
To speak the amazing passion in my Heart;
Thy dazzling Excellence each moment breeds.

My Goddess now in praise of me exceeds.
That I from Fate or Nature did obtain
Any Deserts, that might your favour gain,
Must in my Soul a Noble pleasure raise;
But now you quite oppress me with your praise.

Not half my sense of your desert I speak;
My Heart can never show it, till it break,
Which swelled with kindness it will do e're long,
If Love can find no passage but the Tongue.

Chaste Power! I beg you let these praises die,
Take some compassion of my modesty.

Oh! Princess! it is I that pity need,
(shall I the secret tell?) your merits breed
In my last Heart, a strange uncommon flame:
A kindness I both fear and blush to name;
Nay, one for which no name I ever knew,
The Passion is to me so strange, so new!

My wondering thoughts you into mazes guide!
And your dark meaning close in Riddles hide.

You are not half so much amazed as I!
My self am frighted at the Prodigy.
I daily stand, and wonder at my pain,
And do not know of what I would complain;
I always sigh, when I your Beauties view,
And wish (but wonder why!) I wish for you.
Something I fain would crave, but do not know
What I should ask, or what you can bestow.
Some Charms about you for my ease you bear,
But know not how they cure, nor what they are;
But I am certain they could give me ease.

Oh! Gods! how came you by this strange disease,
Weary with hunting, you to day in hast
Of some accursed Plant did rashly taste;
On which some Viper left his deadly sting;
Or else you drank at some infectious Spring.

Some Spring where Cupid washed his bloody Darts,
When the young Tyrant had been murdering Hearts;
That, that the Author of my grief does prove,
The poisnous gore has tainted me with Love.

Who to that fatal Spring your steps betrayed;
Call, Call to Aesculapius for some aid.

Oh! none can give me any ease but you.
Sick! Sick I grow! --

What would you have me do?

Look kindly on me with a pleasing Eye!
Smile, smile upon me sweetly, or I die.
Suppose me now, some Beauteous God, or Jove
The King of Gods, and think your self in Love.

You do not speak your own desires, I'm sure,
You'd rather dye, than ask me such a Cure.

Yes once I would, but I am altered now:
Some kindness now, you may, you must allow.

What kindness can I show? what can I do?
Stand off, or I shall be infected too.

That is the reason why I press so nigh;
To Cure me, you must be as sick as I.

Yes, were your sickness but the Plague, I would;
This for a World shall never taint my Blood.

In this necessity you must submit;
It will be only one tempestuous Fit;
And we shall both be well, -- you must, you shall. --

She raves, I to the Nymphs for aid must call,
Or she will do some horrid act, I fear;
Help, help, my Goddess is distracted here;
Come both to mine, and to my Goddess aid!

I will not wrong you, be not thus afraid.

You cannot help it, you distracted grow,
Loose me, or this into my Heart shall go.

I find my stratagem is fond and vain,
By other Arts I my design must gain;
Or in despair and shame must vanish hence;
Glory has most victorious influence
On Women's Hearts, that seldom is denied;
For that subdues their only guard, their pride.
I'll try how that will work upon her mind,
And rush with Troops of Glories from behind
The Ambush, where I lye in vain concealed,
And fight her Virtue fairly in open field.
The wondrous Virtue, Royal Nymph, you show,
Deserves your Glorious Fortune you should know:
From fair Diana's vanished form, see here,
Low at your Feet thus prostrate does appear,
Paying his homage to your conquering Eyes,
No less than Jove the King of Deities;
Who so unfortunate ('tis true!) did prove,
At Two Celestial Springs to drink in Love;
But they were these Two bright ones of your Eyes,
From which he bears such tortring miseries,
Unless you quickly some compassion show,
You will the World into confusion throw.

Oh! Gods! have I been cheated all this while?
Talked with a God, and of a thing so vile
As Love? I might have guest by all his words,
As Men by horrid shrieks of ominous Birds;
Their deaths foretell some fate in secret lay,
To make my Fame and Innocence a prey.
What sin have I committed, mighty Jove!
You should contrive to punish me with Love?

Your killing Beauty is one great Offence;
But your chief sin is too much Innocence.

If Beauty does offend you, ruin, blast,
Take what revenge on it you please, -- the last
My Virtue, you, nor shall, nor can destroy;
I all my Life will in that sin employ.

Then all my life I must be wretched made.
Condemn me then to the Infernal shade.
Let me with speed to any pains remove,
To Hell, or any Torment, but your Love.

That way my self I into Hell shall doom,
And turn their Hell into Elizium;
For that is Heaven, where Sovereign Pleasures are,
And oh! what Pleasure can with you compare;
Then do not by severity so fierce,
Damn the great Soul of the whole Universe.

These fond discourses I'll no longer bear;
Farewell, you only Combat with the Air:
And all your high Contention vain shall find:
Ha: He my feet does with Enchantments bind!
Release me Tyrant! --

Do not yet begone!
I Beg, I kneel, I offer you my Throne.

I scorn the Throne, the Deity of Jove!

Oh! do but counterfeit a little Love.

Be gone, the Sight of You I cannot brook.

I'll give my Empire for a smile, a look:
For nothing, -- let me but so happy prove,
To oblige one I so entirely Love.

If Gifts you will bestow, I'll name you one,
Give me my self, and let me straight be gone.

Proud and ungrateful Nymph, did I bestow
Those Treasures on you, which enrich you so,
And now I come a begging to your door,
Can I not gain an Alms when I implore?
I'll quickly if I please retake my due,
And punish those your saucy Virtues too:
For Virtues in a Soul my Vice-roys be,
And may my Empire guard, but not from me.
Their power vanishes when I appear,
Nor shall they dare over me to domineer.
I will depose 'em from their high commands,
And take the Rule of you into my hands.
Ho! There the Winds? to yonder Valley bear
This Nymph, and for my Love prepare her there.

Kill me you Tyrant!

Stop her needless Cries!
Now Nymph, it is my turn to tytennize;
She is led hence my Captive, but I find
My self in stronger Chains left bound behind:
Glory and Pleasure in my Breast contend;
Pleasure would seize what Glory would defend:
Her Virtues charm my Glory on their side;
But pleasure longs to have his pleasure tried;
For Glory like a bragging Coward, does here
Only in Beauties absence domineer;
But in her sight 'twill make a poor defence,
And never stand before Victorious sense.

COme Shepherds quickly hasten to the Shades,
The Sun with all his force the Air invades.

The open Plains let us forsake;
Here is a Grove will pity of us take:
The Trees in gentle whisperings invite us;
Here are all things to invite us.

These pleasures none can well improve,
But we, (my Shepherdess) who love.

These Pleasures none can well improve,
But we (my dearest Swain) who love.

Oh happy Shepherd, and kind Shepherdess,
Whom all the Gods, above expression bless.
Here Sylvia cruel, I forlorn,
Torment our selves each day.
Whilst I with grief, and she with scorn,
Wast all your youth away.

Alas poor Shepherd! the fault is not mine
That to thy passion I do not incline;
I wish thy love and desert were more moving;
For I confess I fain would be loving.
What (on the sudden) do I aisle?
Gentle Winds from yonder Vale,
On the sudden warm my Heart.

Oh! I'm wounded: Oh! I smart.

Sure some God is here descended,
With a Train of Loves attended.

Oh! I'm wounded: Oh! I Love.
This is some enchanted Grove.

This is some enchanted Grove.

Oh! my Soul is in a Flame.

I must fly, or lose my Fame.

O what raging Passions fill me!
Love me Sylvia now, or kill me.

Oh! I love, and long to show it;
But my Shepherd shall not know it.

Oh! my Daphne! now or never.

Strephon, fly my sight for ever.

I can no longer Sylvia wait thee.

Corydon be gone, I hate thee.

Curse on this enchanted Grove.
We are all undone with Love.
We are all undone with Love.
Fly from this enchanted Grove.

DOwn from the Heavenly Rooms, and Airy Throne.
Where I have long been left alone:
As fast as Jealousy my steps could bear,
I come to seek my wandering Jupiter:
I am assured he does not wait
On any politic Affairs of State:
He stays not to employ his public mind,
And fix the general Business of Mankind.
No, I have too much cause to fear;
Affairs less good and virtuous keep him here.
My Blood grows hot! -- and must I then be used
For ever thus? -- for ever thus abused?
Must every trifling Nymph, that looks but fair,
Entice from my Embrace my Jupiter?
Must all my Charms be every Strumpets scorn,
Only because they by a Wife are born?
Oh! Servile State of Conjugal Embrace!
Where seeming Honour covers true disgrace.
We with reproaches Mistresses defame;
But we poor Wives endure the greatest shame.
We to their Slaves are humble Slaves, whilst they
Command our Lords, and rule what we obey.
Their Loves each day new kindnesses uphold,
We get but little, and that little cold!
That a poor Wife is with her state reproached,
And to be Married is to be debauched.
Now some new rival must my Soul perplex;
I'll find her out, or I'll destroy the Sex:
And I will Jove too in his thefts detect,
Or I'll each Bird and Beast I meet dissect.

Where is this Love of mine a wandering now?
When I would scarce a look to him allow:
The restless Slave would follow me all day,
I could not frown or chide him then away:
And now that I would kind to him appear,
The handsome Fool is gone I know not where.
If any of the winged Train of Love
Now hover in this Grove,
Go fetch the moaning Boy to me with hast,
Tell him the happy Minute's come at last:
For by Loves Bow I swear,
I with my Goddess open War declare,
And for the Battle all my Charms prepare.
Ha! what fair Vision's this assaults my sight,
My Beauties Love I swear arrayed in light:
Sparkling in Glory brighter than the day;
His splendid Train sweeps all the shades away.

My Nymph!

My Love appear to me again,
Welcome as sudden ease to one in pain:
Where hast thou hid thy lovely self to day?
A whole long Morn together from me stay?
I have been seeking thee in every Grove,
To give some ease to thy despairing Love:
But I'm afraid my trouble I may spare;
The Cure's already wrought by one more fair:
Some of the Charming Goddesses above,
From me have Spirited away my Love.
Venus has chose thee for her Page, and she
Has dressed thee in this shining Livery.

Oh! what amazing Change is this!
I am a dreaming now in Paradise;
Or this is some kind Image of my Fair,
My Charming Nymph that pities my despair;
Act on this sweet delusion, pretty shade,
What pleasure does my Heart invade.
My panting Heart is on the sudden eased;
I, since I was a God, was ne'er so pleased.

If in my Love be any Bliss,
Thou shalt have more delight than this.
A kindness equal to my former hate,
Thou shalt not wish thy self a happy Fate.

Can Psecas then do any thing but kill?
Psecas be kind, and yet be Psecas still?

The very Psecas who did hate thee once;
But now does all her cruelty renounce:
And with it both my Goddess and her Train,
Whom now I shun, I hate, disdain,
Throw off the Yoke of her unnatural Law,
And all my Beauties from her Camp withdraw;
And now in Loves and Natures Cause will fight,
And do my Sex, and injured Beauty Right?

Oh! with what Noble Courage art thou fired;
What Courteous God these Thoughts in thee inspired?
Lead on, we will begin the War to day;
I'll fight the Cause, and thou shalt be my Pay.
These pois'nous Fumes we'll from the Earth remove,
And cleanse the Air with the hot Fire of Love.
All Beings are concerned in our just Cause,
To kill these Rebels against Natures Laws;
Who if they be not to Confusion hurled,
Will beggar Nature, and lay wast the World.
And to encourage us my Love the more,
Great Jove himself in person now adore,
Does Execution for her proud disdain,
Upon the fairest Criminal of the Train:
On her who only sways your Goddess Breast,
And thou, my Nymph, hat'st more than all the rest.
Look in that Vale, and thy revenge delight.

Oh! how I am transported with the sight!
Oh! that some God now my revenge to please,
Would summon hither all the Deities;
All Beings Mortal and Immortal too,
And show her shame to universal view.

My Nymph, not yet her Empire understands;
See here a God attending her Commands.

Ha! what great brightness does around thee shine;
Something beams through thee like a Power Divine.

Such Glorious Vassals are your Beauties due,
And less than Gods should not pretend to you.

This is a Fate more great than I would crave;
Have I a God then for my Beauties Slave?

One of highest Rank, and next the Throne.

This is a Love I may with Honour own:
For petty Gods, like Mortals I despise;
But yet I understand not Deities.
I fear your passion, I must disapprove;
Gods always make dishonourable Love.

By Love, by Styx, I true to thee will be;
And lose my Godhead, e're be false to thee.

Suppose you constant to your Love remain,
I know not how a God to entertain;
Or if I did, perhaps Divine delight
May not agree with Humane appetite.

The Joys of Gods exceed the Thoughts of Men.

Oh Gods! and shall I be a Goddess then?

As great as Juno, more beloved and praised,
And have more Altars to thy Beauty raised.

What? and have power to Torture all I hate,
That will not dye with envy at my state.

All! All!

Oh! then the Nymphs I will torment!
But for Calisto I will plagues invent.
By my Great self, this does so pleasing prove,
My ravished Heart begins almost to Love.
Come to my Coronation straight proceed,
Call all the Gods and Goddesses with speed:
Let the whole Air with the bright Throng abound,
To shame Calisto, and to see me Crowned.

I fly my Queen, and will your Will obey;
But oh! some present Kindness you must give,
To bear my Charges in this way
To Heaven, and back again, in this one kiss I'll give.

I heard a doleful Cry, not far from hence,
Of one who in some great distress must be;
The Voice seemed like Calisto's to my Sense:
Oh! all the Gods forbid it should be she.
Ha! Psecas here a Lover entertain:
Oh! the vile Nymph, she will disgrace our Train.

Oh! now I long till I my Reign begin,
To plague the Nymphs I hate, and act the Queen.
And see!
Already here a Subject for my power,
Thrown in my way by Fortune, to devour.
What brings you here my secrets to discover?

Not your design to entertain a Lover.

How dare you so presumptuous be, to spy
My Royal, nay, my Divine privacy.

Royal Divine, and how dare I presume?
Good Heavens! what mighty thing are you become?

A thing too Sacred for your Tongue to Name,
The mighty Glories of my swelling Fame;
You shall not once into your Mouth receive,
Nor dare to look on me without my leave,

Since when were you so great, so Sacred grown,
Surely if any Honour must be shown
The Right is mine, who am a Princess born.

That's Natures Gift, whose Charity I scorn.
On my own Treasure of desert I live,
And all my Glory from my self receive.

No, from your Lover you some Glory gain!
I'll do you Right, and spread it through the Train.

How? do you threaten me? stop, stop her flight;
Although my Fame is spotless as the Light,
My Goddess from dishonour less secure,
I'll not the affront of a dispute endure.

Oh! Blasphemy! Oh! Prodigy of Pride!
Crimes black like these do you once hope to hide?

Continue still in a Contempt so great!
Confine her, till my pardon she entreat,
For daring thus my anger to despise,
And against my Honour to believe her Eyes.

Thy pardon?

Will you all you saw deny?

I'll tell it all, though I that moment dye

Then kill her!

Do! thy Infamy and shame,
My walking Ghost shall to the World proclaim.

To what a height will this young Courage grow?
The shame to me designed, on thee I'll throw.
From hence I charge you let her not remove:
I'll call the Nymph, and swear you are her Love.
The Lye is Sacred, and prevents a Crime
Her boiling blood will sure commit in time.
I'll quench the Love is springing in the Blood,
And blast her vicious Nature in her Bud.

Run, run, with speed! I'll Charm her in this Grove,
show her with me Calisto there with Jove.

Oh! Traitoress!

Go, obey my Charming Rod,
Know 'tis but vain contending with a God!
Whilst in this Grove, this Nymph with Charms I tie,
Straight on my Loves Commands to Heaven I'll fly,
To call my Queen! But oh! what do I see,
Juno already here! Oh Jealousy!
This Jealousie's the Ghost of murdered Love,
Which turned all Spirit does outrageous prove:
Groans over its Grave the poor despairing Breast;
But never lets the Murderer have Rest.
Juno I fear will all our Plots prevent;
But I will stand behind, and see the Event.

What Saucy watchful Spies
Does Juno place on me where e're I go;
I think the Trees of every Grove have Eyes,
And Winds breath Stories as they blow.

Is this your Business mighty Jove below?
Are these the Secrets none must dare to know?
For this does Jove in Clouds his Glory hide?
Is thus his great Omnipotence employed?
How will the Arcadian Nymphs his Praises sing?
And Crown with Garlands the Almighty King?
But what need Shapes conceal the wandering Jove;
He is transformed too much with shameful Love?

The Love I to this Royal Virgin own,
I take a greater pride in, than my Throne;
And all my shapes do but adorn me more;
As shining Armour does a Warrior,
To fight this Field under the Power of Love,
Is greater Glory than to Reign above.

Oh! Blasphemy above an Atheists Tongue!
Should Men in Thought your Glory so much wrong;
The Impious Slaves you quickly would destroy,
Your Thunder now against your self employ:
Or rather there against those Traitrous Eyes,
That have deposed the King of Deities.

She has Exalted me above my Throne;
In the short time I have her Virtues known:
The Joy I felt in loving her, was more
Than endless Eyes blessed me with before.

Then all my Beauties are forgot it seems,
And Jove for her his Goddess disesteems.
A long Fruition has a Loathing bred,
Of me for Ages you have surfeited.

I own I have of your impetious mind,
Which to your so much boasted Charms, (I find)
No small indifference in my Breast Creates.

My haughty mind not half so much abates;
The passion in you for my Beauty's due,
As your low mind does my esteem for you.
I scorn my Beauties should descend to please
One, who degrades himself to such as these:
With whom if strife were for my Grandeur meet,
I now would trample her beneath my Feet;
But that resentment I disdain to show,
And think the Nymph for my Contempt too low.

Great Queen! all Honour to your Rank is due:
But please to know, I am a Princess too,
And do in that respect your Image wear;
Nor does that State from me dishonour bear:
You scorn not more your Monarch should forsake
Your Bed for me, than I his Love to take;
And if for Love the high Contention be,
You scorn strife less, than I the Victory:
Not that my hate on Jove alone does fall;
But I disdain, and hate to Love at all.

When first begun in you this hate to Love,
This mighty Pride, in the Embrace of Jove?

That raise my Pride! True Honour you Blaspheme?
An Insect, or a Plant, in my Esteem
Are Nobler Beings, and of higher Price,
Than Nymph or Goddess that descends to Vice.

Oh! how in favour boldly you presume!
When had it then beginning?

From the Womb.
Rather from Fate, which did my choice foresee,
And durst not other Natures frame for me,
For fear I should 'twixt Horror and disdain,
Have started to my nothing back again.

Was ere such Insolence by Mortal shown?
What then (it may be) you disdain my Crown?

I do; nor by your Glory would be bought,
To sin against my Honour, but in Thought.
All kinds of Love to me are so impure,
I hate the Marriage Bed, which you endure;
Nor would exchange my Virtue for my Power;
A Virgin is a Queens Superior.

Amazing haughtiness! This saucy scorn,
If thou were virtuous, were not to be born.

As Queen she is! more Virtues in her shine,
Than you, and all the Female Powers Divine.

What Virtues yielding easier to your Will,
And pleasing you perhaps with greater skill.

She gives me greater pleasure in her pride,
Than ever Juno did in being enjoyed.

Oh! how he Tortures me! what secret pain
I feel, to counterfeit a brave disdain?
Your pleasure with the artful Nymph pursue;
If Pride so pleased, what did Fruition do?

Her Vertue's more untainted than your own*
And less of yours advanced me to my Throne.

What stayed* you then together in the Grove?
Virtue is but of little use to Jove.

Rapt with her Beauties, but her Virtues more!
I tarry here her Virtues to adore.
They used that force upon my vanquished mind,
Which once on her bright Beauties I designed.
The fire these kindled the other did put out.

To Virtue you are seldom so devout,
And scarce for such insipid Joys would stay.

Cease your contention without more delay;
Lest you provoke me in this Nymphs defence,
To prove too fatally her Innocence.

Give her my Crown, the trifle I despise;
By being deposed from thee, I higher rise.
To thee no more I will my self debase,
But here condemn thee to this Nymphs Embrace.

Do, we shall both be gainers by the strife;
You get more Glory, I a fairer Wife.

A fairer Wife! though I with scorn look down
On thy lost Heart, and on my falling Crown,
Above thy Throne, my Beauty I surprise;
I will revenge on thee these Blasphemies.
I will ascend, and leave thy hated Bed;
But mounting thus, I'll on thy Goddess tread.

Hold, lest indeed I raise her to my Throne,
And to thy Rival make thee Vassalage own.

Thy Throne and Heart on whom thou wilt bestow;
Without revenge from hence I will not go.
Revenge to my enraged Soul shall be,
My Throne, my Jove, my Heavenly Dignity.

Nay then I'll govern your Imperious hate.
You Airy Spirits that on Tempests wait:
That all the Forces of the Air command;
Rain, Thunder, Lightning, Muster or Disband,
Employ 'em when, and against whom I please,
Vice-roys of all the spreading Provinces.
'Twixt Earth and Moon, quick with your Guards appear,
And take the loudest of all Tempests here:
Your Queen from hence, -- and keep her close confined,
In the cold Rooms, where Hail and Snow you grind,
Where with more fit Companions she may be,
With Storms that can reply as loud as she;
Where she her fill of noise may take,
Rail as she will, and no disturbance make:
And do not dare to let her escape from thence,
Till of her duty she has learnt a sense.

So then; thy Queen must be confined above,
That thou below may Revel with thy Love:
Loose me you Slaves, I will not bear this wrong,
I will not stir till I have him along.

Oh! the Eternal Plague! my will obey!
This Tempest from my Ears with speed convey.

I will not go, you Rebel Slaves forbear;
Jove, to confinement send me, if you dare.
All the Celestial Powers shall quickly know,
On what Affairs you are employed below:
I'll make 'em choose another in thy Throne,
To save both Heaven and Earth from be'ng undone.

Guard, wait a while. --

Nay, now I will not stay.

Will you your Queens, or my Commands obey?
Once more I do instate you in my Throne;
Once more this Royal Virgins Virtues own.
Though had she loved, it is sufficient plea
For Innocence, that she's beloved by me;
For I will be controlled in no amour;
My Love is arbitrary as my power:
I bound all Minds and Beings, but my own,
Am place to all things, but my self have none.
On you my largest share of Love shall fall;
But no one Heart has room enough for all.
I like my Sun, my Beams will not confine,
Nor starve all Beings by my self to shine.
And like him too, where e're I shed my light;
I Nature do not alter, but excite.
When on a loose and wanton Nymph I smile,
Her Blood breeds Monsters like the Mud of Nile:
But when to Flowers and Gardens I repair,
With fragrant Odours I perfume the Air.
Such were the Sweets I from her Virtues drew,
And you shall own it, yes and thank her too:
Do it I say, and her deserts proclaim;
She of a Goddess only wants the Name.

I will embrace her, since I must obey;
But she by Heaven shall dearly for it pay.

Farewell Fair Nymph!
To that I call my Heaven I now must go;
But leaving you, I leave true Heaven below.

From what a horrid Dream do I awake?
I am afraid my Sense does yet mistake.
From these Celestial Tyrants I amfreed;
But still the Thought does horror in me breed.
I cannot yet compose my restless Soul,
The Storm is ended, but the Billows roll.
But oh! which tears my Soul, a shame remains;
My rising Blood does almost break my Veins:
A fiery blushing flame's around my Face;
I'm all on fire with rage at my disgrace:
For I'm enough dishonoured, and ashamed
To breath, but in the Air, where Love is named.
But be disgraced with an attempt so foul,
I hate this place, the World, the Gods, my Soul.

The Tempest ended? and no mischief done?
Calisto's Innocence unshaken stand?
This horrid Storm must be again begun.
I'll fly to Heaven, as Psecas gave command:
And to my Queen with Lies my self address,
And bring again that raging Lioness.
Mean while I'll charm the Nymphs within this Grove:
Around, around here let'm rove:
And Visions guard the Sacred ground,
To fright 'em still within their bound.

How am I kept a Prisoner, in the Power
Of this base God? Oh! that revenge to have
I were some mighty Goddess for an Hour:
Oh! how I would torment the Heavenly Slave?
But see! my Sister here? and oh! my Fears
Her lovely Face all delug'd over with Tears.
Ah! what means this?

My Sister here? be gone,
Leave me to my disordered self alone;
And fly these Groves, they are the cursed abodes
Of Satyrs, Fiends, or worse, of Impious Gods.

Oh! how you fright me? I grow pale with fear;
What fatal accident has happened here?

I'm too disordered now Replies to make!

No matter, I will no denial take.
What has befallen you since I parted hence?

What you to hear have too much Innocence.

Not let me know it? this unkind appears;
I will both hear it, and have all the Tears.
To yonder mournful Shades let us repair,
Which to our sorrows some resemblance bear:
And there to tell your Griefs your Task shall be,
And I will sit and weep for you, and me.

COrydon is a Noble Swain,
And too long has felt disdain:
But since scorn I once did show,
My Love I'm too proud to let him know.

Ah Sylvia! Sylvia! my Heart (like yours)
Pain from foolish Pride endures.
I angry with Strephon to day did appear,
And now long to reconcile;
Yet in pride for a time will seem severe,
Though it breaks my Heart the while.

Oh whither does my lovely Daphne fly?

How long will Sylvia Corydon deny.

It is my Will my kindness to remove.

And I shall never, never Love.

Oh! what has changed my Daphne's mind?

Oh false, and cruel Woman-kind!

Come Shepherds do not complain.
See, see yonder a merry Train,
Of Gypsies dancing over the Plain.
Call 'em straight, Call 'em straight to comfort these poor Swains.

No longer complain,
If your Loves show disdain,
Be proud and disdain 'em again.
The Fools you will find
Will be glad to be kind,
When they once are despised by the Men.
Hark, Hark! in yonder Woods the Satyrs Play,
The Echoes bring their Laughs this way.
They with some pleasant sport are pleased.
The wanton Demy-Beasts some Nymphs have seized.

Laugh Shepherds, Laugh and Sing;
Joyful Tidings now we bring.
The Fair Calisto is disgraced;
Gods and Mortals hate the Chaste.
All this to me but little ease does give.

All Joys are dead to me, why do I live?

In death alone we ease shall find.

In death alone we ease shall find.

of all. oh false and cruel Woman-kind!

HOW long will these malicious Woods in spite
Conspire to hide my Goddess from my sight.
Were the Truth known, she is in private gone
To some blind Cave with her Endimion:
For busy Tongues are with her Honour bold,
Or she with Love does Correspondence hold.
Some beauteous Youths that do her fancy please,
Have reconciled those bloody Enemies;
I scorn and hate her, (though these falsehoods be)
That she delights in anything but me.
At her my generous Revenge does aim,
I in Calisto would my Goodness shame.
But ha! my Vassal Mercury so nigh?
Put me in humour with some pleasing Lye,
For my lost Goddess I can no where find.

I bring you News (my Nymph!) will tune your mind,
Much better News then did I only aim
To please and flatter you my wit could frame.

Oh! Speak! the Expectation does delight.

The minute that I parted from your sight,
Our jealous Queen descended from above,
And found Calisto (as you wished) with Jove.

Oh! Joy! and killed her straight? --

She was debarred,
The Nymph was then under her Lovers Guard,

What strange Event must that Encounter have?

All his Queens Rage my Monarch did outbrave.
With her fair Rival forced her to comply,
Nay, ask her pardon for her Jealousy.
Not daring then to truth her with his Love,
Compelled her to return, and fled above.

Tyrant! That I had been his Queen an hour,
I would have plagued and exercised his power!
Will Juno then put up Affronts so rude?

No, No, the angry Queen I strait pursued,
Fired all the Mines of Sulphur in her Soul,
The active Flame through every Vein did roll,
That she wept Fire, and her whole Soul did blaze.
The frightened Gods, did at the Wonder gaze,
Believed the World once more with Fire undone,
And Jove looked round for a new Phaeton.

The World for Ruin surely must prepare!
Let her destroy it, ere Calisto spare.
Oh! I'm impatient till she does appear,
Why tarries Juno? when will she be here?

Ere you can think again -- I left her now
This instant standing on the shining brow
Of a Celestial Arch, of wondrous height,
With her Robes girt, and ready for her flight.
Calisho's dead by this time, or at least
Roaring beneath the figure of a Beast.

Oh! Shall she be a Beast?

If any ease
It will give you, she shall what Beast you please.

Oh! Let me think! -- Some very ugly one,
Uglier than yet by Nature ever was shown
With all her skill and power, let Juno try
To outwit Nature in deformity.

She shall observe your pleasure to the full,
She shall discover Natures fancy dull.

My most obedient Deity! But stay,
May not Calisto have escaped away,
And found our Goddess, whilst you fled above?

I charmed both her, and Nyphe in that Grove.
There round they wander, chac't by panic fear,
Take for a sighing Ghost each wind they hear;
At their own Voices start, and Shadows stare,
And think the lofty Trees tall Phantoms are.

Observed to every tittle my Command;
Nay, guest my very wishes, take my hand,
Here pay thy self, for thou hast pleased me so,
My Favours unpetition'd I'll bestow*
Now Nyphe's Ruin I must next contrive;
For no one my displeasure shall survive.

For her disgrace do not disturb your thought;
Go, let your Goddess to the Grove be brought.
To show her Favourites virtues there pretend,
My jealous Queen will soon your Cause defend.
Calisto's fall will some dishonour throw
On her young Friend, and to pursue the blow,
Charge her with confidence of Love to me.
Then I, as if I feared discovery,
And of my Mistress Honour cautions were,
Will gently call, but so as all may hear,
Nyphe my Love. -- My Nyphe, why so slow!
Come to me here, for I impatient grow.

How active in Invention dost thou prove?
Thou half deserve the glory of my Love.
I could descend to smile now, if I durst;
But that's too great a Favour at the first:
And to rash Youth 'tis an unhappy Fate*
To come too early to a great Estate.
Much Wealth, much Honour, I design my Slave,
But I the management of all will have.

My glorious Mistress, does her kindness show,
With the vast wealth, I should distracted grow.
But yet some mark of Favour let me wear,
This little Arrow from your Quiver spare.

'Tis thine! -- But stay, not that, the Dart you have,
My Goddess in reward of Service gave, --
No matter, take it, I her Favours slight;
Nay, to affront her, wear it in her sight.

How will I strut among the Powers Divine
With this, and make 'em at my Fortune pine?

Knight my self I now declare,
And this the Badge of my Queens Order wear.
But see the Nymphs walking their Fairy round,
This of their Circle is their utmost bound.

Oh! Let me run and wound em with my Eye!
But now I think on it -- by my Frowns to dye,
Will be a Fate too glorious and sublime,
And I shall look em dead before their time.
They are of use that Huntress to disgrace,
Which because she is of a Celestial Race,
Usurps the Title of a Power Divine,
Though her Deserts inferior are to mine.
Howe'r by Birth she's not below my hate,
I'll show her Folly, and dismiss her strait.
Then these may live. --

See! See! I have descried
Your Goddess.

Where?

There by that Rivers side --
Run, Run, my Queen!

In yonder Thicket stay
Till my Return --

My Queen I shall obey.

How long shall we this black, this cursed place,
The hated horrid Scene of my disgrace,
In wild and frightful Mazes wander round?

Sure we are here by black Enchantments bound.

Where ere we go, wild shapes around us move!
And every Tree appears to me like Jove.

These frightful shadows are his Guard I fear,
And for some black design, imprison us here.

They are! What shall we for our safety do?
Run, and the Phantoms swiftlier pursue!
Shoot, and our Arrows fly we know not where,
Are lost in Mists, or only wound the Air.
They come! -- Stand off ye Fiends! --

How pale they show?

And every thing is blasted where they go.
That some brave Man of the old Tytans Race,
Would help me to revenge my great disgrace.
If any God will tempt my Soul to Love,
Let him depose that hated Tyrant Jove.

Oh! That the Gods should be such wicked things!
Now this into my Soul the Reason brings,
Why Heaven is hated by the Young and Fair;
It seems, the Deities abuse 'em there:
For which, the old and slighted do not care.
Is it for this Priests bid us worship Jove?
Are these the Joys they promise us above?
But we are safe, my Goddess does appear.

Disguised again the Tyrant Jupiter.

Do you not see the Nymphs around her there?

Cheats, Phantoms, all! -- Delusions of the Air.
My heart of fears for you (sweet Nyphe) ease!
Leave me to suffer my own miseries.

Why with unkindness do you Love repay?
I hope you do not think I will obey.
Besides, I'm fettered in Enchantments too,
Though I need none to fasten me to you.
The foolish Gods may their Enchantments spare,
Stronger than theirs about your self you bare.

Fortune who sends me Sufferings, does in you
Send me the sweetest of all comforts too.

Discourse no more, I cannot bravelier dye,
Than in your aid, and by a Deity.

Then let us bravely perish in defence
Of injured Chastity and Innocence;
And when we both are dead, oh! if there be
In Heaven, but any Friend to Chastity.
Some Goddess, of our purity have care,
And to some private Tomb our Bodies bare.

The chaste Calisto sin? if thou would try
To scare us with some frightful Prodigy,
Thy stories within bounds of Reason feign;
Those who out-talk their mark, derision gain.
Who use Invention must with Art proceed!
They, of all Merchants, the most cunning need.

I scorn the Traffic, and your Friend, nay you
May Love, ere I speak any thing untrue.

Of one most useful Virtue you have store,
Of Confidence, to charge you with no more.
But know, no ill can her fair Soul invade!
Her whole Composure is for Virtue made.
Her Body of so pure a mold is wrought,
Her very Body may a Soul be thought!
A Soul to highest Purity refined!
Visible Virtue, a Celestial Mind
Condens't to Beauty, in that fair disguise
Descending to the view of humane eyes.
Gross Passions can no more find dwellings there,
Than Men can breath in the Ethereal Air.
There is no Fuel there for earthy Fire,
The starving Flame must instantly expire.

Oh! How much curious Art you make appear?
How finely you would paint us nothing here?
Your Colours are so fine, your Strokes so small,
That they no Strokes, nor Colour have at all.
I know not how invisible, and pure
Her Body may be, 'tis not so obscure,
But you may see her now in yonder Grove;
There but this instant in the arms of Jove,
She humbly condescended to my view.

I say 'tis false! Nay, it is Nonsense too.

Nonsense to see! That does indeed surprise*
Nymphs in your service must have witty Eyes.

That it is Nonsense, I again proclaim,
The Gods for her must a new Nature frame,
Ere Sin in her the least possession gains!
No longer then Calisto she remains,
Who says Calisto then does spot her Fame,
Says she's at once another, and the same.

How for Calisto you employ your Wit?
How virtuous 'tis to be a Favourite?
Her Crimes with glosses as you please disguise,
You shall not argue me out of my Eyes.

Proceed in insolent Contention still?
Cease your Disputes! And know it is my Will,
You never more presume to touch her Fame,
Nor mention, but with high Respect, her Name.

Gods! Gods! to reverence her I much incline!
What pity 'tis she is no Power Divine?
Yes! I will spread her Virtues, and your own,
What Virtues too they are, shall well be known.

Call in dispute my Virtues? -- Seize her there!

Is this the Love to Chastity you bear?

Who boast of it so much, oft-times have none!

My Chastity is equal with your own.

Amazing Pride! -- Confine her.

If you dare.
I'll work on Flowers the story with my hair;
Which round the World some courteous wind shall blow,
Till it with Zeal into a Tempest grow.

With Pride and Malice she begins to Rave;
Conveigh her to some Beasts forsaken Cave.
I doom her by her restless self to dwell,
And that at once both Fury is, and Hell.

Hold! Goddess, Do you thus your Nymphs reward,
That with such Loyalty your Honour guard?
Is this the place where Chastity's professed?
Has Love so strong a party in your Breast?

Has Love in any Breast a greater Foe?

Do you your Hatred to that Passion show,
By guarding those who wrong my Bed and Throne?
Am I excepted from your Rules alone?

On any such did ever my Favour fall,
Who will not bear my Nymphs should love at all?

Does not this Nymph in seizure here remain,
For charging the most Vicious of your Train?
Whom you from Infamy defend with Might,
For no desert, but being your Favourite?

The merits of Calisto well I know,
My Favour rashly I on none bestow.

And shall my Eyes then be affronted too?

It was some shape abused both her and you.

That cursed shape still somewhere haunts this Wood,
And it shall bleed if it be flesh and blood.

See! with Dart fixed, and Bow completely beat,
She comes from yonder Grove.

As if she meant
To give us an Assault.

And Nyphe there? --

Of Virtue she has much her Sisters share.
I thought to tell you (if I durst proceed)
How Mercury her forward Youth does breed,
And make already most expert in Love,
But I perceived I should your Anger move.

Ignorant Nature (if these Nymphs be ill)
To temper spotless Chastity wants skill,
Or flesh and blood is of too course allay,
And she may waste the fires of Souls away,
And in her vain Experiments grow old,
Ere that base Metal will be turned to Gold.
In them I'm sure she did at Virtue aim,
And never yet so near Projection came.

Now, now the Satyr comes, let us prepare!

Guarded around with Spirits of the Air
In shape of Nymphs.

Let's make a brave defence,
Who knows what Charms may be in Innocence?
'Twas Virtue to the Gods their Godheads gave,
Dare they, what made 'em impiously outbrave?

If that gave Godheads, we, who Virtue have,
Are above Gods, and Jove is but our slave.

Fear not, but valiantly our selves defend.

See! See! I think for Battle they intend.

Amazement! let us their intention know.
Princess, what mean you by that bended Bow?

Tyrant! I mean to guard my self from you.

Do you not know me?

Yes, and hate you too.
And will my Honour to the death defend.

This is your Royal Virgin.

This your Friend.

She knows her guilt too public to be hid,
So does to Honour bold defiance bid.

Why sacred Honour do you dare to name?
Is Honour, since we parted, turned to shame?
And Vice grown Virtue? Riddles you express.

That Virtue is a Vice which you profess.

Practise no more on us that stale deceit!
You wear that shape of Chastity to cheat.

The wonder almost stupefies my Sense;
Run Nymphs, and bring 'em here by violence.

Stand off you shapes, and do not venture near.

Go play your Masquerading tricks elsewhere.

Stand off, I say, if further you proceed,
If shapes have any blood, I'll make you bleed.

See! to the height they Insolence pursue.
Now to all honour and esteem for you,
And everlasting farewell; now I'll know,
If against me you dare to bend your Bow.

We dare, and will. --

And could we make you fly
From your strong Guard of Immortality,
Let Heaven and Nature of themselves take care,
Or stand, or fall, to kill you we would dare.

I'm wounded!

They to Violence proceed,
And have presumed to make a Goddess bleed. I
Immortal blood runs trickling from her veins.

Oh! the infernal deed! fetch Engines, Chains! --

They shall this instant at my Altars dye,
I will revenge my injured dignity.
Not Jove himself shall his loved Mistress save.

And I the honour of the Priesthood crave.

'Tis thine the glory to thy zeal is due.

Now all my malice is devotion too.

Like one from strong infernal Chains unbound,
Whose Soul is after long distractions found,
To Sense and Reason, I begin to wake,
And doubt and tremble at my sad mistake.
Is it our Goddess? are you Nymphs indeed?
For Heaven, for goodness sake, reply with speed.
Yet if you do, delusions still I fear,
Who will secure me it is you I hear?
I dare not trust my cheated ears or sight.

Ah! Princess! do you thus my Love requite?
Do I displease you then in being too kind?
And is this wound a punishment designed?

Am I betrayed into so black a guilt?
Is it your sacred blood which I have spilt?
Oh! Look not on me with that wounding Eye,
Speak not, unless to sentence me to dye.
No other word but death I can endure,
My impious hands from farther ill secure.
Kill me, if you design Revenge to gain,
Ere I grow mad, and have no sense of pain.

My Goddess cannot save me if she would,
For I am fainting in her loss of blood;
If to her self she does Revenge deny,
I of her bleeding wound alone shall dye.

Now they begin again their Sirens Song,
The Tunes which charmed my Goddess Soul so long.

Hope they to be forgiven Crimes like these?
Abuse at once two mighty Goddesses?
The spotless blood of chaste Diana shed?
And yet more horrid, durst invade my Bed?

Believe it, I will scorn to make defence,
Nor to beg Life, pretend to Innocence.

The reason for it, is, but too well known!
In spite of you, you are ingenious grown.
This injured Queen, my Goddess here and I
May thank your guilt for so much modesty.

Your Office, Nymph, I do not understand,
Who to implead us gave you the command?
From whom do you derive a place so high?

I shall inform you, 'tis from Mercury.
Her Charms that God her humble Vassal make;
He would not be a God but for her sake.
And she that she may kind, and grateful prove,
Revolts from Chastity, and sides with Love.
Nature has to the amphibious Creature lent
An art to live in either Element.

Malicious! Will you wipe your stains on me?
And soil my Honour with your Mercury?
Though could I bow to Love my Noble Sense,
Love then would be a thing of Excellence.
My Nature is so Godlike and Sublime,
That nothing I can do can be a Crime.

My Mercury?

Yes yours, who should he be?
He durst not have presumed to think on me.

Did I not find him with you making Love?

Did I not leave you with him in the Grove?

You did, but do you not the Reason know?

Must I a Reason for your Vices show?

Oh! Gods! Are there such things, as wrong, or right?
As Truth, and Falsehood? And is Seeing, Sight?
If Truth be true, and Seeing be to see,
You love, and are beloved of Mercury?

Which way can I such confidence confute?
But yonder's one will finish our dispute.

See, Mercury indeed in yonder Grove!

Listen, he gently calls.

within.] Nyphe, my Love.
Steal to me, I will help thee safe away.

Steal to thee? who art thou?

within. Haste, haste away.

Villain, Impostor, Had I but a dart,
I'd steal to thee, and fix it in thy heart.

Now Truth is true, I hope, and Seeing sight,
Now pray inform us, who is in the right?

I am, and this some wicked Plot must be
Invented by thy lying God, and thee.

Astonishment! So soon to Vice begin?
Your youth an early riser is in sin.
Love is in so much haste he cannot stay,
But must set with you ere break of day.

Now where's your Chemistry? your beaten Gold?
Your spiritual flesh and blood? A finer mold
Than Souls are made of? All's a Cobweb Cell,
Where her black Soul does like a Spider dwell.

Embitter not thy words with Gall like this!
Treacherous Love has robbed my Paradise,
And plucked the fairest Fruit that there did grow;
The Gods in vain, plant Virtue here below.
It ripens not by any Sun or Time,
This World for Virtue is too cold a Clime.

Her thoughts, still for her Favourites, partial stay;
Virtue can sooner faulty be than they.
You may forgive the blood of yours they shed,
But she shall dye for injuring my Bed.

Yes, let me dye! I many deaths would bear,
Rather than once these foul Reproaches hear.

Death on a Rack would be a greater bliss,
Than Life in such a lying World as this.

Chaste Goddess, my Petition is to dye,
Hearken no longer to your Clemency;
Death for your sacred blood alone is due,
Let me not live to wound your Honour too.
I can a Plea produce yet (if I please)
Not only all my clamorous Enemies
Could vanquish, quite, but silence, if I would,
The loudest cries of your immortal blood.
Not only quell my Foes injurious hate,
But make your blood become my Advocate.
That very dart (would I the truth reveal)
Which wounded you, my bleeding Fame would heal.
But that would too much love for life display;
And I so hate the evils of this day,
My self I out of Fortunes way would hide!
My Innocence will for it self provide.
If that shines by me in my shady Tomb,
I shall sleep sweetly in that mournful Room,
And dream not of the Worlds censorious doom.

Unhappy Princesses, your Fate's severe!
Your Prayers I most unwillingly must hear,
Your Cause I cannot with my Honour own;
A torrent of misfortunes bear you down.
In spite of all my kindness you must dye;
Nay, I must banish too your memory.
What Plea you have your Innocence to clear,
I cannot guess; but I have cause to fear
None, that can all these Witnesses oppose:
At least, subdue the malice of your Foes.
If you shall suffer an injurious doom,
Oh! may your Honour blossom from your Tomb!
I'll build my Arbor there, and every hour
Come and bedew with tears the sacred Flower.
If you be faulty, and disgrace your due
Eternal shades conceal your names and you.

See! in deep sorrow she is parted hence!
Her love to Virtue is but a pretence --
She is unchaste her self.

Is that unknown?
Have you not heard of her Endimion?
Nor of her young Hippolitus that fled
From every Nymph, in private to her Bed?
She to the World has been a long mistake!
Pretends to Chastity for pleasures sake.
For secret Love does in the Forests dwell!
They understand each others meaning well.

She shall disgrace our dignity no more,
I will depose her from her heavenly Power.
And crown thee in her stead a Power divine!
I will! -- the Empire of these Woods is thine.
Mean while I to my first Revenge will fly,
Thy Foes and mine shall at my Altars dye. --

Oh! how I am transported with success!
Courted and sought by Fame and Happiness!
But how malicious does my Fortune prove?
Now he comes here to pester me with Love.

My fairest Queen!

Thou trouble me, be gone!

What change is this?

I'm busied in fruition
Of a new Love.

Do you say this, to try
If with despair I at your feet will dye?
Name him.

My self.

Oh! Now farewell despair,
I hope in that fruition I shall share.

I must feign Love, that I may freedom gain.
Another time you shall.

Oh! where, and when?

Perhaps this Evening.

Where?

In yonder Grove.

Will you not fail me?

Ask a Maid in Love,
If she will fail to meet with her delight?

With expectations of this pleasant Night,
Till it arrives, my thoughts I will employ. --

Do! Expectation's all you shall enjoy.
If in the Grove he tarries till he sees
Me there, he shall stay longer than the Trees. --

Oh! whither are our poor despairing Shepherds gone?
I fear I have my Strephon slain,

And I my Corydon.

Oh my sorrow! Oh my pain!
Could I my Strephon find:
Could I my dearest Strephon find,
I'd never be unkind.
I'd never be unkind to him again.

And I, my Love would passionately own,
Could I find my Corydon.

Do I Dream? Do I Rave?
Look towards yonder Cave.

Our Shepherds come from yonder Cave.

Our Shepherds come from yonder Cave.

From empty Pride I'll be free,
It shall bring no more mischief upon me,
Since I Love as well as he,
I'll not hazard my joy,
In being foolishly coy,
It had like to have undone me.

Dear Strephon, give despairing o'res,
Vnkindnesses are gone,
I never will be cruel to thee more.

Nor I to Corydon.

O what kind God does Sylvia's hate remove?

And made at length my Daphne grateful prove?

The God of Love.

The God of Love.

The gentle God of Love.

Oh happy Tidings!

Blessed hour!
Ever kind and gentle Power.

Even kind and gentle Power.

Joy Shepherds Joy! Diana's disgraced,
Love has had to day Revenge on the Chaste.
The Bacchusses here our mirth to improve,
Come hither to follow the Triumphs of Love.
No mirth without Bacchus, nor joy without Love.

Since all our Grief thus joyfully ends,
Let each Shepherdess make her Shepherd amends,
To the Temple let's go,
And then we will show,
What every Lover, by Loving intends.

THE time is past, whilst vainly round I pace,
As yet encountering nothing in this place,
But the long Evening shadows of the Grove;
And shadows are but slender food to Love.
Not it is substance! substance! must delight
Loves wholesome frame and eager appetite.
Malicious Fortune, must this stay contrive
Some sudden ill to Psecas must arrive.
Nothing that's common could my Nymph retain,
For when Nymphs love, they fonder grow than Men.
Their melting hearts in kindness does excel;
And I am sure my Psecas loves so well,
That were she dead, her spirit would appear,
And leave the Elizian joys to meet me here.
Well, patience! patience! time rides proudly by!
And looks upon me with a scornful eye;
But I, in spite of all his swift Career,
Will overtake him, when my joys appear.

The mighty Victims ready to be slain!
Heavens Queen a Vassal to my merits grown.
Diana now no more my Sovereign;
The shady Empire of these Woods my own?
The impoverisht Stars have nothing to bestow,
But what for my acceptance is too low.
My next affair is quickly to Cashier
My loving patient Slave that waits me here.

My Nymph appear? oh! now my Planets smile!
What has detained thee from me all this while?
(...) have been wandering here in grief and fear.

Who bid you do it? Could you expect me here?

Can the kind Vows my Queen was pleased to make
Her just and noble Thoughts so soon forsake?

Do I such trifling Contemplations use?
Will I my Memory with you abuse?

Though I deserve not such a glorious place,
My Goddess will not from her Mem'ry chase
The noble Creatures which she being gave,
I mean, the promises she made her slave.

Well, if I did, I'll break 'em if I please! --
Am I obliged to keep my promises?

Nothing can sov'reign Power oblige, 'tis true,
But its own will, that sov'reign Power have you;
But yet there is one mighty thing above*
Even your own powerful Self, and that is Love.

Can any one such Insolence endure?
Love above me? You would affront me sure.
Who should, or can I Love? Where is there ought,
(Except my Self?) -- that's worthy of my Thought?

True! But since Love to me you did express,
Your Love confers on me some worthiness.

My Love? Why can you think 'twas Love I meant?
Dare you to hope it be so insolent?

Why? -- should I rudely think you speak untrue?

Am I obliged to speak my Thoughts to you?

Do you not Love then?

Dare you hope I do?

Are you in earnest?

What should I intend?
Should I with my own Slaves to Mirth descend?

And am I fooled then?

Well! What if you be?
Is't a dishonour to be fooled by me?

And will you all my service thus requite?

Challenge Reward, as if it was your right?

Your service then is with it self re-paid*

Supposing not? What service did you do?
Invent a Falsehood? Shame a harmless Maid?
Well! when you please, I'll lye as much for you.

Exceeding well! -- Did I then toil and sweat,
At last, this Mockery to get?
None serve you for your Fools but heavenly Powers*

Mortals are yours, you may sometimes be ours.

What? then I must to your Contempt submit?

I cannot help another want of Wit.

You do continue in your boldness still?

'Tis you are bold, who dare dispute my Will?

Thou empty foolish Female, who to please
Thy sickly Longings, with the fond delight
Of thy vain Sex, or rather their disease
Of Pride, resists thy nobler appetite.
Though now when thou so coy pretend'st to be,
You would give an Empire I would ravish thee.
But I'll not stoop to gratify thee so;
That joy some bestial Satyr shall bestow! --
Ho! there! --

A Rape! here!

Call out if you dare,
I'll all your Lies and Villainies declare.

Rape! Rape! here!

So! 'tis well you do appear!
Virtue has excellent protection here.
Much safety your good Government affords,
The spreading Trees are not so full of Birds,
The Caves of Beasts, as all the Woods around,
Of wanton Gods who every where abound,
Waiting to make our Chastities a prey,
And Gins and Toils do for our Honours lay.
On our occasions we can no where move,
But strait we fall into some Trap of Love.
Dare you affirm it is a Fault of mine?
Can I the Gods to their abodes confine?
If they be weary of their heavenly bliss,
Must I be guilty? --

You are too remiss.
And both our Honours and your own neglect.

You are too bold, and full of disrespect.

Wherein do I that confidence express?
Is hate to Love and Vice grown sauciness?
Your pardon for my dullness I implore,
I never knew they were your Friends before.
It seems your meaning we must backward read*
And we a Key to all your Ciphers need.
By Chastity, you zealous Love intend;
By Hate and Coyness, Kindness to a Friend.
Your nimble Wits have found it out; -- but I,
Dull Fool, am hardened in my Chastity.
You should have plainly told me what you meant,
Before your wanton Gods to me you sent.
For I affront 'em all, and spoil the sport,
And quite disorder your mysterious Court. --

Immortal Gods! was ever Celestial Power
In her own presence so blasphemed before?
What? I am turned a Venus, and my Groves,
Private Retreats, and Nursery's of Loves.
Hence from my sight, and in the Forest howl,
In some Beasts shape, deformed as thy Soul.

Stay Nymph, and fly to me, I'll have it known,
Here is a Power superior to her own.

What in my Forests here have you to do?
I in my Empire am supreme to you.
Go exercise your Goddesship above,
There you may share authority with Jove.

Your Nymphs diminish there my Royal due,
And I will have Reprisals here on you.

Her Love to Virtue now I hope is shown,
And how much wrong I have her Honour done.
She has but one chaste Nymph in all her Train,
And she enjoys no rest till that is slain.

Boldness above belief! -- I've watched an hour
From all these cloudy Mists to set you free,
And disentangle the whole mystery,
And never yet could get it in my power.
I will no longer bear the pangs and throws,
I now will speak, and none shall interpose.
She then who dares your anger so outbrave,
Is my sworn Female, my devoted Slave!
Bought to my pleasure at no dearer Rates,
Than ruining the Nymphs she so much hates.
I help to gain her her malicious ends,
And for that hire my pleasure she attends.

Oh! hellish falsehood! --

I believe it true! --

I think it false.

The opinion is my due! --
I scorn to fear he can my Fame remove.

That let the event of my Relation prove.
I shall bring proofs will make your courage fall.

I'll hear no more.

But I will hear it all.
Can you the honour of my Nymphs restore?
And are they innocent?

They are; and more,
Calisto's Virtue is above Divine,
And Nyphe at the least a Heroine.

How he exalts the praises of his Love?

And flatters servilely the vice of Jove.

In your own presence dares your Rival praise.

To affront me, he does her Honour raise.

He is no doubt the cause of your disgrace,
And first allured your Jove to her embrace.

What horrid Monster art thou? of what kind?
How fortified in body or in mind?
Under what species does thy Nature fall?
Or humane? hellish? or Divine? or all?
So many Gods thou dare deride, defy?
To conquer thee, will be a Victory
Great as the Sun's over Python, nay above
That over all the Titans gained by Jove.
But with the force of Truth I'll make thee bow,
And yet will batter down that brazen Brow.

Melt it with shame! -- For though she virtuous be,
Malice so great dishonours Chastity.
They should not dwell together in one Breast,
It is a Serpent in a Phoenix's Nest.
Say then, why called you Nyphe in the Grove?

Vile Psecas her dishonour to remove,
And fasten it on Nyphes spotless youth.

That was not wise, it would not look like truth,
To clear your stains with Innocence so pure.

Neatness alone some Maladies does cure.
Contagions soonest taint the finest blood,
Unwholesome Rooms they love to change for good.
But us on all these pikes her Virtue drove,
She chance it to make discovery of our Love,
And rather chose a thousand deaths to dye,
Than hide a crime of the least infamy.

Where lodges truth, if Gods such Liars be?
He knows all this is only true of me*
Cause by my zeal his Nymph is doomed to dye,
He sought Revenge here on my Chastity,
And now with falsehoods does my Fame pursue.

Against such confidence what can I do?

What? but your self a foul Defamer own.

Despise her boldness, and the truth make known.

I am confirmed that Psecas suffers wrong.

If ever did Nymph from a defaming Tongue.

With sacred Truth he does her Honour blast,
Why should I judge a mind so vicious, chaste?

Nor Chastity, nor any thing that's good,
Can lodge in one that shares Calisto's blood.

My Vice, (I fear) to your disgrace will prove,
Too much severity to Vice, and Love.

Hermes! Release me from this Viper here! --
Who in my sacred Honour, does not fear
To fix her Teeth, and Venom to distill*
On that, which is an antidote to ill.
Make but Calisto's Fame, as Nyphe's clear,
And this bold Nymph a punishment severe,
For all her Blasphemies shall quickly bear.

When he clears her, then you do what you dare,

Her divine Virtues, and unspotted Fame,
Incense and Victims only should proclaim.
All wordish praise she is so much above,
That Eloquence would Profanation prove.

Oh! how the Woods must with her praises ring?
Such were the words entic't her to his King.

Praise on -- and Pseeas's Reproaches slight,
Torment her envious Nature to the height.
And did Calisto triumph over Jove?

O'r him, o'r Pleasure, Empire, Glory, Love.
Despairing to subdue by open storm,
He first stole to her in your beauteous form,
Hoping by ambush his design to gain;
And finding that fair stratagem in vain,
Himself and all his glory he displayed;
Himself his Heaven at her feet he laid,
He sued, commanded, threatened, and implored,
Nay, wept, bowed, kneeled, and at her feet adored;
But could not or by promise, force, or guile,
Entice, compel, or cheat her to a smile.
Her Fort of Chastity to buy, to break,
Heaven was too poor, Omnipotence too weak.

This to torment you sure is some design.

It tears my ears.

'Tis harmony to mine.
The brave Calisto's praise still boldly tell!
My Pleasure is their Rack, my Heaven their Hell.

Fond Goddess, who triumphest in thy shame,
Preferring thy vain Fancy to thy Fame;
Contending in thy Favourites defence,
Against thy Honour, Reason, and thy Sense.
If all I can affirm no Faith can gain,
Believe thy wound, and listen to thy pain.
Hark how thy blood thy Favourite commends!

That very blood will prove her best of Friends.
And only be (when you the reason know)
To your malicious hopes a mortal blow,
Jove in your shape deep on her Soul impressed,
And strongly with the horror still possessed.
The sight of you new terrors did awake,
She did your person for your shape mistake.
And that deceived her to a Crime so brave,
She aimed at Jupiter the blow she gave;
You of his sufferings alone complain,
You have the wound, but Jupiter the pain*
A Crime will to her endless Fame redound.

Gods! then I must reward her for my wound.

You ought! -- but how? -- the Virtue she has shown,
Not all the Laurels in your Woods can crown.

Happy the moment when my blood was spilt!
I'll now have Altars to my Victims built.
Their glory shall exceed their past disgrace!
Bring 'em in triumph here to my embrace.

Oh! Gods! this impious sentence who can bear?
This is a plot betwixt these Gods and her,
Wholly to ruin Virtue by degrees,
That they may love and revel as they please.
Nay, glory in it too, and make it prove
A Virtue worthy high rewards to Love.
And shortly all will Chastity disclaim,
And to be virtuous, will be thought a shame.

Oh! most provoking! --

Her reproach disdain,
Her slanderous tongue shall quickly end its Reign.
I'll fetch a sov'reign Judge shall quell her pride,
And this debate impartially decide.

She names but half your villainous design,
You plot my glory too to undermine.
Ungrateful Jove, now weary of me grown,
Will place my Rival in my Bed and Throne,
And it is plotted here among you all!
And my severe Revenge on thee shall fall.
I'll kill thy Nymphs, thy Reputation blast,
Throw down thy Temples, lay thy Forest waste.
Thy self from Cave to Cave with Tempests chase,
And in the savage Beasts an instinct place;
To tell 'em who their Murderess used to be,
And make 'em for Revenge go hunt out thee.

Oh! foolish Rage! which will no Reason hear!
Your Fury against me I scorn to fear.
Alas! your anger at your equal flies;
But yet, perhaps, you may my Nymphs surprise.
I to their Innocence the more incline,
Your Honour to respect as well as mine.
But since you fight your own disgrace to prove;
I'll both defend 'em against you and Jove.
Come Princesses! this posture is not due!
Truth has unvailed it self, and so may you.
Your Beauties are not brighter than your Fame,
Falsehood and Malice you have put to shame.
For the Rewards of Virtue now prepare,
And scorn the utmost which your Foes can dare.

Oh! What kind Power has the Truth revealed?

One that has all our wounds entirely healed.

And your wound too! For unless that be whole,
My Honour may be well, but not my Soul.

So well, that I am better than before!
My courage greater, and my pleasure more!
If I have any pain, 'tis that which flows
From the excess of joy, your Fame bestows:
The mark of which, upon my arm I bear;
The only Jewel, I am proud to wear.

Oh! Glorious News! Who proves the Liar now?
Great Goddess some Revenge to us allow.
The impious Author there of all this Evil,
Let's offer up a Victim to the Devil:
But she in mischief does so much excel,
Pluto, in fear, will keep her out of Hell.
She'll be a greater Plague than any there;
Furies themselves will be afraid of her.

Did ever Falsehood Virtue so outbrave?
Great Goddess, on my knees, Revenge I crave.

You fierce, tempestuous Spirits of the Air,
Who late confined me, to my aid repair.
The favour which you forfeited regain;
The Honour of your injured Queen maintain:
These bold Rebellious Nymphs in pieces tear,
And throw their Limbs in Whirlwinds round the Air.

Approach who dares! nay, for permission pray
To blow out of my Woods one Leaf away.

Oh! Goddess! let 'em come! for I'm in pain
Till one of 'em at least by me is slain.

Must I my Heaven eternally forsake,
To quiet the disorders which you make?

Returned again? -- Oh! most tormenting sight!
There, I resign to you, your sole delight.
Make her your Goddess in the room of me,
I'll bear no more the Royal mockery,
Nor be a Statue to adorn your Throne.

And are you weary then of Empire grown?

I am, and of my life! -- And to be free,
Desire no blessing like Mortality;
That my own hand might pour out with my blood,
My sorrows and my life! --

I wish you could! --
That both of us and all the World some ease
Might find of your eternal Jealousies.

Who is in fault?

Your folly is the cause,
For I will not be limited by Laws;
You but in part my kindness can enjoy,
My Ocean must a thousand Springs supply.
Once more I own this Royal Maid, I strove
To tempt by all the arts of Threats, or Love;
But against her Virtue did no more prevail,
Than the old Giants when they Heaven did scale.
They piled up hills on hills my Throne to seize,
I Mountains heaped of golden promises;
But found her Virtue from my reach as far
As from my Palace all their Mountains were.
Like those fond Fools when I was most sublime,
I did but in the reach of Thunder climb.
Her Soul shot down such Lightning from her Eyes,
Instead of spoiling, I adored my prize.
Once more embrace her then, and after this
The least injurious thought of her dismiss;
And Mercury the wrong which you have done
That fair young Nymph with low submissions own.
And to whatever sufferings she thinks fit
To sentence you, with Penitence submit.

I gladly to her fair Tribunal come,
And humbly on my knees attend her doom.

I recompense enough from this receive,
Revenge and Malice to your Nymph I leave.

And those good Virtues, which her gentle Mind
So much adorn, she shall rewarded find.
Now you, who with such zeal the ruin sought
Of these fair Nymphs, shall to your doom be brought.
I hope my words they credit may afford,
And all for truth acknowledge! --

Not a word.

Oh! Insolence! Charge me with Falsehood too?

Falsehood, I hope, is false, though spoke by you.
Power gives not language the more truth or sense.

Astonishing! drag her to Torments hence.

Spare her, for I my Honour scorn to owe
To her Acknowledgments.

No, let her go.
For she has done, and let her suffer ill.

Now I will stay to contradict your will.
The Foundlings dandled upon Fortunes Knee
Ne'er saved, ('tis true!) from my conspiracy.
But to no merit have the least pretence,
Excepting pure insipid Innocence.

Your judgment (if you please, great Psecas!) spare;
We (with your leave) of that sole Judges are.
Oblige us now your Reason to relate,
Why you pursued the Nymphs with so much hate.

My hatred stoop to have concern for them?
You much mistake, the Error I contemn.
Seeing what fondnesses abused your mind,
Having some kindness for you, I designed
To disabuse you, set your judgment right,
And honour you with being your Favourite.
But since you from your own good Fortune go,
And have not Wit enough desert to know,
I throw you wholly out of my esteem,
And no submission shall the loss redeem,
Though in deep sorrow at my feet you fall;
For now I scorn you, nay, I scorn you all.
Gods, Goddesses, and Nymphs, away I'll fly,
And keep no more such trifling company.
I'll hunt alone, and in my self delight,
And be my own most dear-lov'd Favourite.

She is grown frantic!

Rather she is brave.
Stay generous Psecas, I thy friendship crave,
Bury not all thy worth in a Retreat;
Give me thy Love, and I will make thee great.

A most harmonious friendship this must prove!
The Fates designed 'em for each others Love.
For none love them, and they have love for none;
Their kindness centers on themselves alone.
And they are so exactly of a make,
Each may the other for her self mistake.
Now must the last and heaviest sentence fall
Upon my self the greatest Criminal.
My wretched self (as to my Crimes is due)
I doom to part eternally from you.
And to the pain of heavenly joy to go;
But yet I must not leave you here below.
In pity to the World, I must remove
Those fatal eyes, out of the reach of Love.
Love must not here those killing darts retain,
To wound and torture Gods, and murder Men.
And yet to place you in my Heaven, would be
Not your Reward, but my Felicity.
Some middle Region I must prepare,
Where all may with some ease your Beauty bear.
I then entreat, you will (to end this War!)
Accept the small dominion of a Star.
There you and beauteous Nyphe may dispense
With cooler beams your light and influence.
On the great Ceremony Hermes wait,
Let all the Gods give their appearance strait.
These Virgins Consecration nought debars,
I'll in a full Assembly crown 'em Stars.

Happy Lovers! happy Live,
And all the Gods their blessings give.

Lead along, and with Delight,
Let us hasten on the Night.

What Vision's this is come to greet us?

See! the Night is come to meet us.

Stay gentle Swains be not afraid,
To see our Faces hid in shade.
We, but lately, were as fair,
As your Shepherdesses are.
Did not a frantic Youth of late,
O'reset the Chariot of the Sun?

He did, and his deserved Fate
He met when he had done.

It is he that hath undone us:
He powered whole streams
Of melting beams,
Red, and glowing hot upon us.
And now we range the World around,
To see if our lost Beauty can be found.

Rejoice, Rejoice: our Beauty's found,
Our lovely White and Red,
To two chaste Nymphs of Cynthia's Train is fled,
And they must Stars be crowned:
And now instead of what we sought,
Our Black with us must fair be thought.
This happy Fate, who could Divine?
Our Beauty then in Heaven must shine.

No Losers we shall prove,
By parting with our Red and White;
If black will serve the turn of Love;
For Beauty's made for Loves delight.

See! See! the Nymphs are coming here.

But Oh! what glorious Apparition's near?
The Clouds amazing Glories gild:
All the Clouds with Gods are filled.
And all the Gods appear.

Must these be Stars? And to Heaven remove,
Before they have tasted the pleasures of Love.
That the Gods so ill, such Beauty should use!
What mighty Cost must Nature lose?

I cannot so much Beauty show,
But what I have, I'll better bestow.
Not upon Gods, or Glories above,
Or empty Renown, but Pleasure and Love.
All pleasure but love, from our hearts we will be chasing,
We will kindle our selves into Stars with embracing:
We will every moment our pleasures renew,
Our Loves shall be flaming, and lasting and true.

THE Stars for your Reception now prepare,
And the ambitious Heavens expect you there;
But I will spoil their hopes, and break my vow,
For I've considered there are Stars enough:
And this inferior World can scarce dispense
With the entire loss of so much Excellence.
With each of you I can oblige a Throne,
I'll keep you then to grace some Favourite Crown.
On that design you here shall still remain,
And I'll dissolve into a Nymph again.
Which will no less this fair Assembly please;
For Nymphs, in Courts, have sway like Deities.
You Wits who think you Gallantry display,
To laugh at every thing a God can say,
Will in good manners to a Nymph submit,
And own whatever Beauty speaks for Wit.
Perhaps the power of Beauty to express,
We choose our Language careless as our Dress.
None should come hither to attend, but gaze;
Here Beauties charms not Wits you ought to praise.
And 'tis your safest course, judge you of Show,
Fine Clothes, and Faces, Tunes, and Dances too;
For those are things which you may chance to know.
There is no doubt but you have ears and eyes,
Your understanding most in question lies.
But what do I here trifling thus with these?
There are the Powers to whom we sacrifice,
In whose great Presence I may well allow
To lay aside my useless Godhead now.
You, Sir, such blessings to the World dispense,
We scarce perceive the use of Providence.
And since Your Rule such joy to all procures,
All should contribute what they can to Yours,
Wit by Your Smiles a Lustre does maintain,
And Beauty keeps a long and happy Reign.
Your Right in them is therefore so entire,
They, above all, Your Pleasure should conspire.

