GOOD Heaven be Thanked, the Frenzy of the Nation
Begins to Cure, and Wit to grow in Fashion:
Long the Two Theatres did proudly jar,
And for Chief Sway, like Two Republics War;
When of the sudden, a Devouring Host
Of Dreadful Knights, (I say not of the Post)
But strange Tongue Warriors, over-ran the Town,
And Bl^w the Stage, almost the Kingdom down.
And with the Stage the P^ets must expire,
For Bells will melt, if Steeples be on Fire;
Then Coffee-Houses Th^atres were grown,
Where Zealots acted in a furious tone,
Oliver's Porter Damming Babylon.
But they more Mad; for he in his worst (...),
Was ne'er so Mad as to Talk TREASON yet.
'Tis strange those Men should wish the POPE such Evil,
Who are so kind to the POPE's Friend, the DEVILS.
They Drink, they Whore, and at their Rulers Rant,
And all is well in a True PROTESTANT.
These Follies have the Nation long Employed,
And almost all the POETS Trade destroyed.
That they may justly seek Reprisals now,
And Board those Pirates which brought them so low;
Seize on that Ware, by which some Men by stealth
Promote the Traffic of a Common-Wealth*
Ware, some believe by Priests and Jesuits Spun,
They Weave the Cloth, FANATICS put in on.
But some will say, a POET mend the Age!
In these High Matters how dare they engage?
Why, SIRS, a Poets Reformation scorn;
Since the Reformers now all POETS turn?
And by their awkward jangling Rhymes proclaim,
Like Bells rung backward, that the Town's on Flame:
The City WHIGGS such cursed Poets choose,
For that alone they should their CHARTER lose.
He is a wretched Coxcomb, who believes
Muses, like JVRIES, will be packed by SHERIFFS.
But their ill Palate no fine dressing needs,
All Stuff that any Whiggish Fancy breeds,
They swallow down, and live like Ducks on Weeds.
These things give all the Nations round delight,
Sure at our Fools to laugh we have most right.
Lets not our Mirth to Foreign Kingdoms send,
But here the growth of our own Country spe^d.
Heaven knows what sums the CAVSE has cost this Town!
Here You may have it all for Half-a-Crown.

Pietro.


Sir.


What News Pietro? Has the worthy Citizen, whom I have Elected to be my
Cuckold, attained the other Dignity of Podesta of Naples yet?


Not yet Sir, but he will attain it very speedily, all his Party are hard at
work, Voices and Elboes at it, and they exceed the other Forty for one.


I am glad of it Pietro for when he is chief Magistrate of Naples, I shall be
-- of his Wife, dispatch his Domestic Affairs, and receive all the Fees of
that sweet Office.


In troth you deserve it Sir, for you buy the Place dear.


Indeed I give a great deal for it Pietro, I give some scores of ready
Mistresses I have in bank for the reversion of one, which perhaps I may never
enjoy.


A great Price Sir.


'Tis so Pietro, I give away a hundred other pleasures into the bargain; as
Drunkenness, a sweet sin Pietro, Wine is as necessary to a Man, as a Navigable
River to a City, it conveys to him many pleasant Commodities; without it, he
must depend upon his own growth.


'Tis true Sir.


Then I part with all the society of my witty lewd Friends, to keep company
with dull lewd Saints.


Not Saints Sir, but Whigs.


That's as bad, and so loose the Reputation of my Loyalty and good Affection to
my Prince.


You also part with the Reputation of being sound Sir, and of your affection to
Women: In short Sir, you pass for a poor, rotten dying Saint.


A dead Saint Pietro, at least a dead Sinner, for I appear the Ghost of what I
was, all my Vices mortified, and I am in a Wold very different from that I used
to live in; I talk Godly, a strange Language to me Pietro; I Pray, hear
Sermons, live soberly, abstain from Wine, Women, and Wits, a strange life to
me; but this new World is a dismal Purgatory, for as yet I have not attained my
Heaven! my Rosaura, if I should never attain her Pietro --


^Twill not be her fault Sir.


That's true Pietro.


I suppose Sir she is not frightened by the Ghost you appear to be.


No Pietro, she knows me to be Flesh and Blood, sound Flesh and Blood, whose
only Disease is a troublesome watchful Cuckold, if I can be cured of him,
she'll venture on me.


If you never attain her Sir, Heaven be praised, you won't loose your
sufferings, you will attain the States-man's Mistress, Popularity.


Popularity! Dam her! a lewd, inconstant, common Prostitute; so old she's
blind, and cannot distinguish an honest Man from a Knave, though she has a
hundred pair of Spectacles put on her Nose, that show the Knave never so clear,
she cries I can't see him; Ignoramus, Ignora^us, that's all the sense she has.


It may be not Sir, she sees well enough, but is too cunning to lay open the
blemishes of her Stallion.


It may be so, but were she fairer then the most doting old Statesman thinks
her, she is not so charming as a Hundred beautiful Women which I loose for her.


That's true Sir.


Do not the Ladies give me for gone?


For a Dead Man Sir.


And do they lament me?


All, all, Sir, the virtuous Ladies sigh, and cry 'tis pity, the other run
distracted, the very common Whores abstain from Plays, and Bawds neglect their
Brandy-Bottles.


You see what it is, Pietro, to do good in a Mans Generation; Hark!

The News Pietro?


Your Friend is Chosen Sir.


Is he? then shall I enter into my Employment speedily; now he is filled with
Authority, he will be drunk with Pride to th'end of his Year, and I can make
him reel whether and when I please; Hark! somebody comes --


Esquire Artall Sir.


That Rogue! my Patch upon my Nose, my Pillow and sick Equipage quickly.


Where's this damned confounded Hypocrite? this religious, sactious, dying
Saint? I come to give you Thanks for the Legacy you leave the Nation, a sweet
Rogue you have helped into power; we shall have a sine time on it.


Sir, if I have committed any crime in it, let the Law punish me, but do not
Murder me with all this noise, I have mortal distempers enough upon me, I need
not your bawling.


That you have not one sound part in your Soul or Body I ^irmly believe; that
the greatest part of your Body comes out of Shops, and every night goes not
into Bed but Boxes, I know; but that your Soul and Body, although they have
used one another, are upon parting, I no more believe, then that your Soul and
your Vices are parted.


I value not what you believe Sir, but why should it be incredible a Man should
part with any thing that uses him ill? say my Vices had not Murdered me, 'tis
sufficient they fooled and enslaved me.


Ah poor Man!


I was a common Belman with my Rhymes to chime Fools asleep in their Sins, a
Beadle to Whip out of the Parish impudent Beggars, and such we esteem all
Church-Creeds and Principles.


So you do still Sir, and are as little Charitable to 'em, whatever you
pretend, as to any other kind of Beggars, for you will give good words to any
handsome Beggar you hope to make a Whore of; And you have a worse design on
Religion, to make her a Bawd to carry on some lewd project.


Rail on, or Laugh on, or both, I care not, you and the rest of my Atheistical
Companions were Heaven-threat'ning, which stood long between me and the Church;
and though I dwelt among you, I confess, to my shame, I was afraid of you; but
now (Heaven be praised) I have travelled beyond you, and shall never look back
on those horrors and precipices more.


And are now got within a Days Journey of Heaven; Are you not Sir?


What is that to you Sir? get you about your business, do not disturb me, and
make me waste my spirits to no purpose.


I would only take my leave, wish you a good Journey, and a (...) you when we
shall see you again; for you will not stay long in Heaven I know, there's no
Company that you will like Sir.


None that I like so ill as yours Sir --

vexes me so, I almost faint.


There are none of your Club Sir, Wits that believe one Stet Divine before all
the Twelve Apostles Sir.


I am quite fainting.


That count his Story true, and all their's a Shamm Sir.


This Fellow babbles me out of my senses.


You would babble and scribble us out of our Estates.


Quite babbl'd me dead, I faint! give me a Cordial! if ever you let him in again
-- I'll -- Pooh -- I can hardly speak -- give me that Cordial quickly.


A Plague on you.


Oh! he has startled me with his frightful Curse! made me spill my Cordial,
slabber my self, and almost choke my self; bless me! what work's here with this
Fellow?


Have I almost choked thee with a Cordial? then thou art no right Saint, for I
have seen one of those they call the true Protestants, swallow another Mans
whole estate for a Cordial, and never choke himself: Choke thee, damn thee.


Mercy on me! what a cursing and swearing the Wretch keeps; to what purpose is
all this, thou silly Fellow? I warrant thou think those sine-Mouth'd Jewels
become thee, and art as proud of them as a Cannibal of a Ring in his Nose: if
to be one of the Devils Knights, called an Atheist, be a sine thing, prithee
wear a better Badge of thy Order then an Oath or a Curse, for those are
Porterly Badges.


Confound thee, sink thee.


Take me away, take me away, I am not able to bear this!


Ha! ha! ha! the dissemulation of these Fellows is pleasant; but, a Pox on it,
we pay too dear for these Jests, they cost us confusion and almost ruin: these
Fellows so love division, every one of 'em has two Parties in himself.

There is in every true Protestant Breast
A Heraclitus Ridens, his Contest,
A Knave in Earnest, and a Saint in Jest.
The Saint looks up to Heaven, the Knave that while
Your Pocket picks, and at the Cheat does smile:
Catch him, he, like a Hedge-Hog, scrapes your ^ury
Under the Prickles of a sturdy Jury;
Then, looking out, he does the Hunters brave,
For squinting vilely between Saint and Knave:
He looks Ten ways at once, so they that watch him,
Cannot tell which he'll take, and never Catch him.

Sir, he's gone.


Is he? that's well.


Sir, here's the new Lord Podesta's Son,

Mr. Craffy.


Oh! my Friend's Son! you must let him come in, though he be a very troublesome
Coxcomb.


Oh Friend Florio, are you here?


Ay Sir, thanks to my Distemper that keeps me prisoner.


Whoo! but are'nt you with my Father yonder?


No, I profess I am here Sir.


How are you able to be here?


I am not able to be any where else, I'm so ill.


Ill? you are dull Man, for if you were not dull, you would go to my Father's
Election; if you were giving up the Ghost, 'tis better then a thousand
Bear-baitings, stay! a Camillo! a Camillo! a Camillo! say our party, what do
you keep such a bawling for such a Fellow? says one of theirs? such a Fellow
say our Party, and set up a laughing and hissing, and a hissing and a laughing;
for all your laughing and hissing I'll speak my mind, says the Man; will ye so?
says one of our party, and gives him a thump with his Elbow under the small
Guts. Now will you speak your mind? says our Man; The Man is speechless.


A good way of silencing a Man.


The best we have, so upon that some of their party began to bear up, but we
never gave over till we had quite hiss'd'em, and hooted'em, and Rogued'em, and
Toryed'em out of the Hall.


I am glad of it.


But who do you think was the Captain of all our Party (...) to lead 'em on
wherever he saw an Enemy? and, I believe, discharged Rogue, Rogue, forty times
for any Mans once.


Who?


Your Chaplain Doctor Sanchy.


Oh! he is a zealous Man, where is he? for I want to go to my Prayers.


Pray? he can't speak he's so hoarse, he's gone to drink a glass of Sack to
clear his pipes; the truth is, I had as live he should pray for me as any body.


Why so.


Because no Saint in Heaven dare deny him any thing, for if he should he'd call
him Rogue and Rascal. Well, but this is not the business I come to thee about,
what dost think it is?


I cannot guess.


Guess! no, I'll give thee a thousand Guesses to guess it, I will give thee ten
thousand; come, I'll give till this time Twelve-Month, and thou shalt think of
nothing else.


Really, I have a little other business to employ my thoughts about.


Well, I'll put thee out of thy pain, and tell thee the oddest thing that ever
thou heardest in thy life. Thou know my Father has lately Married the most
delicate, luscious -- luscious -- lus -- did^st ever see such a Woman in thy
life?


I can't tell, I am past those studies now, the young Lady no doubt is handsome
enough, but what o'that?


I'm stark mad in love with her.


In love with your Father's Wife?


Ay, so mad for her, that I am quite out o'my Wits; nay, I have not only lost my
Wits, but my Stomach.


The greater loss of the two.


I can't eat nor drink, I can't sleep neither; I was once a rare sleeper,
consta^ly after Supper my Eyes used to call for their Evenings draught and I
was no sooner in bed, but they would top off fourteen Hours at one go-down Now
I tumble and toss like a Child that has the Worms, Love and Poetry are
continually biteing me, I can't pray neither when I fall to my Beads, instead
of crying Ave Maria, I cry Ave Mother-in-Law, I have given over all sorts of
pleasures, I read no News, go to no Coffee-house, frequent no Club, and take no
snuff.


Why you are come to a sad pass.


In truth I am, thou wud'st say so if thou knew all, and I come to thee, to
beg of thee, as ever thou would save the life of an Honest young Fellow of
thy own party, and a true Whig as I hope to be saved, to lend me a little of
thy assistance, for thou art a rare Fellow at Wenching, know all the tricks
of Women, and hast great power over my Mother.


And so I must procure her for you Sir?


Ay, prithee do now, prithee dear Rogue do now; Brother Whig, Brother Whig,
prithee dear Brother Whig do now.


Brother Whig! thou horrid Wretch, Brother to the Devil, art thou in earnest.


Why thou horrid Fool, Brother to a Cha^gling, dost think I come to hear my
self prate?


Then would thou Cuckold thy Father, thou Monster?


Would I not if I could, thou Monster? would any thing refuse to lye with such
a sweet Creature but a Monster?


Would any thing but the horridest Villain upon Earth, endeavour to dishonour
his Fathers Bed?


Would any thing but the horridest Ass upon Earth, say a lusty young Fellow
shall not honour his Fathers Bed more then an old fumbler that disgraces it!


Then 'tis a thing of reputation with thee to commit Incest?


Incest? prithee don't trouble me with hard names, I don't think it is any more
Incest to lye with the same woman my Father does, then to drink in the same
Glass, or sit in the same Pue at Church.


Is there no difference between your Fathers Wife and his Pue?


He makes none, for they only both lay him to sleep. I would make a
difference, I confess, in the sweet use, not that I think his Wife more sacred
then his Pue, for the locking of a Man to a Woman in Marriage, or in a Pue in a
Church, are only a couple of Church-tricks to get Money, one for the Priest,
and the other for the Sexton; that's all.


You are a fine Fellow.


I would I were so fine a Fellow as to please my Mother-in-Law, and I would not
change to be thee, if thou were at thy best; And I do all I can to be a fine
Fellow, it costs me the Lord knows what in one Beauty-Water or another to mend
my Face, and a Pox on it, I'm never the handsomer; prithee hast e're a
Looking-glass to see how I look?


Why, if thou look never so well, dost thou think thou could charm thy
Mother into an Incestuous Strumpet?


What a robust word is there? look thee I understand Trap, and so does she, I
kissed her behind tother day, that is, I came behind and kissed her, pretending I
took her for the Waiting-Woman, and she let me, pretending she took me for my
Father; a rank Sham o'both sides, we had both a mind to kiss, and there's an
end; And I swear she let me rumple those sweet Lips of hers as patiently as a
Mercer will let a good Customer do his Silks in hopes to put'em off.


Ha! I'm glad you tell me this Sir, since she is so weak a piece, I'll fortify
her.


With Godly Counsels! putting forces into her Head will never fortify her
Tail, what signifies fortifying the Capital City, when the remote Provinces
rebel?


I shall bring down the Prince of the Country, your Father Sir, upon you, who
if he cannot quell the rebellion, shall deal with you.


Why thou wu't not betray me, wu't thou? I never knew a religious Fool that was
not a Rogue in my life; I tell thee what, if thou dost tell my Father I would
lye with his Wife, Egad I'll swear to him thou dost lye with her, and I'll
bring a hundred Witnesses to (...) it, besides Corroboraters.


How!


Yes that I will, I'll teach you to play the Knave, you stinking damned Fellow
you, I'm going now by my Fathers order to search the Cathedral for Arms to
affront the Clergy, and make 'em suspected for Plotters; now, instead of Arms,
I'll search for Swearers, and if they catch you by the back, they'I shake you
worse then an Ague, and be harder to cure then the Pox Sir.


There is a way to be cured Sir.


Ay, Twelve Protestant Consciences cleanly picked, not one or tother side
amongst 'em, are as certain a Cure of an Evidence, as Jesuits Powder of an
Ague, Probatum est.


Come back, thou art such a Villain, I know

not what to do with thee.


And thou art such a Knave, I know not what to do with thee, Pox on me for
trusting thee.


If I should conceal thy wickedness, thou would proceed in it.


I will proceed, whether thou concealest it or no.


And ruin thy Soul.


I don't know whether I have a Soul or no.


If I tell thy Father --


Then I'll forswear it.


And hide your Roguery with perjury?


Ay, and be a true Protestant for all that.


And break your Fathers Heart?


I'll come the sooner to his Estate, and the easier to his Wife.


Oh fine Fellow! Well Sir, out of love to your good Father, whose Heart this
news would break; and out of love to the City, whose safety depends much upon
your wise Fathers Conduct, I will conce^l this; but I'll watch you.


Watch and be Hanged -- I would watch thee for my Mother, but that she knows
thou art such a foul rus^y Gun, if she should discharge thee, thou would fly
in pieces, and hazard her life too.


Away you Monster.


Away you Godly fa^se Puppy.


I am glad the Fool gave me this notice. I do not know But my sair ^ove, like
an o're-sertile Field,
May breed rank Weeds, if she be idly Til^'d;
Least Love for Fools should in her Bosom live,
She shall have all the Tillage I can give.



This foolish head-strong City will choose that factious troublesome Coxcomb
Paulo Camillo for their Podesta.


A brave Paulo, we have carried thee Boy!


Is this Gentleman Elected?


Yes that he is, for all the tricks that were used to hinder it.


I thought his Excellency the Vice-Roy had given you intimation another person
would be more pleasing to him, and in this juncture more sitting for the
Office.


Another Man more fit to be Podesta then me? then I shall think another Man
more fit to be Vice-Roy then he, and so I'll make bold humbly to acquaint His
Majesty.


Are we to follow the Vice-Roys pleasure, or our own consciences?


Here's saucy Rogue.


What are you Sir, that undertake thus impudently for all the rest?


'Tis well known what I am, I am a Freeman of Naples, a Bricklayer by Trade.


Oh I have heard of a busy pragmatical Fellow that calls himself the Catholic
Brick-layer, are you he Sir?


I am not bound by Law to give an account what I am; if any one has any thing
to say to me, let him deal with me according to Law.


But Sir, you might be so civil as to make me an Answer.


I'll do nothing for no Man, but according to Law.


My Lord, the Man as to his occupation is but a mean Man, but as to his
abilities, he makes a very considerable Figure.


He is a pretty Figure indeed.


We have a Charter for the free Election of our Magistrate, and what we have
done, our Charter will justify.


Have you a Charter to be sawey Sir?


What I speak is according to Law, and I may speak Law in defence of our
proceedings.


Come, pray be silent, 'tis according to Law also for me to speak, His
Excellence the Vice-Roy has been pleased to oppose my Election, stimulated
thereunto by evil Men, Enemies to the City and Nation, they would betray and
sell us to the French, and they are angry so active a Man as I am put over the
City to prevent their wicked Machinations; for that reason I will be ten times
more active.


A Pox of an active Rogue.


Who are these evil Men you speak of, Indict 'em and prove 'em Guilty, and I'll
engage the Vice-Roy will severely punish 'em.


I don't know who they are, all's one for that, I'm sure there are such
Traitors, though I don't know who they are, and French-Men, though I don't know
where they are, and Plots, though I don't know what they are, and I'll make
work.


May not you be deceived?


No, I'm never deceived; for the preservation therefore of the Town, I wi^l
have four Regiments of the Train bands be upon the (...), during my whole Year;
and I, or my Officers, will every four and twenty Hours search every House in
the City.


At this rate you will not let people be quiet in their Houses.


No* nor out of their Houses neither, I will have no Ranting, Rev^l^ng,
Gaming, Drinking, no nor Eating immoderat^ly; I will have ^ eat and drink
according to Law, and I will have all Men's Tables examined to see if there be
no Letters cou^ey'd into their Dishes from the French, and if I find but the
least cause of suspicion, I'll take their dinners into custody; I will have all
persons be in bed at the ringing of the Nine-a-Clock Bell; and I, or my
Officers, will see 'em i'bed, and see who they have a bed with 'em too.


Here's a fine business, pox o'thee and thy Officers, shall we neither eat,
drink, nor lye a bed in quiet, for thee and thy Officers?


Poxo' me and my Officers? Pox of your Wenches Sir, I'll make you know I am a
Magistrate; Seize him.


And have I no Authority, that you offer to Seize him in my presence?


Yes, we know your Authority, know you are Military Governor of the City,
Captain of the Vice Roys Guards, a Lord, nay more then all this, a Justice of
Peace, and twenty things more; what do we care for all that, we are in the City
Liberties, and what we do is according to Law.


Hold your prating Si^rah.


He says truth.


It may be according to Law, but 'tis unmannerly.


All's one, 'tis according to Law.


But Sir, this Gentleman is an Officer under me, and you have not power over
him, therefore I advise you not to meddle with him.


Have a care what you do, do nothing but according to Law.


Have you a care of advising me, I know what I do, I'll do nothing but
according to Law.


Nor I neither, for I have Authority by Law to Protect my Officer by force, if
you use force; but because I'll make no disturbance, let him alone, and I'll
pass my word for him.


If the Law will let him alone, do, otherwise not.


Will you not take my Word?


Advise with Counsel.


Advise me again! I know what I do, I will advise with Counsel!


Advise with Counsel whether my Word's to be taken, or no; Guards, force Artall
out of their Hands, and take that Rascally Brick-layer into Custody,


'Tis beneath my Dignity, though I respect the Man.


Who else will be bound for him? No-body? You see, Sirrah, for what special
Friends you leave you Trade and venture your Neck.


Hang 'em, I knew the Rogues were of untemper'd Mortar: A word with you Sir in
private -- Procure me a Pension, I'll come over to your Party.


A Pension! a Whip you Rascal; go Sirrah, I give you liberty, follow your
Trade, and mind all of you your own matters, leave State affairs to your
Governors, we have more to lose than any of you.


I don't know that I have a hundred thousand pound to lose, and that's enough
for one Man; but however my Lord, if you please to introduce me to His
Excellence the Vice-Roy --


What to be --? I understand you my Lord.


How the Devil came he to understand my mind so well?


Truly my Lord, I must tell you plainly, I don't care to do so ungrateful an
Office to His Excellency, for I know his mind very well, I know, till you have
a better introducer then my self, I mean your good management of affairs, you
will not be very welcome to him, nor receive any honour from him. And so Farewell
my Lord.


Say ye so, shall I not be welcome to him? then he shan'not be Welcome to me;
And since he'll do me no Honour, I'll do his Government not Honour. My Wife, for
want of this Knighthood, will lead me an ill life; and I for want of it will
lead him an ill life, since he is so huffy and stormy, I'll be a Storm.


Do my Lord.


A Whirlwind, that shall rumble and roar over his head, tear open Doors by day
and by night, toss his Friends out of their Coaches and Beds into Goals; nor
shall all the Preachings, and Pulpit-Charms (...) their Priests Dispossess me,
or fright me in the least,
A Whig's a Devil that can cast out a Priest.



NOt Knight me? when he knew I was a proud Man, very proud Man, opposed him out
o'pride, and a Knighthood might have bought me. He shall repent it.


Welcome home my Lord, I wish you joy of your new Honour.


Thank you Sweet-heart, I am glad I'm in a capacity to do my Country service,
but I'm sorry I can't do you the service you affect.


What's that my Lord?


Give you lasting Honour, The Title I shall bestow on you will live no longer
then a Grasshopper or a Silk-Worm, 'twill dye at the end of the Year, your
present Title of Ladyship will then dye into an Aldermans Wife, for I am not
Knighted.


Not Knighted?


Not Knighted.


How dare they use you thus?


They are desperate.


I'm troubled.


I know it.


I was born well, and I affect Honour.


I know it, I know your spirit better then you do your self, and am pleased
with your affection to Honour, for Honour is an excellent guard to Virtue, I
know you are punctually just to me.


Am I? I think I am.


Out of a point of Honour I know it, scorning to appear what you are not; not
out of dullness and want of gaiety you affect pleasures and follow 'em.


I do.


Out of a point of Honour, to appear what you are, I know you, know your temper
perfectly.


So perfectly you amaze me.


Oh! I have a penitrating judgment, know your passion for Honour, highly
commend it, and would gratify it if I could, but since I cannot, I will give
you a kind of Honour, Revenge. The methods you must leave to me.


Give me Greatness, and do you keep Policy.


Well carved.


So, I have nursed the Wenn of his Vanity, till it has blinded his Eyes, and
made him mistake his affection for mine; what I really affect, he is never like
to see, and that's only my dear Florio.


Your Servant Sir, I am much beholding to you, and the rest of my Breth^ren of
the City for the kindness you showed me to day in refusing to be bound for me.


I'll answer you Sir, we resolved to go prudently to work, we did not know but
they might have laid Treason to your charge, so we resolved to see whether they
durst have Tried you, and if they had Tried you, whether they durst have
brought you in Guilty, and if they had brought you in Guilty, whether they
durst have Hanged you, and if they had Hanged you -- then let 'em look to
themselves.


And who should have looked to me then? a very fine busines^, come, come, this
was scurvy, but I'll stick to the cause whilst I have drop of blood.


Ha^ there's my delicate Mother-in Law, that ever such a curious Appendix
should be bound up with such a Volum^ ^ covered with Calves Leather, as that
old Fellow is, I will t^a^her (...) him, I'll be hanged if she loves him; and
as for Marriage-promises, they are but Church-Mouth-Glue, they won't hold a
couple together Three Days.


Oh are you come Sir? well, what have you done Sir?


A delicate Woman!


Sir? are you asleep Sir?


No, nor a ^ed Sir, would I were with your Wife Sir.


What are you ^areing on Sir? why don't you give me an Account of what I sent
you about? did not I send you to search the Cathedral for Arms Sir?


Yes Sir.


And what have you done Sir?


Sir, I have been searching -- searching -- searching -- Sir -- that
Mother-in-Law --


Searching your Mother-in-Law Sir?


The Cathedral, the Cathedral I mean Sir.


S^rrah, you said Mother-in Law.


Why is not a Cathedral a Mother-Church Sir?


S^rrah, you said Mother in-Law.


Why is not a Cathedral according to Law Sir? I spoke jeeringly, and you k^ow
we use to jeer the Church Sir.


That's true.


Lord Sir, must I teach you the language of your own Family?


Well, did the Priests let you come in patiently?


Ay, ay, -- fiddle -- faddle -- a delicate Woman!


That's very strange, then they are not afraid of me?


I hope shortly to leave never a Priest in Christendom, they call themselves
the Pillars of truth, they are rather the Whipping-Posts of truth, and
Sign-posts of Faction.


I'll handle greater people then they.


I must have this Woman, if Courtship won^t do, Love-powder shall.


Come Sir, I'll try your understanding.


I am resolved upon Love-powder.


I can put the City in Arms, upon pretence of a French Invasion, but when they
see no invasion, and the fright is over, how shall I keep up that Army?


The best way will be by Love-powder.


How! keep up an Army by Love-powder? you impudent, illmanner'd unnatural
Rascal you, do you jeer your Father?


Sir, I don't jeer you.


Sirrah, you either jeer me, or which is almost as saucy, did not attend to
what I said.


Well, I confess my Wits were a Wool-gathering, and I beg your pardon Sir.


A Wool-gathering? a Whore-gathering by your story of Love-powder, you saucy
debauched Fop you, when your Father condescends to talk wisely to you of
State-affairs, must your brains be rambling after Wenches?


Wenches are ^itter for me then State-affairs Sir; what a Duce should such a
young Fellow as I trouble himself with State-affairs for?


Who used to trouble themselves and others too about State-affairs more then
you Sir? were you not such a tempestuous disputer in Coffee-houses, that as
soon as ever you appeared in one, both sides would run away, our Friends out of
envy, and our Enemies out of fear.


'Tis my case, no Man will sit by me in a Coffee-house.


Were not your Writings like so many Fire-drakes? no Printer would meddle with
'em, no person come near 'em.


His things are very near my Stile, and I am forced to Print all my things at
my own charge.


And now Sirrah, all of the sudden, you are unfit for State-affairs; come, come
Sirrah, you are a Villain, have turned Cat in Pan; and are a Tory.


A Tory? that's a good one, when I'm now Writing an Answer to Absalom and
Achitophel.


How!


Tis true indeed, he read part of it to my Maid last night.


He did indeed Madam, and 'tis very fine.


May be that puzzles his Head then.


Nay, if it be so, I shall not be angry with him, for of my Word* a good Answer
to that would do us service.


And 'twill require pains.


It will do so, if he employs his time and thoughts so well as that* I shall be
very well satisfied; what do you call this Poem?


A^riah and Hushai.


A very good subject.


Well chosen.


Is not this a strange thing now, that you who are no Poet, not understand
Poetry no more then a Cat, should lye insulting over a Man of sense, when he is
breaking his brains for the service and honour of you and your party?


Well, well Craffy, I did not know it, I did not know it.


Not know it? then you should not meddle with that you do not understand, I
must break my sleep, and spoil my stomach in studying to do you service, and be
called a Villain and a Tory?


Well, well Child, I am sorry, I am sorry.


Sorry? what does your sorryness signify? suppose your vexing me should make
me Write but a sorry Poem, as twenty to one but it will, and so I'll go burn
what I have done, and there's an end.


Nay prithee Child.


I will.


Prithee dear Child.


Hay I will.


No, prithee Child, let me see what thou hast done, and finish the remainder.


I won't.


Prithee do now, 'twill joy my heart.


I say I won't.


This it is to breed our Sons Wiser then our selves, we are despised for our
pains.


Look, if he has not made his good Father weep; are not you a cross-grain'd
ill-natur'd Fellow to make your old Father weep? what if he be not so good a
Poet and Scholar as you, he has as good natural parts, and better.


He is ungrateful to me, for what learning he has, my purse paid for; but I
always find over-much wit and learning make people insolent, and when alls
done, a Fool's a better comfort to his Parents, then one of these great Wits.


Go fetch the Poem, and be Whipped to you.


Do Mr. Craffy, 'twill obliege your Father and me both.


Will it obliege your Lor'ship Madam? to do that I'll run a Thousand Miles upon
my bea^ Head, Madam.


I'm glad he pays so much respect to you, Sweetheart, though he will pay none
to me.


Yes, yes, he will, but great Wits are humour some.


Nay, the Boy has excellent parts, that's certain, but when all done, tis but a
folly to breed Boys up to this height, for it does but spoil them, and all
business, for they will be a top of business, riding upon old Men's backs, and
so the old Men go lamely, and the Boys ride madly, and the business goes
awkwardly.


Now shall I be wedged in, between the old Fool and the young, by the heavy
Beetle of this Poem, and have no opportunity with my charming Florio, when he
comes I'll lay away the Beetle;


Madam.


Did not you say Craffy fell asleep last night in reading his own Verses, and
when he waked, forgot 'em in your Chamber?


Yes Madam.


Run quickly and bring 'em to me.


Oh! how do you good Mr. Florio?


Thank you good my Lord, the better to see things go so well, that you are
chosen.


Oh! we carried clearly.


Ay, so my Chaplain Dr. Sanchy said, who I think laboured for my Lord.


Ay indeed, he took great pains, there was scarce a Man appeared against my
Lord, that he did not call Rogue and Rascal a hundred times.


He is a zealous Man, and so seldom calls any Man by his Christen name, that
he is suspected to be an Anabaptist, and against Christening -- Oh! dear Madam,
is your Ladyship here? when I came into the Room, I saw a Lady, and turned my
head aside, as my usual manners is when I see Women, for they have been no good
Friends of mine, and so I did not mind your Ladyship, I beg your pardon.


Oh! it needs not Sir, I am very glad to see you look so well.


Ay truly, Mr. Florio looks very fine and fresh ruddy and plump, methinks I
have hopes of him; what says your Doctors Sir?


Alas! my Lord, they have given me over long since, all my trust is in an
incomparable Nurse.


Pray who is she?


As you came along my Lord, you might have seen her tied by a Rope to my door.


Tied with a Rope? what is she a mad Woman?


No, no, my Lord, a Cow, my Lord, a Cow.


A Cow?


Ay my Lord, have not I managed my self well, to bring my self from one of
those they call one of the Wits of the Kingdom, to be one of the Calves, and
live upon the breasts of a poor Beast, for thence I have all my subsistence.


Alack! yet your Face says you are as well as ever you were in your life, I
protest it does.


My Face is as false as ever my heart was, it might have more innocence, for it
is scarce two Months old, I mean the Flesh of it.


Is it possible, I warrant if you were to begin the World again, you would have
none of the mad frolics you had?


I think I should not, I laughed once at mad Fellows that in drunken frolics
eat ^ire, but was not I more mad to belch Fire at Heaven it self, as I have
often done in my abominable talk? but what did I get by it? he threw it all
back again in my Face, and almost consumed me. Man is a shallow Animal, can bear
no excess, too much Wit makes him as mad as too much Wine, and a little over
sets him; yet he thinks his silly Scull contains all things, rules all things,
and Omnipotence it self is afraid of that pitiful Engine.


Very well.


When all that the most hot-brain'd Fellow in the world can do, is to make a
smoke to darken things, he can't strike Fire enough out of himself to light him
into the nature of a Fly. But 'tis time we went to Prayers. Doctor Sanchy.


I'm a coming.


Good Doctor give us a few Prayers.


Ay if you will.


My Lord being a Magistrate, I think Doctor you must read the Prayers of the
Church.


I'll see 'em burnt first, and all Priests hanged, before I read any of their
Prayers.


The Law commands i^.


Therefore I won't do it, I'll be commanded by nothing, and do nothing I'm
commanded.


For matter of Law, we can easily come off, no body dare indict us.


But for matter of Conscience.


Hang Conscience, I do it out of matter of Honour, and matter of Revenge, the
Priests are Rascals and slight me, and I'll slight their Prayers.


We shoul'd not be humoursome in our Prayers Doctor.


I'll do what I please, or I'll do nothing.


Pray let him, for we are all oblieg'd to the Doctor for the assistance he gave
my Election.


He had need of it, there was a damned Company of Rogues appeared against you,
I hope to see 'em all hanged.


There was one great Man.


A great Rogue, he deserves to be burnt.


There was a great lady very busy.


A great Whore, she deserves to be whipped, I hope to see all such Rogues and
Whores whipped out of the Kingdom; but come let us go to Prayers.


O the Devil, the Devil!


What's the matter?


I have lost my Hushai, I can't find it high nor low. Who saw my Hushai?


What the Poem that you read to me, that was an answer to Absalom?


Ay.


I had rather have lost ten pounds out of my own Pocket.


Then do you like it Doctor?


'Twas an admirable thing! 'twould have made the Rogue that writ Absalom hang
himself; look about for this Hushai.


Won't you go to Prayers first Doctor?


Hang Prayers! this is a thing of forty times the consequence we may pray at
any time, or if we never pray at all, 'tis no great matter, it is but a thing
of form to please the people; look for this Hushai. I'll look for it my self.


Who the Devil has got my Hushai?


Is Mr. Craffy here?


Well Sir, what would you have?


I come from the Club, they stay for you Sir.


The Club be damned, I can't come, I have lost my Hushai.


What Club is it?


The Club of young politic Whigs, you know 'em.


Oh Craffy, you must go to 'em, they are all persons of Quality.


What care I for their quality, they are but a company of young Coxcombs, I
won't loose my Hushai for 'em.


Sirrah, you are a saucy fellow to call young Men of their parts and quality,
Coxcombs, they are admitted into better Company then yours Sir.


Ay, to help to pay reckonings, flatter an old Knaves vanity, and give a Guinny
to the burning of a Pope.


Sir, some of 'em have had the honour to sit in great Caballs.


I wonder they could.


Why so Sir?


Because some of 'em were so lately whipped at School for Blockheads. I wonder
they could sit any where, they have the marks of Fools both before and behind,
and if ever they speak, the mark's in their Mouths.


I don't like this Fellow.


Sirrah, I now begin to suspect you again for a Tory, and get you to 'em, or
I'll not only Cudgel you, but disinherit you.


Take notice if I go to 'em, I shall be very drunk.


I care not if you be in such company as they are.


Your Wise's Honesty may pay for it, for I shall be very impudent when I am
drunk;

look all for my Hushai.


What else!


So, we are rid of one Fool, could we have as good luck with the rest!


What is become of this Hushai, some concealed Rogue has burnt it out of Envy.


Doctor you must come to the Coffee-house.


Must come?


Ay, to a person of quality.


That person of quality is a Coxcomb, and you are a saucy Rascal; must come?


'Tis the lame Lord.


He is a Rascal.


Your Friend.


Oh! then I'll come, but look all about for this Hushai.


Do so, and let me have an account of it when I come home.


Are you a going abroad my Lord?


Yes Sweetheart, and shall not come home these three hour,

Mr. Florio, you'll excuse me, I leave you.


Oh! good my Lord!

Ha! rid of all my diseases at once!

I mean my Fools, and left alone with my health! my Rosaura!


My life! my Florio!


My Rosaura!


My Husband! faint, ^aint in my arms, help, help, help.


What's the matter?


Mr. Florio is fallen into an Appopleptick Fit, and dyes in my arms.


Alas poor Gentleman! who there?


My Lord, here's an old Counsellour, Bartoline, lighted at your door, and is
coming up to speak with your Lordship.


This old Lawyer is a strange Fellow, he is very old, and very rich, and yet
follows the Term, as if he were to begin the World.


He has lost all his Teeth that he can hardly speak, and he will be pleading
for his ^ee; but he's of our side, and so we must not speak against him.


What pretty Country Creature's this! I cannot but venture inafter her; the
Podesta's House is public, and so I shall not be taken notice of.


Where's my Lord Poshta? hah! where ish he?


Here, here, old Friend, do not you see me?


No, said my eysh are none of the besht.


You follow the Term still?


Ay, and will ash long ash I live, yer'sh no caush wi'out me.


How can you follow all Causes?


Ye'y follow me, ye'y will ha'me.


What young Gentlewoman have you brought with you here (...)


One I may be ashamed on -- shesh my folly, yat ish cho shay my Wife -- I have
played ye fool, and Married a young Garle.


Thy Wife? if thou be her Husband, thou shalt be my Cuckold.


Welcome to Town Madam.


Welcome Mistress.


Ish she not pritchy? you she I have a shweet chooth in my head shtill.


Sweet Tooth? you have never a Tooth in your head.


Yatsh chrue, but I'll bite for all yet wr' my Wit.


Why would you Marry such a young thing as this?


A Man of fourscore be so fond? he, (...).


A Man of foashco -- yersh no shuch thing, ye are Boysh or foashsco -- if you
will, after 'hreeshco we ought cho go in long coa^h, for breechesh are imposh
churesh and preechen^ cho that ^ I believe my Lord Poshta you are behind-hand
with your ^ ash I, I believe sho -- hah!


Though I be, I shall suffer no disgrace.


How do you know yat?


Because I married a virtuous Woman.


A vartuoush Woman? why sho did I for ought I kno may be bo'h mi^hchaken.


No, I am never mistaken.


Oh you're a happy Man, I ha'no shuch confidentsh in a Woman I declare it before
my Girlesh faish, I'll wash her wachersh.


Do if you please.


And for yat reashon I have brought her hither, deshire you though let her be in
your housh; yoursh is a shivil Family, and here she'll have a great yeale of
good company, yat will chake off her fanshy from going abro^d and playing ye
fool.


So, ^ow I shall know where to find her.


What would you h^' me keep a Boarding-house?


What do you shtand upon sheremonyesh with an old Friend fo^ you and I have
known one anoyer fortchy years, and when you're in bed with your Wife, yersh
shome'hing about you dosh confesh you cho be old. Come, if you'll let me be
here, I'll give your Wife a Jewel, and you a peish of Plate, and I'll pay a
good rate beshidesh; what chay you cho y'ish now, Huh?


With all my heart.


Will my Lady conshent? for I believe de Maresh de lecher hoish.


My Will is hers.


I would know 'yat of her.


She is busied now in a work of Charity, about a poor Gentleman, that's fallen in
an Appoplectick Fit, I don't know whether he^l recover it, if he does, he can't
live long, he's in a deep Consumption, I should be sorry to loose him, though
in point of Money, I should be a gainer by his death, for he will leave us a
very good Legacy.


A Legashy? huh!


Yes, for he's a rich Bachelor.


What a Kinshman?


No kin at all, but he has a great Friendship for us because we are a strict
sober Family, and he is a mighty Religious Gentleman.


Oh! I know this Religious Rogue, 'tis Florio.


Will he leave you money, becaush you are shober? huh!


You must know he was a great follower of naughty Women, and now he feels the
sad consequence, and has a great value for Virtue, and I believe will leave my
Wife a great part of his estate, because she is a virtuous Woman.


Do you hear Girl? you are fallen incho a brave housh, where you may get money
by Vartshow and Shobrietchy; Come, my Lord, what will you have, I'll pay you
any rate, Come.


You and I will not fall out.


Ha! is he a providing a Florio for his Wife? I'll provide him a Florio. By
good luck I have an Indian-Gown and Cap at the door, just new out of the Shop.


What ish yish Gentlemansh name?


Florio.


Oh! y're ish shuch a Man; I never shaw him, but I have heard of him, a great
debosh, wash he not? and a good witshy Fellow.


Oh! a very witty man, and a wicked man too once, but now the most penitent
creature in the world, and he had need be so, he is going out of it, he cannot
live many Months.


Alash poor man, and when he dyesh he'll leave all hish money to Vartuoush
people will he? huh.


Yes, he says 'tis sowing Seed in good ground; well ^ha^ some occasions call me
away, you may be here if you will, old acquaintance.


Ay, let him, let him, and come away about your business.


Hark you, hark you! Sho, yish wash very lucky, Girl you mush make it your
buyshnesh cho get iucho yish Genklemansh favour by your Shobriechy, and you may
mump my Lady Poshta of hish Eschate for oughteh I know.


I grow weaker and weaker every day, my time draws on, Heaven prepare me for my
Change, yet I'll use the means to live. Give me my Milk.


I my Consciensh, yish ish de Genkleman!


Give me my Milk I say you Rascals: what have I said? indeed I should not call
any thing out of it's name, I ask your pardon for it.


Ah Sir! ask your poor Servants pardon?


Ay and thank you too, if you will give it me. I was so accustomed in the days
of my wickedness to Libel every thing, I cannot leave the ill habit still.


Ay, yish ish he, yish ish he sharchainly.


Truth is, Atheism is nothing else but a Libel on the whole Creation, calling
it the Off-spring of paltry Chance, when 'tis the Child of Heaven, that I ought
to ask pardon of every Dog for detracting from his descent; But give me my
Milk, and set me a Chair to repose my sel^, for I am very weak.


Alack! alack! yish ish de poor Gentleman; But what a 'hing it ish y'at yish
young Fellow should bring himshelush inchoshuch a shad condition: let me she
how he looksh!


Certainly this handsome sick Gentleman is the ^ine unhappy Mr. Florio, I have
heard so much talk of, a thousand pities such a delicate Gentleman should
bring himself to this!


He looksh very white -- odsha' me -- 'twash the white potch -- ay 'twash the
potch, and he looks very rudgy, but men in yat g^t will do sho, ay yey will do
sho.


Oh! Florio, Florio!


Oh! now I am shachishfyed, 'tish he.


How hast thou brought on this Youth all the Infirmities of Age? my eyes are
dim, my breath is short, my Limbs are weak, Limbs did I say? I have none, at
least of Heaven's making: I have Imbezell'd all the Furniture of my Soul and
body in vice, though Heaven gave me an excellent House-keeper to look to it
all, a careful wakeful Creature, called a Conscience, which never slept, never
let me sleep in ill, but I abused her, sought to turn her out of doors, nay,
Murder her, but could not.


I prochesht yish ish very shad.


Exceeding pitiful.


Ashamed of her I was, and to all my Atheistical Companions denied her, at the
same time she stared me in the face; 'Tis the Athiests trick to hide his
Conscience as the Tradesman does his Wench, for fear of spoiling his Credit,
and loosing his Traffic with those ill people, who will not come near him if
he owns so scandalous a thing as a Conscience.


I swear he almost makes me weep.


Why chruly I am chroubled, and I don't ushe cho be sho.


But ala! let him hide her for a time, when diseases and death come and shake
the building in pieces, as now they do mine, the poor foul Conscience will
appear through all the Rubbish, and call out mercy, mercy, when it may be 'tis
too late; thank Heaven for the fair warning I have had; Is my Coffin ready?


Dear Sir, why does your Honour think of a Coffin? 'tis time enough to talk of
that forty years hence.


Oh! prithee don't flatter my crazed body, I cannot live, I hang on the Eves of
life, like a trembling drop, ready every minute to fall and be seen no more.


Alash, alash.


Oh! dear, and please your Honour, here is company, I doubt your Honour
intrenches on a Gentleman's Chamber?


Heaven forbid! where is the Gentleman? I beg your pardon Sir a thousand times;
my good friend the new Lord Podesta, you know Sir, is a sober, discreet, frugal
person, hates the vanity and prodigality of splendid House-keeping, and so I
suppo^e, may content himsel^ with a part of this House, and oblige a friend
with the remainder; if you be the friend, I beg your pardon Sir, I would have
gone up higher, but truly I wanted breath.


Why chruly, you shay chrue Shir, my Lord yo'sh oblige me with part of hish
housh, which part, or the whole housh, if it were mine, should be at your
shervish, good Mr. Florio.


Do you know me Sir?


No Shir, but I have heard mush of your great partsh, and my Lord Poshto
chellsh me what a good man you are, and I have heard it choo with my own earsh.


May I crave your name Sir?


I am called Barcholine Shir, I am a Fellow pritchy well known among Lawyersh..


The famous Counsellor Bartoline?


I have some Repuchation in y'at way Shir.


I am glad to know your Sir, I think I see a young Woman there, very young --
is she your Grand-Child Sir?


Why chruly Shir, I am almosht ashamed cho chell you she is my Wife.


Oh dear! would you Marry one so young Sir?


I wanched a comfort for my Age Shir.


And she wants a comfort for her Youth, Heaven that made both Sexes, would have
both provided for, can pou provide for hers?


Whatch I want in Provisionsh I make up in a heartchy Welcome -- hah!


But will that suffice her?


It may in chime, cushtome ish a great matcher, I have obsherved lushty
Sou'dies by custom got cho dine and shup very comforchably on a pipe of
Chobacco.


But they steal many a good bit that no body knows of.


Why chruly she may Shir, but not if she be honesht.


Many an honest Parishoner follows private Meetings, because he finds no
comfort from the Parson of the Parish, but she seems a virtuous, modest, young
Lady, and I would pay my respects to her in a salute, but I fear my breath may
offend her, pray excuse me to her Sir.


Oh! good Shir, well shir, she and I are cho chaken with the discourshesh we
have heard fall from you, y'at we are exshtreamly deshiroush to be frequently
with you Shir.


Alas Sir! I am unfit for company, my good Lady Podesta indeed will fit by me
half a day here, as by a murmuring Brook that slides fast away, and soon will
be dried up for ever, and she is content to hear my little purlings.


Ay yey are very well ingeed Shir, very well, and you would much obliegsh ush,
my Wife wantsh shuch good company, shesh a ^oung creature, yat never in Chown
before, and yos'h not know the World Shir.


Is it possible! sweet Madam, you are failed into a dangerous Gulf which few
young Ladies pass without casting away their Reputations, or Honestys, or both;
I have been an Admiral here, and you see to what I am brought!


Well Shir, affairsh call me away, I'll make bold cho leave you chogether Shir.


She will be weary of me Sir, for I am weary of my self.


No ingeed Shir, she chaksh great gelight in your dishcoursh, pray letch her
have it Shir, I'll rechurn presently, wheegle him, dee hear? wheegle him, you
may get a good Legashy.


Is he gone?


He's gone Sir.


My Periwig and Love Aquipage, quickly.


How now! what's this?


An Adorer of yours fair creature, no unsound, false, wicked Florio, but a
sound, young, vigorous, passionate Lover, if you will not believe my tongue,
believe my Nose, the patch covers wholesome flesh, believe my Legs, which leap,
vault, and run, except from you sweet Creature.


I am betrayed! drawn into a Snare (but 'tis a sweet one (aside) help! help!
help!


I need no help my Dear.


But I do, help! help! help!

Oh 'tis a lovely Gentleman! (aside.) help! help!

'Tis a delicate Gentleman! (aside.) help! help!


Why do you call so loud? I can help you to what you want.


Help, help! will you force me? (I can't resist him, (aside.) help! help!


All this is to no purpose.


Oh fie upon you, what a Man you are? A handsome Man I mean, (aside.) I am out
of breath with striving, help! help! Oh my heart pants! help! help! help!


OH! Fie upon you! fie upon you, was ever virtuous Gentlewoman served such a
trick before?


Oh! frequently, scores of 'em are served so, every Easter- Term.


What, Women that are as virtuous as my self?


Ay, full as virtuous.


O Lord bless us! what a place is this! I did not think there had been such a
place, nor such a Man as you in the world, I shall never endure to see you
more.


Do not say so.


No, never as long as I live.


You'll change your mind.


Never whilst I breath.


Yes when I come next, mean while I am your humble Servant.


Your Servant dear Sir.


When shall I wait on you again, Madam?


When you please Sir, I shall at all times be glad of your good Company.


Your Servant dear Madam.


Your Servant dear Sir.


Wher'sh my Wife, and poo Mishte Florio? huh! where are yey?


Here's your Wife, but poor Mr. Florio is gone away very ill.


Were you not weary of him? huh!


No indeed, I could have been with him all day and all night.


I doubt you dishemble.


Indeed I do not.


I doubch you had rather been at a Play, or shome other Diverchishment.


I swear I had more pleasure from him, then ever I had from any Divertisement
in my life.


Well, be good whilsht I live, 'twill be the betcher for you when I dye, then I
shall leave you Rich enough cho chake your choish of young handshome
Coxshcombes.


Do not tell me of young handsome Coxcombs.


You won't Marry I warrant when I am gead? no not you? a 'housand to one, you
will be Married before, nay, I dare hold chenne pound you are Conchracted now?


How!


Nay, not by a Preish, but by looksh, and shmirkeh, c. twisching of Eye-beamsh,
and making a Wedging-Ring of the fine round mou'h -- and yush, I believe you
have promish'd your shelf cho a 'housand foolsh.


You wrong me extremely.


All ye betcher, I'm sure I shall disherve your kindness, for I am labring
cho make you a rich Widgow; The Term won't lashed a mouth, and I have more
breviatsh and Papersh putch incho my hand shince I went out, yen I can read in
'hree monh'sh, I'm sure on it.


And what must become of your Clients Causes?


I yont care, I know what will become of yeir Money; I'll lock it up
preshently, all for you, give me my Papersh, come let me she now -- let me she
-- whatsh her cho do?


Will you Hang your Brother for ten pound?


You should ashke me if I would hang him for chenne shillingsh, yen I might
conshiger it, but chenne ponn' ish a great yeale of money, tish a great yeale
of money, come let me she.


Methinks 'tis a little against the Law of Nature.


Ye Law of Natchure belongsh cho Pchivilians Woman, we common Lawyeash y'ont
studgy ye Law of Nachure, tish none of our shtudgy -- no -- no -- But come let
me she -- whatsh here now? come.


My Lord.


What's your business Sir?


I have a Message to you Lordship, from his Highness the Vice-Roy.


Very well Sir, I attend.


His Highness desires your Lordship not to disturb and frighten the City, by
raising the Town Forces to no purpose


He is of opinion, 'tis to no purpose, is he?


Yes my Lord.


I am of a contrary opinion, and I am seldom mistaken.


His Highness bid me tell you, that for the bare satisfaction of the Poeple,
(though danger requires it not) he is willing you should keep up half you do.


He would have me keep but half?


No my Lord.


Then I will keep as many more.


Is that your Answer?


Yes, and we will justify it by Law.


Well bred, good humoured Gentlemen these, and fine Subjects


He shall shortly hear from us things that


Here is Counsellour Bartoline, the greatest Lawyer in the Kingdom, and one of
our own Party, you can't possibly advise with a better Man about 'em, give him
the Hundred pound Fee, the City allows you to retain some eminent Lawyer.


I will, Counsellour Bartoline, I must speak a word with you.


I'm not at leishure, I have Caushesh cho look over, yat are cho come on cho
Morrow.


But we have a Cause in which the whole City's concerned.


You must defer it yen, for if I y'ont appear in yish Cause cho Morrow, 'twill
be losht, it wholly dependsh upon me, and I cannot but in conshiensh atchend
it, I have a Fiftshe pound Fee.


We will give you a Hundred pound, Mun.


How? a Hundger'd poun? huh?


Ay, there 'tis.


Here, lay ashide yesh Papers,

Well, whatsh your buyshnesh now -- come -- huh!


We are drawing up Articles against the Man of the Castle.


Yea Man at ye Cashtle, wosh yat?


He means the Vice-Roy.


Archiclsh against the Viceh-Roy -- huh?


Ay.


Go me ye Papersh again, I won't meggle in it.


How! not meddle?


No, I won't meggle, I won't meggle.


Your reason?


I may loosh my Head mun, I won't meggle, no, no, come let me she.


No matter if you do loose your Head, if you have no more honesty nor love for
your Country, then to refuse to do your Countries business, when you have
received your Countries Money.


I yon't care whosh money 'tish, let it be ye Devilsh money I'll keep it, now I
have it, but I won't meggle in the buyshnesh -- no -- no -- come -- come.


Keep our Money? and not do our business?


Tish our way. 'Tish our way.


Sir, by your Favour, either do our business, or pay back our Fee.


Pay back your Fee -- 'twash never known mun, and I won't shet an ill
pregident; no, no, tish shufficient I won't be against you, yatsh enough. Come
let me she.


Did one ever know such a Knave? what shall we do? for you and I must account
for this Money.


Let me alone with him, I understand Mankind; Counsellour Bartoline, do not
play the Fool with your self, and loose a Thousand pound, which you may get by
this Cause.


A 'houshand Pound? huh!


Yes, this is a great Cause, and the City will go through with it, whatever it
costs 'em.


Come, I'll underchake ye buyshnesh -- come.


Did not I tell you I understand Mankind?


But I won't appea publicly -- dee hear -- I won't appea.


Give us Councels will do the Man at the Castle's business, and we don't care.


Let me alone.


Counsellour Bartoline a word with you.


Your buyshnesh.


I am sent to you by his Highness the Vice-Roy.


Hish Highnesh the Vy'sh-Roy? shpeak shoftly.


His Highness is enform'd you are here, and very great with these Men.


I great with yesh Men? 'tish falsh, they're Knavsh, I haitch 'em, I haitch
'em.


Nay, he believes you only assist 'em as a Lawyer for your ^ees, you have too
much Wisdom and Law to engage in their ill and dangerous designs.


Hang 'em, hang 'em.


And such they have, his Highness is well assured.


No doubeh on it, mosht sherchain.


And therefore he's resolved to punish 'em.


He musht do it! he musht.


To that end he intends to indict 'em of several Crimes.


I am glad of it.


How far they will extend in Law he knows not.


Very probable.


Therefore he sends you by me a hundred pieces.


He doesh very well -- very well -- hesh a wysh Man.


For your Advice.


I'll give it him, but not publicly -- I won't appea, but I'll give him shuch
advysh ash shall do yeir buyshn^sh.


I'll tell it him.


If he hash a fanshy cho hang'em he shall.


I'll tell him.


Well, you'll undertake our business?


Let me alone -- give me your Articlesh -- come -- now I'll go studgy, come
along.


So, this is a notable old Fellow, if he undertakes the business, he l do it.


You need not inform me in Mankind.


Where's my -- Where's my -- every little thing puts me so out of breath --
Where's my Lord Podesta?


Here Mr. Florio.


I have great (pooh) blows) I am so faint with every little motion, and little
talk -- I have great News for you.


Great News, and I not know it? there is seldom any thing to be known that I
don't know.


I^ll tell it you, but I must open a Vein first that I may breath -- ^e^ch a
Surgeon -- I played the Fool -- uh! as I came -- uh! along, I saw a young Woman
with naked (pooh) Breasts -- going I'm certain to -- pooh -- to be nought; ^o I
reproved her, but she was very angry, and sed she was an honest Woman; then I
sed she was to blame to let those two Breasts come abroad, like two Domestic
Intelligences to slander her; so she said she did it to please her -- pooh --
her Husband; so I sed her Husband was a wise Man to make his Wife show her --
pooh -- her Breasts in such a Town as this, such Treasure would invite
Pickpockets enough to rob him of it. And thus with this wanton Woman I wasted
my -- pooh -- my Spirits.


So you have done now more then needs, you might have told us the News in the
time you have told the Story.


'Tis true indeed -- Well, I'll tell you the News, you may see how things go,
for my part I am glad I have not long to live, to see the Nation Ruined.


Why what's the business?


There's a French Fleet upon the Coast, and six of the principal Commanders
lurk in the Disguise of Pilgrims about Mount Vesuvio, to burn the Town by
night, and let in their Friends.


I knew all this several Hours ago.


Is it possible my Lord? you have excellent Intelligence.


So I have.


I'm sure 'tis not half an Hour since I invented it.


What do you think made me raise the Militia?


Was it for that?


Do you think I raised 'em for nothing, I never do a foolish thing.


And why would you not tell me?


I had some reasons of State.


And what will your Lordship do in it?


What else, but seize 'em?


We must do it very privately, least they have notice, for they have Friends in
Town.


You need not teach me my business, nor that they have Friends in Town, what
meant the Order to put down Two Regiments of the Militia?


Was there such an Order?


I was an ear-Witness.


You may see how things go: whereupon I smartly replied, Would they have Two
down, said I? then I will have four more up, said I, smartly.


That was very well.


As well as I could have advised.


Sir, I know what I do.


I protest I thought you had done it only to cross 'em.


Sir, I have deeper fetches in things then you are aware of.


I see you have.


Now you shall see how I'll manage this business, I will leave my Hat, Gown,
and Periwig here, put on your Hat, Coat, and Periwig Bricklayer, and go out
so disguised, that my own Family shall not know what is become of me.


That will do very well.


I cannot advise better.


Then I'll go to your House Bricklayer, and there send for Twenty Men such as I
can trust, and Arm them, and when that's done I won't trust them neither, but
take 'em along, and they themselves shall not know whether they go, What say
you to this?


Incomparable.


Very well; but why would you not do this before, since you had intelligence of
these Men?


For good reasons you may be sure, I never do a foolish thing; come, give me
your things.


What shall I wear my self?


Any Porters so far as your House,

Now will not this deal with Pilgrims?


have you strength to go with us?


To mount Vesuvio? I may as well hope to carry the Mountain on my back, but if
I had strength I durst not venture.


Why, what are you afraid of?


Pride, Pride, I am mighty apt to be vain, formerly a little success in a Jest
or a Song, or Libel, would have made me a notorious Ass; imagine then, if when
I come from this great expedition, I should see my name in every Intelligence,
my Picture on every Wall, what an insufferable haughty Coxcomb I should be?
Lord, Lord, I should be so proud!


For my part now, I go of purpose for these things, and intend to sit for my
Picture as soon as ever I come home, I was bid Money for my Face yesterday.


You who have but one infirmity, need not fear it. But my Vices like Tories
ride in troops, and if one gets into me, a hundred will follow: if now I am
sick I should love your praises, when I am well I shall love your Wives.


He speaks a great deal of reason, we will go without him.


But who shall guide us?


My Lord needs no Guide.


No, I know where they are to a hairs breadth, Here comes my Wife, don't let
her know who I am; Plutarchus, that Brutus would not trust his Wife Portia with
Affairs of State, I'll imitate his Politiques.


No News of my Lord?


I suppose Madam he's busied about some great affair.


Mr. Florio, I have an humble address to make to you.


What is it good Madam.


I am a Woman more nice and careful of my honour, then any other Woman is of
her face or skin; in my Husbands presence I am secure from malice, but in his
absence I can never open my doors but slander will enter, even your Religion
and Virtue Sir cannot hinder her from following you in, and fastening on us
both.


Slander will have lean food in me Madam.


All's one Sir, 'tis best to avoid her. I would therefore humbly beg you at all
times of my Husbands absence to bestow your excellent conversation elsewhere.


'Twill be very prudent Madam.


I hope you'll not take it ill Sir.


By no means Madam.

Do you hear what an excellent Wife you have?


I know her Sir.


An Admirable Woman!


Sir, you need not inform me.


Who have you got with you there?


A very Honest Man Madam.


Are you sure of that? because these are dark times, a Knave will shine in 'em
like rotten Wood by night, And that Man has a notable out-side, he resembles
much my Husband, who is one of the wisest men in this Age.


Do you hear?


Sir, she is a Woman of vast parts.


I have a great fancy to secure him.


Pshaw, we shall have a fiddle faddle with her, and spoil our business -- Get
you gone, go.


How does he fly? that's suspicious. Seize him.


Away, away Man, I'll follow you.


No good Madam, I'll be bound for him. Ha! Ha! what a Coxcomb is this? now is
he gone he knows not whether, to catch he knows not whom.


What an Excellent thing, and how Useful in the World is Credulity?


'Tis so, to many excellent Trades, To the sparkish Fop, the Shopkeepers large
faith swells his Feather and garniture, To the Politician, the believing
empty-headed Rabble are his Bladders. But oh 'tis of excellent use to a Lover.


And to a Trade you have not named -- a Swearer.


A Lover is a Swearer, a private one, he is not a public Evidence, a
Swearer-General.


You were once Swearer-General to our whole Sex.


But I recant, and now will I kiss no Book but these sweet Lips.


Hold! not so fast.


Why, what's to do?


I must blush a while.


Blushes are for the Morning of Love, we have travelled many tedious hours
since that, and without any refreshment, except baiting now and then at a Kiss,
Those lips are delightful places, but not the end of the Journey.


You say you have travelled in Love, you say true, you have passed through many
hearts, and I fear have wasted all your love by the way.


I have only tri^led away some unnecessary travelling expenses, here will I
lay out my whole heart.


A mortgaged Heart!


Indeed it is not.


What security will you give me?


Have I not Pawned a Kingdom to you, I was King of Libertines, and I have left
my Dominions, and all my fair female subjects to be a slave to you and a fool
to the Priests.


Whoever it be, we are in an ill condition to


Venture to ask who 'tis.


Who's there?


'Tis I Madam.


'Tis the fool Craffy.


What shall we do with him?


Madam, I must speak with your Ladyship.


Come some other time, I'm very busy now.


This business must be done now Madam.


Dispatch it where you are then.


I cannot, this is private business Madam.


Then you must let it alone, for I neither can nor will speak with you.


You must and shall speak with me, since you go to that, and if you won't let
me in at the Door, I'll climb in at the Window.


You are saucy Sirrah.


There is no business to be done without sauciness.


What shall we do with this Fellow?


Put on my Husbands Gown, Hat, and Periwig, and lye upon the Couch as if you
slept.


Will you let me in or no?


You are in great haste Sir.


Yes that I am, my business is earnest.


So, she's all alone, as I hope to be saved!


Well, what's your business Sir.


I have sweet business! delicate business, and I'll do it I'll Warrant me --
Drunkenness has given me wit and impudence, if it don't dis^igure me, I don't
care, I am cursedly afraid 'twill put my features out of Rank and File, they
won't march even, and gracefully, and in Battalia.


Well, hast thou given me all this trouble, and now hast nothing to say?


Yes, I have something to say, and now it shall out. I come -- I come -- most
sweet --


Speak so^tly, for your Father's asleep on the Couch.


My Father there! the Devil take him for his pains, that Blo^khead never did me
any good, nor ever will; now he lies like a great Boome to hinder my Vessel
from coming into the Harbour when the wind is fair: Od I could find in my heart
to cut him!


Well Sir, you have no business it seems?


Od I'll do my business, and let the old Fool dispose his greasy Bags as he
has a mind; I care not, I'll pass the Rubicon, and be ant Casar, aut nullus --
I come then to tell thee such a story, as no Age, nor History, can do the like.


Ay, prithee let me hear that.


Ay, prithee let me hear that with a smile, many a Roman General has fought a
Battle upon the encouragement of Birds that have not chirped half so prettily;
Prithee let me hear that -- And thou sweet Rogue, thou shall it --


The Bruit is drunk, and I never discerned it.


Then thou delicate Creature, I come to tell thee, I love and adore thee!


Love and adore me? what does the Coxcomb mean? but why should I consider the
meaning of a Fool in drink?


Nay, my News does come wet out of the Press, that's certain, 'tis delicate
News, is't not? what say thou? Have I no Darts nor Arrows in my eye? prithee
look upon me, nay, look if this Fantastic Woman will look upon me? prithee
look upon me, I'm newly Shaved, and a Man looks like a notable smirk Rogue when
he's Shaved, his face is like a Bowl new wiped, he may kiss the Mistress if he
has any skill, and I'll try.


Sirrah, attempt any R^deness to me, and I'll waken your Father, and ruin ye;
I am amazed he should sleep thus!


I believe there is a Proclamation come out against sleeping, and the Rogue
takes a nap to affront the Government, for nothing else could make a Whigg
quiet so long, that's certain.


So Sir, you are a Ran^ing Tory, begone you had best, before I waken your
Father, and you who are now so ^ull of Wine, be turned out of doors, and want
Bread, consider that Sir.


How! when I have thee before my eyes, dost thou think I can consider a Crust?
what a pitiful hungry thought was there?


Dis-inheriting then and starving, are nothing to thee.


I starve now, Love has dis-inherited my stomach, which, before I fell in love
with thee, had as good a Title to meat as any stomach in Christendom, that is,
if meat be made for stomachs, and now if I were to go to Law with a Chicken for
Crumbs, he'd Cast me, I should have nothing to show for 'em, so that I must enjoy
thee that I may eat again.


Enjoy me Sirrah! do you know who I am, you dare mention such (...) Word before
me?


Know thee! I, well enough.


Am not I your Father's Wife Sir?


And what of all that?


What of all that?


Thou think I warrant I'll be frightened with Incest? with fee, fa, fum, I am
not a Child to be scared from a Sack-Posset with a white fheet, if we must
meddle with nothing that is a Kin to us, we must not eat or drink, for we are
all near a Kin to our Victuals, but thou art no Kin to me, thou art only
tacked to my Father's side by a Priest, and art no more my Mother then his
Back-Sword is, for that's buckled to his side sometimes; Besides, I don't know
whether he be my Father or no, I'm sure he is not fit for it.


Whatever I am to him or thee, 'tis sufficient I am nearly related to Virtue
and Honour, and do not dare Sirrah, so much as to talk undecently before me.


Why dost thou talk undecently before me?


Who I?


Yes, thy eyes talk Bawdy, thou hast the wanton'st eyes that ever I saw in my
life: Give me a Kiss, give me a Kiss I say -- the best you have in the house,
won't you? I'll come to the Vessel my self then.


Bless me! Husband! Husband!


Let him wake if he dares.


Oh Lord! what shall I do?


Ha! does he snort? let him snort again, he has neither Powder nor Shot in his
Nose.


Oh Madam! your Husband and the Bricklayer.


How! where are they?


Just coming into this Room.


Cannot your Master possibly get by?


Not possibly.


Oh misery! shame! death! what shall I do?


What's the matter Madam?


Ha! what comes into my head! I'll make this fool beat his Father out; (aside)
Oh your Father will be Murdered, and I abused, here are Villains got into the
house in Arms, one of them they say has a design upon my Person.


Your Person?


Ay, help us for Heavens sake!


Where are they?


Just coming into this Room, beat 'em out of the house, as you value your
Fathers life, and my Honour.


I'll do it.


Here they come.


Some one help me to kill this unnatural Rogue.


No, take him alive I charge you, that we may know who put him upon this
horrible damnable Plot, for this is as horrible a Plot as has been these
thousand years.


Sirrah, who put you upon this horrible wickedness?


Sirrah, who put you upon the horrible wickedness of attempting this sweet
Lady?


This Fellow's Drunk.


As Drunk as he is, he asks no impertinent Questions, nor has he committed any
great Error in the ill-favour'd Entertainment he has given you for entering my
Husbands house in this armed posture, in these dangerous times, without giving
me any notice what he has done, he did by my command, and i'll justify it.


This is a wise Woman.


The Woman could not act wiser if she were my own Wife.


I'll reveal my self to her, Sweet-heart I am your Husband.


Come Sir, lay aside your unseasonable and unmannerly mirth, these are no
Rallying times, or if they were, you are not my equal at Repartee with me: But
now I think on it, see what's become of my Husband some body, he has slept these
two hours upon that Couch, and this rude Scuffle has frighted him away.


Indeed Madam, I fancy this is my Lord.


Sweet-heart, upon my Honour I left my Gown, Hat, and Periwig upon that
Couch, and there's no difference between the Lord Podesta and me but a Gown.


Then there is Roguery, for there lay a Fellow under that Gown. I'll swear I
heard his Nose go.


He says true.


Bless me! here's a Plot.


Some of the French Pilgrims to Murder you, and burn your House.


Most certain, fetch a Regiment of the Militia, I'll have a Sentry at every
door in my House, two at every Post of my Bed, and one under my Bolster.


Search all the Tubbs, Pots, Bottles, and Vessels in your House, for
Gun-powder.


Yes, and I'll unpave the streets to see if the Stones be not Hand-Granadoes.


'Tis necessary, and I hope your Lordship will not blame me for defending your
House, though you suffered something by it.


'Twas admirably done.


Wisely, very wisely.


Like a Woman that knows Man-kind.


Well, and shall I no praises have, That beat the Knave?


O 'twas very well done Craffy.


Very well indeed.


But are not these Unhappy times,
That I can take no Joy
In such a Wife, and great Estate,

And such a Son as I.


COme, Captain, place those two Soldiers behind those two Doors, and then my
House will be too hot for a Knave.


For the justification of our Proceedings, we will print a Narrative of the
Pilgrim under the Gown. As Paper, in Holland, passes for Money, Pamphlets with
us pass for Religion and Policy: a bit of Paper in Holland, from a Man of
Credit, takes up Goods here, pays Debts there; so a Pamphlet will take up Fools
here, make Fools there. A Pamphliteer is the best Fool-maker in the Nation. And
this Story well improved --


The Story's well enough, what need we lye to no purpose?


By your favour, 'twill be to good purpose; a Lye will give it the stamp of our
Party. Lies are the Supporters of our Arms, and the Great Seal of our
Corporation.


If a Lye will do the Nation any Service, I shall not scruple.


You would have no Reason; for that Lye that does as much good as Truth, is as
good as true; Ergo, 'tis true. Quicquid est idem, est idem, is a Rule in
Logic, but you know no Logic.


But I know a Rule in Divinity, that says, you are not to do Evil that Good may
come thereby.


Ay, that Good may come, and not come: but the Evil that does Good, is a Good
Evil; but no Evil is Good, Ergo, 'tis no Evil at all: But there's no talking
Logic to you, you don't understand it.


How now, what would you have?


May it please your Honour, My Lord.


Speak to me, I am my Lord, that is, I manage all


It has always been a Custom for the new Lord Pod^st to send poor Prisoners
some relief.


It has been a Custom you say?


Yes, Master.


Is there any Law for it?


Law, Master?


Ay, for we will do nothing but according to Law.


You would not have poor Prisoners starve, Master


Sir, if they starve according to Law, no body has any thing to say.


That's hard, Master.


Go, get you about your business.


Pray Master.


I hope, Master, you will be kinder to us, Master.


Why, what are you?


Honest, poor People, Master, that always used to have some broken Meats from
my Lord Podesta's Table, and now we have not had one bit.


Is there any Law for it?


Law, Master?


Ay, for in plain Terms, we will do nothing for any body, that is not of our
Party, but what we are forced to by Law.


We are all of your Party, Master.


Ay, Master, we are all Whiggs, Master, we are all Whiggs.


Master, I poll'd for you.


I poll'd three times over, for my Lord; came in three several Coats, and past
for three men.


Say you so? who employed you?


The Doctor, Master.


And several of our Prisoners poll'd for my Lord. Master.


Well, give 'em half-pence a piece.


Half-pence! -- my Lord -- half-pence!


Well, when my Year's out, I'll consider farther.


We shall starve in that time, Master.


Go, go, begone, the Bricklayer and I are consulting about Affairs of State,
for the good of you all, how to secure your Religion and Property.


Our Property, Master?


Go, go, you have no Property, nor, I think, Religion, you are idle Knaves --
begone.


The Devil take you -- a half-penny Lord, is the Podesta's place worth but a
half-penny?


Plague rot you -- a half-penny Lord, I'd have seen the Devil have you, before
I'd have chose you, if I had known.


A half penny Lord -- confound 'em damned Rebel Rogues, I hope to see 'em
hanged.


Now let us to Counsellour Bartoline's Chamber, to know his Opinion, concerning
our Arming and Fortifying.


One Lawyer is positive against us.


That's a Tory Fellow, I don't mind Tory Law.


But he spoke a great deal of Reason.


I care not a Farthing for Reason, Law, nor Scripture, if they side with the
Tories. I prefer Whigg-Nonsence, before Tory-Reason: But come.


No body in the House here? O Sir, you are the Man I desire to speak with. I
suppose you remember me?


I remember you? How should I remember all the People gat come cho me?


'Tis strange you should forget me, 'tis not long since I put just such another
Fee into your Hand, as this.


Od sha me! now you putch it incho my headge, I do remember you; you come from
ye Vish roy.


I do so.


He ish a worhy Genkleman, I shall be glad to sherve him.


The Business is, My Lord Podesta fortifies without his leave.


Doesh he? yen hesh a Yebel, shay I shay it.


But is there no Clause in their Charter will bear 'em out?


Shir, if year be shuch a claush, 'twill overthrow yeir Charcher, 'twill argue
the King was deshieved, so his Grant will be void; 'tish against ye Peyogative,
ash I'll prove outch Common Law, and clea shatchute Law; and if I yon throw 'em
on yeir backsh I'll hang for it, sho chell ye Vishroy -- But I'll be privatsh.


I'll tell him.


O, here he is! come, Counsellour, we must speak with you.


You musht not, for I am very buishy.


But these ten pieces must, and shall speak with you.


Why chruly, I have a great yeal of buishnesh; but I have alsho a great
kindnesh for boh you; for I hinke you are very honesht Men, and wish well to ye
Nation, and have very good yeshignsh. And I will do you what kindnesh I can, I
will ingeed. Well, come, your buishnesh -- huh --


May the Subject -- Subject? I don't love that word Subject: But, come, may the
Subject Fortify by Law, without leave?


May he wear a Shword by hish shide without leave? a shimple Shtory.


But a Lawyer told me the contrary.


'Twash not ye Lawyer, 'twash hish Fee; and Fees will shay any hang.


He said 'twas against clear Statutes.


Yersh no shuch hang ash a clea Shtachute, hant we Law yersh the penning of
'em, and do you think we won't make work for our shelu'sh? We hate a clea
Shtachute, as a Housebreaker yoesh a clea Night, I shpeak against my own
Profession; for I'm an honesht Fellow, I am worth but shix hou^and a year, and
I mightch have been worth twenchy, if I would have been a Knave; but I love cho
make a Consciensh of what I shay, and do, I do ingeed, ingeed I do.


But we are told that 'tis so against Law, that if there should be any such
Power in our Charter 'twould argue the King was deceived, and overthrow the
Charter.


If such a Power in your Charcher should overthrow it, it would argue the King
had yeshieved you, mum, and who dares shay yat? yersh a chrick for you, yey
chalk like Foolsh and Knavsh, yey don't know what yey shay, let me alone wi you
buishnesh, dee hey? but privately, very privately. Come along, come.


This is a notable old Fellow.


I was of his Opinion.


My Lord, will you continue those Guards and Centuries about your House?


Sweet Heart, to ask my Wisdom questions, is to question my Wisdom.


I confess, you have reason to stand upon your Guard: 'twere well the People
knew it; and your Son Craffy has a Pen ^it for the purpose.


He shall meddle no more with his Pen, it has almost mop'd him. I would give
five hundred pound he had never seen a Pen in's Life; but I will take him from
it before he's too far gone, and enter him into business: Here he is Powdered,
a Feather in's Cap, and Chatechising


Ay, this will do -- This will do -- Nature writ no good Hand when she penned
me, because she wrote after a damned Copy, the Fool my Father; but this will
mend some Letters. This will take my Mother.


Craffy.


Drunkenness, like a Hog in a Garden, rooted up my Flowers, but now the Tulips
in my Face begin to lift up their Heads.


Craffy.


They do in Faith.


Why don't you come?


Let him alone, all this is not his folly, but mine, who have let him take more
Poetry than his Brains would bear, and have ruined my Child; and though I say
it, a delicate young Fellow.


I fancy he's turned Amorous Fop, for he's broke out into a Feather, and all
those Fooleries that trouble Love-sick People.


Indeed his Feather says some such thing.


And I'll take the Feathers word.


Before mine? do not you teach me to know my own Boy, nor any thing. I'd give
you a hundred pound I were an Ass.


You may have it cheaper.


I mean in this, that I mistook the Boys Distemper. Lord, that I should let him
spoil himself!


I have a mind to know his Contemplations. I'll go towards him.


Ha. my delicate Mother-in-law? I'm ready for her: I'll charge her with Smiles,
Wit, Impudence, Modesty, Humility, all sorts of Weapons. First, with Humility
upon my Knees. Most Sweet Dear -- ha! my Father behind -- That old Fool is
always in my way -- How shall I get from my Knees again! The Devil take him.
Most sweet dear, Madam, pray to Heaven to bless me -- Pray, my Lord, pray to
Heaven to bless me.


Bless thee?


Ay, to bless me.


What of this time of day.


A Blessing will do a Man no hurt at any time of day.


Well, the Lord bless thee, and deliver thee from Poetry, say I, it has utterly
spoiled thee: That ever I should let this Fellow tamper with Poetry. I could
have made him -- I don't know what -- I could have made him such a States-Man, as
these times could not have produced. These times, pitiful Fellows, the Statesmen
of these times were all starved at Nurse. Some of 'em were Foundlings, one
found under a Rump, another was a Maggot in English Noll's Nose. A pack of
strange Fellows they are all, in short, Craffy --


Most sweet Woman.


You shall never Write nor Read more; but be a Man of Business.


Yes, Madam.


Madam?


Yes, my Lord, I mean --


Did you mind what I said to you?


No, Madam -- yes, Madam, -- Ay, my Lord, I mean.


Yes, Madam -- Ay, my Lord -- Sirrah, where are your Brains?


Brains Madam -- my Lord, I mean.


In your Ink-Pot, Sirrah?


I'm now answering the Meddal.


I thought as much, the Devil take thy Poetry. Sirrah, meddle with Pen and Ink
more if you dare.


Who must answer these things then? There's ne'er a man of Wit of our Party,
but my self, and my things are discommended. I know several People don't like
my Hushai: That I intend to call my Poem, The Meddal Reversed, Written by him
who was not the Author of Hushai, nor of any Pen writ of our side


Come, Poetry be hanged, and Prose too.


Come, come, my Answer will be the best.


What's that?


A Flail -- if I meet with the Author in a convenient Place, I'll give him an
Answer.


Yes; and, Sirrah, you shall never meddle with Pen, Ink, nor Book more, but be
a Man o'business.


I shall be a pretty Man of business, never Write nor Read.


Sir, the greatest Politicians of our times, never Write nor Read, as you may
see by their Speeches.

Come, Sirrah, you have Wit enough, and Courage too, and we have Business, and
Enemies to employ both, insomuch I shall not dare to go to Bed to Night.


Shall not you? Then I'll dare to go thither in your stead: I have showed my
Mother my Wit, I never showed her my Skin yet. I'll tempt her with that.


I'll have you in the Head of a Party, go to Mount Vesuvio.


I'm resolved to steal to her when she's a Bed.


Get a Horseback presently, do ye hear?


Ay, my Lord, in a rich Night Gown, Point de Venice Shirt, and Velvit Slippers.


How, a Horse-back in this Equipage? Do you know I bid you get your Horse?


Ay, my Lord, washed from head to Foot in Rose Water.


This is mockery, give me a Cane.


O good my Lord.


Come, let him alone.


I will not.


What's the matter? what's the Matter?


What's the matter with your Brains, Sirrah? For when I come to one side of your
Head, they shift of the other, that you never mind what I say. Get you gone you
Rascal you.


Sweet Rogue, I'll be with thee at Night.


Would the Devil had had this Fellows Poetry: A Gentleman may carry a little of
it for an Ornament and Pleasure, as a Lady carries an Orange in her hand, but
to have a Fool carry a great Basket on his Head, like a Costardmonger; and
break his Brains.


Clamb'ring up these Stairs, has almost spent me; I'm ready to tumble down
dead.


Poor Man, how bad he is!


I wonder he's come abroad!.


'Tis pity, he's a pretty Fellow.


My good Lord, I beg your Pardon a thousand times for the Liberty and
Confidence I take in your House.


You are very welcome, good Mr. Florio.


You may believe my Lord, Sir, he's your very humble Servant.


Your Servant, good Madam. Why truly, we sick People take upon us a strange
Authority, I know not by what Commission. I* think 'tis because Sickness is
Heavens Messenger, and when a Man is upon the Road in a Messengers Hands, all
People give way, and I am riding Post.


Where are you all? where are you all?


What's the matter?


Who says there are no Plots?


He that has a mind to be hanged.


As he shall be. He that will not believe in the Doctor, must expect no
Salvation in this Life.


What's the Plot, good Doctor?


Only to cut your Husband's Throat, and all our Throats, that's all.


Oh, you ha struck me dead, some help, I faint.


Good Creature, she's swooning; who's there?


My Lord.


Your Lady swoons.


Carry her away, don't let us be troubled with Women.


Take her into the fresh Air, and give her some strong Water; and, do you hear?
bring me some privately.


Come, the Plot.


What do you think the Tory Rogues have done? they have met with our Paper of
Association.


What care we for that?


Ay, but they have drawn up one among themselves, in imitation of ours, cast
one in our own Mold, taken our own words, and discharge 'em upon us.


The Devil!


As you shall hear: We, the Loyal, c. finding to the grief our Hearts, a
certain sort of People, consisting of Hobb^sts, Atheists, Fanatics, and
Republicans, have for several years last past, pursued a pernicious Plot, to
root out the true Religion, subvert our ^aws and Liberties, and set up
Arbitrary Power.


Well, and what of all this?


Pray hear.


And it being notorious, that they have been highly encouraged by the
countenance and protection given 'em by the Rabble, and by their expectations
of the said Rabble coming to the Government. It appears also to us, that for
these Designs, Ignoramus Garrisons have been established among us, by whose
assistance these Men have laid a Blockade before the Crown it self, denying it
all relief, unless 'twill own it self a dependence upon them.


All this is true, and we are not ashamed of it.


Go on.


And we considering with heavy Hearts, how greatly the Reputation and Honesty
of the Kingdom hath been wasted, in maintaining the said Garrisons: And finding
the same Counsels, after exemplary Justice upon some of the Conspirators, to be
still pursued with the utmost Devilish Malice, and desire of Revenge, whereby
his Majesty is in continual hazard, to be destroyed, to make way for the said
Rabbles advancement to the Crown.


Well, and what of all this?


Have patience.


The whole Kingdom in such case, being destitute of all security of their
Religion, Laws, Estates, and Liberties: Sad experience in the Case, the Rump
Committee of Safety, Nol and Dick in England: And Massianello here, having
proved the wisest Laws to be of little force to keep out Tyranny under no
Prince, or no lawful Prince.


I would we had 'em.


We have, therefore, several times endeavoured in a legal way, by Indictments,
to bring the said Criminalts to condign Punishment; but being utterly
rejected, and brought almost to despair, we bind our selves one to another,
jointly and severally, in the Bond of one Firm and Loyal Society, and
Association: And do solemnly Vow, Promise, and Protest to demolish the said
Ignoramus Garrisons, which are kept up in and about this City, to the great
Terror and Amazement of all the good People in the Land.


And shall be in spite of 'em.


And utterly destroy all that shall seek to set up the said Rabble's pretended
Title, or shall raise any War, Tumult, or Sedition in his behalf, or by his
Command, as public Enemies, to our Laws, King, Religion, and Country, and this
on penalty of being esteemed such our selves. Witness our Hands.


Are there any Names to it?


Only Nick-Names to know one another by: As Loyal Domestic Absalom, and
Achitophel, Tory Coffee-house, Towzer, Heraclitus, and such Names, forty
thousand.


Oh, we have six times their Number.


Pray hear the Postscript: Persons to be destroyed, Imprimis the Podesta.


Am I to be Murdered Imprimis? bloody Rogues.


Then the Doctor: And why after him, unmannerly Rascals?


Why after me? Sure, good Doctor, you won't dispute precedence with me.


But I will, good Podesta, with you, or any Man in Christendom; what the Devil
are you?


What am I?


Ay, if you compare your self with me, you are a Fop.


Fop! You are an unmannerly Fellow.


How! ho! call one of my Men some body. Serve. Sir.


Go bid the Arch-bishop of Naples come to me, I'll make his Fortunes.


Nay, nay, Doctor, Doctor.


He means, bid the Arch-bishoprick of Naples come to him, but it won't come,
Doctor.


You are a Rascal.


Call a Constable.


Gentlemen, Gentlemen, are you out of your Wits, to quarrel who should be
murdered first? I need care for it as little as you, I shall lose as few days;
for shame reconcile, pray reconcile.


Then let him not play the Coxcomb, if the Pope disparage me, I'd say he were a
Rascal.


Well, well, the Podesta respects you, Doctor, give him your hand.


Give him my hand first? I'd scorn to do it if he were a Prince.


Then give him your hand, Podesta.


Well come, Mr. Panchy.


Mr. Panchy?


Doctor I mean, come Doctor.


Then come Podesta.


So, this is well, now let us know whose Throat is to be cut next.


The Bricklayers and yours: Cum multis aliis quae nunc prescribere longum est.


Will they cut mine? They may spare their pains: well we had more need go to
Prayers than Quarrel. Pray Doctor.


Pray, Fools Head! what should we pray for? That's like your Papists, who think
to keep off Devils with Holy Water, as if a Devil were like a Cat, he could not
endure to wet his Foot: These Devils are best driven away with Fire-locks.


You are in the right, Doctor.


I'm sure our Cause is in the right.


We have a hundred thousand Men, and they are always in the right: Set me in
the Head of such a general Counsel, and I'll be Pope, the only infallible
Judge.


Ay, and have what forms of Worship you will; when a Canons the Preacher, who
dare shut up the Conventicle, and nothing opens and divides a Text like
Gun-Powder.


Heaven turn these wicked Men, I love their Souls.


Heaven turn 'em, out of the Kingdom, for I love their Lands; that's my way of
turning my Adversaries; and I'll set 'em part of their way to Night: I'll shove
the whole Town against 'em that shall be my business.


I'll go arm my self, and then watch upon the Battlements.


I'll go with you.


I'll to my Devotions: That is to your Wife -- if I knew where she was.


Not far off.


I might have guessed it by the sudden gaeyty of all things, the whole Face of
Nature smiled on her sweet favourite.


Upon the ridiculous Cuckold, and his wise Companions, which you have finely
fooled; for was not this Paper yours, Sir?


It was.


What a Ghost every Shadow appears to a guilty Conscience: Therefore I had not
best consent to your Murder of my Honesty, for I shall never sleep for fear of
the discovery; and you Men commonly boast of those Murders, and cast a brazen
Image of the dead Creature in an impudent Libel.


If this be not privately buried, it shall be your own fault.


It shall be yours, for I have provided a Chapel fit for the Work, this
Garden-house.


Then will I be a second Ner^* I have put all my City in a Flame.

And now, with Harp in Hand, I will survey

My burning Rome, and whilst it burns I'll play.


Then Nero take thy Harp into thy Hand,

The tuneful Strings will follow thy Command:

Now equal Orpheus in thy Art Divine,

Make all things round thee Dance, with one sweet touch of thine,


Come, pray come in, Sir, ingeed I love your Companey mighchily. Come, how isht
with you, Shir?


Better and better, Sir, that is to say, worse and worse, nearer my end, which
I hope will be the better for me.


Ay, yer'sh no doubt on it, Shir, you're a very good young Genkleman.


Not so good, as I have been bad, Sir.


'Tish no great matcher, Shir, we have all been bad; one chime or anoyer.


Not so bad as I, Sir, the Devil is not, cannot be so bad as I, he cannot
drink, can he, Sir?


Why chruly, Sir, I believe notch, I yont know what he can goo, I yont chrouble
my self much wid him.


I was one of the Devil's Low-Countries, always under a Flood: the Devil cannot
Whore, Sir, neither, can he?


I yont know, Shir, in chroth, but I believe in general heisha great Rashcal.


I have not only debauched Women, but the whole Age, poisoned all its Morals,
murdered thousands of young Consciences, sung others asleep, pumped others with
Drunkenness, Sin I Honoured and Privileged as a Peer to the Devil, Heaven I
affronted, Libell'd his Court, and in my drunken Altitudes have endeavoured to
scour the whole Creation of Souls and Spirits, now is it fit I should be saved?


Ay, why not, Shir, yo'nt chrouble your shelf with yosh mattchersh.


I doubt I trouble you, Sir, with my tedious Discourses?


Oh no Shir ye'y are ve'y goodg ingeed: I never heardg a Parshon chalk sho well
in a Pulpit, and I hear 'em shomechimes.


Don't you go always to Church, Sir?


Yesh, Shir, but we Law yesh are sho employed all th, Week, y'at we may be
excush'd if we chake a Nap a Shunday at a Shermon.


You should not neglect the business of your Soul, Sir.


No chruly, Shir, but we have a great yeale of business, a great yeale of
business.


I do believe so, Sir, therefore I don't know how I can with any Confidence beg
the favour of you to be one of my Executors.


O yesh shir, I'll find a chime for yat I wayant you, pray employ me, Shir.


Thank you, good Sir, I will endeavour to reward your trouble.


O good Shir, what you pleash, I shall be glad of any ^hoken of you love.


I have drawn up some Heads of a Will.


You have y'one mighchy wishly, Shir.


Will you please to look over it, Sir, as also some deeds of my Estate, whilst
I lay me down? For I am very faint: Shall I borrow your Bed, Sir?


Ay, with all my Heart, Shir, Lushenda, Girl.


Husband.


Why gee come wi'out a Godly Book in your Hand, when you know how hesh
inclined?


I have none, you must lend me one out of your Study.


I have none in my Shtudy, ne've hadg one in my Life, we Lawyesh yead no
Yivinichy -- Buy one [Aside.] Come chake yish poo Genkleman, and lay him upon
our Bedg, and cover him warm, and shit by him, and gee hear, chalk Goly to
him; hesh making his Will, you yont know how you may win upon him.

Pray Shir go in, and I'll go cho my Shtudy, and come you in a minute.


Pox of thy haste,


No, no, I won't shtay shir, but pray let me lead you, for you are very weak.


Oh, no Sir.


Pray Shir, let me.


What new Larum's this? And I'm enquired after to be made an Ass on; and sent
on some silly Errant, and so shall not come at my Mother to Night: Pox, I'll have
none of these Foolish doings: I'll get out of the way; and now I think on it,
I'll hide my self in this Room; how now, the Doors shut, there's somebody in
the Room sure. I'll peep -- I'm shot -- I'm shot -- I'm shot --


What's the matter? what's the matter? what's the News?


I'm shot, I'm shot, I'm shot.


Guard, Guard, Guard, Train-bands, Podesta, Podesta, come hither all quickly.


Bless us, what's the matter?


Your Son's killed.


My Son killed?


I'm shot -- I'm shot -- I'm shot.


Oh, where, where, where, poor Child -- poor Boy.


To the very Soul, to the very Soul.


Oh my poor Boy, my poor Boy! who shot thee, and where are the Murderers?


Who should, but the Associating Bully Tories.


Ay, ay, Associators, Associators.


Dr. Br. Oh, Rogues, Villains!


A Whore and a Rascal are Associated in that Room, I mean your Wife and Florio
are there joined in one close abominable Bond of lewdness, and Cuckold you, as
if they were to be hanged if they did not dispatch it in a minute; the sight
has shot me to my Soul, my Soul.


How, Sirrah, have you invented such a notorious Sham as this, to set me at
variance with my Wife, and my Friend? and to buzz me with Domestic Confusions,
that I might not have my Brains at liberty, for the public? Is it possible?


Sirrah, you are a Traytorly Rogue.


I'll call you as much out of your Name, Sirrah, you are a Doctor of Divinity.


Sirrah, you are an Associating Tory.


Sirrah, you are an Hermaphrodite, Compounded of to Sexes, Verse and Prose, and
engender with neither.


Sirrah, I make better Verses than your self: and Verses is all that you are
good for: I make Officers and Jurymen, And Evidences, and Pictures, and
Poppetts, and as good Verses as you into the bargain. I made your Father what
he is. That you are an ungrateful Fellow to be thus saucy with me.


Come Sirrah, you are a notorious Parricide, and plot with Traitors against
your Own Father.


Father you are an abominable Cuckold, and plot with him that makes you one,
against your Own Son: I will swear Fl^rio is in that Room aboard your Vessel
and stealing all your Customs: And here you stand upon the Key and let him.


I will break open the door to show thou art a Rascal.


Are you mad. Is not this a plain Sham Plot? here are either Traitors or
Treasonable Papers, and they will be found and laid to your charge.


You speak with a great deal of Prudence; And I'll guard the door with my life,
for my Honour is Concerned.


Your honour is concerned, for you're made a Cuckold.


The Honour of my Loyalty is Concerned; for Sirrah you would make a Traitor of
me: that you might hang me and get my Estate.


I will call a Guard. Break open the door, and show that you are a Cuckold, the
Doctor Bricklayer, a Couple of Pimps. And I see a Guard go by: Guard, Guard,
Guard! Treason, Treason, Treason!


Nay then Militia, Militia, Militia, keep this door here, Treason, Treason.


Why who the Devil's able to bear this. Give me a P^ke I'll force my way in.


Nay then Give me a Pike.


Oh Cuckold, Cuckold; Wittal, Wittal.


Oh unnatural Monster!


Villain.


Tory.


Hold Gentlemen, I have considered of it: Because this Fellow is so insolent;
and potsiive and may report the worl^ hinder Truth from coming to light, to
clear the Honour of my self, my Wife, and my Friend, I will open the door in
the presence of you all, and you shall see what's there: And so Gentlemen all
bear witness.


You shall not open the door.


I will.


You shall not.


He shall -- Break Open the door.


Break open the door.


What are you all madg? are we in Beglam here? you a Magishchrate, and shuffer
shuch dishorgersh as yesh in you housh, you may be ashamed: if you have no
yegard cho your own cregit, ha shome pitchy on a poo Genkleman almost murger'd
by the Noish you make. your own friend Mishe Florio.


Florio! why where is he?


Upon my bedg, giving up the Ghosht.


So Sirrah, and you say he is in this room.


Giving up the Ghost upon that old Follo'ws Bed?


Now the sham-plot's plain.


Then he has given up the Ghost, and I saw his Ghost in this Room.


And has Wife given up the Ghost too, Sir?


I don't know, but if they were Ghosts, they were the lewdest Ghosts that ever
I saw.


Come, Sirrah, confess your Rogueries.


What Rogueries? Is it Treason to be mad? If he be there, my Wits are not here;
I'm cracked, and there's an end.


Sho, shcolding again? I shuppose he'll conshiger your Shivilitiesh in hish
Will, which he's now a making.


So, Sir, we shall loose all our Legacies through your Roguery; come ask him
pardon on your Knees.


I'm cruel afraid he'll dye before we come; let's go quickly, quickly.


Ha! gone! this was good Fortune, away to thy Chamber, my Dear.


And do you go home.


Pox on it, my pretty Opportunity is cast away in a Storm; I must make the other
Voyage: I venture boldly into the Dominion of these Arbitrary Rogues, who have
a strange absolute Authority over their own Consciences, in Lying and Swearing:
But Love, Love, Love.


Gone away in dishconchent?


No, but in great pain, he said his Head was torn in pieces.


Well, I shall be no loosher, he knowsh 'twash not my fault. Come away Girl.


Now I'll see what's in this House; Fellow Souldier^ Guard me in, and have a
care of me.


My Lord, my Lady's extremely discomposed with the fright she had about your
Lordship, and begs there may no^ be so much noise, it almost kills her.


Poor kind Heart, where is she?


In her Chamber upon her Bed.


So, Sir, and you said she was in this Room.


Well, I'm mad, and there's an end.


Tell her there shall be no noise made.


There's nothing in this Room.


Nothing?


Nothing.


What do you say to this, Sirrah?


That thou art an Ass to talk to a Madman, for my Wits have given me the slip
all of the sudden; I don't know how, nor which way.


Truly I'm convinced he says true, and my Hearts ready to break.


I am partly of that mind; for in the Room is no sign of a Sham-plot.


He does look wildly, that's the truth on it.


He's mad, he's mad, and I have lost my Child, my dear child, my poor Child.


Well, well, poor Father, don't take on so, my Wits are not gone far, they 'l
come again, I warrant 'em, for I don't know who the Devil will entertain 'em,
they were mad sort of Wits, and they are as mad that entertain a Poets Wits.


Oh curse, curse on Poetry, that ever I should let thee meddle with it, my poor
Boy.


Nay, prithee Father don't take on thus, thou'lt make me cry too.


I am so grieved, that I will eat and drink and sleep, and never mind what
becomes of the World.


Fie, fie, you won't be so wicked as that.


Wherefore should I trouble my self, when I have no body to inherit my Labours?


You have Friends enough, the Doctor, and I another.


Puh, a Child's above all: don't we see old Politicians venture their Necks for
half a Child, a Changeling? And I have lost a Boy worth millions, millions; and
so I'll enjoy my self 'till my Heart breaks, and there's an end.


Come, come, leave off this.


No, I remember a saying of a Wise man:
Who plays the Knave to enrich his Son, a Fool,
Is like a Fox that ventures for a Prey,
To bury it in some poor dirty hole,
And feed an Idle Dog, that trots that way:
The Beast is torn with fruitless pain and care,
And hanged at last to make his Foe his Heir.
I shall play the Knave, and be hanged for a mad Son, and so have a Tory; beg
my Estate, No, no, no.

Let's after him, and get him out of this humour.


I Am strangely taken with this sweet young Creature, 'tis so pleasant to drink
at such a fresh Spring, which never Brute de^l'd, or muddied: This old Fellow
is but a withered Tree, that shades it; 'tis so much wholesomer to love then
the sophiistcated Beauties of this Town, which sicken and kill an Intrigue in
few days. Ha! where's my Gown and Cap^ I came in such amorous haste, I forgot
my sick dress, and I shall never be able to act my sick part without it; ^ut I
have no patience to go back for it now -- Here she comes! My Dear! where's the
old Devil that would hinder our happiness? Old Tempter I


I will not tell you.


But you do.


What?


That he's abroad, your Smiles say it; those Birds would be gone, if that
Winter were here. They say he won't come home a great while.


You are a Witch I think


We will lose no time.


Fie! Fie! you must not do such things as these.


O Sir! here's a Gentleman kissing my Mistress.


How?


Oh dear, my Husband!


Sirrah, you lye; unsay't again, or you are a dead Rogue.


No, no, Sir you did not indeed Sir, I mistook, this is the sick Gentleman, Mr.
Florio.


How? a shick man kish my Wife?


No, no, I am not the sick man.


What are you, yen? call shomebody; cho sheize the Rogue.


Yes, yes, I am the sick man -- I don't know what am, a pox.


Yesh, yesh, I know what you are, a Raschcal; and you choo have abu'sd me, a
yamn'd Rogue and Shlut.


No, no Sir --


Why do you geny your shelf yen?


Sir, I was afraid you might be jealous, because I was whispering in your
Ladies Ear, my Lungs being weak.


Your Lungsh weak, and huff, and rant like a Bully* ah! you are Rogue.


That was only a sudden blast of Zeal for your good Ladies reputation and mine,
'twill shorten my days. I had not above a Month to live, and I have spent a
fortnight's Breath before hand.


Oh you Rashcal! have I ca^ch'd you in your chricksh^ have you sherv'd me
shush.


Why do you censure so rashly? I appeal to your Lat die.


Make a partchy Judge? no you have put choo goodg a Fee in you hand, cho let
her bechray your Caush.


You wrong me extremely.


I wronged my shell, cho entcher incho Bondsh of Marriage, and could not
perform Covenantsh, I might well hinke you would chake the for^eychure of the
Bond, and I never found equichy in a Bedg in my Life: But I'll trounce you boh,
I have paved Jaylsh with the Bonesh of honester People yen you are, yat neve'
did me nor any Man any wrong, but had Law of yeir shydsh, and right of yeir
shydsh, but cause yey had not me of yeir shydsh, I ha beggared 'em, 'hrown 'em
in Jaylsh, and got yeir Es^chatsh for my Clyentsh, yat had no more chytle to
'em yen Dogsh.


And were you a good Man in that?


I wash a good Lawyer, and sho you shall find cho your cosht, we' in yish
twelvemonth you shall not be worth a groatch.


Oh, I have too good a Title to what I have.


Chytle? I value not your Chytle: Beggarsh have not sho many chricksh, cho make
shorsh in yeir Bodyesh, ash we have cho make 'em in Chytlesh. But I'll chell
you what, I'll draw you up an exshellent Chytle cho the Jail; and if you have
any Children, I'll shettle it upon you and your Heirsh for ever; a Jail shall
be the Sheat of your Family. Od sha' me, if any brishke Rogue would cut hish
'Hroat neatley, and privateley, yat nothing might appear against him but
Shircumshansesh, I'd bring him off, proviged it be not a shimple Rogue, yat
wantsh Money.


At this rate, your Wife shall be never the better for the Settlement you have
made upon her.


No, no more than I am the betcher for the Shettlement the Priesht hash made of
her upon me, the Devil chake him for hish painsh, would I could find a slaw
in it.


Now thou make me angry, thou ungrateful Knave^ suppose she and I have
sinned, hast thou got an Estate in the Devil's Service, and would thou hinder
his work.


Oh! you impugent Whoremashcher!


Sirrah, you have made more Whores than ever I did.


I make Whorsh?


Yes, thou hast debauched whole Families by beggaring 'em, made Father and
Mothers Bawds to their own Daughters, to earn that Bread thou hast cheated 'em
off.


You lye, you lye; but if I have, I only follow'd my chrade.


Well, and it may be my Trade is Whoring, and I'll follow that*


Follow it with your own Commoditchyesh then, and don't meggle with mine.


No more I have not, your Clerk is a lying Fellow, and your Lady a virtuous
young Woman* and my near Kinswoman; and since you abuse her, I'll take her into
my protection: Come, Cousin --


Oh brave Rogue! he chaksh away my Wife before my Faysh: Shirrah, I'll have
forty Actionsh on you back preshently.


Then in a little time will I have forty Swords at your Throat, French Swords,
I'll let in the Enemy, and cut the Throats of such Rogues as you, who abuse
your Trade, and like so many Padders, make all People deliver their Purse, that
ride in the Road of Justice. Better be ruled by the Swords of gallant Men, than
the Mercenary Tougues of such Rascals as you are.


Bear witnesh, Chreashon, Chreashon, horrible Chreashon.


I defy thee, do thy worst; I am Florio, Prince of Whigs, never without a
chosen Life-guard of Jury-men, with brazen Consciences, proof against Oaths,
like Bucklers against Arrows. So, come away, Cousin -- Now will this Rogue fall
on Florio.


Oh impugent yamn'd Rogue; Shirrah, be sure you yemember all yish Chreashon,
have you a good memory?


Yes, Sir.


I mean a ferchile memory, will a 'hing grow in it?


I'll remember enough to hang Florio, I'll warrant him I'll remember all he
said.


And more choo. And becaush the Rogue runsh away with my Wife, he'll shay, I
proshecute him out of Malish; sho if no Body swearesh against him, but you and
I, the Rashcal may come off: yerefore we musht look out for an Evidensh or choo
more. Go cho shome able Atchurney, they are acquainched with 'em all, I'll look
out for shome my shelf, and run my for Lord Chief Jushchishesh Warrant, cho
apprehend yish Rash^all Go quickly, quickly.


Impudent, lying, perjured Villain, accuse me of being a secret Strumpet?


And me of being your Gallant? I'm in a sine condition to be a Gallant to a
fair Lady.


All's one, Malice will believe it, and I, though innocent, shall live in
reproach


Not long, Madam, not above a Week; my Doctor has confessed to me, I shall dye
some day next Week, and then I suppose this Story will dye too.


How! are you to dye next Week?


Yes, a great Lady will call for me, the only Lady in the World, I have an
Intrigue withal.


What Lady?


The Moon, my Lord, the Moon; she has an Intrigue with my Body, and never puts
on new Clothes, but at my Cost: she means to be very fine about Thursday come
seven-night* that is to say, in the Full; and then the World will see if my
bankrupt Body be able to carry on such a Trade.


All's one, Sir, if you were dead, Malice would live and entertain Censure.


Well Sweet heart, as long as I don't entertain it, you need not troubled.


I confess, if I have the comfort of your Love --


You have, you have, Woman; don't make more fiddle faddle then needs, and
hinder us from business of consequence.


Sweet-heart, no body takes a Degreein my University, but they perform their
Exercises, which you two have done, I have had experience of your Virtues, and
pronounce you both innocent. All the Shame and Grief is mine, that my only Son,
the Pillar of my Family is cracked or rotten, mad or a Knave: I say he is mad.


I say he is a suborned Rascal:


I'm of the Doctors mind.


I'll give you an unanswerable reason to the contrary.


What's that?


I never discovered it, not so much as in the Boys Face, and I'll see through
such a Boy as he, as plain as through a new-laid Fgg. The oldest Face shall no
more cheat me, than old Coin does an Antiquary.


And what am I? an Owl.


I don't say you are.


You two will kindle again.


No, the Boy shall decide the difference, I have sent for him; here he comes.


This Woman is a Whore, and I was in the right.


What say you now? does not the Madman peep through all his Looks and Gestures?


I'll examine him -- Sirrah.


Hold your prating -- damned Whore.


De'e see? stark mad.


Who suborned you to accuse your Mother of bei^ng Prostitute to Florio?


Who suborned you to accuse the Title of Doctor of Divinity, of being a
Prostitute to such an ignorant Ass?


Sirrah, I am a Scholar, and you are an ignorant, saucy, pragmattical Rascal.


Nay, if Rogue and Rascal be Latin and Greek, thou art the best Scholar in
Christendom, for no Man living is so ver^ in those Languages.


When I use those Languages, I, like Adam, give every Beast (...) proper Name.


And when I call thee ignorant Coxcom^, I give thee no other Name then thy own
Sermons do. That thou art an insolent Fool, is the only true Doctrine thou
preach.


Is he mad, or no?


He is more Knave, than ^ool, Sarrah, don't you abuse the D^tor.


How do I know (...) a Doctor, we have only his word for it, nor that neither
when he Preaches.


Sirrah, I'll hang you.


Ay, thou art a Doctor at that.


Ay, and of Divinity too, you impudent Rascal.


Where did you take your Degree in, Beargarden?


In a learned University, Sir.


I, the University of Coffee-houses, the University of Lies, where, if any one
speaks Truth, the University (...) it's Charter. ^here you're a Doctor, and
the Bricklayer principal Fellow of a College.


Don't you meddle with me, you malapert boy you, the greatest Lords and
Politicians of the Kingdom, of our Party, won't be so saucy with meas you are,
but Court me, and are proud of me, and depend upon my Counsel and Countenance.


Depend on thy Countenance! They hav^ (...) dependence -- damned confounded
Woman? great with a Rascal


You see what Sa^eys of madness he has of Craffy! but to what purpose should I
speak to him? Craffy, if you have any understanding; say whether you saw your
Mother in the Garden house with Florio, or not?


Why I will swear that --


Look upon her.


She's the handsom'st Woman in the World, what Breasts she has!


The handsom'st Woman? what's that to the business? Is not this distraction,
Gentlemen? Answer to the question, did you see her in the Garden-house with
Florio?


I'll see her there with me, or I'll --


Your Witnesses are perjured Rascals, and you are an Ass, who abuse me just now
I'm coming to have more inclination for you, than my Conscience will admit of.


Say thou so --


Then thou art mad.


Will you meet me there?


Perhaps I may, if you'll be civil.


Delicate Rogue.


Now I swear I did not see her there, but that damned Rascal I did see there;
an impudent rotten Fellow, that has never a sound bit about him, of his own,
but is inlay'd like a Cabinet: that he should dare to kiss and embrace such a
delicate Woman as my Mother, there.

Why, did he?


Did he? ay, a hundred times, I saw him, a Rascal.


And yet just now, you said she was not there.


How now? was I there?


I forget my self -- (Aside.) No faith she was not there.


How could he embrace her then?


In his fancy, I saw her in his Fancy, as plain as could be, he has a huge
fancy for her.


Fancy, Lord help thee Boy, thou hast strange fancies; take himaway, he's a sad
(...) -- take him away, or he'll break my heart. Lock him up.


Lockme up? how shall I come at my Mother then? Pox take it.


He's far gone.


I think my Judgment is to be relied upon.


I wish in his madness he had not torn my good Reputation, the only Image of a
Man we ought to venerate.


I would have no body's Picture preserved but the Doctors.


Nor I. Well, I have news to tell you from another World, the very Devils have
more care of us, than our pretended Friends. A Spirit appeared to a Country
Maid, and told her, Naples would be burnt on this Night, if care was not taken.


Is it possible! where is the Maid?


In the Country, she was coming to Town, fell ill by the way, so she has sent
the Story to the Viceroy, by the Post.


And what says he?


He laughs at it.


He's a fine Fellow.


He's in the right, why the Devil would not the Spirit come Post himself, but
deliver a Message of this consequence to a silly Country Gossip? The Devil
never employs any but Fopps of Spirits, he's not fit to be a Devil, I'll
justify it.


How do you know 'twas a Devil? May be 'twas the Soul of some of our Friends.


Let it be whose Soul it will, I say the Soul was a Fop. I think People, when
they are dead turn Tonies; they never say one wise word, nor ever come into any
wise Company.


The Viceroy is a pure Canary-Bird, I'll have him turned out of his place, I'll
prove he is a Mohammedan, he was Circumcised at Bar -- bar -- badoes.


I believe you mean Barbary, Doctor.


Why, ay, Barbadoes is the Latin name for Barbary. I love to swear like a
Scholar, and a Doctor, as I am.


Well, I'll go put all the Town in Arms.


I'll go with you, I dare not stay in any House


I dare not stir out of mine.


My Lord, here is a Great Gentleman lays he must n^eds speak with your Lordship
presently, about affairs that concern your self.


Look to me, for I know not what he is.


My Lord, I must beg leave to whisper you.


You may, Sir, but I must also beg leave to use (...) these are dangerous
times* some men have been almost whispered out of their Necks.


I come from the Viceroy; he is sensible of your great Parts and Intere^, and
desires to speak with you presently; and if you will be his ^riend, he offers
you your own terms, (...) Honour, Profit, and Greatness.


Had is it come to this? I like this -- Sir, ^.


A Chair waits for you at the door; he desires ^ may be managed with all
secrecy 'till 'tis settled.


I will ^ a Wise Man. Mr. Florie I'm called away about matters of very great
Importance, I must take my leave.


Of this ^ Night, my Lord?


It must be.


Would (...) Nation were settled once, that we might en^y one another.


It may ^ speedily. Good Night.


Good Night^ Madam.


^ Mr. Florio! are you well enough?


^, my Lord, my good Name is the Child of a ^ck Man. seldom sound, never
thought to be so. I must be ^ender of it: Good Night, Madam; come, my Lord,
I'll see you in your Chair.


No, no, I cannot stay for your dreaming pace: I'm in haste.


Pray, my Lord.


I cannot stay, I cannot stay; good Night, good Night.


Ha, ha, ha, how greedily this Fool swallows the (...), ^s the room, that must
pass with him for the Court, and secure him till his Horns be grown, so dressed
^e cannot know it to be one in his own House?


That was my care.


You see my Man's new furniture has cheated him.


So shall the Room.


Then we may securely hoise Sail for ^. All the Mud that barred it up, we have
con^eyed away, and I will come a Shore on these white Cliffs, and plant my
Heart there for ever.


Do so, and I'll promise thee the Happiness and Wealth I gain by the Residence
of my Prince, shall not make (...) ungratefully Factious. (...) true to me, and
I'll be most Loyal to thee.


Then we'll be the happiest pair in the whole World.


My Lord, you are very welcome to Court.


Your most humble Servant, Sir.


Take not your private Reception ill, for f^w or none are entrusted with this
^ntrigue; 'tis a great State (...) and great Honours, to my knowledge, are
designed you, no less than the High (...) of Lord Treasurer.


Lord Treasurer?


Sir, I speak what I know; 'twill be some time before you come to it; and the
Viceroy will expect you sacrifice to him the Doctor, Bricklayer, Florio --.


Ay, and my Father too, if he were alive, he should hang 'em all. Lord
Treasurer!


I hope, my Lord, you won't (...) some Oaths -- and --


Nothing, I'll refuse nothing, Sir, for such Honour as this: Lord Treasurer!


I'll acquaint his Highness with your Arrival: you must be willing to suffer
some attendance, the common affliction of all Courtiers.


I'll do, or suffer any thing, for so much Glory as this. Lord Treasurer!


Your humble Servant, my Lord.


Your most humble Servant, Sir: Lord Treasurer! to what Grandeur am I rising?
Some of the Court are coming.


So, I have got out of my Prison.


Craffy in Court!


So, I have shut back the Lock admirably, and got out of Prison: my Father! but
why should I be afraid of him? he thinks me mad, and will be afraid of me.


What a notable Boy is this? I thought he was mad, and he has more Wit than my
self, he has climbed to preferment before me; I always said this Boy had nimble
parts. Son.


My Lord.


You are surprised to see me in Court.


In Court!


I am as much surprised to see your Wit, which so subtly disguised your
Policy under pretended madness.


Policy! am I grown from a Madman to a Politician?


Well, I am proud of thee. Father and Son, both Favourites! of my word we shall
be a great Family. Well -- what says the Viceroy to thee of me?


Viceroy!


Ay, and how art thou in with the Vice-Queen?


Vice-Queen!


Ay, for Women have great power in all Courts. Did now come out of the
Vice-Queen's side?


Out of her side!


Her side, that is her part of the Court? -- her Apartments; thou think I'm a
raw Courtier; no, Sir, I know Court Phrases.


My dirty hole, the Vice-Queens Apartment!


Why art so shy to thy Brother Courtier? I'm thy Brother Courtier now.


Now would I give ten pound to know which of us two is mad; if I were sure he
were mad, I'd run and beg him presently; but the danger is, lest I be begged my
self.


Thou art close with me, but I'll be open with thee: I have sold all the Whigs,
and my self into the Bargain; and what dost think the Court gave me?


I don't know.


The Lord Treasurer's place; I am to be Lord Treasurer. Boy.


Father!


Child.


The Lord bless thee, and deliver thee from Poetry, for thou art a sad sight.


Ha! a noise! the Court assaulted! I am cruel afraid the Whigs have made some
attempt upon the Court, and got the better, then will they catch me in Court,
and hang me for a Turn-coat. -- hide Boy, hide.


Yet cannot I tell which of us is mad, or where I am.


Friend, you were best confess where your Lord is, before I break open any more
Doors, for if I find him in the House, after your denial of him, I shall punish
you.


Indeed, if it please your Highness, he never came home since he went abroad
with a strange Gentleman.


Your Lady you say's a Bed, and will not be disturbed?


I must disturb her, if it be your pleasure, but she has forbid any Person
coming near her Chamber.


The Governor of the City here? then the Whigs are worsted, and I'll show my
self.


The Governor here! then this is the Court.


My Lord.


De'e see, Sirrah? your Master's in the First Room I come in.


I did not know it, indeed, my Lord.


Secure the Podesta.


Secure me!


Ay, the Viceroy will endure your intolerable disorders no longer. Arm the
City at mid-night, and send your Agitators abroad to disperse new minted lies
among 'em, the Com wherewith you pay all your Forces. I have order to secure
you all.


I fear you not.


^and my Habeas Corpus.


How now brother, Courtier! is this your greatness


Ha! am I trepanned? was this fair o'th Viceroy to entice me to Court with
promises of Honours and Preferments, and then secure me?


The Viceroy entice you to Court with Promises?


Yes, you had not seen me in Court else.


Why, when did I see you in Court?


When! that's a strange Question. Where am I now*


That's a stranger Question. Do you not know where you are? do you not know
your own home?


My own home! why am I at home?


The man's mad.


Then the disputes at an end? my Lord, I beg to (...) his Guardian.


If I be at home, I have had a fine trick plaid me and by this Gentleman, I am
glad I have you Sir pray let him be secured, and examined Sir, where am I?


At home Sir.


At home! and wherefore did you entice me out o^ my house, and after you had
danced me to and fro, (...) me home again, pretending you brought me to Court.


Confess. Sir.


His Periwig. and false Beard, confess 'twas that his Master might make my Lord
Treasurer a Cuckold -- for this is Florio's man --


Florio's man! then his Master is an Impostor, my Wife a Slut, and I'm a Fool.


And a Knave, for I believe you went abroad with designs to betray us.


I shall not inform you Sir.


There's not an honest man in the world.


Now am I to be believed, or no? Sirrah you Pimp, where have you pimp'd this
couple together?


In the next room.


Force open the door.


You Villain -- [draws]


Disarm the fellow.


You Strumpet.


You Jilt.


You Rogue.


Tory in Masquerade.


Are you sick Sir? I'll know the state of your body.


My wife can tell.


There's another Lady shall enquire a Rack.


That Lady's a scurvy bedfellow, I'll spare her pains.


Are you to dye a Thursday come-sennight?


I believe 'twill be put off a little longer now.


So, you are a healthy Rascal, are you?


Why truly I find my self very finely well, I thank heaven, very well.


Oh you shamming Rascal!


How! have you abused me thus? and are you an Impostor.


And would you abuse us, Madam? and cheat us into a belief you did not know it?


Do you believe I did?


Did not all our eyes see you Arm in Arm?


What of that? I invoke heaven to witness --


Away you Strumpet.


Is it possible --


Never come near my bed, or sight more.


I invoke heaven to witness --


What?


That thou shalt never come near my bed, or sight more.


Oh Impudences!


The impudence is yours. I modestly concealed your shame and mine, and you
would force me impudently to confess.


Is it my shame that you are a Strumpet?


Yes, she is a true Whig, and has revolted from you, because you did not pay
her nightly Pension well.


I hope you have Sir.


I wonnot say whether I have, or no.


But I will say thou art a Rascal.


I'm an honester man than your self, and truer to my Principles, you would
have left 'em for Preferment. I retain 'em, our Principles are, he is not to be
regarded who has a right to Govern, but he who can best serve the ends of
Government* I can better serve the ends of your Lady* than you can, so I lay
claim to your Lady.


And you have my consent.


So, I have the voice o^ the Subject too; then you are m^ wife, and I'll keep
you.


Oh brave! Sir, must this be?


Ask the Law, I must do all things according to Law.


Your Servant, My Lord Treasurer; these are a fine Crew, Sir, Here's the
Bricklayer, Sir, a fine Privy Counsellor, is he not? he expects also every day
to be a Colonel, he is already a Colonel Presumptive.


Very well.


Here's the Doctor too, a fine Divine, Sir.


Si^rah don't meddle with me.


He applies himself very much to the Bible, I mean to kiss it. He Prays much,
so help him the Contents of the Book, and they have helped him to many a pound,
though they and he scarce ever saw one another. The Bible is the only Benefice
he has, Sir.


Si^rah, I'll have your Ears.


Never when you Preach, Doctor. They are all very good Men, never take Heavens
Name in vain, that is, Swear, and get nothing by it; but to get your Estate, or
command, they'll Swear your Head off.


That I believe.


They are moderate Drinkers of Wine, but will Carrous^ Water abundantly, for
they'll drink your Rivers, Fish and all, and put your Land into it for a Toast,
if you'll let 'em. And yet sometimes they have very narrow Swallows, they cannot
down with a little Church Ceremony, but they'll swallow Church Lands, Hedges and
Ditches.


Well, my Lord Pedesta, your Office the Victroy and the Council will order be
managed by a wiser Man.


I wonnot part with my Office but by Law. I have done nothing but by the Advice
of Able Council -- Here he comes.


That Knave.


Counsellor Bartoline, will our Charter justify us?


In What? keeping a Bawdy housh? your Housh ha^li been made a Bawdy-housh,
notch by me, but by Florio, your shicke shaint -- a yam'd Rascal.


I know it to my sorrow. But the Question I ask is, will our Charter justify
our Arming without the Viceroy's leave?


I have chold you it will a hundred chymsh, and let the Vishroy do hish worsht.


^ow! bring that Knave to me.


Sir, the Governor ot'h City commands you to come to him


The Governor here ^od' shame, yen l'me ruined, I'm ruined.


Sir, did not the Viceroy retain you for his Lawyer, and did not you send him
the direct contrary Opinion?


Yesh and pleash your Lordship, and I sent his Highnesh chrue Law. I only
sheatcher'd Chas among these Fellowsh cho catch 'em, caush I found 'em arrant
Rashcalsh, and cho show my Loyalchy, I have drawn up Arti^lsh of High Chreason
against 'em, and you may hang 'em all.


What a Rogue's here?


This was you that understood Mankind.


I'l^ never pretend to it more.


There yey are Shir --


Articles of High Treason, with other High Crimes and Misdemeanours against Don
Pedro, Duke of Ossuna, Viceroy of Naples: How! Articles of Treason against the
Viceroy?


Oh, My Lord, My Lord, I have given you the wrong Paper, yat wash a Paper I drew
to delude yesh Rogush. Pray don't chake advanchage of an old fumbling Fellow.


An old Blood-hound.


I beg you Lordships pardon on my kneesh.


Oh, Sir, if the Viceroy were at a Bar, you'd bring him upon his Knees.


Ingeed I am Loyal Shir. I have discovered a horrible Plotch, one Flor^o has
Plotched cho open the Gatesh, and letch in the French.


How?


What* Florio*


A de^aush'd Fellow, yat prechends to be Sink, (...) Godly, Preachesh up and
down for a Benefish. Yat ish (...) Mansh Wife he likesh.


Here's the Man you speak of.


Then I desire he may be apprehenged for High ^ I have choo Witneshesh will
Shwear all yish upon (...)


what means the Rascal?


Yesh are the Men.


What C^untry-Men are they?


I am an Irish man, I'm not ashamed of my Country


What Religion are you of?


Hubbubbow! ask an Irish Man what Religion he (...) shertainly it I be an Irish
Man, I'm a good Catholic


Well, and what can you Swear against Florio^


I'll Shwear hesh a Knave and a Rascal, and a (...) and hash been in a Plot.


What Plot?


To kill all the Town, and let in the French; yesh indeed.


Kill all the Town by my self.


No, I wash to have a toush and Cobs to help tee.


Cobs! what are those?


Pieshes of Eight -- and I wash to have ten hundred of 'em.


To do what?


To let in the French, and make a Fire in the Town, and cut all our Troa^sh;
yesh indeed.


All our troatsh? wast thou to cut thy own throat.


Sir, we wo^'t have our Evidence ba^led -- he means All our throats -- dost
not?


Yesh indeed -- all our throatsh.


I'll swear I never saw this Fellows face before in my life.


Hubbubbow, tou hasht drunk above a thousand times ushqaebagh wi'me, to de
carrying on of tish plot.


Ushquebagh! what's that?


A brave Liquor tat we have in Ireland, tersh no such here, I never shaw any
here.


How could I drink (...) then?


I don't know how tou coud'st drink it, but tou hash drunk it above a toushand
times, and a toushand.


Come, come Sirrah, I doubt you are a Vill^in.


Hubbubbow! tou talk like an English ^, wilt tou be an English Heretic,
and not believe (...) Irishman.


Come, come, the Fellow's an honest simple Fellow


Ay, by Shaint Patrick am I.


He has discovered a horrible plot, only wants expression. Is it possible you
Rogue you? was this the meaning of all your canting, and deluding us, to lull
us asleep whilst our Throats are cut?


Thou Monster^ not only Cuckold me, but Cut my Throat.


'Tis false.


'Tis true.


^ say the ^ellow before.


I'll Swear, I have seen him with thee above ^orty times.


And so have I too I'll teach the Rogue to lie with my Mistress, I'll hang him
if I can.


So the Plot's proved, plainly proved.


A Plot to murder me ^s proved, but sure such a Ra^cal as this who has sworn
Contradictions shall not be believed.


He is a Rogue, and a Traitor that does not behave every Word he says.


Sir, I have caught Mr. Florio here.


What Florio? art out of thy Wi^sh*


The Florio, that was to let in the Fren^, and run away with my Mistress, ^ have
caught 'em together, and brought 'em


Thou art Mad, our Evigensh has shworn again^ a noyer Man.


Then your Evidence is Mad, and don't know what they Swear.


Sir, I know what I Swear as well as you do, and know Mr. Florio as well as any
Man, I have known him this seven years, and know this Man to be the true
Florio, and a Traitor that plotted to let in the French.


Then thou art a Rascal, and bought off, for this is the true Florio, and the
Traitor that plotted to let in the French.


Then thou art a Rascal, and hired to be one; for I, and all the Town can swear
his Name is Artal.


Oh, the Devil! all our Plot's confounded.


You Irishman, which do you say is the true Florio?


Tish ish de Man I wash bid to shwear againsht.


Bid to swear against? who bid you? confess, or the Rrack shall make you.


Oh! preedee do not wrack me, and I will confess. Tish Knave and I had shome
acquaintansh, and sho I had shome occasionsh for Money, and I borrowed shome of
him, and he had shome occashionsh for Teshtimony, and sho I tought I wash
obliged in civility to lend him shome Teshtimony, and sho he bed meshwear
againsht one Florio, and shaid tish was de Man, but if ^ou wilt forgive me,
I'll shwear him off again.


So, Sirrah; and who put you upon this?


An Attorney, Sir; employed, I suppose, by this Counsellor.


O notorious mercenary Rogues! who'll believe such Rogues as they are?


None but Rogues.


Just now you said he was a Rogue that would not believe 'em.


Ay, when they said the same things that I did: what I said was confirmed by
Craffy, a considerable young Man, Heir to a great Estate, and of a spotless
Reputation, no Man can say the least against him.


And what say you, Craffy? speak truth, if you mean to have any Fars.


Or any part of my Estate.


Did you ever see this Irish-man with Florio?


I only spoke in a little Passion: I have some of the Doctors Infirmities, I'm
passionate, and apt to swear in my passion.


Be perjured in a Passion?


This Fellow's the lyingst Rogue in the Nation, and has been so from his
Cradle.


Just now you said no Man could say the least against him.


Sham upon Sham.


My Lord, I'll clear all. This young Woman is my Kinswoman, I hearing she was
Married to that Old Man, brought to Town, and lodged in House which Florio
frequented; she not knowi^g me, I took upon me Florio's Name, and made
addresses to her; partly to divertise my self, but chie^ly to make trial of her
Virtue. The Old Man caught me in the act of Courtship, grew Jealous, and would
have abused his Wife, which, to prevent, I took her from him, he, to be
revenged, hired Witnesses to hang me for Treason.


I'll shwear he shpoke Creashon, but 'tish to no purpose, for now 'twil appear
Malish.


To Prison with 'em all.


I beg your Lordship to intercede with the Viceroy for the Old Man, for my
Cousins sake, and command him to use her kindly.


I shall consider of it.


I hank your Lordship, but my Heartsh broken.


Hang me, if you will: I'll swear I'm murdered by Sulborners and Shamplotters.


And Traytorly Rogues.


Well said, Doctor, thou wilt give Titles in the last day of the Reign.


The last day it shall be. The Viceroy, and all of us will put an end to his
Absolute Negative Voice, his great power of degrading Lords and Dukes, into
Rogues and Rascals, if they will not purchase of him the Confirmation of their
Titles, by capping to him: Nay, of deposing Kings, if they slight his Councils.
We will also Dissolve all his Privy-Council: And so Gentlemen, henceforward be
wise, leave off the new Trade you have taken up, of managing State Affairs, and
betake your selves to the Callings you were bred too, and understand. Be
honest, meddle not with other Men's, matters especially with Government, 'tis
none of your Right. In short, trouble not your selves more than needs.

Chiefly you Married Men, for all allow
You Married Men, have private Plagues enough.

SIR, I come to you ^ worthy Gentlemen, the World is pleased to call Wh^


Whigs Sir, they are the Props and Pillars of the Nation.


Sir, There is a Poet has been so bold as to write a Play against 'em, in which
several of 'em think themselves abused; now, Sir, they desire to know if they
have not an Action of Slander against the Poet?


Ay, ay, Sir, ho's a Raico^l.


And may not have considerable Damages?


Oh! very considerable --


Here are two Pieces.


Two Pieces --? pretty indifferent damages -- I believe they may have some
Damages.


Here's one great person thinks himself much abused, and has sent you 20
Pieces.


Sir, he shall have great Damages, he shall trounce the Poet, a Rascal to abuse
great persons.


I'll tell him -- Ex.


Sir, I come to you from a person that wants your Council, but he is a
swingeing Tory.


Well, he's ne'er the worse man, provided he has a swingeing Purse.


Sir, he has writ a Play against Faction^ and some ^higs think themselves hit
home in it, and they are bringing Actions of Slander agai^st him to punish him.


Sir, if he has his the Whigs home, he is a good Ma^ks-man, for now they are
all upon the Wing.


Sir, he desires to know whether there lies an Action of Slander against hi^ or
no? and so, whether he had best compound the business in time, or go through
with it?


Oh! let him go through with it.


And you will assist him?


Ay, ay, in private.


But he has no Money, he must Sue in Forma Pauperis.


Forma Pauperis? Oh! damned Rogue, does he abuse Great Men, a^d has he no
Money? Tell him have considered it, and I (...) defend a slanderous Rascal in
abusing honest men.


You said you would help him through with it.


Ay, through the Pillory. A Rascal without Money abuse Great Men, and then Sue
in Forma Pauperis! -- Come the Court is fat -- I must Plead for the Plaintiff.


^
^
^
^
^
^
^
^
^
^
^
^
^
^
^
^
^
^
^
^
From WHIGS* to whom by Custom it belongs,
WHIGS are all Freeholders of their Tongues,
And (...) too --
In le prove it out of Janeway's Reports,
And the Decrees of several Coffee Courts.
The POET has no title then to rail,
Let him be seized, nor let Wit be his Bayl,
Wit is a Tory, ne'er with us would join,
Wit never helped the Whigs to write one Line.
'T has been ^ccus'd, and in our Writings sought
But still the Co^oner Non inventus brought:
But Learned Judges, I leave all to you,
If you're for TORIES, I w^ll be so too.
Noint Witches, they will fly, though ne'er so old;
I'll be as nimble too, ^oint me with Gold:
I'll quickly to the Tory Party skip,
Grease my Fist well, I'll let cur Faction slip.

