YOu Judges, Critics, Wits, and Poets too,
And whatsoever Titles are your due;
As pretty Features, each in proper place,
Put altogether, make a pretty face;
So you good Wits, and you that would be so,
You all together make a pretty show;
And when you thus in general Council sit,
You are the body Politic of Wit:
Unto you all our Poet bid me say,
Good faith you're kindly welcome to his Play.
'Tis a plain Complement, to speak the truth,
But you must know he is a modest youth;
Like Country Gallant just, whom Courtier brings
To see fine dainty Mis -- who plays and sings.
Approaching to'r, poor Gallant falls a mumping,
Scraping of legs, and feign he would say something;
And round about the room he slings and skips,
Whilst tongue lies still in the scabbard of his lips.
Just so our Poet ushered to the door
To court coy Wits h'ad never seen before,
Wits that have all the sparkish Gallants known,
And tried the abilities of all the Town;
Poor bashful Poet, faith, h'ad got his Play
Under his arm, and had run quite away,
^ad not we promised him to use our skill
And in'trest w'e'e to gain him your good will:
Then faith for ence, since he's so eager for it,
Seem kind and coming, though it be for sport;
Then like some Cully on his wedding night,
Thinking his Bride lies ravished with delight,
Bestirs his simple self whilst she lies still,
Laughs at the Fool, and lets him work his will.
So will our Poet to it, and work his brain
To try to entertain you once again;
And if he mends, you that delight to range
With every Youth, may use him then for chang;
If not, even huff the Fool, and give him over,
Then he perhaps will trouble you no more.

LO, behind a Scene of Seas,
Under a Canopy of Trees,
The fair new Golden World was laid;
Sleeping like a naked Maid,
Till alas! she was betrayed:
In such shades Urania lay,
Till Love discovered out a way:
And now she cries some Power above,
Save me from this Tyrant Love.
Her poor heart had no defence,
But its Maiden Innocence;
In each sweet retiring Eye,
You might easily descry
Troops of yielding Beauties fly,
Leaving Rare unguarded Treasure
To the Conquerors will and pleasure:
And now she cries, -- c.
Now and then a straggling frown,
Through the shades skipped up and down;
Shooting such a piercing Dart,
As would make the Tyrant smart,
And preserve her Lips, and Heart.
But, alas! her Empire's gone,
Thrones and Temples all undone:
And now she cries -- c.
Charm aloft the stormy Winds,
That may keep these Golden Mines,
And let Spaniard Love be tore
On some cruel Rocky Shore,
Where he'll put to Sea no more;
Lest poor conquered Beauty cry.
Oh! I'm wounded! oh! I dye!
And there is no power above
Saves me from this Tyrant love.

Oh cursed Duke! Africa ne'er bred
A Monster like thee, to forsake my Princess
After the a'dst married her, and thus enticed her
From all the Glories of her Fathers Court,
To follow thee, vanquished, wandering exile,
Unhappy Victory, that brought thee captive
To Muscovy, and more unhappy she
To sacrifice her heart, her life, her honour,
To one so false. But I shall wake her, see,
She starts! --
Her soul is walking in a Grove of dreams,
And there some mournful Vision entertains
Her sad despairing thoughts: See! see! a Poniard,
How came she by that fatal Instrument?
She stabs at something; oh! she makes me tremble,
I'll snatch it from her! --

Oh! ungrateful man! --
And dost thou then deride at my misfortunes?
Is this the recompense of my too fond
Unfortunate love? dye in thy Mistress arms.
Bleed I fall! Ha! gone! whither? where am I?
Was it a dream?

She's had some frightful dream
I see. --

Joanna, did nothing pass that way?
Yes, sure there did; 'twas Curland and his Mistress,
They embraced, and smiled at me, and then they vanished;
See I there he stands all wrapped in white, that, that;

Oh! the good heavens, she is grown distracted.
Madam, what i'st you see?

Look there! there!
Is not that he? that tall and shining thing?
He's dead, and I have wrongfully accused him.

That, that's the Moonshine, nothing else in deed,
A stream of light that glances through the Trees.

see, now it vanishes.

And now a Cloud
Covers the Moon; it is no more. Come Madam,
The dewey Vapours of the night are cold;
The shade is melancholy, and the air unwholesome:
Pray to your chamber Madam.

Ah! never, never
Was any so unfortunate as I,
What shall I do? and whither shall I go?

Oh! do not weep thus, you will break my heart;
I hope the Duke will prove a man of honour yet,
You do not know what accidents have happened.

No, no, he's hid in his fair Princess arms:
But perjured man, I'll chase thee from thy bowers
Of love, I'll steep, I'll steep thy joys in blood,
In thy heart-blood, I'll stab it till the poisonous
Serpentine dew, drops weeping at my feet;
Oh! me unfortunate, what shall I do?

Poor Lady --

Madam;

Whose that?

'Tis I, the Princess, is she there?

The Princess, blunderheaded old Soldier!
Thou wilt betray us:

Who, Count Alexey!

Oh! Madam, I'm out of breath with running;
The Duke's come.

What is't thou say? the Duke:

Madam, for certain he was seen this evening,
To fling a Letter in Count Sharnofskyes Coach,
And upon this, the Troops are all alarmed;
The Cardinal sits close in his Cabal.
Orders are issued out to secure his friends,
Chiefly, Count Sharnofsky, and the Princess,
The Guards are drawing up, about the Palace:
In the interim, five thousand crowns are proffered
To any one, that will discover him.

Did I not say, that I should hear some news?
I thought my dream was a forerunner of him,
This news congeals my blood; what shall we do?

Had we not best go in?

No, no, the Guards
Are searching every house, and we being strangers
Perhaps may meet with incivility.
Hark, they are in the house already, see, they come
To search the Gardens; Madam, take no notice.

Come Sir, now we must catechife your Garden.

I, I, do Sir, my Garden's a good boy, he can say his Catechise.


Nay be not so joculary Sir, we have power
To carry you before the Cardinal if we please.

Carry me, and my house too before the Cardinal if you please Sir, set us but
here again where you found us, and I am contented.


Here are people; who are you Sir?

A stranger Sir:

A stranger Sir, what stranger Sir?

A Russian Sir; a Pristaffe's son of Archangelo.

Your name Sir!

Basiliwich.

I see, my Princess hath a quick invention,

And who are these?

My servants* Sir.

'Tis well, keep in your Lodgings Sir, there must be account given of you, come
to the next house.


Go, and a good riddance on you, here's a pother, ho! see if none of my Cups,
or Silver Spoons be missing.


Now all's over, I'll retire to my chamber,
Revenge appears to me in shapes so horrid,
It fright's my soul, call for a light.

A light for my Master's Landlord,

Ho, there a light for the Gentleman,
Well, how bravely were I made now, could I but light upon the Duke! five
thousand crowns! that is to say, five times ten hundred crowns! most monstrous,
prodigious, Gigantique, Pedantique, unarithmetical Sum; why, this would make me
a Duke, well, I'll go to a Conjurer to find him; but hold then, the Rogue will
find him for himself. But then I'll make him believe, I am a Conjurer as well
as himself, and make him be glad to go half shares. But hark, I hear talking.


Never was any thing so fortunate,
To hear of him just at my arrival.
I^le into the town and search for him immediately.

Hold, my Lord, are ye mad? whether do you go?
To rush into a Town thronged with armed men
So late at night, and all the Guards about,
And you a stranger too? come Sir, 'tis time
We rather went somewhere to seek a lodging:
All Inns, and public houses are taken up,
And for ought I see we're like to lie in the streets to night.

I care not where I lye,
For I cannot rest in body or soul,
Until I find this most ungrateful Duke.

What do these people babbling in my Garden
All this while, and say never a word to me?
This 'tis to let it lye unfenc't;

Look, I see a man!
And I am got into a Garden here:
Whose there?

Nay, who's there, and you go to that?
Here's one that hath authority to be here.

The Master of the house I do perceive,
And by his tone a kind of Letter of Lodgings;
I'll ask the Question;
Sir, we are strangers, newly come to Town,
Could you afford us any room in your house?

I cannot tell Sir whether I can or no;
According as I like you; Bring a light here.

Nay then we're well enough, take up my rooms,
Ne'er stand agreeing with him, give him twenty
Thirty, forty, a hundred crowns a week, what he
Hath a mind to,
I'll into Town -- I grow impatient.

Oh! heavens, Sir, whether do you go
To rush in armed crowdes so late, a stranger;
Curse on all rashness, I must follow him,
For fear some mischief happens to him.
Landlord, look to the things, provide our rooms;
We will return within this half hour, or never.

Ha! gone and left their Cloak-bags with me;
What kind of fellows are these? some High-way men
I know by their hast:
But sure I'm in a dream; is this a Cloak bag?
Let's see what weather 'tis; it doth not rain Cloak-bags?
Come I'll go see what's in it, ho! a light there.

Here Sir: --

Nay here Sir.
Here's a Cloakbag dropped in my mouth,
Come let's see the Entrails of this beast.
A rich Chesticore with Diamond buttons;
Enough, enough, I'm satisfied,
These are stolen goods as sure as I am here.
And now what shall I do with this Cloakbag?
Shall I keep the Cloakbag? or shall I cry the Cloakbag? or shall I sell the
Cloakbag; nay, then I may chance to stretch for the Cloakbag; so I may if I
should keep the Cloakbag, if the right owner should come with an Officer, and
find the Cloakbag; why then the Devil take the Cloakbag, for never was any one
so plagued with a Cloakbag, well, if no body comes to claim the Cloakbag, I'll
sell the Cloakbag, buy Land, and marry a Lady with the Cloakbag, and then be
Dubbed a Knight of the Order of the Cloakbag.


Ungrateful men! and do they thus reward me,
For all the blood I've shed in their defence,
To set my head to sale,
That head which once these flattering Poles would cry
Their State could live no more without then I.

I wish your Highness had not flung that Letter,
It seems you were discovered -- I'm amazed
Which way.

Sharnofsky hath betrayed me?
Thus had he done, had I exposed my person
Instead of a trifling paper, or had sent thee,
He would have wracked thee to discover me.

But I'd have been torn limb from limb first.

I doubt not thy fidelity good Theodore;
I've ever found thee generous and faithful;
More generous then those, whose birth and Grandeur,
Obliges them to higher pretence of Honour.
Good heavens, what's this world! I should have sooner
Suspected Angels then the Count or Princess:

Good Sir, do not discompose your Soul
With these suspicions of your noble friends
'Till you know more.

My noble friends! ah, Theodore,
I have no friends, my fortune, fame, and honour,
Heaven, and Earth, and she whom I adore
Above them all deserts me; nothing adheres to me
But my own courage. I see the Count and she
Convert the news of my escape from Moscow,
By the generous kindness of the Russian Princess,
Into pretences to disguise their falsehood;
To ruin my interests, and unite their own,
To marry, and to aspire to the Crown.
All Poland sees it; and the Card'nal dreads u'm
Much more then me? and all this great alarm
You'll find, aims at their lives, as well as mine.

Ah! do not credit Sir the common Vogue.

Come Theodore, 'tis true; but that I've learnt
How to command my passions as well as Armies;
And owe more reverence to my own memory,
Then after death to have my head placed aloft
On some old Tower, to feed the greedy eyes
Of my proud Enemies, this very instant
Shanofsky's soul or mine, should fleet in air.

Well Sir, I say no more, I only beg you
Take into some house, you see what danger
You're in; the Guards are searching all about,
And here we wander up and down in the dark,
Only what sickly light the Moon will lend us.
But Sir, I think we're got into a Garden.

On the backside of a house; knock, Theodore.

Who's there? well, this is not to be endured;
Every one gets into my backside:
If my Landlord will not fence it, I'll promise him
I'll do it, and stop it in his Rent, well, whats the
Business with you, now? more Cloakbags?

Sir, we are strangers -- newly come to Town
And are in great want of Lodgings,
If you could furnish us, name your own price,
By this Gold we will not refuse it you.

Let's look on you, according as I like you:
By this Gold you have good honest faces,
I have a room for you.

Thank you Sir, pray, what other Lodgers have you?
We ask you, because we would be very private.

I have none at present but some fiddling women, that come from Cracow, to see
the choosing of the new King, a young Gentleman and a Cloakbag.


What doth this fellow mean by this Cloakbag?

Your Highness hath happened very fortunately.

Well, but how did you pass the Guards so late?
For here's a heavy pother about the Duke of Curland;
He's come to Town it seems in disguise;
And here's five thousand crowns bid for his head.
Happy man be his dole that catches him;
For my part, I don't expect so good luck,
Five thousand Crowns and a Cloakbag are too much for one night.

I perceive this fellow's none of the honestest,
I! here's a great alarm, what's the matter?

Why Sir, the Duke of Curland, look ye, you must know,
Was a great favourite of the last Kings,
And he contracted him to his Daughter,
And intended to marry him to her, but then it happened
The Muscoviters invaded us with a great army;
The Duke, Sir, upon a simple quibble of Honour,
Goes General of our Army against them,
I was a Corporal under him at the same time.

De'e hear, my Lord? pray keep your disguise close.

And thought forsooth to have come back in triumph,
And married the Lady, and he was taken prisoner,
And ne'er comes back at all.

That was unfortunate.

Now Sir it seems he hath given them the slip out of Muscovy, by the help of the
Russian Princess, and they are run away together; and here he lies lurking in
Poland to fit his business; and now all the Ban and the Arrierban, are met
armed in the field, to choose a King, he's come to Town in disguise, and so
there's a heavy bussle, the Cardinal on one side, and the Princesson the
the other, and between u'm both he's got into Lobbs pound, and I am very glad
on it; he's but a kind of a pitiful whiffling small-beer Duke; I ne'er was
drunk thrice in his house, all the time he was here. I can go into the
Cardinals Cellar, and tie my nose to one barrel, and my horse to another, and
top who shall top most for a wager; and he a sneaking hide-bound Duke of a
Duke, hates the sight of us true Spaniels, that will take water at any time,
dive over head and ears in Liquor, and he would smell a red nose, as far as a
Teale would Gunpowder.


How am I tormented with this fellow?

He's not to be endured.

And now he's come to Town, to be King, yes he shall be King, when I am
Emperor of Morocco, or Muster-Master General of Bautam: we will have no such
thin-gut Kings, that shall in half a year dye of the Gripes, and whilst he
lives, shall starve the English Beer Merchants, set a Tax upon the Tap, and an
Excise upon Rednoses: and there's one Count Sharnofsky, too, such another
ambitious dry-chops, he hath not the grace to love good drink, and yet he hath
the impudence to aim at the Crown. 'Tis true, he doth not goggle at it so
plain, as Mr. Mumpsimus of Curland doth; but he doth as I do now, he squints at
it fearfully, and he hath an


This Villain, I could kill him.

Shall I be for ever tortured with this fellow?
You're not at leisure then to show us our Chambers Landlord.

Yes, yes; come, come:

Ser! here's the Gentleman about the Cloakbag

Oh! Mr. Cloakbag you're welcome Sir;

Come Landlord will you show us our chambers?

One of my fellow lodgers, see if you know him Theodore.

No news.

What news can you expect Sir?

That heaven would be so just to direct me to him.

I do not know him Sir,
And yet me thinks I've seen a face like his In Muscovy.

Come let us to our chambers.
Landlord we will follow you.

Stay behind some body
And light the Cloakbag.

Come good Sir, conquer your impatience,
You'll find him soon enough, perhaps on a Throne;
And speedily, he who in passion now
Is proclaimed Traitor, shall shortly with applause
Be proclaimed King; this is a Feavourish fit
Of the State-sick Cardinal; nor doth the Duke
Come hither in disguise, on no design.

But hark thee; when they make him King of Poland,
They will not make him God of Poland,
And Immortal; will they?

No Sir, he'll be Mortal
No doubt.

If he'll be mortal, I am satisfied.
Go, I am weary, light me to my chamber:
I shall dream of the Duke!

Treason. Treason, the Princess will be murdered.

Oh Francisca, what's the matter?
Here's a noise of Soldiers about the Palace,
And every one runs shrieking up and down:
Oh! my heart aches.

Oh! there's the strangest news.
The Duke's come, and sent a Letter to the Princess
By Count Sharnofsky, and all the Towns alarmed,
The Guards they say are come to search the Palace,
And we're afraid the wicked Cardinal
Designs the Princess death.

Oh horrid Tyrant!
But see, she comes.

Ha! must I dye, for being abused, affronted
By that false man? hath he betrayed my honour,
And doth he now throw in his hand Granado's
To blow my life up too? thus in the flames
Thy Scrawle shall dye; and as it pines to ashes,
Then wanders in the wind, so dies for ever
Thy memory in my soul; and if thy image
Appear but to my thoughts, but in a dream,
I'll hate that dream, and I will stab that thought
As I'll do thee, if e're thou dost approach me.
Now call up all my scryants, bid them arm.

Ha! fling a Letter, and disguise himself,
What means this mighty caution of the Dukes?
Dost thou mistrust my honour? if thou dost,
I may in just revenge distrust thine;
And let me tell thee, if thou dost design
To wrong the Princess, and surprise the Crown,
I in this tempest will not fall alone,
Thou shalt destroy my fortunes and thy own.

Madam, the Guards are broke into the Palace, the Common Hall glitters with
naked swords, and hither they are running in confusion; escape, or you'll be
murdered; hark they 'r come, they've overtaken me; Madam you're lost.


And let them come, I'll look the Villains dead,
And let me see who dare's assassinate
The yet surviving Majesty of their dead King,

Who dares, shall fall as victims to his shade.
But see, the Count Colimsky, ha! our friends
Betray us.

Madam, for heavens sake retire
With all the speed you can, your life's designed;
My Lord Grand Marshal hath Orders from the Council
To seize you both, the Troops are drawing up;
News of the Dukes arrival haunts each ear,
Just like a frightful Spectre; Letters
Are intercepted by the Cardinal
Written by you my Lord, of horrid consequence.

By me!

By you, to Dorosensko General of the Tartars
To assist you with fifty thousand men,
Ten thousand Cassacques should be sure to second him,
That y'ad decreed upon a time prefixed
To fire the City, kill the Cardinal,
Dissolve the General Diet in the Tumult,
Seize the Crown.

Monster of Villainy,
Thou Scarlet prodigy, Polands glaring Comet,
Barbarous Idol, not content with blood,
But must have Kingdoms victim'd at thy Altars!
Almighty powers, I kneel, I kneel, if ever, ever
One thought;

No more I do believe your innocence,
And therefore stole away from the Cabal
To give you intelligence, what horrid Spells
Are made, what Spirits conjured up
Against you, in our Magicians Grotto,
And here I've brought a hundred resolute
Young Gentlemen, whose swords shall cut the Charm,
And yet secure the Princesses retreat
And yours; if you'll accept their generous kindness,
Then Madam hasten, let us loose no time,
Each minute now is precious as the Indies.

Pious Cardinal, my Guardian Angel,
Heavenly Tyrant, little thinks my Royal Father
How he hath left me to the Guardianship
Of Dragons that devour me.

Oh undone!
We have lost time, all, all to arms.

Call up the Princesses servants, arm, arm.

Murder, murder.

Now the long wished for time of my revenge
On the old Tyrant that affronted me,
Is come; but ha? Colimsky here.

Are you there Traitor?

Are you here, cheated bubbles?

This too honest fellow hath prevented us:
You'll answer for this Treason to the General Diet.

With my sword in hand in the interim
My Princess shall not fall an Indian Martyr
Under the Chariot wheels of your great Pagoda;
Your I dol shall not have such noble victims.

Let us not stand disputing.

Seize the Traitors.

I, you may say, seize the Traitors, long enough you might have had the wit to
have come with a stronger party.


Murder, Murder.

Oh! bloody Cardinal. Royal shade
Of my great Father, hide thy glorious head,
And see not my oppressions.

Now all's clear:
My Lord conveigh the Princess by a private way
To the Monastery of Sancta Clara; there's a Vault
Where you may lie secure for an hour or two;
In the interim I'll go place a Guard in my house,
And then conduct you thither: my Gardens
Lye just opposite to the Monastery,
And there's a private way, where you may pass secure;
And then for our greater preparations.

Come Madam,
The tempest is begun, let's bravely through.

Lead on my Lord,
I'm none of those, who when the storm prevails,
Creep to the winds, and humbly strike the Sails.

Escaped!

All betrayed by Count Colimsky.

I feared as much.

My Lord, you may remember
He gave us warning with mysterious words
He dropped at Council; I might have had the wit
To have seen it, but I am grown both fool and knave
With keeping knaves and fools company.

With mysterious words!
In plain terms he talked both saucily
And like a Traitor.

Well said wisdom:

I observed him;
And do repent we did not then secure him:
But I was unwilling to create
Too many enemies. Well, this news is bad,
The Duke arrived, the Count and Princess fled
To arms, Colimsky turned a Partisan:
I now foresee a dreadful strom of blood.

A storm of thy own creating; but yet I love thee,
Because thou love mischief, 'though these simple Lords
Have not the wit to see it.

My Lord, all places shall be strictly searched,
Houses, Vaults, Churches, Monasteries,
And then by break of day we will be ready
To bring our Slaves armed into the field.
Then let the tempest blow, this storm of Fate
Shall overset the Pirates of the State.

Brave Patriots! may heaven succeed your Loyalty.

Oh! most noble Cardinal; I am almost as cunning
A Knave as thy self, and I have one knack more,
To appear, what I am not, one of thy bubbles.

Good men, how easily they swallow down
The bait; such honest men are the soft moulds
Wherein wise men do cast their great designs.
Still crossed! what ill-natur'd star envies my glory?
Oft have I built my great designs so high,
That they have dazzled each spectators eye:
When to the highest story I should come,
Even just to have a prospect into Rome,
To view the Conclave, and o'retop them all,
And catch the golden fruit, when it should fall,
Then some unhappy ball, at one rebound,
Hath thrown down all my projects to the ground,
And now, as all my policies were ripe,
And each thing fitted as I had designed,
The Duke a captive, and his friends confined;
And I had stole an interest in the State,
Enough to sell the Crown at my own rate;
Just on the sudden they are all got free,
And the whole storm is like to ^all on me:
Such things as these would puzzle humane sense,
And make one half believe a providence;
And I confess it staggers me, to find*
My Engines broke, by one that stands behind.
But all this shall not my designs defeat,
It is a wise mans duty to be great
To save the helpless World.
For they above affect to show their powers,
And haughty wisdom, by confounding ours.
Then heaven we bow; but if that will not do.
The sword shall give, what I demand from you.
When Beads and Altars no relief afford,
The best devotion then is in the Sword.
Break down the doors, I care not for ne'er a City Cuckold of 'em all.

Murder, murder, call up all our neighbours.


Hold your babbling, or I'll set a pellet in the throat of you, I've authority
to search your house for the Princess.


A Princess Sir, I'd have you to know I keep no such house, I keep no
Princesses, and so get you from my doors.

Do I pay Tax and Contribution, and the Devil and all, to have my doors broken
open at midnight to search for Princesses, I^le complain to the Council.

Some scalding water there.
How do you threaten? fire upon them.
Murder, murder.

Murder! murder! there's murder cried in the streets, we shall be all killed in
our beds; ho! where are you all? light a candle; call up all our Lodgers; ho,
murder.


Oh! we shall be murdered:


Here's a Steel hath as much fire in it as is in my tooth:


Oh! Madam, Madam; I have seen the


Oh! thou hast surprised me;

I faint.


Strange, what a fortunes, this?


See this is he.


Why ho, will you bring a light here? sleepy Rascals, are you all dead?


Where is this murder?


Nay what know I? all the Guards are about, Horse and Foot, this is about the
Duke of Curland; I would I had him by the nose with a pox to him, I'd hold him
as strong as Mustard; he might smell to a crust long enough I faith, nor should
it be four thousand nine hundred ninety-nine crowns should excuse his head:


Do ye hear my Lord? this fellow's a Rogue.


I hear him.


A damp strikes to my heart at fight of him.


Where are these murders done?


In the Landlords pate.

No other we shall meet withal to night.

Master:


Master, you Rogue, where's a light? shall we be all killed in the dark here?


All's over Sir.


Over or under, I'll have a light Sir, I won't loose my life in the dark, a
light I say, whilst I go call up all my people.


What an impertinent cowardly follow is this?


Fear Sir, is natural to vulgar spirits.


What people are those in the room here?


Your fellow lodgers Sir!


I do suppose the Guards are searching for me;
Perhaps they may break into the house.
'Tis safer being abroad; call for the key of the Garden door; I'll go walk in
the Grove.

Follow, follow, Madam, he is going out.


Come, my Lord, you've slept but little, will you to your Chamber? or walk
abroad?


'Tis too early yet, hardly day, and I feel my eyes a little heavy, I care not
if I take the the other slumber, and finish the remainder of my dream.


Had you a dream? I thought you slept so little, you had no time to dream.


'Twas a confused one: of the Duke, and my Princess, methoughts I met them in a
Grove; and in a house I wounded him; she fainted, and they both vanished: and a
thousand such wild things.


This busy soul of ours cannot be idle;

It must be doing, and doth it knows not what.


Come I'll to my Chamber, take the other flumber, and then in chase of the Duke,
and I'll find him if all the arts of hell can discover him.


Now you may venture to walk in the Garden, all's over; beshrew me, I tremble
like a quaking pudding.


How comes your Grove and Gardens to lie open?


How comes a Wench to lie open, and common? when no body will fence her? Your
Grandfather: you wonder to hear me say, your Grandfather, I warrant. You must
know, I call all my lodgers my sons; and so I being your Father, my Landlord is
your Grandfather Now Sir, your Grandfather is in Law about it, with the
Monastery of Santa Clara? and did you never see a couple of Hectors fight for a
Wench, here I tickle thee, and there I tickle thee; so, sa, sa, Co' your
Grandfather, a homethrust Co' the Monastery! and so they fetch one another with
whiscum, whascums, and I know not what; and neither of them will suffer it to be
fenced, and so my Garden lies stark naked, without ever a rag to her back; but
I keep the poor Jade as private as I can, and suffer none to pass, but those
that go between the Counts Gardens and the Monasteries.


There is no speaking whilst this fellow's here.


What Gardens are those, yonder?


One Count Colimsky's Gardens;

A very brave man, he hath a gallant house at the the other end; ah! many sousing
soakings have I had in his Cellar: There have I sailed, top and top gallant,
all Sails aloft, and bravely boarded the French-man, the high Dutcher, the
Spaniard, the Grecian; then Sir, there hath made up to me, a Fleet of
Algerines, Tunis, and Sally men (for so I call the drunken dogs.) A Sail, a
Sail quoth I; strike for Algier quoth they, strike for Danzig quoth I; then
to it we go, and board one another with small shot, pint glasses, and the like;
from them we go to Cuddy-guns, and so to Demy-cannon, whole Cannon, and all our
lower Teer, Romers of an Ell; and then there's bloody work; here sinks a
Galley, there a Galleass; there a stout Frigate turns up his Keel, then high for
the main boys cry I.


What a tedious impertinent fellow is this?


And what high wall is that, that faces to the Counts Gardens?


That's the Monastery wall I told you of.


Will this fellow never have done?


You don't know who those young Gentlemen are, that lodge in your house, do
you?


Not I, they are pretty youths, strangers, speak but bad Polish; I asked them
when they came, Rosmepopolsky said I, no Rosmepopolsky quoth they; but one may
make a shift to understand them.


How came you to have any room in your house, at so great a concourse as this,
of all the Nobility and Gentry of Poland with their Trains, for the election of
a King?


How came my neighbours wife to have any room in her? she was delivered of a
boy, and my big-bellied house of a man; and both were brought to bed yesterday
morning; the great Count Palatine of Smolensko (if you know him) lodged here;
and he whipped out of town upon some bickerings betwixt him and the Cardinal: he
told the Cardinal his own, he made a most brave mutinous speech in the Diet,
which is highly applauded, I have a Copy on it in my pocket.


No matter for the Copy Landlord.


This fellow's tongue hath the perpetual motion;

Good my Lord, rid your self of him?


Well Landlord, I have a little business with my servant, you'll excuse me.


I think I have lost the Copy of this same Speech, I must run in to find it I'll
be back presently.


Heaven be praised!


So now I'll venture to him.


Do, and we will stay behind.


Ha! who's this follows the Duke?

My Lord, retire, here's some one follows you.


Some of the lodgers for the morning air.


No, no, my Lord, he makes directly to you.


I think he doth, as if he'd speak with me.


My Lord.


To me Sir?


Yes, to you my Lord;

Come make it not so strange, I know you well enough.


Oh! heaven's, betrayed.


Nay, be not startled Sir;

I've no design but what is honourable.


Surely you do mistake your person Sir;

I'm but a stranger here.


I know you are not Sir,

You lately came out of Muscovy;

You were a prisoner there Sir, were you not? yes Sir, I'm sure you were, and
your name is Ladislaus Duke of Curland.


Ha! he names my name,

How came I thus discovered?


So 'tis he;

Now I have born him down with confidence.


I know him not, but since he names my name,

Let him be Man or Devil, Friend or Enemy,

I'll not disown it Sir, I am Ladislaus

Duke of Curland; what's your business with me?


That Letter Sir, that Letter will tell you.


Whence is this?


Read, and you'll see.


Ha! subscribed Demetrius:

What, is this from Muscovy? where's the Prince?


The Letter Sir, will tell you.


Poland; my Errand you your self may conjecture, and I had rather tell you with
my Sword then my Pen; which I had done, if an unhappy accident had not confined
me to a small Village, and my Chamber; and enforced me to make use of the
kindness of the bearer, my Cousin, the Duke of Novogrod, to seek you. The
acquaintance you have had of my temper, will easily give you to believe, that I
had rather fight ten battles, then write six lines, and therefore you must not
expect long Epistles from me. Then in short you have abused me with dissembled
friendship; affronted and ruined me, by stealing away my Princess; your crimes
are unexpiable by any thing but your life, which I expect you tender me on the
point of your sword. The circumstance, as of time, place, and weapon, I refer
to your self; and you may acquaint my Cousin the Duke, whose return from you, I
expect with impatience: Demetrius.


The Prince is very severe, and his charge is high.


Sir, I suppose he hath reason.


That he ought to have been assured of, e're he had condemned his friend.


Well Sir, in short, your answer.


My answer is Sir, that the Prince hath wronged me,
I've not abused him with dissembled friendship,
Nor stole his Princess; she remains with him
For ought I know, so may my friendship too,
If it pleases him; --

Oh heavens! how unfortunate
Am I in my love? see, he disowns my flight*
And he'll disown the marriage too, and I
Shall pass for some base prostrate thing.

You seem disordered Sir.


I am disordered Sir at what you've said, I only thought before the Princess
lost to all her friends and fortunes; but now 'tis worse, I see she's lost to
honour, and fallen into the hands of one that basely disowns her.


You are too quick and fierce in your assertions Sir.


No fiercer Sir,
Then the case merits: Had you owned her flight,
And owned a marriage too, it had been honourable;
For upon other terms she would not fly;
But let me tell you Sir, in the same breath
In which you disown her flight, you little less
Then call her Strumpet.

Do you come here young Duke, to talk or fight?


Sir, which you please,
To fight; now that I had a Furies whip
Totear thy heart, and scourgethy perjured soul.

Must it be so?


Oh! murder, murder.


Hold, hold your hand Sir, save that tender life,

Here is an enemy more fit for thee.


What Villains are these?


Ha! an ambush.


Begone, what mean you to betray me thus,
I am but humouring my part, retire;
These are my servants Sir, regard them not,
I'll play you no foul play; retire I say.
Come, come my Lord, let us put up our anger;
This time and place are not convenient
For this; besides I exceed my Commission in it.
I should displease the Prince to take your life,
And grieve him to loose my own; come let us talk:
By all that's good I honour you:
And do believe you'll tell me sacred truth,
Then tell me truly, by the faith and honour
Of a brave man, do you know where the Princess
Is fled: and are you married to her, or no?

Then by those sacred things, by which you conjure me, by any thing that's more
Divine then they, I know not of her flight, nor am I married to her.


Oh! horrid, horrid; I shall sink and die.


Sir, you look pale, how do you?


I could find in my heart to stab him.


Your countenance changes Sir, I fear you're ill, and but dissemble it in
complaisance -- pray let me wait upon you to your Chamber.


No, good my Lord, no Ceremony pray,

Sweetnatured Devil.


Ha! what is't I see? It is a Vision; Count Sharnofsky conducting a Lady out of
yonder Monastery, she and her Train all Masked, what should it mean? my Lord, I
beg your pardon, I'll wait on you instantly.


Oh! my sweet Lord;

Ho there!


Madam, the news.


Curland's a Monster.


I'll run and kill him.


No, let me alone, I'll kill him, but it shall be with torments; Steel, Poison,
Fire, Racks, Scorpions, Hell; oh me unfortunate!


She's grown distracted.


Lead me, I faint.


She swoons, help, help.


Who should these be?


Who 're these my Lord is gazing on so earnestly? ha, it should be his friend
the Count; but what's that Vizard Lady? see, she unmasques.


Where are we now my Lord?


I'm sure, not far from Count Colimskyes Gardens.


It is the Princess.


Heavens! 'tis my Princess;
'Tis she, 'tis she, my guilty soul retires
At the apparition of that bright Divinity
Which my soul whispers I have now offended.
Just so a suffering Saint that long had bin
Triumphant over all the Arts of Sin;
And in all combats made a brave defend,
And still preserved entire his innocence;
But yet at last, before he is aware
Begins to slide into some pleasing snare:
By heaven surprised his soul, is then afraid
Of joys for which he had endured and prayed.

I see the Garden gate, this, this way Madam.

Ha! vanquished thus, heavens unsold this Mystery;
It is too dark for me, and I must follow
To see the opening of this cloudy Scene.

See, my Lord chases them, I dread the event,
I wish some Mist had screened this horrid Vision from his sight.

Heavens! in what shady path's my fortunes leads me? And must I hide my head in
Natures Nunnery, among these Virgin flowers to save my self

From him, who now though he so proud can be,
Hath often for his safety fled to me?
Nor would it grieve me, if I did but know
For what it is, he persecutes me so;
Or how I ever did offend this proud
Aspiring Man, that he should seek my blood.

The Tyrant, Madam, thinks the Duke and you,
Do all his towering policies undo;
And then his active brain wants no design,
The strongest innocence to undermine:
Then for the State, he doth bewitch their sense
With the love-powder of his eloquence:
His sliding tongue doth with its charming strains,
Like a smooth Serpent coil about their brains,
And with its sting not only taints the blood
Of fools and bigotts, but the wise and good;
But yet in spite of all such arts as these,
VVe'l darken his proud Stars, and on his knees
Yet make him (ever w' have done this fatal strife)
At these fair hands, thus humbly ask his life.

Heaven blast my eyes, rather then see this sight,
I'm abused; Villain.

Oh my Lord, what mean you?

Loose me Theodore, or thou die.

I die, ah Sir, 'twill be a fate too glorious to die by your hand, thus saving
of your friend.


Hark, I hear a noise.

See, see, the Guard.

Fly, I command you fly? we are betrayed.

See, she entices him, and the Coward flies,
And hast thou lost thy courage with thy honesty?
This man was valiant once, I've now done more
Then I have seen whole Armies do before:
But guilt now so unman's him, that he flies
What once he had the courage to despise:
But I'll pursue thee to thy base retreats.
Ha! the Gates fastened, are they barricaded?
Fetch me a Torch, I'll fire my way to them,
And kill him in the arms of that false woman:
Yea rage perhaps, may tempt me to destroy
Her, whom I once thought heaven to enjoy.

Oh! how his passion, like a clap of Thunder, rends her great soul; but ha,
they fire upon us, my Lord, you will be shot, a shower of bullets flies from
each corner, see some Musketeers upon the Battlements, the fatal Hail falls
thick.


Poor men, how dangerously they stand against so numerous an Army? how bloodily
they wound the drooping flowers?


A flight of arrows
Covers the Garden with a poisoned shade;
And one just glanc't your side, you're shot, you bleed.

I feel it not.

'Tis fallen at your foot;
Shot from some Tartars bow, curse on the slave,
The horse-fed dog; oh, let me suck the wound,
For fear the Dart was venomed.

Ha, I bleed;
Indeed these are Juliana's Darts of love,
Thank you kind Princess: Come then Theodore,
I will retire, I ought not to resign,
T'each common shaft, a life so great as mine;
No, perjured woman, I will live to have
Such a revenge as shall be great and brave;
Suiting thy birth, and mine, and be above
My injured honour, and affronted love:
And when I've done, I'll make my last retreat
To her, that never hath deceived me yet,
Honour, a Mistress worthy of my mind,
Both fair and great, as thou, and far more kind.

Fire on them still.

I can descry but two from the Terrace walk.

They 'r hid behind the trees.
But see the affrighted Maids.

Oh! out of breath, w'ave been pursued by such a crew of Rogues!

I indeed Madam, there was Horse and Foot,
I was pursued at least by twenty Pikemen.

And sixteen Musketeers ran after me.

The Count -- my Lord, did you not meet the Guards?

Not I.

Then sure we'are pursued by fantomes.

Well Madam, I've had fortunate success,
And raised a Force very considerable
For the small time I had to do it in;
I find the young Nobles, and many Commons,
And almost all the Ladies, highly sensible
Of your great wrongs, and ready to engage with you:
Madam, in short, fear not the Cardinals threats;
But above all things trust not his promises.
Hell's not so false Madam; you can but die,
And you had better bravely give your life,
Then be deluded out on 't; but I hope
You'll be constrained to neither, if a wall
Of fifty thousand bucklers can protect you.

Blessed news! let's arm; I will have Poland see,
My Fathers Royal Soul survives in me.

MArry a Lady of my quality, and then deny the marriage! oh perfidious
ungrateful man! and was it then for this trampled on my self, my Honours,
Fortunes, run on the pikes of my great Fathers anger, bestowed thy life, when
all thy friends abandoned thee, and for thy sake am now become a poor and
wandering Exile; and thou thus reward me, basely abandon me? oh horrid, horrid,
weep, bleed, die, fall at my feet thou Tyrant, quick, quick, or see this Steel
is in thy heart.


How wild she looks, and talks; oh my poor Princess, how deadly pale she is?
now weeps again.


What shall I do? in a strange Country here
Exposed to shame, yet strangled if I return,
Death waits me at home, disgrace and ruin here;
Like a poor Ship thus labouring in a storm,
I view the angry Ocean, over and over,
And see a thousand Waves, but not one Shore.

Oh, that I were a Witch to torture him*

To night he dies: where is Alexey gone?

Gone out to see what means these strange confusions, shouts, clamours, cries,
billows and tides of people flowing in the streets, calling to arms, to arms.


Alexey knows his Chamber: then to night,
When weariness betrays him to his rest,
And he lies Coffined in the Vaults of sleep,
Haunted with mournful dreams; Iile to his bed,
Unwrap his breast, Anatomize his heart;
Here runs a vein of courage, there of falsehood,
This Fiber shows him man, but that a Devil;
Then if he groans, or else with cast up eyes,
Shall sigh a prayer, I'll stab it as it flies,
And beg of heaven both soul and prayer may
To those blessed Regions, never find their way
But then lest heaven should deny my prayer,
I'll kill my self, even to torment him there.

Oh Madam; there's the strangest news abroad,
The Princess and the Count are up in arms,
Poland's in a blaze, all's in confusion,
The General Diett's equally divided,
And millions of reports fly to and fro:
Some say they design to Crown the Duke;
Others to murder him, and Crown themselves.
The Duke lies sick of an invenoin'd wound,
But more of jealousy; I listened at his Chamber, and heard him groan of both;
his soul is bubbling, a little heat would boyle him to a height,


I'll go, I'll go I'll sting his poisoned soul,
Put fire under his heart, I'll boil him, boil him,
Till in his rage, he runs and kills his friend,
His Mistress and himself, then we will be merry,
Be jolly, carouze, drink health in their blood.

Our Landlord too 's a talking News-monger, I'll go and stuff the fools Cranny
with all the rascally news I can invent.


Do, all tools shall help; there's nothing now
So base, I would not do to have revenge:
Revenge to me, doth even seem above
Celestial joys, or the delights of love.
Ye Powers! --
Let but revenge give me one minutes ease,
And cast your other joys to whom you please.

To arms, to arms!


Not mounted yet my Lords; the Cardinal is ready to march into the field.


Heaven speed his Eminence, I hope he is in his Coach; for if he was a
horseback, and his horse trotted as high as his designs, he would jolt the old
mans bones.


I thought what would become of these violent proceedings.


So here's Machiavel, Policy in the abstract; the wind of the other party blows a
little dust in's teeth, and he wheels about.


You thought, were not you as forward as any one?


So Blunderbuss, my Lord Grand Lubber; be sure if there be any simple knavery,
thou wilt be forward enough in it, but thou want wit to be an ingenious
knave; and yet this fool got the Marshal Baton from me, thank the good King.


As forward as any one? no, I was not as forward as any one Sir.


I hate this.


Well, and I hate Sir.


Nay Sir, be not so passionate, farewell to you; I'll stand by the Cardinal my
self.


So, these Lords will go to cuffs about State you shall see; come my Lords, no
dissentions, we have enemies enough.


Sir, I am as ready to draw my sword in the Cardinals defence, as he can be.


No doubt, no doubt my sweet noble Lord, all the world knows you're Royal, Wise,
and Valiant. My sweet Count Simpleton, all the world knows you to be a Coxcomb,
and so do I: well, I am so out of humour, I could hate all mankind.


Then what need all this quarrelling among our selves?


Enough of this my Lord; I must reconcile them for my own ends, or else they
might fight and hang.


Is your Lady amongst them my Lord?


I, I have an impertinent Hen amongst them, that would crow over all the Cocks
in the Kingdom, if she could.


Sha's reason, for half the Cocks in the Kingdom have crowed 'ore her.


They'll have the wit to keep out of dander. By this time the Cardinal is ready,
bid them sound to horse.


So, thus am I forced to soader them together to keep our rotten building from
falling in pieces, till I requite the kindness of the King upon his Daughter,
for opposing me in all the Offices of State, I stood candidate for, Great Seal,
Gold Key, preferring these, and every Phlegmatic fellow before me; and now
'tis I have raised all this storm, and the overwise Cardinal thinks to make me
a Tool in his Design, and I make him an Instrument in mine.


This is pretty, the women in arms; ha, ha! is thy Mistress amongst them, she
with the high Roman Nose?


I, and thine too, she with the low flat French Nose.


Ha, ha, how I shall laugh to see the little pretty uptails come to make a
home-thrust at a man; prithee let's follow our Lords, and see this desperate
Camp.


But first let's arm, back and breast, bodkin proof.


Not one face here that doth resemble his.


My Lord, you'll be observed.


Stand back Battista? I'll view them all; and if thou dost provoke me, I'll
fight them all.


Let all the gazing crowds withdraw, and place strict Guards about the Tents.


Come let's withdraw in time among the crowd.


I'll not withdraw, Curland is among them,
And I will make their close Cabal deliver him.

Yes, yes, be cut in pieces by the Guards.

Avoid the Tent all, all.

Slave, who do you speak to?

Ha Sir, who are you?

Cleave his head.

Hold Sir, for heaven's sake.

What Mutiny's that?

A Traitor, comes to murder the Princess.

A Traitor?

A Traitor, you Mercenary slaves.


Oh Gods, what work is here?


Deliver, Sir!


Who employed you Sir, on so wise an errrand?


A thing, which I'm afraid Poland ne'er heard of yet, called Honour; 'tis to
seek a person hid in your false Cabals, as false as they.


The youth's distracted.


This generous person is but a stranger, one of high quality, and only comes in
curiosity to see the election.


Sirrah, you lie; I come to seek the Duke, and I will have him here, or fire
their Tents about their ears.


He is a little crazed, he hath his liberty, conveigh him home, and send for
one of my Physicians to him.


I humbly thank your Highness.


Am I your Buffoone then? send your Physicians to me.


Go young Sir, another time you shall be welcome hither, at present Sir, indeed
you must excuse us.


Take notice Sir, I will revenge th'affront when you're a King, at present you
are all beneath my anger.


What a mad fiery youth is this?


And now must I with humble patience wait
Upon this Scarlet Minister of Fate,
Who comes with slow and a Majestic pace
To speak a Princes doom with greater grace,
And with a specious gravity to hide
His Traitorous design, and haughty pride?
Yes: -- To his Grandeur, I owe more esteem,
I at his own Cabals should visit him:
And if he stays, perhaps I shall prevent
With fifty thousand swords his complement.
In th'interim I'll divertize my self and these noble Ladies; Command my Music
to sing a song of Triumph:

Fierce and Heroic tempers cannot stay,
To Court a Victory with long delay,
Like a dull Bridegroom for his wedding night,
But conquer and triumph, and then they fight.
Awake, awake, thou warlike Genius of our State,
who once did glorious things;
But hast of late
Lain sleeping under drouzy Kings;
Arise, and on triumphant beauty wait:
See, see, he comes,
Roused with the noise of Trumpets and of Drums,
The Air all flaming whereso'ere he went,
And now he hovers over our Prin^ses Tent.
Fair Amazon, the day's thine own,
Thine enemies look pale to see thy warriors stand
Impatient for thy great command,
Whose looks do make the fainting villains groan;
And by and by
Shall on the Altar of the field
Ten thousand Victims lie.
Then Church and State
Shall on thy Triumphs wait,
Mitre and Crown
Shall at thy feet lie down
To flatter thy Victorious charms;
Away to Arms, to Arms.

Madam, the Cardinal's come into the Field, and all the Lords that join with
him.


The Lords, and doth his piety distrust
Heaven's protection of a cause so just?
But he good man, though he is armed with prayer,
And hath Battalions Marshalled in the air,
Yet will make use of other Guards beside,
And rather will in temp'ral Arms confide:
My Lord Sharnofsky, draw up the Squadrons of horse into Battalia, I'll head
them my self in person.

We have a braver appearance then could be expected on so little warning.


Madam, the Cardinal desires to treat in person with you, and demands caution,
for the security of himself and those that shall attend him.


Let sufficient caution be given.


Open to the right and left to make way for the Cardinal.


The women armed! then sure we're all mistaken;
This preparation's only made
For some great Masquerade.

A Play, 'tis only to divert you, Sir,
And called, The downfall of the Cardinal.

And was it this, you and your Mighty Poets
Have so long studied on? The Plot's too mean
For such great wits, and such a mighty Scene:
An usurped Crown a better plot would be
For armed Tragedians, such as here I see;
And if we make inquiry, we shall find
T'was such a Plot your Poetry designed:
And to deny it Madam, is in vain,
For we have searched your Vaults, and found your Train:
And 'twill but set you higher on the score
To justify your ills, by doing more;
But if in this contempt you will proceed,
Then thank your own ambition if you bleed;
You are an Orphan, so is the Kingdom too,
And no less trusted to my care then you.

How blessed am I, with this great State to share
In such a holy Guardians pious care,
Whose thoughts are busied for me night and day,
That my good Angel may have leave to play:
Whose love to that Romantique height is flown,
That he to save my soul would lose his own:
For though in complement he seemed to approve
The little youthful vanities of love;
And did my Marriage with the Duke advance,
To show the King and me his complaizance;
Nay more did to my dying Father swear,
Our mutual loves should be his chiefest care:
He had a far more heavenly intent,
And swore in Courtship what he never meant;
For he, who from his youth hath understood
The pleasing Mysteries of flesh and blood,
And knows how seldom those that are in love
In their embraces think of joys above:
He therefore charitably breaks his oath,
And becomes perjured to preserve us both.

I am not ignorant what you design,
By Ironyes like these, so sharp, so fine;
'Tis true, I promised I would ever bear,
Even of your loves, a most Religious care;
And that I would endeavour to redeem
The captive you did then so much esteem,
And faithfully engaged when that was done,
I would complete the vows you had begun;
Things good and just like these I vowed to do,
But not to uphold you in all evil too;
I did not swear if you should both combine
To oreturn the State to share in the design;
Though with my honour you so pleasant be,
And think to laugh me into perjury;
Sport with me, Madam, as your scorn thinks fit,
We can distinguish innocence from Wit;
And if I'm perjured, Poland then shall know
Their safety did require it to be so:
For know my Lords, the ambitious Duke and she
Whom I have injured, as she charges me,
Have sought this Crown by Treason to obtain,
Which by just ways they did despair to gain;
And to all Princes have addresses made
The Commonwealth by fire and sword t'invade,
Seeking that Throne which they despair to enjoy
By mean revenge and envy to destroy;
And here their Partisans do seek by stealth
To gain upon the sleeping Commonwealth.
And now to stop so evil a design,
Stepping to take the Actors in the Mine;
Enraged their enterprise should hindered be,
They strive to blow up both themselves and me.

No more (proud Priest) how dare thou at this rate
Sport with a Princes, and a Kingdoms Fate:
And charge us boldly with this black intent,
When as thy conscience knows we're innocent?
But thou whose valiant conscience never fears
To rifle Urns, and sell an Orphans tears,
To break thy Oaths made to a dying King,
Must have a soul debauch't for any thing.
Alas poor man! here are ten thousand eyes
That see thy plots through all their vain disguise:
Poor vulgar spectacles can fit at home,
And read thy darkest policies at Rome;
At Rome, the Market for thy Royal ware,
Thou chaffer'st Poland for the Papal Chair,
And here thou striv'st to beat that Interest down,
Which spoils thy trading for the triple Crown:
Nay more, for fear thy Chapmen there should fail,
Thou to all Princes set this Crown to sale.
'Tis placed upon thy private Stalls,
And cheapened in thy dark Caballs:
No Packets come, nor envy doth resort,
But brings thee pelf from every Christian Court:
And not a Princely Suitor sends to woe,
But thy good will must first be courted too,
Each Royal youth of Europe panting lies,
For fear the Cardinal his consent denies.
And now because some cannot bear to see
A Priest make Merchandise of Royalty;
That Money should the Throne invade,
And turn the Crown into a Trade;
He all impending evils to prevent,
Accuses us, to be thought innocent.

Well Sir, then since you have so good a cause,
Repose your life and honour in the Laws,
Deliver your self unto the State, and I
Will lay my Maces and my Scarlets by,
And from my Office, waving all pretence,
Will to the State submit my innocence:
Then let the Diet freely try
Which is the Traitor, you or I.

'Tis bravely spoken.

Greatly like himself!

Knavishly like himself.

Agreed, here bind my hands?

My Lord, you shall not?

His Proposition's fair; the Cardinal
Never preach't any thing so much Divine,
And let no blood be shed, but his or mine.

'Tis all deceit, through you he aims at me,
That he my Fathers Throne might freely invade,
And proudly triumph over his Royal Shade;
But that he shall not do whilst I've a hand
To hold a Spear, and Armies to command.

And Madam, do you think that fate is amorou?
Or to find any Courtship from a bullet?
They like raw travellers court all they meet;
Nor can we send a Guide to give advice
Whom to respect, but let them take their choice.

Their rugged Courtship Sir I shall not deny,
Send them abroad, and give them all supply,
That may defray the charges of their flight,
Draw bills of death, they shall be paid on sight;
I will your faithful correspondent be,
And pay as fast as you can draw on me.

Madam, I'm sorry you resolve to expose
Your self, and such a lovely Guard as those,
To all the sad uncertainties of Fate,
To try your skill in fencing with the State;
For justice at a Traitors life doth fly;
And when it makes a pass, you put it by;
But if the sword doth hap to run astray,
Then thank your self for standing in the way.

Come valiant friends; the talking Prologue's done;
The Curtain's drawn, the mighty Play's begun:
The Music of the field in Martial rage
Calls us to enter on this fatal Stage,
Where each brave man shall doubly have applause,
Crowned by his courage, and his glorious Cause;
A Cause more glorious there cannot be,
I for the Kingdom die, and you for me.

Offer to let my Master go out in this condition?


I could not hold him Sir, he would go out whether I would or no; but there's
no danger, his wound's not great, nor was the arrow venomed, as first you
feared.


Oh! he'll hear all the news,
And then I tremble at the consequence.
Now comes this babbling rascal.

Nay, I thought 't would be as I said, the Count is to be King, and marry the
Princess: How now, where's your Master? I've news for him.


Get you gone with your news you prating bufflehead, or I'll set you down
stairs; come here with your news?


Prating Bafflehead; and you'll set me down stairs? do you know who you speak
to, Sirrah? come, come, you lie, you lie, you don't know who you speak to, and
you're drunk Sirrah, you would not talk to me at this rate else Sirrah; get me
down stairs with my news Sirrah? I'd have to know, the best men in the Kingdom
are glad of my intelligence, you drunken rascal you.


Yes, no doubt you have all the intelligence -- pray Mr.
Corantoe-Master-General, what may your Envoyes and Spies in Foreign Courts
cost you yearly?


What may they cost me Sir? pray what may your Envoyes and Spi^s which you
maintain with the Duke of Gally-pots, Count Palatine of Glister-pipes, Marquess
of Mouth-glue, and Baron of Bathingtubs, for the support of your rotten body
politic, cost you yearly? ha, Sir-Ragmanners, my intelligence comes from
better men then you or your Master either. I met no less now (because you
prate) then six Lords of my old acquaintance coming out of the field together
all of a knot.


What knot? a bow-knot?


A bow knot saucy-chops; when did you see six Lords tied of a bow-knot? ha! can
you tie your nose of a bow knot? you had not best provoke me sirrah; but so,
here comes my man, now it shall be seen whether I am a liar or no.


How, not here! where did we loose her?


I'll hold a wager the person we met in the Cloak was the Duke, and she went
after him somewhere, and is lost in the crowd.


Come, come Sir, you Mr. Peagoose that stand peeping there, pray Sir thrust in
your nose a little further, I have some employment for you.


The Rogue will discover all my design, and render us suspicious to the Duke's
servant, I am afraid, come in Alexey and help me to out-face the fool.


Come Sir, did not you hear in the field, as much as to say, as if the Count
was to be made King, and to marry the Princess? come answer directly to the
point; why don't you speak Sir?


Who, me do you mean?


I, you sir, who should I mean else?


I hear it, how should I hear it? was I in the field to day?


Why, you impudent stinking lying Rascal, you won't tell me such a lie, will
you?


You mistake me Landlord, and have met some body like him.


No sir, I don't mistake; I can see, when I see, surely, I don't carry my eyes
in a Hand-basket, and more then that, because he goes to it, he's the very man,
and no other, from whom I'd all this news now.


Is this your six Lords of a knot you Ninny? I see you can invent for a need.


Oh, a most grievous impertinent lying fellow, I'm so plagued with him
sometimes!


Hark you Landlord, are not you troubled with a dizziness in your Noddle, a
Megrim sometimes; I am afraid you eat too much mustard, and such hot things.


Some snush would purge your simple brain.


A little more would make me run distracted, don't you tell me,of your Megrims,
your Snush, and your Mustard, a company of Rascals: Sirrah, did not I meet you
coming out of the field, and I asked you what news, because I was loath to go
farther, because I was to go buy a pole o'Ling for the women's dinner that lie in
my house here; and you told me all this bibble babble, and bid me go no
farther, but go to my Lodgers with it, deny it if you dare sirrah, I'll promise
you if you do, I'll churn those Buttermilk-chops of yours, and let your Master
take it off; I care not if you and your Master both get out (...) my house, I
can have customers for my rooms.


Come, enough of this Landlord.


I have not enough Sir, I won't be made a liar on


Why, what a troublesome fellow art thou?


And what a troublesome fellow art thou? I won't be born down by a company of
saucy Valets that are good for nothing but to twirl a whisker, and a shave the
crown of some Sir Nicolas Emptipate his Master, and be kicked thrice a day for a
cast suit, and Bread and Cheese.


Come Landlord, I perceive you are abusive; this is not to be endured, you must
be corrected out of this humour, it will be for your good another day; and now
our Masters backs are turned, we will make bold to give you a taste of our
Parmesau.


And I^le give him one lick for the sake of his Corantoes: Come Sir, since you
'r so good at Corantoes, pray let's see how you can dance a Coranto, come; up
with your news quikcly.


Rogues, you won't murder me, will you?


On the fourteenth instant, at the Port of Hucklebone, was drove in by storm a
Vessel called the Royal Cudgel bound for back, bum, belly, noddle, or any part
of the Kingdom of Coxcomb.


And near the same Port another.


And another laden with Snush, for the cure of the Megrim.


They'll kill their Landlord.


Rogues, Rascals, Thieves, will you murder me?
Why Surgeon, wilt thou stand by and see me
Murdered? I'll lay my death to thee.

Pray Gentlemen --


How now Sirrah? do you prate, shaver of shin-bones, Drawer of Gum-stakes,
Grafter of broken Stilts, Trapanner of cracked Coxcombs, I'll teach you more
manners.


Murder, murder.


See our Lords.


And is it thus? come Theodore, my Sword.


Oh heavens, what is't I hear?


Come Sir, I know they are wronged, by the fond talking world: they are constant,
generous, they are Angels, Angel's, not a pound of flesh about them Sir; and doth
it sting thy soul? crawl, crawl about


Heavens! I fear something is strangely amiss with Theodore.


My Lord, upon my knees --


No more, I'm wronged, abused, by my false friends,
And I will in, and dye in their defence,
Since they have lost their guard of innocence:
If in a cause so bad my blood is spilt,
I have revenge by adding to their guilt*
My noble Lord farewell, a thousand blessings
Crown your sweet youth; and when you see the Prince,
Do me the right to inform him of my story,
And recommend me to his noble thoughts;
Tell him the dying Duke of Curland begs
A place, a Monument in his fair soul;
And so heaven bless you both.

Oh! oh, I faint.

Now Theodore --
Farewell to thee, if I ne'er see thee more,
Here take these Jewels, they are all I have
At present, to reward thy love and faithfulness;
And now dear Theodore, when the day is done;
And with it me, seek out my lifeless carcass
Among the dead, and give it a private Monument:
Let not my Princesses insulting eye,
Find out where injured Curland's ashes lie;
Lest she in scorn should visit him, and there
Profane my Tomb with a dissembled tear.

My Lord, be sure I shall do this and more,
Ten thousand times, if I'm not dead before.

Ha, is he gone? and hath he left me thus?
Ne'er was false Lady so beloved as she,
Nor any so unfortunate as me!
But see he is not gone, there there he stands,
Come here my kindest Lord, and kiss me once,
But once before I die, for I am going
Where poor Paulina 'l trouble you no more.

Oh heavens! her grief mislayes her noble reason, what shall we do

I'll run and kill the Villain.

Alexey see what shadow's that?
Is't not a Coffin? 'tis; come lock me in,
I know not whether I am dead or no,
But if I am not, I would feign be so.

Oh, I shall run my sword into my self.

And I shall break my heart.

Sirs, lead me in.
Well, since you are gone, brave Ladislaus adieu,
I'd not have dealt thus cruelly by you;
But I forgive thee, and when no one's by,
I'll pray for thee, then fetch a groan and dye.

ALl's our own, victory, victory.
Come, for the plunder of the Princess Tent.

But see Prince Radzevile, Commander of the Transilvanian horse; what news from
the dead? did not I see thee fall under thy horse feet?


Come, for the plunder of the Tent, brave Prince.

Move slow Devils.

Never did such a gale of fortune blow, I'll sail in tides of blood up to their
Tents, and take the Duke of Curlands Mistress prisoner, carry her to Moscow,
and keep her captive till Poland ransomes her with Curlands blood; follow brave
men.


Go, 'tis in vain to hinder thee
When honour calls, nor will I stop thee now,
Although he fights, he knows not where, nor how.

Must we not only fight with men, but Devils? Radzevile Commander of the
Transilvanian horse, who fell by my sword, is mounted afresh, hath broke
through all our Troops, and Stands of Pikes, and flies like lightning to the
Princes Tent, and doth greater things, now dead, then living. Pursue the
Warlike Ghost; all, all to the Princes Tent -- But see whole Troops of flame;
(A flame flashes through the Tents) a thousand fiery Spears pierce every way,
and a bright Cloud of fire breaks from the Town; what should it mean?


My Lord, to the Princes Tent, or she is lost.

Teach me my duty you slave;
What means this flame?

It is some valiant stranger, but who I know not, that hath flown about just
like a Fire-ship in Seas of blood to grapple with whole Fleets; and seeing the
enemy flow all in Tides up to the Princes Tent, hath set the Tents and all the
Town on fire; and here with five hundred resolute Cavalry he comes to force his
passage.


Brave men, I'll lead the way to glory; all, all to the Princes Tent.


Come valiant men, let's give them brave diversion,
Lets set their Tents afloat in blood and flames,
And fill the Air with Clouds of humane ashes;
Set all on fire, the Town, the Tents, the Temple;
Spare not the very houses of Religion.

Brave Prince, how generous thy actions are!
Unseen he changes all the Scenes of war,
And with a noble scorn he fights for them
Who both his courage and his love contemn;
These Glories must at last themselves betray,
And through all gloomy Clouds must pierce a way.

Murder, murder, the Princess will be murdered.


Stand by Sharnofsky, I'll defend my self.

Madam, for heavens sake do not deprive me in the last moment of my life, of
that which I have lived and fought for all this while;

For if without defending you I'm slain,
I loose my honour, and I die in vain.

That honour you shall have, but not alone,
Nor rob my courage Sir, to crown your own.

Oh! whether doth she rush? for shame ye cowards set not your swords against a
Ladies breast, your Princess too: she bleeds; you saucy Villains, you've wounded
a Divinity, the Americans would have kneeled and prayed to; ye Powers, what are
ye all asleep above the Clouds? if ye are, lend me your thunder: oh! she's
lost.


You are my prisoner Sir.


You Princess, are mine.


So now shall I have a full draught of revenge.


Now know fond Poles, I have deluded you; I am not Radzevile, but Demetrius, a
Prince of the Imperial house of Muscovy; a mortal, an eternal enemy to you all;
I come to search your General, the Duke of Curland, who like a treacherous
Pole, after I had took him prisoner, showed him kindness, hath stole my
Princess, and I'll enslave his, and the next time I come, enslave you all: And
now stand by me valiant Transilvanians, I'll give you all a hundred crowns a
man.


Oh! the good heavens, he betrays himself.


Ha! what saith Radzevile?


This is distraction.


Must I be carried then a slave to Moscow?


Oh, the Princess! oh, this Russian slave!


He's mad, he raves.


Hold Sir, cleave the Rebels head, slaves.


Heaven! what stupid Lethargy hath seized thee? assist, unbind me, or else
strike me dead, rather then torture me with such a sight.


Hold Rebel, Villain.


My Lords, command all your men, Horse and Foot, to surround the Transilvanian
Troops, and make them fling down their Arms, or dye.


Let all the Cossacques wheel.


Fire, give fire; a hundred of you stay, and guard the prisoners.


Oh! the unruly fire that governs thee, Where will it lead thee?


Now to guard the Prisoners shall be my work:


How am I made the sport and scorn of Fortune, abused by Curland, trampled on
by slaves; and now led bound to follow the Triumphant Chariot of Scarlet
perjury?


My soul is torn with grief and rage.


Come then, I'll ease you both; alas I pity you; but chiefly you, good
Princess: your kind Father I thank him eased me of many a burden some
employment; and I in gratitude will ease your shoulders of such a weighty head
laden with sorrow.


Oh bloody Villain!


Insolent slave; dares such a thing as thee threaten a Princess life?


Barbarous Dog, bring me but to him, I le kick his dirty soul out of his body.


I'll snap thy saucy head from off thy shoulders first. Guards kill the
prisoners, I'll not allow the formality of praying; and he that asks what
Orders I have for it, let them know, I wear my Orders by my side; this is my
Cardinal, Senate, and my King, off with their heads, his crooked Majesty
commands it.


Thou Monster of mankind, hast thou no sense of pity or humanity, nor of thy
own, nor of thy Countries honour, which such a horrid act will render infamous
to all the world? here quench thy barbarous thirst of blood with mine, open all
my veins, take my life, my fortune, honour, all I have, but spare, oh spare the
Daughter of thy King.


No more my Lord, swell not the Villains pride by falling prostrate to it;
Quick Hypolita, give me a Poniard.


Fetch a Wrack, an Engine, I'll torter him to death: But ha! more sport, de'e
come to put affronts upon the Kingdoms.


In the face of the whole Army Sir, I'll cool your fiery insolence.


Yes, murder me you slaves,
I do deserve this punishment, and more,
That my revenge should be so low and poor;
I ought to have set it at no lower rate
Then the whole ruin of your Polish State,
All of you hudled in one common doom,
Curland the Cipher to make up the sum.

Tame the proud Rebel; Guards, off with his head.

Hold, strike who dares, till I give the command!

Come Villains, level me right against the Clouds,
And then give fire, discharge my flaming soul
Against such saucy Destinies as those
As dare thus basely of my life dispose;
Then from the Clouds rebounding I will fall,
And like a clap of thunder tear you all.

Well then Sir, since your spirit is so high,
Your head shall be as lofty by and by,
Yes, you're exalted thoughts shall have their due,
Your head shall stand in both the Armies view.

Guards, are you asleep? cleave all their heads at once.

Strike.

Hold.

Count Lubomirsky, the news?

All's lost; I am in such a confusion I cannot speak, some Devil in humane
shape hath quite turned all the fortune of the day, hath fired the Town, the
Tents, and here he's coming on waves of blood and flame.

Hell take thee for thy news; where is this Devil?

The Gurads retire; stand Villains, or you die.

Stand, cowardly slaves.

Is Fortune penitent? Battista loose me.

I am bound too, Sir.

Are your teeth bound too, Sir?

Ha! is the Scale a turning?
A thousand crowns but for one hand loose.

Deliverance swift like lightning! Heaven, I thank thee.

Stay flying Cowards; disparage not my sword,
Let it be said at least I fought with men.

We are lost.

And must I stand to be a thing of pity,
To receive the charity of this mans sword?

I blush at our own chains, and this mans glory.

Secure the Lords, Madam, the Scene is changed,
You're all at liberty;
And now my next great deed shall be
To set my heart at liberty from thee.

My noble Lord,
Thus through the field with unseen triumphs flies,
As souls make their Entradoes in the skies;
Sure Heaven some mighty glory hath designed,
At last to crown such an Illustrious mind.

What Prodigy's this?

'Tis your Angel, Madam.

A thousand Crowns to know him.

A Warlike Fantome.
By heaven created for this exigence.

His haughty Valour hath affronted me,
I^le out and kill him for his insolence,
And when he's dead, I'll hug him for his bravery.

To arms again; thus doth his active soul
Leap from one danger to another;
Here we destroy, and there we save,
As Vessels tossed from Wave to Wave.

Let's out, and help to reap this glorious Harvest;
But hark, a loud Volley of Martial shouts.

Long live Juliana, our Queen.

Blessed noise; your name is bandied in the Clouds,
There's a victorious Tempest in the Air,
And see a thousand lights approach the Tent.

Oh cursed sight! and cursed noise.

Now Madam, all's our own; your enemies have all flung down their arms, some
come to crave your pardon, others fly in multitudes to the Cardinals Tent; the
Cardinal in transports of rage for his misfortune, confessed his horrid
villainies, and fled: I sent an Officer to conduct him to a private Grotto in a
neighbouring Grove, pretendingly for his security; In the interim the croudes
rifled his Tent, and found the Crown concealed, and here they are coming sailing
along with shouts and acclamations, resolving to repose it on your brow.

The weight's too great for me.

Secure the distracted State.

The people grow impatient.

I'll sacrifice my self t'appease the croudes;
Heavens! never was such a turn of fortune known,
From a Scaffold to a Throne,
In one moment to be seen,
A dying Captive and a Queen.

So now my good Lords you may be all at leisure for holy contemplations:

Guards, see especially
To that malicious Count.

I know your kindness, I need not go to an Astrologer to know my doom: What a
long neck shall I have when my head's set upon a Pole on one of the City Gates.

This is the giddiness of Fortune.

This way the Spirit went, and as it walked I saw a kind of shape resembling
Curland.

My Lord, your fancy in the heat of passion forges a thousand Images.

If 'twas his Ghost, I'll find out his abode; let it be Air, Earth, or Fire.

If it walks any where, 'tis there amongst the Queens triumphant Train

I hear them shout, I'll amongst them.

Hold Sir, pray let them not discover you for fear the Poles revenge the affront
you did their Princess.

Then I'll revenge the affront the Poles did me.

Heavens! what a task have I? It is the same,
To bridle a tempest, or to steer a flame.

Heaven! have mercy! whither dost thou lead me?

I was commanded to conduct you hither;
The Count will come to you here, and bring the news.

He is a worthy friend.

'Tis dark and private,
Here you may lie with safety.

Thus in a moment is my Sun gone down.

My Lord, convey your self away with speed, All's lost; your men are fled, your
Tent is plundered; the Princess Crowned, and all your friends betray you; my
Lord Grand Marshal's ^oming with a Guard from the Queen to secure you.


Then there's no trust in man.

This way Sir; hasten.

Hold Sir, not so fast.

Art thou set here to betray me too?

To guard you Sir.

To guard me as a Victim for Sacrifice; I am at last outwitted in Villainy.


Oh heavens! Sir, you're lost,
The Queen approaches; hark the dreadful shouts,
A thousand streaming lights flow all this way.

And let them come, I have a friend in private will not betray me.


A poisoned Handkerchief I fear.

The little winding-sheet of all my glories;
Ah! had I studied but as much to gain
Heaven, as this world, I had not sweat in vain:
Instead of horrors that pursue me now,
Immortal Crowns had waited for my brow;
But my amazing miseries now are
Beyond the aid of Penitence and Prayer:
To my own Idols I too long did bow,
To put that fawning cheat on heaven now;
For he hath my Religion understood
To be but craft, and my devotion blood.
My heaven was t'ascend the Papal Throne,
Where to save others souls, I've lost my own.
And now, alas! 'twere folly to deny
My self the pleasure to despair and die.
May all great men learn by my wretched Fate,
Never to stake their souls at games of State;
For though a while perhaps they seem to win,
They'll find at last there is no cheat like sin.

He's gone; irrecoverably gone; his great souls fled,
And see a thousand lights usher the Queen;
She comes to see her mighty enemy
Lye a cold Statue prostrate at her feet.

Long live Juliana Queen of Poland.

My Lords, I thank you for all this great honour.

I've stole from Count Alexey and Joanna,
To seek my Lord, and I'm afraid to find him,
Or with my Rival here, or with the dead;
If here I find him, I'm resolved he dyes,
Only to spoil the triumphs of her eyes;
But see, my servants come, I'll get away.

Heavens! where is she wandered; and how came we to lose her?


What dost thou do crowding in here? idle body, come help us to look our
Master.


I look your Master, go hang your self with your Master.


What murmurings that?


See Guards, what means that noise?


No Rascals, I remember your Megrim, your Snush, and your Mustard; I'll make
you pay dear for that Mustard, it shall be costly Mustard.


Oh! is it you Sir?


Guards keep off the Rabble; take that rude fellow, clap him neck and heels.


Begone, quick, quick, and leave the Rogue in the Bilboes.


Oh, good your Honour, I beseech your sweet Honour.


Sirrah, what's your business here?


Nothing an't like your honour, but a couple of idle quarrelsome Rascals that
lie at my house, have lost their Master, and they'd make me look for their
Master; Now if they have lost their Master, I'm not bound to make good their
Master by no Law in Poland; I refer it to your Honour.


Get you about your business Sirrah, and make no references to me.


I thank your Honour, I believe your Honour knows me, don't you remember where
you lay when your Honour kept the fat Lady, the Lady Clumsky? you could make
references to her for all your pride.


B^gone Sirrah.


I thought I should put you in mind of a reference; I've done an't like your
Honour.


Now my Lords, what news of the Cardinal.


Nigh to this part of the field is the Grotto where I commanded him to be
conveyed, and see the Officer I sent to guard him.


My Lord the Cardinal.


Where is he?


Dead.


Dead.


He lies so near, Torches may show him you.


Oh, bominable! killed? and is the Council of Trent, and Pope Paul come to this?
thou must know honest Guard I'm a merry man, and I used to visit this good
man's back Cellar of Rhenish, and then I called it the Council of Trent, and
there was a great Tun, great Grandfather, or Gossip at least to the great Tun
of Heydelburgh, and that I used to call Pope Paul the third, and there did the
Beef-eaters of the Guard and I --


Beef-eaters you Rascal!


Sit in Council about the good of Christendom, till at parting we did our
reverences to Pope Paul, fall down and kiss his great Toe, the Spigot, and let
the heavenly Benediction drop into our mouths.


You'd have my Halbeard drop into your mouths, would you Beef-eater, you saucy
Cur?


A mournful spectacle; how died the Cardinal?


Proudly as he lived; he would not stoop to pray,
Or if he prayed, 'twas so, as he would seem
He expected heaven should first pray to him;
He gave up's glory, but with such a pride,
He scorned to keep it, since he was denied;
And though with death he found some little strife,
Rather then ask, he would resign his life.

What a wicked fellow was this? oh, sye upon him! not say his Prayers when he
died! how doth he ever think to come to good; my Lord, he was as arrant a --


Guard --


I have done, an't like your Honour.


Sirrah, I could find in my heart to Beef-eat you.


I'm sorry for his soul, but heaven's merciful! ah! had this great mans piety
been equal to's wisdom, and his many other Noble Virtue he had been a man too
glorious.


Nay truly, he had as good a Study of Books I'll say for that him, good old
Authors, Sack and Claret, Rhenish and old Hock; come said I to the Library
keeper, tap me St. Gregory, or that good old Father a tilt that looks like St.
George a Horse back; take his Nag by the Spigot, and give our brains a leap,
said I.


Thou hast a mind to be laid by the heels with thy Pope Paul.


I have done honest Guard.


He was too self admiring, and conceited
The Church and we did but his wisdom owe
All honours Rome or Poland could bestow.

He was something self-conceited indeed, that's the truth on it.


He had a soaring spirit.


Reaching wisdom.


Unsatiably ambitious, and inexorable.


He was a notable man.


No more my Lords; what he hath done, he's gone to answer for; then for the
reverence we owe Religion, let him be Interred with decency.


And for the reverence I owe burnt Claret, I'll be at's Funeral.


Now all the Storms are past, the Winds are down,
The Waves transport me gently to a Crown:
Kind heaven smiles, and I am got above
All other Tempests but the World and Love:
And now I'll seek Religions flowery shore,
And be exposed to all these storms no more.
My Lords attend me, and you all shall know
How I'll my person, and the Crown bestow.

Well, I swear this is a delicate woman, I'd give all I'am worth in the world
I were a young Prince for her sake, I'd so jumble her and tumble her, I'd set
her upon her head, and her heels, and kiss this end, and that end, and all in
an honest way too.


These words are of dubious and mysterious sense.


To a Cloister I fear.


My Lords prevail with her,
I can assure you she designs a Cloister.

Let's attend her to the Palace, and then meet in Council.


Well, it's a lovely Creature; I love her so well, I could be contented to be a
little Shock ^or her sake, that I might lye in het lap, lick her lips, and be
stroak't, but hanged it would but puff me up, I should be too proud and
self-conceited: But here's a devilish fall in my wishes, now I think on it,
from a Prince to a Puppy-Dog, but love is humble. Well now, there's a Harvest a
coming, a Coronation; oh, what a crop of Dollars will I reap for my windows,
and Balcony: I'll have a Rix Dollar for every quarry in my window, and a
hundred for my Balcony; that is to say, fifty for my Bell, and fifty for my
Coney.

In all I'll have in currant Polish money,
A hundred Rix Dollars for my Bell-coney.

Heavens! I've lost him, whither is he wandered?
What new Fury hath transported him?
But ha! the glittering of a naked Sword;
A person tall, and of my Princes stature,
Walking about, and hark I hear a voice!

Heavens! I walk about here in the dark,
And hear the labours of departing souls;
A thousand aerie forms fly round about me,
And fan me into cold and dewey sweats:
Oh! if my Lord be dead, would I were with him.

The place is enchanted.

There the dying voice fainted away, by that old wall -- no liar, that was an
echo.


My Prince, some frightful Apparition leads him about.

What art thou that usurp the sacred name of my divinity?
Speak, or I'll turn a Ghost as thin as thee,
And torture thee. --

Hark, the Guards are near, I will avoid them, and go fetch a Torch, and seek
my Lord among the dead, in those pale Groves he is unkindly wandered, t'avoid
his poor Paulina.


Hark, the voice cries Paulina.

Paulina still; what faucy Spirit mocks me with that name? could I but find
thee, I'd tear thy aerial body into Atoms; and I'll have light, or I'll fire
this Grove, I, set thee on a Rack of flame to make thee confess, who, and what
thou art? and a light comes from behind that wall, a youth with a Torch, I'll
run and fetch it.


He's grown distracted, I must speak to him Sir.


And dost appear at last!


'Tis I; Battista Sir.


I know I might have killed thee so; I'm led about with voices, groans,
illusions; fetch me that Torch.


A fair and lovely youth walking among the dead; sure 'tis some Spectre.


Fetch me that Torch!

There she is all alone walking with a Torch.

Where?

Under that Tree.

I see her, let's run, let's run to her?

Hark, a consort of voices.

Let's leave this dismal place? there's a Cabal of melancholy Spirits that
haunt it; see two flying shapes come towards this youth.


I think the dead hold here their Rendesvouze; hark, there are more come from
yonder Grove? I'm tortured, plagued; fetch me the Torch I say?


Now Theodore, press me no more,
I now renounce her, and her Sex for ever.
And now I've steered her safely to a Throne,
I'll leave her in her Ports, and to my own,
From whence the war she hath on me begun,
Shall now on all the world be carried on;
And captive Monarchs shall of her complain,
And curse my injuries and her disdain,
Whilst I shall still by blood and slaughter prove
The scorn and hate I bear to her, and love.

Ho! stand, what are you? Battista, come with a Torch!

Hark, the Perdues call to the Guard; I'll in my Chariot to Town; do you ride
before, Theodore, and get Post-horses ready this night, I'll onward on my way
to Curland.


To Curland! Ye Powers, stand, stand, come with the Torch you slave.


Sir, Sir.

I see a Chariot, Villain stand by or I'll kill thee.

Are you distracted Sir? yonder's your Princess; I've overheard their talk.


Yonder's Curlands Chariot, and the slave holds me.


Ha! I see a Chariot, I'll after it, do you go to your Princess: here, here
Sir.


Hark, I hear a voice.

It is the Guards.

Here Sir, by all that's good, this is your Princess.

After the Chariot then, fly; Sir, a word with you.

The Guards call to us, out with the Torch Alex.

Run, run; murder, murder.
The Torch is put out.

Fly Madam, I'll make good your retreat.

Curse on my folly, I've lost them in the dark.


Ha, lost them and the Chariot both? curse on this rashness; here, here they
flee.


Here, here's a path.


I see the Chariot going straight to Town.


I see the shape flying on the wind before me.


WIth much ado I've overtaken the Chariot, and I'm so out of breath I cannot
speak; ha, stopped her, by that Balcony! this is our Lodging, it is, and see the
persons coming out of the house with a light, where do they go, I'll watch them.


Oh! I am faint with running, and the fright; where's Alexey?


He stayed behind to guard us, but see he hath been here before us.


Oh! Madam, the Duke is newly alighted at the door, and on some news I know not
what it is; He's gone straight to the Palace.


Heavens! what should it be?


They talk the Queen is gone into a Cloister, some say to marry.


Oh! what comes into my head? Joanna slip to my Chamber, and get a Feather and
a better Periwig, and follow the Duke with all the speed you can.


I run, I run.


'Twas here they came; this was the house I'm sure: ho, ho, the house!


Ha! my Landlord, what, am I at home?


You Rogue, you Dog, I'll kill you Sirrah, I^le murder you; would not you tell
me this before.


Murder, murder.


Hold, come along with me quickly, show me all your rooms, here's a Princess
lodges here.


Don't tell me of Princesses? the Rogue hath undone me.


Sirrah, come along, or I'll send your Soul before me.


Sirrah, hold your prating, I've lost more then thee and all thy generation are
worth; I've lost five thousand Crowns, and I'll stop it out of his wages, I'll
not pay one of them a farthing. But what will that do? that's some fifty
Dollars; what's that to five thousand Crowns? undone, undone.


Dog, I'll set fire on's house.


Will you so Sirrah? a brave amends for my loss; but Sirrah, I'll keep you fast
enough for that, go quickly boy, run and fetch a Constable.


A Constable, Rascal.


Murder, murder; ho! there Sirrah, come back again, I shall be killed: you
bloody Rogue, will you murder me?


Good Sir, don't kill my Master.


Hold him whilst I go run and fetch a Constable and secure his Cloakbag, and
then I must to the Palace after this base cheating Duke. I've a pack of brave
Lodgers: here's one young blade, that I'm much mistaken if he or his man be n't
a Whore; and the Duke's run away and paid me no Rent; and this vapouring Jack
would kill me, and then set fire on my house; brave doings, is't not? but I'll
feage you all.


What Duke's that?


The Duke of Curland's an't please you Sir.


Curland, where, where, quickly slave.


I chance it to spy him, and came and told my Master, and for this he would have
killed me.


Where I say, Villain?


Sir, he is just gone to the Palace; a young Gentleman that lodges here brought
a Courtier that told him the Queen was to be married to night, and they are all
run to the Palace together.


I'll make one of the company, his soul shall dance Levoltoes in the Air at
the Queens wedding.


Well, I was a fool he did not let this Gentleman kill my Master, or fire his
house, I would he had, -- teach him to be labour me for my good will.


So, I have overtaken them,

And here's some great mysterious thing in hand,

The Duke hath some design about the Crown.


Knock at the Gate Theodore.


Indeed my Lord, this Courtier is mistaken; all say positively the Queen's
resolved t'resign the Crown, and go into a Cloister, and that she spends this
night among her Priests, and women in devotion to prepare for it; and now all
the Lords of the Council are gone in to dissuade her.


Knock when I bid you.


Come good my Lord, do not expose your self to so much danger; the Gentleman's
misinformed.


Perhaps so Sir, I only told you what my sister, who is a Maid of Honour to the
Queen, told me.


Your Sister!


My Lord, let it be true or false, I am resolved to be concealed no longer:

Thus to the sinful world revenge divine,
Moves gen^ly on with paces slow as mine;
And Heaven stands behind the Clouds awhile,
And let's deluded man himself beguile;
And seems as if his Law he did not own,
But with brave scorn to let the World alone,
Till man grown impudent, begins to play
His Villainies in open Scenes of day;
Then strikes, strikes home, and then his arm doth fall
With such a weight, one blow may serve for all:
Thus my revenge I do a while retain,
That when I strike, I may not strike in vain.
Why dost not knock, Theodore?

I do my Lord, and none will answer within, h^ there, open the Gate!


What would you have there? here can none come in.


Give the fellow forty crowns.


Here are persons of great quality, you shall have forty crowns to open the
Gate.


Bear back there, Guard keep off the crowd.


Oh, pray Mr. Porter.


I dread th'event, I wish I had not done this.


Take notice Sir, if any mischief befalls my Lord, you and your Dukes lives
shall answer for it.


Do you threaten Sir -- Alexey.


I hear the slave, let him have a care I don't cut his throat, and his Masters
the worthy Duke.


I'll after you all to see the meaning of this.


Now I warrant shall I have much ado to get into the Gate after this cheating
Knave the Duke, I must speak them fair; Porter: honest old Crony, friend and
fellow Soldier in the Wars of Bacchus, open the door, my drunken Bulley.


What saucy fellow's that? get you from the Gate, Sirrah, or the Guard shall
lay you by the heels.


Oh, the Rogue, he pretends not to know me, he knows me well enough; why honest
Bulley Cerberus, Corporal-turnkey, Squire of the house, 'Nointer of Page-bums,
Engineer General of double Locks, Spring-locks, Pad-locks, and Mouse-traps,
open the Placket of the house, called the Wicket, and let's in boy. Dost not
remember the Council of Trent, and Pope Paul the third.


Prating Rascal! you 've a mind to be laid by the heels.


Of the cunning Rascal! he thinks I have company with me now, he's as cunning! but
here comes my slaves, what have you set fire on my house yet?


How now, the Gate barred? open the door here.


Nay, if I can't get in, I believe you'll hardly get in, for all your brave
Cloakbag.


Open the door, or I'll set fire on it.


De'e threaten Sirrah! Guard, out quickly, here's a Traitor threatens to fire
the Palace Gate.


Bear back there, let's come out;


Oh, you crowd me.


So, so, you have done finely, we shall have our brains knocked out; come,
come, a spell quickly before they come, I know the Rogues as well as if I were
in the bottom of their bellies; come half a Doller or so --


Open the door fellow, thou shalt have fifty Dollars.


If I do let you in, you ca'nt get into the Presence -- the Guard-rooms are all
crowded; I let in a Gentleman just now, and he stands in the crowed still.


The Rogue begins to be pliable.


Open the door I say, here's thy money.


Bear back there, keep off the crowds.


Now you can bear back with a pox to you, now you hear of money; well, I see
this money will make every thing bear back, and fly open.


Ah Mr. Porter, we will give a Rix-Dollar, betwixt four of us.


A Rope between four of you.


Well Madam, since we must despair t'obtain,
VVe'l cease those prayers, which we thus make in vain;
For to our sorrow we confess it true,
This Kingdom hath not glory 'enough for you.
In those Celestial Crowns you'll only find
Exalted glories equal to your mind:
We only beg you'll help the shrinking Throne,
And save ten thousand souls besides your own:
For, Madam, whatsoever your Priests pretend,
You may by Crowns, to Crowns ascend:
And Cells on Earth, will Cells in heaven find,
Large Crowns for mighty bounties are designed.

And Madam, I but one thing will implore,
That when you address your self to the Sacred Altarr
You'll please to recollect upon what score,
You at those Altars have stood once before.
When Vows with Vows, Altars with Altars jars,
It seems to breed in heaven a civil war;
It is not for the Duke I intercede,
I now in the behalf of Honour plead:
Though to the sacred Church I freely bow,
No doubt they can absolve you from your Vow;
Yet with the reverence to their power is due,
Methinks I would have Honour do it too:
In other worlds Devotion may have bliss,
I'm sure 'tis Honour that must save in this;
And generous Honour passes doom on none,
Till first their crimes are clearer than the Sun.

My Lords, on either side I've heard your pleas,
And very much resent your kindnesses:
But now my souls employed on things above,
Concerns of Empire, and much more of love.
As for the Duke I cannot censured be,
I quit not him, but he renounces me;
Nor for the Throne, I found it in distress,
And mildly leave it in the calms of peace:
And now eternally I bid adieu
To Love, and Empire, to the Duke and you:
And here my Lords, I do your Crown restore,
And now retreat to what I was before.

Great Victory; you Saints above make room,
A mighty Spirit doth in triumph come.

Hold Madam, e're you fall so great a weight,
And break in pieces our disjointed State;
Rather then we will rush again once more
In the wild Chaos we were in before;
'Tis voted by us all, that you alone
Shall fix some person in our shaking Throne.
We swear Allegiance to whomsoe're you choose,
Yea, and the death of him that shall refuse:
'Tis all our votes.

All, all.

The trust is high, and great, and needs many solemn thoughts, and you must
give me some time to pause.


Madam, the better to compose your mind,
And fortify your soul in these last conflicts
With earthly glory; please to rest a while,
We will use the devout Ars of holy Church.

How nobly heaven doth receive
what 're a pious mind
Is in Devotion pleased to give,
as if he Crowns resigned;
The sacred Vaults with joy resound.
The Altars all with Roses Crowned,
And the poor Saint in triumph brought
To offer up one holy thought.
And if to that such honour's due,
What glorie's wait, (great Queen) for you*
Chorus. And if to, c.
If heaven thinks an humble bow
to him devoutly meant,
Then we whole Hecatombes bestow
in one devout intent;
When Queens lay youth and glory by,
To seek out Crowns of chastity:
Some brighter Stars must sure compound,
The Wreath wherewith her head is Crowned:
For more then common Honour's due
To Royal Saints, Great Queen, like you:
Chorus. For more, c,
Then blessed be all my storms of love,
(though they discourteous were)
That on our peaceful shore hath drove
a Saint, so Great, so Fair:
Now let the Boy with all his train
of griefs, go weeping back again;
Whilst you set Sail before the wind,
And leave this floating world behind.
Till spooning gently on, and fair,
You turn an Angel unaware.
Chorus. Till spooning, c.

Now that your royal soul is flown ^oft
Upon the wings of Divine Harmony;
We will keep it there by holy representation,
First of the vanishing glories of the world,
Its splendid entrances, its shady Exits.

Saw you those Royal Shadows pass the round
With all the charms of Power and beauty Crowned:
Would not the glory which they did display,
Make the world think none are so blessed as they?
Alas, had they but looked on either side,
They might have seen what would have damp't their pride:
Two pining Spirits that wer'e once as fair,
Showing with sighs where they must all repair:
Such are the unseen shadows that attend
All earthly glory, and in those they end.
Now the next thing that we shall represent,
Is chaste Devotion, recluse Piety,
It's humble entrances, its glorious Exits.

Saw you those Virgins pass in holy state?
Observe how Angels on their Triumphs wait:
Their Souls are as their Beauties fair and bright;
Their thoughts are as their garments pure and white:
Their dreams are Visions, and their breath is Prayer;
They are fasted into Spirits thin as Air;
Nor can you them from holy Angels know,
Since these are Nuns above, and they below.
And now you in a solemn dance shall see,
How all these move to Divine Harmony;
Confusedly mixed each in their several States,
Walking around the changes of their Fates;
The world is a great dance in which we find
The good and bad have various turns assigned;
But when the have ended the great Masquerade,
One goes to glory, to'ther to a Shade.

What tumults that?

My Lords, here is a person of unknown quality desires admission; by's habit we
conjecture 'tis the same that fought to day in the head of all our Troops, and
saved the Count and Princess in the field.


He's highly welcome; let him have admission.

It seems the Bridal Masque is done.

So, I have crowded in among the rest,
To see the event of this mysterious business.

I have considerd on it, my Lord Sharnofsky, heaven and your own merits design
you for the Crown.


Ye Powers!

What Tragedies will here be straight?

She's false indeed.

Great Madam.

Kneel, and receive the Crown.


Then now I see, I have not been deceived,
Sharnofsky, as thy glory, so thy fate,
Is very near, and thus successful villainy;
Heaven let's it to the top of glory come,
Then (draws) thus strikes it dead with unexpected doom.
Sharnofsky draw, there's one obstruction more lies in your way to all your
glories; the Duke of Curlands Sword.


The Duke of Curland!


Ye Powers! the Dukel I faint Hypolita, Emilia hold me?


Help the Princess.

The Duke of Curlands Sword; and can that Sword
Be set against my breast? for what is this?

That shall afford us talk in the other world.

I fall.

Hold Villains! 'tis the Duke your General; what cursed Devil poisoned the
Dukes soul with jealousy of his brave friend?


What fatal work is here?

Oh heavens! Joanna, what have we done?

What should this Tragical confusion mean?

What Vision have I seen? where am I?
Am I awake? or is't a Martial dream?
See, the Count bleeding? who hath done this deed?

And dost thou then lament him to my face?
Oh thou Apostate shame of Royal blood;
Is this thy gratitude for all the Martyrdoms
I've suffered for thy love? 'Tis I have done it and done it
To revenge my injured love. -- And I but just should be,
Now I have punished him, to punish thee;
But that, alas, 'twould be so poor a deed,
My very Sword would scorn to make thee bleed;
And if my passion should the thing request,
'Twould turn in rage against his Masters breast.
No, I shall leave thee to a higher doom,
And now go wait thy lover to his Tomb.

Ha! doth he go? and leave me thus in scorn,


Madam, he breathes, and whil^st there's life, there's hope, Guards stop the
Duke.


She'll kill the Duke; but I'll not long survive him.

Curland, thou die; but first thou must explain
The Mysteries of this thy proud disdain;
Say then, what Fury did thee hither send,
To wound my honour, and destroy thy friend;
For none in Poland hath this treason wrought,
Nor dare they wound my honour with a thought,

None dare, 'twere Sacrilege to make it bleed,
None but your valiant self dare do the deed;
And you are grown to that insulting height;
You scorn the modest whispers of the night:
Trumpets must speak, and Banners must display,
And to your Lovers arms you fight your way.

This is distraction.

His Russian bondage hath mislaid his reason.

He's mad.
I once to punish him had an intent,
And now I pity him; and those thoughts repent:
And yet it may be those distractions are
Only the effect of pride, and wild despair:
The sinner finds he's damned, and prays in vain,
And now by blasphemy would case his pain.

Yes, as a man damned by a false Religion,
When he finds all his piety in vain,
Doth curse his gods, and wish he had lived profane;
So all my merits lost, I now repent,
That I have been so fondly innocent,
That I in Muscovy so vain should prove,
In seeking Crowns and Armies for thy love;
And cruelly my heart refused to give,
To one who wanted it, that she might live.

What then it seems thy killing eyes have there
Done many murders too, as well as here;
And what If I thy triumphs should disgrace,
And in a grave should hide thy conquering face,
Where Ladies hearts it might no more surprise,
Nor women be in danger of thine eyes?
Sharnofsky's blood forbids to let thee live:
Yes, Curland thou shalt dye, it shall be seen
In this one glorious act, I am a Queen;
And let thy Sovereign title plead thy cause,
Let Poland talk of privilege, or Laws,
In this great doom I uncontrolled will be,
And trample on the State, their Laws, and thee:
And let the glory of thy Fate contain,
And sum up all the glory of my reign.
Guards, kill the Duke; hold, but kill him so,
That he may live within an hour or two:
Methinks I now a little weakness find,
And my heart tells me, I would seign be kind:
Fool that I am; I weeping melt away
Even all the Crowns, and Triumphs of the day:
The Conqueror doth quit the field and fly,
Whilst the proud captive stands insulting by;
That ever I should play so weak a part,
To be entic't thus to refign my heart?
A heart, designed for things so far above
The petty troubles and concerns of love:
Yet now led captive, can so prostrate be,
To worship him, who ought to worship me:
But for these follies I'll my self dethrone,
Forgive his sins, but will chastise my own:
Lead to the Chapel; I'll to night --

Hold Madam, your soul's disordered, it must be calmed with penitence and
prayer, before you can be fit.


I cannot help it, I am but woman.

Ha! and have I wronged her?
What cursed charm hath lead me in this maze?
Surely I have been abused, young Duke of Novogrod,
Have you not told me lies? I fear you have,
And done it to revenge your friend the Prince.

Hark, he calls my Princess Duke of Novogrod.

Discover to him --

Madam, undisguize; and let the Duke affront you if he dares.

Yes Sir, I've led you in this maze of jealousy;
And done it to revenge my injured honour.

A woman!

A woman!

Yes, and a Princess Madam,
Great as your self by birth, greater in misfortunes;
The daughter of the mighty Czar of Muscovy,
Become a wandering Pilgrim, hidden lies
In the poor Hermitage of this disguise;
By Curlands treachery, now brought so low,
I even am ashamed my self to know.

Now I perceive the Mystery.

The Princess Paulina.

And dare thou mention then Paulina's name,
And proudly stand without remorse or shame?
Because in war thou hast a captive been,
Wilt thou in spite, thy victories begin
On Virtue, on Religion, Love, and me,
And hate my name, because I pitied thee?
When all the world forsook thee, I alone
Bestowed thy life, and made thy chains my own,
Yea more, so fondly I betrayed my flame,
At thy petition, I thy wife became.
When Crowns lay at my feet, I married thee,
Who had no Armies, Crowns, nor liberty;
Yet promised one, but meant in that above,
A Crown of Martyrdom, for injured love.
Yet after all, (perfidious man;) to fly
And leave me in thy Chains condemned to die?
And when I found thee, basely to disclaim
Thou had relation to Paulina's name?
Know Duke, I do abhor thee, and to day,
This Hand, this Steel, had ta^ne thy life away,
But that some power did the blow withstand,
And when I proffered, did withhold my hand;
But my revenge now alters its design,
The death it aimed at thee, now shall be mine,
Not that I dye, because I grieve to part,
But thus to punish my rebellious heart.

Oh, she hath hurt her self; Oh, Madam; Madam:

What means this cruelty? oh, let me die:

I now perceive the maze in which they wander;
Oh, I have been too slow in my discovery.

And have I wept and bled for this?

What cursed Fantome did abuse my shape?
As ever, heaven, thou'st regard to truth
Or innocence* now by thy thunder show
If it was I, that wronged this Lady so.

Oh horrid, horrid!

Oh immortal Powers! and can you suffer this?

Prodigy!

Oh! Madam, rule your haughty passions,
There is a Ring of Angels made about you,
To see how you'll come off in this great combat.

And let them make a Ring -- they to themselves
The pleasure of revenge would not deny,
Were they but flesh and blood as well as I.

I must reveal in time, before more mischief ensues. --
Royal Madam --

Ha? what art thou?

I'm one, whom if you please
Can in one word rectify all mistakes.
'Tis a deceitful marriage then breeds this
Confusion; the Princess was not married
To the Duke, but to my Prince Demetrius,
He who to day was (Madam!) in your Tent
Condemned to die --

My innocence is cleared by Miracle.

Is Prince Demetrius here? and did he abuse me so?

Madam, he ventured on so grand an enterprise,
Partly to allay the torment of his love,
And partly for revenge upon your Father,
Who having promised you, as a reward to him,
For taking the Duke prisoner, slighted his Royal word,
Upon the news of the King of Polands death,
And proffers you to the Duke, with a great army,
Only in hopes to make you Queen of Poland;
The Duke indeed did nobly slight the proffers.

So Count Sharnofsky said.
What have I done to wound that gallant man?

My fiery Prince resenting the affront,
As proudly as the Emperor did his,
'Twixt rage and love, did by a wile entice you
Unto the Castle where the Duke was prisoner,
Pretending danger; penitence and love,
And (if you if you remember) married you in the dark,
Because he would not trust (as he pretended)
The Priest himself with such a dangerous secret.

Amazement!

And e're you could discover the mistake,
You fled away in a fright, and ere you went,
Bribed the Cipier for the Dukes liberty;
Then he in innocence forsaking you,
And you as innocent in pursuing him,
Occasioned this unhappiness.

Heavens, 'twas this the Cardinal took advanage on to breed all this disorder.


Now all's come to light.

How have I been abused? unhappy I, born to misfortunes.

See, my Prince is here!

I think my Landlord, the Prince perhaps was the other strange lodged in the
same house: petty humour of fortune!


Come honest Cardinal Bembo, dost thou not remember
I made thee a Cardinal at the Council of Trent,
Hast thou forgot Pope Paul's great Toe, boy?

Slave, shall I stay here all night?

Well what would you see? all's done.

Nay, I told you Id'e get you in, if any body could; the Rogues all know me as
well as a beggar knows his Clap-dish.


Curland, have I found thee? 'tis not thy friends,
Nor the Queens Guards that shall protect thee.

Hold Sir, all's well.

Not till Curland or I fall.

Why, what a mad fellow's this? draw in the presence; why Sirrrah, do you know
where you are, you malapert lad you? I shall be hanged for bringing in a
quarrelsome Jackanapes, if I had known, I would have kept him at home, I warrant
him.


O! hold, and turn your eyes on that sad object that there lies weeping,
bleeding for your crimes.


My Princess, I'm in a trance; oh bloody Vision! what cursed hand hath done
this wretched deed?


'Tis you have done it, oh Demetrius,
How have you injured me? what horrid dangers
And miseries have you exposed me to?

This young man hath been in a scuffle, I see.

I'd lost my life under my Fathers anger,
Had it not been for this good Count Alexey,
Who had the charge of me, and helped me away;
And now in passion I have chased the Duke,
Thinking him guilty of forsaking me
His lawful Wife, and made him kill his friend,
Injure his Princess; and had fallen himself
By my revenge, this Steel had pierced his breast;
But heaven to whom his innocence was known,
Thus made me turn the blow against my own.

What's the meaning of all this blind story?

And have I injured thus the Duke, and you?
What miseries, what torments are my due?
First by some slave, or Villain, let me dye,
And when I'm dead, then stab my memory.
By my own hand, or yours, to dye, would be
A death too brave for such a Fiend as me:
And when I'm buried, to my Grave repair,
And throw in scorn my ashes in the air:
But lest you prove unjust, and pardon all
My horrid crimes, thus at your feet I fall.

What art mad? wilt thou kill thy self, sweetheart? bless me, he makes my heart
ache; take the sword from him, fie upon it, who lets such young fools have swords,
that don't know how to use them?


Hold Prince Demetrius! live, your wife Paulina doth beg it of you.


Your wife Paulina; what, I warrant this young man is that young mans wife; why
sure my house was enchanted to day, lodged Princes, and Dukes, like Mummers and
Masqueraders; and Women and Wenches in men's clothes, and Cloakbags, and
scufflings, and they kill one another* and they are alive again, and this, and
that, and I know not what; here's work indeed.


And can you pardon me my kindest Princess?

Yes, my dear Demetrius, I have charity enough to pardon you, and virtue enough
to love you.


Blessed minute; I shall dye with happiness.

And I with joy.

Now generous Ladislaus, can you forgive me?

My Princely friend.

I, -- hug, -- but you're but a couple of Knaves both on yo^

Great Madam, may not we embrace, as well as our ^

Yes Madam, and perhaps with an affection as generous as theirs


Celestial sight!


The Charm that raised this 'o tempest confusion
Is now undone, the horrid Spectre's vanished;
All ends in friendship, let it end in glory;
Love now is Crowned, let honour be so too;
Let's place the Crown upon the head of him
Who in a thousand fields hath purchased it.

With all my heart truly, though I must tell you, you're none of th'honestest to
run away and pay me no rent.


Great Duke, it is decreed you are our King,
And you our Queen.

Long live Ladislaus King of Poland, and Duke of Curland.


Long live Juliana Queen of Poland, and Duchess of Curland.


My Lords, we thank you all for this great honour, And shall endeavour still to
make this Crown Rather the Kingdoms glory than our own.


Your humble servant; no body questions it; well now an't please your Majesty
--


Go, I forgive thee.


Forgive me; thank you heartily: I come to dun him for money, and he cries he
forgives me; right Courtier I'faith; but if you forgive me, I won't forgive
you: in the first place, for cheating me of five thousand Crowns, but that I'll
take no notice of (aside Why Sir, for my Rent, and several other courtesies, as
procuring, conniving, angling for Trouts; no courtesy in this age; come, come
Sir, a feeling, a feeling, and I'll take no notice, otherwise my tongue doth
naturally hang so loose, -- but nothing is better for it than a little Aurum
Potabile.


This fellow is strangely impertinent.


Besides, do I deserve nothing for my honesty for concealing you? I knew you
well enough.


I doubt Landlord, if you had, my head had not stuck fast upon my shoulders.


It may be Sir, if I had been put to a great straight indeed, I might have
borrowed a little money upon your Nose, or so --


Rid me Theodore of this fellow, and give him a hundred Dollars.


Thank your Mijesty.


Sir, the Grand Marshal and the other Lords desire to have admission to your
Majesty to implore your Grace and pardon. to the King.


Bring them in.


Heaven Crown your Majesty with a long and happy Reign.


Oh my good Lords; what have you changed your tunes?

But you poor men sung but the Card'nals Notes:
My Lord, forgive'um. Thou malicious Count
That would have murdered me in my Tent to day
And mixed my blood with my great Fathers ashes,
Know slave, some of my Guards should strike thee dead,
But that thy very baseness saves thy head.
Who merits my revenge and hate, must prove
As brave and great, as he who gains my love.
I pardon thee, retire out of my sight --
And now go home, repent thy crimes and see
If heaven will be generous like me.

My Lords, you have your pardons; your Lives and Fortunes we shall not touch,
your Offices and Governments we must bestow on men of better maxims: Count
Colimsky, the Baton of Grand Marshal we confer on you: Their Governments and
Palatinates we shall consider of.


I'll beg a command of the King for you, good Count Alexey.


No Madam, I'll serve none but your Highness; let me but live in your favour,
'tis all the glory I am ambitious of.


Now will I go home and hang one half of my Slaves, starve the other; kick my
wife out outdoors, be drunk nine and fifty hours together, breed a mutiny at
home, and a Rebellion in the Kingdom; and at last loose my head for my pains,
and there's an end of good Count Cass^nofsky.


Now let us all go visit my brave friend.


Great Sir, I now came from him, his wound is searched, and is found not so
dangerous as first was feared; at his return to sense, he seemed amazed, as
having lost all memory, how he came wounded so, nor was he concerned, but only
enquired about the Queens health.


Brave friend!


The Count was ever generous.


Lights for the King and Queen.


Thus do our Fortunes lead us blindly on,
And to be happy we are first undone;
And thus the mighty storms have all combined,
To cast thee on the shore which I designed.
And now I'm blessed with happiness above,
My own ambition with a Crown and Love.

NOw Gentlemen, a word.

How now, you Lout,
What are you speaking?

Now you have put me out,
I know not what it was.

Oh, I can tell!
The Epilogue; yet it becomes you well,
You Gentlemen! and why I pray to them,
What do the Ladies merit no esteem?
Good Sirs! I know not whether 'tis your due,
But Poets still direct themselves to you:
Don't the Foppes know in this and every age,
'Tis beauty rules the World, much more the Stage.
When you have done your best, the Seribling Clowns
Lye at the mercy of the Ladies frowns:
And not a Critic of you all but knows,
No reparties are half so sharp as those.

Why prithee, 'twas the women wits I meant,
'Tis not the men I'm sure that pay my Rent;
For they are grown so Hect'ring now adays
They kick my Customers, and damn their Plays,
That I am ruined by your Critic Blades;
What dee think I keep Fiddlers, Men, and Maids
For nothing? and besides that dreadful charge,
I'm building a new house that's brave and large;
If you're so curious as you've been before,
I must even lay the Key under the Door.

Prithee have done?

No Sir, I've more to say
Then if the Liquor I ha br^ach't to day
B^ good, commend it, but if it be dull,
I'faith even da^m, and ramm your belly full.

Away rude Fool! fair English Diet then,
Senate of Ladies, lower House of Men,
I bumbly pray decree before you go
If Marriage like mine be right or no,
At least resolve in pity of my pain,
To sit to morrow on the same again.


