WHat are the Charms, by which these happy Isles
Hence gained Heaven's brightest and eternal smiles?
What Nation upon Earth besides our own,
But by a loss like ours had been undone?
Ten Ages scarce such Royal worths display
As England lost, and found in one strange Day.
One hour in sorrow and confusion hurled,
And yet the next the envy of the World.
Nay we are blessed, in spite of us 'tis known,
Heavens choice for Us was better than our own.
To stop the blessings that oreflow this day,
What heaps of Rogues we pild up in the way?
We chose fit tools against all good to strive,
The sawciest, lewdest, Protestants alive.
They would have formed a blessed Church indeed,
Upon a Turn-coate Doctor's lying Creed.
To know if e're he took Degree is hard,
'Tis thought he'll have one in the Palace Yard,
Plot swallowers sure will Drink no more stuff down,
From that foul Pitcher when his Ears are gone.
Let us rely on Conscience, not on Cheats,
On Heavens wisdom, not on Jugglers feats.
How greatly Heaven has our great loss supplied?
'Tis no small Virtue heales a Wound so wide.
Nay in so little time to rear our Head,
To our own wonder, and our Neighbours dread.
They see that Valour Crowned with regal Power,
They oft have seen what Laurels Crowned before.
Verse is too narrow for so Great a Name,
Far sounding Seas hourly repeat His Fame.
Our Neighbours vanquished Fleets oft wafted over,
His Name to theirs and many a trembling Shore;
And we may go by His great Conduct led
As far in Fame as our Forefathers did.
At home he milder ways to Glory chose,
God like, by Patience he subdued his Foes;
Now they and their designs are Ruined all,
Beneath their fallen, accursed, Excluding Wall.
These are not all the blessings of this Isle,
Heaven on our Nation in a Queen does smile.
Whose Vertue's Grace by Beauty shine so bright,
All the Fair Sex to Virtue She'll invite;
And all the Clouds turn to a glorious Day,
By that Illustrious paire's united ray,
Who both Reform and Grace Us by their sway.

MY Dear --


My Dear, how is it with thee? What amendment in thy Brothers humour, and thy
condition?


None.


Oh! thou break my heart, for I love him extremely, and am, I think, as well
beloved by him; but whilst he has this Disease upon him so mortal to Liberty,
dare venture on him no more, than if he had the Plague, or any other Distemper
dangerous to Life. For what is life without Liberty? To be his Wife is worse
than to be a Ghost, for that walks and enjoys a little chat sometimes, but I
must be laid by a Conjurer called a Husband for my whole life, I would not be a
Queen on the terms; no nor on any terms, because a Queen is confined to
Forms, so fond am I of Liberty; but next to that I love your Brother; I would
give all the World to cure him, is there no way?


None that I know off.


Must we then be for ever unhappy, I in the loss of him, and you in Eternal
Slavery?


I might have Liberty, but on such terms --


What Terms?


Marriage with such a Coxcomb, you know him -- Sir Courtly Nice.


A tempting Man, he has a vast estate.


But encumbered.


With what?


A Fop, 'tis mortgaged to a thousand expensive Follies, if it were not, I would
not drink water for the sake of a fine Bowl chained to the Well. The Youth I
love has a fair and free Estate.


Mr. Farewell is it not?


The same.


Ay, but he's forbidden Fruit.


I know it to my sorrow.


What's the reason?


History must tell you. There has been a pique between our Families since the
Conquest; none were thought truly of our Blood, that had not that Scurvy in it;
because mine began to sweeten, my Father almost suspected my Legitimacy; and
left me no Fortune but on condition I retained the Ancient mark of our House.


There arises then your Brothers great Authority. He has the disposal of your
Fortune, by consequence of your Person; Fortune is all Men seek now. They are
so cowed from Marriage, they will go Volunteers into a Battle but must be pressed
to marriage; and 'tis the Shilling does it.


Too true, But I believe Mr. Farewell of a more generous temper, he addresses
still.


It may be he does not know how it is with you, you have the Fame of Ten
thousand pound.


And the Money too, if I marry with my Brothers consent, not else.


That's hard, but Mr. Farewell has enough for you both.


Ay, if he will venture on me; yet if he will I know not how to come at him, I
am so watched, not only at home but abroad. I never stir out but as they say
the Devil does, with Chains and Torments. She that is my Hell at home, is so
abroad.


A new Woman.


No, an old Woman, or rather an old Devil; nay worse than an old Devil, an old
Maid.


Oh! there's no Fiend so envious.


Right, she will no more let young People sin, that the Devil will let 'em be
saved, out of envy to their happiness.


Who is she?


One of my own Blood, an Aunt.


I know her, she of thy blood? she has not had a drop of it, these Twenty
Years; the Devil of envy sucked it all out, and left verjuice in the room.


True, this Aunt hangs on me like a daily Ague; but I had rather endure her,
then be cured by such a nonsensical Charm as Sr. Courtly is. And nothing else
can be applied to me; for to assist my governing Aunt, there is a whole Army of
Spies in the House; and over them two Spies General: And there my Brother
thinks he shows a Master-piece of Policy.


Why? what are they?


Two, that will agree in nothing but one another confusion. The one is a poor
Kinsman of ours, so fierce an Enemy to Fanatics, that he could eat no other
meat; and he need no other Fire than himself to roast 'em, for he's always in a
flame when he comes near 'em, his Name is Hot-head.


And I warrant thee the other is a Fanatic.


Oh! a most Zealous Scrupulous one; with a conscience swaddled so hard in its
Infancy by strict Education, and now Thump'd and Cudgeled so sore with daily
Sermons and Lectures, that the weak rickety thing can endure nothing.


Certainly these two, must make you sport.


Oh! their faces, Dresses, Names are jests. The Fanatick's Name's Testimony.

Where is my Lord? Where's my Lord?


Oh! I hear my Choleric Cousin Hot-head.


Where's my Lord? Where's my Lord, I say?


What would you do with my Lord?


Call him to an account if he were not my Cousin, cut his pate, it may be
Cudgel him. Heaven be thanked to Cudgel a Lord is no Scandalum Magnatum.


What's the reason of all this anger?


He affront's me, he invites me to live in his house, and then keeps a Fanatic
to make a jest of me. He knows I sweat when I see one.


May be he has occasion for one.


What occasion? He is not in a Plot, is he? Fanatics are good for nothing else
that I know of.


Why not? Toads are good for something.


Ay, when they are hanged and dried, so is no Fanatic. He is such a cankered
Rogue, he does mischief when he's hanged; let him spread Ink upon Paper and it
raises blisters. -- But here the Rogue is.

[Sirrah! Sirrah, What's your business in this House, Sirrah?


What Authority have you to examine me, Friend?


Friend, you Dog! call me. Friend, I'll knock you down Sirrah.


Poor Soul -- poor Soul --


You are an Impudent Rascal to call me poor Soul -- Sirrah, I have a Loyalty
and a good Conscience, and that's a better Estate, than any of your Party have;
and if you live in the House with me, I'll settle it on you with a Pox to you.


Yes, Mr. Hot-head I know you well enough, I know you would hang us all if you
could.


I need not Sirrah, for Heaven be praised now you begin to hang your selves; I
knew when Tyburn was bestowed upon the Priests and Jesuits, the Fanatics and
Re-publicans would not long be without it, for they are very fond of all Church
Lands, come, Sirrah, if you live here, I'll make you turn over a new leaf, I'll
make you go to Church, Sirrah.


That's more than you do your self Mr. Hot-head, you go not often to Church.


What then? I'm for the Church, Sirrah. But you are against the Church, and
against the Ministers, Sirrah.


I cannot be Edified by 'em, they are formal, weak, ignorant, poor Souls --
Lord help 'em -- poor Souls.


Ignorant? you're an impudent Rascal to call Men of their Learning Ignorant;
there's not one in a hundred of 'em, but has taken all his Degrees at Oxford,
and is a Doctor, you Sot you.


What signifies Oxford? can't we be saved unless we go to Oxford?


Oxford don't lye out of the road to Heaven; you Ass.


Pray what do they learn at Oxford? only to study Heathens; they'll talk of
Aristotle in the public, they may be ashamed to name Aristotle among civil
People.


Oh! you Sot.


Our Ministers are powerful Men. Oh! Forsooth I wish


This Rogue is talking Bawdy.


They would show you the great -- great sinfulness of sin, that sin is one of
the sinfullest things in the whole World.


You senseless Rascal, what should be sinful but sin? what should be foolish
but a Fool?


Are not these a ridiculous Couple?


Come this is very provoking, and very Profane; I shall have a sad time on it
in this wicked Family.


Wicked! Sirrah: What wickedness do you see in this Family?


Ay, Mr. Testimony, now we are all concerned, what Vices do you find among us?


Suppose I see not many Vices, morality is not the thing; the Heathens had
morality, and forsooth would you have your Coachman or your Footman to be no
better Men than Seneca?


A Coachman a better Man then Seneca?


I would have him be a better Coachman than I believe Seneca was.


Ay, and a better Christian too, or woe be to him. But truly I see great
wantonness even in your self forsooth, -- the very Cook debauches you. --


How? call the Cook! -- Cook! -- Cook! --


The Cook debauch me, Sirrah?


I mean by pampring you, Morning, Noon, and Night with one wanton kickshaw or
another. --


You Coxcomb.


Sot.


Rascal, I thought the Cook had lain with my Cousin -- Sirrah, you deserve to
have your bones broke. Well Sirrah, since you find my Lords. Table is too
Iusty, I'll have it guelded; I'll make you keep Lens, and fast Wednesdays and
Fridays.


I will not, I abhor it, 'tis Popery.


Then you shall fast Tuesdays and Thursdays.


And then the Family will slander me, and say I do it out of contradiction, --
I will not do it, I do not love to grieve the weak.


To grieve the strong thou mean, thy own strong stomach.


You are offensive.


I will be more. I will watch you Sirrah, and know why my Lord feeds such
Rascals.


I tarry not for his feeding, the Family is a sad Family, and I tarry out of
pure Bowels.


Out of empty Bowels, which you have a mind to fill, and it may be you may fill
other empty bellies, I mean among the Wenches, some of you Godly Rogues play
such tricks some times. I'll watch you Sirrah.


And I'll watch you, my Spirit rises at this Man exceedingly.


These are a pleasant Couple.


Is not my Brother politic? These are to see no Provisions for wantonness be
conveyed to me from abroad, and be sure they will not agree to deceive him.
And that I may have none at home, My Brother will not venture a handsome
Servant in the house; he swears he will not be Brother in Law to ever a Butler
or Footman in England; and he has culled for his Family, the most choice pieces
of deformity he could find in the Nation. I believe they are now altogether in
the Pantry, and my Aunt among 'em distributing their Breakfasts -- the Monsters
will be worth seeing -- open the Door. --


How now? Who opened the Door without my leave? Niece, this is one of your
Girlish tricks, will you always be a Child? Will you never learn staidness and
gravity, notwithstanding the perpetual Counsel you have from me, the perpetual
displeasure I show at all sort of youthful Follies; do not you know how I hate
impertinent Youth?


Or any sort of youth to my knowledge.


Do not I always tell you how sine a thing it is to be Grave; that Youth with
Gravity is very passable, and almost esteemed equal with years? Very wise
Persons will not be ashamed to match with Grave Youth; daily experience shows
it, and will you never leave? Fie -- fie -- fie -- I would not for the World
any Wise Sober Person of Quality that has an Inclination for you, should have
seen this rudeness in you, to Expose your Aunt in this manner, in her undress;
it might have created in him an aversion for you.


An aversion to me, to see your ill dress?


Madam, I hope you'll pardon the liberty I take in your presence.


Oh! good Madam. --


Oh! Madam -- pardon me -- I know I commit a Solecism in good Manners, -- but
you are a Lady that has a great deal of goodness, and a great deal of worth. --



Oh! sweet Madam! --


Oh! Madam! our Family has found it -- you are pleased to Honour us with your
Friendship. We may venture to expose our Frailties before you, Madam, you'll be
so good to pardon -- Madam --


Oh! Madam! --


Well really Madam -- I wonder where my Niece learns her wantonness, we are the
most reserved Family in the World. There were Fourteen Sisters of us, and not
one of us married. --


I'st possible?


To your great grief --


We were all so reserved. Oh! Madam! no Man durst presume to think of us; -- I
never had three love Letters sent to me in my whole life.


Oh! strange!


Oh! we were very reserved. Well Madam I am very much out of Countenance to
appear thus before you.


Oh! Madam, every thing becomes you Madam.


Oh! you are very obliging Madam. -- Do you hear Niece -- learn of this Lady?


To flatter you. --


Madam I am extreme unfortunate, the affairs of the Family call me away from
your sweet Conversation.


the misfortune is mine, Madam.


Oh! sweet Madam your most humble Servant.


Your humbler Servant dear Madam. Ha! ha! ha! what


All the house is of a piece.


Nay if thou learn'st lewdness at home, thou hast a great Genius to it.


Well, what do you think of my condition?


I like it.


Like it?


Ay, for I perceive your Brother has put the whole force of his Wit into this
Form of Government; now if we can baffle it, he will find it is a dream fit for
nothing but Utopia; and never torment himself and his Friends with it any more,
then he'll be a faultless Creature, and all of us happy in our Loves, Here he
comes.

Your Servant good my Lord.


Your most humble Servant Madam.


My Lord, why do you call him Lord? he's a Doctor and curing me of the
Palpitation of the heart, Falling-sickness, Convulsions in the Eyes, and other
such Distempers.


A Doctor? a Quack by his false Medecines; shortly we shall see him mount the
Stage, or stand at the Old -- Exchange and cry a Cure for your Horns, a Cure
for your Horns.


I'm glad to see you so pleasant Madam.


How can I otherwise choose my Lord, and see your Family and Government?


Faith, Madam he that will have a Garden must enclose it, and cover tender
Plants: This is a very blasting age to Virtue, 'twill not thrive without a
covering.


Ay, but my Lord, you force your ground too much, what Horns would not grow in
your Soil? When would not your Forehead sprout? Were I your Wife and thus
kept, I should spread like a Vine, and all the Walls in England would not hold
me.


I'm not of that opinion, Madam.


Why should you think better of me than your Sister?


I judge very well of her, but must speak freely I think few Women may be
trusted in this life, this World is, and ever was a great brothel; where? or
with whom may a Woman be trusted? with ancient Ladies; they are the chief
Beauty Merchants, vendors of fine Love.


Ladies of that Profession.


Oh! the most excellent, and most in Employ. Peddling Women cry Scotch Cloth of
a groat a yard, stuff only fit for Footmen. But would you have fine Beauty,
Choice of Beauty, and with ease Security and Decency, go to your Lady
Merchants; in Common houses the work is managed as slovenly as Religion in
Conventicles, enough to put one out of conceit with it; but in Brothels of
Quality, Iniquity is carried on with that venerable order would entice any one
to Devotion.


Fie! fie!


And with that security. A Man may there enjoy a Lady whilst her Husband holds
her Cards.


And shall the Lady of the house know of these things?


And manage 'em too; break the Lady to the Lovers hands; that's the advantage
of Quality, if a young Lady has not a natural amble, a poor Bawd cannot have
access to teach her.


What can a Lady of Quality propound by such doings?


Oh! many things. As Presents; and Pleasures. She has her house full of good
Company, her Ears full of wanton Stories; her Eye full of tempting Sights, and
now and then her Lips get a close kiss. Oh! Madam! do you think it does not
warm an Elderly Lady's blood, to have a brisk young Spark always by her side?
he is her Liquour of life, and though she never gets a full draught, a taste
cheers her heart.


Who are these Ladies? where do they live?


Oh! you'd feign be acquainted with 'em? no such matter; and yet I'll tell you
where they live.


Where?


Almost every where; where there is an Amorous Aunt, or over-indulgent Mother.


Mothers? will Mothers corrupt their Daughters?


Ay, or if they wont Daughters will corrupt their Mothers. Things are so
inverted, that Ladies who were honest all their Youth to be like their Mothers,
turn lewd in their old Age to be like their Daughters. There never was such an
open and general War made on Virtue; young ones of Thirteen will pickeere at
it, and by that time they are twenty, they are risen to be Strumpets General,
and march in public with their Baggage, with Miss, and Mass, and Nurse and
Maid, and a whole train of Reformade sinners, expecting the next Cully that
falls.


You talk of paltry husses.


Very good Gentlewomen.


Gentlewomen of those employments.


Ay, purchase 'em. I have known a fair young Lady give all her Fortune to
attend a Man of Quality in his Bed-Chamber; be his chief Gentlewoman.


Suppose so, what's all this to me? If they be bad must I be so?


Truly Sister, a rambling Woman let her be never so good a manager, will be apt
to bring her Virtue as a Traveller does his Money, from a Broad peace to a
brass Farthing: But say she does not, is reputation nothing? and let me tell
you, Reputation will hang loose upon a galloping Lady; you may as well go among
high Winds and not be ruffled, as among Men and not have your good Name blown
over your Ears.


Those Winds blow where they list. A Woman is not secue rat home from Censure.


But you must allow a Jewel is not so safe in a Crowed as when locked up.


Locked up? do you think to lock me up?


I think to secure thee, my dear Sister.

Women like Cheney should be kept with care,
One flaw debase's her to common ^are.

IS Mr. Farewell coming?


Yes Madam, he's just at the Door.


That's well, if this brisk young Fellow, has but Love enough to undertake this
work, and Wit enough to go through with it, we shall all be happy.


Where's your Lady? Madam, your most humble Servant.


Your Servant Mr. Farewell; you are a happy Man, young, rich, and in the Ladies
Favours.


I'm glad to hear that, Madam; who are these Ladies Madam,? a day, and hour of
Youth and good Fortune is precious; and Ladies like Birds must be aimed at
whilst they hop about us, miss that opportunity you may loose 'em for ever.
Therefore the Ladies, good Madam, quick, quick, for if you defer but half an
hour, they'll be in love with some body else.


No Mr. Farewell, there is one Lady more Constant, you'll own it when I name her;
my Lord Belguard's delicate young Sister. What say you to her?


I adore her.


And dare you attempt her?


Dare I?


Ay, for do not you know you are the only Man forbidden her.


Do I know of what Race I am, Madam? Never was such a pack of Fops as my Lord
Belguard's Ancestors and mine. They loved wrangling more than we do intriguing;
kept Lawyers instead of Wenches, and begot upon their bodies, a thousand
illegitimate Law Suits, the Terms they observed as duly as the River does t^e
Tides, and Land was carried too and frow, as mud is in the Thames. Nor were
their quarrels so bitter about Land, as place; so big were their great hearts,
they could not come into one Room together, for fear of loosing place. My Lord
Belguard's Father to end the difference, most piously endeavours to be a better
Man than any of his Ancestors. That is to say a Lord.


And then the strife ended?


Was more inflamed. For my Lord was more insolent, as having Authority under
the Broad Seal to be proud, by Consequence my Father more enraged; and both the
old Gentlemen contended who should have the greatest Estate in malice, and
attained to be very considerable, and when they dyed, endeavoured to settle it
all upon us. But truly the young Lady and I most prodigally consumed all our
Portions at one look, and agreed to cut of the wicked Entail.


You did well, but how will you accomplish your desires? her Brother has such
guards upon her.


Oh! 'tis Decreed! nor shall thy Fate oh! Brother! resist my Vow, though Guards
were set on Guards, till their confounded Coxcombs reached the Skies, I'd over
'em all --


You are in a Rapture.


Ten thousand when ever I think of her.


But how will you do this?


I have leagued with a Witch; at least a young Fellow that has more tricks than
a Witch; he was a poor Scholar at Oxford, but expelled for studying the Black
Arts.


For Conjuring?


Yes, Madam, not only any Mans Pigs or Poultry, but Wife or Daughter into his
Chamber. Nothing could escape him, and he escaped every thing. The Proctors
watched more diligently for him, then a Benefice, and could never catch him.
The Grave Doctors abhorred him worse than a Haeresie, and studied more to keep
him out of their Families, but he confuted their Skill, and they could no more
light upon him than on a jest.


I long to see him.


I ordered him to come hither to me.


Here's one Mr. Crack enquires for you, Sir.


That's he -- bring him in --


Crack your Servant.


Your Servant Sir, your humble Servant, Madam.


Your Servant Sir, I am told you have been an Oxford Scholar.


A Scholar Madam? a Schollers Egg -- emptied by old suck. Eggs, of all that
Nature gave me, and crumbled full of Essences, Hypostases, and other stuff of
their baking.


Why did not you apply your self to Divinity?


Leave Wenches for Pigs, Madam; 'tis true I may Wench then too, but it must be
with Fear and Reverence, I hate that.


Why would not you be a Physician?


A Gold-finder Madam? look into Jakes for bits of money? I had a Spirit above
it. I had an ambition to be of some honourable profession; such as People of
Quality undertake. As for instance, Pimping. A Pimp is as much above a Doctor,
as a Cook is above a Scullion; when a Pimp has fouled a Dish, a Doctor scours
it.


This is an arch Blade.


Oh! you are pleased to say so, Madam; 'tis more your goodness than my desert.


Well Mr. Crack, you know what you have undertaken.


I'll do it -- The Lady's yours. -- Give me some Money.


There, there. --


Gold! thou Son of the Sun, and Brother of the Stars, Nutmeg of comfort, and
Rose of delight, as my Friend the King of Persia call's himself, -- what can
thou not do great Prince, if I be thy chief Minister? --


This is a notable Fellow, -- our next Plot must be to secure your Rival Sr.
Courtly Nice.


Hang him, he secure's himself by his Foppery's, she despises him.


Not many Lady's do so.


Oh! no, Madam, he's the General Guitarre of the Town, inlay'd with every thing
Women fancy; Gaytry, Gallantry, Delicacy, Nicety, Courtesy.


And pray, put in Gold too.


True Madam, Oh! the Ladies love to have him in their Chambers. and play
themselves a sleep with him.


Well, I have provided one shall thrumble on him.


Who's that?


Surely.


Oh! Fire and Water are not so contrary, Sr. Courtly is so civil a Creature,
and so respectful to every thing belongs to a Gentleman, he stand's bare to his
own Perewig. Surly uncovers to nothing but his own Nightcap, nor to that if he
be drunk, for he sleeps in his Hat. Sr. Courtly is so gentle a Creature, he
writes a challenge in the stile of a Billet-doux. Surely talks to his Mistress,
as he would to a Hector that wins his Money. Sr. Courtly is so pleased with his
own Person, his daily contemplation, nay his Salvation is a Lookinglass, for
there he finds Eternal happiness. Surley's Heaven at least, his Priest is his
Claret Glass; for to that he confesses all his Sins, and from it receives
Absolution and Comfort. But his damnation is a Looking glass, for there he
finds an Eternal fire in his Nose. In short if you would make a Posset for the
Devil, mingle these two, for there never was so sweet a thing as Sr. Courtley,
so sower as Surely. But how will you get 'em together? for nothing has power
over Surely, but Claret and the Devil.


Yes I have. Heaven is pleased to think the Devil himself has not mischief
enough to plague that ill-natur'd Rogue, and joins me in Commission with him to
torment him with Love; he loves me. --


Love? can he love?


So much, he neglects his Claret for me; and comes hither hourly to perform his
Devotions to me, but in such a slovenly manner; 'tis such a Non-Conformist to
all decent Ceremonies.


Where's your Mistress?


I hear him, we will have sport with him. He abhors his Love worse than Murder or
Treason, for those are mischiefs to others, but Love he accounts High-Treason
against his own damnable Person; and he's more ashamed of it, than he would be
of a Beasts Tail if it grew out of him. Therefore I'll conceal, and do you
charge him with it, you shall hear how he'll renounce it, then will I appear
like Conscience to a sick debauch, and you shall see what an aukard Penitent
I'll make him.


Honest Surly, how dost do?


Prithee look in my Water.


In thy Water?


Ay, for I don't love to answer impertinent questions,


Is it impertinent to enquire after the health of a Friend?


A Friend? thy talk is more boyish than thy Face. Dost thou think there are
such Friends? thou believe there are Mair-maids and Centaurs I warrant; for
such Friends. Monsters that grow to some other Beasts, and are the least part
of themselves?


Why? hast thou no concern for any Beasts but thy self?


Yes Bird, for many things for my own sake; for Witty Men whilst they drink
with me, handsome Whores whilst they lye with me, Dogs, Horses or Cattle
whilst they belong to me; after that, I care not if the Wits behanged, the
Whores be poxed, and all the Cattle bewitched.


A very generous temper.


'Tis a wise and honest temper. The pretended good nature is ill nature; it
makes a Man an Ass to others he bears their Burden, a Rogue to himself, he
cheats himself of his quiet and Fortune. I am so very honest to my self, if the
whole World were hanged it should not rob me of a Minutes ease, I thank Heaven
for it.


Was ever such a Barbarian?


Thou 'rt an Ass; which is the Barbarian, he that eats Man, or the Man that's
eaten? The Rogue that grieves away my Flesh eats me, and is a Barbarian; so is
he that with vexation gnawes himself; I am no such Cannibal.


Hast thou no compassion?


I know not what it is.


Suppose you see a Man of Quality in misery.


Let him be in misery and be damned.


Are you not concerned for his Quality?


The less for that, because if he fancies the whimsy he has it to please him.


To trouble him.


Then to comfort him I'll tell him he's the Son of a Whore, and his Grandfather
rose by Pimping.


Suppose you saw a Man of parts unfortunate?


Let his parts look after him.


They'll afflict him.


Then to quiet him I'll tell him he's an Ass.


Have you no charity? do you never give any thing to the Poor?


As much as any Man.


What's that?


Nothing.


Does no Man give any thing?


Not to the Poor; they give it to themselves; some Fools have Diseases in their
Natures, they never see any one in pain, but they feel half on it, and so they
give money to ease themselves.


Have you no love for any thing?


I have Appetite.


Have you no love for Women?


I have Lust.


No Love?


That's the same thing, the word Love is a Fig-Leaf to cover the naked sense, a
fashion brought up by Eve, the Mother of Jilts, she Cuckolded her Husband with
the Serpent then pretendedto modesty and fell a making Plackets presently. And
her Daughters take up the Trade, you may import what Lewdness you will into
their Common-wealth, if you will wash it over with some fine Nmae. You may
proclaim at Mercat-cross, how great an Adorer you are of such a Woman's Charms?
how much you desire to be admitted into her Service; that is, how lusty a
Centaur you are, that the Horse in you is much the major part, and she shall
receive all this without a blush, whilst the Beast trots to her under the Name
of a Lover; when if she had any Wit she'd know, a Lover is a more impudent Name
than Whoremaster; for a Whoremaster throws all his Bombes at a whole City, your
Lover wastes all his upon a single House. That when a Woman desires a Lover, she
desires to have the whole Brute to her self.


Ha! ha! ha!


What do you laugh at Sir?


Only that your Mistress has heard your learned Discourses Sir. Pray appear
Madam, and own you have lost your Wager, is he a Lover or no?


Here's a young Treacherous Rogue.


Yes -- a Brutal one -- are these your Sentiments of Love Sir? was it this you
meant when you talked of Love? when we grow Lovers do we degenerate into
Brutes? I thought there was a generous Passion, of which a Beast could have no
more sense, than he has of Music or Poetry. And to such Love you pretended
Sir.


I'll whedle her,


You are charming in your expressions.


Mr. Surly, Madam, is a mistical peace, to be understood like a Prophecy, where
Rams and He-Goats stand for Kings and Princes. Mr. Surly's, rank expressions
must signify Virtue and Honour.


No, no, they signify his own filthy meaning; and the truth is, love has no
other sense, in this corrupt Age. Now if a Woman by blushes or otherwise,
confesses she thinks a Man, a fine Gentleman, he to requite her sends her
presently a Libel called a Billet-doux, where he in fine words tells her to her
Face, he thinks her a Wench, and invites her to lye with him. This ruins all
Conversation, Men are always driving their brutal appetites to the Plays, the
Court, to Church, like Drovers their Beasts to every Market; and there's no
conversing with 'em, unless you'll take their Cattle of their hands.


Madam, I love your in your own fashion, admire you, adore you, and the Devil
and all, what would you have? -- Now will this simple Jade believe me?


He calls you simple Jade, Madam, and say's you'll believe him.


You Malapert Boy, why do you meddle in my business?


'Tis my business, she's my Friend, and I wont see her abused.


A Friend to the Woman loves your Enemy, Tom-Fool?


No, she hates him, and has quarrelled with him, and I would have had you step
into his room.


Oh! ho!


Now who's the Tom-Fool?


I am, look you Madam, that Rogue despayr made me talk like an Ass, and I am
sorry for it.


I know you are Sir, I know your base desire is for your punishment; confined
to my Eyes, and I'll use you as you deserve.


Come, Madam, let me interpose; though you will not receive Mr. Surly as a half
Horse, you may as a whole Ass, a Drudge, you know you have business most
agreeable to his ill Nature, pray employ him.


Well; I'll make trial of him, you pretend you love me Generously.


Yes, and Damnably.


Know then my Lord Belguard, is (as I have of late perceived) sunk with the
rest of the Age, into base opinions of Love and Women, that I am angry I ever
had a good thought of him.


Good.


Look upon his address to me, as an affront, and will revenge it.


Better and better.


And you shall do it.


Best of all.


Do not you know Sir Courtly Nice?


That you should join knowledge with such a Fop? 'tis a question to be put to a
Boy? I may know Philosophy, but to ask a Man if he knows a Horn-Book? for such
a thing is this Fop; gilded on the out side, on the inside, the Criss Cross
row, and always hanging at the Girdle of a Girl.


You have described him right. This rop has my Lord Belguard entie'd to accept
his Sister with no Fortune, but her Birth and Beauty. Now if you'll break the
Match, you'll be to me the most annable Creature in the World.


Or the most damnable, if you Jilt me.


In earnest of a farther favour here's my hand.


There's the Devil in it. Tis transforming my shape, I am growing a Woman's Ass,
I feel the Ears prick out of my skin already; and I must hoof it away with her
load of Folly upon my back. Well I am thy Ass at present, but if thou Jilts me,
I will be thy Devil.


'Tis the fittest Office for thee; thou art so like one already, you may pass
for Twins. Now Mr. Farewell let's go in and Laugh.


He shall not speak with her, I don't approve of it.


You approve Sirrah? what have you to do?


I have Authority.


You Authority?


Yes, from my Lord.


You had it then out of his Kitchen, Sirrah; the Beef of the Nation breeds all
the Maggots in the Peoples heads. I am sometimes tempted to throw down their
Porridge-pots, and spill the Divine Right of Presbitery. In short my Lord is a
man of honour, and you have belied him, Sirrah.


It is well known I make a Conscience.


Ay, you Rogues making of Consciences is a great trade among your Party, and
you deserve to loose your Ears for it.


I mean I keep a Conscience.


You've reason Sirrah, it keeps you; but that an honest Lord should give money
for a Rogues false Conscience. -- Oones! --


Well but don't swear.


Sirrah, who swears?


Dee hear? -- don't swear I say.


Oones! Sirrah, don't preach to me.


Don't swear then.


Sirrah, if you preach to me, I'll cut your Pate.


Had I a Sword 'twere more than you could do.


How now Sirrah?


Nay but don't throttle me, don't Godfrey me.


What's the noise? what's the rudeness, Cousin Hot-head? you a Gentleman, and
make a Bear-Garden of a Persons of Honours house?


Better make a Bear-garden of it than a Conventicle; here's a Fanatic Rogue
ordained ruling elder of the Family by my Lord, as the Rogue says, so he
undertakes to govern and Preach.


And you undertake to Govern and correct? Cousin no body Governs here but I; if
he had committed faults, you should have brought him before me.


Oh! you'd have him entered in your Office?


What do you mean? obscenely? you are confident You are the first Gentleman
that offered to say a wanton thing to me.


To your great sorrow.


What's the quarrel here?


There's a Taylor would fain speak with you.


All this noise to introduce a Taylor?


He can't get through this Fellows narrow Conscience, yet there is room for a
whole Common-wealth.


Call in the Taylor; there must no Clothes be made without my orders, that I
may see 'em modest.


A Taylor? I ordered no Taylor.


How now, Sir? what are you?


A Taylor, Madam.


Who sent you? I know you not.


Your own Taylor, Mr. Stitch, Madam.


How chance he came not himself?


He's sick, Madam.


And can you work well, for we are very hard to please? There's scarce a Taylor
in Town can make me endure to see my self.


The fault lies in -- Fifty -- Fifty --.


Indeed Madam, I must needs say my Country men are not the best Taylors in the
World. This is a fine Nation, and all spoiled by the Taylors. Heaven makes the
Women Angels, and Taylors make 'em Hedg-hogs; 'tis a sad sight to see 'em, now
I'll make an Angel of a crooked Pin.


Ay, where did you learn your Skill?


In France, Madam.


In France? then Friend I believe you are a Papist.


Sirrah, I believe you are a Presbyterian.


Friend, if you be a Papist I'll have you before a Justice.


Sirrah, if you be a Presbyterian, I'll kick you down Stairs.


What are you Friend?


Ay, what are you Sirrah?


What am I? why, I'm a Taylor, I think the Men are mad.


Intolerable; Mr. Testimony pray leave us, and Cousin Hot-head, I shall desire
the same of you, unless you'll behave your self like a Gentleman.


I will behave my self like a Gentleman, for I'll know of my Lord when he comes
home, if he has given this Rogue Authority over me; if he has I'll demand
Satisfaction of him; if he be innocent woe be to your prickears, Sirrah.


I fear you not.


Mr. Testimony, I once more desire you'll give us liberty.


Yes, Forsooth, I dare trust the young Gentlewoman with you, Forsooth -- you
are a grave -- Gentlewoman and in years -- Forsooth. --


In years, rude Clown. --


And truly she's a very pretty sweet Woman, and deserves to have great care
taken of her.


Well Sir, we will excuse the care at this time. --


Pretty Woman. --


Pray leave us --.


Sweet Woman -- I profess she's strangely alluring, I had best retire least I
fall into frailty, and be discovered.


Now, Madam, before I take measure of you, I'll show you some Patterns -- please
you to look upon some Madam, you have judgment --.


Let me see.


To you, Madam, I would recommend this peace.


Mr. Farewel's Picture? oh! I Sirrah! now I guess thee -- my Dear -- Dear --


Have a care of your Aunt Madam. -- I have a Letter too. --


Give it me -- quick -- quick --


These are pretty Silks.


The best in France, Mdaam.

Where's my Sister?


My Brother? I hope he does not know thee.


No, if he does I'm a dead Man.


Hast thou no disguise for fear he should?


Only this great pair of Spectacles.


What Fellow's this?


A Taylor.


Not your Taylor?


No, he's sick and sent this Fellow in his Room.


How comes such a young Fellow to wear Spectacles?


Young my Lord? I'm above Five and Fifty.


Thou bear thy age well.


Ay, every where but in my Eyes I thank Heaven.


This Fellow may be a Bawd for ought I know, I'll watch him.


Well, Madam, I perceive your Ladyship likes the Pattern I showed you first.


I have seen the whole piece.


And your Ladyship likes it?


Oh! very well.


I'll assure you, Madam, you'll like it mightily when 'tis upon you, and you
have a sweet body to work for. I do not doubt, Madam, but to get a great deal
of credit and a great deal of Custom by you, among the Ladies, as soon as ever
they see my work.


Well let's see your work, and I'll say something.


That you shall and speedily, Madam, I'll bring you home as sweet a peace of
Work, as ever you had in your Life. You'll look upon the Pattern I showed you
last?


Yes.


That's for the inside; do you like much Bombast, Madam?


No --.


Well, Madam -- I have taken a Surveigh of your fine Body -- now you shall be
pleased according to your own hearts desire -- your Servant Madam --.


Well Sister -- prepare to receive a Visit from Sr. Courtly Nice, this
Afternoon.


Oh! dear! then I must dress. He's a great Critic.


She designs him for her self, would she could get him.


Sr. Courtly and I have agreed; pray give him your promise.


So soon? 'twill be fulsome, he's abstemious.


Therefore take him whilst he has an edge.


You use to despise Fools, how chance you marry amongst 'em?


Because none but Fools will marry. Wits are but few and commonly poor; Fools
are numerous and rich. Fortune is as fond of those bits of Men, as Bigots are
of Relics; wraps 'em in Silver.


Better they were buried. A Fool in a Coach is like a Knave in a Pillory, the
Object of public derision.


Oh! there are few to deride 'em, many to admire 'em, so many, I have oft
admired how one Apple,

Should such Diseases in old Adam breed.
That from his Loins not Men, but Wroms proceed.

Oh! the News! the News! art thou an Angel or a Devil? bring thou Joys or
Torments?


Joys! joys! joys!


Angel! Angel! Angel!


In the first place I delivered your Picture.


Rare.


And she kissed it.


kissed it?


Sweetly, wantonly, lasciviously. She set me so on fire, I kissed all the
Wenches as I came along, and made their moist lips fiz again.


Oh! Rogue! Rogue! delicious Rogue.


Then I delivered the Letter, and before her Brothers face.


Before his face? ha! ha! ha!


Prepare this Night to be the happiest of Mortals. Give me some more Money.


Money? I'll sell my Land rather than thou shalt want. That one Inheritance will
purchase me two, one in Love, and another in laughing at this politic Brother.


No, no, Inheritances as for laughing, I believe you will have an Anuity for
life; but for Love you'll only have a lease for three or four Years.


Pleasant Rogue! here's Money.


So, so, I wish you joy I wish you joy.


See Surly going to my Rival; my affair thrives admirably.


Is Nice within?


Nice Sir?


Ay, Nice Sir; is not your Masters name Nice.


'Tis Sir Courtly Nice.


Well Sir, if I have a mind to clip half his Name, 'tis not Treason, is it
Sirrah?


I believe not Sir.


Then get you in, and tell your Master I'd speak with him


What sort of domineering Man is this?


Very fine! extremely fine. Gentlemen and Ladies, will you do me the favour to
walk in, and accept of a small Collation? I am in some hast to dress upon an
extraordinary occasion. You'll Pardon me? -- your very humble Servant --.


Very fine.


You Sot, 'twas very barbarous.


Your honour said 'twas very fine.


You Clown, don't you know what belongs to a Gentleman? Complaisance is the
very thing of a Gentleman, The thing that shew's a Gentleman. Wherever I go,
all the World cries that's a Gentleman, my life on it a Gentleman; and when
you've said a Gentleman, you have said all.


Is there nothing else Sr. belongs to a Gentleman?


Yes, Bon mine, fine Hands, a Mouth well furnished --


With fine Language --.


Fine Teeth you sot; fine Language belongs to Pedants and poor Fellows that
live by their Wits. Men of Quality are above Wit. 'Tis true for our diversion
sometimes we write, but we ne'er regard Wit. I write but I never writ any Wit.


How then Sir?


I write like a Gentleman, soft and easy.


Does your Honour write any Plays?


No, that's Mechanic, I bestow some Garniture on Plays, as a Song or a
Prologue.


Then your Honour is only a Haberdasher of small Wares?


A Haberdasher, you saucy Rascal?


Here's one Mr. Surly to visit your Honour.


Surly, what the Devil brings him hither?


He has been walking about the Rooms this quarter of an hour, and would not let
me bring him in, till he had fouled 'em all with his dirty Shoes.


A Nauseous, Beastly, Sloven, Clown, Fool, Sot.


Surly your most humble Servant. (Sir Co. Bows to receive him.


What, are you unbu -- buckling my Shoe?


Dear Mr. Surly -- he stinks horribly -- piquee, and I'm amazed to see you at
my levee.


I begin to think, thou art a good honest Fellow, and have a mind we should no
longer be two lo -- lo -- Loggerheads, but one.


Dear Sir, you are always so divertising; Well Sir, shall I beg a favour of
you?


What's that?


Leave to dress before you, Sir. I am to meet some fine Women to day, one
presently.


Prithee dress, and be damned -- shall we di -- dine together?


Yes Sir, I suppose, and Sup too --.


That's kind, well when?


About Five of clock Sir.


Where?


In the Kings Box, Sir.


Must you and I, dine in the Kings Box?


Oh! dearest! I beg your Pardon Ten thousand times, I thought you asked me
where I should meet the Lady.


Pox of the Lady; I ask where we shall Dine?


Really Sir I don't know, I can't put my head into one of your beastly eating
houses, nor swallow the filthy meat you eat there, if you'd give me One hundred
pound.


Filthy Meat? Sir I eat as good Meat as you do.


Oh! dear Mr. Surly, no doubt the meat in its own nature may be very innocent;
but when once it has committed familiarity with the beastly Fists of Cooks and
Butchers, 'tis to me an unpardonable Sinner. My Butcher cuts up all his Meat
with a Fork.


Does he cut up an Ox with a Fork?


Ay, and he cuts up an Ox as neatly as a Lady does a Partridge.


Well, then I'll accept of thy Dinner.


Dear Sir, your most humble Servant; pox on him


No Sir, your Butler has forgot your Salt.


Left my Salt? careless Rascal. Let him take Horse immediately.


Sir he's rid post for it.


Rid post for Salt? whether?


To my Country house.


How far's that off?


But a little way, not above Forty miles.


Send Forty miles out of London for Salt? Is there not Salt enough in London
for you?


Ay, stuff pawm'd by Butlers and Waiters, they take up the Wenches coats, then
handle the Salt.


Here's a Rogue --


Oh! dear Mr. Surly, if you name Wine, you make me throw up my Soul. I have
abhorred Wine ever since I was in France, and saw what barbarous Education they
give that generous Creature. Duce take me, Sir, if the Clowns don't press all
the Grapes with their filthy naked Feet. Oh! beastly nasty Dogs! no wonder we
are poisoned with their Wine.


Prithee what of that? the Wine purges before it comes over.


Oh! Lord Mr. Surly what a Phrase is there? you'll Pardon my Freedom, Sir? --


Most civil Coxcomb


I have several drinks of my own composing at your Service, as Mead, Cider,
Ale. --


Ale? there's Sauce for a Woodcock. Come let's taste a Bottle.


Fetch a Bottle; This Fellow will Poison me --.


Well I come to request a favour of thee.


Your most humble Servant Sir, how de'e' like this Cravat?


What's that to my business? I come to make a request to thee.


'Tis well tied too, with a great deal o'humour.


A Pox on thee, mind me.


Your most humble Servant Sir.


I am going to make Love.


Before you drink Sir?


Before I drink Sir --.


Well Sir, since you'll have it so, I'll wait on you down stairs.


Is the Devil in the Fellow? I tell thee I'm going to make love.


Oh! Lord Sir, I beg your pardon a thousand times.


And I come to beg thy assistance.


Oh! dear Sir.


For thou hast a knack on it. Thou art the only Court Card Women love to play
with; the very Pam at Lantereloo, the Knave that picks up all.


Oh! Sir, you are so obliging; -- and stinking -- Pox take him. --


And 'tis a very pretty Woman I'm in love with; my Lord Belguard's Sister
Leonora; thou know her.


The Rogue's my Rival, he was born for my confusion


Prithee speak for me.


Oh! dear Sir, you have a great Talent of your own:


But thine's a better. One thing I am sure thou may do, there's an
abominable Fop makes Love to her, and I am told is to marry her; prithee tell
him he's a Son of a Whore.


Really Sir I'm unfortunate; I have no manner of Genius to that sort of
Conversation.


Say my words. Tell him if he proceeds, I'll not only Libel him, but tweag him
by the Nose, Kick him, Cudgel him, and run him through the Guts. Prithee tell
him this.


Oh! pray Sir give me Air.


Prithee do.


Sir I am ready to --


And thou wilt tell the Puppy this?


I will upon my Soul.


Then thou art an honest Fellow -- so, is the drink come? fill a Glass, why two
Glasses? do you think I cannot drink after your Master?


Pox of your Compliment --.


Here Nice, my Mistresses health.


What misery is this Beast imposing on me? he coughs in the Glass too --


Pox on it, a whole gulp went the wrong way, come off with it 'Tis my Mistresses
health.


This Fellows the Devil --


Off with it, Man.


I never was so embarrassed since I was born. --


Oones! off with it.


I must take the beastly portion down, but I shall be most horrible sick after
it. --


So, now thou art an honest Fellow, now I'll kiss thee.


The Devil thou wilt? more miseries? Surly.


I swear I will.


Nay but you'll disorder me.


I swear I will.


But Sir I'm going upon your occasions to your Mistress.


Nay then I'll give thee two kisses, one for thy self and another for her.


Oh! Hell. Surly.


I swear I will.

This Bottle Beer is damned windy -- well honest Nice farewell to thee.


Who's there? I'm sick to death, -- to death! -- lead me in -- get my bed ready
-- and a Bath -- and some Perfumes -- I'm sick to death, -- I'm dead.


Thou horrid Vision! would I had met with the worst Fiend in Hell, rather than
thee; in thee there is a Legion exciting me to Blood -- blood -- Who's there?


My Lord --


My Coach -- to blood -- blood --


To Blood? what means my Brother?


Be gone:


To whom do you speak?


Bless us; Nephew what ails you?


Alas my Lord, I fear you are a going to quarrel.


Yes, I'm going to punish one who Violates my Fathers, my Will and calls my
Mother Whore.


What execrable Wretch is that?


Thy self.


Me?


Yes, what dost thou else but proclaim our Mother false, when she conceived a
thing so opposite to all our Fathers race as thou art?


In what?


In Infamy; when was there a spot in our name, till Heaven for our sins sent
thee among us? and I am going to destroy thee in thy lewd undoer


I know of no reproach in our Family but your madness, destroy that. What are
your Spies and Coxcombs, but so many Capital Letters, wherein you write over
your Door, My Sister is a wanton Woman.


'Tis truth, you are not only a wanton, but a wicked Woman; not only Intrigue,
but with the Enemy of our Family, Farewell.


How?


I am betrayed --


Do you blush?


At your Folly.


Dare you deny it?


Who dare accuse me?


This Picture, which I found in your Chamber.


Horrid Creature! -- I shall swoon away.


How shall I bring off this


Do you laugh at your shame?


She shall have no cause.


Do, kill me, before you know whether he's guilty or no.


I'll know it from himself. If he denys it, it will be some revenge to make him
stab his Soul with Lies. He shall swear not only that he never did, but never
will send so much as an Imagination to you.


Do, if you would force him hither, what charm to a Man of spirit, like daring?


She speaks sense in that.


If you would be fighting, fight your own jealousy, which abuses you worse
than Mr. Farewell can do, my Honour protects you from him; but neither Wit or
Honour, can guard you from the rude insolence of your jealousy, which is now
sending you of an Errant, a Footman of Spirit would scorn, to proclaim the
dishonour of your own Sister. Fie! Fie!


And so I must sit down tamely with this abuse?


You are not abused, the Picture was found at Church.


At Church? do you intrigue at Church?


They do nothing else, the Church is almost as bad as the Porch.


Nay there's shameful doings, that's the truth on it, it provokes my Flesh to
see how the young Men fling their Eyes about.


And not upon her. --


But 'tis no marvel; when Women will encourage 'em. No Fellows dare gape upon
me, because I never encourage Fellows.


A Face of Fifty is small encouragement.


Nay no wonder the Devils cause thrives, he has a numerous Clergy, Heaven has
but one Minister in the Church, and whilst he is Preaching Divinity, the Devil
has a thousand of both Sexes, by all the Oratory of looks and dresses,
preaching Fornication and Adultery.


Too true, well she's certainly undone. I dare not examine her Breasts, if
there should be any thing in 'em, I should dye.


In my breasts?


Ay, Gentlewoman, do you think I regard your Flim flam story of the Church?


'Tis not my story, my Woman found it in Westminster Abbey, at Prayers, and I
knowing what work would be made with it, commanded her to burn it, and she has
dared to dissobey me.


Indeed, Madam, I thought to have presented it to a Friend of mine; and laying
it out of my hand unfortunately in your Honours Chamber, my Lord found it.


Oh! how nimbly she takes the lye at the first rebound?


Out upon you; I'm extreme sick -- lead me in -- not you -- you are not fit to
touch a Woman of my Virtue. These things have strange impression upon me. --


That you don't share in 'em --


Pray, Sister, go out of my sight, you are an horror to me.


Your own Dreams are. You're as mad as a Prophet, you have always before your
Eyes a Vision of Horns and Whores.


All this goes upon the score of Farewel's heart blood if he be guilty, I'll
make enquiry presently, and search at what gap this Treachery entered.


Oh! unfortunate negligence!


Who's there, Cousin Hot head, Testimony?


Oh! are you here?


Ay, to your sorrow, if you have played me false.


You have served me finely.


Do you first complain?


Coupled me with a Dog?


But you have Coupled my Sister Sir.


With a Fanatic Rogue.


No -- with a finer Gentleman. Who brought this Picture?


The common Fire-fork of Rebellion.


A Fire-fork. -- Fork me no Forks -- Who brought this Picture?


The rotten rump should have been burnt -- when 'twas only Roasted.


The rotten Rump -- Answer me, or i'll fight thee.


Answer you what?


Who brought this Picture? I found it in my Sister's Chamber.


Then your Fanatic Rogue conveyed it thither to make me suspected, out of
his malice to the Common-Prayer. I'll cut the Rogue to pieces.


Testimony.


I am here.


How now, Sworded?


To preserve my Life. My life is threatened by that bloody Papist.


How, Sirrah? dare you think of fighting me?


Yes, and hope to do it, through Providence.


Drawing before me?


Will you protect a Fanatic? I see what you are.

Well Sirrah, though I may not cut your Throat, i'll choke you Sirrah.


De'e, hear the bloody Papist? He'll throttle me.


Sirrah, i'll cram the Oaths of Allegiance, and Supremacy into you, and they'll
stick in your Throat, though Treason wont, and so i'll to a Justice presently.


And stay with him, and never plague me more. Now Sir do you resolve my
question.


I do resolve I will not take the Oaths.


I do not ask you about the Oaths.


Why, if you ask me Ten thousand times, I will not take the Oaths.


Did one ever see such a Coxcomb?


Call me what you please, I will not take the Oaths -- So do your worst.


A very fine account of my business.


My Lord a Gentleman desires to speak with your Honour.


I'm not to be spoke with, i'm a broad -- my Soul is -- in the heart of
Farewell, ripping it up for this Secret. What Gentleman?


One from the East-Indies, My Lord, he brings a Letter from your Uncle Rich.


He comes in a Storm; he will find worse Weather here, than any he met at Sea.
But i'll endeavour to compose my self -- admit him --


My Lord, your Lordships most humble Servant. I perceive your Lordship has
forgot me; you will know me better, when I acquaint you, who I am. My Father
had the honour of being a Retainer to your Lordships Father, of Honourable
memory; and sent me some Years since to the East Indies, in the Service of your
Noble Uncle, Mr. Rich. My name is Waytewel.


Oh! Mr. Waytewel, I am glad to see you, truly you are so changed, if you had
not told me who you was, I should never have known you.


I believe so my Lord -- for I'm sure you never saw my Face before, but the
Picture of it you have -- for Waytewel was my Picture.


How?


Only the trouble of it, my Lord. Your Uncle contracted in the Indies an
intimate Friendship with Sir Nicholas Calico, President for the East India
Company. Sir Nicholas dyed, and left most part of his Estate (which was near a
Hundred thousand pound,) to his only Son, Sir Thomas. But poor Sir Thomas
happened in his Fathers Life time to fall into a Distemper, which gave him a
scurvy flaw in his Brain, that Sir Nicholas left him and all his Estate to your
Uncles Guardianship. Now your Noble Uncle perceiving his affairs are like to
detain him many Years in the Indies, and fearing if he should dye, poor Sir
Thomas might be cheated of all; he has like a Worthy and honest Gentleman, sent
Sir Thomas and all his Estate to your Lordships care, as these Letters will
testify. I suppose your Lordship is well acquainted with your Uncles Hand and
Seal.


I am, and this is his Hand and Seal reads -- um -- um -- um -- to preserve him
from being cheated here, or begged in England, I take the boldness to recommend
him, to the care of so Noble a Person as your Lordship -- um -- um -- um --.
Well Sir the Letter expresses what you told me. -- Where is the Gentleman.


I brought him along with me; he's in the next room, my Lord. Poor Gentleman,
he has the oddest Phrases and ways with him. He will needs be attended like a
great Indian Mandarin, or Lord. And has brought with him several Siamites and
Bantammers, that serve him as his Slaves, in the ridiculous Dresses and Modes
of their own Countries. we had such a gaping Rabble after us, as we came along.


Pray call him in, I long to see him --


-- Sir Thomas -- pray come to my Lord.


Which is the Peer?


This is my Lord.


Great Peer, your extreme humble Servant.


Your Servant Sir, you are recommended to me, by my Uncle.


I know it my Lord, and am most incomparably obliged to him --. He is a Person,
my Lord, that as to the altitudes of Friendship, and the most glorious
Circumstances of a Singular Person, is not to be cast up by the Logarithmes of
Oratory, nor his Latitude to be taken by the quadrangle of Circumlocution.


So -- I find I shall have store of Non-sence.


My Lord, I'm a Person that as to the Circumstances of Money, am not
indifferently contemptible; and as to the circumstances of Honour, I am by
profession a Merchant, by Generation a Knight. Sir Nicholas Calico applying his
Person to my Mother, was the Author of, Sir, Your humble Servant.


So the Letter says.


The Letter contains Verity.


Pox I shall be teased.


One thing more Sir, I am a Person that as to understadning, am under the
circumstances of Witchcraft. I loved in the Indies, a fair Christian Curiosity,
and a nauseous Indian Baggage, had a mind to apply to my Person her Tawny
Circumstances; and finding she could not obtain her Ambition, applies her self
to an Indian Bawd, and Bewitches me.


Pshaw! Bewitch! what stuffs here? --


Bewitches me Sir, what follow's thereupon? a loathing in me of Females? I
abhor Women; fall into Agonys when I see Women. Pray let me see no Women.


You shall not Sir.


Pray My Lord, no Women.


I'll warrant you Sir.


But as much Supper as you please, my Lord.


You shall Sir.


You are highly civilised.


I told Your Honour he had such odd ways; well My Lord, as soon as the Ship is
come up the River, which will be in few days, I'll bring the Captain to wait
upon Your Lordship, with the account of Sir Thomas his Estate, Aboard; which
will amount to Forty thousand pound, besides Ten thousand pound he has brought
a shore in rough Diamonds. So, My Lord, your very humble Servant. Sir Thomas
your Servant I leave you in good hands.


Your Servant, Sir.


I'll order things for you. I must dispose this Man quickly, for i'm horribly
weary of him, and also impatient to go about my Affairs.


'Tis he -- I'm sure 'tis he --


How now Sister? what's your business here?


Staring at this strange sort of Man.


You were no Woman else -- pray get from him speedily.


You are not jealous of a Mad-man sure? he's mad is he not?


Yes, and impertinently brings me vexation too from the Indies, at a time when
I've enough at home, as every Man has, that keeps a Woman. Pray get from him,
he hates to see Women.


Hates to see Women? ha! ha! Sir Thomas Calico your humble Servant, you are
welcome from the Indies; but have a care of being discovered, least you be
under the circumstances of a Cudgel.


Truly Madam, I expect to have something stick by my ribs presently, that is to
say a good Supper; which I have ordered. My Lord and I will sup together, and
you and Mr. Farewell.


We sup together? where? in the Grave? a fatal accident has' happened, will
bring us both thither. My Brother has found Mr. Farewel's Picture in my
Chamber.


He shall not keep it, he shall deliver both Picture and jealousy.


Then thou art a Master. I told him my Woman found it in Westminster-Abby; may
be thou may make something out of that?


Stay let me consider Westminster-Abby, or the Abbey of Westminster -- um -- um
-- Let me alone -- begone -- he comes.


Come Sir, let me wait on you to your Chamber.


Hold, my Lord, a word, I have business of great consequence, I must humbly
apply to your understanding.


So, I must be hindered with more Non-sence.


I've in the Indies, a delicate peace of my Fathers Rib, I beg your Lordship to
advise me in the disposal.


Oh! dispose it how you please, Sir.


'Tis a Sister I mean, Sir.


Oh! that's something.


She's sweet and slender as a Clove, and is worth two Millions of Coxcombs --
Three hundred of 'em comes to Three Farthings; 'tis a Chinese Money. This Money
makes her much sought in Marriage: The great Hobbommoccoes of the Indies come
galloping upon Elephants, Camels, Rhinoceroses, and Oxen to see her. Now my
Father was under the circumstances of great obligation, to a Gentleman in
England; and out of gratitude to him, ordered me on his Death bed, to bestow my
Sister on his Son, and Heir, if his actions have any sort of smile in 'em to
his incompatible Father, which is the query. Pray resolve it.


First let me know the Gentleman.


You shall, I'll give you a Map of his Face, a Picture contained in my pocket.
-- ha! -- I have lost it, -- I have lost it --.


Tell me his Name, Sir.


I have dropped it out of my pocket.


I, but his name.


I have dropped it out of my pocket.


Have you dropped his Name out of your pocket? his Name Sir?


Oh! his Name, I'll tell you both his Name, and Cogname. His Name is Andrew,
his Cogname Farewell.


Farewell? what comes into my head? Sir can you guess where you might loose this
Picture?


A guess may be obtained -- by the Prayers of Mariners --


No other way? those I seldom hear of --


-- I was drawn down -- stay let me see -- remembrance begins to be idle -- has
London no place in the West?


Ay, no doubt.


Ay, but something very West? something called West?


Yes -- there's VVest-Smithfield.


That's not the appellative. Is there no Monster in the West, called
Westmonster?


Westminster I believe you mean.


You've nicked it it. To Westminster I rode, to behold the Glorious
circumstances of the Dead; and diving into my pocket, to present the
representer with a Gratification, I am fully confirmed, I then lost it; for my
Eyes and the Picture had never any rencounter since.


This exactly agrees with my Sisters story, what a Prodigious thing is this? a
discovery of my Sisters innocence, sent to me from the Indies, in a heap of
Non-sence? and in so Critical a minute; excellent Providence?


What's an excellent Providence, Sir, that I have lost my Picture?


No Sir, that I have found your Picture.


Found my Picture?


Ay, Sir, 'twas found by a Friend of mine, in Westminster-Abby -- there it is
--


Oh! my Picture! -- my Picture! -- my Picture! --


Oh! my eased heart!


Oh! my Picture! my Picture! my pretty Picture!

My Lord I must requite this favour, open that Casket, and give my Lord a
handful of Diamonds.


A handful of Diamonds.


Ay, my Lord, I beg your Pardon for the inconsiderableness of the Present.


Inconsiderableness? what a Market would some make of this Man? -- put up your
Diamonds.


By no means, my Lord.


Put 'em up Sir, or you'll dissoblige me.


You overwhelm me with Favours, I wish I had you at my house in Bantam.


I thank you, Sir; we are better where we are.


My Lord, you put me under the circumstance of blushing.


Pray let me put you into a Chamber, to rest your self.


Rest is good -- yours humbly --


Yours as humbly -- What a Fire did I kindle in my house, to clear the Air of a
Pestilence, was not in it? my Sister and all my Family are innocent. But what a
fantastic thing is Women's Honour?

Whilst She enjoy it, 'tis not seen or known,
And yet when lost She's utterly undone.

HA! ha! ha! what an excellent Fellow is this? what Engines he has in his head?
not only to wind himself into my Lords house, but the Picture out of his hands?


He undertakes to bring Mr. Farewell hither to Night. If he engaged to bring him
in a Church with a Parson to marry us, I would not doubt it.


Certainly my Lord must be in a most mortified humour; now is the time to
scarify him, and take out his Worm.


Here he comes, now will I carry my self with all the insolence of a Virtuous
Woman.

So my Lord have your Slaves been gathering any more scattered smiles of mine?
what loads of that Gold Sand have your Asses brought home?


They have heard all, now I am ashamed to show my Face.


Come, my Lord, would you confine a Woman of Honour? give her Liberty; would
you corrupt her? confine her.


'Tis true; were I a Wife to such a Man, I should abuse him out of Pride; and
think my self not an ill but a great Woman, since to punish is a mark of
Princely Dignity.


This I confess is the English Dialect; and when I talk of Governing Women, I
talk of a thing not understood by our Nation. I admire how it came about, that
we who are of all Nations, the most wise and free in other respects, should be
the only Slaves and Fools to Women.


Oh! you are the Wisest of all Nations, you know let Men do what they can,
Women will do what they please; and whereas other Nations by their spies and
Governantes are at great toil and charges to be Cuckolds, you have it for
nothing.


Come Brother, do not dress me in a Fools Coat, nor hang spies about me, like
so many jingling Bells, to give notice of all my motions. I can count, and know
that one and one, put shamefully together, are two lewd Fools, and not one
happy pair, as ill Women reckon, and deceive themselves.


Sister, I believe you Virtuous, but I would have you not only be Virtuous but
thought so. And truly a Woman may be Virtuous, but is seldom wise in Men's
company. Her vain honour will put her on new Conquests. And Women's Conquests
are pretty things; they often end like those of Highway Men, in a shameful
Execution on their one Persons. And yet all the business of their lives is
mustering up Forces. To day the Beauty Lies ambushed in undresses, the hair
pined up in Papers, like Serpents coyl'd to fly on you with greater force; the
Garments are loose and flowing as the Sea, to show a Venus is there. To morrow
she's as regularly fortified as a Low Country Town, and oft a party of Charming
looks are sent abroad to put all Spectators under a contribution.


Your Wife must not dress?


Why should she? I think Women's Points and Embroyderies, but so many
Billet-doux in Needle work.


She must not go abroad or see a play.


Yes, She may go to Plays, provided she'll see Plays and not Fools, it may be
enter into Conversation with 'em, and instead of getting Wit from the Plays,
get folly from the Fops; and so her Wit being spoiled in her Youth, shall like
a Clock set wrong in the Morning, go false all the day after. In short, no Wife
or Sister of mine shall dabble in conversation with any Man; I hate a Slattern
in her credit.


In my conscience I think I hear Belguard and his Mistress quarrel in good
earnest.


Let no Woman marry a Man of your humour, but she that for her Crimes is
condemned to Transportation. The Slave that in Virginia toils to plant her Lord
Tobacco, is not more miserable, than she that in your bosom Labours to plant a
good opinion; both drudge for smoke. I scorn the slavery, nor will marry a King
to increase his Dominions, but to share 'em.


I offer you the entire Dominion of my self; only desire you, not to aim at
further conquests.


I should be a fine Sovereign, where Jealousy, Pride, Rage, and such a saucy
Committee shall give me Laws; which they would never do to a Prince they loved.


I think I've given convincing Proofs of Love.


When?


When I offered, Madam, to take you for better and for worse; those are
Heroical Complements. The form of Matrimony out-does Ovid for passionate
expressions.


Ay, my Lord, but that's none of your Wit, and I would not have a Man of your
parts, steal other Men's Phrases; so Your Lordships humble Servant. -- Come away
Child


Rare! they are parted; once a Woman spoke truth. My Lord, your Servant. I've
over heard your quarrel, and I honour you, you are the only Man in the Nation
that understands himself. Lock up the Women till they are musty, better they
should have a Hogo, than their Reputations. And their Honours are not like
their Smocks, whitened by lying abroad.


Nor have their adored Faces the more esteem, for often appearing.


pox on 'em, they varnish like Copper, and the Women are sensible of it, that's
the reason they forge new faces every time they go abroad; and all the Arts of
Paint and dress are suborned to give a Bastard beauty Title to Reign, because
the Legitimate Face is fallen into contempt by familiarity. No more to be said,
keep your ground like a Man of honour; and loose your Mistress like a Coxcomb.
--


An't please your Honour, Mr. Hothead and Mr. Testimony, are returned, as your
Honour gave order.


That's well -- come Mr. Testimony; here has been a mistake gave me a harsh
opinion of you -- I'm sorry for it.


Oh! My Lord, have a care of censuring Professors -- for a Professor.


Nay, prithee don't profess too much. I am satisfied with thee.


Truly you would, if you knew of what a tender Spirit I am of. I was only
deluded the other day into a Play-house, and truly it will be a burden to my
Spirit whilst I live.


A lack a day, well I hope you'll be the more tender of my Sister, your trouble
will not be long. I have engaged her to a Gentleman, whom about this time I
expect. What a clock is it?


Truly I do believe it is about Four, I cannot say it positively; for I would
not tell a Lye for the whole World.


This is an excellent Fellow, if he be what he pretends.


Did you send for me, my Lord?


Ay, Cousin, to reconcile my self to thee; I was in a mistake.


I think you was, when you judged a Rascally Fanatic a better Man than I.


The contrary Cousin -- I think thee so much the better Man, I keep thee to
have an eye over him, because I don't know if he be a Knave.


Not know if a Fanatic be a Knave? You're fit to sit in the House of Peers I
faith.


Well, thou art a very honest Fellow Cousin -- let me have thy Company. But
what are those Patches on thy Face, for Ornament?


they are for Plasters, but they are Ornaments. I have been in a Fanatic
Coffee-House, and this is the Beauty they gave me.


'Twas to reward some honourable Names, thou gav'st 'em.


I gave 'em no wrong names. I called 'em Rogues indeed, but that's their proper
Name; and they all set their hands to it immediately, and subscribed themselves
Rogues upon my Chops, the only true Narrative they ever writ.


Thou art a mad Fellow -- prithee go in.


Well -- who's at the Door?


A lamentable Soul.


A Beggar?


A more sad Object; but I conceive he comes rather to rob than beg, for he
comes Armed with a strong Bow and Arrows.


A Bow and Arrows? what, is he a Tartar?


A Bow and Arrows made of Ribons, Laces, and other idle Vanities, wherewith he
intends to wound your Sister's heart.


Oh! the canting Coxcomb.


Nay, why canting Coxcomb?


Be gone you senseless Ass; and bring in the Gentleman.


Nay, why senseless Ass? this is unseemly.


He wont stir.


I am no senseless Person -- I have more senses than your self* I have a sense
of Vanity, and of the nothingness of the things of this World -- and a sense of
Sin, and a sense of the insinuating nature of sin -- I dare not bring this
wanton frothy young Man to your Sister -- for she is frothy also -- and sin
will get in at a little crany -- and if sin once get in his head, he'll get in
all his whole body. now your honour has not that sense of these things. You
ought to have that Your Honour is a senseless Person --


-- How Sirrah --?


In a spiritual sense --.


There's no getting this preaching Fellow away. -- Cousin Hothead.


My Lord.


Why do you let this canting Coxcomb plague me?


Why do you keep such a canting Coxcomb? let him plague you, Pox you, and Damn
you, I don't care.


Oh! sad! oh! sad!


Oh! shad! oh! Sot!


So, now I've brought 'em both upon me.


He's always tuning his Nose, too high too low, like a Sowgelders Horn


Well, Sir, if you please, tell me who's at my Door?


Forty One is coming in ding dong.


Into My Door? who's at my Door, I say?


Old Forty One, I'faith.


I cannot have an answer -- Sirrah -- who's at my Door?


Popery, I'm sure is coming in.


Into my Door? I ask you, who's at my Door?


Popery I'm sure.


Roguery I'm sure.


Popery I'm sure.


Roguery I'm sure.


Confound you both.


And confound you both.


You Boy, is there any one at Door?


Yes my Lord.


So, this Boy can answer, who is it?


Sir Courtly Nice, My Lord.


O! these Rogues, have they made him wait all this while? introduce him
quickly. He comes most seasonably to rid me of my plague, now I'm very sick of
it.

Dear Sir Courtly, my Servants did not tell me who you were, that I have
ignorantly made you wait, I am a shamed to see you.


Your Lordships most humble Servant.


Your very humble Servant Page -- call my Sister.


Madam your most --


Sir Courtly, your very humble Servant.


Oh! your Ladyships very humble Servant --


Your most humble Servant.


Now Madam, your most humble Servant.


An incomparable fine Gentleman.


Well, Sir Courtly, now I've brought you thus far of your way to my Sisters
inclinations; I'll leave you to pursue the rest of your journey by your self;
you need no guide to Ladies hearts.


Oh! your most humble Servant.


No, Sir Countly commands all. If my Niece does not receive you, Sir Courtly,
in all the obliging manner in the World, 'tis for want of experience and
understanding merit -- I'll assure you, Sir Courtly, I who have some little
more judgment, have had a very particular value for you, Sir, from the first
Minute I had the honour to see you, Sir.


Oh! Madam, your most humble Servant.


A very particular --


Oh! your most humble Servant.


And if my Niece has not, it proceeds from her want of Years to know Desert.
And indeed all Youth is indiscreet, I would by no means advise a Gentleman of
Merit, to marry any Person, that has not some Years and experience upon her --


She's setting up for her self I think. Aunt. --


Nephew --


Pray leave the Lovers together.


Sir Courtly, your most humble Servant.


Madam, your most humble Servant.


Pray, Niece, behave your self so to Sir Courtly, as at least to do me right;
and by all your expressions and behaviour, he may know how very particular an
honour I have for him.


She has for him? --


Most particular. --


Pray Aunt in particular -- come with me --


Very particular --


Oh! Madam -- Madam --


Aunt --


Yes Nephew -- Sir Courtly, I am exceeding unwilling to leave you to to the
Conversation of a young Lady, whose Years I'm afraid will not afford her Wit
enough to entertain so fine a Gentleman --


Oh! Madam! Madam! Madam!


But I'll return with all speed possible. --


But you shall not, if I can help it --


And so your very humble Servant.


Oh! Madam! your most humble Servant.


Now will I manage him, humour him -- pretend to admire him -- to draw him into
love, laugh at him and revenge my self on him, for plaguing me.


Now, Madam, is the glorious opportunity come, which my Soul has long wished,
to express how much I admire, adore --


Oh! Sir Courtly --


Extravagantly adore! --


Oh! Sir Courtly -- I cannot receive all this.


Oh! Madam, is there any thing on the Earth so charming? -- I never saw any
thing so fine as your Ladyship, since I was born.


Fie, Sir Courtly --


Never since I was born --


You'll kill me with blushing.


I speak my Soul -- Heavens! what Divine Teeth there are?


Fie! fie! I shall never open my mouth more.


Then you'll undo all the World. Oh! there's nothing so charming as admirable
Teeth. If a Lady fastens upon my heart, it must be with her Teeth.


That's a pleasant Raillery -- ha! ha! ha!


Oh! Madam, I hope your Ladyship has a better opinion of my good Manners --
Railly a Lady of your quality?


Oh! you Wits, turn all things into ridicule.


Madam, I never was so serious since I was born; therefore I beseech your
Ladyship have pity upon me. -- I swear and vow if you do not, I shall dye.


Dye! ha! ha! you Wits will be rallying.


Heavens, Madam! how shall I convince you, I am serious.?


Really, Sir Courtly, I should be very sorry if you be serious.


Oh! Heavens! why so Madam?


Because 'tis pity so fine a Gentleman should lose all his Gallantry --


Now you frighten me, Madam. Is it impossible for me to attain the Glory of
your inclinations?


It will be impossible for me to keep the Glory of your inclinations, Sir
Courtly; so I dare not venture on 'em.


Oh! as to that, Madam, I'll swear Eternal constancy, eternal services, and all
those things.


You are not in your own power, Sir Courtly. You fine Gentlemen, like fine
Countries, are desired and fought by all, and therefore in a perpetual War. If
I should place my heart in you, it would not have a minutes quiet. A thousand
Potent Beauties would every day assault you, and you'd yield out of
Complaisance, your good Breeding would undo me.


Oh! Madam, this is extremity of Gallantry; your Ladyship pushes things to a
strange height.


I speak my Soul. Besides i've another humour, but that's a Foibles will
ridicule me.


Oh! Madam.


Nay i'll confess it. I am strangely curious -- extravagantly curious -- I
nauseate a Perfume if it ever saluted any Nose but my one.


Oh! fortunate! my own humour.


Nothing must come near me, that was ever once touched by another.


Is it possible?


Not if you'd give a Hundred pound.


My own Phrase too, i've observed it in my self, i'm strangely fortunate -- we
shall be fond to an infinite degree.


For that reason, your fine Gentlemen is my aversion, he's so tempted by all
Ladies, so Complaisant to all Ladies, that to marry a fine Gentleman, is to
accept the leavings of a Thousand Ladies.


Oh! Madam! you have met with the Creature you desire; -- I never touched Woman
since I was born.


That's pleasant, I believe you have ruined a thousand.


Not one upon my Soul.


'Tis impossible.


Oh! Madam! there's not one Lady in a thousand I can Salute. I only touch the
tip of their ear with my Cheek.


Fie! fie!


Not one Lady in a Million, whose breath I can endure. But I could not go into
their Beds, if you'd give me a Thousand pound. I could not come into the Air of
any Bed in England but my own, or Your Ladyships, if you'd give me all the
World.


This is all Gallantry, Sir Courtly. You have been told this is my humour.


Is it really, Madam?


Oh! above all things. I suffer nothing to come near my bed, but my
Gentlewoman.


Nor I, but my Gentleman. He has a delicate hand at making a Bed, he was my
Page, I bred him up to it.


To making Beds?


Ay, Madam, and I believe, he'll make a Bed with any Gentleman in England.


And my Woman has a great Talent.


Is it possible? Ladies commonly employ ordinary Chamber Maids -- with filthy
Aprons on, made by sluttish Women that spit as they -- spin -- foh!


Foh!


Your Ladyship will pardon me -- my Linen is all made in Holland, by neat
Women that dip their Fingers in Rose-water, at my charge.


Delicate.


And all washed there.


And so is mine at Hearlem.


At Hearlem, I hold a constant correspondence with all the Eminent Washers
there.


That's delicate, and agrees wonderfully with my humour.


Oh! happy! we shall be fond to an infinite degree.


Oh! foh! here's that beastly rude Clown Mr. Surly.


Oh! foh! what shall we do with him?


How now? how now? you two are intimate -- hark you, Madam.


Oh! foh!


Foh!


Foh! what's this fohing at?


No body Mr. Surly; only at present we are accosted with an ungrateful smell.


Yes, I smell an ungrateful smell, your Rogury. Madam, I employed this Fellow
to speak for me, and i'll be hanged if he be not false to me.


To speak for him? ha! ha!


Ay, for him, Madam, ha! ha!


Ay, for me Nickumpoop.


Your humble Servant Sir, y' are very civil.


So I am, that I do not execute thee for this theft upon the place; but thou
plead'st thy Face, as Whores do their Bellies; 'tis big with Fool.


Very civil -- Sir.


Sure, Madam, a Woman of your sense, will not choose him before me. He has more
Land? not more improved Land. His Acres run up to one great Weed, I mean
himself; and there it Blossoms in Periwigs and Ribons. Oh! but he has a finer
Person! that's a cheat; a false Creed imposed on you, by a General Council of
Taylors, Milliners and Sempstresses; let my hat expound his Face, and you'll see
what a peace of simple stuff it is.


Horrid! he has put his beastly Hat upon my Head -- pray Sir do me the favour
to remove it, or I shall grow very sick --


Sick? I hope thou wilt eat my Hat. Now, Madam, you see what a cheat he is, and
whether he deserves any more favours, then to be decently hanged with the rest
of his Brothers.


My Brothers hanged, Mr. Surly?


I mean the Pictures in the Hangings, for they and thou are all but
Needle-work; and thou would serve for a peace of Tapstery, but for a
Husband, Lord, have Mercy on thee.


Your Servant, Mr. Surly. You are a very well bred Gentleman, Sir, and pay
great Veneration to a Lady of Quality, and your Mistress -- ha! ha!


His Mistress? ha! ha!


Let's railly him to death, Madam -- ha! ha! --


Railly? does the ridiculous Figure pretend to laugh at any thing?


Dee' hear, Madam?


Sir Courtly, you are a Martyr to good manners, and suffer out of respect to
me, more than is fit for a Man to bear.


He a Man? I have seen a Butler make a better thing out of a Diaper Napkin.


Your most obliged humble Servant -- Sir.


Sir Courtly, I'll withdraw, that you may do your self Justice -- and be kicked
--


Your Ladyships most humble Servant.


I'll no longer protect such a Coxcomb -- as your self.


Your very humble Servant, Madam; I'll push his Soul out presently.


Oh! don't do him that favour, Sir, only correct him.


Well, Madam, what your Ladyship pleases. --

Your Ladyships very humble Servant.


I have received some favours from you, Sir, and I desire the Honour of your
Company, Sir, to Morrow morning at Barn-Elms, Sir, -- please to name your
Weapon, Sir.


A Squirt.


A Squirt?


Ay, for that will go to thy heart, I'm sure.


Well, Sir, I shall kiss your hands.


Kiss my Breech. --


Beast, Clown, Fool, Rascal. Pox take him -- what shall I do with him? it goes
against my stomach horribly to fight such a Beast. If his filthy Sword should
touch me, it would make me as sick as a Dog.


Ha! ha! I'll secure the Coxcomb -- I'll get him confined upon the Guard, among
Tobacco takers and that will confine him to his Bed and Bagnio's for one Month.


That will do rarely. About this time I expect Mr. Farewell, I ha sent for your
Brother to introduce him.


My Brother?


Your Brother I say, to show my skill. Retire, and stay concealed in the
Garden. Here your Brother comes.

Now for lies and nonsense to entertain this jealous Brother till the Lover
comes.


Sir Thomas your Servant, what's your will with me?


Talk -- I love talk -- begin.


Very pithy.


In what circumstance are we?


Circumstance?


Ay, what call you this, where we are?


A Garden.


A Garden? i've seen in the Indies a Melon as big.


As all this Garden?


Bigger.


Well lied of a Mad-man.


All.


Your Nutmegs and Pepper are not.


Your History is erroneous. We have Nutmegs as big as small Fly-boats, I have
sailed a hundred Leagues in a Nutmeg.


Well lied.


Our Oysters have wonderful conferrence.


Circumference I suppose you mean.


Y' ave nicked it. Three of 'em block up a Harbour. 'Tis our way of
Mortification.


Fortification.


You are in the right -- Pox on it I have been so long abroad, I have almost
forgot my Mother tongue.

Well -- when will this Lover come? 'tis near the hour, and delicately dark.

Murder! murder! murder!


That's he! he's come!


And at my Coach-house Door?

Oh! Cowardly Rogues! Four upon one.


A Gentleman assassinated?


Open the Door.


Who's there?


My Lord.


Call some of the Servants to assist a Gentleman, set upon at my Coach-House
Door.


Ay -- quick -- quick --


How, Sir Thomas? will you venture among 'em?


Dee' think I wont? a Gentleman and not fight?


I must not suffer it, you may be hurt.


No Sir, I'll fight like a Gentleman; I'll come by no hurt I'll warrant you. --
Come quick -- quick -- open the Door --

Now Sound a Trumpet, Tivy -- tivy -- tan tan -- tivy -- Tone, -- Pox on it 'tis
a Horn -- I don't know a Horn, I have forgot every thing belongs to a Gentleman.
-- among 'em -- helter skelter --


In my conscience this is Cracks design to let in Mr. Farewell.


Dear Madam you are in the right.


Mr. Farewell? I know your voice --


Oh! Madam, I adore you for this bounty.


And I should blush for it.


Why so, Madam?


Should a Woman admit a Lover by night at a Back-Door into the same house where
she lies, and converse privately with him before Marriage.


Your Brother admitted me.


'Tis true indeed, you may thank him for the favour, I thought your sufferings
deserved pity, and my Brother would let me show it, no other way.


A thousand Blessings on you.


I doubt not but my honour is very safe in your keeping, I wish your Person,
were as secure in mine.


I am glad of the danger, since tis some assurance of my Love.


Your Friend Mr. Crack plays his part very well, and I doubt not but he will
secure us here, and conveigh us hence, but then other dangers will follow you.


What are those, Madam?


The danger of marrying without a Fortune, my Ten thousand pound is at my
Brothers dispose.


I am glad of that too, Madam, 'twill show my love is not mercenary.


The danger of being laughed at by the Wits, for marrying at all.


Oh! let the Wits keep the Jilting rotten Wenches, and leave the sweet Virtuous
Ladies to us marrying Fools, I can be as well pleased to keep a fine Wife to my
self, as they can be to maintain five Wenches for all the Town.


Nay, your keeping Men, Keepers like have commonly but the Offals for their
Slave. Well the Evening Air will be unwholesome to you, if you stay longer in
it, you'll be in danger of Thunder and Lightning presently, I mean my Brother --
he comes -- follow me --


What Cowardly Rogues were these? they ran upon our first sallying.


They had a reason, you're a Lyon.


I used to kill Lyons and Tigers in the Indies, as you do Hares and Conyes
here. I kept a Tiger Warren, I killed a brace every morning to get me a
stomach.


It was a good one sure, you offered dear for it. Well I hope you have got no
hurt?


Yes, something very sharp, went quite through my stomach.


How? through your stomach? then you cannot live.


Yes, if you noint it presently with a good dish of Jelly-broth, and Tent it
with a bone of Roast-beef.


Is that the wound? it shall be healed presently.


Presently, for my stomach is Captious.


It shall be done. Go to my Aunt and desire her to order Sir Thomas his Supper
--


She's not very well, my Lord, and gone to bed.


Then let the Steward do it. Sir Thomas I am going out and shall stay late.
Pray command my house -- good Night to you --


Your Servant Sir -- you keep a Woman? -- now to the Lovers -- where are they?
--


Here! here! thou Divine Fellow.


So, so, kiss! kiss! kiss! --


Before Marriage?


Ay, for fear you should not kiss after marriage -- well the house is our own,
and the Night our own -- your Aunts gone to bed, and your Brother abroad, we will
Tory -- rory, and 'tis -- a fine Night, we will Revel in the Garden -- Slaves go
bring my Supper -- quick -- quick --

Now a Song and Dance of your own fashion -- but shut the Garden. Gates -- and
look to 'em well, for I'll be private in my pleasures --

-- So -- now to my Chamber -- well -- there is no public Officer like your
Pimp --.

Pimps manage the great business of the Nation.
That is -- the Heavenly work of propagation.

OH! thou Divine Fellow, what joys hast thou procured me?


What joys?


All that Innocence could afford.


Innocence? that's insipid stuff.


No Mr. Crack, there's difference between the Mannah that came, from Heaven,
and that out of 'Pothecaries Shops; a touch of Leonora's hand like Mannah from
Heaven has all that Man can fancy. Here she comes.

This, Madam, is bountiful after an Evenings Conversation, to afford me a
Morning too.


We should be charitable ^o Prisoners.


I am a Prisoner, but such a happy one, as a King is when Lodged in a Royal
Tower, to prepare for his Coronation. My hour of Coronation draws near, I want
only the Church Ceremony and the Oath.


Madam, how dirst you venture hither, by day light?


My Aunt, and Brother, are both gone abroad, and won't come home till Noon. So
all those hours are mine, and now Mr. Crack to requite your Music I have
brought some of mine to entertain you.


Oh! Madam -- undone -- your Brother.


How? how?


Just coming up stairs, to visit -- you Sir Thomas.


Pox of his civility. Hide, Sir Hide. And do you Women shreike! -- shreike! and
cry out murder.


So, here's my Sister got into the Madmans Room; and has put him into a
frantic fit. Oh! the insatiable curiosity of Women.


You Whores! -- you bewitching Whores, do you come to bewitch me? I'll fetch
blood from you.


Why would you offer to come hither, Sister?


What are you, Sir, the King of Bantam?


No Sir, no.


Oh! the Mogul.


Nor the Mogul.


What do you then with all these Concubines? -- Oh! I know you now, you're a
fine man, you have put me into brave circumstances. Did not I desire you to let
me see no Women? and here, you keep a company o'rambling Whores in your house,
that have put me into the circumstances of distraction. I was a top of the
Staircase taking a prospect of the Cape of Good-Hope, and these Flyboats came
sailing under my Nose. What do me I? but leap down to break their Necks? and
have broke my own I think. I am certain, I have broke something, but what I
don't know. Pray take me up, and look over my bones, see if none be missing; if
they be, Bone for Bone will be demanded.


Poor creature! who's there?


Who's there? will you trust me to your servants! so if a Leg or an Arm of mine
be broke, they'll leave it behind em, and I shall loose it. I expect all my
Limbs and Bones from you, as you received 'em. So -- come and take account of
'em.


I will -- I will --


Oh! have a care -- Oh! --


Alas! I fear he's hurt; your foolish curiosity ha's done this? did you not
gape enough upon him before?


Oh! gently! gently! -- so -- so --


Oh! this pleasant Rogue! ha! ha!


Tis an excellent fellow. As soon as we hear my Brother is returning, slip into
that passage, 'twill lead you to Crak's Bed-chamber.


How now Gentlewoman? a man with you? Nephew -- Nephew -- Nephew. --


Begone -- begone -- through that Entry.


What's the matter?


Our family's dishonoured, dishonoured -- here was a fellow, a handsome young
fellow with my Niece. Oh! my flesh! my flesh.


With me?


Will you deny it Confidence?


Who's there? Hothead, Testimony, all of you come hither.


What's your honours pleasure?


To cut all your throats, you are all Bawds and Villains.


Leave me out of the number you had best.


I will not Sir, For here was a young fellow with my Sister;


My Aunt's whimsy and jealousy.


I could tread you under my feet.


Which way went he?


Into that passage: He cannot be got further, then Sir Thomas Calicoes
Bed-chamber.


Lock all the doors, Arm and beset Sir Thomas Calicoes lodgings.


This will prove such another wise business as the Picture.


Hold your peace -- get you into that room with my Aunt. Aunt pray look to her.


I'll keep her, I warrant her -- come in gentlewoman. -- you are a fine
gentlewoman.


Oh! my heart trembles -- Heaven inspire Crack.


Oh! cursed fortune.


Well don't trouble your self. I'll bring you off safe.


Not trouble my self, when Leonora's honour is in danger? she'll be the jest of
every prating Fop, and malicious beauty.


Her honour shall be safe too. This blustering -- Brother shall entertain you.
--


With a Blunderbuss?


Ay, full of Claret. Away -- away -- he comes?


How? the High and glorious Emperor of Siam with all his guards? Thou most
invincible Paducco, Farucco, -- nelmocadin -- bobbekin -- bow -- -- wow -- ww
-- why dost thou seek to destroy us English, seated on thy Dominions by thy own
Letters Patents?


Pish! -- take him away.


Take away our Privileges? then this goes to my heart.


Hold, hold -- Sir Thomas -- Sir Thomas, no hurt is meant to you.


Most Great and Glorious Emperor, I humbly thank, and do humbly Implore thee;
that thou would command thy Invincible guards, to lay down their arms, and
put us out of our frights, and we will submit our persons to thee. This is some
Interlopers work.


Pox of this impertinent mad -- coxcomb? Lay down your weapons, may be if we
humour him, he may come to his senses, and give us leave to search the rooms.


My Lord Bellguard, your most humble servant.


He's come to himself; that's well. Sir Thomas your servant, how do you?


A little discomposed, something has frightened me, and put me into the
circumstance of a sweat.


I'm sorry for that. Shall I beg leave, to search your rooms for a thief
that's got in?


Pardon's begged; search must not be made; for I have a friend there, you must
not see. Would you and your friend were hanged.

A very honest Gentleman, but very much addicted to marriage. 'Tis he that I
told you, is to marry my Indian Fubs of a Sister -- Mr Farewell.


Mr. Farewell?


Ay, hearing of my arrival, and what circumstance I was in; hovered all this
morning about the house to get a sight of me; but cared not to come in, for it
seems there is enmity between you.


'Tis True, and I wonder how he got in without my knowledge.


I made him come in. I was throwing my legs about in the Hall, and the door
being open, our eyes knocked immediately, and gave remembrance such a bang,
that we ran full speed into the circumstances of embracing?


And pray who saw this?


Who saw? what care I who saw? I care not if the whole Town saw, I'm not
ashamed of owning Mr. Farewell.


No Sir, but I mean which of my family saw? that I may thank 'm for their care.


What do I care for your family? if I may not bring a friend into your family,
a fart for your family.


Nay be not angry Sir Thomas, your friend's welcome.


I doubt it not, for I have found you a very civil person. And now recollection
is active, I fancy he's the man you take for a thief. Tis so -- ha! ha! --
excuse me -- ha! ha! -- leave is implord -- ha! ha! -- brot'her Farewell.

Brother.


Come out, and participate of laughter.


So, now have I played the fool again, vexed my self, and wronged my Sister
with my impertinent jealousies.


Come brother -- ha! ha! laugh -- but first salute.


My Lord, I believe you wonder to see me here, and you may; I call my self
Bastard, and renounce the blood of my family, by coming under your roof with
any design, but to prejudice you, which at present I must acknowledge to my
shame is not my intention. I visit my friend here for his own sake, and the
sake of a great Beauty, which you shall not hinder me of, My Lord.


I will not Mr. Farewell, I scorn those effeminate revenges. If I hurt any Man
it shall be with my Sword.


Your Sword, my Lord?


Hold? hold.


Ay any where but here Mr. Farewell, my House is your Sanctuary, and here to
offer you violence, would prejudice my self.


What a quarrelling's here? i'my conscience I believe, my Lord, 'tis because
you think he came to steal me, I being under whimsical circumstances, for I
remember you called him a Thief. Look you, My Lord don't fear me, I won't be
stole -- I know when I'm well -- Brother I'm very well provided for, I want
nothing but my Wits; and what do they signify? if a Man lives like a
Gentleman, no matter whether he has Wit or no --


Well, my Lord, though I have the misfortune to be your Enemy, I am none to
good manners; I am sorry I have given your house this trouble, and the more
because my Friend receives such generous usage in it.


Nor am I an Enemy to Love, and the fair Sex. If the Lady you come for loves
you, for her sake I wish you success. --


Now my Lord you vanquish me.


He's a brave Man -- Faith. --


I fancy we shall live to be better Friends, at present I'll take my leave, --
my Lord your Servant. --


Your Servant Sir.


Brother I must see you down stairs. This was a Master-peice. ha! ha!


Now I am cool again. What a flame had your negligence put me into. Here
release my Sister, I'm ashamed to see her --


Sirrah! Sirrah! you did this to make me suspected.


Ay -- ay, I must be abused, because I'm a Protestant.


A Protestant? a Dog. But with such Names the Rogues divide the Rabble, and
make the Nation go like the Devil, upon Cloven Feet.


Hold your prating, and by your future care make amends for your past
negligence; your trouble shall not be long, within this Eight and forty hours
I'll marry her, or send her into the Country.


Well -- well -- I'll look to her, for the Honour of my Family, not your
huffing.


I to discharge a Conscience --


So -- Sir --


My Sister --


Do you run from me? is that the reparation you make for the intolerable wrongs
you have done me?


Well, I have wronged you, I'm sorry for it, and beg your Pardon -- I must be
gone -- about business -- your business -- to fetch Sir Courtly Nice. your
Servant, Sister.


Oh! your Servant Sir -- ha! ha! -- he runs -- I may chance Sir to run as
nimbly from you, if Cracks Wit do not fail him -- here he comes --

Thou admirable Fellow, what hast thou done with Mr. Farewell?


He's in the Street staying for you.


Staying for me? and can thou conveigh me to him?


Dee' question it? put on a Vizard and something over your Clothes.


Sweet Rogue.


Nay, nay be gone.


Delicate Rogue.


Nay, nay he stays for you.


Incomparable Rogue.


Pshaw! put on your Vizard.


Most excellent Rogue.


Oones! put on your Vizard.


I will -- I will -- ha! ha! toll -- loll -- derol --


Oh! Sister your tune's altered.


Oh! Madam! I'm happy to find your Ladyship, in so gay a humour.


You'll not find it so --


Sir Courtly I'll betray her to you. I left her in Tears upon an unhappy
occasion, and at parting told her I would bring you. Now you are come, I find
her in joy. Nothing else could cause the change.


Oh! fortunate.


Oh! Fop! --


Now improve your interest, and let us see how great a Master you are in
Courtship, by your dextrous dispatch. I leave you together --


And upon my Soul I will. Oh! Madam, am I so Fortunate, so Glorious, to be well
in your fine inclinations?


Oh! fie, Sir Courtly -- if I had any such guilt upon me, do you think I would
confess?


You do confess, Madam -- your fine Eyes, and your languishing Air, and your
charming Blushes, and all those things --


I hope I carry no such false things about me; for if they say any such thing
they infinitely wrong me.


Oh! now you are cruel, Madam; you kill me.


Can you hope for my heart Sir Courtly, till I've some assurance of yours.


What assurance would your Ladyship have?


All manner -- he that pretends to my heart -- must sigh, and wait, and watch
-- and pant -- and fight, and write -- and kill himself.


All this I have done, Madam, and Ten thousand things more. Drove by your
Windows, a thousand times a day, sought you at the Parks and the Plays. Was a
constant faithful Attendant at all Tragedys -- for I presumed your Ladyship
nauseates Comedys --


Oh! Foh! --


They are so ill -- bred -- and saucy with Quality, and always crammed with our
odious Sex -- that have not always the most inviting smell -- Madam, you'll
Pardon me -- Now at Tragedies, the House is all lined with Beauty, and then a
Gentleman may endure it. And I have gone, found not your Ladyship there, drove
home, killed my self with sigthing, and then writ a Song.


Oh! Heavens! Sir Courtly, did you ever write a Song upon me?


Above a thousand.


Oh! there's nothing charms me like a Song --

For Heavens sake -- the Song! -- the Song --


I've above forty here in a sweet Bag, I'll show you the first I made upon Your
Ladyship. 'Tis thought to be a pretty Foolish soft Song, most Ladies are very
kind to it.

As I gazed unaware,
On a Face so fair; --

Oh! Sir Courtly --


-- Your cruel Eye,
Lay watching by
To snap my heart,
Which you did with such art;
That away wi't you ran,
Whilst I looked on. --
To my ruin and grief;
Stop Thief -- stop Thief.

Oh! fine! oh! fine!


That stop Thief, Madam, is pretty Novel.


Oh! delicate! I'm charmed! I'm lost! -- fie what have I said --


What makes me the happiest of Creatures.


I only railly -- I renounce all --


Not for the World --


Away -- the Song again -- the Song -- I'll hear nothing but the Song. Is there
no tune to it?


One of my own composing.


That accomplishment to? Heavens! how fine a Gentleman is this?


Oh! Madam, how proved you make me?


Oh! dear, how I betray my self? foolish Creature -- no more -- no more -- the
Tune, the tune.


I always humour my words with my Air. So I make the Voice shake at the last
Line, in imitation of a Man that runs after a Thief. Sto -- ho -- ho -- hop --
Thief --


Oh! delicate! cannot I learn it? sto -- ho -- ho -- ha! ha! ha!


Dear Madam, what makes your Ladyship laugh?


At a Coxcomb, that thought to win me with a Foolish Song, this puts it into my
head.


Oh! Foolish! there are abundance of those Foolish Fellows, and does the Song
please your Ladyship?


Infinitely, I did not think you had been so fine a Poet.


Poetry, Madam, is my great foible, and when I see a fine Woman I cannot
command my foible.


How? dee' make Songs upon other Ladies? unfortunate I've given my heart to
aninconstant Man --


Oh! Madam, -- only Gallantry.


I'm abused -- unfortunate --


Oh! Madam, you take it wrong --


I'm abused. --


Oh! Heavens!


But the Songs very fine! -- sto -- ho -- ho -- ha! ha!


Pleasant Creature.


Coxcomb. --


We shall be infinitely fond -- a pretty Glass, this Madam


So he's making an assignation with his own foolish Face, I'll leave him to
Court that and steal away.


Sto -- ho -- ho -- hop --


Singing, Sir Courtly?


At your Service, Madam. Well, Madam, you have said so many fine things to me,
that I assure my self of your heart, and now I am resolved to push this
opportunity, to an extremity of happiness.


Oh! fortunate! this to me? I did make him some advances to day I confess, and
have they had this success? my heart pants: I am surprised with infinite joy,
and am not able to answer --


Well, Madam, I must be happy, and so upon my -- the Lady gone --


Sir Courtly you put me in great confusion --


The Lady's consent is very considerable -- she governs her Niece, and under
her conduct may make me happy, with a reserve to Modesty.


Oh! dear Sir! is it possible to answer you so soon?


So soon, Madam? you know my passion has been long.


Is it possible? I swear I never heard of it before.


That's strange; would not my Lord, your Nephew acquaint you?


He never said one word of it to me.


That's amazing.


I find my Nephew has been false to me. It seems 'tis me the Gentleman loves,
and my Nephew would defrau'd me of him, for his Sister -- here's fine doings. --



I swear I thought your Ladyship had known, and granted your consent -- you
said so many fine things --


I said no more, -- Sir Courtly, then what were the result of my thoughts, upon
the contemplation of your great desert --


Your Ladyships most humble Servant -- then I hope, Madam, since my passion has
been long, though you knew not of it, you will not defer my hapyness -- 'tis
in your power I'm certain, no Person controlls you --


Controlls me? that's pleasant -- no Sir.


She says true -- she can bring her Niece --


Oh! Sir, should I consent so soon, it would be against all Forms. --


I would not for the World offend against any Forms. No Man living more
studies, and adores all manner of Forms -- but my passion has been long.


I know not what to say, Sir, indeed I must not. --


Oh! Pardon me!


Oh! Pardon me!


Oh! Madam!


You confound me, Sir:


You distract me, Madam. It must be. --


Well, Sir I yield, but with an extremity of blushing.


Your most obliged humble Servant.


My severe temper would never have been wrought on so soon, but by so fine a
Gentleman.


Your most humble Servant.


And to revenge my self on my Nephew, for his false play.


Well, Madam, we will in my Coach to the next Church presently.


'Tis very hard to resist you, Sir Courtly. If you please I will first put on a
Disguise; for I desire it may be managed with all secrecy, till the Ceremony of
Marriage be over.


With all my Soul; for I infinitely love a secret Intrigue, especially when
every body knows of it.


Least my Nephew light on us, and prevent it.


He's for the Match.


He's very false.


Is it possible?


Is it not apparent, when he concealed the whole matter from me, least I should
promote it?


That's unanswreable, I'm amazed at it. Well, Madam, I shall not fail of being
happy? --


Immediately, Sir.


And you think you have power?


Power? that's pleasant.


So -- so -- she'll bring or send her --


Your very blushing Servant --


Your humble -- sto -- ho -- ho -- hop -- Thief --


An humble Thief indeed, steal an old Woman? --


This was a pleasure I could not have thought of. Now to our Affair.


Come -- on with your Vizard.


Barbarity! falsehood! treachery! murder


What's the matter?


Did not I stipulate upon the surrender of my self to this House, to be kept
from Women? and I am devoured with em; here's come into my Chamber, a hot
burnt Whore, with a black crust upon her face -- here she is, Avaunt.


You damned Whore, how came you into this house? and what are you? I'll see
your face.


Then I'll see your brains, I swear by Gogmagog, and all the seven damnable
Sins.


Oh! sad! oh! sad


Show me the face of a Woman? I had rather see forty full moons.


Stand off Impertinence; I will see her face.


Murder! murder! call my Lord -- Lord, Lord -- murder -- murder! Lord -- Lord
-- Lord.


Hold your bawling, I'll let her go. -- For now I think on it, If my Lord should
find this Whore here when he gave such strict orders, we should let no body
out, or in, he'll make more noise than this mad fool -- so let us kick her out
of Doors, and say nothing.


Hold, let us not use violence to her -- she's a great temptation to me.


Gain a Clap Sirrah! for this is some of the footmen Whores, picked up in the
dark. Get you out you Whore.


No violence pray. She's a great snare to me.


Do old godly knave, and thou shalt be welcome.


I come! I come!


Get you out -- you Whore.


Good morrow -- up so early?


What's the whimsy now?


Am not I in Bed?


In Bed?


Poor soul, poor soul --


I am not in faith. Then I walk in my sleep: I was fast a sleep just now, and
dream't I saw women, and Vizards, and all that Trash; and the fright put me in
a Fever. I burn; prithee give me a mouth full of sweet air.


Prithee take a belly full and be damned. A fine time on it I have; with Whores,
and Fools, and mad Men, and Fanatiques.


So, now I'll steal after her; for I find in me a very great uproar.


Come in, come in honest old Fornicator, though the girl be mine, when I have
had my collation, if she'll consent, faith, thou shalt have a bit; I love a
Wenching Rogue in my heart.


Oh! dear Sir, your very humble servant, and truly I am a kind of a wag. I love
a pretty bit sometimes.


And I love thee the better for it, and this is a pretty bit, thou shalt see
her


Oh! dear! undone! undone!


Nay, nay Mr. Testimony won't you be as good as your word? shall not we have a
Bottle?


Oh! Madam, don't discover me to my Lord, and you shall not only have my
prayers, but the prayers of all the sober party for you all days of my life.


So, he runs from Whoring to Praying.


Are not you a Rogue Sirrah?


I know I shall be called Rogue, by the Popish party -- they will rejoice at my
fall, but I hope my fall will be sanctified unto me for my better Upstanding.
--


Among the Wenches -- Sirrah -- come, Sirrah, you shall stay till my Lord
comes, for his mortification, as well as yours.


Oh! my flesh, it has undone me.


My dear.


My dear. --


Excellent Crack; for this great peace of service, I'll have thee knighted under
a petticoat. Well we must send for my Lord, to laugh at him.


Oh! dear! I tremble!


Who's there? well my Lord, I desire to speak with him.


Pray let him bring Sir Courtly Nice, and his bride with him; be sure you say
nothing of me. --


Are you a Bride yet?


Not yet.


Get in, and let my Chaplain make you one.


Come Mr. Testimony. Mr. Crack, bring him.


How now you Rogue? what's your business?


Oh! my reproach will be great.


Mr. Surly.


Well, what now?


Now, you shall be my Husband.


Your Jack, to turn and roast you for another, whilst I have no share in you.


According to the share I have in you: You men would feign engross all manner
of Sins, by the pretended Prerogative of your Sex; well if iniquity be your
Estate, when you have married me, I'll put in for my thirds.


I doubt it not; within this week, I shall see in a Fop's hand, a Billet Doux,
that is a Ticket to let him into your Play-house.


Prithee leave of this doged humour.


I have none; fawning is a Dogs humour.


Nay but Sullenness; it taxes thy Estate, that thou art never the better for
it; tis a french Estate.


Ay, but to lick a fool's shoe, is a Spaniels Estate.


Prithee dress like a Gentleman.


So I do,; but I would not dress like a Gentleboy, lag at my years among those
Children, to play with their Toys; be always followed up like a love letter,
with a superscription, these to the next pretty girl.


There's no altering thee -- go in a while.


My Lord, your humble servant. I invited you hither, to reconcile you to your
Sister, she's weary of your Government, and has disposed of herself.


Ay, Madam, but according to my own desires, that now I suppose you will
acknowledge the good effects of my Government; -- Sister salute your friend.


Do you take that for your Sister? then I'll show you the good effects of your
Government. Open the Door.


My Sister there? call my servants.


Nay then call mine, the great Mogul, and the King of Bantam, I'll pepper you.


Then you were the Pimp were you -- Sirrah -- I may chance begin with you.


How? in my house and presence? touch him if you dare.


I'm made an Ass on.


Not far from that circumstance.


You Rascal --


Again?


But what the Devil am I made? what have I got?


Even my stale Aunt.


Saucy hussy.


The Aunt? what have you put upon me, Madam?


What have I put upon you, Sir, more than your self desired? Did not you
declare you have long had a passion for me?


A Passion for you? Comical! that's probable! Rot me if ever I had a Passion
for you in my Life. I meant all to your Niece; a Passion for an old Woman?


Ill-bred Fop.


Very fine --


Now, my Lord, what say you of your fine Cotqueen art of Conserving Woman? will
she keep if not candied with Virtue? here is a peace of dried Sweet-meat, you
see could not keep; and proves by her example, that the Hufls of either Sex,
when they are boldly attacked in private, soonest deliver their Weapons.


This is all ill manners.


Ay, but here's an old Cat will suffer no Vermin to come into the House; but
then he has a Liquorish tooth, and loves to have a sweet bit for himself; he
would fain have picked up your Sister for a Wench.


How?


'Tis true indeed my Lord; I will not tell a lye for the whole World.


Oh! Villain -- well Sirrah -- I'll leave you to my Cousin Hotheads correction.


But your faults my Lord I'll take into my correction, and give my self to Mr.
Surly --! Mr. Surly.


Well --


To Surly?


Ay, now Nico thy quarrel and mine is at an end, I'll let thee be an Ass forty
years longer.


You are a rude fellow and you are all ill -- bred -- and I'll revenge my self
on you all, as far as my Sword and my Wit can go --


Wit -- ha! ha --


-- Very fine manners this -- my Coach -- Madam, you may follow your own
occasions -- I have none with an Old Woman.


You are a Coxcomb.


Your Servant -- my Coach --


Must I lose you Sir Courtly -- stop Thief -- stop Thief --


Oh! your Servant -- my Coach you Dogs --


Come my Lord, I see Patience in your Face, all may be well yet.


How! Jilting already?


Promise I shall enjoy all and singular the Privileges, Liberties, and
immunities of an English Wife.


All.


That is to say, Ramble, Rant, Game, Dress, Visit, Prate, Ogle, Kiss -- and --


Hold -- hold -- whether the Devil is she running: Kiss, kiss -- and -- stop
for Heavens sake.


Kiss, and before your Face; is it not the Prerogative of an English Wife?
Surly, I owe thee a reward for Service, kiss me.


That's not to be borne.


Surly, I am thy Wife.


Hold -- hold -- for Heavens sake -- do not use me thus?


Then do not Rebel but practise obediently, the postures of an English Husband,
before you are Listed; Poise your Hat, draw your left Leg backward, bow with
your Body, and look like an Ass, whilst I kiss like a -- Wife -- Surly kiss
me.


-- If he does --


With all my Heart. If I kiss thee, let the Devil Marry thee.


And the Devil kiss thee, could thou think any Woman would suffer thy face to
come near her, but some Dairy Milk, to curdle her Milk?


Ha! ha! ha!


Ho! ho! What a society of Gotam's are here, to laugh at Man for missing a
Woman? had I Married her, as my Lord Wise-acre intends to do, I had deserved to
have been laughed at, for a Coxcomb, and a Cuckold, as he will be in few Days.


How?


Ay, you are all Whores, Pox on you, all Whores.


Did you send for us?


Yes, do you see where my Sister is?


By what witch craft was this?


Do not you remember a Vizard you turned out of Doors?


Was it you?


Even the same.


Then you deserve to be turned out of Doors again.


But what do you deserve Sir? that not only turned my Sister out of Doors --
but let Mr. Testimony -- pick her up for a Wench.


Oh! Dog -- oh! Rogue --


I am no Rogue -- a Man may fall, and be Godly in the main -- I am satisfied in
my Spirit, I am a Godly Man --


-- Here's a Rogue -- Sirrah -- Sirrah --


Persecution -- Persecution -- Papist -- do -- kick the Godly, kick the
Protestants out of Kingdom -- do Papist -- I see what you would be at --


So Cousin now I have done with spies -- you may follow your own business, if
you have any --


Business? yes I have business, and will have business as long as there is a
Fanatic in the Kingdom, and so farewell --


I am now convinced, Virtue a Woman's only guard. If she be base Metal, to think
by Chemistry, to turn her into Gold,

Is a vain dream of what we never see,
And I'll proclaim to all -- It cannot be.

OH! be kind, my Dear, be kind,
Whilst our Loves and we are Young.
We shall find, we shall find
Time will change the Face or Mind;
Both will not continue long.
Oh! be kind, my Dear, be kind.

No, I Love, and fear to loose you,
Therefore 'tis I must refuse you,
When I've yielded you my Crown
You'll no more Obedience own.
No, I Love, and fear to loose you
Therefore 'tis I must refuse you.

The Fair by kindness Reign,
By cruelty Destory.
If you can Charm with the Pain
Of Love, then what can you do with the Joy?
The Fair by kindness Reign,
By cruelty Destroy.

I fear to yield, but cannot deny.

If you do not I shall die.

So shall I.

So shall I.

Then come to Joy -- come to Joy,
Better Love than we should die.
Come to Joy, come to Joy.

THou lovely Indian Sea of Charms,
I'd envy no Jaw-waw alive
Might I be so, blessed to dive
In thy soft yielding Arms
With a Jimminy, Gomminy, whee-whee, whee.
With a Gomminy, Jimminy-whee.

I would if you'd be true,
But when you've done
You'll be gone,
And throw me of with a Shooh-shooh, shooh.
And a hush pooh,
And a fush whooh,
And a migotty, magotty, migotty, magotty,
Migotty, magotty, shooh.

No, no, my other Females all
Yellow, Fair or Black,
To thy Charms shall prostrate fall,
As every kind of Elephant does
To the White Elephant Buitenacke.
And thou alone shall have from me
Jimminy, Gomminy, whee, whee, whee,
The Gomminy Jimminy, whee.

The great Jaw-waw that Rules our Land,
And pearly Indian Sea
Has not so absolute Command,
As thou hast over me.
With a Jimminy Gomminy, Gomminy
Jimminy, Jimminy Gomminy, whee.

Thou alone shalt have from me
Jimminy Gomminy, Gomminy,
Jimminy, Jimminy, Gomminy,
Whee, whee, whee, whee, whee, whee.


