YOu, that frequent the Stage, must needs allow
The Sect of Poets their Fanatics too:
How could so many else their Gifts impart
In spite of Nature, and in scorn of Art?
All tedious Methods we cut short, and grow
Poets and Saints, by thinking, we are so:
A strong Faith does the business, and the place
Of Wit supplies in those, in these of Grace.
Their Muse, and Spirit differ but in Name;
With equal Rage, all, but themselves they damn:
When either carries on the Work of the Day,
'Tis a Stage-Sermon, or a Pulpet-Play:
Both Trade in Lofty-Sounds, and can Dispense
With the Formalities of Wit and Sense.
The Stars at their Nativity did Reign
With a Malignant Influence over the Brain,
Leaving it dry and shrunck, as Marrow-Bone,
Or Shell-fish dwindle in a waning-Moon:
And therefore our Fore-Fathers wisely said,
A perfect Poet was born such, not made.
Nor is our Saint less Privileged by Birth;
For though some Virtuosi may hold forth,
That Eggs, when first they drop, are not laid addle,
Yet both our Twins came Gifted from the Cradle.
Their Brains are stumm'd, and in a constant Huff;
And what works out, is Froth, and Humming- Stuff.
But, we allow, these Insects are not bred
Always from Wind, and Hollowness in the Head;
Sometimes an empty-stomach does infuse
The Canting-spirit, and the scribling-Muse:
And thus some sharply Write for a Third Day,
And some for Sundayes-Pudding Preach, and Pray.
But, when we Preachers name, those, who contemn
The Laws, we mean, and whom the Laws condemn:
And, when we talk of Poets, only they
Of his low Form are meant, who vamped this Play;
Which wants of Gyant-VVit the brawny-strength,
And is but Punchinello drawn at length.

TImothy.


Sir.


Are the Writings engrossed, and ready for Sealing?


Yes Sir; just now I saw the Wax clapped on.


'Tis well. But prithee tell me, What said my Lawyer to this settlement of my
Estate?


In troth I fear your Worship will be displeased, should I tell you his sense
of it.


No, no: I love to hear Fools spend their Grave Fopperies: 'Tis the
divertisement of my life to laugh at their Folly.


Truly, Sir, he seems to be of opinion, that your settlement is not good in
Law.


How? not good in Law? That's pleasant; when he himself drew up the Writings.


The defect lies not in them (I only speak his words) but in your Worship: For
(says he) it will be strongly presumed, that whenever you Seal such a
Conveyance, you are not Compose Mentis (you understand me, Sir:) It being
impossible, that any man in his right Senses should throw away his whole
Fortune upon an unknown Woman; who, by all signs and tokens will be deemed no
better then your Concubine; and at the same time disinherit an only Son, who
has so fair an esteem in the World.


Let the Fool please himself with his Scrupulous Fancies. Timothy, there was a
necessity of this Fellows Suspicion, and Wonder: For, had I named her in the
Deed, as my Wife, and expressed a consideration of Marriage, my whole Design
might have taken vent, and so miscarried: For 'twere unreasonable to expect,
that a Lawyer, whose Trade is Talking, should keep silence: And should my
cast-off Son have smelt the design, his Wants and Despair would have left no
stone unmoved to disappoint it. Besides, in settling my Estate on her, I run no
hazard of prejudicing my self; For when I Seal the Writings, I'll Seal her too
for my Wife; And then, if we have Children --


That is; when your Worship has Sealed, and she's delivered --


No quibling, good Timothy -- Then, I say, who but they, should inherit my
Estate: If we have none; at least my Rebel Son is out of doors, and she, who
has my Heart, has my Estate.


I must confess, the secret Conduct of this Design is very admirable; For, Sir,
I think, she her self, who to morrow must be your Lady, is hitherto no less
kept in ignorance both of your Name and Quality, then all the rest of your
nearest Servants, and Relations are of her Person, and your resolution to Marry
her.


O Timothy: The Art of Secrecy is the Secret of the World. 'Tis the Rudder,
that silently governs the whole Bulk of Human affairs. A Secret well kept, like
Powder close rammed, does certain execution, when ever you give Fire with a
just aim. Therefore have I kept and educated this tender Virgin in so private
and remote a Quarter of the Town; Therefore have I disguised my Person under a
borrowed name to her, and those Servants I placed about her, that it should not
be in the power of any body to acquaint the World with my Design.


But (with your Worships leave) I am afraid the World will judge hardly of you,
for abandoning thus your only Son, and making him an utter stranger to your
Blood and Estate.


The World's an Ass, and so is doubly he
Who incommodes himself to humour fools.

But, Nature, Sir --


Nature! What's that? 'Tis the blind side of our Reason; the soft place in our
Souls. Children owe all to Parents, but there lies no Obligation on the Parents
side: on, if there did, when Sons Rebellious prove, those Bonds are Cancelled.


I must not doubt your Justice; But, Sir, 'tis your misfortune, to treat him
ill, of whom the World speaks well.


Who Courts Opinion, is a Slave to Slaves;
And gives up Liberty and Happiness
To be controld by every idle Breath.
Let my young Master cram himself, and swell
With the Worlds empty Praise;
'Twill do him just as much good, as the vain Reproaches of
loose Tongues will do me hurt.
Timothy, call in all my Servants; for now
I intend to publish my Wedding, that they
may accordingly know their duty.

Sir, my young Master came this morning --


Or have you any Master but my self?
All you that eat my Bread, this warning take,
That he, who was my Son, is no more so:
And, Who dares own the Person I discard?
In place of him I will a Virgin bring,
Virtuous, and young, under my Roof to morrow,
To be your Mistress, and my Wife:
For whose Reception you must all prepare,
Each in his Office -- Now you may withdraw.
My Friend, and Neighbour, Mr. Wary!

Sir Salomon Single; most happily met!

You are the very Person I wished for; for I have a business of Consequence,
which I long to communicate with you.


Then, Sir, we meet upon even terms; for 'tis a matter of no small moment,
which brought me hither to find you out.


Mutual satisfaction is a double Joy -- Timothy, follow your Orders, and
prepare every thing, as I directed.


But, Sir, as to the --


Mr. Wary, I beg your leave to give a short dispatch in a word or two to my
Steward.


Pray use your freedom. Roger, you may now go about your business; for, (as I
told you) I have discovered a secret traffic of Love between my Daughter and
this Knights Son: And now must I take my kew from him; and by feeling his Pulse
and Temper, fashion my Countenance accordingly on the Proceeding of our young
Lovers. If the Father will own his Son in the Match, I have my wishes in having
so rich an Heir for my Son in Law. But, if he, who has the Means, and Power in
his Hands, prove Resty, my young Gallant must be shuck off --


Now, Mr. Wary, I am at your service.


Faith, Sir, my Business with you is the old Business of Mankind; Love, and
Matrimony. For, to tell you truly, though the matter has been closely carried,
yet I have smelt out the Rat.


I protest, Sir, you're a man of quick sense, and rare intelligence: For, I
thought it impossible, that you, or any man living could have known it so soon.


We have all quick Eyes in things that concern us. Well, Sir; since you need
not my instruction in this business, pray deal freely with me: How does it
relish with you?


A pleasant question! Sure I am not so much a fool, as to make that my choice,
which In disrelish.


Was it then your Choice* Let me embrace my dear Sir Salomon.


You amaze me (Sir) with this excess of kindness: Pray, is she any kin to you?


I'm foully deceived, if she be not. I see you are merry (Sir) to ask such
questions.


Sure the Man is frantic!


But Sir, (Drollery a part) lets come seriously to the business. First, I
assure you, she shall not want a Fortune answerable to your Estate and Family;
Provided, that you make Settlements for Jointure, Maintenance, and other
matters proportionably.


What is't you say? Shall she not want a Portion equal to my Condition, and
Fortune? This is an Extravagance of Kindness too mighty for my Faith! she only
wanted a Fortune: For in all other Attractives she answers my expectation
(which is no common one.) But, pray Sir, satisfy me a little, how long you've
known her, and how near she is related to you.


Can any man in his right Wits seriously ask such questions? Is she not my
Daughter?


Ha? Your Daughter? -- Have I all this while reared up a Bastard-Slip of his to
graft upon?


Sir Salomon! What's the matter? Have I said any thing to give you disturbance?


Pray, Sir, Was she begot in lawful Wedlock?


Hai! What time of the Moon is this? --


I knew her to be poor, and I thought her Fatherless; And I liked her the
better: But with all this, to Marry a Bastard, is too much.


The Man is certainly Distracted. -- Sir, I perceive you are not well; Shall I
call some of your People to you?


Pray, Sir, only satisfy me in these two short Questions; Where does this
Daughter of yours live? And when did you see her last?


Where should she live but in my House? And I saw her within this half hour.


Say you so? Then, Sir, let me advise you to go home, and the first thing you
do, call a Doctor; for, take it from me, your condition is desperate. This is
the last degree of Madness! For, to my certain knowledge, you have not seen
this Woman, whom you call Daughter, these two years.


In troth, Sir Salomon, it grieves my heart, that you are not in a condition to
be discoursed withal; if you were, I could bring your Son, your own Flesh and
Blood to convince you, that this very morning he saw her in my House, spoke to
her there, and, what is more, (I think) made Love to her.


My Son? -- In what a Labyrinth of Mistakes have we wandered all this while? And
was it his, and your Daughters blind Bargains, that you came to break my head
withal?


Had it not been cracked before, 'twould ne'er have been broken now. -- Pray do
me the Favour to give me some private Mark, whereby I may know when I am to
believe you: For did you not tell me just now, that you relished this Match as
your own Choice?


Still run Counter? Pray take up; and (if it be possible) lets both fall upon
the right Sent. You talk of your Daughter, and her Gallant, don't you?


What else, Sir?


And all this while my Discourse has been of my own Affections: For, to morrow
I resolve to be a Married Man.


You a Married Man! Was this the Mystery? Well, Sir, you have removed my
mistake; but, you have planted wonder in the room on it, much greater then it.


Why should you wonder? I see you are of your Daughters, and her Lovers Party;
and sorry, their Sport is disappointed.


Alas, Sir, you misapprehend me every way. I only came to inform you of it;
and to take my own measures from your liking, or disliking of it; both which
are indifferent to me.


I thought the World had not been ignorant of my resolutions concerning that
Prodigal and Rebel of my House, whom you call my Son: He shall have no more
share in my Estate, then he has in my affections; and those he has utterly
forfeited. But, if you think it expedient to take the out-cast of my Family
into yours, you may use your discretion.


Fear it not, Sir; I shall not purchase your ill-will so much to loss. But,
(pray) are you resolved so suddenly to thrust your Reverend head into the old
Noose of VVedlock?


To morrow's the day. Iacta est alea.


Faith, Sir, I think your undertaking as bold as his, who first said so; but,
(I fear,) not so fortunate. You've a dangerous Rubicon to pass over. Have you
thought well upon it? For, in my judgment, To morrow is both too soon, and too
late for you to accomplish such a resolution.


You perhaps (like the rest of the World) Judging others by their own
scantling) may have reason for this Caution: But (thanks to the bounty of
Nature) under these Ashes there wants no Fire; Nor is the Oil half spent in
the Lamp.


You say very well: But, I have found by experience, there are two sorts of
People in the World mightily given in their several ways to boast of their
Valour, and both with cause alike; Cowards, and Old Men. We two, (you know)
started into the World almost together; and, our eight and Fifty years a piece
are now run off: For my own part, I should think it an excess of rashness in my
self, if, after so long a Race, I should still presume so much upon my
strength, as to venture at the dangerous Leap of Matrimony.


I grant ye, that some Men may be old at Thirty, and others young at
Threescore; and what is my Physic, may be your Poison: and there's an end of
this Dispute.


But have you forgot, how severe a Critic you've always been upon the
Disasters of poor Husbands? Now should the person you Marry, not think you so
young, as you think your self, are you not afraid of Circular Justice, of
scurvy Ballats and Lampons?


Had I been guilty of the Folly of other Husbands, in the Choice of their
VVives, I might then have feared, and deserved their Fate;

But I grown wise at the expense of others.
Have chose a piece of Native Innocence,
Unsullied by the VVorlds corrupting Air;
Whose Beauty, and whose Virtues void of Art:
Her have I reared, and fitted for my use,
And taught her all the Duties of a Wife:
Like Virgin-wax, she wears no other Stamp,
But what my own Instructions have impressed.
Then judge, how happy, and secure I am.

Pray, Sir, what lucky Star directed you to the discovery of this Treasure?


That (Sir) I owe to Fortune: For in a Country-Farme I first saw her, and read
it in her looks, that Heaven had not designed her for that place: And being
informed she was a Merchants Daughter, who had miscarried at Sea, and before
his Voyage had put her to Nurse there, I easily prevailed with the Old Woman
of the House, who was my Tenant, to resign her Charge to me. I took her, as a
Present sent from Heaven to make the rest of my days comfortable, and happy.
For two years together I have trained her up my self, making it my business to
preserve her in her primitive innocence, and simplicity: And, lest the
contagion of ill company should infect the original candour of her nature with
the least tincture of malice, I have placed two Servants about her, the
honestest and simplest, I could find out.


But how will so much simplicity be a Match for the wisdom of Sir Salomon? Can
such extremes meet with delight?


I pity your ignorance; search the Records of Time, and by all Examples, old,
and modern, you shall still find it true, that wit in woman is the Bawd of
Vice:

Who of the Sex had ever fame of wit,
That was not famous to the other way?

Fie, Sir Salomon; you're too Satirical; and too singular in your Judgment. For
my part, were I to choose a Wife (be she honest, or be she otherwise) I say, let
her have Wit; for that will either protect her Honesty, or conceal her Frailty.


Well, Sir; I have no time at present to prosecute this argument, and make you
sensible of the folly, and danger of your Principles; Only, as a friend, I must
advise you to have a care of your Daughter; for she (I hear) is a Wit.


I thank you, Sir: And (to return your kindness) let me counsel you to look
well to your Wife; for, by your own confession, she wants wit to look to her
self.


'Tis my Maxim so to do; and should be yours: In order to your Conversion, pray
come to morrow to my Wedding: Perhaps, Example may be more prevalent with you,
than Precept. However I have done a Friends part; And after all, if a mischance
should happen in your Family, there is a Saying, that the Disaster of Fools
does reward the Circumspection of the Wise.


I'll not fail you at your Wedding Dinner; And to requite your Proverb, take
heed, lest to morrow it prove true, That Fools make Feasts, and Wise-men eat
'em. Farewell.


Farewell.


Ah, Madam! How can I hope, that you should be constant in your love to him, to
whom Fortune is so constant in her hatred?


I shall not make the Injustice of Fortune my President: But what I have often
told you, I now repeat; nothing but your jealous humour has the power to make
me inconstant.


'Tis of my Stars and of my Destiny,
That I am jealous (Madam) not of you.
When with a Father all the world conspires
To cast me down; what Virtue is so firm,
As to support a Man so weakly built,
So potently assaulted?

This very Doubt is more unjust to me,
Than all your Fathers Cruelty to you.
Your want of Means, and Friends
My love can pardon, and (perhaps) supply;
But your Mistrusts I never will forgive.
These early mists upon our morning love
Show, that a stormy day will follow.

Madam, these little mists before my eyes
Are, but the smoke, which from Lov's fire does rise:
Nor can your Reason that calm Lover choose,
Who, what he loves, is not concerned to loose.

Rather, than him with furious doubts possessed,
Who (still alarmed) gives, and takes no rest.

Unjealous Love is a degenerate thing,
A feeble, lazy Drone without a sting:
Nor is it glorious such tame Herds to sway;
The generous Lyon must your will obey.

Brave Subjects! Prostrate at my feet they lye
To day, to morrow in my face they fly.

Love, and Rebellion inconsistent are,
But, Madam, let's compose this amorous war;
Which swells the number of your Victories,
Making your Wit as conquering, as your Eyes.

Mr. Single; well met. -- Nay, be not startled. I am now glad to see you; and
to see you in the company of my Daughter.


Sir, you surprise me with a happiness unlooked for in this unusual kindness of
your expressions --


Hold, Sir; I would not have you disappointed in your expectation by promising
your self too much. My desire of seeing you now was to let you know in her
hearing, that I have taken notice of your late frequent resort to my house:
And, though according to my inclination, my doors should never be shut to a
person of your merit, yet (as matters stand) you must excuse me, if I prefer
the Interest of a Child before the Concern of an Acquaintance. Sir, to be
short; I know your constant Visits imply your Addresses to my Daughter: And,
since your Father is resolved to make you a stranger to his Estate, I must
entreat you henceforth to be a stranger to my House; for (to deal freely with
you) no Deserts (though never so great) attended with poverty, can satisfy the
care of a Parent in the disposal of his Daughter.


Ah Sir! will you be my Father's Second in his unjust cruelties towards me? --


Sir, I will have no Argument in this case; nor put a Father's Right into
dispute. Farewell. Daughter, I desire your company.


Fortune! thy malice is so spent on me,
That thou hast now disarmed thy cruelty:
But I forgive thee; thou (alas!) art blind;
Since Nature, that has eyes, proves more unkind:
Of foreign wrongs can I resent the smart,
Destroyed by him, of whom I am a part?
If he, that made, and should preserve me too,
His work undoes, what may not strangers do?

Dear Mr. Single! have I met you at last? I vow, it has cost me five good
shillings in Coach-hire to find you out.


Pray, leave me; I am not at leisure.


Leave my dear Single? Not for a world.


Pray, Sir, forbear: I tell you, I am busy.


Busy? so much the better: Of all men living I love business, and hate idle
fellows.


Sir, if you will not release me, I shall be forced to make my escape.


What? fly from thy Friend? sure, some melancholy Devil does possess thee.


No, Sir; I am not possessed, but I find, I am haunted. Pray, let me beg it of
you, as a kindness. or an Alms, that you will leave me to my self, and my
occasions, which at this present cannot possibly admit of your company.


No, Sir, no: I see, you're in trouble; and I must not forsake my friend in
Adversity.





Besides, I must propose to you a business of weighty consequence, in which you
must needs do me a kindness -- I see, you don't mind me. What are you thinking
on? Unbosom your self to a Friend.


Faith, I am thinking, that the greatest Plague of Egypt was that of Flies,
and Gnatts buzzing about their Ears.


Egypt! Good Lord! How your thoughts ramble? Well; I must put you out of this
Fit of the Spleen. Come, prithee, let's go dine at Chateline's; and there I'll
tell you my whole business.


O, no Sir; I'll rather compound with you, and hear it now; provided, I may be
quickly released.


Nay, as for brevity, and quickness of dispatch, there's no man upon the face of
the Earth that loves it like me: 'Tis my Mistress. I hate your prolix Fellows:
Long speeches are death to me: And that's the reason why I never hear a Sermon;
nor a Presbyterian-Grace; nor a French Tragedy; nor a --


Hold, hold: Pray make your words good; and he not so long in the commendation
of Brevity.


Why, then to the Point. There is a certain Lady in this Town, with whom I am
desperately and damnably in Love; And I want a good opportunity to tell her so.
For (look ye) I take a business of this nature to be half done, when 'tis well
proposed. You (Mr. Single) are the only proper Person for me to employ in this
Treaty; And, if you succeed in it, Sir Arthur Addel is yours for ever.


Well, What's her Name?


Iulia; the fair Daughter of old Wary.


Iulia? What a storm he has raised in my blood?
But the Fool is below my Jealousy, and resentment.

Nay, prithee, dear Single, don't relapse into thy Melancholy Fit.


No, Sir; I am only studying your Case: For (to deal friendly with you) there
is much for you to consider in the business, which you take in hand; To my
certain knowledge, there are at least a dozen Pretenders (all men of the Sword)
to that Ladies favour: And, before you can have admittance to the place of a
Suitor, you must dispute your entrance with every one of these; And that (you
know) will be a long, and hazardous work.


Are there so many of 'em (say you?) Why then they may have fighting work
enough amongst themselves, and let others alone: 'Pox take 'em all, my business
is not with them, but with the Woman.


But Lovers, Sir Arthur, are (like Argus) all Eyes: And you can no more conceal
your self to 'em, then walk invisible at noon day.


Now, Is not this a damnable Custom, that a Man can no sooner love a pretty
Woman, but he must presently be quarrelling and fighting with all that come
near him. I wonder, how the Devil they can do it; For I can't be in Love and in
Wroth too, all at once, for the heart of me.


Were all the World of your benign temper, I confess we should enjoy the
Blessings of Peace. But, Sir Arthur, as the case now stands, What is it you
would have done?


Hai?


Consider, consider -- This Fool well managed may prove useful to me.


Faith, even let her go. What shall a man be the better for a Mistress, when
his Throat is cut?


How? Let her go, by no means, Sir. It shall never be read in Chronicle, that
Sir Arthur Addel (my renowned friend) bawk'd a Mistress for fear of Rivals.
Come (Sir;) you shall trust your Love and your Reputation in my hands; And all
my Rhetoric shall serve you with your Mistress, and my Sword against your
Rivals.


Dear Single, let me hug thee, and kiss thee. I vow now, I could be as kind to
thee, as to my Mistress.


O, pray, Sir, reserve your tenderness for her.


Ran, tan, tan. You, and I, (Mr. Single) will fight the proudest of 'em all:
Nay, when I have a good second o'my side, I can be as valiant as my betters.


Why now, Sir Arthur, you speak like a Wight, that wears not his Knighthood
in vain. What a blemish had you cast upon the whole Order, if you had tamely
suffered your Mistress to be snatched from you by Rivals.


They snatch her from me? They shall eat her as soon. O! that I had but one of
those Rivals here now! First would I make him beg his Life, and then kill him.


Brave Sir Arthur! Now your Courage, like a Lion rows'd from sleep, stretches
out, and begins to roar: But you must have a great care to moderate this excess
of Rage in the presence of your Mistress: For before her you must be a Lamb.


Why there's the Devil on it again: I tell you, I shall never make both at once,
a good Lyon, and a good Lamb too.


I warrant you; 'Tis but giving your mind to it -- And, to lose no time (for
Lovers, I know, are in hast) you shall presently go about the Work; and, in the
first place ask her Fathers consent, who can never refuse a Man of your Parts,
and Estate. When this is done, I'll deliver you a Letter of Commendation for
the young Lady, which you must put into her hands with all privacy, and
circumspection: For, secrecy in Love is as necessary as in Cabinet Counsels.


I know that as well you --


Pox o'this troublesome Fellow, that comes to disturb us now. Methinks he has
the Countenance of a Rival. My fingers itch to be at him.


No, no.


Dear Single!


Peregreen Woodland! You're the most unlooked for Person, and the most welcome
to me in the World. I firmly believed that you had been now in Italy.


Two Months ago I was there; And, 'tis much against my inclination, that I am
not there now: But, Fathers must be obeyed.


How long have you been in England?


Some ten days; All which time I have made it my business to find you out; and
now I owe that to Fortune, which I could not compass by my Industry.


Assure your self, that nothing, but my ignorance of your being come over,
could have deprived me so long of your Company.


I have a Letter here for your Father from mine; it contains business of
importance, at least, to me: For, it gives me credit for some Money, which my
occasions at present stand in need of.


Though I cannot introduce you to him for some reasons, which I shall tell you
hereafter, yet I'll direct you to a speedy sight of him: But first I must of
necessity have an hours discourse with you.


With all my heart; and let it be over a Glass of Wine.


Agreed. But before we go, I must needs make you happy in the knowledge of the
incomparable Sir Arthur Addel. I can assure you, he is a Rarity, which perhaps
all your Travels cannot Match.


I know, so fair a Superscription must needs be extraordinary in the Contents.


Sir, for Mr. Single's sake you may command me.


Well, Sir Arthur; you must not neglect your business. When you've dealt with
the Father, give me notice of it; and let me alone with the Daughter: You may
reckon her your own.


As sure, as Chick in Pouch, or Louse in Bosom.
My Flames are raging; and who dares oppose 'em?
They soon shall thaw her Heart, though ne'er so Icy;
Like Iulius Caesar, veni, vidi, vici.

NOw Timothy, I have fully instructed you in all particulars. You may therefore
go back to my own Lodgings: Be sure you forget not the Lisence, and the Parson.


I warrant you, Sir, but may I not have the happiness now to see my young Lady
that must be to morrow.


No, Timothy; 'Tis enough for the first time, that I acquaint you with the
Lodging where she lies. Time is precious, and not to be spent in seeing sights:
Away, make hast.





Gods so, 'tis Master.


What? our new Master, that gave us Money?


No, no, our old Master Evans, that never gave us a Farthing. Why don't you
open the door?


An't be he, Even open it your self: I am busy,


Are you so? why then so am I too.


Sure they must needs hear me knock, for I can hear them gabbel: Ho; Whose
within there?


Sir, this Slut Alice won't open the door.


Sir, this lazy Rogue Ralph won't let you in.


Precious Coxcombs; Open the Door quickly, or I'll make you both fast this
se'night from Beef and Pudding.


Stand off; I'll open it;


You open it? You shall be hanged first.


'Tis I (Sir) that let you in.


You lie: were it not in respect to Master Evan's Worship --


Unmannerly Whelp!


Cry you mercy (Sir) 'twas she was the cause on it.


Was it so? because I opened the door first.


Peace, both of you; Will you never arrive to Common sense? Let no body speak
till I bid them -- Ralph, come hither: What has your Mistress done, since I saw
her last?


Why, Sir, my Mistress -- my Mistress -- God be thanked --


Rude Raskal! Who taught you to speak to me with your Hat on?


Indeed your Worship has Reason; I had forgot my self.


Go, call her down presently. Allice; and was my Betty much troubled for my
absence?


Troubled? No.


No?


O, yes Sir; Now I think on it; she was troubled.


Why, this is now, as it should be; with thy work in thy hand: Pretty Rogue;
What ar't thou making there?


A Coefe, and a Pinner, Sir. I have made an end of your Shirts, and your
Night-caps.


That's very well: For Idleness, Betty, is the Mother of all Evil; Come, give
thy work to Alice; for thou and I must talk together. Ralph, fetch me out a
Chair, And, Art thou grown perfect in thy Catechism?


Yes (Sir) I can say it all without Book.


You two go in, and leave us alone -- But, Betty, 'tis not enough to say it by
Rote; you must print it in your heart; and make it your daily study and
exercise; thereby to govern all the actions of your Life. Betty, come nearer me
-- hold up thy head a little more -- So -- Turn your Body a little this way --
That's well: And whilst I talk to thee, look up in my face -- That's very
well: Now, Betty, I must examine you a little, to see how you have profited in
your Catechism; First tell me, What you were made for?


To be your Wife, forsooth.


And what's the Duty of a Wife?


To honour, and obey her Husband; and love no man but him.


Now, What are the particular duties; which I expect from her, who is to be my
Wife?


First, to watch and observe all the motions of your Eyes, and Countenance, and
accordingly to stand, go, run, sit still, speak, or be silent: Secondly, To
detest and abhor going to Court, Hide-Park, Mulberry-Garden, or the
Play-Houses. Thirdly, To Visit, and be visited by none of a remoter degree,
then an Uncle, or an Aunt; Fourthly, To write and receive no Letters, to accept
and give no Presents, but such as you see, and allow of: Lastly, To warm
Napkins, make Cawdles, dress Issues, give Glisters, and the like; still
remembering, that the office of a Nurse inseperably belongs to the duty of your
Wife.


Incomparable Girl? Thou hast answered to admiration in all things concerning
the virtues of a Wife; Now tell me, What, and how many are the deadly sins,
which she ought carefully to avoid?


They are seven.


Which is the First?


Pride: For, a woman, that thinks too well of her self, is apt to think better
of another man, then she does of her Husband.


Very well. What's the Second?


Covetousness: For she that Loves Money overmuch, will first pick her Husbands
pockets, and at last be bought and sold her self.


That's right: Now the Third.


Lechery, -- Pray (Sir) What's that? For you have no Annotations upon it in
all your Catechism.


Pretty Simplicity! O, Betty, That's a very Pawthing, and must not so much as
be thought on, proceed to the Fourth.


Anger: For Anger breeds Revenge; and a Wives Revenge commonly lights upon the
Husband's Head, and leaves dreadful marks behind.


The Fifth?


Gluttony: For the Woman, that feeds high, requires more exercise, then is to
be had within doors: And modest Wives should seldom rainge abroad.


Admirable well: I see, thou art so perfect in thy Lesson, that I may spare my
self, and thee the Labour of a farther examination. Well, Betty, thou art my
Master-piece; And shortly I intend to set thee forth as an Exact Model, and
Pattern to the World (which too much needs it) of a perfect, obedient Wife; In
the mean time, we must repair to our several tasks, and prepare our selves,
Thou to be happy, I to make thee so.


Daughter, I had rather your own Reason, then my Justice in punishing you,
should make you sensible, how heinous the Crime of Rebellion is in a Child to a
Parent; Have you not a fresh Example before your Eyes, in your Beggarly
Gallant, turned out of Doors, and ejected from all Title, and Claim, which
Nature gave him to a Fair Inheritance? and now become a mere Vagabond in the
wide World? you know, it lies in my power to do, what his Father has done; I
can marry again, and bring a second Brood into the World to possess that
Fortune, which you undeserve: And, if you persist in your obstinate passion for
this Indigent-Lover, I am resolved, You shall ee'n meet him upon equal terms.


Sir, I confess, all is in your power; And, as I need not be bribed by the
hopes of a plentiful fortune to do my duty; so 'tis in vain by frights and
terrors to exact that from me, which liess not in my power to perform; the
example in Sir Salomons Family is so odious a President of tyranny in the eyes
of the whole world, that I am sure you can never make it your Pattern. And,
Sir, give me leave, for your satisfaction and mine, to make you this solemn
protestation, that I never will marry him, whom you like not, nor him, whom I
love not.


Gossip, your love should follow my liking, not ramp before it.

It casts a blemish on a Virgin's name,
To own a voluntary, unbid flame.
By your dead Mother you have oft been told,
That Maiden Breasts, like snow, are white, when cold:
But, when the sultry breath of Love does blow,
All that is Dirt, which formerly was Snow.

Such passion I abhor no less, than you,
As honour does not to our Sex allow;
But (Sir) unless by Love made soft, and light,
The yoke of Marriage all the world would fright:
And, if my Love in Wedlock-bands be forced,
Alas! I am not married, but divorced.

Begone, my reasons are but lost on thee:
For no dispute can cure Love's Heresy.

These young wenches, when the toy of love once takes them in the head, are
like wild ungoverned Colts, no Curb can hold them, no Fence can stop 'em. This
obstinate affection is so wedged into her mind, that there is no way to loosen
it, but by driving in another.


That (Sir) may do it.


Could I but find a Fortune and a man according to my expectation, I would then
make trial, what a Fathers power can do.


Tis he -- By your leave, Sir: I have a Paper here in my pocket, which I must
beg you to peruse.


With all my heart (Sir) provided there be no thing of Petition, nor of Poetry
in it.


No Fiction, I'll assure you: all the contents are true.


A true Particular of the Estate of Sir Arthur Addel Knight -- What do ye mean
by this Sir? I am not prepared for a purchase.





Summa totalis 1432 l. per annum, truly, Sir, your Letter has a very fair
Subscription: but still the meaning of the Contents is so mystical, that I know
not how to answer it: Pray Sir explain.


Thus 'tis (Sir) in short: your Daughter (do ye conceive me) wants a Husband;
and I want a Wife (do ye conceive me;) Now what are we born for in this world,
but to supply one another wants? Do ye conceive me?


I marry (Sir) now you speak plain, and to the purpose: But this is a matter,
which requires deliberation.


Pox on deliberation: I am in haste, and so perhaps is she too.


Not so fast. How do I know, that this is a true particular? And how do you
know what Portion I shall give with my Daughter? and how do we both know,
whether she'll consent to the bargain;


Hang Portion, and Particulars: let our Lawyers wrangle about them; I am a
known man of land, and so are you of money. Your business is to give me your
consent, and then let me alone with your Daughter.


You speak very home: sure (Sir Arthur) the world has done you a great deal of
wrong in representing you, as a man of Parts, much inferior to those, which I
discover in you.


And have you lived so long in the world, and do not know that 'tis the
arrant'st liar in nature?


Well Sir; to let you see, how little I believe it, I here give you my consent
(provided this be a true particular) to marry my Daughter; win her, and wear
her.


Thank you heartily, good Father Wary; for I reckon my self now as good, as
married: I know she can no more refuse me for a Husband, than you for a
Son-in-law.


So (Sir;) I perceive you speak the language of our young men of these times,
who exceed all their Ancestors in their good opinion of themselves: The
business is done, if my Daughter can think but half so well of your person, as
you do.


I vow (Sir) I am afraid of nothing, but that she will be too fond of me: And I
take it to be the worst surfeit, that is, to be cloyed with kindness.


If that be all your apprehension, fear nothing: I dare answer for her.


See you be as good as your word: And (to lose no more time) you may presently
let her know, how happy she is in my affection: but let her know it gently, and
by degrees, lest too sudden joy suffocate her spirits.


The danger is not great: however she's beholding to you for your care; But
(Sir Arthur) pray let me advise you, as a friend, to touch as little as you can
upon this string, when you make your addresses to her: For (perhaps) she's as
much infected with this self opinion, as her neighbours; and she'll be apt to
tell you, that Pride is a Vice in men, but Virtue in a woman.


You need not tell me, what I am to say, or do; but, if you will needs be
tutoring, go teach your Daughter, how to behave her self; for I shall return
immediately in a pretenders equipage with Drums beating, and Colours flying,
and then let her expect a Charge.


Roger, To say the truth, this Sir Arthur's a very shallow Knight: But 'tis no
matter; he'll prove the kinder Husband.

And better 'tis (your Modern Authors say)
To rule a Fool, then a Wise Man obey.

'Tis not possible for me to express how deeply I resent your Father's
unnatural rigour: But can it be true, that he will be married to morrow, and
that no body should know to whom?


My intelligence comes from such hands, that I am sure 'tis authentic: But,
neither by my own industry, nor the help of spies, can I possibly learn out
the person of the Bride.


Well, Sir, I am resolved to serve you in that office my self: for I can do it
with less suspicion, than any body; because your Father dreams so little of our
Communication together, that he is yet ignorant of my being in England; and
I'll use all my art to win so far upon his favour, and confidence, as that I
may put my self in a capacity of serving you.


Sir, my case is desperate; yet my obligation to you will be as great, as if
your endeavours were attended with success. However your own business (I know)
requires a quick dispatch with my Father: There's his Lodging; and fare you
well; for I must go hunt out my simple Knight.


But where shall we meet two hours hence?


Where we last met, and then we'll confer notes together.


Is Sir Salomon Single at home?


Pray what's your business with him?


That's no answer to my question: my business (friend) is with him, not with
you: Is he within, or no?


Why, Sir, unless I may know your business, or your name, he is not within.





Perhaps he may.


Why then (grave Sir) be pleased to tell your Master, that my name is Peregreen
Woodland; and that I desire to know of him, whether he be within, or no.


You shall have your answer presently.


Very well Sir, This stiff piece of formality deserves to be cudgell'd, were it
only to make him more limber: but 'tis the nature of fools in employment to
think such solemn rudeness to be the badge of their Office.


Mr. Peregreen? had I known it was you, I would have left all business, and a
Mistress too, to fly into your embraces: your Father is the oldest
acquaintance, and best friend I have in England: Lord! how time runs away? I
knew you no higher, than this. I protest, you make me an old man.


Not so, Sir, I hope; since I hear, you are to be married to morrow.


How is it possible you should hear it, unless my Steward told you. But (Mr.
Peregreen) I have nothing that I shall make a secret of to you. 'Tis even so;
and you are returned from your Travels most opportunely, to grace my Wedding.
O! how glad should I be, that your Father were here too. Pray, when did you
hear from him? how does he do? He is so wedded to his estate in the Country,
that his friends in Town are quite forgot.


I lately received a Letter from him with this enclosed; which will give you as
good an account of his health, as I can.


I joy to see any thing that comes from him -- Timothy.


Sir.


Bring me fifty pieces in gold presently.


I have reason to believe, that my Father may be in town sooner. than these
Letters mention: for I have one from him of a fresher date, which tells me,
that an extraordinary occasion calls him hither in company of a Merchant,
lately arrived in England: but what his business is, the Letter mentions not.


Were it not possible, that we might see him here to day, or to morrow? Nothing
could heighten more my Nuptial Joys, then the presence of such a Friend?


For the precise time of his coming, I can answer nothing: But, Sir; Might I
not be so happy, as to kiss the hands of your fair Bride before the Ceremony of
Marriage?


In that (Sir) you must excuse me: This Jewel is not to be taken out of the
Case, till I wear her.


Here is the Sum you commanded me to bring.


Pray (Sir) take it; and, if you have occasion for more, you may as freely
Command My purse, as your Fathers.


I humbly thank you: I have no present necessity of more -- But, Mr. Steward,
if you please to draw a Note of so much received --


What do ye mean, Sir? Timothy, Let it alone. I hope you do not imagine, that
you deal with a Scrivener.


Sir, you are too generous.


No Complements, good Mr. Peregreen: Well, and, How long have you been in
England?


Some ten days; in all which time I could not till yesterday, find out your
Habitation.


And how does your own Country relish with you, since your experience of
Foreign Parts?


Better, then before.


I rejoice to see you make such good use of your Travels; For, the best thing
which a man can bring from abroad, is the love of home. And, How have you spent
your time, since your coming over? methinks a young man of your Complexion
should be engaged, ere this, in some Love-adventure: What? Are the Ladies kind
to you?


Considering the shortness of the time, I have no reason to Complain.


Pray, make me your Confident; I am Secret, and true to Love. What Exploit?
What Success have you had?


Sure (Sir) you want Leisure for such frivolous Narrations.


You mistake me; I have Youth enough left to relish affairs of Love.


I shall with less reluctance obey you, because there is something very
extraordinary in my adventure, which may afford you Divertisement: And (to tell
you truly) the Money, which you favoured me with, I chiefly want to prosecute
this design,


I long to hear it.


I confess, here is a young Beauty here in Town, which has already gained very
much upon my heart: She is one, who has received no improvement from Education;
Nor does she want it: For, Nature has left her so well finished, that Art has
little to do. Perhaps her Ignorance is greater then ordinary; but that's
abundantly recompensed by her Innocence: An Air so taking, so free, so modest,
I never yet beheld in any Face.


Had you studied to hit my fancy, you could not have drawn a Copy more like the
Original.


It adds much to my satisfaction, that her Character is agreeable to your Fancy;
I think I may without vanity tell you, that my pretensions and hopes stands
very fair, for I am admitted, and received by her with such expressions of
kindness, as ought to content any reasonable Lover in his first Essays.


Pray, What is her name? and Where does she lodge?


By those about her she's called Mrs. Betty; and I enquired no farther of her
name; she's lodged in a House on the back-side of Holborn, towards the Fields.


Hell, and Devils, What is't I hear?


But, the pleasant part of this Story is, that all this while she is
maintained, and educated in a private cunning way by an old Gentlemen they call
Mr. Evans --


I have trod upon a Snake, which stings me to death!


Sure, he's a person so very remarkable in his kind, that you must needs know
him; Has he not the reputation of a Formal Coxcomb?


I have heard of the name, -- I burst I die.


'Tis much, you should not know him: Though I never saw the Man, yet the
extravagant economy of his Family, and his exottick way of training up this
Lovely Creature sufficiently discovers to me the politic worm in his Pate --
But, to my thinking (Sir) you don't relish this Narrative, as I expected.


O! yes, Sir.


I am afraid, you are of too scrupulous a Conscience for such Relations.


Not at all, Sir.


For my own part, I must acknowledge, that I never embarked in a Love-Adventure
more to my satisfaction in my life: For, though my Passion for her be very
great, yet the pleasure of disappointing the ridiculous Policy of this old
jealous Guardian, is very near as great as that which I receive in the
enjoyment of her affection -- But (Sir) I perceive my Story grows tedious to
you; Nor can I blame your want of Patience, having Love-Concernes of your own,
more pressing and urgent; I shall therefore only Conjure you to be a faithful
preserver of my secret; since the rendering of it public, would ruin my
happiness so well begun: Especcially should it come to the Politic Ears of
that Mr. Evans. Farewell.


Is there a Torment? --





So: so, -- Oh? let me breath a little: was ever Man so tortured, as I am, and
yet constrained to dissemble his pain, and put a smiling Countenance upon his
Torment? False Woman! thy whole Sex is a mere Quicksand, false, and
treacherous ground for any Man to build his happiness upon! Thy whole Sex is a
Generation of Vipers, that gnaw and eat into the hearts that give them
reception: They are born with all their poison about them, which no Art, or
Industry, no Education can remove -- Unjust Stars? That a vain young Fellow, not
knowing what he does, but conducted by the hand of blind chance, should thus
baffle me in my Love, my Reputation; and in one moment disappoint the whole
design of my happiness, which with long study and labour, has been managed, by
the most exact Rules of Policy. That I should furnish him with Money, to cut my
own throat? and he, out of Kindness and Confidence, be the Informer of his own
Treason against me? -- Yet in all this misfortune I were unjust, not to
acknowledge some favour from my Stars, in the miraculous discovery of this
Mine, before the fatal Fire was put to it: And now, having warning, and time to
repair, fortify, and countermine, if I fail to blow up, and scatter the Enemy,
and to maintain my ground, let me become the scorn of the Wise, and the
Laughter of Fools.


You, Mr. Single; and you Mr. Peregreen; are the two dearest Friends I have in
the World, And I bespeak you both to my Wedding.


Against what time, Sir Arthur?


Let me see -- About some four days hence; For by that time the Lawyers, the
Tailors, the Semstresses, and riming Poets, with the rest of the
Wedding-Mongers, will have all things in readiness.


But will the Lady be ready so soon?


Will she tarry so long?


You're a great Conqueror Sir Arthur, that can make such Forts surrender at
first summons: But, Did she ever come to a Parley with you?


Hang Parlyes; I never spoke to her in my Life; But her Father begs me to take
her; and I hope, she has more need of me, then he has. Can she resist a man of
Estate, and Title, with my Parts?


Arthur, you make me stark mad, to see how foolishly you destroy your own
designs, by talking at this rate, before Mr. Peregreen there: To my certain
knowledge he's newly entered into the List of the Rivals; And is a dangerous one
too; for he's a Landed Man, and will fight.


God's so, What an unlucky Fellow am I; Why could not you tell me on it?


I wincked, and wincked upon you, and did all that I could; But, you run on so
madly in your Career, that the Devil cannot stop you, when once you're going.


Dear Mr. Single, What must I do then?


Nay, you must first know what he'll do: But your only way for the present will
be to address your self to the Lady with all secrecy and speed; And if you can
but get her of your side, that will be some protection to you.


Well; I'll go immediately and put my self in equipage; and then have at her;
but, let not him know it; I have your Letter of Recommendation in my Pocket;
And, if the old man be but at home, I warrant you I shall do well enough with
the Daugter -- Faith, Gentlemen, for some reasons, which I have since thought
on, I shall not be Married so soon as I said: For, this Wedlock is such a damnable
Clogg, that I vow, I don't know what to think on it. God be'wy.


This is a pleasant Knight.


O! let him go: The Fool began to grow troublesome, And I sent him on an
Arrand. But, as Blunt as you see him, he's a most admirable Tool for the Work
which I have in hand. Now, since we are rid of him, pray let me hear what past
between my Father and you.


Faith, were he not your Father, I should think him as extravagant in his way,
as this good Sir Arthur is. For upon our first interview, he was all sweetness,
and kindness; He paid me his money with the best grace that ever I saw. He owned
his Marriage to me; but, when I asked him to wait upon his Mistress before the
Marriage, there he stuck, and absolutely refused me: yet still his gracious
aspects were the same; and Ilabouring to improve his Favour, and gain farther
upon his Confidence, told him the Story (he putting me upon it) of Mrs. Betty),
which (you know) is pleasant enough in the Relation: And all on the sudden,
when his kindness and good humour were at highest, he sunk in a moment to so
flat an ebb of coldness, and dryness, that he scarce minded what I said,
turned his head on one side, stood making of Faces, and was so like a man
distracted, that I cannot attribute this inequality, in his temper, to any
thing else, but some inward disorder in his Brain, which must necessarily in
time grow to a direct Frenzy.


I have too much cause to believe, what you apprehend. But, Sir, much against
my Will, I must leave your Company: For my several designs of disappointing my
Fathers Marriage, and securing my own Love, so hurry me too and fro, that I
cannot enjoy a moment of rest.


Farewell, may you prosper in both: To tell you truly, this little Betty is so
much in my head, and (I'm afraid) in my heart too, that I am very near as
restless as you.


My brace of Monkys, advance, and stand before me, that you may receive in
Charge, how to behave your selves in my Service; First, because I am a Martial
Man, I will assign you employments accordingly: You, Sirrah, shall be my
Trumpeter; and you my Scout. Your Office, Trumpeter, is, wherever you go, and
especially in my Mistress quarters, to sound forth the Praises of me, your
Commander in Chief -- Rogue! D'e Laugh? Know, Sirrah, 'tis the fashion of us
Great Ones to keep Men in pay for no other end, but to Commend us in all places
right or wrong -- You, Scout, are a necessary Officer in my Service; and I
shall put you upon Duty presently: You are to watch the motions of the Enemy;
and when he draws near, to give me intelligence.


Pray, Sir, Who is the Enemy?


I see. (Boy) you're a Blockhead. I go a Wooing Sirrah, and all that pretend
to my Mistress are the Enemy. Go, Sirrah; scout abroad to Mr. Wary's House, and
if thou see any body in the way, that has the Countenance of a Rival,
instantly retreat to your head-quarters here.


A Rival, Sir? What's that?


Well; there is no such misery in the World, as to be served by Fools; Dost
not know a Rival, when thou see him? Why, What art thou good for?


If your Worship will give me any Marks to know him by, I'll do my best to
find him out.


Find him out? I tell thee (Sirrah) I would not find him out; nor have him find
me out: Ignorant Puppy! not know a Rival?


Rival? Sure your Worship means a Sergeant; I know them well enough by the Dirt
o'their Clothes, and the slits o'their noses.


What Rascal? Dost think that I am afraid of a Sergeant? No, I defy all the
Justice of England: For, I have Fifteen Hundred a year, and owe never a Groat.
Come hither, Boy; I see I must take pains to instruct thee: A Rival (Sirrah)
is a thing compounded of Collar, and Love: One of his Eyes, and half his Face,
that looks t'ords his Mistress, is so mild and sweet, that you would Swear, the
Creature had no Gall in it: whilst the other side of his Countenance looks on
all about him, as if he could eat 'em up. When he speaks, the Clapper in his
Mouth strikes double; To his Mistress Ears it sounds, Sweet Madam, let me kiss
your fair hands; and, to the rest it Rings out, Dam Me, What make you here? --
Now (Blockhead) I hope, you'll know a Rival, when you see him: Abroad then,
quickly, as I bid you, and bring me word if the Coast be clear.


I'll do my best to serve your Worship: And, if I discover any such strange
thing, as you talk of, I'll bring you notice instantly.


Now (Sirrah) let me examine you a little, and see, if you have any more wit
then your Companion. How long have you been of the Running-Trade?


Ever since I could go.


Why, that's very strange!


Not at all, Sir: I come of a Running Generation. My Father (as they tell me)
was an over-grown Link-boy; and my Mother was a Woman employed in Errands; who,
when she went of me, out of Modesty, and Shamfac'dness, fairly run the Country;
so that I was born to my Trade, and have it by kind, as well as by Education.


But, Dost thou know what belongs to Service?


Sir, there's not a Boy in all this Town of my Age, that has my experience:
For, I have served above a dozen Masters, besides Mistresses, and am able to do
your Worship good Offices in all kinds.


Thou art a Boy worth having.


I am none of those heavy Lobcocks, that are good for nothing, but to hang at
the tail of a Coach; I am for all Service, as well by night as by day: If your
Worship be a Gamester, I can furnish you with Cards of the newest Mark; Dice,
High, or Low; I can --


Well, Boy: These qualities may be useful hereafter: But, for the present, I
have appointed thee thy Office already.


For that (Sir) I can Swear and Lye for the Credit of my Master, as well as any
Boy, or Man of them all.


O Sir, Sir, -- they come, they come!


Who, Boy? Who? -- The Rivals?


I Sir, I.


What a Valiant Knight have I for my Master?


Well, my Masters; to morrow's the VVedding day, and this is your last time of
Trial; I need not tell you, how much our Credit's engaged in the exact
performance of this piece of Ingenuity: As for the Speeches in the Masque,
those I take upon my self; and as for this Masking Dance, pray take notice,
that although the Performance be yours, the Contrivance was mine -- Now Music,
strike up again.


Bravely performed! This will do: And let me tell you, There is more Wit in
this Dance, then in a dozen of your best Modern Plays: They with their gingle
of Rhyme, and playing with Words, go just like the Chimes of St. Bart'elmy: and
please the Ladies ears, but effect not the understanding at all. This does
gratefully Ravish our noblest Sense, the Eye, with an exact contrivance of
Figure and Motion, which are the Elements of Beauty:

This Entertainment worthily may Greet
Our Solomon, and Sheba, when they meet.

ALlice; Shall you and I talk a little wisely together?


I, come; just like our Master Evans.


Our Master Evans? hang him, dry-bones: No, we'll talk just as our Fine new
Master talks with Mrs. Betty.


O, I: come, do you begin.


O Rogue; now would thou have me make Love to thee, and Kiss thy hands over,
and over, and squeeze em, and cast Sheeps eyes on thee, just, as the Fine
Gentleman does upon Mrs. Betty.


O pray be quiet; you are not half so Fine a Man, as he; an you were --


Mary come up, Gillen Flourish, is that a Bit for your greasy Chops? A'n you be
so dainty, you may even fast long enough.


Why so I will for all you, if I have a mind to it.


Nay, but Allice; consider a little; Since the Fine Gentleman came amongst us,
we have got Fortunes of our own: and Folk, that have means, should think with
themselves, how to set up in the World; If I join my Twenty Shillings, with
thy Twenty Shillings, and thou join thy self with my self, we should begin the
World curiously together.


There are other-guess Men, then you, to begin withal: I'll have neither
beginning, nor ending with you --


Peace, peace; here's Master Evans.


O! How he Looks.


Slaves, dispatch quickly: make ready to die.


O pray Sir.


Indeed I shall not be ready a great while.


Peace, Traitors; examine your Conscience; think what you've done.


I did nothing; 'twas she opened the door, and let him in.


But 'twas you, that told him first; he mought come in.


I told him no more, then Mrs. Betty bid me.


Still worse, and worse! quickly Villains, confess, confess: When came he
first? How often has he been here? How long did he stay? Did he come by day or
by night? What did he say? What did he do? No body speak?


O Sir, I have got the Palsy in my Tongue, I can't speak.


Rascal! Are you stealing away? if you stir an inch, I'll flea you alive.


No, no; Sir: when I have recovered my Senses, I'll tell you all.


Base, and ungrateful Vermin! that would have starved, and stunk in a Ditch
long e're this, had I not taken them under my Roof, nourished them with my
Bread, and raised them from the extremity of want, and impotent folly, to a
comfortable subsistence, and state of living: And after all this (treacherous
Wretches!) Could you betray such a Master? let a Man into my House to rifle my
happiness, rob me of all my Treasure? --


No, indeed Sir; he was very honest; we have mist nothing out of the House
never since he came.


Hush, brute beast! Come, confess quickly, How came he in? What did he do to
Mrs. Betty?


Why Sir, about a week ago --


But 'tis not a week though; nor won't be, till to morrow night.


'Tis no matter.


There came a man to the door --.


No, no; he's out: there came a woman first.


But she did not come in, Did she?


But I say, she did come first.


Why then tell the Story your self: I can never begin to speak, but she puts
me out still.


What patience can overcome all this?


This blockhead will always be prating, and knows not what he says.


Peace both: Call down your Mistress: I'll see if she can speak sense -- Stay:
come back again; Should they give her notice of the business, and my
resentment, she will have time to frame a Story, and disguise the truth: I had
better moderate my anger, and by gentle means draw a plain confession out of
her; wait both here till I come out again.


What a dickens is come to our Master?


I always thought the coming of this young Man would make a foul house at
last.


As sure as can be some mad Dog has bit him.


No, no: 'tis a what-dee-call thing, like a Fly under a Horse-tayl, that makes
him wince, and fling about so: I think they call it Jealousy.


Jealousy? What's that?


Why, that's a Disease, which Folk in Love are troubled with. 'Tis Physic,
that works the wrong way; in stead of going downwards, it flies up into the
head.


Come, Betty, 'tis fine Walking. Go, get you within doors -- And a sweet day.


Yes indeed.


What news do ye hear?


O Sir, my little Bird died last night.


I'm sorry for it -- Betty, the World is grown very Malicious. Would you think,
that some of the spiteful Neighbours hereabouts should report, that a certain
young Man (a stranger) has several times been seen going in, and out of your
Lodging, and that you have received, and entertained him in discourse whole
hours together? But, I am none of those, that are apt to credit the Slanders of
bad Tongues: For, I offered to lay all I am worth, there was no such thing.


Indeed but you must not; for as sure as can be you'd lose all that you lay.


Why? Was there such a Man then? --


O Lord, I; he was here this very day: Had you but come two hours sooner, you
might have seen him here.


Betty, as I remember, I did forewarn, and command you to speak with no man,
especially with no young man.


I remember that too; But had you been here, when I spoke first to him, I knew
you would have done as I did.


It may be so: But pray, let me hear how 'twas.


With all my heart; I was sitting in the Balcony one evening at work, when this
handsome proper young man came by; and just, as I looked on him, he chan't to
look up to me: He presently makes me a low reverence, and I, in civility, rose
up and did the like; By and by he turns back again, and salutes me, as before;
and I, as in good manners I ought, did the same: thus he continued a great many
times together: About two hours after, when 'twas almost dark, there came an
Orange-woman to the door, who sent me up word, That she had the finest
China-Oranges that ever were seen; and, that if I would not buy em with Money,
I should have 'em for Love: I presently came down to see her Oranges (for I
love 'em mightily:) And whilst I was looking upon 'em, she whispered in my
Ear, God bless those sweet eyes of yours; but, if you knew how you have
wounded a brave Gentleman, who is ready to die for you, your heart could not be
so hard to deny him some relief.


Cursed Engine of the Devil?


Good Woman (said I) you're mistaken; I never wounded any body in my Life: The
Man, that you lately saw under the Balcony, I am sure (said she) is so hurt by
you, that he is not like to live two days to an end, unless you take pity of
him: Sure I did not let fall any thing* (said I) down upon his head: No, Madam
(said she) 'Tis from your Eyes alone, that he has received his wound; They have
a secret poison in them, which you are ignorant of, that has seized on his
heart, and reduced him to this Languishing Condition: I view (said I) I would
not for a World, that the poor Man should miscarry, and I be the cause on it;
What would he have me do to help him? Nothing (answered she) but give him leave
to look upon you again; for, your Eyes, that hurt him, can only cure him: With
all my heart, if that will do him good (said I) he may come hither, and see me
as much as he pleases. And (Would you believe it?) as soon as ever he came,
and saw me, he was as well, as ever he was in his life: Now (judge you) could
I'm Conscience do less, then relieve a dying Man, when it cost so little the
doing?





Beyond all measure. He presented me the finest Box that ever you saw (I can
show it you above;) besides, he gave whole handfuls of Money to Ralph and
Alice; and he said the sweetest things that did so please me --


Well; but when you were alone together, What did he do then? Now must I search
for that, which if I find I die.


Then he was kindest of all: He took me by the hands, and held them so fast,
and kissed them a hundred times over.


And what else? -- I am in a cold Sweat!


What else? Why do ye ask?


Come, 'tis a good Girl, speak freely.


But you'll be angry.


No, no.


Sure you will.


I tell you no -- With what a lingering death she torments me?


I vow I'm ashamed to tell you.


Come, come; you may tell me any thing.


He took --


What did he take?


He took my --


Out with it.


Scarlet Ribbon, which you gave me, and said, He would wear it for my sake.





No: Was there any thing else for him to ask? For sure at that time I should
have denied him nothing.


Well, Betty; what is past, is past: and you shall hear no more of it from me:
but, little think you what a danger you've escaped. Thou hast too much simplicity
to understand the malice of these Frizzled heads, who with their Flattery and
fine words, seek only to dishonour and ruin thee.


O, 'tis impossible, that he should mean me any hurt, for he loves me.


He love thee? he deceives thee; and is kind to thee only for his own wicked
ends, which having compassed, he will scorn and hate thee.


Sure that can't be; for he Swore to me above a dozen times that he would
always love me.


You're undone, should thou trust to the Promises and Oaths of this
Seducer; they are mere Cobwebs to catch silly Flies: Besides, Betty, to admit
such Visits, and take Presents, and to delight in the Amorous Conversation, and
dalliance of these Periwig-men, is a Sin (Betty) and a great one.


No sure; A Sin is a black ugly thing: but this is so pleasing, and sweet; And
when one means no hurt --


I tell you, 'tis a Sin, unless Marriage take away the offence.


Say you so? Then pray, Sir, Marry me out of hand.


Yes, Betty, I intend to Marry thee; and I have put all things in readiness for
it.


But, When will you do it?


To morrow morning.


To morrow morning?


Without fail: I see you are mightily pleased.


Yes indeed: I shall be extremely obliged to you, and hugely satisfied in him.


Him? What him?


Why, him, we spoke of.


Very fine; you are mighty forward to choose your Husband: But, for that him,
trouble not your head any further; let him die of his wounds a-Gods name. I am
resolved, when he comes next, you shall give him such a welcome, that the
importunate Guest shall no longer hant you.


Why; What must I do?


You shall shut the door on the Face of him, and then if he knocks, you shall
send that after him out of the Window, which shall cool the heate of his
Passion.


How shall I be able to do that? He is so kind and so handsome --


What? Do ye make a difficulty of it, when I command it? Betty, no more words;
before I stir from hence I'll see you do it my self. I know we shall have him
quickly here. Come along with me, I find you want Instruction yet.


Nay, Sarrah; by Martial-Law I'll have thee hanged for giving a false Allarum,
and putting me in such a disorder, as I have hardly yet recovered.


Truly (Sir) I took 'em to be the Monsters you spoke of.


Did you so? And where were your Eyes (Puppy? a Pox o'your fears, that made 'em
see double: Of all Men living, I hate these Cowardly Rogues.





This is the time too of Old Waryes Assignation. And I Vow, 'tis all I can do,
to rally my Forces against my Onsett on Mrs. Iulia.


This, Sir, was the hour by him appointed to meet you in these walks.


Go tell him, Boy, that I am here, and stay for him.


Here they are, Sir.


Have you no body, Sir, to offer me, but the most notorious Fool of the Town?


Peace: Thou art a greater Fool then he, to refuse a man, that has a great deal
of Money, and little Wit; and so lose the opportunity of being sole Mistress of
a large Fortune. See, in what a submissive posture the Amorous Knight begs his
admittance into your Favour? Nay, come up to him -- Sir Arthur, here's my
Daughter, and God send you good luck with her. Perhaps you'll find her a Coy
Mistress; but, let not that dishearten you; farewell; I'll leave you to your
selves.


Come, Madam; now we are alone, you need not be ashamed to speak your mind
freely to me: Be of good Courage; I am kind-hearted, and can deny you nothing
that you ask.


Sure, the Fool expects that I should Court him. Arthur, I would fain ask you
something; but, I am afraid, you are not good-Natur'd, nor a Man of your Word.


As I am a Gentleman, and a Knight -- She's coming already --


But, What if you should deny me? you know, for a Woman to be refused, is the
last misery that can befall her.


Alas, poor heart; I vow I take such pity o'thee, that there is no kindness, I
would not do instantly for thee.


Well (Sir) remember your promise: I ask you to forbear all manner of
Courtship, or pretension to Marry me.


This is very pretty I faith: I know well enough, you say this now only to try
me; I can't but laugh to think, how damnably you'd be mumped, if I should take
you now at your word.


Do it, pray Sir; and take it which way you will; either grant my real desires,
according to your promise, or punish my Dissimulation (if so you will have it.)


So, so; you're very pleasant: But, pray Madam, for a while give over Fooling,
and be serious; Alas, I know you're bashful (as all young women are, or should
be) and loath to come out with it: Therefore I'll take pity o'you, and speak
your mind for you; You'd fain have a Husband (Would you not? and you'd be
married to a man of Fortune, and good Parts, and be a Lady, (I know you would:)
Then say no more, trouble your self no farther, you shall have all this, here's
your Man, take him, and be thankful.


Is there any persecution like that of a Arthur, I confess you're a Man of
Fortune; but, I am not of Fortunes mind to dote upon you, as she has done: As
for your good Parts, they are past my understanding; and for the Ladyship you
talk of, pray keep it for those, who are disposed to wear it for your sake,
which I am resolved never to do.


What a perverse Woman is this? --


I know the Hand: But; I cannot possibly imagine, how he should come to be the
bearer of it -- Single.

Well, Single, since thou hast put me upon it, I'll act the part thou gav'st me,
so to the Life, that thou shalt tremble at thine own disguise; and so by a
wholesome severity I will at once punish thy jealous humour, and secure thy Love
-- Sir Arthur, come hither; What do ye think this Letter Contains?


A great deal of Truth, I warrant you.


Be you the Judge of that; take it, and read it.


Truly I am a modest man, and don't love to read my own Commendations: but,
since you Command it -- Hai, What's here? -- This Fool -- for your
Divertisement -- to be made use on -- to amuse your Fathers -- discreet
Management: -- O Traitor! there's not a true word in it. Judge you, (Madam;) Am
I a Fool? Am I a fit Person to deceive, or be deceived?


No, Sir Arthur: And, to let you see what part I take in the injury done you,
this is the Answer, which (She tears it. I give to so malicious a Libel. 'Tis
true, I am none of those, who can fall in love with a Man at first sight (which
perhaps you may take unkindly at my hands) --


No indeed, not I.


But I am so much concerned to see plain-dealing and honest simplicity abused,
under the colour of Friendship, that I shall always side with the
well-meaning-Party against the false underminings of Dissemblers.


What a happy man am I?


You are to know, that this Mr. Single has been a Pretender to me himself; and
now he makes you his stalking-horse to drive the Game into his own Nets: But,
go you immediately to him, and relate what you've seen me do, and heard me say;
and tell him from me, that I have now taken a better man into his Room.


Let me alone; I'll tell him his own to some tune.


Since thou art doomed to Poverty
By a Mad-fathers harsh Decree,
And since my Sentence is the same
From mine, if I admit thy Flame;
Single, 'twill just in me appear
To try well, what must cost so dear:
No Common test is fit to prove
The truth, and firmness of thy Love;
Since thou with nothing come to me,
And I leave all to follow thee.

Some way or other I am resolved to find out this woman, before your Father is
Married to her: I must break, or delay the Match.


Your Labour will be fruitless. What can you do in so short a time? his Wedding
is to Morrow.


I have all to day for it: And I'll do nothing, but watch him, and dog him from
place to place, till I find out his hant.


Should you compass the seeing her, What will it avail? you may as soon Convert
a Jew, as make him alter his Resolution.


But she may be Converted: For if she have Honour or Reason in her, 'twill be
enough to tell her only the plain story of your Fathers Humour, and Injustice
towards you. If she be void of both, I'll get some Wench or other to swear a
Promise of Marriage with your Father: Rather then fail I'll pretend a Contract
my self with his Mistress; and so forbid the Banes. For, What is't I would not
do to serve my Friend in such an Exigence?


In all your designs I see much of your kindness, but very little probability
of success.


I suppose you come immediately from your Mistress. Well? Have you delivered my
Letter?


Yes, Sir; I have delivered it.


And, I hope, it produced those good effects, which you have cause to thank me
for.


O yes, Sir; I thank you most abundantly.


But, Have you not brought me an Answer?


Yes, I have an answer for you, but, 'tis by word of mouth.


How's this? Sure you mistake your self.


No, good Mr. Single; 'Tis you that mistake your self, and me too: For, I am no
Fool (do ye see;) And Mrs. Iulia cares not this for you. What say you now, Sir?


Either the Fool's run mad, or I shall -- Sir Arthur, you are grown very
mysterious: Pray, tell me plainly, What did she say?


Then, to be plain, Sir, she said no better of you, then you Writ of me.





Alas, poor Mr. Single! I find you are exteamly troubled: But, I scorn to be
base; and, one good turn deserves another. Shall I write a Letter of
Commendation for you to Mrs. Iulia? Ha, ha!


You're too saucy: Give over fooling quickly, or I shall grow in earnest. Come,
tell me her Answer; and, if you swerve one tittle from the Truth, I shall be
worse to you, then a thousand Rivals.


Lord! Why are you so angry now? If Mrs. Iulia will be kind to me, Can I help
it?


That it should be in the power of such a Worm to sting me thus! -- Dispatch;
What said she?


Good Lord! in what haste you are to hear ill News? I vow now, I can't help it:
she read your Letter, and then gave it me to read (I need not tell you what was
in it). When I had read it, she took it and tore it (without my bidding her) And
said, That was the Answer she made to it: Withal, she bid me tell you, That
she was now provided with a better Man to fill your room.


'Tis false, She did not; She could not say so.


I thought what 'twould come too -- Why, look'ee now, if you won't believe me,
ask her.


Sir Arthur, This business must not pass so: I must be farther satisfied in the
Truth of your relation, or I shall take a course, which I suspect may not be
agreeable to your temper. Go instantly back, and let her know from me, that,
when she sends such a Message by such an Ambassador, she ought to send her
Credentials too: And I shall also advise you, for your own sake, to bring me a
speedy account of this business.


Methinks you might take my word for a greater matter then this; But, you shall
have your humour, and I'll go strait -- Would I were well rid of him.


Where can Faith be found, if Iulia be false? Must Virtue it self degenerate to
Treachery, and an Angel turn Devil to complete my unhappiness?


Come, come; All this may be nothing but a Trial of your Constancy; or some
Stratagem of Love to amuse the froward suspicion of her old Father.


She could not show that Fool my Letter, and tear it before his face, with any
other design, but to abandon, and destroy me.


Be not so hasty to conclude her unfaithful, and your self unfortunate: For my
part, I hold it impossible, that a Woman of Wit, who has always been constant
to you, should on the sudden desert you for so despicable a Person, as your
pretended Rival.


Ah, Peregreen! had but a nobler Object debauch't her from me, it would not
have put such scorn upon my sufferings: But now I fall dishonourably by an
infamous hand, and am exposed at once to Ruin, and Contempt.


Now, Sir, I hope I have pleased you; I told her all that you said: And, she
bid me tell you again, that, since you are so hard of belief, both she, and her
Father will meet you in this place within this hour, to give you full
satisfaction in the point: And so God b'wy.


Nay, but Sir Arthur; Pray, one word more with you. Come near.


By no means, Sir; I am in haste; And my Mistress will be angry, if I stay from
her so long. Farewell.


So; Now I think my business is completely done: Nature and Love have both
declared me their Enemy; whilst I am disinherited by my Father, and forsaken by
my Mistress. What have I left me, but to Court an honourable and speedy Death?


At least suspend your judgment, till you speak with Iulia. All this may still
be a blind to cover, and secure your Love. You must not expect at first sight,
to see the bottom of a Woman's Policy in matters of this Nature: They manage
such Affairs with a subtlety, and address beyond our reach.


Your excess of kindness makes you flatter my Misery with vain hopes.


You must not antedate your Misery by Despair; That will teach Fortune the way
to ruin you: First hear what Iulia says; examine well her words, and her
eyes; And then you may knowingly make a Judgment of your Case -- I shall
impatiently wait the success of this Assignation. In the mean time I must beg
your leave to dispatch a Visit here close by to my little Betty; That being
done, your Concerns shall be my whole Employment. Adieu.


Dear Peregreen, Farewell.

Peregreen knocks at Mrs. Bettys Lodging,
Ralph looks out, and shuts the Door upon him.

Stand off.


Hai dai! What's the meaning of this? I'll try a little farther; perhaps he
mistook me for another.


What would you have?


Here's nothing for you.


They turn me away like a Beggar from the door! Now I am sure they saw me --
Ralph, Alice -- my pretty Rogues, Don't you know me? 'Tis I.


To all you've said, or have to say to me, this is my Answer.


Does that hand persecute me too? she speaks in Thunder, and vanishes like
Lightning -- If this Betty should be so changed all of the sudden, as to do this
of her self; without dispute Old Evans has been alarmed, and is now himself
upon the Guard: I must 'een draw off at present from the Enemies Quarters --
What have we here? a Letter, For Mr Peregreen Woodland? good, or bad, I'll take
it; but, this is no place to read it in.


The Bird is flown.


Most bravely performed of all hands; you Ralph, and you Alice did so well
execute my Orders, that now I forgive you all your past-faults: And you, my
dear Betty, are now restored to the place you formerly held in my affections;
For know, that I am no less a Rewarder of Virtue, then a Punisher of Vice: I
believe my Confident Lover will brag no more of this Adventure; The Brick-bat
has dashed in pieces all his Designs. And now, Betty, learn from hence the
necessity of a wise Conductor even for Innocence it self: Thou had been quite
lost, and undone, had I not miraculously delivered thee from the Ambuscade,
which was laid to ruin thee; but, for the future I hope, all of you are
sufficiently instructed, how to behave your selves, should he renew his
attempts again.


We have our Lesson without book now; let him come when he will, and do his
worst, I defy him.


But have a care you be not caught with his smooth Words, and fair Promises;
What would you say to him now, if he should come to you, and cry, Ralph, honest
Ralph, Wilt thou forget thy Friend? take a little pity of me.


No; you're a Rogue.


Good: But thou Alice at least art so pretty and sweet, thou can not be so
hard-hearted.


You're a Iack-straw.


Excellent! Alas, What hurt is there in the thing which I ask? I intended
nothing but Honour and Virtue.


You're a Cunning Catching Rascal.


Rarely well; Nay then, if you no compassion of me, I must die.


The sooner the better.


Most incomparable? You know, I am none of those, who use to forget the
Courtesies done 'em: I never leave a Service unrewarded: And, to give you a
taste of my grateful nature, Ralph, here's for thee to Drink; and Alice,
here's to buy thee a laced Hancarcher; This is but a small earnest of what I
intend.


Am I a Man to be bribed? stand off.


That's right.


Get you out.


To the Life.


Get you out.


As it should be.


But presently then.


Mighty well? but now 'tis enough.


Be gone then.


Hold I say.


We won't hold, you come to affront our Master Evans.


I tell you I am in earnest.


So are we too: we'll do what our Master bid us.


Give over, I say, or I'll break my Staff about your cares.


Must we give over so soon?


How the Slaves have bruised me?


What say you now, Sir? Have not we done as we should do?


Extremely well; only you were a little too slow of understanding to'rds the
Last, and too quick in taking Money at First.


I Swear, I had quite forgot that part of my Lesson concerning Money: But, since
we were out, Shall we do it over again?


No: 'Tis enough.


Speak but the word, and we are ready.


You've done very fairly: ye may now withdraw, whilst I talk a little in
private with Betty. Betty, methinks you are very silent; And yet that's a thing
I like very well in a Woman, I know, poor heart, thy mind is troubled for the
over-sight thou did commit, not out of Malice, but through too much
Innocence: But, Betty, be not dismayed; thy Fault is forgiven, and forgot: and,
for a testimony of it, to morrow I'll Marry thee.


To Morrow, Sir? that's very soon.


How comes it to pass, that now 'tis too soon, when two hours ago you thought
it hardly soon enough.


I am grown more knowing since that time; For, you have given me so many
Admonitions concerning the Duty of a Wife, that 'tis impossible for me to have
'em perfect so soon.


Thou shalt get them perfect by the practice of 'em: And, Betty, to let thee
see, how my kindness is enlarged to 'rds thee, and to Crown all my other
benefits heaped upon thee, take this Writing, and preserve it charily, for in
this I make thee Mistress of my whole Estate. Moreover, Betty, I'll tell thee a
Secret, which thou little dream on; To morrow thou shalt be a Lady, and
shalt have a place much above the Rank of the Modern ones. And now, Betty,
consider well, what gratitude you owe the Author of so much happiness -- Did
the rest of the World Marry at this prudent rate, we should not hear such loud
Complaints of Wedlock-Fetters.

Let foolish Men their Marriage-Fate deplore;
Whilst I to Cupid his lost Eyes restore:
And all the Poison from his Darts remove,
By teaching Wisdom in the School of Love.

THis I must own to be the Fortunate Moment of my Life: For now the Harvest is
come of my long ripening Designs, which call for the Sickle. I touch the very
Center of Human Felicity, which lies in that Point, where expectation ends, and
fruition begins. I am now beholding to the late Assaults and Dangers I have
sustained, which add to the fullness of my Joy the Pleasure of Victory. That I
could but see the Countenance of my defeated Rival since his Salutation with
the Brickbat? What a Change shall I find in the briskness of his Humour?


Sir Salomon; I have been to wait on you at your Lodging; and have sought you
far and near.


Good Mr. Peregreen, y' are heartily welcome. Well; and how thrives Love? I
suppose by this y' are in a fair possibility of enjoyment.


Faith, Sir, that's the very business I have to confer with you: I know not
how it comes to pass, but (to tell you truly) I have had some Traverses in my
Affairs, since I last imparted them to you.


I protest, I'm extremely sorry for it. Why What's the matter?


Without dispute, that watchful Dragon, old Evans, smells the Powder, and
stands upon his Guard to countermine all my Designs.


What reason have you to think so?


I know it must so: For, I had absolutely gained those two Animals, the Man,
and Maid of the Family; and made them as tame, and obedient to all my purposes,
as watch't-Hawkes; And now (all on the sudden) they are turned Haggard again,
know me not, and repulse me with such rudeness, as if they had never seen my
face, nor taken my Money.


What ill luck's this? But how in the name of Wonder should this Evans come to
the knowledge of your Design?


I know not what Devil of Jealousy has inspired him; But too sure I am, that
he has me in the wind; For (not many hours since) going to visit my Betty, as
I use to do, when I came to the House, and had one foot in, they shut the Door
with violence upon me; and both Man and Maid cried out, What make you here?
here's nothing for you --


I vow, this was very hard usage; after they had taken your Money too.


However, I ventured to knock once more; and presently Betty her self came to
the Balcony, and threw a huge Brickbat at me, telling me, That was her Answer
to all I had to say.


A Brick-bat, say you? That was an odd Favour for a Mistress to bestow on her
Gallant: But, Did it hit you?


No; I had the good fortune to avoid the blow.


What pity 'tis, so hopeful a Design should be knocked of the head with a
Brick-bat?


Hold, Sir; for all this, there's some life in it still: and, I believe, old
Evans, who was the Engineer, that raised this Battery against me, will have no
cause at last to brag of his Victory.


If the young Wench be o'your side, you may easily out-wit the old Man's
Vigilance.


I don't question it; And, 'tis no small part of my satisfaction, to think, how
this Jealous Coxcomb fools himself into a security upon this imaginary Rout.


Well, Sir; -- How he frights me?


Now you shall see, that Love is an equal Conqueror of Art, and Nature; First,
in baffling all the subtlety, and stratagems of that old Fox; And next, in
making a cunning Pollititian of Innocent Betty.


Where will this end?


For she, being constrained by her Tyrant to give me this unwilling Repulse, at
the same time under the shelter of that Brick-bat dropped a Letter at my Feet so
full of sweetness, and unsophisticated-love, expressed with so much Innocence,
and Modesty, that now I'm no less charmed with the beauty of her Mind, then
with the Loveliness of her Person.


I am relapsed into Torment! --


Don't you admire this miraculous effect of Love, and readiness of wit in so
ignorant, so unpractised a Creature? Methinks, you are not so affected with the
strangeness of it, as the thing deserves.


O, yes; I'm unspeakably surprised.


When the Door was shut against me, and the bawling Servants houted at me, and
the hand-granado was flung out to route the poor Lover, Was not the Politic
Conductor of this Stratagem all this while in a dainty Fooles-Paradice? Did he
not act a pleasant Part in this Tragi-Comedy? Why don't you Laugh heartily at
it?


I protest, I Laugh as heartily, as I can -- How I'm worry'd by him!


But, as you are my Friend, I must needs show you her Letter; For, I believe,
you never saw a more admirable piece in the kind: Do but hear it. Evans does
often Preach to me, That all young men are Deceivers; and, that 'tis their
Trade by fair promises to cheat Women of their Honour, and then forsake 'em.
Pray tell me whether it be so or no. I have no Malice my self; and, should you
deceive me, 'twould be ill done, and I'm confident 'twould kill me -- Was ever
any thing so tender, and so ravishing? How her Wit and her Love flow from the
clear Fountain of Nature, without the least tincture of Artifice? And, Is not
this Evans a most unsufferable Beast to drown in ignorance and stupidity (as
much as in him lies) so perfect a Soul, and so capable of the highest
improvement?


Oh!


What ails you, Sir?


Nothing, but a Cold. Uh, uh, uh.


I must needs beg your assistance a little in this business: For, I am a
stranger in Town, and you are the only person I confide in. Could you not
acquaint me with some of the Neighbours thereabouts, where I might have access,
to watch opportunities of speaking with my Mistress?


No; I have not any acquaintance in that Quarter. Farewell.


Pray Sir, stay a little longer: The kindness of friends should be reciprocal.
You have not told me any thing concerning the progress of your own Affairs: I
suppose the Wedding holds for to morrow. I am resolved (notwithstanding the
urgency of my own occasions) to prepare my self for it. But, Sir, Will you not
grant me the favour to kiss the fair hands of your Lady before the Marriage?


It can't be: The time is short. God b'ye.


This good Sir Salomon has a strange Ague in his Nature: His Temper never holds
the same for half an hour together. How pleasant, and well humor'd he was, when
first we began our discourse; And after a while how sullen, and ill at ease he
seemed to be? Poor Single! I pity thy hard Fortune, in having such a Father.


Is he gone at last? -- Could any Devil, but he, be so skilful in the Art of
tormenting? Could any Devil, but she, have so much untaught Malice born in her
Nature? My Patience and my Wits will forsake me! I have published my Wedding,
named the Day, invited my Friends, and, Am I not finely provided with a Bride?
I shall become the Discourse of every Coffy-house, be Libell'd, Lampon'd,
Acted; and every Fool will think himself a Wit, when he talks, and tells
Stories of me --


Sir, according to your appointment, all things are in readiness, as becomes
your Quality, and the Solemnity of such a Wedding. The Taylor, Milliner,
Seamstress, and Periwig-Maker, for the setting forth your Person; And the
Butcher, Polterer, Vintner, Confectioner, and Fruiterer, for setting forth the
Feast, have all brought in their Provisions* But, there is such a tearing noise
of Fiddles* Drums, and Trumpets at your Lodging, to give your Worship Joy, that
your whole Family are like Seamen in a Tempest, all bawling, and none hearing:
They are His Majesties Trumpets, and His Grace the Lord Generall's Drums, What
will your Worship be pleased I shall give them? --


A Halter -- How all Mankind conspires to torment me! Where shall I hide my
head,


What will your Worship be pleased I shall do?


Hang your self -- [Tim. starts back again. Well; if it must be so, at least
the World shall see, that I am none of those tame Fools, that can be the Bawds
of their own Infamy, and fairly hold intelligence with those, who are the
Authors of their Shame and Dishonour. My revenge shall be as loud as my
disgrace; It shall be Writ in red Letters upon this insolent Robber, and
Ravisher of my Affections, and my Honour; and upon that ungrateful young Viper;
whom friendless, and indigent, cold, and naked, I took into my warm Bosom, nay
more, into my Heart --


I beseech your Worship to dispatch me: Your House is so full of all sorts of
Tradesmen, and such a Rabble is got together about the Door (the Drums and
Trumpets having proclaimed a Wedding) that I fear your House and Goods are not
safe.


There's your dispatch, impertinent Varlet!


Why, Sir! 'tis I: Who do ye take me for?


I am to blame. This extravagance of Passion serves only to make my disgrace
more visible: And my Resentment, making a noise in the World, will but sound a
Trumpet, to draw more Company in to see the Monster -- All things duly
weighed, Why should I lay the blame on others, when here within me lies my
worst Enemy? An obstinate Love has taken possession of my heart, which makes an
Ass of my Reason, and forces me, though I know the Treason, to dote still upon
the Traitor. Unjustly I condemn the amorous pursuit of a young Gallant, who is
so ignorant of the wrong and affront he does me, that he calls me to Counsel
in all his Plots and Contrivance against me! Why do I blame the seduced
Ignorance of an Innocent Girl, whose want of knowledge (which causes my
Disgrace) is the effect of that Education which I gave her? No: My designs of
Revenge are vain, and unjust. I must pull down my Sails to weather out this
storm. My only Course will be, to marry her out of hand: That may open her
eyes, to see her Duty; and his, to know the Injury he does me. Heaven! If it
may be, make her honest; if not,

At least that strength of Patience grant to me,
Which I in other Husbands daily see.

What? No Mr. Single appears yet.


Alas, Sir; he dares not show his Face, when I am here.


Roger, to tell thee truly, my understanding Single comes, you may observe the
passages between them.


I warrant you, Sir; I'll give you an account to a tittle of what's said, or
done.


Sir Arthur, my business calls me away in order to your Service: But, I leave
you in good company. And, Daughter, I expect from you, that when Mr. Single
comes, you should give him such a Dismission, as that neither you, nor I, may
be any more importuned by him.


Sir Arthur, I must confess, y' ave already given me abundant proof of your
Wit; but, in regard I would fain have a thorough Veneration for him, I am to
obey during life, Pray afford me some testimony of your Valour too: For that
(you know) is as necessary to protect, as Wit is to govern the Subject.


Valour, Madam? why that's the only fault I am guilty of: I'm too rash. I vow,
Madam, my courage is so fierce and outrageous, when I let it loose, that I dare
not stir abroad, nor meet any body, till I have first chained it up, like a
cursed Masty-dog, for fear of doing mischief.


Good Sir, for my satisfaction unchain it now a little: Here's no body in the
way, that can take any hurt, but Roger there; and, if you'll venture your Dog,
I'll venture my Fathers Devil.


O sweet Lady! for your own dear sake, I would not do it for a World. Alas,
Madam, it flies at all, when 'tis loose, without any distinction of Persons;
and where it lays hold, it worries.


O terrible! -- But look'ee; The Gentleman's come at last. -- What? Am I grown
so out of Credit with you, that when I send my mind by a person so worthy of
belief, as Sir Arthur Addel, both my Message, and Messenger are to be slighted?


Madam, in common Justice no man is allow'd for good Evidence, when he speaks
in his own Cause.





I'm come to see, whether I at least may obtain the favour of your belief.


I hope, I shall have no cause given me to think you untrue; and then I must
believe you.


O Madam; you give him too much head --


Know then, that Sir Arthur was a person sent, and authorised by me; and all
that he told you, is true concerning your Better, and his Admission.


O, well said, sweet young Lady! How my Master's heart will be over-joy'd at
it!


Is it I that am to be blamed now? --


Madam, I submit: For there's no Appeal for him, whom you condemn.


I say still, Have a care of him --


Come, Sir; stand before me. What Woman can do less, that looks upon Sir Arthur
Addel, then yield her self up to so fair an Estate, so comely a Person, such a
graceful carriage, so excellent a Wit, such modesty in using it, such
invincible Courage --


O Madam, such truths are not to be spoke before my face.


I'm glad she likes him so well: But did she know all.


Now, Sir; What have you to say in your own behalf, to counter-ballance the
perfections of such a Competitor?


Madam, I am nothing, but what you please to make me.


I would make you understand your self and me; and that I am a person worthy of
belief: nor shall all the perswasisions of the World ever seduce me from a well
taken resolution.


You say right, Madam; especially when your Father directs, and commands it.


Especially, when my Father provides a Person every way so qualified for a
Husband, as the famous Sir Arthur Addel.


I vow, Madam, you ravish me. Shall we be Married to night?


How ambiguous she is? Was ever man so parted in two between Happiness, and
Misery? --


To hold you all no longer in suspense, know, that I have now before my eyes
the Objects both of my Scorn, and my Esteem: The one by a just title of desert
has possession of my Heart; The other by his bold and rude Addresses, has
raised a just Aversion in me, and contempt of his person. After this
Declaration let me see, which is that impudent Man, who dares continue in my
presence?


I, let him go: His guilty Conscience makes him fly -- But Madam, you forgot
your promise of binding him to the Peace: He's a troublesome unruly Fellow.


O, call him again.


Mr. Single, Mr. Single; The Lady has something more to say to you -- I
protest, Sir, this is all her own doing; I had not the least hand in it: you
must not be angry with me.


I have also this command for him of you too, whom I love, that he shall not
make the Pretensions of his Rival, any ground of a difference or quarrel.


Madam, your Commands shall bind my hands: Though Rivalship be a hard thing to
digest.


Mr. Single, You've now your liberty to retire.


And, pray Sir, let's see you here no more: It is my old Master's express
command as well as my young Mistresse's here.


If he comes again, your Order, Madam, for a Cessation of Arms must cease,
become void, and of no effect.


I hope, Sir Arthur, he will be so discreet, as not to put you upon desperate
courses: But, should the worst happen, 'tis but unchaining your Masty Dog.


If he makes me do so, he shall ee'n answer himself for all the Mischief that's
done.


And so he may, without holding up his hand at the Barr. But, Sir Arthur, the
freshness of the Evening warnes me to retire: I know, you'll Gallant me to my
Lodging.


O yes, Madam -- Poor thing! she can't live a moment without me.


But, Art thou sure my Father will be here to night?


Yes, Sir. He comes in company with one Mr. -- (Faith, Sir, I've forgot his
name) a rich Merchant, newly arrived from the Indies: And, he sent me before to
find you out, that he might not fail to speak with you about some very earnest
business, as soon as he came to Town.


What should this business be?


I believe, Sir, I can tell you something of it, by what I have over-heard.


Prethy what is't?


Your Worship then must promise to keep my Counsel: otherwise I shall gain a
great deal of ill will with my old Master, first for over-hearing, and then
revealing his private Discourses.


Take my word for thy Security.


That I will for all I'm worth: And, to tell you truly, Sir, I did ee'n long to
be the first, that should bring you this good News.


Good News? Of what?


Of being Married out of hand to a young Lady, who, (they say) is vastly rich,
and hugely handsome.


And dost thou call this good News? I had rather thou had told me, That to
Morrow I must have gone to Goal, nay more, to Execution; For in one, a man may
hope to be releast from Misery, and the other is an end of it: But, to be
Married so soon, and having newly tasted Liberty, to have it snatched away from
me for ever, is more then I can suffer. No: My Father must excuse me; All other
things he may do of himself without me; but, Marriage is a Work, which I must
do, not he.


I hope, Sir, you are not in earnest; For, by all that I can perceive, my
Master's heart is so set upon this business --


Well, well; You may go rest your self after your Journey.


But, Where shall I find you, Sir, when your Father's come?


Either here, or under the Arches in Covent-Garden. Single, Fortune has at last
decreed, as we are joined in Friendship, to join us in Adversity.


What's the matter?


I have told you many passages of Love between Betty and me; But, I never fully
confessed to you, how deep the impression was she has made upon my heart. Ah
Single! she's the very same thing in every respect to me, that the fair Iulia
is to you.


If this declaration of Love be in earnest, I doubt you're past the Cure of
Reason: Otherwise, I should endeavour to dissuade my dear Peregreen from a
Passion (if it tend to Marriage) every way so unequal to him.


Ar't thou a Lover thy self, and, Can thou talk of inequality in Love.


I've done; You shall hear no more from me: But, pray, give me leave to be
sorry.


You misplace your Sorrow; 'Tis not here that I want it: But, what I now shall
tell you, will too justly deserve the compassion of a Friend. Whilst my
Affections are thus unalterably preingaged, just now my Father comes to Town
with a positive determination (as I'm informed) of matching me to one of his
own providing, whose Person, and Fortune (they say) are such, as to render my
disobedience to him unexcusable in the Eyes of the World. Judge then in what
condition I am: Uncertain of my Love; for, she's in the hands of my Enemy, her
Jailer Evans; And only certain of my Father's just indignation.


Methinks, your Passion for Betty in so short a time should not have taken such
deep roots, but that another might be planted in the room on it, when a Fortune
is offered by your Father, so much above her in quality and Estate, and perhaps
not inferior in Beauty.


Deal more justly with a Friend: Is it in your power not to love Iulia? Nor is
it more in mine to relinquish Betty. No; whatever befalls me; I'm resolved this
very night to get her into my possession, and then Marry her: Which being done,
I shall endeavour to obtain my Fathers Pardon, for what I could not gain his
Consent.


Well, Sir; since I cannot serve you with my Counsel, at least I offer you my
Person, to assist you in the execution of your design.


No (dear Single;) I know your own occasions of a like nature require your
whole attendance: Besides, I look upon your Father, as a more proper Instrument
for me in this Work. He's already acquainted with it; and has promised secrecy;
and his Person (being a Man of years) appearing at Bettys Lodging, will be less
subject to the suspicion of old Evans. Moreover, by employing him, I hope to
get a sight of his intended Bride; For, in all my own Distractions, I cannot be
unmindful of your Concerns.


Your Generosity may teach the World new Lessons of Friendship, whilst even in
your own Distress you continue such care for me: Thanks to my Stars, my heart
is now at some ease concerning Iulia's constancy: I confess, she frighted me at
first with that very Vizard, which I bid her put on; But since, through that
Disguise, she has artificially cast such beams of Comfort on me, as have
revived my drooping Spirits.


May Fortune continue her smiles upon you. Farewell; I must to your Father
about my business.


And I must find out Sir Arthur, to renew a strict League of Amity with him.
May we both prosper!


Betty, Have you said your Prayers to day?


O yes, Sir.


And, Do ye know what 'tis to die?


To die? I remember I saw one of my Nurses Daughters die in the Country.


And, How did you like it?


O, very ill: She was a pretty Girl before; but, when she was dead, I was
afraid to look upon her.


Betty, you must die; and die presently.


No sure, Sir; For I'm as well, as ever I was in my life.


How unconcernedly she answers? -- apart. -- I say again, within this quarter
of an hour you must die.


Indeed, Sir, you fright me; and yet I can't see any danger of death.


Wicked Girl! Look upon thy Treason against thy Lord, and Master; thy
Ingratitude to thy Benefactor; thy falseness to him, that must be thy Husband:
Remember the Letter thou drop'st to day in the Street; and then look upon me,
and tell me, Dost thou see no danger of death? -- What, Are you dumb? -- Why
don't you answer? you can't speak to me; but you can write to your lewd
Gallant?


You put me in such a fright, that I am not able to speak.


Hussee, you were not afraid to break my Commands, to betray me, to be
strumpeted by a wild young Fellow: In all Mischief you're bold enough; but, when
you are to hear your faults, and to answer for your Crimes, then your Fears
come upon you!


I can't speak for my life, when you look so terribly upon me: look but as you
use to do, and I'll answer you any thing.


How in spite of my teeth she breaks the force of my Anger, and disarmes it
with her softness! -- Tell me then, Why did you write that Letter, after I had
forbid you all Communication with him?


I writ it, because it goes against my Nature to hurt any body; And, since you
would needs have me throw that great Stone at him, I could not choose but let
him know, I did it against my will.


O, how tender you are in hurting him! whilst at the same time you make nothing
of breaking my heart, destroying my happiness, ruining my Reputation, who have
been a Nurse, a Father, and would have been a Husband to thee.


Indeed I'm beholding to you for your care of me; And, when I'm able, I'll
satisfy you for it.


Satisfy me? How the Gipsy word's it! How can thou satisfy me for all the
good I have done to thee, and all the mischief thou hast done to me?


God forbid I should do you any mischief: I know of none I have done you.


What Devil has taught thee to sin thus without Remorse? Thy Ignorance cannot
excuse thee: For, Have I not daily instructed thee for two years together in
thy Obedience, and duty of a Wife? Have I not hourly inculcated into thee, That
thou ought not so much as to look upon a young Man; and that thou were born
and made to no other end, but to love me?


Truly, Sir, I love you as well as I can: And, if I love you no better, 'tis
not my fault; you should make your self more lovely.


How innocently she stabb's me with her


What would you have me do? I'll do any thing I can, to give you content.


Then I command you to renounce all manner of kindness to this bold Assaulter
of your Honour, and mine, and never more to see him, nor so much as think upon
him.


That's impossible for me to do: For, now I know him, I must love him, and see
him too, when I may.


O impudence! to tell me this to my face? Had she been bred in the most famous
Schools of Iniquity? Had she been Prentice all her life to the ablest
She-Professors of the Trade? Could she have owned her Transgression with a more
daring Confidence? Since thou art so impenitent, and hardened in thy Sin, expect
no Mercy -- Behold this.


Sure you won't kill me: But, if you should, I must not leave the World with a
Lie in my Mouth, and say, I don't Love this young Man: For indeed I can't choose
but love him. And, I think, it is no Sin, when I can't help it.


How she argues the Case! Where has she learned this Cunning, and this
undauntedness? Ah! she holds intelligence with my heart, and knows the power
she has there, which grows stronger and stronger upon me, in spite of all her
neglect to me, and Love to my Rival -- Here, Betty; Do you take this Sword:
Take it, and kill me. For all the care I have had of thee, for all that I have
done, and meant to do for thee (since thou wilt not love me) I ask thee no
other reward.


Indeed, Sir, I would not kill you, though 'twere to save my own life: And I'll
endeavour to love you as well as ever I can.


Nay, unless you'll love me better then that young Man, I must die.


No, pray don't: What are you the worse, because I love him? You shant lose a
Farthing by it. To content you, I should be glad with all my heart I had never
seen him, and did not love him: But, now 'tis done, who can help it?


How immovable she is! Neither Threats, nor Kindness work upon her. Well, Marry
her I will; and take my venture -- Betty, notwithstanding all your unkindness,
I'll be as good as my word, and Marry you.


Marry me? To whom?


Ah, cruel Girl! Why dost thou stab me with such a question? Love me, or love
me not, I'll be your Husband to morrow.


Indeed, Sir, that's very short warning.


No more words: I'll have it so. When thou see the Bravery, and fine things
I've prepared for thee, thou'lt be of a better mind.


If it must be so, I can't help it.


Come, get you in; and pray to Heaven, that thou may be sensible of the
happiness I intend thee.


Sir Salomon, I have been in despair for want of seeing you; For you are my
good Angel --


And you my Devil --


That must direct and assist me, and crown all your past favours with the most
important kindness that I am capable of receiving.


What is't, Sir?


Only to deliver this Letter safely to my Betty: On her receipt of it depends
no less, then the happiness of my life. I dare not approach the House my self
by day-light, because the Servants know me, who are now turned of old Evans his
Party: Nor can I put my concerns in such trusty hands as yours.


Does it require haste in the delivery?


O, by all means: The Lodging is close by; 'Tis a Corner House, with a Balcony,
that looks into the Fields here, next to Swan-Ally: You may see the House from
hence. Now, Sir, the way to deliver it, that neither old Evans, nor his
Houshold-Spies may see it, is to tie it to something, and then toss it up into
the Balcony: By the manner of the conveyance Betty will presently know whence
it comes, and how to behave her self: And, this is the proper time of doing it;
For, at this hour she always comes out in the Balcony, to take a little fresh
Air of the Evening; It being all the liberty allow'd her by her Jailer.


Well, Sir; This is all.


It imports me likewise, that you should know the business. My passion for
Betty is now come to that height, that I'm resolved instantly to Marry her. But
(most unfortunately to my Designs) my Father comes this night to Town; and with
a resolution (as I am certainly informed) to strike up a Bargain of Marriage
for me of his own driving. In these Streights I have no expedient left to
prevent his purpose, and execute my own, but to get possession of Betty, and
Marry her out of hand. Though my Fathers present dissatisfaction may be great,
yet, I hope, time will mollify him; And I doubt not but your good Offices will
much contribute towards it.


You may be sure of me. But, when do ye purpose to get possession of your
Mistress?


This very Night, as soon as 'tis dark; for, by that time Evans always retires
to his own quarters.


But, What place of security have you to lodge her in, when you've brought her
off?


There lies my greatest difficulty; And, were it not too bold a Petition, I
should think no place so safe and honourable for her reception, as your house,
only for a day or two, till I've made her my Wife: But, Sir, I have trespassed
already too far upon your generosity, and dare transgress no farther.


O Sir, your modesty does me wrong. To mistrust the kindness of a Friend, is
the greatest sin in Friendship. Bring her when you will, you shall find, that
my House is her Home.


You surpass all Men living in the noble Art of obliging a Friend. But upon
reflection, since you're to be Married your self to morrow, I fear her coming at
such a time may prove unseasonable.


So far from it, that I'm resolved not to be Married without her.


You are generous to that excess, that you leave me not a possibility of being
grateful. And now, Sir, I have nothing more to beg of you, but the Honour of
kissing your Ladies hands before her Marriage; that I may obtain an early place
in her favour, by letting her know what my Obligations are to you.


Matters of Complement and Curiosity require no haste: But, since you so much
desire it, I give you my word, That, when you bring Mrs. Betty to me, you shall
then see my Wife.


You make me happy every way, except in this, that I owe you more then I am
worth; And am forced, like other Banckrupts, to compound my Debts, begging you
to accept those small Services I can pay, in lieu of the vast Sum that's due.


O, Sir, you mistake in the Account between us: I am yet in your Arrears, which
I shall endeavour to discharge out of hand, by serving you in this business
concerning Mrs. Betty, as I ought.


Dear Sir Salomon, Farewell; And good luck attend you.


Doubt not, young Man, I'll serve you as I ought;
As Men serve Vermin, that in Traps are caught.

WHat? Kick your Steward? The Supreme Head of the Family under your Worship?
'Tis such an Affront done to my Office, as I cannot in honour put up:
Therefore, as I said before, here are my Keys, and here are my Accounts; and
so I take my leave.


Nay, prethy, Timothy, be pacified: Good-natur'd Men (thou know) are subject
to Passion.


But Stewards, Sir, are not subject to be kick't. Show me but one President for
it amongst all those of my Profession, and I'll be bound to be your Worships
Football as long as I live.


Indeed the Case is extraordinary; And so was the Cause; and so shall the
Satisfaction be: For, Timothy, I'll give thee in amends a Childes Life in thy
Copy-hold.


Well, Sir; since 'tis your seeking, I accept of the Reparation -- Sir, I have
two or three Children more yet unprovided for; if your Worship will be pleased
to kick them into Livings too, I stand ready to have their Fines laid upon me.


So, so; I'm glad wee're friends again. Now call in my Family; For, I have
something of consequence, which I must propound to you Timothy, I order you to
give him all reasonable satisfaction.


God bless your Worship.


And I doubt not on your parts, but you're all ready to serve my Person, and
vindicate my Honour, as occasion shall require.


Our Lives are at your Service.


Know then, that this very moment I am actually assaulted by an insolent young
Fellow, who, to night Plots no less Mischief, then to Ravish my Bride.


What manner of death would your Worship have him die?


No; let not his Punishment be Capital, nor Sanguinary; but load him with as
many Blows, and as much Infamy, as you can.


Show us but the Man, and your Worship shall see, that we are as able to serve
you in chastising your Enemies, as entertaining your Friends.


Pray, Gentlemen, can you direct me to the Lodging of Sir Salomon Single?


Friend, there's Sir Salomon himself.


Squire Woodland, my Master, commanded me to let you know, that he is newly
come to Town upon some business, in which your Worship is concerned; and
desires, he may speak with you before you go to bed.


Friend, tell thy Master, that, if I can possibly, I'll wait upon him: Where's
his Lodging?


At a Barbers, next door to the Fleece-Tavern in Southampton-Buildings.


Very well -- apart -- In what a seasonable hour this old Man's come to Town,
to see the Iniquity of his Son chastised? However, my person shall not appear
upon the Stage in this Tragedy; I'll only prompt behind the Curtain.


Where shall I find my young Master now, the Lord knows. This was one of the
places he appointed --


The time draws near; yet, did thou know (Single) with what panting
expectation I long to be possessed of my Treasure, thou would pity the Torment,
which each Moment brings me, by interposing it self between me and my
Happiness.


O, Sir; well met! My old Master's newly come to Town, and by all means must
speak with you instantly.


Peace, Screech-Owl! I think that Fellow was born to bring me ill News.


In troth, Sir, I think so too: For, if to Marry a rich handsome Lady, and to
see your Father after so long an absence, be ill News, I'm sure I can bring
you none that's good.


Ah, Single! What shall I do? I must not disappoint Betty; and I should not
neglect my Father.


None can tell you better, then I, what the danger is of disgusting a Father,
though innocently: And yet I'm too much a Lover my self to advise a breach of
promise with your Mistress. To satisfy both, you must defer your going to
Betty for an hour, or thereabouts. Your Father must needs be weary after his
Journey; and cannot hold you long: And, that she may not think her self
disappointed by you, write a note to her, to let her know the occasion.


But, Who shall deliver it?


Had not I a private summons from Iulia to meet her just at this time, I'd be
your Man: But, you may send your Father's Servant there.


Send him? He scarce knows the Town by day; much less by night.

What makes this Fool come to disturb us now?


O, pray bear with him: By a special command from Iulia I am now entered into a
strict League of Amity with him. Faith, ee'n send him with the Note; and you'll
do me a particular kindness in it; for otherwise, he will stick upon me like a
Burr, and disappoint my meeting with Iulia.


With all my heart.


Why, Gentleman, Where have you been? These two long hours I have done nothing
but hunt after you.


Well, Sir, For what?


Faith, I have made a discovery of the rarest Champaine-Wine in Town: Prithee,
let's go, and fill our Earthen Vessels with it;

For we are but brittle Clay,
Then let's he Merry whilst we may.

O brave Arthur of Bradly! The Motion's good in it self, but not seas'nable for
us at this time; for, we have business, in which you must do a Friends part.


Thou know (Man) I love Business: What is't? Quickly.


Only to deliver a note for our Friend Peregreen here: But 'tis of high
Concern, for there's a Mistress in the Case; and therefore we choose a Man of
Ability for the Employment.


Come, give it me; I long to be in Action.


You shall have it immediately.


Faith. Single, never let's break good company* Prethy, come along with me,
when I deliver this Note.


Could I have gone, you should not have had the trouble on it; But, I am
preingaged.


Prethy, Where?


Why -- to tell you, as a Friend, I have an appointment just now to receive a
little Money; and, that's a business (you know) I must not neglect.


Hang Money: A Friends Company is better then it, at any time.


Why, there's the difference between us two now: You have too much Money, and
want Company; and I have too much Company, and want Money.


Well, Gentlemen, I have done. Sir Arthur, Have you a Watch about you?


No, Sir, not I.


Here, take mine; and precisely at half an hour past eight, deliver this Note
to a young Lady at the Corner house that has a Balcony, which looks into
Holborn-Fields, next to Swan-Ally.


I know the place.


But you must knock gently at the back-door of the Garden, to'rds the Fields;
and, when she appears, give her the Note, and tell her, He who sent it, will be
with her about an hour hence, or sooner, if he can.


Take no further care; your business shall be punctually done.


You're an obliging person, Sir Arthur -- Come, Harry; Now I am for my Father.


But hark'ee, Mr. Single; Did not you tell me, that this Peregreen was one of
my Rivals? I vow now (upon better consideration) Why should I do such a
kindness for an Enemy? for ought that I know, there may be some trick in it.


'Tis true, I did tell you, that he was then newly entered the List of your
Rivals: But now (take my word for it) he's so far from it, that he's engaged
elsewhere: And this kindness which you are now to do for him, relates to his
new Amour.


Nay, I'll take your word for it --


Sir Arthur, farewell.


God buy, Sir.


I'm glad I've found you at last; for, I sent my Man all the Town over to look
you.


And now you have me, What have you to say to me?


You must needs come away immediately with me to my Lawyers Chamber.


Excuse me, Sir; I must not.


I have appointed a Meeting about the Marriage Writings, and both our Counsel
are already there.


There let 'em wait; I'll pay 'em by the hour.


I thought, Sir, you had been more in haste, and more pressing in matters that
concern your affection to my Daughter.


Nay, take it not ill, good Sir: your Daughter and I understand one another
very well; we don't stand upon such Punctillio's.


I am afraid, she understands you but too well.


Let me see -- What a Clock is't now? Some half an hour hence I can be there;
till then Mr. Lawyer must have patience.


Well, Sir, if it must be so, then I'll go before: But first, pray, Sir, let
me give you a little good advice.


You need not, Sir; we shall go to Counsel within this half hour.


'Tis the Advise of a Friend, not of a Lawyer, that I would give you. I
perceive, that you are very much in the company of this Mr. Single, who, in my
judgment, is, for several respects, a person very unfit and dangerous for you
to converse with: First, he has a great deal of Wit, and no Means --


Which is to say, I have a great deal of Means, and no Wit -- Go on, Sir.


Not so neither. In the next place, he is, or has been your Rival to'rds my
Daughter: Now judge you, What Friendship you can expect from an indigent Man,
whom you have dispossessed of all hopes to raise his sunk Fortune?


Hark'ee, Sir, You are Mrs. Iulia's Father, Are you not?


Yes, Sir. What makes you ask such a Question?


'Tis well you are: Otherwise I should be bold to tell you, That I'm already
provided of a wiser Governor then your Worship, by name, Sir Arthur Addel.
S'liddikins, I have lived to a fair Age, if every old Man must take upon him to
be my Tutor.


I'm sorry my good Will's lost upon you. However, pray fail not to come
according to your promise.


No, no --


Suffer patiently; you'd best: If you make a Noise, you die for it.


Quickly, quickly; pray take my Money and my Clothes, and use me gently.


If he speaks one word more, cut his Throat -- No, Sir; your Punishment must
not be Pecuniary, but Corporal: your Crime is Lechery; and, the Body must
suffer for the Sins of the Flesh.


Murder! murder! murder!


What? Is he dead?


Some unlucky blow has hit him under the Ear.


'Pox take him for a Chicken-hearted Fellow, to die so soon.


Unfortunate men that we are! What will become of us?


The Gallows take the bindmost, I cry.


What's the Matter? -- The Rogues have undone me by thus over-doing their
Work! This will cover me with shame, and infamy, and bring in question my Life,
and Estate! What shall I do? Whither shall I fly -- I hear the noise of Justice
--


I'm sure I heard a cry of Murder -- Look Neighbour, here has been Mischief
done. The Man is dead.


Come, let's carry him off.


No, no; let's first call the Coroner; 'Tis dangerous meddling, till he has sate
upon the dead Body; after that, he may be buried out of the way.


How? Carry me off, and Bury me, said they? I'll show em a trick worth two
on it.


What? all run away? And the dead Man too? Then I'll 'een run too for Company.


What was this Noise, and out-cry, which we heard? Pray God there be no hurt
done.


Yes, but there is hurt done; For, I heard 'em say, he was killed?


Killed? Tell me quickly, Who's killed?


As long as you are alive, What need you trouble your self?


Thou naughty Wench; I could find in my heart to beat thee: I'ell me, I say,
Who was killed?


I did not see him; but, I believe, 'tis the young Man that used to come
hither, by what I could over-hear.


Where are the Rogues that did it? I'll kill 'em with my own hands; or, if I
can't, I'll kill my self. Help me, Allice, to find them out.


Nay, Pray Mistress, have patience.


I will not have patience: I'll either be revenged on them, or on her, for
whose sake he was killed.


Why Mistress; now I think on it, if any body had been killed, we should have
seen him lie here: but, here's no sign of any hurt done.


VVho's there?


O, Mistress, run away: here are more of the Rogues.


Thou Coward! I'll at 'em, and fly in their Faces.


What? Betty?


Is't you?


I Mistress; 'tis 'een he, whom you thought to be dead.


O Lord! I was afraid, you'd been killed.


No, dear Betty; I was only hindered from coming at my hour; And I sent thee
word on it -- But this is no place for us to stand talking in. Come, Betty; now
I have thee in my possession, I'll put thee in a safe place, far enough out of
the reach of thy Jailer Evans.


But, Will you Marry me?


Ah Betty! Why art thou so cruel, as to make a doubt on it? I'll rather die,
then not Marry thee -- What hast thou in thy hand there? give me thy Basket;
it troubles thee to carry it.


Then (pray) have a great care on it, and let it not go out of your hands; for,
there is a Writing in it, which I'm told, is worth me a great deal.


I warrant you; I'll not part from it. Salomon? -- Most fortunately met, to
relieve me in distress! Here, Sir, I have now my Jewel to consign into your
hands; Pray have a care of her, as of my Life. I broke away with violence from
my Father to look after this Treasure: But, I'm obliged to return immediately
to him. Pray, lose no time; but lodge her safely in your House: For, I
apprehend the pursuit of old Evans. Within this hour I hope to be with you.
Dear Betty, for a little while farewell.


What? Will you leave me so soon?


I'll be with thee again immediately: In the mean time I leave thee in a
Friends hands, who will have the same care of thee that I have.


Gipsy, Do ye know me?


Hold your self contented; VVee'l not part with you so: You're a very suspicious
Person; for immediately after the Fact committed, we found you running away.


Pray, Mr. Constable, believe me; Indeed I'm an honest Man.


Clear your self before the Justice, and I'm satisfied: But, thither you must.


Am not I finely served? Now shall I be hanged for killing my self.


Neighbour, the Rogues, since we were here, have carried away the Body.


Friend, you are mistaken; The Body carried away it self.


How the Man talks? Sure he's Mad.


I, Neighbour, they that shed Man's Blood are commonly so: 'Tis a Judgment upon
Murderers.


To what Justice shall we carry him, Mr. Constable?


To Justice Wary; He's nighest at hand.


I, he's as like to get him hanged, as any Justice upon the Bench.


Why, Mr. Constable; What do ye mean to do? Upon my reputation I am the Man
that was killed.


Away, away with him; he's raving mad: Derick must be his Doctor.


This is the Justice his House.


Knock then.


What would you have?


We have apprehended a Man here upon suspicion of Murder; and we have brought
him to be Examined and Committed by his Worship.


That's well: I'll call my Master instantly; He's but a little way off, at
Grey's-Inn.


Pray make haste.


Friend, friend; 'tis I: Don't you know me?


I know no body, when he's in the hands of Justice. My Master shall be here
strait.


I did certainly hear Sir Arthur Addell's voice. Look, where my Knight is in
the Constables clutches! Slip you away, whilst I go see, what the meaning is of
this Tragy-Comedy.


Madam, A very wicked Man, without doubt: For, here was Murder committed close
by; and, presently after we caught him flying away, with as guilty a
Countenance as ever I saw: and yet I have seen many in my time.


A very shrewd presumption indeed.


But, Madam, Don't you know me? All this while 'tis I, your Husband that must
be, whom these Rogues abuse thus.


I'm the sorrier for it, Sir Arthur; that a Man of your Quality should run
himself into such Enormities: I thought, you had not been so bloody. And yet,
'tis no more then what your self have confessed formerly to me; that, when your
Courage is let loose, like a fierce Mastiff-Dog, it falls upon all that comes
in it's way.


Nay, but pray, Madam, hear me: Will you mistake the Matter too, like these
Clod-pated Rascals here? I am the very Man, on whose Person all this Murder
was committed; for I was set upon by Rogues, that would have killed me, but
that I prevented 'em --


How? By killing 'em?


No, no, Madam; by dying my self; or at least making them believe so: At which
the Rogues took such a fright for fear of hanging, that away run they; and away
went I: Then come the Clutches of the Parish here, and, according to their
usual Custom, seize me, who was the Person assaulted, and suffer the Rogues to
make their escape.


A very pretty story indeed! No, no; Mr. Justice, when he comes, won't be fob'd
off so.


In troth, Sir Arthur, 'tis so intricate a Case, that I can determine nothing
in it, till my Fther comes.


Good Madam, make the Slaves release me: I would not for a World be seen in
their Company by your Father.


I vow, Sir, I dare not entrench upon my Fathers Authority: You're now in the
hands of the Law; and that must either, quit you, or condemn you -- Neighbours,
you'd best bring your Prisoner within doors till my Father comes.


Yes, Madam. Jogge on, Sir.


Ill-natur'd-woman! I'll pay all thy Scores, when once thou art my Wife.


Ah Single! What shall I do? Whilst I'm happy in the possession of my
Mistress, my Father is so violently bent upon this Match of his own providing,
that to oppose him openly in it, would certainly cause as wide a breach in our
Family, as is already (unfortunately) in yours. His impatience is such, that he
will needs have me see her to night; to which end he tells me, She will
immediately be brought to his Lodging. All, I can hope in this business, is,
when I see this young Lady, to let her know my former engagement; (that if she
be generous) the Treaty may seem to break of her side.


'Tis your only expedient, as the Case stands.


O, Sir; my Mistress Betty is stark staring mad: If I had not hindered her, she
had thrown her self out at Window; Nor could I have held her hands from doing
her self a Mischief, but that I promised her to find you out, and let you know,
in what condition she is.


For Heaven's sake, What's the matter?


She says, you're the falsest Man living, to betray her thus, and quite undo
her for no other fault, but loving you too much.


Thy words are so many Daggers to my heart! What cause can there be for this?


O Sir, after she had put her self into your hands, why would you deliver her
up again to Mr. Evans? who now watches her, as a Cat does a Mouse: Sometimes he
threatens her, and sometimes he flatters her; and all won't do; for, she's
ready to fly in his Face, and bids him kill her; and says, that she hates him
for his own sake, and all Mankind for yours.


I am all horror, and amazement! But, this cannot be; for, I put her into the
hands of your Father, Sir Salomon Single.


Why so our Master Evans is now called at the New House where we are. He has
changed his Name.


Changed his Name? Are Sir Salomon and Mr. Evans the same Person?


Too sure.


I'm lost, undone, ruined for ever! How fatally blind have I been? and now my
Eyes are opened to see nothing, but a vast Abisse of despair! --


But, What shall I say to her? for I dare not stay any longer: I ventured as
much as my life is worth, in coming out now.


Tell her, Allice, That I'll claim her, as my Wife; and that I will not live a
day to an end without being possessed of her.


See you be as good as your word.


Now help me in this extremity! What shall I do? How shall I keep my word?


I confess, my reason at first was dazzled with the surprise of such a mistake:
But upon reflection, since your Mistress has the Courage of resist Marrying my
Father, the worst, that can happen in this matter, is Delay.


That's too much for a Lover. But alas! I row against Wind, and Tide, and the
double opposition of both our Fathers.


There being a Promise of Marriage between you and Betty, you've the Law of your
side against my Father; and, with your own, I hope, Nature will be your Friend.
But, you told me of a certain Writing, which Mrs. Betty gave you to keep: Have
you looked upon it? Perhaps you may find something in it that may be useful to you
in this present conjuncture.


Alas; I've had no time to look upon it. Here 'tis.


Forbear. Both our Fathers are here.


Whatever you do, Sir, maintain the Authority of a Father; And, since you have
provided so considerable a Match for him, make sure whilst you may.


Howe you much for your Friendly advice; which I intent to follow; And, in
order thereunto, I have now desired this conference with you.


See, how he still labours to destroy me!


O Son; Are you there? 'Tis very well. Your Mistress will be here presently.


But Sir, have a care, that ill Company seduce him not from his Obedience:
They'll put a thousand Flames in his head.


Faith, Peregreen, I must take pity of my Father, and remove: For, I'm too
great an eye-sore to him. I must needs see what's become of Sir Arthur, whom I
left in a pleasant posture, attended by the Constable, and the Watch. But I'll
be back immediately.


I protest, Sir, I'm sorry to hear you're so unfortunate in your Son, of whom,
in other respects, I've heard a very good Character given.


'Tis as I tell you; Therefore have a care of yours --


Go tell the Constable, that, if he be in haste, he may bring his Prisoner
hither; for I'm engaged, and cannot come.


Ah Heaven! I did not want this farther Evidence to let me see from what State
of happiness I'm fallen into the bottom of despair.


Mr. Barter, I must confess, that the health and prosperity of my Friend, after
so long a despair of his being alive, is the greatest joy of my life.


I owe much to Heaven in my preservation, and not a little to my Friends for
their concern in it: But, Sir, the favour I ask at present, is this; I have a
business of great importance with one Sir Salomon Single, a person unknown to
me: And, because you are my only acquaintance of Credit and Note here in Town,
I desire your presence and assistance in it.


You may command me -- Very fortunately there is the Party you wish for, Sir
Salomon Single.


Therefore, Sir, be not delayed with Excuses, but dispatch it instantly.


Sir, I thank you; Your Counsel shall be follow'd.


How he persecutes me to death!


Sir, though I'm a stranger to your Person, yet I suppose Mr. Woodland may now
have informed you of a match concluded between his Son and my Daughter.


Sir, he has informed me of a considerable Fortune, which his Fatherly care has
provided for his Son; for which I heartily give him joy; And if your Daughter
be the intended Bride, I give you the like; and shall take this, as a happy
rise to begin our acquaintance. Methinks, Gentlemen, matters of so happy a
Consequence can never be dispatcht too soon: I see no reason why the Wedding
should not be to morrow.


How implacable is his Rage!


Agreed.


Agreed.


Then, Sir Salomon, there wants nothing to complete what you in so friendly
manner advise, and we so passionately desire, but your concurrance: For my
Daughter, I understand, is in your Custody; who took her out of the Nurses
hands, with whom I left her before my Voyage into the Indies.


Ha! What's this?


When you received her, she might well appear to be an object of your Charity;
All my Friends at that time gave me for lost, in regard the Ship, which
transported me, foundered at Sea: And the several accidents of my life since
have hindered me from giving them an account of my safety. But, the bounty of
Heaven having now at last restored me to my Country, my Estate, and my Child, I
shall make you ample compensation for the charge of her Breeding, with infinite
thanks for your Care of her.


Sir! let me fall down, and ask you the greatest blessing that Man can receive!
Is that Mrs. Betty, in the Custody of Sir Salomon; your Daughter? And is it
she, whom Heaven, and you have designed for my Wife?


The very same.


Sir, the Story you tell, is no sufficient Evidence for me, to relinquish that
right of adoption, which I have in her.


For your fuller satisfaction here is the Nurse her self, who calls you
Landlord, from whose hands you received my Daughter -- Pray call her in.


However, she's already my Wife; And, as such, I'll keep her.


The young Lady, Sir, in spite of all our Vigilance, has made an escape in
company of the Maid Servant that waits on her: They leaped out at a lower
window into the Street, and took their flight this way.


'Tis in vain to struggle any longer against the Perverseness of Fate!


Evans.


Ah, dear Betty! be not so cruel, to make a Crime of that Error which I have
smarted so deeply for. However, if by mistake I put thee into the hands of thy
Jailer (to make thee amends) I now (knowingly) restore thee to the embraces of
thy Father; That so by his gift I may confirm the Title of my love.


Is this my Father?


Pretty, sweet Mistress! How glad am I to see you grown so proper a young
Woman? God's blessing on my Landlords heart, Sir Salomon there, for giving you
such good keeping: And, Mistress, I hope, now your Fathers Worship is come home
again, he'll provide a good Husband for you.


Art thou sure, Nurse, this my Father?


I'm sure he told me so above a dozen years ago.


I do believe it; for methinks, at first sight I loved him better, then ever I
loved any old Man in my life. Pray, Sir, give me your Blessing.


Take it (my only Child) and with it this Gentleman for thy Husband; who, I
perceive, is no unwellcome Present to you.


Heart, since thou needs must break, go, break alone, And rob'em of the
pleasure to look on.


Mistress, Mistress! As sure as can be, our Master Evans is gone to die in a
Corner, like a poisoned Rat behind the Hangings.


Follow him, Ralph; and take care of him.


No, I thank you, good Mistress. If he be gone to die, I'll 'een stay with you:
The living are better Company then the dead.


Gentlemen, by'r leave; His Majesties business must take place, and be first
served. Is Justice Wary here?


Well, Friend; What would you?


I've brought a dangerous Person before your Worship upon suspicion of Murder.


What? Sir Arthur? Is this the Equipage you Woo my Daughter in?


If you don't punish these Rogues for abusing me thus, I'll have nothing to do
with the Daughter of a Justice as long as my name is Arthur.


I must punish no body for duly executing his Office. Let me hear the Matter.


Upon an Out-cry of Murder, we presently run to the place; where we found a Man
stretched all along, to our seeming dead: Presently after we met this Sir Arthur
(as he calls himself) running away at a very guilty rate. Hereupon we seized
him; and now your Worship may do with him as you think best.


Pray, Sir, let me speak a good word for him: I dare swear, Sir Arthur is not
guilty of Murder.


Meeting my Friend in distress, I could not choose but come, and offer to be his
Bail.


Not so fast -- This smells of a Trick -- What say you, Sir Arthur?


Why, I say, I was the Man, that was set upon, that cried Murder, that lay
dead, and now am apprehended for it.


And were you the Man that run away too after you were dead?


Yes, mary, was I; and so would you have done too, good Mr. Justice, had you
been in my place.


It may be so. Constable, you may release your Prisoner, and go home.


And, Is this all the satisfaction I shall have for the affront done me?


Pray, Sir, let me entreat you to do him all the right you can; for, by some
Circumstances in this matter, I have reason to fear, these sufferings have
befallen him upon my account.


Yes, marry, have they; a Pox of the Employment you put me upon. If ever I carry
Love Letter more for you, or any man living, you shall write Letters in my
Forehead with a hot Iron.


But, Did this Misfortune happen to you at the House, where I directed you?


Just there, as if you'd sent me for that very purpose. I had no sooner knocked,
but out fly four Men, or Devils (I can't tell which) and having told me, That
my sin was Lechery, (which I vow now I did not know till then) they tormented
my Carcass at such a rate, as would have quickly mortified for ever all
concupiscence in me.


Sir Arthur, I am bound in honour to be more then ordinary sensible of your
disaster; For I was not only the occasion of it (though innocently) but all
this Tempest, which fell upon you, was prepared and designed for me. And, to
show you my resentment of it, I have a Sister at home, a wholesome Country Girl,
whom, (with my Fathers leave) I here offer you for a Wife.


Thank'ee heartily, Sir; No, I am very well provided already: Look'ee here
else.


Pray, Sir, let me prevent your falling into farther mistakes, which may prove
dangerous to you; I can assure you, this Lady is no Wife for you. She's
Town-bred, and after she's married must live in London, which is a place in
many respects very inconvenient for you. By the virtue of strong Beer, and
Fourteen hundred a year, you may do very well in the Country, and pass for an
honest substantial man amongst your Neighbours; and stand for Burgess in the
next Election.


What can his meaning be in this?


Pish, pish: Keep your good Counsel to your self, and your Sister too. I can't
but wonder at the confidence of People; every body now a days takes upon him
to be my Governor.


Mr. Peregreen (methinks) you're very forward, and positive in ordering matters,
which concern you not. You're to know, that a Treaty of Marriage is already fixed
between Sir Arthur and my Daughter; The Writings are actually drawing: And will
you, that are a Stranger, and not called to Counsel, interpose in a Business
of this Nature?


Sir, when you know my reason for it, I hope I shall not deserve your Censure.
This Mr. Single, and your Daughter (to my certain knowledge) are mutually
engaged to one another; and there wants nothing but your consent to make 'em
both happy.


Yes, Faith, there wants an Estate too.


'Tis true; but, when that want's removed, your consent must follow. Now, Sir,
it has pleased Heaven to put the power in my hands of serving my Friend on this
important occasion. Behold an absolute Gift and Conveiance of his Fathers
Estate upon my Betty; Here, Sir, I give it you freely: And what in Law shall be
farther required for the Confirmation of it from Betty and me, shall be done
hereafter.


I stand amazed at my own happiness! Nor can I determine, whether this strange
Revolution, or your Generosity, have more of Miracle in it.





I dare not resist the will of Heaven, which shows it self in the wonderful
turn of Affairs, which this day has produced. Daughter, enjoy your Love; and
my blessing go along with it.


Now have I brought my Hogs to a fair Market: I take other men's beatings upon
my self, and they take my Mistress to themselves.


Sir Arthur, you need not be unprovided, if you please, my Sister is still at
your service.


I vow I could find in my heart to Marry her out of spite: then will I be
revenged by Proxy; and make her bones feel, what mine have suffered for you.


For all this, I'll venture her Person, if you'll venture yours.


Say you so? Faith if I like her when I see her (upon the foresaid terms) have
at her.


Why so now; here's a Match begins in anger, and who knows but it may end in
love; since most of those that I have been acquainted with, begin in Love, and
end in War.


All our business being so happily concluded, 'tis time --


No indeed, Sir; My business is yet to do. Methinks, ere the Market break up,
some Provision should be made for me too.


In troth, now she talks of Provision, I begin to grow hungry too. Faith,
Mistress, I see when your belly's full, you care not what becomes of the
Waiters.


We stuck close to you all the time of your Wooing; and sure they that tend the
Roast, deserve one warm bit off o'th Spit.


I never turned the Spit in my Life, but I was allow'd my Sop in the
Dripping-pan.


I protest, Betty, thy old Servants here have just cause of Complaint against
thee. Come Allice; give me thy hand: And, Betty, do you take Ralph; and let's
join 'em together. These two were cut out (Bodies and Souls) for one an other.


I shall never love that slobbering Fellow there: An he were but half so
handsome, as your Worship --


Pretty sweet Mistress (to confess the truth) when I look upon you, that
greasy Wench turns my Stomaek.


This must needs be an happy Match; they meet with such equal affection.


At first hunting, like Whelps newly entered, they are apt to change; but, when
they are well fleshed, they'll grow stanch.


Honest Ralph, you must not be so squeamish: I can assure you, Allice there
deserves every inch of you.


Come Allice; of all thy kindness to me, I here make a Deed of Gift to Ralph.


What must be, must be. Hunger makes any thing go down.


For my part, I declare, 'tis a Match of my Friends making; and, if it do
otherwise then well, let them answer for it.


This being done, we must now consider these Gentlemen, who have been
Travellers to day. We'll execute to morrow, what this Night has concluded, to
the satisfaction of all Parties, except Sir Salomon in Single;

Whose disappointed Stratagems advise,
To shun the dangerous Sin of being too Wise:
For, as Extremes on Globes at last (...) touch,
So Wit in Folly centers, when too much.
Love Changes Natures order: in his School
The young are Wise; The old Man is the Fool.

SInce Stealing's grown a pretty, thriving Trade;
Which many Rich, but few has Guilty made,
To needy Poets, Why should you deny
The Privilege to steal, as well as lie?
Their Theft (alas) swell's not the Nation's Debt*
Nor, makes Wine dear, nor will Land-taxe beget.
Money they always wanted; Now they grow
No less in Fancy, then in Fortune, low;
And are compelled to rook* as Gamesters are,
That can hold out no longer on the Square.
Faith, be good natured to this hungry Crew,
Who, what they filch abroad, bring home to you.
But still exclude those Men from all Relief,
Who steal themselves, yet boldly cry, Stop Thief?
Like taking Judges, these without remorse
Condemn all petty Thefts, and practise worse;
As if they robbed by Patent, and alone
Had right to call each Foreign Play their own.
What we have brought before you, was not meant
For a new Play, but a new President;
For we with Modesty our Theft avow,
(There is some Conscience shown in stealing too)
And openly declare, that if our Cheer
Does bit your Palates, you must thank Molliere:
Molliere, the famous Shakspear of this Age,
Both when he Writes, and when he treads the Stage,
I hope this Stranger's Praise gives no pretence
To charge us with a National Offence;
Since, were it in my power, I would advance
French Wit in England, English Arms in France.

