DO you (...)? You Prompter! You may spare your pains,
The Devil shall ^earken to you, before Jo Hains.
Whine out your Prologue in your Canting tone,
But tell your Poet I shall speak my own,
For, Sirs, the Impudent Author of this day,
Has put my sa^red person in his Play,
He fancies too the Picture's like, they say.
'Tis true, these very Roguish Eyes he draws,
And paints this very Snout, and these grim Jaws,
But Satans Horny Forehead, and his Claws.
To show me as a Sinner had been civil;
But ^Zounds, be represents me like a Devil.
Now, Sirs, to treat me still a scurvier way,
This part they've got one Penkethman to play.
For that I d act it crimp they apprehended,
And so, as Gad shall judge me, I intended.
Yet, who but I should be desired to day,
To recommend this Embrion of a Play!
And thus I praise it in the modern way!
For as some Demi-gods, which Painters show,
Are Gods above, but very Beasts below,
So praise, which best you taste and understand,
Carries a bloody Libel underhand.
This Play, they say then, in a little space
Of time was writ, and a damn^d scurvy place.
The time Six weeks, the place I have forgot:
Damme, this Brandy makes a man a sot.
Were but the Author here, perhaps he'd tell you,
'Twas in some Coffee-house in Exchange-alley.
A place of late to Epic Muse well known,
Perhaps that 'twas composed in's Coach he'd own,
But that alas poor Devil he has none
For Muse is served by Modern Bard, as Whore
By Modern Beau at Cho^olate-house door.
Where swinging Hack with sympathetic motion,
Bows to the sacrificing Sparks Devotion.
Then secondly, to lease both Wise and F^ols
Here, they say, Whimsey's reconcil^d to Rules.
But what wise Woman in the month of May,
Does not prefer the gallant, strong, and gay,
Who ruffles her in wilds, and the open face of day;
Before the precise (...) who (...) delight,
To lawful Sheets, and the dull decent night*
As for my own part, Lord, what Drabs I towze,
Rather than take just pastime with my Spouse.
Now, tho this Play perhaps may show no brains,
Yet spare this Prologue, which was writ by Hains.
Writ? Where? In Coach? No: When got drunk with Sherry,
Among the Putney Pikes, and wondrous merry,
In Chelsea reach, I writ it in a Wherry.

DOes my Disguise become me? Hah!


Every Disguise becomes thee: Thou hast a comprehensive genius for Roguery.


Nay, I thank my Stars, I have made a shift to make my self a sort of a name.


An immortal one: Thy merit is so extraordinary that Fame cannot do thy actions
too much right, and Fortune can do thy designs no wrong; but that which is most
to be valued in thee, is, that thou art the only Rogue alive who never
pretended to be honest; other Rascals owe their success to Virtue. Thou alone
hast a genius to go through thy business without the help of Hypocrisy.


No, 'sbud, I never pretended to Honesty, I set up for Religion once.


Why ay, there's it; so sudden a setting up for Religion in so vicious a Dog as
thou art, was to renounce Morality by a public act.


But, for what reason, Mr. Belvil, have I Baldernoe, by vocation Player,
Dancing-master, Mountebank and Solicitor, Pimp, Poet and Fortune-teller; for
what reason have I quitted all these to turn Lacquay to Mr. Belvil?


Why you must -- But look you, you had need be very dexterous and very well
assured; for you are to pass for an important person upon --


Very dexterous! and very well assured! Ha, ha, ha, look in my face, and give
me that counsel! Do you know what this modest Gentleman has done with in these
three days? 'Sbud I baffled an impudent Irish Chancery-man in his own
blundering way; I put Eikon Basilike out of conceit with himself, and damnably
out of countenance; I caldes'd a Judge while he was taking my Depositions, and
I bantered a Bishop while I was asking him blessing.


Ve^y well!


And then for passing for an important person; do you know, Sir, that in France
once I palm^d this Identical person of mine for Quality upon my Friend Lewis?
Do you know this, hah! And that at Rome I topped Signior Giusippe, wicked
Signior Giusippe, Pagan Signior Giusippe, for a Saint upon old Infallibility.
But, what is it I must do for you?


The Garden in which we are walking, you must know, belongs to my Uncle: You
have heard of the famous Mr. Bull?


What, the great Banker, who is every Spring and Fall regularly clapped up for a
Plot?


The same: And who first gave his Brethren the noble example of refusing their
own Bills.


He, who has Colonel Medley's five thousand pounds in his hands?


Yes, and refuses to pay his old friend, and one of the warmest of his own
party, one poor hundred pounds, tho he has all his fortune by him. This Uncle
you must know, has not only the right of Guardianship over me, but the disposal
of me in Marriage; and if I refuse the Wife that he provides for me, then the
one half of my Estate to descend to my younger Brother.


And remain in your Unkle's hands till your Brother comes of Age?


This Uncle is Guardian at the same time to a Lady whose name is Sylvia, who is
at present in the house, and is just come to Town by his own order: He has over
her much the same advantage which he has over me. But, see, he comes.


Let me see! 'Tis now turned of four. Oh Nephew, you are punctual: But, hey
day! whom have we here?


'Tis my new Servant, Sir.


Faith and troth I have seen that face somewhere. Zounds! what a Lee^ was
there^ In that single cast was the villainy of twenty Stook-jobbers.


I can't help my face Sir; but I was never accus^d of doing any thing against
my Conscience.


Here's a Rogue! Here's an impudent Dog! Perhaps Sirrah you he no Conscience.


Not so much, I must confess, as your Worship: My Conscience is no^ so large,
but that I can carry it about me


The very modesty of this fellow is impudence.


But I can hardly be said to want Conscience, because, like your Worship^ I am
contented with what I have.


What horrible Rogue is this? Gadsbud I am amazed! Sirrah, I say you do want
Conscience.


Why faith, old Gentlaman, if he did want Conscience, 'twere a hard case to
despise any single person for poverty, at a time when there is no body rich.
You know Conscience at years of discretion is become a notion and nothing else,
as very a Chim^ra as is a Maidenhead at years of discretion; they both pass
away in contemplation as soon as we come to know what they are.


Say you so Sir? A very hopeful young Dog I have to deal with! But come Sir,
are you resolved to do what I expect you shall do to morrow?


To morrow Sir! Marry to morrow!


To morrow Sir! Marry to morrow! Ay, ay, to morrow, to morrow. Hey day! what a
Devis here to do? why pray Sir, who am I? Ay, come Sirrah* I say who am I?


Who are you Sir?


Ay Sir, I say who am I?


Why don't you know, old Gentleman?


It may be not, Sir.


Faith it may be so too, Sir: For if thou did but know thy self never so
little, thou would never talk at so damned a rate. Marry to morrow! why dost
thou not know, old Gentleman, that Marriage and Death are two things of which a
wise man will consider all his life time? and would you provide me a
Matrimonial noose, with as little ceremony as a Grand Signior sends a Bassa a
Bow-string? S'death! let me executed at least like an English-man; let me have
fair warning, time to prepare for another world, to take leave of my friends,
and so be truss^d up with decency.


Sirrah! hast thou no way to show thou art no Blockhead, but by railing at
Matrimony, the vilest Common-place of the most abandoned Fop that ever set up
for a Wit!


But, pray Sir, what sort of Woman have you provided for me? perhaps I can't
love her.


Why, you impudent Dog, do you take me for a Pimp? Zounds! not love her, quoth
a! why who the Devil, at this time of day, ever so much as thinks of love, the
day that he hears of Matrimony: however, she whom I have provided for you is no
Scare-crow, Sir, but one who has Wit and Beauty Sir, and is absolutely the
finest bred Gentlewoman in all Cumberland.


Nay, then, she must needs be a glorious Creature, and her name is --


Mr. Bull, I have something of importance to impart to you, and must desire
your ear immediately.


With all my heart, old Boy! Little Rumour of the world! my dapper
Intelligencer! 'twere a, hard case, if a man should not have one ear at his
service, who has so often ventured both for his friends. Nephew! I'll be for
you immediately.


Rumour will certainly know me.


Peace! he does know thee, and is here by my appointment to prepare the way for
you. But what do you think of my Uncle? you have now had time to observe him.


What do I think of him? why, before Rumour came in, I took him for a whimsical
hair-brain'd Coxcomb, but now he is come to his politics, s^bud he looks very
wisely, and very circumspectly. And if this is the man I have to deal with, let
me tell you, I shall have a hard --


Thou art an Ass! a man who looks sometimes very wisely, is certainly sometimes
a very Coxcomb, and never so much a Coxcomb, as when he looks very wisely; he
who is truly wise is equal, and appears for the most part alike.


Nay, Mr. Belvil, your Uncle is not the only fool of our acquaintance who
sometimes looks grave and wise.


No, not by a hundred: a Gown and Gravity frequently disguise a Blockhead.
Folly has its Hypocrisy as well as Vice, and it is as common a thing to see a
Sot grave, as a Villain devout.


Or a Drab squeamish.


As if Wisdom maliciously sat on his outside, on purpose to inform the world
that he is an Ass within; like a Spy that repairs to the enemies frontiers,
purposely in order to make discoveries, and to convey back Intelligence. For my
Uncle, thou shalt attack him to choose, in the midst of his gravity and of his
politics, and when he most depends on his own sufficiency, thou shalt
dexterously make that self-conceit an accessory in his Trepan.


Baldernoe, my Nephew's Footman. It is not the least inconveniency that attends
us, great Statesmen, that we are forced to stand buff against all the various
whiffs that come puffing from our politic Whisperers: This morning I was
attackt by two at once; one whispered in my right Ear a French invasion, at the
same time that the other communicated a Scotch Rebellion to my left. The one of
which had swa^low'd Garlic, and the other at that very instant, Gadsbud, was
chewing Tobacco.


For godsake what is the ma^ter with you, Mr. Bull?


Horribly attackt with Vapours on the sudden.


Once more your Ear, Mr Bull.


Prithee my dapper Intelligencer, since we are out of that Rogue my Nephews
hearing, speak a little louder.


We Politicians, Mr. Bull, hold that even Walls have ears.


Gadsooks let them: As long as they have no Tongues, I warrant they keep a
secret.


Once more your ear, Mr. Bull.


A pox on thee, take it then.


I say already landed.


Colonel Macruby, and Brigadier Bloodybones, and the Countess and her
Daughter, whom Fame reports so beautiful?


All landed I say.


And a French Marquis come over to be the chief Agent?


The famous Marqu^s De Mascarille!


Oh blessed news! oh joyful hearing! Well, for this, my little Rumour, we will
^up together to night: for thou, my Bully, get thy living like Fame, and art
nourished by Intelligence. But at present I must desire thy absence, for I have
business with my Nephew.




Why, pray who is the business, Sir?


Who is the business, Sir? Why the business is Justice Dowdy's Daughter, Sir.


S'death! and would you have me linked to that Northern Monster?


Sirrah! by the contempt you show for her, I should swear you were already
linked to her, but that I know she is hardly yet come to Town: But I expect her
with her Father by eight. And my will and pleasure is, that you wait upon her
as soon as she comes, for you are to be marry^d to morrow to her.


But perhaps my affections are engaged.


Yes, to Sylvia, we know your engagements Sir: But I cha^ge you see her no more
till to morrow, when she and my Son Batt are to be dispatch^d by the same
Black-coat who is to do your business.


Why, he has not been three days in England yet, nor she five in Town: She
never saw him yet, and when she does see him, she will certainly laugh at him.


You are very saucy methinks, Sir: But if she thinks him a Fool she ^ll marry
him to choose; for a Fool is the fittest thing for a Woman.


The fittest? ay, for some Women indeed.


For all, sirrah, for all: Do we not see that they are all fond of Fools? and
do you think Nature has not given them affections for what is convenient for
them, as well as she has given the rest of the Animals?


Was there ever such an old Beast? Sylvia --


But let me tell you, Sir, a wise Woman is still a Woman. We see by experience,
that a wise Woman, will choose a fellow indeed that has sense for her Parlour,
but a Fool, you Dog, for her Bed-chamber.


Then it is not their folly, it seems, that makes Women fond of Fools?


Their folly; no, 'tis their prudence Sir, and the genius which they have for
business. Much contemplation hinders business Sirrah and they know it well. Why
should nature, that can as easily make a wise man as a fool, make a hundred
fools for one wise man, if she did not know the fools to be most proper for the
carrying on her grand design?


Nay, at this rate indeed your Son --


I tell you Sirrah, when Sylvia sees Batt she'll like him; for Bats a lusty
Dog, let me tell you; a confounded fellow on occasion! Gadsbud, if he is not,
he is no Bull, Sirrah! Ga^sbud if he is not, he is a Bastard on both sides. His
Mother was a Hummer in her time, and the Jade would kick between sleeping and
waking, like an unbacked Filly.


Sir, one from Colonel Medley would speak with you


Sirrah, conduct him in.





Sirrah, I tell you you must not, I have not done with you yet.


Sir, the importance of my business will excuse my want of ceremony. Colonel
Medley sends you this with his service.


Sbud! The very Bully that was with the Colonel and us at the Rose but now. Is
the part that I taught him there^ to be acted here?


It is: In the mean-while step into the house, and deliver this as dexterously
as you can to Sylvia.





Faith Sir, I have both done and suffered, My name is Macfleer: I had formerly
the honour to be Captain General of all the Rapparees in Ireland; where in
cutting above five thousand Throats, I received above fifty Wounds; besides
that, I was twice hanged in the Woods of Tiperary, but relieved both times by
our own party and cut down in the nick.


Twice hanged, Sir!


Twice, Sir.


Gadsbud, Sir, I honour you. Five thousand Throats cut! English, a perfect
honest man* How do all your friends abroad, Sir?


Faith, lusty all, and longing to be with you. Hark you! Your Ear, Mr. Bull.


All embarked say you? Forty thousand!


Before I came away I tell you, and only expecting --


Gadsooks, I will be very drunk to night.


The next news you are to expect is, that your Ships are burnt in their
Harbours, your Towns consumed to ashes.


La Lol, Dera, Lol Dera.


Then will you behold this City flowing with human gore, your Virgins ravished,
your Matrons violated, and your Widows -- well diverted. But time calls upon
us, and the Colonel stays.


Sir, take but one turn, and I^le be with you in a moment. I have but two words
with an idle Rascal here.


Well! Come, Sir, to the Premises, what say you to the Justices Daughter.


What do I say, Sir! why, that you are a fine facetious old Gentleman, and
rally very agreeably.


Oh Lord! Oh Lord! Here's a Rogue! Here's a Villain! A fine facetious old
Gentleman and rally very agreeably! Why, thou young Dog, art thou resolved to
bring my grey Hairs with sorrow to the Grave! Have I liv^d to a good old Age
without infamy, and must I be dubbed a Wit at threescore! The first of the
Family of the Bulls that ever incurred that ignomy. The Bulls have been always
gave --


Blockheads.


And politic --


Rascals.


But no Wits, Sirrah. 'Tis well known that I am so far from a Wit, that a
Songster who frequents Will's Coffee House, threatened to bring an Action of
scandal against me for commending his Madrigals. But, come to the point: Will
you comply with me or not? or are you resolved to be an Ass?


I shall be no Ass, Sir, for I shan^t marry: Could you in Conscience marry me
to one whom I contemn and detest?


Humph! Could I in conscience? There I must confess thou hast touch^d me,
Nephew. For the uni^ersal World I would not do a thing against Conscience.
Marry one whom I contemn and derest! Humph* Other people contemn and detest
after Mar^iage; but here's a Rogue detests and contemns before Marriage. Why,
tis but detesting and contemning a month before the usual time, and for that
very reason thou shalt have her, old Boy, that thou may not be taxed with
inconstancy. Well, remember what I have said to you, and think of your fathers
last Will, and tremble, Sirrah. But come, Teddy, thou wilt be a good Boy. Go,
get you gone and furbish, you little young Dog: But hold, take a little advice
with you first; He who is in pursuit of a Country Lady, must do as if he were
stalking for Wild Fowl, hide the Man behind the Beast; for the more Fool there
appears, the less shy will your Game be. Come,


Well, Mr. Belvil, did the Bully manage his tackle tightly?


Rarely! and the old Jack greedily struck at the Bait.


'Sbud! But that any thing like this, should pass upon one who has common
sense! If we Players should show any thing like this on the Stage, it would be
certainly damned as improbable.


Not by those who had Judgment to weigh it: For is not this seen every day in
the world? Are not more discerning people than my Uncle drawn daily into the
gross^st snares upon the like occasions? The showing which would therefore be
just and instructive Satyr upon Mankind in general, and would plainly show us
how the clearest sighted are blinded by affection; how easily we believe what
we eagerly desire; and what a constant Cully reason is to Passion; whereas the
exposing the credulity of an errant Ass could never show us any thing. Besides,
I have taken so many precautions, that every part of this design is the
likeliest in the world to succeed. There are some Gentlemen of my Unkle^s
party, in whom he perfectly confides. Men indeed of worth and honour, who were
formerly my intimate friends and from whom humanity has obliged me since not
wholly to withdraw my self. Colonel Medley, who is the chief of them, and the
primum mobile of this whole affair, has been cheated of five thousand pounds by
my Uncle, which is almost all his fortune, and which we pretend to retrieve by
the success of our St^atagem, and you know common interest to be the powerful
uniter of all parties. The rest of those Gentlemen I have engaged in my design,
by remonstrating to them the villainy of my Unkle's intentions, and the
innocence of my own, and by the hopes of diversion. The Gentlemen and my Money
together have secured some Rascals who perpetually haunt my Uncle; and all his
Servants have embarkt on the same bottom; so that we are safe on all sides: but
have you been with my Mistress?


I have.


And what says the Chaming Creature?


Rapture! Sbud a certain sign that these two have hitherto done nothing but
talk^d together.


And will she meet me at the Play?


She says she will not: For her Guardian has commanded her not to come into
your company, and therefore she thinks it her duty to tell you, that she
intends to sit in the Stage-Box on the Right hand, that you may be sure to
avoid that place.


A very odd way of making an Assignation! But come, let's away to the
Play-house: I have promised to meet Frowzy at the Curtain before the Play
begins; for she is to act the Countess that comes from St. Germain^, and
Friskit is to play her Daughter.


Frowzy? How long has the Bawd been in England?


She is just come piping hot from Flanders, and designs this night to appear at
the Curtain in triumph.


In Triumph!


Yes, they say she swears she alone has made the Confederates an over-match for
the French, that she plots propagation for more places than they contrive
destruction, and that she alone by her wise Counsels repairs the ruins of the
War.


The raillery is something strong, I long to see the Bawd.


Faith, to give the Jade her due, she was very well worth the seeing, before
she went out of England: She did not as most Bawds do, like a Nov^l, consist of
Intrigue alone; but, like a Comedy, besides design, had wit, folly, and humour
in her; was officious, discerning, subtle impertinent, whimsical, fond of her
condition, and proud of infamy. This she was, but Campaigning must still have
improved her Character, and she will now come forth a ^arce revived with
additions.


Bu^, Mr. Belvil where is the famous Ma^quis de Mescerille* (...) who is to
play him?


Who? who the Devil but thou? Thou who ^ Count upon Lewis the Fourteenth, may
very ^ a Marquis on my Uncle.


(...)* He^ll know me again.


I have contriv^d a disguise that will hide thee even from thy own evil genius.
Besides, we shall take such care of him, and give him so many alarms to night,
th^t he shall neither have time nor power to make (...) observation.


(...)* Say you so? Then pray, Sir, know whom you are before. V^ez done,
Chapeau, has, Venez Morbleu vite, faites un Reverence a Monsieur Le Marquis.
So, now let's away to Frowzy, who, as I can perceive, wants nothing to make her
complete in her Calling, but my knack of Fortune-telling. For, as my Brother
Butler says,

One predicting Pimp has the odds.
Of whole Chaldrons of downright Bawds.

DAughter Friskit! Frisk. Mother!


Is Mr. Belvil come?


He has sent word that he'll be here immediately. You heave and puff strangely,
Mother: How do you find your self?


Almost bowzy, by this light, Daughter. Prithee contemplate my Phiz a little:
Hath it not a damnable hue with it? I warrant it is as comically hideous, as
that old Hatchet-fac'd Beau's, who stands grinning in the Front-Box over my
Lady what de call her?


And appears like the Dragon that was guardian to the Golden Fruit. But why
should you come hither in this woeful condition, Mother? Gemini, in what a heat
you are? Jesu, how you are tumbled!


Ay, so are you too, Daughter: No matter, the more like women of business.
Brush!


Madam!


Where ^s the Delight of my Soul? Where's my Gallant in ordinary?


Here, Madam! A Brandy-bottle Vade Mecum of a travelling Bawd.


Medley says, let me kiss thee.


S^heart, Mother! For shame step into the Scene room.


For shame! Yes, I am a very bashful person indeed: Modest Su Frowzy! what a
rare Monster would she be? But let Sinners be ashamed, I am Virtuous, Daughter.


Virtuous!


Virtuous! Ay, Virtuous. For pray who boasts of receiving the last favour from
me? Now, let Ladies do what they will besides, let them censure and rail, and
dissemble and cheat, nay, and drink their four Bottles a day, if they do not
grant the last favour, they are Virtuous. Nay, I know a Gentlewoman at Court my
self, who because she does not Cuckold her Husband, thinks she has a privilege
to beat him: Formerly indeed I was one of the wicked, for I gave my Husband his
choice, whether he would have me a chaste, repining, obstreperous Turtle, or a
silent, dutiful, humble Jilt; and the good man chose Cuckoldom and Quiet. In
troth, he was a very good man, Daughter! He was wont to say, that the Wife who
upbraided her Husband with her Chastity, implied that she cornuted her Monster
in Spirit abunda^tly.


Right, Mother: For she did not Cuckold him actually, because she had no mind
to Cuckold him, where a Devil lay the obligation to her?


So that, as I was saying, Daughter, my good wretch chose Cuckoldom and Quiet;
one for the happiness of this world, and the other for that of the next. And
thus I was formerly one of the wicked: But for these fifteen years last past, I
have taken off my Bottle, and been Virtuous. But thou art mighty ignorant in
Spiritual affairs, Child. So taken up about Carnal matters. Brush!


Madam!


Go to the Rose, and see if you can hear of Mr. Belvil: He knows I have a
calling to look after, and that I am obliged in Conscience to mind it. Well,
Daughter, is it not more comfortable being here than in a Camp?


Ay, Mother, here we are in expectation of no Battles, but those which the
Players fight on the Stage.


Or those which the Bullies act in the Pit. But hold! Let me examine a little:
Thou hast not studied faces for nothing, Su Frowzy. Lord! what a numerous herd
of Cullies is here! I have not seen so comfortable a prospect the Lord knows
the time! Daughter, Daughter! I'gad you'll do your business well here! If I had
but thy Youth, Child, I would lay a Tax of five hundred a year upon yonder
limbo of Vanity.


If you were but to talk with the Doorkeeper, he'd quickly assure you that
you'd find the Fund deficient.


Look yonder is Frowzy arrived piping hot from Flanders.


Frowzy upon my Life! Was there ever such an impudent Bawd!


Impudent Bawd! Dost thou hear that foul-mouth'd Rogue, Daughter? Well great
Virtues have been always persecuted, and rare Talents have been always envied.
But does that senseless Puppy know what extraordinary qualities are required to
complete what he is pleased to style Bawd? What Parts? What Education? What
Discipline? What Observation? What? -- Oh a thousand things more than I can
think of at present!


And 'tis very well known, Mother, that you have all the qualifications which
can accomplish the most Reverend Matron.


Nay faith, all that know me, do me the honour to say, that for our profession
there is not a greater person living than my self. Yes, faith, all that know me
--


And that is All Europe.


Do me the honour --


The Justice you mean, Mother.


To assert this: And that there is not a woman breathing who has a larger
capacity for the Calling.


All the world allows it.


Nor a greater genius.


'Tis the voice of Fame, Mother.


And that my Education has been as liberal. Faith and troth I was brought up at
the University, Daughter; went through a course of natural experimental
Philosophy there, performed my public exercise with applause, and when I came
to be of complete standing, past the examination of several Masters, and
regularly took my Degree. After that I came to be public professor of the
Mathematics in that place.


But with this preferment, how came you to change your station, Mother?


You must know, that my Fame increasing with my Virtues, and both growing too
large for that narrow Sphere, it was unanimously voted, in full Congregation,
that I should be conveyed from thence, to the great City at the public
expense, for the public benefit. Oh! you^ most humble Servant, my Lord! Your
humble Servant, Sir Arthur! Noble Colonel I am yours.


Bless my Eyes! What do I see! Ah Godson you ravish me.


Well! You are welcome into England Mother: I hope you have made your Markets
in Flanders well.


My Markets, Son! I wonder you should talk at that rate: You know I act for
Glory. And truly, I hope I have behaved my self so, that he who writes the
History of this War, will mention Su Frowzy with honour. Ah Son, that you had
been but an eye witness of my actions! To see the rate discipline that I
observed among them. I have done wonders among them, my Boy! I have made the
German active, the Spaniard humble, and the Dutch man lean and liberal. Ha, ha,
ha: There was an old Dutch Captain, who when he first came into my hands, was a
lubberly, wheezing, unwieldy wight, that was fit neither for a Charge nor a
Retreat: But by that time I had had him three months, he became a pretty,
slender, nimble, Mercurial fellow; and at the Battle of Landen, as Gad shall
save me, ran away at the head of his Company.


But, hark you Mother, I have a word of business with you.


Hast thou so my boy, and Faith Ill do it effectually for thee If she's in the
Playhouse, give me but thy Billet and the Orange Wench shall deliver it
immediately to her.


Indeed that business you have often done for me, but this is of another
nature.


Let it be what it will it must be done before 8 of the clock; for then I am to
meet some Statesmen upon a politic conference, and to morrow I return for
Flanders.


How! I was in hopes we should have had you till June.


Jesu! Why the Army will be in the Field within these three weeks.


And cannot they lye there without you, Mother.


Yes, I'd have you to know I seldom lye in the Camp, but in the next walled
Town, still like the Great Ladies of France, to provide for the necessities for
the Army. But France is the place Son, where Merit is regarded. Some of them
now are Ministers of State, I am but poor Sue Frowzy. Yet, I, gad, as simple as
I stand here, in one of the former Reigns, I was a Cabinet Councellor.


But Mother --


Right Child! Since I am to return so suddenly, you would ask me why I came
over? Why for Recruits Child^* The Forces that I raised last Spring are some of
them dead in the service, others wounded, but harassed, damnably harassed
all.


Death and the Devil! This Jade's impertinence will quite ruin my business!
Mrs. Frowzy! Look, there is your retaining Fee. I must have a word apart with
you immediately.


Humph! ^ive Guineas! I have not had so much these two Campaigns from a Major
General Son my Soul is yours.


Am I grown old or ugly that I stand unattack'd here? or am I neglected as an
unfortify'd place, that lies open to all invaders? I'll e^en put on my Mask,
and try what that will do. That will atract some ^op or other. For an Ow^ loves
not the face of night so much as a fool is fond of a Visor.


Hey day! What Stripling comes here? This is one of those ^oung
wou'd-be^Sinners, whom we may call wicked Platonic, and who make lewd love
without desire.


Demmee, Madam.


What? Before you are capable of being a Sinner! All in good time sweet Sir.
The Devil does not care for these Tit Bits; he's for a more substantial morsel,
a morsel that may be felt in the going down: And truly he and I are much of a
mind. But come, for what have you a mind to be damned, young Sir!


For you, withal my heart, my Dear* Come, shall you and I go aside and divert
one another?


Why, I can laugh at you here, and that is all the diversion that thou can
give me poor little Animal!


Nay, but this is speaking without Book. Come, come, come and see.


No, I'd have you to know, I am a little too old for a Puppet-show. No, Sir,
no, I am for none of your diversion.


S'death, if you are not for diversion, will you do business?


Business! What a Boy and talk of Business? No, no, youngster, you are not
grown up to Business yet.


What a Devil can this be; She talks too well for a common Punk, and too lewdly
for a woman of Honour. Ten to one some Actress who is rehearsing her part to
me. Adieu Jilt!


The most effectual way of Jilting thee, were to grant thy request


Baldernoe expects you. But be sure you remember the Letter.


I warrant you* Daughter, come along Child


But Sylvia comes adorned with every Grace,
And Love and Death sit sporting in her Eyes.

And for what weighty reason, Mr. Belvil, have you drawn me hither?


To expose my Rival to you


A very frank confession! You are jealous then?


I should be very unworthy if I should be jealous after the engaging assurance
which you gave me this morning. When you see my Rival you will be convinc^d
that I am not jealous.


Why am I then come hither?


That the full knowledge of the Husband which my Uncle designs for you, may
give you the juster excuse for refusing him.


But can your Uncle dare to use his authority in such an arbitrary manner, as
to oblige me to take for a Husband to morrow, a man whom I never saw?


My Uncle has several reasons for this precipitation: But this is not the
meanest of them, that the longer you know his Son, the more nauseous you^ll
find him.


But since this Gentleman is to be shown in the Playhouse, pray do what is done
in our Comedies, and let me know something of the character, before I see the
person


Why, then for his parts, Madam, Nature has been a very niggard to him: She has
made him a poor Dog, but he is contented, and so far he may ^e said to be rich


Nay, this you have spoken in his commendation: For content, where murmuring
will not mend the matter, denotes a man of Judgment.


True, Madam: But, like some old Philosophers, he is not only contented in his
poverty, he is proud in it: Like a Stoic, at the time that he is scandalously
^ecessitous, he affirms that himself is only rich. An humble Fool is one of
Gods creatures, and consequently very good: Ignoranee and stupidity are
Nature's follies, and Nature is always lovely: But affectation is a Coxcomb's
own.


Nay, we have certa^nly reason to bear with your downright Fool, for native
folly is a necessary foil, and serves to set off the Brilliant of Wit, but
affectation is false and counterfeits it, to cheat us of our good opinions.


Right, Madam: He who courts our applause by affecting Wit, is a cheating
Beggar, who asks Alms with a false Certificate; and every pretending aspiring
Fop is a Knave as well as a Fool. In short, this is so vain a Coxcomb, that he
would be contented to feel himself miserable, that others might imagine him
happy; and would be satisfied to be a Sot in his own judgment, that he might
pass for a Wit in the opinions of other people.


But have a care, are only Fools vain, very vain, Mr. Belvil?


Yes, a man of sense may be puffed up sometimes, because he cannot always
reflect; but a conceited Fool is eternally vain, because he is never
thoughtful.


Then Vanity, like Wine, it seem^, works most violently upon the weakest
brains?


It does; and Vanity makes the Sot as conceited of his fancied capacity, as
Wine made the Beggar proud of his imaginary quality. Frowzy and Friskit have
sent him by my appointment. But that this Lady must not know.


Damme, how dost thou do, Ned?





Do you stay the Play out?


Dost thou know, Ned, that I am just now come out of France?


And what of that?


And what can you see in my face to persuade you, that I, who come from Moliere
and Racine, should stay out one of your damned foolish things here?


Why have we nothing but foolish things then?


No Sir, if my Judgment may be taken; and I hope my Judgment may be taken for a
foolish thing as soon as another mans.


No doubt on it.


As I was just coming into the door, I met 3 or 4 Wits going out: They were all
of them down to the ground immediately to me: Your most humble Servant, sweet
Mr. Bull. And thus I returned the salute: Jack how dost thou do? Will, I am
heartily glad to see thee. Rot me Tom, thou look execrably to day. Ned, I
always treat people De haut en bas, who have not a great deal of money.


What if they have merit?


Merit without Money! Thou talk like a Bantamite or a Chinese, let me perish;
and not like an inhabitant of this side of the Globe. There is an air of
greatness in Tutaying men. Ned, man Ned Thou behav'st thy self so gently to all
sorts of people, that let me die if I am not ashamed of thee.


Nay, I must confess thou dost treat most people with a surprising familiarity.


That i^, Ned, because for most people I have a very hearty contempt.


And so have all who have thy noble accomplishments. For


On what the Devil art thou musing man? As I was saying, Ned, thou know that
I am lately come out of ^rance.


Very good.


Thou art very perfect I know in the French Tongue.


Oh God, Sir, you rally me.


Non, que Le Diable my emporte. And thou hast a very pretty stile in English.
Now I have thought of a business that may get thee some reputation.


As how, pray?


Why, I have brought over with me about a bushel of Billet Doux, which I
received from the Wives, and Sisters, and Daughters of Dukes and Peers of
France, and which I would have thee translate for the benefit of our English
Ladies.


I am the most unqualify^d man in the world for such an employment.


The most qualified man in the Universe, let me perish for it, our Language
stands in want of these things. You will find in them to a miracle, Le gallant,
Le Doux, Le Tender, Le Delicat le bien tourn^.


Is that one of them in your hands?


No, that is a Letter which I have just received from a Duchess.


May I read it?


You may.


Pshew! Pox she does not know thee, or she would never have given thee that
caution. 'Tis now


There is not a man in England who is more shocked at vanity than my self.


Or who loves a vain Coxcomb more.


I don't understand you.


Of all loves, self-love is the blindest


Tho perhaps if I had a mind to be vain.


Nature has given thee as good grounds to be so, as she has done any man
breathing.


Right.


For she has made thee as great a Coxcomb.


Humph!


Belvil mean by all this? This Coxcomb can never be so odiously base as to bear
it. Heavens! How I tremble.


I would despise another man for this, but thee I pity, Ned.


This Billet, I'll lay my life, comes from some Drab who has heard what a Fop
thou art, and who by necessity is reduced to abandon her self to thee, which is
enough even in this lewd Age, to brand Fornication with ^nfamy.


A Drab who is reduced you say? Prithee let's hear that again.


Yes, reduced even to flatter thee, which is still a more vile and a more
abominable prostitution.


Ned, some people would decently cut your Throat about this business. But --


Your dare not, it seems.


I will only tell thee, that the Lady from whom this Letter comes, is just as
great a Drab as I am a Fop, and I am just as great a Fop as she is a Drab: Ha,
ha, ha. And so adieu.


Nay, Faith you shan^t go.


Faith but I must, Ned: For look you, the Fop at present is busy, nay, very
busy. For the Drab, do you see, has sent ^he Fop an assignation, and the Fop
is resolved to be punctual. Ha, ha, ha.


This is wonderful.


But can you resolve to go to a Whore to night, when you know you are to be
married to morrow?


Ay, to choose, Ned, and for a very good reason.


Name it.


That I might not be tempted to do so damned an unfashionable thing as to be
immoderate with my own Spouse to morrow night.


Have you seen Sylvia?


No.


How do you know whether you shall like her?


I never concern my self about that: For who would trouble himself about
marrying one whom he likes, in an age in which every well bred man professes
the hating his Wife? Has she all her Teeth, two Eyes, and a Nose?


Yes sure.


Rot me, I had a live she had not: For nothing can make a woman so abominable
as wedlock, and all Wives are hideous alike. For my part, of all things in the
world, I would choose to marry the woman I hated most.


The Devil thou would?


Let me perish, Ned, but I would: for whom a man hates he would be glad to
avoid, and people marry now adays on purpose to live asunder.





Mr* Bull, if Sylvia were here now?


Faith if she had been here, it had been all one.


Faith I believe thee.


Well, Ned, adieu.


So, Madam! How do you like Mr. (...)?


Infinitely. There may be men in the world who have greater understandings, but
he is extremely handsome.


Nay, now I am sure you dissemble, for it is the hardest thing in the world,
for a Woman who finds that a man wants Wit, to find that he is extremely
handsome.


You did not hear me say that he wanted wit: for my part I think that he is
very brisk.


And at the same time very melancholy.


I don't know what you may think, but I am sure a great part of what he said
would pass for Wit with others.


Yes, and make him pass for a Fool with them.


How! Wit make him pass for a Fool with them? I thought people had passed for
Fools for want of Wit.


No, Madam, 'tis for want of Judgment.


And do you think to make your Court to a Woman by saying this?


Yes, to a Woman who can despise the little follies of her Sex, as much as she
detests their Vices. But, Madam, you are sensible of the choice to which you
are reduc^d, if you will not accept of me to night, you must ee^n take my Rival
to morrow.


You draw strange consequences.


You know, that by the indiscretion of your Father, your Guardian has the same
advantage over you that he has over me.


You know him to be utterly averse to your desire.


But if within these two hours I obtain his con^sent, will you promise to give
me yours.


Upon that condition I may promise any thing, and run no risque of performance.
But I must think of removing: For so long a conversation in so public a place
has drawn all the Eyes of the Playhouse on us.


Then you shall give me leave to wait upon you to your Chair.


You may spare your self the trouble, for I have brought my Gentlemen Usher
with me. Your Servant.


Madam, your most humble servant. Well* Thus far I have only exposed my Cousin,
but that is not sufficient, he must smart too. My Unkle's ill usage has been
intolerable. His years, and the relation which I have to him, restrain me from
revenging that usage upon himself immediately. No I will punish it in his
ridiculous Off-spring, and visit the exorbitant sins of the Father, upon that
extraordinary Rogue the Son. Since I have depriv^d him of the Wife designed for
him, I will put very fair for the providing another for him. In Friskit I have
made a proper choice for him. For so extravagant a Drab and so extraordinary a
Fop are tallies to one another; so surprising a match may be very instructive,
and snow the ridiculous vanity of some Coxcombs who are now in my Eye; for they
are but copies of this original, and the conclusion of all their boasted
intrigues is the same.

Those plagues of the fair Sex, of ours the scum,
Got doubly drunk with Vanity and Stum,
Their high-born Mistresses in Brimmers toast,
And to their friends their false good fortunes boast;
But the Wine drunk, and the vain frolic over,
Departing, reel to some abandoned Whore:
And with her fancying Quality, and Charms,
Enjoy fair Duchess in a Bulkers arms.

MR. Bull not at home say you? Nay then --


Nay, I beseech your Ladyship: My Master sent word but now that a little
unexpected business detains him, but that in less than an hour he'll wait upon
you. In the mean time he commanded me to tell you, that the House is your
Ladyship's. A Gentleman is in the Garden, who desires to know if he may wait
upon you.


His name?


Mr. Dorant. At least Bull for Dorant, I must confess is above my apprehension.
But that which is more strange is, the Mr. Belvil gave us notice before-hand
that young Mr. Bull would tell this lye, and obliged us all to confirm it. But
Mr. Belvil is so honest, so worthy, so liberal a Gentleman, that we have all
engaged to run through fire and water for him. Will your Ladyship sent any
answer to him?


Tell him, that I'll but dispose of some things and send to him. Dorant is
you^g Mr. Bull?


Mother, I do remember it.


That Mr. Belvil told us, that Dorant was his nom de guerre in France, where
the fool was ashamed of his own?


I remember that too.


And that it was agreed by Mr. Belvil and me, that at my first meeting Mr. Bull
at the Chocolate house, I should salute him by the name of Dorant, as by a name
that was very well known in France to me?


Nothing of this has slipped from me.


For that it would be necessary to make him go by an alias, because it would be
necessary to make him pass for a person of Quality. You remember this too?


Perfectly.


And you have not forgot the reason of it?


The reason is, that his going by a wrong name, and his passing for a person of
quality, wou^d help us to conceal this design from the Father.


Right Child! or if he came to discover it, would oblige him to be assistant in
the carrying it on against his Son and himself.


And the Servants of the house you say you are secure of?


Mr Belvil, who has obliged them all along by the goodness of his humour, and
by the mildness of his carriage towards them, has destributed fifty pounds
among them this very morning.


Nay, that will corrupt any Family now adays.


Daughter, have you the rest of your instructions perfect?


Mother, you give your self a vain trouble.


Then, Brush, go tell the young Gentleman that I should be glad to see him;
and, by the way, Sirrah, be sure you behave your self as I have commanded you.


If you should be deceived now in your expectation, Mother, and this Fop should
not listen before he comes in.


Never fear that. But are you sure, Daughter, that you can act a fit of the
Mother well?


Ay, and top my part too, Mother.


Well said! But have a care of over-topping it, Child, as I have seen a young
buxom Widow do at the Grave of a rich impotent Husband, and by that means make
a Farce of a Funeral. But, as I live he comes?


Talking of him who is to marry the young Lady, do you say?


Ay, Sir, and earnestly.


Wilt thou do me the favour to go and see for my man? In the mean time I shall
make bold to listen.


And has your Ladyship seen the dear man, do you say?


Lord! That I must tell my story twenty times over! I tell you I saw him at the
Chocolatehouse, while you was with Mr. Bull at the Colonels.


And is he not altered a jot, since we saw him at Paris? How does he look?


Ravishingly. Nay, I gad, Child, I can't blame thee in the least. 'Tis a most
delightful figure. Then he will talk, good Gods how he will talk!


A judicious person, let me perish.


Nay, every one esteems him a prodigy. But I hope your Ladyship gave him no
occasion to say any thing of me.


Why, what if I did?


What if you did? Jesu!


Nay, look you, Peggy, don't be in a passion you have not heard me say that I
told him; but supposing I had.


Why then, that dear Creature would utterly despise me for my weakness.


What, despise thirty thousand pound? why you don't take him for a fool, Peggy?


No, but I take him for a Wit tho. A Wit always hates and rails against
marriage. A Wit won't be a Slave for all the money in the world.


But if a Wit will not, an English man will; as we who come from France know by
some very good tokens. Thirty thousand pound, Peggy! Show me one English-man in
forty, that will not sell himself and all his posterity, for a tenth part of
the sum. Besides, Mr. Dorant's a Courtier, a true thorough-pac^d Courtier, and
consequently for half thirty thousand pound would marry me, even me, tho I had
twice my age, four times my fat, and not half my virtue.


This old Lady shows a great understanding of the world.


And then your Ladyship has told him all?


Nay, look you, as I said before, don't be in a passion, Peggy: We shall have
you play the fool and have one of your fits. Could I see you dye for Mr Dorant,
as the young Marchioness did at Ver^ailles, without letting him know it?


This is news: I warrant I have done a plaguy deal of mischief in my time, more
than I know of.


Are you sure he is a man of quality?


Yes, yes, he says he is Son to Viscount Dorant, otherwise thou should^st
sooner have died than have married him.


And so I would: for I had rather the Devil should have me than a little
fellow.


He'll be here in a quarter of an hour, and then --


Why, has your Ladyship been so barbarous as to tell him my Lodgings? I won't
see him.


I should laugh at that?


How does your Ladyship think I can look a man in the face --


Nay look you, Peggy, you had best play the fool an lose your love -- For


Eh! Gad I am sick.


He tells me that he has an old Father, who designs to marry him to morrow to a
rich beautiful Heiress


Eh --


Ah, Lord! What have I done? Why Daughter!


Stand off, I can hardly fetch my breath; Heavens how my heart pants?


Nay, Peggy --


And my Head shoots --


Nay, dear, Peggy --


And my Back opens and shuts --


Ah, Lord, I have killed my Child, I have murdered my dear Child Help, help.


For Heavens sake, Madam, what is the matter?


Ah, my dear Child's dead.


Oh, Heavens help. Quickly let's have her to Bed and Chafe her.


^ vow Sweet-heart thou speak well. Have her to bed, and get her soundly
rubbed --


And then if she shows no sign of life --


In troth she's dead with a vengeance.





Ah, Gad, Sir, is this a time to answer Complements.


Madam, the Devil take me, I am heartily sorry.


Sorry! Quoth a, what would you be if you knew the occasion?


Madam, I know every thing, for I overheard all.


Did you so? That was well contrived, and handsomely done. Well, Sir, I must go
look after my dear Child, if you stay I'll be with you as soon as I possibly
can.


Well! The Devil take me, all this is very surprising: I am sometimes almost in
doubt, whether this be a dream, or real. Hold! let me see! Batt! though thou
hast always past for un homme a bonnes fortunes, yet is this the finest of all
thy Belles avantures. But now, to push it Cavalierement, when first I saw the
Countess at the Chocolate-house, I was very glad to find that she and her
Daughter, by Colonel Medley's recommendation, were lodg^d here at my Fathers:
Because, that shows that what they pretend to to be they really are, Women of
fortune and quality, (but of that what happened just now would convince an
Infidel.) Yet, when I found that this old Lady was as passionate an admirer of
quality as I am my self, and that she was resolved to have a Peer for her
Son-in-law; why then I wish^d them fairly removed to another place. I told the
Countess that my name was Dorant, Son to Viscount Dorant, for Viscount Bull
would have sounded hellishly. Besides, it would have made a discovery, for she
knew me by my other name in France. I have ordered the Servants here to confirm
my lye, which they have undertaken to do. The Lady is desperately in love with
me, that is certain: if I can secure her before my Father sees me, all is well,
otherwise all is ruined; for he will infallibly use me like a Dog, and so
discover me to be the spawn of a Citt. But see the Countess.


How does she do. Well! I vow, I found her in a lamentable pickle, stretching
her self out, and heaving and grasping for life: but chafing her and rubbing
her, has fetched her again


Madam, I beg leave to wait upon her.


As Gad shall save me, not for the world, Sir, the bare mention of such a thing
had like to have thrown her into a second fit: She swears she'll dye a thousand
times, rather than look a man in the face, who knows that she has been so weak
as to love him before she was sure of his heart.


She gives her self a vain trouble, let me perish. For, may I pass for the
errantst Coxcomb in nature, if I were not the first in love of the two. The
first time I had the happiness to be near her was in Carnival time, in a
certain place where I had a fancy to appear in disguise; and where I fell
desperately in love with her. It was a fortnight after that; that she first
cast her Eye upon me as I was walking in the Tuilleries.


Lord! To see how good Wits will jump! I ventur^d to tell her something like
this to appease her but she said that was not sufficient to to justify her For
when my weakness comes to be divulged, says she, people who have a mind to be
censorious will say, supposing he did love her first, how could she know that,
when he had never spoke to her?


Never spoke to her?


Nay, they'll say, continued my Daughter, that supposing she could have known
that he loved her, without hearing him speak, how could she tell but that he
was a fool? For in troth, Mr Dorrant, a fools face may do as much execution as
yours. Now, she who can love a fool, says my Daughter, must certainly be little
better. Is it then for Mr Dorrant's credit or mine, to have it said that the
Conquest of me is owing to his Eyes alone? If it were known that he had made
love to me, people would attribute that Conquest to the force of beauty and wit
in conjunction.


Gad, she's in the right of it.


And then the effect would be as excusable in me, as the cause would be glorious
in him.


Pardieu Margaret forgot me so far as to affirm that I never spoke to her.


Indeed I think so, I can't be positive: but I am confident she says you never
had any conversation with her in private.


Why, there's it, Madam, but ^in public places I have conversed a hundred
times with her. In the Tuilleries, at Luxemburg, at the Palais Royal, at the
Gobelins. But love made publicly at Paris, passes for gallantry.


But since you were in love with my Daughter, how chance you never came home to
our Lodgings, whether all the people of quality, both English and French
resorted?


Lord, Madam, I waited^upon your Daughter twice, and immediately after that, I
received Commands to return for England.


I vow 'tis a sad thing to grow old, Mr Dorinant. I had perfectly forgot this:
In what part of the Town did we lodge then, for we had 3 Lodgings at Paris?


'Twas, Madam in the very last lodging that you took; which was in -- let me
see -- Rot me, I am a Dunce to night. For the Blood of me I cannot think of the
name of it: What does your Ladyship call the Street?


Paris. Why, the Street was called -- But it was a nasty Lodging, and a filthy
place. Foh! I abominate the very name of it.


Nay, then I have it. Oh! You lodged in the Fauxbourg, Madam.


It was indeed in the Fauxbourg.


In the Fauxbourg St Germain.


St. Germain.


In the Butcher row.


In the Butcher-row. Ha, ha, ha.


English that ever I knew at Paris, lodged in the Butcher-row.


Butcher-row is a most whimsical place, let me perish, for a woman of pleasure
to lodge in. Ha, ha, ha. But my, Peggy has such odd fancies, as would make a
body dye with Laughing. Ha, ha, ha.


Oh all, Madam, all the English lodge there. Before they go over, they are
terrified with the report of the scarcity of Flesh at Paris, and therefore as
soon as they come there, to make sure of Beef, they entrench themselves in the
Butcher row.


So that my Daughter and I, to make sure of Beef, entrenched our selves in the
Butcher-row. Rot me


Rot me, your Ladyship rallies your humble Servant.


No, as Gad shall save me, Sir, who but a Sot would pretend to rally you, Sir?
But as I was saying, my Daughter loves you, and you assure me that you love my
Daughter.


Ouy: Dieu me damme, Je I'adore.


Gallantly declared, as Gad shall save me, and you made this French Declaration
in France to her?


An hundred times, Madam; Witness it, O ye Flowery Beds of the Tuilleries, and
ye Sandy Walks of Luxemburg!





Nay, Madam; I made too an English Declaration in France to her. Hey! Boy!


WHen Cloe, I your Charms survey,
My wandering Senses run away.
My trembling Heart goes pit a pat,
Can you not guess what I^d be at.
Sometimes in gentle Sig^s I move
The Air with softest Breeze of Love.
Sometimes like Gun of largest Bore,
I vent my Sighs with dismal Roar:
Disordered, know not what I do,
And all, my Dear, for Love of you.
Very pretty, as I hope to breathe. And you are ready to own this in England
for her reputation and your honour. For you may assure your self, that no one
will believe that you could frequent any one person of quality, without
conversing with us, because we frequented them all.


Nay, look you, Madam, as for the young Lady's Honour, I am ready to marry her
immediately, and then then her honour is mine.


Well said! That is spoken like a man of of honour: as for your Estate?


Of that you shall be satisfied when you please. But


Hang an Estate; my Daughter has enough to make you both happy, and I can
augment her fortune considerably out of my own Jointure, which is sufficiently
known. In short, my dear Child's Life is in danger, and I value her Life above
a thousand Estates: But I'd have you to know I value her Honour a thousand
times more than her Life. And as Gad shall save me, I had as live see her
follow the Camp, as married to a vulgar person. Sir, I beg your pardon, but I
must be satisfied that you are a man of quality.


Madam, as I told you at the Chocolate-house, my Father is the most
considerable Viscount in England.


Viscount Dorant! In troth a very pretty sounding business! But this is a
Viscount that I never heard of. You don't know the Gentleman who owns the
House, for I must consult with him, and must be governed by him.


Madam, I told you at the Chocolate-house, that he is my Enemy, and that I
desired not to be seen by him. And I beseech your Ladyship, that you would
refer this business to some other person.


I have promised that you shall not be seen by him, and what I have promised I
will perform. But, in troth, I am sorry such a man as he is your Enemy, for in
troth he is a very worthy person.


Why, faith, Madam, the man is what they call an honest man, and that is all
but a strange humoursom, obstinate, old scoundrel, and a paltry Cit, the Devil
take me, to boot.


But, Sir, how comes a man of your quality, so familiar with a Cit, as to
quarrel with him.


Why, you must know, Madam, he has a Son who is a very pretty Gentleman, and
one for whom I have a greater kindness than I have for any one, excepting your
Daughter: And I have wondered a hundred times how, so very a Bear as the
Father, could get so witty, so gallant a person as the Son: I suppose he had
help, and some interloping Courtier slyly came in for his snacks. And yet the
Monster his Father uses him like a Dog, for which I hate him, and for which I
have sworn not to come n^ar him, when I can at any time avoid him.


Belvil gives you notice, that the old man will be here immediately, and
desires that you would be prepared to receive him. He bids me tell you that
Colonel Medley has half foxed him.


Gad^s my life, how unlucky's this! Well, and Baldernoe?


Bald. sends word that he^ll be behind him but a quarter of an hour at the
farthest. He sent word by the Messenger that the Engines are ready, and all
things prepared for a general assault.


Very good! Sir, Sir,


Madam, you oblige me eternally.


In troth, Su^y, this is hard fortune, to be bilked of thy Bubble when thou
had taken so much pains in the working him up. If the old man had staid but a
quarter of an hour longer, in all likelihood Friskit had been coupled* and the
Fop had been sped. If any thing should retard the old fellow, this blessed
match shall go on. But in taking all this pains with the Son, I have laid in
for the deceiving the Father too: for if he disco^ the Sons design* the Fop
will infallibly boast of his acquaintance in France with us, and the
consequence of that cannot but be to our advantage. But if there ^ likelihood
of such a discovery, I must prevent it, and must discover first; make the old
fellow a false and a half confidence; and concealing the name of his Son,
communicate the rest of the affair as a secret to him, upon which I shall beg
his advice; make him acquainted with my false fears, and my pretended
jealousies; inform him of the attempts which are made upon my Daughter, but at
the same time conceal the temptations and the encouragements which I
industriously give underhand to them.


Thus will I cheat him, as the married Jilt
From the suspecting Cuckold hides her guilt:
First she the Gallants lewd design reveals,
Then to the secret Assignation steals.
MAdam, 'tis the very best in the three Kingdoms. Here, Sirrah, take the Key of
my Closet, and bring the two quart Bottle of Brandy to the Countess. I wonder
his Lordship is not come yet.


I expect him every moment: He sent word that he would come in the dusk, and
come mystically. Indeed all that he does is done in the dusk, and mystically.
Oh 'tis a very mysterious person!


Nay, Gadsooks, they all say he is a great person, and has more out of the way
Politics than any man in the three Kingdoms.


Oh! quite another sort of a thing from your clumsy awkward British
Politician: He has often a whole Intrigue in one single grimace, and his jests
and his frolics are all of them master-pieces of State.


I long to see him. Sirrah, fill a Glass. Madam; my hearty service to you.
Come, a Health to the young Lady.


Ay, poor Creature, she wants it.


Faith and troth I am sorry to hear she's so ill. Sirrah, fill to her Ladyship.


Mr. Bull, on the other side of the water this liquor is grown mightily in use
among women of my quality. Do they use it here?


Gadsbud, Madam, they drink nothing else; formerly, saving your Ladyships
presence, only Bawds drank Brandy, but now the poor Jades can't go to the price
of it; and as some great Ladies have taken their trade out of their hands, they
have taken their liquor.


But did the Coll. acquaint you, say you, with the misfortune which my Daughter
met with in France?


He told me she was deeply in love with a Gentleman, who left her in the height
of her passion, and came for England. Does your Ladyship mind the Colour of
that Brandy?


A lovely Complexion indeed!


And the young Lady saw the very person as she was coming to my house?


Ay, just at the corner of Bow-street.


And the sight renewed her disorder?


To both our sorrows, God knows.


How does your Ladyship like the flavour?


A most alluring flavour, in truth. Come, Sir, my Daughters Health to you.

Upon my honour this is right Nantz: I warrant this costs you ten and eight
pence a Gallon at least. At the last Conference that I had abroad for the
public benefit, there was some quantity of it drunk; since I have tasted
nothing like it: As Gad shall judge me, this is a treasure.


Your Ladyship is a true and nice Judge.


Nay, tho I say it, for Politics --


And Brandy --


There is no woman alive comes near me. But still I forget my dear Child. Oh
Lord! Mr. ^ull, I mightily want your advice. At least I would have him think so
Belvil says, people never believe we are so sincere as when we flatter them
most.


Why, look you Madam, if the Lady's condition is so desperate, the Gentleman
must be told that she loves him.


Ah God, Sir, he knew it in France.


And did not love her again?


Oh! Doted on her^


What, and left her?


The old whimsical Fop his Father would have it so.


Then it is his Estate concerning which you have a mind to be satisfied. Your
Ladyship has reason: For your Daughter has thirty thousand pound. Bless me,
what a Fortune there is! And your Ladyship can increase it considerably out of
your own Jointure. which I know to be three thousand a year.


And pray Sir who gave you this information?


Tho I never had the honour to see your Ladyship nor your Daughter before, yet
I am acquaintwith the circumstances of every considerable person in the
Kingdom. It is partly my Trade, Madam.


Then the Gentleman about whom I enquire^


Tell me but his name, and I'll tell you his Estate immediately.


I make no enquiry after his Estate. Shall I stand upon a little dirt, when my
dear Child's life is at stake? The thing that I want to be satisfied of, is
whether he is a person of quality: For I'll see her dye a thousand times rather
than she shall marry a filthy little fellow.


Could your Ladyship be so cruel as to see her die rather?


To see her die! Ay, to see her damned rather.


Oh Lord! oh Lord! damned.


Ay, damned. I mean in an honourable way, Mr. Bull, and as a woman of quality
should be damned.


How does your Ladyship call the Gentleman?


Mr. Dorant.


Mr. Dorant?


Ay, Mr. Dorant, Son to Viscount Dorant.


Gadsbud, I never heard either of the name or the title.


That's strange, he says he knows you very well; and has lately had a quarrel
with you, for your severity against your Son.


Pray, Madam, where is he to be found?


Herein your House.


In my house?


Ay, he is at present with my Daughter.


With your Ladyships leave, I'll go talk with him immediately.


Sir, by no means he has sworn not to see you, by reason of the foresaid
quarrel, and I have promised him that he should not.


Gadsbud, Madam, your Ladyship is abused. This is some Rogue, some Cheat, some
Fortune-hunter.


It is impossible, he does not look like any such man.


Madam, those vermin swarm, and multiply as fast in this itching Age, as Rats
do at Sea in a Ship laden with Salt.


This damned Father of mine won't be gone, and the time presses. If I can steal
out while his back's turned, the young Lady has promised to follow.


Friskit has follow'd my instructions and sent him out, for he behaves himself
so extravagantly, that he would certainly discover himself, and therefore I
resolved to discover him first. Mr Dorrant. your Servant.





The Gentleman! Why don't you know him then?


Oh extremely well! Mr Dorant! Sweet Sir your most humble Servant.


Bull! How dost thou do? Stairing him in the face, and shaking him by the hand.








So! God be thanked. Now I can let my fury fly. Sirrah! Rogue! Dogbolt, tho I
bear something like this from my Nephew, who is such a Heathen as to make a
jest of passive Obedience, shall I see my own Flesh rise in rebellion against
me in my old age?


But, Sir! Hear me a little.


I will hear nothing, you Rogue! To show my Arbitrary power, I will execute
first, and examine afterwards.


But, Sir, Sir, Sir.


Here's to decide the quarrel between us, you Rogue! And here's for the affront
you put upon Sylvia.


Sylvia? Rot me, I never saw her.


Sirrah, you lye! She says she will sooner espouse Infamy than you; and that an
old paraly^ck bedrid Beggar is a Prince to you. Then, Sirrah, here's for your
talking insolently to your Father. And here's for your going like a Rogue by an
alias. Mr Dorant, you Son of a Whore?


If I am a Son of a Whore, pray from whence do you take the privilege of using
me thus? and if I am a Son of a Whore^ Gad, I don't know but Dorant may be
likelier to ^e my true name than Bull.


Oh Rogue! Rogue!


Look you Sir, will you fairly hear me three words? If not, I shall fairly take
up my heels and be gone.


Speak, Sirrah!


Why then do you know that the young Lady who lies in your house to night, has
taken a fancy to this Son of a Whore's person?


Which, I must confess,


My Family? Why you assure me that I have reason enough to be ^sham'd of my
Mother, who is one part of my family, and as for my Father, till I know who he
is, Rot me, I don't know whether I have reason to be ashamed of him or (...)


Here's a profligate villain!


Sir, Sir, one word more. Do you know that the old Countess has as great
passion for quality, as her Daughter has for this Son of a Whore?


Humph!


And is Bull a fit name for a Viscount's Son?


Well, I am a Choleric old Coxcomb that is certain.


Look you, I had an opportunity of making you and my self. What I undertook was
chiefly for your sake, but now I leave you to repent at le^sure.


Why, Batt!


He bien!


Nay, good Batt!


Vous p^aitil queque chose av^ moy?


Now (...) this Rogue calling me names. Batt!


Juse a revoir


Nay, dear Batt. Tell me but one thing. Did thou know this young Lady at
Par^?


A pretty question! The Countess will resolve you. He bien! Serviteur.


Nay, but Batt, why wilt thou be so obstinate?


To prove my self legitimate.


Batt! here are fifty Guineas for thee and retrieve this business.


Well, for once! But S life, here comes the Countess. Come, come, off with your
hat quickly, and show the respect that is due to a person of my quality.


I suppose by this time they may have consented to have carried this cheat on
against themselves. So, Gentlemen, is the old difference like to be reconciled?


We are just upon the point, Madam. And you confess then (to his Father) that
you are a testy petulant old fool?


I have been to blame in troth; was there ever such a Dog?


And that you have used your Son like a Beast?


Something too roughly!


And you promise amendment?


If he behaves himself for the future as you give me hopes.


Well! Put on your hat, put on your hat: Thou art a sad old scouudrel, but for
this once I receive you to mercy.





Bless me! Whither is the Girl going?


Madam, your most humble Servant.


Whither away I say?


Madam, I am going to take. Ha, ha, ha.


To take what?


Only the air a little. Ha, ha, ha.


It seems you are mightily tickled.


I shall be, Madam, before I sleep. Ha, ha, ha.


Madam, I wait upon you.


Jesu! Was there ever such a fond fool?


Nature, Madam, Nature!


I thought, Sir, you had not know this Gentleman.


Why, Faith, Madam, the pronuncing his name the French way, caused my mistake.


Well! I vow he's a fine person. Don't you think so?


Why, truly, Madam, I think so, and my Son thinks so.


At Paris, every body thought so.


But here some ridiculous Rogues, swear he is come over a mere ^op.


Envy and aversion to different customs! Ever while you live observe, that your
Fop at London, is at Paris your fine Gentleman: But do you know the young
Gentleman's ^ather?


What! My dearest friend? For tho the Vi^count be my superior quatenas
Viscount, yet, in all things else, he does me the honour to esteem himself my
equal. Faith and troth, Madam, there are few friendships like ours. I esteem no
body thoroughly but him. And ^tis thought, and perhaps with some justice, that
he loves no body cordially besides my self.


Will you be so kind as to break this business to him?


Madam I will. Ill go down to his Seat in Northamptonshire, where I shall
certainly find him, and about a month hence I'll give your Ladyship an account.


Jesu! Mr Bull, I must be in France long before that time.


And your Ladyship has a mind to see this business dispatched before you go?


Do you think I would leave my dear Child in Convulsions?


You are not over sollicitous you say, concerning the Jointure?


Not a jot.


Why then, even let the young people take their course.


What will the Father say to that?


Say? He ^ll think the alliance an honour to him.


Will you answer for that.


I think I know him and I can govern him, I^ll answer for it.


Why then, as you say, even let the young people take their course.


Hey day! Who should knock so imperiously Some body has mistaken my house for
my Neighbour Midnight the Midwifes: Four or five times a week that happens to
me, and my sleep like a Pandars is disturbed for other Folks lechery.


Sir, Sir, there are at the Gate half a score --


What, Sirrah?


Why, Sir, surly, snarling, sour looked fellows.


Who are they?


Why, at first, Sir, I thought they had been the club of ugly faces that is
kept yonder in the City, and that they were come hither in a body to give your
Worship an invitation.


Sirrah, I shall trepan your skull in good time But what would these fellows
have?


They come to look for a French Marquis who they say is newly come over.


Ha!


And besides, Sir?


What besides, Sir?


Some Officers are searching Squire Grumbleton's house, by an order of Council,
and threaten to be here immediately.


Take that for your news, you Rascal. Do you hear that Madam? Half a score
ill-look'd Rogues come to look for my Lord Marquis! And Officers just now
coming to search my house? I must tell your Ladyship I don't like this: No, not
a jot. This smells of Hemp, strongly, gadsbud, strongly.


Lord! That I must tell you things twenty times over. Why, he comes mystically,
Mr Bull, mystically, and where-ever they see him, they'll least of all think of
finding him. But hark, what noise is that.


Chairmen! Take away your Shair presaunt; and Violons, attaund in de
Anti-chambre.


Monsieur Le Marquis?


My dear a Countess!


How over joy^d I am to see you again!


Quese suis Ravi de vous trouver ici.


As he is^ going


Meistre Bull^ Have you a forgot a me?


Forgot you! No gadsbud, I hant forgot you, for I never saw you before.


Ha! Meestre Bull You have too mush of de jugment to have de memoir. Me was
formerly here vid Barillon, and have receiv^d many good lettre de change of you
Meestre Bull, and have had de ver mush frolic vid de money. De Francois have
de ver great passion for de frolic, Meestre Bull, But me ver glad to see you
Meestre Bull, ver glad to see you.


I am sorry to see you with all my heart.


Jernie! Dat be de veritable, dam Eng^ish civil^y.


Why, gadsbud, I shall see your Lordship hang^d. Here are Politics for the
Devil? We shall be infallibly found out: Did ever Politician appear in such an
Equipage?


Ver well! Begad! Ver well! vee had de Anglish Civility before Now we have de
veritable Anglish Politic: Because never Politic did appear in such an
Equipage, therefore vee fall be infallibly found out. Mo^bleau, therefore vee
sall infallibly not be found out.


I tell your Lordship we shall be all hanged* The Officers are just now a
coming to search the house. Look you, my Lord, I am downright, I am dunstable,
Gadsbud* and must speak the truth. Did ever any man in a Conspiracy behave
himself at your rate? Who the Devil would take you to be a Plotter?


Ver good again! Ver plaisant Begad! Who de Devil would taken me for de Plotter?
Who de Devil do desire to be taken for de Plotter? Not de Franc^s, Meestre
Bull: De English man do desire to be taken for de Plotter, and he is hanged for
de Plotter.


Well! I begin to think that I am an Ass, and that the Marquis is a wise man.


Madam La Comtesse!


My Lord!


Have you yet spoke vid de Viconte?


Not yet, my Lord^


Do you know, Madam, dat de Duc has been vid me, and has make me de promise to
appear at de head of feeve thousand men! Meestre Bull, de Countess, Morbleau, be
de brave Dame, and bea^ always about her de veritable marque of de woman of
condition.


Pray what should that be?


You must know dat in France de woman of Condition be distingue from de common
woman by de kiss.


Gadsbud that's odd, as how pray?


Look you Meestre Bull, Van in France you kiss de Dame upon de Mout, if she do
stink of Brandevin, do you comprand me Meestre Bull, if she do stink very
strong of Brandevin, Jernie dat be de ve^table woman of quality.


And, Mr Bull, the men of quality in France too are distinguished by their
savours.


Sometime, Mr Bull, sometime.


As for example; the simple Gentleman smells modestly and you may approach if
you please. The Chevalier stinks more proudly, and you must keep some distance.
But the stately Marquis has an inaccessible hogo.


Diantre! Dat be plaisant De Countess, Meestre Bull be de Railleuse, De
Countess be de^ver good Droll Meestre Bull.


Sir, The Officers are come and want to speak with you.


Gadsbud, we are all undone, here are frolics for the Devil!


Meestre Bull, you have no apprehaunsion at all, no apprehaunsion of any thing,
Meestre Bull. Stand a you still, and receive them, and let me alone vid de
rest. Allons, Violins, strike up de Minuet.


Sir, We have an order of Council to search the Neighbourhood for persons who
are in the Proclamation, but because we know you to be a civil Gentleman, we
shall take your word. Is this all the Company that you have in your house?


All, upon my word, Gentlemen^


Why then, we wish you a good night, Sir. For I'll swear these people are not
in the Plot.


He were a Devil who could take these to be Plotters.


Well, this Marquis is a great man.


Vat say you now, Meestre Bull? Vho vud taaka us to be de Plotters? Vat had
become of you, if you had plotted vid de Anglish-man? Ven de Anglish man do
plot, Begad all his politiq be on de outside of him^ and his Countenance be as
terrible as if it vere already upon de Pole.


His Lordship^s in the right of it. When an English-man goes about to cut a
Throat, faith and troth he looks like a damned Rogue.


Ouy Morbleu! He appear to be de Felon, de Sauvage; he have de Devil of malice
in his Visage. But van de Fraunch-man do go about to cut de troat, Oh de
plaisant man! He be absolument de best humoured Creature in de universal world:
So civil, so frolic, so gay, dat dere be plaisir, dere be satisfaction in
having de troat cut by de Fraunchman. Meestre Bull! Van de Fraunch-man do
medite de grand mischief, he alvays copy dat bell original de Monkey; he show
de ver plaisant grimace, he make de shattering and de noise, dat signify just
noting at all. Begad, you would swear he had no meaning in the universal world:
He dance up and down, and play de thousand pretty tricks, and begad do ruin
twenty, forty, a hundred people, vile they are making de ridicule upon him.


His Lordship tells you but the naked truth.


Meestre Bull! you must put a your Scrawl to dis paper! (Pulling out a
Pocket-book) Vat are you villing to contribute to de grand expedition?


What your Lordship thinks fit. But, my Lord, before I set my hand.


Jernie! you take a this Gentlemen to be de Coquin, de Maistre de Dance? This
be some of de plus grand personages de France, who be come over deguisee, to
rendre service to your Nation: dis be Monsieur le Marquis De Coupee.


I am your Lordships most humble Servant.


Dis be de Viconte Baladin.


I am your honours most obedient.


And dis be de Baron De Bellefigure.


Your very humble: If your Lordship will be pleas^d to let me see the Book,
I'll set my hand to it.


Barnaby Bull, a thousand pound! Very good, Meestre Bull, you sall have de ver
good place for dat.


Sir, the Officers who were here are come back with Mr. Bungy the Constable,
who has assured them that there are suspicious persons in the house.


Damned Rogue!


I refused to open the doors till I had given notice of it.


Oh Lord, Mr. Bull, what shall we do?


Ah, we sall do ver well, ver well begad. Madam la Countess, let a me alone,
and no aprehaund any ting. Run a you all


Vho go dere?





Vat friend? vat be your name?


My name is Bungy, my name is pretty well known, friend.


Bungy! vich of de Bungy's? dere be Bungy de Cuckold, and Bungy de Vittal: Are
you de Cuckol or de Vittal?


Hey day! what have we here? a Walloon Constable!


Walloon! Jernie you lye in your troat, me be de ver good Gascon, and de high
Conestable of Soho.


The high Constable of Soho! That, I must confess, may be, that may very well
be indeed. But look you Brother Constable, here's an order of Council to search
the house.


My dear a Brother, me have already cherched the house, and me find just noting
at all.


Have you looked in the Cellar?


There is nothing in the Cellar, upon my word Gentlemen, but two Pipes of
Claret, and four Hogsheads of October.


Claret! That is French? Do you hear that my Boys? The Enemy's at hand, and in
a strong body.


Fall on, fall on, fall on: Huzza! Huzza!


But harkee, Brother. I have orders to take up every one that I find in this
house, Officers only excepted. Now the thing that I would know of you, is,
whether Mr Bull and that fat Gentlewoman are comprehended in that order.


O^y Begad, they are compraunded. Dat old man have de look, Brother, of de ver
dam Rogue.


Then some of you away with him, while I with the rest search the Cellar; for I
shall not be satisfied till I see all the Vessels emptied, for fear there
should be Gun-powder or Fire-arms hid there.


But harkee, Mr Constable, hear me a word.


Morbleu Brother, you no hearken to any ting; avay vid him presaunt.


Do you hear this, Madam? Dog of a Marquis!


Mr Bull, he only does this for a blind, that he himself may pass unsuspected:
For, he knows that you can receive no harm, unless they take up him, who has
your hand-writing in his Pocket.


Humph! Gadsbud that's true. Well this is a wonderful man.





Away with them! Away with them! Away with them!


So! Now let's call in the Fiddles, and rejoice for our good success.


A Merry Cup, faith let us drink,
To be more wise the less we think,
Since thinking is a silly thing
Which brings us care,
Fear and despair,
To leave off thinking we should sing.
Well sing and drink eternally,
Who thinks too much, too soon will dye,
Too much thought, is too little sense;
He^s sad who thinks,
He's glad who drinks,
He who thinks least is most a Prince.
Wise Turks, that they may never think,
Take Opium, and wise Christians drink;
Thought drains and drys the fertile brain,
But moistning it,
Judgment and Wit
Will flourish and spring up again.
A merry Cup then let us take,
That dreams asleep, nor cares awake,
May break our rest, our peace destroy,
When we drink deep,
Cares, sorrows sleep,
Drowning our Care, buoys up our Joy.
The thinker is the greatest fool,
He without thought the true great soul,
Who lets the world jog on as 'twill,
Knowing all thought
Is good for nought,
But minds to torture, men to kill.
So! Now Gentlemen, while you are drinking out the old fellow's Wine, I'll make
use of my utmost art to terrify him, that I may prepare him for what's to
come.


But kearkee friend Joseph, thou who art a professed thorough-pac'd Rogue, hast
appeared as unconcern^d all this while, as if thou had been only acting. But
I am sometimes ready to tremble, when I think what consequences this business
may have.


P'shew! If the worst comes to the worst, that which brought thee on will bring
thee off.


What's that?


Why, your Landlord Belvil's Money, old Boy. But fear nothing, for 'twill be in
our sham Plot, as 'tis often in real Conspiracies,


Where poor Rogues escape, who first the Plot being,
And the rich So^s are swinged, who are drawn in.
ANd what do I deserve now?


A Statue: Thou art Mercu^y himself, the very genius and power of Cheating, and
all the herd of Under-Rogues shall worship thee. But did my Cousin receive his
Bride with so much joy?


With Rapture.


Fools are most subject to little transports, because they are presently struck
by appearances, and never reflect on consequences. But are you sure that
neither my Cousin nor Friskit knew any thing of carrying away my Uncle?


I am very sure. But what should oblige you to conceal it from Friskit?


Because at their return, I promise my self very good sport from their
ignorance. About what time do you expect my Uncle back?


Much about this time. After that I Justice Baldernoe, had examined your Uncle
and Frowzy, at my friend Mr. Palmer's house, and had commanded my Clerk to draw
up their Mittimus, I told your Uncle, that to show him what favour I could, he
should have the privilege of going in a Chair, and that Frowzy and his Guards
should follow at a distance; so I ordered the Chairmen before they brought him
hither to trot twice round the Garden with him, dismissed the Myrmidons, threw
off my disguise, and brought Frowzy along with me.


Are the Chairmen to be depended on?


They are my Sub-pimps, and pick up a penny under me. But can you think to
succeed in your attempt, of making your Unkle's house pass upon him for
Newgate?


Are you sure you ordered the Chairmen to bring him up to this very Chamber?


I did. And trusty Joe, who acts the Jailer, is planted at the door; with
instructions to receive and guide them.


This Chamber, you must know, is dignified by the name of the Devil's
Apartment. It has been nailed up these twenty years, upon the belief of its
being haunted. And, besides, I have caused it to be disguised with as much art,
as so short a warning would let me. But is my Uncle sufficiently scared?


Yes, damnably; and to terrify him more, there happened the luckiest accident
in the world. For just as the Chairmen were carrying him along, the Hawkers
roared out a Proclamation just published, for the apprehension of Conspirators
who are just now discovered, and I gave one of the Hawkers half a Crown to
bellow out your Unkle's name; so that when he came to be examined, he never so
much as looked once up upon me. I never saw a more patibulary phyz: I'll tell
you exactly for all the world how he looked.


How, prithee?


Did you never observe a fellow, who, while the house has been all on fire
beneath him, has been measuring with his Eyes the leap from the Garret-window.
Did you never observe such a one? Hah!


Why, Faith no --


Why then you never had the best diversion in the world. That would have given
you an exact image of your Uncle.


Nay, at this rate we may make him believe what we please. But hark he comes,
let us step in quickly.


Pray, Mr Keeper, let the Lady who follows me be well used.


She shall have all the favour I can show her.


Have you never a better Room than this, Mr. Keeper?


Why, what ails the Room? A great many very good men have been hanged out of
this Room.


Gads bud, what ^ commendation there was. Well! This is the only Jail in Town
that I have not yet been in. But I don't like coming to this Newgate a jot. As I
came out of the Justices door to take Chair, I stumbled at the threshold and
fell flat on my face? That was boding. Immediately my Nose burst out a
bleeding. Another devilish omen? And to confirm both, news was immediately
brought me that my Lord Marquis was taken in his Constables habit. Pray, Mr
Jailer, let me have Pen, Ink, and Paper.


Do you design to impeach any one?


Sir, I design to write my Narrative, and pray don't be troublesome: My
Narative! Good! Narrative Bull! This morning I had some little stock of
reputation left in the world: And now before night I am turning Author and
Evidence: Two very pretty creditable businesses.


May I ask whom you design to accuse, Sir?


Perhaps you, Sir. Pray friend don't be troublesome.


Me, Sir, I desie you, I am innocent, Sir.


Innocent, Sir! Well, Sir! And I am an Evidence, Sir. Look you, friend, I must
produce Traitors to save my self, and Gadsbud I'll take the first persons I can
light of: I^ll give my self as little trouble as I can.


Hark you Sir! If it were not for the Duty I owe Mr. Belvil, and the
obligations I have to him, I would load you with Irons till you roared, for
this.


Why, do you know my Nephew Belvil, friend?


Know him? I think I have reason, Sir. He helped me to the employment which I
am in.


How?


He is one of those who stands bound to the Gentlemen who lent the Money which
purchased it. He has just now sent to me, that in case you were committed --


Sir, is this Prisoner named Mr. Bull?


Friend, it is.


A Gentleman without desires to speak with you.


Sir, before he can be admitted, I must go search and examine him.


I am glad to hear that my Nephew has so much influence upon this fellow.
Instead of Evidence, I shall now turn Suborner, and do what I can to corrupt
the Jailer. I'll send for my Nephew immediately, and to engage him closely in
my interest, release my right of Guardianship, which by his Fathers Will was to
continue till Marriage. What if I should likewise bestow his Mistress upon him?
Humph! I'll do it: For sylv^ refuses to marry my Son, and Batt will be better
provided for.


Ah, Mr. Bull, my heart bleeds to see this sight!


Nay, prithee little Rumour, don't talk thus: Thou bring the tears into my
eyes. Prithee now what News, my Boy!


Ah! Mr. Bull.


Nay, Gadsbud speak to me.


Mr. Bull, I come from the Council-Chamber.


Well!


That damned Marquis! That damned Marquis!


Thou shrugst as much as if thou were Dean of the College.


That damned Marquis!


What of him?


Has produced a Table-book --


Gadsbud I am a dead man.


You tremble and look pale, Mr. Bull. So glorious a Cause, and want resolution!
What afraid, Mr. Bull?


No, no, afraid! I am not afraid: But the noisome smell of the Jail raises the
Vapours, and will certainly suffocate me.


Why, then I bring you comfort, comfort, Mr. Bull. Can you have patience till
Friday?


Why, what of Friday, little Rumour?


Nay, all that you hear me say is, Can you have patience till Friday?


Nay, but my dear Bully, give me some satisfaction.


Before Friday night you'll be out.


How dost thou know?


Why they design to have you tried to morrow, and hanged before Friday noon.
Have a little patience till Friday. Our friends, Mr. Bull, have great
expectations from you, great expectations!


What expectations?


Why, that you will go off bluff; and hang with such an air, with such a grace,
that the Monthly Spectators at Hide-Park Corner may say unanimously, we were
never so we^l pleased in our lives here.


A pox please them! Dost thou hear any news of my son Batt?


Your Son and the Countesses Daughter are both in the Proclamation: The
Messengers are searching all over the Town for them. They have set a thousand
pound a Head upon them.


Oh Nephew!


Ah Sir, I am thoroughly afflicted at this sight.


Are you here too, Madam?


Can you wonder at that, Sir?


Nephew! Thou would be the most welcome man in the world to me, if I were not
conscious to my self, that I have used thee so like a Rogue, that I am ashamed
to look upon thee. Can thou forgive me?


Can you be so good as to ask it, Sir?


Nephew, to show you that I design to be a kind Uncle for the future, I here
before this Gentleman release my right of Guardianship, both to you and to this
Lady, and she may now dispose of her person and fortune, as she her self thinks
fit.


Sir, you oblige me in the most sensible part of me: And before I have slept I
shall endeavour to deserve this kindness.


It was but this afternoon, Sir, that you designed me for yo^ Son. This is a
very sudden alteration.


'Tis true, Mad^m. But other people now have a design upon ^. Poor Ba^ is like
to ^.


Now, Madam, may I presume to claim the performance of your promise. What, no
answer? But what answer could be so favourable to me as silence?


Nephew! Consider that the Halter is now about your Unkle's Neck. Some other
time for Courtship good Nephew. The Jailer gives me to understand that you have
some influence over him.


Otherwise he were a very ungrateful Rogue. I have been just speaking to him in
your behalf, and have with much ado prevail^d upon him -- Hark you, Sir, a
word in your ear. Who is that Gentleman!


A very honest fellow.


Is he to be trusted?


With any thing in the world ^ that he can't pawn. The Dog will entertain folks
rather with his own invention, than with his friends secrets.


Why then, Sir, with much ado, I have prevailed upon the Keeper, to let you
make your escape: But it must be upon his own terms.


Upon any terms, Gadsbud, upon any terms.


You must know then, that so many who were committed for Treason, ^having
lately got out of this Prison, he lies under a strong suspicion, and
consequently must be obliged to make his escape with you, and to leave his
employment.


Very good!


This employment cost him three thousand pound, which is still a debt, and must
be discharg'n before he goes off.


It shall be paid to night.


And then two thousand pound will be the very least penny that can make
compensation for his abandoning all, and provide for his subsistence in a
foreign Country. Do you consent to the payment of that too?


Gadsbud 'tis a great deal of Money.


Look you, Sir, you have but a moment to resolve: For your Trial comes on to
morrow, and consequently your escape must be made to night: And if you
determine to pay the Money, you must give your orders immediately.


No abatement?


None.


'Tis very hard, but I must submit: I have Notes for the money in my Pocket,
which will be paid at sight.


'Tis very well! I will go and give all necessary orders and attend you again.
Madam, I wait upon you.


Mr. Rull, your most humble Servant.


This is a melancholy business in troth, a very melancholy business; but here
comes Batt and the young Lady.


Hey day! What a Devil makes him in this Room, which has been nailed up for
these twenty years. Yesterday he was afraid to pass by the very door. Mr Bull
your Servant.


Mr Dorant, your humble Servant. Madam, your most humble Servant. Are you two
prisoners?


Prisoners! Ay, prisioners for life, old boy!


Perhaps not so neither.


How, not so neither?


Madam.


Sir.


Bear up, don't be dejected.


I am always contented with my present condition, Sir.


Spoken, Gadsbud, like a wise woman.


And for my part, I am both glad and proud of my captivity.


This was always a vain Rogue, and always will be. Glad and proud of his being
in Newgate! Senseless puppy,


Who secured you? How every old impertinent Fop can be satirical upon a new
married couple! Why, if you call it securing us, Parson Goggle secured us.


Did he so? He may be ashamed of the office.





Who do you think did my business and the Countesses?


Why are you too in Limbo, to carry on the Allegory?


In Limbo? Why what the Devil do you think I do here?





Why that treacherous Rogue my Neighbour Bungy, the Constable.


My Neighbour Bungy?


Ay, Mr Dorant.


Bungy the Constable?


The very same.


That married you and the Countess? Ha, ha, ha.


Married! Is that the cant word for sending a Man and a Woman together to this
place?


The Cant word for sending a Man and a Woman together to this place! Bull.


Look you Mr Dorrant, don't rally your friends in adversity, for that may breed
ill blood: I give you fair warning.





Madam, this is a sad place for friends to meet in. I hope you'll excuse --


Prithee honest Mr Bull, no Apologies, for she and I had as live see thee here,
as in any place in Christendom.


Let me tell you, the Press-yard is but a sad place to see a friend in.


The Press-yard! Why who has any friend in the Press-yard?


Why is there no body in the Press-yard* whom you esteem your friend, and for
whom you are conc^rn^d?


Look you, between you and me, (...) Bull I hope to see all the friends I have
in the Press-yard, very fai^y hang^d





In affliction!





Become of me!


Ay Sirrah! As soon as I get out of this place, I shall remember this behaviour
with a vengeance. 'Tis true indeed, I am now in a Jail, and bound to my good
behaviour.


Ha! His Scull's cracked, by Heavens.


But I shall not be always in Newgate.


Stark staring mad, let me perish!


I tell you, Sirrah, I shall have my liberty sooner than you may imagine.


Alas! I know it very well, Sir: The Keeper informed me of it as I came in but
now.


And how durst you say then, that you hoped all would be hanged that were in
the Press-yard?


Lord Sir, I thought the Press-yard had been on the other side Newgate.


Oh! Did you so? Did the Keeper tell you how much I gave him?


He said nothing of that.


Five thousand pound, you Dog! A swinging sum! But mum you Rogue! Gadsbud not
a Syllable. Hark you, the Keeper makes his escape with me. But upon your life
not a word!


This is very strange. He was well enough within this half hour, he talked as
sensible as I my self can do: But these things will happen.


Madam?


Sir.


Don't be dismayed, don't be dejected.


Hark you my dear, in your Ear. Stark staring mad by Heavens: Humour him a
little him in his Frenzy, while I go fetch some to take care of him.


Look you, Madam, you shall not be in Newgate three days longer, assure your
self.


In Newgate, Sir! Lord! How wildly he looks!


No, for if some people make good their promise to me, you may assure your self
that the first thing I shall do after I have my liberty shall be to take care
of yours.


I expect the appointed time, Sir.


As for my own part, I design for Flanders; but if I have any friends or
interest in the world, I shall leave those behind me, who shall solicit your
business powerfully.


Well! this is very wild, and yet something consistent too. How do you find
your self, Sir?


Why, faith Madam, pretty well in Body, but grievously troubled in Mind. A
troubled Spirit is a grievous burden, Madam. I am afraid I behave my self after
a mad rate: But you'll have the goodness to excuse all.


He seems something sensible of his condition; a sign that his case is not
desperate.


Ned, it is necessary that we should make him sensible of his condition, and
cure him of this conceit of his being in Newgate.


You must. For if, as you say, the fear of hanging has seized so strongly upon
him, as long as that continues, he'll grow worse.


But then, Ned, for fear, as you say, that as soon as he is convinced that he
is not in Newgate, he should grow unruly, and refuse to undergo the Remedies
which may be proper for him; we must e^en make him believe, that he is in Salva
Custodia in another place.


And that his friends who studied his welfare, made use of the Address of
making him believe he was sent to Newgate, only that they might convey him
gently to that other place


Ay, ay, as Bedlam for example; but be sure you say as I do.





In a place where she has engagingly changed that name for a kinder.





Jailer! What Jailer! Here's no Jailer.


Where's no Jailer?


Why not within a mile of this place.


Hey day! What! I warrant there's no Jailer to Newgate.


Newgate! Why there we have it again. Newgate! What Newgate? Rot me, here's no
Newgate.


This fool ought to be shut up in Bedlam,


Why there's it, the fool is already shut up in Bedlam.


What does the Fop mean?


Why the Fop has no meaning at all, and therefore he was sent hither. Look you
old Gentleman, I will touch this matter as gently as I can to you. Your friends
taking notice that you were grown something foolish, whimsical, absurd, and
soforth, thought fit to have you sent to the College here, that you might go
through a course of Philosophy, and be cudgeli'd and firk'd into a little
Wisdom, by the surly professors of this place.


What can this Dog mean?


But considering that you were always an obstinate Scoundrel, they thought it
might be convenient to make use of a little Address with you. So taking you up
for a sham Plot, they had you before a sham Magistrate, and instead of carrying
you to Newgate, conveyed you to the Southside of Moorfields here.


Was ever such a hellish Rascal heard of?


Why look you, would any one but a Cit who was out of his Senses, call a person
of my quality Rascal to my face!


A person of your quality, you Rogue! Sirrah! What do I say or do like a mad
man, that you dare to talk at this impudent rate to me?


Every thing tho^ say or doest, let me perish. Will you put it to the
judgment of the Company: If thou can give but so much as a reasonable answer
to any thing; if thou either know what thou art, or where thou art, or with
whom thou art, then will I be contented to be thought mad, and dieted and
flogged in thy stead.


Say you so? Come on, Sir! I take you at your word.


Come then, old Bully, answer to thy Catechism. What and where art thou?


Sirrah, to answer both in a breath, if I were not in Newgate, I would quickly
prove to thee by very weighty arguments, that I am thy own natural Father.


Exceedingly foolish, let me perish. Come, come, judgment, judgment, the
judgment of the Company. Is this old fellow in Newgate or in Bedlam?


In Bedlam in Bedlam.


Very good! Do you believe now that the inside of your Skull is a little out of
repair, or no?


I am so amazed, that I know not what to think.


Oh, oh, are you thereabouts? Now, let only this Lady answer. Madam,


Sirrah! Did I say I was her Father?


Sir, If you are his Father, you must be mine, for this is my Husband.


Is he so; I am glad of that however.


Raving mad, let me perish. Now Ned, do you answer: What is this old
Gentleman's name?


Bull.


Very good. And, Madam,


Dorant.


A Bethlemite, a Bethlemite, a Bethlemite!


Dorant he is my Son. I shall satisfy your Ladyship about that business
another time.


Pray, Sir, who is that whom you call her Ladyship?


Why the Countess there.


The Countess! Ha, ha, ha, why that is Frowzy the Fla^derkin.


The Countess! Ay, ay, this is Frowzy the Flanderkin! Well said little Ned,
Ned.


And this is Friskit her Daughter.


Ay, this is Friskit her Daughter. Ha, ha, ha. Well had ever man such
diversion?


Well, either this Newgate or Bedlam. Frowzy, Have a care what you say, Nephew!
she's a Bawd! This a Lady of Honour and Quality.


For my part, I won't say this Reverend Gentlewoman is a Bawd. But she's very
famous for her Charity, I'll say that for her: A great doer of good offices, a
reconciler of differences, and a promoter of Christian Union.








Ha! Are not you my Lord Marquis?


My Lord Marquis? Alas poor Gentleman! Let me see! March the first, three
quarters after seven at night.


Why this is my man Baldernoe, Sir.


Damnation! What do I hear? This is a Rogue. I both see him, and hear him, and
smell him. Let me go, let me go, a plague confound you all, let me go


Now let me see a little whither they have brought me whither this is Newgate
or Bedlam. Bedlam, I am not like to be long out of it. Was ever man served as I
have been? I have been us^d like a Bartholomew Cokes; I have been cheated of
five thousand pound, have been made to pass for a mad man: And my Son in all
likelihood is married to the worst of Drabs. But hold, let me consider a little
That Fop there is my Son, and in affirming the contrary they are mistaken; and
this is my own house: In saying it is not they lye. But that Rascal yonder is
not a Marquis: So far they are in the right: Now what that old Gentlewoman and
her Daughter are, it lies upon me to examine. For, tho my Son is an unnatural
Rogue, yet I cannot wholly cast off the concern of a Father for him. Besides,
both my Credit and Interest will suffer in his misfortune, and I am sure I must
be concerned for those, Madam!


Sir?


And are you the very person that they say you are?


The very person, at your service, Sir.


Bless us! And is it your Daughter that my Son has married?


Heavens! And is it your Son that my Daughter has married?


Am I thus grossly imposed upon?


Am I thus basely cheated?


Is the Countess sunk to this?


Is the Viscount dwindled to this?


Have you that are a Bawd, and have known what Carting is, presume to marry
your Daughter to the Son of such a man as I am?


Have you that are a Cit, and have known what Cuckoldom is, dared to marry your
Son, to the Daughter of such a Woman as I am?


Gadsbud, the Boy's ruined.


Faith and troth the Girl's undone.


He'll quite lose his Reputation.


She'll be downright infamous.


I designed to make him one of the principal Merchants of England.


I intended her for one of the topping Traders of the Kingdom.


But he'll now be avoided by all substantial Dealers.


She'll be now thrown off by all her lusty Lovers.


As for my Daughter-in-law, I shall get her soundly whipped.


As for my Son-in-law, I shall get him fairly pilloried.


Ned, prithee a word with thee: is all this raillery or no?


Ral^ery you senseless puppy? Is this raillery?


But without passion I beseech you, Sir.


Without passion let it be then. Have you behaved your self in all this
business think you, suitably to the Character which you bear in the world?
Where's the man of sense, and the man of honour in all this? Is it for a man of
honour to be concern^d in a cheat? Or for a man of sense to bring misery and
infamy upon his Family, and infamy too, which must reflect on himself. What is
become of the money I gave you.


Why, to tell you the truth, I kept it as a Trustee for Colonel Medley.


Hah! Have you dared to do this? Gadsbud, I'll have you all indicted for
Cheats.


Why then Baldernoe here shall even produce his pocket-book.


Ha!


Look you, Sir, it was agreed by Colonel Medley and me, that I should be
serviceable to him in the getting his money for him, and he should be
instrumental in the helping me to my Mistress; the Lady I have got, and he
shall have the money.


He shall?


He shall. Yet to show you that my intentions were honourable, and that in what
I have done, I have acted by a nob^er motive than Interest, if you will promise
before this Company to forgive what's part, and to approve my Marriage, then I
promise upon the word of a Gentleman to pay back the five thousand pound, and
to pay the same sum to the Colonel my friend, out of my own fortune.


Ha! Say thou so? And can thou show^ thy self so much a friend to one is of
a contrary party?


I can never cease to be a friend to any one, because he's in an unhappy
error. For to err is humane, and whatever is humane may befall the best of us.
I know the Colonel to be a man of honour, and men of honour in all parties
have the noblest Relation.


Well, Nephew! To show you that this generosity has touched me, set but that
intreaging head upon invention once more, and find out a way to rid me of this
Beldam, and her Daughter, so that I and my Son may never hear more of them, and
the Town may never talk of the business, and I here promise not only to approve
your Marriage, but to pay the five thousand pound to the Colonel my self
immediately.


Why then, Sir, know, that as you at the time that you fancied your self in
Newgate, were very safe in your own house here, so your Son, tho he imagines
himself linked in Wedlock, is still the master of his Native freedom, and as a
sham Magistate committed you to an imaginary Prison, so a counterfeit Priest
betrayed him to a chimerical Marriage; and Baldernoe here, who was the Justice
that committed you, was the Priest too who fetter^d your Son.


Gadsbud, let me hug him for it.


And now, Sir, I hope you are satisfied, that I have been so far from engaging
in a Cheat, that I have only obliged you to do justice to my self, and my
friend.


I acknowledge it.


And instead of bringing misery and infamy upon my Family, I have endeavoured,
by opening your Eyes, to prevent your being cheated for the future, and
consequently to prevent your real misfortunes, and your future Infamy. And
first, for you, Cousin, I hope what has happened will something cool your
passion for quality, which has so often run you into so many inconveniences.
For we have taken an effectual course, to show you that a bare Title is but an
imaginary excellence, which, though it sometimes shows and adorns true Merit,
yet it never gives it, and does not always suppose it.


Sirrah! Lay this up in your heart.


As for you, Sir, I have hopes that what is past, may somewhat assuage your
itch of Caballing, and correct your Credulity. What has happened, may serve to
convince you, that there are in all Parties, persons who find it their inte^est
to deceive the rest, and that the one half of every faction, makes a property
in Fee-simple of the other: Therefore, if I may presume to advise you, never
believe any thing will or will not be, because it is agreeable or contrary to
your humour, but because it is in it self likely or improbable. And that for
the future, you may be secure from more dangerous attempts than mine, learn to
check your Vanity, and to moderate that heat, which you show upon every
occasion, and to humble your Pride. For credulity in men engaged in a party,
proceeds oftner from Pride than Weakness. And it is the hardest thing in the
world to impose upon an humble man.

Few tricking Rogues would be believed,
Unless their Sotts by Self-conceit,
Were acces^aries in the cheat,
And by themselves were first deceived.

THo I was lately slighted as a Beau,
I hope you^ll think me fit for business now.
For Friskit's motive to refuse me then,
Will scarce be thought a just one by the men.
For young and little things, are things, I'm sure,
Which you'll be well contented to endure.
Therefore the Poet was incli^'d to choose
Your humble Servant to sustain his Muse:
He knew, if I would beg, I should not want
A favour, who you know have one to grant.
I've kept it long; There's an old Dame -- Pox on her,
An old morose, damned grinning Jade, called Honour;
Who with her coldness checks my forward Nature,
Else should I quickly prove -- The happiest creature!
I'll throw her off, if possibly I can,
Throw the grim Goddess off, and put on Man.
I your young, bux^m Magdalen's despise,
She Saints, that have seven Devils in their ^es:
Who, to persuade us their above Humanity,
St^rve vigorous Appetites, to f^ed dull Vanity:
No; 'tis decreed, since Lovers are so plenty,
No Mai^ shall tread ^ur Stage of five and twenty.
I'gad we^ll use our prime, before tis past,
All won't find Legacies for being Chaste.
Now who shall (...) he my ma^? He, I swear,
Who for this Play most warmly shall declare:
The tis the empty^ Fop in Covent-garden,
Nay, tho some wheezing o'regrown City Warden,
On whose high Front the Branching Antlers grow,
Full Beast above, and not half Man below.

