SInce what is new, will likeliest Entertain you,
With a new Prologue first, we'll strive to gain you.
The Prologue's so entirely new to Day,
It ne'er can serve for any other Play.
Th^n all you Sparks who have to Paris Rid,
And there heard Lullys Musical Armide;
And Ye too, who at home have Tasso read,
This in precaution to you must be said;
Armida's Picture we from Tasso Drew,
And yet it may Resembling seem to few;
For here you' see no soft bewitching Dame,
Using Incentives to the Amorous Game,
And with affected, Meretricious. Arts,
Secretly Sliding into Hero's Hearts.
That was an Error in the Italian Muse,
If the great Tasso were allow'd to accuse;
And to Descend to such enervate Strains,
The Tragick-Muse with Majesty disdains.
The great Torquato's Heroine shall appear,
But Proud, Fierce, Stormy, terribly severe,
Such as the Italian has Armida shown,
When by the Worlds disorder, she'd revenge her own.
To change Rinaldo's manners, we had ground,
Who in the Italian is unequal found.
At first he Burns with fierce ambition's fire,
Anon he Dotes like any feeble Squire,
The mere Reverse of all that's noble in Desire.
Then in a Moment leaves the Lovesick Dame,
And only Burns, and only Bleeds for everlasting Fame.
In a Just Play such Heroes ne'er have part,
For all that offends Nature, offends Art.
What we have Changed, we leave to you to Scan,
Yet Judge with all the Candor that you can;
So shall your pleasure be the Writers Care,
Who for it neither Time nor Thought will spare;
Which were not wanting now, to give this Play its due,
To make it truly great, and truly worthy you.

THus Heaven declares the Importance of our Enterprise,
While Angels their Ethereal Trumpets sound,
To animate us in our glorious March.

At length the Labours of that March are over,
At length the sharpness of the Ascent is conquered;
And we through ways untractably abrupt
Have reached this Towering Sommet of the Mountain,
Where never Mortal yet, by Mortal Force,
Was known to ascend, from whose commanding Height
At once Two Worlds lie subject to our view.

By its transcendent Beauty and its Height,
This sure must be the Paradise of Nature.
O Blessed Retreat! O Fields beloved by Heaven!
O Island justly called the Fortunate,
And with High Reason by the Ancients thought
The Elysian Seat of Happy Heroes Souls!

But, O Amazing Height!
At what Remote, and what Stupendous Distance,
Yon Tyrannizing Main below,
Insults the foaming Shore!
Ubaldo, see how very far beneath us
With flagging Wings the Painted Meteors fly
Through all the Infernal Regions of the Air!
How far below, Illustrious in its flight,
The nimble Lightning scowres along the Sky!
And hark how far, how very far beneath us,
The exasperated Thunder roars!
To plague the guilty World!

But never Storm disturbs this Happy place,
The very pride and pomp of Wanton Nature,
The very Darling of Indulgent Heaven;
Which still the Sun, the Worlds great Eye, contemplates,
And never suffers Interposing Cloud
To bar the Eternal prospect; 'Tis a Scene
Not unbecoming of the glorious Action,
Which Heaven's Almighty Will has chosen you
Its Ministers to Accomplish; To this place
Armida's Magic power conveyed Rinaldo.
Here the great Champion of the Christian Faith
Lies Languishing, and half dissolved in Love.
The Terror of the Unbelieving World,
And of thy proud Oppressors, O Jerusalem;
Is here become an Impious Woman's Slave!
A Woman, who, like Lucifer of old,
Of all the Angels of her Sex created,
The Brightest and the nearest to Divinity,
Is fallen, and lost by her excessive Pride:
And not contented with her Native Charms,
Holds guilty commerce with Infernal Spirits.
Here in the Embraces of his young Enchantress
The Blooming Hero passes all his days,
And his Luxurious Nights in Wanton Joys,
As wanton as the Wings of Western Winds,
Whose spicy breaths throughout these slowry Plains
Maintain Eternal spring. Him you must free,
Or thou must still be enthral'd, O Sacred City;
For on Rinaldo's Conquering Sword
Thy Destiny depends.

The very Place assists us in the Action,
The very Place inspires magnanimous Thoughts,
As by the help of so sublime a Station
Here on the Frontiers of the rolling Skies,
We stand and breath, the Borderers of Heaven;
So it exalts our very Souls, and lists them
As far above the Level of Mankind
As here we walk above the Inferior World.

So had it need, for Dangers are to ensue,
Enough to shake the Constancy of Martyrs*
And move the Blessed Inhabitants of Heaven.

What greater Dangers can Enfue,
Than what in reaching hither we Surmounted?
For, have we not by Heaven's supreme Decree
Transgressed the Bounds established by Alcides?
Have we not insolently dared to Plow
The Worlds uncultivated waste, the Ocean,
And dauntlesly explored its dreadful Wonders?
And in Ascending this Ethereal Mountain
Stood firm against the fierce Assaults of Hell.
Repelled more Monsters than Alcides vanquished,
And baffled Futies, who in hortid Shapes
With stormy Rage opposed our Steep Ascent?
And can we now be capable of Fear,
In the Great Cause of Heaven! And in a place
Intended for Delight, and not for Terror?

But yet remember, Carlo, that Alcides
Who subdued Monsters, triumphed over Hell,
Nay, and suppored Heaven, became a Slave
To Pleasure.

Things terrible are Enemies to Nature, Carlo,
Declared and open Eenemies,
And all that's Great and Noble in that Nature,
At their approach still Rouses to Resist them.
But Pleasure, though its secret Foe,
At least appears its Friend.

Hark! What enchanting Sound salutes my Ear?


Ay, now the dangerous Conflict must begin,
For in this Moment Hell begins the Attack,
For know thou hear no Human Sounds, the skill
Of all that's exquisite in mortal Man,
Could ne'er produce such Harmony, the Work
Of Spirits which Usurp the Ethereal Air,
Who formerly enjoyed sublimer Stations,
And so Divinely touched Empyreall Lyres
As pleased, even him who turns the harmonious Spheres,
And sweetly Tunes the Universe. But see
How yonder Fabric like a Meteor rises,
Advancing through the Skies its pompous Front,
To this Enchanting Symphony.

Hark! Voices in the Air.


YE mighty Powers who Rule the Air,
Ye Gods who in the Ocean dwell,
And ye who at the Center govern Hell,
Hither at great Armida's Call repair;
And while by your Command these Towers arise,
Till with unequalled Pomp and State,
Their soaring Heads salute the Skies,
Show those above that Hell can too create.
But why, O sacred Minister of Heaven,
Just at this Juncture does this Fabric rise?

Know to this Hour Rinaldo and Armida
Have loosely Revelled in Enchanted Wilds,
And Wantoned in the open Face of Heaven.
But now the Enchantress who suspects his Constancy,
Has to Secure him, by the advice of Hell
Raised this Majestic Structure.

But can the Hero of our Age Rinaldo
The Champion of the Christian Cause, Rinaldo
Descend to love a Sorceress?

No, not a Sorceress, Rinaldo Loves
The Beauty, not the Enchantress, He ^oves
The Master-piece of Heaven, not that of Hell,
The most Accomplished Work of the Creator;
One who both Speaks and Looks above a Woman,
Whom Heaven designed with more peculiar care,
A whole vast Species in one single Person;
And an Idea of Sublimer Beauty
Than that with which the Loveliest of our Sex
Ensnare and Captivat the Souls of Men,

She is indeed a wonder.


A Beauty, in the prime of her perfection,
On whom scarce Twenty blooming Eastern springs
Have shed their sweetest Influence;
Not an Asiatic Monarch but Adores her,
But Eastern Kings are soft as is their Climate.
Have you forgot the time when this Armida,
Leaving her Uncles Kingdom of Damascus,
With a dissembled Discontent, approached the Christian Camp
On the Pretence of asking Aid
Against the Oppression of a Tyrants power?

That cursed design we never shall forget,
Which was to weaken and destroy the Army,
By drawing all our bravest Warriors after her.

Tell me, one Hero of you all, whose Virtue
And whose Religion did not melt at sight
Of this Triumphant Beauty? nay and melt,
Even as you stood upon the Sacred ground.
Where for your Lusts a God Expired in Torments:
Have you so soon forgot this?

Our blushes say we have not.


The very rude Plebeians of the Camp
By Habitual hardship mortified to Pleasure,
By Sanguinary deeds inur'd to Cruelty,
Gazd all the fierceness of their Souls away,
And at that sight dissolved in soft desire;
Those brave Adventurers whom their fervent Zeal,
The flaming Love of Everlasting Glory,
Engaged the noble Voluntary Champions
Of this Renowned Crusade Heavens darling cause,
Disbanded all with shameful stealth by Night
And left the Field, their Glory and their God,
To follow this Enchanting fair, of all
Only Rinaldo still remained Invincible,
But I want time to say the rest --
E're yet approaching Night usurps the World,
Both thou and Carlo must once more behold Her,
And in a Cloud with me Converse before Her,
Unmoved, unseen, unheard, unthought of by Her.
Such is the Will of the Most High, but Hark!
More Harmony, and this way it approaches.

And see the Happy Natives of the place.


These are by Heavens permission come to try you,
And with soft Sounds seduce your Souls to Pleasure,
Now stand upon your strongest Guards.

Welcome to these Lovely Plains,
The happy Seats of Blissful Swains.

Welcome to these blissful Shades,
The soft Retreats of Happy Maids.

Here we feel no want nor Care,
And no inclemency of Air,
And Lovers never here Despair.

Sorrow ever from us flies,
Pleasure revels in our Eyes.
If we pass an Hour in Courting
'Tis for more Delicious sporting,
Never cruel Nymph denies.

If any thing like Sorrow's seen
In our Voice, or in our Men,
'Tis not Grief that gives the Anguish,
'Tis with Pleasure that we languish;
And if ever Nymph denies,
'Tis like one in Love who's Wise;
'Tis like one who would invite
To more delicate Delight,
'Tis with wishing, dying Eyes.

All about us and above
Gaiety and Love inspires;
All about us and above
Infuses Tenderness and Love,
And wanton fine Desires.

The Jolly Breeze,
That comes whistling through the Trees,
From all the blissful Region brings
Perfumes upon its spicy Wings,
With its wanton motion curling.
The Crystal Rills,
Which down the Hills
Run over golden Gravel purling.

All around Venereal Turtles
Cooing, Billing, on the Myrtles;
The more they show their Amorous trouble,
More fiercely dart their piercing Kisses,
And more eagerly redouble
The Raptures of their murmuring Blisses.

Enough, ye Ministers of Hell be gone,
Behold the waving of this potent Wand,
Whose sight can make the fiercest of you tremble,
And whose least touch can with Ten thousand plagues
Transfix your Howling Furies; Hence, take hence
Your Lying Forms, the Mimic Shapes of Men.
Or, by the unutterable Name -- they vanish.
Now, Heroes, I observed you well, and find,
That you unmoved have past a dangerous trial,
And gained a glorious Conquest over your selves.

Let us Advancing, our success pursue,
They who themselves overcome can Hell subdue.

Then as we move tow'rds yonder Magic Towers,
Protect us in our March ye Guardian Powers;
Y' Immortal Ministers to whom by Heaven
The Care and Charge of this great Action's given,
Defend us from Hell's Terrible Alarms,
And guard our Hearts from Pleasure's fatal Charms;
Ye Angels strike your everlasting Lyres,
Sound, sound the Lofty Trumpet, which inspires
The exalted Soul with your Celestial Fires.

SSleeps he Secure? And is the Queen Obeyed?
Though here's a Magic Symphony might Lull,
The raving Furies into soft Repose,

There he lies Buried in eternal Sleep,
Unless my self or some more powerful Spirit
Unbind and Rowze him from his Iron Slumber.
Thrice while I muttered Mystic Sounds I sprinkled
His Temples with the Drowsy Deadly Dew,
Brushed by the Infernal Ravens Baleful Wing
From the Black Poppies which on Lethe grow.
How Fares Armida?

She dotes, alas, she dotes on this Rinaldo,
Her Love, and Fear of losing what she Loves
Disquiet her sometimes almost to Madness,
Thow know the greatness of her Soul; from whence
Conclude how this Tempestuous Flame must Shake her;
Alas, I pity her.

I cannot blame thee.
Even I, who for these long Six thousand Years
Have never felt one motion like Remorse,
I, were I not a Devil, I should Pity her;
The Fairest Creature which on this side Heaven
My Eyes have ere beheld.

Say, what Success attends this desperate Love?


Alas, I dare not; for Remember Ramiel,
Who but for barely Hinting at her Fare,
Lies Howling at the Bottom of the Abyss,
Under the Vengeance of that Dreadful God,
Who makes even Furies tremble;
Scourged till at each resounding Stroke
He Bellows to the Blow:
While all around, the poor tormented Ghosts,
Gastfully staring with their Baleful Eyes,
Cease their shrill Cries, and their lamenting Wails;
All with Amazement hushed, and as they Listen,
Shuddering with Horror at his Hideous roar,
Yet what I dare I'll tell thee.
Fame, that with Indefatigable Wings
Born through the boundless Regions of the Air,
Incessantly Surveys this Globe of Earth,
Once in the Course of the revolving Year,
Stoops at these Isles of Fortune, the Abodes
Of happy Heroes, separated Souls,
To visit her Adopted Sons, all Demy-Gods,
Who undisturbed in these Elysian Shades,
Pursue Immortal Pleasures. If he shrinks not
When next the Goddess comes, He's ours for ever.

When arrives she?


I dare no more, but tis thy part to try
To Cure Armida of this raging Passion.

Nay, then thou say Enough; Alas I have,
Thou know it is my Interest more than Hers;
Rinaldo is a Christian,
And wins each Moment on Armida's Soul,
Who knows how far at last He may prevail?
If he should once Seduce her from her Faith,
What could be so Abandoned as Phenissa.
It is my daily Study to Reclaim her,
A Thousand times in vain I have attempted it.

Once more attempt it, then if thou Succeed'st not,
Lull her with Hope, true Woes are to Succeed,
Let her enjoy false Pleasures while she may.
But she appears, I vanish.

Phenessa, sleeps Rinaldo?


He does.
Why were you absent at the Magic Rites?

I hate this cursed Art since first it showed me
That, that to which the hardest things are possible,
Yet wants the power to calm my raging Grief;
All Nature lies subjected to my Charms,
I give her Rest, and Rowze her with Alarms,
My Arbitrary voice she hears with awe,
And standing fixed suspends the eternal Law.
I to the Tempest make the Poles Resound,
And the conflicting Elements Confound;
At my Command
The Thunder rushes out on flaming Wings,
And all the hollow deep of Hell
With hideous Uproar Rings;
Fierce Spirits who great Heaven's command disdained,
Submit themselves and are by mine restrained.
The Wildest things are by my power Confined:
All but my Wild ungovernable Mind.
But I have home-bred Furies which Rebel,
While I subdue the fiercest Powers of Hell.
Oh, my foreboding Soul!

Compose your self, Consider you're a Queen.


Consider I'm a Slave, Consider I'm a Lover.


No Common Queen, they Rule but Common Slaves;
You Govern with a Nod all Asia's Monarchs.

Effeminate, Slothful, Lukewarm Creatures all,
Whose Souls were but half kindled by their Maker.

Then what they want from Heaven they have from you;
Your Eyes have Blown those Suols into a Flame.

Those Kings I scorned before, I knew my Hero;
What are those Royal Pageants? Thou hast seen them,
And what is my Rinaldo? Thou hast gazed on him.

The greatest of Mankind, since to this Height
The great Armida by her Favours Raised him;
Before, the last of the Italian Princes.

But the first of Conquerours.


A private Man, without Command in the Army.


Fortune, and Fame, and Victory obeyed him,
Him, the Sole power of that Victorious Army.
Who was the Terror of the East, but He!
This private Man made all your Monarchs Tremble,
Even in the midst of their own shivering Slaves,
To whom they owed their Power and their Security.
His Power was in himself, His dauntless Soul,
And his unconquered own Right Hand his Safety.
What? though he Rules no Empire, he deserves One,
And has both Conquered and Rejected Crowns:
He in his Inborn Worth is more Exalted.
No drowsy Monarch by a Dull Descent,
But for his High Desert preferred by Heaven,
And singled from the rest of Human kind,
To Execute the vast Designs of Fate.

The Theme transports you.


Tis my Love Transports me.


Tis frankly owned,
For such a Proud, Severe, disdainful Beauty.

Yes, I am Proud that I my self have Excellence,
To Know and Love such Merit; Surely Love
In this Excess has something that's Divine;
Women who Dote on Monsters even to Madness,
Are proud of their own Fury. What must I be,
When the consenting World admires my Choice!
Thou, whose cold Mass runs Curdling through thy Veins,
Thou gazest on Rinaldo with Desire;
Yet thou hast only seen the God of Love,
In the fresh Beauries of my Blooming Hero:
Oh, even in thee, what Raptures had he Raised!
Had thou once seen him like the God of War,
While Grizly Terror perched upon his plume;
Severely shining in his dreadful Helmet,
And Thundering through the Tempest of the Field.

Well! tho you Love with fury, you possess;
Since then the God of Love has made you Blessed,
Why should you toil to make your self unhappy?

Once more, I tell thee, Love has taught me fear.


Fear! Fear of what?


The Torments which the Souls in Hell endure;
Nay worse, those Souls have only missed of Heaven,
But to have lost it, that's the Plague of Devils.

You seek those groundless fears.


Ah no!
Hell threatened me with fate by Ramiel's voice,
And Heaven by these Foreboding thoughts fortells it;
And, what is more than Heaven or Hell to me,
Rinaldo has confirmed it.

'Tis but an Hour since he declared He Loved you.


But with such Accents and such Eyes declared it,
His very Anger had been less provoking;
Can one who Loves with such a Soul as mine,
Be Tortured worse than with endearing Words,
Spoke with the Coldness of that cruel Air?

But how should Natute bear perpetual Rapture,
When she quite sinks in Momentary transports?
Sometimes He meets your Love with equal Fury.

If he did not, he would be less then Man,
This Desert Isle divides us from the World,
Where He, and I, and Thou, are Human kind:
He loved me not in Palestine, where I
Seduced the very Flower of Godfrey's Army,
Subdued their inmost Souls by my soft Arts;
And led them from the Army through the East
In Amorous Pomp, the common Foes of Asia,
And Victims to my Uncles great Revenge,
Only Rinaldo's Soul remained Impregnable;
A fiercer Flame than that of Love had seized it,
And his Eyes sparkled with severer fires;
The Love of Glory reigned sole Tyrant there,
Which in great Souls still rages to a fault,
The Crime of Angels, and of Men like Angels;
Who conscious to their own surpassing Excellence,
Would by great Actions force the Envious World
To acknowledge their Transcendency of Nature.

But still the Ambitious love, as well as others:
Nature makes use of Love in Mighty Minds,
Who else would be aspiring to be Gods,
To show them they are Men.

Yes, they can Love, but think that Love their Frailty,
And not their Virtue;
And when that Love comes once to obstruct Ambition,
With all their might they make a vast Effort,
And tear it from their Souls.

The knowing this,
One would have thought, might have secured your Heart.

This made me Dote on him, and as he slept
Transport him on a Storm's sonorous Wings,
Far from the War, and the shrill Trumpet's sound,
To this sweet Place designed for Love and Joy.
Yet even here, where Earth and Heaven, nay Hell
Conspires to Indulge the sweetest of all Passions;
Where even I, for whom a Thousand Lovers
Have sighed, and sighed in vain, with all that's soft
And delicate in Love descend to incite Him,
Even here he has but Intervals of Passion;
'Tis true those Intervals are Furious All,
For He in every thing is more than Mortal:
But then anon, even in my very Arms,
My Eager Arms, he languishes for Glory:
He meditates profound, and fetches sighs,
Which, while He vainly struggles to repress,
With terrible Revulsions shake his Soul:
With Eyes upon me fixed He sees me not,
And gazing upon his, I find him absent.
Oft in his Sleep he takes Convulsive Starts,
And cries, to Arms, Hark, Hark, the Trumpet sounds,
And Glory calls to Arms; I come, I fly,
Thou Darling of my Soul, thou Mistress even of Gods!
Then with the fury of the Transport Waking,
He fetches sighs that shake his Inmost Soul.

Well, since Ambition Rules in all great Souls,
Shake off this softer Rage.

I want the very Will to shake it off,
Ambition rules in Men, but Love prevails in Women;
Had Heaven, that gave us such attractive Grace,
Not Tempered our unruly Souls with Love,
We had been more dangerous to Men than Devils:
Phenissa, I am a Woman.

But no Vulgar Woman.


No, nor is mine a Vulgar Passion,
I bear a Mind no Stranger to Ambition,
But still my Love prevails above my Pride.
Oh, let me never know Indifference more;
I never can, nor will be calm again;
For who could live indifferent as to Heaven,
That had but known the vast delight of Gods,
And had a taste of Immortality?

'Tis the mere Fever of your mind that talks thus,
For Love is nothing else.

Thou rail at Love as Fiends blaspheme their God,
Because He has abandoned thee for ever.

My Years will bring my Sentiments to you.


Oh never, never let me see those years,
The Soul, that sparkle of Celestial Fire,
The longer it has lain immerst in the Air,
The colder feels its sense of Heaven and Love,
The great Originals from which it sprung.

Reason requires that you should rule this Passion.


Talk not of Reason, what, but Love, is Reason?
For, what, but Love, is Happiness?
Love first appears with Reason in the Soul,
And by degrees with Reason it decays.
But cease, forbear thy foolish ill-tim'd Counsel,
With silent awe attend my Potent Charm.
And thou, O Air, that murmur on the Mountain,
Be hushed at my Command, Silence ye Winds,
That make outrageous War upon the Ocean;
And thou, old Ocean, lull thy wondering Waves;
Ye Warring Elements be hushed as Death,
While I impose my Dread Commands on Hell;
And thou profoundest Hell, whose dreadful sway
Is given to me, by Fate and Demogorgon,
Hear, hear, my powerful Voice through all thy Regions!
By Demogorgon, I Command thee, Hear!
And from thy gloomy Caverns thunder thy Reply.
I am obeyed --
Now send up Dreams that may be fittest found
T'impose upon Rinaldo's slumbering thoughts,
And to enslave his Soul.

Rinaldo!


Rinaldo!


Look up, Behold the Mournfu Shade
Of him who gave thee Breath,
Who steps to see thee, while you're laid
Upon the Confines here of Death;
T'inform thee of thy future State,
And, e're yet it be too late,
To prevent thy wretched Fate.

Look up my Son, Look up on me,
In me the Aflicted Sophia see.
Ah Son! not all the grinding throws,
With which, when thou were born,
My Tortured Nerves were torn,
Equalled half the wracking woes,
Which now thy Mother undergoes,
Thou Darling of my Soul, for thee.

Last night I cast a Look
Upon Fates dreadful Book,
And read a Lesson which no Brain
That is Mortal can Sustain,
While all my Soul with Horror shook.

Oh! the distraction of the sight
And Oh! the Torments of the fright
I never, never shall forget that Night.

Rowze all thy Faculties my Son,
And to my Fatal words give ear,
For know that they concern thee near;
No longer let thy Fancy run
After that Aerie Phantom Fame;
But Love Armida with a constant Flame:
Or Destiny decrees,
Thou shalt feel woes, which but to hear
Would distract thy Soul with fear,
And all thy Blood with Horror freeze,

Ah! see around the Raving Hosts
Of purple Ghosts;
Whose Blood thou hast in Battle spilt,
With fearful Guilt.
Who, unless awed by her Commanding Power,
Would, ah, this Moment, tear thee and devour!

How they advance with whirling Brands,
All flaming in their threatening Hands!
And as they go their dreadful Round,
Revenge, Revenge Resound!
Armida we call,
That we terribly may on our Murderer fall;
That as now we with Sulphurous Torches surround him,
We with our Screams and our Scorpions may wound him;
And with astonishing Horrors confound him.

By Heaven Rinaldo smiles at all their Threats,
And slumbering scorns this terrible appearance.
Confusion and Amazement! What do I hear?
What Trumpets, this whose great and Martial sound
Makes the World Echo to its Music?
Ha! Disappeared! All vanished on the sudden!
Gone undismiss'd! The Charm not yet unbound!
Ho! Ariec! Hear, and know my awful Voice,
At my Command appear again I Charge thee,
Or else be Banished from my sight for ever.
O Queen, to whom thy Excellence of Nature,
And thy Transcendent Beauty gives Command
Over all the Infernal Powers, for in thy Brightness
We see what once we were in our High Stations,
And some Reflected Beams enjoy
Of that supremely Blissful Vision,
From whose Enjoyment our aspiring Minds
Have banished us for ever.
Excuse thy Slaves unable to obey thee,
For know a greater Power now drives us hence,
One of the Brightest of the Empyreal Mansions
Expels us with a Stream of Light
That sets this Atmosphere on fire,
And with its Blaze insufferably Bright
Confounds Hell's Gloomy Powers;
Summmon the Aerial Spirits to thy Aid,
For they who poised upon expanded Wings,
Like Basking in the Sun's Meridian Glory.
Are fitter to sustain Heavens flaming Ministers
Than we who sojourn in the Dusky Deep;
And they, perhaps too, with Enchanting Voices,
To Pleasure may seduce Rinaldo's Soul.
Pleasure thou know can tame that Dauntless Soul,
Which thou no more by Terrors can subdue,
Than fright the Dreadful God who darts the Thunder.
But, Oh, dismiss me, for I can no more,
A Deluge of Empyreal Light o'rewhelms me.

Begone then, and for Ease to Hell repair.
But see Rinaldo wakens, Oh! Astonishment,
How every thing I see and hear confounds me,
And shows a Power above my own controlls me,
Let us retire, and then unseen observe him,
I from himself my Destiny would learn.

Me-thought the Trumpet's noble Sound
Alarm'd me to the Combat,
Was it Illusion that, or was it real?
Let it be what it will, it gives thee Cause
To ask thy self this Question, what thou were,
And what thou art at Present? O Rinaldo,
Heaven gave thee Reason for thy Guide of action,
But that's a Lamp set up in every Breast.
Heaven gave thee yet a more exalted Spirit
Which reached above the frail Efforts of Reason;
For Reason only teaches Man his Duty:
That raised thy free-born Soul to nobler Heights,
To things Superlatively Great and Good,
Beyond what Reason or what Heaven Required.
But wher's that Spirit now? That Towering Faculty,
Which mounting Soared above Humanity?
Tis now half Quenched by an Ignobler Fire.
Oh base Desertion from my self and glory.

Hear this Phen ssa, now are my Fears groundless?


Nay, thou hast stifled too the very Dictates
Of Common Reason which Mankind Obeys,
And while Ten thousand Slaves before Jerusalem,
Urged by their Duty in this very Moment,
To Danger and to Death bid loud Defiance,
Thou Loyter'st here in soft Inglorious Ease.
Perhaps the Fable of the Army, Ha!
Can thou bear that? Can thou so much as Think
That thou deserve to be Contemned and Live?

Oh, I am lost, beyond all Hope, Undone?


Nay, can thou bear even this? That thou no more
Deserve to be preferred above the Rest,
Above the Rest, admired? That in this Moment
The Brave Tan^redi like Celestial Jove
With Thunder in his Hand distributes Fate,
While Thou -- By Heaven I'd rather be a Dog,
And lead a Brutal Life, without Reflection
Than to be stung with the tormenting Thought
That one who is my fellow Creature
Merits to Command me.
Oh, what's what's become of that aspiring-greatness
That once disdained to yield to less then Infinite!
Tis lost, tis to a Woman's will Abandoned.

Madam contain your self.


Tis true thou love her with that height of Fury,
Which none but her Inimitable Beauties
Cold ever have Inspired.

Observe him now.


But what? The Vulgar can Command small Passions;
Tis for Rinaldo to Control the Fiercest.
Why art thou by Fames Hundred Tongues extolled?
Why by her Golden Trump proclaimed a Hero,
If thou hast only Brutal force to boast of?
Tis chiefly force of Mind that makes a Hero.
Then, O thou loveliest of thy Sex, Armida,
Thou only one of all created Beings,
That ere had power to Fire Rinaldo's Heart
Be satisfied with this, that only thou
Had power to move his Soul, which for a time
Admired thee Equal to eternal Glory.

Rinaldo, in the Enchanted Grove
Prepare to meet immortal Love;
Straight to the Bower of Bliss repair,
Fortune nd Fame attend thee there.
Again that noble Clangor, and with Voices!
Nay then tis Evident 'tis no Illusion.
Who ere thou art that with those God-like Sounds
Thus raisest all that's powerful in my Nature,
This moment in the enchanted Grove I'll meet thee.
But O Rinaldo whither were thou fallen?
Who want a call to rouse thee from thy Lethargy,
That might Awake the Dead and make them Start
From their Eternal Slumbers

Patience ye Heavens, or thou Hell Revenge!
But let us to the Enchanted Grove Repair,
And thither call the Powr's that Rule the Air;
Yet least the Charms of Pleasure too, should fail,
Hell, let thy gloomy gods their last Efforts prepare,
If Destiny Decrees that after all,
I needs must perish, like my self I'll fall;
I'll fall like one whose Arbitrary Sway,
The Aerial and the Infernal gods obey:
With me the Traitor shall not only Die,
But groaning Nature in Convulsions lie.

Now to the Bower of Bliss let's fly
And all the Way we go,
Hell, by thy Music show
Thou art enraged as well as I.
WEre then those glorious Voices but Delusions,
That called me with that Pomp of noble Harmony?
Fortune they cried, and Fame attended here,
But all things here as soft as Lovers Wishes,
This Magic Symphony with sweetness sooths me,
And every thing around me Breaths Desire,
Which passes through my Senses to my Soul,
And to Armida's Beauteous Image there
Imparts fresh force and new Divinity.
That Image to perpetually torments me,
Reflecting on the Ecstatic Joys,
Which I must loose for ever.

See where he walks in gloomy Contemplation!
Summon the Aerial Spirits to their Duty,
While I unseen observe him.

Could thou resolve, then should Heaven send the occasion
To leave this lovely Master-piece of Nature;
To leave her in this fulness of Desire,
This height of all thy Furious Wishes;
When each succeeding Hour
Adds to her Graces, and sublimes thy Pleasure.
Can thou resolve to see that Face no more;
And never more to hear that Voice,
Whose Music Charms above the Magic Songs
Even of the Immortal Ministers who serve her.
Can thou Resolve? Ay, There's the Dreadful Question!
For what can be so terrible to Nature
As to fall all at once from blissful Rapture
To the Cursed State of Wishing without Hope?
Can thou make this Effort and live? No matter,
Life's not the thing in Question now, 'tis Glory.

See how the Tempest of his Passion tears him!
But can thou hear him thus contrive thy Ruin,
And yet stand tamely by?
Thou who can crush him in a moment!
Since thou hast cloyed him with thy softness,
What if he heard thee thunder in his Ears,
With that terrible Voice that untunes Nature,
And makes the Inverted Spears fall into discord?
But something tender in my Soul restrains me,
Is it Compassion? No, 'tis something softer,
Thou love the Traitor still; Love him to madness.
I do, I will, I must. Can ever Woman
Behold that Form without a bleeding Heart?
That Men that claims the Empire of the Universe?
With which he may give Laws to Human Kind.
May the High place with Dignity maintain
Of Heav'n's great Viceroy for this Under-World,
And Represent Immortal Majesty.
Once more I'll try Endearments.

Ha! The Queen!
Now, where are all thy feeble Resolutions?
One Glance has humbled thy Aspiring Thoughts,
Pleasure flows streaming from those Lovely Eyes,
And with it's sweetness overcomes my Soul.
If 'tis a Crime to look and be Transported,
Why was I made thus sensible to Pleasure?
Why was she formed with that surpassing Beauty,
That might transport an Angel from his Sphere,
And fix him by Divine Resemblance here?
Armida! My Queen! My Mistress!

Yes, she is here, and still the same she has been,
Unless that to her self she's altered;
That I must see,
At least I'm sure she is the same to thee;
But thou art altered to thy self and me,
And thou art lost to both.

So lost indeed I was, while I
From thee, the dearer part of me, was absent;
But I shall find my self again in thee.
Why dost thou vainly seek thy likeness there?
Can the frail Crystal represent Divinity?
Would thou behold these Eyes in all their Glories?
To see the force of their Celestial Fire,
Turn them on mine all flaming with desire;
Or look upon the Crystal of the Skies,
And view thy own in the World's flaming Eyes;
Those Eyes which vast Intelligences move
Minds made like thine, all Knowledge and all Love.

By all my Hopes of Happiness and Him,
His Heart's once more my own. Rinaldo sit,
To drive away all Sorrow from thy Soul
I'll give thee Music that may lull Despair,
And tempt the Dire Tormentours of the Damned,
With listed Brands to listen to its Air.
Aerial Spirits who attend me, Hear,
And shaped like Gods whom Greece Adored, appear.

Cupid, come to the Relief
Of thy Mother's piercing Grief;
Hither quickly, Cupid, fly;
With thee bring thy keenest Dart,
To subdue a Rebel Heart,
Thou art Scorned as well as I.

Come Cupid, on thy Golden Wing,
And in thy sounding Quiver bring
Pernicious Arrows, winged with Fire,
T'inflict incurable Desire.

To my great Parent I repair;
And though the World's maintained by me,
Yet, Mother, to attend on thee,
I leave the mighty Care.

A Mortal in this Fragrant Bower,
Presumes that he's above our Power.

I'll make that Mortal know,
That none too Great for Love can grow:
I tame the mighty Powers above,
And cruel Gods below.
Great Jove, whose Arms the Lightning, sling,
Has felt my fiercer Fire,
And Hell's Inexorable King
Has yielded to Desire.

Great Jove, whose Arms the Lightning sling,
Has felt thy fiercer Fire, c.

Now quickly through the Enchanted Grove,
Let all my nimble Brethren Rove.

Let Earth, and Air, and Flood, and Fire,
And every thing around conspire
To breath forth soft and sweet Desire.

Let Earth, and Air, c.


Thus we unseen have past the winding Mazes
Of this Enchanted Labyrinth, and now
Stand here invisible to Mortal sight,
To all unless Rinaldo's
See where the wanton Lovers lie reclined
In all the soft and pleasing Pomp of Luxury.
But now tis Heavens High will that I Retire,
And the remaining Task consign to you:
To you, I Delegate this Sacred wand,
This wand whose powerful touch no Impious Spirit,
Whether of Earth, or Air, or Fire can Bear,
With which thou shalt expel these shining Phantoms.
Then waiting the Departure of the Enchantress,
Ubaldo, thou shalt first approach Rinaldo,
And to his Eyes presenting that bright Orb,
Show him himself, the only form can shake him.

What? All upon the Wing? And undismiss'd too!
All Starting with amazement from their Stations,
Like watchful Fowl, that spring upon descrying
The Fowler's sly approach.
What can this mean, that neither is in Nature,
Nor in the Compass of my powerful Art;
That Hell or cannot, or else dare not Speak!
Rinaldo too, seems strangely discomposed;
What ails my Love? What means that furious Start?
Why do thy lovely Eyes appear thus Terrible?
And threatening shoot their fiery glances that Way?

Why have you done this?


What have I done? Thou art not well my Love.


Why have you raised these Phantoms to delude me,
In that provoking Posture?

These Phantoms are within thee, I see nothing;
I who a hundred times a Day view Beings,
That are to thee Invisible.
Sure, 'tis the effect of his distempred Mind;
But then my Spirits who are fled unlicensed:
The more I think, the more I grow Confounded.
My Genius seems to whisper me within,
Armida! Fate approaches.
An iey Horror strikes through all my Veins,
And Freezes as it runs; not far from hence,
There is a dismal Cave, the Mouth of Hell,
Out of the which, the old ugly Beldam Night,
With Twenty thousand fiends, her fearful Equipage,
Each Evening Rushes to usurp the Sky,
And in her hideous flight Deform
The afflicted face of Nature; Straight, Phenissa,
Into its monstrous Caverns shall Descend
And thither Summoning Hell's blackest Furies,
Fiends too abominable to behold
The face of Heaven or mine,
Shall there Compel them to unfold my Destiny*

Ha! What are you,
That in this posture of Defiance,
Thus dare to explore the Secrets of a Solitude,
That's Sacred to the Immortal Powers and me?
What are you? Speak or --

Men.


Soldiers.


Friends.


Ubaldo,


Carlo.


Now, what art thou? Look there and satisfy thy self.


Damnation, what indeed? For 'tis Impossible
That thou can be Rinaldo. Oh, Dishonour!
Earth open quick, and take me to the Centre!
Ye Cedars fall and Crush me to Conceal me!
But what Retreat can hide me from my thoughts?
For I have seen my shame, and that's to me
As much as if the assembled World beheld it.
What Godlike Forms are those, compared to mine?
Off ye vile Trappings of soft Syrian Slaves,
The Pride of little base Esseminate wretches,
That want the very outside of Humanity.

Now He begins to be once more Rinaldo,
Throws off the Captive, and resumes the Demi-god,
We come to free thee from inglorious Thraldom,
Follow us.

Whither.


To Jerusalem.


Ha!


Godfrey Invites thee.


The universal Camp demands thee,
Victory on her Eagles Wings attends thee.

Fortune, and everlasting Fame expect thee.
Art thou not Fired? When Europe and when Asia
Contending for the Empire of the World,
In dreadful Conflict meet, Is this a place;
This soft Retreat for that aspiring Soul,
That once was foremost in the Race of Glory?

Great Deeds are oft in Solitude performed.


Of all created Spirits, is there one
So Covetous of Deathless Fame as thine?
Then where are thy Applauders here?

The Brave can never be without Applauders,
The Gods, and I my self approve my Actions.

Can thou Desert the darling Cause of Heaven,
And yet affirm that Heaven approves thy Actions?
What wants there but thy Sword, O Fatal Warrior,
To finish this Crusade with glorious Victory?
To extinguish that abominable Sect,
And put an end to all their Impious Rites?
Break forth, and be thy God-like self once more,
The matchless Champion of the Christian Cause,
Who art now the Egregious Champion of a Woman;
Break from her Influence, whose malignant Aspect
Eclipses all thy glory.

Have neither of you seen this Woman,
Whom thus disdainfully you mention?

Thou know we have*


Did you unmoved behold her? No, you Loved her,
Even to the loss of Reason, both you loved her,
Contemned and used like Slaves, you Doted on her;
I met you led in Triumph both, and Bound,
Bound in Ignobler Bonds than those of Love;
I met you, and delivered you, unmanned
To that degree, you grumbl'd at your Freedom,
Because your Baseness had excuse no longer.
Have I a Soul so little Sensible,
That I should leave the soft, the kind Armida,
When her Disdain and her Imperious fierceness
Could so engaging prove to you?
Me she yet never gave just cause to leave her,
Unless because for me She left an Empire.
And the Addresses of all Asia's Monarchs.

Our Actions ought not to be Rules for yours,
You have a Soul of a Superior Order.

Could you persuade my Vanity to that,
Great Souls by Mighty'st Passions are tormented,
Besides, Armida has Ten thousand Charms,
Of which you never can have any Notion.
Could Cruelty have binding force for you,
And am I urged to leave the last Endearments?
That only by their sweet Remembrance pierce
My Inmost Soul, and Rowze up sleeping Raptures.

A Hero ne'er can want a worthier Mistress.


Thou talk, but Ah! thou dost not think, Ubaldo.
For him who has Enjoyed Armida,
There is no other Mistress.
Thou hast beheld her Angel Form,
And Frowning, it has Ravished thee.
Thou know her Science, and her wondrous Wit too,
But Ah, thou ne'er can know with how much Art,
She makes that Wit subservient to her Happiness,
When she designs to bless the Man she Loves,
And raise him to a God, with height of Rapture
Were you that happy Man, would you forsake her?
At least, thou should not Carlo.
Thy languid Eyes, that glow with humid Fires,
Declare too well thy Soul.

I must confess, I should not.


Nay, then all's lost. Heaven's darling Cause is lost,


Ubaldo, No,
What I have said, has been designed to show,
That the great thing I now shall do is owing,
Not to the Influence of your frail persuasion,
Who stand Convicted both, and both Confounded;
But the full Force of my own Reasoning Virtue.
Tho Dearer than my Life I Love Armida;
I Love my Duty and my Honour more.
And since they call, Rinaldo will obey.
But Oh, thou Tyrant, Glory, How much gentler,
And how much Lovelier in the Field I found thee,
When stained with Human Gore, from far thou beckon'st,
And I while Death and Horror stalked before me,
Broke through the whole Arabian Horse to join thee,
And Mow'd my passage through the Syrian Infantry.

There spoke the very first, and best of Heroe's


Nay, then Appear Urania.


The blessed Urania here!


Yes, now you purge your stains by such Contrition,
Urania dares appear,
She has with transport, and with wonder heard thee.
Thou hast assumed a god-like Resolution.

Yes, I will leave my very Life, my Soul.
Farewell thou Dearer part of me, and with thee,
Pleasure farewell, a long farewell ye Raptures,
That have so often in this blissful Bower,
Raise*d me above the height of mortal Happiness.

My Lord, the Queen your Mistress, Ha!
Bless me, what shapes are those?

Tell her, she is no more Rinaldo's Mistress,
And he no more a Slave.

What's this I hear? Nay then assist me Hell;
Fly Nisroe, fly, and on the Wings of Lightning,
Convey this News I charge thee.
This certainly must turn her Love to Hate,
To mortal Hate; and force her to destroy him.

Now all ye separated Souls of Heroes,
Who in this happy Isle, enjoy Immortal Pleasures;
Who hovering in the Balmy Air around me.
Beheld the dreadful Conflict in my Breast,
And saw me with a bleeding Heart, a Victor;
Say all, if I deserve a place
In your Illustrious Roll?

No Roman ere did half so much for Glory.
True, they resigned their Lives for Glory,
But soon their pangs were over.
Thou art contented to Live greatly miserable,
But quickly let us fly, thou know Armida,
And know how far her dreadful power Extends;
That power that sets Earth, Hell, and Heaven in uproar,
While Chaos Hushed, stands listening to the noise,
And wondering at Confusion, not his own;
And though she should not hurt us, she may shake us.
But hark, already she begins, already,
Hells grizly Tyrant takes the dire Alarm
In Frantic haste even now the Furies Arm,
The Infernal Trumpet through the Abiss profound,
Horribly Rumbles with its dreary Sound.
Hark!
In that Roar Hells dreadful Mounds ir past.
Hark!
Now the vaulted Heaven's restore the dismal Blast.

I stiffen with Astonishment,


And I grow Chill with Horror.
Bless me, what hideous Forms are those,
That threatening Nod their ghastly skulls,
And Stalk to oppose our passage,
Rin. Why? those are Creatures whom their Crimes have thrown
So far below us, we to them are Gods
In Scorn of all their empty threats I'll on.
Are we not Spirits too? Immortal Beings,
Whom only we our selves have power to hurt?
I fear the fair Armida's softness more
Than all these ghastly shapes, and all this dreadful Roar.

Why am I called with so much eager haste?


Oh, I want time to tell thee, Haste, Be gone,
Fly, fly, this very moment,
Swift as a Storm, Impetuous as the Lightning,
To execute Armida's Dreadful Will.

Rinaldo --


Is gone with Vengeance, and with Death o'retake him;
Go, bid the avenging Ministers of Fate
Rush through the inmost Chambers of the Earth,
And shake the World's Foundations.
Bid the Tempestuous Powers that rule the Air
Let loose the unbridled Fury of the Winds,
To overthrow their Empire.
And let the Furies with Infernal Horrors
Affright, astonish and confound the Traitor.
What! stand thou pausing now the Queen's betrayed?

I do not pause, this moment you're obeyed.
Behold that grisly Form which there ascends,
The Dire forerunner of Confusion;
As in this Western Main a small black Cloud
Lifting its threatening Head above the Horizon.
The Signal of the Warring Winds
Foreruns the Dreadful Hurricane --
This Rising Fantome by its black appearance
Alarms Millions of Immortal Spirits,
To raise up Tumults that will shake all Nature.

Let us be gone then, Thou to Hell,
And to the Queen, my Mistress, I,
To tell her what thou hast done.

Ye Spirits that dwell in Earth, Fire, and Air,
Hither, Hither, Hither, Hither, hurrying repair:
Behold your great Mistress, Armida's betrayed,
Hither, hither, hither, Hurry all to her Aid.

Lo, from Earth, from Hell, and from Sky,
With Vengeance laden we fly.

Ye Fiends that are lurking in Graves,
Or gliding in Vaulted Caves,
All working amain in your Holes,
Heave, Heave up the Crumbling Earth like Moles.
Till the Mountain shakes,
And the Rock its Basis forsakes,
And the Heart of the Traitor quakes.

'Tis done, see the Mountain shakes,
And the Rock its Basis forsakes.

Ye Powers who govern the Air,
Let nought but Confusion be there;
Haste to send forth
The stormy North,
And unbind the Deep Mouth
Of the Blustering South:
Let them blow, let them blow, till with Fury they Roar,
And ambitious old Ocean disdains the Shore.

Hark how they blow! Hark how they blow!
If they go on, through the Void they will sweep
The Heavens, the Earth, and the Deep,
And the World into Chaos will throw!

Now flying in Crowds,
Charge, Charge all your Clouds,
Charge them all with Destructive Thunder,
Let it roar, till it rends the Vast all asunder.
Let the Lightning fearfully blaze,
Till Mortals who gaze,
Fall Dead at the terrible Wonder.

'Tis done, 'tis done, and we shake
At the dire Confusion we make.

Ye Furies who Reign in Unquenchable Fires,
To the sound of your Yells tune your Horrible Lyres;
And give us that Music by which you Redouble
The Horrors of Hell, and unspeakable Trouble.

'Tis done.


Now add to the Symphony clinking of Chains.
Cho. 'Tis done.

Add the Howls of the Damned, in the height of their Pains;


'Tis done.


Add their Scream and their Roar, and their Serpentine Hiss;


'Tis done.


Let Lucifer's Thunder now answer to this,
And Bellow alternately through the Abyss.

'Tis done, and 'tis past our power to know,
Whither this be Chaos or no?

At length you have moved his mighty Soul.


But 'tis with Anger not with Fear, he's moved,
See where transported with a Noble Fury,
Lovelily dreadful as a Warring Angel,
He drives the Infernal Fantomes all before him.

Redouble your Efforts.


That certainly destroys him.


No matter, since you cannot shake him, crush him.


Thus Godlike! Thus insensible of Fear!


Think He's insensible of Love too.


Perhaps He may relent. He comes this way,
And I will make the Trial.

Relent! What can you hope? What can you do?
When Furies can't prevail?

Show him a greater.


A greater? What greater?


A Woman,
An injured Woman!
VVrong'd in her Love, and Raging for Revenge.

Be Wise, and let him perish.


Yes, he shall perish if he dares persist;
But thou the giver of bold fatal Counsels,
Assure thy self that thou shalt perish with him.
But see, he comes, and to my Wish alone,
Divided by the Tempest from his Friends,
Without Reply, be gone.

Be still, at my Command be still, ye Furies,
And ye, Restrain your Roaring Mouths, ye Thunders,
For I am to be heard.

Ha! The Queen!
The only Object which I would avoid!
Ay, here's the sight at which my Genius shrinks.
Now, all ye Motives to my great Proceeding,
Thou the Remembrance of my former Triumphs,
And Thou the Hope of Future, Thou, O Glory,
That Day and Night in my aspiring Mind
Ragest with inextinguishable Fire;
United aid me in this Dreadful Conflict.
And thou, too conscious of thy great Original,
Rowze, Rowze each nobler Faculty, my Soul,
Exert thy utmost force in thy Defence,
For dreadful is the Danger.
Armida!

Traitor!


Traitor!
Armida has had kinder thoughts of me.

Ungrateful VVretch! Am I at last reproached with it?
I have, and therefore doubly you're a Traitor.
Have I selected thee from all Mankind,
To heap upon thee Obligations! --
And basely after all to steal away!

You wrong me.
Are not your Sentinels in every Corner?
Have not your Airy Scouts over spread the Island?
How could I hope then to depart unknown?

Confusion? Am I then defied? Hark!
The Impatient Thunder grumbles to be at thee;
Ten thousand Raging Friends around thee wait,
Watching the sign to spring and to devour thee,
At my least Nod most certain Death attends thee.

I go to seek him in the search of Glory,
And if I find him here,
There's a long Voyage saved.

Then you will go?


Will! Have you not urged it?


Oh, Confusion! What do I hear?
Audacious Fool to tempt thy certain Ruin,
And basely to presume to that degree
Upon the poor Remains of Tenderness,
Which to this moment have preserved thee,
I urged it?

Yes, Urged it by your Impotent Attempts,
To fright me from departure.

Oh, Patience yet a Moment!


The greatness of my Mind is now concerned,
And tho I had no other Call then that,
I would be gone. Gods! that you should descend
So far beneath your selves,
To think that you could love a Man so base,
As to be swayed by Fear.

By my Remaining Hopes of great Revenge,
I ne'er designed to fright thee, but destroy thee;
I know thy Soul incapable of Fear,
Even of the Fear of doing basest Wrongs.

Whom have I wronged?


Whom hast thou sworn Eternally to Love?


Armida! And that Hour I cease to Love her,
Hear me, ye Gods! pierce me with all your Bolts;
But from this Hour I will ne'er see her more.

Hell and Confusion! Dare thou mock my misery?


I dare not do a thing so much beneath
The Greatness of my Soul.

Did thou not say that thou Resolv'st to Love me?


Eternally.


And yet resolv'st to Leave me?


By Heavens for ever.


O vile Dissembler!


Madam I must be gone, for I am called
With such a Voice as Man dares not resist.

By whom?


By Victory, by Fame, by Heaven.


To do a Barbarous thing? Impossible!


'Twas but this moment that the Immortal Powers,
Called loudly from above Begone Rinaldo,
Without delay Begone, 'tis We command Thee;
Fortune, and Victory, and Fame attend Thee;
This very night Begone or stay for ever.

Mere Vapour! and Deluding vision all!


'Tis real all by Heaven, this very moment
I heard the Ethereal Trump upon the Mountain,
While the Hill trembled with the eternal clangour;
Vrania too, and Carlo and Vbaldo
With Messages from Godfrey are arrived.

They must return.


Without me?


Fate has by me pronounced it.


What will the Army? what will all Asia think?


The greatest and most glorious of them all,
Will envy thy Transcendent Happiness.

But envy always stirs up Base born minds,
To blacken whom they Envy.
I shall become the common talk of Slaves.

They can but talk, while in Revenge we'll live.


Nay, then I leave you as my Mortal Enemy.


Your Mortal Enemy! Provoking wretch!
On every side avoidless Fate surrounds thee.
To whom then doest thou owe the very Breath,
That thus pronounces this audacious Insolence?
Is it thy Mortal Enemy preserves thee?

Yes, 'Tis my Mortal Enemy who e're
Preserves me from a glorious Death,
To see me live a cursed Life with Infamy.
Think of my purple Rivals of the East.
What will they say? That they were all disdained for --
Gods! I want patience to support the Thoughts of it.
But if no sense of my dishonour moves thee,
Think of thy own; what will they say of thee?
That you so far beneath your self descended,
To give a wretch possession of your Soul,
Who vilely could renounce eternal Fame,
To squander an Inglorious Life away
In a fond Woman's Arms.
If thou so little art concerned for me,
I who Love thee beyond all bounds, must leave thee,
To vindicate thy Fame from bold Blasphemers;
And carrying Terror to the very Courts
Of my Imperial Rivals, make them know
That he alone was worthy of thy choice,
Who had the power when Duty called to Leave thee.
Oh! would but thou Armida do thy part,
And show by bearing this Departure greatly,
That she of all her Sex was worthy me;
Who in the Furious Height of all her Love,
To glory could resign me.

Ay, Here's another cause for my detaining thee,
My Fame as well as Love requires thy stay;
What would those Monarchs say should thou Desert me?
How would they Scorn the weakness of my choice,
Or meanness of my Beauty?

Then to secure that Fame lo here I Swear,
The memory of what has past between us
Shall in this corner of the World lie Buried:
In Europe and in Asia unrecorded:
And that of all the Actions of my life,
Alone shall be forgotten.

Me would thou have give faith to thy False Oaths?
The very Breath that swears, declares thee perjured?
Am I to be forgot, as well as left?

You mistake me.


Fate ne'er mistakes, and Traitor is at Hand.


I thank thee; since for glorious death I leave thee,
How could I ever hope to fall more greatly,
Than dauntless, in this dreadful wrack of Nature?

So brave! His greatness shakes my Soul, He frowns.
With congregated clouds about his brows,
As if he were the God who threw these Thunders;
And he commanded Nature.
Yes, thou shalt die, but not with so much pleasure
As fondly thou believe, for thou shalt die
Convicted, and Remorse shall plague that soul
Which fear of danger never could disturb.
Can thou thy self believe thou art not Perjured?

Perjured!


Yes Perjured!
Hast thou not sworn eternally to Love me?

Well!


And yet hast sworn to leave me too for ever?


That is to say, I Love thee with a Passion
That Hopeless and in absence will endure.

But thou art called alas! and by whom called?
By Victory, by Fame, by Heaven; fine Visions!
By thy Satiety thour't called, false man,
By the base lightness of thy changing temper.

You wrong me.


I do not; Had Heaven enjoined thee to Depart,
Would it command thee to appear Inhuman;
Sprung from a Rock and by a Tigress Nursed?
For hast thou, say, fetched one Reluctant groan?
Have not thy unrelenting Eyes been dry,
Yet seen my poor Distracted Heart weep Blood?
Hast thou so much as cast one Pitying glance,
On my Hard Fortune? On my Fortune said I?
My dreadful Fate, my Everlasting ruin,
And can thou falsely then affirm thou Love?
Doest thou not now Convicted fall a Traitor?
Be gone, and meet the Fate which there attends thee.

Farewell.


What I have done? He goes to certain Death.
Stay; Hast thou not one word to excuse thy crime?

Yes, yes, 'tis in my power to justify my self,
To your confusion too, of that be certain.

Do it then.


No.


You must.


I'll die a thousand Deaths first.


By Heavens I feel I am a very Woman.
Rinaldo, if ever I was Dear to thee;
If e're I gave thee high and Perfect pleasure,
Here by its dear Remembrance I conjure thee,
That thou would satisfy this last request,
Let me but know thou art not false,
And I shall die with pleasure.

O urge it not, if e're thou Love Rinaldo,

Why?


In pity to us Both.


Ha! now by Heaven I long, I die to know it.


Yet, if tho love Rinaldo, let it die with me,
Thou hast alas! endured too much already,
Why should thou strive to know a thing which known,
Will break thy wretched Heart?

To break my heart you must continue silent,
If I persist to think thee false I die;
Then speak and let me live.

Thou hast overcome, but dread the fatal consequence,
Here I relax the Violent effort;
Which has thus far suppressed the struggling Passion,
That tore my very Vitals to get free,
I told thee That I Loved thee my Armida,
I told thee not how far, that thou shalt see;
Then with those Eyes that through the Stars see Fate,
Look upon mine and through them view my Soul;
Say, do I Love thee now, art thou yet satisfied?

Prodigious alteration in a moment!
Thou doest not only Love, but thou art Love;
Come to my Heart, and feel it leap to meet thee.

Why would thou urge me to this fatal Weakness
That has undone us both? and why return it
With that bewitching softness, which afresh
Must plunge me in the Torments of the Damned?
Why would thou sharpen thus the cruel Sting
Of that severe necessity, which now
O cursed Hour! Eternally devides us?

Ah Gods! Ah wretch! Ah Cursed perfidious wretch!
Blast him ye Lightnings, and ye Furies tear him;
The Traitor has dissembled Tenderness,
To torture me the more.

Now, now O all ye Heavenly Powers defend me.
In this first dreadful moment of my Life,
Not from the Danger of her potent art,
But from my self, y' Eternal Powers defend me!

Now, now Tartarean Deities Revenge me,
But hold, what Fury want I but my own;
Mine is the wrong, the Vengeance shall be mine:
Die Traitor.

Do strike and pierce thy Image here, so fixed,
That nothing but a Dagger can Remove it.

What has he said? And can thou pierce him now?
I can for his is a persidious Tongue,
But then his Eyes, his Lovesick Eyes speak Truth;
I cannot hurt him with that melting Look:
Love in his Eyes defends him. Curse on thy Tenderness
Then pierce thy self, then Stab him here.

Oh Heaven's!
What has thou done? The Dagger's in thy Bosom.

Could I oblige thee more?
Now I prevent thy Barbarous design;
This was the only way, I had to abandon thee.

I have a Soul that Loves and Dares like yours,
And thus.

Ah Hold, Rinaldo Hold, if I am Dear to thee,
By that Dear Love I here conjure thee Hold!
Throw down that Cursed Instrument of Death,
I can with constancy support my Wound;
I die to think of thine.

Ho, there, Phaenissa, Help Vbaldo, Carlo?


Alas! thou call in vain, I die Rinaldo.


What will become of me, thou bleedst to Death,
And yet no succours nigh.
Let me support thy Lovely Fainting Limbs,
Back to the Palace where Phaenissa waits thee;
Now where's Ambition.

If I would Live, I want no mortal aid;
A Thousand powerful Spirits round me wait,
Hark! how they groaning all deplore my Fate!
Hark! how their Lyres resound a Rueful Strain,
Which shows them sensible of all my pain.

O Grief! O Infinite excess of woe!
That makes the very Damned with Piercing moan
Lament our Sorrows, and forget their own.

NOw you and Heaven have perfected my Joy,
And all I would have asked prevented:
Thou hast renounced thy Faith, renounced thy Art,
And thy Wound is not Mortal; my Friends too,
My Friends will all be ravished, I'll but seek them,
And with them in a moment I'll return.

Wilt thou begone then?


I must, it is in order to our Happiness.


I know it, and yet methinks 'tis Death to part with thee?


It is but for a moment.


But yet that moment sure will break my Heart.
How Dolefully it beats with Dying Blows?
As if with thee my very Soul departed.
How would Eternal separation plague me?
But see, Rinaldo there, look here Phaenissa!
What mean these winged ill Omens of the Air
That passing brush me with their deadly Pinions,
And seem the forlorn Hope of Fate?

I see nothing.


Nor I.


Is it possible? nor hear you any Voice?


None but that Voice whose Music Charms my Soul.


Nor you?


Nor I.


Hark! how it cries again, prepare Armida,
Dispatch, we're grown Impotent of Delay:
See, where we all stand ready to Receive thee,
Assembled in the Air, we hovering stand,
And Instantly expect thee.

What do I hear? Her mind is much disturbed,
And Danger's Imminent, I must be swift,
On wings of Fear which thou hast lent I'll fly,
And in a moment with my Friends return.

My Lord.


What want you?


Madam, I thought my Lord Rinaldo called.


Sure so he did, for see he turns this way,
And seems to Beckon to you.
Fly, to know what he wants.

Wants the Queen any thing Phaenissa?


No my Lord!


Why am I called then?


My Lord,
I have something of Importance to Impart to you,
Which the Queen must not hear.

I am now in haste, my Impatient Friends expect me,
I'll instantly return.

You will! why then the Sun, that all things sees,
Sees not a wretch that's so forlorn, as I am:
Return! for what! To bear the Queen to Palestine?
Whither must I transport my self? to Syria?
Without Armida! or to Godfrey's Army?
Thou! thou the mortal Foe to their Religion!
But such Armida was! Renounce thy Faith!
Thou hast a Queens Example!
Suppose I should? alas! I have an art,
An Art, which Christians utterly abhor,
And that, I never, never can renounce:
Her, all the Infernal powers obeyed, attracted
By Supreme knowledge and by Sovereign Beauty!
For in her face, they saw the bright Reflection
of that refulgent place, from which they fell,
But I, alas! O dire Remembrance! I
Am by indissoluble contract bound.
This Voyage I must then obstruct or Perish!
Then his return I must obstruct or Perish.
But the black stratagem that Fate suggests,
Perhaps may touch Armida's precious Life:
No, by discovery of the Truth at last
I can prevent that dire Calamity. --

What says Rinaldo?


What said your doleful heart at his departure?
What said the Winged ill Omens of the Air?
And what the Voices of the Eternal Beings?
Hear them once more! Ye Spirits now assist me.

Ah Queen! ah wretched Queen give over,
Cease, cease with hopeless Fire to burn,
Ah cease his absence to deplore:
Who now, even now forsakes the Shore,
And never, never will return,
No never see thee more.

What say they now?


Gods I am tortured, I am stung to madness!
Let 'em say what they will: I'll not believe 'em.

Will you give Credit to Rinaldo then?
Since you must know what he himself has said.

Ah Gods, and was it that?


And was it that? what could it be but that?
Or what could he declare but that?
Which you were not to hear:
He coldly bad me Comfort you.

Ah! Comfort from a Devil! but be hushed!
Be hushed my Soul but only for this moment:
And be as mad as all the Winds the next,
And ye, ye Tyrant Gods, unless y' are pleased
To see perfidiousness pass unrevenged:
While thus you plague the Creature of your hands,
Only for too much truth; for too much Love;
Assist my enseebled Arm this once, and then
Hurl all your Thunders at my wretched head,
And take your willing Victim.

So, she resents it greatly.
I see a noble Fury in her Eyes.

Why then Rinaldo's gone?


Most certainly.


Confusion! I must now make haste:
I shall be mad too soon else.
But how durst you, my Slave! conceal his Treason:
How did you dare to abet his damned design?

To abet it.


Ay, how did you dare to abet it?


Hell had suggested --


What?


Why, that you --


Die, and consult it better.
So: 'twas exactly levelled at thy Heart:
Would I had always taken aim as justly.
And hast thou then forsaken me! what me!
Me, could thou then forsake! is't possible!
Me, that had laid out all my Soul upon thee!
That willingly, that gladly would have died for thee!
And could thou not be satisfied, unless
Thou murderst me thy self! O wretched man!
Can you see this! you Gods! and not Revenge it!
Revenge it then, Revenge it then ye Devils!
Who with Abhorrency and Detestation
Foretold this more than Devilsh Act!
They hear thee not! my Spirits too have left me.
But behold!
Phaenissa there lies dead! Rinaldo's gone.
Whither must I go! ha! where am I left!
Thrice has yon Planet wayn'd and thrice increased,
Since I came flying to these Isles of Fortune:
In all which time no Footstep has appeared
Of any humane Creature here inhabiting:
Nor has one Sail bin seen to dare the winds!
Upon this unknown Ocean! But this morning
I seemed to be the darling care of Heaven!
The pow'rfull'st Queen of all the Eastern World!
The adoration of Mankind: O dreadful change!
But have I not one Friend in Heaven or Hell?
Yes: one I have: then let him come! Come death!
Come thou most Generous of the Immortal Powers!
The only God, that's true to the Unhappy:
Thus let me guide thee to my faithful Heart:
Take heed; how thou a second time mistake!
Ah Gods! thou hast a second time mistaken!
And I have now not strength enough to assist thee!
Yet hast thou done thy work! and though thy hand
Is slow; I find 'tis sure.
What's that a Noise!
The trampling sure of Feet! which this way tend.
Oh all ye powers the Christians are returning!
Is it my weakness that deludes my Eyes,
Or has the barb'rous man relented? ha!
He has, he has! Oh all ye Eternal Powers!
What have I done! now death forbear a Moment!
That with my dying breath I may upbraid him:
That with my dying breath I may forgive him,
And that my Soul may blessing him, expire.

Not far from hence you know you left Armida!


A very little further on the right:
Upon a sudden 'tis exceeding Dark.

Yes, with a Darkness foreign to the place:
A Fog, that steaming from the Mouth of Hell,
Doubles the Native Horrors of the Night:
Be cautious! Cautious, how thou treadst, Rinaldo;
Lest blindly guided by thy head-strong Love
Thou stumble on despair!
Whom lest you with Armida?

Phaenissa.


Armida's evil Genius bore that name,
The Source of all her woes.

Oh Cursed Phaenissa! hast thou then betrayed me!
Is't Possible?

Angels, and all ye Host of Heaven defend me,
What dismal Shape is this.

The Remnant of the wretch that was Phaenissa.


Look down upon me ye eternal Powers!
Phaenissa! where! Oh where!

Where! here! Look here Rinaldo,
Now see thou show thy self a man! a Man!
That's not enough. Be what thou art, a Hero!
And then with steadfast Eyes, and heart unshaken,
Behold ill Fate lie their.

Oh! Oh!
Nor Man nor Hero can ill fate resist,
And thus it tears me down: all Conquering Death
Thou art indeed the Greizly King of terrors!

Son of Bertoldo! be thy self this moment.


Think of thy Glory!


Think of past Trophies and of future Triumphs!


Think that the Army of the East Survey's thee!


Think that a Thousand Demi-Gods Surround thee.


O my Armida.


And art thou come my Hero! art thou mine!
Take, take my fleeting life! ye Envious powr's!
For life with thee, exceeded Mortal happiness.

What wrought this dreadful work of Fate!


Leave that Discovery to me, Rinaldo!
For know that in three Minutes she Expires.

Heart rending sound! has Heaven expressly formed
My Soul, for her alone! and will it part us.
For ever part us! we'll not part a moment:
Behold her with my Eyes! ye Heavens! and spare her.

Thy prayr's are all delivered to the winds,
Heaven hears not: and she dies.

Oh sad reward of Constancy divine!


'Tis the dreadful punishment, of Lawless Love!


Oh Faith! Oh matchless Truth oppressed by Fate;
For Truth it self embodied lies in thee:
And with its Beauty charms the admiring World.

'Tis not for Man to censures Heavens decrees;
As it knows how to Punish, it can recompense?
By Impious Arts, she drew thee to her Arms!
No sacred rites prepared; the unlicensed way:
For which, by Heavens severe decree, she dies
A Terrible Example.
But yet because her Faith, her Truth, her Constancy;
Seemed to have more then humane Virtue in them,
And she Expires repentant.
Heaven, that in all its sacred dispensations,
Makes the perfection of its Justice shine;
A more then mortal Recompense ordains for them:
For after both your mortal Dates are past,
Here in this blissful Region of the Air;
Thou shalt for ever Live, with thy Armida.

Nay, then you Powers! you make amends for all:
These, these are Sounds, which can make Death delightful.

Thus with the motion of this sacred Wand,
I in a moment drive away the Mists;
That Cloud your mortal Eyes.
And now behold!
If that your Eyes can bear Immortal Splendour;
Behold where hovering on her Golden Wings:
Bright Fame illuminates her Godlike Equipage.
Heroes, and Heroines? in the Air assembled,
A Thousand Glorious forms that live in pleasures;
To mortals inconceivable;
With these you shall for ever live;
Over these you shall for ever reign,
For ever reign united.

Thou Kindest, Dearest, Best of Men, farewell?
I come ye Powers!
Rinaldo! let no grief come near thy Soul:
In insupportable delight I die.

Break Heart; this very Moment! Cruel Powers!
Why am I such a Wretch, that Death avoids me:
Faith, Beauty, Truth, and Constancy farewell;
For a short time farewell; farewell, ye Hero's,
Who in your Mansions of the Air expect me.
Death! who should join me to you here, avoids me?
Then to Jerusalem I'll fly, and there
Provoke him, and compel him, to unite me;
Eternally to you and my Armida.

There I'll Proclaim, how he who rules above!
Takes severe Vengeance of unlawful Love.

TO some fine Sparks methinks in yonder Rows,
The Brave Rinaldo, a Barbarian shows:
His leaving for a Camp his Amorous Care,
Is a rude thing they'll ne'er Forgive they swear:
They ne'er could think so barb'rously they say,
No, that Young Hero's mere Reverse are they:
On his young Cheeks Love's Charming power abides,
While in his Manly Breast the God of War resides:
In their soft Hearts, Ten Thousand Loves have places;
But Wars stern God dwells on their dreadful Faces:
While the late War in all it's fury Raged,
They ne'er with Gauls in Belgian Plains Engaged:
Nor Towering Fame on Alpine Mountains sought,
But here with Frightful looks, while others Fought,
They guarded the weak places they had Bought.
But you, who to your Country and your Fame,
Great Souls, still sacrificed your Amorous Flame:
Who in each Spring, the season of Desire,
Left the Bright Dames, that set your Souls on Fire;
To follow William, forcing France to yield,
And hunting Glory through the Dusty Field:
You sure with Pleasure should Rinaldo view,
Who less deserves Immortal Fame than you:
He flew from a polluted Beauties Arms,
And from the Influence of malignant Charms.
You from such Beauty and such Virtue flew,
As might enamour Gods as well as you.
And you Bright Nymphs --
Whom for a time the Noble Youths forsook,
With Pleasure may on Lost Armida Look:
Since by her weakness, your High merit shines;
And to your praise, the rudest Hearts inclines.
She to retain her Hero in her Arms,
The utmost force exerted of her Charms:
You when their Glory Summoned yours away,
Your Looks rebated and relaxed your sway,
By which you force even Savages to obey.
Your Countrey's happiness you first designed,
To that the Darlings of your Souls resigned,
And sent them Death, or Victory to find.
O Roman Virtue! which it's trial past,
Well merits the Reward it meets at last:
For since with Peace the Noble Youths returned,
They for such worth with Double fires have burned.
May long Fruition but foment the Flames,
And be your Loves Immortal as your Fames.

