WELL! Now for a kind-hearted Pitt to day,
To hide the Blushes of a Virgin Play.
Oh Pox! Here's store of old Campaigning Faces;
Faith, Critics, now you'd best to quit your Places*
These are the Men, that point of Honour know,
And will be generous even to a Foe:
Whilst you your snarling brutish Rage display,
And Cannibal like, upon each other Prey.
From the nice powdered Sparks we little fear,
Their Judgment only does in Dress appear;
Nor need we care, how much we do expose
Those tame unthinking Animals, the Beaux;
Who still are Satyr-Proof, be it ne'er so keen;
They'll all things bear, rather than not be seen.
But welcome now, you She-obliging Cits,
Who gull your Husbands to equip the Wits,
Leaving the Drones to mind their Cheating Tasks,
And hither flock, prink'd up in Vizor-Masks:
So may your Issue still supply the Stage,
And furnish Scandal for the ensuing Age.
And now to you, the Glories of our Isle,
Give but to day one kind consenting Smile;
'Twill more than doubly pay the Poet's Toil.

G'Morrow Mr. Breviate; I'm taking a Mouth full of your Temple Air: But I
profess it is so blowed upon by the White-Fryars Knights of the Post, the Noble
Attestors of your studied Frauds and Falsehoods, that 'tis dangerous giving it
Reception in an honest Breast.


You are very Conscientious Eager, -- And speak as if your Profession was a
Secret.


I dare own my Profession, and justify my self a generous public spirited
Person, a Promoter of civil Understanding, and a charitable Procurer of
Fellow-feeling betwixt both Sexes, in order to the Establishing the mutual
Correspondence of Mankind -- Whilst you Wranglers, at the Bar, disturb the
Peace and Repose of all Men; then basely build your Fortunes upon your own
Client's Ruin.


Prithee leave this Railing, -- And communicate some of your Instructions for
the effectual prosecution of my Amour I told you of.


Oh! -- with the great Heiress Mrs. Purflew; -- Why look you now, here you find
the want of my Faculty already -- managing a Match, and procuring a Mistress,
is still Pimping -- though by distinct Methods we attain our different Ends.


Go Jocund, get my things to my Lodgings, and call at my Taylors, and the
Exchange, and -- bid them send home what I writ for.


Yes Sir. -- Now must I quest amongst a Covey of Strumpets; All the Eringo my
Master has been chawing this Voyage, won't supply a single Pittance to each of
the Game I shall spring.


'Ods so, here comes Col. Bellair -- by his Garb. I believe just arrived.


Col. you're welcome back to England -- I won't ask how stand Affairs in
Flanders, since your safe return will atone for the loss of Hundreds.


I am confident the hearty Jollys of the Old Devil, as well as the buxom She's
about Covent-Garden, will subscribe to Mr. Breviat's Opinion.


Your Servant Gentlemen -- What do you entertain a Stranger with Raillery? But
I am glad to find the same gaiety of Humour reigns with you still. -- Eager
thou look very Spruce, -- Do lucky Hits fall apace? But thy Calling can
never be at a stand, whilst either young Fools have Money, or the old ones
Lechery. -- You see I must go and Accoutre. For the present adieu.


See how heavily the Col. walks, with a score or two of dead Men in each
Pocket, and half a dozen of vacant Commissions.


I don't grudge him the fruits of his Fatigues, -- Since he's a brave, honest,
generous Gentleman. -- I think he has escaped without the Badge of a single
Scar.


Though he has lost no Blood this Summer, yet he has sweat for it sufficiently,
and has swelled out his Honour, in a graceful Chair of State. -- I heard that
he was laid up Stewing all the beginning of the Campaign.


O fie! -- Eager, thou art ill-natur'd.


The truth on it is, I ought to be silent -- For I know I shall be employed by
him -- I must hunt the City for some Merchants Prentices, that have broke into
their Master's Cash; or some young Recreants of the Law, that have made
themselves Purses by a decent Robbery of their Father's, or some rich Uncles;
-- So they shall have Commissions, and handsome retreats to the Army. And the
Col. shall have his Recruits made, and I shall have my Snacks -- And so that
business is done.


I find you are very instrumental in military Promotions; -- Is that the way to
Preferment?


That's a safe way to the first step; but there's another, a sure Card to
Advancement for such as have an exquisite Knowledge in my honourable Vocation
of Pimping; as prostrating a handsome Relation, or so.


But, what a Pox, is this to my business? -- my little charming Purflew, and
those killing Graces, of her Manors, Lands and Tenements.


I must confess her well stuffed Purses are weighty Perfections, had she no
other.


'Sbud they are -- I would willingly shake hands with this crabbed Study of the
Law, with all the dull Ribaldry of Infeofment, Disseizins, Vowchings, and the
Divel and all.


A -- h, That black old Gentlemen you speak of, was the first of your Employ,
he sui'd out a Writ of Ejectment against poor Father Adam.


And I don't care if he claims his Right to the whole Tribe of Gown-men
Ecclesiastical and Civil. -- If I get my Mistress, he shall have nothing to say
to me, on that score, I promise him. -- Therefore, prithee, let's come to the
Point -- thou know I won't be backward to whet thy Invention. -- There
honest Eager, dost understand the Language of old Jacobus's?


Ay, Sir, now you say something to the purpose. -- Then to be plain and short
with you.


Come -- begin then.


I have already told you something of Alderman Whim's Humour. -- He has a
greater Influence over his Niece Purflew, than her other Uncle Sir Nicholas,
who is joint Trustee with him.


Good --


And though the young Lady be enjoined by Will not to Marry till Eighteen,
without the consent of both Uncles; yet I am confident the Alderman alone is
able to effect the business, -- she being already of that Age, or very near the
matter, though kept in Ignorance of it.


Very well.


You must know both the Uncles design to make their Markets -- Yet will not
trust each other: Therefore you must come down a good handsome Donative to the
Alderman, which will bring him to treat of further Terms.


A lusty round Bribe you mean. -- I believe you're much in the right on it, for
that's the chief Spring in all the grand Movements of both Church and State.


Oh fie! -- You must not call it barefaced Bribery; 'tis not good breeding to
term it so -- I that have no other way of Living should be loath to have
Gentlemen's noble Gratuities have that scandalous Title. -- But to proceed, You
know he's a magotty Projector; You must humour his extravagant Notions, and
what you deposit, you must pretend to entrust him withal for the Encouragement
of some Project.


Very pretty. -- I find downright Suborning is improved to a delicate nice
Science.


O God, Sir, a curious Study, and has its different Appellations by the several
Stations of Men. -- The Church-men call it an Earnest of Merit. -- The
Courtier a Hint of Remembrance. -- Ministers of State, and Officers in the
Courts of Justice term it Expedition. -- The Grandees of the Army a
Recommendation. -- The Parliament-men a Promoting of the Business. -- The Bawd
a Gratuity. -- The Whore a Pair of Gloves; and the Jockeys a Barnacle. -- All's
to the same purpose in Faith.


Why, look you Mr. Eager, I believe what you utter is downright Oracle;
therefore I having a parcel of old Granam Gold by me -- I am resolved to put it
in, and venture my Luck for the Double-Chance, Wealth and Beauty.


Do so; I have urged your business to the Alderman already, and found it work;
therefore about it.


I'll go to my Chamber, and take my Credentials with me, and to him. -- Eager,
wish me good Luck; -- Farewell.


Sir, I am your most Obsequious: So there's one Bubble dispatch'd. -- Let me
look over my Table-book, and see how I must order the Business of the Day. --
To meet Mr. Goosandelo to introduce him into Sir Nicholas's Company, and assist
him in his Amour with Mrs. Purflew; the same with Breviat's: But that won't
prejudice my Concern. -- To bully Squire Sapless out of a certain Sum of Money.
Good, that will be done with ease: A rich Prize, that Cheshire Spark, in Faith
-- I must make this Booby bleed stoutly. -- To Solicit for Alderman Whim, that
he may solace himself, as he calls it, with Madam Vesuvia; so. -- To procure an
honourable Interview betwixt the old Herald, Sir Nicholas Purflew, and the
bright Inhabitant of the Azure Apartment; (as his Letter styles her) very well.
The same Lady Vesuvia -- I must put the grand Menage upon these two old lustful
Satyrs. -- Well, I profess mine is a laborious Employ. -- All the
Qualifications for a Secretary of State, or a Principal Minister, are not
sufficient to accomplish a thorough-pac'd Pimp, and Cheat. By your leave, sweet
Mr. Eager; but, I think, I may make bold with my self now I am alone.


I vow, Landlady, you grow younger -- I never saw you look better in my life.


Ah, -- Lord bless you noble Col. it's the sight of your sweet Face has brought
the Blood into my Cheeks; I can't choose but smirk and simper to see you come
well back. --! hope you've brought your Limbs, and all your Members safe and
sound home, or else we shall have a filthy Outcry in the Parish, God knows.


I thank my Stars, Landlady, I am no ways disabled.


Troth I am glad on it. -- You're a happy Man, Col. and I dare say was lapped in
your Mother's Smock; God rest her Soul. -- There has been some how notice of
your coming, for I have had nothing but rapping at my Door, Coaches and Chairs
every Hour, and all the same Questions, squeaking through their Vizor-masks, Is
Col. Bellair come to Town?


Say you so, Landlady?


Ay Troth, -- I protest I pity you; -- I am sure I know what a Man is, and as
much of a Man as any Woman; and therefore know you'll have too much upon your
Hands.


I have good store of very able Assistants a coming over, Landlady.


I vow you Men of the Sword strike deep with the Ladies. -- How sneakingly do
the peaking Chits, the Summer Beaux look, when you Men of Mettle, armed at all
points, appear?


Faith the Soldiery is obliged to you. -- But, I assure you, I design to lead
a reserved course of Life, having very serious matter upon my Hands.


Marry, God send alls well with you say I; or that you be not near your End --
So, do you near? they are knocking; look to your self, for your Quarters are
attacked already.


Good Landlady, let 'em know I am indisposed after my Journey, and gone to rest.


I know they'll be very pressing: but I am resolved they shall not disturb you.


Jocund, Are my things come?


Yes Sir; and the Women will soon follow. -- As soon as I told them you were
returned, away they run to their Glasses, fell a setting their Heads, and
clapping on of Patches; then skipped over the Counters for haste. -- I'd advise
you, Sir, to stop some Cotton in your Ears, you'll have a hideous buzzing about
your Head in a moment.


I am resolved I'll see none of them. -- Jocund, Go get your self clean and
ready, then come and receive your Instructions; I must send you to my Mistress
to give notice of my return, and to know how stand Affairs in that Family.


Well, Sir* for tipping of Billet Deux, and Whispering of soft Messages, let me
alone. -- I find whoever serves an Officer long, may in time expect to be
principal Messenger to the Prince of Darkness.


I find that I begin to abominate the Thoughts of the obstreperous, rampant
Sluts of my former Acquaintance; -- and would marry, were it purely in my own
Defence, had I not the blessed Inducements of a blooming Beauty, that wants not
the poor assistance of Art; Of a lovely Innocence, without the least tarnish of
Folly; Of maturity of Sense, without a vain knowledge of it; -- And such a
plentiful Fortune, that may at all times furnish a hospitable Table, Means for
charitable Reliefs, supplies for Building, Plantations and Adornments, and all
necessary Expenses for Gentleman-like Diversions. -- Such is the Platform of my
future Happiness; -- And so adieu to the toils of War, and the fatigues of
Campaigning; Whilst, in the circle of my Purflew's Arms, I shall enjoy more
solid Pleasures, than the Conquest of Kingdoms can afford to martial Heroes,
and ambitious Princes.


Upon my Reputation, Sir Nicholas Purflew, he's every way a fine Gentleman; a
Man of nice Honour.


That I profoundly approve of.


In short he's -- Master of all the worthy Endowments I know you esteem. -- The
circular Rays of the Drawing-room center on him; by him the Beaux of the
Chocolate-house adjust their Garniture; -- And the Wits at Will's, Common-place
his Sayings; his Pedigree, Sir, you very well know.


I can peremptorily attest to be of a very ancient and honourable Family.


Without dispute, Sir.


Let me see, -- if my memory betrays not my overburdened Knowledge, he is of
old Gaulish Extraction. -- He bears in a Field Gules, three Geese Heads
Eras'd Argent by the name of Goosandelo.


Very like so.


A just reward that for their impertinont Cackling, and preventing that noble
Enterprise upon the Capitol. -- The Coat does plainly illustrate the heroic
Actions of his valiant Ancestors.


A mighty Exploit to ring off the Necks of three Geese.


Sir Nicholas Purflew, I humbly kiss your hand, and foot too, if you'll give me
leave, with all the Respect I am capable of paying so honourable a Personage as
your self.


Worthy Mr. Goosandelo, with expanded Arms I embrace your Friendship.


So --, here's like to be a pretty medley of young Foppery and old Formality.


I magnanimously applaud your noble Intentions of tracing the hidden Footsteps
of Antiquity, and searching into the petrifi'd Bowels of past Ages.


It's the searching into your pretty Niece, he'd be at in Faith.


With the Directions of so sure a Guide, as you Sir --, I question not of
making a good Progress in those Studies --. I must own without vanity, my
Genius is quick and perceptive; that you may find by the vivacity of my Eyes.
-- Don't you see a peculiar Sparkle about them? If you look narrowly, you'll
perceive some thing of the true black Water --. They are composed of Diamantick
Principles, and are able to make legible Characters in the most obdurate of
Hearts.


A pretty ingenious Remark of yours --. I suppose you are already acquainted
with the Rules of Heraldy.


Oh* Dear Sir! How can a Gentleman pretend to that Name, without knowing the
Affinity he bears to the Beasts, Birds, or what else adorns his Shield?


So, by his own Rule he may find a flock of Relations on every Common.


What you say is infallibly true, Sir, --. And then the Ancient Heroic Laws of
Chivalry affords matter of high Speculation.


No question; I should be very happy in fancying Devices, and composing of
smart Motro's for Knights Adventurers.


Then again, the Embellishments of Coat-Armour, the branching of Genealogies,
are the Grounds to build upon the worth of a Family. -- And for the
Illustration of History, the exquisite knowledge of Hieroglyphics, Obelisks,
Urns, Sculptures, Statues, and Medals, nervates the Undestanding. -- I'll show
you a Medal lately sent me from Rome, by my Son that's making the Grand-Tour,
more worth than all the Mines of Peru.


Upon my Soul, 'tis violently fine.


Pray, Sir, give me leave to see it; -- I can't for my Life discern any
Impression or Character upon it.


O'ds heart, O me Man! why that's the rarity of it: -- If those had been left,
every body had known it. I would not give a Button for an Inscription, that has
so much as every tenth Letter remaining; or a Figure or Statue that has any
thing of the Resemblance of what it was intended for.


I find there's a plag^y Mystery in Ignorance, and it's a wonderful wise thing
to know nothing of the matter.


Why there's the business; now -- I must take the liberty to tell you Mr.
Eager, that by this you have demonstrated your self of a Vulgar Capacity.


So he has, I protest, Sir, -- Poor Eager, I pity thee. -- You saw, Sir, how
quickly I discovered its Excellences.


And by so doing, you demonstrated the great reach of your understanding: --
I'll undertake by this Medal, to sound the depth of a Judgment as faithfully,
as holding up a young Eagle to the Sun, will discover the truth of his Breed.


Gentlemen, my business calls me away; I hope you'll pardon me. -- This dull
Stuff gives me the Spleen intolerably.


Mr. Eager, pray don't suffer an Oblivion, to obliterate what I enjoined you to
Commemorate in the the Afternoon upon the Declension of the Sun.


What a Pox does he mean?


I design, Sir, to order the payment of a parcel of Money where you please to
appoint, -- if you'll give your self the trouble to expend it on Curiosities.


I shall industriously apply my self on so noble a Design.


Now, Sir, I have a matter of another nature to divulge to you. -- 'Tis to
acquaint you with the violent Passion I have entertained for your pretty Niece.


Hum, -- indeed I have no present discernment of any Obstacle that may
ineffectuate your Desires. I shall offer you some preliminary Proposals, -- and
so leave it to the Decision of the young Lady her self. -- Your Blood and
Person render you acceptable to the fair Sex.


If I am left to the Lady, I need not say a word of the matter, tho you see I
have a happy Talent in Polite Oratory were there occasion.


But, good Sir, will you make love without speaking?


I'll undertake to thaw a Woman's heart, that's as cold as Ice, with my bare
Appearance, -- and insensibly riggle into her Affections with my pretty taking
Movements, as thus. -- So I come into a Room, and erect my self at a distance,
thus; -- observe my Eyes now. -- Then I jut a little on, twisting my self thus.
-- Now look how I set my Feet. -- Then I gracefully handle my Snuff-box thus;
-- pray mind my Hand. -- Now she Smiles, -- I spring forwards, -- open my Arms,
-- and she poor Soul drops into my Bosom like a shooting Star, and there
dissolves to Jelly.


On my word, a notable odd way of Courtship. -- Come, Sir, will you honour me
with your Company to Dinner. -- Alderman Whim and I keep a Joint House over our
Joint Trust: -- But not a syllable of it to him.


No, no, Mum's the word.


We are both at present as it were Rangers, and Men at large. -- My good Woman
is in the Straw, and his gone to a Funeral of a Relation in the Country.


So much the better, for old Women are generally the Plague of young Society.


Come, we'll go and take a Whet by the way, -- and agree of Articles.


Sir, I'll attend you.

Then I with Shape, Mien, Wit, and pleasing Air,
Will snap the Heart-strings of the charming Fair.

I Have been preparing my Niece for your Reception, Mr. Breviate. -- I'dad,
I'dad, the young Gipsy is prinking her self up. -- As soon as I whispered the
concern, the little Rogue did so twitter about the mouth, it made the Blood in
my old Veins dance again, tho I am her own Uncle. -- But I am heartily glad you
say you are inclined to Projection.


I think Mr. Alderman it's a Study that renders a man most capable of doing his
Country Service.


I'dad you are in the right on it. -- I'll show you here some rough-drawn Schemes
of Projects, which I hope to put in Execution.


You'll oblige me entirely.


This is, -- do you mind me? For making Automata's self-moving Engines, by
which whole Timber-trees shall come Whirling to the King's Yards without the
assistance of a single Horse, I'dad.


There will be an Improvement of Land-Carriage!


And by the same Principles, do you mark me? -- I may contrive a fiery Machine,
that shall invisibly roll under Water for some Leagues, -- then burst with that
tremendous Violence, that shall rend the French Fleet to Atoms.


Good Lord! -- What a Hurricane will there be?


This again, -- mark me well, is a most exquisite Project if it hits, and I get
a Patent for it, I shall be as Rich as Croesus, and the Nation the most
flourishing Kingdom in the Universe. -- It is, do you see, the furnishing Ships
with Remora's, to each Vessel a Cask of little Emissaries; -- that whenever a
Privateer comes sooping along to seize his Prey, -- I'dad clap him a Remora in
his Stern, -- and so good by to ye In faith.


Ah, ah, ah, I laugh to think what a devilish Sputtring will there be among
the French Seamen, when they find their Vessel fixed.


I believe I can't put this in practice; -- Do you see? -- without some
preternatural Incantations, some infernal Rhetoric, -- which I shall find out
amongst the Magickmongers; -- and what if the Devil be employed, so it be for
the public Good?


Oh, to choose Sir! -- A man of excellent Morals, this Alderman.


We all konw what Land-spirits the French have made use on in their Exploits.
-- And the Sovereignty of the Sea being ours, -- Why should not the Sea-Devils
be entertained in our Service?


It's but reasonable.


I think it would be of moment too, to encourage Missions to Lapland to be
instructed there in the way of Barrelling up Winds. -- I see the Ladies a
coming; -- I'll leave you to entertain them, whilst I go into my Study, and
hammer out my Projects to shape and perfection.


Now I -- that am never at a stand to brazen hundreds of Lies at the Bar, can
scarce put a face on it to utter a single Truth in the business of Love; -- but
I'll keep to general Topicks.


Here's your Lover, Cousin Purflew. -- I vow I like his looks, he's a good
lusty portly Fellow.


Indeed, Cousin Pliant, I think you are inclined to like any man's looks, let
him be what he will, so he be but a man.


Prepare your self -- for now he advances; no doubt big with an amorous Speech.


I shall never, Madam, sufficiently acknowledge the Alderman's double
Obligations, as well of his own ingenious Conversation, as in affording me the
most ravishing sight humane Eyes are able to bear the lustre of -- your most
transcendent Beauty, -- When were you at the Play, Ladies?


Truly we seldom come there, -- but I find you go, and have picked up a fulsome
way of Expression; -- the stile seems to be the young Chaplains when he makes
love to Abigal.


Faith, I design to go no more. -- The Rogues the Poets make greater Monsters
of us Gentlemen of the Long Robe, then ever they used to make of the Grandees
of the City.


You know, Sir, Folly and Knavery furnish matter for Satyr; -- and whilst any
of you make profession of the latter so publicly, and detect one another so
ridiculously, they must expect to be the sport of the Ingenious, as well as the
scorn of the most Serious part of Mankind.


You must give my Cousin Purflew the liberty of Raillery; -- 'tis her way, Sir.


Lord, Madam, what the Lady pleases; -- I shall neither undertake to palliate
the miscarriages of some, nor vindicate the Profession in general; -- fince my
study of it has been only for my Accomplishment and Diversion: -- But I shall
adventure to plead my Cause in Love, according to the liberty the Alderman has
pleased to allow in my Pretentions to your fair Ladyship.


My Uncle is very obliging. -- I suppose he has consulted his own Interest
before my Inclinations, -- and no doubt you have made trial of a method you
find most prevailing in the Affairs of your own practice.


'Sbud she's a Devil at guessing. -- I fear I shall be run aground.


Pray, Mr. Breviate, next time you come, bring me an old Limb of the Law; and
being two for two, you'd have the fairer play for your Money. I am for none
under the Coif. -- I could perfectly reconcile my self to all that an old
Sergeant expects in a young Wife; -- officiously cut his Corns, rub his Shins
every Night, and his Head every Morning, make him a Pot of Chocolate, set his
Band, give him a Buss, and so dispatch the old Fool to Westminster; -- But by
all means let him be a Circuitire; so much time every Year I could willingly
have at my own disposal.


I find I am fallen into Hucksters hands, but I am resolved to bear on. [
Aside] You are disposed to be merry, Lady; -- but mine is a serious
undertaking, -- therefore, Madam. --


Well, Spark. --


Now she looks me in the Face with such a roguish Leer, that were I to be
damned, I can't proceed.


Come, shall I speak for you -- you being naturally Lumpish, and Phlegmatic,
and wanting a knack to entitle you to be a Practitioner of the first Rate; you
would willingly save your self any further trouble, -- and be at Livery and
seizin of my Estate. -- Is not this to your purpose, -- Hey?


Fie Cousin, this was a little too severe.


Bless me! -- What shall I say now? Would I had my old Gold out of the
Alderman's Clutches, and cooped up in my Study, tumbling over my Volumes of
Reports.


What, Sir, are you silenced? Pull up and stickle in the business, the Cause is
not lost yet, Man. -- It's the nature of our Sex to rally them most we like
best.


Have at it once again. [ Aside.] -- Your Beauty alone had to the utmost
enslaved your Admirer -- You had no need to have used such irresistible Shafts
of Wit, to have perfected your Conquest.


Conquest, of whom, pray Sir? -- You speak as if you were a Person of Value, --
and that a Woman had need to exert all her Charms, to assure her self of so
rich a Prize, as I find you esteem your self.


Prithee, my Dear, don't discourage the Gentleman at this rate. -- I'll assure
you I don't think Mr. Breviate despicable. -- His Person robust* and very
promising, his Air grave, modest, and natural. -- And I have heard fortune has
not been the least niggardly in the distribution of her worldly Bounties; since
he is left stated in a handsome paternal Inheritance.


In my Conscience, the Girl is gulling me of my Lover under the very Nose of
me. -- Mr. Breviate look to your self, -- I find my Couz. Pliant has a Hawk's
Eye upon you.


I am obliged to the Lady, and can aver what she has been pleased to intimate,
that I am not incapacitated for my pretentions to any Gentlewoman. -- Nor shall
I ever be ashamed of the sincere Zeal I shall religiously manifest, in the
paying of my Devotion to so Divine a Being as your self.


Why, look you now, -- there's Temple Love for you; -- an Amorous Bishop could
have said no more to a Woman. -- What would you have?


If you expect your Sincerity to stand you in stead, you must apply your self
to some Woman that never was within the smoke of London, -- especially not to
one bred at Hackney.


'Tis you alone, I must, and will adore.


What love Madrigal are you obliged to for that whining Expression? -- Can't
you remember the next Line, and so Court me with Couplets? -- But to deal
plainly with you; which by the bye, you ought not to expect in a Woman, I hope
I shall have no obligation to do otherwise than dutifully submit my self to my
Uncle Alderman's Conduct, -- whose Kindness or Prudence I am unwilling to call
in question.


D' ye see, Sir, what a pretty conscious Blush attended that Answer? And how
her Fan caught the soft consenting Sigh.


Oh blessed Accent! -- Oh harmonious Words! -- The Raptures that seize my Soul,
can be expressed no otherwise than by being Dumb.


A thought a thought, Mr. Breviate. Mr. Breviate, a thought, I say, a rich
thought. [ Enters.] Ods me, Man, what fallen a Sleep in your Addresses? I
certainly have, Sir, the most pregnant Brain of any Man living. -- It has just
now teem'd such a thought; come along, I'll show it you. -- I'dad, I'dad, I
have clapped it under the Hatches of Black and White, that it shall not escape me.


I fear the honest Alderman will teem so many thoughts as he calls it, that
he'll leave himself a very empty Skull at length.


Nay, 'tis certain he's a little beside himself already, he would ne'er a
picked up for me such a Fool of a Fellow, as this Lawyer else: -- A solemn Fop.


The fitter for a Property. -- But prithee Couz, if thou dost not like him, why
did you give him that encouragement at last?


How, dear Child! -- You that are a professed Votary in Amour and Gallantry; -- a
studious Novice of Plays and Romances; and not guess at my Intentions? -- Is it
not plain, how both my Uncles would sacrifice me and my Fortune to their
separate Interests?


That I believe.


Have not I reason therefore to take my own Measures, and free my self from the
Danger of their mercenary Proceedings? -- I'll say no more.


Oh, pure Couz. I'faith. -- Will you that profess your self a severe Moralist,
do any thing that may infringe your Duty to your present Relations? -- Or offer
to contemn the wise Precautions of the Deceased? --


Cousin, -- I am not unacquainted with either my Age, or my Power; tho they
have been so sedulous to hood wink my Preceptions. -- Nor shall I attempt any
thing but what may concur with Morality, and be justifi'd by Prudence.


I swear thou art a rare Girl: -- but hark ye, this Affair with Mr. Breviate may
be very well managed for my Advantage. -- You may easily palm him upon me. --
And to tell you the truth, Couz. methinks it's high time I should have a
Husband; should I once reach that fulsome Title of a Stale Maid, I should be
the miserablest Creature living.


Alas, poor Soul. -- Well, Cousin, I'll undertake to serve thee effectually, I
am something inclined to projection, as well as my Uncle. -- Sprightly our
Housekeeper is stanch and may; -- but here she comes very hot with some news or
other.


Ah Madam. 'Od be thanked I'Goddle, ah, ah, ah. -- Who do you think? Oh, dear
heart, I can't speak -- Oh! Iack-a-day, and marry, Odd send my heart hold out.
Oh! -- Ah, ah, ah -- Oh! I am so glad.


What's? -- What's the matter? Prithee Sprightly compose thy self, and let's
hear.


Why then that fine, -- handsome, -- well-favour'd Gentleman, your Colonel, is
come safe to Town; -- so now it's out, and I am pretty well at ease. -- He has
sent his Boy, Jocund, hither who has brought you a Box of fine Outlandish
things. -- I told our Folks he came from an Acquaintance of yours at Hackney.


Is this all?


Marry, and I believe you think it a fine All too. -- But I have more news to
tell you, Sir Nicholas is come home, and has brought another Suitor, -- the
gimm^st Moppet that e're has been here yet; -- but as to a Man, no more like
your Colonel, that a Baby upon a Butter-print is like the Man in the Moon. --
He calls him Mr. Goose -- Goose -- something, I don't know what. -- Well, I'll
go keep Jocund company till you come.


Oh, Cousin, it's Mr. Goosandelo, he was the topping Spark at the Wells this
Year.


Yes, yes, Mr. Goosandelo is a topping Spark where-ever he comes.


Do you know him?


I know enough of him. -- The last time I was at the Play with my Aunt, -- I
saw him making antic Grimaces, and playing a thousand Monkey-tricks in
Fop-box.


You must not expect a Mr. Breviate of him, on my word.


I must expect what's worse; -- shallow Conceits, -- windy Noise, -- and
insufferable Self-applause. -- I find the Air sweetens, the Beaux is making his
Approaches.


Mr. Goosandelo, -- my Niece, -- my Cousin Pliant.


Here I am obliged to break the Rules of modern breeding to please the old
Antiquary. [ Aside. -- [to Mrs. Pliant.] I have not seen you of late, Madam; --
I might say you live very obscurely in this Town, had not your Eyes the power
of dispelling Obscurity it self.


O dear, Mr. Goosandelo, you still keep your obliging way of Gallantry. -- I
think the last time I saw you, I had the honour to be your Partner at a Dance
at Astrop.


Let me perish, Madam, if ever I Dance when I drink the Waters again; -- it
settled such Humours in my Legs, that I was obliged to Cup, and suck 'em down
with Leeches a month or two to give them their true Air and Shape again. -- I
have a mind to forswear Dancing.


'Twill be impossible, Sir, to withstand the Importunities of the Ladies. --
Lord! 'twill be Death to 'em to be denied.


Let 'em dye. -- I'll not dance, to save the Life of a Duchess. -- To see a
well-shap'd Gentleman move upon huge Porterly Pillars, and be damned all the
days of his life to a sad-colour'd Stocking. -- Oh abominable! -- D' you think
I'll hazard that?


Mr. Goosandelo, I'll leave my Niece your Charge for the space of some ensuing
moments, whilst I go pay a Visit to my Wife, the Lady Couchant above stairs.


O Heavens! how came we, Couz, without our knotting? -- What will this
Gentleman think, to see us Idle?


On my soul Ladies, I am violently concerned that you are without your
Housewifery; I shall want a great part of my Discourse. -- 'Tis generally the
first Topic we fall upon, when we make our Addresses to Persons of Quality.


I should think, Sir, 'twere a dry, crabbed subject.


Ah, ah, ah; because it's so full of knots; but nothing is uneasy to a Man of
Parts. As I could say thus, -- You have knotted so long upon the Thread of my
Affections, that your Ladyship has now worked up a Piece sufficient to fringe
round a Squab of Repose, for my long languishing Amour. -- And a thousand such
pretty things. But since I am left here by Sir Nicholas to make Love, How do
you think I'll begin? In what Shape? -- Like what?


Why you need not take the pains the gods of Yore used to do. -- You see you
have easy access to me in your own shape, and that's more monstrous than any
you can think on.


Nay, now I swear you talk by contraries. -- Here's a Lady will tell you what
killing work my Shape has made in the world.


I know, Sir, you were ever reputed a very pretty Gentleman.


Phoo -- every body knows that; and my Life on it this Lady shall know it before
I have done. -- I am positive I shall not want shafts, for I design to make Love
to you in the nature of a Porcupine. -- I'll rustle my Habiliments, dart forth
a Poignant Quill, and strike you dead, I'gad. -- Don't you find your self
wounded? -- Hah, Madam.


I must confess your Complicated Perfumes, and your Cashified Breath have a
little discomposed me. -- Therefore pray, Sir, make Love at a farther distance.


Now by the Universal Light, I have no occasion for them, were they not
customary to all those that are the exact Models of Wit and Breeding. -- And
now I talk of Wit, do you see this Diamond Ring? -- This Diamond Ring?


What are you going to show Hocus Pocus Tricks? Have you got any of the German
Artist's Powder la Pimp a la Pimp? -- You should first put on a little Blue
Jacket, tie a Chain about your middle, and skip up and down the Balcony to
gather Spectators e're you begin. About Pug.


I find you begin to love me, by that pretty endearing word. -- But as I was
saying, this Ring guided by this hand; -- which is a hand I am not at all
ashamed on.


That I vow you need not.


Has writ in Ladies Windows such Mysterious Things, that the severest Critics
allow 'em to be Wit it self epitomized. -- The Shashes at Kensington are full
of the Proofs of my Genius; which I daily see entered into the Tablets of
Travellers: -- If you'll show me your Closet, I'll write something in your
Window there.


Gently, Spark. -- Sure we have not proceeded yet so far, as to admit you into
my Closet.


No? -- I find you are unacquainted with the Assurance that is inseparable with
Men of Wit. -- We often rush into the Closets of Ladies that we never saw
before. I was sent for the other day by a Lady of no small Rank, to teach her a
Song in her Closet. -- It's one of my own composing; I'll sing it you, Ladies.


O! by all means, -- I beseech you, Sir.


Pray observe the Sweetness of its Air, and the Delicacy of its Turn and
Cadence.


RIch Mines of Hot Love are rooted here:
Flashes of Flames in my Eyes appear,
When swift as the Sun,
To the Arms of Thetis
I run, I run, I run,
To seize of my Bliss,
In the Parts where 'tis,
Oh! you know, you know, you know where.
She laid by 'r knotting with wondrous haste,
And took me about my well-shap'd Waste:
I envied not Jove
His Celestial Throne,
Nor all the gods above:
Whilst Kisses came on,
And something was done,
Which I know, I know, I know best.
Was there ever any thing so ridiculous? --


I protest, Sir, it's very pretty and peculiar.


Ay, so it is, Madam: What an Engaging Freedom is there in that, Oh you know,
you, c. Alas! this is but the loose droppings of my Pen. -- Upon my soul, my
Songs are reputed the Standard of Lyrick Poesy. -- Most of those Odes that are
entit'led, Done by a Person of Quality, are mine. -- I design to write a Play
by the same hand.


If you copy your self, you won't fail of one good Character.


That's true, Madam. -- The Poets generally do that. -- I'll be the Fine
Gentleman of Wit and good Education; -- You the Fine Young Lady, of Beauty,
Fortune, and good Sense: We'll trick the old Guardians, marry in disguise, and
so have a Dance. -- It's a good beaten road; a man that writes, can scarce be
out of his way. -- What say you, Madam? Is this to be the conclusion of our
Amours?


You would not have me surrender upon the first Attack? -- That will lessen the
Hononr of your Conquest.


Have a care; deferring a Parley may be of dangerous consequence. -- I am of a
fiery Temper. -- If you hold out to be taken with Sword in hand, -- I don't
know what may become of you.


To prevent your Fury, it's but reasonable that Sir Nicholas Purflew, whose
Name I bear, should have the power of altering mine. What can be gathered from
this, I leave to you. I see him coming to you. -- Come, Couz. let's go walk a
little before Dinner.


This I think is Encouragement enough: -- But how the Devil could it be
expected otherwise? -- What Woman can withstand my perfect agreeableness?


Won't that I showed you last be of excellent use, and very feisible? I'dad,
i'dad, there was never any thing like it in the known parts of the world.


No, nor in the unknown neither, I dare say. -- No doubt, Sir, you'll have your
Effigies erected in Brass, to transmit to future Ages the universal Service you
have done. -- For what a Pox, has this gaudy winged Insect Goosandelo been
fluttering about my Mistress? 'Sbud, I'll watch his waters for him.


My Brother, Sir, for so our near Affinity makes us term our selves, does merit
very much from the Nation. -- And if it does him that piece of Justice, I'll
take care to form the Model, and compose the Inscription.


Then no doubt 'twill be according to the true Roman Grandeur.


My Brother Knight here too, deserves very well to be minded of the world,
i'dad, or else it will be a very ungrateful blockhead of a world, to forget all
its old Acquaintance, that Sir Nicholas daily converses withal.


Gentlemen, I hope you'll honour us with your Company in the Evening. We are
willing to make each other happy with our respective Acquaintance. -- To day is
our Niece's Birth-day, the poor Girl is now just Sixteen.


It's very true, so she is, Brother.


The night we'll celebrate with Mirth. -- It shall be my care to entertain you
with an Arcadian Pastoral.


Sir, you're very obliging.


Come, Mr. Goosandelo, I'll go show you my Musaeum; you shall see finer
Curiosities than ever you saw at Gresham College. -- The University of
Cambridge shall with my Collections eternalize the Name of Sir Nicholas
Purflew, and by this means she shall have a Purflewean to outdo their Ashmolean
at Oxford.


Well, Mr. Breviate, how succeeded you? What said my Niece? -- Was she coming?
-- Did you find her glance upon you? -- Did she take an occasion to walk round
you, for a view of those Shoulders? I'dad, that's a hint the young Gypsies
never fail of, as soon as they know the difference of the Sex.


She first received me with a very gay and tart Humour. -- She came slap dash
upon me at every word, with terms full of disdain.


Ah, Mr. Breviate, those are true signs of a yielding Woman. -- I'dad she's a
parless Baggage.


Then, Sir, she assumed a pretty becoming Gravity: And with an unaffected Air
of Modesty made me sensible that she would submit to your Prudence.


Poor little Rogue, she has always been very dutiful to me. -- We must have an
eye upon that Spark my Brother brought: -- Does he think he can overreach a
Projector?


Not in all likelihood:


I'll take care to confirm my Niece. -- Sprighty, our Housekeeper, is trusty:
To night when Sir Nicholas is busy about his Pastoral, as he calls it, she
shall slip you both into a private Room; where a Tacker-together of Human Flesh
shall be ready. -- Then you shall come and discover it; and so end the Masque
with a Jest. -- Get the Writings ready at Mr. Settlebank's Chamber in the
Temple, and I'll come and see 'em sealed this Afternoon. -- Come, Sir, I'll
wait on you in to Dinner.

He ne'er can fail of Project or Design,
Who has a Brain so Rich in Thought a mine.

DAm ye for an over-grown Bumpkin. -- I'll slice you; -- I'll carbonade you, ye
Dog, ye Tub of Cheese-curds and Hogs-wash, I'll kick your Guts out. -- Oounz,
why don't you draw, you eternal Lubbard; I'll pink you, I'll pink you as full
of holes as a Colander; I'll rip your heart out, you Joulterhead.


Nea, nea, but hold ye Master Eager. -- Wawns, yo thinken I'm no body. -- Why
what a Pox, an yo'll let's lay Swerds by, 'Sflesh, I'll venture a bloody Nose
with you, or a brawken Head, with best pair Crab-tree Cudgels yo can get. --
Marry yo shall not find Chicken to deal withal, by Mass.


Rot ye, you Hounds-face; I am a Gentleman, and know no other way to go to work
with you, but with the point of my Sword; therefore if you won't pay me the
Money, I'll slit your Weazen this moment, you Moon-calf.


'Sflesh, it will be a nuncky thing now to be murdered, and to hey our Lasses
in it Country sing Ballads on one.


Hark ye, Squire Sapless, -- Did not you promise me Twenty pounds upon the Word
of a Gentleman, before sufficient Witness?


Troth I can't deny that.


And have not I laid by all business, to saunter along with you? -- Showed you the
Lions at the Tower, New Bedlam, and the Tombs at Westminster?


Nea, I'm hugeny beholding to yo, that's truth on it.


And what's more, I took you to a Tavern, made you drunk on my own cost, and
then carried you to a Bawdy-house, and have endeavoured the accomplishing you
as is befitting a Gentleman of your Quality; and now to disappoint me.


Come pree-a Master Eager been pacified, and I'n be better on my word, on that
be all.


Very well, Sir, I am your hearty Servant. -- Faith, Noble Squire, we were
roaring merry last night. Were not they pretty good-natur'd Pugs I took you to?
-- I believe you parted with a troublesome companion. -- Did not you slip your
Maidenhead, Squire, ha?


Nea, nea, Master Eager, I'm not the Mon yo taken me for neither. -- I know a
Cat from a Cowl staff, and What-d'-ye-call'n from a Cart-wheel. Marry we'n a
pratty Farrantly Lass, Madge to Dairy-Maid at whom, when I goo a fetch Mess a
Cream, or now and ten see her suckle younck Breendle in the Caw-Crib, yo little
thinken what we don.


Ay, say you so, Squire? -- I find you 're a very forward hopeful Young
Gentleman; and by that time I have done with you, you shall not be ashamed to show
your self at the Assizes, and make as good a Figure there as the Sheriff.


Nea, an that be all, I sh't be Shreeve my sen at upshot. -- I can drink as
much Eeal awready as e're a Justice of Peace in awe Cheshire; and that's a prawd
word naw. -- I made 'em awe knock under-boord last Monthly-meeting, be mass.


Gad-a-mercy Squire, by this worthy topping Qualification, you're fit to be
elected Knight of the Shire, the Tun-Representative of all the Hog tubs in the
Country; no doubt you'll be a true Patriot, and promote the great Manufacture
of Sandbich.


Naw I think on it, I mon goa to the Carrier, I hey a Firkin of Stingo a coming;
and I mon send some things dawn to Lady Mother. -- And I'ne tell you what,
Master Eager, if our John to Bailey be come to Tawn, I'ne pay you your Money
this Afternoon; and more than that, In it gee yo a Hundred paund besides, if I
shan marry that handsome Gentlewoman yo shoden me in to Painted Gallery.


Oh ho, Squire Sapless. -- I'faith I find you're no Fool at Faces. -- Sign
then and seal to what you have said, and we'll drink a Bottle and be Friends.
-- In the Afternoon I'll take you to wait upon the Lady you saw in the Blew
Balcony. -- She's my Relation; Madam Vesuvi^. -- Upon my word she has refused
the Offers of several Young Lords; and I have heard her say, she took great
delight in darying; and that she would marry some honest Country Gentleman.


Nea, nea, and she been for that, wee'ne as fine Milch Kine as any in awe
Cheshire. Be mass, we maaken two hundred a Cheese e'ary week that comes over
our heads, besides Butter for to house; and Milk for to Caws and Lasses. -- But
naw I think on it, Lady Mother charged two things on her Blessing, Ne'er to set
Have not and Seal to Paper, nor Marry without her Caunsil; -- 'Sflesh, I'ne gooing
to do booth naw: But sure I can wawk without Deading Strings; I'ne Mon enough
to goo by my sen I trow.


How's this? -- No scruples, Squire, no qualms of Conscience; the least of that
will raise my Passion again: But if you do as you have resolved, -- I'll do any
thing for you, -- fight whole Armies, encounter Giants, and bid defiance to
Jove and all his Thunder to serve you.


Oh Lawd! what a wawndy fighting man is this Master Eager! Well, well, I'll go
do a what yo'n hey me. -- Nea, I'd wawk a score a miles barefooted and
barelegg'd to do you good, that I wood.


Well said, my noble Mirror of Squireship. -- But come, let's to the Tavern
then.


How sweetly will you furnish your Closet with those little Pictures the
Colonel has brought you from Flanders?


They are, Madam, as curious a parcel of Nuns-work, as I believe was ever
picked up in those Countries. -- My Master left no place unsearched, for what
he thought might be most pleasing to your Ladyship.


Poor Gentleman, he has been at a great deal of pains.


Ay, and trouble too: I would not have led the life my Master has done this
Campaign, to have had at my beck all the Beauties of Christendom.


Why Jocund, how was it?


To have lain in a morning tossing and sighing for an hour or two; then fling
himself out of bed carelessly, clap on his Clothes, and away out of his Tent to
the next Wood that could afford him most Privacy; -- There loll himself down at
the foot of some shady Tree; -- where must I sing the Song of distressed
Amintor; whilst he with his Arms a-cross seemed to be as senseless as the Tree
it self; or like an ancient Stump, from whose Root the present Plant had
sprouted.


Oh Couz, how dear and passionate was that?


The Boy is very perfect in his Lesson truly.


Every syllable truth, as I hope to be saved, Madam. At night again, when he
had left his Company, which always seemed uneasy to him, away to his old
posture, where the Locket of your La'ships Hair, which he always wore next his
heart, must be kissed a thousand times. -- And which was strange in a man that
the world knows as brave as the Sword he wears, not without a frequent Current
of Tears. -- I almost weep to tell the Story.


Poor Boy! how pathetically does the young Rogue express himself! -- Speak
truly, Couz. -- Dost not thee believe thy self a happy Creature? -- To have so
fine a Person as Bellair your Admirer. -- No doubt you may promise your self in
him all the delicious Blessings that man can afford in the Arms of a young
Lady. -- Love and Reverence compose the Air of his Face. -- His Person
Graceful, his Humour Generous, and his Fidelity as unquestionable as his
Courage. -- What a true Drudge at an Amour has he been since he first danced
with you at Hackney. -- How comically he looked when he came to sell us
Cheesecakes? and how prettily he contrived the Locket in that which you bought?


I think his Character will receive but little advantage by your good word;
thou art so sweet natured a thing that thou speak ill of no man. -- It's the
Sex it self thou art a lover on. -- And how readily you smother all his wild
courses, and those excessive Rangings which he has been addicted to.


Your men of mettle must be allow'd some small Extravagances, which are
generally abated by the accomplishment of a faithful Passion. -- And I doubt
not but his for you will have that reclaiming effect.


I am very unwilling to put my self and Fortune into the hands of a Libertine,
and purchase Experiments at so hazardous a rate.


But, Madam, what do you think I am come to tell you? -- You must know, an't
like you, that both my old Masters your Uncles are resolved to marry you this
very night. -- The Alderman says you shall have the Lawyer; and Sir Nicholas is
for that Thing that tosses his Head like a Fore-horse, struts like a Turkey
cock, and smells like a Civet Cat. -- I am, forsooth to be the go between for
both, and huddle you together in private. -- Now, an't please you, I humbly
conceive that you have a months mind to another-guess man than either of them,
i'troth. -- Therefore let me have your counsel what to do.


I find they are very sudden in their Resolves, lest I discover my own Power.
-- Honest old Sprightly, thou shalt have thy Lesson before night. Come Cousin,
let's go and consult what measures to take. -- Jocund, you shall have an Answer
presently.


Come Jocund, you shall go along with me into my Chamber, and tell me stories
of Flanders.


What you please, Mistress.


There's a Bed in the room, Jocund; -- and if we chance to sit upon the side
on it, be sure you don't grow waggish; -- be sure you don't, you smock faced
Young Rogue you.


On my conscience thy withered looks won't provoke me.


Methinks Jocund, you have a sort of a languishing lascivious Cast with your
Eyes; -- but be sure you mind what I told you.


What a Pox does the old Carrion mean?


Upon these terms I'll show you the way in: You are too young to do any harm,
and I am too old to receive any; therefore we may cuddle together safely: And
so come along Sweet-heart.


Gentlemen, your Entertainment has been to the height of perfection: I rise
with my Understanding as much improved, as my Appetite is satisfied.


'Lack Sir, I fear there is but small occasion for this Compliment. -- Indeed
at the good old Festivals of the Greeks and Romans, they always took care to
regale the Mind as well as the Body.


Ay Sir, it's very true; they seasoned their Discourse as well as their Sauce.
-- Peppered it up high when they talked of War; and when it flattened with the
dull relish of Religion and Politics, the Poet at the lower end of the Board
took care to squeeze in a smutty Jest, to leave a Flavour upon the Palate; --
as now-a-days the Smug Chaplain does at my Lady's Table.


Ha, ha, ha.


Gentlemen, we expect to see you to night. -- I am engaged this Afternoon; My
fame has reached to Pekin, and the Illustrious Emperor there has sent over a
great Chinese Projector, to consult with me for the finding out a shorter way
of Correspondence betwixt them, and we the Western Inhabitants of the World.


That, Sir, has been a matter long wished for in vain.


And I have don't already. I went to my Study, do you mark me? -- and took a
large Bumper of Malaga; which is a notable help to Projection; gave my Forehead
three lusty Rubs; -- whip stitch, out (...), and here it is I dad.


Good Sir, let's know it.


Why do you see, -- it's only making the Rivers navigable, and cutting a few
Cannals through some parts of Crim Tartary, and there it is, -- and a fig for a
North-East Passage. -- What thundering Bribing shall we have amongst our honest
Senators for the establishing a new China Company?


Ha, ha, ha.


I am also engaged to take a view of some Egyptian and Asiatic Rarities, that
a great Traveller has collected on purpose for me. -- Amongst which he say,
That there is an odoriferous Arabian Balm, that he will undertake, if he
unstops the Bottle on the top of the Monument, and the Wind sits right, it
shall diffuse its scent so far, that any Person at the same time upon Salisbury
Steeple shall be very sensible of the Persume.


For Heavens sake, good Sir Nicholas, engage me some of it; -- I would give the
Universe for such a Perfume, that I might by its Effluviums at a distance give
the Ladies notice of my approaching, and they dispose themselves into a regular
Order for my Reception.


Were thou received as a Coxcomb should be, you would be obliged to keep always
at home.


Mr. Breviate, you go my way, I'll take you in my Coach.


I'll wait on you, Sir.


The young ones are gone a gadding this Afternoon; -- they make use of their
time now they are freed of the old Ladies.


How! my Mistress gone, and I not pay my Devoirs to her Coach? -- Ye eternal
Lights, Sun, Moon, and Stars, how come I so stupefied! -- But I over-heard them
say something of the Walks. -- I'll find them out anon.


By your favour, Sir, you need not give your Intellectuals this disturbance, --
for I have ordered matters with that solid Conduct, that she shall not fail of
being your Bride this Evening. -- Come, Sir, you must go Seal the Writings we
gave order for.


Ay, ay, by all means; -- then I'll to my Chamber new wash and scent my Body,
-- and so make a Bridegroom, able to charm the fairest Goddess that e're
inhabited the Mansions of the Sky.


What art thou Love? -- Thou hast so subtly diffused thy self throughout my
o're-spreading Veins; -- each Particle of me is sensible of smarting Wounds
received by thy mysterious Shafts; -- thou restless Disquieter of my labouring
Soul. -- But why should I foment my Flames with ungrounded Doubts? -- And fuel
my burnings with boding Apprehensions? -- I have no reason to dread the dismal
Consequences of an unmutual Amour. -- The dear Object of my Wishes has given me
Testimonies, that she's not unsensible of my Passion; -- yet still, O mighty
Love thou 'rt impetuous, -- urging my desires to Fruition. -- O blessed Fruition!
what Transports! what amorous Respiration! what Thought can reach the Ecstasies
that accompany the possessing such immortal Charms! A hey Rapier; come and sing
me the Song you learned last.


FVll of the God I feel my raging Soul,
Around their Spheres, my glowing Eye-balls roll.
Sparkling forth Raptures from my active Breast,
In vain I beg the sullen God of Sleep.
In vain I call him from his gloomy Deep,
To fetter up my wandering Thoughts to rest.
See, see, bright scorching Flames about me rise,
Bright as the Beams of my Clorinda's Eyes,
And I the Martyr in those Flames rejoice.
Sound all your Flutes, ye softest powers of Love;
Warble your Triumphs from your Seats above;
Then chant my Requium with a dying Voice.
What Melancholy in your Chamber, Colonel? -- What's the meaning of this?


Disposed a little to Contemplation.


Have not you been ranging yet amongst your Bona Roba's, and discharging your self
upon our Covent-Garden Proprietors of Lace, Linen, and Silks?


No.


Why, you are obliged to propagate an Issue of young Hero's of the Blade. -- 'T
would be of manifest prejudice to the Nation, to have the Striplings of the
next Age be the lumpish lawfully begotten Off-spring of Sedantry Cits.


You're for propagating thy own dear Vocation, tho it were only for the sake
of Pimping.


I should be glad to do you any Service in that Province of mine.


Faith, Eager, I am not grown so far out of Acquaintance to want Assistance,
nor have so little knowledge of the World to trust thee.


'Ownz, do you think I have so small a respect for my Garcass, as to practice
my little Tricks upon you? -- You have something Colonel sits heavy upon your
Thoughts. -- Let's go chat over a Dish of Tea with Vesuvia, she's a merry Jade,
and will give you some Account of the Intrigues of the Town; -- but to prevent
us, here she comes to give you a Visit.


Your Servant, Warrior; -- what makes you thus Baricado'd? I have been obliged
to force my Entrance. -- Pray for whom amongst your Flanderkins must we make
our Lamentations: -- But we are so used now to the loss of our dear Creatures,
that our Condolence is very short. -- Poor Rogue, is he gone? -- that's all
I'faith.


We are pretty even with you in good nature. -- When we hear of the decease of
any of you Women of the Town, -- we may be say, she was a good humoured thing,
but 'twas pity she should have lived to have made a Bawd.


Very civil this.


Why did not you make your Campaign this Year, Madam? You'd certainly have had
the first Post among our Amazons. -- Dutch Hogans. German Counts, and Spanish
Cavaliers, would have been your daily Victims. -- Perhaps you might have become
the Mother of a Vesuvian Prince.


I had fitted up my Equipage, but I was kindly prevented by a keeping Lord of
our own, as good a Booty I believe, as any of your Foreign Dons.


I know who you mean. -- Is he well-furnisht, Child?


He is furiously furnished with an indigence of Ability. -- You know that
entitles us to press for good Payment; -- but I can dispense with that small
Obstacle of Impotency in my Keeper, now Colonel Bellair is come to Town?


I am obliged to you for the Drudgery you design me; -- but thank my Stars, I
am otherwise provided.


Good lack, Drudgery! you might have found out a better way of expressing your
self, methinks. -- What has your lusty Excellencies reached the Ears of some
musty Quality, who has made choice of you to prop up her rotten and tottering
Reputation.


The truth on it is Child, I am going to mislead my self into a right way. --
How dost think I shall become Wedlock?


As awkwardly, I believe, as I do Devotion; -- but if that's all, it wont spoil
your ranging long. -- We don't find that Marriage prevents Lewdness in the
least. -- A separate Bed in a Month's time, and a separate Maintenance at the
Years end, are no new things amongst us.


If that be the business, Vesuvia shall not be behind hand with you. -- I have got
a thumping Squire for you, I'faith Child; -- Two thousand a Year is the least
penny of his Estate.


Prithee, Eager, be serious.


On my Soul I am in earnest, -- he has seen you already, -- and swears Flesh
Blood, and Bones, he'll have you. -- I'll bring him to you anon; faith I shall
deserve a substantial Pension.


You know my Temper is far from being ungrateful.


I have a brace of old Leachers you must help me to manage first. -- It shall
be your farewell in that way.


With all my heart. -- 'Sdeath, I can but think how I shall rustle in the World
when I come to elbow Quality. -- I'll look big on my Visiting-nights; loll back
in my Coach at Hide-Park, and Box it at the Play with the best of 'em.


I shall be well-pleas'd to see it, faith, Vesuvia; -- On my Conscience thou'lt
become Grandeur well.


Bellair, I shall have you skrewing your self into Cringes at a distance: --
And when I think fit to admit you nearer my Presence, you'll be thrusting into
my Gloves. your impertinent Billet-doux, but I shall be otherwise provided, and
have no need of your Drudgery.


What won't you forgive me one single blunt Expression?


You shall get your Booby knighted for the sound sake of my Lady.


I am confident, I shall not fail in any Application for that piece of Service. --
I have a large stock of Promises for Court Favours, that I accepted when ready
Cash has been wanting. -- And I know a certain Gentleman that will usher my
Spouse to receive his new Honour, then take him to the King's Cellar, and make
him Drunk whilst I am slipped into a private Room to have a Lord dub me a Lady.


Prithee, Vesuvia, let's hear who and who's together. -- You used to be full of
News. -- How go the Affairs of the Town?


Oh most abominably Scandalous! Every body strives to be first at Ingratitude
and Treachery. -- And the hearts of the Women are as false as their Beauties.


That was always so.


But, what's new is, -- our Ladies now first trust each other, and then through
an accountable Malice make discoveries. -- You Gallants may spare your selves
the vanity of boasting.


It's very true.


Nay, some, as if they envi'd themselves the Bliss, are the first Publishers of
their own Infamy; -- so that our whole Sex seems to have as little regard to
common Prudence, as they have pretentions to Morality.


Ah, ah, ah, very good.


And for the Men, ye Gods defend us. -- Every individial Person is a true
Figure of old Janus. -- Pretentions and meanings are diametrically opposite, a
fawning Grin of a great Man, is a certain Sign he'll ruin you.


Notable Satyr, this.


For our Principles, we change them as oft as Chameleons do their Colours. --
And private Interest in Persons of Trust never fails to over-ballance the
public Concern. -- And the discovering of their fing'ring, has not been the
effect of Honesty but Spite.


The truth on it is, our late Briberies have made a great noise in the World!


The World is peopled now with Monsters, -- Church Atheists, State-Hypocrites,
and Conscientious Cut-throats. -- What's more common than that ungenerous Trade
of Cheating by the name of Friendship? -- In short, all Vices flourish, whilst
poor Virtue stalks about ragged and contemned.


A pleasant Scene this, to hear a professed Sttumpet talk of Morality, and a
known Cheat of Virtue and Honesty.


Very blunt again, methinks, Coll.


How e're unhappy the Age is in its Miscarriages, it's rarely blessed by a couple
of such Reformers.


We that are most instrumental in the Vices of the World, are the best able to
give an account of them.


I am sure we are less prejudical to the World, that make Lewdness and cheating
our Profession, than those that practice both, under the Disguises of Honour
and Religion; and pretend to sanctify their Crimes by their Places and Habits.


Hark you, good People, I must deal plainly with you, and desire you to walk
off, -- having particular Business that require me to be private.


By all means, Sir. Come Madam Vesuvia, let you and I go perfect the Work I
have prepared.


And must I part from your Chamber at this rate, Coll. -- I vow this is a
strange Reformation. -- Well, for the future I'll have nothing to say to you;
from a noble generous Ranger, I see you are grown a sneaking doting Lover, and
therefore ought to be abandoned by every free-born Breast, and left to the
frozen Embraces of a cold virtuous Wise, where may you starve unpitied by all
Women that have the least grace of Gallantry. With this hearty Curse I leave
you.


Come, Jocund, you have been an Age away. -- Well: -- How? -- What? -- Is all?
-- Bless me, crowds of Questions press so upon my Lips, that they hinder each
others passage.


Well, Sir, I'll save you the trouble of asking, and tell you all that you can
wish to know.


Quick then, why this Harangue?


Old Mrs. Sprightly, your true Friend, -- did so smuggle me, nay, she said I
should lye with her.


Ounze, what's this to the purpose?


Patience, Sir, -- and then the wanton old Jade took me into her Chamber, and
asked so many Questions of Flanders; first, whether I spilt any Blood in the
Wars; and then, whether I had lost my Maidenhead; -- and then. --


Dam ye, -- you impertinent young Dog; -- what have I to do with this? -- Were
not you to tell me of my Mistress, you should never speak a word more.


Good Sir, bridle your Passion, you shall have no occasion to be angry when I
have told you all.


Blood and Death, tell me all the next Sentence you speak, or your Bones shall
pay for it.


Now, Sir, I come to the point, -- your Mistress is very well; she looked over
your Presents with a great deal of satisfaction, -- seems pleased at your
return: -- In fine, you'll be better informed by the Contents of this.


Hell and Furies, why did you not give me this at first?


O, Sir, there might be danger in an over-hasty Bliss* -- a sudden Joy has
often proved fatal; -- with-holding a Pleasure is the way to endear it.


What have you been abusing me, you young Villain? Make things plain to me or
I'll sacrifice you to the pit of Hell.


Lord, Sir! what I told you is positive truth. -- I hope you have had
sufficient proof of my faithful service. -- I am sure I discovered so much by
her own looks, and by what both Old Sprightly and Madam Pliant told me; that if
she has writ any thing that seems unkind, I dare swear she has belied her own
Thoughts


[ Reads] Sir, I must own my self not a little concerned at your present
return, since I am sensible that the Circumstances I now lie under may be very
surprising to you; each of my Uncles are resolved to dispose of me, and have
obliged me to comply with their Intentions. You may take your own Measures, and
propose something most diverting to you; your Endeavours in that nature shall
be seconded by my Wishes, and your Misfortunes shared by


Were I to advise you, it should be to repair to your Post.

Why, I dare say every word is truth, and her real meaning. -- Pray let me see
the Letter. -- The Lady I lived withal before I came to you, was notable at
the little Mysteries of Billet-doux, and instructed me mightily in such
Affairs. [Reads to himself.] Why to me it seems you have as blessed an Answer
as you could wish. I should read it thus; [Reads.] Sir, I am very well pleased
you are come to Town, now I can surprise you with the news of being at my own
Disposal. My Uncles have separately engaged me to two several Persons, which I
have seemingly consented to, that I might the better deliver my self to you. If
the possession of me will be what's most diverting to you, use your own
Measures, my Wishes shall kindly meet your Intentions, and your Concerns for
the future dutifully shared by


Were I to advise you; repair to the Post, a Lover ought to maintain in his
Mistresses Affections.

O my dear Boy! how sweet are those ravishing Accents? -- Yet still I doubt
what most I would believe.


Upon my life, Sir, there's not a Syllable but bears this Construction, which
perfectly agrees with all other Circumstances. -- And now, Sir, to give you the
Soul and Quintisence of my Embassy, which was whispered to me by your
Mistresses Confident, and no doubt by her order, you are suddenly to meet her.
-- Prepare your self for a Rencounter, -- she is accidentally to fall into the
Ambush, and you are to bear her off with flying Colours. -- Come along, Sir,
I'll show you the place, -- the time draws near.


I'll strike at Fate, should I the Blessing miss.


SHall we go look upon some Silks, Couz? -- Coll. Bellair lodges somewhere
hereabouts; should he meet us, he'd conclude I came on purpose to see for him.


Good lack! and not judge amiss; -- as if you did not know that I sent him word
we should be here, with Resolutions, as I imagined, to conclude on the matter,
when to crown his Passion.


I know you sent him word! -- I conclude the matter! I crown his Passion! What
does the Girl mean?


Ha, ha, ha! This is very pretty; -- I am sure you gave me large hints to guess
at your Intentions. -- And pray what's the business of an humble Confident; if
not to inch out coming Inclinations, or bear the blame of pretended Mistakes.


I can't imagine what you'd be at.


Lord, we Women in love are so perverse in our Humours, -- and would always
seem to walk counter to our Intentions; what advances we make are backwards,
like the Marches of a Crab.


I own I have let the Woman grow a little upon me: -- I have nettled him, I
believe, in the Letter I sent by Jocund; though I left him room for a
favourable Interpretation, but Lovers generally lay hold on the wrong end.


How many of us do make Pride and Ill-nature our Diversion? We love that our
Tongues should contradict our Hearts; as well as to have our Women belie our
Faces, -- and are always stretching our Thoughts for new Matter to torment both
our selves and our Lovers.


Well, say what you will, I am resolved, when I see him, to receive him very
coldly.


And I am resolved to disabuse him. -- I am confident you love him, and doubt
not in the least his Sincerity, why then should you sacrifice the Repose of him
you esteem at the cost of your own?


I am sure I have reason to scruple his Sincerity; since I very much believe he
gives himself the same licentious freedom in the World as ever.


Why? you would not be so unreasonable to expect to be sole Proprietor, before
you are in possession, would you?


Besides, there's a secret pleasure to see how our Admirers behave themselves
under a disgrace: who would not know the force of her Frowns, as well as the
power of her Smiles? -- A little insult is an inseparable Prerogative of our
Sovereignty during our Courtship.


And we often pay dear for playing the Tyrant, -- when a Man of Sense comes to
reflect on the baseness of his Slavery we design him, and prudently refuses the
weight of our Shackles, how contemptible do we appear when we prostrate our
Charms afresh to re-invite his Service; -- therefore, Cousin, have a care of
playing foul in Love, least you lose your Gamester that has the best Stock and
then be obliged to play with others upon Tick.


I protest yonder he comes.


This, Madam, was the kindest thing imaginable; -- and though you are fair to a
Miracle, it may bring in question, whether your Goodness is not of larger
extent than your Beauty.


Perhaps, Sir, you mis-interpret the One, as you mistake the Other.


My Sufferings have confirmed my Judgment; -- and had I ten thousand Lives, the
force of your Charms would be justified by as many Victims.


I am convinced you are in no great danger of being sacrificed to the force of
Love; you're not unexperienced of a sure way of Prevention.


None but your self can cure the Wounds you have made. -- Nature generally
provides the surest Antidote from what caused the Infection.


And from the first Principle of Nature, I shall take care of
Self-preservation.


'T would be Sacrilege in the highest degree to injure her chiefest Work.


But, Sir, tho you were so Improvident to entertain an unlucky Passion, -- I am
confident your long absence has by this time procured you a good reasonable
Indifferency.


Absence, Madam, has had the same effect on my Passion, as the Wind has on
Fire; -- it extinguishes a faint Flame, but feeds and excites a great one.


And has not your She-volunteer had Power sufficient to abate those Flames?


What She-volunteer? -- Hang me if I can imagine what you mean!


Come, what little bickrings are these betwixt you two Lovers?


Do you know this Hand?


No, by my Soul don't I.


How's this! -- but I do: -- Lord, was this the business that raised your
mighty Scruples?


[ to Pliant] I beseech you, Madam, the meaning on it?


That Letter was a Contrivance of your old Aunt Whim's, -- she made Mrs. Grace
Copy it, and then sent her with it, to her Brother at the Post-Office, to put
it in amongst the Foreign Letters. -- Let me see, it begins thus; -- You would
do well, Madam, to entertain no farther thoughts of that dear Man, whose
Fatigues I share, and whose Caresses I enjoy, and so forth: -- by the same
token the Night you received it, she laid the Blaid-bone of a Shoulder of
Mutton under your Pillow, and pumped you the next day at Dinner for your Dream.
-- Do you remember this?


And you, Cousin, privy to the Contrivance?


Indeed Mrs. Grace showed me the Letter; -- but I profess I looked upon it so
frivolous and improbable, that I never minded to acquaint you with it.


I am sorry, Madam, you so easily entertain thoughts to my prejudice.


However, Sir, since it does not lie in my power. --


Nay, now I swear you tell a Ripper; -- for to let you know the truth, -- it
never did lie in her power till this very day; and now she is wholly Mistress
of her self.


Now, Madam, where lies tho next Objection?


Well, since as my Cousin Pliant tells you, I am but this day sole disposer of
my Person, it's but reasonable I should spend some time under my own
Jurisdiction.


Faith my Service should not diminish but enlarge your Dominion.


I have no mind to be serious now, but will give my Thoughts a loose for the
present. Adieu -- Come away Cous.


Whatever Circumference they take, ne'er doubt, Sir, their centring upon you,
-- Hark you, we'll be anon upon the Walks. -- Adieu, Sir.


Hey-day, -- what can be the meaning of this? If she gets once into the
Town-road of Love, I had been much happier to have received the kind Salutation
of a Twelve-pounder long e're now.


This is only a feint to draw you to Battle. -- Well, of a Soldier, I never
saw such a timorous whining Lover as you are. -- Why did not you take the
little Baggage and fling her into a Coach, and away with her, I'm confident
you'd please her better than to have her repent her bargain.


Sirrah, hold your profane Tongue, or I'll cut it out; -- what you say, I
could do, did I not love her; -- nay more, cut any bodie's Throat that
interposed: -- Ravish the Joys she were so nice of, and then abandon her to
Despair and Infamy.


Ay, now you talk like a Man of your own Profession.


Such an Action might be the result of Lust; or what were due to a Jilt; but
mine's a Flame pure as the vestal Fire, and she as sacred as the pious Saint
that attends the Altar: -- But this I'll do, I'll pursue her to the utmost, and
reach her too if possible. -- Numberless are the Toils of Love and War, and
whoever expects to succeed in either is required to be indefatigable.


Just upon the stroke of Three; -- the Alderman, no doubt, will be here
presently; here he comes already.


Oh, art thou there, my trusty Mercury?


I find, Sir, you are punctual to a minute.


'Sbud, I am as hot as a pampered Prelate, -- my Blood beat an alarm in my
Veins to give me notice of the time, and away I came, I'dad.


I'll secure you as cool as Clouted Cream e're she has done with you; I'll
assure you she's almost inaccessible, had not I the influence of a Relation
over her.


Prithee see, see, good boy; 'Sbodlikins I took a Dose of Cantharides this
morning, and methinks I am so lusty.


I vow you look as brisk, Mr. Alderman, as though you were but fifteen.


I? Hem -- hem -- There's Lungs for you -- I am as sound as Heart of Oak, boy:
-- I was a pretty Youth when I was fifteen -- nay, I am a very comely handsome
old Gentleman now. -- Old -- not very old neither, a little turned my Prime,
not much neither -- But prithee see, see a little whether she be at leisure, my
dear Boy, will you?


Here she comes -- Madam, a very worthy acquaintance of mine begs the liberty
to kiss your fair Hand.


I am obliged, Sir, to give civil Entertainment to your self; or to any friend
of yours, so far as it consists with my honour.


When you hear me knock, take care to slip him into your Closet.


Madam, as the rising Sun is adored by the prostrate Persian, no less Worship
and Veneration shall be paid you, by your humble Slave and Vassal Nicholas
Whim, Citizen and Alderman of London.


Vou are very Courtly, Sir.


Nay hold, you shall have more -- Nor has the Rays of your bright Eyes diffused
their Power with less force, through the Territories of my Heart, than does the
Beams of that glorious Planet shed their Influence through the utmost depths of
our sublunary World. Hem, hem. This I heard a City-Poet say to my Lady Mayress.


What makes you so florid, Sir? you might spare your Rhetoric -- a more
familiar way of Expression suits better with the matter of Love; and I suppose
that's your business.


Yes, my sweet Sugar-sops -- Love, Love's the dear business -- You have hit the
mark, you have nicked it I'dad -- and I'll nick you anon -- and my Name is Nick
-- and there will be Nick upon Nick: how do you like that, Lady Bright? -- was
not that smart and familiar?


You are a very merry Gentleman, truly.


Pish, this is nothing, my little Pigsny, to what you shall see me do anon --
To give you a taste of my familiarity, let me mumble, let me mumble these
Pitty-paddy-pods of yours, E-e-e-e -- now let me smuggle between my little
Biddy's Bubbies, E-e-e-e -- Oh how did they caper it, ferk it and jerk it under
the green-wood Tree. [ Sings and Dances.] O Lawd, O Lawd, I am taken with a
strange Dizziness in my Head -- Pray, Madam, have you ever a Coach, or a
Pallat-bed, where I might repose my self a little.


Sir, I'll conduct you into my Chamber, and give you some of my Waters.


Thank you, good Lady; thank you, good Lady. -- There, there was a Project of
mine.


So, there's one noosed -- I shall not be long without the Fellow on thee: To trap
these old Buck-fitches, is, I think, a very reasonable piece of Service. --
It's so preposterous a thing to see old doting, drivelling Fellows pretend to
feats of Love; the thoughts of it chills my blood, and gives me a disrellish to
the sweet Sin it self. I protest here comes Sir Nicholas.


I am sincerely glad to find you so minutely punctual, Mr. Eager.


Certainly, Sir, I should have been erroneous to a degree of stupidity to have
disappointed a Person of your Worth and Character; especially in a business of
this moment.


You say well, Sir: It is a matter of great moment -- Scouring off the Rust of
Nature, and refining our Vital Spirits, from the scum and dross they contract,
by cohabiting with the Earthly particles of the Body -- By which the Mind may
become alleviated, and all its noble faculties operate with greater freedom and
vigour.


I vow, Sir Nicholas, you talk very prettily of Wenching.


Oh, Sir, I understand it in all its Branches, Divisions, and Sub-divisions. --
how far it has been encouraged in several of the best-constituted Governments
-- and how we came to be Priest-driver from the allow'd practice of it. -- I
have composed a little Tract upon that Subject, which I design to get Printed
at Amsterdam -- It will be of singular use.


It's pity but the World should be obliged with it.


I have there laid down its Rise, Growth and Progress, and have traced it from
its very Original; which I find to be very Ancient -- Wonderful ancient,
truly.


I protest, Sir, your Discourse of it almost equals its pleasures.


But, Mr. Eager, pray one word with you -- Is this Lady of any Descent? -- has
she any pretensions to Coat-armour? -- I vow I wouldn't not Contaminate my self
with vulgar Blood for Christendom -- I would not touch the Flesh of any under a
Gentlewoman.


Oh, dear Sir, she is a near Relation of mine by my Mother's side, her Name
Vesuvia.


Vesuvia! Ods so, of the Old Neopolitan Vesuvians -- Let me see, she bears in
a Field-Argent a Furnace Sable, ejecting sulphurous Flames proper.


Her Furnace may have a Neopolitan Heat in it, as far as I know; do you look to
that.


A Family of great Antiquity, upon my Honour. -- Burning of Brimstone has been
of very long dare in the World.


And is like to continue very long, or else we lie under a great mistake.


Sir, will you please to Supplicate the Lady to admit of my humble Devoirs.


This is her Lodgings, I'll knock and see whether she be at leisure.

So now for my Disguise.


Having, Madam, received Intimation of your Ladyships high Worth, and nobleness
of Blood, I look upon my self to be obliged in honour to tender you my Offers
of displaying your bearing, and searching into your Pedigree.


What a pretty ingenious way you have found of opening your Intentions, Good
Sir Nicholas Purflew.


A Lady of transcendent Parts, I dare avow.


Your Character is so honourable, and your Ingenuity so conspicuous, that I
shall be proud of serving you -- Within here, in my Chamber, I have my
Scutcheon; if you please, you shall go in and see it.


Scour, scour, scour; Ferret, ferret the Whores; Bolt, bolt.


O Lord, what will become of us? some rude drunken fellows are got into the
House, slip into my Closet, and I'll deal with 'em as well as I can.


Here, here's one.


O, Madam Minx, are you there? -- Where are the rest of your Coneys of this
Borough? -- Da -- me, we must have every one, one, or you'll have very hot
work on it.


'Sbud unrig her, uncase her; make the Picture of Fortune of her, and let her
show the Naked truth.


Let us Revel and Roar, the whole World is our Store;
Nay, the Gods shall Club to our Pleasure:
When we Wallow all Night, in an unknown Delight,
Aurora discovers the Treasure.
Let us never Repine, whilst brisk Wenches and Wine,
Make the Brims of our Lives run over;
Leave the How and the What, to the Politic Sot,
And the When, to the Fool of a Lover.
Thus free from all Cares of Taxes and Wars,
We know not the Name of Dull Sorrow;
Every Purse is our Prey, which we spend in a Day,
And the Devil take Care for to morrow.
What, is the Brimstone vanished? -- I'll rummage her Closet for a Bottle of
cold Tea.


Da -- me, do, and we'll see the bottom of it.


To -- t me so we will, and then stagger to fresh Game.


'Ounz here's a brace of old Fornicators.


Out with 'em, Out with 'em.


No, one at a time. -- What a pox does your Goatship here?


Kimbaw him, Kimbaw him.


Ay, ay; Kimbaw him, Kimbaw him.


We'll only make you lighter by a stone or two -- that's all, get a cleft stick
and a sharp knife here.


[In the Closet.] O -- h.


Hold your bellowing, your turn's a coming.


Why look you, friend, I am a Man of honour -- Sir Nicholas Purflew by name,
Herald and Antiquary by profession; Therefore out of a just respect to all
honour either past, present, or what's to come; I hope you'll regard me with a
due Decorum, and desist from any rudeness.


Da -- m your Decorum -- You have been a Traitor to your own lawful Spouse,
therefore you must be reversed.


Ay, ay; Reverse him, reverse him.


It rains plentifully; this is one of Old Jupiter's showers; so in with him:
now for the next.


Why Gentlemen, do you see, Gentlemen, I love a Wench, Gentlemen, as well as
the best of you, Gentlemen -- and believe you are very honest Gentlemen; and
make use of this project to get a little Ready -- Pray take this Purse I'dad,
and I won't grudge you a Groat on it.


A very reasonable Gentleman.


Come Brother Sir Nicholas, the Coast is clear, a couple of very pretty fellows
I'dad. -- A -- h, Brother, this comes of Whoring.


O Lawd, O Lawd, I shall not get my Guts in their right place this month -- And
the fright for my Manhood won't off, I fear, much longer. -- This must
certainly be an enchanted Castle; those three were Gyant's Cubs, and that
Jezebel the Witch, I dare say she had Cloven feet, had we looked.


Let's make the best of a bad Market; pop into a Coach; -- Drive to a Tavern,
and drink away Sorrow.


Gentlemen, I heard a great Noise, thought you might be abused; and coming to
your Rescue, was met in the next Room by some Ruffians, stripped as you see, and
beat most confoundedly.


I'dad I began to have but an ill opinion of thee.


I must confess I began to have some Dubitation, that Mr. Eager had not dealt
very candidly.


This I get by being serviceable to my Friends -- and now to be Ill thought on
sticks worse by me than my Bastinading. -- Wrong my Friends? -- I'd be drawn
Piece-meal first.


Come Eager, we'll take thee along with us, and recompense thee for thy
misfortunes.


That's the House, Sir, where the two Ladies went in.


Very well, enough, enough: -- Go bid my Coachman turn the Coach before the
door, and lash the Horses, -- and do you Dogs make a noise, that the Ladies may
look out of their Windows and see the Splendour of my Equipage: -- I would have
the Eyes of a Whole street upon the Gaze, as soon as ever I approach it. --
Lol, lol; la, ra, la, ra.


Oh, Couzin, ha I found you?


How now, Mr. Sapless, -- how long have you been in Town? -- What a pox makes
you in such a heat?


Why, I was going to see for yo, to know whether yo can os^e me, to find out
our John't Bailey; I ha been running up tawn and dawn tawn to finden, and one
had as good looked Needle in Bottle a Hay, as any body in this tawn.


What the devil does he say? Da'me if I understand him a syllable -- How does
my Lady and your pretty Sisters? -- When do they come to town?


They are awe weel at whom, thank ye. -- T'lasses are aw-ways tawking on you,
Couzin -- They lov'n you hugeny b'mass.


Don't say Couzin, when you speak to a Person of Quality, but say, Sir -- and
prithee try to speak intelligibly; Lawd, lawd, what a monster of a thing is a
Country Squire -- Oh saw, how he stinks of Sweat.


Giss a little Snush.


Ounz how he paws it! -- a foot of an Ox would take it out handsomer -- 'Od
confound him, he has dropped my box. -- What the devil have you done, Sir? --
there's not another box-full of it in the Universe -- I had it from Donna
Aurelia Formalitosa, and she had it from Don Antonio Ernesto Steffatito, and he
had it out of the King of Spain's own Box.


A chawnce, a chawnce comes aws we'll, aws we'll:


Pray, for the Respect I bear your Family, let me furnish you with a Tutor,
that he may cut you out of the Rough, and Polish you a little; -- and when you
have got your English, and know how to put on your Clothes, you may be fit to
go to the Academy -- Then I'll take care to lay on the finishing strokes, and
make a complete Gentleman of you.


Yo tawken -- 'Sflesh I am a Gentleman enough aw-ready in mine none Country,
and I thinken I ought to be thoughten so here; for I ha been faw drunk at
Tavern, and have lain all Neet at a Bawdy-house; and they tell'n me yo London
Geutlemen do no more.


O abominable! I find thou art beyond the hope of Retrieving. -- In gad here
comes the Ladies -- away Sapless -- vanish, prithee vanish, I would not be seen
in the Company of such an Animal for the Universe.


Marry, and yo been thereabouts -- I had rather be Coupled to our Joler for a
twelve month, than be forced to stay with yo for an hour: and so fare you well
with a Murrain to you.


Powder me, Powder me, ye Dog.


O Ladies, I seize you here as lawful Prize -- I rule in this Parish of
Covent-Garden as Sovereignly by day, as ever Stoaks did by night, and the
Beauties of these Precincts contest my power with as little success as the
Bullies did his.


Sure Sir, the limits of a Parish are two small to confine your Graces -- the
Rays of your Charms have an influence that's Universal.


That's true, Madam; and when ever they contract themselves to give place to a
greater Light, it is in your Presence.


Right Mr. Goosandelo still.


Indeed there's little danger of Mr. Goosandelo altering his temper -- a
hardened Fop is as irreclaimable as a sottish Drunkard.


But, Madam, I suppose you are not unacquainted with Sir Nicholas's Resolution.


I don't at all dispute his Intention, Sir.


Nor scruple his Judgment, I hope.


There was little occasion for its being over-discerning in its Choice of you,
Mr. Goosandelo.


That's true again, Madam. -- I vow I pity some Ladies that I know -- this
Wedding will mortify 'em strangely.


No doubt of it. -- Come, Couzin, let's away.


I'll Usher you to your Coach, Ladies.


Drive on Dull Time, to reach my Waiting Joys,
Moments are Ages in a Lover's Eyes.
THese are the Walks -- But I see nothing of them yet.


Never doubt their being here anon, Sir. -- I question not but she is as intent
upon the Matter as your self.


Sirrah, hunt about, and be as vigilant as a Lynx -- You shall meet with me
hereabouts.


I'll secure you, Sir, my part shall not be wanting -- I'll say that for my self,
there is never a Puppy-dog in the Kingdom better taught to seek out and find,
than I am.


For my life I can't find out the true nature of Woman -- not a single motion
of their Minds, but seems irregular -- their Thoughts and Resolves no sooner
bubble up, but they break and are dissipated with the same puff of Air, that
first raised 'em -- the Composure of their Souls is too light and unsuitable
for the strength of their Charms; which have power to oppress with a delight,
and to enslave with a pleasure, whilst with a secret Joy, we lose our selves,
and blindly trace the mazing Labarinths of Love.


'Tis no otherwse than I expected -- 'Sbud, Sir, you look very charming -- with
this Presence you have power to kill like Lightning at a distance -- 'Tis but
clapping your Hat before your face, and taking it away again of a sudden --
Flash, if ere a Woman in Christendom would not fall as flat as a Flounder, I'd
perish.


May be so, I now -- Ha bien ajuste; let me die, Eager, I think thou dost not
flatter me.


Flatter you! -- You can't be flattered, your Perfections are unspeakable.


I have now put on most of my Graces, in order to the celebrating my Nuptials.


Why, the Bride can't choose but think she has got a Young God in her Arms.


Gad I am a Violent Fool to make Love to Mortals, paltry flesh and blood -- I
should reserve my self for Nymphs and Goddesses.


No doubt they'll come in search of you; if you'll have but patience -- Was you
never attack't with a Succubus yet?


Succubus, succubus, who's she? Some foreign Princess! is it not?


No Sir, no; they are black-ey'd Ladies of the Royal Blood of Pluto -- when
they find a Man that's cast in something more than Humane Mould, you appear to
be; they slip gently into his Bed when he's fast a-sleep, -- clasp* their airy
Limbs about him, and so enjoy him in a Dream.


Pox on 'em, if those are they I have 'em every Night; -- they harass me off my
Legs.


They are very busy when they find out such a complete, sweet, youthful Person
as your self, especially if he's a Lover of Provocatives, such as Shellfish,
Cavere, Eringo-roots, Pistachoo-past, Spanish Chocolate, c.


There's the business then, for I violently love all such things; -- but,
Eager, there's a great bulky Volume of the Law, a Favourite of the Alderman's,
hankers after my Mistress.


I know him, Breviate: Dam him, next time you see him in your Mistresses
Company, kick him, he dares not fight: -- To my knowledge he's as afraid of a
drawn Sword as an Atheist is of Thunder.


Would I were sure of that, -- not but that I know it impossible for any Man to
supplant my Interest in her; but I would not have her blowed upon by the breath
of such a Bear, and I am so passionate, that I protest I dare scarce trust my
self with repairing my own Injuries: -- Can not get him murdered for me?


It will be something chargeable if you'll have it done decently.


Decently? No, no, butcher him any how, his foul Carcass does not deserve a
jauntee thrust, else I'd do it my self.


First do you beat him, if he mutters I'll take him to task.


Let me die, Jack Eager, you're a very honest fellow; -- prithee accept of
this, and stand my Friend; [ gives him Money.] thou shalt stay with me: -- If
he comes, you and I and my Footmen will trounce him, I'gad, -- we'll sacrifice
him, a Dog, a Rogue, a Son of a Whore. --

-- O Lord, here he comes, -- don't take any notice of it, for I be not in a
quarrelling temper at present. -- Your Servant, good Mr. Breviate, -- I must own
I never had any esteem for a Man of your Profession till your Worth laid an
Embargo on me and my Services.


Pray, Sir, trade freely with your Services where you please; -- I fear your
Stock is so low, that you are not able to freight for a Passage, were it only
to cross Covent-Garden, to give an account how your Complexion heightens.


What, do you intend to be sharp upon me? -- if you do, look to your self, for
I'll ^serk you with Repartee, I'll promise you. -- Eager, this is the Gentleman
that's like to carry the great Fortune, Mrs. Purflew.


'Twill be impossible if you make Pretensions, Sir.


Oh, Sir, I protest every moment, you make fresh Discoveries of your Sense and
Judgment. -- Let me perish if I have not forgot to be put on my Scented
Leather-Shooes. -- Gentlemen, a matter of high concern requires my attending
upon my self to my own Apartment.


Was there ever such a Fop in Nature? -- and yet they tell me, that the Ladies
dote on such Fools.


That the Ladies love Fools is true enough, but they must be Harmless,
Credulous, Passive Fools, not such a Self-admiring Fool, as Mr. Goosandelo is,
that insists so much on the Theme of his dear self, that he can't afford the
fair Sex their share of Worship and Flattery.


That I believe is very true.


Then a Country Eldest Brother Fool, goes down very well with a Lady, though
she be a Woman of good Sense, such as there's a pattern of [ pointing to
Sapless] and she will very lovingly take into her Arms his Worship's lump of
animated Earth, though the Blockhead's Brains were composed of the worst Mud
about his Estate.


But still I apprehend some danger from this Coxcomb Goosandelo.


When you see him in your Mistresses Company affront him; -- Pull him by the
Nose; all Women hate a Coward, as much as they do the Man that deals sincerely
with their Looks or Conduct; -- and I am confident he dare not resent it.


Are you sure of it?


As sure as that a London Justice go's snacks with Pick-pockets, or that his
Clerk gathers Contribution round the Whores Quarters. -- Your Man of Dress is
ever too nice for a Quarrel, -- he has just now owned that he fears you'll take
occasion to fall out with him.


'Sbud, I'll do it then. But he has been* at Paris, and has learnt how to push
Mathematically, and kill by Demonstration.


If he comes to pushing, let me alone with him. I'gad I am as ready at whipping
Men through the Lungs as a Smithfield Cook is at spitting of Pigs at a
Bartholomew Fair.


Stick to me, honest Eager, in this Business, and there's a token of
Encouragement for you. -- I must step to a Gentleman's Chamber, I'll be here
again in a moment.


Well, noble Squire, hey for Cheshire, how proceed you with the Lady, ha?


Marry, Master Eager, we fadgen prattily: -- I ha fast hold on her, and I con
but keep her: -- But they sen in our Country, that he that has holt on a young
Woman has got a slippery Eel by the Tail.


Spear her then, Squire, and that will secure her.


'Sflesh, and so I wood, on I could but lighten on her on a Sond-bed: -- Nea,
what sen yo, Mistress?


I say, it's very hard for a poor weak Woman to withstand your strong and
pressing Importunities.


Do you think you can dispense with a Country-life, Madam?


No doubt I shall be happy with my pretty Squire in any place.


Oh, we han huge merry Folks in Cheshire! -- I'se mind my Horses and my Dogs,
and yo san take care of the Dairy and feeding of the Swine; -- and then at Night
to Bed, to play at high Gaffer hoop, old Lass.


Come, make no bones on it, there's a Spiritual Flesh-broker lives hard by, that
will mould you both up into one Mass of Flesh and Blood in a trice.


Mass I'se lead her thither then. [ Hawls her by the Tail, and Sings.] Come
away, come away; sweet if thou love, come away.


Coll. Bellair, you are come to the Conclusion of a merry Bargain: here's a
Couple just going to be Priest-link'd; -- you shall see Madam Vesuvia the
Honourable Lady Sapless in a little while.


Ay? -- Are you the Son of Sir Thomas Sapless of Cheshire, Sir?


Yea, b'Mass, I am his Son and Heir too, as God would hey it.


Your Father, Sir, was an honest Gentleman, and a very good Friend of mine.


So he was of mine, Sir, to die in good time and leave me the Estate.


So, -- here's all at an end, I fear; -- we shall have that impertinent
mischievous thing called Honour, spoil this business, I'faith.


I vow, Madam, I must do that piece of Justice to my old Friend, to put a stop
to this Affair; -- I can't in Honour do otherwise.


I thought so, I'saith, -- 'tis time for me to be gone, lest for the sake of
his old Friend, he should think fit to break my Bones out of a point of Honour
too.


Pray what do you mean, good Mr. Colonel? do you think with your Flames to make
a breach betwixt our true Conjugal Love and Affection? -- Don't believe a word
he says, Squire. -- Sir, you have nothing to do with Mr. Sapless, -- he is my
lawful Husband already; he has promised me, and that's enough; -- and I'll have
him if all the Law in the Kingdom will get him me, that I will, ye Scarlet
Scarecrow, ye tool of Death and Destruction.


Hold your noise, for 'tis to no purpose: -- Mr. Sapless, you were upon the
brink of Ruin, and going to marry a Doll Common, therefore come along with me,
-- I'll make you sensible of the piece of service I do you, -- and for this
time put you into secure Hands.


Marry, and may be yo tel'n me nothing but what's truth, and therefore, as they
sen in our Country, Two words a bargain, I'll look before I leap, so I will.


Come away, Sir, pray come along with me.


What? do you think to run away with my Husband? I'll have him; I tell you,
I'll have have him in spite of you, -- ye paltry, filthy Upstart you.


It's pleasant being abroad this Evening.


I am glad it draws so near Night, I would willingly be Femme Covert under the
lusty Lawyer: -- Here he comes, I vow; I find he has follow'd us upon the dry
scent.


What are you upon the hunt for, Spark? -- Some Vizor-Mask to put Law-Cases to.


I am come, Madam, to retrieve a purloined Heart, -- I have issued out a Writ
de Corde Replegiendo, and it is returned Elongat' by your Ladyship.


You make very learned Love, this might take with some old Westminster-Hall
Trotter.


I had rather referr my Business with you, Madam, to the Abbey than to the Hall
at present.


That you may not be out of your Road, I'll entertain my Cousin here to put in
my Plea.


I fear I shall betray your Cause for self-interest, as all Lawyers do; -- I
must plead guilty, and put in Security for restoring the lost Heart, for which,
Sir, I'll be bound body for body.


I can't except against the Bail; -- but if I had it under the Lady's Hand and
Seal 'twere sufficient.


What, would you be hooking me into Contract? -- If you are so mistrustful
before-hand, I may well judge of your Jealousy afterwards; -- and so, Mr.
Lawyer, you may turn over another leaf, for you'll find nothing to your purpose
here, I'll promise you.


How's this? my Mistress hot upon the Lawyer? I am glad to see that, I faith.
-- What now, Black-Box, with Broad-Seal of Yellow Wax? -- for such seems your
Face afixt to your Body when your Gown's on: What receiving Reprimand at the
Bar, ha?


What make you ask? -- thou Composition of persum'd Past worked up by the Hands
of Quack Operators, thou hast nothing of thy own about thee, but thy Sense,
that indeed seems thine by making so dull a forced Jest, and afterwards
explaining it.


Do you think this is very becoming, Gentlemen, before us?


I apprehended this Lawyer had some-how disobliged you, Madam, and so looked
upon my self bound in honour to engage on your Ladiship's side.


'Sbud I'll venture to affront him.


I beseech you, Sir, if you must engage, let it be for your self.


My self? so now I have a good subject, Madam, I am --


Hold, Sir, if you once begin to talk of your self, we shall ne'er stop your
Mouth, therefore you shall hear me handle that Subject concisely: -- You are a
vain, noisy, empty, insipid --


Fool.


How's this, Sir, is it manners thus to take the Fool out of a Lady's Mouth?


I think, Gentlemen, it would be Manners to share your Discourse so, that you
might by turns entertain us both. -- I have not had a syllable from either of you
yet.


That's because this Body of the Law has interposed; I know my self
accomplished with all the Rules of general Conversation, and have suitable
Sayings for all Complexions.


I am no stranger, Sir, to your most refined way of Discourse.


You confound me, Madam, with your Encomium, tho I must own the justice of it:
Now for you, Madam, [ to Purf.] let us look fixed on each other a while, that I
may drink up your Eyes with mine; -- and I that look so brilliant with my own,
how glorious shall I appear with the addition of your Rays?


Still you take care to squeeze in your self; -- I believe you would suffer
more patiently the loss of your Mistress, -- than be deprived of that dear
Self-Opinion; -- and in my Conscience you undergo more hazard of being jilted
by your self, than by the most subtle of our Sex.


What, Madam, do you design to be severe upon me, but I have bethought my self
of a sure way of overpowring you, [ Clapping his Hat before his Face, and
taking it away again of a sudden:] Flash, flash, I'gad you're fixed and
transfixed. -- What, Lawyer, are you Thunder-struck too?


What a pox can you mean by this Foppery and Impertinence?


Come, Couz. let us slip into another Walk, and leave the Blockheads to wrangle
by themselves.


What was that you said, Sir Foppery and Impertinence; -- you lye Sir, Foppery
in the Face of you, and Impertinence upon your back-side.


Say you so, Sir? Come on, Sir.


A Fool, Sir.


The Lye and a Kick, Sir?


Impertinent Fop, Sir.


Ay, Sir.


Then no more to be said, Sir.


Then no more to be said neither, if that be all; and so farewell till I meet
you next.


Fare you well too, if you be so huffish.


I was coming, Sir, with what haste I was able, to prevent mischief, but I find
your Prudence has over-ballanc'd your Passion.


I'gad, Sir, we were very near it; -- had I drawn an Inch farther, my Sword had
been unsheathed, and then by this time, this spot of Ground had been delug'd
with a Crimson Flood.


You keep the Field, I see.


Yes, Sir, the Enemy fled not being able to make Head against the terror of my
Puissance, -- and e're he rallies again I'll pursue and perfect my Conquest.


What are become of the Combatants? -- We saw the desperate Action through the
Hedge.


Ha, ha; they have taken different Routs, I suppose, to prevent meeting again,
tho, as far as I see, they may do it safely at any time; -- they are certainly
acting a Farce, or they are the rankest Cowards upon the face of the Earth.


They are very much in earnest, I'll assure you, Sir, and the Prize they
contest for, no less a Stake than this Lady.


I fear it would be very hazardous for the Lady to trust her Honour under
either of their Protections.


I shall take care never to bring my Honour so far in question to need a
Champion for its Defence.


The most virtuous, Madam, may be subject to Detraction*


And a public Vindication seldom abates the Scandal, -- Innocence is the
surest Guard and the best Defence against a Reproach.


Now your hand is in, pray Madam, give your Reasoning Faculty the liberty of
determining what ought to be the recompense of an unsullied Faith, and how long
a time is required to be convinced of the reality of Pretensions.


'Tis easily answered, Sir, -- if that Faith respects a Reward, it seems to be
too selfish, and therefore deserves none; -- and if those Pretensions grow
faint, and weary, it's a sign they were never real, and therefore ought not to
be valued.


Perhaps, Sir, I can give you a more satisfactory Answer; -- hark ye, a word in
your Ear.


I vow, Couzin, the Air grows so very cool, it's time we should be going, come
away.


Adieu, Sir, -- I know we shall not be long before we see you.


Come in disguise, bring a Parson with me and Jocund Masked in a Woman's Habit,
this exactly agrees with what the Boy said: -- Now methinks the ineffable Joys
begin to appear in view, a sudden (...) shoots through my Veins; -- my Blood
moves quick, and my Breast heaves high, as doubting their force to sustain the
approaching Bliss, my hasty Thoughts anticipate the flowing Pleasures, and leave
me all dissolved with the power of Apprehension.


Well, old trusty Trojan, is all things in order? -- has the Canonical Black
his proper Post of Darkness? -- hast given my Niece the Cautionary
Instructions, honest old dry Chops, ha?


Yes, an't please your Honour's Worship, all things are as they should be, and
God send the Lawyer be so, all will be well over, I'gad -- I ha shed many a
Tear to think on my poor young Mistress to Night, God love her, poor tender
Chicken.


Never doubt her, old Sprightly: -- I'dad, I'dad, I shall grow as mad as a
March Hare to hear the young Hussy squeak. -- If I should come Caterwawling
into the Garrets to Night amongst the Wenches, be sure thou exercisest thy
retentive Faculty, dost hear?


An't like your Worship, I was never given to twittle twattle.


Don't you babble then, but hold your Clack.


I'll warrant you, I'll be as silent as a Mouse in a Cheese.


I hear some body a coming, I believe 'tis the Lawyer, I'll go see.


Is every thing in a decent posture, to make an honourable Reception for that
true Epitome of Honour, my spruce Nephew that must be? Alderman Whim smokes
nothing of our Project, I'll vow thou merit'st Coat-Armour for thy Cunning and
Secrecy: -- What think of a Cat Couchant, ods-life thou shalt have one for
thee and thy whole Posterity.


Bless your Honour, -- ^eckins I am glad at Heart I can serve your Honour's
Worship: -- I warrant my young Mistress, Lord save my Child, will feel the
Cockles of her Heart leap, when she has got that sweet smockfac'd Gentleman in
Bed with her. -- I'll go see that all things be done in print to your Honour's
liking.


Do so, honest Sprightly. -- Here comes old Whim to vent some new-hatch'd
Project, I dare say.


I have been considering of it, Brother, -- and find, if the War holds, we must
of necessity introduce Polygamy for the supply of Men.


On my word, Brother, you say well -- The Huns, Lombards, Goths and Vandals,
had never made so many Southern Incursions, had they not had a plurality of
Wives.


You shall invent Additions of Honour for them that are most dextrons at
Propagation, and add to their former Coats, Bulls, Goats, Stone-horses, and
Cock-sparrows -- I'dad as old as I am, I'll have for my share half a score at
least, and strut about, my little Seraglio, the lusty predominant Alderman,
Sultan, Whim.


You do well to talk of a Seraglio, for were those ten Wives to go loose, the
Neck of the best Town-Bull in the Country would not be able to support your
Horns.


But hark ye Sir Nicholas, my dear Brother and worthy Knight -- Let's consider
of disposing of our Charge -- I'dad if she gets sensible of her own Power,
she'll perhaps bob us both in short.


Your Advice, dear Brother, is of great Importance -- Here I'll read you a List
of our Proposals.


And I'll give you my Opinion.


Imprimis, My Lord Grimace promises us Court-preferment.


He has not Interest there, not so much as to have a Stand-by from the
Yeoman-Usher.


Item, My Lord Supple says he'll make his Appearance for us in the Country at
the next Elections.


His Honour is hamstringed by bowing two ways at once, therefore his Cringes
will be of no farther use. But here's the Company a coming, to morrow we'll
settle this Matter, and dedicate this Night to Mirth.


Oh, you Heavens! what, the Ladies in Masquerade! -- had we known that, we
would have been in Habits too. -- I would have been the Great Mogul, Brother of
the Stars, and Son of the Sun, and have out-shin'd my Glorious Father himself:
-- The Lawyer should have been Prestor John of Aethiopia, Mr. Sapless,
Garagantua; and honest Jack Eager, Pantagruel.


It's no matter, the Ladies shall Unmask presently. -- Pray Place you selves,
Fiddles: Strike up.


Hey-day, what's here to do? -- What, Sir Nicholas, is your Arcadian Pastoral
to be performed by Tipstaves and Constables?


By your leave, Gentlemen, our Business is with one John Eager, alias Curryman:
here's the Gentleman, seize him.


What, what's the matter? what Process have you against Mr. Eager?


Only a Warrant, Sir, that Charges him with a few small Forgeries, of Bonds,
Wills, and Indentures; that's all, Sir.


So now must I be clapped up betwixt a pair of Iron-Grates, and squeezed dry, and
then be turned loose for new Exploits -- That's the main business I protest,
Gentlemen.


Away with him, away with him.


I'dad I began to believe this Eager was a sort of a Dangerous Spark.


You would not believe me, Brother; for my part, I saw it in his Eyes, and
discovered the Perfidy of his Soul through the Port-holes of his Body. -- Now,
now stand clear.


An Entertainment of Singing and Dancing by Sheppards and Satyrs; in the
beginning of which, Sprightly slips off, Goosandelo and Jocund at one Door, and
Breviate and Pliant at the other, who soon after return again. At the latter
End of the Dance, Bellair appears in Disguise.

1 COme, Thyrsis, come; let us our Voices try,
And Charm the Woods with Orphean Melody.
2 This is the Glorious Annual Night,
That first gave fair Corinna Light.
1 The Bright Corinna,
2 Divine Corinna.
1 Corinna, who has Joys in store;
2 Corinna, whom all Eyes adore:
[Both.] Corinna, who, c.
1 Come, let us of her Graces tell,
Charms that do Themselves excel.
2 Let us softest Notes rehearse,
And Sing her Beauties in Immortal Verse.
[ Both.] Let us softest, c.
We'll all join in Chorus, and Echo her Praise;
Pay our Vows to the Gods, to smile on her Days:
May she ever be Gay, may she ever be Young;
As our Harmony sweet, and as soft as our Song.
Very well performed, the Interlude we'll have after Supper.


Brother, Brother; Pray what Spark is this that looks so big, and struts about
at this Rate?


It may be he is dropped from the Sky, for I know nothing of him.


[ Leading up Pliant to the Alderman and Sir Nicholas] Gentlemen, I have the
Honour to be your Nephew, and humbly beg you will Approve the Choice your Niece
has made.


Ay, Niece: Have you been too nimble for us? Come, Brother, since 'tis so, Mr.
Breviate is an ingenious worthy Gentleman, let's wish 'em Joy.


Ounz, what's the meaning of this?


[ Leading up Jocund.] Ah, ah, ah; Faith, Lawyer, you are a little beside the
Point: Gentlemen, your Beautiful Niece has delivered her fair Person to me. --
Under therefore your benign Aspect, we shall shine the two brightest Glories of
this your Hemisphere.


What a pox is the matter now?


Ay, ay, Brother; Mr. Goosandelo is a Person of Honour and Quality; I think we
shall do well to Congratulate the Match.


[ Leading up Mrs. Purflew.] Make room here, I lay claim to this Lady, who
lately bore the Name of Purflew, and am ready to justify my Title.


Bless us, who's this?


[ Discovering her self.] I hope, Uncles, the different Measures in each of
your Conducts will excuse my Choice of this Gentleman, whom I have made my
Husband.


Pray will you all Unmask, that these Riddles may be explained.


[ Discovering himself.] My Name is Bellair; it shall be my Care to set a true
Value on the Blessing I have obtained.


Coll. Bellair!


Who have you got, Mr. Breviate? [Pliant discovering her self.] What, my Couzin
Pliant!


O Lord, what will become of me when I go the Circuit! -- Faith I may now go
and take a gentle Swing into the other Word, and so finish the Law upon my
self.


Don't despair, Sir; now I am yours, I may be allow'd to own my Affections for
you, and since Custom deprives our Sex of making Court where we like; when I
was assured of my Couz Purflew's Pre-ingagement, I took this method, and shall,
I hope, by my Duty, procure your Esteem.


[Jocand discovering himself.] Oh ye Powers above, I have Married a Boy here.


Ha, ha, ha, ha.


And Ha, ha, ha, too: -- I'gad I'm glad on it, it's a very pretty Boy by my
Soul: come to my Arms, my dear little Ganymede.


Fine doings, I'dad. -- Ah, Brother, we are well enough served for being so
distrustful of each other.


Since my Niece has disposed of her self -- I am glad she has made Choice of
you, Sir: -- I am not unacquainted with the Family of the Bellairs, and you,
Colonel, have added fresh Laurels to the Deeds of your worthy Ancestors, and
have maintained an indisputable Character of a Man of Honour. -- Come, let's
have another Dance, and so in to the Collation.


Come, now to Supper.


Then to that grand Regale of Bliss, where famished Love may make an insatiate
Feast of Beauty.


What share, Sir, I have of it, is but a just Reward for your faithful Passion


They're sordid Flames, that Interest does impart;
Nothing but Love's a Purchase for a Heart.
I Find I'm forward in my Tender ^ge,
And show the Early Manhood of a Page.
I dare already for a Mistress Tilt,
Bully a Bawd, and Kick a Bant'ring Jilt;
Can cheat at Cards, Slur, Strike, or Palm ^ Dye,
Break Windows too, with Mid-night Gallantry.
Thus being qualified, I need not fear,
To go abroad a Taring Volunteer,
And be a Captain by another Year.
Ladies, look to it, by that time I come back,
I shall have learnt to Manage an Attack;
I'll Court you then in Military Strain,
And, by my Dint of Conduct, Conquest gain:
But ever I bid adieu, Faith I've a mind
To leave you some good Wishes here behind.
May Virgin never her first Desires baulk,
So fall to feeding upon Coals or Chalk.
May never Wife any Occasion miss,
To wipe her Lips of Husband's nauseous Kiss.
May no Rich Widow ever her Kindness smother,
Or spare to pay the Pains of Younger Brother.
May none of either Sex, ever fail to find,
A Lover constant, or a Mistress kind.
OROONOKO: A Tragedy. Written by Mr. Southern. Deliciae Musicae, the Fourth
Book: which completes the First Volume. Printed for H. Playford and B. Took.


