I Won't speak this Prologue -- Go tell him so;
If he no Wit, I can some Manners sh^w.
I curse the Critics! Rail at Men of Sense;
Gadzooks I wonder at his impudence.
Besides --
He should have chose some tender Cherub face,
Whose melting smiles could so bewitch the place,
That might have forced him to a state of Grace.
Such a queer Phiz as mine, on my Salvation,
Will ne^re retrieve him from his late Damnation.
And yet methinks, I'm loath to lose him quite,
First let me drink, then try to do him right.
Here you Gall'ry Spankers: a Health to those
That value Brawn, and scorn the Lath-backt Beaus.
Those City Ladies who to quench a flame,
From their own Counters spring the lusty game.
Next to all sound Masks. Yup Kecks not one drop will down,
This plainly shows there's none in all the Town.
Come a Bumper to th'Pit -- No doubt but you
Expect from me, a Health entirely new.
Your thoughts I would not willingly forestall;
If this Play's damned, Confusion to ye all.
Sirrah, be sure you fill me nicely now,
While I on either side profoundly bow.
Gad, sure to Men of so much Grace and Feature,
There should be left a spice of Human Nature.
Then let your Goodness more conspicuous be,
And don't you snuff at every fault you see.
So may your Mistresses be over kind,
And none of all your Imperfections find.
Till thus you stand, full of your selves possessed,
But leave good drudging Sparks to do the rest.
Now on my Knees, I'll veneration pay,
And heartily Drink,
In short, Ladies --
Thus does our Poet for your mercy sue,
And swears he dreads no other Stars but you.

WEll, Sir Bellamour, how shall we dispose of our selves, now we are arrived at
this glorious Town of London?


Why faith, Vainthroat, I'm not well acquainted with the Town; but by what I do
know, thou may even choose what corner of it thou think fit, and yet never
want objects for either Ridicule or Detraction; and those are thy two darling
faculties.


Lord, Sir, why should you say that of me, who am the nicest man living of all
peoples Reputations?


Reputation! I'd undertake there would not be a single grain of such a thing in
the Universe, were it in the power of thy Tongue to blast it.


Come, Sir Bellamour, I must tell you, that you have got a damned unbecoming
quality, to speak always what you think, 'tis the absurdest thing that a
Gentleman of this age can be guilty of.


Would it not be more absurd, either to speak without thinking, or impudently
to belie a man's own opinion?


Not at all I vow; I find you are, as you say your self, not well acquainted
with the Town: why all Gentlemen of good assurance and right Town breeding,
first never think of what they say, and then don't care one ^a^thing whether a
syllable of it be truth or not.


For that reason I'll avoid all Town Company, to prevent being shockt with the
insolence of Lies, or stunned with the eternal sputter of Nonsense.


At the present we'll wave disputes -- Let's settle our selves into convenient
Lodgings, get splendid Equipages; and then Beau it about the Town.


What the Devil dost mean by that foolish word, Beau?


Why faith the title and qualifications of a Beau, have long been the standing
mark for the random shot of all the Poets of the Age. And to very little
purpose. -- The Beaus bravely stand their ground still e'gad -- The truth on it
is, they are a sort of case-harden'd animals, as incapable of Scandal, as they
are insensible of any impression either from Satyr or good Sense.


And prithee how must these case-harden'd animals be distinguisht?


Barring Reflection, I believe the best way to be adquainted with the whole
Tribe of 'em, would be to get a general Register drawn from all the Persumers
Shop-books in town -- Or which is more scandalous, to examine the Chaulks in
all the Chair-mens Cellars about the Pallmall; where each morning the poor
fellows sit, looking pensively upon their long scores, shaking their heads and
saying -- Ah! how many times have we trotted with such a powdered Son of a nine
Fathers, from the Chocolate-house to the Play, and never yet saw a groat of his
Money.


Mr Vainthroat you are welcome to Town, you are the only person living that I
most wanted a sight on; I vow and protest you are, upon my honesty.


I never yet heard a man call his honesty to witness, but he proved a damned
Rogue at bottom. -- This fellow has Rascal stamped upon his very countenance.


Honest Nickycrack, thou art come very opportunely -- You may at present be
assisting to us.


O Lord, in whatever lies in my power, you know, Sir, that you may assure your
self of me -- Is this your friend, pray Sir?


'Tis Sir Bellamour Blunt, Sir: a person highly worth your acquaintance.


Sir Bellamour Blunt, I am yours, with all the integrity, sincerity, and
uprightness an honest heart is capable of containing -- Pray, Sir, how can I be
most serviceable to ye.


By going about your business, Sir.


You must pardon this Gentleman's abrupt speaking, 'tis his way Mr Nickycrack.


Then the Gentleman's way of speaking suits punctually with my way of acting,
which is always honest and downright.


Were I to guess at your actions by your looks, I'd sooner cut out my Tongue,
than speak a syllable that should correspond even with your bare conceptions.


Fie, Sir Bellamour, prithee leave this strange moroseness. -- Come honest
Nickycrack, can thee advise us to any good Lodgings?


O dear, Sir, my Sister Sweetny here just by, has the best convenience of
Lodging and Boarding of any woman in Town -- And she, you know, Sir, is a good
woman; a woman, tho I say it, of much true Piety and Devotion.


I'll hold my life on it, she's a Bawd by her Character.


Why suppose she were, does not a person of that necessary function deserve a
more tender expression -- As that such a Lady is a most obliging officious
Virginity-Broaker, Them me if she be not the charitablest creature in the Kingdom
-- Whenever ye design to villi^y, you must be sure to let it be tout en
Ridicule, ah, ha, ha. And thus you may modishly be allow'd to to bespatter any
body.


I'd as soon disguise my person to be a base and barbarous Assassin, as I would
my thoughts by telling a Lye.


Prithee what Company is there at your Sister's at present?


O Lord, Sir, we are never without good Company; there's the fine Widow
Thoroshift, a vast fortune; and her pretty Country bred innocent Maiden Sister,
Mrs. Minx.


Very well, I know 'em.


And just now Sir Wealthy Plainder and his beautiful Daughter Ophelia, have
made an addition to the Family.


Sir Wealthy Plainder, and his Daughter Ophelia! Do you hear, Sir Bellamour;
the very persons we came up to Town withal. I am confident you need no farther
inducement. -- Go Nickycrack, get our Rooms ready, and we'll order our things
thither, and follow immediately.


Sir I shall be proud of obeying your Command.


Ha! My Dear, have I found thee? I have been upon the hunt for ye, with greater
vigour than ever I yet pursued an Enemy; and that you may imagine was never with
any small heat. -- Come faith you must assist me.


In what, good Captain Bownceby? What is the mighty business?


Why the mighty business is love -- And who the Devil would think a man of my
rough temper, a Soul of that fierceness as mine is, should e're be flexible to
the beck of a little, puny, blind brat?


Good Captain, the Object?


The Object of my uncontrollable passion, is the Widow Thoroshift: I know you
have an interest in her -- And let me perish if it shall not be worth thy while.


Ha! Pimp for a Soldier in time of Peace, ah that's damned cool work e'faith.


Pox! I understand ye. -- You shall not want your encouragement, tho I sink my
Arrears three parts in four for you.


Captain, I have business at present: but assure your self you may command me
in any thing, so your intentions be just and honourable; for all the world
knows that Mr. Nickycrack will not act otherwise than what is becoming an
honest man.; and as such, I am noble Captain Bownceby's very humble Servant. --
Oh! Yonder's Nibs, the trusty Servant-maid, walking this way, she can better
inform you in your present concerns. -- I am yours, Sir.


Sweet Mrs. Nibs, I'll be short and Soldier-like with you. Know then that the
suze of my Vitals is fired by the lighted Match of your Mistresses Beauty; and
if it be not quickly extinguished by her cooling P^mp of Pity, dry up my blood,
if I shall not be blown into the air; and there burst into millions of fiery
atoms.


Sir, I'll endeavour to answer you as a Captain ought to be answered: I'll say
but little, but what I do say shall be to the purpose. I say, that a Servant
that is entrusted with the concerns of a Family, ought always to have
Discretion stand Sentinel upon her lips, there strictly to guard the port of
her utterance. For my part, I scorn to let my tongue, Weather-cock like, wag
with the breath of every impertinent enquirer: If I see with one eye; I wink
with the other: and whatever I hear, is that very moment barricaded within the
precincts of this Breast: and mum's the word; and tho I say it, that should not
say it, and all that --


Nay prithee Nibs, halt, halt, halt I say. -- Come, let's to the purpose,
I^expect very soon to be a Colonel, and I'll give you my parole of honour to
make that man a Captain that you shall think fit to make your Husband, deal but
sincerely with me, and let me know how things stand?


Well Sir, what is't you would know?


Why I would know who pays Court to the Widow?


O Lord! all the world: Who pays Court to a rich Widow? Why Courtiers without
Estates, Country-Gentlemen damnably in debt, unbenefic'd Divines. Officers
without Posts, Doctors without Patients, Lawyers without Clients, Tradesmen
without Stocks, younger Brothers without either Fortunes or Employs, Beaux upon
their last legs, cast Stallions, and begga^ly Poets; and there's the greatest
part of the world, I'm confident on it.


Blood and Brimstone, Nibs, prithee leave this eternal chattering, and tell me
who is my most dangerous Rival.


Why then, Sir, as I hope to be a Captains Lady, for once I will divulge --
There's one Mr. Broakage, a wealthy Merchant, who attacks her vigorously.


Hell and furies! Bombs and Bilboa Blades! May rank Coward be imprinted on this
dreadful Countenance, if I don't go raise the Siege instantly -- How! A
City-drone stand in competition with a daring war-like Hornet? Ha!


He's wonderful rich; and you know that's a prevailing accomplishment in the
business of Love -- He has Colonies in all our P^antations, Cargoes in all our
Trading bottoms, and Shares in all our Banks.


Ha! I'll go this moment and depopulate all his Plantations, sink all his
Ships, and blow up all his Banks.


Oh brave Captain!


I'll Carbonade the Dog full of ghastly Wounds, then with my charming Widow in
my arms, I'll mount my triumphal Chariot, and drag his mangled Carcase around
the utmost limits of the Universe.


Well said Captain!


I'll first go to the Widow, and if I find there be occasion, I'll put this
tremendous sentence of mine in execution the very moment afterwards. Parch my
puddings if I don't.


Ha, ha, ha.


Nibs, what has the Captain deserted?


Why faith, I have been whetting his Courage, and spurring him in his amour
with the Widow -- And you know there's no time to be lost in that business.


Gad 'tis true, for if we don't dispose of her in less than four and twenty
hours, I'm confident the Tallymen will be for disman^ing of her -- And should
every Bird setch her own Feathers, I doubt the poor Widow Thoroshift would be
left as bare as AEsop's Daw -- But first I'll to the Commissaries Office, and
make some enquiry after this thundering Captain Bownceby.


Pray do Mr Nickycrack, for as times go now there are near as many that take
the names of Captain upon 'em, as there are Soldiers in the Kings Army.


'Tis true; for a stiff cockt-up Hat, close twisted Peruke, and a tuckt-in
Cravat --


A brandy pimpled face, impudent look, and a hoarse voice. --


A score of new coined Oaths, and half as many drunken Catches --


A great brass hilt Sword, and an Oaken Plant with a dirty Ribbon in it --


A blue pair of Breeches and red Stockings --


Are sufficient to gain any man the title of a Captain, tho perhaps he be but a
Bailiffs Follower --


Or the scoundrel Bully to a Widows Coffee-House in a blind Alley.


And indeed there's as much occasion that you should go to the Change and make
some enquiry after Mr Broakage, that so we may be ready to snap at that which
proves the best bargain.


That's right again; for 'tis as difficult to guess at the substance of a
Merchant by his figure in the world, as 'tis to know the true grief of a young
Widow, by the dismal appearance of her mourning Veil.


Or at the real intentions of a blushing Virgin, when she sets her mouth in
print, and says No to a good proffer --


Or as it is to know the age of a Beau, without having first consulted the
person that shaves his empty Noddle, or his Operator, to be informed, whether
this European Monster is not obliged to the great African one, for the
whiteness of his Teeth --


Or to know his natural imperfections, unless his Valet de Chambre be worked to
a Confession, what suppliments his Beauship makes use of, to correct the
deficiencies of his Shape and Complexion.


Right e'gad, as whether his nice jutting backside be real flesh and blood, or
only an artificial Cusheon of quilted Cotton --


Or whether the calves of those pretty Legs he struts upon, do not owe their
original to some ingenious Artists amongst the Stocking-Weavers in Spittle
Fields.


Ha! Yonder's the Widow, and my Sister Sweetny coming this way from their
evenings devotion.


A fine trade indeed, Prayer-Books in their hands, and the World, Flesh, and
the Devil in their hearts.


Thoroshift I am your Servant -- Sister Sweetny I have just recommended to you
a couple of new Lodgers; I believe they are by this time got to your house.


Pray who are they?


Why there's Mr Vainthroat, a person that we all know, and his friend Sir
Bellamour Blunt, such a morose piece of Knighthood that I never yet saw; should
he chance to go into your Cellar, he'd endanger souring your Beer, more than
all the Thunder of a hot Summer -- But no matter for that, he's a man of
substance, and that is enough for our purpose.


I have heard of him; but is Mr Vainthroat come to Town? I vow I am glad on it,
for he's a pure man.


Mr Vainthroat indeed is most excellent company amongst the women; he knows all
the scandalous news about Town, especially that part of it, that is most
necessary for us to know, as when the close-fisted Steward fills his Masters
Fob for him, and thinks fit to entrust him with the management of three or four
hundred of his own Guineas.


Or when the City Merchant, after a lumping bargain by inch of Candle, comes to
lavish away a hundred pieces amongst our Bon^ Roba's of Covent Garden.


Or when an Inns-of-Court Spark confesses a Statute to raise five hundred
pounds, upon the reversion of his Fathers Manor house, to make his last
flourish withal -- And when that is fairly snackt by Bawds, Pimps, and
Strumpets, the vain Coxcomb sneaks over the Water into the bounds of the Kings
Bench, and there dozes away the remainder of his Life, with fulsome Flip, and
nasty Mundungus.


Nay, he has always pretty stories of the women too.


Ay so he has, Madam; and you know 'tis the delight of our Souls to hear others
of our own Sex reflected on.


So it is, Mrs Sweetny, A^, ha, ha, I laughed heartily when he told me how my
Lady Rampabout uses to infuse Opium into her Husbands Tea, and when the good
old Knight is fast asleep in his chair of ease by the fire side, she very
fairly receives her friendly visits without any danger of a discovery.


Ha, ha, ha: And I laughed as heartily when he told me of a certain Fleetstreet
Dame, that had got a Receipt to give her Husband the nasty Northern distemper,
by dressing his Shirts with a white Powder, that so she might have a pretence
to lye alone, and there entertain the caresses of her lusty long limbed
f^re-man of the Shop.


Ha, ha, ha.


But good lack, alack! how came we to enter into this discourse before we had
laid our Prayer-books out of our hands?


Come, come, as long as there is no body but our selves, 'tis well well enough.


But pray let's leave this chit chat, and mind the main chance: Madam
Thoroshift you shall not fail to have an account of the true estimate of your new
Lovers.


Mr Nickycrack, I am wonderfully obliged to you.


In the first place I will go to my Lord Courtipolls, about your Sister, Madam
Minx's concern, by this time I suppose he may be come from Court: I'll secure
you, I'll bring him along with me.


Pray do, Sir, and besure you urge the business home to his Lordship, make him
sensible of all the incident charges of a lying-in bout.


Nay faith he's not unsensible of such matters; for I believe his Lordship has
paid for fifty lying-in bouts, where he has had no farther concern but for the
bare credit on it.


The truth on it is, his politic vanity makes him the most accomplished Cully in
the Kingdom.


I'll undertake there's never a Crack in Town, if she reports that she was
first debauched by my Lord Courtipoll, but is sure to receive a gratuity from
his Lordship, for telling that most obliging lye.


'Tis pity indeed, that his mighty business at Court about State affairs would
not allow us more of his company.


He business at Court! 'tis all pretences, all pretences ^aith, Sister. 'Tis
true, he goes every day thither, but has nothing to do there, but to walk out
of one Room into another, which indeed he does with a wouderful deal of
politic gravity. And as for his being consulted in State affairs, I dare swear
his opinion was never asked, tho it were only to know the qualifications of his
neighbour in the Country, who solicited hard at Court to be made a Worshipful
Justice.


Well, 'tis time for me to go, and give a welcome to my new guests. Madam, will
you please to walk?


Mr. Nickycrack, my Lord has urgent business with you, and would speak with you
immediately.


Mr Prim, I was this moment coming to pay my humble Deveirs to the most noble
Lord Courtipoll, and now at his Lordships command, I'll fly* I'll fly to his
honourable presence.


Mrs Nibs, I congratulate the cheerful ruddiness of your Complexion, and must
own, that I find a fresh spring of joy begin to flourish in my Bosom, by the
warm influence of your bright shining Eyes -- Gad that was finely spoke, and
very much like a Gentleman.


Pray, M^ Prim, don't exercise your Court flattery upon me.


Not a syllable of flattery, Gad Them me -- May I forfeit the honour of my
Family, if I have not a great veneration for you.


Your Family! Pray what Family are you of, Sir?


What Family? I am of the ancient Family of the Prims of Prim Castle, upon
Chivet Hills, on the Borders of Scotland; and would have you to know, tho I
serve a Peer of the Realm, yet I'd scorn to serve the best Commoner in the
three Kingdoms. Upon the word of a Gentleman you may believe me.


Ha, ha, ha, I could tell this pitiful scoundrel another story if I pleased --
But that I'll reserve to another opportunity -- Prim, I am sorry I cannot stay
at present, and pay you the honour that is due to you, and to the ancient
Family of the Prims of Prim Castle (...) B^t I shall leave you in good hands;
so^ I see Madam Minx's Maid, honest Country Doll, coming this way, and so I am
worthy Mr Prims most obedient.


Mrs Dorothy.


Mistress Dorothy! pray Mistress me no Mistresses; I am plain Country Doll.


Then sweet Country Doll, may base ignominy taint the blood of me, if you have not
something in your face that looks very charming.


Charming! what's charming, I never heard such a word in all my breath, not I.


Pretty Innocence! -- why prithee Doll, how do they make love in the Country?


Why in it Country, if John oasts a Motion to Joan, and Joan she likes it, then
Joan gis John't Sillabub, Then John teakes Joan to the Alehouse, and gis her
Plumb Ceake and Ale, where m'aps ater't first Flagon, John slaps Joan or't
face, then Joan she's dugged. But after the other por or two all is well again;
and Joan she promises to meet John at night upon Measters Hay Mow, where a
hun^er't to one but Joan she proves with Chilt. Then Joan she fetches John
for it the Justice, and Justice ater't hearing whole story, makes John marry
Joan, and there's an end of tat business.


Ha, ha, ha, very pretty I vow.


Now pray Measte^ Prim, will yo tell one how yo maken Love in London.


That I will Doll to the best of my power. In the first place, Great men make
haughty love with their titles and honours -- Elder Brothers just come to their
Estates, make taring love, with gaudy Liveries and gilt Coaches -- Statesmen
and men of business, make solid love with formal shrug and politic grimace.
And your Citizens make sordid love, with paltry Presents from their
well-stockt Purses.


Good, pray go on.


Officers of the Army make thundering love, with Volleys of Oaths and Curses.
And the Beaus make as apish and impertinent love with their Combs and Snuff
boxes, as the Wits do tiresome and whining love, with their Songs and Elegies.


So, very well.


Your cropt-ear'd Prentices make sneaking love, with stealing into Abigal's
pocket either an Orange stuffed with Cloves, or a good slice of Ginger-bread --
Pert dapper Pages, and spruce Valet de Chambres, make teasing love with
ruffling of Heads and hauling of Petticoats. In fine, your Bullies, and
Troopers, make barbarous love, by knocking down their Dowdies, and enjoying
them in a swooned.


O Gemini gemini, did one ever hear the like on it? -- But pray when will yore
Lord come and make love again with my Mistress? Poor Soul! he has brought her
to a fine pass a my word; she's either longing or puking all the day long, so
she is.


My pretty Dolly, my Lord won't fail of being with her this evening; and as
soon as they are Chambered, thee and I will go and solace our selves over a
glass of Wine at the Tavern.


Marry but don yo think that I will trust my self? that would be fine work
indeed.


In token that I'll do nothing but what is becoming a Gentleman, I'll make my
dear Rustic Cherub a Present of this Diamond Ring.


O Lord, O Lord, a Diamond Ring on Doll's Finger, how that will look when I goo
a into the Country, to rake ater't Cart or milk Kye again.


It was presented me by a great Courtier, and I hope Doll you will accept of it
from my hands, as an inviolable pledge of my just and honourable pretensions.


In troth Master Prim, it shall go hard, but that I'll make you amends some
way or other -- Ods so, here comes my Mistress.


How now Doll, why are you not at home doing what I bad you?


I was just a gooing forsooth.


Nay, now stay and go along with me -- Mr Prim what does my Lord Cou^p^'l mean,
never to see a body again.


M^dam Minx, I was coming to acquaint your Ladyship that his Lordship will be
with you immediately. I'll assure you Madam, that my Lord languishes with
impatience, till he h^s once more sacrificed his bleeding heart at the shrine
of your most illustrious beauty -- Gad I shall rival my Lord with pure dint of
Eloquence.


Sackerfize and Lusters, I don't know what you mean by such words not I, we are
not used to such gibberish in the Country -- Pray go tell him that my heart is
ready to burst for him, that I have almost cried my eyes out, that I'll neither
eat, drink, nor sleep till I have seen him.


Madam, upon the unblemished fidelity of a Gentleman, I'll punctually deliver
your Ladyships commands.


Well Doll, hast thee been playing thy Country part with Prim, ha?


To a hair e'faith, Madam; the Puppy has just given me a Diamond Ring to go
with him anon to the Tavern.


Let me see it. Upon my Soul'tis right, and 'tis high time for me to look to my
hits too, and fix his Lord -- This evening in spite of fate I'll hook him into
settlement. What signifies his Lordships paying for Lodging and Diet, and some
little nasty Pr^esents of a Gown and Petticoat once a month or so. A musty
Quietus Judge would give me as much as that comes to, besides the assurance of
a Legacy of broad Gold, that the old Toast had palmed when he sat upon the
Bench for perverting of Justice.


Indeed, Madam, 'tis true, I know a Lady that has three times as much only for
scratching the Poll of a Gouty Citizen.


A woman of pleasure is worse than an Indian Slave, that has not a Settlement
at her own Command. A Quality Mistress should keep her Coach, a brace of
Footmen, and a leash of young Gallants at least.


Pray, Madam, be ruled by me, get the writings drawn, according as my Lord has
already given you the particulars. And when you have worked up his passion to a
glowing pitch, then of a sudden take upon you to be peevishly coy, and don't so
much as let him squeeze your hand, till he has first squeezed the Wax.


Don't question Doll, but I'll manage him as a Cull of the first head ought to
be managed.


Do so, Madam.


Tears mixed with Smiles, won't fail to do the feat;
And Country Minx may prove a London cheat.
Plainder, Mrs. Sweetny and Ophelia walking off at some distance.


PRay Landlady Sweetny, let me recommend to your care my Daughter Ophelia there
-- My Daughter, who I may justly say is --


Is! Sir Wealthy Plainder? she is the mirror of Beauty, the pride of Mankind,
the glory of her Sex, and the wonder of the Age; she is --


Struck with amazing confusion to be thus flattered. Oh how odious a creature
is a fawning Hypocrite.


I'll say this for Ophelia, that she's an excellent Huswife -- You must know,
do you mind, that I have bred her to be --


A slave to a miserable parent


To be, I say, exquisitively officious in the affairs of the Family. She shall
clarify Whey, make Nettle Porridge, and Barley-broth, with ever a Girl in the
Kingdom.


This indeed is a true bill of fare of our late Country Diet.


Now look ye Mrs Sweetny, if you can find me out some substantial Tradesman,
that will take my Daughter purely for her intrinsic value, and expect nothing
with her, I may perhaps be persuaded to part with her.


Here's a Parents affection; and yet he's every moment thund^ing in my ears
fi^ial duty, forsooth.


Well, at present I have some business of consequence to dispatch, I'll
therefore leave her with you: but be sure that amongst your many pious
instructions, ply her home with the fifth Commandment, descant well upon that I
say; so that reverend old age may keep its lawful Sovereignty.


O good, Sir, what small Talent I have either in argument or eloquence, shall
certainly be employed for the service of Sir Wealthy Plainder, and for the real
good and essential benefit of pretty Madam Ophelia here -- I'll take care she
shall accompany me to my daily Devotions.


Devorions! As for Devovions, do you mind me, I do not think 'tis a pin matter.
If she asks me blessing, do you see, 'tis enough, 'tis enough in all
conscience.


And that I should go without, were the purchase of it any more than a bare God
a mercy.


Well, mind what I have said, and so, do ye see, fare you well. Da, da,
Daughter.


Come, pretty Madam Ophelia, now you and I are together in private, we may take
the liberty to open our Souls freely. Dissimulation is a loose upper garment,
that may be laid aside at pleasure.


Now the old Cockatrice begins to appear in her proper colours.


You are young, Madam, and consequently must have wishes; soft, young, tender
wishes, which wishes may be satisfied, so it be within the rules of discretion.


If discretion direct our wishes, I am confident they can never tend to any
thing that is vicious -- Well, since 'tis not in the power of Mankind to shock
my principles, or tarnish my virtue, I'll for once counterfeit a levity, and
see what she would be at Sweetny, that I do believe the shackles of ignorance
to be the greatest burden that can be imposed upon us Mortals. I am therefore
very willing to surrender my self to ye, that I may be better instructed.


That's my good Girl, dost thee know what love is, Child?


Not very well: But I have heard 'tis something that of a sudden plays and
dances about the heart, and from thence gradually trickles along the Veins,
till having diffused itself into subtle rays, i^ steals out at the corners of
the Eyes to reach the object of desire.


Ah, ha, ha, a pretty notion truly of Loves first Onset. But I must tell you,
that were Love to do nothing else, than what is performed by ineffectual
glances Well, I'll say no more, these are many gay, young, Sparks about the
Town. Let opportunity show ye further -- What think you of Mr Vainthroat that
came up to Town with you? Ah! He's a pure man* -- Od, so, see where he comes.
How do you do, good Mr Vainthroat, after your Journey?


Pretty well, Madam, but methinks I want to divert my self with some of my old
hearty Bottle friends.


And pray can't you no way divert your self with us that are Women?


Faith, Madam, not easily; for generally you that are Women, either affectation
makes you troublesome, pride makes you imperious, or an over easiness makes you
nauseous.


Such tempers are often assumed, Sir, when at so cheap a rate a woman can free
herself from some of your impertinent and coxcombly addresses.


I thought Mr Vainthroat had been better bred, than to express himself in
general terms, before particular Company, especially before a Lady every way so
deserving, as is Madam Ophelia here.


O Lord, Madam, I am sufficiently acquainted with the bright Ophelia^s
perfections, to except her from the whole Sex.


I am sure not a Member of the Sex, ought ever to value what is said by a
public Detractor.


Detraction! why 'tis by that alone that I have insinuated my self into the
intimate acquaintance of all the Women of Quality about the Town.


Come, Mr Vainthroat, you shall atone for your Fault by giving us a Song.


With all my heart, Madam; but I wish by that means I do not commit a greater.


THE Riddle of Nature,
Is a Female Creature;
She's graciously proud,
Maliciously good,
And her business is to be idle.
The mysterious Toy,
If she weep 'tis for joy,
And when she beguiles,
'Tis done with her smiles,
He's mad then that bites of the Bridle.
O fie upon you, for you're a sad man -- Have you seen Madam Thoroshift yet, Mr
Vainthroat.


Yes, faith, ha, ha, ha, poor Widow, I pity her e'gad, if she lets that
Tenement of hers stand a little longer uninhabited, it will be difficult for
the next possessor to make good repairs.


I'll promise you, Sir, she does not want applications, but her prudence makes
her cautious -- Come, shall us walk into the Dining Room, by this time I
believe my Lord Courtipoll may be come.


'Tis done! 'tis done. That heart that till now ne'er felt a single throb, is
become all over pangs -- I must own, that at first sight I thought her
beautiful; and what I have now overheard, assures me that her virtue is
inestimable. -- Oh Ophelia.


By hard shift I have slipped the Company of that wicked Seducer. And now I ll
retire to my chamber, to enjoy the true pleasure of thinking.


Bless me! She's here


Sir.


Do ye discover nothing by my looks?


Indeed, Sir Bellamour, I always thought you looked something cynical: And I
believe you are now running mad.


My passion, I must confess, is something furious. Love is a sort of madness.


The knowledge of your Distemper is half your cure, Sir?


Will you suffer your pity to assist in the cure?


I am not credulous enough to think that you have any occasion for it. --
However, I can't stay to discuss the point with you at present.


Why so? where are you going then?


I'll soon try his reality.


Indeed I may, Madam.


Then know I'm going to my Chamber, to fetch my Mask, Hood and Scarf, and so
jaunt it a little.


Jaunt it! -- What's the meaning of that?


Why that's to take a Hackney Coach, scour from Playhouse to Playhouse, till I
meet with some young Fellow that has power enough to attack me, stock enough to
treat and present me, and folly enough to be laughed at for his pains.


Sure that Devils impliment, my Landlady, has not already induced her
unexperienced youth.


Have you any thing else to say to me, Sir?


A great deal, Madam.


Then when I have nothing else to do, I'll hear you; and so ^ loving Sir
Bellamour.


Well, tho I am not cut out for a soft Lover, I have a resolution that's
capable of persevering. And if I mistake not, I do already make plain
discoveries through the thin veil of my Mistresses pretences; so that till a
farther opportunity, I shall rest satisfied that I have ad^serving object for
my pas^ion, and entrust to her and fate for a suitable success.


Pray Captain, what do you think the world would say on me, should I bestow my
self and fortune on a person --


Halt, halt good Madam: before you say a word on my person, pray be so kind as
to view me well Do but mind this capacious Breast; these robust Shoulders, the
sturd^ss of my Chi^e, the bre^h of my Ga^kins, the true turn and symmetry of my
Limbs, and the length of my Foot.


Your person I must confess is not despicable, but then, Sir, your ^ion, where
you may come to expose your l^fe --


Halt. halt again. I say, if (...) once cope with my Widow, adieu Scarlet
E'saith. If ever I spill drop of blood in the Field more, may my (...) be food
for Ravens, and my Bones lie blanching upon a Country Common.


But then Captain, without an Estate where's an equivolent for my Fortune?


An equivolent, Madam! Why this person of mine that you have al^eady viewed, is
more than equivolent for an Earldom, if inherited by a puny Lanthorn-back^t
Chitty-fac't Stripling.


Look ye, Captain, I question not but you know that I am addressed to by Mr
Broakage, a wealty Merchant; and I have no sooner mentioned him, but see where
he comes, for the present Ill leave you together.


Sir?


Sir.


Did you never hear of Captain Bownceby?


I have heard of several Captain Bowncebys, Captain Hackums, and Captain Kick
and Cuffs. And what then, Sir?


I find this Mongrel has got Beef and Pudding in his paunch, and I believe dare
sight Bownceby can do if he pleases?


I know what the Law will suffer him to do; and if he does more than that --


What then, Sir?


Then, Sir, his big looks may chance to dwindle into a Tyburn grin.


Ay, Sir, ay Sir, 'tis well you have got Tyburn on your side, or let me tell
you, Mr Broakage should not have out-liv'd his last words, scar^y my Carcass if
he should.


Gentlemen the Widow has over-heard your high words, and sent me to tell you,
that if you don't this moment accommodate your differences, and embrace as
friends, she'll never see the face of either of you while she breaths again;
therefore if you have any value for her, I hope you'll not dispute the
executing her Commands.


Mrs Nibs, the Widow shall be obeyed by Captain Bownceby, and all the Bowncebys
in Christendom.


And by me Benjamin Broakage, and all the Broakages in the Universe.


Honest Mr Broakage!


Dear Captain Bownceby!


A couple of Coxcombs!


You shall for the future command me and all my Weapons, even from my Bagonet
to my Back-sword.


And you my Purse, from the Decus's to the Jacobus's.


Is it so? Gad then it shall not be long before I borrow Money of him, I'll
promise him.


Come Gentlemen, what think ye of strengthening your friendship with a Health
to the Widow, and so binding your bargain with a Bottle?


With all my heart, Mrs Nibs.


Come along then.


What the dickings is the matter with ye, to be always thus teasing a body when
you come to Town?


Matter my Minky! Why I love my Minky. Piddy my Minky let me go a little into
die Chamber widdee; wou't a my Minky?


My Chamber! don't you think I^ll let any thing in the shape of Man enter my
Chamber doors?


Odsboblikins let me go in any other shape then: Tie a Collar about my neck and
lead me thither in the shape of Towzer, if dow tinkst fit, my Minky. Nay, I'll
be die Pussy-cat, die Puppy-dog, die any ting, my little pity Minky.


None of these shapes will do indeed, Sir Wealthy.


Shall I come then, like another Jove, in the shape of --


Alack Sir, you have such winning ways with you.


I call, and I call, catch Minky; edad there be Purse and all, my Child a
grace, there's Gold for thee. -- Edad I'm old Sir Wealthy still, tho I've sold
my Estate, plead poverty to the world, and have swore my self not worth a
groat, on purpose to avoid paying the Kings Taxes.


A very conscientious Commonwealth^-man truly. Well, Sir, I have bethought of a
way take to you into my Chamber unsuspected -- Doll, go and fetch hither one of
your quondam Country Habits, she and I will dress you up, and if my Lord
Courtipoll comes, I'll pretend you are my old Nurse just come out of the
Country -- But be sure, whatever you do, don't ye discover your self, if you
do, you'll ruin me for ever.


E'dad this is a pure contrivance: And never Nurse hugged a Bantling, as I'll
hug thee for this invention. Minky.


Come, come strip off your Jerkin, and let's dizen you.


Hold up your head Gammer, and mump and simper a little.


Nay I believe I shall not wholly unbecome a woman's Dress, for I have features,
Chicken; features, tho I say it, that are not altogether despicable -- See, see
how I can roll my Eyes about; and then pout out a plump under-lip, that would
make the mouth of a Hermit to water again.


Ah, ha, ha,


Now if any body ask you any questions, take your Apron thus, -- drop two or
three Curtzies, and say, I forsooth, and No forsooth.


I'll warrant ye, let me alone for I forsooths and No forsooths.


O Lord Mistress! does not Master look just like Joan the Ale-wife, at our
Church-yard stile?


Madam Minx, here's my Lord Courtipoll.


Oh! my dear Country puggy.


O my Lord! why would you stay so long from a body?


We men of business, my dear Pug, lie under that heavy curse to have our
pleasures give way to our toils. And now I talk of business, let me consider a
little. Prim, disperse my Footmen. Let one wait at the Secretaries Office,
another at the Admiralty, and the rest at the Foreign Ministers, that I may
have speedy notice where my assistance is required


So, under this pretence the Servants are now set at liberty, and each man may
go visit his own Pug if he pleases, and so follow the present blessed vocation
of their politic Lord and Master.


Who's this you have got with you, Pug?


'Tis my Nurse, my Lord, that is just come out of the Country.


Bless me! did ever such a sweet Creature as thee art, suck at the breast of
such a Horse-fac't Dame as this is? But hold, I^ll go ask her after some affai^
in the Country, that may in some measure relate to the State. Let me consider
-- Good woman, is there store of Acorns this year, ha?


A notable politic State question truly.


Nurse, why don't ye answer my Lord? -- I find the poor old woman is in a
quandery, I believe she never saw a Lord before.


On my Soul that may very well be. -- Nay, I my self have known a whole monthly
meeting of Country Justices struck so dumb at the grandeur of my presence, that
it was scarce within the power of Stale Beer to set their Tongues a moving
again. -- But come what say ye, old Mrs Chue cud, are Acorns plenty or not, ha?


Nurse, why don't ye answer, my Lord.


Yes, forsooth.


Then we may expect our Venison to be fat, if my Dog of a Keeper have the grace
to keep the Parish Hogs out of the Park. -- But hold, let me consider -- Now
for some Domestic Intelligence: Is the Widow your Sister married yet? ha, Pug?


She's not sped yet, but o'restockt with Suitors, as we sen in the Country.


Pretty Pug, thy Country language does become thee. But hold, let me consider
once again -- I profess there ought to be a Statute of Restriction relating to
the Widows of this Kingdom; they are generally so damned cunning in their
Amours, that half a score of Widows are sufficient to enslave all the young
fellows about the Twon.


Ah, my Lord, the young fellows about the Town are not so easily enslaved in
this age of Liberty.


O my Lord Courtipoll, I can't but with Reverence acknowledge the high honour
your Lordship does my house, in letting its mean roof shadow a person of so
much worth, goodness and wisdom, as is the Lord Courtipoll.


Oh Mrs. Sweetny, you are always so lavish in your expressions! -- Ha! Bless
me! I'm Planet-struck -- Never was an Astrologer more amazed at the discovery
of a new Star, than I am at the sight of that beautiful creature -- Pray, Mrs.
Sweetny, by what name and title must I salute this fair Angel?


'Tis the beautiful Madam Ophelia. my Lord, Daughter to Sir Wealthy Plainder.


So, my Lord I find is embarking himself for another piece of Gallantry. -- His
politic Lordship f^lls as naturally into new amours, as a Town Bully runs
himself into fresh Rencounters. -- Minx, Minx, ply thy stumps, or all is lost,
faith girl.


My Lord, my Lord, you forget to bring your Pug the Lapdog you promised her, so
you do. --


I profess I was within my self deciding an intricate State question, and find
it must be so.





What would this dry chopped Hag have? -- Pray good woman don't you nose me at
this rate.


Ye young Baggage don't ye know me?


I'm resolved I won't know him at present


Ye young Jade you, I'm your Father: But if ye discover me look to it.


Alas the poor woman is beside her senses I find.


Hussy I'll thump your Jacket for this. I could find in my heart to tear ye in
pieces.


Here, pray let somebody lay hold on this Mad woman, she talks of tearing me in
pieces.


What's the matter, what's the matter with the Nurse, ha?


Alas, alas! the poor Nurse is sometimes troubled with fits, and I fear she's
now fallen into one.


Hold her down, hold her down Brother Nickycrack; and Doll do you run and fetch
the Bottle of Spirit of Harts-horn, run quickly.


O pox! I find the Nurse proves to be the old Fornicator Sir Wealthy Plainder,
(aside.) So so, I find she begins to recover. -- Come, now let me alone with
her, I'll take her, and give her a turn or two in the Air, and a dram of Aqua
Mirabilis, which is the life of an old woman, and I'll warrant ye all will be
well again.


I must go see however, that they don't carry the business too far, as bad as
he is.


What has this new-born Star left our Hemisphere already, ha?


Go, go my Lord, I find you don't love your Pug, that ye don't; if you did, you
would never have stood and stared upon a strange face at that rate, indeed you
would not.


Not love my Pug? By the Soul of Matchiavel but I do, and that's the greatest
oath a Statesm^n can swear by -- Were I, my Dear, to gaze upon crowds of
Angels, and should my Pug be amongst them, she alone should have th^ last and
fixing look.


There's a kind Lord for ye. Come, my Lord, by this time I suppose Supper waits
for your Lordship.


Come along then. -- And after that I and my charming Pug here,


In amorous sports will so Di^ely toy,
The God of Love shal^ clap his wings for joy.
AH Mr Nickycrack, is it not a hard case for me that am but a poor Commoner,
thus to be rivalled by a Lord.


Lord, Sir Wealthy Plainder, why would ye not discover your self and concerns
to me? -- All the world knows the sincerity of honest Nickycrack.


Alas, alas! in this case there can be no remedy but patience. Now must I
forsooth even draw in my Horns, sneak off and dance Attendance, tho I am sure
to enter into a Steel course to cure my self of the Spleen for it.


Come, Sir Wealthy, do but open your self-freely, and I'll engage to assist ye.


Open my self, I that I will with all my heart, and my Purse too, I'll promise
ye -- I am not that indigent person I pretend my self, but am as rich in
reality as a Chemist is in fancy -- There, Nickycrack, take this as an earnest
of my future intentions.


O Lord, Sir, I am now linked to your service by the very tie of gratitude: and
so to the point, Sir; I very well know your affections for Mrs Minx, and have
already thought of an Expedient, that if you be but consenting, shall soon put
ye in quiet possession of the charming Fair.


Ah my dear Boy, propose it, propose it I say, and never doubt my consent.


The business is this, I perceived my Lord Courtipoll fixed his eye upon your
Daughter Ophelia, and then he licked his Lips, bit his Thumbs, sighed, and
pressed his sides with his Arms thus.


Very good.


Now, Sir, if you be but consenting, that we shall endeavour to work up her
inclinations.


Inclinations! 'Sbud, I say she shall have inclinations if that be all. I'll
undertake to enjoin it by force of power paternal.


A speci^l Father e'saith


VVork^ up quoth a! E'gad in this case she shall be worked up, and worked down
too, I'll promise her that.


Not so fierce, pray Sir, women are of a perverse and refractory temper, and
their wills must by gentle and insinuating means be suppled into? compliance,
and not rashly forced by violence. This I'll do, I'll first go and engage my
Sister Sweetny on our side, and don't ye doubt the effects.


Prithee do, my dear Boy, about it this moment I beg thee


Ha, ha, ha, Sir Bellamour in love, pleasant enough e'faith: why an amour, man,
will sit as awkwardly upon thee, as a good suit of Clothes does upon an uncouth
Country Squire -- But see yonder's your Father-in-law that is to be.


Rot him, he's a Brute.


However, you must be civil to him on the account of Ophelia -- Your Servant,
Sir Wealthy, how goes it with our fellow Traveller?


How can it go well with any Gentleman that is decayed in his Fortunes, and as
it were turned loose into the world, especially such a base degenerated world
as this is?


Faith I believe the world is as it used to be.


I am of your opinion, the rich dread disasters, and the poor contemn 'em.
Fools wonder at what wise men foresaw. -- And potent Knavery depresses and
preys upon meritorious honesty; and so it was always, I believe.


As for the female part of the world, I'm sure it is as it should be.


How is that, pray Sir?


Why the dear charming Creatures are so coming, that there's not one in fifty
but Cuckolds her Husband before she has him -- As thus Sir, when once a young
couple have entertained a correspondence, and that correspondence ripens into
warm desires, and those desires require fruition, then she immediately, for the
security of Reputation, marries another, on purpose to give her Spark an
opportunity to reap the Blessings freely -- And that's Cuckoldom before
Marriage for ye, at least it's so intentionally*


And pray Sir why could not the Lovers themselves have marry^d?


O Pox! that were the way to have had the joys palled upon their hands
immediately. Marriage joys, foh!


Vainthroat you're a horrible censorious fellow; and abundantly too general in
thy reflections ^elating to the fair Sex. Sir Wealthy Plainder, if you please,
a word with you.


Your pleasure, Sir.


You have a Daughter, Sir.


I have so: And 'tis well I have, as the case stands, I can tell you that Sir.


I must tell you, I think her extremely Beautiful.


So much the better for my purpose still, Sir.


In short, I love her.


And to be as short as you, you are not like to have her, nor have I any thing
to give her, Sir.


My affections are above a bargain.


And below the mark, I'll tell ye that.


How so, Sir, I hope our qualities are equal.


In short, I have engaged her to a person above your quality.


Who's that, pray Sir?


Why then to be plain with you, 'tis to my Lord Courtipoll.


Lord Courtipoll! why he's married.


Married! What then, ha, ha, ha, may not he have occasion for my Daughter for
all that? Ha, ha, ha, married, that's a good one e'faith.


What does the old Rogue mean, would he prostitute his own Daughter?


Sir, I must beg your pardon, for I am this moment going to see them fairly put
together: and so your servant.


Oh horrid Monster! however, I don't question but the young Ladies Virtue will
stand the shock, and baffle the intentions of this villain, and so render
herself the most adorable Creature upon the face of the Earth.


Mrs Nibs, you seem to have discretion, and I believe you may be confided in.


Sir, I'll endeavour to merit your good opinion, by any service you shall
please to command me -- In the first place you may be assured of my secrecy.


Pray Sweet-heart accept of this small token,


That I am, Sir; there is nothing that is done, said, or scarce thought of
under this Roof, that is unknown to your very humble Servant Nibs Trusty.


Then, Mrs Nibs Trusty, I need not tell ye that there are at present base
things in agitation.


I know what you mean, tho I will say but little. Madam Ophelia is to be
sacrificed to the pleasures of my Lord Courtipoll, to gratify her old doting
Fathers passion for Mrs Minx, his Lordships present kept Mistress.


I find your intelligence is authentic.


I am not unac^ainted neither with your pretensions to the beautiful Ophelia --
What is it now you'd have me do?


Only to give me a punctual notice of proceedings.


I'll do it on the forfeiture of my life. And more than that, I'll assist ye to
countermine any Plots that shall be laid against the young Lady's Honour -- You
seem to be a man of worth, and I have sound ye a person of Generosity,
therefore assure your self that in your affairs I'll be as diligent as a
Court-Procurer, and as secret as a Mother Mid-night. This moment I'll see how
things go on: and so I am Sir Bellamour's most humble Servant.


But come, prithee Vainthroat give me some account of this Lord Courtipoll, and
look you deal sincerely.


Ha, ha, ha, What, Knight, art stung already with that pestiferous Viper
Jealousy?


I'm not distrustful, but cautious.


Why then, Sir, upon my word my Lord Courtipoll is a dangerous Rival, Folly and
Profuseness are taking qualities among the Ladies. And faith they are in the
right on it; for how can a Woman better secure her pleasures, than when she
commands the Purse of a liberal Fool?


For my part, I shall not think him dangerous; for I'm confident Ophelia has
Discretion enough to laugh at his Folly, and a sufficient stock of Virtue to
despise the baseness of his Bribes.


Come, Sir Knight, that you may shake off this moody amorous temper, I'll
entertain you with a Song and Dance.


LEt never dull sorrow our joys invade,
But for ever let's follow the topping trade:
Let a merry merry Song
Drive the Current of Time along;
He's a Prince of a Man
That doubles his Span,
And makes it a Cubit long.
Call Harry to fetch us more Bottles in,
Don't tarry, since to Revel we thus begin:
Let's tipple tipple on,
Till the Moon and Stars are gone;
'Tis a meeting divine,
When our faces so shine,
That they Rival the Rising Sun
So, very well -- To morrow you shall range the Town along with me* A Wench and
a Bottle is a certain Antidote against the poison of Love: But for the present
let's go and divert our selves with the follies that this Family of ours can
afford us.


Toll, doll, di, da, doll. Broakage, sneaking up in this corner; Hercules,
fling by my Club and take up the Distaff -- The roaring Lion shall clap his
Tail betwixt his Legs, and become a fawning Spaniel to lick the dust off your
Ladyships Shooe-soles -- But first, Madam, let me beg leave to sacrifice
yonders snivelling Whore^ bird, up in the corner there, to my own vengeance, and
for your Ladyships honour.


what's the matter with the Captain here, he is fallen fast asleep.


Why I left him and Mr Broakage in the Buttery, drinking the Widows health upon
a reconciliation, and I find they have made one another drunk.


E^gad let's play him some trick or other, and try to startle this undaunted
Hero.


With all my heart. We will take out the Candles, and get the Trumpets my Lord
Courtipoll has brought to rattle him awake of a sudden, and see how he'll bear
it.





'Tis I, Captain Bownceby, 'tis I, your friend Nickycrack.


Then I find I have been dreaming all this while.


But why this cold sweat? why all this fear, good Captain?


Why would ye have a man have courage in his sleep, that is a jest indeed. Now
I am awake, Mr Nickycrack, I must tell you, that there is nothing upon the face
of the earth, that can terrify Captain Bownceby; nay, I defy the King of
Terrors himself, and all his Hell-born Guard de Corps. But hark ye, dear
Nickycrack, prithee tell me how dost think my affairs stand with the Widow?


On my Soul, as you can wish your self. Ah Captain! I have heard her speak very
feelingly of that graceful person of yours.


Very like so I vow, for I took care to make her view me distinctly. And what
if I take an opportunity to palm the true dimensions uodn her? ha, Boy.


Now's your time to bear up briskly: Your Rival Mr Broakage is dead drunk in
the Buttery; and I'll contrive to secure him for one hour at the least, don't
question it.


Egad then I'll go strike her home. I'll first go wash and tallow, and then --
Have at thy Coat, old Widow.


But Captain, methinks you're somethiug forgetful of your faithful servant, Mr.
Nickycrack.


Not at all, I protest Sir. Ods life man, the Arrears are not yet paid, when
they come in thou shalt swim in Money: by the bar^el of a Blunderbuss thou
shall it, my Boy.


But Sir, if you please, in the mean time to sign this small Note, it will
encourage the work strangely.


That I will my Lad, I'll sign it as freely as ever I signed a false
Muster-Roll. Let me see it.


So, Sir, now away to the Widow, and Heavens prosper ye; in the mean time I'll
take care of Mr Broakage.


Then faith I'll lose no time -- Adieu.


Well Nibs, I have got the Captain in black and white here; and now I'll go try
to get the Merchant under the same circumstances.


I have been examining the Merchants Cargo for him.


Well! and how, was he richly laden?


Hang him, I'll be far enough if he is not a Bankrupt, he had not one souse of
Ready in's pocket.


What Bills had he Child?


Bills he had indeed, of Taylor, Surgeon, Landlady, Cook, and Laundress, but
not one single Bill of Credit.


The less favour he is like to find at my hands, I'll promise him. Come, let's
go order matters to the best advantage.


Hold! let me consider! what shall I say first? -- Oh now I have it. Do you
know who I am, Madam, ha?


'Tis in vain to be in earnest with this politic Blockhead. I'll even play upon
the fool to make my self diversion.


Right, Madam, I am so. -- And pray, Madam, how came you to know that I was a
man of noble quality, ha?


Your mean and person bespoke you so, my Lord.


Very like so, I vow -- Gad I'll try her parts a little farther,


No doubt, for your wisdom, my Lord.


Ay, say ye so? -- Why should you think so, pray, ha?


By the solemn air of your countenance, my Lord.


By the soul of Matchiavel, she's a mere Sybil,


To sit at the Helm of Government, and steer the State, my Lord.


O bless me! I vow Madam you're a person of the clearest apprehension that ever
I yet conversed withal. Should I have a Son by you, I'd forfeit my honour if he
did not bid fair for the Crown of Poland, should there chance to be an Election
by the time he came of age. But now to the business in hand: Come, pray let's
sit down, and I will make love to you as becomes a Statesman, by asking of some
politic questions.


What can the Coxcomb mean by this? however, at the present, I'm resolved to
humour him.


Then I am the happiest man in the world, I find the Heavens are propitious to
our Amours; for you must know I always sleep on my right, so that I, each night
^laspt within thy circling arms, shall coo, pur, and murmur out my love with
the greatest transports imaginable.


This I must confess, was a rapture worthy a Politician.


But hold, let me consider once again! -- Ay, if so, then that may very well
be.


Ha, ha, ha, if this be politic Love, it is a very cool way of proceeding.


Hold out of the way, you old doting fool ye.


Odslifelikius she has made my ears sing again; what a plaguy strength did the
young vixon strike withal.


So so, is this going to see a Packet opened? You a person of quality, and tell
a lie.


You mistake, Pug, a Statesman can't tell a lie, he only gives out false
intelligence to amuse and gain advantage.


A fig for a Statesman, don't tell me of a Statesman, ne'er a Statesman in
Christendom shall abuse me. Don you think to leave me in this condition,
without providing either for me or my burden here. By jenkins before I will be
served so, I'll take up the Fire-sork and crack the very skull of you, so I
will.


Patience, patience, Pug -- E'gad I'll comply, for it may be a fatal thing for
a Politician to receive a very small blow, if it chance to hit in the right
place.


Come, come away, will you? The Lawyer waits for you, will you go in and seal
the Writings, or no?


That I will, my Pug, I never designed otherwise.


Come along then. Come, Sir Wealthy, you shall go and be witness.


With all my heart, Madam; ods life, if his Lordship delivers I'll take
possession e'faith.


I guest, Madam, at your uneasiness, and therefore soon contrived your relief.


And I guess who employed ye, and therefore shall take care to keep you in the
dark.


Did not you find his Lordship very troublesome and impertinent?


Not at all. How can a person of his quality be thought troublesome, or a man
of his parts be reckoned impertinent.


I scarce believe you to be serious. I know you, Madam Ophelia, to have a
better judgment; but there is a person in the world, tho I'll say nothing of
him, who has no small esteem for you, and is really a man of parts, an honest
Gentleman, whose pretensions are honourable: what think you of Sir Bellamour
Blunt, Madam?


I think he is a Hog, ameer Hog; who do you think would be troubled with his
moroseness?


It is his true notion of things, and the sincerity of his principles that
makes him so downright, both in his discourse and actions: but here he comes,
let him speak for himself.


Are you now at leisure to hear me, Madam?


No, nor never will be at leisure to hear any body but my Lord


Well Sir, if you have any business at Court, I may perhaps prevail with my
Lord Courtipoll to intercede for you.


Thank my Stars, my business there is equal to his interest, which --.


Hold, no reflections upon a noble Courtier, pray Sir? They ought to be above
censure.


Nay his Lordship may be a great Courtier as far as I know. Gay fools often
serve for the ornamental furniture of a Court -- Tho this is not my business at
present. Now I have an opportunity I must tell you, that I have a strong and
sincere passion for you.


Passion! Ha, ha, ha. And I must tell you that I have a strong and sincere
aversion to all manner of passion, especially a foolish lovepassion. 'Tis a
turbulent storm of the mind, that raises a short blustering disorder, but soon,
alas, flags into a cool regardless calm.


Mine, Madam, is of a temperament that promises duration.


Many things that are very promising, meet with strange alterations before
th^ir events.


Have you had any account of this Lord Courtipoll?


Yes, yes, he has kept a Mistress, and what by that? we're not to expect Saints
about the Town in this Age -- The very bulchin Country Calf, that till the age
of one and twenty sucks the Teat, and bleats at the heels of his Lady Dam, soon
finds an opportunity to lick the face of some homely Heifer or other.


Do ye know that he's Married, and what function you are designed for?


The thoughts of this, I must confess, in spite of my pretensions, shocks the
very soul of me, and fires me all over with Indignation.


O fie, O fie, come along with me, Hussy, quickly.


Sir, Sir, your Periwig is a fire, your Perriwig's afire, I say.


Where, where?


'Tis out now, Sir: And all's well again.


Ophelia?


She's stepped in before you, Sir.


Edad then I'll after her.


Was there ever such a barbarous horrid fellow, as this Sir Wealthy?


Come, Sir Bellameur, all will go well, I'll warrant you. I can see as far into
a Millstone as another body: and can foretell the success of an Amour better
than e're a Fortune-teller in the Kingdom: Tho I love to say but little, I
don't question but I shall bring all things about, and give you the possession
of both the Lady and a considerable Fortune into the bargain, out of her
Fathers concealed Treasure. For tho I never do discover Secrets, yet I must
tell you, that, for all Sir Wealthy pleads poverty at this rate, yet the old
Rogue is as rich as a Jew. You shall not want my assistance I promise ye, Sir
Bellamour. But mum's the word, not one syllable more. And for your comfort,


At Games of Love, where Lovers tug most hard,
'Tis trusty Nibs that proves the surest Ca^d*
WEll, and pray Madam what proceedings is there in your grand affair of Love?


Indeed Mrs. Sweetny I'm at last drove to take my choice of two Extremes,
either to be stripped, and flung into durance, by the force of Law Temporal* or
to be divested of all freedom, and deliver my self into Matrimonial bonds, by
the power of Law Spiritual.


If you'll be advised by me accept of the latter, for in that the tie is
mutual: And your knowledge of the world will direct you to loose your own hands
at pleasure.


Then as to my choice of persons, whether I shall take that palpable Fool of a
Captain, or the shrewd suspected Knave of a Merchant.


Where there is a plentiful Estate a Fool may be very convenient* But in your
circumstances the Merchant, that, no doubt, is well acquainted with all manner
of subtle Tricking, would, I think, be the fitter Match.


They have both my promise to dispatch the business this very night, and they
equally confide in it.


I must tell you, dear Madam, that I look upon both of 'em of very uncertain
worth. I wish you would take Courage, prune, bristle, and display your Charms
so, that you might entangle the affections of honest Sir Bellamour Blu^t; he's
a man of a known value.


Alas his gruffship is already visibly fastened: Don't you see how he ^lounces
about after the tail of your new guest Ophelia?


Here comes his friend Vainthroat, we'll engage him in the business?


Where have you been, good Mr Vainthroat, we have wanted you strangely.


Why faith, Madam, I have been, like an out-lying Deer, browsing about a little
in fresh pasture* and am now very coolly returned within the pale again.


Come, sweet Sir, what think ye of promoting a Match betwixt the Widow here and
your friend Sir Bellamour.


Ha, ha, ha, promote do ye call it? I think there is not three pence difference
in the piece of service, either to promote a friend six ^ounds up an
Execution-Ladder, or as many steps towards Matrimony.


sings in a Ballad tone.


But see where walks the doughty Knight,
Who all in doleful guise,
Metes out the time of sable night.
With Tears dropped from his Eyes.
Widow, Widow, I vow yonders Champion seems to lye under some dire Enchantment,
prithee go try whether you have ever a Spe^ about you that's powerful enough to
set him at liberty.

I'll use my endeavour to unshackle him: But it shall be with design to secure
him within a Circle of my own* I promise him a that.


Come, sweet Madam Thoroshift, you shall show a Female prowess in attacking
this sour Knight of the Lees. I'll conduct you into the Lists, and leave you
to manage the Combat as you see convenient. (Sweetny and Widow walk up towards
Sir Bellamour.) I hope honest Sir Bellamour won't think much to be left alone
with a handsome young Widow. Pray let me enjoin you that Love be the subject of
your discourse, and look that you handle the matter warmly -- Come Mr.
Vainthroat let's leave them together.


But do ye think, Sir, there's no Charms in the world that equals Ophelia's? To
my knowledge there's a certain person, that, without offence, for Features, for
Complexion, for Shape, for Air, for Mien; nay more, one that knows how to --


Render herself Ridiculous, by a nauseous, false commendation.


Come, come, a Woman of Discretion, and of a kind, complying temper, as I know
who is, will bear with any thing that comes from Sir Bellamour Blunt. -- Will
you suffer --


The Rack rather than this Impertinence -- What the Devil would this woman
have?


Have you to recollect your self, and consult your Reason. Do but think how
mean a spirited thing 'tis, not to resent the slights and affronts of a young
wanton Coquette; and how ungenerous it would be, not to caress the sincere and
obliging offers of a person --


Who in Confidence epitomizes her whole Sex.


How, Confidence! I find you are one of those tame fools that love to be ill
used. And since you thus basely refuse my kind and tender Compassion for you,
I'll make you smart under the lash of my Vengeance.


As long as I'm got clear of your Smiles, I'll stand the Battory of your Frowns
at a distance. And so faith Lady I shall take my advantage, and sheer off.


Was there ever any thing so provoking? A dull insensible Log: Efaith I'll
plague him for this, I^ll warrant him.


Ah Madam, Madam, we^e all undone, undone; yonders the Mob up in the City,
ravishing at such a rate, you never heard the like on^t. They say there is not
a Female left undefiled twixt Algate and Ludgate.


Then for my part, I believe the worshipful the Mob have but left them as they
found them.


O Lord, O Lord! why what, Madam, do ye offer to make a jest of Ravi^hing?


Why it always was a jest, a mere jest, Nibs. I never yet saw it only
represented on the Stage, but it created a satisfactory titt'ring amongst all
the Females in the house.


I have told my Lord Courtipoll of it, and he's going up into the City with all
the haste imaginable.


Come, now I'll show the world how serviceable I can be to a State upon an
emergent occasion.


O good my Lord make haste, to be ravished by a parcel of nasty Kennel-rakers
would be insufferable, were it to be by Gentlemen it were nothing.


Alas, poor thing.


But what my Lord, do ye mean to Drawcancer it, and singly encounter
Multitudes?


No, no, Madam, I'll promise you I don't mean to strike a stroke, I know better
things* In the first place I'll make Speeches. Thus I'll begin: My loving
Friends and dear Countrymen. As for the rest I may trust my genius to direct
that happy Talent I have in Oratory. Madam, your Servant. But hold! E're I go,
pray Mrs Nibs do you take this Ring, and whilst 'tis warm with these three
kisses, present it to the fair Ophelia, and let her put it on her middle finger
on her left hand. And having also solemnly kissed it three times, let her lay it
close to her heart, and then put up some ejaculations for her adventurous Lord
Courtipoll. Such mysteries as these were always thought requisite amongst the
ancient Politicians, upon the undertaking of any grand affair. Madam, your
Servant. Come along (...).


what have you done with my brace of Lovers, I am resolved I'll soon decide the
point in controversy. But first I'll to my Chamber, to meditate Revenge upon
this base fellow Sir Bellamour, to slight proffered Caresses is an injury that
a woman is never able to forgive.


And I shall take care to blunt the edge of your malice on this occasion, I'll
promise you.


Ha, ha, ha, yonder's my Lord marched up into the City to quell the Mob,
forsooth.


Have not I managed this project rarely? I have sent his Lordship on this fools
errand, so that my generous friend Sir Bellamour might have the greater freedom
to prosecute his Amour with Ophelia.


Faith 'twas well contrived, and I'll assist thee in any thing with all my
heart, Girl.


Come along then.


Now Doll I am a little at ease; my Settlement is not only a sufficient
maintenance for my self, but for any Spark that I shall best fancy; so that I
may now when I think fit, turn honest with a safe Conscience.


And your humble Servant Country Doll here is jumping into preferment apace. In
the first place, I am to be married to superabundantly nice Mr. Prim, and by
that means I shall forthwith commence Gentlewoman, and become acquainted with
people of Quality: Then, no doubt, upon the discovery of some private
qualifications that I am Mistress of, I shall soon be resorted to by the
greatest men in the Kingdom. Madam, shall I beg a small favour at your
Ladyships hands, says one Lord. It lies in your Ladyships power to relieve a
person in very great distress, says another Lord. Oh how I'll bristle when they
come cringing to me for a Cast of my function.


Gad a mercy Doll.


But what have you done, Madam, with Sir Wealthy Plainder? Certainly he's not
to be neglected till he's a little better fleeced.


Hang him, an old rivell^d skin impotent Cur, a bundle of dried Kexes would be
a better bed fellow.


What the Devil signifies his Carcass, so his Purse be but proli^ick.


Well Doll, I'll freely remit both his Carcass and Purse too into your hands,
manage him as you think convenient; you may easily contrive to personate me,
there is no danger that he can make any discovery of the cheat.


Faith then I'll about it immediately, I'll go send him a challenge in your
name, appoint some convenient place, and should he prove backward, and refuse
to bleed freely, I'll first rifle the old Rogue, then beat him into better
manners. I know he carries two or three hundred pieces always about him, and I
will rip the very Wasteband of his Breeches for him, but I'll find it out; such
a sum as that will furnish me a small secret Apartment with an Indian
Pallet-Bed, and a large Glass at the head on it, a set of Dutch Nudities, a
Silver Chocolate Pot, and a Punch Bowl, and some other pretty utensils that are
absolutely necessary for one of my employ.


Ha, ha, I fancy Doll thou't become thy promotion very well, indeed thou hast
something in thy face that looks very reverend.


Nay I am confident I shall be as punctual in all the formalities of my Calling
as any body. I can double my Chin, pout out a wanton Lip, wag the Head, and tip
the wink, as well as e're a standing Bawd in Christendom.


O rare Madam Dorothy.


Well, Madam, with your leave I will now go look after Sir Wealthy Plainder,
and manage that affair.


Do so Doll, and I will go see how my Sister Thoroshift goes on in her
business.


Yonder's the Arbour that trusty Nibs promised to decoy Ophelia too. 'Tis to be
hoped that the serenity of the night, and the sweetness of the place, may so
becalm her bosom, that it will be the more susceptible of the soft inspirations
of love.


So, under this Bench will I conceal my dear, dear Treasure here, Luna scorns
to tell tales: had she been a blab of her Tongue, the Gods would never have
chose her out for a Midwife -- So, now I'll to my Minky, and recreate the flesh
a little. I'll make the young Jade practice a thousand pretty Dalliances; she
shall rub my Ears, clap my Cheeks, scratch my Knees, and tickle me under the
short Ribs, e'faith, Thee, e, e, e, I'll show her how, I'll show her how
presently.


A pox of thy damned lascivious hide, for an old doting Lecher -- However,
methinks this proves very lucky. I may certainly, with all the justice in the
world, carry off this old villains beloved Wealth -- And so constitute my self
Trustee for the much wronged Ophelia.


Here is a lovely night, Madam; the Sky looks clear and glorious, the Air is
fresh, and the Banks are fragrant.


The night is pleasant indeed, and the place agreeable.


And very suitable for Love Adventures, is it not, Madam?


The truth on it is, this might be a proper Scene for some of the idle
Romantic Stories we meet withal in Novels -- As when Olimpia, lying under the
constraint of severe Parents, being wholly debarred the object of her
affections, restless in bed, she slips on a loose Garment, takes her Lute, and
steals gently forth into the Garden, where, having burdened the ambient Air
with pressing sighs, and long complain to the regardless Plants, at length the
lovely Nymph warbles out some soft and killing words made of her absent Swain.
Celadon, concealed in an adjacent Arbour, surprised with the unlooked for
harmony, rushes out of his melancholy covert, flings himself at the feet of his
charming Goddess, and there expires in the highest Transport of an amorous
passion.


And would not this, Madam, look very prettily, were it to be performed in
reality? Pray let me beg of you to begin the story at the Song, and see how
fate may order the Consequences.


I will not deny you a Song, Nibs, but I believe the story as you call it, is
like to begin and end with it.


ALL things seem deaf to my complaints,
In vain I roam the Groves along.
Hear me ye Loves departed Saints,
That to Elizyan shades are gone.
If to my faithful Celadon I prove not true,
Let it be both our dooms never to come to you.



Ha, ha, ha, 'Tis your faithful Celadon, Madam, expiring in the transports you
just spoke of. And now to go on with the Novel. Olimpia, struck at the sudden
amazement of her unexpected Celadon, continues for some time silent as the
night, and senseless as a statue, till recollecting the sufferings of her
faithful Swain, a relenting pity soon seizes her trembling heart, pity the kind
harbinger of triumphant Love. What then should ensue, but a whole train of
Tears, Fires, Flames, Raptures, and so forth, which are things that never admit
of a witness. I shall therefore beg leave to drop a hasty Curtzie,





Ha, ha, ha; what, have you been all this while studying of that Speech --
There's a flight with all my heart.


And must my passion for ever be the subject of your Raillery?


Your passion, I suppose, is like other men's, of the same continuance as your
courtship.


Could I suppose my self capable of altering my esteem by a possession, I'd
sooner tamely surrender my breast to be possessed by Furies, nay, by Envy itself,
the worst of Fiends, rather than urge you one syllable farther.


So, so, I find your are resolved to take a share in the Novel; this is all
Romantic to the highest degree.


I'm not used to any thing but truth, Madam.


Pray don't be angry, good Sir; and I'll give you a piece of truth in return to
your truth, you so much boast of -- You must know then that my affections are
at present a little upon the float; they may in time fix, and come to a
sediment, then if a draught of the dregs of Love will go down with your
Constitution, I may perhaps have a dose or two at your service. And so adieu,
sweet Sir Bellamour.


Hold, Madam.


How dare you be so saucy? Unhand me I say, or may I never --





Out with it quickly then.


Do but step into this Arbour with me, and there --


There you'll play the Satyr perhaps, 'twill concern my interest truly, to give
you an opportunity to proceed farther with this brutish force you have so
rudely began.


Don't you thus wrong the innocence of my thoughts.


If your intentions be just, why can't you make this grand discovery you
pretend to, here in the place where we now are?


Stay but a moment and I'll convince ye.


What can he be gone for? -- Be it what it will, I am resolved I will not stay
to be convinced, satisfying a curiosity has ever been very fatal to our Sex.


Ophelia, Ophelia.


That must be Sir Bellamour's voice. I'll take this opportunity and fling him
the Letter I have prepared.


Ha! Ophelia, ^tho I can't in this place read the Contents -- I am impatient to
read it.


So, the bait he swallows greedily, and I'll take care to ho^k him.


This is the place appointed; and ^m confident the old Dotard will punctually
answer my Defiance -- I vow here he comes already.


Minx, Minx, Minky, Minky, ha! sure yonder must be Petticoats that are sailing
about there: 'Sboblikins if they be, I will make 'em fly presently. Why Minky,
Minky*


So, this Arbour is a convenient place for the execution of my design -- Here,
here, Sir Wealthy


Where, where?


Minky, don't play the fool with a body at this rate.


So, there let the old bearded Goat stand and cool himself a little; 'tis to be
hoped before morning, the Cuffs brisk thoughts of wenching may be pretty well
over -- Now I will go strike up a merry bargain with Mr Prim as soon as he
pleases: and as I have already taken possession of the Breeches, so to his
sweet comfort, shall he find, that I will make bold to wear 'em stoutly, that I
will.


If I should agree to the proposals you make me, Mr Nickycrack, I fear upon the
least dissatisfaction betwixt us, you would be very apt to fling in my Dish, a
spice of my former practices.


Ah, no, no, not in the least, Mrs Minx -- Come, pray let's be brief in the
matter. You have now a pretty Income, for which you may please to remember,
that I have been in some measure serviceable to you. I my self am not without a
reasonable stock of Ready, with which I don't doubt but I shall riggle my self
into some employ or other. And we will live so sweetly.


And pray what employ do you think would best suit with your Genius?


My Genius, indeed, will require some very honest employ. What think you of a
Tax-Collector, a Military Pay Master, a Change-Broaker, or a Solicitor in
Parliament?


A parcel of very conscientious Callings, truly.


Minx, why what the Devil at't a doing, and who is that thou hast got with
thee?


Hark! Some body calls out, let's go see who it is?


I protest 'tis Sir Wealthy Plainder, by all means let's unloose him. Wealthy,
in the name of wonder what have they done to ye?


Prithee leave fooling at this rate, give me but my Breeches again and all
shall be well, faith Child. Then Minky, we'll go into thy Chamber, and there we
will fairly unrip 'em. Every tenth piece shall be thy own freely, and for each
piece I'll have a tubbers at bowls in a Summers day. Ta Doll, di, da, doll, di,
da, doll.


Ha! Now I smoke the business. Ha, ha, ha, he's uncased I find. He may Ta doll,
di, da, doll long enough before Doll will refund again, I'll warrant her.
Wealthy, I can't imagine what you'd be at. Mr Nickycrack and I are but just come
into the Garden, and how you come tied after this manner, and what you have had
done to ye, I know no more than the man in yonders Moon, not I, I'll promise
ye.


I profess Sir Wealthy I don't know what to think of your Ta, doll, di, da,
doll; for my part I'm afraid your Worship is at present something Lunatic.


Why, what a pox! would you both persuade me out of my Christian name? Had not
I a Letter from you, Mrs. Minx, to meet you here in the Garden? and accordingly
I came. You beckoned, and called me into this Arbour, tied my hands for me, and
then run away with my Breeches.


Not one syllable of this is truth, by jenkins; now you make a body swear.


In short, Sir Wealthy, you are either disturbed in your brain, or have been
most horribly abused; for, upon my salvation, this Lady and I have been
together for this half hour, and were but just come into the Garden as you
called out.


O Lord, O Lord! such doings as these would make my Brains burst about my Ears,
tho my Scull were ho^p'd with Steel. May the Gods send I find all safe under
the Bench.


Why, what is the Devil in Sir Wealthy?


I believe Legion himself has possessed him: He seems at present even too mad for
Bedlam.


Had I but a grant of his body, I'd cage him up e'faith, and show him about the
Country for the Wild Man.


You had best prevail with my Lord Courtipoll, to beg him for you.


Ay that would be wise work indeed, to set on a Fool to beg a Madman.


Prithee Mr Nickycrack, let's go in and examine Doll about this business, I
believe she's able to unravel the whole matter.


Madam, if you think convenient, I^d rather be for tying a knot of our own,
than unravelling fifty of other peoples.


Why look ye, Mr Nickycrack, I hope you'll give me half an hours time to
consider of your proposals. I am not unthoughtful of your former favours. And
can at present assure ye, that I hate to be ungrateful. But what requires the
most expedition is my Siste^ Thoroshift's business.


Madam, I've employed Mr. Plodder, my chief Implement of Intelligence, and
expect his return every minute. I am confident that by his means I shall know
the value of the Merchants stock; and of the substance of the Soldiers
preferment to a single grain.


Well, when that's effected then the Parson goes to work, and Marriage you know
is a fruit, that like Nuts generally grows in clusters.


And egad as soon as the Bough is shak^d, I^ll be ready with my open arms to
take into my bosom the dear sweet Nut that falls to my share*


That you may, Mr Nickycrack, and get at the Kernel without endangering your
Teeth by cracking the shell.


Phoo! pox of cracking of shells, what care I for cracking of shells.


Who most depends upon a Maidenhead,
Is at the best, but by a Phantom led.
Ophelia

At the end of the Gallery leading to the Backstairs when the clock strikes
one.

Oh happy Summons! This is the place, and I am confident it draws near the
time.


I am not able to say more. But --


Hell and Hand-granades! I have watched to fine purpose, to be at length an eye
witness of the loss of my Mistress -- No, I ll first be rammed into the mouth
of a Cannon, and be discharged against my Enemy, with my heels foremost, to
kick the breath out of his Stomach. Bownceby make pretensions. If you think
fit, Sir, to dispute my Title, you shall find it writ in legible Characters
upon this invincible Bilboa Blade.


If you'll walk a little nearer, Sir, you shall see me break your Bilboa Blade
about the ears of you, and imprint its Characters upon your Skull; I am
confident 'tis soft enough to take the impression.


Ha! A rough Dog! I fear this: what a damned sour look he has?


Gad I ll venture out. Captain I see you are like to be engaged, and tho we are
Rivals as to the Widow yonder, yet, with your leave, we will join our Forces
against the common Enemy.


With all my heart, honest Broakage. Come, prithee do thee march in the Front,
and let me bring up the Rear. By my experience in War I'll undertake to make
good the Retreat, should we chance to be over-press'd.


No, pray Captain do you take the honour of leading, because you know how to
give the Onset with advantage.


Nay, good Mr Broakage.


Nay, dear Captain.


I protest you shall.


I vow it must be you.


What if we first parley, and make our demands in form, and upon refusal, then
fall on?


Do so, Captain.


Hark you, Sir, will you surrender the Widow, or not?


Pray, Madam Ophelia let me beg of you to withdraw for a moment, whilst I
correct the insolence of these two Coxcombs.


Death and Thunderbolts! 'tis none of Ophelia, 'tis the Widow Thoroshift.


Odsniggers, Sir, 'tis the Widow Thoroshift; do but look, and if it does not
prove so, we'll be content you shall bear her off; and we our selves will
attend your Triumph in chains.





Am I not only discovered, but affronted with a second contempt? Villain I will
have thy blood.





Loose me, ye Poltroons ye. Had either of you the respect for me you pretend to
have, or the least dram of Courage, you would a ster him, and cut his Throat
this moment.


Captain, Captain, you understand the business, prithee after him, and fet^
back his head to expiate for his saucy crime.


Brimstone and Blunderbuss Bullets, Madam, had I thought it manners to have
done it before you, I'd have whipped it off before he had stirred a step. But if
your Ladyship pleases to lay me any night in Ambuscade under his Bed, if I
leave him an inch of neck to tie his Cravat upon in the morning, may I end my
days under a Hedge, and have my Eyes closed with Caterpillars.


And after that, Madam, if ever he troubles your Ladyship more, I'll undertake
to decoy him aboard a Ship, and so Spirit him away to one of my Plantations.


Gentlemen, now my passion is something over, I am ready to acknowledge that I
am equally obliged to both of you, for thus espousing my Quarrel. -- 'Tis a
miserable case that I am forced to keep my self on fair terms with such a
couple of ninny Lovers as these. Nibs married. She has got one of our
Modern-Play Lovers, that lies in wait for her, and yet knows nothing of the
matter.


And then, Madam.


And then, Madam.


You are very civil, Mr. Broakage, thus to take out of one ear what I whispered
into the other.


No jarring, Gentlemen, on penalty of my eternal displeasure. As soon as Nibs
is married, we'll get together, and dance till morning.


Captain Bownceby shall be ready to attend your Ladyship, with evry Caper five
foot high.


And your obedient Slave, Mr. Broakage, shall Coupee and Coulee to your
Ladyship, as dexterously as a Beau does to himself at the great Glass in the
Chocolate-house.


These Beaus have a fine time on it, when such Blockheads as thee must have a
fling at 'em.


Now, Sir, the common danger is over, what if we about again as we were?


You are in the right, I protest, Captain; but first let's embrace. Your
Servant, noble Captain. Exeunt. Capt Your Servant, sweet Mr Broakage -- Now
mind to turn short upon your left heel at the word of command. To the right
about^ march.


I vow I am glad to see your noble Lordship safe returned; how generously it
was done, thus to expose your precious person for all our safeties.


As it happened there was no danger, the business only proved a Match at
Foot-ball in Moor-Fields, but I have been so plagued with the insolence of
onstables, not one of the Scoundrels would kn^w me to be a man of quality; but
after abundance of barbarous usage, I was hurried before a City Magistrate, who
at first very hastily sent word, that we^e I the best m^n in the Kingdom I must
be secured till morning. But at length upon much solicitation, he and his wife
examined the business, and upon her command I was set at liberty Upon my honour
she was a very prett^ woman, and took occasion to draw up her Breasts, mump her
Mouth, and say, she believed I was a person of quality by my white Hand and
diamond ^ng.


O goodness! sure every body may know that by your graceful deportment.


It is fifty to one, my Lord, but you'll have her at Court e're long a
soliciting Knighthood for her Husband, and then --


Then I'll take care she shall succeed e'faith. And when the beast of her
Husband has his shoulders loaded with a Sirdom, it shall be my business to give
the addition of a corniferous badge, and adorn his front with a courtly
Cuckoldom -- But Mrs Sweetny, where is Ophelia?


Alas poor young Lady, she's very dutifully attending upon her Father -- Sir
Wealthy, my Lord, is of a sudden run quite besides himself. See where she comes
along with him.


Will you be pleased, Sir, to take a little repose?


No, Child, lust and villainy never sleep.


Good lack, what is to be done with him, see how strangely thoughtful he looks.


Be gone, Ophelia, there's a cup of Poison by you, nay, the deadly draught was
prepared by thy Fathers own hand; be gone I say.


This sudden care of me is wondrous strange; by this my Father rather seems to
have recovered than lost his senses.


Why how now old fellow, what art run mad?


Yes, young Coxcomb, I am mad.


Then here's one shall match thee faith.


Ha? let's see what's to he done with him; why if the Gentleman's Noddle has
sprung a Leak, the best way will be to ply the pumps. Mr Vainthroat, do you
take the other arm, and I will manage this, and let's work him a little.





You are very familiar with your betters, methinks good Mr Mad man.


Its a sign indeed the poor Gentleman's distraction is very great, he could
never have thought that your Lordship could possibly have been a fool else.


Let us consider Mr. Vainthroat -- By what I can apprehend of him he only
affects a surly humour, and under the pretence of madness takes the liberty of
being saucy; prithee let us laugh him out on^t.


With all my heart, my Lord, say what you will, I will have a laugh at your
service -- I think I may safely promise that, for the Coxcomb is scarce capable
of saying any thing but what is very ridiculous, and yet has the vanity to
think a man laughs at the gaiety of his parts.


Ha, ha, ha, what, Sir Wealthy has my quondam Mistress put thee thus in the
dumps. Its a sign thou were a Madman to venture coming after a man of my
quality -- Mr Vainthroat.


My Lord. Oh -- ha, ha, ha. S'bud I'd forgot to laugh at the right stop.


Come Knight, prithee cheer up Man, I'll make thy posterity amends for thy
misfortunes, I'll infuse into Ophelia, such a stream of sense and solidity,
that she shall become the mother of a Generation distinguisht by the name of
the Matchiavellian Courtipollions.


Ha, ha, ha, there I was ready for you, my Lord.


And I am as ready to despise both your impertinences.


I find nothing will move the sullen Sot, prithee for Ophelia's sake, see him
safe to his Chamber, while Mrs Sweetny and I go and push on my affairs with the
Virgin that I have now upon my hands


Like a man of your quality


O Sir Wealthy, I was looking for you. Pray don't give way to this strange sort
of splenetic humour; do but walk in, and you'll soon find how matters stand.


What care I how matters stand, I could now, with a steady unconcern, see the
crazy props of Nature slip their hold, and all this giddy world stagger into
eternal Confusion.


Ha! what is the old Rogue turned Stoic?


Faith I can*t tell what to make of him, not I -- But Nickycrack I am in
expectation of flinging of Stockings, and lapping of Sack-possets, and so
forth. Is there any thing to be done to night or not?


Yes faith, there will be tickling work anon; you shall see me take my turn
too.


E'gad it shall go very hard but I'll have some tickling amongst ye. Bite of
the Bridle as soon as you will, I'll take my turn in the Saddle I'll warrant
ye.


See here comes one couple already; the finical Mr Prim has very nicely
espoused honest Country Doll.


Joy to thee Doll. What has the Court then struck a lasting Covenant with the
Country?


Yes indeed, poor Doll here has at length been bribed to betray herself into
the bonds of Matrimony.


Gentlemen, no more plain Doll, I beseech you, I am confident she can now lay a
just claim to the title of Madam Prim, and I hope that term won't in the least
damnify your voices in the expression, Gentlemen; prithee my dear, mind my way
of talking, you must now strive to leave off your Country Dialect, and give to
every word you speak, a pretty gentile courtly twang


Here's Mrs Nibs, I dare say is married too, by the solemn paw she takes, and
by that pretty blush which she cunningly assumes, to bid a formal adieu to what
she has long parted withal. Is it not so, Mrs Nibs?


Yes indeed, I am fast enough; but what's the jest, is, the man that has
married me, knows not a syllable of the business.


If half the Husbands in the Kingdom were to be kept in the same ignorance, ^
my Conscience they'd have reason enough to think themselves happy fellows. Were
I to advise you, I*d never let him know it, lest he should repent his bargain,
ha forsooth?


Pray, Mr Vainthroat, for the future, vouchsafe to let your Forsooths be Madams
when you speak to me, for I assure you I have married a man of Honour.


You won't pretend to take place of Madam Prim I hope.


Madam Prim! Ha, ha, ha, that's a good one e'faith.


Pray, Madam, why this public derision of a person that has married a
Gentleman.


A Gentleman, ha, ha, ha. Had my Husband no better a pretence to his gentility,
I should blush to hear my self Madam'd. If you will give me leave, I can give
you an exact account of your pedigree.


By all means let's hear it.


Well, then, I don't love to say much, but what I do say shall be to the
purpose. Jacob Scout, the Beadle of Cripplegate Parish, will be ready at any
time to justify upon Oath what I am going to say. You must know then, that this
very Gentleman who pretends himself of Prim Castle in the borders of Scotland,
was not many years since a squauling bantling, laid in a Hand-basket upon a
Bulk in Woodstreet, and being taken care of by the Parish, old Scout the Beadle
was his Godfather, and afterwards --


You're a base Detractor of my Honour, and I'll have you --


Nay, hold, hold, let's hear the full charge before you make your reply, good
Mr Prim.


Afterwards I say, this Gentleman Mr Prim, when he was grown a little up, was
put in among the Blue-coat Boys, and my Lord Courtipoll being one day a
visiting Christ's-Hospital, his Lordship discovering something in the youths
face that promised a future dexterity in the subtle vocation of pimping, he was
pleased to entertain him in his service, where he has continued ever since.


O them her discovery.


Ha, ha, ha.


E'faith Nibs, if I be not even with you for thus publicly exposing Mr Prim,
I'll be bound to forfeit all the famous qualifications of my Sex, and be a
scandalous Apostate to the whole race of Womankind.


Nay, not so, pray child, that would be the way to baulk the Devil of his due,
and it is pity he should be wronged of one single Member of the Sex.


I find Mr Prim, your Lady does not require much instruction in her speech:
methinks her Dialect is very courtly of a sudden.


No, nor in any thing else relating to the Town, I'll pass my word for it. I
dare say Madam Prim here, knows as much of assignation, snapping, fastening,
loosening, and counterfetching, with all the numerous turns of Jilting and
Coquetry, as well as ever a Hackney Coach-plyer, Pit-padder, or
Gallery-galloper about the Town of London.


Death! is it so too?


Ha, ha, ha.


The danger is over, the danger is over; Ta, doll, di, da, da, ra.


How came you empty handed then? where's the Bride?


She's safe enough boy, you shall see her betwixt a pair of Sheets with me
presently, and if you lie near me, you shall hear me a thundering it away, a
hammering out of young Hercules's, ye dog you.


Gad they'll be very wooden ones if they're like their Father.


But if you have got the Widow, Captain, pray what have you done with the
Merchant?


Ah poor Broakage, I cannot imagine what will become of the puppy, it's fifty to
one but he has already knotted his Garters, and is gaping about for some
convenient noosing place or other.


Here he comes e'faith, as merry as your Worship.


Now, now the Fight is done; Ta, di, doll, da, ra, da. The Widow^s mine own,
faith boys. Now, Mr Captain, you may march about your business as soon as you
please, ha, ha, ha.


Why what^s the fellow distracted, ye Nehemian Ninnyhammer you, I say I have
married the Widow.


Why ye Belzebubbian Blunderbus ye, I say I have married the Widow*


You are both very confident of the matter, methinks, be it how it will, it is
time for me to look after my own Match: but to prevent disputes in my case, you
shall see me enter with my Bride in my hand I^ll warrant ye.


No quarrelling, pray Gentlemen, since you have both married the Widow, why
should you fall out about the matter?


What say thou, Jeronimo? Peace or War, the Olive branch or the Bilboa Blade?


Why faith Captain, let's have a Truce at the least, since we have both courted
her in amity, and married her in amity, e'^e let us both keep her in amity --
Here comes the Lady, pray let her decide the business.


Madam, here is a great Controversy, which of these two Gentlemen does your
Ladyship design to own for a Husband?


To deal plainly with you, it's scarce in my power to tell; they were both so
urgent for privacy, that having neither light to discern, nor speaking loud
enough to distinguish a voice, all that I know is, that a Husband I have; but
which of these two Gentlemen 'tis --


'Tis me, by Jerico.


By Jerico, ye sneaking Whores-bird. Tis me by. Jove, Madam, and all the rest
of the thundering powers above.


That will soon be decided by the contents of this little Ceremonial Implement.


Pray then let that little Ceremonial Implement, as you call it, clear this
matter in dispute.


It shall so, Sir, I'll read the Motto, then let the Gentleman from whose hands
I reeeiv^d it, claim me for his own lawful Spouse till death does us part.


E'gad so she is, and accordingly I'll take possession.


Why what the Devil then (...) of mine, ha?


That, good Captain, you shall know presently. Nibs, read the poesy of your
Ring.





Hell, Blood, and Furies, thy Stowage! why what a pox shall I get by that, ha?


Ha, ha, ha.


Your Servant, sweet Captain, indeed you promised I should be a Captains Lady,
but I did not think you were so kind to design me for your self, good Captain
-- Come, Sir, don't be discouraged, I^ll undertake to do those good offices for
you with your General, that shall make you bounce forward in preferment at a
strange rate.


Like enough, faith Nibs, your bowncing in the business may do much. A nights
service for a General in the Trenches, will do more for the Captain^s
advancement, than his own service in Siege Trenches all his life time* But here
comes a couple hand in hand that ha^e made sure work.


I have ^old you, Madam, how I came to discover it, and knowing what usage you
have met withal, I did believe my self bound in justice to secure it. Here tis
for you,


I am not, Sir, to be bribed into an esteem; but here comes my Father, to whom
I suppose it may properly belong, I shall therefore take care to restore it.


Here is something, Sir, which this Gentleman, Sir Bellamour Blunt, would
willingly f^rce upon me, knowing that 'tis my duty to acquaint you with what
offers are made me, I humbly remit it into your hands.


Bellamour will accept of you without the Casket.


Most willingly, Sir Wealthy.


Then I must blushing own, that my inclinations suits with my Fathers commands;
and my only regret is, that so deserving a Gentleman as I believe Sir Bellamour
to be, should meet with so poor a bargain.


Madam, I love you, and the possessing the object beloved, is, I think, the
greatest treasure that this world affords.


Here's strange coupling, my Lord, of a sudden; your Virgin too has given you
the slip, e'faith, and tho not Parson-fetter'd, yet she ha^ fairly surrenderd
herself in order to it.


Ay! say you so? then it must be so.


Here's a Letter directed to Mr Nickycrack, to be delivered with all the speed
imaginable.


I guess from whence it comes; but be the Contents what they will it comes too
late for prevention.


Bownceby, as you call him, is no Captain, but a blustering Subaltern Officer
that was casheer^d for ^owardice


Blood and Fire-balls! Furies and Fugacies.


Ha, ha, ha, alas poor Nibs! you are a Captains Lady, forsooth, and have
married a man of Honour, ha, ha, ha.


But to proceed Broakage, he is no Merchant, but has been employed by the Jews
to drive some rooking bargains upon the Change, where he is at present so far
out of Credit, that is apprehended, I believe his ears must atone for his
former practices.


A curse upon his Plodship!


Why what out of countenance, Mr Broakage, why it is but moving into one of
your foreign Plantations man, hah?


Come cheer up, Mr Broakage, to tell ye truth my circumstances are as bad as
yours can be, and since we have tricked one another, there's no remedy now, but
to rest satisfied, and lay our heads together, how we may sham old Creditors,
collogue in with new ones, make a ^earing figure, and so trick all the world
besides


I hope, my Lord, I have no ways incurred your Lordships displeasure, by taking
possession of a Relic of your Lordships.


What my Country Pug married, ha?


Your Country Pug knows as much of the Town as another body; and tho by my
Country pretensions, I have made shift to ^ll your Lordship out of a
Settlement, yet I do not question but I shall make as just a Wife to Mr
Nickycrack here, as any sits at my Lady Mayoress^s Table, at a Lord Mayors
Feast.


That I believe you may, Madam, and hold on dealing with the Court into the
bargain.


Ha! since you are so pert, Mrs Minx, I can satisfy you that your Settlement
is not worth one farthing, it's drawn upon an Estate that I can make no Title
to.


O fie! I hope not so, my Lord, that can never be acted like a man of Honour.


But it can be acted like a State^man tho, and that's my pretensions, Sir.


Now good people, give a Mad man leave to speak: I have at length observed,
that for the procuring of this Devil of Wealth we stick at no Baseness, and the
possessing it does generally serve to foment our Villainies. I will therefore
before all these witnesses voluntarily part with my greatest store, and put it
into the hands of a Gentleman, that if I mistake not, is Master of such
virtuous inclinations, that will direct him in the right use of it. Here, Sir
Bellamour, (Gives him the Trunk) let what's in here serve to guild Matrimony,
and make the bitter dose of woman go down the better.


Then Joy to my old friend, Sir Bellamour Blunt, and to his beautiful Ophelia.
If there can be such a thing as Felicity in a married state, it must certainly
be found in such a well matched pair as these.


As far as I find, here is every body well matched.


Come then, let us grace these solemnities with a Dance: but the next Virginity
Game I undertake, shall be played with more politic Caution, I'll pawn my
Honour for it.


Now Gentlemen, let each man to bed with his own Wife.

And however most of us --
May branded seem, for being old offenders,
In feats of Love let none be bare pretenders.

THE writing Plays, a sort of Lott'ry is,
There's many Blanks for one good lucky Prize.
Our Author hopes he has your humour hit,
And now by me his Proxy does submit
To own this placethe Judgment-seat of Wit.
But does avow no Critics vote is good;
Butchers are ne'er returned in case of Blood
Whoever for Justice does on them rely,
Does the same thing as Council with a Spy.
Let each free soul, his proper Verdict tell,
And pin no faith on Critic Infidel.
'Twas your applause first drew the Poet in;
Won't you then spare whom y^u enticed to (...)?
In comic Socks still let him trip (...) Stage,
And stigmatize the follies of the age.
Till by your smiles he has such vigour won,
May make him dare to draw the Buskin on.
High in expense who ud not his utmost do,
When he's to treat such gallant Guests as you?
If once he gets you, he has wor^ his ends;
You are the worst of foes, but best of friends.
Let ranting Coxcombs scorn an Audience fro^,
He only writes, who writes to please the Town.

