AS want of Coin did store of Banks beget;
So Poets swarm upon this Dearth of Wit.
And as those Banks, when ready Cash grew scant,
Excused non-payments by the public want:
Ill Poets so, when you on them reflect,
Their proper Faults upon the Times reject.
Shoals of damned Play-wrights in our Pits are found
Like Brother Bankrupts for each other bound;
Who, sinking first themselves beneath the Test,
With joint Endeavour strive to damn the rest:
And, having failed to satisfy the Town,
Turn Levellers and cry all credit down.
Fools, French-men, Players, fill the crowded Pit,
Those sworn Confederates to write down Wit.
Instead of Manly sense, and strong writ Plays,
They bring you Harlequin, and Opera's.
They let you thus, like Children, have your will,
Knowing how fond you are of Rattles still.
These Practices on us have brought such Ills,
That half our Customers protest our Bills;
And our Receipts of late to less amount
Than formerly by double Bank discount.
Our young Beginner, fearing this to day,
Offers Security for his first Play.
To raise his Stock he wise provision made,
Of a rich Partner to support the Trade:
Whose visible Estate, and Credit yet
Make his Bills current through the Land of Wit,
Which upon sight, if any doubt be made
In specie shall in new milled Wit be paid.
For like our Mints, our Scribler has made bold,
To make all new by melting down the Old.
Nor can you blame him, if he has the Skill,
But to maintain the Ancient Standard still;
For, what he finds in weight deficient grown,
He will make good with Bullion of his own.
Thus much he thought was to the Critics due:
Next comes his Complement fair Sex to you.
He would not raise your Blushes by his Play,
Nor suffer Scandal on the Stage to day.
On Knaves alone at present he makes War;
For only such are brought unto the Bar:
And yet the Fool did the whole City spare.
Like running Traders thus he does begin,
By courteous dealing first to draw you in.
If to his word this time you find him just,
It may encourage you to greater Trust.
Next time perhaps alone He'll undertake,
And by your Favours in your Debts may break.

PRithee dear Careless consider a little, and try to manage the last Stake, I'm
no great Friend to plodding business, but thy Extravagance makes me Grave: I'm
ashamed to see thee thus varying thy outside continually like a Camelion, a few
days will reduce thee to the same Diet too.


Yes, yes, i'm like to edify by such a Preacher, whose life's a continued
contradiction to his Doctrine, now art thou 'tis ten to one going to a Whore
and a Treat, and recommend'st thrift to me, only to give the better relish to
thy own iniquity, like a Pampered Chaplain's preaching Abstinence, and
surfeiting all the time on the Luxury of his Lords's Table.


A wise Gamester need not absolutely forswear Play; but I'm mad to see you a*
Bubble to your own Indiscretion; and in a world so full of Sharpers thinking
you play upon the Square.


Hang Caution, 'tis the Companion of Fools; I tell thee Friendly, that among
all the numerous Follies of Mankind, there's none so ridiculous, and so
destructive to our ease as that which they call Discretion, 'tis a Bridle put
into the mouths of Asses, by which they are ridden, and managed to other Men's
Humours; I defy it, and from hence forward Wit be my Wealth, and Pleasure my
Business.


Pleasure and Wit are Mistresses that must be treated high, a Poor Lover can no
more hope a Favour from either, than from a Town-Jilt, or a Courtier; 'tis
never Flood with them, when the Pocket is at low E^. If you would preserve
their Favour, keep your Estate, when that's gone you'll find they'll soon desert
you.


Does true Wealth then consist only in the number of Acres? No let the dull
Landed Clods manure the Dirt they sprang from, and when they^ve worn themselves
out in the Slavery, fatten it with a Dung-hill of their own Carcases; I
cultivate a more fruitful Soil; my Brains my Estate; my Wit my Plow; Pleasure
my Crop; the whole Town my Tenants; the Tavern my Store-house; every Man's
Purse my Exchequer; thine or any Friends Wardrobe mine; and your Houses (when I
please) my Lodging. Thus I've given a Particular of my Revenue, acquired
without Purchase; enjoyed without Settlement; and collected without trouble; My
Friends are all my Stewards; for what one brave Spirit enjoys is common to all;
Nature and great Souls know no limits; they scorn the mean distinctions of Meum
Tuum.


You've spent your Estate to a fine Purpose, and are in a fair way to make a
Philosopher, a Diogenes the second; pray reserve a Tub for a habitation, th^
you may secure some retreat at last. It vexes me to see you so easy and
ca^eless, as to hug those that devour you: No raw Squire was ever fonder of the
Rooks that made a Cully of him; or thought 'em civiller Gentlemen for supplying
him with Money to cheat him of it again.


Faith! He that has any such designs against me may cheat himself; me he can't.
When I had my Estate I was plagued with a Nursery of Beggars, called Footmen;
kept Hospitals for Curs and Kites; and Mustered Regiments of Fools and Knaves
every day at my Table; that surfeited on my Folly, and paid with a Country
Proverb, God bless the F^under.


That was your Fault, and is so still; must you needs sacrifice to Knaves, or
Fools? Could you not avoid the Caterpillars of the Country, that only devoured
the Fruit, but you must harbour worse Vermin here, that will consume the Land,
and prey at last, like Lice upon your Body?


'Tis Nature's fault (if it be one) that made me a Lover of Mirth and Pleasure,
not Business. I find my self a Sociable Creature with natural Appetites about
me; those I gratify; a Prince can do no more; then why should I by an
unnecessary solicitude disturb the quiet enjoyment of 'em.


This you might have secured the continuance of by a timely Providence; not
suffered all to be shared thus, like a wrecked Vessel, by Villains that would
knock your Brains out to secure their own titles to the Prize.


What different notions Men have of things! What you call Extravagance was the
height of Policy in me. I examined all my Nature's demands, and found I had no
occasion for 3000l. a year, why then should I be encumbered with it? A Snail's
happier in's Shell, than if he had all Versailles upon his Back. I resolved
therefore to turn the Tables, and make other Men my Proveditors, as I had been
theirs.


Nobly resolved truly; but you're a little beside your Natural Philosophy; for
your Beasts of P^ey never make good Venison, you'll ne'er be able to make a Meal
of 'em. Besides you've taught 'em wit at your own cost.


Hang 'em Locusts (do you think I mean my Creditors?) If the World were an
absolute Wilderness, I would starve e're I would prey upon such Insects. No, I
mean those Gentlemen, my Friends, that have been as free with me, and are
sensible of their Obligations.


Friends, that are sensible of Obligations! where do those Monsters grow? Has
all thy Wit, and thy dear bought Experience taught thee to know the World no
better? Don't you know that Friends are a sort of Summer-Companions, that leave
you at the first approach of Winter, and that to oblige a Man, is a sure way to
make him shun you, when your necessities begin to call for a return?


There he is, let's lay it home to him.


I'll warrant you, a Paper-mill shall be silence to me.


'Tis a Lye, and does n't like my Worship, you're no Tenants of mine. Would Ye
have an abatement of your Rent for Repairs, or Taxes? March into the City,
there are those that love to be troubled with you.


We beseech you, Sir, don't be undone for your own Good.


Sirrah, whistle to your Horses, and let them edify, and trouble your empty
Noddle no more with my Good.


We beseech you, Sir, consider our hard case, We shall be turned out of Doors;
pity us, as we do you: Say what we must do.


Sow Hemp, and hang your selves with it, Rascals; or go, and fawn upon your new
Landlord, flatter his sordid Covetousness, call it thrift, and rail at my
Prodigality, and witness his Forgeries. You look like thriving Knaves, he'll
find you Employment as Knights of the Post; and that may prefer you to the
Pillory; those superfluous Lugs of yours well pruned may yield you as great a
Crop, and bring you as much Dirt (since you're so fond of it) as my Farms. Or,
if you'd rather, take a Purse, and let the Gallows provide for you the shortest
way; your Countenances will become a Halter, and a Psalm. There's advice for
you: No Replies, but vanish. Am I so low as your pity, Slaves?


Good Sir, have Compassion on Us for our Wives, and poor Children's sakes.


Who bid you get 'em? Had not you Threshing Work enough, but Children must be
banged out of the Sheaf too? Our Beau's, with all their Strengtheners get
nothing but Diseases; But these Rogues, Friendly, upon a Clove of Garlic, a
piece of hard Cheese that would starve the Rats, and break a Saw, and a little
sour Milk, can mount like Stallions; and expect I should maintain these
Tumblers.


Whatever thou hast for the Children, thou dost n't use to want Compassion for
the Women; pray take 'em into Consideration.


D'yee hear Fellows, your Wives I think may be wholesome, send 'em to me, and
I'll teach 'em Trades they shall live by; as for the Brats, let the Parish, that
clubbed to beget 'em, join to maintain 'em.


Sir, your Father's Worship would ha'us'd us better?


My Father's Worship was an Ass for using you at all, else he had ne'er left me
the Plague of such an Estate, which I have parted with to get rid of you.


Nay, and you abuse us thus, you must bear with us, if we tell You your own.
Pray, what maintained your Whores, and supplied your riotous Extravagance? Who
found you Money for the Gaming-Ordinaries, and paid your Tavern, Taylor's and
Surgeon's Bills? Our Labour sure. For without it, all you Father's Estate would
have afforded you no better Fare, than your Horse has.


Your Father, rest his Soul, kept a noble House, and bid his Friends and
Neighbours welcome to good Meat and Drink; kept good Horses, Hounds and Hawks;
and could hunt a whole Summer's morning in his own Grounds; and all this he
thought himself beholding to our honest Industry for, that brought him in good
Rents.


Dogs, do you remonstrate, you saucy Puppies? You that were necessary to his
Estate indeed, but like the Dung, that lay upon it, a necessary Nuisance that
made it rich and nasty; that were company only for his Dogs, and lived like 'em
upon the Reversions of his Table.


Those Dogs lived better, and at more liberty, than you'll do in a little Time;
in the Kings-Bench you'll think that Dung-Civet, and wish for those dirty Acres
to take the Air in, and these Dogs to wait upon you.


Rascals, Villains, I'll teach you Manners.


Begone, honest Friends, you've heated him, and the next time let your Zeal be
more respectful.


Yes, we will go, but it shall be like Rams to return with greater force; We will
tease him into Reason.


Is your Mortgage past Redemption, Careless?


Faith, I think not, but 'tis as bad, for I've neither Money nor Inclination to
redeem it.


I've both, and you shall n't part with it so: Shall that Rogue insult us both,
get my Mistress from me first, and then your Estate?


We may be bound to thank him for both, as we may manage matters, and make him
keep a Mistress for you, and gather Rents for me.


That's my present aim, which I miss, if, though the Lawyer hold the Plow, the
Crop be not of my Sowing; thither I'm bound this minute.


'Tis a laudable Design; but why in this trim, Thou that use to out-brave the
Spring? A green Bag would become thee better now, than a Billet-Doux; Love's
Merchants should all be gay Adventurers.


There's a Mystery in that, a little time will unriddle to you. But here comes
the Pilot, that must conduct me into the wished Harbour.


Faith, I like thy Fancy, of making the Spirit Pimp for the Flesh, very well;
these Spiritual Guides seldom miss the way to the Carnal Part; these
Conscience-Brokers, these Scruple-Mongers are the best Bellows to blow such
Flames with; and this of 'em all the fittest Engine in Europe for your purpose:
For he has as little Conscience as Learning, but 'tis as craving as his
Stomach, and governed by it; a Treat, or a Bribe makes him your Creature.


Hard Times, Spade, very hard Times; we pray, and pray, but to little purpose;
formerly, if a good warm Sermon would n't kindle Men's Zeal, it would their
Fires, and Men of our Function were sure of two or three good Meals at least in
a Week gratis; now, in spite of all we can say, their Kitchens are as cool as
their Charities.


Nay, if you complain, Sir, what may we poor Sextons do, that live upon the
bare Sound of Prayers? We rise, and ring the Bells, and get good Stomachs, and
may eat the Ropes when we've done to satisfy 'em.


We used to earn now and then a comfortable Ten Shilings by Preaching an old
Sermon, but our Benefic'd-Men are grown so provident, that they buy 'em ready
Printed as cheap as we can, and preach 'em themselves. When had we a
Christening, Spade?


Not this ten Weeks: they've gi'n over getting Children: The Taxes, the Seas,
and Usury undo us, take off their Edges, and blunt their Plough-shares. There
are some poor Labourers, that perhaps once in seven years, by helping one
another produce some few puny Butter-Prints, that seldom hold the Christening
without shrinking in the wetting.


The young Mad-Caps carry their Diseases into Flanders, there the Pox, or the
Enemy dispatches 'em, and there's the profit of their Burials lost.


Ay, and they're grown so hard-hearted of late, that they won't die at home;
and so cheat the King, and the Parson of their Duties. I've buried but one Man
these three Months, and that was an Apothecary that pined for want of Business.


'Tis a healthy year, a lamentable healthy year, the Air's too wholesome. What a
torment 'tis to have a slender Stipend, and an Immortal Parish.


You're allow'd to pray against all Weathers foul, or fair, as you see fit,
Master; why not against all Airs too, good or bad?


'Tis n't in the Cannon, Man, I'd give my best Cassock, that it were.


'Tis strange! they're starved too, yet they won't die here, they won't Earth.
A good Plague now, or half dozen new fantastical Fevers, that would turn up
their Heels by whole sale, and take the Doctors in their grave Consultations,
that there might be no natural help for Money. How merrily my Bells wouldn't go
then!


Hold there, Boy, Doctors and Apothecaries, are our Friends, let's spare them;
For tho they're slow, they're certain. O! for Mr. Bolus, and Mr. Glister, the
two great Apothecaries in our Neighbourhood again, they did but give 'em a
shake, and they dropped like ripe Fruit from the stalk. Now we must either remove
to some muddy air, or wait for a Contagious Season.


Oh! for the Hundreds of Essex here, Master, that Nursery of Agues, Agues that
will shake Men's Souls out, and ne'er stay for Drugs, Possets, or Plasters.


Gouts, Rheumatisms, and dead Palsies. --


I like that word Dead monstrously: But for those Gouts and Rheumatisms, they'll
hang an Arse a scurvy while. The Pox, Small Pox, or Epidemical Surfeits are
rich Marle, and make a Church-yard fat, and the Sexton merry.





Prithee leave me now, and anon you shall hear further from me.


Farewell, and if you want my assistance, send me your Instructions, and I'll
pursue 'em with more Application than ever the Lawyer did a rich Client's
Breviate; I'm a very able Councellor in a case of Cuckoldom.


Sir, your most humble Servant, is not your name Homily?


It is, Sir, your Will with me, I pray?


Are not you Curate of the Neighbouring Parish?


I am so, Some Funeral Sermon,


Sir, I've a little business with you at your good leisure.


I pray, Sir, be free, if it be matter of Privacy, this Man's my Sexton, and
(...), be trusted.


Sir, O my business is partly with him too, and I am glad to meet you both so
opportun^ly.


Well, Sir, I partly guess your Business, -- you would be Married, I suppose,
-- and desire secrecy, this may be done, -- and with security too, -- 'tis but
antedating the Certificate.


There will be no occasion --


Excuse me, Sir, I say there will be occasion, give me leave to understand
these matters, -- 'tis part of my Trade. For without an antedated Certificate,
how will you evade the Act of Parliament, which obliges to a discovery?


You say true, Sir, but my Business is of another nature.


Cry you mercy, Sir; Perhaps you've transgressed, and the fruit of it calls for
our Assistance; nay, ne'er blush for the matter, young Blood is warm, and the
offence is veni^l, the Lambs of God will play, 'tis best to sow our wild Oats
in our Youth, we make the better Christians for it after. Here's my Sexton too,
if you've occasion, shall for a small Sum oblige the Parish to take care of it.


Or if you would quit your Hands of the Mother, for Forty Shillings, I'll bring
one that shall Marry her, and so rid you at once of both, if she be yet
undeliver'd.


I thank you both, Gentlemen, but you're wide of the matter still.


Have you lost any Relation, or Friend, and would have a Funeral Sermon? I
shall be very reasonable: For a Father 40s. shall suffice, a Mother, Brother,
or Sister 30s. an Uncle, or Aunt 20s. and for a Friend, or more distant
Relation 10s. Say your Price, and it shall be done accordingly.


Still you prevent me, Sir; but to be short, my Business is from an Old Friend
of yours in New England.


A Friend in New England! Sir, I know no Body there: His Name pray, and
Business?


That Letter there will inform you of both.


Have a care of a Trick, Master; He looks like a Sharper, I don't like him.


Ne'er fear, Cantabit Vacuus, all I've to lose is my Learning, and that he may
put in a Nut-shell.

SIR, SINCE my Settling in New England I've sent several Letters to you to
desire a Correspondence, and a continuance of our Ancient Friendship; But never
receiving any Answer, I have doubted either your Death or Removal from London,
or at least the miscarriage of all my Letters. For I could not persuade my self
that either length of Time, or distance of Place could discard from the Memory
or Affections a Friend so early, and so deeply rooted in 'em: I conjure you
therefore by that strict and mutual intimacy contracted in our Youth, and so
long continued (till that necessary to my Affairs, but cruel divorce forced me
from you hither about twenty years since) to take care of this Young Man my
Son, the Bearer, and see him placed under the Care and instruction of some
able, experienced, and sober Lawyer; and in so doing you shall not only make
amends for your past forgetfulness, but further oblige an acknowledging as well
as

Your real and hearty Friend, TRADEWELL.


New England -- Several Letters -- Ancient Friendship -- Tradewell -- A very
ancient Friend sure! For the Duce a Man of that Name can I remember in New or
Old England!


You look, as if you had forgot my Father, Sir.


No, I look as if I would remember; for I can't forget what I never knew.


I've heard my Father say, You were Students, and Chamber-fellows together in
Oxford, till he Married.


'Tis impossible, Young Man, I'm a perfect Stranger to the Name, and have no
more acquaintance in New England than in Catay.


Look sharp, Master, this Fellow would banter us out of our Wits. Do ye hear
Friend, have you no Letters for me?


No Letters, but I was charged by my Father to give his Love to honest Old
Spade the merry Sexton, if you be he.


Hah! have I unknown Friends too? Hark ye, Young Man, what time of the Moon
is't? Ha'ye been wormed since ye came over? If I know your Father, or any of
your Kin, hang me in my own Bell-Ropes.


Gentlemen, I thank you, I was told you were the Men; but it may be my Father's
Friends are dead, and you of the same Names succeed 'em. You do honestly to
undeceive me; For I had a Present of 60 Pistols to deliver to them, as a Token
of my Father's Love, but since you are n't the Men.


Pray, Sir, have a little Patience, and let me think, pray stay a little, and
let me remember, it vexes me to forget an Old Friend, an intimate Friend.


A kind Friend too, that sends so lovingly, Master.


We hard Students have very slippery Memories; but we must be the Persons: For
he and I have been Curate and Sexton in this Parish these 35 Years. I must
remember sure.


Pray remember, Master, such Friends are not to be forgotten.


Stay, methinks I have him now, let me see a goodly, proper, strait, well
timbered, grave Gentleman with --


Black Hair.


Very right, with a goodly Beard, when he was in England he lived next Door to
the --


To the Sign of the Holy Lamb hard by this Place.


Alack, alack, what Squire Tradewell, Master? Oh 'twas a Noble Gentlem^n.


(...)-a-mercy Letter, now it operates.


^ee what a Treacherous Knave this Time is; how has he played the Wag (...) me,
to make me forget my best, my dearest Friend? He Married, let ^ --


^ ^e^lthy's Daughter.


(...) very same, I Married 'em, I remember your Mother perfectly well, as if
it were but Yesterday, a Goodly Lady she was. Oh! the Feasting, the Masks, the
Mirth, we had at that Wedding.


How this Money rubs up their Memories! For Ten Pistols more they'd make her
the Great Mogul's Daughter.


Your Father and I had both one Soul. Look Spade, whose Eyes are those? Look
in's Face, if he be not the very Picture of Squire Tradewell. I think you was
born here.


I was about five Years old, when he carried me over with him.


Your Name is --


Samuel.


That was your ^ather's Name, I think, Well Gentleman I Baptised you, and a
sweet Child you were then; See now, Time, that consumes us, shoots him up still
sweeter.


A wondrous sweet Child you were, I've kissed ye, and played with ye, and
dandled ye in my Arms a hundred, and a hundred times, and swung ye in my
Bell-Ropes; ye loved swinging.


Lying Rascals, now their Memories are whetted, if it were for their purpose,
they'd remember Adam's Grand-father.


Well, Young Gentleman, You're welcome to your Native Air. How does the Noble
Gentleman, your Father? when will he bless his Country in his Return?


Very shortly, Sir; till which Time he entreats your care of me, and desires
you to accept of these fifty Pistols, as a small earnest of his future
Gratitude, and acknowledgments of your Services.


Sir, I am bound ever to be his very humble Beadsman, and most assiduous
Orator.


Lord, Lord, how Sickness decays our Intellects! This is the very Gentleman,
that before your last long Sickness, when I lay so ill at the same time too,
Master, about two years ago, we used constantly to remember in our private
Devotions; that a Fever should have such influence over our Memories!


Well, it shall be so no more; I shall ever hence forward remember him, Good
Gentleman.


My Father was used to say, that his Neighbour Spade the Sexton was a very
honest, but a wondrous Merry Man, and a Good-fellow; and therefore desired me
to give his Love and these Ten Pistols to him.


Ah! 'tis my noble, generous Master still; and you shall see I can be merry as
ever upon so joyful news as of his Health.


Thanks to the Gold, for half the Sum more you would sing a Psalm as merrily at
his Execution.


Shall's to the Dog and Duck, Master, or to the Whelp and Bacon? there's a Cup
of rare Stingo abroach, such as you love, and as good true Nantz, as e're was
tipped over Tongue.


No, Spade, My Charge has been nicely bred, those Houses are too mean for his
high Keeping: We must have something befitting his fine Stomach. Step and
provide us something at the Rummer. You see, Sir, we aren't dainty, homely
Places and mean Cheer serve us usually; we don't pamper our selves, we mortify
the Carnal Man, but upon such an extraordinary Occasion to remember an old
loving Friend, and in respect to you Sir.


I humbly thank you, Sir, but it needs not, I'm not delicate, and have at
present no Appetite but to my Study, which must be the Law. I desire you to
excuse me.


But, Sir, you may be hungry, you must be hungry, pray do nothing rashly; Study
creates Appetite mainly, but be not too violent, it impairs the Health; Take
your refreshment first, 'tis time, and then to your Study. Here's my Master,
had n'er been what he is at these years, if he had studied immoderately.


I thank you both for your Care, but I desire you to dispense with me at this
time. But, Sir, I suppose my Father in his Letter has made it his request, as I
do mine, to place me under the Instructions of some Lawyer of great Business;
and for his Pains and Care he shall be gratified with two hundred Guineas,
besides his own demand for my Lodging and Diet. I've heard much of Sergeant
Wrangle.


What, not eat, nor drink, first; Sure he has n't heard any thing of the
Serjeant's House keeping yet. Well, he's an Ass, and so we will use him. Cook and
Littleton.


Sir, You've hit happily upon Sergeant Wrangle, he's an able Councellor, and
makes more noise in Westminster-Hall, than half the Lawyer's there; he's Master
of that Art. He's my near Neighbour and Parishioner, I'll recommend you to him.
See yonder he comes, and Mr. Affidavit, the famous Solicitor, with him, and one
or two more.


Well, Gentlemen, you've played your Parts to a Miracle, I suppose we've gi'n
'em their Bellies full of this Cause; they'll know who they plead (Non est
factum) to next time.


When I lose a Cause for want of Witnesses, I'll bid adieu to Practice* as if I
could n't prove any Man's Hand when I've a mind to it. Mr. Swearhome I n'er knew
you so out in my life, so shamefully out-sworn, so baff^'d, by a young Fellow
too, that has n't been above five or six years at the Business.


Whose Fault was that? I went according to my Instructions: You knew the merits
of the Cause, and should have informed me better.


He had the disadvantage indeed of being first sworn, but Mr. Nickit retrieved
all.


Ay, he saw where the Pinch was, he swore last, I've known you Mr. Affidavit,
call for the Book even towards the Conclusion of a Cause to no purpose; if I
might have had the Book again, the Cause should n't have stuck, I warrant ye.


Come, come Gentlemen, you've all done to admiration, and the Cause has
succeeded accordingly, 't has paid you nobly. Well, a rich Client's a Blessing:
A rich litigious Lord's Cause is an Estate; that's never starved: there are
those that expect a Man should drudge for a single Fee, but they thrive in
proportion.


Hang the Penurious, their Causes like their Purses have poor Issues. Good Fees
beget good Causes; the Times are Aguish, and a Plea must be warmly lined to
keep it in heart.


The Prerogative of Crowns goes far, and those that will spare no cost, need
want no Witnesses; experienced, fearless Witnesses, that understand their
Businesses, and will make no unnecessary Scruples.


Well, Gentlemen, you are all Men of Sagacity in our Business, and never let a
Clause run a-ground upon Truth, but you help it off again immediately, and set
it afloat. I've known Witnesses sometimes over-set a Cause foully for want of
your Discretion: Too much truth is a very bad Ingredient in a Witness, a little
now and then sets a Cause off handsomely, but laid on too thick, it obscures
the Colours, and instead of giving a gloss, like an ill Varnish it hides all
the Beauty. Mr. Swearhome, and Mr, Nicki^, did my Lord make good his promise to
you?


Very nobly indeed Mr. Sergeant, we're very much obliged to you, and whenever
you've occasion, we hope you'll command us in your own Affairs gratis.


I'm glad on it, my Lord's a wise Man, and knows how to value your Services.
Call upon me anon at my House, I've occasion for your hands to some Writings,
and yours Mr. Affidavit.


Mr. Sergeant we're your Servants, and bound to be at your Devotion; command
whose Land or Money you please, we will not shrink from you.


A good Morrow to your Worship, Mr. Sergeant.


Thank you Master Homily, thank you good Neighbour Spade. Have ye any Business
with me? if so, be brief, I'm full of Business, and every minute's precious.


We know your Hours are taken up with full Employ, and therefore have brought
this young Gentleman of a considerable Family, and Heir to a great Estate, and
of a promising Aspect.


He appears no less; but to what end Neighbours?


To be your Pupil, Sir, and study the Law under your Instructions.


Alas, Sir, I should be glad to serve you, but I'm a private Man, and my House
strait not fit to receive a man of your Quality, scarce large enough for my
small family, Besides, Sir, you must pardon me, if I be a little scrupulous,
these Times make us all so; I mean you no affront, Sir.


To secure my Honesty, I'll deposit two hundred Guinea's, which I would beg
you to accept, as a Gratuity for the favour of your Instruction; and for my
Diet whatever you please I can agree to with thanks.


That's an Honest Pledge, yet there needs none, your Face and Carriage, Sir,
declare an innate honesty.


So strong an Inclination I have to the Law, and hear so great a Character of
you, Sir, that the meanest corner in your House will be more acceptable to me
than a Palace; Books, and your Direction, are all I covet; I shall have no
resort to me, no company; these two are all my acquaintance in this Town.


So much the better; a Student should be retired and frugal; to take you would
straighten me very much, my Affairs and the straightness of my House
considered. Could you be contented with a hard Lodging in the Out-parts of my
House?


Any thing, Sir, that's dry and wholesome, I'm not wantonly bred.


Would he'd live with me, and learn to dig?


Mark but his mind to Learning.


I do, and like it wondrously. Thanks to his Money.


But he's so mod^, Sir, he's too bashful for a Lawyer.


Not at all, 'tis a good Sign. Come, Sir, with me, but you must keep to your
Apartment. Good morrow Neighbours, I thank ye.


Good morrow to your Worship, young Gentleman I'll come sometimes, and crack a
Case with you.


My good Friends, I thank you both.


Fare 'em well, let's to the Tavern Spade, and enjoy our selves, and pray for
the Fool, the Founder.


And pray for more such fools, more Friends, and fools from New England.


From Lapland, or whatsoever quarter the Wind blows Money, I'll know 'em,
instantly, nay, I'll be a-kin to 'em, I can't miss a man that brings Money.


I'll change my Trade, Master, and live by the living, let the dead stink, 'tis
a poor stinking Trade.


If the young fool should chop upon his Wife now, and handle her Case, that's a
Law Point that would make the Lawyer start; 'tis a hidden. Point worth the
canvasing.


The Woman was n't born to so much happiness; he's too demure; he has no heat;
Study consumes his Oil.


I say, if he should sting her home, I should love him for it; for to say truth,
though I call him Worshipful, the Lawyer's an arrant Dogbolt, a stingy narrow
sou^d Wretch, that starves the very Rats and Mice out of his House, and so
jealous, that he starts if but the shadow of a man enter at his Window. I wish
him a Cuckold upon Record, and if my Youngster should dub him. -- But let's
leave that to the will of Fate, and over a Cup of lusty Canary let's Prophecy.

If Fools are doomed the Favourites of Fate,
Then they that deal with 'em are fortunate.

LET riotous Prodigals lavish away both health and treasure to please their
wanton Palates, and gorge intemperate Luxury. Let 'em debauch their Appetites,
and consume their Fortunes to purchase Surfeits, and nurse up diseases; Let 'em
be served in Gold and Silver, and indulge themselves in rich Soups, and costly
Ol^o's, in high Ragou's, and nice Fricafsee's till they grow more lusty and
salicious than pampered Cardinals; where does this end? Their Dishes come to us
that are wise and provident to pay for their Sauces, and their Luxurious
Carcases either fatten a Church-yard early, or at length encumber an Hospital.
These are the fruits of their excess and vanity, which the frugal and
industrious reap the benefit and comfort of. The wise take other measures, and
know that Nature's content with a little; this Egg to me's a greater Feast, and
contains more Dainties, than French Cook ever dressed, or Glutton thought of.
In this are health and content, all that wise Nature asks.


I fancy my Nature's none of the wisest then, Sir; for she would never be
satisfied so; yet she knows what's good for her self, and has taught my Stomach
to be more craving.


Of my Conscience thou'st a Wolf in thy Belly, thou insatiable Rascal, nothing
will suffice thy ravenous Gut, I saw you eat two Apples just now: Prodigious!





To feed thee as long as thou'd'st cram, would bring a Dearth upon the Land;
had thou been one of the five thousand that were fed by Miracle, there had
been no Fragments brought away; thy Mind's always on thy Guts, sure thy soul
lies there.


I can't tell that; but I'm sure 't had need, otherwise they'd shrink up quite
they're so empty; for I get nothing else to put into 'em here.


Ungrateful Rascal, hadn't you the Water I boiled tother Egg in, to make you
hearty Broth? are ye never to be satisfied?


Yes, Sir; but I might as soon make the Philosopher's Stone on it. you gave it
me in water, and if 'twere n't for good manners, I could give it you again in
Wind; 'twas so hearty.


Hold your tongue, Sirrah! and look to my Egg; how does it roast.


It heats apace, Sir.


Turn it then. Where's your Mistress? Why is n't she here?


The very sight of this Egg has made him Cockish; what would a Dozen Buttered
do?


Within, Sir, at what? Is she getting --


At the Window, getting a good Stomach.


I mean, what is she doing, Sirrah?


Praying heartily, Sir, upon her knees, that Heaven would send her a good
Dinner, a substantial Dinner, there's no fear of want of Stomachs here, the air
of this House is the thinnest and keenest in Europe. They that can live upon
our House-keeping, may surfeit upon the pickings of a Spaniards Teeth. My
Mistress, Sir, I doubt is a little of my Constitution, she loves a good Meal.


Nothing but Cluttony and Intemperance goes down with you, Sirrah. Had n't she
two Sprats for Supper last night, and Oil to 'em too? Was n't she sick with
eating?


Yes, she had Oil, and was sick with eating it, it would have turned a Dutchman's
Stomach; some Lamp or other furnished it.


Well, I'll have that Window stopped up; for I observe there are always swarms of
Bea^'s plying under it; as thick as Pimps, or Persons at VVhitehall, or Porters
at Billingsgate. Go call your Mistress, Sirrah.


Come, my Dear, I sent for thee from the Window in pure Tenderness, the (...)
too ^harp for thy delicate Constitution; thou should not come (...) that
Window, 'tis too bleak, and exposes thee too much to the cold Wind; I'll stop
it up.


Come, I know your disease; 'tis your Jealousy, not your Affection ^ you ^ of
me. How have I deserved to be mewed thus like ^?


Retirement, my Florella, is the Pleasure of Life; Oh that I could enjoy what
thou dost! that my affairs would suffer me to be always with thee! Privacy and
good Housewifery are the best Ornaments of a Wife, a Virtuous Woman, like a
Rose, the less she's blown upon is the sweeter. Why should the Windows be
opened to let in Scandal, and Censure, when the wholsomest Air blows inward.


Of what use are the the sweetest Flowers, if none come near enough to be
refreshed by, or perceive their Odours, yet they too only flourish in open air,
shut up they wither and die: So my Fame which might shine to the Honour of us
both, like a choked Lamp, is suffocated by your base Suspicions. No, my
Reputation which no malice could ever touch, is tarnished by your Jealousy.
What occasion must the World imagine I've given for so severe a Confinement?


England to sow Horns in; and I'm mistaken in my man, if he has n't brought
home, as able a Seeds-man.


Don't misconstrue my Love; you're fair, my Dear, and the fairest Flowers are
soonest blasted. 'Tis not that I doubt thy Virtue; but the World is envious,
and I would fence thee as well from its malice, as Temptations.


If you believe me just and true, why daren't you trust me to my Liberty? The
seeds of Virtue thrive poorly in the shade, set 'em in the warm Sun, and they
spring gloriously. Why have n't I my Coach, rich Clothes, Jewels, and Equipage,
like other Lawyers Wives? Neither my Fortune, nor my Person are inferior to
any of 'em; your sordid temper makes me vain, and tell you so.


Fie, Florella, don't take example by those foolish extravagant Women, that
stick their Husbands wealth upon 'em in trifles, and only mark out a Gaudy Path
to their own infamy and ruin.


No such matter, they visit, and enjoy themselves, live plentifully and
merrily; and the indulgence of their kind Husbands binds them faster to 'em.





What is't you can desire, or wish? here's what may satisfy the most covetous
eye. Here are Diamonds, Rubies, Ormus, or Bengal, worth Princes Ransomes, and
Pearl, as rich and orient, as Cleopatra's Banquet, all Nature's wealth, the
Treasures both of Sea and Land. Here's the work too of the most celebrated
Artists, Watches, Seals, Lockets, Rings, Crochets, and Neck-laces, that young
Extravagants purchase of Christian, and T^mpion, at the Price of their undoing;
where're they circulate, 'tis here they center, the reward and fruit of honest
industry, and good husbandry. All these are thine; what can they show to vie
with 'em, that carry all about 'em?


And what am I the happier for all these? what use are they of to me, more than
if they were in the Mine? All this is but wealthy Beggary, and I enjoy no more
than starved Prisoners, Confinement, want and hunger. But my Patience shall no
longer bawd to my own misery. Here's a Treat, two Eggs, and a Salad, that
would n't give a single Caterpillar a Dinner.


Nay, his Table's so loaded always, that his Cat's starved, and the Mice have
taken Sanctuary in the Church to avoid the same fate, and mend their Quarters.


Come, prithee Dear, be satisfied, 'tis only my care of thy health; I should be
loath, by our own thri^tless folly to become a constant Revenue to Doctors and
Apothecaries. Come, come, though what we have's but little, 'tis wholesome and
'cleanly. I've been my self both Caterer, and Cook, Sweet.


A Pox of the Cook, that can't lick his Fingers.


Can you think a Woman of my Birth and Fortune, can bear such usage patiently?
Such Avarice and Inhumanity? Is^t not enough that you're incapable of being a
Husband, but you must perform the Office of a Jailer to confine and starve me?


Come be pacified, and I'll add another Course to our Feast, you shall have
Milk, and stewed Prunes for a Collation.


With Sugar to 'em, Sir.


This Rogue would ruin our West India Plantations to fill but the hollow of
his sweet Tooth. Come, Florella, let's sit down, and think the Roman Dainties
at our Table; 'tis all but fancy.


If that would do, I've as strong a fancy to a good Meal, as the best of them.
Let the Devil take those ^gg-shells to equip his Witches for Lapland. Now, in
my opinion, 'tis Treason against all good Stomachs to hear a tedious Grace said
to no Meat. Well, I've a Rhadish yet, but that's transitory. I'll steal off,
and feast with it, upon the smell of the next Cook's Shop.


What Man was that you brought in with you?


A young Man, that is to study the Law under me, I've taken him into the House,
my Dear; but he shall not disturb thee, he shall not come near thee, but at Meals.
Did see him?


Yes, as you crossed the yard together.


How dost like him? 'tis a silly, Bookish, Bashful wretch; but he pays nobly,
he desires but three Months Instructions, and he has given me 200 Guinea's
before hand.


I caren't for that, he shall not stay here. What a Life shall I lead betwixt
your Jealousy and Covetousness? whenever I see him, I shall be in fear of one,
or shame for tother.


Of my Conscience, thou need not apprehend either. He's such a raw
Phlegmatic cold thing, thou might wear him in thy Bosom, and n'er warm him;
his mind's o'th Law, and not on lewdness.


Do, trust him, and repent it, do. I say he shall not stay, I know your Jealous
temper too well, I'll have no more of those fits.


Thou shalt n't, Dearest, I amn't Jealous of thee for any Man, much less for
him. Do but comply, and thou shalt have the profit of his Board to buy thee
Pins, which will be considerable; For he's willing to give any rate, and yet so
modest, that he's contented with the old Wood-room for a Lodging.


That used to hold Fuel, now you've brought Fire into it, but 'tis your own
doing, and against my Opinion; Take notice therefore, if your Jealousy, which
is arrant Tinder, should catch the Flame, I shall regard it only, as an Ignis
fatuus.


Fear nothing, Chicken, there's no danger; I'll call him to thee, and thou
shall it agree with him about the Terms thy self.


What, hard at it still? this is too violent to last, all things must have
their (...); Nature requires it. Come take breath, Sir, and consult your
health, as well as study. See how modest he is, speak to him, Wife, and
encourage him.


Sir, you're welcome to such poor accommodation as our House can afford.


Thank ye, Madam, I'm not nice, any thing serves my turn; Books, and your good
Husband's Instructions are all my ambition.


He's a very Book-worm, and feasts upon old Volumes, I must commit him to your
care, Wife; H's so bashful, he'll starve there else, before he'll speak.


Since 'tis your Pleasure, Sir, it shall be mine. And his too, or I mistake my
Man.


'Sir, here are three Gentlemen desire to speak with you about earnest
business.


I'll wait on 'em immediately. Feewell. Encourage him, and manage him smoothly,
thou may get what thou wilt out of him.


I shall get something for you then, you often dream of, but little think so
near you now.


I've lost abundance of precious time, Madam, and would study hard to redeem
it, every minute was invaluable, but they're past, and I would employ my utmost
care to improve the remaining; 'tis that makes me so thoughtful, not my natural
temper.


Come, you over-act your Part, I know you Friendly, this Disguise fits as
awkwardly upon you, as the Hab* of a Non-Con Parson would upon a Dancing Master.
Your Money has blinded him, he's easily imposed upon, when he gets by it. Though
there's nothing more common, than for your Hypocrites in general to cheat one
another. But could you imagine, that two years absence, and this Disguise could
^ide you from my Knowledge.


My dear Florella, thou art the only Volume in the Lawyer's study, that I
covet; let Wrangle tumble over the rest, and fill his head with Learned Jargon,
Law Billingsgate, and scold from Cook and Littleton to justify his Knavery;
let him (...) the Milch Purses of Litigious Fools, I envy him nothing he
enjoys, but thee.


Hold Friendly, 'tis too much; I'm now another right, and must not grant,
what I before might give, when 'twas my own; you freely had my heart, my Body
was another purchase, who must alone enjoy it.


Curse on your sordid Uncle, that ^ that, and yet with-held the rest. He knew
too well the Price, that Beauty yields, and would n't truck for Love or Hearts;
but prized the Lot ^ I my then low Stock, then stepped this Muckworm in, out bid
my ^ I'd the Ma^*^ and took Possession; Curse on 'em both* But, ^ has been
ki^der since, and given me my Elder Brother's Estate; suffer me therefore to
resume my right; and since 'twas an unjust Purchase made over my head, and in
my wrong; thus, thus I seize my own.


O Friendly, but too well I love you, therefore as you tender my safety, rake
not into the ^mbers of our disquiet, nor seek to revive a Flame, that will
consume us both. I'm bound by Sacred Vows, and what Love prompts me to, Duty
forbids.


Let not your Superstition wrong my Love, mistaken Notions, and false
Principles, not zeal for real duty, raise these doubts. The Matrimonial Vow's
reciprocal, as our Allegiance claims Protection, Conditions unperform'd on
either Part, make void the Obligation on tother. If you contract with an
insolvent Man for an Estate, are you bound to make good your Counter-part, if
he regards not his. Marriage is an agreement witnessed only, and ratified by
Law on certain terms, of which if he has failed, your Bond is cancelled, the
Knot's dissolved, and you are mine again, by all the Canons both of Church and
Nature.


Urge me no further, Friendly, 'tis a crime in me to hear you plead in such a
cause; But you've a Powerful Advocate within, that fain would raise rebellion
in my Blood; down, down, thou Traitorous warmth, that swell my Veins. How
has my Husband failed, how forfeited?


As well may Winter boast the Summers Fruits, and chill December vie with
scorching July; as he pay down the Hymeneal dues, numbed with the Frost both of
his Age and Temper, no Joy can spring through such an Icebound Clay. This Air's
too bleak for Love to wanton in; he seeks the cheerful Sun to prune, and bask
in, and keeps his Revels on warm Downy Beds, whose Genial warmth revive, his
drooping Joys. These, these, my dear Florella, shall be thine, return but Love
for Love at thy Devotion.


Tempt me no more, too well you know your Power, and would despise, and hate me
for my Frailty, should you prevail. Why will you urge it then?


Dearest, charming Florella.


Madam, my Master's just at my Heels.


How now Wife? What's the matter, Pupil? Why this disorder in both your
countenances? What's the meaning of this confusion? You look angry, Sir; Why
Sirrah, Famine, Rascal, what makes you run away?


O! My Dear, I've committed such a Folly, such a Fault, I ne'er was guilty of
the like before. But 'tis your Fault, you --


Why, what's the matter? what have ye done? tell me, speak quickly; Have ye --


Careless, and hooted at by all the Boys in Town.


Such rudeness, such an Affront I've given this Gentleman, as I doubt he n'er
will pardon, and I can make no Apology for.


I'm glad 'tis no worse, I had rather they should quarrel than agree too well,


He mentioning New England, and I not dreaming he was of that Country, I told
him some Stories of that Place, which I have formerly heard my Cousin Ramble
tell; His Colour went, and came, he looked first Pale, then Red, then Pale, and
Red again, which I not thinking him concerned, ne^r minded imputing it only to
his excessive Bashfulness till by the extreme disorder, and confusion I
perceived him under, I found it touched him nearer.


'Twas indiscreetly done, but like a Woman, rather than want Tattle, to out
with all they know at first sight to any Body. Sir, you must pardon her; you
must follow the rule of Law, in like cases, where if any Persons offend without
malice, or ill design, they are acquitted; you'll find it in your reading; 'tis
called Chance-medley. See and he be not discomposed still. Why Wife, ask his
Pardon, Wife.


Sir, your Lady's not in fault, 'tis my misfortune, that there's too much truth
in what was said, which I had not temper enough to cover my concern for. But I
beg to be excused the uneasy repetition of Particulars.


Sir, I ask your Pardon, and will hereafter offend you in that manner no more.


Come, come, all's well, we will drink a Glass to a better understanding, and bid
my Pupil welcome; come you'll agree the better hereafter, as Bones once broken
knit the closer.


I hope you're a Prophet, Lawyer?


Fam^ne.


Did you call, Sir?


Fetch the Bottle, and the ^l^ss out of my Writing-Desk.


The Ink-Bottle, Sir?


No, the Bottle of He^rts-ease, Sirrah, and wash the Glass.


Shall I tie a String to it, Sir? it may be swallowed unawares else.


Away, Sirrah, and do as I bid you, here's the Key.


Come, fill a Glass, it warms the Stomach, and moderately used is Cordial, too
much destroys Health, and ruins the strongest Constitution. Come Pupil to ye;
-- How thou fill Villain! -- This Rogue's in League with some Apothecary
sure to throw us all into Fevers.


A very little, pray;


They're at present how to make you reparation, Sir. Come, Dearest, Success to
the Gentleman's undertaking, that his Studies may thrive.


'Tis a good wish, he shall not want my Assistance.


I thank you both for these undeserved favours.


I've been reconciling two Quarrelsome Neighbours, they had no Money, so I even
advised 'em to a Reference; 'tis the best way of ending poor Causes. 'Tis for
rich Booties, Golden Birds, we spread the Nets o'th Law.











Come, my Dear, thou can sing, give my Pupil one Song, and then leave us to
discourse of his Studies.


WHy was not Wit with Beauty joined?
I hate ^ Face without a Mind.
If e're I to that Sex submit,
'Twill be to Cloe's powerful Wit.
For Coelia, though divinely fair,
Art may improve, or Age impair.
When Wit alone, my Passion moves!
The only thing which Time improves.
The God with Wit must tip his dart,
And pierce my Ear, to wound my Heart.
Sir, I am very sensible, that the Business of a Lawyer depends not wholly ^on
Learning, or great reading in the Law, there are other mea^ (...) be (...) to
introduce a Man to Practice.


You observe very well; For in our Profession, as in all others, 'tis (...)
m^it, but a little unheeded, artificial management, that recommends us (...)
the world, and gets Business, tho the thoughtless crowd impute it to our ^ill
and Ability. So the City-Divines insinuate themselves into the favour of the
People, by Preaching up Popular Doctrines, and declaiming for Liberty and
Property, the Contract implied betwixt the King and Subject in the Oaths of
Coronation and Allegiance, and the lawfulness of Rebellion upon disgust, and
the necessity of curbing the Prerogative; at Court they raise themselves by
advancing the Divine Right of Monarchy, and urging the dangerous consequences
of disobedience, and making Resistance to the Higher Powers, and enforcing the
Religious Obligation to the Civil Authority, and the danger of using our own
Eyes, and consulting Carnal Reason in matter of Faith. The circumstances of
Time and Place are nicely to be considered; For that which is Orthodox at
Whitehall, is seldom calculated for the Meridian of Cheapside.


Nay, the Spiritual Compass in that respect is like the Mariners and the
Priests, like their Needles, though they agree in their main aim, have their
several Points at which they certainly vary.


In Physic, the Doctors grow famous by affronting Galen and Hippocrates, and
complementing Apothecaries; by writing long Bills filled with unnecessary
Medicines; by repeating Draughts, Bolus's, and Pearl Cordials, and emptying the
Patients Pockets to fill their Windows; by caresling Old Midwives, and bribing
Nurses, and Favourite Servants; by making impertinent officious Visits.
Philosophical Gossipings, and talking Non-sense liberally to Old Ladies in
Cramp Terms; by commending the insipid Receipts they show 'em, and
communicating now and then a Dispensatory Water for an Arcanura of their own;
by reading in their Coaches what they don't understand in their Studies; by
running into Cabals to recommend their own Faction, and decrying the rest of
their Profession; by frequenting Conventicles, and Lecture-Sermons to please
Knaves, and cheat Fools into an Opinion of their Religion; by talking
perpetually of Monstrosities, and unusual Phenomenon, though at the same time
they can't distinguish betwixt a Chamoelion, and a Dutch Sooterkin. These are
the Acts that make 'em famous, 'tis no matter for Learning, they need not cure,
if they can but amuse the People; A Collection of Journals, or Transactions
equips 'em for Philosophers, a Slaughter-house for Anatomists, and their
Grand-mothers for Chemists.


Well, there are Cheats in all Trades, not excepting ours; and I find 'tis
easier much to be a Man of Business, than a Man of Skill. I've lost so much
time in New England, that I would fain take the shortest cut to the Knowledge
and Practice of the Law. For that end I desired to be placed under your
Instructions; whatever you are pleased to communicate, shall be further
acknowledged.


You say honestly; and I'll deal by you like a Son, I'll let you into all the
Mysteries of our Art, and if you can but follow my Directions, I'll make you a
Master of it too, one Month in my House shall be worth seven years in your
Study.


Sir, you bind me to you, and doubt not but by your good Lectures to prove such
a Proficient, as you need not be ashamed on.


Most Gentlemen take a wrong method in breeding their Sons to the Law, they
send 'em to the Inns of Court, where, if they prove Students, (which very few
do) they drudge away seven years, in making common Place-Books from Reports,
and Statute-Books, before they're called to the Bar; and many saunter away
seven, and seven more, before they be sent to it again with a Fee.


My Father was very sensible of that, which made him take other measures.


He's a wise Man, I warrant him; For with an experienced Practiser, you shall
learn more thriving Law in a few Months, than in your whole Life in a Study, if
he will be free and communicate, which any one will do upon a good
consideration.


That sha'nt be wanting, Sir, my Father has taken care for that, and I'll see
his Commands performed.


You do wisely both. But to be successful in our Profession, there is an
aptness of Temper required. Some Men set up for such a scrupulous, inflexible
honesty, that they are n't to be moved an Inch from what they call their duty
upon any consideration, that start, and boggle at the hast oblique Proposition.
Have nothing to do with 'em, not one in a hundred of 'em, proves worth a
farthing. Do you love Money heartily?


Entirely, I never part with it, but to get more of it, or something more
valuable, as I hope to do now.


Very good. Then you need not pore upon Law-Books continually, and cite Cases
as some do; a moderate skill in Law-terms, and a com(...) knowledge of the
common Practice of the several Coats will carry you through all, with a little
Address, which I'll teach you.


Under so great a Master 'tis impossible to miscarry.


When you're called to the Bar, you must make an interest in some Attorneys and
Solicitors, which you may easily do by letting 'em (...) in all the Fees, they
bring you, and giving 'em Authority to use your (...) when e're they've
occasion for a Councel's Hand without a Fee, which they frequently have. These
things may seem at first to lessen your profit; but trust me they return with
Interest upon Interest.


But how must I behave my self at the Bar, when I come there; for if Law be not
necessary, I suppose, there must be other Qualifications in its stead.


You're young, and seem to have good strong Lungs; are you well breathed? are
you long winded?


Very long winded, when I was a Boy, I could out-holloa e're a Hunter in New
England.


Tis the best Qualification for the Bar in the World. Then when you're retained
in any Cause, be sure you talk enough, talk abundance, no matter what; if you*
can outwind the Antagonist's Council, your Points gained.


But will the Court suffer that? won't the Bench take notice of it.


No matter for that, you must n't be easily snubbed, if the Court give you a
Check, go on still; and if at last they force you to desist, sit down sullenly,
and say not a word more in the cause, if it ^oes for you, your Client will hug
you, and attribute all his success to your zeal at first; if otherwise he'll
impute it to the partiality of the Judge that would n't hear you out. There's
Councellor Noisy is one of the best Lawyers for that, that ever tired the
Court.


I've heard much of your Fame, Sir, for this Politic way of Practice.


Time has been Pupil; but my Lungs are past the best, they won't serve me now
as they have done. You'll be of a rare Age for it, when you come to it. When your
Adversarie's Witnesses are called, be sure to give 'em frequent Interruptions
by Questions, sly cunning Questions, there's a great deal of Art in managing an
Adversarie's Witness well; by neat address most of 'em may be made Evidences
for you; but you must ask 'em cunningly; you may lead 'em whither you please,
and draw what answers you will from 'em. But if the adverse Council discover
and countermine you, to cross Purposes with 'em immediately, ask 'em Questions
innumerable to the Point or not, 'tis all one, it confounds 'em, confounds the
Court, and perplexes the Cause.


But how must we do to defend our own Witnesses from the same Practice
o't'other side?


They must be prepared before hand; a well-instructed Witness is all in all.
It would make a Man mad to see what Witnesses are brought out of the Country
sometimes, there's no hammering a right impression in their heads. If you would
have a Cause go glibly forward, never trouble those thick skull'd Rogues, but
take two or three of your own training, or that you've tried; and I'll warrant
your Cause for miscarrying.


But are they so easy to be had?


There are about this Town abundance of very pretty apt fellows, that either
through a natural inclination to appear in public, or their necessities, are
very ready to receive any Impression from Money.


Sir, there's Madam Olympia, and Mr. Affidavit without, and desire to speak
with you.


Wait on. 'em in. may stay Pupil, we may have occasion for your Hand. This Mr.
Affidavit's the ablest Solicitor in England, he has always his Witnesses, and
his Implements in such order, it would do one's heart good to be of Council for
him.


Madam, I'm your Ladyships most humble Servant, the 10000l. was paid to me
yesterday according to your Order; How will your Ladyship be pleased to have it
disposed of?


That's what I'm come about Mr. Sergeant; I've two or three offers, and am in
some doubt which to take, they all appear fair.


Does your Ladyship persist in your resolution of accepting an Assignment of
Squire Careless's Mortgage, there can be no better Security in the World.


I wish she would, she's a Woman of Honour, and Careless may expect kindness
and civil Treatment from her; but I'm afraid these Knaves will trick her; I'll
watch 'em.


If Mr. Sergeant will use me well, I'm willing enough; for I don't care to
break the Sum, and 'tis too big to lend upon any, but Land-Security.


Madam, I'll ask nothing of you for my Bargain; Pay me my Principal and
Interest at seven per Cent. which is the Interest Mr. Careless should have
paid, and 'tis your Ladyships.


Take him at's word, Madam; if I had the Money to lay down, as you have, I'd
not take 5000l. for my Bargain, as I could manage it. Your Ladyship may afford
the Serjeant's Lady a Present of a Noble Piece of Plate.


You might perhaps, but I can't. Whenever Mr. Careless, or his Friends, think
fit to redeem it, I shall take no advantage.


'Tis nobly answered, and Careless shall know his Obligation to thee.


How foolishly some People throw away these Golden Opportunities, but that I
know the Sergeant too well, I could make a shift to raise the Money. But we
Sharpers never play with one another.


What's the Sum, Mr. Sergeant?


The Principal, Madam, 17000l. the Interest 3500l. and some odd Pounds, but you
shall know to a Farthing.


Well, let the Writings be drawn that they may be perused by my Council, and
the rest of your Money shall be ready upon Sealing.. Mr. Sergeant where's your
Lady, I must see her; why won't she visit me sometimes? I almost take it ill.


She stirs so little abroad, she's not fit to wait upon your Ladyship* Famine,
bid your Mistress wait upon her Ladyship immediately.


Ha! what Noise is that?


'Tis the Clashing of Swords sure, keep the Door fast.


What's the matter, Sir? you're not hurt I hope.


No, thanks to your timely Inter(...) Sir; my worst hurt is, my Regret, for
having been the ^ fair Lady.


If my Fright has ^ in the safety of a Gentleman* 'tis very welcome to me.


I'm a stranger, Madam, to that sweet voice, yet I'm glad to hear it sound a
more pleasing Note.


May a Woman be so bold as to ask the occasion of this Quarrel, Sir?


The Sergeant there, Madam, or Mr. Affidavit, can better resolve that Question
than I; these were some of their Mirmydons, I suppose, they were Catchpoles,
Bailiffs, Madam.


Upon my word. Mr. Careless, 'twas n't at my Suit.


Nor any, that I know of, I do assure you, Sir.


Well then you two have got enough by me; will you be my Bail?


Indeed, Sir, you must excuse me, you know you're a great many thousand Pounds
in my debt, and pay no Interest, you take no care o'that.


Don't you take care o'that? Don't you receive my Rents. Thou perplexer of
Causes, thou tormenter of the Law, the Stomach of an Ostriege is but a Type of
thy Conscience, that can digest any thing, though never so hard and bulky. Can
thou swallow three thousand Pounds a year, and disgorge nothing? I don't owe
you any thing, Sir; do I?


No, Sir, but I've made a solemn resolution never to Bail any Man, though he were
my Father. Besides, we don't know at whose Suit, nor for what this Action is
brought.


I've enquired that, 'tis at the Suit of one Mr. Snip, a Taylor, for 70l.


Sir, I'm sorry I can't serve you in this Affair, in any thing else --


Why thou Buckram Bag-Carrier, thou Bastard, Son of Parchment, thou Nit to the
Lay, thou Cur that art grown fat upon the scatterings of my Extravagance,
dare thou bark at me? your Man his scarce worn out the Livery that came off
your own Back; and dare you insult? Of all my Follies, or misfortunes this is
the worst, that I should want, or expect any kindness from such Grubs, such
grovelling Muck worms.


A brave spirited, mettled Fellow.


But I'll take care to provide such ^ine for you, Horse le^ches, as shall make
you discharge the Go^ you swell with, I will ye Blood suckers, I will.





Pray, my Dear, oblige the Gentleman, 'tis in your own power to repay your
self.


Mr. Sergeant, you ought not to let the Gentl^man suffer, since you with-hold
his Estate.


So, he has brought the Women over to his Party already, a handsome, wild young
Fellow, ^'r misses their good word.


Ladies, I'm extremely obliged to you both for this Favour; your Beauties ought
to command, not su^: But to such a fordid Wretch I've a better Advocate, one
that (...), and ^hin^s with (...) Lustre in his greedy ^yes, than all the
Charms you are Mistresses of.


I don't care to meddle with such things; I don't know the Value of 'em.


200l. upon it, and place it to my Account, and give me the Ring, and Bail him,
and I'll indemnifie you.


Well, Madam; if you'll secure me, it shall be done.. 200l. upon your Ring,
which shall be yours again whenever you please to redeem it; and will be your
Bail to this Action. Mr. Affidavit, pray call in the Officer; but let his
Followers keep without.


For the Money, you've a Pledge, I shall not part with; and for the rest, you
know how to lick your self whole.


Still brave, and like himself: He can't return Thanks for a Service, he does
n't think done out of Kindness.


I shall be a Widow suddenly, I hope: This Generosity looks like a Lightning
before Death.


Heaven verify the Omen, Madam.


O, Mr. Trappum! Are you the Man? Pray, What Summ's this Action for? What's the
Debt? and at whose Suit?


The Debt's 70l. and at Mr. Snip's Suit.


Well, I'll be th^ Gentleman's Bail: You'll take my Word till anon, and not
molest him?


An't were for 1000l. an't please your Worship.


Well, call two or three Hours hence, and the Business shall be done.


God bless your Worship; 'Servant, Master.


Sir, I'll fetch your Money.


Ladies, this wonderful Conversion's owing to your Charms; your Eyes are the
happiest S^ars ever influenc^d my Fortune.


So they are if you knew all; I could give a more natural Solution of this
Miracle, if I durst.


Mine, Madam, have shed their Influence long since: 'Tis for your Ladyship, to
work such strange Conversions.


I shall impute it to the happy Conjunction of Both. Had I only such bright
Constellations to consult, I should turn Astrologer, and never be out in my
Predictions.


I must break off this Parley, that extravagant Fellow will solicit my Wife
before my Face else.


Mr. Sergeant, You'll take care to dispatch those Writings as fast as you can?
But don't let Mr. Careless know a Syllable.


I'll wait upon your Ladyship with'em, in a few Hours.


Mr. Sergeant, your Servant: Madam, your most humble Servant.


Your Ladyship will permit me to wait upon you to your Coach? Madam, your
humble Servant: Gentlemen, yours.


Come, let's walk in: Mr. Affidavit, I have further Business with you.


For my part, I can't believe this Miracle; there's some deeper laid Knavery,
than I can fathom the Bottom of: I'll follow'em, and try what Discovery may be
made.

I dare not yet to such Conversions trust,
Where M^sers generous prove, and Knaves are just.

CAN you guess the meaning, Friendly, of the Lawyer's surprising Change? If ill
Language and Railing work so well with him, I'll make my self Master of all the
Rhetoric of Billingsgate, to pleasure him; the best Breathed, loudest Scold
there, shall be a civil, modest Person to me.


That's a Groundless Fancy. Quarrelling's his Trade, and Scolding his daily
Exercise at the Bar; 'tis as familiar to him as Snuff to an Irish-man, and he
takes it as unconcernedly. If you had as much Malice as a disappointed
She-Saint, as much Scandal as a Secret Historian, with the Lungs and Front of a
Scotch Field-Preacher, you'd never be able to rail him out of a single Do it.
There's some Roguery a foot, which I'd fain trace.


Why should he send the Ring back without Money? He knows I'm too sensble of
his Knavery, for him to trust to my Honour. There's the Ring, Friendly, and my
Thanks.


This is none of my Ring; 'tis a fairer, and worth more than mine. Here, take it
again, and wear it: We're in a Labyrinth now, and this may prove a Clue to
guide us out again.


What! more Miracles? Nay, even keep it till I redeem yours. Sure some Qualm of
Conscience has o'ertaken this harpy Sergeant; some honest Devil or other has
frighted him into a Fit of Repentance, and he begins to refund now with the
same Grace that Thieves make Restitution at the Gallows. Oh, for your Spiritual
Pimp now, to perfect this good Work of the Devil's beginning.


^'m apt to think the Flesh has more to do in this Matter, than the Devil. I
fancy I'm Oedipus enough to solve this Riddle. Who brought this King?


I don't know: 'Twas sent to me, at the R^se, sealed up, and superscribed, but
nothing written within the Paper: Before I could come out of the Room, the
^essenger was gone.


Let's see the S^al; something may be made of that perhaps. What's here? A Lady
throwing out a Rope to a drowning Cupid! More Mystery still! Do you understand
Hieroglyphics, Careless?


Not very well; but I can guess at this. Faith, Friendly, I'm sorry to be thy
Rival: I suppose the Serjeant's Lady has taken a Fancy to my Person, and either
robbed or whead^'d her Husband out of this Ring, and sent it me, as an Earnest
of her Inclination. 'Tis as unwelcome as Press-Money to me; I don't like the
Service, for your sake: Prithee keep it, and serve for me. Pox on it, this
Clerk-like Figure thou make, disgusts her.


No, take it again: You're mistaken; 'tis one that can draw surer and deeper
than Florella. What think you of the Widow Olympia?


I remember she pleaded for me to the Lawer, indeed.


I can tell you more than that; she has taken your Estate into her Care, and
perhaps designs as much for your Person.


If she's any Design, my Body's at her Devotion; an easy Fine shall make her
Mistress of it: But I don't care for making a Settlement, or granting too long
a Lease.


How can a Lease be too long, where the Consideration is worth more than the
Inheritance? Come, don't trifle with your good Fortune; like a foolish Cat,
that plays with a Mouse till she loses it.


I'm afraid I'm more likely to be the Mouse; if this Female Pufs should get me
into her Clutches, you must rescue me, Friendly; you must be my Deliverer.


Never fear, Man; if she does, she'll use you like a Kitten. What a
faint-hearted Soldier art thou, to shrink before the Enemy comes in view!


A prudent General would be cautious of bringing himself under a Necessity of
Engaging where the Success is doubtful, and even Victory is certain Loss.


What careful Officer would not quit Quarters that lie waste; and venture
something to win a rich Soil, with a great Crop standing, and plentiful
Magazins?


But no wise Commander would fight himself into a Nook, though never so rich, to
be penned in there, who'd all the rest of the Country to forage in at liberty.
These Women of Honour expect such a deal of Constancy and Sincerity, that I
dare not venture on'em. I can't swim, and therefore care no more to Love, than
wash out of my Depth; I should be lost if I did.


These raw Lovers are like fearful Boys, that put first one Foot into the
Water, then the other, and so prolong their Pain; when 'tis but plunging boldly
to be out on it.


Yes, yes; you that are in, cry 'tis warm, to draw more Fools after you: But we
that are dry and warm on Shore, have no reason to trust to such shivering,
chattering Invitations.


Here comes your starved Pimp: It would puzzle a nice Virtuoso to tell which
weighs most, he, or his Shadow. How now, Shotten Herring?


How is't, Famine? What Wind blew thee hither?


Faith, a brisk Wind might blow me like a Feather, Sir: I've ballasted my
Stomach well out of your Bounty; otherwise, the least Blast would have over-set
me: I was afraid to venture into the Sun, for-fear of being drawn up among the
Motes that play in the Beams.


Well, mind my Business, and thou shalt fare better than my Lord Mayor's
Carver; thy Belly shall be all thy Care, and thou shalt out-feed a Catholic
Priest at Easter.


Shall I see good Days, Days of Plenty again? Then hang this penurious Master
of mine; let him eat his Cheese unpar'd, and eat the Rhind of his Bacon
himself; I'll no more of 'em. If you'll but provide for my Belly well, you
shall furnish his Head as you please.


Thou shalt be fat and Iusty, Si^rah; it shall be Carnival all the Year: Effect
but this, thou shalt be-rich too.


Hang Money, Sir, 'tis mercenary; Give me Meat plenty, and drink in abundance.
Oh the delicious flavour, the ravishing Ha^tgoust of a Savoury Venison Pasty!
the pomp and state of a fat Turkey marches up to the Table! in my mind his
Entry's a Nobler sight than the Venetian Ambassadors. Let Trave'lers pra^e of
stately Fdifices abroad; to me there's no Structure so magnificent, as a lofty
towering Goose-Pye; the Pastry Cook's the noblest Architect; ay, and Engineer
too; 'twould do a man's heart good to storm such Outworks: At a Breach in those
Walls, I could out-charge a Marshall of France.


The Rogue will surfeit upon Imagination. Hark ye, Famine; Is there no
procuring a Favour of you under all these? A Man might corrupt a whole Polish
Diet, and influence an Election at an easier rate.


O Lord, Sir; I always make my Price according to the Commodity. If you've a
Mind to deal with me, you'll find me the most reasonable Man breathing: A Cod's
Head, or a Side of Salmon, attended by a Brace of Roasted Congers, slank'd with
Stewed Carps, and a Train of Soles, Tenches, Whitings and Smelts, Sauced with
Lobsters, Cray-fish and Shrimps shall fetch you a Countess.


This is for a Lenten Sinner, you Rogue. But, suppose my Appetite to stand more
to the Flesh; What Pennyworths can you afford?


A Jolly Pheasant, with a Guard of Ducks, Woodcocks, Partridges, Quails,
Snipes, Plover, Ruffs, and a Mob of Larks about 'em, shall lay any inferior
Quality as flat as a Flounder before ye.


How if a Man should design against the City?


A Haunch of Venison, and a Pyramid of Sweet-meats, shall procure you a Lady
Mayoress; a Couple of Capons and Sawsages, and a good large Marchpane, an
Alderman's Consort; a Shoulder of Mutton and Oysters, and two or three
Castle-Custards, a Common-Council-Man's or Deputy's YokeFellow: The rest are
such kind Turtles, a Glass of Rhenish and Sugar, and a Cheese-cake brings 'em
to Billing infallibly.


Well, but I'm ambitious of Luck at Horse-flesh: What say you to the Parson's
Help-meet?


Oh, Sir! a Tythe-Pig and Plumb-Sauce does the Business: Or, if she be Non-con,
a fat Loin of Veal, and a long Canting Grace, brings her under Hatches
effectually.


You're the reasonablest Pimp in Christendom: If you were half as able, you
should to Court for Preferment; and be made Ranger-General of all the
Pettycoat-Chaces.


If I were in heart now, I could work Miracles; but the Truth is, my starving
Allowance has somewhat enfeebled my Talent: But, with your Encouragement, I
shall soon recover it.


Give me but the least Glimpse of Success, and never a Zealous, Believing
Sister in the City ever cherished Precious, Painful, Mortifying Brother with
half the Luxury that I'll treat you.


My Stomach's a tiptoes already: Here comes one that looks like a, dainty Bit;
Shall I fetch her to you? Say the Word, and you shall see, there is n't a
better Dog for a Duck in England, than I am.


Hold, Sirrah; 'tis the Widow Olympia: Out with your Guns, Careless; and salute
her with a Broad-side; she has the Weather-gage of you, she bears down upon
you, and gives you Chase, you see. I'll leave you to grapple with, and board
her, if you can.


Leave your Setter with me, I've Occasion for him. Famine, you must go with me.


To Dinner, or Supper, Sir?


I've dined already; but to a good Supper, if you deserve it.


I've a Sister, Sir, that People say is handsome: Shall I fetch her, Sir?


Is your Mistress fond of your Master, Famine?


Fond of him, Sir! A tame She-Bear would n't couple with him: He's so bristly,
there's a Warren of Fleas perpetually frisking about him.


Sirrah, be careful, and assistant to my Friend, and thou shalt eat EggBroth no
more, nor lick the Dust and Flies out of the Dish where Oil has been. Blow up
your Mistress, Rogue; poison her with his Praises.


Let him blow her up, Sir, as Butchers blow their Veal; let him poison her; let
him infuse the kind Venom; she'll swell notably, no doubt on it.


Madam, I'm happy in this Opportunity of paying my Thanks for the extraordinary
Favour conferred upon me at the Serjeant's. Acknowledgments are, I confess, but
poor Returns to such weighty Obligations: But your Generosity, like the Bounty
of Heaven, admits of no other.


I'm a perfect Stranger to these weighty Obligations you speak of Sir: But I
should have been very glad it had been in my Power to be serviceable to a
Gentleman of Mr. Careless's Merit: But the Serjeant's Generosity took away all
Occasion.


His Generosity, Madam, is like the false Compassion of a Crocodile; only shown
to those he's about to devour. But I had rather owe it to your Ladyship's Power
over him: Don't rob me of the Satisfaction of being your Debtor.


I wish you were so neither to him, nor me, Sir. But, methinks, a Man of your
Interest, and Sense, should not be taken in Snares you're aware of.


'Tis in vain to struggle when we're in the Toil; it only pinches us the
harder.


Have (...) no Friends that will help you at this Pinch? You've been so ready
to assist others, that I should expect to see Crowds pressing to be the first
to other their Service.


For that very Reason you see none of 'em, Madam: For, since they can't make it
an Obligation, and lend me Money, they wo'n't pay it, as a Debt due. Yet I have
one Friend left, would help me to play the Fool again, and redeem my Estate.


Why do you refuse his Kindness? Can an Estate be a Burden to you?


An insupportable one. I'm wise enough now to see my past Folly: Yet I find it
in my Nature to play the Fool again, and therefore I would not have it in my
power. I like the Bever's Policy; I know what 'tis I'm hunted for, and
therefore throw it 'em, to compound for my Quiet all my ^


What a brave-soul'd Fellow were this, if he could be wrought from this wild
Conceit?


There your Ladyship touches me to the quick. I've as much of the Christian
Spirit of Revenge, and could swinge 'em with as little Mercy or Remorse as the
Saints Elect (as they think themselves) do those they call Reprobates; I could
handle 'em with as much Severity as the late Reforming Scotch Kirk-Apostles did
their Episcopal Clergy. No, I shall reach Sergeant Hocus Pocus, and his Tumbler
too, I hope, in spite of his Law Legerdemain.


Can you guess at the Occasion of that sudden Turn of Temper to day? I should
as soon have expected a Revolution in the State.


I was in hopes your Ladyship could have untied the Knot for me: It was a
Miracle of your working. But you, Madam, like the Sun, are alone insensible of
your own Influence; and are blind to the Lustre of those Charms, which the rest
of the World see, and are governed by.


This Ceremony don't become you, Mr. Careless; your merry Freedom sits better
by half upon you. I'm too much a Woman, not to be vain, if I could tell for
what.


The natural Magic of your Charms has done more than Medaea's were feigned to
do; for 'tis more to make an old Miser honest and generous, than to make an old
Cripple youthful and vigorous; the Sergeant has sent me my Ring again.


How's this! Does he take it for his own still?


Friendly's in the right on it; she has some Design upon me by her Concern. Let
him put such Tricks upon me as often has he thinks fit; 'tis not the same
indeed, 'tis a richer.


Are you sure it came from him?


So, I see she's concerned; I'll drive this a little farther.


Pray, Sir, let me see it; I have a little Skill in such Toys.


You say true, Madam; but I'll not be obliged to him, Curmudgeon; I'll carryit
back, and redeem my own. What your Ladyship hinted just now is very reasonable;
we ought as much to suspect the Civilities of such Men, as the Devil's
Kindness; there's always a Design for themselves at the Bottom.


O fie! Mr. Careless, you can't be so dull as you'd make your self; this looks
more like a Lady's Favour, than an Usurers. If it should be from his Lady,
you'd be guilty of an inexcusable Folly. You may remember, she would not have
had him taken the Ring.


Troth, Madam, I can't believe so well of my self; but if it be sol've a Friend
will set a greater Value upon it: He'll hug himself, as if he were in Possession
of the Indies. He shall have it.





I'm not acquainted enough with 'em to know the true Value of 'em. I was always
afraid of trading in that way, Madam; for fear of dealing to loss, or making
bad Debts.


How can that be in a Trade that's carried on purely by Truck? How can the
Stock be diminished, where an Equivalent is always deposited?


That might be the ancient way of Traflick, Madam; but the Case is very much
altered in our Times: There's no such thing as Retail Truck now; and your Sex
are grown such arrant Brokers, you're for dealing altogether by the Lump, and
rate a Man's Stock by the Bulk, not th'intrinsick Value: Nay, you're such very
Jews, there's no Credit to be had amongst you; not a Favour without Ready
Money, or Church-security for such extravagant Demands, that 'tis the Business
of a Man's Life to raise the Interest, without hope of ever discharging the
Obligation.


That's because so many of you make your selves wilful Bankrupts, there's no
trusting to you; you break on purpose to compound with one at an easy rate,
and set up with the remainder for fresh Credit with others.


Can you blame us, or wonder? If, when you make your Service so hard, we make
our Escape by running away. They that sell themselves to the Western
Plantations, have their Liberty at the Expiration of a certain Term of Years,
and may set up for themselves; but nothing but Death sets us free from your
Yoke, unless we will be beholding to our Heels for our Liberty.


You ought to be punished, as Deserters of the basest kind, that mutiny without
Reason, and are'nt content to disparage the Service, but run from your Colours
with your Pay in your Pockets before-hand.


'Tis but Justice, when you put us upon harder Duty than we list our selves
for; a poor Soldier of yours is never excused a Tittle of it; and if he stirs a
Foot beyond his Post for a little necessary Provision, a little fresh Provant,
you're ready to treat him as a Revolter.


Haven't we reason to keep up strict Discipline among such licentious
Freebooters, that have no regard to Civil Quarters, but where you come make
all Free Plunder.


How can it be otherwise, when the Allowance from your Magazins is so small,
and you give us so little room to forage for our selves in.


Well, we poor Women are in as bad a Condition, as Frontier Towns, that, to
secure themselves from the Insults of their Enemies, are forced to take in a
Garrison that oppresses them as bad.


Only you not being under the same Apprehensions of your Neighbours, have a
Stratagem to keep us low, which they dare not make use of; you oblige us to
such frequent, unnecessary Firings, that the Terror of our Artillery's lost,
'tis grown a mere Scare-crow; you won't trust us with Ammunition enough at a
time for any great Enterprise.


Well, I should rejoice heartily to see you in Love: I hope your Mistress will
revenge the Quarrel of her Sex upon you.


That makes me stand upon my Guard; for your Ladyship has all the Power of a
Conqueror, with the Principles of a Tyrant: For, though I'm willing enough to be
a Subject, I don't care to be a Slave.


If it should ever be my Fortune to tri^mph over you, I should so insult, that
your Panishment should make more Proselytes to Love's Church, than ever the
Inquisition did to the Roman. I wish 'twere come to that;


Here comes one that will save me the Expense of an Apology, she's just the
Reverse of your Ladyship: The Knowledge of her justifies the greatest Aversion
we can conceive to your Sex; as of you, the greatest Deforence for it. Many a
tough old Brood-Hen has she sold to greedy Coxcombs, for Virgin-Pullets. She's
Hymen's Press-Mistress General, and has ecoy'd and trepann'd more Fools in one
Year into his Wars, than ever Tooly did to Flanders; and abused those that
trust her, worse than ever the Dutch or Portuguese did the poor ridiculous
ind^s; and has made more unnatural Couples, than all the Primitive
Persecutions: She's the Counter-part of those Persecutors; for, like them, she
binds dead Bodies to live ones; and as they used to dress Christians in the
Skins of Beasts, and set Dogs upon them; so the dresses Beasts in Humane
Figures, and sets Christians upon 'em; and by that means has planted Colonies
of Monsters in the World. She's the Voucher of Cracked Maidenheads, the Scourer
of Tarnished Reputations, the Botcher of Broken Fortunes, the Varnisher of
Faded Complexions, the Plasterer of Rough-cast Faces, the --


Careless, and the Lady Olympia! Does the Wind sit there? No wonder sh'as
received all my Proposals so coldly of late. No Profit blows from that Corner;
I must try if my Breath can turn the Stream of her Inclinations, or raise a
Storm that may wreck his Hopes. Now help me, Female Malice, and Invention. --
Madam, I'm your Ladyship's most humble Servant: Well, I don't know what 'tis;
but certainly, you've some Charm about you, that all the World's so fond of
^ou; I'm sure I've no Comfort the Day I don't see you. I've been, I vow, I can
scarce tell you where, since I parted from you: I've made a Visit to my Lady
Scruple; from thence, I went to Sir John Finicel's; so to Great Squire Noble's;
then to my Lord Treat-W^s, where I was obliged to dine; there was abundance of
Company, I had much ado to get away: My Lord, and the young Ladies are so
intolerably fond of me, by their Good Wi^* should never be from 'em. But the
Talk of all the Drawing-rooms was of you, and Mr. Careless.


^f me, and Mr. (...) What could they say of me?


Nay, nothing but your due, Madam: They say, you carry all be fore yo^, and
conquer where (...) you come: The Men praise and admire you, th'e Women all en^
(...) jealous of you; they think you the Universal Ri^val, that rob 'em of all
(...).


^ey've little reason for either: I've as little Ambition, as Merit, to rob n^
(...) 'em. But, what do they say of Mr. Careless and me?


Only that ever since Mr. Careless made his Addresses to you, fine Mrs.
Washwell has been ready to break her Heart; she sighs and starts, rails at you,
scolds at her Woman, beats her Marmoset, and weeps all Day and Night. Well,
you're a sad Man, Mr. Careless; I must needs say it to your Face; to abuse such
a pretty, tender Creature, as she is, so: For, on my Conscience, before she
knew you, she was as Spotless as Innocence it self; and has n't the least
Blemish in her Fame, but what her Love for you has brought upon her.


If your Report be true, she deserves no Censure now, but that of a Fool upon
my Score: If she had let me know her Mind, I'd have laid her Itch effectually
ever this. Pox on it, what an unlucky Rogue am I, if this be true, not to know
it sooner!


Really, Sir, I beg your pardon, if I've imprudently blabbed any thing that was
a secret to Madam Olympia, but I did n't imagine she could be ignorant of a
thing, that all the Town talks so publicly of. Nay, they talk confidently of
no less than a contract before you prevailed. But you do well to take care of a
Ladies Reputation, that suffers for you, 'tis like a Gentleman however if you
can be her Lover no longer. I'm sorry for my Indiscretion, and do assure you it
shall go no further for me; and Madam Olympia's too discreet a Lady too use,
what she hears to the prejudice of a young unhappy Creature.


If one part of your Story be no truer, than the other, the Lady need n't break a
moments rest for the matter. I do assure you Mr. Careless has never made the
least address of Love to me.


Contracted to one, and in Love with another. Faith, Mistress Varnish, I always
took you for an able Woman of Business, but I never was conscious of this
wondrous dexterity of yours before; you've had the guidance of my Hand many a
time, but never of my Heart, that I know of.


Well, I'm glad to hear you both disown it, I protest I am heartily glad for
the poor young Thing's sake; Poor Soul she took the report so heavily, that she
was fit for no place but Bedlam, she loves you to distraction; your unkindness
would kill her. But I'll go and undeceive her; 'tis an Act of Charity. Poor
Wretch!


Nay, if there be any thing in what you say 'twere more Charity to bring her to
me, I could comfort her more substantially; But, Madam, how long has this
Wooing been betwixt you and I? The next time we meet we shall be married I
hope, 'tis pity this Farce should end without a Wedding.


Come, come, leave your Fooling, Sir, and make much of your Lady, her Affection
deserves your tenderest care. But, Madam, I was about to tell you (when this
Discourse interrupted me) that you are the happiest Lady living; there's my
Lord Strutwell, Sir Featherall Peacock, Mr. Jaunty, and several others are ready
to die for you; But my Lord, Oh my Lord's a Man beyond all Competition, without
exception; Such a graceful person, and so Noble an Air and Mien! Well, in my
Opinion, the rest of our Nobility are Hobby Horses to him, nothing but Tinsel
and Trappings. On how I long to see your Train held up, Madam, I've a little
Nephew would make your Honour a very pretty Page.


Now have I an itching after this Lady; if it be but to countermine this
Pandress, this Match-jobber, this Mummy of Concupiscence; I did n't know the
keenness of my own Stomach till she gave me this whet. Love comes upon me like
the Small-Pox upon some others, there must be something to drive it from the
Heart, before 'twill appear; I find it coming out plentifully, thanks to her
Dose;


I begin to smell this Plot, 'tis too rank; but I'll know the bottom before I
discover my apprehension of it. Varnish.


Madam, you've too much discretion for a Lady of your years; you're just of a
fit Age to relish the Pleasures of the Town, and methinks should n't deny your
self 'em. A Lady of your Beauty and Fortune may justly expect to appear in the
Park with a Coronet behind your Coach, to take place in the Drawing-Room at St.
James's amongst the greatest Quality, and sit at the front of my Lord Steward,
or my Lord Chamberlain's Seats at all the Balls of Whitchall. Nay, I believe,
my Lord, may have a White-Staff, or a Star and Garter when he pleases; and do
you count these things nothing?


I despise the low, mean Ambition of those empty shallow Creatures, that amuse
themselves with such gaudy Trifles, and place their whole satisfaction in
hollow Sounds and Formal Ceremonies of Place and Precedence. Give me the Man --



Nay, for a Man, I think there is n't a finer Gentleman about the Court, than
my Lord is. Who Powders, or Essences higher? Who dresses, or dances better? Who
Sings, Fences, or Vaults finer than he? Then he's as Proper, a well-set Man as
e're you saw, and as fit for a Ladies Service; 'twould do your heart good to
see him a Horse-Back, he sits so gracefully in the Saddle.


So! she's given him a recommendation for a Brothel; she thinks no
Qualifications required in a good Husband but those of a Stallion. Varnish is a
discreet Woman, she knows for what intent, Man and Woman were Originally
brought together, and would pro^de you a Husband of tried ability to answer his
Maker's purpose, Madam.


Mrs. Varnish, and I take very different measures of Men ^en; He that would win
me, must have a stronger Brain than Back, and a Head better mounted than his
Heels; I hate Fellows that like Tumblers are so equally po^s'd at both ends,
they might (but for the Figure) serve themselves indifferently of either for
Basis, or Capital.


Madam, a little experience of my Lord, would convince you, that he's quite
another sort of Man, than you take him for; But I can't expect that a nice
young Lady should declare at first Proposal infavour of the finest Gentleman in
the World, a little time I hope will bring (...) to a better Opinion of his
Lordship.


Mrs. Varnish is so approved a Judge of men's (...)es, that 'tis almost Heresy
to dispute her Authority, and wou' d undou(...) recomm^nd no Body to your
Ladyship without sufficient evidence of the^ (...) a^ Qualifications.


I never ^ail of your good word Mr. Careless; but 'tis (...) matter for that;
her Ladyship shall always find me ready, and zealous to serve her, when ever
she pleases to command me. And so shall you too, Sir; for I'll go this Minute
to your Mistress, and set her Heart at rest, poor Soul!


The greatest Service you can do me at present, Mrs. Varnish, is to undeceive
any body that may have received any Impression from the Report which, you say,
runs about Mr. Careless and me. Sir, your Servant: I hope the Town wo'n't be so
uncharitable, as to censure you any longer upon my Account.


I wish your Ladyship feared their Censure no more than I do; they should have
more Occasion.


Gone together! I must take care of that old Copulation-Broker, sh'as Mischief
in heart against me; she's a stalking now, and is too well practised a
Sports-woman to be suffered with Security to pursue her Game. Olympia has Wit
enough, 'tis true; but most Women now-a-days have such Green-Sickness
Appetites, that 'tis ill laying Trash in their way. They must be inter rupted;
-- Famine, dog Madam Olympia, and that old Hag; and, if possible, over-hear
their Discourse, and bring me an exact Account.


I'll do it, never fear, Sir: No Plotter that designed to turn Evidence, and
hang his Brother-Rogues, shall take more particular notice.


Love and Jealousy are Twins, I find; and tread upon one another Heels: No
sooner do I begin to like this Woman, but I wish no body else did. Well, now I
begin to feel the Folly of my Extravagance; the Disgrace I suffered by it
before her to day, at the Serjeant's, had so damped me, that, like a Cowed
Cock, I durst not venture one Stroke, not so much as a Sparring Blow, though she
gave me both Provocation and Encouragement. What a Fool have I been? And now
I'm turning Coward too. A Man's Courage, I perceive, ebbs and flows with his
Fortune: I must try to recover both; but how, 's a Question I'm not able to
answer. Of all those Multitudes I've lavished an Estate away upon, not one
would assist me with Ten Pound to save me from the Gallows, Friendly excepted;
the rest avoid me, as if I were a Dun: Friendly alone acknowledges, like a Man
of Honour, my past Services; but I'm afraid of striking him upon the same Rock
with my self, and --

-- But I must quit the Thoughts of my own Business, to mind my Friend's now.


Don't prate to me; I'll stay no longer among you: Ignorant, lazy Knaves I
found ye, and Fools I leave ye. I've preached Spoon-meat to ye these Twenty
Years, that a Child might swallow; and yet you're Blockheads still: You've
neither Faith nor Money to save ye.


If the Shepherd will suffer the Sheep to be scabby --


No you're rotten --


Would they were, for my sake.


I've anointed ye, and tarr'd ye all over with my Doctrine, yet the Murren
sticks to ye; you're mangy still, in spite of all. Fare ye well.


Nay, pray be n't so passionate in the Heat of your Sack; don't let it elevate
you too much. Come, we've been kind Hearers, and you a quiet Teacher, that
would not trouble us too often with Sermons; one that, rather than vex your
Audience, would sleep with 'em. Come, I know you're good-natur'd.


Don't grow proud, and let your Wine make you forget the jolly Bowls you've
^mptied at my House, Neighbours, I shall think my Punch unhallowed Liquor, if I
have not you two to say Grace, with a merry Catch to it, I'd rather drink it
without a Toast.


Nay, my Shovel-Board will grow melancholy, if Master Homily be not there to
give the leading Push, and set the rest to work.


Can ye find in your Heart to leave my Nine Pins? Oh! the many fair Tips I've
seen you make! and must we lose ye now? Nay, I've laid a dozen of Stout upon
your Head, Master, against Neighbour Tipwell the Blacksmith, who tips all Nine
oftenest together, and 'tis to be decided to night.


All this won't do; you shall find I can have better Preferment, than to ring
all into a rout of Dunces all my Life.


Prithee, Neighbour Spade, speak for us, and next Parish meeting we'll move the
Church-Wardens to mend your Salary.


I speak for you? No, ye shall find the Key under the Church Door, you may go
in, and drive away the Daws, I speak for Capons? Not one of ye has got a Child
these ten Years.


There you'll find the old Surpless with one Sleeve, and the Cutwork Cope, that
hangs by Geometry; Pray turn 'em carefully, they 're very tender. There's the
Poor's Box, with the Inscription half rubbed out, for fear of waking your
Charities; if you find any thing in it, give it to pious Use, that is, spend it.


There are the remnants of the Books, all that the Church-Wardens Pipes have
spared, they've smoky Zeals against hard Places.


N'er let's part thus: Come you've been good Customers to us all, both of you;
I've a rare Gammon of Bacon at home, I'll give it ye, and we will be merry to
night.


I'll give a Bowl of Punch to it.


And I Derby, and Stout, their Skins full.


This don't move me; if you'd have us stay; if you'd have the comfort of our
Companies --


Hark ye, Neighbour Spade, in your Ear; persuade him but to stay, and we will all
wipe out both your Scores, and you shall have fresh Tick with us for as much,
and as long as you please.


Well, since you're old loving Neighbours, I'll try,but --


Let Weddings, Christnings, Churchings, Funerals, and merry Gossipings go about
briskly.


They shall, they shall.


Then, if you please Master, we will try 'em one half Year longer, and see if
they'll mend.


Be it so. We'll send your Gammon, and you your Punch to my Neighbour Spiggot's
here, and we will come and taste his Stout.


It shall be done; come let's have the old Song, and then let's away, and dust
it about.


Though to Sots all the Day
We cant, and we pray,
And preach up Mortification;
We reserve the Delight
Of the Bottle for Night,
And there we find Revelation,
Let Fools, that believe,
Dull Morals receive,
And lavish their precious time so;
Wine alone can inspire
Celestial Fire,
And the Bottle is Jure Divino.
How the Rogue swells, this Money has made him so merry, he'll not be in's Wits
again these three months. H's as Simony in's heart, and looks as big as if
Friendly's money had purchased a Deanery for him. Now will I dash all his Pride,
and good Humour, in a moment.


Begone, Neighbours, I take your Submission graciously, and will meet you. Here
comes a Gentleman, that's no Company for you.


Mr. Homily, I'm glad to find you here.


I thank you, Sir; have ye any Letters, any kind Tokens from New England, or
any remote Part. You look like a Traveller.


I come to tell you, ye've received great Sums from one Friendly, a young
Merchant, that has robbed his Master.





Do you shrink, Monsieur Curate? Can you sing a Psalm handsomely at the Gallows,
Rascals?


We beseech you, Sir, we've most of the Money left, we'll refund, or do any
thing in our Power; Good Sir, be merciful.


Since you're penitent, I take you to Grace, but you must do as I bid you, if
ye falter --


Hang us both, we shall deserve it.


Well, follow me --

Lawyer beware; for if my Plot succeed,
My just Revenge hangs heavy over thy Head;
I serve my Friend, and for thy Knavish Life
I punish thee, and in it oblige thy Wife.
IN vain Melissa we defend
Our selves against your conquering Eyes;
Since each melodious Breath you send,
Does through our Ears our Hearts surprise.
In you Love all his Darts employs,
The secret Sparks, your Eyes inspire,
The charming Accents of their Voice,
Blow up into a raging Fire.
Thus, while our Eyes and Ears are charmed
by either Sense we are betrayed;
For, all Attempts thus doubly armed,
The Conquest's sure when you invade.
So Mariners their Ruin view,
When two fierce Elements conspire;
And while the eager Flames pursue,
In Crowds they drown; to shun the Fire.
HEre v'are welcome, and must command, Madam; for, all that I call mine, must
pay their Homage where I do. How could that Swine, your Husband; keep so sweet
a Turtle in so filthy a Sty? A Squirrel's Box is a nobler Apartment; and a
Fox's, a sweeter.


'Tis the securer Retreat for Innocence; unguarded Virtue is scarce safe any
where. The Negligence of our House frights away Temptation: Pomp and Delicacy
only invite Luxury and Wantonness. 'Tis the cleanly Sweetness of the Bees, that
invites Drones to their Hives.


True, Madam: But there are infinitely greater Swarms of nasty Flies that
infest the rankest Shambles, that not only consume what they immediately prey
upon, but taint all they leave behind 'em too. But what's this to thee, who art
all Sweetness; and, like a flowering Tube-Rose, may be raised in a homely
Bed; but blown, should be translated to the Apartments, and for the Delight of
Princes.


My Fortune's quite the Reverse of this; for I was raised first in an Alcove,
and thence transplanted to a Dung-hill; but there I've taken root, and there
must grow. Second Removes are dangerous.


I can't consent to leave so precio^s a Plant in a spent, barren, heartless
Soil, where not a wholesome Blast can have Access, and nothing thrives but
Sapless Avarice, and rank Jealousy, amongst heavy Damps that choke the noble
Senses, and poys'nous Fogs that almost suffocate the Vital Heat. I must remove
you, or find means to open a Way for the sweet Air of Conversation to come
freely at you.


That were a Service, indeed. The Plant you speak of has taken too deep root,
to be torn rudely up: If you could purge the Soil from those foul Weeds that
over-run it, and turn the fresh Streams of Liberty throughout -- But 'tis in
vain to attempt it; 'tis more than a Herculean Labour.


Then I'll do more than Hercules, and effect it.


I'm afraid you'll scarce do half so much in a Night, as he did, if you talk
away your Time thus. Is this a Time for Debate, when you should be in Action?
What a raw Soldier are you, to be gravely consulting, when you should be
mounted, and in Arms? The Enemy's just upon you, Man -- Wrangle will be here in
a Quarter of an Hour.


You're such a Hotspur, Careless, you're for engaging at all Adventures,
without considering how to bring all safe off again.


Well, for my part I think the suddenest Resolutions are always the briskliest
executed; and I observe, that your Men of over cautious Conduct, that are for
securing all, generally manage away their fairest Opportunities.


For Heaven's sake, Gentlemen, don't let's be surprised here by my Husband; I'm
undone if we be.


Fear nothing, Madam, I've Scouts abroad to observe his motion^, that will give
us a timely alarm, when he approaches; he's the Common Enemy, and therefore we
ought to enter into a Joint Confederacy against him.


You may have reason enough, Mr. Careless, to proclaim open War against him;
but what just pretence have Mr. Friendly, and I?


Abundance more than he, Madam; for he has only invaded Careless's Estate,
which 'tis ten to one but some Body else would have done. From you he has taken
your Liberty, and though he be in right but your part in Authority, yet in
violation of all his Articles he has deposed you not only from all Power, but
even from the rights of a Free-born Subject, and like a Tyrant insults over his
Equal, as his Slave. Me he has injured yet more enormously; for he has robbed me
of you, a Treasure of infinitely more value, than Wealth, Liberty, or Power, a
Robbery, that he can never make restitution for, nor I forgive. Unless he could
call Time back again, and restore those unvaluable Minutes that are past.


'Tis a sign you know the worth of 'em, you spend those few you have to so much
purpose. You're like a formal, old Pedant I once knew, that would declaim
nonsensically about the Preciousness of Time, and the sin of misspending a
moment for several Hours together.


I thank you for your Correction, 'tis just and kind. My dear Florella let's
withdraw, and redeem all we can.


What occasion for with-drawing? since Mr. Careless is entered into the League,
I declare it no Counsel without his Presence; I'll have no private Caballing
amongst Confederates; it looks suspicious.


No, Madam, if we do but agree upon the several Quota's to be contributed to
the common Cause and Interest: We may take our measures apart without breach of
union.


Now is he as impatient to show his zeal, as a newly hired Irish Footman his
diligence and expedition, that posts away with his Errand, and when he has run
himself out of Breath must come back for it again.


Sir, I've endeavoured to obey your command, but I'd as soon undertake to
muster an Army by Rote upon once hearing 'em called over, as to repeat what she
said. I've heard People talk much of one Fame, for a notable Gossip; but if she
has half the Tongue of this Scandal-spreader, or half the Intelligence, I'll
hang for her; compared with her, I dare swear, she'd appear a Bashful, silent,
sober Body.


What can you remember nothing particular?


Yes, abundance more than perhaps you'll have patience to hear. I never took my
self for a man of so much ^isdom before; but I suppose you both saw it in my
face, Gentlemen, ^lse you had n'er employed me in such weighty Affa^s. Well,
Discretion is an admirable thing, 'tis imp^sible to be a good Pimp without it.


If you've done admiring your own Parts, give us some proof of 'em, and let's
hear how like a discreet Pimp, you've managed for me. What did you hear?


The Scandal of all the Town, Sir, and a great deal more; besides the secret
History of your Life, and of all your Family ever since the Conquest, and long
before, which that Retailer of live flesh, traced farther back than Welsh
Pedigree, or Hebrew Genealogy e're reached.


How did Olympia relish all this Stuff? did she listen with any sort of
satisfaction, or disgust?


As a Socinian would to the Athanasian Creed; I'll warrant her.


She seemed to regard* her sometimes with neglect, sometimes with scorn and
indignation, but she was extremely nettled at something she told her you
reported of her, and after they parted, ordered one of her Servants to find out
where you were immediately, and bring her word. Whereupon I stepped to him, asked
him two or three impertinent Questions, scrapped acquaintance with him, and
informed him, that I was coming to you at Mr. Friendly's, and desired his
Company, as far as his business lay my way, he immediately excused himself, and
turned about after his Lady. Have I done well, Sir?


Admirably well. Thy Belly shall be regaled for this anon, Sirrah. Away to your
Post, and Scout against the Serjeant's coming.


'Tis so, Ol^mpia's caught; Love has laid his Lime-twigs upon her, now let her
flutter, and struggle as much as she will to get loose, it but entangles h^r
more. What luck's this, Careless, thus with Art to catch the very Bird, that
all the s^llful Fowlers about the Town have been beating the Bush, and
spreading their Nets for so long? --


Madam, this Visit's an Honour, I'm extremely proud of, but the Obligation is
yet the greater for being unexpected, the only Circumstance that could raise it
higher.


Unexpected, Sir, how can that be? I thought Mr. Careless had made nothing a
secret to you. --


Madam, if this Honour was intended to me, I am yet more obliged, than my
Friend, because less deserving; but I was altogether as much a Stranger to the
intended Favour.


I've heard it often said indeed, that true Friends were like Fiddle-strings
tuned to an Unison, touch but the one, and the other would immediately answer in
the same Note; but I never met with an instance so exact to the Letter before.


Madam, the Honour done to my House by your Presence is too great to need the
Address of a Surprise to heighten it; But your Gallantry in taking it off,
raises the Obligation beyond the reach of my Acknowledgments. But --


Come leave this ^anter, Mr. Friendly; 'tis ungenerous to insult in your own
House. Careless, when you see I follow you thus up and down.


I wish I had merit enough to engage you once to think of me; so far am I from
the vanity of assuming this favour to my self.


The vanity of some men, I find, like their courage appears only, when the
Subject of it is removed. How long have you been thus humble, Sir?


This Question from your Ladyship surprises me extremely, because ^


Is it so familiar a thing with you to boast of Favours n'er received, that you
wonder it should be taken amiss? Our Sex had need be cautious how they
converse; for we can scarce speak civilly to a man, we accidentally meet, but
he makes his Brags of Favours and Appointments.


There are such Fellows, 'tis true, Madam, that imagine all the World steers
their Course by their vain Blasts; and believe it as easy to cheat others into
a great Opinion of their Extraordinary Accomplishments, and irresistible
charms, as themselves. But I've always endeavoured to deserve another
Character; and would n't willingly injure any person, much less your Ladyship.


Those that have the baseness to traduce us behind our Backs, seldom have the
courage to justify it to our Faces.


Mr. Careless has always born himself with so much honour; that I must think it
impossible, he should be guilty of any thing so base. It must be malice, Madam,
that has fixed this Scandal upon him. I'm sure he honours your Ladyship too
highly any way to offend you.


I do believe it malice; But 'tis malice with such Demonstration in its mouth,
that 'tis impossible to doubt the Truth of the information, tho I am convinced
of the insincerity of the intention of it.


By this, Madam, I guess my Accuser to be Mrs. Varnish, but as to my particular
offence, I am still in the dark, and can't grope my way out, unless your
Ladyship be pleased to afford me a little light.


Have ye been so free with me that you can but guess at the Informer, and are in
doubt of the nature of the Affront?


'Tis the knowledge of her inveterate malice, and my own innocence, that guides
me to one, and keeps me in a maze for the other.


To confront your impudence, tho it feeds your Vanity, I will for once produce
an Evidence shall confound you. Do you know this Ring?


I think I saw it upon your Ladyships Finger just now; but am not conscious
what it can accuse me. Pray, Madam, explain your self.


This is gallant impudence; a hissed Actor could n't keep the Stage with more
unconcerned confidence; or a bilked Poet vindicate his damned Play with more
Arrogance in his Preface. Sure you think I'm in Love with you for your
Assurance, you'd show some more taking Quality, to countenance the Scandal
else.


Rather let me be thought guilty, Madam, than offend by an unseasonable
Justification. Yet I could wish --


I perceive, Madam, we're in a Labyrinth of Error, which tho I can't absolutely
lead you out of, yet, I hope to point you to the Clue, that may Careless, let's
see your Ring. Do you know this, Madam?


What's this, a Confederacy to affront me? Yes, I do; since you will have a
Triumph, 't shall be a short one. I own I sent it to that unworthy man, out of
compassion for his wrongs, or perhaps a concern more tender. For I (...) own a
weakness I've overcome, and shall blush no more, unless with in^. Nay more,
know that 'twas I that lent the money; to me you (...) your Liberty, not the
Sergeant. I sent the Ring, because I scorn a Pledge, (...) though your own
might be a means to betray from whence it came. There it is, return me that;
and then insult, 'twill become you, and I can laugh at it.


Madam, I own the Justice of your Anger, and my punishment; but 'tis my dull
unapprehensive stupidity, that deserves it; not vanity, or insolence, as you
are misinformed.


Go tell Mrs. Varnish, I thought it not enough to send you one Ring to engage
you to meet me, but I must follow you, to give you another.


Madam, I can safely aver, that till this moment he knew not to whose
Generouty, he owed the ^ing; so far it was impossible for him to boast any such
favour from your Ladyship.


Sir, I can't blame you for endeavouring to bring your Friend off; but 'twill
puzzle all your Skill. Was possible for him not to know his own Ring, when he
saw it upon my Finger?


'Twas scarce possible he should; for twas not his, but mine, slipped into his
Hand in the Time of his Distress at the Serjeant's, never seen by him before.


How's this! Then my Passion has fooled me into Confession, I must again blush
for; Varnish come by her Information, since I did not so much as trust my own
Servant with the Knowledge of what he carried?


That part of the Knot remains yet to be disentangled. Leave that to me; and as
I clear my innocence, let me merit your Pardon, Madam.


While Justice seemed to be on your side, Madam, I durst not interpose; but
since all things are in so fair a way to an ?claircissement, let me beg you to
suspend your Resentments, and give Mr. Careless time to provide for a fair and
equal Trial.


I could not deny you a more unreasonable Request, Madam.


Here comes my Master, and Mr. Homily.


'Tis time for us to withdraw then: Ladies, will you please to honour my House
so far, as to accept of a small Collation.


Is't possible he should be so rich? A poor Fellow, that was Sexton to the
A^-houses, rather than Parish; and buried the dead Remains of their halfempty'd
Pots in his own Belly, or earned his Drink by setting up the Nine-Pins for
those that played; spunged Tobacco out of the next Man's Box, and sa^z'd
himself into the Chimney-corner in Winter, gratis.


'Tis true; he was always a very close, scraping Fellow; and that fills (...),
Sir: Though his Gains were small, yet he has been many Years raking together.
T^a're learned, Sir; and know the Adage, ex gravis fit Acervus.


(...) he used to be reckoned a notable Good-fellow, one that would --


Sometimes, Sir; when he hop'st to drink a Man into a Fever, or a Surfeit, and
(...) by his Grave.


'Tis very strange. But we see by honest Thrift, and Endeavour, what mighty
things may be effected.


^, qui v^tulum tulit. Milo, Sir, by carrying a silly Calf, (with Sub^sion to
your Worship,) come to carry a Bull. From a Penny to a Pound* from one pound to
many, is the Progress of the World, Sir.


'Tis so. But he loved to eat well too; and that, methinks --


At another Man's Cost, Sir; there he would play the Cormorant, and devour more
than the Graves he made. At home he lived like a Chameleon, upon Air; grew fat
upon the Brewis of an Egg-shell; and surfeited upon the Smell of a Cook's Shop,
that a Month scarce fasted it away again.


An Apoplexy, you say; and he desires I would be his Executor. What Relations
has he?


None, Sir, that I know of.


His Mind will be the quieter. What D -- s has he?


None, Sir: He never esteemed their Art.


'Tis vain and useless in such Extremities; it but prolongs Men's Miseries. Who
has he about him?


Several that flock about him, like Crows about a Carrion; as well Gentlemen,
as others, that claim his Friendship, and some his Kindred too: Rich Men can't
want Heirs. Some of 'em, under pretence of Care of his Health, have removed him
hither, and lodged him like a Prince, only to insinuate themselves into his
Favour at his last Moments.


They do ill to trouble him; very ill. But we shall take care --


Will you walk in, Sir? This is the Door of the Chamber where he lies.


Pray stand further, Gentlemen, and give him Air; you won't suffer him to
breath.


How do you, Neighbour Spade? I'm sorry to find you in so weak a Condition.


Ah! Master Sergeant, you're welcome; but I am fleeting.


Methinks he looks fresh and well, and his Eyes lively.


A Glimmering before Death only. Mind how he fumbles with the Sheet.


Pray -- sit down -- Sir -- Iv made -- bold -- to send for you -- to take care
of what -- I leave.


Pray don't trouble him, he's weak, and his Brain disturbed.


Don't weep, Friends; I must leave you; -- we must all drop in our turns: 'Tis
a Debt we owe the Worms, and they won't be cheated. -- Give me a Drop or two of
Cordial, to raise my Spirits, and e^lt my Voice -- Sir, I intend to make you
Whole and Sole Executor to this my Last Will and Testament; and therefore I
desire you would, before these my Friends and Neighbours, solemnly engage to
see it executed.


I do; and, before these Gentlemen, give my Oath to perform every thing to a
tittle, according to the Tenor of the Will.


Imprimis, I bequeath my Body to the Grave, a Legacy that's rarely unpaid.
Item, I give to Mr. Searjeant Wrangle, for his Care and Pains requisite to the
just Execution of my Will --


What do you give, Neighbour?


A 1000l. 'tis too little, but I've many to serve. Item, I give to my old
Master Homily 300l. to buy Books, and understand 'em. You've a learned Head,
stuff it with Libraries; but don't run the Parish mad with Controversies, nor
preach Abstinence to Longing Women. -- Item, I give 500l. to be laid out in
purchasing the Advowsons of Small Livings, to be bestowed in Dower with stale
Maids, and Oat-meal-eating Damsels of this Parish, at the Direction of Master
Curate and the Church-wardens, to procure 'em the Benefit of the Clergy.


'Tis a pious, and a meritorious Legacy.


Item, I give 10l. to the Lineing of Mr. Church-wardens Pew, that they may
sleep warm at Church. -- Item, I give 100l. to enlarge the Churchyard, and to
build two new Houses, for Apothecaries to sit Rent-free in, and fill it.


These are mad Legacies.


Item, I give 20l. to purchase some loud, new Stops to the old dumb Organ, to
drown the Church-wardens snoring, in lieu of those they have already piped out
of the Parish. -- Item, to all Ringers I bequeath new Ropes, to be applied as
their own Discretions shall direct. -- Item, I give 10l. per Annum for ever, to
be laid out in Spirit of Clary, and Candy'd Satyrion, to be distributed, by way
of Dole, to the Married Men of this Parish, once every Month, for the Comfort
of their Wives, and the Profit of Master Homily and his Successors. -- Item, I
give 10l. towards repairing of the Pulpit, that Master Homily may sleep in
Comfort in it.


This is mere Frenzy; these Legacies are void in Law: He's Non Compose Mentis
now: Take notice of it, Mr. Homily.


He's Delirious, and raves a little now; but 'twill soon be over, and he'll be
composed again.


Item, I give 20l. towards the stopping Leaky Vessels; for I doubt there are
few sound Keels in the Parish.


Won't you remember us, that are your Friends, and take care of you in your
Sickness.


I do, and will take care of yours; therefore I leave you Mercury and
Turpentine, Sarsaparilla and Guajacum in abundance; strong Syringes, and
careful Surgeons; warm Tubs to sweat in, and wholesome Diet-drinks: Make good
use of 'em, you've Occasion.


Ha'ye done giving?


I'm loath to give more from you, because In know you'll be a faithful Executor.
Yet, to pious-Uses, if you please, a little.


Now he grows temperate again.


To the Re-marrying of poor young Widows --


'Tis a charitable Will; for 'tis pity to see so many tight Vessels moulder in
the Dock, for want of Ballast to put out with. What's your Pleasure in that
Point?


I give Two Hundred Ells of Lockram, that there may be no strait Doings in
their Linen, but the Sails cut according to their respective Burdens. -- Item,
I give 500 Mark, to build an Hospital for Honest, Wise Men: For Fools and
Knaves, crowd 'em out of the Parish. 'Twill be but very small; yet more, I
doubt, than will be soon filled.


I doubt so too: It would puzzle an Oracle to show a Man that's both wise and
honest in the three Kingdoms.


Arn't you weary yet?


Never of Well-doing. But I'll give no more away. Five Hundred Acres of Land,
Arable and Pasture, lying and being in the Vale of Fools; Two Ships homeward
bound from the Isle of Expectation, called the False Hope, and the Banter; with
my Stock of Cattle, Oxen, Cows, Sheep, Hogs, c. with all my Money, Mortgages,
Bonds, and other Debts; my Plate, Jewels, and rich Movables, I leave to
discharge these Legacies; the rest, and Residue, to my Executor.


If he be worth all this, he'll be the richest Wind-fall I ever had; [Aside.]
You make me your Executor?


I do; Whole and Sole Executor. Pray Gentlemen, be Witnesses: I declare this to
be my Last Will and Testement; See me sign it.


I wish I had more; but this may suffice an honest, reasonable Mind.


You say true, and make it rich too. Is this House and Furniture yours?


Alas, no Sir; the noble Gentleman that owns it, was pleased to accommodate me
during my Illness: I must restore it with my last Breath, or my Recovery.


Ha'ye no other than that in Tickle-Trout-Alley? That looks like a deserted
Snail-shell inhabited by a Spider, hung with Cobweb-Arras: All the Furniture I
could ever see there, was an old Worm-eaten Truckle-bed, two old crippl'd
Wooden Chairs, and a broken Joint-stool: These promise no such mighty Treasure.
Where shall I find this Estate? Where shall I raise these Sums?


Where you think good. Your Worship's wise, and know Business; know where the
Wealth lies --


Think good! -- Will that raise Thousands?


Your Worship's an able, and a just Man, and will see my Will faithfully
executed; you've sworn it, that's my Comfort. Even raise 'em where you please.


Where I please! Very well. Where am I? What Time of the Year is't? Does the
Dog-Star reign, that you're all mad?


You're in Fool's Paradise; and this is the First of April. What will you take
for the Profit of this Executorship?


I hope you'll take care that the Legacies be paid out of hand; the Parish is
poor, and wants 'em. What will you take to advance the Money?


Make Ensurance upon your Ships, Mr. Sergeant; the Banter's richly laden, and
the Seas are dangerous; abundance of Privateers are upon the Coasts.


Give you Joy, Mr. Executor. Will you sell the rich Furniture of
Tickle-Trout-Alley? You'll keep the Hangings, I suppose, to your self: You live
like a Spider, in Cobwebs, and entangle and devour like Flies, all the Fools
that come to you.


I must dissemble my Resentments, they'll tease me to Madness else.


Give me a little more Cordial, I faint else.


This is Careless's Doings; these Worms durst not have turned their Heads
against me, though I had trod on 'em. I must smother the Fire they have kindled
in my Breast, till it may blaze to the Destruction of 'em all.


I hope 'tis driven Home already.


We mean nothing more than Mirth, harmless Mirth, Sir?


Well, I've loved a Jest my self in my time, and therefore can excuse it in
others. But 'twas a little hard to make an Old Man the Subject of it,
Neighbours; but Mr. Careless has some Reason, and therefore I forgive you all;
and that we may be thoroughly reconciled, I desire your Companies all at
Supper.


c. We'll wait on you.


And you, Neighbour Spade; your Fit will be over by that time.


I'll endeavour, Sir, as well as a Sick Man may.


We (...) meet anon at the Sergeants, Gentlemen, and Triumph in the Success of
(...) Plot.

(...) this one Path to different Ends we move:
I, guided by Rev^ge; my Friend, by Love.

Abused, insulted, and made a Fool of! -- An April Fool! -- To be caught with
an old stale Boy's Trick; a Trick that Children see through, and School-boys
laugh at -- Have I been thus long fameas for my Cunning through all the Courts of
Westminster, the Terror of Mad Fools, and Wild Extravagants of all Degrees and
Qualities; and am I fallen at last so low, as to be practiced upon like a raw
Prentice in his first Year? No, Mad-cap, since you've put me in the Humour, you
shall see some of my Frolics ever the Sun set yet; I'll show you a Gambol of
the Law, a Trick that shall stick by you, and make ye remember the First of
April as long as ye live. As for the Curate, I've that shall make him put the
Lawyer before the Devil into his Litany. Nor shall my Wealthy Treasurer escape
me, I'll be his Executor yet before he dies; he shall wish he had met with the
Man he stole the last Shroud from in my stead -- What, no Body within? Sure my
House is become the Residence of Silence; no Sound to be heard; not a Whisper
stirring -- My Wife, my Pupil, my Servants all abroad; I wish I been it
Metamorphosed.

-- How now, Raskal? How dare you leave my House ungarded?


What need of a Guard? Your Money's so well fortified, it may defy a French
Army; the biggest Battery in Flanders would not open a Breach to it: And for any
thing else, your House is as secure, as if the Plague-mark were set over the
Door; no Body will venture into it,


Why, you Impudent Villain! What Suburb Bawdy-house do you reel from now, to
affront me in the Strength of the Brandy ye pim^'d for? Stand off; you stink of
Leeks and Toasted Cheese, worse than a Welsh Company of Foot Soldiers upon St.
David's Day.


Leeks and Toasted Cheese compared with your House-keeping, are an
Entertainment for a Prince of Wales. A Chameleon would be starved in your House,
there's not so much as wholesome Air for him.


Are ye so lusty, Sirrah? Do you kick at your keeping, you saucy Rogue? I'll
bring down your high Stomach? ye shall starve for this; you shalln't so much as
smell Meat these Six Weeks; no, not so much as feast your Imagination with a
Picture of any thing that's earable.


I caren't, there are Services to be had, and Masters too, that know how to
value a Man of my Parts, and Abilities for Service. Masters that will make me
eat and drink better, and more lustily every day, than you do at a Client's
Charge, when he treats his Jury or Witnesses. You may get a Dog, Sir, to lick
your Dishes, and see if he'll stay with you. I'm provided.


Are you so, Sirrah? But I've another Place for you in Bridewll, where Hemp
shall be both your Task and your Diet.


I thank your Worship; I hope I shall have the Honour to work a Necklace for
you there.


You shall have Forty Lashes the more for that, Brazen-face.


Cursed Cows have short Horns, Sir: I hope to be out of your reach. Yet I thank
your Worship for your Bounty.


Pandar, Snarling Dog.


Now for a Law-Tempest; the Codices are broke loose already: How the Sea rises!
How it tumbles and foams! Sir, you're Horn-mad; I'll fetch a Doctor to you.


'Tis done, and this Rogue's made drunk to embolden him to abuse me with it.
I'm made a Monster, and shall hereafter appear like a Comet, for People from
all Quarters to gaze, Fools to wonder, and Boys to point and laugh at. I shall
be sung in Ballads, and made a By-word to scoff others by -- But here she
comes; I must conceal my Grief, till my Revenge has brought it to a Head, and
heal.


-- So! What sweet Voyage have you been making? What Relation have you been to
visit? Whose Garden did you take the Air in?


At the old Trade again? Your Jealousy pursues me even to Church, and brings a
Scandal upon my very Devotions.


Yes, yes; Women Cuckold their Husbands very devoutly now-adays. 'Twas Woman,
and the Devil, ruined us all Originally; but as if they weren't sufficient,
they draw the Priest into the Confederacy too now.


You'd best deny me the Liberty of going to Church, and taking care of my Soul;
but, in spite of your Tyranny, my Conscience shall be my Guide.


I wonder where abouts a Woman's Conscience lies, or how far it extends; 'tis
more than any man could ever fathom. But I find it has this good property of a
Bawd, its pretences are always very fair, let its designs be never so foul; I
don't like the spiritual Tumbling, it looks one way and plays another. Who went
with you?


This Oaf here, and let every Rascal, justle me so, that he made me almost
ridiculous; I was forced to drive him along, and push him on, till the People
laughed and fleer'd --


How! did ye push him on? Was he so stupid?


In the middle of Church-time, he fell fast asleep, and snor'd so, that the
stops of's Nose were louder than the Organ; after that --


Ay, what after that?


Madam, I confess my self unfit to wai^ on you; yet forgive aed spare me this
time, and the next --


No, T'll publish your Moral Virtues: He talked in his sleep of Declarations,
Ej^ctments, Warrants and Executions, till he frighted almost all the People out
of the Church. Am I to be thus manned always?


I see through this; but I must pull in my Claws till* I can seize and gripe my
Prey.


I wish I may, I*'^ endeavour all I'm able.


I shall make no further Trial; I'll neither be disgraced nor suspected for him
another time. Now, Sir, your groundless Jealousy deserves to be punished with
what you fear; if you continue to suspect my Virtue, you'll provoke me to give
you cause.


Well, my Dear, be pacified, and I'll offend thee so no more. I must go about a
little Business; but to let thee see I'm resolved to reform, and please thee,
I've invited Mr. Careless, and the Curate, and some Gentlemen to Supper, if
they come before I return, bid 'em welcome.


This Confidence, I'm sure, is counterfeit, and he has mischief in his Heart.
But armed with innocence, I can dare his malice.


I'm glad to find you keep the Field last, Madam: But Victory's your Slave, and
waits your motions; where e're you come, you conquer. Is the Enemy f^ed?


Only retreated, I doubt an Ambuscade.


We're aware, and shall easily defeat him. But, Madam, let's lose no more
precious moments, 'tis dangerous. Love's an active flame, that unfed will
consume us.


And fed, will destroy both our Honour and Repose. 'Tis a Thief, that if he
be not strictly watched; where're he's harboured steals away the most pr^cious
Movables, and if not prevented, is n'er to be brought to Justice.


Madam, you've no reason to complain of his injustice, since, tho he borrows
from your Eyes his Power, he lays at your feet the spoil. I'm both a witness
and an instance, Madam; does a faithful heart like mine, deserve no return?


Yes, it has as much as my Honour will permit, and more it never shall. I'll
not make such a Present of my Heart, as shall lessen the value of it.


Can the Enjoyment of Heaven, lessen our value of Happiness?


No; but I'm not so much a Bigot, as to be deceived with an imaginary view, and
lose the real Prospect. I've considered it, and am convinced, that what I can
give, is like the Presents of poor Tenants to their great Landlords, it may
ruin me, ^t can make you n'er the richer.


The value of things above the common way of Traffic is Arbitrary, and depends
upon the esteem of those that possess 'em, and you can't prize a Favour higher,
than I am ready to bid ^or it.


Have a care how you advance, if I should take you at your word, you might
repent your Bargain.


I should only fear breaking in your Debt; since the Purchase is more than I'm
worth.


We need not dispute that. For what you would contract for, I can't make you a
good Ti^le to, and am resolved to be honest to a Scruple.





You're welcome, Sir; but I hope you're better pleased with the present
Occasion, than the last.


In this at least I ought to be, that with this Lady I've brought a better
Apology, than the Serjeant's invitation.


She commands her welcome, where e're she comes, but more particularly here.


All Occasions of waiting upon you, Madam, are very acceptable to me; but Mr.
Careless has promised before you to unfold a Mystery, that at our parting we
did not understand, and to clear himself and me.


I'll make good my Promise, Madam, immediately.


Now, Mrs. Varnish, you must to this Company unriddle, you must tell the Truth,
the whole Truth; or I shall deliver you over again to the Tormentors. What was
your design? Who set you on? And whence had you the information you pretended
to this Afternoon?


I hope your Ladyship, won't let me suffer for my zeal to serve you; Mr.
Careless has laid an Action of a Thousand Pound upon me for telling you, what I
heard. 'Tis well known I'm a Woman of Reputation and Conscience, and what I
said was in pure tenderness of you. For my part I have no malice to any Body,
and would n't wrong any man for the World.


I can say nothing to the matter, Mrs. Varnish; if you've injured Mr. Careless,
'tis but justice to leave him to his Liberty to seek Reparation, as he thinks
fit.


Heaven, that sees my Heart, Madam, knows that I never bore any malice to Mr.
Careless.


Every Carted Bawd in Town, can plead more in her own Justification than this.


All this is beside your Text, Mother Sodom; confess ingenuously, who set you
to work, and for what End; otherwise you know your Lodging: 'Tis in vain for
you to expect mercy, without showing true signs of your Repentance.


Immediately after Mr. Careless and you were gone from the Sergeants, Madam, he
came to me, and told me, that you had just then Bailed Mr. Careless, and lent
him Two hundred Pound upon a Ring, desired me to pump out of your Servants how
you disposed of it; which I effected by one, that I employed to trepan your
Servant, under pretence of Drinking with him, who saw both the Ring and the
Direction.


This is but half satisfaction; there remains a reckoning for the Story of Mrs.
Washwell. --


'Tis enough for us, Sir; I'm satisfied. You may make up the rest of your
Account with her at leisure.


Here, take her away; and set her by till she be called to the Ba^ again.


The Lawyer has been scolding at his sweet Lady this half Hour for going to
Church; I suppose to prepare himself for some bawling Cause.


How! for going to Church? What! Does he deny her Liberty of Conscience? We'll
have him up in the Spiritual Court for it, there's Law for him, that will make
Cook and Littleton sweat.


For my part, all I can do to be further revenged on him, is to eat lustily; if
that will do it, I'll crucify him: I wish I could clap a Tire or two more of
Teeth into my Head, to grind him.


We've a Design to reduce the Sergeant to Reason, Madam; and procure his Lady
for the future the same Liberty that others have, and she ought to have. Will
your Ladyship join with us in so good a Work?


I shall be proud to contribute any thing in my power towards it.


Be pleased to let one of your Servants fetch the Writings of Mr. Careless's
Estate; I shall open such a piece of Villainy to you, as you little suspect,
Madam.


Waitwell, run, and bid my Woman send the Black Box of Writings in my Closet.


To care such a Cankered Knave, his Sores must be laid open, they are foul to
the Bone.


So, they're all in the Toil already: Keep back all, only you that are to lay
the Cloth.


We intend no less: An Hour of Freedom's worth an Age of Juggling.


I'm come too, to specify my Stomach: Your Worship's Generosity has wrought a
miraculous Cure upon me.


And thou shalt have it filled, my merry Lad; my bonny, bounteous Testator:
Thou shalt find me the kindest Executor that ever was bilked by a Recovery; it
shall be filled till it groan again.


Let it have fair Play; and if it founder --


Faith, the Trick you put upon me, nettled me cruelly at first; but when I
considered that it was but a Jest, and carried off so neatly, it made me
extremely merry: I was so tickled with the Mirth!


Harmless Mirth always works so. No^, should we have been in earnest, it might
have sowr'd your Humour, and filled your Head with strange Matters. For, Things
thrust home in earnest --


Very certain. But you're merry Wags all; and you shall see I can be merry too.
Madam,


Come, fall to, Gentlemen; eat a bit, that we may drink a Glass.


What's this? an Execution?


Much good do you, Sir; 'tis a little tough, but 'tis sound; a good Stomach
will digest it easily: 'Tis but 1000l. Nay, never stir; your Sword's gone, and
these are Bailiffs.


a Citation, and a Warrant to appear before the Judge of the Arches!


Can you conjure, Mr. Marr-Text? To your Prayers, the Devil's in your Dish;
I've raised him, now try if you can lay him.


I must go to the Necessary House.


You need not; your Fear will make ye find the way to your Breeches. How do you
like your Mess, my wealthy Sexton? What Legacy would you give now? What would
you pay down upon the Nail, to escape my Clutches?


Have you betrayed us? and dare you insult?


Invited, you mean! Fall to, you've diligent Men about you, and shall want
nothing that may persecute you.


As bold and brave, as like a Lion, as you swagger now, I shall make you hang
your Ears like an Ass yet, ever we part.


O, yes! The Lawyer's a Fool, an April-Fool, a Thick-skull'd Fellow; fit only
to be the Sport of such Triumphant Wits. Within this Half Hour you shall have a
Second Dish of new Debts from all your Creditors; new Invitations to Whips and
Halters for my loving Neighbour Spade; and Excommunications, Suspensions and
Sequestrations for the learned Curate. A Masque of all your Furies shall dance
to you.


Have a care of being taken in your own Pit-fall. Do you think to catch us in a
Cobweb? Do you hear, Purse-Gelder? The First of April is n't over yet.


He braves it out nobly; his Courage don't sink in the least. I'm resolved once
more to redeem him, whatever comes on it.


If you threaten, you go to Prison directly, without Mercy. I've a better Guard
without. Do you know this Man, Curate? He's an Apparitor, that comes to tell
you a pleasant Story of an old Whore, and half a dozen Bastards, you've palmed
upon the Parish. You know the Penalty.


Good Sir, be compassionate; and I'll -- In Verbo Sacerdotis, I will.


No, no Bribery: I'll swinge ye. Thou rash, inconsiderate Fool, can thou hope
for Compassion? And you Lenten-Chaps, that lay sick, and mocked me; I 'll make
you s^ch at Heart. Yes, you shall die, but not worth a Sheet to wind you in;
not so much as that you stole, with the Ring, from the Merchant's Grave. Do you
smell me now?


Good Sir, have a little Mercy.


Mercy! yes; as much as a Halter can show ye: You smell strong of Hemp, Rascal;
the Gallows wait for you: 'Tis n't a Penitential Psalm shall save you.


What! Are you treating about a separate Peace, Rogues? Have a Care what you
do, we shall turn our Arms upon you; we allow no Neutrality.


Mr. Sergeant, yours: Now I'm no longer your Servant, methinks I've an
Inclination to be your Friend; I've brought you some Clients: They are not
over-stock'd with Fees, 'tis true; but I know you're a charitable Man, and love
Business in Forma Pauperis.


I'm glad to see you; my Revenge had not been complete without you.


I heard there was Meat in your House, and came to wonder at it; 'tis a Miracle
that never happened in my days here. The Dishes are licked clean, I see,
already; according to the ancient Custom of this House, you suffer nothing to
go from the Table.


You come a little of the latest; however, there's a Service left for you. Mr.
Constable, have this Fellow to Bridewell, and let him be soundly lashed thrice
a Week, and beat Hemp for his Diet.


Sir, I desire you to spare this Ceremony; you treat me like a Stranger: Pray
give your self no Trouble; since I'm too late, I can go as I came.





My Punishment! -- I've been too tame, too submissive a Wife to your base
Usage. But since you dare provoke me --


Be resolute, Madam; I'll stand and fall in your Defence: And he that dares to
brand your Fame, or taint your Virtue, is a Rascal, though your Husband.


How's this? Who have we here? a New-England Bully?


No; but a Gentleman of Old-England: One, whose Relation to your Lady, put him
upon this Stratagem, to prove her Virtue, and your Barbarity and Villainy; both
which I find far to exceed Belief.


I doubt he'll prove nearer a-kin to her Issue, if ever she has any,


Not easily. I can pronounce her Virtue fixed as a Rock, never to be moved, and
unalterable as Fate. But since you are so stubborn, I'll try to reclaim you by
Force.


Do you see these forging Instruments of yours? They shall suffer, and you too
with 'em, unless you come immediately to Composition, upon such directionary
Terms as I shall order. I watched your Privacy, and overheard all your Villainy
practised against this Lady; and took care to lay a Trap for your Under-Vermin.


A while after we came from your House, we were apprehended upon a Warrant from
my Lord Chief Justice for Forgery, and have been ever since in Custody.


Let's see the Writings of Mr. Careless's Estate. In one Week's time these had
been all a Blank! See, Madam; some of the Letters are vanished already, the
Names are almost lost.


Now, Sergeant, what will you give to ensure your Ears?


Well, Gentlemen, you've over-reach'd me, and I am an Ass: But propose your own
Conditions, and I submit to 'em.


Mr. Careless, What Reparation do you think fit to demand, for the Injuries he
has done you?


Only let him produce the real Writings of my Estate.


Here they are.


These are right. Then here I pay 'em, where they, and more, than I am worth
are due.





Let him obtain his Wife's Pardon, and promise hereafter to be as subject to
his Wife, as she has been to him, and I am satisfied.


I thank your Ladyship, for your care of me, let me but live hereafter free,
and unsuspected, and that's past shall be forgotten.


You hear, Sir, the Terms of your Indemnity. Allow your Lady, Maintenance
suitable to her Quality, and Liberty answerable to her Virtue, and all shall be
baried in silence.


You've made me truly sensible of my Folly; and henceforth Wife, you shall be
at your own discretion, both in point of Liberty and Expense.


Since there wants a sufficient Guarantee, you must be a while upon good
Behaviour.


Gentlemen, you forget your fellow Labourers; must we have no reparation?


What do you desire?


Let him turn his Sham-Treat into a real One.


Mr. Sergeant, as an easy Fine, to ratify our Articles of Reconciliation;
you're condemned to treat this good Company to night in reality.


With all my heart; let the Officers be discharged on all parts, and you shall
see I'll commence my Reformation in good earnest.


Mr. Careless I've found you a Man of so much Honour, that here I make you a
Present of your Estate again, and with it of my self, if you think it worth the
Acceptance.


Madam, you make me blush for my own want of Merit, but since your Bounty, like
that of Heaven out-strips my boldest wishes, with Joy I receive what I durst
never presume to ask.


Nay, Gentlemen, before you ratify the Articles of Peace, let me be
comprehended.


You shall; and for this once, I'll try the stretch of your Belly.


I thank your Worship, I've a good Stomach at your Service.


Mr. Sergeant, you've plaid the Jealous Ass, and mistaken your Ears for Horns.
Let that mistake be rectified, and henceforth you shall know me as a sincere
Friend, that shall never design either against your Lady's Virtue, or your
Quiet.


When I relapse again to Jealousy,
May they to real Horns converted be.
And may all else their their Faults, as timely know,
And to like means the like Conversion owe.

ON Business I'm returned so quick this way,
Sent by the Author to inter his Play.
He waits within in mortal Expectation
Of his own Sentence in his Play's Damnation.
Like Malefactor at the Bar, he stands,
And his Grand Jury's Countenances scants.
For, as some Plants, ever the rude Hand approach,
Contract themselves, and shun the Fatal Touch:
So our Young Scribler dreads the Critics here,
And shrinking from their Gripe, betrays his Fear.
I saw him shake at every sour Grimace;
Which, multiplied by Fear, as by a Glass,
Each Fac' appeared a File of Critics, laid
Against our Poet here in Ambuscade.
Moved at his Case, I could not well refuse
This last kind Office to's expiring Muse.
If he has sinned against this Pious Place,
And show as little Wit, as you do Grace;
His Crime's confessed, and he hopes Absolution,
And craves a short Reprieve from Execution:
Which gained, he now by me invites you all,
To attend him to his Muse's Funeral.
For, though some Precedents of late are found,
Without embalming Muse defunct unsound
To keep her Six Days stinking above Ground;
Our modest Author ordered me to say,
He valued not the Mummy of a Play.
He further sent me, having tried my Skill,
To be his Deputy, and make his Will:
First, To the Critics he would leave his Wit,
If they could but be reconciled to it.
Which I'll maintain's so little, and so light,
They need not fear spoiling their Judgments by it.
Yet since this Legacy's out of their Way,
He leaves besides the Carcase of his Play:
For well he knows 'em to be Birds of Prey.
To you, sweet Beaus, he fain would something leave,
But he has nothing, that you would receive.
His Vanity's a thing you never wanted,
Who boast so much of Favours never granted.
He'd leave you Courage, and a March to Flanders,
In quest of Fame, and hopes to be Commanders;
For you can brag at ho^. like Alexanders.
He told me too, what staggered much my Faith,
That if you ventured to scare the French from Aeth,
Some Roguish Bullet there might take the Pains
To undeceive the World, and show your Brains.
To the Masked Ladies 'tis his great Mishap,
He can't so much as give one Civil Clap.
But that's no Rarity to them, he knows,
For 'tis their usual Present from the Beaus.
Last to us Players, this he bid me say,
He gives to us the Profits of his Play:
But if i^ takes, he sends for it next Day.

