WHen first our Poet set himself to write,
Like a young Bridegroom on his Wedding-night
He laid about him, and did so bestir him,
His Muse could never lye in quiet for him:
But now his Honey-moon is gone and past,
Yet the ungrateful drudgery must last:
And he is bound, as civil Husbands do,
To strain himself, in complaisance to you:
To write in pain, and counterfeit a bliss,
Like the faint smackings of an after kiss.
But you, like Wives ill pleased, supply his want;
Each writing Monsieur is a fresh Gallant:
And though, perhaps, 'twas done as well before,
Yet still there's something in a new amour.
Your several Poets work with several tools,
One gets you wits, another gets you fools:
This pleases you with some by-stroke of wit,
This finds some cranny, that was never hit.
But should these jaunty Lovers daily come
To do your work, like your good man at home,
Their fine small-timber'd wits would soon decay;
These are Gallants but for a Holiday.
Others you had who oftner have appeared,
Whom, for mere impotence you have cashiered:
Such as at first came on with pomp and glory,
But, overstraining, soon fell flat before ye.
Their useless weight with patience long was born,
But at the last you threw 'em off with scorn.
As for the Poet of this present night,
Though now he claims in you an Husbands right,
He will not hinder you of fresh delight.
He, like a Seaman, seldom will appear;
And means to trouble home but thrice a year:
That only time from your Gallants he'll borrow;
Be kind to day, and Cuckold him to morrow.

DOn Lopez?

Any new business.

My Master had forgot this Letter.
Which he conjures you, as you are his friend,
To give Aurelia from him.

Tell Don Melchor 'tis a hard task which he enjoyns me:
He knows I love her, and much more than he;
For I love her alone, but he divides
His passion betwixt two: Did he consider
How great a pain 'tis to dissemble love,
He would never practise it.

He knows his fault; but cannot mend it.

To make the poor Aurelia believe
He's gone for Flanders, whiles he lies concealed,
And every night makes visits to her Cousin.
When will he leave this strange extravagance?

When he can love one more, or the other less.

Before I loved my self, I promised him
To serve him in his love; and I'll perform it,
How e're repugnant to my own concernments.

You are a noble Cavalier.

Sir, your Guests of the English Embassador's Retinue.

Cavaliers, will you please to command my Coach to take the air this Evening?


We have not yet resolved how to dispose of our selves; but however we are
highly acknowledging to you for your civility.


You cannot more oblige me then by laying your commands on me.


We kiss your hands.

Give the Don his due, he entertained us nobly this Carnival.


Give the Devil the Don for any thing I liked in his Entertainment.


I hope we had variety enough.

I, it looked like variety, till we came to taste it; there were twenty several
dishes to the eye, but in the palate nothing but Spices. I had a mind to eat of
a Pheasant, and as soon as I got it into my mouth, I found I was chawing a limb
of Cinnamon; then I went to cut a piece of Kid, and no sooner it had touched my
lips, but it turned to red Pepper: at last I began to think my self another
kind of Midas, that every thing I touched should be turned to Spice.


And for my part, I imagined his Catholic Majesty had invited us to eat his
Indies. But prithee let's leave the discourse of it, and contrive together how
we may spend the Evening; for in this hot Country, 'tis as in the Creation, the
Evening and the Morning make the Day.


I have a little serious business.

Put it off till a fitter season: for the truth is, business is then only
tolerable, when the world and the flesh have no baits to set before us for the
day.


But mine perhaps is public business.

Why, is any business more public than drinking and wenching? Look on those
grave plodding fellows, that pass by us as though they were meditating the
reconquest of Flanders: fly'em to a Mark, and I'll undertake three parts of
four are going to their Courtesans. I tell thee, Jack, the whisking of a
Silk-Gown, and the rash of a Tabby-Pettycoat, are as comfortable sounds to one
of these rich Citizens, as the chink of their Pieces of Eight.


This being granted to be the common design of humane kind, 'tis more than
probable 'tis yours; therefore I'll leave you to the prosecution of it.


Nay, good Jack, mine is but a Mistress in Embryo; the possession of her is at
least some ten days off, and till that time, thy company will be pleasant, and
may be profitable to carry on the work. I would use thee like an under kind of
Chemist, to blow the coals; 'twill be time enough for me to be alone when I
come to projection.


You must excuse me, Frank; I have made an appointment at the Gameing-house.


What to do there I prithee? to mis-spend that money which kind fortune
intended for a Mistress? or to learn new Oaths and Curses to carry into
England? that is not it -- I heard you were to marry when you left home:
perhaps that may be still running in your head, and keep you virtuous.


Marriage quoth a! what dost thou think I have been bred in the Deserts of
Africa, or among the Savages of America? nay, if I had, I must needs have known
better things than so; the light of Nature would not have let me gone so far
astray.


Well! what think you of the Prado this Evening?

Pox upon it, 'tis worse than our contemplative Hide-Park.


O! but we must submit to the Custom of the Country for courtship: what ever
the means are, we are sure the end is still the same in all places. But who are
these?


Do you see those strangers, Sister, that eye us so earnestly?


Yes, and I guess 'em to be feathers of the English Embassador's Train; for I
think I saw 'em at the grand Audience -- And have the strangest temptation in
the world to talk to 'em: A mischief on this modesty.


A mischief of this Father of yours that haunts you so.

'Tis very true Beatrix; for though I am the younger Sister, I should have the
grace to lay modesty first aside: however, Sister, let us pull up our Vails and
give 'em an Essay of our faces.


Ah Bellamy! undone, undone! dost thou see those Beauties?


Prithee Wildblood hold thy tongue, and do not spoil my contemplation; I am
undoing my self as fast as e're I can too.


I must go to 'em.

Hold Madman; dost thou not see their father? hast thou a mind to have our
throats cut?


By a Hector of fourscore? Hang our throats, what a Lover and cautious?


Come away Daughters, we shall be late else.

Look you, they are on the wing already.

Prithee, dear Frank, let's follow 'em: I long to know who they are.


Let me alone, I'll dog 'em for you.

I am glad on it, for my shoes so pinch me, I can scarce go a step farther.


Cross the way there lives a Shoemaker: away quickly, that we may not spoil our
man's design.


Now friend! what's your business to follow us?


Noble Don; 'tis only to recommend my service to you: A certain violent passion
I have had for your worship since the first moment that I saw you.


I never saw thee before to my remembrance.

No matter Sir; true love never stands upon ceremony.


Prithee begone my saucy companion, or I'll clap an Alguazile upon thy heels;
I tell thee I have no need of thy service.


Having no servant of your own, I cannot in good manners leave you destitute.


I'll beat thee if thou follow me.

I am your Spaniel Sir, the more you beat me, the better I'll wait on you.


Let me entreat thee to be gone; the boys will hoot at me to see me follow'd
thus against my will.


Shall you and I concern our selves for what the Boys do, Sir? Pray do you
hear the news at Court?


Prithee what's the news to thee or me?

Will you be at the next Juego de cannas?

If I think good.

Pray go on Sir, we can discourse as we walk together: And whither were you now
a going, Sir?


To the Devil I think.

O! not this year or two, Sir, by your age.

My Father was never so matched for talking in all his life before; he who
loves to hear nothing but himself: Prithee, Beatrix, stay behind, and see what
this impudent Englishman would have.


Sir! if you'll let my Master go, I'll be his pawn.

Well, Sir, I kiss your hand, in hope to wait on you another time.


Let us mend our pace to get clear of him.

If you do not, he'll be with you again, like Atalanta in the fable, and make
you drop another of your golden Apples.


How much good language is here thrown away to make me betray my Ladies?


If you will discover nothing of 'em, let me discourse with you a little.


As little as you please.

They are rich I suppose.

Now you are talking of them again: but they are as rich, as they are fair.


Then they have the Indies: well, but their Names my sweet Mistress.


Sweet Servant their Names are --

Their Names are -- out with it boldly --

A secret not to be disclosed.

A secret say you? Nay, then I conjure you as you are a Woman tell it me.


Not a syllable.

Why then as you are a Waiting-woman: as you are the Sieve of all your Ladies
Secrets tell it me.


You lose your labour: nothing will strain through me.


Are you so well stopped in the bottom?

It was enjoined me strictly as a Secret.

Was it enjoined thee strictly, and can thou hold it? Nay then thou art
invincible: but, by that face, that more than ugly face, which I suspect to be
under thy Veil, disclose it to me.


By that Face of thine, which is a Natural Visor: I will not tell thee.


By thy --

No more Swearing I beseech you.

That Woman's worth little that is not worth an Oath: well, get thee gone, now
I think on it thou shalt not tell me.


Shall I not? Who shall hinder me? They are Don Alonzo de Ribera's Daughters.


Out, out: I'll stop my Ears.

-- They live hard by, in the Call mayor.

O infernal Tongue --

And are going to the next Chapel with their Father.

Wilt thou never have done tormenting me? in my Conscience anon thou wilt blab
out their Names too.


Their Names are Theodosia and Jacinta.

And where's your great Secret now?

Now I think I am revenged on you for running down my poor old Master.


Thou art not fully revenged till thou hast told me thy own Name too.


'Tis Beatrix, at your service, Sir, pray remember I wait on 'em.


Now I have enough, I must be going.

I perceive you are just like other Men; when you have got your ends you care
not how soon you are going. -- --.Farewell, -- you'll be constant to me --


If thy face, when I see it, do not give me occasion to be otherwise.


You shall take a Sample that you may praise it when you see it next.


Look, there's your Dog with a Duck in's mouth -- Oh she's got loose and dived
again. --


Well Maskall, What news of the Ladies of the Lake?


I have learned enough to embarque you in an Adventure; they are Daughters to
one Don Alonzo de Ribera in the Call major, their Names Theodosia and Jacinta,
and they are going to their Devotions in the next Chapel.


Away then, let us lose no time, I thank Heaven I never found my self better
inclined to Godliness than at this present. --


By that time you have told your Beads I'll be again with you.


Do you think the English Men will come after us?

Do you think they can stay from you?

For my part I feel a certain qualm upon my heart, which makes me believe I am
breeding Love to one of'em.


How, Love, Jacinta, in so short a time? Cupids Arrow was well feathered to
reach you so suddenly.


Faith as good at first as at last Sister, 'tis a thing that must be done, and
therefore 'tis best dispatching it out of the way.


But you do not mean to tell him so whom you love?


Why should I keep my self and Servant in pain for that which may be cured at a
days warning?


My Lady tells you true, Madam, long tedious Courtship may be proper for cold
Countries, where their Frosts are long a thawing; but Heaven be praised we live
in a warm Climate.


The truth is, in other Countries they have opportunities for Courtship, which
we have not, they are not mewed up with double Locks and Grated Windows; but
may receive Addresses at their leisure.


But our Love here is like our Grass; if it be not mow'd quickly 'tis burnt up.


Yonder are your Gallants, send you comfort of 'em: I am for my Devotions.


Now for my heart can I think of no other Prayer, but only that they may not
mistake us -- Why Sister, Sister, -- will you Pray? What injury have I ever
done you, that you should Pray in my company? If your servant Don Melchor were
here, we should have you mind Heaven as little as the best on's.


They are at a loss, Madam, shall I put up my Vail that they may take aim?


No, let 'em take their Fortune in the dark: we shall see what Archers these
English are.


Which are they think thou?

There's no knowing them, they are all Children of darkness.


I'll besworn they have one sign of Godliness among 'em, there's no distinction
of persons here.


Pox o'this blind-mans-buffe; they may be ashamed to provoke a man thus by
their keeping themselves so close.


You are for the youngest you say; 'tis the eldest has smitten me. And here I
fix, if I am right -- happy man be his dole. -- -- -- -- By Theodosia.


I'll take my fortune here. -- By Jacinta. Madam, I hope a stranger may take
the liberty without offence to offer his devotions by you.


That, Sir, would interrupt mine, without being any advantage to your own.


My advantage, Madam, is very evident; for the kind Saint to whom you pray, may
by the neighbourhood mistake my devotions for yours.


O Sir! our Saints can better distinguish between the prayers of a Catholic
and a Lutheran.


I beseech you, Madam, trouble not your self for my Religion; for though I am a
Heretic to the men of your Country, to your Ladies I am a very zealous
Catholic: and for fornication and adultery, I assure you I hold with both
Churches.


Sir, if you will not be more devout, be at least more civil, you see you are
observed.


And pray, Madam, what do you think the lookers on imagine I am employed about?


I will not trouble my self to guess.

Why, by all circumstances, they must conclude that I am making love to you:
and methinks it were scarce civil to give the opinion of so much good company
the lye.


If this were true, you would have little reason to thank 'em for their
Divination.


Meaning I should not be loved again.

You have interpreted my riddle, and may take it for your pains.


Madam, your Father is returned.

She has nettled me, would I could be revenged on her.

Do you see their Father? let us make as though we talked to one another, that
we may not be suspected.


You have lost your Englishmen.

No, no, 'tis but design I warrant you: you shall see these Island Cocks wheel
about immediately.


Perhaps they thought they were observed.


Talk not of our Country Ladies: I declare my self for the Spanish Beauties.


Prithee tell me what thou can find to dote on in these Castilians.


Their wit and beauty.

Now for our Champion St. Jago for Spain there.

Faith I can speak no such miracles of either; for their beauty 'tis much as
the Moors left it; not altogether so deep a black as the true Ethiopian: A
kind of beauty that is too civil to the lookers on to do them any mischief.


This was your frowardness that provoked him, Sister.

But they shall not carry it off so.

As for their wit, you may judge it by their breeding, which is commonly in a
Nunnery; where the want of mankind while they are there, makes them value the
blessing ever after.


Prithee dear Jacinta tell me, what kind of creatures were those we saw
yesterday at the Audience? Those I mean that looked so like Frenchmen in their
habits, but only became their Apishness so much worse.


Englishmen I think they called 'em.

Cry you mercy; they were of your wild English indeed, that is a kind of
Northern Beast, that is taught its feats of activity in Monsieurland, and for
doing 'em too lubberly, is laughed at all the world over.


Wildblood, I perceive the women understand little of discourse; their Gallants
do not use 'em to it: they get upon their Gennits, and prance before their
Ladies windows; there the Palfrey curvets and bounds, and in short entertains
'em for his Master.


And this horse-play they call making love.

Your Father Madam. --

Daughters! what Cavaliers are those which were talking by you?


Englishmen, I believe Sir, at their devotions: Cavalier, would you would try
to pray a little better then you have raillied.


Hang me if I put all my devotions out of order for you: I remember I prayed
but on Tuesday last, and my time comes not till Tuesday next.


You had as good pray, Sir; she will not stir till you have: Say any thing.


Fair Lady, though I am not worthy of the least of your favours, yet give me
the happiness this Evening to see you at your fathers door, that I may acquaint
you with part of my sufferings.


Come Daughters, have you done?

Immediately Sir. -- Cavalier, I will not fail to be there at the time
appointed, if it be but to teach you more wit, henceforward, then to engage
your heart so lightly.


I have engaged my heart with so much zeal and true devotion to your divine
beauty, that --


What means this Cavalier?

Some zealous ejaculation.

May the Saint-hear him.

I'll answer for her. --

Now Bellamy, what success?

I prayed to a more Marble Saint than that was in the Shrine; but you, it
seems, have been successful.


And so shalt thou; let me alone for both.

If you'll undertake it, I will make bold to indulge my love; and within this
two hours be a desperate Inamorado. I feel I am coming apace to it.


Faith I can love at any time with a wish at my rate: I give my heart according
to the old law of pawns, to be returned me before sun-set.


I love only that I may keep my heart warm; for a man's a pool if love stir him
not; and to bring it to that pass, I first resolve whom to love, and presently
after imagine I am in love; for a strong imagination is required in a Lover as
much as in a Witch.


And is this all your Receipt?

These are my principal ingredients; as for Piques, Jealousies, Duels, Daggers,
and Halters, I let 'em alone to the vulgar.


Prithee let's round the street a little; till Maskall watches for their Woman.


That's well thought on: he shall about it immediately. We will attempt the
Mistress by the Maid: Women by women still are best betrayed.


DId you speak with her Woman?

Yes, but she was in hast, and bid me wait her hereabouts when she returned.


Then you have discovered nothing more?

Only, in general, that Donna Theodosia is engaged elsewhere; so that all your
Courtship will be to no purpose.

But for your Mistress, Sir, she is waded out of her depth in love to you
already.


That's very hard, when I am scarce knee-deep with her: 'tis true, I have given
her hold of my heart, but if she take not heed it will slip through her
fingers.


You are Prince of the Soil, Sir, and may take your pleasure when you please;
but I am the Eve to your Holy-day, and must fast for being joined to you.


Were I as thou art, I would content my self with having had one fair flight at
her, without wearying my self on the wing for a retrieve; for when all's done
the Quarry is but woman.


Thank you, Sir, you would fly 'em both your self, and while I turn tail, we
should have you come jingling with your bells in the neck of my Patridge; do
you remember who encouraged me to love, and promised me his assistance?


I, while there was hope Frank, while there was hope; but there's no contending
with one's destiny.


Nay, it may be I care as little for her as another man; but while she flies
before me I must follow: I can leave a woman first with ease, but if she begins
to fly before me, I grow opiniatre as the Devil.


What a secret have you found out? why 'tis the nature of all mankind: we love
to get our Mistresses, and purr over 'em, as Cats do over Mice, and then let
'em go a little way; and all the pleasure is, to pat 'em back again: But yours,
I take it, Frank, is gone too far; prithee how long dost thou intend to love at
this rate?


Till the evil constellation be past over me: yet I believe it would hasten my
recovery if I knew whom she loved.


You shall not be long without that satisfaction.

'St, the door opens; and two women are coming out.


By their stature they should be thy gracious Mistress and Beatrix.


Methinks you should know your Q. then and withdraw.


Well, I'll leave you to your fortune; but if you come to close fighting, I
shall make bold to run in and part you.


Yonder she comes with full sails i'faith; I'll hail her amain for England.


You do love him then?

Yes, most vehemently.

But set some bounds to your affection.

None but fools confine their pleasure: what Usurer ever thought his Coffers
held too much? No, I'll give my self the swinge, and love without reserve. If
I'll keep a passion, I'll never starve it in my service.


But are you sure he will deserve this kindness?

I never trouble my self so long beforehand: Jealousies and disquiets are the
dregs of an amour; but I'll leave mine before I have drawn it off so low: when
it once grows troubled I'll give vent to a fresh draught.


Yet it is but prudence to try him first; no Pilot ventures on an unknown Coast
without sounding.


Well, to satisfy thee I am content; partly too because I find a kind of
pleasure in laying baits for him.


The two great virtues of a Lover are constancy and liberality; if he profess
those two, you may be happy in him.


Nay, if he be not Lord and Master of both those qualities I disown him -- But
who goes there?


He, I warrant you, Madam; for his Servant told me he was waiting hereabout.


Watch the door, give me notice if any come.

I'll secure you, Madam. --

What have you laid an ambush for me?

Only to make a Reprisal of my heart.

'Tis so wild, that the Lady who has it in her keeping, would be glad she were
well rid on it: it does so flutter about the Cage. 'Tis a mere Bajazet; and if
it be not let out the sooner, will beat out the brains against the Grates.


I am afraid the Lady has not fed it, and 'tis wild for hunger.


Or perhaps it wants company; shall she put another to it?


I; but then 'twere best to trust 'em out of the Cage together; let 'em hop
about at liberty.


But if they should lose one another in the wide world.

They'll meet at night I warrant 'em.

But is not your heart of the nature of those Birds that breed in one Country,
and go to winter in another?


Suppose it does so; yet I take my Mate along with me. And now to leave our
parables, and speak in the language of the vulgar, what think you of a voyage
to merry England?


Just as Aesop's Frog did, of leaping into a deep Well in a drought: if he
ventured the leap, there might be water; but if there were no water, how should
he get out again?


Faith we live in a good honest Country, where we are content with our old
vices, partly because we want wit to invent more new. A Colonie of Spaniards,
or spiritual Italians planted among us would make us much more racy. 'Tis true,
our variety is not much; but to speak nobly of our way of living, 'tis like
that of the Sun, which rises, and looks upon the same things he saw yesterday,
and goes to bed again.


But I hear your women live most blessedly; there's no such thing as jealousy
among the Husbands; if any man has horns, he bears 'em as loftily as a Stag,
and as inoffensively.


All this I hope gives you no ill Character of the Country.


But what need we go into another Climate? as our love was born here; so let it
live and die here, and be honestly buried in its native Country.


Faith agreed with all my heart. For I am none of those unreasonable lovers,
that propose to themselves the loving to eternity; the truth is, a month is
commonly my stint; but in that month I love so dreadfully, that it is after a
twelvemonths rate of common love.


Or would not a fortnight serve our turn? for in troth a month looks somewhat
dismally; 'tis a whole Egyptian year, if a Moon changes in my love I shall
think my Cupid grown dull, or fallen into an Apoplexy.


Well, I pray heaven we both get off as clear as we imagine; for my part I like
your humour so damnably well, that I fear I am in for a week longer than I
proposed; I am half afraid your Spanish Planet, and my English one have been
acquainted, and have found out some by-room or other in the 12 houses: I wish
they have been honourable.


The best way for both were to take up in time; yet I am afraid our forces are
engaged so far, that we must make a battle on it. What think you of disobliging
one another from this day forward; and showing all our ill humours at the
first; which Lovers use to keep as a reserve till they are married?


Or let us encourage one another to a breach by the dangers of possession: I
have a Song to that purpose.


Pray let me hear it: I hope it will go to the tune of one of our Passa-calles.

You charmed me not with that fair face
Though it was all divine:
To be another is the Grace,
That makes me wish you mine.
The Gods and Fortune take their part
Who like young Monarchs fight;
And boldly dare invade that heart
Which is another right.
First mad with hope we undertake
To pull up every barr;
But once possessed, we faintly make
A dull defensive war.
Now every friend is turned a foe
In hope to get our store:
And passion makes us Cowards grow,
Which made us brave before.

Believe it, Cavalier, you are a dangerous person: do you hold forth your gifts
in hopes to make me love you less?


They would signify little, if we were once married: those gaieties are all
nipped, and frost-bitten in the Marriagebed, i'faith.


I am sorry to hear 'tis so cold a place: but 'tis all one to us who do not
mean to trouble it: the truth is, your humour pleases me exceedingly; how long
it will do so, I know not; but so long as it does, I am resolved to give my
self the content of seeing you. For if I should once constrain my self, I might
fall in love in good earnest: but I have stayed too long with you, and would be
loath to surfeit you at first.


Surfeit me, Madam, why you have but Tantalised me all this while.


What would you have?

A hand, or lip, or any thing that you can spare; when you have Conjured up a
Spirit he must have some employment, or he'll tear you a pieces.


Well, Here's my Picture; to help your contemplation in my absence.


You have already the Original of mine: but some revenge you must allow me: a
Locket of Diamonds, or some such trifle, the next time I kiss your hand.


Fie, fie; you do not think me mercenary! yet now I think on it, I'll put you
into our Spanish Mode of Love: our Ladies here use to be the Banquiers of their
Servants, and to have their Gold in keeping.


This is the least trial you could have made of me: I have some 300 Pistols by
me; those I'll send you by my servant.


Confess freely; you mistrust me: but if you find the least qualm about your
Gold, pray keep it for a Cordial.


The Cordial must be applied to the heart, and mines with you Madam: Well; I
say no more; but these are dangerous beginings for holding on: I find my month
will have more then one and thirty days in it.


Madam, your Father calls in hast for you; and is looking you about the house.


Adieu Servant, be a good manager of your stock of Love, that it may hold out
your Month; I am afraid you'll wast so much of it before to morrow night, that
you'll shine but with a quarter Moon upon me.


It shall be a Crescent.

Pay your ransom; you are my Prisoner.

What do you fight after the French Fashion; take Towns before you declare a
War?


I should be glad to imitate them so far, to be in the middle of the Country
before you could resist me.


Well, what composition Monsieur?

Deliver up your Lady's secret; what makes her so cruel to my Master?


Which of my Ladies, and which of your Masters? For I suppose we are Factors
for both of them.


Your eldest Lady, Theodosia.

How dare you press your Mistress to an inconvenience?


My Mistress? I understand not that language; the fortune of the Valet ever
follows that of the Master; and his is desperate; if his fate were altered for
the better, I should not care if I ventured upon you for the worse.


I have told you already Donna Theodosia loves another.

Has he no name?

Let it suffice he is born noble, though without a fortune. His poverty makes
him conceal his love from her Father; but she sees him every night in private:
and to blind the world about a fortnight ago, he took a solemn leave of her,
as if he were going into Flanders: in the mean time he lodges at the house of
Don Lopez de Gamboa; and is himself called Don Melchor de Guzman.


Don Melchor de Guzman! O heavens!

What amazes you!

Why, Beatrix, where are you?

You hear I am called; Adieu; and be sure you keep my Counsel.


Come, Sir, you see the Coast is clear.

Clear, dost thou say? no 'tis full of Rocks and Quicksands: yet nothing vexes
me so much as that she is in love with such a poor Rogue.


But that he should lodge privately in the same house with us! 'twas oddly
contrived of fortune.


Hang him Rogue, methinks I see him perching like an Owl by day, and not
daring to flutter out till Moon-light. The Rascal invents love, and brews his
complements all day, and broaches 'em at night; just as some of our dry wits do
their stories before they come into company: well, if I could be revenged on
either of 'em.


Here she comes again with Beatrix; but good Sir moderate your passion.


Nay, Madam, you are known; and must not pass till I have spoke with you.
Bellamy lifts up Theodosia's Vail.


This rudeness to a person of my quality may cost you dear. Pray when did I
give you encouragement for so much familiarity?


When you scorned me in the Chapel.

The truth is, I denied you as heartily as I could; that I might not be twice
troubled with you.


Yet you have not this aversion for all the world: however I was in hope though
the day frowned, the night might prove as propitious to me as it is to others.


I have now a quarrel both to the Sun and Moon, because I have seen you by
both their lights.


Spare the Moon I beseech you, Madam, she is a very trusty Planet to you.


O Maskal you have ruined me.

Dear Sir, hold yet.

Away.

Pray, Sir, expound your meaning; for I confess I am in the dark.


Methinks you should discover it by Moon-light. Or if you would have me speak
clearer to you, give me leave to wait on you at a midnight assignation; and
that it may not be discovered, I'll feign a voyage beyond sea, as if I were
gone a Captaining to Flanders.


A pox on's memory, he has not forgot one syllable.


Ah Beatrix, you have betrayed and sold me.

You have betrayed and sold your self, Madam, by your own rashness to confess
it; Heaven know's I have served you but too faithfully.


Peace, impudence; and see my face no more.

Do you know what work you have made, Sir?


Let her see what she has got by slighting me.


You had best let Beatrix be turned away for me to keep: if you do, I know
whose purse shall pay for 't.


That's a curse I never thought on: cast about quickly and save all yet. Range,
quest, and spring a lie immediately.


Never importune me farther; you shall go; there's no removing me.


Well; this is ever the reward of innocence --

Stay, guiltless Virgin, stay; thou shalt not go.

Why, who should hinder it?

That will I in the name of truth. (If this hard-bound lie would but come from
me:) Madam, I must tell you it lies in my power to appease this tempest with
one word.


Would it were come once.

Nay, Sir, 'tis all one to me, if you turn me away uppon't; I can hold no
longer.


What does the fellow mean?

For all your noddings, and your Mathematical grimaces, in short, Madam, my
Master has been conversing with the Planets; and from them has had the
knowledge of your affairs.


This Rogue amazes me.

I care not, Sir, I am for truth; that will shame you and all your Devils: in
short, Madam, this Master of mine that stands before you, without a word to say
for himself, so like an Oph, as I may say with reverence to him --


The Raskal makes me mad.

Is the greatest Astrologer in Christendom.

Your Master an Astrologer?

A most profound one.

Why you dog, do you consider what an improbable lie this is; which you know I
can never make good: disgorge it you Cormorant, or I'll pinch your throat out.
--


'Tis all in vain, Sir, you are and shall be an Astrologer what e're I suffer:
you know all things, see into all things, foretell all things; and if you pinch
more truth out of me, I will confess you are a Conjurer.


How, sirrah, a Conjurer?


I mean, Sir, the Devil is in your fingers: own it you had best, Sir, and do
not provoke me farther; what did not I see you an hour ago, turning over a
great Folio with strange figures in it, and then muttering to your self like
any Poet, and then naming Theodosia, and then staring up in the sky, and then
poring upon the ground; so that betwixt God and the Devil, Madam, he came to
know your love.


Madam, if ever I knew the least term in Astrology, I am the arrantest Son of
a whore breathing.


O, Sir, for that matter you shall excuse my Lady: Nay hide your talents if
you can, Sir.


The more you pretend ignorance, the more we are resolved to believe you
skilful.


You'll hold your tongue yet.

You shall never make me hold my tongue, except you conjure me to silence: what
did you not call me to look into a Crystal, and there showed me a fair Garden,
and a Spaniard stalking in his narrow breeches, and walking underneath a
window; I should know him again amongst a thousand.


Don Melchor, in my conscience, Madam.

This Rogue will invent more stories of me, than e're were fathered upon Lilly.


Will you confess then; do you think I'll stain my honour to swallow a lie for
you?


Well, a pox on you, I am an Astrologer.

O, are you so, Sir?

I hope then, learned Sir, as you have been curious in enquiring into my
secrets, you will be so much a Cavalier as to conceal 'em.


you need not doubt me, Madam; I am more in your power than you can be in mine:
besides, if I were once known in Town, the next thing, for ought I know, would
be to bring me before the fathers of the Inquisition.


Well, Madam, what do you think of me now; I have betrayed you, I have sold
you; how can you ever make me amends for this imputation? I did not think you
could have used me so. --


Nay, prithee Beatrix do not cry; I'll leave of my new Gown to morrow, and
thou shalt have it.


No, I'll cry eternally; you have taken away my good name from me; and you can
never make me recompense -- except you give me your new Gorget too.


No more words; thou shalt have it Girl.

O, Madam, your Father has surprised us!

Then I'll begone to avoid suspicion.

By your favour, Sir, you shall stay a little; the happiness of so rare an
acquaintance, ought to be cherished on my side by a longer conversation.


Theodosia, what business have you with this Cavalier?

That, Sir, which will make you as ambitious of being known to him as I have
been: under the habit of a Gallant he conceals the greatest Astrologer this day
living.


You amaze me Daughter.

For my own part I have been consulting with him about some particulars of my
fortunes past and future; both which he has resolved me with that admirable
knowledge. --


Yes, faith, Sir, I was foretelling her of a disaster that severely threatened
her: and (one thing I foresee already by my stars, that I must bear up boldly,
or I am lost.)


Never fear him, Sir; he's an ignorant fellow, and credulous I warrant him.


Daughter be not too confident in your belief; there's nothing more uncertain
than the cold Prophecies of these Nostradamusses; but of what nature was the
question which you asked him?


What should be my fortune in marriage.

And, pray, what did you answer, Sir?

I answered her the truth, that she is in danger of marrying a Gentleman
without a fortune.


And this, Sir, has put me into such a fright --

Never trouble your self about it, Daughter; follow my advice and I warrant you
a rich Husband.


But the stars say she shall not follow your advice: if it happens otherwise
I'll burn my folio Volumes, and my Manuscripts too, I assure you that, Sir.


Be not too confident, young man; I know somewhat in Astrology my self; for in
my younger years I studied it; and though I say it, made some small proficience
in it.


Marry Heaven forbid. --

And I could only find it was no way demonstrative, but altogether fallacious.


On what a Rock have we split our selves!

Now my ignorance will certainly come out!

Sir, remember you are old and crazie, Sir; and if the Evening Air should take
you -- beseech you Sir retire.


Knowledge is to be preferred before health; I must needs discuss a point with
this learned Cavalier, concerning a difficult question in that Art, which
almost gravels me.


How I sweat for him, Beatrix, and my self too, who have brought him into this
Praemunire!


You must be impudent; for our old man will stick like a bur to you, now he's
in a dispute.


What Judgment may a man reasonably form from the trine Aspect of the two
Infortunes in Angular houses?


That's a matter of nothing, Sir; I'll turn my man loose to you for such a
question. --


Come on, Sir, I am the quaerent.

Meaning me, Sir! I vow to God, and your Worship knows it, I never made that
Science my study in the least, Sir.


The gleanings of mine are enough for that: why, you impudent rogue you, hold
forth your gifts, or I'll -- What a devil must I be pestered with every trivial
question, when there's not a Master in Town of any Science, but has his Usher
for these mean offices?


Try him in some deeper question, Sir; you see he will not put himself forth
for this.


Then I'll be more abstruse with him: what think you, Sir, of the taking Hyleg?
or of the best way of rectification for a Nativity? have you been conversant in
the Centiloquium of Trismegistus: what think you of Mars in the tenth when 'tis
his own House, or of Jupiter configurated with malevolent Planets?


I thought what your skill was! to answer your question in two words, Mars
rules over the Martial, and Jupiter over the Jovial; and so of the rest, Sir.


This every School-boy could have told me.

Why then you must not ask such School-boyes questions. (But your Carcass,
Sirrah, shall pay for this.) --


You seem not to understand the Terms, Sir.

By your favour, Sir, I know there are five of 'em; do not I know your
Michaelmas, your Hillary, your Easter, your Trinity, and your Long Vacation
term, Sir?


I do not understand a word of this Jargon.

It may be not, Sir; I believe the terms are not the same in Spain they are in
England.


Did one ever hear so impudent an ignorance?

The terms of Art are the same every where.

Tell me that! you are an old man, and they are altered since you studied them.


That may be I must confess; however if you please to discourse something of
the Art to me, you shall find me an apt Scholar.


Sir, --

Sir, I am sorry a business of importance calls me hence; but I'll wait on you
some other time, to discourse more at large of Astrology.


Is your business very pressing?

It is, I assure you, Sir.

I am very sorry, for I should have instructed you in such rare secrets; I have
no fault, but that I am too communicative.


I'll dispatch my business, and return immediately; come away Daughter.


A Devil on's learning; he had brought me to my last legs; I was fighting as
low as ever was Squire Widdrington.


Who would have suspected it from that wicked Elder?


Suspected it? why 'twas palpable from his very Physiognomy; he looks like Haly,
and the spirit Fircu in the Fortunebook.


How now Bellamy, in wrath, prithee, what's the matter?


The story is too long to tell you; but this Rogue here has made me pass for an
errant Fortune-teller.


If I had not, I am sure he must have past for an errant Mad-man; he had
discovered, in a rage, all that Beatrix had confessed to me concerning her
Mistresse's love; and I had no other way to bring him off, but to say he knew
it by the Planets.


And art thou such an Oph to be vexed at this? as the adventure may be managed
it may make the most pleasant one in all the Carnival.


Death! I shall have all Madrid about me within these two days.


Nay, all Spain, i'faith, as fast as I can divulge thee: not a Ship shall pass
out from any Port, but shall ask thee for a wind; thou shalt have all the trade
of Lapland within a Month.


And do you think it reasonable for me to stand defendant to all the
impertinent questions that the Town can ask me.


Thou shalt do it boy: pox on thee, thou dost not know thine own happiness; thou
wilt have the Ladies come to thee; and if thou dost not sit them with fortunes,
thou art bewitched.


Sir, 'tis the easiest thing in Nature; you need but speak doubtfully, or keep
your self in general terms, and for the most part tell good rather than bad
fortune.


And if at any time thou ventur'st at particulars, have an evasion ready like
Lilly; as thus, it will infallibly happen if our sins hinder not. I would
undertake with one of his Almanacs to give very good content to all
Christendom, and what good luck fell not out in one Kingdom, should in another.


The pleasure on it will be to see how all his Customers will contribute to
their own deceiving; and verily believe he told them that, which they told him.


Umh! now I begin to taste it; I am like the drunken Tinker in the Play, a
great Prince, and never knew it.


A great Prince, a great Turk; we shall have thee within these two days, do
grace to the Ladies by throwing out a handkerchief; 'lif, I could feast upon
thy fragments.


If the women come you shall be sure to help me to undergo the burden; for
though you make me an Astronomer I am no Atlas, to bear all upon my back. But
who are these?


You know the men if their Masquing habits were off; they are the Music of our
Ambassadors Retinue: my project is to give our Mistresses a Serenade; this
being the last Evening of the Carnival; and to prevent discovery here are
disguises for us too. -- --


'Tis very well; come Maskall help on with 'em, while they tune their
Instruments.


Strike up Gentlemen; we'll entertain 'em with a song al' Angloise, pray be
ready with your Chorus.

After the pangs of a desperate Lover,
When day and night I have sighed all in vain,
Ah what a pleasure it is to discover
In her eyes pity, who causes my pain!
When with unkindness our love at a stand is,
And both have punished our selves with the pain,
Ah what a pleasure the touch of her hand is,
Ah what a pleasure to press it again!
When the denial comes fainter and fainter,,
And her eyes give what her tongue does deny,
Ah what a trembling I feel when I venture,
Ah what a trembling does usher my joy!
When, with a Sigh, she accords me the blessing,
And her eyes twinkle 'twixt pleasure and pain;
Ah what a joy 'tis beyond all expressing,
Ah what a joy to hear, shall we again!

Ill Musicians must be rewarded: there, Cavalier, 'tis to buy your silence. --
--


By this light, which at present is scarce an oath, an handkerchief and a
favour.


Hark, Wildblood, do you hear; there's more melody; on my life some Spaniards
have taken up this Post for the same design.


I'll be with their Cats-guts immediately.

Prithee be patient; we shall lose the sport else.

'Tis some Rival of yours or mine, Bellamy: for he addresses to this window.


Damn him, let's fall on then.

So, all's past, and I am safe: a pox on these fighting Masters of mine, to
bring me into this danger with their valours and magnanimities. When I go a
Serenading again with 'em, I'll give 'em leave to make Fiddle-strings of my
small-guts.


Who goes there?

'Tis Don Lopez by his voice.

The same; and by yours you should belong to my two English Guests. Did you
hear no tumult hereabouts?


I heard a clashing of swords, and men a fighting

I had my share in it; but how came you here:

I came hither by my Masters order to see if you were in any danger.


But how could he imagine I was in any?

'Tis all one for that, Sir, he knew it, by -- Heaven, what was I agoing to
say, I had like to have disover'd all!


I find there is some secret in it; and you dare not trust me.


If you will swear on your honour to be very secret, I will tell you.


As I am a Cavalier, and by my Beard, I will.

Then, in few words, he knew it by Astrology, or Magic.


You amaze me! Is he conversant in the occult Sciences?

Most profoundly.

I always thought him an extraordinary person; but I could never imagine his
head lay that way.


He showed me yesterday in a glass a Ladies Maid at London, whom I well knew;
and with whom I used to converse on a Pallet in a drawing-room, while he was
paying his devotions to her Lady in the Bed-chamber.


Lord, what a treasure for a State were here! and how much might we save by
this man, in Foreign Intelligence!


And just now he showed me how you were assaulted in the dark by Foreigners.


Could you guess what Countrymen?

I imagined them to be Italians.

Not unlikely; for they played most furiously at our back-sides.


I will return to my Master with the good news of your safety; but once again
be secret; or disclose it to none but friends. -- -- So, there's one Woodcock
more in the Spring. --


Yes, I will be very secret; for I will tell it only to one person; but she is
a woman. I will to Aurelia, and acquaint her with the skill of this rare
Artist: she is curious as all women are; and, 'tis probable, will desire to
look into the Glass to see Don Melchor, whom she believes absent. So that by
this means, without breaking my oath to him, he will be discovered to be in
Town. Then his intrigue with Theodosia will come to light too, for which
Aurelia will, I hope, discard him, and receive me. I will about it instantly:

Success, in love, on diligence depends;
No lazy Lover e're attained his ends.

THen, they were certainly Don Lopez and Don Mel-Melchor with whom we fought!

Yes, Sir.

And when you met Lopez he swallowed all you told him?


As greedily, as if it had been a new Saints miracle.

I see 'twill spread.

And the fame of it will be of use to you in your next amour: for the women you
know run mad after Fortune-tellers and Preachers.


But for all my bragging this amour is not yet worn off. I find constancy, and
once a night come naturally upon a man towards thirty: only we set a face on it;
and call our selves unconstant for our reputation.


But, What say the Stars, Sir?

They move faster than you imagine; for I have got me an Argol, and an
English-Almanack; by help of which in one half-hour I have learnt to Cant with
an indifferent good grace: Conjunction, Opposition, Trine, Square and Sextile,
are now no longer Bug-bears to me, I thank my Stars for it.

-- Monsieur Wildblood, in good time! What, you have been taking pains too, to
divulge my Talent?


So successfully, that shortly there will be no talk in Town but of you only:
another Miracle or two, and a sharp Sword, and you stand fair for a New
Prophet.


But where did you begin to blow the Trumpet.

In the Gaming-house: where I found most of the Town-wits; the Prose-wits
playing, and the Verse-wits cooking.


All sorts of Gamesters are so Superstitious, that I need not doubt of my
reception there.


From thence I went to the latter end of a Comedy, and there whispered it to
the next Man I knew who had a Woman by him.


Nay, then it went like a Train of Powder, if once they had it by the end.


Like a Squib upon a Line, i'faith, it ran through one row, and came back upon
me in the next: at my going out I met a knot of Spaniards, who were formally
listening to one who was relating it: but he told the Story so ridiculously,
with his Marginal Notes upon it, that I was forced to contradict him.


'Twas discreetly done.

I, for you, but not for me: What, says he, must such Boracho's as you, take
upon you to vilify a Man of Science? I tell you, he's of my intimate
Acquaintance, and I have known him long, for a prodigious person -- When I saw
my Don so fierce, I thought it not wisdom to quarrel for so slight a matter as
you Reputation, and so withdrew.


A pox of your success! now shall I have my Chamber besieged to morrow morning:
there will be no stirring out for me; but I must be fain to take up their
Questions in a cleft-Cane, or a Begging-box, as they do Charity in Prisons.


Faith, I cannot help what your Learning has brought you to: Go in and study; I
foresee you will have but few Holidays: in the mean time I'll not fail to give
the World an account of your endowments. Fare-well: I'll to the Gaming house.


O, Sir, here is the rarest adventure, and which is more, come home to you.


What is it?

A fair Lady and her Woman, wait in the outer Room to speak with you.


But how know you she is fair?

Her Woman plucked up her Veil when she spake to me; so that having seen her
this evening, I know her Mistress to be Donna Aurelia, Cousin to your Mistress
Theodosia, and who lodges in the same House with her: she wants a Star or two
I warrant you.


My whole Constellation is at her service: but what is she for a Woman?


Fair enough, as Beatrix has told me; but sufficiently impertinent. She is one
of those Ladies who make ten Visits in an afternoon; and entertain her they
see, with speaking ill of the last from whom they parted: in few words, she is
one of the greatest Coquette's in Madrid: and to show she is one, she cannot
speak ten words without some affected phrase that is in fashion.


For my part I can suffer any impertinence from a woman, provided she be
handsome: my business is with her Beauty, not with her Morals: let her
Confessor look to them.


I wonder what she has to say to you?

I know not; but I sweat for fear I should be gravelled.


Venture out of your depth, and plunge boldly Sir; I warrant you will swimm.


Do not leave me I charge you; but when I look mournfully upon you help me out.


Here they are already.

How am I dressed to night, Camilla? is nothing disordered in my head?


Not the least hair, Madam.

No? let me see: give me the Counsellor of the Graces.

The Counsellor of the Graces, Madam?

My Glass I mean: what will you never be so spiritual as to understand refined
language?


Madam!

Madam me no Madam, but learn to retrench your words; and say Mam; as yes Mam,
and no Mam, as other Ladies Women do. Madam! 'tis a year in pronouncing.


Pardon me Madam.

Yet again ignorance: par-don Madam, fie fie, what a superfluity is there, and
how much sweeter the Cadence is, parn me Mam! and for your Ladyship, your
Ladyship -- Out upon it, what a furious indigence of Ribands is here upon my head!
This dress is a Libel to my beauty; a mere Lampoon. Would any one that had the
least revenue of common sense have done this?


Mam the Cavalier approaches your Ladyship.

Maskall, pump the woman; and see if you can discover any thing to save my
credit.


Out upon it; now I should speak I want assurance.

Madam, I was told you meant to honour me with your Commands.


I believe, Sir, you wonder at my confidence in this visit: but I may be
excused for waving a little modesty to know the only person of the Age.


I wish my skill were more to serve you, Madam.

Sir, you are an unfit judge of your own merits: for my own part I confess I
have a furious inclination for the occult Sciences; but at present 'tis my
misfortune -- --


But why that sigh, Madam?

You might spare me the shame of telling you; sioce I am sure you can divine my
thoughts: I will therefore tell you nothing.


What the Devil will become of me now! --

You may give me an Essay of your Science, by declaring to me the secret of my
thoughts.


If I know your thoughts, Madam, 'tis in vain for you to disguise them to me:
therefore as you tender your own satisfaction lay them open without
bashfulness.


I beseech you let us pass over that chapter; for I am shamefaced to the last
point: Since therefore I cannot put off my modesty, succour it, and tell me
what I think.


Madam, Madam, that bashfulness must be laid aside: not but that I know your
business perfectly; and will if you please unfold it to you all, immediately.


Favour me so far, I beseech you, Sir; for I furiously desire it.


But then I must call up before you a most dreadful Spirit, with head upon
head, and horns upon horns: therefore consider how you can endure it.


This is furiously furious; but rather than fail of my expectances, I'll try my
assurance.


Well, then, I find you will force me to this unlawful, and abominable act of
Conjuration: remember the sin is yours too.


I espouse the crime also.

I see when a woman has a mind to it, she'll never boggle at a sin. Pox on her,
what shall I do? -- Well, I'll tell you your thoughts, Madam; but after that
expect no farther service from me; for 'tis your confidence must make my Art
successful: -- Well, you are obstinate, then; I must tell you your thoughts?


Hold, hold, Sir, I am content to pass over that chapter rather than be
deprived of your assistance.


'Tis very well; what need these circumstances between us two? Confess freely,
is not love your business?


You have touched me to the quick, Sir.

La you there; you see I knew it; nay, I'll tell you more, 'tis a man you love.


O prodigious Science! I confess I love a man most furiously, to the last
point, Sir.


Now proceed Lady, your way is open; I am resolved I'll not tell you a word
farther.


Well, then, since I must acquaint you with what you know much better than my
self; I will tell you I loved a Cavalier, who was noble, young, and handsome;
this Gentleman is since gone for Flanders; now whether he has preserved his
passion inviolate or not, is that which causes my inquietude.


Trouble not your self, Madam; he's as constant as a Romance Heroes.


Sir, your good news has ravished most furiously; but that I may have a
confirmation of it, I beg only, that you would lay your commands upon his
Genius, or Idea, to appear to me this night, that I may have my sentence from
his mouth. This, Sir, I know is a slight effect of your Science, and yet will
infinitely oblige me.


What the Devil does she call a slight effect! Flanders.


To view him in a glass is nothing, I would speak with him in person, I mean
his Idea, Sir.


I but Madam, there is a vast sea betwixt us and Flanders; and water is an
enemy to Conjuration: A witches horse you know, when he enters into water,
returns into a bottle of hay again.


But, Sir, I am not so ill a Geographer, or to speak more properly, a
Chorographer, as not to know there is a passage by land from hence to Flanders.


That's true, Madam, but Magic works in a direct line. Why should you think
the Devil such an Ass to go about? 'gad he'll not stir a step out of his road
for you or any man.


Yes, for a Lady, Sir; I hope he's a person that wants not that civility for a
Lady: especially a spirit that has the honour to belong to you, Sir.


For that matter he's your Servant, Madam; but his education has been in the
fire, and he's naturally an enemy to water I assure you.


I beg his pardon for forgetting his Antipathy; but it imports not much, Sir;
for I have lately received a letter from my Servant, that he is yet in Spain;
and stays for a wind in St. Sebastians.


Now I am lost past all redemption. -- Maskall -- must you be smickering after
Wenches while I am in calamity?


It must be he, I'll venture on it. I was complaining to my self of the
condition of poor Don Melchor, who you know is windbound at St. Sebastians.


Why you impudent Villain, must you offer to name him publicly, when I have
taken so much care to conceal him all this while?


Mitigate your displeasure I beseech you; and without making farther testimony
of it, gratify my expectances.


Well, Madam, since the Sea hinders not, you shall have your desire. Look upon
me with a fixed eye -- so -- or a little more amorously if you please. -- Good.
Now favour me with your hand.


Is it absolutely necessary you should press my hand thus?

Furiously necessary, I assure you, Madam; for now I take possession of it in
the name of the Idea of Don Melchor. Now, Madam, I am farther to desire of you,
to write a Note to his Genius, wherein you desire him to appear, and this, we
Men of Art, call a Compact with the Idea's.


I tremble furiously.

Give me your hand, I'll guide it.

Now, Lady mine, what think you of my Master?


I think I would not serve him for the world: nay, if he can know our thoughts
by looking on us, we women are hypocrites to little purpose.


He can do that and more; for by casting his eyes but once upon them, he knows
whether they are Maids, better than a whole Jury of Midwives.


Now Heaven defend me from him.

He has a certain small Familiar which he carries still about him, that never
fails to make discovery.


See, they have done writing; not a word more, for fear he knows my voice.


One thing I had forgot, Madam, you must subscribe your name to it.


There 'tis; farewell Cavalier, keep your promise, for I expect it furiously.


If he sees me I am undone.

Camilla!

Ah he has found me; I am ruined!

You hide your face in vain; for I see into your heart.

Then, sweet Sir, have pity on my srailty; for if my Lady has the least inkling
of what we did last night, the poor Coachman will be turned away.


Well, Sir, how like you your New Profession?

Would I were well quit on it; I sweat all over.

But what faint-hearted Devils yours are that will not go by water? Are they
all Lancashire Devils, of the brood of Tybert and Grimalkin, that they dare not
wet their feet?


Mine are honest land Devils, good plain foot Posts, that beat upon the hoof
for me: but to save their labour, here take this, and in some disguise deliver
it to Don Melchor.


I'll serve it upon him within this hour, when he sallies out to his
assignation with Theodosia: 'tis but counterfeiting my voice a little; for he
cannot know me in the dark. But let me see, what are the words?

Don Melchor, if the Magique of love have any power upon your spirit, I conjure
you to appear this night before me: you may guess the greatness of my passion,
since it has forced me to have recourse to Art: but no shape which resembles
you can fright

Aurelia.


Well, I am glad there's one point gained; for by this means he will be hindered
to night from entertaining Theodosia. -- Pox on him, is he here again?


Cavalier Ingles I have been seeking you: I have a Present in my Pocket for
you; read it by your Art and take it.


That I could do easily; -- but to show you I am generous, I'll none of your
Present; do you think I am mercenary?


I know you will say now 'tis some Astrological question, and so 'tis perhaps.


I, 'tis the Devil of a question without dispute.

No 'tis within dispute: 'tis a certain difficulty in the Art; a Problem which
you and I will discuss, with the arguments on both sides,


At this time I am not problematically given; I have a humour of complaisance
upon me, and will contradict no man.


We'll but discuss a little.

By your favour I'll not discuss; for I see by the Stars that if I Dispute to
day, I am infallibly threatened to be thought ignorant all my life after.


Well, then, we'll but cast an eye together, upon my eldest Daughters Nativity.


Nativity! --

I know what you would say now, that there wants the Table of Direction for the
five Hylegiacalls; the Ascendant, Medium Coeli, Sun, Moon, and Sors: but we'll
take it as it is.


Never tell me that, Sir --

I know what you would say again, Sir --

'Tis well you do, for I'll besworn I do not --

You would say, Sir --.

I say, Sir, there is no doing without the Sun and Moon, and all that, Sir. And
so you may make use of your Paper for your occasions. Come to a man of Art
without


'Tis no matter; this shall break no squares betwixt us: I know what you would
say now, that Men of parts are always choleric; I know it by my self, Sir.


Don Alonzo in my house! this is a most happy opportunity to put my other
design in execution; for if I can persuade him to bestow his Daughter on Don
Melchor, I shall serve my Friend, though against his will: and, when Aurelia
sees she cannot be his, perhaps she will accept my Love.


I warrant you, Sir, 'tis all pieced right, both top, sides and bottom; for,
look you, Sir, here was Aldeboran, and there Cor Scorpii --


Don Alonzo, I am happy to see you under my Roof: and shall take it --


I know what you would say, Sir, that though I am your neighbour, this is the
first time I have been here. Don Lopez his permission let us return to our
Nativity.


Would thou were there, in thy Mother's Belly again.

But Sennor -- to Alonzo.

It needs not Sennor; I'll suppose your Compliment; you would say that your
house and all things in it are at my service: but let us proceed without his
interruption.


By no means, Sir; this Cavalier is come on purpose to perform the civilities
of his house to you.


But, good Sir --

I know what you would say, Sir.

No matter, let him go, Sir; I have long desired this opportunity to move a
Suit to you in the behalf of a Friend of mine: if you please to allow me the
hearing of it.


With all my heart, Sir.

He is a person of worth and virtue, and is infinitely ambitious of the honour
--


Of being known to me; I understand you, Sir.

If you will please to favour me with your patience, which I beg of you a
second time.


I am dumb, Sir.

This Cavalier of whom I was speaking, is in Love --

Satisfy your self, Sir, I'll not interrupt you.

Sir, I am satisfied of your promise.

If I speak one Syllable more the Devil take me: speak when you please.


I am going, Sir;

You need not speak twice to me to be silent: though I take it somewhat ill of
you to be tutored --


This eternal old Man will make me mad.

Why when do you begin, Sir? How long must a man wait for you? pray make an end
of what you have to say quickly, that I may speak in my turn too.


This Cavalier is in Love --

You told me that before, Sir; Do you speak Oracles that you require this
strict attention? either let me share the talk with you or I am gone.


Why, Sir, I am almost mad to tell you, and you will not suffer me.


Will you never have done, Sir; I must tell you, Sir, you have tatled long
enough; and 'tis now good Manners to hear me speak. Here's a Torrent of words
indeed; a very impetus dicendi, Will you never have done?


I will be heard in spite of you.

There's one Don Melchor de Guzman, a Friend and Acquaintance of mine, that is
desperately in Love with your eldest Daughter Donna Theodosia.


'Tis the sentence of a Philosopher, Loquere ut te videam; Speak that I may
know thee; now if you take away the power of speaking from me --


I'll try the Language of the Law; sure the Devil cannot out-talke that
Gibberish -- For this Don Melchor of Madrid aforesaid, as premised, I request,
move, and supplicate, that you would give, bestow, Marry, and give in Marriage,
this your Daughter aforesaid, to the Cavalier aforesaid -- not yet, thou Devil
of a Man thou shalt be silent --


At the fume time with Lopez his last speech, and after Lopez is runout Oh, how
I hate, abominate, detest and abhor, these perpetual Talkers, Disputants,
Controverters, and Duellers of the Tongue! But, on the other side, if it be not
permitted to prudent men to speak their minds, appositely, and to the purpose'
and in few words -- If, I say, the prudent must be Tongue-ty'd; then let Great
Nature be destroyed; let the order of all things be turned topsy-turvy; let the
Goose devour the Fox; let the Infants preach to their Great-Grandsires; let the
tender Lamb pursue the Woolfe, and the Sick prescribe to the Physician. Let
Fishes live upon dryland, and the Beasts of the Earth inhabit in the Water. --
Let the fearful Hare --


Help, help, murder, murder, murder. Exit Alonzo running.

There was no way but this to be rid of him.

Sir, there are some Women without in Masquerade; and, I believe, persons of
Quality, who are come to Play here.


Bring 'em in with all respect.

Cavaliers, and Ladies, you are welcome: I wish I had more company to entertain
you: -- Oh, here comes one sooner then I expected.


I have swept your Gaming-house, i'faith, Ecce signunt.

Well, here's more to be had of these Ladies, if it be your fortune.


The first Stakes I would play for, should be their Veils, and Visor Masques.


Do you think he will not know us?

If you keep your Design of passing for an African.

Well, now I shall make an absolute trial of him; for, being thus la, I
shall discover if he make Love to any of you. As for the Gallantry of his
Serenade, we will not be indebted to him, for we will make him another with our
Guitars.


I'll whisper your intention to the Servant, who shall deliver it to Don Lopez.


Sir, the Ladies have commanded me to tell you, that they are willing, before
they Play, to present you with a Dance; and to give you an Essay of their
Guitars.


They much honour me.

While you have been Singing, Lady, I have been Praying: I mean, that your Face
and Wit may not prove equal to your Dancing; for, if they be, there's a heart
gone astray to my knowledge.


If you pray against me before you have seen me, you'll curse me when you have
looked on me.


I believe I shall have cause to do so, if your Beauty be as killing as I
imagine it.


'Tis true, I have been flattered in my own Country, with an opinion of a
little handsomeness; but, how it will pass in Spain is a question.


Why Madam, Are you not of Spain?

No, Sir, of Marocco: I only came hither to see some of my Relations who are
settled here, and turned Christians, since the expulsion of my Countrymen the
Moors.


Are you then a Mohammedan?

A Musullman at your service.

A Musullwoman say you? I protest by your voice I should have taken you for a
Christian Lady of my acquaintance.


It seems you are in love then: if so, I have done with you. I dare not invade
the Dominions of another Lady; especially in a Country where my Ancestors have
been so unfortunate.


Some little liking I might have, but that was only a morning-dew, 'tis drawn
up by the Sun-shine of your Beauty: I find your African-Cupid is a much surer
Archer then ours of Europe. Yet would I could see you; one look would secure
your victory.


I'll reserve my Face to gratify your imagination with it, make what head you
please, and set it on my Shoulders.


Well, Madam, an eye, a nose, or a lip shall break no squares: the Face is but
a spans breadth of beauty; and where there is so much besides, I'll never stand
with you for that.


But, in earnest, Do you love me?

I, by Alha do I, most extremely: you have Wit in abundance, you Dance to a
Miracle, you Sing like an Angel, and I believe you look like a Cherubim.


And can you be constant to me?

By Mahomet, can I.

You Swear like a Turk, Sir; but, take heed: for our Prophet is a severe
punisher of Promise-breakers.


Your Prophet's a Cavalier; I honour your Prophet and his Law, for providing so
well for us Lovers in the other World, Black Eyes, and Fresh-Maidenheads every
day; go thy way little Mahomet, i'faith thou shalt have my good word. But, by
his favour Lady, give me leave to tell you, that we of the Uncircumcised, in a
civil way, as Lovers, have somewhat the advantage of your Musullman.


The Company are rejoined, and set to play; we must go to 'em: Adieu, and when
you have a thought to throw away, bestow it on your Servant Fatyma.


This Lady Fatyma pleases me most infinitely: now am I got among the Hamets,
the Zegrys, and the Bencerrages. Hey, What work will the Wildbloods make among
the Cids and the Bens of the Arabians!


False, or true Madam?

False as Hell; but by Heaven I'll fit him for it: Have you the high-running
Dice about you?


I got them on purpose, Madam.

You shall see me win all their Money; and when I have done, I'll return in my
own person, and ask him for the money which he promised me.


'Twill put him upon a straight to be so surprised: but, let us to the Table;
the Company stays for us.


What is the Ladies Game, Sir?

Most commonly they use Raffle. That is, to throw with three Dice, till Duplets
and a chance be thrown; and the highest Duplets wins except you throw In and
In, which is called Raffle; and that wins all.


I understand it: Come, Lady, 'tis no matter what I lose; the greatest stake,
my heart, is gone already


So, I have a good chance, two quaters and a sic.

Two sixes and a trey wins it. -- sweeps the money.

No matter; I'll try my fortune once again: what have I here two sixes and a
quater? -- an hundred Pistols on that throw.


I take you, Sir. -- Beatrix the high running Dice. --

Here Madam. --

Three fives: I have won you Sir.

I, the pox take me for it, you have won me: it would never have vexed me to
have lost my money to a Christian; but to a Pagan, an Infidel. --


Pray, Sir, leave off while you have some money.

Pox of this Lady Fatyma! Raffle thrice together, I am out of patience.


Sir, I beseech you if you will lose, to lose en Cavalier.


Tol de ra, tol de ra -- pox and curse -- tol de ra, c. What the Devil did I
mean to play with this Brunet of Afrique?


Will you be gone already Ladies?

You have won our money; but however we are acknowledging to you for the honour
of your company.


Farewell Lady Fatyma.

All the company took notice of your concernment.

'Tis no matter; I do not love to fret inwardly, as your silent losers do, and
in the mean time be ready to choke for want of vent.


Pray consider your condition a little; a younger Brother in a foreign Country,
living at a high rate, your money lost, and without hope of a supply. Now curse
if you think good.


No, now I will laugh at my self most unmercifully: for my condition is so
ridiculous that 'tis past cursing. The pleasantest part of the adventure is,
that I have promised 300 pistols to Jacinta: but there is no remedy, they are
now fair Fatyma's.


Fatyma!

I, I, a certain African Lady of my acquaintance whom you know not.


But who is here, Sir!

Madam, what happy star has conducted you hither to night! A thousand Devils of
this fortune!


I was told you had Ladies here and fiddles; so I came partly for the
divertisement, and partly out of jealousy.


Jealousy! why sure you do not think me a Pagan, an Infidel? But the company's
broke up you see. Am I to wait upon you home, or will you be so kind to take a
hard lodging with me to night?


You shall have the honour to lead me to my Father's.

No more words then, let's away to prevent discovery.


For my part I think he has a mind to be rid of you.

No: but if your Lady should want sleep, 'twould spoil the lustre of her eyes
to morrow. There were a Conquest lost.


I am a peaceable Princess, and content with my own; I mean your heart, and
purse; for the truth is, I have lost my money to night in Masquerade, and am
come to claim your promise of supplying me.


You make me happy by commanding me: to morrow morning my servant shall wait
upon you with 300 pistols.


But I left my company with promise to return to play.

Play on tick, and lose the Indies, I'll discharge it all to morrow.


To night, if you'll oblige me.

Maskall, go and bring me 300 pistols immediately.

Are you mad Sir?

Do you expostulate you rascal! how he stares; I'll be hanged if he have not
lost my gold at play: if you have, confess you had best, and perhaps I'll
pardon you; but if you do not confess I'll have no mercy: did you lose it?


Sir, 'tis not for me to dispute with you.

Why then let me tell you, you did lose it.

I, as sure as e're he had it, I dare swear for him: but commend to you for a
kind Master, that can let your Servant play off 300 pistols, without the least
sign of anger to him.


'Tis a sign he has a greater bank in store to comfort him.


Well, Madam, I must confess I have more then I will speak of at this time; but
till you have given me satisfaction --


Satisfaction; why are you offended, Sir?

Heaven! that you should not perceive it in me: I tell you I am mortally
offended with you.


Sure 'tis impossible.

You have done nothing I warrant to make a man jealous: going out a gaming in
Masquerade, at unseasonable hours, and losing your money, at play; that loss
above all provokes me.


I believe you; because she comes to you for more.

Is this the quarrel? I'll clear it immediately.

'Tis impossible you should clear it; I'll stop my ears if you but offer it.
There's no satisfaction in the point.


You'll hear me? --

To do this in the beginning of an amour, and to a jealous servant as I am; had
I all the wealth of Peru, I would not let go one Maravedis to you.


To this I answer --

Answer nothing, for it will but inflame the quarrel betwixt us: I must come to
my self by little and little; and when I am ready for satisfaction I will take
it: but at present it is not for my honour to be friends.


Pray let us neighbour Princes interpose a little.

When I have conquered, you may interpose; but at present the mediation of all
Christendom would be fruitless.


Though Christendom can do nothing with you, yet I hope an African may
prevail. Let me beg you for the sake of the Lady Fatyma.


I begin to suspect that Lady Fatyma is no better than she should be. If she be
turned Christian again I am undone.


By Alha I am afraid on it too: By Mahomet I am.

Well, well, Madam, any man may be overtaken with an oath; but I never meant to
perform it with her: you know no oaths are to be kept with Infidels. But -- --
--


No, the love you made was certainly a design of charity you had to reconcile
the two Religions. There's scarce such another man in Europe to be sent Apostle
to convert the Moor Ladies.


Faith I would rather widen their breaches then make 'em up.


I see there's no hope of a reconcilement with you; and therefore I give it
over as desperate.


You have gained your point, you have my money; and I was only angry because I
did not know 'twas you who had it.


This will not serve your turn, Sir; what I have got I have conquered from you.


Indeed you use me like one that's conquered; for you have plundered me of all
I had.


I only difarm'd you for fear you should rebel again; for if you had the
sinews of war I am sure you would be flying out.


Dare but to stay without a new Servant till I am flush again, and I will love
you, and treat you, and present you at that unreasonable rate; that I will make
you an example to all unbelieving Mistresses.


Well, I will try you once more; but you must make haste then, that we may be
within our time; methinks our love is drawn out so subtle already, that 'tis
near breaking.


I will have more care of it on my part, than the kindred of an old Pope have
to preserve him.


Adieu; for this time I wipe off your score.
Till you're caught tripping in some new amour.

You have used me very kindly, Sir, I thank you.

You deserved it for not having a lye ready for my occasions. A good Servant
should be no more without it, than a Soldier without his arms. But prithee
advise me what's to be done to get Jacinta.


You have lost her, or will lose her by your submitting: if we men could but
learn to value our selves, we should soon take down our Mistresses from all
their Altitudes, and make 'em dance after our Pipes, longer perhaps than we had
a mind to it. -- But I must make haste, or I shall lose Don Melchor. --


Call Bellamy, we'll both be present at thy enterprise: then I'll once more to
the Gaming-house with my small stock, for my last refuge: if I win, I have
wherewithal to mollify Jacinta.

If I throw out I'll bear it off with huffing;
And snatch the money like a Bulli-Ruffin.

HEre comes one, and in all probability it must be Don Melchor going to
Theodosia.


Stand close, and you shall see me serve the Writ upon him.


Now, Maskall.

I stayed here, Sir, by express order from the Lady Aurelia, to deliver you
this Note; and to desire you from her to meet her immediately in the Garden.


Do you hear friend!

Not a syllable more, Sir, I have performed my orders.

He's gone; and 'tis in vain for me to look after him. What envious Devil has
discovered to Aurelia that I am in Town? it must be Don Lopez, who to advance
his own pretentensions to her, has endeavoured to ruin mine.


It works rarely.

But I am resolved to see Aurelia; if it be but to defeat him.


Let's make haste after him; I long to see the end of this adventure.


Sir, I think I see some women coming yonder.

Well; I'll leave you to your adventures; while I prosecute my own.


I warrant you have made an assignation to instruct some Lady in the
Mathematics.


I'll not tell you my design; because if it does not succeed you shall not
laugh at me.


Let us withdraw a little, and see if they will come this way.


We are right, Madam, 'tis certainly your Englishman, and his Servant with him.
But why this second trial, when you engaged to break with him, if he failed in
the first?


'Tis true, he has been a little inconstant; choleric, or so.


And it seems you are not contented with those vices; but are searching him for
more. This is the folly of a bleeding Gamester, who will obstinately pursue a
losing hand.


On the other side you would have me throw up my Cards before the game be lost:
let me make this one more trial, when he has money whether he will give it me,
and then if he fails --


You'll forgive him again.

He's already in Purgatory; but the next offence shall put him in the pit past
all redemption; prithee sing to draw him nearer: Sure he cannot know me in this
disguise.


Make haste then; for I have more Irons in the fire: when I have done with you
I have another assignation of my Lady Theodosia's to Don Melchor.

Calm was the Even, and clear was the Sky,
And the new budding flowers did spring,
When all alone went Amyntas and I
To hear the sweet Nightingale sing;
I sate, and he laid him down by me;
But scarcely his breath he could draw;
For when with a fear he began to draw near,
He was dashed with A ha ha ha ha!
He blushed to himself, and lay still for a while,
And his modesty curbed his desire;
But straight I convinced all his fear with a smile,
Which added new flames to his fire.
O Sylvia, said he, you are cruel,
To keep your poor Lover in awe;
Tken once more he pressed with his hand to my breast,
But was dashed with A ha ha ha ha.
I knew 'twas his passion that caused all his fear;
And therefore I pitied his case:
I whispered him softly there's no body near,
And laid my cheek close to his face:
But as he grew bolder and bolder,
A Shepherd came by us and saw;
And just as our bliss we began with a kiss,
He laughd out with A ha ha ha ha.

If you dare be the Sylvia, Lady, I have brought you a more confident Amyntas,
than that bashful Gentleman in your Song -- -


Hold, hold; Sir, I am only an Ambassadress sent you from a Lady, I hope you
will not violate the Laws of Nations.


I was only searching for your Letters of Credence: but methinks with that
beauty you look more like a Herald that comes to denounce war to all mankind.
--


One of the Ladies in the Masque to night has taken a liking to you; and sent
you by me this purse of gold, in recompense of that she saw you lose.


And she expects in return of it, that I should wait on her; I'll do it, Where
lives she? I am desperately in love with her.


Why, Can you love her unknown?

I have a Banque of Love, to supply every ones occasions; some for her, some
for another, and some for you; charge what you will upon me, I pay all at
sight, and without questioning who brought the Bill.


Heyday, You dispatch your Mistresses as fast, as if you meant to o're-run all
Woman-kind: sure you aim at the Universal-Monarchy.


Now I think on it, I have a foolish fancy to send thy Lady a taste of my love
by thee.


'Tis impossible your love should be so humble, to descend to a Mulatta.


One would think so, but I cannot help it. Gad, I think the reason is because
there's something more of sin in thy colour then in ours. I know not what's the
matter, but a Turky-Cock is not more provoked at red, then I bristle at the
sight of black. Come, be kinder to me. Young, and slip an opportunity? 'Tis an
Evening lost out of your life.


These fine things you have said over a thousand times; your cold Compliment's
the cold Pie of love which you serve up to every new guest whom you invite.


Come; because thou art very moving, here's part of the Gold, which thou
brought'st to corrupt me for thy Lady: truth is, I had promised a sum to a
Spanish Lady -- but thy eyes have allured it from me.


You'll repent to morrow.

Let to morrow starve: or provide for himself, as to night has done: to morrow
is a cheat in love, and I will not trust it.


I, but Heaven that sees all things --

Heaven that sees all things will say nothing: that is, all eyes and no tongue;
Et la lune les estoiles, -- you know the Song.


A poor slave as I am --

It has been always my humour to love downward. I love to stoop to my prey,
and to have it in my power to Sows at when I please. When a man comes to a
great Lady, he is fain to approach her with fear and reverence; methinks
there's something of Godliness in it.


Yet I cannot believe, but the meanness of my habit must needs scandalize you.


I'll tell thee my friend and so forth, that I exceedingly honour course
Linen; 'tis as proper sometimes in an under Garment, as a course Towel is to
rub and scrub me.


Now I am altogether of the other side, I can love no where but above me:
methinks the rattling of a Coach and six, sounds more eloquently, then the best
Harangue a Wit could make me.


Do you make no more esteem of a Wit then?

His commendations serve only to make others have a mind to me; He does but
say Grace to me like a Chaplain; and like him is the last that shall fall on.
He ought to get no more by it, then a poor Silk-weaver does by the Ribbon
which he works, to make a Gallant fine.


Then what is a Gentleman to hope from you?

To be admitted to pass my time with, while a better comes: to be the lowest
step in my Stair-case, for a Knight to mount upon him, and a Lord upon him, and
a Marquess upon him, and a Duke upon him, till I get as high as I can climb.


For ought I see, the Great Ladies have the Appetites which you Slaves should
have; and you Slaves the Pride which ought to be in Ladies. For, I observe,
that all women of your condition are like the women of the Play-house, still
Piquing at each other, who shall go the best Dressed, and in the Richest Habits:
till you work up one another by your high flying, as the Heron and Jerfalcon
do. If you cannot outshine your fellow with one Lover, you fetch her up with
another: and in short, all you get by it is only to put Finery out of
countenance; and to make the Ladies of Quality go plain, because they will
avoid the Scandal of your bravery.


Madam, come away; I hear company in the Garden.


You are not going?

Yes, to cry out a Rape if you follow me.

However, I am glad you have left your treasure behind you: farewell Fairy.


Farewell Changeling -- Come Beatrix.

Do you know how you came by this money, Sir? you think, I warrant, that it
came by fortune.


No, Sirrah, I know it came by my own industry. Did not I come out diligently
to meet this gold, in the very way it was to come? what could Fate do less for
me? they are such thoughtless, and undesigning rogues as you, that make a
drudge of poor providence, and set it a shifting for you. Give me a brave
fellow like my self; that if you throw him down into the world, lights every
where upon his legs, and helps himself without being beholding to Fate, that is
the Hospital of fools.


But after all your jollity, what think you if it was Jacinta that gave it you
in this disguise? I am sure I heard her call Beatrix as she went away.


Umh! thou awaken'st a most villainous apprehension in me! methought indeed I
knew the voice; but the face was such an evidence against it! if it were so she
is lost for ever.


And so is Beatrix!


Now could I cut my throat for madness.


Now could I break my neck for despair; if I could find a precipice absolutely
to my liking.


'Tis in vain to consider on it. There's but one way; go you Maskal, and find
her out, and invent some excuse for me, and be sure to beg leave I may come and
wait upon her with the gold before she sleeps.


In the mean time you'll be thinking at your lodging.


But make haste then to relieve me; for I think over all my thoughts in half an
hour.


Hanged, now I think on it, I shall be but melancholic at my Lodging, I'll go
pass my hour at the Gaminghouse, and make use of this money while I have tools,
to win more to it. Stay, let me see, I have the box and throw. My Don he sets
me ten pistols; I nick him: ten more, I sweep them too. Now in all reason he is
nettled, and sets me twenty: I win them too. Now he kindles, and butters me
with forty. They are all my own: in fine, he is vehement, and bleeds on to
fourscore or an hundred; and I not willing to tempt fortune, come away a
moderate winner of 200 pistols.

The Garden door opens! How now, Aurelia and Camilla in expectation of Don
Melchor at the Garden door; I'll away lest I prevent the design, and within
this half hour come sailing back with full pockets, as wantonly as a laden
Galleon from the Indies.


But dost thou think the Englishman can keep his promise? for I confess I
furiously desire to see the Idea of Don Melchor.


But, Madam, if you should see him, it will not be he, but the Devil in his
likeness; and then why should you desire it?


In effect 'tis a very dark Enigma; and one must be very spiritual to
understand it. But be what it will, body or fantome, I am resolved to meet it.


Can you do it without fear?


No; I must avow it, I am furiously fearful; but yet I am resolved to sacrifice
all things to my love. Therefore let us pass over that chapter.


Do you hear, Madam, there's one treading already; how if it be he?


If it be he; that is to say his Specter, that is to say his Fantome, that is
to say his Idea, that is to say, He and not he.


Ah, Madam, 'tis he himself; but he's as big again as he used to be, with eyes
like sawcers. -- I'll save my self


Oh heaven! humanity is not able to support it. [running.


Dear Aurelia, what mean you?


The Tempter has imitated his voice too; avoid, avoid Specter.


If he should find me under the table now!


Is it thus my Dear that you treat your Servant?


I am not thy Dear; I renounce thee, spirit of darkness.


This Spirit of darkness is come to see an Angel of light by her command; and
to assure her of his constancy, that he will be hers eternally.


Away Infernal, 'tis not thee, 'tis the true Don Melchor that I would see.


Hell and Furies.


Heaven and Angels! Ah --


This is a riddle past my finding out, to send for me, and then to shun me; but
here's one shall resolve it for me: Camilla, what dost thou there?


Help, help, I shall be carried away, bodily.


Why Aurelia, Camilla! they are both run out of hearing! This amazes me; what
can the meaning of it be? Sure she has heard of my unfathfulness, and was
resolved to punish me by this contrivance! to put an affront upon me by this
abrupt departure, as I did on her by my seeming absence.


Don Melchor! is it you my Love that have frighted Aurelia so terribly?


Alas, Madam, I know not; but coming hither by your appointment, and thinking
my self secure in the night without disguise, perhaps it might work upon her
fancy, because she thought me absent.


Since 'tis so unluckily fallen out that she knows you are at Madrid, it can no
longer be kept a secret; therefore you must now pretend openly to me, and run
the risque of a denial from my Father.


O, Madam, there's no question but he'll refuse me: for alas, what is it he can
see in me worthy of that honour? or if he should be so partial to me, as some in
the world are, to think me valiant, learned, and not altogether a fool, yet my
want of fortune would weigh down all.


When he has refused you his consent, I may with Justice dispose of my self;
and that, while you are constant, shall never be to any but your self: in
witness of which, accept this Diamond as a Pledge of my hearts firmness to you.


Madam, Your Father is coming this way.


'Tis no matter; do not stir; since he must know you are returned, let him now
see you.


Daughter, What make you here at this unseasonable hour?


Sir, --


I know what you would say, That you heard a noise, and ran hither to see what
it might be -- Bless us! Who is this with you?


'Tis your servant Don Melchor; just returned from St. Sebastians.


But, Sir, I thought you had been upon the Sea for Flanders.


I had so designed it.


But, Why came you back from St. Sebastians?


As for that, Sir, 'tis not material --


An unexpected Law Suit has called him back from St. Sebastians.


And, How fares my Son-in-Law that lives there?


In Catholic health, Sir.


Have you brought no Letters from him?


I had, Sir, but I was set on by the way, by Pickerons: and, in spite of my
resistance, robbed, and my Portmantue taken from me.


And this was that which he was now desiring me to excuse to you.


If my Credit, Friends, or Counsel can do you any service in your Suit, I hope
you will command them freely.


When I have dispatch'd some private business I shall not fail to trouble you;
till then, humbly kisses your hands, the most obliged of your servants --


Daughter, now this Cavalier is gone, What occasion brought you out so late? I
know what you would say, That it is Melancholy; a Tincture of the
Hypocondriaque you mean: but, What cause have you for this Melancholy? give me
your hand, and answer me without Ambages or Ambiguities.


He will find out I have given away my Ring -- I must prevent him -- Sir, I am
ashamed to confess it to you; but, in hope of your indulgence, I have lost the
Table Diamond you gave me.


You would say, The fear of my displeasure has caused this perturbation in you;
well, do not disquiet your self too much, you say 'tis gone; I say so too. 'Tis
stolen; and that by some Thief I take it: but, I will go and consult the
Astrologer immediately.


What have I done? to avoid one inconvenience, I have run into another: this
Devil of an Astrologer will discover that Don Melchor has it.


When did you lose this Diamond? the minute and second I should know; but the
hour will serve for the Degree ascending.


Sir, the precise time I know not; but, it was betwixt six and seven this
evening, as near as I can guess.


'Tis enough; by all the Stars I'll have it for you: Therefore go in, and
suppose it on your finger.


I'll watch you at a distance, Sir, that my Englishman may have wherewithal to
answer you -- --


This melancholy wherewith my Daughter labours, is -- a -- I know what I
would say, is a certain species of the Hysterical Diseases; or a certain
motion, caused by a certain appetite, which at a certain time heaves in her,
like a certain motion of an Earthquake --


This is the place, and very near the time that Theodosia appoints her meeting
with Don Melchor. He is this night otherwise disposed of with Aurelia: 'Tis but
trying my fortune to tell her of his Infidelity, and my love. If she yields she
makes me happy; if not, I shall be sure Don Melchor has not planted the Arms
of Spain in the Fort before me. However, I'll push my Fortune as sure as I am
an Englishman.


Sennor Ingles, I know your voice, though I cannot perfectly discern you.


How the Devil come he to cross me?


I was just coming to have asked another Favour of you.


Without Ceremony command me, Sir.


My Daughter Theodosia has lost a fair Diamond from her finger, the time
betwixt six and seven this evening; now I desire you, Sir, to erect a Scheme
for it, and if it be lost, or stolen, to restore it to me -- This is all, Sir.


There is no end of this old Fellow; thus will he bait me from day to day,
till my ignorance be found out. --


Now is he casting a Figure by the Art of Memory, and making a Judgment of it
to himself. This Astrology is a very mysterious speculation --


'Tis a madness for me to hope I can deceive him longer. Since then he must
know I am no Astrologer, I'll discover it my self to him, and blush once for
all --


Well, Sir, and what do the Stars hold forth? What says nimble Master Mercury
to the matter?


Sir, not to keep you longer in ignorance, I must ingeniously declare to you
that I am not the man for whom you take me. Some smattering in Astrology I
have; which my Friends, by their indiscretion, have blown abroad, beyond my
intentions. But, you are not a person to be imposed on like the vulgar:
therefore, to satisfy you in one word, my skill goes not far enough to give
you knowledge of what you desire from me.


You have said enough, Sir, to persuade me of your Science, if Fame had not
published it, yet this very humility of yours were enough to confirm me in the
belief of it.


Death, you make me mad, Sir: Will you have me Swear? As I am a Gentleman, a
man of the Town, one who wears good Clothes, Eats, Drinks, and Wenches
abundantly; I am a damned ignorant, and senseless Fellow.


How now Gentlewoman -- What, Are you going to relief by Moonshine?


I was going on a very charitable Office, to help a Friend that was gravelled
in a very doubtful business.


Some good news, Fortune, I beseech thee.


But now I have found this learned Gentleman, I shall make bold to propound a
Question to him from a Lady.


I will have my own Question first resolved.


O, Sir, 'tis from a Lady --


If you please, Sir, I'll tell it in your ear -- -- My Lady has given Don
Melchor the Ring; in whose company her Father found her but just now at the
Garden door.


Come to me to morrow, and you shall receive an answer --


Your Servant, Sir, -- --


Sir, I shall take it very unkindly if you satisfy any other, and leave me in
this perplexity.


Sir, if my knowledge were according --


No more of that, Sir, I beseech you.


Perhaps I may know something by my Art concerning it; but, for your quiet, I
wish you would not press me.


Do you think I am not Master of my Passions?


Since you will needs know what I would willingly have concealed, the person
who has your Diamond, is he whom you saw last in your Daughters company.


You would say 'tis Don Melchor de Guzman. Who, the Devil would have suspected
him of such an action? But he is of a decayed Family, and poverty it seems has
enforced him to it: now I think on it better he has even stolen it for a fee to
bribe his Lawyer; to requite a lye with a theft; I'll seek him out, and tell
him part of my mind before I sleep.


So, once more I am at liberty: but this Astrology is so troublesome a Science
-- would I were well rid on it.


Astrology does he say? O Cavalier is it you; not finding you at home I came
on purpose to seek you out: I have a small request to the Stars by your
mediation.


Sir, for pity let 'em shine in quiet a little; for what for Ladies and their
Servants, and younger Brothers, they scarce get a Holy-day in a twelvemoneth.


Pray pardon me, if I am a little curious of my destiny, since all my happiness
depends on your answer.


Well, Sir, what is it you expect?


To know whether my love to a Lady will be successful.


'Tis Aurelia he means --


But what hope for me?


The Stars have partly assured me you shall be happy, if you acquaint her with
your passion, and with the double dealing of your friend, who is false to her.


You speak like an Oracle. But I have engaged my promise to that friend to
serve him in his passion to my Mistress.


We English seldom make such scruples; Women are not comprised in our Laws of
friendship: they are ferae naturae; our common game, like Hare and Patridge:
every man has equal right to them, as he has to the Sun and Elements.


Must I then betray my friend?


In that case my friend is a Turk to me, if he will be so barbarous as to
retain two women to his private use; I will be factious for all distressed
Damsels; who would much rather have their cause tried by a full Jury, then a
single Judge.


Well, Sir, I will take your counsel; and if I err, the fault be on love and
you. --


Were it not for love I would run out of the Town, that's the short on it; for I
have engaged my self in so many promises for the Sun and Moon, and those little
minc'd-meats of 'em, that I must hide before my day-of-payment comes. In the
mean time I forget Theodosia; but now I defy the Devil to hinder me.


What rudeness is this?


Madam Aurelia, is it you?


Monsieur Bellamy!


The same, Madam.


My Uncle told me he left you here: and indeed I came hither to complain of
you: for you have treated me so inhumanely that I have some reason to resent
it.


What occasion can I have given you for a complaint?


Don Melchor, as I am informed by my Uncle, is effectively at Madrid: so that
it was not his Idea, but himself in person whom I saw: and since you knew this,
why did you conceal it from me?


When I spoke with you I knew it not: but I discovered it in the erecting of my
figure. Yet if instead of his Idea I constrained himself to come, in spite of
his resolution to remain concealed, I think I have shown a greater effect of my
art then what I promised.


I render my self to so convincing an argument: but by over-hearing a discourse
just now betwixt my Cousin Theodosia and her Maid, I find that he has concealed
himself upon her account, which has given me jealousy to the last point; for
to avow an incontestable truth, my Cousin is furiously handsome.


Madam, Madam, trust not your ears too far; she talked on purpose that you
might hear her: but I assure you the true cause of Don Melchor's concealment,
was not love of her, but jealousy of you: he staid in private to observe your
actions: build upon it Madam, he is inviolably yours.


Then will he sacrifice my Cousin to me?


'Tis furiously true Madam.


O most agreeable assurance!


Albricias Madam, for my good news; Don Melchor is coming this way; I know him
by his voice; but he is in company with another person.


It will not be convenient to give him any umbrage by seeing me with another
person; therefore I will go before; do you stay here and conduct him to my
Apartment. Good-night Sir.


I have promised Don Lopez he shall possess her; and I have promised her she
shall possess Don Melchor: 'tis a little difficult I confess, as to the
Matrimonial part of it: but if Don Melchor will be civil to her, and she be
civil to Don Lopez, my credit is safe without the benefit of my Clergy. But
all this nothing to Theodosia.


Don Melchor, a word in private.


Your pleasure, Lady; Sir, I will wait on you immediately.


I am sent to you from a fair Lady, who bears you no ill will. You may guess
whom I mean.


Not by my own merits, but by knowing whom you serve: but I confess I wonder at
her late strange usage when she fled from me.


That was only a mistake; but I have now, by her command, been in a thousand
places in quest of you.


You overjoy me.


And where amongst the rest do you think I have been looking you?


Pray refresh my memory.


In that same street, by that same shop; you know where by a good token.


By what token?


Just by that shop where, out of your nobleness, you promised me a new Silk
Gown.


O, now I understand you.


Not that I press you to a performance --


Take this, and please your self in the choice of it --


Nay, dear Sir, now you make me blush; in faith I -- am ashamed -- I swear 'tis
only because I would keep something for your sake. -- But my Lady expects you
immedeiately in her Apartment.


I'll wait on her if I can possibly -- I can prevail with Don Alonzo for his
Daughter, then will I again consider, which of the Ladies best deserves me. --

Sir, I beg your pardon for this rudeness in leaving you.


I cannot possibly resolve with my self to tell him openly he is a thief; but
I'll guild the pill for him to swallow.


I believe he has discovered our amour: how he surveys me for a Son in law!


Sir, I am sorry for your sake, that true nobility is not always accompanied
with riches to support it in it's lustre.


You have a just exception against the Caprichiousness of destiny; yet if I
were owner of any noble qualities, (which I am not) I should not much esteem
the goods of fortune.


But pray conceive me, Sir, your father did not leave you flourishing in
wealth.


Only a very fair Seat in Andalusia, with all the pleasures imaginable about
it: that alone, were my poor deserts according, which I confess they are not,
were enough to make a woman happy in it.


But give me leave to come to the point I beseech you, Sir. I have lost a Jewel
which I value infinitely, and I hear it is in your possession: but I accuse
your wants, not you, for it.


Your Daughter is indeed a Jewel, but she were not lost, were she in possession
of a man of parts.


A precious Diamond Sir. --


But a man of honour, Sir.


I know what you would say, Sir, that a man of honour is not capable of an
unworthy action; but therefore I do not accuse you of the theft, I suppose the
Jewel was only put into your hands.


By honourable ways I assure you Sir.


Sir, Sir, will you restore my Jewel?


Will you please, Sir, to give me leave to be the unworthy possessor of her? I
know how to use her with that respect. --


I know what you would say, Sir, but if it belongs to our Family; otherwise I
assure you it were at your service.


As it belongs to your Family I covet it; not that I plead my own deserts, Sir.


Sir, I know your deserts; but, I protest I cannot part with it: for, I must
tell you, this Diamond Ring was originally my Great Grandfathers.


A Diamond Ring, Sir, do you mean? --


By your patience, Sir, when I have done you may speak your pleasure. I only
lent it to my Daughter; but, how she lost it, and how it came upon your Finger,
I am yet in tenebris.


Sir --


I know it, Sir; but spare your self the trouble, I'll speak for you; you would
say you had it from some other hand; I believe it, Sir.


But, Sir --


I warrant you, Sir, I'll bring you off without your speaking; from another hand
you had it; and now Sir, as you say, Sir, and as I am saying for you, Sir, you
are loath to part with it.


Good Sir, -- let me --


I understand you already, Sir, that you have taken a fancy to it, and would
buy it; but, to that I answer as I did before, that it is a Relic of my
family: now, Sir, if you can urge ought farther, you have liberty to speak
without interruption.


This Diamond you speak on I confess --


But, What need you confess, Sir, before you are accused?


You promised you would hear me in my turn, Sir, but --


But, as you were saying, it is needless, because I have already spoken for
you.


The truth is, Sir, I was too presumptuous to take this Pledge from Theodosia
without your knowledge; but, you will pardon the invincible necessity, when I
tell you --


You need not tell me, I know your necessity was the reason of it, and that
place and opportunity have caused your error.


This is the goodest old man I ever knew; he prevents me in my motion for his
Daughter. Since, Sir, you know the cause of my errors, and are pleased to lay
part of the blame upon Youth and Opportunity; I beseech you favour me so far,
to accept me as fair Theodosia already has --.


I conceive you, Sir, that I would accept of your excuse: why restore the
Diamond and 'tis done.


More joyfully then I received it: and with it I beg the honour to be received
by you as your Son in Law.


My Son in Law! this is the most pleasant Proposition I ever heard.


I am proud you think it so; but, I protest I think not I deserve this honour.


Nor I, I assure you, Sir; marry my daughter -- ha, ha, ha.


But, Sir --.


I know what you would say, Sir, that there is too much hazard in the
Profession of a Thief, and therefore you would Marry my Daughter to become
rich, without venturing your Neck for it. I beseech you, Sir, steal on, be
apprehended, and if you please, be hanged, it shall make no breach betwixt us.
For my part, I'll keep your Counsel, and so good night, Sir.


Is the Devil in this old man, first to give me occasion to confess my Love,
and, when he knew it, to promise he would keep my Counsel? But, Who are these?
I'll not be seen; but to my old appointment with Theodosia, and desire her to
unriddle it --


But, Madam, Do you take me for a man of Honour?


No.


Why there's it; if you had, I would have sworn that my Master has neither done
nor intended you any injury; I suppose you'll grant he knew you in your
disguise?


Nay, to know her, and use her so, is an aggravation of his Crime.


Unconscionable Beatrix! Would you two have all the Carnival to your selves? He
knew you, Madam, and was resolved to countermine you in all your Plots. But,
when he saw you so much piqued, he was too good natured to let you sleep in
wrath, and sent me to you to disabuse you: for, if the business had gone on
till to morrow, when Lent begins, you would have grown so peevish (as all good
Catholics are with fasting) that the quarrel would never have been ended.


Well; this mollifies a little: I am content he shall see me.


But, that you may be sure he knew you, he will bring the Certificate of the
Purse along with him.


I shall be glad to find him innocent.


No mortal man ever threw out so often. It could not be me, it must be the
Devil that did it: he took all the Chances, and changed 'em after I had thrown
'em: but, I'll be even with him; for, I'll never throw one of his Dice more.


Madam, 'tis certainly my Master; and he is so zealous to make his peace, that
he could not stay till I called him to you -- Sir.


Sirrah, I'll teach you more manners then to leave me another time: you Rogue,
you have lost me two hundred Pistols, you and the Devil your accomplice; you,
by leaving me to myself, and he by tempting me to Play it off.


Is the wind in that door? here's like to be fine doings.


Oh mischief! am I fallen into her ambush? I must face it out with another
quarrel. --


Your man has been treating your Accommodation; 'tis half made already.


I, On your part it may be.


He says you knew me.


Yes; I do know you so well, that my poor heart aches for it: I was going to bed
without telling you my mind; but, upon consideration I am come.


To bring the Money with you.


To declare my grievances, which are great, and many.


Well, for impudence, let thee alone.


As in the first place --


I'll hear no Grievances; Where's the Money?


I; keep to that, Madam.


Do you think me a person to be so used?


We will not quarrel; Where's the Money?


By your favour we will quarrel.


Money, Money --


I am angry, and can hear nothing.


Money, Money, Money, Money.


Do you think it a reasonable thing to put on two disguises in a Night, to
tempt a man? (Help me, Maskal, for I want Arguments abominably) I thank Heaven
I was never so barbarously used in all my life.


He begins to anger me in good earnest.


A thing so much against the Rules of Modesty: so undecent a thing.


I, so undecent a thing: nay, now I do not wonder at my self for being angry.
And then to wonder I should love her in those disguises? to quarrel at the
natural desires of humane kind, assaulted by powerful temptations; I am enraged
at that --


Heyday! you had best quarrel too for my bringing you the Money!


I have a grudging to you for it: (Maskall, the Money, Maskall; now help or we
are gone.)


Would she offer to bring Money to you? first to affront your poverty -- --


I; to affront my poverty. But, that's no great matter; and then --


And then, to bring you Money (I stick fast, Sir.)


(Forward, you Dog, and invent, or I'll cut your throat;) and then as I was
saying, to bring me Money --


Which is the greatest and most sweet of all temptations; and to think you
could resist it: being also aggravated by her handsomeness who brought it.


Resist it? no; I would she would understand it, I know better what belongs to
flesh and blood then so.


This is plain confederacy; I smoke it; he came on purpose to quarrel with
you; break first with him and prevent it.


If it be come to that once, the Devil take the hindmost; I'll not be last in
love; for that will be a dishonour to my Sex.


And then --


Hold Sir; there needs no more: you shall fall out; and I'll gratify you with
a new occasion: I only tried you in hope you would be false; and rather than
fail of my design, brought gold to bribe you to it.


As people when they have an ill bargain, are content to lose by it, that they
may get it off their hands.


Beatrix, while our principals are engaged, I hold it not for our honour to
stand idle.


With all my heart: please you let us draw off to some other ground.


I dare meet you on any Spot, but one.


I think we shall do well to put it to an issue; this is the last time you
shall ever be troubled with my addresses.


The favour had been greater to have spared this too.


Beatrix, let us dispatch; or they'll break off before us.


Break as fast as thou wilt, I am as brittle as thou art for thy heart.


Because I will absolutely break off with you, I will keep nothing that belongs
to you: therefore take back your Picture, and your Handkerchief.


I have nothing of yours to keep; therefore take back your liberal promises.
Take 'em in imagination.


Not to be behind hand with you in your frumps, I give you back your Purse of
Gold: take you that -- in imagination.


To conclude with you, take back your oaths and protestations; they are never
the worse for the wearing I assure you: therefore take 'em, spick and span new,
for the use of your next Mistress.


Beatrix, follow your leader; here's the sixpenny whittle you gave me, with the
Mutton haft: I can spare it, for knives are of little use in Spain.


There's your Cizars with the stinking brass chain to 'em: 'tis well there was
no love betwixt us; for they had been too dull to cut it.


There's the dandriffe Comb you lent me.


There's your ferret Ribbaning for garters.


I would never have come so near as to have taken 'em from you.


For your Letter I have it not about me; but upon reputation I'll burn it.


And for yours, I have already put it to a fitting employment. -- Courage, Sir;
how goes the battle on your wing?


Just drawing off on both sides. Adieu Spain.


Farewell old England.


Come away in Triumph; the day's your own Madam.


I'll bear you off upon my shoulders, Sir; we have broke their hearts.


Let her go first then; I'll stay, and keep the honour of the Field.


I'll not retreat, if you stay till midnight.


Are you sure then we have done loving?


Yes, very sure; I think so.


'Tis well you are so; for otherwise I feel my stomach a little mawkish. I
should have doubted another sit of love were coming up.


No, no; your inconstancy secures you enough for that.


That's it which makes me fear my own returning: nothing vexes me, but that you
should part with me so slightly, as though I were not worth your keeping; well,
'tis a sign you never loved me.


'Tis the least of your care whether I did or did not: it may be it had been
more for the quiet of my self, if I -- but 'tis no matter, I'll not give you
that satisfaction.


But what's the reason you will not give it me?


For the reason that we are quite broke off.


Why are we quite broke off?


Why are we not?


Well, since 'tis past, 'tis past; but a pox of all foolish quarrelling for my
part.


And a mischief of all foolish disguisements for my part.


But if it were to do again with another Mistress, I would even plainly confess
I had lost my money.


And if I had to deal with another Servant, I would learn more wit then to
tempt him in disguises: for that's to throw a Venice-glass to the ground, to
try if it would not break.


If it were not to please you, I see no necessity of our parting.


I protest I do it only out of complaisance to you.


But if I should play the fool and ask you pardon, you would refuse it.


No, never submit, for I should spoil you again with pardoning you.


Do you hear this, Beatrix? they are just upon the point of accommodation; we
must make haste or they'll make a peace by themselves; and exclude us from the
Treaty.


Declare your self the Aggressor then; and I'll take you into mercy.


The worst that you can say of me is that I have loved you thrice over.


The prime Articles between Spain and England are sealed; for the rest
concerning a more strict alliance; if you please we'll dispute them in the
Garden.


But in the first place let us agree on the Article of Navigation I beseech
you.


These Leagues offensive and defensive will be too strict for us, Maskall: a
Treaty of commerce will serve our turn.


With all my heart; and when our loves are veering, We'll make no words, but
fall to privateering.


TIs true, if he had continued constant to you, I should have thought my self
obliged in honour to be his friend; but I could no longer suffer him to abuse a
person of your worth and beauty with a feigned affection.


But is it possible Don Melchor should be false to love? I'll be sworn I did
not imagine such a treachery could have been in nature; especially to a Lady
who had so obliged him.


'Twas this, Madam, which gave me the coufidence to wait upon at an hour which
would be otherwise unseasonable.


You are the most obliging person in the world.


But to clear it to you that he is false; he is at this very minute at an
assignation with your Cousin in the Garden; I am sure he was endeavouring it
not an hour ago.


I swear this Evenings Air begins to incommode me extremely with a cold; but
yet in hope of detecting this perjured man I am content to stay abroad.


But withal you must permit me tell you, Madam, that it is but just I should
have some share in a heart which I endeavour to redeem: in the Law of Arms you
know that they who pay the ransom have right to dispose of the prisoner.


The prize is so very inconsiderable that 'tis not worth the claiming.


If I thought the boon were small, I would not importune my Princess with the
asking it: but since my life depends upon the grant --


Mam, I must needs tell your Ladyship that Don Lopez has deserved you: for he has
acted all along like a Cavalier; and more for your interest than his own;
besides Mam Don Melchor is as poor as he is false: for my part I shall ne'er
endure to call him Master.


Don Lopez go along with me, I can promise nothing, but I swear I will do my
best to disengage my heart from this furious tender which I have for him.


If I had been a man I could never have forsaken you: Ah those languishing
casts, Mam; and that pouting lip of your Ladyship, like a Cherry-bough weighed
down with the weight of fruit.


And that sigh too I think is not altogether disagreeaable: but something
charmante and mignonne.


Well, Don Lopez, you'll be but too happy.


If I were once possessor --


O we are surprised.


Fear nothing, Madam, I think I know 'em: Don Lopez?


Our famous Astrologer, how come you here!


I am infinitely happy to have met you with Donna Aurelia, that you may do me
the favour to satisfy this Lady of a truth which I can scarce persuade her to
believe.


I am glad our concernments are so equal: for I have the like favour to ask
from Donna Theodosia.


Don Lopez is too noble to be refused any thing within my power; and I am ready
to do him any service after I have asked my Cousin if ever Don Melchor
pretended to her?


'Tis the very question which I was furiously resolved to have asked of you.


I must confess he has made some professions to me: and withal I will
acknowledge my own weakness so far as to tell you I have given way he should
often visit me when the world believed him absent.


O Cavalier Astrologer; how have you betrayed me! did you not assure me that Don
Melchor's tender and inclination was for me only?


I had it from his Star, Madam, I do assure you, and if that twinkled false, I
cannot help it: The truth is there's no trusting the Planet of an inconstant
man: his was moving to you when I looked on it, and if since it has changed the
course, I am not to be blamed for it.


Now, Madam, the truth is evident. And for this Cavalier he might easily be
deceived in Melchor, for I dare affirm it to you both, he never knew to which
of you he was most inclined: for he visited one, and writ letters to the other.


Then Madam I must claim your promise: (since I have discovered to you that Don
Melchor is unworthy of your favours) that you would make me happy, who amongst
my many imperfections can never be guilty of such a falsehood.


If I have been deceived in Melchor whom I have known so long, you cannot
reasonably expect I should trust you at a days acquaintance.


For that, Madam, you may know as much of me in a day as you can in all your
life: all my humours circulate like my blood, at farthest within 24 hours. I am
plain and true like all my Countrymen; you see to the bottom of me as easily as
you do to the gravel of a clear stream in Autumn.


You plead so well, Sir, that I desire you would speak for me too: my cause is
the same with yours, only it has not so good an Advocate.


Since I cannot make my self happy, I will have the glory to felicitate
another: and therefore I declare I will reward the fidelity of Don Lopez.


All that I can say at present is, that I will never be Don Melchors: the rest
time and your service must make out.


I have all I can expect, to be admitted as eldest Servant; as preferment falls
I hope you will remember my seniority.


Mam, Don Melchor.


Cavaliers retire a little; we shall see to which of us he will make his Court.


I thought you had been a bed before this time.


Fair Aurelia, this is a blessing beyond expectation to see you again so soon.


What important business brought you hither?


Only to make my peace with you before I slept. You know you are the Saint to
whom I pay my devotions.


And yet it was beyond your expectances to meet me? This is furiously
incongruous.


Don Melchor, whither were you bound so late?


What shall I say? I am so confounded that I know not to which of them I should
excuse my self.


Pray answer me truly to one question: did you never make any addresses to my
Cousin.


Fie, fie, Madam, there's a question indeed.


How Monster of ingratitude, can you deny the Declaration of your passion to
me?


I say nothing Madam.


Which of us is it for whom you are concerned?


For that Madam, you must excuse me; I have more discretion then to boast a
Ladies favour.


Did you counterfeit an address to me?


Still I say nothing, Madam; but I will satisfy either of you in private; for
these matters are too tender for public discourse.


This is strange!


Ladies, we would not have disturbed you, but as we were walking to the Garden
door, it opened suddenly against us, and we confusedly saw by Moon-light, some
persons entering, but who they were we know not.


You had best retire into the Garden-house, and leave us to take our fortunes,
without prejudice to your reputations.


Do not fear, Madam, I think I heard my friends voice.


Marry hang you, is it you that have given us this hot alarm.


There's more in it than you imagine, the whole house is up: for seeing you two,
and not knowing you after I had entered the Garden-door, I made too much haste
to get out again, and have left the key broken in it. With the noise one of the
Servants came running in, whom I forced back; and doubtless he is gone for
company, for you may see lights running through every Chamber.


What will become of. us?


We must have recourse to our former resolution. Let the Ladies retire into the
Garden-house. And now I think on it you Gentlemen shall go in with 'em, and
leave me and Maskall to bear the brunt on it.


Me, Sir? I beseech you let me go in with the Ladies too; dear Beatrix speak a
good word for me, I protest 'tis more out of love to thy company than for any
fear I have.


You Dog I have need of your wit and counsel. We have no time to deliberate.
Will you stay, Sir?


No Sir, 'tis not for my safety.


Will you in Sir?


No Sir, 'tis not for my honour, to be assisting to you: I'll to Don Alonzo, and
help to revenge the injury you are doing him.


Then we are lost, I can do nothing.


Nay, and you talk of honour, by your leave Sir. I hate your Spanish honour ever
since it spoiled our English Plays, with faces about and the other side.


What do you mean, you will not murder me?


Must valour be oppressed by multitudes?


Come yarely my mates, every man to his share of the burden. Come yearly hay.


If this Englishman save us now I shall admire his wit.


Good wits never think themselves admired till they are well rewarded: you must
pay him in specie, Madam, give him love for his wit.


Ladies fear nothing, but enter into the Garden-house with these Cavaliers --


Oh that I were a Cavalier too!


Come you back Sirrah.

Think your selves as safe as in a Sanctuary, only keep quiet what ever
happens.


Come away then, they are upon us.


Hark, I hear the foe coming: methinks they threaten too, Sir; pray let me go
in for a Guard to the Ladies and poor Beatrix. I can fight much better when
there is a wall betwixt me and danger.


Peace, I have occasion for your wit to help me lie.


Sir, upon the faith of a sinner you have had my last lye already; I have not
one more to do me credit as I hope to be saved, Sir.


Victore, victore; knock under you rogue, and confess me Conqueror, and you
shall see I'll bring all off.


Search about there.


Fear nothing, do but vouch what I shall say.


For a passive lye I can yet do something.


Stand: who goes there?


Friends.


Friends? who are you?


Noble Don Alonzo, such as are watching for your good.


Is it you, Sennor Ingles? why all this noise and tumult? where are my
Daughters and my Niece? But in the first place, though last named, how came you
hither, Sir.


I came hither -- by Astrology, Sir.


My Master's in, heavens send him good shipping with his lye, and all kind
Devils stand his friends.


How, by Astrology, Sir? meaning you came hither by Art Magic.


I say by pure Astrology Sir, I foresaw by my Art a little after I had left
you that your Niece and Daughters would this night run a risque of being
carried away from this very Garden.


O the wonders of this speculation!


Thereupon I called immediately for my sword and came in all haste to advertise
you; but I see there's no resisting Destiny, for just as I was entering the
Garden door I met the Women with their Gallants all under sail and outward
bound.


Thereupon what does me he but draws by my advice --


How now Mr. Rascal? are you itching to be in?


Pray, Sir, let me go snip with you in this lye, and be not too covetous of
honour? you know I never stood with you; now my courage is come to me I cannot
resist the temptation.


Content; tell on.


So in short Sir we drew, first I, and then my Master; but, being overpowered,
they have escaped us, so that I think you may go to bed and trouble your self
no further, for gone they are.


You tell a lye! you have curtail'd my invention: you are not fit to invent a
lye for a Bawd when she would whedle a young Squire.


Call up the Officers of Justice, I'll have the Town searched immediately.


'Tis in vain, Sir; I know by my Art you'll never recover 'em: besides, 'tis an
affront to my friends the Stars, who have otherwise disposed of 'em.


Sir, the key is broken in the Garden-door, and the door locked, so that of
necessity they must be in the Garden yet.


Disperse your selves, some into the Wilderness, some into the Allies, and some
into the Parterre: you Diego, go try to get out the key, and run to the
Corigidore for his assistance: in the mean time I'll search the Garden-house my
self.


I'll be unbetted again if you please Sir, and leave you all the honour of it.


Come Cavalier, let us in together.


Hold Sir for the love of heaven, you are not mad.


We must leave no place unsearched. A light there.


Hold I say, do you know what you are undertaking? and have you armed your self
with resolution for such an adventure?


What adventure?


A word in private -- The place you would go into is full of enchantments;
there are at this time, for ought I know, a Legion of spirits in it.


You confound me with wonder, Sir!


I have been making there my Magical operations, to know the event of your
Daughters flight: and, to perform it rightly, have been forced to call up
Spirits of several Orders: and there they are humming like a swarm of Bees,
some stalking about upon the ground, some flying, and some sticking upon the
walls like Rear-mice.


The Devil's in him, he's got off again.


Now Sir I shall try the truth of your friendship to me. To confess the secret
of my soul to you, I have all my life been curious to see a Devil: And to that
purpose have coned Agrippa through and through, and made experiment of all his
rules, Pari die incremento Lunae, and yet could never compass the sight of one
of these Daemoniums: if you will ever oblige me let it be on this occasion.


There's another storm arising.


You shall pardon me, Sir, I'll not expose you to that perril for the world
without due preparations of ceremony.


For that, Sir, I always carry a Talisman about me; that will secure me: and
therefore I will venture in a Gods name, and desie 'em all at once.


How the pox will he get off from this?


Well, Sir, since you are so resolved, send off your Servant that there may be
no noise made on it, and we'll take our venture.


Pedro, leave your light, and help the fellows search the Garden.


What does my incomprehensible Master mean?


Now I must tell you Sir, you will see that which will very much astonish you
if my Art fail me not.

You Spirits and Intelligences that are within there, stand close, and silent,
at your perril, and fear nothing, but appear in your own shapes, boldly. --
Maskal open the door.

Now Sir what think you?


They are here, they are here: we need search no farther. Ah you ungratious
baggages!


Stay, or you'll be torn in pieces: these are the very shapes I Conjured up,
and truly represent to you in what company your Niece and Daughters are, this
very moment.


Why are they not they? I durst have sworn that some of 'em had been my own
flesh and blood -- Look; one of them is just like that rogue your Comrade.


Do you see how you have provoked that English Devil: take heed of him; if he
gets you once into his clutches: --


He seems to have got possession of the Spirit of my Jacinta by his hugging
her.


Nay, I imagined as much: do but look upon his physiognomy, you have read
Baptista Porta: has he not the leer of a very lewd debauched Spirit?


He has indeed: Then there's my Niece Aurelia, with the Spirit of Don Lopez;
but that's well enough; and my Daughter Theodosia all alone: pray how comes
that about?


She's provided for with a Familiar too: one that is in this very room with
you, and by your Elbow; but I'll show you him some other time.


And that Baggage Beatrix, how I would swinge her if I had her here; I lay my
life she was in the Plot for the flight of her Mistresses.


Sir you do ill to provoke her: for being the Spirit of a Woman, she is
naturally mischievous: you see she can scarce hold her hands from you already.


Let me alone to revenge your quarrel upon Beatrix: if e're she come to light
I'll take a course with her I warrant you Sir.


Now come away Sir, you have seen enough: the Spirits are in pain whilst we are
here: we keep 'em too long condensed in bodies: if we were gone they would
rarify into air immediately. Maskall shut the door.


Monstrum hominis! O prodigy of Science!


Now help me with a lye Maskall, or we are lost.


Sir, I could never lie with man or woman in a fright.


Sir, we found this Gentleman bound and gagged, and he desired us to bring him
to you with all haste imaginable.


O Sir, Sir, your two Daughters and your Niece --


They are gone he knows it: but are you mad Sir to set this pernicious wretch
at liberty?


I endeavoured all that I was able --


Now Sir I have it for you -- Theodosia was his prize: but we prevented him,
and left him in the condition in which you see him.


I thought somewhat was the matter that Theodosia had not a Spirit by her, as
her Sister had.


This was he I meant to show you.


Do you believe him Sir?


No, no, believe him Sir: you know his truth ever since he stole your Daughters
Diamond.


I swear to you by my honour.


Nay, a thief I knew him, and yet after that, he had the impudence to ask me
for my Daughter.


Was he so impudent? The case is plain Sir, put him quickly into custody.


Hear me but one word Sir, and I'll discover all to you.


Hear him not Sir: for my Art assures me if he speaks one syllable more, he
will cause great mischief.


Will he so? I'll stop my ears, away with him.


Your Daughters are yet in the Garden, hidden by this fellow and his
accomplices.


I'll stop my ears, I'll stop my ears.

A thief, a thief, away with him.

He thought to have born us down with his confidence.


Sir, with much ado we have got out the key and opened the door.


Then, as I told you, run quickly to the Corigidor, and desire him to come
hither in person to examine a malefactor.


Hark, what noise is that within? I think one sneezes.


One of the Devils I warrant you has got a cold with being so long out of the
fire.


Bless his Devilship as I may say.


This is a mans voice, do not suffer your self to be deceived so grossly, Sir.


A mans voice, that's a good one indeed! that you should live to these years
and yet be so silly as not to know a man from a Devil.


There's more in it than I imagined: hold up your Torch and go in first, Pedro,
and I'll follow you.


No let me have the honour to be your Usher.


Help, help, help.


What's the matter?


Stir not upon your life Sir.


I was no sooner entered, but a huge Giant seized my Torch, and felled me along,
with the very whiffe of his breath as he past by me.


Bless us!


Pass out now while you have time in the dark: the Officers of Justice will be
here immediately, the Garden-door is open for you.


What are you muttering there Sir?


Only dismissing these Spirits of darkness, that they may trouble you no
further: go out I say.


I have caught some body; are these your Spirits? Another light quickly, Pedro.


'Tis Maskall you have caught, Sir; do you mean to strangle me that you press
me so hard between your Arms?


Is it thee Maskall? I durst have sworn it had been another.


Make haste now before the Candle comes.


Now I have another.


'Tis Maskall you have caught Sir.


No I thank you Niece, this artifice is too gross! I know your voice a little
better. What ho bring lights there.


Her impertinence has ruined all.


Sir, the Corigidor is coming according to your desire: in the mean time we
have secured the Garden doors.


I am glad on it: I'll make some of 'em severe examples.


Nay then as we have lived merrily, so let us die together: but we'll show the
Don some sport first.


What will become of us!


We'll die for company: nothing vexes me but that I am not a man to have one
thrust at that malicious old father of mine before I go.


Let us break our way through the Corigidor's band.


A match i'faith: we'll venture our bodies with you: you shall put the baggage
in the middle.


He that pierces thee, I say no more, but I shall be somewhat angry with him:


You do not mean to murder me!


You murder your self if you force us to it.


Give me a Razor there, that I may scrape his weeson, that the bristles may not
hinder me when I come to cut it.


What need you bring matters to that extremity? you have your ransom in your
hand: here are three men, and there are three women; you understand me.


If not, here's a sword and there's a throat: you understand me.


This is very hard!


The propositions are good, and marriage is as honourable as it used to be.


You had best let your Daughters live branded with the name of Strumpets: for
what ever befalls the men, that will be sure to be their share.


I can put them into a Nunnery.


A Nunnery!


I would have thee to know, thou graceless old man, that I defy a Nunnery:
name a Nunnery once more, and I disown thee for my Father.


You know the Custom of the Country, in this case Sir: 'tis either death or
marriage: the business will certainly be public; and if they die they have
sworn you shall bear 'em company.


Since it must be so, run Pedro and stop the Corigidor: tell him it was only a
Carnival merriment, which I mistook for a Rape and Robbery.


Why now you are a dutiful Father again, and I receive you into grace.


Among the rest of your mistakes, Sir, I must desire you to let my Astrology
pass for one: my Mathematics, and Art Magic were only a Carnival device; and
now that's ending, I have more mind to deal with the flesh than with the devil.


No Astrologer! 'tis impossible!


I have known him, Sir, this seven years, and dare take my oath he has been
always an utter stranger to the Stars: and indeed to any thing that belongs to
heaven.


Then I have been cozened among the rest.


And I; but I forgive him.


I hope you will forgive me, Madam; who have been the cause on it; but what he
wants in Astrology he shall make up to you some other way I'll pass my word
for him.


I hope you are both Gentlemen?


As good as the Cid himself, Sir.


And for your Religion, right Romanes --


As ever was Marc Anthony.


For your fortunes and courages --


They are both desperate, Sir; especially their fortunes.


You should not have had my consent so soon, but only to revenge my self upon
the falseness of Don Melchor.


I must avow that gratitude, for Don Lopez is as prevalent with me as revenge
against Don Melchor.


Lent you know begins to morrow; when that's over marriage will be proper.


If I stay till after Lent, I shall be to marry when I have no love left: I'll
not bate you an Ace of to night, Father: I mean to bury this man e're Lent be
done, and get me another before Easter.


Well, make a night on it then.


Jacinta Wildblood, welcome to me: since our Stars have doomed it so we
cannot help it: but 'twas a mere trick of Fate to catch us thus at unawares: to
draw us in with a what do you lack as we passed by: had we once separated to
night, we should have had more wit than ever to have met again to morrow.


'Tis true we shot each other flying: we were both upon wing I find; and had we
passed this Critical minute, I should have gone for the Indies, and you for
Greenland e're we had met in a bed upon consideration.


You have quarrelled twice to night without bloodshed, 'ware the third time.


A propos! I have been retrieving an old Song of a Lover that was ever
quarrelling with his Mistress: I think it will fit our amour so well, that if
you please I'll give it you for an Epithalamium: and you shall sing it.


I never sung in all my life; nor ever durst try when I was alone, for fear of
braying.


Just me, up and down; but for a frolic let's sing together: for I am sure if
we cannot sing now, we shall never have cause when we are married.


Begin then; give me my Key, and I'll set my voice to it.


Fa la, fa la, fa la.


Fala, fala, fala. Is this your best upon the faith of a Virgin?


I by the Muses, I am at my pitch.


Then do your worst: and let the company be judge who sings worst.


Upon condition the best singer shall wear the breeches: prepare to strip Sir;
I shall put you into your drawers presently.


I shall be revenged with putting you into your smock anon; St. George for me.


St. James for me: come start Sir.

Celimena, of my heart,
None shall e're bereave you:
If, with your good leave, I may
Quarrel with you once a day,
I will never leave you.
Passion's but an empty name
Where respect is wanting:
Damon you mistake your aim;
Hang your heart, and burn your flame,
If you must be ranting.
Love as dull and muddy is,
As decaying liquor:
Anger sets it on the lees,
And refines it by degrees,
Till it works it quicker.
Love by quarrels to beget
Wisely you endeavour;
With a grave Physician's wit
Who to cure an Ague fit
Put me in a Feavor.
Anger rouzes love to fight,
And his only bait is,
'Tis the spur to dull delight,
And is but an eager bite,
When desire at height is.
If such drops of heat can fall
In our wooing weather;
If such drops of heat can fall,
We shall have the Devil and all
When we come together.

Your judgement Gentlemen: a Man or a Maid?


And you make no better harmony after you are married then you have before, you
are the miserablest couple in Christendom.


'Tis no great matter; if I had had a good voice she would have spoiled it
before tomorrow.


When Maskall has married Beatrix, you may learn of her.


You shall put her life into a Lease then.


Upon condition that when I drop into your house from hunting, I may set my
slippers at your door, as a Turk does at a Jews, that you may not enter.


And while you refresh your self within, he shall wind the horn without.


I'll throw up my Lease first.


Why thou would not be so impudent, to marry Beatrix: for thy self only?


For all his ranting and tearing now, I'll pass my word he shall degenerate
into as tame and peaceable a Husband as a civil Woman would wish to have.


Sir --


I know what you would say, but your discovery comes too late now.


Why the Ladies are found.


But their inclinations are lost I can assure you.


Look you Sir, there goes the game: your Plate-fleet is divided; half for
Spain, and half for England.


You are justly punished for loving two.


Yet I have the comfort of a cast Lover: I will think well of my self; and
despise my Mistresses.


Enough, enough; let's end the Carnival abed.


And for these Gentlemen, when e're they try, May they all speed as soon, and
well as I.


MY part being small, I have had time to day.
To mark your various censures of our Play:
First, looking for a Judgement or a Wit,
Like Jews I saw 'em scattered through the Pit:
And where a knot of Smilers lent an ear
To one that talked, I knew the foe was there.
The Club of jests went round; he who had none
Borrowed of the next, and told it for his own:
Among the rest they kept a fearful stir,
In whispering that he stole the Astrologer;
And said, betwixt a French and English Plot
He eased his half-tir'd Muse, on pace and trot.
Up starts a Monsieur new come over; and warm
In the French stoop; and the pull-back of the arm;
Morbleu dit il, and cocks, I am a rogue
But he has quite spoiled the feint Astrologue.
Pox, says another; here's so great a stir
With a son of a whore Farce that's regular,
A rule where nothing must decorum shock!
Dam' me 'ts as dull as dining by the clock.
An Evening! why the devil should we be vexed
Whither he gets the Wench this night or next?
When I heard this, I to the Poet went,
Told him the house was full of discontent,
And asked him what excuse he could invent.
He neither swore nor stormed as Poets do,
But, most unlike an Author, vowed 'twas true.
Yet said, he used the French like Enemies,
And did not steal their Plots, but made 'em prize.
But should he all the pains and charges count
Of taking 'em, the bill so high would mount,
That, like Prize-goods, which through the Office come,
He could have had 'em much more cheap at home.
He still must write; and Banquier-like, each day
Accept new Bills, and he must break, or pay.
When through his hands such sums must yearly run,
You cannot think the Stock is all his own.
His haste his other errors might excuse;
But there's no mercy for a guilty Muse:
For like a Mistress, she must stand or fall,
And please you to a height, or not at all.

