Our modest Poet's in as great a fright,
As a young Bride upon her Wedding Night.
She starts and trembles when she sees the Bed.
Like Criminals to execution led:
Alas poor thing she's loath to lose her -- Head.
As Boys stand shivering on a Rivers brim,
Enquire the warmth, and depth, of those that swim.
She cries to Married Friends, what shall I do,
I do so shake, Lord, was it so with you:
And yet she makes a hard shift to go through.
But that once over what she esteemed a Crime,
She boldly runs to meet a second Time.
Poets were once as full of trouble too,
But now they're desperate --
To lose this Play as much our Poet strives,
As you to hide your Misses from your Wives.
He thinks your Critics (and I gad he's right)
Are grown as merciless to those that Write:
As Husbands to their Wives 'oth' Wedding-Night.
You care no more for Poets pains and fears,
Then those vile Men regard poor Women's tears.
You stair and sniff when you're to mischief bent,
As if like Hounds you knew Wit by the scent.
One of our Nymphs should in this Place appear,
But you're so dreadful she's fallen sick with fear.
Those that pay dear for Love, the veriest Fools,
Though they condemn the work, preserve the Tools.
Faith for this once let us compound to day,
Be you indulgent to our Orphan Play.
You shall be as much obliged another way.

GOOD Sir, do not bait me thus.

I'll break thee of this peevish humour, or I'll worry thee;
Thou dost infect my house with melancholy.

This is the height of Tyranny, to chase away
My Comfort, and deny the pleasure of my
Grief too,

Indeed Cousin, it very ill becomes you, every tear
Drowns part of your Beauty, and every sigh
Carries away in the blast a parcel of your Youth.

Alas Cousin! for whom should I preserve it? he that
Owns it, either is not, or else lives a Vagabond.

I wonder that every thought does not restore thee
To thy self; methinks he having caused thy misery,
Thou should hate and forget that Vagabond.

I rather must hate him that made him one; had you
Been just, we had been happy: I am indebted to your
Avarice for this Discourse, else had we lived together in
Peace and plenty.

Yes: while the Eight thousand pounds lasted, when
That had been consumed in Tavern Reckonings, and
Glass Coaches, where then had been the plenty?
I wonder what Allurements of his gained thee,
His handsome Structure certainly did not take ye.

Sir, you know you wrong him; yet granting him not
Handsome, since he loved me, and in my behalf
Hath often hazarded his person, 'twas an
Indearment forced me to be grateful.

What? he fought for you! he would have done
As much for his Whore.

Sir, I can hear no more.

O! he loves you most monsterously, he does
Nothing but think of you: pray how many Reams
Of Letters have you received from him
Since his departure these Nine years?

Pity me Heaven, and correct him for it, and if
Iv'e talked beyond the duty I owe a Father, pardon it.

Come, let's after her, ne'er let her rest, till
She do quit her folly.

It goes against my Heart, to see her vexed thus,
But I must obey.

Thus do they tire out the poor Gentle woman;
Her Father sent her Husband of an Errand, no man
Knows whither: well, 'twas an honest Gentleman,
But took not thrifty Courses: I have said often
To him, Mr. Manley; You write a good hand, go
And be a Justices Clerk; there's half a Crown
A Quarter from every House of Sin in the
Precinct, to be shared betwixt your Master and your self.
I would have had him set up a Writing-Shcool;
Six pence a Week per Pole, besides command over
The Young Ones; but he would hearken to none of
These things, and now he has been away these
Nine years, and no tidings of him, not so much
As Commendations to me, to his Confident, his Trusty
Thomas, that made up the Match.

Mr. Thomas there is a Gentleman at our house
Desires to speak with you.

With me? what is he prithee?

I don't know indeed, I never saw him before;
But he's a brave Spark; the Gold in his Pocket
Chimes ding dong: and he has bespoke a brave
Supper.

Tell him I'll wait upon him; who should this be trow?

Set down your Wine and leave us.

A Quart of Canary in the Rose, Score.

Prithee leave off these palpable Chimera's, these
Witty Nothings; retire yet while you may your
Fame unsullied.

Prithee forbear thy useless Morals;
Besides, I will not
Stain my Family: a Younger Brother of the house of
Mercury, and baulk at any thing that's not impossible!
But there is probability in this, and profit at the end as
Well as pleasure.

How smooth your Fancy paves a rugged way? and with
What ease you polish Learcuts harshness? You know
His hate towards him you'd personate, for matching
With the Woman you now aim at; you know his obstinate
Refusal to pay in the Legacy her Grand-Father bequeathed
Her (Eight thousand pounds I take it,) you know too,
(Which makes your business harder) that this Manley
(Whom you would counterfeit) never enjoyed her,
Being surprised upon his Wedding-day, and separated
From her by her Father:

All this is granted:

Then how he ruined Manley with long Suits, who forced
In tender pity to his Wife, whom he foresaw inevitably
Famished, lest he submitted to that strict Condition,
Took an Eternal leave of her; and formed it with a
Sad Vow, never to see her more. Yet notwithstanding
These impediments, you will on.

And force em, I tell thee here are Pioneers shall do it,
With as much ease as I can fling two Sixes; these
Obstacles you mention fall of course, I will compass the Woman.

Methinks 'tis easier to compass the earth: how can you
Have admittance? or if admitted, how, but be discovered;
Though, I confess, Manley and you are alike.

Yes, so like, that it shall ask a subtler head
Then hers to find the difference.

Do not glut thy self with these fantastic hopes,
But sit down fairly here.

Thou know I have furnished him with Clothes
And Money; many expensive drunken
Meetings we have had, in order to this grand
Design, and now just ready to possess, shall I desist?

If there were any colour to think you might
Achieve what you attempt --

Why, have not I, that I may seem more like
Him, Imprinted here the Scar of such a wound
As he received in her quarrel once?

You have.

Then, that he never enjoyed her, makes for me.
As for the rest in the
Large freedom of our merry Meetings, there's not
A secret passage in their Love, nor any concealed
Agent in the Match: but Iv'e extracted, and have
Sounded his heart,

And find it shallow;

Yes.

Yet still I'm puzzled to think of the difficulty of
Access to her.

See thou this Boy? this Golden Key
Opens her Chamber door, although at midnight.

That piece of Gold!

The very same; this piece was broke betwixt
Them at their separation; which is some Nine
Years since: this useful piece, full fraught with
Wine, I did persuade him out of, at our last Jovial
Bout at Rotterdam:

What, when you promised to be his Solicitor, and
Re-instate him in his Wife and Fortunes?

That very time.

You swore you would perform it.

I'll forget that; for men whose Lands and Wealth
Lie in this Circle
Must not stick at trifles: are you resolved, or will
You prove a Recrant?

I'll on, whether I fall or swing with thee.

Come Infidel, obey but the directions I give thee,
And be a punctual Serving-man:

Do not doubt me, -- but stay a little, it has been
Often in my thoughts to ask, and still some other
Business has diverted me: what should be the reason
That you refused to accept money for the Ship you
Won last night at Gravesend?

Not impertinently, I warrant thee thou shalt know
Further suddenly: do not you fail your part, If I
Miscarry, hang me up for a Pryapus to scare
High flying Wits.

And if I wait not with a Trencher to an Inch, discard
Me your service, without a Ticket of my Truth.

I hear some body coming up stairs; observe your distance.
Honest Thomas, how dost thou? how hast thou done this
Long time honest Thomas?

'Troth Sir, as you see, I want Clothes, and money, and the
Best can do no more Sir.

Well, thou art strangely altered since we parted,
I protest I scarce know thee.

And truly Sir, I cannot know you by instinct: It may
Be you know me, but truly Sir I never saw you before.

Thomas, I did not think you would so easily forget
Your Friends; not know me Thomas! 'tis strange! your
Memory is very weak.

By my troth, to my knowledge, I never saw you
Before Sir.

No, come here's to thee Thomas.
Look on me well, and recollect thy self:

Let me see, truly Sir, now I look upon you well,
You are very like -- no body that ever I saw in all
My life.

Well, well, persist in that opinion.

Take off your Wine, before two Glasses more, you'll
Change your Dialect.

Truly Sir, I was never worthy of such worshipful
Acquaintance.

Fie, fie, Thomas, complement with your old Friends!
Your Wine pawles:

Sir, I pledge you, and make bold to drink to your
Friend here: -- Pray Sir excuse me, I'll fill it;
Will you please to pledge me?

Pray Sir excuse me, I do not use to drink
Among my Masters Companions.

His Master! this is some Great Man, some Knight I
Warrant ye.

But speak seriously Thomas, dost thou know
Me, or dost thou dissemble with me?
Methinks our Friendship should be of too long growth
To be forgotten: One Glass of Wine to me, and try if
Yet you can remember: Sit down, view every
Character in my Face; did you ever behold
Any thing like it?

Truly, I have seen a Face resemble yours.

O! do you remember now! where pray?

Among the brazen Tombs at Westminster.

There he has hit you.

It seems you reckon me among the Dead then.

That's dexterously warded.

I thought that had I been deceased, I should have lived
Still in your thoughts; but since you have banished
Me your memory --

Why? would you have me remember a Gentleman
I never set eyes on before?

No Thomas; why, whom did you bring down to me to
My Father in Law's back door? whom did you
Put into the Coach to me, and wait upon to Pancridge?

Pray let me review you; that is his Nose, and those
His Eyes, or I'm mistaken.

I, I'll swear thou art.

'Tis Mr. Manley; what a Beetle was I? forgive me
Good Sir, sweet Sir pardon me; for as I'm an honest
Man you're the strangest altered! Lord! I should
Never have known you, but by that Token.

This is a pure Coxcomb.

Your voice is altered too.

See what 'tis to Travel Thomas!

And how, and how, and how dee Sir? by my troth
I'm glad to see you Sir.

Kind Thomas thank thee, how fares it with my
Poor Wife? has she been pleasant since?

Poor Soul! I think in my conscience, had not
You come to night, she had dyed to morrow;
She has took on most lamentably, not looked
Kindly on her Victuals since you parted; and for Drink,
She diets her self with a small quantity, to keep
Her in Tears; that she may not want utterance
For her sorrow: I am persuaded the Current of
Her Eyes would go nigh to drive a Mill.

I come purposely to stop up the Stream, or divert
It in to pleasure.

You will be a welcome man to her: good Gentlewoman!
I came but just now from her, there was the
Heaviest quarter! truly, they even weary her out
Of her life: if she had not had the more Grace,
She had en'e gone to Heaven before this time.

Dear Soul! the hour is come to consummate
Thy sorrows!

Her Father was just now
Upbraiding you for a poor fellow, worth nothing.

Nor am I, till I have her.

'Tis no Pilgrimage to her Sir: yet methinks the
World's pretty well mended since our last interview.

Faith I have waited long for it; it was some
Years before I and all the Friends I could make,
Could persuade my Uncle to exchange this
Transitory life for a better.

What Uncle Sir, I beseech you? you never told me
Of this Uncle until now.

Faith Tom, I did never think he would have dyed,
And that was the reason.

I hope he has left you well Sir.

Pretty well, as thou see Thomas; come sit down:
Faith we'll be brave Boys, he has left me all.

Truly I am very glad of it, how much pray Sir?

A poor trifle, some Hundred thousand pounds,
Besides six Ships that have been out a seven years
Voyage to the Indies, which I every hour expect here:
I left em at the Rivers mouth: here's to their save arrival.

Sir, there are a couple of men below enquire for you.

Go down Sirrah, and see who they are.

Sir, I believe the fellows come for the six
Flanders Mares, will you please to pay 'em your self,
Or shall I?

I pay 'em, you superfluous Coxcomb! what did I give you money for?

I fly Sir.

To see how these Rogues will trouble a man for every
Trifle: fill me a glass of Wine; here fill my Friend one:
Here's to you Sweet-heart, Thomas.

By my troth I'll pledge it Sir, without Sugar.

Sir, there's the Coach-maker without too, he will not
Take under a Hundred and fifty pounds: Sir I am unwilling --

You Rogue, must I be troubled with every idle Two
Or three hundred pounds? pay him and be hanged,
Or I'll pay you, and send you to your Friends again
To eat Sprats.

I vanish and obey you with dexterity.

Come Thomas, here's the other Brimmer to thee.

I thank you Sir, but by my troth I dare not stay,
My Master will be mad with me.

Prithee man, a little longer.

Upon my word I dare not.

Then Thomas, present this to my Wife:
And my Heart with it; that Heart that
Broke with this, and never was whole since Fate
Divided us.

I warrant you you shall be with her presently:
I'll but whisper a word in my Old Masters Ear.

No, no, I do not like that, if my arrival's know
We shall be troubled with the unwelcome kindness
Of our civil Friends, and hindered of that privacy
That Lovers thirst after: conceal me then from all,
Unless her self. Tell her when all are quiet
I'll wait on her: when her Father and the Household
Are asleep I'll visit her.

Well Sir, I'll make bold to tell her so.

When thou deliver'st to her this Emblem
Of our Separation, tell her we now shall
Meet never to part.

I'll be very punctual. How my Young Mistress
Will leap out of her skin, to hear the News I bring her.

Now Vnderwit let's laugh at this fellow
For an hour.

And sit down, or I shall be weary of it.
Well, you are a gallant Fellow, thou deserve to
Stand a Stair higher then ordinary in the Pillory.

There she stands, they have driven her from her.
Supper, and now she steals to her Closet, that there
She may banquet on her sighs: a very unwholesome
Diet, and denotes a windy Stomach.

How am I condemned without hope of reprieve, not to
Dye once, but to be ever gasping.

Iv'e a Receipt at my tongues end to cure your melancholy:
O Mistress!

What ails thee? more torments yet: yet, shall I be never quiet?

Will you never leave this peevish humour of weeping?
Can you tell what you cry for?

Fool: dost thou enquire the Cause, that were the Instrument, to give me up to
him whose loss I mourn?

'Troth you have no great cause to weep for the matter.

Art thou revolted too? ungrateful --

Nay, no bad words good Mistress, you know I was your friend
To bring you together: (an exploit, if known, would
Set me at liberty) and if I find no friendlier language,
I'll never bring you together again.

I easily believe thee.

But what would you say, if I tell you where he is?

On that condition I would be a Bond-slave.
But why flatter I my self?
Or why believe delusions?

No, no, do not; for if you can give credit to my Senses,
Till you believe your own, you'll find, and speedily,
He's no distressed Indigent, forlorn Fellow; but a
Gallant and a brave one.

Do not abuse me.

Be not you incredulous, for he is near and wealthy,
Can shovel Gold for a wager with your Father, and --

How willingly I would believe thee, and how little
Can I.

Can you believe this?

Sure my senses do not conspire against me:
Dear Friend, tell me quickly, where may I find the Owner.

No, no, I'm a Tormentor!

Prithee do not wrack me, but tell me where
I may meet my Manley.

Why, in your Bed.

Do not delude me, he is not there.

No, but he will be, he sent me to give
You intelligence; he'll be with you when the
Old man's laid asleep, and the house hush: he
Desires you to put out the Candles, that he
May be the less noted: he would have his
Arrival conceall'd from all but you: he's on
Fire to pay you some arrears which were owing
You on your Wedding night.

Art thou alive still! then Heaven has not let
Me pray and weep in vain.

When you see him, you'll swear it, he is not the
Quondam man, in the thread-bare-breeches and no money,
But dazelling Scarlet, laced and lined with Gold:
His Coach richly drawn by six Milk-white Mares,
Guarded with Pages and Lackeys dressed like Hinch-boyes.

Can this wonder be?

Else never trust your trusty Thomas: go
Mistress, will you about your business,
Hasten the House to rest, for you'll get little.

By his presence, more then I have had this nine years.

Beshrew his heart then, I do but think how you'll smile to morrow.

And I hope ever.
Return my Husband my obedience.

What life this has put into her! the very apprehension of this same harlotry
matter makes her as nimble as an Eel riggling in the mud. Well, I have brought
you twice together now, if you part again, I shall have an ill conceit of my
labour.


Forsooth, Cousin, will you make haste to Bed.

Excuse me, I'm indisposed.

And ever are so; my Uncle has told over the Bags in the
Chest by this time, and when he hath said his prayers with
Beads, you know he wakes not long; if he hears us stir
After him, he'll lay suspicion of Felony to our charges;
Swear we conspire with his Servants to drink out the March
Beer: Good Forsooth to bed.

Troth Cousin, I believe I shall not sleep to night,
And know, then I'm an unruly Bed-fellow:
I do nothing but tumble and toss.

Truly, and that's fine sport sometimes.

Sweet Cousin, let me entreat yt our absence, the Maid
Has laid you a pair of clean Sheets in the Red Chamber.

Indeed Cousin, you are not to be trusted alone, for fear
You weep to death.

Trust me, I will not weep at all.

Well then, if it must be so, I'll humour you, though I
Doubt, to your prejudice, on the condition you'll neither be
Drowned in your Tears to morrow, nor parched up to Mummy in
Your long winded sighs of an Ell, London measure.

Good rest to you dear Cousin, have you laid on the
Finest sheets, as I bid you?

Yes, indeed Forsooth, and made the Bed high, towards the
Feet, as you bid me likewise.

Is my Cambrick-Holland-Night-tyre in the Sweet-Bag?

As you would please to have it.

Then make haste to Thomas, and
Tell him I'm a Bed.

Make haste to Thomas and tell him I'm in Bed: Those were the words. Is all
this ado for Thomas? Were you so hasty you could not unlace your self, but you
must cut? Did you for this tear off your Handkerchief, because I could not
unpin it fast enough? Must Thomas handsel your new Linen? Will a fit of Mirth
with him cure you of a Nine years Melancholy? Well, well, little would any one
think it were in her; but I'll watch your water: for Thomas, I Faith, I know
he'll be constant to his poor Bell, that gave him two yards of Ferret Ribbon
the other day for a pair of Shoe-strings. As I am very Woman, look where he is!
he talks to himself too: I'll hide my self, and find it out.


The Old One's laid; now if the Young One were, my work were ended: but what do
I deserve for my contrivance? what reward must I expect for all the Wit I have
expended in this business? I shall, at least, be Steward when they keep house;
then will I take Poundage for all the Bills I pay, besides my New-Years-Gifts:
or say, he give me one of his Ships; I, I, I, that's most likely; for he'll
never trouble himself with such Lumber: then will I Trade into the Straits, and
in three years be an Alderman -- But Thomas, Thomas, what if a Turks Man of War
take her, what wilt thou do then? No, there's Mortality in one Ship -- he will
give me two, and with those two I'll defy Mahomet of Algiers -- But suppose he
gives me all the Ships -- Yes, yes, I'm sure he will give me all the Ships; how
shall I bestow 'em then? Let me see, let me see -- Yes it shall be so -- I will
way-lay the Spanish Carrukes coming from the Indies, and master em. But whom
should I entrust with the Command of this Fleet? for I dare not look Salt Water
in the Face my self, since an Innes of Court Man stal'd on me out of a Tavern
Window once: if I should trust it to one and he should cheat me, and keep all
to himself, what a pickle were I in then? No, no, I must find out some other
expedient.


I'll do my errand to him, if it be but to feel his pulse.
My Mistress --

Having three or four Knights to wait on me in blew Coats
After the old fashion --

What, will you not hear me Thomas?

To whom I will allow thirty pounds wages, besides their Vales -- And my
Footmen ten shillings a week Board-wages.

Passion of me, I begin to fear; he did not use to deal thus Scornfully with
me.

And two new Suits a year --

This vexes me, but I'll set a face on it as if I cared not for him.
Well sullen Fool, I must tell you my message, and therefore
Take notice of it --

O! Right Trusty and Well-belov'd Isbel, I cry thee mercy,
I did not see thee.

No, not you: some body will repent this.

By the Faith of my Body, my dainty Duck --

Well said dissembler: no, no, you are for my Mistress Palate:
She commanded me just now, to make haste to you, and tell
You she was in Bed. I have not been a Chamber Maid so*
Long, but I can construe her part of Speech without an Interpreter.

Farewell till by and by.

So soon vanished?

What's the reason, trow? he's gone down stairs, though that's not the way to
her: Well Thomas, well, the case is altered, and may be again shortly: then
good Isbel mend my Stockings, and sweet Isbel look my Head, and we will go to
Islington, and drink Ale in an Arbour: is there no Faith in Sugar-Cakes and
Cream? Are Custards and Cheese-cakes hollow-hearted? Well, I faith I'll be
coyer then I have been for this trick. Go thy ways, thou should never have
kissed me as thou hast done, if I thought thou would have served me so: but
what's done is done, and cannot be helped.

Here he comes again, ha! what Gallant is that with him?


Sir, this way.

Tread softly, for fear my Master hear you.


Why, he's almost asleep at best, for he's somewhat deaf: Both his Eyes and
Ears are lock^d fast enough now I believe.


I, but you must think a man who has waded in oppression these Fifty or
Threescore years has some Monitors, that give his conscience an Item, when he
offers to wink.


I'll let em pass, but I'll observe em narrowly.


You are sure she has no manner of light in her Chamber.


But her light Heart I warrant you.


Have we any more Rooms to go through before We come at hers?


She lies in the very same Chamber she did when you Wooed her: the blew Room on
the right hand Sir.


Faith 'tis so long ago, I've almost forgotten it. Id Almost spoiled all: good
night Thomas, I'll grope out the Bed My self.


Is this the trick on it? then I see I wronged my
Faithful Thomas -- but yet he wrongs me, and takes
My Office from me, and so I'll tell him:
How now Thomas, from whence came you thus laden?

My pretty Bell I'll tell thee; thy Mistresses Husband having been outed his
Free Tenement, is newly gone to make his entry on it.


Is that Mr. Manley?


The very He.


Truly he's a handsome Gentleman: 'tis a thousand pities --


What, a thousand pities that he's a handsome Gentleman?


No, but that he should not live with her: I warrant he's A good Comforter.


I, my aimable Belly, so would I be to thee, if thou would
But be pliable!
But we men may speak our hearts out, you remorseless
Virgins will either not hear us, or not believe us. How
Often have I robbed my Masters Bolsters of the Keys of the
Cellar? and w^ had swil'd the Wine out, broke the Bottles,
And told him 'twas the strength of the Wine?
Yet thou had no more --

Well Thomas, well, you have no great reason to say so,
Have not I found thee Handkerchiefs these two years?
Have I not starch't thy Bands to bid defiance to thy Masters?
Have I not sewed on thy little peeping Cuffs? Nay, have I
Not slighted a Lords Footman for thee?
Hast not thou compared my Legs, and untied my Garters?
Even yet can thou call me hard?
Unthankful Thomas! Unhappy Isbel!

Then, Heart split asunder for very joy! Dear Chicken!
I will dry thy Tears up with my Lips! Honey forgive me!

O! did I ever think this?

No more trials of thy Love, my Dear!

Thieves, thieves, thieves.

Passion of me! the Old Man's awake.

Thomas, Andrew, Thieves here!

What shall we do? he'll catch us, and then we're undone.

Do you go that ways to bed?
I'll make down this way.

Are my Knaves all deaf? shall I be murdered here? why
Thomas, Andrew --
O! here they are: Good Gentlemen, as you're Gentlemen
Do not hurt an old man!

Do you take me for a Thief, Sir? 'tis I, Sir; Thomas.

Thomas? Let me look better on thee, is not that
A Dark Lanthorn in thy hand?

No Sir, 'tis a Pewter Candlestick.

I think it be indeed: well Sirrah you put me into
A villainous cold Sweat: but sure I heard a noise.

Alas, Sir! it was nothing but a humming in your head.

I, and I heard a chink too like money.

Trust your own Eyes, if I have lost my credit with you,
Look round about the House.

I like the motion well, go before me, Thomas.
The Windows and Bolts are all secure: doth no body lie under
The Tables or the Stools.

Now all will out, I must reveal my secret.

Ha! Thomas, how came these here?

Since it can no longer be hidden from you, be pleased to
Know, there's a Gentleman within in Bed with my young Mistress,
Who will not be afraid to own 'em.

What? are you turned Pander? set up in my own house?
Begin with my Daughter? come out thou Villain, I'll have
Thee Carted.

Good words, good words, and not too loud for fear of disturbing the young
Couple; if this noise should make the Gentleman miscarry, 'twould be no small
grief to your Daughter.


How have I been deluded in thee! out Impudence,
Avow thy roguery!

Well, Sir, not taking notice at present of an Action of Slander, but desiring
you to keep those terms to your self, to be as short as you have been with me,
Your travelling Son-in-Law, having followed the track of Sir Francis Drake's
Ship, is returned hither again; and now Vlysses is with his Penelope.


Villain: I had rather she had been a Whore. Andrew, rise,
Fetch the Constable; I'll have him to the Gaol,
He comes to rob me.

Softly, softly good Master! for if he over-hear you, you're
Undone; he'll recover God knows what of you.

Hang him, beggarly* Rascal! I'll have him whipped, he
Has a Plot upon me; he lies with my Daughter to fill my
House with Vermin to destroy my goods.

Why, Sir, do you think he'll beget Rats and Weazels?
I'm of a clear contrary opinion; for I have a conceit he
Will get Children in embroidered Coats. Alas, alas, Sir! he's
None of the Old Master Manley, who courted me for the Wing
Of a mangled Capon; would kiss the Leg on it as 't had been his
Mistresses Hand, and stand gazing on the Carcase, admiring
The fair proportion of the Body.
He's now in his glass Coach lined through with Velvet,
Attended by his Pages and Lackeys, that look
Like running Rain-bows: prances in State to Fish-street,
Eats of his twenty Dishes at a Dinner, maintains a brace
Or two of Wits at's Table, and --

Is't impossible!

It is most certain.

Why what Estate hath he?

A small trifle of some Hundred thousands of pounds in
Money, besides a dozen Ships that have been trading for
Pearl in the Indies, and ride now at Gravesend.

Thou dost amaze me! how in the name of Goodness
Did he compass it?

It was an Uncle, when he died left him all this.

Dost thou think there's no cheat in it?

Why, Sir, he sent to me to prove his Uncles Will at the
Office, I took out Letters of Administration for him.

And art thou certain he hath so many rich Ships?

Certain? Lord, Sir, you make such a question of it, why
I received but to day, Letters from the Masters of 'em all,
And all their Bills of Lading.

How long hath he been in Town?

Not above a fortnight, Sir

So long? and neither I, nor my Daughter know it?

For you, he took some old passages to heart, to tell you
The truth, I think he was dogged.

Alas! good Gentleman! why should he be angry with me?
I never hurt him, only my Daughter being a tender gristle, I was
Loath he should overstrain her: but I'll make him amends for it.
But hear you Thomas.

Yes Sir --

Bring my Sable Jerkin down with you, and call Isbel by
The way, we will congratulate the conjunction of those small Plants.
Thomas to bed; disturb not the Young Couple:
There let 'em lie for me, and take their ease,
Since Manley's Rich, he may do what he please.

Oh Isbel! fie, fie; Isbel, fie.

O the Lord! Thomas, where, where is the Fire? I'll
Be hanged if it be not in our Neighbours house
The Pewterer; for they are up knocking
Early and late: out upon it how it stinks, my Mistress,
My Mistress will be burnt in her bed.

Gad, that's unhappily said, for I'm sure there's hot
Work by this time,
Stay inhumane Isbel, still insensible, here is the
Fire; thou like a careless Maid, hast thrown
The burning Snuf of thy Beauty into the
Chink of my Heart, there it has smothered long:
But now, like Aetna, it breaks out, and throws
Hot Stones and melted Mettle up*

Poh! now I hate you Mr. Thomas, so I do; you
Waked me out of the sweetest Dream! high ho.

Pretty unconscionable Rogue! tell me thy Dream,
And I'll let thee go.

Then I'll tell't ye, to be rid of ye, methought
Mr. Thomas, I had a grievous fit of the Mother;
And they burnt Feathers and soles of old Shoes under
My Nose, but still it rose and rose like to
Choke me; till a brisk young Doctor came, and turned
All out of the Room, and then -- Ah! you'll laugh
At me: I won't --

What? the Doctor threw thee on the Bed --

Yes.

Then got upon thee, and held thee down with
All his strength.

Aye.

Then tickled thee soundly, till thou turn up
Like a Trout in the water.

O dear! Doctor! I was never so sweetly cured
In all my life, and he would not take a farthing
Of me. I was just falling into another Fit when
You wooed me, with a mischief to you; I have forgot
The Doctors name too.

Poor Mistress Isbel! fear not, I'll cure thee when
Thou wilt; I will so tickle thee!

Ah! tickle me thereabout! any body can
Tickle me thereabout. Oh the sweet Heavens!
We shall be hanged if our Mistress hear us.

Our Mistress hear us! if ten couple of Cats were
Making Love at her Pillow, and all the Kings Lyons
Roaring at her Beds feet, she would not hear.
Her Husband, our Master is a Bed with her: I called thee
Up to tell thee of it.

What? Our Master that has been a married Bachelor
These nine years?

The same: and they are just now dancing
The beginning of the World.

O the sweet Father! I warrant our Mistress will tell
Him such Tales, and ask him forty questions.

I, and have such grievous Fits of the Mother, Isbel!

For the Lords sake, what kind of man is he?

A very handsome, neat, accomplished, gentile,
Pretty man, much of my make, and something
Like me; and I'll assure you, well bred; for he
Swore Damme, and called me Son of a Whore
Twenty times, and then he gave me a ^uinney:
But as soon as I was out of the Room, the Bed
Cracked like a Ship breaking on the Sands,
And my Mistress cried out like a drowning
Passenger, Ah! --

Alas! poor Mistress! if he should overlay her
Mr. Thomas!

Nay, I'm sure he had some ill design,
For his Eyes rolled, and his Colour did come
And go, and he shook all over, as if he
Had the Palsy.

Mr. Thomas, you are a Fool.

Fool! Nay, if you go to that, I hearkened
At the door, and I'll take my Oath I heard her
Cry, O deer! O Sweet Husband! Ah!
And then I could hear no more.

Now am I so afraid to go to bed;
For I shall dream of nothing but
Dying; and falling into such grievous Fits,
That the very bed will tremble: O sweet Doctor!

I tell thee, I'm as good a Doctor at that
As any breathing: But talk not of bed
Before we have drank to their Hans in Kelder.
Come, let's to the Pantery.

A match.

Let them with too much Love destroy each other:
Good Wine is better then the Fits of the Mother.

ALas! I am betrayed! 'tis not my Husband.

How now, my Heart! what's the matter?

Now I'm confirmed; that's not his voice.

What would thou have? can thou not speak for it?

One unhappy! O thou sly dissembler!

Dissembler? 'tis a word I understand not:
By thy own Fair Self, not one unmeant Oath
Of my affection hath escaped my Lips.
Fair Sweetness! what a Paradise of Beauty!
'Twas well I saw thee not e're I enjoyed thee.
She is so lovely! I could even repent
I have deceived her.

Was my Chastity
So envi'd by thee, thou must rob me of it?

By this Light, Madam,
You are the first Wife ever complained of that fault.

With what Forehead
Dare thou call me so?

Is Pancrass fallen down? or the Church burnt there?
The Parson, or our Parent-Clark deceased?
Or are you cloyed, and surfeited on a Husband
After so long a Fast, that you dare ask
That Question?

Impudent Ravisher! unhand me;
Thou art not he; but some false Villain
Disclosed these secrets to thee, and betrayed me.
Let me go Monster; I will fly from thee.
Into some Desert, where the direful Screech-Owls --

Prithee cast off this whining foolish humour:
Be pliable; come, come,
You'll ne'er be right till I --

This startles me: this private token speaks him.

That staggered her.

I know not what to think on it.
Those Eyes, that Hair is very -- He:
But, O! that Voice, like the Devils cloven Foot
Discovers an Impostor. Hence; I loath thee.

Art thou incurable for ever?

Yes: unless thou could restore me my stolen Honour.

For that Fair Sweetness sake that once dwelt in thee
I am content to please thee to my ruin.
I'll take one Journey more, whose period
Shall be my Tomb; I'll travel to my death:
For 'tis no matter now whither I wander,
Since I have lost that dwelling which I had
In thy once tender and relenting Breast.
Yet for the Love you once pretended to me,
Deny not the last Kiss to a dying Martyr.
Farewell for ever:
The Darts of Scorn are sharper far then those
Of Anger.
This wound thou hast given me, strikes deeper here
Then e're Rivals Sword did.

Bless me! I'm amazed!
It should be he! and yet methinks it cannot:
Pray good Sir, stay, Alas! my troubled Brain's
Distracted 'twixt the Love and Doubt of you;
And by two Strengths of equal power my Fears
And my Affections bend two several ways:
Trembling I stand! tortured between them both;
But cannot yield to the force of either.
So willingly I pray to be deceived,
That I could wish one Sense a Traitor to me,
For all things else conspire in your reception;
But this old trusty servant, the Sense of Hearing
Evinces plainly you are not the man.

That Servant you call Trusty, is a Traitor,
Or an o're-diligent officious Servant,
Whose care creates imaginary difficulties
And dangers, where the way is safe, and easy.
Please to consult the Steward of your Soul,
And Ruler of your Senses, Your wise Reason.
Ask if nine Winters Cold, nine Summers Heats,
And almost a continual emptiness
Can choose but alter the Organs of the Voice?
Oh! Madam, Madam, did you know my Story,
You'd rather wonder I can speak at all,
Then that my Tone is changed: if that be all
The scruple, from this hour I will be dumb;
And give no food to your distrust.

It must be he.
Sir, you may spare that Penance; I'll delight
To hear you tell with this Voice, how your old one
Departed from you, and by frequent hearing
Forget the difference of their sounds. Believe me!
My heart shall ever be so full of joys
For your deliverance; I will not weep
When you relate your Sorrows.

Love, I am now thy Sacrifice, on this
Thy living Alter I lay down my life.

May the same fire that burns the Victim, seize
The Altar too, since I am it.

How charming she looks now?
When she was conceived, her Mother looked on Lillies.
O! I could stare for ever here! Wild Poetry!
Creatrix of Impossibilities,
Show me but such another among thy Quire
Of Goddesses, and I'll forgo my Conquest.

Make haste, my Young Master may chance to long for
Some excuse to be called away from his labour.

Mistress, forsooth.

Sir here's an Attendant of yours, a wise Maid that knows the smack of her
Mistresses Palate, and gives a shrewd guess at the sharpness of yours, has
brought you a Repairer of Falling Nature, and your Father-in-law is in the next
Room, who Desires to be informed, whether your Wife have breath enough left to
ask him blessing.


Prithee, bid the Wench come in, and tell my Father
We'll wait upon him presently.

Will you please to come in Sir.

Good morrow, Good morrow Children,
God bless you both.
What? have you gotten me a Grand-Child to night?

If we have not, Sir, 'tis the fault of the Planets, and not of us,
For I have ploughed and sowed in a rich mould.

O, Forsooth Cousin, was it for this you shifted me off
Last night? is your Melancholy melted away
In a Feather-bed?

Prithee Couz. excuse me, I'll give thee leave
To cheat me so.

Beshrew me, Forsooth; but your Husband's
A Gallant Gentleman!

Sweet Heart, here's my Cousin Isbel.

So, So, I'm glad I know my Cousins name.

She is a Lady, whom without a Letter of Attorney,
From you, I made your Substitute in my Bed.

Your humble Servant, sweet Cousin
I'm much obliged to you for the Pains you have taken on my
Wife in my absence. I hope, my good Cousin,
Your Father and Mother are well.

You are mistaken, Son, this is my Cousin Edwards daughter.

O! I cry you mercy sweet Cousin, I thought
You had been my other Cousins Daughter.
'Twas well I had two Cousins.

Isbel come after me, and dress me.

What a fine proper Gentleman my Son is grown?
Of what a goodly Garb and Presence! truly, Son, I sent two or
Three several Messengers to hearken after you.

Yes: whether he were dead or no.

O, thank you heartily, loving kind Father for your care,
But I never saw any of 'em.

The worse luck mine; I hope you tak't not ill.

No indeed Father.

Son, here's a Toy, pray desire your wife
To take it in good part; she shall have more speedily
When I die.

You are too bountiful, Sir, by this Light Oriental.
Tom, Go carry this to my Wife, it is her Fathers
Blessing, tell her.

And Thomas, fetch up the great Plate, and
Set it on the Cupboard in the Chamber --
And the Looking-Glass inlay'd with Pearl that
The Knight pawned, and forfeited.

The Old man will grow mad sure.

Nay, Son, now you take good Courses, my assistance
Shall not be wanting to you.

A pretty Gentleman! why was not I a dozen years elder?
'Tis a wish few women e're were known to sigh after, and yet
I grieve I am not; then it might have been my fortune to have
Taken the Love my Cousin now enjoys. I cannot now think
Thy tears were in vain. Now I'm amazed thou did not
Die for him. Then had not I despaired for him,
Or been content with transitory Thomas.
I'll to my Cousin and forget him.

Come Father what service will you command me?

We'll even down to dinner and drink healths
To Hans in Kelder.

Content.

Have you burnt any Juniper in the Parlour?

Yes, Sir.
Come in Jack, come in.

How now Jack? what hast thou brought? my Cabinet?

Yes, Sir: and here's a Packet from Van Stoven.
Your Factor in the Mary.

Some good News sure; for he is very well pleased at it.
It tickles him, he smiles.

How long is't since these came?

Some two hours since, Sir.

Well then, I have leisure to stay here till Evening,
But then Father, I must crave your dispensation, and my Wives
Leave for this Night, the reason you may read there, if you
Vouchsafe the favour.

Hououred Sir, my Love to you remembered; I received Yours of the Fourteenth
Instant, wherein you commanded me to send you the state of your Affairs. I came
down this Tide with the Mary, and in my company came the Unicorn to Gravesend;
the Leopard, the Tygar, the Crane, and the John of London we expect the next
Tide. The Mariners are greedy for Money, because they have not any to fee the
Searchers to let their Parcels go uncustom'd; wherefore your presence, some
time this Evening would be necessary: you need not bring above twelve hundred
pounds Sterling with you, for I have here near three thousand Pieces of Eight
in Cash aboard. I have sent you herewith the Bills of Lading of your Six Ships
for fear the former I sent you by Peter Horen might miscarry. I have nothing
else at present to write, but that it would please Heaven to bless you; and so
I rest,

Your Trusty and Faithful Servant. [Here's a name will make my mouth ache.]
Hercules Herman Vansloven.



Now, he's poring on the Bills of Lading, where there are Parcels enough to
furnish the City these twenty years.

Coperas, Coperas, Coperas --

Yes: with Gall of your Worshipful Conscience,
Will make fine Ink for the Devil to write withal.

Indico, Indico -- Scutchionele, Ingots of Gold --

As much as you can lift; this old Coxcomb will stand
Poring there till his Spectacles grow blind:
I must put him out of it: Jack, come hither, have you
Received those Bills of Exchange from Hans?

He has accepted them, Sir, and for your present
Occasion sent you a Thousand pounds, but will not pay
The rest till the Bills are due, whereof Eight days
Are unexpired; so there remains upon 'em
Seven thousand pounds and upwards.

More wealth yet? sure he hath got a College of coining
Devils at his beck: else this was impossible.

Give me the Bills. Come, Sir, will you walk down
Into the Garden?

I, Son, there we'll confer.

My Heart, prithee make haste down, I am no body
Without thee.

I obey you instantly.

What a fortunate man am I in a Loving and a Rich Son?
In the afternoon we'll to Gleek till towards evening.

By that time my Coach may come, if you intend to make
Visits to day.

Sir, just as I was going down through the Hall, I met
The noise of Fiddlers that use to play the Healths to you, who heard
Of your arrival, will not be kept out with twenty Whifflers.

Bid 'em strike up hastily; but thrust out that
Old Violin that uses to set men's Teeth on edge.

Shall old blind David with the Harp come in Sir, he plays
Sellingers Round in Sippets the rarest --

If he do, remove the Cloaks into the Buttery,
He can feel, though he cannot see.

I will Sir.
Do you hear Porter, put out the Mandrake with the
Squeaking Christopher: Set the blind Harper in the Corner.
Now Fiddlers, scrape your Guts till your Hearts ache.

'Tis very well: Now Son let's in to Dinner.

We wait upon you, Sir: Come my Dear Love,
Though Fortune and your Father once have tried us,
Their utmost spite again shall ne'er divide us:
In kind Embraces we our lives will waste,
And double Joys to come, for Sorrows past.

SWeet Love, make as much haste home again
As you can.
I shall be sick till I see you again. I'm afraid almost to trust
You out of my sight, your former Voyage runs so in my mind.

I will be back again to night, if possible.
Business must be looked after Sweet-heart: Once more
Farewell till to morrow.
Here, Sirrah, take this Gold with you.
Hast thou got all?

Not left a Silver Spoon, nor a Hook to hang
A Napkin at.

Away then, make haste, and get aboard the Ship I won at
Gravesend: she rides now by Cuckolds Haven:
Stay there till I come to thee.

Why, will you not along with me? methinks
It would be very convenient to fly away in that
For fear of a surprise. We have got a handsome
Pittance that will make us live like Princes.

'Tis not mere Avarice incites me further; but a Design
Of higher consequence.

What then, would have the Wench away too?

Prithee be not scrutinous, but obedient; give out
That you are bound for the Barbados, and let your
Streamers be displayed, that I may know you.

But hark you, I must share in the Woman too,
When we come to America.

No more words, but away, lest some of the Servants
Should discover you; Sirrah Jack, make haste after me,
I'll stay at Limehouse for you.

Will you please to have a Fire this Evening, Sir?

Unthrifty Knave! hast thou a Plot upon my Charcoal,
Thou seek their ruin thus?

Truly, Sir, this Weather would endure two in latter fire;
And your Worship knows that is your stint.
(If I do not think
His body's as miserable as his Conscience, I'm no upright
Foreman.) The Thames is frozen over above-Bridge, Sir, and
Sackcloth-Towns are built upon it: 'tis such a Season, Sir,
Zeal cannot warm a man: for a Fanatics Teeth, as he
Passed by just now, shattered, as if one had plaid a Tune
On the Gridiron.

How now? whither so fast? Is your Mistress
In labour already?

O Lord, forsooth, Sir, my Mistress is undone.

The more shame for her Husband.

O Father, we are robbed.

That very Word sticks like a cake of Ice at my heart.
I dare not ask of what.

All your Plate, and the Jewels you gave me
Are vanished, as if they had been Apparisions.

Why, this comes of keeping no Fire in the house,
Any manner of light would have frighted a Thief.

Where was my Son?

He went out upon business as soon as e're you left him.

Ah! curse of his Journey! this is one of his tricks.
I thought what a Son I had got: send a Hue and Cry after him
Presently.

Pray do not wrong him:
I know his Noble Mind's so truly virtuous, that should he
Hear of your suspicions: he'd blush to death for shame,
Not of himself, but you.

He Sir? No, Sir, you're mistaken in Mr. Manley: I'm sorry
You should injure so worthy a Gentleman: I warrant he
Forgot to shut the door, and some body 'een slipped in
And stole away all.

This was your fault too, you Baggage; would
You have such a Treasure in your Chamber, and dare to sleep?
You never learned that of me, I'm sure.

O, here's the Gentleman himself now: you shall see
What he'll say to you.

'Tis not he sure, if he were guilty, he durst not face me gain.
You Housewife, hear you:
Not a word of what I said.

Be confident, Sir, I respect both your Honours
And your Safeties more high then to reveal it.

Where is this drunken Dog? with a Pox to him! must my
Business be neglected for his afternoons Drinkings? Prithee
Sweet forgive me,
I did not see thee, my impatience hoodwinks me.
Where is this Villain?

Whom mean you Dear?

This careless Rascal.

Whom Son?

Thus he serves me always when my occasions require
Greatest haste; he must be Tippling.

Good Son, tell us whom.

He's monstrous angry!

Why, my negligent Rascal Jack; I hope, Thomas,
You would not detain him.

By my troth, I saw him not this Evening, nor heard
Of him, till when you bid him make haste after you.

Is he not in the House then? now do not I know
Where to find him without a Conjurer; the Rogue
Has got my money too: Thirteen hundred pound in Gold,
And without that, I am --

Ha! then I smell Knavery, had he so much of yours?

He wanted not a grain of the sum.

As sure as can be, this Fellow is run away with all.

No: do not think so: alas! he was Cashier unto my Uncle:

And, methinks now to you.

I dare swear, his innocence in that point's equal
With mine.

Nay, be not over confident, for we are robbed too.

Robbed!

Yea, verily, robbed, all my Plate is run away, and
Your Wives Jewels.

It could be none but he, for I mist him presently
After your departure.

Nay, then I am confuted: O! these Knaves that can be so
False hearted! do they think there is no Hell, Father?

O, good Son, do not put me in mind of Hell!

But has the Rogue taken all?

All but my Wedding Ring, Love.

Nay, if that be safe, it's no matter for the rest:
We have more Jewels in my Ships.
Come, Sir, be not dejected, leave the melancholy;
Send it after the Thief, let it pursue his Conscience
Like a Hue and Cry: but what an afront 'twill be unto
My Credit, To have it said for a slight thousand pounds,
Manley was fain to beg help of a Broker.
O! I'm transported!

Dear Sir, be calmer, that may be soon repaired.

O! never! never!

Sweet Love, command your temper.

Shall my Factors send double Letters for so small a trifle?

He marks me not; good Father, do you speak
To him: his duty will not let him use you so.

What ails you Son? can you be patient at a certain
Loss? and care to think you must do that which Knights
And Lords do, borrow: I, and glad too if they can have credit.
You shall not stray for such a Sum; I'll be your Scriv'ner
And your Usurer.

O my dear Father!

Thomas, go; go fetch a Thousand pounds from
My house.

How shall I defer this? for ought you know Sir, he's
One whose tongue is taught to speak lies to
Gull you: this is too great a Trust to repose in any one person.
Oblige me but with your company, down stairs, and
There I'll give you Security for it, I'll not finger one penny else.

Well; I will not force you to do this; but yet
You may, Son, for mortality sake; for I protest, the
Reason I go with you, is not for Jealousy of you,
But to bear you company.

Here 'tis in Gold, Sir.

Come will you walk Son, we will take a Sculler at the
Next stairs.

I'll wait on you; my Dear, once more Farewell
This night will be the longest of our stay.
Thomas, get you gone to Justice Fowler for a Warrant,
And lay after my Renegade.

I will Sir. If I catch him, I'll make him piss Vinegar for
Stealing the Silver Chamber-pot. Ah, Rogue! no mercy of
A Young Gentlewoman.

Now, after my new Father-in-law -- His
Covetousness to have Security for his Thousand pounds,
Has made him willing to go with me to my Ship;
Where I will first clap him under Hatches, and then
Return and plunder him to a Joyn'd-stool,
It is decreed; Nor shall thy Fate, Old Man, resist my Vows.

Dear Sir, Welcome, you have almost
Outgone my wishes. where's my Father! Ha! he weeps; nay, then
My heart misgives me.

Oh! My eyes will better relate the Story then my
Tongue, which newly escaped the danger, trembles with fear,
And hardly yet can stammer my misfortunes.

Sir, the certainty of your safety will
Keep me alive whatever you relate.

Alas! the Story's short: Your Father's dead. He would needs take water in a
Sculler; And to save part of the Charges, going to row, overturned the Boat
upon a Buoy: he had a thousand Guineas in his pocket, which were too powerful
for his Age, so his money weighed him down, and Heaven knows whither it has
carried him. You may well think I did what I was able to have saved him; but it
was his destiny! Yet he had the comfort, which no other Usurrer ever had, to
have his Gold go with him.


Miserable woman! my sorrows never end!
But as some pass by, others succeed,
More bitter then the former.

Beshrew his Heart for it!
For, trust me, Sir, you discourse finely; methinks I
Shall desire to hear you often, you have
In a short time altered me much.

Peace dwell in your soft breast! Io! She's mine.

Now what would this whining fellow have? How now, Thomas, you hear the sad
News Thomas?


Yes Sir, I heard it to my grief, for having to no purpose searched all day
after your Man, I went in a Melancholy humour to the labour in vain, and
condoling your Worships misfortune over two pots of Ale, a dismal voice Croaked
out, my Masters death. Oh, Oh, Oh!


Alas poor Thomas, we must all die!


I have heard a great many say so, but they were all* Parsons, Sir, Yet now me
thinks I believe it too: And Die of such a death, Sir, and in such a place,
where he shall never be at rest, but roll up and down with the Tide, till one
ravenous Fish make a Leg of him travel on an errand to Bermudos, another lead
him by one Arm to China, Oh it is lamentable, and makes me continually cry and
howl.


Troth, Thomas I pity thee, thou drivel'st notably,
Why dost not get thee a bib?

I have bespoke one, Sir, and a dozen of Muckanders.


Look who knocks at door.


I Sir, who's there?


Is Mrs Manly within?


Yes, Sir, please to come in.


Save you, Sir, is your name Mr. Manly?


Yes, Sir, to serve you.


I'm glad to see you safe, Sir, but the Corps of the old man you left behind
you was taken up at the Isle of Dogs, his body lay 'oth' shore as I passed by
there. I was informed he was your Father in Law.


He was Sir.


Understanding his Relation to a Gentleman of your Nobleness, my Piety
commanded me to cloth him in a wooden Suit, and bring him hither to you.


I will go kiss him all over e're he's buried.


Spare your pains, Sir, 'twill be unnecessary, for the Coffin is nailed up, and
hooped with Iron.


You have showed much Humanity in this Action. Sir, I beseech you, do not rob
us of your company, till you have Finished that civility you have begun, leave
him not now, till you have left him in the Earth.

Take Order for his Funeral this Night, we must make hast with him to perform
the Will of the Dead, which was ever You know to save Tavern Charges; invite
all the Neighbours, and all's Acquaintance to assist our mourning; will you
please to follow?


I wait on you.


Doleful employment!
How will I gnaw the sweet-meats in my fury!
Out eat a Justice, and out drink a Jury.

WHat a Megrim I have in my head! The world is very merry, as I passed along
the Trees and Hills danced Trenchmore. Catch me at Sea again, and divide me
among the Mackrel, hang me, if the tempest be not yet in my brains, well I'm
glad I'm at my Journeys end. I hope Hazard hath thriven well, I was impatient
to know it, and that made me hasten speedily after him; here's the Cloister
where my Wife's mewed up, and that the door where those lights are! what's the
matter trow? Those Torches speak a Funeral, pray heaven she be safe.

'Tis Mr. Learcut Sir.


Ha, boy! prithee speak that again.


'Tis Mr. Learcut.


There's a Crown for thy News boy.


Thank you, Sir, would you please to know any thing else I can tell you?


Yes prithee, how, and when died he?


He was Drowned yesterday.


I'm sorry -- 'twas no sooner.
How hath he disposed of his Estate?

Troth Sir, I know not but I heard my Master say, his Daughter was to have all.


There's an Angel boy.


Sure the Gentleman's distracted.


Sir, I'll set thee up, Rogue, thou shalt be free of Guild-Hall. I'll change
thy Apron into a Gold-Chain; thou shalt talk to Gentlemen with thy Hat on,
come tell more good news, how does his Daughter resent it.


What's that Sir.


How doth she base it Knave?


Very sadly, 'tis said Sir, and the servants of the house say she would do much
worse, but that she is cheered up by her Husband.


Ha Boy!


By her Husband Sir, that came very rich from beyond Sea lately.


Give me my money again boy.


Excuse me for that Sir, my Father was a Gentleman's Falconer, and he told me
the first Principle of Hawking was Hold-fast, if you are upon that lock,
Farewell Sir.


Nay, friend, I shall take advice from your Father too, for holding fast, and
keep you here a little longer.


O Lord Sir, for heavens sake, my Master will hang me for staying.


And I'll cut your throat, if you offer to stir; this shakes me, if Hazard have
served me an old trick of Trustees, and entr'd my Freehold for his own use. I'm
rarely served -- yet if he would have don't, I have such high proofs of her
Loyalty I know it impossible! Yet woman though she be a fine thing must be
charily kept from touching, or she will crack like a China dish, with a little
blow. It may be he hath assured her of my death, and so hath wrought her well,
be what will, I am resolved I'll not appear till the solemnity be over, come
Sirrah, get me a room where I may see the Funeral march by, her'es the other
Crown for you.


I Sir, with all my heart, but beg pardon of my Master for me, he will rant like
a Corporal.


MAke hast up to Isbel quickly, there's an old toothless Lady that feels the
Burnt-Wine needs no chewing, has mumbled the Silver Flagon full, and calls for
more still.


And there's the Seamans wife, that sits next to her has wept out the bowl
twice filled in telling a mournful story, how her first Husband was wracked
'oth' sands for want of water.


A curse on her old dun Chapps! where the Devil does she find Stowage for all
she swallows?


Marry, hang her! she's Hogs-head risen in the Waste. These women of a Dutch
built are all Hold, within two inches of their Port-holes, both a low and
abaft.


Nurse, here's no body here but I now.


Andrew quickly clap this under the Stairs, and let my Son carryit home when he
comes.


I warrant you, by this light, 'tis as hot as a smoothing Iron, now fill me
mine speedily that I may be Jogging.


Fly, fly Andrew, they are ready to Choke for want of you, in the back Chamber
there's the Grocers daughter stands licking her lips at the empty Goblet, like
a Horse foundered upon all four, and rocks her self from one Leg to the other.


I'm there already.


More Wine for the Lords sake, there's a Feltmakers Wife within, come out of
Southwark, that inveighs against intemperance, she has sipped off my Lading in
her declamation, and is now fallen into a new discourse over Andrews. I'll say
this for her, she keeps close to her Text still. Dispatch me, Nurse this Pot
will hold'em some play.


The Women are all served, George into the Chamber where the Corps are, the
Gentlemen will be soon run over, for they are most of 'em Sack drinkers, but
have a care of the Constable, and be sure you fill him a brimmer, or he will call
twice.


The best way to please him, is to set the Pot to his Nose,


Prithee Nurse, quench me with a bowl of the sweetest. I am so dry, I shall
take fire else.


ARt thou sure 'twas he?


Am I sure you are not he? He was in the very Clothes you gave him first,
leaning out of the Tavern window one pair of Stairs high towards the Street
with a Tobacco-pipe in his mouth.


Take that for thy discovery. Columbus, boy Call Vnderwitt hither to me.
Vnderwit, welcome, I want thy help indeed now.


Why, what new accident?


Manly's come over.


How!


Nay, I know not how; whether in an Egg-shell, or a Man of War.


How came the Intelligence?


My boy going out for Torches saw him in the Tavern Window.


All's spoiled then, if we love our selves, let's sneak out at the back-door,
with what we can take up privately, unto our Ship, and set sail.


Whence this fear? Art thou turned Coward lately?


Faith, I thought I was valiant once, but then I was honest, I believe I could
yet make a shift to fight, but to be wafted up to Tyburn in a Land Sculler,
attended with a Train of Halberdiers, Truant-prentices, seems to me much
unlike a gentleman.


Come, be resolute, and dare thy fate. I'll teach thee how to ward this blow,
be thou but bold.


You know though I am no Master Architect of high design. I'm an indifferent
subordinate workman, and can obey directions.


Then thus,
Let me hug thee!

Hast thou never a little Cadua that follows thee!
Nothing less then a Devil could teach thee this.

Commit not Sacrilege to Mercury;
Nor rob him of his honour, he's the God of Coyners boy, and
Sublimates a wit.
He flies into my fancy when I'm moved there.
Away, about it quickly.

WHat a deal ado is here about a Fellow raised from a Whole-sale Cheese-monger
to be a Merchant, and Match into a Noble Family! What a Melody the Peckled boys
of Christ-Church made! A Herald Ushered the Hearse forsooth, and after that a
mourning Serving-man with a Crest. Thomas succeeded him with a Helmet instead
of a Butter Firkin, next marched his Hearse beset with Funeral Scutcheons (Azure
on a Fez Argent, three Tortoises, in chief as many Plates, which are by
interpretation, three Holland-Cheeses on a Stall, and the Suffolk on a Shelf)
in the rear of this came my Spouse, supported by my Benefactor, with a Pox to
him, and after him the whole crew of Billingsgate and Wapping.


Dear fair one, stop those flood-gates; you over flow,
Your health as well as beauty.

Sweet forsooth Cozen, be your self again.
To grieve that is to Capitulate with heaven.
Or repine at it, did you indent with Providence.
His Life should out last yours, thank Heaven for lending it so long; grudg not
to part with what's not yours when the Owner calls for it, as the Parson sweetly
told us.

By your Leave Gallants.


Sure I should know that Voice.


Do you know me Madam: Sure you are not so over-grown in Tears, but your Eye
may discern whether you know me then:


I'll satisfy you briefly. Sir, I ne'er till now beheld you.


No Sir, I am her Husband.


If any former Contract do Entitle you to make a claim, do it by Law, Our
Marriage cancels it, let the Church decide the Controversy.


Sir, forbear you are uncivil, if you have ought to say, Do it by your Proctor.


Do you think I'll be talked out of my wife?


Your Wife.


I my Wife ravished by thee.


Call for a Beadle hear to conduct this Madman to Bedlam.


Do, and bid him bring a whip with him, why thou base Impostor with what
forehead dare thou deny these evidident truths: can thou deny thy promise
made to me for my re-establishment in my Estate, and now instead of that,
ransak'st my rich Treasure, thou perjured Traitorous Villain.


These fowl words I know not how to answer.


I believe thee.


In terms as scurrillous, but the Laws shall revenge my silence, i'll provide
you a Desk with a window to peep out at, where exalted above the Vulgar, you
may declaim to the Admiring Porters.


'Tis a place i'll not dis-sease you of, you're heir apparent to the Pillow; and
in great probability to inherit a more lofty tenement near Padington.


You look as you would take a room there.


Counterfiting my person makes it yours by the Statute, Did you supply my wants
to beggar me, your Charity was a Plot I see.


What means that Orlando furioso, is the Moon at full that he raves thus? Your
name is Tom.


Is it so, and you would make it Fool: but e're we part you'll find I've wit
enough to prove you a Knave; you are Mr. Manly I hear Sir, whose rich Uncle
died lately, and left you an Armado of rich Indian Ships.


The very same Sir, would you serve him; bring a Certificate that you'll bid
none but your self: and that you can keep Close -- at Dinner time, and I may be
wrought to bestow a pied Coat upon you.


It would be better Husbandry to provide your self with a Clean Night-Cap, that
go out like --


Will sorrow be buried with him: Now must I wriggle my self into my young
Mistresses favour; bless me Sir, you have changed Clothes very speedily!


O here's one will dash thee,
Know thou me Thomas.

Know you, Sir, 'tis not so long since I saw you, that I should forget you,
do you think I do not know you because your habits altered.


Now, Sir, are you meditating an escape?


O Sir, I cry you mercy, I took you for Mr. Man.
But I see I'm mistaken.
I have bin with the Ringers, Sir, They are strong Knaves and have pulled out a
piece from me.

Now, Sir, are you in contemplation which is the nearest way to Bridewell.


Here's an impudent Fellow would persuade me I am not my self.


Is he of the Conspiracy too? Sirrah, dare you deny that I am her husband?


Dare thou deny she is my Wife.


No, Truly gentlemen not I.
But I am sure this is Mr. Manly,
For I saw him in Bed with his Wife this morning, and helped to dress him in
these very Clothes, and indeed la, I think you are he too,

Are you not well.
She faints again, I'll cut her Lace, run up to the Cabinet, and fetch some
Spirits somebody?

I saw a Goldsmiths boy slit a shilling once, and the Stamp was visible on
both parts:
Hath no body served you so Sir?

Why Reason we with one that wants it thus, in the mean time neglecting her;
forgive me Sweetest, Thomas, her eyes open.


Oh!


Bow her this way.


Prithee, let me prop my self with thy neck, O
Villain thou hast ruined me --
And on my Name stuck an eternal infamy.

I, dear Lov, thou shalt have any thing, give her more strong-waters, drink
till th'rt --

Drunk, and then I may be impudent! O whither shall I turn me?
If I am Just, I blast my fame for ever!
If I conserve my fame, my Faith's abandoned.
To be a Loyal Wife I must proclaim my self
A Strumpet.

As I live, she begins to waver, do you hear
Renounce him stiffly, or you know with what Tittle
The Town will qualify you.

It must be so. I must abominate a real Virtue,
That unto Vulgar eyes I seem unspotted.

Still weeping forsooth Cozen?

Pray rescue me from the impertinencies
Of that babbling brawling Fellow yonder.

We'll into your Chamber, there repose upon the Couch.

Such strange impudence I never heard of.


Will you vanish Sir? Do not disturb the quiet of this dwelling with your
unmannered railings, had you come in a fair civil way you had bin welcome, and
might have bin drinking with the Servingmen.


Friend, pray be moderate, if all this stir be for a Cup of burnt Wine, go home
and fetch your Dish* and the Porter shall bring it out to you.


Is't not enough to be gulled, but I must be jeered too?


That's he with the drawn Sword.


Come neighbours, let us steal behind him softly, softly.


How now, what mean you?


What! does he resist? Take away his Sword and knock him down Neighbours for a
saucy fellow! Not obey Officers?


Wherefore do you pinnion me? I am no condemned Rogue.


No, not yet, but you may be in good time, let's away with these Pick-pocket
Thieves, neither I, nor my Subjects can sleep on the stalls a night quietly for
'em.


I do not think but this is he that stole away my
Lanthorn, I dreamt of him presently after.

I, and I warrant you, he had my Bill too. Sirrah confess.


Is all the City Mad?


No Neighbour, I see he has no grace in him; he will not confess.


Let me but know my crime, and I'll obey your Wooden Power.


How now, Malapert Rascal! Talk to Mr. Constable, Kemb his Head with a Halberd.


No, Neighbour, patience, I will give him leave to speak; he has but a short
time, his breath will be stopped suddenly, alas friend 'tis no great fault you're
accused of; 'tis only flat Felony, taking a purss upon Shooters-hill; that's
all.


Who I? Let me see my accuser, I know he'll acquit me.


Oh, are you one of that Fraternity! he came hither, Thomas, upon some design,
is the Plate safe?


There was a silver spoon missing Yesterday, it may be he has it.


Let me but view the party robbed.


There he is, Sir,


Oh! are you the man? then I smell whence this wind blows, you are that
Cheaters Complice, when you robbed Sir.


Is Yesterday seven-night, so long ago you have forgotten it.


What did I spoil you of? your virtues? or one bale of high men, and another of
low? Forty copper Rings, and one gold one to put of the rest off?


Yes, those very things, besides twelve pounds in silver. How readily he can
tell the number! Gentlemen, remember he has confessed the gold ring.


I, I, I we'll bear witness, come, hale him away.


By heaven I'm abused! I came but this night from Sea.


Oh, Sir; These excuses will not serve.


Take but that Fellow along with me in the mourning Cloak, he's the arrant'st
Cheat --


How now, Sawcebox! what! abuse Mr. Manly? away, away with him, he's an arrant
Knave I warrant you.


Did you ever see such an impudent Rogue, Thomas?


Never since I was born Sir, but me thinks he's very like you good Sir, let me
bite a mark about your face, that I may know you.


TO what a Precipice do you hurry me,
My wicked thoughts! O whether am I reeling!
Why did I not acknowledge my delusion?
Then I had yet been white in my own innocence:
Whereas this rash black act of my denying him,
Stains me all over with incontinence.
Now I perceive sins do not walk alone;
But have long trains, endless concomitants,
Who acts but one will soon commit a Million.
He comes again, this ravisher of my honour,
And yet; I know not why, I cannot hate him!
Would he could put on some less pleasing form;
I am not safe in this -- But I must Muster
All I have left of virtue to resist him.
Peace to your fair thoughts, sweet Lady.

It must come then, by some other Messenger.
Thou art the Screech-owl to, the bird of night
That bod'st nought but ill: Why dost thou follow me!

Why do you fly me!

Because thou Breath infection on me: thou art
A Pestilence (or should be!) to my Nature.

If I'm infectious, 'tis alone with Love;
And then no wonder, if like those who bear
Contagion about 'em, I desire
To infect you with the same Disease!

I bear thy spots already in my Fame;
And they are Mortal to it.

They are not visible:
And so long, all conclude you may be cured
I can bring Cordials to restore your honour,
But you shun your Physician.

No, my Condition's desperate; 'tis past help.
I am undone for ever.

How many Women whose names stand white in the Records of Fame, have acted
willingly what you were wrought by fraud to suffer; only they keep it from the
public knowledge, and therefore they are innocent. How many Fair ones, were
this your story acted in a Play, would come to see it sitting by their
Husbands, and secretly accuse themselves of more. So full of spots and brakes
is humane life, but only we see all things by false lights, which hide defects,
and gloss 'ore what's amiss, -- Grant me your Love once more, and I will yet
restore your Honour: You shall appear as virtuous and innocent, as you are fair
and charming.


How dare thou move so impudent a Suit,
Or hope the least success in it! Can I think
Of all Mankind thou can restore my Honour;
Thou Thief, thou Murderer, thou destroyer of it.

I grant I am a Thief, and who so proper
To give Wealth, as he who robbed you of it?
But I have not destroyed it: 'tis it safe,
And does not that deserve some recompense.
Love me, and let me get a new possession
From knowledge of that good your Error gave me,
And you shall see what --

Never, name it no more; no prayers shall ever win me.
No Sophistry seduce, or Tortures force me.
To one dishonest act, now known dishonest!

What contrary effects enjoyment causes!
In you a loathing, and in me a love!
The sense of such a blessing once possessed,
Makes me long after what before I prized not!
And sure that needs must be the truest passion,
Which from possession grows; for then we know
Why 'tis, and what we love: all love before,
Is but a guess of an uncertain good,
Which often, when enjoyed we find not so.

Why am I forced to tell you that I love you!
I do, and blush to say it; but my guilt
Shall reach no farther than my self; expect
No fruit from my Confession, no new yielding.
Yet love me still -- for that I may permit you;
Think of no other woman for my sake,
And I'll forgive you what is past: and sometimes
More then I should remember you!

And is this all that I must ever hope?

This is too much!
Have pity on me, and demand no more:
Leave me some Love for him who should have all:
And, if you have so much of honour in you,
Invent some means to piece my shattered Fame.

Madam, I will not shame your Charity:
You have forgiven me, and I'll deserve it:
I'll give you from my self; though I can ne'er
Forget you have been mine: You have left in me
An hatred to all woman kind besides,
And more undone me in this short visionary joy
Of once possessing, then I e're could you.

Then Farewell!
Farewell the mutual ruin of each other:
Farewell a dream of Heaven; how am I tossed
Betwixt my duty and my strong desires!
Dash't like a ship, upon an unseen Rook;
And when my care can hardly get my off:
Yet I am ready to repeat my crime;
And scarce forbear to strike a second time.

How now, what News from Tripoly?


O Lord, Sir, 'tis no jesting matter, my Mistress is in the strangest taking,
she fomes as if she had the falling sickness, Curses like a Carman stopped going
up Ludgate-Hill, and has whetted the point of her Steel bodkin, as if she had a
plot on us, she has asked twice or thrice for a Knife.


Never fear her, I warrant you, she that will ask for a weapon is not
desperate; get you gone in to her, and twattle her out of the sullens if you
can; if not, I'll not long be absent.


I have done the business, the Justice was as stately as a drunken Constable at
midnight, till his Clark whisper^d him in the Ear what I had brought him, and
told him of your promise of a Turkey Pie at Easter, then the weight of that made
him lean to my party, and now he has committed him to Newgate.


Thomas

Vnderwit, a Word. We must break up house-keeping presently, and away; for this
Woman's plaguy peevish, and will discover all: go abroad quickly, we'll to Sea
to Night, though I am monstrous loath to leave Her.


'Tis impossible, for I spied one of the Sailours in a Strong-Water Shop, who
tells me another Ship fell fowl of our^, and has broke her Stern and Galleries.


Then we are lost!


No, not so; I'll help you out, so that we may escape gainers, though not so
great ones as we aimed to be. I thought on my expedient in my return from the
Justices, and least my memory might fail me, writ it down: There 'tis, Manly's
credulous enough to believe a formal story, And while you prepare the woman; if
I work not his dull clay brain to any thing, I am no Master Potter.


I like the design, let us about it presently; and with the Morning-Tide, down
to the Ship.


Neighbours, I am a Searcher by my Place, and a Constable by my Office; you are
my Trusty boys, that Watch my Candle, and take a care that I do not sleep in
the dark. I am not ignorant of your abilities, for every night I'm on the
Watch, you overcome eighteen penny-worth of my Ale apiece, besides what Thieves
allow that they may steal by us, and our extortions from wandering Wastcoateers,
with all which you are yet able to reel home in the mornings, which shows, you
have not only able Legs (and those I have seen you use very nimbly when you
have been assaulted by drunken Gentlemen) but strong Brains, wherefore
Neighbours I ask your advice concerning this Warrant.


Pray Mr. Constable, whose Warrant is it.


By' Lady, that's a hard question, for a Justice of Peace with the help of his
Clark made it, my Gossip Turnup paid for it, and she delivered it to me.


I but I mean Mr. Constable, from what Justice came it?


Why it came from Justice Shipwreck, a very able man: I know not what rent he
sits at, but that he paid a good fine for his place, it cost him a brace of
hundreds to be put into Commission -- but to the business -- my Gossip that
gave it me, told me it was a Warrant; but we Magistrates must not trust too
much to Information. I cannot read it Neighbour, pray do you.


Truly, 'tis a very pretty thing, how evenly 'tis cut!


Hold up the other end Neighbour.


Why, will you teach me to read?


No truly, I will not teach you to do that I cannot do my self; but I know you
hold it as if you were about to show tricks with the heels upwards. Well, this
is from the purpose how do you like the Warrant?


Very handsomely indeed, Mr. Constable, these dainty fair black strokes look
very prettily upon the white Paper.


Lord! To see what some men can do! How many scratches go to the making of a
Warrant!


Well, but what are the Contents?


Nay, there I leave you. I should have learned to write and read too, had not
all my time been taken up in running of Errands.


Give it my neighbour here, he was Clerk of a Parish once, and might have been
still, had he not frighted the Patron out of his sleep with Tuning a Psalm. He
has his Written-Hand at his Fingers ends.


I Neighbour, I can spy the business through these thick Spectacles. These are
--


What are they Neighbour?


A Warrant I'll lay my life on it.


Patience, good Mr. Constable to will and Command you --


I and you too, Neighbours, I'll not go else, do you think I'm mad, to be duckt
alone?


Well, one.


And Command you to --


Nay, by'r Lady, all four or none I say again.


Observe Mr. Constable --
To make strict Search --

I promise you I'll be strict enough.


And Enquire --


We'll enquire into every Hogshead in the Ship.
No Vessel shall escape unsearched, even to the very
Aqua Vitae Bottle.

In all suspicious places --


Hold, Neighbour, here is a very suspicious house hard by old Mrs. what do you
call's, that whiffes whole pots of Ale off, and cries Dam me you whore, pledge
the Gentleman -- Super naculum, or I'll fling the remainder on your Satin-gown*
She's a good one I warrant her, had not we best look there?


Indeed Mr. Constable, she's a virtuous Matron, pays Church duties justly
though she make no use of it, and does a great many Charitable deeds in the
Parish, she took a liking to my daughter, because she was somewhat handsome,
and keeps her I warrant you, in goodsilk gowns by'r Lady all the Term time.


Read on then.


Namely in the Ship called the William.


Mark that Neighbour.


Yes my namesake.


Riding about Cuckholds Haven.


Remember that Neighbour, that we do not forget whither we are to go.


Never doubt it, I call to mind a very good token, a Shipwright got my eldest
boy there in a Lanthorn of the great Ship.


For the Child of Widow Turnup -- O Young Rogue! steal already.


No, Neighbour, you misconceive that Child, for he is stolen poor fool, some
Knave or other has ticed him away with a baked Pair, and my Gossip hear's this
Ship is bound for the Bermudos, and suspects he may be spirited into it, truly
Neighbours consider soberly, and 'tis a very hard case, when we cannot get
Children our selves, but are forced to allow wages to Seamen, and labouring
younger brothers to do it for us, and as soon as ever we have 'em they must be
stolen, there's all our charges merely throne away.


Does any body steal Children?


Yes, familiarly when they have poor folks brats, the Church-wardens wink at
such small faults; nay, and some think (under the Rose neighbours) 'tis done by
their own Journeymen.


I would fain be acquainted with these Child-stealers. I have a Litter of my
little Urchins at home, I'll show 'em how they shall steal them every one, and
their mother too if they please, but then they must come in armour, for she's a
plaguy Jade, and will kick woundily.


On, On.


All persons whom you shall instruct, to bring before me, require in all
persons to be aiding and assisting unto you --


That's some comfort yet.


Fail not at the Execution hereof --


Execution! What? have we more power to hang, draw, and quarter with 'em, but
we cannot hang 'em, read that over again Neighbour.


Fail not the execution hereof on your peril.


I, There's the sting in the Tail of all Warrants, we must execute other men's
wills on our own perils, while they snort in security.


By the Mass, this is a dangerous business indeed! these Mariners are
boisterous Knaves.


We must even through stich with it. I have made my Will, and took my leave of
my Wife and Children; let's run to the Alehouse and say prayers over a double
pot, and then we may venture the more boldly by the time, Tide will serve.


Yes, Mr. Constable, but pray let's make all the haste you can, for you know
the Warrant says the Ship is now riding about Cuckholds-Haven; but if it rides
but a Trot or a hand gallop, it may be twice as far off e're morning.


Do not be afraid of that Neighbour, for while it turns round about it, it ever
now and then comes into the same place again; and there certainly we shall find
it, for it dares not disobey our Warrant.


I'll give thee a Tenement of four pound, per annum and let me go to Land
again.


I'd rather lie 'ith Bilbows, then in such a Hovel; it cannot be so convenient
as a Hammaque.


I'll give thee Cheese to Victual thy whole Family for a Twelve month, though
every soul were Welch.

A whole Tun of Butter to mollify thy stony Biscuit, and twenty new stamped
spankers tied up 'ith corner of a Handkerchief.


Your Cheese is mouldy, and your Butter fusty, your old Shop-keepers stick
friend.


What temper is this fellow made on!
This would have wrought me to have sold my Father to the Turks
I must bid higher yet,
I'll give thy Wife a watered Chamlet Petticoat,
Laced with embroidered Satin; a Gold wedding Ring for every Finger, no body
shall take for less then a Midwife, she shall have a rough Demicastor with a
Sugar-loaf crown; Coifs and Cross-cloaths numberless, a Silver Bodkin to
rectify her stairing hairs; new Neats-leather Shoes that creak, and murrey
Worsted Stockings.

You may as soon bribe Tempests, or with your entreaties calm raging Seas, as
tempt me.


Think the Land you see on either side to be a mere apparition.
Your sole shall not touch ground till you are in Bermudas.
If profit will not move, let pity stir you.
Let not these gray hairs
Be subject to the mercy of a drunken,
Or domineering Planter.

These hairs I reverence, that the honour
I pay to them may be returned to me,
When age shall make mine such.
But, Old man, your extortions have degraded you.
Had you shown pity to the Needy Widow,
You'd here not wanted it:
But to your Cabin, see if you can sleep on it.

Set me a Shore, I'll make thee my heir.

Alas! Sir, I am too old to believe the promises of men
In distress, I am a Seaman, and have been in a storm.

This was a kind Visit indeed to come aboard, you're welcome to the Masters
Cabin, Captain, were he here himself, I know he'd make very much of you; for
he's an old Seaman, and loves one with his life.


Honest Boatswain, thank thee; I read thy kindness in thy eyes, before I heard
it from thy mouth.


Noble Captain, once more, welcome; Here's good Wine aboard, and white Biscuit,
in to the Cook Boy, quickly, Bid him put some Beef in the Stew-pan.


I see it, and I taste it now.


What we have given for such in Algiers.


Nothing, for we had no money, had not you made your Escape, you might have
staid as long as I.


I hope we shall be able to requite their courtesies one day. I wear their mark
yet.


I believe, you had but little faith in the Hieroglyphic. When they Printed
it, that Anchor represented you but slender hopes of your redemption.


No, for each flook of it put me in mind how fast I was moor'd there.


But you took an occasion to Cut the Cable.


Yet I was strong enough to bring the Anchor with me.


I stayed till mine was weighed (I do you reason)


The other spoonful, noble Captain.


Here's to your boon Voyage.


I pledge you.


Whither are you bound,


For Bermudas.


Would I had never known't!


Had you any great loss on that shore,


Yes, such a one as I shall never recover.
I lost a quiet Conscience.
What store of Passengers have you aboard?

Very few yet, but we keep our Spirits hungry, and they are seeking prey in all
quarters.


How goes the Market now?


Faith low, a Crown a pole.
Fling out a rope, fling out a rope.

Who the Divel are those coming aboard trow?
Boy what are they? A Searcher come with a Warrant to Search The Ship.

Noble Captain, pray step upon the Deck, and hold 'em in discourse over a
Bottle until I give the word.


'Tis the least service I can do you.


But it is greater it may be, then you think of, what if they should come to
search after this old fellow? Then there's a Ship clearly lost, I must tack
about to gather wind, or I shall be driven backwards, now let me prove an able
Pilot, or my designs sink, where are you, Mate?


Do you mean to air me that I may keep sweet?
Or 'ist your plot I should see earth, and not to enjoy it, but to curse the
want of it.

No, but to seat you in it if you'll be wise; the last Conference I had with you
has struck a deep Impression on me, and so wrought me that could I see a
probability you would perform what then you promised me, you should be free as
I, within two hours.


Art thou in earnest?


Were you in earnest when you promised me to make me your heir.


Yes, by --


Nay, do not swear, but set your hand and seal to what I write here.


I, I'll subscribe any thing.
I'll sign any Covenants, but never perform any
And if he sues, I'll plead per Minas to it.

Here Sir.
I do promise to adopt Iohn Whistler my Son, and settle my estate on him within
these ten days.

That's all.

A trifle, then here I sign and seal.
Dull blockhead! He forgets witness too
This will never hold.

Well Sir, no this is done; I'll be better then my word. I'll let you see,
although I am your heir, I thirst not for for your death, I'll save your life,
Sir,


Am I designed to death then?


Without remedy, unless you take my Council.


Honest Son!


Here will immediately a company of Ruffians come, pretending they are Officers
(although in truth they are disguised Rogues, hired by the Master to sound if
you would me seek for the help of any you thought could free you from this
prison.


O Villains!


They'll set a face of searching the Vessel from the Keel to the Top-gallant,
and it may be they will blurt out some questions to entrap you; but if you
speak the smallest word, or think too lewd a Fellow with a butchers knife.


Were ever such things heard of! Twenty per Cent. is nothing to it.


We'll pair your weazand to the coar without any mercy.


How happy am I that thou art honest I'll warrant 'em. Il not speak a word to
'em, I'll breath as softly as I can too.


They come now, be wise, what would you have? come upon the Quarter-deck here.


The child was in none of those bottles we tasted was it neighbour?


No sure, for the Wine tasted very sweet.


And the bottle did not smell of Chamber-lie.


Pray Mr. Constable lets make haste, for I begin to be Sea-sick.


My Stomach wambles too. Lear.


Ah, ah where is he, Mr. Constable?


Oh, there, there, there, neighbours I think none of us can say our prayers,
but I am sure we can all run.


What hast they make! there's o^e of 'em tipped over into the River.


It may be he hath need on it.


His Comrades take little notice of it, for they are putting off without
helping him. Oh the fellow has got hold of an Oar, and will not part with it,
I'll go down to the Forecastle and keep sight of 'em as long as I can.


Content.
What cheer?

Are they all gone?


Gone, Yes.


Shall we ashore?


Yes.


Is the Boat ready?


Some three or four months hence it shall be to set you a shore in America.


Did you not promise Liberty to me,
If I would sign a Writing I delivered.

Yes, I did so.


You talked another kind of Language then.


Yes, but my meaning was the same as now.


Why, did you make me hope, but to despair?


Truth, there was much necessity for it, which you'll be apt to believe, when I
tell you when these Searchers came aboard, I feared they had made some
discovery of you, by some words you might let slip; wherefore I did apply that
promise finely gilded for a preventing Pill.


Thou hast not only then deluded me, but lost thy self by it, if thou dost not
yet perform it look but what an estate, I make thee heir of at least an hundred
thousand pounds.


There take your meat again, do not I know men in necessity are always
prodigal of promises? but once escaped the storm, the Saint to whom they vowed
is laughed at.


Well, Heaven thou art just! for when I made


Noble owners, welcome aboard, now Sir you may beat your bargain with them, the
old man and I have been bartering for his liberty, by the Mass he bids high.


Would you be out of the Ship?


Yes any where else.


Why, be but patient till we come to the Ocean; we'll fling you over board, and
tie a good Cannon Bullet about your neck instead of a Gold Ring in your ear.


Or what think you of being turned loose in a half Tub, or a Wash-bowl, like a
baited Cat.


Yes, you shall have your freedom -- but you shall serve for it some fourteen
years among the flax-dressers in the Summer-Islands, exercise will get you such
a stomach, Sir.


Is there no hope of ransom?


Yes, by sneaking out of the world to take a Nap with your Forefathers.


Come I interpose, and on condition you'll be tractable,
I'll prevail with this Gentleman, Sign those Articles.

Any.


He that is so precipitate in signing any, in my opinion resolves never to keep
any, though he huddle on now, he will put on his spectacles, I fear, when he
should perform 'em.


To clear that scruple I will swear performance,
And if I fail may he whom I invoke --

There's a necessity in believing him, yet still I doubt.


Do not, who knows his space, diet may have caused much mortification? shall I
read 'em to you?


With all my heart. Manly by her Grand-father with interest to this day to her
Husband, that you bestow on me and the rest of my friends two thousand pounds
for taking the pains to make you just and honest, that such as have had any
hand in your Cure shall pass undamaged by any Suits from you, and indempnified
from the rigour of any Laws, in Condition of which we will make restitution of
all we have taken from you, together with your Liberty.


These are but reasonable, I assent to 'em,
Nay more, I thank you, and shall reckon you
My greatest benefactors, for you have
Restored me man, before I was a muck-worm.

I have obtained my ends then, which were only to reduce you to terms of
Justice.
Boatswain, this Ship's the wages of thy fidelity.

Gentlemen I thank you, and I beseech you let a friend of mine be welcome to
you in her, noble Captain, be pleased to come into the Cabin.


I am astonished -- but my amazement must turn to reverence.

All things conspire to crown me happy, spare that labour,
Sir, reserve your knees for Heaven and your Parents --

Do you deny me then.

No, but I beg pardon of you
My earnest Zeal to make you restitution
Will not permit me, to relate the cause of it,
Least it defer your happiness, but if you will with me --

Will I? Yes into an earthquake, Mr. Learcut I beseech you dispense with me
till Evening; I'll meet you then at your own House.

With all swiftness imaginable,
Will you along Sir.

Yes, I follow you.

Release the Waterman, how does he take it?

Faith very well, Sir, I've kept him drunk ever since.

Give him that for the loss of his time.
Well, Sir, Farewell, at seven I'll be at your own home.

Is the Boat ready now?

It is, Sir.

To shore with me quickly, then I shall never believe I'm there, till I feel my
feet touch the ground, a comfortable Ditch in the Isle of Dogs now would
confirm me.

Suppose I did believe, that on necessity
This Usurpation of my name and bed
Were to be pardoned, that my Wife's untouched yet.
Yet comes it in the reach of possibility
That to be dragged to the Goal, hither, to Newgate
To be squeezed down into the Dungeon
Among ten thousand grey Confederates,
But a degree beneath a Pick-pocket
To be thus Manacled, next Goal-delivery
To be turned over to Tyburn for my good.

Have you but patience, and you'll grant it is;
For your harsh usage here, 'twas you that pulled it
Upon your self, had not this trick been put on you,
You'd ruined both your self and me.

Yes, I believe,
I had undone your hopes upon my Wife
But thereby built my self a goodly Fabric
Seated full Lord of her estate.

There's your mistake you think that she is Mistress of all Learcuts Wealth.

Yes, Sure.

She hath no interest in it at all.

Why have you changed the property, and sent it
Beyond Seas?

No indeed. Yet she hath no right in it.

Do not I know Learcut had none to give it to?
Not so much as a Gingerbread Cozen
To bestow a Ring with a Deaths-head on? is not she is Heir!

No.

Who is then?

No body.

He was no felo de se.

Very far from it.

The Man talks Riddles.

You will find 'em truths.
Because you saw the old man buried,
You therefore do conclude him dead.

What if I do.
That way of reasoning, once upon a time,
Was not thought much incongruous, however now
You Wits of the first rate disapprove it.

'Tis but a Fallacy, and I'll resolve it
Without the help of Logic, the old Usurer
By my contrivance was conveyed away
To a secure place; in the Interim
Your Wife and I did celebrate his Funerals,
Burying a weighty Coffin for his Worship,
Thus we resolved to keep him in restraint
Till we could either force him to be just,
Or re-imburse us out of his estate.
Now I have got's consent, he will pay you Sir,
Eight thousand pounds with interest, and receive
You into favour if you yield to this.
I would advise you to it; I will release him,
And in his liberty, you shall meet your own,
If not, I'll drown your Father in Law in earnest.
Transport away your Wife to the West-Indies.
Keep all the estate, and the next Sessions.
I'll hang you for a High-way man, I have Money,
And the City certainly can furnish me
With witnesses for good considerations.

He talks unhappy. I must believe him,
For my own safety, this choak-pare must down.
I do believe you, that my Wife's unstain'd,
If I believe amiss, I pray forgive me.
I thank you for your fine contrivances:
If you have had any closer then ordinary
With my dear Chicken thank, you for them too.
I am not the first Gentleman hath borne
A Horn in's Crest.

To clear that Scruple,
I Swear --

Nay, good Sir do not, for an Oath
Will not make me believe a tittle more.

Come then, we will walk down and discharge you instantly.
I have a Warrant here will do it, from thence,
Home to your Father-in-Laws.

As speedy as you can, for I am
Much out of Love with this fashion of ruffle Cuffs.

Day light's shut in, and yet my doors are open,
Here has been good House-keeping, I warrant you,
Since my departure, meat Ushered up with Music,
And all the Parish have been in the bottom
Of the Cellar, I'll shut the door and steal in softly
To descry the behaviour of my Family.

O Lord Thomas shift for your self.

Is death such an excellent Cure for the Gout, he can walk Now. Up to my Mrs.
quickly Isbel, she can say prayers.

If he had been a mannerly Ghost he would never have Disturbed us.

This comes of not making Love in the day time, then There's never a Spirit of
e^m all dares show his face.

Oh! he comes again!

What do you fear? Why do you shun me thus.
I am not Pestilential, nor Leaprous.
Gone without answering, is this House mine?
Sure I'm on Ship-board, yet my giddy brains
Have played the Carpenters and built these Houses.
Now, me thinks some body knocks at door,
And now, methinks I open it.
And now, my thinks, here is a boy, I cannot dream
All this, what would you have boy.

I should speak with Mr. Manly, Sir,

Me thinks he speaks too.

He bid my Master send in his Bill to Night, and I have brought it.

What is thy Master boy?

A Vintner, Sir.

Hey day! My years store exhausted in two dares,
I'll examine this boy farther, For what Wine is't boy.

For the Burnt-Clarret, Sir, at Mr. Learcuts Funeral.

Ha, boy! is he buried; if he be, they have not laid weight enough on him to
keep him under ground, for I am he boy.


Ha, is the Devil so well pleased at a Usurers Burial, that he comes in person
to defray the charges, bless me! I see his Cloven foot now, sure he cannot run
as fast with that as I with mine.


How now, the boy is fled too? it seems then I am dead and buried, and bring my
own Ghost to fright 'em, this is very pretty. I have a fine Daughter in the
mean time, that this conspires against me, well, I will prosecute my adventure,
and since you have made me an Inhabitant of the lower Region. I'll ramble
through every Room, and play some fair Tricks among you.


Sir, I beseech you check these swelling Torrents of my amazement, lest the
Lawless Flood pull up my senses by the roots; Why, do you deny to accept that
duty you have hitherto smiled on, when e're I tendered?


Can you pardon my Usurpation of your bended knees,
When you shall know that I am not your Father?

It is a knowledge I should never thirst after,
But with more fervent prayers wish, I may
Continue in an ignorance I dote on:
Yet, if it be your will to cast me off,
I shall submit to it, and who here
You turn me over for a Son unto,
My thoughts shall still acknowledge you my Father.

Some Five and twenty Years are past, since setting forth
A Ship for the Bermudas, and employing
My Agents (people commonly called Spirits)
To furnish me for my Plantation
With such as were to inhabit it, one of 'em
Brought you unto me in your Nurses arms.
I Shipped you both with me your Foster Mother
Dyed in the Voyage of a Calenture.
Seeing you destitute, and with my self
Considering I had made you so, my heart
Immediately was filled with Love and Pity.
I carefully provided for your health,
And when you were ripe for generous education,
You wanted not what I could help you to.

You have by this astonishment given me occasion
To be inquisitive, pray be not offended
If I ask why, till now you near disclosed
This weighty secret to me.

I was so proud of you,
That I resolved no man should lay claim to you
Unless my self; you may remember I
With swelling eyes upon your Cheeks did leave
My parting Tears in Holland, where I last left you.
You know, I then was a Captain of a Ship
In the Fleet bound for Brazile in the States service
When a stout Turkish Squadron mastered them,
Then were we Fettered all and sent to Algier,
Where we were used with utmost Barbarism.
Then penitence instructed my moist eyes
To wash my sins in Tears. I did so, vowing
(If I ever were free) as far as possible
To make you reparation; gentle Heaven,
Having a care of you, preserved me,
For about six months since, I was redeemed
Amongst others by the Public Charity.
We now wear the accomplishment of my penitence,
For to some House adjacent you're indebted
For your birth, your father will be easier found,
And when we know him,
He will make no scruple to acknowledge you,
After he views the Evidence, I bring with me:
But we burn day-light, and defer your blessing*
Let us enquire.

Hear are discoveries,
More worth the Note then those of the new World.

Have you leapt out of your Senses?
Are you possessed?

Sweet Mrs. send for a Cunning Man.


Good Mrs. Isbel, hide me under your Petticoats, that the Divel may not find
me, they say he dares not peep under a Maids Coat.


Are you Lunatic?


What strange Monster have your fancies been brought to Bed of?


O Lord Mrs. he leapt in the Key-hole, he has got Firebrands instead of eyes.


I, and he draws a great Chain after him*


Is not the Monkey broke loose?


I will believe now? Now he's playing his pranks in the Kitchen, he will be in
the Closet among


What should that noise be trow?


Ten to one but the Cats are showing Christmas gambals.


Do I speak truth yet? good Spirit do not pick my bones,
I am but lean, and not food good enough for an old Divel.

Spare me, I beseech you good Mr. Beelzebub.


Fear not t'approach me, for I am yet alive, rumour was somewhat too hasty to
kill me, and some of my friends over pious to bury me before I was cold, but I
forgive all.


What Miracle's this? The Emblem of an Apostate? The Spirit tuned flesh.


This is comfortable News, I'm sure it makes the Spirits return to my flesh.


I'm afraid still, prithee Thomas Cheer me up.


Madam I now at length present him to you, whose shadow I did represent --


Sir, you are welcome.


Do you know me now then?


Sir, I hope this Gentleman your Friend, hath explained that to you.


Yes, and all scruples are vanished now,
And yet I hear the worst betwixt you.

How's this? are not you my Son in Law, Sir,


No indeed, Sir I only attempted your conversion in my Friends behalf.


But you were my Daughters Bed-fellow in his behalf.


Friend, That's a mistake too,
She's free from any unchaste touch of me.

Very likely.


Well then my true Son in Law, welcome, I will not fail a Syllable of my
promises.


Use Exercise, as playing at Cards, or Shuttle-Cock, do any thing rather than
be idle; and at night when you undress your self against the fire, chafe in
three or four short pithy prayers and the deeds done.


Why look you, Madam, to let you see how far I am from a desperate Inamorato, I
promise you faithfully I will never trouble you with this Sugar Courtship while
I live, if on these terms you please t'accept my Visits, they shall be
frequent.


Most willingly, for I affect your Conversation.


Well Thomas, I remit your errors; but have a care you prove true to me
hereafter.


Else may my Pigs ney, here forsake her Trusty Thomas!


Lo're your Top-gallant, you must stick here Sir.


I do with all obedience, and beg your Pardon Sir,
For those discoveries I put you upon.

Why to me all this?
Do you begin to feel compunction,
And now come to restore?

I do so, Sir.


Withal, I here make restitution too,

A son that six and twenty years ago was stolen from you by some whom I
employed; a Crime I hope heaven hath forgiven; if you cannot, here do I wait my
doom: (Nay do not stand so like a Statute, 'tis a truth I publish.) This
gentleman an Infant was brought to me in his Nurses Arms, about his Neck this
Whistle which I have kept like Meleagers brand.


This is the same, now I am completely happy
Even ready for my Tomb, and only Thirst
To live in thee.

May you live long and happy,
Dear Sister --

This Act of yours Cancels my anger.


You are kindly charitable.


The Brother and Sister are very intimate, and loving already; small kindred
are not taken notice of.


Sister Excuse me, If I lay claim to my new Privilege, I fear I have assisted
an exploit will shame us both. Nay do not blush but tell me, Did Hazard e're
enjoy you?


How do you like the new revived Gentleman?


In truth, he looks like a fine Fellow to make a Husband of.


Sister, I am much taken with your free Confession, Could I now find a way to
disanul the former Match, would you receive my Friend into your Bosom, that's
the only means to save your good Name, people will talk else.


Brother, let me see how, least my fame will suffer, And I will fix on that.


Sir, A word with you,


I will requite your plainness, Sir, in Specie. Were she now Teeming with a
litter of seven; nay did she confirm the miracle of that Lady who brought three
hundred sixty five at once, I would not quit her cause, I would not loose the
money I have long suffered for; but knew I how to compass that, and then be rid
of her, she should to grass to Night.


Will you compound, and take one half?


You tempt me shrewdly, how shall I be secured of it?


It shall be paid you instantly.


'Tis done then, I'll to travail again; Come give me your hand.


I, with it pawn my Faith to you.


Me thinks, I have driven a very good


Cozen your pardon, hark thee Haz.


Now your pleasure with me?


What think thou of my Sister? how dost like her?


Faith I like her very well.


What if I made a Match betwixt you two?


Faith I believe one of us would be content to forfeit our earnest, thou hast
not a mind to have her hanged hast thou?


No certainly, but if I could lay level at the troublesome fences of the Law,
what would thou say?


I'd say thou were an excellent Pioneer.


Would marry her?


Yes Fait, for we have both had the best trial of liking one another, 'tis true
I have had her before hand but that's but being my own Cuckold.


What mean these Whispers?


Sir they concern you much, you must have another Son in Law.


Where must I find him?


In this Gentleman -- Manly (whatever was pretended to, he never enjoyed my
Sister, till last night she was a Virgin.


I'll be sworn she was for Mr. Manly.


Then take your choice, there is a Marriage without Consummation; here's a
Consummation without a Marriage.


If Manly be contented, I am; for that way which renders my Child an honest
Woman.


Sir, he must be contended; He has been above seven years away beyond Sea, and
has never Writ her word he was alive; so that in Law the Marriage is void.


Then take her hand she's yours by my Consent.


And what is more, by mine. This way my honours safe, but by the other nothing
but discontents and endless quarrels could have ensued. I hope Sir, you will
not judge the worse of my Virtue by what has past between us.


I was in fault not you, but 'twas a fault, so fortunate, that I can ne'er
repent it; pardon me for what is past, and for the future all my wild follies
and debaucheries I'll leave and place my happiness alone in you.


And to encourage your conversion I'll give you Twenty thousand pounds with
her, and five times as much that I have in store for you Son.


Thomas you look as if your mouth were big with some request or other.


Me thinks he simpers as if he had a mind to be Married to Morrow.


Truly Sir you read my Thoughts, for I am as they say, a young beginner, and
fain would save the Charges of a Dinner.


'Tis granted.


Thank your Worships. Isbel set back your appetite some Four and Twenty hours,
and then you shall have your belly full.


'Tis a great matter to forbear so long, when a Woman's Stomack's up, but I'll
endeavour.


Send for a Noise of Fiddlers quickly.


I mean to dance this month without Cessation,
And to be drunk as at a Coronation.

TWice lately have you Graced our House before;
For Loves sake, Gallants, give us this bout more.
'Tis all we ask, you've reason kind to be,
When we're so moderate to desire but Three.
Could you deny the Dear that thus should woo
My heart, you've pleased your self, now please me too.
Two damned ill Plays, your favour has o'repast;
We keep our Loving kindness for the last.
When we grow eager 'twould show rude to scoff,
And to shrink from us with a dry come off.
You see what shift we make to meet again,
To Act with raw Boys, is Loving without Men.
What will not poor forsaken Women try,
When Man's not near, the Signior must supply.
Excuse our Play; we dare not hope its taking,
We're told of a fine House, and Clothes a making.
And these hired Signiors when we meet together,
May then wear Satin, though they now wear Leather.

