IS this the Seat our Conqueror has given?
And this the Climate we must change for Heaven?
These Regions and this Realm my Wars have got;
This Mournful Empire is the Loser's Lot:
In Liquid Burnings or on Dry to dwell,
Is all the sad Variety of Hell.
But see, the Victor has recalled, from far,
The Avenging Storms, his Ministers of War:
His Shafts are spent, and his tired Thunders sleep;
Nor longer bellow through the Boundless Deep.
Best take the occasion, and these Waves forsake,
While time is given. Ho, Asmoday, awake,
If thou art he: but Ah! how changed from him,
Companion of my Arms! how wan! how dim!
How faded all thy Glories are! I see
My self too well, and my own change, in thee.

Prince of the Thrones, who, in the Fields of Light,
Led forth the imbattel'd Seraphim to fight,
Who shook the Power of Heavens Eternal State,
Had broke it too, if not upheld by Fate;
But now those hopes are fled: thus low we lie,
Shut from his day, and that contended Sky,
And lost, as far as Heavenly Forms can die;
Yet, not all perished: we defy him still,
And yet wage War, with our unconquered Will.

Strength may return.

Already of thy Virtue I partake,
Erected by thy Voice.

-- See on the Lake
Our Troops like scattered Leaves in Autumn, lie:
First let us raise our selves, and seek the dry,
Perhaps more easy dwelling.

-- From the Beach,
Thy well-known Voice the sleeping Gods will reach,
And wake the Immortal Sense with Thunders noise
Had quelled, and Lightning, deep had driven within 'em.

With Wings expanded wide, our selves we'll rear,
And fly incumbent on the dusky Air:
Hell thy new Lord receive.
Heaven cannot envy me an Empire here.

Thus far we have prevailed; if that be gain
Which is but change of place, not change of pain.
Now fummon we the rest.

Dominions, Powers, ye Chiefs of Heav'n's bright Host,
(Of Heaven, once yours; but now, in Battle, lost)
Wake from your slumber: Are your Beds of Down?
Sleep you so easy there? or fear the frown
Of him who threw you thence, and joys to see
Your abject state confess his Victory?
Rise, rise, ere from his Battlements he view
Your prostrate postures, and his Bolts renew,
To strike you deeper down.

-- They wake, they hear,
Shake off their slumber first, and next their fear;
And only for the appointed Signal stay.

Rise from the Flood, and hither wing your way.

Thine to command; our part 'tis to obey.

So, now we are our selves again, an Host
Fit to tempt Fate, once more, for what we lost.
To overleap the Ethereal Fence, or if so high
We cannot climb, to undermine his Sky,
And blow him up, who justly Rules us now,
Because more strong: should he be forced to bow,
The right were ours again: 'Tis just to win
The highest place; to attempt, and fail, is sin.

Changed as we are, we 're yet from Homage free;
We have, by Hell, at least, gained liberty:
That's worth our fall; thus low though we are driven,
Better to Rule in Hell, than serve in Heaven.

There spoke the better half of Lucifer!

'Tis fit in frequent Senate we confer,
And then determine how to steer our course;
To wage new War by Fraud, or open Force.
The Doom's now past; Submission were in vain.

And, were it not, such baseness I disdain.
I would not stoop, to purchase all above;
And should contemn a Power whom Prayer could move,
As one unworthy to have conquered me.

Moloch, in that, all are resolved like thee.
The means are unpropos'd; but 'tis not fit
Our dark Divan in public view should sit:
Or what we plot against the Thunderer,
The Ignoble Crowd of Vulgar Devils hear.

A Golden Palace let be raised on high;
To imitate? No, to out-shine the Sky!
All Mines are ours, and Gold above the rest:
Let this be done; and quick as 'twas expressed.
Most high and mighty Lords, who better fell
From Heaven, to rise States-General of Hell,
Nor yet repent, though ruined and undone,
Our upper Provinces already won,
(Such pride there is in Souls created free,
Such hate of Universal Monarchy;)
Speak, (for we therefore meet) --
If Peace you choose, your Suffrages declare;
Or means propound, to carry on the War.

My sentence is for War; that open too:
Unskilled in Stratagems; plain Force I know:
Treaties are vain to Losers; nor would we,
Should Heaven grant Peace, submit to Sovereignty.
We can no caution give we will adore;
And He above is warned to trust no more.
What then remains but Battle?

I agree,
With this brave Vote; and if in Hell there be
Ten more such Spirits, Heaven is our own again:
We venture nothing, and may all obtain.
Yet who can hope but well, since even Success
Makes Foes secure, and makes our danger less.
Seraph. and Cherub. careless of their charge,
And wanton, in full ease-now live at large,
Ungarded leave the passes of the Sky,
And all dissolved, in Hallelujahs lie.

Grant that our hazardous attempt prove vain;
We feel the worst; secured from greater pain:
Perhaps we may provoke the Conquering Foe
To make us nothing; yet, even then, we know
That not to be, is not to be in woe.

That knowledge which, as Spirits, we obtain,
Is to be valued in the midst of pain:
Annihilation were to lose Heaven more:
We are not quite exiled where thought can soar.
Then cease from Arms; --
Tempt him not farther to pursue his blow;
And be content to bear those pains we know.
If what we had we could not keep, much less
Can we regain what those above possess.

Heaven sleeps not; from one wink a breach would be
In the full Circle of Eternity.
Long pains, with use of bearing, are half eased;
Heaven unprovok'd, at length may be appeased.
By War, we cannot escape our wretched lot;
And may, perhaps, not warring, be forgot.

Could we repent, or did not Heaven well know
Rebellion once forgiven, would greater grow:
I should, with Belial, choose ignoble ease;
But neither will the Conqueror give Peace,
Nor yet so lost in this low state we are,
As to despair of a well-manag'd War.
Nor need we tempt those heights which Angels keep,
Who fear no force, or ambush from the Deep.
What if we find some easier Enterprise?
There is a place, if ancient Prophecies
And Fame in Heaven not err, the blessed abode
Of some new Race, called Man, a demi-god,
Whom, near this time, the Almighty must create;
He swore it, shook the Heavens, and made it Fate.

I heard it; through all Heaven the rumour ran,
And much the talk of this intended Man:
Of form Divine; but less in excellence
Than we; endued with Reason lodged in Sense:
The Soul pure Fire, like ours, of equal force;
But, pent in Flesh, must issue by discourse:
We see what is; to Man Truth must be brought
By Sense, and drawn by a long Chain of thought:
By that faint light, to will and understand;
For made less knowing, he's at more command.

Though Heaven be shut, that World if it be made
As nearest Heaven, lies open to invade:
Man therefore must be known, his Strength, his State.
And by what Tenure he holds all of Fate.
Him let us then seduce or overthrow:
The first is easiest; and makes Heaven his Foe.
Advise, if this attempt be worth our care.

Great is the advantage, great the hazards are.
Some one (but who that task dares undertake?)
Of this new Creature must discovery make.
Hell's Brazen Gates he first must break, then far
Must wander through old Night, and through the War
Of antique Chaos; and, when these are past,
Meet Heav'n's Out-guards who scout upon the waste:
At every Station must be bid to stand,
And forced to answer every strict demand.

This Glorious Enterprise --

-- Rash Angel, stay;
That Palm is mine, which none shall take away.
Hot Braves, like thee, may fight; but know not well
To manage this, the last great Stake of Hell.
Why am I ranked in State above the rest,
If while I stand of Sovereign Power possessed,
Another dares, in danger, farther go?
Kings are not made for ease, and Pageant-show.
Who would be Conqueror, must venture all:
He merits not to rise, who dares not fall.

The praise, and danger, then, be all your own.

On this Foundation I erect my Throne:
Through Brazen Gates, vast Chaos, and old Night,
I'll force my way; and upwards steer my flight:
Discover this new World, and newer Man;
Make him my Foot-step to mount Heaven again:
Then, in the clemency of upward Air,
We'll scour our spots, and the dire Thunders scar,
With all the remnants of the unlucky War,
And once again grow bright, and once again grow fair.

Mean time the Youth of Hell strict guard may keep,
And set their Centuries to the utmost deep,
That no Ethereal Parafite may come
To spy our ills, and tell glad tales at home.

Before yon' Brimstone-Lake thrice ebb and flow,
(Alas, that we must measure Time by woe!)
I shall return: (my mind presages well)
And outward lead the Colonies of Hell.
Your care I much approve; what time remains,
With Sports and Music, in the Vales and Fields,
And whatever Joy so sad a Climate yields,
Seek to forget, at least divert your pains.

WHat am I? or from whence? For that I am
I know, because I think; but whence I came,
Or how this Frame of mine began to be,
What other Being can disclose to me?
I move, I see; I speak, discourse, and know,
Though now I am, I was not always so.
Then that from which I was, must be before:
Whom, as my Spring of Being, I adore.
How full of Ornament is all I view
In all its parts! and seems as beautiful as new:
O goodly ordered Work! O Power Divine,
Of thee I am; and what I am is thine!

First of Mankind, made over the World to Reign,
Whose Fruitful Loins an Unborn Kind contain,
Well hast thou reasoned; of himself is none
But that Eternal Infinite, and One,
Who never did begin, who never can end;
On Him all Beings, as their Source, depend.
We first, who of his Image most partake,
Whom He all Spirit, Immortal, Pure, did make.
Man next; whose Race exalted, must supply
The place of those who, falling, lost the Sky.

Bright Minister of Heaven, sent here below
To me, who but begin to think and know,
If such could fall from bliss, who knew and saw
By near admission, their Creator's Law,
What hopes have I, from Heaven remote so far,
To keep those Laws, unknowing when I err?

Right Reason's Law to every humane heart
Th'Eternal, as his Image, will impart:
This teaches to adore Heaven's Majesty:
In prayer and praise, does all devotion lye:
So doing, thou and all thy race are blessed.

Of every creeping thing, of Bird, and Beast,
I see the kinds: in pairs distinct they go;
The Males their loves, their lovers Females know.
Thou nam'dst a race which must proceed from me,
Yet my whole Species in my self I see:
A barren sex, and single, of no use;
But full of forms which I can ne'er produce.

Think not the power, who made thee thus, can find
No way like theirs to propagate thy kind.
Mean time, live happy, in thy self alone;
Like him who, single, fills th'Etherial Throne.
To study Nature will thy time employ:
Knowledge and Innocence, are perfect Joy.

If solitude were best, th'allwise above
Had made no Creature for himself to love.
I add not to the power he had before;
Yet to make me, extends his goodness more.
He would not be alone, who all things can;
But peopled Heaven with Angels, Earth with Man.

As Man and Angels to the Deity,
So all inferior creatures are to thee.
Heav'n's greatness no society can bear;
Servants he made, and those thou want not here.

Why did he Reason in my Soul implant,
And speech, th'effect of reason; to the mute
My speech is lost; my reason, to the Brute.
Love, and society, more blessings bring
To them, the slaves, than power to me their King.

Thus far, to try thee; but, to Heaven, 'twas known
It was not best for man to be alone;
An equal, yet thy subject, is designed.
For thy soft hours, and to unbend thy mind.
Thy stronger soul shall her weak reason sway;
And thou, through love, her beauty shalt obey:
Thou shalt secure her helpless sex from harms;
And she thy cares shall sweeten, with her charms.

What more can Heaven bestow, or man require?

Yes; he can give, beyond thy own desire.
A mansion is provided thee, more fair
Than this; and worthy Heav'n's peculiar care:
Not framed of common Earth, nor fruits, nor flowers,
Of vulgar growth; but like Celestial Bowers:
The soil luxuriant, and the fruit divine,
Where golden Apples, on green branches shine,
And purple grapes dissolve into immortal wine.
For noon day's heat, are closer Arbors made;
And for fresh evening Air, the op'ner glade.
Ascend: and, as we go,
More wonders thou shalt know.

And, as we go, let Earth and Heaven above
Sound our great Maker's power and greater love.

Am I become so monstrous? so disfigured,
That nature cannot suffer my approach,
Or look me in the face? but stands aghast;
And that fair light which gilds this new made Orb,
Shorn of his beams, shrinks in, Accursed ambition!
And thou, black Empire of the nether World,
How dearly have I bought you! But, 'tis past:
I have already gone too far to stop,
And must push on my dire revenge, in ruin
Of this gay frame, and Man, my upstart rival;
In scorn of me created. Down, my pride,
And all my swelling thoughts; I must forget,
A while, I am a Devil; and put on
A smooth, submissive face; else I, in vain
Have past through Night and Chaos to discover
Those envied skies again, which I have lost.
But stay; far off; I see a Chariot driven,
Flaming with beams, and in it Uriel,
One of the seven; (I know his hated face)
Who stands in presence of th'Eternal Throne.
And seems the Regent of that glorious light.

Spirit, who art thou? and from whence arrived?
(For I remember not thy face, in Heaven)
Or by command, or hither led by choice?
Or wander thou within this lucid Orb,
And strayed from those fair fields of light above,
Amidst this new creation want a guide,
To reconduct thy steps?

-- Bright Uriel,
Chief of the seven, thou flaming Minister,
Who guard'st this new created Orb of light,
(The world's eye that, and thou the eye of it)
Thy favour, and high Office, make thee known:
An humble Cherub I, and of less note,
Yet, bold, by thy permission, hither come,
On high discoveries bent.

-- Speak thy design.

Urged by renown of what I heard above
Divulged by Angels nearest Heav'n's high King,
Concerning this new World, I came to view
(If worthy such a favour) and admire
This last effect of our great Maker's power:
Thence, to my wondering fellows I shall turn,
Full fraught with joyful tidings of these works,
New matter of his Praise, and of our Songs.

Thy business is not what deserves my blame,
Nor thou, thy self, unwelcome; see, fair Spirit,
Below yon' Sphere, (of matter not unlike it,)
There hangs the ball of Earth and Water mixed,
Self-Center'd, and unmoved.

-- But where dwells Man?

On yonder Mount; thou see it fenced with Rocks,
And round the ascent a Theatre of Trees,
A sylvane Scene, which rising by degrees,
Leads up the eye below, nor gluts the sight
With one full prospect, but invites by many,
To view, at last the whole: there his abode,
Thither direct thy flight.

-- O blessed be thou
Who, to my low converse, hast lent thy Ear,
And favoured my request: hail, and farewell.

Not unobserved thou go, who ever thou art;
Whether some Spirit, on Holy purpose bent,
Or some fallen Angel from below broke loose,
Who come with envious eyes, and cursed intent,
To view this World, and its created Lord:
Here will I watch, and, white my Orb rolls on,
Pursue from hence, thy much suspected flight;
And, if disguised, pierce through with beams of light.

If this be dreaming, let me never wake;
But still the joys of that sweet sleep partake.
Methought -- but why do I my bliss delay
By thinking what I thought? Fair, Vision stay;
My better half, thou softer part of me,
To whom I yield my boasted Sovereignty,
I seek my self, and find not, wanting thee.

Tell me ye Hills and Dales, and thou fair Sun,
Who shin'st above, what am I? whence begun?
Like my self, I see nothing: from each Tree
The feathered kind peep down, to look on me;
And Beasts, with up-cast eyes, forsake their shade,
And gaze, as if I were to be obeyed.
Sure I am somewhat which they wish to be,
And cannot: I my self am proud of me.
What's here? another Firmament below,
Spread wide, and other trees that downward grow?
And now a Face peeps up, and now draws near,
With smiling looks, as pleased to see me here.
As I advance, so that advances too,
And seems to imitate what e're I do:
When I begin to speak, the lips it moves;
Streams drown the voice, or it would say it loves.
Yet when I would embrace, it will not stay:
Lost ever 'tis held; when nearest, far away.
Ah, fair, yet false; ah Being, formed to cheat,
By seeming kindness, mixed with deep deceit.

O Virgin, Heaven begot, and born of Man,
Thou fairest of thy great Creator's Works;
Thee, Goddess, thee th'Eternal did ordain
His softer Substitute on Earth to Reign:
And, wheresoe'r thy happy footsteps tread,
Nature, in triumph, after thee is led.
Angels, with pleasure, view thy matchless Grace,
And love their Maker's Image in thy Face.

O, only like my self, (for nothing here
So graceful, so majestic does appear:)
Art thou the Form my longing eyes did see,
Loosed from thy Fountain, and come out to me?
Yet, sure thou art not, nor thy Face, the same;
Nor thy Limbs moulded in so soft a frame:
Thou look more sternly, dost more strongly move;
And more of awe thou bear, and less of love.
Yet pleased I hear thee, and above the rest;
I, next my self, admire and love thee best.

Made to command, thus freely I obey,
And at thy feet the whole Creation lay.
Pity that love thy beauty does beget:
What more I shall desire, I know not yet.
First let us locked in close embraces be;
Thence I, perhaps, may teach my self, and thee.

Somewhat forbids me, which I cannot name;
For ignorant of guilt, I fear not shame:
But some restraining thought, I know not why,
Tells me, you long should beg, I long deny.

In vain! my right to thee is sealed above;
Look round and see where thou can place thy Love:
All creatures else are much unworthy thee;
They matched, and thou alone art left for me.
If not to love, we both were made in vain:
I my new Empire would resign again,
And change, with my dumb slaves, my nobler mind;
Who, void of reason, more of pleasure find.
Methinks, for me they beg, each, silently,
Demands thy Grace, and seems to watch thy Eye.

I well fore-see, when ever thy suit I grant,
That I my much-lov'd Sovereignty shall want:
Or like my self, some other may, be made;
And her-new Beauty may thy heart invade.

Could Heaven some greater Master-piece devise,
Set out with all the glories of the Skies:
That beauty yet in vain he should decree,
Unless he made another heart for me.

With how much ease I, whom I love, believe!
Giving my self, my want of worth I grieve.
Here, my inviolable Faith I plight,
So, thou be my defence, I, thy delight.

FAir place; yet what is this to Heaven, where I
Sate next, so almost equalled the most high,
I doubted, measuring both, who was more strong;
Then, willing to forget time since so long,
Scarce thought I was created: vain desire
Of Empire, in my thoughts still shot me higher,
To mount above his sacred Head: ah why,
When he so kind, was so ungrateful I?
He bounteously bestowed unenvied good
On me: in arbitrary Grace I stood:
T'acknowledge this, was all he did exact;
Small Tribute, where the Will to pay was act.
I mourn it now, unable to repent,
As he, who knows my hatred to relent,
Jealous of power once questioned: hope, farewell;
And with hope, fear; no depth below my Hell
Can be prepared: then, ill be thou my good;
And vast destruction, be my envy's food.
Thus I, with Heaven, divided Empire gain;
Seducing Man, I make his project vain.
And, in one hour, destroy his six days pain.
They come again; I must retire.

Thus shall we live in perfect bliss, and see,
Deathless our selves, our numerous progeny.
Thou young and beauteous, my desires to bless;
I, still desiring, what I still possess.

Heaven, from whence Love (our greatest Blessing came)
Can give no more, but still to be the same.
Thou more of pleasure may with me partake;
I, more of pride, because thy bliss I make.

When to my Arms thou broughtst thy Virgin Love,
Fair Angels, sung our Bridal Hymn above:
The Eternal, nodding, shook the Firmament,
And conscious Nature gave her glad consent.
Roses unbid, and every fragrant Flower,
Flew from their stalks, to strew thy Nuptial Bower:
The furred and feathered kind, the triumph did pursue,
And Fishes leapt above the streams, the passing Pomp to view.

When your kind Eyes looked languishing on mine,
And wreathing Arms did soft embraces join,
A doubtful trembling seized me first all o'r;
Then, wishes; and a warmth, unknown before:
What follow'd, was all ecstasy and trance;
Immortal pleasures round my swimming eyes did dance,
And speechless joys, in whose sweet tumult tossed,
I thought my Breath, and my new Being lost.

O Death to hear! and a worse Hell on Earth:
What mad profufion on this clod-born Birth:
Abyss of joys, as if Heaven meant to show
What, in base matters; such a hand could do:
Or was his Virtue spent, and he no more
With Angels could supyly the exhausted store
Of which I swept the Sky?
And wanting Subjects to his haughty Will,
On this mean Work, employed his trifling skill.

Blessed in our selves, all pleasures else abound;
Without our care, behold the unlaboured Ground,
Bounteous of Fruit, above our shady Bowers
The creeping Jess'min thrusts her fragrant Flowers;
Thy Myrtle, Orange, and the blushing Rose,
With bending heaps so nigh their blooms disclose,
Each seems to smell the flavor which the other blows:
By these the Peach, the Guava, and the Pine,
And creeping 'twixt 'em all, the mant'ling Vine,
Does round their trunks, her purple clusters twine.

All these are ours, all nature's excellence
Whose taste or smell can bless the feasted sense.
One only fruit, in the mid garden placed,
(The tree of knowledge,) is denys our taste;
(Our proof of duty to our Maker's will.)
Of disobedience, death's the threatened ill.

Death is some harm, which, though we know not yet
Since threatened, we must needs imagine great:
And sure he merits it, who disobeys
That one command, and one of so much ease.

Must they then dye, if they attempt to know
He sees they would rebel, and keeps them low.
On this foundation I their ruin lay.
Hope to know more shall tempt to disobey
I fell by this, and, since their strength is less,
Why should not equal means give like success?

Come, my fair love, our mornings task we lose;
Some labour even the easiest life would choose:
Ours is not great; the dangling boughs to crop,
Whose too luxuriant growth our Alleys stop,
And choke the paths: this our delight requires,
And Heaven no more of daily work desires

With thee to live, is Paradise alone:
Without the pleasure of thy sight, is none.
I fear small progress will be made this day;
So much our kisses will our task delay.

Why have not I like these, a body too,
Formed for the same delights which they pursue?
I could (so variously my passions move)
Enjoy and blast her, in the act of love.
Unwillingly I hate such excellence;
She wronged me not; but I revenge th'offence
Through her, on Heaven whose thunder took away
My birth-right-skyes! live happy whilst you may,
Blessed pair, you're not allowed another day!

Ithuriel, since we two Commissioned are
From Heaven the Guardians of this new-made pair,
Each mind his charge, for, see, the night draws on,
And rising mists pursue the setting Sun.

Blessed is our lot to serve; our task we know:
To watch, least any, from th'Abyss below,
Broke loose, disturb their sleep with dreams; or worse,
Assault their beings with superior force.

Gabriel, if now the watch be set, prepare
With strictest guard, to show thy utmost care.
This morning came a spirit, fair he seemed,
Whom, by his face, I some young Cherub deemed,
Of Man he much inquired and where his place,
With shows of zeal to praise his maker's grace;
But I, with watchful eyes, observed his flight,
And saw him on you steepy Mount alight,
There, as he thought unseen, he laid aside
His borrowed masque, and reaslum'd his pride:
I marked his looks, averse to Heaven and good;
Dusky he grew, and long revolving stood
On some deep, dark design; thence shot with hast,
And over the mounds of Paradise he past:
By his proud port, he seemed the Prince of hell;
And here he lurcks, in shades, till night: search well
Each grove and thicket, pry in every shape,
Left, hid in some, th'arch hypocrite escape.

If any spirit come t'invade, or scout
From hell, what earthy fence can keep him out?
But rest secure of this, he shall be found,
And taken, or proscribed this happy ground.

Thou to the East, I westward walk the round;
And meet we in the midst

Heaven your design.
Succeed, your charge requires you, and me mine.

So, now they lye, secure in love, and steep
Their sated senses in full draughts of sleep.
By what sure means can I their bliss invade?
By violence? No; for they're immortal made.
Their Reason sleeps; but Mimic fancy wakes.
Supply's her parts, and wild Idea's takes
From words and things, ill sorted, and misjoyn'd;
The Anarchie of thought and Chaos of the mind:
Hence dreams confused and various may arise;
These will I set before the Woman's eyes;
The weaker she, and made my easier prey;
Vain shows, and Pomp, the softer sex betray.
Look up, look up, and see
What Heaven prepares for thee;
Look up, and this fair fruit behold,
Ruddy it smiles, and rich with streaks of gold.
The loaded branches downward bend,
Willing they stoop, and thy fair hand attend
Fair Mother of Mankind, make haste
And bless, and bless thy senses with the taste.

No; tis forbidden, I
In tasting it shall dye.

Say who enjoined this harsh command.

'Twas Heaven; and who can Heaven withstand?

Why was it made so fair, why placed in sight?
Heaven is too good to envy man's delight.
See, we before thy face will try,
What thou so fear and will not dye.

Behold what a change on a sudden is here!
How glorious in beauty how bright they appear!
From spirits deformed they are Deities made
Their pinions at pleasure, the clouds can invade,
Till equal in honour they rise
With him who commands in the skies:
Then taste without fear, and be happy and wise.

Ah, now I believe; such a pleasure I find
As enlightens my eyes, and enlivens my mind.
I only repent
I deferred my content.

Now wiser experience has taught you to prove
What a folly it is,
Out of fear to shun bliss.
To the joy that's forbidden we eagerly move;
It enhances the price, and increases the love

To the joy, c.

What art thou? speak thy name, and thy intent.
Why here alone? and on what errand sent?
Not from above: no, thy wan looks betray
Diminished light, and eyes unused to day.

Not to know me, argues thy self unknown:
Time was when, shining next th'Imperial throne,
I sate in awful state; while such as thou
Did, in th'ignoble crowed at distance bow.

Think thou, vain spirit, thy glories are the same?
And see not sin obscures thy God-like frame?
I know thee now, by thy ungrateful Pride;
That shows me what thy faded looks did hide.
Traitor to him who made, and set thee high;
And fool, that power which formed thee to defy.

Go, slaves, return, and fawn in Heaven again;
Seek thanks from him whose quarrel you maintain.
Vile wretches! of your servitude to boast:
You basely keep the place I bravely lost.

Freedom is choice of what we will and do:
Then blame not servants who are freely so.
'Tis base, not to acknowledge what we owe.

Thanks, how ever due, proclaim subjection yet:
I fought for power to quit th'upbraided debt.
Who ever expects our thanks himself repays;
And seems but little, who can want our praise.

What in us duty, shows not want in him:
Blessed in himself alone --
To whom no praise we, by good deeds, can add;
Nor can his glory suffer from our bad.
Made for his use; yet he has formed us so
We, unconstrained, what he commands us do.
So praise we him and serve him freely best:
Thus thou, by choice, art fallen, and we are blessed.

This, lest thou think thy plea unanswered, good;
Our question thou evad'st, how did thou dare
To break Hell bounds, and near this humane pair
In nightly ambush lye?

Lives there who would not seek to force his way
From pain, to ease; from darkness, to the day?
Should I, who found the means to escape, not dare
To change my sulphu'rous smoke, for upper Air?
When I, in fight, sustained your Thunderer,
And Heaven on me, alone spent half his war,
Think thou those wounds were light? should I not seek
The clemency of some more temperate Clime
To purge my gloom; and by the Sun refined,
Bask in his beams, and bleach me in the wind?

If pain to shun, be all thy business here,
Methinks, thy fellows the same course should steer.
Is their pain less who yet behind thee stay?
Or thou less hardy to endure than they?

Nor one, nor the other; but as leaders ought,
I ventured first alone; first danger sought;
And first explored this new created frame,
Which filled our dusky Regions with its fame:
In hopes my fainting Troops to settle here,
And to defend, against your Thunderer,
This spot of earth; or nearer Heaven repair,
And forage to his gates from Middle Air.

Fool, to believe thou any part eanst gain
From him, who could not thy first ground maintain.

But whether that design, or one as vain,
T'attempt the lives of these, first drew thee here;
Avoid the place; and never more appear
Upon this Hallowed earth else prove our might.

Not that I fear, do I decline the fight:
You I disdain; let me with him contend
On whom your limitary power's depend.
More honour from the sender than the sent:
Till then, I have accomplished my intent;
And leave this place, which but augments my pain
Gazing to wish, yet hopeless to obtain.

STrange was your dream, and full of sad portent;
Avert it, Heaven, (if it from Heaven were sent:)
Let on thy foes the dire presages fall;
To us be good and easy, when we call.

Behold, from far a breaking Cloud appears,
Which, in it, many winged wariours bears.
Their glory shoots upon my aching sense;
Thou stronger may endure the flood of light,
And while in shades I cheer my fainting sight
Encounter the descending excellence.

First of mankind, that we, from Heaven are sent
Is from Heav'n's care thy ruin to prevent.
Th'Apostate Angel has, by night, been here,
And whispered through thy sleeping consorts ear
Delusive dreams, thus warned by us, beware;
And guide her frailty, by thy timely care.

These, as thy guards from outward harms, are sent:
Ills, from within, thy reason must prevent.

Natives of Heaven, who, in compassion deign
To want that place where joys immortal reign,
In care of me; what praises can I pay
Defended in obedience; taught to obey?

Praise him alone who, God-like, formed thee free,
With will unbounded, as a Deity;
Who gave thee reason, as thy Aid, to choose
Apparent good, and evil to refuse.
Obedience is that good; This Heaven exacts
And Heaven, all just, from man requires not acts
Which man wants power to do: power then is given
Of doing good; but not compelled by Heaven.

Made good; that thou dost to thy Maker owe:
But to thy self, if thou continu'st so.

Freedom of will, of all good things is best;
But can it be by finite man possessed?
I know not how Heaven can communicate
What equals man to his Creators state.

Heaven cannot give his boundless power away;
But boundless liberty of choice he may.
So Orbs, from the first mover, motion take;
Yet each their proper revolutions make.

Grant Heaven could once have given us liberty;
Are we not bounded, now, by firm decree,
Since what so ever is preordain'd, must be?
Else Heaven, for man, events might preordain,
And man's free will might make those orders vain.

Th'Eternal, when he did the world create,
All other agents did necessitate:
So, what he ordered, they by nature do;
Thus light things mount, and heavy downward go.
Man only boasts an arbitrary state.

Yet causes their effects necessitate
In willing agents: where is freedom then?
Or who can break the chain which limits men
To act what is unchangeably forecast.
Since the first cause gives motion to the last?

Heaven by fore-knowing what will surely be,
Does only, first, effects in causes see;
And finds, but does not make necessity.
Creation, is of power and will th'effect,
Foreknowledge only of his Intellect;
His prescience makes not, but supposes things;
Infers necessity to be; not brings.
Thus thou art not constrained to good or ill;
Causes which work th'effect, force not the will.

The force unseen, and distant I confess;
But the long chain makes not the bondage less.
Even Man himself may to himself seem free,
And think that choice which is necessity.

And who but man should judge of man's free state?

I find that I can choose to love, or hate;
Obey, or disobey; do good, or ill:
Yet such a choice is but consent; not will.
I can but choose what he has first designed,
For he before that choice, my will confined.

Such impious fancies, where they entrance gain,
Make Heaven, all pure, thy crimes to preordain.

Far, far from me be banished such a thought:
I argue only to be better taught.
Can there be freedom, when what now seems free
Was founded on some first necessity?
For what ere cause can move the will t'elect
Must be sufficient to produce th'effect:
And what's sufficient must effectual be;
Then how is man, thus forced by causes free?

Sufficient causes, only work th'effect
When necessary agents they respect.
Such is not man; who, though the cause suffice,
Yet often he his free assent denies.

What causes not, is not sufficient still.

Sufficient in it self; not in thy will.

When we see causes joined t'effects at last,
The chain but shows necessity that's past.
That what's done, is: (ridiculous proof of fate!)
Tell me which part it does necessitate?
I'll choose the other; there I'll link th'effect.
O chain, which fools, to catch themselves, project!

Though no constraint from Heaven, or causes, be;
Heaven may prevent that ill he does foresee:
And, not preventing, though he does not cause,
He seems to will that man should break his laws.

Heaven may permit, but not to ill consent;
For hind'ring ill, he would all choice prevent.
'Twere to unmake, to take away thy will.

Better constrained to good, than free to ill.

But what reward or punishment could be
If man to neither good nor ill were free?
Th'Eternal justice could decree no pain
To him whose sins it self did first ordain;
And good compelled, could no reward exact:
His power would shine in goodness, not thy act.
Our task is done: obey; and, in that choice,
Thou shalt be blessed, and Angels shall rejoice.

Hard state of life! since Heaven fore-knows my will,
Why am I not tied up from doing ill?
Why am I trusted with my self at large,
When he's more able to sustain the charge?
Since Angels fell, whose strength was more than mine,
'Twould show more grace my frailty to confine.
Fore-knowing the success, to leave me free,
Excuses him, and yet supports not me.

Behold my heart's dear Lord, how high the Sun
Is mounted, yet our labour not begun.
The ground, unbid, gives more than we can ask;
But work is pleasure when we choose our task.
Nature, not bounteous now, but lavish grows;
Our paths with flowers, she prodigally strowes;
With pain we lift up our entangled feet,
While cross our walks the shooting branches meet.

Well has thy care advised; 'tis fit we hast;
Natur's too kind, and follows us too fast;
Leaves us no room her treasures to possess,
But mocks our industry with her excess;
And wildly wanton wears by night away
The sign of all our labours done by day.

Since, then, the work's so great, the hands so few,
This day let each a several task pursue.
By thee, my hands to labour will not move,
But round thy neck, employ themselves in love.
When thou would work, one tender touch, one smile
(How can I hold?) will all thy task beguile.

So hard we are not to our labour tied
That smiles, and soft endearements, are denied.
Smiles, not allow'd to Beasts, from reason move,
And are the privilege of humane love:
And if, sometimes, each others eyes we meet,
Those little vacancies, from toil, are sweet.
But you, by absence, would refresh your joys,
Because perhaps my conversation cloys.
Yet this, would prudence grant, I could permit.

What reason makes my small request unfit?

The fallen Archangel, envious of our state,
Pursues our Beings with immortal hate.
And hopeless to prevail by open force,
Seeks hid advantage to betray us worse:
Which when asunder, will not prove so hard;
For both together are each others guard.

Since he, by foree, is hopeless to prevail
He can by fraud alone our minds assail:
And to believe his wiles my truth can move
Is to misdoubt my reason or my love.

Call it my care, and not mistrust of thee;
Yet thou art weak, and full of Art is he;
Else how could he that Host seduce to sin
Whose fall has left the Heavenly nation thin?

I grant him armed with subtilty, and hate;
But why should we suspect our happy state?
Is our perfection of so frail a make;
As every plot can undermine or shake?
Think better both of Heaven, thy self, and me:
Who always fears, at ease can never be.
Poor state of bliss, where so much care is shown
As not to dare to trust our selves alone!

Such is our state, as not exempt from fall;
Yet firm, if reason to our aid we call:
And that, in both, is stronger than in one;
I would not; why would thou, then, be alone?

Because thus warned, I know my self secure,
And long my little trial to endure:
T'approve my faith; thy needless fears remove;
Gain thy esteem, and so deserve thy love.
If all this shake not thy obdurate will,
Know that, even present, I am absent still:
And then what pleasure hop'st thou in my stay
When I'm constrained, and wish my self away.

Constraint does ill with love and beauty suit;
I would persuade; but not be absolute.
Better be much remiss than too severe;
If pleased in absence, thou wilt still be here:
Go; in thy native innocence proceed,
And summon all thy reason at thy need.

My Soul, my eyes delight; in this I find
Thou love; because to love is to be kind.
Seeking my trial, I am still on guard:
Trials less fought, would find us less prepared.
Our foe's too proud the weaker to assail;
Or doubles his dishonour if he fail.

In love, what use of prudence can there be?
More perfect I, and yet more powerful she.
Blame me not, Heaven if thou love's power had tried,
What could be so unjust to be denied?
One look of hers my resolution breaks;
Reason it self turns folly when she speaks:
And awed by her whom it was made to sway,
Flatters her power, and does its own betray.

Methinks the beauties of this place should mourn;
Th'immortal fruits, and Flowers at my return
Should hang their withered heads; for sure my breath
Is now more poys'nous, and has gathered death
Enough, to blast the whole Creation's frame:
Swoln with despite, with sorrow, and with shame,
Thrice have I beat the wing, and rid with night
About the world, behind the globe of light,
To shun the watch of Heaven; such care I use:
(What pains will malice, raised like mine, refuse
Not the most abject form of Brutes to take.)
Hid in the spiry volumes of the snake,
I lurked within the covert of a Brake;
Not yet descried. But, see, the woman here
Alone! beyond my hopes! no guardian near.
Good Omen that: I must retire unseen,
And, with my borrowed shape, the work begin.

Thus far, at least, with leave; nor can it be
A sin to look on this Celestial tree:
I would not more; to touch a crime may prove:
Touching is a remoter taste in love.
Death may be there, or poison in the smell,
(If death in any thing so fair can dwell:)
But Heaven forbids: I could be satisfied
Were every tree but this, but this denied.
Strange sight! did then our great Creator grant
That privilege, which we their Masters want,
To these inferior beings? or was it chance?
And was he blessed with bolder ignorance?
I saw his curling crest the trunk enfold:
The ruddy fruit, distinguished ore with gold,
And smiling in its native wealth, was torn
From the rich bough, and then in triumph born:
The vent'rous victor marched unpunished hence,
And seemed to boast his fortunate offence.

Hail, Sovereign of this Orb! formed to possess
The world, and, with one look, all nature bless.
Nature is thine; thou, Empress, dost bestow
On fruits, to blossom; and on flowers, to blow.
They happy, yet insensible to boast
Their bliss: more happy they who know thee most.
Then happiest I, to humane reason raised,
And voice, with whose first accents thou art praised.

What art thou, or from whence? for on this ground,
Beside my Lord's, ne'er heard I humane sound.
Art thou some other Adam, formed from Earth,
And come to claim an equal share, by birth,
In this fair field? or sprung of Heavenly race?

An humble native of this happy place,
Thy vassal born, and late of lowest kind,
Whom Heaven neglecting made, and scarce designed
But threw me in, for number to the rest,
Below the mounting bird, and grazing beast;
By chance not prudence, now superior grown.

To make thee such, what miracle was shown:

Who would not tell what thou vouchsaf'st to hear:
Saw thou not late a speckled serpent rear
His gilded spires to climb on yon'fair tree?
Before this happy minute I was he.

Thou speak of wonders: make thy story plain.

Not wishing then, and thoughtless to obtain,
So great a bliss; but, led by sense of good,
Inborn to all, I sought my needful food:
Then, on that Heavenly tree, my sight I cast;
The colour urged my eye, the scent my taste.
Not to detain thee long; I took, did eat:
Scarce had my palate touched th'immortal meat,
But on a sudden, turned to what I am:
God-like, and, next to thee, I fair became:
Thought, spake, and reasoned; and, by reason found
Thee, Nature's Queen, with all her graces crowned.

Happy thy lot; but far unlike is mine:
Forbid to eat, not daring to repine.
'Twas Heav'n's command; and should we disobey,
What raised thy Being, ours must take away.

Sure you mistake the precept, or the tree:
Heaven cannot envious of his blessings be.
Some chance-born plant he might forbid your use,
As wild, or guilty of a deadly juice:
Not this, whose colour, scent divine, and taste,
Proclaim the thoughtful Maker not in hast.

By all these signs, too well I know the fruit,
And dread a power severe, and absolute.

Severe, indeed; even to injustice hard;
If death, for knowing more, be your reward:
Knowledge of good, is good; and therefore fit;
And to know ill, is good; for shunning it.

What, but our good, could he design in this,
Who gave us all, and placed in perfect bliss?

Excuse my zeal, fair Sovereign in your cause,
Which dares to tax his arbitrary laws.
Tis all his aim to keep you blindly low,
That servile fear from ignorance may flow:
We scorn to worship whom too well we know.
He knows that eating you shall god-like be;
As wife, as fit to be adored, as he.
For his own interest he this Law has given;
Such Beauty may raise factions in his Heaven.
By awing you, he does possession keep,
And is too wise to hazard partnership.

Alas who dares dispute with him that right?
The power which formed us must be infinite.

Who told you how your form was first designed?
The Sun and Earth, produce of every kind;
Grass, Flowers, and Fruits; nay, living creatures too:
Their mould was base; 'twas more refined in you:
Where vital heat, in purer Organs wrought,
Produced a nobler kind raised up to thought;
And that perhaps, might his beginning be:
Something was first; I question if 'twere he.
But grant him first, yet still suppose him good,
Not envying those he made, immortal food.

But death, our disobedience must pursue.

Behold, in me, what shall arrive to you.
I tasted; yet I live: nay, more; have got
A state more perfect than my native lot.
Nor fear this petty fault his wrath should raise:
Heaven rather will your dauntless virtue praise,
That sought, through threatened death, immortal good:
Gods are immortal only by their food.
Taste and remove
What difference does 'twixt them and you remain:
As I gained reason, you shall God-head gain.

He eats, and lives, in knowledge greater grown:
Was death invented then for us alone?
Is intellectual food to man denied
Which Brutes have, with so much advantage tried?
Nor only tried themselves, but frankly, more,
To me have offered their unenvi'd store?

Be bold, and all your needless doubts remove:
View well this Tree, (the Queen of all the grove,)
How vast her bole, how wide her arms are spread,
How high above the rest she shoots her head,
Placed in the midst; would Heaven his works disgrace,
By planting poison in the happiest place?
Hast; you lose time and God-head by delay.
Tis done; I'll venture all and disobey.
Perhaps, far hid in Heaven, he does not spy,
And none of all his Hymning guards are nigh.
To my dear lord, the lovely fruit I'll bear;
He to partake my bliss, my crime shall share.

She flew, and thanked me not, for hast: t'was hard
With no return such counsel to reward.
My work is done, or much the greater part;
She's now the tempter, to ensnare his heart.
He, whose firm faith no reason could remove,
Will melt before that soft seducer, love.

MEthinks, I tread more lightly on the ground;
My nimble feet, from unhurt flowers rebound:
I walk in Air, and scorn this Earthly seat;
Heaven is my palace; this my base retreat.
Take me not Heaven, too soon; 'twill be unkind
To leave the partner of my bed behind.
I love the wretch; but stay, shall I afford
Him part? already he's too much my Lord.
'Tis in my power to be a Sovereign now;
And, knowing more, to make his manhood bow.
Empire is sweet; but how if Heaven has spied?
If I should dye, and he above provide
Some other Eve, and place her in my stead?
Shall she possess his love, when I am dead?
No; he shall eat, and dye with me, or live:
Our equal crimes shall equal fortune give.

What Joy, without your sight, has earth in store!
While you were absent, Eden was no more.
Winds murmured, through the leaves, your long delay;
And fountains, over their pebbles, chid your stay.
But with your presence cheered, they cease to mourn,
And walks wear fresher green, at your return.

Henceforth you never shall have cause to chide;
No future absence shall our joys divide:
'Twas a short death my love ne'er tried before,
And therefore strange; but yet the cause was more.

My trembling heart forbodes some ill; I fear
To ask that cause which I desire to hear.
What means that lovely fruit? what means (alas!)
That blood, which flushes guilty in your face?
Speak -- do not -- yet, at last, I must be told.

Have courage then: 'tis manly to be bold.
This fruit -- why dost thou shake? no death is nigh:
'Tis what I tasted first; yet do not dye.

Is it -- (I dare not ask it all at first;
Doubt is some ease to those who fear the worst:)
Say, 'tis not.

-- 'Tis not what thou need to fear:
What danger does in this fair fruit appear?
We have been cozened; and had still been so,
Had I not ventured boldly first to know.
Yet, not I first; I almost blush to say
The serpent eating taught me first the way.
The serpent tasted, and the god-like fruit
Gave the dumb voice; gave reason, to the Brute.

O fairest of all creatures, last, and best,
Of what Heaven made, how art thou dispossessed
Of all thy native Glories! fallen! Decayed!
(Pity so rare a frame so frail was made)
Now cause of thy own ruin; and with thine,
(Ah, who can live without thee!) cause of mine.

Reserve thy pity, till I want it more:
I know my self much happier than before;
More wise, more perfect, all I wish to be,
Were I but sure Alas! of pleasing thee,

Y'have shown how much you my content design:
Yet ah! would Heav'n's displeasure pass like mine.
Must I without you, then, in wild woods dwell?
Think, and but think of what I loved so well
Condemned to live with subjects ever mute;
A salvage Prince, unpleas'd though absolute.

Please then your self with me, and freely taste,
Lest I, without you, should to Godhead hast:
Lest differing in degree, you claim too late
Unequal love, when 'tis denied by fate.

Cheat not your self, with dreams of Deity;
Too well, but yet too late, your crime I see:
Nor think the fruit your knowledge does improve;
But you have beauty still, and I have love.
Not cozened, I; with choice, my life resign:
Imprudence was your fault, but love is mine,
O wondrous power of matchless love expressed:
Why was this trial thine, of loving best?
I envy thee that lot; and could it be,
Would venture something more than death, for thee.
Not that I fear, that death th'event can prove;
We're both immortal, while so well we love.

What e're shall be the event, the lot is cast:
Where appetites are given, what sin to taste?
Or if a sin, 'tis but by precept such;
Th'offence so small, the punishment's too much,
To seek so soon his new made world's decay:
Nor we, nor that, were fashioned for a day.

Give to the winds thy fear of death, or ill;
And think us made but for each others will.

I will, at least, defer that anxious thought,
And death, by fear, shall not be nigher brought:
If he will come, let us to joys make hast;
Then let him seize us when our pleasure's past.
We'll take up all before; and death shall find
We have drained life, and lefta void behind.

'Tis done,
Sick nature, at that instant, trembled round;
And Mother Earth, sighed, as she felt the wound,
Of how short durance was this new-made state!
How far more mighty than Heavens love, Hells hate!
His project ruined, and his King of clay:
He formed, an Empire for his foe to sway.
Heaven let him rule, which by his arms he got;
I'm pleased to have obtained the second lot.
This Earth is mine; whose Lord I made my thrall;
Annexing to my Crown, his conquered Ball
Loosed from the lakes, my Legions I will lead,
And, over the darkened Air, black Banners spread:
Contagious damps, from hence, shall mount above,
And force him to his inmost Heav'n's remove.
He hears already, and I boast too soon;
I dread that Engine which secured his Throne.
I'll dive below his wrath, into the deep,
And waste that Empire, which I cannot keep.

As much of grief as happiness admits
In Heaven, on each Celestial forehead sits:
Kindness for man, and pity for his fate,
May mixed with bliss, and yet not violate.
Their Heavenly harps a lower strain began;
And in soft Music, mourned the fall of man.

I saw th'Angelic guards, from earth ascend,
(Grieved they must now no longer man attend:)
The beams about their Temples dimly shone;
One would have thought the crime had been their own.
Th'Etherial people flocked for news in hast,
Whom they, with down cast looks, and scarce saluting past:
While each did, in his pensive breast, prepare
A sad account of their successess care.

Th'Eternal yet, in Majesty severe,
And strictest justice, did mild pity bear:
Their deaths deferred; and banishment, (their doom)
In penitence forseen, leaves mercy room.

That message is thy charge: mine, leads me hence;
Placed at the garden's gate, for its defence,
Lest, man, returning, the blessed place pollute,
And escape from death, by life's immortal fruit.

In what dark cavern shall I hide my head?
Where seek retreat, now innocence is fled?
Safe in that guard, I durst even Hell defy;
Without it, tremble now, when Heaven is nigh.

What shall we do? or where direct our flight
Eastward as far as I could cast my sight,
From opening Heavens, I saw descending light.
Its glittering through the Trees, I still behold;
The Cedar tops seem all to burn with gold.

Some shape divine, whose beams I cannot bear!
Would I were hid, where light could not appear.
Deep into some thick covert would I run,
Impenetrable to the Stars, or Sun,
And fenced from day, by night's eternal screen;
Unknown to Heaven, and to my self unseen.

In vain: what hope to shun his piercing sight
Who, from dark Chaos, stroke the sparks of light?

These should have been your thoughts when parting hence,
You trusted to your guideless innocence.
See now th'effects of your own wilful mind:
Guilt walks before us; Death pursues behind.
So fatal 'twas to seek temptations out:
Most confidence has still most cause to doubt.

Such might have been thy hap, alone assailed;
And so, together, might we both have failed.
Cursed vassallage of all my future kind:
First Idolis'd, till loves hot fire be over,
Then slaves to those who courted us before.

I counselled you to stay; your pride refused:
By your own lawless will you stand accused.

Have you that privilege of only wise,
And would you yield to her you so despise?
You should have shown th'Authority you boast,
And, Soveraign-like, my headlong will have crossed:
Counsel was not enough to sway my heart;
An absolute restraint had been your part.

Even such returns do they deserve to find,
When force is lawful, who are fondly kind.
Unlike my love; for when thy guilt I knew.
I shared the curse which did that crime pursue.
Hard fate of love! which rigour did forbear,
And now 'tis taxed, because 'twas not severe.

You have, your self, your kindness overpayed:
He ceases to oblige, who can upbraid.

On women's virtue, who too much rely,
To boundless will, give boundless liberty.
Restraint you will not brook; but think it hard
Your prudence is not trusted as your guard:
And, to your selves so left, if ill ensues,
You first our weak indulgence will accuse.
Cursed be that hour --
When, sated with my single happiness,
I chose a partner, to control my bliss,
Who wants that reason which her will should sway,
And knows but just enough to disobey.

Better with Brutes my humble lot had gone;
Of reason void, accountable for none:
Th'unhappiest of creation is a wife,
Made lowest, in the highest rank of life:
Her fellow's slave; to know and not to choose:
Cursed with that reason she must never use.

Add, that she's proud, fantastic, apt to change;
Restless at home; and ever prone to range:
With shows delighted, and so vain is she,
She'll meet the Devil; rather than not see.
Our wise Creator, for his Quires divine,
Peopled his Heavn with Souls all masculine.
Ah: why must man from woman take his birth?
Why was this sin of nature made on earth?
This fair defect; this helpless aid called wife;
The bending crutch of a decrepit life.
Posterity no pairs, from you shall find,
But such, as by mistake of love are joined:
The worthiest men, their wishes ne'er shall gain;
But see the slaves, they scorn, their loves obtain.
Blind appetite shall your wild fancies rule;
False to desert, and faithful to a fool.

Unkind! wilt thou forsake me, in distress,
For that which now is past me to redress?
I have misdone; and I endure the smart:
Loath to acknowledge; but more loath to part.
The blame be mine; you warned, and I refused:
What would you more? I have my self accused.
Was plighted faith so weakly sealed above
That, for one error, I must lose your love?
Had you so erred, I should have been more kind,
Than to add pain to an afflicted mind.

You're grown much humbler; than you were before:
I pardon you; but see my face no more.

Vain pardon, which includes a greater ill:
Be still displeased; but let me see you still.
Without your much-lov'd sight, I cannot live:
You more than kill me if you so forgive.
The Beasts, since we are fallen, their Lords despise;
And, passing, look at me, with glaring eyes:
Must I then wander helpless, and alone?
You'll pity me, too late, when I am gone.

Your penitence does my compassion move;
As you deserve it, I may give my love.

On me, alone, let Heav'n's displeasure fall:
You merit none, and I deserve it all.

You all Heav'n's wrath! how could you bear a part,
Who bore not mine, but with a bleeding heart?
I was too stubborn, thus to make you sue:
Forgive me; I am more in fault, than you.
Return to me, and to my love return;
And, both offending, for each other mourn.

Of sin to warn thee, I before was sent;
For sin, I now pronounce thy punishment:
Yet that much lighter than thy crimes require;
Th'all-good does not his creatures death desire:
Justice must punish the rebellious deed:
Yet punish so, as pity shall exceed.

I neither can dispute his will, nor dare:
Death will dismiss me from my future care,
And lay me softly in my native dust,
To pay the forfeit of ill-manag'd trust.

Why seek you death? consider ere you speak:
The laws were hard; the power to keep 'em, weak.
Did we solicit Heaven to mould our clay?
From darkness, to produce us to the day?
Did we solicit Heaven to mould our clay,
From darkness, to produce us to the day?
Did we concur to life, or choose to be,
Was it our will which formed or was it he?
Since 'twas his choice, not ours, which placed us here;
The laws we did not choose, why should we bear?

Seek not, in vain, our maker to accuse:
Terms were proposed; power left us to refuse.
The good we have enjoyed from Heav'n's free will;
And shall we murmur to endure the ill?
Should we a rebel-son's excuse receive,
Because he was begot without his leave?
Heav'n's right, in us, is more: first formed to serve;
The good, we merit not; the ill, deserve.

Death is deferred, and penitence has room
To mitigate, if not reverse the doom:
But, for your crime, th'Eternal does ordain
In Eden, you no longer shall remain.
Hence, to the lower world, you are exiled:
This place, with crimes, shall be no more defiled.

Must we this blissful Paradise forego?

Your lot must be where Thorns and Thistles grow,
Unbid, as Balm and Spices did at first;
For man, the earth, of which he was is cursed.
By thy own toil procured, thou food shalt eat;
And know no plenty, but from painful sweat.
She, by a curse, of future wives abhorred,
Shall pay obedience to her lawful Lord:
And he shall rule, and she in thraldom live;
Defiring more of love than man can give.

Heaven is all mercy; labour I would choose;
And could sustain this Paradise to lose:
The bliss; but not the place: here could I say
Heav'n's winged messenger did pass the day;
Under this Pine the glorious Angel stayed:
Then, show my wondering progeny the shade.
In woods and lawns, where ever thou did appear,
Each place some Monument of thee should bear.
I, with green turfs, would grateful Altars raise,
And Heaven, with Gums and offered Incense praise.

Where ever thou art; he is; th'Eternal mind
Acts through all places; is to none confined:
Fills Ocean, Earth, and Air, and all above,
And through the Universal Mass does move.
Thou can be no where distant: yet this place
Had been thy Kingly seat, and here thy race,
From all the ends of peopled-Earth, had come
To reverence thee, and see their native home.
Immortal, then; now sickness, care, and age,
And war, and luxury's more direful rage,
Thy crimes have brought, to shorten mortal breath,
With all the numerous family of Death.

My spirits faint, while I these ills foreknow:
And find my self the sad occasion too.
But what is death?

In vision, thou shalt see his grisly face,
The King of Terrors, raging in thy race.
That, while in future fate thou shar'st thy part,
A kind remorse, for sin, may seize thy heart.

O wretched off-spring! O unhappy state
Of all mankind, by me betrayed to fate!
Born, through my crime, to be offenders first;
And, for those sins they could not shun, accursed.

Why is life forced on man; who might he choose,
Would not accept, what he, with pain, must lose?
Unknowing, he receives it, and, when known,
He thinks it his, and values it, 'tis gone.

Behold of every age; ripe manhood see,
Decrepit years, and helpless infancy:
Those who, by lingering sickness, lose their breath;
And those who, by despair, suborn their death:
See yon'mad fools who, for some trivial Right,
F' or love, or for mistaken honour ^ght:
See those, more mad, who throw their lives away
In needless wars; the Stakes which Monarchs lay,
When for each others Provinces they play.
Then as if earth too narrow were for fate,
On open Seas their quarrels they debate;
In hollow wood they floating Armies bear;
And force imprisoned winds to bring 'em near.

Who would the miseries of man foreknow?
Not knowing; we but share our part of woe:
Now, we the fate of future Ages bear;
And, ere their birth, behold our dead appear.

The deaths, thou show, are forced and full of strife;
Cast headlong from the precipice of life.
Is there no smooth descent? no painless way
Of kindly mixing with our native clay?

There is; but rarely shall that path be trod
Which, without horror, leads to deaths abode.
Some few, by temp'rance taught, approaching slow,
To distant fate, by easy journeys, go:
Gently they lay 'em down, as evening sheep
On their own woolly fleeces, softly sleep.

So noiseless would I live, such death to find,
Like timely fruit, not shaken by the wind,
But ripely dropping from the sapless bough
And, dying, nothing to my selfwould owe.

Thus, daily changing, with a duller taste
Of less'ning joys, I, by degrees, would wast:
Still quitting ground, by unperceived, decay,
And steal my self from life, and melt away.

Death you have seen: now see your race revive,
How happy they in deathless pleasures live.
Far more than I can show, or you can see,
Shall crown the blessed with immortality.

O goodness infinite! whose Heavenly will
Can so much good produce, from so much ill!
Happy their state!
Pure, and unchanged, and needing no defence,
From sins, as did my frailer Innocence.
Their joy sincere, and with no sorrow mixed:
Eternity stands permanent, and fixed,
And wheels no longer on the Poles of time:
Secure from fate, and more secure from crime.

Ravished, with Joy, I can but half repent
The sin which Heaven makes happy in th'event,

Thus armed, meet firmly your approaching ill:
For, see, the guards, from yon' far eastern hill,
Already move, nor longer stay afford;
High, in the Air, they wave the flaming sword,
Your signal to depart: Now, down amain
They drive, and glide, like meteors through the plain.

Then farewell all; I will indulgent be
To my own ease, and not look back to see.
When what we love we ne'er must meet again,
To lose the thought, is to remove the pain.

Farewell, you happy shades!
Where Angels first should practice Hymns, and string.
Their tuneful Harps, when they to Heaven would sing.
Farewell, you flowers, whose buds, with early care,
I watched, and to the cheerful sun did rear:
Who now shall bind your stems? or, when you fall,
With fountain streams, your fainting souls recall?
A long farewell to thee, my nuptial bower,
Adorned with every fair and flagrant flower.
And last, farewell, farewell my place of birth;
I go to wander in the lower earth,
As distant as I can; for, dispose,
Farthest from what I once enjoyed, is best.

The rising winds urge the tempestuous Air;
And on their wings, deformed Winter bear:
The beasts already feel the change; and hence,
They fly, to deeper coverts, for defence:
The feebler herd, before the stronger run;
For now the war of nature is begun:
But, part you hence in peace, and having mourned your sin,
For outward Eden lost, find Paradise within.


