The Conquest OF GRANADA BY THE SPANIARDS: In Two Parts. Acted at the
Theater-Royall.

Written by IOHN DRYDEN Servant to His Majesty.

-- Major rerum mihi nascitur Ordo;
Majus Opus moveo.
In the SAVOY, Printed by T. N. for Henry Herringman, and are to be sold at the
Anchor in the Lower Walk of the New Exchange. 1672.

SIR, Heroic Poesy has always been sacred to Princes and to Heroes. Thus
Virgil inscribed his Aeneids to Augustus Caesar; and, of latter Ages, Tasso and
Ariosto dedicated their Poems to the house of Est. 'Tis, indeed, but justice,
that the most excellent and most profitable kind of writing, should be
addressed by Poets to such persons whose Characters have, for the most part,
been the guides and patterns of their imitation. And Poets, while they imitate,
instruct. The feigned Hero inflames the true: and the dead virtue animates the
living. Since, therefore, the World is governed by precept and Example; and
both these can only have influence from those persons who are above us, that
kind of Poesy which excites to virtue the greatest men, is of greatest use to
humane kind.

'Tis from this consideration, that I have presumed to dedicate to your Royal
Highness these faint representations of your own worth and valour in Heroic
Poetry: or, to speak more properly, not to dedicate, but to restore to you
those Ideas, which, in the more perfect part of my characters, I have taken
from you. Heroes may lawfully be delighted with their own praises, both as they
are farther incitements to their virtue, and as they are the highest returns
which mankind can make them for it.

And certainly, if ever Nation were obliged either by the conduct, the personal
valour, or the good fortune of a Leader, the English are acknowledging, in all
of them, to your Royal Highness. Your whole life has been a continued Series of
Heroic Actions: which you began so early that you were no sooner named in the
world, but it was with praise and Admiration. Even the first blossoms of your
youth paid us all that could be expected from a ripening manhood. While you
practised but the rudiments of War you out-went all other Captains: and have
since found none to surpass, but your self alone. the opening of your glory was
like that of light: you shone to us from afar; and disclosed your first beams
on distant Nations. yet so, that the lustre of them was spread abroad, and
reflected brightly on your native Country. You were then an honour to it, when
it was a reproach to it self: and, when the fortunate Usurper sent his arms to
Flanders, many of the adverse party were vanquished by your fame, e're they
tried your valour. the report of it drew over to your Ensigns whole Troops and
Companies of converted Rebels: and made them forsake successful wickedness to
follow an oppressed and exiled virtue. your reputation waged war with the
Enemies of your royal family, even within their trenches; and the more
obstinate, or more guilty of them, were forced to be spies over those whom they
commanded: lest the name of YORK should disband that Army in whose fate it was
to defeat the Spaniards, and force Dunkirk to surrender. Yet, those victorious
forces of the Rebels were not able to sustain your arms: where you charged in
person you were a Conqueror: 'tis true they afterwards recovered Courage; and
wrested that Victory from others which they had lost to you. And it was a
greater action for them to rally than it was to overcome. Thus, by the presence
of your Royal Highness, the English on both sides remained victorious: and that
Army, which was broken by your valour, became a terror to those for whom they
conquered. Then it was that at the cost of other Nations you informed and
cultivated that Valour which was to defend your native Country, and to
vindicate its honour from the insolence of our encroaching Neighbours. When the
Hollanders, not contented to withdraw themselves from the obedience which they
owed their lawful Sovereign, affronted those by whose Charity they were first
protected: and, (being swelled up to a pre-eminence of Trade, by a supine
negligence on our side, and a sordid parsimony on their own,) dared to dispute
the Sovereignty of the Seas; the eyes of three Nations were then cast on you:
and, by the joint suffrage of King and People, you were chosen to revenge their
common injuries* to which, though you had an undoubted title by your birth, you
had yet a greater by your courage. Neither did the success deceive our hopes
and expectations. the most glorious victory which was gained by our Navy in
that war, was in that first engagement: wherein, even by the confession of our
enemies, who ever palliate their own losses, and diminish our advantages, your
absolute triumph was acknowledged. you conquered at the Hague as entirely as at
London. and the return of a shattered Fleet, without an Admiral, left not the
most impudent among them the least pretence for a false bon-fire, or a
dissembled day of public Thanks-giving. All our achievements against them
afterwards, though we sometimes conquered and were never overcome, were but a
copy of that victory: and they still fell short of their original. somewhat of
fortune was ever wanting, to fill up the title of so absolute a defeat. or,
perhaps, the Guardian Angel of our Nation was not enough concerned when you
were absent: and would not employ his utmost vigour for a less important stake
than the life and honour of a Royal Admiral.

And, if since that memorable day, you have had leisure to enjoy in peace the
fruits of so glorious a reputation, 'twas occasion only has been wanting to
your courage; for, that can never be wanting to occasion. the same ardor still
incites you to Heroic actions: and the same concernment for all the interests
of your King and Brother, continue to give you restless nights, and a generous
emulation for your own glory. you are still meditating on new labours for your
self, and new triumphs for the Nation. and when our former enemies again
provoke us, you will again solicit fate to provide you another Navy to
overcome, and another Admiral to be slain. You will, then, lead forth a Nation
eager to revenge their past injuries: and, like the Romans, inexorable to
Peace, till they have fully vanquished. Let our Enemies make their boast of a
surprise; as the Samnites did of a successful stratagem: but the Furcae
Caudinae will never be forgiven till they are revenged. I have always observed
in your Royal Highness an extreme concernment for the honour of your Country
'tis a passion common to you with a Brother, the most excellent of Kings: and
in your two persons, are eminent the Characters which Homer has given us of
Heroic virtue: the commanding part in Agamemnon, and the executive in
Achilles. And I doubt not, from both your actions, but to have abundant matter
to fill the Annals of a glorious Reign: and to perform the part of a just
Historian to my Royal Master, without intermixing with it any thing of the
Poet.

In the mean time, while your Royal Highness is preparing fresh employments for
our pens* I have been examining my own forces, and making trial of my self how
I shall be able to transmit you to Posterity. I have formed a Hero, I confess,
not absolutely perfect: but of an excessive and overboyling courage. but Homer
and Tasso are my precedents. both the Greek and the Italian Poet had well
considered that a tame Hero who never transgresses the bounds of moral virtue,
would shine but dimly in an Epic poem. the strictness of those Rules might
well give precepts to the Reader, but would administer little of occasion to
the writer. But a character of an excentrique virtue is the more exact Image of
humane life, because he not wholly exempted from its frailties. such a person is
Almanzor: whom I present, with all humility, to the Patronage of your Royal
Highness. I designed in him a roughness of Character, impatient of injuries;
and a confidence of himself, almost approaching to an arrogance. but these
errors are incident only to great spirits. they are moles and dimples which
hinder not a face from being beautiful; though that beauty be not regular.
they are of the number of those amiable imperfections which we see in
Mistresses* and which we pass over, without a strict examination, when they are
accompanied with greater graces. And such, in Almanzor, are a frank and noble
openness of Nature* an easiness to forgive his conquered enemies; and to
protect them in distress; and above all, an inviolable faith in this affection.
This, Sir, I have briefly shaddow'd to your Royal Highness, that you may not be
ashamed of that Hero whose protection you undertake. Neither would I dedicate
him to so illustrious a name, if I were conscious to my self that he did or
said any thing, which was wholly unworthy of it. However, since it is not just
that your Royal Highness should defend or own, what, possibly, may be my
error, I bring before you this accused Almanzor, in the nature of a suspected
Criminal. By the suffrage of the most and best he already is acquitted; and by
the sentence of some, condemned. But, as I have no reason to stand to the award
of my Enemies, so neither dare I trust the partiality of my friends. I make my
last appeal to your Royal Highness, as to a Sovereign Tribunal. Heroes should
only be judged by Heroes; because they only are capable of measuring great
and Heroic actions by the rule and standard of their own. If Almanzor has
failed in any point of Honour, I must therein acknowledge that he deviates from
your Royal Highness, who are the pattern of it. But, if at any time he fulfils
the parts of personal Valour and of conduct, of a Soldier, and of a General;
or, if I could yet give him a Character more advantageous than what he has; of
the most unshaken friend, the greatest of Subjects, and the best of Masters, I
should then draw to all the world, a true resemblance of your worth and
virtues; at least as far as they are capable of being copied, by the mean
abilities of

Sir, Your Royal Highnesse's Most humble and most obedient Servant J. DRYDEN.
WHether Heroic verse ought to be admitted into serious Plays, is not now to
be disputed: 'tis already in possession of the Stage: and I dare confidently
affirm, that very few Tragedies, in this Age, shall be received without it. All
the arguments, which are formed against it, can amount to no more than this,
that it is not so near conversation as Prose; and therefore not so natural. But
it is very clear to all, who understand Poetry, that serious Plays ought not
to imitate Conversation too nearly. If nothing were to be raised above that
level, the foundation of Poetry would be destroyed. and, if you once admit of a
Latitude, that thoughts may be exalted, and that Images and Actions may be
raised above the life, and described in measure without Rhyme, that leads you
insensibly, from your own Principles to mine: You are already so far onward of
your way, that you have forsaken the imitation of ordinary converse. You are
gone beyond it; and, to continue where you are, is to lodge in the open field,
betwixt two Inns. Yon have lost that which you call natural, and have not
acquired the last perfection of Art. But it was only custom which cozened us
so long: we thought, because Shakespeare and Fletcher went no farther, that
there the Pillars of Poetry were to be erected. That, because they excellently
described Passion without Rhyme, therefore Rhyme was not capable of describing
it. but time has now convinced most men of that Error. 'Tis indeed, so
difficult to write verse, that the Adversaries of it have a good plea against
many who undertake that task, without being formed by Art or Nature for it.
Yet, even they who have written worst in it, would have written worse without
it. they have cozened many with their sound, who never took the pains to
examine their sense. In fine, they have succeeded: though 'tis true they have
more dishonoured Rhyme by their good Success than they could have done by their
ill. But I am willing to let fall this argument: 'tis free for every man to
write, or not to write, in verse, as he judges it to be, or not to be his
Talent; or as he imagines the Audience will receive it.

For Heroic Plays, (in which only I have used it without the mixture of
Prose) the first light we had of them on the English Theatre was from the late
Sir William D' Avenant: It being forbidden him in the Rebellious times to act
Tragedies and Comedies, becuase they contained some matter of Scandal to those
good people, who could more easily dispossess their lawful Sovereign than
endure a wanton jest; he was forced to turn his thoughts another way: and to
introduce the examples of moral virtue, writ in verse, and performed in
Recitative Musique. The Original of this music and of the Scenes which adorned
his work, he had from the Italian Opera's: but he heightened his Characters (as
I may probably imagine) from the example of Corneille and some French Poets. In
this Condition did this part of Poetry remain at his Majesties return. When
growing bolder, as being now owned by a public Authority, he reviewed his
Siege of Rhodes, and caused it to be acted as a just Drama; but as few men have
the happiness to begin and finish any new project, so neither did he live to
make his design perfect: There wanted the fulness of a Plot, and the variety of
Characters to form it as it ought: and, perhaps, something might have been
added to the beauty of the stile. All which he would have performed with more
exactness had he pleased to have given us another work of the same nature. For
my self and others, who come after him, we are bound, with all veneration to
his memory, to acknowledge what advantage we received from that excellent
ground-work which he laid: and, since it is an easy thing to add to what
already is invented, we ought all of us, without envy to him, or partiality to
our selves, to yield him the precedence in it.

Having done him this justice, as my guide; I may do my self so much, as to
give an account of what I have performed after him. I observed then, as I said,
what was wanting to the perfection of his Siege of Rhodes: which was design,
and variety of Characters. And in the midst of this consideration, by mere
accident, I opened the next Book that lay by me, which was an Ariosto in
Italian; and the very first two lines of that Poem gave me light to all I could
desire. Le Donne, I Cavalier, L' arm, gli amori,
Le Cortesie, l' audace imprese jo canto, c.
for the very next reflection which I made was this, That an Heroic Play ought
to be an imitation, in little of an Heroic Poem: and, consequently, that Love
and Valour ought to be the Subject of it. Both these, Sir William D' Avenant
had begun to shadow: but it was so, as first Discoverers draw their Maps, with
headlands, and Promontories, and some few out-lines of somewhat taken at a
distance, and which the designer saw not clearly. The common Drama obliged him
to a Plot well-form'd and pleasant, or, as the Ancients called it, one entire
and great Action: but this he afforded not himself in a story, which he neither
filled with Persons, nor beautified with Characters, nor varied with Accidents.
The Laws of an Heroic Poem did not dispense with those of the other, but
raised them to a greater height: and indulged him a farther liberty of Fancy,
and of drawing all things as far above the ordinary proportion of the Stage, as
that is beyond the common words and actions of humane life: and therefore, in
the scanting of his Images, and design, he complied not enough with the
greatness and Majesty of an Heroic Poem.

I am sorry I cannot discover my opinion of this kind of writing, without
dissenting much from his; whose memory I love and honour. But I will do it with
the same respect to him as if he were now alive, and overlooking my Paper while
I write. his judgment of an Heroic Poem was this, That it ought to be dressed
in a more familiar and easy shape: more fitted to the common actions and
passions of humane life: and, in short, more like a glass of Nature, showing us
our selves in our ordinary habits: and figuring a more practicable virtue to
us, then was done by the Ancients or Moderns: thus he takes the Image of an
Heroic Poem from the Drama, or stage Poetry: and accordingly, intended to
divide it into five Books, representing the same number of Acts; and every Book
into several Canto's, imitating the Scenes which compose our Acts.

But this, I think, is rather Play in Narration (as I may call it) than an
Heroic Poem. If at least you will not prefer the opinion of a single man to
the practice of the most excellent Authors both of Ancient and latter ages. I
am no admirer of Quotations; but you shall hear, if you please, one of the
Ancients delivering his judgment on this question: 'tis Petronius Arbiter, the
most elegant, and one of the most judicious Authors of the Latin tongue: who,
after he had given many admirable rules, for the structure, and beauties of an
Epic Poem, concludes all in these following words:

Non enim res gestae versibus comprehendae sunt; quod lunge melius Historici
faciunt: sed, perambages, Deorumque ministeria, praecipitandus est liber
Spiritus, ut potius furentis animi vaticinatio appareat, quam religiosae
orationis, sub testibus, fides.

In which sentence, and in his own Essay of a Poem, which immediately he gives
you, it is thought he taxes Lucan; who follow'd too much the truth of history,
crowded Sentences together, was too full of points, and too often offered at
somewhat which had more of the sting of an Epigram, than of the dignity and
state of an Heroic Poem. Lucan used not much the help of his heathen Deities,
there was neither the ministry of the Gods, nor the precipitation of the Soul,
nor the fury of a Prophet, (of which my Author speaks) in his Pharsalia: he
treats you more like a Philosopher, than a Poet: and instructs you, in verse,
with what he had been taught by his Uncle Seneca, in Prose. In one word, he
walks soberly, a foot, when he might fly. Yet Lucan is not always this
Religious historian. the Oracle of Appius, and the witchcraft of Erictho will
somewhat atone for him, who was, indeed, bound up by an ill-chosen, and known
argument, to follow truth, with great exactness. For my part, I am of opinion,
that neither Homer, Virgil, Statius, Ariosto, Tasso, nor our English Spencer
could have formed their Poems half so beautiful, without those Gods and
Spirits, and those Enthusiastic parts of Poetry, which compose the most noble
parts of all their writings. and I will ask any man who loves Heroic Poetry,
(for I will not dispute their tastes who do not) if the Ghost of Polydorus in
Virgil, the Enchanted wood in Tasso, and the Bower of bliss, in Spencer (which
he borrows from that admirable Italian) could have been omitted without taking
from their works some of the greatest beauties in them. and if any man object
the improbabilities of a spirit appearing, or of a Palace raised by Magic, I
boldly answer him, that an Heroic Poet is not tied to a bare representation of
what is true, or exceeding probable: but that he may let himself loose to
visionary objects, and to the representation of such things, as depending not
on sense, and therefore not to be comprehended by knowledge, may give him a
freer scope for imagination. 'Tis enough that in all ages and Religions, the
greatest part of mankind have believed the power of Magic, and that there are
Spirits, or Spectres, which have appeared. This I say is foundation enough for
Poetry: and I dare farther affirm that the whole Doctrine of separated beings,
whether those Spirits are incorporeal substances, (which Mr. Hobbs, with some
reason thinks to imply a contradiction,) or that they are a thinner and more
Aerial sort of bodies (as some of the Fathers have conjectured) may better be
explicated by Poets, than by Philosophers or Divines. For their speculations on
this subject are wholly Poetical; they have only their fancy for their guide,
and that, being sharper in an excellent Poet, than it is likely it should in a
phlegmatic, heavy gown-man, will see farther, in its own Empire, and produce
more satisfactory notions on those dark and doubtful Problems.

Some men think they have raised a great argument against the use of Spectres
and Magique in Heroic Poetry, by saying, They are unnatural: but, whether
they or I believe there are such things, is not material, 'tis enough that, for
ought we know, they may be in Nature: and what ever is or may be, is not
properly, unnatural. Neither am I much concerned at Mr. Cowleys verses before
Gondibert; (though his authority is almost sacred to me:) 'Tis true, he has
resembled the old Epique Poetry to a fantastic fayery land: but he has
contradicted himself by his own Example. For, he has himself made use of
Angels, and Visions in his Davideis, as well as Tasso in his Godfrey.

What I have written on this Subject will not be thought digression by the
Reader, if he please to remember what I said in the beginning of this Essay,
that I have modelled my Heroic Plays, by the Rules of an Heroic Poem. And,
if that be the most noble, the most pleasant and the most instructive way of
writing in verse, and, withal, the highest pattern of humane life, as all Poets
have agreed, I shall need no other Argument to justify my choice in this
imitation. One advantage the Drama has above the other, namely, that it
represents to view, what the Poem only does relate, and, Segnius irritant
animum demissa per aures, Quam quae sunt oculis subjecta fidelibus, as Horace
tells us.

To those who object my frequent use of Drums and Trumpets; and my
representations of Battles, I answer, I introduced them not on the English
Stage, Shakespeare used them frequently: and, though Jonson shows no Battle in
his Catiline, yet you hear from behind the Scenes, the sounding of Trumpets,
and the shouts of fighting Armies. But, I add farther; that these warlike
Instruments, and, even the representations of fighting on the Stage, are no
more than necessary to produce the effects of an Heroic Play. that is, to
raise the imagination of the Audience, and to persuade them, for the time, that
what they behold on the Theater is really performed. The Poet is, then, to
endeavour an absolute dominion over the minds of the Spectators: for, though
our fancy will contribute to its own deceit, yet a Writer ought to help its
operation. and that the Red Bull has formerly done the same, is no more an
Argument against our practice, than it would be for a Physician to forbear an
approved medicine because a Mountebank has used it with success.

Thus I have given a short account of Heroic Plays. I might now, with the
usual eagerness of an Author, make a particular defence of this. but the common
opinion (how unjust soever,) has been so much to my advantage, that I have
reason to be satisfied: and to suffer, with patience, all that can be urged
against it.

For, otherwise, what can be more easy for me, than to defend the character of
Almanzor, which is one great exception that is made against the Play? 'Tis said
that Almanzor is no perfect pattern of Heroic virtue: that he is a contemner
of Kings; and that he is made to perform impossibilities.

I must therefore, avow, in the first place, from whence I took the Character.
the first Image I had of him was from the Achilles of Homer, the next from
Tasso's Rinaldo, (who was a copy of the former:) and the third from the Artaban
of Monsieur Calprenede: (who has imitated both.) the original of these, (
Achilles) is taken by Homer for his Hero: and is described by him as one, who
in strength and courage surpassed the rest of the Grecian Army: but, withal,
of so fiery a temper, so impatient of an injury, even from his King, and
General, that, when his Mistress was to be forced from him by the command of
Agamemnon, he not only disobeyed it; but returned him an answer full of
contumely; and in the most approbrious terms he could imagine. they are Homers
words which follow, and I have cited but some few amongst a multitude.

(...):
(...), c.
Nay, he proceeded so far in his insolence, as to draw, out his sword, with
intention to kill him. (...).
and, if Minerva had not appeared, and held his hand, he had executed his
design; and 'twas all she could do to dissuade him from it: the event was that
he left the army; and would fight no more. Agamemnon gives his character thus
to Nestor. (...),
(...).
and Horace gives the same description of him in his Art of Poetry.

-- Honoratum, si forte reponis Achillem,
Impiger, iracundus, inexorabilis, Acer,
Jura neget sibi nata, nihil non arroget armis.
Tasso's chief Character, Rinaldo, was a man of the same temper: for, when he
had slain Gernando, in his heat of passion, he not only refused to be judged
by Godfrey, his General, but threatened, that if he came to seize him, he would
right himself by arms upon him: witness these following lines of Tasso.

Venga egli, o mandi, jo terro fermo il piede;
Giudici fian tra noi la sort e'l' arm:
Fera tragedia vuol ches' appresenti
Per lor diporti ale Nemiche genti.
You see how little these great Authors did esteem the point of Honour, so much
magnified by the French, and so ridiculously ap'd by us. They made their Hero's
men of honour; but so, as not to divest them quite of humane passions, and
frailties. they contented themselves to show you, what men of great spirits
would certainly do, when they were provoked, not what they were obliged to do
by the strict rules of moral virtue. for my own part, I declare my self for
Homer and Tasso; and am more in love with Achilles and Rinaldo, than with Cyrus
and Oroondates. I shall never subject my characters to the French standard;
where Love and Honour are to be weighed by drams and scruples. yet, where I
have designed the patterns of exact virtue, such as in this Play are the Parts
of Almahide, of Ozmyn, and Benzayda, I may safely challenge the best of theirs.

But Almanzor is taxed with changing sides: And what tie has he on him to the
contrary? he is not born their Subject whom he serves: and he is injured by
them to a very high degree. he threatens them, and speaks insolently of
Sovereign Power: but so do Achilles and Rinaldo; who were Subjects and Soldiers
to Agamemnon and Godfrey of Bulloign. he talks extravagantly in his Passion:
but, if I would take the pains to quote an hundred passages of Ben. Johnson's
Cethegus, I could easily show you that the Rodomontades of Almanzor are
neither so irrational as his* nor so impossible to be put in execution. for
Cethegus threatens to destroy Nature, and to raise a new one out of it: to kill
all the Senate for his part of the action; to look Cato dead; and a thousand
other things as extravagant, he says, but performs not one Action in the Play.

But none of the former calumnies will stick: and, therefore, 'tis at last
charged upon me that Almanzor does all things: or if you will have an absurd
Accusation, in their non-sence who make it, that he performs impossibilities.
they say, that being a stranger he appeases two fighting factions, when the
Authority of their Lawful Soverign could not. this is, indeed, the most
improbable of all his actions: but, 'tis far from being impossible. Their King
had made himself contemptible to his people, as the History of Granada tells
us. and Almanzor, though a stranger, yet, was already known to them, by his
gallantry in the Juego de toros, his engagement on the weaker side, and, more
especially, by the character of his person, and brave actions, given by Abdalla
just before. and, after all, the greatness of the enterprise consisted only in
the daring: for, he had the Kings guards to second him. but we have read both
of Caesar, and many other Generals, who have not only calmed a Mutiny with a
word, but have presented themselves single before an Army of their enemies;
which, upon sight of them, has revolted from their own Leaders, and come over
to their trenches. In the rest of Almanzors actions, you see him for the most
part victorious: but, the same fortune has constantly attended many Heroes who
were not imaginary. Yet, you see it no Inheritance to him. for, in the first
Part, he is made a Prisoner: and, in the last, defeated; and not able to
preserve the City from being taken. If the History of the late Duke of Guise be
true, he hazarded more and performed not less in Naples, than Almanzor is
feigned to have done in Granada.

I have been too tedious in this Apology; but to make some satisfaction, I will
leave the rest of my Play, exposed to the Critics, without defence.

The concernment of it is wholly past from me, and ought to be in them, who
have been favourable to it, and are somewhat obliged to defend their own
opinions. That there are errors in it, I deny not: Aft opere in tanto fas est
obrepere Somnum.


But I have already swept the stakes; and with the common good fortune of
prosperous Gamesters, can be content to sit quietly; to hear my fortune cursed
by some, and my faults arraigned by others, and to suffer both without reply.

THE applause I gave among the foolish Crowd,
Was not distinguished, though I clapped aloud:
Or, if it had, my judgment had been hid:
I clapped for Company as others did:
Thence may be told the fortune of your Play,
Its goodness must be tried another way:
Let's judge it then, and, if we've any skill,
Commend what's good, though we commend it ill:
There will be Praise enough: yet not so much,
As if the world had never any such:
Ben Iohnson, Beaumont, Fletcher, Shakespeare, are
As well as you, to have a Poets share.
You who write after, have besides, this Curse,
You must write better, or, you else write worse:
To equal only what was writ before,
Seems stolen or borrowed from the former store:
Though blind as Homer all the Ancients be,
'Tis on their shoulders like the Lame we see.
Then, not to flatter the Age, nor flatter you,
(Praises though less, are greater when they are true)
You're equal to the best, outdone by you;
Who had outdone themselves, had they lived now.
Vaughan.
Spoken by Mris. Ellen Guyn in a broad-brim'd hat, and wast belt.

THis jest was first of the other houses making,
And, five times tried, has never failed of taking.
For 'twere a shame a Poet shoud be killed
Under the shelter of so broad a shield.
This is that hat whose very sight did win ye
To laugh and clap, as though the Devil were in ye.
As then, for Nokes, so now, I hope, you'll be
So dull, to laugh, once more, for love of me.
I'll write a Play, says one, for I have got
A broad-brim'd hat, and wastbelt tow'rds a Plot.
Says the other, I have one more large than that:
Thus they out-write each other with a hat.
The brims still grew with every Play they writ;
And grew so large, they covered all the wit.
Hat was the Play: 'twas language, wit and tale:
Like them that find, Meat, drink, and cloth, in Ale.
What dullness do these Mungrill-wits confess
When all their hope is acting of a dress!
Thus two, the best Comedians of the Age
Must be worn out, with being blocks of the Stage.
Like a young Girl, who better things has known,
Beneath their Poets Impotence they groan.
See now, what Charity it was to save!
They thought you liked, what only you forgave:
And brought you more dull sense. -dull sense, much worse
Than brisk, gay Non-sence; and the heavier Curse.
They bring old Ir'n, and glass upon the Stage,
To barter with the Indians of our Age.
Still they write on; and like great Authors show:
But 'tis as Rollers in wet gardens grow;
Heavy with dirt, and gath'ring as they go.
May none who have so little understood
To like such trash, presume to praise what's good!
And may those drudges of the Stage, whose fate
Is, damned dull farce more dully to translate,
Fall under that excise the State thinks fit
To set on all French wares, whose worst, is wit.
French farce worn out at home, is sent abroad;
And, patched up here, is made our English mode.
Hence forth, let Poets, here allow'd to write,
Be searched, like Duellists, before they fight,
For wheel-broad hats, dull humour, all that chasse,
Which makes you mourn, and makes the Vulgar laugh.
For these, in Plays, are as unlawful Arms,
As, in a Combat, Coats of Mayle, and Charms.
Messengers, Guards, Attendants, Men and Women.

The SCENE, in Granada, and the Christian Camp besieging it.

THus, in the Triumphs of soft Peace I reign;
And, from my Walls, defy the Powr's of Spain:
With pomp and Sports my Love I celebrate,
While they keep distance; attend my State.
Parent to her whose eyes my Soul enthrall;
Whom I, in hope, already Father call;
Abenamar, thy Youth these sports has known,
Of which thy age is now Spectator grown:
Judge-like thou sitst, to praise, or to arraign
The flying skirmish of the darted Cane:
But, when fierce Bulls run loose upon the Place,
And our bold Moors their Loves with danger grace,
Then, heat new bends thy slackened Nerves again,
And a short youth runs warm through every Vein.

I must confess the Encounters of this day
Warmed me indeed, but quite another way:
Not with the fire of Youth; but generous rage
To see the glories of my Youthful age
So far outdone.

Castile could never boast, in all its pride,
A pomp so splendid; when the lists set wide,
Gave room to the fierce Bulls, which wildly ran
In Sierra Ronda, here the War began:
Who, with high Nostrils, Snuffing up the Wind,
Now stood, the Champions of the Salvage kind.
Just opposite, within the circled place,
Ten of our bold Abencerrages race
(Each brandishing his Bull-spear in his hand,)
Did their proud Ginnets gracefully command.
On their steeled heads their demy-Lances wore
Small pennons, which their Ladies colours bore.
Before this Troop did Warlike Ozmyn go;
Each Lady as he rode, saluting low;
At the chief stands, with reverence more profound,
His well-taught Courser, kneeling, touched the ground;
Thence raised, he sidelong bore his Rider on,
Still facing, till he out of sight was gone.

You praise him like a friend, and I confess
His brave deportment merited no less.

Nine Bulls were launched by his victorious arm,
Whose wary Ginnet, shunning still the harm,
Seemed to attend the shock; and then leaped wide:
Mean while, his dexterous Rider, when he spied
The beast just stooping; 'twixt the neck and head
His Lance, with never erring fury, sped.

My Son did well; and so did Hamet too;
Yet did no more then we were wont to do;
But what the stranger did, was more then man:

He finished all those Triumphs we began.
One Bull, with curled black head beyond the rest,
And dew-laps hanging from his brawny chest,
With nodding front awhile did daring stand.
And with his jetty hoof spurned back the sand:
Then, leaping forth, he bellowed out aloud:
The amazed assistants back each other crowed,
While, Monach-like he ranged the listed field:
Some tossed, some goar'd, some, trampling down, he killed.
The ignobler Moors, from far, his rage provoke,
With woods of darts, which from his sides he shook.
Mean time, your valiant Son who had before
Gained fame, rode round to every Mirador,
Beneath each Ladies stand, a stop he made;
And, bowing, took the applauses, which they paid.
Just in that point of time, the brave unknown,
Approached the Lists.

-- I marked him, when alone
(Observed by all, himself observing none)
He entered first; and with a graceful pride
His fiery Arab, dexterously did guide:
Who, while his Rider every stand survay'd,
Sprung loose, and flew, into an Escapade:
Not moving forward, yet, with every bound,
Pressing, and seeming still to quit his ground.
What after passed --
Was far from the Ventana where I sate,
But you were near; and can the truth relate.

Thus, while he stood, the Bull who saw this foe,
His easier Conquests proudly did forego:
And, making at him, with a furious bound,
From his bent forehead aimed a double wound.
A rising Murmure, ran through all the field,
And every Ladies blood-with fear was chilled.
Some schriek'd, while others, with more helpful care,
Cried out aloud, beware, brave youth, beware!
At this he turned, and, as the Bull drew near,
Shunned, and received him on his pointed Spear.
The Lance broke short: the beast then bellowed loud,
And his strong neck to a new onset bowed.
The undaunted youth --
Then drew; and from his Saddle bending low,
Just where the neck did to the shoulders grow,
With his full force discharged a deadly blow.
Not heads of Poppies, (when they reap the grain)
Fall with more ease before the labouring Swayn,
Then fell this head: --
It fell so quick, it did even death prevent:
And made imperfect bellowings as it went.
Then all the Trumpets Victory did sound:
And yet their clangors in our shouts were drowned.

The Alarm-bell rings from our Alhambra walls,
And, from the Streets, sound Drums, and Ataballes.
How now! from whence proceed these new alarms?

The two fierce factions are again in arms:
And, changing into blood the days delight,
The Zegrys with the Abencerrages fight,
On each side their Allies and Friends appear;
The Macas here, the Alabezes there:
The Gazuls with the Bencerrages join,
And, with the Zegrys, all great Gomels line.

Draw up behind the Vivarambla place;
Double my guards, these factions I will face;
And try if all the fury they can bring
Be proof against the presence of their King:

The faint Abencerrages quit their ground:
Press 'em; put home your thrusts to every wound.

Zegry, on manly force our Line relies;
Thine, poorly takes the advantage of surprise.
Unarmed, and much outnumbered we retreat
You gain no fame, when basely you defeat:
If thou art brave, seek nobler Victory;
Save Moorish blood; and, while our bands stand by,
Let two to two an equal combat try.

'Tis not for fear the Combat we refuse;
But we our gained advantage will not loose.

In combating, but two of you will fall;
And we resolve we will dispatch you all.

We'll double yet th'exchange before we dye;
And each of ours two lives of yours shall buy.

I cannot stay to ask which cause is best;
But this is so to me because oppressed.

On your Allegiance, I command you stay;
Who passes here, through me must make his way.
My life's the Isthmos; through this narrow line
You first must cut, before those Sea's can join.
What fury, Zegrys, has possessed your minds,
What rage the brave Abencerrages blinds?
If, of your Courage you new proofs would show,
Without much travel you may find a foe.
Those foes are neither so remote nor few,
That you should need each other to pursue.
Lean times, and foreign Wars should minds unite,
When poor, men mutter, but they seldom sight.
O holy Alha, that I live to see
Thy Granadins assist their Enemy.
You fight the Christians battles; every life
You lavish thus, in this intestine strife,
Does from our weak foundations, take one prop
Which helped to hold our sinking Country up.

'Tis fit our private Enmity should cease;
Though injured first, yet I will first seek peace.

No, Murd'rer, no; I never will be won
To peace with him whose hand has slain my Son.

Our Prophets curse --
On me, and all the Abencerrages light
If unprovok'd I with your Son did fight.

A band of Zegry's ran within the Place,
Matched with a Troop of thirty of our race.
Your Son and Ozmyn the first squadrons led,
Which, ten by ten, like Parthyans, charged and fled.
The Ground was strewn with Canes, where we did meet,
Which crackled underneath our Coursers feet.
When Tarifa, (I saw him ride apart)
Changed his blunt Cane for a steel pointed Dart,
And meeting Ozmyn next,
Who wanted time for Treason to provide,
He, basely, threw it at him, undefy'd:
Witness this blood -- which, when by Treason sought.
That follow'd, Sir, which to my self I ought.

His hate to thee was grounded on a grudge
Which all our generous Zegrys just did judge;
Thy villain blood thou openly did place
Above the purple of our Kingly race.

From equal Stems their blood both houses draw
They from Marocco, you from Cordova.

Their mongrel race is mixed with Christian breed
Hence 'tis that they those Dogs in prisons feed.

Our holy Prophet wills, that Charity
Shoud, even to birds and beasts extended be:
None knows what fate is for himself designed;
The thought of humane Chance should make us kind.

We waste that time we to revenge should give:
Fall on; let no Aboncerrago live.
Upon thy life pass-not this middle space;
Sure Death stands guarding the forbidden place.

To dare that death, I will approach yet nigher.
Thus, were it thou compassed in with circling fire.

Disarm 'em both; if they resist you, kill.

Now, you have but the Leavings of my will.

Kill him; this insolent Unknown shall fall,
And be the Victim to atone you all.

If he must die, not one of us will live,
That life he gave for us, for him we give.

It was a Traitors voice that spoke those words;
So are you all, who do not sheath your swords.

Outrage unpunished when a Prince is by,
Forfeits to scorn the rights of Majesty:
No Subject his Protection can expect
Who, what he owes himself, does first neglect.

This stranger, Sir is he,
Who lately in the Vivarambla place
Did, with so loud applause, your Triumphs grace.

The word which I have given, I'll not revoke;
If he be brave he's ready for the stroke

No man has more contempt than I, of breath;
But whence hast thou the right to give me death?
Obeyed as Sovereign by thy Subjects be,
But know, that I alone am King of me.
I am as free as Nature first made man
Here the base Laws of Servitude began
When wild in woods the noble Savage ran.

Since, then, no power above your own you know,
Mankind should use you like a common foe,
You should be hunted like a Beast of Prey;
By your own law, I take your life away.

My laws are made but only for my sake,
No King against himself a Law can make.
If thou pretendst to be a Prince like me,
Blame not an Act which should thy Pattern be.
I saw the oppressed, and thought it did belong
To a King's office to redress the wrong:
I brought that Succour which thou oughtst to bring,
And so, in Nature, am thy Subjects King.

I do not want your Council to direct,
Or aid to help me punish or protect.

Thou want 'em both, or better thou would know
Then to let Factions in thy Kingdom grow.
Divided int'rests while thou think to sway,
Draw like two brooks thy middle stream away.
For though they band, and jar, yet both combine
To make their greatness by the fall of thine.
Thus, like a buckler, thou art held in sight,
While they, behind thee, with each other fight.

Away; and execute him instantly.

Stand off; I have not leisure yet to dye.

Hold, Sir, for Heaven sake hold.
Defer this noble Strangers punishment,
Or your rash orders you will soon repent.

Brother, you know not yet his insolence.

Upon yourself you punish his offence:
If we treat gallant Strangers in this sort,
Mankind will shun the inhospitable Court.
And who, henceforth, to our defence will come,
If death must be the brave Almanzors doom?
From Africa I drew him to your aid;
And for his succour have his life betrayed.

Is this the Almanzor whom at Fez you knew,
When first their swords the Xeriff Brothers drew?

This, Sir, is he who for the Elder fought,
And to the juster cause the Conquest brought:
Till the proud Santo, seated in the Throne,
Disdained the service he had done, to own:
Then, to the vanquished part, his fate he led;
The vanquished triumphed, and the Victor fled;
Vast is his Courage; boundless is his mind,
Rough as a storm, and humorous as wind;
Honour's the only Idol of his Eyes:
The charms of Beauty like a pest he flies:
And, raised by Valour, from a birth unknwn.
Acknowledges no power above his own.

Impute your danger to our ignorance;
The bravest men are subject most to chance.
Granada much does to your kindness owe:
But Towns, expecting Sieges, cannot show
More honour, then t'invite you to a foe.

I do not doubt but I have been too blame:
But, to pursue the end for which I came,
Unite your Subjects first; then let us go,
And pour their common rage upon the foe.

Lay down your Arms; and let me beg you cease
Your Enmities.

-- We will not hear of peace,
Till we by force have first revenged our slain:

The Action we have done we will maintain:

Then let the King depart, and we will try
Our cause by arms:

-- For us and Victory.

A King entreats you.

What Subjects will precarious Kings regard:
A Beggar speaks too softly to be heard:
Lay down your Arms; 'tis I command you now.
Do it -- or by our Prophets soul I vow,
My hands shall right your King on him I seize.
Now, let me see whose look but disobeys.

Long live King Mahomet Boabdelin:

No more; bu husht'd as midnight silence go:
He will not have your Acclamations now,
Hence you unthinking Crowd --
Empire, thou poor and despicable thing,
When such as these unmake, or make a King!

How much of virtue lies in one great Soul
Whose single force can multitudes control!

The Duke of Arcos, Sir, --
Does with a trumpet from the Foe appear.

Attend him, he shall have his Audience here.

The Monarchs of Castile and Arragon
Have sent me to you, to demand this Town:
To which their just, and rightful claim is known.

Tell Ferdinand my right to it appears
By long possession of eight hundred years.
When first my Ancestors from Affrique sailed,
In Rodrigues death your Gothique title failed.

The Successors of Rodrique still remain;
And ever since have held some part of Spain.
Even in the midst of your victorious powers
The Asturia's, and all Portugal were ours.
You have no right, except you force allow;
And if yours then was just, so ours is now.

'Tis true; from force the noblest title springs;
I therefore hold from that, which first made Kings.

Since then by force you prove your title true,
Ours must be just; because we claim from you.
When with your Father you did jointly reign,
Invading with your Moors the South of Spain,
I, who that day the Christians did command,
Then took; and brought you bound to Ferdinand.

I'll hear no more; defer what you would say:
In private we'll discourse some other day.

Sir, you shall hear, however you are loath,
That, like a perjured Prince, you broke your oath.
To gain your freedom you a Contract signed,
By which your Crown you to my King resigned.
From thenceforth as his Vassail holding it,
And paying tribute, such as he thought fit;
Contracting, when your Father came to dye,
To lay aside all marks of Royalty:
And at Purchena privately to live;
Which, in exchange, King Ferdinand did give.

The force used on me, made that Contract void:

Whey have you then its benefits enjoyed?
By it you had not only freedom then,
But since had aid of money and of men.
And, when Granada for your Uncle held,
You were by us restored, and he expel'd.
Since that, in peace we let you reap your grain,
Recalled our Troops that used to beat your Plain,
And more --

Yes, yes, you did with wondrous care
Against his Rebels prosecute the war,
While he secure in your protection, slept,
For him you took, but for your selves you kept.
Thus, as some fawning usurer does feed
With present sums th'unwary Unthrifts need;
You sold your kindness at a boundless rate,
And then orepaid the debt from his Estate:
Which, mouldering piecemeal, in you hands did fall;
Till now at last you came to swoop it all.

The wrong you do my King I cannot bear;
Whose kindness you would odiously compare.
The Estate was his; which yet, since you deny,
He's now content in his own wrong to buy.

And he shall buy it dear what his he calls
We will not give one stone from out these Walls.

Take this for answer, then --
What here your arms have conquered of my land
I will, for peace, resign to Ferdinand:
To harder terms my mind I cannot bring;
But as I still have lived, will dye a King.

Since thus you have resolved, henceforth prepare
For all the last extremities of war:
My King his hope from heavens assistance draws:

The Moors have Heaven and me to assist their cause.

Fair Almahide.
(Who did with weeping eyes these discords see,
And fears the omen may unlucky be:)
Prepares a Zambra to be danced this Night,
In hope soft pleasures may your minds unite.

My Mistress gently chides the fault I made:
But tedious business has my love delayed;
Business, which dares the joys of Kings invade.

First let us sally out, and meet the foe:

Led on by you we to Triumph go.

Then, with the day let war and tumult cease:
The night be sacred to our love and peace:
'Tis just some joys on weary Kings should wait;
'Tis all we gain by being slaves of State.

THis happy day does to Granada bring
A lasting peace; and triumphs to the King:
The two fierce factions will no longer jar,
Since they have now been brothers in the war:
Those, who apart in Emulation fought,
The common danger to one body brought;
And to his cost the proud Castillian finds
Our Moorish Courage in united minds.

Since to each others aid our lives we owe,
Loose we the name of Faction and of foe,
Which I to Zulema can bear no more,
Since Lindaraxa's beauty I adore.

I am obliged to Linduraxa's charms
Which gain the conquest I should loose by Arms;
And wish my Sister may continue fair
That I may keep a good,
Of whose possession I should else despair.

While we indulge our common happiness
He is forgot by whom we all possess;
The brave Almanzor to whose arms we owe
All that we did, and all that we shall do;
Who, like a Tempest that out rides the wind,
Made a just battle here the bodies joined.

His Victories we scarce could keep in view,
Or polish 'em so fast as he rough drew.

Fate after him, below with pain did move,
And Victory could scarce keep pace above.
Death did at length so many slain forget;
And lost the tale, and took 'em by the great.

See here he comes,
And leads in Triumph him who did command
The vanquished Army of King Ferdinand:
Thus far your Masters arms a fortune find
Below the swelled ambition of his mind:
And Alha shuts a mis-believers reign
From out the best and goodliest part of Spain.
Let Ferdinand Calabrian Conquests make
And from the French contested Millan take,
Let him new worlds discover to the old,
And break up shining Mountains big with Gold,
Yet he shall find this small Domestic foe
Still sharp, and pointed to his bosom grow.

Of small advantages too much you boast,
Your beat the outguards of my Masters host:
This little loss in our vast body, shows
So small, that half have never heard the news.
Fame's out of breath here she can fly so far
To tell 'em all, that you have here made war.

It pleases me your Army is so great:
For now I know there's more to conquer yet.
By Heaven I'll see what Troops you have behind;
I'll face this Storm that thickens in the wind:
And, with bent forehead, full against it go,
Till I have found the last and utmost foe.

Believe you shall not long attend in vain;
To morrow's dan shall cover all your Plain.
Bright Arms shall flash upon you from afar;
A wood of Lances, and a moving war.
But I, unhappy in my bands, must yet
Be only pleased to hear of your defeat*
And, with a slaves inglorious ease remain,
Till conquering Ferdinand has broke my chain.

Vain man, thy hopes of Ferdinand are weak!
I hold thy chain too fast for him to break.
But since thou threatn'st us, I'll set thee free,
That I again may fight and conquer thee.

Old as I am I take thee at thy word,
And will tomorrow thank thee with my sword.

I'll go and instantly acquaint the King:
And sudden orders for thy freedom bring.
Thou can not be so pleased at Liberty,
As I shall be to find thou dare be free.

Of all those Christians who infest this town,
This Duke of Arcos is of most renown.

Oft have I heard, that in your Fathers reign,
His bold Advent'rers beat the Neighbring Plain;
Then, under Ponce Leon's name he fought,
And from our Triumphs many Prizes brought.
Till in disgrace, from Spain at length he went,
And since, continued long in banishment.

But see, your beauteous Sister does appear.

By my desire she came to find me here:

Why, fairest Lindaraxa, do you fly
A Prince, who at your feet is proud to dye?

Sir I should blush to own so rude a thing,
As 'tis to shun the Brother of my King.

In my hard fortune I some ease should find
Did your disdain extend to all Mankind.
But give me leave to grieve, and to complain,
That you give others what I beg in vain.

Take my Esteem, if you on that can live,
For, frankly, Sir, 'tis all I have to give.
If, from my heart you ask or hope for more,
I grieve the place is taken up before.

My Rival merits you.
To Abdelmelech I will Justice do,
For he wants Worth who dares not praise a Foe.

That for his Virtue, Sir, you make defence,
Shows in your own a Noble confidence:
But him defending, and excusing me,
I know not what can your advantage be.

I fain would ask, ere I proceed in this,
If, as by choice, you are by promise, his?

Th'Engagement only in my Love does lye;
But that's a knot which you can ne'er untie.

When Cities are besieged and treat to yield,
If there appear Relievers from the Field,
The Flag of Parley may be taken down,
Till the success of those without be known.

Though Abdelmelech has not yet possessed,
Yet I have sealed the Treaty for my breast.

Your Treaty has not tied you to a day,
Some chance might break it, would you but delay:
If I can judge the Secrets of your heart,
Ambition in it has the greatest part;
And wisdom then will show some difference
Betwixt a private Person and a Prince.

Princes are Subjects still: --
Subject and Subject can small difference bring:
The difference is 'twixt Subjects and a King.
And since, Sir, you are none, your hopes remove;
For less then Empire I'll not change my love.

Had I a Crown, all I should prize in it,
Should be the power to lay it at your feet.

Had you that Crown which you but wish not hope,
Then I, perhaps, might stoop, and take it up.
But till your wishes, and your hopes agree,
You shall be still a private Man with me.

If I am King, and if my Brother dye --

Two if's, scarce make one possibility.

The rule of happiness by reason scan;
You may be happy with a Private man.

That happiness I may enjoy, 'tis true;
But then that Private man must not be you.
Where e're I love, I'm happy in my choice;
If I make you so, you shall pay my price.

Why would you be so great?

-- Because I've seen
This day, what 'tis to hope to be a Queen.
Heaven, how y'all watched each motion of her Eye:
None could be seen while Almahide was by;
Because she is to be her Majesty.
Why would I be a Queen! because my Face
Would wear the Title with a better grace.
If I became it not, yet it would be
Part of your duty, then, to Flatter me.
These are not half the Charms of being great:
I would be somewhat -- that I know not yet:
Yes; I avow th'ambition of my Soul,
To be that one, to live without control:
And that's another happiness to me
To be so happy as but one can be.

Madam, (because I would all doubts remove,)
Would you, were I a King, accept my Love?

I would accept it; and to show 'tis true;
From any other man as soon as you.

Your sharp replies make me not love you less;
But make me seek new paths to Happiness.
What I design, by time will best be seen.
You may be mine; and yet may be a Queen:
When you are so, your Word your Love assures.

Perhaps not love you -- but I will be yours.
Stay Sir; that grace I cannot yet allow;
Before you set the Crown upon my Brow.
That favour which you seek --
Or Abdelmelech, or a King must have,
When you are so, then you may be my slave.

How here imperious in her words she were,
Her parting looks had nothing of severe.
A glancing smile allured me to command;
And her soft fingers gently pressed my hand.
I felt the pleasure glide through every part;
Her hand went through me to my very heart.
For such another pleasure did he live,
I could my Father of a Crown deprive.
What did I say!
Father! that impious thought has shocked my mind:
How bold our Passions are, and yet how blind!
She's gone; and now
Methinks there is less glory in a Crown;
My boiling passions settle and go down:
Like Amber chaf't, when she is near she acts,
When farther off, inclines, but not attracts.
Assist me, Zulema, if thou would be
That friend thou seem, assist me against me.
Betwixt my love and virtue I am tossed;
This must be forfeited or that be lost:
I could do much to merit thy applause;
Help me to fortify the better cause.
My Honour is not wholly put to flight.
But would, if seconded, renew the fight.

I met my sister; but I do not see
What difficulty in your choice can be:
She told me all; and 'tis so plain a case
You need not ask, what council to embrace.

I stand reproved, that I did doubt at all;
My waiting Virtue stayed but for thy call:
'Tis plain that she who for a Kingdom, now
Would sacrifice her love, and break her vow,
Not out of Love but interest, acts alone,
And would, Even in my arms, lie thinking of a throne.

Add to the rest this one reflection more,
When she is married, and you still adore,
Think then, and think what comfort it will bring,
She had been mine --
Had I but only dared to be a King!

I hope you only would my honour try;
I'm loath to think you vertue's enemy.

If, when a Crown and Mistress are in place,
Virtue intrudes with her lean holy face;
Virtues then mine, and not I virtues foe;
Why does she come where she has nought to do?
Let her with Anchorit's not with Lovers lye;
States-men and they keep better Company.

Reason was given to curb our headstrong will:

Reason but shows a weak Physicians skill:
Gives nothing while the raging fit does last.
But stays to cure it when the worst is past.
Reason's a staff for age, when Nature's gone;
But Youth is strong enough to walk alone.

In cursed ambition I no rest should find;
But must for ever loose my peace of mind.

Methinks that peace of mind were bravely lost;
A Crown, what 're we give, is worth the cost.

Justice distributes to each man his right,
But what she gives not should I take by might?

If Justice will take all and nothing give,
Justice, methinks, is not distributive.

Had fate so pleased, I had been eldest born;
And then, without a Crime, the Crown had worn.

Would you so please, Fate yet a way would find;
Man makes his fate according to his mind.
The weak low Spirit Fortune makes her slave;
But she's a drudge, when Hectored by the brave.
If Fate weaves common Third, he'll change the doom:
And with new purple spread a Nobler loom.

No more; -- I will usurp the Royal Seat;
Thou who hast made me wicked, make me great.

Your way is plain; the Death of Tarifa
Does, on the King, our Zegry's hatred draw;
Though with our Enemies in show we close,
'Tis but while we to purpose can be foes.
Selin, who heads us would revenge his Son;
But favour hinders justice to be done.
Proud Ozmyn with the king his power maintains:
And, in him, each Abencerrago reigns.

What face of any title can I bring?

The right an eldest Son has to be King.
Your Father was at first a private man;
And got your brother here his reign began.
When, by his Valour, he the Crown had won,
Then you were born, a Monarch's eldest Son.

To sharp eyed reason this would seem untrue
But reason, I through Loves false Optiques view.

Loves mighty power has led me Captive too:
I am in it, unfortunate as you.

Our Loves and fortunes shall together go,
Thou shalt be happy when I first am so.

The Zegry's at old Selin's house are met;
Where in close Council, for revenge they sit,
There we our common interest will unite;
You their revenge shall own, and they your right.
One thing I had forgot which may import;
I met Almanzor coming back from Court.
But with a discomposed and speedy pace,
A fiery colour kindling all his face:
The King his Prisoners freedom has denied:
And that refusal has provoked his pride.

Would he were ours!
I'll try to guild th 'injustice of the cause;
And court his valour with a vast applause.

The bold are but the Instruments of the wise:
They undertake the dangers we advise.
And while our fabric with their pains we raise,
We take the profit, and pay them with praise.

THat he should dare to do me this disgrace!
Is Fool or Coward writ upon my face?
Refuse my Prisoner! I such means will use
He shall not have a Prisoner to refuse.

He said you were not by your promise tied;
That he absolved your word when he denied.

He break my promise and absolve my vow!
'Tis more than Mahomet himself can do.
The word which I have given shall stand like Fate;
Not like the King's, that weathercock of State.
He stands so high, with so unfixed a mind,
Two Factions turn him with each blast of wind.
But now he shall not veer: my word is past:
I'll take his Heart by the roots, and hold it fast.

You have your Veng'ance in your hand this hour,
Make me the humble Creature of your power:
The Cranadins will gladly me obey;
(Tired with so base and impotent a sway.)
And when I show my Title, you shall see
I have a better right to Reign, than he.

It is sufficient that you make the claim:
You wrong our Friendship when your Right you name.
When for my self I fight, I weigh the cause;
But Friendship will admit of no such Laws:
That weighs by th'lump, and, when the cause is light,
Puts kindness in to set the Balance right.
True, I would wish my friend the juster side:
But in th'unjust my kindness more is tried*
And all the opposition I can bring,
Is, that I fear to make you such a King.

The Majesty of Kings we should not blame,
When Royal minds adorn the Royal name:
The vulgar, greatness too much idolize,
But haughty Subjects it too much despise.

I only speak of him,
Whom Pomp and Greatness sit so loose about,
That he wants Majesty to fill 'em out.

Haste, then, and lose no time --
The business must be enterprised this night:
We must surprise the Court in its delight.

For you to Will, for me 'tis to obey;
But I would give a Crown in open day:
And, when the Spaniards their Assault begin,
At once beat those without, and these within.

Abdalla, hold; there's some what I intend
To speak, not as your Rival, but your Friend.

If as a Friend, I am obliged to hear;
And what a Rival says I cannot fear.

Think, brave Abdalla, what it is you do:
Your Quiet, Honour, and our Friendship too,
All for a fickle Beauty you forego.
Think, and turn back before it be too late;
Behold, in me the example of your Fate.
I am your Sea-mark, and though wracked and lost,
My Ruins stand to warn you from the Coast.

Your Councels, noble Abdelmelech, move
My reason to accept 'em; not my Love.
Ah, why did Heaven leave Man so weak defence
To trust frail reason with the rule of Sense!
'Tis over-pois'd and kicked up in the Air,
While sense weighs down the Scale; and keeps it there,
Or, like a Captive King, 'tis born away:
And forced to countenance its own Rebels sway.

No, no; our Reason was not vainly lent;
Nor is a slave but by its own consent,
If Reason on his Subjects Triumph wait,
An easy King deserves no better Fate.

You speak too late; my Empire's lost too far,
I cannot fight.

-- Then make a flying War,
Dislodge betimes before you are beset.

Her tears, her smiles, her every look's a Net.
Her voice is like a Syren's of the Land;
And bloody Hearts lie panting in her hand.

This do you know, and tempt the danger still?

Love like a Lethargy has seized my Will.
I'm, not my self, since from her sight I went;
I lean my Trunk that way; and there stand bent.
As one, who in some frightful Dream, would shun
His pressing Foe, labours in vain to run;
And his own slowness in his sleep bemoans,
With thick short Sighs, weak Cries, and tender Groans,
So I --

-- Some Friend in Charity, should shake
And rouse, and call you loudly till you wake.
Too well I know her blandishments to gain,
Usurper-like, till settled in her Reign;
Then proudly she insults, and gives you cares
And jealousies; short hopes, and long despairs.
To this hard yoke you must hereafter bow;
However she shines all Golden to you now.

Like him, who on the ice --
Slides swiftly on, and sees the water near,
Yet cannot stop himself in his Carrear:
So am I carried. This enchanted place,
Like Cyrce's Isle, is peopled with a Race
Of dogs and swine, yet, though their fate I know,
I look with pleasure and am turning too.

Fly, fly, before the allurements of her face;
Here she return with some resistless grace,
And with new magique covers all the place.

I cannot, will not; nay I would not fly;
I'll love; be blind, be cousen'd till I dye.
And you, who bid me wiser Counsel take,
I'll hate, and if I can, I'll kill you for her sake,

Even I that counselled you, that choice approve,
I'll hate you blindly, and her blindly love:
Prudence, that stemmed the stream, is out of breath;
And to go down it, is the easier death.

That smile on Prince Abdalla, seem's to say
You are not in your killing mood to day,
Men brand, indeed, your sex with Cruelty,
But you're too good, to see poor Lovers dye.
This Godlike pity in you I extol;
And more, because, like heavens, 'tis general.

My smile implies not that I grant his suit:
'Twas but a bare return of his salute.

It said, you were engaged and I in place:
But to please both, you would divide the grace:

You've cause to be contented with your part:
When he has but the look, and you the heart.

In giving but that look, you give what's mine:
I'll not one corner of a glance resign:
All's mine; and I am cov'tous of my store:
I have not love enough; I'll tax you more.

I gave not love; 'twas but Civility,
He is a Prince; that's due to his Degree.

That Prince you smiled on is my Rival still:
And should, if me you loved, be treated ill.

I know not how to show so rude a spite.

That is, you know not how to love aright;
Or, if you did, you would more difference see
Betwixt our Souls, then 'twixt our Quality.
Mark if his birth makes any difference,
If, to his words, it adds one grain of Sense:
That duty which his birth can make his due
I'll pay; but it shall not be paid by you.
For if a Prince Courts her whom I adore,
He is my Rival, and a Prince no more.

And when did I my power so far resign,
That you should regulate each Look of mine?

Then, when you gave your Love you gave that power.

'Twas during pleasure, 'tis revoked this hour.
Now call me false, and rail on Woman-kind,
'Tis all the remedy you're like to find.

Yes, there's one more,
I'll hate you; and this visit is my last.

Do it, if you can; you know I hold you fast.
Yet, for your quiet, would you could resign
Your love, as easily as I do mine.

Furies and Hell, how unconcerned she speaks!
With what indifference all her Vows she breaks!
Curse on me but she smiles.

That smile's a part of Love; and all's your due:
I take it from the Prince, and give it you.

Just heaven, must my poor heart your May-game prove
To bandy, and make Childrens play in Love.
Ah how have I this Cruelty deserved,
I who so truly and so long have served!
And left so easily! oh cruel Maid.
So easily! 'twas too unkindly said.
That Heart which could so easily remove,
Was never fixed, nor rooted deep in Love.

You Lodged it so uneasy in your Breast,
I thought you had been weary of the Guest.
First I was Treated like a stranger there;
But, when a Household Friend I did appear,
You thought, it seems, I could not live elsewhere.
Then, by degrees, your feigned respect withdrew:
You marked my Actions; and my Guardian grew.
But, I am not concerned your Acts to blame:
My heart to yours, but upon liking came.
And, like a Bird, whom prying Boys molest,
Stays not to Breed, where she had built her Nest.

I have done ill --
And dare not ask you to be less displeased:
Be but more Angry, and my Pain is eased.

If I should be so kind a Fool to take
This little Satisfaction which you make,
I know you would presume some other time
Upon my Goodness, and repeat your Crime.

Oh never, never: upon no pretence:
My Life's too short to expiate this Offence.

No; now I think on it, 'tis in vain to try;
'Tis in your Nature, and past remedy.
You'll still disquiet my too loving Heart:
Now we are friends 'tis best for both to part.

By this -- will you not give me leave to swear?

You would be perjured if you should I fear.
And when I talk with Prince Abdalla next
I with your fond Suspicions shall be vexed.

I cannot say I'll conquer Jealousy:
But if you'll freely pardon me, I'll try.

And, till you that submissive Servant prove,
I never can conclude you truly love.

Approach, my Almahide, my charming fair;
Blessing of Peace, and recompense of War.
This Night is yours; and may your Life still be
The same in Joy, though not Solemnity.

Arm, quickly, arm, yet all, I fear too late:
The Enemy's already at the Gate.

The Christians are dislodged; what Foe is near?

The Zegry's are in Arms, and almost here.
The Streets with Torches shine, with Shoutings ring,
And Prince Abdalla is proclaimed the King.
What Man could do I have already done,
But Bold Almanzor fiercely leads 'em on.

The Alhambra yet is safe in my Command,
Retreat you thither while their shock we stand.

I cannot meanly for my life provide:
I'll either perish in it, or stemm this Tide.
To guard the Palace, Ozmyn, be your care.
If they overcome, no sword will hurt the fair.

I'll either dye, or I'll make good the place.

And I, with these, will bold Almanzor face.

What dismal Planet did my Triumphs light:
Discord the Day, and Death does rule the Night:
The noise, my Soul does through my Senses wound.

Me thinks it is a noble, sprightly Sound.
The Trumpets clangor, and the clash of Arms!
This noise may chill your Blood, but mine it warms:
We have already past the Rubicon.
The Dice are mine: now Fortune for a Throne.
The sound goes farther off; and faintly dies,
Curse of this going back, these ebbing cries!
Ye Winds waft hither sounds more strong, and quick:
Beat faster, Drums, and mingle Deaths more thick.
I'll to the Turrets of the Palace go,
And add new fire to those that fight below.
Thence, Hero-like, with Torches by my side,
(Far be the Omen, though,) my Love I'll guide.
No; like his better Fortune I'll appear:
With open Arms, loose Vayl, and flowing Hair,
Just flying forward from my rolling Sphere.
My Smiles shall make Abdalla more then Man;
Let him look up and perish if he can.

We have not fought enough; they fly too soon:
And I am grieved the noble sport is done.
This only man of all whom chance did bring
To meet my Arms, was worth the Conquering.
His brave resistance did my Fortune grace;
So slow, so threatening forward he gave place.
H^s Chains be easy and his Usage fair.

I beg you would commit him to my care.

Next, the brave Spaniard free without delay:
And with a Convoy send him safe away.

The King by me salutes you: and, to show
That to your Valour he his Crown does owe,
Would, from your Mouth I should the Word receive;
And, that to these, you would your Orders give.

He much o're-rates the little I have done.
Now to revenge the Murder of my Son.
To morrow for thy certain death prepare:
This night I only leave thee to despair.

Thy idle Menaces I do not fear:
My business was to die, or conquer here.
Sister, for you I grieve I could no more:
My present State betrays my want of power.
But, when true Courage is of force bereft,
Patience, the noblest Fortitude, is left.

Ah, Esperanza, what for me remains
But Death; or, worse than Death, inglorious Chains!

Madam, you must not to Despair give place;
Heaven never meant misfortune to that Face.
Suppose there were no justice in your cause,
Beauty's a Bribe that gives her Judges Laws.
That you are brought to this deplored estate,
Is but the ingenious Flatt'ry of your Fate;
Fate fears her Succour like an Alms to give:
And would, you, God-like from your self should live.

Mark but how terrible his Eyes appear!
And yet there's something roughly noble there,
Which, in unfashioned Nature, looks Divine;
And like a Gemm does in the Quarry shine.

Turn, Mighty Conqueror, turn your Face this way,
Do not refuse to hear the wretched pray.

What business can this Woman have with me?

That of the afflicted to the Deity.
So may your Arms success in battles find:
So may the Mistress of your vows be kind,
If you have any; or, if you have none,
So may your Liberty be still your own.

Yes, I will turn my face; but not my mind:
You bane, and soft destruction of mankind,
What would you have with me?

-- I beg the grace
You would lay by those terrors of your face.
Till calmness to your eyes you first restore
I am afraid, and I can beg no more.
Well; my fierce visage shall not murder you:
Speak quickly, woman; I have much to do.

Where should I find the heart to speak one word,
Your voice, Sir, is as killing as your sword.
As you have left the lightning of your eye,
So would you please to lay your thunder by!

I'm pleased and pained since first her eyes I saw,
As I were stung with some Tarantula:
Arms, and the dusty field I less admire;
And soften strangely in some new desire.
Honour burns in me, not so fiercely bright;
But pale, as fires when mastered by the light.
Even while I speak and look, I change yet more;
And now am nothing that I was before.
I'm numm'd, and fixed and scarce my eye balls move;
I fear it is the Lethargy of Love!
'Tis he; I feel him now in every part:
Like a new Lord he vaunts about my Heart,
Surveys in state each corner of my Breast,
While poor fierce I, that was, am dispossessed.
I'm bound; but I will rowze my rage again:
And, though no hope of Liberty remain,
I'll fright my Keeper when I shake my chain.
You are --

-- I know I am your Captive, Sir:

You are -- You shall -- And I can scarce forbear --

Alas!

-- 'Tis all in vain; it will not do:
I cannot now a seeming anger show:
My Tongue against my heart no aid affords,
For Love still rises up, and chokes my words.

In half this time a tempest would be still.

'Tis you have raised that tempest in my will,
I wonnot love you, give me back my heart.
But give it as you had it, fierce and brave:
It was not made to be a woman's slave:
But Lyon-like has been in deserts bred;
And, used to range, will ne'er be tamely led.
Restore its freedom to my fettered will
And then I shall have power, to use you ill.

My sad condition may your pity move;
But look not on me with the eyes of Love. --
I must be brief, though I have much to say.

No, speak: for I can hear you now, all day.
Her suing sooths me with a secret pride:
A suppliant beauty cannot be denied:
Even while I frown, her charms the furrows seize;
And I'm corrupted with the power to please.

Though in your worth no cause of fear I see;
I fear the insolence of Victory:
As you are Noble, Sir, protect me then,
From the rude outrage of insulting men.

Who dares touch her I love? I'm all over love:
Nay, I am Love; Love shot, and shot so fast,
He shot himself into my breast at last.

You see before you, her who should be Queen,
Since she is promised to Boabdelin.

Are you beloved by him! O wretched fate,
First that I love at all; then, love too late!
Yet, I must love!

-- Alas it is in vain;
Fate for each other did not us ordain.
The chances of this day too clearly show
That Heaven took care that it should not be so.

Would Heaven had quite forgot me this one day,
But fate's yet hot --
I'll make it take a bent another way.
I bring a claim which does his right remove:
You're his by promise, but you're mine by Love.
'Tis all but Ceremony which is past:
The knots to tie which is to make you fast.
Fate gave not to Boabdelin that power:
He wooed you, but as my Ambassador.

Our Souls are tied by holy Vows above.

He signed but his: but I will seal my love.
I love you better; with more Zeal then he.

This day --
I gave my faith to him, he his to me.

Good Heaven thy book of fate before me lay,
But to tear out the journal of this day.
Or, if the order of the world below
Will not the gap of one whole day allow,
Give me that Minute when she made her vow.
"That Minute, even the happy, from their bliss might give:
"And those who live in grief, a shorter time would live.
So small a link, if broke, the eternal chain
Would, like divided waters, join again.
It wonnot be; the fugitive is gone;
Pressed by the crowed of following Minutes on:
That precious Moment's out of Nature fled:
And in the heap of common rubbish laid,
Of things that once have been, and are decayed.

Your passion, like a fright suspends my pain:
It meets, 'ore-powr's, and bears mine back again.
But, as when tides against the Current flow,
The Native stream runs its own course below:
So, though your griefs possess the upper part,
My own have deeper Channels in my heart.

Forgive that fury which my Soul does move,
'Tis the Essay of an untaught first love.
Yet rude, unfashioned truth it does express:
'Tis love just peeping in a hasty dress.
Retire, fair Creature to your needful rest;
There's something noble, labouring in my breast:
This raging fire which through the Mass does move,
Shall purge my dross, and shall refine my Love.
She goes; And I, like my own Ghost appear:
It is not living, when she is not here.

My first acknowledgments to heaven are due:
My next, Almanzor, let me pay to you.

A poor surprise and on a naked foe.
What ever you confess, is all you owe.
And I no merit own or understand
That fortune did you justice by my hand.
Yet, if you will that little service pay
With a great favour, I can show the way.

I have a favour to demand of you;
That is to take the thing for which you sue.

Then, briefly, thus; when I the Albayzyn won,
I found the Beauteous Almahide alone:
Whose sad condition did my pity move:
And that compassion did produce my love.

This needs no suit; in justice, I declare
She is your Captive by the right of war.

She is no Captive, then; I set her free.
And rather then I will her Jaylour be,
I'll Nobly loose her, in her liberty.

Your generosity I much approve,
But your excess of that, shows want of Love.

No, 'tis the excess of love, which mounts so high
That, seen far off, it lessens to the eye.
Had I not loved her, and had set her free
That, Sir, had been my generosity:
But 'tis exalted passion when I show
I dare be wretched not to make her so.
And, while another Passion fills her breast,
I'll be all wretched rather then half blessed.

May your heroic Act so prosperous be,
That Almahide may sigh you set her free.

Of five tall towers which fortify this Town,
All but the Alhambra your dominion own.
Now therefore boldly I confess a flame
Which is excused in Almahida's name.
If you the merit of this night regard,
In her possession I have my reward.

She your reward! why she's a gift so great --
That I my self have not deserved her yet.
And therefore, though I won her with my sword,
I have, with awe, my sacrilege restored.

What you deserve --
I'll not dispute because I do not know,
This, only I will say, she shall not go.

Thou, single, art not worth my answering,
But take what friends, what armies thou can bring;
What worlds; and when you are united all,
Then, I will thunder in your ears, -- she shall.

I'll not one tittle of my right resign;
Sir, your implicit promise made her mine.
When I in general terms my love did show,
You swore our fortunes should together go.

The merits of the cause I'll not decide,
But, like my love, I would my gift divide.
Your equal titles, then, no longer plead;
But one of you, for love of me recede.

I have receded to the utmost line,
When, by my free consent, she is not mine.
Then let him equally recede with me,
And both of us will join to set her free.

If you will free your part of her you may*
But, Sir, I love not your Romantique way.
Dream on; enjoy her Soul; and set that free;
I'm pleased her person should be left for me.

Thou shalt not wish her thine; thou shalt not dare
To be so impudent, as to despair.

The Zegrys, Sir, are all concerned to see
How much their merit you neglect in me.

Your slighting Zulema, this very hour
Will take ten thousand Subjects from you're power.

What are ten thousand subjects such as they;
If I am scorned -- I'll take my self away.

Since both cannot possess what both pursue;
I grieve, my friend, the chance should fall on you.
But when you hear what reasons I can urge --

None, none that your ingratitude can purge.
Reason's a trick, when it no grant affords:
It stamps the face of Majesty on words.

Your boldness to your services I give:
Now take it as your full reward to live.

To live!
If from thy hands alone my death can be,
I am immortal; and a God, to thee.
If I would kill thee now, thy fate's so low
That I must stoop here I can give the blow.
But mine is fixed so far above thy Crown,
That all thy men
Piled on thy back can never pull it down.
But at my ease thy destiny I send,
By ceasing from this hour to be thy friend.
Like Heaven I need but only to stand still;
And, not concurring to thy life, I kill,
Thou can not title to my duty bring:
I'm not thy Subject, and my Soul's thy King.
Farewell, when I am gone
There's not a star of thine dare stay with thee:
I'll whistle thy tame fortune after me.
And whirl fate with me wheresoever I fly,
As winds drive storms before 'em in the sky.

Let not this Insolent unpunished go;
Give your Commands; your Justice is too slow.

Stay: and what part he pleases let him take;
I know my Throne's too strong for him to shake.
But my fair Mistress I too long forget:
The Crown I promised is not offered yet.
Without her presence, all my Joys are vain;
Empire a Curse; and life it self a pain.

ADvise, or aid, but do not pity me;
No Monarch born can fall to that degree.
Pity descends from Kings to all below;
But can no more then fountains upward flow.
Witness just heaven, my greatest grief has been
I could not make your Almahide a Queen.

I have too long the effects of Fortune known,
Either to trust her smiles, or fear her frown.
Since in their first attempt you were not slain,
Your safety bodes you yet a second reign.
The people, like a headlong torrent go;
And, every dam, they break, or overflow:
But unopposed, they either loose their force,
Or wind in volumes to their former course.

In walls we meanly must our hopes enclose,
To wait our friends, and weary out our foes,
While Almahide
To lawless Rebels is exposed a prey,
And forced the lustful Victor to obey.

One of my blood, in rules of Virtue bred!
Think better of her; and I believe she's dead.

We are betrayed; the Enemy is here;
We have no farther room to hope or fear.

It is indeed Almanzor whom you see,
But he no longer is your Enemy.
You were ungrateful, but your foes were more;
What your injustice lost you, theirs restore.
Make profit of my vengeance while you may,
My two-edg'd sword can cut the other way.
I am your fortune; but am swift like her,
And turn my hairy front if you defer:
That hour when you delib'rate is too late:
I point you the white moment of your fate.

Believe him sent as Prince Abdalla's spy;
He would betray us to the Enemy.

Were I like thee, in cheats of State grown old,
(Those public Markets were for foreign gold
The poorer Prince is to the Richer sold;)
Then `thou might think me fit for that low part:
But I am yet to learn the Statesman's art.
My kindness and my hate unmasked I wear;
For friends to trust, and Enemies to fear.
My hearts so plain,
That men on every passing thought may look,
Like fishes gliding in a Crystal brook:
When troubled most, it does the bottom show,
'Tis weedless all above; and rockless all below.

Here he be trusted let him first be tried,
He may be false who once has changed his side.

In that you more accuse your selves than me:
None who are injured can unconstant be.
You were unconstant; you who did the wrong;
To do me justice does to me belong.
Great Souls by kindness only can be ti'd;
Injured again, again i'll leave your side.
Honour is what my self and friends I owe;
And none can loose it who forsake a foe.
Since, then, your Foes now happen to be mine,
Though not in friendship we'll in interest join.
So while my loved revenge is full and high,
I'll give you back your Kingdom by the by.
That I so long delai'd what you desire
Was not to doubt your worth, but to admire.

This Councellor an old mans caution shows,
Who fears that little he has left, to loose:
Age sets to fortune; while youth boldly throw's.
But let us first your drooping Soldiers cheer:
Then seek out danger, here it dare appear.
This hour I fix your Crown upon your brow,
Next hour fate gives it; but I give it now.

O could I read the dark decrees of fate,
That I might once know whom to love or hate!
For I my self scarce my own thoughts can guess,
So much I find 'em varied by success.
As in some wether-glass my Love I hold;
Which falls or rises with the heat or cold.
I will be constant yet, if fortune can;
I love the King: let her but name the Man.

Madam, a Gentleman to me unknown
Desires that he may speak with you alone.

Some Message from the King: let him appear.

I see you are amazed that I am here.
But let at once your Fear and Wonder end;
In the Usurpers Guard I found a Friend,
Who led me to you safe in this Disguise.

Your Danger brings this Trouble in my Eyes.
But what affair this vent'rous visit drew?

The greatest in the world; the seeing you.

The Courage of your Love I so admire
That to preserve you, you shall straight retire.
Go, Dear, each Minute does new dangers bring;
You will be taken; I expect the King.

The King! the poor Usurper of an Hour,
His Empire's but a Dream of Kingly Power.
I warn you, as a Lover and a Friend,
To leave him e're his short Dominion end.
The Soldier I suborned will wait at night;
And shall alone be conscious of your flight.

I thank you that you so much care bestow.
But, if his Reign be short, I need not go.
For why should I expose my life and yours,
For what, you say, a little time assures?

My danger in the attempt is very small:
And, if he loves you, yours is none at all.
But, though his Ruin be as sure as Fate,
Your proof of Love to me would come too late.
This Trial, I in Kindness would allow;
'Tis easy, if you love me, show it now.

It is because I love you, I refuse:
For all the World my Conduct would accuse
If I should go, with him I love, away:
And therefore, in strict Virtue, I will stay.

You would in vain dissemble Love to me*
Through that thin Veyle your Artifice I see.
You would expect the event, and then declare:
But do not, do not drive me to despair.
For if you now refuse with me to fly,
Rather then love you after this, I'll die.
And therefore weigh it well before you speak;
My King is safe; his force within not weak.

The Counsel you have given me, may be wise:
But, since th'affair is great, I will advise.

Then that delay, I for denial take. --

Stay; you too swift an Exposition make.
If I should go, since Zulema will stay,
I should my Brother to the King betray.

There is no fear: but, if there were, I see
You value still your Brother more than me.
Farewell; some ease I in your falsehood find;
It lets a Beam in, that will clear my mind.
My former weakness I with shame, confess:
And when I see you next shall love you less.

Your faithless dealing you may blush to tell.
This is a Maids Reward who loves too well.
Remember that I drew my latest breath
In charging your unkindness with my death.
Have I not answered all you can invent
Even the least shadow of an Argument?

You want not cunning what you please to prove;
But my poor Heart knows only how to Love.
And, finding this, you Tyrannize the more: --
'Tis plain, some other Mistress you adore:
And now, with studied tricks of subtilty,
You come prepared to lay the fault on me.
But oh, that I should love so false a man!

Hear me; and then disprove it, if you can.

I'll hear no more; your breach of Faith is plain.
You would with Wit, your want of Love maintain.
But, by my own Experience, I can tell,
They who love truly cannot argue well.
Go Faithless Man!
Leave me alone to mourn my Misery:
I cannot cease to love you, but I'll die.

What Man but I so long unmoved could hear
Such tender passion, and refuse a Tear!
But do not talk of dying any more,
Unless you mean that I should die before.

I fear your feigned Repentance comes too late:
I dye to see you still thus obstinate.
But yet, in Death, my truth of Love to show,
Lead me; if I have strength enough, I'll go.

By Heaven you shall not go: I will not be
Overcome in Love or Generosity.
All I desire, to end the unlucky strife,
Is but a Vow that you will be my Wife.

To tie me to you by a Vow, is hard;
It show's, my Love, you as no Tie regard.
Name any thing but that, and I'll agree.

Swear then, you never will my Rival's be.

Nay, prithee, this is harder then before;
Name any thing, good Dear, but that thing more.

Now I too late perceive I am undone:
Living and seeing, to my Death I run.
I know you false; yet in your Snares I fall;
You grant me nothing; and I grant you all.

I would grant all; but I must curb my will:
Because I love to keep you jealous still.
In your Suspicion I your Passion find:
But I will take a time to cure your mind.

Oh, Madam, the new King is drawing near!

Hast quickly hence; least he should find you here.

How much more wretched then I came, I go:
I more my Weakness, and your Falsehood know;
And now must leave you with my greatest Foe!

Go; how I love thee Heaven can only tell.
And yet I love thee, for a Subject, well. --
Yet, whatsoever Charms a Crown can bring,
A Subject's greater then a little King.
I will attend till Time this Throne secure;
And, when I climb, my footing shall be sure.
Musique! and I, believe, addressed to me.

WHerever I am, and whatever I do;
My Phillis is still in my mind:
When angry I mean not to Phillis to go,
My Feet of themselves the way find:
Unknown to my self I am just at her door,
And when I would rail, I can bring out no more,
Than Phillis too fair and unkind!
When Phillis I see, my Heart bounds in my Breast,
And the Love I would stifle is shown:
But asleep, or awake, I am never at rest
When from my Eyes Phillis is gone!
Sometimes a sad Dream does delude my sad mind,
But, alas, when I wake and no Phillis I find
How I sigh to my self all alone.
Should a King be my Rival in her I adore
He should offer his Treasure in vain:
O let me alone to be happy and poor,
And give me my Phillis again:
Let Phillis be mine, and but ever be kind
I could to a Desert with her be confined,
And envy no Monarch his Reign.
Alas, I discover too much of my Love,
And she too well knows her own power!
She makes me each day a new Martyrdom prove,
And makes me grow jealous each hour:
But let her each minute torment my poor mind
I had rather love Phillis both False and Unkind,
Then ever be freed from her Power.
Now, Madam, at your Feet, a King you see:
Or, rather, if you please, a Sceptred Slave;
'Tis just you should possess the power you gave.
Had Love not made me yours, I yet had bin
But the first Subject to Boabdelin.
Thus Heaven declares the Crown I bring, your due:
And had forgot my Title, but for you.

Heaven to your Merits will, I hope be kind;
But, Sir, it has not yet declared its mind.
'Tis true, it holds the Crown above your Head;
But does not fix it till your Brother's dead.

All, but the Alhambra, is within my power.
And that, my forces go to take this hour.

When, with its Keys, your Brothers Head you bring
I shall believe you are indeed a King.

But, since th'events of all things doubtful are,
And, of Events, most doubtful those of War,
I beg to know before, if Fortune frown,
Must I then loose your Favour with my Crown?

You'll soon return a Conqueror again;
And therefore, Sir, your question is in vain.

I think to certain Victory I move;
But you may more assure it by your Love.
That grant will make my arms invincible.

My prayers and wishes your success foretell.
Go then, and fight, and think you fight for me;
I wait but to reward your Victory.

But if I loose it, must I loose you too?

You are too curious if you more would know.
I know not what my future thoughts, will be:
Poor women's thoughts are all Extempore.
Wise men, indeed,
Before hand a long chain of thoughts produce;
But ours are only for our present use.

Those thoughts you will not know, too well declare
You mean to wait the final doom of War.

I find you come to quarrel with me now:
Would you know more of me then I allow?
Whence are you grown that great Divinity
That with such ease into my thoughts can pry?
Indulgence does not with some tempers suit;
I see I must become more absolute.

I must submit;
On what hard terms so e're my peace be bought.

Submit! you speak as you were not in fault?
'Tis evident the injury is mine;
For why should you my secret thoughts divine?

Yet if we might be judged by Reasons Laws!

Then you would have your reason judge my cause?
Either confess your fault or hold your tongue;
For I am sure I'm never in the wrong.

Then I acknowledge it.

-- Then I forgive.

Under how hard a Law poor Lovers live!
Who, like the vanquished, must their right release:
And with the loss of reason, buy their peace.
Madam, to show that you my power command,
I put my life and safety in your hand:
Dispose of the Albayzin as you please:
To your fair hands I here resign the keys.

I'take your gift because your love it shows;
And faithful Selin for Alcalde choose.

Selin, from her alone your Orders take:
This one request, yet, Madam, let me make
That, from those turrets, you the assault will see;
And Crown, once more, my arms with Victory.

Gazul, go tell my daughter that I wait:
You, Reduan, bring the Prisoner to his fate.
Here of my charge I will possession take,
A bloody sacrifice I mean to make:
The Manes of my son shall smile this day,
While I in blood my Vows of Vengeance pay.

I sent, Benzaida, to glad your eyes:
These rites we owe your brothers Obsequies.
You two the accursed Abencerrago bind,
You need no more to instruct you in my mind.

In what sad Object am I called to share,
Tell me, what is it, Sir, you here prepare.

'Tis, what your dying brother did bequeath,
A Scene of Vengeance, and a Pomp of death.

The horrid Spectacle my Soul does fright;
I want the heart to see the dismal sight.

You are my principal invited guest:
Whose eyes I would not only feed but feast:
You are to smile at his last groaning breath,
And laugh to see his eye-balls roll in death:
To judge the lingering Souls convulsive strife;
When thick short breath, catches at parting life.

And of what Marble do you think me made?

What, can you be of just revenge afraid?

He killed my Brother in his won defence,
Pity his youth, and spare his innocence.

Art thou so soon, to pardon murder, won?
Can he be innocent who killed my son?
Abenamar shall mourn as well as I;
His Ozmyn for my Tarifa shall die.
But, since thou plead'st so boldly; I will see
That Justice thou would hinder, done by thee:
Here, take the sword; and do a Sisters part;
Pierce his fond Girl; Or I will pierce thy heart.

To his commands I join my own request,
All wounds from you are welcome to my breast:
Think only when your hand this act has done,
It has but finished what your eyes begun.
I thought, with silence to have scorned my doom;
But now your noble pity has ore'come:
Which I acknowledge with my latest breath;
The first who here began a love in death.

Alas, what aid can my weak hand afford;
You see I tremble when I touch a sword?
The brightness dazzles me; and turns my sight:
Or, if I look, 'tis but to aim less right.

I'll guide the hand which must my death convey
My leaping heart shall meet it half the way.

VVaste not the precious time in idle breath.

Let me resign this instrument of death.
Ah, no: I was too hasty to resign;
'Tis in your hand more mortal then in mine.

The King is from the Alhambra beaten back;
And now preparing for a new attacque.
To favour which, he wills, that, instantly,
You reinforce him with a new supply.

Think not, although my duty calls me hence,
That with the breach of yours I will dispense:
Here my return, see my commands you do;
Let me find Ozmin dead; and killed by you.
Gazul and Reduan attend her still;
And if she dares to fail, perform my will.

Defer not, fair Benzaiida, my death;
Looking on you --
I should but live to sigh away my breath.
My eyes have done the work they had to do;
I take your Image with me, which they drew;
And, when they close, I shall dye full of you.

When Parents their Commands unjustly lay
Children are privileged to disobey.
Yet from that breach of duty I am clear,
Since I submit the penalty to bear.
To dye or kill you is th'alternative*
Rather then take your life, I will not live.

This shows the excess of generosity;
But, Madam, you have no pretence to die.
I should defame the Abencerrage's Race
To let a Lady suffer in my place.
But neither could that life you would bestow
Save mine: nor do you so much pity owe
To me, a stranger, and your houses foe.

From whence-soe're their Hate our Houses drew,
I blush to tell you, I have none for you.
'Tis a Confession which I should not make,
Had I more time to give, or you to take.
But, since death's near, and run's with so much force,
We must meet first and intercept his course.

Oh, how unkind a comfort do you give!
Now, I fear death again, and wish to live.
Life were worth taking could I have it now,
But 'tis more good than Heaven can e're allow,
To one man's portion, to have life and you.

Sure, at our Births,
Death with our meeting Planets danced above;
Or we were wounded by a Mourning Love!

The noise returns, and doubles from behind;
It seems as if two adverse Armies joined:
Time presses us.

-- If longer you delay
We must, though loath, yours Fathers Will obey.

Haste, Madam, to fulfil his hard Commands:
And rescue me from their ignoble Hands.
Let me kiss yours, when you my wound begin;
Then, easy Death will slide with pleasure in.

Ah, gentle Soldiers, some short time allow,
My Father has repented him e're now;
Or will repent him when he finds me dead:
My clue of Life is twined with Ozmyn's Thread.

'Tis fatal to refuse her, or obey:
But where is our excuse? what can we say?

Say; any thing --
Say, that to kill the Guiltless you were loath.
Or, if you did, say, I would kill you both.

To disobey our Orders is to die:
I'll do it, who dare oppose it.

-- That dare I.

Stay not to see the issue of the Fight;
But haste to save your self by speedy flight.
Did all Mankind against my Life conspire
Without this Blessing I would not retire.
But, Madam, can I go and leave you here?
Your Fathers anger now for you I fear:
Consider you have done too much to stay.

Think not of me, but fly your self away.

Haste quickly hence; the Enemies are nigh:
From every part I see our Soldiers fly;
The Foes not only our Assailants beat,
But fiercely sally out on their Retreat;
And, like a Sea broke loose, come on amain.

Traitors, you hope to save your selves in vain,
Your forfeit Lives shall for your Treason pay;
And Ozmyn's Blood shall be revenged this day.

No Sir, your Ozmyn lives, and lives to own
A Fathers piety to free his Son.

My Ozmyn! O thou blessing of my age!
And art thou safe from their deluded rage!
Whom must I praise for thy Deliverance,
Was it thy Valour or the work of Chance?

Nor Chance nor Valour could deliver me;
But 'twas a noble Pity set me free.
My Liberty and Life,
And what your Happiness you're pleased to call,
We to this charming Beauty owe it all.
Instruct me, visible Divinity,
Instruct me by what Name to worship thee.
For to thy Virtue I would Altars raise:
Since thou art much above all humane praise.
But see --
My other blessing, Almahide is here:
I'll to the King, and tell him she is near.
You Ozmyn, on your fair deliverer wait:
And with your private Joys the public Celebrate.

The work is done; now, Madam, you are free:
At least if I can give you Liberty.
But you have Chains which you your self have chose;
And, oh, that I could free you too from those.
But, you are free from force, and have full power
To go, and kill my hopes and me, this hour.
I see, then, you will go; but yet my toil
May be rewarded with a looking while.

Almanzor can from every Subject raise
New matter for our Wonder and his Praise.
You bound and freed me, but the difference is,
That showed your Valour; but your Virtue this.

Madam, you praise a Funeral Victory;
At whose sad pomp the Conqueror must die.

Conquest attends Almanzor every where,
I am too small a Foe for him to fear:
But Heroes still must be opposed by some,
Or they would want occasion to ore'come.

Madam, I cannot on bare praises live:
Those who abound in praises seldom give.

While I to all the world your worth make known,
May Heaven reward the pity you have shown.

My Love is languishing and sterv'd to death,
And would you give me charity, in breath?
Prayers are the Alms of Church-men to the Poor:
They send to Heaven's; but drive us from their door.

Cease; cease a Suit
So vain to you and troublesome to me,
If you will have me think that I am free.
If I am yet a Slave my bonds I'll bear,
But what I cannot grant, I will not hear.

You wonnot hear! you must both Hear and grant;
For, Madam, there's an impudence in want.

Your way is somewhat strange to ask Relief;
You ask with threatening, like a begging Thief.
Once more Almanzor, tell me, am I free?

Madam, you are from all the World -- but me.
But as a Pirate, when he frees the Prize
He took from Friends, sees the rich Merchandise,
And after he has freed it, justly buys,
So when I have restored your Liberty, --
But, then, alas, I am too poor to buy!

Nay now you use me just as Pirates do:
You free me; but expect a ransom too.

You've all the freedom that a Prince can have:
But Greatness cannot be without a Slave.
A Monarch never can in private move;
But still is haunted with officious Love.
So small an inconvenience you may bear,
'Tis all the Fine Fate sets upon the Fair.

Yet Princes may retire when e're they please;
And breath free Air from out their Palaces:
They go sometimes unknown to shun their State;
And then, 'tis manners not to know or wait.

If not a Subject then a Ghost I'll be;
And from a Ghost, you know, no place is free.
Asleep, Awake, I'll haunt you every where;
From my white shroud, groan Love into your Ear.
When in your Lovers Arms you sleep at night,
I'll glide in cold betwixt, and seize my Right.
And is't not better in your Nuptial Bed
To have a living lover than a dead?

I can no longer bear to be accused,
As if what I could grant you I refused.
My Fathers choice I never will dispute;
And he has chosen e're you moved your Suit.
You know my Case, if equal you can be,
Plead for your self, and answer it for me.

Then, Madam, in that hope you bid me live:
I ask no more then you may justly give:
But, in strict justice there may favour be:
And may I hope that you have that for me?

Why do you thus my secret thoughts pursue,
Which known, hurt me, and cannot profit you?
Your knowledge but new troubles does prepare,
Like theirs who curious in their Fortunes are.
To say I could with more content be yours,
Tempts you to hope; but not that hope assures.
For since the King has right,
And favoured by my Father in his Suit,
It is a blossom which can bear no Fruit.
Yet, if you dare attempt so hard a task,
May you succeed; you have my leave to ask.

I can with courage now my hopes pursue,
Since I no longer have to combat you.
That did the greatest difficulty bring:
The rest are small, a Father, and a King!

Great Souls discern not when the leap's too wide,
Because they only view the farther side.
What ever you desire you think is near:
But, with more reason, the event I fear.

No; there is a necessity in Fate,
Why still the brave bold man is Fortunate:
He keeps his object ever full in sight,
And that assurance holds him firm, and right.
True, 'tis a narrow path that leads to bliss,
But right before there is no precipice:
Fear makes men look aside, and then their footing miss.

I do your merit all the right I can;
Admiring Virtue in a private man:
I only wish the King may grateful be,
And that my Father with my Eyes may see.
Might I not make it as my last request
(Since humble carriage suits a Suppliant best)
That you would somewhat of your fierceness hide:
That inborn fire; I do not call it pride.

Born, as I am still to command, not sue,
Yet you shall see that I can beg for you.
And if your Father will require a Crown,
Let him but name the Kingdom, 'tis his own.
I am, but while I please, a private man;
I have that Soul which Empires first began:
From the dull crowd which every King does lead,
I will pick out whom I will choose to head:
The best and bravest Souls I can select.
And on their Conquered Necks my Throne erect.

WHile she is mine, I have not yet lost all:
But, in her Arms, shall have a gentle fall:
Blessed in my Love, although in war overcome,
I fly, like Anthony from Actium,
To meet a better Cleopatra here,
You of the Watch: you of the Watch: appear.
Who calls below? What's your demand?

-- 'Tis I:
Open the Gate with speed; the Foe is nigh.

What Orders for admittance do you bring?

Slave, my own Orders; look and know the King.

I know you, but my charge is so severe*
That none, without exception, enter here.

Traitor, and Rebel, thou shalt shortly see
Thy Orders are not to extend to me*
What saucy slave so rudely does exclaim,
And brands my Subject with a Rebels name?

Dear Lyndaraxa haste; the Foes pursue*

My Lord the Prince Abdalla, is it you?
I scarcely can believe the words I hear:
Could you so coursly Treat my Officer?

He forced me, but the danger nearer draws,
When I am entered you shall know the cause.

Entered! Why have you any business here?

I am pursued; the Enemy is near.

Are you pursued, and do you thus delay
To save your self? make haste, my Lord, away.

Give me not cause to think you mock my grief:
What place have I, but this, for my relief?

This favour does your handmaid much oblige*
But we are not provided for a siege.
My Subjects few; and their provision thin;
The foe is strong without, we weak within.
This to my noble Lord may seem unkind,
But he will weigh it in his Princely mind:
And pardon her, who does assurance want
So much, she blushes, when she cannot grant.

Yes, you may blush; and you have cause to weep,
Is this the faith you promised me to keep?
Ah yet, if to a Lover you will bring
No succour; give your succour to a King.

A King is he whom nothing can withstand;
Who men and money can with ease command:
A King is he whom fortune still does bless:
He is a King, who does a Crown possess.
If you would have me think that you are he,
Produce to view your marks of Sovereignty.
But, if your self alone for proof you bring,
You're but a single person; not a King.

Ungrateful Maid, did I for this rebel?
I say no more; but I have loved too well.

Who but your self did that Rebellion move?
Did I here promise to receive your Love?
Is it my fault you are not fortunate?
I love a King, but a poor Rebel hate.

Who follow Fortune still are in the right. --
But let me be protected here this night.

The place to morrow will be circled round;
And then no way will for your flight be found.

I hear my Enemies just coming on;
Protect me but one hour, till they are gone.

They'll know you have been here; it cannot be,
That very hour you stay will ruin me.
For if the foe behold our Interview,
I shall be thought a Rebel too like you:
Haste hence; and that your flight, may prosperous prove;
I'll recommend you to the powers above.

She's gone; ah faithless and ungrateful maid!
I fear some tread; and fear I am betrayed:
I'll to the Spanish King; and try if he
To countenance his own right, will succour me.
There is more faith in Christian Dogs, than thee.

-- I wish
(To merit all these thanks) I could have said
My pity only did his virtue aid:
'Twas pity; but 'twas of a Lovesick Maid.
His manly suffering my esteem did move;
That bred Compassion; and Compassion, Love.

O blessing sold me at too cheap a rate!
My danger was the benefit of fate.
But that you may my fair deliverer know,
She was not only born our house's foe.
But to my death by powerful reasons, led,
At least, in justice she might wish me dead.

But why thus long do you her name conceal?

To gain belief for what I now reveal:
E'ven thus prepared, you scarce can think it true
The Saver of my life, from Selin drew
Her birth; and was his Sister whom I slew.

No more; it cannot, was not, must not be:
Upon my blessing, say not it was she.
The daughter of the only man I hate!
Two Contradictions twisted in a fate!

The mutual hate which you and Selin bore,
Does but exalt her generous pity more.
Could she a brothers death forgive to me,
And cannot you forget her family?
Can you so ill requite the life I owe
To reckon her, who gave it, still your foe?
It lends too great a luster to her line
To let her virtue, ours so much out-shine.

Thou give her line the advantage which they have
By meanly taking of the life they gave.
Grant that it did in her a pity show,
But would my Son be pitied by a foe?
She has the glory of thy act defaced:
Thou kild'st her brother; but she triumphs last:
Poorly for us our Enmity would cease;
When we are beaten we receive a peace.

If that be all in which you disagree,
I must confess 'twas Ozmyn conquered me.
Had I beheld him basely beg his life,
I should not now submit to be his wife.
But when I saw his courage death control,
I paid a secret homage to his Soul;
And thought my cruel father much too blame;
Since Ozmyn's virtue his revenge did shame.

What constancy can thou here hope to find
In that unstable, and soon conquered mind;
What piety can thou expect from her
Who could forgive a Brothers Murderer?
Or, what obedience hop'st thou to be paid
From one who first her father disobeyed?

Nature that bids us Parents to obey,
Bids parents their commands by Reason weigh.
And you her virtue by your praise did own,
Before you knew by whom the act was done.

Your reasons speak too much of insolence,
Her birth's a crime past pardon or defence.
Know, that as Selin was not won by thee,
Neither will I by Selins daughter be.
Leave her, or cease henceforth to be my Son:
This is my will: and this I will have done.

It is a murdering will!
That whirls along with an impetuous sway;
And like chain-shot, sweeps all things in its way.
He does my honour want of duty call;
To that, and love he has no right at all.

No, Ozmyn, no, it is much less ill
To leave me than dispute a Fathers will:
If I had any title to your love,
Your fathers greater right does mine remove:
Your vows and faith I give you back again;
Since neither can be kept without a sin.

Nothing but death my vows can give me back:
They are not yours to give, nor mine to take.

Nay, think not, though I could your vows resign,
My love or virtue could dispense with mine.
I would extinguish your unlucky fire,
To make you happy in some new desire:
I can preserve enough for me and you:
And love, and be unfortunate for two.

In all that's good and great,
You vanquish me so fast, that in the end
I shall have nothing left me to defend.
From every Post you force me to remove;
But let me keep my last retrenchment, Love.

Love then, my Ozmyn; I will be content
To make you wretched by your own consent:
Live poor, despised, and banished for my sake:
And all the burden of my sorrows take.
For, as for me, in what so ever estate,
While I have you, I must be fortunate.

Thus then, secured of what we hold most dear,
(Each others love,) we'll go -- I know not where.
For where, alas, should we our flight begin?
The foes without; our parents are within.

I'll fly to you; and you shall fly to me:
Our flight but to each others arms shall be.
To providence and chance permit the rest;
Let us but love enough and we are blessed.

They're Lindraxa's brothers; for her sake
Their lives, and pardon my request I make.

Then Zulema and Hamet live; but know
Your lives to Abdelmelechs suit you owe.

The grace received so much my hope exceeds
That words come weak and short to answer deeds.
You've made a venture, Sir, and time must show,
If this great mercy you did well bestow.

You, Abdelmelech, haste before 'tis night;
And close pursue my Brother in his flight.
But see with Almahide,
The brave Almanzor comes, whose conquering sword
That Crown it once took from me, has restored.
How can I recompense so great desert!

I bring you, Sir, performed in every part
My Promise made; Your foes are fled or slain;
Without a Rival, absolute you reign.
Yet, though in justice, this enough may be,
It is too little to be done by me:
I beg to go
Where my own Courage and your fortune calls,
To chase these Misbelievers from our Walls.
I cannot breath within this narrow space;
My heart's too big; and swells beyond the place.

You can perform, brave warrior, what you please,
Fate listens to your voice, and then decrees.
Now I no longer fear the Spanish powers;
Already we are free and Conquerours.

Accept great King, tomorrow from my hand,
The captive head of conquered Ferdinand.
You shall not only what you lost regain,
But, 'ore the Byscayn Mountains to the Mayn,
Extend your sway, where never Moor did reign.

What in another Vanity would seem,
Appears but noble Confidence in him.
No haughty boasting; but a manly pride:
A Soul too fiery, and too great to guide:
He moves excentrique, like a wandering star;
Whose Motion's just; though 'tis not regular.

It is for you, brave Man, and only you
Greatly to speak, and yet more greatly do.
But, if your Benefits too far extend,
I must be left ungrateful in the end:
Yet somewhat I would pay
Before my debts above all reck'ning grow;
To keep me from the shame of what I owe.
But you --
Are conscious to your self of such desert,
That of your gift I fear to offer part.

When I shall have declared my high request,
So much presumption there will be confessed,
That you will find your gifts I do not shun;
But rather much o're-rate the service done.

Give wing to your desires, and let 'em fly;
Secure, they cannot mount a pitch too high.
So bless me Alha both in peace and war,
As I accord what here your wishes are.
Emboldn'd by the promise of a Prince
I ask this Lady now with Confidence.

You ask the only thing I cannot grant.
But, as a stranger, you are ignorant.
Of what by public fame my Subjects know;
She is my Mistress:

-- And my daughter too.

Believe, old Man, that I her father knew:
What else should make Almanzor, kneel to you?
Nor doubt, Sir, but your right to her was known:
For had you had no claim but love alone,
I could produce a better of my own.
Almanzor, you forget my last request:
Your words have too much haughtiness expressed.
Is this the humble way you were to move?
I was too far transported by my love.
Forgive me; for I had not learned to sue
To any thing before, but Heaven and you.
Sir, at your feet, I make it my request --
Though, without boasting I deserve her best.
For you, her love with gaudy titles sought,
But I her heart with blood and dangers bought.

The blood which you have shed in her defence
Shall have in time a fitting recompense:
Or, if you think your services delai'd,
Name but your price, and you shall soon be paid.

My price! why, King, you do not think you deal
With one, who sets his services to sale?
Reserve your gifts for those who gifts regard;
And know I think my self above reward.

Then sure you are some Godhead; and our care
Must be to come with Licence, and with Prayer.

As little as you think your self obliged,
You would be glad to do it, when next besieged.
But I am pleased there should be nothing due;
For what I did was for my self not you.

You, with contempt, on meaner gifts look down;
And, aiming at my Queen, disdain my Crown.
That Crown restored, deserves no recompense,
Since you would rob the fairest Jewel thence.
Dare not henceforth ungrateful me to call;
What here Iow'd you, this has cancelled all.

I'll call thee thankless, King; and perjured both:
Thou swore by Alha; and hast broke thy oath.
But thou dost well: thou take the cheapest way;
Not to own services thou can not pay.

My patience more then pays thy service past;
But know this insolence shall be thy last.
Hence from my sight, and take it as a grace
Thou liv'st, and art but banished from the place.

Where here I go there can no exile be;
But from Almanzor's sight I banish thee:
I will not now, if thou would beg me, stay;
But I will take my Almahide away.
Stay thou with all thy Subjects here: but know
We leave thy City empty when we go.

Fall on; take; kill the Traitor.

-- Base, and poor,
Blush that thou art Almanzor's Conqueror.
Farewell my Almahide!
Life of it self will go, now thou art gone,
Like flies in Winter when they loose the Sun.

Revenge, and taken so secure a way,
Are blessings which Heaven sends not every day.

I will at leisure now revenge my wrong;
And, Traitor, thou shalt feel my vengeance long:
Thou shalt not dye just at thy own desire,
But see my Nuptials, and with rage expire.

Thou dare not marry her while I'm in sight;
With a bent brow thy Priest and thee I'll fright,
Which all thy hopes and wishes should content,
The thought of me shall make thee impotent.
As some fair tulip, by a storm oppresr,
Shrinks up; and folds its silken arms to rest;
And, bending to the blast, all pale and dead,
Hears from within, the wind sing round its head:
So, shrouded up your beauty disappears;
Unvail my Love; and lay aside your fears.
The storm that caused your fright, is past and done.
So flowr's peep out too soon, and miss the Sun.

What mystery in this strange behaviour lies?

Let me for ever hide these guilty eyes
Which lighted my Almanzor to his tomb;
Or, let 'em blaze to show me there a room.

Heaven lent their lustre for a Nobler end:
A thousand torches must their light attend
To lead you to a Temple and a Crown. --
Why does my fairest Almahida frown?
Am I less pleasing then I was before,
Or is the insolent Almanzor, more?

I justly own that I some pity have,
Not for the Insolent, but for the Brave.

Though to your King your duty you neglect,
Know, Almahide, I look for more respect.
And, if a Parents charge your mind can move,
Receive the blessing of a Monarch's love.

Did he my freedom to his life prefer,
And shall I wed Almanzor's Murderer?
No, Sir; I cannot to your will submit:
Your way's too rugged for my tender feet.

You must be driven where you refuse to go.
And taught, by force, your happiness to know.
To force me, Sir, is much unworthy you;
And, when you would, impossible to do*
If force could bend me, you might think with shame,
That I debased the blood from whence I came.
My soul is soft; which you may gently lay
In your loose palm; but when tis pressed to stay,
Like water it deludes your grasp, and slips away.

I find I must revoke what I decreed;
Almanzors death my Nuptials must precede.
Love is a Magic which the Lover ties;
But charms still end, when the Magician dyes.
Go; let me hear my hated Rival's dead;
And, to convince my eyes, bring back his head.

Go on; I wish no other way to prove
That I am worthy of Almanzor's love.
We will in death, at least, united be;
I'll show you I can dye as well as he.

What should I do! when equally I dread
Almanzor living, and Almanzor dead! --
Yet, by your promise you are mine alone.

How dare you claim my faith, and break your own?

This for your virtue is a weak defence:
No second vows can with your first dispense.
Yet, since the King did to Almanzor swear,
And, in his death ungrateful may appear,
He ought, in justice, first to spare his life,
And then to claim your promise, as his wife.

What here my secret inclinations be,
To this, since honour ties me, I agree.
Yet I declare and to the world will own,
That, far from seeking, I would shun the Throne,
And, with Almanzor, lead an humble life;
There is a private greatness in his wife.

That little love I have, I hardly buy;
You give my Rival all, while you deny.
Yet, Almahide, to let you see your power,
Your loved Almanzor shall be free this hour.
You are obeyed; but tis so great a grace,
That I could wish me in my Rivals place.

How blessed was I before this fatal day!
When all I knew of love, was to obey!
'Twas life becalmed; without a gentle breath;
Though not so cold, yet motionless as death.
A heavy quiet state: but love all strife,
All rapid; is the Hurrican of life.
Had love not shown me, I had never seen
An Excellence beyond Boabdelin.
I had not, aiming higher, lost my rest;
But with a vulgar good been dully blessed.
But, in Almanzor, having seen what's rare,
Now I have learnt too sharply to compare,
And, like a Favourite, quickly in disgrace,
Just know the value here I loose the place.

I see the end for which I'm hither sent;
To double, by your sight, my punishment.
There is a shame in bonds, I cannot bear;
Far more than death, to meet your eyes I fear.
That shame of long continuance shall not be:
The King, at my entreaty, sets you free.

The King! my wonder's greater than before:
How did he dare my freedom to restore?
He like some Captive Lyon uses me;
He runs away before he sets me free:
And takes a sanctuary in his Court:
I'll rather loose my life than thank him for it.

If any subject for your thanks there be,
The King expects 'em not; you ow 'em me.
Our freedoms through each others hands have past;
You give me my revenge in winning last.

Then fate commodiously for me has done;
To loose mine there where I would have it won.

Almanzor, you too soon will understand
That what I win is on another hand.
The King (who doomed you to a cruel fate)
Gave to my prayers both his revenge and hate:
But at no other price would rate your life
Then my consent, and oath to be his wife.

Would you to save my life, my love betray?
Here; take me; bind me; carry me away;
Kill me: I'll kill you if you disobey.

That absolute command your love does give
I take; and charge you, by that power, to live.

When death, the last of comforts you refuse,
Your power, like Heaven upon the damned, you use,
You force me in my being to remain,
To make me last, and keep me fresh for pain.
When all my joys are gone
What cause can I for living longer, give,
But a dull lazy habitude to live?

Rash men, like you, and impotent of will,
Give chance no time to turn; but urge her still.
She would repent; you push the quarrel on,
And once, because she went, she must be gone.

She shall not turn: what is it she can do
To recompense me for the loss of you!

Heaven will reward your worth some better way.
At least, for me, you have but lost one day.
Nor is't a real loss which you deplore;
You sought a heart that was engaged before.
'Twas a swift love which took you in his way;
Flew only through your heart but made no stay.
'Twas but a dream; where truth had not a place:
A scene of fancy, moved so swift a pace
And shifted, that you can but think it was:
Let, then, the short vexatious Vision pass.

My joys indeed are dreams; but not my pain
'Twas a swift ruin; but the marks remain.
When some fierce fire lays goodly buildings wast,
Would you conclude
There had been none, because the burning's past?

It was your fault that fire seized all your breast,
You should have blown up some, to save the rest.
But tis, at worst, but so consumed by fire
As Cities are, that by their falls rise high'r.
Build Love a Nobler Temple in my place;
You'll find the fire has but enlarged your space.

Love has undone me; I am grown so poor
I sadly view the ground I had before:
But want a stock; and ne'er can build it more.

Then say what Charity I can allow;
I would Contribute; if I knew but how.
Take friendship: or if that too small appear,
Take love which Sisters may to Brothers bear.

A Sisters love! that is so palled a thing!
What pleasure can it to a Lover bring?
'Tis like thin food to men in feavours spent;
Just keeps alive; but gives no nourishment.
What hopes, what fears, what transports can it move?
'Tis but the Ghost of a departed Love.

You like some greedy Cormorant, devour
All my whole life can give you, in an hour.
What more I can do for you, is to die,
And that must follow, if you this deny.
Since I gave up my love that you might live
You, in refusing life, my sentence give.

Far from my breast be such an impious thought:
Your death would loose the quiet mine had sought.
I'll live for you, in spite of misery:
But you shall grant that I had rather dye.
I'll be so wretched; filled with such despair,
That you shall see, to live, was more to dare,

Adieu, then, O my Souls far better part
Your Image sticks so close
That the blood follows from my rending heart.
A last farewell!
For since a last must come, the rest are vain!
Like gasps in death, which but prolong our pain.
But, since the King is now a part of me:
Cease from henceforth to be his Enemy.
Go now, for pity go, for if you stay
I fear I shall have something still to say.
Thus -- I for ever shut you from my sight.

Like one thrust out in a cold Winters night,
Yet shivering, underneath your gate I stay;
One look -- I cannot go before 'tis day --
Not one - Farewell: what here my sufferings be
Within; I'll speak Farewell, as loud as she:
I will not be out-done in Constancy. --
Then like a dying Conqueror I go;
At least I have looked last upon my foe.
I go -- but if too heavily I move,
I walk encumbered with a weight of Love.
Fain I would leave the thought of you behind
But still, the more I cast you from my mind,
You dash, like water, back, when thrown against the wind

With him go all my fears: a guard there wait;
And see him safe without the City gate.
Now Abdemelech, is my brother dead?

The Usurper to the Christian Camp is fled;
Whom as Granada's lawful King they own;
And vow, by force to seat him in the throne.
Mean time the Rebels in the Albayzin rest;
Which is, in Lindaraxa's name, possessed.

Hast; and reduce it instantly by force:

First give me leave to prove a milder course.
She will, perhaps, on summons yield the place.

We cannot, to your suit, refuse her grace.

How fortune persecutes this hoary head!
My Ozmin is with Selin's daughter fled.
But he's no more my Son --
My hate shall like a Zegry him pursue;
Till I take back what blood from me he drew.

Let war and vengeance be to morrow's care:
But let us to the Temple now repair.
A thousand torches make the Mosque more bright:
This must be mine ^ahida's night.
Hence ye importunate affairs of State;
You should not Tyrannize on Love, but wait.
Had life no love, none would for business live;
Yet still from love the largest part we give:
And must be forced, in Empires weary toil,
To live long wretched to be pleased a while.

SVccess, which can no more than beauty last,
Makes our sad Poet mourn your favours past:
For, since without desert he got a name,
He fears to loose it now with greater shame.
Fame, like a little Mistress of the town,
Is gain^d with ease; but then she's lost as soon.
For, as those (...) Misses, soon or late
Iilt such ^ at the highest rate:
(And oft the (...), or the Brawny Clown,
Gets what is hid in the loose body'd gown;)
So, Fame is false to all that keep her long;
And turns up to the Fop that's brisk and young.
Some wiser Poet now would leave Fame first:
But elder wits are like old Lovers cursed;
Who, when the vigour of their youth is spent,
Still grow more fond as they grow impotent.
This, some years hence, our Poets case may prove;
But, yet, he hopes, he's young enough to love.
When forty comes, if here he live to see
That wretched, fumbling age of poetry;
'twill be high time to bid his Muse adieu:
Well he may please him self, but never you.
Till then he'll do as well as he began;
And hopes you will not find him less a man.
Think him not duller for this years delay;
He was prepared, the women were away;
And men, without their parts, can hardly play.
If they, through sickness, seldom did appear,
Pity the virgins of each Theatre!
Fo^, at both houses, 'twas a sickly year!
And pity us, your servants, to whose cost,
In one such sickness, nine whole Mon'ths are lost.
Their stay, he fears, has ruined what he writ:
Long waiting both disables love and wit.
They thought they gave him leisure to do well*
But when they forced him to attend, he fell
Yet though he much has failed, he ^
You will excuse his unperforming ^
Weakness sometimes great passion does express;
He had pleased better, had he loved you less.
A Pretty task! and so I told the Fool,
Who needs would undertake to please by Rule:
He thought that, if his Characters were good,
The Scenes entire, and freed from noise and blood;
The Action great, yet circumscribed by Time,
The Words not forced, but sliding into Rhyme,
The Passions raised and calmed by just Degrees,
As Tides are swelled, and then retire to Seas;
He thought, in hitting these, his business done,
Though he, perhaps, has failed in every one:
But, after all, a Poet must confess,
His Art's like Physic, but a happy guess.
Your Pleasure on your Fancy must depend:
The Lady's pleased, just as she likes her Friend.
No Song! no Dance! no Show! he fears you'll say,
You love all naked Beauties, but a Play.
He much mistakes your methods to delight;
And, like the French, abhors our Target-sight:
But those damned Dogs can never be in the right.
True English hate your Monsieur's paltry Arts;
For you are all Silk-weavers, in your hearts.
Bold Brittons, at a brave Bear-garden Fray,
Are roused: and, clatt'ring Sticks, cry, Play, play, play.
Mean time, your filthy Foreigner will stare,
And mutter to himself, Ha gens Barbare!
And, Gad, 'tis well he mutters; well for him;
Our Butchers else would tear him limb from limb.
'Tis true, the time may come, your Sons may be
Infected with this French civility;
^
^
^ when few can make a Tossed
^ Writing and the best?
^ cheap and common, who would strive,
Which, like abandoned Prostitutes, you give?
Yet scattered here and there I some behold,
Who can discern the Tinsel from the Gold:
To these he writes; and, if by them allow'd,
'Tis their Prerogative to rule the Crowd.
For he more fears (like a presuming Man)
Their Votes who cannot Judge, than theirs who can.

