NOW Luck for us, and a kind hearty Pit;
For he who pleases, never fails of Wit:
Honour is yours:
And you, like Kings, at City Treats bestow it;
The Writer kneels, and is bid rise a Poet:
But you are fickle Sovereigns, to our Sorrow,
You dub to day, and hang a man to morrow;
You cry the same Sense up, and down again,
Just like brass money once a year in Spain:
Take you in the mood, what ever base metal come,
You coin as fast as Groats at Bromingam:
Though 'tis no more like Sense in ancient Plays,
Than Rome's Religion like St. Peter's days.
In short, so swift your Judgments turn and wind,
You cast our fleetest Wits a mile behind.
'Twere well your Judgments but in Plays did range,
But even your Follies and Debauches change
With such a Whirl, the Poets of your age
Are tired, and cannot score 'em on the Stage,
Unless each Vice in short-hand they indite,
Even as notcht Prentices whole Sermons write.
The heavy Hollanders no Vices know
But what they used a hundred years ago,
Like honest Plants, where they were stuck, they grow;
They cheat, but still from cheating Sires they come;
They drink, but they were christ'ned first in Mum.
Their patrimonial Sloth the Spaniards keep,
And Philip first taught Philip how to sleep.
The French and we still change, but here's the Curse,
They change for better, and we change for worse;
They take up our old trade of Conquering,
And we are taking theirs, to dance and sing:
Our Fathers did for change to France repair,
And they for change will try our English Air.
As Children, when they throw one Toy away,
Strait a more foolish Gugaw comes in play:
So we, grown penitent, on serious thinking,
Leave Whoring, and devoutly fall to Drinking.
Scouring the Watch grows out of fashion wit
Now we set up for Tilting in the Pit*
Where 'tis agreed by Bullies, chicken-hearted,
To fright the Ladies first, and then be parted.
A fair Attempt has twice or thrice been made,
To hire Night-murth'rers, and make Death a Trade.
When Murther's out, what Vice can we advance?
Unless the new found Pois'ning Trick of France:
And when their Art of Rats-bane we have got,
By way of thanks, we'll send 'em over our Plot*

STand: give the Word.

The Queen of Arragon.

Pedro? -- how goes the night?

She wears apace.

Then welcome day-light: We shall have warm work on it:
The Moore will 'gage
His utmost Forces on this next Assault,
To win a Queen and Kingdom.

Pox o'this Lyon-way of wooing though:
Is the Queen stirring yet?

She has not been abed: but in her Chapel
All night devoutly watched: and bribed the Saints
With Vows for her Deliverance.

O, Alphonso,
I fear they come too late! her Father's crimes
Sit heavy on her; and weigh down her prayers:
A Crown usurped; a lawful King deposed;
In bondage held; debarred the common light;
His Children murdered, and his Friends destroyed:
What can we le^s expect then what we feel,
And what we fear will follow?

Heaven avert it!

Then Heaven must not be Heaven: Judge the event
By what has passed: The Usurper joyed not long
His ill-got Crown! 'Tis true, he died in peace:
Unriddle that ye Powers: But left his Daughter,
Our present Queen, engaged, upon his death-bed,
To marry with young Bertran, whose cursed Father
Had helped to make him great.
Hence, you well know, this fatal War arose;
Because the Moore, Abdalla, with whose Troops
The Usurper gained the Kingdom, was refused;
And, as an Infidel, his Love despised.

Well; we are Soldiers, Ped^o: and, like Lawyers,
Plead for our Pay.

A good Cause would do well though:
It gives my Sword and Edge: You see this Bertran
Has now three times been beaten by the Moors:
What hope we have, is in young Torrismond,
Your brother's Son.

He's a succe^sfull Warrior,
And has the Soldiers hearts: Upon the skirts
Of Arragon, our squandered Troops he rallies:
Our Watchmen, from the Towers, with longing Eyes
Expect his swift Arrival.

It must be swift, or it will come too late.

No more: -- Duke Bertran.

Relieve the Ce^t'rys that have watched all night.
To Ped. Now, Colonel, have you disposed your men,
That you stand idle her^?

Mine are drawn off,
To take a short repose.

Short let it be*
For, from the Moorish Camp, this hour and more,
There has been heard a distant humming noise,
Like Bees disturbed, and arming in their hives.
What Courage in our Soldiers? Speak! What hope?

As much as when Physicians shake their heads,
And bid their dying Patient think of Heaven.
Our Walls are thinly manned: our best Men slain:
The rest, an heartless number, spent with Watching,
And harassed out with Duty.

Good-night all then.

Nay, for my part, 'tis but a single life
I have to lose: I'll plant my Colours down
In the mid-breach, and by 'em fix my foot:
Say a short Souldier's Prayer, to spare the trouble
Of my few Friends above: and then expect
The next fair Bullet.

Never was known a night of such distraction:
Noise so confused and dreadful: Justling Crowds,
That run, and know not whither: Torches gliding,
Like Meteors, by each other in the streets.

I met a reverend, fat, old, gouty Friar;
With a Paunch swoln so high, his double Chin
Might rest upon it: A true Son of the Church;
Fresh coloured, and well thriven on his Trade,
Come puffing with his greasy bald-pate Quire,
And fumbling over his Beads, in such an Agony,
He told 'em false for fear: About his Neck
There hung a Wench; the Labell of his Function;
Whom he shook off, i'faith, methought, unkindly.
It seems the holy Stallion durst not score
Another Sin before he left the world.

To Arms, My Lord, to Arms.
From the Moors Camp the noise grows louder still:
Rattling of Armour, Trumpets, Drums, and Ataballes;
And sometimes Peals of Shouts that rend the Heavens,
Like Victory: then Groans again, and Howlings,
Like those of vanquished men: But every Echo
Goes fainter off; and dyes in distant Sounds.

Some false Attaque: expect on the other side:
One to the Gunners on St. Iago's Tower; Bid 'em, for shame,
Level their Cannon lower: On my Soul,
They 're all corrupted with the Gold of Barbary
To carry over, and not hurt the Moor.

My Lord, here's fresh Intelligence arrived:
Our Army, led by Valiant Torrismond,
Is now in hot Engagement with the Moors;
'Tis said, within their Trenches.

I think all Fortune is reserved for him.
He might have sent us word though;
And then we could have favoured his Attempt
With Sallies from the Town. --

It could not be:
We were so close blocked up that none could peep
Upon the Walls and live: But yet 'tis time: --

No, 'tis too late; I will not hazard it:
On pain of Death, let no man dare to sally.


How now! What means this Show?

'Tis a Procession:
The Queen is going to the great Cathedral
To pray for our Success against the Moors.

Very good: She usurps the Throne; keeps the old king in Prison; and, at the
same time, is praying for a Blessing: Oh Religion and Roguery, how they go
together!


Look down, ye blessed above, look down,
Behold our weeping Matron's Tears,
Behold our tender Virgins Fears,
And with success our Armies crown.
Look down, ye blessed above, look down:
Oh! save us, save us, and our State restore;
For Pity, Pity, Pity, we implore;
For Pity, Pity, Pity, we implore.
Lorenzo:
Good news kind Heaven!


How near our Army? When shall we be succour'd?
Or, Are we succour'd? Are the Moors removed?
Answer these Questions first; and then, a Thousand more:
Answer 'em all together.

Yes, when I have a thousand Tongues, I will*
The General's well: His Army too is safe
As Victory can make 'em: The Moors King
Is safe enough, I warrant him, for one.
At dawn of day our General cle^t his Pate*
Spite of his woollen Night-cap: A ^light wound:
Perhaps he may recover.

Thou reviv'st me.

By my computation now, the Victory was gained before the Procession was made
for it; and yet it will go hard* but the Priests will make a Miracle on it.


Yes, Faith; we came like bold intruding Guests;
And took 'em unprepared to give us welcome:
Their Scouts we killed; then found their Body sleeping:
And as they lay confused, we stumbled over 'em;
And took what Joint came next; Arms, Heads, or Legs;
Somewhat undecently: But when men want light
They make but bungling work.

I'll to the Queen,
And bear the News.

That's young Lorenzo's duty.

I'll spare his trouble. --
This Torrismond begins to grow too fast;
He must be mine, or ruined.

Pedro, a word: --

How swift he shot away! I find it stung him,
In spite of his dissembling.
To Lorenzo, How many of the Enemy are slain?

Troth, Sir, we were in hast; and could not stay
To score the men we killed: But there they lye.
Best send our Women out to take the tale;
There's Circumcision in abundance for 'em.

How far did you pursue 'em?

Some few miles. --
To Pedro, Good store of Harlots, say you, and dog^cheap?

They must be had; and speedily:
I 've kept a tedious Fast.

When will he make his Entry? He deserves
Such Triumphs as were given by Ancient Rome:
Ha, Boy, What says thou?

As you say, Sir, That Rome was very ancient --
To Pedro, I leave the choice to you; Fair, Black, Tall, Low:
Let her but have a Nose: -- and you may tell her
I'm rich in Jewels, Rings, and bobbing Pearls
Plucked from Moors ears. --

Lorenzo?

Somewhat busy
About Affairs relating to the public. --
-- A seasonable Girl, just in the nick now: --

I hear the General's Trumpets: Stand, and mark
How he will be received; I fear, but coldly:
There hung a Cloud, methought, on Bertran's brow.

Then look to see a Storm on Torrismond's:
Looks fright not men: The General has seen Moors,
With as bad Faces; no dispraise to Bertran's.

'Twas rumoured in the Camp, he loves the Queen.

He drinks her Health devoutly.

That may breed bad blood 'twixt him and Bertran.

Yes, in private:
But Bertran has been taught the Arts of Court,
To guild a Face with Smiles; and leer a man to ruin.
O here they come. --
Just as I prophesied. --

Death and Hell, he laughs at him: -- in's Face too.

O, you mistake him: 'Twas an humble Grin;
The fawning Joy of Courtiers and of Dogs.


I'll even go lose my self in some blind Alley; and try if any courteous
Damsel will think me worth the finding.

Now he begins to open.

Your Country rescued, and your Queen relieved!
A glorious Conquest; Noble Torrismond!
The People rend the Skies with loud Applause;
And Heaven can hear no other Name but yours.
The thronging Crowds press on you as you pass;
And, with their eager Joy, make Triumph slow.

My Lord, I have no taste
Of popular Applause; the noisy Praise
Of giddy Crowds, as changeable as Winds;
Still vehement, and still without a cause:
Servants to Chance; and blowing in the tide
Of swoln Success; but, veering with its ebb,
It leaves the channel dry.

So young a Stoic!

You wrong me, if you think I'll ^ell one drop
Within these Veins for Pageants: But let Honour
Call for my Blood; and sluice it into streams;
Turn Fortune loose again to my pursuit;
And let me hunt her through embattell'd Foes,
In dusty Plains, amidst the Cannons roar,
There will I be the first.

I'll try him farther --
Suppose the assembled States of Arragon
Decree a Statue to you thus inscribed,
To Torrismond, who freed his native Land.


The shallows of his Soul!

The just Applause
Of God-like Senates, is the Stamp of Virtue,
Which makes it pass unquestioned through the World:
These Honours you deserve; nor shall my suffrage
Be last to fix 'em on you: If refused,
You brand us all with black Ingratitude;
For times to come shall say, Our Spain, like Rome,
Neglects her Champions, after Noble Acts,
And lets their Laurels wither on their heads.

A Statue, for a Battle blindly fought*
Where Darkness and Surprise made Conquest cheap!
Where Virtue borow'd but the Arms of Chance,
And struck a random blow! 'Twas Fortune's work;
And Fortune take the praise.

Yet Happiness
Is the first Fame: Virtue without Success
Is a fair Picture shown by an ill light:
But lucky men are Favorites of Heaven:
And whom should Kings esteem above Heaven's Darlings?
The Praises of a young and beauteous Queen
Shall crown your glorious Acts.



The Queen! That were a happiness too great!
Named you the Queen, My Lord?

Yes: You have seen her, and you must confess
A Praise, a Smile, a Look from her is worth
The shouts of thousand Amphitheaters:
She, she shall praise you; for I can oblige her:
To morrow will deliver all her Charms
Into my Arms; and make her mine for ever.
Why stand you mute?

Alas! I cannot speak.

Not speak, My Lord! How were your thoughts employed?

Not can I think; or I am lost in thought.

Thought of the Queen, perhaps?

Why, if it were,
Heaven may be thought on, though too high to climb.

O, now I find where your Ambition drives:
You ought not think of her.

So I say too;
I ought not: Madmen ought not to be mad:
But who can help his frenzy?

Fond young Man!
The Wings of your Ambition must be clipped*
Your shamefaced Virtue shunned the Peoples Praise,
And Senates Honours: But 'tis well we know
What price you hold your self at: you have fought
With some Success, and that has sealed your Pardon.

Pardon from thee! O, give me patience Heaven!
Thrice vanquished Bertran; if thou dare, look out
Upon yo^ slaughtered Host, that Field of blood:
There seal my Pardon, where thy Fame was lost.

He's ruined, past redemption!


To the first Prince of the blood.

O, let him rave!
I'll not contend with Madmen.

I have done:
I k^ow 'twas Madness to declare this Truth:
And yet 'twere Baseness to deny my Love.
'Tis true, my hopes are vanishing as clouds;
Lighter then childrens bubbles blown by winds:
My merit's but the rash results of chance:
My birth unequal: all the stars against me:
Power, promise, choice; the living and the dead:
Mankind my foes; and only love to friend:
But such a love, kept at such awful distance,
As, what it loudly dares to tell, a Rival
Shall fear to whisper there: Queens ^ay be loved,
And so may Gods; else, why are Altars raised?
Why shines the Sun, but that he may be viewed?
But, Oh! when he's too bright, if then we gaze,
'Tis but to weep; and close our eyes in darkness.

'Tis well: the Goddess shall be told, she shall,
Of her new Worshipper.

So, here's fine work!
He has supplied his only foe with arms
For his destruction. Old Penelope's tale
Inverted: h'has unravelled all by day
That he has done by night. -- What, Planet-struck!

I wish I were; to be past sense of this!

Would I had but a Lease of li^e so long
As till my Flesh and Blood re^ell'd this way
Against our Sovereign Lady: mad for a Queen?
With a Globe in one hand, and a Sceptre in the other?
A very pretty Moppe^!

Then to declare his Madness to his Rival!
His Father absent on an Embassy:
Himself a Stranger almost; wholly friendless!
A Torrent, rolling down a Precipice,
Is easier to be stopped, then is his Ruin.

'Tis fruitless to complain: haste to the Court:
Improve your interest there, for Pardon from the Queen.

Weak remedies;
But all must be attempted.

Well, I am the most unlucky Rogue! I have been ranging over half the Town; but
have sprung no Game. Our Women are worse Infidels then the Moors: I told 'em I
was one of their Knight-errants, that delivered them from ravishment: and I
think in my conscience that's their Quarrel to me.


Is this a time for fooling? Your Cousin is run honourably mad in love with her
Majesty: He is split upon a Rock; and you, who are in chase of Harlots, are
sinking in the main Ocean. I think the Devil's in the Family.


My Cousin ruined, says he! hum! not that I wish my Kinsman's ruin; that were^
Unchristian: but if the General's ruined, I am Heir; there's comfort for a
Christian. Money I have, I thank the honest Moors for it; but I want a
Mistress. I am willing to be lewd; but the Tempter is wanting on his part.


Stranger! Cavalier -- will you not hear me? you Moore-killer, you Matador. --


Meaning me, Madam?


Face about, Man; you a Soldier, and afraid of the Enemy!


I must confess, I did not expect to have been charged first: I see Souls will
not be lost for want of diligence in this Devil's reign: Cynthia behind a
cloud; your will and pleasure with me?


You have the appearance of a Cavalier; and if you are as deserving as you
seem, perhaps you may not repent of your Adventure. If a Lady like you well
enough to hold discourse with you at first sight; you are Gentleman enough, I
hope, to help her out with an Apology: and to lay the blame on Stars, or
Destiny; or what you please, to excuse the Frailty of a Woman.


O, I love an easy Woman: there's such a do to crack a thick shell'd
Mistress: we break our Teeth; and find no Kernel. 'Tis generous in you, to take
pity on a Stranger; and not to suffer him to fall into ill hands at his first
arrival.


You may have a better opinion of me then I deserve; you have not seen me yet;
and therefore I am consident you are heart-whole.


Not absolutely slain, I must confess; but I am drawing on apace: you have a
dangerous Tongue in your head, I can tell you that; and if your Eyes prove of
as killing metal, there's but one way with me: Let me see you, for the
safeguard of my Honour: 'tis but decent the Cannon should be drawn down upon
me, before I yield.


What a terrible Similitude have you made, Colonel? to show that you are
inclining to the Wars: I could answer you with another in my Profession:
Suppose you were in want of Money; would you not be glad to take a Sum upon
content in a sealed bag, without peeping? -- but however; I will not stand
with you for a sample.


What Eyes were there! how keen their Glances! you do well to keep 'em veiled:
they are too sharp to be trusted out of the Scabbard.


Perhaps now you may accuse my forwardness; but this day of Jubilee is the
only time of freedom I have had: and there is nothing so extravagant as a
Prisoner, when he gets loose a little, and is immediately to return into his
Fetters.


To confess freely to you, Madam, I was never in love with less then your whole
Sex before: but now I have seen you, I am in the direct road of languishing and
sighing: and, if Love goes on as it begins, for ought I know, by to morrow
morning you may hear of me in Rhyme and Sonnet. I tell you truly, I do not like
these Symptoms in my self: perhaps I may go shufflingly at first; for I was
never before walked in Trammels; yet I shall drudge and moil at Constancy, till
I have worn off the hitching in my pace.


Oh, Sir, there are Arts to reclaim the wildest Men, as there are to make
Spaniels fetch and carry: chide 'em often, and feed 'em seldom: now I know your
temper, you may thank your self if you are kept to hard meat: -- you, are in
for years if you make love to me.


I hate a formal obligation with an Anno Domini at end on it; there may be an
evil meaning in the word Years, called Matrimony.


I can easily rid you of that Fear: I wish I could rid my self as easily of the
bondage.


Then you are married?


If a Covetous, and a Jealous, and an Old man be a husband.


Three as good qualities for my purpose as I could wish: now love be praised.





This is unconcionable dealing; to be made a Slave, and not know whose livery I
wear: -- Who have we yonder? Gomez, whom I knew at Barcelona: As I live 'tis he
--

Mammon here?


How! Young Beelzebub!


What Devil has set his Claws in thy Hanches, and brought thee hither to
Saragossa? Sure he meant a farther Journey with thee.


I always remove before the Enemy: When the Moors are ready to besiege one
Town, I shift quarters to the next: I keep as far from the Infidels as I can.


That's but a hair's breadth at farthest.


Well, you have got a ^amous Victory; all true Subjects are overjoyed at it:
there are Bonfires decreed: and the times had not been hard, my Billet should
have burnt too.


I dare say for thee, thou hast such a respect for a single Billet, thou
would almost have thrown on thy self to save it: thou art for saving every
thing but thy Soul.


Well, well, You'll not believe me generous 'till I carry you to the Tavern,
and crack half a Pint with you at my own charges.


No; I'll keep thee from hanging thy self for such an extravagance: and,
instead of it, thou shalt do me a mere verbal courtesy: I have just now seen
a most incomparable young Lady.


Whereabouts did you see this most incomparable young Lady? my mind misgives me
plaguily. --


Here, man; just before this Corner-house: Pray Heaven it prove no Bawdy-house.





What dost thou mutter to thy self? Hast thou any thing to say against the
Honesty of that house?


Not I, Colonel, the Walls are very honest Stone, and the Timber very honest
Wood, for ought I know. But for the Woman, I cannot say, till I know her
better: describe her person; and, if she live in this quarter, I may give you
tidings of her.


She's of a middle Stature, dark coloured Hair, the most bewitching Leer with
her Eyes, the most roguish Cast; her Cheeks are dimpled when she Smiles; and
her Smiles would tempt an Hermit.





Thou hast all her Marks; but that she has an Husband; a jealous, covetous, old
Huncks: speak; can thou tell me News of her?


Yes; this News, Colonel; that you have seen your last of her.


If thou helpst me not to the knowledge of her, thou art a circumcised Jew.


Circumcise me no more then I circumcise you, Colonel Hernando: once more you
have seen your last of her.


Hernando, by which I went at Barcelona: now he can tell no tales of me to my
Father.




Jealous* old Huncks: those were the Marks of your Mistresse's Husband, as I
remember, Colonel.


Oh, the Devil! What a Rogue in understanding was I, not to find him out
sooner!


Do, do, Look sillily, good Colonel: 'tis a decent Melancholy after an absolute
Defeat.


Faith, not for that, dear Gomez; -- but,


But -- no Pumping, My dear Colonel.


Hang Pumping; I was -- thinking a little upon a point of Gratitude: we two
have been long Acquaintance; I know thy Merits, and can make some Interest: go
to; thou were born to Authority: I'll make thee Alcaide Mayor of Sarragossa.


Satisfy your self; you shall not make me what you think, Colonel.


Faith but I will; thou hast the Face of a Magistrate already.


And you would provide me with a Magistrate's Head to my Magistrate's Face; I
thank you Colonel.


Come, thou art so suspicious upon an idle Story -- that Woman I saw, I mean
that little, crooked, ugly Woman; for the other was a Lye; -- is no more thy
Wife: -- As I'll go home with thee, and satisfy thee immediately, My dear
Friend.


I shall not put you to that trouble: no not so much as a single Visit: not so
much as an Embassy by a civil, old Woman: nor a Serenade of Twinckledum,
Twinckledum, under my windows: Nay, I will advise you out of my tenderness to
your Person, that you walk not near you Corner-house by night; for to my
certain knowledge, there are Blunderbusses planted in every loophole, that go
off constantly of their own accord, at the squeaking of a Fiddle, and the
thrumming of a Ghittar.


Art thou so obstinate? Then I denounce open War against thee: I'll demolish
thy Citadel by force: or, at least, I'll bring my whole Regiment upon thee: my
thousand Red Locusts that shall devour thee in Free quarter. -- Farewell wrought
Night-cap.


Farewell Buff! Free-quarter for a Regiment of Red coat Locusts? I hope to see
'em all in the Red-sea first! -- But oh, this Iezabel of mine! I'll get a
Physician that shall prescribe her an ounce of Camphor every morning for her
Breakfast, to abate Incontinency: she shall never peep abroad, no, not to
Church for Confession; and for never going, ^e shall be condemned for a
Heretic: she shall have Str^pes by Troy weight; and Sustenance by drachms and
scruples: Nay, I'll have a Fasting Almanac printed on purpose for her use; in
which,

No Carnival nor Christmas shall appear;
But Lents and Ember-weeks shall fill the year.

WHen saw you my Lorenzo?

I had a glimpse of him; but he shot by me
Like a young Hound upon a burning scent:
He's gon a Harlot-hunting.

His foreign breeding might have taught him better*

'Tis that has taught him this*
What learn our Youth abroad; but to re^ine
The homely Vices of their native Land?
Give me an honest homespun country Clown
Of our own growth; his dullness is but plain;
But their's embroidered: they are sent out Fools,
And come back Fopps.

You know what reasons urged me;
But now I have accomplished my Designs,
I should be glad he knew 'em: -- his wild Riots
Disturb my soul; but they would sit more close,
Did not the threatened down-fall of our house,
In Torrismond, overwhelm my private Ills.

I would not have her think he dared to love her;
If he presume to own it, she's so proud
He tempts his certain ruin.


Our old imprisoned King wore no such Looks.

O, would the General shake off his Do^age to th'usurping Q^een,
And re^inthrone Good* Venerable Sancho,
I'll undertake, should Bertran sound his Trumpets,
And Torrismond but whistle through his Fingers,
He draws his Army off.

I told him so:
But had an Answer louder then a Storm.

Now Plague and Pox on his Smock-loyalty!
I hate to see a brave bold Fellow sotted,
Made sour and senseless; turned to Whey by Love:
A drivelling Hero; fit for a Romance.
O, here he comes; what will their greeting be!

Make way, My Lords, and let the Pageant pass.

I make my way where ever I see my Foe:
But you, My Lord, are good at a Retreat:
I have no Moors behind me.

Death and Hell!
Dare to speak thus when you come out again?

Dare to provoke me thus, insulting man?

My Lords, You are too loud so near the Queen:
You, Torrismond, have much offended her:
'Tis her Command you instantly appear,
To answer your demeanour to the Prince.

O Pedro, O Alphonso, pity me!
A Grove of Pikes
Whose polished Steel from far severely shines,
Are not so dreadful as this beauteous Queen.

Call up your Courage timely to your aid:
And, like a Lion pressed upon the Toils,
Leap on your Hunters: Speak your Actions boldly;
There is a time when modest Virtue is
Allow'd to praise it self.

Heart, you were hot enough; too hot, but now;
Your Fury then boiled upward to a Some:
But since this Message came, you sink and settle;
As if cold water had been poured upon you.

Alas, thou know not what it is to love!
When we behold an Angel, not to fear,
Is to be impudent: -- no I'm resolved,
Like a led Victim, to my Death I'll go;
And, dying, bless the hand that gave the blow.


Your own Deserts, and all my People's Voice,
Have placed you in the view of Sovereign Power.
But I would learn the cause, why Torrismond,
Within my Palace Walls, within my Hearing*
Almost within my Sight, affronts a Prince
Who shortly shall command him.

He thinks you owe him more then you can pay;
And looks, as he were Lord of humane kind.

Madam, The General. --

Let me view him well.
My Father sent him early to the Frontiers;
I have not often seen him; if I did,
He passed unmarked by my unheeding Eyes*
But where's the Fierceness, the Disdainful Pride;
The Haughty Port* the Fiery Arrogance?
By all these Marks, this is not sure the man.

Yet this is he who filled your Court with Tumult,
Whose Fierce Demeanour, and whose Insolence
The Patience of a God could not support.

Name his Offence, My Lord, and he shall have
Immediate punishment.

'Tis of so high a nature, should I speak it*
That my Presumption then would equal his.

Some one among you speak.



All dumb! on your Allegiance* Torrismond,
By all your hopes, I do command you, speak.


Which I can never repent, nor can you pardon.
Or, if you needs will know it, think, oh think,
That he, who thus commanded dares to speak,
Unless commanded, would have died in silence.
But you adjured me, Madam, by my hopes!
Hopes I have none; for I am all Despair:
Friends I have none; for Friendship follows Favour*
Desert ^'ve none; for what I did, was Duty:
Oh, that it were! that it were Duty all!

Why do you pause? proceed.

As one condemned to leap a Precipice,
Who sees before his Eyes the Depth below,
Stops short, and looks about, for some kind Shrub
To break his dreadful Fall -- ^o I; --
But whither am I going? if to Death,
He looks so lovely sweet in Beauties Pomp*
He draws me to his Dart. -- I dare no more.

He's mad beyond the Cure of Hellebore.
Whips, Darkness, Dungeons, for this Insolence. --

Mad as I am, yet I know when to bear. --

You're both too bold. You, Torrismond, withdraw:
I'll teach you all what's owing to your Queen.
For you, My Lord, --
The Priest to morrow was to ^oin our hands;
I'll try if I can live a day without you.
So, both of you depart; and live in Peace.

Who knows whic^ way she points!
Doubling and turning, like an hunted Hare.
Find out the Meaning of her mind who can.

Who ever ^ound a Woman's! backward and forward, The whole Sex in every word.
In my Conscience when she was getting, her Mother was thinking of a Riddle.


Hast, my Teresa, hast; and call him back.

Whom, Madam?

Him.

Prince Bertran?

Torrismond.
There is no other He.


Or I am much deceived.

A change so swift, what heart did ever feel!
It rushed upon me, like a mighty Stream,
And bore me in a moment far from Shore.
I've loved away my self: in one short hour
Already am I gon an Age of Passion.
Was it his Youth, his Valour, or Success?
These might perhaps be found in other men.
'Twas that respect; that awful homage paid me;
That fearful Love which trembled in his Eyes;
and, with a silent Earthquake, shook his Soul.
But, when he spoke, what tender words he said!
So softly, that, like flakes of feathered Snow,
They melted as they fell. --

He waits your pleasure.

'Tis well; retire -- Oh Heaven's, that I must speak
So distant from my heart --


I heard 'twas your Command.

A fond mistake,
To credit so unlikely a Command.
And you return full of the same Presumption
T'affront me with your Love?

If 'tis Presumption for a Wretch condemned
To throw himself beneath his Judge's feet:
A Boldness, more then this, I never knew*
Or, if I did, 'twas only to your Foes.

You would insinuate your past Services;
And those, I grant, were great: but you confess
A Fault committed since, that can^els all.

And who could dare to disavow his Crime,
When that, for which he is accused and seized,
He bears about him still! my Eyes con^ess it.
My every action speaks my heart aloud.
But, oh, the Madness of my high attempt
Speaks louder yet! and all together cry,
I love and I despair.

Have you not heard,
My Father, with his dying voice, bequeathed
My Crown and me to Bertran? And dare you,
A private man, presume to love a Queen?

That, that's the Wound! I see you set so high,
As no Desert, or Services, can reach.
Good Heavens, why gave you me a Monarch's Soul,
And crusted it with base Plebeian Clay!
Why gave you me Desires of such extent,
And such a Span^to^ grasp 'em? Sure my lot
By some over hasty Angel was misplaced
In Fate's Eternal Volume! -- But I rave,
And, like a giddy Bird, in dead of night,
Fly round the Fire that scorches me to death.

Yet, Torrismond, you've not so ill deserved,
But I may give you Counsel for your Cure.

I cannot, nay, I wish not to be cured.



There is a Pleasure sure
In being Mad, which none but Madmen know!
Let me indulge it* let me gaze for ever!
And, since you are too great to be beloved,
Be greater, greater yet; and be adored.

These are the words which I must only hear
From Bertran's mouth; they should displease from you;
I say they should: but women are so vain,
To like the Love, though they despise the Lover.
Yet, that I may not send you from my sight
In absolute despair -- I pity you.

Am I then pitied! I have livd enough!
Death, take me in^ this moment of my Joy;
But when my Soul is plunged in long oblivion,
Spare this one Thought: let me remember Pity;
And so deceived, think all my life was blessed.

What if I add a little to my Alms?
If that would help, I could cast in a Tear
To your Misfortunes. --

A Tear! You have o'erbid all my past Sufferings,
And all my future too!

Were I no Queen^ --
Or you of Royal Blood --

What have I lost by my Fore-father's fault?
Why was not I the Twenty'th by descent
From a long restive race of droning Kings?
Love! What a poor omnipotence hast thou
When Gold and Titles buy thee?



Might I presume, but, oh, I dare not hope
That Sigh was added to your Alms for me!

I give you leave to guess; and not forbid you*
To make the best construction for your love.
Be secret and discreet; these Fayery favours
Are lost when not concealed; -- provoke not Bertran. --
Retire: I must no more but this, -- Hope, Torrismond.

She bids me hope; oh Heavens; she pities me!
And pity still foreruns approaching love;
As Lightning does the Thunder! Tune your Harps
Ye Angels to that sound; and thou, my Heart,
Make room to entertain thy flowing Joy.
Hence all my Grie^s, and every anxious Care:
One word, and one kind Gl^nce, can cure despair.

This may hit* 'tis more then barely possible: for Friars have free admittance
into every house. This Iacobin, whom I have sent to, is her Confessor; and who
can suspect a man of such Reverence for a Pimp? I'll try for once: I'll bribe
him high: for commonly none love Money better then they who have made a Vow of
Poverty.


There's a huge fat religious Gentleman coming up, Sir, he says he's but a
Friar, but he's big enough to be a Pope; his Gills are as rosie as a
Turkey-Cock; his great Belly walks in state before him like an Harbinger; and
his gouty Legs come limping after it: Never was such a Tun of Devotion seen.


Bring him in, and vani^*


Welcome, Father.


Peace be here: I thought I had been sent for to a dying man; to have fitted
him for another world.


No, Faith, Father, I was never for taking such long journeys. Repose your
self, I beseech you, Sir, if those spindle Legs of yours will carry you to the
next Chair.


I am old, I am in^irm, I must confess, with Fasting.


'Tis a sign by your wan Complexion, and your thin Jouls, Father. Come -- to
our better Acquaintance: -- here's a Sovereign Remedy for Old Age and Sorrow.


The Looks of it are indeed alluring: I'll do you reason.


Is it to your Palate, Father?


Second thoughts, they say, are best: I'll consider of it once again.

It has a most delicious Flavour with it.

Gad forgive me, I have forgotten to drink your health, Son, I am not used to
be so unmannerly.


No, I'll be sworn by what I see of you, you are not: -- To the bottom. -- I
warrant him a true Church-man. -- Now, Father, to our business, 'tis agreeable
to your Calling; I intend to do an act of Charity.


And I love to hear of Charity; 'tis a comfortable subject.


Being in the late Battle, in great hazard of my Life, I recommended my person
to good St. Dominic.


You could not have pitched upon a better: he's a sure Card: I never knew him
fail his Votaries.


Troth I even made bold to strike up a bargain with him, that if I escaped with
Life and Plunder, I would present some Brother of his Order with part of the
Booty taken from the Infidels, to be employed in charitable uses.


There you hit him: St. Dominic loves Charity exceedingly: that Argument never
fails with him.


The Spoils were mighty; and I scorn to wrong him of a Farthing. To make short
my Story; I enquired among the Iacobins for an Almoner, and the general Fame
has pointed out your Reverence as the Worthiest man: -- here are Fifty good
Pieces in this Purse.


How, Fifty Pieces? 'tis too much, too much in Conscience.


Here; take 'em Father.


No, in troth, I dare not: do not tempt me to break my Vow of Poverty.


If you are modest, I must force you: for I am strongest.


Nay, if you compel me, there's no contending; but will you set your strength
against a decrepit, poor, old man? Dominic shall owe you another Escape: I'll
put him in mind of you.


If you please, Father, we will no^ trouble him till the next Battle. But you
may do me a greater kindness, by conveying my Prayers to a Female Saint.


A Female Saint! good now, good now, how your Devotions jump with mine! I
always loved the Female Saints.


I mean a Female,^mortal,^married^woman-Saint: Look upon the Superscription of
this Note; you know Don Gomez his Wife.


Who, Donna Elvira? I think I have some reason: I am her Ghostly Father.


I have some business of Importance with her, which I have communicated in this
Paper; but her Husband is so horribly given to be jealous. --


Ho, jealous? he's the very Quintessence of Jealousy: he keeps no Male
Creature in his house: and from abroad he lets^ no man come near her.


Excepting you, Father.


Me, I grant you: I am her Director and her Guide in spiritual Affairs. But he
has his humours with me too: for the other day, he called me False Apostle.


Did he so? that reflects upon you all: on my word, Father, that touches your
Copy^hold. If you would do a meritorious Action, you might revenge the
Churche's Quarrel. -- My Letter, Father --


Well, so far as a Letter, I will take upon me: for what can I refuse to a man
so charitably given?


If you bring an Answer back, that Purse in your hand has a twin-brother, as
like him as ever he can look: there are Fifty Pieces lye dormant in it, for
more Charities.


That must not be: not a Farthing more upon my Priesthood. -- But what may be
the purport and meaning of this Letter; that I confess a little troubles me.


No harm, I warrant you.


Well, you are a charitable man; and I'll take your word: my comfort is, I know
not the Contents; and so far I am blameless. But an Answer you shall have:
though not for the sake of your Fifty Pieces more: I have sworn not to take
them: they shall not be altogether Fifty: -- your Mistress, -- forgive me that
I should call her your Mistress, I meant Elvira, lives but at next door; I'll
visit her immediately: but not a word more of the Nine and forty Pieces. --


Nay, I'll wait on you down Stairs. -- Fifty Pounds for the postage of a
Letter! to send by the Church is certainly the dearest road in Christendom.


Henceforth I banish Flesh and Wine: I'll have none stirring within these walls
these twelve months.


I care not; the sooner I am starved the sooner I am rid of Wedlock. I shall
learn the knack to fast a days; you have used me to fasting nights already.


How the Gypsy answers me! Oh, 'tis a most notorious Hilding!





Oh, the Impudence of this wicked Sex! Lascivious Dialogues are innocent with
you!


Was it such a Crime to enquire how the Battle passed?


But that was not the business, Gentlewoman; you were not asking News of a
Battle past; you were engaging for a Skirmish that was to come.


An honest Woman would be glad to hear, that her Honour was safe, and her
Enemies were slain.





No, I need not: he describes himself sufficiently: but, in what Dream did I
do this?


You walked in your Sleep, with your Eyes broad open, at noon of day; and
dreamt you were talking to the foresaid purpose with one Colonel Hernando. --


Who, Dear Husband, who?


What the Devil have I said? You would have farther Information, would you?


No, but, my dear little old man, tell me now; that I may avoid him for your
sake.


Get you up into your Chamber, Cockatrice; and the^e immure your self: be
confined, I say, during our Royal Pleasure: But, first, down on your
marrow-bones, upon you^ Allegiance; and make an Acknowledgment of your
Offences; for I will have ample Satisfaction.


I have done you no Injury, and therefore I'll make you no Submission: But I'll
complain to my Ghostly Father.


Ay; There's your Remedy: When you receive condign Punishment, you run with
open Mouth to your Confessor; that parcel of holy Guts and Garbidge; he must
chucle you and moan you: but I'll rid my hands of his Ghostly Authority


Son of a what, Don Gomez?


Why, A Son of a Church, I hope there's no harm in that, Father.


I will lay up your words for you till time shall serve: and to morrow I enjoin
you to Fast for Penance.














Gomez, stand you at distance, -- farther yet, -- stand out of ear-shot -- I
have somewhat to say to your Wife in private.


the Steeple of his Church were in his Belly: I am sure there's room for it.


I am ashamed to acknowledge my Infirmities; but you have been always an
indulgent Father; and therefore I will venture, to -- and yet I dare not. --


Nay, if you are bashful; -- if you keep your wound from the knowledge of your
Surgeon; --


You know my Husband is a man in years; but he's my Husband; and therefore I
shall be silent: but his Humours are more intolerable then his Age: he's grown
so froward, so covetous, and so jealous, that he has turned my heart quite from
him; and, if I durst confess it, has forced me to cast my Affections on another
man.


Good: -- hold, hold; I meant abominable: -- pray Heaven this be my Colonel.


I have seen this man, Father; and have encouraged his Addresses: he's a young
Gentleman, a Soldier, of a most winning Carriage; and what his Courtship may
produce at last I know not; but I am afraid of my own frailty.








Daughter, Daughter, do you remember your matrimonial Vow?


Yes, to my sorrow Father, I do remember it: a miserable woman it has made me:
but you know, Father, a Marriage-vow is but a thing of course, which all women
take when they would get a Husband.


A Vow is a very solemn thing: and 'tis good to keep it: -- but,
notwithstanding, it may be broken, upon some occasions. -- Have you striven
with all your might against this frailty?


Yes, I have striven; but I found it was against the stream. Love, you know,
Father, is a great Vow-maker; but he's a greater Vow-breaker.


'Tis your Duty to strive always: but, notwithstanding, when we have done our
utmost, it extenuates the Sin.


I can hold no longer. -- Now, Gentlewoman, you are confessing your Enormities;
I know it by that hypocritical, down cast Look: enjoin her to sit bare upon a
Bed of Nettles, Father; you can do no less in Conscience.


Hold your peace; are you growing malapert? will you force me to make use of my
Authority? your Wife's a well^dispos'd and a virtuous Lady; I say it, In verbo
Sacerdotis.


I know not what to do, Father; I find my self in a most desperate Condition;
and so is the Colonel for Love of me.


The Colonel, say you! I wish it be not the same young Gentleman I know: 'Tis a
gallant young man, I must con^ess, worthy of any Lady's love in Christendom: in
a lawful way I mean; of such a charming behaviour, so bewitching to a Woman's
eye; and furthermore, so charitably given; by all good tokens, this must be my
Colonel Hernando.


Ay, and my^ Colonel too, Father: I am overjoyed; and are you then acquainted
with him?


Acquainted with him! why, he haunts me up and down: and, I am afraid, it is
for love of you: for he pressed a Letter upon me, within this hour, to deliver
to you: I confess, I received it, lest he should send it by some other; but
with full resolution never to put it into your hands.


Oh, dear Father, let me have it, or I shall dye.





Nay, If you are obstinately bent to see it, -- use your discretion; but for my
part, I wash my hands on it. -- what make you listening there? get farther off; I
preach not to thee, thou wicked Eves-dropper.


I'll kneel down, Father, as if I were taking Absolut^on, if you'll but please
to stand before me.


At your peril be it then. I have told you the ill Consequences; liberavi
animam meam. -- Your Reputation is in danger, to say nothing of your Soul.
Notwithstanding, when the Spiritual means have been applied, and fails: in that
case, the Carnal may be used. -- You are a tender Child, you are; and must not
be put into Despair: your Heart is as soft and melting as your Hand.


Hold, hold, Father; you go beyond your Commission: Palming is always held
foul play amongst Gamesters.


Thus, good Intentions are misconstrued by wicked men: you will never be warned
till you are excommunicate.








I understand it not, for my part; but I wish your Intentions be honest.
Remember, that Adultery, though it be a silent Sin, yet it is a crying Sin
also. Nevertheless, If you believe absolutely he will dye, unless you pity him:
to save a man's Life is a point of Charity; and actions of Charity do
alleviate, as I may say, and take off from the Mortality of the Sin. Farewell,
Daughter. -- Gomez, cherish your virtuous Wife; and thereupon I give you my
Benediction:


Stay; I'll conduct you to the door, -- that I may be sure you steal nothing by
the way. -- Friars wear not their long Sleeves for nothing. -- Oh, 'tis a Iudas
Iscariot.


This Friar is a comfortable man! He will understand nothing of the Business;
and yet does it all.

Pray Wives and Virgins, at your time of need,
For a True Guide, of my Good Father's breed.

FAther Dominic, Father Dominic; Why in such hast man?


It should seem a brother of ou^ Order.


No, Faith, I am only your brother in Iniquity: my holiness, like yours, is
mere out-side.


What! my noble Colonel in Metamorphosis! On what occasion are you transformed?


Love; Almighty Love; that which turned Iupiter into a Town-bull, has
transformed me into a Friar: I have had a Letter from Elvira, in answer to that
I sent by you.


You see I have delivered my Message faithfully: I am a Friar of Honour where I
am engaged.


O, I understand your Hint: the other Fifty pieces are ready to be condemned to
Charity.


But this Habit* Son, this Habit!


'Tis a Habit that in all Ages has been friendly to Fornication: You have begun
the Design in this Clothing, and I'll try to accomplish it. The Husband is
absent; that evil Counsellour is removed; and the Sovereign is graciously
disposed to hear my grievances.


Go to; go to; I find good Counsel is but thrown away upon you: Fare you well,
fare you well, Son! ah --


How! Will you turn Recreant at the last cast? You must along to countenance my
undertaking; We are at the door man.


Well, I have tho^ght on it; and I will not go.


You may stay, Father* but no Fifty, pounds without it: that was only promised
in the Bond: but the Condition of this Obligation is such, That if the above
named Father, Father Dominic, do not well and faithfully, perform --


Now I better think on it, I will bear you company; for the Reverence of my
Presence may be a curb to your E^orbitancies.


Lead up your Myrmidon, and enter.


He'll come, that's certain: young Appetites are sharp; and seldom need twice
bidding to such a banquet: -- well; if I prove frail, as I hope I shall not,
till I have compassed my Design; never Woman had such a Husband to provoke her,
such a Lover to allure her, or such a Confessor to absolve her. Of what am I
afraid then? not my Conscience, that's safe enough; my Ghostly Father has given
it a Dose of Church Opium, to lull it: well, for soothing Sin* I'll say that
for him, he's a Chaplain for any Court in Christendom.

O, Father Dominic, what News? How* a Companion with you! What Game have you in
hand, that you hunt in Couples?





O, my Love!


My Life!


My Soul!


I am taken on the sudden with a grievous swimming in my Head, and such a mist
before my Eyes, that I can neither hear nor see.


Stay, and I'll fetch you some comfortable Water.


No, no; nothing but the open Air will do me good. I'll take a turn in your
Garden: but remember that I trust you both, and do not wrong my good opinion of
you.


This is certainly the dust of Gold which you have thrown in the good man's
eyes, that on the sudden he cannot see: for my mind misgives me, this Sickness
of his is but Apocryphal!


'Tis no Qualm of Conscience I'll be sworn: you see, Madam, 'tis Interest
governs all the World: he preaches against Sin; why? because he gets by it: he
holds his tongue; why* because so much more is bidden for his silence.


And so much for the Friar.


Oh, those Eyes of yours reproach me justly: that I neglect the subject which
brought me hither.


Do you consider the hazard I have run to see you here? if you do, methinks it
should inform you, that I love not at a common rate.


Nay, if you talk of considering; let us consider why we are alone. Do you
think the Friar left us together to tell Beads? Love is a kind of penurious
God, very niggardly of his opportunities, he must be watched like a
hard-hearted Treasurer, for he bolts out on the sudden, and, if you take him
not in the nick, he vanishes in a twinkling.


Why do you make such haste to have done loving me? You Men are all like
Watches, wound up for striking twelve immediately; but, after you are
satisfied, the very next that follows is the solitary sound of single one.


How, Madam! Do you invite me to a Feast, and then preach Abstinence?


No, I invite you to a Feast where the Dishes are served up in order: you are
for making a hasty meal, and for chopping up your entertainment, like an hungry
Clown: trust my management, good Colonel; and call not for your Dessert too
soon: believe me, that which comes last, as it is the sweetest, so it cloies
the soonest.


I perceive, Madam, by your holding me at this distance, that there is somewhat
you expect from me: what am I to undertake or suffer ever I can be happy?


I must first be satisfied that you love me.


By all that's Holy: By these dear Eyes.


Spare your Oaths and Protestations; I know you Gallants of the time have a
mint at your tongues end to coin them.


You know you cannot marry me: but, By heavens, if you were in a condition --


Then you would not be so prodigal of your Promises, but have the Fear of
Matrimony before your eyes: in few words, if you love me, as you profess,
deliver me from this Bondage, take me out of Egypt, and I'll wander with you as
far as Earth, and Seas, and Love can carry us.


I never was out at a mad Frolic, though this is the maddest I ever undertook;
have with you, Lady mine; I take you at your word; and, if you are for a merry
Jaunt, I'll try for once who can foot it farthest: there are Hedges in Summer,
and Barns in Winter to be found: I, with my Knapsack, and you, with your Bottle
at your back: we'll leave Honour to Madmen, and Riches to Knaves; and travel
till we come to the Ridge of the World, and then drop together into the next.


Give me your Hand, and strike a Bargain.


In sign and token whereof the Parties interchangeably, and so forth -- when
should I be weary of Sealing upon this Soft- wax?


O, Heavens! I hear my Husband's voice.


Where are you* Gentlewoman? there's something in the wind I'm sure, because
your Woman would have run up Stairs before me: but I have secured her below
with a Gag in her Chaps -- now, in the Devil's name, what makes this Friar here
again? I do not like these frequent Conjunctions of the Flesh and Spirit; they
are boding.


Go hence, good Father; my Husband you see is in an ill humour; and I would not
have you witness of his folly.


Dominic is shrunk in the wetting two yards and a half about the Belly: what
are become of those two Timber-loggs that he used to wear for Legs, that stood
strutting like the two black Posts before a door? I am afraid some bad body has
been setting him over a Fire in a great Cauldron, and boiled him down half the
quantity for a Receipt: this is no Father Dominic, no huge, over-grown*
Abbey-lubber; this is but a diminutive sucking Friar: as sure as a Gun now,
Father Dominic has been spawning this young, slender Anti-christ.





Why does he not speak? What! Is the Friar possessed with a dumb Devil? If he
be, I shall make bold to conjure him.


He's but a Novice in his Order, and is enjoined Silence for a Penance.


A Novice, quoth a; You would make a Novice of me too, if you could: but, What
was his business here? Answer me that, Gentlewoman, answer me that.


What should it be, but to give me some Spiritual Instructions?


Very good; and you are like to edify much from a dumb Preacher; this will not
pass; I must exami^ the Contents of him a little closer; O thou Confessor!
confess who thou art, or thou art no Friar of this World:


Gomez; thou see I use thee like a Friend; this is a familiar Visit.


What! Colonel Hernando turned a Friar! who could have suspected you for so
much Godliness?


Even as thou see, I make bold here.


A very frank manner of proceeding; but I do not wonder at your Visit, after so
friendly an Invitation as I made you; marry, I hope you will excuse the
Blunderbusses for not being in readiness to salute you; but let me know your
hour, and all shall be mended another time.


Hang it; I hate such ripping up of old unkindness; was upon the Frolic this
evening, and came to visit thee in Masquerade.


Very likely; and not finding me at home, you were forced to toy away an hour
with my Wife, or so.


Right: Thou speak my very Soul.


Why, am not I a Friend then, to help you out? you would have been fumbling
half an hour for this Excuse -- -but, as I remember, you promised to storm my
Citadel, and bring your Regiment of Red Locusts upon me for Free quarter: I
find, Colonel, by your Habit, there are Black Locusts in the World as well as
Red.





Give me thy Hand; Thou art the honestest, kind man; I was resolved I would not
out of thy house till I had seen thee.


No* in my Conscience, if I had staid abroad till midnight. But, Colonel, you
and I shall talk in another tone hereafter; I mean, in cold friendship, at a
Bar, before a Judge, by the way of Plaintiff and Defendant: your Excuses want
some grains to make 'em currant: hum and ha will not do the business -- there's
a modest Lady of your acquaintance, she has so much Grade to make none at all,
but silently to confess the Power of Dame Nature working in her Body to
Youthful Appetite.


How he got in I know not, unless it were by virtue of his Habit.


Ai, ai, the Virtues of that Habit are known abundantly.


I could not hinder his entrance, for he took me unprovided.


To resist him.


I'm sure he has not been here above a quarter of an hour.


And a quarter of that time would have served the turn: O thou epitome of thy
virtuous Sex! Madam Messalina the Second retire to thy Apartment: I have an
Assignation there to make with thee.


I am all Obedience --


I find, Gomez, you are not the man I thought you: we may meet before we come
to the Bar, we may, and our Differences may be decided by other Weapons then by
Lawyers tongues; in the mean time, no ill treatment of your Wife, as you hope
to dye a natural death, and go to Hell in your Bed: Bilbo is the word, remember
that, and tremble --


Where is this naughty Couple? where are you, in the name of Goodness? my mind
misgave me; and I durst trust you no longer with your selves; here will be fine
work, I'm afraid, at your next Confession.








Why; you see a Cuckold of this honest Gentleman's making: I thank him for his
pains.


I confess I am astonished!


What, at a Cuckoldom of your own contrivance! your Head-piece and his Limbs
have done my business. -- Nay, do not look so strangely, remember your own
words, Here will be fine work at your next Confession: What naughty Couple were
they whom you durst not trust together any longer? when the hypocritical Rogue
had trusted 'em a full quarter of an hour; and, by the way, horns will sprout
in less time then Mushrooms.


Beware how you accuse one of my Order upon light suspicions: the naughty
Couple that I meant, were your Wife and you, whom I left together with great
Animosities on both sides: now, that was the occasion, mark me Gomez, that I
thought it convenient to return again, and not to trust your enraged Spirits
too long together: you might have broken out into Revilings and matrimonial
Warfare, which are Sins; and new Sins make work for new Confessions.





Angle in some other Ford, good Father, you shall catch no Gudgeons here: look
upon the Prisoner at the Bar Friar, and inform the Court what you know
concerning him; he is arraigned here by the name of Colonel Hernando.


What Colonel do you mean, Gomez? I see no man, but a Reverend Brother of our
Order, whose Profession I honour, but whose person I know not, as I hope for
Paradise.


No, you are not acquainted with him, the more's the pity; you do not know him,
under this Disguise, for the greatest Cuckold-maker in all Spain.


O Impudence! O Rogue! O Vilain! Nay, if he be such a man, my Righteous Spirit
rises at him! Does he put on Holy Garments for a cover-shame of Lewdness?


Yes, and he's in the right on it, Father; when a swinging Sin is to be
committed, nothing will cover it so close as a Fryar's Hood: for there the
Devil plays at Bo-peep, puts out his Horns to do a mischief, and then shrinks
'em back for safety, like a Snail into her shell.





Follow your Leader, Friar; your Colonel is trooped off, but he had not gone so
easily, if I durst have trusted you in the house behind me; gather up your
gouty Legs, I say, and rid my house of that huge Body of divinity.


I expect some judgment should fall upon you for your want of Reverence to your
Spiritual Director: Slander, Covetousness, and Jealousy, will weigh thee down.


Put Pride, Hypocrisy, and Gluttony, into your Scale, Father, and you shall
weigh against me: nay, and Sins come to be divided once, the Clergy puts in for
nine parts, and scarce leaves the Laity a tithe.


How dare thou reproach the Tribe of Levi?


Marry, because you make us Lay-men of the Tribe of Issachar: you make Asses of
us, to bear your burdens: when we are young, you put Paniers upon us, with
your Church discipline; and, when we are grown up, you load us with a Wife:
after that, you procure for other men, and then you load our Wives too; a fine
phrase you have amongst you to draw us into Marriage, you call it Settling of a
man; just as when a fellow has got a sound Knock upon the head, they say he's
settled: Marriage is a Settling blow indeed. They say every thing in the World
is good for something, as a Toad, to suck up the Venom of the Earth; but I
never knew what a Friar was good for till your Pimping showed me.


Thou shalt answer for this, thou Slanderer, thy Offences be upon thy head.


I believe there are some Offences there of your planting.

Want wit a Priest-trap at their door to lay,
For holy Vermin that in houses prey.

You are not what you were since yesterday:
Your food forsakes you and your needful rest:
You pine, you languish, love to be alone;
Think much, speak little; and, in speaking, sigh.
When you see Torrismond, you are unquiet;
But when you see him not, you are in pain.

O, let 'em never love, who never tried!
They brought a Paper to me to be signed;
Thinking on him, I quite forgot my name;
And writ, for Leonora, Torrismond.
I went to bed, and to my self I thought,
That I would think on Torrismond no more:
Then shut my Eyes; but could not shut out him.
I turned; and tried each corner of my Bed,
To find if Sleep were there, but Sleep was lost.
Feverish, for want of Rest, I rise, and walked;
And, by the Moon-shine, to the Windows went;
There, thinking to exclude him from my thoughts,
I cast my eyes upon the neighbouring fields*
And, ever I was aware, sighed to my self,
There fought my Torrismond.

What hinders you to take the Man you love?
The People will be glad, the Soldier shout;
And Bertran, though repining, will be awed.

I fear to try new Love,
As boys to venture on the unknown Ice,
That crackles underneath 'em, while they slide.
Oh, how shall I describe this growing ill!
Betwixt my Doubt and Love, methinks, I stand
Alt'ring, like one that waits an Ague fit;
And yet, would this were all!

What fear you more?

I am ashamed to say, 'tis but a fancy.
At break of day, when Dreams, they say, are true,
A drowsy slumber, rather then a sleep,
Seized on my Senses, with long Watching worn.
Methought I stood on a wide River's Bank,
Which I must needs o'erpass, but knew not how:
When, on a sudden Torrismond appeared,
Gave me his hand, and led me lightly over;
Leaping and bounding on the Billows heads,
Till safely we had reached the farther shore.

This Dream portends some ill which you shall escape*
Would you see fairer Visions? Take this night
Your Torrismond within your Arms to sleep:
And, to that end, invent some apt pretence*
To break with Bertran: 'twould be better yet,
Could you provoke him to give you the occasion,
And then to throw him off.

My Stars have sent him:
For, see, he comes: how gloomily he looks!
If he, as I suspect, have sound my Love,
His Jealousy will furnish him with Fury,
And me with means to part.


If she be false, 'tis what she most desires.
My Genius whispers me, Be cautious, Bertran!
Thou walk as on a narrow Mountain's neck,
A dreadful height, with scanty room to tread.

What Business have you at the Court, my Lord?

What Business, Madam?

Yes, my Lord, What Business?
'Tis somewhat sure of weighty consequence
That brings you here so often, and unsent for.


To freeze a man to death. -- May I presume
To speak, and to complain?

They who complain to Princes think 'em tame:
What Bull dare bellow, or, what Sheep dares bleat,
Within the Lion's den?

Yet men are suffered to put Heaven in mind
Of promised Blessings, for they then are Debts.

My Lord, Heaven knows its own time when to give;
But you, it seems, charge me with Breach of Faith.

I hope I need not, Madam:
But as when men in Sickness lingering lye,
They count the tedious hours by months and years;
So every day deferred to Dying Lovers
Is a whole Age of pain.

What if I never consent to make you mine?
My Father's Promise ties me not to time;
And Bonds, without a Date, they say, are void.

Far be it from me to believe you bound:
Love is the freest motion of our minds:
O, could you see into my secret Soul,
There you might read your own Dominion doubled,
Both as a Queen and Mistress: if you leave me,
Know I can dye, but dare not be displeased.

Sure you affect Stupidity, my Lord,
Or give me cause to think that when you lost
Three Battles to the Moors, you coldly stood
As unconcerned as now.

I did my best;
Fate was not in my power.

And with the like tame Gravity you saw
A raw young Warrior take your bafled work
And end it at a blow.

I humbly take my leave; but they who blast
Your good opinion of me, may have cause
To know I am no Coward.

Bertran, stay;

To him whom dearer then my Life I love.

To try your Love, and make you doubt of mine?

Then was it but a Trial?
Methinks I start as from some dreadful Dream;
And often ask my self, if yet I wake.

I'll sound the bottom of't ever I believe.

I find your Love; and would reward it too,
But anxious Fears solicit my weak breast:
I fear my People's Faith:
That hot mouthed Beast that bears against the Curb,
Hard to be broken even by lawful Kings;
But harder by Usurpers:
Judge then, my Lord, with all these Cares oppressed,
If I can think of Love.

Believe me, Madam,
These Jealousies, how ever large they spread,
Have but one Root, the old, imprisoned King;
Whose Lenity first pleased the gaping Crowd:
But when long tried, and found supinely good,
Like Aesop's Logg, they leapt upon his Back:
Your Father knew 'em well; and when he mounted,
He reined 'em strongly and he spurred them hard;
And, but he durst not do it all at once,
He had not left alive this patient Saint,
This Anvil of Affronts, but sent him hence,
To hold a peaceful Branch of Palm above,
And hymn it in the Quire.

You 've hit upon the very String, which touched,
Echoes the Sound and Jars within my Soul;
There lies my Grief.

So long as there's a Head,
Thither will all the mounting Spirits fly;
Lop that but off; and then --

My Virtue shrinks from such an horrid Act.

This 'tis to have a Virtue out of season.
Mercy is good; a very good dull Virtue;
But Kings mistake its timeing; and are mild,
When manly Courage bids 'em be severe:
Better be cruel once then anxious ever:
Remove this threatening Danger from your Crown;
And then securely take the man you love.


'Tis true, this Murder is the only means
That can secure my Throne to Torrismond.
Nay more, this Execution done by Bertran,
Makes him the Object of the People's Hate.




Few are so wicked as to take delight
In Crimes unprofitable* nor do I:
If then I break divine and humane Laws,
No Bribe but Love could gain so bad a Cause.

You answer nothing!

'Tis of deep Concernment,
And I a Woman ignorant and weak:
I leave it all to you, think what you do,
You do for him I love.


She named not me; that may be Torrismond,
Whom she has thrice in private seen this day:
Then I am fairly caught in my own Snare.
I'll think again -- Madam, it shall be done;
And mine be all the blame.

O, that it were! I would not do this Crime,
And yet* like Heaven, permit it to be done.
^ ^ood grossly cheat us with Free-will:
^ ^hat, but what Heaven first decreed?
Our Actions then are neither good nor ill,
Since from eternal Causes they proceed:
Our Passions, Fear and Anger, Love and Hate,
Mere senseless Engines that are moved by Fate;
Like Ships on stormy Seas, without a Guide,
Tossed by the Winds, and driven by the Tide.

Am I not rudely bold, and press too often
Into your presence, Madam? If I am --

No more; lest I should chide you for your stay:
Where have you been? and, How could you suppose
That I could live these two long hours without you?

O, words to charm an Angel from his orb!
Welcome, as kindly Showers to long parched Earth!
But I have been in such a dismal place
Where Joy never enters, which the Sun never cheers:
Bound in with Darkness, over-spread with Damps:
Where I have seen (if I could say, I saw)
The good old King majestic in his Bonds,
And amidst his Griefs most venerably great:
By a dim winking Lamp, which feebly broke
The gloomy Vapors, he lay stretched along
Upon the unwholesome Earth; his Eyes fixed upward:
And ever and anon a silent Tear
Stole down and trickled from his hoary Beard.

O Heaven, what have I done! my gentle Love,
Here end thy sad discourse, and, for my sake,
Cast off these fearful melancholy thoughts.

My Heart is withered at that piteous Sight,
As early Blossoms are with Eastern blasts:
He sent for me, and, while I raised his Head,
He threw his aged Arms about my Neck;
And, seeing that I wept, he pressed me close:
So, leaning Cheek to Cheek and Eyes to Eyes,
We mingled Tears in a dumb Scene of Sorrow.

Forbear: you know not how you wound my Soul.

Can you have Grief, and not have Pity too?
He told me, when my Father did return,
He had a wondrous Secret to disclose:
He kissed me, blessed me, nay, he called me Son;
He praised my Courage, prayed for my Success:
He was so true a Father of his Country,
To thank me for defending even his Foes,
Because they were his Subjects.

If they be; then what am I?

The Sovereign of my Soul, my Earthly Heaven.

And not your Queen?

You are so beautiful,
So wondrous fair, you justify Rebellion:
As if that faultless Face could make no Sin,
But Heaven, with looking on it, must forgive.

The King must dye, he must, my Torrismond;
Though Pity softly plead within my Soul,
Yet he must dye, that I may make you great,
And give a Crown in dowry with my Love.

Perish that Crown -- on any Head but yours; --
O, recollect your Thoughts!
Shake not his Hour glass, when his hasty Sand
Is ebbing to the last:
A little longer, yet a little longer,
And Nature drops him down, without your Sin,
Like mellow Fruit, without a Winter Storm.

Let me but do this one Injustice more:
His Doom is past; and, for your sake, he dyes.

Would you, for me, have done so ill an Act,
And will not do a good one?
Now, By your Joys on Earth, your Hopes in Heaven,
O spare this Great, this Good, this Aged King;
And spare your Soul the Crime!

The Crime's not mine;
'Twas first proposed, and must be done, by Bertran,
Fed with false hopes to gain my Crown and Me:
I, to enhance his Ruin, gave no leave;
But barely bad him think, and then resolve.

In not forbidding, you command the Crime;
Think, timely think, on the last dreadful day;
How will you tremble there to stand exposed,
And foremost in the rank of guilty Ghosts
That must be doomed for Murder; think on Murder:
That Troop is placed apart from common Crimes;
The damned themselves start wide, and shun that Band,
As far more black and more forlorn then they.

'Tis terrible, it shakes, it staggers me;
I knew this Truth, but I repelled that Thought;
Sure there is none but fears a future state;
And, when the most obdurate swear they do not,
Their trembling Hearts belly their boasting Tongues.
Send speedily to Bertran; charge him strictly
Not to proceed, but wait my farther Pleasure.

Madam, he sends to tell you, Tis performed.

Ten thousand Plagues consume him, Furies drag him,
Fiends tear him; Blasted be the Arm that struck,
The Tongue that ordered; -- Only She be spared
That hindered not the Deed. O, where was then
The Power that guards the Sacred Lives of Kings?
Why slept the Lightning and the Thunder-bolts,
Or bent their idle rage on Fields and Trees,
When Vengeance called 'em here?

Sleep that Thought too,
'Tis done, and since 'tis done, 'tis past recall:
And since 'tis past recall, must be forgotten.

O, never, never, shall it be forgotten;
High Heaven will not forget it, after Ages
Shall with a fearful Curse remember ours;
And Blood shall never leave the Nation more!

His Body shall be Royally interred,
And the last Funeral Pomps adorn his Hearse;
I will my self (as I have Cause too just)
Be the chief Mourner at his Obsequies:
And yearly fix on the revolving day
The solemn marks of Mourning, to atone
And expiate my Offences.

Nothing can,
But Bloody Vengeance on that Traitor's Head,
Which, dear departed Spirit, here I vow.

Here end our Sorrows, and begin our Joys:
Love calls, my Torrismond; though Hate has raged
And ruled the day, yet Love will rule the night.
The spiteful Stars have shed their Venom down,
And now the peaceful Planets take their turn.
This Deed of Bertran's has removed all Fears,
And given me just occasion to refuse him.
What hinders now, but that the holy Priest
In secret join our mutual Vows? and then
This night, this happy night, is yours and mine.

Be still my Sorrows; and, be loud my Joys.
Fly to the utmost Circles of the Sea
Thou furious Tempest that hast tossed my mind,
And leave no thought, but Leonora, there. --
What's this I feel aboding in my Soul?
As if this day were fatal; be it so;
Fate shall but have the Leavings of my love:
My Joys are gloomy, but withal are great;
The Lion, though he see the Toils are set,
Yet, pinched with raging Hunger, scowrs away,
Hunts in the Face of Danger all the day;
At night, with sullen pleasure, grumbles over his Prey.

I'LL not wag an ace farther: The whole World shall not bribe me to it; for my
Conscience will digest these gross Enormities no longer.


How, thy Conscience not digest 'em! There's never a Friar in Spain can show a
Conscience that comes near it for Digestion: it digested Pimping when I sent
thee with my Letter: and it digested Perjury when thou swore thou did not
know me: I'm sure it has digested me Fifty pound of as hard Gold as is in all
Barbary: Prithee, why should thou discourage Fornication, when thou know
thou love a sweet young Girl?


Away, away; I do not love 'em; -- phau; no, -- spits. I do not love a pretty
Girl; -- you are so waggish; -- spits again.


Why, thy mouth waters at the very mention of them.


You take a mighty pleasure in Defamation, Colonel; but I wonder what you find
in running restless up and down, breaking your Brains, emptying your Purse, and
wearing out your Body with hunting after unlawful Game.


Why there's the Satisfaction on it.


This Incontinency may proceed to Adultery, and Adultery to Murder, and
Murder to Hanging; and there's the Satisfaction on it.


I'll not hang along, Friar; I'm resolved to peach thee before thy Superiors
for what thou hast done already.


I 'm resolved to forswear it if you do: Let me advise you better, Colonel,
then to accuse a Church-man to a Church-man: in the common Cause we are all of
a piece; we hang together.





Nay, if you talk of Peaching, I'll peach first, and see whose Oath will be
believed; I'll trounce you for offering to corrupt my Honesty, and bribe my
Conscience: you shall be summoned by an host of Paratours; you shall be
sentenced in the Spiritual Court; you shall be excommunicated; you shall be
outlawed; -- and --


In another tone. I say a man might do this now, if he were maliciously
disposed, and had a mind to bring matters to extremity; but, considering that
you are my Friend, a Person of Honour, and a worthy good charitable Man, I
would rather dye a thousand deaths then disoblige you.

Nay, Good Sir; nay, Dear Colonel; O Lord, Sir, what are you doing now! I
profess this must not be: without this I would have served you to the
uttermost; pray command me: a jealous, foul-mouth'd Rogue this Gomez is: I saw
how he used you, and you marked how he used me too: O he's a bitter man; but
we'll join our Forces; ah, shall we, Colonel? we'll be revenged on him with a
witness.

But how shall I send her word to be ready at the door, (for I must reveal it
in Confession to you,) that I mean to carry her away this evening, by the help
of these two Soldiers? I Know Gomez suspects you, and you will hardly gain
admittance.


Let me alone; I fear him not; I am armed with the Authority of my clothing;
yonder I see him keeping Sentry at his door: have you never seen a Citizen, in
a cold morning, clapping his sides, and walking forward and backward a mighty
pace before his Shop? but I'll gain the Pass in spite of his suspicion; stand
you aside, and do but mark how I accost him.


If he meet with a repulse, we must throw off the Foxe's skin, and put on the
Lion's, come, Gentlemen, you'll stand by me. Soldier, Do not doubt us,
Colonel.


Good even Gomez, how does your Wife?


Just as you would have her, thinking no nothing, but her dear Colonel, and
conspiring Cuckoldom against me.


I dare say you wrong her, she is employing her thoughts how to cure you of
your jealousy.


Yes, by Certainty.


By your leave, Gomez; I have some Spiritual Advice to impart to her on that
Subject.


You may spare your Instructions if you please, Father, She has no farther need
of them.


How, no need of them! Do you speak in Riddles?


Since you will have me speak plainer; she has profited so well already by your
Counsel, that she can say her Lesson without your teaching: Do you understand
me now?


I must not neglect my duty, for all that; once again, Gomez, by your leave.


She's a little indisposed at present, and it will not be convenient to disturb
her.


Indisposed, say you? O, it is upon those occasions that a Confessor is most
necessary; I think it was my good Angel that sent me hither so opportunely.


Ay, whose good Angels sent you hither, that you best know, Father.


A word or two of Devotion will do her no harm I'm sure.


A little Sleep will do her more good I'm sure: You know she disburdened her
Conscience but this morning to you.


But, if she be ill this afternoon, she may have new occasion to confess.


Indeed, as you order matters with the Colonel, she may have occasion of
confessing her self every hour.


Pray, how long has she been sick?


Lord, you will force a man to speak; why ever since your last Defeat.


This can be but some light Indisposition, it will not last, and I may see her.


How, not last! I say, It will last, and it shall last; she shall be sick these
seven or eight days, and perhaps longer, as I see occasion: what; I know the
mind of her Sickness a little better then you do.


I find then, I must bring a Doctor.


And he'll bring an Apothecary with a chargeable long bill of Ana's: those of
my Family have the Grace to dye cheaper: in a word, Sir Dominic, we understand
one another business here; I am resolved to stand like the Swiss of my own
Family, to defend the entrance; you may mumble over your Pater Nosters if you
please, and try if you can make my doors fly open, and batter down my walls
with Bell, Book, and Candle; but I am not of opinion that you are holy enough
to commit Miracles.


Men of my Order are not to be treated after this manner.


I would treat the Pope and all his Cardinals in the same manner, if they
offered to see my Wife without my leave.


I excommunicate thee from the Church, if thou dost not open, there's
Promulgation coming out.


And I excommunicate you from my Wife, if you go to that; there's Promulgation
for Promulgation, and Bull for Bull; and so I leave you to recreate your self
with the end of an old Song -- and Sorrow came to the old Friar.


I will not ask you your Success; for I over-heard part of it, and saw the
Conclusion; I find we are now put upon our last Trump; the Fox is earth'd, but
I shall send my two Terriers in after him.


I warrant you, Colonel, we'll unkennel him.


And make what haste you can to bring out the Lady: what say you, Father,
Burglary is but a venial Sin among Soldiers.


I shall absolve them, because he is an enemy of the Church -- there is a
Proverb, I confess, which says, That Dead-men tell no Tales; but let your
Soldiers apply it at their own Perils.


What, take away a man's Wife, and kill him too! the Wickedness of this old
Villain startles me, and gives me a twinge for my own Sin; though it come far
short of his: hark you Soldiers, be sure you use as little Violence to him as
is possible.


Hold a little, I have thought better how to secure him, with less danger to
us.


O Miracle, the Friar is grown conscientious!


The old King you know is just murdered, and the persons that did it are
unknown; let the Soldiers seize him for one of the Assassinates, and let me
alone to accuse him afterwards.


I cry thee mercy with all my heart, for suspecting a Friar of the least
good-nature; what, would you accuse him wrongfully?


I must confess, 'tis wrongful quoad hoc, as to the Fact it self; but 'tis
rightful quoad hunc, as to this Heretical Rogue, whom we must dispatch: he has
railed against the Church, which is a fouler Crime than the murder of a
Thousand Kings; Omne majus continet in se minus: He that is an Enemy to the
Church, is an Enemy unto Heaven; and he that is an Enemy to Heaven, would
have killed the King, if he had been in the Circumstances of doing it: so it is
not wrongful to accuse him.


I never knew a Church-man, if he were personally offended, but he would bring
in Heaven by hook or crook into his Quarrel. Soldiers, Do as you were first
ordered.


What was't you ordered 'em? Are you sure it's safe, and not scandalous?


Somewhat near your^own Design, but not altogether so mischievous; the People
are infinitely discontented, as they have reason; and Mutinies there are, or
will be, against the Queen; now I am content to put him thus far into the Plot,
that he should be secured as a Traitor; but he shall only be Prisoner at the
Soldiers quarters; and when I am out of reach, he shall be released.


And what will become of me then? for when he is free he will infallibly accuse
me.


Why then, Father, you must have recourse to your infallible Church-remedies,
Lie impudently, and Swear devoutly, and, as you told me but now, let him try
whose Oath will be first believed: Retire; I hear 'em coming.


Help, good Christians, help Neighbours; my House is broken open by force; and
I am ravished, and am like to be assassinated; what do you mean Villains? will
you carry me away like a Pedler's Pack upon your backs? will you murder a man
in plain day-light?


No: But we'll secure you for a Traitor; and for being in a Plot against the
State.


Who, I in a Plot! O Lord! O Lord! I never durst be in a Plot: why, how can you
in Conscience suspect a rich Citizen of so much wit as to make a Plotter? there
are none but poor Rogues, and those that can't live without it, that are in
Plots.


Away with him, away with him.


O, my Gold! my Wife! my Wife! my Gold! As I hope to be saved now, I know no
more of the Plot than they that made it.


Thus far have we sailed with a merry gale, and now we have the Cape of good
Hope in sight; the Trade wind is our own if we can but double it.

Ah, my Father and Pedro stand at the corner of the Street with company,
there's no stirring till they are past!


Am I come at last into your Arms?


Fear nothing; the Adventure's ended; and the Knight may carry off the Lady
safely.


I'm so overjoyed, I can scarce believe I am at liberty; but stand panting,
like a Bird that has often beaten her Wings in vain against her Cage, and at
last dares hardly venture out though she sees it open.


Lose no time, but make haste while the way is free for you; and thereupon I
give you my Benediction.


'Tis not so free as you suppose; for there's an old Gentleman of my
acquaintance that blocks up the passage at the corner of the street.


What have you gotten there under your Arm, Daughter? somewhat I hope that will
bear your Charges in your Pilgrimage.


The Friar has an Hawk's eye to Gold and Jewels.


Here's that will make you dance without a Fiddle, and provide better
Entertainment for us then Hedges in Summer, and Barns in Winter; here's the
very Heart and Soul, and Life Blood of Gomez; Pawns in abundance, old Gold of
Widows, and new Gold of Prodigals, and Pearls and Diamonds of Court Ladies, till
the next Bribe helps their Husbands to redeem 'em.


They are the Spoils of the Wicked, and the Church endows you with 'em.


And, Faith, we'll drink the Churche's Health out of them. But all this while I
stand on Thorns; prithe, Dear, look out, and see if the coast be free for our
Escape; for I dare not peep for fear of being known.


Thanks to my Stars, I have recovered my own Territories -- What do I see! I'm
ruined! I'm undone! I'm betrayed!





O, Colonel, are you there? and you, Friar? nay, then I find how the World
goes.


Cheer up man; thou art out of jeopardy; I heard thee crying out just now; and
came running in full speed with the Wings of an Eagle and the Feet of a Tiger
to thy rescue.


Ay, you are always at hand to do me a Courtesy with your Eagle's Feet, and
your Tyger's Wings: and, What were you here for, Friar?


To interpose my Spiritual Authority in your behalf.


And why did you shriek out, Gentlewoman?


'Twas for Joy at your Return.


And that Casket under your Arm, for what end and purpose?


Only to preserve it from the Thieves.


And you came running out of doors --


Only to meet you, sweet Husband.


A fine Evidence summed up among you; thank you heartily; you are all my
Friends: the Colonel was walking by accidentally, and, hearing my voice, came
in to save me; the Friar, who was hobbling the same way too, accidentally again,
and not knowing of the Colonel, I warrant you, he comes in to pray for me; and
my faithful Wife runs out of doors to meet me with all my Jewels under her
Arm, and shrieks out for Joy at my return: but if my Father-in-law had not met
your Soldiers, Colonel, and delivered me in the nick, I should neither have
found a Friend nor a Friar here, and might have shrieked out for joy my self
for the loss of my Jewels and my Wife.


Art thou an Infidel? Wilt thou not believe us?


Such Church-men as you would make any man an Infidel: Get you into your
Kennel, Gentlewoman; I s^all thank you within-doors for your safe custody of my
Jewels and your own. As for you, Colonel Huff-cap, we shall try before a Civil
Magistrate who's the greater Plotter of us two, I against the State, or you
against the Petticoat.


Nay, if you will complain, you shall for some thing.


Murder! murder! I give up the Ghost! I am destroyed! help! murder! murder!


Away, Colonel, let us ^ly for our Lives; the neighbours are coming out with
Forks and ^ire-shovels and Spits and other domestic Weapons; the Militia of a
whole Alley is raised against us.


This is but the Interest of my Debt, Master Usurer, the Principal shall be
paid you at our next meeting.


Ah, if your Soldiers had but dispatch'd him, his Tongue had been laid a
sleep, Colonel; but this comes of not following good counsel; ah --


I'll be revenged of him if I dare; but he's such a terrible Fellow that my
mind misgives me; I shall tremble when I have him before the Judge: all my
Misfortunes come together: I have been robbed, and cuckolded, and ravished, and
beaten in one quarter of an hour; my poor Limbs smart, and my poor Head aches:
ay, do, do, smart Limb, ache Head, and sprout Horns; but I'll be hanged before
I'll pity you: you must needs be married, must ye? there's for that,

That with one Blast through the whole House does bound,
And first taught Speaking-trumpets how to sound.

Are these, are these, ye Powers, the promised Joys,
With which I flattered my long tedious absence,
To find, at my return, my Master murdered?
O, that I could but weep to vent my Passion!
But this dry Sorrow burns up all my Tears.

Mourn inward, Brother; 'tis observed at Cour^
Who weeps, and who wears black; and your Return
Will fix all Eyes on every Act of yours,
To see how you resent King Sancho's Death.

What generous man can live with that Constraint
Upon his Soul, to bear, much less to flatter
A Court like this! can I sooth Tyranny?
Seem pleased to see my Royal Master murdered,
His Crown usurped, a Distaff in the Throne,
A Council made of such as dare not speak,
And could not if they durst; whence honest men
Banish themselves for shame of being there:
A Government that, knowing not true wisdom,
Is scorned abroad, and lives on Tricks at home?

Virtue must be thrown off, 'tis a coarse garment*
Too heavy for the sunshine of a Court.

Well then, I will dissemble for an end
So great, so pious, as a just Revenge:
You'll join with me.

No honest man but must.

What Title has this Queen but Lawless Force?
And Force must pull her down.

Truth is, I pity Leonora's case;
Forced, for her Safety, to commit a Crime
Which most her Soul abhors.

All she has done, or ever can do, of good,
This one black Deed has damned.

You'll hardly gain your Son to our Design.

Your reason for it.

I want time to unriddle it:
Put on your the other Face; the Queen approaches.

And that accursed Bertran
Stalks close behind her, like a Witche's Fiend,
Pressing to be employed; stand, and observe them.


It crosses my Design, which was t'allow
The Rites of Funeral fitting his Degree,
With all the Pomp of mourning.

It was not safe:
Objects of pity, when the cause is new,
Would work too fiercely on the giddy Crowd:
Had Caesar's body never been exposed,
Brutus had gained his Cause.

Then, was he loved?

O, never man so much, for Saint-like goodness.


He had not yet been sainted.

I wonder how the People bear his Death,

Some discontent there are; some idle murmurs.

How, Idle Murmurs! Let me plainly speak:
The doors are all shut up; the wealthier sort,
With Arms a-cross, and Hats upon their Eyes,
Walk to and fro before their silent Shops:
Whole droves of Lenders crowd the Banquers doors,
To call in Money; those who have none, mark
Where Money goes; for when they rise 'tis Plunder:
The Rabble gather round the Man of News,
And listen with their Mouths;
Some tell; some hear, some judge of News, some make it;
And he who lies most loud, is most believed.

This may be dangerous.



If one of you must fall;
Self-preservation is the first of Laws:
And if, when Subjects are oppressed by Kings,
They justify Rebellion by that Law,
As well may Monarchs turn the edge of right
To cut for them, when self-defence requires it.

You place such Arbitrary Power in Kings,
That I much fear, if I should make you one,
You'll make your self a Tyrant; let these know
By what Authority you did this Act.

You much surprise me to demand that Question:
But, since Truth must be told, 'Twas by your own.

Produce it; or, By Heaven, your Head shall answer
The Forfeit of your Tongue.



You bad me.

When, and where?

No, I confess, you bad me not in words;
The Dial spoke not, but it made shrewd signs,
And pointed full upon the stroke of Murder:
Yet this you said,
You were a woman ignorant and weak,
So left it to my care.

What if I said,
I was a woman ignorant and weak,
Were you to take th'advantage of my Sex,
And play the Devil to tempt me? You contrived,
You urged, you drove me headlong to your toils;
And if, much tired, and frighted more, I paused;
Were you to make my Doubts your own Commission?

This 'tis to serve a Prince too faithfully;
Who, free from Laws himself, will have that done,
Which, not performed, brings us to sure Disgrace;
And, if performed, to Ruin.

This 'tis to counsel things that are unjust:
First, to debauch a King to break his Laws,
(Which are his safety,) and then seek Protection
From him you have endangered; but, Just Heaven,
When Sins are judged, will damn the tempting Devil
More deep than those he tempted.

If Princes not protect th^ir Ministers,
What man will dare to serve them?

None will dare
To serve them ill, when they are left to Laws;
But when a Counsellor, to save himself,
Would lay Miscarriages upon his Prince,
Exposing him to public Rage and Hate;
O, 'tis an Act as infamously base,
As should a common Soldier skulk behind,
And thrust his General in the Front of War:
It shows he only served himself before,
And had no sense of Honour, Country, King;
But centred on himself; and used his Master
As Guardians do their Wards, with shows of care,
But with intent to sell the public Safety,
And pocket up his Prince.


This Speech is e^en too good for an Usurper.

I see for whom I must be sacrificed;
And, had I not been sotted with my zeal,
I might have found it sooner.

From my sight!
The Prince who bears an Insolence like this
Is such an Image of the Powers above,
As is the Statue of the Thundering God,
Whose Bolts the Boys may play with.

Unrevenged
I will not fall, nor single.

Welcome, welcome:
I saw you not before* one Honest Lord
Is hid with ease among a Crowd of Courtiers:
How can I be too grateful to the Father
Of such a Son as Torrismond?

His Actions were but Duty.

Yet, My Lord,
All have not paid that Debt like noble Torrismond;
You hear how Bertran brands me with a Crime,
Of which, your Son can witness, I am free;
I sent to stop the Murder, but too late;
For Crimes are swift, but Penitence is slow;
The bloody Bertran, diligent in ill,
Flew to prevent the soft returns of Pity.

O cursed Haste of making sure a Sin!
Can you forgive the Traitor?

Never, never:
'Tis written here in Characters so deep
That seven years hence, ('till then should I not meet him,)
And in the Temple then, I'll drag him thence,
Even from the Holy Altar to the Block.


As all my ends are thine, to gain this Point;
And ruin both at once: -- It wounds indeed,
To bear Affronts too great to be forgiven,
And not have Power to punish; yet one way
There is to ruin Bertran.

O, there's none;
Except an Host from Heaven can make such haste
To save my Crown as he will do to seize it:
You saw he came surrounded with his Friends,
And knew besides our Army was removed
To quarters too remote for sudden use.

Yet you may give Commission
To some Bold man whose Loyalty you trust,
And let him raise the Train-bands of the City.

Gross feeders, Lion talkers, Lamb-like fighters.

You do not know the Virtues of your City,
What pushing force they have; some popular Chief,
More noisy than the rest, but cries Halloo,
And in a trice the bellowing Herd come out;
The Gates are barred, the Ways are barricaded,
And One and All's the Word; true Cocks of the Game,
That never ask for what, or whom, they fight;
But turn 'em out, and show 'em but a Foe,
Cry Liberty, and that's a Cause of Quarrel.

There may be Danger, in that boisterous Rout:
Who knows when Fires are kindled for my Foes,
But some new Blast of wind may turn those Flames
Against my Palace Walls.

But still their Chief
Must be some one whose Loyalty you trust.

And who more proper for that Trust then you,
Whose Interests, though unknown to you, are mine?
Alphonso, Pedro, haste to raise the Rabble,
He shall appear to head 'em.


And then insinuate to them that I bring
Their lawful Prince to place upon the Throne.

Our lawful Prince.

Fear not; I can produce him.

Lorenzo: what a mighty Faction
Would he make for us of the City Wives,
With, o, dear Husband, my sweet honey Husband,
Won't you be for the Colonel? if you love me,
Be for the Colonel; o he's the finest man!


She thinks she's in the depth of my Design,
And that it's all for her, but time shall show,
She only lives to help me ruin others,
And last, to fall her self.

Now to you Raymond: Can you guess no reason
Why I repose such Confidence in you?
You needs must think
There's some more powerful Cause then Loyalty:
Will you not speak to save a Lady's Blush?
Must I inform you 'tis for Torrismond,
That all this Grace is shown?



And yet, what need I blush at such a Choice?
I love a man, whom I am proud to love,
And am well pleased my Inclination gives
What Gratitude would force; o, pardon me;
I never was covetous of Wealth before:
Yet think so vast a Treasure as your Son,
Too great for any private man's possession;
And him too rich a Jewel to be set
In vulgar metal, or for vulgar use.

Arm me with Patience Heaven.

How, Patience, Raymond!
What exercise of Patience have you here?
What find you in my Crown to be contemned?
Or in my Person loathed? Have I, a Queen,
Past by my Fellow-rulers of the World,
Whose vying Crowns lay glittering in my way,
As if the World were paved with Diadems?
Have I refused their Blood, to mix with yours,
And raise new Kings from so obscure a race,
Fate scarce knew where to find them when I called?
Have I heaped on my Person, Crown and State,
To load the Scale, and weighed my self with Earth,
For you to spurn the Balance?

Bate the last; and 'tis what I would say;
Can I, can any Loyal Subject see
With Patience such a stoop from Sovereignty,
An Ocean poured upon a narrow Brook?
My Zeal for you must lay the Father by,
And plead my Countrie's Cause against my Son.
What though his Heart be great, his Actions gallant;
He wants a Crown to poise against a Crown,
Birth to match Birth, and Power to balance Power.

All these I have, and these I can bestow;
But he brings Worth and Virtue to my Bed;
And Virtue is the Wealth which Tyrants want:
I stand in need of one whose Glories may
Redeem my Crimes, ally me to his Fame,
Dispel the Factions of my Foes on Earth,
Disarm the Justice of the Powers above.

The People never will endure this choice.

If I endure it what imports it you?
Go raise the Ministers of my Revenge,
Guide with your Breath this whirling Tempest round,
And see its Fury fall where I design;
At last a time for just Revenge is given;
Revenge the darling attribute of Heaven:
But man, unlike his Maker, bears too long;
Still more exposed, the more he pardons Wrong;
Great in forgiving, and in suffering brave;
To be a Saint he makes himself a Slave.

Torrismond! it must not be;
By Heaven, it must not be; or, if it be;
Law, Justice, Honour bid farewell to Earth;
For Heaven leaves all to Tyrants.

O, ever welcome, Sir,
But doubly now! you come in such a time,
As if propitious Fortune took a care
To swell my Tide of Joys to their full height,
And leave me nothing farther to desire.

I hope I come in time, if not to make,
At least, to save your Fortune and your Honour:
Take heed you steer your Vessel right, my Son,
This Calm of Heaven, this Mermayd's melody,
Into an unseen whirl-pool draws you fast,
And in a moment sinks you.

Fortune cannot:
And Fate can scarce; I've made the Port already,
And laugh securely at the lazy storm
That wanted wings to reach me in the deep.
Your pardon, Sir; my duty calls me hence;
I go to find my Queen, my earthly Goddess,
To whom I owe my Hopes, my Life, my Love.

You owe her more perhaps than you imagine;
Stay, I command you stay, and hear me first,
This hour's the very Crisis of your Fate,
Your Good or Ill, your Infamy or Fame;
And all the colour of your Life depends
On this important Now.

I see no danger;
The City, Army, Court espouse my Cause;
And, more then all, the Queen with public favour
Indulges my Pretensions to her Love.

Nay, if possessing her can make you happy,
'Tis granted, nothing hinders your Design.

If she can make me blessed? she only can:
Empire, and Wealth, and all she brings beside,
Are but the Train and Trappings of her Love:
The sweetest, kindest, truest of her Sex,
In whose Possession years roll round on years,
And Joys in Circles meet new Joys again:
Kisses, Embraces, Languishing and Death,
Still from each other, to each other move
To crown the various seasons of our Love:
And doubt you if such Love can make me happy?

Yes, for I think you love your Honour more.

And what can shock my Honour in a Queen?

A Tyrant, an Usurper?

Grant the be.
When from the Conqueror we hold our Lives,
We yield our selves his Subjects from that hour:
For mutual Benefits make mutual Ties.

Why, can you think I owe a Thief my Life,
Because he took it not by lawless Force?
What if he did not all the Ill he could?
Am I obliged, by that, t'assist his Rapines,
And to maintain his Murders?

Not to maintain, but bear 'em unrevenged;
Kings Titles commonly begin by Force,
Which Time wears off and mellows into Right:
So Power, which in one Age is Tyranny,
Is ripn'd in the next to true Succession:
She's in Possession.

So Diseases are:
Should not a lingering Fevor be removed;
Because it long has raged within my Blood?
Do I rebel when I would thrust it out?
What, shall I think the World was made for One,
And Men are born for Kings, as Beasts for Men;
Not for Protection, but to be devoured?
Mark those who dote on Arbitrary Power,
And you shall find 'em either hot-brain'd Youth,
Or needy Bankrupts, servile in their greatness,
And Slaves to some, to lord it over the rest.
O baseness, to support a Tyrant Throne,
And crush your Free-born-brethren of the World!
Nay, to become a part of Usurpation;
To espouse the Tyrants Person and her Crimes,
And, on a Tyrant, get a Race of Tyrants
To be your Country's Curse in after Ages.

I see no Crime in her whom I adore,
Or if I do, her Beauty makes it none:
Look on me as a man abandoned over
To an eternal Lethargy of Love;
To Pull, and pinch, and wound me, cannot cure,
And but disturb the Quiet of my Death.

O, Virtue! Virtue! what art thou become?
That men should leave thee for that Toy a Woman
Made from the dross and refuse of a Man;
Heaven took him sleeping when he made her too;
Had man been waking he had never consented.
Now Son suppose
Some brave Conspiracy were ready formed
To punish Tyrants and redeem the Land,
Could you so far belly your Country's Hope,
As not to head the Party?

How could my Hand rebel against my Heart?

How could your Heart rebel against your Reason?

No Honour bids me fight against my self;
The Royal Family is all extinct,
And she who reigns bestows her Crown on me*
So must I be ungrateful to the Living,
To be but vainly pious to the Dead;
While you defraud your Offspring of their Fate.

Mark who defraud their Offspring, you or I?
For know there yet survives the lawful Heir
Of Sancho's blood, whom when I shall produce,
I rest assured to see you pale with Fear
And Trembling at his Name.

He must be more then Man who makes me tremble:
I dare him to the Field with all the ods
Of Justice on his side, against my Tyrant:
Produce your lawful Prince, and you shall see
How brave a Rebel Love has made your Son.

Read that: 'Tis with the Royal Signet signed,
And given me by the King when time should serve
To be perused by you.
My youngest and alone surviving Son
Reported dead to escape rebellious rage
Till happier times shall call his Courage forth*
To break my Fetters or revenge my Fate
I will that Raymond educate as his,
And call him Torrismond --
If I am he, that Son, that Torrismond,
The World contains not so forlorn a Wretch!
Let never man believe he can be happy!
For when I thought my Fortune most secure,
One fatal moment tears me from my Joys:
And when two Hearts were joined by mutual Love,
The Sword of Justice cuts upon the Knot,
And severs 'em for ever.

True; it must.

O cruel man, to tell me that it must!
If you have any Pity in your Breast,
Redeem me from this Labyrinth of Fate,
And plunge me in my first Obscurity:
The Secret is alone between us two;
And though you would not hide me from my self,
O, yet be kind, conceal me from the World,
And be my Father still.

Your Lot's too glorious, and the Proof's too plain,
Now, in the name of Honour, Sir, I beg you
(Since I must use Authority no more)
On these old Knees I beg you, ever I dye,
That I may see your Father's Death revenged.

Why, 'tis the only business of my Life;
My Order's issued to recall the Army,
And Bertran's Death resolved.

And not the Queen's; o She's the chief Offender!
Shall Justice turn her Edge within your Hand?
No, if she escape, you are your self the Tyrant,
And Murderer of your Father.

Cruel Fates,
To what have you referv'd me!

Why that Sigh?

Since you must know, but break, o break my Heart,
Before I tell my Fatal Story out,
Th'Usurper of my Throne, my House's Ruin,
The Murderer of my Father, is my Wife!

O, Horror! Horror! after this Alliance*
Let Tigers match with Hinds, and Wolfs with Sheep,
And every Creature couple with his Foe.
How vainly Man designs when Heaven opposes!
I bred you up to Arms, raised you to Power,
Permitted you to fight for this Usurper,
Indeed to save a Crown, not her's, but yours,
All to make sure the Vengeance of this Day,
Which even this Day has ruined -- one more question
Let me but ask, and I have done for ever:
Do you yet love the Cause of all your Woes,
Or, is she grown (as sure she ought to be)
More odious to your sight than Toads and Adders?

O, there's the utmost Malice of my Fate,
That I am bound to hate, and born to love!

No more: -- Farewell my much lamented King.

To own him to the People as their King,
Before their Rage has finished my Designs
On Bertran and the Queen, but in Despite
Even of himself I'll save him.

'Tis but a moment since I have been King,
And weary on it already; I'm a Lover,
Am loved, possess; yet all these make me wretched;
And Heaven has given me Blessings for a Curse.
With what a load of Vengeance am I pressed,
Yet never, never, can I hope for Re^t;
For when my heavy Burden I remove,
The weight falls down, and crushes her I love.

LOve, Justice, Nature, Pity and Revenge
Have kindled up a Wild-fire in my Breast,
And I am all a Civil-war within!
My Leonora there!
Mine? Is she mine? My Father's Murderer mine?
Oh! that I could with Honour love her more,
Or hate her less with Reason! See, she weeps;
Thinks me unkind, or false, and knows not why
I thus estrange my Person from her Bed:
Shall I not tell her? no: 'twill break her Heart:
She'll know too soon her own and my Misfortunes.

He's gon, and I am lost; Did thou not see
His sullen Eyes? how gloomily they glanced:
He looked not like the Torrismond I loved.

Can you not guess from whence this Change proceeds?

No: there's the Grief, Teresa: Oh, Teresa!
Fain would I tell thee what I feel within,
But Shame and Modesty have tied my Tongue!
Yet, I will tell, that thou may weep with me.
How dear, how sweet his first Embraces were!
With what a Zeal he joined his Lips to mine!
And sucked my Breath at every word I spoke,
As if he drew his Inspiration thence:
While both our Souls came upward to our Mouths,
As neighbouring Monarchs at their Borders meet:
I thought: Oh no; 'Tis false: I could not think;
'Twas neither Life nor Death, but both in one.

Then sure his Transports were not less than yours.

More, more! for by the high-hung Tapers light
I could discern his Cheeks were glowing red,
His very Eye-balls trembled with his Love,
And sparkled through their Casements humid Fires:
He sighed and kissed, breathed short, and would have spoke,
But was too fierce to throw away the time;
All he could say was Love, and Leonora.

How then can you suspect him lost so soon?

Last night he flew not with a Bridegroom's haste,
Which eagerly prevents the pointed hour;
I told the Clocks, and watched the wasting Light,
And listened to each softly treading step,
In hope 'twas he: but still it was not he.
At last he came, but with such altered Looks,
So wild, so ghastly, as if some Ghost had met him;
All pale, and speechless, he surveyed me round;
Then, with a Groan, he threw himself a-bed,
But far from me, as far as he could move,
And sighed, and tossed, and turned, but still from me.

What, all the night?

Even all the live-long-night.
At last: (for, blushing, I must tell thee all,)
I pressed his Hand, and laid me by his Side,
He pulled it back, as if he touched a Serpent.
With that I burst into a flood of Tears,
And asked him how I had offended him?
He answered nothing, but with Sighs and Groans,
So restless past the night: and at the Dawn
Leapt from the Bed, and vanished.

Sighs and Groans,
Paleness and Trembling, all are signs of Love;
He only fears to make you share his Sorrows.

I wish 'twere so: but Love still doubts the worst;
My heavy Heart, the Prophetess of Woes,
Foreboads some ill at hand: To sooth my sadness
Sing me the Song which poor Olympia made
When false Bire^o left her. --

Farewell ungrateful Traitor,
Farewell my perjured Swain,
Let never injured Creature
Believe a Man again.
The Pleasure of Possessing
Surpasses all Expressing,
But 'tis too short a Blessing,
And Love too long a Pain.
'Tis easy to deceive us
In pity of your Pain,
But when we love you leave us
To rail at you in vain.
Before we have descried it
There is no Bliss beside it,
But she that once has tried it
Will never love again.
The Passion you pretended
Was only to obtain,
But when the Charm is ended
The Charmer you disdain.
Your Love by ours we measure
Till we have lost our Treasure,
But Dying is a Pleasure,
When Living is a Pain.
Still she is here, and still I cannot speak;
But wander like some discontend Ghost
That oft appears, but is forbid to talk.

O, Torrismond, if you resolve my Death,
You need no more but to go hence again;
Will you not speak?

I cannot.

Speak! oh, speak!
Your Anger would be kinder than your Silence.

Oh!

Do not sigh, or tell me why you sigh?

Why do I live, ye Powers?

Why do I live, to hear you speak that word?
Some black^mouth'd Villain has defamed my Virtue.

No! No! Pray let me go.


By all the Pleasures of our Nuptial-bed,
It ever I was loved, though now I'm not,
By these true Tears, which from my wounded Heart
Bleed at my Eyes. --

Rise.

I will never rise,
I cannot choose a better place to dye.

Oh! I would speak, but cannot.


What have I done? ye Powers, what have I done?
To see my Youth, my Beauty, and my Love
No sooner gained, but slighted and betrayed:
And like a Rose just gathered from the Stalk,
But only smelt, and cheaply thrown aside
To wither on the ground.

For Heaven's sake, Madam, moderate your Passion.

Why nam'st thou Heaven? there is no Heaven for me,
Despair, Death, Hell, have seized my tortured Soul:
When I had raised his grovelling Fate from ground,
To Power and Love, to Empire and to Me;
When each Embrace was dearer than the first;
Then, then to be contemned; then, then thrown off;
It calls me old, and withered, and deformed,
And loathsome: Oh! what Woman can bear Loathsome?
The Turtle flies not from his billing Mate,
He bills the closer: but ungrateful Man,
Base, barbarous Man, the more we raise our Love,
The more we pall, and cool, and kill his ardour.
Racks, Poison, Daggers, rid me but of Life;
And any Death is welcome.

Be witness all ye Powers that know my Heart,
I would have kept the fatal Secret hid,
But she has conquered, to her Ruin conquered:
Here, take this Paper, read our Destinies;
Yet do not; but in kindness to your self,
Be ignorantly safe.

No! give it me,
Even though it be the Sentence of my Death.

Then see how much unhappy Love had made us.
O Leonora! Oh!
We two were born when sullen Planets reigned;
When each the others Influence opposed,
And drew the Stars to Factions at our Birth.
Oh! better, better had it been for us
That we had never seen, or never loved.

There is no Faith in Heaven, if Heaven says so,
You dare not give it.

As unwillingly,
As I would reach out Opium to a Friend
Who lay in Torture, and desired to dye.
But now you have it, spare my sight the pain
Of seeing what a world of Tears it cost you:
Go silently enjoy your part of Grief,
And share the sad Inheritance with me.

I have a thirsty Fevor in my Soul,
Give me but present Ease, and let me dye.

Arm, arm, my Lord, the City Bands are up,
Drums beating, Colours flying, Shouts confused;
All clustering in a heap, like swarming Hives,
And rising in a moment.

With design to punish Bertran, and revenge the King,
'Twas ordered so.

Then you're betrayed, my Lord.
'Tis true, they block the Castle kept by Bertran,
But now they cry, Down with the Palace, Fire it,
Pull out the usurping Queen.

The Queen, Lorenzo! durst they name the Queen?

If railing and reproaching be to name her.

O Sacrilege! Say quickly who commands
This vile blaspheming Rout?

I'm loath to tell you,
But both our Fathers thrust 'em headlong on,
And bear down all before 'em.

Death and Hell!
Somewhat must be resolved, and speedily,
How say thou, my Lorenzo? dare thou be
A Friend, and once forget thou art a Son,
To help me save the Queen?


Bear Arms against my Father? he begat me;
That's true; but for whose sake did he beget me?
For his own sure enough: for me he knew not.
Oh! but says Conscience: Fly in Nature's Face?
But how if Nature fly in my Face first?
Then Nature's the Aggressor: Let her look to it --
-- He gave me Life, and he may take it back: --
No, that's Boys play, say I. --
'Tis Policy for Son and Father to take different sides:
For then, Lands and Tenements commit no Treason.

To be little better than a Rebel, and therefore I'll do
My best to secure him for your sake; in hope you may
Secure him hereafter for my sake.

Put on thy utmost speed to head the Troops
Which every moment I expect t'arrive:
Proclaim me, as I am, the lawful King:
I need not caution thee for Raymond's Life,
Though I no more must call him Father now.


I see Preferment alters a man strangely,
This may serve me for a Use of Instruction,
To cast off my Father when I am great.
Methought too he called himself the lawful King;
Intimating sweetly that he knows what's what
With our Sovereign Lady: Well, if I rout my
Father, as I hope in Heaven I shall, I am in a fair
Way to be a Prince of the Blood: Farewell General;
I'll bring up those that shall try what mettle there is in Orange-Tawny.


Before the Palace gate. -- By Heaven, I'll face
This Tempest, and deserve the Name of King.
O, Leonora, beauteous in thy Crimes,
Never were Hell and Heaven so matched before!
Look upward, Fair, but as thou look on me;
Then all the Blessed will beg that thou may live,
And even my Father's Ghost his Death forgive.

Now, valiant Citizens, the time is come
To show your Courage and your Loyalty:
You have a Prince of Sancho's Royal Blood,
The Darling of the Heavens and Joy of Earth;
When he's produced, as soon he shall, among you;
Speak, what will you adventure to re-seat him
Upon his Father's Throne?

Our Lives and Fortunes.

What then remains to perfect our Success,
But over the Tyrant's Guards to force our way?

Lead on, Lead on.





What means this Pause?

Peace: Nature works within them.

How comes it, good old Man, that we two meet
On these harsh terms! thou very reverend Rebel?
Thou venerable Traitor, in whose Face
And hoary Hairs Treason is sanctified;
And Sin's black die seems blanched by Age to Virtue.

What Treason is it to redeem my King.
And to reform the State?

That's a stale Cheat,
The primitive Rebel, Lucifer, first used it,
And was the first Reformer of the Skies.

What if I see my Prince mistake a Poison,
Call it a Cordial? Am I then a Traitor,
Because I hold his Hand or break the Glass?

How dare thou serve thy King against his Will?

Because 'tis then the only time to serve him.

I take the blame of all upon my self,
Discharge thy weight on me.

O, never, never!
Why, 'tis to leave a Ship tossed in a Tempest
Without the Pilot's Care.

I'll punish thee,
By Heaven, I will, as I would punish Rebels,
Thou stubborn loyal Man.

First let me see
Her punished who misleads you from your Fame,
Then burn me, hack me, hew me into pieces,
And I shall dye well pleased.

Proclaim my Title,
To save the effusion of my Subjects Blood, and thou shalt still
Be as my Foster-father near my Breast,
And n^xt my Leonora.

That word stabs me.
You shall be still plain Torrismond with me,
The Abetter, Partner, (if you like that name,)
The Husband of a Tyrant, but no King;
Till you deserve that Title by your Justice.

Then, farewell Pity, I will be obeyed.

Runs headlong into Treason: See your Prince,
In me behold your murdered Sancho's Son;
Dismiss your Arms; and I forgive your Crimes.

Believe him not; he raves; his words are loose
As (...) of Sand, and scattering, wide from sense.
^ not me, his narural Father;
^ th^ usurping Queen,
^ his Aie^ hopes,
^ his Head,
And turns his Brains to Frenzy.

Hear me yet, I am --

Fall on, fall on, and hear him not:
But spare his Person for his Father's sake.

Let me come, if he be mad, I have that shall cure him.
There's no Surgeon in all Arragon has so much
Dexterity as I have at breathing of the Temple-vein.

My Right for me.

Our Liberty for us.

Liberty, Liberty, --

On forfeit of your Lives lay down your Arms.

How, Rebel, art thou there?

Take your Rebel back again Father mine.
The beaten Party are Rebels to the Conquerours.
I have been at hard-head with your butting Citizens;
I have routed your Herd; I have dispersed them;
And now they are retreated quietly,
From their extraordinary Vocation of Fighting in
The Streets, to their ordinary Vocation of Cozening
In their Shops.


Acknowledge what I am.

You are my King: would you would be your own;
But by a fatal fondness you betray
Your Fame and Glory to the Usurper's Bed:
Enjoy the Fruits of Blood and Parricide,
Take your own Crown from Leonora's Gift,
And hug your Father's Murderer in your Arms.

No more: behold the Queen.

Behold the Basilisk of Torrismond,
That kills him with her eyes, I will speak on,
My Life is of no further use to me:
I would have chaffered it before for Vengeance:
Now let it go for Failing.


And every slackn'd fiber drops its hold,
Like Nature letting down the Springs of Life:
So much the Name of Father aws me still.
Send off the Crowd:
For you, now I have conquered, I can hear with honour your Demands.


Is true to me, it always whispers right when
I have my Regiment to back it.

O Leonora! what can Love do more?
I have opposed your ill Fate to the utmost:
Combated Heaven and Earth to keep you mine:
And yet at last that Tyrant, Justice! Oh --

'Tis past, 'tis past: and Love is ours no more:
Yet I complain not of the Powers above;
They made m'a Miser's feast of Happiness,
And could not furnish out an^ther meal.
Now, by yon' Stars, by Heaven, and Earth, and Men;
By all my Foes at once; I swear, my Torrismond,
That to have had you mine for one short day
Has cancelled half my mighty sum of Woes:
Say but you hate me not.

I cannot hate you.

Can you not? say that once more;
That all the Saints may witness it against you.

Cruel Raymond!
Can he not punish me but he must hate?
O! 'tis not Justice, but a brutal Rage,
Which hates the Offender's person with his Crimes:
I have enough to overwhelm one Woman,
To lose a Crown and Lover in a day:
Let Pity lend a Tear when Rigour strikes.

Then, then you should have thought of Tears and Pity,
When Virtue, Majesty, and hoary Age
Pleaded for Sancho's Life.

My future days shall be one whole Contrition;
A Chapel will I build with large Endowment,
Where every day an hundred aged men
Shall all hold up their withered hands to Heaven,
To pardon Sancho's Death.

See, Raymond, see: she makes a large amends:
Sancho is dead: no punishment of her
Can raise his cold stiff limbs from the dark Grave;
Nor can his blessed Soul look down from Heaven;
Or break the eternal Sabbath of his Rest,
To see with Joy her Miseries on Earth.

Heaven may forgive a Crime to Penitence,
For Heaven can judge if Penitence be true;
But man, who knows not Hearts, should make Examples;
Which like a Warning-piece must be shot off,
To fright the rest from Crimes.

Had I but known that Sancho was his Father,
I would have poured a Deluge of my Blood
To save one Drop of his.

Mark that, Inexorable Raymond mark!
'Twas fatal Ignorance that caused his Death.

What if she did not know he was your Father:
She knew he was a Man, the Best of men,
Heaven's Image double stamped, as Man and King.

He was, he was, even more than you can say,
But yet --

But yet you barbarously murdered him.

He will not hear me out!

Was ever Criminal forbid to plead?
Curb your ill mannered Zeal.

Sing to him Siren;
For I shall stop my Ears: now mince the Sin,
And mollify Damnation with a Phrase:
Say you consented not to Sancho's Death,
But barely not forbad it.

Hard hearted Man, I yield my guilty cause,
But all my Guilt was caused by too much Love.
Had I for Jealousy of Empire sought
Good Sancho's Death, Sancho had died before.
'Twas always in my Power to take his Life:
But Interest never could my Conscience blind
Till Love had cast a mist before my Eyes;
And made me think his Death the only means
Which could secure my Throne to Torrismond.

Never was fatal Mischief meant so kind,
For all she gave, has taken all away.
Malicious Powers! is this to be restored?
'Tis to be worse deposed than Sancho was.

Heaven has restored you, you depose your self:
Oh! when young Kings begin with scorn of Justice,
They make an Omen to their after Reign,
And blot their Annals in the foremost page.

No more; lest you be made the first Example,
To show how I can punish.

Once again:
Let her be made your Father's Sacrifice,
And after make me her's.

Condemn a Wife!
That were to atone for Parricide with Murder!

Then let her be divorced! we'll be content
With that poor scanty Justice: Let her part.

Divorce! that's worse than Death, 'tis Death of Love.

The Soul and Body part not with such Pain
As I from you: but yet 'tis just, my Lord:
I am the Accursed of Heaven, the Hate of Earth,
Your Subjects Detestation, and your Ruin:
And therefore fix this doom upon my self.

Heaven! Can you wish it? to be mine no more!

Yes, I can wish it as the dearest Proof
And last that I can make you of my Love.
To leave you blessed I would be more accursed
Than Death can make me; for Death ends our Woes,
And the kind Grave shuts up the mournfu Scene:
But I would live without you; to be wretched long:
And hoard up every moment of my life,
To lengthen out the Payment of my Tears,
Till even fierce Raymond, at the last, shall say,
Now let her dye, for she has grieved enough.

Hear this, hear this thou Tribune of the People:
Thou zealous, public Bloud-hound hear, and melt.


But yet my Heart holds out.

Some solitary Cloister will I choose,
And there with holy Virgins live immured:
Course my Attire, and short shall be my Sleep,
Broke by the melancholy midnight Bell:
Now, Raymond, now be satisfied at last.
Fasting and Tears, and Penitence and Prayer
Shall do dead Sancho Justice every hour.



He weeps, now he's vanquished.

No! 'Tis a salt rheum that scalds my Eyes.

If he were vanquished, I am still unconquered,
I'll leave you in the height of all my Love,
Even when my Heart is beating out its way,
And struggles to you most.
Farewell, a last Farewell! My dear, dear Lord
Remember me; speak, Raymond, will you let him?
Shall he remember Leonora's Love,
And shed a parting Tear to her Misfortunes?



Now, By my Soul, she shall not go: why, Raymond,
Her every Tear is worth a Father's Life;
Come to my Arms, come, my fair Penitent,
Let us not think what future Ills may fall,
But drink deep Draughts of Love, and lose'em all.

No matter yet, he has my Hook within him,
Now let him frisk and flownce and run and roll,
And think to break his hold. He toils in vain:
This Love, the Bait he gorged so greedily,
Will make him sick, and then I have him sure.

Brother, there's News from Bertran; he desires
Admittance to the King, and cries aloud,
This day shall end our Fears of Civil War:
For his safe Conduct he entreats your Presence,
And begs you would be speedy.

Though I loath
The Traitor's sight, I'll go: Attend us here.

Why, how now Gomez: what make thou here with a whole Brother-hood of City
Bailiffs? why, thou look like Adam in Paradise, with his guard of Beasts
about him.


Ay, and a man had need of them, Don Pedro: for here are the two old Seducers,
a Wife and Priest, that's Eve and the Serpent, at my Elbow.


Take notice how uncharitably he talks of Church men.


Indeed you are a charitable Belswagger: my Wife cried out Fire, Fire; and you
brought out your Church-buckets, and called for Engines to play against it.


I am sorry you are come hither to accuse your Wife, her Education has been
virtuous, her Nature mild and easy.


Yes! she's easy with a Vengeance, there's a certain Colonel has found her so.


She came a spotless Virgin to your Bed.


And she's a spotless Virgin still for me -- she's never the worse for my
wearing, I'll take my Oath on it: I have lived with her with all the Innocence
of a Man of Threescore; like a peaceable Bedfellow as I am --


Indeed, Sir, I have no reason to complain of him for disturbing of my Sleep.


A fine Commendation you have given your self; the Church did not marry you for
that.


Come, come, your Grievances, your Grievances.


Why, Noble Sir, I'll tell you.


Peace Friar! and let me speak first. I am the Plaintiff. Sure you think you
are in the Pulpit where you preach by hours.


And you edify by minutes.


Where you make Doctrins for the People, and Uses and Applications for your
selves.


Gomez, give way to the old Gentleman in black.


No! the the other old Gentleman in black shall take me if I do! I will speak
first! nay, I will, Friar! for all your Verbum Sacerdotis, I'll speak truth in
few words, and then you may come afterwards, and lye by the clock as you use to
do. For, let me tell you, Gentlemen, he shall lye and forswear himself with
any Friar in all Spain: that's a bold word now --


Let him alone: let him alone: I shall fetch him back with a Circum-bendibus I
warrant him.


Well, What have you to say against your Wife, Gomez?


Why, I say, in the first place, that I and all men are married for our Sins,
and that our Wives are a Judgement; that a Bachelor cobbler is a happier man
than a Prince in Wedlock; that we are all visited with a Household Plague, and,
Lord have mercy upon us should be written on all our doors.


Now he reviles Marriage which is one of the seven blessed Sacraments.


'Tis liker one of the seven deadly Sins: but make your best on it, I care not:
'tis but binding a man Neck and Heels for all that! But as for my Wife, that
Crocodile of Nilus, she has wickedly and traitorously conspired the Cuckoldom
of me her anointed Sovereign Lord: and, with the help of the aforesaid Friar,
whom Heaven confound, and, with the Limbs of one Colonel Hernando,
Cuckold-maker of this City, devilishly contrived to steal herself away, and
under her Arm feloniously to bear one Casket of Diamonds, Pearls, and other
Jewels, to the Value of 30000 Pistols. Guilty, or Not guilty; how says thou
Culprit?


False and scandalous! Give me the Book. I'll take my corporal Oath pointblank
against every particular of this Charge.


And so will I.


As I was walking in the Streets, telling my Beads, and praying to my self,
according to my usual custom, I heard a foul Out-cry before Gomez his Portal;
and his Wife, my Penitent, making doleful Lamentations: Thereupon, making what
haste my Limbs would suffer me, that are crippl'd with often kneeling, I saw
him Spurning and Fisting her most unmercifully; whereupon, using Christian
Arguments with him to desist, he fell violently upon me, without respect to my
Sacerdotal Orders, pushed me from him, and turned me about with a Finger and a
Thumb, just as a Man would set up a Top. Mercy, quoth I. Damme, quoth he. And
still continued Labouring me, till a good minded Colonel came by, whom, as
Heaven shall save me, I had never seen before.


O Lord! O Lord!


Ay, and, O Lady! O Lady too! I redouble my Oath, I had never seen him. Well,
this Noble Colonel, like a true Gentleman, was for taking the weaker part you
may be sure -- whereupon this Gomez flew upon him like a Dragon, got him down,
the Devil being strong in him, and gave him Bastinado on Bastinado, and Bu^et
upon Buffet, which the poor, meek Colonel, being prostrate, suffered with a
most Christian Patience.


Who? he meek? I'm sure I quake at the very thought of him; why, he's as fierce
as Rhodomont, he made Assault and Battery upon my Person, beat me into all the
colours of the Rainbow. And every word this abominable Priest has uttered is as
false as the Alcoran. But if you want a thorough paced Liar that will swear
through thick and thin, commend me to a Friar.





Well -- but all this while, who is this Colonel Hernando?


He's the First-begotten of Beelzebub, with a Face as terrible as Demogorgon.

No! I lye, I lye:

He's a very proper, handsome fellow! well proportioned, and clean shaped, with
a Face like a Cherubin.


What, backward and forward Gomez? dost thou hunt counter?


Had this Colonel any former Design upon your Wife? for, if that be proved, you
shall have Justice.




I confess my Wife was as willing -- as himself; and, I believe, 'twas she
corrupted him: for I have known him formerly a very civil and modest person.


You see, Sir, he contradicts himself at every word: he's plainly mad.


Speak boldly man! and say what thou wilt stand by: did he strike thee?


I will speak Boldly: He struck me on the Face before my own threshold, that
the very walls cried shame on him.

'Tis true, I gave him Provocation, for the man's as peaceable a Gentleman as
any is in all Spain.


Now the Truth comes out in spite of him.


I believe the Friar has bewitched him.


For my part, I see no wrong that has been offered him.


How? no wrong? why, he ravished me with the help of two Soldiers, carried me
away vi armis, and would have put me into a Plot against the Government.

I confess, I never could endure the Government, because it was Tyrannical: but
my Sides and Shoulders are Black and Blew, as I can strip, and show the Marks
of 'em.

But that might happen too by a Fall that I got yesterday upon the Pebbles.


Fresh Straw, and a dark Chamber: a most manifest Judgment, there never comes
better of railing against the Church.


Why, what will you have me say? I think you'll make me mad: Truth has been at
my Tongue's end this half hour, and I have not power to bring it out for fear
of this bloody minded Colonel.


What Colonel?


Why, my Colonel: I mean, my Wife's Colonel that appears there to me like my
malus genius, and terrifies me.


Gomez; this is my Son Lorenzo.


How! your Son Lorenzo! it is impossible.


As true as your Wife Elvira is my Daughter.


What, have I taken all this pains about a Sister?


No, you have taken some about me: I am sure, if you are her Brother, my Sides
can show the Tokens of our Alliance.





You see, Brother, I had a natural affection to you.


What a delicious Harlot have I lost! Now, Pox upon me, for being so near akin
to thee.


However, we are both beholding to Friar Dominic, the Church is an indulgent
Mother, she never fails to do her part.


Heaven! what will become of me?


Why, you are not like to trouble Heaven; those fat Guts were never made for
mounting.


I shall make bold to disburden him of my hundred Pistols, to make him the
lighter for his Journey: Indeed, 'tis partly out of Conscience, that I may not
be accessory to his breaking his Vow of Poverty.


I have no secular Power to reward the Pains you have taken with my Daughter:
But I shall do it by Proxy, Friar, your Bishop's my Friend, and is too honest to
let such as you infect a Cloister.


Ay, do Father-in-law, let him be stripped of his Habit, and dis^ ordered -- I
would fain see him walk in Quirpo, like a cased Rabbit, without his holy Fur
upon his Back, that the World may once behold the inside of a Friar.


Farewell, kind Gentlemen: I give you all my Blessing before I go --

May your Sisters, Wives, and Daughters, be so naturally lewd, that they may
have no occasion for a Devil to tempt, or a Friar to pimp for 'em.


He lives! he lives! my Royal Father lives!
Let every one partake the general Joy.
Some Angel with a golden Trumpet sound,
King Sancho lives! and let the echoing skies
From Pole to Pole resound, King Sancho lives.
O Bertran, o! no more my Foe, but, Brother:
One act like this blots out a thousand Crimes.

Bad men, when 'tis their Interest, may do good:
I must confess, I counselled Sancho's Murder;
And urged the Queen by specious Arguments:
But still, suspecting that her Love was changed,
I spread abroad the Rumour of his Death,
To sound the very Soul of her Designs:
The Event you know was answering to my Fears:
She threw the Odium of the Fact on me,
And publicly avowed her Love to you.

Heaven guided all to save the Innocent.

I plead no Merit, but a bare Forgiveness.

Not only that, but Favour: Sancho's Life,
Whether by Virtue or Design preserved,
Claims all within my power.

My Prayers are heard;
And I have nothing farther to desire,
But Sancho's leave to authorize our Marriage.

Oh! fear not him! Pity and he are one;
So merciful a King did never live;
Loath to revenge, and easy to forgive:
But let the bold Conspirator beware,
For Heaven makes Princes its peculiar Care.

Lately printed.

Lucius Iunius Brutus, Father of his Country; A Tragedy acted at the Duke's
Theatre: Written by Mr. Lee.

Contemplations upon the Life of the Holy Iesus, written by the Bishop of
Exeter.

Both sold by I. Tonson.

THere's none I'am sure, who is a Friend to Love,
But will our Fryar's Character approve:
The ablest Spark among you sometimes needs
Such pious help for charitable Deeds.
Our Church, alas! (as Rome objects) does want
These Ghostly Comforts for the falling Saint:
This gains them their Whore-Converts, and may be
One Reason of the Growth of Popery.
So Mahomet's Religion came in fashion,
By the large leave it gave to Fornication.
Fear not the guilt, if you can pay for it well,
There is no Dives in the Roman Hell.
Gold opens the strait gate, and lets him in;
But want of money is a mortal sin.
For all besides you may discount to Heaven,
And drop a Bead to keep the Tallies even.
How are men cozened still with shows of good!
The Baud's best Mask is the grave Fryar's Hood.
Though Vice no more a Clergy-man displeases,
Than Doctors can be thought to hate Diseases:
'Tis by your living ill that they live well,
By your Debauches their fat Paunches swell.
'Tis a mock-war between the Priest and Devil,
When they think fit, they can be very civil.
As some who did French Counsels most advance,
To blind the World, have railed in Print at France.
Thus do the Clergy at your Vices bawl,
That with more ease they may engross them all.
By damning yours, they do their own maintain.
A Church-man's godliness is always gain.
Hence to their Prince they will superior be;
And civil Treason grows Church-Loyalty:
They boast the gift of Heaven is in their power;
Well may they give the God they can devour.
Still to the sick and dead their claims they lay;
For 'tis on Carrion that the Vermin prey.
Nor have they less Dominion on our Life,
They trot the Husband, and they pace the Wife.
Rouse up you Cuckolds of the Northern climes,
And learn from Sweden to prevent such crimes.
Unman the Friar, And leave the holy Drone
To hum in his forsaken Hive alone;
He'll work no Honey when his sting is gone.
Your Wives and Daughters soon will leave the Cells,
When they have lost the sound of Aaron's Bells.

