Almanzor and Almahide, Or, The CONQUEST OF Granada The Second Part. As it is
Acted at the THEATER-ROYAL.

Written by IOHN DRYDEN Servant to His Majesty.

-- Stimulos dedit aemula virtus.
In the SAVOY, Printed by T. N. for Henry Herringman, and are to be sold at the
Anchor in the Lower Walk of the New Exchange. 1672.

THey who write Ill, and they who ne'er durst write,
Turn Critiques, out of mere Revenge and Spite:
A Play-house gives 'em Fame; and up there starts,
From a mean Fifth-rate Wit, a Man of Parts.
(So Common Faces on the Stage appear:
We take 'em in; and they turn Beauties here.)
Our Author fears those Critiques as his Fate:
And those he Fears, by consequence, must Hate.
For they the Trafficque of all Wit, invade;
As Scriv'ners draw away the Bankers Trade.
However, the Poet's safe enough to day:
They cannot censure an unfinished Play.
But, as when Vizard Masque appears in Pit,
Straight, every man who thinks himself a Wit,
Perks up; and, managing his Comb, with grace,
With his white Wig sets off his Nut-brown Face:
That done, bears up to th'prize, and views each Limb,
To know her by her Rigging and her Trimm:
Thou, the whole noise of Fopps to wagers go,
Pox on her, 't must be she; and Damm'ee no:
Just so I Prophecy, these Wits to day,
Will blindly guess at our imperfect Play:
With what new Plots our Second Part is filled;
Who must be kept alive, and who be killed.
And as those Vizard Masques maintain that Fashion,
To sooth and tickle sweet Imagination:
So, our dull Poet keeps you on with Masquing;
To make you think there's something worth your asking:
But when 'tis shown, that which does now delight you,
Will prove a Dowdy, with a Face to fright you.
AT length the time is come, when Spain shall be
From the long Yoke of Moorish Tyrants free.
All causes seem to second our design;
And Heaven and Earth in their destruction join.
When Empire in its Childhood first appears,
A watchful Fate 'oresees its tender years;
Till, grown more strong, it thrusts, and stretches out,
And Elbows all the Kingdoms round about:
The place thus made for its first breathing free,
It moves again for ease and Luxury:
Till, swelling by degrees, it has possessed
The greater space; and now crowds up the rest.
When from behind, there starts some petty State;
And pushes on its now unwieldy fate:
Then, down the precipice of time it goes,
And sinks in Minutes, which in Ages rose.

Should bold Columbus in his search succeed,
And find those Beds in which bright Metals breed;
Tracing the Sun, who seems to steal away,
That Miser-like, he might alone, survey
The wealth, which he in Western Mines did lay;
Not all that shining Ore could give my heart
The joy, this Conquered Kingdom will impart:
Which, rescued from these Misbelievers hands;
Shall now, at once shake off its double bands:
At once to freedom and true faith restored:
Its old Religion, and its ancient Lord.

By that assault which last we made, I find,
Their Courage is with their Success declined:
Almanzor's absence now they dearly buy,
Whose Conduct crowned their Arms with Victory.

Their King himself did their last Sally guide,
I saw him glist'ring in bright armour, ride
To break a Lance in honour of his Bride.
But other thoughts now fill his anxious breast;
Care of his Crown his Love has dispossessed.
To them Abdalla.

But see the brother of the Moorish King;
He seems some news of great import to bring.

He brings a specious title to our side;
Those who would conquer, must their Foes divide.

Since to my Exile you have pity shown;
And given me Courage, yet to hope a throne.
While you without, our Common Foes subdue,
I am not wanting to my self, or you.
But have, within, a faction still alive;
Strong to assist, and secret to contrive:
And watching each occasion, to foment
The peoples fears into a discontent:
Which, from Almanzor's loss, before were great
And now are doubled by their late defeat.
These Letters from their Chiefs, the news assures:

Be mine the honour; but the profit yours.

That tertia of Italians did you guide
To take their post upon the River side?

All are according to your Orders placed:
My cheerful Soldiers their entrenchments hast,
The Murcian foot have taken the upper ground,
And now the City is beleaguered round.

Why is not then, their Leader here again

The Master of Alcantara is slain:
But he who slew him here before you stands;
It is that Moor whom you behold in bands.

A braver man I had not in my host:
His Murd'rer shall not long his Conquest boast.
But, Duke of Arcos, say, how was he slain?

Our Soldiers marched together on the Plain,
We two rode on, and left them far behind,
Till, coming where we found the valley wind,
VVee saw these Moors, who, swiftly as they could,
Ran on, to gain the Covert of the wood.
This we observed; and, having crossed their way,
The Lady, out of breath was forced to stay:
The Man then stood and straight his fashion drew,
Then told us, we in vain did those pursue
Whom their ill fortune to despair did drive,
And yet, whom we should never take alive.
Neglecting this, the Master straight spurred on;
But the active Moor his horses shock did shun,
And here his Rider from his reach could go,
Finished the Combat with one deadly blow.
I, to revenge my Friend, prepared to fight,
But now our foremost Men were come in sight,
Who soon would have dispatch'd him on the Place,
Had I not saved him from a death so base;
And brought him to attend your Royal doom.

A Manly face; and in his ages bloom.
But to content the Soldiers, he must dye;
Go, see him executed instantly.

Stay; I would learn his name before he go;
You, Prince Abdalla, may the Prisoner know.

Ozmyn's his name; and he deserves his fate;
His father heads that faction which I hate:
But, much I wonder, that I with him see
The daughter of his Mortal Enemy.

'Tis true; by Ozmyns sword my Brother fell;
But 'twas a death he merited too well.
I know a sister should excuse his fault;
But you know too, that Ozmyn's death he sought.

Our Prophet has declared, by the Event,
That Ozmyn is reserved for punishment.
For, when he thought his guilt from danger clear;
He, by new Crimes, is brought to suffer here.

In Love, or Pity, if a Crime you find;
We two have sinned above all humane kind.

Heaven in my punishment, has done a grace;
I could not suffer in a betters place:
That I should dye by Christians, it thought good;
To save your fathers guilt, who sought my blood.

Fate aims so many blows to make us fall,
That 'tis in vain, to think to ward 'em all:
And where misfortunes great and many are,
Life grows a burden; and not worth our care.

I cast it from me, like a Garment torn,
Ragged, and too undecent to be worn.
Besides, there is Contagion in my Fate;
It makes your Life too much unfortunate.
But, since her faults are not allied to mine,
In her protection let your favour shine:
To you, Great Queen, I make this last request;
(Since pity dwells in every Royal Breast)
Safe, in your care, her Life and Honour be:
It is a dying Lovers Legacy.

Cease, Ozmyn, cease so vain a suit to move;
I did not give you on those terms my Love.
Leave Me, the care of Me; for, when you go,
My Love will soon instruct me what to do.

Permit me, Sir, these Lovers doom to give:
My Sentence is, they shall together live.
The Courts of Kings,
To all Distressed should Sanctuaries be.
But most, to Lovers in Adversity.
Castille and Arragon
Which, long against each other, War did move,
My plighted Lord and I have joined by love:
And, if to add this Conquest Heaven thinks good,
I would not have it stained with Lovers blood.

Whatever Isabella shall Command
Shall always be a Law to Ferdinand:

The frowns of Fate we will no longer fear:
Ill Fate, Great Queen, can never find us here.

Your thanks some other time I will receive:
Henceforward, safe in my Protection live.
Granada, is for Noble Loves renowned;
Her best defence is in her Lovers found
Love's a Heroic Passion which can find
No room in any base degenerate mind:
It kindles all the Soul with Honours Fire,
To make the Lover worthy his desire.
Against such Heroes I success should fear,
Had we not too an Host of Lovers here.
An Army of bright Beauties come with me;
Each Lady shall her Servants actions see:
The Fair and Brave on each side shall contest;
And they shall overcome who love the best.

True; they have pardoned me; but do they know
What folly 'tis to trust a pardoned Foe!
A Blush remains in a forgiven Face;
It wears the silent Tokens of Disgrace:
Forgiveness to the Injured does belong;
But they ne'er pardon who have done the wrong.
My hopeful Fortune's lost! and what's above
All I can name or think, my ruined Love!
Feigned Honesty shall work me into Trust;
And seeming Penitence conceal my Lust.
Let Heavens great Eye of Providence now take
One day of rest, and ever after wake.

Losses on Losses! as if Heaven decreed
Almanzors valour should alone succeed.

Each Sally we have made since he is gone,
Serves but to pull our speedy ruin on.

Of all Mankind, the heaviest Fate he bears
Who the last Crown of sinking Empire wears.
No kindly Planet of his Birth took care:
Heavens Out-cast; and the Dross of every Star!
What new misfortune do these Cries presage?

They are the effects of the mad Peoples rage.
All in despair tumultuously thy swarm;
The farthest Streets already take the Alarm;
The needy creep from Cellars, under-ground,
To them new Cries from tops of Garrets sound.
The aged from the Chimneys seek the cold;
And Wives from Windows helpless Infants hold.

See what the many-headed Beast demands.
Cursed is that King whose Honour's in their hands.
In Senates, either they too slowly grant,
Or saucily refuse to aid my want:
And when their Thrift has ruined me in War,
They call their Insolence my want of Care.

Cursed be their Leaders who that Rage foment;
And vail with public good their discontent:
They keep the Peoples Purses in their hands,
And Hector Kings to grant their wild demands.
But to each Lure a Court throws out, descend;
And prey on those, they promised to defend.

Those Kings who to their wild demands consent,
Teach others the same way to discontent.
Freedom in Subjects is not; nor can be,
But still to please 'em we must call 'em free.
Propriety which they their Idol make,
Or Law, or Law's Interpreters can shake.

The name of Common-wealth is popular;
But there the People their own Tyrants are:

But Kings who rule with limited Command
Have Players Scepters put into their Hand.
Power has no balance, one side still weighs down;
And either hoysts the Common-wealth or Crown.
And those who think to set the Scale more right,
By various turnings but disturb the weight.

While People tug for Freedom, Kings for Power,
Both sink beneath some foreign Conqueror.:
Then Subjects find too late they were unjust
And want that power of Kings they durst not trust.

The Tumult now is high and dangerous grown:
The People talk of rendering up the Town;
And swear that they will force the Kings consent.

What Council can this rising storm prevent?

Their fright to no Persuasions will give ear:
There's a deaf madness in a Peoples fear.

Their fury now a middle course does take:
To yield the Town, or call Almanzor back.

I'll rather call my death. --
Go, and bring up my Guards to my defence:
I'll punish this outrageous Insolence.

Since blind opinion does, their reason sway,
You must submit to cure 'em their own way.
You to their Fancies Physic must apply:
Give them that Chief on whom they most rely;
Under Almanzor prosperously they fought:
Almanzor therefore must with Prayers be brought.

Haste all you can their fury to assuage:
You are not safe from their rebellious rage:

This Minute if you grant not their desire
They'll seize your Person and your Palace Fire.

Your danger, Sir, admits of no delay.

In tumults, People Reign, and Kings obey.
Go, and appease 'em with the vow I make
That they shall have their loved Almanzor back.
Almanzor has the Ascendant over my Fate:
I'm forced to stoop to one I fear and hate.
Disgraced, distressed, in exile, and alone,
He's greater then a Monarch on his Throne.
Without a Realm a Royalty he gains;
Kings are the Subjects over whom he Raigns.

These shouts proclaim the people satisfied.

We for another Tempest must provide.
To promise his return as I was loath,
So I want power now to perform my oath.
E're this, for Affricque he is sailed from Spain.

The adverse winds his passage yet detain;
I heard, last night his equipage did stay,
At a small Village short of Malaga.

Abenamar, this evening thither, haste;
Desire him to forget his usage past:
Use all your Rhet'rique; Promise; Flatter; Pray:

Good Fortune shows you yet a surer way:
Nor Prayers nor Promises his mind will move;
'Tis inaccessible to all, but Love.

Oh, thou hast rows'd a thought within my breast,
That will for ever rob me of my rest.
Ah, Jealousy, how cruel is thy sting!
I, in Almanzor, a loved Rival bring!
And now, I think it is an equal strife
If I my Crown should hazard, or my Wife.
Where, Marriage is thy cure, which Husbands boast,
That, in possession, their desire is lost!
Or why, have I alone that wretched taste
Which, gorged and glutted, does with hunger last!
Custom and Duty, cannot set me free,
Even Sin it self has not a Charm for me.
Of married Lovers I am sure the first.
And nothing but a King could so be cursed.

What sadness sits upon your Royal Heart?
Have you a Grief, and must not I have part?
All Creatures else a time of Love possess:
Man only clogs with cares his happiness.
And, while he should enjoy his part of Bliss,
With thoughts of what may be, destroys what is.

You guessed aright; I am oppressed with grief:
And 'tis from you that I must seek relief.
Leave us, to sorrow there's a reverence due:
Sad Kings, like Suns Eclipsed, withdraw from view.

So, two kind Turtles, when a storm is nigh,
Look up; and see it gath'ring in the Sky:
Each calls his Mate to shelter in the Groves,
Leaving, in murmurs, their unfinished Loves*
Perched on some dropping Branch they sit alone,
And Cooe, and hearken to each others moan.
Since, Almahide, you seem so kind a Wife,
What would you do to save a Husbands life?

When Fate calls on that hard Necessity,
I'll suffer death rather than you shall dye.

Suppose your Country should in danger be;
What would you undertake to set it free?

It were too little to resign my Breath:
My own free Hand should give me nobler Death.

That Hand, which would so much for Glory do,
Must yet do more; for it must kill me too.
You must kill Me, for that dear Countries sake:
Or what's all one, must call Almanzor back.

I see to what your Speech you now direct;
Either my Love or Virtue you suspect.
But know, that when my person I resigned,
I was too noble not to give my mind:
No more the shadow of Almanzor fear;
I have no room but for your Image, here.

This, Almahide would make me cease to mourn,
Were that Almanzor never to return:
But now my fearful People mutiny;
Their clamours call Almanzor back, not I.
Their safety, through my ruin, I pursue;
He must return; and must be brought by you.

That hour when I my Faith to you did plight
I banished him for ever from my sight.
His banishment was to my Virtue due;
Not that I feared him for my self, but you.
My Honour had preserved me innocent:
But I would your suspicion too prevent.
Which, since I see augmented in your mind,
I, yet more reason for his Exile find.

To your entreaties he will yield alone:
And, on your doom, depend my Life and Throne.
No longer therefore my desires withstand;
Or, if desires prevail not, my Command.

In his return too sadly I foresee
The effects of your returning jealousy;
But, your Command I prize above my life:
'Tis sacred to a Subject and a Wife:
If I have power Almanzor shall return.
Cursed be that fatal hour when I was born!
You love; you love him; and that love reveal
By your too quick consent to his repeal.
My jealousy had but too just a ground;
And now you stab into my former wound.

This sudden change I do not understand;
Have you so soon forgot your own Command?

Grant that I did the unjust injunction lay,
You should have loved me more then to obey.
I know you did this mutiny design;
But your Love-plot I'll quickly countermine.
Let my Crown go; he never shall return;
I, like a Phoenix in my Nest will burn.

You please me well that in one common Fate
You wrap your Self and Me, and all your State:
Let us no more of proud Almanzor hear:
'Tis better once to die, than still to fear.
And better many times to dye, than be
Obliged past payment to an Enemy.

'Tis better; but you wives still have one way:
When e're your Husbands are obliged, you pay.

Thou, Heaven, who know it, judge my innocence.
You, Sir, deserve not I should make defence.
Yet, judge my Virtue by that proof I gave,
When I submitted to be made your Slave.

If I have been suspicious or unkind,
Forgive me; many cares distract my mind.
Love, and a Crown!
Two such excuses no one Man e're had;
And each of'em enough to make me mad:
But now, my Reason re-assumes its Throne:
And finds no safety when Almanzor's gone.
Send for him, then; I'll be obliged; and sue;
'Tis a less evil than to part with you.
I leave you to your thoughts; but love me still!
Forgive my Passion, and obey my Will.
Almahide Sola.
My jealous Lord will soon to Rage return;
That Fire his Fear rakes up, does inward burn.
But Heaven which made me great, has chose for me:
I must the oblation for my People be.
I'll cherish Honour, then, and Life despise;
What is not Pure, is not for Sacrifice.
Yet, for Almanzor I in secret mourn!
Can Virtue, then, admit of his return?
Yes; for my Love I will, by Virtue, square;
My Heart's not mine; but all my Actions are.
I'll, like Almanzor, act; and dare to be
As haughty, and as wretched too as he.
What will he think is in my Message meant!
I scarcely understand my own intent:
But Silk-worm-like, so long within have wrought,
That I am lost in my own Webb of thought.

'TIs true that our protection here has been
The effect of Honour in the Spanish Queen.
But, while I as a friend continue here,
I, to my Country, must a Foe appear.

Think not my Ozmyn, that we here remain
As friends, but Prisoners to the Power of Spain.
Fortune dispenses with your Countries right;
But you desert your honour in your flight:

I cannot leave you here, and go away;
My Honour's glad of a pretence to stay.

I am pursued, and now am spent and done;
My limbs suffice me not with strength to run.
And, if I could, alas, what can I save;
A year, the dregs of life too, from the grave.
Here will I sit, and here attend my fate;
With the same hoary Majesty and State
As Rome's old Senate for the Galls did wait.

It is my father; and he seems distressed:

My honour bids me succour the oppressed:
That life he sought, for his I'll freely give;
We'll dye together; or together live.

I'll call more succour, since the Camp is near;
And fly on all the wings of Love and fear.

Ye've lived, and now behold your latest hour.

I scorn your malice, and defy your power.
A speedy death is all I ask you now;
And that's a favour you may well allow.
Who gives you death shall give it first to me;
Fate cannot separate our destiny.
My father here! then Heaven it self has laid
The snare, in which my virtue is betrayed.

Fortune, I thank thee, thou hast kindly done,
To bring me back that fugitive my Son.
In arms too; fighting for my Enemy!
I'll do a Roman justice; thou shalt die.

I beg not, you my forfeit life would save:
Yet add one Minute to that breath you gave.
I disobeyed you; and deserve my fate,
But bury in my grave two houses hate.
Let Selin live; and see your Justice done
On me, while you revenge him for his Son:
Your mutual malice in my death may cease;
And equal loss persuade you both to peace.

Yes; justice shall be done, on him and thee:
Haste; and dispatch 'em both immediately.

If you have honour, (since you Nature want)
For your own sake my last Petition grant:
And kill not a disarmed, defenceless foe:
Whose death your cruelty, or fear will show.
My Father cannot do an Act so base:
My Father! I mistake: I meant, who was!

Go, then, dispatch him first who was my Son.

Swear but to save his life, I'll yield my own;

Nor tears, nor prayers thy life, or his shall buy.

Then Sir, Benzaida's father shall not dye.
And, since he will want defence when I am gone,
I will, to save his life, defend my own.

This justice Parricides like thee should have:

O help my father, and my Ozmyn save.

Villains, that death you have deserved, is near.
Stay Prince; and know I have a father here.
I were that Parricide of whom he spoke
Did not my piety prevent your stroke.
Depart, then, and thank Heaven you had a Son:

I am not with these shows of duty won.

Heaven know's I would that life you seek, resign,
But, while Benzayda lives it is not mine.
Will you yet pardon my unwilling crime!

By no entreaties; by no length of time
Will I be won: but, with my latest breath,
I'll curse thee here: and haunt thee after death.
Can you be merciful to that degree
As to forgive my Fathers faults in me?
Can you forgive
The death of him I slew in my defence;
And, from the malice, separate the offence
I can no longer be your Enemy:
In short, now kill me, Sir, or pardon me.
In this your silence my hard fate appears!

I'll answer you, when I can speak for tears.
But, till I can --
Imagine what must needs be brought to pass:
My heart's not made of Marble, nor of Brass.
Did I for you a cruel death prepare,
And have you -- have you, made my life your care!
There is a shame contracted by my faults,
Which hinders me to speak my secret thoughts.
And I will tell you (when that shame's removed,)
You are not better by my Daughter loved.
Benzaida be yours -- I can no more.
Blessed be that breath which does my life restore.

I hear my father now; these words confess
That name; and that indulgent tenderness.

Benzaida, I have been too much to blame;
But, let your goodness expiate for my shame;
You, Ozmyn's virtue did in chains adore;
And part of me was just to him before.
My Son!

My father!

-- Since by you I live,
I, for your sake, your family forgive.
Let your hard father still my life pursue;
I hate not him, but for his hate to you:
Even that hard father yet may one day be
By kindness vanquished as you vanquished me.
Or, if my death can quench to you his rage,
Heaven makes good use of my remaining age.

I grieve your joys are mingled with my cares.
But all take interest in their own affairs:
And therefore I must ask how mine proceed.

They now are ripe; and but your presence need:
For, Lyndaraxa, faithless as the wind,
Yet to your better Fortunes will be kind:
For, hearing that the Christians own your cause,
From thence the assurance of a Throne she draws.
And, since Almanzor, whom she most did fear
Is gone; she to no Treaty will give ear;
But sent me her unkindness to excuse.

You much surprise me with your pleasing news.

But, Sir, she hourly does the assault expect:
And must be lost, if you her Aid neglect.
For Abdelmelech loudly does declare
He'll use the last extremities of War;
Since she refused the Fortress to resign.

The charge of hastening this Relief be mine.

This, while I undertook, whether beset
Or else by chance, Abenamar I met;
Who seemed in haste returning to the Town.

My Love must in my diligence be shown.
And as my pledge of Faith to Spain, this hour
I'll put the Fortress in your Masters power.

An open way from hence to it there lies.
And we with ease may send in large supplies,
Free from the shot and Sallies of the Town;

Permit me, Sir, to share in your renown;
First to my King I will impart the news,
And then draw out what Succours we shall use.

Grant that she loves me not, at least I see
She loves not others, if she loves not me.
'Tis Pleasure when we reap the fruit of Pain;
'Tis only Pride to be beloved again.
How many are not loved who think they are;
Yet all are willing to believe the Fair:
And, though 'tis Beauties known and obvious Cheat,
Yet Man's self-love still favours the deceit.

Farewell, my Children; equally so dear
That I my self am to my self less near.
While I repeat the dangers of the War,
Your mutual safety be each others care.
Your Father, Ozmyn, till the War be done,
As much as Honour will permit, I'll shun.
If by his sword I perish; let him know
It was because I would not be his Foe.

Goodness and Virtue all your Actions guide*
You only err in choosing of your side.
That party I with Honour cannot take*
But can much less the care of you forsake
I must not draw my sword against my Prince,
But yet may hold a Shield in your defence*
Benzayda, free from danger here shall stay*
And for a Father, and a Lover, pray.

No, no; I gave not on those terms my Heart,
That from my Ozmyn I should ever part.
That Love I vowed when you did death attend
'Tis just that nothing but my death should end.
What Merchant is it who would stay behind,
His whole stock ventured to the Waves and Wind.
I'll pray for both; but both shall be in sight;
And Heaven shall hear me pray, and see you fight.

No longer, Ozmyn, combat a design,
Where so much Love and so much virtue join.
Then Conquer, and your Conquest happy be
Both to your self, your Father, and to me.
With bended knees our freedom we'll demand
Of Isabel, and mighty Ferdinand.
Then, while the paths of Honour we pursue,
We'll interest Heaven for us, in right of you*

'Tis won, 'tis won; and Lyndaraxa, now,
Who scorned to Treat, shall to a Conquest bow.
To every sword I free Commission give;
Fall on, my Friends, and let no Rebel live.
Spare only Lyndaraxa; let her be
In Triumph led to grace my Victory.
Since, by her falsehood she betrayed my Love,
Great as that falsehood my Revenge shall prove.
Go take the Enchantress, bring her to me bound.

Force needs not, where resistance is not found:
I come, my self to offer you my hands;
And, of my own accord, invite your bands.
I wished to be my Abdelmelechs Slave;
I did but wish, and easy Fortune gave.

O, more then Woman, false! but 'tis in vain.
Can you e're hope to be believed again?
I'll sooner trust the Hyena than your smile;
Or, than your Tears, the weeping Crocodile.
In War and Love none should be twice deceivd;
The fault is mine if you are now believed.

Be overwise, thou, and too late repent;
Your Crime will carry its own punishment.
I am well pleased not to be justified:
I owe no satisfaction to your pride.
It will be more advantage to my Fame,
To have it said, I never owned a Flame.

'Tis true; my pride has satisfied it self:
I have at length escaped the deadly shelf.
The excuses you prepare will be in vain,
Till I am fool enough to love again.

Am I not loved!

-- I must, with shame, avow
I loved you once; but do not love you now.

Have I for this betrayed Abdalla's Trust!
You are to me as I to him unjust.

'Tis like you have done much for love of me,
Who kept the Fortress for my Enemy.

'Tis true, I took the Fottress from his hand;
But, since, have kept it in my own Command.

That act your foul Ingratitude did show.

You are the ungrateful, since 'twas kept for you.

'Twas kept indeed; but not by your intent,
For all your kindness I may thank the event.
Blush, Lindaraxa for so gross a cheat;
'Twas kept for me when you refused to Treat!

Blind Man! I knew the weakness of the place:
It was my plot to do your Arms this Grace:
Had not my care of your renown been great,
I loved enough to offer you to Treat.
She who is loved must little Letts create.
But you bold Lovers are to force your Fate.
This force you used my Maiden blush will save;
You seemed to take what secretly I gave.
I knew we must be Conquered; but I knew
What Confidence I might repose in you.
I knew you were too grateful to expose
My Friends and Soldiers to be used like Foes.

Well; though I love you not, their lives shall be
Spared out of Pity and Humanity.
Alferez, Go, and let the slaughter cease.

Then must I to your pity owe my peace!
Is that the tender term you can afford!
Time was, you would have used another word.

Then, for your Beauty I your Soldiers spare;
For though I do not love you, your are fair.

That little Beauty, why did Heaven impart
To please your Eyes, but not to move your Heart!
I'll shroud this Gorgon from all humane view;
And own no Beauty, since it charms not you!
Reverse your Orders, and our Sentence give;
My Soldiers shall not from my Beauty live.

Then, from our Friendship they their lives shall gain;
Though love be dead, yet friendship does remain.

That friendship which from withered Love does shoot,
Like the faint Herbage of a Rock, wants root.
Love is a tender Amity, refined:
Grafted on friendship it exalts the kind.
But when the Graff no longer does remain
The dull Stock lives; but never bears again.

Then, that my Friendship may not doubtful prove,
(Fool that I am to tell you so,) I love.
You would extort this knowledge from my Breast;
And tortured me so long that I confessed.
Now I expect to suffer for my Sin;
My Monarchy must end; and yours begin.

Confess not Love, but spare your self that shame:
And call your Passion by some other name.
Call this assault, your Malice, or your Hate;
Love owns no acts so disproportionate.
Love never taught this insolence you show,
To Treat your Mistress like a conquered Foe,
Is this the obedience which my Heart should move!
This usage looks more like a Rape than Love.

What proof of Duty would you I should give?

'Tis Grace enough to let my Subjects live:
Let your rude Soldiers keep possession still;
Spoil, riflle, pillage, any thing but kill.
In short, Sir, use your fortune as you please;
Secure my Castle, and my person seize-
Let your true men my Rebels hence remove;
I shall dream on; and think 'tis all your love.

You know too well my weakness and your power.
Why did Heaven make a fool a Conqueror!
She was my slave; till she by me was shown
How weak my force was, and how strong her own.
Now she has beat my power from every part;
Made her way open to my naked heart:
Go, strictly charge my Soldiers to retreat:
Those countermand who are not entered yet.
On peril of your lives leave all things free.
Now, Madam, love Abdalla more than me.
I only ask, in duty, you would bring
The keys of our Albazin to the King:
I'll make your terms as gentle as you please.
What shouts; and what new sounds of war are these?

Fortune, I hope, has favoured my intent
Of gaining time; and welcome succours sent.

All's lost; and you are fatally deceived:
The foe is entered: and the place relieved.
Scarce from the walls had I drawn off my men
When, from their Camp, the Enemy rushed in:
And Prince Abdalla entered first the gate.

I am betrayed; and find it now too late.
When your proud Soul to flatt'ries did descend,
I might have known it did some ill portend.
The wary Seaman stormy weather fears,
When winds shift often, and no cause appears.
You, by my bounty live --
Your Brothers, too, were pardoned for my sake,
And this return your gratitude does make. --

My Brothers best their own obligements know;
Without your charging me with what they owe.
But, since you think the obligement is so great,
I'll bring a friend to satisfy my debt.

Thou shalt not triumph in thy base design,
Though not thy fort, thy person shall be mine.

Bold Abdelmelech twice our Spaniards faced;
Though much outnumbred; and retreated last.
Your Beauty, as it moves no common fire,
So it no common courage can inspire.
As he fought well, so had he prospered too,
If, Madam, he like me, had fought for you.

Fortune, at last has chosen with my eyes;
And, where I would have given it, placed the prize.
You see, Sir, with what hardship I have kept
This precious gage which in my hands you left.
But I was the love of you which made me fight.
And gave me Courage to maintain your right
Now, by Experience you my faith may find;
And are to thank me that I seemed unkind.
When your malicious fortune doomed your fall
My care restrained you, then, from loosing all.
Against your destiny I shut the Gate:
And Gathered up the Shipwrecks of your fate.
I, like a friend, did even your self withstand,
From throwing all upon a loosing hand.

My love makes all your Acts unquestioned go:
And sets a Sovereign stamp on all you do.
Your Love, I will believe with hoodwinked eyes;
In faith, much merit in much blindness lies.
But now, to make you great as you are fair,
The Spaniards an Imperial Crown prepare.

That gift's more welcome, which with you I share:
Let us no time in fruitless courtship loose,
But sally out upon our frighted Foes.
No Ornaments of power so please my eyes
As purple, which the blood of Princes, dies.

My little journey has successful been;
The fierce Almanzor will obey the Queen.
I found him, like Achilles on the shore,
Pensive, complaining much, but threatening more.
And* like that injured Greek, he heard our woes:
Which, while I told, a gloomy smile arose
From his bent brows; and still, the more he heard,
A more severe and sullen joy appeared.
But, when he knew we to despair were driven,
Betwixt his teeth he muttered thanks to Heaven.

How I disdain this aid; which I must take
No for my own, but Almahida's sake.

But, when he heard it was the Queen who sent;
That her command repeal'd his banishment,
He took the summons with a greedy joy,
And asked me how she would his sword employ?
Then bid me say, her humblest slave would come
From her fair mouth with joy to take his doom.

Oh that I had not sent you! though it cost
My Crown; though I and it, and all were lost!

While I to bring this news, came on before,
I met with Selin --

-- I can hear no more.

Almanzor is already at the gate
And throngs of people on his entrance wait.

Thy news does all my faculties surprise,
He bears two Basilisks in those fierce eyes.
And that tame Demon, which should guard my throne,
Shrinks at a Genius greater than his own.

So Venus moves when to the thunderer
In smiles or tears she would some suit prefer.
When with her Cestos girt --
And drawn by Doves, she cuts the liquid skies,
And kindles gentle fires where here she flies:
To every eye a Goddess is confessed:
By all the Heavenly Nation she is blessed,
And each with secret joy admits her to his breast.
Madam, your new Commands I come to know:
If yet you can have any where I go:
If to the Regions of the dead they be,
You take the speediest course, to send by me.

Heaven has not destined you so soon to rest:
Heroes must live to succour the distressed.

To serve such beauty all mankind should live:
And, in our service, our reward you give:
But, stay me not in torture, to behold
And ne'er enjoy: as from another gold;
The Miser hastens in his own defence,
And shuns the sight of tempting excellence;
So, having seen you once so killing fair,
A second sight were but to move despair.
I take my eyes from what too much would please.
As men in feavors famish their disease.

No; you may find your Cure an easier way,
If you are pleased to seek it; in your stay.
All objects loose by too familiar view,
When that great charm is gone of being new.
By often seeing me, you soon will find
Defects so many in my face and mind,
That to be freed from Love you need not doubt;
And, as you looked it in, you'll look it out.

I, rather, like weak armies should retreat;
And so prevent my more entire defeat.
For your own sake in quiet let me go:
Press not too far on a despairing foe:
I may turn back; and armed against you move
With all the furious train of hopeless love.

Your honour cannot to ill thoughts give way;
And mine can run no hazard by your stay.

Do you, then, think I can with patience, see
That sovereign good possessed, and not by me?
No; I all day shall languish at the sight;
And rave on what I do not see, all night.
My quick imagination will present
The Scenes and Images of your Content:
When to my envied Rival you dispense
Joys too unruly, and too fierce for sense.

These are the day-dreams which wild fancy yields
Empty as shadows are, that fly over fields.
O, whether would this boundless fancy move!
'Tis but the raging Calenture of Love.
Like the distracted Passenger you stand,
And see, in Seas, imaginary Land.
Cool Groves, and Flowers Meads, and while you think
To walk, plunge in, and wonder that you sink.

Love's Calenture too well I understand;
But sure your Beauty is no Fairy Land!
Of your own Form a Judge you cannot be;
For, Glow-worm-like, you shine, and do not see:

Can you think this, and would you go away?

What recompense attends me if I stay?

You know I am from recompense debarred;
But I will grant you merit a reward.
Your Flame's too noble to deserve a Cheat;
And I too plain to practice a Deceit.
I no return of Love can ever make;
But what I ask is for my Husband's sake,
He, I confess, has been ungrateful too;
But he and I are ruined if you go*
Your Virtue to the hardest proof I bring:
Unbrib'd, preserve a Mistress and a King.

I'll stop at nothing that appears so brave;
I'll do it: and now I no Reward will have.
You've given my Honour such an ample Field
That I may dye, but that shall never yield.
Spite of my self I'll Stay, Fight, Love, Despair;
And I can do all this, because I dare.
Yet I may own one suit. --
That Scarf, which since by you it has been born
Is Blessed, like Relics, which by Saints were worn:

Presents like this my Virtue durst not make
But that 'tis given you for my Husbands sake.

This Scarf, to Honourable Rags I'll wear:
As conquering Soldiers tattered Ensigns bear.
But oh how much my Fortune I despise,
Which gives me Conquest, while she Love denies.

AFFected Modesty has much of Pride;
That scarf he begged, you could not have denied:
Nor does it shock the Virtue of a Wife,
When given that man, to whom you owe your life.

Heaven knows from all intent of ill 'twas free:
Yet it may feed my Husbands jealousy,
And, for that cause, I wish it were not done.
See where he comes all pensive and alone;
A gloomy Fury has o're-spread his Face:
'Tis so! and all my Fears are come to pass.
Marriage, thou curse of Love; and snare of Life,
That first debased a Mistress to a Wife!
Love, like a Scene, at distance should appear;
But Marriage views the gross-daub'd Landscape near.
Loves nauseous cure! thou cloyst whom thou shoudst pleas;
And, when thou cur'st, then thou art the disease.
When Hearts are loose, thy Chain our bodies ties;
Love couples Friends; but Marriage Enemies.
If Love, like mine, continues after thee,
'Tis soon made sour, and turned by Jealousy.
No sign of Love in jealous Men remains
But that which sick men have of life; their pains.
Has my dear Lord some new affliction had?
Have I done any thing that makes him sad?

You, nothing, You! but let me walk alone!

I will not leave you till the cause be known:
My knowledge of the ill may bring relief;

Thank ye: You never fail to cure my grief!
Trouble me not; my grief concerns not you.

While I have life I will your steps pursue.

I'm out of humour now; you must not stay.

I fear it is that Scarf I gave away.

No; 'tis not that: but speak of it no more:
Go hence; I am not what I was before.

Then I will make you so: give me your hand!
Can you this pressing, and these Tears withstand?
O Heaven, were she but mine, or mine alone!
Ah, why are not the Hearts of Women known!
False Women to new joys, unseen can move:
There are no prints left in the paths of Love.
All Goods besides by public marks are known;
But what we most desire to keep, has none.
Why will you in your Breast your passion crowd
Like unborn Thunder rolling in a Cloud?
Torment not your poor Heart; but set it free;
And rather let its fury break on me.
I am not married to a God; I know,
Men must have Passions, and can bear from you.
I fear the unlucky Present I have made!

O power of Guilt; how Conscience can upbraid!
It forces her not only to reveal
But to repeat what she would most conceal!

Can such a toy, and given in public too --

False Woman, you contrived it should be so.
That public Gift in private was designed,
The Emblem of the Love you meant to bind.
Hence from my sight, ungrateful as thou art;
And, when I can, I'll banish thee my heart.

What precious drops are those
Which, silently, each others track pursue,
Bright as young Diamonds in their infant dew?
Your lustre you should free from tears maintain;
Like Egypt, rich without the help of rain.
Now cursed be he who gave this cause of grief;
And double cursed who does not give relief.

Our common fears, and public miseries
Have drawn these tears from my afflicted eyes.

Madam, I cannot easily believe
It is for any public cause you grieve.
On your fair face the marks of sorrow lie;
But I read fury in your Husbands eye.
And, in that passion, I too plainly find
That you're unhappy; and that he's unkind.

Not new-made Mothers greater love express
Than he; when with first looks their babes they bless.
Not Heaven is more to dying Martyrs Kind;
Nor guardian Angels to their charge asign'd.

O goodness counterfeited to the life!
O the well acted virtue of a wife.
Would you with this my just suspicions blind?
You've given me great occasion to be kind!
The marks, too, of your spotless love appear;
Witness the badge of my dishonour there.

Unworthy owner of a gem so rare!
Heavens, why must he possess, and I despair!
Why is this Miser doomed to all this store:
He who has all, and yet believes he's poor?

You're much too bold, to blame a jealousy,
So kind in him, and so desired by me.
The faith of wives would unrewarded prove,
Without those just observers of our love.
The greater care the higher passion shows;
We hold that dearest we most fear to loose.
Distrust in Lovers is too warm a Sun,
But yet 'tis Night in Love when that is gone.
And, in those Clymes which most his scorching know,
He makes the noblest fruits and Metals grow.

Yes, there are mines of Treasure in your breast,
Seen by that jealous Sun; but not possessed.
He, like a dev'l among the blessed above,
Can take no pleasure in your Heaven of love.
Go, take her; and thy causeless fears remove;
Love her so well that I with rage may die:
Dull husbands have no right to jealousy:
If that's allow'd, it must in Lovers be.

The succour which thou bring me makes thee bold:
But know, without thy aid, my Crown I'll hold.
Or, if I cannot, I will fire the place:
Of a full City make a naked space.
Hence, then, and from a Rival set me free:
I'll do; I'll suffer any thing, but thee.

I wonnot go; I'll not be forced away:
I came not for thy sake; nor do I stay.
It was the Queen who for my aid did send;
And 'tis I only can the Queen defend:
I, for her sake thy Sceptre will maintain;
And thou, by me, in spite of thee, shalt reign,

Had I but hope I could defend this place;
Three days, thou should not live to my disgrace.
So small a time --
Might I possess my Almahide, alone,
I would live ages out'ere they were gone.
I should not be of love or life bereft;
All should be spent before; and nothing left.

As for your sake for Almanzor sent,
So, when you please, he goes to banishment.
You shall, at last, my Loyalty approve:
I will refuse no trial of my love.

How can I think you love me, while I see
That trophy of a Rivals Victory?
I'll tear it from his side* --

-- I'll hold it fast
As life: and, when life's gone, I'll hold this last.
And, if thou take it after I am slain,
I'll send my Ghost to fetch it back again.

When I bestowed that scarf, I had not thought
Or not considered, it might be a fau't.
But, since my Lord's displeased that I should make
So small a present, I command it back.
Without delay the unlucky gift restore;
Or, from this minute, never see me more.

The shock of such a curse I dare not stand,
Thus I obey your absolute command.
Must he the spoils of scorned Almanzor wear?
May Turnu's fate be thine; who dared to bear
The belt of murdered Pallas; from afar
May thou be known; and be the mark of War.
Live just to see it from thy shoulders torn
By common hands, and by some Coward worn.

Is this a time for discord or for grief?
We perish, Sir, without your quick relief.
I have been fooled, and am unfortunate.
The foes pursue their fortune; and our fate.

The Rebels with the Spaniards are agreed.

Take breath; my guards shall to the fight succeed.

Why stay you, Sir, the conquering foe is near:
Give us their courage; and give them our fear.

Take Arms, or we must perish in your sight.

I care not; perish; for I will not fight.
I wonnot lift an arm in his defence:
And yet I wonnot stir one foot from hence.
I to your Kings defence his town resign;
This only spot whereon I stand, is mine.
Madam, be safe; and lay aside your fear,
You are, as in a Magique Circle, here.

To our own Valour our success we will owe.
Hast, Hamet, with Abenamar to go;
You two draw up, with all the speed you may,
Our last reserves, and, yet redeem the day.

Granada is no more! the unhappy King
Vent'ring too far, here we could succour bring,
Was, by the Duke of Arcos, Prisoner made;
And, past relief, is to the Fort conveyed.

Heaven, thou art just! go, now despise my aid.

Unkind Almanzor, how am I betrayed!
Betrayed by him in whom I trusted most!
But I will never outlive what I have lost.
Is this your succour, this your boasted love!
I will accuse you to the Saints above!
Almanzor vowed he would for honour fight;
And lets my husband perish in my sight.

O, I have erred; but fury made me blind:
And, in her just reproach, my fault I find!
I promised even for him to fight, whom I --
-- But since he's loved by her he must not dye.
Thus, happy fortune comes to me in vain,
When I my self must ruin it again.

The foe has entered the Vermillion towr's;
And nothing but the Alhambra now is ours.

Even that's too much, except we may have more;
You lost it all to that last stake before:
Fate, now come back; thou can not farther get;
The bounds of thy libration here are set.
Thou know this place, --
And, like a Clock wound up, strik'st here for me;
Now, Chance, assert thy own inconstancy:
And, Fortune, fight, that thou may Fortune be.
They come; here, favoured by the narrow place,
I can, with few, their gross Battalion face.
By the dead wall, you, Abdelmelech, wind;
Then, charge; and their retreat cut off behind.

You were my friend; and to that name, I owe
The just regard, which you refused to show.
Your liberty I frankly would restore;
But honour now forbids me to do more.
Yet, Sir, your freedom in your choice shall be;
When you command to set your Brother free.

The exchange which you propose, with joy I take;
An offer, easier then my hopes could make.
Your benefits revenge my crimes to you:
For, I my shame in that bright Mirror, view.

No more; you give me thanks you do not ow,
I have been faulty; and repent me now.
But, though our Penitence a virtue be,
Mean Souls alone repent in misery.
The brave own faults when good success is given:
For then they come on equal terms to Heaven.

I see there's somewhat which you fear to tell;
Speak quickly, Ozmyn, is my father well? --
-- Why cross you thus your arms; and shake your head?
Kill me at once, and tell me he is dead.

I know not more than you; but fear not less;
Twice sinking, twice I drew him from the press.
But the victorious Foe pursued so fast,
That flying throngs divided us at last.
As Seamen, parting in a general wreck,
When first the loosening planks begin to crack
Each catches one; and straight are far disjoind,
Some born by tides and others by the wind,
So, in this ruin, from each other rent,
With heaved up hands we mutual farewells sent;
Methought his Eyes, when just I lost his view,
Were looking blessings to be sent to you.

Blind Queen of Chance, to Lovers too severe,
Thou rul'st Mankind, but art a Tyrant there!
Thy widest Empyre's in a lovers breast:
Like open Seas we seldom are at rest.
Upon thy Coasts our wealth is daily cast;
And thou, like Pirates, make no peace to last.

We were supriz'd when least we did suspect;
And justly suffered by our own neglect.

No; none but I have reason to complain,
So near a Kingdom, yet 'tis lost again!
O, how unequally in me were joined
A creeping fortune, with a soaring mind!
O Lottery of fate! where still the wise
Draw blanks of Fortune; and the fools the prize!
These Cross ill-shuffled lots from Heaven are sent,
Yet dull Religion teaches us content.
But, when we ask it where that blessing dwells,
It points to Pedant Colleges, and Cells.
There, shows it rude, and in a homely dress;
And that proud want mistakes for happiness.
Brother! what strange adventure brought you here?

The News I bring will yet more strange appear.
The little care you of my life did show,
Has of a Brother justly made a foe.
And Abdelmelech, who that life did save
As justly has deserved that love he gave:

Your business cools, while tediously it stays
On the low Theme of Adelmelechs praise.

This, I present from Prince Abdalla's hands:

He has proposed, (to free him from his bands,)
That, with his Brother, an Exchange be made.

It proves the same design which we had laid.
Before the Castle let a bar be set;
And, when the Captives on each side are met,
With equal Numbers chosen for their Guard,
Just at the time the passage is unbarred,
Let both at once advance, at once be free.

The Exchange I will my self in person see.

I fear to ask, yet would from doubt be freed,
Is Selin Captive, Sir, or is he dead?

I grieve to tell you what you needs must know;
He is a Prisoner to his greatest Foe.
Kept, with strong guards, in the Almambra Tour;
Without the reach even of Almanzor's power.

With grief and shame I am at once oppressed.

You will be more, when I relate the rest.
To you I from Abenamar am sent;
And you alone can Selin's death prevent.
Give up your self a Prisoner in his stead;
Or, e're to morrow's dawn, believe him dead.

E're that appear I shall expire with grief.

Your action swift, your Council must be brief.

While for Abdalla's freedom we prepare,
You, in each others Breast unload your care.

My wishes contradictions must imply;
You must not go; and yet he must not dye.
Your Reason may, perhaps, the extremes unite;
But there's a mist of Fate before my sight.

The two Extremes too distant are to close;
And Human Wit can no mid-way propose.
My duty therefore shows the nearest way,
To free your Father; and my own obey,

Your Father, whom since yours, I grieve to blame,
Has lost, or quite forgot a Parents name.
And, when at once possessed of him and you,
Instead of freeing one, will murder two.

Fear not my Life; but suffer me to go:
What cannot only Sons with Parents do!
'Tis not my death my Father does pursue;
He only would withdraw my Love from you.

Now, Ozmyn. now your want of Love I see:
For, would you go, and hazard loosing me?

I rather would ten thousand Lives forsake.
Nor can you e're believe the doubt you make. --
-- This night I with a chosen Band will go;
And, by surprise, will free him from the Foe.

What Foe! ah whether would your Virtue fall!
It is your Father whom the Foe you call.
Darkness and Rage will no distinction make;
And yours may perish for my Fathers sake.

Thus, when my weaker Virtue goes astray,
Yours pulls it back; and guides me in the way:
I'll send him word, my being shall depend
On Selin's Life and with his Death shall end.

'Tis that indeed would glut your Fathers rage:
Revenge on Ozmyn's Youth, and Selin's age.

What e're I plot, like Sisyphus, in vain
I heave a stone that tumbles down again!

This Glorious work is then reserved for me;
He is my Father; and I'll set him free
These Chains my Father for my sake does wear:
I made the fault; and I the pains will bear.

Yes; you no doubt have merited those pains:
Those hands; those tender Limbs were made for chains.
Did I not love you, yet it were too base
To let a Lady suffer in my place.
Those proofs of Virtue you before did show
I did admire: but I must envy now.
Your vast ambition leaves no Fame for me
But grasps at universal Monarchy.

Yes, Ozmyn, I shall still this Palm pursue;
I will not yield my Glory, even to you.
I'll break those bonds in which my Father's tied:
Or, if I cannot break 'em, I'll divide.
What though my Limbs a Woman's weakness show;
I have a Soul as Masculine as you.
And, when these Limbs want strength, my Chains to wear;
My Mind shall teach my body how to bear.

What I resolve I must not let her know;
But Honour has decreed she must not go.
What she resolves I must prevent with care;
She shall not in my Fame or Danger share.
I'll give strict Order to the Guards which wait;
That, when she comes, she shall not pass the Gate.
Fortune, at last, has run me out of breath;
I have no refuge, but the arms of death:
To that dark Sanctuary I will go:
She cannot reach me when I lie so low.

The hatred of the brave, with battles, ends;
And Foes, who fought for Honour, then, are Friends.
I love thee, brave Almanzor, and am proud
To have one hour when Love may be allowed.
This hand, in sign of that esteem, I plight:
We shall have angry hours enough to fight.

The Man who dares, like you, in fields appear;
And meet my Sword, shall be my Mistress here.
If I am proud, 'tis only to my Foes;
Rough but to such who Virtue would oppose.
If I some fierceness from a Father drew,
A Mothers Milk gives me some softness too.

Since, first you took, and after set me free,
(Whether a sense of Gratitude it be,
Or some more secret motion of my mind,
For which I want a name that's more then kind)
I shall be glad, by what e're means I can;
To get the friendship of so brave a man:
And would, your unavailing valour, call
From aiding those whom Heaven has doomed to fall.
We owe you that respect --
Which to the Gods of Foes besieged was shown;
To call you out before we take your Town.

Those whom we love, we should esteem 'em too;
And not debauch that Virtue which we woo.
Yet, though you give my Honour just offence,
I'll take your kindness in the better sense.
And, since you for my safety seem to fear,
I, to return your Bribe, should wish you here.
But, since I love you more then you do me,
In all events preserve your Honour free:
For that's your own, though not your destiny.

Were you obliged in Honour by a Trust,
I should not think my own proposals just.
But, since you fight for an unthankful King,
What loss of Fame can change of parties bring?

It will, and may with justice too, be thought,
That some advantage, in that change I sought.
And, though I twice have changed, for wrongs received,
That it was done for profit, none believed.
The Kings Ingratitude I knew before;
So that can be no cause of changing more.
If now I stand, when no reward can be;
'Twill show the fault before was not in me.

Yet, there is one reward to valour due;
And such it is, as may be sought by you.
That beaut'ous Qneen: whom you can never gain,
While you secure her Husbands Life and Reign.

Then be it so: let me have no return
From him but Hatred, and from her, but Scorn.
There is this comfort in a noble Fate,
That I deserve to be more fortunate.
You have my last resolve; and now farewell;
My boding Heart some Mischief does foretell:
But, what it is, Heaven will not let me know;
I'm sad to death, that I must be your Foe.

Heaven, when we meet, if fatal it must be,
To one; spare him; and cast the Lot on me.

Ah, what a noble Conquest were this Heart!
I am resolved I'll try my utmost Art:
In gaining him, I gain that Fortune too
Which he has Wedded, and which I but Woo.
I'll try each secret passage to his mind;
And Loves soft Bands about his Heart-strings wind.
Not his vowed Constancy shall escape my snare;
While he, without, resistance does prepare,
I'll melt into him e're his Love's aware.

You see, Sir, to how strange a remedy
A persecuted Maid is forced to fly.
Who, much distressed, yet scarce has confidence,
To make your noble pity her defence.

Beauty, like yours, can no protection need;
Or, if it sues, is certain to succeed.
To whatever Service you ordain my hand,
Name your Request, and call it your Command.

You cannot, Sir, but know, that my ill Fate
Has made me loved with all the effects of Hate:
One Lover would, by force, my person gain;
Which one as guilty would by force detain.
Rash Abdelmelechs Love I cannot prize;
And fond Abdalla's passion I despise.
As you are brave, so you are prudent too,
Advise a wretched Woman what to do.

Have courage, Fair one; put your trust in me;
You shall at least from those you hate, be free.
Resign your Castle to the King's Command;
And leave your Love-concernments in my hand.

The King, like them, is fierce, and faithless too:
How can I trust him, who has injured you?
Keep for your self; (and you can grant no less)
What you alone are worthy to possess,
Enter, brave Sir; for, when you speak the word,
These Gates will open of their own accord.
The Genius of the place its Lord will meet:
And bend its tow'ry forehead to your feet.
That little Citadel, which now you see,
Shall then, the head of Conquered Nations be:
And every Turret, from your coming, rise
The Mother of some great Metropolis.

'Tis pity words which none but Gods should hear,
Should loose their sweetness in a Soldiers Ear:
I am not that Almanzor whom you praise:
But your fair Mouth can fair Idea's raise:
I am a wretch, to whom it is denied
To accept, with Honour, what I wish with Pride.
And since I fight not for my self, must bring
The fruits of all my Conquests to the King.

Say rather to the Queen; to whose fair Name
I know you vow the Trophies of your Fame.
I hope she is as kind as she is fair:
Kinder then unexperienced Virgins, are
To their first Loves; (though she has loved before)
And that first innocence is now no more:)
But, in revenge, she gives you all her Heart;
(For you are much too brave to take a part.)
Though blinded by a Crown she did not see
Almanzor greater than a King could be,
I hope her Love repairs her ill made choice:
Almanzor cannot be deluded, twice.

No; not deluded; for none count their gains,
Who, like Almanzor, frankly give their pains.

Almanzor, do not cheat your self, nor me;
Your Love is not refined to that degree.
For, since you have desires; and those not blessed,
Your Love^s uneasy, and at little rest.

'Tis true; my own unhappiness I see:
But who, alas, can my Physician be?
Love, like a lazy Ague I endure,
Which fears the Water; and abhors the Cure.

'Tis a Consumption, which your life does waste:
Still flattering you with hope till help be past.
But, since of cure from her you now despair;
You, like consumptive Men, should change your Air.
Love some-where else, 'tis a hard remedy;
But yet you owe your self so much, to try.

My Love's now grown so much a part of me,
That Life would, in the Cure, endangered be.
At least it like a Limb cut off, would show;
And better dye than like a Cripple go.

You must be brought like mad Men to their cure;
And darkness first and next new Bonds endure:
Do you dark absence to your self ordain:
And I, in Charity, will find the Chain.

Love is that madness which all Lovers have;
But yet 'tis sweet and pleasing so to Rave.
'Tis an Enchantment where the reason's bound:
But Paradise is in the enchanted ground.
A Palace void of Envy, Cares and Strife:
Where gentle hours delude so much of Life.
To take those Charms away; and set me free
Is but to send me into misery.
And Prudence of whose Cure so much you boast,
Restores those Pains, which that sweet Folly lost.

I would not, like Philosophers, remove,
But show you a more pleasing shape of Love.
You a sad, sullen, froward, Love did see;
I'll show him kind, and full of gaiety.
In short, Almanzor, it shall be my care
To show you Love; for you but saw Despair.

I in the shape of Love Despair did see:
You, in his shape, would show Inconstancy.

There's no such thing as Constancy you call:
Faith ties not Hearts; 'tis Inclination all.
Some Wit deformed or Beauty much decayed*
First, constancy in Love, a Virtue made.
From Friendship they that Landmark did remove;
And, falsely, placed it on the bounds of Love.
Let the effects of change be only tried:
Court me, in jest; and call me Almahide.
But this is only Council I impart;
For I, perhaps, should not receive your heart.

Fair though you are --
As Summer mornings, and your Eyes more bright
Than Stars that twinckle in a winters night;
Though you have Eloquence to warm, and move
Cold age; and praying Hermits into Love;
Though Almahide, with scorn rewards my care;
Yet; than to change, 'tis nobler to despair.
My Love's my Soul; and that from Fate is free:
'Tis that unchanged; and deathless part of me.

The Fate of Constancy your Love pursue!
Still to be faithful to what's false to you.

Ye Gods, why are not Hearts first paired above;
But some still interfere in others Love!
E're each, for each, by certain marks are known,
You mould 'em off in haste, and drop 'em down.
And while we seek what carelessly you sort,
You sit in State; and make our pains your sport.

HAst; and conduct the Prisoner to my sight.

Did you, according, to my orders, write?
And have you summoned Ozmyn to appear?

I am not yet so much a slave to fear:
Nor has your Son deserved so ill of me
That, by his death or bonds, I would be free.

Against thy life thou dost the sentence give:
Behold how short a time thou hast to live.

Make haste; and draw the Curtain while you may:
You but shut out the twilight of my day:
Beneath the burden of my age I bend;
You, kindly ease me here my Journey's end.

It is enough: my promise makes you free:
Resign your bonds; and take your liberty.

Sir, you are just; and welome are these bands:
'Tis all the inheritance a son demands.

Your goodness, O my Ozmyn, is too great:
I am not weary of my fetters yet:
Already when you move me to resign:
I feel 'em heavier on your feet than mine.

A youth attends you in the outter room;
Who seems in hast; and does from Ozmyn come.

Conduct him in: --

Sent from Benzayda I fear to me.

My Ozmyn here!

-- Benzaida! 'tis she!
Go, youth; I have no business for thee here:
Go to the Albayzin; and attend me there.
I'll not be long away; I prithee go;
By all our Love and friendship --

-- Ozmyn, no.
I did not take on me this bold disguise,
For ends so low to cheat your watchmens eyes.
When I attempted this; it was to do
An Action, to be envied even by you:
But you, alas, have been too diligent,
And, what I purposed, fatally prevent!
Those chains, which for my father I would bear,
I take with less content, to find you here.
Except your father will that mercy show,
That I may wear 'em both for him and you.

I thank thee, fortune; thou hast, in one hour,
Put all I could have asked thee in my power.
My own lost wealth thou give not only back,
But drive upon my Coast my Pirates wrack.

With Ozmyns kindness I was grieved before;
But yours, Benzaida, has undone me more.

Go fetch new fetters, and the daughter bind

Be just, at least, Sir though you are not kind.
Benzayda, is not, as a Prisoner, brought;
But comes to suffer for another fau't.

Then Ozmyn, mark; that justice which I do,
I, as severely will exact from you.
The father is not wholly dead in me:
Or you may yet revive it, if it be.
Like tapers new blown out, the fumes remain
To catch the light; and bring it back again.
-- Benzaida gave you life, and set you free;
For that I will restore her liberty.

Sir, on my knees I thank you.

-- Oxmyn hold
One part of what I purpose is untold:
Consider, then, it on your part remains,
When I have broke, not to resume your chains.
Like an Indulgent father, I have paid
All debts, which you, my Prodigal, have made.
Now you are clear, break off your fond design;
Renounce Benzaida; and be wholly mine.

Are these the terms? is this the liberty?
Ah, Sir, how can you so inhumane be?
My duty to my life I will prefer;
But life and duty must give place to her.

Consider what you say; for, with one breath,
You disobey my will; and give her death.

Ah, cruel father, what do you propose!
Must I, then, kill Benzaida, or must loose?
I can do neither; in this wretched state
The least that I can suffer is your hate:
And yet, that's worse than death: Even while I sue,
And choose your hatred, I could dye for you.
Break quickly, heart; or let my blood be spilt
By my own hand, to save a fathers guilt.

Hear me, my Lord, and take this wretched life,
To free you from the fear of Ozmyns wife.
I beg but what with ease may granted be;
To spare your son; and kill your Enemy.
Or, if my death's a grace too great to give;
Let me, my Lord, without my Ozmyn live.
Far from your sight, and Ozmin's let me go,
And take from him a Care; from you a foe.

How, my Benzaida! can you thus resign
That love, which you have vowed so firmly mine?
Can you leave me for life and liberty?

What I have done will show that I dare die.
But I'll twice suffer death; and go away;
Rather than make you wretched by my stay;
By this my father's freedom will be won;
And to your father I restore a Son.

Cease, cease, my children, your unhappy strife.
Selin will not be ransomed by your life.
Barbarian, thy old foe defyes thy rage:
Turn from their Youth thy malice to my Age.

Forbear, dear father, for your Ozmyn's sake:
Do not, such words to Ozmyn's father speak.

Alas, 'tis counterfeited rage; he strives
But to divert the danger from our lives.
For, I can witness, Sir, and you might see
How in your person he considered me.
He still declined the Combat where you were;
And you well know it was not out of fear.

Alas, my Lord, where can your vengeance fall:
Your justice will not let it reach us all:
Selin and Ozmin both would suff'rers be;
And punishment's a favour done to me.
If we are foes: since you have power to kill
'Tis generous in you not to have the will.
But are we foes? look round, my Lord; and see;
Point out that face which is your Enemy.
Would you your hand in Selins blood imbrue?
Kill him unarmed, who, armed, shunned killing you!
Am I your foe? since you detest my line,
That hated name of Zegry I resign:
For you, Benzayda will her self disclaim:
Call me your daughter, and forget my name.

This virtue would even Savages subdue;
And shall it want the power to vanquish you?

It has, it has: I read it in his eyes;
'Tis now not anger; 'tis but shame denies.
A shame of error; that great spirits find,
Which keeps down virtue struggling in the mind.

Yes; I am vanquished! the fierce conflict's past:
And shame it self is now ore'come at last.
'Twas long before my stubborn Mind was won;
But, melting once, I on the sudden run,
Nor can I hold my headlong kindness, more
Than I could curb my cruel Rage before.
Benzayda, 'twas your Virtue vanquished me:
That, could alone surmount my Cruelty.
Forgive me, Selin, my neglect of you!
But men, just waking, scarce know what they do.

O Father!

-- Father!

-- Dare I own that name!
Speak; speak it often, to remove my shame!
O Selin; O my Children, let me go!
I have more kindness then I yet can show.
For my recov'ry, I must shun your sight:
Eyes, used to darkness, cannot bear the light.

'Tis War again; and I am glad 'tis so;
Success, shall now by force and courage go.
Treaties are but the combats of the Brain,
Where still the stronger loose, and weaker gain.

On this Assault, brave Sir, which we prepare,
Depends the Sum and Fortune of the War.
Encamped without the Fort the Spaniard lies;
And may, in spite of us, send in supplies.
Consider yet, e're we attacque the place,
What 'tis to storm it in an Armies face.

The minds of Heroes their own measures are,
They stand exempted from the rules of War.
One Loose, one Sallye of the Heroes Soul,
Does all the Military Art control.
While timorous Wit goes round, or fords the shore;
He shoots the Gulf; and is already over.
And, when the Enthusiastique fit is spent,
Looks back amazed at what he underwent.

They fly, they fly; take breath and charge again.

Make good your entrance, and bring up more men
I feared, brave Friend, my Aid had been too late,

You drew us from the jaws of certain Fate.
At my approach --
The Gate was open, and the Draw-bridge down;
But, when they saw I stood, and came not on,
They charged with fury on my little Band;
Who, much o're-powr'd, could scarce the shock withstand.

E're night we shall the whole Albayzin gain,
But see the Spaniards march along the Plain,
To its relief: you Abdelmelech, go
And force the rest, while I repulse the Foe.

Turn, Cowards, turn; there is no hope in flight;
You yet may live, if you but dare to fight.
Come, you brave few, who only fear to fly:
We're not enough to Conquer but to Dye.

No, Prince; that mean advantage I refuse:
'Tis in your power a nobler Fate to choose.
Since we are Rivals, Honour does command,
We should not dye but by each others hand.
Retire; and if it prove my destiny
To fall; I charge you let the Prince go free.

O, Abdelmelech, that I knew some way
This debt of Honour which I owe, to pay.
But Fate has left this only means for me,
To dye; and leave you Lyndaraxa free.

He who is vanquished and is slain, is blessed:
The wretched Conqueror can ne'er have rest:
But is reserved a harder fate to prove;
(Bound in the Fetters of dissembled Love.)

Now thou art base; and I deserve her more:
Without complaint I will to death adore.
Dare thou see faults: and yet dost Love pretend?
I will, even Lyndaraxa's Crimes defend.

Maintain her cause, then, better than thy own,
Than thy ill got, and worse defended Throne.

Now ask your life.

-- 'Tis gone; that busy thing
The Soul, is packing up; and just on wing.
Like parting Swallows, when they seek the Spring.
Like them, at its appointed time, it goes;
And flies to Countries more unknown than those.

No; you shall stay; and see a Sacrifice;
Not offered by my Sword but by your Eyes.
From those he first Ambitions poison drew;
And swelled to Empire for the love of you.
Accursed fair!
Thy Comet-blaze portends a Princes fate;
And suffering Subjects groan beneath thy weight.

Cease Rival, cease!
I would have forced you; but it wonnot be:
I beg you now, upbraid her not for me.
You fairest, to my memory be kind:
Lovers like me your sex will seldom find.
When I usurped a Crown for love of you,
I, then, did more than dying now I do.
I'm still the same as when my Love begun:
And could I now this fate foresee or shun;
Would yet do all I have already done.

Weep on; weep on; for it becomes you now:
These tears you to that love may well allow.
His unrepenting Soul, if it could move
Upward, in Crimes, flew spotted with your love;
And brought Contagion to the blessed above.

He's gone; and peace go with a constant mind:
His love deserved I should have been more kind.
But then your love and greater worth I knew:
I was unjust to him, but just to you.

I was his Enemy and Rival too;
Yet I some tears to his misfortunes owe:
You ow him more; weep then; and join with me:
So much is due even to Humanity.

Weep for this wretch, whose memory I hate!
Whose folly made us both unfortunate!
Weep for this fool, who did my laughter move;
This, whining, tedious, heavy lump of Love!

Had Fortune favoured him, and frowned on me,
I then had been that heavy fool, not he:
Just this had been my funeral Elegy.
Thy arts and falsehood I before did know;
But this last baseness was concealed till now.
And 'twas no more than needful to be known;
I could be cured by such an act alone.
My love, half blasted, yet in time would shoot;
But this last tempest rends it to the root.

These little picques, which now your Anger move,
Will vanish; and are only signs of love.
You've been too fierce; and, at some other time,
I should not with such ease forgive your Crime.
But, in a day of public joy, like this,
I pardon; and forget what ere's amiss.

These Arts have oft prevailed; but must no more:
The spell is ended; and the Enchantment 'ore.
You have at last destroyed, with much ado;
That love, which none could have destroyed, but you.
My love was blind to your deluding Art;
But blind men feel, when stabbed so near the heart.

I must confess there was some pity due:
But I concealed it out of Love to you.

No, Lyndaraxa; 'tis at last too late:
Our loves have mingled with too much of fate.
I would; but cannot now my self deceive:
O that you still could cheat, and I believe!

Do not so light a quarrel long pursue:
You grieve your Rival was less loved than you.
'Tis hard, when men, of kindness, must complain!

I'm now awake, and cannot dream again!

Yet hear --

-- No more: nothing my heart can bend:
That Queen you scorned, you shall this night, attend:
Your life the King has pardoned for my sake;
But, on your Pride, I some revenge must take.
See now the effects of what your Arts designed:
Thank your inconstant, and ambitious Mind.
'Tis just that she who to no Love is true,
Should be forsaken, and contemned, like you.

All Arts of injured Women I will try:
First I will be revenged; and then I'll die.
But like some falling Tower --
Whose seeming firmness does the sight beguile,
So hold I up my nodding head awhile;
Till they come under, and reserve my fall;
That with my ruins I may reach 'em all.

Conduct her hence. --

Almanzor is victorious without fight;
The Foes retreated when he came in sight.
Under the Walls, this night, his men are drawn;
And mean to seek the Spaniard with the dawn.

The Sun's declined:
Command the Watch be set without delay;
And in the Fort let bold Benducar stay:
I'll haste to Court, where Solitude I'll fly;
And heard, like wounded Deer, in company.
But oh, how hard is passion to remove,
When I must shun my self to escape from Love!

I thought your passion for the Queen was dead:
Or that your love had, with your hopes, been fled.

'Twas like a fire within a furnace pent:
I smothered it, and kept it long from vent.
But (fed with looks; and blown with sighs, so fast)
It broke a passage through my lips, at last.

Where found you confidence your suit to move?
Our broken fortunes are not fit to love.
Well; you declared your love:: what follow'd then?

She looked as Judges do on guilty men:
When big with fate they triumph in their dooms,
And smile before the deadly sentence comes.
Silent I stood as I were thunder -- struck;
Condemned and executed with a look.

You must, with haste, some remedy prepare:
Now you are in, you must break through the snare.

She said she would my folly yet conceal,
But vowed my next attempt she would reveal.

'Tis dark; and, in this lonely Gallery,
(Remote from noise, and shunning every eye)
One hour each Evening she in private mourns,
And prays, and to the Cercle then returns.
Now, if you dare, attempt her passing by. --

These lighted tapers show the time is nigh.
Perhaps my Courtship will not be in vain.
At least few women will of force complain.

Almanzor and with him --
The favourite slave of the Sultana Queen:

E're they approach, let us retire unseen.
And watch our time when they return again
Then force shall give, if favour does deny;
And, that once done, we'll to the Spaniards fly.

Now stand; the Apartment of the Queen is near,
And, from this place your voice will reach her ear.

He. HOw unhappy a Lover am I
While I sigh for my Phillis in vain;
All my hopes of Delight
Are another man's Right,
Who is happy while I am in pain!
She. Since her Honour allows no Relief,
But to pity the pains which you bear,
'Tis the best of your Fate,
(In a hopeless Estate,)
To give over, and betimes to despair.
He. I have tried the false Med'cine in vain;
For I wish what I hope not to win:
From without, my desire
Has no Food to its Fire,
But it burns and consumes me within.
She. Yet at least 'tis a pleasure to know
That you are not unhappy alone:
For the Nymph you adore
Is as wretched and more,
And accounts all your suff'ring's her own.
He. O ye Gods, let me suffer for both;
At the feet of my Phillis I'll lye:
I'll resign up my Breath,
And take pleasure in Death,
To be pitied by her when I dye.
She. What her Honour denied you in Life
In her Death she will give to your Love.
Such a Flame as is true
After Fate will renew,
For the Souls to meet closer above.
Accept this Diamond, till I can present
Something more worthy my acknowledgement.
And now, farewell; I will attend, alone,
Her coming forth; and make my sufferings known.

A hollow wind comes whistling through that door;
And a cold shivering seizes me all over.
My Teeth, too, chatter, with a sudden fright:
These are the raptures of too fierce delight!
The combat of the Tyrants, Hope and Fear;
Which Hearts, for want of Field-room, cannot bear.
I grow impatient, this, or that's the room:
I'll meet her; now, methinks, I hear her come.

Well may thou make thy boast, what e're thou art;
Thou art the first e're made Almanzor start.
My Legs --
Shall bear me to thee in their own despite:
I'll rush into the Covert of thy Night,
And pull thee backward by thy shroud, to light.
Or else I'll squeeze thee, like a Bladder, there:
And make thee groan thy self away to Air.
So; art thou gone! thou can no Conquest boast:
I thought what was the courage of a Ghost. --
-- The grudging of my Argue yet remains:
My blood, like Ysicles, hangs in my veins,
And does not drop: be master of that door,
We two, will not disturb each other more.
Ierr d a little, but extremes may join;
That door was Hell's; but this is Heavens and mine.
Again! by Heaven I do conjure thee, speak.
What art thou, Spirit; and what dost thou seek?

I am the Ghost of her who gave thee birth:
The Airy shadow of her mouldering Earth.
Love of thy Father me through Seas did guide;
On Sea's I bore thee, and on Sea's I died.
I died; and for my Winding-sheet, a Wave
I had; and all the Ocean for my Grave.
But, when my soul to bliss did upward move,
I wandered round the Crystal walls above;
But found the eternal fence so steepy high,
That, when I mounted to the middle Sky,
I flagg'd, and fluttered down; and could not fly.
Then, from the Battlements of the Heavenly Tower,
A Watchman Angel bid me wait this hour;
And told me I had yet a task assigned,
To warn that little pledge I left behind;
And to divert him, e're it were too late,
From Crimes unknown; and errors of his Fate.
Speak, Holy Shade; thou Parent form, speak on:
Instruct thy mortal Elemented Son;
(For here I wander to my self unknown.)
But oh, thou better part of Heavenly Air,
Teach me, kind spirit, (since I am still thy care,)
My Parents names!
If I have yet a Father, let me know
To whose old age my humble youth must bow;
And pay its duty, if he mortal be,
Or Adoration, if a Mind like thee.

Then, what I may, I'll tell. --
From ancient Blood thy Fathers Linage springs,
Thy Mothers thou deriv'st from stemms of Kings.
A Christian born, and born again, that day,
When sacred Water washed thy sins away.
Yet bred in errors thou dost mis-imploy
That strength Heaven gave thee, and its flock destroy.

By Reason, Man a Godhead may discern:
But, how he would be worshipped, cannot learn.

Heaven does not now thy Ignorance reprove;
But warns thee from known Crimes of lawless Love.
That Crime thou know, and knowing, dost not shun,
Shall an unknown, and greater Crime pull on:
But, if thus warned, thou leave this cursed place,
Then shalt thou know the Author of thy Race.
Once more I'll see thee: when my charge is done,
Far hence, upon the Mountains of the Moon
Is my abode, where Heaven and Nature smile;
And strew with Flowers the secret bed of Nyle.
Blessed Souls are there refined, and made more bright,
And, in the shades of Heaven, prepared for light.

Oh Heaven, how dark a Riddle's thy Decree,
Which bounds our Wills, yet seems to leave 'em free!
Since thy fore-knowledge cannot be in vain,
Our choice must be what thou did first ordain:
Thus, like a Captive in an Isle confined,
Man walks at large, a Prisoner of the Mind:
Wills all his Crimes, while Heaven the Indictment draws;
And, pleading guilty, justifies the Laws. --
Let Fate be Fate; the Lover and the Brave
Are ranked, at least, above the vulgar Slave:
Love makes me willing to my death to run;
And courage scorns the death it cannot shun.

My Light will sure discover those who talk; --
Who dares to interrupt my private Walk?

He who dares love; and for that love must die,
And, knowing this, dares yet love on, am I.

That love which you can hope, and I can pay
May be received and given in open day;
My praise and my esteem you had before:
And you have bound you self to ask no more.

Yes, I have bound my self, but will you take
The forfeit of that bond which force did make?

You know you are from recompense debarred,
But purest love can live without reward.

Pure love had need be to it self a feast;
For, like pure Elements, 'twill nourish least.

It therefore yields the only pure content;
For it, like Angels, needs no Nourishment.
To eat and drink can no perfection be;
All Appetite implies Necessity:

'Twere well, if I could like a spirit live:
But do not Angels food to Mortals give. --
What if some Daemon should my death foreshow,
Or bid me change, and to the Christians go,
Will you not think I merit some reward,
When I my love above my life regard?

In such a case your change must be allow'd;
I would, my self, dispense with what you vowed.

Were I to dye that hour when I possess;
This minute should begin my happiness.

The thoughts of death your passion would remove.
Death is a cold encouragement to love!

No; from my joys I to my death would run;
And think the business of my life ^ell done.
But I should walk a discontented Ghost,
If flesh and blood were to no purpose lost.

You love me not, Almanzor; if you did,
You would not ask what honour must forbid.

And what is Honour, but a Love well hid?

Yes; 'tis the Conscience of an Act well done:
Which gives us power our own desires to shun.
The strong, and secret curb of headlong Will;
The self reward of good; and shame of ill.

These, Madam, are the Maxims of the Day;
When Honour's present, and when Lov's away.
The duty of poor Honour were too hard,
In Arms all day, at night to mount the Guard.
Let him in pity, now, to rest retire;
Let these soft hours be watched by warm desire.

Guards, who all day on painful duty keep,
In dangers are not privileged to sleep.

And with what dangers are you threatened here?
Am I alas, a foe for you to fear?
See, Madam, at your feet this Enemy:
Without your pity and your Love I die.

Rise, rise: and do not empty hopes pursue:
Yet think, that I deny my self not you.

A happiness so nigh, I cannot bear:
My loves too fierce; and you too killing fair.
I grow enraged to see such Excellence:
If words so much disordered, give offence,
My love's too full of zeal to think of sense.
Be you like me; dull Reason hence remove;
And tedious forms; and give a loose to love.
Love eagerly; let us be gods to night;
And do not, with half yielding, dash delight.

Thou strong Seducer, Opportunity!
Of womankind, half are undone by thee!
Though I resolve I will not be misled,
I wish I had not heard what you had sed!
I cannot be so wicked to comply;
And, yet, am most unhappy to deny!
Away:

-- I will not move me from this place:
I can take no denial from that face!

If I could yield; (but think not that I will:)
You and my self, I in revenge, should kill.
For I should hate us both, when it were done:
And would not to the shame of life be won.

Live but to night; and trust to morrows mind:
Here that can come, there's a whole life behind.
Methinks already crowned with joys, I lie;
Speechless and breathless in an Ecstasy.
Not absent in one thought: I am all there:
Still close; yet wishing still to be more near.

Deny your own desires: for it will be
Too little now to be denied by me.
Will he who does all great, all noble seem,
Be lost and forfeit to his own Esteem?
Will he, who may with Heroes claim a place,
Belie that fame, and to himself be base?
Think how August and god-like you did look
When my defence, unbrib'd you undertook.
But, when an Act so brave you disavow,
How little, and how mercenary now!

Are, then, my Services no higher prized?
And can I fall so low to be despised?

Yes; for whatever may be bought, is low,
And you your self, who sell your self, are so.
Remember the great Act you did this day:
How did your Love to Virtue then give way?
When you gave freedom to my Captive Lord;
That Rival, who possessed what you adored.
Of such a deed what price can there be made?
Think well: is that an Action to be paid?
It was a Miracle of Virtue shovvn:
And vvonders are with wonder paid alone.
And would you all that secret joy of mind
Which great Souls only in great actions find,
All that, for one tumultuous Minute loose?

I would that minute before ages choose.
Praise is the pay of Heaven for doing good;
But Loves the best return for flesh and blood.

You've moved my heart, so much, I can deny
No more; but know, Almanzor, I can dye.
Thus far, my virtue yields; if I have shown
More Love, than what I ought, let this atone.

Hold, hold!
Such fatal proofs of love you shall not give:
Deny me; hate me; (both are just) but live!
Your Virtue I will ne'er disturb again:
Nor dare to ask, for fear I should obtain.

'Tis generous to have conquered your desire;
You mount above your wish; and loose it higher.
There's pride in virtue; and a kindly heat:
Not feverish, like your love; but full as great.
Farewell; and may our loves hereafter, be,
But Image-like, to heighten piety.

'Tis time I should be gone!
Alas I am but half converted yet:
All I resolve, I with one look, forget.
And, like a Lyon whom no Arts can tame;
Shall tear, even those, who would my rage reclaim.

It is enough; you've brought me to this place:
Here stop: and urge no further, my disgrace.
Kill me: in death your mercy will be seen,
But make me not a Captive to the Queen:

'Tis therefore I this punishment provide:
This only can revenge me on your pride.
Prepare to suffer what you shun in vain.
And know, you now are to obey, not reign.

Help; help: oh heaven, some help.

-- Make haste before,
And intercept her passage to the door:

Villains, what Act are you attempting here!

I thank thee, heaven; some succour does appear.

With what ill fate, my good design is cursed!

We have no time to think: dispatch him first.

Oh for a sword!

Ruined!

-- Undone!

-- And which is worst of all
He escaped:

-- I hear 'em loudly call.

Your fear will loose you: call as loud as they.
I have not time to teach you what to say:
The Court, will in a moment, all be here.
But second what I say, and do not fear.
Call help; run that way; leave the rest to me.

What can the cause of all this tumult be?
And what the meaning of that naked sword?

I'll tell, when fear will so much breath afford.
The Queen and Abdelmelech. -- 'twill not out --
Even I, who saw it, of the truth yet doubt,
It seems so strange.

-- Did she not name the Queen!
Haste; speak:

-- How dare I speak what I have seen!
With Hamet, and with Zulema, I went
To pay both theirs, and my acknowledgement
To Almahide; and by her Mouth implore
Your Clemency, our Fortunes to restore.
We chose this hour, which we believed most free,
When she retired from noise and company.
The Antechamber past, we gently knocked,
(Unheard it seems) but found the Lodgings locked.
In duteous silence while we waited there,
We, first a noise, and then long whispers hear:
Yet thought it was the Queen at Prayers alone,
Till she distinctly said, -- If this were known
My Love, what shame, what danger would ensue!
Yet I (and sighed) could venture more for you!

O Heaven, what do I hear, ( Almanz.) Let her go on.

And how, (then murmured in a bigger tone,
Another voice) and how should it be known?
This hour is from your Court Attendants, free:
The King suspects Almanzor; but not me.
I find her drift: Hamet be Confident;
Second her words; and fear not the event.

Welcome, my only Friends; Behold in me
O Kings, behold the effects of Clemency!
See here the gratitude of pardoned foes!
That life I gave 'em, they for me expose!

Though Abdelmelech was our Friend before,
When Duty called us he was so no more.

Damn your delay, you Torturers proceed,
I will not hear one word, but Almahide.

When you, within, the Traitors voice did hear,
What did you, then?

-- I durst not trust my Ear:
But, peeping through the Key-hole, I espied
The Queen; and Abdelmelech by her side:
She on the Couch, he on her bosom lay,
Her Hand, about his Neck, his Head did stay,
And, from his Forehead wiped the drops away.

Go on, go on my friends, to clear my doubt
I hope I shall have life to hear you out.

What had been, Sir, you may suspect too well:
What follow'd, Modesty forbids to tell:
Seeing, what we had thought beyond belief,
Our hearts so swelled with anger and with grief,
That, by plain force, we strove the door to break:
He, fearful, and with guilt, or Love, grown weak,
Just as we entered, escaped the other way:
Nor did the amazed Queen behind him stay:

His sword, in so much haste he could not mind:
But left this witness of his Crime behind.

O proud, ungrateful, faithless, womankind!
How changed, and what a Monster am I made!
My Love, my Honour, ruined and betrayed!

Your Love and Honour! mine are ruined worse:
Furies and Hell what right have you to curse!
Dull, Husband as you are, --
What can your Love, or what your Honour be!
I am her Lover, and she's false to me.

Go, when the Authors of my shame are found,
Let 'em be taken instantly, and bound:
They shall be punished as our Laws require:
'Tis just, that Flames should be condemned to fire.
This, with the dawn of morning shall be done.

You haste too much her Execution.
Her Condemnation ought to be deferred:
With justice, none can be condemned unheard.

A formal Process, tedious is, and long:
Besides, the evidence is full and strong.

The Law demands two witnesses; and she
Is cast; (for which Heaven knows I grieve) by three.

Hold, Sir; since you so far insist on Law;
We can, from thence, one just advantage draw:
That Law, which dooms Adultresses to die,
Gives Champions, too, to slandered Chastity.

And how dare you, who from my Bounty live,
Entrench upon my Loves Prerogative.
Your courage in your own concernments try;
Brothers are things remote while I am by.

I knew not you thus far her cause would own;
And must not suffer you to fight alone:
Let two to two in equal combat join;
You vindicate her Person, I her Line.

Of all Mankind Almanzor has least right
In her defence, who wronged his Love, to fight.

'Tis false; she is not ill, nor can she be;
She must be Chaste, because she's loved by me.

Dare you, what Sense and Reason prove, deny?

When she's in question, Sense and Reason lye.

For Truth, and for my injured Sovereign,
What I have said, I will to death maintain.

So foul a falsehood, who ever justifies
Is basely born; and, like a Villain, lies.
In witness of that Truth, be this my Gage.

I take it; and despise a Traitors Rage.

The Combat's yours; a Guard the Lists surround;
Then raise a Scaffold in the encompassed ground:
And, by it, piles of Wood; in whose just fire,
Her Champion's slain, the Adulteress shall expire.

We ask no favour, but what Arms will yield:

Choose then two equal Judges of the Field,
Next morning shall decide the doubtful strife;
Condemn the unchaste, or quit the virtuous Wife.

But I am both ways, cursed. --
For Almahide must dye, if I am slain;
Or, for my Rival, I the Conquest gain.

I Have out-fac'd my self: and justified
What I knew false to all the World, beside,
She was as faithless as her Sex could be:
And now I am alone, she's so to me.
She's fallen! and now where shall we virtue find;
She was the last that stood of Woman-kind:
Could she so holily my flames remove;
And fall that hour to Abdelmelechs Love?
Yet her protection I must undertake;
Not now for Love; but for my Honours sake.
That moved me first, and must oblige me still,
My cause is good, however hers be ill;
I'll leave her, when she's freed; and let it be
Her punishment, she could be false to me.

Heaven is not Heaven; nor are there Deities.
There is some new Rebellion in the Skies.
All that was Good and Holy, is dethroned,
And Lust, and Rapine are for justice owned.

'Tis true; what justice in that Heaven can be
Which thus affronts me with the sight of thee!
Why must I be from just Revenge debarred!
Chains are thy Arms, and Prisons are thy Guard:
The death thou dy'st may to a Husband be
A satisfaction; but 'tis none to me.
My Love would justice to it self afford;
But now thou creep'st to Death, below my Sword.

This threatening would show better, were I free,

No; were it thou freed, I would not threaten thee.
This arm should then. -- But now it is too late! --
I could redeem thee to a nobler Fate.
As some huge Rock
Rent from its Quarry, does the Waves divide,
So I, --
W'ould sowze upon thy guards, and dash 'em wide:
Then, to my rage left naked and alone,
Thy too much freedom thou should soon bemoan:
Dared, like a Lark, that on the open plain
Pursued and cuffd, seeks shelter now in vain:
So on the ground would thou expecting lye,
Not daring to afford me victory.
But, yet thy fate's not ripe: it is decreed
Before thou dy'st that Almahide be freed.
My honour first her danger shall remove,
And then, revenge on thee my injured love.

See how the gazing people crowd the place:
All gaping to be filled with my disgrace.
That shout, like the hoarse peals of Vultures rings,
When, over fighting fields, they beat their wings.
Let never woman trust in Innocence.
Or think her Chastity its own defence;
Mine has betrayed me to this public shame:
And virtue, which I served, is but a name.

Leave then that shadow, and for succour fly
To him, we serve, the Christians Deity.
Vertue's no god, nor has she power divine:
But he protects it who did first enjoin.
Trust, then, in him, and from his grace, implore
Faith to believe what rightly we adore.

Thou Power unknown, if I have erred forgive:
My infancy was taught what I believe.
But if thy Christians truly worship thee,
Let me thy godhead in thy succour see:
So shall thy Justice in my safety shine,
And all my days, which thou shalt add, be thine.

You Judges of the field, first take your place:
The accusers and accused bring face to face.
Set guards, and let the Lists be opened wide,
And may just Heaven assist the juster side.

What not one tender look, one passing word;
Farewell, my much unkind, but still loved Lord!
Your Throne was for my humble fate too high;
And therefore Heaven thinks fit that I should dye.
My story be forgot when I am dead;
Least it should fright some other from your bed:
And, to forget me, may you soon adore
Some happier maid (yet none could love you more.)
But may you never think me innocent;
Least it should cause you trouble to repent.

'Tis pity so much beauty should not live;
Yet, I too much am injured to forgive.

Say for what end you thus in arms appear?
What are your names, and what demand you here?

The Zegry's ancient Race our Linage claims;
And Zulema and Hamet are our names.
Like Loyal Subjects in these lists we stand,
And Justice in our Kings behalf demand.

For whom, in witness of what both have seen,
Bound by our duty, we appeach the Queen
And Abdelmelech, of adultery.

Which, like true Knights we will maintain, or die.

Swear on the Alcoran your cause is right;
And Mahomet so prosper you in fight.

Say for what end you thus in arms appear:
What are your names, and what demand you here?

Ozmyn is his, Almanzor is my name;
We come as Champions of the Queens fair fame:

To prove these Zegrys, like false Trators, lye;
Which, like true Knights, we will maintain, or dye.

Madam, do you for Champions take these two;
By their success to live or dye;

-- I do.

Swear on the Alcoran your Cause is right;
And Mahomet so prosper you in fight.

If you 'orecome, let neither of 'em live:
But use with care the advantages I give
One of their swords in sight shall useless be;
The Bearer of it is suborned by me.

Now, Principals and Seconds, all advance
And each of you assist his fellows chance.

The wind and Sun we equally divide;
So, let the event of Arms the truth decide.
The chances of the fight, and every wound,
The trumpets, on the Victors part, resound.

Our difference now shall soon determined be:

Hold, Traitor, and defend thy self from me.

I must make haste some remedy to find: --
Treason, Almanzor, treason; look behind.

Now triumph in thy sisters treachery.

Hold, hold; I have enough to make me dye,
But, that I may in peace resign my breath,
I must confess my crime before my death.
Mine is the guilt; the Queen is innocent;
I loved her; and, to compass my intent,
Used force, which Abdelmelech did prevent.
The lye my Sister forged: But, oh my fate
Comes on too soon, and I repent too late.
Fair Queen, forgive; and let my penitence
Expiate some part of. --

-- Even thy whole offence!

If ought remains in the Sultana's cause,
I here am ready to fulfil the Laws.

The Law is fully satisfied; and we
Pronounce the Queen and Abdelmelech free.

Heaven thou art just!

Before we pay our thanks, or show our joy;
Let us our needful Charity employ.
Some skilful Surgeon speedily be found,
To apply fit Remedies to Ozmyn's wound.
That be my charge; my Linen I will tear:
Wash it with Tears, and bind it with my Hair.

With how much pleasure I my pains endure!
And bless the wound which causes such a cure.

Some, from the place of Combat bear the slain:
Next Lyndaraxa's death I should ordain:
But let her who this mischief did contrive,
For ever banished from Granada live.

Thou should have punished more, or not at all:
By her thou hast not ruined, thou shalt fall.
The Zegry's shall revenge their branded Line:
Betray their Gate, and with the Christians join.

The thanks thus paid, which first to Heaven were due,
My next, Almanzor, let me pay to you.
Somewhat there is, of more concernment, too,
Which 'tis not fit you should, in public, know.
First let your wounds be dressed with speedy care;
And then you shall the important Secret share.

When e're you speak,
Were my wounds mortal, they should still bleed on;
And I would listen till my life were gone:
My Soul, should, even for your last accent, stay;
And then shoot out, and with such speed obey;
It should not bait at Heaven to stop its way.

'Tis true, Almanzor did her Honour save;
But yet what private business can they have!
Such freedom, virtue will not sure, allow;
I cannot clear my heart; but must my brow:
Welcome again my Virtuous, Loyal, Wife;
Welcome, to Love, to Honour, and to Life. --
You seem --
As if you from a loathed embrace did go!

Then briefly I will speak, (since you must know
What to the World my future Acts will show:)
But, hear me first, and then my reasons weigh:
'Tis known how Duty led me to obey
My Fathers choice; and how I since did live,
You, Sir, can best your testimony give.
How to your aid I have Almanzor brought,
When by rebellious Crowds your life was sought;
Then, how I bore your causeless Jealousy,
(For I must speak;) and after set you free,
When you were Prisoner by the chance of war;
These, sure are proofs of Love. --

-- I grant they are.

And cou d you, then, O cruelly unkind,
So ill reward such tenderness of mind!
Could you, denying what our Laws afford
The meanest subject, on a Traitors word,
Unheard, condemn, and suffer me to go
To death, and yet no common pity show!

Love filled my heart even to the brim before:
And then, with too much jealousy, boiled over.

Be it Love or Jealousy, tis such a Crime,
That I'm forewarned to trust a second time.
Know then, my Prayers to Heaven, shall never cease
To crown your Arms in War; your Wars with Peace:
But, from this day, I will not know your Bed.
Though Almahide still lives, your wife is dead:
And, with her, dies a Love so pure and true,
It could be killed by nothing but by you.

Yes, you will spend your life, in Prayers for me;
And yet this hour my hated Rival see.
She might a Husbands Jealousy forgive;
But she will only for Almanzor live.
It is resolved, I will, my self, provide
That vengeance, which my useless Laws denied:
And, by Almanzor's death, at once, remove
The Rival of my Empire, and my Love.

How much, Almanzor, to your aid I owe,
Unable to repay, I blush to know.
Yet, forced by need, e're I can clear that score,
I, like ill debtors, come to borrow more.

Your new Commands I on my knees attend:
I was created for no other end.
Born to be yours, I do by Nature, serve,
And, like the labouring Beast, no thanks deserve.

Yet first your Virtue to your succour call,
For, in this hard Command, you'll need it all.

I stand prepared; and whatsoever it be,
Nothing is hard to him who loves like me.

Then know, I from your Love must yet implore
One proof: -- that you would never see me more.

I must confess,
For this last stroke I did no Guard provide;
I could suspect no Foe was near that side:
From Winds and thickening Clouds we Thunder fear:
None dread it from that quarter which is clear.
And I would fain believe, 'tis but your Art
To show
You knew where deepest you could wound my Heart.

So much respect is to your passion due,
That sure I could not practise Arts on you.
But, that you may not doubt what I have sed,
This hour I have renounced my Husbands Bed,
Judge then how much my Fame would injured be,
If, leaving him, I should a Lover see!

If his unkindness have deserved that Curse,
Must I for loving well be punished worse?

Neither your Love nor Merits I compare;
But my unspotted Name must be my care.

I have this day established its renown.

Would you so soon, what you have raised, throw down?

But, Madam, Is not yours a greater Guilt
To ruin him who has that Fabrique built?

No Lover should his Mistress Prayers withstand:
Yet you contemn my absolute Command.

'Tis not contempt,
When your Command is issued out too late:
'Tis past my power; and all beyond is fate.
I scarce could leave you when to Exile sent,
Much less when now recalled from banishment:
For if that heat your glances cast, were strong;
Your Eyes like Glasses, Fire, when held so long.

Then, since you needs will all my weakness know,
I love you; and so well, that you must go:
I am so much obliged; and have withal,
A Heart so boundless and so prodigal,
I dare not trust my self or you, to stay,
But, like frank gamesters, must forswear the play.

Fate thou art kind to strike so hard a blow;
I am quite stunned; and past all feeling now.
Yet -- can you tell me you have power and will
To save my life, and, at that instant, kill!

This, had you stayed, you never must have known:
But now you go, I may with honour own.

But, Madam, I am forced to disobey:
In your defence, my honour bids me stay.
I promised to secure your life and throne;
And, heaven be thanked, that work is yet undone.

I here make void that promise which you made:
For now I have no farther need of aid:
That vow which to my plighted Lord was given,
I must not break; but may transfer to Heaven:
I will with Vestals live:
There needs no guard at a Religious door;
Few will disturb the praying and the poor.

Let me but near that happy Temple stay,
And, through the grates, peep on you once a day.
To famished hope I would no banquet give:
I cannot starve, and wish but just to live.
Thus, as a drowning man
Sinks often, and does still more faintly rise;
With his last hold catching what here he spies;
So, fallen from those proud hopes I had before,
Your Aid I for a dying wretch implore.

I cannot your hard destiny withstand;
But slip, like bending rushes, from your hand:
Sink all at once, since you must sink at last.

Can you that last relief of sight remove,
And thrust me out the utmost line of love!
Then, since my hopes of happiness are gone,
Denied all favours, I will seyze this one.

My just revenge no longer I'll forbear;
I've seen too much; I need not stay to hear.

As a small Shower
To the parched earth does some refreshment give,
So, in the strength of this, one day I'll live:
A day: -- a year -- an age -- for ever now;
I feel from every touch a new Soul flow.
My hoped Eternity of joy is past!
'Twas insupportable, and could not last.
Were heaven not made of less, or duller joy,
'Twould break each Minute, and it self destroy.

This, this is he for whom thou did deny
To share my bed: -- Let 'em together dye.

Hear me, my Lord. --

-- Your flattering Arts are vain:
Make haste; and execute what I ordain.

Cut piece-meal in this cause,
From every wound I should new Vigour take:
And every limb should new Almanzors make.

What angry God, to exercise his spite,
Has armed your left hand to cut off your right!
Hast, not to give but to prevent a Fate:
The foes are entered at the Elvira gate:
False Lyndaraxa 'has the Town betrayed,
And all the Zegrys give the Spaniards aid.

O mischief, not suspected nor foreseen!

Already they have gained the Zacatin,
And, thence, the Vivarambla place possessed:
While our faint Soldiers scarce defend the rest.
The Duke of Arcos does one squadron head;
The next by Ferdinand himself is led.

Now brave Almanzor, be a god again;
Above our Crimes, and your own passions reign:
My Lord has been, by Jealousy, misled
To think I was not faithful to his bed.
I can forgive him though my death he sought;
For too much love can never be a fault.
Protect him, then; and what to his defence
You give not, give to clear my innocence.

Listen sweet Heaven; and all ye blessed above
Take rules of Virtue from a Mortal love.
You've raised my Soul; and if it mount more high,
'Tis as the Wren did on the Eagle fly.
Yes, I once more will my revenge neglect:
And whom you can forgive, I can protect.

How hard a fate is mine, still doomed to shame:
I make Occasions for my Rivals fame!

Already more than half the Town is gained:
But there is yet a doubtful fight maintain d;

The fierce young King the entered does attacque,
And the more fierce Almanzor drives 'em back.

The valiant Moors like raging Lyons, fight.
Each youth encouraged by his Ladies sight.

I will advance with such a shining train,
That Moorish beauties shall oppose in vain:
Into the press of clashing swords we'll go;
And where the darts-fly thickest, seek the foe.

May Heaven, which has inspired this generous thought,
Avert those dangers you have boldly sought:
Call up more troops; the women, to our shame,
Will ravish from the men their part of fame.

Fair Lyndaraxa, and the Zegry line
Have led their forces with your troops to join:
The adverse part, which obstinately fought,
Are broke; and Abdelmelech prisoner brought.

Fair Lyndaraxa and her friends shall find
The effects of an obliged and grateful mind.

But, marching by the Vivarambla place,
The combat carried a more doubtful face;
In that vast square the Moors and Spaniards met;
Where the fierce conflict is continued yet.
But with advantage on the adverse side,
Whom fierce Almanzor does to conquest guide.

With my Castilian foot I'll meet his rage;
But these loud clamours better news presage:

Granada now is yours; and there remain
No Moors, but such as own the power of Spain.
That squadron which their King in person led,
We charged; but found Almanzor in their head.
Three several times we did the Moors attacque,
And thrice, with slaughter, did he drive us back.
Our troops then shrunk; and still we lost more ground:
Till, from our Queen, we needful succour found.
Her Guards to our assistance bravely flew,
And, with fresh vigour, did the fight renew.
At the same time --
Did Lyndaraxa with her troops appear,
And, while we charged the front, engaged the rear.
Then fell the King (slain by a Zegry's hand:)

How could he, such united force withstand!

Discouraged with his death, the Moorish powers
Fell back; and, falling back, were pressed by ours.
But, as when winds and rain together crowed,
They swell till they have burst the bladdered cloud:
And first the Lightning, flashing deadly clear,
Flies, falls, consumes, here scarce it does appear:
So, from his shrinking troops, Almanzor flew;
Each blow gave wounds, and with each wound he slew.
His force at once I envied and admired;
And, rushing forward, where my men retired,
Advanced alone.

-- You hazarded too far
Your person, and the fortune of the War.

Already, both our arms for fight did bare,
Already held 'em threatening in the air:
When Heaven (it must be Heaven) my sight, did guide,
To view his arm, upon whose wrist, I spied
A ruby Cross in Diamond bracelets tied.
And just above it, in the brawnier part,
By nature was engraved a bloody Heart.
Struck with these tokens, which so well I knew,
And stagg'ring back, some paces I withdrew;
He follow'd; and supposed it was my fear:
When, from above, a shrill voice reached his ear;
Strike not thy father, it was heard to cry;
Amazed; and casting round his wondering eye,
He stopped: then, thinking that his fears were vain.
He lifted up his thundering arm again:
Again the voice withheld him from my death;
Spare, spare his life, it cried, who gave thee breath*
Once more he stopped, then threw his sword away;
Blessed shade, he said, I hear thee, I obey
Thy sacred voice: then, in the sight of all,
He at my feet, I on his neck did fall.

O blessed Event! --

-- The Moors no longer fought;
But all their safety, by submission, sought:
Mean time, my Son grew faint with loss of blood:
And, on his bending sword supported, stood.
Yet, with a voice beyond his strength, he cried,
Lead me to live, or dye, by Almahide.

I am not for his wounds less grieved than you*
For if, what now my Soul divines, prove true,
This is that son, whom in his Infancy
You lost, when by my father forced to fly.

His Sisters beauty did my passion move,
(The crime for which I suffered was my love.)
Our marriage known, to Sea we took our flight,
There, in a storm, Almanzor first saw light
On his right Arm, a bloody heart was grav'd,
(The mark by which this day, my life was saved.)
The Bracelets and the Cross, his mother tied
About his wrist, here she in childbed died.
How we were Captives made, when she was dead;
And how Almanzor was in Africque bred,
Some other hour you may at leisure hear,
For see, the Queen, in triumph, does appear.

All stories, which Granada's Conquest tell,
Shall celebrate the name of Isabel.
Your Ladies too, who in their Countries cause,
Led on the men, shall share in your applause*
And for your sakes, henceforward, I ordain,
No Ladies dower shall questioned be in Spain.
Fair Lyndaraxa, for the help she lent,
Shall, under Tribute, have this Government.

O Heaven, that I should live to see this day!

You murmur now, but you shall soon obey.
I knew this Empire to my fate was owed:
Heaven held it back as long as here it could.
For thee, base wretch, I want a torture yet --
-- I'll cage thee, thou shalt be my Bajazet.
I on no pavement but on thee will tread;
And, when I mount, my foot shall know thy head.

This first shall know thy heart.

-- Oh! I am slain!

Now boast, thy Country is betrayed to Spain.

Look to the Lady. -- Seize the Murdere.

I'll do my self that Justice I did her.
Thy blood I to thy ruined Country give,
But love too well thy murder to out live.
Forgive a love, excused by its excess,
Which, had it not been cruel, had been less.
Condemn my passion, then, but pardon me;
And think I murdered him, who murdered thee.

Dye for us both; I have not leisure now;
A Crown is come; and will not fate allow:
And yet* I fell something like death, is near:
My guards, my guards; --
Let not that ugly skeleton appear.
Sure destiny mistakes; this death's not mine;
She dotes; and meant to cut another line.
Tell her I am a Queen; -- but 'tis too late;
Dying, I charge Rebellion on my fate:
Bow down ye slaves --
Bow quickly down, and your Submission show.
I'm pleased to taste an Empire here I go.

She's dead and here her proud ambition ends.

Such fortune still, such black designs attends.

Remove those mournful Objects from our eyes;
And see performed their funeral Obsequies.

See here that Son, whom I with pride call mine;
And who dishonours not your royal line.
I'm now secure this Sceptre, which I gain,
Shall be continued in the power of Spain;
Since he, who could alone my foes defend,
By birth and honour is become my friend,
Yet I can own no joy; nor Conquest boast,
While in this blood I see how dear it cost.

This honour to my veins new blood will bring:
Sreams cannot fail, fed by so high a Spring:
But all Court-Customs I so little know
That I may fail in those respects I owe.
I bring a heart which homage never knew;
Yet it finds something of it self in you:
Something so kingly, that my haughty mind
Is drawn to yours; because 'tis of a kind.

And yet, that Soul, which bears it self so high,
If fame be true, admits a Sovereignty.
This Queen, in her fair eyes, such fetters brings,
As chain that heart, which scorns the power of Kings.

Little of charm in these sad eyes appears;
If they had any, now 'tis lost in tears.
A Crown, and Husband ravished in one day;
Excuse a grief, I cannot choose but pay.

Have Courage, Madam, heaven has joys in store
To recompense those losses you deplore.

I know your God can all my woes redress;
To him I made my vows in my distress.
And what a Misbeliever vowed this day,
Though not a Queen, a Christian yet shall pay.

That Christian name you shall receive from me;
And Isabella of Granada be.

This blessed change, we all with joy receive:
And beg to learn that faith which you believe.

With reverence for those holy rites prepare;
And all commit your fortunes to my care.

You, Madam, by that Crown, you loose, may gain,
If you accept a Coronet of Spain;
Of which Almanzor's father stands possessed.

May you in him; and he in you be blessed.

I owe my life and honour to his sword;
But owe my love to my departed Lord.

Thus, when I have no living force to dread,
Fate find's me Enemies amongst the dead.
'Ime now to conquer Ghosts; and to destroy,
The strong impressions of a Bridal joy.

You've yet a greater Foe, than these can be;
Virtue opposes you and Modesty.

From a false fear that Modesty does grow;
And thinks true love, because 'tis fierce, its foe.
'Tis but the wax whose seals on Virgins stay:
Let it approach Loves fire, 'twill melt away.
But I have lived too long; I never knew
When fate was conquered, I must combat you.
I thought to climb the steep ascent of Love;
But did not think to find a foe above.
'Tis time to dye, when you my bar must be,
Whose aid alone could give me Victory.
Without --
I'll pull up all the sluices of the flood:
And Love, within, shall boil out all my blood.

Fear not your Love should find so sad success;
While I have power to be your Patroness.
I am her Parent, now, and may command
So much of duty, as to give her hand.

Madam, I never can dispute your power,
Or, as a Parent, or a Conqueror.
But, when my year of Widowhood expires,
Shall yield to your Commands and his desires.

Move swiftly, Sun; and fly a lovers pace;
Leave weeks and months behind thee in thy race!

Mean time, you shall my Victories pursue;
The Moors in woods and mountains to subdue.

The toils of war shall help to wear each day;
And dreams of love shall drive my nights away.
Our Banners to the Alhambra's turrets bear;
Then, wave our Conquering Crosses in the Air;
And Cry, with shouts of Triumph; live and reign,
Great Ferdinand and Isabel of Spain.

THey, who have best succeeded on the Stage,
Have still conformed their Genius to their Age.
Thus Jonson did Mechanic humour show,
When men were dull, and conversation low.
Then, Comedy was faultless, but 'twas course:
Cobbs Tankard was a jest, and Otter's horse.
And as their Comedy, their love was mean:
Except, by chance, in some one laboured Scene,
Which must atone for an ill-written Play.
They rose; but at their height could seldom stay.
Fame then was cheap, and the first commer sped;
And they have kept it since, by being dead,
But were they now to write when Critiques weigh
Each Line, and every word, throughout a Play,
None of 'em, no not Jonson, in his height
Could pass, without allowing grains for weight.
Think it not envy that these truths are told,
Our Poet's not malicious, though he's bold.
'Tis not to brand 'em that their faults are shown,
But, by their errors, to excuse his own.
If Love and Honour now are higher raised,
'Tis not the Poet, but the Age is praised.
Wit's now ariv'd to a more high degree;
Our native Language more refined and free.
Our Ladies and our men now speak more wit.
In conversation, than those Poets writ.
Then, one of these is, consequently, true;
That what this Poet writes comes short of you,
And imitates you ill, (which most he fears)
Or else his writing is not worse than theirs.
Yet, though you judge, (as sure the Critiques will)
That some before him writ with greater skill,
In this one praise he has their fame surpassed,
To please an Age more Gallant than the last.
THe promises of Authors, that they will write again, are in effect, a
threatening of their Readers with some new impertinence, and they who perform
not what they promise, will have their pardon on easy terms. 'Tis from this
consideration that I could be glad to spare you the trouble which I am now
giving you, of a Preface, if I were not obliged by many reasons to write
somewhat concerning our present Plays, and those of our predecessors on the
English stage. The truth is, I have so far engaged my self in a bold Epilogue
to this Play, wherein I have somewhat taxed the former writing, that it was
necessary for me either not to print it, or to show that I could defend it.
Yet, I would so maintain my opinion of the present Age, as not to be wanting in
my veneration for the past: I would ascribe to dead Authors their just praises,
in those things wherein they have excelled us: and in those wherein we contend
with them for the pre-eminence, I would acknowledge our advantages to the Age,
and claim no victory from our wit. This being what I have proposed to my self,
I hope I shall not be thought arrogant when I inquire into their Errors. For,
we live in an Age, so Sceptical, that as it determines little, so it takes
nothing from Antiquity on trust and I profess to have no other ambition in this
Essay, than that Poetry may not go backward, when all other Arts and Sciences
are advancing. Whoever censures me for this inquiry, let him hear his Character
from Horace: Ingeniis non ille favet plauditque sepultis,
Nostra sed impugnat; nos nostraque Lividus odit.


He favours not dead wits, but hates the living.

It was upbraided to that excellent Poet that he was an enemy to the writings
of his Predecessor Lucilius, because he had said, Lucilium luculentum fluere,
that he ran muddy: and that he ought to have retrenched from his Satyrs many
unnecessary verses. But Horace makes Lucilius himself to justify him from the
imputation of Envy, by telling you that he would have done the same had he
lived in an age which was more refined.

Si foret hoc nostrum, fato, delapsus in aevum,
Detraheret sibi multa, recideret omne quod ultra
Perfectum traheretur: c.
And, both in the whole course of that Satyr, and in his most admirable Epistle
to Augustus, he makes it his business to prove that Antiquity alone is no plea
for the excellency of a Poem: but, that one Age learning from another, the last
(if we can suppose an equality of wit in the writers,) has the advantage of
knowing more, and better than the former. and this I think is the state of the
question in dispute. It is therefore my part to make it clear, that the
Language, Wit, and Conversation of our Age are improved and refined above the
last: and then it will not be difficult, to inferr, that our Plays have
received some part of those advantages.

In the first place, therefore, it will be necessary to state, in general, what
this refinement is of which we treat: and that I think will not be defined
amiss: An improvement of our Wit, Language, and Conversation. or, an alteration
in them for the better.

To begin with Language. That an Alteration is lately made in ours or since the
Writers of the last Age (in which I comprehend Shakespeare, Fletcher and Ionson)
is manifest. Any man who reads those excellent Poets, and compares their
language with what is now written, will see it almost in every line. But, that
this is an Improvement of the Language, or an alteration for the better, will
not so easily be granted. For many are of a contrary opinion, that the English
tongue was then in the height of its perfection; that, from Ionsons time to
ours, it has been in a continual declination; like that of the Romans from the
Age of Virgil to Statius, and so downward to Claudian: of which, not only
Petronius, but Quintilian himself so much complains, under the person of
Secundus, in his famous Dialogue de causis corruptae cloquentiae.

But, to show that our Language is improved; and that those people have not a
just value for the Age in which they live, let us consider in what the
refinement of a language principally consists: that is, either in rejecting
such old words or phrases which are ill sounding, or improper, or in admitting
new, which are more proper, more sounding and more significant.

The Reader will easily take notice that when I speak of rejecting improper
words and phrases I mention not such as are Antiquated by custom only: and,
as I may say, without any fault of theirs: for in this case the refinement can
be but accidental: that is when the words and phrases which are rejected happen
to be improper. Neither would I be understood (when I speak of impropriety in
Language) either wholly to accuse the last Age, or to excuse the present; and
least of all my self. For all writers have their imperfections and failings*
but I may safely conclude in the general, that our improprieties are less
frequent, and less gross than theirs. One Testimony of this is undeniable, that
we are the first who have observed them. and, certainly, to observe errors is
a great step to the correcting of them. But, malice and partiality set apart,
let any man who understands English, read diligently the works of Shakespeare
and Fletcher; and I dare undertake that he will find, in every page either some
Solecism of Speech, or some notorious flaw in Sense: and yet these men are
reverenced when we are not forgiven. That their wit is great and many times
their expressions noble, envy it self cannot deny. -- Neque ego illis detrahere
ausim
Haerentem capiti, multa cum laud, coronam:
but the times were ignorant in which they lived. Poetry was then, if not in
its infancy among us, at least not arrived its vigour and maturity: witness the
lameness of their Plots: many of which, especially those which they writ first,
(for even that Age refined it self in some measure,) were made up of some
ridiculous, incoherent story, which, in one Play many times took up the
business of an Age. I suppose I need not name Pericles Prince of Tyre, nor the
Historical Plays of Shakespeare. Besides many of the rest as the Winters Tale,
Love's labour lost, Measure for Measure, which were either grounded on
impossibilities, or at least, so meanly written, that the Comedy neither caused
your mirth, nor the serious part your concernment. If I would expatiate on this
Subject, I could easily demonstrate that our admired Fletcher, who writ after
him, neither understood correct Plotting, nor that which they call the Decorum
of the Stage. I would not search in his worst Plays for examples: he who will
consider his Philaster, his Humorous Lieutenant, his Faithful Shepherdess; and
many others which I could name, will find them much below the applause which is
now given them. he will see Philaster wounding his Mistress, and afterwards his
Boy, to save himself: Not to mention the Clown who enters immediately, and not
only has the advantage of the Combat against the Hero, but diverts you from
your serious concernment, with his ridiculous and absurd Raillery. In his
Humorous Lieutenant you find his Demetrius and Leoncius staying in the midst of
a routed Army to hear the cold mirth of the Lieutenant: and Demetrius
afterwards appearing with a Pistol in his hand, in the next Age to Alexander
the Great. And for his Shepherd, he falls twice into the former indecency of
wounding Women. but these absurdities, which those Poets committed, may more
properly be called the Ages fault than theirs. for, besides the want of
Education and Learning, (which was their particular unhappiness) they wanted
the benefit of converse. but of that, I shall speak hereafter, in a place more
proper for it. Their Audiences knew no better: and therefore were satisfied
with what they brought. Those who call theirs the Golden Age of Poetry, have
only this reason for it, that they were then content with Acorns, before they
knew the use of Bread: or that (...) was become a Proverb. They had many who
admired them, and few who blamed them. and, certainly, a severe Critique is the
greatest help to a good Wit. he does the Office of a Friend, while he designs
that of an Enemy: and his malice keeps a Poet within those bounds, which the
Luxuriancy of his Fancy would tempt him to overleap.

But it is not their Plots which I meant, principally to tax: I was speaking of
their Sense and Language. and I dare almost challenge any man to show me a page
together, which is correct in both. As for Ben. Iohnson, I am loath to name
him, because he is a most Judicsous Writer; yet he very often falls into these
errors. And I once more beg the Readers pardon, for accusing him or them. Only
let him consider that I live in an age where my least faulrs are severely
censured: and that I have no way left to extenuate my failings but my showing
as great in those whom we admire. Coedimus, inque vicem praebemus cura
sagittis.
I cast my eyes but by chance on Catiline; and in the three or four first
pages, found enough to conclude that Iohnson writ not correctly. -- Let the
long hid seeds
Of treason, in thee, now shoot forth in deeds
Ranker than horror.
In reading some bombast speeches of Macbeth, which are not to be understood,
he used to say that it was horror. and I am much afraid that this is so. Thy
parricide, late on thy only Son,
After his mother, to make empty way
For thy last wicked Nuptials, worse than they
That blaze that act of thy incestuous life,
Which gained thee at once a daughter and a wife.
The Sense is here extremely perplexed: and I doubt the word They is false
Grammar. -- And be free
Not Heaven itself from thy impiety.
A Synchoesis, or ill placing of words, of which Tully so much complains in
Oratory. The Waves, and Dens of beasts could not receive
The bodies that those Souls were frighted from.
The Preposition in the end of the sentence; a common fault with him, and which
I have but lately observed in my own writings. What all the several ills that
visit earth,
Plague famine, fire, could not reach unto,
The Sword nor surfeits, let thy fury do.
Here are both the former faults: for, besides that the Preposition unto, is
placed last in the verse, and at the half period, and is redundant, there is
the former Synchoesis, in the words ( The Sword nor Surfeits) which in
construction ought to have been placed before the other.

Catiline says of Cethegus, that for his sake he would Go on upon the Gods;
kiss Lightning, wrest
The Engine from the Cyclops, and give fire
At face of a full cloud, and stand his ire.
To go on upon, is only to go on twice. to give fire at face of a full cloud,
was not understood in his own time: (and stand his ire) besides the antiquated
word ire there is the Article His, which makes false construction: and Giving
fire at the face of a cloud, is a perfect image of shooting, however it came to
be known in those days to Catiline. -- others there are
Whom Envy to the State draws and pulls on,
For Contumelies received; and such are sure ones.
Ones in the plural Number: but that is frequent with him; for he says, not
long after. Caesar and Crassus; if they be ill men,
Are Mighty ones.
Such Men they do not succour more the cause, c.
They redundant. Though Heaven should speak with all his wrath at once;
We should stand upright and unfear'd.


His is ill Syntax with Heaven: and by Unfear'd he means Unaffraid. words of a
quite contrary signification.

The Ports are open,
He perpetually uses Ports for Gates: which is an affected error in him, to
introduce Latin by the loss of the English Idiom: as in the Translation of
Tully's Speeches he usually does.

Well placing of Words for the sweetness of pronunciation was not known till
Mr. Waller introduced it: and therefore 'tis not to be wondered if Ben. Iohnson
has many such lines as these But being bred up in his father's needy fortunes,
Brought up in's sister's Prostitution, c.

But meanness of expression one would think not to be his error in a Tragedy,
which ought to be more high and sounding than any other kind of Poetry and yet
amongst many others in Catiline I find these four lines together: So Asia, thou
art cruelly even
With us, for all the blows thee given:
When we, whose Virtues conquered thee,
Thus, by thy Vices, ruined be.


Be there is false English, for are: though the Rhyme hides it.

But I am willing to close the Book, partly out of veneration to the Author,
partly out of weariness to pursue an argument which is so fruitful in so small
a compass. And what correctness, after this, can be expected from Shakespeare or
from Fletcher, who wanted that Learning and Care which Iohnson had? I will
therefore spare my own trouble of inquiring into their faults: who had they
lived now, had doubtless written more correctly. I suppose it will be enough
for me to affirm (as I think I safely may) that these and the like errors which
I taxed in the most correct of the last Age, are such, into which we do not
ordinarily fall. I think few of our present Writers would have left behind them
such a line as this, Contain your Spirit in more stricter bounds.


But that gross way of two Comparatives was then, ordinary: and therefore more
pardonable in Iohnson.

As for the other part of refining, which consists in receiving new Words and
Phrases, I shall not insist much on it. 'Tis obvious that we have admitted
many: some of which we wanted, and* therefore our Language is the richer for
them: as it would be by importation of Bullion: others are rather Ornamental
than Necessary; yet by their admission, the Language is become more courtly:
and our thoughts are better dressed. These are to be found scattered in the
Writers of our Age: and it is not my business to collect them. They who have
lately written with most care, have, I believe, taken the Rule of Horace for
their guide; that is, not to be too hasty in receiving of Words: but rather to
stay till Custom has made them familiar to us, Quem penes, arbitrium est, jus
norma loquendi.


For I cannot approve of their way of refining, who corrupt our English Idiom
by mixing it too much with French: that is a Sophistication of Language, not an
improvement of it: a turning English into French, rather than a refining of
English by French. We meet daily with those Fopps, who value themselves on
their Travelling, and pretend they cannot express their meaning in English,
because they would put off to us some French Phrase of the last Edition:
without considering that, for ought they know, we have a better of our own; but
these are not the men who are to refine us: their Talent is to prescribe
Fashions, not Words: at best they are only serviceable to a Writer, so as
Ennius was to Virgil. He may. Aurum ex stercore colligere. for 'tis hard if,
amongst many insignificant Phrases, there happen not something worth
preserving: though they themselves, like Indians, know not the value of their
own Commodity.

There is yet another way of improving Language, which Poets especially have
practiced in all Ages: that is by applying received words to a new
Signification. and this I believe, is meant by Horace, in that Precept which is
so variously construed by Expositors: Dixeris Egregie, notum si callida verbum,
Reddiderit junctura novum.
And, in this way, he himself had a particular happiness: using all the Tropes,
and particularly Metaphors, with that grace which is observable in his Odes:
where the Beauty of Expression is often greater than that of thought. as in
that one example, amongst an infinite number of others; Et vultus nimium
lubricus aspici.

And therefore though he innovated little, he may justly be called a great
Refiner of the Roman Tongue. This choice of words, and height'ning of their
natural signification, was observed in him by the Writers of the following
Ages: for Petronius says of him, Horatii curiosa faelicitas. By this graffing,
as I may call it, on old words, has our Tongue been Beautified by the three
fore-mention'd Poets, Shakespeare, Fletcher and Iohnson: whose Excellencies I
can never enough admire. and in this, they have been follow'd especially by Sir
Iohn Suckling and Mr. Waller, who refined upon them. neither have they, who now
succeed them, been wanting in their endeavours to adorn our Mother Tongue: but
it is not so lawful for me to praise my living Contemporaries, as to admire my
dead Predecessors.

I should now speak of the Refinement of Wit: but I have been so large on the
former Subject that I am forced to contract my self in this. I will therefore
only observe to you, that the wit of the last Age, was yet more incorrect than
their language. Shakespeare, who many times has written better than any Poet, in
any Language, is yet so far from writing Wit always, or expressing that Wit
according to the Dignity of the Subject, that he writes in many places, below
-- the dullest Writer of ours, or of any precedent Age. Never did any Author
precipitate himself from such heights of thought to so low expressions, as he
often does. He is the very Ianus of Poets; he wears, almost every where two
faces* and you have scarce begun to admire the one, e're you despise the other.
Neither is the Luxuriance of Fletcher, (which his friends have taxed in him,) a
less fault than the carelessness of Shakespeare. He does not well always, and,
when he does, he is a true Englishman; he knows not when to give over. If he
wakes in one Scene he commonly slumbers in another: And if he pleases you in
the first three Acts, he is frequently so tired with his labour, that he goes
heavily in the fourth and, sinks under his burden in the fifth.

For Ben. Iohnson, the most judicious of Poets, he always writ properly; and as
the Character required: and I will not contest farther with my Friends who call
that Wit. It being very certain, that even folly it self, well represented, is
Wit in a larger signification: and that there is Fancy, as well as Judgement in
it; though not so much or noble: because all Poetry being imitation, that of
Folly is a lower exercise of Fancy, though perhaps as difficult as the other:
for 'tis a kind of looking downward in the Poet; and representing that part of
Mankind which is below him.

In these low Characters of Vice and Folly, lay the excellency of that
inimitable Writer: who, when at any time, he aimed at Wit, in the stricter
sense, that is Sharpness of Conceit, was forced either to borrow from the
Ancients, as, to my knowledge he did very much from Plautus: or, when he
trusted himself alone, often fell into meanness of expression. Nay, he was not
free from the lowest and most grovelling kind of Wit, which we call clenches; of
which, Every Man in his Humour, is infinitely full. and, which is worse, the
wittiest persons in the Drama speak them. His other Comedies are not exempted
from them: will you give me leave to name some few? Asper, in which Character
he personates himself, (and he neither was, nor thought himself a fool.)
exclaiming against the ignorant Judges of the Age, speaks thus.

How monstrous and detested is't, to see
A fellow, that has neither Art nor Brain,
Sit like an Aristarchus, or Stark-Ass,
Taking Men's Lines, with a Tobacco-Face,
In Snuff, c.
And presently after

I mar'le whose wit 'twas to put a Prologue in yond Sackbut's mouth? they might
well think he would be out of Tune, and yet you'd play upon him too. Will you
have another of the same stamp?

O, I cannot abide these limbs of Satin, or rather Satan.
But, it may be you will object that this was Asper, Macilente, or, Carlo
Buffone: you shall, therefore, hear him speak in his own person: and, that, in
the two last lines, or sting of an Epigram; 'tis Inscribd to Fine Grand: who,
he says, was indebted to him for many things, which he reckons there: and
concludes thus; Forty things more, dear Grand, which you know true,
For which, or pay me quickly, or I'll pay you.


This was then the mode of wit, the vice of the Age and not Ben. Iohnson's. for
you see, a little before him, that admirable wit, Sir Philip Sidney,
perpetually playing with his words. In his time, I believe, it ascended first
into the Pulpit: where (if you will give me leave to clench too) it yet finds
the benefit of its Clergy. for they are commonly the first corrupters of
Eloquence, and the last reformed from vicious Oratory: as a famous Italian has
observed before me, in his Treatise of the Corruption of the Italian Tongue;
which he principally ascribes to Priests and preaching Friars.

But, to conclude with what brevity I can; I will only add this in the defence
of our present Writers, that if they reach not some excellencies of Ben.
Ionson; (which no Age, I am confident, ever shall) yet, at least, they are
above that meanness of thought which I have taxed, and which is frequent in
him.

That the wit of this Age is much more Courtly, may easily be proved by viewing
the Characters of Gentlemen which were written in the last. First, for Ionson,
True-Wit in the Silent Woman, was his Master-piece. and True-wit was a
Scholar-like kind of man, a Gentleman with an allay of Pedantry: a man who
seems mortifi'd to the world, by much reading. The best of his discourse, is
drawn, not from the knowledge of the Town, but Books. and, in short, he would
be a fine Gentleman, in an University. Shakespeare showed the best of his skill
in his Mercutio, and he said himself, that he was forced to kill him in the
third Act, to prevent being killed by him. But, for my part, I cannot find he
was so dangerous a person: I see nothing in him but what was so exceeding
harmless, that he might have lived to the end of the Play, and died in his bed,
without offence to any man.

Fletcher's Don Iohn is our only Bug-bear: and yet, I may affirm, without
suspicion of flattery, that he now speaks better, and that his Character is
maintained with much more vigour in the fourth and fifth Acts than it was by
Fletcher in the three former. I have always acknowledged the wit of our
Predecessors, with all the veneration which becomes me, but, I am sure, their
wit was not that of Gentlemen, there was ever somewhat that was ill-bred and
Clownish in it: and which confessed the conversation of the Authors.

And this leads me to the last and greatest advantage of our writing, which
proceeds from conversation. In the Age, wherein those Poets lived, there was
less of gallantry than in ours; neither did they keep the best company of
theirs. Their fortune has been much like that of Epicurus, in the retirement of
his Gardens: to live almost unknown, and to be celebrated after their decease.
I cannot find that any of them were conversant in Courts, except Ben. Ionson:
and his genius lay not so much that way, as to make an improvement by it.
greatness was not, then, so easy of access, nor conversation so free as now it
is. I cannot, therefore, conceive it any insolence to affirm, that, by the
knowledge, and pattern of their wit, who writ before us, and by the advantage
of our own conversation, the discourse and Raillery of our Comedies excel what
has been written by them. and this will be denied by none, but some few old
fellows who value themselves on their acquaintance with the Black-Friars: who,
because they saw their Plays, would pretend a right to judge ours. The memory
of these grave Gentlemen is their only Plea for being Wits. they can tell a
story of Ben. Ionson, and perhaps have had fancy enough to give a supper in
Apollo that they might be called his Sons: and because they were drawn in to be
laughed at in those times, they think themselves now sufficiently entitled to
laugh at ours. Learning I never saw in any of them, and wit no more than they
could remember. In short, they were unlucky to have been bred in an unpolished
Age, and more unlucky to live to a refined one. They have lasted beyond their
own, and are cast behind ours: and not contented to have known little at the
age of twenty, they boast of their ignorance at threescore.

Now, if any ask me, whence it is that our conversation is so much refined? I
must freely, and without flattery, ascribe it to the Court: and, in it,
particularly to the King; whose example gives a law to it. His own mis-fortunes
and the Nations, afforded him an opportunity, which is rarely allow'd to
Sovereign Princes, I mean of travelling, and being conversant in the most
polished Courts of Europe; and, thereby, of cultivating a Spirit, which was
formed by Nature, to receive the impressions of a gallant and generous
education. At his return, he found a Nation lost as much in Barbarism as in
Rebellion. and as the excellency of his Nature forgave the one, so the
excellency of his manners reformed the other. the desire of imitating so great
a pattern, first wakened the dull and heavy spirits of the English, from their
natural reserv'dness: loosened them, from their stiff forms of conversation;
and made them easy and pliant to each other in discourse. Thus, insensibly, our
way of living became more free: and the fire of the English wit, which was
before stifled under a constrained melancholy way of breeding, began first to
display its force: by mixing the solidity of our Nation, with the air and
gaiety of our neighbours. This being granted to be true, it would be a wonder,
if the Poets, whose work is imitation, should be the only persons in three
Kingdoms, who should not receive advantage by it: or, if they should not more
easily imitate the wit and conversation of the present age, than of the past.

Let us therefore admire the beauties and the heights of Shakespeare, without
falling after him into a carelessness and (as I may call it) a Lethargy of
thought, for whole Scenes together. Let us imitate, as we are able, the
quickness and easiness of Fletcher, without proposing him as a pattern to us,
either in the redundancy of his matter, or the incorrectness of his language.
Let us admire his wit and sharpness of conceit; but, let us at the same time
acknowledge that it was seldom so fixed, and made proper to his characters, as
that the same things might not be spoken by any person in the Play. let us
applaud his Scenes of Love; but, let us confess that he understood not either
greatness or perfect honour in the parts of any of his women. In fine, let us
allow, that he had so much fancy, as when he pleased he could write wit: but
that he wanted so much Judgment as seldom to have written humour; or described
a pleasant folly. Let us ascribe to Ionson the height and accuracy of Judgment,
in the ordering of his Plots, his choice of characters, and maintaining what he
had chosen, to the end. but let us not think him a perfect pattern of
imitation; except it be in humour: for Love, which is the foundation of all
Comedies in other Languages, is scarcely mentioned in any of his Plays. and
for humour it self, the Poets of this Age will be more wary than to imitate the
meanness of his persons. Gentlemen will now be entertained with the follies of
each other: and though they allow Cob and Tib to speak properly, yet they are
not much pleased with their Tankard or with their Rags: And, surely, their
conversation can be no jest to them on the Theatre, when they would avoid it in
the street.

To conclude all, let us render to our Predecessors what is their due, without
confineing our selves to a servile imitation of all they writ: and, without
assuming to our selves the Title of better Poets, let us ascribe to the
gallantry and civility of our age the advantage which we have above them; and
to our knowledge of the customs and manners of it, the happiness we have to
please beyond them.


