WHen you cry Poets down, and damn them thus,
Like Vipers slain, they grow more numerous:
Like to Aegypt's Plagues around you swarm,
But you are proof against such common charm:
We know that none, beside a first rate Wit,
Can please the grand Inhabiters o'th Pit;
While others work's, each Ninny of the Town,
Takes privilege to damn for half a Crown.
Our Muse wants complaisance, knows not the Court,
Although she fain would be a prostitute;
Her walks are very near, and there you'll find,
Her Evening love, too soft to be unkind:
Yet those that Critics are, for fashion sake
Will judge this dull, which scarce is a mistake;
And finding one fault, will make ten times more,
Oft force a flaw where there was none before.
Yet if your bisses poison, this he sues
You would some lingering, painful sentence choose.
Prove Tyrants, and with leisure till the third day, kill.
Thunder Damnation then, and what you will.

A Pox of this Love, how damned and Idle t'has made me, here have I marched a
long half hour, which Egad is an Age to me, to wait for this Ambassador of my
amorous Negotiation, pray Heaven no Rival of mine leads her into Temptation!

Oh Lady!


O Lord! What make you here so early?


Oh Peg, thou know Love is a restless Bedfellow, Peg, alas, who could sleep,
that could but hope the blessing of seeing thy sweet Mistress. Peg, Well, what
news, what news, from Cupids Court Wench, ha! Will she be kind, and consider my
Passion, faith I am but a dead Man without a little comfort.


Faith Sir, I am not idle in your behalf, I take all opportunities (which is)
when her Husband's out of the way, to let her know my thoughts of you, which
I'll assure you Sir are most advantageous.


I am beholding to thee Peg.


But you know Sir, she's a married Woman, and ought to be very cautious.


Oh Peg, I love her with a virtuous Flame, believe me I do! and if thou would
but swear and lye, and use a small kind of Treachery in the Case --


You need not doubt such small services Sir -- But --


But thou must be a little encouraged, is it so? Here, here's a pair of Angels
to invite thee to speak. --


Do you take me for Balaams Ass Sir, that can't speak without a Prompter,
however Sir, you court me in no common Language.


Oh thou art a Saint, that will despise a Prayer, made in the vulgar Tongue,
here Proxy, here's my Hand, and Seal, get it delivered, and further the design.


I, but Sir, is there no harm in it?


What dost thou call harm?


I mean Sir, is there nothing, but what I may carry with Honour?


Fie, fie Peg, dost think I'd make a Bawd of thee?


I hope you would not at my years.


Right, having so many yet to come of the kind and amorous ones, But this
Letter Peg is only to invite thy Mistress into the Park to night. I know the
Evening will be fair, and if she can make an escape from that old impotent
Lecher her Husband, I shall be glad to kiss her hands there.


Is this all?


Upon my Life.


Then rest in hope, for I dare promise ye.


Farewell dear Peg.


Your Servant sweet Mr. Lovechange.


Courtwell!


Lovechange, I have been a dozen times at thy Lodging to see thee, but, like
the Devil, thou art always ranging about, seeking whom thou can devour.


Thou hast small reason to accuse me Courtwell, for since thy arrival from
Spain I have not enjoyed thee at our old rate; we were wont to Whose, and drink
together like loving Brothers in Iniquity, but I think thou now hast taken up a
little of the Formality of the Climate, and dost all thy Debaucheries in
secret.


No Ned, I have rather learnt the sobriety of that Nation, and have left off
those lewd courses.


Nay, if thou be come to that, to call em lewd thoud'st better even have
staid amongst em, for thou art unfit for this Town Egad Will.


I think I had not so soon abandoned that agreeable place, but for the Commands
of my Uncle Easy, upon whom my Fortune does so depend, that I dare not disobey
him in any thing.


What, I'll warrant ye, he has that old fashioned design of Matrimony in his
head, he means to marry thee.


Some such thing.


And who is the wretched thing, I pray?


The rich Widow Wou'dbee, she's damned ill-favour'd, and they say as ill
natured, but she'll serve for a Wife Ned.


How, the Widow Wou'dbee -- my Wife Egad!


Yes the very same.


Hark ye William, I don't like the match William!


Your Reasons?


I have divers, and sundry -- That must be nameless


Let's hear a few of them.


Why, first she's Old, next Jealous, she is, to Damnation, Proud, Expensive,
and --


This is all nothing.


She is beside -- a Plague on him I dare not discover --


What Sir?


Nay, nay dear heart, no passion prithee, for she's very honest, which makes
her very insolent.


Oh I am glad 'twas no worse.


Worse! Nay here's ill qualities enough for one Woman a Conscience -- But
prithee was there never a Dona in all Spain worthy your kindness, but you must
come back to England, and like a Jew, be forced to Wed in your own Tribe, ha!


Prithee don't call any Sins to remembrance, Oh Friend! I had a Mistress in
Spain, and such a Mistress, so kind, so fair --


And so tired you out with loving, was't not so? Aye there's the Devil on it.


No, in an unhappy Adventure wherein I took the party of an English Cavaleir my
Friend, I killed her Brother, who was of Quality sufficient to cause me to fear
the inquisition, so I was forced to quit Spain, and meeting with the Command of
my Uncle --


You soon lost the thoughts of your Mistress, and I shall advise you, as you
love health and liberty! two excellent qualities, to loose the thoughts of this
Widow too.


Nay, since I cannot marry where I like, I'll even marry for a World of Money,
that's the next way, and the nearest I know to happiness, therefore I am
resolved to put on the Fetters.


Pox on it they'll gingle after thee at that rate that all pretty Ladies will
shun thee for a fusty Husband, and who would be tied up from Ranging.


There are Ladies Ned, who consider not the Man, but his Pockets, half a piece
for a clean pair of Sheets, half a Crown for a thrice retailed Bottle of
Rhenish, and --


The Pox into the bargain.


The Pox in others will be but the Gout in me.


Your Uncle Sir, stays for you to go make a visit to the Widow Woodbee.


I'll attend him.


You ought to ask me leave first Sir, if you knew all -- Tis well I am not a
jealous Husband, and 'tis better I have no tempting Wife.


Without doubt.


Well Love speed you Sir, 'tis well you're young enough to spare some hours,
for o'my Conscience tis mere loss of time.


Farewell, farewell Sir, ha, ha, ha.


Let them laugh that win Sir, adieu.


For Mrs. Woodbee at her house in
St. Iames's street, -- London. --
Sure 'tis hereabout.

This must be the house I'll knock till they answer.

Is this the Lady Woodbee's, Sweetheart?


It is Sir, may I know your affairs with her, for she is a little busy at
present.


I am a Stranger by Nation a Spaniard, and bring her Letters from her Brother
who is Consul there.


Please you walk in Sir. --


Well Diego, thus far our business is prosperous, we are arrived to a Land,
rich, and beautiful, and where the civility of the Inhabitants give me all the
encouragement I can expect, grant ye gods I may find out this perfidious
Renigado of Love, and I'll forgive what e're you make me suffer another way.

Madam, you I take it are the Lady to whom I am addressed, these will inform you,
why I take this freedom.


Sir, I am not only obliged by the Laws of good manners, and civility to
receive you well as a Stranger, but the Character my Brother gives me of you,
binds me to a more strict observance: Sir, you're welcome, believe so, and
command my house.


Madam, you honour me, and if I take a freedom that unbecomes me, charge it on
your bounty, not my boldness.


A pretty youth in truth Clare, is it not?


Yes indeed Madam.


Madam, I'll take my leave for a few hours to see the City, which done I'll wait
on you again.


So, right Woman, can no more be without a Man, then a Puritan without his
Bible.


The Widow looks very amorous upon him, methinks tis a fine Youth.


Mr. Easy, Sir your servant.


No interruption, Lady, no interruption.


None in the World Sir I protest, this is a Person of Worth and Merit,
recommended to me by the only Brother I have, and for whose sake besides his
own I am obliged to pay him my respects.


By my faith, and he deserves it Lady, he is handsome, and young -- But Lady, I
have, once more, brought my Nephew to wait on you, and to know your resolution
concerning those propositions I made you of Marriage, I'll make short work on it,
I'm no Courtier, but let him speak for himself, he can talk many fine things
of Love, and the like -- In the mean time I'll take a turn in the Garden.


gods! Is not that Courtwell? I must withdraw, or dye; in what a happy hour am
I arrived, to be a witness of his injustice! Oh Fortune! thou hast recompensed
me for all the injuries thou hast done me,


They will seem many to me,


I find Widow, though you profess a great deal of cruelty, and coldness to me,
you can be kind too, when you please.


I am sorry you should take me for an insensible Mr. Courtwell, though for many
reasons I am forced to say I cannot admit of any concern for your self, in a
Word Sir I have reasons (that must be secret ones) to tell you, I cannot
entertain your passion, I am a Person Sir, that --


Seems to have heat enough about you Widow for half a score, faith view me
well, I am a strait chained fellow, clean limbed, and sweet, and dare promise as
much as any Man.


And perform as little as most Men; Well, just thus did my Husband promise
before I had him, and now, though even in the Non age of our Marriage, nay
before the Wedding Sheets were sufficiently tumbled, I find him as reasonable a
quiet Soul, as heart can wish.


What i'st you consult on Widow.


In earnest Sir, I am past consideration, for I am resolved upon the matter.


Not to marry?


By no means Sir, not you.


Why then the Devil take thee for making me loose so much of my precious time,
why thou Unmerciful, Insatiable Widow, that art not only content, to let me
miss of thee, but the opportunity of gaining at least a dozen hearts of perhaps
handsomer Women then thy self Widow.


How Mr. Courtwell, handsomer! you are rude Sir, I must tell you.


Handsomer! Why thou did not take thy self to be a Beauty sure! but yet thou
hast charms Widow in bank, which are allurements I confess, and 'twas well thou
had 'em at these years.


Years -- Certainly I don't pass for a Sibel with you? this is beyond all
patience, Clare, where's Mr. Easy?


Taking a turn in the Garden Madam.


Let him come and carry off his scurvy Nephew here, or I shall set my Footman
to do it in a more undecent manner: years quoth a'!


Fie on it, Age makes thee testy Widow, ha, ha, ha.


Oh intolerable Mr. Easy, do you bring your Kinsman to affront me?


How Lady! Cocks bodikins, you mistake him 'tis the new way of making Love,
he's a spark of the times Lady, and Courts A-la-mode.


Mr. Easy I know you mean well, and for your Ladies sake, who is a virtuous
Gentlewoman, you are always welcome to my House, your Kinsman too, I looked upon
as a proper Gentleman, and one that I was Redivable too, for the passion he
professed to me, but now he has discovered so disagreeable a quality, that really
I am forced to say I do not like his conversation, nor his address.


Address Lady? I know not what you mean by address, but I am sure his Estate is
worth a thousand pound per annum, and a better penny, and do you talk of his
address?


Uncle say no more, leave her to her own peevish humour, and the bare
imagination of so likely a young fellow as my self. Widow I am resolved to
have thee my way, or no way, so adieu dear Widow, I have other game in hand,
beside, tolerated going to it, and so farewell Widow.


Kinsman, come back I say.


Sir, 'tis in vain, let him go, for I am resolved never to dispose of my self
that way, this is my final resolution.


Is it so, then your Nephew, young Mr. Amorous, shall never have my Niece
Grace, and that's my final resolution.


Sweet Mrs. Woodbee, your Servant, what looks are these that cloud your smiles
to day! What's the matter Friend?


Mrs. Easy I beg your pardon really, I did not see you, I have been so ill
treated by some friends of yours --


Of mine! let me know who they are, and I'll secure you I'll own em to be no
more so.


On my Conscience thou wilt keep thy word, for 'twas thy most filthy Husband.


My Husband! Nay I believe it, for in good earnest Mrs. Woodbee, he is kind and
civil to no body, nay, if you knew the daily, aye, and nightly torment too I
have from him, you would not wonder at his incivility to you.


Nay, I believe indeed, you have very slender comfort of him, but alas, what
can you expect from an old fusty fellow, that is even past the years of wishing
well to our Sex --


You are in the right, Lord if I could but tell you the story of all my
sufferings of that kind, but I ought not to complain, when there's no hopes
left of remedy.


So, I hope I have an occasion to be revenged on this Husband of hers, and help
contrive his being made a Cuckold, Hang me, if I am not infinitely raised with
the thoughts on it, ah sweet Vengeance! how I love thee!

Come, I am no Woman if I don't fancy what thou'lt be at, nay, and 'tis but
just and reasonable: 'Slife for Women of our youth, and all that, to languish
away in sickly imagination; No, no, thou shalt make use of what Nature has
bestowed on thee, so much Beauty to be buried alive, with an old rotten
Carcass. --


What do you mean Madam?


That, which thou mean. Come Friend I know thy Soul, thou shalt Cuckold this
Fellow.


How! Cuckold my Husband, forbid it!


Husband! Why what virtue is there in that Name, does the old Fool act like
one? What duty of a Husband do you receive from him, ha?


That indeed is true. But --


I know you Married him out of humour, because you were in Love with another
Man, but that Man, you have never yet confessed to me.


That shall not be long a secret, dear Friend, if this counsel you give me,
proceed from your real thoughts?


So, let me thrive in the like success, when I have so great a provocation as
thou hast, if I be not in earnest, I say again enjoy thy self. I say be kind, be
gay, and live for ever.


And be a Whore? I blush to name it!


I see you're willing, and I long to be revenged on the Insolency of thy
Husband. Easy? You may call your self what you please, but so long as you can
keep your own Counsel, you are pure, and unstain'd in the eyes of all the
World.


I confess, when I look upon Mr. Easy as a very useless Man to me, and how
little Felicity I enjoy with him, I cannot scruple much at the thing proposed.
And therefore to be plain with you, I must own there is a Man, and such a Man
--


I such a Man, I like, forward --


'Tis the same that once made honourable Love to me, but he had no Fortune, and
I, not much, which parted us; And he has since, (by what good fortune I know
not) raised himself in the World, for he's full of Money, which, managed by a
strange liberality natural to him, is every day sacrificed to me in Presents,
and many entertainments.


Now thou speak as if thou understood'st thy self.


He is beside a Gentleman, young, and infinitely agreeable.


'Slife thou'lt make me Rival thee.


He is extremely solicitous for a meeting, I mean such a one, as may afford
him, all I have to give.


And hast thou the heart to refuse him this?


Conscience, Conscience, Madam!


Away, with those silly thoughts, come, if thou be certain of his Love,
recompense it for shame.


I received a Letter from him this very Morning, and I vow, I need counsel how
to answer it, for 'tis to meet him this Evening in St. Iame's Park -- Here's
the Letter.


Before I read it, I protest you shall promise to meet him, nay, and as he
desires too, or loose my Friendship for an unwitty Woman.


Well, you have prevailed, I'll swear to you to follow your Counsel.


Well said, now I'll see in what pleasing stile he writes.

Madam, 'tis strange, that after so many Vows, and protestations, you should
still remain an Infidel! Why is it? You will force me to some Extravagance that
unbecomes a Man, and the secrecy of that Flame I have for you, to express my
Soul in: For Loves sake, for mine, whom once you said, you loved, and more, for
your own Honours sake, force me not into a stark madness that will undo us all.





I vow he writes most passionately, oh do not force him to any despair, but be
kind -- Well, I'll read it out.

You have a Husband, and I have (Hell take em) other concerns too, that
require my secret carrying on of this affair of Love. Therefore meet me this
Night in St. James's Pel Mal, or expect to have me dead, or worse to morrow.

Yours Lovechange.



Ha! It cannot be! Lovechange! 'Tis Witchcraft, this, Lovechange, Hell! 'Tis
not his hand, oh but I am too well assured it is -- Let me disguise my Rage,
and strive against Nature.


Well, what think you of't Madam?


I think all Men are false, and that Woman whose honour is trusted in their
hands, a ruined thing.


Have you met with ought there that has wrought this sudden change in you, if
Women be not as false too, then how came you thus altered? Was it to get this
secret of my Life from me, and then betray it? Bad Woman, farewell.


She must not go thus, nor must I discover, Easy, come, be not angry with me,
nor suspect me, your Letter only made me call to mind some former passages of
my Life, In which I was betrayed; 'Twas such another Man as this you have
described, and such a Letter too, betrayed me, once, to ruin, but you may keep
your word, for this perhaps is real.


If there be truth in Man, this cannot err, and believe he speaks all truths
to me.


It may be so to you, but false to me, as thou art to thy Honour.


Madam, Methinks I find a sudden alteration in you, I am sorry I have
occasioned it, pardon my ignorance.


Indeed you have put a melancholy thought into me, but 'twil not last.


I'll take my leave, it may be you would be alone, when you are disposed for it,
I'll come and let you know my Adventure with Lovechange.


Oh how she stabs me! as if she'd sound the mortal vein, Easy, however you
leave me now, I assure you the Relation of that Amorous adventure, will be very
Cordial to me, as I shall order the matter --


Here's your Kinsman Mr. Amorous, Madam.


Let him come in.

How now Nephew, thou look ill upon it.


As well as a successless Lover can do.


What still whining after Mrs. Grace? I'll tell you Nephew, I'd rather thou
should never marry, then be obliged to that old fool Easy for thy
admittance.


Madam, I was the most acceptable pretender, but I know not what Devil has
possessed him; For he comes into her Chamber just now, and finding me there, very
full of choler, forbade me her presence, and his house, and told me what
Treatment Mr. Courtwell found from you, I should receive there for the future.


He has done well, I tell thee, I hate him, take a secret which thou know
not. This fellow being vastly rich, had got my good will to marry me, the day
was assigned, the things provided; Over night, he by chance saw a woman of
something (as she, and he thought) a better Face, and married her. This, from
my Pride, I do so stomach that I can never forgive.


Yet, you seem to be very kind to the Lady, Madam?


I do so, and will revenge the affront I warrant thee.


But Madam, though you love not him, let not the Niece in your opinion inherit
the crimes of the Uncle, give me leave to adore her, for she's all sweet and
innocent.


I am not so ill natured, but I will say, that if without her Uncles leave you
can gain her, (for I scorn thou should be a suitor to him for any thing) I
give my consent, for besides my aversion to the old Man, I have a secret Reason
not to marry Courtwell, which you shall know hereafter. I have some affairs of
my own to dispatch before Night.


Madam I'll follow your directions in all things.


Cousin, I had forgot to tell you, that there is a young Man, a Person of
Quality, arrived from Spain, from your Uncle there, he has made my house his
home, and pray treat him kindly.


I shall obey you Madam.


I am very glad Madam, that you are at last resolved to oblige Mr. Lovechange,
I'll swear he's almost wild for your answer.


When will he call for it?


Madam, he's walking here hard by, or will be immediately, have you writ?


No, but you may let him know my mind, that is, that I will be in the Mall, as
soon as it begins to be dark, if I can get from my Husband.


Oh Lord Madam! Now I think on it, we look for Sir Ralph Spatter to night, Mrs.
Graces Sweet-heart, and my Master designs to make a Masquerade as they call it,
on purpose to entertain him.


That's true, some way must be contrived to cheat him of my Company. For Peg,
now I have resolved upon it, I cannot forbear going, had my Husband been any
thing approaching to Man, I should have believed I had longed, so great is my
desire of seeing Lovechange to night. Oh, this dear Letter has so powerful an
attraction, that I must go.


Some way we will find out. O dear Madam, here's my Master in Rancour, for I had
forgot to tell you forsooth, that he has forbid Mr. Amorous the house, and that
Mrs. Grace is full of dolor.


What's this I pray?


I am undone! Nay I protest you must not see it for the World, it is a new Song.


Some bawdy Lampoon, I'll warrant ye, I'll see it.


I'll protest it is not Sir, when 'tis set you shall hear it sung.

She's come in very good time. Alas! poor Cousin Grace, and have you Sir, can
you be so cruel to Cousin Grace, pray let her have the Man she loves. -- Peg,
hast never a Song to change this for?


Yes, Madam, but 'tis a very scurvy one.


I say I'll see the Paper.


Any thing dear Peg, but the Letter, Greece?


The Verses I say, I smell a Plot, 'tis some Love Letter, come, come, produce,
produce.


I vow Dear I am ashamed you should see em, they are so very silly.


I Sir, and something --


Bawdy too, I'll warrant ye, let's see, let's see.


Truly Sir, my Mistress has not read em yet.


What's here, Sig -- Sig, Signior -- hey day, what's the Devil got amongst you
two: I shall Signior ye, and you want a Signior.


What say you concerning Grace Sir?


I say you are all nought, and 'tis time you had all Men, lusty Men, able Men,
for the Devil will supply their places else, and therefore I design to morrow,
to marry Grace to a young lusty Lad, and a Knight, de ye see a Knight.


How Sir, marry me, and not to Mr. Amorous?


Amorous! Let me but see thee peep through the Window upon Amorous again, and
I'll make a Nun of thee, dost hear, where thou shalt languish with the thought
of flesh, and every day shall be a Good-Friday to thee.


You will not be so inhumane, will you Sir? you have the liberty to choose Youth
and Beauty here in my Aunt, and despised Riches as the most unvaluable thing;
and can you believe I am so unlike you to choose Wealth and an empty Title
before so much Worth as dwells in Mr. Amorous.


If I have played the Fool, I do not mean you shall do so too. I have a Wife
indeed of Youth and Beauty, but had I known the continual Plague of keeping her
honest, she should even have been left to her old Gallant Lovechange, perhaps
his Youth without my Money, had made her take the same courses, that my Money,
and no Youth does, but I have rid my hands of him, thanks be praised.


This is unkind Mr. Easy to upbraid me with so innocent a kindness as I had for
Mr. Lovechange.


Nay, now I dare swear for thee, but yet I cannot help fearing, for Sweetheart
he is very much spruced up of late, that is, since you were married, goes Rich,
and spends high; notable signs, that some old Fool, or other may have a
handsome liberal Wife, but thou art truly honest. Well, we do every moment
expect Sir Ralph Spatter, pray let there be music got, and let the young Folks
dance, invite Mrs. Lay-it-on, and Mrs. Frisker, and who else you please, and
their Husbands, and entertain his Worship after the London fashion, I'll have it
handsome.


Madam, i'm undone if your goodness don't assist me.


Fear not, I'll warrant we will take some care, I know too well the torment of
forced Marriages to wish thee that punishment, but Cousin, pray do you see all
things got in order to night, for I have a visit, or two, to make of concern.


Madam, you shall command me.


Sir, here's a Gentleman inquires for you.


Bodikins, 'tis Sir Ralph, bring him in.


I believe it is Sir.


Sirrah, go you and look out Mr. Lovechange, and let him know I am come to
Town, and shall have need of that small sum of money he owes me.


Sir Ralph, I am yours, and heartily glad to see you.


Sir, I am as much yours, and as glad to see you, and so I am to see you
forsooth.


'Tis more then I am to see you, I'll promise ye.


Oh cry ye mercy, then you are not the Lady I took you for, I thought you had
been Mrs. Grace my Mistress?


That's her name Sir, and her quality.


Truly Uncle, that must be, if she have no better, you are much too blame for
giving her no better education, I thought she would have received me with open
arms, for though I say it, I deserve it, and understand breeding.


I doubt it Sir.


You can't oblige me more, then to question my ability, for then you give me
occasion to show my parts, and first as touching the Art of Courtship, though I
don't read Romances, Plays, Histories, Pastoralls, or Farces, yet can accost a
Lady after this sort -- Madam, (with my Face scru'd up thus) I am your proud
Servitor, or in English proud to serve you, my hands beneath your feet, is too
mean a sacrifice; go where you will, I am your shadow, advance but the standard
of your eyes, and i'm your Captive, your Creature, your very Frogg, begot, by
your gentle influence. P'shaw I am furnished with a thousand things of the like
nature.


Rare, rare, I vow, ah Sir Ralph, were I a young Wench for your sake, I could
hug you, and love you all over.


Pray do so for me Sir, for I find no one part of him to move me to it.


Madam, if I were you, I would dissemble with him a little.


I had as good do so indeed Betty.


A little time, will make her pliable.


P'shaw, I don't question that mun, what do you think Mrs. Grace?


Sir, I hope time will convince me of my error, and let me see, that you have
perfections, which are yet disguised.


I thank you Mrs. Grace, for your good opinion of me I vow, and shall I hope do
well against to morrow.


'Twere unkind Sir, to forbid your hope.


Well then, I'll set my seal upon you, in sign and token that you are my own.


Go, now Grace, you may withdraw, get things in a readiness against night.


I obey you Sir.


Sir, I must crave your excuse for a few moments, I am going to call in a
little Money, an ill office to play the Dun, but you know Sir, we Lovers that
have peevish Mistresses to deal with, require more than bare Courtship, well
adieu Sir.


This is my constant walk three times a day, pray Heaven the Neighbourhood
don't take me for some walking spright, that upon certain hours, comes to give
some intelligence of hid treasure.

But here's Peg, now dear Soul, what answer dost bring me? Shall I see my
Mistress? Shall I be happy this night?


I know not how happy 'twill make you, but she will be this night in the Mall,
at the upper end.


Dear Maid, I'll owe thee the Indies for this.


I Sir, if you did but know, what shift my Mistress makes, you would think your
self obliged and indebted too I can assure you.


No more, here's an earnest of what I owe thee, prithee give her my service, my
Love, my Heart, and Soul, honest Peg.


Oh lass, what shall I do, here comes Sir Ralph Spatter, Mrs. Graces
Sweet-heart; who by no means must see me.


Why I hope he's no Rival.


No Sir, but he may hereafter know me, for he's a Suitor to Mrs. Grace.


Leave me then, for I have a message from him, and will take this opportunity
to speak to him.


Mr. Lovechange your Servant, I sent to you just now, and a^ glad to meet you,
you know my business Sir.


Yes Sir, I know you pretend I owe you a thousand pounds but I am not provided
with such a sum at present.


Sir, I should not have given you this trouble now, and at so short warning,
but that I am upon my marriage, and there are a thousand Perquisites, and
Trangams required, in order to the gaining my Mistress.


Save your money Sir Ralph, save your money, for this is no time to present
idle Women, they are vain enough of themselves, do not raise them.


I, but Sir, we that are Lovers, must do these idle foolish things, or loose
those more foolish idle things called Women.


If all Lovers, are to walk by one Rule, then Sir I am in the same predicament
with you.


Why, are you going to marry too?


Faith, no Sir, I thank my Stars, but I am as much in Love, as those that are.


Well Sir, I am a little in haste now, pray think of the Debt, your Servant
Sir.


Pox of that foolish noddle of his, to believe i'll ever pay that Debt, which I
was trepanned into, by the old Rogue his Fathers cunning? as long as I have a
Woman in my eye, no, no, my designs can't be carried on with empty Pockets.


I think Sir, your name is Mr. Lovechange.


The same -- From whom, this?


The Contents will inform you.


Dear Lovechange for some reasons that I must tell you, I have thought fit to
alter my design of meeting you in the Mall, but will wait your coming at the
side of the Duck-pond under those Trees, on the Bank.




I like the Resolution well, tell the Person from whom you come, I will not
fail to be at the place appointed.


YOu are sure the Porter gave it into his own hand?


Yes Madam, and he said he would not fail to meet you.


Well Lovechange, I will be revenged, and innocently so, perfidious man, whom I
married without Fortune, or Friends, believing that way to oblige thee, but
thou ungrateful as thou art, make no returns, but false ones, but at least I
will possess thee once more in revenge to both, and then scorn, and abandon
thee to thy former arts of living.


Well, I can't but think Madam, how mad Mrs. Easy will be, when she knows the
trick put upon her.


Let her fret, till she grow old, but Clare I am not content to deprive her of
all she expects this night in Lovechange, but I would have it known, and at
once kill the old Cuckold, and destroy her Pride.


Oh Madam, I have it just now alighted in my Brain: you know Madam, Mr.
Courtwell makes love to you, and so he does to all Woman-kind by turns.


Yes, 'tis a loose Gallant, but what of him?


Why Madam, the next time he comes to wait on you. --


I have given him his answer, he'll trouble me no more -- but suppose he should
-- for I begin to conceive a Project.


Pray Madam let me speak first, for fear it should be the very same I have, and
I claim the privilege of a discoverer: Madam, this very Man Mr. Courtwell,
will I send to meet Mrs. Easy instead of your Husband Mr. Lovechange.


I like the thing, and 'tis the very same with mine, but how to effect it? I
fear we shan'not meet with Courtwell, I would not wish for a madder fellow, nor
a more talkative.


Madam, walk off, for yonder's Mr. Courtwell, as pat as if the Devil had sent
him for the purpose.


I'll leave thee to thy wit, and him.


What's here a Prize, at this time of the day -- Mrs. if a Man should beg leave
of you to take a turn or so?


Two, or Three, if you please Sir --


Kind, and gentle --


And your Servant Clare Sir.


Ah! sweet Mrs. Clare, faith I am Clare, thou should be kind, and I'll be
grateful, come, I can lead thee, the back way into the Bull-head Tavern, and
we will be merry for half an hour.


Tavern Sir, what to do?


Only to drink thy Ladies health, Clare, no harm at all I protest Clare.


You would be making Love I warrant too?


A little Love Clare, for exercise only, alas, we that are young and brisk
cannot live without it.


Why Sir, I do yet understand, but little of that my self, but I know a Lady
Sir --


'Pho thou talk of future joys -- but I am for a little of the present, come
dear Clare, be kind, upon my honour I have had a passion for thee a long time,
and will be as constant, nay i'll swear to have no other Miss, but thee, and
will keep thee as fine as e're a Miss about the Town Egad now.


What, and pretend to my Lady Sir?


That's for a necessary thing, called a Wife, but thou Clare, shalt share with
her.


For a whole week at least.


By my troth, and a fair time too I take it.


Come Sir, you'd better drive the other bargain with me?


What, for the Lady thou speak of, if thou could bring it to pass
suddenly, much might be said, but I hate delays.


This Evening Sir.


Now I hear thee, her name and parts, I prithee.


You may know more in good time -- but thus much now, she's exceeding
Beautiful, Young, and Innocent.


No too much of the last, I pray.


Sir, to speak the naked truth, she is --


Lovely, as Woman in the same condition --


No, but I vow Sir, I lye not, she's exceeding handsome, well shaped, delicate
fine, tall, virtuous, and --


The Devil and all, whither wilt thou carry her, to the degree of an Angel?


Besides, she's Rich, and needs none of your presents, nor keeping Sir.


Oh thou hast ravished me, I am all on Fire, for Heavens sake, sweet Clare, let
me have this Nymph to allay my Flames?


But Sir, I thought you had been in love with me?


I, I, Clare, I am in love with thee too, but this Lady, Clare, ha! where does
she live Girl?


Look Sir, if I bring you together, I have done my part.


I, I, that shall suffice, let me alone for the rest, and reward thee.


Well then Sir, about eight of the Clock this Evening, here in the Mall, you
shall find her in the upper end all alone, she is so, and so dressed, of a good
mean, and shape, not very tall.


All this I like, but is this pure kindness to me Clare, hast thou no design,
no trick to put upon me? or like the Devil, dost thou only enrich me to damn my
Soul hereafter.


Why, to tell you the plain truth Sir, I have an end in it, and that is a little
Revenge only, for Sir this Lady is to meet Mr. Lovechange there.


Lovechange! A very Tiger at a Woman, in truth thou art kind to the Lady, and
putst her into gentler hands by far, but Clare, what spite have you to
Lovechange?


Now, what shall I say? -- Why truly Sir -- He --


What, what Clare?


That Sir; nay you make me blush I vow, yet I had such a smackering for him, as
will carry me to this innocent revenge.


A plague on her, what does she call innocent, to rob a man of the enjoyment of
the finest Woman in Town, Clare, Heavens blessing, and this -- go along with
thee.


Adieu Mr. Courtwell, I warrant you for secrecy.


Now will I go, and dress me as like Lovechange as I can, for I suppose that
will please her best, here's the Rogue himself.


Oh, your Servant Mr. Courtwell, how thrives your Amour with the Widow, ha!
what is she kind, and coming?


Time has worn out, even the very thoughts of all those things in her, I think,
which -- because I can't forbear telling her, does so incense her, as the truth
is Ned, I believe it will not be a match:


Oh, will it not so? Well I hope, like the Sea, what you loose in one place,
you gain in another.


Faith no, that grand concern of the World, making love, is quite laid by with
me, I find none that are kind, but at so unmerciful a rate --


Thou art a miserable man, that can not get the knack on it, for William,
there be Ladies, yes there be Ladies, that will, and can love, look ye.


Oh, you are a happy man Sir.


So might thou, did thou but use my Arts:


Prithee, what be they?


Swearing, Lying, and shamming in abundance.


Poh, all this, I daily practice, but 'tis bootless.


Thou dost overdo't, or underdo't, there is a certain quantity goes to the
charm, thou wilt find it out in time -- there is a Lady Will -- Egad, such a
dear Soul -- that has a passion for me.


Oh, I doubt it not Sir.


And this night begins my Heaven, for I shall possess her Will, dost hear?
possess her Lad.


Then, I rather think 'twil end your Heaven, for you'll care but little for her
after that.


Of, that I'll give you a better account to morrow, I writ a Letter to her to
day to meet me here this Evening, and I am so impatient, that I can't forbear
the place, till the hour come.


And what, is this the Garb you have designed to entertain her in?


Even this.


Well, I congratulate your good fortune Sir.


I have been to inquire for you, and they told me, you were here in the Park.


I vow thou make my heart ache, prithee let me hear thy message, quick, and
put me out of my pain, I hope thy Mistress will come?


Yes Sir, and I only forgot to tell you how my Lady is dressed, and therefore
came to let you know Sir, she'll be --


She need not fear, I shall not mistake her for any other, besides, she will be in
so remote a part of the Park, that I suppose there will be hardly any but her
self.


Lord Sir, what do you mean?


Mean? To meet thy Lady, and all the bliss I expect in this World.


But where Sir?


By the Duck-Pond side.


What do you mean Sir? Are you not to meet her in the Mall? here, in this very
place, where you now are?


No, dear Soul, did not I receive a Letter just now from her to the contrary:
That she desired to change the place for some reasons, best known to her self?
here, read it thy self.


Duck-Pond side -- for Reasons -- ha, ha, ha -- This my Ladies hand?


Why dost laugh Reprobate?


I would I were married, if this be'nt an errant cheat, well, faith I laugh,
but have more need to cry, to think how we poor Women are treated by you false
men, now have you been boasting your good fortune to some kind hearted Lass,
that's jealous of you.


The Devil take me Peg --


Hold Sir, don't swear, how could this come about else? Oh that ever my Lady
should trust you.


By Heaven, thou wilt make me rave, I have not seen a Woman, nor will I see a
Woman, whilst I have breath but thy Lady, Hell take me if I have named her, but
to the Air in sighs, and sure this must be hers.


Believe me Sir, she would not trust this secret to any but my self.


'Twas a Porter brought it me as I was walking here, and now I do believe 'tis
some trick, therefore pray inform her, that according to her first order, i'll
meet her in the Mall, here at the furthest end.


I'll let her know you will Sir, your servant.


What's all this communication?


About a mistake, this is the servant to that Lady I must meet at night, in
order to which I must take my leave.


Your servant Ned, good luck attend thee, now if I can but get here before him,
and lead the Lady off, I shall be a double conqueror.


Now I have told you Madam, how much I love, you'll judge at my unhappiness.

It may be, you have been a Lover too, and then I cannot doubt your pity
Madam, I don't entertain you as an Aunt, our years are equal, and perhaps our
hearts, but as a Sister, and a friend, I sue, and beg you would afford me your
assistance.


I was your friend before I was your Aunt, and wish I had remained in that
blessed state, without advancing farther.

Far from the joys of Youth, and Love, i'm gone, but thou art wise, hold where
thou art dear Grace, and wed thy self to something like thy self, despise Sir
Ralph, and take young Amorous.


Oh Madam, how you do revive my Soul, this goodness in you, shows you just, as
fair; but Madam, whence shall I derive my hopes; my Uncle's too severe, he
won't suffer me to take my liberty abroad, nor here, and how can I find time to
speak with Amorous: who languishes with me by sympathy.


This night your Uncle does design an entertainment: we will be in Masquerade,
Betty shall find out Amorous, and let him come also, masked, none will know
him, and if it be possible, get away with him, I conceive the project easy.


Most probable too, oh dear Madam! how I am obliged to your advice, and
permission.


Now I have instructed you, i'll be no more seen in your company to night,
farewell, think of nothing but Amorous; whilst I prepare for Lovechange:


Come Betty, follow me to my Closet for a Letter, if Prayers can help us, the
gods shall want no sacrifice.


Sir, I am infinitely obliged to you for your goodness to me an unhappy
stranger, and when you know how much I deserve your pity too, I don't doubt
but you will give it me.


Nothing Sir that you can suffer, can deserve pity, unless you be a Lover.


Sir, I am a Lover, and so distressed a one --


Dare you not oblige me with the knowledge on it?


Twou'd be too tedious, and too melancholy, and none but Lovers can a
judgement make of what a Lover feels, therefore excuse me Sir.


To let you know, how great my sense can be I'll tell you I can love as well as
any, nay, and compare my miseries with yours, I love a Lady Sir, whose youth,
and beauty, make all Captives that but look upon her, 'tis such a Treasure,
that had Iason known, he would have let his golden Fleece alone, to have made a
Rape on her, and like that too, 'tis guarded by so strange a monstrous Beast,
an old decripped Miser Uncle, that 'tis more difficult to charm his will, then
fight a thousand Dragoons, the Nieces full consent, and heart i've won, but am
forbid to love by this old man.


What reasons can he give for this severity?


He makes no objections against my Estate, or Person, for I am sole heir to my
Aunt, and all the hope of being so to that Uncle too; which you know in Spain.


Your Person Sir, is far from being disgustful, 'tis rather to be admired, and
loved what can the reason be?


Why Sir, he has a Nephew, called Mr. Courtwell --


Heavens! What of him?


Who is designed by this old testy man, to marry with my Aunt, she's rich, and
as you see, not disagreeable.


What will this come to?


But she for some reasons refuses him, yet he is worthy, young, and rich.


Does she refuse him Sir? Oh false Dissembler.


You seem disturbed Sir.


Yes Sir, to think that no merits, no parts, though even Divine, can take a
heart inflexible, my Case was so, but does he love her much?


For her riches only, her wealth, he courts, not her, could he but gain her, I
should then be happy, for his Uncle declares, I shall be welcome to his Niece,
when Courtwell is received well by my Aunt, of if he would cease his Courtship,
and make it elsewhere, in time, the old man might be reduced.


I know this Courtwell, and will try my Arts to make him alter his, as well as
his Uncles will, believe me Sir, I once had power over him, and I will try and
use it now for both your services.


I don't distrust your virtue, nor your will, pray see, what you can do, and
let me be honoured, with the Title of your friend.


Sir, I am proud of the glory, and am your faithful Servant.


Sir, I have a message to you, besides this.


Welcome dear messenger of Love, oh how you bless my Soul.


You speak as if you were sure it brought love, and good News.


Nothing from this hand can be ungrateful! Betty, thou know the contents of
this, and must assist my just design.


Has my Mistress sent you word what habit she'll be in?


She has, but without that help, my heart would find her out, pray tell her how
impatiently I long for the wished for moment.


Sir, that you may employ your self to advantage till then, you were best to
provide the means to carry her away handsomely, and think of a place, where.


Oh Betty, trouble not your self for that, if fortune be so kind to me, to put
her into my hands, I'll warrant her safety there, I'll defy Fate, to ravish her
^ence, keep but thy Mistress in this happy humour, and I don't fear success.


Well Sir, it grows dark, and I shall be wanted, I'll say all the kind things I
can, and which I am sure you think, to Mrs. Grace, and so farewell Sir --


Oh Betty, thou can not think what I would say, nor I can't utter it, but let
Grace imagine, she loves, and knows my Soul to be entirely hers, I will not
fail a moment, and so disguised, as none but she shall know me.


I wonder Peg, who this should be, that has put this trick upon us, and sent
the note to Lovechange?


Some of his Ladies from Wildstreet Alley, or some other such part of the Town.


I cannot believe he would reveal it to any, I have had many proofs of his
prudence, and love, though no use of his secrecy, till this hour, pray Heaven
I don't repent it.


P'shaw, what at your repentance already, good Madam, don't think of it, but go
boldly on.


Well, I'll be at the upper end of this Walk, but I am so impatient, that I
would have you go through the Guard, and see for him.


You need not doubt his speed, but however I'll go.


Lovechange, Lovechange!


This must be the Lady --


I have sent Peg just now through the Guards to look for you; which way came
you?


By a Key the other way, now what shall I entertain her with for a beginning?

A pox on it, I shall spoil all I fear, if I talk much, and I cannot come right
down to the matter.


You are thoughtful, Mr. Lovechange, what is it some device to excuse the
mistake of the Letter? Oh Lovechange! I could not believe, you would have
treated my first kindness to you, in this ungrateful sort.


What shall I answer now? some kind Devil assist me!


Hold, I must, I will believe you.

Ah Lovechange, you little think with what fear I come to yield you up my
Honour, after believing you false -- But come you must dispose of me, I can't
resist.


Nay, if you be thereabouts already, I am happy enough:


Madam, Madam.


Stay, here's my Woman has something to say to me.


Mr. Lovechange is coming Madam.


Coming! whether is he coming trow?


To you Madam, as fast as he can.


Fool, he's here already.


Already! where?


Why, there thou Dunce.


He mounted a Cloud then, for I'm sure I saw him paying his Coach, and spoke
to him, told him where you were, and run before, to give you notice.


Thou art stark mad, I have entertained him this half hour, here.


Lord Madam, 'tis the greatest mistake in the World, I vow this is some
forlorn, or other, that making a discovery of the Enemy unguarded, fell on,
believe me Madam, 'tis none of Mr. Lovechange.


Who the Devil should it be then? Well 'tis a mercy I had not discovered all to
him.


If you have been together this half hour, I fear you have discovered too much
-- 'Slife -- I have it, I fancy this must be some body concerned in the
Intrigue of the Letter sent to Mr. Lovechange.


Faith it may be so, I'll try, and fit him for it.


Madam, you forget, that I am impatient of delay, what's all this whispering
for?


My Woman informs me, that some of my Relations are in the Mall, and 'tis
possible may know me, therefore dear Lovechange, retire to some remote place of
the Park.


Madam, I obey you, with joy.


The Duck-Pond side, I think most convenient; But for our better security, go
you about that way, I'll go this, and meet you.


I take your word, and will be there before you.


I believe you will, if at all?
Oh the villainy of Man!

Oh th Wit of Woman! Madam, I adore your contrivance.

My Lovechange!


My dearest Mistress!


Oh I know that voice 'tis music to my Soul, Lovechange, let's withdraw to
some other part of the Park less open, for I have many eyes to watch me.


This overcharge of joy arrives too hastily, I should have time to let it enter
by degrees.


No ceremonious Foppery dear Lovechange! our joys require some hast, but
something Peg, I have to say to thee first, here take this Key, and dress your
self in my Masking habit, and represent me this Evening, I'll trust thy
management of the business, and thy Wit to deceive the old Man.


Let me alone Madam, to act you to the life, till Bed time at least.


Nay, I think thou may venture thy Maiden-head without danger, there too.


I think, for any great massacre he has made of yours, I may; well I'll run, for
fear of the worst.


Come my fair Mistress, whilst thus I bear you off, to reap the joys of Love, I
find more happiness, more real argument for glorious pride, then if Triumphant
Laurel decked my Brow, to speak me Conqueror of Monarchs?


Well Madam, I find you are a Woman of Honour, and have kept your word, and
then I need not doubt of all the happiness I wish beside.


Oh how my heart rises at this false Man, but I must dissemble it.

I vow Mr. Lovechange, 'tis well you can't see me blush, for I confess I am not
used to these encounters.


Come, come, fair one, no sense of shame I beseech you, for that will call the
blood up to thy face, which should be active in another part, oh that dear
thought, faith and troth makes me impatient: Come, come where shall we be,
where, where, what think you of yonder Bench?


Oh intolerable! he never was thus kind to me before! nor would he now, if he
knew all.


Come, come, no study upon the matter.


Fie, fie, Mr. Lovechange, no approaches to the business; methinks there should
be some short Prologue of Courtship, before the Scene of Love begin.


Our youth, and vigour, needs none of all that, we are ready at all times.


I would you were --

Sir, you have prevailed, and overcome, but methinks this Bench is a very
undecent place.


Oh Madam I There has been many a worse shift made, the night, and these kind
shades, secure our joys.


But not your perfidiousness.
I'll swear Sir, you are so importune.

Come, come, Grace, Wife, Betty, Peg, where be all these Girls, there is such
tricking, such licking, patching, and sinifying, that 'tis a shame to see it,
and tedious to attend it, but to entertain you, we will have a Song.


With all my heart Uncle. Poor honest Fool, I wonder what I meant?
When in the Marriage Circle, first I went.
What Magick's in that Name?
What powerful conjuration, can there be,
Or where's that too, too happy she,
That can allay Love -- when 'tis Legion.
Yet for a quiet Life I've often died,
But oft my Wife has Murdered me beside:
So slyly too, she did the deed,
That at my Murderers sight, I could not bleed:
Though a Phillis new inspires,
At once Life, and whole troops of fresh desires.
And yet should I be constant still -- I will,
Yes like a Rock and like that too, I'll take
Each Wave that near me breaks:
And ravished gently, for her cruel sake:
There I'll drink, and quaff, and riot:
They're sickly Souls that keep more constant diet.


Very well, I vow, and swear now.


My dear Wife, now I like thee, i'st not as good to be merry at home, as
abroad?


Sir, I am all obedience, and like any place where you are.


Why, that's well said, come, inform the Music, and I'll make one, and you Sir
Ralph take Grace here, come Grace, be a good Girl, and love Sir Ralph.


Most judiciously tripped, I vow and swear now, ha! little Mrs. Grace, come since
you can wag your heels so prettily in a Dance, you'll wag something else in
place where, I'll warrant ye, ha Rogue, thy handsome Leg, and Foot, has made me
wish -- you little think, what, I vow now.


Nor care to know Sir.


You lye like a pretty little Baggage faith now, you do know, and you shall
know before anon, what say you Uncle?


I say, as you do Sir Ralph.


I Sir, and in order to it, pray send for a Cushion Cuffer, that there may be no
more shall I, shall I, in the Case, for all flesh is frail, and Women fickle.
What say you Mrs. Grace.


I am all obedience.


Come Ladies, and Gentlemen, I have a treat waits you within.


That must be she by her habit, and shape, Madam do you know me?


Do you know me?


My heart tells me I do, and yours might answer you.


Mr. Amorous, -- Oh Sir my Mistress --


How's this!


What's this a Rival, oh Uncle a Rival, a Rival.


Cocks bodikins 'tis this impudent young Hector Amorous.


How, Amorous? what's he? pray Uncle.


One, that would rob you of your Mistress. Sir Ralph, go and take her from him.


I thank you for that, I make one of the worst bulleys in nature, I vow, pray
Uncle do you handle him for me, he has a terrible grim look of his own.


Sir, pray who are you?


A troubled Spirit Sir, that still repairs to it's bright Treasure.


Oh are you so Sir? We shall conjure you, Uncle, Uncle.


First Mistress, come you o'this side -- take her away Sir Ralph.


'Tis not Amorous Sir.


I will not trust you, nor believe you, but who e're he be, we will leave him to
himself. Your Servant good Familiar.


I, Sir your Servant, you see the Treasure's owned, and you may please to walk,
fare you well, fare you well.


Amorous, my faithful Friend!


What this?


My dearest Grace, 'twas kindly done to undeceive me quickly, why did not
tell me of thy plot?


Because I would surprise ye unawares, but dear Amorous, I have a plot for thee
wholly necessary to our happiness, you must play the Parson, and marry this
Fool to Betty, that we may have time for our escape, I have hid a habit within
a purpose, haste dear Amorous, for our affairs require haste.


Oh rare Rogues, have I caught ye.


Dear Grace, how I am obliged to thee for this contrivance, doubt not my
management.


I'll wait behind these hangings for you.


NOw I defy my Rivals, if Amorous court thee now, I'll have an Action against
him, I hate these fighting Fopps faith, that upon every occasion are at Sa --
sa -- A pox of their Valour; sirrah, court my mistress if you dare, says one,
for if thou dost, this shall proclaim my right, then to it they go, and there's
a Lover lost, perhaps the others hanged, the Drunken Fop cries dam ye, you
dog, drink up your Glass, or you are not fit for civil Society; which if
refused, to Tilting they go, and this they call an honourable quarrel. 'Tis
likely three half pence well managed at an Apothecaries, cures all the wounds
they have, and they set up for men of Courage, brisk Bulleys of the Sword:
These Grace, be the finest Blades of the Age, that court ye, and gain too, all
the idle Women of the Town; and when a Country, down-right, honest, peaceable
Knight, as I am, makes Love; we are laughed at called Sir Martin, Sir Nicholas,
and forty other ridiculous names; that the newest Comedies furnish ye withal;
But Grace, I have money Grace, and a pox of formal Fopps.


Sir, you entertain me with things that concern me not.


Yes Grace, I would have thee be wise now, thou art my Wife.


Be these your tricks Mistress, what you were hid to wait your Lover Amorous,
were you? come along, or I will disgrace thee publicly.


What's this, what's this, my Uncle, and Mrs. Grace, why who the Devil have I
married here then?


Your Friend, and Servant Betty, Sir.


How! why you have not cheated me thus, out of my sweet self have you? oh I'm
undone, undone!


How! Sir Ralph, married to Betty? Oh me, that I had but so much moisture in my
whole body as would keep you company Sir Ralph, but since I have not, this
baggage shall cry for me -- go -- get you in, and know your Commander.


Oh Betty I'm lost.


So, now I have resigned my holy Habit, and am become a lay Lover again.


O Sir, my poor Mistress was discovered behind the Hangings, and her Uncle has
treated her very ill for your sake.


Discovered! oh Betty thou kill me! so near my wished for Port, and sunk in the
very harbour. Malicious Stars! --


Well Sir, I don't doubt but for all this, to bring it about again, in the mean
time, 'twere good you should retire, I will give you notice of all that passes.


I thank thee Betty, but I fear my Fate,
How near was I, to being Fortunate.

O Woman! monstrous Woman! Argus eyes quotha'! ye an hundred were not able to
watch one Woman, a curse upon the whole Sex, and foolish Man for being so fond
of 'em. Oh I am sick, very sick with fretting, ten years are taken from my time
with this nights work, but I have her fast, and will as soon as day appears
conjure her into better manners, oh my heart! But all my consolationis in thee
my dear Wife.


What the Devil shall I say, or do? I dare not turn my Face toward the light,
least he should know me, and if I speak, I fear that will betray me, if I
refuse to go to Bed, I discover all my Mistresses secrets, and then we are
undone, if I go to Bed -- Why then -- Heaven knows what --


I am happy in this yet, that I in thee my Honey, have a loving Virtuous Wife,
one that's above all the little Lightnesses of her Sex, yes, her villainous Sex,
Come, come to Bed my Love.


Sir, since 'tis so near day, and you so hasty to take Revenge upon Grace, we
had even as good save the labour of undressing.


By no means, to Bed I say, that I may take a little repose, after this
harasssing of my Spirits, but still I am thrice happy in thee.


Aye, would you knew all -- no hopes yet -- No Mistress come, what shall I do?
she is so taken up with her more soft affairs, that she minds not how rashly I
am like to be used with this old Master of mine.


Thou hast but one only fault, and that is, not loving thy Bed, prithee reform
that lewd and scandalous way of life, of sitting up late.


Lord, that he should blame any Woman, that refuses to go into a pair of Sheets
with him.


Undress I say, or I shall be most villainous angry again.


It must out, and it will out, but I am to be excused, for I have plaid my
part, and counterfeited, till I am come to almost past counterfeiting. To Bed
quotha', 'Slife I had as live lye in a Charnel house, I don't blame my Mistress
for loving another, but hark, I hear a rustling


Why the Devil, come you not to Bed?


I am hasting as fast as I can Sir.
Please you to go in before, I won't stay a moment after you.

Oh the intolerable Pride, and Plague of Woman-kind! I tell ye I will not
budge a foot without ye, therefore come away, I will break thee of this humour
at last.


Oh undone! quite undone!


All is husht, and still, I hope all's well, oh my dearest Lovechange, if you
did but know with what regret I leave you, your pity, would certainly augment
your love. 'Tis almost day, and yet methinks 'tis but a little moment we have
been together: Oh how short the hours of love and pleasure seem.


I think so too my Dear, would it had pleased the gods to have bound us thus
eternally together.


Can you dear Lovechange, speak this Language still? after enjoyment, men grow
dull, and cold.


Number not me, amongst the common rout of those, whose beastly Appetite begets
a short lived passion, mine like the object that first caused it, is pure,
unchangable, without deceit.


I must believe you, and must love you too, but we must part, oh that
ungrateful word!


But we must meet again, that only hope atones for the unkindness of the other,
pray don't suffer many hours to pass, before you let me see you, I shall dye
with one whole day of absence.


You please me, when you do but wish to see me, and to return that goodness,
for 'tis such


I cannot leave the house, till I know how you speed with your too passionate
Husband.


I'll creep softly up, if he be asleep, I'm safe, for nothing but the noise of
money can wake him, attend you below.


Discovered! and undone!


Betrayed! ruined betrayed! oh thou wicked, thou treacherous Wretch, where's my
Wife, my lewd, wicked Wife?


Are you mad?


Yes, I am, and will show it, thou Eternal Baggage.


So now let him strike,


This shall not serve your turn, I will cudgel thee, till I have not left a bit of
skin on thy bones, I don't expect thou should tell me whereabouts thou art,
no Huswife, I'll feel you out


So, now go you in, and receive a blow or two, and be sure you cry out lustily,
and I'll come to your assistance with a Candle.


Good dear Husband be'nt so passionate, what have I done to cause this?


Thou impudent Harlot, dost call me Husband? tell me truly, confess, confess,
what Rogue, has got thy Mistress out, where is she a Caterwauling? confess, or
I will dissect thee, for thou art her Pimp --


Your grief has made you lunatic, I am your Wife, hold, hold your profane
hands.


No, I will mark thee with a Vengeance, I'll spoil your Pimping.


Murder, murder, since you are so inhumane, I will have no mercy on your
Reputation, murder!


Bless me! what do I see, my dear Mistress?


Ha, ha, her dear Mistress? 'tis so, 'tis so, I, I, thou art Peg, and this is
my own sweet Wife.


Sir, pray let me know why you use me thus? Is it not enough that you have
married me to an old stinking Carcass, a useless thing, but you must beat me? I
will no more endure you, no not the sight of thee.


Sweet Wife, most merciful Wife, bear with the frailties of my age.


I have born with 'em too long.


Aye, there's it, It's that sticks by thee, but dear Wife I protest, I took
thee all this while for Peg.


How came you to mistake?


Why, when I was in bed, as you made me go before, you know, I fancied that the
Papers which you were looking on at the Table --


Which was no other then a Prayer-Book to prolong time only.


And thinking it might have been a Love-Letter (for I am naturally jealous)
stole out of Bed, and looking thee full in the face, I thought thou had been
Peg, very Peg; as I am a lover of thy virtue, I know not how I came to be
mistaken, but so 'twas, and I dare swear --


What Sir, that 'twas I? Lord how merry you are Sir.


And must I suffer, because you are old and blind?


Truth is, 'tis very unreasonable, pardon me my fair, my Angelical Wife, I will
never trust my eyes again in this case.


Pray forsooth bear with his Weakness, and the Infirmity of Age.


Ah how she aggravates my crime, old, and age were no harm, but that she's
brisk and youthful, patience, good Lady, patience.


I'm resolved I'll pardon ye this once, in pity to your years.


Aye, there 'tis again.


But if ever I find you faulty again, I'll be divorced.


Thou hast reason, for on my Consccience thou art as good a Virgin, as when I
had thee.


I'll deny that, or she has past her night but ill.


I will not bed with you to night, for besides that I am exceedingly offended
with you, you have mortifi'd all inclinations of a Bedfellow in me, and so fare
you well Sir.


Patience I say -- though I have no great matter to do a bed with her, yet I
dare not trust her out of my sight, -- but I must let her have her will this
once,


I shall do by the morning perhaps. Lovechange, and in his arms, complete the
rest of this so well begun night.


I too, deserve something for acting' so judiciously in this affair.


Thou, dear Peg, art Loves Matchivil, and deserve a Statue reared to thy
memory for all honest discreet Maids to worship.


Haste Madam, for Mr. Lovechange stays to take a parting kiss I'm glad we are
come off so nobly, and that you have a little time, good for a little more
delight, when you are pleased, we must contrive some way to free poor Mrs.
Grace, who suffers for Loves sake too.


Let me alone for that.


I wonder in my heart, where this Mistress of mine is, she'll even stay till 'tis
light, and discover her self, pray Heavens she come before the house is up.

Oh Madam I'm glad you are come before my Master, well how thrived you Madam?


Just as I wished Girl, and as we contrived it, he met me at the Duck-Pond side,
where we stayed most part of the night. Oh had the Joys which I received been
meant to me!


Madam you see, what imagination can do, and did he do as he ought to do Madam?


O Clare! he said and did so many kind things to me!


So many say you Madam? Nay then we shall have him come home as tame, and
pensive, as a Gamester, out-done in his own Trade of Nicking, now it may be I
may go quietly about my business, all this day at least.


And I may lye quietly too, unless I can cheat him again, well I was never so
pleased, and displeased in my Life before, some way I will find to be revenged.


Some such Comical way.


No my hopes are gone for ever having of him this way in my power, oh this
treacherous man that I have so obliged.


And he has this night made some returns.


Stay, when I think how great a satisfaction 'twas to him to believe himself in
the Arms of Mrs. Easy I can't think of a better revenge, then to let him know
it was not she.


Why, will you tell him Madam?


Yes, and at once destroy his vain glory, and let him know how sensible I am of
the affront, if he has any sense of shame, or honour, this may reclaim him.

He's coming; how now Mr. Lovechange, what no good morrow after a whole nights
absence.


What the Devil do you up so early? you become your bed far better.


I can't rest Mr. Lovechange, when you are not there.


You must use your self to such things, Husband and Wife, were not made to lye
Eternally together.


Why, Mr. Lovechange, what other use can you put your self to a nights?


I thank ye for that I'faith -- What -- then to lye with my own Wife? as I take
it, there were no Articles between you, and I, to leave off any part of my
former Trade, as Drinking, Gaming --


And Whoring.


Nay, my Dear, as for that -- believe me, I have left it quite off. A man that
has a Wife so experienced as thou art, so kind, so willing a Wife, faith I
think he were worse then a Tiger to abuse thee, thou hast all my stock, believe
me dear Soul.


Which is a very small one.


Faith a Man, that drinks, and Games, can't be very brisk that way.


Drinking was ever counted an Enemy to our Sex, but pray Sir how does gaming
abuse it?


Why faith, if a Man has ill luck, as likely I have -- What with Fretting,
Swearing, Damming, and throwing, my Spirits disperse, which should retire to
the place you wot on.


You think any excuse may serve for a Wife, all this, may make you unkind at
home, but do the Ladies abroad find your fretting, Damming, Swearing, and
throwing, disperse Nature in you?


Ah! I see where the Worm bites, thou art politically jealous of me.


Oh fie! Jealous? (that were a fault indeed) of one so kind, so just, and true
a Husband as you are Mr. Lovechange.


Thou hast said all in a word, Egad I would not change thee for the finest Miss
in Town.


Yes, there is a certain Lady, that for a Night, you did not care, if you made
an exchange with.


Who I? I defy the World.


You have not been to Night, with the dearest, the finest Woman?


How! 'Slife, this comes home to me.


You were more obliged to the kind shades in St. Iames's Park, than to the
Moon, who's light perhaps might have discovered your error.


O confound her! all's out, how came she to know it?


What are you studying for an excuse? a lye to put me off with?


I will out-face her.


Mr. Lovechange, I have no other end in this, more then to let you know your
error, and that I am sensible of the indignity, take notice I knew of your
meeting at the Duck-Pond side, and shall reward your kindness.


Duck-Pond side? Stay, I grow serious, that I have infinite obligations to
thee, I must ever own, and I had nothing to return you back, but this bare
substance, and a gratitude, and what the heats of youth may prompt me too I
can't tell; But when you ask me truly what they are I will inform your
knowledge, and what you charge me with of this nights action, believe me Madam,
is false information, I saw no woman, by the Duck-Pond side.


How can I credit this? and yet I should believe him, I am not apt to credit
evil Tongues.


Oh don't pursue an error, to my prejudice; upon my Honour; by all the vows of
sacred Love, and Marriage, I was not near that place, but something I remember
past last night, 'twixt whom I know not, that perhaps deceived you. I'll search
it out and satisfy your Jealousy.


Oh Heavens! if this be true what thing am I?


Come don't vex thy self with peevishness, don't create these ills, that will
torment thee. I'll satisfy thy doubt, believe me Dear.


Oh I am ruined,


For Heavens sake, Madam keep your courage up, for if you have Cuckold my
Master by -- mistake, 'tis the best way to put as good a face on it, as you can,
there's no recalling it. Lord what a business you make of a thing that is not
worth speaking of.


But guilt's a strange thing Clare.


Why you don't believe him sure, can all your senses fail you, or will you
credit him, in spite of 'em all, you saw, you heard, and felt too, as you say.


They were all prepared to receive him, without any other imagination, and
might be easily deceived.


But since there's no possibility of any other Person's coming then his, you
ought not to give your faith so easily. But Madam, here comes Mr. Courtwell,
who will perhaps discover more.


Shame, and Confusion, will not let me hear him.


Now, would I give the world to know this Woman's name, and abode, these
curiosities, don't usually last after enjoyment, one would have thought I had
glutted my self of Woman-kind for these two days, and of her for ever, but
'twas a sweet plump active Rogue. 'Slife, yonder's the Rogue Love-change,
Lovechange, methinks thou look melancholy upon it, what no hope from the
Widow? for I perceive you Rival me.


Oh trouble not your head with the Widow, you may remember I told ye she was
not for your turn.


Are you sure of that?


Most certain.


And are you the Man, the happy Man.


Why, what exceptions have you against me, what, I'll warrant, you thought the
noise of Lands, and Joynctures would have carried it, but know Will, that Wit,
and Parts are greater Motives.


And does your conceit Edward! persuade you to the belief, that you are so
qualified?


Faith, I never studied that, but the Ladies are kind, and do tell me of some
such charms I am Master of.


The Lady too Ned, that you met in the Park, she has that goodness for you too,
hah!


She is satisfied, and that's sufficient.


I hope she was, for I did my best. Lord Ned, that thou shou'd'st be so simple,
to believe thy self Master of all hearts. All the Ladies submit to you dear
Ned, so did the Lady in the Mall, did she not; But there was a Man, (though not
so considerable as you Sir) that pleased her better by the Duck-Pond side, and
perhaps may make as good an interest in her, as you have in the Widows heart,
you guess the Man, and so farewell Ned, farewell, ha, ha, ha.


Prithee stay, Egad thou art pleasant company my dear Soul; and was there say
you? was there such a spark? that did the feat so well at the Duck-Pond side?
ha, ha, ha?


I am glad you are so merry Sir.


Faith, I can't forbear being infinitely pleased to find my friend so happy, I
am glad I know this secret, I might have wanted the means to have convinced my
Wife else, that 'twas not I, but I wonder who the Devil the Lady should be,
surely some one taken with my Person, and that had a certain longing -- and how
Will, and how did you find her? for I am willing to communicate my blessings.


Why had thou ever enjoyed her?


In truth not, nor never will for ought I know.


You seemed yesterday to praise her to the Skies, and is she fallen so low in
your opinion.


She that I spoke of, was, and is the same, and nothing but Age, can alter her
from being the finest, sweetest Person in the World.


I found her so,


And was she brisk that way, say you? Will.


To a miracle, I can't contain my joy, I must discover all -- and now dear
Lovechange if thou would let me know her name, and quality?


By my troth Sir, if I could serve you this way, you might command me; But you
are already happy enough, be not too glorious with it.


What humour's this, I can't understand him, but Clare must be my guide -- Your
Servant Sir, since you are so fantastic.


Your Servant dear Will, ha, ha.


I cannot comprehend this Fellow's fancy, now I am for the Widow, whom I must
gain in spite of all her peevishness, I know she has no a version to my
Person, and though I don't love her much, yet, my Pride obliges me to come off
Conqueror, but oh this other lovely, kind, obliging Stranger.


Oh excess of Treachery!


Who's here, ere another Rival? Pox on 'em, how they swarm about a rich Widow,
'Slife, I think he's dressing himself.


Sure Courtwell loves this Lady, for methinks he is very active, how shall I
accost him, how as a stranger shall I begin a discourse to him? I'll pretend I
am his Rival.


Your Servant Sir.


Yours Sir, proceed if you have ought with me?


You look and talk Sir, as if you were Major Domo.


It may be Sir I am, will that afflict you?


My name is Courtwell Sir, and I pretend to the Lady of this Mansion.


Very likely! but whether she will fall to your share or not, is a great
question.


Not to be made by a School-boy, pretty Lad, hast any nickers, or
cherry-stones? if thou hast, there be Children of thy own size without, will
hold thee play.


Oh Sir, I'll give you leave to be witty with my youth, whilst I laugh at your
gravity, and wisdom. In short Sir, if the Lady likes the Boy, better then your
Manhood, you'll find cold entertainment, go Sir, take this answer, she is not
for your turn, go Sir, you loose your time, there is a certain kind, obliging
Lady.


Oh the Devil have they that story by the end too? Well this Clare has betrayed
me, however this little diminutive Man, sha'not affront me, yet hanged he's a
child not worth my malice.


Hold Sir, you pass no further this way, that leads you to the door.


Prit he unhand me youth, thou'lt make me angry, and then I were too blame,
with so much innocence.


None of your put off's Sir, I am not so young, nor innocent, as you take me to
be; I can do many things that would proclaim me Man, don't upbraid the
smoothness of my Chin, my Sword's as rough as thine, and I dare draw it.


Very pretty. Lord how it tattles, why little talking Monsieur, by what
authority do you resist me? can that fair Face disguise it self in anger? and
that's the most that thou can do, let's see thee frown, that perhaps would
break a Ladies heart, a soft, young silly Lady, but I make sport at thee, ha,
ha, ha.


What shall I do, to raise his anger up? For I had rather that way meet my
Death, then see him in the embraces of another: That will but kill me a more
cruel way.


Sure he has some other motive then the love of the Widow, that carries him to
this rashness, the Boy grows angry, serious, and can fight perhaps.


No consideration Sir, if you refuse to fight me, I will Pistol ye, take your
choice to live with Honour, or to dye with Infamy.


Well Sir, I'll meet you there, but don't care for fighting with thee much.


I have Conditions too for Peace, as well as War, and love fighting, as little
as you, I'm glad he consents to go out o'th house, I don't care to have my
story known to any but himself, who only can relieve me.


OH dear Madam, what shall we do for Mrs. Grace, I vow she is in the
lamentablest taking, nay, and a worse matter then that, my old Master is
resolved to fright her out of her wits, till she consent to marry Sir Ralph.


Why I thought he had by mistake married Betty.


So he did Madam, but they design to put her off for a peace of money, it being
a cheat, and without a License, and Betty offers for a thousand pound to sit
down with the loss, and release him to Mrs. Grace, but all this does not
satisfy, for Mrs. Grace is refractory, and will by no means consent.


Poor Grace, what contrivance shall we think of, to release her from her
bondage and torment.


Alas Madam, if that were the worst, but her Uncle designs this morning to let
out some of her hot blood, as he calls it, he has sent for a Surgeon, and
pretending she is mad, means to try conclusions by opening a vein, or two.


He dares not be so cruel, and inhumane.


I suppose he dares not design so ill a thing indeed, but she being very young,
and innocent, will soon (at least he thinks so) be brought to yield to any
thing, rather then be so used, but Madam I have thought of a stratagem; when my
Master sends out for a Surgeon, I'll let you see my wit, I will not tell you
before hand.


Thou art so excellent at contrivance, that I will not question the success,
nor ask thee what it is, go on and prosper; but call upon me by and by for a
Letter, that I intend to write to Lovechange.


This, is your place of execution, consider, repent, and be saved.


I, I, Mrs. Grace, that's your safest way, tis very ill lying in a cold grave
this Winter time, a Bed, and a good Bed fellow were much better, consider,
consider, I vow my heart bleeds to think how you will suffer for love of me.


What shall I do Betty, is their no way left for my deliverance?


Do not fear it Madam, Peg, and I, have laid our heads together for your
relief, however make all the signs of fear you can.


I know not what can relieve me, but I will hope well, good Uncle, what i'st
you'd have me do? how can I marry with a man that is already married?


Aye, by your contrivance Baggage he is, but thou shalt suffer severely for it,
and this Slut I will make dance a new Galliard in Bridewell.


Truly Sir I don't fear you, but for my poor Mistress sake I would do any thing
but loose my Husband.


Oh! I had rather hear a Schreech-Owl then that voice, Husband quotha'? I defy
thee.


Why Sir, I have youth and beauty enough to be a Lady.


Why I tell thee I care not, and thou were it the Devil, so thou had money, oh
I am distracted to think that I should loose six thousand pound, and Mrs.
Grace.


You hear Sir, there's all his grief to loose the money.


I like him the better for it, -- Well you will beg pardon and be received to
mercy?


First Sir, let me see Sir Ralph free from Betty, for I confess I would not
marry a man that should be in danger of the Gallows.


Oh how I tremble at that word, I, I, pray good Uncle, let me be freed from
this little Jilt here, and then I do not fear my fate as they say with Mrs.
Grace, nay if thou dost not release me I will give thee no money, nor no
consolation, thou shalt 'en live by thy wits, and thou wilt for Ralph.


I am well enough satisfied to part upon good consideration.


What be they, what be they, any Condition.


Only giving me a thousand pound Sir.


How! a thousand pound? Mercy upon us!


I cannot live by my Wits, and therefore --


Thou wilt ruin me, a thousand pound?


You will loose six by the bargain Sir, in loosing my Mistress.


That's well considered I confess; But will nothing less, then that mighty sum
suffice you.


By no means, for Sir I must marry, I would not fall much lower then a Lady
Ship.


O insatiable Woman! a thousand pound! why pray Mrs. Betty be good and
merciful.


I have said, and will hold there Sir, or keep my Title.


I am not able to endure the thoughts of parting with so much money --


Come Sir Ralph, since there's no other way, you know Mr. Lovechange owes you a
thousand pound, give her that Bond, and it shall be sufficient.


I am content to take it Sir, but will Mr. Lovechange pay me, is it a good
debt?


I'll secure it good, here, here's the Bond, take it -- and with it my curse. I
had any thing for my Money, it would not have grieved me.


Come Sir, it can't be hope, this 'tis to have to do with any of their Sex. But
here's Grace to make you amends with, take her.


Hold Sir, two words to that bargain.


Refractory still! I will show no mercy on thee, Sir Ralph keep her here,
whilst I see if the Surgeon been it come that I sent for?


Sweet Mrs. Grace consent without compulsion as they say, for I protest but
that I have given a thousand pounds towards thee, I would rather give you over,
then see you suffer any hurt for me, therefore pray be civil a little, though
it be against your inclinations to be so.


I shall not consent.


Here Sir, here's your Patient, and though she looks so soberly at present,
she's stark mad poor Soul. Bedlam, if any Cure may be had otherwise.


Sir forbear, I am not mad, nor will be so unless you make me.


Alas good Lady, you be troubled wit de Love, wit de vere great extravagance,
you be very much distemper'.


You be very much de Coxcomb Sir.


Aye, now she begins, come, come, to bleeding of her, is not that very good?


We', we', ver' necessar, come Lady.


Thou inhumane fellow, think thou indeed I'm distempered, and need thy
cure, or if I were so, that thou hast any skill? Yet once you sed that Love was
my Disease, and that indeed was truth.


Vat Complexion be de Man of dat you love, and dat can be cruel to so very
amiable a Person.


He is not cruel, but my Uncle is, and with your help designs to kill me sure,
do so, for since I cannot marry Amorous I do desire to dye.


See Sir, how her fit alters, she'll laugh again anon, I pray Sir be speedy.


I am not able to see her blood, and therefore must withdraw.


Come Madamosel, you must permit me to do someting to cure your amours, let me
see, she must be tied to dis Chey'r, let me try it first.


Tis well, 'tis well Sir, pray to your business.


No indeed Sir, 'tis not good, make you de experiment pray, and see if 'tis
convenient.


Cocks bodikins, these villainous Outlandish-Men make such a pother, an English
Man would have killed you half a score, whilst you cure one.


Help to bind him fast Boy.


What do ye mean Gentlemen?


Only to tie you up to your good Behaviour a little.


Oh happy deliverance! Amorous is it you?


Yes, and do you shift for your self, and leave me to handle him.


Villains, unhand me, oh thou Monster Amorous, is it thou?


Even I Sir, I am turned Surgeon to serve you Sir, come strip up his Arms, and
let us bleed him speedily. I have a drench here that must be given first, 'twil
make him bleed like one of twenty.


Oh I am killed, I am murdered.


No, you are not to dye so patiently.


Yes, I will dye on purpose that thou may be hanged: no help near? Wife,
Grace, Betty, Murder, murder!


Ah Pox of his bawling, I must shift for my self now.


Oh are you caught Sir, I shall handle you now, 'tis the Rogue Amorous.


Amorous, how came he in?


How shall he get out, oh the Devil --


Have I got ye i'faith into my Clutches? Dear Uncle, leave his punishment to
me, I have a Servant here that has the notablest Hed-piece for Villainy that
ever was.


Do any thing to him, that may torment him soundly, have no mercy on him, sweet
Sir Ralph.


I warrant ye Uncle, I have a brave place to put him into, and will have him
bastinadoed thrice a day for Recreation, till I have mortified his Love.


Fool, I do despise, and dare thy worst of evils, were Grace but safe, oh I
should be content to suffer, I'm sure they dare not murder me.


Yes Grace shall be safe, and my Wife within this hour; thou shalt never see
her face more.


Devil do thy worst!


Here Io, take him into thy Custody, let him be put into the Vault, let silence
and darkness be his Companions.


Come Sir, along with me Sir, I shall teach you the art of Surgery.


Nay, if thou escap'st now, I'll say thou had a Witch to thy Mother, and a
Devil to thy Father.


Rash Boy! to force me to this rudeness, for 'twas not manhood in me thus to
hurt thee, alas, thou could not fight, thou had no skill to hold thy weapon
for thy own advantage.


Sir you have done enough if it be home.


Sure thou art some poor despairing thing that seek a Death from any hand,
why did thou choose out mine, for that base action, there are a thousand
Murderers, Ruffians, things desperate as thy self, that would have done this,
with the least provocation, why did thou choose a Gentleman?


Thou a Gentleman? could any thing, that is not basely born, commit such
villainies as thou hast done, ere since thou called thy self a Man?


Come don't talk, but let me lead thee to a Surgeon.


Mr. Perigreen and Courtwell say you? how in the name of wonder should they
come to fall out?


Nay, I know not Madam, but I believe 'twas about you.


Me? But see Clare where they are --


Curse on her for coming now, a little time might have discovered all.


I'm glad she has released me.


Gentlemen, I heard of some difference between you, and thought it but Justice
to prevent further danger.


Twas well, and charitably performed, Widow, but I suppose 'twas care of your
new Gallant here that hastened you.


Oh villainous Courtwell! what hast thou done! the poor youth bleeds -- alas,
Sir, lets haste for some relief?


Widow I have a word with you, before you go.


I have nothing to say to you, forbear.


But I must stay you for a small season to tell you Widow you are a --


What thou Impertinent?


A strange inconstant, faithless, amorous thing, whom I have now thrown from my
heart.


Have you so Sir?


Yes, and to make thee wretched, know I love elsewhere?


Yes Sir, your new Lady perhaps, which you met last night in the Mall.


How! I did not think thou had been arrived to the years of Witchcraft yet,
Widow?


There needs none to know your secrets Sir, one need but have the faculty of
hearing well, to know 'em all, for you are loud enough in the Proclamation
of'em.


Now are all my hopes dashed here, this must be Clare, or Lovechange, the last I
believe, purposely to ruin all my expectations with the Widow, that Rascal I
must sight Mall, a fine handsome airy Rogue.


And was she kind too?


Wondrous kind, nay of her self, so wittily found out the place of
entertainment, and made the treat too, when she came there.


How Sir! were you in any House?


House? no, we enjoyed our selves like the gods of old, in Groves, and Gloomy
shades, on Rivers Banks, faith Widow, to kill thee quite, I met a Lady on the
Duck-Pond side, that would have fired an Anchorite:


How Sir? by the Duck-Pond side, thou'lt kill me indeed, if thou undeceiv'st me
not presently?


Even there -- since Lovechange, has told her I'll do his business for him.
Lovechange, I dressed my self as like as possible, -- and took all she said to
him, on my self.


Oh I am ruined! and was she easily won Sir? for perhaps I know the Lady -- Oh
how curious I am to know my own dishonour.


I do suppose Lovechange had prepared her, for to me she made but weak
resistance, she said 'twas well the darkness hid her blushes, and that the
Bench was a very undecent place.


My very words! Oh I could kill the Rascal! what different passions is my Soul
possessed with! Courtwell, thou art a Villain, this Lady I know, and thou hast
abused her honour, not won her heart, and all the rest was but a Rape, a base
unworthy Rape, and one perhaps that shall be revenged.


By this light the Widow loves me, I know it by her Jealousy, perhaps this
may be the critical minute, I'll follow her and try my chance: Perhaps too I may
learn something from this young Bully that may explain this Riddle to me.


How shall I contrive to see my dear Mistress? For I am not able to live
without her, though I am a damned mad fellow, and love all her Sex in general,
yet in her is bounded all my love and pleasure -- Pox on it, I am damned dull at
Invention.


What melancholy after his Gaming? Well I hope I may trust my self alone with
him to day, therefore I'll venture in.


Prithee good property of my Wife, leave me.


Faith Sir, I would have a word or two in private with you first


Pox on it, thou would not be so forward if I desired thy Company now.


What will you say now, and I'll tell you what you are thinking on.


Not of your late cruelty to me Clare! nor care I a farthing if you are come to
offer me, what you then denied me, and therefore leave me.


Faith Sir, I have not the heart to obey you till I have left you in better
humour, come Sir!


If I should trust a secret with thee Clare, thou would be blabbing it to my
Wife.


You can trust me with nothing but what I know already Sir!


Faith 'tis not unlikely!


I am acquainted Sir, with all your last nights Intrigue.


The Devil thou art -- and like a wicked Jade, thou hast informed my Wife.


And is that the cause of your affliction?


That's all, that's all, but Clare was it kindly done to turn a base Informer
here at home, just thus it had been had thou been kind to me, on my
Conscience, thou would have told thy Mistress on it.


I hope you don't think me so simple Sir.


Thou never consider'st the evil consequences Clare, of carrying Tales? now
must my daily allowance be shortened, now must I drudge at home, for the
expenses of my Whoring abroad, nay and perhaps be chained up like a Mastiff dog
all day, to make me more fierce a nights: well Clare, if I am forced to keep
home for want of stock, and kept fasting, the whole force of my hungry love
will fall most heavily on thee, and I will show thee no more mercy, then thou
hast done to me.


I don't fear you Sir, since you were with so fine a Lady last night.


I am found out, they know my Roguery, and have mistook the place only but
that's enough to ruin me. Clare -- Is there no hopes of a forgiveness? no
making up of this breach? Methinks you should follow the greatest examples,
that forgive all faults confessed with penitence, I must confess, I had a Lady,
Clare.


Oh, wicked Man! how stiffly he denied this to my Lady to day! Well Sir, what
will you give me to absolve this sin, and restore you to my Mistresses grace
again?


Give thee? Why my heart, thou shalt command me.


Why then Sir, 'twas even my Mistress, and your own Wife that met you at the
Duck-Pond side:


What? the Duck-Pond side?


I Sir, and in St. Iames's Park, where you were kinder to her, than ever you
were before.


Ouns! my Wife?


Yes, your Wife, don't disturb your self, 'twas but one nights loss to you, and
that sure you may afford for all she has done for you* saith Sir, we knew of
your Intrigue, and were resolved to counterplot ye, ha, ha, ha.


Devil! why dost laugh?


To think how safe you fancied your self to be in the Arms of Mrs. Easy.


Oh Curse! I am miserable both ways, not only to find my self Cuckolded by
Courtwell Easy.


What, are you disordered still? Troth, I think you may be glad to make your
peace on an any terms.


One comfort I have yet left, I'm released from the slavery of my Wife by
knowing I am a Cuckold, and that shall secure the credit too of my dear
Mistress whose Honour's now in danger, this secret too, 'tis fit I find some
way to let her know, and consult how to prevent a further growth, and thou
Courtwell shalt feel the effects of my displeasure.


O Lord, what have I done! he talks as if it were not he that met my Mistress,
but Courtwell, I am quite undone. 'Tis so by my Maiden-head, if I could be
serious now; I could cry, and fret my self into a Consumption, for this unlucky
mistake of mine, which I dare not discover to my Lady neither, she has vexation
enough already without this addition, oh that I could bring all about again?


Oh Sir! I have excellent news for you, the lost sheep is found, I have taken
your Mistress Sir, just as she was marching off with all her Movables, her
Jewels, and other Toys, and Sir I have her fast --


Where?


In a certain convenient dark Lodging, which her Uncle provided for her, where
she shall fast and pray, till her stomach come down to marry you Sir.


Aye Io, would I had her? that is her money, for she is very beautiful that
way. Io, but hark ye I would fain see her, I know her mind, for 'tis a pretty
little Rogue.


Sir, I can do you that favour, for her Uncle has committed the Key to my
charge, with a command that none but you shall see her.


So Mrs. Grace, what is your stomach come down or not?


No, nor never will to thee, had you loved me, you could not have suffered me
to be used thus for your sake, a Gentleman would have desisted, after so much
aversion as I have shown you.


Pshaw, whaw, tell not me of desisting, nor aversions as I have shown ye. Mrs.
Grace, you are a Fool, and don't know so well as your Uncle and I, what's good
for you, I have two thousand pound a year mun, and I am a Knight, and all that
mun, keep my Gilt Coach, and five livery men -- and Amorous has scarce a
shilling for a dirty Hack.


My Master speaks reason to you Lady.


Your Master and you, are a couple of sots, impertinent Fools, I hate ye both,
and would not marry him, though I should perish there, whence you draw me now,
Tis Paradise compared to where thou art.


Oh Rare! oh rich! what, you can rant, and scold, one would have thought I vow
that Butter would not a melted in her mouth.


You'll make me rave, you will, and I will Rave too, you can't tie my tongue up,
that's still free to curse you with.


Toes, here's fine doings.


Io, carry her down, she may be tame e're night.


Do what thou wilt, thou shalt never bring me to be tame enough for thee: this
dark, this solitary Cave best suits my absent Love, here I contemplate, here my
thoughts are free, and like a little Bird I'll sit, and sing a melancholy note
within my little Cave.


I, do what you will, we shall change your note, fear it not.


So, now you are fast again, well I am a cruel Rogue, for all this though, that
can find no remorse.


How now Jailer, what black deed are you a doing there?


Only a putting your Mistress into her hole Sir.


My Mistress there, thou art not so barbarous?


Indeed I am Sir.


Was it for this your kindness brought me out, and changed my Lodging for this
opener place to bury her in, Dog, set her loose or by the sacred passion I have
for that fair Maid I'll strangle thee.


Say you so Sir, you had better let me alone though, hark Sir, she's well
contented with her retirement.


Oh charming Virgin, how thy innocence can make thy entertainment, sirrah
deliver the Key, or you're dead.


Stand off Sir, I have a rusty Sword, and you have no weapon, stand off, or --


Slave dost dare me? --.


Oh I am dead, I am dead! stark stone dead.


'Slife I think the Rogue speaks truth, he's dead indeed, but if he be I'll
justify the action, stay, what am I next to do? In passing out perhaps I may
be seen -- I have devised a way for my escape, but first I'll release my fair
Prisoner.


Now if I durst stir, I would get away and show em such a trick -- but hark
they are ascending, and I must lye purdue.


My Dearest! 'tis no time to express joy in, this fellow I fear is dead, and we
have both need of a safe retreat, here's the Key of the Gate to the Fields, get
you out, and go the back way to my Aunts, 'tis but six doors off, you know
she'll receive you well, whilst I escape another way.


My dearest Amorous, take care of what I love, and let me see thee quickly
releast from this base Mansion, where nought but terror dwells.


Come Sir, I have a word or two with you in the next room, I'll put on this
Rogue's disguise, and that will be a means for my escape.


This Wench stays very long, I hope she has found my dear Lovechange.


My heart tells me there is something a forging, but what I know not, perhaps I
may know more.


Madam, here's the answer to your Letter.


How! a Letter to my Wife? gently, good supporters, gently.


Why did thou stay so long? It grows late, and I am impatient to be gone to
Lovechange.


O rare! is it thereabouts with you?


I vow Madam, he kept me there so long -- asking me questions about you,
kissing your dear Letter, and sending so many recommendations to you, and so
many curses to my old Master.


Fine, delicate young Bawd.


I had rather he should wish him well Peg. That's in Heaven.


Hum, hum, charitable, kind Wife.


But to my Letter, dear Lovechange let me kiss thee, before I read thee.


Excellent!


Alas Peg, we are all undone, Lovechange can't meet me at Mrs. Woodbee's to
night, for reasons he will tell me anon; but how anon dear Peg, and where? for
I am not able to live this night without him.


That too, I have to tell you by word of mouth.


O horrid impudence!


O sad! What shall I do?


No evasions, no lies shall serve you, come I will lock thee up from all humane
society, and have no mercy on thee.


Dear Husband!


Dear Devil! For such, and so severe I'll be unto thee.


Now all the Plot's spoiled, this will go hard with my poor Mistress, I'll try
my Wit once more for her deliverance, for I would not have her disappoint Mr.
Lovechange's expectations, she must meet him to night.


Come Brothers of the Baton, open that door, for there's the subject of your
mirth, oh how we will swinge the Rascal, and do you hear Bulleys, you must be
sure you beat him, till he resign (before you that are my Witnesses) Mrs. Grace
to me.


I warrant you Sir,


Sure 'tis the Rascal Amorous returned to make me sure, therefore to my
counterfeiting.


There he sits, Gentlemen to your business.


'Tis so, there's no resistance to be made.


But first let me take him into examination, come sirrah answer me precisely to
these particulars, first how long have you commenced Doctor of Divinity (for
all is out) how came you to marry me to Mrs. Betty? a pox of your sanctified
cause, 'thas cost me a thousand pounds good English Money.


'Tis Sir Ralph my Master.


No reply sirrah, next you quitted the long Robe, and transformed your self to
a French Doctor, a plague of your Physic, as my Uncle may say. And lastly,
sirrah you would have cheated me of Mrs. Grace, for which three enormities I
will chastise thee most abundantly.


Hold Sir, what do you mean Sir?


Bind him fast Gentlemen.


I am not Amorous Sir, a pox of my Visor, I can't get it off.


Stop his mouth Gentlemen, for so he served my Nuncle Easy.


I am not Amorous Sir, but, but --


Stop his mouth I say, have no mercy on him, so now bastinado him soundly.


Murder, murder, I am dead, and you shall all be hanged.


Oh Gentlemen he's dead indeed, what shall we do now?


We care not Sir, if he be dead, we shall not be hanged for him, 'tis only you
shall suffer, who set us on:


Here be rare Rogues, no life? no he's gone, quite gone! oh what shall I do? a
pox of Mrs. Grace, and all her Race, accursed I may say.


Farewell Sir, we will shift for our selves.


I'll go hide my self somewhere from the hands of Justice.
Ah Grace, 'tis you're the cause of all my dolor,
But how shall I escape the Hempen Collar.

SWeet Mrs. Margaret don't fly me, I protest I'll do you no harm, alas I'm in
distress, and only beg thy assistance.


What's the matter Sir Ralph?


Oh I have committed, I dare not tell thee all*


What, Adultery? or Fornication Sir?


Neither, but a worse matter by much, I have killed Mr* Amorous, and desire you
to conceal me a little, I dare not tell my Uncle?


Amorous I'm sure is safe enough, and so is Gracy, what can this fool mean?
But I will now make use of him: well though I say it, I am full of device and
contrivance: Ralph is very unlucky, but if you will take my advice I'll secure
you.


Oh any thing dear Mrs. Margaret.


And can you keep counsel too?


Yes sure, where my life depends on it?


You must then beg leave of my Master, to make a visit to my Mistress, she is
kept a close Prisoner in her Chamber upon some Jealousy that's come into his
Noddle, I know you may be admitted.


And what then?


Oh let me alone then to work for your safety; do this presently, and before
the news of your killing Amorous arrive to his Ear.


I, I, I'll follow your counsel.


There must be something in it, where is the body of this dead Man?


In the apartment of the Garden, but pray say nothing and here's something to
close thy mouth.


So, I hope this Plot will take, I must next invent a way to let my Mistress
know my design, and since I am not permitted to see her, I'll write by this Fop.



What strange misfortune rules the fate of things, the first Revenge that ever
I designed, that it should so unhappily fall on my own head, 'tis too certain
that I did meet Courtwell instead of my Husband: And 'tis as certain that he
took me for Mrs. Easy, when I consider my condition, I find it every way so
deplorable that without some extraordinary change, I shall grow weary of my
Life, I am mad, and know not whom to be revenged on.


Faith Madam, carry on the Intrigue, and let's make a perfect Plot on it?


I can't meet this Rascal Courtwell, for though I don't love this foolish
Woman, whose jealousy has made me a Cuckold: Yet i'm in honour bound to fight
the Villain, 'twas happy as it proved, that 'twas not my dear Mistress, yet
either way he merits my chastisement.


Oh what shall I do? I have not power to withdraw.


All this is my Roguery.


Good Evening to you Madam.


Why this distance Lovechange?


Why these Tears?


For your unkindness Sir.


'Tis rather Madam, for your own lewdness, come I will not entertain you with
the circumstances, but to the business, I will part with you, you know the
entertainment which you gave young Courtwell on the River-side in the Park, I
know it too, and would have killed you for the deed, but that I know the offence
ought to be charged on your curiosity, you thought to have met me there.


Tis true, and will you punish so severely a fault of Love, alas, I meant no
harm.


Twas harm to be so curious, to be jealous, and harm to think of cheating me,
for so it had been if I had met you there instead of Mrs. Easy, for I find you
knew the design.


And are not you as guilty Sir, as I?


No, 'tis the scandal makes the sin, and not the action, custom makes it sin
to us; when you offend, I bear the dishonour on it, when I, you but the little
griefs. In fine, Madam I am resolved to part, none knows, as yet, that we are
married, and if you please it may be still concealed.


I've nothing Sir to answer for my self, and since I can't have your heart, I
am content to quit your Person too, you know the Articles between us Sir, when
I married you, I made you Master of half my Fortune, take it, and what remains
I will enjoy my self with, give me your hand -- Farewell, I've had an ill
bargain of thee, for a poor Months service, thou hast cost me ten thousand
pounds.

Well Clare, in this divorce some ease I find,
Since I am free, to Courtwell I'll be kind.

So, I have shook thee off, and with very little remorse too Egad -- Thou were it
a good Woman, but you're gone -- hang sorrow -- I'll to my sweet, pretty,
little, dear Mrs. Easy, and if she can but contrive to do as much for her
Husband, as i've done for my Wife, we will 'en strike up a match A-la-mode.


So, so, thus far it has succeeded well.


I would thou could but see the Knight dressed in my Night-gown, and Linen,
'tis a sight worth the laughing at, i've charged him to sit very pensive, and
dark, and to answer for me to every question asked, if my Husband should come
to catechise him.


It would be a Dialogue worth the harkening too, he knowing nothing of your
affairs -- Tis like his answers must be very proper to the questions.

Uds life Madam, here's my Master, what shall we do?


Let me alone with him, 'tis pretty dark he can't well distinguish me.


Sir Ralph, when you asked me leave to give a visit to my Wife, I did not desire
the doors should have been shut upon you, I hearkened, and must tell you, I
believe you were no better then you should be.


Truth is Sir, since you have found us out, I only pretended to Mrs. Grace, but
your Wife was my main design.


How! Why thou impudent Varlet, oh horrible? dare thou make me a Cuckold? and
tell me so? sirrah I know thou art a Coward, and I will beat thee, yes I dare
venture on thee.


Nay, then 'tis time to show a fair pair of heels, farewell Sir, I'll leave your
house.


I will not let thee go so, if I have any daring in me.


'S^ife I know she cannot fight, I'll after her, and see to call some body to
her assistance.


I see no light in my Mistresses Chamber, I wonder where they are all, and that
Peg brings me no answer.


Lovechange, dear, assist me!


What the Devil art thou?


Oh thou Traitor to my house, have I trusted thee to this end, to rob me of my
Wife and Honour?


So, I have made fine work --


Stay Sir, don't hurt him, for who e're he be, if he have wronged your Wife, I
will revenge it, thy Arm's too weak for such a glorious deed.


Hey day! another Rival! oh I begin to see I am a most notorious Monster, I
dare not encounter him though, but for thee thou villainous Sir Ralph. --


Sir Ralph my Rival! -- go Sir withdraw, this is not work for you, leave me to
be your Champion.


Yes, yes, against my will I do -- but I will home and claw my Wife, my fine
whorish Wife, away for this.


Now Sir, you and I, must have a touch.


Or two I hope Lovechange, before we part.


Are you so brisk Sir?


You shall try that anon.


Draw then Sir, for I am ready.


Hold, hold, dear Lovechange, put up, we will fight it out in another place.


My noble Mistress.


My dear Lovechange the same, stole out purposely to meet thee, my Husband has
found out our Intrigue, and I dare return no more, I'll tell you all the story
at large, let's hast -- but whither?


I have taken a private Lodging on purpose to night in a friends house, whom I
can trust, fear nothing --


But thy inconstancy, Lovechange.


Sooner thy soul may change it's goodness and generosity, or any thing more
impossible, come the Moons up, and we for our more security will go through the
Park.


Here they say he's walking, I long to know the worst of my sad fate, 'tis
strange he should not know me, he's here -- your Servant Sir.


Yours Sir, have you forgiven my Mornings Complement? how does your wound Sir?


Tis not troublesome.


Pray Sir, tell me, and tell me seriously, what moved you to this rage against
me? how came you to be angry? you told me something of Camilla too, which Sir,
has made me thoughtful ever since, are you indeed acquainted with that Lady?


Yes Sir, most intimately, there's nothing of her soul that's hid from me, she
told me how she loved, and what false breath betrayed her to that weakness.


Poor Camilla!


Your pity comes too late, for Sir she's dead, killed by your cruelty, which at
once has robbed the World, and me, of all we held most dear.


Since she's gone, I'll put this penance on my self; I'll marry nothing that is
young, or beautiful.


But can you talk of marrying any?


Why not Sir, whilst there be women and money to be had, and I suppose you will
be of my mind too.


Ha! Courtwell! come Sir, you and I must Tilt a little.


How! for what? prithee leave fooling.


For several Reasons, but first upon the Widows score, you have debauched her
Sir.


What dost mean Ned? I debauch the Widow?


Yes, you Sir.


You're mad.


No Sir, you have forgot the Lady you made love to, by the Duck-Pond side?


I had a Lady Sir, but she I thought had been thy Mistress.


For that I'll kill thee too if possible.


That were the juster quarrel of the two, but I have reason too, to fight with
thee, who told the Widow of my being there thinking to undermine me.


Come Sir, no argument, but this.


Do ye hear Lovechange, pray don't fight, for then I must be forced to discover
my self.


This won't satisfy, stand by dear friend, my honour is engaged, and I must
fight,


I wait you Sir.


Dear Courtwell, don't fight, for if you dye, I'll wait on you to your Grave.


Whence comes this pretty softness? why for me?


Dost thou not know me yet? Methinks by my faint sigh, thou might discover
-- Thy once loved Camilla, at least this voice, might well enough inform thee.


This is wondrous!


Yes I do know thee, and am ashamed to tell thee that I do so.


What the Devil, i'st a woman all this while?


I can forgive you, if you can be penitent, but on no other terms.


I would not ask it any other way.


Don't let me ask thee that I am ashamed to sue to thee for, can you not guess
what 'tis?


Marry thee, by all that's good I'll do it.


This reformation pleases me, and ends our quarrels; come Sir I'm still your
friend, if you need my assistance, I am at your service, if not, I have a
little peace of transformation here too, that longs to be alone with me.


A Woman this Ned?


Yes indeed, and the same you thought you had possessed on the River-side.


Give me the honour of your hand Madam, and your forgiveness.


You have it Sir, and you pretty Sir, I hope we shall be better acquainted
hereafter.


Come dear Camilla I will loose no time.


I'm overjoyed at this return of Love!
May every moment the rich store improve.

One comfort I have yet, that my Wife is in my hands to handle how I please,
I'll be revenged on her bones however, come impudence let me take you into
examination, nay never hide your face, for you are past blushing, come to your
Catechise, come.


O Lord! what shall I do now? my Nuncle knows all, and I shall be hanged.


Had thou had fear before thy eyes, thou could not ha'been, to abomination,
wicked?


I, I, 'tis plain, I do confess I am something wicked.


Are you so? where learnt you this ha? at Church?


No indeed Sir, I have not been at Church these many years.


Oh impudence! to confess this to me! was it for this, I took thee into my
house? needy, and poor, and made Mistress of all my family, my goods, my
wealth, and now dost thou contrive to Cuckold me, to entertain a lewd Rascal to
Whore thee, to mine, and thy eternal shame, what answer can thou make?


Hey toss! the old Man's mad, what the Devil does he mean now?


You must have your youngster with a Pox to you, I was the old Fool, the
Cuckold, the Ass, to bear all, I, what say you in your vindication?


I am in good hope he does not take me, to be me, I were best to say nothing
for fear he should know me.


Speak impudence, and tell truth, for it shall be thy last.


How! my last? I had as good speak and be hanged, as have my throat cut
silently, I don't like this same dying of any sort.


What say you Mrs. Jilt, what say you for your self? not a word? I'll break
silence then, take that, and that -- and that,


Oh Plague of your chastising, hold, hold!


Oh are you pliant, are you Mistress?


Yes Sir as pliant as you shall be immediately.


Hold, hold, Murder, murder, dost thou add this to thy other wickedness? of
chastising thy own natural Husband.


You lye Sir, you lye, I am none of your Wife, I defy thee, renounce me
quickly, or I'll beat thee into nothing.


Renounce thee? yes I do renounce thee, for thou art a most notorious Whore,
and I scorn thee.


I will beat thee, till thou deny that too, come Sir about, about, exercise
your musty part, come Sir.


Murder, murder! no help? shall I be killed like Acteon with my own Bitch,
ha?


Nay, now I shall be betrayed.


Dear Madam! why so cruel! let me interpose?


Who art thou.


One Sir, related to you now, I am Amorous and thy Kinsman.


How! oh undone! undone!


Not so Sir, Grace will give me a better Character, and you must be contented
for we are married Sir.


Yes indeed Sir, we are married, and beg your good liking of it.


Amorous alive! and married to Grace? nay then 'tis no time to dissemble.


Oh miserable man! Grace married to thee? how many misfortunes arrive on the
neck one of another to make me unhappy, my Wife a Whore, and my Niece married,
oh, oh, ho.


Nay Sir, I'll keep you company, for I am the miserabler man of the two.


Why who are you?


Would I had a Wife, to have been a Whore too for me, would I had been the
biggest Cuckold in London, so I had had Grace and all her money.


Worse, and worse! what art thou?


What am I? what should I be? a man as thou art, I am --


Sir Ralph Spatter?


Yes, that I am, i'm sure you have used me scurvily.


This not my Wife?


No, not your wife Sir, I would I were any thing but Sir Ralph, any thing but
damnable cheating, cozening woman.


I always told you Sir Ralph, that I would never marry any but Mr. Amorous:


I thought I had made him sure, why Sir if it were not you that was dead? who
was it I killed?


Sir, I will show you presently.


How! my own man! Io! nay if I had thought it had been but him that I killed, I
had never took this disguise.


Why Sir, had I been killed, you would as soon have hanged for it, as for Mr.
Amorous.


Why, thou were it not dead then?


No indeed Sir, which was no fault of yours, but of my own natural ability, for
you laid it on, without mercy.


'Tis no matter, why did not you speak then?


Because you would not let me, nor hear me when I did, but I thank my stars you
are served in your kind.


And did thou know of the going away of these two Lovers?


Yes Sir, but durst not resist them, I would have pursued 'em, had you given me
leave to speak.


How got you loose and be hanged, when the Steed was stolen?


By great good Fortune, Mrs. Peg coming to look for Mr. Amorous his dead body
as you directed, found me, and untying me, saw 'twas I, and conjured me in
return to that good office, not to come into your presence, till I knew Mr.
Amorous, and Mrs. Grace, were married.


How! Rogues amongst our selves? my own servant turn upon me, well Jo, well,
I'll be even with thee for this, however I thrive.


Well, since I cannot strive against fate, and that I think I am not long
lived, I will say Heavens bless you together; and you Sir Ralph, I only desire
to know how you came in my Wives Night-cloaths, 'twas not long since you past
out of my house, boasting your love for my Wife, and telling me --


Who I Sir, no, no, 'twas not I, alas I flew hither by Peg's advice for refuge,
but I find 'twas only a trick to abuse me with, and to help your Wife to make
an escape.


Escape! Why, is my Wife gone? nay then by this time she has acted, what before
was but designed, and by this time I am a most formidable monster, however I am
arrived to this knowledge, that nothing can oppose a woman's will. But I'll be
divorced from her, and let her see, what her new Gallant will do.


What's here to do, more mischief? nay, nay, never bow to me, I imagine what
'tis you would say; pardon me Sir for the freedom I have taken in choosing a
Wife without your approbation, and so forth.


You are in the right Sir.


Am I so Sir? A Pox take ye all, may you be Cuckolds as great as I am! and have
the consolation to know it, as well as I do, with all my heart, I say, with all
my heart, de' ye hear?


Sir, I am come, not out of kindness to you, but revenge, to let you know --


That I am a Cuckold, a contented yielding Cuckold, yes spare your pains, I
know it, I know it, Mistress do ye hear, I know it, and am contented, and what have
you to say to this, ha?


I am glad you know your misery as well as I do mine.


Thine? I wish no better companion, much good may it do you, do ye hear? very
much good, oh it lightens my heart!


I have a Husband Sir --


Yes, and I have a Wife -- Confound her --


And do you know my Husband is the man that Cuckolds you?


How! thy Husband! still better, and better! I desire no greater Plague should
befall you, then to feel what I do.


You are very uncharitable, but Sir I find my heart much at ease, and since
this common Calamity has befal'n me, I am resolved to make the best on it, I
have put off my Husband, and intend to entertain a Gallant.


Faith Madam i'm sorry I cannot serve you, for i'm newly entering upon that
dangerous Sea, where you have been too lately ship-wrack't.


Why Mr. Courtwell, you are not married?


Yes indeed am I.


Faith Madam, i'd 'en think of Mr. Perigreen, he's very pretty, and very
young.


Say thou so Clare? to thy hearts breaking, behold, that pretty young
Gentleman is become a Lady, and my Wife, Clare.


Is he? well there's no trust in humane things! well the Town's wide, and many
distressed Gamesters will be glad upon a loosing hand, to be kind.


Nay if Mr. Courtwell be gone, I will never think of his Sex more, but thus
kind I'll be to Lovechange, to beg of you Mr. Easy, to resign your Wife to him,
being much fitter to be his Mistress.


I do renounce her, let her do what she will, I'll have a Mistress too, and will
be young again, what say you Betty?


Sir, I never liked an old man much, especially having been so lately a Lady to
a young Knight.


Sure Jo, I'll take thy counsel, 'twere simple to go home and be laughed at, as
all the Country will do, if I return without a wife.


Besides Sir, you will have your thousand pounds again.


I, I, I considered that too man! come Mrs. Betty if you think fit, I'll 'en
take you instead of Mrs. Grace, ungrateful Grace. --


Indeed Sir Ralph, she'll make a good wife.


She's the worse for thy recommendations, but however she shall take the wall
of her Mistress.


Well said Sir Ralph, I like your resolution, I will be young again, and gay,
and I will like every Extravagance, here take Betty, and we will send for the
music; I will dance, and forget all sorrow, oh that my Wife, my kind, my
handsome young Wife, were here now, I would give her to Lovechange, yes
heartily, and wish 'em joy together, come, some music there, I will not ask
you Amorous, what settlement my Niece has, for I believe she deserves none,
they will be all alike, all turn -- 'tis no matter what -- nor you Nephew, I
will not ask what Fortune your Wife has, for be she rich, or be she poor, she
will prove an errant -- Much good may it do you Sir, I am young again, and will
live as lewdly as the best of you, come fall to dancing, be merry, very merry,
whilst you may, for sorrow will come fast enough I'll warrant ye, come, come, to
Frisking, to Frisking.


By your leave Sir --


Gentlemen you're welcome, very welcome.


I doubt you would recall that word, if you knew who we were.


You are mistaken Sir, I care not if you be Lovechange, and my quondam Wife,
do ye hear, you are still welcome.


Say you so Sir, then have at ye.


So, I like this well, I am pleased, wondrous pleased, here Sir, instead of
affronting you, I will present you, come Sir, never hang back, I know you well,
here -- live -- and lye -- and be hanged -- together if you please, with all my
heart do ye hear? I am not angry, no the business is done, I am a Cuckold that's
not my fault, but I will not be a Fool, and so, much good may it do you kindly.


Well Sir, I thank you, 'tis no disgrace to be a Mistress as the World goes.


Faith Sir, in this gift, you have been so generous, and obliging, that I have
nothing to return but my Wife, by my troth Sir, try her, your Nephew has found
her brisk and active, she's a good soul, she made an excellent Wife for the
time, perhaps she may repair by you, the loss she has sustained by me.


But while these gods Almighty, Guineas reign,
The needy Miss, though chaste, can scarce contain
Religion, and her Hosts of Virtues, prove
Too yielding, to resist such power of Love.
Jove never rained in Gold, but you found Laps,
Without respect to after Thunder-claps:
The loose Gallant grown poor, must yield, and then
Hey for old Wine, old Treasures, and old Men.

WHat has our Poet done you look so big,
Has he not treated you with brisk Intrigue?
Some with dull Morals, would affront the Age,
And make a Conventicle of the Stage.
Should he, but treat you with such things as those be:
Damn the sententious Fop -- come -- let's to Mosely.
Would ye recall some stories of your own,
What on this Tuft, what on that Bank was done,
Our Play perhaps uncensured might have gone.
You Rogue cries one, behold on yonder side,
I joy to name it; I, and Phillis died:
Another with fierce Indignation raped,
Cries, Damn her for a Whore there were I Clapped:
Another year, whoever lives, and sees,
I fear you'll rub the Rind off from the Trees.
Yet for all this, nothing can relish well,
Unless we huff the gods, and hector Hell:
With Wit, and Women, you deal much at one,
First you debauch, and then you cry them down.

