SEE, my loved Britons, see your Shakespeare rise,
An awful ghost confessed to human eyes!
Vnnam'd, methinks, distinguished I had been
From other shades, by this eternal green,
About whose wreaths the vulgar Poets strive,
And with a touch, their withered Bays revive.
Untaught, unpractised, in a barbarous Age,
I found not, but created first the Stage.
And, if I drained no Greek or Latin store,
'Twas, that my own abundance gave me more.
On foreign trade I needed not rely
Like fruitful Britain, rich without supply.
In this my rough-drawn Play, you shall behold
Some Master-strokes, so manly and so bold
That he, who meant to alter, found 'em such
He shook; and thought it Sacrilege to touch.
Now, where are the Successors to my name?
What bring they to fill out a Poets fame?
Weak, short-liv'd issues of a feeble Age;
Scarce living to be Christened on the Stage!
For Humour farce, for love they rhyme dispense,
That tolls the knell, for their departed sense.
Dullness might thrive in any trade but this:
'T would recommend to some fat Benefice.
Dullness, that in a Playhouse meets disgrace
Might meet with Reverence, in its proper place.
The fulsome clench that nauseats the Town
Would from a Judge or Alderman go down!
Such virtue is there in a Robe and gown!
And that insipid stuff which here you hate
Might somewhere else be called a grave debate:
Dullness is decent in the Church and State.
But I forget that still 'tis understood
Bad Plays are best decried by showing good:
Sit silent then, that my pleased Soul may see
A Judging Audience once, and worthy me:
My faithful Scene from true Records shall tell
How Trojan valour did the Greek excel;
Your great forefathers shall their fame regain,
And Homers angry Ghost repine in vain.
PRinces, it seems not strange to us nor new,
That after Nine years Seige Troy makes defence,
Since every Action of Recorded Fame
Has with long difficulties been involved,
Not Answering that Idea of the thought
Which gave it Birth, why then you Grecian Chiefs,
With sickly Eyes do you behold our labours,
And think 'em our dishonour, which indeed,
Are the protractive Trials of the Gods,
To prove heroic Constancy in Men?

With due observance of thy Sovereign Seat
Great Agamemnon, Nestor shall apply,
Thy well-weigh'd words: In struggling with misfortunes,
Lies the true proof of Virtue: on smooth Seas,
How many bauble Boats dare set their Sails,
And make an equal way with firmer Vessels!
But let the Tempest once enrage that Sea,
And then behold the strong rib'd Argosie,
Bounding between the Ocean and the Air
Like Perseus mounted on his Pegasus.
Then where are those weak Rivals of the Maine?
Or to avoid the Tempest fled to Port,
Or made a Prey to Neptune: even thus
Do empty show and true prized worth divide
In storms of Fortune.

Mighty Agamemnon!
Heart of our Body, Soul of our designs,
In whom the tempers, and the minds of all
Should be enclosed: hear what Vlisses speaks.

-- You have free leave.

Troy had been down ere this, and Hectors Sword
Wanted a Master but for our disorders:
The observance due to rule has been neglected;
Observe how many Grecian Tents stand void
Upon this plain; so many hollow factions
For when the General is not like the Hive
To whom the Foragers should all repair,
What Honey can our empty Combs expect?
O when Supremacy of Kings is shaken,
What can succeed: How could communities
Or peaceful traffic from divided shores,
Prerogative of Age, Crowns, Scepters, Lawrells,
But by degree stand on their solid base*
Then every thing resolves to brutal force
And headlong force is led by hoodwinked will,
For wild Ambition, like a ravenous Woolf,
Spurred on by will and seconded by power,
Must make an universal prey of all,
And last devour it self.

Most prudently Vlisses has discovered
The Malady whereof our state is sick.

'Tis truth he speaks, the General's disdained
By him one step beneath, he by the next:
That next by him below: so each degree
Spurns upward at Superior eminence:
Thus our distempers are their sole support;
Troy in our weakness lives, not in her strength.

The Nature of this sickness found, inform us
From whence it draws its birth?

The great Achilles whom opinion crowns
The chief of all our Host --
Having his ears buzzed with his noisy Fame
Disdains thy Sovereign charge, and in his Tent,
Lies mocking our designs, with him Patrocius
Upon a lazy Bed, breaks scurvil Jests
And with ridiculous and awkward action,
Which, slanderer, he limitation calls
Mimics the Greclan chiefs.

As how Vlysses?

Even thee the King of men he does not spare
(The monkey Author) but thy greatness Pageants
And makes of it Rehearsals: like a Player
Bellowing his Passion till he break the spring
And his racked Voice jar to his Audience;
So represents he Thee, though more unlike
Then Vulcan is to Venus.
And at this fulsome stuff, this wit of Apes,
The large Achilles on his pressed Bed lolling,
From his deep Chest roars out a loud Applause,
Tickling his spleen, and laughing till he wheeze.

Nor are you spared Vlysses, but as you speak in Council
He hems ere he begins, then strokes his Beard,
Casts down his looks, and winks with half an Eye;
'Has every action, cadence, motion, tone,
All of you but the sense.

Fortune was merry
When he was born, and plaid a trick on Nature
To make a mimic Prince: he ne'er acts ill
But when he would seem wise:
For all he says or does from serious thought
Appears so wretched that he mocks his title
And is his own Buffoo.

In imitation of this scurril fool
Ajax is grown self-will'd as broad Achilles,
He keeps a Table too, makes Factious Feasts,
Rails on our State of War, and sets Thirsites
(A slanderous slave of an ore-flowing gall)
To level us with low Comparisons:
They tax our Policy with Cowardice
Count Wisdom of no moment in the War,
In brief, esteem no Act, but that of hand;
The still and thoughtful parts which move those hands
With them are but the tasks cut out by fear
To be performed by Valour.

Let this be granted, and Achilles horse
Is more of use then he: but you grave pair
Like time and wisdom marching hand in hand
Must put a stop to these encroaching Ills:
To you we leave the ear:
You who could show whence the distemper springs
Must vindicate the Dignity of Kings.

Why should I fight without the Trojan walls
Who, without fighting, am ore 'thrown within:
The Trojan who is Master of a Soul
Let him to battle, Troilus has none.

Will this never be at an end with you?

The Greeks are strong and skillful to their strength
Fierce to their skill, and to their fierceness wary;
But I am weaker then a Woman's tear,
Tamer then sleep, fonder then Ignorance:
And Artless as unpracticed Infancy.

Well, I have told you enough of this; for my part I'll not meddle nor make any
further in your Love: He that will eat of the Roastmeat, must stay for the
kindling of the fire.


Have I not stayed?


I, the kindling: but you must stay the spitting of the meat.


Have I not stayed?


I, the spitting: but there's two words to a bargain: you must stay the
roasting too.


Still have I stayed: and still the farther off.


That's but the roasting, but there's more in this word stay; there's the
taking off the Spit, the making of the sauce, the dishing, the setting on the
Table, and the saying Grace; nay you must stay the cooling too, or you may
chance to burn your chaps.


At Priams table pensive do I sit, And when fair Cressid comes into my thoughts
(Can she be said to come, who ne'er was absent!)


Well, she's a most ravishing creature; and she looked Yesterday most
killingly, she had such a stroke with her eyes, she cut to the quick with every
glance of em.


I was about to tell thee, when my heart
Was ready with a sigh to cleave in two
Lest Hector, or my Father should perceive me,
I have with mighty anguish of my Soul
Just at the Birth stifled this still-born-sigh
And forced my face into a painful smile.

I measured her with my girdle Yesterday, she's not half a yard about the
waste, but so taper a shape did I never see, but when I had her in my arms,
Lord thought I, and by my troth I could not forbear sighing, if Prince Troilus
had her at this advantage, and I were holding of the door. -- And she were a
thought taller, but as she is, she wants not an Inch of Hellen neither; but
there's no more comparison between the Women -- there was wit, there was a
sweet tongue: How her words melts in her mouth! Mercury would have been glad
to have had such a tongue in his mouth I warrant him.

I would some body had heard her talk Yesterday, as I did:

Oh Pandarus, when I tell thee I am mad
In Cressid's Love, thou answer she is fair;
Praise her eyes, her stature and her wit;
But praising thus, instead of oil and balm,
Thou lay in every wound her Love has given me
The Sword that made it.

I give her but her due.

Thou give'st her not so much.

Faith I'll speak no more of her, let her be as she is:
If she be a beauty 'tis the better for her, and she be not
She has the mends in her own hands for Pandarus.

In spite of me thou wilt mistake my meaning.

I have had but my labour for my pains,
Ill thought on of her, and ill thought on of you:
Gone between and between, and am ground in the Millstones
For my Labour.

What art thou angry Pandarus with thy friend?

Because she's my Niece, therefore she's not so fair as Hellen, and she were
not my Niece, show me such another piece of Woman's flesh; take her limb by
limb, I say no more, but if Paris had seen her first, Menelaus had been no
Cuckold: but what care I if she were a Black-moore, what am I the better for
her face.


Said I she was not beautiful.


I care not if you did, she's a fool to stay behind her Father Calchas, let her
to the Greeks; and so I'll tell her: for my part I am resolute, I'll meddle no
more in your affairs.


But hear me!


Not I.


Dear Pandarus --


Pray speak no more on it, I'll not burn my fingers in another body's business,
I'll leave it as I found it, there's an end.


O Gods, how do you torture me?
I cannot come to Cressid but by him,
And he's as peevish to be wooed to woo,
As she is to be won.

How now, Prince Troilus; why not in the battle?

Because not there, this Woman's answer suites me;
For Womanish it is to be from thence*
What news Aeneas from the field to day?

Paris is hurt.

By whom?

By Menelaus. Hark what good sport
Is out of Town to day, when I hear such Music
I cannot hold from dancing.

I'll make one,
And try to lose an anxious thought or two
In heat of action.

Seek the less dangers, and the greater shun.

My Lord Aeneas, who were those went by? I mean the Ladies!

Queen Hecuba, and Helien.

And whither go they?

Up to the Western Tower.
Whose height commands as subject, all the vale;
To see the battle, Hector whose patience
Is fixed like that of Heaven, to day was moved:
He chid Andromache, and struck his Armourer,
And as there were good Husbandry in War,
Before the Sun was up he went to field;
Your pardon Lady that's my business too.

Hectors a gallant Wariour.

What's that, what's that!

Good morrow Uncle Pandarus.

Good morrow Cousin Cressida: when were you at Court?

This morning Uncle!

What were you a talking when I came? was Hector armed,
And gone ere ye came? Hector was stirring early.

That I was talking of; and of his anger!

Was he angry say you? true he was so, and I know the cause: He was struck down
yesterday in the battle, but he'll lay about him; he'll cry quittance with 'em
to day I'll answer for him: and there's Troilus will not come far behind him;
let 'em take heed of Troilus, I can tell 'em that too.


What was he struck down too?


Who, Troilus? Troilus is the betterman of the two.


Oh jupiter! there's no comparison, Troilus the better man!


What * no comparison between Hector and Troilus? do you know a man if you see
him?


No, for he may look like a man, and not be one.


Well, I say Troilus is Troilus.


That's what I say, for I am sure he is not Hector.


No, nor Hector is not Troilus, make your best of that Niece!


Tis true, for each of 'em is himself.


Himself! alas poor Troilus! I would he were himself, welk the Gods are all
sufficient, and time must mend or end: I would he were himself, and would I
were a Lady for his sake. I would not answer for my Maidenhead, -- No, Hector
is not a better man than Troilus.


Excuse me.


Pardon me: Troilus is in the bud; 'tis early day with him, you shall tell me
another tale when Troilus is come to bearing: and yet he'll not bear neither is
some sense. No, Hector shall never have his virtues.


No matter.


Nor his beauty, nor his fashion, nor his wit, he shall have nothing of him.


They would not become him, his own are better.


How, his own better! you have no judgment Niece, Hellen her self swore the other
day, that Troilus for a manly brown complexion, (for so it is, I must confess;)
not brown neither.


No, but very brown.


Faith to say truth, brown and not brown: come I swear to you, I think Hellen
loves him better then Paris: Nay I'm sure she does, she comes me to him the other
day, into the bow window, and you know Troilus has not above three or four
hairs on his chin.


That's but a bare commendation.


But to prove to you that Hellen loves him, she comes, and puts me her white
hand to his cloven chin!


Has he been fighting then, how came it cloven?


Why, you know it is dimpled. I cannot choose but laugh to think how she
tickled his cloven chin: She has a marvellous white hand I must needs confess.

But let that pass, for I know who has a whiter: Well Cousin I told you a thing
yesterday, think on it, think on it.


So I do Uncle.


I'll besworn 'tis true; he will weep ye, and 'twere a man born in April.
Cressida.


For once you shall command me.


Here, here, here's an excellent place; we may see 'em here most bravely, and
I'll tell you all their names as they pass by: but mark Troilus above the rest,
mark Troilus, he's worth your marking.


Speak not so loud then.


That's Aeneas, Is't not a brave man that, he's a swinger, many a Grecian he
has laid with his face upward; but mark Troilus, you shall see anon.

That's Anthenor, he has a notable head-peece I can tell you, and he's the
ablest man for judgment in all Troy, you may turn him loose in faith, and by my
troth a proper person: When comes Troilus? I'll show you Troilus anon, if he
see me, you shall see him nod at me.

That's Hector, that, that, look you that, there's a fellow, go thy way Hector,
there's a brave man Niece: O brave Hector, look how he looks! there's a
countenance! is't not a brave man Niece?


I always told you so.


Is a not? it does a mans heart good to look on him, look you, look you there,
what hacks are on his Helmet! this was no boys play i'faith, he laid it on with
a vengeance, take it off whose who's will as they say! there are hacks Niece!


Were those with Swords.


Swords, or Bucklers, Faulchions, Darts, and Lances! any thing he cares not!
and the devil come 'tis all one to him, by Jupiter he looks so terribly that I
am half afraid to praise him.

Yonder comes Paris, yonder comes Paris, lookye yonder Niece; is't not a brave
young Prince too! He draws the best bow in all Troy, he hits you to a span
twelvescore level; who said he came home hurt to day: why this will do Hellen's
heart good now! Ha! that I could see Troilus now!


Who's that black man Uncle?


That's Helenus, I marvel where Troilus is all this while? that's Helenus, I
think Troilus went not forth to day; that's Helenus.


Can Helenus fight Uncle?


Helenus! No, yes, he'll fight indifferently well, I marvel in my heart what's
become of Troilus? Hark! do you not hear the people cry Troilus? Helenus is a
Priest and keeps a whore; he'll fight for's whore, or he's no true Priest I
warrant him.


What sneaking fellow comes yonder?


Where, yonder! that's Deiphobus: No I lye, I lye, that's Troilus, there's a
man Niece! hem! O brave Troilus! the Prince of chivalry, and flower of
fidelity!


Peace, for shame peace.


Nay but mark him then! O brave Troilus! there's a man of men Niece! look you
how his Sword is bloody, and his Helmet more hacked then Hectors, and how he
looks, and how he goes! O admirable youth! he ne'er saw two and twenty. Go thy
way Troilus, go thy way! had I a sister were a grace, and a daughter a
Goddess, he should take his choice of 'em, O admirable man! Paris! Paris is
dirt to him, and I warrant Hellen to change, would give all the shoes in her
shop to boot.


Here come more.


Asses, fools dolts, dirt and dung, stuff and lumber: porredg after meat? but I
could live and dye with Troilus. Ne'er look Niece, ne'er look, the Lyons are
gone; Apes and Monkeys, the fag end of the creation. I had rather be such a man
as Troilus, then Agamemnon and all Greece.


There's Achilles among the Greeks, he's braveman!


Achilles! a Carman, a beast of burden; a very Camel, have you any eyes Niece,
do you know a man! is he to be compared with Troilus!


Sir, my Lord Troilus would instantly speak with you.


Where boy, where!


At his own house, if you think convenient.


Good boy tell him I come instantly, I doubt he's wounded, farewell good Niece:
But I'll be with you by and by.


To bring me Uncle!


I, a token from Prince Troilus.


By the same token you are a procurer Uncle.

A strange dissembling Sex we Women are,
Well may we men, when we our selves deceive.
Long has my secret Soul loved Troilus.
I drunk his praises from my Uncles mouth,
As if my ears could ne'er be satisfied;
Why then, why said I not, I love this Prince?
How could my tongue conspire against my heart,
To say I loved him not, O childish love!
'Tis like an Infant froward in his play*
And what he most desires, he throws away.

AFter the expense of so much time and blood,
Thus once again the Grecians send to Troy.
Deliver Hellen, and all other loss
Shall be forgotten Hector, what say you to it?

Though no man less can fear the Greeks then I,
Yet there's no Virgin of more tender heart
More ready to cry out, who knows the consequence,
Then Hector is; for modest doubt is mixed
With manly courage best, let Hellen go.
If we have lost so many lives of ours,
To keep a thing not ours; not worth to us
The value of a man, what reason is there
Still to retain the cause of so much ill?

Fie, fie, my noble Brother!
Weigh you the worth and honour of a King,
So great as Asia's Monarch in a scale
Of common ounces thus?
Are fears and reasons fit to be considered,
When a Kings fame is questioned?

Brother, she's not worth
What her defence has cost us.

What's ought but as 'tis valued?

But value dwells not in opinion only:
It holds the dignity and estimation,
As well, wherein 'tis precious of it self.
As in the prizer, 'tis Idolatry
To make the Service greater than the God.

We turn not back the Silks upon the Merchant
When we have worn 'em: the remaining food
Throw not away because we now are full.
If you confess 'twas wisdom Paris went,
As you must needs; for you all cried go, go,
If you'll confess he brought home noble prize
As you must needs, for you all clapped your hands,
And cried inestimable: why do you now
So underrate the value of your purchase?
For let me tell you 'tis unmanly theft
When we have taken what we fear to keep!

There's not the meanest Spirit in our party
Without a heart to dare, or Sword to draw,
When Hellen is defended: none so noble
Whose life were ill bestowed, or death unfam'd,
When Helleu is the Subject.

So says Paris.
Like one besotted on e^eminate joys,
He has the honey still, but these the gall.

He not proposes merely to himself
The pleasures such a beauty brings with it:
But he would have the stain of Hellen's rape
Wiped off in honourable keeping her.

Troilus and Aeneas you have said:
If saying superficial things be reason.
But if this Hellen be another wife,
The Moral laws of Nature and of Nation's
Speak loud she be restored: thus to persist
In doing wrong, extenuates not wrong,
But makes it much more so: Hectors opinion
Is this, is in way of truth: yet ne'retheless
My sprightly Brother I incline to you
In resolution to defend her still:
For 'tis cause on which our Trojan honour
And common reputation will depend.

Why there you touched the life of our design:
Were it not glory that we covet more
Then war and vengeance (beasts and women's pleasure)
I wou^d not wish a drop of Trojan blood
Spent more in her defence: But oh my Brother
She is a subject of renoun and honour,
And I presume brave Hector would not lose
The rich advantage of his future fame
For the wide worlds revenue: -- I have business;
But glad I am to leave you thus resolved.
When such arms strike, ne'er doubt of the success.

May we not guess?

You may, and be deceived.

A woman on my life: even so it happens,
Religion, state affairs, whater'es the theme
It ends in women still.

See here's your wife
To make that maxim good.

Welcome Andromache: your looks are cheerful;
You bring some pleasing news.

Nothing that's serious.
Your little Son Astyanax has employed me
As his Ambassadresse.

Upon what errand?

No less then that his Grandfather this day
Would make him, Knight: he longs to kill a Grecian:
For should he stay to be a man, he thinks
Youll kill 'em all; and leave no work for him.

Your own blood, Hector.

And therefore he designs to send a challenge
To Agamemnon, Ajax, or Achilles
To prove they do not well to burn our fields;
And keep us cooped like prisner's in a Town:
To lead this lazy life.

What sparks of honour
Fly from this child! the God's speak in him sure:
-- It shall be so -- I'll do it.

What means my Son?

To send a challenge to the boldest Greek;
Is not that Country ours? those fruitful Fields
Washed by yo^ Silver flood, are they not ours?
Those teeming Vines that tempt our longing eyes,
Shall we behold em? shall we call em ours
And date not make em so? by Heavens I'll know
Which of these haughty Grecians, dares to think
He can keep Hector prisner here in Troy.

If Hector only were a private Man,
This would be courage, but in him 'tis madness.
The general safety on your life depends;
And sho^'d you perish in this rash attempt

with a groan, would feel her Soul go out:
And breath her last in you.

The task you undertake is hazardous:
Suppose you win, what would the profit be?
If Ajax or Achilles fell beneath
Your thundering Arm, would all the rest depart?
Would Agamemnon, or his injured Brother
Set sail for this? then it were worth your danger:
But, as it is, we throw our utmost stake
Against whole heaps of theirs.

He tells you true.

Suppose one, Ajax, or Achilles lost.
They can repair with more that single lose:

has but one, one Hector.

No Aeneas?
What then art thou; and what is Troilus?
What will Astyanax be?

An Hector one day.
But you must let him live to be a Hector.
And who shall make him such when you are gone?
Who shall inst^nct his tenderness in arms,
Or give his childhood lessons of the war?
Who shall defend the promise of his youth
And make it bear in Manhood? the young Sappling
Is shrouded long beneath the Mother tree
Before it be transplanted from its Earth,
And trust it self for growth.

Alas, my Father!
You have not drawn one reason from yourself,
But public safety, and my Sons green years:
In this neglecting that main argument
Trust me you chide my filial piety:
As if I could be won from my resolves
By Troy, or by my Son, or any name
More dear to me than yours.

I did not name my self; because I know
When thou art gone, I need no Grecian Sword,
To help me dye, but only Hectors loss.
Daughter, why speak not you? why stand you silent?
Have you no right in Hector, as a wife?

I would be worthy to be Hectors wife:
And had I been a Man, as my Soul's one
I had aspired a nobler name, his friend.
How I love Hector, (need I say I love him?)
I am not but in him:
But when I see him arming for his Honour,
His Country and his Gods, that martial fire
That mounts his courage, kindles even to me*
And when the Trojan Matrons wait him out
With prayers, and meet with blessings his return;
The pride of Virtue, beats within my breast,
To wipe away the sweat and dust of War:
And dress my Hero, glorious in his wounds.

Come to my Arms, thou manlier Virtue come;
Thou better Name than wife! would thou not blush
To hug a coward thus?

Yet still I fear!

There spoke a woman, pardon Royal Sir;
Has he not met a thousand lifted Swords,
Of thick ranked Grecians, and shall one affright him?
There's not a day but he encounters Armles;
And yet as safe, as if the broad brimmed Shield
That Pallas wears, were held 'twixt him and death.

Thou know me well; and thou shalt praise me more,
Gods make me worthy of thee!

You shall be
My Knight this day, you fhall not wear a cause
So black as Hellens rape upon your breast,
Let Paris fight for Hellen; guilt for guilt,
But when you fight for Honour and for me,
Then let our equal Gods behold an Act,
They may not blush to Crown.

Aeneas go.
And bear my Challenge to the Grecian Camp,
If there be one amongst the best of Greece,
Who holds his honour higher then his ea^e,
Who knows his valour, and knows not his fear;
Who loves his Mistress more then in confession:
And dares avow her beauty and her worth,
In other Arms then hers; to him this Challenge.
I have a Lady of more truth and beauty,
Then ever Greek did compass in his arms:
And will to morrow, with the Trumpets call,
Mid-way, between their Tents, and these our Walls,
Maintains what I have said, if any come
My Sword shall honour him, if none shall dare,
Then shall I say at my return to Troy,
The Grecian dames, are Sun-burnt, and not worth
The splinter of a Lance.

It shall be told 'em,
As boldly as you gave it.

Heaven protect thee.

YOnder he stands poor wretch! there stands he, with such a look, and such a
face, and such begging eyes; there he stands poor prisoner.


What a deluge of words do you pour out Uncle, to say just nothing?


Nothing do you call it, is that nothing, do you call it nothing? why he looks
for all the World, like one of your rescally Malefactors, just thrown off the
Gibbet, with his cap down, his arms tied down, his feet sprunting, his body
swinging, nothing do you call it? this is nothing with a vengeance.


Or, what think you of a hurt bird, that flutters about with a broken wing?


Why go to then, he cannot fly away then, then, that's certain, that's
undoubted: there he lies to be taken up: but if you had seen him, when I said
to him, take a good heart man, and follow me: and fear no colours, and speak,
your mind man: she can never stand you: she will fall, and 'twere a leaf in
Autumn.


Did you tell him all this without my consent?


Why you did consent, your eyes consented; they blabbed, they leered, their very
corners blabbed. But you'll say your tongue said nothing. No I warrant it: your
tongue was wiser; your tongue was better bred: your tongue kept its own
counsel: Nay, I'll say that for you, your tongue said nothing. Well such a
shamefaced couple did I never see days of my life: so afraid of one another;
such ado to bring you to the business: well if this job were well over, if ever
I lose my pains again wtth an awkward couple, let me be painted in the
signpost for the Labour in vain: fie upon it, fie upon it; there's no
conscience in it: all honest people will cry shame on it.


Where is this Monster to be shown? what's to be given for a Sight of him?


Why ready money, ready money; you carry it about you: give and take is
square-dealing; for in my conscience he's as errant a maid as you are: ^ was
fain to use violence to him, to pull him hither: and he pulled and I pulled:
for you must know he's absolutely the strongest youth in Troy: to'ther day he
took Hellen is one hand, and Paris in to'ther, and danced 'em at one another at
arms-end, and 'twere two Moppets: there was a back, there were bone and
Sinnews: there was a back for you.


For these good procuring Offices you'll be damned one day Uncle.


Who I damned? faith I doubt I shall: by my troth I think I shall, nay if a man
be damned for doing good, as thou say, it may go hard with me.


Then I'll not see Prince Troilus? ^e not be accessory to your damnation.


How, not see Prince Troilus? why I have engaged, I have promised, I have past
my word, I care not for damning, let me alone for damning; I value not damning
in comparison with my word. If I am damned it shall be a good damning to thee
girl, thou shalt be my heir, come 'tis a virtuous girl, thou shalt help me t^
keep my word, thou shalt see Prince Troilus.


The ventures great.


No venture in the World, thy Mother ventured it for thee, and thou shalt
venture it for my little Cousin that must be.


Weigh but my fears, Prince Troilus is young. --


Marry is he, there's no fear in that I hope, the fear were if he were old and
feeble.


And I a woman.


No fear yet, thouart a Woman, and he's a Man, put them two together, put 'em
together.


And if I should be frail. --


There's all my fear that thou art not frail: thou should be frail, all flesh
is frail.


Are you my Uncle, and can give this counsel to your own Brothers daughter.


If thou were my own daughter a thousand times over, I could do no better for
thee; what would thou have girl, he's a Prince and a young Prince, and a
loving young Prince! an Uncle dost thou call me, by Cupid I am a father to
thee; get thee in, get thee in girl, I hear him coming. And do you hear Niece!
I give you leave,


Now Pandarus.


Now, my sweet Prince! have you seen my Niece? no I know you have not.


No Pandarus; I stalk about your doors
Like a strange Soul upon the stygian banks
Staying for waftage: O be thou my Charon,
And give me a swift transportanee to Elysium,
And fly with me to Cressida.

Walk here a moment more: I'll bring her straight.


I fear she will not come: most sure she will not.


How not come, and I her Uncle! why I tell you Prince, she twitters at you. Ah
poor sweet Rogue, ah little Rogue, now does she think, and think, and think
again of what must be betwixt you two. Oh sweet, -- oh sweet -- O -- what not
come, and I her Uncle?


Still thou flatter me; but prithee flatter still; for I would hope; I would
not wake out of my pleasing dream: oh hope how sweet thou art! but to hope
always, and have no effect of what we hope!


Oh faint heart, faint heart! well there's much good matter in these old
proverbs! No, she'll not come I warrant her; she has no blood of mine in her,
not so much as will fill a flea: but if she does not come, and come, and come
with a swing into your arms, I say no more, but she has renounced all grace,
and there's an end.


I will believe thee: go then, but be sure:


No, you would not have me go; you are indifferent: shall I go say you: speak
the word then: -- yet I care not: you may stand in your own light; and lose a
sweet young Ladies heart: well, I shall not go then!


Fly, fly, thou tortur'st me.


Do I so, do I so! do I torture you indeed! well I will go.


But yet thou dost not go?


I go immediately, directly, in a twinkling, with a thought. yet you think a
man never does enough for you: I have been labouring in your business like any
Moyle. I was with Prince Paris this morning, to make your excuse at night for
not supping at Court: and I found him, faith how do you think I found him; it
does my heart good to think how I found him: yet you think a man never does
enough for you.


Will you go then, what's this to Cressida?


Why you will not hear a Man; what's this to Cressida? why I found him abed,
abed with Hellena by my troth: 'tis a sweet Queen, a sweet Queen, a very sweet
Queen; -- but she's nothing to my Cousin Cressida; she's a blowse, a gypsy, a
Tawney-moor to my Cousin Cressida: And she lay with one white arm underneath
the whorsons neck: oh such a white, lilly white, round, plump arm it was -- and
you must know it was stripped up to th'elbows: and she did so kiss him, and so
huggle him: -- as who should say --


But still thou stay: what's this to Cressida?


Why I made your excuse to your Brother Paris; that I think's to Cressida; but
such an arm, such a hand, such taper fingers, the other hand was under the
bed-cloaths, that I saw not, I confess, that hand I saw not.


Again thou tortur'st me.


Nay I was tortured too; old as I am, I was tortured too: but for all that, I
could make a shift, to make him, to make your excuse, to make your father; --
by Jove when I think of that hand, I am so ravished, that I know not what I
say: I was tortured too.

Well I go, I go; I fetch her, I bring her, I conduct her: not come quoth a,
and I her Uncle!


Im'e giddy; expectation whirls me round:
The imaginary relish is so sweet,
That it enchants my sense; what will it be
When I shall taste that Nectar?
It must be either death, or joy too fine
For the capacity of human powers.
I fear it much: and I do fear beside,
That I shall lose distinction in my joys:
As does a battle, when they charge on heaps
A flying Enemy.

She's making her ready: she'll come straight, you must be witty now; she does
so blush, and fetches her breath so short, as if she were frighted with a
spright: 'tis the prettiest villain, she fetches her breath so short, as 'twere
a new taken Sparrow.


Just such a passion, does heave up my breast!
My heart beats thicker than a feavourish pulse:
I know not where I am, nor what I do:
Just like a slave, at unawares encountering
The eye of Majesty: -- Lead on, I'll follow.

I have conceived an embryo in my brain:
Be you my time to bring it to some shape.

What is't, Vlysses?

The ^eeded pride,
That has to this maturity* blow^ up
In rank Achilles, must or now be ^ropt,
Or shedding, breed a nursery of ^ike ill,
To overtop us all.

That's my opinion.

This challenge which (...) as brings from Hector,
However it be spread in general terms,
Relates in purpose only to Achilles.
And will it wake him to the answer think you?

It ought to do: whom can we else oppose
Who do^'d from Hector bring his honour off,
If not Achilles the Success of this
Although particular, will give an Omen
Of good or bad, even to the general cause.

Pardon me Nestor, if I contradict you.
Therefore 'tis fit Achilles meet not (...).
Let us like Merchants show our coursest (...),
And think perchance ^
The lustre of our better yet unshown
Will show the better; let us not (...)
Our greatest warrior should be matched with Hector.
For both our honour and our shame in this,
Shall be attended with strange followers.

I see em not with my old eyes; what are they?

What glory our Achilles gains from Hector.
Were he not proud we all should share with him:
But he already is too insolent:
And we had better parch in A^rick Sun
Than in his pride, should he escape Hector fair.
But grant he should be foiled
Why then our common reputation suffers,
In that of our best Man: No, make a Lottery;
And by device let blockish Ajax draw
The chance to fight with Hector: among our selves
Give him allowance as the braver Man;
For that will physic the great Myrmidon,
Who swells with loud applause; and make him fall
His Crest, if brainless Ajax come safe off.
If not, we yet preserve a fair opinion,
That we have better men.

Now I begin to relish thy advice:
Come let us go to Agamemnon straight,
T'inform him of our project.

'Tis not ripe.
The skilful Surgeon will not launch a sore
Till Nature has digested and prepared
The growing humours to his healing purpose.
Else must he often grieve the patients sense,
When one incision once well-time'd woul'd serve:
Are not Achilles, and dull Ajax friends?

As much as fools can be.

That knot of friendsip first must be untied
Ere we can reach our ends; for while they love each other
Both hating us, will draw too strong a bias,
And all the Camp will lean that way they draw:
For brutal courage is the Soldiers Idol:
So, if one prove contemptuous, backed by to'ther,
'Twill give the law to cool and sober sense,
And place the power of war in Mad-mens hands.

Now I conceive you; were they once divided,
And one of them made ours, that one would check
The others towering growth: and keep both low,
As Instruments, and not as Lords of war.
And this must be by secret coals of envy,
Blown in their breast: comparisons of worth;
Great actions weighed of each: and each the best,
As we shall give him voice.

Here comes Thersites.
Who feeds on Ajax: yet loves him not, because he cannot love.
But as a Species, differing from mankind,
Hatss all he sees; and rails at all he knows;
But hates them most, from whom he most receives.
Disda^ing that his lot should be so low.
That he should want the kindness which he takes.

There's none so fit an Engine: Save ye Thersites.

Hayl noble Grecian, Thou relief of toils,
Soul of our mirth, and joy of sullen war.
In whose converse our winter-nights are short,
And Summer-days not tedious.

Hang you both.

How hang us both!

But hang thee first, thou very reverend fool!
Thou sapless Oak, that liv'st by wanting thought.
And now in thy three hundredth year repin'st
Thou should be felled: hanging's a civil death,
The death of men: thou can not hang: thy trunk
Is only fit for gallows to hang others.

A fine greeting.

A fine old Dotard, to repine at hanging
At such an Age! what saw the Gods in thee
That a Cock-Sparrow should but live three years,
And thou should last three Ages! he's thy better;
He uses life: he treads himself to death.
Thou hast forgot thy use some hundred years:
Thou stump of Man, thou worn-out broom: thou lumber.

I'll hear no more of him, his poison works;
What curse me for my age!

Hold, you mistake him, Nestor; 'tis his custom:
What malice is there in a mirthful scene!
'Tis but a keen-edg'd Sword, spread over with blame
To heal the wound it makes:

Thou beg a curse!
May thou quit scores then, and be hanged on Nestor,
Who hangs on thee: thou lead him by the nose:
Thou paly'st him like a puppet; speak within him,
And when thou hast contirv'd some dark design
To loose a thousand Greeks; make dogs meat of us,
Thou layst thy Cuckows egg within his nest,
And make him hatch it: teach his remembrance
To lye; and say, the like of it was practised
Two hundred years ago; thou bring the brain;
And he brings only beard to vouch thy plots;

I'm no mans fool.

Then be thy own, that's worse.

He'll rail all day.

Then we shall learn all day.
Who forms the body to a graceful carriage
Must imitate our awkward motions first;
The same prescription does the wise Thersites
Apply to mend our minds. The same he uses
To Ajax, to Achilles; to the rest;
His Satyrs are the phyfick of the Camp.

Would they were poison to it, Rats-bane and Hemlock:
Nothing else can mend you; and those two brawny fools.

He hits em right:
Are they not such my Nestor?

Dolt-heads, Asses.
And beasts of burden; Ajax and Achilles!
The pillars, no, the porters of the war.
Hard-headed Rogues! Engines, mere wooden Engines,
Pushed on to do your work.

They are indeed.

But what a Rogue art thou
To say they are indeed: Heaven made e,m horses
And thou put on their harness: rid'st and spur'st em:
Usurp upon heavens fools, and make em thine.

No: they are headstrong fools to be corrected
By none but by Thersites: thou alone
Can tame, and train em to their proper use;
And doing this may claim a just reward
From Greece, and Royal Agamemnons, hands.

Ay, when you need a man, you talk of giving;
For wit's a dear commodity among you:
But when you do not want him, then stale porridge,
A starved dog would not lap; and furrow water
Is all the wine we taste, give drabs and pimps:
He have no gifts with hooks at end of em.

Is this a Man, O Nestor to be bought!
Asia's not price enough! bid the world for him.
And shall this man, this Hermes, this Apollo,
Sit lagg of Ajax table? almost minstrel,
And with his presence grace a brainless feast?
Why they con sense from him grow wits by rote,
And yet, by ill repeating, libel hi^*
Making his wit their nonsense: nay they scorn him;
Call him bought rayler, (...) tongue!
Play him for sport at meals* and kick him off.

Yes they can kick; my buttocks feel they can:
They have their Asses tricks: but I'Ie eat pebbles,
I'll starve;'tis brave to starve, 'tis like a Soldier;
Before I'Ie feed those wit-starv'd rogues with sense*
They shall eat dry, and choke for want of wit,
Ere they be moistened with one drop of mine.
Ajax, and Achilles, two mudd-walls of fool,
That only differ in degrees of thickness.

I'd be revenged of both, when wine ^umes high,
Set em to prate, to boast their brutal strength,
To vie their stupid courage, till they quarrel
And play at hard-head with their empty Skulls.

Yes; they shall but and kick; and all the while
I'll think they kick for me: they shall fell timber
On both sides; and then log-wood will be cheap.

And Agamemnon --

Pox of Agamemnon;
Cannot I do a mischief for my self
But he must thank me for it!
Away; our work is done.

This Agamemnon is a King of clouts:
A chip in porridge.

Thersites!

Set up to frighten Daws from Cherry trees.

Dog!

A standard to march under!

Thou bitch-woolf! can thou not hear! feel then.

The plague of Greece, and Hellens Pox light on thee,
Thou mungrill masti^e; thou beef-witted Lord.

Speak then, thou mouldy leaven of the Camp.
Speak or I'll beat thee into handsomeness.

I shall sooner rail thee into wit: thou can kick, can't thou?
A red murrayn on thy Jades tricks!

Tell me the Proclamation:

Thou art proclaimed a fool I think.

You whoreson Cur take that.

Thou Scurvy valiant Ass.

Thou slave.

Thou Lord! -- I, do, do, -- would my buttocks were Iron for thy sake.


Why how now Ajax! wherefore do you this?
How now Thersites, what's the matter man!

I say this Ajax wears his wit in's belly, and his guts in brains.


Peace fool.


I would have peace; but the fool will not.


But what's the quarrel!


I bad him tell me the proclamation, and he rails upon me.


I serve thee not:


I shall cut out your tongue!


'Tis no matter; I shall speak as much sense as thou afterwards: I'll see you
hanged ere I come any more to your Tent: I'll keep where there's wit stirring,
and leave the faction of fools. --


Nay, thou shalt not go Thersites, till we have squees'd the venom out of
thee: prithee inform us of this Proclamation.


Why you empty ^uz-balls, your heads are full of nothing else but
Proclamatio^s.


Tell us the news I say.


You say! why you never said any thing in all your life! But since you will
know, 'tis proclam'd through the Army, that Hector is to cudgel you to morrow.


How cudgel him, Thersites!


Nay, you may take a child's part ont if you have so much courage, for Hector
has challenged the toughest of the Greeks: and ^tis in dispute which of your
two heads is the sonndest timber.

A knotty piece of work he'^l have betwi^t your noddles,

If Hector be to fight with any Greek^,
He knows his Man.

Yes; he may know his man, without Art Magic.


So he had need: ^or to my certain knowledge neither of you two are conjurers
to inform him.





I mean nothing


Thou mean so always.


Umh! mean nothing!


Jove if it be thy will, let (...) two fools q^arrell about nothing: 'tis a
cause that's worthy of'em.


You say^d he knew his Man: is there (...) one?
One Man amongst the Greeks!

Since you will have it,
but one to fight with (...).

Then I am he;

Weak Ajax.


Weak Achilles.


Weak indeed: God help you both!


Come, this must be no quarrel.


There's no cause for it.


He tells you true; you are both equal


Fools.


I can brook no comparisons.


Nor I.


Well Ajax.


Well Achilles.


So now they quarrel in Monosyllables: A word and a blow, and't be thy will.


You may hear more.


I would.


Expect,


Farewell.


Curse on them, they want wine: your tr^e fool will never fight without it. Or
a drab a drab: Oh for a commodious Drabb betwixt 'em! would Hell^n had been
here! then it had come to something.

Dogs, Lyons, Bulls, for Females tear and gore:
And the Beast Man, is valiant for his whore.

SHall the Idiot Ajax use me thus! he beats me and I rail at him: O worthy
satisfaction! would I could beat him, and he railed at me! Then there's
Achilles, a rare Engineer: if Troy be not taken till these two undermine it,
the walls will stand till they fall of themselves: Now the Plague on the whole
Camp, or rather the Pox: for that's a curse dependent on those that sight as we
do for a Cuckolds queen. -- What ho, my Lord Achilles.


Who's there, Thersites! Good Thersites come in and rail.




I have said my prayers; and the devil Envy say Amen.
Where's Achilles!
Who's there Thersites! why my digestion, why hast thou not served thy self to
my table, so many meals! come begin what's Agamemnon?


Thy Commander, Achilles: then tell me Pauroclus, what's Achilles?


Thy Benefactor Thersites; then tell me prithee what's thy self?


Thy knower, Patrcolus; then tell me, Patroclus, what art thou?


Thou may tell that know.


O, tell, tell. This must be very foolish: and I dye to have my spleen tickled.


I'll decline the whole question. Agamemnon commands Achilles, Achilles is my
Benefactor, I am Patroclus knower; and Patroclus is a fool.


You Rascal?


He's a priviledge'd man, proceed Thersites. Ha! ha! ha! prithee proceed while
I am in the vein of laughing.


And all thses foresaid men are fools: Agamemnon's a fool to offer to command
Achilles: Achilles is a fool to be commanded by him, I am a fool to serve such
a fool, and Patroclus is a fool positive.


Why am I a fool?


Make that demand to Heaven, it suffices me thou art one.


Ha, ha, ha! O give me ribs of steel, or I shall split with pleasure: now play
me Nestor at a Night alarm: Mimic him rarely, make him cough and spent, and
fumble with his gorget, and shake the rivits with his palsy hand; in and out,
in and out, gad that's exceeding foolish.


Nestor shall not escape so, he has told us what we are; come what's Nestor?


Why he's an old wooden top, set up by father Time three hundred years ago,
that hums to Agamemnon and Vlysses, and sleeps to all the world besides.


So let him sleep for I'll no more of him: O my Patroclus, I but force a smile,
Ajax has drawn the lot, and all the praise of Hector mu^t be his.


I hope to see his praise upon his shoulders, in blows and bruises, his arms,
thighs, and body, all full of fame; such fame as he gave me, and a wide hole at
last full in his bosom, to let in day upon him, and discover the inside of a
fool.


How he struts in expectation of honour! he knows not what he does.


Nay that's no wonder, for he never did.


Prithee say how he behaves himself?


O you would be learning to practice, against such another time. -- Why he
tosses up his head as he had built Castles in the air; and he treads upward to
'em, stalks into th'Element, he surveys himself, as 'twere to look for Ajax: he
would be cried, for he has lost himself, nay he knows no body; I said good
morrow Ajax, and he replied thanks Agamemnon.


Thou shalt be my Ambassador to him Thersites.


No, I'll put on his person, let Patroclus make his demands to me, and you
shall see the pageant of Ajax.


To him Patroclus, tell him! humbly desire the valiant Ajax to invite the Noble
Hector to my Tent: and to procure safe conduct for him from our Captain General
Agamemnon.


Jove bless the mighty Ajax!


Humh!


I ^ome from the great Achilles.


Ha!


Who most humbly desires you to invite Hector to his Tent.


Humh!


And to procure him safe conduct from Agamemnon.


Agamemnon?


I, my Lord.


Ha!


What say you to it?


Farewell with all my heart.


Your answer Sir!


If to morrow be a fair day, by eleven a clock it will go one way or the other,
however he shall buy me dearly, fare you well with all my heart.


Why but he is not in this tune is he?


No, but he's thus out of tune, what Music will be in him when Hector has
knocked out his brains I know not, nor I care not, but if emptiness makes
noise, his head will make melody.


My mind is troubled like a Fountain stirred:
And I my self see not the bottom on it.

Would the Fountain of his mind were clear; that he might see an Ass in it.


Look who comes here.


Patroclus, I'll speak with no body, come in after me Thersites.


Where's Achilles!


Within, but ill disposed my Lord.


We saw him at the opening of his Tent.


Let it be known to him that we are here.


I shall say so to him.


I know he is not ^ick.


Yes, Lyon sick, sick of a proud heart, you may call it melancholy; if yo'll
humour him: but on my honour' tis no more than pride: a^d why should he be
proud?


Here comes Patroclus; but no Achilles with him.

Achilles bids me tell you he is sorry
If any thing more than your sport and pleasure
Did move you to this visit: he's not well,
And begs you would excuse him, as unfit
For present business.

How! how's this Patroclus?
We are too well acquainted with these answers.
Though he has much desert, yet all his virtues
Do in our eyes begin to lose their gloss.
We came to speak with him; you shall not err
If you return we think him over-proud
And under-honest. Tell him this; and add,
That if he over-hold his price so much
We'll none of him: but let him like an Engine
Not portable, lye lagg of all the Camp.
A stirring Dwarf is of more use to us
Then is a sleeping Giant; tell him so.

I shall; and bring his answer presently.

I'll not be satisfied but by himself.
So tell him, Menelaus.

What's he more than another?

No more than what he thinks himself.

^s he so much! do you not think he thinks himself a better Man than me?


No doubt he does.


Do you think so?


No, noble Ajax; you are as strong, as valiant; but much more courteous.


Why should a man be proud? I know not what pride is: I hate a proud man as I
hate the engendering of toads.




Achilles will not to the field to morrow.

What's his excuse?

Why he relies on none
But his own will; possessed he is with vanity:
What should I say, he is so plaguy proud
That the death tokens of it are upon him;
And bode there's no recovery.

Let Ajax go to him.

O Agamemnon, let it not be so.
We'll consecrate the steps that Ajax makes
When they go from Achill^s: shall that proud man
Be worshipped by a greater than himself,
One whom we hold our Idol;
Shall Ajax go to him? No, Jove forbid,
And say in thunder, go to him Achilles.



If I go to him with my Gantlet clenched,
I'll dash him over the face.

O no, you shall not go.

And'he ^e proud with me I'll cure his pride: a paltry
Insolent fellow!

How he describes himself?




Wherefore are you? He is not envious as Achilles is.

Know all the world he is as valiant.

A ^horson dog that shall palter thus with us! would a were a Trojan.


Thank Heaven my Lord, you're of a gentle nature,
Praise him that got you, her that brought you forth;
But he who taught you first the use of Arms,
Let Mars divide Eternity; in two,
And give him half. I will not praise your wisdom.
Nestor shall do it; but pardon father Nestor,
Were you as green as Ajax, and your brain
Tempered like his, you never should excel him;
But be as Ajax is.

Shall I call you father?

I, my good Son.

Be ruled by him Lord Ajax.

There is no staying here; the Hart Achilles
Keeps thicket, please it our great General.
I shall impart a counsel, which observed
May cure this Madmans pride.

In my own tent our talk will be more private*

But nothing without Ajax:
He is the soul and substance of my councels
And I am but his shadow.

You shall see
I am not like Achilles,
Let us confer; and I'll give counsel too.

Come, come, what need you blush? shame's a baby; swear the oaths now to her,
that you swore to me: what are you gone again? you must be watched ere you are
made tame must you? why don't you speak to her first! -- Come draw this
Curtain, and lets see your picture: alas a day, how loath you are to offend
daylight! -- (they kiss) that's well, that's well, nay you shall fight your
hearts out ere I part you. -- so so -- so so --


You have bereft me of all words, fair Cressida.


Words, pay no debts; give her deeds; -- what billing again! here's in witness
whereof the parties interchangeably -- come in, come in, you lose time both.


O Cressida, how often have I wished me here?


Wished my Lord! -- the Gods grant! O my Lord. --


What should they grant? what makes this pretty interr^ption in thy words?


speak I know not what!


Speak ever so; and if I answer you
I know not what, it shows the more of love.
Love is a child that talks in broken language,
Yet then he speaks most plain.

I find it true, that to be wise and love
Are inconsistent things.

what blushing still, have you not done talking vet!

Well Uncle, what folly I commit, ^ detdcate to you.

I thank you for that: if my Lord get a boy of you, you'll give him me. Be true
to my Lord, if he flinch I'll be hanged for him -- (Now am I in my kingdom!


You know your pledges now, your Uncles word and my firm faith.


Nay I'll give my word for her too: our kindred are constant: they are burrs I
can assure you, they'll stick where they are thrown.


Boldness comes to me now, and I can speak:
Prince Troylus, I have loved you long.

Why was my Cressida then so hard to win?

Hard to seem won; but I was won my Lord.
What have I blabbed, who will be true to us,
When we are so unfaithful to our selves!
O bid me hold my tongue? for in this rapture.
Sure I shall speak what I should soon repent.
But stop my mouth.

A sweet command; and willingly obeyed.

Pretty I faith!

My Lord I do be^eech you pardon me,
'Twas not my purpose thus to beg a kiss.
I am ashamed: O heavens what have I done!
For thts time let me take my leave, my Lord.

Leave! and you take leave till to morrow morning, call me Cut.


Pray let me go.

Why what offends you, Madam?

My own company.

You cannot snun you self.

Let me go and try:
I have a kind of self resides in you.

Oh that I thought truth could be in a woman!
(As if it can, I will presume in you)
That my integrity and faith might meet
The same return form her who has my heart.
How should I be exaltted! but alas
I am more plain then dull simplicity!
And art less, as the infancy of truth.

In that I must not yield to you my Lord.

All constant Lovers shall, in future Ages,
Approve their truth by Troylus: when their verse
Wants similes as turtles to their mates:
Or true as flowing tides are to the Moon;
Earth to the Center: Iron to Adamant:
At last when truth is tired with repetition;
As true as Troylus shall crown up the verse,
And ^anctify the Numbers.

Prophet my you be!
If I am false, or swerve from truth of love,
When time is old, and has forgot it self,
In all things else, let it remember me;
And after all comparisons of falsehood
To stab the heart of perjury in Maids;
Let it be said as false as Cressida.

Go to, little ones: a bargain made: here I hold your hand, and here my
Cousins: if ever you prove false to one another, after I have taken such pains
to bring you together: let all pitiful goers between, be called to the worlds
end after my name, Pandars.


And will you promise that the holy Priest
Shall make us one for ever!

Priests! marry hang 'em! they make you one! go in, go in, and make your selves
one without a priest: I'll have no priests work in my house.


I'll not consent unless you swear.


I, do, do, swear; a pretty woman's worth an oath at any time. Keep or break as
time shall try; but 'tis good to swear, for the saving of her credit: Hang em
sweet Rogues they never expect a Man should keep it. Let him but swear, and
that's all they care for.


Heavens prosper me as I devoutly swear,
Never to be but yours.

Whereupon I will lead you into a chamber: and suppose there be a bed in it; as
I fack, I know not: but you'll forgive me, if there be: away, away, you naughty
hildings: get ye together, get you together. Ah you wags, do you l^er indeed at
one another! do the neyes twinkle at him! get you together, get you together.


So ho; who goes there? Aeneas!

Prince Hector!

Good morrow Lord Aeneas.

A valiant Greek, Aeneas; take his hand;
Witness the process of your speech within;
You told how Diomede a whole week by days
Did haunt you in the field.

Health to you, valiant Sir,
During all business of the gentle truce;
But when I meet you armed, as black defiance
As heart can think, or courage execute.

Both one and to there, Diomede embraces.
Our bloods are now in clam; and so, long health;
But when contention, and occasion meets,
By Jove I'll play the hunter for thy life,

And thou shalt hunt a Lyou that will fly
With his face backward: welcome Diomede
Welcome to Troy: now by Anchises Soul
No man alive can love in such a sort
The thing he means to kill, more excellently.

We know eath other well.

We do; and long to know each other worse
To Hect. my Lord, the King has sent for me in haste:
Know you the reason?

Yes: his purpose meets you,
It was to bring this Greek to Colchas's house.
Where Pandarus his Brother, and his Daughter
Fair Cressida reside: and there to render
For our Anthenor, now redeemed from prison,
The Lady Cressida:

What! Has the King resolved to gratify
That Traitor Colchos; who forsook his Country,
And turned to them, by giving up this pledge?

The bitter disposition of the time
Is such, though Colchos as a fugitive
Deserve it not, that we must free Anthenor
On whose wise Counsels, we can most rely:
And therefore Cressida must be returned.

A word my Lord -- (Your pardon Diomede)
Your Brother Troylus, to my certain knowledge,
Does lodge this night in Paudarus his house:

Go you before: tell him of our approach
Which will I fear be much
Unwelcome to him.

I assure you
Troylus had rather Troy were born to Greece
Than Cressida from Troy.

I know it well: and how he is beside,
Of hasty blood:

He will not hear me speak:
But I have noted long betwixt you two
A more than Brothers love: an awful homage
The ^iery youth pays to your elder virtue.

Leave it to me; I'll manage him alone:
Attend you Diomede; My Lord good morrow:
An urgent business takes me from the pleasure
Your company affords me; but Aeneas
With joy will undertake to serve you here,
And to supply my room.



Softly, villain, softly; I would not for half Troy the Lovers should be
disturbed under my roof; listen rogue, listen, do they breathe?


Yes, Sir, I hear by some certain signs, the are both awaken.


That's as it should be that's well about sides.


Shall they ^trike up Sir!


Art thou sure they do not know the Parties?


They play to the Man in the Moon for ought they know.


To the Man in the Moon, ah Rogue! do they so indeed Rogue! I understand, thee:
thou art a wag; thou art a wagg. Come towze rowze! in the name of love, strike
up boys!


CAn life be a blessing,
Or worth the possessing,
Can life be a blessing if love were away?
Ah no! though our love all night keep us waking,
And though he torment us with cares all the day,
yet he sweetens he sweetens our pains in the taking,
There's an hour at the last, there's an hour to repay.
In every possessi^g,
The ravishing blessing,
In every possessing the fruit of our pain,
Poor lovers forget long ages of anguish,
Whatever they have suffered and done to obtain;
'Tis a pleasure, a pleasure to sigh and to languish,
When we hope, when we hope to be happy again.
Put up, and vanish; they are coming out; what a ferrup, will you play when the
dance is done? I say vanish.


Good In faith; good ifarth! what hand in hand! -- a fair quarrel, well ended!
do, do, walk him, walk him; A good girl, a discreet girl: I see she'll make the
most of him.


Farewell, my life! leave me and back to bed:
Sleep ^eal those pretty eyes;
And tie thy senses in as soft a band
As Infants void of thought.

Cressida?


Go hang your self you naughty mocking Uncle:
You bring me to do ill and then you jeer me!

What ill have I brought you to do? say what if you dare now!
My Lord have I brought her to do ill?

Come, come, beshrew your heart; you'll neither be good your self, nor suffer
others.


Alas poor wench; alas poor Devil; ^? would anot (a naughty Man) let it sleep
one ^ take him!


Who's that at door? good Uncle go and see:
My Lord come you again into my chamber!
You smile and mock as if I meant naughtily!

Indeed, indeed!

Come you're deceived; I think of no such thing:
How earnestly they knock, pray come in:
I would not for all Troy, you were seen here.

Who's there! whats the matter!
Will you beat down the house there!

Good morrow my Lord Pandarus; good morrow!

Who's there, Prince Hector! what news with you so early?

Is not my Brother Troilus here?

Here! what should he do her^?

Come he is here my Lord, do not deny him:
It does import him much to speak with me.

Is he here say you? 'tis more than I know, I'll be sworn!
For my own part I came in late! -- what should he do here?

Come, come you do him wrong ere you're aware; you'll be so true to him, that
you'll be false to him: you shall not know he's here; but yet go fetch him
hither: -- go.

I bring you Brother, most unwelcome news;
But since of force you are to hear it told,
I thought a friend and Brother best might tell it:
Therefore, befroe I speak, arm well your mind
And think you're to be touched dev'n to the quick;
That so, prepared for ill you may be less
Surprised to hear the worst.

See Hector, what it is to be your Brother,
I stand prepared already.

Come, you are not,
I know you Troilus, you are hot and fiery:
You kindle at a wrong; and catch it quick
As stubble does the flame.

'Tis heat of blood
And rashness of my youth. I'll mend that error:
Begin and try my temper.

Can you think
Of that one thing which most could urge your anger
Drive you to madness, plunge you in despair,
And make you hate even me?

There can be nothing.
I love you Brother, with that awful love
I bear to Heaven, and to superior vert^e,
And when I quit this love you must be that
Which Hector near can be.

Remember well
What you have said: for when I claim your promise
I shall expect performance.

I am taught:
I will not rage.

Nor grieve beyond a man.

I won not be a woamn.

Do not Brother:
And I will tell my news, in terms so mild,
So tender, and so fearful to offend
As Mothers use to sooth their froward Babes;
Nay I will swear as you hve sworn to me,
That if some gust of passion swell your soul
To words intemperate, I will bear with you.

What would this pomp of preparation mean?
Come you to bring me news of Priams death
Or Hecuba's

The Gods forbid I should:
But what I bring is nearer you, more close,
An ill more yours,

There is but one that can be.

Perhaps 'tis that.

I'll not suspect my fate
So far, I know I stand possessed of that.

'Tis well: consider at whose house I find you.

Ha!

Does it start you! I must wake you more:
Anthenor is exchanged.

For whom.

Imagine.

It comes like thunder grumbling in a cloud,
Before the dreadful break: if here it fall,
The subtle flame will lick up all my blood,
And in a moment turn my heart to ashes.

That Cressida for (...) is exchanged
Because I knew 'twas harsh I would not tell;
Not all at once; but by degrees and glimpses
I let it in, lest it might rush upon you
And quite orepower your Soul: in this I think
I showed a friend: your part must follow next:
Which is, to curb your choler, tame your grie^,
And bear it like a man.

I think I do
That I yet live to hear you: but no more:
Hope for no more: for should some Goddess offer
To give her self and all her Heaven in change,
I would not part with Cressida: so return
This answer as my last.

'Twill not be taken:
Nor will I bear such news.

You bore me worse.

Worse for your self; not for the general state,
And all our common fafety, which depends
On freed Anthenors wisdom.

You would say
That I'm the Man marked out to be unhappy;
And made the public Sacrifice for Troy.

I would say so indeed: for can you find
A fate more glorious than to be that victim?
If parting from a Mistress can procure
A Nations happiness, show me that Prince
Who dares to trust his future ^ame so far
To stand the shock of Annals, blotted thus
He sold his Country for a woman's love?

O, she's my life, my being, and my Soul!

Suppose she were, which yet I will not grant,
You ought to give her up.

For whom!

The public.

And what are they that I should give up her
To make them happy? let me tell ^ou Brother,
The public, is the Lees of vulgar slaves:
Slaves, with the minds of slaves: so born, so bred:
Yet such as these united in a herd
Are called the public: Millions of such Ciphers
Make up the public sum: an Eagles life
Is worth a world of Crows: are Princes made
For such as these, who, were one Soul extracted
From all their beings, could not raise a Man. --

And what are we, but for such men as these?
'Tis adoration, some say makes a God:
And who should pay it, where would be their Altars
Were no inferior creatures here on Earth?
Even those who serve have their expectances;
Degrees of happiness, which they must share,
Or they'll refuse to serve us.

Let em have it.
Let em eat, drink and sleep; the only use
They have of life:

You take all these away,
Unless you give up Cressida.

Forbear;
Let Paris give up Hellen: ^he's the cause,
And root of all this mischief.

Your own suffrage
Condemns you there: you voted for her stay.

If one must stay, the other sha'not go.

She sha'not?

Once again, I say she shall not.

Our Father has decreed it otherwise.

No matter.

How! no matter Troylus?
A King, and fathers will!

When 'tis unjust.

Come she shall go.

She shall? then I am dared.

If nothing else will do.

Answer me first;
And then I'll answer that: be sure I will;
Whose hand sealed this exchange?

My Fathers first;
Then all the Council's after.

Was yours there?

Mine was there too.

Then you're no more my friend:
And for your sake now mark me what I say,
She shall not go.

Go to, you are a boy,

A Boy! Im'e glad I am not such a Man,
Not such as thou; a traitor to thy Brother:
Nay more, thy friend: but friend's a Sacred name,
Which none but brave and honest men should wear;
In thee 'tis vile; 'tis prostitute: 'tis Air;
And thus I puff it from me.

Well, young Man,
Since I'm no friend (and oh that ere I was
To one so far unworthy) bring her out,
Or by our Fathers Soul, of which no part
Did ere descend to thee, I'll force her hence.

I laugh at thee.

Thou dare not.

I dare more,
If urged beyond my temper: prove my daring,
And see which of us has the larger share
Of our great Fathers Soul.

No more, thou know me.

I do; and know my self.

All this ye Gods,
And for the Daughter of a fugitive,
A Traitor to his Country!

'Tis too much.

By Heaven too little; for I think her common,

How, Common!

Common as the tainted shambles,
Or as the dust we tread.

By Heaven as chaste as thy Andromache.

What! nam'st thou them together!

No; I do not:
For Cressida is first: as chaste as she,
But much more fair.

O patience, patience, Heaven!
Thou tempt'st me strangely: should I kill thee now,
I know not if the Gods can be offended
Or think I slew a Brother; but be gone,
Be gone, or I shall shake thee into Atoms:
Thou know I can.

I care not if you could.


My promise that no words of thine should urge me,
Beyond the bounds of reason: But in thee
'Twas brutal baseness, so forewa^'d to fall
Beneath the name of man: to spurn my kindness;
And when I offered thee (thou know how loath!)
The wholesome bitter cup of friendly counsel.
To dash it in my face: farewell, farewell.
Ungrateful as thou art: hereafter use
The name of Brother; but of friend no mo^e.

Wilt thou not break yet heart? stay Brother, stay*
I promised too, but I have broke my vow,
And you keep yours too well*

What would thou more?
Take heed, young man how you too ^
For Heaven can witness'tis with much (...)
That I preserve my faith.

Else you would kill me;

By all the Gods I would.

I'm satisfied.
You have condemned me, and I'll do it my self;
What's life to him, who has no use of life?
A barren purchase, held upon hard terms!
For I have lost (oh what have I not lost!)
The fairest, dearest, kindest of her Sex,
And lost her even by him, by him, ye Gods,
Who only could, and only should protect me!
And if I had a joy beyond that love,
A friend, have lost him too!

Speak that again:
(For I could hear it ever:) ^aidst tho^ not
That if thou had a joy beyond that love
It was a friend? O said thou not a friend!
That doubting if was kind: then you're divided;
And I have still some part,

If still you have
You do not care to have it.

How, not care!

No, Brother, ca^e not.

Am I but thy Brother!

You told me I (...) call you friend no more.

How far my words were distant from my heart!
Know when I told thee so I loved thee most.
Alas! it is the use of human frailty
To fly to worst extremities with those
To whom we most are kind.

Is't possible!
Then you are still my friend!

Heaven knows I am!

And can forgive the Sallies of my passion?
For I have been too blame: oh much too blame:
Have said such words, nay done such actions too,
(Base as I am) that my awed, conscious Soul
(...) in my breast, nor dare I lift an eye
On him I have offended.

Peace be to thee
And calmness ever there. I blame thee not:
I know thou love; and what can love not do!
I cast the wild disorderly account
Of all thy words and deeds on that mad passion;
I pity thee, indeed I pity thee:

Do; for I need it: let me lean my head
Upon thy bosom; all my peace dwells there;
Thou art some God, or much much more then man!

Alas! to lose the joys of all thy youth,
One who deserved thy love!

Did she deserve?

She did.

Then sure she was no common creature.

I said it in my rage, I thought not so.

That thought has bles'd me! but to lose this love.
After long pains, and after short po^ession.

I feel it for thee: Let me go to Priam,
I'll break this treaty off; or let me fight;
l'le be thy champion; and secure both her
And thee, and Troy.

It must not be, my Brother!
For then your error would be more then mine:
l'le bring her forth, and you shall bear her hence;
That you have pitied me is my reward.

Go then; and the good gods restore her to thee,
And with her all the quiet of thy mind;
The triumph of this kindness be thy own;
And heaven and earth this testimony yield,
That Friendship never gained a nobler field.

I'St possible! no sooner got but lost!
The devil take Antenor: the young Prince will go mad:
A plague upon Anthenor! would they had broke's neck.

How now! what's the matter! who was here!

Oh, oh!

Why sigh you so! O where's my Troilus? tell me sweet
Uncle what's the matter?

Would I were as deep under the earth, as I am above it!

Oh the Gods, what's the matter?

Prithee get thee in, would thou had never been born!
I knew thou would be his death; oh poor Gentleman!
A plague upon Antenor?

Good Uncle, I beseech you on my knees, tell me what's the matter?


Thou must be gone girl; thou must be gone, to the fugitive Rogue Priest thy
father, (and he's my brohter too, but that's all one at this time:) a pox upon
Antenor.?


O ye immortal Gods, I will not go.

Thou must, thou must?

I will not: I have quite forgot my father;
I have no touch of birth; no spark of Nature:
No kinn, no blood, no life; nothing so near me
As my dear Troilus?

Here, here, here, he comes sweet Duck!

O Troilus, Troilus!

What a pair of Spectacles is here! let me embrace too: Oh heart, sings(as the
saying is) O heart, heavy heart, why sighst thou without breaking (where he
answers again) because thou can not ease thy smart, by friendship nor by
speaking, there was never a truer rhyme; let us cast away nothing; for we may
live to have need of such a verse: we see it; we see it, how now lambs?


Cressida, I love thee with so strange a purity
That the blessed Gods, angry with my devotions
More bright in zeal, than that I pay their Altars,
Will take thee from my sight?

Have the Gods envy?

I, I, I, 'tis too plain a case!

And is it true, that I must go from Troy?

A hastefull truth?

What, and from Troilus too?

From Troy and Troilus: and suddenly.
So suddenly 'tis counted but by minutes.

What not an hour allow'd for taking leave?

Even that's bereft us too: our envious fates
Justle betwixt, and part the dear adieus
Of meeting lips, clasped hands, and locked embraces.
My Lord, is the Lady ready yet?

Hark, you are called: some say the Genius so
Cries come, to him who instantly must dye.

Where are my tears! some rain to'lay this wind:
Or my heart will be blown up by the roots!

Hear me my Love! be thou but true like me.

I true! how now, what wicked thought is this?

Nay, we must use expostulation kindly,
For it is parting from us:
I spoke not, be thou true, as fearing thee;
But be thou true, I said to introduce
My following protestation: be thou true,
And I will see thee.

You'll be exposed to dangers.

I care not: but be true.

Be true again?

Hear why I speak it love.
The Grecian Youths are full of Grecian Arts:
Alas a kind of holy jealousy
Which I beseech you call a virtuous sin,
Makes me afraid how far you may be tempted.

O Heavens, you love me not!

Dye I, a villain then!
In this I do not call your faith in question
But my own merit.

Fear not; I'll be true

Then fate thy worst; for I will see thee love
Not all the Grecian host shall keep me out,
Nor Troy, though walled with fire, should hold me in.
My Lord, my Lord Troilus: I must call you.

A mischief call him: nothing but Schreechowls? do, do, call again; you had
best part 'em now in the sweetness of their love! l'le be hanged if this
Aeneas be the Son of (...), sor all his bragging. Honest Venu^ was a Punk:
would she have parted Lovers: no he has not a drop of Venus blood in him:
honest Ve^us was a Punk.




Marry and I will: follow you your business; lose no time,'tis very precious;
go, Bill again: I'll tell the Rogue his own I warrant him.


What have we ga^n'd by this one minute more?

Only to wish another, and another
A longer struggling with the pangs of death.

O those who do not know what parting is
Can never learn to dye!

When I but think this sight may be our last,
If Jove could set me in th^ palce of A^las
And lay the weight of H^av'n and Gods upon me
He could not press me more.

Oh let me go that I may know my grief;
Grief is but guessed, while thou art standing by:
But I too soon shall know what absence is.

Why 'tis to be no more: another name for death.
'Tis the Sun parting from the frozen North;
And I, me thinks, stand on some cey cliff,
To watch the last low circles that he makes;
Till he sink down from Heaven! O only Cressida,
If thou depart from me, I cannot live:
I have not soul enough to last for grief,
But thou shalt hear what grief has done with me.

If I could live to hear it, I were false,
But as a careful traveller who fearing
Assaults of Robbers, leaves his wealth behind,
I trust my heart with thee; and to the Greeks
Bear but an empty Casket.

Then, I will live; that I may keep that treasure:
And armed with this assurance, let thee go
Loose, yet secure as is the gentle Hawk
When whistled off she mounts into the wind,
Our love's, like Mountains high above the clouds,
Though winds and tempests beat their aged feet,
Their peaceful heads nor storm nor thunder know,
But scorn the threating rack that roles below,

AChilles stands in th'entrance of his Tent:
Please it our General to pass strangely by him,
As if he were forgot, and Princes all
Look on him with neglectful eyes and scorn:
Pride must be cured by pride.

We'll execute your purpose, and put on
A form of strangeness as we pass along
So do each Prince either salute him not
Or else disdainfully, which will shake him more
Then if not looked on: I will lead the way.

What, comes the General to speak with me!
You know my mind; I'll fight no more with Troy.

What says Achilles, would he ought with us?

Would you, my Lord, ought with the General!

No.

Nothing my Lord.

The better.

How do you, how do you!

What does the Cuckold scorn me!

How now Patroclus!

Good morrow Ajax*

Ha!

Good morrow.

I; and good next day too.

What mean these fellows! know they not Achilles?

They pass by strangely; they were used to bow;
And send their smiles before 'em to Achilles,
To come as humbly as they used to creep, to holy Altars.

Am I poor of late!
'Tis certain, greatness once fallen out with fortune
Must fall out with men too! what the declind is
He shall as soon read in the eyes of others
As feel in his own fall: for men like butter-flyes,
Show not their mealy wings but to the Summer.

'Tis known you are in love with Hector's Sister,
And therefore will not fight: and your not fighting
Draws on you this contempt: I oft have told you
A woman impudent and mannish grown
Is not more loathed than an effeminate man,
In time of action: I'm condemned for this:
They think my little appetite to war
Dead all the fire in you: but rouse your self,
And love shall from your neck unloose his folds;
Or like a dew drop from a Lyons Mane
Be shaken into air.

Shall Ajax fight with Hector?

Yes, and perhaps shall gain much honour by him.

I see my reputation is at stake.

O then beware, those wounds heal ill that men have given themselves, because
they give em deepest.


I'll do something:
But what I know not yet, -- No more our Champion.

Here art thou daring combat, valiant Ajax.
Give with thy Trumpet, a loud note to Troy,
Thou Noble Champion, that the sounding air
May pierce the ears of the great challenger,
And call him hither.

Trumpet take that purse:
Now crack thy lungs, and split the sounding brass;
Thou blow for Hector.

Yonder comes the Troop.
Health to the Grecian Lords; what shall be done
To him that shall be vanquished? or do you purpose,
A Victor should be known! will you the Knights,
Shall to the edg of all extremity,
Pursue each other, or shall be divided
By any voice or order of the ^ield;
Hector bad ask.

Which way wouldn't Hector have it?

He cares not, he'll obey conditions.

'Tis done like Hector but securely done;
A little proudly, and too much despising
The Knight opposed, he might have found his match.

If not Achilles, Sir, what is your name!

If not Achill^ nothing*

Therefore Achilles, but who ere know this;
Great Hector knows no pride, weigh him but well,
And that which looks like pride is courtesy.
This Ajax is half made of Hectors blood,
In love whereof half Hector stays at home;

A Maiden battle! I perceive you then.

Go Diomede, and stand by valiant Ajax:
As you and Lord Aeneas shall consent,
So let the fight proceed or terminate.

They are opposed already.
Princes enough, you both have shown much valour.

And we as Judges of the Field declare;
The combat here shall cease.

I am not warm yet, let us fight again.

Then let it be as Hector shall determine.

If it be left to me, I will no more.

thou art my Aunt Hesion's Son;
The Obligation of our blood forbids us.
But were thy mixture Greek and Trojan so,
That thou could say, this part is Grecian all
And this is Trojan, hence thou should not bear
One Grecian limb, wherein my pointed Sword
Had not impression made, but Heaven forbid
That any drop thou borrowst from my Mother,
Should ere be drained by me, let me embrace thee Cousin:
By him who thunders thou hast sinnewy arms,
Hector would have 'em fall upon him thus: --
Thine be the honour, Ajax.

I thank thee Hector,
Thou art too gentle, and too free a Man:
I came to kill thee Cousin, and to gain
A great addition from that glorious act:
But thou hast quite disarmed me.

I am glad.
For 'tis the only way I could (...) thee.

If I might in entreaty find success,
I would desire to see thee at my Tent.

'Tis Agamemnons wish, and great Achilles,
Both long to see the valiant Hector there.

Aeneas, call my Brother Troil^s to me;
And you two sign this friendly interview.


Who would be rid of such an Enemy.
Troy, no less to you.

I have, thou gallant Trojan seen thee often
Labouring for destiny, make cruel way,
Through ranks of Grecian youth, and I have seen thee
As swift as lightning spur thy Ph^ygian Steed,
And seen thee scorning many forfeit lives,
When thou hast hung thy advanced Sword in the air,
Not letting it decline, on prostrate foes:
That I have said to all the standers by
Lo Jove is yonder, distributing life.

Let me embrace thee, good old Chroni le,
Who hast so long walked hand in hand with time:
Most Reverend Nestor, I am glad to clasp thee.

I wonder now, how yonder City stands,
When we have here, her base and pillar by us.

I know your countenance, Lord Vlysses well;
Ah Sir, there's many a Greek and Trojan dead,
Since first I saw your self and Di^mede,
In Ilion, on your Greekish Embassy.

Now Hector, I have fed mine eyes on thee;
I have with exact view perused thee Hector,
And quoted joint by joint.

Is this Achilles!

I am Achilles.

Stand fair, I prithee let me look on thee.

Behold thy fill.

Nay, ^ have done already.

Thou art too brief, I will the second time
As I would buy thee, view thee limb by limb.

O, like a Book of sport thou read me ore;
But there's more in me then thou understand.

Tell me ye Heavens, in which part of his body
Shall ^ destroy him? there, or there, or there!
That I may give th'imagin'd wound a name,
And make di^tinct the very breach, whereout*
Hectors great spirit flew! answer me Heavens!

Were thou an Oracle to tell me this!
I'd not believe thee, henceforth guard thee well,
I'll kill the every where:
Ye Noble Grecians pardon me this boast,
His insolence draws folly from my lips,
But I'll endeavour deeds to match these words;
Else may ^ never. --

Do not cha^e thee Cousin,
And you Achilles let these threats alone:
You may have every day enough of Hector,
If you have stomach, the General State I fear
Can scarce entreat you to perform your boast.

I pray you let us see you in the field;
We have had paltry Wars, since you refused
The Grecian cause.

Dost thou entreat me Hector!
To morrow will ^ meet thee fierce as death;
To Night all peace.

Thy hand upon that match.

First all you Grecian Princes go with me,
And entertain great Hector, afterwards,
As his own leisure, shall concur with yours,
You may invite him to your several Tents.

My Lord Vlysses.

Tell me I beseech you;
In what part of the field does Calehas lodge!
At Menelaus Tent;
There Diomede does feast with him to Night:
Who neither looks on Heaven or on Earth,
But gives all gaze and bent of amorous view,
On C^essi^a alone.

Shall I, brave Lord be bound to you so much
After we part from Agamemnons Tent.
To bring me thither!

I shall want on you.
As freely tell me, of what honour was
This Cressida in Troy? had she no Lovers there
Who mourn her absence?

O Sir, to such as boasting show their scars,
Reproof is due, she loved and was beloved:
That's all I must impart. Lead on my Lord.


Which with my Sword I mean to cool to morrow.
Patroclus, let us feast him to the height.

Here comes Thersites.

How now thou core of envy,
Thou crusty batch of Nature, what's the news?

Why thou picture of what thou seem, thou Idol of
Idiot worshippers, there's a Letter for thee.

From whence fragment?

Why thou full dish of fool, from Troy.

Well said adversity! what makes thee so keen to day?

Because a fool's my whetstone.

Meaning me?

Yes meaning thy no meaning; prithee be silent, boy, I profit not by thy talk:
Now the rotten diseases of the South, gut gripings, ruptures, Catarrhs; loads
of gravel in the back, Lethargies, cold palsies, and the like, take thee, and
take thee again; thou green Sarcenet flap for a sore eye, thou tassell of a
prodigals purse, thou: Ah how the poor world is pestered with such water-flys:
such diminitives of nature.


My dear Patroclus, I am quite prevented
From my great purpose, bent on Hector's life:
Here is a Letter from my love Polixena,
Both taxing, and engaging me to keep
An Oath that ^ have sworn: and will not break it
To save all Greece: let honour go or stay,
There's more Religion in my love than fame:

With too much blood, and too little brain, these two are running mad before
the dog-days. There's Agamemnon too, an honest fellow enough, and loves a
brimmer heartily; but he has not so much brains as an old gander. But his
brother Menelaus, there's a fellow: the goodly transformation of Jupiter when
he loved Europa: the primitive Cuckold: A vile Monkey tied eternally to his
brothers table. To be a Dog, a Mule, a Cat, a toad, an Owl, a Lizard, a
Herring without a roe, I would not care: but to be Menelaus I would conspire
against destiny -- Hey day! will with a wisp, and Jack a lanthorn!


We go wrong; we go wrong.

No, yonder 'tis; there where see the light.

I touble you.

Not at all Cousin: Here comes Achilles himself to guide us.

Welcome brave Hector, welcome princes all:

So now, brave Prince of Tray, I take my leave;
Ajax commands the guard, to wait on you.

Good night my Lord!

Good night Sweet Lord Menelaus*




Nestor will stay; and you Lord Diomede.
Keep Hector company an hour or two.

I cannot Sir: I have important business.

Enter my Lords.

Calchas's tent.

This Diomede's a most false-hearted rogue, an unjust Knave: I will no more
trust him when he winks with one eye, then I will a Serpent when he hisses. He
will spend his mouth and promise, like Brabbler the Hound: but when he
performs, Astronomers set it down for a prodigy; Though I long to see Hector, I
cannot forbear dogging him. They say a keeps a Trojan Drabb: and uses Calchas
tent, that fugitive Priest of Troy; that Canonical Rogue of our side. I'll
after him: nothing but whoring in this Age: all incontinent Rascals!


O, what a blessing is a virtuous child!
Thou hast reclam'd my mind, and calmed my passions
Of anger and revenge: my love to Troy
Revives within me, and my lost Tyara
No more disturbs my mind:

A virtuous conquest.

I have a woman's longing to return
But yet which way without your aid I know not.

Time must instruct us how.

You must dissemble love to Diomede still
False Diomede, bred in Vlysses School
Can never be deceived,
But by strong Arts and blandishments of love:
Put 'em in practice all: seem lost and won,
And draw him on, and give him line again.
This Argus then may close his hundred eyes
And leave our flight more easy.

How can I answer this to love and Troilus?

Why 'tis for him you do it: promise largely*
That Ring he saw you wear, he much s^spects*
Was given you by a Lover; let him have it.

Hoa; Calchas, Calchas!

Hark! I hear his voice.
Pursue your project: doubt not the success.

Heaven knows against my will: and yet my hopes
This night to meet my Triolus, while 'tis truce
Afford my mind some ease.

No more: retire.

I came to see your Daughter, worthy Calchas.

My Lord I'll call her to you.



Cressida comes forth to him!

How now my charge?

Now my sweet Guardian: hark a word with you.

I, so familiar!

Will you remember?

Remember: yes.

Heavens! what should she remember! plague and madness!

Prince, you are moved: let us depart in time
Lest your displeasure should enlarge it self
To wrathful terms: this place is dangerous;
The time unfit: 'beseech you let us go.

I pray you stay; by Hell, and by Hell torments
I will not speak a word.

I'll hear no more: good night.

Nay, but you part in anger!

Does that grieve thee! O withered truth!

Farewell Cousner.

Indeed I am not: pray come back again.

You shake my Lord, at something: will you go?
You will break out.

By all the Gods I will not.
There is between my will and all my actions,
A guard of patience! stay a little while.




But will you then?

I will as soon as ere the War's concluded.

Give me some token, for the surety of it:
The Ring I saw you wear.



The Ring! nay then 'tis plain! O beauty where's thy faith!

You have sworn patience.

That's well, that's well, the pledge is given, hold her to her word good Devil
and her soul's thine I warrant thee.


Who's wast?

By all Diana's waiting train of stars,
And by her self, I will not tell you whose.

Why then thou love him still, farewell for ever:
Thou never shalt mock Diomede again.

You shall not go, one cannot speak a word
But straight it starts you.

I do not like this fooling.

Nor I by ^luto: but that which likes not me, pleases me best.

I shall expect your promise.

I'll perform it.
Not a word more, good night -- -I hope for ever:
Thus to deceive deceivers is no fraud.

All's done my Lord.

Is it?

Pray let us go.

Was Cressida here?

I cannot conjure Trojan.

She was not sure! she was not.
Let it not be believed for womanhood:
Think we had Mothers, do not give advantage,
To biting Satyr, apt without a theme,
For defamation, to square a^l the sex
By Cressid's rule rather think this not Cressida.

Will he swagger himself out on^s own eyes!

This she! no this was Diomedes Cessida.
If beauty have a Soul, this is not she:
I cannot speak for rage, that Ring was mine,
By Heaven I gave it, in that point of time
When both our joys were fullest! -- if he keeps it
Let dogs eat Troilus.

He'll tickle it for his Concupy: this will be sport to see!

Patroclus will give me any thing for the intelligence of this whore; a parrot
will not do more for an almond, than he will for a commodious drab: I would I
could meet with this Rogue Diomede too; I would croak like a Raven to him; I
would bode: it shall go hard but ^'le ^nd him out.


I have been seeking you this hour, my Lord:
Hector by this is arming him in Troy.

Commend me gallant Troilus to your Brother:
Tell him I hope he shall not need to arm:
The fair Polixena has by a letter
Disarmed our great Achilles of his rage.

This I shall say to Hector.

So I hope!
Pray Heaven Thersites have informed me true, --

Good night, my Lord; accept distracted thanks.

Hear ye, my Lord, hear ye; I have been seeing yon poor girl.
There have been old doings there i'faith.


The poyson's kind: the more I drink of it
The sooner 'twill dispatch me.



She has been mightily made on by the Greeks: she takes most wonderfully among
em: Achilles kissed her, and Patroclus Kissed her: Nay and old Nestor put aside
his gray beard and brushed her with his whiskers. Then comes me Agamemnon with
his Generals Staff, diving with a low bow even to the ground, and rising again,
just at her lips: And after him came Vlysses, and Ajax, and Menelaus: and they
so pelted her i'faith: pitter patter, pitter patter, as thick as hayl-stones.
And after that a whole rout of 'em: Never was woman in Phrygia better kissed.


Hector said true: I find, I find it now!


And last of all comes me Diomede so demurely: that's a notable sly Rogue I
warrant him! mercy upon us, how he laid her on upon the lips! for as I told
you, she's most mightily made on among the Greekes. What, cheer up I say Man!
she has every ones good word. I think in my conscience, she was born with a
caull upon her head.




And that Rogue-Priest my Brother, is so courted and treated for her sake: the
young Sparks do so pull him about, and hall him by the Cassock: nothing but
invitations to his Tent, and his Tent, and this Tent. Nay and one of'em was so
bold, as to ask him if she were a Virgin, and with that the Rogue my Brother,
takes me up a little God in his hand, and kisses it; and swears devoutly that
she was, then was I ready to burst my sides with laughing, to think what had
passed betwixt you two.


O I can bear no more: she's falsehood all:
False by both kinds; for with her mothers milk
She ^uck'd th'infusion of her Fathers Soul.
She only wants an opportunity,
Her Soul's a whore already.

What would you make a Monopoly of a woman's lips: a little consolation or so,
might be allow'd one would think in a lovers absence!


Hence from my sight: let ignominy brand thy hated name:
Let Modest Matrons at thy mention start;
And blushing Virgins, when they read our Annals,
Skipo're the guilty page that holds thy Legend,
And blots the noble work.

O world, world; thou art an ungrateful patch of Earth!

Thus the poor Agent is despised! he labours painfully in his calling, and
trudges between parties: but when their turns are served, come out's too good
for him. I am mighty melancholy: I'll even go home, and shut up my doors; and
dye o'th sullens like an old bird in a Cage!





My Lord I am by Ajax sent to infrom you
This hour muft end the truce.


Think where we are.

Your stay will be unsafe.

It may for those I hate.

Trojan: there's the frrst hit.

Beseech you Sir make haste, my own affairs
Call me another way.




May I enquire where your affairs conduct you?



Oh, it concerns you not.

Perhaps it does.

You are too inquisi^ive: nor am I bound
To satisfy and Enemies request.

You have a Ring upon your finger Diomede,
And given you by a Lady,

If it were; 'Twas given to one who can defend her gift.




You must restore it Greek, by Heaven you must:
No spoil of mine shall grace a Traitors hand.
And, with it, give me back the broken vows
Of my false fair; which, perjured as she is,
I never will resign, but with my Soul.

Then thou it seems art that for saken fool
Who wanting merit to preserve her heart,
Repines in vain to see it better placed;
But know, (for now I take a pride to grieve thee)
Thou art so lost a thing in her esteem
I never heard thee named; but some scorn follow'd:
Thou were our table take for laughing meals:
Thy name our sportful theme for Evening walks:
And intermissive hours of cooler Love:
When hand in hand we went. [ Troil.] Hell and furies!


Now Menclaus his Greek horns are out of doors, there's a new Cuckold start up
on the Trojan side.


Yet this was she, ye Gods that very she,
Who in my arms lay melting all the Night;
Who kissed and sighed, and sighed, and kissed again,
As if her Soul flew upward to her lips,
To meet mine there, and panted at the passage.
Who loath to find the breaking day, looked out,
And shrunk into my bosom, there to make
A little longer darkness.

Plagues and tortures!

Good, good, by Pluto! their fool's mad to lose his harlot; and our fools mad,
that the other fool had her first: if I sought peace now, I could tell 'em there's
punk enough to satisfy 'em both: whore sufficient! but let 'em worry one
another, the foolish currs; they think they can never have enough of carrion.


My Lords, this sury is not proper here,
In time of truce; if either side be injured
To morrow's Sun will rise apace, and then --

And then! but why should I defer till then?
My blood calls now, there is no truce for Traitors.
My vengeance rolls within my breast, it must
It will have vent* --

Hinder us not Aeneas,
My blood rides high as his, I trust thy honour;
And know thou art too brave a foe to break it. --

Now Moon! now snine sweet Moon! let 'em have just light enough to make their
passes: and not light enough to ward 'em



You both are mad, is this like gallant men
To fight at midnight; at the Murderers hour?
When only guilt and rapine draws a Sword?
Let night enjoy her dues of soft repose;
But let the Sun behold the brave mans courage.
And this I dare engage for Diomede
Foe though I am, he shall not hide his head,
But meet you in the very face of danger.


High as Olympus, and a Sea beneath
Call when thou dare, just on the sharpest point
I'll meet, and tumble with thee to destruction.

A gnawing conscience haunts not guilty men
As I'll haunt thee, to summon thee to this,
Nay, should thou take the Stygian lake for refuge
I'll plunge in after, through the boiling flames
To push thee hissing down the vast Abyss.

Where shall we meet?

Before the Tent of Calchas:
Thither, through all your Troops, I'll fight my way;
And in the sight of perjured Cressida
Give death to her through thee.

Tis largely promised.
But I disdain to answer with a boast;
Be sure thou shalt be met.

And thou be found.

Now the furies take Aeneas, for letting 'em sleep upon their quarrel: who
knows but rest may cool their brains, and make 'em rise mawkish to mischief
upon consideration? May each of 'em dream he sees his Cockatrice in to theirs
arms: and be stabbing one another in their sleep, to remember 'em of their
business when they wake: let 'em be punctual to the point of honour; and if it
were possible let both be first at the place of Execution. Let neither of 'em
have cogitation enough, to consider 'tis a whore they fight for: and let 'em
value their lives at as little as they are worth. And lastly let no succeeding
fools take warning by 'em; but in imitation of them when a Strumpet is in
question,

Let 'em beneath thair feet all reason trample;
And think it great to perish by Example.

THe blew mists rise from off the nether grounds,
And the Sun mounts apace: to arms, to arms;
I am resolved to put to the utmost proof
The fate of Troy this day.



Methought heard you sigh, Andromache!

Did you my Lord?

Did you my Lord? You answer indirectly,
Just when I said that I would put our fate
Upon the extremest proof, you fetched a groan;
And, as you checked your self, for what you did
You stifled it, and stopped. Come you are sad.

The Gods forbid.

What should the Gods forbid?

That I should give you cause of just offence.

You say well: but you look not cheerfully.
I mean this day to waste the stock of war,
And lay it prodigally out in blows:
Come gird my sword, and smile upon me, love;
Like victory come flying to my arms;
And give me earnest of desired success.

The Gods protect you; and restore you to me.

What, grown a Coward! thou were used Andromache,
To give my courage, courage: thou woudst cry
Go Hector; day grow's old; and part of Fame
Is ravished from thee, by thy sloathfull stay.


Come let me gird thy fortune to thy side:
And conquest sit as close, and sure as this.
Now mercy, Heaven! the Gods avert this omen!

A foolish omen! take it up again;
And mend thy error.

I cannot: for my hand obeys me not.
But as in slumbers, when we fain would run
From our imagined fears, our idle feet
Grow to the ground, our struggling voice dyes inward,
So now, when would force my self to cheer you
My faltering tongue can give no glad presage;
Alas, I am no more Andromache.

Why then thy former Soul is flown to me:
For I, me thinks, am lifted into air:
As if my mind, mastering my mortal part
Would bear my exalted body to the Gods.
Last night I dreamt Jove sate on Ida's top
And beckoning with his hand divine from far,
He pointed to a quire of Demi- gods,
Bacch^s, and Hercules, and all the rest
Who free from humane toils had gained the pitch
Of blessed eternity: lo there he said;
Lo there's a place for Hector.

Be to thy Enemies this boding dream!

Why it portends me honour and renoun.

Such honour, as the Brave gain after death.
For I have dreamt all night of horrid slaughters,
Of trampling horses, and of Chariot wheels
Wading in blood up to their Axeltrees.
Of fiery Demons gliding down the Skies,
And Ilium brightened with a midnight blaze;
O therefore, if thou love me, go not forth.

Go to thy bed again; and there dream better.
Ho bid my Trumpet Sound.

No notes of sally for the Heaven's sweet sake.
Tis not for nothing when my Spirits droop:
This is a day when thy ill Stars are strong
When they have driven thy helpless genius down
The steep of Heaven to some obscure retreat.

No more; even as thou lov st my fame no more:
My honour stands engaged to meet Achilles:
What will the Grecians think; or what will he,
Or what will Troy; or what wilt thou thy self
When once this ague fit of fear is ore;
If I should lose my honour for* a dream.

Your Enemies too well your courage know,
And Heaven abhors the forfiet of rash vows
Like spotted livers in a Sacrifice.
I cannot; O I dare not let you go:
For when you leave me, my presaging mind
Says, I shall never, never see you more.

Thou excellently good, but oh too soft,
Let me not escape the danger of this day,
But I have struggling in my manly Soul
To see those modest tears, ashamed to fall,
And witness any part of woman in thee!
And now I fear, lest thou should think it fear,
If thus dissuaded, I refuse to fight,
And stay inglorious in thy arms at home.

Oh could I have that thought I should not love thee;
Thy soul is proof to all things but to kindness.
And therefore t'was that I forbore to tell thee
How mad Cassandra, full of prophecy
Ran round the streets, and like a Bacchanal
Cried hold him Priam, 'tis an ominous day,
Let him not go; for Hector is no more.

Our life is short but to extend that span
To vast Eternity is virtues work.
Therefore to thee, and not to fear of fate
Which once must come to all, give I this day
But see thou move no more the like request:
For rest assured that to regain this hour
To morrow will I tempt a double danger:
Mean time, let Destiny attend thy leisure.
I reckon this one day a blank of of life.

Where are you Brother? now in honour's name,
What do you mean to be thus long nnarm'd?
The imbattel'd Soldiers throug about the gates:
The Matrous to the turrets tops ascend
Holding their helpless children in their arms,
To make you early known to their young eyes,
And Hector is the universal shout.

Bid all unarm, I will not fight to day.

Employ some coward to bear back this news,
And let the children hoot him for his pains;
By all the gods and by my just revenge,
This sun shall shine the last for them or us:
These noisy streets or yonder echoing plains
Shall be to morrow silent as the grave.

O Brother do not urge a brother's fate,
But let this rack of heaven* and earth roll over,
And when the storm is past put out to sea.

Oh now I know from whence his change proceeds,
Some frantic Augur has observed the skies;
Some victim wants a heart, or crow flies wrong;
By heaven 'twas never well since saucy Priests
Grew to be Masters of the listening herd;
And into Miters cleft the Regal Crown.
Then as the Earth were scanty for their power,
They drew the pomp of Heaven to wait on them;
Shall I go publish Hector dares not sight
Because a mad-man dreamt he talked with Jove?
What could the God see in a brain-sick Priest
That he should sooner talk to him then me?

You know my name's not liable to fear.

Yes, to the worst of fear, to superstition.
But whether that or fondness of a wife,
(The more unpardonabl^ ill) has seized you,
Know this, the Grecians think you fear Achilles,
And that Polixena has begged your life.

How! that my life is begged, and by my sister?

Vlysses so informed me at our parting,
With a malicious and disdainful smile:
'Tis true, he said not in broad words you feared,
But in well-manner'd terms 'twas so agreed
Achilles should avoid to meet with Hector.

He thinks my Sisters treason, my petition,
That largely vaunting in my heat of blood
More then I could, it seems, or durst perform,
I sought evasion.

And in private prayed.

O yes, Polixena, to beg my life.

He cannot think so, do not urge him thus.

Not urge me! then thou think I need his urging.
By all the Gods should Jove himself descend,
And tell me Hector thou deserve not life
But take it as a boon; I would not live.
But that a Mortal man, and he of all men
Should think my life were in his power to give,
I will not rest, till prostrate on the ground
I make him Athiest- like, implore his breath
Of me and not of Heaven.

Then you'I refuse no more to fight.

Refuse! I'll not be hindered, Brother.
I'll through and through 'em, even their hindmost ranks.
Till I have found that large sized boasting fool
Who dare presume my life is in his gift.

Farewell, farewell: 'tis vain to strive with fate:
Cassandra's raging God inspires my breast,
With truths that must be told and not believed.
Look how he dyes! look how his eye turns pale!
Look how his blood bursts out at many vents!
Hark how Troy roars, how Hecuba cries out
And widowed fill all the streets with screams!
Behold distraction, frenzy and amazement,
Like Antiques meet, and tumble upon heaps!
And all cry Hector; Hectors dead! oh Hector!

What sport will be when we return at Evening,
To laugh her out of countenance for her dreams!

I have not quenched my eyes with dewy sleep this Night;
But fiery fumes mount upward to my brains,
And when I breathe, methinks my nostrills hiss!
I shall turn Basilisk! and with my sight
Do my hands work, on Diomede this day.

To Arms, to Arms, the vantguards are engaged:
Let us not leave one Man to guard the Walls,
Both Old and young, the coward and the brave,
Be Summoned all, our utmost fate to try;
And as one body move, whose Soul am I.

THus far the promise of the day is fair:
Aeneas rather loses ground than gains,
I saw him overlabour'd, taking breath;
And leaning on his spear, behold our Trenches
Like a fierce Lyon looking up to toils,
Which yet he durst not leap.

And therefore distant death does all the work:
The flights of whistling darts make brown the sky,
Whose clashing points strike fire, and guild the dusk:
Those that reach home, from neither host are vain,
So thick the press; so lusty are their arms,
That death seemed never sent with better will!
Nor was with less concernment entertained.

Now Nestor, what's the news?

I have descried,
A clow'd of dust that mounts in pillars upwards;
Expanding as it travels to our Camp,
And from the midst ^ heard a bursting shout,
That rent the Heavens! as if all Troy were swarmed,
And on the wing this way.

Let 'em come, let 'em come.

Where's great Achilles!

Think not on Achilles:
Till Hector drag him from his Tent to fight,
(Which sure he will, for I have laid the train.)

But young Patroclus leads his Myrmydo^s;
And in their front, even in the face of Hector,
Resolves to dare the Trojans.

Haste Vlysses, bid Ajax issue forth, and second hi^.

Oh Noble General, let it not be so.
Oppose not rage, while rage is in its force;
But give it way awhile; and let it waste:
The rising deluge is not stopped with dams,
Those it orebears, and drowns the hopes of harvest.
But wisely managed its divided strength
Is sluc'd in channels, and securely drained:
First, let small parties da^y with their fury.
But when their force is spent and unsupplied
The residue with mounds may be restrained,
And dry-shod, we may pass the naked ford.

Ho, ho, ho!


Why dost thou laugh, unseasonable fool!


Why thou fool in season, cannot a man laugh, but thou think he makes horns
at thee! Thou Prince of the Herd, what hast thou to do with laughing! Tis the
prerogative of man to laugh! Thou Risibility without Reason: thou subject of
laughter; Thou fool Royal:


But tell us the occasion of thy mirth?


Now a man asks me, I care not if I answer to my own kind: why the Enemies are
broken into our Trenches: Fools like Menelaus fall by thousands; yet not a
humane Soul departs on either side. Troilus and Ajax have almost beaten one
another heads off; but are both immortal for want of brains. Patroclus has
killed Sarpedon; and Hector Patroclus: So there's a towardly springing fop gone
off: He might have made a Prince one day: But now he's nipped in the very bud
and promise of a most prodigious Coxcomb.


Bear off Patroclus body to Achilles:
Revenge will arm him now, and bring us aid.
The alarm Sounds near; an shouts are driven upon us,
As of a crowd confused in their retreat.

Open your Ranks, and make these mad men way:
Then close again, to charge upon their backs:
And quite consume the Relics of the war.

What shoals of fools one battle sweeps away!

How it purges families of younger Brothers! Highways of Robbers, and Cities of
Cuckold-makers! There's nothing like a pitched Battle, for these brisk
Addle-heads! Your Physician is a pretty fellow; but his fees make him tedious;
he rids not fast enough; the fools grow upon him, and their horse bodies are
poison proof. Your pestilence is a quicker Remedy; but it has not the grace to
make distinction; it huddles up honest men and Rogues together. But your battle
has discretion; it picks out all the forward fools. And souses 'em together
into Immortality.


Turn slave and fight.





A Bastard Son of Priam's.


I am a Bastard too: I love Bastards: I am Bastard in body, Bastard in mind,
Bastard in valour; in every thing illegitimate. A Bear will not fasten upon a
Bear; why should one Bastard offend another! let us part fair, like true Sons
of Whores; and have the fear of our Mothers before our eyes.


The Devil take thee Coward.


Now would I were either invisible, or invulnerable? these Gods have a fine
time on it; they can see and make mischief, and never feel it. Ajax for a
minute: some sturdy Trojan will poach me up with a long pole! and then the
Rogues may kill one another upon free cost, and have no body lest to laugh at
'em:

Now Destruction! now Destruction!



I fight not at all: I am for neither side.

Thou art a Greek: art thou a match for Hector.
Art thou of blood and honour?

No, I am a rescall: a scurvy railing knave; a very filthy Rogue.


I do believe thee; live.


God a mercy, that thou wilt believe me: but the Devil break thy neck for
frighting me:





A gleaning of the war: a Rogue he says.


Despatch him and away.


Hold, hold: what is't no more but dispatch a man and away! I am in no such
hast: I will not dye for Greece; I hate Greece, and by my good will would ne'er
have been born there; I was mistaken into that Country, and betrayed my parents
to be born there. And besides I have a mortal Enemy amongst the Grecians, one
Diomede a damned villain, and cannot dye with a safe conscience till I have
first murdered him.


Show me thrt Diomede and thou shalt live.


Come along with me and I'll conduct thee to Calchas his Tent, where I believe
he's now making were with the Priests daughter.


Here we must part, our destinies divide us;
Brother and friend, farewell.

When shall we meet?

When the Gods please: if not, we once must part.
Look; on you hill their squandered Troops unite;

If I mistake not, 'tis their last Reserve:
The storm's blown ore; and those but after drops.

I wish our Men be not too far engaged:
^or few we are and spent; as having born
The burden of the Day: but hap what can
They shall be charged: Achilles must be there;
And him I seek, or death.
Divide (...) Troops; and take the fresher half.

O Brother,

No dispute of Ceremony!
These are enough for me; in faith enough:
There bodies shall not flag while I can lead;
Not wearied limbs confess mortality,
Before those Ants that blacken all you hill
Are crept into their Earth: Farewell.

Farewell; come Greek:

Now these Rival-rogues will clapperclaw one another, and I shall have the
sport on it.


Which way went Hector?

Up you sandy hill:
You may discern 'em by their smoking track;
A wavering body working with bent hams
Against the rising, spent with painful march,
And by loose-footing cast on heaps together.

O thou art gone! thou sweetest, both of friends*
Why did I let thee tempt the shock of war
Ere yet thy tender nerves had strung thy limbs,
And knotted into strength. Yet, though too late,
I will, I will revenge the, my Patroclus!
Nor shall thy Ghost thy Murtherer's long attend,
But thou shalt hear him calling Charon back,
Ere thou art wa^ted to the farther shore.
Make hast, my Soldiers: give me this days pains.
For my dead friend: strike every hand with mine,
Till Hector breathless, on the ground we lay!
Revenge is honour, the securest way.

That's Calcha's tent.

Then that one spot of Earth contains more falsehood
Than all the Sun sees in his race beside.
That I should trust the Daughter of Priest!
Priesthood, that makes a merchandise of Heaven!
Priesthood that sells eve'n to their prayr's and blessings!
And forces us to pay for our own cousnage!

Nay cheats Heaven too with entrails and with offals;
Gives it the gar^idge of a Sacrifice
And keeps the best of private Luxury.

Thou hast deserved thy life, for cursing Priests:
That back, that nose; those eyes are beautiful:
Live thou, art honest; for thou hat'st a Priest.




Me thinks my soul is roused to her last work:
Has much to do, and little time to spare.
She starts within me, like a Traveller
Who sluggishly out-slept his morning hour
And mends his pace, to reach his Inn betimes.
A Noise of Arms! the Traitor may be there:
Or else, perhaps, that conscious scene of Love,
The Tent may hold him, yet I dare not search
For Oh I fear to find him in that place.

Where is he? I'll be justified or dye.

So quickly vanished! he was here but now:
He must be gone to search for Diomede,
For Diomede told me, here they were to fight.

Alas! ( Calch.) you must prevent, and not complain.

If Troilus dye, I have no share in life.

If Diomede sink beneath the sword of Troilus,
We lose not only a Protector here,
But are debarred all future means of flight.

What then remains!

To interpose betimes
Betwixt their swords; or if that cannot be
To intercede for him, who shall be vanquished,
Fate leaves no middle course. --

Ah me I hear em;
And fear 'tis past prevention.

Now beg thy life, or dye.

No: use thy fortune:
I loath the life, which thou can give, or take.

Scornst thou my mercy villain! -- take thy wish. --

Hold, hold your hand my Lord, and hear me speak.

Did I not hear the voice of perjured Cressida?
Come thou to give the last stab to my heart?
As if the proofs of all thy former falsehood
Were not enough convincing, come thou now
to beg my Rivals life!
Whom, Oh, if any spark of truth remained,
Thou coud'st not thus, even to my face prefer!

What shall I say! that you suspect me false
Has struck me dumb! but let him live my Troilus,
By all our loves, by all our past endearments
I do adjure thee spare him.

Hell, and death!

If ever I had power to bend your mind,
Believe me still your faithful Cressida:
And though my innocence appear like guilt,
Because I make his forfeit life my suit,
'Tis but for this, that my return to you
Would be cut off for ever by his death.
My father, treated like a slave and scorned,
My self in hated bonds a Captive held.

Could I believe thee, could I think thee true
In triumph would I bear thee back to Troy,
Though Greece could rally all her shattered troops,
And stand embatteld to oppose my way.
But, Oh, thou Siren, I will stop my ears
To thy enchanting notes; the winds shall bear
Upon their wings, thy words more light then they.

Alas I but dissembled love to him;
If ever he had any proof beyond
What modesty might give. --

No! witness this --
There, take her Trojan; thou deserve her best,
You good, kind-natur'd, well-believing fools
Are treasures to a woman.
I was a jealous, hard vexatious Lover
And doubted even this pledge till full possession:
But she was honourable to her word;
And I have no just reason to complain.

O, unexampled, frontlesse impudence!

Hell show me such another tortured wretch, as Troilus!

Nay, dare grieve not: I resign her freely up:
I'm satisfied: and dare engage for Cressida,
That if you have a promise of her person,
She shall be willing to come out of debt.


Which if there be a power above are binding,
Or, if there be a Hell below, are fearful,
May every imprecation, which your rage
Can wish on me, take place, if I am false.

Nay, since you're so concerned to be believed,
I'm sorry I have pressed my charge so far;
Be what you would be thought: I can be grateful.

Grateful! Oh torment! now hells blewest flames
Receive her quick; with all her crimes upon her.
Let her sink spotted down. Let the dark host
Make room; and point: and hiss her, as she goes.
Let the most branded Ghosts of all her Sex
Rejoice, and cry, here comes a blacker fiend.
Let her --

Enough my Lord; you've said enough:
This faithless, perjured, hated Cressida,
Shall be no more, the subject of your Curses:
Some few hours hence, and grief had done your work;
But the your eyes had missed the satisfaction
Which thus I give you -- thus --

Help; save her, help.

Stand off; and touch me not, thou Traitor, Diomede:
But you, my only Troilus come near:
Trust me the wound which I have given this breast
Is far less painful, then the wound you gave it.
Oh, can you yet believe, that I am true!

This were too much, even if thou had been false!
But, Oh, thou purest, whitest innocence,
(For such I know thee now) too late I know it!
May all my curses, and ten thousand more
Heavier than they, fall back upon my head,
Pelion and Ossa from the Giants graves,
Be torn by some avenging Deity,
And hurled at me, a bolder wretch then they,
Who durst invade the Skies!

Hear him not Heavens!
But hear me bless him with my latest breath:
And since I question not your hard decree,
That doomed my days unfortunate and few,
Add all to him, you take away from me;
And I dye happy that he thinks me true.

She's gone for ever, and she blessed me dying!
Could she have cursed me worse! she died for me;
And like a woman, I lament for her:
Distraction pulls me several ways at once,
Here pity calls me to weep out my eyes;
Despair then turns me back upon my self,
And bids me seek no more, but finish here:
Ha, smilst thou Traitor, thou instruct'st me best,
And turn my just revenge to punish thee.

Thy worst, for mine has been before hand with thee,
I triumph in thy vain credulity,
Which levels thy despairing state to mine:
But yet thy folly to believe a foe;
Makes thine the sharper, and more shameful loss.

By my few moments of remaining life;
I did not hope for any future joy,
But thou hast given me pleasure ere I dye:
To punish such a Villain. -- Fight a part.
For Heaven and hell have marked him out for me,
And I should grudg even his least drop of blood,
To any other hand. --

Our toils are done, and those aspiring Walls
(The work of Gods, and almost mateing Heaven,)
Must crumble into rubbish on the plain.

When mighty Hector fell beneath thy Sword,
Their Old foundations shook, their nodding Towers
Threatened from high, the amazed Inhabitants:
And Guardian Gods for fear forsook their fanes.

Patroclus, now be quiet: Hectors dead:
And as a second offering to thy Ghost,
Lies Troilus high upon a heap of slain:
And noble Diomede beneath; whose death
This hand of mine revenged.

Revenged it basely.
For Troilus fell by multitudes oppressed;
And so fell Hector, but 'tis vain to talk.

Hayl Agamemnon! truly Victor now!
While secret envy, and while open pride,
Among thy factious Nobles discord threw;
While public good was urged for private ends,
And those thought Patriots, who disturbed it most;
Then like the headstrong horses of the Sun,
That light which should have cheered the World, consumed it:
Now peaceful order has resumed the reins,
Old time looks young, and Nature seems renewed:
Then, since from homebred Factions ruin springs,
Let Subjects learn obedience to their Kings.

THese cruel Critiques put me into passion;
For in their lowering looks I read damnation:
Ye expect a Satyr, and I seldom fail,
When I'm first beaten, 'tis my part to rail.
You British fools, of the Old Trojan stock,
That stand so thick one cannot miss the flock,
Poets have cause to dread a keeping Pit,
When Women's Cullyes come to judge of Wit.
As we strew Rats-bane when we vermin fear,
'Twere worth our cost to scatter fool-bane here.
And after all our judging Fops were served,
Dull Poets too should have a dose reserved,
Such Reprobates, as past all sense of shaming
Write on, and ne'er are satisfied with damming,
Next, those, to whom the Stage does not belong
Such whose Vocation only is to Song;
At most to Prologue, when for want of time
Poets take in for Iournywork in Rhyme.
But I want curses for those mighty shoals,
Of scribbling Chlorisses, and Phillis fools,
Those Ophs should be restraind, during their lives,
From Pen and Ink, as Madmen are from knives:
I could rayl on, but 'twere a task as vain
As preaching truth at Rome, or wit in Spain,
Yet to huff out our Play was worth my trying,
John Lilbourn escaped his Judges by defying:
If guilty, yet I'm sure of the Churches blessing,
By suffering for the Plot, without confessing.
COntemplations upon the remarkable Passages in the New Testament, Consisting
in Divine Meditations upon; the Life of the Holy Jesus. Written by the Bishop of
Exeter.

Ten Tragical Histories, Containing Gods Revenge against the Sin of Adultery,
Illustrated with Cuts.

The Feigned Curtezans, Or, A Nights Intrigue.

Sir Patient Fancy.

The Counterfeits.

Brutus of Alba, a Tragedy, By M. Tate. Acted at the Dukes Theatre.

Medulla Historiae Anglicanae, Being a comprehensive History; of the Lives and
Reigns of the Monarchs of England, From the time of the Conquest thereof by
Julius Caesar to this present Year, 1679. With an Abstract of the Lives of the
Roman Emperors Commanding in Britain. To which is added, A List of the Names of
the Present Members of Parliament.


