THIS Year has been Remarkable two ways,
For Blooming Poets, and for Blasted Plays.
We've been by much appearing Plenty mocked,
At once both tantalised, and over-stock'd.
Our Authors too, by their success of late,
Begin to think third days are out of date:
What can the Cause be, that our Plays won't keep,
Unless they have a Rot some Years like Sheep?
For our parts, we confess we're quite (...)
To read such Weekly-Bills of Poets damned.
Each Parish knows 'tis but a mournful Case
When Christnings fall, and Funerals increase.
Thus 'tis, and thus 'twill be when we are dead,
There will be Writers that will never be read.
W^y will you be such Wits, and write such things?
You're willing to be Wasps, but want the stings.
Let not your Spleen provoke you to that (...),
'Od^ife you don't know what you do, Sirs, when you write.
You'll find that Pegasus has tricks, when tried,
Though you make nothing on it but up and ride;
Ladies and all, I faith, now get astride.
(...) Characters, and Scenes, and Plots,
Is grown as common now, as knitting Knots;
With the same ease, and negligence of thought,
The Charming Play is writ, and Fringe is wrought.
Though this is frightful, yet we're more afraid,
When Ladies leave, that Beaux will take the Trade:
Thus far 'tis well enough, if here 'twould stop,
But should they write, we must even shut up shop.
How shall we make this Mode of Writing sink?
A (...) said I? 'Tis a Disease, I think,
A (...) Tetter that's not Cured with Ink.
(...) it spreads, 'till each the infection takes,
And seizes ten for one that it forsakes:
Our Play to day is sprung from none of these,
Nor should you Damn it, though it does not please,
Since born without the bounds of your four Seas.
(...) if you grant no savour as 'tis new,
Yet as a Stranger, there is something due:
From Rome (to try its fate) this Play was sent,
Start not at Rome, for there's no Popery meant;
Where ever the Poet does his dwelling choose,
Yet still he knows his Country claims his (...)
(...) an (...)-Born he sends,
(...), (...), on you depends.
Yet he (...) hope some kindness may be shown,
As due to greater Merit than his own,
And begs the Sire may for the Son atone.
There's his last Refuge, if the PLAY don't take,
Yet spare Young Dryden for his Father's sake.

NEighbour Lurch, I am heartily glad to see you, but why that melancholy Face,
that Countenance in Eclipse, how goes the World Man?


How goes the World, Sir John? why how should it go with a married Man? I have
been Married a whole half year, in which time I have had more business on my
hands than a Secretary of State, have raised more Out-works than any Governor
of a Citadel to preserve my Wife's Chastity: In short, I am so broken and
brought down with this blessed half year of Wedlock, that at the end of the
next half, I am of Opinion I shall be Celebrated with the Anniversary of my
Funeral; the Doctors have almost given me over already.


And the Midwives too, Neighbour; you have entered indiscreetly upon this
business of Matrimony, without making some necessary reflections. Why, in the
name of goodness, what could provoke you with these some fifty years, as I
modestly suppose on your back, at such an Age of ^umbling to take a Girl of
sifteen?


Why, Sir John? to answer you with the same freedom what you interrogate, this
was my Reason; you are not ignorant, as being my Neighbour, that I have thriven
in the World; having so done, I began to bethink my self of making a retreat
from business, in order to enjoy the declension of my days as comfortably as I
could.


In order to which, you took a Wife, a very pretty retreat from Business and
the World, and an excellent Cordial for a Man in a declining Condition; then to
finish the happiness of your retreat, you are most abominably jealous, and take
all the care imaginable to divulge it to the World, by depriving your Wife of
those Christian Liberties which all Wise Men allow theirs; as you order your
affairs, Neighbour, you had as good make a public Proclamation in the Streets
of London, I have a pretty young Wife, who will make me a Cuckold, you do the
same thing in effect already.


Sir John, I am obliged to you for the Summary you have been pleased to make of
my present Condition; but methinks in the first part of your Discourse, where
you take notice of the little or no Comfort there is to be had in Marriage with
so small concern, you seem to forget that you your self are a married Man.


Forget, say you, that would be more than any married Man in Christendom could
ever do yet; but I remember it as seldom, and with as little regret as possibly
I can: I have been married now these ten years, that is to say, I have served
almost two Apprentiships to Matrimony, 'twere hard if I were not Master of my
Vocation.


So it should seem indeed, by your advising me to allow my Wife that Christian
Liberty which you say all wise Men allow theirs; 'tis a Heathen Liberty, a
Crime Capital, the broad Road to Cuckoldom.


I tell you, Neighbour, you talk like a mere Novice in Matrimony, give me leave
to tell you, 'tis in vain to consine them; for the more Women are constrained
and deprived of Liberty, the more eager they are in the pursuit of it; if you
vex them, they'll cross you, 'tis an original perverseness they inherit by
Nature; why, I tell you once again they are the crooked rib of Adam, they love
nothing like cross purposos.


'Tis well there are no Women here to hear you; but still I say no liberty; if
I must be a Cuckold, I shall have this satisfaction at least, to be made one my
own may.


'Tis pity but your Wife should give it you; i am afraid, Neighbour, I am
afraid you have Capricorn gloriously ascending in your Nativity, you have a
very foreboding look with you.


you that are so good at deciphering other Peoples looks, had best look at
home; since I am provoked to speak my mind, I have observed that there is a
certain swinging two-handed well set black Doctor, who comes very often to
feel your Lady's Pulse, I think they call him the Ladies Doctor in the Town,
but he looks more like a Horn Doctor; I am of opinion your Lady is not so often
indisposed for nothing.


You mean Doctor Lorman, that insignificant Fop Doctor, who has not the tenth
part of the Learning of a Mountebank in LincolnsInn-Fields, a mere Cravat and
Periwig one, who never knew beyond the composition of a Washball or a Pomatum,
or how to prescribe a Clyster for my Lady's Lap-Dog. He is not the first
Coxcomb that has passed with Women for a Man of Parts; but to confess freely to
you, Neighbour, I never yet suspected my Wife's Virtue with the Doctor; I know
her to be humorous and fantastic, and therefore as she is often troubled with
little indispositions, I am willing to let her have the Doctor she fancies.


You take a very prudent course Sir John, according to your Maxim of Christian
Liberty.


This it is to be in company with a Man that's Jealous; Neighbour, thou art
just like those who are seized with the Plague, they are not satisfied to have
the Disease themselves, but make it their business to infect others: all
Husbands ought to avoid thee as the Contagion, thou art full of the Purples of
Jealousy. But no more of this, here comes my Wife.


Oh! Grace, I am so very weak and faint all of the sudden, that except you hold
me up, I shall scarcely have strength to come to your Master. Oh, Sir John,
where are you? I have got such a dizziness in my, head, I can scarcely see from
one end of the Room to the other.


What's the matter, my Dear, what new accident has befallen you?


Oh, Sir John, no new accident, 'tis my old misfortune, the Vapours, a sudden
faintness, a kind o^ a Falling-Sickness, that reigning Disease among Ladies of
Quality. Oh! dear Sir John, send quickly, before I have another Fit, for that
fin^ Doctor, who is so Famous for Curing the Ladies of their Vapours; Oh, oh, I
am ready to fall, I am so faint; quickly, Sir John, quickly.


Have a little patience, my Dear, 'till I go to the door and give orders --
Who's without there? do ye hear,

Run immediately and fetch your Lady's Doctor hither, desire him to come with
all possible speed.


O fie, Sir John, how you give a Message to a Doctor of such a Repute! I find I
must word it my self, though I am so very faint. Do you hear, Fellow, run quickly
to the Gentleman your Master has mentioned, and present Sir John's humble
service to him, and besure you remember to give mine in particular -- This
Fellow's such a Sot he'll never remember half the Message -- And, do you hear,
let the worthy Doctor know I have had a most violent Fit of the Vapours.

O ^ie, Sir John, what Servants you keep, what a beastly leg the Fellow has
made, and dirty'd all the boards of my Room.


My Dear, you take no notice of my Neighbour Lur^ here.


O Mr. Lur^h, I protest I never saw you all this while, I am utterly ashamed of
my self for being so unmannerly, pray Mr. Lurch how does the good young Woman
do?


Whom does your Ladyship mean, if I may be so bold?


I mean the good young Woman your Wife.


I left her at home very well, at your Ladyship's service, under Lock and Key.


I need not ask you how you like a married Life, you are but in Hony-Moon yet.


If there be a hony-Month in Marriage, I should be glad to find it; but I'll
swear I have felt nothing but the Sting, without one drop of the Honey hitherto.


My Neighbour is but a mere Bridegroom yet, my Dear; by that time he has been
as long Married as you and I have been, he'll be able to give a good account of
it. What say you, Neighbour, to ten years of Matrimony?


Why I say, Sir John, that in half that time Matrimony would give a better
account of me.


I protest, Mr. Lurch, I forgot to ask you one Question, is your Wife never
troubled with Vapours?


O yes, of all sorts, Madam. I am sure she Hectors and Vapours me sufficiently.


'Tis a sign she is well born, for Vapours are more frequent among Persons of
Quality, than those of mean Condition; I believe I* have the ablest Physician
in all Christendom for removing of them.


Pray, Neighbour, let me recommend my Wife's Doctor to you, I'll send him to
visit your Spouse to morrow, or next day, or when you will.


No, Sir John, I am in no haste, I thank you, my Wife is in no such want of a
Doctor yet, as yours.


You need not fear our sending the Doctor to you, Neighbour, he's not so easily
sent; he's not a Person who runs after Patients, on my word, the whole Town
runs after him. But what's the reason, Neighbour, you did not bring your Wife
along with you? I warrant you have left her at home all alone; sie, you do very
ill, Neighbour, 'tis enough to make a young Woman grow melancholy, and despair;
you ought to take her abroad, and air her sometimes.


Come, Neighbour, I know my Spouse will be glad of some Company, to pass away
her indisposition; come, I won't be denied, you must step home now immediately
and bring your Wife to us, 'tis a deed of Charity -- But do you hear, Neighbour,
do not forget in returning, to come along with her.


You might have omitted your last Commands, for here's a a swinging black
Doctor to be here, who looks like a Bird of Prey.


So, I have taken a very good pretence to send him for his Wife; the
impertinencies of this Doctor, whom I expect every minute, will make the
jealous Rogue ^ass like a vexed Wasp.


O (...), Sir John, why would you send for Company? I can't endure to receive
Visits when I have got the Vapours: I am so indisposed at present, I am fit
only to be seen by a Physician.


I thought 'twas your desire, my Dear, I did it to procure you some Company to
pass away time, and divert Melancholy, but you always pervert my good
Intentions.


I'd rather you'd procure me a Physician: Oh, oh, I'm so faint again all of the
sudden, your Arm quickly, Grace, your Arm.


Courage, Madam, here comes the Doctor.


Sir John, after having professed the more than ordinary Concern I had, when
just now I was Informed by one of your Attendants, of the most unwelcome News
of your very Honoured Lady's Indisposition; I ought to make a just Apology for
my appearance in this negligent and too familiar Habit: But I have been so
pursued and persecuted by several Persons of Honour at home, for this whole
Morning, that as I am a Professor of Physic, I have not had a Minutes leisure,
to compose and put* my self into a decent posture, in order to visit and attend
those Patients, for whom I reserve so much esteem and respect, as I really do
for your self, and much honoured good Lady.


What do you think Graee, is he not a Comely, Proper, Well-set, Black Man? He's
absolutely the ablest Physician in all Europe.


Worthy (...), you confound me with your Goodness. But that I may not neglect
the great end for which I came hither, I must beg your permission to approach
your Fair Lady, and take the Moments of her Pulse.


What a flourishing Coxcomb's this: A Patient might expire in the while he's
making a Compliment of Entrance, or setting his Wig in order.


O welcome, Doctor, I have been dying for you, absolutely dying for you, I have
had such a terrible (...) of the Vapours; but the very sight of you has half
Cured me already.


Why, that is not altogether impossible, Madam, for I have had several
Patients, who have protested to me, that they have discovered, I know not how
to express my self, a Jenescay quoyness in my Physiognomy, that my very first
appearance, I will not say has absolutely Cured them, but has given them a
present ease from the Distemper under which they then laboured*


Good Doctor feel my Pulse quickly; how does it beat? am I a Woman of this
World or no?


'Tis a brawny Aesculapius, he's able to beget a whole College of Physicians.


Madam, you have a very uneven disordered Pulse, it beats an alarm: But I
shall order you a Tizan to rectify it immediately, as also (...) remove those
Obstructions from your Head and Stomach, which gene^te and beget Vapours.


The Rogue has got the Trick of the French Doctors, ho prescribe a Tizan to
every Disease.

Neighbour Lurch; I see you are a Man of your Word, you are doubly welcome now.


Here is that Doctor whom Heaven confound.


Doctor Lorman, this is a worthy Neighbour of mine, and this a Fair Lady called
his Wife, whom I recommend to you as a Patient, that she may li^ her self under
the Protection of so able a Physician.


Methinks you are very forward in recommending another Man's Wife, Sir John,
but I shall desire hereafter, you would neither list my Wife for a Patient, nor
me for a Cuckold.


Madam, I cannot but harbour an exceeding Esteem for your person, in which, at
the first view, I discover such transcendent Merits, and as I have dedicated my
Self and my whole Art, to the Service of the Fair Sex, I should be infinitely
transported, if ever I may be able to serve you in any particular of my
Profession.


Sir, I shall think my self highly honoured, in being assisted by One, whose
Famous Cures have sill'd all Eyes with admiration, and all Tongues with
sufficient Matter of Discourse.


So, she's in with him already; now am I all over in a sweat, I shall have him
laying his brawny Fist on her Pulse immediately.


As for my Cures, Madam, (but first let me beg the Honour of your Fair Hand to
consult your Pulse) as for my Cures, I say, they speak themselves.

And though indeed my Public Profession is of Physic, yet I dare aver, no Man
in Christendom has a freer Hand in the Practical Part of Anatomy and
Surgery.


O Lord, O Lord! but you had as good depose my Wife's Hand, Doctor, that it may
not be a hinderance to your Discourse.


No, the Doctor does me a particular Favour, and if it be no burden to him, I
am very well satisfied he continue it.


'Tis impossible, a Fair Lady's Hand should be a burden.


I am much troubled with a Noise in my Head, Doctor.


And so am I, while your Tongue's there.


I can bear this no longer, that he should Court any other Woman in my
presence; I knew this devilish Company would hinder me from enjoying him all my
self; but I'll be even with Sir John for this.


But now I will acquaint the Company present of some precious Rarities of my
own Manufacture.


I have a most approved water-wash for the Face, called my Lac Virginis, which
works wonders on the Fair Sex, in clearing and beantifying their Skins; and
this Rich Cosmetic not to be sold a Farthing under five Guineas the Bottle,
absolutely the greatest Secret in th^ European World.


Absolutely the greatest Cheat in the whole Universe; how the Rogue squeezes
me.


Secondly, I have most precious Pomatoms of all sorts, of my own composition.

Thirdly, I have rare oiled Night-Gloves of right Roman Kid.

Fourthly, Plumpers for the help of decayed Ladies who are Cheek-fallen; Lead
Forehead-Pieces, all manner of Night-vizards, or Face-moulds, with several
other Gallantries of great consideration and importance; but for fear of
seeming vain-glorious, I shall pass by in silence the rest of my Abilities, and
beg your Pardon, Madam, for keeping your fair hand a Prisoner so long, which I
thus Salute, to expiate my Crime with all due --

Sir, I am no Mountebank, I would have you to know I am no Mountebank; Sir, let
me tell you, I seldom or never knew any Person who made a jest of my
Profession expire in his Bed -- I am no Mountebank, Sir.


I know not whether I am in jest with you or no, but I'll swear you have been
in earnest with me, this hand of mine which you have worry'd so, knows it very
well.


Mr. Lurch, Let me tell you that you have neither a capacity to distinguish, or
good breeding in treating with such levity a Person so esteemed for his many
Virtues by all the World*


Madam, you mortify me with your exceeding goodness, let the Gentleman alone,
he will meet with his reward one time or other, as I said before.


Doctor, will you favour me to order the Tizan you mentioned for my Wife?


You may command my Art, Sir John.


Who waits without, bring Pen, Ink, and Paper quickly.


Let your Lady take this, and I'll pawn my Art it does the business, it wants
only to be superscribed; for when my Apothecary serves

a Person of Quality, he always makes use of his best Drugs.


Now you have obliged my Wife, Doctor, I have another Patient to recommend to
you, which is my Wife's Lap-Dog, who is so troubled with the worms, he's a very
pest in the house.


Sir John, I receive particular consolation in the Proposal, and declare it to
be one of the chief branches of my Profession, the knowing how to Cure those
tender Creatures, who are so Lady-like in their Constitutions.

What Appeliation or Nom de Guerre does your Ladyship use for your Dog, that I
may superscribe?


Cupid.


His Age, Madam? that I may regulate the Dose.


Two years old since Candlemas last past.

For Mr. Cupid, Lap. Dog to the Honourable the Lady Dorothea Crossit, this will
suffice.


Really I shall be overjoyed when my Dog's Cured.


I must put an end to this impertinence, Doctor, I have some business to
dispatch this Morning, and therefore must beg your leave to --


Let me see what is it a Clock, this is my Governor;

How, is't possible it can be so late, I am a ruined Man! certainly my Watch
runs upon wheels, I shall lose my Reputation absolutely, I should have made my
whole tour of Patients by this time; when a Man is once become necessary to the
World, he is a Slave ever after. Ladies, I must suffer an unwilling divorce
from your fair Companies.


Adieu, Doctor.


Adieu, dear Madam.


Adieu, dear, dear Doctor. Your Fee, Sir John your Fee quickly, and remember my
Dog's Fee.


You must force him to take it, my Dear; he's so modest.


O Lord! Sir John, what do you mean to do? O pray, Sir John, what do you mean?
Sir John; your most humble Servant.


You shall give me leave to wait on you down Stairs.


Sir John, my Wife and I have been troublesome too long to you and your Lady,
and therefore will take our leaves also.


I hope, Madam, I shall find another occasion to show how much I am your
Ladyship's most humble Servant.


Madam, you may command me; you will pardon me that I leave Sir John to
accompany you; I am so faint with the Vapours, I dare not venture out of doors.


Repose your self, my Dear, in your Chamber, and leave me to ^rve the Company.


Ay, you are much discomposed, Madam.


I am all confusion, prithee call 'em to Sing the Song I love.


HElp, help, ye Powers Divine,
For sure from you this Lightning came,
That from his Eyes shot thorough mine,
Down to my Heart a subtle flame.
I try to get (...), (...) always in vain,
For as fast as I fly, I fly with my pain.
There's nothing my Love and my Life can divide,
For equally both to my Heart-strings are tied.
Do ye hear, shut the door close: Well, we Ladies of Quality are all Slaves to
our Waiting-Women. We are forced to trust them with our Secrets, and then they
become our Mistresses:

Have you shut the Door?


I have locked it on the inside, Madam.


Do you remember, how many Rich Gowns and Petticoats, how many laced Pinners,
Hoods, Scarfs, and Nightrails, I have given you, since the three Years you have
served me, together with many other Vails, Perquisites, and Profits you have
enjoyed in my Service?


What Tune will this Prelude end in, I wonder!


I do not call to mind my Favours; implying, that you are ungrateful; but only
to encourage you to persevere in the Love and Duty you owe me, and in that
Faithfulness and Secrecy I have always found in you. Secrecy, Grace, is a
most necessary Gift and Accomplishment, for one in your Station.


'Tis a Gift with which very few of our Sex are blessed.


Art thou sure thou can be Secret Proof.


I think I am, Madam.


But 'tis such a Secret, that if ever it should be discovered, especially by my
Husband, I am a ruined Wife for ever. Hast thou the gift of Secrecy? May I
make thee my Confessor? But first to stop thy Mouth, I give thee that fresh
Manteau and Petticoat I wore yesterday.


Now, Madam, I am sure I have the Gift of Secrecy, you may Confess with
safety.


Swear thou wilt be true to me.


What Oath shall I (...) by (...) ^hat?


Swear by any (...), (...) (...).


^hen, may I never wear ^ood, Scarf, Manteau, or Petticoat, more of your
Ladyships, when ever I am guilty of betraying my Trust.


Well, I must tell thee then, I am in Love, Grace! O that Doctor, that Doctor,
that Charming Doctor, I dye for him!


'Tis pity your Ladyship should dye for want of a Physician.


O, this Doctor will be the Death of me.


That may be too, for 'tis one part of his Profession.


Did thou never observe, how often I have chan^d Colour at the sight of Dr.
Lorman, my frequent Sighs, and languishing Looks, that have spoke too plainly
my Passion?


Yes, indeed, I always thought your Ladyship had a kind of a grudging to him.


Ah, would it were no worse; I love him even to Madness.


Nay, now I find your Ladyship is (...) a desperate Condition.


Well, since I have made thee my Confident, I must inform thee what Service
thou must do me in this Business. Knowing my Husband was to go to Barnet this
day, and not return till to Morrow Morning, I went privately yesterday to the
Change, and bought a dozen of the finest Holland Shirts, lac^d with the best
Flanders Lace I could lay hands on: These I have put up in a Band-Box, and
intend you shall convey 'em to Dr. Lorman, in form of a Present.


A whole dozen of Shirts! does your Ladyship intend he shall wear 'em all out
in your Service?


Leave your idle Questions: I intend to place a Letter in the Band-Box, which
will sufficiently unriddle the meaning of my Favours.


I think the Riddle of your Favours is not so very dark, that it should want an
Explanation: Those Coats of Arms, as soon as seen, are blazon'd; and declare
your Ladyship of the Family of Love, without a Herald to pronounce it.


However, don't you fail in your Duty, and when the Doctor Reads my Letter, be
sure you say a world of tender Things to him, such as I would, were I present;
thou hast Wit at command.


I warrant you, Madam, he's ours; he must be a Doctor of Marble, to resist such
a Letter as you have writ. Besides, there's a Present will bring him with a
Vengeance.

Love and a Bribe will make him soon surrender,
Such powerful Forces make all Hearts grow tender.

DEar Harry, well met, may I presume to guess whither you are bound in such
haste?


No, my Friend, I'll ease you of that trouble, and let you know I am bound with
all my Sails full to the Port of Love; Mrs. Lucy, your fair Cousin, Rich old
Landy's Daughter.


'Tis as I thought, you are a happy Man, you have the young Lady's heart, and
^er Father's liking, you cannot fail of making a prosperous Voyage, and
carrying the Golden-Fleece off in Triumph.


True indeed, I steer as (...) with fair weather, and a prosperous gale in
sight of the Port; but, my Friend, there are so many Sands, Rocks, and shallows
to be passed ever I can enter, that if a Man be not an expert Pilot indeed, he
may perhaps founder in sight of it. I shall never think my self out of danger,
'till I have cast Anchor in the Harbour.


Never doubt, your Person, Virtues, and Repute you have in the World, with the
deserts of a Thousand Pounds a year, are sufficient to secure you, without
other helps.


Of which I must own your Friendship to be the chief; but why does old Landy
torture me thus with these delays and puts off? it throws me into continual
agonies, and (...).


O my Friend, these Rich old miserable Fathers are always more considerate than
other Men, they never clap up a Marriage in haste, but haggle to the last
farthing, and love to have a lumping Pennyworth of a Husband.


I wish he were less Rich, then I would convince him I value not his paltry
dust, and that I Court your fair Cousin for her own sake, not for the sake of
what he has to give her -- But 'tis late, and I must follow where my heart is
gone before me.


I am just now come from thence, and as soon as I have dispatch'd a word of
business, at a house within half a stones cast, I shall be back again there as
soon as you; for I have to tell you, that I have already ^ngag'd old Landy and
his Daughter to be merry at a Dinner I have (...) for 'em, where you, dear
Harry, must oblige me to make one. Besides, you may have known that Lurch the
Landlord of the (...) where they lodge, has newly married a young brisk Wife,
with whom I have a small Intrigue in Embryo. My design is to get this young
(...) of (...) dinner along with us, in which I desire your (...) my return,
for the beast is not a little jealous of her; he has carried her abroad
somewhere this Morning, and was not returned home when I left old Landy.


Ah, Ned, Ned, wilt thou never leave this single sinful way of living? had
thou not as good take up in time, and end honourably in Matrimony?


I have no design to make an end so honourable as yet, this little World and I
have something more to say to one another ever we part. Well, fare you well,
I'll be with you in a minute.


Where's my Father, Phil?


I saw him about a quarter of an hour since,
Walking about, with starts and pauses,
And talked, or rather muttered to himself,
Some grumbling words.

Could thou not distinguish any?


Very little, yet I listened, for I fancied
'Twas you that caused his staggering:
But I could hear nothing, but sometimes
Too little; a very scanty pattern; then paused, and then,
But this Girl, then paused again, and then again
Repeated the words Too little.

What power has Money in the mind it governs?
'Twill not allow Virtue to bear a price,
Nor purchase any thing but its (...) increase,
And yet afraid to use it.

I hope, Madam, all will be well yet;
Sure Mr. Bellvill's merits will prevail.

Did he see with my eyes they would,
But Misers see no difference in Men,
But what is made by Fortune.

Oh! my dear Mistress, in what fears I languish,
Your Cruel Father keeps me on a rack
By his delay; every look I take
From your fair sight, gives a fresh Torment;
To think what Curses rise against me,
To keep me from enjoying such a blessing.

I have owned enough for you to guess
I share in your affliction; press him now
To give his final Resolution.

But if he should deny, let me have yours;
And keep his slighted Wealth for his own load
That clogs his greedy Soul.

O Bellville, though I love you
Enough to share the lowest Fortune with you,
I dare not show it by a disobedience;
Though to a Cruel Father, one shake in any Virtue
Will loosen all the firmness of the rest.

See where he comes, disturbance
Hangs on his looks.

O Mr. Bellville, what, in your old pursuit?


I have no other Object in this World
To wish or hope for, but the longed for Blessing
Of your fair Daughter.

And you forsooth, are languishing, I hope,
As well as your warm Lover; all in haste,
Reason and Consideration are grown Enemies.

I hope, Sir, Mr. Bellvill's Merits
Are a just Reason for my value of him.

Yes, yes, send Virtue to the Market,
And see what 'twill purchase: Mr. Bellville,
I have perused the Authentic Copies
Of your Estate and Fortune; I think
It barely may amount to a Thousand Pounds per Annum.

Were it a Thousand Millions,
All were too little
To present your Daughter.

We are not talking of if it were,
But what it is; let me see,
A bare Thousand, as we suppose at best,
Is in troth too little, a very slender Patrimony.

You talk, Sir, as if all Content and Happiness
Were only placed in R^hes.

Hold your tongue, busie-box, when your Father
Speaks, meddle not in the Matter, Hussy;
'Tis I am to give the Money, you have nothing to give
But your Consent, a thing not worth a Groat;
'Tis a fond property, that every Woman gives
To the first Man she likes.
You have been reading some vile Romance,
Where the sine outside Fellow gets the Lady:
I thought I had burnt all your Amorous Fables.

What, in wrath, Mr. Landy, with your own Flesh
And Blood? Come, come, there's a Haunch of Venison
And a Bottle of Burgundy that stays for you,
Will set all right again.

Angry, Cousin Feewell! yes, very angry,
'T would move a Millstone to speak!
The Gypsy interrupts me just as I am talking
For her own good.

You know, Mr. Landy, she's an obedient Daughter.
And you may kindly end these troubles;
Tell me, when is my Friend Bellville to be made happy
With your fair Daughter?

'Tis that I was discoursing of, Cousin,
But things of Importance require a mature
And weighty Consideration; but she's in haste,
In a most Amorous haste; let me see,
A Thousand pounds per Annum -- (...) -- a thousand pounds.

So much my Friend has, I'm sure, besides
A considerable Personal Estate, which he's so modest
Never to mention; this joined to what you are
Able to give, may be a fair provision
To make a very happy Couple.

'Tis true, what I am able to give, I am able
To give; but by way of Bargain, and as I am
A dealing Man, I am obliged to lay down no more
In ready Moneys, than what's equivalent to
Mr. Bellvill's Estate.

He has an Uncle, that has fifteen hundred
A year, and no Child.

And may give it I suppose to whom he pleases.
Besides, Mr. Feewell, there's an old English Proverb,
He that waits for Dead Men's shoes may go barefoot.

But sure, Sir, you ought to regard a little
The many Virtues and Deserts
Which render my Friend capable
To pretend to any Fortune.

Alas, Cousin, Deserts and Virtues
Are mere Drugs now a-days, mere Drugs,
No Man is looked upon or esteemed,
But he that has Money, and where there's most Money,
There's most Worship; and commonly
Your Men of great Virtues, are great Beggars.

Our Fore-fathers, whom some will allow
To be as Wise as we are, were of another Opinion.

What Fore-fathers do ye mean?
A Company of ragged (...) Philosophers,
Who lived in Tubs, and Cellars, and worth nothing
But what they carried about 'em.

Yet that was a greater Treasure than
Men ordinarily can now boast of.

What Treasure do ye mean; their numbers
Of Vermin, and other troublesome Companions
That infested them?

I mean their Knowledge and Content,
Which Money cannot purchase.

Nor could their great Wisdoms purchase a groat,
Look you, Mr. Bellville, we have been
Discoursing your Concerns; you have a zealous Friend,
And I join with him in a just and far esteem of you,
But that must not hinder my care and desire
To see that Gypsy well settled; nothing of Consequence
Ought to be done in haste, we ought to look
Before we leap; I like your Person, and
My Daughter likes you, but soft and fair goes far;
Time and Straw ripen Medlars.

'Tis but just reason you should have
The satisfaction due to a Parent
In this, and all things that concern your Daughter:
But since you say you have no great objections
Against my Estate, my Person, or Conditions,
I humbly* beg your Promise as an earnest
Of all my future Happiness.

Well, I promise you, as I may say; well,
I do promise you.

May all the Happiness --
Curse of her interruption.

So, there's Feewell, as I thought;
I must give him a hint that my Husband
Is to go abroad this Afternoon
To receive some Money; sure he'll have sense enough
To take the hint, and give a civil Visit.
Though the Brute should leave me under
Lock and Key, as sometimes he does:
I have a Key as good as his, thanks
To my Revengeful Ingenuity.
Mr. Landy, your Servant; your Servant
Sweet Mrs. Lucy.

You come, Madam, seasonably, if you please
To grant me the favour of your most
Agreeable Company, with the rest of your
(...) here, to do Penance at a
Poor Batchelor's Dinner.

Were I absolute Mistress of my self,
And my own time, I could quickly resolve you
How much more I esteem a Batchelor's Treat,
As you call it, than what I am like to have
At home with a Husband, who this Afternoon
Goes to the other end of the Town
About some earnest business, and leaves poor me
All alone at home; I know not how to spend
My time alone, not I, I swear -- besides,
He is so wickedly Jealous, that if I do
But look on a Man, as I may now on you,
Mr. Feewell, he immediately thinks I intend
To make him a Cuckold.

What a Tottipottimoy Tyrant 'tis,
She has given me a hint,
And I must improve it.

So, there's my Prisoner broke loose;
I no sooner turn my back, but she
Breaks Goal immediately; and talking
With Feewell, whose frequent Visits to
My House have given me suspicion.
Heigh day, how she (...) and jetts her tail
In and out -- this can be no less than a Plot
To Subvert the Government of her Anointed
And Supreme Head -- but I shall dissipate
The Conspiracy in a moment. Hark ye,
Hark ye, Mrs. Wagtail, I have something
To say to you, I have some earnest business
With you, by the leave of this Gentleman
With whom you are so close in Council.

Earnest business! you have had no
Earnest business with me the Lord knows when;
But you always interrupt me, if I am engaged
In Discourse with any one.

Very (...)! I shall make you know
That you ought not to be engaged with any
But your Husband, Madam; therefore
I Command you, in virtue of Holy Obedience,
To come away; come away, I say, and do not
Provoke me to make use of my Sovereign Authority.

(...), fie, Mr. Lurch, now you are (...) severe
Upon your (...), the Company have reason to take
It ill; this Warfare of your (...) is (...),
It's enough to deter a young (...)
That are going to join hands.

I am weary (...), I (...)
Forbear saying so; he never (...) me to see
Any Company, or go abroad, but keeps me
Under Lock and Key for whole days together,
He had as good bury me alive.

Come, Mr. (...), to make amends for the scandal
You have given, I propose that you permit
Your Wife to dine with us, and (...) you also
Be over-rul'd by the present Court, to do
The same in order there, to make up this breach
Of Wedlock, and give ample security for keeping
The (...)* (...) Feewell (...) to
Day, and will be pleased to have his Table (...) with
Good Company.

'(...) my intention to have (...) the (...), had
Not you prevented my Request.

I have a strong (...) your (...)
Are, but I shall put a spoke (...).

'Tis a laudable (...), and I
Am resolved to see it executed, and therefore
I press you Mr. Lurch to muster with us,
And the other moiety, your little (...),
To be merry to day.

Me you may (...), (...) my (...) no
Doubt may be pressed, but now (...) may
Come in as a Volunteer.

Come, it lies on my (...)
To see this Domestic Fury (...);
Why Man, you are not (...),
Should you be left in this Fit alone (...)
Your Spouse, in hot blood you*
Might be apt to exercise (...)
Upon her.

Let him (...) his (...), (...) are already
Ceased between (...), I fear no (...) of
Manhood he can do.

Come, no more of (...),
Prepare for (...) now but Mirth and Peace.

Well, well, I submit, I must go lay up
Some Papers, and will be there as soon as
You -- Nay, Mistress, you shall along with me,
You shall march with your Chief Officer,
We'll be with you presently.

How this Fellow with his Soliciting
Jealousy prepares a Cuckoldom for himself.

Save you, Mr. Landy.


O Mr. Scrible, what News with you*
I hope my Mortgages stand good?

O very safe, Sir; but I have a business with you,
That may deserve your privacy.

What a Devil brings this ill-look'd (...)?


Pray Gent. oblige me
To entertain your selves in the next
Room, 'till I call you; I know 'tis no*
Unkindness to leave you together.
Now, Mr. Scrible, the business.

Why, Sir, I hope 'tis that will be
Acceptable to you; but first give me leave
To ask you, for I see Mr. Bellville
Here, and there's a Report he's to have your
Daughter Mrs. Lucy, I hope you are not engaged*

Why, Mr. Scrible? he's a Gentleman
Of a fair Character, and an indifferent
Competent Estate.

But I hope you are not engaged?


Why, why, good Mr. Scrible?


Why, Sir, I am come with a Proposition
To you, for a Gentleman of two Thousand a year,
His Name Sir Timothy Shallow, of a good Family
In the North; the Shallows of Shallow-Hall have
Been ancient there, his (...) clear, and as
Much as I tell you; a plain honest (...),
And a Justice of Peace, and of the Quorum*

How, how, two Thousand a year?


Yes, as good a two Thousand as is in England, and the
Gentleman himself, upon my Account of your
Daughter, and what you were very well able to give,
Is so earnest in the matter, that he would needs
Presently present himself to you. I have lodged him
Hard by, at a Friend's House, 'till I made way
For his Reception.

Umh, this is very unlucky.


You (...) troubled, Sir.


A little, Mr. Scrible.


Do you not like my Proposition?


Yes, Mr. (...), (...) like (...) Proposition
Very well; yes, very well, but I am --

What, Sir -- you are much concerned.


A little, Mr. Scrible -- (...) -- two Thousand a year.


Yes, Sir, fairly and (...), without any the
Least encumbrance.

I am unlucky.


I hope you have not (...) your self?


Why, in troth I have (...) a way,
Or as one may say, in a (...)
Given my Consent.

But have you (...) any Agreement?


Not at all, not in the (...); nay, I was not at all willing*
But always put off coming (...) the matter,
For I (...) Mr. (...) Estate
Of the smallest; but at last being
Very much importuned, I think I did say
I consented, or promised, or something like it.

And was this all?


Yes, the very all* and no more*
And the word slipped (...)
But just as you came.

Well, well, (...) nothing in this
Actionable, and therefore if you (...) it*
I'll fetch Sir Timothy presently,
To present himself to you, and your Daughter,
And if you agree, we'll make short work
Of it, to prevent tricks and devices.

Pray do, Mr. (...)* and in the mean time
I'll discourse the matter (...). (...)
A Man ought to do the
Best he can for his Child, you know; I'll tell him
So plainly, so pray (...) the Knight.
Two Thousand Pounds per (...), and a Lady
At first dash; not to be neglected.
Without there --
Call in Mr. Bellville, and
My Daughter, I shall make a (...)
Pother amongst 'em; but my Daughter's
My Daughter, and if she be not wise enough,
I ought to be so for her*

I have often told you, that Prudence
And Consideration ought to be used in
Matters of Importance, and the bestowing
A Child is a great one.

I hope, Sir, you proceeded so when you
Promised me the Happiness of your Daughter.

Soft and fair, good Mr. (...), your
Importunities, and my Cousin Feewells, were
So troublesome, that I think I did in a
Manner, and as a Man may say, somewhat (...)
Utter something of Consent, Of to that purpose.

So much, Sir, that sure I cannot justly be
Any others, but Mr. Bellvill's.

Again Prattle-Box, at your old way, to
Meddle when your Father pronountes Matters
For your good.

But your Reputation, Sir,


Ay, Sir, my Reputation shall be preserved.
By keeping my self from being thought an Ass,
By seeming not to know a Shilling from a Sixp^nce.
In short, I have received a Proposition,
From a worthy Knight for my Daughter,
With double Mr. Bellvill's Estate,
I say double.

But, Sir.


No buts, Sir, no buts, I am bound in
Conscience, and must and will examine the Matter,
Therefore no more words, they are but wind.
The Knight will be here presently.
See where he comes.


Bless me, what a Figure 'tis.


Mr. Landy, this is the worthy Knight
I made the Motion for, who comes in Person
To present himself to you and your
Fair Daughter.

He is very welcome, Mr. Scrible.


Your Servant, Sir, and as Mr. Scrible
Told you, I come to offer my self a
Servant to your Daughter. I suppose,
Sir, this may be she.

Yes, Sir, such as she is.


By your leave, Fair L^dy,
By the Mass, I ne'er blinked my Eyne on
A titer Lass, in good Faith, Mr. La^dy,
You have a most bonny Daughter.

Why indeed, Sir Timothy, I think she is not
Much a-miss, come, Lucy, hold up your Head,
Leave whimpering, Hussy,
She's bashful, Sir.

In faith, a most dainty Creature:
Look you, Mr. Landy, Ise (...) make many words,
I am downright Country all over,
I don't practice the fine Words, and
May be most of them the fashionable Li^s
Of the Town; but in short, if you and
The Lady likes me and my Estate, I am fully
Satisfied; I'll prod^ you the Particu^
Of an Honest Estate of 2000 l. a Year,
All lying about (...) Hall, where the S^llows
Have been known for many (...).

A fair Estate, I confess, Sir Timothy,
And when you please to bring the Particulars,
We shall proceed, and I make no question,
But fairly on all sides.

Nay, Ise not be long in doing that,
For I hate delays; besides, I hate staying
In this Town, I should be ^akt here in,
A little time.

If Sir Timothy pleases, we will depart now,
And speedily return, with a full Account
Of every thing, and short Heads for an Agreement.

With all my Heart, Mr. Scrible.


Nay, I warrant (...) Ise ^sten Matters,
For in troth, Fair Mistress, I like you exceedingly,
And you shall live in the North, as well
As the Proudest of 'em all,
And have a Coach at your Command,
And if you take to Love Hunting,
I have as good a Pack of Dogs (...) ever laid nose to ground.

Come, Sir Timothy, time calls upon us.


I go, I go, Mr. Scrible; for this time farewell,
Good Mr. Landy, I shall be with you again
Speedily; farewell Fair Mistress, I assure you
I like you very much, exceedingly yf^ith.

Come, Sir Timothy, I'll wait upon you out:
Lucy follow me, I have something to say
To you.

Was there ever such a turn
Of Fortune, I fancied that Parchment
Rascal came for no good?

Was there ever such a Miser?
A Groat more purchases him from
The freehold of common honesty.

'Tis insupportable to think of losing her.


Come, clear up, we will not lose her,
We'll pursue 'em close, this Northern Privateer
Shall never Board our Rich Vessel.

I'll sink him and my self first;
Before he has fair Lucy for his Wife,
I must be first unmarried from my Life.

Are you sure you are perfect in your Message?


I have it all without book to a tittle,
And your Ladyship has no more to do now, but to give me your Letter,
And fling an old shoe after me for good luck.

Here's the Letter ready writ, Signed and Sealed,
Take it you, and put it under the Shirts,
That when the Doctor goes to look on the Present,
He may take it out with his own hands.

I like the Contrivance very well, however let me alone to guide him to take up
the Linen, and to put his hand upon it.


Use your own discretion,
I rely wholly on your Conduct.

Sir John is already gone to Barnet,
And there's no danger of his return 'till (...) morrow Morning,
For he is to lie at one of his Tenants Houses in the Town,
As 'tis his usual Custom.

Thou art in the right,
Therefore carry my Letter, and the Present immediately
To my dear Doctor, sure he will not slight the Summons
A Person of my Quality sends him.
Well, (...) leave thee to bring about the ^est;
And retire to feed my fancy befir^-hand,
With the thoughts of my Lover, 'till thy return;
Do but ^cceed, and bring him to my Chamber to night,
And I'll Reward thee beyond thy expectation.

Now if I can but play the Mistress of the Ceremonies,
And Conduct this Ambassador
To a private Audience to Night, my Fortunes are made.
Well, I find the Vapours her Ladyship complain of,
Were only a mist she cast before her Husband's eyes,
And the large Rewards she has promised,
Have caused the like effects on me;
W^o am to hear all, see all, and know nothing*
As they who keep a Treating-House connive
At all the Cheats and Vice by which they thrive;
When Mass and Miss in hugger-mugger come,
The officious Chamberlain strait shows a Room:
And though he more than guesses their Design,
He has no other but upon their Coin*
So I, as true a Chamberlain as he,
Am guiltless of the Fact, to get the Fee.

Grace, is't you, what makes you start so?


To see your Worship returned so soon.


I am returned, only to take a Copy of a Lease I forgot.
Where's yo^r Lady?

Retired to her (...).


What (...) you got there, that you (...) so,
And endeavour to conceal from me?

Some things that belong to my Lady.


What things?


Only some new Head-dresses my Lady does not like,
And I am going to carry 'em back to the Change.

Let me see 'em,
If they like me better than they do your L^dy*
It may be I may persuade her to wear 'em.

But I am sure you won't like 'em neither --
Besides, there are some things here, that Men must not see.

If it be any thing that belongs to my Wife,
I am sure I may see it, and will see it.
I begin to suspect something,
Her starting, and endeavouring to hide the Band-Box m^kes me curious.
Open the Band-Box, and show me what you have got there.

'Tis nothing but foul Linen indeed, indeed, Sin


First Head-Dresses, and then foul Linen,
This is mere prevaricating, it may be she has stole something,
And I have seized her in the act of Conveyance.
Come, open your Band-Box quickly, or I'll force it open;
For I am in haste, and cannot lose time.
Open, Open, I say.

Why should you desire to pry into Women's Affairs?
I must not, and cannot open to you.

I'll see that immediately.


O Mercy, Mercy, and I'll discover all.


First, let me see what discoveries I can make without you,
Do ye call these Head-Dresses?
They are very large ones,
And the Fashion is prodigiously increased.

If he looks any further, he certainly discovers the Letter; and I am ruined.


Item another -- But what does this Letter do here?

To the Dear Idol of my Soul.



This looks like my Wif^'s Fenwork;

But now for the Contents.

I never thought before this fatal Hour,
Thus to confess the Naked Archer's Power.
Till now my stubborn Breast, like (...) shreld,
Slighted his weaker Darts, and (...) not yield.
That only Arrow (...) me through and through,
Which the well-ayming Bow-Boy shot for you;
Who rushing on me then in Fury came,
And took me Prisoner in your Mighty Name.



And so forth in Doggerel quite ^o the bottom: What can this LoveStuff mean? But
hold, here's a Post-scribble, I think in Prose; what says this?

Dir Doctor, my Husbane is gon to Barnit this Ivining, and duz not cum back tel
cummorro mornin; the Nits are long and coll'd, and I am not accost^'d to lie
alon, bein firful^; I think no Parson so we^ quallifid to guard my Hon^s, as you
are, and therefore (...) bold to beg your sweat Company to Nit, excuse this (...)
Lins, from her, who is alw^s your most umbel Servant:

Dorothy Crossit.




This is some of her own Ingenious Stile and Spelling; However, there's Sense
enough in it to make me a Cornuto.

Pray, Madam, what was your Ladyship to have for the Postage of this important
Letter; what reversion of the next Satin Gown or Silk Petticoat have you been
promised for this great Piece of Bawdy Service?

O Mercy, Mercy; Pardon me but this one time, and I'll never do so again.


That ^ealous Rogue, Lurch, who suspects all Wives as well as his own, was in
the right I find.

Well I will be Merciful for once to you, but on these Conditions, that you
^cerely unravel the very bottom of this Intrigue to me; and Secondly, that you
keep my Counsel, as you have kept my Wife's.


The bottom of the Intrigue is this; my Lady, who is deeply Enamoured of this
ugly Fellow of a Doctor, went yesterday privately to the Change, and bought
those dozen of Shirts you have discovered in the Band-Box; and ordered me just
now to deliver them with this Letter, as a Present to him in her Name; the rest
you may easily understand by the Letter you have Read. -- I believe my good
Angel was the cause of your unexpected return; for just at that very Moment
when you surprised me, I had a qualm of Consclence, and was ready to wave my
Commission. Thought I, what, shall I be accessory to the wronging so sine a
Gentleman, as your Worship is, for the sake of that ugly Blackamoor Doctor.
Thought I, I'll never do it: -- Your Worship's a ^ine Gentleman: I wonder
ind^d, how my Lady can have the Heart to fall in love with such an ugly
Monster, when she has so fine a Gentleman as your Worship for her Husband.


Well, well, I am glad to be thought so by thee, thou art a forward Girl, I
have always had a particular Esteem for thee, and am resolved to continue it.

The Baggage is full of Wit, and taking; I have had a liking to her long ago.

But do you hear, if you intend I should Seal your Pardon, you must now do me a
piece of Service.


Any thing, Sir, to serve you, and to show I intended you no wrong.


Then thus; you must keep all secret from your Lady that has passed, or is to
pass between us two: In the next place, you shall pretend to have delivered the
Message and Present to the Doctor; and acquaint your Lady he will wait on her
at the time appointed; and I instead of goi^g to (...) will take Possession of
the Shirts, and play the Doctor in (...) this very Night.


But how will your Worship do, not to be discovered who you are?


Why thus: I intend to come late, and you shall order it so, that my Wife shall
expect me in Bed; I shall have nothing upon me but a Night-gown, and when I am
just ready to enter her Room, you shall immediately let the Light fall, or
snuff it out, as by chance, so that I being undressed, and having nothing to
do, but to step into the Bed to her, there will be no occasion of lighting the
Candle again.


So far all goes well: But how will your Worship do not to be known by Talking,
and in the Morning before your departure?


That's easy still, for my Voice, when I talk in a whispering Tone, will not
be distinguished. Then I intend to put on one of the laced Shirts, which will
favour my design still more: As for my parting undiscovered in the Morning,
thou know 'tis late before the day breaks this Winter Season, and I design
to leave her before 'tis light, pretending fear of being seen to Morrow by the
Neighbourhood, in the absence of her Husband.


You have answered all my Objections, and I promise to serve your Worship
faithfully.


Do so, and I'll not only forgive thee what's past, but also Reward thee Nobly
-- Be sure you take care your Lady knows nothing of this my sudden return by
means of any in the Family.


There's no fear I believe of that, for she's retired to her Chamber, has there
shut her self up, to Meditate, as she told me, and will speak to no body all
this Afternoon but me; when I return as she imagines from the Doctor.


Well, I'll slip aside 'till about Eleven at Night, at which Hour expect my
Return, and get all things ready.


Your Worship shall be served punctually, leave it to my Management.


'TWas a Noble Entertainment Mr. Feewell made us, Retty* yet I fed my eyes more
than my stomach;
For every time I observed my Husband's head was turned from me,
I immediately cast an amorous look on Mr. Feewell,
Who seldom failed of catching it, and returning me another.
What did not he ask me with his Eyes?
What did I not grant him with-mine?
Our Eyes spoke faster, and explained
Such Thoughts no Tongues could utter:
'Tis certainly a Language only of Angels, and of Lovers.
Mr. Bellville was the best Friend I had at Table;
He still plied my Monster of (...) with so many
Healths, and full Glasses, that he forced him
By mere strength of Wine, and Argument of Bumpers,
To change his natural ill humour for a good one,
And become a sociable Beast in Company
Yet he did not forget himself so much,
But that as soon as Dinner was ended,
He ordered a Coach to be got ready,
And hurried me home along with him;
And is gone to the other end of the Town to receive a sum of Money.

What would you say if Mr. Feewel should come to you now?


'Tis not impossible.
For when I was going out of the Room where we were merry,
I remember I heard the Company talk something of breaking up.
Besides, I gave him a hint this very Morning,
That my Husband was to go abroad.

This very morning I did as much,
Fearing the Infallibility of Eye-Language
Might fail in such Particulars;
And told him, this hour your Husband was to go abroad.
For which, like a well-bred Gentleman,
He put a New Crown Piece into my hand;
'Tis not the first I have had of him.

Then I am certain he will come,
If the Company does not detain him.

I hope you'll be Civil to him, Madam, if he should come?


Oh, Betty, my heart's so full,
And I find my self in such a Confusion,
That I know not what I shall say to him if he should come --
Love has put me so on the rack of Expectation,
That I shall never be able to speak to him;
And I'm af^aid he'll mistake my silence for a rebuke,
And be daunted in his Address.

Never fear, Madam, you'll sind the benefit of your Tongue.
We Women never lose the use of it,
But in the Bed of Sickness, or of Love.
But should you be as mute as a Fish,
Do ye think Mr F^wel does not understand the hanging of the Lip,
And the Languishing cast of an Eye half asleep?
Besides, Men have more ways to the wood than one;
When they see that Love and whining Passion will not work us,
And that we expect to be put to the Question,
They behave themselves like an undaunted General,
Who, resolved to storm a Fort, admits of no Parley,
And Puts all to the Sword.
(...), hist, what foot-steps do I hear?

'Tis Feewel, on my life; I tremble all over.


Let him come, we are two to one.
We'll give him as good as he brings, never fear.

O Heavens! who's that, my Husband?


No, 'tis Mr. Feewel, Madam.


Sure Mr. Feewell has mistaken my Chamber,
For that of his Cousin Landy.

Joy of my eyes, 'tis impossible I should mistake,
When I have so sure a guide as Love to direct me.

You naughty Man,
How durst you venture to come into my Chamber,
When you knew my Husband was abroad, and I all alone?

That was the chie^est motive of my coming, Child.


If my Husband should find us two together,
I am ruined for ever.

Therefore we must prevent his coming upon us,
And dispatch my Love:
'Tis no time now to discourse or think of an absent Husband,
When a Lover's present;
Come, prithee, I am in more haste than thou imagin'st.

He has the true knack of undoing us,
He has such a pretty kind of way with him, no Woman can deny him.
My Mistress is reduced to her Eye. Language already --
Well, I'll take a turn in the Garden,
And leave the Knight and the Enchanted Lady together.

What, is the filthy Girl gone,
And left me all alone with a Man?
Why Betty, help, help, where are you? I darn't call aloud now,
For fear any body should hear me.
Why Betty, Betty.

Come, come, if Betty should hear,
She has more wit than to answer;
She knows you are in safe hands, come prithee, come this way a little,
And do not put me to lug so hard, thou dear Creature.

Bless me, what do you mean to do, Mr. Feewell?


Why, I do mean to bless thee, and my self too;
But in the first place, I intend to lock the door,
And after that, to retire with thee into the next Chamber,
And I'll tell thee the rest when I am there.

I hope you are a Man of Honour, Mr. Feewell,
And intend me no harm,
You see I trust you with my Reputation.

Ay, Child, I warrant thee,
Thou shalt find that I am a true Man of Honour*

O my Husband, my Husband, what shall we do?


'Sdeath, I fancied the Devil would thrust in his horns,
When you began to talk of him;
Is there no place to hide me in?

No place but an old Armoury,
And there he'll be sure to look in the first place.

All I can do, is to disg^ you
In some of the Maids Clothes, that lie in the next Room.

Come, dispatch the Masquerade then, if there be no other way.
But 'twill not do, unless we (...) out fire, fire, and I sally in the smoke.

So, so, now get to that Corner --
Rush out upon him.

Open the door, I say, open the door,
Or I'll break it open.

Where, where? O my Papers, my Papers.


I hope 'tis out again, 'twas but just begun;
I was so suddenly frightened, that it made me cry out.
O Betty! I hope the Fire's out?


Yes, Madam, you ne^d not be afraid.


A very sudden Fire, and as suddenly put out.
There was a devilish strong dockt Jade gave me a broad side,
And whirld me about like a Gigg;
You had got a very lusty Lady, a Fortune-teller, I suppose,
Or a Cuckold-maker in Woman^ Clothes,
Which amounts to the same thing.

If a Broom were dressed up in Woman's Clothes,
Your Jealousy would make a Man of it immediately.
If you continue to mistrust my Virtue at this rate,
I'll give you cause to do so in reality.

I think that's pretty well performed already.


None but such a jealous head as yours,
Could harbour such a suspicion. How came you, pray,
To return so soon from the other end of the Town?

Because I remembered I was invited to a
Burial that way, as you know (...) morrow,
And so I turned back, resolving to do it all under one.

No, 'twas your jealousy brought you back,
Only to plague me with your hot-headed Fit*
Be as innocent as I will, I must be Condemned;
You're a great Encourager of Virtue indeed;
You ought in Conscience to ask my Pardon on your knees,
And 'tis well I have the Charity to forgive you.

Forgive me, very good, forgive me!


Yes, forgive you, for thus publishing
Your own Folly, and my Dishonour.

Excellent! come, we'll go in and consider the Matter; If any one wilfully
destroys himself, they say he's felo de se, she shall not have cause to call me
Cuckold de se, I'll not be Jilted out of my Care and Vigilance:

Plots may be better laid, and then, if luck hold,
I may ask Pardon for being made a Cuckold.

Sir Timot^y has sent word he's coming.
'Tis well, very well, Mr. Bellville must give way;
A Knight, and 2000 per Ann. not to be resisted.
Let Fools please themselves with empty Notions
Of fine Parts, and outside Virtu^.
A dressed up fashionable Gentleman --
All fading Fooleries, their value a Notion;
Give me the solid lasting Properties
Of Land, and Money -- O here he comes.

you are a punctual Man, I like it well,
I love punctual Proceedings, Mr. Scrible.

Nay, Sir, you shall always find me
Tight and honest, plain-dealing, and steady;
Good faith, Ise no waverer.

Sir Timothy hath hereby brought you
A true and honest particular of his Estate.
I have also prepared some short Particulars,
With Blanks for either to Sign, if you so agree;
For Sir Timothy is much taken with you Daughter, and is in haste.

Why, look you Mr. Landy,
(Father I hope that shall be) I am at a word, I hate delays,
Besides, I would fain be rid of this smoky Town, so plaguy full of noise,
That a Man had as good live in a Belfry when they ring a Peal,
And things so strangely dressed, as if it were all a Poppet-show;
Ise even thought I had met two or three Ghosts,
They said they were the Sparks of the Town,
And called them by a strange name, Boughs, or something like it;
'Slid they looked as if they had been hauled out of Meal-Tubs,
Tom (...) our Miller does not go more besinea^.

For my part, Sir Timothy, I'like an honest plain Country Gentlem^n, there's no
tricks covered in fine words to abuse one another; a Civil-war of Tongues in
this Town rages perpetually.


Nay, in good faith, Ise carry your Daughter to Peace and Plenty, and show you
how well I like her, Ise make a Thousand a year Joynter.


Enough, enough, good Sir Timothy, and I will give the Girl a Portion
proportionably.


It is then meet that you sign these short Articles accordingly.


We'll retire to my Closet, and there finish.
Come, Sir Timothy, good Fortune attend us.

They say this damned Image of a Knight
Is come, with that Rascal Scrible.

Curse on' em, what (...) they make; 'slife they give us no time for invention,
we might else try to bribe that Scribbling Cur, he would bark on any side for
Money


I am so confounded, that my Thoughts justle and crowd one another into
confusion.

Look, Feewell;

See where that Sunshine comes, over-cast with a soft shower -- O, my dear
Lucy, while this gentle pity blesses my Soul with joy; the cruel fears of
losing you, blasts all the springing Comfort, and withers into sorrow.


How cruel is a Father, to make the Life he g^ve so miserable, as mine must be!


O Mistress, we are all undone, I peeped into my Master's Closet, and there's
the Bumpkin Knight and he, Signing and Sealing, and that Ink-Bottle Rascal,
busy in ^iverting the Papers.


This is worst of all.


I am lost beyond Redemption, there's no avoiding this ruin, unless fair Lucy
will fly with me, and in my Fortune find shelter from this storm.


Alas, I dare not! I cannot fly from that which Heaven makes my Duty.


Mr. Bellville, there's a Gentleman without, come Post from the Country, who
desires to speak with you.


Let him come in --

What should this be?
How! Elliot -- what News with you?


Very sad, Sir, at least to me, your Uncle my good Master is dead, and has left
all his Estate to you, Real and P^rsonal: (...) ^ Letter from his Steward, Mr.
Trusty, who keeps all things in qulet Possession for you, and desires you to
hasten down with all the speed you can.


'Tis so -- My Uncle was lately in good Health.


Yes, Sir, but died suddenly of an Appoplex, I lost a good Master.


And you have found another, if you please, Elliot.


I thank you, S^r, what order do you please to take for going?


Do ye know my Lodging, Elliot?


Yes, Sir, I was directed from thence to find you here.


Go thither then, and refresh your self, I believe you ^ave Rid hard, I have
some (...) that I must look after; but I'll come thither with all the speed I
can, and then order every thing.


I'll wait there for you, Sir.


This is very ^lucky, would this News had come a little sooner, this Argument
would Convert the Old Gentleman to the Religion of our side.


But I fear 'tis gone too far.


'Twill turn him again, and fet him, like a wind mill, to ^all with the wind
that changes, and turn off the Knight, as he did the Squire.


But if he has Signed Covenants, he'll never venture the battle of a Suit of
Law, he dreads a Writ, as he would a piece of Canon (...) him.


'Slife, how dull we are; yet if we could make him of our Party, there might be
some contrivance to (...) this Knight (...) upon a wrong Adventure.


'Tis possible this additional Consideration might incline his (...) Prudence,
but I fear 'tis too late.


Mistress, I have a Fancy come into my Head, that may do.


P^thee Phill, let's hear it.


Nay, 'tis a very pretty one, and tends to no less than to make my self a Lady.


On my Life, I have hit on the same fancy with Phill.


Mine is to pack the Cards upon him, and shuffle me to turn up instead of my
Mistress.


Say no more, Phill, I have it all; thou art the ^ather, and I the Mother of
this Plot; let me alone to shape it, now thou hast got it.


But dear Cousin Feewell, what is't.


Say no more, but let me alone with my Cousin Landy, you ^ellville shall be
Taught your Part in good time, and you Cousin Lucy have nothing to say, but to
have and to hold, after the Parson.


You intend, I suppose, to draw my Old Master into the Plot. It cannot fail; he
will certainly take the Bait, and then Mistress, I must take place of you.


With all my Heart, Phill; thou dost deserve it for taking mine.


Come, no Words, nor Conjuring up Doubts, withdraw all, and leave me to Assault
this Castle of Treasure, which is unfortified to hold out against such
Batteries as I shall raise against him, observe well your Parts. One thing I
had forgot; you Bellville, you must seem a little cold, as if your new Fortune,
and being so ill used by him had chilled your passion for his Daughter; stay,
give me the Letter, now be gone, while I wait for his bolting out.


Heaven prosper your attempt.


They are gone in time, see where the Squadron comes, led by Captain Scrible,
having, I suppose, newly Signed the Treaty.


Give you joy, Mr. Landy, and you, Sir Timothy; I suppose you have no business
more for me at present, I must hasten and provid^ other Matters necessary for
the Wedding.


Do, good Mr. Scrible.


Nay, I must about Matters too, in good faith; (...) ^mble the Parson, time,
and place together, I long y faith to make Mrs. Lucy the Lady Shallow, and Ise
return quickly.


The sooner the welcomer, good Son, as I think I may now call you.


And I hope I may call you Father, and get a little Son to make you a great
Father.


Lustily spoke y faith, Sir Timothy, and I'll give it a Father's Blessing.


And in good faith Ise ^asten to get it, so farewell 'till then; Ise quickly
come to fetch my Lady, to increase the Family of the Shallow.


So, all goes well. Pretty y faith! they would have p^swaded me to take
Ninepence for a Noble; very pretty y faith. O (...) Fe^well, your Servant.


I waited to speak with you, Cousin.


What, about the old Story? Pray Cousin Feeweell give off the pursuit of that
Matter, 'tis a cold scent, and I am engaged, fully engaged.


I hope not, Sir, for 'tis a new Matter I have to acquaint you with.


New Matter, pish, what new Matter! my Daughter's my Daughter, and my Care of
her the same* and a Thousand a year is but a Thousand a year, and two Thousand
is two Thousand; and I must desire Mr. Bellville to forbear further troubling
himself, and me.


I wish, Sir, no may not too readily comply; he had your Promise, and I assure
you, resents his injury.


I think I did utter a hasty word, or so, but two Thousand a year is a very
good Ex^use:


But almost three Thousand is a better Argument.

In short, Sir, I resolved, without Mr. Bellvill's leave, to acquaint you that
his Uncle is dead, and has left him above Fifteen Hundred a year, besides a
great Personal Estate.


How, Cousin, sure this is a devise?


Read this Letter, and if your Opinion holds, you will repent what you now joy
in.


By my life 'tis so indeed; nay, I have heard his Uncle had such a fair Estate.
O Mr. Feewell, what have I done?


I hope nothing but what may be undone.


O yes, Cousin, that scrible scrable Rasc^l has fettered me in Articles, to get
his Fee.


Not so fast, I hope, but that you may get loose.


O impossibl^, they'll clap Writs upon me, and toss me into the Spiritual
Court, where no flesh ever escaped destruction.


I am very much troubled, is there no Remedy?


O I would there were, Cousin, you know I ever esteemed Mr. Bellvill's Person.


I must confess I wondered you were so suddenly fond of this Knight, of the
ill-favour'd Countenance; besides, you knew your Daughter loved Bellville, some
Consideration should have been had of her Content.


Alas! 'twas for her sake; care of her, care of her; 'tis very unfortunate, had
this News come but a day sooner.


That's not to be helped now, if I were you, I'd stand the (...).


No, Cousin, I'd as willingly Death should Arrest me as a Sergeant, and had as
good almost fall into the hands of the Hangman, as the Lawyers; besides public
shame, Cousin.


Would you be truly and heart^ly pleased, if a way might be found to set you
safely free, and Bellville (...) have your Daughter?


Cousi^, Cousin, with all my Soul, I have found this Knight to be Sir Shallow,
indeed a very Coxcomb.


And will you steadily act in the (...), if a handsome one be contrived?


Most cheerfully, Cousin, trust me, most willingl with my best skill and power.
But do ye hear, Cousin, will not this great addition of ^ortune, joined to the
unhappy usage of Mr. Bellville, make him fly off?


'Troth he is something grumb upon the Matter, but 'tis possible his love for
your Daughter may overcome.


Persuade him, good Cousin, work him into easiness, and forgiven^; I always
esteemed his Person, desire him to believe it from a penitent and hasty Father;
good Cousin can you tell where we may find him?


Easily, Sir, for I left him taking his leave of his Mistress, I saw her begin
to put finger in eye.


Then I fear he'll fall off. Call 'em in, good Cousin, and assist me ^n that
you say is your own design; call 'em in, good Cousin, and endeavour to soften
him by the way; tell the Girl I charge her to look kindly (...) him.


Well, Sir, I'll try my utmost --

B^t be sure, Sir, to be very kind to him.


Doubt it not in the least. Now am I to go to Sentence and Repentance, and my
Penance will be (no doubt on it) an additional Portion; how this Earthquake of
Land has shaken me? No matter, if the Plot be well laid, and succeeds, I shall
be contented, and my poor Gi^l will be pleased. And I consider, when Riches
give me leave, that the truth on it is, this Knight is a very Coxcomb, and my
Daughter had been as well disposed of in a deep Well, as to this Shallow; what
Troubles have I twisted my self into! O these Girls, these Girls, every one of
them gives as much trouble as a Leash of Boys, they must be reared like
Or^ngeTrees in a cold Country, kept within doors, and carefully housed; what a
happiness it would be for Parents, were there an Insurance-Office ^or getting
Boys instead of Girls, any Wise Man would give Ten in the Hundred to have his
Wife Insured. Soft, they come -- I see my Cousin Feewell is working the Matter.


Have you any Commands for me, Sir?


I wish Mr. Bellville I had the power to Command you, but I am now the
Petitioner for what you once desired.


I do not understand you, Sir.


I think you once desired Lucy.


I did, Sir.


And now, Sir, I desire you should have her.


Once indeed, Sir, you seemed to be of that mind, but presently I was forbid to
hope that happiness.


I was too hasty I confess, and if you still love my Daughter, she shall plead
my excuse. Speak to him, hussy.


What should I say, Sir?


What should I say! when I scrupled at your having Mr. Bellville; then you
could interrupt me with your chattering, and now forsooth, you can't speak;
look kindly on him, and win him into kindness and forgiveness.


You hear, Mr. Bellville, what my Father says, if you lov^ me still.


Well said, my best Girl, y faith, that was a devilish look; can you resist it,
Mr. Bellville?


I must ever love Mrs. Lucy, I dare not deny that powerful truth; but to what
purpose is all this discourse? I hear you are engaged to Knight-hood.


Then let me speak, I have promised my Cousin Landy to find a way to free him
from that engagement; he joyfully con^ents to act his part in the Plot, and if
you love Mrs. Lucy still; she shall be yours.


With an addition of Portion, Mr. Feewell, to express my esteem of you.


Come, (...), Mrs. Lucy shall be yours; but no more words, we'll in, (...) our
Design, which I think cannot fail; Phill is one of the Party, Sir.


She's honest, I dare swear.


At this time especially, when my own advantage Rewards me for it.


You must be sure, Madam Phil. that must be, under pretence of Modesty, to
(...) ordel and mu^le your self with Hoods, that the Knight may not discover.


Trust that to my management.


(...) Mrs. Lucy, when the Knight comes next to make his last Claim, you must
manage your Hoo^ so as to be a pattern for Phil. But now let's withdraw, and
perfect (...) Design.


Well, I must rid my self of these Lodgers, for as long as they domineer, at
this rate, I shall never be Master of my own House, or my Wife; at the end of
this (...) I shall (...) old Landy to remove himself, his Daughter, and the
rest of his Luggage; as long as they are here, this Feewell will have a (...)
upon my House, under pretence (...) coming to (...) Landy. B^des, wherever a
Rich young Heiress lives, all the young (...) and starched (...) of the Town,
come buzzing about that House all day long, like so many Bees about a Hive, and
the Servants need have no other business, than to open the door to Penny-Post
Men, and (...) in the shape of Porters.


Who dost thou (...) gave this (...) (...) to thee?


Sir, it was given me by a Woman in ^aste, just at the turning of the last
Street.


(...) you so! This is Feewell, I know the voice. I'll venture to draw nearer,
and observe him a little; 'tis late in the Evening, and (...) not easily
discover me.


At the Corner of the (...) Street! (...) thou so? I have a strong guess,
before I open it, from whence it comes.


So have I, I'll swear.


Yes, it is that Dear Creature, Lurch his Wife, as I imagined.


Yes, 'tis that dear Devil, as I imagined too.


Sir, To Morrow at Three of the Clock in the Afternoon, my Husband goes Abroad,
to Accompany the Corps of a deceased Friend; this is to let you know, I expect
your Company in my (...) at that (...), begging that you would not omit so
blessed an Opportunity.


To make me a Cuckold.


I shall impatiently wait you at the Place appointed, (...) without Seconds; if
you are a Man of Honour do not fail me, who am yours, c.


No Seconds, said she? tho, by her leave, I intend to make a third, to hinder
the effusion of Christian Blood.


Yes, fair Inviter, I will meet thee.

O thou dear expected Hour of Three in the Afternoon to Morrow, how long wil^
thou (...) coming? How shall I be able to pass my time away with Patience? To
Night I'll go in search of Bellwille, or pick up some other intimate
Acquaintance, with whom I may be free, and over a Glass of Life-giving Liquor,
I'll heighten Humour, and Enjoy my Friend.

To Morrow for my Mistr^ss.


Your Mistress, and my Wife -- Hence forward I shall never wonder at these
Billet-douxs, for being made up in the fashion of Horns -- Blessed Opportunity,
and Man of Honour -- O sine Age!

O dainty fine Age! O delicious Age!

What a Wife of defiance have I got?

O Husbands, Husbands, you that are fast in the Lobs-Pound of Matri^mony,
behold, and pity your Poor Fellow su^rer: Was it not sufficient that we entered
the Prison voluntarily but we must bind our selves over to such good Behaviour,
and give such swinging Security for our staying there? We have all paid dearly
for our Peeping and (...).

So have I seen a Mouse with Hunger spent,
To the strong Parmaz^ns inviting scent
Advance, and creep around the wiery Gin,
That seems to fortify the Bait within*
At length (for nothing hazard, nothing hold,
Hunger and Women make a Coward bold)
The thoughtless Animal, resolved to dare,
Ventures within the Matrimonial Snare:
Down falls the Trap door of the teacherous House,
And makes a Husband of that Captive Mouse.

I Am got loose from her Ladyship at last! Never was Poor Man so put to it, to
play the Lover with his own Wife! One such another Night, would have forced me
to have crossed the Cudgels, and confessed the Husband in my own defence.


Sir John, Sir John, is it you?


Yes, 'tis I, all that's left of me.


I heard your Wors^ip come out of my Lady's Chamber; I hav'n't Slept a ^ink all
this Night, for fear my Lady should have discovered you, and I was terribly
afraid she had, because I heard her make a Noise, and cry out, as I thought --
just when yo^ Worship left her.


Thou are in the right, the Out-cry was made by my Wife, but not because she
discovered me.


Why was it then?


'Twas because I (...) her a (...) ^ort of a (...) at my parting, instead of a
more civil good Morrow, she might reasonably have expected from me.


I cannot comprehend your meaning, Sir.


To be more (...), I have (...) Marks of Remembrance behind me, on her
Ladyship's Face, with these Ten Executioners, that the Doctor will not be able
(...) Cure them this Month, with all his Art; in short, I Counterfeited the
Madman all (...) sudden, rose from her Bed in a Clap of (...), like (...) from
his Mistress, and have left such a storm of my Fingers ends on her Visage, that
she writes no more Love-Letters in haste, I (...). But do you hear; Go you up to
your Lady immediately, and strive to (...) her as well as you can, and above
all, be sure you tell her, you have (...) the Doctor is given to be Lunatic
(...) certain (...). Go get you gone, you'll find I have locked the door upon
her. In the mean time, I'll dress my self abroad in my Riding Habit, in order
to return home again, as from the Country. Do as I bid you, and leave the rest
to me.


Well, I will go to her, (...) you have Commanded me, though I tremble at the
approaching storm.


(alone)

This it is to have a Matrimonial Conduct.
Happy were all the Husbands in the Nation,
Could they, like me, put down the old Horning Fashion,
And follow this new Dance, as I have led it,
Of Cuckolding themselves to save their Credit.

The Plot's admirably laid, it can't miss, I can't but be pleased to think my
poor Girl shall be pleased too. To say the truth* Mr. Bellvill's an honest
Worthy Gentleman; she had almost as good have been coupled to one of his
Hounds, as to this Knight; but he'll not be unprovided of a Wife; and of my
Conscience Phil. will make one good enough for him.


O Sir Tim^y; welcome, I see you hasten Matters.


In geud faith Ise have been used to pursue the Chase, when I like my Game.


Nay, I must confess, I think Lucy is a fair Quarry.


And (...) run her down I (...) you; I pray call my Mistress, Ise let her know
I have provided all things, and the mickle Man of God waits ready for us.


Without there, bid my Daughter Lucy come presently.


Ise quickly gang into the Country with her; I am here like one that has lost
his way in the night. I hope, Father Landy, we shall see you at Shallow-Hall,
(...) faith the Bells ^all twang it away, to bid you welcome.


Thank you Son, all in good time.

Why, how now, what (...) up? here's Sir Timo^ come to carry you to Church, are
you ready?


Yes, Mistress, and y faith Ise gang thither more (...), than ever I did to say
my Prayers.


Why, how now Girl, look up; and speak to Sir (...), what, whimpering (...) a
(...)? what say you, Girl, not a word?


What you please, Sir.


You must excuse her, she's so bashful she can't look up.


'Tis the fashion when Women are going to be Married, they all seem fearful.
Why, there was Jane (...) of our Town, I was ^vited to the Wedding, she never
held up (...) head all the while, but whimpering, and (...) she liked the
Fellow well enough.


Besides, Sir Timothy, you may excuse her, she's a fond Girl, and must leave a
fond Father; come, hold (...) thy head, my Child.


No matter, Father, Ise warrant you, Ise blink upon her face hereafter, and
gudfaith show it in the North, where there is never such another; Ise carry
them the Northern Star.


Notably said, in troth.

How now, Mr. Bellville, what brings you at this time of day?


You may easily guess, Sir, I come to demand my Right.


Your Right, (...) your Right?


Your (...), (...) if you (...) just (...) word.


Mr. (...), my Daughter's disposed of, and I am bound in Covenants to this
Worthy Knight.


'Tis even so, (...), and Ise (...) keep her.


You shall neither do it with ease or safety, I shall not quickly submit to such
an injury.


Nay, geud (...), if you are angry, you may turn the (...) of your Girdle
behind you.


Are you, Madam, consenting to my injury and ruin?


I must obey my Father, Sir.


That's my good Girl. In troth, Mr. Bellville, I esteem you, and wish you well,
heartily well (...) and if you wish my Daughter well, I hope you will not (...)
to hinder her good Fortune; let that prevail with you to excuse me; Care of a
Child, Mr. Bellville is excusable in a Father; I do not doubt, Sir, but (...)
Merits will make you happy in another.


Faith, Bellville, this is gone so far, that I could wish you might desist, if
possible.


I thank you, good (...), I pray you good Mr. Bellville, you see? tis
impossible for me to go back now.


But I can Sue you upon your I (...).


But I have Signed nothing.


Come, Bellville, a Law-Suit will but bring trouble to you (...), let me beg
you to desist.


Since I must obey my Father, you will but (...) a storm upon us all.


Nay, Mrs. since you are of the Party, I must submit.


In (...), Mr. Bellville, this is very kind, and I wish you had another Lady at
the same time, to make you happy, (...) I may (...) your Wedding-Feast.


Why, on my (...) that may be* if Bellville will; I know a Lady that has loved
him long, and deserves (...), or any one. Now to make all things clear, and
that the World may see that you are dis^ from your Promise, I would propose
that Bellville should be Mrs. Lucy's Father, and give her in the Church, and
permit me to fetch the fair Lady that loves (...) and I to be her Father, and
give her Bellville at the same time.


Geud faith, a rare Contrivance.


Since I have (...) to (...) Mrs. Lucy, I can (...) submit to all the rest.


I am for (...) you, Mr. Bellville.


Y Good Faith, Sir, Ise ever be your Servant; and if I should have the good For^
to see you at Shallow Hall, Ise make you welcome, and show you good Sport. I
have good (...), and a (...) of good Hounds as (...) away; and when we have
done our Chase, then what (...) think we (...) y' (...) even (...) it away to
my Neighbour Allens, and there (...) off a (...) of (...) Ale, and all the
while John Slouch, the (...) Piper in the North of England, plays to us; and
afterwards every one trips off a Jig cleverly away.


Who are your best Jiggers, Sir Ti^?


Geud Faith, I have a man without, ee'n (...), that foots it as well as the
best.


Pray, Sir Timothy, oblige us all with the fight of it.


Mar^y, with all my Heart: Call in my man Jonny.


Geud Faith you must trip a (...) my (...)*


(...) can they play John (...) his (...)?


Yes, I warrant you: Strike (...) there.


I protest, Son, you are a (...) Gentleman, you have half celebrated your own
Wedding.


Come, let's dispatch then, for I am to (...) a Bride too.


Come, Child, make your self ready; you'll acquaint them, Sir Timothy, where
they must come.


Aye marry, and fetch the (...), (...) meet (...) at the ChurchDoor.


Go, Lucy, and make your self ready. So, (...), prosperity attend you; and in
(...), you Mr. Bellvile, in your new Lady.

-- -- Excellent, it goes smoothly on all. I'll send and invite my Friends,
especially Sir* John Crossit and his Lady, and (...). (...), (...) his Wife. --
(...), (...); Lucy: will have (...). They that have most Wealth, have most
Worship: I remember a most pertinent parcel of Verses on the Subject of Riches.

All (...) ^sides is poverty: with Gold,
Wit, Virtue, Courage, Honour, bought and sold.
Ee'n Jove once doubting his Almighty pow^.
(...) his Mistress in a Golden shower.

O Grace, I am undone for ever, This Devilish inhumane Doctor has ruined my
Face to that degree, 'twill never be my own again! What could move this Cruel
Monster to use me thus?


Madam, I (...) told for (...), (...) I (...) gave credit to it 'till now; that
(...) some very extravagant. (...).


It must be so, Grace; for no man living, in his right Senses, would have (...)
a Woman at such a (...): A Woman that loved him too passionately -- O my Face!


Ah! poor Lady, my very Heart bleeds for you: Did you perceive no (...). Madam,
lin (...), Senses, no alteration of his Carriage before the Morning?


None, that I remember; no discomposure of his Carriage, but what was very
agreeable. I had no cause to complain of him the first part of the Night.


These men who study hard, are often given to odd Fancies, and (...) Madness;
but to show it in such an unnatural way, is something more than one would have
suspected.


Madam, Sir John is (...) from (...)*


O Grace, what shall I do now* What Excuse shall I make for my Face? say
quickly, or I am ruined for ever; Sir John will ask me twenty questions why I
am so bepatched.


Tell him any thing, Madam; that you have had a Fit of the Vapours, the
Swimmings in the Head, and have got a Fall, and so hurt your (...), or any
thing (...) that comes (...) Head first; if a Woman sets her self to (...),
she? (...) an (...) worth a (...).


I am so distracted, I can (...) think or say any thing.


Lay your self down quickly then, and receive Sir John in your Bed, as becomes
your (...).


Had I received no other, besides Sir John, I had never been so (...). I (...)
my (...).


Hark, I hear him (...); (...) to accost him, and put the best Face on the
Business I (...).


What ails your Lady, Grace? the Servants tell me she is very ill.


O Sir! there's my poor Lady; she has had a most violent Fit of th^ Vapours,
and spoiled all her Beauty with an unlucky fall.


Ah my poor Dear; how is it? are you not (...) -- with fulling?


Ah Sir John, my Face, my (...), my Face, has received all the (...); my (...)
is (...) very Soul of my Body; I am hurt in the very Soul, (...) John.


I find Women have (...) then.

(...) shall we (...) you, my (...)? (...) find your (...)?


Troubled with a (...), Sir John.


But has not the Doctor been with you yet.


O no, Sir John*


Why, what a neglect's that? (...), look (...) your L^dy, that see she wants
nothing, while I my self go for the (...).


No Doctor, I beseech you, my Dear; don't put your self to these perpetual
Expenses.


I take it unkindly of you, my Dear, that you should think I grudge to give a
Guinea or two to do you good; my whole Estate is too little for such a Wife.


You'll ruin your self with Doctors Fees. O Sir John, Si^ John!


Ay, ay, my Dear; I'll look all over the Town, but (...) find him out, and send
him to you immediately; (...) have patience a little, and (...) send him to
you.


What Grace, must I see this Devil of a Doctor again, after all my (...)? I
shall tear his Eyes out of his Head, if ever I light on him, and revenge the
Wrong he has done to my Face on hi^


And so I would, Madam, and repay it with Usury.


And so I will, Grace; therefore I charge you get a (...) of my Foot-men ready
with stout Oaken Plants: But he'll never be so bold to approach me, sure, not
even to come near the House.


It may be he has forgot what he has done in his mad fit, and may come; (...)
if he does, let me alone to prepare a substantial Bastinading for him.


O, I am so afraid of Visitants! Give Orders to all the House, that I'll see no
body; I'll see no body this half Year: O this Face that has Captivated so many,
is ruined it self.


So, Betty, now we have caused the great Ches^ to be brought from the other
Room into this, and got the (...) of Ropes ready, let Mr. Feewell come when he
will, I am prepared to receive him without fear of being discovered by my
Husband: This Plot is so well laid, it cannot but take -- When Husbands grow
Jealous, they only put us to the trouble of being so much the more Ingenious,
and working the Web of our Designs finer. How long is it, Betty, since my
Husband has been gone to the Burial?


About half an Hour, Madam.


Is't possible, 'tis no more: O what a sweet half Hour of Love's lost by
Feewell's not making more haste to take his share of it!


'Tis scarcely yet the Hour you appointed him.


When will that dear Hour come?


Immediately, Madam, have but patience.


O, 'twill never come 'till he comes!


Then 'tis already come, for here he is.


Am I not (...) daring Lover, in venturing to mount that breach a second time,
where I lately escaped a scouring so narrowly?


And to appear a Confessed Man, whereas before you were glad to (...) off in
the opprobrious Shape of a Woman.


Love, Child, can do all things; Almighty Love, that Trans^ the Gods into Birds
and Beasts, and all other sort of Living Creatures.


Transformed your Worship into a Chambermaid.

If I (...) not, there is another God called Fear, altogether as Powerful,
which worked this last wonder, and diminished you from the stronger Sex, to the
weaker.


Fear that thy Husband should have discovered thee, no other: But whatsoever
Fear diminished in me then, Love has restored me now, I can tell thee; and
(...) thou hast any doubts left concerning my Sex, I am come on purpose to
clear them.


You had as good let the Trial alone, I shall make a Woman of you the second
time; for my Mind misgives me terribly, and I know not why, that my Husband
will return upon us unexpectedly as he did before, and if he should, you'll be
changing Sexes again: But for your Comfort, I have taken Compassion on you this
time, and found out a securer Retreat than you made use of before; I have
prepared a Ladder of Ropes, not a Rope and a Ladder for you; by which, if my
Husband should surprise us, you may easily escape out of my BedChamber Window
into the Garden, and then let your self out, through a back door, into the
Street: As for that Chest you see there, 'tis a Trap for my Husband, if he
should (...) untimely to disturb us.


Prithee tell me no more, I know too much already, and would not think my self
secure in my Enjoyment; It's difficulty and danger, make an (...) pleasant.


Madam, some body knocks at the door.


Bless me! Who can it be? My Husband would have knocked louder, and with more
Authority; go to the door softly, and listen a little: How I tremble all over?


Will my Lady buy any Ribbands or Gloves to day?


Madam, we are undone; on my Life it is my Master, who feigns a Woman's Voice;
it must be so, for I am sure I have turned away the Ribbon Woman once to day
already: I am certain 'tis a feigned Voice.


Then I suppose, I must in good Manners betake my self to the Ladder of Ropes,
and scamper.


You must so, and that without delay, there's no help for it; but if the Plot I
have laid succeeds, I'll not be long from you.


That's all my Comfort; what Noses these Husbands have got! this is the second
time this old Bowman has smelt me out.


(...).


What so coldly must we part! By Heavens, I must have the pleasure of ravishing
a Kiss or two, now thy (...), to (...) veng'd on him! -- O, I could dwell here
for ever!


Go, get you gone, till you can Kiss (...). Betty, (...) him quickly to escape,
and leave me to manage this Ribbon Woman.


Who's there?


'Tis your (...) Glove-woman* I have the finest scented Gloves, and new
fashioned Ribbands, no Man in Europe has finer.


So, (...) has discovered himself, 'tis he, now I must play him (...) trick.

Betty, why don't you make more haste? the (...), (...), (...); lock the Chest
upon him quickly, quickly.

I have no need of (...) Gloves or Ribbands, at present, (...), I am (...),
(...) here another day.


Madam, all's safe, you may open the door to your Husband (...) please; the
Bird's flown.


That's well; but we must endeavour to (...)

Who's (...) knocks so loud and impertinently?


'Tis I my Dear; I want something in your Chamber, let me in quickly.


Betty, open the door to your Master.


What does you Conscience misgive you (...) that you dare not look a Blunderbus
in the Face?

John, (...), Thieves, Thieves.


Where, Sir, where?


Hid in the House; (...) every Corner, and under the Bed, carefully I charge
you.

I heard her say, lock him in the Chest quickly; he must be in that Chest
there.

The Chest shall be my Throne.

Where I sit and reign over this Slave and Cuckoldmaker; the King on Horseback
in the Stocks-Market, that tramples on Heretics and Pagans, is but a Type of
me, that triumph over the living (...) -- Now, Mistress, if you have not a mind
to have some Pills discharged into your Stomach, to (...) Amorous (...), tell
me immediately and directly, (...) you have hid that Robber of my Honour.


Whom do ye (...)


You know, Minx, well enough (...) I mean; I mean Feewell, that Polluter of my
(...) and (...) of my (...).


How should I know?


I believe (...), and (...) too; but what does this Chest do here? it uses to
stand in another Room.


O my Dear, I have put some Table Linen in it, and other things, and had it
brought into this Room, to be readier at hand.


Where is the (...) of it? give me the Key.


You have put (...) in (...) a (...), I know not where I laid it; 'tis well I
am not with (...), (...) a fright would (...) have made me (...).


(...), what of a (...)? if (...) you (...) with Child, I'm resolved to plead
(...) Guilty, in the face of the World, declare it a Bastard from, the
beginning, and proceed to (...) it (...) 'tis Born. Come, come, without delay,
deliver me the Key of (...).


Nay, prithee, my Dear, 'twill be so (...); I have things there, I (...).


I (...) indeed, there (...) that you will want very often.


We have (...) every (...), and can (...) nothing like a Thief.


(...), be (...) keep the (...); then he

must be here waiting (...) the resurrection of the Flesh; come, the Key I say,
or do you see this?


Yes, (...), if you please; you have murdered my Honour already, by your base
Jealousy; all the World thinks (...) made you a Cuckold.


Then all the (...) in the (...).


'Tis (...) makes you one* you had best kill me, and be hanged for it.


Good Sir, don't hold the Gun so against my Mistress; Lord! if it should go
off.


(...) her give me the Key then.


Why how now, Mr. Lurch, Armed, and in a furious Warlike posture?


Yes, Sir John, I am upon my guard, being near the Enemy.


What Enemy, Mr. Lurch, I see none but your Wife?


Why that's one, the other is enclosed here in this Fortification; but I shall
storm it.


Fie, Mr. Lurch, your (...) makes you fancy it.


Sir John, I never saw a Marriage in all my life, but a CuckoldMaker belonged
to it; every Husband is as sure of his evil Genius, as having a shadow when the
Sun shines on him. A Cuckold-Maker is as inseparate from our Calling, as an
Apothecary from a Doctor of Physic he Prescribes, but the Apothecary
Administors.


Fie, Mr. Lurch, you grow Extravagant.


Let her give me the Key then.


There are Women's things in it, not fit to be sce^.


I believe so, truly; now Sir John, do you perceive, Sir John* look you Mrs. no
more delays, if you'll not open the door, I'll fire upon the Castle.


Hold, hold, Sir; here Betty, give him the Key.


There 'tis, Sir, now for your Discovery.


So, have you found this mighty Enemy*


Nay, Mr. Lurch, this is so unreasonable, are you not ashamed?


I had ears sure -- this is odd, very odd.


Fie, Mr. Lurch, come ask your Wife forgiveness, and use her more like a
reasonable Man.


Why, I confess I did believe she had made me a Beast; come, Sweet heart, we'll
forget, and forgive.


And how long will you continue reasonable?


As long as you please to let me; come, my Dear, no more skirmishing, Peace is
concluded, and I'll present thee with a handsome New Gown, and the
Appurtenances, as a Testimony of my Reconciliation.


Well said, Mr. Lurch, and now prepare for Mirth and Jollity; we shall be
presently Invited to Mrs. L^oy's Wedding, and Mr. Lan^ has prepared a mighty
Feast.


Send him a happy Voyage through the u^certain ways of Matrimony.

Constant severeness that warm Sex inflames,
The wildest Haggards gentle Manning tames:
Too much ill usage, and to want all trust
Raises Revenge, to make their Crimes seem just.

Lady Crossit' s Anti-Chamber.

THere lies my Lady in the next Room, Railing at, and Cursing the Doctor, and
Swearing she'll tear him to pieces if he durst come near her, and it cannot be
long before he must come.

O Doctor! you are Born under a Lucky Planet, you are the happiest Man; my Lady
thinks it an Age till she sees you! But we must speak so^ly, she's run half Mad
for you; well, 'tis most certain, you are a most taking Man with the Ladies;
and you know mine in particular, has always had an Esteem for your Person, she
does nothing but sigh all day for you, I believe poor Lady she'll run Mad; but
you must be secret, o^ you ruin all, you know there's a Husband in the case.


Poor Lady, she needs not fear, I took an Oath to be secret, when I was Sworn
Doctor: Alas! she is not the first Lady who has fallen in love with my Person,
one half of my Women Patients are in her Condition.


I must inform you, that my Lady has had the Misfortune to hurt her self a
little with a fall, as you'll see by her Face, and has taken that occalion to
^eign her self (...) ^or your ^ake, has sent her own Husband to fe^ch you, and
lies on her Bed in the next Chamber, expecting your happy Arrival; I blush to
say more, but you may guess the rest.


What her Ladyship has a violent sit of the Vapours, I warrant, is it not?
Well, let me alone with her Ladyship.


But hold, do you Entertain your self in this Room; while I acquaint her that
you are come, as I am ordered: If the violence of her Passion should cause her
to be extravagant in her Actions, you are not to be surprised, now I have told
you how excessively she loves you.


Never fear, I can be as Extravagant as she is; I like an open bare-fac'd Love
that con^es it self; the more manifest the Disease is, the more easily the
Remedy is applied.


Expect here a Moment then, and you shall be admitted immediately, I must use
you now like a Lover, and not like a Doctor.


Doctor or Lover, Lover or Doctor, Student in Physic, or Student in Love, are
Synonymous. We Doctors of Physic, have a ^arge Cure of Bodies, an unlimited
^rerogative over Flesh and Blood.

But here's my Patient! Hem! Hem! Now to show my skill in manageing an
extravagant sit of Love: Now to show my self a Physician of Parts. Hem! Hem!


Where is this Devil? Where is this cruel, inhumane, barbarous Monster?


Here am I, no Devil, but a Man; a kind, yielding, melting Lover.

she's in a desperate taking: Hem! Hem! How she stares on me, and devours me
with her Eyes.


What does the Villain jear and laugh at me a^ter all; O Devil! Devil! Let me
come ^ear to th^e, that I may revenge my self for all I have suffered.


Hold, hold, a Truce.

she's in a furious fit of Love I see; the Old ^hilosopher was in the ^ight --
Prima Coitio est acerrima, The first Engagement is the sharpest. Truce, Truce,
a little, and I'm for you again.


O Impudent Devil! Monstrous Hell-hound* a Rape! Help! Help!


Treason! Treason! Murder! Mercy! Murder! O my Cravat and Periwig! What shall
I do? My Profession's spoiled for ever!


Monster! Devil! Pound him, break his Bones, beat him to a Jelly!


What all the House in an uproar! Hold there, and let me know what's the Matter
amongst you; who's that Fellow undressed there?


O my Dear, a Monster, that would have offered Violence to my Virtue; would
have ravished me, but for the Servants who came in to my assistance.


Speak, Monster of Monsters; what art thou?


O, Sir John, your most humble Servant,

I am a Doctor of Physic, my Name's Lorman,

Sir John, your most humble Servant.


Dr. Lorman, what, a Doctor of Physic Practising undressed; is it you, good
Doctor, who would have thought it! I could have sworn Butter would not have
melted in his Mouth, by his fine Talking! -- Well, I shall always suspect the
worst of a fine Talking man, that can do nothing but Talk finely, for his sake.


Now I begin to see day a little, the Lady is Literally run Mad for Love, and
in this mad fit, she thinks I am some Monster or other, and has treated me
accordingly: But I must frame some plausible Excuse, to save my Credit and
Doctoral Authority, if the aching of my Bones, will permit me to Harangue.

Honoured, Sir, I imagine you are not a little surprised, as also, your much
Honoured and Virtuous good Lady; who by this time, I dare aver, is returned to
her good Senses again, to behold a Person of my Coat at this present in
disorder: But when you shall have understood the Reasons I had to put in
practice this Mysterious Operation; I promise my self, you will not only hold
me guiltless of any ill designs, but also applaud my Conduct and Physical way
of Proceeding in a Matter of so weighty Consequence.


What, is the Villain going to discover all? What can this mean?


Perceiving at my first Entrance. But first let me beg the favour of perusing
my Habiliments again.


By all means, pray let the Dr. peruse his Habiliments.

Doctor

Perceiving at my first Entrance, as I was saying, that your very honoured and
virtuous good Lady's indisposition -- Sir John, may I beg the favour you would
be pleased to order one of your Attendants to restore my Periwig to its former
decorum.


By all means, Doctor; who's there? give the Doctor's Wig to my Valet to revive
it a little.


Perceiving at my first entrance, as I was saying, that --


I pray dispatch, for my Wife's indisposed, and wants repose.


Now I am a Doctor of Physic again, and can harangue.


How the Villain holds me in suspense.

O, Grace, I am ruined for ever, if he produces the Letter I sent him.


Never fear, Madam, let him go on, I warrant we have Cudgeled him into
discretion.


Hem, hem, perceiving at my first entrance --


He's perceiving at his first entrance again; what did you perceive at your
first Entrance?


That your honoured and good Lady's indisposition had troubled and diverted the
right course of her senses, which I soon discovered by a disorderly stare, or
rolling of her eyes; it immediately came into ^y head, to restore your Lady's
health, by playing a piece of ingenious Extravagance; upon which, incontinently
I fell to undressing and dismantling my self --


Yes, incontinently indeed, Doctor!


And threatened to assault your Virtuous Lady by way of a Rape; but as I hope to
receive a Fee to day, without any sinister intention, Sir John, your good
Lady's natural inclination to Virtue, restored her to her right senses again;
caused chiefly by the fright with which I struck her good Ladyship, for I had
put on a look as fierce as that of a Centaur.


That is to say, of a Horse Doctor, by way of Parenthesis only.


Sir John, I am your most humble Servant; but I am a Member of the Reverend
College.


There's a Footman without, who enquires for Dr. Lorma^, say^ he comes from my
Lady Lackit, who lies dangerously ill, and desi^es the Doctor would come to her
immediately.


She's a very impertinent Lady, I am not in a Condition of serving her at
present, but I'll make use of this pretence to go home, and apply Sal^es and
Ointments to my back and sides.

Sir John, I am heartily sorry I am interrupted by the Request of this Lady,
for my Personal Appearance to relieve her, and that I have not leisure to
dilate on this wonderful Cure I have wrought to day mo^ning on your very
Virtuous, and much honoured Lady.


I can a^ure you, Doctor, I wouldn't rather have chosen to have remained
indisposed, than to be Cured (...) such an undecent and (...) way, it has put
me in such a fright.


Admirably well Counterfeited, Madam.


There is a virtuous Wife for you; Sir John, you are very happy in a virtuous
Lady.


(...) seem to be sorry for his being beaten to satisfy my Husband ( to D.
Lorman) I am in^initely concerned, Doctor, that you have received so (...) a
Recompense for the great service you have done me to day. My Servants beat you
like a very Stock-Fish.


Dear Madam, never trouble your self for that, the Credit I shall gain in the
World for this Operation, will make me sufficient amends. I aim at Fame --
Madam, Hercules gained Heaven by his Club; and I mount up to the top of Fame
and Heaven of Reputation, by means of the Cudgel, like a second Hercules -- But
I must take my leave of you now, Sir John, to wait on this Patient, who expects
me; she is a Lady of Quality, and must be served punctually.


You have more need to look after your self, Doctor; you must of necessity have
received some damage in your outward Man.


Nothing at all, Sir John, a trifle, a Rib or two of lesser note broken, or so,
nothing else, on my word, a mee^ Trifle, Sir John, and Madam, your most humble
Servant.


Sir John, I wonder you'll put your self to this trouble, suspend your Favours
'till I have done your Lady some further service.


But for the beating, Doctor, you must accept it indeed.


You are so obliging, Sir John! well, I'll protest I'll have nothing from you,
for my next Visit. Sir John, and sweet Madam, your most humble Servant.


So he said the very last time he was here; so far by the help of my own Wit,
and Grace's assistance, I have carried it victoriously, not only satisfied my
self on the Body of him that might have made me a Cuckold, but also revenged my
self bodily on my Wife, that would have made me a Cuckold.

Come Sweet heart, how does your Face?


O Sir John, so torn and scratched.


Scratching is an Appendix to Caterwauling.


How, Sir?


Your Doctor, Madam, was justly beaten for his wonderful Cure, but he was to
have cured you another way.


I know not what you mean.


You may understand without my telling you.


What should I understand?


Your own Folly.


Ah me. --


No more, you must understand me now. The Letter and Shirts (...): I have (...),
your (...) would (...) you than Excuses, or seeming (...).


Oh Sir John, Can you forgive me?


I'll try.


By all my hopes of good, I'll never more injure you in a Thought.


'Tis well, rise and compose your self, for we are invited by Landy, to his
Daughter's Wedding, they are ready to (...) from Church.


I hope, Sir, you will not carry me in this Condition.


Yes, but I will, or else worse Interpretation may be made of it; no more
words, I must be obeyed in this; I have hid your shame and mine: Henceforth, be
your own Doctor, and prescribe your self a Constant use of Virtue.

For that Receipt ne'er failed of doing good,
And Cures the looser Fevers of the blood.

By this time Lucy has her Wishes, and I have mine; if the Plot should be
discovered, I hope Bellville has too much mettle to lose his Mistress; the
Knight will look as blank as a Cut-Purse, that finds no Money in the place he
searched for -- No matter, 'tis not the first Game he has lost, and Phill will
stand him another very good Chase.


Lurch, you are welcome, heartily welcome, and your fair Partner too; they are
coming, Mr. Lurch, with your ^etters about 'em.


I wish they may prove Easy to all, especially to fair Mrs. Lucy.


She deserves all Happiness.


I thank you both.


Welcome good Sir John, and your good Lady too, what is not your Lady well?


She has got an unhappy fall, Mr. Landy, and very much hurt her Face, but her
respect to you and Mrs. Lucy, forced her to come, notwithstanding her unfit
Condition.


In Troth, Madam, I am very much obliged to you, the new Married People, I
believe, are near upon returning.


Mr. Bellville will be a happy man.


None, Sir, my Daughter is to be a Lady.


How, a Lady?


This is very strange.


'Tis very true, Sir, a Northern Knight, one Sir Timothy Shallow, has out-bid
Mr. Bellville by a Thousand a Year.


I wish Mr. Landy that you are not bribed to make your Daughter unhappy.


I have known many, Sir John, very unhappy by being too Poor, but never any by
being too Rich.

Ha^ke --

I hear 'em coming.


What's here, a Mask?

I now represent Hymen, Signior Landy,
My Deputy has done as well as can be;
Has made their Tongues tie knots to such a wonder,
That their own Teeth, though Bones, can't know asunder:
And now we are for jollity preparing,
Which all ('till deep Night calls) shall have a share in.
Then we must leave the Lovers to their own share,
To end their Kind Disputes in Civil-Warfare;
Where the least Mercy the most Love expresses,
And he most gentle proves, that most oppresses.
While the Fair Sufferer Languishing cries sie on it,
The God of Love's the only pleasing Tyrant;
Advance, Sir Tim, and with a dutiful guessing,
Find out your Daddy quickly, and ask Blessing.

Your Blessing.


What, Madam, not down upon your Maribones; come, off with your trumpery -- how
-- what have we here?


What's the meaning of this? woe's me, what have I got?


An Obedient Wife, Sir.


Nay, in geud faith, hold a blow, Ise not be choosed so.


Where's my Daughter, I am abused, where's my Daughter?


Here, Sir, with her Husband, and beg your Blessing.


Hey day, what means all this?


Nay, by the Mass, Mrs. Lucy is my Wife, and no other, and Ise seize my own
Chattel where I find her.


You must seize this first.


What a God's name, must one sight for his Wife? Father Landy, I pray let us
send for Mr. Scrible, and clap Actions on 'em for Cheats and Robbers.


'Troth, Sir Timothy, Law-Suits are dangerous Bogs to get into, we may sink
faster than we can get out; besides, I fear Matters are gone too far.


Be appeased, Sir Timothy, what's done, can't be undone; be contented, many
have done worse, you have Married a handsome Woman, virtuous and good.


Believe me, Sir, none exceeds her in goodness, and good humour; I have
esteemed and loved her, as I would a Sister.


Why, in troth, Sir Timothy, since we are both deceived, the best way is to
bear it patiently; and, in troth, she has always behaved her self so well, she
shall not come a Beggar to you.


I hope, Mr. Bellville, for my sake, will add to my Father's (...).


That I will, most willingly, and as largely as my dearest Lucy pleases.


Look you there, Sir Knight, come, give her your hand; nay, never hang back,
there is no other Remedy; come, come, she'll bring you a brave young Shallow.


If it must be so, y faith Ise gang into the North as fast as four Legs will
carry me.


This minute, if you please; Sir, you shall ever find me an Obedient Wife, and
with true Love and Care will ever strive to please you.


Since I am Pounded, and no (...) out, Ise even make the best of a bad Market.


I dare swear you will be pleased with her, when you know her better. Come, no
more words, nothing now but Music, and every Man take his Lady.


I having none of my own, must presume to borrow another Man's.


Like enough, in troth.


Sir, here are Gipsies, that desire admittance.


Let 'em come in, all's free this day.


Bless you Masters, we'll tell your Fortunes.

O Master! you may be happy if you will,
For 'tis a good Jack, that makes a good Gill.

Master, Master.

You have a great Cross through the Line of Life, Perhaps you're Jealous, you'd as
good trust your Wife.


You shall enjoy good health, and good cheer, And have a young Huntsman within
the year.


O brave Palms, you have Mistresses plenty, And you can be Constant at once to
twenty.


Come, Mr. Lurch, you could Sing well in your young days, if Marriage has not
cracked your Voice, let's hear the Dialogue between you, and your Wife; it may
be a means to make a thorough Reconciliation.


WHy so Coy, and so Strange?
Does your Kindness decline?
Your Love find a Change,
Or do you doubt mine?

When inconstant Men grow,
We c^n quickly discern,
And ou^ Sex you ^ll know,
Are apt Scholars to Learn.
I watched how your Eyes on Phillis wero g^ncing,
Crowned with a Garland of Roses for Dancing:
When t^e Peddler came, you gave her a Lace,
And a fine gaudy string for her Needle-Case.

You remember, it may be,
When you were May-Lady,
The nimble Thyrsis so Caper d and Chanted,
You gave him a Ribbon so long that it ^aunted
And wav'd in the air; when the brisk youth then tried
For a Kiss, you simpered, and faintly denied:
And blushing; you only cried fie, forbear,
You're such another; nay, pish, I swear
There was never in the World such rudeness as this;
Yet gently contrived he should rav^sh a Kiss.

Now prithec let's leave this impertinent str^ggle,


For Men will be false,


And Women will juggle.


Then let us be easy by freedom hereafter,
For Jealousy never yet mended the Matter.

What's past, we'll forget,


What's to come, never enquire,


But take surest Advice of present Desire.


Now to such poor Cheer as I have provided for you;

Joys Crown you all, every one here's my Guest, (...) all are welcome to a
Mis^'s Feast.



