IS it not strange, to hear a Poet say,
He comes to ask you, how you like the Play?
You have not seen it yet! alas 'tis true,
But now your Love and Hatred judge, not You.
And cruel Factions (bribed by Interest) come,
Not to weigh Merit, but to give their Doom:
Our Poet therefore, jealous of the Event,
And (though much boldness takes) not confident.
Has sent me, whither you, fair Ladies, too
Sometimes upon as small occasions go,
And from this Scheme, drawn for the hour and day,
Bid me inquire the fortune of his Play.
A Figure of the heavenly Bodies in their several Apartments, Feb. the 5th.
half an hour after three after Noon, from whence you are to judge the success
of a new Play called the Wild Gallant.


Who must judge of it, we, or these Gentlemen? We'll not meddle with it, so
tell your Poet. Here are in this House the ablest Mathematicians in Europe for
his purpose.


Yet let us judge it by the rules of Art.
First Jupiter, the Ascendants Lord disgraced,
In the twelfth House, and near grim Saturn placed,
Denote short life unto the Play: --

-- Jove yet,
In his Apartment Sagitary, set
Under his own Roof, cannot take much wrong;

Why then the Lif's not very short, nor long;


The luck not very good, nor very ill,


That is to say, 'tis as 'tis taken still.


But, Brother, Ptolomy the Learned says,
'Tis the fifth house from whence we judge of Plays.
Venus the Lady of that House I find
Is Peregrine, your Play is ill designed,
It should have been but one continued Song,
Or at the least a Dance of 3 hours long.

But yet the greatest Mischief does remain,
The twelfth Apartment bears the Lord of Spain;
Whence I conclude, it is your Authors lot,
To be endangered by a Spanish Plot.

Our Poet yet protection hopes from you,
But bribes you not with any thing that's new.
Nature is old, which Poets imitate,
And for Wit, those that boast their own estate,
Forget Fletcher and Ben before them went,
Their Elder Brothers, and that vastly spent:
So much 'twill hardly be repaired again,
Not, though supplied with all the wealth of Spain:
This Play is English, and the growth your own;
As such it yields to English Plays alone.
He could have wished it better for your sakes;
But that in Plays he finds you love mistakes:
Besides he thought it was in vain to mend
What you are bound in honour to defend,
That English Wit (how ever despised by some)
Like English Valour still may overcome


AS some raw Squire, by tender Mother bred,
Till one and Twenty keeps his Maidenhead,
(Pleased with some Sport, which he alone does find,
And thinks a secret to all Humane kind;)
Till mightily in love, yet half afraid,
He first attempts the gentle Dairymaid.
Succeeding there, and led by the renown
Of Whetstones Park, he comes at length to Town,
Where entered, by some School-fellow or Friend,
He grows to break Glass-Windows in the end:
His valour too, which with the Watch began,
Proceeds to duel, and he kills his Man.
By such degrees, while knowledge he did want,
Our unfletch'd Author, writ a Wild Gallant.
He thought him monstrous lewd (I'll lay my life)
Because suspected with his Landlords Wife:
But since his knowledge of the Town began,
He thinks him now a very civil man:
And, much ashamed of what he was before,
Has fairly played him at three Wenches more.
'Tis some amends his frailties to confess;
Pray pardon him his want of wickedness:
He's towardly, and will come on apace;
His frank confession shows he has some grace.
You balked him when he was a young beginner,
And almost spoiled a very hopeful sinner:
But, if once more you slight his weak endeavour;
For ought I know, he may turn tail for ever.

WHat! Not ready yet, Man?


You do not consider my Voyage from Holland last night.


Pish, a mere Ferry; get up, get up; my Cousins Maids will come and Blanket
thee anon: Art thou not ashamed to lie a Bed so long?


I may be more ashamed to rise; and so you'll say, dear Heart, if you look upon
my Clothes; the best is, my Buff-coat will cover all.


I gad, there goes more cunning than one would think, to the putting thy
Clothes together: thy Doublet and Breeches are Guelphs and Ghibellins to one
another; and the stiches of thy Doublet are so far asunder, that it seems to
hang together by the Teeth. No Man could ever guess to what part of the Body
these fragments did belong, unless he had been acquainted with u'm as long as
thou hast been. If they once lose their hold, they can never get together
again, except by chance the Rags hit the Tallies of one another. He that gets
into thy Doublet, must not think to do it by storm; no, he must win it inch by
inch, as the Turk did Rhodes.


You are very merry with my Wardrobe: but till I am provided of a better, I am
resolved to receive all Visits in this Trucklebed.


Then will I first scotch the Wheels of it, that it may not run; thou hast
Cattle enough in it, to carry it down stairs, and break thy neck. 'tis got a
yard nearer the door already.


Mr. Bibber your Taylor's below, and desires to speak with you.


He's an honest Fellow, and a fashionable, he shall set thee forth I warrant
thee.


I, but where's the Money for this dear Heart?


-- Well, but what think you of being put into a Suit of Clothes, without
Money?


You speak of Miracles.


Do you not know Will. Bibbers humour?


Prithee, What have I to do with his humour?


Break but a Jest, and he'll beg to trust thee for a Suit; nay, he will
contribute to his own destruction; and give thee occasions to make one: he has
been my Artificer these three years; and, all the while I have lived upon his
favourable apprehension: Boy, conduct him up.


But, What am I the better for this? I ne'er made Jest in all my life.


A bare clinch will serve the turn; a Carwichet, a Quarterquibble, or a Punn.


Wit from a Low-Countrey-Soldier? One that has conversed with none but dull
Dutchmen these ten years! What an unreasonable Rogue art thou? why, I tell
thee, 'tis as difficult to me, as to pay him ready Money.


Come, you shall be ruled for your own good, Lie down; I'll throw the Clothes
over you to help Meditation; and, upon the first opportunity, start you up, and
surprise him with a Jest.


Well, I think this impossible to be done: but, however I'll attempt.


Husht! he's coming up.


Morrow Mr. Failure: What, I warrant you think I come a Dunning now?


No, I vow to Gad, Will, I have a better opinion of thy Wit, than to think,
thou would come to so little purpose.


Pretty well that: No, no; my business is to drink my mornings-Draught in Sack
with you.


Will not Ale serve the turn, Will?


I had too much of that last night; I was a little disguised, as they say.


Why disguised? Had thou put on a clean Band, or washed thy Face lately?
those are thy Disguises, Bibber.


Well, in short, I was drunk; damnably drunk with Ale; great Hogen Mogen bloody
Ale: I was porterly drunk, and that I hate of all things in Nature.


Rising: And of all things in Nature I love it best.


Art thou there I'faith; and why, old Boy?


Because when I am porterly drunk, I can carry my self.


Ha, ha Boy.


This Porter brings sad News to you Will. you must trust him for a suit of
Clothes, as bad as 'tis: come, h's an honest Fellow, and loves the King.


Why? it shall be my Suit to him, that I may trust him.


I grant your Suit, Sir,


Make hast and dress you: Sir Timorous Dines here to day you know him.


I, I a good honest young Fellow; but, no Conjurer; he and I are very kind.


I gad we two have a constant Revenue out of him: he would now be admitted
Suitor to my Lady Constance Nonesuch, my Lord Nonesuch his Daughter; our
Neighbour here in Fleet street.


Is the Match in any forwardness?


He never saw her before yesterday, and will not be brought to speak to her
this Month yet.


That's strange.


Such a bashful Knight did I never see; but we must move for him.


They say here's a great Dinner to be made to day here, at your Cousin Trices,
on purpose for the interview.


What he keeps up his old humour still?


Yes certain; he admires eating and drinking well, as much as ever, and
measures every mans wit, by the goodness of his Palate.


Who Dines here besides.


Jac. Loveby.


O, my Guest.


He has ever had the repute of a brave clear-spirited Fellow.


He's one of your Dear Hearts, a Debau che.


I love him the better for it: the best Heraldry of a Gentleman is a Clapderiv'd
to him, from three Generations: What fortune has he?


Good Fortune at all Games; but no Estate: he had one; but he has made a Devil
on it long ago: he's a bold Fellow, I vo w to Gad: a person that keep; company
with his betters; and commonly has Gold in's pockets: come Bibber; I see thou
longest to be at thy mornings watering: I'll try what credit I have with the
Butler.


Come away my noble Festus and new Customer.


Now will he drink till his Face be no bigger than a threepence.


Nay, the Devil take thee, sweet Landlady, hold thy tongue: Was't not enough
thou hast scolded me from my Lodging, which, as long as I rent it, is my
Castle; but to follow me here to Mr. Trices, where I am invited; and to
discredit me before strangers, for a lowsy, Paltry sum of Money?


I tell you truly, Mr. Loveby, my husband and I cannot live by Love, as they
say; we must have wherewithal, as they say; and pay for what we take; and so
shall you, or some shall smoke for it.


Smoke! why a piece of hung Beef in Holland is not more smoked, then thou hast
Smoked me already. Thou know I am now fasting; let me have but fair play;
when I have lined my sides with a good dinner, I'll engage upon reputation to
come home again, and thou shalt scold at me all the afternoon.


I'll take the Law on you.


The Law allows none to scold in their own Causes: What dost thou think the
Lawyers take our money for?


I hope you intend to deal by my Husband like a Gentleman, as they say?


Then I should beat him most unmercifully, and not pay him neither.


Come, you think to fobb me off with your Jests as you do my Husband; but it
wonn't be: yonder he comes, and company with him; Husband, husband; why William
I say!


Speak softly, and I will satisfy thee.


You shall not satisfy me, Sir; pay me for what you owe me, for Chamber-rent,
and Diet, and many a good thing besides, that shall be nameless.


What a Stygian woman's this to talk thus? hold thy tongue till they be gone,
or I'll Cuckold thy husband:


You Cuckold him -- would you durst Cuckold him; I will not hold my Tongue,
Sir.


Yonders my Guest; what say you Gentlemen? shall I call him to go down with us?


I must make a loose from her, there's no otherway: Save ye Mr. Failure; is your
Cousin Trice stirring yet: answer me quickly Sir, is your Cousin Trice yet
stirring?


I'll go and see, Sir; sure the man has a mind to beat me; but I vow to Gad I
have no mind to be beaten by him: come away


Will. you'll follow us.


I'll be with you immediately --


Who was that with Failure, Will.


A man at Arms, that's come from Holland.


A man out at Arms thou mean, Will.


Good I'faith.


I, I; you runquesting up and down after your Gambols, and your Jests William;
and never mind the main chance, as they say: pray get in your Debts, and think
upon your Wife and Children.


Think upon the Sack at Cary-House, with the Apricot flavour Will. hang a Wife;
What is she, but a lawful kind of Manslayer? every little hug in bed, is a
degree of murdering thee: and for thy Children fear u'm not: thy part of u'm
shall be Taylors, and they shall trust; and those thy Customers get for thee
shall be Gentlemen, and they shall be trusted by their Brethren; and so thy
children shall live by one another.


Did you mark that Frances? there was wit now; he called me Cuckold to my face,
and yet for my heart I cannot be angry with him: I perceive you love Frances
Sir (...) I love her the better for your sake; speak truly, ^o you (...) such a
pretty brown kind of woman?


I do I'faith, Will. your fair Women have no substance in u'm they shrink In the
wetting.


Well, you may be undone if you will Husband: I hear there are 2 or 3 Actions
already out against him: you may be the last, if you think good.


'Tis true she tel's me; I love your wit well Sir; but I must cut my coat
according to my cloth.


Sir, we'll come by our own as we can; if you put us off from week to week
thus.


Nay, but good Landlady --


Will good Landlady set on the Pot, as they say; or make the Jack go; then
I'll hear you.


Now she's too much on the the other hand: hold your prating Frances; or I'll put
you out of your Pater Nosters with a sorrow to you.


I did but lay the Law open to him, as they say, whereby to get our money in:
but if you knew how he had used me Husband.


Has he used you Frances; put so much more into his Bill for Lodging.


Honest Will, and so he died; I thank thee little Bibber, being sober, and when
I am drunk, I will kiss thee for it.


Thank me, and pay me my money, Sir; though I could not forbear my jest, I do
not intend to lose by you; if you pay me not the sooner, I must provide you
another Lodging; say I gave you warning.


Against next quarter Landlord?


Of an hour Sir.


That's short warning, Will.


By this hand you shall up into the Garret where the little bed is; I'll let my
best room to a better paymaster; you know the Garret, Sir.


I, he knows it by a good Token Husband.


I sweat to think of that Garret, Will. thou art not so unconscionable to put
me there: why 'tis a kind of little ease, to cramp thy rebellious Prentices in;
I have seen an Usurers Iron Chest would hold two on it: a penny Looking-glass
cannot stand upright in the Window, that and the Brush fills it: the Hat-case
must be disposed under the Bed, and the Comb-case will hang down form the
Seeling to the Floor. If I chance to Dine in my Chamber, I must stay till I am
empty before I can get out: and if I chance to spill the Chamber-pot, it will
over-flow it from top to bottom.


Well, for the description of the Garret, I'll bate you something of the Bill.


All, all, good Will. or to stay thy fury till my Rents come up; I will
describe thy little Face.


No, rather describe your own little money; I am sure that's so Little, it is
not visible.


You are in the right, I have not a cross at present, as I am a sinner; and you
will not believe me, I'll turn my Pockets inside outward -- Ha! What's the
meaning of this, my Pockets heavy? Has my small Officer put in Counters to abuse
me? -- How now, yellow Boys, by this good light! Sirrah, Varlet, how came I by
this Gold? Ha!


What Gold do you mean, Sir? the Devil-a-piece you had this morning: in these
last three weeks, I have almost forgot what my Teeth were made for; last night
good Mrs. Bibber here took pity on me, and crumm'd me a Mess of Gruel, with
the Children, and I popped and popped my Spoon three or four times to my mouth,
before I could find the way to it.


'Tis strange, how I should come by so much Money!


O yes, Sir; I forgot to tell you that: this Morning a strange Fellow, as ever
eyes beheld, would needs come up to you when you were asleep; but when he came
down again, he said, He had not waked you.


Sure this Fellow, who ever he was, was sent by Fortune to mistake me into so
much Money. -- Well, this is not the first time my necessities have been
strangely supplied: some Cadua or other has a kindness for me, that's certain:
( aside. -- Well Monsieur Bibber, from henceforward I'll keep my wit for more
refined spirits; you shall be paid with dirt; -- there's Money for you.


Nay, Good Sir. --


What's your sum? tell it out: Will the Money burn your fingers? Sirrah, Boy,
fetch my Suit with the Gold Lace at Sleeves from Tribulation -- Gives him Gold.


I shall turn the better Bill-man, and knock that little Coxcomb of yours, if
you do not answer me what I owe you.


Pray Sir, troub not your self; 'tis nothing; Ifeck now 'tis not.


How, nothing Sir?


And't please your worship, it was seventeen pounds and a Noble, yesterday at
noon, your worship knows: and then your worship came home ill last night, and
complained of your worships head; and I sent for three Dishes of Tea fo your
good worship, and that was six pence more, and please your worship's honour.


Well; there's eighteen pieces, tell u'm.


I say, Frances, do not take u'm,


What, Is all your pleading of necessity come to this?


Now I see he will pay, he shall not pay, Frances; go home, and fetch him the
whole bag of forty pounds, I'll lend it him, and the Lease of the House too; he
shall want for nothing.


Take the Money, or I'll leave your house.


Nay, rather than displease his Worship, take it.


So, so; go home quietly, and Suckle my God-son, Francis.


If you are for the Cellar, Sir, you know the way.


No, my first visit shall be to my Mistress, the Lady Constance Nonesuch: She's
discreet, and how the Devil she comes to love me, I know not; yet I am pretty
confident she loves me: well, no woman can be wiser than, you know what will
give her leave to be.


Look, look; Is not that your Servant, Loveby.?


'Tis she; there's no being seen, till I am better habited --


Let him go, and take no notice of him: poor Rogue!
He little thinks I know his poverty.

And less, that you supply it by an unknown hand.


I, and falfified my Fathers Keys to do it.


How can you answer this to your discretion?


Who could see him want she loves?


Oh here's Mr. Setstone come, your Jeweller, Madam.


Welcome Setstone, hast thou performed thy visit
Happi y, and without discovery?

As you would wish it, Madam: I went up to his
Chamber without interruption; and there found him
Drowning his cares, and pacifying his hunger with sleep;
Which advantage I took, and undiscovered by him left
The Gold divided in his Pockets.

Well, this Money will furnish him I hope, that we may have his company again.


Two hundred and fifty good pounds, Madam! Has your Father missed it yet?


No; if he had, we should have all heard on it before how: but, pray God
Monsieur Loveby has no other haunts to divert him now he's ransomed: what a
kind of woman is his Landlady?


Well enough to serve a Taylor; or to kiss when he comes home drunk, or wants
money; but, far unlikely to create jealousy in your Ladyship.


Madam, Justice Trice desires your Ladyships excuse, that he has not yet
performed the Civilities of his hour to you; he is dispatching a little
business, about which he is earnestly employed.


He's Master of his own occasions.


We shall see him anon, with his face as read, as if it had been boiled in
pump-water: but, When comes this Miror of Knighthood that is to be presented
you for your Servant?


Oh, 'tis well thought on; Faith thou know my affections are otherwise
disposed; he's rich, and thou want a Fortune; achieve him if thou can;
'tis but trying, and thou hast as much wit as any Wench in England.


On condition you'll take it for a Courtesy to be rid of an Ass, I care not if
I marry him: the old fool, your Father, would be so importunate to match you
with a young Fool, that partly for quietness sake I am content to take him.


To take him! then you make sure on it.


As sure, as if the Sack Posset were already eaten.


But, What means wilt thou use to get him?


I'll bribe Failure, he's the man.


Why this Knight is his inheritance; he lives upon him: Dost thou think he'll
ever admit thee to govern him? no, he fears thy wit too much: besides, he has
already received an hundred pound to make thee Match between Sir Timorous and
me.


'Tis all one for that; I warrant you he sells me Fee-simple of him.


Your Father, Madam. --


The Tempest is risen; I see it in his face; he puffs and blows yonder, as if
two of the Winds were fighting upwards and downwards in his belly.


Will he not find your false Keys, Madam?


I hope he will have more Humanity then to search us.


You are come after us betimes, Sir.


Oh Child! I am undone; I am robbed, I am robbed; I have utterly lost all
stomach to my dinner.


Robbed! good my Lord how, or of what?


Two hundred and fifty pounds in fair Gold out of my Study: an hundred of it I
was to have paid a Courtier this afternoon for a Bribe.


I protest, my Lord, I had as much a do to get that parcel of Gold for your
Lordship. --


You must get me as much more against to morrow; for then my Friend at Court is
to pay his Mercer.


Nay, if that be all, there's no such hast: the Courtiers are not so forward to
pay their Debts.


Has not the Monkey been in the Study? he may have carried it away, and dropped
it under the Garden-window: the grafs is long enough to hide it.


I'll go see immediately.


This is the Gentleman, my Lord


He's welcome --


And this the particular of his Estate.


That's welcome too.


But, besides the Land here mentioned, he has wealth in specie.


A very fine young Gentleman.


Now, my Lord, I hope there's no great need of Wooing: I suppose my Estate will
speak for me; yet, if you please to put in a word.


That will I instantly.


I hope I shall have your good word too Madam, to your Cousin for me;


Any thing within my power, Sir Timorous.


Daughter, here's a person of Quality, and one that loves and honours you
exceedingly --


Nay, good my Lord! you discover all at first dash.


Let me alone, Sir; Have not I the dominion over my own Daughter? Constance,
here's a Knight in love with you, Child.


In love with me, my Lord, it is not possible.


Here he stands that will make it good, Child.


Who I, my Lord? I hope her Ladyship has a better opinion of me than so.


What, Are not you in love with my Daughter? I'll be Sworn you told me so but
even now: I'll eat words for no man.


If your Ladyship will believe all reports that are raised on Men of Quality --



He told it me with his own mouth, Child: I'll eat words for no man; that's
more then ever I told him yet.


You told him so but just now; fie, Sir Timorous.


He shall have no Daughter of mine and he were a thousand Knights; he told me,
he hoped I would speak for him: I'll eat no mans words; that's more than ever I
told him yet.


You need not keep such a pother about eating his words; you see he has eaten
u'm already for you.


I'll make him stand to his words, and he shall not marry my Daughter neither:
by this good day, I will --


'Tis an ill day to him; he has lost 250 l. in it.


He swears at the rate of two thousand pounds a year, if the Rump Act were
still in being.


He's in passion man; and besides, he has been a great Fanatic formerly, and
now has got a habit of Swearing, that he may be thought a Cavalier.


What noise is that? I think I hear your Cousin Trice's voice.


I'll go see --


Come Sir Timorous, be not discouraged: 'tis but an old mans srowardness; he's
always thus against rain.


O Madam follow me quickly; and if you do not see sport, Melancholy be upon my
head. --


Cinque and Cater: my Cinque I play here Sir, my Cater here Sir: Now for you
Sir: but first I'll drink to you Sir; upon my faith I'll do you reason Sir:
mine was thus full Sir: pray mind your play Sir: -- Size Ace I have thrown:
I'll play em at length Sir: -- will you Sir? then you have made a blot Sir;
I'll try if I can enter: I have hit you Sir.

-- I think you can cog a Dye Sir.
-- I cog a Dye Sir? I play as fair as you, or any man.
-- You lye Sir, how lye Sir; I'll teach you what 'tis to give a Gentleman the
lye Sir. --


Is this your serious business?


O you Rogue are you there? you are welcome huswife, and so are you Constance,
fa tol de re tol de re la.


Prithee be not so^ude Trice.


Housewife Constance, I'll have you into my Larder, and show you my provision: I
have Cocles, dainty fat Cocles that came in the night; if they had seen the
day, I would not have given a fart for u'm. I would the King had u'm.


He has as good I warrant you.


Nay that's a lye, I could sit and cry for him sometimes he does not know what
'tis to eat a good meal in a whole year: his Cooks are Asses: I have a delicate
dish of Ruffs to dinner Sirrah.


To dinner!


To dinner! why by supper they had been past their prime. I'll tell thee the
story of u'm: I have a friend. --


Well, well; I have a friend as I told you. --


Dinner stays Sir, 'tis Dinner that stays: sure he will hear now.


I have a friend as I told you. --


I believe h's your friend, you are so loath to part with him --


Away; away; -- I ll tell you the story between the courses. Go you to the Cook
immediately, Sirrah; and bring me word what we have to supper, before we go to
dinner; I love to have the satisfaction of the day before me.


SPeak thy conscience; was it not well dressed sirrah?


What think you of the Park, after our plenteous entertainment Madam?


I defy the Park, and all its works.


Come, Mr. Trice, we'll walk in your Garden.


O, one thing I had almost forgot to tell you: one of us two must ever be near
Sir Timorous.


Why?


To guard our interest in him from the Enemy Madam Isabelle; who, I doubt, has
designs upon him. I do not fear her wit, but her sex; she carries a prevailing
argument about her.


By this hand, I have a light upon the best wine in your Coufins Cellar, drink
but one glass to me, to show I am welcome, and I am gone.


Here then, honest Will. 'tis a cup of forbearance to thee.


Thank you Sir, I'll pledge you -- now here's to you again.


Come away; what is't Will.


'Tis what you christened it, a cup of forbearance Sir.


Why, I drank that to thee Will. that thou should forbear thy money.


And I drink this to you, Sir; henceforward I'll forbear working for you.


Then say I: take a little Bibber, and throw him in the River, and if he will
trust never, then there let him lie ever.


Then say I: take a little Failure, and throw him to the Jaylour; and there let
him lie, till he has paid his Tailor.


You are very smart upon one another Gentlemen.


This is nothing between us; I use to tell him of his Title, Fiery facias; and
his setting dog, that runs into Ale-houses before him, and comes questing out
again, if any of the woots his customers be within.


I faith 'tis true; and I use to tell him of his two Capons tails about his
hat, that are laid spread eagle wise to make a feather; I would go into the
snow at any time, and in a quarter of an hour I would come in with a better
feather upon my head; and so farewell Sir; I have had the better on you
hitherto, and for this time I am resolved to keep it.


The rogue's too hard for me; but the best on it is, I have my revenge upon his
purse.


Came not Sir Timorous this way, Gentlemen? he left us in the Garden, and said
he would look out my Lord Nonesuch, to make his peace with him.


Madame, I like not your enquiting after Sir Timorous: I suspect you have some
design upon him: you would fain undermine your Cousin, and marry him your self.


Suppose I should design it; what are you the worse for my good fortune? Shall
I make a proposition to you: I know you two carry a great stroke with him: make
the match between us, and propound to your selves what advantages you can
reasonably hope: you shall chose him of horses, clothes and Money, and I'll
wink at it.


And if he will not be choosed, shall we beat him out on it?


For that, as you can agree.


Give us a handsel of the bargain; let us enjoy you, and 'tis a match.


Grammarcy in faith boys; I love a good offer how ever the world goes? but you
would not be so base to wrong him that way.


I vow to gad but I would Madam: in a horse or a woman I may lawfully cheat my
own Father: besides, I know the Knights complexion; he would be sure to follow
other women; and all that.


Nay, if he fought with the sword, he should give me leave to fight with the
Scabbard.


What say you Madam? is't a bargain.


'Tis but a promise; and I have learnt a Court trick for performing any thing.
(aside) Well Gentlemen, when I am married I'll think upon you; you'll grant
there's a necessity I should Cuckold him, if it were but to prove my self a
Wit.


Nay, there's no doubt you'll Cuckold him; and all that; for look you he's a
person fit for nothing else; but I fear we shall not have the graffing of the
horns; we must have Livery and Seisin before hand of you, or I protest to gad
we believe you not.


I have past my word, is't not sufficient? what do you think, I would tell a
lie to save such a paltry thing as a nights lodging? -- Hark you Sir:


Now will she attempt Burr; igad she has found him out for the weaker vessel.


I have no kindness for that Failure, we'll strike him out, and man ge Sir
Timorous our selves.


Indeed we wonnot.


Failer's a Rook, and besides, he's such a debauched fellow.


I am ten times worse.


Leave it, and him that taught it you: you have virtuous inclinations, and I
would not have you ruin your self. He that serves many Mistresses, surfeits on
his diet, and grows dead to the whole sex: 'tis the folly in the world next
long ears and braying.


Now I'm sure you have a mind to me; when a woman once falls to preaching, the
next thing is ever use and application.


Forbear your rudeness --


Then I am sure you meant to jilt me: you decline Failure because he has wit;
and you think me such an ass, that you may pack me off so soon as you are
married; no, no, I'll not venture certainties for uncertainties.


I can hold no longer; Mr. Failure, what do you think this fellow was saying of
you?


Of me, Madam.


That you were one of the errantest Cowards in Christendom, though you went for
one of the Dear Hearts: that your name had been upon more posts than
play-bills: and that he had been acquainted with you these seven years, drunk
and sober, and yet could never fasten a quarrel upon you.


Do you believe this, Dear Heart?


If you deny it, I'll take his sword, and force you to confess it.


I vow to gad, this will not do, Madam: you shall not set us at variance so
easily; neither shall you have Sir Timorous.


No! then mark my words: I'll marry him in spite of you; and which is worse,
you shall both work my ends; and I'll discard you for your pains.


You shall not touch a bit of him: Ill preserve his humbles from you igad; they
shall be his Keepers fees.


She shall cut an Atom sooner than divide us.


I have given u'm the slip in the Garden, to come and overhear thee: no fat
overgrown virgin of forty ever offered her self so dog cheap, or was more
despised: me-thinks now this should mortify thee exceedingly.


Not a whit the more for that: Cousin mine, our Sex is not so easily put out of
conceitwith our own beauties.


Thou hast lost the opinion of thy honesty, and got nothing in recompense: now
that's such an oversight in a Lady.


You are deceived; they think me too virtuous for their purpose; but I have yet
another way to try, and you shall help me.


Mr. Loveby. welcome, welcome: where have you been this fortnight.


Faith Madam, out of Town to see a little thing that's fallen to me upon the
death of a Grandmother.


You thank death for the windfall, Servant: but why are you not in mourning for
her.


Troth Madam it came upon me so suddenly I had not time: twas a fortune utterly
unexpected by me.


Why, was your Grandmother so young you could not look for her disease?


Not for that neither; but I had many other kindred whom she might have left it
to, only she heard I lived here in fashion, and spent my money in the eye of
the world.


You forge these things prettily; but I have heard you are as poor as a
decimated Cavalier, and had not one foot of land in all the world.


Rivals tales, Rivals tales, Madam.


Where lies your land, Sir?


I'll tell you Madam, it has upon it a very fair Manor house; from one side you
have in prospect an hanging Garden.


Who was hanged there? not your Grandmother I hope?


In the midst of it you have a Fountain: you have seen that at Hampton-Court;
it will serve to give you a slight image of it. Beyond the Garden you look to a
River through a Perspective of fruittrees; and beyond the River you see a Mead
so flowery: well I shall never be at quiet, till we two make hay there.


But where lies this Paradise?


Pox on it; I am thinking to sell it, it has such a villainous unpleasant name;
it would have sounded so harsh in a Ladies ear. But for the Fountain, Madam --


The Fountain's a poor excuse, it will not hold water; come the name, the name.


Faith it is come so lately into my hands, that I have forgot the name on it,


That's much, now, you should forget the name, and yet could make such an exact
description of the place.


If you will needs know, the name's Bawdy; sure this will give a stop to their
curiosity.


At least you'll tell us in what County it lies, that my Cousin may send to
enquire about it; come, this shall not serve your turn, tell us any Town that's
near it.


'Twill be somewhat too far to send; it lies in the very North of Scotland.


In good time, a Paradise in the Highlands; is't not so Sir?


It seems you went Post, Servant: in troth you are a rank rider, to go to the
North of Scotland, stay and take possession, and return again, in ten days
time.


I never knew your Grandmother was a Scotch woman: is she not a Tartar too:
pray whistle for her, and lets see her dance: come -- whist Grannee!


Fie fie Servant; what no invention in you? all this while a studying for a
name of your Manor? come, come, where lies it? tell me.


No faith, I am wiser than so; I'll discover my Seat to no man; so I shall have
some damned Lawyer keep a prying into my title to defeat me of it.


How then shall I be satisfied there is such a thing in Nature?


Tell me what Jewel you would wear, and you shall have it: Enquire into my
money, there's the trial.


Since you art so flush, Sir, you shall give me a Locket of Diamonds of three
hundred pounds.


That was too severe; you know he has but 250 l. to bestow.


Well you shall have it, Madam: but I cannot higgle: I know you'll say it did
not cost above 200 pieces.


I'll be hanged if he does not present you with a parcel of melted Flints set
in Gold, of Norfolk pebbles.


Little Gentlewoman you are so keen: -- Madam, this night I have appointed
business, to morrow I'll wait upon you with it.


By that time he has bought his Locket, and paid his Landlady, all his Money
will be gone: but, Do you mean to prosecute your plot, to see him this evening?


Yes, and that very privately; if my Father know it I am undone.


I heard him say this night he had appointed business.


Why that was it Madam; according to your order I put on a disguise, and found
him in the Temple-Walkes: having drawn him aside, I told him, if he expected
happiness, he must meet me in a blind Alley I named to him, on the back-side of
Mr. Trices house, just at the close of evening; there he should be satisfied
from whom he had his supplies of Money.


And how did he receive the Summons?


Like a bold Hector of Troy; without the least doubt or scruple: but, the jest
on it was, he would needs believe that I was the Devil.


Sure he was afraid to come then.


Quite contrary; he told me I need not be so shy, to acknowledge my self to
him; he knew I was the Devil; but he had learnt so much civility, as not to
press his Friend to a farrher discovery than he was pleased, I should see I had
to do with a Gentleman; and any Courtesy I should confer on him he would not
be unthankful; for he hated ingratitude of all things.


'Twas well carried not to disabuse him: I laugh to think what sport I shall
have anon, when I convince him of his lies, and let him know I was the Devil to
whom he was beholding for his Money: go Setstone; and in the same disguise be
ready for him.


How dare you trust this fellow?


I must trust some body; gain has made him mine, and now fear will keep him
faithful.


Pray, my Lord, take no picque at it: 'tis not given to all men to be
confident: Igad you shall see Sir Timorous will redeem all upon the next
occasion.


A raw mieking Boy.


And what are you but an old Boy of five and fifty; I never knew any thing so
homorsome. -- I warrant you, Sir Timorous, I'll speak for you.


Would thou have me be friends with him! for thy sake he shall only add
five hundred a year to her Jointure, and I'll be satisfied: come you hither,
Sir.


You'll not find your account in this trick to get Failure beaten; 'tis too
palpable and open.


I warrant you 'twill pass upon Burr for a time: so my revenge, and your
interest will go on together.


Burr, there's mischief a brewing, I know it by their whispring I vow to gad:
look to your self, their designs on you; for my part I am a person that am
above u'm.


to Trice: But then you must speak for me Mr. Trice; and you too my Lord.


If you deny it again, I'll beat you; look to it Boy.


Come on; I'll make the bargain.


You were ever good in a Flesh Market.


Come you little Harlotry; What satisfaction can you give me for running away
before the Ruffs came in?


Why I left you to u'm, that ever invite your own belly to the greatest part of
all your feasts.


I have brought you a Knight here Huswife, with a plentiful Fortune to furnish
out a Table; and, What would you more? Would you be an angel in Heaven?


Your minds ever upon your belly.


No; 'tis sometimes upon yours: but, What say thou to Sir Timirous, little
Constance?


Would you have me married to that King Midas Face?


Midas me no Midas; he's a Wit; he understands eating and drinking well: Poeta
coquus, the heathen Philosopher, could tell you that.


Come on Sir; What's your will with me?


Why Madam, I could only wish we were a little better acquainted, that we
might not laugh at one another so.


If the Fool puts forward I am undone.


Fool! Do you know me Madam?


You may see I know you, because I call you by your name.


You must endure these rebukes with patience, Sir Timorous.


What, are you Planet stroke? Look you, my Lord, the Gentleman is Tongue-ty'd.


This is past enduring.


'Tis nothing, my Lord; Courage, Sir Timorous.


I say 'tis past enduring; that's more then ever I told you yet: Do you come to
make a fool of my Daughter?


Why Lord --


Why Lady --


Let's follow the old Man, and pacify him.


Now Cousin --


Well Mr. Failure, I did not think you of all the rest would have endeavoured a
thing so much against my inclination, as this Marriage: if you had been
acquainted with my heart, I am sure you would not.


What can the meaning of this be? you would not have me believe you love me;
and yet how otherwise to understand you I vow to gad I cannot comprehend.


I did not say I loved you, but if I should take a fancy to your Person and
Humour: I hope it is no Crime to tell it you: Women are tied to hard unequal
Laws: the passion is the same in us, and yet we are debarred the freedom to
express it. You make poor Grecian beggars of us Ladies; our desires must have
no language; but only be fastened to our breasts.


Come, come; I gad I know the whole Sex of you: your Love's at best but a kind
of blind-mans-buff, catching at him that's next in your way.


Well Sir, I can take nothing ill from you; when 'tis too late you'll see how
unjust you have been to me. -- I have said too much already. --


Nay, stay sweet Madam: I vow to gad my fortunes better than I could imagine.


No, pray let me go, Sir; perhaps I was in jest.


Really Madam, I look upon you as a person of such worth and all that, that I
Vow to gad I honour you of all persons in the World; and though I am a person
that am inconsiderable in the World, and all that Madam, yet for a person of
your worth and excellency, I would --


What would you, Sir?


Sacrifice my life and fortunes, I vow to gad, Madam.


There's Failure close in Talk with my Cousin; he's soliciting your suit, I
warrant you, Sir Timorous: do but observe with what passion he courts for you.


I do not like that kneading of her hand though.


Come, you are such a jealous Coxcomb: I warrant you suspect there's some amour
between u'm; there can be nothing in it it is so open: pray observe.


But, How come you so officious, Madam; you, that ever now had a design upon Sir
Timorous for you self?


I thought you had a better opinion of my Wit, than to think I was in earnest.
My Cousin may do what she pleases, but he shall never pin himself upon me
assure him.


Sir Timorous little knows how dangerous a person he has employed in making
love: --


How's this! Pray my Lady Constance, what's the meaning of that you say to
Failure?


What luck was this, that he should over-hear you! pax on it!


Mr. Burr, I owe you not that satisfaction; what you have heard you may
interpret as you please.


The Rascal has betrayed me.


In earnest, Sir, I do not like it.


Dear Mr. Burr. be pacified; you are a person I have an honour for; and this
change of Affairs shall not be the worse for you I gad Sir.


Bear up resolutely Mr. Failure; and maintain my Favours, as becomes my servant.


He maintain u'm! go you Judas! I'll teach you what 'tis to play fast and loose
with a Man of War


Lay it on Burr.


Spare him not, Burr.


Fear him not, Servant.


Oh, oh; would no body were on my side; here I am praised I vow to gad into all
the Colours of the Rainbow.


But, remember 'tis for me.


As you like this, proceed, Sir; but, come not near me to night, while I'm in
wrath.


Come, Sir; How fare you after your sore Trial: you bore it with a most heroic
patience.


Brave man at Arms, but weak to Balthazar!


I hope to gad, Madam, you'll consider the merit of my sufferings: I would not
have been beaten thus, but to obey that person in the World --


Heaven reward you for it: I never shall.


How Madam!


Art thou such an Ass as not to perceive thou art abused: this beating I
contrived for you: you know upon what account; and have yet another or two at
your service: yield up the Knight in time, 'tis your best course.


Then, Does not your Ladyship Love me Madam?


Yes, yes; I love to see you beaten.


Well, methinks now you have had a hard bargain on it: you have lost your Cully,
Sir Timorous; and your Friend Burr, and all to get a poor beating: but I'll see
it mended against next time for you.


I am so much amazed, I vow to gad, I do not understand my own condition.


This is the time and place he 'pointed me; and 'tis certainly the Devil I am
to meet; for no mortal creature could have that kindness for me, to supply my
necessities as he has done, nor could have done it in so strange a manner: he
told me he was a Scholar, and had been a Parson in the Fanatics times; a
shrewd suspicion it was the Devil; or at least a limb of him. If the Devil can
send Churchmen on his Errands, Lord have mercy on the Layety! well. let every
man speak as he finds, and give the Devil his due; I think him a very honest
and well-natur'd fellow: and if I hear any man speak ill of him, (except it be
a Parson that gets his living by it) I wear a Sword at his Service: yet for all
this I do not much care to see him. He does not mean to hook me in for my
Soul, Does he if he does, I shall desire to be excused. But what a Rogue am I,
to suspect a person that has dealt so like a Gentleman by me? he comes to bring
me Money, and would do it handsomely, that it might not be perceived: let it be
as 'twill, I'll seem to trust him, and then if he have any thing of a Gentleman
in him, he will scorn to deceive me, as much as I would to cousin him, if I
were the Devil, and he Jack Loveby.


What will become of me to night! I am just in the condition of an
out-lying-Deere, that's beaten from his walk for offering to (...): Enter I
dare not for Burr.


I hear a voice, but nothing do I see; speak what thou art.


There he is, watching for me: I must venture to run by him; and when I am in,
I hope my Cousin Trice will defend me: the Devil would not lie abroad in such a
night.


I thought it was the Devil before he named himself.


Honest Satan! well encountered! I am sorry with all my heart it is so dark:
Faith I should be very glad to see thee at my Lodging; prithee let's not be
such strangers to one another for the time to come; and, What hast thou got
under thy Cloak there little Satan; I warrant thou hast brought me some more
Money.


Help; help; Thieves, thieves.


This is Failers voice: How the Devil was I mistaken! I must get off, ever
Company comes in.


Thieves! Thieves!


Where! where!


One was here just now; and it should be Loveby by his voice, but I have no
Witness.


It cannot be; he wants no Money.


Come, Sirrah; I'll take pity on you to night; you shall lie in the
Truckle-bed.


Pox of this noise, it has disturbed me from such a Dream of Eating!


Constance, Isabelle.

'TWas ill luck to have the meeting broke last night, just as Setstone was
coming towards him.


But in part of recompense you'll have the pleasure of putting him on farther
streights, O, these little mischiefs are meat and drink to me.


He shall tell me from whence he has his Money: I am resolved now to try him to
the utmost.


I would devise something for him to do, which he could not possibly perform.


As I live yonder he comes with the Jewel in his hand he promised me; prithee
leave me alone with him.


Speed the Plough; if I can make no sport I'll hinder none: I'll to my Knight,
Sir Timirous; shortly you shall hear news from Damaetas.


Look you Madam, here's the Jewel; do me the favour to accept it, and suppose a
very good Complement delivered with it.


Believe me a very fair Jewel: but, Why will you be at this needless charge?
What acknowledgment do you expect? you know I will not Marry you.


How the Devil do I know that; I do not conceive my self under correction, so
inconsiderable a person.


You'll alter your partial opinion, when I tell you 'tis not a flash of wit
fires me; nor is it a gay out-side can seduce me to Matrimony.


I am neither Fool, nor deformed so much as to be despicable. What do I want?


A good Estate, that makes every thing handsome; nothing can look well without
it.


Does this Jewel express poverty?


I conjure you by your love to me, tell me one truth not minced by your
invention: How came you by this Jewel.


'Tis well I have a Voucher; pray ask your own Jeweller Setstone, if I did not
buy it of him.


How glad you are now, you can tell a truth so near a lie: but, Where had you
the Money that purchased it? come, -- without circumstances and preambles --


Umh, -- perhaps that may be a secret.


Say it be one; yet he that loved indeed, could not keep it from his Mistress.


Why should you be thus importunate?


Because I cannot think you love me, if you will not trust that to my
knowledge, which you conceal from all the World beside.


You urge me deeply --


Come, sweet Servant, you shall tell me; I am resolved to take no denial: Why
do you sigh?


If I be blasted it must out.


Either tell me, or resolve to take your leave for ever.


Then know I have my means; I know not how.


This is a fine secret.


Why then if you will needs know; 'tis from the Devil; I have Money from him,
what, and when I please.


Have you sealed a Covenant, and given away your Soul for Money?


No such thing intended on my part.


How then?


I know not yet what conditions he'll propose: I should have spoke with him
last night, but that a cross chance hindered it.


Well, my opinion is, some great Lady that is in love with you, supplies you
still; and you tell me an incredible Tale of the Devil, merely to shadow your
infidelity.


Devise some means to try me.


I take you at your word; you shall swear freely to bestow on me, what ever you
shall gain this unknown-way; and for a proof, because you tell me you can have
Money, what and when you please; bring me an hundred pounds ever night: [If I do
marry him for a Wit] I'll see what he can do; he shall have none from me.


You overjoy me, Madam; you shall have it, and 'twere twice as much.


How's this!


The Devil a cross that I have; or know where to get; but I must promise well
to save my credit: now Devil, if thou dost forsake me!


I mistrust you; and therefore if you fail, I'll have your hand to show
against you; here's ink and paper


What makes Loveby yonder? he's Writing somewhat.


I'll go see. --


Have you no more manners then to overlook a man when he's a Writing? -- Oh,
Is't you Sir Timorous? you may stand still; now I think on it you can not read
Written hand.


You are very familiar with Sir Timorous.


So I am with his Companions Sir.


Then there's hopes you and I may be better acquainted: I am one of his
Companions.


By what title, as you are an Ass Sir.


No more Loveby. --


I need not Madam; alas this fellow is only the Solicitor of a quarrel, till
he has brought it to an head; and I will leave the fighting part to the
Courteous pledger. Do not I know these fellows? you shall as soon persuade a
Mastiff to fasten on a Lyon, as one of these to engage with a courage above
their own: they know well enough who they can beat, and who can beat them.


Yonder they are; now would I compound for a reasonable sum, that I were
Friends with Burr: if I am not, I shall lose Sir Timorous.


O, Servant, have I spied you! let me run into your Arms.


I renounce my Lady Constance: I vow to gad I renounce her.


To your Task, Burr.


Hold, Gentlemen; no sign of quarrel!


O Friends! I think I shall go mad with grief: I have lost more Money.


Would I had it: that's all the harm I wish my self: your Servant, Madam; I go
about the business. --


What! Does he take no pity on me?


Prithee moan him Isabelle.


Alas, alas poor Nuncle! could they find in their hearts to rob him!


Five hundred pounds out of poor six thousand pounds a year! I and mine are
undone for ever.


Your own House you think is clear, my Lord?


I dare answer for all there, as much as for my self.


Oh that he would but think that Loveby had it!


If you'll be friends with me, I'll try what I can persuade him to.


Here's my hand, I will dear heart.


Your own House being clear, my Lord; I am apt to suspect this Loveby for such
a person: Did you mark how abruptly he went out?


He did indeed, Mr. Failure: but, why should I suspect him? his carriage is
fair, and his means great: he could never live after this rate if it were not.


This still renders him the more suspicious: he has no land to my knowledge.


Well said mischief --


My Father's credulous, and this Rogue has found the blindside of him; would
Loveby heard him! --


He has no Means, and he looses at Play: so that for my part, I protest to gad,
I am resolved, he picks Locks for his Living.


Nay, to my Knowledge, he picks Locks.


And to mine.


No longer ago than last night he met me in the dark, and offered to dive into
my Pockets.


That's a main argument for suspicion.


I remember once when the Keys of the Exchequer were lost in the Rump-time, he
was sent for upon an extremity, and I gad he opens me all the Locks with the
Blade-bone of a Breast of Mutton.


Who, this Loveby;


This very Loveby: Another time, when we had sate up very late at Ombre in the
Country, and were hungry towards morning, he plucks me out, I vow to gad I tell
you no lie, four ten-pennyNailes from the Dairy-Lock with his teeth, fetches me
out a Mess of Milk; and knocks me u'm in again with his Head, upon Reputation.


Thou Boy!


What shall I do in this case? my comfort is, my Gold's all marked.


Will you suspect a Gentleman of Loveby's worth, upon the bare report of such a
Rascal as this Failure?


Hold thy tongue, I charge thee; upon my blessing hold thy tongue, I'll have
him apprehended before he sleeps; come along with me, Mr. Failure.


Look well to Sir Timorous; I'll be with you instantly.


I'll watch you, by your favour.


A word, Sir Timorous.


She shall have a course at the Knight, and come up to him, but when she is
just ready to pinch he shall give such a loose from her, shall break her heart.


Burr there still, and watching us? there's certainly some Plot in this, but
I'll turn it to my own advantage.


Did you mark Burrs retirement, Madam?


I; his guilt it seems makes him shun your company.


In what can he be guilty?


You must needs know it; he Courts your Mistress.


Is he too, in love with my Lady Constance?


No, no; but which is worse, he Courts me.


Why, what have I to do with you? you know I care not this for you.


Perhaps so; but he thought you did: and good reason he had for it.


What reason, Madam?


The most convincing in the World: he knew my Cousin Constance never loved you:
he has heard her say, you were as invincibly ignorant as a Town-fop judging a
new Play: as shame faced as a great over-grown School-boy: in fine, good for
nothing but to be wormed out of your estate, and Sacrificed to the god of
Laughter.


Was your Cousin so barbarous to say this?


In his hearing.


And would he let me proceed in my suit to her?


For that I must excuse him; he never thought you could love one of my Cousin's
humour: but took your Court to her, only as a blind to your affection for me:
and being possessed with that opinion, he thought himself as worthy as you to
marry me.


He is not half so worthy; and so I'll tell him, in a fair way.


Sirrah Boy, deliver this Note to Madam Isabelle; but be not known I am so
near.


I warrant you, Sir.


Now fortune all I desire of thee, is, that Sir Timorous may see it; if he once
be brought to believe there is a kindness between her and me, it will ruin all
her Projects.


To the Boy. From whom!


From Mr. Burr, Madam.


These for Madam Isabelle.

Dear Rogue.

Sir Timorous knows nothing of our kindness, nor shall for me; seem still to
have defigns upon him; it will hide thy affection the better to thy Servant
Burr.


Alas poor Woodcock, dost thou go a birding: thou hast even set a Sprindge to
catch thy own neck: look you here Sir Timorous; here's something to confirm
what I have told you.


D, e, a, re, dear, r, o, g, u, e, ro-gue. Pray Madam read it: this written
hand is such a damned pedantique thing I could never away with it.


He would fain have robbed you of me: Lord, Lord! to see the malice of a man.


She has persuaded me so damnably, that I begin to think she's my Mistress
indeed.


Your Mistress? why I hope you are not to doubt that at this time of day. I was
your Mistress from the first day you ever saw me.


Nay, like enough you were so; but I vow to gad now, I was wholly ignorant of
my own affection.


And this Rogue pretends he has an interest in me merely to defeat you: look
you, look you where he stands in ambush, like a Jesuite behind a Quaker, to see
how his design will take.


I see the Rogue: now could I find in my heart to marry you in spite to him;
what think you on it in a fair way?


I have brought him about as I would wish; and now I'll make my own conditions
( aside) Sir Timorous, I wish you well; but he I marry must promise me to live
at London: I cannot abide to be in the Country, like a wild beast in the
wilderness, with no Christian Soul about me.


Why I'll bear you company.


I cannot endure your early hunting matches there; to have my sleep disturbed
by break of day, with heigh Jowler Jowler, there Venus, ah Beauty! and then a
serenade of deep mouthed cures, to answer the salutation of the Huntsman, as
if hell were broke loose about me: and all this to meet a pack of Gentlemen
Salvages to ride all day like mad men, for the immortal fame of being first in
at the Hares death: to come upon the spur after a trayl at four in the
afternoon to destruction of cold meat and cheese, with your lewd company in
boots; fall a drinking till Supper time, be carried to bed, rop'd out of your
Seller, and be good for nothing all the night after.


Well, Madam, what is it you would be at? you shall find me reasonable to all
your propositions.


I have but one condition more to add; for I will be as reasonable as you, and
that is a very poor request, to have all the money in my disposing.


How, all the Money?


I, for I am sure I can huswife it better for your honour; not but that I shall
be willing to encourage you with pocket money, or so sometimes.


This is somewhat hard.


Nay, if a woman cannot do that, I shall think you have an ill opinion of my
virtue: not trust your own flesh and blood, Sir Timorous.


Well, is there any thing more behind?


Nothing more only the choice of my own company, my own hours, and my own
actions: these trifles granted me, in all things of moment, I am your most
obedient Wife and Servant Isabelle.


Is't a match then?


For once I am content it shall; but 'tis to redeem you from those Kascals
Burr. and Failure. -- that way Sir Timorous, for fear of Spies; I'll meet you at
the Garden door. --


I have led all women the way, if they dare but follow me; and now march off,
if I can escape but spying, with my Drums beating, and my Colours flying.


So their wooing's at an end; thanks to my wit.


Oh Burr! whither it is Sir Timorous and Madam Isabelle are gone together?


Adore my wit, boy; they are parted never to meet again.


I saw u'm meet just now at the Garden door: so ho, ho, ho: who's within there:
help here quickly, quickly.


What's the matter?


Your Niece Isabelle has stolen away Sir Timorous.


Which way took they?


Follow me, I'll show you.


Break your necks after him, you idle Varlets.


Boy! how long have I slept boy?


Two hours and a half Sir.


What's a clock Sirrah?


Near four Sir.


Why there's it: I have promised my Lady Constance an hundred pounds ever night;
I had four hours to perform it in when I engaged to do it; and I have slept out
more than two of them: all my hope to get this money lies within the compass of
that hat there. -- before I lay down I made bold a little to prick my finger,
and write a note in the blood of it, to this same friend of mine in to'ther
world, that uses to supply me, the Devil has now had above two hours to perform
it in; all which time I have slept to give him the better opportunity: time
enough for a Gentleman of his agility to fetch it from the East-Indies, out of
one of his Temples where they worship him; or if he were lazy, and not minded
to go so far; 'twere but stepping over sea, and borrowing so much money, out of
his own Bank at Amsterdam! hanged, what's an hundred pounds between him and
me. -- Now does my heart go pit a pat, for fear I should not find the money
there: I would fain lift it up to see, and yet I am so afraid of missing: yet a
plague, why should I fear h'll fail me; the name of friend's a sacred thing;
sure he'll consider that: -- methinks this Hat looks as if it should have
something under it: if one could see the yellow boys peeping underneath the
brims now: ha! ( looks under round about) in my conscience I think I do: stand
out oth'way sirrah, and be ready to gather up the pieces that will flush out of
the hat as I take it up.


What is my Master mad trow.


Snatches up the hat, looks in it hastily, and sees nothing but the paper.

Now the Devil take the Devil: ah plague! was ever man served so as I am:
(throws his hat upon the ground) to break the bonds of Amity for 100 pieces:
well, it shall be more out of thy way than thou imagin'st, Devil: I'll turn
Parson, and be at open defiance with thee; I'll lay the wickedness of all
people upon thee though thou art never so innocent; I'll convert thy Bawdsand
Whores; I'll Hector thy Gamesters, that they shall not dare to swear, curse or
bubble; nay, I'll set thee out so, that thy very Usurers and Aldermen shall
fear to have to do with thee.


How now what's the matter?


Nay, sweet Mistress, be not so hard-hearted; all I desire of you is but
harbour for a minute: you cannot in humanity deny that small succour to a
Gentlewoman.


A Gentlewoman! I thought so, my house affords no harbour for Gentlewomen: you
are a company of proud Hallottries; I'll teach you to take place of Tradesmen's
Wives with a wannion to you.


How's this Madam Isabelle.


Mr. Loveby! how happy am Ito meet with you in my distress!


What's the matter Madam?


Ill tell you, if this Gentlewoman will give me leave.


No Gentlewoman, I will not give you leave; they are such as we maintain your
pride, as they say. Our Husbands trust you, and you must go before their Wives,
I am sure my Goodman never goes to any of your Lodgings but he comes home the
worse for it, as they say.


Is that all! prithee good Landlady, for my sake entertain my friends.


If the Gentleman's Worship had come alone, it may be I might have entertained
him; but for your Minion!


My Lord, arrest Sir Timorous upon a promise of marriage to you Daughter, and
we will witness it.


Why, what a strange thing of you's this Madam Isabelle, to bring a man into
trouble thus!


You are not yet married to her;


Not that I remember.


Well Failure, I shall find a time to reward your diligence.


If the Knight would have owned his action, I should have taught some of you
more manners, then to come with Officers into my Lodging.


I'm glad with all my heart this Minx is prevented of her de-sign: the
Gentleman had got a great catch of her as they say. His old Father in the
Country would have given him but little thank for it, to see him bring down a
fine bred Woman, with a Lute, and a Dressing-box, and a handful of money to her
portion.


Good Mistress Whatdeelack! I know your quarrel to the Ladies, do they take up
the Gallants from the Tradesmen's wives? Lord, what a grievous thing it is for a
she-Citizen to be forced to have Children by her own Husband!


Come, come, you're a slanderful huswife, and I squorn your hallottry trick that
I do, so I do.


Steeple-hat your Husband never gets a good look when he comes home, except he
brings a Gentleman to Dinner; who if he casts an amorous eye towards you; then,
trust him good Husband, sweet Husband trust him for my sake: verily the
Gentleman's an honest man, I read it in his countenance: and if you should not
be at home to receive the Money, I know he will pay the debt to me. Is't not so
Mistress?


Will you see me wronged thus, under my own roof, as they say, William?


Nay, 'tis very true Mistress: you let the men with old complements take up new
clothes: I do not mean your Wives clothes Mr. Merchant- Tailor.


Good in faith! a notable smart Gentlewoman!


Look to your Wife, Sir, or in time she may undo your Trade: for she'll get all
your men-Customers to her self.


And I should be hanged, I can forbear no longer.


How now! what means Prince Pericles by this?

Bibber on his knees.

I must beg your Ladyship even to have the honour to trust you but for your
Gown, for the sake of that last jest. Flowr'd Satin, wrought Tabby, Silver
upon any grounds: I shall run mad if I may not trust your Ladyship.


I think you are mad already, as they say, William: you shall not trust her. --
plucks him back.


Let me alone Frances; I am a Lyon when I am angered.


Pray do not pull your Lyon by the tail so Mistress. -- In these Clothes that
he now takes measure of me for, will I marry Sir Timorous, mark that, and
tremble Failure.


Never threaten me Madam, you're a person a despise.


I vow to gad I'll be even with you Sir.


-- And when you have arrested him, be sure you search him for my gold.


We arrest you Sir at my Lord Nonesuch his Suit.


Me you Rascals!


Search him for my gold; you know the marks on it.


If they can find any marked or unmarked gold about me; they'll find more than
I can. You expect I should resist now; no, no, I'll hamper you for this. --


There's nothing to be found about him.


'Tis no matter, to prison with him; there all his debts will come upon him.


What hurried to durance like a Stinkard!


Now as I live a pleasant Gentleman; I could find in my heart to bail him; but
I'll overcome my self, and steal away.


Come, Sir, we must provide you of another Lodging; but I believe you'll scarce
like it.


If I do not, I ask no favour; pray turn me out of doors.


Turn him out of door! What a jest was there? Now and I should be hanged I
cannot forbear Bailing him: stay Officers; I Bail him Body and Soul for that
Jest.


Let us be gone in time, Burr.


You shall not Bail him.


I know I am a Rogue to do it; but his Wit has prevailed upon me, and a man
must not go against his Conscience. There Officers --


Old Man, if it were not for thy Daughter. --


Well, well; take your course, Sir.


Come Will. I ll thank thee at the Tavern. Frances, remember this the next time
you come up to make my Bed.


Do your worst, I fear you not, Sir. This is twice to day, William; to trust a
Gentlewoman, and Bail a Ragamuffin: I am sure he called you Cuckold but
yesterday, and said he would make you one.


Look you Frances, I am a man of Honour, and if I said it, I'll not break my
word with you.


There he was with you again, Frances: an excellent good jest In faith la.


I'll not endure it, that I won't, so I won't: I'll go to the Justices Worship
and fetch a Warrant for him.


But Landlady, the word Cuckold will bear no Action in the Law, except you
could prove your Husband prejudiced by it. Have any of his Customers forsook
him for it? or, any Mercer refused to trust him the less, for my calling him so.


Nay, I know not for the Mercers; perhaps the Citizens may take it for no
slander among one another, as they say; but for the Gentlemen --


Will, Have they forsaken thee upon it?


No, I assure you, Sir.


No, I warrant u'm: a Cuckold has the signification of an honest well-meaning
Citizen; one that is not given to jealousies or suspicions; a just person to
his Wife, c. one that to speak the worst of him, does but to her, what he would
be content should be done to her by other men.


But that another man should be the Father of his Children, as they say; I
don't think that a civil thing Husband.


Not civil, Landlady! Why all things are civil that are made so by Custom.


Why may not he get as fine Children as I, or any man?


But if those Children, that are none of yours, should call you Father,
William!


If they call me Father, and are none of mine; I am the more beholding to u'm.


Nay, if that be your humour, husband, I am glad I know it, that I may please
you the better another time, as they say.


Nay, but Frances, Frances; 'tis such another woman.


'Tis such another Man: -- My Coat and Sword Boy, I must go to Justice Trices;
bring the Women, and come after me.


SIr, some Company is without upon Justice-business.


Saucy Rascal, to disturb my Meditations.

-- I, it shall be he: Jack Loveby, what think thou of a Game of Picquet, we
two, hand' to fist! you and I will play one single Game for ten pieces: 'tis
deep stake Jack, but, 'tis all one between us two: you shall Deal Jack: who I,
Mr. Justice, that's a good one, you must give me use for your hand then; that's
six in the hundred? Come, lift, lift; mines a ten; Mr. Justice: -- mines a King,
oh ho, Jack, you Deal. I have the advantage of this In faith, if I can keep it.

He Deals 12 a piece; 2 by 2.
And looks on his own Cards.
I take seven, and look on this -- Now for you Jack Loveby.


How's this? am I the man he fights with?


I'll do you right Jack; as I am an honest Man you must discard this, there's no
other way: if you were my own Brother I could do no better for you. -- Zounds,
the Rogue has a Quint-Major, and three Aces younger hand. --

Looks on the other Cards.
Stay; what am I for the Point? but bare Forty, and he Fifty one: Fifteen and
Five for the Point, 20, and 3 by Aces, 23. well, I am to play first: 1.23. 2.
23. 3. 23. 4. 23. -- Pox on it, now I must play into his hand: 5 -- now you take
it Jack, 5. 24. 25. 26. 27. 28. 29. 30. and the Cards Forty.


Hitherto it goes well on my side. --


Now I Deal: How many do you take Jack? All? then I am gone: What a rise is
here! 14 by Aces, and a Sixieme Major: I am gone, without looking into my
Cards. -- I, I thought so: If ever Man Played with such cursed Fortune, I'll be
hanged, and all for want of this damned Ace -- there's your ten pieces, with a
Pox to you, for a Rooking beggarly Rascal as you are.


What occasion have I given you for these words, Sir? Rook and Rascal! I am no
more Rascal then your self, Sir.


How's this, how's this!


And though for this time I put it up, because I am a winner.


What a Devil do'ft thou put up? not my Gold I hope Jack?


By your favour but I do; and 'twas won fairly; a Sixieme, and Fourteen by Aces
by your own confession. -- What a Pox we don't make Childrens Play I hope?


Well, remember this, Jack; from this hour I forswear playing with you when I
am alone; What, Will you bate me nothing on it?


Not a farthing, Justice: I'll be Judged by you, if I had lost you would have
taken every piece on it: what I win, I win. -- and there's an end.


Sir, these People stay without, and will not be answered.


Well, What's their business?


Nay, no great matter: only a Fellow for getting a Wench with Child.


No great matter say thou; Faith but it is: is he a poor fellow, or a
Gentleman?


A very poor fellow, Sir.


Hang him, Rogue, make his Mittimus immediately; must such as he presume to get
Children?


Well considered: a poor lousy Rascal, to entrench upon the Game of Gentlemen!
he might have passed his time at Nine-pins, or Shovel-board, that had been fit
sport for such as he; Justice, have no Mercy on him.


No, by the Sword of Justice will I not.


Swear thou, ungracious Boy? that's too much on the other hand for a
Gentleman. I Swear not, I drink not, I curse not, I Cheat not; they are
unnecessary Vices: I save so much out of those Sins, and take it out in that
one necessary Vice of Wenching.


Sir the Parties are without according to your order.


'Tis well; bring u'm in Boy.

Justice I recommend this ancient Gentlewoman, with these virtuous Ladies, to
thy Patronage; for her part, she is a person of exemplary life and behaviour,
of singular conduct to break through, and patience to bear the assaults of
Fortune: a general Benefactress of Mankind, and in fine, a promoter of that
great Work of Nature, Love.


Or, as the Vulgar Translation hath it, a very sufficient, and singular
good-Bawd: Is't not so Boy?


I, Boy: Now for such a petty-fogging Fellow as thy Clerk to persecute this
Lady; prithee think on it: 'tis a grievance of the Free-born-Subject.


To see the ingratitude of this Generation! I that have spent my youth, set at
nought my Fortune, and what is more dear to me, my honour, in the service of
Gentlemen; should now in my old age be left to want and beggary, as if I were
the vilest, and most unworthy creature upon Gods Earth.


Nay, good Mother, do not take it so bitterly.


I confess the unkindness of it troubles me.


Thou shalt not want so long as I live: look, here's five pieces of Cordial
Gold to comfort thy heart with, I won it even now of Mr. Justice; and I dare say
he thinks it well bestowed.


My Money's gone to very pious uses.


(Laying her hand on Lovebyes head.)


I knew thy Father well; and thy Grandfather before him; Fathers they were both
to me; and I could weep for joy to see how thou take after them. ( Weeping
again) I wish it lay in my power too, to gratify this worthy Justice in my
Vocation.


Faith I doubt I am past that noble Sin.


Prithee good Magistrate drink to her, and wipe sorrow from her eyes.


Right Reverend, my Service to you in Canary.


'Tis a great way to the bottom; but Heaven is alsufficient to give me strength
for it: --

Why Gods blessing on your heart, Son Trice. I hope 'tis no offence to call you
Son: Hem, hem! Son Loveby, I think my Son Trice and I are much of the same
years: let me see Son if Nature be utterly extinct in you: are you ticklish,
Son Trice?


Are you Ticklish Mother Dulake.


I would have all London now show me such another sight of kindness in Old Age:

Come, a Dance, a dance; call for your Clerk, Justice, he shall make one in
sign of Amity:


Are you at that Sport, I'faith? have among you blind Harpers:

She falls into the Dance.
At the Dances ending Loveby sees Constance.

Is she come! a Pox of all honest Women at such a time!


If she knows who these are, by this Light I am undone.


Oh Servant, I come to mind you of your promise; come, produce my hundred
pounds; the times out I set you.


Not till dark night upon my Reputation: I have not yet fpoke with the
Gentleman in the black Pantalloons; you know he seldom walks abroad by
day-light: Dear Madam, let me wait on you to your Coach, and if I bring it not
within this hour, discard me utterly.


You must give me leave to salute the Company: What are they?


Persons of Quality of my acquaintance; but, I'll make your excuse to n'm.


Nay, if they are Persons of Quality, I shall be rude to part from u'm so
abruptly.


Why so! the Devil owed me a shame; and now he has paid me. I must present u'm
what ever come on it. (aside. -- This Madam is my Lady Du Lake -- the Lady Spring
well, -- The Lady Hoyden


What a Whiff was there came from my Lady Heyden! and, What a Garlic breath my
Lady Spring-well had?


Ha, ha, ha, ha.


Do not betray me, Justice, if you do. --


Oh, Are you thereabouts, Sir; then I smell a Rat In faith; but I'll say nothing.


Ladies, I am an humble Servant to you all, and account it my happiness to have
met with so good Company, at my Cousin Trices.


Ha, ha, ha.


Are these two Ladies of your acquaintance Son Loveby?


Son quoth a! a Pox of our Relation. --


I shall be glad to be better known to your Ladyships.


You too much honour Servants, Madam.


How Loveby fidges up and down: in what pain he is! well, if these be not they
they call Whores, I'll be hanged, though I never saw one before: --


Will your Ladyship please to go, Madam?


I must beg the favour of these Ladies first, that I may know their Lodgings,
and wait of u'm.


It will be our Duty to pay our respects first to your Ladyship


I beg your Ladyships pardon Madam --


Your Ladyship shall excuse us, Madam --


Ha, ha, ha!


Ah Devil grinyou --


I must go out, and laugh my belly full.


But in earnest Madam, I must have no denial; I beseech your Ladyship instruct
me where I may tender my devoyres?


Since your Ladyship commands me, Madam, I dare disobey no longer. My Lodgings
are in St. Lucknors Lane, at the Cat and Fiddle.


Whereabouts is that Lane, Servant?


Faith Madam, I know not that part of the Town. -- Lord, how I sweat for fear --


And yours Madam, where, I beseech your Ladyship.


Wh. In Dog and Bitch Yard, and't please your Ladyship.


Wh. And mine in Sodom, so like your Ladyship.


How Loveby! I did not think you would have used me thus?


I beseech your Ladyship but hear my Justification as I lead you.


By no means, Sir; that were such a rudeness to leave persons of quality, to
wait upon me: unhand me Sir.


Ha, ha, ha. --


I am ruined! for ever ruined, plague had you no places in the Town to name but
Sodom, and Lucknors. Lane for Lodgings!


If any prejudice arise from it, upon my honour Son 'twas by mistake, and not
intended you: I thought she desired to have been admitted of the quality.


I was cursed when I had first to do with you -- kicks u'm


Well, I thank Heaven, that has endued me with such patience.


I have made a fair hand on it to day -- both lost my Mistress, and hear no news
from my friend below: the World frowns upon me, and the Devil and my Mistress
have forsaken me: my Godfathers and Godmothers have promised well for me:
instead of renouncing them, they have renounced me.


Sir, I saw my Lady Constance smile as she went out: I am confident she's angry
but from the teeth outwards; you might easily make fair weather with her, if
you could get the money you promised her, but there's the devil --


Where is he boy? show me him quickly.


Marry God bless us! I mean Sir, there's the difficulty.


Damned rogue to put me in hope so. --


Uds so, look where Bibber is: now I think ont, he offered me a bag of forty
pounds, and the Lease of his house yesterday: but that's his pocky humour, when
I have money and do not ask him, he will offer it; but when I ask him he will
not lend a farthing -- turn this way Sirrah, and make as though we did not see
him. --


Our Gentleman I think a talking with his boy there. --


You understand me --


I warrant you Sir.


No News yet; what an unlucky rascal 'tis! if the rogue should hereafter be
reduced to the raiment of his own Shreds, I should not pity him --


How's this!


Now is this rascal hunting after jeasts, to make himself the greatest to all
that know him.


This must be me.


I can hear neither tale nor tidings of him: I have searched him in all his
haunts; amongst his Creditors; and in all Companies where they are like to
break the least jest. I have visited the Coffeehouses for him; but among all
the news there, I heard none of him.


Where's the warrant, I'll put in my own name, since I cannot find him.


Sir, I gave it a Scrivener at next door because I could not write, to fill up
the blank place with Mr. Bibbers name.


What an unlucky vermin 'tis; now for an 100 l. could I have gratified him with
a waiters Place at Custom-house, that had been worth to him an 100 l. a year
upon the nail.


Could you so, could you so Sir? give me your hand, and I thank you heartily
Mr. Loveby.


Art then honest Will? faith 'tis not worth thy thanks till it be done: I wish
I had the money for thee.


How much is't Sir?


An hundred pounds would do it:


Let me see forty I have already by me; take that in part Sir; -- and that, and
the Lease of my house would over-do it.


By all means thy Lease Will: near scruple at that; hang a piece of Parchment,
and two bits of soft wax: thou shalt do it, thou shalt boy.


Why then I will, Sir: -- but stay, stay; now think on it, Frances has an 120
pieces of old Grandam and Aunt gold left her, that she would never let me
touch: if we would get that Mr. Loveby -- but she'll never part with it.


'Tis but saying the place is for her; a Waiting-woman's place in the
Custom-house: Boy, go and tell her ont immediately.


Hold a little; she has been very defirous to get a place in Court, that she
might take place as the Queens Servant.


She shall have a Dressers place, if thou'lt keep counsel. The worst on it is, I
have never a Warrant ready.


'Tis all one for that Sir; she can neither write norread; 'tis but my telling
her 'tis a Warrant and all's well. I can but laugh to think how she'll be
choosed.


And you too: Mum. She's here Will.


A Waiting-womans place in the Custom-house! there's news for me! thank you
kind Mr. Loveby; you have been instrumental I hear of my preferment.


No, 'tis a Dressers place at Court, Landlady.


O gemini! that's better news.


I, but you must make hast and fetch an hundred pieces: I can assure you 500
are bidden for it: and the Courtiers are such slippery youths, they are ever
for the fairest Chapman.


I'll fetch it presently; oh how my heart quops now, as they say: I'll fetch it
presently: fweet Mr. Loveby, if the business can be done, it shall be a good
thing in your Worships way I promise you: O the father! that it could be done:
O sweet father!


Here Mr. Bibber, pray put in Madam Bibbers name into the Warrant.


Madam Bibber, there's joy, I must call you Wife no more, 'tis Madam Bibber
now.


Pray read it Mr. Bibber.


An Order for the admission of the Illustrious Lady Madam Bibber into her
Majesties service.


Pray give me the Paper, I'll have no body touch it but my self; I am sure my
Money pays for it as they say. These are the fi-nest words; Madam Bibber; pray
Chicken show me where Madam is written that I may kiss it all over. I shall
make bold now to bear up to these flirting Gentlewomen, that sweep it up and
down with their long tails. I thought my self as good as they when I was, as I
was, but now I am, as I am.


Good Landlady dispatch, and bring the Money. --


Truly in the place of a Dresser, I dare be bold to say, as they say; I shall
give their Majesties Worships good content: I'll go fetch it. --


We must keep the poor Soul in ignorance as long as we can, Sir; for, when she
has one smoked it, I have no other way but to retreat into the body of my
Janissaries my Journey-men; and never come out into her presence more: Where
will you be at nine a Clock, Sir, that we may rejoice over our good Fortune.


Call me at my Lord Nonesuch his House, and I'll go with you.


We'll have the Fiddles and triumph In faith.


Lord, how eager this Vermin was to cheat himself: well, I'll after, I long to
finger these Jacobus s: perhaps they may make my peace again with my Mistress.


I Vow to Gad my Lord, Sir Timorous is the most dejected person in the World,
and so full of regret for what is past. 'Twas his misfortune to be drawn in by
such a Person as Madam Isabelle.


'Tis well his Estate pleads for him; he should ne'er set foot more within my
doors else.


All be security for him for time to come: leave it to me to get the Licence:
all I desire is, your Daughter may be ready to morrow morning.


Well, let me alone with her.


You heard the dreadful sound to morrow Cousin.


I would not throw my self away upon this Fool, if I could help it.


Better marry a Tertian Ague then a Fool, that's certain; there's one good day
and night in that.


And yet thou art mad of him thy self.


Nay, the Fool is a handsome Fool, that's somewhat; but 'tis not that; 'tis a
kind of fancy I have taken to a Glass Coach, and six Flanders Mares; rich
Liveries, and a good Fortune.


Prithee do not mind me of u'm; for though I want u'm not, yet I find all Women
are caught with Gaieties: one grain more would turn the balance on his side;
I am so vexed at the wild courses of this Loveby.


Vexed? Why vexed? the worst you can say of him, is, he loves Women: and such
make the kindest Husbands I am told. If you had a Sum of Money to put out; you
would not look so much whether the Man were an honest Man, (for the Law would
make him that) as if he were a good sufficient Pay-master.


As I live thou art a mad Girl.


She must be used as Mad-folkes are then; had into the dark and cured,


But, all this is no comfort to the word Tomorrow.


Well, what say you, if I put you to night into the Arms of Loveby?


My condition's desperate, and past thy Physic.


When Physics past, what remains but to send for the Divine? here's little
Nicodemus your Fathers Chaplain; I have spoke with him already; for a brace of
Angels he shall make all sure betwixt you without a License. I, and prove ten
at night a more Canonical hour than ten in the Morning.


I see not which way thou can perform it; but if thou dost; I have many
Admirations in store for thee.


Step in, and get a Cushion underneath your apron.


O, I must be with Child it seems!


And Loveby shall bring you to Bed to night, if the Devil be not in the Dice:
away, make hast; --

Setstone Be not you far off; I shall have need of you too: I hear my Uncle
coming; --

Me thinks I long to be revenged of this wicked Elder for hind ering of my
Marriage to day: Hark you Setstone. --


'Tis impossible, Madam: 'twill never take.


I warrant you, Do not I know him? he has not Brains enough, if they were
buttre'd to feed a black-bird -- Nay, no replies -- out of what I have said,
you may instruct my Cousin too.


Oh, Are you there, Sir? Faith it was kindly done of you to hinder me of a good
Husband this afternoon: and but for one thing, I would resolve to leave your
house.


I'm glad there's any thing will stay thee.


If I stay; 'tis for love of my Cousin Constance, not of you: I should be loath
to leave her in this sad condition!


What condition?


Nay, I know not; she has not worn her Busk this fortnight. I think she's grown
fat of the sudden.


O Devil, Devil! what a fright am I in?


She has qualms to every morning: ravins mightily for greenfruit; and swoones
at the sight of hot meat.


She's with Child: I am undone! I am undone!


I understand nothing of such matters: She's but in the next room; best call
her, and examine her about it.


Why Constance, Constance?


Now for a broad-side; turn your prow to him Cousin.


Now Gentlewoman! is this possible?


I do not reach your meaning, Sir.


where have you been of late?


I seldom stir without you, Sir: these Walls most commonly confine me.


These Walls can get no Children; nor these Hangings; though there be Men
wrought in u'm.


Yet, by your favour Nuncle, Children may be wrought behind the Hangings.


O Constance, Constance! How have my gray hairs deserved this of thee? Who got
that Belly there?


You, I hope, Sir.


Tell me the truth; for I will know it; come, the Story.


The Story's quickly told, Sir, I'm with Child.


And whose the Father?


I do not know, Sir.


Not know! went there so many to it?


So far from that, that there were none at all, to my best knowledge, Sir.


Wast got by Miracle? who was the Father?


Who got your Money, Sir, that you have lost?


Nay, Heaven knows who got that.


And, Heaven knows who got this: for, on my Conscience, he that had your Money,
was the Father on it.


The Devil it was as soon.


That's all I fear, Sir.


'Tis strange: and yet 'twere hard, Sir, to suspect my Cousin's Virtue, since
we know the house is haunted.


'Tis true, that nothing can be laid, though under lock and key, but it
miscarries.


'Tis not to be believed what these villainous Spirits can do: they go
invisible.


First they stole away my Prayer-Book; and a little after that a small Treatise
I had against Temptation; and when they were gone, you know Sir --


If there be such doings, pray Heaven we are not all with Child: 'tis certain
that none that live within these Walls, but they have power of; I have feared
Toby the Coachman any time this fortnight.


Out impudence! a man with Child! why 'tis unnatural.


I, so is he that got it.


Thou art not in earnest.


I would I were not; hark, I hear him groan hither: come in poor Toby.


How now! what have you there, Sirrah?


And't please your worship 'tis my Water; I had a spice of the new Disease here
in the house, and so carried it to Master Doctor.


Well; and what did he say to you?


He told me very sad news, and please you: I am somewhat bashful to speak
on it.


Out with it Man.


why truly he told me the party that owed the Water was with Child.


I told you so; Uncle.


To my best remembrance I never heard of such a thing before.


I never stretch out my self to snap my Whip, but it goes to the heart of me.


Alas poor Toby.


Be gone, and put off your Livery Sirrah: you shall not stay a minute in my
Service.


I beseech your good Worship be good to me; 'twas the first fault I ever
committed in this kind: I have three poor Children by my Wife, and if you leave
me to the wide World, with a new charge upon my self.


Be gone, I will not hear a word.


If I must go, I'll not go alone: Ambrose Tinis the Cook is as bad as I am.


I think you'll make me mad: Call the Rascal hither I must account with him upon
another score now I think on it.


Sirrah, what made you send a Pheasant with one wing to the Table yesterday?


I beseech your Worship to pardon me, I longed for it.


I feared as much.


And I beseech your Worship let me have a boy to help me in the Kitchen; for I
find my self unable to go through with the work: besides the Doctor has warned
me of stooping to the fire, for fear of a mischance.


Why, are you with child Sirrah!


So he tells me: but if I were put to my oath, I know not that ever I deserved
for it:


Still worse and worse: and here comes Setstone groaning.


O Sir I have been so troubled with swooning fits; and have so longed for
cherries.


He's poopt to.


Well, this is not the worst yet: I suspect something more; than I will speak
on.


What dost thou suspect; ha!


Is not your Lordship with child too?


Who, I with Child! Marry Heaven forbid: what dost thou see by me to ground it
on?


You're very round of late; that's all Sir.


Round, that's only fat I hope: I have had a very good stomach of late I'm
sure.


Alas, and well you may: you eat for two Sir.


Setstone look upon me, and tell me true: do you observe any alteration In me?


I would not dishearten your Ladyship: -- your Lordship I would say: but I have
observed of late, your colour goes and comes extremely: methinks your Lordship
looks very sharp, and bleak in the face, and mighty puff in the body.


O the Devil! wretched men that we are all: nothing grieves me, but that in my
old age, when others are past child-bearing, I should come to be a disgrace to
my family.


How do you Sir? your eyes look wondrous dim: is not there a mist before u'm?


Do you not feel a kicking in your belly? when do you look Nuncle?


Uh, uh! me-thinks I am very sick o'th sudden?


What store of old shirts have you against the good time? shall I give you a
shift Nuncle?


Here's like to be a fine charge towards: we shall all be brought to bed
together: well, if I be with Devil I will have such Gossips: an Usurer and a
Scrivener shall be Godfathers.


I'll help you Nuncle, and Saundyes two Grannies shall be Godmothers: the Child
shall be Christened by the Directory, and the Gossips Gift shall be the good
Scotch Kivenant.


What rare musics here!


When ever it comes from me 'twill kill me, that's certain:


Best take a vomit.


And't comes upward the horns will choack him.


Mass and so they will.


Your only way is to make sure of the Man-midwife.


But my Child's dishonour troubles me the most: if I could but see her well
married, before I underwent the labour and peril of Child-bearing! what would
you advice Niece!


That which I am very loath to do: send for honest Jack Loveby, and let him
know the truth ont: he's a fellow without a fortune, and will be glad to leap
at the occasion.


But why Loveby of all the world? 'tis but staying till to morrow, and then Sir
Timorous will marry her.


Uh! I swell so fast, I cannot hide it till to morrow.


Why there's it now!


I'll send for the old Alderman Getwell immediately: he'll father the Devils
Bastard I warrant you.


Fie Nuncle! my Cousins somewhat too good yet for an Alderman; if it were her
third child she might hearken to you.


Well, since it must be so, Setstone go you to Loveby, make my excuse to him
for the arrest, and let him know what fortune may attend him.


Mr. Setstone, pray acquaint him with my Cousins affection to him; and prepare
him to father the Cushion underneath her Petticoat.


I'll bring him immediately.


When he comes Nuncle, pray cover your great belly with your hat, that he may
not see it.


It goes against my heart to marry her to this Loveby; but what must be, must
be.


O, Mr. Loveby! the welcom'st man alive: you met Setstone I hope, that you came
so opportunely.


No faith Madam, I came of my own accord.


'Tis unlucky he's not prepared.


Look you Madam, I have brought the 100 l. the Devil was as punctual as three a
clock at a Play-house: here, 'tis right I warrant it without telling: I took it
upon his word -- gives it.


Your kindness shall be requited Servant: but I sent for you upon another
business: Pray Cousin tell't him, for I am ashamed to do it.


Ha! 'tis not that great belly I hope! is't come to that?


Hark you Mr. Loveby, -- a word with you.


A word with you Madam: whither is your Cousin bound?


Bound Sir?


I bound; look you, she's under sail, with a lusty fore-wind.


I sent for you Sir, but to be plain with you 'twas more out of necessity than
Love.


I wonder my Lord at your invincible ill nature: you forget the arrest that I
passed by: but this 'tis to be civil to unthankful persons; 'tis feeding an
ill-natur'd dog, that snarles while he takes the victuals from your hand.


All friends, all friends; no ripping up old stories; you shall have my
Daughter.


Faith I see your Lordship would let Lodgings ready furnished, but I am for an
empty Tenement.


I had almost forgot my own great belly; if he should discover that too! --


to Loveby. You will not hear me, Sir: 'tis all roguery as I live.


Flat roguery I'll swear; if I had been father ont; nay, if I had but laid my
breeches upon the bed, I would have married her: but I see we are not ordained
for one another. -- is going.


I beseech you Sir. --


Pray cover, my Lord.


He does his great belly, methinks --


I'll make it up in money to you.


That cannot tempt me; I have a friend that shall be nameless, that will not
see me want -- and so your Servant.


I'll after and bring him back --


You shall not stir after him; does he scorn my daughter.


Lord how fretful you are: this breeding makes you so peevish Nuncle.


'Tis no matter, she shall straight be married to Sir Timorous.


I am ruined Cousin.


I warrant you: -- My Lord I wish her well married to Sir Timorous; but Loveby
will certainly infect him with the news of her great belly.


I'll dispatch it ever he can speak with him.


When ever he comes, he'll see what a bona roba she is grown.


Therefore it shall be done in the evening.


It shall my Lord.


Shall it?


Let me alone Cousin, -- and to this effect she wall write to him, that to
conform to your will, and his modesty, she desires him to come hither alone
this Evening.


Excellent wench! I'll get my Chaplain ready.


How can you hope to deceive my father?


If I do not I have hard luck.


You go so strange a way about, your bowl must be well biased to come in.


So plain a ground there's not the least rub in it, I'll meet Sir Timorous in
the dark, and in your room marry him.


You'll be sure to provide for one.


You mistake me Cousin: Oh! here's Setstone again;

Mr. Jeweller, you must again into your Devils shape, and speak with Loveby:
but pray be careful not to be discovered.


I warrant you Madam; I have cozened wiser men than he in my own shape; and if
I cannot continue it in a worse, let the Devil I make bold with, even make as
bold with me.


You must guide him by back ways, to my Uncles House, and so to my Cousins
Chamber, that he may not know where he is when he comes there: the rest I'll
tell you as we go along.


Here here, read this Note; there's news for us.


Let me see it.

Sir Timorous.

Be at the Garden door at nine this Evening, there I'll receive you with my
daughter; to gratify your modesty I designed this way, after I had better
considered on it: and pray leave your Caterpillars Burr and Failure behind you.

Yours Nonesuch.

There is some trick in this, what e'rit be: but this word Caterpillars: you
see Burr, Sir Timorous, is like to be lured from us. --


Is there no prevention?


One way there is: Sir Timorous pray walk a turn while Burr and I confer a
little upon this matter -- Look you Burr, there is but one remedy in Nature I
vow to gad: that is for you to have a new Sir Timorous, exceeding this person
in bounty to you. Observe then, in Sir Timorous his place will I go, and igad
I'll marry my Lady Constance; and then from the bowels of friendship bless thee
with a thousand pounds, besides Lodging and Diet for thy life, boy. --


Umh -- very well thought on. -- No Sir, you shall trust to my bounty; I'll go
in his place, murmure or repine, speak the least word, or give thy lips the
least motion; and I'll beat thee till thou art not in condition to go.


I vow to gad this is extreme injustice: was it not my invention?


Why dost thou think thou art worthy to make use of thy own invention? -- speak
another word dee see -- come help me quickly to strip Sir Timorous: his Coat
may conduce to the deceit.

-- Sir Timorous by your leave. --


O Lord! what's the matter? -- murder -- murder.


Dee open; I have something in my Pocket that will serve for a gag now I think
on it.

So lye there Knight. Come Sir, and help to make me Sir Timorous; and when I am
married, remember to increase your manners with my fortune -- yet we'll always
drink together.


Constance, Isabelle, Nonesuch.

THis is just the Knights hour; and Lovers seldom come after their time.


Good night Daughter, I'll to bed; and give you joy tomorrow morning.


I'm glad he's gone: what, your train takes?


Yes, yes; Loveby will come: Setstone has been with him in disguise; and
promised him golden Mountains if he will not be wanting to his own fortune.


Is your habit provided too?


All is ready.


Away then; for this is the place where we must part like Knights Errant, that
take several paths to their adventures.


'Tis time; for I hear some body come along the Alley; without question 'tis
Timorous. Farewell, the Captain stays for me in my Chamber.


And I'll post after you to Matrimony; I have laid a fresh Parson at the next
Stage that shall carry me tantivy.


My Lady Constance!


The same: Sir Timorous!


The same.


Sir Timorous takes me for my Cousin.


My Lady Constance mistakes me for the Knight.


Here, Sir; through the dark walk; 'tis but a little way about: -- he's my own
beyond Redemption. --


The Indies are mine; and a handsome Lady into the bargain. --


He shall be hanged ever he shall get her. Thus far I have dogged u'm, and this
way I am sure they must pass ever they come to the house: the Rogue had got the
old Dog-trick of a Statesman; to fish things out of wiser heads than his own,
and never so much as take notice of him that gave the Counsel. --

Now if I can but give her the hint without his knowledge! -- Madam, -- my Lady
Constance --


Whose voice is that?


A word in private, or you are undone: -- Pray step aside.


Where are you, Madam?


Immediately, Sir Timorous.


You are mistaken, Madam; 'tis not Sir Timorous; but Burr in his clothes: he
has stripped the Knight; gaged him, and locked him up.


Failure?


The same: I could not but prevent your unhappiness, though I hazard my person
in the discovery I Vow to Gad, Madam.


Who's that talks to you, my Lady Constance?


a Maid of my acquaintance that's come to take her leave of me before I marry;
the poor soul does so pity me.


How will that Maid lie thinking of you and me to night!


Has he the Key about him?


I think so, Madam.


Could not you possibly pick his pocket, and give me the Key? then let me alone
to release Sir Timorous; and you shall be witness of the wedding.


Igad you want your Cousin Isabells wit to bring that to pass Madam.


I warrant you my own wit will serve to fool Burr, -- and you too, or I am much
deceived --


I am a little apprehensive of the Rascals fingers since I felt u'm last; and
yet my fear has not power to resist the sweet temptation of revenge; I vow to
Gad I'll try, Madam. --


Never fear; let me alone to keep him busy. --


Come, Madam, and let me take off those tasteless Kisses the Maid gave you; may
we not join lips before we are Married?


No, fie, Sir Timorous.


I have it, -- here 'tis, -- now shift for your self as I'll do: I ll wait you
in the Alley.


Sir Timorous, pray go into my Chamber; and make no noise till I return: I'll
but fetch the little Man of God, and follow you in a twinkling.


There's no light I hope. --


not a spark


For to light me to the mark --


What a scouring have I escaped to night! fortune, 'tis thou hast been ingenious
for me! Allons Isabelle! courage! now to deliver my Knight from the Enchanted
Castle.


What art thou that hast lead me this long hour

Through Lanes and Alleys, and blind passages?


I am thy Genius; and conduct thee to

Wealth, Fame, and Honour; what thou come to do

Do boldly: fear not; with this rod I charm thee;

And neither Elf nor Goblin now can harm thee.


Well, march on; if thou art my Genius, thou art bound to be

Answerable for me: I'll have thee hanged if I miscarry.


Fear not my Son.


Fear not quoth a! then prithee put on a more familiar shape: -- one of us two
stinks extremely: prithee do not come so near me: I do not love to have my face
bleach'd like a Tiffany with thy Brimstone. --


Fear not, but follow me. --


Faith I have no great mind to it: I am somewhat godly at present; but stay a
month longer and I'll be proud, and fitter for thee: in the mean time prithee
stay the stomach with some Dutchman: an Hollander with Butter will fry rarely
in Hell.


Mortal, 'tis now too late for a retreat: go on and live: step back and thou
art mine.


So I am however; first or last, but for once I'll trust thee. --


Take here the mighty Queen of good and ill;

Fortune, first Marry, then enjoy thy fill

Of lawful pleasures; but depart ever morn:

Slip from her Bed, or else thou shalt be torn

Piece-meale by Fiends; thy blood carows'd in Bowles,

And thy four quarters blown to the top of Pouls.


By your favour I'll never venture it: is marrying the business; I'll none I
thank you. --


Fortune will turn her back if twice denied.


Why she may turn her Girdle too on the other side.

This is the Devil; I will not venture on her.


Fear not; she swears thou shalt receive no harm.


I, if a man durst trust her; but the Devil is got into such an ill name for
lying.


When ever you are not pleased, it shall be lawful to sue out your Divorse.


I; but where shall I get a Lawyer? there you are aforehand with me: you have
retained most of them already -- for the favours I have received, I am very much
her servant, but in the way of Matrimony, Mr. Parson there can tell you 'tis an
Ordinance; and must not be entered into without mature deliberation: besides;
Marriages you know are made in heaven; and that I am sure this was not.


She bids you then at least, restore that Gold, which she, too lavishly, poured
out on you unthankful Man. --


Faith I have it not at present; 'tis all gone, as I am a sinner; but, 'tis
gone wickedly; all spent in the Devil her Fathers service.


Where is the grateful sense of all your favours? Come, Fiends, with
Flesh-hooks tear the wretch in pieces, and bear his Soul upon your leather
wings, below the Fountain of the dark Abyfs.


What, are you a Conjuring? if you are good at that sport, I can Conjure as
well as you --


Hold; for Heaven's sake hold, I am no spirit: touch but my hand; Ghosts have
no Flesh and Blood.


My Lady Constance! I began to suspect it might be a trick; but never could
imagine you the Author: it seems you are desirous I should Father this Hans en
Kelder here.


I know not how without a blush to tell you it was a cheat I practised for your
Love.


A mere Tympany, Sir, raised by a Cushion; you see 'tis gone already.


Setstone was sent to have acquainted you; but by the way unfortunately missed
you.


'I was you then that supplied me all this while with Money; pretty Familiar, I
hope to make thee amends ever I sleep to night: come Parson, prithee make hast
and join us. I long to be out of her debt poor Rogue.


I'll be the Clark; Amen, give you joy Mr. Bridegroom, and Mrs. Bride.


Constable. Thanks honest Setstone.


God give your worship a good even Mr. Loveby.


Hark! what noise is that? Is this Music of your providing, Setstone.


Alas, Madam, I know nothing of it.


We are betrayed to your Father, but the best on it is, he comes too late to
hinder us -- fear not, Madam, I'll bear you through them all. --

All cry out, Oh the Devil! the Devil! the Devil!


Lord bless us, Where are you Frances?


Here William! this is a judgment, as they say, upon you William; for trusting
Wits: and calling Gentlemen to the Tavern, William.


No; 'twas a Judgment upon you, for desiring Preferment at Court, Frances.
Let's call up the Watch, and Justice Trice, to have the house searched.


I, I; there's more Devils there I warrant you.


It was certainly Will. Bibber and his Wife with Music: for now I remember my
self I pointed him this hour at your Fathers house: but we frighted them worse
than they frighted us.


Our Parson run away too: -- when they cried out the Devil!


He was the wiser: for if the Devil had come ind eed, he has Preached so long
against him it would have gone hard with him.


Indeed I have always observed Parsons to be more fearful of the Devil than
other people.


Oh the Devil's the Spirit, and the Parson's the Flesh: and betwixt those two
there must be War: yet to do them both right, I think in my Conscience they
quarrel only like Lawyers for their Fees; and meet good friends in private to
laugh at their Clients.


I saw him run in at my Cousin Isabells chamber door, which was wide open; I
believe she's returned: we'll fetch a light from the Gallery, and give her joy.
--


Why is she Married, Madam?


I'll tell you as we go. --


My Lady Constance are you come again? that's well: I have waited sufficiently
for you in the dark.


Help, help, help good Christian People! the Devil, the Devils here.


'Tis I Madam; what do you mean?


Avoid Satan! avoid, avoid.


What have I here, the hairy Woman?


Ha! yonder's my Lady Constance! Who have I got, a stone-Priest by this good
Light. How's this, Loveby too!


Burr, a beating my Reverend Clergy: What make you here at this unseasonable
hour! I'll know your business --


Will you Sir? --


Set. Parson. Help, Murder, murder.


Murder, murder! beat down their weapons: Will you murder Sir Timorous, Mr.
Loveby --


ha, Burr! Thieves; thieves! Sit down good Mr. Justice, and take their
Examinations: now I shall know how my Money went.


They shall have Justice I warrant u'm.


The Justice is almost dead drunk, my Lord.


But and't please your Worship my Lord this is not the worst sight that we have
seen her to night in your Worships house, we met three or four hugeous ugly
Devils, with eyes like Sawcers, that threw down my Husband, that threw down me,
that made my heart so panck ever since, as they say.


The Devil again in my house.


Nay, here he was, that's certain; he brought me hither, I know not how my
self, and Married me; Mr Setstone there can justify it: but the best is, I
have a Charm about me that will lay him yet ever midnight.


And I Vow to Gad my Lord, I know as little how I came hither as any man.


Nor I.


Nor I.


No I dare swear dost thou not Mr. Justice.


But I wonder how the Devil durst come into our Ward, when he knows I have been
at the Duties of -- my Family -- this evening.


And please your Worship I met this couple in the street late, and so seeing
them to be man and woman, I brought u'm along with me, upon suspicion of Felony
together.


This is the proud minx that sought shelter in my house this afternoon Mr.
Justice.


Sir Timorous and Madam Isabelle! I Vow to Gad we are undone Burr. --


Do not you know me, Mr. Justice?


Justice is blind, he knows no body.


My name is Isabelle.


No, thy name is Jezabelle: I warrant you there's none but Rogues and Papists
would be abroad at this time of night.


Hold Frances. --


She's drunk I warrant her as any beast: I wonder woman you do not consider
what a crying sin Drunkenness is? Whom do you learn it from in our Parish? I'm
sure you never see me worse.


Burr and Failure; acknowledge your selves a couple of recreant Knights: Sir
Timorous is mine: I have won him in fair Field from you.


Give you joy Cousin, -- give you joy!


Married!


And in Diana's Grove boy.


Why 'tis fine by heaven; 'tis wondrous fine; as the Poet goes on sweetly.


I am sure they had gagged me, and bound me, and stripped me almost stark naked,
and locked me up as fast as a Butterfly, till she came and made me a man again;
and therefore I have reason to love her the longest day I have to live.


I, and the longest night too, or you are to blame. And you have one argument I
love you, if the proverb be true, for I took you almost in your bare shirt.


So much for us Failure!


Well my Lord, it had as good at first as at last: I must beg your Lordships
blessing for this Gentleman and my self.


Why you are not Married to him I hope! he's Married to the Devil.


'Twas a white Devil of your Lordships getting then; Mr. Setstone, and the
Reverend here can witness it.


Par. We must speak truth my Lord.


Would I had another Child for your sake, you should ne'er see penny of my money.


Thank you my Lord; but methinks 'tis much better as 'tis.


Come Nuncle 'tis in vain to hold out now 'tis past remedy: 'tis like the last
Act of a Play when people must Marry; and if fathers will not consent then,
they should throw Oranges at them from the Galleries: why should you stand off
to keep us from a Dance?


But there's one thing still that troubles me, that's her great belly, and my
own too.


Nay for mine my Lord, 'tis vanished already: 'twas but a trick to catch the
old one.


But I'll do my best; she shall not be long without another.


But as for your great belly Nuncle, I know no way to rid you on it but by
taking out your guts.


'Tis such a pretty smart rascal; 'tis well I am pleased with my own choice;
but I could have got such Hectors and Poets and Gamesters out of thee


No, no; two Wits could never have lived well together; want would have so
sharpened you upon one another.


A Wit should naturally be joined to a fortune; by the same reason your
Vintners feed their hungry Wines.


And if Sir Timorous and I had married; we two fortunes must have built
Hospitals with our Money, we could never have spent it else.


Or what think you of paying Courtiers debts with it.


Well, to show I am in charity with my Enemies, I'll make a motion: while we
are in Town let us hire a large house, and live together: Burr and Failure. --


Shall be utterly discarded; I knew 'twould come to that I vow to gad.


Shall be our Guests.


And Bibber shall make our Wedding Clothes without trusting.


No, hence forward I'll trust none but landed men; and such as have houses and
apple-trees in the Country: now I have got a Place in the Customehouse.


Nothing vexes me, but that this flirting Gentlewoman should go before me; but
I'll to the Heralds Office, and see whether the Queens Majesties Dresser should
not take place of any Knights Wife in Christendom.


Now all will out -- no more good Frances.


I will speak, that I will, so I will: what! shall I be a Dresser to the Queens
Majesty, and no body must know on it; I'll send Mr. Church-warden word on it; and
Gentlemen, when you come to St. Brides Church (if ever you come to Church
Gentlemen) you shall see me in the Pew that's next the Pulpit; thank Mr.
Loveby's Worship for it.


Spare your thanks good Landlady, for the truth is we came too late, the Place
is gone; and so is yours Will; but you shall have 200 l. for One, if that will
satisfy you.


This is better news as they say.


Cheer up thy Wife Will: where are they fiddles? a dance should do it:


I'll run and call u'm.


I have found out that will comfort her: henceforward I christen her by the
name of Madam Bibber.


A Madam Bibber, A Madam Bibber.


Why, I thank you sweet Gentlemen and Ladies, this is a Cordial to my drooping
spirits: I confess I was a little eclipsed; but I'll cheer up with abundance of
love, as they say. Strike up Fiddles. --


That's a good Wench.


This Music, and a little nod has recovered me; I'll in and provide for the
Sack-Posset.


To bed, to bed; 'tis late: Son Loveby get me a boy to night, and I'll settle
three thousand a year upon him the first day he calls me Grandsire.


I'll do my best.

To make the bargain sure before I sleep.
Where Love and money strike, the blow goes deep.

The Wild Gallant has quite played out his game;
He's married now, and that will make him tame;
Or if you think Marriage will not reclaim him,
The Critiques swear they'll damn him, but they'll tame him,
Yet though our Poet's threatened most by these,
They are the only People he can please:
For he to humour them, has shown to day,
That which they only like, a wretched Play:
But though his Play be ill, here have been shown
The greatest Wits, and Beauties of the Town,
And his Occasion having brought you here
You are too grateful to become severe.
There is not any Person here so mean,
But he may freely judge each Act and Scene:
But if you bid him choose his Judges then,
He boldly names true English Gentlemen:
For he ne'er thought a handsome Garb or Dress,
So great a Crime to make their Judgment less:
And with these Gallants he these Ladies joins,
To judge that Language their Converse refines.
But if their Censures should condemn his Play,
Far from Disputing, he does only pray
He may Leanders Destiny obtain:
Now spare him, drown him when he comes again.
OF all Dramatique Writing, Comic Wit,
As 'tis the best, so 'tis most hard to hit.
For it lies all in level to the eye,
Where all may judge, and each defect may spy.
Humour is that which every day we meet,
And therefore known as every public street;
In which, if ever the Poet go astray
You all can point, 'twas there he lost his way,
But, What's so common, to make pleasant too,
Is more then any wit can always do.
For 'tis, like Turks, with Hen and Rice to treat;
To make regalio's out of common meat.
But, in your Diet you grow Salvages:
Nothing but Humane flesh your taste can please:
And, as their Feasts with slaughtered slaves began,
So you, at each new Play must have a Man.
Hither you come, as to see Prizes fought;
If no Blood's drawn, you cry the Prize is nought.
But fools grow wary now; and when they see
A Poet eyeing round the Company,
Straight each man for himself begins to doubt;
They shrink like Seamen when a Press comes out.
Few of 'em will be found for Public use,
Except you charge an Oph upon each house,
Like the Train-Bands, and every man engage
For a sufficient Fool to serve the Stage.
And, when with much ado you get him there,
Where he in all his glory should appear,
Your Poets make him such rare things to say,
That he's more wit than any Man in the Play.
But of so ill a mingle with the rest,
As when a Parrat's taught to break a jest.
Thus aiming to be fine, they make a show
As tawdry Squires in Country Churches do.
Things well considered, 'tis so hard to make
A Comedy, which should the knowing take:
That our dull Poet, in despair to please,
Does humbly beg by me his Writ of ease.
'Tis a Land-tax, which he's too poor to pay;
You, therefore must some other Impost lay.
Would you but change for serious Plot and Verse
This mottley garniture of Fool and Farce,
Nor scorn a Mode, because 'tis taught at home,
Which does, like Vests, our Gravity become;
Our Poet yields you should this Play refuse,
As Tradesmen by the change of fashions, lose
With some content their fripperies of France,
In hope it may their staple Trade advance.

