Ladies, you're welcome, -- and we hope you're all sharp set,
Good Appetites excuse a homely Treat;
This was intended for our selves alone,
From whom our Masters feared no cens'ring frown:
But awed, and dazzled by your piercing eyes,
(For, though expected, you like Death surprise)
They humbly bow, -- and beg a kind excuse,
For straitened time, and a disordered House;
Hoping, the want of practice, fitting dress,
And glorious Scenes, may make our failings less:
As if defects could purchase good success.
This might appease an accidental Guest;
But you're invited, and expect a Feast:
Enlarged hopes, and longing looks y'have brought,
Fine Dances, Songs, and Show, swell every thought:
Such things our Masters meant; but strove so fast
To win the prize, we fall with too much hast.
Like eager Gardeners, that make Nature post
The Flowers to early births, which being forced,
Their sweet perfume and native beauty's lost.
If we miscarry, let them feel the smart,
They hardly gave us time to read a Part:
Yet -- if we're out, -- I fear 'twill break my heart. --
Courage! be gone dull fear, and sullen doubt:
The Cause! the Cause we fight shall bear us out.
Beauties Triumph, -- Beauty! your joy and care,
The crown of Peace, and the reward of War.
Ladies, Your interest your assistance calls;
Your Empire's lost if Beauties Triumph falls:
If any Lover his applause denies,
Kill the Rebel, -- stab him with your eyes.
Sound a charge, -- we will nor take no quarter,
She that falls is Educations Martyr.

STern Fate relent, change thy obdurate will,
Can thou without remorse see Monarchs kneel?
For every moment added to our breath,
We will send whole Hecatombs of Slaves to death.
O gentle Fate my beauty spare;
Is there no pity for the Fair?
All the Stars and the Glories my Lovers e're gave,
I'll part from to buy a release from the Grave.
Shall a Hero whose valour no force e're o'recame,
Submit his great heart to an Aerie name?
Thou Deity of slaves and fools,
Let me and my Subjects alone,
Or I'll pull thee from thy gloomy Throne,
And make thy Spinsters quit their tools.
We court the fate from which they fly,
For death, for death the wretched cry,
Oh change our doom, Oh change our doom, Oh change our doom
Or let us dye.
We court, c.
Mortals give over,
In vain like raging Seas your passions roar,
In vain for pity you implore:
The fixed decrees which Fate has passed,
No threats or prayers can stop or hast;
The Vassal shall tread
On the Conquerour's head;
And the Beggar that lies
In the dust shall arise
To a Crown,
While Usurpers and Tyrants fall down:
Fate crops the gayest, sweetest Rose,
While the prickly Thistle grows;
The creeping Bramble still looks green,
When he lops the lofty Pine:
Some shall love and sigh in vain,
For her that is by others slighted,
And the coyest Nymphs disdain
Shall be requited
By as proud a Swain.
Some shall dye laughing, and some shall dye sad,
For the deformed the fair shall be mad,
And the glittering Sceptre be changed to a Spade.
Some shall, c.
For the deformed, c.
And the glittering, c.

With cares and contrivance their Fate to avoid,
Men lose the short pleasures that may be enjoyed;
Their fears are too swift, and their wishes too late,
For nothing can alter the dictates of Fate.
With cares, c.

Give over --
Spin no more lives, burn all the sacred Tow,
Let hasty births to sudden fun'rals go,
Till the vast world a second Chaos know.

Dread King of all the skies great lights, disclose

What weighty cause
Obstructs thy Laws,

What does thy haughty spirit discompose?

Juno and Pallas with proud Venus join,
The awful Throne of Fate to undermine:
Ungrateful powers! I'll break your close design.
Hoe Discord! hoe! --
Whence come thou, Minion, from the shades below?
Or from dark caves where struggling winds do grow?

Ah -- no!
In Courts and Cities now I dwell;
The sullen man and wanton wife,
Have more employment found for strife,
Then all the winds
The Seaman finds,
Or all the Fiends in Hell.
c.

From the Hesperian Tree with nimble wing,
The fairest, largest golden Apple bring:
Hast! hast! I sealed the watchful Dragons eyes.

Great Ruler of the World, thy Servant flies.

When power and wisdom with beauty unite,
Mankind will be drowned in such Seas of delight,
My frowns they'll despise, and my favours they'll slight.
Proud Deities, dare you oppose my Yoke,
When your poor petty Cobweb plots are broke?
I'll make you cringe and tremble at my stroke.
The fiercest Gods with all their Titles swelled,
Even Jove himself to Destiny shall yield.
The fiercest Gods, c.
Even Jove, c.

Be gone, to Ida's flowery Mount make hast,
There thou shalt find
Three Goddesses joined,
And by Concord embraced;
Before their eyes this gilded poison cast:
Take all the Furies with fierce Adders curled,
Let their envenom d^spight a' round be hurl^d,
And ghastly mischief fright the sleepy world.
Take all the Furies, c.

What hoe! you dismal hags, --
What hoe! you dismal hags, -- that hate the light,
Daughters of dreadful Styx, and dreary Night;
You snaky Sisters rise with threatening hands,
Shake your steeled whips, and wave your smokey brands.

The news, --

The news, --

The news,

The news, fierce Discord, quickly tell the news.

Listen dire messengers of angry fate.

Enough,

Enough,

Enough, we will about it strait.

Enough, we will about it strait.

Lean Virtue shall down with her barren reward,
When Discord comes on she'll no longer be heard.

Great Power, and Wisdom, and Beauty we will sever,

And singly destroy what would conquer together:

The fair shall be foolish, the wise shall be mad,
And by their delusions the great be misled.
c.

The Gallant shall swear, and the Nymph shall be kind,
But both shall prove false to the Love they designed:

The wise shall for power and wealth be too zealous;

The great of their plotting and pride shall be jealous.

And when the whole World's in confusion again,
The Furies and Discord shall pleasantly reign.
c.

Our Sacred Union all the Gods approve,
And send this thundering message from above,
To grace the Sister and the Wife of Jove.
Iris my swift Embassadress, be gone,
Clap thy light wings and shining colours on,
And let our Union round the world be known.

Great Queen of Gods, and Empress of the Skies,
Whose fair plumed team adorned with Argus eyes,
Eclipse the splendour of my brightest Dyes:
My painted Throne with watery Clouds I'll build,
Which with more various colours shall be filled,
Then flowery Springs, or gaudy Summers yield.
When wondering Mortals from their houses run,
To see my Glories far out-shine the Sun,
The will of Royal Iuno shall be known.

Rich Embassies the wills of Kings declare:
What then should mine, to whom great Monarchs are
Like twinkling Glow-worms to the Morning-Star?

Is this the Union, this the equal sway?
I'll rather Fate's than Iuno's power obey:
The will of Royal Iuno --
And is not Venus worthy of a name?
My Beauty's greater, and as great my Fame.

Fair Queen of Love, let not the rash mistake
Of that untutored Maid a difference make;
My honour is an equal suff'rer made,
And with your fame shall Pallas shine or fade:
But let not Passion be too fast obeyed.
Passion commits more crimes then it can find,
It shakes the soul like a tempestuous wind;
The Senses slave, but Tyrant of the mind.

Sister of much-lov'd Mars, Goddess of Arms,
Thy Prudence conquers whom thy Beauty warms,
I yield as all must to thy pow'rfull charms.

Iuno does private power in vain pursue,
While Beauties Goddess is to Pallas true;
Beauty and Wit the highest powers subdue.


Ascend and from thy party-colour'd bow,
Proclaim it to the listening world below.
Now Fate, deluded mortals shall no more
Dread thy feigned Laws, and thy fantastic power,
But with glad hearts our sacred Shrines adore.
Our Rites were lost, our Temples were profaned,
No Praise or Sacrifice our Altars gained,
No power, forsooth, could change what Fate ordained.

So far this wild Imposture has been hurled,
Gypsies and Star-gazers command the world.

They are Fate's Viceroys, dispose of every heart;
From Sacred Love the giddy Youth depart,
And marry by the Stars: -- vain rules of Art.

Iuno's not called to kindle Hymen's fire,
And bless the Nuptial-bed with chaste desire,
But Fate with Avarice base knots conspire.

Then bloody Discord with a Hellish throng
Of Furies, howl the Hymeneal Song,
And make the hated Marriage-night seem long.

They rise, seek lawless Love in several rooms,
And cry, Alas! who can avoid their dooms?
Thus rigid Fate a gentle Bawd becomes.

Then with unhallowed breath they spot my name,
And on my Innocence would lay their shame;
I cherish none but chaste and virtuous flame.

The lazy drone lies stretched upon the floor,
Cries, Destiny compels him to be poor:
He lies, -- What am not I the Queen of Power?

The wild debauch against Heaven makes open War,
And lays his crimes upon his harmless Star,
As if that caused that did the guilt declare.

Mankind no more in slav'ry shall remain,
Long banished Justice shall to Earth again,
And Virtue over insulting Fate shall reign.
I'll give her power unlimited to share
The highest blessings of the Field or Chair,
Among the good, the painful, chaste and fair.

Prudence I'll give, and an enlightened mind,
To teach her where she may be wisely kind.

Beauty I'll give in blooming youth enshrin'd;
Beauty which Monarchs more than Empire prize,
Which makes the Hero brave, and States-man wise;
For which the wretched lives, and happy dies.

Fortune shall still command the ignorant Fool,
But those that live in spotless Virtue's School,
Over the severest Destiny shall rule.

Hail mighty Queens of conquered Fate.

Quickly thy progress and success relate.

No sooner from my arched Throne,
Which with unusual Beauties shone,
Did I Fate's sudden fall proclaim,
But every word by greedy Fame
Was to a thousand echoes sent,
And posted through each Element;
Like Lightning 'twas dispersed a-round,
And Thunder echoed from the ground:
Such joyful shouts were upward sent,
As shook Heavens lofty battlement:
My painted bow their vigour felt,
And to a pearlie shower did melt.
Hark! the impatient Crowd draws near,
To let their hasty joys appear;
Two of Fate's notorious cheats,
About the Mount the Rabble beats.

In yond bright cloud concealed let's lye,
While the rejoicing Crowd pass by.

Be gone you Deluders, your Traffic is over,
Your Figures and Canting shall cheat us no more.
Come, come away,
To solemnize this happy day;
With joyful cries
Let's rend the skies,
For Fortune's fall is Virtue's rise.
Sing, sing aloud,
And you that love the coy or proud,
No more complain,
But choose again,
For Fate must yield to Virtue's reign.
c.

Fortune's a drab, though the fool and the knave
Proclaim her a Goddess, and Court her;
Because they deserve not the blessings they have,
They think the blind Quean their supporter:
But the wise and the brave
Still make her a slave,
They laugh at her frowns and her favour,
And now the deceiver
Is ruined for ever,
Her Cracks and her Cullies shall leave her.
The Iilt to her own rouling-wheel shall be tied,
And the three Fatal Sisters be hanged in their thread.
c.
I love and am loved, but dare not declare
The beauty that reigns in my breast,
She's smoother then Lillies, she's softer then Air,
She's all that can make a man blessed:
But alas she's confined to the pleasure
Of one more unhappy then I;
An Indian that knows not the worth of his treasure,
But slights that for which I would dye.
The Dragon still wakes, and guards with fierce eyes
The fruit which he cares not to taste,
But Virtue and Honour are watchfuller spies,
Their tyranny ever will last:
When in secret our flames we discover,
We bow to the Laws they ordain,
How short are the joys of a virtuous Lover,
But Ah there's no end of his pain!
Joy sits smiling on each brow,
In each dimpl^d cheek's a furrow,
Made by mirth to bury sorrow;
All are happy, -- All are happy now,
Only Celia's cruel, cruel, cruel eye,
Dooms Amintor still to dye.

Poor Amintor's doomed to dye.

Poor Amintor's doomed to dye.

Poor Amintor's doomed to dye.

Celia c

Oh Amintor hide thy pains,
If thy tempting tongue had won me,
Lawless passion had undone me,
Sacred Virtue, -- Sacred Virtue reigns.
All that Virtue, All that Virtue grants I'll give,
For thy hopeless love I'll grieve,

And Amintor still shall live.

Celia bids Amintor live.

Celia bids, c.
c.

Then the longing eyes may gaze,
In each others beams uniting,
And the trembling hands uniting,
Break not Virtues, -- Break not Virtues Laws.
Chastest Vestals, Chastest Vestals thus may kiss,
Thus may Saints repeat their bliss,

Virtue will not blush at this.

Virtue will, c.

Virtue will, c.
c.

Hold, fond Shepherd, keep thy vow,
Love denied 's an humble waiter,
But a bold insulting traitor,
When the Virtuous, -- when the Virtuous bow.
Dear Amintor, Dear Amintor pray give over,
Celia cannot grant thee more,
Alas she would but has not power.

Virtue, makes thy Celia poor.

Virtue, c.

Virtue, c.
Amintor, c.

Let's love, and let's laugh, let's dance, and let's sing,
While shrill echoes ring,
Our wishes agree, and from cares we are free,
Then who are so happy, so happy as we.
We press the soft Grass, each Swain with his Lass,
Or follow the chase,
When weary we be, we sleep under a Tree,
And who are so happy, so happy as we.
By flatt'ry or fraud no Shepherd's betrayed,
Or cheats the fond Maid,
No false supple knee to deceive us we see,
Then who are so happy, so happy as we.
We envy no power, nor cannot be poor,
Who wish for no more;
Some richer may be, and of higher degree,
But none are so happy, so happy as we.
Now injured Fate thy gloomy den forsake,
Raise all thy forces from the Stygian Lake;
Thy foes are mighty, and thy Crown's the stake.
Burning Ambition and revengeful Pride,
Heart-gnawing Envy, and all ill beside,
Attend, and Hell and Furies be your guide.
Ho, ho, ho, hoe, 'tis done, 'tis done:
Methinks I see the frighted world look pale,
And Nature to her secret mansion crawl,
As if she feared an everlasting fall.
To Ida's Mount the striving powers retire,
Prophetic Spirits my hot brains inspire,
And swell my thoughts with ruin, blood and fire.
Venus obtains the prize from Priam's Son:
Good, good, then Rapes and Murders shall be done,
Whose stories shall make future Ages groan.
Now Fate, let thy tormenting Furies rest,
Since my wild Empire's fixed in every breast,
The Goddesses themselves shall do the rest.
Virtue shall into several factions fall;
Strictness, Pride; Freedom, it shall Looseness call:
Where Discord raigns, swift ruin swallows all.
Tell me dearest Oenone,
Why such sadness clouds my Sun;
A pearly deluge from thy eyes,
Spreads thy rosie cheeks around,
Where poor Cupid mourning lies,
To see his World of beauty drowned.

Oh my Paris, Oh my Swain,
Thou darling of the flowery Plain,
I fear -- But Ah my grief's too much to speak,
I fear, I fear my swelling heart will break.

Has the fierce Woolf devoured a bleating Lamb,
Or robbed the Fondling of his Dam?

Ah! -- no, those losses are
Which changing time or prudent care
Would soon repair.

Say what does thy heart invade,
I conjure thee, charming Maid,
By those secret Bowers,
Which the twining Myrtles shade;
By those banks of flowers,
Where our sacred vows were made;
By the Spring, and by the Grove,
And by the soft delights of Love.

Among the sweets this Garland bears,
Say which the greatest glory wears.

That --
Whose bright leaves round yellow seeds are grown,
Like sparkling Gems about a Golden Crown.

That does my sudden sorrow move,
It will I fear thy Emblem prove,
That gaudy flower's called Shepherd's Love.
How far his sweet perfumes do spread,
How proudly shines his painted head:
A dazzling Crown's less gay then this,
And that excels Arabian Spice.
c.
How proudly, c.
A dazzling, c.
And that, c.

My Shepherdess more glorious shows,
And sweeter breath perfumes her vows.

But e're yond' Sun the world survey,
And chase a second night away,
This glory of the Spring will fade,
And shrink into perpetual shade.

His stalk will stoop,

His head will droop,

His fragrant scents will fly;

His beauteous leaves no more will shine,

But this proud Shepherds love will die,

And so alas, and so I fear will thine.

The Sun shall be fixed, the Earth shall remove,
But never shall Paris be false to his Love.

And will you always be thus kind to me?

By all those powers that our actions see
I will. --

Yet! yet! yet you may deceive.

O cruel! will you ne'er believe?

I do, I do, and will no longer grieve.

We will love while we live, and we will live without care,
Together we will dye, and we will make but one Star,
To which happy Lovers shall offer their prayer.
We will love, c.
Together, c.
To which, c.

Hail thou most beauteous youth, hail Princely Swain!
Thou pride of Shepherds, glory of the Plain!
The motto on this Golden Apple writ,
Three pow'rfull Goddesses at strife has set;
Let it be given to her that is most fair,
Thy prudent Judgment must their right declare.
To thee their doubtful Titles they submit,
Thou now art Lord of Beauty, Power, and Wit.

Iuno thou declare,
Crowns and Empire are thy share;
Laurels on thy brow I'll shower,
And all the tempting sweets of power.

Oh how sweet it is to reign!
How delightful 'tis to see
The begging eye and bended knee,
To hear the gilded Palace ring
With praises of the King:
Kings are Gods, and from the lofty Throne,
On all the rest of men look down;
All bow to them, but they submit to none.
With frowns they kill,
And with a smile
More ravishing delights they move,
Then all the fading sweets of Love.
Pleasure and Treasure and Beauty are theirs,
To sweeten their Cares;
All Nature gives or Art can find,
To please the sense and ease the mind,
The Gods for Monarchs did ordain:
Oh how sweet it is to reign!
Pallas gain the envied prize,
Though thou to Empire dost not rise,
Great Monarchs shall yield
To thy Counsel at home, and thy Sword in the field.

Why should short-liv'd mortals strive to gain
Gilded cares and glorious pain,
'Tis not powers boundless sway,
Nor all the guards that wait upon
A shining Throne,
Can drive intruding care away.
Wisdom's sacred power can bind
The raging passions of the mind,
He that has attained to that,
Is the Emperor of Fate.
Rough tempests that make Kingdoms roll,
Against his breast in vain do beat,
They cannot shake his fixed soul,
But must like vanquished waves retreat.
No restless wish, no trembling fear,
Or fierce despair can enter there;
Vain love, cold death, or hasty time,
Have neither darts nor wings for him;
When life forsakes his quiet breast,
He does but change his place of rest:
'Tis he, 'tis he alone is blessed.

None shall be so blessed as thee;
Killing eyes and charming faces,
Beauties decked with all the Graces,
Shall submit to thy embraces.

When Beauty armed with smiling eyes,
And in betraying features dressed,
For wandering hearts in Ambush lies,
She beats the valiant, cheats the wise,
And gains a Throne in every breast;
To so many bright forms she varies her shape,
No God nor no Hero can ever escape.
Who pleasing looks and mirth disdain,
She wounds with more Majestic Art,
And where the haughty men proves vain,
Such pearlie showers of tears she'll rain,
As can dissolve the hardest heart:
So deep is her cunning, so sweet is hes stroke,
That all must be subject to Beauties soft yoke.
But Oh how sweet 'tis to possess
The secret wishes beauty move,
The joys no language can express,
Nor any wretched mortal guess,
That has not tried successful love;
Such raptures of pleasure from Beauty proceed,
That none but true Lovers are happy indeed.
The wise and the great
To Beauty submit,
It reigns in the Study, and conquers in fight;
Then let my fair Mistress for ever be true,
And Beauty shall Power and Wisdom subdue.
So sweet are her charms,
I'll quit without terms,
The splendour of Empire and Trophies of Arms;
Oh let me be blessed in my dear Oenone,
And give the Ambitious the Mitre and Crown.
Thy fondness, silly Shepherd, shall destroy
The late enlarged Monarchy of Troy;
When Grecian Swords and Fire thy house devour,
No God shall guard thee from my injured power.

I'll your infatuated minds prepare,
To urge swift ruin and destructive War;
Neglected Wisdom near that fatal hour,
Shall leave the City, when I quit the Tower.

Saturn's proud daughter, to thy office hie,
Go mind thy Match-making and Midwifrie.
And what's dame Pallas with her pining train?
A sordid Insect, bred of Iove's hot brain.
Go threaten Children with your Bug-bear rods,
My Son, my Husband, and Gallant are Gods.
Love! -- Love's thy Province! -- let Fools and Stoics care,
I rule the mighty Gods of Fire, Love, and War.

To the Grove, gentle Love, let us be going,
Where the kind spring and wind all day are wooing;
He with soft sighing blasts strives to o'retake her,
She would not, though she flies, have him forsake her.

But in circling rings returning,
And in purling whispers mourning,
She swells and pants as if she'd say,
Fain I would but dare not stay.

Strait he gets all the sweets on the banks spreading,
Which he brings on his wings where his Nymph's hiding,
In some close hollow creek kind Nature shades her,
In the green Willow tree he Serenades her.

-- And to gain her chaste embraces,
Sends his notes to losty places;
In calms they lye and seem to say,
Stormy care drives love away.

-- There the loud busy Crowd never shall part us,
Nor no kind fawning friend from love divert us;
We will to each other be friends, fame and treasure,
And no unruly thought shall stain our pleasure.

-- Time and Nature ever smiling,
Shall forget their Arts of killing;
And all the Gods aloud shall say,
Love so chaste should ne'er decay.

Oh, how delightful is Love, and how strong,
When Beauty and Virtue are joined in the young.
c.
When, c.

The flashes of Vices intemperate joys,
Are haunted with noise of Drunkards and Boys:

And when the short blaze of Beauty decays,
With spite and contempt on the ashes they gaze.
c.
When, c.

For the ruin of Virtuous Beauties are still,
Adored like old Temples where Deities dwell.

Fair Virtue keeps love still alive in the heart,
When Age has overcome Youth, Beauty and Art.
Oh how, c.
When, c.

LIke cloistered Nuns with virtuous zeal inspired,
From public noise, and vicious ease retired,
Here we have all that's by the good admired.
While thus the loosest of our time is spent,
'Tis advantageous, sweet, and innocent.
And when our thoughts to serious things are bent,
One in rich works with lively colours tells
Lucretia's Rape, or mourning Philomels:
Each chaste beholder sighs and drops a tear,
To burn the well-wrought Silk they scarce forbear,
So sad and moving does the work appear:
Oh that the Ravisher were here! one cries,
Thus would I rend the bloody Tyrant's eyes;
Then for his crime some harmless Flower dyes,
Whose falling head, as if indeed 'twere pained,
Sheds dewy tears upon the murth'rers hand.
Some Hero's praise in sacred Verse kept long,
Another sings to th'Lute --
While every string seems turned into a tongue,
And sends soft echoes to the joyful Song.
Another different mind more pleasure takes,
In various forms to mould the painted Wax;
Such shape, such beauty in each piece is shown,
Nature sits pale, or blushing on her own,
To see her pride by curious Art out-done.
While buzzing Infamy, with venomed wing,
Haunts clam'rous pleasures that in Cities ring,
Thus we enjoy the sweets without the sting.
When riper age with flattering care's oppressed,
Toiled with false joys, 'twill sadly be confessed,
Of all our lives these happy hours were best.

