SInce Heroes Ghosts, and Gods have felt your spite:
Your She Familiars, and your dear delight;
The Devils shall try their power, w'ee to night:
Some do believe that Devils ne'er have been,
Because they think, none can be worse then them:
But Female Sprights by all are felt and seen.
You see our Study is to please you all:
Lets not by stiff Tom Thimbles faction fall;
Whose censures are mere ign'rance in disguise,
The noise of envious fools, that would seem wise.
If Bacons Brazen-head cry -- that won't pass,
Strayt all the little Fops are turned to brass,
And Echo to the braying of that Ass:
Although we take their shapes and senseless sounds,
Lets not be worryd by our own dull Hounds:
Let not their noise that got your Money there,
Deprave your Judgments, and your pleasure here.
Ye men of Sense and Wit, resume your Reign.
They are honoured who by noble Foes are slain;
Such comforts wounded Lovers have who swear,
When their tormenting pains are most severe,
Dam'ee!
It does not vex me to be Clapped by her:
Gad she was handsome, though the sport is dear.
But who in your sight at their mercy lies,
Much like an Eastern Malefactor dyes,
Exposed in the Sun to be devoured by flies.
Let Language, Wit and Plot, this Night be safe,
For all our business is to make you laugh.

WHAT a noise they make!


A roaring noise, we shall have foul weather.


The Dogs have us in the Wind, 'twill go hard.


Hectorio! Hectorio!


Hectorio! Hectorio! Hectorio!


Here here Mother, what cheer, what cheer.


Never worse, never worse, barr up the Doors, barr up the Doors: Oh! Oh!


Barr up the Doors, barr up the Doors.


Let's make all fast enough, and let'm roar the Devils head off.


Beantosser, Beantosser.


Beantosser, Beantosser, Beantosser.


Why where is this damned deaf flunder mouthed drab?


Here here, a pox of these full mouthed Fox hounds.


They hunt devilish hard, I'm affrai'd they'll earth us.


Give Hectorio a dram of the Bottle, the Whey-Blooded Rogue looks as if his
heart were melted into his Breeches.


Bear up, bear up my brave Amazons, you've born Ten times as many men in your
times, beigh my Girls, stand fast my stout bona Roba's; run, fly, work nimbly,
nimbly ye Queens, or all's lost.


Good friend, stand to thy tackling, and play the Man: where's Mother
Stephania.


Prithee old Goat tie up thy Clack, and move thy hands.


Friend, friend, look thee, bridle thy unruly member -- to wit, thy tongue.


Work, work, my heart of Gold.


Ha, ha, ha, my Father to whom thou spoke so unadvisedly is Duke of that
building which do-eth sustain my Lord Mayors Cattle, Vidicilet, his Dogs.


Fill the sweating Tub with Stones, and set it against the Door, quick, quick.




He is moreover perpetual Whiffler to the Worshipful company of Pin-makers, as
I my self am.


Confound thy Father and thy self. Pin-makers.? Silence, and to work, or I'll
ram thee into a Chamber-pot, and throw thee out at Window.


Stir, Wenches, stir, bring out all the Jourdans full of Water.


The Jourdans, the Jourdans, c.


Send a Legion of Devils down their yelling throats to pluck their lungs out.
-- Out ye bawling Curs, ye ill-bred hounds, here are Whores enough for you all,
All, if you would behave your selves like civil Gentlemen, and come one after
another.

Down, down, down to the Cellar Windows. --


The Cellar Windows, the Cellar Windows.


Undone, undone, not one drop of Water in the house.


With hard labour all their moisture turns into sweat.


They are dryer then hung Beef, and almost as black too.


Your advice, your advice Mother.


Dispatch, or we're ruined. --


Get up in the Windows, you musty Queens, make water in their Eyes, and burn
em out, I'm fure you're hot enough. --


Turn out, turn out all hands to the Back door: is this a time to prate ye
spurr-gald jades, ye over-rid Hackneys. --


O you huffing Son of a Whore.


You rotten Jack in a box.


You foul mouthed Nickumpoop.


Prate on, prate on, do ye hear how it Thunders? -- stand still and be damned,
I'll shift well enough for one.


Turn out, turn out Seditious mutiners, ye or I'll have ye all flayed -- Out,
out!


More noise and terror then a Tempest at Sea.


The green Chamber, the green Chamber.


Aloft, aloft, to the green Chamber, all to the green Chamber -- Aloft, aloft.
--


My Honour, my Reputation. --


Yea! Reputation, Reputation! -- Woo man, ah! ha!


Reputation! ye crop-ear'd whelps, Reputation! is not my Reputation dearer to
me then your lives, and Souls? Down with the Close stool upon their heads.

You louzy farandinical Sots, Reputation! I have had Lords -- Lords! thou
whey-bearded Ananias, and then I had a blessing on my endeavours; but this is
justly fallen upon me, for dealing with such zealous Whore-masters, thin-gutted
3 d. Customers -- Out of my sight, and to work, or by the beards of my renowned
Predceestors I'll have you hung out like Wool-sacks to defend my Walls. See if
thou can preach the Rabble to Silence, thou canting Hypocritical Abednego.


Yea, thou babylonish Whore in grain, thou Harlot of a London dye, thou shalt
see the strength of the power of a um -- Thou shalt see, I say, look ye
Friends, Brethren and Sisters -- Give heedful attention, and a, and I say a um
--


We are gone, we are gone, they are all broke in the Closet Window,


Hell, and Devils, they are untiling of the House.


Let off the Bottles of Stepony, they may think they are Guns.


Clap up the middle hatch with the Iron spikes.


Take down the false Stairs.


Open the Trap-door, that falls into the Common-shoar.


Hang up the tenter Hooks. --


Set the great Chest against the stair Door.


To the great Chest, the great Chest.



Heave Cats, heave -- cheerily, cheerily.

-- Murder, murder, murder.


Oh, you obstreperous Woolves, a Rot consume your Windpipes, you're louder then
the rabble.


O, this base, this cursed business!


Cursed business, thou invincible Fop, thou Brazen headed Ignoramus -- Hast
thou a mind to be limbed? one word more, and all the Doors shall fly open:
Cursed business, with a pox to ye.

Come tag-rag-and long-tail, Old Satin, Taffeta, and Velvet, rouse about,
charge 'em briskly, shower the Coals on their pates. -- He calls Wenching, base
cursed business -- Oh you rake Hells, sons of unknown Fathers.


Hell take 'em, they clime the Walls like Cats.


Down with the Tables and Stools upon 'em.


Sound a Parle, sound a Parle, or they'll break in upon us -- There's no hope
left.


A Parle, thou impudent miscreant! false hearted Caitiff I'll rather like a
noble Roman Virago, make my House my Funeral pile.


All are resolved not to fight a stroke more, sound a Parle but to gain time.


To delude the Foe I consent, but never to yield.


Hark, they answer us.


Go you Drinkallup, and see what they will demand.


Here's a Plenipotentiary desires admittance.


Let him be blinded, and introduced by the Postern -- Casement -- Come fellow
Soldiers, lets sit in State, and receive him with undaunted Countenances, as
blustering Warriors do, though we are like to dye for fear.

Master of our Ceremonies, introduce the Plenipotentiary.


Fellow Soldiers 'tis a Maxim in War to treat with our Arms in our hands --
(Guard, deliver us your Weapons) -- and while we talk of peace to prepare for
a Battle; therefore Guard go you and mend the backs of the Chairs.

Plenipotentiary, be not dismayed with the glittering Splendour of our Court,
but boldly deliver what thou hast in Charge. --


My Master, the many-headed-monster-Multitude, to save the great effusion of
Christian Chamberly, will grant you peace on these terms.


Say on.


First, they demand the Dominion of the Straights mouth, and all the
Mediterranean Sea -- That every Frigate, Fireship, you have, shall strike, furl
up their sail, and lye by to the least of their Cock-boats, where-ever they
meet, and receive a man aboard to search for prohibited Goods, and permit him
to romage fore and oft without resistance. --


Umph. -- My friends, this is very hard.


Secondly, That all their Vessels shall have and enjoy a free-trade into and
out of all your Ports without paying any Custom. --


The duties of Importation are my greatest Revenue, and must not be parted
with.


But though your People pay for import, we will engage to pay them at going
off.


As we have always done heretofore.


Lastly, That you re-imburse the charge of the War, pay for the Cure of the
wounded, and the recov'ry of those that have surfeited on your rotten Ling and
Poys'nous Oil, and allow Pensions for those that are dismembered -- What say
ye, Peace, or War?


War.


War, War, War.


Return for answer, that we will rather dye at their Feet, then submit to such
dishonourable Conditions: -- Begone: -- And so she prayed me to tell ye.


Though you refuse peace, I scorn to carry back my present, -- there.


We scorn their Courtesies, and their dry toys.


Are ye so fierce? if the Seige continue, you'll Petition for 'em: look for Fire
and Sword -- And so she prayed me to tell you.


Arm, Arm, give the word, Arm, Arm.


Arm, Arm.


Arm, Arm, Arm,


Many a brush have I gon through in my time, but never was any so sharp.


S'death, our Ammunition's spent, the dear dear dyet-drink's gone.


And yet these Cannibals, more insatiate then the Sea, are not satisfied with
our best goods; pull up the Harths, and down with the Chimneys.


'Tis in vain to strive.


Thou Cow-hearted cormorant, shall we be all lost for thee?


No, 'tis for thy obstinacy, thou insatiable shee-Woolf.


Rot your Sheeps blood.


Confound your brutish heart and bacon, face.


Nounz, stir about, or I'll beat thy brains out with my Bottle.


One word more, and by the Lord, Harry.


Thou dare not for thy Blood, thou dare not.


For shame let not the Army see our difference, or thy Cowardice. --


Pull down the House, and bury them in the Ruins: come along boldly, my dear
hearts, follow me, I shall find a time. --


To be hanged -- I don't doubt it.


O save the Syring and the Pot of Turpentine-pills for my sake. --


Save nothing, cut off your Legs and throw at 'em. Out with the Exchange
Woman's Trunk of Perfumed Linen which the Old Knight used to play hey Gamer
Cook in -- Out, out; save nothing.


Fill the old Justices greasy Night-Cap with the Rosary of Beads the Fryer
pawned here but last Night, and down with 'em.


I wish they were all Cannon-bullets for their sakes.


Hold, hold, if you throw out the Beads, they'll take us for Papishes, and then
there's no Mercy; otherwise we may still hope for pity because we are all of
one Religion.


Set the Led Cistern against the Door; all hands to the Cistern, to the
Cistern.


My Girls, my Daughters.


Fellow Soldiers, dear hearts now for the last push.


All hands to the Cistern, away* --


Hoa up; hoa up; cheerily, cheerily, pluck all together. --


Hoa up! hoa up! hoa up!


Down, down, all hands down, they are going to spring a Mine.


There's a fresh Brigade of sturdy Blood-hounds come from the Butcher-row.


The Barr of the Door's broke. --


Barr it with the Constables staff that lay here last Night.


O Mother, save your self, save your self.


Must our mouths be cold then?


All's lost, all's lost. --


They break in like a full Sea upon us.


O Mother, Mother, shift for your self.


Name not me: the Justices, and Jailers, are my very good Friends, and
Customers.


Ah, there's no trust to Friends now.


If I dye, I dye, but I pity your tender backs, and grieve for the present want
all these young Gallants will have of so many excellent Beauties.


Yet, yet, you may escape perhaps.


The poor hearts fight as if they were all Scanderbegs.]


Yet, shift Mother in two minutes, 'twil be too late.


No, here will I stay, and like a Phaenix, perish in my Nest, the Fates so
Decree.


Then let's among 'em, and dye all together, or break through. --


Agreed, agreed.


MIranda, where's your Sister?


I left her on the Dust-Cart-top, gaping after the huge noise that went by. --


It was a dreadful show.


Oh woe, and alas, ho, ho, ho! I'm glad I did not see it though.


Hold in thy breath, and tell thy Virtuous Body, there's no harm down, they are
all reserved for thine, and thy Sister Dorindas private use.


And shall we have 'em all, a-ha! that will be fine i'fads; but if you don't
keep'em close, pray Father, we shall never have 'em long to our selves pray;
for now every Gentlewoman runs huckstring to Market, the youth are bought up so
fast; that poor Publicans are almost starved, so they are so.


Leave that to my Fatherly Care.


And shall we have 'em all, ha, ha, he! O good dear hau, how the Citizens Wives
will curse us. --


Miranda, you must now leave this Tom-rigging, and learn to behave your self
with a grandeur and state, befitting your illustrious Birth and Quality. -- Thy
Father, Miranda, was 50 years ago a man of great power, Duke of my Lord Mayors
Doggkennel. --


O lo, why Father, Father, are not I Miranda Whiffe, sooth, and arn't you
Prospero Whiffe, sooth, Keeper of Bridewell, my Father?


Thy Mother was all Mettle. -- As true as Steel, as right's my Leg, and she
said thou were my Daughter; can thou remember when thou were Born, sure thou
can not, for then thou were but three days old.


I'fads, I do remember it Father, as well as 'twere but yesterday.


Then scratch thy tenacious Poll, and tell me what thou find backward in the
misty black and bottomless Pit of time.


Pray Father had I not Four, or Five Women waiting upon top of me, at my
Mothers groaning, pray?


Thou had, and more Miranda, for then I had a Tub of humming stuff would make
a Cat speak.


O Gemine! Father how came we hither?


While I despising mean, and worldly business, as mis-becoming my grave Place,
Quality, did for the bettering of my mind, apply my self, to the secret and
laudable study of Nine-pins, Shovel-board and Pigeon-holes -- dost thou give
eat Infant*


I do, most Prudent Sir.


My Brother, to whom I left the manage of my weighty state, having learned the
mysterious Craft of coupling Dogs, and of untying them; and by strict
Observation of their jilting carriage, found the time when Venus, Countess,
Lady, Beauty, and the rest of my she subjects, were to be obliged, by full
allowance of their sports, soon grew too Popular, stole the hearts of my
currish Vassals, and so became the Ivy-leaf, which covered my Princely Issue,
and sucked out all my Juice. Dost observe me Child?


Yes, forsooth Father, this story would cure Kib'd-heels.


This Miscreant, so dry he was for sway, betrayed me to Alonzo, Duke of
Newgate; and in a stormy and dreadful Night opened my Kenell Gates, and forced
me thence with thy young Sister, and thy howling self.


Father! did they kill us then, pray Father?


Near the Kenell they dared not for the love my dogged Subject bore me. -- In
short to Newgate we were carried, -- And thence all in a Cart, without a
cov'ring, or a Pad of Straw, to Hyde Park-corner, we were hurried there on the
stubbed Carcass of a Leafeless Tree, they hoisted us aloft to pipe to winds,
whose murmuring pity whistling back again, did seem to show us cursed kindness.


O poor Father! -- But whereof, how did we escape Father?


Some Friends we had, and some Money, which gained the assistance of a great man
called Gregoria Dunn', appointed master of that black design: now luck begins
to turn. -- But ask no more; I see thou grow pinck-ey'd, go in, and let the
Nurse lay thee to sleep.


And shall she give me some Bread and Butter, Father.


Ay, my Child, -- Go in. -- Ariel, what ho my Ariel?


Hayl most potent Master, I come to serve thy pleasure Be it to lye, swear,
steal, pick pockets, or cerep in at Windows --


How did thou perform the last task I set the?


I gathered the Rabble together, showed them the Bawdy House, told em they
used to kill Prentices, and make mutton pies of 'em -- I led them to the
Windows, Doors, backward, forward, now to the Cellar, now to the House top --
Then I ran and called the Constable, who came just as the Rabble broke in, and
the defendants were leaping from the Balcony, like Sailors from a sinking Ship.
The Duke and his Train I clapped into a Coach.


Are they all taken and safe?


All safe in several parts of this thy enchanted Castle of Bridewell, and not a
hair of 'em lost.


Twas bravely done my Ariel! Whats a Clock?


Great Tom already has struck ten:
Now blessed are Women that have men,
To tell fine tale, and warm cold feet,
While lonely lass lies gnawing sheet.

We have much to do e're morning come: follow me, i'll instruct thee within.
Before the gorgeous Sun upon* House top doth Sneer,
The Laud knows what is to be done, the Laud knows where.

OH Sister sister, what have I seen pray?


Some rare sight I warrant.


From yonder dust-cart-top, as I stared upon the noise, I thought it had been
fighting, but at last I saw a huge Creature, for ought I know.


O whereof you mean the Coach.


Coach! i'fads, I thought it had been a Fish, I'm sure it was alive, and it ran
roaring along, and all the People ran away from it for fear it should eat 'em.


O lo, O lo Sister, O lo! -- ha ha he --


Why do ye laugh at one Sister, indeed it had eaten men, for just by our gate it
stood still and opened a great Mouth in the belly of it, and it 'em out all
whole:


Oh but Sister, whereof I can tell you news pray, my Father told me in that
Creature was that thing called Husband, and we should see it shortly and have
it pray, in a Civil way.


Husband, what's that?


Why that's a thing like a man (for ought I know) with a great pair of Horns
upon his head, and my father said 'twas made for Women, look ye.


What must we ride to water upon it, sister?


No, no, it must be our slave, and give us Golden Clothes Pray, that other men
may lye with us in a Civil way, and then it must Father our Children and keep
them.


And when we are so Old and Ugly, that no body else will lye with us, must it
lye with us it self?


Ay that it must Sister.


You see my Father gets men to lye with us, is not he a Husband then?


No, you see he has no Horns.


May be he sheds 'em like a Buck, or puts 'em in his pocket like a rich
Citizen, because he won't lye with us himself when he can get no body else.


Fie Sister; no! Fathers and Mothers are kinder and wiser now then they were
heretofore look ye; for when they see their Daughters will be modish and kind,
they provide 'em Gallants themselves to lye with them.


But if we must take those our careful Parents get, only for profit, 'tis as
bad as marrying.


They do it only 'till they get us Husbands to ease them of the trouble.


O whereof Sister, my Father may spare himself of that trouble, for I am old
enough to shift for my self in a civil way, for I was 13. last quarter
Sessions, ay and wise enough too.


So we all think i'vads, but they can get us Coaches and Settlements, whereof
if we were left to our selves, we should creep into holes, and yet nothing but
Bastards.


If our fathers don't get us Husbands quickly, we'll make him lye with us
himself, shall we sister?


Ay ay, that we will, but lets go in now, He's about something I long to see
the end of, come lets not despair, the flesh is strong.


O for a Husband sister how I long.


GOnzalo Oh -- my lodging is enchanted.

Mine with a Devil and like your Grace is haunted,
Which plays more tricks then e're the witch my Aunt did.

First doleful groans at both my ears were lugging.
Then whistling voice like wind in empty muggin.

Shrieks as of switcheld lass I heard, and anon
Sighs of enchanted ghost like roaring Canon.

With Princely hoof I knocked, and noise did follow,
By which I find O, Heavens! the House is hollow,
My bed of state --

Of straw you mean -- now good my Lord do not lye.

Millions of devils moved, black, white, and motley,
Six legs a piece, sharp claws.

Aye mine were so Sir,
Each tooth a needle, and each eye a saucer.
They stole my shoes, and in a hole I found 'em.
The white possessed, black Armies did surround 'em,
Fiercely the black attaqu'd, and white defended,
Horror and death in every Seam attended.
The nimble black like hopping Devils ventured,
Mounted the works, and on the half moon entered.
But here the white serty'd as thick as sawdust,
And beat them off.
Then marched up the red listed Reformadoes,
But what they did I dare not tell for fear.

Sage matrons say, where such kind Foes appear,
The Lord of the pasture shall not dye that year.

Unless he's eaten out --

On large deal board by prudent vermin chosen,
Two Armies more were fighting for my hosen.
If I but offer composition for my sock,
All leave the field, and to my Carcase flock.
No Fairy pinches half so close, nor no Witch.

'Tis worse then nettle, sting of Wasp, or Cowage.

Treason treason, O here's one of the white devils, treason treason, my guard
my guard, Oh ho hoe.

Fortune has cheated me of all, pize on her,
I am no Duke now, but a poor Prisoner.

Oh what horrid noise is this assaults our ears.

Where be those boys,
That make such a noise,
And won't eat their bread and butter?

Without all doubt.
The are hereabout,
We'll teach 'em to make such a Clutter.

Who are the ring-leaders, who rules the Boast?

Alonzo the Duke, and another old Toast.

We'll put water in their porridge,
And straw in their beds,

Shoes on their feet, and a Comb in their heads.

We'll put c.
And straw c.
Shoes c.

O save me, save me, Gonzalo

I would give him the best member I have, to save my self.

These great He Devils will hearken to no such Composition.

Rogues that from their Liquor shrink,
Shall scorch to death for want of drink.

And who with false glass good fellows betray,

And tipple small beer in stead of their wine,

Then bubble their poor weak brothers at play,
To the whip and the stocks we'll confine.

So poor, so poor, they still shall remain;
Mirth, or good Wine, they shall ne'er have again,
Nor never, oh never, be eased of their pain.

So poor, c. --
Mirth --
Nor never --

Never, oh never, eat Custard again!
Oh murthering Sentence -- Oh, ho, ho!

Never, never -- O Inhumane Correction!
Oh, they begin again -- Oh. --

Who are the pillars of the wenching Trade?

The zealous professor, and brisk City blade.

The Gallants, and Bullies,
Do often grow poor, and bare, and bare.

But these Canters, and close City Cullios
Are ne'er without Money, or Ware.

What Slave permits
Such Hypocrites
In peace to taste of all our sweets?

In the midst of their joys, they discoveries fear,

And their Wives, if you have any, shall make the score clear.

With Claps, and with Duns, we torment them all day,
And at night we take them and their Doxies away.

With Claps c. --
And at night c. --

Pox of the Devil, 'tis too true, they did take our Doxies away.


Ay, and I would procure 'em a whole Regiment, for my Ransom.


Alas, they were but Oysters before their meal; besides they were so rotten,
they would melt in their mouths, all their bones were turned to gristle: We
are kep'd for the standing Dish.


Nay, then I am safe enough, for I have no more standing Dish, then a post, my
hearts no bigger then a Pins-head.


My poor Boy Quakero's, gone too, Oh, ho, ho!

Say, say,
Shall we take up these Rogues, and Carry them away,
With a tory, rory, Tory, rory, rory, Red-Coats?

Aye, aye.

Aye, aye.

Aye, aye.

Aye, aye.

With a Tory, rory, Tory, rory, rory, rory.

No, No,
'Till we show them their Crimes, let em stay.
With a Tory, rory, Tory, rory, rantum, scantum.

Let 'em stay.

Let 'em stay.

Let 'em stay.

Let 'em stay.

With a Tory, rory, Tory, rory, rory, rory.

Cabbage is windy, and Mustard is strong,
But a Lass with a wide Mouth, and a liquorish Tongue.
Will give thee the Palsy, though never so young.
Then first let their Pride, let their Pride come along.

Cabbage. --
But a Lass --
Will give --
Then first --

Lo here, here is Pride, that first lest them aside,
An honest true Trojan, and then she died.

With upright look, and speech sincere,
In public, I a Saint appear.
But in private I put out the light,
And I serve for a Whore, or a Baud.
I have taught them to cheat, Swear, and Fight,
For by Yea, and by Nay, I am Fraud.

Send out a Scout
To yonder Hill.
Stand, and deliver.
You dog, must I wait.
I'm thy fate:
Dispatch, or I'll send thee to Hell.
From Fraud, they thus proceed to force.
And then I Rapine, guide their Course.

Wake Duncan! would thou could.
Disguised with blood, I lead them on,
Until to Murder they arrive.
Then to the Gallows they run.
Needs must they go, whom the Devils drive.
Alas poor Mortals.
They gape like the Earth, in the Dog-days.
What a rare life the Frogg has?
Drawer, Drawer.

Anon, Anon.

Give 'em drink, or they are gone,
Ever their torment's began.
Pour, pour, pour, pour.
Hark, hark, how it hisses,
See, see, how it smokes:
Who refuses such Liquor as this is,
May he pine, may he pine, may he pine
'Till he choakes.

Hearks, c.

Around, around.
Around, around, around.
Let's sing, and tear the ground,
There's no such sport below,
Where sinful mortals go.

Oh, oh, are you alive my Lord Duke.

I cannot tell, Ah, ha, -- Feel me, feel me, what a drench they gave us, sure
'twas Spirit of Brimstone. -- I am all in a flame.


Their design, is to roast us as some do Geese, by putting a hot Iron in their
bellies, I begin to drip, they may make a Sop in the Pan already.


Anon they'll cut off slivers from us, as they did from the whole Ox, in St.
Iames's Fair.


Oh, 'tis intolerable: methinks I hear a great she Devil, call for Groats
worth of the Crisp of my Countenance. -- They are all for Gristle.


Another cries Six peny-worth of the brown, with Gravy, Shalot, and Pepper, Oh
there's a Collop gone!


Shalot, and Pepper, was well though of, for if I am not well seasoned, there's
no eating of me.


Indeed old Lord, you have a kind of Ven'zon haugou.


How can it be otherwise, my Lord, when I'm roasted with the guts in my belly?


If Shat'lin, or Locket had us, what Olio's, Raggous, and Pottages, would they
make?


So new a Dish never came from France, they would get the Devil and all by us.


We should out-stink French Cheese.


O help help, here's Raw-head and Bloody bones, the Master Cook of Hell. Arise,
arise, ye Subterranean Fiends,
Come claw the backs, of guilty hinds:
And all ye filthy Drabs, and Harlots rise,
Which use to infect the Earth with Puddings, and hot Pies;
Rise ye who can devouring glasses frame,
By which Wines pass to the hollow Womb, and Brain;
Engender Head-akes, make bold elbows shake;
Estates to Pimples, and to deserts turn.
And you whose greedy flames mans very entrails burn,
Ye ramping queens, who rattling Coaches take,
Though you've been fluxed 'till Head and Body shake.
Come Clap these Wreches 'till their parts do swell:
Let Nature never make them well.
Cause Legs, and Arms to pine, cause loss of hair,
Then make them howl with Anguish, and sad groans.
Rise and obey, rise and obey, Raw head and bloody bones.
Alonzo, and Gonzalo, off the Stage.


THere was a noble Marquess,
Took up his Maidens carcase,
Fast by the Fire side.
A very homely Damsel,
Her lips were soft as Lambs wool,
Or marrow Pasty-fri'd.
This is but a kind of a doleful Tune, to beat Hemp to, but hanged lets squeeze
the Picher, here's to thee my doughty Amazon.


Right reverend Trot-up-and-down, I'll do thee reason here Moustrappa.


Come bouze it about, and a fico for the Justice. Fortunes a Whore, and will be
kind to her Sisters.


Of the first Five men, we met Three were Iohns, and Four of those were
Cukolds, -- Which is a good sign, and so squeeze the juice. --


A strong point of Consolation, let me kiss thee for that, thou pretty, pocky,
well favoured Crack.


Fill the Dish Molly,
And think of a Cully.
Here's a health to the best.
Give us more Drink, a Surgeon that's jelly.
And a pox take the rest.
Molly fill.
We cry still,
Fill again, and drink round.
'Till we empty the Pitcher, and fill up the Crown.

Hold, hold, our Sister is grown hollow hearted, and like a jilting Quean,
forsakes us in our Tribulation.


'Tis even what I looked for, -- The last Dish came as slow, and frothy, as the
last words of a declaring Quaker.


When the Spirit sinks down his Throat, and rattles like the departing Water in
a leaky Pump.


Blame her not, you here she is sound still, ha! wilt thou so?


Look Moustrappa Weeps, -- Hang losses, though our Dancing Schools ruined, we
have saved our Instruments: And as ong as Men drink, and Women paint, we shall
still jog on.


There are more of our Dulcimers thump'd every Night in Covent-Garden, then
there are Ghittars scraped in a Week, in Madrid; therefore I say, staunch thou
false hearted misbeleiving Jewes-Trump, do not many industrious Females live
well by bidding Gentlemen welcome to Town, singing at their Chamber doors?


And trucking their English small Wares, for French Toys.


O this was a dreadful bout for poor Moustrappa. In robbing me, they pillaged
six Brokers: ruined my Credit and quite killed my old dealer, honest Jack the
Mercer; for just as I had brought his Body to such a state, that none else
would touch him so that I could set my own rates, they took me from him; the
French Farendine, he gave me for a Gown is gone too. -- But let the World rub,
when 'tis at worst 'twill mend.


The devil take thee, for putting me in mind of my losses: hang me if I can
forbear weeping too.


Then thou art in danger of drowning for the water's above thy mouth, and
there's no passage by the Nose, for the bridge was down long ago; and so she
prayed me to tell ye.


My friend is a brisk French Merchant, I knew him a Taylors Trotter: but from 3
Ounces of Jessimy-butter, half a Pound of Powder, and 6 pair of
Jessimy-Gloves, by cheating the King of his Customs, and his fellow Subjects
of their Money, he's come to his beaten Farendine Suit every day: had not this
befallen me, I had reduced him to his first being, and I had hazarded the
saving of his Soul, by the ruin of body, and estate. -- But he is but
repreiv'd, -- the pox will take him, for he is a Termagant at laced Mutton.


Mischief light on ye both, for minding me of my losses; there was scarce a
Manchild in Town, gentle, or simple, from Fifteen to Threescore, that did not
pay me Tribute. -- When I walked the Streets, the Shop-keepers bowed, the
Prentices winked; If five, or six Gallants stood in the way, Lord what rustling
and cringing was there to Madam Stephania? -- Aunt, cries one, how does my
little Niece? -- The Aunt, and the Niece, may both be damned, for any thing you
care to please: me he slips a Guinny. When shall we cut up the Giblet Pie?
cries another. -- Go you're a wag, cry I: there's half a Piece. Says a third,
is there never a fresh Runlet taped? yes quoth I, but you shall be hanged e're
you lick your lips with it; and so she praid me to tell ye: still something's
coming, for every now and then slips in a close thriving Tradesman, look ye
Mrs. quoth he, I do not use these things, but the case is thus, I'll be at a
word, I want a Wench; give me good sound ware, here's your Money, ready Money:
I won't build Sconees, and bilk you, as your Gentlemen Bullies do, let me have
weight and measure, one words as good as a thousand. Well quoth I, put your
business into my hand, I'll use a Conscience, aye, and I did too, for as I hope
for freedom; sometimes I have hardly got 8 d. in the Shilling. But such were
sure Customers, they never left me for fear of discovery. Oh! I could tell you
such stories of Vestry-men, and Burgesses, as would make the Bells ring
backwards, i'faith, -- Me, and my business, was the whole talk of the Town,
but all was kep'd secret, not a word mentioned, unless it were in some
Coffee-house, or the Streets. -- But now they all forsake me -- but 'twill rub
out when 'tis dry, and so I squeeze. --


Tough Hemp must we beat?
Dry Bread must we eat,
And be bumbled, and jumbl'd, and grumbl'd at too, too, too.
And drink nothing, but Wat, Wat, Water that's cold?
Then Harry, and Mary, be merry and cheery, as long's we can do, do, do.
And drive away sorrow, until we are old.
Come bouze it about, and lets squeeze out the Pitcher.
He's a Rogue that stands out, and shall ne'er be the Richer.
Here's Ten go downs upon Re. Moustrappa.


Put rem to it or I renounce thee.


Renounce me Puss, not pledge me, thou salt Suburban Hackney, not pledge me.


Well Mrs. Beantosser, I hant stood three years at Livery, and been hyr'd for 6
d. a side on Holy days* by Chimny-Sweepers, and Cobblers 'Prentices, I hant so.
--


Who has Mrs. Gillian flirt! Mrs. To and again, who has?


I name no body, but touch a galled Horse, and hell wince.


But I know who has been taken up in the common, and rode so many heats that
they got the French, fashions that was even your own sweet Monkey face, I
scorn to go behind your crooked back to tell you so.


Fight Dog, fight Bear, still here's the juice of life.


I never danced naked at the French house for Mild-Six- pence, goody
Lerry-come-twang.


Out, out, that's old, that's old.


Nor I never walked the Streets at Night, stark naked in a Buckram Suit, trimmed
with black Ribons at the Codpeice, Mrs. Gincrack, Mrs. Nimble-go-through.


No, no, that thou did not old Tru-peny, that was the Tailors Wife, -- but
'tis old too. --


Who dressed her self in mans cloahes to commit with another Woman's Husband
under his natural Wives nose, not you?


Who goes every Night upon Water to see men swim on their backs, and show
beastly triks, not Beantosser, no?


Who uses to be drunk at Taverns tear her friends Wigs, and then give all the
Money, she has for a frisk with the Drawer, not Mrs. Betty Moustrappa?


Who storms the Fort in private with a Leathern Gun.


Go you're a mean spirited Crack, to be kep'd by a Club of Prentices: and so she
praid me to tell ye.


'Tis better to receive small ware then give broad Gold, as thou doest like a
silly Trapes.


The foul names thy own, and I'll dash it down thy Throat.


Help, help, murder, she'll murder me.


Hold, hold, hold, keep the Kings Peace, I say keep the Peace, do you not
tremble to use such bug words, if any body should hear you it would bring a
scandal on the house, and make 'em think us Whores, Restore her nose
Moustrappa, and you Beantosser, give back her Eye-brows: I say squeeze the
juice, and let acts of Hostility cease, I was governaunt at home, and I will be
justice of Peace here.


I will have no Justice. --


Beantosser be orderly, and thou shalt be my Clerk.


No private bribery to Corrupt Justice, and to show that I desire all things
may he done without favour or selfishness, let Beantosser be hanged, and give
me her clothes, and so I squeeze.


Justice, an't please your Worship, I'll swear the peace against her.


Bear back, bear back, good People don't press upon the Court. -- Constable
stand by me, and go fetch the offender before me.


I command thee to come before my Lord Justice. No -- good people will ye aid
and assist me. -- We are resolved to assist Mr. Constable Beantosser to the
death. -- La you there now.


The Justice is an Ass, the Constable a Sheepshead, and all the good People a
Whore, and a Baud: and so she prayed me to tell ye.


Grant me a humming Warrant to compel her to come before you volens nolens of
her own accord.


How, how, thou art an evil Counsellor, and a Traitor; thou seek to deprive
me of my honourable Employment by force quoth'a, no, some wiser then some: I am
a Justice of peace, and must keep the peace. But if I grant a Warrant to
compel, I break the Peace. If she comes, she comes, all must be done in a
peaceful way: Volens nolens quoth'a.


Right Worshipful, 'tis a common way to grant a Warrant.


Ay, ay, 'tis so common that we Magistrates are all the worse for it, it makes
justice so cheap that no People of fashion care for using any.


An't please your Worship,


Please me, and please thy self, I say still.


To accept this small present?


Hay! more Plots, how dare thou corrupt Justice, thou Treacherous Strumpet!
devour the bowels that gave thee Suck? Now do I know she wants Justice, because
she would buy it -- Clerk, take up the Bribery, and give it to the poor: since
my Clerk is absent I will vouchsafe to do it my self. -- But did this audacious
Tatter-de-mallion declare with her own Corporal voice, that she would not come
before us?


I did, and I do again send thee word by my self, that thou shalt come before
me, -- If thou wilt not, I command thee to stay there, -- and so I squeeze.


Does the Rebel send word, her self being present, that she will not appear? --
it stands not with our high place to put up such affronts. -- Head-Constable,
knock her down, and keep the Peace.


So now the whole Courts in an uproar, fight, 'till the Devil part you. --
Hold, hold, fall off, and unite against the common Enemy.


Francky, was his name a,
And Francky was his name a;
His Beard was black, and his Gills were Red,
And his Bill was all of the same a.
With weapon full sharp, he fought 'till he was dead,
With a Heycock of the game a,
And Francky was his name a,
And with weapon c.

Francky's dead, and gon a,
Poor Franchy's dead, and gon a:
Thy brows are black, and thy lips are Red,
And thy bellies soft as the down a.
Let me be thy Worm, and at every turn,
I will tickle thy flesh, and bone a.
Then prithee cease they moan a,
Since Francky's dead, and gon a.
Let me c. --

Silence in the Court, to keep a sound Peace, I make you both my
High-Constables of Westminister.


Agreed, agreed.


Agreed, agreed.


Then by Virtue of my Warrant, which shall be made when we are at leisure,
bring those disturbers of the Peace before me.


Woman, leave thy babbling, and come before the Justice.


Hectorio, be uncovered in the Court, and obey the Officers.


What Court? what Officers?


Why Stephania is Justice of Whorum, and we are both Head-Constables.


Then Officers, look to your Throats, for there will be above Ten thousand up
in Arms to Night. Sings. -- And their bellies soft as the down a.


He has confessed, and shall be hanged 'till he's dead. Come thou Rake-hell,
villain, dog, where are they, what's their design, who leads 'em on, who brings
'em off, make his Mittimus, before he answers, and send him to Tyburn.


Old touch and go, why so hasty? -- My Lord Bacchus leads 'em on: my Lady Venus
brings 'em off: their design is to rise up in their Beds, at midnight, to stab
all the Women, and be head all the Virgins they Catch.


Sings -- With a Hey-cock of the game a.


O inhumane Cannibals!


Let 'em do their worst, the Women will be hard enough for 'em, man to man.


And I believe the Virgins had notice of their design, for there is not one
left in my Liberties: Head-constables, dispatch this Westminster Wedding, I
say, tie 'em up.


Won't your Worship examine the Woman?


I say, take her away, shes a Pick-pocket I know, by her laced Shoes: besides,
hark ye, she's a Witch, she carries an enchanted Ring about her which turns
Rich men to beggars, and makes an Ass of a Justice of Peace.


Gentlemen of the Jury, this Villain is no honester then he should be, he robbed
me of a dozen of precious Turpentine guilt Nutmegs, and a Pewter Squirt.


Which is flat felony, for that's the Iron work to her Plough, without which it
must stand still, and her Familiars must starve: and so she prayed me to tell
ye.


But because the old Rogue is a true friend to the Chuck-office, I care not
much if I save him, therefore you may bring in the Felony, Man-slaughter.


Gentlemen, I am a Witness for the King, and so lets squeeze all round.


Art thou her Cozen after the flesh?


No, he is my Husband's Brother, for they tumbled both in one Belly.


Then thy Husband has a whole Legion of Brothers, for half the Town have
tumbled in the same place: and so she prayed me to tell ye.


Woman, put me in good Bail, or take her away Jailer.


Hold, hold, what Bail dost thou demand?


Two substantial Citizens, Aldermens fellows, or common Council men, but no
Cuckolds.


No Cuckolds, Jailer take me away, -- hold, hark you, If you'll take a Hundred
that are Cuckolds, by the help of my friends here they shall be produced
presently. -- Nay don't bob down your heads, I did but try him.


No, no! no Cuckolds.


This is flat Tyranny, thou may as well demand a Tribute of Maiden-heads in
the Teens: but Miracles are ceased.


What is this notorious talking Rogue in for?


For Robbing of the Vestry.


How Sirrah, who made you a Church-Warden?


'Tis but a Vestry matter, and may be agreed at the next Tavern.


Who will pay Scot and lot, as they say, and serve in all under Offices of
trouble, if every Rascal shall usurp that very Office, where they may reward
themselves?


Ay, without Authority, or paying a farthing for it, when 'tis well known
substantial House-keepers have given hundreds or't.


Yes, and thrived upon it too, with a blessing on their pious endeavours.


Head Constables take 'em away to Limbo.


We defy thee, and thy Head-Constables, to mortal battle.


Then blood will ensue: and so she prayed me to tell ye. -- Sound a charge, and
keep the Peace.


FOllow me, and follow me, hey jolly Robin.
The Moon shines bright,
And Women are light,
And most men had rather eat then fight.
Then leave off your Coging.
And follow me, a follow me hey jolly Robin.
Four corners on my bed,
Four beauties therely spread.
If any evil come to me,
O goodness sweet deliver me.
Blessed be thanked, it is now again departed; this Charm I learned in the
days of my Paganis-me, before I attained to the inworking and the
bowel-yernings of the outgoing of the over-flowings; but now that I am mounted
into the Saddle, and exalted to the House top, and lifted on the sounding Tub
of reformation, I am above the Fruit-mongers of the hard Streets of
stony-heartedness: and I am above thee Satan -- ha it comes again.

Four corners on my bed.
Turn thy Stocking, and tie thy Shoe hard.
Thy mouth being washed, and wiped thy beard.
Come away, come lets be jogging.
By, by, by, by,
Hark, hark, how the Bettern bellows
Now is the time for good fellows.
To it -- to it -- to it -- to it.
The Citizens Wife.
Leads a merry, merry life,
While her Husband at home does grunt and groan.
Whoo whoo oo oo oo -- whoo ooo oo.
Alas poor man he is sick of the yellows.
Cuckoo, cuckoo.
Hark, hark, what the little birds tells us.
Cuckoo, cuckoo, cuckoo.

Torment me no more thou Hobgoblin, thou Robin-good-fellow, thou Will with a
wisp, thou Spright, thou Fairy, thou, thou nothing, thou something -- ha, what
should this be, assuredly here hath been some Crouder slain against his
consent, or murdered wrongfully, or else 'tis the Soul of some profane
Singing-man that rejoices and gibeth at the death of the Duke my father, Oh!
O! O! it comes again.

Four corners on my bed.
Four beauties --
Youth, youth of mortal race, give ear,
Thy Daddies dead, thy Daddies dead.
To Stocks his feet, to Pillory his Ear,
To whip of thong his flesh is ay turned;
And tough baton does thump his bone.
O hone, O hone, O hone, O hone.
Then little youth Nandy.
Drink Ale and Brandy.
His knell is hourly rung on his back.
Hark now I hear it, thwick, thwick, thwack,
Thwick c. -- thwack.

This doleful madrigal says my Father is in Limbo, that is Mortus est, that
is, he is dead, that is, he is departed, he is gone, he is fled, he is no more;
He is, he is, I say, he is, that is, he is not.

His feet Stock-fish, his ears Pilchards, his flesh
Thornback, and Tough Baton does thump his bone.
O hone, O hone, O hone, O hone.
Friend Quakero, this is no mortal business, though thou hast done Satan right
noteable service in perverting many, believe him not, I say believe him not:
hast thou forgot how it was resolved in a full dispute, where a friend, even
Guly Penno, declared that Satan was a liar, nay thou hast not forgot, believe
him not, yet I will go to find out and be satisfied in the truth of the lye.


Thwick, thwick, thwick, c.


Hark, it is there again, it luggeth me by the Ears, even as a Swine is lugged
by a Mastiffe-dog: or as one of your wicked Idolatrous Misses is led by the
rattling of a guilt Coach, or as, as I say, or as ah ha em, or as ah a aa.

So much for this time.


NOw does the charmed impostume of my Plot
Swell to a head, and begin to suppurate,
If I can make Mantua's Infant Duke,
Switchel my young giglet Dorinda.
Sincere Quakero to my power bends,
And shall with my discreet Miranda yoke,
Or be tormented ever here,
In my enchanted Castle of Bridewellow.
Great pity 'tis -- for he's a pretty fellow.
Ariel!

What says my mighty and most potent Master.

How do these right puissant Ragamuffins bear their durance?

The Duke with haughty men, for lack of food,
Sits cracking Fleas, and sucking of their blood.
With him is good Gonzale.

Is he so, Adsbud.

From eyes of Glass the gummy tears that fall
Down Iv'ry beard like Crystal vermin crawl.
The rest are picking straws, and so that's all.

Where is Quakero, that young Princely Sprout?

Like Lanthorn-jack I led him all about,
And now he's blowing of his nailes without.

Alas poor Trout.


I have so galled 'em, 'twould make your Graces hair stand on end to see how
they look; though your heart more stony was then Cobblers wax in the dog days,
'twould make it in your mouth dissolve like Culvers dung.


Dost thou think so Spirit?


It makes mine open and shut, open and shut, like a fat Hostesses greasy Pouch,
so it does: and then the poor old Gentleman and her daughters have almost torn
one another to pieces -- I pity them.


And I will -- hast thou that art so young a Spirit, so little too -- had a
touch a feeling of their Case, and shall not I have a relish? -- Well, Ariel go
let a Table be brought to them furnished with most sumptuous Cates, but when
they try to eat, let two great Babboons be let down with ropes to snatch it
away.


O Sir Punchanello did that at the Play-house.


Did he so -- then bend thy airy ear.


More toil -- I prithee now let me mind thee of thy promise then -- where is
my Two-penny Custard?


Ho now moody, doe'st thou murmure?


No my Lord!


Thou lie, Malignant thing, thou dost.


I pri'the my Lord, be not so touchy.


Hast thou forgot the hairy Woman I freed thee from, who sent thee every
morning down her Gormandizing throat with a Candle and Lanthorn, to tread the
Ooze of the salt deep? -- At other times she made thee pass up against the
strong Northern blasts, when the capacious Bay was baked with brandy 'till thou
had cleared thy passage to her nose, on whose sulph'rous top thou fat'st
Singing like a little Chimney Sweeper, hast thou forgot her?


No my dread Lord.


If thou more murmur, in some small dimple of her Cheek I'll peg thee, where
Twelve Summers more thou shalt lye stewing like a Maggot in a Holland Cheese.


O pardon great Sir this once, and I will be a good Boy, and never do so more.


Then do as I commanded, but make hast least the Conjurers of to'ther House
steal the Invention -- thou know they snatch at all Ingenious tricks.


I fly most potent Sir.


Now for the infant Duke of Mantua. Hipolito my Child come forth.


Anon, anon, forsooth -- you Sir, don't you stir the Nickers, I'll play out my
game presently.


Come gentle youth, exalt thy ducal chin, for thou shalt have a Wife my boy.


A Wife Sir! what's that, I never saw it?


No my boy, but they are now so common, young men can hardly walk the streets
for them.


Don't go away, you Sir, I do but stay for a Wife, and then I'll play out my
game -- O good Sir, let me have it quickly.


And so thou shalt, for my daughters sake; if he should know Wives were growing
out of fashion, I fear he would not marry, for the stripling has a gentile
fancy, I see by the neatness of his clothes.


Will it play at Bullet with me?


Ay and Cat, and Trap-ball too.


What is it like Sir? what is it like?


'Tis so inconstant I scarce know what to liken it to, 'tis still unsatisfied,
restless and wrigling like an Eel.


O pray let me have it then; I love Eels mightily.


But like an Eel 'twill slip from thee.


But I'll bite it by the tail then, and shake it 'till it lies still.


A shrewd youth! well thou shalt have it, 'tis beautiful as a Colly-flower,
but like that too, when 'tis kep'd long, nothing is more unpleasant.


O Sir! I won't keep it long.


A very hopeful Lad! -- But it won't part from thee.


Then I'll beat it, and kick it, and run away from it.


Modishly said y'gad, still hopeful -- but she'll save thee that trouble, and
leave thee as soon any other will keep her; for she's wild and skittish as an
unbackt Colt.


Is it like a Colt? O Lemine! then I'll ride upon it.


A lass poor youth! thou wilt soon be tired, and thrown off.


No Sir, I shall never be weary of Riding; and I'll hold so fast by the Mane
and the Tail, that I won't fall off.


O sie, you must not use it like a Beast.


What must I do with it then?


Why you must eat and drink with it.


What is it a Fork, and an Earthern-Pot then?


No, but she may make Forks, and crack too many Pots.


Then she shall teach me to make Forks.


Hold there, -- you must enjoy none but her.


Enjoy, ah ha! enjoy! what a word is there? enjoy! O rare! -- what is enjoy
Sir?


Why, that is to be happy.


Enjoy to be happy, then I'll enjoy all the Wives in the World; -- For I love
to be happy Sir: enjoy!


I'll tell you more hereafter; go in and read your Hornbook, that Treatise of
Abstruse Philosophy I gave you last.


I go forsooth.


Now by my best hopes, a shrewd youth, a very shrewd youth, and a notable
head-peace -- I'm glad he's grown so prudent. If all that Marry in this Age of
liberty were so Politic, we should see better times.


O lo! o lo! o lo! Oh, ho, ho, ho!


What's the matter? what grand intrigue of Fate can reach to the disturbance of
thy manly Soul?


Manly Soul, quoth a, 'twould disturb any mans Soul: I'm undone Sir, while I
was talking with you about a Wife, Tom Bully stole away my stones.


Hah thy stones, what stones?


Why my bowling stones. O ho ho, now I can't teach my Wife to play Nickers.


I'm glad 'tis no worse; O fie, fie my Lord, you must leave off this boys
Play now, and learn to play with Children; go, go in.


By never, I'll pay that Rogue Tom Bully, when I catch him.


Now I must instruct my Daughters.
Long sleeps and pleasures follow every Novice:
But plots and cares perplex grave men of Office.
Ye Gods!
More blessed are men of mean and low condition,
Then Bridewell-keeper is, or sage Magician.

OH Sister! I have such a twittering after this Husband,
And my mouth doth so run in a civil way.

Are you not breeding Teeth Sister?


Zooks, if I am the King, shall know it.


'Vads Sister, ever since my Father told me of it, which is at least six Hours
ago, I can't rest Day, nor Night, for ought I know.


Its hole's hereabout, whereof looky' my Father said that it should get me with
Child pray.


O lo! get you with Child, what's that?


I can't tell, but I do so shake and laugh when I think of't.


Heigh ho! whereof Sister you are afraid? -- Let it come to me, vads Sister I
won't be afraid.


Zooks Sister, if my Father should send a hundred to get me with Child in a
civil way, I wouldn't be afraid.


O but Sister, whereof looky', my Father said that a Husband was wild as a
Cock-Sparrow or a Curl'd-Lamb, that he did now pray.


Then I would chirrip to it, and make it hop, and stroke it, and make it wag its
tail and Cry blea, 'till it 'twas as tame as a little Lap-dog, but my Father
says they are always gentle at home: and wild abroad.


Whereof Sister hark ye, now lets leave this idle talk, and play the Scotch
Morice.


Then I'll play forward, and backward, for that's the way now.


No I won't play Boys play, -- I'll tell you what, you should be a School
Mistress, and --


No Sister, no I'll tell you what? You should be a Citizens Wife pray, and so I
should be a Lord looky', and I should come in a Golden-Coach and be your
Husbands Customer.


Ay 'vads that's pretty.


So I should meet you at the Play-House, and say Madam looky' 'tis a thousand
pities such a glazing Di'mond of beauty should be the Slave of a dull
Mechanic Cit. and cry what do ye lack? Whereof you should cry then, O Lord Sir,
you are mistaken Zooks.


O Lord Sir, you are mistaken Zooks!


Then I should say Dam'ee Madam! you are a necklace for a Prince, I'll settle
Three Pounds a Year upon you, and you shall have a Silver Baby, and a Silver
house, and eat nothing but Golden Custards, and Silver-Stew'd-Pruines: then you
should say whereof you have got a Wife of your own, my Lord?


Then you should say whereof you have gotten a wife of your own my Lord.


Then I should throw my Wig, and say, Oh Madam! if you love me, name her not.
She's so dull and musty, the very thought of her will make me swoon, Damher.
But you I dote upon. So then you should let me lye with you in a Civil way.


O ay, ay, I love that y'vads!


And then another should lye with you, and another, so at last you should be
caught in a Baudy-house with your Husbands under Prentice looky', and so be
brought to Bridewell as Mrs. Tweedlebum was the other day.


No, no, Sister, I wont play so -- I'll tell y' what, lets play Truss-fayl, do
pray now Sister.


Come then, I'll lye down first.


Truss.


Fail.


Send me well upon my Grey Nags tail. O Sister, Sister! here's the Husband
thing coming.


Looky, looky, O sweet Father its Legs are twice as long as ours.


What's that before so trimmed up with yellow Pissabeds, and green Blew Bottles.


See, see it pulls off half its head.


Run Sister, run, I'm so afraid 'twill pull your head off too.


Zooks! I would rather lose a hundred Heads if I had 'em, then stir a foot.


Oh! it looks angry, I'm so afraid for you Sister.


Fear not me, if I offend it, I'll lie down and paw it with my Four-feet, as our
Shock does when we beat it.


Miranda, Miranda!


O Sister! my Father calls you, -- whereof she says she won't come for'oth.


She fibs, she fibs Father, -- I would come, but I am not here for'oth -- you
spiteful pissabed Slut.


But you are here for'oth.


I wonder you're so simple Sister, as if I could not tell where I am better then
you -- for ought I know.


I will take Husband first that I will.


Hussy, am not I the Elder?


Then you shou'dn't set your Wit against a Child.


Well then Sister, I'll tell y'what, we'll play heads or tails, who goes first,
that's fair now, e'nt it?


Ay, and she that don't win shall lose and keep the door.


Well there's a good Girl, now toss up.


A ha! my tails turned up, you must watch.


Good dear Sister have done quickly, prithee do for because you know why
Sister.


Prospero has often told me, Nature makes nothing in vain, why then is this kip
kap here -- tis not awe nor e nor oo, nor lm n o-q-py you -- it strangely puzles
me; I'll ask him when I see him next.


Thing, thing, fine long thing*


Bessy come bunny, come buy me some lace Sugarcandy, Cloves and Mace. Sure I am
ready for a Wife now, I can read my abstruse Horn Philosophy.


O Rare thing, it talks just like one of us.


Ha -- what thing is that? Sure 'tis some Infant of the Park, dressed in her
Mothers gayest beams of Impudence, and sent down here to play at Hemp and
Beetle; but stay, is not this that thing called Wife? What art thou, thou
fleering thing?


Alas I am a Woman, and my Father says I must be a Wife in a Civil way, pray
thing don't be angry.


Angry, no, I'll sooner break my Trapstick; mun if thou art that thing called
Wife, which troubles poor men so that they can't Wench in quiet -- Prospero
says that I must enjoy thee.


If thou art that thing called Husband which art always sullen and niggardly
at home, but merry and expensive abroad. which feedst a Wife with tripe and
Cowes heels, and treat a Mrs. with Woodcock and Teale, and fine things, and
at last turn off a Wife with just enough to buy Bread and Cheese and worsted
Farendine, but maintainst thy Miss like a Princess, my Father says thou must
get me with Child for ought I know.


Get thee with Child, O lo! whats that?


Whereof I can't tell, but I think you must dig it out of the Parsly-bed.


Show me the Parsly-bed then.


I won't, you ha, got nothing to dig with: you said you must enjoy me, what's
that pray?


Why Prospero says you are like a Colt, and then you should be backed.


Phoe, I won't play so.


Won't you, then look to it, for you are but a Colly-flower, and though you're so
proud to day you'll stink to morrow.


Zooks this is the filli'st Husband-thing I ever saw: I'll run into the Garden,
and teach him more wit in a civil way.


Nay if you run from me like an Eel, I'll bite you by the tail.


(Within) Miranda! Dorinda! Daughters, Daughters!


Oh I'm glad my Father comes, for when Fire and Flax are together, none knows
how soon mischief may be done. Dorinda, Dorinda, my Fathers coming.


O Sister pray lets Dance our new Heroic Song that our Father may not know who
was here.


Here comes a lusty Wooer, my dildin, my darling.
Here comes a lusty Wooer Lady bright and shining.

I Woo for one of your fair Daughters, my dildin, my darling.
I Woo for c. -- Lady bright c.

I'm glad I have one for you my dild, c.
I'm glad c. -- Lady bright, c.

She looks too brown upon me my dild, c.
She looks c. -- Lady c.

Enough, enough, all this won't blind me, come, come, come stand, stand you
here, and you there, nay, nay, nay, no (...).


Indeed, and indeed, pray Father, I did but keep the door.


Did thou keep the door for thy younger Sister?


Yes forsooth, pray Father, that I did.


Blessing on thy pretty heart, cherish that gentile Motherly humour, thou hast
a generous Soul; and since I see thy mind so apt to take the light impression
of a modish Love, I will unfold a secret to thee -- That Creature* that thou
saw, is a kind of a Creature which is much like another Creature, that shall
be nameless, and that's Quakero.


But Father, pray Father, shall that Quakero Creature be my Husband? You said I
should have a Husband before she, that you did.


Shortly my Miranda thou shalt see the flower of this bud; this Chit, chit,
chit, chit, Cock-sparrow husband may serve thy Sister well enough, thou shalt
have a ho-ho-ho-ho-Husband, a Horseman, goin I'll provide for thee.


Let me have the ho-ho, quickly then pray Father.

Father, Father, I forgot to make my Cursy; b'wy Father.


Come hither Dorinda, why saw you this Husband without my order?


Who I! truly I didn't sawed him 'twas he sawed me.


Come, come, your Sister told me all.


Then she fibs for ought I know, for she would have seen him first, if I would
have let her.


Tell me what past between you?


Nothing passed between us but our great dog Towzer.


What did he do t'ee? come confess.


He did nothing, but I am afraid he would if you hadn't come.


Why, why speak out?


Because he came towards me with his tail up as stiff as any thing.


Ha, I thought as much; when what did he do then? the truth, I charge you.


Why he did nothing but walk to his Kennel.


Walked to his Kennel -- who?


Why our great dog Towzer.


Pho, thou understandst me not, what did the Husband-thing do to thee?


Why nothing at all, for just as we got to the Parsly-bed, you frightened it
away.


I charge you see it no more, 'twill Poison you, and make you swell as big as a
house.


Not see it, I'll run th'rough Nine Walls, but I'll see it, and have it to,
though it make me swell 'till I break in pieces.


Go get you in, you're a naughty Girl.


The World's come to a very fine pass for ought I know, one can't play with a
thing an hour or two alone, or be in bed with a man, but one must be nought: I
won't endure it much long, that I wont so.


So -- my wishing Pipe
Has swelled my hoping Cistern to a Flood.
Dorind' and Polito's agreed, that's good.
Now for Miranda, and the youth Quakero;
When they are coupl'd too -- there ends my Care'o.

MY hands are so tired with staring about for meat, that my feet can look no
further -- I must rest my old bones.


Old Lord I cannot blame thee, for I am seized with such a griping, that I
cannot rest. -- My Courtiers used to tell me I had no humane imperfection; But
here I will put off my hose and keep it no longer for my Flatterers


Ha, these are a sort of doggish greedy Devils, come to devour the meat ever
'tis dished up.


Do not for one repulse forgo the great design you were about to act.


Oh help, help, something unseen has tied my hands behind me.


Mine are stolen away too, and 'tis well for 'em, for my mouth is grown so
angry for want of meat, that if they should again appear empty it would devour
them.


Sure tis the Devils hock-tide, for mine are bound too.


O hark my fiends,
I fear we shall behold another horrid sound.

The Devil takes his time when we are bound.

He thinks to save his Bacon, feeble fiend,
But with bound hands our hands we will unbind.

Dry your eyes, and cease your howling:
For your Broth is set a Cooling.
While you're in this Castle staying,
Eat and Drink, ne'er talk of paying.
Wine and Women here are plenty,
You shall taste of every dainty.
And as soon as you are weary,
Here are Crowds to make you merry.
I marry this is comfortable.


No Music like that which powdered Beef Sings,
A consort of Carrets with hey ding a ding.

We'll dye for our meat, then our lives shall maintain.
No buttering of Parsnips like long live and reign.
O for a dainty vision of buttered Neptunes Tritons
And Nereides.

See my Lord a stately Banquet, adzooks!


First come, first served.


Happy man catch a Mackarell -- But stay is not this meat and drink brought to
Poison us?


Here may be more Spirit of Sulphur: but hungers sharp, and I will taste in
spite of the Devil.


And I will have a Soup.


If both resolve, I'll take my part; Devil do thy worst. As they try to eat,
Gonzalo and Antonio are snatched up into the Air, and Alonzo sinks with the
Table out of sight.


I Will be no longer seduced by Yea and Nay, I defy thee.


I defy thee.


Thou art a Torch of Darkness, and a Snuff of the Candle of the Socket, of the
Dominion of Darkness.


O minion of Darkness.


Thou lie, I am no minion of Darkness, for look thee, a lye is a lye, but the
truth is not a lye, and therefore thou art a liar because thou lie, as one of
us hath he is sweetly in his Scourgestick of Prophanishness, he is a right
precious one, truly, truly.


You lye, truly.


Out thou reproacher of friends, thou Bearward of the Bull and Mouth, thou
Lambskinner of Lumbard-street, thou waspish Woolf of Westminster, thou a a, I
say thou um ah a, thou-avaunt, begone, fly, vanish, I defy thee, I abhor thee,
I renounce thee, yea, I will scare-crow thee, I will top and scourge thee, and
I will humguig thee, for I see by thy invisible Horns that thou art the very
Devil.


Out Dragon, Bell and the Dragon, I knew thee long agone.


I knew thee long agone.


What dost thou know of me? Speak, say thy worst, what dost thou know of me? --
I may fail, but I cannot fall, for I am a Friend -- a Chosen -- One of Us.


A Chosen one of Us.


None of thy Usses, Satan, none of thy Usses; therefore cease to torment me,
for I will not speak one word more.


One word more.


Nay but I will not -- I will Padlock my lips with Patience, and set the Porter
of peaceishness at the Wicket of my Mouth, who shall knock thee down with the
Silver head of saving-gableness which is on the long Cane of Conscientious
Reproof: So that thou shalt no more enter into the Meeting-House of my heart,
look thee -- Obadiah Cod, one of Us, who now sleep -- eth did declare soundly
what thou were, and I find it all as Poo Cod said.


Mock on, mock on, I will try if thou wilt answer me while I sing my Sorrows to
the snapping of my Thumbs: thy gibing is all but nonsense.


All but nonsense.


How dost do?


How dost do?


What's that to you?


Whats c.


Pull out thy whistle, and tune up thy Pipe.


Pull c.


Under yonder hollow Tree, Nan lies asleep.


Under c.


Her thing is her own, and I'll bounce it anon.


-- and I'll bounce c.


What care I for treasure, if Nanny but smile?


-- if Nanny c.


Within this shining place,
There's not a better Face;
Faith now she's down, there I'll get her with Child.

Kind Nanny smiles, and she
Does sigh and snore for thee;
O strange Simplicity,
Follow me, follow me, and thou shalt see.

Does Nanny sigh and snore for me, O Lo! umph, I ham mollified: Nanny snore for
me -- think of thy Soul Quakero, I say think of thy Soul; if the flesh prevail,
thy Soul is but a dead man.


Follow me, follow me, and thou shalt see.


Hark I am called again -- this voice may be a Vision -- go Quakero, I say go
-- but it may be a snare, a trick to draw me into derision, go not Quakero nay
but I will not go -- Nanny sigh and snore for me, O dear!


Follow c.


Again -- Well I will go and advise with Friends, but why should, thou advise,
look thee, thy intention is good, though the Action may wander, it matters not,
I say, it matters not. -- Nanny sigh and snore for me, I will go -- yea
assuredly I will.


Follow c.


Nay but I will not, it shall not be said Quakero followe'd the Devil. -- But
look thee, go thou before, and I will come after, -- if that will do.


ADvance the frizzled frouzes of thine Eyes, and glout on you fair thing.


O dear sweet Father, is that a ho ho ho a Horse-man, Husband?


It is my Girl, and a yerker too; i'faith were he not tired with seeking of
his Company, he would play thee such Horse-tricks, would make the sneer again.


'Tis a most crumptious thing; i'vads if you'll let me have it, I'll make no
more dirt Pies, nor eat the Chalk you score with, nor spoil your Garden to play
with the Carrets before they are ripe -- pray sweet honey Father.


Well I'll leave ye together. But I charge you let him not touch your honour.


My honour O lo! pray what is that father?


'Tis a kind of fluttering Blood which haunts the head and hinder parts of men,
some call it life-Blood, because death often ensues when those tender parts are
touched: in Women its seat is on the nose, and on the --


Where else pray tell me, that I may defend it.


That's the ready way to make it be betrayed. -- No Child of my bowels, thou
shalt never know thy honour from me.


Now do I long to have this secret of my honour opened: prithee now, Father
tell me where 'tis.


Why, -- I know not what to say -- On thy Elbow.


My Elbow, O lemine! fear it not then, for my honour is so hard with being
thump'd and leand upon, that a hundred touches can't hurt it.


All falls out yet even as my Soul would wish, but I must Watch, I don't like
this leering Quakero, such zealous youths are very Tyrants in secret.


Assuredly Satan thou hast told truth, for she is here; But yet thou art a liar
Satan, for she is not here, that is to say, she sleeps not, I will declare
before her umph a ha h. --

Most finest, most delicatest, and most lusciousest Creature, whose face is
more delicious then a Pot of Ale with Sugar and Nutmeg, after a long Exercise.


Ha.


The savour of whose breath is more comfortable then the hot steam of a Sundays
Dinner.


O Lo!


Whose Paps are whiter then two Norfolke-dumplins stuffed with Plums -- and
softer then Quaking-puddings.


Why did you ever feel my Bubbies?


Nay assuredly, but I hope I shall --


Whose soft Palms are pleasanter then a warm cloth to my Sweaty-back, or a
hot Trencher to an akeing Belly.


O rare!


Whose Legs are smoother then my Chin, on a Saturday-night, and sleeker then
thy Elbows.


O my honour, my honour, my Father says you must not touch my honour pray.


Nay Sister far, far be it from me to soil thy honour. Thy nature is more
inviting then a Christning-Bowl of warm red Wine deekt round with Lemon peel.


Oh my dear ho, ho, ho, I can no longer forbear.


Ah Sister mine; Now I ham even like unto that little Creature called a Cat,
when his back is stroked, he longs to play with his tail.


And what are I like then, tell me what I are like?


Why thou are like a pretty little Mouse verily. -- But then I ham two-fold
luck thee: first I ham like a Cat, and secondly I am not like a Cat. -- First,
I ham like a Cat, for when the Cat smells the pretty Mouse, he is restless and
eager; Nay, he cannot stand still, but frisketh, and jumps, and dance -- eth
'till he hath devoured hit; -- In like sort, firstly, I ham like a Cat, look
thee, for I am inflamed, and eager truly: nay, I am even ravenous after the
pretty tender Mouse, as a Bear bereaved of her Whelps. But secondly* I ham not
like a Cat, look thee; for that seeks the destruction, and the nothingness of
the Mouse, but I thirsts for the Propagation, look thee, and the
somethingness, yea the fullness of hit -- ha, ha, have.


And am I like a Mouse i'vads?


Unfeignedly.


Then I'll run into my hole.


And I will pursue even unto thy very hole, till I have overtaken thee.


Ah how nimble this zealous youth is -- Miranda! -- Miranda! Quakero, come
back, or I'll throw you over the Balcony, and try if you have as many lives as
a Cat.


Zooks, Father you have spoiled the rarest play of Cat and Mouse.


Thou shalt be mouz'd my Girl, but every thing in season, Rome was not built
in a day, go in and trust me.


Shall not my Puss go with me; come Puss, come little Puss.


Hypolito my Child! Nicodemus, 'till my return, you must be acquainted with
him.


Pray Mr. Nichodemus, what did your Periwig cost you?


Ha, ha, ha, he!


Ha, ha, he, how much is, ha, ha, he!


I will be avenged of thee Satan!


Sa -- tan, my name is Hypolito!


I will no more stir up friends to despise Government, and teach them 'tis a
great point of Faith, rather to believe an ignorant upright Taylor, or a
precious enlightened Weaver, then a Book-learned Tythmonger verily.


Hey brave Boys you Rogues Mr. Nichodemus, will you play at Nickers you Sir,
or Spand-farthing?


Out thou lewd scoffer, I ham a Professor.


A Professor, what's that?


That is a friend.


And what is a friend?


Why a friend is one of Us.


And what is one of Us.


Why one of Us is a -- I say is a -- um a -- ha, ha, ha, he.


Pray Mr. Nichodemus, let me be one of Us, ha, ha, ha, he.


I would thou were, I say, I would -- thou were, but thou know not the
Splendour of the obscurity of the revealed secret, umph -- ha, thou
understand not?


Yes I understand you well enough, but only I don't know your meaning.


What Religion art thou of?


Religion, why I am a Duke.


What Faith dost thou profess?


Why Faith and Troth, and adznigs, and by this Cheese.


Ah thou art a beast, and should be chastised; -- therefore provoke me not:
-- I say provoke me not.


Not provoke thee -- but I will provoke thee: take that.


I ham not provoked.


Then have at the again.


I ham not provoked yet.


There, then there.


Nay, but I ham not yet provoked.


No then I'll wear out my Shoes, but I'll provoke thee; there, there, there,
and there.


Hold, hold, I say hold, for I ham provoked, and I will chastise thee.


O murder, murder, I'll fight no more: you pull by the hair Mr Nichodemus.


What dismal noise is this -- ha! Hypolito dead, then all my toyl's in vain: --
O thou unlucky chit, I wish I'd been betwattl'd, when I had to do with thee.


Unfeignedly I was provoked, therefore I say have Patience, that is to sayo be
pacified.


Out thou stinking, sneaking Bastard, he's quite dead: If ever thou serve me
so again, I'll whip thee 'till the Blood drops at thy heels.


Dead! then by Yea, and Nay, I never saw him in my life.


O cruel luck! Ariel, what ho my Spirit Ariel.


What says my mighty, and most Potent Lord?


Most potent Lord! most Potent Fiddle-stick! See thou lazy droan of a Spirit,
what mischief here is done.


O lo! O lo! O Laud! Ah poor Polly, how sadly his finger's scratched; but I'll
fly to Mother Damnables, and fetch some Pilgrim salve to cure it.


Miranda! Dorinda! Dorinda, thy poor Polly's dead.


O my dear Puss cat, shall us play Cat and Mouse?


Touch him not you Harlotry baggage, why when I say -- come away.


Alas! What's worse then ill luck?


Alonzo, Gonzalo, and Antonio, as driven in by Spirits.


Never were Hogs so driven to Rumford, as we are hunched along.

What my Boy Quakero, and alive, touch my Flesh.


My Father after the Flesh, O sorrowful joy.


You stare as if you had never seen me: have so short a time as 50 years made
you forget Prospero?


How my good old Neighbour Duke Prospero!


The Devil 'tis: O strange, I thought he had been hanged long ago.


Laud, how a little time will change folks, I had quite forgot him, and yet I
remember him as well as if 'twere but yesterday.


Had I lived 'till now where you sent me, I had been dead 20 years ago -- Know
'twas I trepanned you to this my enchanted Castle of Bridewello, where I yet
govern, and am Lord Paramount. I meant to be friends with you all, and Marry
that stripling to my eldest Girl; but see what he has done to the Infant Duke
of Mantua.


Never stir, if it be not honest little Duke Polly.


Alas poor Duke, as towardly a Child as ever broke bit of bread.


And what dost thou now intend? we fear thee not.


Quakero shall be hanged, and you shall be all tortured; ho within there,
prepare the Pillory, the Whipping-post, the Stocks, and Cat of Nine tails --
entreat me not, dispatch.


I can hold no longer, O, ho, ho-ho-ho.


Ah, ha-ha-ha-e.


Away with them, See it done.


Stay my most Potent Master, I come from the sage Vrganda of Wildo streeto,
that renowned Enchantress, who has disarmed all the Knights of the White Spear
and Nut-brown Shield: And that most mighty Necromancer Punchanello Alquiffe,
who with one breath puts Candle out, and in Rains Fire, makes Sea of painted
Clout to move, and Devils dance: by their aid I have composed a Suppositorial
Ligneous puff and blow, which would recall life though Nine days lost, see here
'tis come.


'Tis joyful news.


All must assist in the Ceremony.


Come then let's about it.


Help, help Lordlings, and Ladies help
To raise up great Heroic whelp.

Prospero, Prospero
Looks feirce as a Hero;
Then blow the Bellows, blow the Bellows, blow the Bellows, blow; blow and
puff, blow and puff, puff, puff, and blow, blow, blow.

Let not his Soul,
Get out of the hole
And all shall be well I trow, trow, trow, c.

We conjure thee to wake
By a Two-peny Cake,

By a Ginger-bread-role,

By a thing with a hole,

Which thou love with thy Soul;

By a Rattle and Drum,

By a great Sugar-plum,

As big as thy Thumb.

Polly, Polly, Polly,
O Polly, Polly, Polly!
To dye is but folly.
For shame lye not there,
While thy Doxy is here.

How is't.

By the Mass
As 'twas.

Alas.

Prospero, Prospero,
Looks, c. -- As before.

Then blow the Bellows, c. -- As before.

We conjure thee again
By a hobby Horse fine,

By thy Bullets and Cat-stick,

By thy Rearer and Trap-stick,

By thy Marbles and Nickers,

By thy Top and thy Gigg,

By thy Beard, and thy Wig.

Polly, Polly, c. -- All as before.

Victoria, Victoria! He lives, he lives, he lives.

Then let's hug him, and logg him, and tug him, and smug him: with a hey
brave Polly, and ho brave Polly and fake him, and shake him, and wake him, and
never forsake him, with a hey brave Polly, and ho brave Polly.


So, so, so, welcome to life again, now the man shall have his Mare again, and
all friends.


Thanks Prospero, and gentle Ariel.


Thanks Ariel, and gentle Prospero.


Ha, is it so, more Officers then head Constables, you may dismiss the
Prisoners and adjourn the Court.


What to the old place in Moor-fields.


Ay, ay, and make Proclamation that all good Religious People may take notice
of it.


No, no, we'll meet here again to morrow. And so she prayed me to tell ye.


If any forget the place, that man in black may instruct them, for he's
Chaplain to the Society.


Set open the Gate, you may march off, you've had punishment enough for once.


Now to wipe out the remembrance of all past sorrow, I'll show you the
pleasures of my enchanted Castle. -- Ariel, see it done, and then be free.


I'll about it strait.


My Lord great Cac-Cac-Cac-Cac-Calyban
For my sweet sake,
Some pity take
On beauteous Nymph in Caravan:
And check with seemly snout,
The Rabble rout.

Sweet Sycorax, my Mopsa dear,
My Dove, my Duck,
My Honey suck-
-le which hast neither pricknor peer,
I'll do it, take tail of Shirt,
Cleanse Eye from Dirt.

Give all the rest of this fair Crew,
A play day too;
Let Pillory
And Stocks agree,
To set all free:
Let the Beetle and Whip, be both laid to sleep,
And Prisoners Condemned, live for want of a slip.

Dear Dowdy be jocund, and sleek
The dainty fine furrows of thine Olive Cheek:
I cannot deny
My pretty Pigs ny,
With a Nose like a Rose,
And a lip as green as a Leek.
Be calm ye great Parents of the Punck, and the Pad,
While each Bully and Lass sing and revel like mad.

Be calm, c. --
While each, c. --

Compel this roaring rout to fly.

And we'll obey you by and by.

Compel, c. --
And we'll, c. --

Give's something to drink, and we'll go hence,
For we meant your honours no offence.

Here, here ye dogs, here's Eighteen-pence.

But ere you go, lets have a Dance.

Here here, c. --
But ere you, c --
While each Bully and Lass, sing and revel like mad.

Head-keeper, let Correction cease,
Let every back and bum have peace.

Do not the noble Crew beguile,
They came to sing and dance a while:
And you of pleasure make a toil.

Be still, be still, ye whips, and ye backs,
Obey, obey, my lovely Sycorax.

Be still, c. --
Obey, c. --

Her I'll obey whose breath's so strong, one blast
Sent from her Lungs would lay my Castle wast;
Come down my furies, lash no more,
But gently pour in
Salt and Urine,
To cleanse their crimson Face from gore:
Whatever they are, or what'ere their transgressions,
Free all in the Castle, free all;
Make it as quiet, as at quarter Sessions,
When they make visits to Westminster-Hall.
To the Houses you know,
Round, round, must you go,
And search every place where their Revels they keep:
But no more 'till I call, shall ye handle the whip.

To the Houses, c. --
Round, c. --
And search. --
But no more --

Now the Tyrants are gone that made ye afraid:
Let each Daughter and Son,
Make hast to come on;
And be merry, be merry, be merry,
Be merry, as a Maid.

Now the Tyrants, c. --

Bullies my Lads, your Battle sound.

And let sweet Echo from each Last rebound.

Bullies, c. --
And let, c. --

Drink up all.
Drink up all.
Drink up all.
-- Up all.
Drink up all.

See, see black Queen of Night, is sneaking down,
And under sable Arm, she hides pale Moon.
And Dame Aurora, yonder with eyes grey,
Shedding Od'rifferous dew, and breaking day.
Behold the Skies Head-Waggoner, the Sun,
With Fiery steed up yonder Hill does run.
Miss Thetis would from Watery Bed pursue.
Begone fond Minx, must none have Sun but you?

Now your drink, and your Drabs you shall safely enjoy.

No Constables or Watch, shall your quiet destroy.

Now, c. --
No Constable, c. --

We'll closely convey you by a private back door:
Your Ale and Stepony we'll fill on the Score.

We'll treat ye great lubbers, as ye sail in the Straits,
With Trumpets and Cymbals, and loud City Waits.

In each room a soft Bed, or a Couch we will lay,
To please you all Night, and delight you all day.

In each room, c. --
To please you, c. --
Ariel appears in the Air, and Sings.
Where good Ale is, there suck I,
In a Cobblers Stall I lye,
While the Watch are passing by;
Then about the Streets I fly,
After Cullies merrily.
And I merrily, merrily take up my clo'se,
Under the Watch, and the Constables nose.

Henceforth may our Enchanted Castle be,
From Ignorant Sprights, and sullen Devils free:
May beauteous Nymphs like little Lambkins play,
While Swains with amorous Pipes drive care away,
Our harmless mirth' shall still attend you here:
'Tis mirth that makes you Youthful brisk and fair.
That our Mock-Tempest, then may flourish long,
Clap all that would seem beautiful and young.

GEntlemen look'ee now, pray, my Father says that I and my Sister
must have ye all i fads:
Whereof I can't tell what to do, I'll swear'o;
If I take you, I lose my dear Quakero:
His things are precious, and his love is true;
But there's no trust in ought you say or do:
Yet for ought that I know,
My self could serve you all as well as any;
But my Father says, pray,
One Dish of meat can never serve so many;
For though you all agree in one design,
To feed like Schollers on the tender Loyn;
In this you differ with them, pray;
One little Chop, and one plain Dish will do.
You must have Sauce, warm Plates, fresh hau-gou's too;
The large Pottage of glittering show and dress,
Must cheat you to the little bit of flesh.
My Father says,
Since with such charge we purchase your Contents,
He thinks 'tis fit we should have Settlements:
For when you have enjoyd, what that is, I cant tell i ^ads; but I believe you
can, --
Tare dronish, cold and dull as any thing;
Just like a Be, when he has lost his sting:
And though with all our tempting sweets we strive,
We ne'er shall catch you more within our Hive.
Then must our sinking joys ne'er rise again?
Must we be kind, and show all in vain?
You loved the jilting Mother much and long;
She's old, the Daughter's active brisk and young:
If you neglect us still, pray,
May all your stony Pride unpit i'd fall;
And may our harmless Devils take you all.

