OLd Plays like Mistresses, long since enjoyed,
Long after please, whom they before had cloyed;
For Fancy chews the Cudd on past delight,
And cheats it self to a new Appetite.
But then this second Fit comes not so strong,
Like second Agues, neither fierce nor long:
What you have known before, grows sooner stale,
And less provokes you, than an untold Tale.
That but refreshes what before you knew,
But this discovers something that is new;
Hence 'tis, that at new Plays you come so soon,
Like Bride-grooms, hot to go to Bed ere noon!
Or, if you are detained some little space,
The stinking Footman's sent to keep your place.
But, when a Play's revived, you stay and dine,
And drink till three, and then come dropping in;
As Husband after absence, wait all day,
And decently for Spouse, till Bed-time stay!
So, ere the Brethren's liberal Fit was spent,
The first wise Nonconformist, underwent
With ease, and batten'd in Imprisonment.
For greater gains, his zeal refused the less;
Each day to him was worth a Diocese.
But he who now, in hopes of equal gain,
Will needs be Prisoner, tries the Trick in vain;
He melts in durance half his Grease away,
To get, like us, poor twenty Pounds a day.

HEll now has done its worst; the meagre Furies have opened all their Viols of
black Malice, and shed the utmost drop -- Is't possible! What Commission from
the King to seize and banish my dearest Friend! Who would be good or virtuous
if this be the reward! Can it be true? -- What banished!


Oh killing Sound! The greatest pang of death is easy to this Torment.


'Tis my Fortune.
But Oh ye immortal Powers! what is my sin,
To merit this thy worst of punishments?

If it be sin to love, we are past mercy,
For never hearts were swelled with that true passion,
As was Ursaces and Eugenia's.

Hell swallow thee quick that cause this Separation:
Thou hast the old man's Curse; I hope 'twill speed thee:
To weep is but in vain.

My Queen, my Mistress,
Stop these warm bubbling Springs that melt my heart;
Those Currents dearer than the Wealth of Ganges,
Now flowing down the Rosie Fields of Beauty;
And listen to my Vow: I will continue
The truest Husband that ere plighted faith:
My Residence in Galia at Beaupre's;
My Father's Friend: Thither write my Soul,
And I will feed upon each Character,
And wear the Paper out with eager Kisses.

So will I yours, with keeping in my bosom,
Here near my heart -- O the sad thought of parting!

It must be so.


Nay stay a little longer:
Were you but riding out to take the Air,
Such parting were too slight -- See here my Love,
This Diamond was my Mothers -- wear it for me,
And keep it till you woo another Wife,
When poor Eugenia's dead.

Another Wife!
Why my best Life; Oh why that cruel word!
Another Wife! No, you supreme Directors
Give me my own; let me enjoy but this,
And freeze up my Embraces of a next
With Death's cold Icicle.
Remain thou here while Sense can keep it on;
And Sweetest Dearest,
As I my poor self did exchange for you,
To your so infinite loss, so in our Trifles
I still w^ of you -- for my sake wear this Bracelet:
It has a Charm against Levity and Jealousy;
'Twill keep me in your mind.

It shall grow to me, and from my Arm
Never shall be separated -- Ha, my Father!
When my Ursaces shall we meet again?

When? Heaven can tell.


Still dare thou with thy baseness wound my eyes:
Mechanic Wretch, lost both in birth and merit,
Can thy plumed Insolence dare to soar so high,
As to contemn my Orders?

Royal Sir,
Grace but my Story with a minutes audience.

Ha! Would thou speak?
And shall I patient hear my own dishonour,
Having yet bleeding Wounds new probed -- What listen
To my Daughters Infamy? and shall a Vassal,
The Creature of my Charity, insolently dare
To stamp his plebeian Image on my Coin,
Yet live untortur'd? -- Oh ye Powers have patience!

Mercy, Sir, adds lustre to a Crown;
'Tis lost on stubborn minds.

Hence from my sight:
If after the next dawn within my Kingdom,
Appears so vile a Creature as Ursaces,
That moment is thy last of Life -- Away
Thou poison to my Blood.

Heaven keep your Majesty,
And may your years and joys numerous as sands,
Crowd happily upon you.
So poor Offenders trembling meet their doom,
Punished by death, yet fear a worse to come.

So breaks the dear strings of the panting heart,
When the loved life flies from it -- Oh --

Was ever Scythian Cruelty like this,
Or long Divorce so bitter?

Was ever King so wretched in his Off-spring,
Or ever careful Father cursed as I?

Are you not mighty? Shall the lofty Oak
Stoop to the Shrub beneath it? No, rather root it up.
O that my Spirit lodged within your Bosom,
I would not counsel but command Obedience!

Madam, I must believe you are my Step-mother,
Better known to me by that title than your Love.

She is your Queen, whose Son you might have married,
Had wisdom guided thy unskilful youth:
Designed to make thee happy.

Happy?


Nay let her use her pleasure:
A Jewel of true worth, exceeding lustre,
Sure need not court the wearer; nor shall my Son
By humble flattery sooth her pride and vainness:
If as her Equal she think fit to treat him,
My voice is his -- but I'll have no Submissions.
But I shall court occasion to consider
This sly contempt -- You shall know who I am.

I do too well.


Thou too well know thy shame, but from this moment
I charge thee on thy life not shed a Tear,
Nor breath a Sigh -- But entertain the Prince
As he deserves, with the best face of Smiles:
Bury in black oblivion that low Fellow,
That exiled Wretch Ursaces, forget for ever,
Or by the Gods of Britain, by my Crown,
And my Queens Love,
I'll cast thee out a stranger to my Blood,
And ne'er remember that thou were my Daughter.

There yet is comfort, could you calm this Passion:
Your Father may relent, your Lord return,
And you again be blessed, a happy Princess.

A Princess? O vain Title, and thou ingrate
To mock my bitter Woes with Quality,
The cursed cause of my Grief -- Ah would I were
Some Shepherd's Daughter, and my dear Ursaces
The Darling of some neighbouring Villager!
That through the flowery Meadows sent him daily,
His Scrip well filled with store of Rustic Viands,
To treat me under some old shady Oak,
The Monarch of the Grove: Then then should I be happy;
There would we look and smile, and talk and sing,
And tell a hundred, hundred pretty Tales,
Vow lasting passions all the live-long day,
And sigh, and kiss the happy hours away.

Here comes my Father.


May all thy years, thou Parent of my Life,
Be long and happy, as thou bring me comfort.
How did my Lord support this Separation?

Like your Lord,
I kissed his hand aboard, saw the hoised Sails,
Stood on the shore, and viewed the rolling waves,
Then smooth as Youth, and mild as modest Virtue,
Courting his presence -- all the gentle winds
Were lodged in remote corners, softly breezing,
To wast that Treasure safely to the Port,
On which your Life depends.

My Life indeed -- But good old Sir,
Tell me (for there's a Theme of Truth lodged in that Face)
What was the last kind word he spoke of me?

His Queen, his Wife, and then removed from shore,
Just as I left him,
I saw him clasp his hands, and kiss your Ring.

Senseless Jewel, happier far than I!
But could thou leave him so? -- had I been there,
I would have broke my Eye-strings, cracked them,
And looked after him till the diminution of space
Had pointed him, sharp as my Needle,
And when the envious distance barred my sight
Of that blessed Object, turned my eyes and wept.

I could not stop that Tribute more than you,
What War could never force, mild Pity drew.

I did not take my leave of him, but had
Most pretty things to say, ere I could tell him
How I would think of him at certain hours
Such thoughts, and such -- ere I could make him swear,
The Gallian Beauties never should betray
My Interest, or his Honour, or have charged him
At the sixth hour of Morn, or Noon, or Midnight,
To bless me with his Greeting: Or ere I could
Give him a parting Kiss, which I had set
Between two charming words, comes in my Father,
And like the stubborn blast of the stormy North,
Nipped all my Buds from blowing.

Madam, Prince Cloten's coming.


I'll fly him as the Plague: My Lord, your Servant;
Alas, how poor a thing's a Fool of Quality!

Had Nature stamped all Women in this mould,
Our Sex had all been damned, attractive Love and Beauty
Had lulled us to the Devil; we should have doted so,
Self-murder must have followed,
And shown the effect of too much Love and Jealousy.
But they are not all like this -- This is a Creature
So good, I almost wonder that she lives:
Her Lord's a brave young man too, and when I prove
False to his merit, may I then be wretched.

But to have six to four for 200 Guinies,
And lose, is damned luck, though by your favour, for a man
Of my quality, ha Iachimo! honest drunken Lord, is't not?

'Twas indifferently hellish -- the Devil had a paw in it,
That's certain.
But stay, how now, who's that?

'Ud so, 'tis my Lord Pisanio, and I'll lay a Wager sent Messenger to me from
the Princess Eugenia.

Well, my Mother's a plaguy cunning Woman:

I, see she will make her marry me in spite of her. How now my Lord Pisanio,
what News with you, umph?

My Lord Iachimo, prithee be wise now, and look soberly a little.


Never fear me man, I am sober as a Judge.


And how does the Princess old Lord -- ha -- does she come about, does she
relent, does she yet know the difference between Lord Cloten, and that
mechanic banished Worm Ursaces?


A Worm, my Lord?


A Worm, my Lord, ay a Maggot, if compared to me; hang him, indigent Rascal,
were there no other Reason, I hate him for his Poverty, for he's not worth a
Groat, as poor as Iehu.


Iehu? Iob, Iob, my Lord, 'twas Iob was the poor Rat.


I say 'twas Iehu: Prithee Iachimo be silent, a Pox I wonder you will pretend
to talk when you see you are drunk.


Mum, mum -- I've done: But, my Lord, prithee ask him if he knows where we may
find a sound Wench; he's a slauging old Whipster, I warrant him.


The disease of Folly may be infectious, I'll be gone.


Hark you my Lord, why in such hast -- have you no message from the Princess?
-- umph --


The Princess? Not I, my Lord.


Not you, my Lord? and why so -- my never look sow'r for the matter, Gad if you
do, I'll be revenged, I'll tell you that the Queen shall know it; I'll not be
affronted, not I, by ne'er a State-Caterpillar in Britain; Gad any one that
frowns at me is the Son of a Whore, and my Mother shall get him poisoned.


My Lord, I know nothing of your Affair; I beseech you make not my Age the
Subject of your Anger; I am not fit to be privy in Love-matters; the Princess
may be fond, dote, languish, nay die for you, but for my part I am ignorant.


O may she so, Sir -- dost hear that, Iachimo?


Oons, Pull off his Beard, confound his Whiskers; what does he prate?


I thought she could not hold out long: Come Iachimo, thou and I will go and
prepare a Serenade for her.


Let's put old Drybones there upon a wooden Dromedary,
Carry him before her Window, and make him sing her a Song.

Ha, ha, he! 'twould be rare sport faith; but hang him, we won't do him that
honour: Come, come away.


That such a subtle Devil as his Mother
Should bring the World this Ass -- this Ape of Mankind;
A Woman too that puts down all with Brain,
And over-reaching Plots, yet this great Fool her Son
Cannot take two from twenty for his heart,
And leave eighteen -- Alas poor Eugenia, how I pity thee!
Now I'll to the King;
If I can, I'll serve thee; if not, wish thee well.

There goes Ursaces Parasite; that old Fellow
Does me, my Son, and great Design, more mischief,
Than any now at Court. Well, what's to be done then?
When a Tree stands to hinder a good Prospect,
The only way's to fell it -- he shall down,
His Fate is cast -- Aurelia.

Your Majesty.


Is the Doctor come yet?


Not yet Madam, but expected every moment.


That Instrument of Fate I've bribed to serve me;
He has strange poys'nous Drugs, whose mortal Quality
Hold deadly enmity with humane Life.
This being mine, I'll try the first effects
Upon this Lord, this Bar of my Ambition,
This foe to my Son's Greatness -- where's Eugenia?

The Princess, Madam?


Could you not answer me without that Title?
The Princess? you'll call her Queen ere long.

Your Majesties Pardon; I know more of duty.


Has she been seen to day?


Nor yesterday, Madam.
The twilight Bat that hates the meridian Sun,
Keeps not so close, her Window's are damned up,
And not a Creature suffered to come near her,
But her new Favourite Clarinna.

Pisanio's Daughter?


Yes, Madam.


Send one to tell him I would speak with him.
They're plotting hourly, therefore 'tis fit Vengeance
Should be swift; for by Pisanio's death,
My Son mounts one step higher towards the Throne.
The King is old, too old to share my heart,
And if he dies, Eugenia then is Queen:
But Queen of Shades she shall be ere that happen,
If she refuse the Marriage with my Son --
Virtue avaunt, thou Dream, thou airy Phantasm;
Had I been lowly born, I might have been
Thy Votary -- but 'tis below a Queen.
Ambition's Virtue now, therefore be gone:
Cloten, For thee I'll cut through all Opposers,
King, Husband, Daughter, Friend, I'll stop at none,
But on their bloody Ruins build thy Throne. --

UPon my Honour, Sir, I have observed him in Britain; he was then of a
declining fame, and not expected to reap the additional Honour Fortune has
since blessed him with: I could have looked on him then, without the help of
admiration, though the Catalogue of his Endowments had been tabl'd by his side,
and I to peruse him by Items.


You speak of him when he was much less accomplished than now he is. Consider,
Sir, he was young, he was young.


I have seen him at Madrid, and am of opinion, we had many there that could
behold the Sun with as firm eyes as he.


This business of marrying his King's Daughter, wherein he must be weighed by
her youth and weakness, rather than his own value, echoes him, I doubt not, a
great deal above his true worth.


And then his Banishment.


I, and the approbation of those that weep. This lamentable Divorce to comply
with her, seem wonderfully to extend him: But I shall shortly be better
informed; for I design a speedy Journey to Britain, where perhaps I may spend
the best part of this Summer.


If the Ladies there are to be won at this easy rate, your time, Sir, may not
be altogether lost.


Why faith 'tis to be hoped so; and for my encouragement, the Gentleman has
given us a good hint of the free Constitution of his Country. But how comes
it, Sir, he is to sojourn with you? Pray how creeps Acquaintance.


His Father and I have commanded together, to whom I have been often bound for
no less than my Life: Here he comes; and pray let him be so esteemed among you,
as suits with Gentlemen of your knowledge to a Stranger of his Quality -- I
beseech you.

Be better known to this Gentleman, whom I commend to you as a noble Friend of
mine; how worthy he is, I will leave to appear hereafter, rather than story him
in his own hearing.


Sir, If my memory play not the Traitor with me, I think I had the honour of
your Company once in Spain.


Since when, Sir, I have been debtor to you for Courtesies, which I will be
ever to pay, and yet pay ever.


Sir, You o're-rate my poor kindness; I was glad I did atone my Countryman
and you; it had been pity you should have been put together, with so mortal a
purpose as then each other bore, about a business of so slight and trivial a
nature.


Sir, I was then but a young Traveller, and rather desired to be silent in what
I heard, than to be guided by others Experiences; but upon my riper judgement,
(if I offend not to say it is riper) my Quarrel was not altogether slight.


Faith, yes to be put to the Arbitrament of Swords, and by two such that would
by all likelihood have disabled one the other, or have fallen both.


Can we with manners ask what was the difference?


Safely I think: 'Twas a Contention in public about the praise of our
Countrey-Mistresses; this Gentleman at that time vouching, and upon warrant of
blood affirmation, his to be more fair, virtuous, wise, chaste, constant,
qualified, and less contemptible, than any the rarest of our Spanish Ladies.


That Lady is not living now sure, or this Gentleman's Opinion by this worn
out.


Sir, She holds her Virtue still, as I my Mind.


You must not so far prefer her before ours of Gallia.


Being so far provoked as I was at Madrid, I would diminish nothing, though I
profess my self her Adorer, not her Friend.


Methinks as fair, and as good, a kind of hand in hand Comparison were somewhat
too good for any Lady in Britany; for as that Diamond of yours there outshines
some I have seen, so perhaps may she; but I have not seen the most precious
Diamond that is, nor you the Lady Sir.


I praised her as I rated her, so do I my Jewel.


What do you esteem it at?


More than the World enjoys.


Then it must of necessity follow, that your unparalleled Mistress is outpriz'd
by a Trifle.


You are mistaken: 'Tis possible one may be sold or given, if there were Wealth
enough for the Purchase, or Merit for the Gift; the other is not a thing for
Sale, and only the Gift of Heaven.


Which Heaven has given you.


Yes, and which with its leave I will keep.


In secure Opinion, the contented blessing of the Wise. 'Tis true, you may; but
you know, Sir, Strange Fowl light upon neighbouring Ponds; your Ring may be
stolen too, and so your brace of unprizable Estimations be lost; the one being
frail, and the other casual, a cunning Thief, or a (that way) accomplished
Courtier, would hazard the winning both of first and last.


Your Gallia contains none so accomplished a Courtier, to my knowledge: If in
point of Constancy you term my Mistress frail; I doubt not but you may have
store of Thieves, but yet I fear not my Ring.


Thieves in Love, Sir; we are for the pleasant way of Larceny.


Ay 'tis well you steal Love, your Rhetoric else would hardly promote you
higher than the Intrigue of a Shepherd's Daughter.


Come enough of this Gentlemen; pray let's leave here.


Sir, With all my heart: This worthy Monsieur, I thank him, makes no Stranger
of me* we are familiar at first sight.


With five times so much Rhetoric I should get ground of your fair Mistress,
nay perhaps make her go back even to the yielding, had I admittance and
opportunity to befriend me.


No, no.


Come, I'll make a bold Proposition: I will lay the Moiety of my Estate to your
Ring, which in my opinion overvalues it something -- that I can win your Lady:
I make this Wager now rather against your Confidence, than her Reputation; and
to bar your offence herein too, I durst attempt it against any Lady in the
World.


Come Sir, you abuse your self, and would, I doubt not, sustain what you
deserve by such an Attempt.


What's that?


Why a shameful repulse, though your attempt deserves more a punishment too.


As how Sir?


To have your Nose slit cross, your slanderous Tongue pulled out by the roots,
torn, mangled, cut to atoms, and blown like common filth into the Air.


And who should do this?


I, were I concerned: Come, Sir, hold your Tongue, or by Heaven I shall --


What a sleepy Britain? -- I'll try that.


Hold Gentlemen, and as you are my Friends forbear; there has been too much
said -- it came in suddenly, let it die as it was born, I beseech you be
reconciled.


The Gentleman was a little too free in language.


Mor dieu, Would I had my Estate and my Friend's, on confirmation of what I
speak.


That you would win my Lady?


Yours to choose, who in Constancy, you think, stands so fair -- Come Sir, let
us lay by this petty Brawl; I will lay you 10000 Ducats to your Ring, that
commend me to the Court where your Lady is, and with no more advantage than the
opportunity of a second Conference, I will bring from thence that Honour of
hers which you imagine so reserved.


I will wage Gold against your Gold; my Ring I hold as dear as my Finger, 'tis
part of it.


Oh you are a great Courtier Sir, and know that to buy Ladies Flesh at millions
a dram is cheap, though you cannot keep it from tainting; but I see you have some
Religion in you that you fear.


Faith, I fear Religion much more than your Prowess: And now to reclaim your
vanity, let there be Covenants drawn between us, and I will accept your Wager.
Come now, I dare you to it; there's my Ring.


'Tis done.


I will have it no Lay.


By the Gods 'tis one. If I bring you not sufficient testimony that I have
enjoyed the dearest bodily part of your Mistress, my 10000 Ducats are yours,
so is your Diamond too; but if I thrive in my Enterprise, this your Jewel is
mine, provided I have a Letter of Recommendation for my better Entertainment.


I embrace the Conditions; only thus far you shall answer: If you attempt her,
and give direct proof you have prevailed, I am no further your Enemy, she is
not worth a Quarrel; but if she remain chaste, you not making it appear
otherwise; then for the ill Opinion, and the Assault you have made to her
Chastity, you shall answer me with your Sword.


Your Hand -- my Honour on it -- I'll fetch my Gold, have our two
Wagers recorded, and then away for Britain.
And if I lose, I must prove dumb or blind;

If win, there is no Hell like Womankind.


NOt seen, nor to be spoke with?


She's too haughty,
And since the exile of her abject Minion,
Proves a stranger both to Manners and Obedience.

She shall be forced to Duty.
What disobey her Father, slight her Queen?
Now by the awful Powers that sway the Heavens,
Paternal Love and Mildness I disclaim,
And as a Corrosive to my sick heart,
Hold her for ever.

Please your Majesty.


Pisanio, do not speak.
I have with watchful eye observed thy actions,
Oft probed thy heart, and found it still corrupted,
Still linked and fettered to that banished Fellow,
Maugre our strict Commands, and deep Resentments.
Why dost thou shame thy Age, and smile upon us?
Bend low thy knees as loyal, that art known
A Rebel to our Peace -- Come, this is not well.

Royal Sir, and my most honoured Master,
In whose blessed favour I was ever happy,
Whom I have loved from my hearts core, obeyed with joy,
As King, and Genius of the War, followed through death,
And as a God adored for Clemency.

O smooth-tongu'd Vice, O Flatterer!


Brand not your poor old Soldier, I beseech you,
With breach of Loyalty. I rebel to your Peace?
These Cheeks that have been furrowed in your Service;
This Body scarred with wounds; these low sunk Tapers
Now dully shining in their withered Sockets,
And spent with watching in cold Winter Camps,
Have still been careful to preserve your Peace,
Not to disturb it. How then am I a Rebel?
Plebeian Sound it freezes all my blood,
And adds a sharper Winter to my Age.

The silver Hairs that grace thy Reverend Head,
Should grow in Wisdoms Soil, thou should be
Loyal: But who can tell a Murderer by his Face,
Or know when Treason's candi'd over with Virtue?
'Tis said you love Ursaces, wish him King,
In hopes to make your self and Daughter mighty:
But these are but Reports, and claim small credit.

Slanders, hellish Slanders.
The poys'nous Bite of some detracting Villain,
That thinks my glass of Life has run too long:
So may my better part, my immortal Soul,
That guides the Orders of this aged Body,
And dignifies it from the sordid Bruit,
Return to its first Seat, its primitive Glory,
As I have always wished my Soveraign's Life,
And oft with hazard of my own defended it.
'Tis true I love Ursaces.

Ha, mind that Sir!


You love him then, and though your enervate power
Dare not oppose our rage, you wish him well.

As he deserves Sir, modestly I think.
His Virtues merit some small approbation;
He's honest, valiant, and what's more, judicious;
Wife to his Youth, and temperate to his Judgement.
I once remember Sir, when the great Cassibelan
Sent me against the stubborn Cambria Rebels,
Then up in Arms, headed by old Bellarius,
At Milford-haven, I took Ursaces with me,
Who though a beardless Boy of 16 years,
Showed many signal proofs of manly Valour,
Fleshed his young Arm, and died his virgin Sword,
In the best blood of your proud Enemies.
This was some proof of Virtue, and deserves
Sure some applause.

He was rewarded for it.
His Majesty heaped daily favours on him,
Blessed him with smiles, and gave him the permission
Like a young Bird to wanton in his shine,
And grow even till he grew insolent,
And like a Bruit,
Sullied the Royal Spring that quenched his thirst.

The Bonds of Love and Nature.


Speak no more.
Upon thy Life no more in his defence.
Rash headlong Fool -- how dare thou shock my will,
Or stand betwixt his sentence and my power?
Your service past pleads for you; but a second Crime
Of this cursed nature rends thee from my Clemency.

My Lord, You were to blame t'enrage the King,
With lavish praise of that desertless Exile:
But be not troubled, I will appear your Friend,
And stand between his anger and your fault.
Doctor, a word; my Lord, for a time leave us.

Thank your Majesty.
She's kind of the sudden, pray Heaven it portend good:
Such Flashes from her, like Ethereal fire,
Are followed with a Thunder-bolt; I must be watchful.

Yes, I will stand thy Friend, and such a one,
As fire to Cities, kindled by some Traitors;
Or the long-wing'd Hawk, to the weak prey she trusses.
Now, Doctor, have you brought the Drugs?

They are here, Madam.


Well, there's your reward: Lock up your lips with the Key of
Secrefie; whatever thou know, say nothing;
Do this; I'll load thy merit richly, move the King
To any shape for thy preferment: fare thee well;
Be faithful, then be great, thou hast my power.

That is, be a Rogue, and thrive; no Idol Greatness,
Thou gilded Pill, swallowed by many thousands,
Ne'er shalt thou infect my honesty. -- She thinks she has
Strange lingering poison; but I well knew her spirit,
And would not trust one of her malice with a Drug
Of that damned nature: Those she has
Will stupefy and dull the sense a while,
And seemingly destroy; but there is
No danger in what show of death it makes,
More than the locking up the spirits a while,
To be more fresh reviving. -- She is gulled
With a most false Effect, and I the truer,
Hindering her black design with honesty.

AH cruel Father, and a bloody Queen!
Step-mother to my hopes as well as person,
A dull Fop Suitor to a wedded Lady,
That has her Husband banished. Can there be
A tide of woe like this -- yet life to bear it?

Madam, A Gentleman new arrived from Gallia,
Comes from my Lord with Letters.

What dost thou say, thy Lord? speak, speak again:
Oh thou art tedious! Said thou, from thy Lord?

Yes, Madam, and with Letters.


Fly to conduct him; be thy nimble speed
Swifter than Winds, or the Suns race -- away.
Now my Clarinna, now my dearest Lord,
Remembers his poor Wife: Oh my full heart!

Madam, The brave Ursaces is in safety,
And thus salutes your Highness.

Most worthy Sir, You are the happiest Messenger
That ever Lady wished for -- my dear Clarinna:
See all the doors be locked, lest the Queen
Come and disturb us.

I am proud to do you service; here are Letters.


The Index of my joy -- I know the Hand:
For learned indeed were that Astronomer
That knew the Stars, as I his Character.
Wax, by your leave, (Oh be you ever blessed!)
You pretty Bees, that make these locks of Counsel;
Bankrupts and Lovers have not equal prayers.

All outwardly seems most Angelical:
If she be furnished with a mind so rare,
She is alone the Phoenix of the World,
And I have lost my Wager. -- Boldness befriend me;
Arm me Audacity from head to foot,
Or like the Parthians I shall flying fight,
And never keep my ground.

He is one of the noblest Note, to whose kindnesses I am most infinitely bound;
Reflect upon him accordingly as you value your Ursaces.
So far I read aloud; but even the life-bloud
Of my heart is warmed by the rest -- Noble Sir,
The worth my Lord writes of you, shows your value.
Pray command here; you're welcome, Sir, to Britain.

Your Highness too much honours me:
Now to begin the Game, assist me Cunning.
Has Nature given 'em eyes,
To see you spangled Sky, and the rich crop
Of Sea and Land? Can they distinguish 'twixt
The Planetary Orbs, and the numerous Pebbles
Upon the hungry Beach? and can they not,
Guided by humane Reason, make distinction
'Twixt fair and foul?

What makes your admiration?


Oh cursed lust!
Thou horrid, old, blind Devil of the flesh,
Why do men suffer thee to dam their Reason?

This is strange. -- What's the matter, Sir? Continues
My Lord in health? Indeed you make me fear.

He's well, Madam.


Is he disposed to mirth? I hope he is.


Exceeding pleasant, not a Stranger there:
So gay and frollicksom. -- He is nick-nam'd,
The Britain Reveller.

When he was here, he did incline to sadness,
And oftentimes not knowing why.

It seems then our sharp Air has cured him.
For my part I never saw him sad:
There's an Italian, his associate one,
An eminent Signieur, that has lately wedded
A plump young Bona Roba, and when he speaks
Of Constancy in Love, the roving Britain,
(Your Lord I mean) laughs from free Lungs, cries, Oh
Can my Sides hold, to think that man, who knows
What Woman is, how loose and how imperfect,
Should throw away a thought on such a trifle!

Will my Lord say so? Pray speak.


Oh often, Madam!
And with his eyes flowing in tears of laughter.
It is a kind of sport, faith, to be by,
And hear him mock the Italian.
But Heaven knows, some men are much to blame.

Not he, I hope.


Not he?


Nay, there is more in this, that cold Assertion,
Attended with a careless carriage, shows
You speak not what you think; my Lord, I fear,
Blessed with the Gallian Beauties, forgets Britain.

Oh gracious Heaven! why dost thou shower down blessings
Upon unthankful man, that hourly slights 'em,
And like the lavish hand of hood-wink'd chance,
Throw all to the fool, and let the learned, wise and virtuous,
Pine out a miserable life in poverty?

This still is from the matter; I beseech you, Sir,
What is't creates your wonder?

Something that moves my pity too.


Who do you pity, Sir?


Two Creatures heartily.


Pray Heaven it reach not hither: Am I one, Sir?


The more my Plague to know it you are one.


How can I merit pity, my Lord being well,
As by this Letter I have proof he is?
The meaning of all this.

The meaning's fatal: Gods, Had I this Cheek
To bathe my Lips upon; this Hand, whose touch,
Whose every touch would force the feeler's Soul
To the Oath of Constancy; this Object, which
Takes prisoner the wild motion of the Eye,
Fixing it only here: Should I, damned then,
Oh double damned, if ever so Apostate
Mingle with Lips, as common as the stairs
That mount the Capital.

Hah!


Clasp Bodies plagued with all the pains
That Infamy can lend Nature: Swear, an Eye
Base, dead and glimmering as the smoky Taper,
More bright than yours that lights that World of Beauty.
Should I swear this, 'twere fit all Plagues of Hell
Should bribe my Perjury.

Why has my Lord, has my Ursaces sworn this?


I would he had not.
Had I not heard it, he has so fair an outside,
Belief could not have entered me.

Oh misery!


Unhappy I that tell you this sad Story:
But Heaven knows my just and good design;
I could not, see you wronged, and keep you ignorant.

Then is there nothing in Mankind but Vice?
No Faith, no Honour. Ye swift-footed hour,
Ye silent Witnesses of my true passion,
Call back his Oaths: How often has he sworn
To be for ever constant?

Oh he will swear extremely!
He takes a kind of pleasure to be perjured.

And will he kiss those Creatures?


Kiss them, Madam?
Alas, would that were all! there's no great fault in kissing.

Let me hear no more; be dumb to the rest for ever.


I know he hates ye; he has almost owned as much:
When fired with Wine and Lust, he told your fondness
In sport to his new Mistress.

Oh hellish Act! Oh cursed Ingratitude!


I swear, your sad Misfortunes strike a heart
That here vows to your service: Be revenged, Madam,
The way is easy.

Revenged? Alas how should I*
Unless upon my self, by sighs and weepings,
For loving that false man.

Another way
Courts your acceptance.

How Sir?


'Tis the secret'st and the sweetest way:
I dedicate my self thus to your pleasure;
Thus pay my adoration to your Beauty:
I am a man born nobler than Ursaces,
As young, as vigorous, and far more constant,
And will continue fast to your affection,
Still close and sure.

Oh Heaven! Is't possible? And will you love me too?


Love thee? -- I, better than my Soul:
Were I assured of celestial Joys,
Long as its Immortality love thee.
The tender Mother loves not her first-born,
The Poet Fame, or the sick Youth his health,
With half that zeal. -- Kind Fate, she comes, she yields:
Oh glorious Conquest! -- Let me seal my Passion
Upon thy snowy hands transported, then rove higher,
And ransack this white Magazine of Beauty.
Here I shall find.

That which thou meritest, Death.
Detested Wretch, practised in Villainy,
How I condemn my credulous Ears that have
So long been Traitors? Were thou honourable,
Thou would have told me this for Virtues sake,
And not for such base Ends.
Who's there, Clarina?
The King my Father shall be made acquainted
Of this presumption, and by punishment,
Equal to the Crime, reward thy brutal folly.

'D's heart, this won't do, I must shift quickly, or I'm ruined.
Give me your gracious pardon:
What I have spoke was by your Lord's Command,
To try your Constancy, and find if distance
Could play the Traitor with your faith and memory,
Which now I know unshook'd, and shall acquaint him.

Can this be true? Could my Lord doubt me then?


Alas you know, Madam, fierce Loves have still some jealousy
He is a man of that clear equal temper,
That he enchants Societies unto him;
He sits amongst them like a descended God;
He has a kind of Grandeur sets him off,
More than a Mortal seeming. Be not angry then,
Oh chastest of thy kind! that I have adventured*
To try your Virtue by a false Report,
Being obliged by Oath, and my design so honest.

I'm satisfied; you appear clear again:
Pray use my Power in the Court.

My humble thanks; I had almost forgot
To entreat your Highness in a small Request,
And yet of moment too; for it concerns
Your Lord, my self, and other noble Friends,
That share in the design.

Pray what is't?


A dozen of us Gentlemen, and your Lord,
The best feather of our Wing, have mingled Sums,
To buy a Present for the Roman Emperor,
Which I, the Factor for the rest, have done in Britain here:
'Tis Plate of rare device, and Jewels
Of rich and exquisite form; their value's great,
And I am something curious, being a Stranger,
To have them in safe custody: May it please ye
To take them in protection?

Willingly.
Since 'tis my Lord's Concern, I'll have them kept
Here in my Apartment.

They are in a Chest,
Attended by my Men; I will presume
To send them to ye, only for this night,
I must aboard to morrow.

So soon?


Indeed I must.
Therefore I shall beseech you, if you please
To greet your Lord by writing, do it to night*
For I've outstay'd the time that is material
To the tender of our Present.

I'll instantly about it.
Send your Chest to me, I'll take care of it,
And see it safe returned.

Your Highness faithful Servant.


'Twas but a gust of Passion in the King,
That like a ruffling Storm shakes the tall Grove,
Yet in a moment's gone, and all is calm.

I am much a debtor to your Majesty.


Besides you should consider he is old,
Peevish with sickness, scarce had lived till now,
But for these Helps of Nature, this rich Cordial,
Which I have made through providence to help him:
This Glass is worth a Kingdom to the Sick;
I give it thee Pisanio, I give it as an Earnest
Of future favour; when thou art ill, drink this,
'Twill conquer the Disease, nay though given over
By all Physicians, 'twill renew thy health.

Your Majesty's too gracious; but like the Sun,
Display your beams, and shed your kindly blessings
Upon a withered stump that cannot grow,
Though you can influence; this rich Cordial,
Though of this heavenly nature, can but add
A minute more to the snuff of my life's Taper,
That yet must out at last.

We all must die, my Lord:
But 'tis no harm sure to prolong a life,
When living we do well; therefore preserve it,
'Tis worth your care. -- The King's in bed; good night,
My Lord.

Blessings still crown your Majesty.


On him or Eugenia; if it work, I'm happy.


There is a mystery in her tide of Favours,
Heaven will not let me know: She always hated me,
Because I mislik'd her Son, yet now showers down
All Kindnesses, commends me to the King, takes care
Of my health, and gives me here a Cordial to preserve it.
But why may not all this be as a hook and bait,
To get me from my Element of Honesty?
Hah, it is, it must, I have it! Hah! beware then,
And though in Exile, show thou love Ursaces,
That good, that brave young man; I wish Eugenia
Deserve him; I have some fears I saw a Stranger,
A tall, hot-blouded, fluttering Fellow,
An hour ago, strutting from her Apartment,
And as he went, the perfumed Pulvillio left a scent behind him,
Enough to choke a Civet-Cat: I always thought her innocent,
Pray Heaven she prove so; for if the Woman's
Fickle Devil once seize her,
Like a huge Stone she rolls the steepy Hill,
Not to be stopped by Conscience, Force, or Skill.

WHo's there -- Clarina?


Yes, Madam.


What hour is't my Dear?


Past Twelve above a quarter.


I have read three hours then.
My Eyes are weak;
Pray then go to Bed:
Indeed I trouble you; but leave the Candle burning,
And if thou think on it, bid my Woman call me
At five a Clock: Good night, Sleep seizes me;
To thy protection I commend me Heaven.

All's still as Death, and hushed as Midnight silence:
Now the Crickets sing, and mortal wearied Sense
Repairs it self by rest. Lewd Tarquin thus
Did softly tread and tremble, ere he wak'ned
The Chastity he wounded. Oh Soul of Beauty!
Sure none but I could see thee thus, and leave thee
Thus in this lovely posture. But no more;
I've other business. Chill all my Blood,
Ye Powers, and make me cold to her Allurements:
This is no loving minute; Come, to my design:
To note the Chamber: Here I'll write all down;
Such and such Pictures; there the Window; such
The adornment of her Bed; the Arras Figures:
Why such, and such, and the Contents of the Story.
Ay but some natural Notes about her Body,
Above ten thousand meaner Witnesses,
Would testify to enrich my Inventory.
What's there, a Bracelet on her Arm? 'Tis so.
Now sleep thou Ape of Death, lye dull upon her;
And be her Sense but as a Monument,
Thus in a Chapel lying. Fortune befriend me;
'Tis mine, and this will witness outwardly,
As strongly as the Conscience does within,
To the torture of her Lord: On her left Breast,
A Mole Cinque, spotted like the Crimson drops
In the bottom of a Cowslip: Here's a Voucher
Stronger than ever Law could make; this Secret
Will force him think I've picked the Lock, and stolen
The Treasure of her Honour. No, now I have enough:
To the Chest again.
Swift, swift ye Dragons of the Night; loved Phospher,
Return the welcome day, I lodge in fear,
Though there's a heavenly Angel, Hell is here.

I Gad this damned Armour is plaguy troublesome:
Does it become Florio? Hah! Do I look like one
That could slay my ten thousand in a morning, and
Never sweat for it? Have I the sow'r Look of a Hero?

Your Look will cause more wonder than fear, my
Lord; you are too young to be very terrible.

Nay I know I should look more like a Warrior,
If I were not so handsome; Pox on it, I have
Looked so clear ever since I took Physic last,
That Gad I'm afraid people begin to think I paint.

They often look smiling on you, I confess.


Come, begin then, first play and then sing; you shall
Charm her with your Fingers, and you with your Tongue,
Whilst I, God Mars, brandish my Weapon; and if
Tonguing, fingering and fighting, don't please her,
The Devil's in her.

My Lady is rising Sir, she hears your Music.


Ud so, she peeps through the Window yonder now.
The Dance, the Dance.
She comes; away all and leave me to her.
Good morrow to the radiant Queen of Beauty;
Fierce Mars in Field with Sword and Shield yields
Thee the time of the day.

I am covetous of thanks Sir, and scarce can spare them,


Gad that's a little morose though, to a Deity of my
Valour and Quality.

It suits my Humour Sir: but pray why thus in Armour?
You amongst all men in my opinion,
Need not Burlesque your self.

Burlesque? Now she mauls me with her hard words.
Madam, I love and honour you in plain terms; pray
Give your consent, and let's be married; your Heroes hate delays.

Married, what to such a Figure?


Figure? Why I'm a Lord, and the Queen's my Mother,
As inconsiderable a Figure as you make me; Gads, that's
More than a banished Fellow of your Acquaintance can
Pretend to, since you go to that.

That banished Fellow is a God, when balanced
With your weak merit; I swear his meanest
Garment that ever touched his Body, is more dear to me
There* the life's service of a hundred Cloten's.

His Garment? A Plague, what his Shirt?


Hah! my Bracelet lost, my dear Lelia?
Run to my Woman instantly.

His Garment did you say?


I am sprighted with a Fool, frighted and angered worse:
Bid her, Clarina, search for a Bracelet, that too
Casually hath left my Arm;
I would not lose it for a King's Revenue;
I think I saw't this morning; sure I am,
Last night 'twas on my Arm, I kissed it;
I hope it is not gone to tell my Lord,
That I kiss ought but him.

His Shirt, what his contaminated Shirt,
Preferred before my Service? I'll be revenged;
I'll not take this; by Jove, I'll tell your Father.

Daily to live thus tortured by this Fool,
Is double misery; therefore I'm now resolved
To free my self: The way is thus contrived;
I'll steal from Court in a disguise; Pisanio
I know will stand my Friend through his Life's hazard,
And never shrink at danger: This once done,
With joy I'll meet my dearest Lord in Exile,
Feed him with Love, and sweeten all his Cares
With soft Embraces; then each happy night,
Fancy a Palace of a poor Retreat,
And slight the inconstant Glories of the Great.

WEll, my brave Friend, what think you of your Wager?
Shattillion must by this be coming back.

A Coxcomb as he went. Ha, ha! Would I were
As certain to win the King again, as I am
Confirmed -- her Honour is secure.

Hear you no News to day?


Not I: Have you any?


Yes, and of moment: I was just now informed,
That Caius Lucius, sent by great Augustus,
Is going with an Embassy to Britain,
Commissioned to demand retarded Tribute,
And I fear,
Your King will sooner gratify his Message,
Than enrage our warlike Romans, whose
Late Conquest lives yet fresh in his memory.

I am not of your mind, but rather do believe,
(States-man though I am none, nor like to be)
That this will prove a War.

By all that's good, Shattillion. -- See Sir.


The swiftest Racers posted you by Land,
And Winds in all the corners kissed your Sails*
To make your Vessel nimble.

Welcome Sir.


I hope the briefness of your Answer made
The speediness of your Return.

Your Lady, Sir,
Is faith the fairest that I ever looked on.

And therewithal the best, or else her
Beauty is but a shadow, or like a painted
Tulip, for nothing good but show.

Here are Letters for ye.


Their tenure good, I trust.


'Tis very likely. --


Is Caius Lucius, Ambassador from the
Emperor, expected yet in Britain?

He was talked of -- but I had other business
There than to mind News.

All is well yet.
Sparkles that Stone as it was wont Sir, or is it
Too dull for you to wear?

If I had lost it,
I should have lost the worth of it in Gold;
But I'll make a Journey twice as far,
T'Enjoy a night of such sweet shortness,
As was mine in Britain. -- Sir, the Ring
Is won.

The Stone's too hard to come by.


Not at all, your Lady being so easy.


Why sure you will be wiser than to make
Your loss your sport; I hope you know Sir, we
Must not continue Friends.

Faith Sir, we must,
If you keep Covenant, had I not brought
The knowledge of your Mistress home, I grant
We were to question farther; but I now
Profess my self the winner of her Honour*
Together with your Ring, and not the wronger
Of her or you at all, having proceeded
But by Agreement.

If you can maked appear
You have enjoyed her in her Bed, my Hand and
Ring is yours; if not, my Sword must right the
Wrong done to her Chastity.

Chastity? ha, ha!


Ha, ha! Why is her sacred part become so tainted,
That 'tis but worth your Fleer?

I am sorry to confess it, Sir.


Devils and Hell -- Confess it? -- Come, be
Brief your Story.

First, her Bed-chamber:
Where I confess I slept not, for she gave me
That which was well worth watching; it was hanged
With Tapestry of Silk and Silver; the Story
Was the Meeting of the Egyptian Queen and
Anthony, when Cidnus swelled above the Banks
For pride, to bear that glorious Hero
And his Mistress, that gave the World
For Love.

This is nothing;
For I perhaps, or any other asked,
Might tell you thus much.

More Particulars
Shall justify my Knowledge.

So they must,
Or do your Credit injury.

The Chimney --
Is South the Chamber, and the Chimney-
Piece Diana bathing: -- Never saw I
Figures so nearly drawn to Nature;
The skilful Painter had even outdone
The Life, so excellent was his dumb Poetry.

And what of this?
Let it be granted what you say is true,
And praise be given to your Remembrance:
The Description of what is in her Chamber,
Must not say the Wager you have laid. --

Must it not? Then if you can be pale,
I beg your leave to air this Jewel. -- See
And presto, -- now 'tis up again; it must be married
There to your Diamond; I beg your pardon, Sir, that
I play the Juggler with you.

Jove -- Is it that I gave her? 'Tis impossible:
Pray once more let me see it.
I swear, the very same.
The Bracelet that I gave her at our parting,
And damned her with an Oath to keep for ever;
'Tis that, it must, nay now I know 'tis that. --

Yes, Sir, 'tis that, the very that, I thank her,
She took it from her Arm, methinks I see her yet;
Her pretty action did outsel her gift,
And yet enriched it too; she gave it me,
Then smiling, sighed and said, she prized it once.

May be she plucked it off to send it me.


She writes so to ye, does she?


Death and Hell! There's no truth,
Where there is Beauty; the seeming modest face
Lies even at the Altar and at Prayers;
Honour and Love in that false Sex are nothing;
Profit still breaks their Vows, and Lust their Constancy;
Pride dams their Beauty, Perjury their Souls.

Have patience, Sir:
It may be probable she lost it; or
Who knows but one of her Women being corrupted,
May steal it from her.

Very true.
And so I hope he came by it. Render me, Sir,
Some noted Mark, some corporal Sign about her,
More evident than this, for this was stolen.

By Iupiter, I had it from her Arm.


Hark you, he swears, by Iupiter he swears,
Binds the salacious Villainy by Oath,
And never blushes for it. Oh Hell of Impudence!
Is there a Fury hot as Womankind?
By the Fiends there is not.
Take it, for thou hast won, I swear thou hast,
And the most fulsome way; for well I know
She could not lose it; her Attendants are
All sworn and honourable, they induced to steal it,
And for a Stranger; no, he has enjoyed her.

Good Sir, be calm, you may be yet deceived.


For further satisfying, under her left Breast,
Worthy my pressing, lies a Mole, right proud
Of that most delicate Lodging; by my Life
I kissed it, and it gave me present hunger
To feed again, though full. You may perhaps, Sir,
Remember this Stain upon her.

I, and it confirms
Another Stain, big as the dismal Cause,
Where Devils freeze and burn. Say on, what more?

Why would you have more?


Now I think on it; no, for shame speak not the rest.


By yonder blessed Sun.


No swearing, Sir.
If you will swear you have not don't, ye lye,
And I will kill thee if thou dare deny.

I'll deny nothing.


Had I her here, I'd tear her into atoms;
But live she shannot, nor with whorish grace
Laugh at my Infamy. -- Oh cursed Marriage!
Thou Hell to the Mind, and Body's Purgatory.
Meet we with common Creatures, they are kind,
Love out their hour with eagerness and Art,
And if they give Diseases -- 'tis their Trade,
We can expect no less. But the Marriage-state
Gives ye a gilded Pill that poisons ye,
And yet pretends to cure. -- The Plague of Life,
And Curse of our Creation -- was a Wife.

He's quite besides
The government of Patience. -- You have won:
But come, let's in, and prevent the present rage
He means against himself.

With all my heart: I'll follow ye Sir, ha, ha, ha!
I am sensible this Lye will occasion some mischief:
But a Poxon't, I could not for my life but make
The most on it, when my hand was in. Well, what
Wit has begun, Policy must preserve; and Tongue
Be but thou silent, and then let him fist out the
Matter as well as he can.

This Paper signs her death: I know my Friend,
My good old Friend Pisanio, will dispatch her
On sight of this -- and then she is with the Furies.
Fly Sirrah with this to the Packet-Boat.

I'm gone, my Lord. --


But why should Nature make us miserable?
Is there no way for Man to be, but Women
Must be half-Workers? We are all Bastards,
And that most venerable Man which I
Did call my Father, was I know not where
When I was stamped:
Yet my Mother seemed
The Vesta of her time, so did my Wife,
The Jewel of this Age. Oh damned Hypocrisy!
Me of my lawful Pleasure she restrained,
And prayed me oft forbearance, did it with
A Pudency so Rosie, that sweet object
Might well have warmed old Saturn, that I thought her
As chaste as un-Sunn'd Snow, as pure as Virtue,
And lost my self in my imagined joys.
That's as the hapless Merchant rash and young,
Listens to hear the charming Siren's charming Song;
His Soul is fettered, and he fain would get
To the fair tempting Creature's rocky Seat;
And to the Charmers swiftly strives to run,
Leaps on the fatal Shore, and is undone:
So tempting Beauty did my Sense betray,
And faithless Woman stole my Soul away.

THe Sun, the glorious Monarch of the day,
Guilds all the Valleys, and with cheerful beams
Smiles on the Persian, who with prostrate Body
Now pays his Adoration: This instructs us
How to admire the Heavens, and bend our minds
To a Mornings holy Office. Come forth my Sons,
The blessings of my Age; warmth of my Winter;
Come forth, and with your customary Duties
Pay Reverence to Heaven and the Morn. --
Hail great Divinity.

Hail gracious Heaven, and our most noble Father.


Hail Heaven, and to the Parent of our Lives.


Is not this Life better,
Than servilely attending for a Check,
Or be obliged to flatter some gross Fool,
That gives ye Food and Raiment? Is it not richer*
Than thriving in contempt of Honesty,
Or proudly ruffling in unpaid for Silk;
When the poor Creditor
Oft gains the Cap of him he has made fine,
Yet keeps his Books uncross'd?

You told us, Sir,
That Nature stamped all humane-kind like us:
Began they resemble us, and are not honest?

The Face deceives all; -- 'tis the Nation's Plague,
That he that looks most honest, soonest wrongs ye.

I hate a Villain as I love Virtue, and could wish
A season to employ my eager Courage,
And steep my Javelin in the reeking blood
Though of a Giant, that had wronged my Father.

'Twas kind; but thou art young, Arviragus, a twig
That shake with every blast; art like a Woman,
But that I think thou hast not so much falsehood.

Why are there Women false too?


False as Court-Promises;
Or the young Trader's Oath; but that the fruit of Falsehood
Gains more than Virtue. You may find by me
My Honesty undid me; my Body's marked
With Roman Weapons, and my Fame was once
First with the men of Note: Cymbeline loved me;
And when a Soldier was the Theme, my Name
Was loud as any's: Then was I as a Tree
Whose Boughs did bend with fruit; but in one night,
(So ill did Fortune love me) a rude Storm
Shook down my mellow Blessings, nay my Leaves,
And left me bare to weather.

Uncertain Favour: But could you not revenge it?
Could your great Soul suppress such Injuries,
Be mildly passive in a Cause so just?
Now* by that Reverend Shape, had I been wronged so,
I would have sought my Enemies through dangers,
Numerous as Stars, and though hemmed round with Foes,
Feast my Revenge, then smiling, took my Fate.

Arviragus, Thou art too passionate; thy fiery temper
Will waste thee like a Fever.

Be silent Brother, and hear my Father's Story.


My fault being nothing, as I've often told you,
But that two Villains hating me, swore to Cymbeline,
I was Confederate with the Romans, so
Follow'd my Banishment, and this 20 years
This Rock and these Demeans have been my World.

Death to your Honour! Did you part so tamely?
Did you not kill the Villains? Oh I tremble,
And all my Bloud's on fire, at the apprehension
Of your disgrace? Such Injuries as these
Require Blood, Ruin, Desolation,
Fatal Destruction, Death in thousand terrors.
Oh Heaven and Earth, not kill him!

They were killed, were they not, Sir?


They were, though not by me. But come, the day grows old,
Now up to the Mountains, 'tis the Hunter's language,
And he that strikes the Venison first shall be the
Lord of the Feast: Away, I'll meet you in the Valleys.

Come Brother, I lodged a stately Stag last night,
A Pollard that has newly cast his head; let's go
And chase him, he is our Feast.

No, I have a nobler Game* A Forest Boar
Last night did cross my way, and staring on me,
Grinding his foaming Tushes, roared and fled;
My Javelin I swiftly darted at him,
Which glancing from his Shoulder cleft the ground,
And Night opposing with dark shades, I lost
What now will find and conquer.

Heaven protect ye.
How hard it is to hide the Sparks of Nature:
These Boys know little they are Sons to th'King,
Nor does their Father dream they are alive.
They think they are mine, and though bred up thus meanly,
They think and do like Princes.
Oh Cymbeline, Heaven and thy Conscience knows,
Thou did unjustly banish me, for which
At three and two years old I stole thy Children,
Thinking to take from thee a Successor,
As thou my Lands from me; 'tis a Revenge
Pleases my Age. Now to my brace of Princes,
Who swifter than two Roes leap over the Hills,
And in their speedy Chase outstrip the Winds.

How -- Of Adultery, and with a Gallia^?
Then all my Fears prove true, and that tall Fellow
I once saw with her, proves the Villain I doubted.
Oh perjured Creature!

This is a strange wild melancholy Place;
Good my Lord, how far is't now to Milford?
Why do you shun me so? My Legs are weary
In striving to o'retake ye: Alas I know the trouble
I bring upon you! But for pity's sake
Reflect not on it now. You went this morning
To meet the Post with Letters; my heart pants,
I hope there's no ill News.

Oh Woman, Woman!
Who ere could learn thy deep Philosophy,
Or fathom thy unsounded Sea of Graft?
That Look of her's has power to cause sound Faith
Revolt, and make men fancy her a Saint.
This Letter proves a Devil.

What Letter's that? Is't from my Lord?


From him that was your Lord:
Read it, and when you have done, prepare to die.

To die? Good Gods, for what?


Read there, and blush instead of growing pale;
The Crime will give occasion.

-- Pisanio, My Wife has damned her self, and
Played the Strumpet in my Bed: (Oh gracious Heaven!)
The testimonies whereof lye bleeding in me, and a
Fluttering Gallian is more grateful to her than
Her unhappy Husband. I write this from
Proofs, as strange as my Griefs; therefore
Kill her, if thou love me, and send a Handkerchief
Dipped in her blood: That done, my Interest here shall
Secure both thy Life and Fortune. Ursaces.
I'll kiss thy Name although it brings me death,
A cruel death to the Innocent. Oh my Fortune!

Why there now.
There is another Fetch of female Policy,
This Swouning: I have known a Woman swooned
At the puking of her Monkey, or feign sorrow
To see her Husband's Nose bleed^ Craft, Craft, damned Craft:
I'll not believe'um. Oh she comes again!

False to his Bed? What is it to be false?
To lye in watch there, and to think of him;
To weep 'twixt hour and hour: If Sleep charge Nature
To break it with a frightful Dream of him,
And cry my self awake; can this be Falsehood?

Weak Excuses.
You ill plead Innocence, when your virtuous Lord
Defames you thus by Letter, and has proof
Of your detested Crime; for well I know,
He would not write this without good assurance.

Yes, any thing to please his new-found Mistress,
That basely reaps the harvest of my Love.
Men's Vows are Women's Traitors; and as Synon,
That perjured Wretch, that cunning flattering Greek,
By weeping scandall'd many a holy Tear;
So does Ursaces by his broken Oaths,
The Faith of all Mankind.

And you by Levity,
The virtue of your Sex. Kneel therefore, and pray,
Or unprepared receive your Fate.

I swear
I am not guilty, yet do not wish to live,
Ursaces being false. Come, strike my Lord,
Strike the innocent Mansion of my Love, my heart,
And give a hapless, much wronged Woman, rest,
As lasting as her woes.

Do you not fear?


My grief has made me past it.


Die then, lest it return; it wonnot be:
Methinks some Genius hinders my rash Arm,
And blames my cruel purpose.

Make not my Death your Sport,
But do a speedy justice for your Friend,
And tell my Lord, when I am laid in Earth,
He then may revel quietly.

I cannot do it,
And I'll attempt no farther. If she is false,
Let Heaven punish her; I'll leave her to its mercy,
And with some bloody token greet her Lord,
As if I had performed the horrid Action.
Madam, I pity you, and through that passion
Resolve to save your Life: But from this moment
Expect no further service; for Heaven forbid,
The least grain of my Love should fall on her,
Whose blameful Levity wronged my dearest Friend*
Thus then I turn away, and all alone
Within this gloomy melancholy Desert,
Leave you to Fortune: If you are innocent,
That Innocence protect you; but if guilty*
As I much doubt you are, let Thunder
Punish the hated Falsehood. -- Fare ye well.

Stay, dear my Lord* Oh do not leave me so,
So lost, so comfortless!

No tears shall stop me; there's too much of Woman in them.


Alas I know not where I am! The Place
Is ruthless, wild and uninhabited;
No friendly Path leads to a neighbouring Village,
But all untrod and savage, like the Covert
Of some rude Satyr; here only Nettles grow, and Ivy
That clings to the dismal Ewe; and in yon Rock,
The dreadful spotted Toads and poisonous Serpents
Will hourly fright me with their Croaks and Hisses.
Ah do not leave me in this horrid Place,
For I shall die with Fear!

I must be gone,
Though her words touch me strangely.

I shall be starved too. Recall, recall Humanity,
And let that aged Breast bear tender Nature:
Let the Oath of Knighted, charm ye not to suffer
A wretched Princess famish in a Desert.

The Summer-fruit that now lades every Bush,
Makes vain that Fear. To help ye a little,
Take here this Glass, I had it from the Queen,
What's in it is precious; when you're sick, a dram on it
Will drive away Distemper. Farewell; my heart
Bleeds for ye, although your abhorred Crimes deserve no pity.

Ye mighty Powers, that sway yon glorious Heaven,
Rise from your awful Thrones, look down and pity
A wretched Innocence; for well ye know,
I'm guiltless, and deserve not this Barbariety,
Though more than Scithians cruel. Poor Eugenia,
Where wilt thou fly for Succour? Home is fatal:
If to my Lord; why he has sent to kill me.
Too cruel Husband of a Wife so faithful.
Oh wretched state!
Oh Misery! If Virtue be thus used,
How are the vicious punished? What shall I do,
And whither shall I turn? As some poor Slave,
Accused of Crimes which he had never done,
Is from his angry Patron's Favour thrown.
Hated although he faithfully did serve,
Is cast on some wild Beach to pine and starve.
In vain bemoans himself, and makes defence,
In vain sighs, weeps, and tells his Innocence.
Sits sadly on some Rock, his Eyes do flow,
Mourns his hard Fate, but knows not where to go.
So I unskilful what strange Course to run,
Must perish here, by faithless man undone.

THou seed of Mischief, young Practitioner
In the Art of Treachery, how did thou dare
To conceal this devilish Secret,
No less than the disturbance of a Nation?
But in thy death I'll strait revenge the Affront.

Oh do not fright me with the name of Death!
But look with pity, Madam, on my tears,
And see a wretched Virgin beg for Life:
So may your Reign be prosperous, so your Beauty
Still fresh and heavenly, as your mercy flows
In showers of tender pity on my youth.

Pity? Ay, let me have her, I'll show pity on her
Youth; Gad, I'll first make my Footman ravish her,
And then have her hanged.

And why your Footman, my Lord? I hope you have
Other Friends about you that will do her that kindness.

I have considered now she shall not die so well,
But banished, live to prolong her misery,
And none shall help her, upon pain of Death.
My Lord Iachimo, to you I give the Wretch,
Use her as she deserves: Hence hated Harpey.

Nay kill me now, and I will think you kind;
Let (...) not be a prey to his wild Lust.

Away with her, I will not hear a word.


You'll like me better in the Country, Madam;
Come, come, there's no remedy.

No spark of Pity; help, help.


Stop her Mouth, away with her; I'll go and
Dispatch a small Affair, and follow thee. --

I've been too slow in executing vengeance,
Too dull and cold; had I been diligent,
I could have stopped her posting toward Gallia,
And sent her Post to the Furies. Who's that comes yonder?

The King, Madam, and by his actions seems
In a high rage. --

I'll whet it to a madness.


Go search the Country round, and bring her back:
Send out more Horses; let every Town and Village
Be narrowly surveyed, each House, each Cottage,
Caves, Grotto's, nay the very clefts of Rocks.
Seek and return me this rebellious Fugitive,
Or lose your Monarch ever.

Send to Milford,
If you'll succeed: We hear now she's gone to ship*
For Gallia, to meet her Love in Exile.

I come to inform your Majesty, that the
Beacons near to Milford-Haven are fired;
And the Post just come declares,
The Roman Army's landed there,
Led on by Gaius Lucius.

Summon all the Captains,
And give strict Order that the Troops be ready
With the next Sun. I'll to the Field in person,
And with my presence animate the Soldiers.
Away, and sound to War; draw up your Infantry:
We will timely march, and scourge this haughty Roman: Oh
Eugenia! were it thou here, I'd fear no Foe.

GOod Heaven!
No Succour yet: I'm tired with wandering,
And saint with hunger. Ah some kind Silvian God,
That rul'st these Groves, rise from thy mossy Couch,
And with thy hoard of Summer wholesome Fruits,
Preserve an innocent Lady from sharp Famine!
I saw an Apple-tree in yonder Thicket,
On which eager to feed, as I drew near it,
A large grown Serpent from the hollow root,
Opposed my raging hunger, and instead of pitying
My pale and pining Looks, with flaming Eyes,
And dreadful Hisses, like the Hesperian Dragon,
Frighted me from the place; the very Trees, I think,
Take part with cruel man. Ha! what gloomy Place is this?
Here is a Path to it; sure 'tis some savage Hold.
Hoa, who's there?
If any thing that's civil, speak and help
A wretched Creature; but if savage,
Be speedy in my death. No Answer; then I'll enter.
Now Mercy, Heaven.

I've haunch'd the Stag, and hung his Quarters up
The backside of the Cave, and when your Brother comes,
We will make our Feast.

Hark, I think I hear his Horn; let's go and
Meet him, he has ventured hard to day, it may
Be the wild Boar has hurt him too.

Heaven forbid, my Boy. --


Blessed be this poor Retreat; for ever blessed
The Steward of this Feast, that brings me comfort,
And saves me from a miserable Fate. Oh Heaven!
How sweet is this course Bare, this little morsel,
Which in prosperity my lavish hand*
Would have profusely thrown away to Dogs?
How dearly does it relish now? How covetous am I
Of each least Bit? Pardon great Providence:
We are ignorant of our selves, till Miseries
Purge our corrupted Natures, and Want, rare Artists,
Moulds us to sense of our Mortality.

Welcome Arviragus; welcome my young Hero,
Let me embrace thee.

Welcome dear Brother, I congratulate your Conquest,
I see you shun no danger.

Danger? 'tis my Pleasure:
I would not give a minute for a Victory,
Unless by hazard sweetened; there's the bliss,
The proof of Valour. -- This very Boar to day,
Foaming through rage, with mighty force rushed on me,
And ere I could avoid, threw me to the ground;
When angry at my fall, I spurned him from me,
Rose quick, and with my Javelin pierced his heart.

Thanks Heaven for thy Escapes. Come Palladour,
Your Brother to day is Master of the Feast;
We will play the Cook and Servant. How now, what's here?

What's the matter, Sir?


Stand back a little:
But that he eats our Victuals, I should think
He were a Fury.

Iupiter -- What is't?


An Angel, by my Soul; or else at least
Some Rural Deity.

A pretty Boy, a very Cupid: Hold, it's going to speak.


Good Master, hurt me not.
Before I entered here I called, and thought
To have begged or bought what I have took: Indeed
I have stolen nothing, nor would not, though I had found
Gold strewed in the Floor; Here's money for my Meat:
I would have left it on the Board as soon
As I had made my Meal, and then departed,
With humble thanks and prayers for the Provider.

Money -- sweet Youth.


Let Gold and Silver, the Dirt of the Earth, be prized
By such as worship dirty Gods, not us.

I see you are angry;
But know, if you kill me for my fault, I should*
Have died, had I not made it.

With what a modest innocence he speaks?


And what a rosie face he has?


Whither are you going?


To Milford.


I hope you have done no mischief, and are flying,
From Justice?

No, Heaven knows, not I.


What's your Name?


Fidele, Sir; I have a Kinsman that
Is bound for Rome; he embarks at Milford Haven,
To whom being going, I lost my way in the Woods,
And almost pined with hunger,
Am fallen in this offence; pray pardon me,

Prithee my pretty fellow,
Think us not Churls, nor measure our good minds
By this rude place we live in, come, come, you're welcome,
Heartily welcome, and shalt have better cheer,
Ere thou depart, and thanks to stay and take it.
Nay prithee wipe thy eyes: Boys, bid him welcome.
By Jove, there's something in his honest Look,
That moves my heart with love and pity for him.

I know not what you feel, but in my breast
Love gives him large possession; my Genius tells me,
He's worthy our best Favour. Sir, I embrace ye.

And I as kindly as I would a Sister,
Were she distressed as thou art. Welcome, dear Brother:
I'll call thee so, and would revenge thy wrongs
With a full heart, knew I the fatal Authors.

A thousand blessings on you. Oh gracious Heaven!
Can this be true? Are there such blessings left
Yet for Eugenia?

He weeps at some Distress.


And the clear drops stand on his blushing Cheek,
As pearly dew on Roses. Come, my sweet Brother,
You must not be thus sad; we are all your Friends,
And love you heartily, I do swear.

And I, by yonder Sun; there is methinks
A sympathy between us.

For my part,
I liked him at first sight: Come, welcome, welcome;
In troth you are too melancholy.

A small Distemper, Sir:
'Twill quickly away again. -- How courteously they use me?
And with what honesty express their Love?
Dear modest Creatures.

Now Sirs, let's in,
And dress our Venison; when we have supped, sweet Boy,
We will mannerly desire of thee thy Story,
As far as is convenient.

I'm obliged to you for Life, Sir.


Come dearest Brother.


More loved than the ruddy morn, or the
Purling Brook, when parched with heat of the
Dog-star, we descend to quench our eager thirst.

I'm bound to you for ever:
And now too well I can disprove Report,
The Country is not savage, but the Court.

MY Heart throbbs still, my Senses are disturbed too,
And since I left the Princess in you Court,
I have not been at rest; sure she's innocent,
And I and her rash Lord have been abused.
I'll seek her out,
And comfort her, for I believe she's innocent.

Look on my tears, and let them melt your heart,
Your rocky hearts, yet harder far than Stone;
For Stones melt, when relenting Heavens weeps,
But you grow more obdurate with my tears.

Tears? Why thou can not oblige me more than to
Weep soundly; it makes the flame of Love more
Vigorous; Oh I like a pass^ Woman in that
Business extremely! she ha^ ^nest ways
With her.

Think you not on your Souls? Alas, when I am dead,
As I will ne'er outlive so black a Villainy,
My Ghost will fright you, your wounded Consciences
Lash and torment you like a thousand Furies.

Ghost? A pox o'thy Ghost: Prithee art thou such a
Fool to think we fear the Devil? Iachimo, show
Her the contrary, rowze her, towze her, Boy, I'll
Do thee an honourable kindness, and pimp for thee,
For fear of disturbance.

A very friendly part, faith, my Lord: Come, Madam,
You and I must be more familiar; nay, nay, no
Struggling, my heart's a flame, and you must quench the fire.

Rather be burned to ashes, barbarous Wretch; help, help.
Oh Heaven, send down thy Thunder, dash me to the Earth,
Rather than suffer this: Help, help.

What piteous Cry was that? sure 'twas a Woman's voice
By the shrill sound. Good Gods, what's this I see?
My Daughter here?

Mercy -- unlooked for: 'Tis he, Oh my dear Father,
In a blessed minute are you come to save me!

Ha! Lord Cloten too?
Then all's discovered, and I'm lost.

See Iachimo, yonder's that old Traitor too luckily
Fallen into our snare: Go, go, take his Daughter
From him, and ravish her before his face.

With all my heart; I'll not lose for a million.


He comes upon his death that touches her: Base men,
Have you no humane Nature?

Does he expostulate? Kill, kill the Slave.


I first shall see thy death.


No, Thou shalt never see again; for when I have conquered thee,
With my Sword's point, I'll dig out both thy eyes,
Then drag thee to my Mother to be tortured.

I'll do his business presently.


Fly Daughter, fly, whilst my remains of Life
I render for thy safety.

Oh save my Father! Heaven save him, save him.


Thou hast it now, I think.


A Plague on him, he has killed me. Oh --


Cursed Misfortune! He's dead; but I'm resolved to
Be thy true Prophet however, thou shalt not
See my death, unless with other eyes.

Hell-born Fury! Oh --


So, now smell thy way out of the Wood, whilst
I follow thy Daughter, find her, and cut her piece-meal:
I'll sacrifice her to the Ghost of Iachimo.

All dismal, dark as Night, or lowest Shades,
The Regions of the Dead, or endless Horror;
The Sun with all his light now gives me none,
But spreads his beamy Influence in vain,
And lends no Glimpse to light my Land of darkness.
Sure near this Place there lies a Sword,
I'll try if I can find it. Pitiless Fate,
Wilt thou not guide my hand? My Wound's not mortal,
And I shall yet live Ages: True sign of Grief,
When we do wish to die before our time.
I'll crawl into some Bush and hide my self,
Till Fate's at leisure; there
To the dumb Grove recount my Miseries,
Weep Tears of blood from Wounds instead of Eyes.

TUrning my head towards you point of the Sea,
Methoughts I heard a noise of Drums and Trumpets,
With shouts of men, as of an Army landed:
Perhaps 'tis so indeed; I know the Romans
Have long watched an advantage, and would run
With joy the race great Caesar once begun.

You are not well; pray stay here in the Cave.


Go you to Hunting, Sons, I'll stay with him.


I beseech you do not; nay then you'll make me blush,
To think how much I trouble ye: Let me beg ye,
Stick to your Journal Course; the breach of Custom
Is breach of all: I am ill, but your being by me,
Is not medicinable; Society is no comfort neither,
To one not sociable: Pray go and trust me here;
I'll rob none but my self, and if my self,
The theft's so poor 'tis not worth punishing.

There's so much virtue in his Love and Actions,
It more and more does steal away my heart.

Kind Heaven preserve you both. Oh sacred Providence!
Who could have thought to find such gentle Creatures
In a wild rustic Cave, by Nature only taught?
I am sick still,
Very sick; now Pisanio I'll taste thy Cordial,
I never had more cause.

Let's to our Silvian sport. How now, who's that?


I cannot find this Fugitive; sure the Devil
Has lent her wings to fly, and cross my purpose.

Hah! What are you that fly me thus? Some Villain Outlaws?
I've heard of such. -- What Slave art thou?

A thing more slavish did I ne'er, then answering
A Slave without a Knock.

Thou art a Robber: I'll murder thee.


Ye lye, you wonot, you cannot, nor you shall not,
I'll beat your Brains out first; S'death, have not I
An Arm as long as thine, a Heart as big?
Thy words may appear bigger, but I wear not
My Dagger in my mouth.

A plaguy little Whipster this: Why, thou
Abject Villain,
Knows me not by my Clothes.

No, I say, how should I?


Then hear my Name and tremble.


I tremble at nothing but the Thunder,
And that I'm sure thou can not do:
What's thy Name?

Cloten, thou Villain.


Cloten? Then double Villain be thy Name,
I care not -- Were it Toad, Spider, or Adder,
It would move me sooner.

To thy Confusion know, I am Son to the Queen.


I am sorry for it, not seeming so worthy
As thy Birth.

Does thou not fear?


Those that I reverence, those I fear, the Wise,
All Fools I scourge and laugh at.

You're witty, are you? but I'll fetch ye out of
Your Jest presently; Sirrah,
I'll slay thee with this hand, and when thou
Art dead,
Upon the Gates of Ludds-Town set thy Head.

It stands yet on my Shoulders; come, come on Sir.


No Company's abroad.


Not a man stirring -- You did mistake him sure.


No, I am firm 'twas he.


In this Place we left them.
I wish my Brother make good party with him;
You say he's very strong.

I have often heard so.


He looked but like a Fool. But see, our
Fears may vanish, here comes my Brother.

This Cloten was a Fool, an empty Purse,
There was no money in it; not Hercules
Could have knocked out his Brains, for he had
None; but I think I've stopped his Railing.

What hast thou done?


Yon grinning Face will inform you.
I've cut off one Cloten's Head, Son to the Queen,
He says he is, who called me Villain, who
Swore he would cut mine off from my
Shoulders, and set it upon Ludds-Town.

We are all undone*


Why, worthy Father, what have we to lose?
The Law protects not us, why should we fear?
Arviragus, I love thee like a Brother, but envy much
Thy Valour in this Action.

I fear 'twill be revenged.


With his own Sword he wav'd against my Throat,
I hewed it off; I'll throw't into the Creek
Behind our Rock, and let it to the Sea,
To tell the Fishes he's the Queens Son Cloten.
That's all I care.

I'll go and see Fidele;
I hope he's somewhat better after Sleep.

Oh divine Nature, how thou show thy Power
In these two Princely Boys! 'tis a wonder
That an invisible Instinct should frame them
To Royalty unlearned, Honour untaught;
Civility not seen from others, Valour
That wildly grows in them, but yields a Crop
As if it had been sowed.

I have sent Cloten's Clotpole down the Stream,
In Embassy to his Mother; his Body lies
In yonder Thicket. -- Hah, that's my Brother's Voice!
Where is he?

Gon out of the Cave just now to see Fidele.


See Brother, see, the pretty Bird is dead,
That we so well did love.

Dead? and by Melancholy? this is strange.


Oh piercing Sight! Thou sweetest, fairest Lilly,
My Brother wears thee now not half so well,
As when thou grow thy self.

How did thou find him?


Just as you see, smiling as in a slumber;
His right Cheek reposing on a Cushion on the Floor*
His Arms thus crossed, I thought he slept, and put
My Hunting-shooes from off my feet, whose rudeness
Answered my Steps too loud.

Well, 'tis in vain to mourn, what's past recovery:
Come Sons, let's lay him in our Tomb.

Rest there sweet Body of a sweeter Soul,
Whilst we lament thy Fate.

To them the Succours sent from Gaul will join,
And now are setting forth to cross the Sea,
And meet you here at Milford.

What number are they?


At least 10000. and all disciplined,
Bred to the War, most willing active Spirits,
That promise noble Service; they are coming
Under the Conduct of the bold Shattillion,
Syenna's Brother.

Oh I know him well, a most methodical Courtier:
But when do ye expect them?

With the next benefit of Wind.


This forwardness makes our hopes fair. What News
Have you from Ludds-Town?

The Queen is dead, raging with desperate madness
For the absence of her Son late strangely lost,
And as they fear is murdered. But I hear the old King
Comes forward with his Power.

We shall the sooner meet him;
And Caesar shall have Tribute, or we will shed
Our Roman Blood in Britain. What's here?
A Boy
Asleep I think, or dead; let's see his Face.

He is alive, my Lord.


What art thou, Youth?


I am nothing; or if something,
'Twere better I were nothing.

This Country sure
Is savage grown: This Morning in yon Wood
I found an old Man, his Eyes just put out, wounded,
And freshly bleeding: And not far off from him,
A tender Virgin, running with Hair dishelved,
And crying to Heaven for succour; whom strait I seized,
And carried to my Tent, where now they are.

I saw them, and heard since they are of quality.


Look up, Youth, I'll entertain thee,
Thou shalt go with me.

I beseech you, Sir, excuse me.


By no means; I like thee well, thou shalt be my Page.


He's going with an Army against my Father;
In the Battle sure I cannot miss a death,
Amongst so many Swords. Well, Sir, if I must go.

Leave soft Grief,
And bend thy mind to the War; if thou dost nobly,
Caesar shall honour thee. March.

We are discovered: Here, Sir, take your Sword,
And let's adventure out; 'tis much better
To brave a dangerous Fate, than tamely suffer it.
Pray let's to the Army.

I shall be discovered,
And then be racked and tortured.

Do not fear it:
This is, Sir, not a time for private Fewds;
Besides the Frost of twenty nipping Winters,
As many Summers Heats furrow that Brow
Which once was smooth: You look not now, my Father,
As you did then, when lusty Youth and Vigour
Sate blushing on your Cheek.

Consuming Time,
That alters every thing, you cannot doubt,
Has changed you much from what you were.

I know it;
And since your Valours prompt you to the War,
I'll hazard with good will remaining Life,
To get you Fame.

Whilst we have any Life, yours, Sir, shall be in safety.
Come, Brother, let's to the King's Party, 'tis the noblest way;
For never shall it be declared hereafter,
That our first Onset in the Race of Honour,
Was in ignoble Fight against our Country.

'Tis honourable Advice, and shall be follow'd.
And now methinks I wish to be in Battle:
Once more, Bellarius, draw thy Sword for Britain,
This Sword that made the all conquering Iulius
Stoop to the Earth, and grovelling kiss the Dust,
When like another Cyclops, the sound stroke
Made his well-temper'd Helm shed sparks of Fire.
This Sword shall once more know the Toils of War,
And reek with Victory.

With Victory?
Oh Royal Sound, the Prize of honoured Valour!
Let's on, let's on.

Methinks my Heart grows bigger,
And swells within my Breast, to meet the Fame
My fatal Sword shall purchase. Oh my Father!
The thought of your famed Deeds so steels my Courage,
That when I'm full of Wounds, begrum'd with Dust,
Spotted with Blood, and hemmed about with Enemies,
I shall break through like the young God of War:
With Blood of Foes the neighbouring Valleys fill,
Like Lightning scatter, and like Thunder kill.

FRom hollow Rocks and solitary Caves,
Where the evil Genius hunts the Miserable,
To mask in Shades, and shun the cheerful Light,
Wretched Ursaces back to Britain comes,
Bearing this bloody witness of his Cruelty:
Heart-killing Sight! The Blood that stains this Linen,
Once swelled the Veins of the mildest, fairest, chastest;
O but not chaste! In that my praise exceeded:
That Title fatally she lost, and now
Has paid too dearly for it; -- yet divine Heaven,
Should every one that forfeits Honour, be
Deprived of Life, thy World would be unpeopl'd.
The full fed City-Dame would sin in fear;
The Divine's Daughter slight the amorous Cringe*
Of her tall Lover; the close salacious Puritan
Forget the Appointment with her canting Brother.
Should rigorous Death punish the venial Error,
The fashion of the World would be abolished.
How great then is my Crime? I am brought hither*
Disguised amongst the Cavalry, to fight
Against my Ladies Kingdom. -- But 'tis enough, dear*
Britain, I have killed thy Mistress.
Peace, I'll give no Wound to thee,
But mourn my fault, and fall in thy defence:
So some vile Wretch that in his Life has been
Unhappy, and has done some deadly Sin,
In Conscience struck, by some good Act does try
To merit Heaven -- make his peace and die.

It grieves me I have reason, Caius Lucius*
To meet thee thus in Arms -- the Bower of Peace;
For my now frozen and unwieldy Age,
Were fitter than the noise Tents of War,
Were Honour not concerned. -- Say therefore, General,
Is there yet left a way, our Honour safe,
That we may end the Difference without Battle?

The Tribute due to Caesar being paid,
You are in peace, and we will return to Rome.

That were ignoble, and not like a King.
Though Iulius Caesar made a Conquest here,
And of Casibelan had a Grant for Tribute,
I'm not obliged to pay it.

There may be many Caesars,
Ere such another Iulius. -- Ours is a World by 'tself,
And the hardy Britains, Sir, will nothing pay,
For wearing their own Noses.

They shall pay,
If the culled Power of Rome and Gaul can make them:
But we have always noted you hard Britains,
As you call your selves, most valiant in your Talk,
And know you can run with an unmatched Celerity.

Now by my Crown,
You shall not buy us cheaply, nor shall this Isle,
That stands like Neptune's Park, pal'd round with Oaks,
And fenced with roaring Waters, e're pay Tribute,
While Cymbeline's alive.

Then for Augustus, thus I bid defiance:
Caesar who has more tributary Kings,
Than thou domestic Slaves, and in his Name,
Bid thee prepare for Battle.

I take thee at thy word: Charge, charge my Friends;
This is your happy hour: Draw all your Swords,
And fight for Liberty, Cymbeline and Britain.

For Honour, Rome and Caesar, we.


Charge, charge there.


Make good the Breach, whilst I defend the King.


Stand Britains, we have the advantage of the Ground,
The Enemies disordered.

Stand, stand and fight.


All Plagues pursue them, do they run already?


My Life's indebted to thy Valour. Speak,
What art thou? for I know thee not.

A Gentleman, and the Lover of the King.


Thou art brave, and well deserve a Monarch's Favour.
The Battle ended, see me in my Tent,
Where I'll load Honours on thee.

Fetters rather.
Did he but know 'twas I that killed Eugenia;
O dreadful Sound! But stay, there is a deed
Must yet be done. -- I'm tardy. -- Now for Vengeance.

Inconstant Chance wavering, and Woman-like,
Smile once more on us. -- Was ever day thus changed!
Those that within this hour ran from our Swords,
Like fearful Hares before the full-mouth'd Cry,
Now turn, pursue, and chase us from the Field.
Oh Devil Fate.

The old Man and his Sons fought like Devils,
There was no coming near them; they have peppered
All my Taper-Gallians, there's hardly one of 'em left
To give his Mistress an account of Valour.

This is that Devil Shattillion, now I know him,
The fatal Cause of all my Miseries.

They tossed me up and down the Field like a Foot-ball,
I may thank my activity for my Life.

Hark, they pursue us, -- and all is lost.
Away, Boy, from the Field, and save thy self;
Now Friends kill Friends, and there's no hope of safety.

Mine is secure, I've a Project for it.


O treacherous Fortune!


Let us pursue you scattered Troops, where Lucius
Seeks safety by base flight; -- when he is taken,
The day's our own, and haughty Rome must bow
To the British Power. -- Come Sons, -- my dear Arviragus,
Thou hast shown thy self the Hero of the Battle.

I am not fleshed enough; Come, follow, follow,
I will my self take Lucius.

Let Roman Fools give up themselves to Bondage,
While I by Wit gain Freedom.
Thus habited like a Britain, have I passed
Through all their Troops, -- unseen or unsuspected,
And now with happy speed design for Milford,
From thence to ship to Gallia, -- where in safety
I'll laugh at this Contrivance, and with pleasure boast
Of my kind Fortune.

Disguises cannot save thee, I know thee, Devil,
By more than vulgar Signs.

The very Devil has not a blacker Fiend, that I
Would sooner shun, than thee; but come, thou
Know me, what's the Result on it?

Death and Damnation.


A kind of an odd Reward for a man of my Parts:
But I'm of a Religion, Sir, that tells me,
My Life's not in your power, if taken nobly.

Not in my power? Yes,
If Heaven swerve not from its awful Justice,
I'm sure I have. Think on Eugenia,
O Devil think on her! She that was once
The dear loved Genius of this happy Country;
The brightest beam of Light that graced the World,
Made by thee black as the Shades of Hell,
Where now she wanders in the Vale of Horror.
Remember her, and let thy Soul despair.

Ha! Is Eugenia dead then?


Dead? Why did thou think I was so tame a Fool,
To let her live after her horrid Crime?
Could thou imagine I would quench my Thirst
At that vile Spring, where the sordid Bruit had trampled,
And turned the crystal Current into Mud?
Or let the spotted Serpent sting again,
That had already poisoned me?

If thou hast killed her, thou art miserable
Above Mankind.

I am, and by thee made so.


She was innocent, rash man.


Hah!


Innocent, I swear, as Angels; chaste as the Phaenix,
And was indeed the Phaenix of the World,
And never to be equalled.

These are Lies which more perplex my Soul,
Than thou that make 'em, and Riddles shall not
Save your Life, Sir.

Now I dare fight with thee
With a full heart. -- Thou rash, thou wretched Creature,
Thou hast killed the only best of all her kind,
Eclipsed a Planet Heaven in mercy gave,
To bless and beautify the World.

Still Riddles: -- Doubts to plague me; but I'll try
Whether in Death you'll have the gift of Lying.
Stand you apart.

Come on, and summon all thy skill and vigour,
For I will meet thee, fell as the hungry Lyoness
In the wild Desert, roving for her prey.

I'm pleased to know, that we with equal rage
Do play our parts in this bold Scene of death,
Occasioned by dishonouring a Princess:
That Crime will dam thy Soul when Life is lost,
Which thus I offer to Eugenia's Ghost.

Thou hast performed thy word:
My warm Blood
Flows from my Heart, and my departing Soul
Swims on the surface of the purple Gore:
O too small recompense for Eugenia's wrongs,
That blessed, that innocent Princess!

O Heaven!


Nay thou'lt wonder more anon: Know then rash
Credulous Fool, I did betray the Princess.

Betray? how betray? O speak on;
For thou art now a Prophet to my sense,
And all thy words are Oracles? How innocent?
And how was she betrayed?

I'll tell the Cause I hate thee, therefore observe me:
I did belly her Virtue, and by Cunning obtained
The knowledge of her Apartment and Person.

By Cunning say thou? -- Break not yet my Brain;
Do not distract me till I have heard all:
Say how by Cunning.

Cunning that now I hope may chance to dam thee.
I got my self conveyed into her Chamber, and at dead
Of night, she innocently sleeping, took view of the
Hangings, Furniture and Pictures, and all which
When returned to Gaul I told you.

Horrid and damned Impostor! But say further,
Speak on thy Soul, how did thou get that Bracelet?

There as she slept I cut it from her Arm,
And viewing nearer, saw the Mole I spoke of.

And this is true, as thou hast of rest?


What e're I hope, rest or unrest, 'tis true. But Oh
My Soul is wandering to its unknown home,
My Blood's all Ice!

Then am I damned more than the worst of Fiends:
Heaven keep not now thy Thunderbolt in vain,
To shoot at Trees, or cleave the marble Rocks,
But dart it here; here on this wretched Head
Throw thy swift Bolt* and dash me to the Center;
Let Hell devour me quick, the Fiends dissect me,
Burn, cut me atoms. -- O revenge, revenge
The innocent Eugenia! Here he stands
That caused her to be murdered; dam him, dam him;
Bathe him in molten Glass; -- let a Cabal of Furies
Meet and consult t'invent new Tortures for him,
And be his Pangs eternal. He comes, ye Fiends,
Swift as old Lucifer, when first he fell,
And with this stroke transports himself to Hell.

That must not be while we stand tamely by.
Soldiers, he has confessed he killed
The Princess; let's bear him to the King.
Death is too kind a punishment, he merits the worst
Of Tortures: O horrid Murderer, away with him!

Let me kneel before thee,
And thank thee for that Judgement: Thou art wise,
And 'tis most true that only Death is much too kind;
I deserve Pains greater than Tongue can utter,
Or barb'rous Policy invent.

Who could imagine so much Villainy
Could dwell with so much Courage?

And shall tame lazy Death be all my Torture?
No, I have yet more Conscience than to hope it.
Poisons and Flames,
Racks, burning Iron, and flaming Lead,
Hot Pincers, Daggers, suffocating Water,
All, all are nothing, I will my self find greater:
And as in Lacedemon, the greatest Villains
Were by the State made Judges of all Criminals,
Because they best knew how to weigh and punish;
So I that know my self, my self will doom,
By Tortures here out-pain my Hell to come. --

NOble old Man, and you most worthy pair,
That Heaven has made preserver of my Honour,
Let me embrace you: Yet is there a Fourth,
That in my tide of Thanks deserves large share.
He that bestrid me, gasping on the ground,
And like stern Ajax, with his shining Buckler,
Secured my Life from Storms of Roman Fury,
Where is he, that I may unclew my grateful Heart,
To pay the Debts I owe him?

Since his last Sally he has not been seen,
Though we have searched among the Dead and Living,
And much I fear he's lost.

A Kingdom were too small to buy his Virtue.


Now great Cymbeline,
I conjure thee by thy Fortune, grant me a Request:
Let my poor Boy be ransomed; -- never Master had
A Page so kind, so duteous, diligent,
So modestly affected to his Master, -- nor
So unwearied in his Service. -- Let his Virtue join
With my Request, which I'll presume your Majesty
Will soon find in him. He is of this Country,
And has done no Britain harm, though he has
Served a Roman. -- Save but him, Sir,
And spare no Life besides.

Let me see his Face. Ha, what strange Surprise
Is this! I have seen him somewhere, methinks
His Features are familiar to me. Boy,
Thou hast looked thy self into my Favour, live.

I humbly thank your Majesty.


It must be the Boy Fidele, I'll speak to the King.


What, my Preserver?
Does he then live? You holy Powers, I thank ye:
Let me embrace thee, thou best, thou bravest man;
And that I may be grateful for thy service,
Ask what thou wilt on the King's word 'tis thine.

Had ever Fiend such mercy? Royal Sir,
Refer your bounty till you find my merit;
Know, I am that Ursaces whom you banished,
For yet you know not how much I deserve.

Ursaces! What miracle is this?


Oh Heaven!


He Sir? A Basilisk that wounds you to the Soul
With his contagious Aspect. -- Remember Eugenia,
Your heavenly Daughter:
Think Sir, O think upon her.

Ha! where is she?
Speak, speak: O doubt not but I think of her.

You do, you must, I know it. -- Now then as the Angels
From glorious lucid Thrones, eternal Mansions,
Look down and see the damned wallow in horror;
So without regret or pity look upon me,
A worser Fiend, worse damned, for worser Reasons:
I like a sacrilegious Thief broke open
Virtues best Temple, and from the shining Altar
Impiously stole the consecrated Vessel,
The Gods had treasured up for their own use.

My blood flows to my heart; say, dost thou mean
Her Life, her precious Life?

The best of Lives she lost, and by my Order.


Then art thou damned indeed.


Then am I damned indeed? O true Assertion!
And see I thus submit me to be tortured,
Thus fall at thy Slave's feet, and beg for justice.
Be dark, thou Sun,
And be ye lesser Lights extinguished all:
Be Nature sick, let Shades surround the World,
And Order cease, till my Eugenia, the fair, the best Eugenia,
Be in my horrid torturing Death revenged.

Shine brighter Sun,
And all ye happy Stars glimmer for joy,
At this unlooked for Change. Oh my dear Husband!
Here is thy Wife, here is Eugenia;
Once more receive me as the (...) of Heaven.

Oh my Souls Joy! Can thou e're pardon me?
Can thou forget?

Heaven knows, with all my heart;
But let me beg you doubt my Faith no more.

If I do, may Heaven forsake me ever,
And thou my better Genius cease to guide me.

His Love so blinded thee thou hast forgot me?
Dost thou not know thy Father?

O my Lord!
So thrive my Soul, as in my best of Duty
My heart is vowed to you: Pray pardon me.

Let this declare I do.


Where, where's my Lord Ursaces? lead me to him.


Ha! His Eyes lost, and for my sake I fear:
Speak good old Friend, whose cruel deed was this?

'Twas Cloten's; but if you love me, do not pity me:
For this was I ordained, and well can bear it.
Where is the Princess? let me kiss her Hand.

Come not near me, Murderer:
Thou left'st me in the Desert, and gave me Poison.

Poison? May then the swift Lightning blast me,
If the Box I gave you was not thought by me
Of precious value; I had it from the Queen.

Most like it did, for I was dead a while.


My Boys, there was our Error.


My Pity swaying over your Command, my Lord,
I had no heart to kill her.

'Twas heavenly Mercy;
For had thou done it, O what Misery,
What Hells had I endured?

I left her to Heavens Mercy in a Desert,
Where after I found Cloten and Iachimo,
Dragging my Daughter with barbarous design,
In whose defence, bold Iachimo I slew,
And then lost my Eyes by Cloten's Cruelty;
But what befell him afterwards I know not.

Then let me end the Story, I killed him there.


Heaven forbid, brave Youth:
I would not thy good Deed should be rewarded
With a fatal Sentence; prithee deny it again.

Sir, I spoke it, and I did it.


He was a Prince.


A most uncivil one.


Bind the Offender, and take him from our presence.


Nay then stay Sir, hear me speak*
First pay me for the breeding of your Sons.

Breeding my Sons?


Perhaps I am too bold: Thus bow my Knee then,
And e're I rise I will prefer these two;
Then spare not the old Man. Mighty Sir,
These two young Gentlemen that call me Father,
And think they are my Sons sprung from your loins,
To you are debtors for their Beings.

Me?


To you Sir; you are their Parent,
Their Nurse Euriphele,
Whom I with Gold corrupted, stole these Children,
By which I thought my self revenged for Banishment:
But now they are yours again, and I must lose
Two of the best Companions in the World;
All blessing from the kind and bounteous Heavens,
Fall on their heads like Dew, for they are worthy
To inlay Heaven like Stars.

Welcome, welcome,
Ye Pillars of my Age. -- O my Eugenia,
Thou hast lost by this a Kingdom!

No, my Lord,
I have got two Worlds by it.

I'll have no sadness now, this is a day of Joy;
The Prisoners shall be freed, our Enemies pardoned,
The Streets of Ludds-Town shall with Bonfires shine,
And all the Temples smoke with Sacrifices.
Thou art my Brother, so I hold thee ever.

Our Actions, Royal Sir, shall still declare,
We will not shame our Births.

Though bred up in a Cave,
Our Thoughts were high as Palaces, and our Souls
Soared still above our level: For our Valours,
Let 'em be tried, and if we flinch in Battle,
Then let some Hero of the bloody Field
Defame and call us Slaves, not Sons to Cymbeline.

You are my Nerves, my Sinews, and my Age
Is firmer now than Youth. Valiant Ursaces,
Thou too art of our Blood, and by Eugenia
Claim'st a full part: But O beware of Jealousy,
That worst of Passions, cherished by the blood,
And nourished by destruction! For what's past,
Let it be all forgotten. -- Love Eugenia;
The Gods have linked your Destinies together,
Then now receive her from a Father's hand.

How like the Accent of some pitying God?
The King then spoke:
I swear you have outdone the Deities,
Given me the brightest Jewel of Perfection.
O my fair Love! Was ever Joy like mine?
Did ever Raptures touch a Heart so nearly,
Or shoot with so much fierceness through the Soul?
The excess on it is so great, sure it will kill me.
Thus as some wounded Hero,
That where most danger was, pressed forward still,
At last his Life owes to Physicians skill:
So Love, the blessed Physician of the Mind,
Heals all my Griefs, immortal Joys I find,
And Heaven on Earth, whilst my Eugenia's kind.

OUr next new Play, if this Mode hold in vogue,
Shall be half Prologue, and half Epilogue.
The way to please you is easy if we knew't,
A Iigg, a Song, a Rhyme or two will do it,
When you're in the vein: and sometimes a good Play
Strangely miscarries, and is thrown away*
That this is such our Poet dares not think,
For what displeases you's a waste of Ink:
Besides this Play was writ nine years ago*
And how Times alter, Ladies you best know;
Many then, fair and courted, I dare say,
Act hal^ out of Fashion, as our Play.
Besides if you'd consider't well, you'd find,
Y have altered since ten thousand times, your mind;
And if your humours do so often vary,
These in our Comedy must need miscarry;
For as you change, each Poet moves his Pen,
They take from you the Characters of Men.
The Wit they write, the Valour, and the Love,
Are all but Copies, of what you approve*
Our's follow'd the same Rule, but does confess,
The love and humour of that seasonless.
And every Artist knows that Copies fall,
For the most part, short of their Original.

