IN hopes the coming Scenes your Mirth will raise
To you, the Just pretenders to the Bays;
The Poet humbly thus a Reverence pays
And you, the Contraries, that hate the Pains
Of Laboured Sense, or of Improving Brains:
That feel the Lashes in a well-writ Play,
He bids perk up and smile, the Satyr sleeps to Day.
Our Sancho bears no Rods to make ye smart;
Proverbs, and Merry Iokes, are all his Part.
The Modish Spark may Paint, and ^ie in Paste,
Wear a huge Steinkirk twisted to his Waste;
And not see here, how foppish he is Dressed.
The Country Captain, that to Town does come,
From his Militia Troop, and Spouse at home,
To beat a London-Doxies Kettle-Drum:
One, who not only the whole Pit can prove,
That she for Brass Half-crown has bartered Love:
But the Eighteen-penny Whore-masters above,
With his Broad Gold may Treat his Pliant Dear,
Without being shown a Bubbled Coxcomb here.
Grave Dons of Business, may be Bulker's Cullies,
And Crop-ear'd Prentices set up for Bullies,
And not one Horse-whip Lash here, fla^g their Follies;
Nay* our hot Blades, whose Honour was so small,
They'd not bear Arms, because not Colonels all:
That wish the French may have a mighty Slaughter;
But wish it safely, -- on this side of the Water.
Yet when the King returns, a^e all prepared
To beg Commissions in the Standing-Guard;
Even these, the Sons of Shame and Cowardice,
Will escape us now, though 'tis a cursed Vice.
Our Author has a famous Story chose,
Whose Comic Theme no Person does expose,
But the Knights-Errant; and pray wh^re are those?
There was an Age, when Knights with Lance and Shi^ld,
Would Right a Ladies Honour in the Field:
To punish Ravishers, to Death would run;
But those Romantic Days -- alas, are gone;
Some of our Knights now, rather would make one,
Who finding a young Virgin, by Disaster,
Tied to a Tree, would rather tie her faster.
Yet these must escape too; so indeed must all
Court-Cuckold-makers now not Jest does maul;
Nor the horned herd within you City-Wall.
The Orange-Miss, that here Cajoles the Duke,
May sell her Rotten Ware without rebuke.
The young Coquette, whose Cheats few Fools can dive at,
^ay Trade, and the Old Top Kniperkin in private.
The Atheist too on Laws Divin^ may Trample,
And the Plump Jolly Priest get Drunk for Church-Example.

SAncho.


Sir.


We are now in pursuit of Valorous Adven^ures; entered into the pleasant Fields
of Mon^iel, the Air is fragrant and delightf^l, and the Valley, near yonder
Tuft of Virdant Trees, Cool and Shady; therefore let us alight -- And prithee
take the Bridle from ^osinante's Head, that he may the better taste the
Refreshment of this flowery Pasture; and when thou hast done so, show the same
Courtesy to thy own friend Dapple, for they have born us day with a fortitude
and patience that exact from us, an answerable Return of Civility.


With all my Heart* Sir; and I wish that Dapples generosity could be as Civil
to me, as I to him, and return me a good refreshing too, for as the Case of my
Belly now stands, I find my fortitude and patience inclining to yield to the
Giant Hunger; and methinks, I begin to wish my ^elf an Ass too, that we might
Improve good fellowship, and lovingly Dine together.


Do not indulge thy self, too much upon thy Belly, good Sancho; an Epicure
contradicts the function of the Squire of a Knight-Errant, entirely; go, do as
I have ordered, and a^ thy return I will give thee the honour of a Conference.


If the Conference were to be over a good piece of Beef and Cabbage, I could
confe^ no^ like any Clergyman; but I don't like these windy Exhortations
without meat, --


The gross and sordid quality of this Fellow, gives me the better reflection
upon my self, for as his thoughts are grovelling like his Nature, so mine are
elevate like my Profession: On which let me now consider a little. What art
thou? And what would thou be, Don Quixote? A Renowned Knight-Errant, a Tamer
of Giants, a Righter of Wrongs, a Defender of Virgins, a Protector of Justice;
In fine, a Scourge to the Infamous World, and a noble Retriever of the Golden
Age; but hold Illustrious Don, you are not Knighted yet, and consequently
incapable of these Performances. What then? as I have read in Books of
Chivalry, I may still undertake an easy Adventure, under the Title of the
Maiden-Knight, till I receive that honour; and then proceed the glory of that
function, the terror of all Miscreants, and the delight and wonder of ensuing
Ages.


So, thanks be to Lady Flora, the Beasts are well provided for, Dapple is
happy, he is exercising his Grinders yonder, whilst I carry mine here only for
show; for the Devil of any other use will my Master let me have for 'em; See --
now is he making his Dinner upon Cogitations, and I am to have the Scraps of
'em for mine* Honour and Air is always our fa^e. Oh Sancho, Sancho! What hast
thou brought thy self to?


Oh Dulcinea d^l Toboso* Thou light of all Eyes, Empress of my Soul, and
Sovereign Princess of my Heart and Vitals.


Ay, 'tis so, Thought of his supposed Mist^ess, a Murrain take her, is the
first Course, and no doubt a Conceit of the next beating for her will be the
second; Oo^s this is choice Diet, I grow damnably ^at upon it; Oh D^nce! You
must leave Wife and Children to go a Squiring, must ye? Well! can you eat
Grass, good Squire? Can your Worship Dine upon Clovet, you may find Salleds in
abundance, but like the Spanish Boors, your Countrymen, the Devil of any meat
to 'em, most Noble Squire.


Now Animal of little Faith, and less Ingenuity, what are you grumbling at?


Why troth, Sir, if your Worship will needs know, my Belly and I have had a
sharp Combat, it was grumbling at me for a good Dinner, and I was cramming it
as well as I could with the good hopes of the Island your Worship has promised
me, when you come to be Emperor of -- what do ye call it.


Empires, Sancho, have their Titles as various as the ways to Achieve 'em; but
let it suffice thee, that when I am Dubbed Knight, as with the first opportunity
I mean to be, Adventures of that Nature will flow in upon us; so that in the
^pace that one may trim a Beard, an Empire may Drop into my Mouth, and an
Island, or at least an Earldom into thine.


Pray Heaven my Government afford me Beef enough, to make amends for all these
Days of Fasting: But I have found to my sorrow in your Service hitherto* that
fair Words b^tt^r no Parsnips; he is blind enough that sees not through the
Holes of a S^ive; Desert and Reward seldom keep Company, and none are Fools
always, though every one sometimes; better on bare Foot then no Foot at all; and
thou art known by him that doth thee feed, not by him that doth thee breed; and
he that --


Wheiw! a plague on thee, where the Devil art thou running with thy flim flames?
what time of Year hence dost think I shall answer thee, if thou run on
threading thy Proverbs at this rate.


Well, well, Sir, that's all one* Let every one be the Son of his own Works,
for under the name of a Man one may become Pope; for my part, I see Land every
day more then other, you promised Islands and Earldoms; but how you shall get
'em or I govern 'em is the question; the Sancho's know better how to govern a
Plough than a Province; and since I have been your Squire I have got no
preferment yet, but Cudgels and more Cudgels, blows, and more blows^ I have
been but three days out a Squiring, and if drubbing could get me an Island I
have deserved one as big as Great Britain already.


Battles of Honour, Sancho, should not be disparaged by the base Epithet of
drubbing; thou hast done Nobly, and as Noble shall be thy reward; therefore I
once more tell thee, fear not thy Bones, and thou shalt be great, only because
I know thou art an Admirer of Proverbs, always remember this -- That Patience
grows not in every ones Garden.


Ay, and pray, Sir, do you remember this, That there is not always good Cheer
where there's a Smoking Chimney, and there's Proverb for Proverb; -- But yet a
plague on it, this plaguy Government wont out of my head, and methinks he
promis^s it with as much Confidence as if he were Emperor already, and carried
the Keys of it at his Girdle. -- Let me see, -- to be Don Sancho, -- good; to
sit upon my Velvet Cushions of State, and look big upon my Vassals, -- good
again; then to have my Wife be a Countess, and come to me in a Morning with --
Good morrow my Lord the Governor, hah, ha, ha, very good, faith -- Admirable!
I am transported at the thoughts on it; therefore Bones ach, Guts grumble, I am
resolved to be great in de^iance of ye both.


Hah! What do I see! -- Thanks to those propitious Stars that Usher my Renown
and Fortune, occasion offers it self in a most glorious Adventure.


What's the matter now?


Se^st thou that Giant, Sancho.


Giant, Sir.


That monstrous Giant, with Arms almost two Leagues long! see how he swings 'em
about, and fans himself to Cool his head.


I see no Giant, not I, I see a Windmill.


'Tis the dreadful Giant Caraculi^mbr^, Tyrant of the Island Mallindrania, who
devours every day to appease his hunger, ^2 new born Children baked, whose
Bones he grinds between his Teeth to powder.


Ha, ha, ha, ha, -- 'Tis the Giant Windmilliambro you mean, Tyrant of the
Island of Wheat, Barley, and Oats, twelve Bus^els of which he every day
devours, and grinds the Grains between the Stones to powder.


See there, an Innocent Wretch dressed all in White, whom the horrid Canibal is
Just now drawing into his Mouth.


Oons! What Innocent? what Wretch? what Mouth? Why don't you see 'tis the
Miller in his White Coat, going to carry a Sack into the Mill Door?


I tell thee 'tis one of the brood of A^aeon, whom I am obliged to cut off*
from the face of the Earth; therefore Saddle Rosina^te instantly, and i^ thou
art afraid go aside thy self, and pray whilst I enter into Cruel and unequal
Battle.


Battle, Gadsbud, Sir, are ye blind, will ye Battle a Windmill, have ye a mind
your Brains should be dashed out with the Sails.


Jolthead, to thee, they may seem Sails, but to me they are like the hundred
Arms of its Brother Giant Briareus, whom I will Instan^ly Lop off and destroy,
with whose spoils we will begin to be Rich. -- Away, I say, that I may perform
an Exploit for aftertimes to wonder a^ -- Stand thou proud Miscreant, and fly
me not; I will attack thee a^one, Oh Beautiful and Adored Dulcinea, In^luence
now thy Knight, I b^seech thee, I come Canibal, I come, -- Stay, stay, thou
Monster,


Stay, Stay, Ay you need not fear but the Windmill will stay ^or ye, d'sheart
he^l be knocked of the Head now; and there's my Island gone before I come to it
-- Why Sir, Sir, come back for Shame: Ah Plague of his mad Pate, What a Devil
shall I do with him.


Gone from her Fathers House?


Most certainly, and as 'tis thought in search of Don Fernando, who forgetting
all his fo^mer Vows and Promises of Marriage to her, as common Fame reports,
suddenly intends to Wed Luscinda.


Car^enio's Mistress.


Ay, and more than that -- has been Betrothed to him; but that's all one* the
old Man her Fathers Love of Money, Luscinda's Frailty -- and Don Fernando's
Treachery, has it seems brought my poor Niece Dorothea to this Distress; and
poor Cardenio to a worse; who, as 'tis said, stark Mad runs wild amongst yonder
Mountains of Sierra Morena.


But leaving this discourse, now lets mind our new Affair that we agreed on
last Night about Don' Quixote, when we heard the two Mad Fools, Master and Man,
were gone a Knight Erranting.


I have been Cudgelling my Brains ever since, with studying how to retrieve
'em; for I confess it troubles me, that a Man of clear Sense, good Learning,
and sound Judgment, on all other Subjects and Affairs, should be so strangely
bewitched upon the most ridiculous of all, Knight Errantry.


'Tis indeed a strange Infatuation.


But I think I have employed my time very well to day in your absence, for
whilst you have been enquiring which way the Whimsical Knight is gone, I, and
the old Woman his House Keeper, have been burning his Books.


That was our last Resolve, I remember, and will no doubt contribute to his
Cure; for 'tis most certain, that those Romantic Books of Knighthood and
Poetry have been the main Cause of all his Frantic Humours -- but see here
comes mine Host.


Hah, hah, ha, ha, ha.


How now mine Host; What price bears Oats and Barley, hah; What new Ambassador,
or noble Guest, with his large Pockets crammed wi^h Spanish Ducats, has made
you so merry this morning.


Ha, ha, ha ha, -- Oh my Heart, Oh my Lungs, -- ha, ha, ha, ha, Don Quixote,
Don Quixote, ha, ha, ha, ha.


Why what of him --


The Mad Fool has been charging a Windmill yonder, and swears 'twas a Giant;
The Sails whisked him about like a Rat in a Mill Wheel, endangering his Neck
every Minute, till at last, Fortune unwilling to spill the small quantity of
Brains remaining, threw him some twenty yards off into a Fish*Pond, ha, ha, ha,
ha, Oh I shall burst, ha, ha, ha, ha.


And where is he prithee.


Here just by, with his Booby Sancho; but the best Jest is, he persuades
himself that 'tis all done by Enchantment of some Magician that owes him a
spite, and that this Misfortune has happened only because he was not Knighted;
and therefore has entreated me to do that Honour for him; Calls me, Sir
Constable, and my Lord; and my Inn, a Castle; and I am now going to get my
Wife, my Daughter, and two or three other merry Fellows to assist me in the
Ceremony, for I'm resolved to carry on the Jest; and if you'll stay with me
till to morrow morning you shall share in it.


With all my Heart, the diversion must needs be surprising


Oh yonder comes Sancho, first lets hear what he says.


Thanks be to good luck -- he has saved his Neck, however, Gramercy Fish-Pond,
our Adventures had all been at an end else Faith; and so had my Government too,
with all the noble hopes of Sancho's Preferment: Yonder he is, as wet as a
Water Spaniel that has just been Diving; and as Angry, as if the Windmill had
called him Coward; or Son of a Whore; and to provoke him more, had railed
against Knight-Errantry.


Oh -- Neighbour well met, -- well, how goes matters, how fares our noble
F^iend, your Master; mine Host tells us he has been Fighting a Devilish Giant
yonder; prithee how wa'st, for I am sure you must know.


Though I know no such matter, I'm re^olved to banter the Barber however, Mouth
was as wide as your Shop Door Neighbour: This is truth upon my Squirehood* I
saw him.


Bless us, why this was prodigious; come lets go and congratulate him
immediately.


The Lye is prodigious indeed,


Ha, ha, ha, ha, ha*


Good luck betide us, have I found ye so merry at last; there has been such a
Noise within yonder, the House has been ^oo Hot to hold us: There's two Women,
or Furies, (for I know not what to make of 'em) inquiring for ye: One of 'em
has a Tongue louder than a Sow-gelders Horn; She says, she has come three
Leagues after ye this morning, and will have ye if ye are above Ground. She has
a long lean withered Walnut coloured Face; She's as dirty as a Gypsy, and as
ill Dressed as a Rag-Woman.


Oh Plague, that must be my Wife by the Description; and what kind of Creature
is with her prithee?


A young Todpole Dowdy, as freckled as a Ravens Egg, with ma^ted Hair, ^notty
Nose, and a pair of Hands as black as the Skin of a Tortoise, with Nails as long
as a Kites Tallons upon every Finger.


Ah, that's my Daughter too, I know by her cleanliness* I stole away from 'em
with design to surprise my Wife with a Countess-ship before she was aware; but
since they have found me out by the Scent, let 'em come in with a Pox to 'em.


Oh, thou Dromedary, thou Foundered Mule without a Pack-Saddle; o^ what other
soul Beast shall I call thee, for Man thou art not, nor hast not been to me,
Heaven knows the time when; ar^ not ^hou ashamed to see me, t^ou Nincompoop.


Why how now Crooked Rib, how now Cro^kadile* can your Tongue wag this Morning,
is the Matrimo^ial Horn Pipe Tuning already.


Oh Lord Father, why would you run away so Father; and how do you think I shall
get my new pair of Green S^ockings home, and have my Sabbath days Shoes
mended, if you leave me and my Mother in this Fashion, oh, ho, oh.


If any one wants a pair of Marriage ^g Pipes, I can sell him now a rare
Bargain: A Man that had her for a Wife, and an Acre of Thistles, need not care
which ^e burnt first* oons what a coil is here.


How have I deserved this, thou Man of the Devil; Have not I been a most true,
and loving to thee, mended thee weekly from Top to Toe, and taken as much care
of Dapple thy Ass as if he had been Born of my own Body; Have I not clip'd the
Bristles of thy Beard with Wiselike Patience, that no filthy Vermin might breed
there; and washed thee with my own Hands when thou hast been as full of Mire as
a Hog in a Highway: Nay, and what's more, the last Night we were in Bed
together, would I may never Drink more, if I did not move to thee in the wa^*
kindness whilst thou lay Snoring like a Drunken Carri^r, and at last gav'^t
me a huge thump, enough to spoil a Woman's Childing for ever after.


Why, thou she Cormorant, thou Man Devourer, have I been beating the Conjugal
Drum this twenty years, and dost thou blame me now for Snoring: Oh Conscience,
Conscience, Where art thou?


You don't do well Father, so you don't, to call my Mother such Names, she's no
Drum; look slidikins, if any one else had called her a Drum, I'd ha set my
Nails in the Jaws of un.


Here's a mettled Whore too, sbud, a word or two more would make that young Cat
set her Claws in my Face indeed.


Ay, you see the Child will take her Mothers part, however, go to him Mary,
speak to him Child, don't be afraid of hi^ whittle Truth, has a good Face,
though the Quoif be torn, speak to him I say M^ry.


Nay, Mary's an admirable Speaker, I'll say that for her; Well, Offspring, mine
Mary, the Buxom, What say you humph?


Why, I say, you shall go home with us now we have found ye Father; I cant get
the Cow home to Night without ye; And there's a Bag of Barley must be carried
to the Mill too: Gadsniggers I'll hold fast by this Arm.


And I'll stick close to the other.


So, Now ^s here the true sign of the Marriage Mousetrap; and I, a Pox on me,
am the unlucky Vermin that's caught in it: I'm a notable Figure now I believe if
my Picture were drawn: Sbud you Man Leaches let go my Hand; Or by my Hollidame.


O Lord, you maynt Swear Father, the Devil will have you if you Swear.


And his Dam, there, will have thee, if thou follow her advice ye young Oaf.
Here am I, that by seeking noble Adventures, am going to be an Ea^l; and in the
twinkling of a Star to be able to make ye both Countesses; and yet this Devil
of a Woman will be always crossing me, and daming her self ^o Clouted Shoes,
and a Canvas Smock all days of her Life.


A Countess! O Lord, Is that true Mother?


I shaw, waw, nee^ mind tho^e great so (...) Titles Fool, they are a great deal
too big for our Mouths, Mary; My Name has been always Teresa, and Goodwi^e
Panca; and thou, time out of mind, hast been called M^ll or Mary, and ^t the
latter end of my days to be called Coun^e^s, and I know not what, I shall Die,
I shall never be able to be^r it.


Why, there 'tis now; A Plague on it, who would put Honey into an Asses Mouth:
I am making my self a Gove^nor, and setting her upon Velvet Cushions of State;
and this Plaguy Woman of Barrabas, in spi^e of me will sit ba^e B^ttock'd upon
a Dunghill.


And do you say, that I should be a Governors Daughter, and sit upon a Cushion
too, Father.


Wowns, thou shalt be a Countess I tell thee in a Months time, if that Adder
^ere would leave her Hiss^ng, and let me be quiet: I would Ma^ry thee in ^n
instant to the great Lord Don W^irligigaric* Son and H^ir to the the other great
Lord Don Wha^hum: Thou ^houldst walk in th^ Streets wi^h ^hy Train held up, and
two Embroidered Lackeys holding an Umbre^ over thee, to keep thy amiable Phiz
from Tanning.


Ha, ha, ha, ha, -- on Gemini* and that will fit my Humour to a Button, Father:
Well, the first thing I would do, should be to learn to be Proud, and look
Scornfully, I warrant I'd carry my self like a Countess quickly.


Alas, poor Mawkin, she's bewitched already; I find this Earldom will be the
undoing of the poor Jade do what I can: Why hear me, thou Father of Folly, thou
wilful Corrupter of thy own Flesh and Blood; Does that Child look as if she
could walk in State with her Train held up, d^heart 'twill give me Gripes to
hear how the Folks will Laugh at her; Look how Stately the Hoggrubber goes,
says one; she that was yesterday at her Spinning Wheel, and went to Church with
the Skirt of her Coat over her Head, to keep her from the Rain, has now a Tail
three yards long, says another; and an Umbrel to defend her Olive coloured
Countenance, with a Pox to her, says a third; This will be the cry all the
Village over; therefore come away Mary, and don't ^e a Countess Child.


Call thy Mother Fool, Mary the Buxom, and be a Countess in ^pite of he^:
Remember thou art to be Married, and Breed a Race for the Honour of the
Panca's, think upon the young Lord Whirligigario, Child.


Think upon thy self, Mary, remember thou hast sometimes worn Shoes, and
sometimes none Child.


Crooked Loggs make good Fires, think upon Don Whirligigario, M^ll.


Ay, ay, Father, I'm for Don Whi^l^gigario, and there's no more to be ^aid, but
let my Mother sit ^are B^ttock'd upon a Dunghill, if she will, I'll be a
Countess, ^.


That's my good Girl, look'ee Teresa, the Court has given their Judgment, your
Caus^ is lost in Course.


Well Satan, I know thou dost it to break my Heart thou Cruel Man; for the very
hour that I shall see that Girl a Countess, will be the hour of my Death; I'm
sure, the Jade will never be able to know her self, she'll be every Minute
hoydning and discovering her Course Thread: Well, she's thy own, do what thou
wilt with her; but for my part I'll near consent to it, and so farewell: A
Countess, O Lord, I've no Patience to think ont.


Good Lord, now is my Mother as Rusty as an old Cow that has got the Belly Ach,
but I care not; She dares not beat me, because she knows I'll beat her again.
Well, de hear Father, be sure you make me a Countess as soon as ever you can.


I warrant thee Girl; and let thy Mother go and Fume at home with the Smoke in
the Chimney corner: He that looses his Wife and Six Pence looses a Tester: Thou
art my Darling, and shalt ere long be a Lady; for she that has luck has better
than a good Estate in Reversion; and the full Bags of Fools Command Wise-Men
for Followers. I by following Adventures intend to be a Governor; and when I am
so, I intend to make thee Rich; And when thou art Rich, no Body will say thou
art Freckled, nor think thee a Dowry. For Gold makes Country Joan look fair and
Bonny,
Though old and chopped, and Skinned like Orange Tawny.



AND are you sure, Mr. Curate, that your Letter is Authentic, and that it says
positively your Niece Dorothea lives disguised amongst the Shepherds of
Cordova?


'Tis most certain, for the Discover of her is my particular Friend; one o^ ^e
best of that Quality too in all the Country, and h^s been often with (...) at
her Father's House.


'Tis very odd, that when this Devil Love gets once into a young Female Noddle,
what Tricks and Gambols will it make her play: ^ had rather be obliged to tame
a Hare in the beginning of March, and mak^ it come to my Hand, than any Woman
in her Pride of Eighteen, if once she be touched with this loving Fury.


He writes me word here, he discovered her one Evening by her Singing, for she
can Sing ^oo like an Arch-Angel. The pretty Rogue was washing her Feet in a
little Brook that runs just by his Cottage, the Whiteness of which made him at
first suspect her Sex, till viewing her Face nearer, he knew her perfectly, yet
discovered not himself, but follow'd her, and by that means found her Abode
among the Shepherds.


And how do ye intend to get her thence?


Occasion offers f^ly, to Morrow will be the Funeral of Chrisostom, a young,
witty and learned Engli^h Gentleman, that for the Love of a ^oy beautiful
Virgin of these Precincts, called Marcella, put on a Shepherd's Habit to Court
her, but she disdaining him, despaired and died. At this Ceremony will atte^d
all the Shepherds hereabouts, and there will be a Di^ge ^ung, with other Rural
Games, made by a dear Friend and Country-man of his, called Ambrosio, in Honour
of the dead Man's Memory. Now amongst this Troop 'tis probable she comes, and I
may then surprise her.


'Tis likely enough I co^fess, and to assist a little, good Mr. Curate, I'll be
there too, and if the Clergy miss her, perhaps the Laity may come in for a
Snack; but come, let's mind our present Diversion, here comes mine Host, the
Antic Ceremony of the Knighthood will be performed immediately.

Ah! the Devil take all mad Fools: Was ever Man so plagued? Come, Wife,
Daughter, and Gentlemen, pray mind all your Instructions, that I may humour this
Frantic Ass wi^h a Sham Knighthood, and so get him out of my House, for I
shall be undone if he stays a day longer in it -- He rose up in a Dream just
now, and fancying he was fighting with Giants, falls a Slashing two Bags of
Red Wine, that stood up in a Corner, and has spilt upon twenty Gallons on it
about the Floor. D'sheart! he has made me almost as mad as himself; therefore
Wise, be sure you make haste, and remember your Part of the Ceremony.


Ceremony! Hang him; Gad I'll Charge him with a Co^stable, if he does not pay
me for my Wine.


Ha, ha, Oh Neighbour! you must consider he's a mad Man.


And such are not only excused from Civility, but Law too.


He calls me Princess, Radiant, and Incomp^rable; and told me my Eyes glittered
brighter than Venus or Mercury, with a World more of such Gibberish, tha^ for
my part, I thought the Devil was in the Man.


Ay Gad, I get clear of him presently -- O^, yonder I see him! He's coming with
his Armour to this Well, which he takes to be a consecrated Fountain, and
therefore a Place ^tto be Knighted in. Come, come all in, let's leave him to
himself a little, whilst I go and get all my merry Grigs ready for the Song and
Dance; we'll Fool him methodically however.


Set down the Shell of my Renown, my Armor^ that wondrous Ca^e, that must
defend this Body from vile Inchanters, Monsters, Giants, Furies; there, set 'em
down by that most Holy Fountain, whilst, like a Tortoise, strip^d of her
Defence, I craule about, and grovelling, kiss the Earth, till Fate or^ains the
Honour to retrieve 'em. Go Sancho, go thou aside, my faithful Squire, and Pray,
Squires have no other Office in this Ceremony.


Why the truth on it is, Sir, you have nicked me there to a Hair, for my whole
Office has been to Pray and Fast ever since I came into your Service: I have
told my Wife Teresa Wonders of ye, that I am to be an Earl and a Governor, and
the Devil and all, but the Horse next the Mill carries the Grist, Mischiefs
come by the Pound, and go away by the Ounce; God send me a good Deliverance, I
say, I am a Fool, ^ find it.


No, if thou woul'st have thy self unravelled, thou art a Mixture of Knave and
Fool; the Weights are often equal, but now I think, the Fool weighs down the
Ball^nce; thou art now a silly desponding Varlet.


Well, well, where nothing is, a little goes a great way, and an old Dog will
learn no Tricks* What a Devil do ye call this Well a Fountain for? And who the
Devil consecrated it, unless it be two or three dozen of b^ld pate Frogs I
heard croaking in it.


Hark, I hear 'em coming;


Why there's another very pretty Task to, a thing that would baffle the whole
Clergy, as I'm a true Squire, to Pray as heartily as one can Ea^; ds'bud,
there's ne'er a Priest in Christendom can do it.


I have a shrewd Suspicion that this Belly of thine, Sancho, will hinder thy
Preferment; when ever the Squire of a Knight Errant gives himself to Eating,
Honours fall off insensibly.


Why then the Devil take all Honour^; a hungry Horse makes an ill Journey, and
half a Loaf is better than no ^r^ad; rather than starve for a Governorship,
I'll be plain with you Sir --


Away, thou Prater; I'll hear no more, away I say.


Thou God that love loud Drums that rattle.
Raw Heads and bloody Bones, and Battle;
That try'st with Blows our Sense of Feeling.
Look down upon this Mortal Kneeling:
Grant him Honours, with Redundance,
Thumps and Blows, and Kicks abounda^ce;
And when his Bones all broken be,
Be this the Type of Victory.

Proud Giants let him better quell,
Than when he from the Wi^d-Mill fell.
No more may Fish-Ponds drench his Carcass,
Nor waggish Ho^s make him a stark Ass.

Let no Soul-Broker have a Hand in
The Shaving of his Understanding.
Fame let him get at Tilt and Barriers,
And never more be swinged by Carriers.

Claret, no more for Blood be spilling,
Nor no more costly Wine-Baggs killing;
Least some hard-fisted Ostler flies on it,
Or angry Hostess scratch his Eyes out.

May Dulcinea del Toboso,
That likes his Tawny Phiz but so, so,
By being in her Rigour lasting,
Get him more Honour, and more Basting.

So, now remove him, whilst these Sons of Fame, these Knights that represent
the Times past Glory, perform the rest of this high Ceremony.


Now Sing the Song in Praise of Arms and Soldiery.

SIng all ye Muses, your Lutes strike around;
When a Souldier's the Story, what Tongue can want Sound?
Who Danger disdains, Wounds, Bruises and Pains,
When the Honour of Fighting is all that he gains.
Rich profit comes easy in Cities of Store,
But the Gold is earned hard where the Cannons do roar.
Yet see how they run at the Storming a Town,
Through Blood and thr^ugh Fire, to take the Half-Moon.
They Scale the high Wall,
Whence they see others fall.
Their Hearts precious Darling, bright Glory pursuing,
Th^' Death's under foot, and the Mine is just blowing.
I^ springs, up they fly, yet more still supply,
As Bride grooms to Marry, they ^asten to dye.
Till Fate claps her Wings, and the glad Tidings brings,
Of the Breach being entered, and then they are all Kings.
Then happy's she whose Face
Can win a Soldier's Grace,
They range about in State,
Like Gods disposing Fate;
No Luxury in Peace,
Nor Pleasure in Excess,
Can parallel the Joys the Martial Hero Crown,
When flushed with Rage, and forced by Want, he storms a wealthy Town.

Ladies, the last great Honour now afford,
And arm the Cha^pion with the Spurs and Sword.

Let this bright Spur, with prickly Rowels,
That wounds thy Courser near the Bowels,
Mind thee in thy Adventures thick,
How thou for Women's Rights should kick.
So Fortune, thou bold Knightly Tony,
Send thee more Wi^, and me more Money.

About thy Loins I gird this doughty Blade,
To fight thy Battles, and make Foes afraid*
Cudgel, and Cudgell'd be, be no Man's Debtor,
The more that stupid Pate is mauled the better.
Thy Fate defends thee from the Pains of Killing,
Who has no Brains, is past all S^nse of Feeling.

Then lastly, with this Knightly Thwack,
And these about thy Sides and Back.
I Dub thee for an Arms Professor,
Champion for War, and Wrongs Redres^or.
Once, twice, and thrice, now rise with Grace,
The Knight of the Ill-favour'd Face*

Sir Constable, the Honour you have done me, devotes me to your Service during
Life; show me a Monster, Giant, or Enchanter, though ne'er so huge or terrible,
that has wronged ye, and you shall see me make him do you Justice, and lay his
Recreant Head beneath your Fee^. And you great Princesses, and Illustrious
Beauties, that this great Hour have done Don Quix^te Honour, low at your Feet
your Knight offers his Homage. My grateful Thanks likewise to you my Friends,
by whom this Sword and Arm shall always be commanded.


All Honour to the Son of Fame, and brightest Planet of Knig^t Errantry, Don
Quixote de la Ma^cha.


May his Heroic Deeds make Amad^s du G^ul a Tri^ler.


Don Bellianis of Greece, and Felixmarte of Thriani^ be Mushrooms to the Pine
of this tall Glory.


Good my Lord, your Excellence too much honours me; and so does your fair Lady
-- of whom I must presume to beg one Courtesy -- additional -- which is -- a
Plaster -- for wi^h your Lordships too much Zeal in Dubbing me, I humbly do
conceive -- my Head is broke.


Most happy Omen!


Yes, if it bled three Drops.


It has, three hundred, I feel 'em in my Collar.


Run Maritornes, fetch the Vng^entum Album.


Most Radiant Princess! I shall trouble ye.


Why truly Sir, since you have made me a great Lady, I can't help being as
proud as one; and to send a Princess for a Plaster, is, in my Opinion, a
little undecent.


Oh Madam! your Highness shall not need, I have one ready here in my Pocket.


Odsbodokins! if ever you'll see a fine Sight as long as you live, come away
quickly to the Inn Door.


How now Sancho? Where's your Obeisance to this Noble Knight?


Mum, Mum, I understand ye -- Most Noble Emperor, that is to be, I kiss your
Majesty's Foot.


'Tis well, my Squire -- but prithee what Sight is this thou h^st seen at the
Castle Gate?


Why at the Castle Gate then, since you will have it so, there^ a dead Man
walked by in more State, and with greater Noise after him, than a London
Alderman, whose Soul is gone to Hell for Usury, then he has, I say, when his
Son and Heir hires a whole Troop of Blue Coat-Boys to sing Psalms, and try if
they can bawl i^ out again.


Oh! 'tis the Funeral of Chrysostom, that died for Love. My Lord Don Quixote,
'tis fit you should be there, perhaps some Adventure may show it self.


Your Excellence Councels well, there may indeed, for now methinks I'm weary of
soft Ease, and long for some Exploits to rouse my Valor To purge the World of
Vice by powerful Arms,
In spite of Hell, and Necromantick Charms.



The Devil go with him; Must we lose our Money for our Wine after all then, for
a Jest? ds'life I'll run after him, and fetch him back.


No, no, prithee good Hostess let him alone now, I'll see thee paid upon the
Word of a Priest; I'll be his Pledge for once, for out of Kindness to his
Family, I intend very suddenly, by a Trick, to core his Frenzy, and bring him
Home again.


The Word of a Priest, Thank'ee good Sir, I desire no better Security for all
the Wine in my Cellar.


If there be any sport in it, you are sure of me Mr. Curate.


Oh, thou art to be my Chief Engine -- but more of that another time; now let's
to the Funeral, and if I can but find my Niece there.


We'll Fuddle mine Host to night in his own Castle, as Don Quixote calls it.


Ah, would I could see that, my jolly Lads, I'd try your Forces i faith.


And did not I do my Speeches purely, Mr. Curate?


Ay, little Maritornes, that thou did, I assure thee.


They come with Sighs, and as half dead with Sorrow,
Attend the Body of the wretched Chrysostome,
Whilst I, that seem to mourn another Fate,
Dissolve in real Tears, to know my own:
Poor Dorothea, Where are now the Comforts
That used to make thy Days Divinely happy?
Where now are Blessings from Indulgent Parents,
That used to smile upon thy Morning Duty,
Kiss thy refreshing Cheeks, lean on thy Bosom,
And in soft Rapture, invoke Heaven to guard thee?
All gone, quite lost, you're now a Friendless Vagabond*
Undone by Love, and by a Man betrayed,
For who could else undo an innocent Maid?
Forced in these Groves among the stranger Swains,
To waste a woeful Life, -- Oh false Fernando!
But hush -- no more, they come. --


Thus to the Grave the last retreat of Mortals,
Has sad Ambrosio brought his dearest Friend,
Oh that he could revenge his hapless Death upon the cruel Tigress that has
caused it, with what a pleasure would I fly to execute; or could my Breath blow
Plagues among the Sex, and only amongst them, no Malething suffering, what
Rapture should I feel; but alas, I wish in vain, no Pestilence can hurt 'em:
One poisonous Viper cannot hurt another: A Woman is the Plague, the hottest
Plague, and where they harbour, breed Contagion round 'em.


To me I'm sure a Man has been a greater, and bred more desolation.

But good Ambrosio, was this fair Murdress thoroughly satisfied of your dead
Friends Affection?


Too too well, there past no Minute on of stealing time, that he past
unemployed to do her service; he was a Man, the brightest of her Sex, if they
could ever consider, would be proud of, an admirabl^ Scholar, rare Musician,
Learned without Pride, and Valiant without Passion; The Elements were all so
tempered in him, that except Love, his Breast was still and calm; no Gust
within to ruffle his rare Judgment, so knowing too, and yet withal so modest,
that tho his Reason could instruct great Teachers, he never thought himself the
Wiser Man.


He was indeed the wonder of his time.


Oh ye immortal Powers! How comes it then that all this Worth is thrown away on
Woman? Woman, that as the Poet nobly tells us Deceitful Woman, that will in
time forestall,
The Devil, and be the Dam^ing of us all.



Bless us! What Romantic thing have we got here?


I know not, he looks like the Ghost of some Murdered King in a Tragedy;
Prithee observe the the other too that comes slowching after him, that must be
some rare Fellow by his Look.


By the Mass I admire him, I must go stare at 'em.


I am, Sir, by profession a Knight Errant, renowned for Righting Wrongs; my
Name's Don Quixote; otherwise called the Knight of the Ill-Favour'd Face.


Faith 'tis Ill-favour'd indeed, there you are in the right, in troth Sir
Knight.


And you must know I am the Renowned Sancho Panca, this Renowned Knight's
Renowned Squire, and, all in good time, am to be a Renowned Governor.


I have with wonder heard some part of your Discourse, and therefore, as it is
my Duty, make Request to know if you are wronged.


Some Mad-man, sure.


He looks no better, Sir Knight, who ever you are, if you'll have patience till
we have performed the Funeral Ceremonies, I shall have time to answer, but till
then --


With all my heart, most Courteous Knight, and will assist my self.


He's got hither before us, I see.


And I warrant they ta^e him for some strange Monster, How they Stare and Grinn
at Sancho?


Perform the Dirge, and let all other Rites be done in solemn Order: And oh
thou dear best pattern of true Friendship, a^cept this poor last Tribute from a
Friend, whose Love to thee was boundless as thy Merit.


YOung Chrysostome had Virtue, ^ense,
Renown, and Manly Grace,
Yet all alas were no Defence,
Against Marcella's Face.
His Love that long had taken Root,
In Doubts cold Bed was laid,
W^ere She ^ot warming it to Shoot,
The lovely Plant Decaid.
Had coy Marcella owned a Soul,
Half Beauteous as her Eyes;
Her Judgment had her Soul controlled,
And taught her how to Prize:
But Providence that Formed the Fair,
In such a charming Skin,
Their outside made their only Care,
And never looked within.
SLeep poor Youth, Sleep in Peace,
Relieved from Love and mortal Care;
Whilst we that pine in Life's Disease,
Uncertain Bless'dlesse happy are.
Couched in the dark and silent Grave,
No ills of Fate thou now can fear;
In vain would Tyrant Power enslave,
Or scornful Beauty be severe.
Wars, that do fatal Storm disperse,
Far from thy happy Mansion keep;
Earthquakes that shake the Universe:
Can't Rock thee into sounder sleep.
With all the Charms of Peace possessed,
Secure from Life's Torment or Pain.
Sleep and indulge thy-self with Rest,
Nor Dream thou ever shalt rise again.
PAst is thy fear of future Doubt,
The Sun is from the Dial gone,
The Sands are sunk, the Glass is out,
The Folly of the F^rce is done.
Oh, I shall choke with a Revengeful Spleen, against that cursed She that robbed
me of this Jewel, each single Ray of whose transparent Virtue, out-shin'd a
Million of those Counterfeits, those dull false Pebbles, Women.


My Uncle, as I live, how shall I shun him.


I'm sure 'tis She, I know her by that Blush.


Follow her close, then the Game lies just before ye.


Sir, to me, there is no brighter Jewel than a Woman, and he that dares affirm
my Peerless Mistress sweet Dulcinea del Toboso, is a Pebble, is but a Turf
himself, and holds his Soul at nothing.


Ha, ha, ha, ha, this is rare stuff.


Some Officer sure grown frantic.


The Squire-Governor too looks with the same Air, ha, ha, ha, ha.


What a Plague do these Frogs in green Liveries grin at? A Knight Errant to
these Fools now, I warrant, is as strange a Sight, as a Rhinoceros, ho ho,
ha, ha, Laugh on, Laugh on, Boobies, there's some difference sure between a Kite
and a Pismire; What a Pox, Earldoms, are not got by keeping of Sheep -- ho,
ho, ho, hah.


Hah, here's some wonderful Adventure, What beauteous Vision's this.


Oons, if this should be some Empress or Queen now, and my Government at my
Elbow before I'm aware.


By Heaven 'tis She, the very Charming Devil, that has done all this mischief.


Great cause thou hast to wonder, rash Ambrosio, that I who from my Infancy
Devoted to Solitude, have shunned all Human Converse, should now un-ask'd,
expose my Person here; but know I do it to defend my Hon^ur, against the
poisonous slander of vile Tongues, who render me the Cause of their un-rest,
and the late Death of thy-ill-fated Friend.


Oh! Tigress of more Cruel and Fell kind than ever yet in Africa Deserts bred,
can thou defend thy self?


Yes, and with Justice too, his Death was caused by his ob^inate Folly.


Of loving thee too well. Oh barbarous Women, the Sacred Powers above, lent^y
Beauty to give Delight, not Kill, though it had Power, yet you all filled with
the old Serpents Primitive Mischief, knowing that Power, --

Convert it to our Ruin.


Oh, filly Men, that knowing then our Mischiefs, will ye^ turn Amorous Coxcombs
to provoke us.


Thou very Devil in an Angels shape, thou know it was t^e Fate of my dear
Friend, he could not help his loving thee.


Why then, thou very Fool in thy own shape, the less my Obligation; who is
obliged to one for any Courtesy, that cannot help the doing it?


Yet dost not pity him.


Pity's the Child of Love; and I never yet Lo^'d any of your S^x, I might have
some Compassion fo^ his Death; but still the Occasion of it moves my Mirth.


The Occasion of it! why thou strange Cruelty! art thou not th'Occasion? Did he
not die for thee?


For me! No, certainly; Was he not a M^, one grounded too in Knowledge, a
Philosopher, dressed in the Pride of all those ^littering Arts that raise your
Sex, you think so much above us? Poor Ignorant Women, I warrant he despised us
in his Heart; Toys, Puppets, fashioned only for the Pleasure, Mirth, and
Convenience of Lordly Man; and could he die for Love? Fie! 'tis Impossible! Who
ever knew ^ Wit do such a thing?


Triumphant Mischief; Have you no Remorse?


I rather look on him as a good Actor; that Practising the Art of deep deceit,
as Whining, Swearing, Dying at your Feet, Cracked some Life Artery with an
overstrain,
And died of some Male Mischief in the Brain.



Ah plague, I find now this is no Queen; this Woman is too much a Tattler to be
of any great Quality.


Peace Bottlehead.


Oh! that some Power would bless me with a Charm, to Plague thy Heart, as thou
has Tortured his; that thou might feel the force of those hot flames, that
burnt the Life out of the Noble Chrysostom.


'But since your words have no bewitching Arts,
'No Charm your Person, nor your Eyes no Darts.
'Happy Marcella, who no danger sees,
'Untouch'd by Love does neither burn nor freeze.

His Merit, though not mine, would Inspire Love
In any generous Woman.

That's as she prized it,
Men will be vain, and value their own parts;
But 'tis our ^ancy that bestows our Hearts.
Merit is what we Love, sometimes a Fool
Outdoes the ^hilosopher in a Woman's School;
But if she's wilful, and has no remorse*
Believe me, Fool, 'twill be in vain to force.

Heaven! Why did our Creation come by Women?
Can Mankind be no other way Increased.

No other way; so set your heart at rest.


We doubt 'em, even whilst in their Arms we lye
Prospect of Cares we find, but none of Joy.

Pish -- Now I laugh at ye, you know you lie
^eauty, you as your greatest bli^s pursue,
Feign what you can, nay, Fool we know it t^o
Fair is my Face, my Liberty my own,
I will accept no Love nor promise none:
Nor pity any would my Peace betray;
Though there should die ten thousand in a Day.

Once to Revenge this Lover that lies Dead
Grant ye, immortal Powers, that I may Wed,
I'll quel the Pride of your Rebellious Race,
Form Woman new and make her know her place.

Hear him sweet Heaven, and let his Consort be
Armed with another Soul like that in me.
A Soul that too fond Pa^ion never Confined,
But knows the Cheats of all his Cosining kind;
Your Rage, weak Sir, will slenderly prevail;
My Rule's Effectual, and it cannot fail:
Our easy Natures oft with Pride you vex;
But know that I was born to plague your Sex.
Formed to Attract, and featured to Excel,
Beauty's a Charm against which you want a Spell*
When Heaven conveys such Influence to you,
Correct with awful Frowns and make me few;
But whilst your Fate's submitted to my sway,
I know my Power, and Men shall Obey.

Do ye hear the Insolent, Shepherds you, that were Friends to the brave
Chrysostom? ds'Death, shall she brave us thus? for shame run some of ye, and
bring her back; let's make her have some sense of her Barba^ity, at least.


Let no one dare to follow her on his Life; I find she does but Justice to her
Sex, that are too often much abused by ours, therefore as I profess my self
Knight-Errant, 'tis fit that I protect her.


You protect her, ha, ha, ha, ha.


Knights, I will do it, and more then that against ye all.


That he will, srogs, and against a hundred more of ye for all your Grinning.


Oons what do the Bedlams mean; Come Friends, let's bind 'em, and put 'em into
the Dark, the Fools are Distracted.


I'll try how sound your Senses are, Sir Dogbolt.


There's for your ^rinning, Rogues, I think I am even with ye now; woons! what
a fine thing fighting is, when a Man is sure of having the better of it? And
what a delicate difference there is between a Toledo-Blade, and a Sheephook?
But come, Sir, let's get away for fear they Rally, 'sbud I think I behaved my
self bravely.


Why troth, if thou could but keep thy Eyes open a little better, thou
might in time come to do something: But a plague o^ thee, thou fight as a
Crab Crawls* backwards, for Instead of giving one of 'em a side long thump Just
now, if I had not stepped quick aside thou had struck my Knighthood over the
Pate? But however, thou mean well, I dare swear, and I believe fight as
well as thou can. And he's no braver that subdues ^n Host,
Then he is that stands still and keeps his Post.



AH, Sir, I beg ye for my Mother's sake, or if you e^r loved poor Dorothea,
when with her Prattling Infant Innocence* and springing Beauty in it's early
blossom, she used to please, by both I do Conjure ye, let me not see my Father.


Trust to me; You must to your past crime add a gre^er, by Hateful
Disobedience.


Oh! I shall dye with shame; Alas! I left him alone unfriended, warped with Age
and Sorrow! That good Old Man* That kind Indulgent Father, I shall never dare,
forlo^n as now, to meet his Eyes again! Barbarou^ Fernando, that False Cruel
Tyrant, pleased with the spoils of my dear Virgin Honour, has Ravished that
blessed ^ight for ever from me.


Had you no Contract from this false Fernando.


In Vows and Oaths a thousand; I was too Artless to desire him more: Heavens!
He would swear till he was black in the Face; Dissemble six long hours by the
Clock; and when he Vowed the truth of his Affection, the Potestation^ came so
fast and thick, so feirce withal and Eager in Expressing, that I've been fain
to let him kiss and breath for fear the thronging Lies should suffocate him.


Yet after all this to pretend to marry Lucinda; Nay, forge a false Letter from
her, to her betroath'd Love Cardenio, implying she had deserted him; and then
sacrilegiously steal her from a Nunnery, to which she fled for Sanctuary, is
such a stain to his Nobility as wants Example* and rather than not have Justice
done thee, Girl, I resolve the Court shall know it.


To marry Luscinday there's the dart that stung me! Oh, let all Virgins by my
Fate take Warning, and never more believe that faithless Sex.


Come, no more Tears; a Cause so Just as thine can never wa^t an Advocate.


'Twas that Heart-breaking News that stabbed me most; so that forgetting
Father, Sex, and Honour, in this disguise I w^ resolved to seek him, and either
Cause him to perform his Vows, or Die in the pursuit of my desire.


The Lady Luscinda shall be instantly informed of his Treachery and what
Interest I can make against him thou art assured of: Come let's about it -- How
now, thy Face seems to have some surprise in it. Is there any News stirring?


Yes, and some that will surprise you, indeed, or I'm mistaken; As I was
standing at my Post without, to give you the better opportunity of Discourse,
who should I see below at the Inn door, but Don Fernando, and in the Habit of a
Nun, a Lady with him.


Strange Fortune, art thou sure 'twas he?


Oh Heaven, how my Heart throbs?


I saw his Face, and also guess the Lady, to be the Fair Luscinda, there's some
strange difference between 'em, for by her Actions she seemed much
dissatisfied; hark, they are coming up this way, step but into the next Room
you may discover more.


Do so, good Niece, and let's observe 'em, then when thou see thy opportunity
-- appear and charge him boldly, I'll not be far off.


Nay, I will speak to him, though Death attends it.


Is there no end of your Impiety, have Nunnery Walls, strong Gates, nor Iron
Bars, nay, nor the Deity Adored within, to whom I fled for help in my distress,
not power enough to hinder one Man's wickedness? you Sacred Powers, Have you
forgot your Justice? that you send none to succour poor Luscinda.


The Powers you speak of, Madam, that knew what's better for ye, than you did
for your self, you see assisted me in my design.


Oh Impious Wretch, dare you think Heaven assisting in wicked Actions? No,
'twas the Aid of Hell, in some cursed Minute, when all good Angels slept, or
else stood Neuter.


Hell, Madam, what has Hell to do in Love Affairs? the Devil is Foe progess'd
to Amity, no, my sole Aid, was my own prosperous Genius, Courage t'attempt, and
fortune to succeed, this gave me power to scale your Nunnery Walls, and
recompense my Love with spoils of Beauty.


Have you no Conscience, you are of Noble Blood, and in your Veins should run a
stream of Virtue, that should distribute Justice through your Soul; Cardenio
was your Friend, my betrothed Husband, and in severing us, you do not only fix
a foul stain upon your Houses Honour, but violate the Laws of all Humanity.


Why then let that most great and strong Omnipotence, that to my Fames
Confusion, makes my Love, answer for all my Crimes* I love Luscinda, and 'tis
in vain to tell me the mischiefs I have done, I know 'em all, I know I have
been Treacherous to Cardenio, False to my Friend, but 'twas for Love of thee, I
own I forged a Letter in thy Name, which caused his sad Distraction, and Ruin,
but thou were still the cause; nay, more than thy Beauty, made me a Traitor to
an innocent Virgin; forget my Vows, break all my Oaths and Promises, and leave
her Pregnant, with Heart-breaking Sorrows, and Love's dear Load, the Trophy of
my Conquest, to follow still my headlong Fate and Thee.


Oh Heaven, and can you own all this without a Blush, a scarlet Blush, to stain
your Cheeks for ever.


Why should I deny it, I still have too much Honour to dissemble, I've told
this Truth only to let thee see, the power of thy Attractions and my Love,
think what the Man would do for thee, when his, that could do all these mighty
Ills to get thee; if thou would have me virtuous, do but Love me, the Miracle
is wrought, for 'tis a Sacred Verity, what Sins so ever Love drives me to
commit, thou art the certain cause, And since I know the scruple, which the
Priests call Honourable, Affects you Women, more than Love or Fortune; take
there my Hand, and be this hour my Wife, I vow it most Religiously.


No, kill me rather, and wed me to the Grave, I'll dye a thousand deaths,
rather than falsify one Sacred Vow, or the least Particle of plighted Faith to
my beloved Cardenio.


Keep then that Faith for him, give me but the Reward, that my Desire and
Services deserve, and I'll be satisfied.


Vile wretch, Would you dishonour me?


Not I by Heaven, your stubborn obstinacy and faulty noise, these may perhaps
dishonour ye, not I, I'll be as secret as the Virgins Blush, that with a Rosie
Tincture paints her Cheeks, when trembling she consents.


You will not force me, rash, as you are, young and ungovernable, you dare not
be so base.


Oh thou need not fear it, thou wilt be kind, and give me no occasion; I must
confess, it is not with my liking to Cater for my Love as Satyrs do, Beauty's
most sweet to me that's won with Patience, Heart-burnings, Dangers, Plottings,
and Contrivances; I'll wait on thee, and watch thee into yielding, tire thee
with Sighs, and mould thee soft with Kisses, dress the dear Banquet with
industrious skill, that I may hereafter feed with greater pleasure.


Come, come my Lord, let Reason take its place, and let these flowing Tears
quench your hot Blood; remember who you are, what I am too, then you must do me
Justice.


And you must do it me, remember who thou art, I do most sensibly, thou art
mine by a double Right, by your Fathers consent First, and next by Stratagem:
you'll urge, perhaps you were betrothed t'another, fled to a Nunnery to perform
your Vow, and I that forced you from it, act strange Sacrilege: but I, sweet
Creature, am not of that opinion: Are those dear Eyes that warm all Hearts --
with Passion, that lovely Face and Body, fit for a Nunnery? F^e, Sweet, 'tis
Contradiction to the intent of Providence, that gave thee Beauty to Delight and
Love; A Nunnery Air in two days time would kill thee, make thy plump Youth lean
as Anatomy, and Prayer would waste thee into a Consumption.


Ah! never think to move me with your Fallacies, I'm fixed as Fate.


'Twas Sacrilege to Love, not to have freed thee, and Treason to my Self had
not I Loved; as for the failure to my Friend, 'tis trivial, when Beauty Charms,
Friendship avails but little, and I may think, had the occasion offered,
Cardenio would have done the same to me.


Oh no, he was too good, too true a Friend, see me, my Lord, thus Prostrate at
your Feet; if ever Pity Lodged within your Bosom, If Human Nature, or the S^nse
of Honour, have not quite left your Soul, and the Brute entered, by all the
Sacred Powers I do implore ye to desist from your bad purpose, for be assured,
I never will consent.


What sudden shock was that? a Bolt of Ice, methought shot through my Heart:
I'm cold, as if an Ague Fit had seized me: hah, What am I doing? What lovely
Tears are those? I find I'm but a squeamish Whoremaster, I am not hardened
enough to go through with it, -- Ah! that sparkling Glance has shot new Fire
again into my Soul, and I would dwell upon this Breast for ever; Oh thou Great
God of Love, that Rul'st our Passions, Command our Wills to baffle Reason,
Honour, Virtue, Religion, Fame, and all Morality, influence her Bosom with thy
hottest Flame, and let her feel thy Power.


I am come.


Hah, -- What art thou?


I am what you called for Love, or if you please to have me use another
Nomination, to express all tender Attributes of Passion, in Sorrows, Sighs and
Tears; I'm Dorothea.


Dorothea, by Heaven 'tis she dropped out of the Clouds, I think.


A very Angel, sure, sent to relieve me.


I am a Messenger from him you invoked, who gives you strict Commands to obey
his Laws; and in a more especial manner, Constancy for breach of that his
dreadful Vengeance, punishes much more than all the rest; this I am come to
tell ye.


You are come very opportunely indeed, you have nicked the time, that I must
needs say.


Oh my dear Lord! the Joy I have to see ye, exceeds my Sorrow to have heard
what's past, for I have heard it all.


Why then you have heard enough in Conscience, a Plague of my hot Head, that
could not consider the inconvenience of a damned Inn, when a Love Intrigue was
going forward -- so then I know I must expect your hatred.


Oh Heaven! my Hatred, what for a small frailty, a slight forgetfulness, which
all young Men have Naturally, when their Loves are absent, to remedy which, and
to prevent such danger in this Disguise, through Groves and Plains I've sought
ye, left Parents, Kindred, Friends, and all the World to follow my dear Lord.


And now you have found me, shall I beg one Favour.


You may Command my Life.


'Tis this then -- to leave me instantly.


Ah, that's not in my power till I am dead, I'm bound by Oath, as you are, to
the contrary, but that I ever can hate ye, is impossible; no, no, my Lord, what
would make other Women Loath and De^ert, has no effect on me; what though I see
you cling to that young Beauty, dote on her Looks, and languish for her
Favours, it moves not me, I know too well my Power; I am as Fair as She, as
young, as Charming, Formed for the Pleasure of my Dearest Lord; Blessed too with
Virtue, Constancy, and Duty equal to her, or any of my Sex, and when he
pleases, he'll return to me, in the mean time, I will not grudge the Kisses he
gives others, but Love him for my own.


You shall have small occasion, Madam, to grutch me.


I know it, Madam, for you are Wise (...) Fair, and know to take another
Right's Injurious, this is my Lord, my Dear, my betrothed Husband.


So, now all's ou^, I never was so tric'kd in all my life, I know not what to
say to her.


Madam, I hope you will not think me Rude, if I desire a little Privacy, I have
a thousand Pass^onate things to say, fit for no Ear but his.


With all my Soul.


Oh! I must beg your Pardon, the Jest must not go so far neither.


Nay, let her go my Lord, am not I here, the happy She that you were once fond
of, What can you seek from her, I cannot give you? Remember, oh remember the
dear Hours, when with transporting Passion you have sued for such an
opportunity, when every Visitant was irksome as a Feavor, each flying Minute
tedious, and too long, and all your Prayers and Wishes were Addressed, to
invoke Night, that we might be alone, and can I now be troublesome?


'Ds'death, I shall never hold out, I find I'm softening, her pretty Pleading
Eyes, and Charming Tongue melt, me I know not how.


Blessed Accident, there's pity in his Look, she wins upon him.


Madam, My Lord has thought on it now, and you may retire, if you please.


Art thou resolved to ruin thy self, dare thou provoke my Anger.


Not by my Will, Heaven knows, I'd lose my Life to please ye.


Too Credulous Fool, How could thou believe I would affront 'my Quality, by
mixing with thy Lowness.


I was not basely Born, besides, could boast a Noble value in my Face and
Virtue, which made Don Fernand think me worthy of him, and raise me to his
Love, which while Life lasts I will preserve for ever.


Why wilt thou add to thy Misery, by Obstinacy, poor Creature, I shall kill
thee.


Why then, no harmless Dove, or tender Infant, will ever dye so patient: death
I long have Courted, and should you stab my too fond Heart this Instant, you
should perceive me smile to meet the blow; make me your Slave, put round my
Neck a Chain, wear my poor Arms with Fetters to the Bone, torture this Body
where your Image lies with Cruelties unpractised, and what's worse then all,
before my Face, Act Kindness to another. You are my Fate, which still I must
pursue,
To show the World what constant Love can do.



And might I choose a Wife amongst you bright Host of Radiant Angels, thee I'd
prefer before 'em;


Oh killing Joy.


Ay, now my Lord I honour ye, this was a noble conquest over your Passions.


Ah Madam, 'tis with Shame I bend my Knee to beg your Pardon for my Brutal
Folly, I was Enchanted, Mad.


Not more my Lord, you have it.


Heaven, what a thing is Man when Reason leaves him, but I'll retrieve my Fame
by my new Services, I'll seek Cardenio out, heal his Lovesick Frenzy, and
fraught with Joys present him to your Arms.


Sure without some allay, my Heart can't bear these Transports of true
pleasure.


By Heaven, my Breast is so overcharged with Joy, there is no room for thought;
call all below, there I'll have a thousand Witnesses of my new Contract and
repeated Vows*


My Uncle Perez that with diligent care found me among the Shepherds, is
within, and waits with Impatience, I know, my coming out.


That good Man then shall join our Hands this Instant fast, fast, for ever,
lead the way Luscinda, whilst I and my unvalued Blessings follow. Oh my best
Life! how could I talk of killing thee, thou tenderest sweetest good, but with
Love's Balm. 'I'll heal the hurt my rude Expressions gave,
'I was thy Tyrant, but am now thy Slave.



c. Odsdiggers. -- This was a rare Contrivance to keep me from the Rain, the
Shower would have peppered me else Faith.


Stand, Insolent Knight, and yield that precious Helmet or thou Die.


Helmet, Oh Lord, what do you mean Sir, what Helmet?


That which thou bear Wretch, the Golden Helmet of Mambrino.


Mambrino, ds'heart Sir, I know no such Man, I am a Barber Sir, and going to
Trim a Gentleman in the next Town here, I never use a Helmet, this is nothing
but a Basin, Sir.


Hah, dare thou dispute, prepare then for the Combat.


Help, Murder, Murder, ds'heartliking's is the Devil in the Man.


Hey day, what a Plague are ye doing now, Zoons* will ye Rob the poor Barber.


What Barber, Jolthead? dost not see the Treasure I am Master of, for which
I've watched so many Nights and Days, and oft resolved to lose my Life or
purchase, this is the precious Helmet of Mambrino, Rascal, which I have got as
the spoils of Victory, from the Renowned Knight of the three Roses.


From the Knight of the three Razors, you have indeed.


Is it not rare? dost not admire the Workmanship?


Why, troth Sir, the Basin I must needs say is as clever a Basin as a Man would
desire to be Lather'd in, but as for any great Workmanship that I see in the
Basin.


Basin, what Basin Sott, I tell thee 'tis a Helmet.


A Helmet, ha, ha, ha, ha, what is this a Helmet?


A famous one, and made of Spanish Gold, in value wor^ a Province, only there
wants a Beaver.


Only you want Brains rather, say, ha, ha, ^a, ha. And so this Helmet you say
is all Gold, so, is it?


Of Purest Gold, by art too made Impenetrable.


Ha, ha, ha, ha, very good, why then I know where the Wind sits, but of little
meddling comes great Ease, let not the fault of the Ass be laid upon the
Pack-Saddle, every Herring must hang by its own Gills, and he that hears much,
and speaks not at all, is welcome both in Bower and Hall, and he that --


And he that has the Tail and Cloven Feet, take thee for a Blockhead, art thou
stringing thy Proverbs again, And a Pox take thee, without Head or Tail to 'em,
look out th^re, D^lt, and see who's coming, if my Eyes dazzle not, here's an
Adventure will give occasion to employ this Helmet.


Pray Heaven we meet no more Carriers, my Bones ache still with the last Combatt
of Honour, but I think if my Eyes inform right, here's no great fear of a
Quarrel, these People are all bound to the peace already.


Bless me, what Scene of Cruelty is this, dost thou observe how they have
Chained and Bound these honest People.


Honest People, what a Plag^e are ye Blind again, Zoons! don't you see that
these are Rogues, Condemned for some Notorious Crim^ and forced by the King to
serve in the Galleys.


Force, Sancho, the King can force no Body, I must examine this.


Nay, if you come to examining once, here's like to be fine Work.


Pedro, go before to the Inn, at the bottom of the Hill yonder, and bring
hither some Wine and a Manchet, tha^ we may refresh a little, the heat of the
Day and the Dust have almost Choked me


Gnawing it, why d'e make an Ostrich of me? d'e think I can digest Iron?
Confound the World, you know well enough I suppose the strength of the Necklace
I wear here, or you would not be so Rusty; I should teach you another manner of
Speech if my Ten Pickers were at liberty: But come, 'tis well enough, there's
no more to be said.


Sirrah, hold your Tongue, and leave swelling, least I make St. Andrew's Cross
upon your Pate.


By this Man's Inhumanity, Sancho, I do perceive these Wretches have great need
of my assistance, therefore I have some thoughts to free 'em.


The Devil you will.


It falls out fitly for my Knightly Function to succour the Distressed;
therefore no more of your Proverbial Fooleries. I tell thee I'll make them free
as Air.


O Lord, O Lord! Why, pray, Sir, consider a little, you are going to free these
Rogues from the Galleys, and the Holy Brotherhood will send us thither in their
places; oh that ever I was born! Oons, consider, Good Sir, consider what you
are doing.


Thou foulest Insect, can thou fear the Brotherhood, when I am by thee;
follow me, I say, and Courageously too, or by the Star of my hopes, my fairest
Dulcinea del Toboso, I'll spit thee like a Frog.


Oh what will become of me; 'sheart, I shall have that grim Fellow's Sword in
my Guts within this two Minutes.


Captain, as a Knight-Errant, on whose sacred Office depends the Laws of
executing Justice, and consequently to be well Informed in the Case of the
Afflicted, I request to know the reason why these Men are carried thus; for, if
my Judgment has informed me right, 'tis much against their Wills.


Against their Wills, Sir, why troth, I think there need no great dispute to be
made of that; I suppose, there are few Malefactors so very stout hearted to go
to the Galleys with their own consent.


Generous Sir, your Answer is Ingenious, and I beseech you therefore, give me
leave to add a little to this Obligation, and know from you, before you pass on
further, the nature of their several Crimes.


So, he's got into his Examinations, and the Devil can't hinder him.


The Nature of their Crimes, ha, ha, ha, I'm not at leisure to give you a six
hours Information of their several Affairs; but if you think fit to take a
brief Relation from themselves there they are, I shall have patience till my
Comrade comes, and so your Servant, good Knight of the Basin; ha, ha, ha.


Captain, your Courtesy obliges me. Well Friend,


Love, Sir.


Love, Can there be such Barbarity in Nature to Chain the Brave, and make 'em
Slaves, for Loving: Heavens, I my self had bin long since in the Galleys, if
Love had bin a Crime that could Condemn me: No, no, dear Brother, set thy Heart
at rest, whilst there's a Lover's Arm, and Conquering Sword to strike in thy
defence, for this thou shalt not suffer.


Ay, but good Sir, your patience, my Love was not the sort that you conjecture,
for you must know, Sir, I was in Love with a parcel of Gold Plate, and that so
desperately, that hugging on it too closely had not the Commissary took me
napping, I believe we had joined Affections till this hour.


Look'e, Sir, the Lover there has opened his Case very plainly, He that handles
a Thorn shall prick his Fingers; your dear Brother has told ye he's no better
than a Thief, in few words.


The Function discovers Wit in it however, Blockhead. And History tells us, some
have made themselves great by it, the Wise Lacedaemonians had none but Thieves
in their Privy-Council; but let that pass now. My young-Stripling, what say you
to the matter? how came you strung here? what brought your Neck to the Yoke?


The King's Evil, Sir.


How so, Can the Law punish thee for a Disease.


No, no, Sir, want o^ Money and ill Friends, that's the Evil I mean.


Gad you're in the right, Brother, that's a King's Evil indeed.


So, that's his Brother too, he'll pick up a World of Relations amongst these
honest People.


My fault was nothing, only a slip of the Tongue, a little Perjury or so, but
having no Money, and a damned Covetous Lawyer, that would let no Man Swear
falsely but himself, I could not get it off, so was sent hither.


'Twas hard, troth Brother, but come, to the next in Order, what says your
thoughtful Neighbour here, what's he in for?


Why, for a few hot words the Law called Treason, I hate the Government, and I
spoke my Mind.


There's a brave Fellow for ye now!


Oh! a very brave Fellow indeed! -- damned Rogue, I warrant* the Gallows groans
for him.


His Brother, there too, has the self-same Kidney; there are not two such
Traitors in all Spain.


Gad, a mettled Fellow that too, I warrant him, and who knows but some
Villainous Lye of some Court Pimp or other has brought him into this condition.
Gad, I have seen many a Priest that has not had so honest a look.


Nay he's an extreme honest Person without doubt -- Oh Lord, now do I begin to
tremble.


But come to the Text: What says my old Friend here? What unkind Star? What
strange malevolence brings that grey Beard to this calamity? Thy Aspect does
seem wise, and I should guess thy Occupation has been Noble too.


It has, Sir, and most Ancient: I have bin now this Fifty year^ a Bawd, but
that brought me not here, Sir; 'Twas foolish curiosity to know Simples, dealing
in Herbs, Wax, Crooked Pins, and Needles, which the vulgar said they found in
Sheep and Children; this brought me hither. To be plain, Sir, I am hampered now
for Witchcraft.


Oh! A small matter, a thing of nothing.


For Witchcraft, Umph! 'Twas there then the Devil owed thee an ill turn: Thy
Bawding Trade was honourable enough; great Ministers and Court-Matrons have bin
Bawds; the Occupation is of ancient standing. But now to the last; here is,
methinks, a Fellow that has a written Volume in his Face of Actions wonderful,
chained more too than the rest: The Reason, Captain?


The Reason: Why, the Reason is, because that's the very Devil of a Fellow; his
Name is Gines de Passamonte, a most notorious Villain, that has done more
Mischief alone than all the rest have; and, besides, so plaguy strong, that we
are not sure he's fast enough, for all he's chained so.


Faith he's a fine Person to look on, his Face and Whiskers would become
Knight-Errantry extremely, pray look up, Sir, and as the rest have done; be
plea^ed to tell me how the Galleys chance to be honoured with your Company.


Oh, Sir, for that your humble Servant; 'tis no new thing to me, they have bin
honoured with that before now, Sir; I know how the Water and Bucket will agree
with my hot Stomach.


What! for some Duel of Honour, I warrant; some Governors proud Nephew killed
by thy Noble Hand.


No, no, Sir, my Hand was employed another way; I was condemned for seven Years
the first time, for ravishing my Sister: Confound the World; I liked her, and
there's an end on it.


Oh! there's another very honest Fellow too.


And now I'm going thither for Robbing a Church: I had occasion for the Plate
and Ornaments, to raise some Money to buy my Whore a Petticoat; and, just as I
had got 'em, the Devil sent the Priest to stop me; but I soon gagged and
hamstring'd that poor Fool, fought through the Town, and, had not a whole Troop
of Dragoons, that were by chance a Must'ring, fallen upon me, I and my Purchase
had bin now at liberty.


Very good: Did you never hear of a thing called Conscience, pray Friend?


Conscience! What's that, the Itch? I had it when I was a Boy, I remember.


O Lord, Conscience the Itch! -- here's a damned Son of a Whore for ye. --
Gines, you would fleece me too upon occasion, were you loose, and I had a good
Booty?


No, no* thou look too much like a Thief thy self, thou should pass free;
we always spare one another.


Ha, ha, ha, ha, there's for you, Bufflle; by the Honour of Knighthood thou
deserve thy Freedom, if 'twere but for that Jest -- Give me thy Hand.


I have use for them; but there's my Foot at your Service.


Oh, I cry thee Mercy, I see thou art manacled -- but prithee don't be angry,
Friend; hark ye, what would say now if I should give thee Liberty?


Nothing.


Why so?


Because an impossibility offered by a Fool, deserves no answer from a wise
Man.


Ha, ha, ha, ha, there I think, Sir, your Brother Gines was even with you too.


That thou shalt see presently, and whether to our Profession any thing is
impossible. Sir Captain, I have with Care examined all your Prisoners, and find
though there are several heinous Faults committed, for which the Law should
punish 'em, yet the main Stroke of Justice belongs to Heaven; to Heaven's
Vengeance therefore let us leave 'em. And, since I am by Oath bound to relieve
'em, as Wretches and distressed, let me entreat you, as a Respect to me, to
give 'em Liberty.


Liberty! what a Plague, would you have me set the King's Prisoners at Liberty?
'Oons, who would be mad then? No, no, good Sir Errant, march on your way, and
settle your Basin right there -- Free the King's Prisoners! that were a good
one faith.


Your Pate shall want a Basin, Captain Scoundrel. Sancho, and help Gines; now,
peerless Dulcinea, aid thy Knight; unfetter Gines, dear Sancho.


Now can't I deny him for the Soul of me, though Heaven knows what Mischief will
come on it.


On, the Devil! what's here to do! Treason, Treason; Murder, Murder.


Now let the World declare, whether Knight-Errantry is not the Noblest of all
Sciences!


Or, whether Noble Squires of Knights-Errants ought not to be Earls and
Governors of Islands!


Huzza, Liberty, Liberty: Thanks to the Noble Knight-Errant, Liberty, Liberty,
Huzza.


Thanks to our Noble and Valiant Redeemer; here's to his Health; and, Brothers,
let's entertain him with a Song. Confound the World. Dear Redeemer, we are no
more Rogues than the rest of Mankind; all the World are Rogues, and deserve the
Galleys as much as we. Come sing the Song to that purpose, Brother.


WHen the World first knew Creation,
A Rogue was a top Profession;
When there were no more in all Nature but Four,
There were two of them in Transgression,
And the Seeds are no less,
Since that you may guess,
But have in all Ages been growing apace;
There's Lying and Thieving,
Craft, Pride, and Deceiving,
Rage, Murder and Roaring,
Rape, Incest and Whoring,
Branch out from one Stock, the rank Vices in Vogue,
And make all Mankind one Gygantical Rogue.
View all humane Generation,
You'll find in every Station,
Lean Virtue decays, whilst Interest sways,
Th'ill Genius of the Nation.
All are Rogues in degrees,
The Lawyer for Fees,
The Courtier Le Cringe, and the Alderman squeeze;
The C^ter, the Toper,
The (...) Interlop^r,
(...) ^unk, and the (...) of Piet^ (...);
(...) all, he that ^,
And deserts the ^
He that first to mend the (...)
Made Laws to bind our Nature,
Should have found a way,
To make Wills obey;
And have Model'd new the Creature*
For the Savage in Man,
From Original ran,
And in spite of Confinement now Reigns as began*
Here's Preaching and Praying, and Reason d^splaying,
Yet Brother with Brother, is Killing and Slaying;
Then blame not the Rogue that free Sense does enjoy,
Then falls like a Log, and believes -- he shall lie.
I do acknowledge, Sirs, your Musical Courtesy, and am well pleased to see
your Gratitude; yet one thing more I must enjoin, without which the rest
appears as nothing.


Any thing: Confound the World; dear Redeemer, comman^ ^y thing.


'Tis this; That you all, laden with that Chain from which ^ow have freed ye,
go instantly to the great City of Toboso, and there, before my Mistress,
Dulcinea, present your selves, letting her know, her Beauties Slave, Don
Quixote de la Man^ha, has sent you to her to enquire her Health.


^oso.


^ulcinea!


Enquire her Health!


And how far is this Toboso off, good Sir?


Not above a Thousand Leagues; not very far; 'tis a very pretty Message truly.


Confound the World, d'e know what you say, Sir, to desire us to go a Thousand
Leagues? 'Oons, we must ^ide our selves in the Mountains here by, for fear of
being taken^ we must shun all Roads and Cities.


How's that? Dare you disobey my Commands, Rascal?


Rascal! Keep good Words in your Mouth. D'e hear Friend, we are no Sheep.


Good Sir, come away whilst you are well; that devilish Gines has Mischief in's
Heart, I see by's Looks.


We can't go to Toboso, not we, that's in short, Knight.


No, Knight, we'll go to no Toboso; if you have a Wench, there, and any News
for her, you may send^ by your Booby there; we thank ye for you ^


But -- ^ thee ^ self, and like a Cut to ^ Legs. -- ^all on, Sancho, let's
chas^se ^


^ will become of us now?


Come, Sirs, the Coast is clear* now let's away.


Follow me, Boys, I'll carry ye where ye may soulk securely,
To a plump Doxy here hard by of mine
Shall cheer your Hearts with Kisses and good Wine.

SAncho.


Umph. --


Son Sancho, Art thou asleep?


Oh, yes, upon a Down-Bed, the Governor lies, as you ^ee here, stretched at
his Ease, thanks to your most Invincible Arm, only with some Two or Three
Hundred Bruises of State upon his Bones. I have got my Earldom, and a load of
Honour now, or else the Devil's in it.


Look'e, Sancho, I have often told thee, these Successes of Chivalry cannot
always be of one Degree or Value; so that though naturally, as it may happen,
that a Kingdom or a Continent may drop into a Knight-Errant's Mouth, and an
Earldom or a Province into his Squire's; so sometimes too they may chance to
meet with Carriers Packstaves, Giants like Windmills, Thumps with Stones, and
the like; nor are they to grumble or repine at the variety of Accidents,
because they are liable to our Profession.


Profession! 'Oons, yours is the Devil of a Profession, besides all your
Accidents, I mean your ill ones (for good I despair of) are, a plague on it, all
of your own making. Would any one with an Ounce of Brains, after he had
miraculously done such an Exploit, have pretended to force those rude Rogues to
go a Thousand Leagues off, upon a sleeveless Errand to the Devil, to Toboso? --
I know not where. Ah.


Very well, Sancho, talk on, talk on, the smarting of thy Bones I do perceive
has made thee sharp and witty.


Come, come, Sir, Brabbling Curs never want sore Ears: 'Tis but an ill
Procession where the Devil carries the Candle: He that speaks does sow, and he
that holds his Tongue may reap. I think I pay dear enough for it if I do talk.


I confess thou hast Reason, as I have, to resent it; but who could expect such
Ingratitude after so good a Turn?


Who? Woons! Who could expect otherwise from such honest People? Have not you
heard often enough the old Proverb, Save a Thief from the Gallows, and he shall
be the first to hang ye? -- Ah, plague of your Brethren, your Brother Gines of
Passamonti, the Devil pass him, 'has made me black and blue on my left Side
here: But let it go, the Governor will be wiser one day.


If a desponding Puppy were fit to make a Governor of, I say that for thee,
Sancho, thou would make a rare one: But come, I'll not anger thee now,
because I know thou art in pain; prithee come hither, and see how many
Cheek-Teeth and others they have beaten out here, for it seems to me that my
Mouth is quite empty.


Ay, there's some other part of your Head empty too besides your Mouth, if I am
not mistaken: But come, let's see, O monstrous! here's six Grinders wanting on
one


Oh Profanation to all Learning and Sciences! Omicils, 'Clipses, Campaign, and
Estill, for Homicides, Eclipses, Champion and Sterril! Be dumb, thou
Earth-worm, or speak in thy own Stile, on pain of Annihilation. A plague on
thee, thou confounded Prevaricator of Language.


Why then, in my own Stile, for you know well enough that I'm no Scholar, I
believe here's another Adventure coming, and I hope 'twill end better than the
last, because it begins Musically.


Ha! who have we here?


LEt the dreadful Engines of eternal will,
The Thunder roar, and crooked Lightning kill;
My Rage is ^ot, as theirs, as fatal too,
And dares as horrid execution do.
Or let the Frozen North its rancour show,
Within my Breast far greater Tempests grow;
Despair's more cold than all the Winds can blow.
Can nothing, nothing warm me?
Yes, Lucinda's Eyes;
There Etna, there, there Vesuvio lies,
To furnish Hell with flames,
That mounting reach the Skies.
Ye Powers, I did but use her Name,
And see how all all the Meteors flame,
Blew Lightning flashes round the Court of Sol,
And now the Globe more fiercely burns
Than once at Phaeton's fall.
Ah! where are now those Flowery Groves,
Where Zephir's fragrant Winds did play?
Where guarded by a Troop of Loves,
the fair Lucinda sleeping lay;
There Sung the Nightingale and Lark,
around us all was sweet and gay;
We never grew sad till it grew dark,
nor nothing feared but short'ning day.
Glow, I glow, but 'tis with hate,
Why must I burn for this ingrate?
Cool, cool it then, and rail,
Since nothing will prevail.
When a Woman Love pretends, 'tis but till she gains her ends,
And for better, and for worse, is for Marrow of the Purse,
Where she filts you over and over, proves a Slattern or a Whore.
This hour will tease and vex,
And will Cuckold ye the next:
They were all contrived in spite,
To torment us, not delight,
But to scold, and scratch and bite,
And not one of them proves right,
But all are Witches by this light:
And so I fairly bid'em, and the World Good-night.
By the Matter delivered in this Song, I perceive this poor Gentleman's
distress was occasioned by Love; therefore 'tis fit I follow and relieve him.


You relieve him! 'Sbud, why, don't you see the Man's Mad; how the Devil can
you relieve him, unless you could give him Physic? Pray, Sir, hold your self
contented; you may be a good Knight-Errant, but for a Brain-curer, the Lord
have mercy upon ye.


Thou art a Clod, Sancho, and hast not Soul enough to fathom the depth of my
Understanding; but know, thou Lump unformed, that our Profession extends to aid
the Mind, as well as Body; were he as Mad as Ajax, or that stout Peer of
France, Orlando Furioso, with one hours Conference, I'd make him spout
Politics, with a Secretary of State, Law with a Judge at the Assizes, and
Theology with a Convocation of Bishops, therefore follow me, and saddle
Rosinante immediately, for I intend to overtake him, and then thou shalt see
this done in an instant.


I shall see my self well thrashed again, I believe, and so 'tis likely will end
the Adventure of the Madman; but hanged, the Devil is not always at one door,
He that is in is half way over, there's no help for it now, I must follow him,
though my Government come at last to be no better than to govern a Herd of
Cattle; Well, He that blows in the Dust will make himself Blind; and If it were
not for hope, the Heart would break, there's Three Proverbs left yet to comfort
me.


Can you then be so good? Do I not dream that you have repented of your late
unkindness, and now resolve to own poor Dorothea.


The Resolution is as firm as Fate; you're now my own for ever.


Blessed Accent! And now, my Lord, I honour ye: This was a noble Conquest over
your Passions.


'Tis Great and Worthy, like himself.


Ah! Madam, 'tis with shame I bend my Knee to beg your pardon for my Brutal
Folly: But I'll retrieve my Credit by my new Service, in presenting to your
Arms the wronged Cardenio.


All Honour and Happiness attend your Lordship; and pray Heaven we may find him
quickly: Oh how I long to give that Heart a Remedy that lost its Peace for me!


He cannot be far off; for, as the Shepherds have directed us, yonder's the
Rock wherein he sleeps by Night, and where 'tis likely we may find him.


And did they say Don Q^xote was here too?


Both he and Sancho: Therefore, my Lord, if you are resolved to further the
Contrivance I lately told ye of, and do an Act of Charity, by getting the poor
Lunatic Gentleman home to his House, this is the Place and Juncture.


Most willingly, and will make one my self: For the Scene well Acted, must
needs create Diversion. Come, my sweet Love, you must have your part too.


Oh! my Lord, she is to be the Principal Actress, and we have a Dress ready for
her: She's to Personate the Princess Micomicona, Queen of the geat Kingdom of
Micomicon in AEthiopia; who being deposed and driven from thence by a monstrous
Giant called Pandafilando of the dusky sight, comes some three thousand Leagues
to the famed Don Quixote to redress her Wrongs and re-^nstate her: This Plot
will doubtless draw the frantic Fool from these wild Deserts, and we shall
share the Mirth.


Let's about it presently: And for your Princess, let me alone to divert my
dearest Lord here; you shall see me Act it like any Player.


Ha, ha, ha, ha! I shall die with Laughing -- I'll be some Don to Usher in your
Majesty.


And I'll be your old Squire to introduce your coming: I have the Tail of mine
Hosk Mare to make me a Beard shall reach to my Knees.


'Twill be rare Sport; my Servants shall all be disguised too for the business:
Come, Madam, pray be Merry with us, all will be well; I warrant ye, we shall
soon find your Love Cardenio, and cure him of his Frenzy: I have already sent
for a Doctor, and given order what to do: And, Madam, doubt not but you shall
meet with Joy.


Heaven grant we may; let me but see Cardenio once more mine; I'll envy not the
rest of the World's Pleasures.


You much amaze me, Sir, in this wild Desert; a place that only suits the
Miserable, where People Civilized never inhabit, to meet such Courtesy as
yours.


Sir, Humanity is one of the best Rules of my Profession; and I shall be highly
pleased, if my good fortune


Your Person I am wholly a stranger to, and cannot but admire, why in this
Country, so blessed with Peace, you practise Arts of War, and Travel thus in
Armour: But perhaps there is a secret in it not proper for my knowledge; I'll
therefore stint my Curiosity, and beg you, if you know where there is any thing
to drink, to give a little to assuage my Thirst, for in this slender interval
of Sense, I can make use on it; but if my Fit should take me, as at uncertain
times it often does, all Charity were lost.


Run Sancho and search the Wallet, there is, I think, some Wine, bring it
hither presently.


Why, here's another of the Starving too; a Knight-Errant, I warrant him, by
his Tatters: What a devouring meagre look he has! 'Sbud, he makes me hungry at
the very sight of him.


And now to satisfy your Curiosity, Sir, of knowing what I am, and how I came
thus wretched, I will relate my Story, but with this Condition, that you will
promise me upon your Honour, during the time of telling, not to Interrupt me,
nor by a Question or Contradiction stop me, for if you should, my Accident of
Madness would return, and I should then do things Extravagant.


Oh! fear not, Sir, you shall find me more attentive: Come, fill a Cup, Sancho:
-- Here, Sir, here's to your better Fortune.


May yours be happy, Sir, with perpetual Blessings, whatever becomes of me.


Why then, by my Governorship, I believe this plaguy Devil my Master can
Conjure in good earnest; to my thinking the Madman talks as wisely as any
Bishop of'em all already.


Now pray begin, Sir, I am silent as a Dormouse; sit down Sancho.


Know then, good Sir, my Name's Cardenio, a Gentleman of Arragon, well
descended, who from my Childhood to my riper Years, lived with a Credit and
Content unparalleled, till Love, that fatal bane to humane happiness, subdued
my senses to bewitching Beauty, and forced my Soul to dote upon Lucinda, a
noble Virgin of unmatched perfection.


Hum, hum, hum.


Come, Sir, Sorrow's dry, and before you go any further, here's your Lady
Sindys health.


Peace, Blockhead; or if you must be Mannerly, with a pox t'ye -- do it by
Signs as I do.


Take heed, good Friend; pray remember the Conditions. Sir, I loved her, and
was loved with that Success, nothing was wanting but the happy Day, to crown
our Wishes, which was at last appointed.


Hum, hum, hum.


And because Love's best Guard is Secrecy, I trusted my Affair only to one, the
Son of a Grandee, his Name Fernando, my Youth's Companion, and, as I thought,
my Friend: him I entrusted with my dearest Treasure, and in his Honour thought
my self secure.


Hum, hum, hum.


Hey, hoe, hum.


But ah, let none depend on the Hearts Sincerity, because the Face seems
honest; for some few Days after, Lucinda having a great Wit and Genius, and one
that still delighted much in Reading, I sent to her by my false Friend,
Fernando, a foolish Book of Chivalry, called Amadis du Gaul; not that she
valued it for the Contents, for she had Sense to know 'twas all ridiculous, the
Exploits of the Knights-Errant, all Romantic, and their whole Volumes filled
with lying Fables. But --


But! A plague on your Buts, -- You


But that before, we had a rallying Argument upon a modern Madman called Don
Quixote, a strange whimsical Dulcinea, famed Mistress of that foolish frantic
Idiot, had once a Bastard by her Apothecary.


Oh Fire, and Furies! Oh shame to Arms and Honour.


Nay then, the Storm comes with a Vengeance: fire, fire; murder, murder.


Am I a Knight, and hear this hellish Slander. -- Awake, Don Quixote, thou
sleep, awake I say -- Hark'e, dost hear me? Madman, Fool, or Devil, if thou
hereafter dare but move thy Lips against sweet Dulcinea, or but so much as
name that cursed Pothecary with Peerless Dulcinea, or think of any of his
Tools, or Implements -- Storax, or Savine, get thee each Day a Heart, for I
will be as cruel in the tearing it, as is that abhorred Tongue, that slanderous
Viper, in poisoning the Fame of Radiant Dulcinea. --


So, there's the first Gun, the Broad-side's coming, here will be devilish work
between the Two Madmen presently.


The Rack's a foolish Torture, Phallaris Dionysius, that were proper for him --
Hah! What art thou! the Traitor Fernando! And thou art his Catamite, his Pimp,
art thou?


Not I, Sir; I'm none of his Pimp not I. Would I were a Mouse for Two Minutes,
so I had but ever a Hole to creep into.


Oh, that I now had Thirty Rows of Teeth, or were an Eagle with an Hundred pair
of Claws, that I might tear and eat this Traitor, Traitor.


Oh, Dulcinea del Toboso, pardon my Negligence, I beseech thee; I had forgot to
invoke thy Influence when first I rose this Morning, and see what comes on it:
-- is the Madman gone, Sancho.


Yes, yes, and wonderfully recovered; you have been as good as your Word, you
have cured him to a Miracle. Whether he can spout Politics like a Statesman,
or Law like a Judge, I know not; but he can kick and cuff like a Devil, that
I'm sure of.


A Plague of his mad Pate, the fit was a little too far gone upon him.


A Plague of Radiant Dulcinea, I say, would the 'Pothecary had poisoned her; or
would her Nurse -- had drowned her -- in her Cradle -- with a Water of her
own^making -- rather than my Bones had been concerned about her, or her Bastard
either. -- But come, better late than never, I'm resolved now to retire in time
from this Highway to Battoons and Bruises, and visit my Wife and Children again,
whilst I can make shift to crawl to 'em; for to that Scantity of Travelling my
Squireship has brought me.


Wilt thou then leave me, Sancho?


Leave ye? ay, and 'tis high time, I think, Sir: 'Tis an old Saying, The Ant
had Wings to do her hurt: Farewell Knight-Errantry i'faith: And to begin to get
rid on it, there Sir -- there's the dudgeon Dagger you gave me, the Rust upon it
has kept it warm and quiet; Besides I never showed it the Sun to tan it, not I:
There's the Murrion too, that did Service at the Siege of Golletta; this Jerkin
likewise, that has defied all Weathers; pray give 'em your next Squire,
together with some hard Crusts here to keep his Teeth going, least he forget to
use 'em: These, I think, are the main part of my Equipage, and so part fair.


'Tis very well.


As for the Government of the Island you promised me, even let that hang a
drying a little, for some more able Earl than I to manage, for I'm satisfied
now, That the Hen lays as well upon one Egg as upon many; and several come for
Wool that return shorn; so much you're worth as thou hast, and so much thou
hast as you're worth. I know you don't like my Proverbs, but now 'tis as broad
as long, Better Play a Card too much than too little; a good Pay-master needs
no Surety: And my Grannum used to say, The Legs carry the Belly, and not the
Belly the Legs; and there's an end on it.


Oh Pox! Nay go on, go on, thread 'em, string 'em, away with 'em, take thy
Belly full of Proverbs at parting however, but remember this when I am an
Emperor, Dogbolt


An Emperor, ah! Gad save your hot head, you had better go home along ^ith me,
and look to your Ploughmen.


'Tis very well, Clodpole.


Know thou most doug^ty and renowned Knight-Errant, that I am called the Squire
of the White-Beard, Servant to the mighty Princess Micomicona, Queen of the
great Kingdom of Micomicon in AEthiopia, who, by the Fame of thy most noble
Deeds, has Travelled from her Country to this Place, to beg a Boon of thee; and
now, behind you Bush she stands on foot, and begs admittance to thy Lordly
Presence.


Friend, go and tell the Queen, Don Quixote's at her Service, and will attend
her here -- hum, hum,


How's this? A great Queen come from her Country to beg a Boon of him; 'sbud,
if this Squire of the Beard should speak Truth now, I have made a fine business
on it. Zookers, here she comes as fair as a Church Saint, as bright as a
Cherubin; 'sdheartlikins, I never saw such a Creature in my Life.


By the Honour of Knighthood, Madam, 'tis too much, your Greatness must not
kneel to your unworthy Servant; nay, I beseech your Majesty.


Thrice Valiant Knight, thou flower of Chivalry, Soul of true Lovers, and
quintessence of Courtesy, I've sworn to l^ve for ever in this Posture, and
make my bended Knees one piece with the Earth, unless you grant me the Request
I come for.


Madam, I'll do it whatever it be, therefore pray rise, let me but know what
Miscreant has wronged ye, this powerful Arm shall Thunder in your Quarrel more
swift than the hot Bolts that split the Clouds.


I see, most Renowned Sir, loud Fame has done you Justice in sounding through
the World your Courtesy.


Assured of this, I now may rise with Comfort.


All Honour to the blazing Comet of Knight-Errantry, ^he Rose and Tulip of Fame
and ^ortitude, my Noble Country-man Don Quixote de la Mancha, the Report of
this great Queen's coming being spread already through our Neighbourhood, so
far increased my Joy and Wonder, that I could not contain my self from seeking
^ou out and being an E^e witness.


Ay 'tis so, I am utterly undone, a most miserable Rogue; stay, is there no way
to Rigg my self without his taking notice.


I am glad to see your Reverence well, good Mr. Curate, and would entertain ye
longer, but that I thirst to receive the Queen's Commands.


The Trick takes rarely I see.


As we could wish, but how thrives our Affair, have my Servants found Cardenio.


Just as I came hither, as he was lying fast asleep under a Cork-Tree, he was
very unruly at first, he being overpowered by Numbers, they soon bound him, and
carried him to the Inn you ordered.


And has Lucinda seen him.


Not yet, I have advised the contrary, till he has taken the Medicine the
Doctor ordered, and slept upon it.


'Tis well; in the morning I my self will be his Doctor; at present let's mind
the Game on foot.


To be brief then, brave Sir: In AEthiopia, where the Sun sheds his swarthy
Influence, making my Natives all of Sable hew, as I had bin, had not the skill
in Charms of my kind Father, wise Finacrio, hindered it in those Dominions: You
must know, I'm called -- I'm called -- Most Generous Knight: -- I say I'm
called -- O Heavens! the memory of my Griefs hinders my very Speech! What, am I
called quickly, 'dslife I've forgot?


The Princess Micomicona!


I'm called, the Princess Micomicona, so named from the Kingdom of Micomicon,
late left me by my Father.


How Proud he looks already? There's some great Honour coming to him, I see it
in's Face: -- O Dog, Dog Sancho! don't you deserve to be Hanged?


The good old King knew by his Skill in Magic, what would befall me after he
was dead, how Pandafilando of the Dusky Sight, a horrid Brutal and mis-shapen
Giant, should treat of Marriage with me, which refused, should then make War,
and drive me from my Kingdom, to relieve me from which distress, he told me at
his death that I must travel into Spain, where I should happily meet with a
Knight-Errant, the honour of his Country, and that Order, the Valour of whose
Arms should kill the Giant, and presently restore me to my Kingdom; which
Knight must be your self, to whom (my Father has commanded me) after the
Giant's Death, if you think fitting, to give my self in Marriage, and make you
Monarch of Micomicon.


Oh Madam, your Father was too gracious, -- what think you now, Hog-grubber, is
Knight Errantry worth chawing, hah? -- Which had I better do now, be an
Emperor, or go home and mind the Ploughmen, umph, Jolthead?


Ah, dear Sir, consider no man is born wise; a Bishop is no more than another
Man without Grace, and good Breeding. (...), I ^fess my self a Booby, Sir, a
fearful Scoundrel: There's ^, I ^eech ye, Sir, break it across, or if you
please to honou^ ^ a Dozen or two of Kicks, Sir, I shall think my self ^, so
you dissuade your anger, and forgive me.


Her Majesty I hope remembers likewise that the wise King to reward my Fidelity
when this good Knight had slain Pandafilando, gave charge to make her Suit to
him, that I might be an Earl or Governor of some Island.


You an Earl! hark'e Friend, Slow Fire makes sweet Malt. There may be more than
one Egg in a Hen-Roost. If you meddle with my Mouth I shall snap at your
Fingers; d'e see, therefore look to your self; what a Plague, all is not got by
wearing of long Beards.


No, no, Friend, you know you must go visit your Wife and Children.


Ah Sir, if you mention that, you slay me, -- you flea me alive. Alas, Sir, I
dare as well hang my self as go home without my Government; my Wife, and the
young Cockatrice my Daughter, now I have put this plaguy Countess-ship into her
Head, will worry me if I fail her.


Well, Vermin, for some good service past, in consideration too of some late
Drubbings, I will once more take thee into Grace; but if again I catch thee
Grumbling, thou art no more my Squire; there are others would be Earls too, you
see, Sancho.


What, that dry old Kex? 'Gad I'd have throtled him with his own Whiskers if he
had said Three Words more. -- But come, 'tis well enough now; and since we are
reconciled, as soon as ever you marry that delicate fine Queen there, -- my
Island will be within an Inch of me in a twinkling.


I shall laugh out. I'm not able to hold.


Was ever Fool so transported!


Hush; look Grave; his Master turns this way.


You have raised me from the lowest Vale of Sorrow, to the highest Mountain,
Sir, of Humane Happiness: I'm all Air methinks. Let Music sound there; and let
my menial Slaves begin a Dance to entertain this wonder of Knight-Errantry.


This will I make my Black Subjects do every Morning to divert me. -- I'll sing
a Song that was made at Teresa's and my Wedding, that her Majesty may know my
Parts.


TWas early one Morning, the Cock had just crowed:
Sing hey ding, hoe ding, langtridown derry;
My Holiday Clothes on, and Face newly mow'd,
With a hey down, hoe down, drink up your brown Berry.
The Sky was all painted, no Scarlet so Red,
For the Sun was just then getting out of his Bed,
When Teresa and I went to Church to be sped,
Wi^h a hey ding, hoe ding, shall I come to Woo thee;
Hey ding, hoe ding, will ye buckle to me,
Ding, ding, ding, ding, ding, ding, derry, derry, derry ding, ding,
ding, ding, ding, hey langtudown derry.
Her Face was as fair as if it had been in Print;
Sing hey ding, c.
And her small Ferret Eyes did lovingly Squint,
With a hey down, c.
Yet her Mouth had been damaged with Comfit's and Plumbs,
And her Teeth that were useless for biting her Thumbs,
Had late, like ill Tenants, forsaken her Gums,
With a hey ding, hoe ding, c.
But when Night came on, and we both were a Bed;
Sing hey ding, c.
Such strange things were done, there's no more to be said;
With a hey down, c.
Next Morning her Head ran of mending her Gown;
And mine was plagued, how to pay Piper a Crown,
And so we rose up, the same Fools we lay down,
With a hey ding, hoe ding, c.
This is unexpected.


My Squire, Madam, -- honest and trusty, but no great Head piece.


He has performed to a miracle, and I resolve to do him grace.


Now spawn of old Father Time, let me see your Beard do as much.


Her Majesty values me more for my Head than my Heels, Skip-Jack.


Madam, you must needs have heard of the Renowned Sancho Panca; his Fame sounds
almost as loudly as Don Quixote's; this is the famous Squire, Madam, That by
his Master's side defies Battoons and Clubs,
Whose Back and Sides, both Black and Blue now, wear the honoured Drubs.



That I do by my Faith, Madam; which, if your Majesty will give me leave to
strip, you shall see if you please.


I know him now, he's just the very Person my Father once described, who I also
remember was sorry for a Misfortune which he knew by his Art had happened to
him, which is, that Sancho's married, to whom I else had been obliged to give
one of my Maids of Honour.


Why then, the Devil take all Ill Luck; now I see that old Saw is true that
says, Every Man once in his Life will find a minute to curse his Marriage. If I
had not bin yoked now to my Blouze at home, a Pox take her, I might have had a
May Lady, a Virga tacta, with a Head as gaudy as a Tulip, and a shape as
slender: 'Odzookes, I've no patience to think on it; I'll go and hire some
Rat-Catcher to anoint the Cups and Dishes at home: Who the Devil would lose
Preferment for the sake of Two-Penny-worth of Ratsbane?


In troth, my good Friend and Neighbour, honest Sancho, I am Sorry to hear
this; for as I remember, 'twas my luck to give Teresa and you the Blessing.


A Plague on your Blessing; I perceive I shall have occasion to wish you hanged
for your Blessing -- Good finisher of Fornication, good Conjunction Copulative.


The profane Wretch defame's the Holy Ordinance of Marriage, and ought to be
presented to the Inquisition.


Speak reverently of our Function, Sancho, or I'll Excommunicate you the
Church.


I care not; I should lose nothing by it if you should, but my Nap in an
Afternoon.


Is your Valour, Sir, at leisure to begin the Journey towards the Giant?


Madam, I am. Sancho, a word with thee* I've bin considering on this Adventure,
and must confess, though I may be an Emperor, my Head runs more on Honours
Ecclesiastical; a Pope, methinks, or Cardinal; I'm for some grave and solid
Dignity that tends towards Religion.


Religion! Oh Gadzooks, Sir, never mind it; take care of being Priest-ridden,
good Sir, whatever you do, unless you have a mind to lose all your Dominions
as soon as you come to 'em.


I must reflect upon it. Now Madam, please your Majesty to set forward. Lead me
where ever you please; 'tis still my duty
To right a Ladies wrongs, and fight for Fame and Beauty.



Long live the Illustrious and Incomparable Knight, Don Quixote de la Mancha.


How I admire his Fortitude and Virtue! -- Well Neighbour, what'^ your
business.


Why, look'ee Neighbour, though I wished you hanged just now, 'twas only in my
Passion, d'e see, -- and never the sooner for a hasty Word -- you know; and
therefore because I know you can forget and forgive, I'll make bold to desire a
Favour of you.


Well Neighbour, though you were a little hard upon the Priest-hood; yet because
I know 'twas done without any intention of harm, I'll pass it by for once;
come, what is't?


Why, you must know that my Master, Don Quixote, is just now breeding a new
Maggot in his Pate, not to be an Emperor, but a Pope, or a Cardinal: And if so,
my Preferment's gone again, for I am wholly unfit for any (what d'e call it)
Ecclastical Dignity, because I am a married Man; and for me to be every foot
hunting for Dispensations to enjoy Church-Livings, were to pound a Snow-ball in
a Mortar, with design to make Powder on it; therefore I would desire you as his
Friend, to advise him to be an Emperor by all means, that I may have an Office
proper; for to say the truth, I may chance to make an Angel of a Governor, but
I shall be a very Devil of a Church-man.


How's this? Have I caught thee a second time vilifying the Church? nay now the
Inquisition shall know it, and the Maid of Honour be mine for my good service:
I'll about it instantly; you are a precious Rogue indeed.


Will ye so, ye old Bearded Goat? I'll have a Tuft on you first 'ifaith; I'll
send ye marked to the Inquisition however. How now! What a Plague, does he shed
his Beard Nicholas the Barber?


The Planets have decreed it -- Sword, Spain! the fatal Beard is off.


I must second the Barber, -- or this Accident will -- discover us -- Spain!
the fatal Beard is off.


The Beard is off indeed, and as cleverly as the wearer himself could have
shaved it: But what this is to Spain, and Eclipses, and Dooms-day, there I am
puzl'd again. The Beard has discovered the Barber, and if the Barber don't
discover the Trick of the I^hanted Beard, I shall begin to fear there's some
Dog trick in ^e business; I knew him for an arch Rogue when he was at home, and
therefore doubt him the more now; 'Gad I must after him and know the Truth --
But stay, first let's take a Dram of Consideration, Friend Sancho -- Let me see
-- The Fortunes of this Day are worth repeating*
My Mornings Breakfast was a lusty beating;
My Nooning time, more lucky though by far,
Crammed then with hopes to be a Governor.
But now, this Evening Whim has changed it so,
That what I am, Plague take me if I know;
Whether an Earl, fit to wear Pearl and Ruby,
Or Sancho, as I was -- a Country Booby.



HE's dressed, and ready to come out; the Doctor tells me too his Sense is
perfectly recovered, the Frenzy being only continued by Colds and ill Diet,
the Medicine has taken effect, which, assisted by his gentle Sleeps, have quite
restored him.


The Sorrow and Distresses he has suffered, have changed him so, I fear he has
forgot me.


Never fear it, Madam -- Here he comes, pray step in there till I am ready for
ye.


My Lord, it seems I stand indebted to ye for Courtesies relating to my Health
of Brain and Body, but my wounded Soul, in its most dear and tender part, my
Love, stabbed by your Falsehood and unnatural Cruelty, stands yet unsuccour'd,
that is, unrevenged; the^efore as I must thank ye for the one, my Sword for the
other demands Satisfaction.


Hold, pause a little: The Sacred Blood of Friends is of more value than to be
shed rashly without debate or reasoning. What's your Quarrel to me?


Oh, bring me not to my mad fit again, from whence I'm just relieved, by such a
cursed Repetition. Lucinda! think on Lu^inda.


Well, I'll speak the rest, I know I took her from thee.


And can thou hope to live?


Hold yet, and hear me speak: 'Twas my resistless Love, not I, betrayed thee;
the God of Amity opposed in vain; all the soft Bonds of our endearing
Friendship, were scorched and burnt, by her bright Eyes, to Ashes.


I'll hear no more; defend thy self, or die.


I will not fight with thee. Is this obscure Cottage a proper Stage to drink
the Blood of Friends? No, I'll reserve it for some Amphitheatre, that when we
play the Prize for fatal Beauty, no less than Thousands may admire the Action.


Away thou Trifler, I am loath to call thee Coward.


I believe thee, and know thou can not do it with a safe Conscience; for I,
too often in our days of Friendship, have proved my self so contrary, that well
thou know I fear thee not, Cardenio; no, the reason why I refuse, is -- I
have wronged thee; and by my good Will, I would have my Blood be the last means
of giving Satisfaction; therefore I charge thee first mark my Proposals: I took
a Lady from thee -- Well, to atone it, here is one in Exchange, whom if you use
ill, or with undecent Obstinacy slight, we then must fight indeed.


And so we must, Sir; your Women shall not be your Bucklers long. -- Hah! --
This is a Face indeed that my Heart bows to, whose Eyes, tho guilty, are too
fierce for mine.


My dear Cardenio, I am thine for ever; cheer thy sad Looks, and smile with Joy
upon me; for Fate shall never, never part us more.


Oh thou sweet Vision, get thee from my sight, for I must love thee, though I
know thee false.


By Heaven I am as true as Truth it self; the Letter thou receiv'st, was not of
mine, but of Don Fernand's counterfeiting.


Hah! What is't I hear! Don Fernand's counterfeiting?


I must confess it was, Sir; for which I ask your Pardon; my headlong, rash,
and most ungoverned Passion, checked at no Crime, that would indulge my Wishes:
This caused her flight into a Nunnery, from whence I forced her, and had no
doubt proceeded, had not my Guardian Angel, my dear Doro^hea, proved my good
Genius to prevent my Mischief.


Oh Heaven! is this Dorothea!


Th^ very same, Sir.


Let this atone then for my rash Offence, that I surrender back this precious
Jewel, bright and unsullied; and for my Sin in seeking to corrupt her, with
Shame and sorrow once more beg your Pardon.


My Lord, you've done me Justice, and I thank ye. Oh my sweet Life! I shall
grow wild with Joy, such vast content crowds in, I cannot bear it. Oh, Madam!
How shall I repay your Goodness too?


Let me be happy in the re-uniting my Lord and you, I then am overpaid.


Let this declare my willingness, I have forgot what's past.


And this mine -- we will be Friends for ever.


Oh, my honest and worthy Friend, I am thy Debtor too.


My Care, Sir, was my Duty, and I'm heartily glad to see my Diligence so well
succeed. And now if you please to change the Scene, and give your selves a
little Diversion, there's Matter working within, will occasion it I'm sure.


Ha, ha, ha, ha, -- what, Sancho has told his Master, I suppose, the Accident
of the Beard?


Yes, and in the horriblest fright you ever knew; he is now with him; the Rogue
begins to stumble upon our contrivance of the Princess too, Madam; so that we
must set more Wheels a-going.


But 'prithee how wilt thou top upon him now, for he must needs know thee now
thy Face is bare?


We'll make him believe that all things are governed by Enchantment. The
Inn-keeper has provided half a dozen merry Fellows, with Magicians and Devils
Vizards, such as are used in Carnaval time, with other rare Antics, and all to
assist in the Frolic. He also has a rare Contrivance to carry him off, which
is, a great wooden Cage, in which Two Eagles formerly were kept; the use of
it, if you please to be present, you'll see with Satisfaction; and if you can
laugh, you'll have cause I warrant you.


Your Lordship must take no notice that you know me, ^t look and speak as if
you never had seen me.


I'll warrant thee, my merry Face-Smoother, I'll humour the Jest.


And to confound Sancho the more, I'll go to his Master presently, and press
him to go on with his Journey towards the Giant.


I'll wait on ye, and second what you say.


And then come I enchanted.


We must be Spectators of the Sport too, one way or other.


Oh, that may be easily done; and to help forward with the Jest, I'll go and
act the part of an Enchanter, and assist in the Song. I long, methinks, to see
this strange Knight-Errant, for I remember him not; though once in my Distress,
I'm told I met him to his cost.


Ha, ha, ha, -- I heard indeed you swinged him once confoundedly. But come,
'prithee, let's make haste to him, and see this rare performance of
Enchantment.


^Tis time we were there. Come Uncle, you are to second me.


THou tell me Wonders, Sancho.


Strange, and true, Sir -- There's the Beard, and within is the Barber; I am
sure these Eyes saw him; and I think I know his snivelling, Sheep-stealing Phiz
too well to be mistaken in him.


I am not a Jot the more of thy Opinion because thou say thou hast seen him;
for, Sancho, I am satisfied thou can not see.


Not see! --


No, thy Sense is often blind -- thy Reason always; besides a Thousand strange
Defects brood in thee to clog thy Understanding.


Very good: Well, will you do me the Favour to let me feel then, if I can't
see? Will you let me be sensible of the Dash in the Chops, that damned Squire
of the Horse-Tail gave me before I unbearded him; I hope I may with some
Assurance say I felt that, may not I?


Why, according to the Stoical Philosopher -- no.


No? 'Gadsbud, what a strange kind of a Creature am I then, that can neither
feel nor see! But whatever you say of my Understanding, I'm sure I know this,
That a Man's Life is a Winters Day, and a Winters way: A Cudgel that bruises,
is a thing that contuses* I have a sore place here in my Shoulder, occasioned
by a Stone from one of the Galley Slaves, shall make me believe I can feel,
whatever your damned Stockick or Philosopher, with a Pox to him, says to the
contrary.


I tell thee, Clod-pate, there is no certainty in Nature; so that if thy Nose
were battered flat with a Smith's Hammer, or thy Head opened with a Church-key,
so that one might see thy Brain^, thou ought not unlearnedly to say, thy
Head is really broke, but that thou suppose it to be so.


Ah, the Devil take your Suppose, will you make me mad? Won't you let me feel I
am beaten, when the Cudgel is upon me? nor see that the sham Squire yonder, is
that cunning Rogue, Nicholas the Barber of our Town, that comes to put a Trick
upon ye? and that the Beard you hold in your Hand there is a White Horse Tail
tied on to play his Prank in?


Why Faith as to the Beard, it may seem to thee a Horse Tail indeed, as I
confess it does to me; but 'tis Obstinacy to be positive in it, because thou
know too well how these Inchanters persecute me.


Ah plague, nay, if that Whim possess your Brain again, you will find a number
of Enchantments within yonder: There's your Lady Misrisoma, what a Devil d'e
call her, is as much a King's Daughter too, as I am a Knight of the Garter, or
Golden Fleece; the Giant Dandipratdando may dance a Jig in her Dominions as
long as he pleases, for all your Prowess: for Curiosity tempting me to peep
through the Key-hole of a Door this Morning, who should I see, but your chaste
delicate Misrisoma, sitting in the Lap of the young Rampant Spanish Don that
came with her, and clinging as close as two Faces in a Medal.


How's this! -- O excommunicated Rascal, dare thou affront the Queen?


Queen! 'Oons, what Queen? 'tis a hopeful Queen that will let one of her
Subjects ruffle her like a Bulker in a Bawdy-house. 'Sbud, I saw him brush his
Whiskers upon her Face twenty times one after another.


Oh slanderous Villain, thou hast lived too long.


Oh, good Sir, Mercy, Mercy, I may be mistaken -- I do but suppose I saw all
this -- I do but suppose it, Sir.


Suppose this then too, Rascal -- to confirm ye.


Hold thy dead-doing Hand, most Noble Errant: Wonder of Wonders! What Empire's
revolution, or other accident of vast and mighty moment, could raise the Anger
of the great Don Quixote?


That Rat, that Vermin there, that but for the Reverence I bear to your
Majesty's Person, my Foot should tread into his primitive Clod, amongst his
fellow Worms that there inhabit: Would you believe it, Madam? the Blasphemous
Varlet had the Impudence to tell me you were no Queen! And that you were as
familiar with the Master of your Ceremonies, as if he had been privy to your
Intellect, and had got ye an Heir to the Kingdom of Micomicon.


Oh! I forgive him freely; his Error, no doubt, is caused by some Illusion,
that often happens in my Affairs: Therefore, Noble Sir, let's go with our best
speed to attack the Giant; when he is dead all these Chimera's vanish.


Desponding Hang dog, what say you to this now? Is she a Queen, or no?


Why? as well as a beaten Governor can give his judgment, I do suppose she is.


Miracles! Miracles! Bold Knight, stand on thy Guard; for here's a wonderful
Adventure coming; the Inn's all in Confusion; and by the several
Transformations there, we find the Inchanters are in search for thee: My
Hostess within Mews like a Cat, and Maritornes answers like a Screech Owl; two
bawling Carriers are turned into He-Asses, and Bray incessantly; and the good
Reverend Squire here to this Sage Princess, seems in my Eyes, changed like to
our Town Barber.


Oh Power of strong Enchantment! Is this possible? But that I know how I am
persecuted, I should have sworn this was my very Neighbour, that oft with
Razor-keen and Lathering Washball, mow'd the rough Stubble from my dented Chin,
and snapped his Fingers with acute Agility.


This cannot be my Squire, I know him not.


Hah -- ah --


I am thy Squire, O Queen, but now Enchanted by the Sage Merlin, who is coming
hither for endeavouring to deprive great Sancho Pancha of the Wife the Fates
allot him, the Maid of Honour; for in short time the Destinies so order, Teresa
shall bequeath to Death her Beauties, and he survive with the fair Rumpibella.


D'e hear this, Bacon-face? Are not you a damned desponding Son of a Whore,
hah? What can you say now?


Why, I say, good News and a Bag-pudding, is better than ill with nothing to
Dinner: If Mistress Rump, what d'e call her, fall to my lot by your means, you
shall suppose me another drubbing as soon as you please; and as for Teresa's
Beauty, let her bequeath it to the Devil, or where she pleases: All Shoes fit
not all Feet; Sancho shall bear the loss of that well enough.


Prodigy on Prodigy! Stand forth, thou most Renowned, for an Adventure's coming
hither to thee, has struck us blind with gazing: A Golden Chariot drawn by
fiery Horses, descended from the Sky, and out of which came forth an Aged Man
with a Majestic form.


He comes, he comes; O how I tremble!


Madam, dismiss your fear; whilst I am by ye, you are safe as in a Sanctuary.


To thee, O Knight of the Ill-favour'd Face, from my low Cell near hot
Vesuvio's Mount, where our black Spirits with perpetual labour, surrounded with
blue Flames and sulphurous Smoke, with horrid silence, forge our Magick-Spells;
I, the Sage Merlin, come, sent by the Fates, to hinder for a time, thy present
Enterprise: The Queen must Patience have, and Pandafilando revel and range
within her large Dominions, till it shall come, that the Manchegan Lyon and the
Tobosian Dove are joined in Wedlock; for so 'tis fixed, spite of Trinacrio and
his Pristine Charms: Therefore, all you my Partners in the secret, dark and
mysterious Art of Necromancy, appear, and with a Charm as strong as Destiny,
seize on the most Illustrious Knight and Squire, and in the Enchanted Chariot
bear 'em hence, to the place the Fates have ordered.


I feel the Charm already; my Blood freezes, and my Enervate Arms, inur'd to
Battle, grow weak and spiritless.


What d'e feel? 'sbud, Sir, you only fancy so; for my part I feel nothing, not
I, only my Fingers itch to be battering that old Fellow; who for all his
disguise there, is as like mine Host of that plaguy Inn, where I was tossed in
a Blanket ^'other day, as one Thumb is like another: Ay, and now I look nearer
him, 'tis he, Sir, 'tis he: -- A Trick, a Trick, 'Gadzooks, I know him.


Peace, sordid Wretch.


Oh Impudent Scoundrel! Dare thou affront the Great Merlin, that designed so
well for thee.


See, Merlin frowns; woe, woe be to thee, Sancho!


I fear we shall be punished for his sake.


Oh, naughty Sancho, hast thou no sense of fear, when thou see the very.
Off-spring of the Devil before thy Eyes? I shall laugh out; I am scarce able to
contain -- Lord, how the Fools look!


WIth this, this sacred charming Wand,
I can Heaven and Earth command.
Hush all ye Winds that curl the angry Sea,
And make the rolling Waves obey.

I from the Clouds can conjure down the Rain,
And make it Deluge once again.

I when I please make Nature smile as gay,
As at first she did on her Creation Day.
Groves with eternal sweets shall fragrant grow,
And make a true Elyzium here below.

Groves with Eternal sweets shall fragrant grow,
And make a true Elyzium here below.

I can give Beauty, make the aged young,
And Love's dear momentary Rapture long.

Nature restore, and Life, when spent, renew;
All this by Art can great Urganda do.
Why then will Mortals dare
To urge a Fate, and Justice so severe?
See there a Wretch in's own Opinion Wise,
Laughs at our Charms, and mocks our Mysteries.

I've a little Spirit yonder,
Where the Clouds do part asunder,
Lies basking his Limbs
In the warm Sun-Beams,
Shall his Soul from his Body plunder.

Speak shall it be so? No,
That Fate's too high; I'll give him one more low.

Let it be so, c.
Appear, ye fat Fiends that in Limbo do groan,
That were, when in Flesh, the same Souls as his own.
You that always in Lucifer's Kitchen reside,
Amongst Sea Coal, and Kettles, and Grease newly tried:
That pampered each day with a Garbidge of Souls,
Broil Rashers of Fools for a Breakfast on Coals.
These Mortals from hence to convey try your skill;
Thus Fates and our Magical Orders fulfil.

Appear, ye fat Fiends that in Limbo do groan,
That were, when in Flesh, the same Souls as his own.
You that always in Lucifer's Kitchen reside,
'Monst Sea-Coal, and Kettles, and Grease newly tried:
That pampered each day with a Garbidge of Souls,
Broil Rashers of Fools for a Breakfast on Coals.
These Mortals from hence to convey try your skill;
Thus Fates and our Magical Order fulfil.

You Mortals that have viewed our Magic Skill,
As you would escape our dreadful Charms, be still:
Whilst we our secret Consultations make,
None but the Enchanted must have leave to speak:
For Sancho's Fault, you all had felt his Case,
Had you not been relieved by Merlin's Grace.

You must be Saucy, with a Pox t'ye, and now see what comes on it: Had not
Merlin been Gracious, the Queen and all this Company had been Enchanted through
your Insolence; you see how narrowly they have escaped.


I see! 'sbud, why, don't you say I can see nothing? I suppose I am in a Cage
now, cooped up like a green Goose with your wise Worship: But to say I see this
were Madness, unless I resolve to have my Bones broke.


A Cage! Oh blind Stupidity! Now will I referr my self to any thing that's
Wise, to know if thou dost not deserve to have thy Bones broke, to call the
Enchanted Chariot here a Cage?


Oh! -- so then, this is a Chariot, is it?


Yes, Rascal, what else can it be? did not the great Merlin call it so?


Oh, very good -- Nay, nay, I suppose it.


'Tis something odd, I confess: The Knights of old that suffered on these
occasions, were carried through the Air in some strange Cloud, or mounted on a
flying Hippogryphis: -- But perhaps the Method's changed.


'Tis changed to a very pretty Method, truly: -- If any one would see a
Raree-Show, let him come hither: Here's the Emperor and the Governor Cheek by
Jowl, like two Paraguites hung up in a Hall Window: Lord, if we were in England
now, what a World of Fools Six-pences we should get for a sight of us: A Groat
to see the Emperor, and Two-pence the Earl; 'Oons we should put down all the
Holiday Monsters clearly.


Very well, Dogbolt; you are Witty again, are ye? and I suppose, know the
Privilege of the place you are in.


The narrowness of the place I'm in, I suppose I do; 'tis in vain to be angry
here, Sir, here's no room for drubbing.


No, I forgive thee, because I perceive the Enchantment works upon thee;
besides the Fable says, That in the Toil, once the Wolf and the Sheep were
Friends: Then I know thou art nettled too about the delay of thy Preferment;
which troth, as things stand, I must needs say I cannot now prefix a time to.


Why troth I as faithfully believe ye.


What grieves me most, is to see the trouble the Queen is in yonder: But,
Madam, I beseech ye don't despair, these Accidents are common to Knights
Errant; but 'tis only for a time, for I shall soon be free again to aid ye --
till when, confirm your hopes in my past promise -- She thanks me with a Sign;
but the rest, that by thy Fault are now deprived of Speech, by their Actions,
Sancho, seem to threaten thee.


Why, let 'em threaten; if they will help me out of my Enchanted Castle here,
I'll give 'em leave to take their Revenge: But a pox on my ill breeding and
folly, Old Father Merlin has found another way, and there's no more to be done
but Patience, and be wiser another time: -- A scalded Cat fears cold Water: If
Wishes could bide, then Beggars would Ride: The worth of a thing is best known
by its want; and One Nightingale in a Bush, sings better than two Iackdaws in a
Cage: And so, Sir, let's behold our selves, as one blind Fool said to the other.


Oh Plague! why, thou art in thy Kingdom, I see now; this is the rarest place
to string thy Proverbs and thy Flim-flams in; I must get Merlin to Enchant that
Tongue of thine a little, I find there will be no peace else.


The Hour is come, and all the Sons of Art in Council sit; hast and set forward
there.


Why Dolt, Madman, Ass; a Murrain take thee, whither wilt thou let them carry
thee -- thus like a Fool? 'D'sheartlikins, hast not Brains enough to see 'tis
only a Trick upon thee to make thee a -- mew -- mew --


And you, Jolthead Governor, don't you know a Proverb, that says, Bray a Fool
in a Mortar, and you'll find all of him but his Brains. Where the Devil are you
riding like a -- whoo, whoo, whoo, whoo --


Alas, sweet Ladies, I pity ye, I see you feel my Fate, but cannot help me.
Till Merlin does ordain I shall be freed,
Valour's in Bonds, and Chivalry lies dead.



Earl Sancho is cag'd, past all relief, Not like a Governor, but like a Thief.



Ha, ha, ha, ha, -- rarely performed of all Hands: Gramercy mine Host, thou
hast acted thy Part like any Comedian.


Ah, to divert your Lordship and the good Company here, I could do twice as
much as this is.


There was no way to get him home but this, which has been excellently
well-humour'd on all sides.


The Princess Micomicona deserves a real Kingdom for the Wit she has shown
in it.


She has indeed done it to a Miracle; and managed, not only the Action, but the
Romantic Stile so naturally, that a wiser Head than Don Quixote's might have
been deceived.


Not unless he had some Sparks of his Frenzy. But what pleases me most is
Sancho, who is every foot at a loss, whether he shall be a Governor or
nothing.


Ha, ha, ha, -- Come now, let's go dine, and laugh an Hour away about it
within.


Ay, ay, a Jest sounds always most merrily at a good Dinner, my Lord; and to
say the truth, the Squire of the Beard has been enchanted so long, that he
begins to be hungry.


Oh, thy Mirth shall begin presently then; were thy Hunger as sharp as one of
thy one Razors it should be blunted -- Come* mine Hostess too, and little
Maritornes -- y' have all done admirably* Oh, how every little Subject pleases
us, when Love has tuned ou^ Souls by his sweet. Harmony! Now,


In my Lucinda's Love, mine are as perfect as Heaven has Power to make 'em.


And mine in meeting with my dear Cardenio.


And let each kind, too late repenting, Maid,
That fears she's by inconstant Man betrayed,
Yet by peculiar Fate, and Grace Divine,
At last retrieves her Lover -- guess at mine.

THis Sou^lry season which was wont to clear
The Town, of all the friends we held most dear,
Believe we are very glad to s^e you here*
The Wits that now defy their God the Sun,
(Proof against his beams) to see Don Quixote run,
Such miracles have he and comic Sancho done
Faith since good Nature did your Hearts inspire
To use us kindly once don't let it tire;
But let our second Merry Scenes be graced
With your united praise, as were our last.
If you object the weather is too hot,
The World is in a ^erment, think of that:
Heroes abroad sweat for the glorious day,
And I am sure you cannot choose but say,
That 'tis much safer sweating at a Play:
For in the main, vast difference will appear,
Twixt those that sweat for pleasure or for fear.
Well, then 'tis time to doubt ye were unjust,
Since you have been so civil to our first;
For those abroad as well as here at home,
To see our last, we thank 'em, all have come;
Some to oblige us, from the B^th have stayed,
The unteeming Wife, and the Green sickness Maid,
Such Sport has been, it seems, in what we plaid.
From Richmond some, where crowds of Beauty dwell;
Nay the Cits have left their darling Epsom W^ll,
And jogged from them to us like honest Men,
Upon their trotting Pads of Three Pound Ten:
Then, we have had some of the Blackcoats too,
Men skilled in Books, that our Don Quixote kn^w,
That fearing to be found o^t at a Play,
Sat in the Pit, in Coats of Iron gray.
In short, 'tis plain, we all degrees have had,
Their Money too -- for which we are not sad;
And if you please to favour us once more,
To encour^ge ye, the Poet just now swore,
This is a better play than t^at before.

SO Gentlemen, are all things in order for the Dukes design of entertaining
this whimsical Knight Errant?


They are Sir, every Servant in the house answers to his Cue as readily as if
he had been brought up in a Theatre.


We find no one tardy in the business but Diego the Dukes Master of the
Shepherds, who we hear has almost lost his wits for Love; and the Coxcomb grows
every day so mop'd with it, that he neglects all other business.


There's something in that fellow more than ordinary, a swarth complexion, hot
and Saturnine, you had best look to him Master Steward, for I know him to be of
a mischievous nature, and not honest. Farewell, I must go seek the Duke, who is
gone to the Grove, just by the Park side yonder, to meet Don Quixote, and bring
him to his Castle.


Have they lodged the Knight then?


'Twas all the work of the neighbourhood to watch his motion: Sancho we hear
was sent of an Errant to Toboso this morning, but about what we know not -- and
the Knight stays yonder, waiting for his coming -- farewell, you had best make
haste home before, to get all things in readiness.


I intend it Sir. Come Doctor, we shall have rare sport.


-- 'Sdeath! is't possible the Frenzy should still be so ^rong upon the Fool:
'tis not above a Month, since a Brother of my Profession, told me that he
administered to him at his House, and had great hopes of his Cure.


There was such a report indeed. The manner of his ridiculous Enchantment, and
bringing home in a Cage too, is very authentic -- But Sancho and he one Night,
made a shift to give 'em all the slip, and this is now his second Sally.


Ha, ha, ha -- And in good time, he undertakes it to give the Duke and Duchess
diversion -- Come let's be gone, that I may be ready for my part in the Scene.


The Chaplain must not know of it.


What are their Frolics or their Sports to me, that have a burning Fever in
my breast, that hourly consumes me. I know no Master now, but raging Passion,
nor own Obedience, but to Love's great power; and my hearts Murdress, the
adored Marcella, whom to enjoy, I'll hazard Credit, Fortune, nay venture at
once, my Souls and Body's ruin, and ne'er believe that I can pay too dear.


I've r^iss'd the Duke and Duchess strangely, who I believe, are gone the left
hand way over the Pattock, -- How now, who have we here, Diego the chief
Shepherd, -- This is the loving Fool they lately talked of. I'll stay a little
to observe him.


This Letter here, shows me the road to happiness, which is just sent me from a
trusty friend that I employed to watch her Evening Haunts, and now 'tis done
effectually -- Know she's the proudest of her Sex, as well as the most
beautiful, and therefore shuns all Conversation with ours, and generally with
her own; therefore to indulge her humour, I have observed her several evenings
together to walk alone exactly about seven in the Myrtle Grove, that joins to
the Ambassadors Garden, where at the aforesaid hour, you may securely seize
her. I would assist ye, but the Ambassador is this minute sent for to Court --
But at my return, I expect the pleasure, to hear that you are revenged upon
that proud Beauty, that so long has tortured ye -- the account of which Action
will give a secret pleasure, to your faithful Friend, c.





The Action -- Oh how my heart leaps in my breast to think ont! Remorse avaunt,
I am resolved this Evening to force the scornful Fair to quench my flame, and
glut my love with the sweet Spoils of Beauty --


Here's a pretty business going forward; why what a damned Wolf or Satyr of a
Fellow, have I discovered here among the Sheep-coats -- In Love, did they say?
-- ay, this is the very Devil of a Lover, a most admirable Monster to justify
my quarrel to the Sex: this sort of Coridons now, would fit the Female
Devillings. Dam 'em ^le take no notice on it; no usage can be bad enough for
'em, -- But hold, is that resolution like a Gentleman? does it consist with
honour? Pox on it, would chance had never led my feet this way. Now I'm a
greater Villain than the Ravisher, if I permit the mischief. 'Tis so, and I
must prevent it. In spite of Rancour she shall succour find,
I'll save her honour, tho I hate her kind.



Oh that I had, as once young Phaeton, the rule of the bright Chariot of the
Sun, that I might whip the Hours into more speed, or for a minute could disarm
the Furies, to give one good smart lash to ^agging Sancho, whom I this morning
sent, with a Love Message, to my Adored and Charming Dulcinea. Post on ye
sluggish Minutes, run dull Squire, and let thy Thoughts inform thy heavy Heels,
the longings of my Soul: In the mean time, here in this Grotto, rest thou load
of Love, think on thy lovely Charmer, and let thy amorous Soul, send forth no
other sound but Dulcinea, oh Dulcinea.


Yonder he lies, and as melancholy as a Cat in a Church Steeple, expecting my
return, -- and now good Brother Sancho -- be pleased to go on with your design,
and since you don't like the Mess^ge you are sent about, let's see how your Wit
can bring you off -- let me see, your maggot pated Master Don Quixote sends you
to Toboso, to the P^incess Dulcinea -- very good -- Did you ever hear of any
such Princess Sancho? -- no -- or has your Master ever seen such? -- neither,
-- why then yo^r errand appears to be but a kind of mad whimsy Sancho -- no
doubt on it -- well then, what remedy? -- why thus Brother -- if your Master can
fancy Princesses, where none ere were -- Windmils to be Giants, and flocks of
Sheep, Armies -- and say every foot that his sight is beguiled by Enchantments
-- 'twill be as easy for you to take the next Comer Sancho -- and perswadehim
to believe 'tis the radiant Dulcinea.


Come Couzin Ricotta, prithee come along; Udsliflikins, I'll be hanged if the
Bride b'ant gone to Church, before we can get thither.


Why prithee how can that be fool, when Father Iodolet ^he Priest, and Gasper
the Piper, are just gone before us.


Pshaw that's all one, the holy Cormorant has been at Breakfast already, he has
devoured half a Turkey, and drank a Bottle of Malaga, -- this Morning, so that
he has nothing to do till Dinner, but to chop up Mass, and see 'em joined
according to custom.


He see 'em joined according to custom, why how now you plaguy Hoyden you, --
dee make a pimp of the Priest.


Why how now you young pert baggage, a pimp of a Priest, why is that such a
miracle. This comes as pat as I could wish, these are two rare Jades for my
purpose.


What ails the Slouch, can't you go on your way, I spoke to my Couzin Flora, I
did not meddle with you swag-belly.


Ha, ha, ha, ha, it shall be so faith, this shall be the Princess Dulcinea
Gadzookes, -- and this other Dowdy here, shall be her waiting woman -- ha, ha,
ha.


What's the matter with the Paunch, what ails the bristle chops, can't y^u let
us go and be hanged.


Till my Lord Don Quixote, has kindled his amorous Taper at the Glow-worm Rays,
of your Lady the Princess there, not for the world -- my dear Lindabrides.


What Lady, what Princess? what a Dickins, is the Booby mad?


Therefore appear, thou mirror of Knight Errantry, thy Queen, here is thy
Dulcinea, Moon of thy hopes, North Star of thy desires, shining with all her
fiery beams upon thee.


'Twas Sancho's voice, -- and see yonder he stands -- welcome thou blessed, thou
longed for Messenger, -- well and what success good Friend, hah! was the God of
Love compassionate?


Success, sbud -- kneel, kneel; Sir, oons are you blind, why there she is Sir,
the Princess, the Peerless Dulcinea, the grand Toboso, the silver Trumpet of
Renown, the fire Arms of Beauty, and the Touchhole of Love, attended by the
most beautiful Babberlips of Spain, the lovely -- Wiffundera.


Where is the Princess Sancho.


Ah Devil on ye, what game, what foolery's this? pray let's go will ye.


Oh Princess and Universal Lady of Toboso, why does not your magnanimous heart
relent, seeing the Pillar, and prop of Chivalry prostrate before your
sublimated presence: 'Sbud Sir are you dumb? -- or a^e your senses ravished
from you, at the beams of those fair Eyes, those lushious Bubbies, and Amber
Locks, adorned with Pearl and Diamonds.


Pearl and Diamonds?


'Dsheart, what dee lye rubbing your Eyes so for? Why don't you see all this?


Upon my Knighthood -- No.


The Devil were in ye if you should, -- how the clownish Jades stare at one
another.


I see no Princess: the objects that present themselves to me, are Faces most
uncomely, dost thou see this rare sight, Sancho?


Do I? I think I do, I see the Princess shining with Gold there, like a Sun
beam, and the most bright and altified Whiffundera, blazing like a Star of the
first Magnitude.


Well enough Brewis-belly; Adshdikins leave off your fooling, and let's be
gone, or I'll call out to the Vineyard yonder.


There be Folks there that will take our parts, you may chance to get a
drubbing for your Jokes, if you have not a care, Bacon-face.


Zooks, Queen Blouze may be in the right in that, therefore I'll make haste.


If that be the Princess that spoke last, some Devilish Spell this moment is
upon me, I am bereaved of all my sight and senses.


How, how's that Sir? I hope not so -- This is what I looked for, ha, ha, ha,
ha, the Trick fadges rarely.


Dost thou smell nothing, Sancho?


A perfumed sigh or two, the Princess breathed, Sir, nothing else.


Nay, then 'tis plain I'm enchanted -- again, by my Knighthood, ^t seemed to me
of Garlic.


Garlic! oh Villains, now could I eat one of these Enchanting Rogues. And I
warrant the Princess and her Lady, Sir, seems to you like two Hog-rubbing
Dowdies?


Todpoles! Witches! I have not seen two uglier.


Good lack a day, that these Devilish fellows can do this! -- Keep in your
breath, and be hanged.


Keep you off and be hanged. So ho, in the Vineyard there.


Pedro, Valasco, Tarzoe, so ho; odslid come near me again -- a couple of Cogging
Scoffing Gibers, what a Murrain can't you let people go along the Road? did we
meddle with you? odslid come near me again, and I'll give thee such a gripe on
the Weazon, I'll make thee kackle again.


Ugh -- ^here's another whiff, the very -- quintessence of Garlic. Oh thou
extreme of all wickedness, thou abhorred Enchanter, whoever thou art, think not
because thou can pervert my Smelling faculty, and put these Clouds and
Cataracts in my Eyes, to eclipse that dazzling Beauty from me, that it shall
serve thy turn; no Misc^eant, the time shall come, when by my powerful Arm all
Charms shall be dissolved, and this bright Planet, hid by vile Enchantment,
shine bright and clear for ever. Is she gone, Sancho?


Yes Sir, and upon so fast a gallop, that 'tis impossible for Rosinante to
overtake her; therefore pray Sir consider the Proverb that says, To ill
accidents apply patience; Let every Conscience fit itself to the times; we
shall have a smiling minute, when we shall ferk these plaguy Inchanters before
they are aware: In the mean time be pleased to think of being an Emperor as
soon as you can Sir -- that I may be a Governor, and raise my Family, for to
my thinking I should become governing hugely. Well, and now I talk of
governing, yonder comes a company that I think look like Emperors and
Governors indeed.


Not a word more -- I know 'em, 'tis the Great Duke of that noble Seat thou
see there, with his fair Duchess: And I suppose my Fame has reached his
Ears; he comes hither now to find me out.

Down swelling griefs a while be husht and silent, whilst from these great ones
I receive that Ceremony my noble Function merits: And dee hear Sancho, be sure
you behave your self with that Decorum as suits my Squire, and the place you're
in.


Well, well, Sir, a word to the wise is enough -- Manners makes the Man, quoth
William of Wickham -- Now we are to deal with People that have a sense of
governing; I warrant ye let me alone for behaving my self.


Lure off the Hawks, the day's too hot for sport, we'll out again in the
Evening -- Most noble Knight Don Quixote de la Mancha -- Fortune has now
obliged me to my Wishes, thou Quintessence, thou Soul of Arms and Honour,
welcome into my Province.


Your Graces most devoted, lives no longer, than whilst he is yours in all
humble duty.


Illustrious Errant, I am proud to thank ye -- Madam that you m^y know highly
Fortune honours me, I am obliged to tell ye this is the Knight of the
Ill-favour'd face, the shining Sun of Spain, the Mars of Arms and Chivalry,
whom I desire you to invite to my Castle, that we may show how we admire such
Virtue.


I am his Greatnesses most humble Servant, and hope he'll so far honour us.


I kiss your beauteous Hand most excellent Lady, and wholly subject my self to
your Commands.


Subject himself to her Commands, -- Gadzooks very pretty, that, -- well, this
plaguy Devil my Master, has a notable way with him sometimes.


We are all -- Valiant Sir, your humble Servants and most obliged.


But most of all our Sex -- as to a Champion whose daily Endeavour is to right
our wrongs, with Sword and Lance, on Mountain or in Valley, to vindicate the
cause ^f injured Ladies.


And this good Fellow, if I mistake not, must sure be trusty Sancho, the honest
Pa^tner of this brave Knights dangers.


Your Mightiness h^s hit it to a hair -- I am the very Sancho, indeed a
Governor elect too, for all I look so* and as for dangers, why little said is
soon amended, common fame is seldom to blame, but Patience is a plaster for
all sores. My master and I have heard Wolves howl at Midnight before now, -- we
know how an Oaken Cudgel can bruise, and what danger is in cold Iron: we are no
Flinchers, we.


You will forget blunderhead.


Oh, Sancho is very pleasant, and his Proverbs become him extremely -- Go some
of you and bridle this noble Knights Horse, that I see feeding yonder, and
bring him to the Stable; we'll go in the back way over the Garden.


And pray Mrs. since I see you have nothing else to do, will you be so kind as
to go to yonder Hedge, where Rozinante, and pray take what care of him you can,
because the poor fool is a little skittish, and I can't wait on him my self, by
reason you see me obliged to follow my Master.


How now ignorant Bufflehead, d'e know who you talk to?


Oh confound him, did you ever hear such a sordid Son of a Whore? Why thou
complicated lump of Dullness, does this good Gen^lewoman look like a Groom?
Does she seem fit to manage in a Stable, thou incomprehensible Rascal.


'Twas only a small mistake, Sir Knight, my woman's very good natured, and I
know Sancho intended no affront.


No, no, 'twas a civility any one might have begged; besides Dapple may be
nearer related to Sancho than we imagine. I have bit my tongue almost through*
I shall ne'er be able to hold out.


Nor I, I dare not look that way for fear of laughing aloud.


How Mrs. Rodriguez swells, I warrant she could poison Sancho now with all her
Soul, for she knows nothing of the design.


I shall hardly expose my sense, to resent any thing from su^h a Rustical
Brute; my Breeding and his, I suppose, have been in different stations,
therefore the best way of expressing my self about it, is by contempt. I
despise the Creature.


Well, well, since you despise him, so let it end then. Come most Heroic,
shall I lead the way -- My Wife attends your motion.


Her Grace extremely honours me -- Hah -- Dunghill Vermin is this your manners
with a Pox t'ee.


Where the Devil's the harm ont? Gadzooks I thought Waiting Women might have
gone into Lords Stables, as well as Footmen into Ladies Bed-chambers; hut Live
and learn, and be hanged and forget all; there's a good Proverb however.


COme, are the Musicians ready now for the Entertainment, the Duke and Duchess
are just at the Gate.


They are all tuning their Instruments in the next room.


Page, prithee run and tell the Cook and the Confectioner my Lord will have the
Banquet after the Music is ended.


And what's all this preparation for I wonder: What silly gambol is going to be
plaid now?


And why silly gambol? Lord you are always so p^ish Mr. Cuff-cushion, there's
no living with ye, any thing that does not suit your grave testy humour is
silly presently. Pox methinks you should know your station of being unmannerly
a little better, be civil here, and be rude when you get into your Pulpit.


Ah, thou art a pretty fellow to govern a Family with a flashy Head, and a
Heart void of Conscience, Morality and Religion. How dare thou profane the
Pulpit, Reprobate; a Whore were a more natural thing for thee to talk of.


Why that's a Pulpit you love to preach in too, as well as I, for all your
canting.


No, you must let him govern every thing, and then Sir gravity will be easy;
let but the head Butler be his Croney, and my Ladies pretty Chambermaid sit on
his Bed-side in a Morning, and mend his Stockings, and then you shall hear him
rail no more, nor ever have a Sermon against Drinking or Whoring.


Why thou infect, bred from excrement; thou Quack, with not skill enough to
cure a Lap-dog of the Mange? thou venery-promoter, art thou shooting thy
Turpentine Pills at me too.


Put him but into a fret, and 'twill be better sport, than a Bearbaiting, ha,
ha, ha, ha.


Fulsome Idiot, poor wretch.


Ha, ha, ha, ha, -- poor Vestry dawber.


Come, come, prithee, -- now let's leave him to chew the Cud upon contemplation
-- here comes my Lord.


Is he unarmed?


They are doing it my Lord, and treating him in all points, as your Grace has
ordered.


My Lady Duchess will grow fat with laughing, I never saw her take so much
pleasure in any Jest before


Go you and assist in the Ceremony, and be sure Bernardo, what is your reverend
solidity musing on, hah?


I am musing my Lord, on those books of Chivalry, which I have of late often
found you reading, and I profess I wonder that a man of your clear Sense and
good parts, should waste your precious time so unprofitably.


Testy Fool, now if I would permit him, would this peevish Blockhead, be
impertinent two long hours by the Clock, -- Come, come, I'll endure no reproof
now; if thou'lt be sociable, and take part of the Music and the Banquet, 'tis
well, if not. --


The Music -- No, not I, Heaven estrange my ears from hearing such Vanity, --
as for the other part, it is my duty to give a Blessing to it, therefore I shall
attend.


Ay to the eating part, I warrant thee, if any of thy Tribe are wanting at that
I much wonder.


Long live the Flower of Knight Errantry, the renowned Don Quixote de la
Mancha.


Vivat the Succourer of Widows and Orphans.


The Righter of Wrongs, and Retriever of the ancient and most noble Laws of
Chivalry.


The Tamer of Giants, and undaunted Queller of Monsters and Furies.


Let the Sports begin to entertain him, and let no part be wanting to do him
honour.


IF you will Love me, be free in Expressing it,
And henceforth give me no Cause to complain;
Or if you hate me, be plain in Confessing it,
And in few words put me out of my pain.
This long decaying, with sighing and praying,
Breeds only delaying in Life and Amour,
Cooing and Wooing,
And daily pursuing,
Is damned silly doing, therefore I'll give over.
If you'll propose a kind method of ruling me,
I may return to my Duty again;
But if you stick to your old way of Fooling me,
I must be plain I ^m none of your Men;
Passion for passion on each kind occasion,
With free inclination does kindle Loves Fire,
But Tedious prating,
Coy folly debating,
And now doubts creating, still makes it expire.
YOU Love, and yet when I ask you to marry me,
Still have recourse to the tricks of your Art;
Then like a Fencer you cunningly parry me,
Yet the same time make a Pass at my Heart.
Fie, fie, deceiver,
No longer endeavour,
Or think this way ever the Fort will be won?
No fond Caressing
Must be, nor unlacing,
Or tender embracing 'till the Parson has done.
Some say that Marriage a Dog with a Bottle is,
Pleasing their humours to rail at their Wives;
Others declare it an Ape with a Rattle is,
Comforts Destroyer and Plague of their Lives:
Some are affirming,
A Trap 'tis for Vermin,
And yet with the Bait tho not Prison agree,
Venturing that Chose you,
Must let me Espouse you
If e're, my dear Mouse you will nibble at me.
I do beseech your Grace, I shall dye with Blushing*


The highest merit must have highest place.


My Lord, you confound me with excess of favour.


Nay, nay, it must be so, Sir.


O^ my Conscience this is that Scare-crow Knight Errant Don Quixote, that I
have heard the Duke talk so often of; oh the whimsical Idiot!


Indeed, Sir Knight, if I may speak my thoughts, your Modesty is a great deal
too nice: You needs must know your place, wheree're you are.


Now have I two Proverbs at my tongues end, that I'd give half my Government
to vent -- One is, He that has more manners than he ought, is more a Fool than
he thought; and the other is* there is more ado with one Jackanapes, than with
all the Bears.


How now Friend Sancho, what are you muttering, come we must have no wit lost.


Ah blessing on your Noblenesses prattling place; y're a princely Jewel, I'll
say that for ye: And now my Master Don Quixote has put me in the mind on it -- I
could tell ye a very pretty tale that happened in our Town, concerning places.


You will prate Jolthead -- I beseech your Graces, let this Coxcomb be thrust
out, we shall hear a thousand follies else.


By my sincerity these are both crazed alike, and I shall ne'er have patience
to hear half their Fooleries.


By no means, my noble Sir, Sancho must needs go on with his tale.


Oh we lose our chief diversion else -- for his wit and good humour must needs
make it very pleasant.


Therefore begin quickly, honest Friend, for my Lady Duchess and I are
impatient till we hea^ it.


Why then thus it goes, you must know then, that there was a Gentleman in our
Town, nearly related to Don Alonzo de Maranon, Knight of the Order of St.
Iaques, who was drowned in the Heradura, about whom that quarrel was a little
while since in our Town* Master mine, pray Sir, were not you in it -- Where
little Thomas the Madcap. Son to Balvastro the Smith, had a deep wound in the
Scrotum as they called it, about the Widow Waggum.


A plague on thee for a Crust-grinder, dost thou begin a Tale without head or
foot, and then ask me a question -- Now do I sweat for the Rogue.


Well, well, then 'tis no great matter -- And so this Gentleman that I told you
fi^st of* invited a poor Husbandman to Dinner; and so the poor man coming to
the Gentleman Inviters House, Heaven be merciful to him, for he is now dead;
and for a further Token, they s^y, died like a Lamb -- for I was not by, for at
that time I was gone to another Town to reaping.


Ay, and prithee come back from reaping quickly, without ^urying the Gentleman,
unless thou hast a mind to kill us too with expectation.


Ha, ha, ha, ha.


Oh tardy Hellhound, I'm in a Fever for him.


Ne'er ^ear, Sir, I'll be mannerly.


Ha, ha, ha, ha.


A very admirable tale and quantity delivered, ha, ha, ha.


Poor Sancho will ^ay for this anon; the Knight looks very angry, I'll try to
divert it -- My Lord, Don Quixote, I beseech ye, if my request be not improper,
how fares the gracious Dulcinea del Toboso, -- and what Giants, Bugbears and
Captives have you sent her lately.


How could I mumble that Dog, if I had him in a corner.


What a plague's the matter, I've said something amiss now I see by's look.


Ah Madam, there you divide my heart in ^under, the beauteous Dulcinea is
enchanted.


Is't possible!


Ye Crack brained Idiot, I profess I can bear no longer. Fie, fie, my Lord and
Madam, what dee mean -- I vow your Graces are much to blame to indulge the
Frenzy of this Lunatic.


How? What's that Sir, Lunatic?


Now comes the sport.


The Priest has smothered his testy humour till he's black in the face.


Who thrust it into your brains Don Quixote, or Don Coxcomb, that you are a
Knight Errant, with a murrain tee, and that you c^n kill Giants, Monsters,
B^gbears -- Or know of any Princess that's enchanted? Is not this Spain,
incorrigible Dull pate? What Errants are (...) here? Or what use of'em, hah?


Oh monstrous! Oh thou old black Fox with a Firebrand i^ thy tail thou very
Priest, thou Kindler of all Mischiefs in all Nations, dee hea^, Homily, did not
the Reverence that I bear these Nobles bind my just rage, I would so thrum your
Cassock, you Church Vermin.


I profess, I have a great mind to strip, I have much ado to forbear -- but
hold, I will not shame my Coat -- I will absent me prudently -- Well, Madman,
passion is an ill arguer, some other time we will dispute this point -- Till
when farewell -- Add^e pate.


Adie^ Scriptures groper.


A waspish strange old Fool: I hope, Sir, you take no offence.


None, none, my Lord, upon my Honour, Women and Priest^ may say any thing.


He shall beg your pardon* Hey Page, bid the Chaplain wait m^ in the Park.


Come will you retire, Sir, for an hour, and then we'll divert you abroad with
Hawking.


I am your Graces ever.


I am glad of this; that Black Coat's prating has made him forget me.


Come, my Dear, lets follow and laugh.
This ^ut begins the Farce which yet we see:

-- Where these Fools are, there must Diversion be.


HElp, help, for Heavens sake help.


You call in vain, nothing can help you now but fair compliance.


Help, help -- is no blessed charitable creature near, to help a Maid in her
distress?


Yes I.


Thou art a Devil.


So, my Dear, art thou, a very Devil, and the Hell I've suffered, through thy
nice Female Pride and Obstinacy, is greater than the Damned below endure; but I
am now grown a profound Magician, and I can conjure that proud Daemon from
thee, that late insulted over all human kind. You now must love, Marcella.


Cursed sound, and now more cursed than ever, coming from the mouth of such a
Fury.


Ay, this is well now -- I am pleased to see that Lucifer keeps his old station
in your proud heart; my Spell will work the better. Mildness perhaps had
wrought me to a stile of whining Love, to court and sue for favour, look like a
Fool, be modest, cringe and bow, lye like a Chambermaid, and at last get
nothing, but You're an Ill-favour'd Monster, and I scorn ye.


No succour yet! no kind relieving Passenger!


But now you show your Sex in their true quality you more oblige me; I now can
bluntly seize thee without wooing, and like a man claim Beauty as my due,
pattern the noble Savages of old, when Woman, like the rest of other Females,
patiently couched under the Male Prodominance; and since you are obstinate and
stubborn, instruct the rest of men by my example.


What dost thou propose, oh, thou most abhorred?


To make a Convert of thee -- What a str^nge, coy, wild, impertinent, unnat^ral
thing hast thou been hitherto, thou wo^est thy Eyes as if thou were a Ba^ilisk,
destroying others, still to please thy self; thou taughtst thy tongue to murder
all thy Lovers by proud refusals -- thy hands to tear their Letters, and thy
feet to run away like an ungrateful Daphne, tho an Apollo followed.


'Tis my nature, born for my self; all men are my aversion.


Then know, that I was born to new create thee; I will not have those Beauties
lost through Pride, which Nature first intended for Enjoyment; your Eyes shall
learn to smile, your Lips to kiss, your Tongue to praise your Lover; Arms to
embrace him: I'll mould your body to a proper form, make every part about you
do its office, and fit ye for the business of the world.


The Devil shall have you ^irst.


The Devil shall have me after, Child, as he and I agree upon it; but before
hand I'll beg his Devilships pardon.


Oh, how I hate this fellow! What a rage I feel within my bosom glow against
him? What! Shall I sue to any man for favour; I that have through the series of
past years, made 'em the business of my jest and raillery? Shall I submit and
beg? I'll rather dye first.


I can but think how much ^he case is altered; how many tediou^ hours with
downcast Eyes, pale Cheeks, a throbbing Heart, and Arms across, have I wa^ched
a kind look of this Calisto, who now I can command -- Come will you be kind and
f^eely.


If, (as the word has always been a stranger to me, when it related to thy Sex)
i^ I ^ould be kind, can thou believe, oh thou foul Crimin^l, such words ^s
these could win me!


Oons I have no Complements; all women have been spoiled since men first used
'em. Kiss and Consent at first begot the Joy; '^was Sighs and ^hinings bred the
Pish and Fie -- I will be fooled no longer.


Stand off rude Hell-hound, I yet have some defence; when Innocence fights,
each Pin, each little Bodkin, will prove a Lance to wound the cursed Assailer!
Oh, ^hou most vile of Creatures ^hat is, (th^u man) dost thou belie^ I wi^
yield ^amely to thee? No, I will make each Nail an E^gles Tal^, my T^eth shall
(...) thy Fl^sh, my Eyes shall blast thee; and in this noble ^use, this lit^e
Arm, in my defence, be like the Club of Hercu^s, thou worst of all Male Devils,
Ravisher. --


Oh, I shall coo^ your Cou^age.


And I you^s Sir, I must make bold to interrupt you^ sport a little, the Duke
shall have no S^tyrs in his Family. Come, come, Sir, deliver me your Sword.


My Sword? It must be this way then: ^'m upon the forlorn hope, and so have at
ye, Sir,


Ambrosio! He^vens! Is't he I am obliged to for thi^ Succour! The Man of all
^he World I've least deserved from -- I'm so confounded with shame I cannot
look on him.


Now Villain, you shall obey in spite of ye; but more of that presently, first
let's see the Woman -- Hah, Marcella! Oh blind, blind Chance, Oh ill con^riving
Fortune, thou know I hate the cursed Cleft Tribe in general; and could thou
amongst the rout of female mischiefs, find me no other to oblige but thi^! This
worst of all ^he Sex! This damning Eve, with not one only, but Legion of
Serpents round her!


What do I feel! His words shoot through my heart, as if 'twere wounded with a
Sheaf of Arrows; I am not angry neither to hear him rail, but changed so, that
methinks I could hear more.


Oh thou dear Manes of my brave Friend Chrisostome, art thou not ang^y with thy
poor Ambrosio whose ill placed stars maliciously compel him to vindicate the
honour of thy Murdress?


Si^ce the good deed y' have don^, cause 'twas for me* so much offends your
thoughts, oblige us both, and kill me; for I can bear death better than your
words. Kill me, and I am then ou^ of your debt, and you revenged for
Chrisostome.


No, live however, and (if a woman can) repe^t; for 'twe're damnation certain,
now to kill thee; live therefore, but let me see those baneful Eyes no more;
lock from henceforth those Ignes Fatui up, that lead men wandering into Bogs and
Ditches; veil 'em I say, that I again may never be troubled to defend your
Caterwawling; a creature that can purr, and ^hen can squeak, that scratching
can repulse the eager Lover, and yet be prompt and willing to inge^der: Away,
there's counsel for ye. Come, Sir, now march before me; something remains for
you too -- go on.


Had I but done the deed I had not cared.


Yet thou art brave: Oh Heaven what shall I do to pay the Debt of Gratitude I
owe thee; what a forlorn and miserable Wretch had I been but for thee! Oh I am
lost! What Beauty, Riches or the Gloss of Honour, with all the allurements
never could subdue, is conquered by this great, this generous Action: My Heart
is melting, and a new strange passion fills all my bosom, that firm resolute
will, that stood unshocked to the deserts of Chrisostome, is wholly Captive to
the brave Ambrosio. In vain is Art or Obstinacy now. In vain does weakened Force
resist the stronger;
The Fort's o're-pow'r'd, and can hold ou^ no longer.



Is the Doctor ready with his disguise for Merlin.


He has be^n dressed this hour my Lord; the Page too is perfect in his part of
Dulcinea; we only wait my Lady D^tchesses coming back, who is gone after the
Hawk the back side of the Wood -- And then we shall begin the Comedy.


The Knight and the Parson are still in hot argument yonder; the Cassock and
the Helmet are at mortal odds; the Church Militant scorns to truckle to the
Camp, he'll not ask him pardon, he says, tho all the Knights of the Round Table
were by to back him.


I took this opportunity of slipping from 'em, to take-breath a little, and
laugh by my self -- See here they come, away Mannel to your Fellows, and as soon
as ever it begins to be dark do as I've ordered.


We'll be punctual as the minute, my Lord.


Well, Chaplain, is the business reconciled; have you done Justice to this
noble Knight?


I profess, I think I have, I have told him plainly he is a Madman, and have
conscientio^sly proposed to him a certain remedy


I have not told you yet, that a Clergyman may be a Bl^ckhead, tho I may
suppose it, only to show the different manners betwixt my Function and yours.


Nay, if the Swo^d and the Gown can agree no better, we are like to see but an
ill Reformation.


Once more, I say, ask him pardon Bernardo.


For what my Lord, I profess, I begin to fear, he has infected your Grace with
^is own distemper.


Ha, ha, ha, ha, -- He'll call me Fool presently.


For me that have swallowed and digested Sciences, as common as Loins of
Mutton, to aff^ont Lear^ing so vilely, to compare with one that's ignorant of
all -- A downright Madman.


Good words, Priest, g^od words, did Religion teach you to be rude, Sir
Cassock? Besides* to show I am not so ignorant, as you'd make me, know I have
learnt the Sci^nces -- and made a^dition to excel your Gown by one much better
than ^he rest, Knight Errantry.


That a Science, oh ri^iculous, ^harkee; prithee prepare thy brains a little,
to answer me one question.


Ay, now they buckle to it.


What's a Knight Errant good for?


Every thing: He that is honoured with that Function understands a Science that
contains in it all the rest, which thus I make appear. First, He must be skilled
in the Law, to know Justice distributive and commutative, to do ^ight to every
one: He must be a Divine, to know how to give a reason clearly of his Christia^
Profession: He must be a Physician, and chiefly an Herbalist, to know in a
Wilderness or Desar^, what Herbs have virtue to cure Wounds; for you^ Knight
Errant must not be looking out every pissing while for a Surgeon to heal him:
He must be an Astronomer, to know in the night what a Clock 'tis by the Sta^s:
He must be also a Ma^hematician, and principally a good Cook, because it may
very often happen, he may have occasion to dress his own Dinner. Nor should he
only be ador^'d wi^h all divine and moral virtues, but he must descend to
Machanicks also; for he must know how to shoe a Horse, to mend a S^ddle, to
sole a Boo^, to dearn a Stocking, to stitch a Doublet; and in short, to do all
things that reason can imagine. And all these things, and as many more, is your
Knight Errant good for.


What say to this, my good Divinity Teacher; methinks the Knight has given ye a
very fair account of his F^nction.


And now I have answered his question, I think 'tis but reasona^le to ask him
one: I demand of hi^ ^hen, and put it fairly to his Co^cience, I say, I desire
to know of him -- What a Chaplain's good for?


By my troth a shrewd question.


And p^t home too, as the case now stands.


Oh sinful Caitiff, is that a question to be asked in these religious times:
Come, come, I'll tell thee that presently -- Humh, good for? Why in the first
place, let me see, What's a Chaplain good for? Oh, now I have it; why all the
serious part of the world must allow that.


Ay, 'tis plain now, the cause is lost, the Chaplain's confounded, he has not a
word to say for himself, ha, ha, ha.


Ha, ha, ha, ha, Eagerness and Rage have so choked him, he has no utterance --
Ha, ha, ha, ha.


What am I become a jest, fie my Lord, where is the decency, where is the
sagacity! Oh strange this is very unseemly -- And I'll be gone lest choler
arise, and I exceed the bounds of discretion: Oh, my Lord this is very
unseemly.


Now will he be musty this month, and we shall not get a word from him.


Hah, what dreadful sounds are these.


Most wonderful!


Oh yonder are the Lights, I see they are coming.


That last to me seemd like the cry of women, this may be some Adventure worth
my notice.


Oh save me, my Lord, save me.


How now, for Heavens sake what's the matter!


The Wood's all in a Flame, a thousand Spirits are in it, and all coming this
way, oh -- What will become of us?


One of 'em made me shriek so loud with a fright, that I'm sure I could not be
louder, if I were to be ravished.


All Hell is broke loose yonder! There are Devils a foot, and Devils in
Coaches, and Devils of all sorts, shapes and sizes, oh! Where's this plaguy
Chaplain now; I never had such a mind to pray in my life? Fly, fly, good Sir,
oh gadzooks, they'll be here in a twinkling.


Why let 'em come, stand by me and fear nothing.


This is something more than natural, and I confess amazes me.


Save us ye powers -- What horrid thing is this?


I'll speak to it, for by Don Quixotes side, how terrible so ever it be I cannot
fear, speak thou frightful Vision -- What art thou --


I am a Devil.


Lucifer?


No, his Butler; I fill up molten Lead in Cups of Agate to all the Wretches that
are damned for drinking.


What dost thou from thy Office then, and whither art thou going?


My Master now has lent me out to Merlin, Prince of the Inchanters, who is
coming yonder, bringing the Princess Dulcinea del Toboso with him enchanted,
and I am sent before to seek a famous Knight they call Don Quixote de la
Mancha, to tell him how the Princess may be freed.


If thou were a Devil of Parts and Understanding, thou would have known
without my information, that I am Don Quixote.


By my Conscience and Soul, Sir, I think you are, and I beg your Pardon with
all my heart, but I was so busied in my several cogitations, that I forgot the
chief, as I hope to be saved.


Gadzooks, I am not half so much afraid now as I was, this Devil seems to be a
very honest fellow, and I'll warrant him a good Christian, because he swears by
his Soul and Conscience; but yet he makes me laugh to talk of Dulcinea's
Enchantment, ha, ha, ha -- Mum for that, I'm sure I know the trick of that
better than any Devil of 'em all.


Prepare thy self therefore, oh most renowned, for here they come, clear, clear
thy Eyes from dust, and pick thy ears, that thou may take the secrets with
attention; nor be thou daunted; for Merlin holds thee well -- I can no more,
the rest himself will tell.


I see impertinence is a vice amongst those in the other world as well as this,
this foolish Spirit might have spared his bidding me not be daunted, if he had
known how to manage a Speech wisely.


The Butler was in the right, Sir, here comes more of the Devils Officers.


Let him send all his Family, my Lord, I know how to answer 'em, I'll warrant
ye --


I come, O valiant Knight, to let the see, tho all the rest of sage Inchanters
hate thee, that Merlin is thy Friend; here is thy Mistress enchanted to a soul
rude Country Dowdy by the malice of thy cruel Foe Lyrgander, and if thou see
her now beauteous as formerly, 'tis through my present grace, and to move pity
in those that are concerned to disinchant her, for she must turn to her vile
shape again till the cursed Spell be ended, which to perform observe my words
with care, and listen to what the destinies ordain.


Most reverently, and in all humble duty, I thank the gracious Merlin for his
Clemency.


What a plague have I been in a dream then all this while; and when I thought I
had fooled others, am I a Fool my self, and is she really enchanted after all.


Now is Sancho at his wits end to know, whither he may believe his Eyes and
Ears, or no.


But his Master there is wholly transported, the Lady Dulcinea's fair eyes have
enchanted him more than she is by the Magician Lyrgander, ha, ha, ha.


Softly, sweet Love, they'll hear ye.


Why a man shant be sure, that he has his own Nose on at this rate; I would
have laid my Earldom that I am to have to a Cucumber, that I had enchanted her
my self, and now Mr. Merlin there makes it out, that it was done before*
Gadzooks I believe we are a^ enchanted, and Swarms of Devils like G^ats and
Flies are buzzing in every corner.


Peace Babbler, eternal Mill-Clack, let your Clapper lye still a while, that
the great Merlin may unfold himself.


We have had the Prologue to it already, he has stroked his Beard three times --
now one good sound hem -- and we have it. Dulcinea, from an ugly Creature,
Would be transformed to this her former feature,
The Powers, who now her Beauty do r^tain,
To free her from the Curse, do thus ordain;
That Sancho shall three thousand Lashes give

This done, from her Enchantment shall relieve her;
But not performed, she shall be charmed for ever.



A thousand Blessings fall on Merlins Tongue, that like an Oracle has now
delivered these happy sounds -- Oh Sancho, Brother Sancho, or how shall I stile
thee, to express my self more tenderly; my Son, my Friend, how am I overjoyed
to know that thou art to be the glorious means of Dulcinea's freedom; for now I
reckon it as good as finished*


Oh not too fast, good Sir; there's a great deal to be said upon this matter
yet; An old Ape has an old Eye: I know well enough Mr. Merlin has owed me an
ill will ever since the Cage business, and now thinks to revenge himself upon
my Buttocks for it; but 'tis all one, forewarned, fore-arm'd, better a fair pair
of heels, than dye at the Gallows; tho I have not an ounce of Brains I may have a
drachma -- I can tell that four and five make nine, tho I am no Conjurer.


Oh prithee sheath, sheath up thy Proverbs now if ^hou love me, and prepare
thy self to disenchant the Princess, dear Sancho.


Ay now 'tis dear Sancho, now you have occasion for my Buttocks 'tis dear
Sancho; but just now I was a Babbler, a Mill-clack, and every foot a Hound, a
Vermin, and I know not what; therefore I'gad I'll make much of one, good men are
scarce, the Hound shall have more wit than to l^sh himself, I'll tell ye but
that.


How's this! Dare thou provoke my Rage by a Denial?


Consider what you owe to the merits of your Master, Sancho that sure must
soften your hard heart.


And to the Princess too -- his Soul, his better part, from whose benign and
wonderful Influence, all honours must arise.


'Tis but three thousand Lashes -- and alas -- what are those.


Alas those are nothing, I warrant nothing;


Realiy 'tis great pity the world should be deprived of such an excellent
Beauty, and I am very certain that generous Sancho will quickly relent, and
willingly sacrifice his Backside to end the Enchantment.


Why there's another now, I warrant that squeaking Devil could fla^g a man to
death by her good will. Why what a plague has my generous Backside to do with
Enchantments?


Is it then possible, thou Soul of Lead, thou Marble-breasted Rocky-hearted
Squire, that thou should boggle at such easy penance, to do thy Lord and me
so great a favour? Had thou been doomed to eat a hundred Toads, three
thousand Lizzards or a peck of Vipers, to sheer thy Eye lids, flea thy Head and
Face, or broil thy self three hours upon a Grid-Iron, this ha^ ^een something
for thee to refuse; but since the thing imposed is but a flauging, a punishment
each paltry School-boy laughs at, and which each rampant antiquated Sinner
chooses for Pleasure; this to deny, especially when the performance would
retrieve my Beauty, supple my Skin, and make this Olive-colour'd face as fair
as now it seems, is a Barbarity unpardonable, and the World will hate thee
for it.


And let thy sweetness know, that he shall do it, tho he could herd with a young
brood of Giants, fierce as the old that combated with Jove -- Harkee, Rascal,
Garlick-eater, I will tie thee naked to a Tree, and instead of the three
thousand Lashes give thee six, and each of those six inches deep, if I but hear
thee breathe another word like a refusal.


Hold, noble Knight, thou errst, that must not be, for the great powers have
ordered the Penance done must not be forced but willingly.


Why then every one as you were, and face about to the right again; God a mercy
for that i'faith Master Merlin. the grand powers have ordered: Come, come, 'tis
ill shaving against the hair; the wearer best knows where the Shoe wrings him;
besides you know the old saying, Scratch my back, and I'll claw your elbow;
there's nothing to be done but by fair means, think of that, Sir.


Why then a thousand times begging thy pardon, Sancho, I do entreat thy favour
in this business.


Humh -- humh -- entreat my favour.


Consider friend our future rise depends on the performance; for wanting her
influence I can be no Emperor, nor thou no Governor, which i^ once done I
promise thee within a month at farthest.


Why, ay, Sir, this is something now -- but yet three thousand Lashes, humh --


Nay, as to that, if Sancho be so generous to disinchant the Lady, he shall not
stay so long to have a Government, for I have now an Island at his service.


Oh fortunate Sancho, Oh most happy Squire, I shall be proud to wait on him.


And I.


And all of us.


Ay marry Sir, now you sound well indeed, there's no squeaking in this Bagpipe;
why 'tis a wonderful thing to think now, how benefits have power to alter
resolutions, and how merrily an Ass will trip it up Hill that's laden with Gold
and Jewels; methinks I am strangely altered on the sudden, and am not so averse
to this Lashing as before.


Well, are things yet according to thy wish, a^t thou now satisfied, that by my
means, thou shalt become a Governor, does thy heart yet relent?


It does, Sir, and you may see it in my Eyes. Dulcinea, who yet e're morning
shall find her business much bettered, if my Buttocks can be but in humour.


There spoke my Brother, my Right hand* my Genius.


The Islands name is Barataria -- and here I do declare before ye all, Don
Sancho is the Governor.


Long live the Governor of the Island Barataria.


'Tis well, and more to celebrate this hour, I by my Art will show how I
approve it.


YE Nymphs and Sylvan Gods,
That Love Green Fields and Woods*
When Spring newly born,
Her self does adorn,
With Flowers and Blooming Buds;
Come Sing in the praise,
Whilst Flocks do graze
In yonder pleasant Vale,
Of those that choose
Their sleeps to lose,
And in cold Dews,
With clouted Shoes,
Do carry the Milking Pail.
The Goddess of the Morn,
With blushes they adorn,
And take the fresh Air;
Whilst Linnets prepare
A Consort on each green Thorn,
The Ousle and Thrush,
On every Bush;
And the Charming Nightingal;
In merry Vain,
Their Throats do strain,
To entertain
The Jolly train
That carry the Milking Pail.
When cold bleak Winds do Roar,
And Flowers can spring no more,
The Fields that were seen,
So pleasant and green,
By winter all Candy'd over,
Oh! how the Town Lass,
Looks with her white Face,
And her Lips of deadly Pale:
But it is not so,
With those that go,
Through Frost and Snow,
With Cheeks that glow,
And carry the Milking Pail.
The Miss of Courtly ^ould,
Adorned with Pearl and Gold,
With washes and Paint,
Her Skin does so Taint,
She's withered before She's old,
Whilst She in Commode,
Puts on a Cart-load;
And with Cushions plumps her Tail;
What Joys are found,
In Russet Gown,
Young, Plump and Round,
And sweet and sound,
That carry the Milking Pail*
The Girls of Venus game,
That venture Health and Fame,
In practising Feats,
With Colds and with Heats,
Make Lovers grow Blind and Lame;
If Men were so Wise,
To value the prize,
Of the Wares most fit for sale,
What store of Beans,
Would daub their Clothes,
To save a Nose,
By following those
That carry the Milking Pail.
Merlin is pleased at Sancho's condescension, which he has drovd by this
strange Entertainment.


And Dulcinea smiled most radiantly.


And at her going made a low bow to Sancho.


Come Governor, now let us home to Supper, where we'll confer about some
public matters relating to your Charge.


Take heed you are not cruel, our Islanders will ne'er endure a Tyrant.


Oh let me alone for that Madam, I'll be as mild as a Milch Cow: I have nothing
rough about me but my Beard. Thus goes the World Sirs, many must fall low,
^hilst others rise up high;
Many get Governments the Lord knows how,
And so Gadzooks have I.



-- SO Cynthia rose amidst the Myrtle Grove,
Like the Queen Mother of the Stars above.
Oh, dear Ambrosio, good morrow to thee, what you come from seeing Execution
done upon Diego?


I have seen him soundly whipped, and turned our of his Employment this morning.


Insolent* Villain! was there no one to attacque but the chief Beauty of our
Groves, the Glory of the Plains, and Darling of the Shepherds, the admired
Marcella. Leandro her Father it seems was there too, who, I hear, has made a
particular Suit to the Duke about his Daughter.


Your Intelligence is good, Sir.


My Intelligence is good? Why, how now Friend, art thou grown resty, is that
all, to say my Intelligence is good? nay, then you shall find my Intelligence
is better; for I heard a Bird sing, that the old Man, weighing your late b^ave
action done for her, and knowing you to be the Dukes kinsman, has made an offer
of his Daughter for a Wife for you.


So S^r.


So, Sir, I gad, and I think very well too Sir, what a Pox ails thee? Why thou
art as musty, as if thou had been offered a Witch without a Portion, or dost
thou banter me with a fit of dissimulation? Hah, come, come, Sir, welcome your
happy Planet with smiles, Plato, Socrates and Aristotle are good Companions
when a man has an Estate, but horribly dull and phlegmatic fellows when the
Assets are wanting.


Very well, Sir.


Thou art the Duke's Relation, and I know he loves thee, and will do very well
for thee, but still a fortune of thy own making is more honourable, and I know
Leanardo dotes on his sine Daughter, and will give her a world of Wealth; nor
is his Family to be despised for all he fancies a rural Life among the
Shepherds, he being, as I'm informed, lineally descended from the noble Cid Ruy
diaz.


And what of all this, Sir?


What of all this? Why then you're a happy fellow, I think to have the
prospect of enjoying so sweet a Creature with so plentiful a Fortune: Yet what
most surprises me is, to hear that her sudden Love to thee, has quite altered
her nature, and she that from her Infancy was noted for the most reserved and
coy of all her Sex, now talks of Love, blushes, sings amorous Sonnets, and
lives quite contrary to her former custom.


So let her live, prithee why dost thou trouble me with the recital of a Woman's
follies; their Wiles, their Mischief^, and their Protean Changes I know too
well already; I am as well skilled in the Philosophy of that damning Sex as
e're was Aretine, and hate 'em as he did, with such a rancour, that I have an
Odium even for her that bore me, for being female in her generation; if thou
would please me say the plague's amongst 'em.


What the Devil ails him? the young fellow's bewitched I think, I thought he
came hither on purpose to follow her, for I'm sure I saw her go down that walk
just know -- But since 'tis otherwise, I'm certain she must meet him, and then
a kind word, and a sweet look or two I warrant willsoon convert him from his
Heresy.


My Lord Duke has been looking for ye, Sir, this hour, he's now in the Hall
with the Duchess, ready to see the second Exploit which we are going to banter
Don Quixote with, which is the Adventure of the Countess Trifaldi; if you
intend to laugh, Sir, come away for we are just going to begin.


I'll follow thee; the Jest must needs be excellent.


Was ever man so teased with what he hated, the more I shun the Plague, the
more I am infected, how dare thou follow me?


What dares not Courage do? I am in your debt, Sir, and like a generous
Bankrupt am so honest I cannot rest, nor harbour any quiet till I have made
repayment.


By tor^uring me, is that the way Tormentor!


Heavens can you talk of tortures I being here, that undergo the greatest that
are possible: Is there a greater torture for a woman, than to suppress her
humnour, vail her Pride which she sometimes calls Modesty, and be forced,
blushing beneath a thousand thousand shames, to curse her Stars like me, and
own she loves.


Why then Antipodes to Amity, dost thou pretend to Love?


Oh that thy tongue were a sharp pointed Dagger to wound my heart, that it
might bleed an answer, as it does now my -- Soul when it compels me to answer
yes -- I do.


What me, is't me thou love, speak sweet damnation.


I will not speak, thou Devil! -- Gods what am I doing -- Oh -- give me back
one minute of my past strength, that I may have the pleasure but of railing a
little at him, and 'twill be heaven to me; where does thy Witchcraft lye, thou
Sorcerer, in thy eyes, thy tongue, or in what other part? Tell me, that I may
tear the fatal Charm, and give my poor tormented Soul some ease.


Hey, Fits, Eruptions! This is woman right now, there's now a Legion of Cub
Devils within her, that tumble up and down and make her mad.


Forgive me, Sir, these strange effects of passion, these stubborn weeds, which
I will now endeavour to root out and demolish.


That was a flattering Fiend now; soft and moving to make us think she is a Foe
to Pride.


I have seemed proud, Sir, but 'twas all Hypocrisy, which Patience and warm
pursuing had discovered, as now your Charms have done, and made me flexible.


Ha, ha, ha, ha, now dearest Chrisostome look down and smile to see the Victim
offered to revenge thee.


DAmon let a Friend advise ye,
Follow Cloris tho she flies ye,
Tho her Tongue your Suit is slighting,
Her kind Eyes you'll find inviting:
Women's Rage* like shallow Water,
Does but show their hurtless Nature;
When the Stream seems rough and frowning,
There is still least fear of drowning.
Let me tell the advent'rous Stranger,
In our calmness lies our danger;
Like a River's silent Running,
Stillness show, our Depth and Cunning:
She that rails ye into Trembling,
Only shows her fine Dissembling;
But the Fawner to abuse ye,
Thinks ye Fools, and so will use ye.
A well tuned Devil this, oh she has great variety --


There are a thousand frailties in our Sex which every day and hour succeed
each other, uncertain natures with uncertain Passions, swayed by the Ebb and
Flowings of our Blood by Seasons, as the Tide is by the Moon; like Rowers we
look one way -- move another. Sooth with our Tongues to make Mankind obey,
But scarcely ever think the things we say.



Go on, for now you're on a Theme that pleases me, rail at thy Sex, and I will
hear with patience, nay help thee onwards thus -- Even from your Infancy you
show the Serpent in your perverse natures. cry for each Bauble, then powt and
be sullen: The stubborn Curse grows as 'twere seededin ye, and springs
unculter'd from the first original.


We very often show a bud, 'tis true of mischeifs, that bloom out in riper
years.


Why that's honnestly owned, and shows thou hast some conscience, prithee
proceed; come to the Girl of ten.


Her chief delight is, e're she can be one, to be thought a woman; she always
stands on Tiptoes, and her hand is never from her Breasts to make 'em grow.


Right again, right dear Sin breeder, very right -- proceed.


Boys of her own age she hates mortally, but still extremely pleased when men
accost her; to call her Miss is an affront unpardonable; but tell her she's
grown tall and fit to marry you win her heart, then you shall see her smicker,
and make a thousand silly apish faces, to let you see how well she understands
ye.


Young Crocodiles, but go on thou incomparable Orator, thou Cice^o in
Petticoats, prithee, go on -- Come to their Womanhood, their Pride of eighteen,
and so to one and twenty; what are they the^ thou Sibill?


He rallies me, this base invective pleases him.


Awe -- nay if thou flagg'st to thy old course I hate thee: come I'll refresh
thy Genius with a scrap of Poetry I lately met with in an honest Satyr, that
suits exactly with the present Theme. At fourteen Years young Females are
contriving Tricks to tempt ye,
At sixteen Years come on and woo, and take of Kisses plenty;
At eighteen Years full grown and ripe, they're ready to content ye;
At nineteen sly and mischievous, but the Devil at one and twenty.
There, there's a Poetical touch now to inspire thee; come, prithee go on now.


Oh Heaven, he makes me his mere jest, and I ungratefully have been exposing my
Sex to entertain his vanity.


Nay, either rail quickly or I'll be gone, I have no other business with thee.


Yes, thou insulting Monster, I will rail, but it shall be at thee, thou seed
of Rocks, unnatural Brute, thou shame of all that call themselves of humane
race.


Thou Woman.


Have I been from my Infancy adored, my Person been he Idol of thy Sex, and
drawn more worshippers than often Heaven it self, to pay Devotion to my
Beauty's Altar; and is it possible that thy humanity can so degenerate, to
think me --


Woman.


Reject a joy too precious for thy hopes, and barbarously use me like --


A Woman -- Woman, that I could wish with all her kind were doomed to stand in
one great field of Flax, and I had power to set it on a blaze. Remember
Chrisostome, ^here, there's the cause That 'twixt thy Sex and me breeds endless
jar,
And for'whose sake I shall till death abhor.



Do: But yet e're thy death, I beg the powers divine, thou may find one, one
Woman, to give thee as little rest as thou hast left me now; for I shall never
never rest again: Racks, Poison, Flames, Halters, and Cutting Swords, I long
methinks, I long to use ye all; this comes of being coy, and of dissembling.
All stubborn Maids, let my Example guide,
Henceforth ne'er sacrifice your Love to Pride:
Take whilst you can the kind deserving he,
Lest in Refusing, you Repent like me.



Your Grace has here a very pleasant Prospect, the Landscape filled with sweet
variety; and then the Sea at distance near that Champion, makes the view more
delightful.


A seat for sports, Sir, during the Summer season, I hope your Valour rested
well to night Sir: How fares the noble Governor of Barataria too? have you
seen him this morning?


Not yet my Lord, which in some little measure causes my wonder.


Oh you must consider Sir, the task he has undertaken; his zeal perhaps to
disenchant your Lady speedily, might make him lash himself so much last night,
as may require him to rest more in the morning. But see here he comes.


Your Grace has found the Reason, it must be so.


Mrs. Rodriguez there tells me he has been writing a Letter to his Wife this
morning, to inform her of his change of fortune, and invite her to his
Government.


He write it, I beg your pardon, good Madam, I told ye the Stewards Clerk writ
it for him; for his part poor Peasant he can neither Write nor Read; he'll make
a rare Governor.


Oh never the worse for that, Mrs. Rodriguez, the essential part of a Governor
is Judgment.


And Rodriguez I'd advise you to take care how you vilify him Sancho is very
satirical -- and there's an old grudge depending between ye, about Dapple you
may remember, here he comes, we shall now have an Account of his Letter and the
rest.


How does my Friend, my Intimate, for since the Duke has honoured thee, and the
Fates have ordained thee to do me such a signal Courtesy, 'tis fit I take thee
into the List of Friends: Well, and how go matters, hah -- troth thau look st
lean upon it, I'm afraid thou hast overjerked thy self; no don't do so neither
-- Dear Sancho, come prithee tell me how many hundred hah.


Hundred, Sir, hold a blow there a little, sustained and fair goes far, and let him
that owns the Cow take her by the Tail, 'tis easy to be prodigal at another
mans cost. Oons dee think a Governor has but one business in's head at a time
-- Charity, Master mine, begins at home, you know, and ever while you live,
christen your own Child first; I have be^n cudgelling my brains all this night
about writing a Letter to my Wife Teresa, and my Daughter Mary, (pray heaven
she don'^ dye of a fit when she hears she must come away and be a Countess) so
that betwixt one and to other, as concerning the Lashes, to be plain with ye, I
could give my self but five of the three thousand yet.


But five, oh unreasonable Hang-dog, my Lord Duke did your Grace ever hear such
a pitiful sneaking Account.


I faith, Friend Sancho, five was too few of all conscience.


'Tis a palpable affront to the Princess, five hundred had been too few.


Dee hear, pray Friend, will you meddle with your own matters, go too there's
many will shuffle the Cards that won't play, and I beseech your Grace consider
me rightly, I'll make my Master full amends another time, for tho the^ were but
five, yet they were laid on with my hand, and with a thumping good will I
promise ye.


Blows with a hand, Friend Gove^nour, are rather Claps than Lashes, and yours,
I see there, is so soft, that I fear the sage Merlin will hardly accept of such
effeminate discipline.


Why then, if your Grace pleases to provide me a good Holly-bush against night,
I will so fegue my Buttocks before morning, that you shall say I have earned my
Government I'll warrant ye, and I propose this the more willingly, because I
intend to enter upon it to morrow, as my Lord Duke has promised.


That indeed, Madam, may do something to the purpose.


Dee hear, Rodriguez -- Let there be such a Bush got ready.


What means your Grace, I beseech ye consider my place, and what I officiate
in; and since lashing the Buffoon is necessary, let some of the fellows of the
Stable exercise him with a Horse Whip.


Marry gep goody Sock-mender, what you are too good are ye -- Well from the
Conscience of an old Bawd, and the Pride of a fusty Waiting-woman, good Lord
deliver me. If I had desired ye to lead my Dapple after me to my Government,
how you would have cocked up your Nose, I warrant.


What Creatures of that course kind, what Asses are ever used to go to
Governments, thou unpollish'd Animal.


Why, thou Pomatum Pot, did never hear of an Ass that went to a Government in
thy life -- Ah pox on thee, where hast thou been bred.


Oh a hundred, a hundred, the grand Sancho speaks but reason.


What noise is this?


The sound is dismal, and it seems to me, as if some strange Adventure were at
hand.


It must be so, see here they come upon us.


Some Embassy to the great Don Quixote without doubt.


A plague on their Embassy, who e're they are, I don't like their coming at
this time -- If this Adventure now should put any stop to my Government -- I
should make bold to wish their long nosed Ambassador hanged there.


Most noble Prince, you must be pleased to know, that in the flourishing
Kingdom of Candaya, I am known by the Name of Pierre^ the hardy, otherwise
called the Knight of the Roman Nose* only Brother to the Countess Trifaldi,
otherwise called the afflicted Matron: The Lady you see yonder, who in her
prosperity, was chief Lady, or Waiting woman, to the Queen Dona Magunsia,
Dowager to King Archipiello, and from his Territories, thus far is come to kiss
your mighty hands, and your fair Duchesses, and to entreat a favour.


Thrice worthy Knight -- Your self and the good Countess are most welcome.


And tell her Sir, if any griefs oppress her, we shall be very glad to bring
her comfort.


Your Beauty is most generous: but e^e I proceed to that, I must desire to
know, whether the valorous and invincible Knight Don Quixote de la Mancha be in
your Castle, in whose search principally, to say the truth, she comes.


Tell her then likewise noble Pierres, that here is the valiant Knight Don
Q^ixot, from whose generous condition, she may safely promise herself all
courtesy and assistance.


Then, blessed be our happy Stars -- I will inform her instantly.


Oh admirable function of Knight Errantry, beyond all other happy!


Oh Virtue excellent, to whom Ladies come from the remotest Regions of the
Earth, to sue for succour.


Secure in his strong Arm and never failing Valour.


Now I could wish my Lord that prating Gownman, that dull Bag-pudding Priest,
that lately railed at Chivalry -- were by to see whither such Knights are
necessary.


Oh, a home bred Bookworm, you must not think of him. Nay Madam this must not
be, we are your Servants all.


Your Merit claims respect, Madam, from every one, therefore pray sit by us,
and please to unfold your Griefs.


Illustrious Beauty, as soon as my full heart and faltering tongue will give me
leave I shall: But in the first place, I must desire to know whether the most
purifiediferous Don Quixote of the Manchissima and and his Squireiferous Panca
be in this Company or no.


Why look ye forsooth without any more flourishes, the Governor Panca is here,
and Don Quixotissimo too, therefore most afflictedissimous Matronissima speak
what you willissimus, for we are all ready to be your Servitorissimus.


Upon my honour straightened Lady, let me but know the tenor of your wrongs,
they shall not want redress, and now you hear Don Quixote speak himself.


Art thou the Man? blessed be that Madrid Phiz, those Toothless Jaws, and that
way beaten Body, here at thy Feet I prostrate my nuworthiness to beg assistance
from thy Magnanimity.


Oh Madam, Madam, what do you mean? By my honour this must not be.


And thou more Loyal Squire, than ever followed in past or present times, the
ragged fortunes of so august and so renowned a Master; thou second part of
Errantry, longer in goodness th^n my Brothers Nose there; thus do I shake thy
Fist and thus conjure thee to be^r thy part in my affair with willingness.


Why truly Mistress, as to what you say, of my honesty in following my Master
-- Ragged or not ragged, wet or dry, I think you are pretty right; but when you
say my Goodness is longer than that Gentleman's Nose, there I must beg your
pardon, Gadzooks 'tis a mere Complement, faith it comes short of that, I assure
you.


Be pleased to know then, valorous and untamed Sir, that in the Queen Donna
Maguncia's Court, I being Governess to the young Princess Antonomasia, and
hindering her from marrying the Giant Malambrurio, a great Enchanter; He to vent
his rage more sensibly upon us, did it on our most tender part, our Faces,
thatching our Chins as you may behold 'em, with these unseemly Beards and
loathsome Bristles.


'Tis wonderful!


Beyond all thought amazing!


The Enchanter showed his Malice to the height.


To make a Witch of a Woman before she comes to be fifty, is very hard.


The hair is plaguy fast set on; the Enchanter as ye call him has bearded 'em
with a vengeance; why this would undo the poor Devils in a little time: if
they are inclined to be cleanly they'll spend all their Portions in one year, only
in paying for their shaving.


How my blood boils against this damned Enchanter! for I perceive now this
disgrace of theirs is done in spite to me, he knows I hate a Woman with a Beard
-- and now has plagued me with 'em in a Cluster.


But see how harmless Innocence gets Friends; we were no sooner bearded, as you
see; but to our wonder, in the place appears this golden head, charmed with
prophetic speech by the great Merlin, who bid us instantly travel into Spain
to find Don Quixote, and with him his Sword and Buckler Sancho Panca, in whose
renowned presence, he would discover the remedy to ease us of our shames --
This is our dismal story, and thus far are we come famed Knight in quest of
you, and least you doubt the truth of my relation, question the head, and you
will then know more.


Not that I question, most afflicted Lady, the truth of your strange story; but
to be satisfied in the method I must use in your relief, I will presume
t'interrogate the head.


Now for the Oracle, thus far 'tis rarely carried.


They act it to a miracle. Sancho is so confounded yonder, he cannot speak.


Oh! they'll give him vent presently.


Pray Heaven, the Head be in a good humour, and has not got a cold, that we may
hear distinctly, Merlins order.


Good Sir be pleased to begin as soon as you can, for els^ the Head to my
thinking by his gaping, will attack you with a Speech first.


Hem, hem, thou admirable Head, what is thy name?


Don Quixote de la Mancha, otherwise called the Knight of the Ill-favoured-Face.


O, Lord, and who am I pray Mr. Head?


the trusty Sancho-Pancha, and now the famous Governor of Barataria.


Th^ Devil's in it, I see there's no keeping preferment secret, every ones Head,
enchanted or not enchanted, will be meddling with other peoples matters; and
when am I to be settled in this Government, good Mr. Golden-pate?


Not till the Adventure of the Beards is ended.


Why then pray, let it be ended quickly, for my Cloths are making; and my Wife
is coming, and I must govern to morrow, whether these good women have beards or
no beards.


Be brief, incomparable Head, and let me know the way to disenchant the
Countess.


This night between the hours of twelve and one, Merlin will send thee an
enchanted Horse, on which thou and thy valiant Squire must ride through the
Region of the Air, un^o Candaya, to Combat the Cursed Giant Mala^bruno, who by
thy hand shall f^ll, and from that instant, the hairs shall peel from these
disconsolate faces, and every Chin be smooth as Infant Beauty*


Thanks to the gracious Merlin, and let the Horse but come, i'll in a trice be
with this horrid Giant. Sancho, prepare, for I will lose my Beard among those
Infidels, e're suffer these to grow a moment longer.


Dee hear, dee hear Sir, pray let d^scretion rule the roast with ye a little, I
am a Governor now, and can speak Sentences by the Dozen, what a plague have we
to do with Giants of Candaya? how do you think the Princess Dulcineas business
will go on, if I am galling my Buttocks in a Journey towards Candaya? And as
for these Gentlewomen, they'll do well to get into some Country or other where
there's but little Sun-shine, they may do business well enough in the Dark, for
the Proverb says, when Candles are out all Cats are Grey.


Oh, barbarous, art thou to be a Civil Judge, and can thou want compassion;
whither inhumane shall we fly for Succour, who'l take a Waiting-woman with a
Beard on.


Well, well, that's all one, I shall not ride for all t^t.


Truly Sir Governor, the Countess is in the right, a Lady with a Bea^d, will
look but oddly in a Queen's Bedchamber.


Oh, the grand Sancho, is a greater friend to our Sex (...) ^o suffer such
ignominy through his default.


I've taught him more humanity I am sure.


Ay, you may talk, but this shan^t get me on Horseback, ^or tho I am a friend
good enough to the Sex, yet I am for letting ^ery one shave her self as she
can. Now am I piping-hot just ready to enter upon my Government, and here's the
devil of a Head would (...) it, to send me of a fools Errant, as far as
Candaya, gadzookes, ^et Waiting-wo^en go hairy to their Graves, i'll not jolt so
far to take way any ones Beard; not I, if my Master has such a mind to it let
him do^t alone, I've other business eno^gh he knows.


Why friend, the Island is rooted fast in the earth, 'twill stay for ye till ye
come again, besides, I find there's a necessity for your going: what say^st
thou famed Head? Can Don Quixote end the Charm alone?


No, 'tis impossible, Sancho must go, or these be Bearded ever.


Oons, ye damned chattering devil, ye lye, and i'll see if I ca^ Cunjure yo^
into a better opinion; now I'm provoked, i'll see what ^ind of witchcraft lurks
w^thin ye here. How now.


A Pox on him, the Choleric fool has discovered us.


^Tis so, he has spoil^d the rest of the Scene, come let's take the Page away,
and carry off all with a Laugh -- ha, ha, ha, a trick, a trick, ha, ha.


A trick, a trick, ha, ha, ha, ha, ha.


'Tis pl^in now, this is a mere piece of Roguery.


Invented I warrant by some enemy to Knight Errantry.


And acted by some of the Mobile of the Village.


That heard of his high soaring fame no doubt, and therefore tho^ght to blast
it with this jest.


Poor infects I despise 'em.


Ha, ha, ha, ha, -- but what says Mr. Head here all this while to the business?
Shall my Master and I go a voyage to Candaya? good Mr. Head, ha, ha, ha, ha,
humph, what dee ye say nothing to it, to Shave a parcel of rotten Waiting-women?
admirable Mr. Head, ha, ha, ha, ha, I think I have routed your enchantment,
In faith, ha, ha, ha, what thinks your Worship of the business; as the Natural
said to the Bishop, who's the Fool now?


Peace Buffle, all Drolls are below me to take notice of.


Ay, ay, Don Quixote's in the right; and so is likewise the Grand Sancho, to
honour whom for this last witty discovery, i'll instantly send for his Robe, and
prepare his Officers to wait on him to his Government. To do such feats Ages to
come shall brag on,
Nay, when I'm there, i'll govern like a Draggon.



COme, come, Mother, pray be pacified and cheer up a little better, and since
my good Father is got to be a Governor, and has sent for us hither to this
curious place to be Countesses an vine Volk, slidikins let's go to it merrily,
and not look sneaking, as if we were going to be hanged for Sheep stealing.


Ah, Mary, if I am melancholy 'tis upon thy account, for thou'lt prove but an
awkerd Countess I'm afraid, now the blessing is fallen upon us; hast left off
blowing thy Nose between thy Fingers Mary, and wiping it upon thy Smocksleeves
Child.


Yes that I have pray, and dipping my Knuckles in the platter too.


And playing at see-saw a stroddle cross a board with the Ploughmen; and above
all thy dearly beloved delight, moulding of Cocklebread.


Awe, I have left 'em all off I fackins, my Va^her shall see when he comes, that
his daughter Mary, shawnt disgrace her Gentillity, he shall find me so chang^d
in my discourse, and my way so altr'd, that odslidikins, he shall hardly know
me again.


Ah blessing on the good Man's heart, here's his Letter, and little did I think
that my Sancho, could have made his words good that he said to me, when he left
me to go a Squiring: Good-lack-a-day, I have been so overjoy^d ever since I had
it, and have read it so ^ften, and kiss^d it and thumbed it so much, tha^ ^
have almost worn the Letter out; it has had two or three mischances too, for
the same day I had it, putting it into my Bosom as I was a washing, and being
taken up with thinking, I dropped it into the Tub amongst the fowl Suds; but I
warrant ye I snatched it out with hast enough; but then again, to see the ill
accidents that come by being over fond of a thing, at night carrying it to bed
with me, and reading it with joy, by an inch of Candle, which I he^d in my
hand, I fell a sleep, the light went out I know not how, and in the Morning I
found the Candle in my hand, squeezed as flat as the Letter, and gad forgive
me, the Letter in the Chamber-pot.


Goodnow let's see it a little, for I'm hughly pleased with the dress that the
Dutch have found out for us here.


The Dutch have found out, why did every any one see such a simple Holden, 'tis
not the Dutch that have found it out for us fool, 'tis a huge great Lady that^s
Wife to one Duck, a huge great Lord that the Letter says has done it, ye silly
Jade.


Duck, Duck, good lord Mother, that you should mistake so, why what a dickins,
dee think I can^t read, here's no Duck nor Mallard neither, I tell ye 'tis th^
Dutch, look here else; let's read again.


reads, Therefore now goody B.E.A.N. goody Beanbelly (Lord bl^ss us, my Father
you know used to Joake, and often call ye so Mother) ha, ha, ha, ha, l^ft up
your G.O LL. S, and thank heaven that you are now a Governors Wife, My Lady
the Dutch, ay here 'tis now.


Where, where, is't now, ye blind Oatmeal-e^er, That you are now a Governors
Wife, my Lady the Dutc^es, the Duchess ye ignorant Jade, that is as I said
before the Ducks Wife, has sent my Daughter Mary a rich p^ice of St^ff, to make
h^r a modi^ ^ress: 'tis she has sent it Clodpate, not the Dutch, wh^ever knew
them mind any Modes or Dresses either, ye senseless Mawkin.


Well, well, but then here again a little farther I intend to marry Moll out of
hand ha, ha, ha, ha, for her B. V. B. her Bubbys grow large and seem to make
motion for a Husband, ha, ha, ha. -- Well my Vather's a parlous man i'll say it,
O my Soul and Conscience he knows ones mind as well as if he were in one.


Ay, Lord save him, the man had more in him than ever we thought Mary, and then
lets see here I come in, in the Come to me as best thou can, and against thy
coming I will provide thee a Coach, for I go to my Government to morrow, with
intent to make money, as all other Governors do. -- Dapple is well and
commends him heartily to thee.


Ah bless the Soul of him, would the pretty Creature were here, that I might
buss him a little.


Ah Gimminy, I could eat the Letter up methinks: -- well dear Sancho, or dear
Governor, here I am come to thee at last; good Lord Mary! I can but think upon
his former words, which odsdiggers I could n'er have believe then, tho now I
find 'em true* Teresa, said he thou were born to be a Countess, the what de'e
call 'ems, Planets I think he called 'em, have allo^ted thee Honours, said he,
Thou hast an Eye like a Countess, says he a Cocking Nose like a Countess, says
he, a shape like a Countess, a jetting Bum like a Countess, and a -- every
thing like a Countess, said he; and good lack a day, to see how the dear man's
words fall out.


Odsl^dikins, I am so merry, I could l^ap out of my skin methinks; but come
Mother, now lets settle our faces and enquire for the Governor Sancho's House
pray.


It must be here about I'm sure, by the directions of the Letter: Oh! here
comes a Gentleman, i'll inquire of him. Now Mary look to your self, be sure


Well, they may talk of Proteus, and his changes, but in so ^mall a time, if
ever he wore so many shapes as I have done, I much wonder, the blunt fool
Sancho by chance made shift to frustrate our last design; but i'll try if he has
brains enough to find me out in this disguise. I am now by my Lord Dukes order
to be Secretary, and Civility Master to fool him and his Wife in there new
Government: He I hear is upon his way hither, and she too ought to be here to
meet ^m, with the dowdy her daughter, I wonder their Tawny Ladyships sta^ so
lo^g.


Sir, Gentleman, if I may presume to be so bold.


Prithee hold thy Tongue, i'll speak to him my self, hem, ^em, if your business
Sir, Sancho's Wife Sir, and therefore desire you would do your self the honour
Sir, to conduct me to his house Sir.


It must be they, their Comical Figures show they can be no other.


And look friend, I am his daughter Moll you must know, otherwise called Mary
the Buxom; and now yo^ know us, pray will you tell my Father, -- that we are
come, de'e hear.


In happy time good Ladies, for I have been here ready this two hours, to
attend your motion.


Deslikins, de'e hear Mother, he calls us Ladies already.


Humph, you will be prating still, you will show your self a hoyden; why look
Friend, to deal plainly, we had made our noble entrance sooner, but the Waggon
broke, and we were forced for three hours to tarry the mending.


The Waggon, why did your Excellencies, then condescend to make your approaches
to your Government, by the contemptible ^onvenience of a Waggon.


Why truly yes friend, for want of better, our Excellencies for once made a
hard shift.


There was ne'er a Cart to be had in Town, you must know but one, that was
carrying Lime to make Mortar to mend the Town Hall.


A Cart! a Chariot sure you must mean Misse-Pritty.


A Cart did you ever hear such a Jade, ay, ay Sir, Miss meant a Chariot as you
say: Pox take her, would she were whipped at a Cart* a little; a thing that runs
upon Wheels Sir, a fine stately thing that runs I say upon Wheels.


Ay, it may run upon Legs for any thing thou know of it.


Ay, ay, your Ladyship is in the right, it does run upon Wheels indeed: But
come now I beseech you give me leave to usher ye to your House, I am my self a
small Officer under the Governor and your Ladyship; to him I serve as
Secretary, and to you as Civility Master.


Good Mr. ^ivility, I shall ^oon know your good qualities.


Oh, ho, ho, O Lord! I can^t keep from laughing for the life of me.


My duty at present, is to conduct you to the Chief Matron, to be new dressed,
as fits a Governors Wife, -- it must be done instantly, -- therefore pray
follow me, that you may be ready to receive your Lord, who intends to be here
at Dinner.


Well, pray lead the way friend, i'll warrant i'll keep touch with ye.


Lord bless us, what^s to be done now, I am in such a quandary I know not what
I say nor do, for my part.


HAve the Chief Citizens and leading Men of the Island notice, of their new
Governors Arrival.


They have my Lord, and this is the place, where they design^d to meet him.


'Tis well, is there ought else, my most illustrious Don, in which my self or
the Duchess there can honour ye.


Ds'death, is that a look like a Governor, hold up thy head for shame, his joy
my Lord has pressed so much upon his spirits, his Tongue at present is not at
liberty.


The favours these illustrious persons bestow hourly, would make a Dumb man
speak to return thanks.


And yet he stands as if he did not mind 'em.


Any thing in my power the Noble Governor is sure he may command, unless it be
to give him leave to Ravish my woman Rodriguez.


Me, I had rather see his Governorship hanged, than he should come but as near
as to whisper me, -- marry choke him what the first day of his wearing Socks.


Oons is he Dumb indeed.


Hark good Mistress Conserve-maker, hold your self contented: All Rats, look
care not for mouldy Cheese, if you Virginity is to be hanged upon the Tree till
I shake it off, the Crows may come and pick at it for Sancho.


Oh, this is well now, a few wise sayings ^rom a Governor look decently.


Some of which should profit your pert Lady then methinks, that she is so quick
at putting her Spoon into another mans Porridge: look friend too much Tongue,
too much Tail, -- I say no more, but the Hen discovers her Nest with Cackling.


Oh unfortunate person, now have I roused a sleeping Lyon that will tear me to
pieces.


No, no, Madam the wise Governor will consider the f^ailty of our Sex.


As to your Grace, I must needs say I am beholding, and if my Government
stretch to my mind but an inch or two, I will show my self thankful as well as
I can, -- but for your flee^ers, -- and especially Goody Warming Pan there, the
Governor turns his Rump upon 'em, as things below his place and Sagacity.


Well, and I turn my Rump upon the^ too -- 'dslife ye were but a Stirrup holder
the to'ther day, were ye.


Come good words Roderiguez, there's distinctio^ between Sancho and you now.


Ay, the worse world in the mean time, -- I thought I might have de^erv'd an
honour from your Grace, considering all things, as well as that Sheepsheerer.


Ha, ha, ha, Faith my Lord, Mistress Rodriguez is the right, and but that the
Governor here has got the start of us, and that his people are coming to wait
upon him, I would put one Shoulder to heave him out of his Authority, for the
hard Joke he gave my Wife.


I but in the mean time, don't sell the Bears Skin before you have caught him:
All are not Thieves that Dogs bark at, you may turn the buckle behind ye now
Friend.


Health to the Duke and next, the Governor, I, as his Physician in ordinary,
-- and the Mouth of these grave Citizens, thus tender homage, -- and am proud
-- t'inform him we come to wait upon him to his Government.


Your hat, Sancho your hat, 'dsdeath, don't you see they are all bareheaded:
Come, come look grave and speak after me, we^l imitate* the Polish Election,
and give it them in Latin, -- Sit bonus Populus.


Sit bonus Populus.


Bonus ero Gubernator.


Bonus ero Gubernator.


So then, since all things move in their right orde^, here now let's part, and
bonos nocios Governor.


The Governor is your Graces Footstool my Lord.


I hope your Excellency will let us hear s^metimes of your Transactions.


Madam, there shall not be a Pound of Butter weighed, nor yet a Pudding be
enriched with Plumbs, wherein your Graces shall not have a Finger.


Oh! Air, Air, -- I shall choack else, ha, ha, ha.


Well, since it must be so, adeiw most noble Governor.


I yet must be a minute with my friend, i^e follow your Grace instantly: you
Sirs, I must desire t'absent a little too, I have some private business with
the Governor How now my kind companion in my Travels, what means this
tenderness?


Nature works, Sir, -- I never look upon that scurvy Phiz of yours, nor think
upon the many drubs and bruises you are to suffer* but my bowels earn after ye,
just like a Mother, for her first born, -- oh*


Brother, Sanc^o, in truth this is too kind, come think of governing Man, and
let that cheer thee, in which Station to give thee some few instructions I have
picked out this minute, therefore mind m^.


I will, Sir, and beseech ye, speak slowly that ^ may keep pace with ye,
because you know my understanding was always rather for the Trot than the
Gallop.


I'll fit it to a hair, hem, to begin then, if thou would make thy self a
proper Governor for these times, thou oughtst principally to adorn thy self
with these three virtues or qualifications, which are Morallity, Conscience,
and Decency. -- And first, of the first, to have or be thought to have
Morality, is extremely useful for a Governor, if it were for nothing but to be
a Screen, that people might not pry too much into his Religion, for if he is
once noted for a moral Man (whither he be really so or no) let him be a Jew in
his opinion, or of no Religion at all, 'tis not three half pence matter.


I am glad of that Sir, for my Religion, like the rest of my good parts is
somewhat Cloudy at present, 'tis like a Field of Corn ill managed, there will
want a great deal of weeding before the Crop would come to be good for any
thing.


Another part of Mor^lity, Sancho, is self knowledge, to be sure not to forget
thy Original, nor blush to own that thou com^st of a poor Lineage for when thou
art not asham^d thy self no body will seek to make thee so, but if thou
should like the Fr^g, fancy thy self an Ox, thou art undone, for many
hundreds now live that know thou were at first but a Hog-keeper.


That's true, Sir, but then, 'twas when I was but a Boy, for when I grew up to
be Mannish, ^ kept Turkeys and Geese, which is counted the better preferment by
much in Spain, you know.


Well let that pass, in the second place, a Governor ought to take care to
have an admirable Conscience; he must have a Conscience so very tender, that a
Fly can't buzz upon it without making him squeak, it ought to sit straight and
close to him, like a Thimble upon a Ladies finger, and not as 'tis customary,
like a Jockeis Boot that he can stretch which way he pleases, this will best
appear in his impartial execution of Justice, and to avoid Corruption, or
taki^g of Bribes which is so tempting, and withal so crying a sin, that
there^s not one Governor in forty can forbear damming himself about it do what
he can.


Why then, Lord have mercy upon my Soul too, for to deal plainly, ^ am afraid
my fingers (as well as the rest) will itch damnably to be handling the money.


As to the manner of getting the Government, that piece of self-denial is
generally smothered, for if thou hast the Conscience to think thou deserve
it, 'tis thy own fairly if thou can get it in Course: I could be somewhat
Satirical upon thy parts now, but that I love thee Sancho, and the^efore will
desist; besides, to do thee justice, thou art not the first that has got a
Government he was not beholding to his desert for.


No nor shall not be the last, Sir, for desert is governed by fo^tu^e you know,
and in a double manner, for if some were to have thei^ true deserts, they would
be Princes and Governors presently, and if others, again, were to have theirs,
-- Oons what an Army of Subjects here would be hang^d up in one Summer.


Well d^ar Sancho, for that saying thou deserve not only to Govern an Island,
but an Empire: therefore to proceed briefly, because I see thy people wait, i'll
come to the third good quality proper for a Governor, which is decency.


I have an inkling, that that good quality will be as proper for me as any of
the rest, -- because I suppose it relates to cleanliness, good breeding.


Thou hast nick^d it, therefore be sure to take care to pair thy Nails, and
scour thy Teeth clean; and when thou sit upon the Judgment seat, take
special heed thou dost not Belch, nor Yawn, for those are b^astly neglects,
though too commonly used among our Modern Ministers of Justice.


Why looke'e, Sir, as to Belching, tho I learnt it of a Stout Dutch Trooper
that thought it became him very well, yet, I shall make no great matter to
leave it off; but as for Yawning, 'tis impossible for me, Zooks, I can as soon
leave off my Proverbs, and that you know were to unhinge all in faith: why look
now, your very putting in mind on it has set me at it already.


Oh, the Devil, what a Yell is there, for a Magistrate, but come, since I see
Nature is not to be expelled with a fork, observe the rest, take heed of
eating Garlic as thou hast used to do, for that will discover thy Course
Extraction, and be nauseous to all about thee, for in that manner I once knew a
Country Recorder that used to give poor Criminals double deaths, first by his
abominable breath, and afterwards by his Sentence.


That will be a plaguey hard Chapter too, for to my thinking a Clove of Garlic
gives ones Dinner a curious hautgoust.


Be sure always to walk Slow and Stately, and let the fulness and gravity of
your look atone for the vacuum, and cavity of thy head; and lastly, above all
to be sure to manage that beard of thine wisely, Scrub it, Sancho, Comb it,
mundifie the Whiskers, I say, that when thou waggst it on some great occasion,
thou may scatter no Vermin upon those that occasionally come to thee for
Justice: And so good fortune guide thee.


Well, Sir, I can but thank ye, you have given me a plaguey deal of good
Counsel, if I have but the Grace to follow it; but come many ventures make a
full freight, i'll do what I can, ^ut especially for that about Garlic and
Belching let me alone, and so, Sir, wishing ye to be an Emperor in the space of
a whistling-time, we take our leaves. To feast and give our Islanders a
Playday,
And meet our Spouse, who now must be a Lady.



and the rest. Long live the Governor of Barataria, Huzza.


LOrd is this me, odslidikins, they have made me so fine, that would I were
hang^d if I know whither 'tis me or no.


Well, and what's to be done next good Mr. Civility, what you have shown us
already is cur^ou^fine i^akins.


Leave off that course, that Clownish word ifakins, and if you would swear like
a Lady of the Mode, ^ou must say by my Soul m^ Lord, by my Honour Madam, by the
universe Cavalier, unless you are at Cards among your selves, and then you may
enlarge a little, as thus, SoonsI have had horrid ill luck to night, I ha^e
lost 50 quadruples, Damme.


Well that^s very pretty by the universe Caval^er.


It has such a pure sound with it when one swears a little, and methinks the
words Mother come off so round^, that would I may never make water more, if I
had not rather


O Lord, O Lord! there the Quean had it out broad, why ye clownish Jade, have I
--.


Hold, hold, good Madam, let me manage her, you must consider she is not yet
weaned from her Countr^ Dialect. Oh s^e Miss, you have said such a paw thing,
that I warrant ne'er a one of the Town Ladies would have said for a Thousand
pounds: Oh, you must not offer to say such a paw thing as that, nor do such a
paw thing as that for the World, though ye are in never so great an extremity.


No, I cod that's very hard though.


Let me come to her, Sir; 'dlife this rude Hilding will spoil all our
preferment.


Oh, Patience, patience, Madam; she must come too't by degrees: Young Lady, I
blame you not for speaking, but for the manner of it; therefore from
henceforth, when you would express your self on that occasion, if you are
visiting or elsewhere, you must say, Dear Co^sin, or Madam, I've an extreme
desire to make a Natural Evacuation.


A Natural Evacuation! O Lord, that's pretty I swear.


Oh, Modesty is the most darling Jewel amongst all well-bred Ladies, though it
often occasions 'em distress enough too. I remember once at a certain noble
Lord's Trial, a certain ruddy plump young Lady, dyed a green Manteau and
Petticoat into a perfect Blew, through her riggid Modesty and the violent
Effect of Natural Evacuation. -- But come now, practise your gate again a
little; -- Walk, walk hold up your Heads -- So, snap your Fanns -- Very good --
Wag your Hipps a little more -- Admirable, Adroit and Easy -- leave but off
the Country hobble now, and I defy any Court-Lady of 'em all to outdo ye.


Well, I swear, methinks I^m changed quite to another thing already.


Oh, here's the Governor -- I hear the Music.


Oh, that ever I was born! is that my Father?


Ah, Blessing on the precious Eyes on thee, my dear Yokemate, my Sancho; and
art thou then a Governor indeed, mine own Oosle-cock?


Oh, hands off, good Madam; such greeting is not decent in great Ladies.


Gadslidikins I could smother him in that fine Coat methinks.


I must speak to him; he looks like one of the great fat Men they call Judges,
that used to ride so purely through our Town -- Oh brave Father! Oh brave
Father! is^t you, Father? is't you? Oh Law! oh Law!


Ha, ha, ha, ha; the poor Fools are almost crazed through mere Joy; 'tis well,
Spouse; mine, 'tis well: but not too much of ^ondness now, good Crooked Rib --
and Daughter, mine, take care of Romping: Remember who I am.


Ah, dear Gravel-face, dear Ferret-eyes.


Madam, Madam, you forget.


I am my Lord the Governor Sancho Panca's most humble Servant, upon my Honour;
and would I may never make ^ter if Mannel stops her.


Well, said Mary the Buxom; that's my good Girl, hold thee there, Moll.


And I am his Lordship^s every thing; his hot Loaf and Butter, Suet-pudding,
his Pancake, by the Universe.


Pretty well, that, Madam, indifferent.


'Tis very well good Mouse-trap in me, 'tis v^ry well; and you see I have been
as good as my word; I told ye what my Squireship would come too, Teresa; but
you would not believe, you would be obstinate: A Woman, a Woman.


I was under some little doubt, my Lord; by my Soul, I must confess.


Very well, that last, Madam, extremely well.


I would have laid a Groat I should have had no new Lockram Smocks of your
giving me Father -- not this --.


Awe, not a word more of that; 'tis well he do*s not hear ye.


Here's Dapple too; come along with me, Chuck; the poor Ass, on my Conscience,
is as glad of his Preferment as thou art; I'd have brought him in here, but
that we should have wanted an Elbow-Chair for him to sit down in.


There*s an Alcove within with a State and Velvet-cushions, my Lord


No, no; 'tis no matter now, though the Creature is good Company enough: Faith,
he's trapd so richly, you'd wonder if you saw him: he*s all over Embroidered
like a High Sheriff of a County upon an Entertaining-day.


Please your Excellence to sit and rest a little, for I'm of Opinion that this
sultry Climate bears no Affinity with the Choler of your Complexion,
especially when irritated by Motion: Excuse me, my Lord, 'tis my duty to be
careful of your Constitution, which I perceive at present to be somewhat
languid and sudorous; be pleased therefore to sit, and see the Sports that are
provided to entertain ye.


Ay, with all my heart; and do ye hear Doctor? Prithee let me have as few of
your cramp words as you can, for they'll work more upon my Constitution than
any Dose of Pills you can give me. Come family of the Panca's, set down by me,
and let's see these Sports he talks of, and afterward let's go to dinner, for I
feel a kind of a governing stomach, that methinks grumbles to be satisfied: I
could eat heartily.


Good my Lord, think not too much of Eating, 'tis very unwholesome.


How! Eating unwholesome! prithee honest Gut-scowrer, persuade me to that if
thou can: Ha, ha, ha, that*s a very good Jest, ^aith


SInce Times are so bad, I must tell thee, Sweet-heart,
I*m thinking to leave off my Plough and my Cart;
And to the fair City a Journey will go,
To better my Fortune, as other folk do:
Since some have from Ditches,
And course Leather-breeches,
B^en raised to be Rulers, and wallowed in Riches.
Prithee come, come from thy Wheel;
For if Gypsies don't lye,
I shall be a Governor too, e're I dye.

Ah, Collin! by all thy late doings I find
With sorrow and trouble the Pride of thy Mind;
Our Sheep now at random, disorderly run,
And now Sundays Jacket goes every day on:
Ah! what dost thou mean,

To make my Shoes clean,
And foot it to Court, to the King and the Queen,
Where showing my Parts, I preferment shall win.

Fie, 'tis better for us to Plough and to Spin;
For as to the Court, when thou happen'st to try,
Thou^'t find nothing got there, unless thou can buy;
For Money the Devil, the Devil and all's to be found,
But no good Parts minded without the good Pound.

Why then I'll take Arms,
And follow Alarms,
Hunt Honour that now-a-days plagueily charms:

And so lose a Limb by a Shot or a Blow,
And curse thy self after for leaving the Plough.

Suppose I turn Gamester;


So Cheat and be banged:


What think of the Road then?


The High-way to he hanged.


Nice Pimping however yields profit for (...)*
I'll help some fine Lord to another fine Wife.

That's dangeorus too,
Amongst the Town-Crew,
For some of 'em will do the same thing by you;
And then I to Cuckold ye may be drawn in,
Faith, Collin, 'tis better I sit here and Spin.

Will nothing prefer me? what think of the Law?


Oh! while you live, Collin, keep out of that Paw:


I'll Cant, and I'll Pray;


Ah! there's nought got that way*
There's no one minds now what those black Cattle say:
Let all our whole Care
Be our Farming affair,

To make our Corn grow, and our Apple-trees bear*


So I'll to my Distaff,


And I to my Plough.


Let all our whole Care
Be our Farming affai^
To make our Corn grow, and our Apple-trees bear.
Ambition's a Trade, no Contentment can show;
So I'll to my Distaff,
And I to my Plough.
How does your Excellence like the Entertainment? do our Music and Sports
please ye?


Yes, yes, I like your Sports well enough; -- but here's a Sport that I think
at present surpasses 'em, -- Gad there's a rare Turkey, and I've a furious
Inclination to be familiar with him. How now!


By no means, Sir, 'tis hot, undigestible, and corroding; the Flesh of that
sort of Fowl, are highly pernicious to a Constitution that abounds with
Choler: You must excuse me, Sir, I am stipended in this Island to take care of
its Governors, and study day and night to prescribe a Diet proper for 'em.


You must not eat yet, Madam; 'tis ill Manners; the Carver has not helped your
Lord.


By the Universe that's true: Well, Sir; pray excuse me, I shall remember
better another time.


O Lord, how my Chopps water at one of them fat Birds there!


Young Lady, keep your Elbows off the Table: Oh fie, 'tis highly indecent.


Well then; Prithee honest fellow, hand hither one of those Partridges; those,
Doctor, are harmless Meat I'm sure.


Oh horrible, this plaguy Cook has sent 'em in blood-raw; the Rascal has
peppered the Sauce too, as if they were to feed a Jew -- away with 'em quickly:
'Sdeath this Rogue ought to be hanged, he'll poison the Governor in two days
time.


Poison him! no, gadzooks he's in more danger of starving for ought I see. --
Come, prithee what


Oh, that's very well, Sir: Jesting is wholesome, and I am glad to find your
Excellence so disposed; 'tis more nourishing for ye then any Meat that I see
here: Reach me that Dish there, friend.


Is it always the Custom, friend, for the Governors to have thy hungry
Preamble before Dinner?


Ever, Madam; the Doctor very often makes a Speech upon Temperance an hour or
two long; 'tis the Custom.


The Devil take the Customs then, I say; for I'm damnably sharp-set.


Look ye, your Excellence may


These, Oons why a hundred of 'em wont fill a man's Mouth: Why, ye plaguy
Paracelsian you, do ye think I can dine upon Paper?


Or I upon Froth.


'Sbud give me a Glass of Wine there, I shall choke with Rage else: What a
plague is the meaning of this?


'Tis Death for him; therefore I charge ye all forbear upon your Lives, till I
have corrected it: Let me see the Glass.


Why ye damned Son of a Glister-pipe, must not I drink neither?


Not till I have allayed the Assid quality of the Wine, my* Lord, and made it
agree with your stomach; if you should be sick, alas, 'tis as much as my place,
nay, as my life is worth; therefore it behoves me to be exceeding careful: you
are inclining to a Hectic, my Lord, hot and dry, and too strong Liquors will
infallibly destroy the Humidum Radicale. -- There now, I think I may venture
it.


Oh, confounded Potion-maker, this is mere Water, the very Liquor of Frogs,
gadzooks -- Hark ye, what is your Name, friend?


Sir, I'm styled Doctor Pedro Rezio de Agnero, I am a Native of Tirte Afuria,
which lies between Caragnel and Almodona del Campo, and took my Degree in the
University of Osuna.


Why then Doctor Pedro Rezio Agnero of Tirte Afuria, and Graduated in Osuna,
take t^at ( throws the Glass at him) and get you out of my sight, or I'll throw
my Chair at your head: wh^, ^e Common-wealth's Hang-man, let me eat, or take
^our Government again with a Pox t'ye; for an Office that wont afford a Man his
Vi^uals is not worth two Pilchers.


Oh, my Lord, Passion is very unbecoming a Man of your Place: pray have
patience, 'twas the good Man*s over-much Zeal to serve you.


Here's another too, a mannerl Coxcomb, that preaches Patience to me, when I am
ready to be starved -- Gad I'll rid my Island of such Vermin as you quickly --
you shall know that a Governor must eat in defiance of ye all, Rogues: Come,
Spouse, fall on; I'll have this.


I this.


And I this: But first, friend, I've great occasion for a little ^atural
Evacuation.


'Dsheart not at Dinner time, Madam! that were such a plaguy indecency*


M^ Lord the Governor, ^our Excellence is sta^'d for in Council, where are to
be de^ated some Matters of great Moment; on must come awa^ immediatel^.


How now, Jack Sauce! must come awa^! Soft and fair goes far; after Dinner is
time enough.


By no means, my Lord; stay not a minute, I beseech ye; the Council will take
it so heinously to neglect em at your first coming, that I fear on such an
occasion they'll rise and mutiny; there^ore tis extremely proper your
Excellency should go instantly, your Supper shall be mended, and atone for
this to your satisfaction a^on.


Why this 'tis to be a Great Man now; when I was poor Sancho, the devil of any
Mutineers had I occasion to be afraid of; but now Cares and Dangers crowd on
a-pace: Come, Teresa, we'll take our amends anon; and, do ye hear, let my Supper
make me satisfaction without D^ctor Pedro Rezio's dire^ion; for if I find him
here again flirting my Dishes, or squirting Advice, Gadsbud I will begin with a
Cudgel upon him, and so on, till I leave never a Physician in the Island.


Ha, ha, ha: Go thy ways, Governor; this will be rare sport to send my Lord
the Duke an account of, which I will do instantly, and tell him how
methodically Great Sancho learned in nought but Carts and Ploughing;
Rules without Power, and Judges without knowing.



I Assure ye, Gentlemen, my Lord and Lady were extremely pleased with the last
Acco^nt you sent 'em of your new Governour's Actions; we had the story every
night at Supper, and with so much laughing, that an old Philosopher, plagued
with the Spleen and Gout, could hardly have forbore. I am now dispatch'd hither
upon a new design to further the Jest; I have brought the Grand Sancho a
Letter.


Ha, ha, ha: So, dost know the Contents on it, prithee?


Oh, each particular, my Lord Duke read it to us in public; 'tis a terrible
Scrowl, and pretends to discover some Enemies that have laid a Plot to attack
the Island; 'twill try the Governour's courage, for here's horrible frightful
news in it. Here, Doctor, you must give it him, I must back to my Lord again
immediately.


Ha, ha, ha; this will, no doubt, have the designed Effect, especially
surprising him, now in this juncture; for we have kept him these three days so
hungry, and so little in heart, that he'll be frighted with the least shadow of
danger.


This is the best place to give it him too, for he's just now coming hither to
hear Causes. -- But, Page, prithee how thrives the Jest at home? how does the
uncurably maimed Don Quixote behave himself after the Loss of his Right-hand,
Sancho, hah?


Why, faith, so lamely, and the Jest grows so stale now, that my Lord Duke
begins to be weary; and therefore to get rid of him wittily, and send him home
to his House, he designs a new contrivance for me to Act; what it is as yet I
know not; but I suppose, by that time the Squire-Governour trotts from his
Island here, the Knight-Errant will be moving the same pa^e homewards.


It must be very suddenly then, for the upshot of our Government is drawing on
a-pace, the Mob will soon be prepared for the Jest. And see, here comes the
Pageant -- 'dslife and the Petitioners too. -- Now if any one can l^ugh at
Clumsie Justice, they may have a rare occasion: I must not be seen yet.


Nor I.


Oh, yes! Let all manner of person or persons that come not hither for Justice,
keep Silence; and let those that would have their Grievances redressed, express
'em boldly, for the Governor is prepared to hear 'em.


He is prepa^'d as far as hunger will let him; and though I have observed my
self to have much a clearer Judgment upon a full stomach than an empty one, yet
since they say spare diet and f^sting whets a man*s Understanding, I'll try for
once how wise 'twill make me. Come, friend, what*s your Complaint now, humph?


Why, and please your Honour, my Name is Snip; I am a Woman*s Taylor, and a Man
that the Parish knows to be a Man that is not a Man, who, as a Man may say,
will willingly let a Man, though it may chance a Man may be deceivd with fair
Looks; yet, as your Honour knows, who are a Man.


Who am a Man that is like to know very little of your business at this rate,
friend: Come, come, your Complaint Mr. Snip, your Complaint*


Why, your Honour must know then that my Complaint is against my Neighbour
Radish there the Gardner, who has feloniously, not having the fear of Heaven
before his Eyes, taken from me and defrauded me of a tame Cock-Pheasant, which
I brought up by hand, and upon which I set an extraordinary value; yet this
ravenous Cannibal laid violent hands upon the poor Bird, carried it home to his
Wife, roasted it; and had I not come just in the Nick and hindered ^m, they had
devourd it immediately.


Umph; and what say you to this, Radish, hah?


He, he can say nothing, my Lord; for look, to prove what I say is true, I
have brought the Pheasant here along with me, poor fool, just as I snatch^d it
out of the dish from 'em.


By my faith, and nothing but reason, Mr. Snip; What, what an Enormance is
here; what can you say to this, Radish, hah? is it your Conscience to come into
a Neighbour's house, and steal away his Goods and Chattels; for his Pheasant in
this place is a Chattel.


Nay, I had not valued it so much, my Lord; but, to say the truth, the Creature
was my Wives, and the poor Woman was always s^oking and playing with it.


Gad 'tis a delicate tender young Bit; Radish, to purloin and filch in this
manner; it has an excellent taste, faith: must paltry Diggers and Delvers eat
like the Gentry? Oons, with a little good sauce too't, this were a Dish for a
Governor.


But, p^ay will your Honour hear me a little now; One man's Tale is good till
another is told: This Nitty Jerkin here, this Thimble, this Bodkin, this
Cuckoldly Woman's Taylor, Snip, here.


Why how now ye Dunghill-raker, ye old rusty Pruning-knife, ye Maggot in a
Pescod, ye Caterpillars: What, ye wont deny it, will ye?


Oons, is not here a plain proof? what, you wont deny a plain proof, will ye,
Rascal?


Ay, but pray do but hear me, my Lord, for yet you don^t know the trick on^t:
for you must know this Snip and I used commonly to go to one another Houses,
and jestingly snatc^ away several sort of things to eat and drink, I from him,
and he from me, 'twas ^ommon among us; and particularly the other day, I had a
curious Flask of Florence sent me for a Present, by a friend that I used to
accommodate with Fruit, of which, through neighbourly Courtesy, I gave Snip
and his Wife a taste.


Well, what then? Go on go on; let him go on, Snip, let him go on; Gad I never
eat a better thing in my life.


Now, what do these cheating Companions do, being resolved to have the rest of
my Wine, but come t^other day to my house; and whilst his Wife, who pretended
friendly to cut my hair, put my face in her Lap, this sneaking Louse-snapper,
Snip here, ran away with the Flask; for which, knowing no other way to be even
with him, I yesterday made my Attack upon his Wive's Pheasant.


Why, ye Inoculating Rascal, dare you say 'twas Florence, hah?


Yes, that I dare, Co^cumber; and to prove it to your face, that I mean what I
say, I have here another Flask of it, which was just now sent me by the same
person.


Nay, look, Snip, take heed of Lying; I don^t sit here to see Justice abused;
and if this be really Florence, look too^t, Snip.


Besides, if it were, I think I have not bin behind-hand with ye; you have bin
free to every thing in my house Time ou^ of mind; it had a damnable sour taste
I'm sure; and what-ever you say, I can't think 'twas Florence, not I.


What can't you think, Pimp-whiskin? what can't you think? 'tis Florence, I say
'tis Florence; and Snip, you're a -- What a pox sure, I can't be mistaken.


The Governor has made himself amends for his fasting as it happens: But what
will the Judgment be after all, I wonder?


Ay, ay, Florence; 'tis Florence. I knew I was right; and are these things
fitting for Gardeners and Taylors? fat Pheasants and rich Wines food for such
Vermin? I am inrag^d at it; I burst with Choler.


How will you please to punish 'em, my Lord?


Punish 'em! Oons, I know not how I shall punish 'em: but since they have made
a practice to steal from one another, 'tis plain each of 'em keeps a House to
encourage Thievery, and 'tis likely, in short time, may practice upon others as
well as themselves; therefore I condemn 'em to pay ten Ducats apiece to the
Poor, and from henceforth to be upon their good behaviour -- not a word more --
away with 'em --


Bring the rest forward there.


Well, Mr. ^onstable, who have you got here?


Why, and it please your Honour, a strange hypocritical kind of Rascal, that
formerly we knew to be a common Cheat and Thief; but of late he has taken up a
Trade of Can^ing and Devotion, which we all believe only to be a Blind, that he
may manage his old profession the better; for last night we took him up upon
suspicion of stealing a Velvet Cloak.


To cover his Knavery withal: Very well Mr. Constable; Well, and what say you
to this, Cloak-Merchant, hah?


Why verily, I may not deny to thy Superio^ity; but that in my Pristine days of
Vanity and Youth, I was a great Sinner, before the Spirit of Grace had entered
into me; nay, with shame I do confess it to thee, oh Governor.


Take him away then and hang him, there's no more to be said.


Awe, but I will tell thee what I am now; let me plead, I beseech thee.


Oons, what, after Confession? 'Shud, ant it confess and be hang^d all the
World over? What an impudent fellow art thou! Gadzooks, i'll not spoil such a
curious Proverb to save never a Canting Rascal in all Spain -- Away with him, I
say.


Ah, Mercy, mercy; Ah, wo is me.


This is the worst Confession, friend, you have bin at a great while.


Come, come, for more, for more; I find my Judgment much cl^arer now than at
first: Well, woman, what say you?


Ah, I have many sad things to say upon my honesty, my Lord; ^'m an undone
person, I am crack^d, I am violated, or, to speak it in plain terms, I am
Ravish^d as one may say.


Alas poor tender young thing, th^ look as if thou had bin hardly put
too't indeed: but where, where is this mighty Gogmagog that has done it? he
must be of the Race of the Giants sure.


No, my Lord, 'tis not so much for his largeness, as for his strength and
ability: this is the vile Man, I may say, has abused my body like an unwashed
Rag.


The Devil he is; What a plague, did he attack thee upon Stilts?


My Lord, your Honour shall know, that there is not such another Impudence as
that Woman in all Spain: I met her upon the Road this morning, and I know not
how the Devil ordered the matter, but I found a small Ambition in me of
boarding such a huge tall Pinnace; and so we agreed for half a Ducats about the
matter; and upon the finishing of the business, I pulled out my Purse, in which
I had about twenty more, and paid her honestly.


Nay, thou seem to be an admirable finisher of such a business: Well, go on,
friend.


Now you must know, my Lord, this plaguy Quean, seeing my Purse better stuffed
than she tho^ght, pressed me to give her more* which I refusing, as soon as I
came to Town, she swore a Rape again^t me, which now occasi^ns my appearance
before your Honour.


Oh vile Creature, oh thou slanderous Monster; the guilt of whose lying Soul
equals thy prodigious strength of body; Can thou think to be believed,
against my tears and protestation? No, no, wretch, the noble Governor
understands Justice better.


Alas, go^d Woman, don't afflict thy self so: Look'e friend, Finisher, there
must be more in this than ordinary -- Have you that Purse about ye?


Yes, my Lord, here it is.


Give it me, friend, and we'll make an end of this business presently: Come
hither, Woman; you say this prodigious strong fellow here forced you against
your Will, and you struggled and defended yourself all you could, hah?


Yes upon my honesty, my Lord.


Very good; then to let thee see how much I value honest Women, whose
weaknesses are often unwillingly overcome by such monstrous fellows, there,
there's that Purse for thee; and to make thy self amends for the wrong he has
done thee, get thee gone with it.


Oh, good my Lord, if you take that, I'm utterly undone, 'tis all I'm worth.


Ah, blessing on your Honours sweet face, you're a heavenly Judge upon my
honesty, and I shall pray for ye the longest day I have to live: -- Ah, Gad
save ye, ye are an upright Magistrate in troth.


Oh Lord, I'm ruined, I'm lost, 'tis all I have got this two years by hard
labour, and I have not a penny more left in the world to help my self. Oh, that
ever I was born.


Sirrah, you prodigious, you Finisher, leave your bawling, and gather up your
Legs, and run after her as hard as you can, and force away the P^rse from her,
and bring it hither to me.


Oh, I'll do what I can, but I fear 'twill be a hard matter for the Jades as
strong as a Horse.


I begin to perceive that this Island of mine is very full of Enormities, which
will require a plaguy deal of trouble to weed out; a Fool always sees more in
his own house than a wife Man in another, if they will be Rogues, let 'em look
too't. How now, see how they agree about the business without there.


How now woman, what's the matter now.


Why this impudent Fellow my Lord, contrary to your Honours judgment, has
followed me, and would have taken the Purse away from me again by force.


And has he got it.


No I warrant ye, he get it, 'dslid, i'll tear his eyes out first*


Give it me hither, let me see if there's none missing;


Ah mercy upon me, what means your Honour.


If you had defended your honesty as well as you did the Purse ye Whore, you
need not have feared Ravishing: away with her, and de'e hear you finisher, if I
catch you finishing in such another affair, I shall put an end to you with
Halter, and so with a Quibble thrown at your head, get ye out of my sight too
Sirah.


Mannel and People, A Solon, a Solon!


Come, is there any more of ye, ho, gad my hand is in rarely for business ever
since the Cause of the Flask, and the Pheasant.


Room, room here, where's my Lord the Governor?


There he is Doctor, what^s the matter?


Arm, arm, Sir, you are not safe this Minute, here's news now come, that
several thousand of Buccaneers, Pirates and Banditty have entered your Island:
here's a Letter sent too from the Duke to give you information, you must
prepare for your defence immediately; there 'tis, pray read it and let us hear
the Contents of our condition.


Humph, Tirte Aufuria, art thou here again, then there can be no good towards
me I^m sure, the spightful-Rogue bids me read it too, and he knows I can as
well do that as fly. Here, you Secretar^, let's hear what this matter is, come
read out, from another mouth I can Judge the better on it.


Signior Sancho, I am given to understand that c^rtain Enemies of mine, and of
that Island, mean suddenly to give it a furious Assault: I know likewise that
several Spies are entered there with design to kill you, for they stand much in
awe of your great Abilities; take care of your self and Charge, and I will be
ready to send you what Succour I can.

Your Friend The DUKE.


Oh, unfortunate Estate of this unhappy Island, that because of its Wealth and
Fertility is perpetually plagued with Enemies, who bear a mortal spite to all
those that rule; those damned Banditty and Buccaneers have taken and fleaed
three or four of our Governors already.


The Devil they have.


The noise comes nearer, they are certainly entered my Lord, therefore come away
quickly and Arm, and be our General, to lead us against the Enem^.


'Dslife, I know no more what belongs to a General, than a General does to
Cow-keeping: you knew my abilities well enough, and if you had not liked 'em,
you should have told me so, and have taken your Government again, for if I am
to be fleaed about it, I have made a fine bargain indeed.


'Dslife, they'll come upon us before we have taken up our Arms; but it never
shall be said that I stood tamely and saw so famous an Island lost: i'll go and
defend the Gates as long as I can against 'em.


And i'll go and prepare a certain Poison, and squirt it into their Eyes with a
Sirringe, through the loophole of some private Avenue.


Squirt at 'em, said he; ay, if that would drive the Enemy away, I am as well
prepared for it as any body; but these Buck -- ^anditti Rogues I warrant carry
Guns with Leaden pellets, that will make no more of a Governour's noddle, than
if twere made of Pastboard -- Hark, they are coming still -- this your Ambition
has brought you to Don Sancho; you must be a Governor with a murrain t'ye, you
Plough-jobbing Rascal, you.


Oh that ever I was born; Oh, undone, undone, lost, ruin^d.


Oh Father, the saddest day that ever was known, my Mother and I have bin
plundered and stripped yonder, the Men with the black Whiskers and Buff-Coats
yonder have rouzled and frouzled us so, that they have left never an inch of us
unhandled -- Oh Lord, and one of 'em snatched so furiously at me to get off my
vine Petticoat, that udslidikins I thought once he had got away all.


Here one may see now, the true Emblem of fallen Authority; here's the Countess
and her Daughter metamorphosed already.


Countess! Ah shame on it, thought what my Countessship would come too, if we
had not s^ved our old Clothes by chance, we had gone home to Spin again as naked
as ever we were born.


Make this breach good, keep that gate there, raise those Ladders, fire the
Pitch and Rosin, and get some Kettles of scalding Oil ready.


Bring out the Governor, we know him by his R^be; deliver him up, we'll make a
Truce, for here are a hundred of us have sworn to Roast him and Eat him for
Supper.


Oh, Gadzooks, for Supper!


Do ye hear that, thou wretched Man? Come away quickly; down the back-way here,
there's a close Walk to the Gard^n door may yet secure us.


Come away Father, come away; Oh Lord, when shall I be married now, I wonder?


Nay if like an Ermine I am so known by my Skin, even take it among ye, faith *
Strips from his Robe.; if you would have the Muske-Cats fee too, I should
hardly stand out if I thought you hunted me for that; but there^s no disputing
the case now, you must fly, Governor; and if you save your Bones by the loss
of your Jacket, Thank Fortune that did safe through Dangers carry
Earl Sancho, from his Land of Baratary.



Ha, ha, ha, ha; they are gone, the whole Nest are flown.


Here's the Robe of Authority left; the poor Snake has cast his Skin through
fear.


Come, now let's make hast to the Duke, I know he longs to hear of the Comical
Exit of the Governor.


Let's give the people a Hogshead of good Liquor to make merry with, for
playing their parts so well, and then take horse and away.


Oh, I warrant ye they shall want no tipple, I have given order already.


NOT see this famous Combat? prithee, in what old rotten Tree or Tod of Ivy
hast thou bin lurking? 'dsdeath thou give thy self over to moroseness and
melancholy of late -- A pox, when once a Man of Letters comes to be mop^d, he
grows a Coxcomb, and not fit for a friends Conversation.


Prithee, I gave no heed to the flying report; I heard indeed that a new-come
Errant, that called himself the Knight of the Screech-O^l, had challeng^d Don
Quixote to Combat him about the Beauty of their Mistresses; but I thought it
only a Romantic Jest, and could not imagine it would have gone further.


If the Duke had not caused one of their Lances to be blunted unkno^n to him,
it had gone further assure you; but as the Tilt was now, our famous Don here
was only vanquished, by being over^rown from his Horse, a^d b^ that was oblig^d
to perform any Injunction the Knight of the Screech-Owl should impose upon him.


And who is this new doubty Knight, prithee?


Nay, that as yet is a Secret; but h^s Commands are, That Don Quixote shall
retire to his House, and bear no Arms for the space of one whole year -- This,
according to the Conditions of the Combat, he is punctually to perform, and the
Duke and all are just coming hither to entertain the new Knight, and see the
business ratified.


Why this will certainly murder Dox Quixote with grief; he'll never be able to
have patience -- How now, Winter-pippin; what news bring you? what
Smock-stratagem or Curtain-intreague are you labouring with now, hah?


Ay, you're a cruel hard-hearted Wretch, to use a poor young thing as you have
done her without there: she's come after ye again, in faith, and as mad as a
March-hare: A shame on her shallow pate, it should be long enough before I'd
have cracked my Brain for ere a one of ye.


By all that's good, Marcella -- And now I remember me, I heard indeed she was
run Mad for Love: What a barbarous fellow art thou to destroy a whole family at
once!


Well then, there's an end of 'em: prithee let me go.


Not yet, by Heaven; thou ^alt hear her speak.


'Twill be to night; the God of Love has promised me, he'll bring him to me in
his Mothers Chariot, drawn by white Doves, and with her Breath perfumed: there
lies my dearest crowned with fragrant Roses, vigorous and young, and charming
as a Deity. Hah! what do I see! The dear Man turned to a Draggon! See! see! his
Mouth and Nostrils breathing Flames that singe my veins and scorch my heart to
Cinders.


GEnius of England, from thy pleasant Bower of Bliss,
Arise and spread thy sacred Wings:
Guard from Foes the British State,
Thou on whose smile does wait
The uncertain happy Fate
Of Monarchies and Kings.

Then follow brave Boys to the Wars,
The La^rel you know's the Prize;
Who brings home the noblest Scars,
Looks finest in Celia's Eyes.
Then shake off the slothful Ease,
Let Glory inspire your Hearts;
Remember a Soldier in War and in Peace
Is the noblest of all other Arts.

Alas poor crack-brain'd Creature!


Devil --


Sdeath, hast thou no human Nature? does it not trouble thee (...) see her
thus?


To see her thus! why now she's in her Kingdom; her darling Mischiefs now have
gathered head, and riot in her Brain: Oh, take this from me, friend; when once
a Woman's mad, she's in perfection.


What, is he going? nay then farewell dissembling -- all female Arts and Tricks
begone, avaunt, and let the passion of my heart lye open: Turn, turn thou
dearest pleasure of my Soul, and I will bathe thee with my Eyes fond Tears; lay
thee upon my Breast panting with Love, and speak the softest words into thy
Ears that ere were spoke by a kind yielding Maid; kiss thee with eager Joy, and
press thee close, close to my heart till I am lost in transport, and am for
that short time a Deity.


'Dsheart the Duke's coming too; prithee take her away, dear Rodriguez -- I'll
get thee a Husband for it one time or other.


I Burn, I burn, my Brain consumes to Ashes;
Each Eye-ball too, like Lightning flashes:
Within my Breast, there glows a solid Fire,
Which in a Thousand Ages can't expire.
Blow, blow, the Wind's great Ruler;
Bring the Po and the Ganges hither,
'Tis sultry, sultry Weather;
Pour 'em all on my Soul,
It will hiss like a Coal,
But never be the cooler.
'Twas Pride, hot as Hell,
That first made me Rebel,
From Love's awful Throne, a cursed Angel I fell:
And mourn now the Fate,
Which my self did create;
Fool, fool, that considered not when I was well.
Adieu, adieu, transporting Joys,
Off ye vain fantastic Toys,
That dressed the Face and Body to allure;
Bring, bring me Daggers, Poison, Fire,
For Scorn is turned into Desire;
All Hell feels not the Rage which I, poor I, endure.
Ay, hang y^; ye all promise for one another, but you never care to come too't
your selves -- Well, not for that, but to get some Remedy for the poor
Creature; I'll do it for once: Come Bird.


Bird, right; thou art the bird of Night: Come, I'll go with thee; by thy broad
Face and toothless Gums I know thee, and that hooked Nose that shades the
Stumps remaining, thou art Grimalkin -- Whoo, whoo, whoo -- Come along, Bird.


Well, if thou art not strangely punished for this, I shall wonder.


Pish, prithee no bantering* See the Duke and Company.


Vanquished, because my Horse fell -- Oh rigorous Laws of Chivalry! must my
hard-got Renown, purchas^d with Danger, be poorly lost through Rosinante^s
weakness? My Courage still stands fast, though he is fallen: I beg the Combat
once more, I'll fight him in my Shirt, with a Dutch knife set sharp as any
Razor.


Oh, it must not be, friend; the Laws of Knighthood are, you know, inviolable:
besides for you, the Quintessence of Errants, thus rashly to recant your own
agreement, will be a flaw in your Renown for ever: Therefore take heed, not a
word more of fighting.


What, does he murmur? does his high-flown Vanity think he's disgraced to be
overcome by me? Hah, noble Don, is't so?


No, no: Valiant Sir, the Knight is highly satisfied in being vanquished by so
brave a Warrior -- Look up quickly and seem pleased, for this damned Knight of
the Screech-Owl, now his hand is in, will worry us all else -- 'dsheart what a
terrible voice he has.


The Devil worry him and his Voice too, 'tis a very Screech-Owls to me indeed.


Courage is not disgraced, though 'tis unfortunate; and though Don Quixote is
battered and o*re-thrown, he's valorous as ever.


And when his year of Penance is past over,
Again may cudgel, and be cudgell'd more.

One may see by his Looks, that his pate is plaguily harassed about this
business.


Oh, the whimsical Worms are all now at work -- Ha, ha, ha.


Damned fortune, thou inconstant treacherous Strump^t, hast thou then serv^d me
thus?


Mum, mum, Sir; the Knight of the Screech-Owl observes ye.


Sir, I perceive you do not grace my Conquest with that clear brow, that Aspect
of Contentment my Valour has deserved, but seem to lower and grumble; and your
fortune, as if you thought my Chains disgraces to ye -- Hah, speak thou
conquered, art thou so presumptuous?


Oh, by no means Sir, the Knight was always a person of few words; and as to
the Moodiness of his Phiz, 'ti^ natural t^ him; I dare ^y for the Knight of the
ill-favour'd face, tis not in his power to mend his Looks.


Besides, here being no occasion for mirth, some g^vity is becoming.


Could I but think my easy penance given him exto^ted frowns, he soon should
know my power. Blood of the Heroes, did not I in Ar^agon, overcome the proud
Don Guzman de Alvaro, who being my Slave by a just right of Conquest, I made
his Neck my footstool to mount my horse by, nay, over the parched Plains forced
him to carry a Sack of Barley for his provender; nor was that all, for when at
night we rested, to show my Power and punish his Ambition, I made him wash my
Shirts and mend my Stockings.


This is the very devil -- Oons I tremble every inch of me.


And if I thought this Shrub, this Mushrom-Errant durst mutter discontents, or
look as if Tobosian Dulcinea excelled my bright Castara de Vandalia, I'd set
him instantly to stitch my Boots, and grease em with the Oil of his own labour.


Say something quickly to him to mollify; stitching of Boots is but a scurvy
employment.


Lord ^ir, what need you be so choleric, I said nothing of Dulcinea that ^
know -- Oons he has so cowed me with his plaguy Voice and his confounded
Whiskers, that I can't get out a hard word for the heart of me.


Ha, ha, ha, his heart's quite sunk, the blustering of the Screech-Owl has
bullied him clearly.


Come noble Warrior, be pleased to sit down a little, and to show how much we
prize all Knights of your brave Order; I'll beg ye to let my Servants show
their duty in a Musical Entertainment.


Your Grace is generous; and to show my gratitude, I dedicate thus far of my
sharp Sword to you, and yo^rs for ever; the rest is bright Castara de
Vandalia's -- Come I'll sit down, you Sir, stand by and wait.


Oh, not so, I beseech ye Sir; for my sake let him sit with us.


Your Grace shall then prefer him: sit down.


Ah plague on your Whiskers -- I'm in an Ague still.


DE foolish English Nation,
Dat former Conquest brag on;
Make strange a Discourse
Of St. George and his Horse,
And de Murd'ring of de Dragon:
But should de French Invade 'em,
And boldly cross de Water,
How de Williamite here
Would trembla for fear
Of de Jack grand Roy, mon Maitre.
You boast of your Fifth Henry,
Dat once in France did Forage;
But to answer dat same
Do but read Nostredame,
Garzoon will cool your Courage:
Our Gold will take your ^ity,
Though Fighting never can get one,
Veel (...) Salsbury-Plain
Bring on Millions of Men,
D'en -- Whei^ -- vere is Great-Brittain.
As much, my Lord, as can be possible for us that carry Arms to like soft
pastimes -- I am obliged for this; and that ^ may, when your occasions offer,
be grateful to my power, be pleased to Command Alonzo de Bubone of Castile,
your Grace^s Champion, you soon may find me out, my Lord, by fame: bes^d^s, I'm
of a family numerous and ancient, the Owls at Court are my relations all --
City and Country throng with the Bubones, and 'mong^ the Priesthood and the
daggle Law are Numbers of Screech-Owls; in ^onour of whom This ample form ^ on
my Buckler place,
And wear it for the Glory of my Race.



We are his Greatnesses, the Knight of the Screech-Owl's m^st humble Creatures.


And now, brave Sir, I hope all animosities betwixt you and your nobl^ Brother
here are forgot: Come, I must have the honour to reconcile all matters; he has
resolved to obey your Command, and retiring home, and bearing no Arms for a
year; and you, according to the Conditions of the Combat, in honour can demand
no more.


I am not lim^ted, my Lord; and I must tell your Grace, there is another small
Injunction, which in obedience to the Laws of Chivalry I must impose and he
must execute: 'Tis this, my Lord; that since the Peerless Castara de Vandalia
has influenc^d me with Conquest; and he adores the conquered Dulcinea; he
therefore be oblig^d to wear th^t pre^ious Rellick my Squire has there; which
is, that fair ones, Slipper, during his Truce from Arms, and Year of Penance
--


Oh* that he shall do most Ceremonially.


'Twill look like some new kind of Order, and give him good occasion from
thenceforth to call himself the Knight of the Order of the Slipper: that once
performed, he's free.


Well, I see now that wise Man was in the right, that s^id Valour was a Virtue
between two vicious extremes, Cowardice and Tem^rity: I'm in the snare, and I
must get out on it as well as I can; make Laws and keep Laws, as Sancho used to
say when his Mouth run over with Proverbs: And therefore since tis my fortune,
I will travel home with my new Order here as patiently as I can: And so farewell
t'ye all; nay, let no one touch me, nor speak a word more, for my heart's too
full to bear any Complementing; and as low as my stomach is brought, I could
eat that roaring Knight up methinks if it were not for his Whiskers: but since
'tis as 'tis, let Fate bear the blame on it, whilst I* This long Year study to
wipe off my stain;
The next, in glittering Arms, shine out again.



Ha, ha, ha, ha; farewell poor Knight-Errantry, you must know I have bin weary
of the mad fool of late, and so contrived this trick to send him home to his
house to be cur^d. -- And now Signior Don Alonzo de Bubone, be pleas^d to veil
your Whiskers.


The Page, as I live, the Rogue altered his vo^ce, so I did not know him.


Ha, ha, ha; nothing could be acted better indeed: Well Sir, my Lord Duke
shall not forget your diligence.


One of the Servants told me in a whisper just now* my Lord, that your Grace
may now have an account of Sancho's f^ight from B^rataria, for the Steward and
the Doctor are just come from thence.


Oh come then, let^s in, that story will be very grateful at dinner: Cousin, I
have a small affair with you too, but this is no time to chide: besides, I hope
you will satisfy me in some passages I heard lately of you, which seem to
blast your Virtue and Reputation: I must have a Minute to confer with you about
it.


With all my heart, my Lord.


I have heard of your humour, Sir; and I hope my Lord Duke will punish thee,
for refusing poor Marsella, thou inveterate Woman-hater.


Come my Lord, Methinks I long to hear how the Countess Teresa, and her
Daughter Mary the Buxom, behave themselves in their change of fortune.


Very Comically, no doubt, Madam, and must certainly divert when your Grace
comes to hear their several Histories.


Which, to relish our Meat and Wine the better, I intend shall entertain us
presently; amongst the rest of diversions, there are two that are always very
recreative, which are a fool in Person, and a fool in Character; the fool in
Person, we have just now had a Scene of; and as to the fool in Character, The
Governor not being now before ye,
You must content your selves with Sancho's story.



THE Comical History OF DON QUIXOTE. The Third Part. WITH THE MARRIAGE OF Mary
the Buxom.

Written by Mr. D'Urfey

Non omnes Arbusta juvant humiles{que} myricae.
LONDON, Printed for Samuel Briscoe, at the Corner of Charles-street, in
Russelstreet, Covent-Garden. 1696.

Where is also to be had the Songs, set to Music by the late famous Mr.
Pursel, Mr. Courteville, Mr. Aykerod, and other eminent Masters of the Age.

SIR, THough I know your Character is adorned with so much Goodness and
Humility, that it could dispense with, and excuse even such a presumption as a
Dedication of the following Piece, yet I must with Modesty decline such
Pretensions, and own, That though its innate Defects are not so obnoxious as are
supposed, yet its public Misfortune has so lessened its Reputa^ion, as has
made it incapable of deserving such an Honour.

My whole Extent of Ambition then is, having th^s Opportunity of the Press,
(instead of it) most humbly to dedicate my self, a Presumption perhaps lit^le
inferior to the other; nor can I forbear to br^ng you what all the rest of my
Tribe do to Indulgent Patrons, viz. an Inconvenience -- whilst Poetical
Impertinence attends the good Offices you do, and Generous Condescension and
Good Nature creates your Trouble.

But Sir, be pleased to remember however, That you are the Cause of this
Inconvenience -- Had you been less affable and obliging, I had been more
^imorous and modest. Had your eye shot the haughty Austerity upon me of a right
Courtier, great i^ Dignity and Office, mine had quickly been dazzled and had
seen no farther; nor had your valued minutes ever been disturbed with dilatory
Trifles o^ this Nature; but my Heart, amongst the rest of th^ World, on dull
Consideration of your Merit, had supinely wished you Prosperity at a distance,
tha^ now, warmed by your Influence, and embolden'^ by your Smiles, can be
contented with nothing les^ than laying it self at your Feet, and pretending to
the particular Honour of your Favour.

Condescension to grant Admittance, and Generous Will to do good Offices, are
rare Virtues in Great Men at Court; and he is fortunate whos^ Dependence there
answers his Expectation. Bu^ when a Poet's happy Stars guide him to one who not
only is glad to meet occasion to befriend him, but that eagerly seeks it out,
who though continually fatigued with great Employments in the State, and hourly
busied in the noble Service of his King and Cuuntry, yet will generously spare
a few Minutes from public Affairs to do an humble Suito^ a good Turn; one that
never entertained such a on^ without a welcome Smile, if he could effect his
Desire, or a good natured, courteous and modest Dismission, if he could not:
One that, though a Courtier, never forgot his Promise, but perpetually gives the
World occasion to own his Word as sacred as his other Virtues. ^Tis to a
Maecenas like this my Heart devotes it self; 'tis him it will admire; nor is it
possible for me to suppress its Ambition.

Now Sir, since every discerning Judgment must allow this to be your Character,
be pleased to pardon me, who write it as a plain Truth, not as Praise, but your
undoubted Due: For I dare no more pretend to praise you, than presume to equal
your Wit or other Excellencies. My Design is only gratefully to acknowledge and
publish to the World how much I am obliged to your Virtues, without lessening
their Value by my unnecessary Applauses.

Amongst all good Qualities that seem Praise-worthy in human Nature, the most
proper and most reasonable is Gratitude; and amongst all persons, on whom for
Benefits received there is a Duty Incumbent, I, Sir, am most obliged to own my
Acknowledgments to you: for never had any one less Opportunity to deserve your
Kindness, nor ever had any one more generous or hearty Proofs of it. And since
'tis decreed that my humble Fate will permit me to express my Gratitude no
other way than by Expression, Thanks, and verbal Acknowledgment, That, Sir,
whilst I live be pleased to believe you shall hourly receive, large and
unbounded as your Generous Intentions to me.

Amongst all your numerous Favours, be pleased, Sir, to let me own the first,
(which shall eternally grow to my Heart and Memory,) which was your sending for
me to introduce me to The late Adored Queen of ever Glorious Memory: Of all
whose gracious Smiles on me, enriched with Royal Bounty, you and your good
Lady, my ever honoured Patroness, were the happy Causes. When Majesty, like the
Sun, shone with a Heavenly Influenee, you took care to plant me in the View,
and gave me the Opportunity of receiving the Grace that follow'd; nor did you
stop there, but afterwards made me known and honoured me with your good Word to
most of the principal Nobility, the true Patrons of Poets and their Art, by
whom I have not since been forgot, and whose Favour is a certain Fortune to any
Son of the Muses. And this most generous and uncommon Grace, Sir, when I cease
to remember, or fail in point of Duty, you may certainly take it for granted, I
am ceased to be at all.

And now Sir, That my Ambition may know its bounds, and soar no farther, let me
beseech you to accept of this Dedication of my self and Duty; and likewise be
pleased to receive this Trifle of a Play, ^ack'd to it to divert you a Minute,
when such a space from Business will permit: For I am not ignorant, no more
than the rest of Mankind, of the troublesome Diligen^e your Zeal for the King
and your Country exac^s from you, the Care of your great Charge and Offices, or
of the Envy your Virtue raises in ill Men; yet I am confirmed it cannot
possibly turn to your Prejudice, but that as you was an Honour to the last
Parliament, you will still be acknowledged so to this, and raise your
Reputation yet higher, (if possible) to an Eminence equal to your Merit; whilst
I with Pride fix my Fame at its No plus ultra, in bearing the Title of,

SIR, Your most Humble, and most Devoted Servant, Tho. D'Urfey.
I Had not troubled the Reader with a Preface, did I not find it extremely
reasonable to vindicate my self a little, as well as the en^uing Sh^ets,
ag^inst the unnatural Mistakes, (...) Judgment, and Malice of some part of the
Auditory when this Play came upon the Stage: And as I will not de^end the
^aults which with Justice and unby^ssed Opinion it is taxed with, so on the
other side I will not be run down without defence, when perhaps I can prove the
cause of its miscarriage not to be through its own defect, (as 'tis generally
believed) but occasioned by the ill nature of an inveterate Faction, and some
unlucky accidents happening in its representation. In the first place therefore
I must inform the Reader, that this Third Part before it came upon the Stage
was acknowledged and believed by all that saw it, and were concerned (as well
those that heard it read, as those that w^re Actors, who certainly, every one
must own, are in their Affairs skilful enough to know the value of things of
this nature) to be much the best of all the Three Parts; of which Opinion I
must also confess my self to be, and do not doubt, that when it is impartially
read and judged, to find many more to join with me in that belief.

But as all Dramatic Pieces that depend upon Humour must receive their good or
ill Fate from the good or ill Humour of the Audience, this it seems had the
(...) to meet with the latter; and tho prepared by my indefatigable Diligence,
Care, Pains, nay, the variety which I thought could not possibly miss the
expected Success, yet by some Accidents happening in the Presentment, was
disliked and exploded; The Songish part which I used to succeed so well in, by
the indifferent performance the first day, and the hurrying it on so soon,
being straightened in time through ill management -- (tho extremely well set to
Music and I'm sure the just Critic will say not ill Writ) yet being
imperfectly performed, was consequently not pleasing; and the Dances too, for
want of some good Performers, also disliked; all which, tho impossible for me
to avoid, and not reasonably to be attributed any way to a fault in me, yet the
noisy Party endeavoured to use me as ill as if it were, till the gen^rous
Opposition of my Friends gave me as much r^ason to thank them for their
Iustic^, as to despise the others Malice.

I must confess when I heard the Ladies were prejudiced about some A^ions and
Sayings in Mary the Buxome's and Sancho's Parts, I was extremely concerned, not
that I was conscious to my self I had justly offended, because I know no other
way in Nature to do the Characters right, but to make a Romp speak like a Romp,
and a Clownish Boor blunder out things proper for such a Fellow, but that I
should in doing this unfortuna^ely have 'em counted nauseous and undecent, and
so disoblige that Essential part of the Audience which I have always 'studied
with so much Zeal to divert in all my former Plays with Innocent Mirth, Scenes
of Decency and Good Manners.

In exposing Humour, some Course Saying^ will ^turally happen, especially in
Farce and Low Comedy and ^tis some sort of Excuse for me that I can affirm^ A
Jest adapted to the Genius of the Pit bearing some little distant Obscenities
and double Ente^ders, has past currently in all the Comedies of the past and
present Age, tho I have now the ill Luck to be most detected; I am sure,
offending in that nature is much against my design of pleasing; and I have
through Nineteen of the Twenty Plays I have writ, always studied to shun it as
much as I can, for my own particular satisfaction, as well as to oblige th^
Nicer part of the Audience.

As to the Poppet Show in the Fourth Act, the Accident of its being, placed so
far from the Audience, which hindered them from hearing what eithe^ they or the
Prolocutor said was the main and o^ly reason of its diverting no better; and as
I cannot blame a^ Audienc^ for finding fault on such (...) occasion, so I
desire my Impartial Reader and Judge to w^gh in the ^e^usal o^ it whether I
have no^ done my Part, and whether that Scene is not wove in properly with the
rest of the History, and more likely to give satisfaction than any of the rest,
tho it unhappily succeeded otherwise; As for those that call it
Bartholomew-Fair St^ff they, I'm sure, never digested Don Quixote's History, or
at least tha^ part of it where the Poppet Show is prese^ted, that Passage
being, as I always thought, and as a Noble Person of as much Honour and Wit as
any that pretend to Judge of these Matters, was pleased to allow is the m^st
Material Extravagant Foolery that ever Don Quixote was guilty of throughout all
his Whimsical A^ventures, and therefore most proper to be inserted in the Play.
To finish then* as it is the most difficult undertaking that can be to find out
new Humour to please in so Critical an Age as ours is, so 'tis some pleasure to
me to know, that my severe Judges cannot hinder me from the Reputation of
having diverted them for several years together in spite of their own ill
Nature: A hard task indeed, -- And amongst Men of Sense and Justice, one would
think should exact a modest hearng, if once in Seven years a Play should fail
in diverting, especially when Accidents are the Material Cause, -- but since
that blessing is not to be expected by a Poet, nor the Modest Method of the old
Romans at all proper to be an Example to our Critical and over-witty Britains,
let Folly and ill Nature vent its Spleen till its own unreasonableness makes it
nauseous to the World. Obliged with the kind Indulgence and Instruction of some
few Superior Judgments, I will contentedly sit dow^, ^d s^y to all the others,
as a famous Wit once said before; Let but some few, whom I omit to name,
Approve my Work, I count their Censure Fame.


THrice on one Subject to empl^ a Muse,
'Tis owned has very seldom been in use.
Yet thus far I the Poet's Ca^se pur^ue;
Suppose one had a Mi^tr^ss fair a^d true;
Is three times Visiting so much to do?
Don Quixote like a Beauty that never clo^d,
Should charm anew, though twen^y times, enjoyed.
Thus for the Author then most humbly praying --

Hold Mr. Horden, hold, what are you saying*
If it be any thing of Prologue nature,
K^ow I am come to help ye in the matter.
Come, make your Honours, and begin again;
You are to court the Ladies -- I the Men.
Come, come, your Bow -- your Speech too, quick and ^hort.
Lord, you're so dull methinks --

Lord, you're so pert.


Your Love to the Poet sure i^ wondrous small.
Why, you say nothing --

-- Because you say all.


I must say something, if you wonn^ spe^k
To the Ladies; come, what offers can you make?

Fai^, I can offer nothing that they'll take.
The Poet must excuse me; I can't prattle,
N^r a^k 'em ought -- unless to drink a Bottle.

-- A Bottle -- Are good manners quite forgot?
I^ that a thing to ask the Ladies -- Sot?
Are Ladies prop^r to be so Harangued?

Why not --


Incense should smoke where Beauty's Beams do sh^ne,
The Mistress of all hearts, a Power Divine.

Every one in ^is way -- a Bottle's mine.


Nay, then I see 'tis an Affront designed*
F^r which henceforth I'll B^nter all your kind,
Praise a pert Coxcomb's awkerd Shape and Air,
T^ll^ b'Chesnut coloured Spark he's wond^ous fair*
Admire a third, w^se C^t ^ gr^y,
Lo^ks li^e a Mill^r ^n a M^e^ day.
Or his, ^ Flanders come^,
With ^o^t^ing Sleeves that reach down to his (...)
Commend ^ue's Foot and hand, another Nose.
I'll have ^ thousand Tricks to feel the Beans.
Show 'em by dancing what to ^rt belongs;
Or if that fail, I'll charm 'em with new Songs:
And thus I'll dr^w 'em to the Play in Throngs.
I will but throw 'em out my Hook and straight
Shoals of Male Gudgeo^s nibble at the Bait;
Some by Diversion of my Voice -- and some
I^ Expectation of my Prime to come.

Why then you think --
Your Interest with the Sparks i^ ^drous strong.

Yes: What think you --


-- Child, the art three years too youn^.


Perhaps as much too young, a^ you too good;
Yet 'tis as I would have it understood.

Nay* I confess you are planted in a pla^,
Where, like a M^llon underneath a Glass,
The Towns wa^m Beams soon Ripeness will prod^.
No Hot Bed like a Play-house for th^t use.

Think what you please I'll follow Virtue's Rules,
And keep my Melon close from Kn^ves and Fools.
And now, to turn out of this (...) way --
Be pleased but quietly to bear t^e Play,
Then if you can laugh, you sh^ll do it to day.

Why, that's w^ll said, my D^ -- So let's away.


WEll, Gentlefolk, I dare now Wage a Crown,
You take me for the veriest Romp in Town --
But e're I part from ye* I'll let ye see,
There's other Molly Buxomes besides me.
More Hoydens, that as awker'd G^mbols show:
I'll warrant Forty in that upper Row
Icod, perhaps too, Forty more below.
They're just like Hens; They'll b^ amongst the Cocks.
Let's see, is ne'er a one in the Side Box?
Yes -- There's a S^inger -- by yo^ Bully Rocks.
Then let me look in the Places too foreright.
Humph! strange; I think there's ne'ere a one tonigh^.
Each of 'em thought I'd paint her for a Blowze;
And so they're gone, Icod, to the other Ho^se.
Gadslidikins! What would I give to have showed
You, Errant Knights a Romp in a Comm^de.
Fo^ if the Trut^ with R^ason ma^ be spoke,
One may be found among the Gentlefolk;
Who, though she gravely does to Visit come,
Will ^ap upon the Fo^tmens Backs at home.
The Country Wife too, she that comes to town,
To see her Ki^, and buy a tawdry Gown.
Goes to a Play, there hoydens with the men,
C^ckolds here Spouse, and so Romps down again.
H^re too about the Streets they swarm like Bees;
And all the Nation round, through all Degr^es:
From the Court Velvet Scarf, the Gay and Witty,
To her that slabbers Custard in the City:
From thence back here again to Bulking Betty.
And so good night. 'Tis time to end my D^ty.


The SCENE, A Pleasant Meadow, near a Village.

SLave, open the Cage, or die.


Oh, Good Sir Knight be pacified.


'Dsdeath, Sir, are ye mad? do ye know what you bid him do? Have you a mind to
have us all torn to pieces?


'Dslife, I have cried up Knight Errantry to fine purpose, if I must stand by
and see him and my self worried about it.


Oh! good Sir Counsel-giver, if you fear that, put your self in safety, and
begone -- Sirrah, open quickly, or I'll open your puddings with this.


Oh Lord, Sir, the Lyon has not eaten all this day, and is so hungry that he'll
make no more of us than of so many Kittlings -- At three mouthfuls we shall be
in his Puddings our selves, Sir.


Cowardly Villain -- Dog, Dog, do it, or --


Well, well, Sir, I will, I will -- Oh* that ever I was born! What will become
of me --


Nay, if my Counsel has no better Effect, even let your Donship fight your
Battle by your self; if you are for duelling of Lyons, you had best get an
armed Rhinoceros for your Second; for my part, I'm for no Tilts with these
four-footed sharp-phang'd Antagonists, so will prudently withdraw.


And I -- This is no time for bantering.


Poorness of Spirit! How I look down upon 'em -- Of all the Passions plaguing
weak Humanity, the basest sure is fear -- Come, Fellow, hast thou done?


Done! yes, yes, Sir, time enough, Sir, time enough Done! -- sbud, where shall
I save my self?


The General of Oran sends not this Lyon, as thou hast said, ^oth' King; but
some Enchanter sends it to try me -- to prove my Courage and undaunted Soul --
He shall be satisfied -- Sancho, where art thou?


Here, here, Sir, here, 'oons where


Dull Insect, that can imagine to knock manly Resolution of the head with a
Proverb: Come away! Alas, poor Soulless Wretch, what, from the Road of Glory,
on which this third time I have made my Sally, to exercise the Function I was
born for! No, no, Don Quixote stirs not from the Path of Honour, tho hemmed
with Lyons fiercer than that famed one that in the Nemaean Vale was quelled by
Hercules -- Let me see, where shall I best attack him? Lyons, to me, to me,
your Lyon; Whelps. Come all ye Inchanters, that have formed this Monster to ^ry
my Valour, bestride your fiery Dragons, and behold me; behold this hand tear
from his hollow Trunk the bloody Heart, and dash it in your Faces.





Come forth, thou miscalled Terror of the Forest, and try if thou can make
me give thee ground. Men say thou art the King of Beasts; come forth, and show
thy Royal Bravery; do it, and whet thy clawish Weapons keen to oppose my Force,
and speedily, or I shall believe thee-not to have Courage proper for thy Bulk,
but that like thy Diminutive, a Ca^, thou art only valiant in Confinement --
Come, come forth, I say*


Oh! for Heaven's sake, Sir, don't go so near him; you see he turns his back
side to ye, to let you see how much he minds what you say; therefore pray don't
trouble your self with picki^g his T^eth, nor challenging his Claws, for if one
of those crooked Nippers should get hold on ye, the Lord have mercy upon ye for
a Knight Errant.


Hah! By Dulcinea's Life, the Monster fears me, and ^a^es not meet the Lustre
of my eyes -- ay -- 'tis so -- 'tis now shown plain, his back parts tremble at
me.


O Sir, pray hold your self contented, he only shakes his Tail in contempt --
and if you are wise, stand farther off; for if he gives ye a thump with the
b^nch at the end on it, he'll knock you as flat as a Flounder.


By all my Fame, tis now as clear as Truth, my daring Co^rage has quite daunted
him -- Sancho, come down, and give him three Bastinadoes with a Cudgel to
provoke him to come out.


I give him three Bastinadoes -- not for three Kingdoms Gadzooks, I -- Come
Sir, too much Mettle is dangerous in a blind Horse: Content your self with the
thought that he dares not come out t'ye, and so the Victory is yours -- And
good Sir, put him to no f^r^her Trial


I have challenged him fairly.


Ay, ay, Sir, we are both Witnesses of that -- I'll cokes in with him, it may
be he'll leave off, and I may save my Horses by it,


Dared him, and boldly; and the Enchanter sent him.


Ye have ye have, Sir, and we'll both of us give ye a Certificate that he has
refused to answer ye.


'Sbud you have done wonders, Sir -- and to stickle more in the business were
only to tempt Providence as one may say.


Fellow, you're in the right, and I'm obliged to think my Honour satisfied:
For as the Laws of Chivalry direct us, no Combatant is tied to do more than to
defy an Enemy; if he refuse, he is discomfited.


Right, right Sir; Odsheartlikins you never argued better in your Life-time --
He speaks a little Sense now; pray Heaven it hold.


Come down then, Friend, and shut the Cage -- And Sancho, descend, and call to
those that fled -- come quickly -- thou art so tardy in every thing.


Hold a little, good Sir, and let me but see the Pin in the door, and I'll be
as nimble as an Eell in your Service; for perhaps the Lyon, though he cares not
to scratch the Hide of a lean Knight, may have a Fancy to chew the Cud with a
plump Squire -- Oh! now I think I may venture.


So, now all's secure again, and give ye Joy of your Victory* Sir Knight -- for
Gads digs, little did I think to see that Madrid Face of yours look so cheerily
by this time -- But let it be as it is, you have done Wonders, as I said
before.


'Tis well, and there's a Ducats for thy Reward -- Oh, the unvalued Virtue of
true Valour: Well may Inchanters make me unfortunate, but of that Essence they
can never bereave me.


Though Sancho has told us how the business was, yet let's resolve to cry up
the Exploit,


O as much as if he had quartered the Lyon and eaten him. May Wreaths of Oak,
the Meed of mighty Conquerors, for ever flourish on Don Quixote's head.


Thrice worthy, and eternally renowned, I congratulate your Victory. We hear
the Lyon trembled to behold you, nor durst accept your Challenge.


Both these saw it.


Yes truly, the Beast's hinder parts shook like an Aspen Leaf, as the saying
is.


The truth on it is, he did wag his Tail very frightfully.


The Inchanters therefore have not now prevailed: This is my hour, my Friends.


Still may it prove so, fortunate and happy.


Thou Soul, Heart-blood, and Genius of Knight Errantry.


Go, fellow, to Madrid, and tell the King Don Quixote did this Action, no
longer now Knight of the Ill-favour'd Face, but with new Title graced -- Knight
of the Lyon.


Very well Sir, When ever I've occasion to drink a Flagon with his Majesty, I
shall make bold to do your Errand; and so Good by t'ye. Ha, ha, ha, tell the
King, said he -- Ah Lord save thy crazed Pate.


When I saw first the Lyon's flaming eyes, I could not think the Adventure was
so easy.


Ah -- to a valiant Heart and resolute Will, nothing is hard.


I was confirmed, he would succeed -- and do still prophecy that more and
greater things shall court his Valour -- But now Friend, setting this Discourse
aside, I think it proper to inform the noble Knight of the Lyon your Suit to
him, which is to make one in the Plot to morrow at Camacho's Wedding, who is,
by Compulsion of Friends, to marry with Quiteria, the rich Andr^gio's Daughter.
I suppose your Greatness has heard of the former Love between her and my Friend
Basilius here.


I have, thou Frog of Ag^nippe, thou Nursling of Parnassus, perpetual Delight
of the Salamanca Schools, I have; and am well known ^oo in his Worth and
Virtues: I've also heard Camacho is a Dolt, a sordid Lump, a Glutton, that
crams his Paunch, but that neglects his Mind, laughed at and scorned by every
Man of Sense, not praised by any one but Sancho there, whose Brains are in his
Belly.


Ay* ay, say what you please of my Belly, or Camacho's either; he has refreshed
me often with good Bee^ and Brewis -- and as f^r as a good Word or a Compliment
goes, my Paunch and my Brains too shall be at his Service* Besides, he has sent
for my Wife and Daughter from home, and offers Mary a good Dinner, who is to be
married to morrow, and so to let both Weddings go as one. Come, '^is an ill
Workman that quarr^ls with his own Tools. I wonder when my Master would have
done as much for her.


Why, Sancho, I did not think the Girl was prone to marry.


Not prone! yes, and blown too; She's so ripe, she'd have fallen off the Tree
with a little more shaking -- Oh! yonder comes her Mother, and Gadzooks my
Son-in-Law with her -- I warrant they want me for something.


Oh! 'Tis likely, therefore we'll leave thee to her. And now worthy Sir,
Quixote shall be foremost.


Spoke like the Star of Gallantry.


Farewell Sancho; Whatever business employs us, we shall reserve a Minute to
wish Mary the B^xom Joy.


Oh, that we must in course.


Ay, you may wish her what you please; but I'm sure I wished her hanged this
morning; my wise Son-in-Law that's coming yonder will have a hopeful Bargain of
her; she's the plaguiest Ramp, the veriest Hoyden, and, what's the mischief
on it, grows every day worse than other. As I was looking up to the Sun-dial
this morning, to see what a Clock 'twas, what does this heedless Quean do, but
throws out of the Window a great Jordan full of Liquor luke warm just into my
mouth; Gadzooks, I was over head and ears, like an Ache-bo^e in a Powdering tub
-- But come, thanks to good luck she's going; this Fool will venture on her,
and much good may she do him: He loves Mutton well that can dine upon the Wool.
Marry your Son when you will, your Daughter when you can. And if Coxcombs went
not to Market, bad Ware would no^ be sold -- There's three Proverbs for her
however; 'tis all the Portion she's like to have, that I know of.


Come, Man, what have you been doing? I thought you'd have made more haste
home, being you know to morrow is to be so busy a day.


Doing? Why, conquering Lyons, challenging wild Beasts, getting Honour, crooked
Rib -- a whole Cartload full.


Lyons! What Lyons, Fool?


What Lyons, Fool! I won't tell ye, Fool -- Oh, Son in-Law, good morrow, good
morrow.


Good morrow, Vather-in-Law.


Well, and how go matters -- How does your Spouse that is to be and you agree,
humph?


Why, by Conscience I like the young Woman well enough; she's a thought too
thick and squat, but when she's married, that Belly of hers will come down with
working.


How's that? Gadzooks have a care what you say; why, she had rather her Belly
should get up than down when she's married, man: Not a word more of that good
Son-in-Law.


Gadslid, I would not Mary should have heard him for a hundred Pounds.


Pshaw wagh, I did not mean jokingly, not I by Conscience; I warrant when she's
my Wife, Mary shall have no cause to complain: And by Conscience I like Mary
much the better, because I think she's a Maid; and for my part, I don't love a
Pippin that other Folks have handled: Now, though she be a little unsightly
sometimes, yet I believe Mary is a pure Maid by Conscience.


As when I bound her head first with a Biggen, I'll be sworn for her; besides,
the Girl is mighty meekly minded, she'll not speak for Money, Meat, nor Clothes
-- she'll soon think she has enough, I'll say that for Mary.


Ah, the Devil's in that old lying Jade; 'oons the noise of 20 Powder-mills
come not near her, if she want but her Bread and Butter in a Morning --


So, old Sandy-beard, you have always some good thing to say of the Women still
-- but I'm sure you have no cause to prate, for you have had a good one; and if
you did not like me because I was young when we married, you might have taken
my Mother, she was old enough, and we both lived in a house.


No, No, Matrimony, not so neither; one had as good eat the Devil, as the Broth
he's boiled in: Besides, you were both so like, there was nought to choose. She
had a Tongue like Thunder -- and I think, Spouse mine, yours is not always as
still as a Dormouse: Like Mother like Daughter, faith -- and if the Mare have a
bald Face, the Philly will have a Blaze.


Humph, will it so, goodman Garlick-eater -- Hang ye, don't lye vexing me, but
come your ways home, and help to sit our Mary; she's like to have her Shoes
soal'd, and her blue Jacket edged with green, if you won't look after it, but
stand Idling here.


Nay, pray be quiet now, by Conscience I must have a word or two more with my
Father in Law about Mary's good Parts; for I confess I like her mainly, because
she's a (...); I was (...) to a Widow a while ago, but I would not have her;
for besides that she was no Maid, she had four great Faults, she had three
Children and a lame Leg.


He that marries a Widow and three Children, marries four Thieves. You have
(...) it a Scouring, Son in Law.


Well then, since you must have another Cup of Prate, I'll leave ye, and get me
gone to Mary; the Girl must have some Colberteen Lace set upon her Wedding
Smock: Bless me! what a do has there been about that Smock? Mother, she cries,
are the Gussets big enough here? Is it sloped enough at top, and wide enough at
bottom. I've had above a hundred Questions about that Smock: I warrant that
Smock has been bleaching in her head above this two Months.


So, now she's gone, Father, let's discourse a little more; for I've a huge
Inkling to know a few more of Mary's good qualities. By Conscience I look upon
Mary to have a notable Understanding, Vather-in-Law.


Understanding; She can make a Pudding; that's as much Understanding as a Wife
has need of.


Now if she be but virtuous -- against which she has one wicked sign, your
Nose, Vather-in-Law, for, to quip you with a Proverb too, one may know by your
Nose what Mutton you love -- I say, if she be but virtuous, and has but an eye
to her honour as Gentlefolks call it, then all's right.


Virtuous! Ay, I warrant her she's as virtuous as the Skin between her Brows;
but you must not give your self so much to Jealousy nor Doubt, Son-in-Law: He
that's afraid of every Grass, must not piss in a Meadow; if you fear, why will
you go to it, why will you marry?


Why, by Conscience I don't know; I go to it as other folks do, I think, for
ready Pudding: Besides, Mary has such a way with her, such a jigging crumptious
whim with her Backside, that she's as full of Temptation as an Egg is full of
Meat, she has a pure stroke with her, fackins -- Then, to say the truth, Mary's
very well forehanded too.


Forehanded -- oons this Oaf makes a Mare of my Daughter.


We shall do hugely together; I'll set her to weeding in the Wheat the next day
after we are married; she has curious spud Fingers to grub up the Charvil.


Fingers! I think she has, and the nails of them are an Inch long for the
purpose; she has not cut them this Twelvemonth, to my knowledge.


Then by Conscience she must help the Plough too a little now and then: You
wont be angry if I documentize her, and make her a good Huswife, Vather-in Law.


Angrly -- ^o not (...) prithee ^o^e her in wi^h thy ^elf, Tib, and Crookhorn,
and the rest of the O^en, if thou wilt* An (...) Wife lets the Pig burn by the
^ires when thou hast her, Boy, even draw together a gods-name.


By Conscience, and so we shall, for my mind gives me we shall do mighty well
together; for 'tis odd to think how it came about, bu^ ever since I saw Mary's
Bubbies, as she was sitting withou^ her Waistcoat at our Sheering, I have had a
main Good will to her; by Cons^ience I have thought of those Bubbies I warrant
above a hundred times; and things have grown up to a head, and put forward
mightily since that time. Can Mary spin, Vather-in-Law?


Spin! Oons, like a Spider, boy: Her Mother before her was as good at it as
ever put Spindle between her legs.


Gadsdiggers -- come away then; for I'll go presently, and get ready my
Wedding-Tackle -- and to morrow go to Church and say the words -- and then at
night, Vather-in-law -- at night -- oh Lord, ha, ha, ha, ha.


Ha, ha, ha, ay, at night; oh, poor Man -- ha, ha, and yet she'll hold ye tack,
if I don't mistake her, for all you're so crank; and so take this Proverb with
you by way of Advice. If you an old Flea-bitten ride, you need not fear the
Dirt;
But when you back a young Colt; See your Saddle be well girt?



HEre Mary, prithee thread my Needle, good girl, while^t I turn down this
Selvidge here.


Ay, come, let's see it.


Ay, ye Jade, if my Husband's Proverb be true, that says Sweet Marjoram, and
Marriage is good for the eye-sight.


Ho, ho, ho -- there, now 'tis done


Who, Iaquey, ha, ha, ha -- why, I thought he would have bewater'd himself for
joy when I told him I was sure thou were a Maid; he swore a great Oath he loved
a Maidenhead better than Buttermilk, or a Sunday-Dumpling at the Parson's.


Ho, ho, ho, Did he ^aith -- Well, and good Mother, what said Father then?
-- ho, ho -- Hold, but stay a little -- Icod you'll make it too narrow at
bottom here; I shall not have half room enough, if you pinch it so in this place;
-- odslidikins, if it b'ant wide enough here, Mother, you spoil all.


I think the Girl is betwattled -- why,


Well, let me see now, I can tell to a Ba^ly corn i^ I measure; look here, from
my left Thumb to my Nose is just


Phoo, Pox take him, he stood choking himself with laughing at his own
Proverbs, but ne'^r a one of 'em on our side; I had like to have pulled him by
the ears three times, as I'm a Christian.


Well, I think the Devil's in my Father for that; he makes no more of a Woman,
Icod, than of a wisp of Hay, he loves nobody but Dapple; on my Conscience and
Soul he's civiller to that Ass, than to you, Mother.


Ah! '^is even too true, Mary; this plaguy Knight Errantry, a murrain take it,
crams his head so, that the Man is, as I'm a Christian, I know not how besotted
-- so that he never thinks of Family matters, not he -- I've had no Comfort
from him this half year, Lord help me.


Icod that's very hard -- There, come, now let's set on the Lace.


And a married Woman's but a solitary thing without Comfort, Mary; if I had
married Diego of our Town, as I might have done if I had not been a Fool, for
he cast many a loving Sheeps eye at me, I had had Comforting enough, I had had
my Belly full of Comfort then as I'm a Christen.


If my Husband don't comfort me when I've occasion. I'll make him a C^ckold
faith -- I'd do my self Reason, Icod. Ho, ho, ho, ho.


Ay Mary, in another Country now that might be; but in Spain here, the more's
the Pity, a Woman can't do herself Reason if she would; if a Woman does her
self Reason here, her Husband confines her prese^tly -- she's under Lock and
Key the next minute.


O Lord! I understand ye; and that's a plaguy thing Icod.


Ah! well fare little England, odslidikins, they say there a Farmer's Wife, or
such a one as I now, may have leave of her Husband to be sociable if she can
make any advantage on it; she has no Confinement upon her; all things are open
there; they lock up nothing there, but the Cupboard.


Why, that's a pure place then, I'll swear: but hold ye, what do ye think,
Mother, shall I put any Lace at bottom or no? you know I'm to be a great Lady
Before I die: And now we are talking of England, I've heard there was one at
London, near the Court I think they call it, that wore Lace thus long, and
always took care to have it se^n coming down Stairs, or going out of a Coach;
and that the Fool her Husband --


Knew nothing of the matter, Moll, he never came so near my Lady, he knew
nothing of the Lace. I'm sure.


No, ho, ho, ho, ho, Icod that's good, he know nothing on it! why who should
then?


Who, fool! why, some young Blade with long powdered cu^l'd hair, and a Patch
on's Nose, that watched her motions -- Why, Husbands have the least to do with
their Wives there, Fool, o^ any folk, either to lye with, or to lead 'em there,
is unfashionable and unmannerly.


Ho, ho, ho -- Well Icod, then that's a crumptious place I say again -- and
then Mother, there's a sort of Ca^tle they call Citizens, ho, ho, ho; Icod,
they say they don't get their own Children neither.


Why no, if they'll drive a subtle Trade, no more they must not, ye silly Ja^e;
if they intend to be rich and be Aldermen, the Courtier must Cuckold the
Citizen in course, then in course he gets into Debt, and then the Citizen gets
his Estate ^or Satisfac^ion in course.


Hoy day! why, this is whirly curly murly, round about our Cole-fire, ho, ho,
ho, ho -- Icod, ^his is driving a subtle Tra^e indeed.





Odslidikins -- 'tis Iaquey, he's come to call ye to Church, I'll be hanged
else; I'll go and make an end of my Work withi^, and get things ready; in the
mean time, be sure to coy it, and stand off, and niggle him purely, dost' hear,
Mary?


Ah! Icod, I'll niggle him so he was never so niggled since his Mother* bound
his head, ho, ho, ho -- Go, go, I warrant ye, Mother, let me alone with him.


Why, how now, Flesh of mine, what no farther yet? Good Lord! now how comes
this -- Why, th^ what do ye call it,


I can't d'on my Clothes


Gadsdiggers, Master Camacho and his Bride, and the Man in in the black, tarry
for us; good now, Mary, go dizzen, and come away and be married lightly; good
now do, Mary.


Pish, I can't abide to be married -- I'm altered.


Gadsdigge^s, that's a good one by Conscience; not abide to be married* Was
there ever one of thy Age that could not abide to be married -- Pshaw, you must
not say so, Mary; come buss, come buss.


Pish, I can't buss.


Pshaw, you can buss, and you must buss; 'sbud, she makes me as hot as a Tossed
-- What a devil ails her trow? Come, good honey Flesh of mine, buse now.


I can't buss, I won't buss.


Not buss!


No.


Not Buss me at all!


No, no, no, no.


Not at all?


No, no, no, no.


Nor go to be married?


No.


Gadsdiggers, nor lye with me to night?


Oo -- I'm ashamed.


Ah, dear sweet honey Mary, don't say No -- By Conscience I shall hang my self
if you are in earnest: Look here, I'll give thee this pure white Turnip, if thou
wilt but buss and


Nay, pish, I won't go.


You shall go.


Nay, fie -- be quiet; O Lord, I can't go.


Master Camacho will laugh me to death; I would not but be married to day for a
hundred Pound.


Nor I neither, Icod, for all my fooling.


Therefore, Gadsdiggers, come along, for I must buss, and I will buss: I must
marry, and I will marry, and there's the Resolution of --


Well, I will, I will, I will, I will -- What a-dikins ai^s the Man? Icod, you
won't be so sharp set seven years hence.


SIR Bachelor, I have with care considered on each particular of your
discourse; nor shall this Sword ever keep back its Aid, when Beauty, Wit, or
injured Love's in danger -- I am my self a Lover, learned Bachelor, and
there^ore doubly will assist Basilius. St^cho shall be my Second; he shall
fight too, if there should be occasion.


My Friend and I are doubly yours, heroic Sir.


I fight! with whom must I ^ight, I wonder? Good Sir, don't let your head run so
much upon this Fighting Work: We are going to a Wedding now; and I see no
Monsters that I should be engaged a Second to attack there, unless it be an Ox
that's roasting yonder; -- And I^ll attack that presently, with all my heart,
if you please.


An Ox -- A Calf -- Ha, ha, ha, ha -- Sancho's a Droll, Sir Bachelor, you'll
excuse him -- But at a dire Adventure, brave as Hercules.


A Plague of your Commendations --


But ar^ you sure the Virgin has her Cue? Is she resolved? Will she assist your
Friend?


Most vigorously; 'tis the morose Compul^ion of an Uncle has brought the thing
so far -- She hates Camacho.


No more then to be said* Sir* if your Plot fails, this Arm shall do her
Justice.


Triumphant Voice* How I adore its Author! Now, by Apollo and the sacred Nine,
that dip in Helicon to write of Glory, you seem^, great Sir, an Emperor
already*


Ah! the Emperor of (...) take thee -- art thou putting him in mind of being
an (...) again? Gadzooks, I, begin to find this tongue-padding Fellow is a vary
Rogue: They ^ay he's a Scholard, and can tell by his Art how many pound of
Candles are set up in the Sky from one years end to the other; and that he can
expound Dreams -- I was such a Fool to try him once, but nothing came on it but
Folly that I know; see, they are complimenting still: -- Ah! go thy ways for a
Dream-teller.


Who talks of Dreams there -- Then, Sir, i^ that Title sound too weak for your
high ^elish, to be Emperor of Consta^tinople -- is most grand.


Ye've hit it, Sir; that place I must renown, since one of our best Knights
Patrons of Chivalry, the Star of Arms, great Palmarin d'Oliva, ^eign'd there
long since.


They have made a ^ick Voyage on it; they are got as far as Constantinople in
two Minutes -- This plaguy Conjurer, I lay my life* is interpreting a Dream for
^y mad Master too.


What dost thou m^tter about Dreams, Sancho?


Oh, Sir, his head runs strangely on the Topic; I late was his Interpreter.
Sancho dreamt he was at Sea, very much tossed in a Ship, but amongst the rest,
had three great Tosses, that shook him so, he waked -- I told him the first
signified Preferment -- which so happened; for in two days after, he was tossed
-- into his Government.


And in two days after that, I was tossed out again -- that was the second --
But now, where was the third, good Mr. Conjurer? How was I tossed the third
time?


In that, indeed Sancho, the Stars are cloudy*


Oh Sir, that falls within the Verge of my small Understandi^g. Sancho was,
just before that -- tossed in a Blanket; and I suppose the Stars meant that the
third.


A plague on your suppose -- have you found it out -- Yes, if that were the
third Tossing, I was tossed with a Vengeanc^ and you were ^he Cause, I thank ye
-- for quarrelling with the Carriers at the (...) -- B^t come, look not too
high, lest a Chip fall in your Eye* and don't scald your lips in another Man's
Porridge -- I shall take Warning one day, and ^o perhaps escape a fourth
Tossing, I shall, Gadzooks.


But tha^ I know Sancho's a Virtuoso, I should imagine these were marks o^
Choler.


He is angry -- Which passion as others do express by Oaths and Curses, he
always does by Proverbs -- But hark, I hear the Marriage Instruments are
sounding, and the procession coming.

I'll stand by; and, when you ^ Sign --


Great Sir, I'll soon inform you -- how to get your head broke.


Come Neighbours, merry be your hearts all: And now, let's see ye sing your
Songs, and foot it ^ightly for the Honour of Camacho and Qui^teria I have got
her a^ ^as^, do ye mind me* What, must every poor Fellow ^hink to ou^ (...) or
me -- A Sneak, a Mortgaging Rat; No, I'd have bought his head off, boys, but
I'd have had her -- What, I have Money enough, do ye mind me.


Ay, ay, Cousin, I am glad she's so well bestowed*


I wo^der what she could see in the other, to like him; he could jointure her in
nothing but Fiddling and Poetry: and her good Uncle left her too well to give it
a way all to nothing.


Besides, he has been always bred in the Town: I'll warrant him as rotten as a
Medlar -- as (...) too as a Lath; and his Legs stand as if they were set on the
wrong end upwards -- Now yours* Cousin, have some Substance.


Ay, ay, they'll carry him out o'th dirt; those Legs are sit for business now
-- Ah, the Bride showed her Understanding in her Choice, I'll say it


Oh, thank ye, thank ye, this is kind ^aith -- Come, where are these lazy
Rogues -- Is Dinner ready? Quickly, quickly there -- let me be served, ye
Knaves -- What, I have Money enough, do ye mind me -- Let me have two Sir-Loins
in one Dish, a dozen of Capons in another* for my first Course at my own Table.
Then let the Ducks swim in a River of Sauce, and the Pigeons be stu^t with
Parsley till they crack again: Quick, quick, I say; and you're all welcome, Boys
-- What, I have Money enough, do ye mind me?


A Camacho -- a Camacho, hey.


Two Sir-lyons! humph -- and a dozen of Capons! -- Royal Fare, Gadzooks: -- And
I've a Stomach as sharp as Heart can wish; -- I shall claw those Capo^s off. --
Give your Worship Joy.


Oh, honest Sancho, welcome: What! Thou art hungry, I warrant; ho, ho, ho.
Well, thou sha^ suck at the Horn of Plenty presently, thou shalt. Eat, Rogue,
till thy Guts can hold no more. Where's thy Lean-jaw'd Master?


Mum, mum, Sir; within Ear shot.


What, he's too proud to dine with us* I warrant, without the Ceremonies of the
Great Mogul to usher him in, though he be half starved. -- Ho, ho, ho; How I
laugh at these poor Scoundrels!


Sancho.


I come, Sir. -- Pray Sir,


Sancho, I would not have thee, for I ^ind thee prone, to hold too great a
Correspondence with these People, because I know not yet whether they are
Friends or Enemies. -- And one thing more I tell thee as a Secret; Give me thy
Ear -- Here's an Adventure coming -- we shall have Action suddenly.


Action! What, -- Dinner you mean, Sir, I suppose. Why, Troth, Eating is a very
pretty Action, I must needs say; and I am prepared, Sir; you need not put me in
mind.


Nor do I, Sancho; and therefore thus I charge thee, by the unquestioned Homage
that tho^ owe me, not to dine to day.


Not dine, Sir!


No, unless on Thoughts of Honour, as I do; Dinner will strangely dull thy
Animal Spirits, which I shall presently have occasion for. -- Once more thy
Ear; mark me attentively: Within this Hour one more and thou and I must fight
with all this Company.


The Devil we must! Oh -- that ever I was born.


Conquer 'em -- and do an Act Ages to come shall story.


Canquer 'em -- 'Oons, what do ye mean, Sir? They are tame enough, I think;
here's no Strife amongst 'em, that I see; and to provoke 'em to fight -- not I,
faith, Sir. He goes too soon to that Market where nothing's to be bought but
Blows.


Wilt thou not ^ight then?


Not a Stroke, Gadzooks: Besides, to forbid me eating too, when my Belly has
rung all^in above this two ho^rs -- Sir, I'm your Vassal; but to think I wont
Dine at my Daughter's Wedding, i^ such a Tyranical Whim, that I must rebel, if
you were fo^ty Emperors.


Scoundrel -- Thou shalt not have it in ^hy power to eat -- So: No more Words
for this time. -- I see the Sports begin.


VErtumnus, Flora, you that bless the Fields.
Where warbling Philomel in Safety builds;
And to the Nymphs and Swains
That revel on these Plains
Dispose the Joys that Heaven and Nature yields:
Call Hymen, call him from his merry home;
Bid him prepare his Torch, and come;
To sing and drink full Bowls; Call loud, I say:
'Tis Beauty's Feast, Quitteria's Wedding-day.
HEre is Hymen, here am I,
Some Men's grief, and some Me^s joy:
Here's for better and worse,
Many Bless and many Curse.
Tender Virgins soft and young,
They that to be Mothers long,
By my Aid Loves Raptures try,
Save their blushes and enjoy.
But none must Loves Banquet tas^e,
Tho^ 'tis dressed, till I say Grace;
Till I Lice^se so to do,
Maids that wish, must not fa^ too.
The vast Universe I sway,
Humane Kind my Laws obey:
By a Power that equals Fates,
I give Honours and Estates.
Thousands me a Pillory call,
Mouse-trap^ Stocks, the Devil and all:
For who tries how I can bind,
Is for all his Life confined.
But if any honest Swain,
Ask if I am Joy or Pain,
I am both, the truth to tell,
Sometimes Heaven sometimes Hell.
CEase Hymen cease, thy Brow let Discord awe,
Thou Yoke, where Fools with toil and trouble draw;
I am sworn Foe to-all thy Law does bind;
Marriage from first Creation was designed
A Curse, Entailed on wretched Human Kind.
'Tis noble Discord, generous Strife,
That gives the truest taste of Life;
Marriage first made Man fall,
Had I been in the Garden placed,
The Woman ne'er had made him taste;
'Twas foolish Loving damned us all,
Had I been in, c.
Happy Mortals you from me,
Shall have all felicity.

I'll b^tow, to raise your Joys,
Charming Girls and Lovely Boys.

And to quell each fond Delight,
I will make y^u scratch and Bite.

Let Mortals then know,
Let 'em know, let 'em know, let 'em know, let 'em know,
Let us by reflection show,
What attends the Marriage Vow,
And what Joys and Troubles grow;
Let Mortals then know,
Let 'em know, let 'em know, let 'em know, let 'em know.

A Surgeon, a Surgeon, help, help for Heavens sake.


He faints, he faints, keep the Spirit to his Nose, Oh ^elp, help --


Oh unfortunate Accident, Oh dreadful Mischance, make room there; Where's the
Bridegroom, where's the Cruel Bride?


What are ye mad, do ye mind me; here we are, what's the matter? How now, what
business have you here Friend?


Basilius, my dear Friend Basilius, Oh, if you have any pity, let him come in
and spea^ to the Bride.


Basilius -- should, what my Rival -- no, no, such matter, he comes not here,
do ye mind me.


Oh poor Basilius, he's past being your Rival now Sir, for no sooner had the
Fryer told him, that he was to Marry Quitteria this morning, but in a desperate
Frenzy, with a sharp Tuck he run himself through the Body, and there he is
without, weltering in his Blood, nor will be Confessed do what they can, till
he speak with the Bride, and she consents to hear his Dying Words.


What -- has he run himself through the Body, do ye say --


Oh! ay Sir, ay -- he has killed himself, he has killed himself, he can't live
half an hour.


Nay, look ye, do ye mind me, if he has killed himself, I care not much if I do
let him come in and tell his Tale -- What says Quitty -- let the hot-headed
Fool come in, he can't Prate long, if he has run himself through the Body.


Oh, Sir, believe not I will hinder him, the Man that sacrificed his Life for
me; if in my Bosom lives a generous thought, must certainly have there a large
possession.


We'll bring him then, -- and do ye mind me, tell the Cook we'll send him word
when the simple Fellow's dead, and then we'll go to Dinner.


Bless us, what a Wound's there, the Sword comes above five inches out at his
Back.


Ah, he has taken occasion for the Sun to shine through him Neighbour.


Oh!


'Twas the effect of both our rigid Fortunes -- Alas! I was not in my own
dispose, my Heart ne'er had the power to make amends for your true Love since
'twas confined by Friends.


The short and the long on it is, Friends did it, do ye mind me, I had Interest
with her Uncle, and you had none; What! ^he thing is plain enough, you lost
her, because you were poor; and I had her, because I was rich -- What! I had
Money enough, do ye mind me.


Live happy Sir, and long, as you can enjoy her, I only beg o^ you for my Souls
sake, to grant me one request be^ore I dye.


Request; Well, what is't, let's hear, let's hear.


That whilst I live, which is but till this Weapon be drawn out out of my Body
-- for then 'tis certain my very Soul flows with it -- that you'd resign
Quitteria to me, and to confirm it subscribe here this Paper.


How! subscribe, I don't understand that, do ye mind me.


Alas, Sir, 'tis but for a wretched minute.


Come, good Sir, mind your better part, your Soul, leave these transitory
thoughts, and prepare for your Confession.


'Tis for my Souls sake, Reverend Sir, I beg this, for I, alas, have rashly
made an Oath, that till she's mine, I ne'er would be Confessed, -- and now am
in a State of Desperation; Madam, you may have Charity, though no Love -- Do
you persuade him, alas, you know a Soul's a precious thing.


I am given all to him, but yet, alas Sir, whether my Interest be so much, as
can assure the Grant of any Suit, I dare not yet affi^m --


Let 'em alone Sancho, stand Foot to Foot by me.


What can be the meaning of all this, sure this plaguy Devil, my Master, has
not persuaded this Man to kill himself, only to h^e^ me of my Dinner.


Your Charity should exert it self on this Occasion, troth Sir, ^ the Lady says
-- A Soul's a precious thing.


Why, I should be well enou^ inclined, do ye mind me, to take pi^ty of his Soul,
if it would be civil, and go from his Body in good time, and not hinder us too
long from Dinner; but to be sure of that now.


That, Sir, -- alas, it will be gone next minute, draw out the Sword, you draw
out his Soul too; Besides, Sir, you'll be haunted fearfully if he should die
without shrift in this desperate Condition -- his Ghost will be glaring ye in
the Face every minute.


His Ghost!


Ay, Sir, his Ghost in a Bloody Shroud, with a pale Face and gogling Eyes --
'twill come every day to Dinner t'ye; and to have a Ghost you know always
dipping in one's Dish, Sir.


Humph, dipping in my Dish!


Ay, Sir, with his cold scraggy Knuckles.


Why, troth, do ye mind me Friend, I should not much like that, I confess -- a
Ghost is but an odd Companion at Meals.


The ebbing Pulse about my Heart grows weaker, and little Spirits skim before
my Eyes, all gay and fine in party-coloured dresses, to catch my fleeting Soul
-- therefore consent this Instant, or for ever.


You have, Sir, mine, and with it all my Heart, and were my Hand my own I'd
give that too.


Fiddlers, Physicians, Songs, and Glisterpipes.


He begins to talk idly, therefore if you love your quiet, Sir, subscribe
quickly, 'tis but for a minute you know -- besides think on the Ghost, Sir.


Dipping his scraggy Knuckles in my Dish -- my Hair stands an end at the
thoughts on it -- There, Sir


No, no, Sir, longer, we desire no longer -- there's Sir, there's Balsom for
your Wound,


When stately Rosius on the Roman Stage
Was like some valiant General to dye
The Steel, not through himself he thrust in Rage,
But slily through a Wooden Trunk close by
The Purple stains, which were a Sheeps warm Blood,
Upon his snowy Linen sprinkled were:
But, Oh! the Fools that nothing understood,
How they did wonder, Oh! how they did stare!
Ha, ha, ha, a Trick, a Trick, a Trick -- Oh, my Dear


Oh cruel Man, am I turned off at this rate, I shall cry my Eyes out, Ha, ha,
ha --


Ha, ha, ha, you may get another Wife, Sir, you have Money enough, do ye mind
me.


Odsbodikins, am I fob'd off thus, -- it shall not do, Sir, I'll have her again
with a Vengeance, ^all on, Friends, I'm abused; I'll give a thousand Ducats
for her again, fall on Boys,


Now,


Ten Millions shall not fetch her back --


Brave, Brave Don Quixote, what Honour shall I pay him.


We will have a Statue for him and for Sancho, we will instantly to his Daughter's
Wedding, and caress him there.


Ay, when you have taken away my Stomach with drubbing, you'll give me a Dinner.


And now, dear Angel, let's to our own Happiness -- Thus, let all Lovers that
by Friends are crossed,
Thus let 'em be rewarded for it at last



WHy, here has been mad doings in the Meadow yonder, if all be true as Father
in Law has told us, Master Basilius has whipped away the Bride, it seems, and by
Conscience they have made a mere Fool of my Master Camacho.


Ay, and there's a woundy many Stories about it already; some say the Weapon
came out above a handful at's Back, and some say there was above eight or nine
inches seen out at's Belly, and every body has a several Tale; but let it be
how it will, Mary, since Master Basilius has offered thee thy Wedding Dinner,
as well as tother, he's as proper a Man as tother, and deserves a good Wife
as well as tother, every whit, hah!


Ay, ay, Mother, so I can but be Married, and you can but Dine, we care not
which way it comes, Iaques, I'll set my Mouth in Prim.


Well, Flesh of mine, Rumpsy, Plumpsy, how is't? hah! does Heart thump yet, the
hour's a coming Chuffy Chaps -- 'tis a coming Long Nose Pinckaninny, are your
Twinklers twinkling in faith -- well the Domine will have said Grace presently
-- and then I'll fall to^ with a Tantararara, I've a swinging Stomach by
Conscience.


O Lord, what do ye mean trow? pray Man don't talk so.


Ah -- ye Bubbys you, I must talk so, ye little tempting Rogue, I will talk so;
well, go thy ways, thou puts down all Spain for Bubbys, that's certain -- Hark,
Mother in Law, Mary the Buxome's Bubby's there be not the making of us when I
have made her Milch once, she will be sent for to Suckle all the great Do^s
Children about Court, she'll yield a Pailful a day by Conscience.


Pish -- fie upon it, fecks now I can't abide such talk, can't you let Bubbys
alone I wonder.


Ah, splice ye for a Cunning Carrion -- the Jade simpers as if Butter would not
melt in her mouth, but Cheese of three half pence a po^nd won't choke her, as
the old saying is.


Come, where's the Bride and Bridegroom,


Hark now, by Conscience our Friends are come to fetch us to Church, come
Molly, come away Flesh of mine, p^ithee come.


Fugh, I can't tell how to come, I'm so ashamed.


Ah -- cunning Quean -- Ha, ha, ha, ha --


THus far kind Fortune has improved our Joy, and when the Law has perfected the
Work, then I shall call this Treasure of my Soul, my own securely,


The Pay of Friendly service is the doing it, and I am glad at Heart it has
succeeded; I know the Mad Knights assistance was Authentic, and therefore blew
him up with Praise and Flattery, which made him, when the brunt of the Business
came, to lay about him so; Where have you left him, Madam?


In the Garden, dedicating his Fond Thoughts to his Romantic Mistress Dulcinea;
To divert him from whom, and to promote our Mirth, I have laid a Plot; That
Al^y here, my Niece, shall feign he^ self passionately in love with him, meet
him at every turn, and sigh and languish as if she were despairing.


'Twill make us excellent Sport -- but she must be sure then to cry up Knight
Errantry -- sing Amorous Ditties often, and humour him in his Romantic Vein.


Humour him, 'dslife I have got Parismus and Parismenos almost by heart, and am
as familiar with Don Belianis of Greece, as if I had been his Squire; and then
for singing, I have got the most deplorable Matters, the most Melancholy
miserable Madigrals, that being dismally howled about twelve at night, would
make all the Cats of the Parish come into the Consort.


Ha, ha, ha, ha, the Witty Rogue will mimic it better than any Actress in
Spain, and the Knight will be puzzled Damnably; but a Pox on it, we want him all
this while -- Oh, here he comes and Sancho.


The beauty of the Morning bless ye, Sir, -- and may the Rays of the Meridian
Sun shine gently on the Head of the most ^am'd of all Knights Errant in the
Universe.


Oh good Basilius, generous young Man, -- you do me too much Honour, -- good
faith 'tis far beyond my mean deservings.


No flattery can reach Don Quixote's Head, he looks above it still.


As far as high Olympus does a Molehill.


Or Heaven the lowest Earth.


Most Beauteous Lady, happy I am above all other Knights, to have such Praises
from so sweet a Mouth; and my most learned Sir, I thank you for your Goodness.


Nor must my good Friend Sancho lose his share in our best Compliments -- whose
Service has been notable, -- well my trusty Squire -- to an Immortal Knight; Is
Mary sped yet, are the happy Couple coming, you see we wait for 'em.


Yes, yes, Sir, the job is over by this time, the two Fools are hobbling hither
as fast as they can: I should have had a new Jerkin on by right, my Masters
Worship gave me an old Mantle to make me one I thank him, but I have laid it up
till another time, I love to be saving.


I gave thee that as a Reward for the Bruises thou got in the late
Skirmish; for though thy Mettle, like a resty Jade, ran back at first, yet with
my Spurring thou gott'st Honour afterwards; and Scars and Br^ises that are got
with Honour, all merit to be covered with a Mantle.


Ah sweet Man


What says the Nymph unspotted


Ye sweet Face -- Ah ye dear Man, you.


Fie Altis, fie, did you not promise me to be more moderate. You must excuse
her, Sir, the poor Girl cant hide a Passion for you, which you had known
before, had not I feared the Charms of the bright Dulcinea -- were so rooted in
you, you could heed nothing else, -- but now, since she has broke the Ice her
self, -- I can no longer forbear telling ye, you have bewitched my Niece.


Ah -- those alluring Eyes.


Fie Alty --


Prevailing merit, Madam, is not Witchcraft -- I cannot help my -- influence,
'tis not my fault, you should lock up your Sisters and your Nieces.


That Heart-seducing Nose.


This is almost Distraction, the young Lady is far gone.


Ah poor young thing, this has been breaking out a great while.


That precious --


Prithee.


Graceful.


Nay -- look off Maiden.


Honey wording Mouth,
And that most charming Phillamote Complexion.

DAmon Feast your Eyes on me,
Whither simply would you lead 'em:
Can you think another she,
Has more Charms than I to feed 'em*
He th^t leaves a Ro^ie Cheek,
Lips Vermillion'd like a Ruby,
Blindly courser fare to seek,
Pox upon him for a Booby.
If a Smile, the Lovers Joy
Can Delight, I'll do it Divi^ely,
Or do ye love a Sleepy Eye,
Here is one can Ogle fi^ely:
Charms would make another Man
Gaze an Age, I'll show to win ye;
And when I've shown all I can;
If you go the Devil's in you.
-- Oh Flower of Knights, Don Quixote de la Mancha.

Oh! Dulcinea del Toboso, guard well the Castle of my Constancy -- The foe is
strong, the Nymph is wondrou0s Lovely. Oh I hear Music -- now I shall get
Breath.


He shuns me -- then break Heart, I'll go and cry my Soul out.


Very strange this --


Ay, Here comes Mary, the Jade tosses her Head like the fore-Horse of a Team;
She has made me almost Drunk with Aqua Vitae this morning -- and will be Foxed
her self before night, she's so crank upon the matter.


A very jolly Troop; their ^aces too look merrily.


A sign their Hearts are Tuned: This is their time, a Wedding Day's the Jubilee
of Life.


Welcome, welcome all, and I wish you Joy my Friend -- Your Spouse there is
well pleased I see by her looks.


Ay, I'll make her look nine ways at once before I have done with her, by
Conscience.


Take heed of Threatening F^iend, Mary's a Girl of Courage.


Ay, Ay, l^ him threaten, 'tis all he can do to hurt me, -- I'll deal with him
well enough I warrant ye; Odslidikins, what de think I can't deal with him:
When I was a Maid, and under subjection, I primed and simpered and was
mealy-mouth'd as they call it; but now I am a Wife, I gad, I'll talk what I
please -- and be Master too in my turn, old Rock.


-- Why well said Mrs. Bride -- give her a Buss for that Friend.


How now, What, do as you are bid, every Fool does as their bid, Lobcock.


Ha, ha, ha, -- 'tis a plaguy mettled young Quean, but 'tis no wonder; for at
her Age I was just so my self. This Jade puts me in mind of a pure P^overb,
that says, Honest Men marry quickly, but Wise Men not at all.


Nay, Mary, -- Gadzooks you'll balk my Son in Law if you f^ght upon your
Wedding Day; that's a little too soon -- your Mother and I did not go to Cuffs
in a fortnight after at least, Child.


Oh, 'tis nothing, she intended perhaps to entertain him as the famous Spartan
Ladies used to do at their Marriages, where a good Box on the Ear given by the
Bride to her new Husband, was held a special favour.


'Tis a special favour that she'll entertain him with then, as often as any
Spartan of 'em all, I'll say that for her.


A blow may be a sign of over fondness, as Mothers sometimes Kissing Bite their
Children.


Ay, ay, 'twas a Jest, they play the play together; I warrant they are as fond of
one another as two Kittlins.


Nay I meant no harm not I, -- it came a little sour though upon my le^t Ear,
by Conscience -- but come, we wont fall out for all that Mary.


Fugh, I care not for falling out nor falling in -- I cod I wont be Buss'd but
when I please -- What de think I'm a Fool, to be slopt and slopt every time you
are bid do it, I cod I wont be slopt but when I've a mind to it my self; nay,
look as you will -- I wont be mealy mouthed not I, I'm Married now, mun.


Faith Mrs. Bride, and nothing but reason* and now to end the difference in
Mirth -- lets have some Music, the great Don Quixot's Melancholy: Come, let
the Wedding sports go forward, and bid the Servants get Dinner ready in the
Lodge next to the Grove. I've heard the Bride Dances and Sings her s^lf too my
Dear I hope will pleasure us too, add to the Entertainment upon her Wedding
Day.


I hope she'll be so kind, and to encourage her, there's something towards
House-keeping.


O Lord -- 'tis Gold -- Fackins -- Thank your noble Ladyship.


Give your Honour many Thanks.


Hoy, What do you thank her for -- Look here Presto, you are like to see no
more on it,


Nay here's another for the Bridegroom too* we must not be kind by halves.


Heaven bless ye, by Conscience, you are a noble Gentlemen. Now Flesh of mine.


What now -- Why now, 'tis where it should be -- nay stand away, I cod I'll
keep it -- I'll make it in my bargain, I'll keep all the Money.


So -- the Jade begins already -- she'll show him rare Pranks ere long.


Odsbodikins that were wise work.


Ah, let her have it, let her have her Humour till night, you know then you
must strip her of all.


Oh by all means; and besides, 'twill hinder our Mirth should you cross her now
^ Come begin there.


COme all, great, small,
Short, tall, away to Stool-Ball.
Down in a Dale on a Summers day,
All the Lads, and Lasses, met to be merry;
A Match for Kisses at Stool-Ball play,
And for Cakes, and A^e, and Cyd^r and Perry.
Will, and Tom, Hall, Dick, and Hugh, Kate, Doll,
Sue, Bess, and M^ll, with Hodge, and Bridget, Ned and Nanny,
But when Plump Siss got the Ball in her Mutton Fist,
Once fretted, she'd hit it further than any.
Running, Hairing,
Gapeing, Staring,
Reaching, 'Stooping,
Hollowing, Whooping,
Sun a Setting,
All thought fitting,
To sit down and rest 'em
Hall got Sue,
And Doll got Hugh,
All took by turns
Their Lasses and Buss'd 'em.
Jolly Ralph was in with Pegg,
Tho freckled like a Turkey Egg,
And she as right as is my Leg
Still gave him leave to Touse her.
Harry then to Katty,
Swore her Dugs were pretty,
Though they were all sweaty,
And large as any Cows are.
Tom Melancholy was
With his Lass,
For Sue, what he e're could do,
Would not note him.
Some had told her
Being a Soldier,
In a Party
With Macarty,
At the Siege of Limerick,
He was wounded in the S^rotum.
But the cunning Philly
Was more kind to Willy,
Who of all their Ally
Was the ablest Ringer.
He to carry on the Jest
Begins a Bumper to the best,
And winks at her of all the rest,
And squeezed her by the Finger.
Then went the Glasses round,
Then went the Lasses down,
Each Lad did his Sweet Heart own,
And on the Grass did fling her.
Come all, great and small.
I cod I'll sing my Song then of the Mil^ers Daughter; Come give me the
Trenchers.


THe old Wife she sent to the Miller her Daught^
To grind her Grist quickly, and so return back.
The Miller so worked it, that in eight months after,
Her Belly was filled as full as her Sack:
Young Robin so pleased her,
That when she came home,
She gaped like a stuck Pig, and stared like a Mome;
She hoyden'd, she scampered, she hallowed, and whoop'd,
And all the day long,
This, this was her Song,
Hoy was ever Maiden so Lerricom Poop'd.
Oh Nelly, cried Celie, thy Cloths are all Mealy,
Both backside and Belly are rumpled all ore.
You Mop Mow, and Slubber, why what a Pox ail ye,
I'll go to the Miller, and know all you Whore.
She went, and the Miller so grinding, did ply*
She came cutting Capers a foot and half high;
She wadled, and strodled, (...) hollowed, and whoop'd,
And all the day long,
This, this was her Song;
Hoy, were e're swo Sisters so Lerricom Poop'd*
Then Mary of the Dairy, a third of the number,
Would fain know the cause they so gig'd it about.
The Miller her Wishes, long would not encumber,
But in the old manner, the secret made out.
Thus Celie, and Nelly, and Mary the Mild,
Were all about Harvest time all big with Child.
They Danced in a Hey, and she hollowed and whoop'd,
And all the day long,
This, this was their Song;
Hoy, were three Sisters so Lerric^m Poop'd.
Most excellently performed, I see the Bride's an Artist at it.


Her motion quick and graceful, her Voice good too.


Nay, at our Wake Mary used always to carry away the Garland, I'll say that for
her; Bless us, how the ^lding sweats, here tak^ my Muckender Child.


Do Flesh of mine, and wipe Bubbies.


I wont now because you bid me.


Oh, her Spirits are warm, you must not thwart her now Mr. Bridegroom.


This exercise of Dancing is of use; it is as one may say, a kind of Vaulting,
and Vaulting ever was held very useful, a proper Science in the Art of War,
when I was young I had it in Perfection, and can now without Boots come over
Rosinante.


Sir, you excel in every thing.


Lets in amongst 'em


O Lord, here's Master Peter come, and has brought his Motion with him, I
warrant: Oh Sirs, if ever you'll see a fine thing whilst you live, lets see
Master Peter's Poppet Show; by Conscience this is the purest chance that he
should come to set out our Wedding too.


Oh Gemini Father, the Poppet Show, I cod I am glad of this, for I have longed
to see a Poppet Show as much as ever I did to be Married, I'll Swear.


Well, well, don't make such a noise, don't be such a hoyden.


And I too iffecks --


There we shall see Kings and Queens, and Moors, and Jews, and Bulls, and
Bears. and Ladies, and Bishops, and Barbarians, and all the World by
Conscience: Oh rare Master Peter, are you come In faith.


Ha, ha, ha, -- how the Fool has mixed 'em, Bears and Ladies, and Bishops and
Barbarians.


Ay, I minded it -- Well honest Friend, and what new matters have ye, hah.


Of all sorts Sir: I have Motions proper for all kind of Stories. First, Sir, I
can entertain y^ with a pretty piece, called the taking of Namur, with the
utter routing of the Confederate Army; you'll say 'tis very fine when 'tis
performed.


Ay, that will be a very fine peace indeed.


Ay marry Sir, these are notable things indeed


Did not I tell ye what a pure Fellow he was; well by Conscience, there is not
the like of this Master Peter in all Spain.


Then I've a third, and please ye* upon an English Plot, 'tis called, English
Men Satisfied; or, the Impossibility; 'Tis plaguy Satirical, it makes 'em the
verriest Maggots; the mearest Shatter brains, for it shows, that neither
Monarchy nor Commonwealth, nor Pope nor Protestant, nor War nor Peace, nor
Liberty nor Slavery, nor Marrying nor Whoring, nor Reason nor Treason, can
satisfy a right Englishman.


^umph -- these are shrewd Matters Friend.


Then, Sir, if you please to see any Mimicry, here's my Comrade shall divert
ye better than any one in Spain; He shall Mimic a Cat in a Coal-Basket; a
Mastiff Dog in a Court Yard; a Shoulder of Mutton upon a Spit; and a hundred
thing^: beside, all so naturally -- you would swear it was real.


Pox take him for naming a Shoulder of M^tton, the Rogue has set my Mouth a
watering at it -- besides, this plague Aquavitae works so much in my Head, that
if they don't make haste to Dinner, I shall ne'er hold out till Night,
Gadzooks.


Peace Sancho, but d^ye hear Friend -- What Tracts of History can ^our Motion
perform, I am for that now? Can you show nothing about Knight Errantry.


Oh, the finest Piece in the World, Sir, I can show you the History of the
disastrous Loves of Don Goyferos and Mellisandra.


Hah! -- Cans^ thou?


Yes, Sir, how he freed Meli^endra from a strong Castle in Sansuena, where she
had been close locked up by the Moorish King Marsilius.


Ay, that, that, Friend for my Money, methinks I long to see how the valiant
Knight Errant, Don Gayferos, behaved himself in that dangerous Adventure, --
What, say Gentlemen and Madam, shall we see this noble History?


Oh, with all my Heart, Sir, I am a great Admirer of 'em.


That shall be our Evening Diversion -- Now let's in to Dinner, I warrant the
Bride and Bridegroom are hungry; besides, we must have a Rouse or two to their
Healths: Come, Mr. Bridegroom, manage your Spouse, and Noble Knight, pray
follow.


Ay, ay, come -- a Rouse, a Rouse, let's Sing, and let's Bowze, Gadzooks my
Master must Squire himself to day, for I must top a Brusher or two more, now
my hands's in, come what will on it.


So, thanks to good luck, thus far I'm undiscovered, little does this Whim^ical
Knight think that I am that famous Gines de Passamonte, that amongst the rest
of my Brethren Gally-slaves whom he freed, beat him so damnably in the
Mountains of Sierra Morena -- My disguise here, and false Name of Peter, has, I
f^nd, secured me from his knowledge; Adventures on the High-way was my noble
Function then, but some time after cunningly cheating a poor dull Fellow of his
Motion, I have ever since set up for Master of the Poppets my self, under the
umbrage of which Profession, I have played Pranks innumerable, no Man scaping
my nimble Hand or subtle Brain, that I knew had ei^her Money or Moveable -- The
two Purses, Comrade, that were given to day, are too weighty to stay long in
the Possession of those Fools, therefore are marked for ours -- This Foolish
Don and Clodpate Squire have Beasts to Ride on too, this must not be, Brother,
whilst Men of Brain and Action go on foot -- therefore in reason likewise are
for us too.


Say but how this is to be done, Brother, and I'll warrant I'll play my part.


Why easily, as easily as you may Steal a Hen; As thus now When all these here
are gapping at the Poppets, which I'll take care to hold 'em by the Ears with,
the Purses carelessly put in some Box or Cupboard in the Lodge there, then thou
like Mercury, gliding through the Doors, may snap 'em in a moment.


I'll do my best endeavours.


Then with what pleasure at a private hour shall we laugh at these Fools; Ah,
of all Trades a Rogue is the most pleasant; They may talk of Merchants with
their subtle Bargains; of Shopmen with falacious Weights, and Measures; of
Gamesters with false Dice, Lawyers with Lying; but for the Wit and Pleasure of
Mystery, the Ingenious, the right true modelled Thief, is the delightful
function in the World -- Come Brother, first lets to the Stable -- they are too
busy within about themselves to take care of their Beasts without -- but hold
I think here's some coming out, -- d'sdeath, 'tis the Knight and Squire, -- and
leading the Ass with them -- let's Steal cunningly in behind 'em there's, the
Horse left still, -- and I've a close private place to secure him in -- let 'em
search how they can.


Sancho.


-- ugh -- well.


Fixing just now an Eye of Observation, I found in the Economy of thy
Behaviour, something Oprobrious to the Character of him that is my Squire, thou
took thy Cups at a too lavish rate; a thing offensive to our sobe^ Order;
and though I six times called thee to make ready Rosinante for an Adventure I
had just then thought on, thou answeredst not; which considering my Greatness,
and what I am to thee, is a prodigious fault.


Why looky -- ugh -- though 'tis true, you did call me 6 times, -- yet I was
just then drinking 6 Bumpers in a hand -- which I think, ugh, was another guess
Adventure than yours -- And as to your Greatness, ugh; why looky, I am, ugh,
six times greater than I was too.


Ah, shame on thee, thou art now less than ever -- A Flea's a Creature of much
larger Soul, nay and much larger Merit -- thou great, no ^orbid Fool, the Man
that's Drunk --





Ceases to be at all, thou Soulless Insect -- heaven -- what affront is this to
Chivalry -- what scandal to thy Office.


Ugh -- hang my Office, 'tis a paltry lou^ie Office -- an Office that* ugh --
Gadzooks I^am ashamed of.


How'^ that, Brute?


And as for Chi, Chi, Chivalry, look ye -- the Man that, ugh, carries Guts to
the Bea^s, has a better Trade by half.


Oh Profanation, oh monstrous Scoundrel, this to my Face*


Nay, nay; look'ee, 'tis true, 'tis true; for my part, I speak nothing but the
truth; and ugh -- now am I resolved to speak my Belly full. When ye're an
Anvil hold ye still; But when ye're a Hammer strike your fill. Pop -- there's
a Proverb for ye too.


What am I bound to bear for being rational? Poor Slave! this is the Wine, not
him.


And do ye hear, Friend, ugh, to be even with ye for all the Counsel ye have
given me, let me advise ye, do ye hear, to leave your Errantry, and go home,
ugh; for to be plain -- look'ee, as ye are, they take ye for no better -- than
a Fool-Master of mine.


Oh Dog! -- 'Sdeath, I shall want Patience -- Come, Sirrah, and mount presently
-- I am your Squire for once, and will see ye safe to night -- but to morrow,
Rascal --


Mount -- ay* come, with all my heart -- that I may ride away from -- Chi, Chi,
Chivalry. Do ye hear, Friend mine, the Ass thinks one thing, and he that rides
him another. I'll get far enough from Chivalry, Gadzooks.


The Villain sputters Proverbs, tho he is so sleepy, that he can hardly
R^sinante, and then get him into some adjacent Grove or other, that the Company
within may not see him. See, the drunken Slave's fast asleep already.





^'ll bark like a Dog, and try to fright him.


Hah, what's this I hear: A Dog, a fierce one too, yet none kept h^re, nor in
the Houses round us; 'tis obvious now this can be nought but Magic: some cursed
Enchanter here takes Sancho's part, on purpose to disgrace me. But Dog, or
Devil, I'll not fear to attack him: Therefore come forth, thou tripple-headed
Cerberus, that with thy Hearts Blood I may quell the Charm, and prove the force
of my undaunted Valour


So, I see Lopez is got away, and the Knight follows, but must return quickly;
for he can no more overtake him, than a paltry Village Cu^ can a light-foot Roe
upon the Mountains -- But hush, who have we here? -- hah! -- oons! 'tis the
motley Squire, drunk too, and fast asleep. Humph, though we have mist our Design
upon Rosinante, yet methinks that Ass tempts me strangely -- Gad, I must have
him, and I think I have a trick will do it -- but I must go back to the Stable
for some Engines I saw there. Morpheus, let him but dream that he's regaling
with Buttock Beef, Bacon, Brewis, and such like, and the Prize is my own. I
think I have done, it now; wheiwh, wheiwh -- Come, Dapple, come.


I'm out of Breath with running -- the Enchanter has given him Wings upon his
Feet to speed him, lest with my Sword I should undo the Charm, and triumph over
his Art. I'm strangely embarassed, but must have Patience. Come, where's this
Sot here? I'll first remove him to some private hole, and then recount the
Miracle within. Sancho!


Another slice of Pudding, good Molly.


He's dreaming he's at Dinner. Wake, Dolt, Fool, wake.


Hoa, Dapple, hoa; not too fast, good Dapple.


Thinks the Ass has run from him too, insensible of what has befell by Magic.
Oh Confusion seize this Enchanter! what senseless Tricks they play me; as if
Asses transformed, and Dogs turned into Men, could quell Don Quixot's Courage.
No, ye Hell-searching Crew, if damned Medusa, or Infernal Circe, should round
incircle me with Stigian Monsters, and Fiery Dragons threaten to devour me, No
Terror my undaunted Heart should charm,
Or e're abate the Vigour of my Arm.



YOU tell us Wonders, Sir.


Sir, my Life is full of 'em. No day e're passes me without some Accident
worthy of Wonder^ -- This last was but a Trial: my Enemies the Inchanters did
but try what Mettle I was made of.


And when they found you Proof against their Malice, shrunk back with Shame --
Oh wondrous Power of Chivalry!


Against the Charm of whose Heroic Virtue, Eg^ptian sharp-fang'd Dogs, nor
Russian Bears, Tartarian Tigers, Lybian Cat a-Mountains; tho one attack it with
envenomed Teeth, and the other whisk about with Tabby Tails, can ever prevail a
jot.


But what said trusty Sancho, whom this strange. Adventure did most of all
concern?


A Sot, a Swine, Drunk as a Bachinal, past saying any thing, quite drowned in
sleep, his faculties all doz^d,' nor could my Wisdom open his sealed Eyes, nor
sound Instruction penetrate his Scull.


A mighty fault indeed, Sir Knight, considering the Credit of Knight Errantry's
at stake, amongst whose Virtues cool Sobriety is still placed foremost, -- I
see it has a little troubled ye; but come, I hope Sir, this Evening's diversion
will drive it from your thoughts, the Poppet Show's preparing, the mirth of
that will mollify -- And see here comes the Bride and Bridegroom, Messengers I
warrant from Don Gayferos and Melisendra, to invite ye to it.


Gad slidikins, come away Gentlefolks, the Motion's ready. Master Peter hath
been so busy within yonder, he has almost sweated himself away with setting
on it up; I Cod there's the purest fine things that ever was seen, there's
curious fine Poppet with a long Train, that's in Yellow -- and another curious
fine Poppet that's in Carnation -- and then there's one with a little round
Pearmain-face, full of Patches -- with a w^at do ye call it, a Commode cocking --
as 'twere any Lady, or Duchess, I Cod.


Ay, and then there's a Crumptious fine little Gentleman with a long Peruke,
and a long Sword, -- and about five inches long himself; so glistering and
brave, that if he were in another place, he'd be taken for a Lord by Conscience
-- odsbodikins, pray come away quickly.


What says your Greatness, are your thoughts at leisure t'imploy themselves
upon this Sport?


Madam, your Beauties Servant shall wait on you this moment, and the rather,
because I think I see Sancho coming yonder, whose odious Metamorphosis from Man
to Beast, is more horrible to me, than what I saw to day from Beast to Man.


I Cod, and there's my Mother with him too; get away Master Knight, if you love
your hearing, for she's in such a plaguy fusse about losing the Ass to day,
that she'll be as loud as a Storm; I'll warrant you may hear her forty mile, if
the Wind sit right.


The Bride's in the right, Sir, therefore let's dodge 'em, 'tis no matter if
they follow to the Poppet Show, there they'll be quiet -- and perhaps cause
more diversion, for they are both now in admirable humours for it.


I'll stay behind a little, and blow the Coals, we shall have the Comical
effect on it another time.


Don't let him tell me of Enchantment, and I know not what* the Ass is gone by,
a mere trick, 'tis plain, and you, like a drunken Sot as ye are, to put it up
thus* 'odsbores, I'd have pinched his lockram Jaws 'till I had made him bray
again, but I'd have had my Ass again, or Money.


No noise, Crooked-Rib, no noise, as you hope to escape Correction.


I have some inkling -- of your Affair Mistress -- and truly am of your Opinion
too -- the Ass was gone by a Trick, and not Enchanted.


Enchanted, 'ods bores, no more than I am, Sir -- which my Swine there shall
understand when he's sober, or he shall have such a din about his ears shall
make him weary on it.


Harkee, the Knight's at bottom on it, I heard him say the other day -- Sancho was
too well mounted -- and that Dapple far out-shin'd his Rosinante.


Why look there now; 'ods bores, were I a Man, he should have heard on it at
both Ears I faith -- but you see what I am yoked to there, Sir.

You see what a Condition he's in -- he could pour whole quarts to day down his
ungodly throat, -- but could not spare me so much as a Knipperkin to wet my
Whistle, as the Saying is.


Reason, -- Iniquity, Reason -- I must not let my Mouse-Trap smell of Cheese;
he that lets his Wife drink of every Cup, ugh, and his Horse at every Water,
shall be sure to have neither of 'em good for any thing.


Ay, but to deny her a Knipperkin, friend Sancho, shows that you love to be a
little in the mode, and don't value a Wife very much, who, in truth to me
appears now to be a very comely Person, a handsome presence, and very fair.


Fair, ugh, ay, she's peerless Fair indeed; but do ye hear Sir, the fairer the
Hostess, the fouler the Reckoning; she's a plaguy Devil for all her fair looks.


Too good for him that has her, Gravel-face.


How the jade smickers, and mops and mows at him.


Good Lord, Mother, if you are not bewitched, come away presently, Mr. Peter is
just sending out a little little Gentleman all in Gold, to speak the Pro --
Pro. I Cod I can't tell what they call it; come away with me, good now Mother,
come away.


Will your Worship please to go first?


Oh no* I'll lead ye thi^her.


Hugh, she's v^y sweet upon his Worship, methinks -- she gave me a scurvy look
too, that was half as bad as calling me Cuckold to my face, -- or doe^ the
^craggy Que^n design to give me Horns to make her self fat? I believe the Jade
has read the Proverb, that says, Change of Pasture makes fat Calves; humph --
Zooks I'll go in and watch her water.


Gallants, and Noble Auditors, in the first place, be pleased to observe, that
before I discover who those Noble Persons are that appear yonder in motion -- I
must inform ye that this is the Valiant Don Gayferos, who respectfully
introduce^ himself by way of Prologue. Come, Noble Knight, make your Honours,
and begin.


A Noble Presence, and by my Profession of Arms, looks like the Character is
given of him.


The very shape and air of a Knight Errant, I warrant he'll fight for his
Mistress briskly.


Oh like a Fury no doubt* his Whiskers declare as much.


Look Mother, look there's a fine little Man, there's Clothes! Oh Lord, there's
a Sword!


By Conscience that's he I told ye of, and he that sits within yonder, is a
Pope I warrant.


A Pope, -- a Fool, prithee let's hear a little.


This must be a very Noble Knight -- his very looks are Valiant.


Looks, oons -- he looks as if he just came from the Sucking-Bottle, -- he, a
Knight Errant, -- why he can fight with nothi^g but a Frog, nor that neither if
it has ever a ^ulrush in's Claw.


Do ye hear that Rascal -- that filthy Firkin there Gentlemen, will do nothing
but stink, and disturb us: Pray give me leave to roll him out.


Oh! 'tis below ye, Sir, we consider Sancho's condition.


Silence, Silence, pray Gentlemen, -- Come* once more your Honour's Don, and
then begin.


YOu'll find by the Ensuing Matters,
That I'm a Cuckold, kind Spectators;
Resolved, for the honour of our House,
From Huckster's hands to free my Spouse:
For though I'd wink at a small shame,
A Cuckold's such a kind of Name,
A Scandal so against the hair,
Our Spanish Puncto cannot bear:
No more than you can, that sit there.
Besides, though Female Plagues are common,
Yet there is something still in Woman;
Some sweet alluring Jen Scay Quoy,
Some pleasing pretty tickling Toy;
Will make us venture without fears,
Through Dangers -- over head and ears:
'Tis this that sends me to the Moors,
To fetch her from those Sons of Whores:
And spite of all their Guards, do ye mind me,
To make her gallop home behind me;
As fast as ever my Horse can carry,
I've given my word, -- so sit ye merry.
This -- Now Gentlemen, and Ladies, is Satyrically merry, as most alluding to
the present Custom of Writing Prologues.


I Cod, he spoke it purely, When shall we hear him again, I wonder?


Patience, patience, prit^e go on Friend.


Oh! let me warm me by his ^air Eyes -- let me sit by him, his very touch will
charm me.


I vow now I'll lock you up, if you are thus unruly -- pray sit still Sir, I'll
keep her from ye, she'll sit in your Lap else.


Be pleased to observe now then, Courteous Spectators, that he that sits there
with a Crown on's head, and a Sceptre in his hand, is the Emperor Charlemain,
the Father of the Princess Melisendra.


Look there now, he's an Emperor, do ye hear -- I thought he was no Pope.


Ods heartlikins, that ever I should live to see ^n Emperor! But hold, let's
hear more.


And he that stands by him there, with that fierce look, and Beard of Martial
overture -- is the very Scare-Crow of France, and Flower of Knight Errantry
Orlando Futioso, Cousin German to Don Gayferos, who would fain have tickled the
Intellects of the Emperour's youngest Daughter Angelica; but she, as great
Ladies have their Fancies, rather thought fit to take up with Medoro her Page.


No more of that, good Friend -- Her Quality is too great to be jested with --
And is that then, that most famed and most excellent of all our Order, Orlando
Furioso -- He was one of the twelve Peers, Gentlemen, the only Scourge of
Rodomont and the Pagans. till he fell mad for Love of the bright Angelica. Oh
most Heroic and Immortal Knight! I reverence thy Shoo-lappets.


And now pray observe, Gentlemen, the moody Countenances that both the Emperor
and the Knight have, because Don Gayferos makes no more hast to release the
Princess Melisendra, who was ravished away by Marsilius King of the Moors, and
kept in a strong Calste in Sensuenna. And pray note how Don Gayferos enters,
wearing his Cozen Orlando's Sword Dirundina, which he had sent him to fight,
and to free his Wife with. Pray likewise mark with what Submission he excuses
himself to the Emperor, and with what Courage he resolves upon the noble
Enterprise. Come Don Gayferos, where are ye? -- Pox upon ye, why don't ye
enter?


No cursing, Friend; no cursing -- Here the Noble Knight comes.


His Boots were not greased, I warrant; without doubt 'tis that has made him so
tardy.


Ay, or swift-footed Bayard might want shooing.


Odsbores, here he comes again; now we shall hear him claw it away, Mary.


Ah, ah, so we shall -- I cod, 'tis the littlest tiniest thing for a Husband --
I cod, if he were mine, I should not tell what to do with him, unless 'twere to
carry him about with me in my Pocket. But come, now let's hear what he says.


'Great is my Sorrow, high and mighty Sir,
'That I this Journey did so long defer:
'But this a little may excuse the same,
'My self have had ^ke Stone, my Horse was lame.

Ha, ha, ha -- that was sad indeed.


Oh! and by my Honour a very solid Excuse, and very reasonable.


Extremely reasonable; for to have undertaken such an Enterprise in such a
Condition, and on foot too, might have very much hazarded the happy Success.


Right, Madam; it may be so indeed.


O lord, do ye hear, Mother, he said he had the Stone -- I cod, I'm sorry for
that with all my Heart.


He would have but ill riding by Conscience. He said his Horse was lame too.


Well, well; I heard what he said well enough. Hark! he's going to speak again.


'But now all things are suiting to my mind,
'My Horse is well before, and I behind;
'I'll free my Spouse, spite of what e're retards,
'From the cursed Moorish King, and all his Guards.
'For her Dirundina I thus unsheathe,
'And speedy Death to all oppose, bequeath.
'She shall behind me be on Courser placed,
'And if she by the Pummel but hold fast,
'I'll fetch her spite of Bars or Iron Lock;
'And you to morrow, Sir, by Five a Clock
'Shall find her in my Bed without-her Smock.

Shall find her in Bed without her Smock. Very well, Sir Knight, and a very
good Conclusion that.


I cod, that's pure; ho, ho, ho -- Did ye hear that, Mother?


Did I? -- I think I did -- 'Dslid, I begin to like the Man a great deal better
than I did -- Though he's but little, there's Mettle in him, I see.


'Oons, what plaguy Stuff's this! -- Ugh, I can't understand a word on it, not I
-- I'll take the other Nap, Gadzooks.


Now -- What thinks the Noble Don Quixote? Does not your Brother Knight promise
very fairly?


Faith, yes; I like his Promise well enough: But to tell the Emperor her
Father, that he should find her in Bed without her Smock, that methinks wanted
a little Decency -- He should have allowed her a little clean Linen to be seen
in.


I confess I'm of the great Don Quixot's Opinion clearly; nay, it should have
been very fine Linen too, to show her Quality.


Ah, 'tis all one for that, if the Emperor owned her: A Princess is a Princess
as well without a Smock as with one.


Come now, Mother -- I wonder what's to be next, hah.


Pish, hold your Tongue; Master Peter will tell us presently.


Now, Gallants, be pleased to observe, how the Scene changes to a strong Castle
in Sansuenna, where the beauteous Melisendra is Imprisoned by Marsilius King of
the Moors; and cast your Eyes a little further, and you shall see him with her
upon the Terras Walk, first making Love, then threatening her with Torments, if
she reject it; which she, resolved on Constancy to her dear Spouse, contemns.
Pray note 'em, here they come.


Oh Gemini! here's two pure fine things more.


Oh Lord, but one of 'em's a black thing tho; I warrant he's to eat the the other
for being so fair.


Observe how he seats her, and now commands some ^ersons of Art of his Retinue
to entertain her with a Song and a Dance.


Minuet. DEar Pinkaninny,
If half a Guiny
To Love will win ye,
I lay it here down:
We must be thrifty,
'Twill serve to shift ye,
And I know fifty
Will do it for a Crown.
Duns come so boldly,
Kings Money so slowly,
That by all things holy
'Tis all I can say.
Yet I'm so wrapped in,
The Snare that I'm trapt in,
I* as I'm true Captain,
Give more than my Pay.
GOod Captain Thunder,
Go mind your Plunder;
Odzounds! I wonder
You dare be so bold.
Thus to be making
A Treaty so sneaking,
Or dream of the taking
My Fort without Gold.
Other Town Misses
May gape at Ten Pieces;
But who me possesses
Full Twenty shall pay.
To all poor Rogues in Buff
Thus, thus, I strut and huff;
So Captain Kick and Cuff,
March on your way.
To all poor Rogues, c.
Since your bright Eyes and Beauties of your Face
Have scorched my Heart like any burning Glass,
Think not that I will longer bear your Scorn,
Or cherish these strong Flames without return.
If because I am black retards my Joy,
I'll come at Night, and not offend your Eye.
But if you flight my Love without Remorse,
Rather than perish for you, I must force.

My Love long since locked up is given away,
And of that Lock my Husband has the Key.

But for that Casket I a Picklock have.


A Picklock suits a Thief, Sir, not the Brave.


We all are Thieves in Love's free Commonweal,
And know the Treasure sweetest when we steal.

I know not what by stealing you may win,
But through my Will you ne'er shall enter in.
Don Gayferos my Heart must only have;
A famed Knight Errant, valiant, bold, and brave.

Ah -- Well said, sweet Lady -- Now by my Knighthood thou deservst him richly.


I scorn Knights Errant, and such ragged Imps;
Yours is a fool, and all the rest are Pimps.

You're a black Son of a Whore, and ye lie; and by the Life of Amadis du Gaul,
were you and I together on a Mountain --


Oh good Sir Knight be patient -- Good lack, Sir, the Poppet does not mean any
thing to you, Sir; he only speaks the Words as they are writ.


Such Words as those are odious and offensive.


That Jest was rarely timed, ha, ha, ha, ha.


I cod, I'm cruelly afraid for all this, that black Devil will swallow up that
dear white pretty Creature.


No, no, Fool; I tell thee there's no harm in him; he only means to ravish her
a little, or so.


Ay, ay -- that must be all; my Mother-in-Law has hit it by Conscience.


Go on then, Friend -- I shall see how he behaves himself.


Since then for Diet Conjugal you moan,
I'll teach you how to chew the Cud alone:
In you strong Castle you shall guarded lie,
And to refresh ye no one come but I.

Look'ee there now; he says he'^l only refresh her. I told thee, he would not
eat her --


Nay, then 'tis well enough.


That M^orish Tyrant, Mr. Peter, is very barbarous; I have hardly Patience with
him.


Patience -- 'Dsheart, this is ridiculous enough -- He takes the Poppets for
real Persons, ha, ha, ha, ha -- Well, thus far you see how much the poor
Princess is in Distress; but now cheer your Hearts, and lift your Eyes to
behold the valiant Don Gayseros come pransing to Sansuenna, to release his Love
and dearest Melisendra -- You must suppose it now to be Night, and that by
Instinct he has found her Window the North side of the Castle; and see how she
appears there with a ^ape^, as ready to receive him.


I cod, here he comes; this is pure now; I hope he'll get her d^wn, Faith.


Look down, bright Star, if Love has guided right,
With glittering Beauty gilding gloomy Night,
Appear, and bless thy amorous weary Knight.

Who calls with Voice as sweet as Morning Lark?


'Tis I, my Love, who come from France Inth dark,
My dearest Piakaninny to set free.

Don Gayferos my Husband! Is it thee?


'Tis ^, 'tis ^, the truest kindest Spouse
That ever Marriage Mouse-trap did enclose.

Ah me! what shall I do?


Rouse up thy Wits,
And through the Window slide down by the Sheets:
Tie fast the Knot, and when thou hast done so,
I, thy Dear Spouse, will Horse thee here below:

I'll venture Bones and Neck, for who is she
My Dearest Lord, would not be Horsed by thee?

Brave Lady, upon my Honour her Love and Constancy. move me so, that it brings
the tears into my eyes, I could weep for her, -- oh vexation -- is that Teizer
-- still there to plague me?


This was a very passionate Scene indeed, -- pray observe Altis. the little
Rogue Acts it rarely.


Ha, ha, ha -- I see her, she makes the rarest faces at him.


Hey Boys, he Boys -- she's coming Mother, she's coming down faith.


Ay, and if the Sheet be but tied fast now, she'll be Horsed in a twinkling.


The Gentleman's Nag stands very quiet too, I warrant he knows who he is to
carry behind him.


But now, Noble Spectators, to show Fortune's mutability in Love Affairs, and
to show ye withal, the regular ingenuity of the piece we present -- here is to
be a turn -- which is held by all to be a Beauty in Dramatic Writing; the turn
therefore thus explains it self. Come Beauteous Lady Melisendra -- open your
Window, and come out.


Oh! Fortune, Fortune, still unkind to Love,
I neither can get down -- nor stay above.

There's the turn now, she was just falling into his Arms, and now is hanged
half way, upon a Tenter.


Why sighs my Love?


Alas! I'm hung in the Air;


I'll cut thee down -- with a swift Lover's care,


Ah, Sir, not for the World, my knees are bare:
And something may undecently be shown,
You must not peep upon, though tis your own:

In such distress, we the best means must prove,
To save your Modesty, I'll wink, my Love.

Here you may observe the modest Candor of the Lady Melisendra's nice
Character, who would not suffer her self to be unhitch'd, till Don Gayferos had
promised her upon his Honour to wink: Do ye mark that?


That was nice truly, and considering she's a Married Woman too, very rare.


I Cod, I'll lend her my Muckender -- here Friend, pray give her this to cover
her knees a little, though 'tis course, 'tis clean.


Pish, nay, prithee Mary let her alone.


What, and let every body see all -- I Cod but I won't though don't you see how
her Legs hang sprawling there; here friend, take it I say.


Oh thank ye, Mistris^, thank ye, but you see the Knight has done the business
without -- and now there's joy on both sides; get up, get up -- quickly sweet
Lady get up.


Hey Boys, hey boys, he has got her, he has got her, hogh, hogh, hogh, she's
gone, she's gone, faith.


But for all this good Success, you must now hear the fatal Catastrophe; for by
this time some malicious Spies have informed the Moorish King she's fled, who
presently Consults his Chancellor, Secretary of State, and Principal Officers
of his Household and Army to fetch her back -- To perform which, see on a
sudden how they and all his Guards are ready, and he at the head of 'em,
foaming with Rage. Hark, hark, pray hear what he says, -- And see how the
Emperor Charlemain and his Party are, though far infe^iour in number, yet to
assist Don Gayferos, have marched a Journey to meet 'em.


Follow me, Sirs, I'll fetch her back again,
And spite of the feeble Power of Charlemain,
And all his Resty Knights, the Wench enjoy,

Ye noisy blustering sooty Fool -- ye lye.
For as a Brother of her Husband's Order,
And to revenge me on your Pagan Insolence, I the Renowned Don Quixote will
defend her, and so have at ye all.


Hold, hold, why, Sir Knight -- mercy on me, are ye mad? why these are but
Poppets, they are not real -- oh! undone, undone -- why hold, hold -- they are
but Poppets, I tell ye.


What's the matter now? hey -- what, more fighting work, gad zooks, I'll get
out of harms way.


Poppets, ay Pigmys too, -- and would be Giants presently, if the Inchanters
please -- but I think I have mauled em, and the Lady's at home by this time.


Ay, you have mauled em, oh that ever I was born -- my Motion spoiled, my
Livelihood lost, oh, undone, undone, oh,


Bless me, what a Massacre is here, -- What have you done, Sir?


Done, Sir?


Done Sir? ay, and undone, Sir -- Oh Lord! was there ever such a mad prank?


Why, have I not assisted the Noble Knight Don Gayferos?


Sdeath you have assisted nothing, Sir -- the Figure^s were not real, you have
only confounded the Motion, spoiled the Poppets, and undone the poor Fellow
here.


Humph -- why then by my Renown I thought 'em all in earnest, and being very
angry with that black King there for his insolence, gave my relief accordingly.


You thought -- ay that's fine amends for me indeed -- will your thought mend
my Motion -- Oh unfortunate hour, oh!


Peace Friend, the generous Knight will consider on it, and pay thee for thy
loss.


'Tis I confess against my Order to do wrong -- therefore go Fellow, gather up
thy fragments, and put rates upon 'em, I^ll make thee satisfaction.


Why look ye, in the first place, here's the Emperor Charlemain with his head
off, oh poor Emperor,


Is this that Noble Emperor that so boldly held Paris against the Pagans? Oh, I
heartily b^g his Pardon, and am ashamed to see him thus dismembered -- thou
shalt have Six and Eightpence Friend.


But then, oh dismal to behold -- here's Orlando Furioso without an Arm, and
his neither Jaw -- here's a Furioso for ye, here's a Knight Errant, a router of
Giants, and killer of Dragons, see how he looks -- oh dismal to behold


Sirrah -- hold that up at a good rate, Knights Errant are worth money.


I know it, I know it --

As for him, considering his Chivalry, I look upon him to have twice the value
of the Emperor, a Pistol is the least, the least that can be, and cheap too.


'Tis so indeed -- but prithee take him from my sight Friend, for I cannot look
on the Brave Knight thus hacked without remorse of Consience -- and by his Fame
I cannot help confessing that I deserve for those two blows I gave him, to be
served so my self: But prithee go on Friend.


Then here's Arch-Bishop Turpin -- pox on it, I go to Church so seldom my self,
that I don't know how to value a Bishop.


Ha, ha, ha, what would I give Basilius were here!


Then here's -- the Chancellor -- and Privy-Counsellor to the black King -- Gad
forgive me, one without a Nose, and the other an Ear snipt off, and three fingers
of his left hand; let me see, a King's Chancellor and Privy-Counsellor -- I
should have a Statesman here now, to help to value these.


They should be valued 'tis true by their own Peers -- But come, make hast
Friend.


Why look ye then, Nine Pence a Piece I think one with another; for you know
one must rate them according to their honesty, and as they are true to their
trust.


Very reasonable, faith.


Ay, ay, 'tis so -- but come, without praising more in particular, let's know
what thou value the rest at in a lump, and come in and take your Money.


You have gelt the Kings Captain here too, maimed above twenty of the Guards,
and hamstring'd their Horses; Oons you laid about ye like a Devil, so that
between Turk and Jew, if you'll pay for them in the lump I think forty
shillings more will but just do.


That makes in all much about three pound; well, come in, and thou shalt have
it Fellow.


Why this is Noble, like Don Quixot's Character.


Why bless him I say, and send him to be a King as soon as possible.


All this now was for want of heed and patience. But we must do right, good
Sir, we must do right, for here I was in the wrong unhappily. Fate send me far
from such another broil,



And me more Motions, for such Fools to spoil.


HA! ha! ha! has he paid the Poppet-Man?


To a Farthing, and is now retired there into that Closet to avoid the
intolerable passion, as he calls it, of your Niece Altisidora.


His skulking up so close shall not hinder our coming diversion; for we have a new
Plot upon him, our new Dary-Maid is to Act Enchanted Dulcinea -- and Altis. is
ready here for a new attack upon him.


I intend to tease him now with a whimsical variety, as if I were possess^d
with several degrees of Passion -- sometimes I'll be fond, and sometimes
freakish; sometimes merry, and sometimes melancholy, -- sometimes treat him
with Singing and Dancing, and sometimes scold and rail as if I were ready to
tear his eyes out. Go you to your peeping place, and you shall see such a
Scene.


And then I have given order to the Servants to supply Sancho with more Liquor
-- we must have a C^mbate Royal about the Ass too, or we lose half our sport.


Time enough for that anon. Let your Niece Act her Whim first: Come, let's to
our Peeping-Hole, I hear him moving within.


What boldness dares me from my Thoughts remove? What art thou? Speak.


A Votary of Love;
Fond as the Lids that close those precious Eyes,
From whence, though Sun be missing, Day dos rise.

Oh luckless Maid! Why dost thou follow me?


I can't help it, ye sweet, sweet hony-Man you.


Thou talk Erroneously -- I am not sweet; none of our bustling Order can be
so -- nor am, nor ever was, a Honey Pot: I've not a drop of Honey, Child, about
me. Man's but a better sort of Animal -- If he be brave and honest, he may
smell -- in Virtues sweet, tho he's himself not Amber --


Ah -- me -- Must I ne'er hope then to find Grace -- in those adored black
Eyes?


Grey, grey -- Another notorious Mistake -- my Eyes are grey as Grimalkin --
Bless me! how blind is Love?


Grey let them be then; they are twinkling still, and in their Sockets like two
farthng Candles burn out themselves, and leave poor me in Darkness.


Hah! -- there's another sign now, how much the poor Creature's Sense is
disturbed -- her defect in Simile; she would else have put in Tapers of Four in
the Pound -- For to say my Eyes are like Farthing Candles, is but a diminutive
Complement.


Death, Dungeon, Darkness, Furies, Fate, and Fire! What's in him that can cause
this Wrack within me? For now I consider better, and look on him, he's not
handsome a bit; nay, by my Virginity


So.


And his Face -- ugly and abominable.


Very good -- she looked Eastward last Minute, but now some little Cub Devil
sits upon the Fane of her Fancy, and turns it Northerly.


And then for his foolish Profession, his Knight Errantry.


Hah --


'Tis the most absurd, the most ridiculous, the most -- hah! what am I saying?
and grateful as a Hero's; his Fa^e serene, and charming as a Cherubin.


Hey -- show me, thou famed and skilful Mariner, the Face of the unfathom'd
Gulf of Florida, where Winds from all the Corners of the Globe, by fickle
Nature change their Course each moment, and I'll show thee this other Gulf of
Woman -- Young as she now appears, yet right, right Woman -- Woman, that like
the Satyr in the Fable, can with the self-same Breath blow hot and cold.


Ah -- must then, Dulcinea -- have ye all -- what parts has she -- beyond me --
look in my face -- Is it not pretty --


Compared with hers, a Pebble to a Diamond -- A virgin indeed thou art like
her, and --


Younger I'm sure by far -- Perhaps too young; but I^ll so swell my Breasts,
and heave and fall, and mould 'em with my Hands to make 'em grow -- pull down
my Stays, that they may show themselves, and Jet it up and down.


Thus will it be where-ever I reside -- If Women chance to see me, there is a
Saying old and very famous, That when a Man's a Favourite of the fair, he has
been wrapped up in his Mother's Smock. Sure mine, to make me charm thus, flayed
her self, and made me Blankets of her very Skin.


Has Dulcinea Legs? I'll lay ten Ducats ^hat mine are straighter; for if Fame
not lie -- she had the Rickets once* and hers are crooked; her Feet too big and
splay, as I have heard, and turn in like a Mawkins at a Boarding-School. But
loak how small mine are, like little Mice.


By Fame, if I don't (...) her, the Creature is so rapt, that she'll talk
Bawdy.


She may boast of gaining ye by her rare Qualities; but, Sir, did I but show --



No, Maid* no showing -- I will conceive things well of ye without it -- 'tis
as I said -- Oh strong effect of Passion!


I mean some rare Perfections of the Mind, as well as Graces of the Body, Sir.
Come now, you shall see me sing and dance, and how far I excel dull Dulcinea.


FRo^ Rosie Bowers, where sleeps the God of Love,
Hither ye little wa^ting Cupids fly,
Teach me in soft melodious Strains to move,
With tender Passion my Hearts darling Joy.
Ah! let the Soul of Music tune my Voice
To win dear Strephon, who my Soul enjoys.
Or if more influencing,
Be doing something a^ry,
With a Hop and a Bound,
And a Frisk from the round,
I'll trip, trip like a Fairy.
As when on Ida dancing
Were three Celestial Bodies,
With ^n Air and a Face,
And a Shape and a Grace,
Let me charm like Beauty's Goddess.
Ah! 'tis in vain, 'tis all, 'tis all in vain,
Death and Despair must end the fatal Pain;
Cold, cold Despair disguised, like Snow and Rain
Falls on my Breast: Blea^ Winds, in Tempests blow,
My Veins all shiver, and Fingers glow:
My P^lse beats a dead March for lost Repose,
And to a solid lump of I^e my poor fond Heart is froxe,
Or say, ye Powers my Peace to Crown,
Shall I thaw my self, and drow^
Amongst the Foaming Billows,
Increasing all with Tears I shed;
On Beds of Ooze, and Crystal Pillo^s,
Lay down my Love sick Head.
No, no, I'll straight run mad,
That soon my Heart will warm;
When once the Scense is fled,
Love has no Power to Charm.
Wild thr^' the Woods I'll fly,
And dare some savage Boor;
A thousand Deaths I'll dye,
E're thus in vain Adore.
This I confess, another Heart might charm, but mine is Constant as the
Northern Star -- and Dulcinea only must Enjoy it.


Let her Enjoy it then, and some Ten Thousand, some Fifteen Hundred, Fourscore
and odd Furies; take her for her pains; but I'll not Dye however -- No, hear me,
Don Bullet-head; thou Jack-a-lent, fit to hang on a Sign Post; thou Scheliton
of Barber Surgeons-Hall; thou Wall-Nutt-Colour'd, Lean Jawed, Head of a Base
Vyol -- thou Baboon on Cock-Horse, fit only to ride before the Bears: Thou
maimed, miserable, mischievous, mouldy, mangy, Maggot-eaten Monster: Thou poor,
paltry, Pimping, putrifi'd, proud, Penny-less Puppy, hear me. Merlin is coming,
he'll revenge all my Wrongs;

I see him there in Vision, and Dulcinea with him, Who spite of thee, shall be
Enchanted still,
And so thou Withered Eel-skin stuffed, farewell.



Why, what a Hurricain of Extravagancy is there in Woman, when she's once
enraged -- but hold, either my Senses fail me, or Dul^inea greets my Eyes
indeed -- 'Tis so, and the Immortal Merling with her. Could then that little
passionate Imp speak Truth? O Gracious Figures! what do ye intend?


To Frica^ee thy Soul, thou dull performer of Women's business, when there's
most occasion; and to Dine upon thee, if I could get leave of my Reverend
Keeper here, to have my Wish and Diet that I long for: Is this the honour of
Knight Errantry, to promise and not do? Oh most dishonourable! was I not to be
freed from my Enchantment by some few Lashes laid on lazy Sancho? Yet to thy
lasting shame, the Debts not paid yet, when though he might be resty -- yet a
Lover, as thou pretend'st to be -- might have Engaged him, or at least have*
from its Covering, stripped thy own tough Hide, and with a Horse Whip or strong
Bridle Raigns, have given thy self five hundted Jerks by Proxy; this had begun
a means for my releasement; but on the contrary, I have a Rival here; and
Dulcinea is no more remembered then the Old Boots are when they are left off.
Well, since 'tis so, farewell Ingrate for ever; I'leto my Cave again, far under
ground -- Chaw Roots and Acorns, and Enchanted lye,
Worm Eaten Knight and musty Squire de^ie;
And wish they both were hanged, and so Godbuy.



Stay Princess, sweet surprising Vision, stay. I have been much to blame in not
performing, by my Authority, dull Sancho's Task -- which when I meet him next,
shall trebly make amends; and see blessed Fortune sets him before my Eyes this
very moment, but in a vile Condition -- Drunk -- no matter; that may now chance
to be Convenient to make him bear his Whipping-Pennance better.


Here he is and I^ll begin with him first my self -- here's a foul House as one
may say in a twinkling, the whole Family is together by the ears already -- the
Ass was lost yesterday, and Master Carasco tells us your Worship can tell
within a mile of an Oak where he is -- and now the New Married Couple have lost
their Purses that were given 'em, no one knows how, and they believe each other
is the Thief; there's a fowl House within yonder.


Prithee Woman leave me, why prat'st thou to me of Purses and of Asses, I
cannot hear these vulgar matters now -- Sancho, a word.


Vulgar Matters -- nay, then let me tell ye, as vulgar as the matter is, your
Worship is shrewdly suspected to have a hand in it -- and that the Ass and you
are not far off one another.


Alas I hear thee not, nor mind thee, Sancho -- I have had a Vision just now of
Dulcinea -- has torn my heart in pieces -- she complains Sancho --


Look ye, Master, ^ine -- ugh -- let's divide things equally, ugh, Dulcinea --
is your Friend, and Dapple is mine.


Still muttering about Dapple -- what dost thou mean, why dost thou clog my
ears with thy strange folly?


Your ears, Odslidkins I'll be drumming there this Month unless we have the Ass
-- you need not have put this trick upon us, my Husband has not got so much in
your Service.


Well said, ugh -- Buttock -- thour't in the right, and do ye hear, Sir, as
great as you are, remember this, the Nightingal and Cuckoo sing both in a
Month, therefore let Dapple be produced -- what, I am not grown so Rich with
being a Squire, but I can miss 'em, when any of my goods are purloined --
better have a Mouse in the Pot, than no Flesh at all -- Dapple was a
considerable moveable.


I am sure, if I had brought him forth -- I could not have been more careful of
him -- and therefore Odsbores, bring him again, and quickly, of -- you shall
hear such a noise -- Mary and her Husband, whom I hear in a filthy squobble
yonder -- but if Dapple be not forth-coming against I come back again -- the
Roaring Sea shall be nothing to me.


Was ever such a Couple joined as these, one's Drunk and dosed, the other
bewitched, and mad -- but at this juncture I must bear with all -- and as I was
telling thee Sancho, the Beauteous Dulcinea complains -- as well she may, of
our remissness to her, that thou hast not yet given thy self the Lashes -- nor I
ungrateful have refreshed thy memory -- but come, five hundred I expect this
moment -- the Place is as it should be, still, and proper, thy Doublet too
unbuttoned seems consenting -- and I my self will help thee to unstrip.


Strip -- yes, yes, you are good at stripping -- my Wife ^ays you have stripped
me of my Dapple already -- and if you can, strip me of my Doublet too, gad
zooks you shall strip me of my Skin, and that will be pretty difficult.


No, fleeing will be over-doing it -- some brisk smart Lashes to the blood or
so, will serve to disenchant the Princess, and those thou hast already given
thy word for.


Ay -- ugh, that may be -- but there's difference between a word and a blow,
Seignior -- besides, I promised for a Government worth something -- now my
Government happening to be worth nothing, my Promise is void in Law.


Come, I'll bear part with thee, to honour the performance, I'll take off fifty
from thee, and flaug my self.


That you may -- and to honour -- the performance, as you say, I'll help you to
unstrip, if you please -- but by thinking to have me curried, is a malignant
design upon my person; come, come, Sir, 'tis a hard Winter when one Woolf eats
another; if Dapple had been here, and promises performed -- some Lashes might
have follow'd, but now --


What now, ungrateful?


Why now I shall say unto my Buttocks -- ugh, Friends mine sit ye down in a
whole skin -- for if flauging must do yours and the Princesses business -- all
that I can advice is, to flaug one another.


You shall be kicked into compliance, incorrigible Rascal.


Harkee Master mine -- not a Word more of kicking -- A small Sum, look'ee,
will pay a short Reckoning, I am not so much in your Debt now Dapple's gone --
to bear that; and therefore if you kick here, as the Song says, were you as
good as George a Green, I should make bold to kick again.


Oh Slave! What? Rebel against thy Natural Lord! I'll pound thee into Ashes.


Ay, ay, come on -- many Words go to a bargain -- Now have I great


Wonder of Wonders! What's this I see? Don Quixote overthrown, and by his Varlet
too -- Why how now, Sancho! -- do ye know who you are pounding so?


Why, he was for pounding me; and now you see the Dice are turned, I'm pounding
him.


What! the famed Knight swinged by his Man. Oh! I shall die to see this -- ha,
ha, ha --


Have then my cruel Stars disgraced me thus, Knight Errantry avaunt -- forgot
be Dulcinea -- I'll never see the Sun shine forth again.


Ha, ha, ha, ha; this is Currasco's Trick upon him; I find he has been managing
Sancho.


Her^ comes ^ of (...) and brawling; never was Marriage turned to such a
Cou^ter-Scuffle.


Come, come, say what you will I'll have my Purse again; I cod, I won't be
choosed so -- What* ta^e away your Wife's Money the first Week of her Marriage?
Ah, Nincompoop*


You choosed -- No, no, 'tis -- I am choosed by Conscience. What? Do ye think
I'm blind? Do ye think I can't see how things go between ye?


Between us -- Come Son-in-law, don't put your Afflictions upon me, you had not
best, ^or tho I've had my Daughter's concerns, I have never had your Concerns
in my Hand, I'm sure -- And say what you will, you must have the Money, or no
body; and truly, as she says, 'tis a Nincompoop thing to be ^o ^rty the first
Week -- No body robs their Wives the first Week they are married, whatever they
do after^ards.


How's ^hat? Robbed do ye say'


Of the Purses we gave 'em, I warrant.


Ay, as true as you are there, Madam; and I never handled it but once ^ince I
had it.


^y, and I'd have it (...) and upon his Knees too, or he should never handle
(...) long (...) he ^ad a Nose on's Face, if I were as Mary.


No m^e he s^n't, I (...).


'S^udoi^ th^k you are all mad -- I know no more what's beco^ of th^ (...),
than I know what I did before I was born. And if I must no^ ^andle, nor have to
do with my own Wife, Mother-in-law, by Conscience that's very ^ard -- Come,
I'll tell ye what we'll do; we'll go ^ Cunning Ma^ -- he'll tell us which way
'tis gone presently.


Do, do, Mary ^ sin^ he's so crank about it.


With all my heart -- to the Cunning Man, faith -- He'll ask the Devil, but
he'll tell ^s what's become of 'em -- And if I have but this, if eve^ thou
g^t^st a^y thing of* Mine in thy hands again, Then tell (...) thy Friends once
in thy Life
Thou found a C^ckold ^isen than his Wife.



How now Friend, thou look as if thou were big with some new Event* what's
the matter?


'Dsh^art, we have carried the Jest too far, the Knight is dying yonder --
sounded twice at his Chamber-door, and is now got to Bed, and has sent for a
Notary to make his Will. He's troubled with delirious Fits too; for ^ hear him
often mutter Dulcinea -- but against Sancho he r^ils perpetually.


Nay, this last Miscarriage must needs stick upon his Conscience, if he has
any, as long as he lives -- Come let's go and comfort the Knight. See Sancho
looks wisely now, this frightful News has made him sober.


To beat his Master -- Oh Incorrigible!


Oh -- Drink, Drink, Drink -- thou Devilish damnable Enemy, that dost more to
a Man's Brains in a Minute, than all the good they can recompense in his
Life-time: Thou Iordan of fowl Juice, thou hast undone me -- I shall never get
into favour again now -- nor into his Will I'm sure, and that's worse -- Well,
I'll go to him, fall down on my Knees, and if he does not pardon me -- rise
instantly and hang my self at the Window. Oh Drink, Drink, Drink!


Remove my Pillow -- set me up a little -- so, Sancho too? Ah -- thou ungodly
-- Vermin.


I'll hang my self, Sir -- I can do no more.


No faith -- that's pretty reasonable satisfaction.


Egh, egh -- you wonder, Sir -- sat this sudde^ Alteration; but this is nothing
in the hand of Providence -- Thousands that are struck so have died ever this
time -- Therefore pray wonder not, but e're I go witness my Will -- and so
farewell -- Are ye ready, Friend?


Yes, Sir, yes; begin when you please.


Methinks his Sense is very clear now.


For a minute or two, Madam -- but then he falls to strange Extravagancies -- I
am only here to humour him.


Well first then -- egh, egh -- without complementing the Worms about my
Carcass; for 'tis so lean and scraggy, that they'll have but poor ^eeding -- I
give my chiefest Quality, my Knight Errantry, to the veriest Idiot amongst my
Countrymen, that he may have it in his Head to conquer Kingdoms; and that ^e
may be heartily drubbed about it as ^ have been -- Quickly, quickly, set it
down, I say.


I do, I do, Sir. Now pray observe -- Now the Fit begins.


In the next place I bequeath my Valour, which in me was but a worse sort of
Itch, to all the Cowards and faint-hearted in the Armies abro^d, that they may
fight with one another to the end of the World, without knowing why or
wherefore.


That is indeed -- a very mad Leg^cy.


Satirical tho if you mind it.


Egh, egh -- Set me a little higher -- so -- my Conscience and one half of my
Brains -- I give to the French -- that -- they may learn to be contented with
their own Country -- and not le^p like wild Horses into others Men's Ground,
till they are secure their Neighbours are not strong enough to lash'em out
again.


These are I confess, more than common Legaci^s.


Well said again* Faith -- punc;


To all Statesmen Politicians, Privy-Counsellors, and such like, I bequeath my
Integrity of Soul to be an Umpire between their Gain and their Honesty -- that
when ever they chance to boil over in 'em, it may cool and allay, like a
Wooden-Ladle, when the Fire hath provoked the Pottage into fury.


A Solon -- A Solon -- I say s^ill.


To the great Clergy, and the small -- I give my Voice and Lungs, loud and
sound as they were at twenty -- and a good will to use 'em often -- they preach
so ^aintly now* as if they were ashamed of their Trades, and the Priest dozes
at Church as often as the Parish.


Good again* that was close somewhere too.


To all Knights of the Curtain, Court-followers, and so forth, -- I generally
bequeath -- the Empire that I proposed to my self to get, to defray their
reasonabl^ Expenses, 'till they come to Preferment.


This is strange, I ^xpected he would have changed -- before now.


Give me a Tun of Wine there -- Bourdeux, Burgundy, Sherry, Shampaign, quick,
quick, I grow thirsty.


Oh, now, Sir, mind him*


My Soul's upon a Spit alive -- I feel it Roasting -- hark, it squeaks like a
Lobster; some Wine, I say -- ye Scoundrel.

Hum -- hum -- your ears once more, my Friends.


I told ye there would be a turn, -- see now he's calm again.


To all Loyal and Wise Citizens that are Married, I soberly bequeath my hollow
eyes, and my hearty p^tience, that they may never see the sprouting of their
own Horns, nor grumble at the payment of the King's Taxes.


That's soberly said enough, I'll swear.


You too -- that wait here to see my End, must ^ave some remembrance; and first
to you, Sir, that are newly Married, I frankly give my lepid Age, and limber
Experience, that by knowing the folly you have committed now, it may prevent ye
from Conjugating a second time.


How's that, Sir Knight?


Nay, nay, no noise, no noise, and ye shall all have something -- to you,
Madam, I give and tran^er, and much good may it do ye, my Chastity, to support
your own, for a Woman of your Age and Constitution -- has not singly enough to
keep her honest, I'm sure.


Ha, ha, ha -- the Knight grows merrier as he draws nearer the bottom.


To you, Sir, that are a great Scholar -- and Book-learn'd, I bequeath my Wit
and g^ntile Air, to help your College Breeding; for search the Universities,
and you'll find this Saying true, The greatest Clerks are still the awkerd'st
Blockheads.


Oh, thank ye, Sir, I should be loath to have been left out.


Lastly, to Sancho there, --


Ay, a small Purse, if you please, poor honest Sancho, Sir.


Dull, Saucy, Drunken Sancho, I do bequeath two Gallons a day of my Small-beer
-- to keep him cool from state of reprobat^on, during his Life --


Small-beer, Oons, that's small Comfort; well, I'll go get the Rope ready, oh,
oh, oh --


This is all, Sirs, there's no great need of Executors, or Overseers -- the
Will can walk alone, without Leading-string^ -- and now methinks I would fain
rest a little.


Do, Sir, and to divert your melancholy, and cheer the fading Spirits, we'll
treat ye with some Mus^cal Performance, you used to love it, let 'em begin
there.


AH my Dearest Celide,
T^ other day I asked my Mother,
Why thy Lo^ging changed m^st be,
Why not still lie with thy Brother?

I remember well you did,
And I heard too what she said.
Lisis, You're a great Boy grown,
Therefore now must lye alone.

To part us the Custom of Modesty Votes,
Unless both had Breeches,

Or both had long Coats.


Ah! what mischief can there be
In these little tyny Breeches,
That can part me thus from thee;
Sures there's Witchcraft in the sti^ches.

Or what Devil here resides,
That my Petticoat thus hides;
Mother Laughs a^ hour or t^o,
When I sometimes ask to know.

Why a He,


And a She,


May not Bed at our Size,


As well as two Girls,


Or as well as two Boys.


I will since I'm kept from you,
Get a Wife as soon as may be,

And I'll get a Husband too,
Three times bigger than my Baby:

Father to Mamma tells all,
When in Bed they chatting fall.

And when we are Married too,
We as much as they s^all know.

T^e Secret will out,


In Comparing of Notes,


What's hid in th^se Breeches,


Or lies in these Coats.


Let's laugh then, and follow our innocent play,
And Kiss, when Mamma is gone out of the way;
For I fear, I fear, we shall cry when we know,
'Tis all that a Brother and Sister may do.
He's fallen asleep, remove him out there softly, 'twill either ease ^r end him.


'Tis pity he's condemned such Extravagance, the man has Ex^ellent parts.


And on all Themes, excepting his Knight Errantry, most read^ and acute.


Come, Sweet, let's take the Air. Whilst I amongst all great Contentments
known,
Looking on thee, am happiest in my own.




