AS in Intrigues of Love we find it true,
Stale Faces pall, whilst you are Charmed with New;
The Poet knowing the same in Wit prevails,
Fearing to tire ye with more English Tales,
Has laid his Scene in the French Court, Versailles.
Thus Changed your Diet for Variety,
From our Course Cheese of homely housewifery,
To fragrant Angelote, and Cher Fromage du Brie.
He doubts not, many that sit here to day,
That have observed the Title to his Play,
Believe 'tis for some Politic Essay;
Against this he says, a Proverb gives him Rules,
'Tis never safe to meddle with Edged Tools.
To cause diversion Comic Mirth is best,
Warr's but a dull Occasion for a Jest;
And as in Cudgel Play, we find -- no Ioke,
From either party, when both heads are broke.
But then perhaps it may expected be,
That he should fall upon French Fopery,
'Tis -- true, they have Fools -- I gad and so have we;
In Apish Modes they Naturally shine,
But we by Aping them think our selves fine;
The late blew Feather was Charmant divine,
Then the Sawse gathering Sleve and the huge Button;
And now our Coat Flaps broad as Shoulder Mutton,
With various colours faced, Red, Green and Sky;
Next year I hope they'll give us Wings to fly,
With Sleeves so large, to cover Nails and all,
And every Button like a Tennis Ball.
No folly's theirs, but we have here as bad,
Their Brains have too much Air and ours have too much Led;
They swear and Rant in sprightly Ela -- Sounds,
And ours in Gamut grumble Blood and Ounds.
To cool them they from Salads seek relief;
To warm us, we debauch our selves in Beef;
And when half frantic we to Battle Run,
Priests on both sides ne'er fail to ^oot us on.
Without Reflection therefore either Way,
The Cautious Poet has designed to day,
Nothing but Love intriguing through his Play;
For solid Reasons neither party Lashed,
His fury's not so Fierce but may be dashed;
Wit has no Armour proof against being Thrashed,
Therefore in Terror of the Warriors Trade,
Suspends all Satyr till the Peace be made.

HEy, Rambure.


Monsieur -- Vat is your Plaisire?


Go to the Count de Tonnere's Chamber, and see if he be Stirring.


Begarr, he be no only stir himself, but me think he have stir all the
Whole Varle beside dis Morning; for dere have bin in de Street de great
Fidde^, and de leetel Fiddel, de great Pipe, and de leetel Pipe, Drum, Drum,
Drum; Squeeka, Squeeka, Squeek: Oh Diable! me have no Sleep all this Night
Begarr.


Ha, ha, ha, What has he been Serrenaded?


Begarr, Monsieur, me have de ver great reason to believe de Count is vat you
call de Frantic Person, dat is, he have but leetel here,


Oh you are a great Judge of Brains, Sir, I believe: And what makes you think
so, Blockhead?


Morbl^au, De reason me think is very plain, he come here in de Woman's Clothes
for Disguise, in vish he look ver much like de great Whore Begarr; de likeness
of de Whore draw de Fool and de Fiddler, the Fiddler he draw de whole Varle to
Stare, Stare -- And vere den is his Brain to tinke he can be disguise? Ha, ha,
ha --


Was there ever such a Coxcomb? -- Why thou talk of him, as if he Concealed
himself for a Burglary -- But, Sir, pray let your Discretion be now Informed,
that his is only a Disguise of Honour, till he can get his Pardon of the King,
who is, at present, a little Angry with him about a Duel he lately Fought; So
that if the Woman's Clothes he wears don't Conceal him from Cowardly Poltroons,
he is certain, however, of every Man of Honour's Protection.


Ver good; will de Man of Honour Protect him for de Duel, against de King's
Positive Command, dat is ver fine -- Begarr, Monsieur, dat Man of Honour, like
your self, that will defenda him for de kill; de Man of Honour, like my self,
commit de worst Burglary in de Whole Varle, and deserve to be hang Begarr.


Well, Sir, Pray get you about your Message -- and Release me from your
Casuistical Opinions -- I took you into my Service, Sir, for your skill in
Pimping, not your Judgment of Prowess: Will you go, Sir?


Pimping, vat dam word be dat for de Man of Honour; Begarr, it turna my
Stomach, and spoila mine Breakfast -- he bien, Monsieur, I go -- de Pimpa --
Morbleau -- I go, Sir, I go -- Oh here come de Count himself.


Dear Fiesque, Good Morrow to thee; Gad I have so longed to see thee -- that I
had hardly patience to give 'em time to Dress me in my Female Trinketts here;
thy Pleasant Conversation, and some few Ravishing Thoughts on the Dear Angel I
Adore, are the only Consolation I have in my Confinement; hark, I tell thee
News, Wilt thou believe it? I have been Serenaded to Night, Ha, ha, ha.


Serenaded, Is that all -- Gad, for my part, I wonder thou remainst on Earth,
here, in a Condition of Mortality; such Celestial Beauty, methinks, some
Amorous God should be ready to seize every moment; some Jove should come
dazzling in Golden Showers; or, as a Bull mount thee, like Fair Europa, then
swiftly bear thee, through the Helespont, to some Sweet Bower of Love: What
Gut-scraping Coxcomb has now been Insipidly Sacrificing? What Guittar-Thrasher,
Thrum, thrum, thrum? What Madrigal Chanter with a Love-trilling A -- h me, that
makes me Sweat to hear him? -- Or what Pitiful Pipero, with a Toodle, Toodle,
Toodle, -- has been profaning the Ears of so Admirable a Beauty.


Why this Admirable Beauty, Sir, since you are pleased to divert your Self so
with it, has, to its Eternal Fame, gained an entire Victory upon the old Count
Brissac, whose Charming Wife thou know I have been so long in Love with.


Ay Count, and not without Satisfactory Returns on her Side too -- Your Secret
has been blown upon, I can tell ye; The Court has heard Public Information,
particularly, of your Late Journey to see her in the Country, disguised like a
Pilgrim -- What a Strong Fit of Devotion she had every day to be Closeted up
at Prayers with the Holy Pilgrim; How often she would Puke, and be Sick, that
the Pilgrim might be sent for; And what strange Benefits she made her Credulous
Husband believe she found in her Boddily Health, through the Force of the
Pilgrims Sanctified Beads and Sprinklings, Ha, ha, ha.


The truth is, never was Intrigue better managed for some time -- for Nature
certainly did never produce a better Stock to Graft Cuckoldom upon, the^ Old
Brissac, for he has so great a Fondness for himself, and is always so blindly
partial to his own Abilities -- that his heart is still at Ease about his Wife,
nor would he ever have suspected us, had not Cavoys, that prying Coxcomb her
Brother, discovering, done us the Mischief, upon which follow'd the Duel, in
which he was Wounded, and I made shift to get hither in this Disguise.


But how came Brissac to follow, that part of the Story, is still a Mystery?


Why, as the Devil would have it, he happening to be be acquainted with the
Lady that helped to Disguise me, came hither, and found me Just Dressed as you
see: But, to hear how many Oaths he Swore he was smitten with me, to see the
Old Beau Cock at me, and Smicker with his Grizl'd Chops, and frisk up and down
like an Old Ape, would have put one into a Fit of a Convulsion with Extremity
of Laughter.


And in persuance of this Intrigue, he has follow'd ye hither to Versailes.


Yes, Faith, and is as Hot and Eager upon the Scent, as the youngest Hound in a
Pack. And since I am sure he knows me not, it may chance to give occasion for
some Scenes of Pleasant Diversion, for to Crown my Joy, the Duchess Sanserre
her Sister, told me last Night, that taking this Advantage of her Husbands
absence, she resolved upon a Frolic also hither in Disguise.


Very good -- why faith now taking all things into nice Consideration, here is
laid, between the Sisters, as pretty a well-modell'd compact Design for
Cuckold-making, as heart can wish; for I have long had my self an old
Love-Grudge to the Duchess -- though my Pretty New Mistress Vandosme has lately
-- allayed it; besides, I know the young English Guillamour is now Lord of the
Ascendant there, which makes the Hot-Spirited Jealous Duke ferment perpetually
--


Prithee what is that Guillamour?


Why, faith, a Man of Worth enough; brave, witty* and handsome; he came hither
just before the War broke out, in his return from Travel: he's one that has all
along professed an unbiased Candour for his Country, and their present King,
for which he was some time Imprisoned in the B^stile, till by the Power and
Interest of the Duke de Crequi, his intimate Friend, he was set at Liberty; and
now only stays till some private Affairs are dispatch'd, and then returns to
England.


Monsieur -- you may remember just now, you call me de Pimp; me come now to
tell you, dat dere is below de Old Madamoselle, dat use to bring de young Prett
-- Woman's, de Masquerele -- de She-Pimpa begar would speak with you.


Irreverent Rogue, D'e know who you speak of? She's an Emisary from the God of
Love, ye Dog, therefore I charge ye go and Introduce her with Ceremony.


Me would kick her vid Ceremony begar vid all mine heart.


I'll dispatch away the Company you see here immediately; And prithee tell her I
long for her Company -- take this thy self too in part of my Acknowledgments,


What no Present then for her? -- indeed, -- Is it so Indifferent with ye? you
shall have but an indifferent Entertainment then, I can assure ye that my
frugal Gentleman --


I need not ask thee whither it be a Love Message, but prithee is it from that
dear pretty Cherubin that I used to see with thee, that thou told me of just
now, was a Bastard of the Family of Vandosme.


Why then, Sir, to satisfy your Curiosity, 'tis from the very same, she's
coming to visit me.


Gad you're a happy fellow, -- for, of all Creatures I ever saw, except my
dear Countess, she is the most Charming; And is she thy own too, dear Rogue,
hah? And art thou sure of her?


Sure of her, no Gad, no more then I should be of my shadow, if I thought to
catch it; for even in the Crittical moment when I am in Bed with her, and one
would think then a Man were sure of a Woman; if one word or accident cross her,
Presto, she's gone like a Jugglers Ball in a moment, and then if you think to
stop her, like a hunted Cat, she takes but one Spring, and is immediately from
the Top of the Stairs to the Bottom.


This is Miraculous, Sure, thou art not a good Bedfellow, and dost not use a
Woman well, -- What can be the reason of this?


Damned humour, nothing but damned humour, by Heaven, and because thou shalt not
be too Envious of my happiness, I will now mix it with some allay, know
therefore that this Angel Creature we are speaking of, has by Intervals and
Fits, more and worse humours than all the She Devils put 'em together in
Belzebub's Seraglio; there never was such appearance of Saint and Spirit of
Satan mixed in one Woman, since the Creation, talk to her this minute, her brow
shall be unclouded, Sweet and serene, her Air Innocent and Engaging, and her
whole Composure all Harmony, Softness and quiet, and yet the next, Cross her
but with a Trifle, she shall roar louder than a Storm, Swear, Curse, tear your
Peruke, Linen, throw Bottles, Glases, Knives, Forks, nay Chairs and Stools at
your Head, in less time then I have been making the Description.


Why this is a very Devil Indeed, -- But can thou that art a Man of Sense and
Spirit bear it and proceed.


Oh friend, tho this Devil in her, -- I confess my Philosophy should teach me,
to conjure and avoid; yet when her Charming Person and the Joys she sometimes
gives me comes into my memory, her Cherubs Face, soft touch, and fragrant
Breath, -- I doubt my Sense, and think her all o'r Angel -- Oh I Love her
friend and she too too well knows it, -- She comes, prithee leave me for half
an hour, -- And take a turn in the Garden, 'tis possible e're long I may wean
may Self -- in the mean time reprove me not but Pity me.


Pity -- Faith instead of that I'll do more for thee then I have done for my
self this Seav^n years -- i'll go pray for thee -- for take it from me thy Case
is de^perate.


So Venus Moved, when drawn by Ciprian Doves,
She met Adonis in the Myrtle Groves;
With Rosy face, and loose Expanded Hair,
Exposing all that's Charming, all that's fair.

Hey day, What silly fancy's this? What in the name of Poverty has set ye a
Rhyming this morning? -- Phoo, Jesu -- how hot -- 'tis grown o'th sudden? I was
bewitched, I think, to come out to day.


Why how now Sweet? What de^ponding the first minute you see me? prithee
remember, Child, 'tis me thou come to see, I am I, my dear, the Man that
Loves thee, Loves thee beyond the World; and Gad, if desert may take place,
deserve thy Love again, better then any Man in it.


Lord you are always so full of your own Desert, if others could but see so
much in ye, 'twere well.


Why can you see none at all in me.


Pish, Lord, What a does here every day with your desert, pray don't Expect any
flattery from me, I am not in a humour? -- I met a plaguy Black Coat at my
first coming out this Morning -- I am sure there is some ill coming towards me
-- would the Devil had them. I had rather a Raven should Cross my Way, than a
Priest, a thousand times.


Fie Child, Would thou let such a Trifle as that put thee out of humour when
thou were coming to see me?


Well, well, If you don't like my humour, pray let me be gone, here's no body
will Confine thee too't that I know of.


Nay -- nay, begone; why that is more ridiculous now than the other; prithee dear
Child do but Consider what a strange humour this is.


Well, well, If it be a strange humour, let it be so, I know no body will mend
it.


Oh woman, woman, woman, for one dear Charming minute of Pleasure amongst one
hundred thousand of discontent, What are we poor Mortals Men born to Suffer.


Why this is the Devil now -- ^lways complaining, complaining, always uneasy,
pish, pray let me go, I have other business to do then to stand fooling here.


Oh ungrateful! How can you call the chief, nay the most Advantageous business
of your Life fooling? come, this is a dissimulation so gross you ought to blush
at it -- but you know my Love can hide a thousand such Erorrs as this -- Oh --
by Heaven I love thee so entirely that --


Love me -- yes Sir -- you take care to show it migh^ily, your Love was expressed
extremely in your Actions yesterdeay, D^ye remember the Flea.


The Flea --


Yes, Sir, the Flea -- which tho an Inconsiderable thing in it ^elf yet you
know I passionately Loved it, and for you when I took it out of its Box, to let
it dine upon my breast, to come with your rubbing brush Chin, and horse-play,
to fright it, and make it leap into the Fire -- was an Injury I'll never
forgive: D'slife -- would the fire had been big enough, and you had been bound
to leap into it your self.


Ah, sweet Nature, how I Love thee, prithee have some mercy, Child, and
consider your wish is a double Curse upon me, for I, poor Flea, as I am,
already burn with Love of thee, and to wish me to hop into another Fire before
I am purged in this, is a Martyrdom unexampled -- 'Tis beyond St. Lawrences
Gridiron, or any of the old Persecutions.


Oh, witty Sir, you may talk on, and fancy you are minded if you please.


And so then the burning of this Flea, to Exalt my misfortunes, has been the
notable occasion of this your quarrel to me.


This or any other occasion, so I do but quarrel with thee


Is my Love become a Trouble?


Oh pray call it by its rig^t Name Impertinence, and then I can answer -- that
is always a trouble.


Insuportable vexation -- now am I ready to choke with fretting.


Ugh -- now hawking and Spitting -- on purpose to spoil ones Stomach to ones
Dinner, egh.


What a Devil -- must not I spent for ye, when I have occasion? sure I may spent,
Madam.


Oh, your Lungs up with all my heart, Death and Hell let me be gone.


No, no, you have a Fit upon ye, and I won't expose ye in Public till it be
off, harkee -- Madam, What did you come hither for?


The Devil knows what I came hither for, would I had been hamstring'd, or my
Feet crippled with Corns, as big as Wallnuts, to have hindered me; you shall be
less visited henceforward: What a plague do ye stop the door for?


Nay then my Patience is quiet spent, and let me now tell ye, Madam, you shall
stay a little for my humour.


Your humour; I won't, Fool, D'slif^ keep off your hands, or else may Thunder
Blast me, if my Nailes don't dig as many Holes in your Face as ever the
Small-Pox did; thou shalt not have three Hairs left in thy Periwig, and this
your Beauships Cobweb Steinkirk here shall be as quickly Tinder, as --


Hush, Devil, there's some body at the Gate,


Dear Fiesque forgive me this Intrusion, which I was compelled to make, to
secure my self; the Marquis de la Fert, one of my greatest Enemies, is below to
speak with thee, and thy Ignorant unthinking Valet was just bringing him into
the Garden where I was -- this Pretty Lady, I think, has seen me thus Equipped
before; And, I hope, will Excuse me, that I thus rudely shelter my self in this
Sanctuary -- where Angels are, there always must be safety


He has heard nothing I perceive,


A Paradise indeed, too happy Friend, that hast in thy possession all that's
Charming -- Pray, Madam, please to give me an Answer to one thing --


If my small capacity can do it, Sir -- Pray what is it?


Do you think the Gentleman that went out just now can ever be saved? --


What a Divel does he mean by that Question? --

Bless me! Why not, Sir? -- We all have Faults, 'tis true, but you know Grace,
Sir, Repentance --


Oh, Madam, yes -- I know Grace and Repentance goes a great way -- Was there
ever any thing so Seraphic? --


Oh, Sir, I find you have the Court-Lesson perfectly -- Whatever is to come
hereafter, you, I'm sure, have more then a Double Blessing here, A Charming
Wit, a Graceful Person, and then a Tongue -- that if I durst give Ear too't --
Oh Heaven!


What, dear Charmer, what,


Believe, even what you pleased -- yet, Sir, tho my nature is Easy, Mild, Soft,
and too Credulous, yet I am taught by your Friends Example here -- not always
to think what Men say is Gospel -- he used to talk so too.


And does he falter now? Oh barbarous Wretch -- I find it now Fiesques
Character of her was a mere Banter on me; D'slife, she's a mere Angel.


Alas his Humour is too rough for me -- that's well put in, in case he should
have heard any Noise -- just now


Oh rude, Intolerable rude, Madam -- Gad, I'll be even with


Only by Patience, Sir; I'm skilless in revenging Injuries.


No other Remedy, pray think again, Sweet.


My Sighs and Tears --


Tender as ^nfant Innocence -- a very Magdalen. Fiesque; he has forfeited the
Bonds of Friendship, by traducing you to me: Oh Execrable Villainy! -- Why he
said you had the humour of a Devil.


Too kind to him, the ungrateful Creature knows, but since he dares behind my
back detract me.


Revenge it Madam, if you have any Spirit, and since our tyme's too short here
to propose right methods, know Madam, we are to have the Fiddles to night at
the Duke de Sanserres -- please but to meet me there, and fear not, the result
shall answer Expectation.


A Devils humour did he say? -- Oh! I could cry my Eyes out.


Soft, gentle sweetness -- Why what a lying Rogue is this F^esque -- come dear
Creature -- your promise.


Well, since he could be so base -- there's my hand, I'll come.


That's right -- here he comes -- clear up sweet and feign a smile or two, and
let us talk of News.


I'll warrant ye.


Yes, yes, '^is Certain, Madam, the Grand Seignour has passed the Danube, and
with an Army of Fifty Thousand Ianiz^rys, is come by Niss^ in his March towards
B^l^rad.


Why then Sir, if the Bassa of Allepo, and the other thundering B^ssa what do ye
call him, come and Join him, 'tis as certain that -- hum -- I say, 'tis as
certain that they'll -- that they will bring a great deal of Powder and Shot
wit^ 'em, there will be thundering doings amongst 'em.


Hugh, ha^ily Concluded that truly -- What has my coming frighted ye into
Pol^ticks? I wish there has been no th^ndering doings here sense I left ye, the
false Lady there methinks looks somewhat Guiltilly, and you, M^dam, if I
mistake not, are a great deal better in humour, than when I left ye.


Who I? no: I Vow, I think I'm much at one -- but one can't help being a little
diverted to observe the Count's behaviour in his disguise, I vow he's the best
man^ger of a Woman's Petticoats that ever I saw.


Humph, Does he manage women's Petticoats so well Indeed, Madam?


Thou art the veryst Tyrant Fiesque, the most insulting Triumpher, by Heaven
'twere but a peace of Justice in Fortune, to whirl thee from ^y present
height of Happiness, and crush thee with the Chariot thou now drive -- now
does he feign a Jealousy, Madam, out of mere Ostentation and Vain-glory.


He may feign, Sir -- but alas, he never could Love well enough to be really
Jealous -- What would I give to have power to make him so? -- or that I had so
much Gall -- to Rail enough -- to make him Angry.


Oh impossible, Madam! -- Impossible -- for you, with that Turtle disposition,
to Rail; -- why, 'twould be a Prodigy -- this is a subtle Banter, grounded on
some Mischievous Design by both of


Well, Adieu ye happy Lovers -- I can look on ye no longer without Envy, and
therefore must withdraw in my own Defence -- Besides, I expect my dear Countess
in Town to Night -- She is my stately Banquet of Love; this shall be my little
pretty repas de plasire by the by --


So Calm when I return, yet when I went so


O you must not think at all of it; in such a humour I know not what I say --
Forgive me, dear Sir: Believe me, 'twas only Passion -- Come, you must, you
shall forgive me.


Oh thou bewitching Creature -- I am Charmed, and 'tis in vain to struggle --
But must T^nnere share with me too -- for some Intrigue there is betwixt ye
I'm sure.


Pish -- A Boy -- A Novice -- A Marchpane Toy for Green-Ey'd Girls to play
with -- I'll never speak a word to him again as long as I live.


And have ye no Intrigue?


Believe me, none.


I do; For who can look on thee, and not believe thee? Come, go in with me, and
in my Cabinet I have a Brilliant Diamond shall bind thee to be Constant.


The Diamond shall be welcome, what ever you are --
'Tis Glittering Profit is my Taking Theme,
Co^stancy's Folly, Conscience a mere Dream:
My Vows my Promise, or the Oaths I Swear,
I can Shift from me, like the Clothes I wear.
Thus the Wife Woman moulds her Loving Tool;
His best Enjoyment is his Flame to Cool;
But hers is always to make him a Fool.

WHy have the Doting Sages, of all Times, allow'd this Charm, called Marriage,
yet less hurtful Witchcraft, punished as Horrible and Diabolic? The honest
Conjurer must be Burnt for's Circle, only because 'tis thought he Raises
Devils; yet the Vile Pulpit Drummer must be Pampered, whose Conjuring Rings
prepares more Souls for Devils, then all the Seven Deadly Sins together. Here's
one Marries in hast a Scold, her Noise makes him think Life a Torment: then a
second, one that is Rich, but Ugly -- her Deformity eats him with Spleen; he
fancy's Hell at home, and that he bears Damnation still about him: A Third
torments with Pride; a Fourth with Wantonness; whose Face, Shape, Air,
Address, and Jigging Motion, giving the Lover hope: The Husband's Jealousy,
'twixt hot Desire and fierce Revenge, Dams both. Now one of the worst of this
Cursed Tribe am I, doomed to the worst too of Husbands Torments, Jealousy;
which, like a Ra^enous Canker, knaws my heart, and grants me no Cesation to my
Doubt -- here comes my Credulous Brother-in-Law, old Brissac, the mere
Antipodes to me in Humour; he, though he Married a young Wife, fears nothing;
simply secure of her, and partial to himself, in spite of Time, believes he's
young; Talks, Drinks, Sings, Dances, Dresses like a Beau, and is never better
pleased then when you say, Years leave no mark upon him -- Pox on him, I must
be Civil to him -- So, Brother, I hope am so happy to have this Vi^it meant to
me.


I, I my Lord to you; To whom else should I mean it? Gad, my Lord, we wished
heartily for ye where I have been; two or three young brisk Fellows of us would
have diverted your Spleen, Faith, ha, ha, ha -- we have been up all Night
Serenading my New Mistress -- My Lord, what do ye mean, no Ceremony I beseech
ye? I have but just been at home to New Rig, Wash, Powder, Patch, and put on a
clean Cherry-Colour'd Cravat-string.


And dare you publicly own a New Mistr^ss, Count, without fear of a Revenge
from your Lady at home, if she should hear on it? -- Is not there such a thing
in Nature as a New Gallant? -- Won't Horns grow in that Country think ye?


No, my Lord -- the only proper Soil that I know for 'em to grow fast in, is
your Lordship's Head.


'Pox on him; Pray Heaven he does not Prophesy.


Old Count -- What a plague and ju^t come from Serenading -- my Patch on --
Peruke Powdered, and Cherry-Colour'd-Cravat-string -- Old Count -- Harkee, my
Lord, the first sign of Age is to be Jealous of ones Wife, take that from me,
Old Duke.


Nay, that's no General Rule, Brother.


Most veritable -- for 'tis ten to one he that suspects his Wife, does, in some
kind, find a Defect in, and Suspect himself. And he that Suspects himself --
'tis vehemently to be supposed has some Feeble, Lepid -- Frigid -- Causes, that
thank my Stars, I am a Stranger to --


Very well, Sir, I'm glad to see you so Active.


Humph -- Indifferent well for an Old Count:


O not so fast, good Count -- you Run -- why I see ye halt now -- you are
foundered already.


A Corn -- a plaguee Corn I have, a Pox on it; I trod upon a Nail with it -- Halt
-- Oon's, I can run Forty Mile an end without breathing.


Come, come, take a Friend's Advice, and be more sparing of your Vigour; or if
you will take a Journey of Forty Mile, let it be homeward, upon your Pad-Nag,
that your Lady may take care of your Gout, in stead of your Corn -- for you may
Hop -- Frisk, or fancy what you please, Brother, but you are Old.


Old again, and can you, in Conscience, think ^o my Lord?


Most unalterably.


What -- for all my Peruke's Powdered, and my Patch on?


Ah that won't do.


Zoons, what and for all my Cherry-Colour'd-Cravat-string.


Ay, for all your Cherry-Couler'd-Cravat-string, reserve your Remains for your
Lady at home, good brother, and if you are wise look well to her, she may be
gadding this miunte for ought you know, for take it once more from me, you are
old, the Crow-foot appears Brother.


Spite by the Gods, mere spite, and burning Envy -- my Wife gadding, Oon's,
that I know is this minute sitting at ho^e in her Closet, that looks upon the
Pond, Embroydering little Babies upon Dimety to make me a set of Chairs and
Stools.


Ah brother! she is more likely to be making little Babes in your Bed-chamber
for you to Embroyder -- but since good Council is lost upon ye, I'll be silent,
only Informing ye this, that in Merchandise, Traders can mark their Wares, but
a Wife is such a kind of a Commodity, that a man may be confoundedly cheated in
her without missing one Penny-worth of the Property.


Sir, there's one below to speak with ye, that says his Name is Sir. Blunder
Boss.


Oh! Pox on him, Is he come then? 'Tis a new Acquaintance of mine, my Lord, he
Lodges in the same house with me, gad I must beg your Lordships pardon for
presuming upon my Interest here, I have Invited him to dinner --


The Devil ye have -- this old fellow will make me Mad.


Oons, he's the rarest humorist, the most odd out of the way fellow, my Lord,
that ever you knew -- he's a right Mongrel by Birth -- his Father was an
English North Country Wooller, for his Wealth made a Knight, who trading
afterwards into Holland begot him upon a Dutch Woman in Rotterdam -- And to see
his way of Breeding, and hear -- his method of Speech -- is a Rarity you have not
met with; harkee, boy, boy, Prithee what did he say too thee?


Why he asked me first whose little Pimp I was.


Hah a hah -- well, And what else? --


And when I told him I was Page to the Duke de S^nserre, he asked me if the
Mangy Cur, Old Brissac, were not with him.


Ay -- ay -- 'tis his way my Lord, 'tis his way --


And what other Dogs and Bitches were in the Company?


Ha, ha, ha, 'tis a strange sort of a fellow; go go, prithee bring him up, he
calls every Body without distinction, by such names -- 'tis his way my Lord,
Did you Lordship ever hear of such a Humour?


No: the Devil take me, nor I never since I was Born, confusion -- What Company
am I to have at Dinner?


Oh, Sir Blunder! your Servant -- and with my Lord's leave here you are
welcome.


Ay, -- with all my heart, take whose leave thou wilt -- well, you see ye old
Thief I have found ye out at last, tho like a Cur Dog as you were, you gave but
Scurvy Directions -- Dost hear, is that the Duke thou toldst me of.


Ay, ay, Sir Blunder, this is the Duke, my Brother in Law.


Hugh -- I knew one Gulchen, that used to carry Sacks to the Pinnace in our
Dock at Rotterdam -- just like him, 'tis a good lusty fore-handed well-set Son
of a Bitch.


Sir --


Ha, ha, ha, ha, -- his way Brother his way -- I told ye --


Give me thy hand, Bully, Stiff-rump -- What art loath to show it? Hast got the
Itch? -- why ye whore^on dog you, you and I must be better acquainted before we
part, my name's Boss, Egh.


Ha, ha, ha, Brother, What dost think? Did ever see such a sort of a Fellow?
Gad, I don't think there's the like of him within the four Seas.


No, nor within the four quarters of the World, I dare answer for him.


Harkee dogs-head -- prithee tell him that I am a Sociable Fellow and Love to
be familliar.


Oh! Sir, I need no telling, I see it plainly, you are so far from
Complementing, and ^are so little for Corupting a Language with fine Epithets,
that you give it us as 'tis primitively spoke -- for Rogue, Dog, and such words
are commonly the first we learn.


Right, Dear Son of a Whore, you're in the right, faith; and I have been bred
up in that way ever since: plain words have plain meaning. 'Tis true, sometimes
when we have a Mind to Abuse any Body, we use the glozing English way of
Prating -- as thus now, I have Forty thousand pounds in my Purse, if I call any
Acquaintance of mine Dog, Scowndrel, Rascal, or so, why I mean him well, and if
he wants, will supply him with Five hundred pounds -- but when I Niggle him
with Dear Friend, and Sweet Sir, and upon my Honour you shall Command me, or so
forth -- though he were certainly starving, Gads bud, I would not give him a
Penny.


Why you ought to be valued extremely for this Plain-dealing Sir Blunder.


I, I dear Pimp -- I am honest at ^ottom, and that's mor^ then any of your
Complementers can pretend to; but dost hear, prithe^ let me see thee at my
Lodging -- Gad I'll give thee a swinging Bowl o Punch -- there's an English Son
of a Cur, a Lord he is, though -- on^ Guillamour -- newly come to lye there too:
the Dog is a rare Joke^ faith, I'll bring him into thy Company.


Guillamour -- Ds'death, how the Name startles me! for I hav^ often heard my
Brother Brissac say, that the House where he Lodges join to my Garden: Well,
Sir, go on, And what of this Guillamour?


What of him? why he's an Arch-Thief, a Plaguee Fellow at Wench -- and the
Rogue has found one out at the House joining to us she comes to him every Night
into the Garden, and he Whispers to he out of his Chamber-Window.


Hell and the Devil, it must be my Wife -- for I've observed ^ late she has
taken an Evening's Walk there -- oftner than usual -- ay ay. 'tis so, I'm
certainly abused, and all my Blood's on fire at the thoug^ on it: Now, Count,
here^s a Discovery made by Chance -- of yo^ damned Sister's Intrigue with
Guillamour; What say ye now, am I s^i^ blindly Jealous?


Phoo, pox, one of the Chambermaids comes to him I warran^ or some such Trifle.


I've seen a Ramping thing in a Painted Night-gown twinkle there in an Evening
-- I saw her Face once, 'twas a good handsome Bitch, Faith.


Still, still my damned Wife, for she has such a Night-Gown -- Oh Confusion! Is
there no Faith in the Cursed Sex? -- No honour? -- but Patience till I discover
more; I'll have a Trick this Evening to surprise 'em both, and I'll about it
instantly -- Brother, you and your Friend must excuse me, that I can't
entertain you my self at Dinner, a sudden Affair, which I had forgot, hurries
me hence; but pray Command my House till your Sister comes, who went out this
Morning about some private Affair of her own, but no doubt will soon be here --
your Servant.


Oh your Servant, my Lord, your Servant, here's an odd Whim for ye.


Your Discovery, Sir Blunder, was the cause of this sudden going; I tipped the
Wink upon ye two or three times, but, like a Millstone, down a Hill, there was
no stopping ye when ye were rolling.


What's the Clodpate Jealous? -- nay then I warrant he's a Cuckold --


Gad, Cuckold or not Cuckold -- I'm resolved my Sister, nor my Lord neither,
shall not be surprised this time; for I, my self, will give 'em timely Caution:
What a Pox, my Blood runs warm, and I love these Young Tricks heartily; I'll
therefore, like a kind Brother of Intrigue, prevent their being Catched in the
Evening -- Then return with the Fiddles, Entertain my Mistress, who is to be
here with my Sister, by Appointment, and so all of us Laugh at my Lord -- Come,
Sir Blunder, we'll take none of his Dinner, since he is to Morose not to stay
with us.


Well, well; Prithee good Rascal go where thou wilt, I'll follow thee; but, as
to my Lord's Moroseness, for my part I mind it not; 'tis a common thing with
us, at Rotterdam -- you shall have a Burger there Invite ye to a Shoulder of
Mutton, and just as 'tis set on the Table, if any sudden business happens, he
shall s^atch it out of the Dish, and Lock it up, run out of Doors, and leave you
behind to suck your Fingers.


Nothing in Nature can make a Wife more Easy, than her Husband's good opinion
of her: and I have moulded my Old Count so well to my hand -- that if I should
tell him my self, that I am really here in Specie, and run awayout of the
Country hither, upon a Frolic, I dare Swear he would not believe his own Eyes.


Nay, dear Madam, do you but blind him on one Eye, and let me alone, for
the other -- for he is so Mortified with his Passion for me, that he da^es make
use of none of his Senses but as I shall Direct.


I believe I must call some body, that shall be nameless, to Council too, about
the management of my Conjugal Gentleman, for he begins to be Obstreperously
Jealous -- And when once they are so, they cease to be Husbands, and turn
Jailers -- for my part, I had as live be in the Bastile, and ordered to feed
upon Bread and Water, as be Confined to the sneaking allowance that a
Parsimonious Husband shall bestow on me.


Oh pox, a Husband's allowance, like a Prison Basket, will Starve those that
have nothing else to subsist on.


I, 'tis well that we Women have sometimes Courage enough to usurp the
Privilege of Free-born Subjects, and Enjoy by Wit what our Husbands won't
grant us by good Nature, for then the Pleasure of deserving 'em is a
Substantial happiness. Now does my codel'd Matrimony securely believe, that I
am at home looking after the Rose-cakes -- or licking my Clammy Fingers after
potting up the Marmalade of Quinces -- when God knows I am here under his Nose,
dressed en Cavalier -- ready for the Plays, the Music, the Walks -- and I may
be for variety by to morrow, to please my self, will be in a Fruit Garden
twenty Mile off, with a very good Friend.


Ay gad, and I hope at night, dear Madam, be better pleased in a better Place
with a very good friend.


All Entertainments are prized as the Appetite is inclined, Count now if the
Peaches, Apricots, and Frontiniack Grapes, the Viand delicate -- of the day
shall regale my Sister better than your night treat; Lord, How Sneakingly you'd
look in the Morning?


I Swear he relishes -- So much of our Sex, by wearing Petticoats so long --
that if we chance to be straightn'd for Lodging, And I should be for^'d -- to
Roost with him -- I Vow I should fancy I was going to bed to my Nurse, you'd be
a very Nurse Count.


Such a Confounded Nurse, I should make too Child, gad, I fear, thou would
never be able to endure me. For I should be plaguy Cross if you tumbled or
squawl'd in the Night time, if you'd take the Nipple quietly you might -- but
if I gave ye any thing with a Spoon the Devil take me.


I don't know what sort of Nurse the Count would make, Sister, but by his way
of talking, he would make an Excellent Midwife -- or else some Gossip Hostess
-- Oh! he would make a delicate Gossip at a City Christening for he talks just
as they do to one another in a Lying-in-Room.


Ay, or as you do to one another in your dressing Rooms.


Come, come, prithee leave this unprofitable Chat, and show me the Garden and
Rarities -- I wa^rant there's twenty new Monsters come since I was ere --
besides, I have been so long tormented in the Country with the lowing of Cows,
bleating of Sheep, and Cawing of Rooks, that the least of the Town diversion's
a Calf with* four Legs, or a Russia Ram, with a long Tail, will be a Rarity to
me -- or else let's go to the Opera -- No, no, Stay -- the Water-works, the
Waterworks -- Oh God! but then they say there's the rarest Italian Rope-dancer
come over -- And a wonderful Creature, that has three or four Sexes -- D'slife
I've no patience till I see them all.


What altogether Sister? Prithee let 'em be seen one after another, if you Love
me.


The greatest Rarity you can see, Madam, in this Disguise will be your Husband
making Love to me, he's to bring the Fiddles here by and by; prithee dear Angel
see that first for my Satisfaction.


With all my heart, and I'll Man it so, I warrant he never knows me, I'll
venture what his Instinct can do for once; I believe -- I may be a true or a
false Princess as I please, I need not fear any discovery he can make by his
Lyon like virtue.


'Tis a wild giddy-headed Creature -- and I must take care to govern her
Indiscretion for my own sake -- let me see -- I am to meet my dear Guillamour
at the window on the other side the Garden, an assignation I would not break to
be Mistress of Versailes -- bless me! Is not this he? or do my Eyes Dazzle?


That's Impossible; but mine do always dazzle when they meet thy Luster, thou
brightest and most Lovely of thy kind.


Heavens! my Lord, you amaze me -- How durst you venture hither, my Husband
being here, and knowing his Humour?


Led by resistless Love and a kind Genius that helps a Lover still on b^ld
adventures to unriddle the Mystery, know, my better Angel, that the Marquess
has casually had Information of our Window-Intreague, but my good Old friend
Sessac, happening to be there at the time of the Discovery, and finding the
Jealous Marquess was resolved to surprise us, was coming in all hast to give me
caution, whom I luckilly met Just as we saw your Coach return home. Mrs. L.
Buske here being at the Window, I beckoned her down -- the rest which will make
you Laugh, and the reason of my venturing hither, you shall have from her.


Ha, ha, ha, yes if I have -- breath enough to tell it for laughing -- ha, ha,
ha, be pleased to know th^n Madam -- that Mrs. Danbray the new Spy that my Lord
has lately E^ertain'd, has been dressing him up in your blew Night-gown and
head-^othes, in which he makes so awkward a Figure, 'twould make one Dye to see
him, he's just gon to the Window that opens upon the wall -- th^ other side of
the Garden -- I got so near, that I found his business wa^ to watch for my Lord
here, and that he would stay at his Post some hours -- which made me assure
him, that he might venture to you without danger.


Ay Gad, and for that Assurance, there's a Token of my Love for thee, Ha, ha,
ha; Was there ever so provoking an Adventure? Faith, Madam, it is but
reasonable we should Pay this diligent Watchman for his Waiting.


I am for having him deserve a little more first; we can, at last, but Pay him
altogether --


Gad, for the Honour of my dear Country, England, I'm of a Temper, that desires
to render every one his due; methinks I long to be out of his Debt.


For Punctual Payment of such kind of Debts, I have heard indeed, that your
Englishme^ are very Conscientious, if C^ckoldome would pay a Cittizen's Bill --
the good Apron-man need never stir over his own Threshold to Dun ye -- But
come, my Lord, not to discourage your Generous Intentions quite, I'll make ye a
Present of my Picture here, I charge ye to think of no Substances -- at least
for a certain time that I shall prefix -- What, -- 'tis but reason you should
Invoke your Saint, before you enter your Paradise.


Invok


To enjoy which Imaginary Paradise then -- My Lord, for the present, I'll leave
ye, to go and Play an After-Game with my Jealous Matrimony yonder -- the result
of it, and where we next shall meet, I'll send you word in a Billet: in the
mean time, Adieu, Seducer of this heart of mine.


Joy Great, as thou to me, be always thine --


No Bolting yet -- And the usual hour past; sure she's grown pal^'d to her New
Amoretto; methinks, he else would be more Punctual. Here is a hot Remembrancer
shall meet his Glowing Passion with a quicker Flame: Stay -- let me think a
lit^le what I'm doing; Eternal Devil! Are these the Joys of Marriage? 'tis he
sure; the shade of the Trees eclipse my light -- I'll go nearer, that he may
Lure me to him, for 'tis certainly he: Now do I expect to be Harangued with
some Lovers Amorous Couplet, beginning with So Walked Clarind^ midst the Myrtle
Grove,
Like the Queen-Mother of the Stars above.
And I'll Answer, like Vulcan, with Bullet and Fire.



Well, 'tis a pure Song, I'll say it; Good Honny, Roger, Teach it me it once
more.


Come -- with all my heart; Strike up then -- hem, hem.


Hah! What's that?


Andrew and Susan, Rebecca and Will;


Roger and Sisly, and William and Mary,


There was Kate of the Kitchen, and Kit of the Mill.


Iohn the Ploughman, and Ione of the Dairy.


To Solace their Hearts, and to Sweeten their Labour,


All met on a time with a Pipe and a Tabor.


How -- Nothing but two dirty Devils Singing a Damned Ballad; sure I have not
mistook the Window;


Oh, my Lord, we are ruined! your Design, by some means or other, has taken
Air, and they ^re turning it yonder all into Raillery: there's a Window and a
Garden it seems at the other side of the House, which that Dunce, Sir Blunder,
mistook for this, and another Lady there too.


Ds'death! What with another Painted Night-gown and Petticoat --


So it seems, my Lord; besides, I saw my Lord Guillamour, and your Brother
Brissac this moment at the Door, shaking hands, and Laughing, till they shook
again; and, by what I can guess by him, he's bringing him in.


The Devil he is -- D'sdeath, I shall be the Laughing-stock of the whole Town
-- the very Footmen will Point at me -- and ten to one, in three days time,
have another Horrid Ballad made of the Noble Duke, and Sung to as Confounded a
Tune, at my own Window -- Run Daubray, and shut the Dining-Room Door, that I
may sneak up the Back-stairs into my Chamber before they come.


Ah 'tis impossible, my Lord, they are got as far as the Garden already, and
see, here comes my Lady*


What a Devil shall I say unto her now?


So, Mrs. Daubry, this is very fine Confidence indeed, the first Week my Lord
has Entertained ye -- What Creature, Have you been so Saw^y to Dress in my
Clothes? -- Ha, let me see


I must brush through with it some way or other Daubray -- And pray reform your
Mistake -- 'tis I.


How, my Lord? -- bless me -- my Lord -- In the Name of Virtue what Riddle's
this? -- What means this Metamorphosis?


Humph -- I think I've got a Lye will fit her B^issac -- intends to bring the
Fiddles here this Evening -- and I intended to Surprise the Company in
Masquerade -- being mighty frollicksome to day.


Frolliksome, my Lord -- What with your Pistol there? Your Frolic, I find,
would have had more of Revenge in it then Mirth, base Man -- Must I always be
the Miserable Subject of your horrid Jealousy? -- Jealousy, that has always
made you as Ridiculous to the World -- as it will now be found to be in this --
Charming Disguise -- Heaven! that you could but see your self how you look.


Like a Witch in an Ecstasy, I believe; A Plague upon this headgeer here, would
the Devil had the Inventor.


But 'tis Satisfaction enough to me, to know, that the shame that constantly
attends this Frenzy, is always sufficient Punishment -- which your Grace will
apprehend better, when your Visitors within shall enter, in the mean time let
me Teach ye this Poetical Maxim. Let him whose Jealous Brain his Wife
suspects,
E're he Expose her Fame, prove her defects;
He that want's Proof, and on his Doubt relies,
Will sink his own, but her Esteem shall rise.
There's a short Touch for ye, and so I leave you to your Baiting -- Sir --


I'll go and seek the Butler, and get a Gill of Comfort, for I'm ready to faint
with Fretting as I'm a true Woman.


'Tis so -- here they come -- A Plague upon 'em; and now am I to be half
suffocated with the Fulsome Jokes of that Eternal Old Coxcomb Brissac --
D'sdeath, Is there no Avenue, nor Shelter here? What would I give to be a Rat
now for two minutes? -- A Rabbit, with a Burrow near me; or any other Vermin,
so I had but a Hole to creep into.


Come, before the Fiddles play their Parts, Lets all resolve, by consent, to
have a Merry touch or two at my Lord; Prithee mind me, sweet Empress, thou
Sovereign Queen of all my Faculties, as the Poet says Blunder.


The Loadstone, I find, has lost: its Virtue; the Old Spark does not know me;
Ton. I see it, but -- the Defect is in the Steel, and not the Loadstone -- A
Pox on him, he has no more Natural Sympathy, then if his Skin were Stuffed with
Straw --


I'll try whether he has or no; for I'm resolved to Banter him before we part.


That Pretty Creature yonder has been Oagling me this half hour, hah -- I know
her now, it must be She, Fiesques Charming Mistress, that the Town Celebrates
so for a Miracle of Beauty -- Gad, her Smiles give me strange Encouragement,
I'll go and talk to her -- 'Twill be a pretty Amusement for Sanserre there, who
must then naturally believe my Intreng^e is with her, and not his Wife.


What a Bewitching Face and Air has that Englishman? whose very Look so
Charms me, that, by Heaven, I've hardly Patience to forbear some
Love-Extravagance before the Company -- hah -- he Oagles me too -- Now Beauty,
do me right -- Dear Face perform thy Office.


T^at's all, Boy; Let him but think 'twas thy Mistake, and for the rest of the
Banter let me alone.


Well, well, prithee Old Bullethead don't doubt me; if a Lye will do the
Business, my Conscience is Wide enough -- Pox, I hate a Jealous Rascal -- more
than a Dutch Cook does a French Kickshaw.


Come now then, let's all sows in upon him, like Spaniels upon a Duck in a
Pond -- I'll set in first -- Hey, where are these Fiddlers -- Come, let's have a
Country Dance; Strike up there you Rogues; Come, Cuckolds* all-a-Row --. Here's
a Buxom Lass shall be my Partner -- What say thou to it, my Jolly Sixteen
Ribs? -- Give me thy hand I say, to us, The Nimble Cuckold-makers of Versa^lles
-- Here's one will Foot it Briskly I'faith.


Harkee -- Brother -- No more Jesting, do ye hear, I shall grow Angry.


Harkee, my Lord -- So shall I* -- You have wronged my Sister, do ye hear -- and
I have enough in me to call you to Account for it -- But hush, no more words
on it, for her Quietssake, and the Love of some Body else here, at present I
pass it by; but if I hinder any body from laughing at your Toppings here the
Devil take me -- ha, ha, ha, why Gentlemen and Ladies here^s a surprise will
make ye dye with laughing, we are all deceived here -- this is no Lady,
Gentlemen but a noble Lord, Gentlemen my Brother the Duke de Sanserre Gentlemen
who being horribly suspicious of being hornified Genttlemen by his Lady at
Court here.


As his Brother the old Count Briss^c Gentlemen is foolishly secure of not
being hornified by his Lady in the Country.


Has most cunningly dressed himself ha, ha, ha, in his Ladies Clothes, Gent.
with design to catch her napping, with a certain lusty young English Lord,
alias Whoremaster, called Guillamour Gent* -- at him my young Hercules -- speak
for thy self now, at him, at him.


Who he designed to catch is not my business to examine, but I hope his Grace
has nothing to say to my Conversation with his Lady.


Oh, my Lord you are much in the right.


His conversation with that Lady -- when her coming hither was only an
Assignation with me, ds'death, What means he?


Why the short and the long is, I was mistaken in the Whore, and my Lord there
like a Coxcomb as he was, was mistaken in the Window-what a pox there's more
windows than one to a house sare, and more Bitches then one in Painted
Night-gowns and Peticoats.


If my Lord had not been discovered to be a Man -- by Jove, I should have taken
him -- for a very good fat jolly Lady of mine Acquaintance.


Which very good fat jolly Lady -- is a Baud I'm sure, for that lewd smock
faced ^mp can have no other acquaintance.


I hope, Madam, my Lord has not so wholly Engrossed your Conversation, but you
may have leisure to put in your Jest too; pray give me your opinion, methinks
the head-clothes sitting so awry look like tawdry Mrs. Quakine -- sitting at
Cards in her Chamber, the Evening of the day she has taken Physic.


Ha, ha, ha, ha -- dear Empress -- a witty Observation faith.


Oh! I^m sorry they don't please ye Madam, I hope your Comode there sits
cocking straight enough.


And the Night-gown there so loose and Negligent, looks just like the tawdry
Countess of Iersy in a morning without her Stays.


What's that you say, Sir?


Oh fie! How ill a frown becomes that Dress, which I confess I must own is most
extremely particular.


Is it indeed so particular -- Madam?


Oon's -- the Dog looks like a Hermophrodite -- at a Leaguer, drinking of
Brandy with a Corporal of the Guard.


Nay, if that Porpoise be spouting too, 'tis time to shun drowning indeed, a
plague of your Merriment -- D'sheart I shall grow Mad if I stay and unman my
self --


Ha, ha, ha, ha, -- Now is he gon to vent the rest of his confounded humour
upon his Valet de Chambre, and Pages -- a pox on it, this con ^s of foolish
Jealousy; who the Devil would be Jealous, it makes a Man old, ill-natur'd, ill
Company, ill-belov'd; And brings a thousand Inconveniences, a pox I hate the
very thought on it.


Ay, but yet it shows Love, Count, it shows Love.


Ay, that's before Marriage, dear Empress -- that's before -- you know what,
and then I grant there may be some reason to be Jealous to lose ones Mistress,
but of on^s Wife -- gad 'tis a mere breaking out, a Corruption of Soul and Body
-- 'tis a Disease worse than the Pox -- Why now have I a Wife in the Country --
a very house-dove -- A pretty poor harmless contented thing -- that I warrant
is this very minute reading the Ladies Calling to her Maids, or a Treatise of
the Duty of a Wife to her Husband -- and faith I Love her well enough too, for
a Wife -- She wants for nothing --


How -- A young Wife left by her Husband want nothing? reflect a little on what
you say, old Sir.


Why how now Monsieur, no Beard? -- Do the farthing Candles of your Eyes want
snuffing this Morning, old Sir? ye young Milksop, What do you see old about me?


Why you stoop in the Shoulders, and bend in the Hams -- Old Aeson.


What a lying Jackanapes is this -- prithee look on me, dear Empress -- by gad
I'm as straight as an Arrow.


Ay, 'tis true, he is a little malicious -- but he's a very pretty fellow faith
Count, and I can't forbear oagling him a little.


Prithee look on me -- Oo'ns do but look on me, ye young Coxcomb -- Am not I
straight^ Do I bend in the Hams, ye envious Puppy? -- let all the World Judge
if I am not as straight as an Arrow -- a very Arrow.


Not if your Wife at home were to give her Judgment Sir -- who, for all your
Conjugal security, you shall give me leave to believe does want something.


Hah -- which want, you think your self proper to supply I warrant.


No fa^th, I should do what you ought to do, acknowledging my own single
ability de^tive, call in another able Person to assist, and all wants indeed
might be suply'd fairly.


Well said again young Sir I swear.


Who the Devil is this young Dog? I wonder whither he dares fight or no -- gad
I shall be provoked to try if this hold, for to m^ thinking she begins to be
fond of him -- this is the plaguy vice of the S^ in general, all Woman-kind
hanker after, and how to Debauch these Boys.


I heard you talk of Boys Sir -- dam me, do ye mean me Sir?


You Sir, yes Sir, dam me too -- Are not you a Boy Sir?


No Sir, and I'll bring an abler witness then you are to justify the contrary.


That he can I assure ye Sir, there I must take his part.


How Madam, will you take his part against me? -- pox prithee dear Empress
let's leave him to his Raket and Balls -- you shall do m^ the honour now to let
me treat ye with a little Entertainment of Music and Dancing, after which I
intend to lead ye up a Corrant my self, which is a gr^ye thing, and a graceful
dance for a fine Lady --


And you and I will do a minuett Madam, which is a brisk thing and a more
graceful dance for a fine Lady.


Prithee -- male-varlet, What dost do here? -- pox thou should post into
Italy -- here's no Boys play here -- here's no use of unbearded things -- Oo'ns
get thee to Rome amongst the Cardinals.


No faith, they are fitter for your Company, they are old fumbling fellows like
your self.


This young Dog will never leave prating, gad I'll run my Sword in's Guts.


Oh fie, old friend! no fighting amongst Ladies -- besides 'tis all Gallantry,
and you can't in reason be angry.


Wher's the Music? a pox on 'em let's begin then and put it out of my head,
and in the mean time -- de hear, let the banquet be made ready in the next
Room.


Well, and to let him see I understand Gallantry, I'll add to his Musical
Entertainment, and Sing my self, if any here can bear part in the late new
Dialogue.


That can I, Sir, and in honour of the Count I'll show ye my skill Immediately.


THe World is full of hurry;
Our H^roe'^ ^unt for Glory,
^o swell our future STORY
With D^ds of high Renown.

Religion and Am^ition
Make us in poor Condition,
Till for our sad Division
A Gener^l Peace Atone.

Then Brawling War forsaking,
In Love u^w Tryalis making;
Instead of Cities Taking
I'll Storm your Heart alone.

When to Enjoyment hasting,
Let Youth be slowly wasting,
And Beauty long be Tasting;
I'll wish no Monarch's Crown.

When first the World and Matter
Were form^d by the Creator,

Three only Things in Nature
Were worth a Mortal's Care.

First Wit in Bounteous Measure,
Then Women for our Pleasure.

And Moderate store of Treasure:
To Entertain the Fair.

Nothing can make ye have a good thought of me, Sir, for this strange
confession of my Love, but your extraordinary* Merit and good Nature -- but
pray believe this is not common with me.


Such beauty, Madam -- must command all thoughts and services -- by Heaven,
'tis a sweet Creature -- oh dear, dear Inconstancy, Who can defend himself
against thy Charms? -- hah, la Buske here -- nay then I'm caught in the nick.

The Planets shoot more strongly their Influence on the other side, and 'tis
Impossible to resist the Lady of the Ascendant.


Hah, gon -- ten thousand Furies take that Messenger, for 'tis certain she has
fetched him away upon some other Intrigue, but to go without taking leave, or
an Excuse, or so much as an Assignation for some other time, D^'death, I'm all
on flame with vexation at the thought on it -- I'll run and overtake him in the
Street, for I can't live till night without that Satisfaction.


Hold hold, Madam, Whither so fast? I hope you did not doubt my coming as soon
as I could get loose from the Company.


He here, cursed luck; but 'tis all one I am resolved I will go -- pish -- I
neither wished nor doubted your coming Sir -- pray let me go, for I've an
extraordinary affair has happened that exacts it.


An affair, What greater then your Promise to me? come, you onl^ jest I'm sure.


Oh, Sir, you shall find me no Jester, therefore on^e more let me go, 'tis my
humour, and (...) all the reason you are like to have.


To follow my Lord Guillamour I suppose.


Suppose what you will -- I'll follow my inclinations, though you and all such
impertinent Teizers were damned in the preventing it.


Is't possible? Can you so soon forget your Promise?


Pox Of promises -- that ever any fellow that proudly thinks he carries half an
ounce of Brains, should heed A Woman of my Characters promise -- Hell and
Furies* How am I plagued wi^h this Coxcomb? D'sdeath stand out 'th way.


She Swears and Curses like a Baud in a Brandy-Celler -- I find now Fiesque was
in the right, and thou art indeed a very Devil.


I am so: why thou empty, hot-headed, flashy, Impertinent, ridiculous Animal;
Who would ever give her consent to make a lewd assignation with such a Rampant
Monster as thy self, but a Devil? -- when you deboach us first, you fix
damnation, then shoals of dressing pouder'd Sons of Belzibub, mingle with us
the daughters of Belphegor, and so the thriving Trade of Hell goes forward.


Stand solid Impudence, case hard^'d, and well grounded in the Trade -- and
yet sometimes too you can act as an Angel.


I can act any thing to make a Fool --


And lately when you praiz'd my Face Shape, Tongue -- you thought me a Monster
or an Idiot.


Right -- I never heard a fellow say he Loved me, but I had hopes to beg him
for a changeling.


Thou art the exactest Jilt -- I ever met with.


Thou art the veriest coxcomb I e're bubbled -- But why the Devil do I stand
prating with thee -- give me way to go whither my resolute humour drives me, or
all the Mischif in a Woman's Nature, all that Hells Legion can inspi^e me with,
I'll vent upon thee.


Thou shalt not stir, I'll keep ^hee here to plague thee.


Then take what follows -- sure I shall find something to further my revenge --
the trappings you usurp there of our Sex I shall demollish presently.


Witch -- Fury -- Succubus -- tho as thou look like Woman I dare not strike
thee -- yet as a real Devil Incarnate, I may pinch.


Oh, here's something will do better Execution -- look upon this thou hot
brained fool, and tremble.


Thou wilt not Stab me -- Harpy.


Not Stab thee, yes by the Rage that burns me, through Soul and Body, if I
could -- let this Confirm it.


Was there ever such a Devil? -- 'gad sh^ frighted me -- for this pretty
Instrument had certainly bin sheathed in my Guts if I had ^pos'd her longer --
well I'll straight to Fieske, discover our adventures, and beg his pardon --
and hereafter agree with him. That amongst all Mischiefs that with Vice engage;
Nothing so Barbrous as a Strumpets Ra^e.



YOu have been to look for her in her Chamber then --


Yes, and there's no body there but Grossiere; I asked her for her Lady, and
with a composed modest look, as if she had been at Confession, she answered,
upon her veracity, she had not seen her since morning.


Pox on her veracity; She's as good as her Mis^ress, I'll warrant her, whenever
any ^hamber maid affects fine words, I take it for granted, she's a Whore
infallibly. Did you look into the Closet?


No, the door was locked. Besides, it can't enter into my head she could be
there and deny her self to me, after our last reconcilement, and the kindness
past between us this morning.


Nay, if her Treachery can't enter into your head, after the story I told you
of our late adventure, take it from me, your Head and the Brains belonging to
it, are in an incurable condition. Oh, confound her, she's the most
treacherous, the most base, the most ungrateful, the most pernicious, the most
--


Charming Creature.


Charming, damn her; she charms indeed, but 'tis by Witchcraft only, the Devil
has sent her an Enchanting Out-side, to impose on a young Amorous Fellow's
Reason, till he^s relieved by wise Consideration; but then the Hag appears in
her true colours, and nothing's seen but hellish ugliness.


I've cause to think this true, but yet must love her. Nay, by Heaven, it s^ems
to me unnatural, to believe her treacherous; a thousand times -- with Sighs,
and trickling Tears, that down her Rosy Cheeks have sweetly fell -- Has she
sworn Constancy;


And a thousand times with fulsome scoffs and laughter, has she behind thy back
abused thy kindness, and turned thy passionate Love to ridicule. Besides,
prithee be not so blind to think her true for weeping, for Sighs and Tears are
the Whore's Ammunition, the Tools and Implements of their damned profession:
Thus, like the Prince of the Air, they use both Elements, and Blow and Rain, as
often as they please.


So you think to all Mankind alike for Profit, she doles her private favours.


Most certainly, unless she's caught as the Jilt sometimes is, and falls in
love: then the strongest back still carries her; he that has biggest Bones, and
drudges best. A pox on Merit, Wit, and Learning, Truckle the lustiest Bargeman
is her best Philosopher.


Damn^d hellish Creature.


I believe I can luckily give thee an instance of this presently, for just now
as I was coming to find thee out, I chanc^d to meet that Nauseous fool Sir
Blunder: I know not how, but it came into my Head to revenge my self, and wean
thee from thy passion, to try him with Vandosme; to pursue which, I told hi^,
she had kind thoughts of him; he ignorant of thy Intrigue with her, like a
sense^ess Gudgeon, swallows the Bait greedily, and told me he would go
presently and contrive a Billet-doux for her, and come and show it me. -- I
told him I should be here, and expect him in two Minutes.


Nay, if she cope with that Brute.


Why, that Brute has Money, and your t^ue Ji^t shall cope with that or any
other Brute for Profit, with two Legs or with f^ur; take that for Gospel. Oh,
here he comes, as merry as a


Ha, ha, ha, ha, ha -- dear Devil ha, ha, ha, ha, ha -- dear Son of a Bitch,
ha, ha, ha, ha, ha, ha, ha, ha, ha, Rog^e, ha, ha, ha, Rascal, ha, ha. I have
done such a ha, ha, ha, such a ha, ha, ha, -- such a thing -- such a piece of
Wit, ods Sacrament, nothing in al^ France can mend it, I'm sure -- ha, ha, ha,
here prithee read -- how now, who's that -- hold, hold a little.


Oh, only a friend of mine -- he's one that understands these sort of things
very well -- and has a great value for you and your Country, Sir Blunder.


Has he, hal^, 'tis a good tolerable sort of a scoundrel to look to. Dost thou
understand Wit, Dogs-head --


Enough to commend yours, Sir Blunder -- is it to a Lady?


Ay, ye Whelpsface, ha, ha, ha, -- 'tis ha, ha, -- tis ha, ha, ha, -- 'tis to a
Lady -- if thou'lt have the word lac d, for my part now I love plain-work, I
call 'em all Whores, faith. -- Come, pri^hee good Scoundrel read it, let's
hear, Gad I have tickled her off, I was in a confounded witty humour, when I
writ it.


You plaguy confou^ded, little tempting Devil you.


Ha, ha, ha, smart -- ha, ha, ha, smart -- conceit at ^irst dash -- I love to
begin merrily with the Jades -- hah --


You begin very merrily with her indeed, Sir.


You can't believe I was such a Loggerhead, but that like a Cunning,
Sly-leering, Tittilizing Quean, as you are, I minded your Ogling yesterday.


Ha, ha, ha, -- smart again -- go on dea^ Mongrel.


And if yours and my Father, Mother, Brothers, and Sisters, Uncles, and Aunts,
and all the Dogs Bitches in both our Families should have hanged themselves to
hinder it -- I could not forbear sending you my mind in this Letter.


Good again, ha, ha, was not I a witty Dog there -- humph!


Oh a prodigious witty Dog.


I know you are a well gascoin'd good handsome Jade, and you shall know that I
am an honest, blunt, thundering strong-back'd Rascal, who in the humour I'm in,
resolve to beat up thy quarters.


Strong and sinewy still -- on, on, to the conclusion, dear Rogue.


And since I have 500 l. to throw away upon a young Doxy, as well as other
Fools, let your back door be open, do ye hear, about nine, and if I ha^'t a
smack at yourChops before ten, say I amthe Son of a Mastiff, who now Subscribe
my self -- The obsequious puppy, and languishing Lapdog, Blunder-Bosse.


Right, Rogue, in great Letters at bottom, ha, ha, ha, Gad it makes me laugh to
think how fast the Wit flow^d from me; why the Devil dost not laugh, how can
forbear? why ye grave Hermaphrodite thou do^t not laugh at me.


Ha, ha, ha, ha, -- Gad, but I do, Sir, and more then that, I'll secure ye all
that know ye shall laugh at ye.


Gad, I'll send it to London by the next Post; and have it Printed in the next
Collection of Letters, that come out by the topping Wits there. I know a
Bookseller that will give any rate for it, to set off the rest.


Why, faith, your stile will be very particular, Sir Blunder.


Pox on it I, if there were a thousand, tho I'm told there is but one comes to
her -- A Count they say, but a pitiful sneaking Puppy.


What says the Dog?


Nay, Fiesque, is this your temper?


Well, with ^e good (...) scoundrel I^ll go and dispatch this away immediately,
and afterwards, if e're I meet any Count there, I'll kick the Son of a Whore to
Atoms


Oh, Slave, 'dsheart must I bear this and not cut his Throat.


Ye must; he is not worth your anger; besides, remember, friend, this fool is
to be the touchstone to try the nature of that Jilt Vandosme, and so procure
thy happiness and freedom: Come, let's go and take a turn or two in the Garden,
and then come again, perhaps she may have dispatcht her new Intrigue by that
time and return.


Hard fate, my Curse is want of Liberty,
And y^t 'twill be a greater to be free.

Not within say thou, Sweet heart?


No indeed, my Lord -- Oh dear, upon my veracity she'll be extremely concerned
to be from home, when your Grace does her this honour of a Visit, but she's so
teased about recovering an Estate from some kindred of hers, and the
troublesome Lawyers do so plague her every, day that I speak sincerely, my
Lord, she's hardly ever at quiet for 'em.


Shes so incomparable a Beauty, that I should rather have thought her Lovers,
than her Lawyers had plagued her.


Lovers -- alas -- upon my veracity, my Lord, her head's upon something else,
but she seldom stays lo^g out, and if your Grace pleases to take a turn or two
in the Garden, I'll run and inform you the very minute she comes.


Ay, with all my heart.


Your Grace's most humble Servant, I'll go watch her coming.


This is a subtle Quean, for all her simpering, and trained to lye; she's one
of the Devils Escritoires, crammed full of secret sins, and never opened but by
the potent Master-Key cal^'d Gold: However, I am armed, and if I can by
cunning, or some expense, discover from her Mistress, who I perceive is great
with Guillamour, what I suspect b^tween him and my Wife, I have my ends; the
Viper shall then leave gnawing me to prey on them: If she comes, to nights the
time; if not, a Letter filled with Golden promises, and the present of some
Jewel, shall charm her in the morning. Beauty, mans chiefest blessing, all must
own,
Which we dull Husbands hope is ours alone:
But oh what torments does that wretch endure,
That doubts his power that blessing to secure?



Are you sure the Coast is clear?


Yes, yes, very sure; they are all gone into the Garden, and if the truth were
known, with heavy hearts.


Ay, 'tis all one; I had rather their hearts were out, than I had lost this
dear minute.


Well, Madam, I see I shall never leave your service till I'm quite damned
about it: This is the three and twentieth lye I have told to day for ye; Lord
have mercy upon me, what will become of my Soul!


O prithee go and employ thy Soul in adding to the Musical performance within,
that's all the use thou hast for it that I know of; for my part, I have not
thought of my own this seven year. Come, my dear Lord.


Ye pretty Birds, that Chirp and Sing,
Ye Trees and Plants, that Bud and Grow;
Ye fragrant Flowers, that bless the Spring,
Tell me whence comes it you do so.
Hark, hark, they answer, 'tis Celestial Fire
The Gods call Love, that does us all inspire.
That sacred Flame that sweetly Charms
My Soul when lovely Cynthia sings,
That all Creation; Labour warms,
And Matter to Perfection brings:
The busy useless Sun may cease to shine,
'Tis Love that sheds the Influenoe Divine.
Then Lovers love on, and get Heaven betimes,
He that Loves well, atones for the worst of his Crimes.
Jove's Gate is locked fast on the Sordid and Base;
But the generous Lover is sure of a Place:
And the Nymph her Elizium need question no more,
When her Saint has a Key to open the door.
Dear, sweetest Creature, I am charmed to follow thee. Oh, I shall tire thee,
my Dear. Besides, Fiesque may come.


-- And go, when he does come, he has proved that already. Oh my dear Lord,
there is vast difference between the man loves me, and him I love. Fiesque is
witty, honest, brave, and generous. I know he loves me too, even to despairing;
but what's all this when inclination shuns him, I have no relish of his
entertainment, he always treats me with a palled repast, which tho it feeds me,
yet still it leaves me hungry.


And shall not I be palled too and insipid, when your nice fancy's pleased to
change the Diet?


Oh no, you are a Regalia where there's all variety, your Tongue; your Face,
your Shape, your Charming Air, your Motion, Mean, your every look's a Banquet:
You're like that sweet Tree in the Sunny Continent, where all the best Spices
grow together; and if you ^an but bloom with Flowers of Constancy.


Oh enough of em to make a tolerable Nosegay, never fear, Child. Dear Duchess
I beg thy pardon, for I^m a very lying Rogue.


Could you but love me only, for your sake I'd sacrifice the rest of human
kind, but you are an Englishman, and of a Nation, famous for Levity, full of
wavering fancies; you are ne'er contented with the present good, tho Ruin
follows still the vice of changing.


Gad she has nicked us to a hair, right as she had the Spirit of Prophesy. The
very Women now have found us out. -- This is our blessed Character all the
World over.


Gurse on him -- the impertinent is come back -- Come, my ^ord, let's go in
again to my Chamber, I'm resolved I won't see him.


Oh no, not now, for his curiosity must needs disturb us; besides, you must see
him a little sometimes, 'twill give the less occasion to suspect us. I'll slip
down the back stairs.


Hell take him, would he were blind. Oh how nauseous an old teasing Lover is,
when our eager thoughts are bent upon a new one, I will not see him. --
Grossi^re, do you come back and invent another lye?


Nay, Faith, you must do it your self now, for I have ne^re a one ready.


How different are the various accidents that still attend on Love, what vast
distinctions between the happy and unfortunate: Now is Tonnerre gone flushed
with expectation, to meet his charming Countess; lucky fellow! The Planets all
conspire to bless his Minutes, whilst I, born in an unpropitious hour, wait for
those favours, which the Fair ingrate, perhaps, just now is giving to another.
-- How now, what's here a Letter-case -- 'tis so; by your leave, secret
Carrier, you may make some discovery -- hah, by Heaven, a Picture too, and of
the charming Duchess de Sannserre, joined with a Letter of her Hand-writing,
and Subscribed to the Lord Guillamont -- Hell and Furies, 'tis plain now he has
been lately here with false Vandosme, and negligently dropped these in his
ecstasy, and to confirm it more, see here her Glove, wrought with Gold Flowers,
the ve^y Glove I gave her; here has been claspings, twinings, close embraces,
the hand that wore this circling round his Neck -- Oh Jilt, vile Woman, base,
ungrateful Traitress; oh here comes her Emissary, down passion for a moment,
now where's your Lady? --


Not returned yet, Sir, and affirmatively I fear, since her coming is so
delayed, that the Gentlewoman she went to see, has prevailed with her to stay
and dine


Very good, there's one lye gone already, and no doubt three or four more ready
at her Tongues end; she keeps 'em lump'd up for her use in the corner of her
Jaw, as a Monkey does the remainder of his dinner. Come, pray draw near a
little, and answ^r, if you please, affirmatively, do you know this?


Hah, my Lady's Glove! Oh unlucky negligence,


Good again, there's another lye gone ou^ of the lump; the stock will waste
plaguily at this rate -- Your Glove, Sock-mender, did I get this work done to
Embroider your dirty Golls, hah? Besides, a pox on ye, your Gloves are both of
em on.


Oh dear! so they are affirmatively.


Are they so? good Pomatum-pot, by which then I think your veracity is made out
very plain, besides a Letter carelessly left here, subscribed to the Lord
Guillamour; and a Picture too of the Lady that sent it, sufficiently tells me
what Gentlewoman has been visited. Go, hunt her out, and tell her from me, that
I'm glad her price is so fallen, that she's subservient to one, that I find only
uses her as a foil to another. I have some other advices for her, tell her,
which she shall have; at present I have changed my mind of seeing her: Away,
and pray deliver this with your best veracity.


Oh dear, but really your Lordship is under a great mistake, about my Lord
Guillamour's being here on her account, tho your Lordship has found a Picture,
and some things relating to him, yet I can assure your Lordship, upon my
veracity, that my Lord Guillamour; I mean that my Lady, I-I-I say, that my Lord
has been do-do-do doing, humph, that my Lady has been do-do-do doing, pish,
that my Lord, humph, that my Lady. --


Humph, that my Lord and my Lady have been do-do-do doing a great deal of
business, I don't doubt. Go, go, therefore without stuttering more about the
matter and do yours.


O dear, I can't get out one bit of a lye more, affirmatively. Ex.


This last lye was tied to the lump a little faster than the rest, and could
not get passage. Stay, who comes here; hah, the Duke de Sanserres; can his
haughtiness condescend to an intrig^e with her too? Damn her, she deals will
all sorts, qualities, and constitutions; now I have Gall enough to make his
Veins Crackle with fiery rage, by showing him his Ladies Picture and Letter
here: But than I have a thought of putting the last to a better use, and since
Guillamour and his Grace have privately their designs upon my Mistress, I'll
try what my Brain can work out of this to effect upon his Wife.


She's not come yet I find. I must therefore have patience till to morrow. How
now, who's this? My Lord Fiesque! Why this is half a Miracle, for you and I to
meet in a young Ladies Lodgings: For my part, I am a grave Married Man which
keeps my visit from suspicion, but if my Amorous Lord Guillamour, who dotes on
her so, should find you, I fear there would be Heart burnings.


So, he knows of their Intrigue too, they are come to doting upon one another,
it seems, already. My Lord, this may indeed pass upon me for a common visit of
yours, but if the Duchess knew of it, I question whether she would not have
other sentiments; I believe she could hardly defend her self from jealousy, my
good Lord.


Hah, that was meant as a hit to me.


When ever I marry, my Lord, it shall be to such a one, that shall be incapable
to shoot others, and consequently, I need not fear her being shot at her self.


Oh this is cunningly crying down the Market, like one that's buying a rich
Bargain of Land, and is afraid of being over-bid, and having it bought out of
his hand by another -- Come, come, Count, I know you love Beauty.


Ay, too well, to marry a Beauty that every body will love as well as my self,
my Lord. Besides, I should hate to be jealous and stint the poor things of a
little liberty; I should never think that giving 'em an inch they would take an
ell: not I, I should always love to have em satisfied.


Faith, Count, if so little as you say will satisfy 'em, they must be very poor
things indeed.


Ah, if that be the best reason for a Husband's jealousy, I should hold my old
opinion. You see here my Lord, this picture in my hand.


Well, my Lord, and what of that.


Hah, the Duke de Sanserre and Fiesque here. By heaven, and my Picture that I
lost, and have fretted so about, open in his hand.


'Tis of a Lady and infinitely beautiful.


Do I know her, prithee let me see it.


'Dshea^ and death, not for a hundred thousand Worlds, my Lord. I must beg your
pardon to concern my self in this matter, 'tis the Picture of a Relation of
mine which I lost out of my Pocket: She's a Nun in Brussels, and excluding her
self fr^m the World, obliged me upon Oath, to keep her Picture from all Eyes.
The privilege this accident has given yoo already* my Lord, is past my power
of hindering, but, Fiesque, as you are a man of Honour.


And is not your Honour a little tainted, my Lord, in being false to her that
gave this Picture, and does not the discovery of your flight here, at my
Quarry, oblige me to a Revenge.


-- Upon me what you please, but considering the Lady's quality and merit -- to
all men of honour her reputation ought to be sacred.


But there may be a very great reason for my seeing it, perhaps, my Lord, I
have lost a Picture too.


You can't lose my Picture, my Lord, therefore I must beg your excuse; besides,
my Relation here has a very long Nose, which is not customary, my Lord, in your
French family.


My French Family have as good Noses and Faces belonging to 'em, as e^re an
English Family in Christendom -- and now I think more on^t, I believe I am
concerned in the Picture --


Not in this, I once more am positive.


Nay, that 'tis his Picture, I must join with him there, but as to the Lady she
may be related to both, for ought I know. However, to deal like a Man of
Honour, the property being his, I must restore it to him.


The property may be only his indeed, and it is not impossible that it may be
mine too; but then methinks 'tis unnatural to believe that this Wild English
Colt can have his Leaps with both of 'em, tho I once had an account of a hot
fellow of that Na^ion, that debauch (...) whole Family together, the Mother,
two Aunts, three Daughters, and four Niece^, all at a time; ^ut damn him this
is not authentic enough to prove his double intrigue here: My Letter to morrow
therefore to Vandosm must dissolve my doubt, I'll go and write it instantly.


The Duke is gone dissatisfy^d; and now, my Lord, I think you have reason to
say I am a man of honour.


That I shall always say, I hope too I have satisfied you as to my proceedings
with your Mistress Vandosm; I fear you and I are but two of her Lovers, my
Lord; what discovery happens more, upon my honour, you shall know, and so your
humble Servant.


As far as Generosity, by your own example obliges me, I am yours too, but you
shall give me leave to be even with you if I can* Mistress for Mistress 'tis
fit I should be rewarded, either by m^rit or stratagem; here is the Letter
still, which I find he has forgot; this, with my cunning management, may give
me a sweet revenge, and serve him in his kind too: Let me see -- Hah, in a
Poetical strain, by Heaven; I have heard indeed she had a pretty talent that
way.
'Tis then like Music when the parts agree;
And Wives, like Lutes, when fumbled on, will soon,
Jarring in Artless hands, grow out of Tune:
You, dear Musician, have the only way
To touch my heart-strings right, and sweetly play.


Oh charming Creature and above mortally happy Guillamour, was there ever any
thing so tender; but now for the Postscript. I shall be in the Arbor at the end
of the Garden, every night about ten, which is the only time I have to undress,
and my Husband spares me to play at Chess with his old Steward; the Maid will
be at the back door, to be your Guide in the dark, if your heart inclines you
to wast one short hour in my Conversation: Come therefore and be sure to make
no noise -- So, these are as plain instructions as heart can wish, and I am
resolved to supplant this happy Lover, come what will on it, if I can but get in
first, 'twill be easy to lock him out, and I'll be as punctual as the moment.
A cheat in Love does no dishonour bear,
For so you win, do^t any way, 'tis fair.



Hang the Cards, I never have any luck when I play with you.


Quite contrary, for you never have better luck than when you play with me.


I won't play out the Game, I'm resolved you shall not conquer me now.


What now? You're got into your Petticoats again, you think to bully me, Gad if
you had been in Breeches, I'd have had satisfaction: Besides, I wonder you
should talk of Conquering, I'm su^e at the end of the play, you have always the
better of me.


Pish, you are always wresting ones words to your own silly meaning, if I
should talk of a Charnel-house, on my Conscience, your lewd fancy would turn it
to a House of good entertainment.


No, Child, not unless we had some Flesh there too, to make up our
entertainment; to have a Regalia of all Bones only, is fitter for a Hound, than
a Whore master.


Come, come, let's go into my Sister's Closet, and unbridle her Pegasus, she's
making Verses there.


With all my heart: Oh, I love a Billet in Rhyme from a sweet Lady, with all my
Soul. Exeunt.


So, now I think my intelligence to my Lord, will be worth discovery; for the
first that went into my Lady's Closet, was a man I am sure, I have observed him
up and down here for two or three days together, and just now I found his Coat
and Breeches in an Alcove above Stairs, and who, now to keep his Intrigue the
more secret, is gone to her in a female dress. This is a discovery worth Gold,
Faith, and I'll give my Lord an account of it immediately.


Tho reason his strong power imparts,
If passions keep their Torrent still;
If, spite of all our Praying Arts,
Love gains a Conquest over our hearts;
Where is the use of our Fre^ Wills.
What, Poetical Sophistry too, gad, Madam, you ought to be Arraigned before
Apollo, by all his Sons, for usurping their Masculine prerogative. Methinks
your Province should be Loves soft Government, or Wits Fairy ^and, and not
grave sophistical Arguments. Why does not your Ladyship write a Play?


Because, like a new unpracticed Pilot, tho I can make shift to steer my Vessel
in a calm, yet in a storm, and where so many Rocks are too, I never durst have
the rash assurance yet, to venture splitting.


Pho? 'Tis not a small Rock, Sister, that can hurt a Woman, when her fancy is
so vigorous as yours is. Besides, you have Examples enough: yo^ see here are
Poetical Sapho's venturing among the critical Rocks every day; and I dare swear
for 'em, with as little fear of splitting, as if, like little Pinnaces, they
were entering a Dock where a Vessel was Riding of two hundred Tun.


(...) ha, ha -- Faith, I e^en long, Madam, to see some of your productions in
that kind, I'm sure they must be good, and full of fancy Come, I'll help ye to
a Theme, and give ye a Name -- Let me see, you shall call it the -- humph --


Pish -- you are as long in inventing a Name, as a good Poet would be writing
an Act. If I were to undertake such a thing, I'd call it without more ado --
The Intrigues at Versailles.


Good -- that would raise expectation, Sister, because there's a double
entendre in it: The Intrigues at Versailles -- or, we must have an or -- ye
know.


Or, the Court Cuckolds -- you must have something of Cuckold-making in it, or
else the Comedy won't be worth a farthing --


Phoo, and that jest is as stale too, as Matrimony is after the first
twelve-month. -- No, we'll have, or -- let me see, or -- ha, ha, ha, or the
Count in Petticoats.


No, no, Sister, methinks the Countess in Breeches would do as well -- ha, ha,
ha, -- and make a Character of a wild giddy headed young thing, that run out of
the Country where her old Husband left her.


Ha, ha, ha, ay, and for the love that she bore to the aforesaid Breeches.


No, prithee the Count's love to the aforesaid Petticoats, will come better in
first: And then to embellish it with the Character of a fine Poetical Lady,
that has a horrible jealous Husband, and that uses him so properly, ha, ha, ha,
ha.


That also keeps Company with an old Beau, who fancying his Wife is conserving
in the Country, gives her opportunity to come to Court here, and use him so
properly -- ha, death, damnation, here he comes.


'Tis he by Heaven -- cursed accident -- I have ne'er a Mask neither -- Oh, if
he sees me I'm undone.


Why how now? What a Lady hide her self from me, that must never be said, (
goes to see her. Tonne. hinders.) Pox, prithee, dear Empress, tell her I love
Ladies; and if she be a friend to her that charms me, I'll wear her in my
heart, tell her, as I do thee, my precious -- Goes to embrace her: She clasps
about his Neck, and kissing, covers his Face, whilst L. Brissac goes out.


Oh my dear Count --


Oons, I'm in Heaven -- oh, my lovely, dear, enchanting Creature! Why this is
beyond imagination -- I never was so happy before.


That embrace was wittily contrived of the sudden, he had certainly discovered
her else. Come, come off now. Count, you'll smother the Lady.


Ay, come, let's have a little Air -- So, now I'm a little cooler.


And so am I now too, well, I am the happiest fellow -- phoo -- phoo --


I must after her, and know where she hides, or else this old fool has
disappointed me still.


What is she gone? gad I must Rally again, I must not leave her so. Come, Madam,
how shall we divert this Afternoon, are you for the Opera or Gardens. Hah,
come, for my part I'm for any thing.


And at these years, troth, that ^ little less than a wonder. Well, Count,
we'll resolve of that within; in the mean time let me give ye a little good
advice. When Age and Youth Love's ticklish Game begin:
Youth having still the odds, is sure to win.
Then since our Sex such subtle Gamesters are,
Be sure you set no more than you can spare.
Save your remainder for a future end,
And manage wisely, your last Stake, old f^eind



'Gad thou't in the right -- so I intend


ANd have you really ventured, Madam, to send for the Count, after your
resolution of not seeing him, and the last whimsical trick you put upon him?


Yes that I have, and expect him here every minute -- Resolution ye fool, why
what signifies a woman's resolution, when any turn of interest appoints the
contrary? hast thou glean'd all this while from the harvest of my fertile brain,
and have I taught thee so long in my own Instructive Catechism, to boggle at a
silly word that signifies nothing? Resolution - why ye Moon-calf, I have
resolv^d, and unresolv^d, and resolved again, forty times in an hour, if the
occasion has been proper.


And will the Onion that's wrapped up in the Handkerchief, and the
repentant^story, and the Tears that shall issue thereupon pass upon him, think
you, you know he's no fool.


Yes mine always -- and so are all Mankind when I think fit -- thou shalt see
me mould his heart in the palm of my Hand like foft Wax, till I make it bear
what impression I please. Always* remember this from me* a man is no longer
wise than when a Woman is indifferent to him, if ever he falls in Love once,
farewell Brains, his Wit deserts him presently -- he's just like a Witch,
detected when ever she's in hold once, her favourite Devil leaves her; But come
now to our business. You say the Fool, Sir Blunder, that sent me this comical
Love Declaration, is come already.


Yes, and I have locked him up in the Inner-chamber according to your order.


There let him stay then a little, and tell the Louisd Ors over, that he has
brought me for Entrance money, for as sordid a Clown as he is, he knows nothing
but the Gold Key can unlock the Cabinet of my Conversation. -- So there let him
cool a little, whilst in complaisance to the Duke de ' Sanserre's Letter, as
also to deserve his noble Present here, Guillamour, whom I now know to be
false, I'll discover the Intrigue between him ct the Duchess, you saw the
Letter in the Count's hand you say; that was found with the Picture.


Yes, and am sure it must come from the Duchess by his following words. Tell
her, says he with a scornful Air* I am glad her price is so fall^n, and that
she's subservient to one that only uses her as foil to another.


A foil to another. Death -- how that word inflames me. Besides* I find now too
the reason of the Traitor's coldness, when I desired him to go in a second
time; he had a greater sum to pay, it seems, and and so sneakingly only popped
me off with h^s odd Money; but I'll revenge my self on both, and by prevailing
insinuation, and my never failing Tears, wheadle that Letter out of fond
Fiesque, then show it to the Duke to undo 'em; you have told the other fool
within, that I'm at present only a little busy with a Relation that came to
visit me.


I have told what you bid me, but affirmatively, Madam, it shocks me strangely
to think that you should abuse the generous good natured Count; for such a
horrid Monster as this Blunder, I swear I am extremely dissatisfied.


You are dis^atisfied?


Well Madam as inconsiderable as you think me now, my Wit at a pinch sometimes,
has done yo^ considerable service. And I must be so bold to say once more,
affirm^tively, I admire you should Jilt the Count for this Monster; for, if you
would but give your self time to think a little, you'd find there's ne'er a man
in France, fuller of Love, fuller of Generosity, fuller of Wit good Humour, and
all gentle Qualities upon my veracity, than the injured Coun^t is -- but for
the the other.


But for the the other -- upon my veracity, he has one solid Virtue in a fu^l
Purse of Louisd'Ors which he has brought yonder, that excels all the Count's
good Qualities together. He has come empty handed of late, and whenever he does
so, I fancy his Qualifications weaken extremely.


Oh horrid forgetfulness, 'tis but a very few hours since, to my knowledge, he
presented ye with a very good Diamond Ring, and before that, hardly ever saw
ye, without some acknowledgement o^ other. Besides, a true Love always relished
with a strong Inclination; what qualification has the the other* I wonder?


Money* ye fool, Money.


The Count has a pretty Address, an excellent vein in Music and Poety, and
then the charms of such a Tongue, what can compare with it?


Money, Money, ye Ass, Money --


Besides, a Love so endearing and he himself so indefatigable, in proving it
that even I my self that have been seasoned in your principles, and bred as
very a Jilt as your self -- I beg your pardon, Madam, I cannot help owning his
Perfection -- can you deny this -- has he any equal?


Money, Money, Money, Money, Money, Money.


Damnation on Money, have I not seen you sometimes in your freak, throw it like
dirt about the room; nay, what has vexed me to the Soul, and seems almost
incredible -- to a fellow you have fancied I have seen you refund; a thing
unnatural to the two great damning functions of the World, Whores and Lawyers.


Pish, thy Soul is so sordidly mercenary, it can set no value upon pleasure,
which as well as I love Money, I always fix the highest rate upon. Besides,
Bullion may be scarce, and then to Traffic with Goods for other Goods will be
practicable. And don't you believe, Idiot, but that if ever I refund my Money,
I have a prospect of other returns. -- Hark, that's the Count's knock, -- away,
and remember your cue, leave me to manage him.


Examples in all things like this are found,
Some chowse, others are chows'd, and so the World goes round

You cannot blame me, Madam, if after some late passages I am surprised, to
find my self summoned hither by so obliging a Letter. 'Tis so extravagant a
turn, that I fear I dream, or am in Fairy-land, where joys are only visionary.
Pray resolve me, are you thus kind indeed, is it substantial happiness?


Pray sit down --


How irresistible are Beauty's charms, when such a gentle softness makes
addition -- hah -- Tears too


They only fall for you.


Nay, do not kill me quite -- A phrase like that, if true, would murder me with
Rapture -- for Charity's sake, abuse me not so grossly, nor use my oft-try'd
fondness to my ruin.


I do confess you ought not to believe, if my past faults sway your
consideration. But, Sir, the vilest Creature may repent: Though Ihave sinned,
Jam not reprobate; by all the sacred powers they are for you, and could
Repentance this way merit pardon, thus they should drop eternally.


For me, for poor neglected me? What can I think of this!


Think me no real Devil, and every other wickedness I do confess, I've been in
my ingratitude, for I have used the best of men most vilely, but oh my
Conscience now flies in my face -- now now -- I smart for it --


Is it possible!


It is, dear Sir, it is -- believe these Sighs, these true repentant Words and
real Tea^s --


The brightest Jems that Beauty can put on, to make her self more Lovely -- oh,
who can resist 'em,


I wronged your Love, by an intrigue with Guillamour; your true, your generous,
your perfect Love, that valued me in spite of Injuries. I own it, Sir, and
thus low beg your pardon:


Nay, nay, sweet -- no violence, I do forgive thee all.


Can you be so good.


So good! why ^adst thou murdered all my Family, ruined my Fortune, consum^d my
Health, done Injuries above all human malice; yet, pleading in this posture,
with those Tears, that lovely look, so us^d to charm my Heart, I should ^orgive
thee: Oh thou sweet influencer --


Charming, kind Fiesque -- if I prove false again --


Oh, I cannot doubt thee, this must be now the last of all our differences,
forget but Guillamour, and then, my Love --


Forget him, yes, and for substantial reasons, my dear friend, for as you gave
me a hint lately, I find he made me only a Minutes property, whilst his more
lasting intrigue was with another, Witness the Picture and Letter which you
found of his -- I know he will visit me again, to renew with ^e upon better
leisure: And if I had but either of them to fling in his face now, I should fit
him rarely: What have you done with 'em, my dearest?


Why, Faith upon a high point of generosity, I gave him the Picture again, but
for the Letter --


Oh, if you have but that 'twill be enough -- look in your Pocket, dear Sir,
and give it me to show him, and he shall know nothing but that I found it. I
know the sight of it, I must give occasion for such a quarrel, as will be past
all reconcilement, which is my design, for then I am yours entirely --


She has me again -- nor can I, for mySoul, help believing every word she says.
We^l, tho we are reconciled, and do I give her this Letter, to complete my
Revenge upon Guillamour, she shall excuse my present design upon the Duchess,
or else I am not even with her: Her having it hinders me nothing, I know the
contents well enough. There 'tis, Child, and let it, as you say, be thought as
if you found it.


It shall, and doubt not but you shall be pleased with the effects of it,


She has her ends, and now 'tis my time to enter.


Oh hang him, she tell me, my dear, that nauseous fool: Sir Blunder B^sse is
come to visit me, I'm sure you ca^t be jealous of that Monster; but I would not
have him see you with me, because you kn^w 't^s such a prating fool --


Ay, he is so, therefore dear Child, for the present adieu:


So, here's the L^tter, and in it the utter ruin of Guillamour's intrigue with
his fine Poetical Lady; I^ll teach her to call me her foy! -- ha, ha, ha, and
then I can't forbear Laughing, to think how artificially I have play^d this
last Tear-shedding Scene -- Here prithee take away the nasly Onion and
Handkerchief, and give me another dipped in some Orange-flower Water to wipe my
fingers.


Nay, you are a rare Actress, I^ll ^ay that for you -- What, and you are
resolved then that Beast Blunder shall come.


Come, fool, yes, and this minute too; I'll supple my Face with a little
Pomatum and Powder, to get it ^n order, and then let him enter.


Pox on him, I can hardly endure the thoughts of him. Well, be sure you seize
his Money on the first Attack, or e^se, the Devil take me, if I shall not rail
outright.


Harkee, you Flea-bitten, thou seem to be a very good necessary Quean,
prithee get a Faggot or two into the next room against we come in -- I have
stayed so long there without Fire, that, gadzooks, I'm damnably cold.


And where's the Money? without Money you may get 'em your self, if you please;
for my part I do^'t owe ye so much service.


Why, how now, ye piece of old Hat, what are ye musty? the Jade's as musty as a
st^le pot of Marmalade of her own making.

What say thou my pretty Baggage of ten thousand, shall not we have a Fire and a
Bottle? ha.


Ay, by all means, Sir Grossiere, hold your Tongue, go and get a Fire.


Ay, do do, old Tag-snapper, and then look to the Door, do ye hear, that no
body come and disturb us why, what ye lowering Jade, you know your function
sure.


She^s gone, Sir; and in the mean time pray come and ^it down.


Where's Money a saucy Sow; Gad my Credit's very bad sure, if'twon't go for the
price of a Faggot -- And I think here's a Witness strong enough to show, that
the Family of the Bosseers hate to be stingy. There^s a hundred Louisd' Ors for
ye, ye little twinkling Devil; and now give me a buss.


Your humble Servant, Sir, -- a hundred Louisd'Ors, why, then the Devil take
me, if the man be half so disagreeable, as I thought him.


Gad the Gypsy has a pure tickling touch with her; her Lips are as soft as
Butter, they almost melt in my Mouth. Gadzooks I like her better than my former
Punck the Potato-woman, a thousand times.


I warrant he'd cuff lustily, before A Woman should be taken from him -- I like
such a well-set Fellow, do ye hear; bring a Flask of Champaign hither.


Why* well said? Gad I must have the other Buss, I must Faith. Harkee, dost
hear, I can't Complement and play the Fool, as the Coxcomby, F^ashy, Town
Sons-of-Whores do, but I love thee ^oundly; ^nd, gadzooks, will give thee as
hearty proof on it, as e're a fellow in Christendom.


Indeed, Sir, I'm extremely inclined to believe ye, your Air and Shape, shows
ye to be a very good friend to a Woman. --


Nay, thou see I'm lusty enough, if that will do it: My back is three quarters
broad, measur^d by a Dutch Burgo-master's Yard, and the Calf of my Leg,
eighteen Inches Diameter.


Well, I know not what ails me, but, methinks the blunt humour of this fellow
wins me strangely; methinks there's something so very new in him.


Pox on your cringing flashy Coxcombs -- Come Chuck, sit down, and to make us
merry, I have two English Chairmen without, shall sing a humour made upon on of
those Puppies -- Hey, Chairmen, come in their, bring the Chair, and Act it as
you used to do.


HEy hoe, hey hoe, hey hoe --
The Clock has just struck four,
The Chimes to tel^ the hour;
And morning Cocks that Crow, hey hoe, hoe.

My Lord,
My mad Lord Rantipoll
Sure now his Guts are full,
Will think 'tis time to go -- hey hoe, hey hoe,

No, 'tis too soon, he's not yet Crammed to the Top,
Faith, Tom, let's home,
Pox on him he ne'er budges, till the Sun be up.

Odsbud, as poor as I am grown,
I'd rather lose his nasty Crown

And so had I
Confound me if I lye,
Than wait on such a Fop.

What pranks has he been playing all this day,


Before, and since, we brought him to the Play*


He pulled a Parson by the Ears,
As he was going to say Prayers,
And Rabbit like from Cussack stripped.

Next morning met a Senator
And him through Midrife whipped.

You Rogue says he, I'll maul you for
The want of Money in the Nation,
Land Ta^es, and the Damning Capitati^*

Windows breaking,


Children scaring,


Women Ruffling,


Cuckolds daring.


Bullies frighting, slow of fighting,


Nor old nor young, degree nor Sexes sparing.

Nor old nor c.


He twice raiz'd the Mob


And we twice relieved him:


From Counter and Newgate,


Gallows reprieved him.


By handling our Poles, and stout words of def^al,


We brought him off safe to the Theatre-Royal:


But no sooner got there, and secure from the Rout,


When this troublesome Bear puts the Actors all out.
By squobling in the Pit
With a Ra^e-hell he met.

About two confounded Whores,
Who convey^d him out ofdoors.
And for Supper at last, saved the Fool and his Feather,

And here in the Tavern- they're drunk altogether.

And here, c.


Then, Tom, to the Army let's away,
Nor longer wait at Tavern door,
But take King William's Royal Pay,
Sit up all Night, and Pimp no more.
Whilst they, like two Bitches, and he a third Brute,
Feel the Constable's Clutches, or trudge home a foot.
Oh, she has the Purse, I see* Well, there's a Fire now?


Oh, that's well, tho, Gad I'm warmer by a great deal than I was: Give me a
Woman I can excuse a Faggot at any time.


Nay, I believe a very little brush would kindle your Faggot, Sir. Come, here's
your Health in a Bumper.


Why, Gad-a-mercy -- ah, well drawn faith, -- gad I must dispatch quickly, I
see the Jade will make me Drunk else. Come here's thy Health now, and zooks, to
the happy Minute.


What a Devil does she mean by their Advances


Come, ne'er stand ^mpering for the matter; dost love me, my Lusious
Landabrides.


By all the Arts of Woman-kind I do,


Marry, the Devil fetch him first -- what dee mean, Madam*


Harkee, Goodee Crape, get you to your Post, or I have such a Salt-Eel in my
Pocket for ye,


Huswife, get you gone --


Get me gone, Madam?


Ay, get you gone, Huswife, Jade, Cockatrice, oons, I'll maul ye else.


'Sdlife, here's likely to be fine work indeed, by her eager Ogling him, on my
Conscience; she loves the Brute, and then she's ruin^d andI too.


Gad, thou can not deny it, I see it plainly now, I see it in thy Phiz, thou
dost love me. -- Why how now, ye simple Quean you, why, what are ye asham^d to
own it.


If you can be grateful, I must own it: Come, I've a cold Treat within, we'll
go and eat it.


Ay, with all my heart, zooks, what a lucky dog am I. Nay, Faith, let me be
Purse-bearer too then, let my gratitude appear altogether,


Zoons, you won't part from the Money, Madam.


Not with the Money, Sawcy-face, why who shall hinder? Harkee, hold your
Tongue, or --


Hinder it! 'Sdlife I^ll hinder it -- why, what are ye Mad -- dee know what you
are doing.


Why how now, impudence, dare you dispute my Actions, Huswife, give it me, or
I^ll tear your Eyes out.


You are an impudent Slut indeed, to dare to dispute our Actions. Come little
Bo^a-roba, let^s go in and eat, humph, make your Curtsy and show respect to
your Master and Lady, ye Jade


Ten thousand Furies take her, is there in nature such another Succubus, not
only to oblige her self to a Monster like him, but in the Devils name, in her
Cups, to refund his Money too: Oh, I shall run distracted at the thought on it,
and she has vexed me so, that I have a good mind to set Fire to the Lodgings,
and burn 'em about her Ears, senseless Devil, ^dsdeath, to pervert the main
Topic of our function.

Subtlety, against method we (...) ^ur Gain^


Then sister, you are resolved, you say, to go to this Masquerade, at the Duke
de Creque's -- since your last escape from your Husband, I swear you grow as
bold as a Lyon.


I have some thoughts of going, and yet the Music that I hea^ is to be at the
Marquis de la F^rt's, makes me lean a little on the other side -- or else there's
Basset at my Lady Cavoy's, what if I should go and venture twenty Pistols
there.


Ay, where the old Count your ^usband comes every night to play, who, squatting
down by you on the sudden, desires the civility to go your halfes. Well, if
you will run these Risks, Madam, even get out of 'em as you can; for my part,
I have ne'er another Iudas kiss for him -- a plague of Bristles, he half ^lead
my f^ce with the last.


Nay, you ought indeed, to brag of that exploit, for I never knew a kiss that
did a Woman any kindness before.


Oh, you must allow i^ a pretty Preludium to loves Music.


I remember I read once, a strange, old, dry-headed Poet, that was damnably
puzzled to find out the Etimology of it; amongst all fancies, says he -- ay, --
'tis so. Among all fancies, tell me this,
Whence came the whim, we call a kiss.



Well, and there's another old Rhimer, as great a Crambonian as himself, that
answers pa^ thus -- From Infant Pleasure got and bred,
Upon the Lips still blushing red,
By warm desire always fed,
And makes more sweet the Bridal Bed.



Why, God-a-mercy Dogrill, gad there's a conceit or two in this, tolerably
well.


Ay, ay, and will do very well, to employ your thoughts upon in another quarter
of the Garden. Go, go, get you gone thither. This is Fairy-land, a place where
I always exercise my Poetical Talents.


What thus, in the Dark, Sister, why you cant see to write.


But I can see well enough to think; and if you don't go quickly, my first
thought will be, that you are impertinent if you ask any more questions.
Besides, darkness is naturally a confiner of fancy; and my Muse has taug^t me
just as people do Starlings: I sing always bes^ when I^ve least light: Go, go,
get ye gone, I say.


I believe sweet Sister Sterling, yours is a tenth Muse and of Male-kind, who
teaches you so well with his Flage^et, that Company and al^ other Music is
tedious to ye. W^l* adieu, we won^t hinder your proficiency: I hope I shall
pitch upon some pleasurable diversion, to make me amends for your absence. I'll
to the Music, stay, or to the Comedy, hold, or to the Basset, or to the
Masquerade, or, or, -- or some where, cod I can't tell where yet; come Count.


Come Count, ay but where, where the Devil must I come?


Why, come away, I tell ye I can't tell where yet: nay, if you grow resty,
farewell t'ye.


Whiew! She^ll be at the Indies within this half hour: Resty! gad I think I
have some reason, I'm sure I^m run hard.


I'm glad her giddy head has hurried her away so opportunely, for the happy
minute just now comes on when I used to enjoy my dear Guillamour's Conversation
-- and hark, methinks I hear some walking; ay, 'tis certainly he, and La
Busque, for she has been waiting at the Garden-door above this half hour.


There Sir, that's the way into the Arbor; I'll now go in and see whither the
Duke be in his Closet still.


So, she mistakes me happily; and thus far propitious fortune is favourable;
let me but manage my Voice well, the rest will all be easy.


The happy Ladder that I found hard by here, in a corner of a House that's new
building, has done me signal service; but yet, I can't but wonder, why la
Busque should be from the door, but, perhaps my Watch went wrong, and I have
mistook the hour -- her diligence else doubtless had not been wanting; for
which -- besides -- this Purse that I have brought her here, I know her L^dys
favours are not trivial


Why don't you speak to me, -- am I grown stale, that you aford me now but half
the joy I used to have.


Hah!


I'm only speechless, with excess of Rapture.


The Devil ye are, Furies and Hell I'm jilted; and to confirm it with the
strongest proof, have caught her in the Fact. Come, Sir, guard your self who
e're you are, I'll give ye some fair play.


Hah -- 'tis sure the Duke -- now darkness favour me.


Ah curse of Cowardice, and the clouded Stars, are ye got from me, but I shall
grope ye out.


Oh, softly, dear my Lord, and do but hear me --


Witch, Traitorous Devil, -- I had rather hear a Mandrake Groan, or a Toad
croaking Vespers.


By all that's good, I'm innocent in Will.


By all ill, that's thy self, I^ll be revenged.





So, that's well, first let the Cuckold play his horn part, I'll try to find
out the Intriguer to inform him further,


I am so confounded -- I have lost my Scences; Thieves; Thieves.

Lights, lights -- O my Lord I'm heartily glad you're come, I've been so
horribly fr^ghted with Thieves.


Thieves -- what a Devil make you here?


'Tis my custom, my Lord, (how I tremble!) I do so every night after Supper, (I
can hardly breathe!) to exercise my Poetical fancy.


O plague on your fancy -- this cursed Poetry has made more Cuckolds than all
the rest of the Liberal Sciences together: Go, search round the Garden Letts,
see what sort of Thieves these are.


He you take for a Thief is far enough from thee by this time I hope, for I
left the Key in the door.


If I mistake not, I heard a clashing of Swords; what were they fighting about
their Booty before they had it? or were you that part of my Goods and Chattels
they were tilting for, hah? they chose but an ill place for it here among the
Flower-knots: How now, what's here? A Purse under my feet -- 'Tis so, 'dsdearh,
and cramm^d with Gold! ah, 'tis plain now, these Rogues were too rich to come
hither for Money, that could so carelessly drop a Treasure here.


A Purse! oh Heavens what shall I say now! Bassett, and improved my allowance
by good fortune.


Your Purse?


Mine! mine, who's should it be else? Nay, pray my Lord don't open it, there's
some small Gold amongst the rest, and you may drop a piece or two.


You are as eager to hinder me, as if some little dandiprat Gallant of yours
were lurking here, but I am resolved to know its inside however, -- that I may
say once in my life, Madam, I have dived to the bottom of our Intellects -- oh,
here's a Paper too, a Billet dou^ I'll lay my life.


Ten to one he's in the right, and then I'm ruined past redemption. -- Oh
horrid, is it possible you should still plague me with your jealousy. Curse
on it, if I had but taken a little faster hold --


Oh, is your Ladyship nettled, does the curious sec^et press ye so st^ongly,
that yo^ strive to tear the la Busque.


O Lord me, -- odds heart the Letter to me, and ten to one but the Purse too --
oh good.


Tho you receive thi^ little tender of my kindness, I would have you believe
that I still remain in your debt; for it is not possible your late diligence to
serve me, can be two well rewarded. -- L^t but our Intrigue be still carried on
cunningly, and then let the Horn-mad jealous D -- and here the rest is tore --
D -- what the Devil follows now -- Hell and Furies -- the letter D -- begins
Duke -- Curse on it, it must by so -- for what else can it stand for.


Stand for -- D -- D -- why, why, D D -- stands for Doctor -- ha, ha -- L
Busque, 'tis thy Letter the Son sent thee -- which I found and put in my purse
to keep for thee. Come* I hope you'll give me my Mon^y now.


Humph -- the Devil has got her off again -- here's no certainty, tho there be
plag^y circumstances?


Yes, yes, Madam, I remember the Letter very well, and the Purse too, Madam.


Ay, ay, I know thou dost; you remember I told you when I won it.


Not I, Madam, I remember nothing of that, but you must needs know, Madam --


I do so, as well as if it were done but yesterday; and prithee come in with
me, and I'll tell thee more of him and thee, and them, the Money, and my self,
and every thing, for I dare not speak a word more here, for fear my Lord should
be jealous.


'Dslife, what's all this banter, this shal^ not pass upon me: Gad I'll
discover all rather than lose the Purse; I can tell her, that --


There's no one in the Garden, my Lord, but we have found the back door open,
and suppose the Thieves are gone out that way.


These might be Thieves, 'tis true, and they might be Cuckold-makers. Damn that
thought, how it stings me; oh how insupportable a Torment is doubt, in a
condition of Life from which men ought to expect all quiet and security: They
may talk of Local-hells I know not where, but that poor Husbands Bosoms feels
the hottest that doubts, and yet must Love. -- How now? Daubray,


Ay, my Lord, I have been labouring to do you service, ever since. the last
time I saw ye, and now I think I may truly say, my intelligence is to the
purpose, -- for I have unrevell'd such a secret. --


Hast thou, come then give it me at once, I hate a lingering pain.


'Tis this, my Lord; I observed yesterday when your Grace was gone out, a
young, dapper, sparkish Fellow with my Lady.


So!


And to day, my Lord, he was here again, but had disguised himself I suppose
cunningly to prevent my discovery, in Women's Clothes.


Women's Clothes? good.


But for all his subtlety, I suspected at first it was the face again, and to be
sure of it, I watched matters so closely, that going into La Busque's Closet
after she had come out, and thinking he was hid there, amongst my Lady's foul
Linen, what did I find there, my Lord, but this vile Garment, the very same
that I saw him wear the day before,


The Devil --


Ay, the Devil indeed, as you say, my Lord, for it puts me so in mind of an ill
Husband I had once, who was always a very infirm consumptive person; and it
brings such things into my head, that I vow to Gad I hate the Garment of all
others, I have a perfect aversion for the Garment.


A plague on the Ga^ment, it brings some things into ^y head too that are not
very divertive: But come to the purpose, dear diligence -- can I, think
thou, surprise this young dog with her.


Without sail, my Lord; come in with me and I'll put your Lordship in a way
immediately.


Dispatch then, I'll follow thee. -- Oh, thou absurd Philosop ^e that against
human ills did preach up patience, how art thou baffled here; A Cuckolds case,
I find poor lazy Drone, was ^e're thy study. Pl^gue, Death and Hell? What
strange new unknown punishment shall I contrive for (...)? hah, let me see?
keep her from Meat a month, ^nd starve Concupisce^ no, that won't do, or sha^l
I cut her piece meal* that's impossible -- her; impudence has so case-hardned
her* that she'll exceed the valiant Greek of old, and prove her self all over
impenetrable. Well then, to smoother her with her own Pillow, the accessory
Pillow -- good, then to the Forum like renowned Brutus, and tell the weighty
reason with la^ge Caveat. To all the Human Race that hapless vary
Their blessed State, run mad with fool and marry.



IF thou art tame and passive after such injustice done thee, thou art not what
I took thee for, a Girl of Wit and Spirit; let thy Lady therefore know thou
can resent an injury: what, to deny giving the Purse I ordered thee, 'twas
base, 'twas sordid.


She puts me off hourly, with telling me she has another Business for me to do
first, but if ever I have a finger in her business till I finger the Purse, my
Lord, I wish it may rot: I know her love of Play too well, and how like
Birdlime Money sticks to her. I never hardly had any Wages of her, but she'd
borrow it again in two days time; shes the very Devil at that trick.


'Dsheart, and that very trick would ruin thee in a little time. Come, come,
Sweet-heart, she's all over ingratitude; join therefore with me, and let us
revenge our selves; she has basely used thee for all thy diligent Services:
Take now the opportunity and right thy self, she has also been ingenerously
false to me and my Love, and for my part I am resolved I^ll ne'er forgive her.


Gad, if I have not the Purse between this and seven a Clock at night, I will
have my revenge, I will discover something that -- Well, I say no more.


So, the secret is bubbling upwards, 'twill come out presently, the other ten
Pistols, and she disgorges.


Why truly, I must needs say, your Lordship has taken the only, and most moving
method in the world to engage me.


Ay, no doubt on^t, the Conjurer Gold can never fail in charming.


Which is your Lordship's tender applying it to my Conscience, for Conscience I
assure your Lordship goes a great


Ha, ha, the Purse still, that Purse lies damnably heavy upon her Stomach, all
will out I find.


Then in the next place, to use your own words to be ungenerously false, to so
fine a person as your Lordship.


Oh, your humble Servant.


So well made, so beautiful a person as your Lordship.


Nay, nay, sweet Mrs. L Busque, what do ye mean.


Nay, more, so beautiful, so super-fine a person as your Lordship.


Oh fie, this is too much by half


It really shows that the Woman had no Conscience at all, nor will I any longer
bear her the fidelity usual. Therefore know, my Lord, that for all her Oaths,
Tears, and Prostitutions, she really has Jilted ye.


Damn her, I believe as much now, do but te^l we with whom.


Ay, dear my Lord, you shall know all, and more than all if I could express it,
for I find my Conscience prompts me exceedingly. Does not your Lordship
remember a young, smock'd faced, dapper Spark, that came into the Garden with
old Count Briss^'s company, that Evening the Duke was laughed at, for being
found in his Wife's clothes.


I do, -- death and the devil, -- i'st he.


Most certainly, my Lord, and who has cunningly, ever since, to keep the
Intrigue the closer, daily kept her Company, disguis^d in a Woman's Habit --
and is this instant with her, in her apartment yonder.


Hah, in Woman's Habit say thou? why this is a secret worth Gold indeed;
cursed, hellish, treacherous Creature, this is her Truth and Constancy in the
Devil's name, henceforth let that dull Animal, that will proclaim himself and
Ass with Ears,

Believe damned Woman, when the vows and swears.


For further proof, retire into this Closet, my Lord, I'll warrant you see some
bolting presently.


I'll follow thee, and ^tifle Rage a moment, that I may let it loose with
greater gust upon her.


They are certainly together, my Lord; but to make the proof more plain, be
pleased your self to peep through the Key-hole of the Bed-chamber, whilst the
Count and I go another way, and watched the door of the Drawing Room.


Do do, and if I find 'em here, I'll come and call ye: Damnation! these are the
joys of Marriage. Now Count, I hope I shall convinec ye what a Viper I've so
long cherished in my B^som.


Well, well, let^s see the proof; the proof, I know y^ur Lordship's Eyes*
sometimes see double, therefore, gad I'll not believe a word till I see the
proof. I love an Intrigue too well to have it slandered with doubts and
surmises, the proof, the proof, my Lord.


Away then to the Drawing-room-door, I^ll this w^y.


Softly, softly, my Lord.


'Tis so, by the spirit of Cuckoldom, there th^ are, close together, and Cooing
like two Pigeons just going to Bill, I could ^ot see my Wife for the
Bed-Curtains, but the young rampant Fornicator, I saw plainly in his female
Trappings, wagging his Comm^de, I suppose eagerly exp^ess^ng s^me new lewdness
to her. Death and Hell, where shall I get a Gridiron b^g enough to broil him
on, but hush, another Minute for that, I^ll first go and call B^iss^e to be
Witness of her Infamy: now sure I shall convince the incre^ulous old Coxcomb,
if this peeping proof be not plain enough, the Devil take all Ogling.


What happiness ordained to bless M^rt^lity, can vi^ with that of the
successful Lover.


Then, least the unruly passion should boil over, give me leave, Sir, to bring
ye some allay.


Hah, my Lord Guillamour.


The same, Sir, and whither you had knowledge of my Pretensions to the Lady you
come from or not, I have not leisure now to examine; 'tis enough for me to tell
ye, that I have found my self abused by her, and your unexpressible happiness
as you term it, is the sequel of her unexemplary baseness to me, which I am now
come hither to revenge and expose.


Death and Hell, has he been intrigu'd with my Countess, this is a discovery
amazes me; harkee, my Lord, pray let me ask you a question now.


Da^bray will watch the Drawing-room door close enough, so that they can^t slip
from us that way, and for this passage Count -- hah -- what do I see, by all my
pangs 'tis he, -- and Guillamour a brace of the Court's rankest Cuckold-makers.
Furies and Hell, she deals with 'em in couples, -- but if they escape me now,
draw Count --


Draw -- what a plague does he mean, is not that, my dear sweet, luscious,
charming Empress that stands there: Dsheart 'tis she I'm sure now: Draw, --
oons the man's mad.


Come, Sir, draw; for tho such Villainy deserve no fair play, I sc^orn to take
advantage; nay, nay, no evasion -- draw quickly.


My Lord, I've something to discover, that perhaps may satisfy ye without it.


Your life, Sir, can only satisfy, draw or I'll nail ye to the Wall.


Nay, then I will have play for it.


'Tis lucky, however, to have the old fool Sessac here, I know he will de^end
me.


Hey day, why my Lord -- 'dsdeath, are ye both bewitched -- nay then, then Gad
I^ll put ye out of your tricks, I'll spoil your fencing -- hah, now my Lord,


Damn^d chance,


What raving, stark mad, -- 'dsheart do ye know what ye are going to do, oons,
keep back you had best, he that of^ers to touch my dear Empress, shall have
both these Pokers in his guts the next moment. What a Devil are ye bewi^ch^d,
my Lord, -- what of^er to strike a Woman.


A Woman, a Wizard, -- poor old deluded Wittal, clear your Eyesight and
understanding, -- look again, is that a Woman.


Be a little cur^ous in your observation, old Count, and let her prove her self
a Woman if she can.


Prove her self a Woman? They^re both pos^est, Begad, -- why this is Impudence
unparrelleled: A plague on ye for a couple of ^ewd Fitchews, how would you have
her prove.


Show -- that stubbled Chin, a little nearer to your blind Eyes, look closer ye
old dotard, have Women beards?


Beards oons what care I, what is that to my dear Empress here -- oons you don't
think to make me believe that she is not femina propria, do ye? Dost hear,
Goddess, prithee show em a Bubby. -- Convin^e 'em presently with the sight of a
pretty Nipple, or so; do Faith -- why, pox on ^em, they have the confidence to
hint here, that thou, the treachery of all my Joys art no Woman,


if I were otherwise, their Insolences should hear from me in another manner,
tell em that from me, Count.


Ah, dear, dear charmer, do ye hear that, ye brainless Peers, do ye hear that?


If you were otherwise, death, hell and furies, do not I know?


Oons know what ye will, my Lord, keep back or --


Confound his folly, why, I tell thee, old stupidity once more, that this is a
Man, a young rampant Rake-hell, lewd as the Devil, who, wearing that Woman^s
disguise there, to keep him^elf unknown, intrigues with your damn^d Sister, my
damn^d Wife, and abuses me; I saw him scarce two Minutes since in her Apartment
with her, and will instantly go and fetch her, to prove the truth of all, and
make that incredulous Pate of yours, once in your life, believe the things you
see.


Hamp? Gad now I look better upon her: That Chin, those broad Shoulders, and
those pair of Mutton Fists, do show somewhat more mannish than I imagin^d.
Harkee, what shall I call ye, if, instead of Female Trinkets, I do hereafter
find you of the Male-gender


I shall have one of those two Pokers ungender me, I suppose I am in a very
fine condition truly.


What think ye now, Sir, of the vast happiness of a successful Lover? Will your
crowded joys now give ye breath enough, to express your Rapture.


So, very good, on the other side, I am a very pretty fellow, faith.


Gad, I do not like that Leer, -- I see more of the Whore-master's Air now,
than I thought for. Well, if thou should prove a Son of a Whore after all.


Nay, you are snapped, Sir, and now much good may do ye with Your success in the
Duchess, that your prevailing merit w^n from me.


Ay, ay, Gad 'tis plain now, the very face looks with such a Ma^culine
impudence, as if it could not deny it: Here will appear the Male gender.


Better and better still, I am wedged in too, there's no flin^hing.


Come, Madam, you must this way with me now -- your disguise to escape at
the other door is contrived a little too late -- go forward there to that
incredulous Gentleman, who has at this time a very pre^sing affair with ye,
whilst I, to proclaim your Virtue, and the infinite pleasures of my life so
long drawing, wish your Ladyship in the Conjugal-yoke. -- Expose 'em b^refac'd
to the world, Brissac, -- wonder of wonders, how the Devil comes this?


Oons my Wife, -- I'm dumb, -- I^m blind, -- I'm dead; -- 'tis Witchcraft, --
'tis impossible, -- 'dsheart, I^ll not believe it.


Hah, another Lady instead of the Duchess, 'dslife, ten to one then, La Busque
has been deceived by a mistake, and I have wrong^d an Angel.


Speak, speak thou Fairy, speak thou Fantosme, art thou my Wife, art thou in
the Country or no, art thou making Role-cakes there huswifely, or were thou
yonder just now making me a Cuckold whorishly, -- speak th^u Cornucopia.


Indead, my Lord, to tell you the truth, I am I,


Are ye so, -- then I am I know what, ye damn^d Dalilah.


Just come to Town a little, upon a frolic, my Lord, to watch you, because you
staid so long here; but as for that Gentleman there, how he came hither, I know
not. I suppose he's going to a Masquerade somewhere; for my part, I took him
for a real Woman, till I found him otherwise.


Good again, then you have found him oth^rwi^e, it seems, -- and if he has no
Armour under his Bawdy-Jacket, this I think shall find out some of his
Small-guts,


No, no, Count, we must not have no such violence neither -- here's only
suspicion of Cuckoldom yet; besides, you see he is unarmed, and you must not
take such advantage.


Unarmed, a plague on him, he's well enough armed to Jilt my Wife, and let the
same Weapons serve him against me, with a pox to him.


Well, I see I am discovered, but however must assure you, upon my honour, in
right of your Lady, that she is wholly innocent of engaging me further, tho,
for a frolic, I contrived to get into her Company at her first coming to Town,
nor was my disguise taken upon the score of any Intrigue, but to secure me till
I could get the Kings pardon about a Duel; so that your Lady, my Lord Duke, and
yours there, Count, were very strangers to me till just now, that to make a
little Mirth, and humour my Habit here, I got into their Company.


Did you never leave a pair of Breeches, Sir, in my Wives Closet.


Not I, upon my honour, my Lord.


Come, since the Gentleman has dealt by me like a Man of Honour, I'll unravel
that mystery: Therefore know, my Lord, that those Breeches were mine, and part
of the frolicsome disguise I came up to Town in, the day that a certain young
Bully bantered in the Garden, Court.


Admirable, and so you was then that impudent young Dog, that huffed and
hectored me so, was ye.


In propria persona, faith Count -- nay, never frown for the matter, for if you
do -- remember you did all you could to break your Conjugal-vow, by making love
to that Lady there, which, tho it prove ineffectual -- your will was not
wanting ye lewd Rake-hell, therefore either let's shake hands, and let all go
as frolic, for frolic -- or look Count, I can frown too, dee see.


'Tis a mettled Devil, as like my Wife, as one Pea to another -- but I cannot
believe 'tis her yet; but for your part, Signior Enigma, thou must not put
upon me, I do not like your Story.


Why then, Sir, you must take your satisfaction as you please, I'll venture to
change my Dress and put on a Sword, whenever your scrupulous Honour, Sir, shall
require other satisfaction.


Hah, very fine gad; we Husbands have a fine time on it, if we are n^ Cuckolds,
we must be fools for making a bustle about it, and if we are Cuckolds, we must
fight for making a bustle about it, -- but you shall not bully me with that
friend, I'll have a better reason for your being here, or expect what you
deserve. Oons, was ever Lover so disappointed, -- I thought I had got the
rarest Doxy, the most luscious armful, and in^tead of a Whore, to find a Son of
a Whore,


Oh fie, -- fie, -- r^member, Count, he's unarmed. -- 'Tis certain now by my
dear Duchess not being here, that his Intrigue was with the the other? and I
have basely wronged her by a cursed mistake.


This is an hour of Wonders, -- and all so intricate too, that they surpass my
understanding, first to see my Sister here, whom I and her Husband thought a
hundred miles off in the Country, then to mistake ^er for my Wife whom I was
trained to meet here, and expected to find in that ^om; what can this be but
witchery.


'Tis so, oons, 'tis plain; for if that be personally my Wife that stands
there, we are certainly all bewitched -- no other way could set her before me
this minute I am sure but Witchcra^t.


And see, to improve the wonder, here comes my Wife from a quite contrary
quarter, sure we shall unriddle all now.


The Duchess here, nay, then I begin to take heart.


'Tis so, La Busque has made ^ confounded mistake, and if she can but clear the
Garden business last night, ^ll throw my self at her feet, and beg a thousand
pardons.


So long from your Apartment, Madam, and such visitants waiting for you there;
this is a piece of neglect uncustomary: What in the name of Ceremony and good
Manners, may be your Lodiship's reason. --


Hah, my Lord Guillamour and Tonnerre both here, nay, then I apprehend what he
means by this coldness to me; but I am prepared for him as well as I could
wish.


Madam, you don't see my Lord sure, methinks your Ladyship does not receive your
friends with the usual Air.


Not as my friends, but as your Lordships, and upon the Ladies Account, that
waits for ye all within, bid em welcome.


The Lady within, ha, ha, ha, what trick, what fetch now, what Lady is it you
mean.


Oh an intimate friend of your Graces, I'm very sure, one born and fated for my
ruin, adorn^d with Beauty incomparable, and so many other Charms -- Oh heaven,
'tis your new Mistress, the heart breaker Vandosme, my Lord -- oh -- dee start,
does your Lordship know such a person.


Know such a person? What then, what of her thou Siren.


Ha, ha, ha, some new trick I lay my life, methinks I catch the wit of it
already


What of her, nay, nothing, my Lord, but that she's a Wom^n of Honour I
suppose, and punctual to her Assignation; for she came this mo^ning to visit ye
at the very Minute -- and truly, I like a very Wife, a little ^alous, and more
curious in the Matter than you desire, I believe, finding her business was with
you, pretending to receive her, have locked her up in the Dining-room.


Subtle Devil, Vandosme, no doubt came to me about the discovery I desired to
make, and ten to one she has pumped my secret out of her, and ruined my design.


What she means, is to me a Mystery, but Heaven send her a good deliverance.


Oh, I find you would turn the course of the Story, but pray be civil to my
Lord here, Madam, he wants his dispatch; I beseech ye what may his business be
-- hah -- may not I know.


Ha, ha, ha -- wittily carried indeed; but my Lord, this cunning won't pass
upon me, I kn^w ye are all joint Companions in the Intrigue, only I find your
Lordship is preferred first, for she came after you, but they came after her.
Your Necklace of Pearl, my Lord has incensed her ^o extremely.


How the Devil now came she to know of that, dam her she puzzels the Cause, I
scarce know how to answer her. They come after her, that^s likely.


Come, I know they are men of too much honour to disown Love to a fine Woman,
through fe^r, what say ye my Lords, was not your de^ign here to cha^ming
Vandosme. Speak the Truth boldly.


Hah, I understand that tip of the Wink.


Ah, witty charming Creature, I, (...) it was, it was, what a pox I hate to
tell a Lye.


So you dogged her into the House, but not knowing the Room where I had locked
her, one of ye it seems got into my Apartment, -- and see -- oh power of Truth
what influence it works -- now could I see you blush, my Lord, if I were a
hundred Yards from you.


I blush? why thou provoking Mischief, art thou so hardened to tell me that?


What need I tell ye that, or any thing, is it not plain ungrateful man that
you sent for your Whore into my very House, to Intrigue with her under my very
Nose.


The Devil^s in her, she will turn it upon me, right or wrong -- why thou --
fury, can thou say I blush.


Pray, my Lords, be Judges -- did ye ever see such a colour.


The truth is, my Lord, you do blush extremely.


Your Face is all over in a ^ame; but I confess there is some reason, for I see
my Lady has found out your Intrigue my Lord.


A plague Intrigue ye, this is plain juggling between 'em all, and I am still
the property.


But to show ye what a piece of Integrity you have chose to sacrifice me to,
here comes another couple that I knew concerned in the same Ve^el and Cargo: I
therefore se^t for 'em to put in for their Shares.

And now all Proprietors are ready, I think it is fit to produce the
Merchandise -- therefore have patience and I^ll deliver up the effects
immediately.


Oh intolerable Jilt, Traitress, Devil, I find now all her late Oaths and
Tears were nothing but intended Villainy, and that she has been so very a
Monster, to intrigue with this fellow too, this Monster of Monsters. Sir
Blunder, you are sure you have great power over her.


I think I have, if I should not have power over my Punck it would be hard, --
besides, I need not toil about it, f^ ha, ha -- a pox take her, the senseless
Queen is in love with me, ha, ha, ha.


Oh Witch, oh Succubus.


Gives me the charge of all her Money and Jewels; looke^ here are the Keys of
her Escritoire, you may see by this I ^a^e tickled her fancy; here is a Diamond
Ring too I got from her this morning, she will part with any thing for a nights
Lodging; the Jade knew I ^ a swinging Bed-fellow.


Ha, by heaven, the very Ring I gave -- oh confusion.


^e^e she comes, I'll stand by and listen, and if I find she has been playing
the Jilt, I^ll come in, take her away home, and drub he^ tightly.


Oh damn her, damn her, the worst of Hell is too good.


Come, Madam, a little nearer, and pray throw off that ^emure melancho^ly look
that so disguises ye: I bring ye to none but your acquaintance here, accost
them then with the pure Air of your profession, and let your Eyes use their
Artillery as formally -- shoot, shoot them dead, you have done it a thousand
times before now, -- hah -- what is here a Book -- oh prodigious -- A treatise
of Repentance -- nay then, then, the Devil can cite Scripture for his purpose,
indeed --


Oh heaven, can you believe then I am so Reprobate, that I am past repentance.


There is the soft tone again, and then that damming look would baffle human
re^son.


Oh, this Religious change is of so fresh a date, Madam, that you'll hardly be
believed.


Yes, Madam, I am sure I shall, if it is proved unfeigned, and you ar^ a Lady
of that unsullied Virtue, Candor, and Charity, that your good Nature will be
first my friend.


My Virtue -- sure this Devil does not banter me.


There's no putting in a word now, she has got the ascendant over me clearly.


At her again, -- Sister, things go weil.


Humph! Me^h^nks matters look a little better than they did, for if th^t young
Petticoat Towzer there, came after this Harridan, I may chance to be no Cuckold
after all.


She's got in rarely, if she does but hold out n^w.


Say any thing, Madam, I'll second ye.


Nay, since you think, most infamous of Creatures, to impose upon me with
Hypocresie, I'll lay your mischief open to the World, and be as loud as Thunder
in proclaiming it, thou chief promoter of the cause of Hell.


Oh I beseech ye have patience, Madam, I^m converted.


Thou gulphy Quicks and swallowing all Adventurers; thou very Magdalen, thou
converted?


Alas, you know, Madam, Magdalen Repented.


Intrigu^d with half the Court before this last, the Count here, and you my
Lord, I know can say enough of her.


I, a pox take me fort, she and I have been a little too well acquainted.


Humph, I have not altogether been a stranger to the G^ntlewoman, neither.


Gad, I wonder she missed me, I never was in with her as I remember.


A plague, at this rate half the Town have had her, this has been a damned
Jade.


'Tis by the odiods Witchcraft of such hellish Creatures as you, that the
marriage State is so dishonoured, imbellisht Virtue pines at home neglected,
whilst Riotous Vice is graced with Presents -- Jewels, but I'll turn back the
stream to its right Channel, and Honour and Virtue henceforth shall be
Reverenced, my Wit shall ruin thee, past all redemption. ( apart to Vand.) I'll
make thee change that canting Note, thou Hypocrite.


So, the Alarm is set a going; now shall I hear nothing but the noise of her
damned Honour and Virtue, for a month together,


Well then, you shall change my Note, my Virtuous Lady too soon to your cost,
you shall now hear me then, and


Infamy, I defy thee, what can the Divel mean.


The Devil knows.


Read that, my Lord, and then let Virtue and Honour there, Billet doux to my
Lord Guill.


'Tis so, by Hell -- and of her own Hand-writing.


The very Letter that she got from me, when last imposed on by her Sighs and
Tears. Was there ever such a Serpent.


To show you this, my Lord, was the morning business, which to secure, she
locked me up most wittily. Now let all human Creatures that can read, beho^d in
that the Dutchess's rare Virtue, then judge 'twixt the Strumpet free, and
Strumpet wedded, which is the worst? Come, who speaks loudest, let your sharp
Tongue, Madam, out wit me now, what not a word -- from Honour nor from Virtue,
nay, then 'tis plain, the Strumpet Wife's most blameful.


She has struck me dumb, I cannot speak a word, nor dare I lift my Eyes to look
upon em.


I'll vanish all thoughts of mercy from this moment, I will be as cruel as
Revenge can make me -- My Lord, your ear.


Well, my Lord, 'tis enough.


Here's so much Fi^e it burns my very Vitals, dear, dear Revenge, I'm wedded to
thee now.


No, no, my Lord, I bar that, you shannot leave us.


My Lord, I'm only going to my Lodging?


Ay, my Lord, that's all one, no going, no going now, my Lord.


No, no, let the business cool a little.


This is in return of your ungrateful usage, Traitor, and now thank your self.


Ten thousand plagues upon thee. Death, is there no way left to be revenged
upon this Witch, this Sorceress.


Yes, here's some body left here behind the Curtain that shall take her to task
immediately. Come Jade, every Bodies Cleopatra, come your ways home.


Hah, he here then, I am disgraced for ever, this is the only Devil can torment
me.


Your entertainment Iesabel to night, shall be half a dozen of kicks, or so, or
it may be a light Drubbing, but to morrow expect to be turned a grazing, to try
for a new fortune, I^ll take care of these materials, and of t^e effects
belonging to 'em.


Stand off, Monster, Furies and Fire, touch me, and I'll flea thee: Hah, dare
thou attempt it; nay then, assist me Rage and Vigour, that I may rip this Brute
and carve revenge,


Farewell the Quintessence of all Coquettes in general. Well, this gives my heart
some repose however, to find this brutish fellow revenges me in a right method,
(...) no more than what generally happens to to 'em. For, never wa^ true Jilt,
but was so blind,
To love at last what paid her in her kind.



'Twas ten to one but the reve^geful Creature had invented some lye or other
upon me for my Sisters sake, but now the Riddle is expounded, who these two
Sparks were hunting here for. I hope Count I may sleep free from sensure.


I must help her out in this.


Nay, I believe as things stands, I had as good be satisfied, as go to prove
any thing further; but Gad here has been swinging frolics of all sides: you
smock-fac'd Dog, you Sirrah, you have disappointed me confoundedly. I took you
for a Loop and not a Button* you Rogue, but come, a pox on it, it makes the
Intrigue the better however, and gad I love that so well, that I can be angry
no longer. Come, my Lord, cheer up, you have treated my Sister I suppose the
old English way, but gad if she likes the cheer entire, with all my heart,
we'll have no fighting about the matter.


My Lord, I have been always obliged to your good nature.


What a pox, there's no such harm done as I see, he^e'^ ^o body. a Cuckold but
my Brother the Duke, and gad now he's out of the way, he was so jealous, that I
always wished him one: Why, if I had been a jealous Puppy, on my Con^cience I
^d been so too.


Oh fie, my Lord you, what an intrig^er, a Beau? No, no, Count, you are safe
enough.


So, his Eyes are sealed however.


Come, gad we have been so long out of humour, about thes^ matters, that
methinks I want a little mi^: Let's h^ve a ^or^e and a little Music. Spouse,
if you would have ^e in humour, and ^elieve what you say. Sing me a Song
against Cu^old-making. Hey, within, bid my Servants that I ordered for the
^ulical Entert^inment ^o night, come and give it presently; and dee ^ear, bring
a Bottle.


Come, here's the Count Brisse's Health, and let him live for ever.


Ay, come* with all my Heart, and to all the Cuckolds in and about Versailles.


In the Fountain garden about 7 this eveni^g, dear Angel, if you would have me
live till morning.


No, no, Count, no more intrigues, I have made some sudden Reflection upon^t^
and have resolved severe amendment, you may think this raillery, but you shall
find it real, therefore I charge you forbear my Company, and all future
unlawful Solicitations, for I am conscious to my self, I have deserved the
same fate my Sister has, tho I have the luck to miss it. Not a word more,
content your self with what's past, and as you are a man of Honour, tempt me to
that course of life no longer.


Pish, thy sudden turn can be nothing but a qualm of Hypocrisy Gad I won't
leave her off so.


Come, give me another Bumper, and this last health is to all brave fellows
that stand upright as I do, at eight and fifty, and those happy, Husbands that
can see their Wives sing, dance, joke, kiss, and be mer^y amongst Company,
without jealousy or having the Gripping of the Guts about it, for let 'em
fatigue themselves how they p^e^se, rage, watch, pine, and grow lean about it,
let 'em take this as a Maxim from jolly Brissac. If the good woman gets it in
her Brain,
All Labour's lost, the Italian Eugine vain,
Whilst female inclination tends to man,
There will be Horns, let Heads do what they can.



JVdge's of Wit, and P^ets tell me pray,
Have you e're seen amongst all y have known me play,
So strange a part as this, I've done to day.
'Thas vexed me so, would I may ne'er be famed,,
If I ca^e threepence if the Play were damned:
Or, if some Bully, some loved Iilt revenging,
Helped the Satyrick Scribbler to a swinging.
How long, and oft, have I, in well wrought Scenes,
Dazzled like Glittering Empresses and Queens,
Acted all passions, love, grief, joy, and shame,
The Great Court Lady, and the ^ity Dame.
And if sometimes, a wanton su^ject came
Ye Poets Characters, decent were, and civil,
But ours -- Curse on it here, makes me act the Devil.
I ne'er was so affronted in my Life,
Would he had such a one to be his Wife.
The hot brained Sonnetteer wo^ld soon turn Mome,
Were his poor Pen employed with a Vandosme,
Besides the part is contrary to Nature;
There cannot in our Sex be such a Creature.
We love no fools, ^ ^ure, ne'er let 'em cheat us*
Nor can we do a fau^t for him to heat us:
Tho we should graft more ^rnes on every year,
Then stock St. James's Park, or else St. James's Squa^e,
But hold, now Anger somewhat cooler grows,
T^e ^art, bad as it is, may please you Beaus:
The Play by Judges, has commended been,
And if it bring but the new Money in:
Money's a certain Medicin for my Spleen.
Ah, how that hope, ill humour reconciles:
Money, turns every body's frown to smiles.
Controwling Mammon, can dispose lik a fate;
Money can make a dried warped Cripple strait.
The Wife play false, and the tame Cuckold blind,
^roud Widows pliant, and Coy Virgins kind:
Money corrupts the Body, damns the Soul,
And in Life's game still turning like a bowl,
Can by its By as all distinctions draw,
The Court, the Country, Clergy, and the Law.
How can it fail then, to have power o^re me,
Mine's but a sort of Play-house constancy,
My part, I own, I hate to a degree.
But if it Money gets, will patience borrow,
Set a good face, and play't again to morrow.

