IF Plot and Business Comical and New,
Could please the Critics that sit here to view,
The Poet might have thought this Play would do.
But in this Age Design no praise can get:
You cry it Conversation wants, and Wit;
As if the Obvious Rules of Comedy,
Were only dull Grimace and Repartee.
Such, Sirs, have been your Darlings proved of late:
The Author therefore careless of his Fate, --
And knowing Wit a Chattle hardly got,
Has ventured his whole Stock upon a Plot:
He says a Mock-Song, or a Smutty Tale, --
Can please the Town; and why not this prevail? --
I friendly told him, all that I could say,
Was, that your Fancies leaned the other way;
And you loved Wenching better than his Play.
For the Body still you Luxury prepare;
But let the Mind be desolate and bare:
Thus lose your selves in the Worlds prudent thought, --
Then strive to get Reprieve by finding fault.
A Critic is a Monster that can sway
Only over Ignorance, and yet dares prey
Upon that Power that formed him out of Clay. --
Adulterate Age, where Prudence is a Vice, --
And Wit's as scandalous as Avarice: --
Yet in despite of this, -- you're Poets too;
And what two Fops rail at, a third shall do.
Upon our Privileges you encroach,
And with dull Rhymes the Noble Art debauch.
For Writing Plays you scorn a Poets Name;
A Bawdy Song's enough to get you fame:
Where midst the Reputation that is due,
You will be sure no man shall censure you.
Yet though your Faction does infest the Town,
There is a wise Cabal dares judge and own
Desert and Wit, and our Endeavours Crown:
To these we humbly Dedicate our Plays,
Whilst at their Feet our Poets throw their Bays.

IN vain, Cruel Nymph, you my Passion despise,
And slight a Poor Lover that languishing dies:
Though Fortune my Name with no Titles endowed;
Yet fierce is my Passion, and warm is my Blood.
Delay in Affection exalts an Amour;
For he that loves often will soonest give over.
But Vigorous and Young I'll flee to thy Arms,
Infusing my Soul in Elizium of Charms.
A Monarch I'll be when I lie by thy side,
And thy pretty Hand my Sceptre shall guide;
Till cloyed with delight you confess with a Joy,
No Monarch so happy, so pleasant as I.
BY Heaven, There's nothing so dear to a free and generous Spirit, as this
roving and uncontrolled way of Love: Me thinks we live like Angels, and every
Kiss brings a new life of pleasure.


You have reason to believe I think so, for suffering this early Visit from you
in my Husbands absence; who, poor Man, went from me by break of day to see a
Horse-Race a Mile beyond High-Gate.


Nay, I confess, 'tis a sign of your kind resentment of my passion: Oh Heaven!
that happy thought has made me all rapture: I'll cherish it, Madam, as I would
my Youth, or the best of all my Senses, the Sense of Feeling.


Cherish it rather as the means of keeping our love from my Husbands knowledge.
Well! I swear the thought of my indirect plot sometimes makes me very
melancholy.


Melancholy? -- Fie, Madam, banish such thoughts for ever from your breast: If
you are melancholy now, what would you have done, if I had not known you, when
the Clog of your Conscience (I mean your Husband) would have been your
perpetual plague, and given you cause for more melancholy than the contrivance
of the plots you speak of? --


Ay; but to break a Vow, Sir, a Vow: Little do you think what 'tis to break a
Vow.


Little do I think? Madam, I thought you had known me so much a Gentleman, to
imagine I know what belongs to the breaking a Vow as well as another man. To
undeceive you, I have broke twenty Vows, that is, unnecessary Vows, (such as
yours are!) nay, and without a scruple of Conscience: I thank my Stars, I'm of
a tougher Constitution.


Besides, you consider not the other inconveniences; you know my Husband's
Sister Maria loves you, and is of that untamed, malicious nature, that she'll
revenge my invading her propriety in your heart by discovering our love to my
Husband: I know she plots it hourly; and though her pretence is the Honour of our
Family, her real design is through her love to you.


Never doubt your Husband, Madam, he has so strange a confidence in my
fidelity, that to possess him otherwise, were utterly to take away the little
sense is left him. You know he brought me to lodge in his house, which
prudently I refused at first, and seemingly fled from the Heaven I desired, to
make him more importunate: Since I came here, you know how he has caressed me;
and to colour my design, and divert you, have feigned a Mistress in this
quarter of the Town; and then, as if I spoke of her, have told him all that has
past betwixt my self and you, at which the good-natur'd Creature has laughed
extremely, and wished me good luck a thousand times; and can we now doubt
further success? By Heaven, we cannot Madam.


Then you know there's another great obstacle; Ned Ranger has long professed a
passion for me, and doubtless is not ignorant that my love for you is the cause
of his no better success: A jealous man sees more than twenty others; and
'twill be very necessary for us to be careful of so dangerous an Enemy.


Dangerous? -- not at all, Madam, -- never think him so; success, which
animates the Hero, and leads him on to greater enterprises than before he durst
attempt, has cherished hopes in me: Let me alone with him; and for thy part,
Igad I'll turn thee loose to any Female-Devil on this side Lapland, either for
plot or repartee.


Yet still I fear the worst.


Fear nothing, Madam: Fear is the worst of passions, and incident to base, not
noble Hearts; besides, our love, considered rightly, is a second-rate
Innocence, where affection, not duty, bears prerogative; 'tis the great and
primitive business of our Souls, suspicion and fear came in by the by.


Madam, Mr. Ranger, in spite of my resistance, has rudely pressed into the House,
and is just coming hither.


Call up the Footmen: Lock the door. --


Stand still, Mrs. Jilt, or I shall spoil your door-keeping hereafter. Jack
Rashley, here -- Hell and the Devil --


What insolence is this? pray, Sir, your business?


Only my zeal, Madam, to give you notice of an approaching danger: Your Husband
has so intangl'd his Horns yonder in a Hawthorn-Bush, that 'tis to be feared
without immediate help he will lose the decent and commodious ornament of his
Forehead.


Most impudent of men! how dare you talk thus?


Most infamous of women! how dare you do thus?


Do what, Sir?


Hold, and as you love me, move no farther. Basest of men! have you the folly
to believe this way can prove beneficial to your love? No, I hate thee
mortally, nor shall thy malice from henceforth be successful; I'll disarm it;
and when thou think thy plots are surest laid, be sure of a surprise. --


O infamy! -- 'Sdeath, is your Forehead Steel? and is your Skin of that
obdurate temper you cannot force a Blush into your Cheeks at the confession of
your obscene Crime? -- How great a Friend to Hell is Impudence!


Pray, Sir, -- forgive him, 'tis an insipid Fellow that I am often troubled
with, and believe his insolence for the future shall be prevented: in the mean
time to express my gratitude, give me leave to present you with this Necklace;
this Ring too will fit your Finger; -- nay, and swear you shall not refuse 'em, my
Husband gives me often such as these, 'tis all the good I get by him.


Very well; -- the blessing of a wife let all men judge. What envious Fiend to
plague me makes me love this Creature?


I will preserve your favours as my life; your memory shall possess my Soul,
and all your charms live ever in my sight. -- My kindest, sweetest -- dearest
--


Death and Damnation, must I stay and see this? Madam, -- this modest carriage
before a jealous Lover makes --


Little for your contentment I doubt not, Sir. -- But 'tis a fate proper enough
for such busy and inquisitive persons. --


Fa, la, la, la, la. -- Sings.


Go -- you are a Devil; so far from being a Woman, that I begin to doubt
whether Nature had any hand in your Creation. Is't not enough, Vile Creature,
that I know you abuse your Husband, but that you dare give me an ocular proof?
Dispense your favours to the man that horns him before my face? Oh
unparalleled impudence! --


Incorrigible Fool, think thou to daunt my will? the little ill I do can
raise no infamy, nor will I ever doubt it.


Fa, la, la, la.

The joys of a Lover in passion remains,
In passion that's fervent and free, c.

Oh Madam, my Master's just come home and coming up.


Blessed minute! now I hope his eyes will be unsealed, and through the right end
of the Perspective see you: Madam, assure your self there shall want nothing in
me.


I know, Sir, and am prepared for the worst of thy malice. Here, take this
Battle-dor, and let us play.


Out, out, Madam -- you're out.


Ha, ha, ha. -- Chicken; Good morrow, Chicken. -- Morrow Tom. -- Chick, prithee
let me kiss thee: What, in the mumps? -- This morning, pop -- no more of that
-- ho -- What my old Friend Ranger too! Morrow Ned. Faith! would you had been
with me this morning, I have had the rarest sport yonder at High-Gate with two
or three Country-fellows -- Harkee, Chick, I have invited 'em all to Dinner one
day this week, good blunt course Fellows Faith, but damnable rich: -- as Gad
jidge me, I past for a brave Fellow amongst 'em. --


You need boast of applause from such Clowns.


Clowns? What, honest, tough, hard-fisted, plain-dealing Farmers, Clowns? --
Pop -- I say, you are an inconsiderable Varlet, Chicken, -- and know not what
belongs to such good company.


She is so well diverted at home, Sir, that all Rural society is distasteful to
her. --


I guess 'em to be much of your humour, Sir, Owners of a great deal of dull,
insipid noise, and very little or no sense. --


Well said, Chicken. -- Ned. To her. -- To her again, Ned; 'Tis a raging Turk at
Repartee. -- Invent, invent; strike her home; prithee try her wit. -- Thou art
a Scholar, -- for my part I dare not: (As Gad jidge me!) she's always too hard
for me. --


And me too, I assure you, Sir. -- But there's a Gentleman that has the good
fortune to be more intimate: -- his address is far more pleasing than mine. --


Who, Tom! Come, I'll hold a Guiney she's too hard for him too; why, 'tis the
readi'st, witti'st, jeering'st, flearing'st Quean -- 'Sbud she's one of the
pearls of Eloquence. -- And Pop, -- by the way let me tell you, there's never
an Orator in Christendom has more Tropes and Figures, take her when her hands
in --


Nor knows the Art of Wheedling better, I'll say that for her. --


Gad, thou art in the right, she's a Non Parelio at it: but now you talk of
Wheedling, prithee, Tom, how goes thy Love-affairs? Thou look but ill
upon it? -- Any plots? adventures of late? Hah!


None that can make me frown, Sir: -- My Stars have allotted me so mild a
destiny, that I can caress my Friend with my wonted Air, without being
discouraged by my success in Love-affairs.


I'm glad on it, Faith: Come, prithee let me be partaker of thy good fortune; --
when were thou with her?


Tell him, tell him, Sir: Lord, you never used to be so cautious in these
matters: -- pray tell him and tremble: -- Now observe.


Why, Sir, -- I was with her this morning.


So! and what success prithee?


Why at my first coming she entertained me with a Song, softly expressing the
delights of Love in an excellent Air, and added to it a thousand kind words and
kisses: I had all the privilege imaginable, and 'twas my good luck to come at
a very happy hour, for her Husband went out early in the morning a Fowling as
far as Holloway.


Holloway? -- a Pox on it, -- what damned luck had I? if it had been High-Gate I
should have met the Fool; for I have been there all this morning.


Ah! 'tis no matter, Sir his company can add little to anyones credit; for he
is but a kind of a soft-headed, a half-witted Fellow. --


A Ninny, a Fool. -- Ha, ha, ha.


Ay, and the most credulous of all the Cuckolds I ever met with.


Poor Animal! Faith I pity him, but there's a number of 'em about Town in faith,
-- we men of wit should want diversion else.


We men of wit, quoth a! Dam him, he's duller than a Justices Clark. -- To be
made a property all this while, and not discern it, Oh insufferable stupidity!


Observe, Sir, observe.


Yes, Devil, I do observe; I doubt not but my observation shall add little to
your quiet. Oh curse of --


Why how now, Ned? what, grinning like a Monkey eating of Chestnuts? -- prithee
what art thou thinking on? As Gad jidge me, I think thou art grown insipid, as
my Wife says; How dost like Tom's Intrigue? Ha, -- is it not pleasant?


Very pleasant, Sir, and faith in my judgment represents as nearly as any
character I ever saw. --


Represents? -- whoo pox you're at your Quirks and Quiddits, your
Cambridge-Puns and Westminster-Quibbles are you?


Pray forward, Sir, me thinks 'tis very divertive.


Very divertive! Dam her, she was sure the Off-spring of Beelzebub.


After a thousand other caresses intermixed with kisses and smiles, and a world
of happy thoughts and fancies extravagantly rendered upon so happy an occasion,
she obliged me in a new and most sensible way, presenting me, with a sweet and
incomparable grace, this Gold-Watch, and this Diamond Ring.


Prithee observe Ned there, he's grown a strange whimsical Fellow; -- Ha, ha,
ha, look how he stares.


Was ever such an Impudence? sure I dream! and this is all delusion. -- Harkee,
Sir, are you irrecoverably blind?


Blind? what I blind?


Methinks that Watch looks very like one I have seen your Wife wear often.


Ha! as Gad jidge me, and so it does; but much good do thy heart, Tom, I'll
warrant it right.


Me thinks that Ring too much resembles yours.


The square is right, -- but I think my Stones were a little bigger.


Now the Devil take thee for a dull Rogue.


But the best jest was, before she gave me these, there happened to come rudely
into the Room a wild, young Fellow, that I found afterwards to be my Rival, and
one she hated for his ill nature and impertinence; but to see how pitiful he
looked to see me so presented before his face, would have made you die with
laughing. -- Ha, ha, ha.


Ha, ha, ha.


Ha, ha, ha.


Hell and Furies, what's this I hear? am I made a property too? If I bear this,
may I be posted for a Coward, and my infamy known to all Nations. -- Harkee,
Sir.


Well, Sir.


By your ridiculous fleering behaviour, I guess I was concerned in your last
description, an affront that requires instant satisfaction; and believe, Sir,
you shall not carry it off so clearly as you imagined: Though he is such a fool
to be bubbled out of his reason, -- I am not --; follow me, Sir, if you dare.


Dare! Lead on, Sir, -- you shall see how much I dare.


Hold, Sir, you shall not go.


Dare follow you?


Ay, Sir, 'twould be a doubtful question if your protection there were out of
the way.


What's that? protection?


How now? -- what Jokes? hard words? what's the matter, Tom? -- I must have no
quarrels here.


'Tis Mr. Ranger's ill humour; prithee, Love, speak to him, he's always
disturbing good company; tell him, he's Impertinent.


Gad, and so I will. -- What a pox, a man cannot be a little jocose in his own
house but he must disturb him; you shall see me go and huff him.


His Horns I am sure are large enough; -- Horns of sufficient growth,
substantial Horns; Horns visible, large, craggy-brancht, rough Horns, and yet
he may not believe it.


Believe what, Ned? Ha, ha, ha, -- He's mad. -- Downright out of his Wits: 'Tis
a thick scull'd Fellow, God knows, -- but we were not all born to be Wits. --
What dost believe, Ned?


Why, Sir, I believe you are mad.


I mad? -- Damme Ned, you're an impertinent Fellow. Now observe, Chicken.


How, Sir?


I say, Sir, an impertinent Fellow, Sir, and deserve to be cramb'd into a
Powdering-Tub. --


Dam this Fool, how he tortures me! but my revenge lies another way; I'll
instantly go to his Sister Maria, who I know loves Rashley, and will willingly
join with me in my revenge. This must do, and I'll about it instantly.


Ah -- he's gone; I thought when I began to roar once he would quickly vanish:
I warrant I have frighted him into an Ague. -- Poor Fool, he'll hardly trouble
us again this good while.


An uncivil person, first to intrude into our company, and then to hinder our
discourse, especially of so pleasant a Narration: Gad! 'twas too much. --


Too much? -- Why 'twas the Devil and all; and as Gad jidge me, -- he's the Son
of a Whore, and I'll make him an example.


Sir Roger Petulant with his Nephew, and old Mr. Fumble are come to visit you.


Gads so! -- Sirrah! wait on 'em up, and call my Niece down. This is the man,
Chicken, I told thee that I intend for Cordelia's Husband: He's very Rich, I am
told, and his Father's a Knight, and Sheriff of the County.


But who is the other, Sir?


Why, dost not know him? 'Tis old Alderman Fumble: He's a little deaf, but
in faith very good company, and will so fumble about the Women. -- You shall see
he's a very jolly Fellow, and repartees, and talks, and chats at all rates; --
but the Devil a word he hears, for he always answers quite contrary: -- He*ll
make us all laugh in faith. --


I've heard he dotes on all the Women he sees, and is as passionate and
inconstant at his age of Seventy Three, as the brisk Sparks of our times are at
Five and Twenty.


He says (the Devil take him that believes him) nothing fails him but his Eyes,
which defect he has lately amended by a pair of Venetian Spectacles.


Ha, ha; 'tis a pleasant old Fellow. -- But here they come.


Cob! come, Cob, come! along, I say, and hold up thy head. -- Fie, fie, -- be
not so bashful, Child. -- Nay, Cob, -- what dost think I'll forsake Thee? --
Pish, in verity I will not: Wipe thy Eyes, I say.


He's a little moody-hearted, that's the worst on it: -- But the young man will
show his parts by and by, I warrant ye. -- Come hither, Niece: Sir Roger, Your
most humble Servant.


Yours, good Mr. Peregrine. You see, Sir, I am as good as my word: I have
brought my Nephew, Cob, here's your Mrs. Cob. -- Look, look up, -- and go and
salute her. I'll show thee the way. Nay, Cob, still in thy dumps? -- Look upon
me, Man! I'll do it first.


Well, well! I'll follow you, Uncle: I am a little bashful at present, but I
shall come to it anon.


Well said, Madam! I am your humble Servant. --


And I likewise, Madam!


Ifack, ifack! a pretty well-favour'd Woman that there* A good Eye, good Hair,
and ifack I think every thing good -- ha -- Hem, Mr. Peregrine, prithee who is
that there? that Woman there?


Who, she yonder?


Hah!


Why, she's a near Friend of mine, Sir. --

What an ignorant old Fellow 'tis, not to know my Niece?


A Friend? Well I could have heard you, I could have heard you without this
exclamation: What ifack, I am not deaf, I could have heard you: but if she be a
Friend, I hope an old Friend may salute her; 'tis a civility well paid. By your
leave, sweet Lady.


What the Devil does this old Fellow mean? Uncle! did you ever see the like?


Ha, ha, ha! a pleasant mistake in faith.


Ha! ifack I think I was mistaken, was I not, Gentlemen? was I not? I doubt my
false light guided me to the wrong person; -- Hah! But come, no matter, I meant
it right, Madam, I meant it right: Never the older for a mistake Ifack! I meant
it right.


I am glad I mist it for all that.


Mr. Rashley, you are not merry; in troth I fear I have disturbed you, -- Hah!


Not at all, Sir; 'tis impossible your free humour can be troublesome to any
one.


You know my old way, Sir, jovial and inoffensive. -- Pray let me commend my
Nephew to you. Cob, come hither: --. He's a little too modest, Sir; -- but else
I think I may say, -- a youth of notable parts: Come hither, Cob.


I can believe no less: Sir, your humble Servant.


With all my heart, Sir; and I am your Servant in like manner.


Bless me! what a Figure of a Husband shall I have?


You know, Sir, when I was a Bachelor I delighted much in merry Songs and
Catches. -- 'Ah! Sawny Broom rare Fellow; and when a dozen of us Royalists
were met at the Mitre under the Rose there, the Leveller went round, round,
in faith. -- I hold out still, Sir, as well as I can; and though I cannot sing my
self, I keep those that can. --


Ay, and so do I. -- My Wives Maid shall sing you a Scotch Song: -- Come, sing
it Betty. --


IN January last on Munnonday at Morn,
As along the Fields I past to view the Winter Corn,
I leaked me behind, and saw come ore the Knough,
Yen glenting in an Apron with a bonny brent brow.
I bid Good Morrow, Fair Maid, and she right courteously,
Bekt lieu and Sine kind Sir, she said, Good Day again to ye.
I speard o her, Fair Maid quo I, how far intend you now?
Quo she, I mean a Mile or two to yonder bonny brough.
Fair Maid, Ime weel contented to ha sike Company;
For I am ganging out the Gate that you intend to be.
When we had walked a Mile or two, I said to her, My Dow,
May I not light your Apron sine kiss your bonny brow?
Nea, Good Sir, you are far mistean, for I am nean o those,
I hope you ha more breeding than to light a Woman's Cloths;
For Iv a better chosen than any sike as you,
Who boldly may my Apron light, and kiss your bonny brow.
Nay, gif you are contracted, I have no more to say;
Rather than be rejected, I will give ore the Play:
And I will choose yen o my own that shall not on me few,
Will boldly let me light her Apron, kiss her bonny brow.
Sir, I see you are proud-hearted, and leath to be said Nay;
You need not tall ha started for eaght that I did say:
You know Wemun for modesty no at the first time Boo;
But gif we like your Company we are as kind as you.
How dee like it?


Oh! I have hundred such as this, Sir.


A pretty matter ifack, a very pretty matter.


I doubt, Sir, you heard it not.


Ay, is it not, Mr. Rashley, is it not? Ifack I like it well.


With all my heart, Sir.


Right ifack, it was sung well indeed.


Ha, ha, ha!


Well said, Grandfather Fumble. -- Come, Sir Roger, now let's in, and toss a
Bumper about.


I wait upon you, Sir. Cob, lead in your Mistress. --


So! thus far all is well. -- But what's next to be done? for I know Ranger and
Maria are plotting mischief.


To prevent 'em we must counterfeit a falling out by railing at you to my
Husband. I'll soon confirm it in his opinion; but be sure you are melancholy
enough; and by this means their designs are frustrated, and we still safe in
our Intrigue.


Excellent! -- And I'll warrant you, Sweet, I'll play my part well.


The better will be the success: but let's go in for fear we are seen.


Thus whilst we're equally involved in thought,
That side fares best that lays the wisest plot. --

NEver was an Intrigue carried with so much confidence; every word they spoke
retained a double meaning; but so evident, that any Animal, but a dull Husband,
could not fail to understand it: for they were so far from hiding their Amour,
that they openly confessed all; only speaking in a third person for a slender
security. He stood and heard it, and often would laugh heartily to hear himself
notoriously abused.


An insipid Fool! Oh that I had been there to have changed the Scene a little!
But, Sir, could you be idle on such an occasion? Why did not you play your part
cunningly, and discover 'em? --


Faith, I did what I could: but the cunning Devil your Sister, still as I was
speaking something towards the discovery, would interrupt me, and in a minute
dash all my hopes by turning what was said into raillery.


Is she so politic? 'tis very well: I once imagined I could best design, and
thought my Talent of Wit equal with any. But are they so intimate, say ye, Sir?


As Man and Wife.


Impudent Fellow! dares he insult over my Love? Baffle my passion with a sly
pretence? I am not fair enough; but he shall find my Brain has Wit enough to
ruin his design, Fool as I am.


Now the Devil in her is working hard for me; we shall have it anon. --


Fooled by a Brothers Wife! A Creature that the Law makes kin to me! No, 'twas
tamely thought, and I as tamely now should suffer wrongs had I a Dastard
Spirit. But in me Nature has shown her Master-piece, and to a Masculine person
Providence has bestowed an Active Soul so sensible of wrongs, that to forgive
would argue me as base as is their treachery.


Now she thunders; the Devil has been priming her all this while, and now she
scatters like a Hand-Granado.


My love refused! 'Tis Death to the dull Fool; Death, double Death; Damnation
too 'tis likely. -- But why did I name it Love? there's no such word; for with
this breath I banish it for ever, and in my ^east receive obscure revenge, my
Hearts delightful Darling! Oh the pleasure in that slender word Revenge! --
I'll plague the Fool her Husband with a story shall make his Gall flow upwards.


Plague him with doubts, and make his jealousy break into violent fits of rage
and passion: I'll further all, Madam; by Heaven I will not fail you.


Enough; and doubt not we'll soon turn the Current.


We'll catch 'em in his Lodging.


Entrap 'em there, and bring him in to see it.


Right: What else? We'll shame 'em. --


Slight 'em. --


Laugh at 'em. --


Vex 'em. --


Ruin 'em. --


Dam 'em. --


Hey! By Heaven 'tis excellent; and now I see the sense of wrongs can arm a
Female Spirit, and make it vigorous. -- Oh I adore thy temper!


I'll instantly go to her, and first charge her with the fact, then upbraid
her: for I am resolved never to let her rest till she deserts his passion. --

And whilst she suffers that base Wretch to woo her,
I'll plot, and counterplot, but I'll undo her.

I am glad I met with her; for of all the persons I am acquainted with, she
only has enough of the Devil to follow such a business closely: for she'll
never rest till she has betrayed 'm, which still will further my revenge; and I
am resolved to enjoy her Sister, if it be but only for the dear pleasure of
boasting it hereafter. I'll strait to Bubble, and once more infect him with my
poison: Maria is my Pilot* and her being thus slighted by Rashley, will still
augment her desire of revenge; 'tis natural to the Sex:

For baulk a Woman once, and love rebate,
Not all the Devils shall reclaim her hate.

MAnage it but carefully, you need not doubt the consequence: I have already
possessed my Husband with a belief of our variance, and I know he's coming up
with an intent to reconcile us. I'll not be seen; the rest is your part, carry
it but handsomely, and Ranger's plots are fruitless. Maria has sent also to
speak with him; I guess the business, and I am accordingly provided. -- But
remember you are not tardy.


Never doubt me, Madam; I am more a Lover than to be idle in a business that so
nearly concerns us: besides, 'tis so well contrived, and so easy to be
follow'd, that to fail now would demonstrate me as defective in sense as your
Husband is. But what business can your Sister have with you? The Devil and She
have been plotting together about this Intrigue.


Let 'em plot: -- I am so much her Sister, that my part shall never be wanting
to furnish the Comedy. I'll go to her strait: in the mean time be you sure to
play your part with him. -- Hark! I hear him coming.


Well! I never thought a Woman till now so necessary a Creature: Intrigues are
their Master-pieces, and as readily they undertake 'em as a Country-Lawyer a
bad Cause from a half-witted Client: 'twould be excellent sport to hear the two
She-Wolves bark one at another: but since I cannot be there, I'll divert my
self with entertaining the Fool her Husband. -- Here he comes! Now to my
studied posture.


Why how now, Tom? What, all-a-mort? In verity this is Foppery, as Sir Roger
says. Come, cheer up, cheer up, Man, and hold up thy head; in troth thou make
me sad to see the look so like -- so like a -- Gammon of Bacon. There I was
sharp upon him: -- Ha, ha! a good jest afaith.


Dam him, what a simile the Fool has found out!

Sir, it lies not in any mans power to banish serious thoughts at all times: --
Besides, I have some cause for my present melancholy.


The cause? -- Come, come, Tom, -- I know the cause, ha, ha. -- You thought I
warrant to have carried matters so privately; but if I once go about such a
business, there's never a man in Christendom (though I say it) can find out a
cause sooner than I.


You may be mistaken in mine, Sir, for all that.


Mistaken? ha, ha! -- I see, Tom, thou know not what 'tis to be ingenious: I
tell thee once more, I do know the cause, the very cause; I, and more then
that, the cause of that cause; -- 'Sbud there's never an Attorney in the Inns
of Court knows more causes than I do.


I doubt not but in the end you'll be brought to confess your self too positive
in this particular: but since you have such an excellent faculty, and imagine
your self so well skilled in finding out secrets, -- come, what is't? what
is't?


What is't? Why, ha, ha, ha! -- My Wife -- my Wife, Tom, and you're fallen out,
ha, ha, ha! -- have I mumpt you now in faith? --


I must confess you are in the right, Sir.


O must you so, Sir? What a pox I warrant you thought we Husbands had no wit
but what our Wives lend us? But I would have you to know, Tom, that I am a
Leviathan at these matters: to be plain, that is as much as to say, a Whale. --



I am sufficiently convinced of your excellent judgment, Sir; and as I have
confessed to you freely the cause of my sadness, to be your Wives ill usage of
me, so I am continually tortured to guess the reason: for I am confident, Sir,
you know I always honoured her, and loved her.


Faith! so thou did! I'll say that for thee; and by the Lord Harry she shall
love and honour thee too, or I'll be very sharp upon her; I'll pinch her
severely faith, for all she's my Chicken: nay, if she*ll be still refractory,
rather then fail thou shalt pinch her too, Tom. I am not like your
surly-burly-waspish-cross-grain'd Fellows, that fall out and fight about their
Wives: 'Sbud I'll give my friend leave at any time to chastise my Wife if she
don't behave her self civilly.


You ever load me with your kind expressions, Dear Friend! --


Dear Doom, Faith you're an honest Fellow.


This ever is the fate of Cuckolds. --


Never doubt; -- I'll bring you together again with a vengeance: nay, I can tell
you the reason of her anger too, if I thought 'twere convenient.


Convenient! Why, Sir, 'tis the only thing that conduces to my contentment; for
I have long studied in vain, and could never yet so much as guess at it: Let me
beg it of you, Sir; come, I'm sure you cannot deny so near a Friend.


In faith I cannot, -- that's the truth on it, and thou shalt have it. -- Why, you
must know, Tom, one night (when I was examining her about you) she told me very
seriously that the cause of her anger was, that you promised to give her a
Squirril that night, and never kept your word; and she loves Squirrils
passionately.


'Tis true, I confess I did promise her; -- but as the Devil would have it, I
was disappointed utterly of my Squirril that night my self; for I got very
drunk, and from thence sprung this fatal consequence


Pooh! -- no matter; I'll warrant thee I'll bring all about again. --


Oh 'tis impossible; -- I am sure she'll near be brought to it,


Not brought to it? Yes, I'll lay my commands upon her, and I'll have you know
she shall be brought to it: I'll lay a Wager I'll reconcile you both before
night. --


Done: any Wager. --


What shall it be?


Why, Five Guineas to be spent in a Treat of Ven'son and Champain.


Agreed in faith; and we'll drink and sing Tory-Rory. Not reconcile you! You
shall be all one before to morrow-morning. -- I have a spell for that; I'll
do it, I say; come along, Boy. --


A petty Friend for pimping we applaud:
But of all Men a Husband's the best Bawd. --

MAdam, You, as being the Niece to Mr. Peregrine, truly deserve the favour I
intend you by this Alliance: You are a handsome Woman, and in verity were I a
young Man, none should be more forward than I for a place in your affection. I
like your Air well; and upon my Faith you have the right way on it. Ah! --
Madam, I once saw the days when such an Eye as yours -- Well, I say no more
on it, -- 'tis for my Nephew now I make addresses; -- you see what he is, Madam;
-- His Face is none of the worst, nor his Person I think any way defective. --
In brief, Madam, I present him to you, nor shall he want an Estate to make him
worthy.


'Tis well he named an Estate to Candy over his bitter Pill, my squeamish
Stomach would else have hardly digested it. -- Lord! how he looks? --


Cob! go; -- prithee go and make your address to the Lady. He's newly come from
the College, Madam, and is as the rest of 'em are, a little bashful at first;
but by that time he has seen a Play or two --


Me thinks this silence becomes him very well, Sir: A Student should always be
contemplative; 'tis a great sign of Learning. --


'Tis a sign he thinks the more: But, Madam, Ladies of this Age are not to be
won with Imaginary Courtship, 'tis the practick part they love; and he that can
sing well, dance well, talk well, rhyme modishly, swear decently, and lye
confoundedly, -- is certainly the happy man, whilst others pass unregarded. --


I see, Sir, you are well skilled in Modish Address; but give me leave to tell
ye, perhaps few other Ladies are of my humour: -- I love words considerately
spoken. --


And I too, Faith Madam. Cob, Dee hear that, Cob? --


Ay, ay! 'tis a fine Woman, by Ierico, and now I begin to be a little in heart:
I shall put up well enough anon, Uncle. --


Well said! Why now I love thee: And, Madam, as to his Interior Virtues, I
dare speak for 'em; His Wit is hereditary; Ah! his Father, old Sir Ieremy
Sneak, had a notable Head-piece, and troth Cob comes very near him; you'll find
it, Madam, when he talks with you.


Your Character of him, Sir, gives me the satisfaction I should receive in his
discourse: I imagine him to be one of those that hoard up Wit for Plato's great
Year, and are very shy of using their Talent for fear of diminishing the value
in making it too common. --


In verity, Madam, I always held him so. -- Cob! --


Ay, Madam, you may say of me what you please; I am your Slave, -- your Vassal,
-- your Pig, Madam: But as for Wit, as my Nuncle says, I think I may compare
with another, take the Court-Cabal away. -- 'Tis a blessing thrown upon me:
Besides, mine is none of your Wheedling Wits, that cheat for a Livelihood: I am
no Parasite, Madam; -- I am a Scholar, I!


In troth he's in the right: -- Did not I tell you, Madam, he would speak
notably? -- Ah, 'tis a Wag.


His Disputes in the College have added extremely to his Rhetoric; he speaks
with good Emphasis, and gives a delightful period to every Jest, of which I see
he has many. But I would fain have the Gentleman speak himself, a little talk I
am sure would become him.


He shall do it, Madam. -- Cob, now's your time; -- she's wrought finely. --
Madam, -- I'll take my leave for a minute; -- I know his temper, Madam; --
he'll speak the better for my absence. --


Pray, Sir, what University was blessed with your presence?


Cambridge, Madam. --


Will you not be angry if I ask you one Question more?


O Lord, Angry, Madam? You do not know me. Angry! You mistake me clearly: We of
the Round Cap are not given to*t; 'tis your Graduates are the angry people.


Pray, what have you learnt at Cambridge?


Learnt! what a Plaguy Question's that? -- where's my Uncle now? -- Learnt,
Madam?


Yes, Sir, Learnt!


Why, Madam, -- I learnt Nothing.


Nothing, Sir!


No, -- but to wear a Daggled Gown, as the rest do, and eat dry Chops of Rotten
Mutton: We Fellow-Commoners don't go thither to learn; -- Madam, we go for
Diversion, we. --


I thought you had gone to learn the Sciences. --


Right, Madam; -- but not Gentlemen: Your green halfwitted Pupils, I confess,
come thither for some such business; that is, Madam, your Priggs that would be
Parsons. But the Sciences of your Persons of Quality; -- I ll give you a
description; -- Hum? -- 'Tis to Wench immoderately; -- To be Drunk hourly; --
To wear their Clothes slovenly; -- To abuse the Proctor damnably; -- And so be
expelled the College triumphantly: -- There are seven, -- but I contented my
self with these.


This is ever found, -- Your sly Fool is in his nature more impudent than the
greatest Professors of Debauchery. -- I must shift him off. --


Oh! -- here she is; -- and ifack I'll put up to her now I have found her. How
dost thou do, Girl? -- Hah! how dost thou do? Give me thy hand. Ah, little
Rogue! -- Well, I have been with my Goldsmith about the Ring I promised thee;
Thou shalt have it, Bird, thou shalt have it. -- How now, who is that there? --



O the Devil! -- Now will the old doting Fellow disturb us before I have told
her half my mind. Who am I, Sir? Why, Sir, I am one that cares as little --


Thank you heartily, Sir, Ifack; -- I am very well; only cold weather, cold
weather. -- 'Tis Sir Roger's Nephew! A pretty Fellow, -- a very pretty Fellow.


Very well, Sir; would you were very sick, Sir. 'Ounds, I must beat this
Fellow. --


Here's like to be rare sport.


Pray, Old Philosopher* depart in silence for fear of further damage; this Lady
and I have business.


Ifack, and so she is, Sir, very pretty, very pretty, bona fide. Ah that black
of the top there! Well, I'll say no more. But, ifack, Black Hair, Black Eyes,
and a Black -- (Gad forgive me, what was I going to say?) -- Patch or two
further Generation more than Tissues and Embroideries.


Generation? O Lord! was ever such an Impudence? An old doting impotent Fellow,
one that was rotten in his Minority, and now has lost three of his five Senses,
to talk of Generation! I am impatient: Will you begone, Sir? 'Sbud I will so
swinge you else.


Held, Sir, and pray forbear this rudeness; I like his Company very well. --


How! like him? Why, he has Nothing, Madam: A Lady can like no Hearing, no
Smelling, no Tasting, no Teeth, no Strength, no -- nothing I say that a man
should have? Besides, he*s above fourscore; and by being a Stallion in his
Youth, has acquired to be a Baboon in his Age, by Ierico. -- 'Sbud, like him,
quoth a?


What does the Wag say? Hah! What does he fay? He's a pretty spruce Fellow,
Madam, and ifack knows a Hawk from a Handsaw, as the saying is. -- But here are
those not far off that ifack know as much as he, if that were all; what
think thou, Bird? do they not? do they not, Rogue? Well, still I say that
Hair of thine. Ah, Rascal!


I am glad it pleases you, Sir.


But, Madam, when shall I begin? 'Sbud me thinks we lose time.


Begin! what, Sir?


Why, my Courtship. Pox o'this old chatt'ring Fellow; if he had not come, I had
been out of my pain before now: -- Hark ye, Reverend Sir, 'Bud! what do ye do
prating here? why don't you go and chat to your Grand-daughter at home, if you
love Women so well? --


Hah! -- what does the Wag say, Madam?


He says, Sir, he's extremely in love with your Granddaughter.


My Grand -- daughter? and ifack she deserves it, Madam: She's a juicy,
sprightly Girl; she'll make a Pottle of Water of a Pint of Ale; a Chip of the
Old Block, bona fide, and shall turn her Back to never a one in Christendom of
her Inches, I'll say that for her.


Sir, there's one Mrs. Snare below desires to speak with you.


Snare! O Lord, what shall I do? how the Devil came she to know I was here?
Hark, -- prithee, Sweet-heart, tell her I am gone: Oh! I would not see her for
the World.


Sir, she says she dogged you hither, and swears and rants yonder strangely.


O damned Quean! what shall I do?


And vows if you come not instantly, she'll go into the Parlour to Sir Roger,
and discover something to him, I know not what; but I saw she was a Big-bellied
Woman, and I was loath to discourage her.


Well, well, -- tell her I'll come; why how the Devil could she get from
Cambridge already?


What's the matter, Sir? Not well?


Yes, I thank you, Madam, very well, only thinking of a little business I have;
I must about it presently: Madam, Your Servant, I'll wait on you some other
time. I must go and pacify this Quean* This comes of Learning the Sciences
with a Pox* --


Come, Sir, shall we go in?


Ifack, -- and so he is, Madam: but the Fellow has some pretty parts, and will
grow better in time: But come, let's go in and see Sir Roger.


'Twas that I asked you.


Hah! dost like me, say thou, ifack? I'm glad on it. Shall we not have a word
or two in private, my little Queen of Fairies? We must, I say, we must. -- Ah
Rogue! -- I'll warrant thou art a Swinger: -- But come, let's go. --


NOw for my Talent of Women! I see by her looks I shall have occasion for it.


Sister!


Sister!


The natural love I bear you, and my desire to prevent your growing Infamy, has
brought me hither to give you counsel.


The sense I have of your ill nature, and my knowledge of the little good it
will do you, has brought me hither to give you advice.


Your Reputation is loudly branded by all tongues, and I only as a Sister have
power to speak indifferently of your Life in hopes of your Reformation.


Your Malice and unexampled Envy is mortally hated by all people; I only as a
Sister retaining so much pity as to desire its utter Dissolution. --


Why do you echo me?


Why do you question me? What have I done deserves it?


Done! Recollect your thoughts, and then confess; for my part, shame ties up my
tongue I dare not speak it.


Dare not! Nay, that I am sure is false, you dare speak any thing: Come,
prithee don't fright me, what is't you mean?


Excellent cunning! she has fitted me. --

Why would you seem ignorant? I confess to a stranger you might be cautious of
a nice Confession: But this artifioe to your Sister, fie, Emilia.


Now I'll lay my life your design is to wheadle something out of me to make
your self merry withal.


Rare still! -- No, Madam, this is no such merry matter; the Infamy of a Family
is not so to be jested with.


Infamy! Nay, then I see 'tis time to be serious: Come, express it; I suppose
'tis the Invention of your Envy, some new stratagem to affront me with; I am no
stranger to your temper.


This is an impudence beyond a prostitute: Do I not know you are false?


False! How?


False to your Husband; False with Rashley: I need not tell you how, you best
know that.


I know you love him! and am sensible of the Intrigues and Assignations which
you have had, which makes your meaning visible. But me thinks this is so
strange a design.


Design! What is't she means? I hope you can tax me with no such crime with
him.


Not I; 'tis not my business; I have only liberty to guess: yet indeed your
often private meetings were a little suspicious, and I suppose your late
raillery was only a design; but you might have took a better way with your
Sister: -- I am not so talkative.


Exquisite Devil! -- Death, I am incensed beyond all bounds of reason: I
private with him! An Intrigue with me! Fury! thou know --


I do; -- and to exasperate thy rage, will now confess all* I do love Rashley
more than I love Fame: Nay, more than you could do, could you die for him. --
But why should that offend you?


Oh Confusion! I am all over Fire: Dare you be such a Devil? dare you love him?


Yes; and to vex you more, dare make you of my counsel*


Can I endure this? Oh for a look now of a Basilisk that I might kill thee.


Thou art worse. --


Expect to find me so; for if there be a stratagem of Malice in all Hell, I'll
have it thence: Ah, I'll be a tender Sister to thee.


As ever Woman yet was blessed withal.


Not all the Infernals clad in the secret darkest Robes of Malice, did ever
watch a Soul they meant to ruin, as I will thee: Thy very sleeps shall be
discovered to me, and every dream I'll trace with so much care, that if thou
scapest thou art the wiser Sister, and I a poor unthinking Creature good for
nothing.


I slight thy threats, and dare thee to persevere: Manage thy hate with such
dexterity, the World may wonder at thee, and confess thou had the practick
part of Policy: Design thy plots so subt'ly, that the Devil should own himself
out done in his own Mystery; yet in the Arms of him I love, I'd laugh to see my
Wit out-do 'em.


Thy Wit! thy Wit compare with mine, insipid Fool?


Yes; and my prosperous Fate shall mount me far above thy shallow Stratagems.


I'll pull thee down from that ambitious height, and trample thee in Ashes. --


Do.


Expect it.


And from that low recess I'll forge a plot shall blow thee into Air. --


I'll make that Devil in thy Envy tame.
And if I fail thee may I sink and dam.

NAy! prithee, Pegg, have patience.


Tell not me of patience, Sir, for my part I can stay no longer; you see my
condition; if you will consider, so; if not, Sir Roger shall know that the
abuse of so innocent a person as I was, deserves better satisfaction.


Innocent! -- 'Sbud, she was a Strumpet to the whole College before I knew
her: Innocent, with a pox!


Sir, do not grumble, nor say your Devils Pater Noster to me, but give me
money; Fifty Pounds I demand, which I think is reasonable enough considering
the charge of my journey.


You might have staid till I came back again, I was not running away.


But I was, Sir* and so might you for any thing I know: Come, come, Sir, I am
to be baffled no more; I am grown older now, make me thankful.


Ay, in impudence, by Ierico: she has been snapped it seems formerly, -- but has
now learnt cunning. Ah, plague of these Sciences, I say still! -- Come wilt
thou be civil? wilt thou take Twenty Pounds? Pox, use a little Conscience in
thy dealings; thou wilt thrive the better for it.


I'll abate not a Farthing, Sir; Don't tell me of Conscience.


'Sbud, would she were in the Sea, and a Millstone about her neck: I must give
it; for if my Uncle comes and sees her, I am undone.


O Sir, what shall we do? Sir Roger and my Master are just coming.


Oh unhappy minute! if he sees me I am lost for ever: No hole nor corner to
hide us in, my little Rogue? 'Sbud here's a Guiney for thee do but contrive
handsomely.


Well, Sir, -- I see you are a Gentleman; therefore I'll help you: this door
opens to my Ladies* hamber; there you may hide your selves; -- and at night
when it begins to grow dark, I'll come and let you out.


With all my heart! Oh I've an Ague on me. --


Are you still resolved?


Assure your self I am and shall be ever.


Give me but hopes, and I'll forget all injuries, and ask your pardon.


Fie, this from a Man of Wit, one that can plot so well? 'tis impossible: what
would you have me do?


Desert young Rashley: Come, I beg thee do it.


Not for the World! Oh Heaven! desert him! I love him, Sir.


Go on then, Devil, and if I don't plague thee! --


Now for the Venison, Tom! you'll stand to your Bargain?


Firmly, Sir, win it, and 'tis yours. -- Ha! -- what a Devil makes Ranger here?


Madam, I hope you'll excuse my last abrupt departure: my nature, Madam, is
merry, and in verity careless sometimes. I have not since I came to England
achieved the Polite Method of Courtship and Address; but if blunt Actions,
kind Behaviour, and merry Songs can do it, I think I have shown an example,
have I not, old Signior!


Ifack, Sir, and 'tis right, let who will say the contrary; what does he say
now? Madam, you may believe him.


Any thing, Sir, rather than put you to the trouble of an Apology*


What think you now, Sir? do you observe her angry Look? do but see what an Eye
of indignation she casts upon me!


Ay, ay, -- I'll put out her Eye of indignation presently; I'll fetch her down
with her haughty looks in a moment; I'll make her look as I'd have her, or I'll
put her head into a Pudding Bag.


Sdeath, how she looks! here's another plot a hatching.


Wife! I have brought honest Tom here to be reconciled to thee; and to take
away all manner of distastes, he says he will give thee a Squirril at any time,
woult thou not, Tom?


Sir, and my heart into the bargain, if she please to pardon me.


Why, look ye now; -- he's as honest a Fellow as lives, I'll say that for him.


Sir, the affront he offered me was so contrary to my nature, and his behaviour
so opposite to his Duty and Character, that to forgive him, would argue my
Spirit as mean as by his late deportment one might guess his breeding.


What! dare you be refractory? -- Ho! -- do it, or by the Lord Harry I shall
be very sharp upon you, that's in short. --


Now all the Fiends that dwell beneath the Center,
And hourly study deeds subtle and horrid,
To sooth and snare the Souls ye mean to dam,
In favour of your Commonwealth appear,
And to be still more Devilish, copy her.

Still refrectory? Then thus, I break the Truce, and fally out with my full
power.


Sir, do you not see her artifice? This is nothing what she intends; 'tis all
feigned, and you are abused, by Heaven: Sir, there's nothing of this real.


Ah! would it were not. But Ned, thou can talk well, prithee go and try if
thou can reconcile 'em; Faith I'll do as much for thee; prithee try. --


Insufferable ignorance! No Brains! No sense of feeling! Sir, this is all
dissimulation, and to carry on their design of abusing you.


Why, peace, I say, not a word of this; 'sbud I shall lose my Venison by this
Fools prating, if I let him alone a little longer. Wife, I command you once
more; and instantly obey upon this Summons, or I'll turn you away like a
Vagabond for contempt of my Government. Sir Roger! try you to persuade her;
'sbud this Ned here had liked to have spoiled all; but what says Scoggen?


'Tis hard to force lost friendship to the blood when once 'tis banished.


Had she been bred a Witch she had lost half her Character.


Come, Madam! forget and forgive; 'tis necessary your Husband should be obeyed.
Mr. Rashley, I am sorry to see you so deserted by the Ladies you used to be
most in favour withal.


Not I: but you weigh my Merits in your own Scale, Sir Roger.


No faith; I am old now; but about some thirty years ago I could have said
something; I could have fetched 'em about with a Horse-pox in faith; I never
flincht, I was a true Knight-Errant, I.


What is the meaning of all this? Ifack I cannot guess the matter: but mum, I
must not discover my failing.


Well, Sir, rather than be thought disobedient I will submit; but Heaven knows
with what an ill will --


Why so, now all's well, and the Venison's mine, -- ha, ha, ha* -- I thought I
should have it: Faith, Tom, be civil, and kiss her, 'tis no confirmation else.


Oh dam him, dam him! was ever such a Coxcomb?


'Tis now about Five; at Seven I will not fail ye: Madam, -- you have given me
new life with this favour.


At Seven? (Good!) Thanks to my Ear for that discovery: I shall go near to
spoil your assignation.


Go now, get you in, and begin a Set at Ombre, and I'll come and make one
presently. By the Lord Harry I am glad they are friends with all my heart.


So Paris stole the Wife of Menelaus, and Troy grew bright with Fire. --


Hey day! -- Troy! why what hast thou to do with Troy? Ned, prithee let us talk
of our own affairs.


And wisely too; for your Reputation suspended one hour will grow nauseous; the
Rabble will shout at ye, and point their fingers, and by your Name you will
grow infamous.


My Name, Sister! what dost mean? what name?


A Cuckold: Can you bear it, Sir? A Cuckold-Buz.


By the Lord Harry 'tis but a scurvy Name for a Man of Honour, that's the truth
on it; but what is't to me?


Nothing, Sir, nothing; only you are the Man, that's all.


That's all, quoth-a? what a pox does he mean?


Dull Man! I blush to call ye Brother, that kind name, your want of sense taken
from you: Can you see the guilty Love 'twixt Rashley and your Wife, the melting
Touches, and the glancing Eyes? the often Pressings, Sighs, and kind Caresses,
and all the signs of shame and burning Lust, and yet be patient? Oh the insipid
dullness of a Husband! A Husband.


Rashley and my Wife! Pish, -- why, I reconciled 'em but just now; she has been
angry with him this week for not giving her a Squirril he promised her.


A Squirril? -- Hah! a very fine present that, if you understood all.


Happy discovery! this shall to my Lady immediately.


That anger was designed: You are abused, and I that have a share in all your
ignominy, have now resolved prevention. Oh that ever I should live to be a
Witness of this shame!

Heaven knows how I have loved her, instructed her, and told her the Duty of a
Wife was to obey and be constant; yet all would not do: therefore I am resolved
to right my self and you in the discovery; nor shall our race in future times
be branded with any Spurious Offspring.


I could not be believed, I was impertinent; but if you knew what I have seen,
Sir.


Seen! why prithee what hast thou seen, Ned?


Faith, 'twill be no secret long, therefore I'll tell you: I have seen her lie
in Rashley's Arms and kiss him; play with his Nose, and clap his Cheeks, and
laugh till her whole Frame was shook with Titulation; I guess, Sir, 'twas at
you, but will not swear it. -- She'd sing, and breathe upon him, and with her
Hand locked fast in his, and Eyes with rapture gazing on his Face, she'd tell
him wanton Stories of her love, and of her easy Husband. He, to requite her,
would display her Charms, and betwixt every word imprint a Kiss to prove his
amorous Argument.


And you have seen this?


More than this, Sir, I have seen (but to tell you is to be called
Impertinent!) such things, such monstrous things.


My Head begins to ache; -- all is not well; prithee, Ned, out with 'em; come, I
am thy Friend; and 'sbud, if I thought any thing were done in Hugger Mugger.


What would you do then?


Do! -- Why, I'd ask him civilly whether his meaning were good or no.


His meaning? --


Ay: -- you know 'tis best to begin mildly, that afterwards, if occasion be, a
man may cut his Throat with greater assurance.


Stare on your Infamy with Eagle-aspect! Behold the evidence of Shame writ in
her Eyes and Actions! See every Glance, each Touch, each kind Embrace; and when
you have seen 'em in the very fact, stand coldly unconcerned, and ask the
meaning. Ah! Curse upon all dullness. --


Let Rashley smile and point his Fingers at ye, tell you a Story of a Quondam
Mistress, (which is indeed your Wife) how oft he has lain with her, and
pleasantly deceived the easy Cuckold; -- yet as a President of excellent
Nature, I could advise you still to ask his meaning, -- his meaning. --


Watch all his Actions; and when some kind Genius has, to undeceive you, made
you a Spectator of Rashley, full of hopes, and all undressed, entering your Bed
with a glad Lovers haste, step in, and pull him back; and ask his meaning, his
meaning!


My Bed! my Bed is my Castle; and, by the Lord Harry, he that violates it but
with a look, my First shall crush him into Mummy.


So! now he begins to take fire. --


He's a Son of a Whore, a Dog, a Bitch, a Succubus; and if I find this true,
I'll cut him piece-meal though he were Sword-proof, and had a Witch to his
Mother.


Ay, this is meaning now! Go on and prosper.


These words display a revived sense of Honour, nor shall you want
encouragement to forward it; and since I see your Eyes and Understanding are
opened, I, as your Friend, will give this secret to you: 'Twas my good fortune
to hear an Assignation appointed between 'em this night at seven a Clock; I
guess 'tis now very near the hour; you have a Key to the Chamber, go thither at
the time appointed, and then never trust your Friend if you find her not the
falsest of Women.


If I do, I'll make her the ugliest in Christendom: for I'll cut off her Nose,
and send her to the Devil for a New-Years-Gift.


Here she comes, we must not be seen, 'twill spoil all: talk of going abroad,
and carry it handsomely, for fear she mistrusts.


But where shall we meet?


At my lodging in the Strand, about half an hour hence.


What, studying, my Dear? Come, come, indeed you must not be so thoughtful: Did
you not promise to come and make one at Ombre.


Now if I might be hanged, cannot I speak an angry word, no: -- I wont play, I
am busy, I am going abroad for two or three hours. -- Farewell.


'Tis so; our Intrigue to night is discovered to him, I find by his actions;
the Infernal Colleagues, Ranger and Maria, have been possessing him with some
strange resolutions: But since 'tis but what I expected, it gives me the less
trouble, and 'tis ten to one but I have a Counterplot left that shall undo
their policies, (...) the Devil made one in the Invention. Did you meet my
Husband?


Yes, but in a strange humour: He looked with so dull an aspect, and returned my
salute so coldly, and so far from his usual manner, that I more than half fear
-- our Intrigue is discovered.


Without doubt it is: -- They have plaid their parts to discover, and it now
belongs to us to study to repel. Come, summon your Wits together, and advise
what's to be done in so Critical a Conjuncture; you had a contriving Genius
once.


Ay, 'tis true, Madam, I had once: but this damned Champaign has so dulled it,
that Igad 'tis now worth little or nothing: Madam, you know my Talent in plot
is insignificant; but if a Rencounter, or cutting Ranger's Throat may do the
business, I'll thrust my hand as far as any man. I'll spoil his plotting by
Heaven, say you but the word.


No! fighting will do in any other business better than this: for in stead of
defending, it blasts my reputation.


The Devil take me, if I had not like to have forgot that too: well, I am a
dull Rogue, Madam, that's the truth on it.


Oh Madam, you are betrayed! Mr. Ranger, by what means Heaven knows, has been
informed of your Assignation, I accidentally overheard him telling it to my
Master, and Madam Maria coming in, seconded his Story with an extravagant fury;
and in conclusion 'twas designed that he should pretend business abroad, but
privately return home and surprise ye.


'Tis as I imagined, and I am glad of this caution: Now we may take breath
again.


Gad and so am I. -- But is there no way to keep on the plot, and deceive 'em
still? --


'Tis in my head, and will have birth presently. -- Betty, you have Sneak still
fast in my Chamber?


Yes, Madam, he's securely locked in, and here's the Key.


Follow me then, and do as I directed you: In the mean time, Sir, go you to
your Chamber, and put on your Gown and Night-Cap as if you had been in Bed; and
when you hear me stamp come out, and wonder: Let me alone for the rest, -- I'll
plague 'em with an after-plot. Away, the minute's near. --


What she intends I know not, but am certain of the success by the assurance
she does it with. -- Hah! 'Tis a rare Creature, and by Heaven is Mistress of
^he sweetest Nature, and noblest Trust, and most substantial good English
Principles of any Woman in Europe. Well, -- if Cuckolding be a Crime, 'tis the
sweetest Crime in Christendom, and has certainly the most Practisers. But let
that pass; now to my Gown and Night-Cap.


'Sdeath! I have had confounded luck to night; -- not a good chance since I
begun; nor no Mirth neither, there's the plague on it. -- Had I had the liberty
to have sung two or three merry Catches, and have lost my Money with a Trolly
Lolly -- Lo, -- it had been nothing. -- Here; -- Hey; -- where's Cob, call him
hither quickly, and let us go.


Sir! I have not seen him these two hours; I believe he's gone home.


How! what without taking leave of his Mistress? 'tis impossible.


Sir Roger, you are disturbed me thinks; what is the matter? Hah! your
behaviour seems to publish that --


No great matter, Sir: Pox of this old Fool.


Sir, it ill becomes a person of your gravity to be angry on so small an
occasion. --


Small! By Heaven, Madam, -- 'tis a matter of moment: What, run away without
taking leave? In verity 'tis barbarous, and derogates from his Birth and
Breeding; nor can I, though his Kinsman, excuse --


What does Sir Roger say, Madam? does he rally. Ha! he's a merry Man, and a
good Fellow, and ifack I love mirth: for my part I hate your drowsy, insipid,
phlegmatic Fellows, that sleep over a Glass, and talk of nothing but
State-Politicks: -- But Sir Roger is a man for the purpose, a merry jolly-man,
He.


Sir, you may spare your Commendations for them that delight in 'em. What an
impertinent old Fellow 'tis? -- Pray, Sir, no more of this, I am not pleased
with it. --


Your Song of Sir Thomas Fairfax, and the rest of the brave old Fellows, was
very fine, Sir Roger. -- Well! I'll not be positive, but there was certainly a
great deal of Judgment and sheer Wit in some of those Rump-Songs.


'Sdeath! this is the most insufferable old Fellows: Pox, tell not me of Rump
Songs* Sir in Verity, would you had been hanged up in stead of the Rump, --
that I might have been free from the noise. -- But, Madam, as I was saying* --
upon my Honour I never knew Cob* in such an error.


Then, Sir Roger, Chevy-Chace, and the Hunting of the Hare, is finely penned!
finely penned! Ifack it was --


Oh the Devil, is there no riddance of this Clack? because he can hear nothing,
he would speak all.


Ay, so it was, Sir, so it was. -- But Ifack that Hunting was most excellently
contriy'd* Ah! he makes the Dogs speak notably. Ieod and the Hare repartees
again very well for an Animal of her Magnitude. --


'Sbud. I shall grow as deaf as he if I stay longer: I must go seek my Nephew:
Come, Madam, lets go away and leave him; I am sure his Eyes are so defective he
cannot miss us presently. --


And though some petulant, insignificant, and disaffected persons have raised
Calumnies by calling it Doggerel and fustian, and such like; yet Ifack the thing
is really a witty, sacetious, (nay, and as some think) a Moral Satyr: for mark
me, Sir Roger, and Madam pray give your attention, for the Dogs were
Hieroglyphick-Characters of Fanatics, as the Hare was of the Quakers, and
ifack I have often heard the Sisters sing it in stead of an Hymn or an Anthem,
for the Conversion of Unbelievers; and nay, and as a greater rarity I have
heard it acted to the life betwixt a Dog-Phanatick and a Conny* Quaker. -- But
ifack, -- I think you mind me not. -- Ha, Sir Roger, -- Madam, -- Sir Roger,
Madam, -- what, a vacuity? -- Gone? well. --

I'll after, and redeem all; but Ieod, this was a little uncivil.


Come, Sir, and with as little noise as you can for fear of discovery. I swear
were you not a man, to whom I am sensibly obliged, I should not be drawn to
this Infidelity.


I will reward thy care; are they together?


Yes, Sir, in that Room there.


Take this, and begone, I have no further service for thee, and I would have
her ignorant that this is thy discovery: Away. --


The discovery will add little to your content: but since I have the profit, I
care not.


Ned! what says she? are they met?


Securely, and with a great deal of content, they are in that Room in the dark;
(met!) Ah, Sir! they are both better practised than ever to be tardy in a
Love-Intrigue.


Now I think I have trapt her finely. -- Oh my Joy! -- I shall not be able to
contain my self. --


A Man of Wit and Honour thus abused! 'Tis horrible! A Cuckold! 'Sbud, 'tis a
worse Name than a Conjurer, -- and has more of the Devil in it: -- but I'll be
so revenged, the World shall tremble at it: I'll first cut off her Hair, to
affront her Family; then the want of a Nose shall proclaim her Bawd, and the
Penny-Pot-Poets shall make Ballads on her. --


So! this thrives as I would have it, and we have snapped 'em finely in the nick!
just when the Intrigue was at its best perfection! Oh Revenge! --


Ha, ha, ha! Nay, and at such a time when all help is denied 'em; when her
Blushes, Sighs and Entreaties are all fruitless; when her exasperated Husband's
rage flows high, and best of all when Rashley is defenceless. O Wit! I love
thee for this Stratagem!


She dared us to persevere; slighted our plots, and had the confidence to make
descriptions of her kind Intrigue before her Husbands face, then laughed at us.


'Tis now our time; Ha, ha, ha! I thought I could not fail.


No; and this happy Minute brings me more perfect pleasure, and more true
delight, than pristine Ages: For she's one whom Hell designed for its chief
Instrument; She will out-lye a Siren, cheat the Devil, and dam more Souls to
further her Intrigue than Charon's Boat has room for; yet I own a kind of
Mongrel love, and must enjoy her though Legions were her guard.


Hark! --

He's as good as his word: Now I hope she'll own her Sisters Wit above her. --
Well! -- this was rarely plotted. --


By Heaven it was, -- and fit to be Chronicled, Madam: -- Your Wit surpasses
humane thought, and should be spoken of with wonder: You plot with such
assurance, that --

Hell! Death! and Confusion! Can I believe* my Eyes? She here!


I am confounded, and have lost my senses. Sure, Sir, we dream: Are we awake,
think you?


No! nor shall never wake when I design to raise my Wit above the poor weak
Creatures. I could laugh now, but I swear I pity ye. Wear out your tedious
Nights in dull design, and then in the Morning hatch the Abortive Brood which
ere Night turns to nothing; slender Encouragement, Heaven knows, for Wit: And
you, Sir, plot and sweat, and plot again for Moon-shine in the Water: Poor
reward, Sir, for one so well skilled in Intrigue as you are! --


Oh that I had thy heart here in my hand! How pleasant were the Diet? -- Fate
and Death! was ever such a Devil?


No! never! Therefore since thou art a Devil, as I now am sure thou art, have
mercy on me, and do not take my Soul for my first Crime, -- and I will plot no
more. my Conqueror; I'll honour thee; -- Good Devil, do not hurt me.


Strumpet! Whore! Witch! I'll spoil your Curls by the Lord* Harry. O Lord! my
Wife; -- and she that I have beaten a stranger. --


Oh Heaven! was ever poor sinner so abused? --


Madam, I beg your pardon, and am ashamed of my fault; but I'll make you amends
presently. --


Well, nothing but the greatest Devil could have brought this Woman hither for
this Intrigue, and therefore once more I acknowledge thy power. --


Ay! you had need ask her pardon; 'tis you have betrayed us. Chicken! dear
Chicken, -- don't srown so: -- I confess I was a Fool; -- but forgive me but
this once, and if ever I offend again, I'll give thee leave to Cuckold me
indeed.


Indeed, Sir, your jealousy is a little severe, I wonder what I have done to
deserve it.


Nothing, I know thou hast not; prithee forgive me.


But to be disturbed thus when I was at my Devotion.


Prithee forget it: Come, Tom, you may come out now, here's none but Friends.


Who do you mean, Sir?


Tom Rashley: -- Poor Fellow, I warrant now he'll be so bashful.


So, that's something yet, and I'll fetch him out or bleed for it. --


Look, yonder he is!


I find it now, -- and this is all designed: O Devil! Devil!


What's the matter, Mr. Rashley? what's the matter.


Rashley here? Hey day! who the Devil is that yonder then?


Come, Sir, appear; I find you are now no Hercules. Hah! -- Death more
Miracles, Sneak!


'Sdeath, my Gob! -- and taken with a Wench: Why how now, Sirrah?


Now it works to my wish: prithee observe how they look.


Hush, -- I do.


O Lord, Uncle, your mercy; -- I was betrayed, seduced, as a man may say. --
Go, go, -- begone, I'll speak with you to morrow. --

I say, Uncle, I was seduced, chowsed, cheated.


Caught with a Wench? -- Come, Sir, I'll talk with you. -- Oh disgrace to the
Family. -- With a Wench? a lewd Wench? Come along, Sir; -- I'll watch you
henceforth. --


Ha, ha! Why, here has been a great deal of Intrigue to night I see, Ha, Sir?
-- I am sorry now I went to Bed so soon: -- But I have been in the sweetest
Dream yonder. --


Here has in truth been a great deal of Intrigue, as thou say, Tom: But no
matter; now all's well: And since it has happened so well, a Day of Jubilee
shall Crown it. To morrow is my Wedding-Day, and in memory of that happy hour
that conjoined me and my sweet Chicken there together, we'll have a Feast; --
and I'll sing, and roar, and drink cum privilegio. Go, wait on her in, Tom: --
Chicken, remember we are Friends; Go, -- I'll be with you presently. --


Never was such a day, nor such a deed.


Ned! let me have no more of your doubts nor counsels. Do ye hear! 'Sbud, I say
once more my Wife is the honestest Woman in Christendom, and you shall hear
from me.


Was ever the like known?


Never since Adam; but she was a Devil before the Creation.


I'll not give over thus. --


Nor I. --


Your hand on it --


Here! and may all the Demons that have power
In subtle plots help now, though never more.

I'll die but I'll perform it. --

My Slights shall with Immortal Wit be wrought:
And all my Senses shall convert to Thought.

SIrrah! haunt me no more, I know thee not.


Nay, Uncle.


Go to your Wench, and let her entertain you; then stock Sir Ieremy's
Mannor-house at home with Bastards, -- Birds of night, and teach 'em all to
know their Father when you have done. --


Good Uncle, let me speak. --


No place to bring your Cattle to but thither, under your Mistresses Nose, thou
most notorious Ass? Mercy o'me, what will this World come to? who could imagine
that Sheeps Face of thine; that Mouth, whence never came any thing that had
sense; that Person that has as oft been thought a Puritan as thou hast been a
Fool? Then that hanging Dog-look. I'll say no more, but the Devil is subtle.


Uncle, you know 'tis an old saying, We cannot appoint our own Destinies; nor
did I foresee this: besides, Sir, if you knew her as well as I do, you'd find
the Woman has some parts that are not contemptible. -- 'Sbud, I know what's
what; I am not such a Fool.


Not such a Fool! In verity if thou were but a grain nearer to a Natural, I'd
beg thee of the King, and adopt another to inherit thy Estate. Not such a Fool!


No, so I say, Sir, since you go to that: Whoop! what a Pox you have forgot
since you were young your self?


I young! why, Sir, I hope I got no Bastards.


No: -- But you kept Whores that you did, and that's all one, bona fide.


This Rogue has heard all; I must stop his mouth. How, Sirrah, I kept Whores?


It has been thought so, Sir, since you go to that: Nay, 'tis no such Miracle
now adays; there's many an old Badger about Town does the like; 'tis grown a
custom now.


But 'tis not so customary with your Uncle, Sir: but come, pray express your
self; what Women do the infamous World lay to my charge?


What Women! 'Bud are you ignorant? Hum, Nan, Pegg, Ioan of the Dairy, Sara,
Ienny, Dorothy, Mary, Bridget.


Hold! hold, I say; 'Sdeath he'll reckon the whole Country presently: I must
quiet him, the Rogue has me upon the hip; Harkee, Cob.


Then the Parsons Wife, Sir, and the old Hostess at the Townsend: You see the
Fool has a good memory.


A waggish one I see thou hast: Ha, if thou could remember Law-Cases as
well, thou would be a brave Fellow. Why, Cob, thou think thou hast paid me
off now, dost not?


I know not, if my Wit flow too fast, Sir, I cannot help it* 'tis a good that's
thrown upon me, 'tis not my seeking: 'tis true, I have an unhappy way with me
sometimes, but 'tis over presently, it never lasts long, that's one comfort.


In verity I see thou hast Wit, and now I'll cherish it. Why, Cob, my
instruction is for thy good, Child, what will thy Mistress think when she hears
of it? -- Come, come, in verity, Cob, 'twas ill done, 'twas in faith. -- But mum,
no more words on it, I'll make all well again.


So, so, I have brought him about finely; 'Sbud I did not think I had so much
Wit, but I see a man may be mistaken in his own parts.


But do ye hear, Cob, not a word more of these Wenches, let the foolish World
say what it will. -- Thou art a good Boy in verity, I like thy Wit well: Thou
know I have no *Heir, and when I die, Cob, I will not say I'll give thee any
thing, lest I should make thee proud; but expect, expect wonders may fall, who
knows? --


By Ierico I would not have spoke on it now, but that I had nothing else to say,
and you know 'tis a disgrace to a Scholar to be silent in company.


'Tis no matter, 'tis no matter: prithee how came thou to know that Pegg and
I were so intimate?


Ah, you'll be angry if I should tell you.


In verity not I: -- Angry? -- Come, come, out with it, Cob, out with it.


Why, the truth is, I lay with her one night, and the Quean told me all.


Did thou! God a mercy. (Dam him! what a Snake have I fostered?) Done like a
Cock of the Game in verity. Ah, when I was of thy years I could have done as
much my self.


Yes, she told me you had done as much: but mum, Sir, not a word more, I know
my Kew.


'Sdeath, I shall be a by-word to the Town. -- How now?


Sir Roger, I was just coming to your House for you; my Master desires yours
and Mr. Sneak's company immediately.


What, the Solemnity holds? this is his Wedding-Day?


Yes, Sir.


Tell him I am coming. --

Come, Cob, let us go; and mum, do ye hear? you understand me?


I warrant you, Sir. --


COme, come, another Bumper about; my Chickens Health: Here, I am not wet
through yet; Tom, what say thou?


With all my heart, Sir! Oh here comes Sir Roger and his Nephew.


Mr. Bubble and Gentlemen, your most humble Servant.


Yours, good Sir Roger; I am glad to see you in faith; and you, sweet Mr. Sneak.
Well, Faith, Sir Roger, we have been Bumping it about here, we have been dipped,
as the saying is: Tom Rashley, send it round; come, Sir Roger's a Freshman,
he'll drink an Ocean.


Fill every Man's Glass there: Mr. Ranger, you want it, 'tis Madam Emilia's
health.


I'll do you reason, Sir; --

And ten to one but I have a stratagem shall dash this mirth.

Are they ready?


Hush! we are observed; they are --


So, so! Come, now the Song, and then the Dance. Look ye, Gentlemen, you must
know.


Come, come, Mr. Bubble, let's have the other Soup, I say; ifack we loose time.
Ah Sirrah, are you there? Gad I'll be with you presently; dust it about once
more, I say; the Wine has a pretty smack with it; -- it cherishes, I like it
well: come, another Soup, and then do what you will.


Fill Wine there! -- Gentlemen, (as I was saying) I got this Song made
purposely, 'tis in praise of Marriage, and there was not one ready made of 'em
in Town; I searched it all over.


Were you at the Poets Lodging?


Yes, but they had none; for they told me 'twas a Song would not take: besides,
they were so busy getting Plays up for the next Term, that I could hardly get
one made.


Sir, you needed not have troubled 'em; you once had a very good Vein that way
your self. --


Yes, I was mightily given to rapture and flame once: I writ Tom Farthing: -- I
had a hand too in Colly my Cow, a Song that took well I can assure you: but
this is of another kind in praise of marriage, Sir; and they told me the Town
loved nothing but Satyrs against Marriage, and the reason was because they were
afraid of being Cuckolded: -- When, alas, poor silly Rogues, there's no such
thing in Nature.


Well, of all stupid Animals a drowsy Husband is the most notorious: -- -- but
I shall change your note presently I doubt not, Sir. -- --


You shall hear, Gentlemen: Hey, the Song there and the Dance?


UNder the Branches of a spreading Tree,
Silvander sate, from care and danger free,
And his inconstant roving humour shows
To his dear Nymph, that sung of Marriage-Vows:
But she with flowing Graces charming Air,
Cried, Fie, fie, my Dear, give over,
Ah, tempt the gods no more!
But thy offence with penitence repair:
For though Vice in a Beauty seem sweet in thy Arms,
An Innocent Virtue has always more Charms.
Ah Phillida! the angry Swain replied,
Is not a Mistress better than a Bride?
What Man that Universal Yoke retains,
But meets an hour to sigh and curse his chains?
She smiling cried, Change, change that impious Mind;
Without it we could prove not half the Joys of Love.
'Tis Marriage makes the feeling Joys Divine:
For all our Life long we from scandal remove,
And at last fall the Trophies of Honour and Love.
Well sung in faith: Look'ee, Gentlemen, is it not as I told you?


In verity very well, very well, Sir.


Come, now the Dance. --


Sir, here's a Letter for you; it was left by a Porter, who said it required no
answer, and is gone.


So, now for a change of Countenance. -- I think this will do.


If not, I've writ a Letter that will: but let's observe. --


What the Devil has this Fellow given me here? A Letter? Pray Heaven it be no
challenge. -- How? -- What's here?

Sir, That you are blind, I have heard; that you are a Fool, I know; and that
you are a Cuckold, I believe. -- However, as a Friend, though unknown, I am bound
in Conscience to give you this Information; Your Wife is false; You are abused;
The Author of your wrong you know as well as your self, if you know your self
as well as you know Rashley.

Oh Heaven! was ever such fate? -- But hush, I'll smother my resentment till
they are gone. -- Come, Sir Roger and Gentlemen, there's a Tongue in the next
Room, pray go and eat; -- I'll be with you presently. --


So, I see by this behaviour it takes, and I'll away, lest he should suspect
me. -- Now for my the other plot.


O Sister, here's a new discovery; the Devil is come abroad again.


How? the Devil?


Ay, in the likeness of a Letter: Here, prithee read it; 'tis his Character; I
am sure it looks as if 'twere writ with a Cloven Hoof. -- Hah! -- what think
thou?


Sir, he calls you Fool here.


Ay, he's a little uncivil, that's the truth on it: but what's to be done,
Sister?


A Cuckold too.


Ay; -- was ever such an impudence?


I never heard of any: but 'tis no more, Sir, than I expected: Alas! 'tis
nothing to be a Cuckold now.


Oh unfortunate estate of Marriage! by the Lord Harry, if this be true, I have
praised it to fine purpose. But, Sister, thou were wont to be kind; prithee
advise me.


'Tis to no purpose, Sir, you know I am envious, my words have double meaning:
I did my Sister wrong in my last Story, pray let me offend no more.


Well, I confess I was to blame; but who the Devil could have mistrusted her
when the plot was carried so handsomely?


Oh you will find, Sir, she has still more plots, and I find you so credulous
and so wedded to your infamy, that for my part I am afraid to have any thing to
do with it.


Help me but this once, and if I fail thee again, may I be proved a Cuckold to
the whole County, and my Case tried in Westminster-Hall.


Well! once more then I'll assist you, and to confirm what that Letter has
informed, -- know, Sir, she is false; and though she frustrated our last plot by
her Waiting-Womans means, she certainly met Rashley that night. -- I am glad
you credit a Strangers Letter; for my part I love her so well, I should have
hardly caused a second breach between ye else: but since 'tis out, and you
desire my assistance, follow me, and ere night I doubt not but to give you
sufficient proof of your misfortune


With all my heart, dear Sister. -- 'Sbud, a Cuckold? -- 'Tis impossible, I have
no Cuckolds face; -- but I'll be resolved immediately. --


Do this, thou shalt command me.


In truth, Sir, I am afraid 'twill be discovered, and I would not have my Lady
know it for the World.


I swear she never shall. What, dost thou doubt me? Besides, I'll be so
grateful to thee, thou shalt never have cause to repent this Courtesy. --


Sir, you know you always might command me in any reasonable thing: pray speak
it again, Sir, what would you have me do?


Why only plant me in or near her Chamber for a design I have, she shall be
ignorant why, -- or by what means I got thither; I'll still be careful of thy
reputation: Come, take this Purse, and prithee do it willingly.


Well, Sir, what you mean I know not; but Heaven direct all for the best: I can
deny you nothing, Sir; I lie in a Closet that joins to her Chamber, where you
may both over-hear and speak to her. --


That above all things! prithee let's go.


But for Heavens sake take care she knows not that I brought ye thither; I
would not be seen in such a business for the World. --


Never doubt, I warrant thee I'll be careful.


Follow me then, Sir. --


SPat. Sirrah!


Here, Sir, here.


Whither is this Rascal gone? Well, ifack, I am too full of clemency; I must
swinge this Rogue, or he'll never be good for any thing; he's at Nine-holes
now, I'll lay my life: A damned Villain, that spends me Three-pence a day I
know not how.


O Lord, who I, Sir?


Who's within there? what, will no body hear me? Am I left desolate? I have not
the plague I think. -- Ha!


Why, here am I, Sir; I have been here all this while. --


Oh Sirrah, are you come? where have you been, ha? I say, where have you been,
Rogue?


No where, Sir, not I.


Sirrah! I must be left alone! must I! and when I have a message to send, go my
self. -- Hah! -- Sirrah, Mr. Little-Pox has a Boy, that though he was stinted at
Nurse, and is not above pockethigh, can run, and frisk, and jump upon occasion,
Sirrah, know a Bailey by his Nose, and a Wench by her Buttocks, ye Rogue, and a
good Linguist, and a pretty Pimp, Sirrah, and can hold the Door with a steady
hand, ye Rogue: but thou, a Rascal, a Drone, art good for nothing.


Any thing, Sir, I warrant you: try me, and you shall find I can hold a Door as
well as he.


Why, how now, Sirrah? what, make mouths at me? is your Master grown your
mirth? Ha, this will teach you better; this will new-mold you; I'll fetch you
out of your damned looks ifack: French Grimaces, Rogue, French Grimaces?


O Lord, what shall I do? Because he's deaf, and cannot hear me, he thinks I
mock him. -- Hold, Sir, -- for Heavens sake; upon my Faith I don't mock you;

'Tis all a mistake; and, Sir, you have beaten me for nothing.


What a noise the Rogue makes! Why, Sirrah, cannot you speak temperately, but
you must roar thus? I am not so deaf, but I can hear without this Thunder-clap.
But you do it in contempt, do you, Sirrah? Bless us, to what an impudence this
Age is grown! But I'll fetch the Devil out, lest he should grow in ye, -- thus.
--

I should be loath to see thee hanged till you come to years of discretion.


Mercy o'me, what a Master have I? If I stay long here I shall be beaten into
Mummy.


Come, Sir, now I have performed the part of a Master and a Friend in your
Castigation, I have now a word or two by way of Instruction. Mark me, Sirrah,
-- nothing exasperates more than scorn, nor nothing pleases more than
observance; a Master should be strict in finding occasion to beat his Servant,
and a Servant should be careful in avoiding the beatings of his Master.


So, he has taught me, now I shall be careful of avoiding it hereafter if my
legs will carry me.


What, mouths again, Sirrah, mouths again?


Umph. --


Oh this submission pacifies: Come hither, I have a message for ye, and let me
see how you can behave your self; 'tis a matter of moment.


I'll do my best to please ye, Sir.


What dost thou say now? -- Look, look! -- was ever such a Rascal as this? This
Rogue knows well enough that I cannot hear him. Sirrah, come and lay your mouth
to my ear, and then speak, if you would have me understand ye.


Yes, Sir, I shall be very careful to remember it hereafter.


Rafters? -- what Rafters, Rogue?


Sir, I shall be careful to remember it hereafter. --


O shall you so, Sir? and 'twill become you ifack: for look'ee, Sirrah, 'tis my
humour as long as I am healthy and jovial, to cover failings and imperfections
in Nature as well as I can; 'tis a Wise-mans virtue, and I have paterns for it
every day. Ah! here are a sort of jolly, brisk, ingenious, old Signiors about
Town, that with false Calves, false Bellies, false Teeth, false Noses, and a
false fleering Face, upon the matter fill up Society as well as ere a
Masquerading Fop of 'em all. -- But to the matter: Sirrah, you must carry this
Ring to Cordelia, and possess her with my love in an elegant manner: Stand
there, and let me see how you can carry your self in such a business.


Thus, Sir: I had my Honours from the Dancing-School. --


O damned Rogue! what a Bow's there? 'tis worse than a Country Counsellors to a
Client that has no money. Sirrah, -- pull me your Hat off thus, -- with a
Grace: -- Ah! I could have done it rarely twenty years ago; -- but ifack Time
and Gravity defaces all things. -- Come, Sirrah. --


Madam! my Master too well knowing the Charms of your Wit and Beauty are too
sharp at all times to be opposed, has by me sent this Ring, and humbly desires
--


Well, that last Honour was pretty well: -- but come now, let's hear what you
can say?


'Sdeath! he has not heard me all this while; -- what shall I do?

Oh some-body knocks; this was happy: Sir, there's some-body at door to speak
with you. --


Go see who 'tis, I'll follow. -- This is a plaguy dull Rogue, but I must have
patience, and take pains with him. -- Nor should he do any thing in this
business had I not a design in it; and ifack I like the Woman well; -- she's
young, and plump, free in her Nature, and of a Sanguine Complexion, and bona
fide, I never see her but some secret motions in my blood seem to imply that
she is the cause. -- What? I am not Bedrid; -- I can dance yet, ay, and run and
jump too if occasion be, and why not the the other thing? -- Come, come, -- it
must, it must; -- mine was ever a stirring Family: -- it must, I say, and she
shall know it suddenly. --


COme softly, Sir, and plant your self here at this back-door, I have already
made a discovery.


Are they together?


I believe so; they seldom miss such an opportunity, especially when they think
you absent.


No; they are politic with a Pox to 'em: Sister, what revenge, ha? I am
resolved to be a Tyrant: 'Sbud I'll pinch her to death with a pair of Tongs.


O fie, that will be too cruel. --


Cruel! by the Lord Harry 'tis Justice, -- palpable Justice! Why, should she
live, she'd Cuckold the whole Nation.


Consider better on it, 'tis but a venial Crime, and deserves not such rigour.
-- But come, -- meditate of no revenge till you are certain of the fault: --
keep close at that door, be sure you discover not your self till I come to you;
I'll go and observe.


I'll try my patience; -- but 'tis a damned Cause. --


Our Intrigue as yet goes well.


I swear to admiration; and had I not seen each passage, I should have thought
't had been impossible. Oh my Dearest! how shall I gratify thee? My love's too
poor, and my desert too mean ever to equal it. --


I am glad I've got air again; this damned old Gib-Cat has mewed me this half
hour into such a hole, that had I staid a minute longer I had certainly been
smothered: it stinks worse than a Apothecaries Shop, and is furnished with
nothing but Gally-pots full of nasty Oil, into which groping about I often
thrust my Fingers: -- Fough! -- Assafoetida, as I live! -- a most intolerable
stink! -- -- Ah! the Devil grind her old Chops. -- Stay; -- this is sure
Emilia's Chamber, and if I am not mistaken, I heard a whispering here; -- it
may be they're together; -- I'll be still and listen.


Our love shall last whole Ages, and each Kiss add new and fierce desires:
Death shall want power to separate us, and Envy droop and pine it self away to
see its ^agem succeed no better.


By Heaven 'tis so; -- They are here: -- Blessed minute! now I shall make a rare
discovery.


I am confirmed, and will proceed in loving. A Husband is a dull insipid thing,
palled and grown stale within a week: But a Lover appears still new and gay,
and is to perpetuity the same he was at first, -- all mirth, -- all pleasure.


A most excellent Theme: -- Oh that that Property, that Fool her Husband, stood
now to hear this Devil of a Wife make out this free Confession! --


He, dull Creature, Heaven knows, is blind to all your Charms. Marriage acts
only the Decrees of Duty, Love has the least share in 't. In this Age a Husband
with a Wife is like a Bully in a Church; -- the only pleasure he takes is to
sleep away the hours should be employed in Conjugal Duty.


Well! I am very glad our plots succeed so well: I swear I was half frighted
the other day when my Sister-in-Law Maria discovered us. Was it not done subt'ly?
Did I not fetch all off again with an excellent Invention?


Good! rarely good! This Devil cannot sure have so much impudence to deny this
again.


Ha, ha, ha! By Heaven I'm ready to die with laughing when I think what Asses
we made of 'em. -- Ranger too, that busy Coxcomb, -- what a fretting, and
plotting, and sweating did he make for nothing! -- Alas, poor Fool! -- Ha, ha,
ha!


Ha, ha, ha!


O the Devil fleer you. -- 'Sdeath, am I still their Property? I shall have a
slice at your Nose ere long: I doubt not, my young Gallant, -- I shall dash
your Mummery. --


Come, we lose time: -- Let talk be our diversion when we are old and can reap
nothing else; our minutes now should all be spent in rapture. -- -- Thus, thus,
my Sweet! -- Oh that we could live thus ever! -- How now, what noise is that?


Bawds! Strumpets! Whores! Witches! Break open the door there, break open the
door. --


Fetch a Leaver, or call the Smith over the way presently.


Oh Heaven, my Husband and Maria! we are undone.


Tis Bubble's voice sure! this completes my joy. Now let Beelzebub, if he owes
her any kindness, fetch her from hence, I'll guard this passage.


What! what shall I do, Madam?


Here quickly, run into this Closet, Sir, and jump out of the Window into the
Garden; if you were gone, let me alone for the rest.


Who steps a foot this way, steps on his death; his Soul shall not be his a
minute.


Ha! Ranger here? I am lost in my amazement.


Death! and Hell and I defenceless too! O cursed Minute!


No, Madam, I'll secure you from this stratagem: This Window shall be no Bawd
to the Intrigue now, that I'll be sure on. --


Quickly, quickly! a Leaver, a Leaver!


No way to escape? Can I not climb the Chimney? Any thing to get free this
once. -- Oh fate, taken in the midst of our security, when we least thought of
it! what shall we do?


I have it: Come hither, get ye under this Table, and diligently listen to what
I say: 'Tis ten to one he never searches here. Come, in, in, quickly, and pray
the rest may prosper.


I never had more need of prayers: -- I'll try. --


So! that conveyance is fast enough. Now, Madam, what think'ee of a fleering
Jest upon the Fool Ranger, the Coxcomb, the Ass Ranger, and your jolly spleen
to laugh, Ha, ha? I think the Dice are mine now: Now, Devil, I have trapt ye.
--


This Key may add to my design. --


Down, down with it, break it open there.


What think you of that, Madam? Does your Husbands voice refresh you extremely?
--


Now help me, Wit, or I am lost.

Help, help there, for Heavens sake, I am undone, ruined for ever: A Rape, a
Rape! -- Help, help! --


Hell and the Devil, what does she mean?


Ah, cruel Man, cannot these Tears prevail? will nothing stop Barbarity? what
have I done that could deserve this usage? O most unfortunate of Women.


Dam her, I shall be finely caught if this hold; I must get away. --


A Rape, a Rape! Help there, for Heavens sake, help. --


By Heaven, I am snapped again, caught in my own snare.


Has my Husband been so much thy Friend, and would abuse him thus, (thou base
man?) but Heaven forgive thee.


'Sbud, what's this I see? Ranger?


Ranger here, and Rashley absent: I have plotted finely. 'Tis plain now that
Traitor loves her, and has only made me an Engine to work his design with more
facility.


Rashly gone too? Now has the Devil to spite me conveyed him away in a Mist:
Here's like to be fine work towards; but I must stand the brunt now I am
entered. --


Now, Sir, what a Pox make you here with my Wife? Hah? --


So, it begins rarely! O this subtle Devil! Why, Sir, as I am a Gentleman, and
upon my Honour.


O my Dear, a thousand thanks for this deliverance; and by all our love I
charge thee, by our Marriage-Vows, by all our Pleasures since, and Joys to
come, I charge you revenge me upon that Traitor there: -- He would have Ravished
me! -- Oh Heaven, that ever I should live to be so put to it! --


'Sbud! Ravish my Chicken? Ranger, you are the Son of a Whore, and I shall
presume to cut your Throat.


Sir, do but hear me, upon my Honour all this is false. --


It must be true! what should he come hither for, but upon some ill intent? I
am resolved I'll be revenged on him however. --


'Sdeath! she against me too? this is worse and worse.


Discover the matter, that I may do Justice on both sides.


Sir, know then, -- Ranger long has loved me; often solicited me unlawfully:
-- but finding something in my Virtue that shook his designs, his recourse was
to make you jealous of me and Rashley; - who, poor man, has often told me with
sighs how deeply he has resented your unkind suspicions. --


Alas, poor Fellow!


O confusion! he begins to believe her again. --


At last, Sir, finding his suit to be too troublesome for me to bear, and being
loath to vex you with such fooleries, -- I told Rashley, who promised all
assistance imaginable: -- I desired him also to be careful, and watch lest I
should be surprised; as to night (Heaven knows) I was.


Dam her, what a Lye is this! Pray, Sir, let me speak.


Not in my House, Sir, you have talked too much already; and by the Lord Harry
I'll talk with you anon: but let that pass, go on, Chicken. --


At last, Sir, this unhappy night coming hither as I used to do to my
Devotions, -- He it seems having corrupted some of my Servants, got into the
Closet, and thence came and surprised me; -- first locking the door, and
putting the Key into his Pocket.


I a Key? Sir, as I live I saw none: This is the most notorious Lye --


Oh wretched man! was it not Crime enough to make such an attempt, but you must
persist in falsehood? Sir, he has it now about him there in that Pocket, I saw
him put it in.


This Pocket? -- Why, thou Devil! hah! --

'Sdeath, how came it here? Magic, Witchcraft, -- the Devil and all, --
combine against me! would I were well out, -- if ever I plot again, --


'Tis evident now he would have Ravished her! Locked her in for the purpose. --
Perfidious Traitor, see me no more.


A very fine business this!


Is it so, Sir? I'll do your business for you. --


Discovered? I am lost again.


'Sbud, Rashley!


'Sdeath and Hell, what will become of me now?


How! Rashley under the Table? Then Fate is mine again. Now, Sir, do you
perceive any thing yet.


Stranger and stranger! what can this mean? or what could they both do here?


'Sdeath! how came he here? -- Ho! --


Ay, -- examine that point closely; sure this will make for me.


As Gad jidge me, and so I will: speak, I say, how came he here?


Nay, Heaven knows, not I; I believe for the same design with Ranger.


'Sdeath, she'll betray me too.


Tell him, tell him, Sir: -- speak for your self; -- say any thing.


Speak? why, -- 'Sbud, Madam, have I not done as you commanded me? Have I not
watched here this two hours to frustrate Ranger's design? What, do ye think to
make an Ass of me?


How, Sir, -- my design? Dam me this must not pass upon me, Sir.


Nor you shall not pass upon my Friend here neither, Sir; I heard you this
evening when you corrupted one of the Women to get you into that Closet, that
you might accomplish with more ease, Sir. But, Madam, this is a little
unnatural, to make me suspected as his Colleague, when my design was so far
different.


'Sbud I cannot find the meaning of this.


The meaning! Why, Sir, -- she hid me under the Table as a defence against
Ranger's insolence: but when she heard you at the door, and knew you were
coming in, she conjured me by all the love I bore her to sit still, and not
discover my self; -- and all her excuse was your jealousy; (Jealousy with a
Pox!) a very fine slight for the abuse she intended to me: -- 'Sdeath, Madam,
my service deserved a better reward if you consider it. -- (Pray Heaven this
Lye prosper.)


Ha, ha, ha! -- I knew I should vex him; but I confess 'tis all true: -- For
(my poor dear Rogue!) I am so hourly tormented with fear of thy naughty
jealousy, that I dare not tell thee any thing. -- Prithee desert it, do, my
dear Sweet; -- Ifads thou would be the best Husband in the World if thou
would but leave it. --


Well! it must be so; this cannot be feigned: -- Come hither to me, -- I will
forsake it: -- By the Lord Harry thou art the best Wife in Christendom, -- and
I the most ungrateful Husband; but forgive, my Dear, forgive. --

We have all failings thou know, prithee forgive me.


So! now may I hang my self. 'Sdeath! all the Fiends are Asses to her. -- I'll
begone for shame, lest worse befall me:

-- -- Succubus, Farewell; --
There is not such a Sorceress in Hell. --

Come! hast thou sealed my pardon?


You know the softness of my temper; but your unkind jealousy will kill me one
day. --


Igad I'll kill my self first. Come, prithee no more. Tom, thy hand too; --
come, I know thou can bear with my frailty. --


I Sir, I can bear well enough! but me thought 'twas a little strange to tax
me.


Come, come, all shall be well; -- Faith, we'll go in and frolic. Oh my Dear,
suspect thee; -- Well, I am a Fool, that's the truth on it. --


The Devil helps her sure; for this was certainly an Assignation: I'll after
Ranger and know the truth on it.


Ha, ha, ha! -- Was ever plot carried thus? Sure never! Her Wit has more
supplies than I have thoughts, and happily they end still; and Gad for my own
part I shall love lying the better as long as I live for the success of this --
Once more all is well, and he the Cuckold still, Ha, ha, ha! I must go in and
laugh with her.

Intrigue's her Masterpiece; and all may see,
A Woman's Wit's best in extremity. --

well, of all Creatures that vex Mortality, a superannuated Lover is certainly
the most troublesome, especially to one of my years: our inequality is so
preposterous, and his address so unnatural, that I always entertain rather hate
for his person, than compliance for his love: From Fourscore and five, Heaven
deliver me; 'tis an Age of doting. -- Here he comes, I knew I could not be
quiet one hour.


Sirrah, Sirrah! Rogue, Rogue! and how and how! Hah! art thou jolly, blithe,
like a Bird in a Tree? Ifack I was impatient till I came to see thee: well, and
how sits the Ring? does it shine? does it glitter? Hah, little black Rogue! --
Ifack I bought it of the best Goldsmith in Cheapside, a Man of good Reputation;
A Cuckold too, and they are always the honestest Fellows. --


From henceforth let me desire you, Sir, to bestow your presents on some body
else: -- I sent your Ring back by your Man, he can best give you an account of
it. --


Hah! -- what say thou? Counterfeit? Ifack thou art mistaken, Bird; -- thou
art, bona fide, they are as well cut as any in Christendom, and of the right
Black-water: What, dost thou think I'll put any false Stones upon thee ifack?
-- I am more civil, Ieod, there I was waggish; -- But she's a witty Rogue,
she'll apprehend the jest.


Was ever such an insipid piece of Antiquity? Pray, Sir, forbear these
impertinences, and assure your self I hate an old Fellow for a Husband, as much
as an old Gown, or an old piece of Wit, that after forty years Oblivion, with a
new name, is published for a new Lenten Play. --


What does she say now? But no matter, I'll go on. Well said, Bird, well said:
Bona fide, thou hast Wit in abundance; that Colour, and such a sort of Nose,
never fail. But come, we lose time, I know 'tis ordained I must marry thee: I
am the Man that must gather the Rosebuds. -- Ah Rogue! -- I'll warrant you're
a swinger, and Ifack that black a top there fires me strangely, I am all flame,
and bona fide, me thinks as youthful and Mercurial as any Spark of 'em all. ANd
he took her by the middle small,
And laid her on the Plain;
With a hey down derry down, come diddle,
With a ho down derry, c.


What think you, Madam? am I old?


So old, that your presence is more terrible than a Deaths-Head at Supper: for
my part I tremble all over. There's a kind of horror in all your antic
gestures; 'specially those that you think become you, -- that fright worse than
the Devil; than the Devil, Sir. --


The Devil! what of him, Bird? Pish, the Devil's an Ass, I have seen't in a
Play; -- and ifack we lose time in talking about so worthless a matter. Lovers
should never be slow in their affairs: -- For, as my good Friend Randolph tells
me, Nothing is like opportunity taken in the nick; in the nick, Sweet-heart! --
Icod, I was waggish again, I was waggish again ifack. -- Come, Bird, come.


What will you do, Sir? Heaven, how he tortures me!


Come along then; -- I have got a Priest ready, and paid for the Licence and
all: -- Prithee let me kiss thee; I long to practise something that might
please thee: Never was man so altered! never! Come, prithee Bird, -- come,
ifack I have not patience.


Here's Sir Roger Petulant! my dear Mouse desires to speak a word or two with
you.


Oh here's some hope of deliverance! Sir Roger, your humble Servant. Come
hither, Lattice, and stand just in my place: I am so tortured with this old
Fellow, -- prithee be kind to him, and follow him whither he'd have thee; it
may be a Husband in thy way, and a good Estate.


A Husband! marry that's fine! I warrant you, sweet Mouse, I*ll be very
punctual.


So, now let us slip aside and observe; 'twould be an excellent revenge if he
should marry her. -- He's coming to her already, and his eyes are so old and
dim that he perceives not his mistake.


Delays, Sweet-heart, are dangerous ifack; I have considered it: The time I
have lived in the World has given me the benefit of knowing more than another
of fewer minutes. -- Along, along, -- I say, thou shalt be my Queen, my
Paramour, my Cleopatra, -- and I will live another Age in Love, and then
farewell old Simon ifack. Come, come along.


Oh sadness! what happy fortune's this? Well, I'll go with him, pray Heaven he
be blind enough, that's all I fear.


She seems kinder than usual; -- ifack I have wrought her finely. Come, poor
Rogue, come. --


I am ready, Sir; -- this was a happy hour;
And if it hit but right, I'm made for ever. --

Ha, ha, I am glad I am rid of him any way: but now, Sir Roger, to your
business. -- I hear your Nephew is sick.


In verity, Madam, most dangerously sick, and the cause of my giving you this
trouble was in verity to give you information of it; for by his melancholy I
find love is the cause. Ah, Madam, your last indifference was very prejudicial
to him: 'Tis true, he denies it; -- but I am old enough to judge of the
contrary, and therefore have found out 'tis Passion, nay Passion for you has
laid him thus low, and nothing but your smiles can raise him, 'tis gone so far
in verity. --


I am sorry, Sir, I have the misfortune to be the occasion of such a disaster:
-- but is there any remedy? what would you have me do?


Madam, my suit to you is, that you would be pleased to go with me and give him
a visit; the surprise of your presence I am confident will dissipate his
melancholy, and perhaps totally banish his distemper.

But I see we are interrupted; let's retire, Madam, and if you please now will
be a very good time to visit him.


Softly, Sir, I would not have my Cozen Maria know any thing of it; but if that
can do him any good, I'll not be so cruel to deny it, -- 'tis an act of
charity. -- Come, Sir, I'll go with you.


Madam, you oblige us both --


Still baffled! sure this cannot last long; the Devil will be weary of obliging
her in a little time. I have been yonder sifting Ranger about the last plot,
and by all circumstances find what he said was true, and shall I leave off thus
poorly? Pish, I cannot for shame: -- I have Truth and Honesty on my side; --
she's only cunning, and 'tis impossible that should last ever. -- Once more
then have at 'em: -- I have by several false messages buz'd it again into my
Brothers ears; he believes, and will once more follow my counsel: besides, I
have here a false Key to her Chamber, and can surprise 'em when they least
suspect: this, if Ranger be at all diligent, must needs effect it; -- for I am
resolved not to rest till 'tis done, for the satisfaction of my revenge on that
false man. --


Uh! Uh!


Nay, Sir, if you would have the effects answer your expectation, you must
suffer, Sir, and be patient.


'Ounds! I cannot have patience: -- Sure a civil Clap might be cured without
all this stir. 'Tis not a Miracle in this age. -- Oh Lord!


O horrible! what's this I see?


My Uncle! Oh I am undone, lost for ever.


But, Sir, your civil Clap might have been an uncivil Pox in time.


How, Sir Roger? was it fit to make me Spectator of this object?


The Pox? In verity I have brought his Mistress to fine purpose: Ah damned
Rascal! The Pox? what shall I do? I am disgraced for ever. --


Hark ye, Sir, pray what is that there?


What shall I say? (Death, she has found out his Sweating-Chair!) Why, Madam,
'tis -- umph -- 'tis a Mathematical Engine they use at Cambridge. -- Cob was
always addicted to study.


'Twere a fault to hinder him then, Sir, being so well employed. -- Farewell. --



She has found it out. -- Sirrah, see my face no more: from this hour I abhor
thee, a damned Rascal!


Good Uncle! --


The Pox! A sneaking, snivelling Rogue! Heavens, was ever the like seen? -- But
'tis now a general Maxim, and your Sandy, Sheeps-face, unthinking Villain, is
always the greatest Whoremaster.


Why, by Ierico, it was by chance, Uncle; Hab-nab as a man may say: As I hope
to be saved 'twas against my will.


Sir, your anger makes an addition to his distemper.


What, you are his Pandar, Sir, are you? but I think you may be the Devil for
your honesty; -- so may ye all; -- such as you sooth 'em in Vices; -- I warrant
you are tired with such Customers, -- Ha, Sir, -- are you not?


In troth, Sir, my rotten Patients are so loath to die, and my sound ones,
which for my Arts improvement I would make rotten, -- so hasty to recover, that
I confess I am often weary, but not tired, Sir.


So, Sir, in verity you are all a company of Rascals; -- and as for his part,
I'll instantly write to his Father to disinherit him, that I may revenge my
disgrace, and punish his folly. -- The Pox! a Son of a Whore! the Pox!


A mad old Fellow, but your penitence will recover all.


Would you were hanged, by Ierico, for leaving the door open. -- Oh what shall
I do? This comes of learning the Sciences in the Devils name. --


Patience, Sir, have patience. --


A Trap-door, say you, Madam?


Yes, we happily discovered it yesterday looking for a Ring accidentally dropped;
-- it opens upon the Stairs the backside of the Kitchen; -- I am sure 'twill be
very necessary in our Intrigue: -- Here, take the Candle you, and go and watch;
-- and when I give the sign, be sure be ready.


I'll not fail, Madam.


'Tis good to be secure, for I know Maria has still an eye over us, and my
Husbands new jealousy gives me fresh cause of doubt. --


Igad, 'tis unnecessary: -- This Trap-door must needs be very useful; -- I see
Fortune is ours still, and will not leave us. -- Let us doubt when we see
danger; there is none now, nor can be whilst our love continues. --


Which I fear will be but a short time: for what is indirect is seldom
permanent; therefore let us consider on it.


Dam Consideration; 'Tis a worse Enemy to Mankind than Malice: Let impotent Age
consider, that is fit for nothing but dull tame thoughts of what he has been
formerly: Let the Lawyer and Physician consider, what Quibbles, and what
Potions are most necessary: And let the fly Phanatick think his time out, and
consider how to be securely factious: But let the Lover love on, still
transported, whilst all his thoughts and senses are employed in the dear Joys
of rapture, endless passion, without a grain of dull Consideration.


I swear the softness of our Tempers abuses half our Sex, we should not else be
won so easily: -- But we are such kind Fools!


Ay, we are all Fools, Madam, that's the truth on it; but how shall we help it?


Resolve upon a remedy; -- Love no more. --


Resolve upon the contrary; Love for ever: Gad the World would be at a fine
pass if all were of your mind. How now?


Stand there till I fetch you in; I'm sure they're here.


My Sister as I live! Malicious accident!


Hah, -- with a Light too! How the Devil got she in?


Heaven knows, unless with a false Key.


Nay, You're caught, and finely too, I'm cozened else. What plot now, Madam, to
convey you hence? -- Now show your mighty skill; and if there is a Devil at
your service employ him now, you never had more cause. -- Me thinks you are
melancholy, why do ye not laugh? smile at your Wit and great security? You, I
know, have a thousand ways to get off still; or if you want, that Gentleman can
supply you.


I supply! A plague of your damned jest!


Hush, -- and leave me to her. -- Nay, Sister, this is barb'rous to triumph
over our misfortunes; You know your self what Love is, and what inconveniences
it brings poor Women too.


You can confess now; -- and here's a Gentleman not far off, -- your Husband,
Madam; I know this cannot choose but be grateful to him, I'll call him to hear
it.


Ah, be not so cruel to undo me quite! -- I'll confess all to thee, and from
this minute be converted. -- Ah, had I taken thy counsel before I had been
happy.


Ay; -- but you would persist, and now see what comes on it.


Oh! I am miserable! Forgive me, dear Maria!


Nay, Heaven forgive you: -- but come, will you confess? I have her at a rare
advantage. --


Most faithfully; -- but let me do it in the dark; -- let no light see my guilty
blushes; -- it is enough my tongue dares utter it: -- Dear Sister, let me not
be too much ashamed: -- Oh misery! misery! --


Well, here is a Light not far off, and thus much I'll comply with you. -- Now
begin. --


By Heaven I grow cheerful; -- we shall escape, I am sure, we shall. -- Oh this
dear Devil! --


My grief ties up my tongue. --


'Tis time to grieve: But come, when do ye begin?


This cruel man seduced me: Cruel Rashley. -- Where are you, Sir?


Here, Sweet, here! --


First won upon me with his comely presence, hansom demeanour: -- every several
Grace my Soul admired -- Give me your hand. --

But when he came to speak, his Tongue, his Charming Tongue, Oh Heaven, that I
shall live to utter it! so ensnared me, that I no longer knew my liberty, --
but as his Victim gloried in my passion. --


With shame you live to speak it.


'Twas my misfortune too: -- but Heaven forgive me, I shall laugh out, -- I am
not able to hold. --


Down, quickly down. --


Now could I laugh till my heart ached again to think how I have caught 'em. -- I
knew 'twas impossible she should escape always, -- and I will tyrannize more
than a Turk over his Slave: -- For my part I am sorry for your infamy, and were
it not that by the Laws of Nature I have a great concern in any of my Brothers
injuries, you might love on for me; but since my Blood runs in his Veins, I
dare not see his infamy and let it pass unquestioned: Therefore either swear
from this hour to desert Rashley, and never see him more; or your disgrace I
will this instant publish, or call your Husband to be Spectator of his shame
and yours. -- What, are ye dumb? Not answer me! It seems you dislike this
Proposal; but do not provoke me. -- Not yet? Nay then -- within there? --
Brother, -- here they are, a light, a light, -- quickly.


Where? where is this Traitor? this Strumpet? by Scanderbeg, -- I am ready for
a Charge: I'll push him with a Vengeance; -- Where is he?


Here, here! How now? What, are you got under the Table again? or into a corner?
-- Give me the Candle, Brother, -- I am sure have em fast. --


Here's nothing; another mistake, as Gad jidge me.


She is a Devil, and I lose my labour. Gone! what both gone? Oh I could tear my
self: Which way? -- How! by what means could they escape?


Escape? -- 'Sbud! 'tis impossible they should escape if they were here. --
Pish, -- this is only one of your Maggots, Sister, you do but fancy you saw
'em. --


Fancy? -- Eternal Light forsake me, if I did not both see and speak to 'em two
minutes since; heard her confess the Crime, and vow repentance; here, in this
very place: but by what means they 'scapt, I only can admire, not imagine. --


Prithee hold thy peace; I say once more 'tis only a Maggot: -- Sleep, Fool,
and purge thy head from fancies. How now, Ned?


Sir, I know not whether the News I bring may please you; but I have made a
strange discovery yonder.


Discovery! of what prithee? --


Sir, I saw Rashley and your Wife -- going laughing Arm in Arm through the
Entry -- the Backside of the Kitchen into the Parlour, -- where, if you please
to give your self the trouble, you may find 'em. --


This is as my Mistress suspected, and I'll inform her immediately.


Hey day! My Wife and Rashley? Art sure on it, Ned?


As sure, Sir, as I live, I saw 'em there: -- nay, what's more, my curiosity
inducing me to peep through the Key-hole, I saw his Head lie in her Lap, --
whilst she with a fond passion stroked his Cheeks, and dalli'd with his Hair:
Faith, Sir, I could not see this and be silent; but you I fear will think the
worse of me for it. --


In the Parlour, say thou? 'Sbud, was ever such a confusion? Why, my Sister
says that within these two minutes she saw and spoke to 'em here in this
Chamber. They are here, and there, and every where, and yet I can find 'em no
where; what a Pox should a man think of this?


They are there this instant, Sir, upon my Honour.


Sure, I have not dreamt all this while! Did I not see here ^ by Heaven I saw
the Devil in her likeness then.


Why, peace, I say, -- if you are mad, offend no one but your self with it. --
What a Pox shall I not believe my eyes? The House is not haunted that I know
of, unless it be with Fools: -- There's a Bob for you by way of Conclusion.


Yes, Cuckolds too! There's a Bob for you by way of Repartee.


Cuckold? -- I'd have you to know I scorn your words; -- and were you not my
Sister, I'd fetch you out with your Repartees. What, because you are a Fool,
you guess all persons are alike? -- Do you but conceive me, Mrs. Juniper? I am
a Turk at matter of fact when I see occasion. --


Good Sir, -- no more of this, -- but go down and satisfy your self in the
truth of my Story: -- if I tell you a Lye, call me Fool, -- Horse, -- any
thing, -- do but go and see.


'Sbud, I know not what to do: One brings me up, another carries me down; one
jilts me, another abuses me; a third laughs at me; -- and yet I find nothing,
nor see nothing, -- nor know nothing, -- and you are nothing but Fools to make
all this stir about nothing. But come, I'll go with thee, Ned.


And I, that I may say once in my life I saw a Miracle.


I have her once more in the Noose of the slip; now the Devil hold her fast in
the other World: -- 'Tis above mortal power! Come, Sir. --


HEre, here, quickly take my Night-Gown, and put it on, you are sure they are
coming.


Very sure, Madam; -- I stood at the door and heard all.


What must I do, Sweet? -- Prithee do not let us be surprised again.


Uncase, uncase, Sir; -- and let your Man represent you as Betty does me:
Ieremy, be sure you play your part well, and Court her to the life. --


Do ye hear, Sirrah!


I'll warrant you, Sir. Come, Mrs. Betty.


Stay, a word more in thy ear: -- I see this Fellow is but a Blockhead, and
therefore am afraid of trusting him too far: -- Keep him as ignorant of our
Intrigue as thou can; and if my Husband ask where I am, tell him I am gone to
visit my Lady Courtly: -- I'll be in my Chamber; -- and when they are all gone,
bring me word what Ranger and Maria are doing.


Yes, Madam, I'll be very careful.


I will reward thy care, my pretty little --


Hark! I hear 'em coming; -- now to your postures. --


Now, Mrs. Betty, we having so fit an occasion, let us make Love in some
Heroic Vein.


No, I am for the plain-dealing way. --


Pish! t'others a great deal better, as thus:

Your Eyes with so bright Charms are decked about,
That I could kiss 'em till I kissed 'em out.

Oh I hate that; -- I vow 'tis very silly.


There, there, Sir; -- Do ye see 'em now? will you believe next time?


O dismal Object! -- I am a Cuckold then.


This is miraculous; how was it possible they could get hither? But I am glad
they are here however.


Now for a good full blow at his head before he sees me: 'tis a Cuckolds way of
revenge I'm sure; Have at him! --


Oh Lord, what mean you, Sir, what mean you?


Traitor! Rogue! Rascal! I'll -- Hah, Ieremy?


Ay, Sir, 'tis I, poor Ieremy, Sir.


And Betty in her Mistresses Night-Gown. --


Their old Friend the Devil has fetched 'em away again.


What make you here in their Night-Gowns?


Only, Sir, through an ambition to make Love as Gently as we could.


Go, go, and find your Mistress out, and tell her, Her humble Servant and
Husband desires to speak with her. -- Look ye, Ned, you are a Fool, I see.


I am so, Sir, I acknowledge it.


And you, Madam, are a little leaning that way, are ye not?


I can say nothing for my self, Sir.


Then I can say you're a Couple of Fools: Did I not tell you what all this would
come to? Ha, ha, ha! It makes me laugh to think how busy you two Asses have
been about nothing; and I am no better than a third Fool for believing you: But
from henceforth, he that speaks against my Chickens Virtue, is the Son of a
Whore; for 'Uds Bood she's the honestest Woman in Christendom, and he that
denies it, I will immediately invade him with Battle-Ax, Poinard and Pistol.


She is a very Saint, Sir.


A very Devil, Sir! O Death, is there no remedy?


I'll go instantly and reconcile my self to her, with a strict Vow never to
doubt her more. -- Oh Sir Roger! welcome.

Faith! I was wishing for some good Company to be Witness of my Reconcilement
to my dear Chicken. You are melancholy, Sir, -- I heard your Nephew was sick, I
suppose that's the cause.


If he has heard of what, I am disgraced for ever.


Come, Sir, cheer up, cheer up, he will be well again, doubt not.


I hope so, Sir. Madam, this Generous Act of concealing the infamy of our
Family, has so wrought upon me, that if I could requite --


No more, Sir: -- Your Nephews forbearance is all I desire: You are sensible
now that I have some reason to request that.


I am, Madam, and am extremely bound to your Generosity; and Gad I have another
Nephew whom I'll make better by 200 l. a year to make you amends. -- Well, Mr.
Bubble, I am glad to come at so good a time, when mirth is going forward: you
are a merry man, Sir, -- and in verity I like your company.


And I yours, Sir Roger; -- for I am very merry for some private reason best
known to my self: -- We'll toss a Bumper about by and by, Faith!


An old Cronee, a Sorceress; -- What ifack, and in the Devils Name, am I to be
popped in the mouth with Fourscore and Twelve? A Beldam, a Witch, that expects
next Winter to be turned into a Gib-Cat, -- thought fit to be yoked with me!
No, no, some wiser than some; and I'll have her know within this week that I am
as fit for Two and Twenty, as Two and Twenty is for me: -- In the mean time
avaunt Iezabel, -- I like thee not, Icod; thou hast no black of Top, ifack,
thou art not for my turn.


What, old Signior Fumble? what's the matter, Man?


Yes marry am I, Sir, and chows'd damnably too, and some shall know it when I
can find 'em.


He's groping for his Spectacles; now I expect to be rated.


Ah, -- are you there, Rogue, are you there! Why, you very Wag, would you offer
to serve me so? But hang thee, you're a Rogue, and come ifack though 'twas a
Knavish Trick, I am pleased with the Wit on it: -- Give me thy hand, and come
and kiss me, and all shall be well again. --


Upon condition you never trouble me more, -- there 'tis. --


Icod, she has a pretty Touch with her, she has ifack; I forgive thee with all
my heart. -- Well, old Woman, depart in peace; old Woman, I say, depart, and
trouble me no more: -- I am busy, and cannot dispense with the Fopperies of
Age now.


Well, this comes of eating Sweet-meets when I was young: He had never found
out the trick, if my want of Teeth had not discovered me.


Ha, ha! -- Here had like to have been fine sport in faith: -- but would I knew
where my Wife is, that we might all go and address, now I am in this good
humour.


Sir, just as I came in, I saw her go up into her Chamber.


Did thou? I am glad on it in faith: Come, let's all go.


Sir, I cannot find her; but I heard her say about an hour since, she intended
to go and visit my Lady Courtly.


No, no; -- I know where she is now: -- Poor Creature! I warrant she sits so
melancholy above now. -- Well, -- I dare proudly say I have the best Wife in
Christendom: for in faith I have been very jealous of her, but I was wrought
upon, -- when of my Conscience the innocent Wretch would not hurt a Worm: -- *
But come, we'll all go to her, and be sure, Sir Roger, you plead for me; -- in
troth my heart aches to think how I have used her.


I must prevent their going up, or we are undone.


Whither are you running? I have some business with you.


Good Madam* I'll wait on you immediately.


Ye shall not stir till I have spoke to you: -- Here must be something in this
I find by her eagerness to be gone.


Well, Mr. Bubble, -- in verity I'll do my best in your behalf; my Tongue is at
your service at any time.


Sir Roger, you will oblige me in it. -- She is the most innocent, sweetest, and
most virtuous Person in the whole World, and I shall never be able to make her
amends. -- Come, let us go.


Now will I see how she behaves her self, and wonder at the prosperous
Impudence Hell has endowed her with, though it lies not in my power to repel it.


Now I think better on it, I'll defer my business till another time: -- You may
go where you please.


This cunning Devil has undone 'em; -- nor lies it now in my power to hinder
it. -- Oh I could Curse --


THe Plague of living with such a Husband you must imagine is very disagreeable
to my Temper; -- and were it not for the happy hours I have the good fortune to
enjoy in thy society, my Life would be wholly uncomfortable: -- But, my Dear,
thou wilt forget me, one day I shall grow cheap to thee, shall I not?


No, never, -- never, my Sweet! -- Thou hast more Charms each hour added to
thee, rather than one diminished. -- Forget thee! I sooner shall forget to feed
my self, or that the Sun ere shone in midst of Summer, than thy more precious
Favours. Thou bring each hour new Sweets, and every minute a thousand
thousand Graces throng about thee, my Dear, -- Dear, Charming, Sweet, --
Precious! --


Softly, softly, Sir Roger: Poor Soul, -- I warrant she's at Prayers. -- Hah!
what's this I see? -- Gad jidge me --


By Heaven, they're here a Kissing! -- Oh happy minute!


Ah, who could have the heart to leave thy Blisses for such a Fool, such a
Beast, such a dull, sordid, filthy, insipid Creature as my Husband?


How's that? Oh Devil!


I am smothered with thy Charms; Oh for some Air! Hah! -- Oh horror, cursed
minute! taken thus?


My Husband! Nay then I am lost for ever. --


Ah cursed Creature! is this thy Virtue? -- But I'll --


Hold, Sir, in verity that must not be; No Swords against Women in my Company.


Then here let my Vengeance light. Traitor! have I obliged thee so often for
this? -- Have at thee!


Your pardon, Sir, I must hinder dishonourable proceedings; in the Field you
may do what you please.


Speak, Witch, speak! what reason had thou to use me thus? Thou Limb of the
Devil, -- speak, I say.


Use you thus? -- Why, -- Sir, your Rage makes you suggest strange thoughts
without cause. My kindness to Mr. Rashley was only because -- he promised to be
my Friend in urging my Reconcilement with you; -- and because I knew he was
your Friend, I therefore -- I say, because I knew you loved him, I desired him
to -- to -- I was very urgent with him -- about -- about -- No I mistake! 'twas
he was urgent with me to entreat you to do me the favour -- no -- to do him the
favour: I mean, hum -- to -- to --


Pox! what a Story's here? Oh Strumpet! Witch! --


To Cuckold him, was that it, Sister?


Madam, me thinks your speech fails you exceedingly.


All will not do; O spiteful minute! Taken thus at last? Shame ties my Tongue,
and absence is most necessary.


Oh farewell in the Devil Name! Oh Horns! Horns! found a Cuckold at last! I have
spun a fair Thread, by the Lord Harry; A Cuckold at last! --


A Cuckold! Why, Sir, -- have I done any thing but by your directions? -- Why
do you suggest such things to your self? -- Well, Sir, if I have injured you* I
wear a Sword, Sir, -- and so -- Farewell. --


In verity his was a strange discovery; -- but such things* will happen --
sometimes. --


So it seems; yet this me thinks is wonderful.


Oh unfortunate Husband! Well, -- I'll go instantly and get a Divorce, and
spend the remainder of my Life in penning a Satyr against Women; -- I'll call
it, A CAUTION FOR CUCKOLDS; where I will deplorably set down my own Case, and
as a Warning-piece for rash young men, and for the benefit of my Country.

Felix quem faciunt aliena Cornua Cautum.


Something is the matter now, if I could guess: But mum! I must not yet
discover my failing.


Now the mighty Sophistress is overthrown!


Thank Chance for that; -- but no Wit of our own. --


Right, Madam; and by this a Man may see how unnecessary a thing it is, -- to
strive to turn the current of a Woman's fancy, when it is bent to another. 'Tis
a damned thing this Wenching* if a Man considers seriously on it; and yet 'tis
such a damnable Age we live in, that, Gad, he that does not follow it is either
accounted sordidly unnatural, or ridiculously impotent. -- Well, for my part
henceforward this shall be my Resolution:

I'll Love for Interest, Court for Recreation;
Change still a Mistress to be still in fashion:
I'll aid all Women* in an Amorous League;
But from this hour never baulk a Love-Intrigue.

WEll, Gentlemen, how do ye? -- Icod you sit,
As if you had no Souls, no Brains, no Wit.
What, not a word now in the Poets praise?
Hah! -- Faith, I was a Spark in my young days. --
I Clapped, and Clapped; -- nay, sometimes to my cost:
I Clapped so long, -- Gad, I (was) Clapped at last.
There I was waggish; -- You know what I mean; --
The Devil was in it, a Plaguy Yorkshire Quean. --
But 'tis no matter, -- 'twas but thought a Jest,
And, Gad, I was as brisk then as the best.
So I am now; for Ifack I'd have you know,
Your Old Man, though he only serve for show,
Yet give him a Young Wench with Black of Top, --
And you shall see him Frisk, and Jump, and Hop; --
Icod, and Wriggle! -- Hah! -- the old Bell will sound,
Though there is never a Clapper to be found.
But let that pass: Now your Applause disburse;
Why, -- what the Devil makes you silent thus? --
What say ye, -- The Play does not deserve it? -- Hah! --
Icod, you are mistaken: -- for I'll tell ye,
I once could Write and Judge, -- and 'Fack did do
Very strange things; -- but I've forgot them now: --
But I remember what a Wag -- I was: --
I had so many Smutty Jests those days,
I could get none but Women to my Plays.
But that's all one; -- Icod, the Youth that Writ,
Does well; -- and who knows, -- may do better yet:
Therefore you should encourage him, Do ye hear?
And he that fails, I wish this Curse may bear,
That he be really my Character, --
Lascivious, Deaf, and Impotent as I;
And Gad that's Plague enough, -- and so God bu'y.

