FROM the West, as Champion in defence of Wit,
I come, to mow you Critics of the Pit,
Who think we've not improved what Fletcher Writ.
This Godly Weapon first invented was
By Whigs, to cut down Monarchy like Grass;
But I know better how to use these Tools,
And have reserved my Scythe to mow down Fools:
Yet of my Conscience they would sprout again,
And the Herculean Labour were in vain.
The Pit, like Hydra's, still would yield supplies,
From one lopped Block-head, twenty more would rise.
A sort of City Critics yonder sit,
For this destroying Engine not unfit,
Cuckolds were always Enemies to Wit;
For Wit oft draws the Wife to leave her Spouse,
To take a small refreshing at our House.
Fantastic Tastes how hard it is to please!
Critics, like Flies, have several Species.
There's one that just has paid his grutch'd half-Crown,
Cries, Rot the Play, Pox on it, let's cry it down.
The censuring Spark would fain seem Great and Witty,
Yet Whispers Politics with Orange Betty;
She cracks his Philberds, whilst he, in her Ear,
Is Fighting over again the Western War,
Bragging what numbers his sole Arm has killed,
Though the vain Fop perhaps was ne'er in the Field.
Thus Worm that snugs in Shell where it was bred,
Is nothing to the Maggot in his head,
For Harmless Insect that those Nuts create
Is nothing to the Maggot of the Pate,
Now such a Fop as this would I be at.
Another to complete his daily Task,
Flustered with Claret, seizes on a Mask,
Hisses the Play, steals off with Punk in the dark,
He Damns' the Poet, but she Claps the Spark.
I wonder if the Law could doom one dead,
That now should lop off such a Fellow's Head!
It cannot be found Murder. -- And to share
This dreadful Fate, You Critics all prepare.
For besides all my Scythians yet unseen,
We've yet a Female Common-wealth within,
Who strongly Armed, like Furies venture on,
And if y'approach their Trenches once, you're gone.

MY Love!


I hope I am.


Most certain; so punctual, and so fair, it must be she!


Punctual, you have reason to own me, for if you knew the Difficulty I have
undergone, to get out to you.


I can guess at it, and am too sensible of the Villainy of that French-firework,
thy Damned Guardian, not to know the Difficulty. But 'prithee tell me, what
pretty Stratagem did Love instruct thee with, to make me thus happy?


After Dinner, 'tis always his Custom to call for Tea, in which I cunningly
infused a Dram or two of Opium, which made its Operation instantly; for after
sneezing two or three times, and according to his usual manner, fetching a
Rhumatick Cough from the bottom of his Lungs, which I always pray heartily may
choke him.


And so do I too, Faith. I hope our prayers will be heard one Day.


He fell fast asleep, and by that means gave me Opportunity to meet an
ungrateful Creature here, that is more ready to laugh at me for my Weakness,
than reward me for my Love.


What a barbarous thought is that! Deny it, and make me amends, or I swear I
will kiss thee into an Ecstasy.


Oh! I am fond and foolish: All my Actions show Woman, silly Woman, and must
confess, deserve it.


Prithee, no more of this, it wrongs my Love. And since we have leisure to talk
an Hour, make me so happy to hear the remainder of thy Story; the story of thy
Father, and the manner of thy bringing hither to England, under the Tuition of
that Villain, that Cursed Pirate La Mure: You have often begun it, but we have
bin still interrupted.


'Tis a sad Tale; but I can deny you nothing: If you remember then, I told you
that Don Sebastian was my Father. A generous Portuguise; of Noble House, and
Nature; and Governor of several large Plantations in the Happy Islands; his
Industry and Care made him so rich, that he might vie with Princes; so stored
he was with Friends and Gifts of Fortune! But many years he had not thus
continued, when Hell contriving how to blast our Joys; drove on our Shore a
number of French Pirates; of which La Mure was the most Villainous, and being
Captain of the rest, and well stored with Ammunition, entered upon our
Fortress, ruined our Plantations; and chased the Peaceful Industrious
Portuguese, like Flocks of Sheep upon the barren Mountains.


Inhumane Villains!


My Father, in this distress, willing to save his Treasure, with the help of my
Brother, and a Party of Negro Slaves, secretly Conveyed his Plate, Money, and
Jewels into a small Vessel, and put to Sea, with design-to return, when they
were gone, and comfort us with his Fortune and Policy.


The Design was prudent, whatever the Event was.


Oh it was fatal! For this Cursed La Mure having Intelligence by his Spies of my
Fathers escape, and not knowing how to pursue him, turned his rage upon my poor
Mother, my Sister, and my self. And having Laden his Ship with the Spoils and
Riches of our Island, carried us with him, and the put to Sea.


Where will this end?


You shall know instantly. And the greatest Barbarity that ever Villain acted:
For sailing thence a few Leagues, and resolving to be revenged on us, for the
loss of my Father's Treasure, he leaves my sighing Mother and a little Sister
alone and comfortless upon a wild and barren Island.


Damned Hellish Dog!


And since that hour, I never heard of 'em. As to my self, (though an Infant,) it
pleased his Devil-ship to like my face. And therefore brought me, (with my
Nurse, who has since told me this Story;) with him to London; where I have
lived a melancholy and hated Life ever since: And now am hourly plagued with
the intolerable Harangues of his Nauseous Love, and Impertinent Follies. Oh
Marine!


Why sighs, my dearest?


What shall I do?


I'll tell thee, and charge thee by thy Love,
Nay, by thy Soul, and its divinest Virtue,
To perform my Injunction.

Can I with Honour do it?


Yes, else I would nor propose it.


Speak then, nay quickly, for I fear he'll wake e're I get back again.


This coming night,
When the Tell-tale Clock has told its midnight story,
And sleep Charms all but Libertines and Lovers,
Steal from his House, and fall into my Arms;
I have a Ship lies ready in the Port,
Laden and fit to sail, the wind stands fair too,
In her I'll place my Love, and free her from
The hated bondage of her Cursed Jailer.

Oh! I shall ne'er endure the Sea again.


Rather endure a Storm in all its frights and dangers, than live to be enslaved
to Villainy.


But if you should forsake me! Oh misery!
And leave me helpless on some blasted Country,
As he once did my Mother!

Yet more doubts: by all that's good, you wrong me; prithee no more of it.
Come, your Promise?


I do: I must.


At twelve.


Exactly.


Till then farewell. Heaven and its Angels guard thee.


Oh Love! thou make us do we know not what.


Nay prithee Lieutenant, get off further; Life, I am afraid the Fellow is
killed.


Killed! Hang him; no Sword can hurt him; His Soul and all his Spirits are
shrunk so low into his heels. 'Tis impossible any wound given him should be
Mortal. A Slave, to abuse our noble Admiral. By this Hilt, if thou had not
stood in my way, I would have cut the Rogue into Stakes, and have eaten him up
for my Breakfast.


How now, Lieutenant, what's the matter?


Captain, your Humble Servant. I Plague on it, I know not, a damned huffing
fellow yonder, a Rebel, Whiggy Buffle head -- I know not what to make of him,
not I -- had the Impudence, to my Face, to affront our great Master the
Admiral.


And thou hast killed him, I warrant.


Clapped him through the Guts -- Hamstringed him; broke out six or seven of his
Teeth with the Pummel of my Sword, or so: But I'll be poxed, if he does not
live to be hanged, for all this.


Prithee, do not thou tempt thy Fate, and live to be hanged instead of him: Our
City Juries will show thee but little favour or affection, if thou once come
into their Clutches.


Consume 'em: I'll sooner make my self Immortal, with a pennyworth of
Rats-bane, than stand to the Courtesy of such a Cry of Blood-hounds. But
prithee, Captain, when shall we to Sea again? Pox of, this Dirty part of the
World, a Man only fowls his Linen here, and draws Air amongst a rout of Rebels
-- I am clearly for the Watery Element: And had rather Converse with Dolphins,
Whales, and Porpices, than our Natives: Why, they are honest Creatures, and
better Company.


They are so i'faith: And thou shalt be with them suddenly. For I have some
urgent business will call me aboard within these few hours. And to morrow, if
the Wind sit fare, adieu old England.


By the green Neptune, I am glad on it: A Brummingham Son of a Whore, affront
the Noble Admiral! Nay, 'tis well they scoured, we should have made a
separation between some of their Souls and Bodies else before this time, hah,
Master!


What, has my Master bin in the Skirmish too?


Yes Faith, the old Lad was all hands aloft with 'em. I saw him clap one of 'em
through the Shoulder, and throw a couple more into the Cellar; that I saw him do.


Why, well said old Sea-mark.


Me! Why, how now, do ye doubt me? Give me but a good Cause, and a good Sword,
and if I flinch, hang me on the Top-Mast-head, or flea me, and make
Ship-Buckets of my Hide. What, I have not had so many Towels drawn through me
for nothing, sure!


Ha, ha, ha. But hark you, Lieutenant, a word with thee; I must require thy
assistance in a business to night.


Require -- Command, dear Captain! Pox of requirings and requests -- your Ear
-- is there a Man or a Woman in the Case?


A Woman, Du Pier! an Angel-Woman! a Fortune too, and Young as the Rose-bud --
Beautiful as the Blushing Morning; and as willing as my self.


Good. Well, must we scale for her, or steal her Cunningly? Must we mount the
Counterscarp like Men of Mettle; or squeeze our selves, like Cats, into the
Cellar Window?


Neither; she will meet us half way.


Gad, a Gentlewoman I warrant her: Is there no one else but her to take care
of?


Why, Faith yes, there may a Man come into her rescue, which if it happen, I
must enjoin thee to --


Cut his Throat -- Humh.


No, no: only oppose him, whilst I get off with my fair Prize.


Well, I shall Cut his Throat, my mind gives me, I shall; if he takes away the
Woman, he must take away this too; then Lord have mercy upon his Winde-pipe, I
say.


But what shall we do for a third Man, in case of Danger? who, amongst the
Ships Crew, can we trust in such a business?


Why, Old Tar there, against the World: There was not such another for a
Wench, since Noah's Flood.


Captain, if you dare trust me in your Affair, they shall saw off my Beard with
a Back-Sword, e're I leave you: Though I care not this for the Woman -- for my
part, I am past these things.


Well, well, my good Friend, I will be obliged to thee. Go then instantly and
prepare the Barge, and meet me at Eleven, here at the Corner of the Piazza.


The Wind favours our Design rarely too; besides, we shall have more Company,
for there are three or four young Blades, Acquaintance of mine, that it seems
are married to ill Wives, and to avoid 'em, design to take a Ramble, and go
Reformades with us; for I told 'em it could not be long before we should put to
Sea; and since it happens thus opportunely -- I'll send instantly to give 'em
notice.


Do -- if they are of the Town-breed, they may prove very good Diversion for
us.


The best in the World, Faith, I know 'em to a Hair -- They supped to night at
the Rose, and I believe are there still, for they are no Starters, to my
knowledge -- I'll step into your Lodging, since 'tis so near hand, and write a
Letter to 'em to be ready.


I'll go with thee, and prepare all things for our Adventure -- Ah, Lieutenant!
This Fortune-stealing is a blessed business, is it not?


Ah, if she were but old, tough, and stanch! Pox on it, I hate your young
Weehees, Skitish Colts -- they are so hard mouthed, there's no dealing with
'em.


I hope to see thee fitted one day: Come, Let's away, --


ARe we all agreed then?


All, all! most Constantly.


Let's hear the Oath once more. Come, Frugal -- my Merchant Royal; thou shalt
be Speaker. Silence.


First we have sworn to take a Ramble to Sea for three years, and during that
Term, we have obliged our selves never to converse with our Wives, kiss our
Wives, nor remember our Wives.


No, nor Children, but let them stay at home, keep Lent, and chew the Cud.


And to this we all once more swear.


All, all.


Kiss the Book.


But harkee, Gentlemen, now I have sworn this, 'tis fit I should know the
meaning on it -- 'Tis but just we declare some Reasons why we leave our Wives,
-- hah?


'Tis so: Let one speak then, and the other two shall be Judges.


Do you begin then.


With all my Heart: Why, first then, most Judicious Auditors, the Reason why I
desert my Matrimony is, because she grudges me my Dress, and Garniture, and
takes more care to Lace her own Petticoat, than my Pantaloons. Besides, she
knows that Dress and Garniture, as I said before, are the only Comforts of my
Life: I should lead the life of a Dog, if it were not for my Feathers, my
Fiddles, and my Fineries: But I'll be revenged for her, for I have prepared a
Wardrobe, that shall outshine the Sun in the new World, where we are going. And
resolve to bid adieu to my damned Dog with a Bottle at home: What say you now?
Have I not Reason?


Reason! reason! great reason.


Reason! reason! great reason.


Come, now Merchant -- now, let's here thine?


Mine! nay, if I have not Reason, the Devil's in it! Mine! why, look ye, In the
first place, Gentlemen, you must know that I am a Cuckold.


Very good.


My Wife is an eternal Scold, and had two By-blows before I married her.


Hem! Let's have no more on it; Tace! thou hast very Substantial Reason, Faith.


Most Powerful! there's great strength of Reason in it.


I think so. Besides, she was lavish and extravagant, and continually railed at
my Usury, and honest turning the penny: but to be revenged on her, I cunningly
broke lately, have put all my Plate, Money, and Jewels into two Chests, and
intend to seek some other Country; where I will live, grow rich, and plant a
Colony. Now your approbations, Gentlemen? Have I not Reason?


Ay; the Deem take me, if thou hast not. But come Sharper, now for thee. What
occasion had thou to leave thy Wife?


Oh! occcasion enough, Faith.


What, prithee?


Because I could not keep her.


Pithy and short.


A very solid Reason in troth, and must pass muster.


Besides, I have had an Antipathy to Woman-kind, ever since I saw one of 'em
unscrue her Nose one night -- Oh, that Nose! that Nose has stuck in my Stomach
plaguily.


Hell. I see we are all fixed, and of one mind: And resolve to forget and
despise that Vexatious and Impertinent Sex. For my own part, I hate a Woman
heartily.


And I.


And all things with flat. Bottoms I abominate.


Sir, here's a Letter just now left at our House, directed to you.


News, news, my Lads! rare news!


What, prithee?


The Captain's just a going; the Ship is fallen down, and the Barge given order
for: here's a Letter from the Lieutenant, that says, they'll be gone by four a
Clock this morning. I'll even go instantly and get ready my Money and Wardrobe:
And then adieu dear Dog with a Bottle, as I said before.


And I my Chests of Plate and Jewels.


And I my Cat, and my Bale of Dice: For that's all my Cargo.


Come away, Boys; make haste, we shall lose the wind else.


I'll be ready in a moment.


If I can but draw 'em in to play in the new World, where we are a going -- I
am made for ever. Well, Fortune for me, there lies all my hopes.


DOst thou see that Light in the Window there?


Yes, I thank my Fortune, I have been acquainted with such Stars before now:
And on these Occasions two: But I had rather that Meteor were extinguished for
all that, Captain, left we should be seen.


'Tis past twelve, and few people pass this way.


I fancy your Fortune-stealer to be very like your Venison-stealer, that thinks
himself obliged to the Moon, till he has got his Game, but afterwards wishes
her in a dark-Lanthorn, for fear it should be taken from him.


Master, be sure you scout diligently, and tell us if any one comes.


Go too, go too, mind your Business, and make haste; 'tis well there's Money in
the Case. Before I would stand quaking here for a squab-sucking Rabbit; that's
hardly worth the skinning, I'd as soon stand Sentinel upon one of the Moles at
Argier, though I were sure of neither Pay, nor Provender.


Hark! What noise was that? Did hear no noise?


Some body at prayers, I think: Pox on it, we shall have ill luck.


'Tis some dreaming Phanatick or other is singing of Psalms in's sleep.


Come, Captain, prithee give the Sign. I long to have the Treasure in our
Custody: That if any resistance happens, we may fight for something.


This must be the Door. Harkee, Lieutenant, prithee look to that corner of the
Street -- I think I hear the Constable and Watch.


No. Rot 'em, they are making themselves drunk with Brandy. They'll never mind
us. Come, come, the sign, the sign.


Who's there?


What's that there in white?


Hush, it must be she.


In her Smock, I hope: To make a quicker dispatch of the Business.


Who's there?


'Tis I.


Are you alone? What's that yonder?


Two worthy Friends, that I've entrusted to assist me.


Oh my my Love: How shall I get to thee? For this jealous Wretch has taken the
Key of the Street door into his Chamber.


Leap into my Arms, I can bear thy weight with ease.


'Sbud, would I had her weight in Tobacco or Pepper. Why, what a bustle's here
with a green Artichoak?


No -- I must venture to get it from thence: In the mean time, catch this
Casket; keep it diligently; for 'tis worth your Care: whilst I go and try my
Fortune.


Make haste, my Dearest: For I am impatient, till I have thee in my Arms.
Lieutenant!


How now? What has Heaven sent us?


There's something in this Casket, Lieutenant, that will pay for our trouble.


Why, merry be her Heart: I like a Wench that pays well for her Man, before she
has him: And of all Mistresses, your giving Mistress ought most to be admired.


Hark, what's that?


Mischief! I'll lay my Life: The Truce is broken, and War will ensue. Tar,
haul up thy Main Sheet, there's a Storm a coming.


Oh, undone, undone! ruined for ever!


I thought so.


What's the matter, Sweet! Fear nothing. Thou art safe as in a Castle here.


Eagerly reaching the Key out of the Window, my Sleeve hitcht in the great
Looking-glass, pulled it after me, and broke it in pieces: Which has, I am
sure, alarm'd the House. Hark -- I hear 'em coming.


Well, well, and let 'em come. Captain, retreat you off with your Lady. Tar,
Come hither, and fix thy foot to mine: By this Hilt, if they come on, we'll
mawle 'em.


Is there any Plunder to be got, Boy? This scouring for nothing, is such cold
Work --


O Diable! Rascal! Robera Teefe! V'ere are ye? Vat hoa! Iacka, Petra, Tobee!
Vere are ye all, Sons of Whore? I am rob: Oh Jernee! Mondieu. Here de are!
fall on.


Harkee, Diable! Rascale! Teefe! or what do you call your self? Get you gon, or
I shall so pink your Guts, do ye hear?


Morbleu, Villain! pinka my Guts. Courage.


Nay, if you will be paunch'd, have at your French paunch.


What, hoa, Watch! Watch! Thieves, Thieves, murder.


Sirrah, I'll spoil your Cackling presently.


Stand, who goes there?


Oh, Mr. Constable, you are come opportunely: Here are a Company of disguised
Turks, would have Committed a rape upon a Lady just now; if it had not bin for
this Gentleman, and my self.


How, Turks in my Territories!


Notorious ones. They are all housed within there.


Do I represent the Kings Person, and suffer Mahomet under my Nose, hah?


Monsieur Constable, Monsieur Constable!


Seize, Seize him, Mr. Constable. He is a Mufti; and came over from St. Omers,
with Doctor what do ye call him?


A Mufti! down with him, down with him, I say.


Why, Monsieur Constable, vat you do? Is de Teevil in you?


Search the House, search the House --


Come ^arr, let's put off now: And go aboard immediately: I think the Coast is
clear --


LAy her aloof: the Sea grows Boisterous: How it spits against the Clouds! how
it Capers! And how the Thunder-thumping Element frights it back -- There are
Devils dancing Air, I think; I saw a Dolphin just now hang in the Horns of the
Moon -- shot from a Wave! Hey, how she kicks! how she jerks! Down with the Main
Mast there, lay her at Hull. Furl up her Linens, and let her ride it out.


She'll never brook it, Master: She's so deep Laden, that she'll bulge.


We have discovered the Land, Sir; pray let's make in, she's so drunk, she may
chance to cast up her Lading.


Stand in, Stand in. We are all lost else.


Steer her a Starboard there. What, hoa! call up the Boatswain. Holloa -- below
there!


What says my Master? what shall we do? We must cast up all her Lading: She
will not swim an hour else.


What comfort, Master? I never saw, since I've known the Sea, so rude a
Tempest! In what condition are we?


Dangerous enough, Sir. We have sprung five Leaks; and no little ones; Besides,
her Ribs are open: and Rudder almost spent: But come, have good Courage. Death
comes out once, and let him come in all his fury.


The Storm is so loud, we cannot hear one another.


What's the Coast.


We know not yet. Let's bear in with all the Sail we can.


Master, see what a Thunder-clap is coming: Oh Lord! how dreadful it looks.


Ye fearful Rogue. Sirrah, thou hast bin praying, I see it in thy Face; thou
hast bin mumbling, when we are splitting. You Slave, is this a time to
discourage your Friends with your Cold Ejaculations: Sirrah -- let me but see
thee look Religiously again, and I'll flea thee, as I would an Eel.


Is't not possible to make in to the Land? 'Tis here before us.


Here, hard by, Sir.


Death is nearer, Gentlemen.


Oh, oh, oh.


Why, there's another Rogue now with his Bagpipes: Prithee, Dear Captain, give
me leave to throw that Maudlin Fellow over-board.


Come let's go in, and read.


Ay, come --


Let's hoist the Boat out, and go all at one Cast; the more the merrier.


Hold, you are too hasty, Captain; do ye long to be in the Fish-market, before
your time? hold her up there*


Oh miserable Fortune!


So! now we are like to have rare Music?


Mercy, mercy, what will become of us? Pray, Gentlemen -- pray.


Look! prithee, my Dear; no more words now, by this Light -- thou art the
most unseasonable Rogue in a Storm. Nay, prithee be gone.


Pray, Gentlemen; pray, pray --


Nothing but horror sounding in my Ears: No promise of rest to my poor
frighted Soul! gentle Master, is there no hopes?


None, that I know! Dev'l, Clap this Woman under hatches.


Prithee speak mildly to her. Have patience, Sweet.


Keep her thus, keep her thus.


Oh, that Wave will devour me! Oh --


Carry her down, Captain -- or by these hands I'll give no more Direction. We
have ne'er better Luck, when we have such Stowage as these Trinkets with us.
These sweet Sin-breeders; how can Heaven smile on us -- when such a Burden of
Iniquity -- lies tumbling like a potion in the Ships belly.


What shall I do, my Heart and Senses fail me?

Come in with me. And try if thou can sleep:
Thy pretty Heart wild-fears so long have rocked;
Calm rest will steal upon it.

Oh Marine,

Remember, 'tis for you I meet these Dangers.
For you, expose my self to Seas and Horrors, and fears innumerable.
I know thou dost.

And think too, I have treasured the Remembrance within me here, fast locked up
in my heart; and yet I doubt not but a Day will come -- To Crown our
flourishing Loves, and make us happy.


Throw out the Lading, it must all over-board.


It clears to Sea ward, Master: Heave out there: Let's lighten her! all the
Meat and the Cakes. We are all gone else. That we may find her Leaks, and hold
her up.


Must my goods over too? Kind, honest Master: Why, here lies all my Money --
the Money I have raked by Usury, to buy new Lands and Manors in new Countries.
-- I have been these 20 years a raising.


Over with it.

The Devils are got together by the Ears, who shall have it. -- And here they
quarrel in the Clouds.


Oh, I am undone!


Hang ye, Mungrels, would you be only happy?


Save but one Chest of Plate!


Away with it lustily, Sailers; it was some Pawn that he has got unjustly, down
with it low enough; and let Crabs breed in it.


Over with the Trunks too.


Take mine, and spare not.


Nay, nay; all that has weight must go.


Will you throw away my Lordship, that I sold, to buy me a fine Wardrobe -- For
pity's sake, be favourable to my fine Wardrobe.


Over with it -- I love to see a Lordship sink. My Friend, you left no Wood
upon it, to buoy it up, you might have saved it else.


For my part, I have nothing of weight, but my Prayer-Book: And that, I am
resolved, shall not burden the Ship. There 'tis. --


Why, well said!


Come, come, Lieutenant, you may lose too.


Thou lie: I have nothing to lose, but my Maidenhead, my Skin, my Clothes, my
Sword here, and my Self, two Crowns in my Pocket, two pair of Cards, and three
false Dice -- I can swim like a Fish, Rascal, nothing to hinder me.


In with her of all hands.


Come Captain, come Gentlemen: Ye must all help, my Life now for the Land. 'Tis
high, and very Rocky.


However, let's attempt it.


Then Cheer lustily, my Hearts, and away with her.


IT must be a Ship -- I see it now; a tall Ship, she has wrought lustily for
her Deliverance! Heavens Mercy! what a dismal Day has here been?


To still and quiet Minds that know no Miseries, it may seem wretched; but with
us 'tis ordinary. Heaven has no Storm in store, nor Earth no Terror, that can
seem new to us.


'Tis true, my Son;
If Fortune were determined to be wanton,
And would wipe out the story of Men's Miseries,
Yet we two, living still, should cross her purpose:
Can thou see 'em? Do they live still?

Yes: and make to Shore!


Most miserable Men, I pity 'em.


What Shouts of Joy they make?


Alas! poor Wretches!
Had they but once Experience of this Island,
They'd turn their Shouts to Howlings.

Nay, to Curses!
That ever they set Foot on this fad place.

Sad indeed: where nothing is but Rocks and Barrenness;
Hunger and Cold -- Here's no Vineyards
To cheer the Heart of Man: Nor Crystal Rivers,
After his Labour, to refresh his Body;
If he be Feeble, nothing to restore him,
But Heavenly Hopes: Nature, that made those Remedies,
Dares not come here, nor look on our Distresses,
For fear she turn Wild, like the place, and Barren.

Then, Sir, the memory of what we were,
When we were seated in our blessed Homes,
Gives us a double Misery.

Oh Curse on those French Pirates that displanted us,
And drove me from my Wife and pretty Children,
To live a wretched Life, upon this fatal Island.

They are living yet, I hope, Sir; such Goodness Cannot perish.


They may live -- but never to me, my Son,
Never to me again -- Look on it -- What bear
Their Flagg-staves?

The Arms of England.

They get to Shore apace. What's that which Swims?

A strong young Man! with a hansom
Woman hanging about his Neck.

A Noble Fellow, I warrant him!
May this brave Charity, who e're thou art,
Be spoken in a place that may renown thee,
And not dye here.

Their Boat it seems turned over,
And forced them to their Shifts, yet all are landed --
They are certainly Pirates.

Let 'em be what they will, they will not Rob us;
For none will take our Misery for Riches;
Come, Son, let us descend, and try their Pities;
If we get off, we have a little hopes;
If not, we shall but load this wretched Island
With the same Shadows still that must grow shorter.

Wet come a Shore, my Hearts; we are safe arrived though.


Thanks to Heavens Goodness! and no Man lost neither, but the poor Chaplain.


Ay -- the poor Soul-Broker's gone, he was washed, with a Wave, off the
Quarter-Deck -- I saw his Cassock and he fluttering between Wind and Water, a
great while -- Well, Peace be with him, he was too good for us.


The Weather's turned more Courteous: and the Ship rides fair too, and her
Leaks in good plight:
How does my Dear? Alas, poor Heart!
How weak she is, and wet!

I am glad I escaped with Life:
For which, Dear Captain, I am obliged to you:
Oh let the Heavens but bless me with a means
How to reward such Love, and I am happy.

This Rosy kiss rewards me ten times over,
And this ten thousand.

I cannot speak for Joy.

My Dearest Life -- Well, what cheer, my Lads?


Faith! no great Cheer, Captain! a piece of Soused Biscuit, and half a hard Egg:
For the Sea has taken order, being young and strong, we shall not surfeit: For
my own part, the Water has made a mere Toste of me; I am sopt rarely: However,
I'll Dance* till I am dry: Come, Surgeon, out with your Glister-pipe, Sirrah,
and strike a Galliard.


Why, what a brave day is here? And what fair Weather, after so foul a Storm?


Ay, if the Master had not been bewitched, he might have foreseen this Weather,
and have saved our Goods! Oh my dear Plate and Jewels! Oh my dear Money!
Vengeance on the Master.


Ay, and twenty small Curses beside; I have lost my fine Wardrobe; oh
insupportable! the Ladies will hate me.


Oh never think on 'em: We have our Lives and Healths!


For my part I've lost nothing, but my Prayer Book: I saved my other Cargo, my
bale of Dice: therefore I am happy.


Not think of 'em, Sir! I must and will think of 'em: And that 'twas most
maliciously done, to undo me


And me too: I lost all: I had fifteen fair Suits: the worst of 'em
Embroidered; and now I had not so much as a Shirt left.


Ha, ha, ha, hast not, Faith?


No, by this Light; nor rag of Clothes neither, but these poor things.


Give me thy hand: I am glad on it with all my Heart. Is thy Skin whole?


Sir, you may spare your Raillery.


Faith, I shannot! Harkee, wilt thou see a Dog- fish now rise in one of thy
brave Doublets? And tumble like a Tub, to make thee merry? Or an Old Haddock
rise with thy Beaver Hat on? A Mermaid in a Waistcoat of your Worships; or a
Dolphin with your Point Cravat?


You are merry, Sir; but if I take it thus -- if I be foisted and jeered out of
my VVardrobe --


Nor I, neither.


Nor will I leave my Friends.


Neither Master, nor Mate, nor none of you shall abuse me: I say our Goods
might have been saved; and I'll have satisfaction.


Nay, be not angry, Gentlemen.


Sir, we have reason: And some Friends I can make.


Why, you Scoundrels! was not what I did for the general Safety? if you aim at
me, I am not so tame --


No, nor we neither.


Pray take my Counsel, Gallants: Fight not till the Surgeon be well, do ye hear?
He's damnable Sea-sick yonder: and may spoil all: Besides he has lost his
Fiddle-stick -- And the best Box of Boars-grease. Nay -- do not draw your
Swords; for if you do. --


Who would you fight with, Gentlemen? Who has done you wrong? For shame be
better tempered; no sooner come to give thanks for our safeties, but we must
raise new Civil Broils among us -- Put up, put up, for shame. --


We have been wronged, Sir, and damnably too.


Nay, look; if you will needs fight, and think to raise new Riches by your
Valours, come -- have at you: I have little else to do now: I have said my
Prayers -- You say you have lost, and make your Loss your Quarrel, and grumble
at my Captain here, and the Master: two worthy Persons, indeed, too worthy for
such Rescals -- Come you Wardrobe Gallant, come on: and you, Money Merchant,
that build on Golden Monuments in Potosi. Come, draw all your Swords, ye say ye
are miserable?


Put up, Gentlemen, or, by this light, he'll swinge you damnably -- I see it
in's Face.


Captain stand by a little: And see how I'll correct 'em. I'll make 'em ten
times poorer -- I will not leave 'em -- for look you, fighting is as nourshing
to me, as eating: I was born quarrelling.


Come, they'll Consider.


I will not leave 'em skin to cover 'em: there's no joint shall stand in's
proper place. Do ye grumble when you are well, you Rogues?


A Devilish Fellow this Lieutenant. Gad he has quash'd me already.


Escape drowning, and do ye prate?


Pray, Gentlemen, for my sake be quiet; let it become me to make all Friends.


We have so much breeding, not to deny a Lady any thing: Come let's put up.


Ay, ay: We were to blame, to draw before the Lady, that's the truth on it.


This Passion, and too much Courage, is a damnable fault.


'Tis well, 'tis very well: There's half a Biscuit, break it amongst you all,
and thank my Bounty; that is Clothes and Plate too now. Come no more quarrels.


Ha! in the name of wonder, what have we here? Are they humane Creatures?


I have heard of Sea-Calves.


They are no shadows sure, they have legs and arms.


Ay, they hang but scurvily on though.


What Beards they have?


They have sown Horse Tails to their Faces, to keep -- 'em warm.


How their Eyes are sunk, as if they had bin frighted; sure they are wretched
Men?


There are Wardrobes for you: Look you, my Friend, what do you think of these
now for a Couple of Courtiers?


They kneel, sure they would beg something.


What are you? Speak, are you Substances, or wandering shadows, that find no
peace on Earth, till you reveal some secret?


We are Men as you are, only our Miseries make us seem Monsters; if ever pity
dwelt in noble Hearts --


Stand up, and speak boldly.


If you are Christians, and by that blessed Name bound to ^elieve us. Convey us
from this Island.


Speak -- what are you?


Of honourable Birth; to tell you more,
Were but to number up our own Calamities,
And make our Eyes wild with perpetual weepings;
This many years, in this most wretched Island
We two have lived, the Scorn and Game of Fortune,
Bless your selves from it! noble Gentlemen!
The greatest plagues that Humane Nature suffers,
Are seated here: VVildness and VVants innumerable.

How came you hither?


In a small Vessel: Driven hither by French Pirates, to save my Wealth from
those insulting Robbers.


French Pirates! Oh my heart!


Is all the Island uninhabited?


Most desolate, neither Man nor Beast to comfort or sustain us.


No summer here to promise any thing,
Nor Autumn to make full the Reapers hand;
The Earth, obdurate to the Tears of Heaven,
Let's nothing shoot or grow, but poisonous VVeeds:
No Rivers, nor no pleasant Groves: No Beasts.
All that were made for Man's use, fly this place.
Serpents, and ugly things, the shames of Nature.
Roots of malignant tastes, foul standing VVaters,
Sometimes we find a fulsome Sea Root,
And that's a Delicate; a Rat sometimes,
And that we hunt, like Princes in their pleasure;
And if we take a Toad, we make a Banquet.

Oh Lord! we shall be starved too! Mercy on us, eat a Toad! did he say?


Would I were at home again with my dear Matrimony, I begin to be weary of
rambling.


For Heaven's sake, let's aboard, I would discourse with this Fellow; for my
mind gives me, he can tell me something of my Father?


Do ye know no farther?


We have sometimes seen the shadow of a place
Inhabited: And heard the noise of Hunters.
And have attempted to find it as far as a River,
Deep, slow, and dangerous, fenced with high Rocks,
Would give us leave; but not able to achieve that hazard,
Returned to our old miseries: And, Gentlemen,
If this sad story may deserve your pities --

You shall aboard with us; we will relieve you.


We will not be unthankful for this Benefit;
No, Gentlemen, we'll pay for our deliverance*
Look you, that plough the Sea, for wealth and pleasure,
That out-run Day and Night with your Ambitions:
Look on those heaps, remove 'em, view 'em fully.

By Heaven, 'tis Gold and Jewels!


How!


What's that? Gold and Jewels!


Be not too hasty, here lies another heap.


And here another; all Gold! by this Light.


Stand farther off, you must not be your own Carvers.


We have shares, and large ones -- I'll have my Plate and Money made good.


And I my VVard-robe.


Ay, and we'll Carve our selves too. What hoa! Fellow-Sailers, stand to your
freedoms: Gold, gold.


Take heed, Gentlemen;
This Gold was the overthrow of my happiness.
For landing here with a party of Negro-Slaves,
That I commanded to assist me against the Pirates:
This cursed Gold enticing 'em, they set upon me, and my Son here; wounded us
almost to Death.
And then their Civil Swords, who should be owners:
First in their rage, consumed the Vessel that brought us,
And next themselves by heaps. Oh be you wise and careful.

Tell not me of Care, Sir -- holloa! All that will share with us -- assist us.
I'll have all this.


And I this.


You shall be hanged first: Captain, let's set in.


This Damned Gold will undo us all.


My Losses must be made good.


And so must mine; or else this Sword shall right me.


Nay if you will be Dogs --


Let me come, Captain.
This Golden Age must have an Iron ending:
Have at the Bunch.

Stay, dear Marine! Lieutenant, oh Heavens! what will become of us?


Now Fortune favour us. Come Son, if we stay here, we dye: Here rides their
Ship. Whilst they are gone to the spoil -- let us make quick use, and get off.


Away -- Dear Father.


This Gold was our overthrow.


It may be now our happiness.


You shall have Gold: Yes! I'll cram it into you -- you shall be your own
Carvers, yes; I'll carve you, base greedy Rogues. Captain, let's make an end of
'em.


No -- hang 'em, though they are Villains, yet they are our Countrymen:
prithee Master get the Boat ready, and let's aboard.


Oh, I am hurt to Death.


And I -- my Leg is almost cut off -- Oh.


Oh Captain, we are undone, we are undone; all miserable! ruined -- lost -- the
ship -- the Ship.


What of her?


Oh she's under sail, and floating: See where she flies -- see to your shames,
you Wretches, those poor starved things that showed us Gold, have choosed us.


We are snapped finely.


They have cut her Cables, and got her out: The Tide too has befriended them.


Oh damned misfortune! why, where were all the Sailors that kept her?


Here in the mutiny, to take up Money, with a Pox to 'em: And left no Creature;
left the Boat a shore too. Oh this Gold! This damned bewitching Gold.


Oh we shall be starved, we shall be starved.


Come back, good Men; come back, good old Men --


Come back, good honest Men.


Come back, good Men, come back: Yes, 'tis very likely they will! Do ye look
like Dogs now? Are your mighty Courages abated?


This is the worst of miseries: Oh what shall we do?


Retire, Sir, and comfort her, and let us make the best use of our Misfortune:
I'll but vex these Rascals a little, and come to you straight --


Oh I am hurt and hungry, hurt and hungry, very hungry.


Here's a pestle of a Portigue, Sir. 'Tis excellent meat, with sour Sauce: And
here's two Chains, you may suppose 'em Sawsages: Then there wants Mustard; but
the Surgeon there will supply that presently with Salves.


My Salves, and all my Instruments are lost, and I am hurt and starved.


Starved! what in a Land that flows with Milk and Honey! a second Canaan! Come,
Faith, let's go all to supper.


Ay, where's the meat?


Where's the meat? Why, what a Veal voice is there?


Veal -- gad would we had it.


Ay, or Mutton either: though 'twere of a rotten Sheep that died in a Ditch.


Now would I cut your throats ye Dogs; but that I won't do you such a Courtesy
to keep you from the Benefit of starving; which will be, and suddenly; unless
you can eat Mud, and fancy 'tis Custard; to which excellent repast, I leave ye:
Your first Couse is served up. Expect the second hereafter --


Ah, Pox of these Jewels.


Oh this Cursed Gold. --


NO Comfort yet, nor hopes of a relief,
No welcome Plant, or wholesome Fruit to help us,
Against oppressing Famine: Oh Heaven!
To what Fate do our Cruel Stars reserve us!
How does my Dear, art thou not faint and weak?

Not much; your Company is still a Cordial to me.


You good Angels, that are engaged, when our Ability
Fails, to reward Virtue, look on this Lady;
For me, though Famine gripes my Croaking Entrai's,
Yet when I kiss these lips, methinks
I am at a Banquet; a refreshing Banquet.
Speak, my Dearest life, art thou not hungry?

Indeed, I could eat to keep you company.


Blush, unkind Nature! Can thou supply a Drunkard?
And with a prodigal hand give choice of Wines,
Till he disgorge thy Blessings? Or a Glutton,
That robs the Element, to sooth his Palate;
And only Eats to beget Appetite,
Not to be satisfied? And suffer here
A Virgin, which the Saints would make their Guest,
To pine for hunger.
Hah, if my Sense
Deceive me not, these sounds take Being
From the breath of Men: Confirm me, dear Aminta*
This way the gentle Wind convey's it to us;
Hear you nothing?

Yes, plainly; it seems the Hunters Music.

Still 'tis louder: And I remember the two Portuguese
Informed us, they had often heard such sounds;
But ne'er could touch the Shore from whence they came.

Nor is it to be hoped we shall: This envious
Torrent's cruelly interposed to hinder us, and we
Have no Vessel that may transport us:
Nor has Nature given us Wings to fly.

Better try all hazards,
Than perish here remediless.
To serve my sweet Aminta,
These Arms shall be my Oars, with which I'll swim,
And my Zeal, to save thy precious Innocence,
Like wings shall bear me up spite of these horrid waves.

Will you then leave me?

But for a moment, Sweet: And believe,
Though pleasure met me in most ravishing Form;
And happiness courted me to entertain her,
I would not eat, nor sleep, till I returned;
And Crowned thee with my Fortune.

Oh but your Absence, and my Fears, what mischief
May happen to you in that Fatal place,
Will certainly distract me.

Suppose it but a Dream, and try to sleep.
Think you have sent me for discovery
Of some most fortunate Continent, yet unknown;
Which you are to be Queen of.
And all ye Powers, that Value Lovers prayers,
Or Cherish true affection, guard my Love
In your protection, let her cease to mourn,
Nor sigh, or shed a Tear till my return.

LIberty's the Soul of Living,
Every hour new Joys receiving;
No sharp Pangs our hearts are grieving,
Liberty's the Soul of Living.
Here are no false Men pursuing
Youth or Beauty to its Ruin
Murmuring sighs, like Turtles Cooing;
Nor the bitter Sweets of Wooing.
Liberty's the Soul of Living,
Liberty's the Soul of Living.

In soft dreams our Souls are wasted,
All our solid Joys are blasted.
Sweet Diana, e're I'm past it,
Change thy Law, and let me taste it.
But how vain are Hopes or Sorrows,
Pensive Nights, or sighing Morrows
Love's a Prey, not destined for us.
All our Quivers want their Arrows.
There's no Liberty like Loving,
There's no Liberty like Loving.
Then since, we are doomed to be Chaste;
And loving is counted a Crime,
We'll to our new Pleasures make haste.
Sing, Revel, and laugh out our Time,
And do what we can,
Not to think of a Man,
But make the best use of our Prime.



They that say Women are not fit to Govern,
Betray their weakness, and their want of Knowledge:
For what Perfection is there in the Male,
That is not in the Female: Grant, their Composure stronger,
Their Bodies Courser, and more fit for Wars,
Which some of us, do happily contradict:
I cannot yet Conceive, why this should bind us
To be their Slaves; our Souls are Male as theirs;
And that we have hitherto forborn t'assume,
And manage Thrones: I say, although we have not
Challenged a Sovereignty in Arts and Arms;
And writ our selves Imperial, hath bin
Men's Tyranny, and our Modesty -- not defects,
Or want of Judgment: Blessed be then the hour
That threw me on this Shore, inhabited by Warlike Women,
That keep men in Subjection: And by them, chosen to rule:
Where, since I lost Sebastian, and Nicusa;
My Husband, and dear Son, by those French Pirates;
All others of their Sex have met my hate.

And shall they still do so?

For ever, Girl!
Thou darling of my life: my Dear Clarinda,
I say for ever.

And must I always dream, and dream then, and to no purpose -- by this light I
will have a Husband, or she shall never live a good day.


Nay, the Protectress is too severe, that's the truth on it.


Because she's Old, she thinks every one has as little Occasion for a Husband,
as her self: But she's mistaken in me, I can assure Her.


Ay, and in me too.


And therefore more to confirm my Resolution,
That we may still keep out insulting Man,
I here appoint, when-e're I chance to dye,
That the succession fall on my Clarinda.

Madam, with humblest Duty,
I pay my thanks: but fear the Common-wealth
Will murmur at this positive Election;
She being always chosen to Govern here,
That's voted by the People, as you were --

Which Custom shall continue. We'll have no Arbitrary proceedings.


No: nor will we have our Privileges imposed upon, unless she will give us Men.


What's that you murmur about men?


Men! Out upon 'em, I'll assure your Highness, our thoughts are --


Of nothing else, if the truth were known.


Once more I vote Clarinda my Successor:
And will in this Position be obeyed,
Or like a storm my Rage lets loose upon ye:

I give you leave to consider -- Menalippe, Clita, follow me. You are too young
to engage in private Factions: And therefore meet my pity -- but for the rest
--

Let them take heed, how they my Will debate, Or act a Crime they may repent
too late.

She behaves her self, as if she were Immortal,
Or as the Sun, or she had equal Influence,
And did oblige the World with mutual Blessings.

If such Pride as this hold long, we are like to have a hopeful Government.


Ay, and without Men too, to keep us Company, And be Civil to us, I assure ye:
my Dears, now we are alone, and have liberty to speak our thoughts, In my
Opinion, this usage of our Protectress is not to be endured.


Endured! by my Virginity, 'tis downright Tyranny: For I confess, for my own
part, I have no liking to this single solitary Life; nor do I love hunting
other Creatures so well, but I had as lieve be hunted my self.


Nor I, by Venus.


By Venus! by Diana, I hope you meant to swear, Hippolita? she, you know, had
the most Virtues.


It may be so: But I'm sure the other had the most Wit.


Very fine: I wish you could influence the Protectress with this Doctrine.


Pox on her, nothing can influence an old Woman, but a Iulip.


Oh, Eringo's, or an Ownce or two of Green Ginger, would work admirable
Effects.


I know not what Consolation she may have, but if I have any Comfort in this
life, but when I sleep, I am a Whore.


A Whore! Oh Venus! what a sweet charming luscious honey word, has this raw
Creature thrown away -- A Whore! what the Devil, would you be an Angel?


Would I were a VVhore upon a good account.


Or I either: Oh little England's a sweet place for this purpose, the VVhores
have as much respect there as the Women of Quality.


And more than their Wives, I hear, a thousand times.


But you were talking of Dreams, Sweet-heart: And last night I had the sweetest
sure, that ever woman had; for methought as I was lying in my Cabin, a fine
young brisk, well shaped man, stole softly to me all unbuttoned, and taking me
in his Arms, kissed me, on my Conscience, above twenty times.


Deuce take you: You have made my mouth run with water.


Lord! what a man is this, thought I, to do this to a Maid: And so stretching
out my Arms, thinking to Catch him fast --


You waked, and found nothing --


Even so: Therefore the Devil take all false Figures, I say.


And so say I too: For my part I have wished the Statues in the Garden had bin
real, a thousand times.


Come, Ladies, are you not for hunting?
We dull our selves for want of Exercise.
There's not a gilded Hour adorns the day;
But smiling, greets us with some new adventure;
Away for shame, and clog not your clear bloods
With that perpetual Bane of Beauty, Idleness.

Madam, we wait on you: Who roused the Stag?


Clarinda, and in the instant, Lodged a Steel-Headed Arrow in his Haunch, With
which he's fled.


Ha, what's this comes here?


By all that's good, a man: shall I shoot him.


No, no: 'Tis a handsome Beast, sure.


Would we had more of the Breed, really 'tis a very Comely Creature.


Let's hear if it can speak?

What Heavenly place is this?
Where Beings more than humane keep their Residence?
Sure I have past the Baleful stygian Gulf?
And now touch on the blessed Shore: 'Tis so,
This is Elizium: And these the happy Spirits;
That here enjoy all pleasures.

He comes towards us! O Lord! won't it eat me?


Stand, or I'll shoot.


Hold -- he makes no resistance.


Be not offended Goddesses, that I fall
Thus prostrate at your feet? Or, if not such,
But Nymphs of Diana's Train, that range these Groves;
Which you forbid to men: Vouchsafe to know,
That though I am a man, I am not sold
So far to Impudence, as to presume
To press upon your privacies for my self,
No, that I am an humble Suitor to you,
Is for a Virgin -- Comes as near your selves
In all perfection, as what's mortal may
Resemble things Divine: O pity her,
And let your Charity free her from you Desert;
If Heavenly Charity can reach to Hell.
For sure that place comes near it: And where e're
This wretched frame of mine shall find a Being,
Eternally I shall pour Blessings on you.

By my Maden-head I cannot hurt him now:
Well, some of these mankind have strange influences.

Really, 'tis the finest thing that ever I saw in my life:
Would he would come and kiss me.

Cruel Hippolita, how could thou find in thy Heart to kill him?


Madam, if I had done it, I had but obeyed your Mother's Commands.


If she Commands unjust and Cruel things,
We are not to obey her.

Oh, sits the Wind there?

Pray see what an excellent shape it has?
Why should it be infectious?

I have heard my Mother say, I had a Father: And was not he a Man?


Questionless, Madam.

Your Fathers too, were men?

Without doubt.

And without such, it is impossible
We could have bin.

A sin against Nature, to deny it.


Nor can we ever hope to be made Mothers without 'em.


Never, never; 'tis impossible.


Ay, by my faith is it.


Why, how then could you have design of killing the likeness of the thing by
which you are.


Only in obedience to your Mother.


Age is not sensible of it's own Barbarity. I swear I am resolved to defend and
keep him.


For your own Use.


Nay, if you are resolved on it, I'll assist you.


And I.


And I.


And all of us.


Well, I see by instinct, though a Maid have never seen a Man; there are some
certain motions that inform her -- but here's the Protectress; now I expect a
Storm.


Child of my flesh,
But stranger to my fair unspotted mind;
Unhand this Monster.

Monster, Mother!

Yes, Monster, I say Monster.

Would I had him alone in my Cave for all that;
I should not be afraid he would swallow me.

Whose every word is as a Sirens note,
To drown the careless hearer: Have I not taught the
The falsehood, and the perjuries of men?
On whom, but for a woman to show pity,
Is to be cruel to her self: The Sovereignty,
Proud and Imperious men usurp upon us,
We confer on our selves. And love those Fetters
we fasten to our freedoms. Have we, Clarinda,
E're since Sebastian's loss, thy noble Father,
Planted our selves here in Common-VVealth,
With execrable Oaths, never to look
On man, but as a Monster; and wilt thou
Be the first President, to infringe those Vows
We made to Heaven?

Vows made in heat, and wild temerity, With Heaven, still pass for nothing.
Alas! Madam, should women always use this rigid abstinence, in a few years the
whole world would be peopled only with Beasts. Besides, pray look on him: Is
there not something nobler in his Face, Than graces others?


Spoke to the purpose, Madam: Let's speak well of the man now we have him --
Come, come, there's but few of the sort.


We must, and will have the man: therefore speak boldly, Madam.


Ay -- or we'll shake off all Obedience.

Madam, you'll lose your Subjects hearts for ever,
If you deny this Justice.

Are you all mad?
That no persuasion can have power upon you;
Suppose you had my Suffrage to your Suit,
Can this weak Ship-wrack'd wretch supply you all!

Not together, indeed.

No -- but by Times, and Turns, he may, for ought I know.

Gracious Lady,
I have Fellows in my misery: Not far hence,
Divided only by that hellish River,
There live a Company of wretched men;
Such as your Charity may make your Slaves;
Imagine all the miseries Mankind
May suffer under: And they groan beneath 'em.

But are they all like you?

Speak they your Language, are they kind men?

Are they young, healthy men? Come, there's the point.

They were when I left 'em,
And in their May of Youth, and flowing blood,
And such as might deserve you; now cold and hunger
Hath lessened their perfection, but restored
To what they were, I doubt not they'll appear
Worthy your favours.

This is a Blessing we could not hope for.

Dear Mother -- be not obdurate.

O thou fond foolish Girl! when thou shalt find
Their Levity, and their Neglect of Love,
Thou't mourn thy easiness, and Curse their Sex.
But come, for once your Suits are granted:
And first, all you that are for the Men, hold up your hands;
Very well.
Now you, whose colder Blood, and chaster Tempers
Bid a defiance to loves bewitching Charms,
And flight that Childish God to follow me,
Hold up your hands -- is't possible, not one!

I find the Protectress will have few followers, at this rate?

We shall have men to follow now.

Hear then my Resolution; and endeavour not to add to what I grant, for 'twill
be fruitless: you shall appear as good Angels to these wretched men.

In a small Boat they shall pass over to us,
And crave comfort: If you like their Persons,
And they approve of yours; for we'll force nothing;
Each one shall choose a Husband, and enjoy
His company a Month; but that expired,
You shall no more come near 'em: If you prove fruitful,
The Males you shall return to them, the Females
We will reserve our selves: This is the utmost you shall obtain, Therefore as
you think fit, dismiss this Stranger. And all prepare to morrow for the
meeting.


Come, Sir, pray walk with us,
We'll show you the pleasant Groves and Springs, and Grotto's, and you shall
eat and drink with us.


Excellent Lady!
Though 'twill appear a Wonder, one near starved
Should refuse Rest and Meat -- I must not take
Your Noble Offer -- I left in yonder Desert,
A Virgin almost pined.

She's not your Wife, I hope.

No Madam -- she's my Sister. 'Tis now dangerous
To speak truth --
To her I deeply vou'd not to taste Food or Rest,
Till I returned: Now, if you please
To afford me but an easy passage thither,
And some Convenient Sustenance for her;
I shall for ever bless you, and thankfully
She shall acknowledge to you she owes her life.

You plead so well, I can deny you nothing.
Come in; and I my self will see you furnished,
And with the next Sun visit and relieve you.

Let this declare my thanks.

This act would prove,
In others gratitude: But in me, 'tis Love.

OH what a Tempest have I in my Stomach? My Guts are grumbling a kind of Tune,
Like the Base Pipes of an Organ: I am starved into a Substance so thin, that my
Body is transparent; you may see my heart, and the appurtenances, hang up here
in its mortal Closet, as easily as a Candle in a Lanthorn.


For my part, I've forgot to eat.


My Bellies grown together, like an empty Satchel. I have bin throwing a main
yonder, to pass away the time: But I can get nothing -- my Guts grumble still.

I am thinking, Gentlemen, what a happiness --


How's that! have you the Courage to think of any happiness! Gad you have a
hoard of meat then, Sirrah. You could never have a happy thought, without the
encouragement of Beef, or some such Blessing.


Beef, Rogues, Beef; who the Devil talks of Beef there? I'll draw. I rage, I
storm louder than the Winds or Weather. I am not naturally Valiant, but to
provoke my Courage with the sound of Beef, and give me none, makes me a fury --
I roar like the Sea: Therefore you happy Rascal, make atonement quickly; or in
the name of Famine, I will so grind you -- ah --


Is the Devil in you? Why I am more starved than any of ye, have three times
louder Bag-pipes in my Guts. And am ten times as thin, I was diving in the Sea
to find Oysters last night, and the Sailors took me for Will with the Wisp --
The Moon shone quite through me.


Why, Sirrah, what happiness is that you are thinking of then? Answer me that.


Ay, ay, answer that; the Dog has blood in's face; an apparent sign of
nourishment, he has Eaten lately -- I fee't plainly -- this Rogue has half an
Ox by him, I warrant, in some corner now -- hah -- my Mouth Waters at the
Rascal Confoundedly.


An Ox! Oh Parradise! 'Sbud, would I had but the Hoof of one, on Condition you
were all hanged -- or any part else that had the honour of belonging to blessed
Beef.


Pox on thee, do not talk on it then: Do not charm my starving Intellects, with
that most delightful sound -- Now if I were a great man, the word should be
nothing but Beef, through my Kingdom; my Armies should exercise nothing else:
And my Butcher should mouth it instead of a Drum.


When I was speaking of happiness: I was thinking what a pleasure my Dogs had,
when I kept House at Home -- they had a Store-House, a Store-House of most
blessed Bones, and Crusts; hard and happy Crusts.


Would I had one to gnaw now: or were but amongst 'em; I'd snarl for a short
Dinner with 'em.


Now has this tantalizing Rogue set my Mouth a watering, a second time, with
talking of his Hounds.


A Son of a Whore, when he knows too, that a fat Beagle is as good as a fat
Buck -- And that the Loyn of a Bull-dog --


Ah, is better than a Loyn of Veal a thousand times.


Here comes the Woman;
It may be she has meat, and may relieve us,
Let's stand aside and mark, and then be ready -- she'll hide her
Store else, and so Cozen us.

How weary, and how faint is all my Body,
My Eyes like spent Lamps, going out, grow
Heavy; my sight forsaking me, and all my Spirits,
As if they heard my passing Bell toll for me,
Take in their Powers, and leave me up to Destiny,
Oh for a little meat! a little water.
I had whole Floods of Tears awhile, that nourished me,
But they are all consumed for thee, Marine;
For thou art dead. Oh take my life, sweet Heaven!
Or make me once more happy in his sight.

She's fallen asleep, sure?
Why should she have this Blessing, and we wake?

This thing has bin our ruin: The Captain had not gone to Sea, but for her
sake; and all those mischiefs that are fallen upon us, are come by her means.


Why should we consume thus and starve? Have nothing to relieve us: And she
live there that bred our Miseries, unrosted or unboil'd, hah!


Right; I have read in Histories of such restoring Meats: Besides, we have
Examples, a thousand Examples, Women that have eaten their Children, Men their
Slaves, nay, their Brothers: But these are nothing; Husbands devoured their
Wives. (They are their Chattels.) And of a School-master, that, in time of
Famine, powdered up all his Scholars -- she's young and tidy -- on my Conscience
she'll eat delicately, just like young Pork; a little leaner: your Opinion,
Surgeon?


I think she may be good meat; but we shall want Salt.


A pox, she wants no powdering, Man.


But to suck out the humorous parts: by all means let's kill her in a Chafe;
she'll eat the sweeter.


Let's kill her any way, and kill her quickly; that we may go to supper.


But how if the Captain --


Oh -- he's dead, and the rest famished. Come, wake her,


Cut her throat, and then divide her; Every man his share.


Hush -- she wakes her self --


Who's there! Oh, Gentlemen! give me some Food, or else I perish: I am just now
dying.


You'll save a labour then: You bred our miseries,
And you shall pay for it: We have no meat;
But all are sick and famished: However, e're
We dye, we'll have one dainty meal.

Shall I be with you, Gentlemen?

Yes, marry shall you; in our Bellies, sweet Lady:
You see we love you well.

What said you, Sir?

Why, Faith, only we'll eat your Ladyship, that's all.

Come, come: Say your prayers, that I may perform --
We are wondrous sharp set. Come, Gentlemen*
Who are for the (...) parts?

I, I.

I, I.

Pray be patient: They will not fall to every ones share.

Oh, hear me! hear me, you barbarous Men!

Not a word --

The Lady's Voice! stand off, Slaves! How now,
What do ye intend, Villains?

Oh, my dear Friend!

My kindest, best Aminta! see, what I have brought thee?

-- These Rogues would have ravished her.
Speak, how was it, Lady?

Forgive 'em, 'Twas their hungers.

Their Hungers! Choke 'em, they would have eaten her!
Oh damned Cannibals! speak, is it true?

For my part, I confess an appetite.

An appetite! I'll fit you for your appetite! since you would be such Devils!
why did you not begin with one another handsomely? And spare the Woman to beget
more Food on?


For my sake spare 'em, Lieutenant: And pray come into the Cave, and eat with
us.


Stir not within forty foot of this Food, if you do, Dogs --


Oh Lieutenant! Lieutenant! Dear noble Lieutenant.


Come Master, and honest Sailers: Let's go in: Oh my Dear! I have strange news
to tell thee: I have discovered a new World, a Paradise of Angels, such as thou
art; that have supplied me with these Meats and Drinks. We shall see 'em to
morrow, and they'll relieve us further: I'll tell thee more within.

And with Devotion thank the Powr's above,
For giving me this means to serve my Love.

Thou best of men! how am I bound to thee.

FInd d'em out quickly, vid out excuse or delays, or begar your Troate sal be
Cut.


Alas, Sir, we left 'em here: But you see the place is fatal, and who knows but
they may be starved, and dead, and rotten.


Rotten: De Dev'la rot 'em! dat is no matre, I will have my revenge on d'em;
dead or alive! Morbleu! I will search every Corner of de World, but I will have
d'em.


You see these Foot-steps, and the tracks new made, show that they have bin
here -- hah! and see a further discovery -- what's that moves there upon the
River?


I see it now plainly. 'Tis a Vessel, and thronged with people -- They seem as
sailing over to that other Country there.


'Tis they, Sir. I know the Captain by his Feather; and if you observe
narrowly, look yonder, you may see the Woman too.


Oh Diable! it is she, begar I know her.


But how is't possible they should get thither?


That indeed is most difficult: And much I wonder by what strange adventure
they had this help: Yet thus far I can advise you, whilst we were Cruising up
and down, before you took us, we chanced to touch upon a place, governed by
Women, and went by night on shore to get fresh Water: Thither, as I suppose,
that Vessel's gone; for it lies Westward.


Show us de vay, make us come thither, or begar you sal be no living Creature.


Sir, I'll do the best I can, though I am but an ill Pilot.


Look to it: For if you fail, expect no mercy.


Was ever Fate like ours, to be so taken.


And by this Vallain La Mure too! for now I know 'Tis he, though misery and Age
disguise me from him. But to relieve us -- take this advise, Son, when we are
landed yonder, instead of searching for the Fugitive Woman, throw thy self on
the mercy of the Protectress; there's more pity to be expected from them, than
from this Barb'rous Wretch.


Well counselled, Sir -- I'll do it -- and hope good Heaven will take compassion
on us.


We are undone else.


Come, my dear, the Song, the Song! methinks I'm so merry of the sudden!


Cynthia, with an awful Power,
Over all Hearts extends her sway:
Did the Eastern Natives know her,
They'd less prize the God of Day.
On her Brow Night shady lies,
Whilst Morning Breaks from her fair Eyes.
When she Dances, all the Graces
Charming motion treat your Eyes;
When she sings, she doubly blesses,
With her skill, and Angels Voice.
Musics soul in Airs sublime,
Whilst every Heart still beats the time.
When she smiles, you may discover
Golden Coasts, and wealthy Bliss;
But her Frowns throw back each Lover*
To Cold Green-land, where we freeze.
Men may see the Glittering Shore,
But ne'er deserve, to reach the Ore.


This is the happiest Day that ever blessed our Life. Some of the men are landed
already.


Where, where! did you see 'em, my Dear?


Through the West-Gate of the Garden that looks towards the Sea. Well, I swear
there's one of 'em so pretty a fellow, that I could not forbear Oagling him for
my Heart.


You mad Creature, you: And yet he may be a Monster under his Clothes, for
ought you know.


If he were: He is not the first Monster a Woman has bin fond of, I hope. I
knew one so fond of a Monkey once, she desired to be married to it.


Why really the Masculine Creature comes so near the Nature of Humanity, that
really one would wonder: But did she desire to wed the Creature!


But, Sister, prithee are they all young Men: Can thou tell? For you know
Age will but trouble us; Their Imperfections are not to be reformed: And your
man, when he comes to be old, is good for little or nothing.


Why, troth, I think these are a mixed Party, some young, some old; some weak,
and some strong; some that look briskly, as if they had Wit; and others
Clownishly, as if they might be made Fools.


Venus direct me to one of them. I long to make a Fool of a Man strangely.


Ay, that's a general longing amongst us: For I never heard yet, that a woman
was very desirous that a man should get the upper-hand of her.


Then she's a Fool. For my part, Ple give a Man the upper hand of me, with all
my heart.


Alas! she's too young to understand good Decorum. To use a good Decorum is a
wonderful thing: And wonderful things are beyond thy knowledge, Child. The Girl
is very ignorant, really.


Why then I desire to be instructed really. 'Tis strange you'll allow no one to
speak of a man, but your self.


'Tis likely my Abilities are more --


Your Abilities --


Alas! thou art a young, raw, crude insipid thing, really.


And you are a stale, musty, undesirable thing, really; nay, to vex you
thoroughly, a thing of five and forty.


How! five and forty -- let me come to her. Really the Creature provokes me
now.


How now Malapert! how dare you mention any ones age?


I five and forty! you Squab-Duckling?


Yes, that you are, and more; and your Desires lye so hid in the Ashes of your
age; that 'tis impossible to kindle ye.


But if I were as she, I'd kindle ye --


What, are you coming in with your Abilities too?


I'll tell you instantly.


Hold, hold -- pray let us not enter into Battle upon the Point; but leave it
to the Men rather, who by this time are coming to receive Audience: But come,
enough of this dear Sister; we shall have our hands full, I warrant you --


A Common-Wealth of Women, say you, Captain?


Most certain! all Women; and such as share the Vanity and Ambition of the Sex,
secure and unconfined.


What will become of us now? All Women! what! ne'er a Man amongst 'em, to get
'em Children; and do such Drudgery.


Not one, Sir.


Sure they'll be good to me, for Sexes sake?


And have we then, like Flounders, leapt out of the Frying-Pan into the Fire:
Fled from a Female Fiend or two at home, to be plagued here with a whole Nation
of Devils?


For my part I expect to be unmanned within these two days, so preferred as a
Chamber-maid to one of 'em, and daily employed in the most Heroic Exercises of
washing and starching.


Washing and starching! why, thou speak of Honourable Employments. Come,
shall I give thee a taste of thy true Office? Thou wilt be preferred to be
Gentleman-Usher in ordinary to her Ladyships Lap-Dog.


Oh!


Nay, hear it out, Man: And daily be Commanded to exercise thy patience in
holding him out upon natural Necessities.


Oh! Zooks, I'll be hanged first.


Ha, ha, ha.


And for thy part, thou wilt


Oh insupportable! the Devil shall have her first.


And if thou fail in the least punctilio of Duty, then expect the lash, for
thou wilt be jerked unmercifully. Nay they will do it only to breathe upon
thee; and scourge thee every Morning to keep themselves in wind.


Oh, dear Lieutenant, not a word more, unless you would see me give up the
Ghost before you. He has given me the griping of the Guts with the thought on it
already.


Come, come, take Courage; they will be kinder.
And hark! the Music sounds, they are coming,
Be sure you all stand ready, and look boldly;
And with your best Behaviour make addresses.
Our Lives and Liberties depend upon their pities,
And Death waits on their Anger.

Oh, the Pox take 'em, how imperiously they look?


Sure they are Furies!


Let them be Devils, they are Devils of Flesh and Blood. And after so long a
Lent, to me they are Angels.


Oh Heavens! are these the Jewels you run mad for? These Jack-a-Lents! these
shrivelled poor stuffed Eel-skins!


Pox on her! what does she call us Eel-skins?


What can you see amongst these signs of Men, that can oblige from you a gentle
look?


Signs of Men! very fine --


The Devil take 'em, they fright me plaguily!


We see with our own Eyes, Madam. Besides Age makes your Highness look through
the wrong end of the perspective.


Can nothing persuade you to love your selves; and place your happiness in Cold
and Chaste Embraces of each other? -- alas! my Child: Thou know not what man
is.


No -- but I desire to know, that's the Point.


And when thou dost; how soon wilt thou repent?


I know not: but I fancy I should not a great while.


But they are starved!


No matter, we'll feed 'em up; we'll cram 'em as we do Chickens, but we'll
fatten 'em really.


Besides, Madam, we had your grant to have 'em as they were.


Do ye see the Woman, Madam?


I have viewed her long -- I swear, 'tis a sweet Creature! And to my self I do
appear deformed, when I consider her. And yet she is the Stranger's Sister! why
then should I fear? She cannot be my Rival.


When you repent
That you refused my Council; may that add
To your afflictions, that you were so forward
To leap into the Gulf of your misfortunes.
But have your wishes -- I will keep my promise.

I am instructed: But take heed, dear Friend, you prove not false; my life you
know depends on it.


Thou art thy own assurance.
And should so well discern thy own perfections,
No doubt should reach thee: Not a word more.
You know me.

They make towards us: I am damnably afraid of that Old Woman, her Blood is
Curdled: Pox on her, she has no Devil in her.


That you are poor and miserable Wretches,
My Eyes inform me: That, without our Succours,
Hope cannot flatter you to dream of safety,
The present Case you are in can resolve you;
That to be merciful, is to draw near
The Heavenly Essence. Whether you will be
Thankful, I do not question, nor demand
What Country bred you, what names, what manners.
To us it is sufficient we relieve
Such as are miserable: And I command you,
As we are not ambitious to know
Farther of you, that you, on pain of Death,
Presume not to enquire, what we are,
Or whence derived.

In all things, we obey you.

You speak as becomes you.
First then, and willingly, deliver up
Those Weapons we could force from you.

How! Have I bid defiance to the rage of Fire and Water, and held the Devil at
staves end so often, to be baffled at last by an old Weather-beaten Fire-ship?


We lay 'em down most gladly at your feet.

I have had a Combat with many a bold Wench,
But never was disarmed before.

Well -- I do hope to live to see her turned into a Gibb-Cat, and mewing upon
the top of the House for all this.


Hark you! have yon a mind to be hanged, Scoundrel, ha?


No great Stomach to it, Lieutenant: I had rather go to ^upper, for my part.


Mum then -- not a word more, for your life.

And now hear Comfort.
Your wants shall be supplied: And though it be
A debt, Women may challenge to be sued to;
Especially, from those we may Command;
We give you up that Power. And therefore
Freely each make his Choice.

Can this be true, Sirs! sure we dream?

'Tis certainly true, and we are the happiest Rogues --

O rare old Woman, gad sa' me! why, who would have thought this of her?


Ay, who indeed? But come, let's mind our Business.

Then here I fix.

Nay, hold -- she's mine, I chose her first.

And this mine! ah, this little Rogue, will lye so snug.

And this mine: There's nothing like Womans-flesh after a long Lent -- dear
Fubs, I make bold.


Yours, Rascals, yours! what, before my Captain here,
And I am served? hah! Stand off, Varlets;
Touch 'em not, on your peril: Harkee Monsieur Wardrobe,
You are not giving order to a Taylor
For the fashion of a new suit now?
Nor are you in your Ware-house, Mr. Cit.
Stand back, and give your betters place; we are Soldiers.
And grumble not, for if you do, as I love meat,
I will so swinge the salt Itch out of you --
Away, I say. And now Captain, Master, and the rest
Of us, that are Brothers, and good Fellows, we have bin
Too late by the Ears, and yet smart for our Follies.
To end therefore all future Emulation,
If you please to trust to my Election, you shall say
I am not partial to my self. And doubt not,
I'll give you all Content.

Agreed; with all my heart.

Ay, ay; agreed, agreed.

Ay, ay; agreed, agreed.

Then do but observe how learned and discreetly
I will proceed; and as a skilful Doctor,
In all the quirks belonging to the matter,
Read over your Complexions -- for you, Captain,
Being first in place, and therefore first to be served,
I give my Judgment thus: For your aspect, you are much inclined to
melancholy, and that tells me that sullen Saturn (...) predominance at your
Nativity; a malignant Planet,
And if not qualified by a sweet Conjunction,
A soft and sanguine Girl, born under Venus,
It may prove fatal: Therefore to your arms
I give this blooming Creature.

As I could wish: Till now I ne'er was happy.


Nor I accursed!


A curse of that Lieutenant; I hope I shall have the heart to cut his Throat,
one time or other.


Master, you are old, and may want spurring up:
Therefore to oblige you, here's a Bradamanta,
Young, wanton as the Roe, and brisk, and sound Boy.

A weak old Man allotted to my Share!
I'll have none of him.

Thou would have two -- nay, I think twenty;
But fear not, sweet-heart; though he be old, he's tough;
He'll never flinch for it.

A very pleasant fellow that.

Here's a fair Heard of Does methinks before me,
And now for a Barren one.
For though I am Arts-Master of the Science,
I do not love to Father Children: Like the Grand
Signior then, thus I walk in my Seraglio;
And view 'em as I pass: Then draw I forth my Handkerchief;
And having made my choice: I thus bestow it.

On me, why thou art not mad?

No, faith -- I have only a fit of Love upon me, or so:
And now my Choice is made -- fall on ye hungry Rascals. --

Ha, ha, ha.

He's merry. Oh my heart! now, dear Marine, remember your Vows.


Hush, no more of that, if you love me; we are observed.

Do but see what a strong Contention there is, betwixt my
Mothers mirth and anger.

Nay, nay, no Coyness, Madam: Be Mistress of your word,
For I am resolute, and must, and will enjoy you.

Be advised, Fool: I am old.
What can thou e're expect from one that's fifty?

Never talk on it; the older the better:
For your youthful stomachs are still Craving.
Ay, laugh on, laugh on: Good Gentlemen, do:
I shall make holiday, and sleep.
When 'tis ten to one your Hearts ache.

A strange mad fellow this!
Well, Sir, I'll give you hearing. And as I like
Your wooing and discourse -- but I must tell you, Sir,
We rich Widows, look for great Sums in present;
Or assurances of Ample Jointures.

Sums in present -- with all my heart -- I'll present
Ye a Jewel worth 500 pieces immediately.

Ay, if thou can but do that now!

Can do it -- why, what is't a young brisk able Fellow cannot do? Harkee,
Captain, a word with you.


What say thou?


Why, faith, that to woo a Widow with empty hands,
Is no good Heraldry; therefore let's to the Gold,
And share it equally, 'twill speak for us,
More than a thousand Complements or Cringes.
Besides, 'twill beget us respect,
And if ever Fortune befriend us with a Ship,
Largely supply us with provision.

Well advised: Defer it not: bring in the Trunks there.

Are you all contented?

All, all.

This Fellow talks Mountains.

Nay, Madam, now your grief is unseasonable.
Indeed I love you as my Sister. And you
Shall find it -- I love your Brother two.

Oh my Cruel Fortune --

See here, the Idol of the Lapidary.

To get these Pearls, the slavish Negro
Dives to the bottom of the Sea. And thus
I make good my promise.

And here's Gold, for which the Industrious
Merchant touches at either Pole --

Hah -- Oh ye immortal Powers!

I'll give my Mistress this Jewel: then draw her into play, top false Dice upon
her, and rook her on it again.


Here's the never-failing purchase of Lordships and Honours.

For which the Sailor Scorns tempestuous winds,
And spits defiance in the Sea.

Ay, she's surprised, Boys --
I knew this would take her strangely.
What says my reverend illustrious Mistress,
Look I not lovely now?

Uglier than Hell -- Oh my Stars!
Be now for ever blessed, that thus have brought
To my revenge these Robbers: Take your Javelins all;
And nail these Monsters to the Earth.

What's that, are we Monsters again, already?

Hey day -- what a plague's the matter now?

Oh Daughter!
And you Companions with me in all fortunes,
Look on this Treasure; and these Jewels.
These were my own, I know 'em perfectly:
With these my dear Sebastian put to Sea.
And, doubtless, these the Villains, these the Pirates,
That not alone deprived him of this Treasure,
But took his life.

Harkee, Lieutenant, you see this does take her strangely.


Confound your Politiques: now we are ten times worse than ever.


Peace, ye Curs you: Do I live to be the Subject of your mouldy jests?


What Cruel Fate pursues us! this Chance is past redressing.

I am well enough served, that must be offering Jointures,
Jewels, and precious things; more than I brought with me.

Now strike all; revenge, revenge.

Hear me, Dear Mother!
And when the greatest Cruelty is justice,
Do not show mercy. Death to these starved Wretches
Is a Reward, not a Punishment: Let 'em live
To know the full weight of your displeasure,
And that they may have sense to feel the Torments
They have deserved: Allow 'em some small time.

'Tis well Counselled. Be it so.

For the Captain here, I'll be his Jaylour;
I'll fetter him to purpose.

Gracious Madam -- hear us but speak.

Insolent Traitors! would you speak! Away with them.
Chain 'em in Prisons: Vengeance, though slow paced,
At last o'retakes the Guilty. And the rage
Of the incensed Powers, still falls most sure
On Villains, when they think they're most secure.

SInce Love the noblest passion of our Souls,
With sacred influence, was ordained by Heaven;
To refine us from the Dross of dull mortality,
Why is't a fault in me? It is not, must not.
I am sure I was Created to love on;
And be I hope beloved -- Oh this dear Stranger,
Can he be guilty of such Villainies? No, 'tis
Impossible! my Mother wrongs him sure!
Here comes his Sister -- she must be my
Agent -- I have her in my Power.
And she must serve me.

Can any misery be compared to mine?
Or any love have so severe a Fortune?
Oh, Marine! Where art thou now, my life,
My better part?
Or what's this senseless frame, without thee!
Hah, the Protectresses Daughter! your pardon,
Madam; I fear I am to blame.

Not at all. Come hither, be not frighted,
And think not you steal this Liberty: For
I give it you.
Your tender years, and Innocence, assure me
You had no share in the wrongs these men did us:
Your Brother was mis-led sure.

He mis-led, Madam!
Alas! he's innocent of all he's taxed with:
But I Perhaps know something of your Story.

How! you know something?

Yes, Madam, there's something in your late relation,
So like my own misfortunes; that my heart
Has ever since bin racked with hopes and doubts.
I think you said Don Sebastian was your Father.

Most certainly! a noble Portugal! undone by Pirates.

Such a Sebastian was my Father too, like him,
A Portugal, and like him undone! Oh! speak on,
For my mind gives me, I can make some great Discovery.

It's impossible it should relate to us. But however,
Some other time I'll give you hearing; now I
Have other Business, you say your Brother is entirely innocent.

He is; I am sure he is: For he's a Man
Grounded in so much Virtue, and so noble:
No baseness e're could shelter in his heart.

I must believe it: and now share my Soul,
With it its dearest secret -- I love him.

Love him, Madam!

Yes, and never shall have peace, till I am His wife.


Oh Heavens --


Ha! the meaning of that sigh, does the news Displease you?


No Madam: 'Twas only the effects of my surprise.


Take care, how you abuse me. I have trusted you with more than my life, my
first Love: Therefore use me well. And dearest Sister: For so I'll call you
ever. And methinks we should be Sisters, Natural Sisters: Yet, if you were, I
could not love you more; befriend me in this Business.


To my power, Madam. Yet though he has some Virtue,
He has faults too! nor can deserve your Love,
For you will find him dangerous, fickle, proud:
Soon glutted with your love, and soon forgetful;
I could say more --

Do not, lest I suspect you.
But use your utmost art to win him for me.
(For I perceive you have an interest in him.)
Or failing, lose your self, and me for ever:
I have given him liberty to walk in the Grove
By the Sea-shore. And where to night you'll find him,
Moaning his Fortune; there alone accost him.
Be but successful, and by this I swear,
I'll always love, and ever keep thee here.

AH the Devil take the Captain, that brought us to this Cursed Place. Why,
rowing at the Galleys is better by half than this slavery.


Ay, if I had bin ruled by my poor Spouse at home,
I had never come to this; well, dear Peggy,
I find the loss of thee now?

Come, come; few know the goodness of Wives, till they want 'em. Ah would I
were at home, I'd ne'er throw a main again, but live sober, and sing Psalms --
prithee Surgeon thread this Needle for me?


Alas, I cannot see, Man! I have made my self blind with weeping.


Come, come, mind your business.


Oh that ever I should come to this -- little did I think, when I put to Sea,
to fall into the hands of these Petticoat-whipsters! Oh, gads bud -- I have
spun a fair thread.


Nay, Faith you do well to air us, Ladies, we should grow musty else. But
prithee, my dear Penthisilea, whence comes this kindness -- 'Tis excellent
Wine, Faith.


Sir, 'tis the favour of the Protectress Daughter;
I wish you deserve it.

Nay, the best way to make us deserve it,
Is to fill our bellies, that's the truth on it.
Here, Master.

Come, skink away Boy.


How, the Lieutenant at liberty! and drinking Wine too! whilst we are famishing
here. Choke him.


I thought they would free him -- ah these Women love a strong Fellow
strangely.


Madam, my service t'ee -- here's a health -- let me see -- here's a health --
to your merry thought.


Now their hearts are steeped in Wine, and their bones at rest. They can talk a
little.


Prithee do not slander our bones -- but let 'em be quiet, they have bin our
Servants thus long, and had their share of Pains and Recreations; and to
affront 'em now, gad is fowl play.


Well, Fools may talk of Mythridate, Cordials, Elixers; but from my Cradle this
was my only Physic -- why, here's a Colour now! what Lady's Cheek, though
Cerus'd and Virmillion'd like a picture, comes near it? Here's your Complexion
for you! O my dear, faith I love thee with passion.


There's Fruits, and Confections within too, Lieutenant.


A pox, Boys meat -- I am past it, here's strong food for Men. Nectar, old Lad.
Mistress of Merry-hearts, once more I am bold with you.


Take heed man -- prithee be temperate:


Temperate! why, how now Tar! hast thou lived at Sea so long, where to be
sober, whilst we have Wine aboard, is Capital Treason, and dost thou preach
Temperance, and Sobriety?


See, the rest of your Companions are at their Duty.
What think you now, are you not happy in us?

Ha, ha, ha.


Hang him, he has found us out; now shall we be jeered to Death.


And what think you of changing places with one of these now -- hah --


I'll be hanged first.


Ha, ha, ha -- why, how now Monsieur Wardrobe, what in the Sudds? Well, scour
the Shifts clean, do ye hear! Sirrah -- Or your Patroness will swinge you. Look,
Master, here's another of 'em at his Exercise.


Prithee, dear Lieutenant, leave Joking; and give us a sup of the Bottle. We
are almost starved.


What, my honest Partner, and Companion in starving, Ned Glister-pipe too!
Harkee; Thou hast skill in Phlebotomy. Let the Ladies blood. Cool 'em, Cool
'em; do ye hear? 'Tis a better Employment; and leave spinning, you Fool, leave
spinning.


Leave spinning! Ay, would I could i'faith.


One gulf, dear Lieutenant; but one gulf.


Well said, honest In and In -- Come 7 or 11? Sirrah, I set you this Bottle.


Oh that this damned Epicure, should have the pleasure of being drunk, and we
ready to Choke.


Oh, oh.

Oh my Jewel, my pretty Dear Jewel.
Sirrah take him up again: what do you grow lazy?

Oh the Devil; what a Jewel's here! Insupportable! Zooks,
I'll hang my self. I will never lead this life.

What's here, my Baboon Merchant too! ha, ha, ha; not to hinder your business,
Friend; one word with you -- what think you now,

Am not I a Conjurer?

A Devil, I think.

Sirrah -- Carry the dear Creature to the River side, and let him drink -- do it
quickly -- must I spur you on, you dull Drone --


The dear Creature! a pox on it's Dearness -- gad I'll hang my self to night --
But I'll first be revenged on her -- for I'll hang up her Monster too -- I am
resolved on that --


Well, honest Towzer -- farewell to thee.


Come, let's be gone -- I see Clarinda coming yonder.


Go march, Sir, march. Nay, without reply, as you expect to be obliged
hereafter.


One word to my Friends first, and then I am for you.
Well, Gentlemen, why don't you Joke now?
What not one jeer all this while -- hah -- harkee, Friends.
Look to 'em, do ye hear! and give 'em due Correction. They'll never mind their
Business else. I know 'em to a hair. Ha, ha, ha --


Is there no remedy? Must the Captain, and this Devil of a Lieutenant,
perpetually plague us? And we not revenge it.


Well thought on, faith: I have found one way to do it, and home too.


What is't?


Yonder comes the Protectresses Daughter: Who, I am certain, loves the
Captain. And he has told her, this Lady that came with him, is his Sister. Now
the only way to be revenged on 'em all, and procure our Liberty, is to --


Inform her the contrary.


Right.


Let's do it instantly, here she comes.


Bless thy Divine Beauty.


Mirror of sweetness, vouchsafe one word, we beseech thee.


Poor flattery! what would you have, ye wretches?


We can discover something that concerns you --


Something about the Captain.


Ha. The Captain!


Promise us but our Liberty, and a little meat, and you shall know all.


Know all! how they make me tremble! what shall I know? Speak, and if it merits
favour, you shall have it.


This little Gentlewoman that's with the Captain --


Well -- what of her -- his Sister, you mean.


Sister -- ha, alas! you are deceived in her!


Deceived in her.


She is no Sister.


No Sister -- what is she then? speak quickly! Oh my heart.


She is his --


Peace: Let me speak -- why, faith, sweet Lady, she is as a Man would say his
--


What?


His Mistress -- or so. That's the plain truth on it.


They say, she is Virtuous -- but she has bin his Cabin-Mate this six Months,
to my knowledge.


His Cabin-mate too -- oh this sly Serpent: Be sure you do not lie to me.


If I do -- hang me empty --


No -- you shall be fed -- but with such food as you have given me, new misery
-- away with 'em to Prison -- speak not a word -- begone. Oh I could rage and
Curse, and kill now. Kill him, her, any thing in my revenge; which they shall
feel, and instantly. And now brave Mother, follow thy noble Anger: And I'll
help thee.


What storm is coming now? What must we lose the Men again?


I'll lose my life first -- I assure you, I like my Man extremely.


The Rogues are plaguy unfortunate. I am afraid we shall have but an unlucky
breed from 'em.


Yes really, the fellows behave themselves with diligence enough.


What betwixt fear, and love, they do their Duty:
But for my part, I begin to distate the mercenary Rogues.

They say they are Gentlemen: But they prove Mungrels.


Pray do not rail at the men: I'll assure you, mine proves admirably.


How do thine suffer; Iuliet?


Faith, like Boys: They are fearful in all Fortunes -- when I smile, thay
kneel, and beg to have that Face Continued -- And like poor Dogs, adore the
ground I go on; when I frown, they hang their Tails, like fearful Sheep-hounds
-- show 'em a Crust of bread, they'll Saint me presently.

Frisk up and down, and skip about like Apes;
And for a drop of Wine, be whipped like Hackney's.
I can saddle 'em, ride 'em -- do what I will with 'em.

Ridiculous Wretches: Have they names like Christians.


Oh, very fair names, and brag of mighty Kindred too. They offer very
handsomely. But that I am a Fool, and dare not venture too much; they are sound
too, o'my Conscience, or very near upon it.


These are poor, base, Creatures.


Pax on 'em -- 'tis that makes me hate 'em: If they were, or would be manly in
their sufferings, perhaps one might strain a point or two.


Mine, I assure you, were not cast in such base Mould -- Afflictions, Tortures,
are Names, and Natures of delight to my Men. They sleep soundly, and seldom
troublesome, unless, 'tis when they dream of Fights and Tempests -- And then
they roar, and whistle for Bottles of Wine. And sometimes down they'll throw me
-- and in that rage, for they are violent fellows, they play such Freaks --


Yes, indeed, the Rogues will fumble one strangely.


If they have meat, they thank me; if none, they heartily desire they may be
hanged.


Come, come; let's all go to the Protectress, and intercede for 'em.


For my part really, I'll mutiny if I have not mine freed to night.


And I mine -- for I assure you, he's a Man every inch of him.


This Grove, Sir, belongs to the Protectresses Palace. And the Lights, that we
saw just at our Entrance, I suppose belong to her.


Begar you had best supposa right. And lead us right too. If I no find this
damned Woman, I shall find your head: Morbleu I will hang you, dat is in plain
Term.


Hush, Sir -- and pray let us hide our selves behind these Bushes. For, if my
Eyes are perfect; I see a Man coming down the walk.


Fly Son to the Protectress, this is the Minute, or we are lost. Throw thy self
at her feet, and discover us -- I'd rather be at her mercy, and in Slavery,
than live to be thus used by this horrid Villain; away -- that's the Palace
just before thee.


I could discern him plainly -- I am certain, 'twas a man -- ha, and yonder I
think he comes.


my Love, where art thou?


Jerne, is not that she?


It is, Sir -- I heard her Voice.


Stand close, make no noise.


How well this darkness suits my melancholy? Who's there?


but who else can it be? No other Man's at liberty in the Island. Oh my best
life: I have the saddest news to tell thee: But come, let us go farther off, to
secure us from being over-heard.


Ay begar, you sal be secura presently! I will secure you --


He has carried her off; come, let's follow.


I must obey you, Sir! Cruel Fortune! no news of my Son yet!


Search round the Grove -- And all you find bring hither, if they resist, or,
seem unwilling, force 'em --


Force Marine hither too, and the sly Witch, his pretended Sister.


Stranger, thou hast told me wonders, which if true, as by my beating heart I
have some hopes, this day will be the happiest of my life -- You say your
Name's Nicusa?


It is, Madam -- And the Son of Don Sebastian a Portuguise; by adverse Fortune
thrown upon your Coast, Slaves to La Mure, a barb'rous French Pirate.


More wonders still, for by that name they stilled the Villain that was Author
of our Misery.


Believe him not, Madam; he is a Man: And men have the Cursed trick of lying
from their Cradles.


I hope he does not. And now methinks there are some features in his face -- I
am acquainted with -- what was your Mother's name?


Roselia.


Oh Heaven!


One, whom though I can hardly remember, yet if I may presume to speak my
thoughts, had some features just like yours -- But here comes one will satisfy
you fully.


So much of joy crowds fast into my heart,
There is not room for utterance: Oh, speak Sir, speak!
And if you are Sebastian; speak it boldly:
And give me joy as great, as is my wonder:
For sure you much resemble that dear Man --
Which if you prove -- look up, and see Roselia,
Your Roselia.

'Tis so, by all that's sacred. Thou art mine indeed.
For sure as thou art Roselia, I am Sebastian.

Oh my dear Lord!

Propitious Stars, I thank you.
And Fortune! now thou hast rewarded me
For all past miseries.

Rise Son. And now, my Dear Sebastian!
Look on Clarinda here; this is thy Daughter.

Thou beauteous Spring, and Fountain of my joys, receive my Blessing -- But
Aminta, my lost Aminta -- were she but here too, then my joys were perfect.


Who calls Aminta -- here I am, and come to make a third in this strange
meeting.


Miracle, on Miracle!


This Adventure would make a Theme for an Excellent History --


I am Aminta, and, as I was informed by my Nurse, am Daughter to Sebastian and
Roselia. More of the business, that French Pirate there, whom Heaven has
strangely thrown upon this Island, can soon inform you --


By all that's good -- 'Tis he! that Villain, La Mure; I know him.


So -- we are in a hopeful condition.


Suspend your wonder, Madam -- 'Tis the same, that Execrable Robber, that
caused our separation.


I was saying just now, I vud hang him, Morbleu, now I fear he will hanga me!
Oh damned Whore, Zh^lt, Fortune.


Speak, abhorred Villain! And if thou can discover any thing to save thy
life, do it quickly.


The Diable take you all. Dat is all I will discover, for, vrom dis moment, me
will no open my Lips.


Let him be racked; Slave, we'll make you confess.


Hold, Madam!
I, as his Companion, can inform you
In any thing you demand.

What is this Lady here?

She is you^ Daughter, and her name, Aminta!
The Infant that La Mure carried away with him,
When he left you alone upon this Island,
She has bin bred in England, from whence to avoid his Love, she lately fled
away with this young Gentleman, and afterwards wracked upon that Island, where
you found 'em.


The rest I can make out: upon that very Island,
Seeking for shelter from this Insolent Robber:
I landed with my Son, and some Negro-Slaves,
That set upon me for my treasure, and after in
The fray ruined themselves. There for the space of sixteen tedious Years, we
lived oppressed with all the miseries humanity could suffer, till Heaven grown
weary of afflicting us, by the means of this young man, at last relieved us.
Captain, look in my face, do you not know me?


Not I, Sir; nor can I ever call to mind, that I, till, now have seen you.


I shall refresh your Memory:
Have you forgot two wretched Portuguese?
That, whilst you were mutining for the Gold
They showed you -- Cut the Cable, got your
Ship away, and left you?

That trick of Fortune, Sir, I have reason to remember.


Those famished Portuguese, were my self and Son -- but being at Sea, we were
afterwards retaken by La Mure, and describing your company, and this young
Virgin, who now I'll call my Daughter; whom it seems he came in search of; we
were brought back, where now we live to make you some amends for all past ills.
But where are all your Comrades?


Go, set 'em all at liberty -- and bring 'em hither:
The Case is clear now, how they got that Treasure:
And, dear Aminta! let me hold thee fast,
Here to my heart -- whilst tears Express my joy,
For this most strange unlooked for change of Fortune.

Oh Mother! what a happy hour is this! How blessed! how full of rapture! And as
the chief Author of all our present Happiness, receive this noble Gentleman. No
Brother now, but my betrothed Husband.


Sir, for your ill usage, happening through our Errors, let this atone.


A gift Heaven cannot mend.

Which thus I ratify -- Captain, she's thine --

Now, dearest Sister, I can truly call you so!
Forgive the small offence done to your Love;
Oh pardon it, -- I conjure you by your Virtue.

I do with all my heart. And from this moment banish all fond desires.


Madam, though Fortune willing to oblige me,
And make amends for many days of sorrows,
Gives me your Sister: And in her all happiness:
Yet in the midst af all this Crowd of joy,
My grateful heart does still remember you;
And thankfully acknowledge all your favours.

So, so! I like this very well -- now sure some of the men will fall to our
share again.


I hope so -- I am sure there can be no good Conclusion without 'em.


What's to be done with us now, I wonder?


There are not many new ways of starving, that's my Comfort.


Gentlemen, I am to beg your pardon too, and inform you, that you have suffered
by a mistake: But now you are free, as if in your own Nation.


Gad -- 'Twas well you sent as you did: For I was just upon the Swing, the
Devil and I had fully agreed upon the matter -- you may see by my Bridle here.
I was just ready for a journey.


And what say you, my merry mad Lieutenant?
Were you in the same humour?

I in the same humour! Ha, ha, ha.


Ay, were not you almost ready to Dangle in one of your Garters, for the loss
of your Widow, and the rest of your mighty Expectations?


No -- If I were, the Dence take me.


Nor you have not bin concerned about it?


Perhaps I have had the griping of the Guts, A kind of a grumbling humour, or
so, to be at you, -- But no more -- for my part, I gave you over for an
obstinate Old Woman, and resolved to think no more of you.


Well, Sir, with my self I can do you no justice -- because this Gentleman here
takes possession of me by a better Title.


How, a better Title! Faith, methinks a Widow, and a Woman of your Sense,
should think my Title better than his, by twenty years purchase, by your
favour, Madam.


Ay, a Widow indeed might think so: But know, (Gallant that should have bin)
the Fates have so ordered it, that I am now found to be a Wife.


A Wife!


Even so. And to this very Gentleman, that lays such Claim. But to make thee
full amends, for the loss of my self -- if this Lady can creep into thy heart
-- Take her, she's thine; she's rich, but a little foppish.


With all my heart, by this light; she's rich you say -- I'll marry her, that I
may beat her, and make her Loyal.


Come, let's retire, and make a glad relation of our Fortunes: 'Twill add to
our content; Oh my Sebastian! I have miracles to tell thee, how I came hither
to the Women's Common-Wealth: How chosen Protectress! it is a Tale bears full
variety.


And so does mine, which we'll recount at leisure.

Convey those Pirates straight away to Prison,
Till we consider of their punishment:
For times are altered now, so is the Government,
Whilst my Sebastian lives: 'Tis he must rule it.
Prepare a Banquet, and let Music wait us,
For now we have all the Blessings Fate can give.

And I all joys that Crown a happy life,
Possessing my Aminta for my Wife.

HOW silly 'tis for one, not yet Thirteen,
To hope her first Essay should please you Men:
You cannot taste what such a Creature speaks;
Would she were three years older for your sakes;
Two handfuls taller, a Plump pretty Lass,
I doubt not then my Epilogue would pass.
But, as I am, for your Applause I sue,
Pray spare me for the Good that I may do.
Gallants, I better shall perform e're long,
Despise not a poor thing because she's young.
Twigs may be bent, Trees are too stubborn grown;
And the Roses Bud is sweet as Roses blown.
In China (as I often have been told)
The Women marry at eleven years old:
Our Play-House is a kind of China too,
And nothing like the Stage to make me grow;
For, though not Power, I have the Will to please,
And Will's a mighty help in such a Case.
We on this fruitful Soil have Women seen,
That in few Months have grown as big again.
Oh Iemminy! what is the Cause of that?
I wonder what they Eat to grow so Fat?
We young ones know not how that business is;
But for all that we may be allow'd to guess;
And I beginning now to chatter Sense,
Encouraged, may divert a Twelve-month hence:
And therefore humbly thus I make Address,
Excuse Faults, and accept my Will to please;
But if you fail me, may you nevermore
Kiss Woman under (at the least) fourscore.

