FAncy and Sense the glorious Twins of Wit,
That used to embellish what a Poet writ,
Are now as poor and despicable grown,
As an old wrinkled Trader of the Town,
With hollow Eyes, no Teeth, and tattered Gown;
Like her they are neglected by you Wits,
And forced to trade with Country Squires and Cits,
Who with their Eighteen-pence uphold the Stage,
Which you would ruin with your Critic Rage,
By Heaven, Sirs, it is a Cursed Age.
Too late 'tis now for Poets to get Fame,
Their Works are only fit for you to Dam.
They toil, 'tis true, but gain, instead of Praise,
Malignant Censures; Thorns, instead of Baize.
The great Cabal so partial do appear,
An Authors Wit lies buried in his Fear.
And as a Painter in his skill grown nice,
Still mends and mends till he has spoiled the Piece;
So too much care in striving to essay
New Scenes of Wit, oft ruins a good Play.
The Factious Club are Merciless of late,
Carping, Ill-natur'd, and Degenerate;
Sifting so much to find each little Fault,
They lose their best diversion in their Thought.
And though facetious Plays, and the learned Pit,
When Colleges have failed, have taught them Wit;
The Stages Ruin unconcerned you see,
And Dam the Original of Gallantry.
Should we leave off then, we should hear you say,
Dam 'em, what Drones are these, why don't they Play?
'Sblud I shall never leave this Wenching vein,
Jack, my last swinging Clap's broke out again.
And if we do Play -- then you Censure raise,
And to encourage us, Dam all our Plays;
Nothing will please, I wonder what a Devil
Makes Men of Wit so formally uncivil.
But since 'tis so, and you thus Cruel prove,
We must appeal to our Friends that sit above,
Whose wise indifferent Censures grace a Play,
As Squibs and Crackers do -- a Lord Mayors Day.

Sir! Not a Penny: I say 'tis lost upon thee.


I say -- How Sir!


How Sir: I'll tell you Sir -- First thou art a Melancholy Fellow, a kind of
Hypochondriac, as I am told, and instead of making, spoilst good Company.


Pish: Good Sir believe it not.


Secondly: Sir, thou hast quite forgot to sing a Quality that was Hereditary,
a Benefit that has Graced our Family for above these 20 years, and like a
Varlet thou hast neglected it.


Not I in faith Sir! You are mis-inform'd. I am not melancholy, nor any thing
of that which you imagine. I can sing too, loudly, and for the Benefit of
Company. 'Tis true Sir, want of Money --


Sir, Sir, a lye deserves a Cudgel. Do not vex me. Udsbores, Did I not see
you yesterday at Sir Arthur Oldloves, holding your hands up thus -- conning
your Lesson? What business can you have with Antiquaries, except it be to
practice disobedience, or turn Precisian to disgrace thy Family?


Why Sir. I'll tell you what.


No Sir: You need not;
I know the trick already. Speed the Plough Sir.
Alas! What should you do with Money? To you that neglect the World -- Money's
a Torment. I have considered it -- and will not tempt you -- Money was made for
those that laugh, and drink with appetite, whose merry Souls -- put Padlocks on
dull Conscience, and live the life of sense cum Privilegio.


I will excel in Mirth Sir. Every day shall give you proof, each hour variety,
your House shall ring with shouts of Joy and Music: I long have wished it so:
But still the Duty, the reserved Reverence that I bore you Sir made me forbear
-- But since you'll have it otherwise, it meets my wishes fully.


And mine too Sir. And a pox on Reverence I say, an Ounce of true English Mirth
is worth a Pound on it: But this Antiquary -- What Business had you there Sir?
answer me that.


Sir, there is a rich Widow lodges at his House, one to whom my private
inclinations have been long devoted; and by feigning an Austerity yesterday in
Sir Arthur's Company, I got access to her.


Is she merry, can she sing?


To a Miracle Sir. She's extremely Musical: Plays of the Guitar, and tells a
Story with the best Grace I ever saw.


'Sbud a fine Woman: I warrant her. Hang pinching, Harry thou shalt have her.


She's very reserved; but withal uses a modest freedom that's infinitely
taking.


Udsbores! I like it well, a merry Modesty, and an unstained Integrity add much
to Feminine Capacities: Let the world rub, Harry -- I say thou shalt have her.
There, there's Money for thee -- Nay if thou were it there upon design, 'tis
another matter, I must allow that. When I was a young Man I was the best at a
design: Ah, I could have gone through stitch i'faith: But come, hang pinching --
Harry thou shalt have her.


Away with the Causes of Riches and Cares,
That poison our Spirits, and shorten our Years:
No pleasure can be,
In state or degree,
But 'tis mingled with trouble and fears.
Then perish all Fops by a Sobriety dulled,
Whilst he that is merry reigns Prince of the World.
The Quirks of the Zealous of Beauty or Wit,
Though supported by Power, at last must submit.
For he that is sad
Grows wretched or mad,
Whilst Mirth like a Monarch does sit:
It cherishes life in the Old and the Young,
And makes every day be both happy and long.
By Heaven a rare Woman, a most Divine Creature. Sir there's more Money, and
do but wheedle dexterously. Do but get this Woman, and then hang pinching, let
the World rub.


I'll warrant you Sir* So, I have opened his Purse at last! How now, who's
this?


Ho! My old Friend and Fellow-Collegian Mr. Tilbury: In faith I am glad to see
you. This was good luck to meet you here after so long absence. Pray how fare
all our old Friends in Salisbury.


In health Sir; hard labour, plain Diet, and Hearts Ease, are still the best
Physicians. All well -- All well --


Why, let the World rub: I am glad on it in faith. This is your Son I think Mr.
Tilbury.


One of 'em Sir. Toby -- your Hat. The other hand Sir! Well, this Boy will
never learn breeding.


Oh I'll warrant you Sir, here he'll soon learn that, a very hopeful youth
indeed --


Ay, Ay. God send him Grace Sir, he may do well enough! What Mr. Harry! By
Coxbodikins I did not know you. You are grown a lusty stripling since I saw you
last: Ah -- Lord, how time passes! I am heartily glad to see you, Good Mr.
Harry. 'Sbud he sprouts up finely. -- I hope your Mother's well Mr. Harry.


Very well Sir.


Still twirling your Hat, and sqeezing your Gloves. Iago I'll lame thee. I
wonder when you see Mr. Harry in such a posture. --


Oh give him a little time Sir, he is not yet weaned from the Country.


No, no, my Cudgel shall wean him. Good Sir, let me go: Sir, Sir, -- Have I
not told you of this?


He'll mend it quickly Sir. Pray -- have a little patience, and setting this
apart, what business brought you to Town good Mr. Tilbury?


Why Sir, I have a Suit of Law depending here in the Chancery, which I am
resolved to make an end of; and my next business is, I intend to marry both my
Sons to two Fortunes, which are here provided for 'em.


Both! Why have you another Son?


Another! Yes Zechiel. Did you never hear of Zechiel? He has been a Student in
the Temple this three years, another-ghess fellow than this I assure you, all
Air and Spirit he -- 'Sbodikins, I am told in the Country there's not a true
Wit in all the Fraternity but he.


Why then hang pinching; he's a brave fellow. Come Sir, here's a Glass of
excellent old Hock here at Longs. I'll give you your welcome to Town.


Old Hock! what a Dickins is that? Sir a Dish of Racy Canary if you please, I
am for no Hocks! 'Sbodikins Wine was never good since it has been corrupted
with such barbarous notions.


Well Sir, I'll warrant you I'll please you.


Sir, walk you yonder in the (what d'e call 'ems) the Piazza's, and if Flail
my Man come, direct him hither: And d'e hear, leave that sneaking Dog-look of
yours, or by St. Iago -- Well, -- I say no more for this time. Do'nt provoke
me.


What a peevish old fellow 'tis: Sure he has been stung with a Wasp to day --
He's so fretful -- But Udshash, I'll not be controlled so, and so I'll tell him
when time serves.


Faith Sir he's a little too severe: Why he uses you like a mere Child.


Ay -- like an Infant -- huh -- because he's old, he thinks no body has
breeding but himself; but Udshash -- in Salisbury I assure you I pass for the
more accomplished person.


Without doubt Sir he were an errant Coxcomb that would dispute that -- why,
you have a good Presence.


Yes; thank a good Nurse: I am pretty well fortified by Nature, and yet every
thing I do, he forsooth mislikes, as if I were a Fool, and knew not how to
carry my self: Udshash, I wonder he has no more Civility --


O Sir! Old Men that have the prerogative of being Fathers, think it but decent
to use that liberty: But setting aside this Discourse; Mr. Toby, may not my
Ambition desire the satisfaction of knowing the name of this excellent person
you are to marry.


Why Sir -- to tell you the Truth of the business, I don't know her name my
self; for I never saw her yet. For the old Fool my Father carries matters so
closely, that I can never know any thing: But by Jeroboam I'll fit him; For if
I marry without good pre-meditation, I am the Son of an East-India Bagpiper;
and so Udshash I'll tell him.


Marry a stranger, and one you never saw? By Heaven 'tis unreasonable.


Udshash! He's the most unreasonable Cormudgeon you ever knew -- in the Winter he
will not let me come near the fire for fear of catching Chil-blanes.


Not warm your self --


No: Did you ever hear the like: But Zooks I fitted him once; for I burnt a
whole Stack of Hay down to the ground on that occasion, and warmed my self in
spite of him.


Ha, ha, ha -- a Witty invention by my life; but Mr. Toby, I suppose you know
what Quality she that must be your Wife is.


Yes, yes: She's of very good Quality, and a Widow, and very rich I am told.


A Widow Sir? 'Sdeath if it should be my Mistress --


As to her Conditions, I am ignorant of 'em; but they had need be good; for I
have missed many a Wealthy Match for her sake.


Certainly Sir I've the honour to know this Lady; pray where does she lodge?


D'e know her? I'm glad of that i'faith: You may do me a great kindness in
telling me some of her Conditions -- Why Sir she lodges here in Bridges-street
at the House of Sir Arthur Oldlove the famed Antiquary.


The same by Heaven, 'Sdeath was ever such luck. Sir I was involved in a
mistake. I thought she had been a Lady of my acquaintance: But good Sir, how
came this Match so forward, since you say she's a stranger to you?


Why Sir! You must know this same Sir Arthur is my Fathers intimate Friend, and
this Widow lodging at his House, he presently gave notice of it: Telling him,
he doubted not but he could make her a Match for me. But the main Cause of his
kindness is, because he designs my Brother Zechiel to marry his Daughter.


Very good -- now have I an itching mind to swinge this


Yes! Hanged I will marry -- I fancy there's a great deal of pleasure in it.
First to command a Family, and sit at the upper end of the Table. Then to make
my Wife serve instead of a Valet de Chambre, and never pay her no Wages
neither: Then to command her this way; that way, the other way, and every way;
for this thing, that thing, the other thing, and every thing: Udshash 'tis very
pretty --


But Sir, you still miss the right end of Marriage.


That's all one Sir -- why we must take our Fortune. 'Tis as the Fates decree
--


Gad, the Fates are very uncivil to meddle in a matter that so nearly concerns
you: But Sir! There's one thing more; there's a certain ill Fate attends
Marriage -- Horns Sir; are you not afraid of being a Cuckold?


A Cuckold! ha, ha, ha -- I see he's a little foolish -- a Cuckold Sir, Udshash
-- in Salisbury they know not what it means. 'Tis your London Air that breeds
Cuckolds: Here's your horny Forest -- But Udshash, they say here a Courtier
can't walk the streets without being perpetually troubled in returning the
Complements to some of his Cuckolds: Besides, they are so general a Society here,
that no body minds 'em -- but in Salisbury -- if a man is suspected to be a
Cuckold, he presently gets into Office, either of Constable, or head Church
warden, that his degree may recover his disgrace -- Nay for better security,
some of 'em Padlock their Wives: And Udshash that is certainly the safest way;
and I wonder the Citizens here don't take it into Consideration.


Get one of the Common Council to petition the King for an Act of Parliament to
that purpose.


'Tmay be necessary as things stand sometimes -- But see here comes Flail:
Udshash my Brother too, now for a peal of Wit.


Hah Toby -- Beangarson touch Flesh, touch Flesh: Welcome to Town i'faith --
upon honour thou look well, only thy Clothes a little disguise thee; but no
matter, where's my Father, hah -- Bandog and I have been seeking him this hour,
prithee where is he?


Gone to the Tavern with an old Friend of his.


Come! Let us go thither too; Upon honour the Tavern's a sweet place, and next
to the Play-house, the most becoming a Gentleman of any thing -- Sir I kiss
your hand, and beg your


What! What's all this? Udshash Zechiel's mad --.


Sir! I am very unskilful in a Repartee of this Nature, and therefore beg your
excuses, if all I can say is, that your wit had no occasion for half this
Apology.


Sir, your very Servant. Toby, Come let's to the Tavern, upon honour I'll make
thee drunk to night, give me thy hand. What dull -- flat -- like a Poet in a
Church, prithee hold up thy head and laugh Man, and let us sing, and roar, and
drink away the night like Sons of Thunder, to morrow will be time enough to see
my Father. Hey, come along Boy. Bandog, Sir, you shall go too. You shall
drink Bumpers out of your Custard-Cap you Rogue, and be drunk for the honour of
your Country --


Yes, yes! He's mad --


'Slid! For ought I see you need no Wine: Prating will in a short time make you
too drunk for any civil Maps company.


Well said Ploughshare: Why how now Bully! still in thy Dumps! not a word to
save a Mans longing?

Prithee look up and speak like a Man of Worship: 'Sdeath I must new mould you
e're we part: I perceive that you'll degenerate else: Upon honour he's no kin to
me that is not as brisk as a Dancing-Master. Give me the Spirit of
Conversation, a Man that sings, and talks, and laughs, and stares -- and comes
aloft thus with agility, hah --


Like a Taylor ore' a Washing-block: Well, I must leave 'em; for the Disease of
Folly is as catching as that of the Plague. -- Gentlemen your Servant.


Ah Sir, you will not leave us: Shall we not break a jest together over a Glass
of Burgundy! Upon honour a Man of Wit is to me as welcome as a Beautiful Woman.
Toby, address your self the Gentleman your Friend.


Sir! the Truth is, my Brothers a little off of the Hooks; but 'twill quickly
away -- 'Tis only the over-flows of Wit. You know the old saying. Sine aliquo
Dementio nullus Phoebus! This Wit is plaguy troublesome.


Right Sir. Therefore to prevent, I'll take my leave till some other time.

Is he gone? Dam him he has no Money now, not a souse -- I know it. Upon
honour, in this age a Man knows not who to bestow his Gallantry upon: If he
gets among Persons of Quality, they are so Critical, that he has not matter
enough to work on: If amongst the Vulgar; 'tis lost upon 'em; for the sense of
paying a Reckoning, makes them as dull as a Cantabrigian newly entered into
Orders.


Ay, this London's a wicked place, that's the Truth on it. Che' have gone 3 mile
about, and can hardly see ought but Ale-housen and Taberns.


Nay, the worst is, one can hardly know a Church from a Tavern, but only the
Church has ne'er a Sign.


A good Observation! Gad I'll pinch thee for that. Pinch him Bandog, leave your
Church you Dog, and execute my Mandates. Ha, ha, ha.


Ha, ha, ha, up again Flail; there's no harm done. Udshash! Zechiel's grown an
arch wag.


Arch quoth a! 'Slid he has broke my Nose -- D'e laugh? Ah you may be ashamed
of your Actions. Your Worshipful Father would ne'er have served me so.


Nay! No anger Flail! No anger! What's a fall to a Man of thy parts; Upon
honour 'tis customary here to give or take a fall from any Man, especially
amongst Friends.


Sir take this Letter, and do as I command you, away -- you shall find me in
the Mail --

Come Manly, lets away -- how now? Who's here? My Fop of the Temple Jack? This
is he I told thee of. I won 300 Guineys of him the other night at Back-gammon.


'Twas well you won 'em: They might else have been thrown away upon one of far
less merit; for I see he has a kind of a losing Face -- he'll ne'er thrive at
play.


My Noble Lord! I kiss your Lordships great Toe. Worthy Sir your Adorer. Upon
honour my Lord you had the most Victorious Chance the other night I ever knew:
But since it was my Fortune to lose, Fate did me a great honour in choosing
your Lordship for my Conqueror.


Sir! the most worthy are still more subject to ill chance, and 'tis as
absolutely impossible for me to excuse my own good Fortune, as to enlarge upon
your Merits.


Ah! Your Lordship o'rewhelms me in the deluge of your Gallantries. Be pleased
to know my Brother my Lord. 'Tis true, he's meanly apparelled, because newly
come from the Blessing of 1500 a year in the Country, to spend a Month or two
in Town -- but else upon honour of a good stature, straight Back, and a Head of
most hopeful expectation.


He seems no less Sir. I wish I had leisure to comment upon his Perfections.


Then here's my Bandog, a tough Rascal, a Fellow of so strange a Constitution,
that 'thas been often disputed which was the better bred, he or his Oxen! Upon
honour a second Hobson; my Lord, an everlasting Plough-share -- do but view
him! Stand forth O Man of Motley! Ha, ha, ha -- he blushes upon honour, he
changes Countenance.


Not for a worse I hope.


No not unless he should steal one off the Poles at London Bridge. But come,
Prithee lets away: Such another description would induce me to beat his Fellow
for spoiling my Stomach to my Dinner --


What's that? Dinner! Will your Lordship dine with me? a dish of Partredges,
and a Jowl of Salmon (my Lord.)


But your sauce is scurvy, and will doubtless corrode upon my Nature.


Gad! the best sauce in the World. This Fellow was Cook to the King of France,
and upon honour is the most ingenious in his Function of any Man in
Christendom.


But Sir, our intrigue lies another way.


Sir, we are today Men of great Business, and there is a pressing Affair that
requires instant performance: Therefore adieu.


This is the bane of our Nobility. Pride -- Sloth, and ill Manners undoes the
Nation.


A Lord quoth a: If all Lords have no more breeding than this, the Nation is
like to have a hopeful House of Peers. Udshash, I could have carried matters
better than so my self -- For with reverence be it spoken, and under the Rose,
my Lord was as unmannerly a Fellow as I ever saw.


Ha, ha, ha -- He a Noble Man, and punctilio no better. Byth' Mass the Mayor of
our Town has more manners by half.


Pshaw -- What's matter? Let 'em go, upon honour I scorn their Ignorance, and
to let 'em see the Power of a Man of Wit: Thou and I will Lampoon 'em. I'll
teach thee within this three days to be a Man of Mode; and thou shalt talk, and
roar, and fight, and sing even with the best, nay Cocks of all the Bullies.
I'll teach thee the most new and dextrous way of picking Wenches up. Then thou
shalt know their tempers, constitutions: Whether they are in the Boat or may be
Boarded. Thou shalt know every thing Boy. I'll be a true Brother to thee.


Hoy Boys, then I'll warrant I'll learn quickly: Nay Udshash -- I'm very quick
at any thing I give my mind to.


No more blowing of Noses on your sleeve, nor twirling of Band-strings, d'e
hear? but when you are in Company, Cock your Hat, place your Arms thus, look
like the Son of Thunder, and cry Ho.


Ho -- Udshash! I'll warrant thee I'll do it.


Then we will have our names altered: Let the old Prophets keep their
Appellations; we will be new Christened: Mine shall be -- Filloflorido; thine
Rounsivell -- Hey Rounsivell: Upon honour it sounds rarely -- and then for
humour.


Ay, ay, I warrant thee Boy! If I can but get a little Wit into this Pate of
mine, let me alone for humour.


Then my Pithagoras, shall thou and I make a Transmigration of Souls. Thou
shalt marry my Mistress, and thy Wife shall be my Gracious Paramour: 17 Puncks
shall be thy proportion, thou shalt sleep in the comfort of clean Linen; Wench
with a safe Conscience, and eat no more fresh Beef at Supper; but the
Flesh-pots of Egypt shall fatten thee, and the Grasshopper flourish in thy
Summer.


Hoy! Rare, rare Phillorolido! Prithee give me a note of thy Name; Udshash I
shall ne'er hit on it else --


Come away then, we will go presently and practice --
And to the Tavern door make our Approaches,
Like Hect'ring Gallants rushing from Gilt Coaches.

A Fool is a Vacuum in Nature; a Prolix story without Marginal Notes; in whose
Company a man neither gets credit nor profit: If he be Rich his greatest
perfection is Avarice: If Poor, he is altogether despicable, and unfit for
Society --


I am not of your mind* for if Profit turn the Scale. there's certainly most to
be got by half-witted people; and as to the disgrace, the Notion of a Fool is
so general, and there's so many sorts of 'em, that a man loses not an Inch of
Reputation, but rather gets credit by their defect.


Now Sir! what news?


I delivered your Letter as your Lordship directed; and she desires your Visit
to be as speedily as you can; for she has a Kinsman that about an hour hence
has engaged himself to wait on her; whose Company she fears may be very
prejudicial.


I'll be with her presently, Jack! I must beg thy pardon.


What an assignation my Lord! A Love-challenge I warrant.


Even so i'faith; and I must thither instantly. Where shall we meet at night?


At Lambs with the Fiddles and a Talboy.


Agreed: I will not fail thee -- Jack farewell.
Sir follow me --

So! I am glad it happens thus; I should else have been put to the trouble of
excusing my absence from him. Let me see, 'tis now five a Clock! at six I
promised Celia to visit her, and his absence gives me a happy opportunity. To
perform it, I'll take a walk round the Park, and by that time 'twill be very
near the hour.


Splendid and Gent, upon honour thou art Metamorphosed; a Courtier of the first
Edition. Thou hast the Town Air already, and wearst thy Clothes with a boon
mene. Walk a little! walk! ah -- observe always to keep your Toes outward, and
your Elbows as far back as you can; that's right! give me thy hand: Upon honour
thou art a modish Fellow --


Udshash -- I must quarrel. I shall not be a right Gallant till I have beaten
some body, or am beaten, it's all one: Hah! Philloromine. Plague on it I shall
never hit of thy name.


Thou shalt beat a Constable to night, thou and I will scour through the
Flannel Mermidons, and come off Conquerors; nay, rather than fail thou shalt
beat me: But I'll have thee fleshed. Stand here! Suppose me now a Drawer, and
that I had been tardy in procuring a Wench according to your order: What would
you do of the sudden?


Do! Why thus? a Box of the Ear for a Prologue, you know that's but reasonable --



Right upon honour. 'Tis necessary -- but forward!


Hoy; Scaramouchi, Rascal, Poltron, Popinjay! Son of 20 Fathers, besides
out-liers, comers and goers; must a Man of honour wait your leisure, you Dog,
and miss his necessary diversion, through the negligence of such a Scarab:
Udsbores, I'll beat thee into a Tripe. No hast? No attendance?


Hold, hold! ha, ha, ha; the right Town-humour Ned, Flash to the life -- ha,
ha, ha. Let me kiss thee for this; if thou can but get the art of gleaning
from Plays, and remember but my Rules for picking up Wenches; upon honour in
a short time not a Bully Rock of 'em all can come near thee for Gallantry.


Ay; but they say the best way of picking up Wenches is to speak Bawdy to 'em.
and the Truth is, I am a little shame-fac'd at present; but I shall quickly
come to it.


So pleasant and so inconstant a Temper till now I never knew: Her Carriage is
so graceful and obliging, that 'tis infinitely delightful to all Companies; and
if she happens to speak of love, me thinks there flows a sweetness from her
Language, that charms the Ear.


And yet she's false as Hell; so strangely wedded to inconstancy, that the Town
begins to take notice of her, and speak the more loudly, as being ignorant of
her quality: Sir carry that Letter as I directed you --


Udshash! Here's Women Brother; good Boy! I'll begone: My Heart fails me
already. I shall never be able to speak to 'em.


Not speak to 'em! Upon honour thou shalt, bravely too. What flinch in thy
first Charge. Come back for shame; observe me, I'll begin -- I'll introduce
thee -- Ladies! the Devil take me if it be not a Maxim against Reason and
Civility, for you to walk thus without Servants. But obliging Fortune, a
particular Friend to your Sex, has sent hither for that Employment my Brother
and my self; and if your pleasure --


Sir! you will add very much to our pleasure to leave us; for we are in so ill
a humour, that the Overtures of your Imaginary Wit will be lost upon us.


Leave you! Shall I leave a Lady to the Tyranny of Melancholy, that may be
diverted with the pleasure my Company: Madam, I know more of the Punctilio's of
Civility than so; therefore as I was saying, My Brother and my self --


Oh Heavens Madam! This is the very Fool that my Father designs me to Marry.


It seems he knows you not.


No; he never saw me but once, and then 'twas at a Window.


My Brother and my self Madam, two of the most accomplished Sparks in the Town --



Two of the most conceited Fops in the Town --


That shall be punctual in observing your Commands.


That shall be beaten most unmercifully; if you stay a little longer.


Beaten Madam! What rash Presumer, careless of his life, dares think a thought
like that -- Beaten!


Udshash, she has quelled my Courage already, would I were at home again.


But I see Madam you are disposed to rally: Beaten! There goes more to the
beating of a Man of Parts, than you imagine. Upon honour I was my self once so
well skilled in beating people, that the Herald had like to have given me a
Baton for my Crest; thereby to have signalized my Valour to Posterity.


I wonder you missed so decent an Honour: For I am of opinion 'twas an
excellent Device, and very suitable to your new-coind Gentility.


New-coin'd! Damme, this comes of walking without a Foot-boy: Brother prithee
come and espouse my quarrel. These Eternal Talkers have made my Throat as dry
as a Sponge already -- Come! Address, Address -- They tell me that ours is a
new-coin'd Gentility.


Well Sir, and what has your large quantity of Wit to say on this occasion?


I say! why I say -- Say you what you will: The Family of the Tilburies is an
Ancient Family, God bless the Royal Family, as any Family in Christendom, and
he that says the contrary is the Son of a Whore, and my Brother here shall cut
him into Steakes --


Well said Rounsival.


'Slight! Prithee let's away; this angry Fool will beat us.


So, so -- now they begin to fear me: I shall do well enough; The Coat of the
Tilbury's new-coin'd -- Udshash 'tis as old as Tilbury Camp, and that was in
the same year with Noahs Flood.


Insufferable Impertinence! They may well be Brothers; for their united Folly
out-vies their Consanguinity.


Madam! the Mail may now boast of a Happiness unparalleled, enjoying the
sweetness of your Company.


Still your Rhetorical Vein Mr. Manley, you consider not the weak Capacities of
Women.


Yes Madam: I may consider it; but am sufficiently satisfied in my knowledge of
your Capacity to think it mean: But me thinks your looks are not so lively as
'tis usually: Your Eyes have lost part of their fire: No late loss I hope Madam
has caused this alteration.


None Sir. only a little molested with the present heat, and the continual
buzzing about of Flies that haunt me.


Flies; I understand you Madam.


Come; I think we had best go: Here's some mischief hatching.


I'll not stir upon honour, what a Pox he dares not draw in the Mail.


Sir! I see your Presence has the misfortune to be distasteful to these Ladies,
to whom I have the honour to be known: Therefore 'twill become you and your
Brother Fop there, to leave 'em, and retire to your better Conveniences.


Brother Fop Sir! Upon honour you licence your Tongue by the privilege of the
place; such an attribute should not have passed unrevenged else -- but Sir a
time will come --


When I shall cut your Throat Sir: Come Ladies, I'll be your Guardian; Let
these Mushrumes stand if they dare. The respect I bear the Noble Company that
usually walk here, ties up my Sword; but if they sleep on it hang me.


Udshash! I'll go hire a Coach, and into the Country immediately.


The Country! Such another word and I'll renounce thee forever; Prithee think
no more on it: He'll be hanged before he'll challenge us.


I see he has a murderous intention, and 'tis an act of prudence to be careful.


Oh have I found you at last? I wonder where the Dickins you ramble! ch'have
searched all the Coffe-housen and Taberns 'twixt this and Westminster for you:
What byth' Mass my young Mr. Toby turned Gallant too. Whoop! by Coxounty what a
change is here. Come you must go to Sir Arthur Oldloves to your Father: Byth'
Mass he's almost out on's wits for you.


Go Bandog; tell him we come, and Sir bid him get a Bottle of Claret, and a
Neats Tongue ready -- Go -- Brother come, cheer up: Pox ont, a Rencounter is
nothing when thou art used to it -- Prithee let's be merry --


If this Man had not come to disturb us, I could have been very merry --
Udshash I could have beaten the Woman into a Jelly; but no matter, Time and
Experience shall mend all.


Is he come! give me the Glass.


Yes Madam, and I've led him into the Parler. I protest he's a handsome Man,
and one that in my opinion little deserves the Cruelty you intend him.


Call you Affection Cruelty?


Flattery in Affection is extremest Cruelty, I know you love him not: I have
heard you often confess it: and to possess him with a belief you do, and at
last dash his hopes with a denial, is a horrid Torture.


I am glad he moves your Pity. Do you love him?


I commiserate his Fortune -- his love is a Happiness too high for me; but good
Madam, let me presume to ask the reason why you use all your Lovers thus?


Well, in hopes to make thy diligence the surer, I'll tell thee why.
'Twas my unhappy Fate some three years since to fall in love,
To give away my Heart, and throw my self into the Arms of
One of mean descent -- and also slender Fortune: Yet had Destiny
So linked my Soul with his, that each kind glance
Shot from his darting Eye, me thought went through me.
I loved, nay and adored with so much zeal,
I could have died -- nay willingly been tortured:
I thought he could not wrong my Innocence; for then I
Swear I was so innocent I knew not what sin was;
Yet this deluding Wretch! this base Seducer, although
I slighted all for him, laughed at my fervent
Passion, scorned and left me, and when I thought his Heart
Was mine for ever, 'twas then most treacherous, and farthest
From me: Therefore I've made a strict and solemn
Vow, on the whole Sex to execute revenge -- Flatter, and
Wheedle all I can, and ever.
To practice to ensnare -- but to love -- never --

The strangest revenge I ever heard; but I doubt not Madam in a short time Love
will alter your condition.


I'll venture that -- Go and Conduct him hither, and fetch thy Lute and sing.


Beneath a Shady Willow near,
A Rivers purling Streams;
Astrea Careless of her Sheep,
With folded Arms lay fast asleep,
Possessed with Golden Dreams;
Her working faculties supplied, with drowsy sleep denied;
For oft she'd sigh, and smile, and grasp the Air,
Thinking her much-lov'd Celadon was there.
But as this sleeping harmless Maid,
Lay raped in silent Joy.
Possessing all that could be saught,
In setter'd sense or happy thought,
Her Swain came fishing by;
He eager of such rapting Bliss, awaked her with a Kiss,
She Blushing rose, and cried, unhappy Fate l
Ah Celadon thou now art come too late.
Mirror of Beauty! Abstract of perfection,
Sweeter than Banks of Roses, and more
Glorious, than the Bright Empress of the Ruddy
Morn; when early Titan rises --

So early in your florid Vein my Lord. I thought that 12 at night had been
always your facetious hour: For Heavens sake no more of this. You'll lose your
self in these Hyperboles.


To lose my self in you -- were to find Heaven -- hah -- Gad

Me thinks I have expressed my self in as decent
A whining Method, as 'tis possible for a Lover to do.
Come! shall we abroad, my Coach is at door: Prithee let's to the Park, it is a
fine Evening.


No, I am obliged to stay at home to receive the visit of a Kinsman, that sent
word he would wait on me.


A Pox on Kinsmen! Gad we have other Business than to mind Relations; in these
Cases an assignation disappointed with one of them, is no more than the telling
of a Lye, or an ordinary Frailty; but to spoil an amorous Intrigue when persons
are not at all times provided, i'gad 'tis a most inhumane offence, and merits
condign punishment in the World to come.


Ay Sir -- but this is such a Kinsman --


Such a Kinsman? Why the nearer he is related to you, the better he may stay:
The cold business of Consanguinity is seldom tied to an hour, once a week, or a
month will serve the turn well enough; but the pressing affair of Love brooks
no delay. The minute must be watched that guides our Souls to perfect Joys, and
they who neglect are Fools.


Well, if Impudence be a Grace in a Lover, I swear, my Lord, you have as large
a portion as any one I know: What man but you durst contradict his Mistress
thus?


What Woman but you durst provoke a Lover thus? Nay one that is to marry you;
and consequently to have power to Tyrannize over you; To lie with you but once
a week, and then with an ill will too; To send you into the Country to look to
your Dairy; To keep a Mis in Town, and live three times beyond my Estate,
according to Custom.


It is not also in my power to be false? Is my Beauty so mean think you, that
no one would make Addresses? Lies it not in my ability to wheedle you into a
Belief of Love, and at last to forsake you -- assure your self it does -- but
Heaven knows I am too constant.


A Miracie in Nature! A Notion of so strange an extravagance, that the very
sound is incredible! Constancy in Woman is a second Maidenhead: 'Tis lost e're
they know they have it, and your Constitution Madam certainly tends that way,
and the Truth were known --


He little thinks how right he guesses --


But since you are in so ill a humour, and are resolved to spend this Afternoon
here like a Turtle, solitarily in your Cage, I'll leave you, and strive to
divert my self with other Company: I have a Present here too. which I intended
to Dedicate to you; but to the Melancholy all things are di^stful.


A Neck-lace of Pearl! I must not lose that so -- use your pleasure, my Lord.
The Virtue of a Present seldom makes me fond of any Mans Company.


You think I warrant, this indifference becomes you extremely. That modish turn
of your head, and glance of your Eye, you imagine was infinitely taking: But
Madam, I am now in a more serious humour, and not to be fooled with such
Dilatory motions; so begging your pardon for my obstructing your Kinsmans Visit
-- I take leave --


Well! I am the very'st Fool. I swear, my fondness makes you insult over me;
another Woman would have made you comply, and be glad to ask her pardon; but my
good Nature makes you slight me.


No, this action has endeared my Soul to thee, and I am faster thine than ever:
Oh, I could live for ever in thy Arms -- feed on thy Lips, and surfeit with thy
Kisses.


Madam the Gentleman is come:

Unlucky minute! Sweet my Lord away;
I would not have him see you for the World.

The Devil blow him hence in a Whirlwind: I will obey you* but by Heaven with
as ill a will as ever Coward fought a Duel; but since it must be so -- adieu:
Nay do not smile upon me; by the Lord I shall tire your Kinsmans patience, and
stay if you do. Farewell. A Pox upon him I say -- Farewell Madam.


So, there's one dispatch'd. I was fain to tell him 'Twas a Kinsman, to get him
gone the sooner -- stay; this is my passionate Lover; one that Woos by Method,
and speaks blank Verse. Now must I change my temper suitable to his Tone, and
speak in the same stile: Let me see; When Sapho loved! Oh Heaven! What throngs
of woes oppressed her harmless Breast? Very well -- I have it rarely. Now to my
Posture -- This Book -- Languishing Eyes -- So -- And necessary Handkerchief to
wipe Imaginary Tears off -- So -- The Devil's in it if this is not Melancholy
enough. Here he comes.


Life of my Soul ^ bright Treasure of the World,
Queen of perfections, and the best
Of all thy Charming Sex -- What Dismal Fate
Has caused this alteration? Why are thy Eyes,
Late the extremes of Glorious Light, now clouded?
Adding more trouble to the frighted World,
Than when the Sun Eclipsed threatens a Chaos.

Pardon my Frailty Sir: I have not learned the
Power to dissemble: Who could read
The hapless Fate of wretched Ariadne?
Hear Theseus falsehood, and the piercing Moans
Of a distressed Maid? By Love undone,
Left all alone within a Desert Isle,
And not pay Tribute of a Tear or Two to grace the story.

'Twas a horrid act,
And I confess deserves it; but in us
That Love and Glory in the Passion, 'tis
Not fit Despair should Tyranniz*

Let them despair that merit no return,
My passion has been permanent.

And mine
The truest Heart that e're obeyed the Dictates
Of Loves Imperial Power, from that hour
That first obtained my Eye the happy Object
Of your Perfections, my poor fettered Heart,
Proud of the Chains of such a Conquering Beauty,
Resolved to Grace the long wished Victory
With a perpetual Constancy.

And mine,
Blessed with the Pleasure of your Loves Addresses,
Grew proud of such a Fortune: Happy Celia
Would I oft cry; if thou can purchase him,
Thy Race is finished, the abstract of all Love,
Virtue and Valour: Then with my Minds Perspective
Would I survey your Soul, and sigh, and covet:
Love to my sense such pleasing Motions brought.
That I was lost in my own various Thought.

Sweet Creature! Oh my Soul how I adore thee!
The transport of whose touch has power to kill:
If I should visit often, speak sweet Charmer,
Will you be always true? always thus Constant?

Constant ^ Alas! What power have I to change*
When you posses my Heart.

My Soul!


My Heart!


My Life! My Vital Spirits! Oh Heaven I fool my self in too much Love, and dote
on my own Happiness.


He's finely caught! Wit, where art thou now?


Eiring Philosophers that Knowledge praised
Above the Bliss of Women, Women, Delicious
Women, Women the
Quintessence of Nature: Heavens Treasures
Framed to enrich Mankind, and make 'em Deities:
Travel fond Cynic through the spacious Globe;
Dive through the Sea. Thence through the Airy Region
Soar, to find out new pleasures; and at last,
When thou hast known the Joys of Earth and Heaven,
Believe with me it terminates in Women.

Madam your Kinsman is below, and desires the favour of your Company.


Unfortunate Minute; for Heavens sake Sir begone: I am undone if he sees you.
Hark! he's coming up.


Was ever Fate like mine -- Wear this Sweet Creature, and remember me --


So! adieu Divinest, Sweetest, Kindest! O Heaven!
Must I begone? --
Ha, ha, ha; I think I did it to the life! Silvia, did thou hear our Court?


Yes Madam and I swear I pity the poor deceived Gentleman,


Pity him, prithee talk no more on it: but who is that below?


The Young Brisk Gentleman that fell in love with you yesterday; he that your
Ladyship gave the Song to.


Tell him I'll come to him.
Now for a Brisk Airy Humour to agree with the Temper of this Fool.
This is the most easy Fop of all my Pretenders.
There needs no Net for him; his own actions are
His best Betrayers. The other two I confess have
More wit: But what then? Love makes a Dunce of a
Councellor, and their fondness proves as prejudicial
As t'others folly. O Men! Silly Men! That fettered with
A Smile, forget the Business of their Creation; the Motives
Of their Honour; and the safety of their Country -- Thus
Far my revenge is prosperous; and I'll forward. My Panthers
Breath shall draw em to the Snare; my Tongue shall
Charm; my Smiles kindle Loves Fire in their amorous
Souls, till they are scorched severely; then forsake 'em
Whilst in my Breast, my Heart obdurate Flint
Shall hear, and yet not pity.
Thus all shall know that were like me refused,
No Serpent like a Woman when abused.

SIR, 'tis no matter what the World thinks. The World think? why let it think,
I say once again; 'tis such as we redeem lost time from its Chaos of Confusion;
Is there any thing more pleasant than Antiquities? The knowledge of the
distinction of Ages, or the deeds and manners of the Ancient, I say is there
any thing more pleasant? -- Oh happy Romans that took this into consideration,
for my own part I am nothing, a man of Ignorance, a mere Reptile in these
Rarities.


Every man in his humour, and let the World rub; Appetite and Fancy are two
great Monarchs that sway Mortality, and hang pinching, udsbores 'tis fit they
should be satisfied; but good Sir Arthur, what are these? Doubtless these are
Rarities too.


Right Sir, and such Rarities, that were their worth valued, the West-Indies
were too small to purchase them.


I warrant this has been some Princes or great mans Scull, 'sbodikins he looks
still with the face of Authority.


Fie, fie, Sir, your Hat on: This Relic should be touched with reverence, but
your ignorance must excuse all -- Pray stand a little back* and give attention
-- This Scull, this noble prudent politic Scull, once belonged, or as I may
more properly say, was pertinent to the Body of St Gawaine, a Knight of the
round Table.


St Gawaine! A Dutchman, was he not? I believe I know some of his Relations.


A Dutchman! oh insupportable -- Sir, did you ever know a Relic made of the
Scull of a Dutchman? No, he was a Britain Sir, a hardy Britain, and Nephew to
the famous King Arthur of happy memory; and this Scull was late resident in
Dover Castle, brought thither by a famed Antiquary, whose name time has
outworn, and since purchased by me, to illustrate this City, amongst the rest
of my memorable Antiquities.


Very well, Sir, proceed.


And this here is the famed Hero, Sir Lancelot du Lake's Sword.


I'll warrant this has been the death of many a Constable; but methinks, Sir
Arthur, the Rust has been a little too bold with it.


Ah Sir! Rust adds to an Antiquity, 'tis our Friend: And we that are skilled in
these matters, can by the Rust on a Sword tell how long it has been durable.


Hang pinching, 'twas well discovered; I see a man may live and learn, though he
be never so old, good Sir, forward.


This here is a Shooing-horn, d'mark me -- Hats off still -- pray observe it --
a Shooing horn --


'Tis so --


This Shooing-horn, Gentlemen, the first that ever was invented, was, with
reverence be it spoken, the necessary implement of the Queen of Sheba, and left
by her careless Chambermaid at Jerusalem, after her visit to King Solomon.


By St Iago an admirable discovery, 'sbodikins who would have thought so much
ancient Honour could depend upon a Shooing-horn.


Very strange! very strange! by St. Iago, as you say; but the stranger the
merrier, the merrier the better company, and so hang pinching, let the World
rub.


This is the Silver-box that Nero's Beard was kept in; 'twas in the Vatican 300
Years, and lately presented to me by a Friend of mine, a man of great authority
in Rome.


Somewhat like a Tobacco-box --


No comparisons, good Sir, but observe, this is the Rubbing-Brush of Silvius
Otho, and this the Picktooth of Heliogabalus.


Carefully preserved from the ruins of time, To grace your Study, Sir Arthur.


Lastly, this last -- though most precious and best of all my Relics; this Vial
is full of the tears of St. Ierom, in former Years pendant upon the Spire of
St. Sepulchres Steeple; but by my indulgent care and great charge redeemed from
thence when the City was on fire.


A thing of moment, Sir, and worth your diligence.


Sir, there's two Gentlemen below desire admittance.


Sbodikins my sons, my sons: Sir Arthur, I ordered them to come hither, that
they might see the Ladies you writ me word of. Friend show 'em the way up --


You did well Sir; Dorell, go see if my Niece be at leisure, and bid my
daughter come hither.


Ay, ay, come, hang pinching, let's see the Lady, let Women make up the
Consort, and then let the World rub, there's mirth and frolic in it, but
without Women, udsbores 'tis prolix, 'tis impertinent, 'tis every thing ill,
and nothing well; hang pinching, Women, Women, I say.


Well said 5-and-50, by St. Iago thou grow young again, you're a very Boy.


Not frozen, not frozen, heart whole, and warm enough to keep out Weather;
udsbores, when I was 1-and-20, I was the sprightly'st Fellow -- I could have
sung and danced, and leapt and jumped -- hey troll -- faith -- but 'tis past now
-- however I am sound -- hem -- not so old, but I am a jolly man still, and
hang pinching, let the World rub.


Well, I say still, there's nothing so becoming as Gravity.


Zechiel -- my Boy -- how dost thou -- kiss me sir -- s'bud I am glad to see
thee -- they tell me you're grown an arch Wag -- hah -- how now! what
Metamorphosis sir! where got you them Clothes?


Now must I give him a private Item, or this ignorant old Fool will disgrace me
before all the compay.


Oh! are they so Sir? Well, God give ye joy:
But Zechiel, prithee, what News in Town?
Dost thou thrive -- hah --

Thrive! there's a Salisbury question already; upon Honour, 'tis pity my Father
was no better bred: Sir, the nourishing facundity pertinent to our sphere, has
bestowed a better Talent on me than can be possibly acquired by Fortunes
donation, and therefore -- Noble Sir Arthur, I sue to kiss your hand -- I was
so buried in my Fathers Caresses, that I protest my eyes were Traitors --


Sir! I hope you and I shall have a nearer affinity and knowledge of one
another ere long.


By St Iago my pains were ill employed else! Why I came to Town for that
purpose --


But where's your Brother Sir?


Here Sir -- taking a particular view of your Habit -- Upon Honour Sir Arthur,
methinks your Clothes are not made according to Mode.


Mode -- ah good Sir, no more o'that, no Modes I beseech you: my Habit is the
Mirror of my Mind, little do you know the value of this outside: Sir, in brief,
'tis more than the Kings three Dominions can purchase.


Udshash! I'd like to have spoiled all, I took him for a Morrice-Dancer.


To display my meaning more plainly Sir, this Medal was the Badge of Peace
'twixt Scanderberg and the Turks; this was the Doublet of Gustavus Adolphus;
and these Breeches, renowned be the tattered Linings, were the Breeches of
Pompey the Great; he was called Pompey the Great, by reason of these great
Breeches.


Peace be to the ancient Cobwebs betwixt the seams; Sir Arthur, your Servant, I
must go seek my son: Odsbores here's the Lady -- Ill stay a little longer now,
and let the World rub --


How now, where's my Niece?


Gone to the Park Sir, with my Lady Arbella.


Park! What without my permission? Passion o'me, I shall have her stolen.
Huswife, this is your fault, you are still prating to her of the pleasure of
Intrigues as you call 'em; Well, these new damnable Customs utterly undo the
Nation.


Sir, I am not her Guardian, though you are; nor do I think it a particular of my
duty to pry into her actions.


This certainly the Lady Hurry told me of, udsbores a merry Mushrum I'll
warrant her.


Well, since 'tis so, we must practise patience, and Mr Tilbury it shall be my
care hereafter to have her ready for your sons addresses -- in the mean time,
pray Daughter know this Gentleman, whom I have elected for your Husband


The very same Woman I affronted in the Mall* What shall I do, she'll discover
me.


Why how now sir, what flinch, recreant, dastard -- Bodikins thou art a
disgrace to the Family; the Tilburies have been good Holdersforth for above
this 90 Years, and shall they now be dashed like a Knight at a Bear-bating; for
shame to her, to her again I say, by St Iago Ill cudgel thee forward if thou
dost not.


Mercy a'me, what's that?


No harm, no harm, only a little Vinegar Bottle, an accidental Mischance, as I
hope to be saved Sir Arthur.


How! the Vial! oh Heaven the Vial! What St Ierom! St Ierom's tears! oh Hell!
Fate! Death! Destiny! I'm undone, lost, ruined for ever -- the Vial* St Ieroms
tears spilt, the Holy Relic spoiled; oh I am miserable, oh insupportable
loss. Out of my doors thou Varlet: away; I abominate thee, detest thee, and thy
whole Race for this deed, away; I say, St Ierom! St Ierom! oh dismal accident!


Good Sir have patience, I'll make restitution.


Patience! Restitution! 'sbud both the Indies cannot do it: Had thou burnt my
House, murdered my Wife and Daughter, stolen my Plate, any thing but this, I
could have forgiven, but to disoblige St Ierom, St. Ierom; O insufferable!
insufferable! 'tis a capital crime, and not to be forgotten! --


Sir, this is your unlucky hand. Come, we must go and comfort him, he'll run
mad else --


So I hope this accident, and my Fathers anger, will be a means to keep me from
the future impertinences of this Fop. Lord! how you look, Sir. What's the
matter?


Nothing, Madam: only a little troubled at my Brothers late miscarriage, and
the disturbance of the Company.


You may repair that inconvenience in the Mall to night Sir -- there will be
variety.


A pox on her, she has discovered us! Well, Madam, I guess your meaning; and,
though my behaviour expressed a little too much the freedom of the age. That I
can give my self this satisfaction, That I did nothing but what was Courtly,
and like a Gentleman.


A Gentleman of the first rate I grant, Sir; that is, an insignnificant Squire,
whose addresses are so formal and common* that your Fleetstreet Prentices have
better, whose head, hands, and body are diversely employed in fashioning a bow;
and, when he speaks, he might be called a walking Bagpipe, being obliged to his
nose for gracing his utterance.


Nay, if you talk of Noses, here's a Nose, and udshash, under the Rose, another
manner of Nose than yours is, if you go to that.


Suitable to the owners person, I confess; and were my judgment asked in this
particular, I should guess your Nose and Understanding to be much of a length;
only there is this difference, your Nose is more visible, but both very
equivalent to your person and behaviour.


Madam, let me entreat you to be so much your own friend, as not to question my
behaviour. The shame will be yours, if you do, I assure you that -- 'Sbud, I
knew how to behave my self, before you knew how to -- (mum, I had like to have
spoke it --) to discern behaviour.


Your brisk air, bone Meine, and gentile garb expresses it, Sir. You are the
exact picture of your Brother there: Nature drew you from its Copy. And, Sir,
she has furnished you, as the World may see, and you your self doubtless
imagine, with all graces pertinent to your Sex: but we are seated in so
relentless an Air, that I protest I am blind to your perfection, and you appear
to me a very ordinary person, considering the advantages you have of
Impertinence, Impudence* and good Clothes. What your Brother may be in my Lady
Fickles eyes I know not: but if she desires his Company as little as I yours,
we shall both sleep without dreaming.


Damme, I'll be gone. This eternal fleerer will jear me to a Consumption --
Come Toby, let's to the Tavern, and roar to night: I'll warrant thee I'll
procure a Couple of Females, that shall be good Company, and glad of ours --
This is the most everlasting Repertee -- Ounds, she has given me the Griping of
the Guts in studying an Answer -- Come, come away.


Will, I am certainly the unlucky'st fellow in the World: Why should not I be
now as witty as thee? -- but only Natures a son of a Whore, Destiny's a Slut,
and Fortunes a Bitch; or else Men had had predominance in talk, not Women:
well, the Devil will have em for it one day, that's my comfort.


Hard fate of Women, that bestow your hearts where is no return: and that often
hate such as love em. If Manley knew I loved him, I question the success, and
yet without a hazard nothing is perfected. I wonder I have no Answer of my
Letter. I'm sure he had it: but I must have patience, I expect the event, as
time gives opportunity.


Your servant Lady. Your Father's in an extravagant rage yonder about breaking
his Vinegar Bottle. His Relic, as he calls it. Nothing can pacify him. He
swears he will fill another with his own tears, and never stir abroad till 'tis
finished.


'Tis, what pleases his humour, Sir. I hope he has gained so much of time to
satisfy himself in every particular, without disgracing his Quality, or
reproaching his years.


Prettily expressed that: Udsbores, Madam, you speak well, pithy, and to the
purpose. My Son Harry has a Love-intrigue with a Lady that lodges in this
house, and pardon my presumption, at first I thought you to be the person.


No Sir! I am not the person; and, because I am loath to see good Nature
abused, I'll tell you a secret. Therefore know, this person your Son loves is at
this time engaged to twenty besides this old Gentleman's son you saw here.


How! Twenty pretenders!


At least, Sir: all which she wheadles for revenge or profit, without the least
design of Love or Marriage: for to tell you the truth, Sir, (however secretly
she carries it) she's married already.


Why then my Son is wheadled.


Very near the brink of a precipice assure your self.


I'll go instantly and disengage him: This was a lucky discovery, my Son gulled:
no, my Caution shall secure him from the danger, and then let the World rub.


Sir, I had not presumed to so free a Relation, had I not known how nearly it
concerns you, who bear an estimable Character amongst the greatest Grandees.
Sir, I beg your pardon, I must visit my Father.


Udsbores, a Woman of pretty parts, and methinks of an excellent humour -- hah
-- old Harry, not so old yet but such a Nut may be cracked: but more of this
hereafter. Now to my Son. I'll get his neck out of the Noose, and then follow
my own Designs as occasion serves.


Melancholy is either the dregs of Sickness or Love, and may properly be
termed the poison of life, and the odium of Society; for a Man of Wit that is
melancholy, and says nothing, is in my opinion as unnecessary a Creature, as
a man that wants wit, and says every thing.


I have as few pretensions to Melancholy as to the Wit you speak of; the one
disagreeing with my Constitution, and the other surpassing my Capacity. 'Tis
true, I am somewhat troubled at the receipt of a Paper here, which is the
reason my face is not dressed in my wonted air: but I think 'twill hardly induce
me to be very melancholy.


A paper! prithee, What is't a Challenge?


No, Sir, I have good fortune seldom to look on such Missives as Challenges
with a clouded brow, 'Tis a Letter from a stranger that knows my Amours, and
takes the confidence upon her to ^ll me here, My Mistress is the most
inconstant of Women.


I'll lay my life a malicious design of some Jilt or other, that intends you for
her particular use.


The Letter discovers some affection in the Writer: but my thoughts can never
carry me to a belief, it can come from any of my former Mistresses: for I know
none of em is acquainted with my present Intrigue -- here, prithee read it.


IF your Sex had as great a value for sincere affection, as for inreads.
constancy, you would not be so ignorant of your present condition, nor cherish
a Serpent that delights to sting ye; I mean your Mistress, h, to my knowledge
hates ye, as much as another loves you, whom your self-will'd indifference has
made miserable.

I confess this is Mystical: yet carries a greater resemblance of truth, then
first I imagined.


An Oracle by heaven: and the Devil is so cunning, that with imaginary doubts,
it adds an intolerable addition to my misfortunes.


'Tis certainly a general plague, pertinent to all Mankind, for I have a
Mistress that I mistrust too, and were she not extremely obliging when I am
with her I should be more dubious: for I never come to visit her, but some
Kinsman or other comes to interrupt us: so that certainly she must have a World
of Relations, or else I have this Misfortune, to come just at their hours for
business --


My fate to a tittle: by heaven just so I am tormented. I am scarce yet within
doors -- but I am molested with some Uncle or other.


She calls her self Cleio, one of the Muses; and to pursue that humour, I went
to visit her last night, and engaged three or four friends to entertain her
with a Dance, where we were fain to stay an hour ere we could get admittance.


I hope at last your patience was well rewarded by her kind acceptance of your
gallantry?


Indifferently: she appeared! to be very merry, and expressed a graceful thanks
for the Diversion I gave her; for, the Truth is, I accosted her in this manner,
the more to endear her to approve my passion: I having that very morning spoke
with one, that ignorantly confessed, his Father brought him to Town, upon design
to Marry her.


That was a lucky discovery. I hope you was not idle in your endeavour of
supplanting him --


No gad, I did make the best on it I could: for I went instantly to her, and
with the best Rhetoric I had, endeavoured to weed the Fool out of her
thoughts: 'Twas fortunes bounty also to me, to find her at leisure, and alone;
for had her Guardian Uncle, Sir Arthur, been at home, it had been impossible
to have had any access to her.


Who, Sir! Who? pray that last again.


Sir Arthur Oldlove. The Antiquary here in Bridges-street, she's his Niece, a
Widow, an approved fortune.


Hell and the Devil. The very same Woman I have so sighed for: but I see he's
ignorant that I am his Rival, and I'll get all I can out of him, that I may have
the more to upbraid her with: Well, Sir, you made a happy conclusion, I doubt
not she was kind without scruple afterwards, hah --


By Heaven, kinder than I expected: she told me, I had the largest share in her
heart, and spoke the sweetest, softest things, 'twould melt a man to hear. I
presented her a pair of Diamond Pendants, which she unwillingly received; and,
as a Crown of my Courtship, told me at parting, she had just before thrust away
an impertinent Suitor, that came to make addresses, purposely to make room for
me.


Very well. Dam her, she entertains a Legion: I'll visit her instantly, and with
the extremest sentiments of rage and jealousy, shower my afflicted thoughts
into her perfidious breast.


What say thou, was it not pleasant? what a pox not a word? methinks thou
dost not relish my discourse.


As well as a Rival can Sir: One that has the fate to follow the wheel of your
Chariot, whilst you triumph in Loves Empire: Hark'ee, for your further
satisfaction, this Woman you speak of is my Mistress too, the very same person
intimated in this Letter: one that I have Courted this six Months, and was in
hopes within a week more to have Married.


How, Sir, Married to my Mistress?


Ay, Sir, to our general Mistress; for, as far as reason imbellishes my
judgment, I am apt to believe you, and I come but in the Rear of twenty more.


Now the plots unravelled: I begin to have a knowledge of the visitant Kinsman
that used to molest us.


One of which I'm of opinion often usurped your shape: all will out at last,
Sir: And, I'm resolved I'll not rest till I'm resolved that I may be in a
capacity of revenging my self in the blood of him that dares usurp my right in
her affection.


Fortune was a damned Jilt to make me discover my intrigue, nay to my Rival:
The only man I should conceal it from. Well, I must not sleep in this
business: if she be false, my loss is the less: but, if constant,

My Sword my Rival's claims must strait remove,
Bravely he dies that Victim falls to Love.

So much Beauty, and so many attractive graces I know cannot want adorers: but,
too many Lovers, Madam, in my opinion, is like too much Money, The abundance of
enjoying takes away the pleasure of possession.


What you call much Beauty in Me, is so little, that this complement you make
me, argues, Madam, a defect in your judgment: and as to my servants, which you
call my adorers, they are so few, and those so meanly fettered, that I am
beholden to fortune more than Beauty, for the credit I have got in the World.


Fie, fie; I swear yon wrong your self: your perfections are the general
discourse of the Town.


The Impertinence of Fops and Citizens -- a man of wit can find a better
subject.


I hope you think my Lord Bellamore a Wit; and, to my knowledge, you are the
only Saint he adores: a pretty man by Heaven, tall, strait, and well
proportioned, only a little vain, an intolerable Talker, that's his worst
fault.


Now is this, to my knowledge, a Lye of her own Invention, The monstrous
effects of envy and jealousy --


The happiness I wish you, you may guess in the contentment I shall receive in
seeing you so well married.


If constancy and immaculate affection may merit happiness, I doubt not but to
have as large a portion as another, but want of desert makes me suspect the
event, although I know he loves me -- This searches her --


Insufferable! confession! Oh I could kill her*


Happy chance! see yonder he comes.


I'll take my leave.


Oh fie! By no means, Madam, pray stay a little longer.


I will not for the World: Some other time I'll give you a reason. Till when
your humble Servant.


Madam! the Parks unhappy, so soon to lose the pleasure of your company.


Your ear my Lord --


Here is certainly some plot contriving, her wheedling me and whispering with
him sufficiently declares it: and, by heaven, I'll search into the depth of
Magic, but Ill find it out; I am already sufficiently prepared with arguments:
and, the more difficulty lies in the matter, the better 'tis often performed:
hard shifts, and dangerous plots suit Women's Wits better than dull adventures;
and, whilst in tedious search dull men run on, armed by our minutes thought,
the thing is done.


To morrow, Madam, I will not fail --


The innocent conversation!


Ay, Madam. She's a Soul-saving Creature, a female-Moralist, her discourse is a
continual Sermon, and has the same influence that an Ague has upon me, I do so
tremble.


I imagined it a kind of quaking Zeal, never durable an hour. Jack Manly,
thine, Dear Rogue!


What M^lancholly! qualmish! The sting, of a debauch last night I warrant.


By heaven my to other Suitor. 'Twas happy I brought my Masque -- This will
disguise me --


In one sense you are right; for, Loves grand influence considered nearly, is
but a debauch, and we our selves the Parasites that sooth it.


'Tis so: and therefore why should men of honour, that practice the
Distinction, and know better, resent its treachery: Prithee, What is it, Jack?


A thing of nothing, and yet every thing that could torment me! Oh that dull
appetite should make a Monarch of the slave of Nature, to tyrannize over that
noble Soul that gave it first its being.


Dangerous resentments, by heaven, Jack: but, prithee discover, come, be
genuine.


I received a Letter this morning from a stranger, skilled it seems in my
Amour, full of invectives against my Celia, especially of her inconstancy. This
I confess troubled me, for the reasons urged: it had some appearance of Truth,
and afterward conferring with young Iollyman, whose misfortune seemed to suit
with mine, he made so ample a discovery, that I found we were Rivals, and that
this false one Care him more than me: and, in all probability, entertains
several others. This put me into so extravagant a rage, that had not my
curiosity of knowing the truth, tied my hand, my Sword had pleaded my interest;
I am going now to her Lodging to be resolved --


If he had seen me now, here had been fine work! How near are my plots to
discovery? --


Gad 'tis a business of importance.


So much, that by heaven I am resolved to search it through.


So! now will I instantly home, and persuade him, that all is false, and only
the motions of envy. Come my Lord, shall we go -- Dorel! bid the Coachman come
round to St. Iames's Gate.


What is that Fellow? I never saw him before.


Sir Arthur entertained him in his service to day to look to his account.


And, brush his antiquities -- ha, ha, ha.


Never was man so besotted: he dares not sleep o'nights for fear of Thieves.


Dam him and his old Imaginations: Let us mind our own business: Come, let's to
the Mulberry Garden* I have not treated you this week: methinks we live already
as we were Married, not a word of Love in a whole Scene of Discourse.


'Tis better in the Heart than in the Tongue; besides, from a Man of quality,
Love has so strange a sound: no, in my opinion, the Eyes are the best Orator,
and now and then the Serious Look, with a short sigh for a Prologue.


Thus! ha!


And sometimes the exalting the hand to the lip, with a short Kiss and away.


Thus.


Now I consider better, I shall have occasion to be punctual to an hour: My
Lord, prithee lend me your Watch: hah -- blood and death, What do I see?


Returned again! this was a Cursed trick of fate.


Ungrateful Traitress! now I plainly see (all I have heard is true.) Perfidious
Celia: more false than Crocodills, that mourn the slain, and yet delight to
kill 'em: Do you not blush? Are you so armed with impudence, this object cannot
startle? yea, this beguiled object, that bathed his passion in warm Tears of
blood, and laid it at your feet, deceitful Celia.


Celia! What a mistake is this, by heaven my Friend's mad.


Now Wit assist me, or I'm lost. Mad -- Why do ye not fee't? look, look how his
eyes roll; how pale his lips are; see how his Periwig stares with his wild
passion; his hands and body tremble. Oh this Celia's a cruel Wretch.


Ah, perfection of ill: Would you convert your infamy? Disguise your falsehood
in my shroud of madness? No, no; it shall not do. Madam, all shall out, assure
your self it shall.


So handsome, so well composed a man: Oh heavens what pity 'tis: run, my Lord,
run to the Gate, and call your Footman to fetch a Doctor! two hours in such a
fit will kill him.


Stay, my Lord, and hear me -- I'll discover all -- This Lady --


Ah, delay not a minute, as you love his life!
My Lord -- away, away.

Poor Manley, thou shalt not dye for want of so small a Courtesy.


Well, Madam, What's your design in this? What new plot is contriving?


Oh heaven! Am I thus requited? Sir, I never expected such an action from you:
Was there no way to augment my misery but this?


Your misery! Ha, ha, ha. Your misery! --


You know well enough that this is the person my Uncle designs to Marry me, and
that 'tis impossible for me ever to see you, if he knows you are his Rival.


Hah, this may be true; for he has formerly told me something of an Intrigue
like this: Well, suppose this true Madam, I am sure Mr Iollyman is a person not
interested in your Uncles favour, though in yours.


In mine! That an impertinent Serenader, only accepted for the Company's sake
he brought with him, should have the impudence to talk thus.


He protested it to me a truth, and swore your extravagant favour exceeded his
hopes.


And you believed it: Well, I'll take care with whom I trust my heart again --


Ugh, I can hardly believe this; yet sure these tears are real, it must be so
-- Come, I do believe thee, forgive me Celia; and consider how insupportable is
Jealousy lodged in a Lovers breast.


If I had not hit of this Plot, what should we have done then? I warrant you
won't believe I love you yet.


By this I do, thou hast confirmed it in me.


He'll come back immediately, and I would not have him see you for the World;
therefore be gone, I'll expect you this Evening at my Uncles.


I will not fail you Sweet, I am glad it happens thus.


Ha, ha, ha!
Thus with the snowy Veil of Innocence,
Contriving Women cover their pretence;
When Women weep, look, Gallants, for surprise,
For all deceit lies drenched in watery eyes.

There's a Coach ready at the Park Gate, how now, where is he?


Ah! gone, gone, all my entreaties could not stay him, frighted, I believe, at
my naming a Doctor; I saw him cross the Mall, but in such a strange posture,
that caused both pity and admiration in all that beheld him*


Poor Jack, I see the fits of Madness are as sudden, as those of Love, and
commonly work the same effects, Fate keep me from the trial of it; for Excess
in any thing is a perfect torment, especially this Modish Passion we Men so
hunt after, and which is so generally admired, though conducing to Madness. --

He that of Loves ripe Joys takes over measure,
Abates his Bliss, and loses half the pleasure.

URge me no more, Sir, you have my answer, my final and my punctual answer, I
will proceed no further in this business; nor shall my Niece join issue with a
man so wild, and so unfortunate: St Ierom's tears spilt, my treasure, my
chiefest treasure lost, a blessing which this forty Years we cherished, snatched
from me in an instant! oh unparalleled misfortune! I say, let him forbear my
house.


Well, of a Knight, and a Justice of Peace, this is the simplest man of Worship
I ever saw; good Sir, let it not so nearly concern you, you shall have
restitution, by St Iago I'll fell half my Estate, but Ill make you amends; What
a Pox, do ye think I ll be ungrateful?


Half your Estate! a pretty Proposition; 'sbud, Sir, the Grand Signiors Revenue
would not purchase a drop on it.


A very costly Liquor by Mahomet, I think that Turkish Oath sounds well -- hah
-- *


Old Oaths are not to be despised, Sir, therefore by Melchizedech, which, I
conceive, was well thought on, my resolutions fixed, your son shall be a
stranger to my house, my daughter is not for him, tell him so; 'zlid should he
come here, within a Week I should have my ancient Medals of the Romans plaid
off at Gaming-houses.


Sir, upon my Reputation, he knows not what belongs to a Gaming-house; alas
Sir! You are ignorant of his Principles, he's Country bred, Sir -- Country
Learning, Country Manners, and Country Wit; 'sbodikins he knows nothing of
the Town.


But he may know every thing in time, Sir; and I'll harbour no person within my
doors, whose future knowledge is more dangerous than his present.


Udsbores a necessary Maxim.


Trouble your self no more, Sir, my Will is my Law; and though I am a Justice of
the Peace and Quorum, I think my proceedings in this both necessary and
judicial -- My Niece is an Heiress, and there is great care required in her
bestowing; nor shall my Daughter match into a Family, when I give such evident
proofs of my dislike. Mr Tilbury, you, as being my old acquaintance, shall be
welcome to my house; but give me leave to tell you, my eyes are opened to your
sons folly, you understand me, I do not like their tricks Sir.


Tricks Sir! -- I find 'tis you have your tricks Sir -- But by St Iago Ill go
Fee my Lawyer immediately, force shall compel what good words cannot persuade;
and I've a Bag of old Harry-Groats have lain by me these twenty Years, which
I'll scatter amongst the Gownmen, rather than be thus abused.


Old Harry Groats! What pity 'tis so meritorious an Antiquity should be so ill
employed -- is he gone?


Yes Sir -- just turned the corner of the street in so hasty and discomposed a
manner, that it argues him plotting some business of importance.


Would he were here again. Now would I rather his son should have my daughter,
than that he should waste any of that precious money.


Let it go, let it go, there's enough to be had in Lumberstreet: But, Sir
Arthur, to my present affair; since you have been so generous to deny him your
daughter, I hope my address may be successful.


Troth, Sir, Hope is very necessary in this affair; and if you can but hope my
daughter will like your Person and Years, as well as I like your Estate, your
Hope will have as ample a Field to range in, as any mans I know.


My Person and Years -- Why, Sir, 'tis impossible she should dislike it;
whatever my Years are, I assure you my Imagination is but One-and-twenty.


But, Sir, in the space of a Week, the strength of your Imagination will be
worn away, and your Person will be left to the deliberate age of
Eight-and-fifty a month or two over.


No, 'tis three-months under by my faith, Sir Arthur, and what, then? With me
'tis an age of 21; Look in my face, Sir, observe how the blood mounts; here,
here's your Complexion, without art, fucus, or any thing -- * Then, Sir,
peruse my Person -- Hah -- I think I am well set -- Hem -- And as found as
another man -- Besides, I can talk well, walk well, and make Water well --
which, udsbores, is as provoking a quality as any man is Master of.


Sir, in a young man I confess these are additions; but a man that has the
misfortune to decline into the vail of Years, were he really Master of all
this, would not get credit with the World, he would not be believed.


Not believed! Sir, my actions shall give continual demonstration, I am not in
the Catalogue of your infirm persons; my Back, Sir, is strong, by Body active;
nor has my infirmity been so much my Foe, to abate any part of my vigour: But I
can Run, Wrestle, Fight, or Play a Game at Tennis with any Spark in the City,
and let the World rub. To confirm you, you shall see me do it -- (Not believed!)
Udsbores you shall see me Ride the Great Horse, or jump over a Stick for the
King of England.


Well Sir, I will consider on it -- in the mean time address your self to my
daughter; come, you shall sup with me: Dorrel, if any one ask for me -- I am
not at leisure -- be careful, and let no eye be Spectator of my Rarities
without my knowledge, come Sir --


The uncertain Dice of Fate thus far runs well, and my designs are prosperous
-- My disguise, shroud to my troubled mind as well as person, secures me yet
from knowledge; and my eye attains the liberty to gaze at all her actions, and
yet pass undiscovered -- Oh cursed Jealousy, how crooked are thy paths!


Unconstant, and to me! by Heaven 'tis so strange a Notion, that methinks 'tis
incredible.


And why incredible? Lord how you Men are deceived in your opinion! Your term
your selves Princes and Lords of Nature, imagining the easy tempers of Women
slaves to your nobler quality; and yet for all your pretences, to my knowledge
some of you are often mistaken.


Well, if she be false --


What then?


Why then she's damned, that's one comfort however; but Madam, this
extraordinary favour in you, obliges me in gratitude to a return. Shall I wait
on you to your Lodging, by Heaven I hate ingratitude? Come, Madam, what
satisfaction?


Such a question to a mercenary Spirit, might perhaps be accepted under the
Notion of gratitude, but you having a perfect knowledge of my quality, and
obliging temper, give me leave to tell you, my Lord, 'twas very unbecoming,
especially from the mouth of a Man of Honour.


I gad I mean it cordially, and if my service --


Hold, Sir, you're observed, yonder's Sir Arthur's Man from him, you may
doubtless learn the truth of all, my presence will be unnecessary, therefore
I'll withdraw -- So, I hope this will wean him --


This is one of her Suitors, now for a new discovery, and I'm resolved to be
prepared for him -- Your Lordships humble Servant -- *


Dorel, Come hither, I've some business with thee.


'Tis too much Honour, my Lord.


I long have looked on thee as on a Man above the common Pile of Menial
Servants; and since I know thee such, I dare request a secret from thy tongue
to me of great importance; Come, I'll bind thee to me in golden Fetters; shall
I trust to thee? --


I am your Lordships Creature, and if my ability extend to serve your Lordship,
I am proud on it.

Sure he has not discovered me.


I'll try thee instantly. The truth is, Dorell, I am grown jealous of my
Mistress, several Reports declare she is unconstant; and though I do not
positively believe 'em, yet Gad I must confess they trouble me; now I know thou
hast a Catalogue of all her Suitors, and know all her intrigues, prithee
disclose 'em, am I the Man or no, or has she others?


This is so dangerous a point, my Lord, I know not how to answer.


Fear nothing, but speak to the purpose, I'll be so much thy friend, thou shalt
not need to fear the frowns of any.


My Lord, there is one Mr Manley comes hither often.


So, who else?


And one Mr Iollyman; I heard her swear one night she'd marry him.


Very good, prithee proceed -- oh perfidious Traitoress.


Now has he a fretting Fever on him. Several others there are my Lord that
visit her as Pretenders, but with what success I know not, one of 'em I heard
her appoint to visit her to night; and because your Lordship shall see how
willing I am to serve a person of so much worth -- Follow me, and I'll place
you, where you shall, unseen, hear all their Courtship.


Do that, I am thine for ever.


More than that, owes Tribute to your Bounty; Come my Lord --


Can this be real, Madam?


True as Heaven;
I swear she is the falsest of her Sex,
Designing Love upon fallacious terms,
Without a spark of passion or desire
To possess him that Courts her --

Perjured Creature,
Oh Heaven that Providence gave Man a heart
To lose in such Abyss of Treachery;
But, Madam, is there no ocular proof to be given of this?

There is Sir, and to that purpose I brought you hither; My Chamber joins to
hers, whence from a private Closet door you may hear all; one of her Suitors is
now with her, and by their discourse you may soon guess the truth of her
treachery; for doubtless 'twill be amorous enough, and very suitable to such an
adventure.


O Dam her! Dam her! Is this her Constancy! Madam, the Debt of Gratitude I owe
you for this discovery, is so far above my present ability --


Good Sir, no more of that -- but follow me -- *


All her feigned Caresses come to this! a Curse upon the Sex -- Madam, I wait
your leisure.


And could you credit so ridiculous an Asseveration, knowing how tender my
Caresses have been to ye, I thought my actions might have given you sufficient
demonstration of my constancy.


By Heaven I never doubted it, I confess I was a little surprised to hear him
say he was at the expense of a six months Courtship, and within a Week more it
was to terminate in Marriage. But now you have told me his intrigue with Madam
Constantia, I am very sensible of the mistake* --


Had I not told you, I'll lay my life you would have been jealous.


No, no, Faith I should not -- jealous* -- I know I have no cause, thou art
the Heaven of truth, and in thy breast Astrea reigns and triumphs. Suspect thy
Faith, what Fiend could be so envious? I'll prove thy Constancy as firm as
Fate, and against all defend it.


So, I think I have carried matters rarely.


But, Madam, pardon me, if I presume to ask you why our interview is to be thus
in the dark?


'Tis because Sir Arthur's coming often into the next Room, seeing a Light
here, will be very apt to come and disturb us.


'Sdeath -- I've ignorantly left my Sword and Gloves upon the Table there,
which should he come in, would infallibly discover my being here -- I'll go
fetch 'em immediately. --


How now, what's the matter?


Oh sweet Madam -- ugh -- I am so out of breath, there's the basest Plot
contriving --


A Plot! pritheewhat Plot?


Where's the Gentleman? get him into another Room, or you'll both be discovered
immediately.


How prithee? by what means?


Madam Constantia has watched you all this night, with an intent to betray you;
I saw her bring Mr Manley into her Chamber, I'm confident with design to place
him where he may hear the discourse 'twixt you and the Gentleman.


Manley brought hither by Constantia! her envy now is apparent -- What shall I
do Nurse?


Alas! I know not -- Fire the House, I think, and say you called him in for
help.


No, so dangerous a Remedy must not be tried -- Humm -- I have it -- Sit you
down, and personate me, our Gowns are alike -- and in the dark there can be no
difference in Faces -- He's in the next Room, looking for his Sword, when he
comes, feign my voice, and Caress him like a Lover; in the mean time I'll go,
and with a Counterplot deceive both Manley and Constantia.

Prosper designs, and by this Act I'll try
Which is the Witty'st False One She or I --

Well, I've known the time when I've employed my self in such an Adventure with
a better Will -- But however I'll warrant I'll fit him with a Repertee -- I am
not so old, but I can Repertee as well as another, if occasion serve.


'Tis so dark, that igad I could hardly find the Table. Where art thou my Dear?


Here my Dear.


I have been often thinking on the products of time, and have often wondered
how they employed themselves before the Deluge -- When Love was like the
storming of a Castle attained by violence, not as now, with fair words,
address, and insinuation; Men were not then such Fools to kiss a Glove -- fall
on their knees and sigh -- igad they were wiser in those days --


Fie, fie, I protest you are not civil -- Do ye know who I am --


Do ye hear 'em Sir -- They're yonder in the Alcove.


I do Madam, and am sufficiently confirmed in her treachery; but hush -- let's
observe.


Sir, Ill go and get a Coach to the Garden gate, that you may get away
undiscovered -- I think --


I protest! methinks your carriage is too Licentious, and in my opinion you
treat me ill -- Your Love should still be clothed with a respect due to my
Youth and Beauty -- But I vow you're so wanton --


Very well -- she'll deny this anon --


Can any ill arrive from so much Love, I swear there cannot, Madam; your charms
are engraven in my heart, and in my soul your virtues -- I die when you are
absent, and 'tis your influence that raises me from death to new-born life, and
makes me currant from the dross of Nature.


Give me no cause to doubt what you have said, I then shall be contented; but I
protest you Men are so subject to flatter, and we poor tender young creatures
are so apt to believe, that it often proves very prejudicial --


She doubts his Love -- oh death -- I shall want patience --


To flatter thee -- by Heaven 'tis a thing so far from me, I hardly know its
meaning: Let Parasites, such as get Bread by fawning, flatter their Patrons:
Let the empty Fop, that's sensible of some defect in Nature, and sees the
little beauty in his Mistress, flatter her to exalt it, but in me it would
appear a Crime unpardonable, your Lustre wants no foils; but like a Diamond in
his Native Rock, you shine without the aid of Art or Flattery.


Now by my quondam Maidenhead this is very pretty, well Sir, you shall find my
heart --


And Lungs pray Heaven -- would she might Cough 'em out -- she has caught cold
with sitting up so late. Oh damned Incendiary.


Could I live out Methusalah's long Age, or number Years with the old
Patriarchs, and every day study new Themes of Virtue, I could not merit half so
great a blessing; brightest of Women, fresher than the Dew that early sits on
Roses -- oh I'm rapt with my own happiness!


Well, as I'm Virtuous this is fine -- I see I shall not be able to hold out
long -- I shall grow bold with him -- I hope, Sir, my Love deserves this from
you, you have entire possession of my heart -- and though I have broke my faith
with all my other Suitors, I've kept it firm for you.


Sir, Sir!


Limb of the Devil -- I hear her Madam, I hear her.


You should not hear 'em Sir, pray come back, they are Lovers --


Lovers, Dam 'em -- Have a little patience, I'll wait on you immediately --


I Swear you're uncivil, Sir, thus to disturb em -- for heaven's sake come
away --


Wonder of wonders -- Is there two Celia's -- or, Am I in a Dream?


Yonder's a Light -- Let's step in here -- I fear, Sir Arthur's coming --


What ails you, Sir? For heavens sake why do ye stare so! Dee ye not know me!


By Heaven I know not: Are you Celia?


What strange questions are these, You know I am?


And, Is that yonder Celia too?


Heaven! What a humour's this? That Celia? No: 'tis a Lady that lodges here,
one that Mr. Iollyman Courts.


Young Iollyman!


Iollyman? yes -- What do ye wonder at? if this humour hold, you need not
counterfeit a Madness.


By heaven you are right -- I am mad! stupid, insensibly mad: and have been so
these three hours -- 'Sdeath, Was ever any thing so strange as this? sure I've
been enchanted; pray Madam give me leave to question ye, Where have you been
all this night?


In my Chamber -- Sir -- expecting you.


Who told you I was here?


Constantia; I met her coming up stairs; and, seeing me, she brake into a
violent laughter; and asking her the reason, she told me, she had put a
pleasant trick upon you; and then fell a Laughing till she shook again.


I'gad I have been tricked, that's the truth on it -- Oh the Devil* Am I thus
abused?


This from a Woman that loved ye, is very strange -- Who did you expect to
find?


You -- she told me you was in that Alcove, and placed me to hear you -- where
I have stood this half hour in the most insufferable Torture! the Agony of
jealousy and despair, that 'tis impossible to express it.


Me! Did you expect me there? and after all my actions, to declare my unspotted
constancy; Are you still jealous, ungrateful man? -- Was ever woman so unhappy?
Will nothing^


If she be false, there's no such thing as truth: I'll credit it no more --
Madam, I see my error, and thus low sue for pardon -- 'Tis my last trial: and I
will henceforth more adore thy virtues than ere I did suspect em; Thou art the
soul of Truth, so excellently good: Nature is proud of her great work; nor will
I ever be betrayed again into the gulf of jealousy, but live blessed in thy love,
the Prince of all content, and dye old in thy Arms.


You will relapse again.


Never by Heaven -- by this kiss I'll never --


Come, Sir! the Coach --


May return again if it please, Madam -- your servant, you see your plot have not
took --


This Devil has outwitted me -- nay, in this plot, which I thought so securely
laid, it was impossible to break it. Her cunning is so prosperous, that I
believe Hell designs her for the only person to wheadle Souls with:

I'll try once more --
And if my next plot hit not right, give over.

Here they are. I have from yonder door, now too late, resented her treachery
-- Dam her! was mine a heart to play with? Was there not Fools enough to feed
with hope, but she must fly me? -- but I ll revenge my self immediately --


Here's some body coming towards, let's retire my Dear.


Sir! I have a Message first --


Such Messages are thus to be returned.


Ah help, help! Murder, murder -- help, help --


What's the matter Nurse? Oh heavens my Lord Bellamore! and Mr. Iollyman! How
came you hither at this time of night?


'Sdeath! What a mistake is this -- Have I fought for this pippin?


Zounds! Have I bestowed all my Caresses and Courtship to night upon this
Beldam?


Well, Sir; I shall find a time to requite your favours for all your jesting.


Gad, I thought it had been you Madam --


And so did I by Heaven. I durst have sworn 'twas her voice.


Your thoughts were ill employed, Sir, in a thing that so little concerns you:
I hope you have no pretences here.


How, Sir, no pretences! Ha's any man? --


'Buz: 'Sdeath are you mad! why this


Nor is this boldness pleasing, Sir.


My Lord! for heavens sake what do ye mean? Will you ruin all -- This is the
very Gentleman my Uncle designs for my Husband -- and if he knows you are his
Rival -- I'm undone.


Come, Madam, Whither do you run? by heaven I'm so melancholy -- without you
-- have, my Lord Bellamore and Iollyman! 'Sdeath! What new intrigue's this?


O Fate! Is he come too? What a spiteful minute is this? Arthur to night, and
has chosen this Minute to accost me -- Stare, stare! counterfeit your self Mad,
or we are lost: Then leave the rest to me. Pray, Sir, to bed.

To bed. Fie, What mean you by this unseasonable rambling? Sir Arthur will be
very angry if he knows it. Stare! stare!


Jack Manley here at this time of night -- Hark'ee Madam, What makes him here?


Sir Arthur seeing him in his mad fit, brought him hither to night, with intent
to administer a potion, which he had made for Lunatic persons; and, it seems,
they left his Chamber door open, and he is got out. Look! look how he stares!


Gad, 'tis a miracle to me to see him thus -- I have often heard him say, Love
is the Parent of Dullness, and Wine of Madness. Madam, How came his misfortune?


Love, Sir, Love. Passion for one Celia, a Lady in the Town here, an obdurate,
inconstant person I have heard -- and it seems she has wheadled him into this
condition.


She shall be dressed in Flames! Pendants of Ice shall hang at either ear, and
cool her as she burns -- whiz -- buzz -- shugh Bough -- she's gone, ha, ha, ha
-- Ah Celia! How sweet were thy amours? Dam her! she eats Onions -- and her
blew veins are all but coloured Lute-strings, in which she hangs her Cupids,
Sir -- Sir, I would have your Nose par'd less -- adieu, adieu pop -- Let me
hear no more on it --


Had I not seen this* I should have thought it incredible, a man of the Town,
and run mad for Love -- by heaven 'tis above the common rate of wonders, and
doubtless portends some visible Calamity that threatens the Nation --


Madam, a word with you.


No whispering, Sir; 'twill cause him to suspect us -- you know my promise --
visit me to morrow morning, and then by an unexpected choice, I shall declare
the man I think most worthy of my Love,


Enough, I will not sail. I guess the night far spent, and in slaying longer I
may obstruct your rest: I'll take my leave, Madam, your faithful servant -- My
Lord, your Lordships devoted. He little thinks what pollicy's in this --


Now, Am not I extremely kind, thus to send him away, that I may have the freer
discourse with you? I hope you will say this is very obliging.


I confess it weighs somewhat more then a common favour; but, Madam, I am not
yet satisfied in his proceedings; his coming hither so late must be upon some
design: and, how that old Woman should interpose, is to me a Mystery --


Oh dull* dull man! Why do ye not see 'twas by my plot? I ordered the light to
be taken away, and laid her a Bait for him, purposely to keep my self free from
his troublesome Impertinences --


Was that it -- by heaven 'twas a Witty one --


Was that it? What else could it be -- I wonder what recompense I shall have
for this care, in preserving my Love entire, I Swear my Lord you'll be
ungrateful.


No: by heaven I'll heap together as much Love, and strong Imagination, as
would serve forty men: But, I'll be out of thy debt -- prithee do not censure
till the trial is made: I'gad I'm sure I never failed yet -- But, When shall be
the day?


To morrow, Sir! a sudden thought has so ordained it. Visit me in the morning,
where I suppose will be the rest of my Amoretto's; and you shall see what
sentiments of private passion my heart retains for you.


To morrow! I am rapt with the thought on it! To morrow.

Call up the Sun! black shades away;
Bid Phosporus go fetch the Day.
As my friend Cowley has it: Madam, I'll be as early as the Lark; nay, by
heaven, I'm very passionate! You see your Beauties power, Madam -- And, I'll go
and prepare my self --


And I'll go and think of my purpose.


Think on to morrow night -- A pox on purposes,


You shall have reason to curse it when you know what purpose I mean --


Are they gone, Madam.


Both gone, Sir, and full of different hopes -- I Swear the love I bear you
makes me commit strange frailties.


Oh my Dearest; my heaven of love; How shall I recompense thee? My life's
service as nothing, if considered. When, when my Sweet?


To morrow, Sir.


Happy accent!


You carried the plot so well, in counterfeiting madness,
That I were ungrateful, should I not recompense to visit
Me to morrow morning, Sir; and, by a happy choice,
Receive what you have so long sighed for.

Oh Transport of Delight!
By heaven I fear I shall not live till then:
Excess of joy will kill me -- Best of Women:
Best, 'twas too vilely said, thou art so good;
By heaven thou art a Miracle -- and I
The happy man elected to possess it:
Till the morning comes I will employ my self,
In thinking on thy Beauties -- and then die,
In the possession of so sweet a Joy --

Ha, ha, ha, ha --
That Heaven should give man so proud a heart,
And yet so little Knowledge -- Silly Creature,
That talks, and laughs, and kisses oft that hand,
That steals away its reason; As if Nature --
Had played the Traitor, and seduced the Sex,
Without the aid of Destiny, or Women.
Ah! With what pleasant ease
The Bird might be ensnared -- Set but a wanton look
You catch whole Covyes: Nay, there is a Magic
Pertaining to our Sex, that draws em in,
Though in the Long Vacation -- And, by Heaven,
I'm resolved to work my sly deceipts,
Till my revenge is perfect ^Thus far I've done well,
And I'll persevere in the Mystery.
Wheadle em to the snare with cunning plots;
Then bring it off with quick designing Wit;
And quirks of dubious meaning. Turn and wind
Like Foxes in a storm; To prey on all,
And yet be thought a Saint -- Thus Queen I'll fit,
And Hell shall laugh to see a Woman's Wit.

HEy! rare Boys! rare Boys. Done like sons of Thunder:
True heirs of mirth and jollity, upon honour we have outdone
Example in our frolic to night, the Town shall talk of us,
With admiration, and call us Children of the night; The night,
The happy night. 'Pox of your day-debauches, the dull and insipid
Common-way of frolic. Give me the Night to roar in --

'Sbud, well said:
The night or nothing, I say -- Give me thy hand,
I love thee, Thou art a merry Wagg: I am pleased with it,
Udsbores I am. I thought I had a son here too,
But I see now he's grown a serious Rascal,
He never seeks good Company, such as thine is --
No matter, hand pinching, I'll be even with him,
And let the World rub.

Banter him, banter him Toby. 'Tis a conceited old Scarab, and will yield us
excellent sport -- go play upon him a little -- exercise thy Wit --


Not I^uds hash -- I had like to have had my head broke with his Halberd just
now, for going about to exercise my wit.


Come, another Song, another Song my merry Wags,
And hang pinching, I'll make a third man -- hem --

And underneath the Greenwood Tree
This Youngster laid her down a,
And there he Kissed her once or twice,
Sing hey derry, derry, derry, down, a.
O brave old Signior -- Flail! Sir, Bimdog, what a pox dreaming. Sing Sir
to entertain the Company.


I Sing, Zing, What do ye mean, Sir! I Sing! Lord save us: alas I canno Sing,
Sir, Ich was ne'er so well bred.


Whistle then you Dog, do something for Diversion --


Whistle! by Coxbones I cannot whistle neither. Bless us, Must I never go to
bed -- Bless me from London, if this be the Trade.


Trade! Thou son of Assafaetida! call a Gentleman's divertive Custom a Trade.
Come, all hands, we'll go Pump the Rogue.


Ay, ay; a dull drowsy Rascal: Pump him I say --


A prize! a prize! Petticoats upon honour;
Stand there! come before a man of Authority -- And why
Thus early my Lady of the Lake? Whither are you going.

To Hell* Will you follow me?


Not I, upon honour: There I'll leave you --


By your favour, Madam, What's a Clock?


I am sorry the pawning your Watch, Sir, forces you to Ask so necessary a
Question --


Now will this damned bulking Quean be too witty for me;
'O my Conscience if I shall ask her any more Questions!
Uds hash! I'll ee'n proceed to the Business, and say nothing.

Fie, fie, Sir! an old man and talk thus!


An old Man! 'Sbud! You're a Whore, an old man! Call a
Gentleman, in the midst of a night Debauch old -- Hem,
Hem -- Sound Lungs and Heart-whole -- old quoth a!

Come, upon honour, ye shall all to the Tavern with us, and
We'll complete the nights debauch with Credit: But first
A Song. I know you have your parts in the last new Verses,
Made of the Nights Ramble. 'Tis a part of your Function, a
New Song is as necessary for a Town Woman, as a Suit of Knots,
Or a new Gown -- Hey! strike up there!

Happy the Man that takes delight,
In Banqueting the Senses;
That drinks all day, and then at night,
The height of Joy commences.
With Bottles armed, we stand our ground,
Full Bumpers crown our Blisses;
They roar and sing the Streets around,
In Serenading Misses.
With Bottles armed, c.
Pleasures thus free and unconfined,
No drowsy Crime reproaches;
No Heaven to a frolic mind,
No pleasure like Debauches.
Whilst rambling thus, new Joys we reap,
In charms of Love and Drinking,
Insipid Fops lye drowned in sleep,
And the Cuckold he lies thinking.

Whilst rambling, c.

Rarely done of all hands: come, now let's to the Tavern,
I am resolved to make a night on it.

Well said, again, Boy. To the Tavern! to the Tavern -- hah --
Merry Rascal -- hang pinching. 'Sbud 'thou'rt a brave fellow --

Come my little pignies, you and I will go and be drunk together:
Hey -- you shall see me perform rare exploits, i'faith.

Nay, Gad, now my hands in, I shall pepper you with wit,
I feel it growing in my head like a Bunch of Parsenips.

Again! Igad pinch him again; but come, of this at the Tavern,
We lose time -- Strike up there -- Sing. Whilst rambling.

So, is all fit? prithee how do I look? may I pass for a Bully of the first
Rate amongst Dablers in the Mystery? how sit my Clothes?


Decently I swear, and well become you; you have as masculine an Air as any
Man, I mean any Man that has no more Beard than you.


This gives an end to my suspicion; the Plot's unravelled, and my late doubts
have now their period --


Away then, and be sure you miss not a tittle in the charge I've given you, but
with a seign'd sigh, and a tear or two, tell Sir Arthur I went away unknown to
you, and supposing it to be discontent, relating to his designs of Marriage; do
this handsomely, and I'll come in person, and prosecute the rest: This habit
will, I am sure, disguise me, and I intend to invite my self to another Banquet
of Wit with the Suitors, ere I have done with 'em -- away -- a day or two's
time will make all quiet -- and I shall be in readiness for as many more.


Madam, I have my Lesson perfectly, and am so much your Creature, as not to
dispute your Commands.


Now am I in my opinion a second Machiavil, my Wit has finished Works as strong
and great as Hercules 12 labours! Oh I could hug my self for my inventions --
they are so prosperous, as if Fate meant to make my Wit a Miracle for Men to
wonder at. To betray in me's a Virtue, being first betrayed. The thought of
which does like an eating Canker prey on my heart and vitals. Therefore sweet
Revenge Thou art my Darling. Thus I'll blind their eyes, 'Tis on the neck of
Wit Revenge must rise. --


Can this be true! oh Heavens what have I heard!
Is't possible she should be thus affected
To him that basely so deserted her?
If so I am a Devil, and my jealousy
The sin of all Corruption -- I'll redeem it,
Watch all her actions, and discover all,
Lest she should lose her self in her Revenge.
'Twas well I overheard her -- Happy day!
That does all former fears with Bliss repay.

'Twas well my Lord your Valor interposed betwixt me and the danger, by Heaven
I had been stockado'd else --


I am glad Sir, Fate guided me that way, and made me capable of doing you so
good an office, pray how came your quarrel?


Why one of the Rascals would needs take the wall of me, nay, though I told him
in French I was drunk, and had a Whore with me -- Was ever such an incivility?
But I think I am revenged, for if I may believe my eye, my last full Pass
pierced his Diaphragma -- I'm sure I killed him.


How, killed him! Not so, I hope, my merry Wag, not so --


Not so, upon Honour I am sure it is so --
Whoo -- Pox 'tis accounted nothing now in Term-time.
The killing a Man's no more looked on in a Nights Debauch,
Than getting a Clap in a Mornings Ramble.
The Town's full, the Town's full.

I hope the consequences are no worse than he makes 'em;
But udshah -- my heart goes a-pit-to-pat.

Though I hate this Fellows impertinence, yet for diversion sake I'll make one in
the Debauch to Night: Sir, bid the Coach go home, tell Rains I have no
occasion for him to Night. --


Come Music strike up there, Damme' you sleepy Dogs,
Come, we'll have a Song and a Dance, hey -- Drawer.

Will you not be pleased to take a private Room Sir*


A private Pox Sir.


Sir, you shall be hufft and cufft, and flip'd and kicked, Sir, if you talk
of private Rooms -- Now am I as valiant as a Hector, methinks I could beat this
Drawer into a Wicker Bottle --


Sir, as a Reprieve for Life, bring out the Butt, we'll have the triumph of
Bacchus to Night, my Lord you shall be Spectator; now of one of my Frolics, I
invented it in Paris, for the benefit of all Lovers of the Grape, and
cherishers of Burgundy, and I hope you'll speak it a faceti^us one; 'tis called
a triumph to Bacchus, my Lord.


A good Theme Sir -- worthy of your Wits invention; no doubt a great piece of
ingenuity. --


Come my witty Devottees of Venus,
You must be assistant here.
Hey -- Drawer, where are you Sir?
Come hither Toby, thou shalt personate god Bacchus --
Give him Wreath there -- and a Bumper --
Come, up, up, advance into the Throne --
So, now Ladies kneel, and pay obedience to your Emperor --
My Lord, I must beg your Lordship to bear part in the Ceremony --
There on that side, my Lord --
Drawer give every one a Glass --
Flourish Music and drink --
Hey --

How do I present it, ha! methinks it becomes me very well.


Look big, look a little bigger, you know the Effigy.


By the Lord Harry I'll kiss thee for this, my Darling of the dark-Well, I am
resolved to disinherit my Son, and adopt thee -- hang pinching, I'll do it Boy,
and let the World rub.


Come, now to the Song -- and let all parts be ready for the Chorus.


Bacchus thou mighty Power Divine,
Great God of Mirth, and sprightly Wine,
Behold us here that Kneeling show
The Duty that we owe --
We through thy influence rejoice,
And thus with free and cheerful voice
The Fame and Praises sing
Of Bacchus our great God and King.
'Tis Wine, 'tis Wine, that still controlls,
And Fame and Love must both strike Sail;
There lies such vigour in full Bowls,
The Fate of Princes can't prevail.
The Wreaths of great Heroes his Altar shall Crown,
Whilst the Grave and the Prudent bow down.
When Beauty darts a smiling Beam,
Our Souls are ^by Loves extreme;
But one brisk Glass takes Care away,
And yields us back the Prey:
No Fate of Love or piercing Dart
Can wound when Wine surrounds the heart;
Still guarding it from Care,
It baffles Fate, and slights the Fair.

'Tis Wine, 'tis Wine, c.

Spark, let me embrace thee, 'udsbores thou art the Mirror of our Age, and hast
the best principles of English Gallantry I ever saw -- Ah would I were but
5-and-20 for thy sake -- but come -- hang pinching -- 'tis well it's no worse,
as my friend Hearty says --


What think you my Lord? is it not Modish? -- by Heaven 'tis new, that's one
good property, and I believe 'twill take very well.


Sir, if you will take my opinion in this business, I think it an excellent
Invention, and were I you, I would have Books printed, that the World may not
be ignorant; 'igad you have this encouragement, the Press has been troubled
with matters of less consequence.


I tell you I have 200 l. a Year, I've my Lands free and unmorgag'd, and am
resolved to keep a Miss, according to the Mode, therefore speak now, or for
ever hold your peace.


But which of us would you have Sir?


Either of you -- Udshash I'm a right Country Squire, any thing will serve my
turn, if the properties be not wanting -- What's your price? --


Why in truth Sir, I have had 40 s. a Week, but in kindness to a Man of your
Complexion, I'll abate a Crown.


My Complexion! ah wheedling Queen --


Come Sir, Drawer fill each his Glass. Hey -- Let the World rub, and let's
have the other Song.


Zong quoth a -- Lord zave us a Zong -- pray, pray good folks -- pray -- oh, oh
--


How now Bandog* what makes you howl thus? ha!


Howl! by Coxnowns you'll howl too, if you stay longer; y'have killed a Mon
yonder, he that you quarrelled with about your Crack there, 'slid she have a
good mind to crack her for it, and God save his Soul they think he's dead: The
Constable, and a Regiment of Beggars, I mean Bilbo's, are searching for you,
and just coming up the street, uds-diggers up you go, if they can catch ye. Oh
that ever the ancient Family of the Tilburies should come to such disgrace!


Nay then, this is no time for Merchandising.


Malicious Fortune, Heaven what shall I do, if I am taken, I shall certainly be
hanged?


Pox, not for killing a Man in Term-time, Sir, you know the Town's full.


Hanged! Heaven defend, my merry Wag, is't come to that? Hanged! Gentlemen your
Servant, I've a little earnest business. --


Nay, Sir, leave not your Friends in adversity, for my part I'm resolved to
stick to it, if we are hanged. --


If we are hanged quoth a? Ah Lord! the very word has put me into an Ague.


If we do miscarry Sir -- why let the World rub as you say.


Ay, ay, you need not fear, you are a Lord, you'll come off well enough, 'tis
we shall stretch for it; udshash nothing vexes me, but that I cannot stay to
perform my bargain with Mrs Juniper there.

Hark, they come, the Devil take the hindmost.


And so say I.


Dam 'em! Are they gone? What Scarabs are these, to trust a Tavern security
beyond a Sword -- What Sir are you creeping away too? turn back, and help to
defend you Dog -- or --


O Lord Sir! I defend Sir! --


Fight Sir, and fight valiantly too, or by this Steel --


Well Sir, I will, I will, oh what will become of me!


Come my Lord, have at 'em, since it must be so, here's old Madge has not seen
Sun these 20 Years, shall be scoured in some of their Guts, rather than I'll be
taken; udsbores I have been valiant in my time.


I must quickly dispatch, for fear of a disappointment with my Corinna --


Oh here they are, Caitiffs, Rogues, Murderers, down* down with 'em my Men of
Midnight, fall on in the Kings name, fall on --


No hole, ne'er a corner to creep into? This is the worst contrived house I ever
saw. Hanged did he say? Marry Heaven defend, I am too raw a Bully to venture
hanging yet -- oh well remembered in faith -- here's the Butt, the Throne of
Baccbus, as Zechiel calls it; this will be a rare place to secure my self in


Why Neighbours we were mistaken, these were none of those that hurt the Man I
am told, 'twas two Brothers, and that they were dogged to this Tavern. Come,
come -- they must be here still -- let's in, and see --


Was ever poor Night-walker in such distress? What shall I do? They are
searching within, and the damned Rogues are so curious in the discovery, that
they miss not an Anger-hole; I found this Ladder of Ropes upon a Shelf, but
dare not venture down yet, for fear some prying Rascal shall snap me between
Earth and Heaven -- 'Sdeath I'll creep into this Bush, it may be this may
secure me --


They're all gone in, and now I'm in a Tub of Troubles about vent'ring out; if
some of 'em should watch at the Gate, I should be snapped -- if snapped -- hanged
-- Udshash, my stomach cannot relish that word -- Yet I'll couch a little
longer, and see what will come on it --


Here comes a Man with a Eight -- now sit close --


A Son of a Whore to question a Man of 1500 l. a Year, and dispute the Family
of the Tilburies, by St. Iago he deserves to be mortifi'd -- Constable --
What's a Constable, to a Man of Worship! a Man of drunken reeling Worship* a
Worm! a Scarab! 'tis fit he should be Carbonado'd. Let's see, where am I? What
Tavern's this? oh 'tis the Rose, I'll take another dose of Sack here, and then
-- home -- ho -- within there Drawer, gives a Cup of Sack here --


Ah Lord! 'tis my Father -- and drunk as a Wheel-barrow, I shall be found out,
for he holds his Torch so high, that any one that comes by must needs see me.


Why Rascals, Poltroons -- Sons of Popinjayes, what do ye mean, hah Dare you
affront a Man of Quality -- I mean a Man of Country Quality -- Hah Puppies, by
St Iago I'll break all the Windows -- I'll teach you to be civil-now, now --
cannot I find ever a stone. This is the great enormance of this City -- here's
Wenches in abundance, but not a stone to throw at a Dog -- no matter -- I'll
set fire on your Bush, 'tis all one -- I'll mortify your Owls Nest by St Iago.


Oh! I shall be burnt!


How now! What's here one going to fire the house? Awa^* away with him to the
Lodge; here's fine work indeed! Come bring him away, stay some of you here and
watch, the rest must be hereabouts --


But is't possible Neighbours this house should be haunted, and yet Folks live
in it!


Possible? as sure as you are there Neighbours. They say the Devil appeared to
'em every Night in the likeness of a Hog.


Lord bless us Sirs! a Hog! but see what the Devil can do.


Set down the Lanthorn Patch, and come let's sit down on this Butt -- I'll tell
you the Story --


Ay come, silence ho, let's hear Neighbour Cobble --


Why look you Sirs, one Winter-night the Maid here sitting up late in the
Kitchen, and busy about her Household affairs -- who should come in at the
Window but this Hog --


So!


And you must know the Devil's a cunning Hog, when occasion serves kept such --
such a grunting and shuffling, and jumping, that the poor Wench was even out of
her wits; she would have prayed, but her memory being very short, and her
Prayer-book out of the way, she could not. In short, Sir, this Hog, or this
Devil, er this Devil of a Hog, for'ts all -- having thrown down several Pewter
Dishes, and swallowed a whole Porridge-pot of Brewis -- takes me his way into
the Cellar -- there makes such a wrack among the Butts and Bottles -- such
havoc among the Glasses --


Not I.


Nor I.


Ugh! Ugh! Ugh! --


Oh it comes! it comes! the Devil, the Devil --


Udshash! this Ugh, Ugh, was a rare invention, Machiavil was an Ass to me at a
nights intrigue; but I'll away, for fear of insurrections --


That was Toby's voice, I believe he's gone; what the Devil was't scared the
Watchmen so -- No matter now, the Coast is clear -- I'll venture down -- so --

I have escaped two eminent dangers, Burning and Hanging,
The thought of which has made me as dull as a rifled Cully.
Thus with the Brawny Crew of Suburb Roches,
We swim the Brackish Ocean of Deboches,
Without the Sense of Honour or Reproaches.

Come, come, I say, there's a trick in it, some cunning scurvy lewd design, I
know it; have I not fostered her with tenderness? and before she could write
Woman, bred her carefully! What cause has she then to desert my house? Answer
me that, what cause?


Only fear Sir, you should match her against her Will,
Heaven knows I know no other cause.

No, no, there must be more in it, 'twas your pleasure Mistress often to quarrel
with her, it caused your envy to see her so beloved -- hah -- But bring her
again, and quickly too, or see my face no more, out of my doors, by Iacobs
Pantible -- a Relic of Renowned memory: Thou art no more my daughter, unless
my Niece return --


Indeed Sir Arthur you are a little too severe in this, for I am confident
Madam Constantia knows nothing of her going, she always kept her intrigues
from her knowledge, and consequently this, being, it seems, of more importance
than any of the rest; what her design is Heaven knows, but a day or two's time
will doubtless discover all.


Madam Arbella, you are one I respect, your Father Sir Andrew Swipplethrop is
my intimate good Friend, a Man I love and honour; and by St Augustines
Night-cap -- Madam Arbella you are welcome to my house, but seek not to defend
an ill Argument -- I say once more there's a trick in it -- and give me leave,
Madam, I will persevere in my justice -- therefore Minion look to it.


Sir, there is three Gentlemen below, Suitors to Madam Fickle, that desire
admittance --


Conduct 'em up, I hope here's some discovery.


Though I was ignorant, Sir, you were my Rival, I thought I had known you for a
Gentleman, one that would not have carried a design under the disguise of
counterfeit madness; but assure your self Sir, such an injury shall require
satisfaction.


And have it, my Lord, when you dare demand it: all falsehood I deny; nor can I
condemn my self with carrying on a Love intrigue with policy.


'sDeath! I see I am baffled at last, these are two of her Suitors -- I, it
seems, the third; but I hope her choice will dissipate all doubts --


My Lord and Gentlemen, your humble Servant, may I request to know what
business brings you hither so early?


I suppose my business is not unknown, I come Sir Arthur, to pay my devotion to
the charming Corinna.


And I mine to the glorious Cleio.


And I the particular tender of my heart to the adorable Celia.


Corinna! Cleio! Celia! They are names of Antiquity, I confess -- But for
Heavens sake express your selves more largely Gentlemen, I know none of the
persons.


Now the Plot begins to be discovered, now we shall know all.


Prithee do but observe the alteration of countenances, oh this was a subtle
Devil!


Your Niece, Sir Arthur, the rich Widow -- I have had the honour to be long
interest'd in her favour, and she commanded me to wait on her this morning, and
promised publicly to make choice of me.


By Heaven she promised to make choice of me.


Nay gad she promised to make choice of me.


Was ever such insufferable impertinence? Sir Arthur, I protest by my honour,
all I say is true; and by virtue of her premeditated choice and election, I am
the Man.


Death! What impudence is this? I say, by virtue of her choice, I am the Man.


Hell and Furies! I say I am the Man.


Hey day! What are all of ye the Men? By the Threshold of Mahomet's Temple,
this is very fine! Has she a tripartite Husband, a threefold Father of
Children? But hark ye Gentlemen, let us come nearer to the business; for as far
as I can perceive, you have mistook the house -- Here are no Chio's, nor
Celia's, nor Corinna's under my roof, I can assure ye. 'Tis true, I had a
Niece, a Widow, and such a Fortune as you describe -- who is this day gone, I
think, to seek her Fortune -- h^r name is Fickle -- sure she cannot be the
person you seek after?


'Tis so! We are all most finely gulled, I find it! oh! 'sdeath, now could I
eat my flesh for madness, dull Blockhead, not to perceive her Wheedling.


Fickle is her name; Dam her, she has been fickle enough I see -- oh Hell!
Hell! Were ever hopes so frustrated? 'Tis plain now she has entertained us all
with equal Caresses, and by taking a several name, has thus long kept us
ignorant! --


Sure there must be some Plot in this, Sir Arthur, pray be particular in the
Narration -- is she certainly gone Sir?


Why, Sir, upon my Honour, and the Honour of our Family, I protest Sir -- she
is certainly gone Sir.


The Devil go with her Sir, -- oh confusion seize her, after all my hopes, and
fears, and doubts, am I thus abused?


Oh Heaven! Was it possible your Lordship should be so deceived? Nay, by a
person that should have been proud of the honour she received in the Amours of a
Man of Quality, who was unsensible of any beauty but the charms of Corinna,
nothing could penetrate but the eyes of Corinna! Nor nothing appear attractive,
but the Person and Mean of Corinna! --


I protest Sir I pity you, Heaven knows how constant you have been -- how
adored Celia dreamt of Celia, sighed for Celia! Mourned out the tedious Night
in meditations, and visited the light with thoughts of Celia, and now to have
so strange a Metamorphosis, an ungrateful Fickle instead of a constant Celia,
by Heaven 'tis great Tyranny in Fortune --


Well Madam, well!


Sir Arthur, your Servant, permit a stranger somewhat interest'd in your
present affair, the liberty of speaking a word or two.


Sir, any Man that wears the presence of Gent. has liberty to express himself
here --


Then briefly and boldly thus -- My Lord and Gentlemen -- I know you better
than you imagine, you are all Pretenders to my Lady Fickle, a person to whom my
private inclinations have been long devoted, and having last Night the honour
of kissing her hand, she in tears told me, she had deserted Sir Arthur's house,
only to be rid of your troublesome impertinences; she also did me the favour to
desire me to give you this assurance, That she hated you all three, and her
former proceedings with you, have been only to divert herself with your
ceremonious Addresses.


Sure 'tis impossible a Woman should be such a Devil? Dare you prove this?


Dam him -- this is the impudentst young Hector I ever met with.


Hark ye, dare you fight Sir?


Yes Sir, with you if you dare Sir! Fight! Blood of the Heroes, do ye question
it -- There's my Glove -- I'll sight you all three, appoint your place and
time.


The Soul of a Giant by Heaven, a very Devil in decimo sexto.


I scorn to win a Lady of her perfections, with the loss but of a drop of
blood, a River full I say, my veins drawn dry, and on the active gore fierce
atoms darting to win my Love through streams of Death and Horror. I'll bathe my
Lips in gore, kiss bleeding Wounds, cleave Helmets, stand a Breach, and dare a
Cannon, divide a Heart in two, hah! hah! -- 'tis done. Soul of Belona, I'll
exhaust a Flood, turn Earth to Chaos, Oceans into Blood. Consume your timorous
cringing Amorists, that would possess their Heaven, but dare not bleed for it.
Blood is my Province, therefore with you all am I resolved to fight -- A single
Man's too poor for my Revenge; All, all I say, and all at once, 'tis base else.


This is the daringst young Rogue I ever saw, I must dash his hopes -- Hark'ee
young Huffing Sir, no more of this here, follow me, you shall find one of us
sufficient to cut your Throat.


All or none by Heaven, I will not fight else --


Now is the time, and this mysterious Plot shall be no longer hid -- fie, fie
my Lord -- I thought your Lordship cherished too much honour ever to draw your
Sword against a Woman!


A Woman!


Look on her well, Sir Arthur, My Lord and Gentlemen, do ye not know her? Nay,
Madam, blush not, all must out -- You must be discovered. This is the very
person you are speaking of, my Lady Fickle! your Cleio Sir! your Celia! and
your Corinna, my Lord!


By Pharaoh 'tis the same, I know her now. Why how Niece!


Discovered! and in the end of all my Plots: what Devil told this Fellow my
designs -- Well Uncle -- 'tis I.


What in your Masquerading habit, Madam? if I may presume, what intrigue to
night are you designing for?


'Tis frustrated my Lord, you might have known else.


Ungrateful Creature! Was I so desertless? Was my hearts passion so far wanting
merit, to deserve this return?


Was I not worthy of your favour?


And was my heart too base to be your slave?


By Heaven, no; all your deserts are boundless, and I am far unworthy your
addresses; and since I am discovered, you shall know why I have used you thus.
I loved, and was betrayed, and for this cause swore a Revenge on all that
should love me. To make it plainer to ye I am married. My husband fired with
jealousy, forsook me to spend his time in Travel; since I have lived a Widow
in opinion, and wheadled many Suitors, but loved none.


Why then your Husband lives!


I know not Sir, I have not seen him since.


Yes Sir, he lives, and lives to bless the hour he took up this disguise -- oh
my Sweet -- Consider humane frailty, and forgive my Crime of too much
Jealousy.


My dear Friendlove! Can this be true? Am I then once more blessed with thy
Caresses?


Hey Dorel metamorphiz'd to Mr Friendlove, by Melchizedech this is strange!


Married! Gad I have spent my time very finely well! if ever I trust a Widow
again, may I wear Horns like Acteon, and seek for a Patrimony in terra
la.


I swear I have been cruel to thy Virtue, but my whole life shall sue to make
amends; and my noble Lord, and you Gentlemen, whatever Presents on this Ladies
behalf have been received, shall be returned with ample satisfaction, and since
espousing her perfections, I am bound to have a particular interest in her
actions: If any one here holds himself wronged, my person shall give him the
acknowledgment he demands, and my Sword the satisfaction of a Gentleman --


Sir! I hope you think I dare fight -- and refuse not through fear -- but since
I see she had some reason for what she did, my particular resentments are not
worth a quarrel: My thoughts now bowing down to this shrine of beauty.


And mine to this. Madam! Can you forgive --


'Twere an excellent revenge to use you as my Lady Fickle did, I swear my Lord
you have deserved it.


We have all fallings, Madam, you must pardon.


I like this well. I like this well: win her and wear her: Mr. Manley, I like
your Person and Estate well. By King Pharoab I 'em very merry, come, we'll
have a Dance.

How now, What's here Mr Iollyman* and my old Friend Tilbury indurance -- How
came this Friend? hah!


An't please your Worship! these are the Gentlemen that wounded the Man last
night, and they got from us once, but we caught um again; and we took this
other firing a house.


Well, leave 'em with me, I'll be Ball for their appearance to morrow -- I am
resolved nothing shall hinder my mirth to day -- Mr. Tilbury and Mr Iollyman, I
have heard of all your frolics last night, both yours and your Sons. Let it
be so no more: for the present all shall be well -- But there is no hopes of my
daughter now -- she's bestowed --


Since she's bestowed; God give her Joy. I'll cherish my self with a merry Song
and a Fidle, and hang pinching, let the World rub.


My Son's unmarried, and the Family of the Tilburies thus disgraced -- By St.
Iago, I'll take post and away for Salisbury immediately --


And so will I. Udshah -- if these distasters belong to Men of parts, as ye
call 'em -- give me a Country life -- for though there's less wit, there's more
security.


Infamous, impertinent! Can thou repugn the pleasures of a Debauchee!
through the apprehension of a walking Nightrap, and a gilded Truncheon, with
the City Arms on it -- Upon honour thou art a Libel to my Fame, and unworthy to
break a Glass in my society.


Udshahh, I might ha bin hanged in your society for all that, but that Fortune
was my Friend, and reserved me for the future benefit of my Family --


Hanged! A man of parts! An honest Nightwalker hanged!
Intolerable Impudence! no Sir -- assure your self no such*
Fate attends us Brothers of the Bottles -- a Stockado, a
Gentile thrust through the Lungs or so, might have
Happened -- but no hanging, Brother Bullfinch: no hanging.

Come, come, a word to the wise is sufficient -- I have resolved a reformation
-- I relish not your Stockado's not I, nor is a gentile thrust through the
Lungs, as you term it, so agreeable with my Nature to persevere. In brief,
Sir, I am converted: I will into the Country immediately.


Come, come, embrace and be friends, I am in a good humour, and by Melchizedech
-- strife shall be a stranger to my house, to day: so, so; all, all well -- and
though you are not partners in this Wedding, you shall be merry at it -- and
let the World rub, as my old Friend here says -- go call in the Fiddlers there
--


Come, my dear sweet, and let us loose our selves
In Loves Embraces. This is a happy day

Through crooked paths, dark plots, and ways obscure,
Revenge still roves, to make it's action sure.
I have been false to night, and purchased hate,
But Ladies, on your smiles depends my fate:
Let me then gain one happy glance from you,
And the Witty False One shall be ever True.

ANd now to you Gallants that smiling sit,
And with insipid Votes infest the Pit,
Because the Play was by a Stranger Writ;
The Poet says, he knows his Merit's small,
And trembles at the thought of a Cabal;
But since a Bully in his Play I was,
I am resolved a Champion in his Cause:
Therefore let him that boasts of too much strength,
Appoint the place, and send his Rapiers length:
A barb'rous Critic shall not walk the Street,
Nor from this moment dare to censure Wit,
By Heaven I'll pepper you if once we meet.
You smile, and perhaps doubt my want of skill,
But I'll revenge it, Blood and Death I will.
I must confess there is a safer way,
You may walk safely if you'll like the Play;
But else, if you your Censures raise anew,
Fate sends his Darts abroad, Blood must ensue.
Let him that on that Basis honour builds,
Meet me to morrow in Lambs-Conduit- Fields,
There he shall find a Woman now turned Bully,
Has power to turn a Critic to a Cully.

