IF I'm of Age, to know what's Good from Bad,
I must declare our Patentees are Mad;
They've known my Comic Humour all along,
And yet this Morning sent me here -- a Song,
A nimble dapper Dancing-Master too,
And bids me choose, for nothing else will do.
Mad, Mad, stark Mad. Let's see, Sol la, me, sol.
Zooks, how like Midnight Screeker shall I howl;
For can they ever think I will comply --
I Dance, I Sing;
For as to the first, my English Bulk's not made;
I want an Air for Monsieur's Capering Trade:
And for the next, --
If they expect, I'll be a Capon for it,
I'd have 'em know, my Salary's too short;
I'd do much for Diversion of the Town,
But not do something to lose all my own.
Ah, Sirs, you are the cause of these our Streights,
You still have been our dire malignant Fates:
By your lewd Humours first, which when we follow'd
Our Smutty Plays out of our Doors were Hollowed,
And Zealous Spirits against our Function Bellowed.
And then besides, your Critic Quality,
Makes such a wretched Drug of Poetry,
That we are forced, to help our Withering Bays,
Strangers to Hire, of Sigismundian Race,
At Price so dear, we purchase Voices Killing,
They're Laughing at us, when we think 'em Trilling.
Oh, what va^t Sums, since our late Vein of Plotting,
Have both our Houses paid, for Quavering and for Cutting:
So much, that I in Melancholy Case,
With looking Gravely, have quite spoiled my Face:
They may be Merry, as their Gains provoke,
Bu^ I, a Lose^ have forgot to Ioak.
I was a taking Fool some time ago,
But now as out of Fashion as a Beau;
My Trade's quite spoiled, I cannot vend my Ware,
Ah, would to Heaven I were a Dancing Bear,
Or any other Monster, but a Player,
A singing French Baboon, just come from Lorrain,
A Hedg-hog, gived but out that I am Foreign,
I'll draw the City Fops, and Suburb Whores,
And Cheat the Town by Sixes, and by Fours.
But since our Poet is resolved to day,
Once more to entertain you with a Play,
A famous Story, and known lately True,
Mixed with good Humour, and good Music too,
Which there is in it, give the Devil his due:
I'll once more hope too, it will please your Fancies,
As well as if it were all Songs and Dances.
And if some Foes their Malice should pursue,
Let but our Friends do generous Justice too,
We'll Critics fear no more, those Play degraders,
Than Wise Men did of late the new Invaders.
The first, our Heroes of sharp Understanding,
On Wit's fair Island, shall oppose from Landing.
The last, which some say, mere Courtesy retards
From coming, being Civil to our Guards,
Should, ever their Hot-brain'd Frenzy hither call 'em;
Oh, how our Terrible Train'd-Bands would maul 'em.

SHout on, ye Sons of Clamour, louder still,
And fright the Grandees with obstreperous Noise,
Whilst I secure in Darling Policies*
Am pleased with the success of my Designs against this vile ungrateful City
Naples. Did ever Jesuit Wronged die Unrevenged, if he had power to effect it?
No, the working Brain would burst quite through the Skull, with the excess of
Boiling Rage fermented, sooner than leave that Scandal on our Order, That we
forgive those that Affront the Priesthood. They lately chose Philomerino
Cardinal, and the officious Nobles thronged the Conclave to shut out my Deserts
from being President, as I so long Expected; which to revenge, -- I've subtly
wove my self into the Councels of the new Raised Plebeian, Massaniello, who tho
a Fish^rman, -- has yet a Spirit of unmatched Force; a Head too as well turned
for Mischief as this her^ -- and who now with Resolution and Sense, not found
before in such Course Breeding, has stirred the People to put down the Gabells;
some Numbers are already rose, and -- Mataloni and his Confederates, the Marks
they shoot at. That Bow I'll help to bend; -- Oh! -- here's the Idol Cardinal
and the Great Duke -- They Plot their own Affair;
I'll to the Rabble and do Mischief there.



Five hundred Boys, let 'em not Fright your Eminence, Switch^s and Rods will
^end 'em Home again.


My Lord, I am not Frighted, yet let my Caution be of some use, if only to
prepare Your Grace to take into consideration the danger of such sudden
Insurrections.


What Danger can there be? These Hot-brain'd Youths that march about with
Weapons made of Canes, I'll undertake at the sight of a Whip and Bell, Like
^oisting Curs, shall skulk into their Corners.


The hungry Mice are hunting after Cheese, a Cat will scare 'em all; -- besides
the number is Inconsiderable.


They increase hourly, and Men begin to follow 'em; not only so, but Headed, as
I hear, by a Bold Fellow, who tho but a Fisherman, has yet strange Courage and
uncommon Parts; one who I'm told, has, when his Net lay Idle, sat often down to
read in Politics, and in his spare time studied to catch Men.


Yes, Chapmen, -- my good Lord, -- Men for his purpose; Stewards of Families,
or Clerks of Kitchens, Men proper to buy up his F^sh.


Ha, ha, ha, ha. I hear indeed a Ruffian, one Massaniello, is the Ringleader of
a Rout of Beggars, Fellows that wear half Breeches and no Stockings, cry out
against me, chosen by the Vice-Roy, and the rest that Farm 'em, for imposing
Gabells on their Commodities: Your Grace no doubt, has heard too That I grow
Rich -- with such Oppressions.


The Rabble's Voice, My Lord, can give no Scandal. 'Tis bruited so indeed.


Tripe-eating Rogues.


My Lord, my holy Function does oblige me to preach up Moderation, and to
counsel those I want Power to Govern -- And I could wish Your Grace would make
your self more loved by the People, who, I confess, cry loudly on the Exactions
you late have crushed 'em with: Nay, they now spare not to say the King's
Abused, -- and that your Avarice puts all these Fetters on 'em.


My good Lord Cardinal, you were just now for preaching Moderation; but now
methinks your Talk seems biased Interest, and as the Rabble Dictate.


I must be plain.


And Sincere, good my Lord: And since that word has escaped your Lips so
Gravely, I must beg leave as plainly too to tell your -- humble Eminence, that
this upstart Humility of yours, is of too new a Date to gain great Credit; your
Scarlet Robe wore late a blushing Dignity, more used to awe the Rabble, than to
sooth 'em.


Were the Church Slandered, then what Chains, what Irons* what new Device in
the terrible Inquisition, must plague the Heretic People?


Nay, my Lords, Let not your Passion so far blind your Reason, as to m^take me,
since my only aims are to promote Peace among us, -- which I fear the People
mean to hinder.


Damn the People.


Observe my Lord, that Curse has Echoed back again into your Ears, and only
hurts you, not the People.


Hah -- let's hear him, his Eminence is Preaching.


Some Instructions I think in truth are proper; therefore Historically take
this with you, my Lords, an^ ^ have done. What greater Plague can there befall
a City, than a Disunion and divided Interest? What destroyed Carthage, but two
mighty Factions, the Barchiniani and the Hanoniani? What maintained War in
France for Sixty Years, but Jars 'twixt the House of Burgundy and Orleans? Or
what late brought to England Desolation, and caused so many several bloody
Battles, wherein were Eighty of their Nobles Slain, but the Faction of the
Houses, York and Lancaster? And nothing, be assured, can urge our Ruin so soon
as that in Naples. -- A City is like a Ship, Divisions are her Leaks, -- and
whilst the Mariners fight, the Sea runs in and drowns all. -- I have done, only
one word more -- The Neapolitans, as I've observed 'em, are not like a Top, --
they will not sleep with Scourging. Farewell my Lords.


This dreaming Churchman, pampered and grown rich, fears every little Gust will
blow his House down.


Ay, that's the Moral of his History -- his Bags; the Cardinal quakes even at
the thought of Plunder.


How now G^rvasio, what's the News?


The Rogues are gathering still, they're now Two Thousand.


What Boys or Men?


Both now, and roar like Thunder.


Mushromes bred out of Dunghills. Brother, stay here whilst I go to the
Vice-Roy to demand some of his Guards to quell this Petty Hydra: In the mean
time, if any more of the Rascals straggle this way -- speak not in Rage, but
fright 'em with Whips and the Galleys, -- I'll be with ye strait.


Fright 'em, 'yes, faint-hearted Brother, Timorous Mataloni, I would do more
than fright 'em, for your Office -- which if my Plo^s are prosperous, -- I
shall not long despair of; fright 'em, Confound '^m, I shall never have
Patience to let the Villains waste their Garlic Breath in answering me a word
-- I shall thrust their Souls out.

Roches, Roches; come buy my Flounders, come buy my Flounders.


That's he, my Lord, that's Massaniello; that's their plaguy Ringleader -- I
know his Voice.


The Rascal comes upon us; stand back Gervasio; let's observe 'em a little.


Buy my Flounders, come buy my Flounders. -- Bartallo, where's Perrone, my
Brother Pedro, -- and the People?


Taking down the Arms of the Emperor Charles the Fifth, my Glorious Boy,
according to thy Order, to carry to the Market-place.


'Tis well, those Arms are Badges of our future Freedom, for it shall come to
that, my Lads; be well assured it shall, now we are up.


How the Rogue swells and battens in his Impudence; Gad I don't like him, he
has a devilish Look.


Peace, we shall take down his Swelling presently, -- let's hear a little more.


Well, my bold Brethren, and how do ye like Proceedings ha?


Bravely, bravely; beyond Expectation.


The Gabells shall all down, Boys, there's my Hand on it; never shall more
Exactions be in Naples.


A Massaniello; a Massaniello.


How many Butchers are come to day, my noble Brother of the Cleaver, hah?


Threescore and five, my Child of Thunder -- all brave Fellows, Rogues used to
knock out Brains hourly, without Consideration, and paddle in Blood up to the
Elbows; -- there's never a one of 'em but shall take an Enemy by the Lugs, --
stick a Knife in's Gullet like a Calf, and hang him up with a Hook in's
Nostrils -- say but thou the word, my brave Backsword Man.


Here's a rare Rascal for ye.


Ay, they are curiously matched indeed, if the whole Pack are such Beagles,
Heaven defend me from being the Game they Hunt for.


And what says my Vulcan, my Fire-drake here, how many Anvils want their
Hammers to day, ha?


Fifty and odd, and more a coming too; woe be to the Gabellers if any of these
meet 'em, -- or a thing called a Steward to any of 'em, -- such a sort of a
Rogue, let him look to his Sconce I faith.


Oh Lord!


There will be a score of red-hot Forks in his Guts, before he can get out so
many words to beg their Pardon.


Oh bloody minded Hell-hounds, what an Ague have they given me --


The Princes of the Thimble will be there in shoals too, following a Colours of
their own making.


No Grinding will be neither, the Mill-stones rest in Peace this day.


And all old Shoes soak Water; -- every Cobbler leaves off his Work, and runs to
stitch the Government: -- Not one Profession, but brings in Numbers: -- So that
by to Morrow, the City will scarce hold 'em.


Rare rare News -- Sirs, and merrily strait we'll meet 'em, and then go hunt
for this Leviathan here, the Farmer of the Gabells, -- Duke of Mataloni, -- and
when we have found him --


And what when ye have found him -- you Mouth of these Herring eaters? -- What
stinking Fish would you present his Grace?


Stinking Fish; -- here if your Lordship's Nose be sound, smell to my Basket.


His Lordship; -- Who is't Iacomo, can tell?


Ay, ay, a rank Enemy, I know him well enough, 'tis the Duke of Mataloni's
Brother, Don Peppo di Caraffa.


Don Peppo, Don Pimpo; -- what if he be a Don, -- Hem, here are those dare look
him in the Face, for all his Titles.


Ay, Ay, 'tis not his Whiskers there that can fright us, Neighbours.


Well, what thinks your Lordship now, are they Sweet or no? -- I confess, they
don't smell of Musk, as your Jacket does there; but for the true scent of
wholesome Fish, I dare vouch for 'em.


Sirrah, Sirrah, for this Sauciness, expect the Lash, and for the next, the
Galleys: -- Go Gervasio, and take account of his Fish; -- demand the Gabell, if
he denies it, Seize 'em.


The Dog has a plaguy surly Look, -- I am half afraid to venture on him: Come
Friend, let's see, let's see your Fish; come, come, nay quickly, you had best.


What would you see Friend? -- Hum, dost love Flounders? Can eat one raw,
H^m.


My Lord, d' ye observe this? -- Did ye see the saucy Rascal?


Monstrous! Is your Insolence then gr^wn to such a height, that in the Person
of the Great Duke of Mataloni's Steward, ye dare affront the Government's
Decrees, ordering all Gabells duly to be haid.


We dare; and to prove it, the said Governmen^'s Decree, and Great Duke's
Order, I Massaniello, Gudgeon Catcher of this City of N^ples, and Friend to the
People, Order, henceforth to be Null and Void.


And we'll stand by thee; -- one and all Boys, one and all.


Ay, ay, one and all, one and all.


You, most impudent of Scoundrels, -- you Order; why what are you?


Why faith, one that has formerly sold Fish for Money, but my Generosity being
provoked by these your civil Commands; I will, for once, give 'em your
Lordship's Tarrier here free Cost.


Hah, -- is it possible? -- Well, here are those coming I hope will ^o me
Justice, --


That there will indeed, -- you hear they are very near ye; in the mean time,
no Drawing, my Lord -- no showing Weapons, If your Sword peeps, your Throat
will be in danger --


No, nor no Gabells and please ye, but as much Fish and like your Rogueship, as
you will -- there's a delicate Roach


And there's a couple of Flounders, as good as ever Tooth was put in.


Nay faith, let's make 'em up a Dish.


Ay, ay, the Gabell Monger shall not say we grutch him.


No, no, he shall be frankly used.


The Rabble here, nay, then 'tis in vain to stay for the Guards, I must run
fort, --


No, no, hold, a word with you first, good Mr. Steward.


How now Brother, what's the matter?


Not much, I have only been playing the rough Game a little, told part of my
Mind to Don Peppo di Carraffa, and given a dish of Fish of my own Dressing, to
Mr. Steward there; I mean with the Sauce about his Ears or so, that's all.


And troth, since I am come so luckily to know his Worship's Title here -- I
mean to give him a desert of my own preparing too -- when my Knife is sharp
enough. -- You have an ill Voice Friend, and can sing the Duke your Master's
Praises but Hoarsely, yet -- I'll make you an admirable Chorister presently.


You will not use a Gentleman and a Scholar Rudely, I hope.


Rudely, no not in the least; why look ye, Friend, I'll tell ye how we'll use
ye; First, because you say you're a Gentleman, and so consequently a Cuckold
Maker, and as probably would play upon occasion, your Game at Hot-cocles with
our Wives, Sisters, and Daughters -- you shall only be sequestered, sweet Sir,
you understand me, that's all. And Secondly, As being likewise a Scholar, --
and no doubt, a Wit, -- a Poet, and so forth, -- the Waters of Helicon shall
sprinkle your Clod-pate -- hey to the Pump, to the Pump with him Neighbours.


Ay, ay, Pump the Gentleman, Pump the Gentleman.


No, no, hold Friends, and hear me a little, I'll take him aside and Examine him
-- work upon his fear and hopes of Liberty, till he speaks Treason against the
People, or mould him till he abuses the Church, then Impeach him and deliver
him up to 'em, to knock out his Brains.


There's the true Humour of a Iesuite to a hair -- d'e hear Sir Priest -- can
you think of no Punishment for a Delinquent, but knocking out of his Brains
presently?


None so effectual, Friend, as the Case stands now with the People, who have
been often oppressed by the effects of this Fellow's Office; and understanding
Corporal limited Punishment, I have cautiously observed, has ran the risque of
future Revenge; -- but when the Brains are fairly out, you may be satisfied the
Understanding can do no Mischief.


This Fellow's Roguery outvies the worst even of my Inclinations -- that have
been bred a Banditto from my Child hood, I find I am a Novice in Mischief to
this Priest here.


Brother, thou say well, it shall be so, let the Gentleman's Courtly Courage
be washed away at the Pump, -- then uncase him like a Rabbit, -- to bring him
as near as can be to the mode and fashion of the People -- and when his Far is
off, and one Ear lest in Pawn for his good Behaviour, turn the Crop-ear'd
Rascal loose -- to complain to his Fellows; for now I think on it, to make a
Capon of him -- will be too much Honour, we'll do that for his Master when we
catch him -- and so away with him Boys.


O Tempora! O Mores!


Mores, mores. -- What, you speak Latin, to affront our Learning, ye Rascal, do
ye; -- go, go, away with him Boys, sows him and his Mores together.


Ay, ay, -- come away Mores, -- jog on Mores; we'll have no Mores amongst us.


Hold, hold, Sirs, not so fast -- his Master was once my Patron, and did me an
especial Favour, therefore this once pray let my Interest free him.


Your Interest* -- why how now Perone, dare you pretend to Interest, when I
have given my Orders?


We'll have no Interest nor Orders, but Massaniello's; therefore once more I
sa^, away with the Gentleman, Pump the Gentleman, Crop the Gentleman, I say.


Ay ay, -- away with him, away with him.


No Interest but Massaniello's, have my Life and A^tions been so worthless, and
is my Character ^o Insignificant, that he m^ or^e^ all -- I have been thought a
Person fr --


For what? To rob a Marketwoman of her Butter?


And sp^ your Fish, you mean, for by that deed p^rhaps your Cods-head might
want Sawse, hah.


Or at ^he head of thy Bandi^ti's Troop, hast thou Attacked a poor ^nerant
Taylor, and Robbed him of his Thim^e and h^ Bodk^n?


I've something sharper th^n a Bodkin her^, shall m^ke m^ Party good -- against
any Grig-bobber or Trou^ ca^cher in Naples, if he da^es.


How now Villain, dare you assault my Brother?


Part 'em, part 'em, keep 'em as^under.


I rob a Taylor, a fusty Dog fish.


Look ye Friends -- not too much upon the Taylors d'e see; a Taylor is not a
thing to be too much Joak'd upon; a Taylor can cut a hole in a Coat, as well as
stitch it up d'e see; and therefore Mum, there's no more to be said of a
Taylor'


Let me come to him, and I'll paunch the Rogue, I'll use him as he does a
Rifled Traveller, bore out a Gut, and peg it to a Tree, then wh^p him round
till he has spun his Soul out.


Hey day, what is the Devil in us all on the sudden -- why my Masters, are ye
Bewitched; what a pox, have ye forgot the Proverb, That when Thieves fall out
-- why sure you can't forget the Proverb -- come, come, for shame put up; why
how the Devil wil^ ye Plunder other Folks Houses, if ye destroy your own
Tenements before hand?


Come, come, rest thee quiet, Friend, and let 'em try one another, there may be
good Policy in it, -- for dost hear, if one of 'em Fall, -- we are sure tother
has Mettle, and is certainly a brave Fellow.


Hum -- a fine Counsellor indeed, so there be but Mischief done, this Rogue
cares not how it comes about.


Brazile's in the right; Is this a time for Fewds? And shall desire of being
Chief, spoil all? -- you know by this time the City's all in Uproar, the Court
Alarm'd too, and shall our Jangling grind Swords for our own Throats, that so
late swore to where 'em for our Enemies Destruction? Come, come, let me propose
to heal this Difference: -- Will ye both consent the People shall decide it,
that he who they make Choice of shall Command?


What I've already done, was for the People, and therefore you are sure of my
Cons^nt.


I'm for the Public good as much as any, and therefore never will oppose their
Choice.


Why, that's well said, -- for look ye my Masters, pray remember the Faggot in
the Fable, -- If we hold together, the Devil cannot break us, but if we unbind
and lie asunder, every Addle-pate will snap us like so many Switches; --
therefore prick up your Ears, ye Sons of Sedition, and elevate your Voices
strongly; -- which will ye have for your Captain-General -- a Perone, or a
Massaniello?


A Massaniello; a Massaniello.


'Tis most fit and properly Chosen; I think I have made him my Creature.


Arch-Bishop of Naples -- or so, that's all.


Recorded in the Chronicle of Time, for carrying on so good a Work.


Rare Dog still; -- if Dissimulation had the effect of Poison, how that
Fellow's Belly had been swelled by this time; Hum -- has this many-Headed
Monster deserted me too? -- Well, since it must be so, I'll work by Cunning,
and seem to join with them, in acknowledging their Doughty General here, till I
have means and power to Revenge -- and then pour on his Head with fiercest
Rancour. Thomas Annello of Amalfi, alias Massaniello, Captain-Geneneral of the
N^apolitans.


Long live Thomas Annello of Amalfi, alias Massaniello, Captain-General of the
Neapolitans. --


My Friends, I thank ye, and my brave Perone, live henceforth in my Bosom as my
Brother; and first then, to endear my self the better, I'll give thee my
Commission for my Major -- Joint with my Brother in Command and Love. Next my
brave Ajax, I appoint thee Captain. Stichite cum Stampo, my brave Cobbler,
Ensign; all my Boys, all shall have Offices fitting your Worth and Bravery of
Souls; particularly thou, my witty Currier of the Law, my Quarrel-Broker, thou
Pen and ink Man, as my Bosom Favourite, I create my Secretary and Pillar of the
State.


Thank your good Lordship; -- nay, I knew 'twould come to this, for the Crown
of my Head has itched damnably of late, a certain Sign of approaching Dignity:
-- I knew I should be a Great Man, -- Secretary of the People, -- rare rare
Place! Gad I'll make the Money stick to my Fingers bravely, as soon as ever I
come into it.


Raise high the Arms of the Emperor Charles the Fifth, who b^ his Charter,
granted Naples Freedom, without cursed Gabels, or these late Ex^ctions; Then
let us send a Message to the Palace of Don Tiberio, Prince of Bissignano, who I
design to be our Emissary between the ViceRoy and our dear loved People; and
Trusty Rock, I appoint to Summon him: If he comply with us and our Interest,
he's Safe; if not, immediate Ruin seizes h^m. Follow me, Friends all,
To the great Cathedral,
Where we'll hear Mass with show of high Devotion; And as we pass along, be
this our Cry,
Let the King Live, but the ill Government Die:
Then the Saints Invoke, -- and to do all things well,
First we will say our Prayers,



And then Rebel --


FRom Azure Plains, blessed with Eternal Day,
Celestial flowery Groves, that never decay;
From Lucid Rocks that Sol's bright Rays let in,
Where with unclouded Brow,
I sate and viewed the Deeps below,
And saw my Female Drudges Spin;
I Fate am come, thy Courage to improve,
'Tis the Eternal's Doom Engraved in Adamant above;
And oh! thou drowsy Deity,
That dost in Slumbers bind
The Body of Mortality,
And calm the stormy Mind;
No more, no more his Brain possess
With the soft Charm of gentle Peace;
He must awake to bloody Wars,
Unbounded Fury, civil Iars,
And is by Heavens decree, for wondrous deeds designed.

To mighty Fate all must obey,
And conq'ring Hero's greatest Kings,
Amongst the rest of human things,
Yield to his dreadful Sway.
Yet view thy Book of Dooms once more,
Thou there wilt find one happy hour,
When Naples shall be free from Rebel power;
'Tis sure as the revolving year,
And I her darling Saint appear,
To stop thy Fury, lest it should exceed,
And tell thee, though permission of this ill
Is Sacr'd Mystery and the Eternal's Will,
Yet he that does the Deed,
For doing it must bleed.

Hear each Neighbouring Destiny,
Who the Souls of Mortalsfree,
Hear my Voice, and strait obey,
Heaven commands, the Work must stay.
Such a number and no more,
Must increase your fatal store,
And he must die, the task being over:
Remember all 'tis so decreed,
That he that does this mighty Deed,
For doing it must bleed.

Miraculous Vision! O Celestial Deity! Thou that inspir'st my heart to
undertake by Mystic words dressed in harmonious Sound, things that surpass
Experienced Understanding; as with thy blessed Idea in my Dream I have been
Ectasied -- so teach me now Naples; with Sacred Power, Charm my plebeian Soul;
let but my Country's Freedom crown the Period, my threatened Fall I'll then
despise and Laugh at. Mount over all Dangers that would stop my way,
And make the proudest of our Foes Obey.
Here comes my Jesuit, my new Church Engine, used to encourage Fires, not to
quench 'em, whose Head and Counsels till I'm six'd, I yi^ld to; but when the
Sword I grasp with Power Supreme, I'll trust a Prie^t no longer with my
Politics.


How now, my Brain's Inspirer, what's the News?


News that will make the Vice-Roy quake, my Son: we're now full twenty
Thousand, Armed and Resolute, and ever th^ Sun p^unges in Western Seas -- 'tis
well believed, shall double twice the number: The eager People throng us.


What meant that Shout?


They are burning now the House of Don Rocella, Farmer of the Gabells, with all
his costly Furniture and Plate, huge Coffers too, pregnant with Gold and
Jewels, pursuant to your Order lately made, enrich the Flame, and dazzle the
Beholders: Then as each wealthy Burden is thrown in, the People shout their
Joy.


'Tis as I'd have it.


Now will I sound him in my own Affair, the time is apt,


Your Eyes were only dazzled too, that was all.


Zeal for the Cause, my Son, may be too strong, that rashly throws away the
precious means that can empower and arm the Cause-defenders to prosecute their
pious Undertaking.


Honest Intention must empower and arm us, and the despoiling of Delinquents
Treasure, will let the world know, 'tis the impulse of Conscience, and not of
Gain, that rights the injured People.


Call it not Conscience, say Necessity, the word will do as well: -- The
impulse of Conscience; What is't you mean, good Son?


I did believe, that word would suffocate his Understanding.


Conscience is but our tendrest part of Reason; and Reason urging our
Self-preservation, shows it must be too by the goods of Fortune: The Church is
Indigent, which might be helped by sharing Wealth, thus -- strangely thrown
away.


The Church is rich in Grace.


Grace -- Grace is no Glebe to gratify the Body, tho it may feast the Soul: --
Grace buys no Cassocks for one, tho tother shine with spiritual Clothing;
therefore I say, these Treasures might be saved for pious uses; my self I
mention not, tho my needs perhaps are urgent, but for the Church, for if the
Church wants Necessaries, its Flock will want Instruction.


Oh your Charity binds ye to that for your reward Celestial.


Our Charity! and for reward Celestial: Our Charity! why certainly he's Crazed,
he would else know a Jesuit never had any.


But now I think on it, you have cleared my sight, and from henc^ forth I shall
discern much better; for who ever understood the worth of Gold, or like the
black Robe, with such sense can praise it? Since then you have inspired me with
such Knowledge, I am resolved to prize the gaudy Mammon, rake up large heaps,
and build my self a Fortune, too strong for Fate to Level: -- This is thy
Policy I know, my Machiavil, to have me Rich, then consequently Great -- and it
shall thrive as thou hast forged it; -- for thy self, I know thou art so
Temperate -- so Religious, Devotion and the luxury of Prayer, is thy delicious
Banquet; -- feed on my Father, Feast and grow fat with thy Scraphick Toils
Whilst I regale upon these golden Spoils.



Whilst he regales upon 'em -- very good, this snagged Swordfish Banters me --
'tis plain; he'll rake up heaps and build himself a Fortune -- as I have
Plotted -- hum -- that was not my meaning; and since he will not understand me
right, perhaps I'll make the meaning -- his Destruction; this fruitful Brain
can work the other way; can, nay, I now resolve on it, it shall do it, since
he'll afford me nothing but Devotion to fatten with, I shall not court his
Keeping; he says, I feast on Prayers, Seraphic Joys; but I know he's a Dunce,
and now he's gone, -- he lies.


Valasco.


Sir.


Come, bring a Table, a great Chair, Pen, Ink and Paper, -- quickly, come stir,
stir -- and don't think to sit still Cross-leg'd at your Work, as you did when
you were a Taylor; remember you are a Clerk now -- and in place to mend the
State -- not with a Needle, but a Pen, ye Rogue.


Well, well, d'e see, your Worship knows well enough how I used to flourish my
Shop-Bills -- I put down all our Trade for Flourishing, that all our Parish
knows -- I made the best M's, O's and B's d'e see of any o^ our Trade; M, for
Stay-Tape, O, for Lockram, and B, for Canvas; I out-did 'em all cleverly,
therefore I warrant ye your Worship need not doubt my Clerkship.


Oh! here's that impudent Scoundrel, his new Favourite; this Fellow must have
Office and Preferment, when I must be neglected, 'tis very well, let me
consider a little.


Hum, let me see a list of the Delinquents: their number, Thirty two: -- Ah.
How every one of these will bribe me, to save their Houses from burning, which
shall not be obtained with a little, that I resolve on; rare, rare Fortune! gad
I'm Transported at it.


Oh, now I have it, P^rone must be my Engine; his late disgust against this
proud Fish-General -- is but hid over with some subtle Embers, the Fire will
soon break out again, and shall not want for blowing.


How now, what makes this Priest here, with a cloudy Low'r upon his Forehead
too, as if the Devil and his Conscience had been just quarrelling about some
State Stratagem -- hum, this household Pagoda, with a Breath like an Easterly
Wind, this Reverend Caterpillar shall not spoil my Fruit I'm resolved on it. D'e
hear there, 'tis the General's Pleasure, that all forbear this Place, appointed
for Examination of Delinquents. -- Oh, is your Reverence there, I cry you
Mercy, -- but you must excuse me, I must know my Place.


Your Place, Sir.


Yes, my Place, Sir, -- nay, nay, don't think to fright me with your Picture of
the Inquisition there, your terrible Phiz in Frowns, I say, I say again, I know
my Place, Sir.


And I mine, Sir, is not this the Church?


The Church -- good Domine, what then, was the Church made for no more uses
than yours? Was the Church built only to roost the Rooks, I mean the Jesuits --
Pish, don't ye see we make a Garrison on it. How now, Captain.


We have seized on the Horses, and please you, for the General's use, where
must they be put?


Hum -- stay a little -- put, -- why put 'em up in the North Isle, just by the
Pulpit.


Here's fine Management! bl^ss me, is that a place for Horses?


Horses, yes, Sir, and why not for Horses? -- gad, as things go now, I think
'tis filled with a better sort of Cattle, than with your Tribe, by much; for if
a Horse can't do the General better Service than a Jesuit, my Politics are
very barren. -- Well, what now, Lieutenant.


Why and like your good Honour, Mr. Sec. Sec. Secar --


Well, well, Mr. Secretary; I know what thou would say; what apox, does my
Title stick in thy Throat?


Ay, ay, Mr. Secretary, and please ye, there's the great Don -- within, Don --
Don -- why look now, if my Brain be not as spungy as an old Shoe Sole, Don --
Don -- wheigh -- why what a Dickins ails my Pate now? I used to be as sharp as
an Awl, wheigh -- the Great great Man and please ye, that you sent the Writing
-- the what d'e call it, the Sammon to this Morning.


The Sammon, the Summons, ye Block-head you; ah, this Fellow will never make a
Statesman: -- Oh I know him now, 'tis the Great Prince of Bissignano, Don
Tiberio, whom I have frighted hither by the General's Order. Valasco, -- go you
and introduce him -- and d'e hear, put on your face of Business and look Grum
upon him -- 'twill draw his Pur^e the sooner.


I warrant ye -- I'll look upon him d'e see, as another great Don used to look
upon me, when I went to carry in my Bill.


Come, come, Sir, no more of your Chancel Grimaces, your Brow Lectures now, --
here's matters of State going forward, which I know you all long to have a
finger in, -- but Mum for that, my good Mass Iohn -- some wiser than some;
therefore Presto I say, -- and let your Learning please to withdraw it self
instantly in^o your Study; -- show, show your Back side, I beseech ye, Sir.


I shall, Sir, and show it whole too, which yours shall not be long, if Whips
with Wyre, retain their lashing faculty, if it does, then say this Brain's fit
only to make Sauce on; and so I give ye to old Beelzebub; now my intention's
right, you may depend on it.


Pox on him, what a Jerk the Rogue has given my Apprehension, for tho I know
I'm now too Great to be in danger of such a Punishment, -- yet his words have
made me as uneasy -- as if the Cat with Nine-tails were just coming cross my
Shoulders. -- I have deserved Whipping, and worse than Whipping, I confess, in
many Passages of my Life, but I think that's more than he knows; I was thirteen
Years together bred up under a Roguish Pettifogger, where I learned to be a
Law-Cheat, to take all Advantages by the fore-top that afforded Money, and bid
perpetual defiance to Honesty and Conscience, yet still I escaped -- and now
the Dice run higher, I think my self in a Post rather to cause others to be
Whipped, than to be Flaug'd my self. Oh here's the Prince -- hum, now for a
sullen morose Look, a damned ill-natur'd Phiz -- like a City Magistrate
pronouncing Sentence of Death upon a young lusty Highwayman, that he was
satisfied a little while before, had made him a Cuckold.


Well my mighty Sir in Office -- now I have given ye your Fee, which by your
Signs you taught my Apprehension, what progress will you make in my Affairs?
Where must this Summons lead me?


Why yonder, d'e see, Sir, -- yonder's the Secretary, and as keen at his
Business as a pair of Sheers upon a Cutting-board: -- Hark ye, Sir, I must tell
ye he's plaguy deaf of this hithermost Ear -- and the Drum on it is not to be
penetrated, unless by the chink of Money; that Purse perhaps may stand your
Friend, or else it will be a hard matter to make him hear, yet I'll try him; --
Sir, Sir, -- here's the great Don -- the Prince you sent for, come to --


The Duke of Cavano's House too -- noted, that burns to Morrow.


By Heaven, my Kinsman, one of our Houses Principals -- and if I heard the
Gorgon Head speak right, he said his House -- must burn to morrow -- hear ye,
you Sir, you Minister of Fate and deeds of Horror, what said you of the Duke
of Cavano? -- he will not answer me, or hears me not.


Oh I told ye, Sir -- he was very thick of Hearing.


And yet my Pur^e can cure it.


Hum -- the Purse has a particular Vertu^ indeed; Gold has its precious faculty
-- for Ears as well as Eyes, Gold will do it cleverly.


Thou art a very Rogue, through all thy Senses.


The n^xt, the Duke of Mataloni.


Hah -- my Friend too -- Hear me thou -- Son of Mammon, I charge thee answer
me, -- and for a Bribe, take here this golden Offering -- but speak, I conjure
thee.


Valasco, -- set the Gentleman a Chair.


What must befall my Friend, my Bosom Intimate, dear as its innate Guest, my
Heart -- my Matalo^i.


He is Proscribed, his Wife is to be Seized, and their House burnt and
Plundered.


When, when, thou Author of damned News?


At Seven this Evening; -- and now, Sir, no more Questions, you've had your
Pennyworth; -- nor is it usual with me to afford such rich Discoveries so
cheap.


At Seven, cursed Chance, how much it wants of that now, I know not, nor how to
be Resolved, for here am I, on forfeit of Estate and Life, Summoned to attend
the General of the Rabble -- and so incapable to aid my Friend -- yet stay,
some Notice might be given: -- Dost hear, my Friend, what Hour is't think
thou now? Curse on his sordid Soul, he's Dumb again. Cerberus -- now wilt thou
tell me?


I on my Conscience, think it may be Five, -- and pray Sir, be Patient, you'll
be heard presently, the General d'e see, is coming.


These are rare Rogues in Office, they use a Nobleman like a Dog-whipper: --
Hark thee, Friend, one thing more, if your speaking Clock be not quite run
down, I must request, and there's all I have to purchase it, which is, to call
one of my Servants hither, for I have forgot a Paper at home, which concerns me
extremely.


It shall be done, and cleverly.


I've yet, I hope, time enough to set down in my Tables their horrible
Resolves, and to forewarn the Duke of his approaching Danger.


Come hither with thy best speed, convey these Tables to the Duke of Mataloni
-- run as thy Life were in thy haste concerned -- he will Reward thee well.


I Fly, my Lord.


Are the Chandlers Wives dispatch'd to the Hospital, to Rave there, whose
Husbands were Hanged this Morning?


All, all, and please ye -- I saw a Dozen of 'em roaring together in a Flock;
and 'twill be a warning to the rest, I'll warrant ye, how they use false
Weights and Scales.


Nay, I doubt not but we shall bring things to some order in time. Also -- my
Lord the Prince, what are you here still? -- Alas, my Head is so busied with
things of Imp^rtance, that I p^otest I had forgot your Highness; -- well I
suppose you would fain know the General's Business with ye -- but as for that
matter, without --


Without, if he means more Gold, he must Coin it, for on my Honour, I'm drawn
dry already.


Without, I say, the Means to procure the Secret, it will, I suppose, be
Impossible: -- Hem, hem -- Times are altered, my Lord, they were yours once --
hem -- hem, now we come in for our share. -- Hum, -- Odzooks, here comes the
General himself -- Pox on him, this was a little too soon tho, or I had had
that Ring on his Finger there for another Discovery.


The Houses I Proscribed, let 'em all down, but on your Lives, no more, without
my Order; the Plunder too, I will consider on -- and henceforth, remember,
without the form of Speaking, to understand your Duty by my Motion.


We shall, most Noble Sir, wag but your Hand, Thumb, Finger, or but Nod, --
'tis done as quick as Lightning.


Begin you at St. Carlo, -- throw your Brand at Cavano's Palace; and my
Favourite Captain, bes^re you singe the Traitor Mataloni, let not a post remain
to bear his Structure, but let your fury burn his Goods as greedily as late he
sucked the Life-blood of the People -- away. --


We're gone, brave General.


There's Discipline; this looks like a Commander. -- Hah, yonder's the Prince,
Perone, a word with thee. -- Thou see that Lord there -- he is the only Man
I'd chose amongst all the Court, to negotiate Matters between us and the
Vice-Roy; -- within this Paper is my Will contained, -- I'm positive here, and
so I would have thee, If he denies what there is offered to him -- tell him he
shares the Fate of Mataloni; -- go, take him aside, pretend I've weighty
Business, and cannot hold Discourse with him my self*


Leviathan Impudence, but I'll smother all yet, let him swell on, ^nd he will
burst himself --


His Pleasure, -- insolent Slave, -- this is another upstart Devil, he look^
too as if he all his Life had smoked in Pluto's K^chen; not deign -- a word,
Sir, what is his Mightiness so crammed --


Softly, my Lord, he has quick Ears, and then -- come, no more words, but
follow me.


I vex in vain -- 'tis madness to oppose 'em. Oh! Fortune, Fortune, whither
wilt thou hurry me?


What are the Women up too, say thou, Brother, and Blowzabella my Wife, at
their Head?


Most Captain like In faith -- my Spouse is got amongst 'em too for Company;
these at the head of Numbers, strut in the Streets, and Armed with such variety
of Weapons, 'twould even puzzle Arithm^tick; -- they're ready for an Attack
too, an Attack.


Hah, Hah, hah. -- What Goose or Turkey walled round with powerful Crust, are
they for Storming?


'Zooks, they talk of battering Castle-walls, and I know not what; and my
Sister Blowze is so wrapped up with the thought of Plundering the Duchess
Mataloni of her Jewels, that her very words are nothing but Pearl and Diamonds.
-- Hark'e, here they come I^aith -- now observe and wonder.


Bring in the Prisoners, and keep your Ranks -- Close my Lasses, -- Wheel to
the Right, to the Right, to the Right about; there see now -- Where's the
General? Where's the brave Tomazo? -- Oh, art thou there my Scanderbeg, come
Kiss me, and then tell me -- how dost thou like me, -- hah?


Like thee, hah, hah, hah, why this is Wonderful; prithee Wife, what mean
thou? -- What Work hast thou been cutting out, hah?


Plundering, Plundering, My Lad, Plundering, Stripping Lace off of Petticoats, and
pulling Gold Rings off of Fingers. -- In short, I have been Bobbing for a sort
of Female-Grigs -- they call forsooth your Gentlewomen, -- could thou
imagine, whilst thou were fishing for Courtiers, that I would sitidly at home
sleaing of Eels? -- No, no, Child, I rose as thou did, owned and carried the
Cause; then gath'ring my She Swash-bucklers together, Armed instantly, and
wherever we saw a Silk-worm crawl, we Seized her; see, here's one of 'em,
this, this is forsooth a Gentlewoman, and as I'm told, belonged to the
Vice-Queen: -- You may suppose the Dress I have put her in, has somewhat
altered her, but upon the Honour of a Fish-wife, she's a Gantlewoman every inch
of her.


Why Faith that may be, but her Air seems to have very much of the Vulgar in it
at present.


This is the supe^fine Madam de Rocell, Wife to the Prior, Farmer of the
Gabells, she had Brooches of Diamonds about her when I met her first, and Bobs
of Pearl in her Ears as big as Pears; alas -- what pity 'tis, that Madam should
be stripped, but Madam, I hope you'll Excuse it, we are rude Common-People Madam
-- your Servant good Madam, in Troth 'tis great Pity --


My Spouse there may show her sham Pity as she pleases, but if I had met Madam
in a by Place -- I believe I should have made bold to have stripped her a little
further -- Gad she has a dainty Face for all her Rags, and puts me so in mind
of a plump black-ey'd Beggar-wench I had once.


But what's the tother there?


And this here is one of the Marrow-puddings of Trade, a Citizen's Wife, a
sleek, fine, fat, little finical thing, that would melt in a Courtier's Mouth
like a Comfit: I took her Oagling at her Shop-door, and trussed her up under my
Wing like a Gizard: -- she had her Gems and her Pearls too, -- besides a fine
golden Gown, that her Cuckold bought her by Cheating the People, at Twelve
in the Hundred; -- there she is a little moody, I see, at her odd Rigging; --
her Husband may take his Tortoise again, if he pleases, but for her Shell --
that's disposed of.


Bradamant -- why ye all have done Gloriously -- gloriously -- and what's to be
the next Exploit, dear Wedlock, hah?


The Duchess of Mataloni; we have contrived it, therefore leave it to our
Management, and if before to Morrow Noon, thou see me not tricked in her
Jewels like an Indian Queen, -- then say, which some believe impossible -- a
Woman's Mischief has Miscarried. -- And to show thee that we are capable of
doing greater things than you imagine, you shall see us Exercise, and pray
observe what Diligence has learned, Handle your Arms there.


'Tis well, and Soldier-like -- go on then, my Bellona, and you, Brother, to
the Gate of San Lorenzo; March with your Troops, and as you pass, still cry,
Let the King Live, but the ill Government Die.



Oh, I can never bear it, my dear Lord, that moment you depart, my Life-blood
follows.


Why then, let Fate contrive its bloodiest Scene, I'll stay and dare all
Accidents, grasp thee thus -- within the circle of my eager Arms, and smile on
the grim Hell hounds that would part us.


Could I go with thee, Heaven, what would I venture! what Walls would I climb,
or what vast Deeps would I plunge! for tho I show a Woman in my Tears, my
Courage -- yet for you would hazard Wonder^.


I know thou could, thou quintessence of Goodness, do more than Woman; --
but Oh, I must not suffer thee! I know thou would, with me, leap from the
Window into the Moat, as I must, for my Safety, but I'll not do it to hinder
thee, -- no, 'tis but Death, if I stay here -- and 'twill be that without thee.


Oh, name not Death, I had forgot that Horror!


Give Friend, your Lord, my best Acknowledgment, but tell him, I'm resolved to
stand my Fortune.


Not for the World -- Oh, pardon me dear Life, my Womanish Folly, I had forgot
your danger, you are proscribed to D^e if you are found, yet I would keep ye
here: Oh, racking Torture, was ever Misery so truly great as mine? -- Go, go,
my Lord, my Doom in those cursed Tables, is but trivial Imprisonment, and
perhaps a daily Basting by the Rabble, Village Curs, or Cold, or Hunger,
matters of nothing, -- but yours is Death, my Lord, Life's deprivation; -- the
full gust of Horror blows with that word, upon me -- endless Woe, Despair, and
all the Miseries of Humanity fall then at once upon my wretched Head, And make
me, that so late implored your stay,
Distracted beg ye now to haste away.



Great Providence, whose all-controlling Will, hast for our Crimes, sent down
this Plague on Naples, and make the sparks of bright Nobility, lie hid in the
vile Ashes of the Rabble, behold with pity, Beauty in distress, with Virtue
joined, than that more Charming far; Oh, let her still thy Care peculiar be,
And always blessed, what ever becomes of me.



Oh, hear me too -- thus low with bended Duty, I beg the Power that taught us
first to Love, to look on him most perfect in that Passion, and best deserving
it in its Perfection: To guard his Life, Celestial care employ,
And I shall find all Blessings in my Joy.



One dear Embrace then, and so part.


Oh, pardon me, within my Breast is such a Sea of Sorrow, some must overflow
the Banks, I cannot help it.


I'll make the Fences stronger with fresh hopes of our quick Meeting and
repeated Joy, so once more Adieu, Sweet.


My Life's sole Joy, Farewell.


Come, bear up boldly, and now to the fatal Window, through which my Brother is
already gone, unseen by the Blood-hounds that have us in the Wind, and stop all
other ways and avenues: One kind Look more, and turn that way, Sweet. Thus when
overcome by fierce Diseases power,
The sad Physician gives his Patient over.
Thus does the Tyrant of our Lives, control,
And thus divides the Body from the Soul.



YOU may believe me.


And may be abused; you have not yet enough, Sir, cleared your Credit.


You shall have further proof, my venturous Actions shall henceforth justify my
Inclination, and back the force of these bold Words, which are, That from my
Heart, I loath this Upstart Fellow;
This headstong Fool; this Mushroom, Massaniello.



You say enough; but may one trust a Jesuit, knowing his Principles?


When the trust proposed relates to his Revenge, be sure you may.


Nay, Sir, I will be sure; for to deal plainly, I have not yet been bred with
any Candor for Persons of your Order.


I believe it, and will not stick to say, perhaps with reason, the People
generally, have strange Notions of us, and you, I see, are biased by Opinion.
-- 'Tis true, Church-Interest, and the forward Zeal we use to prop its Power,
raises u^ many Enemies, some whereof, burst into rude and vilifying Terms, and
in plain words, Abuse us.


Yes indeed, I have often heard 'em deal so plainly with ye, to say, You're all
a p^ck of Rogues.


Ha, ha, ha, -- 'tis likely -- but you must know then, Sir Captain, these were
all Sophisters.


How, how, Sophisters?


Even so, you may depend on it; I know it by their word of double meaning -- for
Rogue was meant no more than Politician, a witty Rogue, a subtle Rogue, a rich
Rogue; the word is ost mistook, but means no harm; why Knave, because 'ti^
obsolete, is now Corrupted, which meant of old, a Servant, and no more: Then,
Sir, as you may be a Knave, yet Honest, so we two may be Rogues, and yet no
Villains.


At this rate, this Fellow will make it out, that a Son of a Whore may have an
honest Woman to his Mother.


But come, Captain, pray be particular -- a little more; -- What noted Crime
are we found guilty of?


Ah -- numbers, numbers, Sir, more than your Beads can furnish ye with Prayers
to make atonement for, but one among the rest most Scandalous; they say, you'll
set your Penitents a Gaming for Masses for their Souls, and that the Fortunate
delivering you that still sit by, his Winnings, has his si^s Pardoned him for
his luck at Cribbage.


Why look'e, as to Penitents dole for Masses, truly there may be something
in it, and practicable, but that we play at Cribbage, is a Story, our Game is
always Putt, we know no Cribbage.


Oh, with your Reverence's leave, I know you'll vouch all Games, rather than
lose the Stakes: But come, to the Point. Suppose thou art Sincere in this
Affair, what's to be done with Massaniello? What shall we Murder him -- ha Boy?


Convey a Bullet cleanly through his Head, -- not Murder him, no, no, that were
Undecent.


Nay, nay, I know he uses the Church scurvily, that is he denies 'em Money, and
that's a Damning Sin.


Oh, past hope of Pardon.


And if I should Murder him --


Why ye should have Absolution, the thing is excellent Service, but the word
grates.


And what Security for no Betraying?


The sacred Word and Honour of the College, who all will join in the
Confederacy, to animate the giddy Hot-brain'd People, and in his stead, to make
you General: Come, Captain, 'tis in vain longer to hide your close Design, a
Jesuit's Head is waking, when others are in Dreams; we have found out your
Correspondence with Carraffa's Faction, and know you are Intrigu'd with
Mataloni: -- Since then we know this, yet make no discovery, -- you see the
Danger's equal, therefore may trust -- let us be Rogues, or otherwise, 'tis no
matter.


And you will bring your Brethren to vouch this.


Go with me and be satisfied, however the World taints us for Treacheries, we
are true to one another; -- come, be Wise, resolve on Massaniello's Fall --
then Rise.


Well, Sir, lead on, and as I find this real, a Throat may soon be Cut.


I ask no more. Be then our General, and take the Church's Blessing.


My Lord, I lately sent you my Decree, have you resolved upon it?


What Sir, to negotiate the Peoples Business.


With the Vice-Roy; yes, 'twas set down so.


In what Sir, with my Honour I can serve 'em, I'll never re^use to do my
Country good, provided 'tis no blemish to Nobility.


My Lord, you so much Idolize Nobility, that you'd even make the very word a
Scare-Crow, but we are no such Children to be frighted; Nobility, -- what's
that but Power and Riches, the Will to Govern, and the Means to do so; a
Titular Nobleness, is vacant Air, a trifling Sound of no Validity: What care I
how the Herald's Art can Blazon, since I've Power and Riches, I've Nobility, or
good my Lord, what am I in your Fancy?


You are I know not what, something that amongst all Tongues, must want a
Title; you are beyond Prodigious, Language fails and Reason's at a loss, that
would Expound ye; your Pardon Sir, I am but newly practised in the Trade of
Flattery and Dissimulation.


What, and yet a Courtier! Damnation! is that Possible? Did ever Creature
breath in that rank Air, that was not skilled in both those Qualities? -- Not
Flatter nor Dissemble, say not Live; for riotous Meat and Drink, nor gaudy
Clothes, Hounds, Horses, Whores, your constant Properties in their Perfection,
are not half so natural as Flattery and Dissembling to a Courtier.


I shall not make this good, Sir.


Shall ye Comply?
Come, come, you must, 'tis Death, if you deny.

Was ever Plague so mortally Severe? Had ever Kingdom so debased a Curse? the
Noble Blood of my great Ancestors boils in my Veins with Anger and Disdain, and
yet the Frown of this Plebeian Fellow, spite of my Nature, Aws me; sure 'tis
the effect of Witch-craft, Hell i^ just setting up a Common wealth, and all the
Devils conspire against Nobility.


Your Wife Sir, with the Duchess Mataloni Rifled and Plundered, are just
coming in; -- she's as good as her word Faith, she has stuck her self all over
with Jewels, as thick as a Sir-loyn of Roast-Beef is with Rosemary at
Christmas, -- I had a fling at her Grace too, I told her a Lye, and had a
Diamond-Ring worth a hundred Ducats for it. -- Rare, rare doings, Sir, -- gad
little did I think of ever living to see such blessed days.


Attend all to Morrow Morning, and ^'ll give ye Hearing


Bane to my Eyes -- who would thank Providence for that dear Gift, that was
confined to see such dismal Sights as these?


Why Sister, you don't mind my Brother there.


Oh -- I look the Greater for that, ye Fool, Husbands and Wives should be
careless of one another; -- besides, what have I Tricked up my self thus for,
but that every Body should see me now, and I see no Body; besides, this is
nothing -- the next time I Dress, the Son, Moon, and Seven Stars -- shall look
like Farthing-candles to me. Sister, prithee mind Tomaz now, do but see how he
stares at me; I'll take no notice of him, but pretend to be full of Business,
as he does.


She thinks she's Fine, I warrant, 'sDeath and Hell, -- was ever any thing so
Monstrous -- as course Deformity in gaudy Trappings, I nauseate it, but must
not show it now. -- Hah, what was that! methought a Dart shot from that
Mourning Beauty -- pi^rc'd through my Soul; my Soul, tho of a piece with my
course Body, yet feels the smart, obeys the power of Beauty, and makes me say
aloud -- She's Admirable.


No more, my Lord, let my Misfortunes hide me for ever from your sight, and I
do be^eech ye, leave me.


Thou Beauteous Partner of my dearest Friend, thou charming Form that now
make Sorrow amiable; I will, but yet believe, thou Shrine of Virtue, 'tis
only that I may the better serve thee; my Stars have here condemned me to their
Interest, an Interest that I hate as I love Honour; and if that metamorphosed
Female Brute there, has any spark of Womanish softness in her, she shall in
spite of Nature, use ye well.


Carry the Prisoner to the place I ordered -- What say ye, Sir, would ye speak
with me? -- Hum, w^ll, what is't?


She goars and wounds me still; and now methinks the whole, composure of my
Frame, is alt^r'd -- I tremble and am ashamed to know my self. -- Hah, what did
I say I Trembled, 'tis impossible, can my H^art tremble, that is steeled with
Power? Trembling implies a Fear; what can I ^ear, that have unquestioned Power
to command all, and can enjoy what e'^r ^hat Power possesses: -- Again --
there's no looking on her, I'm all over Flame o'^h' sudden: -- Well, 'tis but
ask and have, I'll send her word I like her, and if she prove peevish, fright
her a little with her Lord's Proscription and she yields presently. -- Rock,
come hither, Thou saw that weeping Woman there.


Who, Sir, the Duchess? Ay, she's a delicate bit faith, -- gad I like her very
well.


You do so.


Yes, Sir, under favour, I intend -- I intend --


What is't you intend -- hah?


Why Sir, I intend, I intend to --


Sir --


I say Sir, I intend to make her do your Excellency Justice.


You shall do so, go get her for me presently.


Get her, What does your Honour mean? -- Have you a Paper ready? Would you
have her Sign any thing?


Yes, Sir, and Seal too. -- Therefore good Monsieur Secretary, I would advise
you to practise your Employment, and make her supple d' hear? Supple for me,
fit to take my Impression, and let your Liking flag, Sir Ink-Bottle; these are
your Ears yet I suppose --


They are so, I suppose my Lord, I have had 'em a pretty while.


'Tis well; i^ you would have 'em so remain, be Diligent; you understand me.


Hum -- sits the Wind there -- understand ye? Yes, yes, a Pox on ye, ye have
given us all occasion to understand ye; we know now what he means by a pinch by
the Ear, a tweak by the Nose, as well as if he had spoke Spanish: -- He, I
find, has a mind to the Duchess himself, and I as princip^l Officer in Trust,
must solicit her for him; 'tis so, there's no avoiding it, if I design to
keep my Place, this must be done; and I see now, 'tis in vain to think to make
my self a Great Man, without being a Pimp into the bargain.


Will it please you to give me an Answer to my Suit, Madam?


Why look'e Sir, cry Mercy -- I think you are a Prince tho.


And your Ladyship's Humble Servant.


Hum, that may not be much a-miss, as things may happen, Od'sfish, the Man's
well made --


'Tis Madam, in favour of the Duchess, let me desire --


Oh, gad ^o, the Du^chess my Prisoner; and you desire -- why look, my Lord, if
we should all have our Desires, what would the World come to? Why you may
desire one thing, and I may desire another thing, when as things may happen,
you can neither have y^r thing, nor I have my thing; oh my word, this is a
great thing to consider of -- and you must think I know my Post, my Lord, what
I must do; great things now.


Pox on her, has she forgot already the great things she used to do, when she
sold Sprats at the Castle-Gate? -- Ah, how the State-Mack^rel Surveys me; it
may chance, that I may have a Hook for her, if it be so, the Duchess shall
gain her end I'm sure.


Well, I swear, I think I have not seen a more likely Person, t^e Man truly
has, as one may say, a mighty promising Countenance; well, he has so, a^d he
has a Suit to me, good again; and perhaps I've a Business for him to do, very
well still; why the World is altered now, and things are changed from what they
were, and Odsfish, I must not be as I have been -- what, I must do great things
now.


I'm still in hopes, Madam, you are thinking how to gratify my request.


My Lord, you speak well, gratify; you would be Gratified you say, and desire
my Prisoner may be tenderly used, and have Servants about her; well, my Lord,
and how, pray, would you gratify for such a Favour? -- Come, you are a
Courtier, I am at present disposed to see a little of those Finicals; -- How
d'e begin?


Why, first, Madam, with all respect imaginable, ^ approach --


Odsfish, is that approaching? Why, my Lord, you stand stock still.


At a respectful distance, Madam, always when we address to Great Persons. With
Familiars; 'tis true, we often approach to the Lips.


Ay, ay, to the Lips -- Odsfish, that's better by half, if you must approach,
approach as you should approach, to the purpose, my Lord.


Madam, this Favour is too great.


Puh, -- never speak on it, my Lord, I am not so strait-lac'd, but I can be
familiar with my Equals upon occasion, and if you have an inclination to
approach once again, my Lord --


The Devil -- this is worse than her refusal; -- Oh, how I hate an Oyster that
opens of its own accord -- but come, once more for the Dutchess's sake, I'll
defy Garlic --


So, my Lord, and now what think ye of my Person and Appearance? Pray be a
little curious -- here's no Rumper above, my Lord, nor no crooked Legs below.


Oh, Madam, your Person, like the rest, must be Admired


'Tis true, Fortune used me a little coursely formerly, as to sell Fish, or so
-- but as to a Person, bring me any of your fine Ladies to discourse with me,
or so, and Gads-fish, then you shall see.


Ah, you are so very exact by Nature, that methinks those Jewels might well be
spared --


Why truly Nature has not been niggardly, but by giving me these Jewels,
Fortune I see, designs to be honest, and be out of my Debt, and I must use her
now she's in Humour.


How the Dowdy has stuck her self in the dear Dutchess's Ornaments, and how
like a Devil midst the Starry Region -- does she appear: But hush -- I must at
her again --


Well, my Lord, let's walk in, and as I find your Reasons are substantial -- I
shall incline the more. -- A handsome Man I'll be sworn he is -- and approaches
very well -- why look'e things are altered now, and if my Husband should chance
to be a Cuckold, why 'tis no more than what's in Fashion; I must not be as I
have been, what, I must do great things now -- Come, my Lord.


How near are those poor Wretches to despair, who dare too nicely scan the Acts
of Providence! And, Oh, how grossly vile is poor Mortality, when it too highly
values its Weak Reason, and ^ansies Heaven has done its Merit wrong -- if I
should number all my past Offences, can they deserve this Scourge, this worst
of Misery? Yes, if Heaven thinks so: Let me then be Obedient, and like Great
Cato's Daughter, bear Misfortunes with more than Roman Constancy; yet if Grief
grows too strong, here is the Means, this dear Reliever Rescues me for ever,


Once more I tell ye, you must deliver up your Charge to me, I have Business
with her from the General, things of Importance Women, weighty Matters; there
is a pressing Affair going forward -- you must give way too, therefore be gone
I say, your Husbands are yonder, toaping a full Bowl for joy of the good
Plunder, at the Duke of Caivano's; go, go, and colour your Gills there, and
leave this Lady to my management.


Ay, with all my Heart, methinks I long to see how my Husband Pedro looks in
his fine Golden Coat. Adsheartlikins, I warrant he's as proud as 'twere any Don
himself.


Hem, hem, Madam, in short, you must know, Madam, that is, Madam, if you don't
know already, that I am his Excellency's Secretary.


His Excellency's Secretary! bless me, how can I deserve this Honour? please
ye, Sir, to take a Chair.


You have very favourable Stars -- Madam, for as you say, this Honour is not
bestowed on every one -- especially without Money.


But how comes it, I beseech ye, Sir, that I am made thus Happy?


Why, you must know, Madam, that the General, who neither sees, says, nor does
any thing without me, thought sit to take my hint of Commendation of that
Forehead, Nose and Mouth of yours, after which too, to speak Unvulgarly, I
expressed my self in praise of the Lilies and Roses in your Cheeks, your white
Neck, and so forth, and at last, gave him signification, that you were
altogether a very tolerable Person.


Thou art in all Significations Intolerable I'm sure.


Hum, 'tis so, I must be the Man I see, she begins to be sweet upon m^ already.



True, Sir, I know it very well -- and therefore since I've the honour of your
liking, what's matter what the General says or doe^?


Ah, what a bewitching Smile was there -- she has charmed me so I cannot speak
a word, and I must be a Traitor in spite of my Teeth. --


Besides, to show my self grateful, Sir, -- and give ye Praise for Praise, in
my fancy now, that Chestnut Phiz of yours, but especially that Nose,
prognosticating strange Events, is wondrous Taking.


I have her fast, for if she likes my Nose once, the rest follows in course. --
But hark'e Madam, is this in Earnest? Am I so fine a Person faith -- I should
be glad to have some favour from ye as a proof.


A Favour, you shall, take this Cordial and drink my Health -- 'tis a warm
Philtre will increase your Flame: To show you too 'tis an especial Favour, I'll
use it with a Gust, when there's occasion; come, Sir, take six Go-downs.


Hum -- what a Plague does she mean? It can't be Poison sure -- Gad, I don't
like the colour on it; why faith, Madam, I must beg your Pardon, I an't dry at
presen^.


Oh, Luxury! Great Men, Sir, are always Thirsty; -- come, you must take it.


But Madam, I have sworn never to drink between Meals.


How, Sir, know then, since you such Grace refuse, Fortune thus flies ye, and
Revenge a Rogue pursues.


That is, she'll tell the General, and he shall Hang me -- gad I must after her
and prevent that tho, for all my Fooling.


My Lord, if ever humble Penitence yet influenced a Heart, believe, mine feels
it; Oh, let me kneel and kiss your sacred Robe, thus low beg Pardon for my past
Offence, then from my Soul thank you for this Discovery.


'Tis too much, my Lord, pray rise, Heaven knows, how the vast bulk of your
Misfortunes oppress my Heart, deep sense of which, and pity to your Lady, who
is involved too in the general Ruin, has made me willing to divulge this
Secret, which a bigoted Jesuit, crazed with the Pl^t even forced into my
Bosom.


Hell of Barbarity! a Brother do this, a Brother plot my Ruin and my Wif^'s,
for in her Death, is mine, with greatest Horror, and this too only for
ambitious Vanity, to forge another Plot -- without my knowledge, even as his
Hot-Brain pleased.


There's the Arch-Contrivance, he knew your tender Passion for your Lady, a
Prisoner now in Massaniello's House, would never give your consent to act
revenge by Fire; and therefore to effect his double Plot, you and Perone were
to be Ignorant, for different Ends, you on your Lady's score, and he as being
designed a Sacrifice with Massaniello, who, they give out, shall fall by Sword
or Pistol; but 'tis indeed resolved by firing Mines under the Marketplace, and
when the Throng is most, to ^low up both, and to accompany 'em, your Lady and a
hundred thousand Vulgar.


Prodigious Villainy!


Of Powder for this Action, fifty Cantara's -- are stowed in several Places
under Ground, enough to shake all Naples into Ruins, and glut Revenge with
such a horrid Massacree -- no Age could ever Parallel.


My Flesh trembles and Blood grows cold, even at the apprehension: Unnatural
Viper! for a Brother's Name from henceforth I renounce, as also a Brother's
Nature, by thy accursed Example, for 'tis past doubt, that with my Wife and the
rest, when this most dreadful Blow had once been given (had not your gracious
Clemency saved me by this Discovery) I too had shared this Ruin.


That's not unlikely, for your Brother's aim, compacted with some Dons of his
rank Faction, we find, is now for setting up himself, when Massaniello and the
rest were Dead, Chief Farmer of the Gabells in your stead.


I see it now, plain as the Sun at Noon, thou venerable Parent of my Life, for
this Discovery gives me all that can be called in Life a Blessing, saving her
who is much dearer than my Life, my Soul: How shall I pay my Thanks? How po^r
out my full Heart? And how Adore thee?


Calm, calm your self, my Lord, and -- cease this Rapture, I'm paid in the good
Action.


May all Stains be wiped for ever from that Honourable Scarlet, for this your
Piety -- Oh, this base Carraffa! this bloody Brother! But yet 'tis no more than
what the Scheme of his past Life has promised, a Nature ever prompt to Cruelty,
hardened in Ill, he ost would set me on to plague the People, and do things
Unnatural, of which the Gabells late imposed, was one, -- and which being too
severe, has now Undone us.


My Lord, I see your Sense is now serene, and therefore I should be most
Uncharitable to twit ye with your former rash neglect: Oh! what a sacred Tutor
is Affliction? To instruct Humanity, and give erring Nature the means to know
it self. -- Farewell, my Lord, excuse Paternal Love and honest Care, if it now
sound too harshly in your Ear; -- the Lot is cast, you must divert this
Stratagem, or she you love amongst the common Crowd is lost for ever; they are
now coming hither to their last Consultation; I was Invited, but made shift to
excuse it; indeed I liked it not, I wish the Rebels quelled, but cannot wish
that way; -- but you must stand the brunt, and countenance 'em, say as they
say, and work your Ends the better: Be Wise then, 'tis the Crisis of your Fate,
One Hour lost now, the rest come all too late.



How have I been mistaken in this Man; this Great, and yet this good Man? This
is indeed a Churchman -- studied in Morals too, and has a Conscience: If the
Body of the Roman Priesthood were like him, just in Actions as in Words,
Preaching no more than they would Execute, nor busied but in case of general
Good, how many Converts would approach the Altars, Suck up their hallowed
Breath, and Kneel and Pray?
That now neglect, and heed not what they say.



Oh, my Lord, is your Grace here? That's well, your Brother and the rest of the
Cabal, are just upon Entering, Perone too with the Bandits, and a whole bundle
of Iesuits following -- gad the Mischief will thrive, I'm sure, because they
have a hand in it: We shall broil this King of Herrings now I'saith -- I have not
forgot the Rascal's Fish-Treat; a Pox on him, he has made me hate the name of
Fish ever since.


This Rascal is my Brother's Creature too, a Bear-Cub, that he could lick into
what Shape he pleased. -- Well, suck your Paws, d'e hear, and grow Fat with
hopes of your Revenge, but leave me to my Thoughts. Oh, here they come; Now
rank Dissimulation, act thy Part,
Tongue, hush my Rage, and Looks disguise my Heart.



The Jesuits are coming, -- and one bold daring Fellow among 'em, who says,
he'll begin first and fire the Train under the Upstart's House.


Hush, my Brother's here -- not a word more now, bid him -- do it, and tell him
he shall be great as his own Wishes --


Well, are all things in a readiness? -- Who fires the happy Piece at this
proud Fellow?


Who but the brave Perone, the Soul of Naples; his Harquebuss is Charged, and
his Heart willing.


Ay, ay, my Lord, let me alone to fire him.


I heard the the other Rascal talk of firing a Train as they came in; 'sDeath,
the Scoundrels quibble with me -- and can ye aim well, Sir?


I think I can, my Lord -- I have killed Black-Birds without a Rest before now;
but if I should fail, here are some more will second me, what say ye, my bold
Lads, hah?


Why Captain, give but the word of Command, your Enemy lies there, look'e, be
it who 'twill.


Captain -- I'll not only kill who you have a mind to, d'e mark me, but if you
command me, I'll Eat him afterwards.


There's a brave Fellow now, my Lord.


A prodigious brave Fellow indeed -- Damnation! what Devils have I about me?
But what are these?


Oh, these, Brother, these are Friends, woven in our Plot, Fathers of the
Church, who with the rest of 'em, resolve to assist us.


Nay, then't must be a Powder-plot, I'm sure. -- Hah, I have it now, and Death
shall never alter me. -- But first, for a Decoy; well, Gentlemen, this
Undertaking will be Dangerous, and therefore requires Wariness and Diligence --
you'll find me ready at a Minute's warning, but first, I must Disguise my self,
which done, Believe, ye all command my Head and Heart --
Villains, to Ruin ye, not take your part.



Methought the Duke your Brother went out Cloudy.


No, no, his Head is only busy about his Disguise -- he has some reason tho,
if he knew all. --


All, all resolved, my Lord -- they'll first assist with Prayer, and then with
Powder, all sworn to quell the Church's Enemies, -- And now, my brave Captain,
since I've so well performed the trust you gave me, I hope you'll think a
Jesuit may be Honest.


Honest, yes, to his promise to do Mischief, I never doubted that; but come,
I'm glad to see you here however.


When the Laity Rebel against the Church, the Mischief that comes of it, lies
on their Heads, tho the Church Execute it.


There's Sophistry for ye -- he calls the non payment of Church Masses,
Rebellion against it -- but let him talk, he's a sure Rogue of my side; -- he
is to fire the Market-place.


A gad, and I'll warrant he'll do it -- he has a Face like a very Salamander it
self.


Oh, bloody-minded Villains! If my Discovery to the Cardinal, put no stop to
this Business -- I shall never Sleep again: -- Oh, Conscience, Conscience.


My Sons, be then Courageous, and go on -- to do a deed will gain perpetual
Glory; and to excite the Cause, pray hear this Fable; The Birds and Beasts, had
once a fierce Dispute, how both their Kinds should make one Government; -- this
side set the Lyon up as Monarch over 'em, but the Feathered Kind were for
Democracy; both Parties daily strong Excursions made, but neither for long
time, the Conquest had -- till at the last a sly old Politic Fox spoke to his
Comrades thus; -- My Friends, this Jar
must end by Stratagem, and not by War.
I'll undertake when next the Birds appear,
To catch a Hundred Thousand in a Snare --
And then the rest must yield, the Case is clear. --
I think, my Sons, this needs no Application, therefore go on.


The Father speaks like an Oracle, let's Embrace, and then go on.


Ay, ay, let's go on, let's go on.


Away then, each to his several Charge -- and when the cheerful Sun begins to
gild the Market-place to Morrow, in all his Pride I'll fell this Giant down.


And we'll to the utmost Second brave Perone.


Now soar my well plumed Hopes, and -- gracious Fortune once fix thy Wheel, and
on the highest Spoke set me but up; if I fear falling, Scorn me: Methinks my
Heart's grown larger since my Plot. -- Into what a Labyrinth of knotty Mischief
have I involved these over-heated Fools, who severally believe they gain that
Prize, which they all work for me, to their Destruction; for at that very
Instant that bold Perone hunts Massaniello's Life, so to succeed him -- his
own, with all the rest, fly up in Fumo: The Jesuits too are Tools; for that
once done, some Troops of Spanish Dons already raised, -- Confederates all in
our intended Greatness, shall crush those Moles to nothing. -- But hold, -- my
Brother and his Wife, whose Fate are both inevitable -- there's the worst
twinge -- but what are Brother, Sister, Kindred, or Friends, to him, that bold
Ambition onward guides. Ambition that made Angels once Rebel,
And from Celestial Throne, sink down to Hell.



OF all the World's Enjoyments,
That ever valued were,
There's none of our Employments
with Fishing can compare:
Some Preach, some Write,
Some Swear, some Fight;
All Golden Lucre courting,
But Fishing still bears off the Bell,
For Profit or for Sporting.
Then who a Jolly Fisherm^n,
A Fisherman will be,
His Throat must wet
Just like his Net,
To keep out Cold at Sea.
The Country Squire loves Running
A Pack of well-mouth'd Hounds;
Another fancies Gunning
For Wild-Ducks in his Grounds:
This Hunts, that Fowls;
This Hawks, Dick Bowls,
No greater Pleasure wishing,
But Tom that tells what Sport excells,
Gives all the Praise to Fishing.
CHO. Then who, c.
A good West^alia Gammon,
Is counted dainty Fare;
But what is't to a Salmon
Just taken from the Ware?
Wheat-Ears and Quails,
Cock^, Snipes, and Rails,
Are prized while Season's lasting,
But all must stoop to Crawfish Soup,
Or I've no Skill in Tasting.
CHO. Then who, c.
Keen Hunters always take too
Their Prey with too much pains;
Nay, often break a Neck too;
A Penance for no Brains:
They Run, they Leap,
Now High, now Deep,
Whilst he that Fishing chooses,
With ease may do it,
Nay more, to boot
May entertain the Muses.
CHO. Then who, c.
And tho some envious Wranglers,
to jeer us will make bold,
And laugh at patient Anglers,
who stand so long in the Cold:
They wait on Miss,
We wait on this,
And think it easy Labour,
And if you'd know,
Fish profits too,
Consult our Holland Neighbour.
CHO. Then who a Jolly, c.
COme, let's have another Song, my Jolly Lads, a^d then tother Brimmer, which
shall be once more, Confusion to all Gentry.


Ay, come, away with it -- but I think we have their Heads upon the Anvel pretty
well now, Neighbour.


Ay, ay, we may lay by our Hammers and our Cleavers; now Broth^r, -- the Sword
is the Tool of Confusion now, ^nd so let's drink about.


Gad, I was so fine, my Wife did not know me to day; I gave her a Buss at the
Mill-door, and Odzokers, the Jade took me for a Courtier, ha, ha, ha.


'Tis a sign a Courtier has been about your Hopper then, Brother, some body or
other has been taking Toll in your Absence; wha^, the Mill must go round,
Brother, the Mill must go round, ha, ha, ha.


Ay, ay, tho the Sole be rent from the Upper-leather, as the saying is, That
work must go forward -- gad, would my Neighbour would drop once and give the
Crow a Pudding, as the saying is, that I might take a Stitch with her, she's a
rare fresh crummy Lass; -- she's no Pin-buttock, not she In faith.


Why well said, Neighbour, -- faith I'm of thy mind -- I'd give a dish of
Marrow-bones, -- nay, all the new Rigging of my Captain-ship here, to beat up
with her for a Volunteer.


Come, Colonel Pedro, let's have Madam Ursula's Health round, and give you Joy
of your new Title, good Madam, and then to Madam Belvidore there -- Health to
your good Ladyships both.


Why, well said, Lieutenant, -- come with all my Heart.


And I'll yours in Rhenish-wine and Sugar; what we must drink Costly now, I'm a
Lady, and then we'll hear another Song; this Music with Drinking, is very
pretty.


'Tis so, Sister; but for my part, I love a Song that raises the Spirits and
makes one merry.


Why well said, my Lass of Mettle, this was a notable Ditty In faith: Prithee
Iacomo do but observe my Wife in her new Rigging there; a Pox on her, she looks
for all the World like thy Mare when she has a Martingal on.


Come, come Boys, strike up there while the Iron's hot, let's have a Song and a
Dance -- come.


Oh Mr* Secretary, Welcome -- but why so late, my man of Politics? why you're
six Bumpers behind at least.


Ay, a Pox on it, and shall not have time neither now I'm come, to drink one of
'em. -- Odsheartlikins, you must leave off Junketing immediately, for the
General's just coming hither to hear Causes; I brought a damned Fellow to him
this Morning, a lowering, horn-fac'd Bandits Rogue, who pretended earnest
Business, that has put him so upon the fret with some Discovery, that there's
no speaking to him, he snaps and snarls at one just like a Dog in a Coach-box
-- Oons, he called me Pimp and Clod-pate just now, only for telling him what a
Clock 'twas, tho he asked me the question.


Also, away with the Bottles then.


Do so, and let's talk of some new Intelligence to find out the Duke of
Mataloni, -- that will put him into Humour -- presently.


Here he comes, and that Devil Bandits with him still; I wonder who he is --
'tis a plaguy poor Rascal -- and I'm sure, had not a Penny about him, because
he gave me no Fee -- for which I would have kept him from the General -- but
'twas such a surly Dog, and those damnable Whiskers struck such an Awe into me
-- that Egad he made me do what he would, in spite of my Teeth.


Thou hast well deserved thy Life; and thy Discovery is of such weight, as
makes me still thy Debtor.


Have you given Order to Secure Carraffa?


'Tis done, and Spies are likewise on Perone, to watch his Motion^, who at this
Instant, I hear, waits for Admittance.


'Tis well; and all the Avenues that reach the Powder, are they taken care of?


All, all, with strictest Diligence. -- My better Genius, how shall I pay my
Gratitude -- tell me thy Circumstances, that I may reward thee -- for saving
me, and two Thirds of the People: Whence, and what art thou?


One of Fortune's Bubbles, blown up and down a while about the World, and when
I break, am Nothing: My Race and Birth-right, if you can believe me, perhaps
are yet too good for what I seem, but that may be my Pride, so heed it not: If
you'd have more know me then by my outside, which in the Figure I at present
bear, expresses me -- a Rogue.


Pithy and short; it does so indeed.


This Male contented slander on thy self, -- bears yet a relish of some hidden
Honesty; thou shalt be mine, and such a Trust I'll give thee, a^ by its Profit
shall reward this Service.


Pray, Sir, not too much of your Trust, I may deceive ye; for what I have done,
perhaps I had my Reasons, but if you burden me with Place and Office -- I
shall do like most of the rest in such Cases; I shall serve my self in the
first place, I tell ye that before hand.


Oh, this Bluntness better recommends thee to me, it shows thou art no
Courtier, no favourer of accursed Mataloni, nor the damned Gabellers, therefore
observe me, some of the Traitors are by this time Seized, and rash Perone
attends his certain Ruin. -- Withdraw a while, till I dispatch some Business,
which done, we'll discourse farther; in the mean time, I tell thee, I am
pleased with thee.


And I, if my Design succeed, most happy.


Brother, I ordered you to burn the Plunder, but you will have your way, I see.
-- What my Bull's-head Captain and the Cobbler, Embroidered too -- and the Women
foisting here too, pshaw, pull off your Trappings, and send those things away,
-- we have no Smock business now.


Smock-business, -- gad if I had said as much, the Tanner's Wife there would
have broke my Head I'm sure; -- what a Devil ail^ him.


Why, Whiskers that went out there, has bewitched him, I believe.


D'e hear Spouse, I see he's in a damned ill Humour, therefore prithee be gone.


Marry gap, what's he too good to speak to us Civilly.


How now, What Noise is that?


The People are mad, I think, they throng the Market-place so, that they ride
upon one another Backs; the Jesuits Horse one another like wild Stallions; --
Perone's Exalted too, and to my thinking, would fain get foremost.


Brother, and the rest of ye, keep here this Post, and on your Life, observe my
Motions. -- Are any yet let in,


Yes, three or four Delinquents, who were Tried this Morning by the Court your
Lordship set up for such Causes, and who now are sent to you to receive
Judgment; They are a Baker and a Fisherman: But in the Rear of these, -- appear
two Ghosts or ^tarv'd Skelitons, whom the Prince of Bissignano sends hither to
plead their Ca^se themselves to you, strange fleshless Creatures, I would not
have you see '^m Faith; their Bones rattle as they walk like a Bag of
Chess-men, and these accuse a Lawver, -- a rich Lawyer, a Friend of mine, my
Lord, of Roguery -- poor Idiots, they are like to get much b^'t.


We'll admit 'em all, but let Perone keep at distance till they're dispatch'd.


Valasco, -- d'e hear.


It shall be done --


Read the Bills of Accusation against these Delinquents severally, then let me
know each Man particularly. -- First, What's he?


So please ye, a Baker -- Tried and Convicted in your Lordship's Court of
Justice -- For that he not having the fear of any thing before his Eyes, and a
world of such formal Stuff, my Lord, sold Bread to the Poor sixteen Ounces in
six and Thirty too Light -- and that too most of it Dough baked -- to lie heavy
on his Customers Stomachs, that they might not find out his Cheat.


Hum -- for Bread Dough-bak'd, and too light sixteen Ounces, well, let his Oven
be hea^ed presently, and in it bake that Baker; bake him, d'e hear, to a Crust
-- then dole him round in Parcels of sixteen Ounces weight to all the Poor that
are Injured.


Oh, that ever I was Born -- Mercy, my Lord, Mercy.


Away, Bake him, I say -- on your Lives see it done. Proceed, who's the next?


A Fisherman, who brags he is Related to your Lordship, his Crime is, That
being sent by a poor Labourer, who works by the Week abroad, to his Wife, lying
in with Twins, with some Fish proper for her condition, she pulling out her
Purse to pay him, he robbed her of it, for want of which, she and her too
Infants are since Starved.


Pshaw, is that all, -- why if they are Dead, the Parish is eased of an
Encumbrance; Ods me, and now I look on him better, this honest Man is a
Relation of mine indeed, for if I have not forgot --


Oh lack a day, Master Thomas Annello -- why sure you can't forget your Cousin
Bobber the Smelt-man -- why I am your Si^er's Son, and please ye; and you may
remember, how Merry we were last Lammas at the H^rring catching -- well gads
bobs, Cousin, I'm huge glad of your good Fortune.


Thank'e, thank'e -- good Cousin; a Chair ^ere for my K^nsman.


Hem, Hem --


W^ll, Cousin, and prithee what is this foolish Busi^ess about this Purs^ --
wha^ I warrant thou took it Joakingly, did not -- thou had occasion ^or
a little Money -- for some Frolic or so, I warrant.


Ha, ha, ha, ha. -- Why in Troth Cousin, I had so, you have nicked it; Gads
bobs, you know I was always given to Frolics and to play Arch-tricks, -- and I
think this was pretty enough: -- You shall hear how 'twas. -- The Woman you
must know, Cousin, was newly brought to Bed, and lay grunting for Fish, and the
Fool her Husband, had no more wit than to send me to her, when she might as
well have come to Market her self, if all be true as I have heard of'em -- well
-- in came I -- out came her Purse -- and whip, says Iethro, I had it in a
Moment, so scoured off -- and over a Brimmer Laughed heartily afterwards, with
my Brother Topers, a^ the dissembling Carrio^ -- and faith; as you say, Cousin,
I think there was good Service done in it, for the D^m a^d her Cubbs, would have
certainly encumbered the Parish -- and to deal plainly, -- I hear I have
prevented that, for they're all Dead -- ha, ha, ha, she'll want no more Fish in
haste, nor her Brats squall no more for the Sucking-bottle, ha, ha, ha.


So -- and for this notable good Service, this same pretty Joak, Cousin, these
foolish Lawyers have Convicted the^.


Senseless Law-Rogues, they have in troth, Cousin -- but I knew I had a sure
Card of you; nay, the Pimps thought to fright me with Raw-head and Bloody-bones
too, and told me, that my Blood drop for drop, should be shed for theirs, and
that the liquor in my Veins, who am one of the Family of the famous Annello's
of Amalfi should run through the Streets, like the Kennels in a Rainy day: --
What says the brave top of our House, shall it, shall it, hah, Cousin.


No not a drop Cousin -- there's my Hand on it -- let the bold Spirits of my
noble Kindred, Kill, Starve, or Drown, or Poison whom they please, must knavish
Law or foolish Justice control 'em in this Juncture too, when they hope to be
Preferred? No, 'tis enough that they are ^in to me -- and why am I in Power,
but to Exalt 'em?


Right, my dear Cousin, right -- Gads bobs, I could kiss thy Foot, hem! hem!
Oons, I'll be revenged of those Law-Rogues that Tried me, as soon as ever I'm
Preferred.


Why Cousin, within this Hour.


Shall I faith, Gads bobs -- I will kiss thy Foot now Annelli of Amalfi --
where?


Why, upon a Sign-post.


A Sign-post -- ha, ha, ha, -- well, well, Cousin, -- I know you're a rare
Joaker; a Sign-post, very pretty faith, ha, ha, ha.


Go some of ye, and Exalt my Cousin, tha^ is, Hang him instantly upon a
Sign-post.


Ah Cousin, dear Cousin, you carry the Jest too far now, you do I'saith.


Hang him in Chains -- but l^t no Blood be spilt upon your Lives, he is my
K^man, and I've given my Word; and so adieu good Cousin -- d'e hear, besure you
do it decently, and let him be with Ceremony Exalted. -- Come, the next, the
next.


Exalted, O Lord! why are ye in Earnest then? Why Cousin Thomas, sure you Joak
-- dear Cousin Thomas -- sure you Joak.


Away, I say. --


Hum, this is somewhat odd, my Friend.


Oh -- a poor Rogue -- I knew he'd be Hanged, for all the General's Joaking.


Well, my good Friend -- take care d'e hear, and there's your Fee -- I have
given the Secretary a hundred Ducats already.


Why look'e, Sir, -- you have given me two Ducats here, if you don't come off
d'e see, as cleverly as a husk from a roasted Chestnut, why then my two Ears are
at your Service: -- I heard the Secretary say as much just now -- and he, he
can do any thing; you shall see him wind the General about his Hand like a
skein of Silk.


What monstrous things are here, that freeze my Blood with Horror of the Crimes,
and make me mad with Wonder! -- bless me, what Figures too, I'll read again --
the Prince of Bissignano's Letter. Your Excellency is to know, your Suitors are
a Widow and her Daughter; the Widow's Husband, some seventeen Years since,
Dying, left his Brother a Lawyer, his Executor, to pay her sixteen hundred
Ducats for her Dowry, and as much for her Daughter's Portion, instead of which,
to defraud both, he hath Villainously and Unnaturally Immured 'em between four
Walls in a Cave, giving out* They were Dead, and ever since fed 'em there with
Bread, roots and Water; their Miseries will appear visible before ye, and your
Justice on the Offender be Nobly Remarkable, --

Bissignano.

Incomparable Villainy, I'm amazed at it; come forward Wretches, and Express
your selves -- Which is the Widow of you, and which the Daughter?


If thou wilt Marry now Captain, here's a rare Bargain for thee -- here's one
won't be proud of her Bills and Bonds -- this Widow will go off cheap enough --
and the Maiden Daughter too -- I believe, would hardly stand priming and
mincing upon such an occasion, she has a Skin there would make a rare pair of
Fox-hunting Boots.


Are they Birds or Beasts, I wonder -- and of what World are they? For ours, in
all appearance, they're utter Strangers to -- I warrant that Scoundrel the
Lawyer, is in a smoky Sweat now -- Ods bobs, this Cause of his looks but
scurvily.


If Misery extreme can deserve Pity -- or injured Innocence can hope Redress,
give ear to my sad Story, and do Justice, for all that Paper mentions, is most
true, full Seventeen Years forced by that barbarous Brother, we have told the
Hours in that loathsome Prison, fed with the dross of Earth, unwholesome Roots,
Bread candied over with Mould and stinking Water, all that could make Calamity
grow dreadful, and yet not Kill us, we have suffered daily; The damp cold Earth
our Beds, hard Stones our Pillows, and nightly visited with roapy Snails, that
crawled upon our Faces, big swolen Spiders, the scream of Weezels, Rats, and
Croaking Toads in Consort joined, was still our hateful horrid Music, whilst
dismal Darkness added to the Horror.


My Lord, I beseech your good Lordship, let her prate no longer she was Mad my
Lord -- she was Mad -- And 'tis true, I kept her a little Hardly -- but 'twas
only to bring her to her Wits again -- Hark'e, Friend, I would the cretary would
put in a word now.


O no matter, no matter, he'll bring ye cleverly off at last, whether he does
or no, Man*


Go on there -- What say you?


The Summer's choking heat, and Winter's cold, both which with their alternate
Misery torturing our Bodies, have quite changed our Natures, our Skins like
barks of Trees, our Hair like Furies, with Eagles Talons on instead of Nails,
and Savage all, but in doleful Sound, breathing from our numbed, starved and
tormented Bodies -- our Voices, that cry out aloud for Justice, for Justice,
that our wretched Trunks may feel one Hour's Pleasure, tho we die the next.


You shall have Justice, sound substantial Justice, as the Fact merits. or your
Revenge could ask; Go take that Lawyer there, that rank rich rascal, that
common Murderer of Common-Pleas, that Capias, that foul blotted Writ of Error
-- take him, d'e hear, and strip him first Naked, then Immure him between those
very Walls where these have lain, let his Food be Wax and Parchment, and his
Drink, the Liquor that has Damned his Soul, his Ink; And whilst the Widow his
Estate enjoys,
Let him Rave, Groan, and Languish till he dies.



Mercy on me, why Friend, Friend, the Secretary don't speak a word for me.


Hum -- why faith your Business does not come off so cleverly as I thought it
would, and I can't part with my Ears very well neither; but d'e hear, Sir, let
'em Starve ye if they dare, let 'em take your Estate, I warrant he'll maul 'em
when you're Dead cleverly, never fear, Man.


When I'm Dead, Oh miserable Comfort! have I Cheated so many to be a prey to
Cheats my self at last; Oh, Lawyer, Lawyer, what will become of thy Soul?


Brother, the Prince attends to speak with ye.


Is Execution done then?


I saw it all performed, -- and with Alacrity; Carraffa and his Faction all are
Dead, the Jesuits also, only Genovino, who, as it seems, intending to discover
'em, has saved himself, but all the rest have Suffered; the eager People gave a
loose to Cruelty, their Heads and Hands cut off, and stuck upon Posts, adorn
the Market-place, and all their Bodies mangled and torn to pieces by the
Rabble.


'Tis well; -- your Ear, my Lord


I am Amazed. --


Fellows in Arms, especially Perone, the chief of my bold Undertakers: Hear me;
some Plots are late found out against my Life, the Authors of it Seized and
Executed, and since for the People's good, I think my Safety -- may be
material, let all stand at distance but those I appoint, till I Explain my
self; What says the brave Banditti's Captain there? Is it not reasonable?


Your singling me out, Sir, to ask that Question, is somewhat odd methinks --
but let us stand as you please -- I think I all along have kept my Distance as
well as any, I grutch ^e no Respect that I know of


Surly, but yet my Friend, you know, he's Honest, honest as his damned Brethren
in a Robbery -- you'll find it so, let Honesty be tried; Seize him and Search
him instantly, and those Banditti's there, the Villains come to Murder me.


Ah, surprised just in the Minute; Oh damned ill Fortune!


Fate, guide my Hand, have at thee.


And mine --


Hah -- have they missed me; then thanks to Providence, and thou, dear Figure
of my blessed Angel, that still defends my Life against all Danger, go drag 'em
to their Deaths; tear 'em to pieces, and let their Heads be fixed among the
rest.


I was a Fool, or thine had grinned there first. Death I deserve for that, and
so Confusion seize ye


The Rascals hid their Arms under Cloaks, and by that trick dec^iv'd us.


'Tis well remembered; be it Ordered instantly, on pain of Death, no Man to wear
a Cloak or upper Garment, of what degree ^oever, they shall have no more
coverings for their Knavery; From High, to L^w, Let all Men walk in Cuerpo. Go
see my Commands obeyed, and strictly, as their Lives will answer it.


Ay gad, and with all my Heart -- for I know a plaguy r^ch Cardinal that wears
a huge long red Coat, and if he does not B^ibe me well, ^'ll strip him ^o his
Shirt in the first place; 'sdheart, this new Order will bring in a Tun of
Money, -- and I'll about it instantly -- Gervatio -- come


This happy chance, which I Congratulate, shows the Divine Powers hold ye in
regard; Respect them, Sir, and cease your rigid Violence, Burning and Plunder;
the Vice-Roy greets ye fair too, and now agrees to grant, for the Peoples good,
Great Charles the Emperor's Charter; my self last night was at a Consultation
with him, and the good Cardinal Fillomarino -- who has besides the Grant, a
Present for ye.


I'll Visit him this Moment; he has a Character 'tis said, beyond the Title
even of Go^dness -- Honest and Conscientious, yet a Cardinal; 'tis wondrous,
and I scarce believe it true.


Truth, may good Angels guide ye to pursue.


Immortal Seneca, whose sacred Morals inflame the Sense, and ease the troubled
Minds of those that can discern and taste thy Learning, how valued were it thou
in these sad Times, to Naples, if every one were skilled in those rich Jewels,
which in their value, are Ines^m^ble; but as the Peoples Plague is Ignorance,
so the d^re want of thy Philosophy, makes still more sharp to them, the darts
of Fortune -- What Noise is that within? Good Heaven defend me! -- ^he State's
Distress, makes every little blast appear a Whirl-wind -- It comes nearer
still, this must be of some Moment.


Bring up the Guards to the door, ye saucy Slaves, how dare ye contradict the
General's Order? -- Is it your Pleasure, my Lord Scarlet-Cap, to affront the
Supreme power -- ho* --


What mean ye, Sir?


What mean I, Sir, you shall know presently, Sir, -- Valasco -- strip him -- if
you can read without your Spectacles, there's my Warrant for it.


Well, Sir, I see your Power and my Patience, as in other things, must also
appear in this


No, no, my Lord -- to your Shirt only -- I'll proceed no further, I will not
show the Church^s Nakedness -- tho some of you give her but Tinsel Clothing.
-- To your Shirt, to your Shirt -- no further.


My Shirt -- alas, Sir, Age has so crazed my Body -- and long Infirmity so
weaken'^ me, should you proceed so in this cold bleak Season, 'twould Kill me;
-- have you quite forgot Humanity?


Oh, my Lord, I know you can Talk -- I know you have a large capacious Wit, my
Lord, and a large Purse too; my Lord, if you would save your shrivelled Carcase,
then let that speak for ye, that's the Philosophy confu^es me always, the rest
is paltry, paltry.


My Purse is the Rhetoric must save me! no, to bribe Barbarity, is to indulge
the sin -- I will not give a Penny.


Come, come, Uncase, uncase then, the fine Weather will make you chatter your
Repentance shortly, I make no doubt on it.


Hah, hands off there -- What are ye doing, Villains?


Oons, the G^n^ral -- we were only zealous in executing your Order, and please
ye -- and because the old Bishop was obstinate, we thought to fright him a
little, that was all.


Avaunt, ^e Scoundrels, whose Souls have more of Dirt than the basest Dung
hills; my Orders were to wear no upper Garments, but you will stretch, you
will; put on his Robe again, Rogues, and then be gone.


He is particular; be gone -- ah, you're a rare Fellow to call a Great Officer
Scoundrel, but come -- Valasco, a pox on him, we must go.


He bears an awful Aspect -- Gravity with Wisdom joined, appear in every
Feature, and seem to force a Reverence -- well, what then, Looks do dec^ive us
often.


Is this the Prodigy, the Instrument of Heaven, and Scourge of Naples? He has a
daring Front, quick Eye, and a Vivacuy uncommon in such Me^ness, Fatal, and
through the who^e Physiognomy is something strangely Terrible.


The Outside's Aw^u^, -- the Inside now I'll try,
And want of Learning -- Reason shall supply.
Well, Reverend Sir, you have surveyed my Figure now sufficiently, would you
know ought besides.


If the strange Frenzy the Age is swav'd with, would permit your Temper to
Re^son calmly -- I confess I wou^d, Sir.


Proceed then, I'am Calm, let us sit down.


What you think of your self?


Why of my self I think -- but yet may Err -- as you do of Religion -- Good I
intend I'm sure -- tho in my Practice perhaps are Mistakes.


But we have no Perhaps, Religion is a firm and solid Basis, a sure Foundation,
and the Matter good too we put in Practice.


So you Preach indeed, but should we come to seek a Heavenly dwelling amongst
your Schisms and Artful Heresies, your Pro and Con, your intricate Church
Sophistry, instead of Pious plain Soul-saving Doctrine, which with sound Truths
should give us safe Retreat, not Babel in all its height of monstrous Jarring,
ever showed such strange Confusions.


The Church cannot Err; --
Some of her Mortal Sons through frailty may.

And those cause all their Flock to go Astray. Your Learning only serves to
guild your Fallacies; your Words and Deeds are never of a Piece; You prate of
Heaven, tho 'tis Earth you love,
Your Hearts are here, tho Eyes are fixed Above.
Seven deadly sins blot out the Cardinal Virtues; rank Avarice, abhorred
Hypocrisy, sharp Tongued Detraction, and inveterate Envy, hot Lechery, and
Charity quite frozen; with your dear darling sin, King-killing, Murder, nest in
the Bosom of your Politic Conclave.


I am Amazed, a Fisherman to talk thus, 'tis most Miraculous.


Crimes of all Natures,
That ever did or shall Infest the Globe,
Lie close and brood under your Scarlet Robe.

Nay, now your Passion is predominant, you break your Promise.


Only a little Zealous for my Cause -- I give you the same liberty, speak
boldly.


So I shall, and Honestly, and therefore must take leave to ask a Question.


Do, I will Answer.


Are not you a Rebel?


I know not by my Soul -- 'tis a State Title which yet I want a Definition of,
but I will ask the People -- their Logic shall discuss it, and then I'll tell
ye: -- In the mean time, to answer with a Question, resolve me Cardinal, are
not you a Hypocrite?


My Conscience prompts me to reply to that without delay, or more demurring, --
No.


Well should I grant you once it may be so,
I'm sure your Tribe can't such another show.

A Hypocrite, -- Oh let these bubbling drops that outwards force their way from
their old Fountains, through very shame, that my unhappy Age should be
affronted with so vile a Question, declare my detestation of that Crime -- you
do not know me, Sir.


Perhaps nor my self neither. Now I have Answered ye; those Tears have shocked
me, I relent of the sudden.


Then I will teach ye, Sir, to know your self, for should I fail to speak for
fear of Death, or stand in awe of your unwieldy Power; or as you have disgraced
my Sacred Function, by stripping off my Robe, tho my Life were next, yet should
I Sue or Flatter ye, to save it -- poorly beg Pity, then I were a Hypocrite,
then you might think me a corrupt Time-server, then you might brand me; no, no,
rash young Man, a Good Man never fears to die, his Sands are still before his
Eyes, he sees 'em run, -- and all his pious Deeds proportioned to 'em -- this
makes me dauntless; this controlls your power, -- and spite of Tortures,
strengthens me to tell ye you're a Rebel.


Very good -- go on.


A most notorious Rebel; a vile Name that bears the greatest and most odious
I^famy, breaker of Laws, contemner of Religion, Author of Murders and unnatural
Riot, Fire, Plunder, and most horrid Devastation. Are not you this?


In part, yet not a Rebel -- I love the King, and for him and my Country, have
undertook this dangerous Enterprise; the People were oppressed with loading
Gabells, and in the Oppression, the King's Honour tainted, which I resolve to
abolish, tho I die for it -- and so I do this, so by my Labour I give ease to
Naples, so the grieved People are by me Enfranchised, may I be torn in pieces
by the Rabble, my Head be mounted on a Pole, my Body dragged through the goary
Streets, whilst each vein spouts Blood out like a Conduit, I am happy, proud of
my Fortune, shall contentedly die, and gladly yield my Soul without a Sigh.


Miraculous still -- the more I hear him speak, the more I wonder.


If my design to quell some of the Court -- whose Avarice cramped us all, be
called Rebellion -- or justly punishing of those, be Murder. -- To palliate
that, I've only this to say, it is the Times Distress that causes it; uncommon
Crimes have forced down Heaven's Vengeance, -- and suppose me, tho unworthy,
chose the means to work its Ends by.


You must not suppose it, -- 'tis Impious and the height of Arrogance; 'tis
making Judgment of Eternal Wisdom, and Heaven the Author of the Ills you do --
you rather ought to think, nay and believe Vengeance will fall on you if you
repent not.


My Heart melts strangely, my hard stubborn Heart; Oh, what a power has Piety
--


What sacred Vision or Inspiring Prophet gave you commission to be Tyrant here?
-- suppose the People Wronged, are you Omnipotence to scourage the Wrongers,
and anticipate Heaven's Justice, through proud Will and rash Presumption --
come, come, Repent, cast down your Usurped Power -- and reverence Heaven, that
thus far suffered ye, -- and turned to Benefits foul Disobedience, but cease
from future Ill.


This is a good Man, Deceit can never have such fair Appearance; his words have
turned my Eyes into my Soul, and his sound Reason changed my very Nature: --
Thou Reverend best Instructor of my Soul, thou hast convinced me, and I now am
Penitent: and if my Actions since for the general Good, may be forgiven by
Heaven and the Vice-Roy, this to perform, by all that's Sacred, Carmine's
blessed Virgin, and your holy self -- soon as the Articles of Charles the
Emperor are Ratified to the People -- to renounce all my Command and Power, and
return to my poor Occupation, Fishery; There with my peaceful Net my days pass
over,
And never dream of proud Ambition more. --



Now thy good Genius prompts, -- 'twas spoke Divinely; perform this Vow, and
yet be blessed for ever; -- and from the Vice-Roy, I have here Commission to
say, those Articles shall all be Ratified, and Gabells quite Abolished --
besides a Present from him to your self.


Oh, let me kiss the Feet of my Director, -- and beg his Pardon for the
Irreverent Sin late acted, in the rudeness to Disrobe him -- I am a Dog, a
sordid gross Plebeian, untutored in Humanity, a vile clod of Earth, and you
should Spurn


'Tis all forgiven, and forgot; thus from my Heart I give ye Absolution: And
now pray rise, and hear what I'm in Charge of from the Vice-Roy, who as a
forerunner to his future Favour, presents ye with a Suit of rich Apparel -- and
will himself meet ye at your appointment, there to confirm the Articles.


I'll meet him with all Joy, but for his rich Present, alas, my gracio^s
Father, I'm unworthy -- for a poor Fisherman these I have on, are rich enough
in Conscience.


Your Person indeed, that goes each day Clothed with Renown, Apparel can never
Embellish more; but yet 'tis proper now, not as a Fisherman, but
Captain-General of the Neapolitans; the Honour of which, obliges ye to wear a
Garb befitting; besides your condescension to the Vice-Roy.


I am convinced, and now will act a Courtier, since you will have it so.


Hark, the Cathedral Bell Rings, I must attend, will you be there?


I'll wait upon your Eminence, and after meet the People, who desire some
Musical Diversion, for joy of my late escape: I'll first be Fine, and then
receive their Kindness. -- Thus till the Charter is confirmed, I'll Revel in
fluttering Gaiety and frolic Mirth: Which done, the gaudy Trash away I'll
spurn,
And to the Canvas I now wear, return.



OH, mighty Love -- how is thy wondrous Power shown in the dangerous round of
my hard Fortunes, and what a narrow Isthmus stands between my future Comfort,
and my present Ruin, led on by thee, tho almost in Despair -- to free my Soul's
best Joy, my Belleraiza; I've 'twix^ the Paws of a fierce Monster ven^ur'd,
whose rancorous Heart thirsts for my Life; whose Hatred, would make a Feast of
Cruelty upon me, and gorge my Blood with Woolvish Appeti^e -- yet for my Love,
my Wife, I venture all -- and only now want glorious Opportunity to bring it to
Perfection -- my late Discovery has fixed me in the Heart of this bold Fellow
-- this bold, nay, I may say, this wondrous Creature; for is it not a Prodigy
in Nature, that a base Boy, poor, ragged, and bar^-footed -- nay, even the
lowest of the wretched Vulgar, should in an Instant, as by Inspiration, be
qualified to hold Dispute with Cardinals, negotiate State Affairs of grand
Importance; draw out a powerful Army to Rebel, Command 'em, and with a Nod, a
Beck, an uncontrolled Motion, subject all Naples; Naples, the Queen of Cities,
Mother of Hero's -- Metropolis and Rendezvous of Princes, and in her full six
hundred Thousand Souls, as Absolute a^ any natural Monarch -- tis above Wonder
-- Let me wait Heaven's Pleasure then, for now it i^ not in my power to crush
him, but with the Ruin of my self, and Love; here is his Ring, which gives me
powerful Trust, and Privilege to pass the Guards at any time -- This may be of
great use to my Design; besides, he treats me now as his best Friend -- and Spy
upon his Enemies -- I'll feed him with such hopes -- hark, they are coming from
Mass -- in Pomp, I hear, and a Solemnity is made to entertain him -- well, let
him mount, Ambitious Fool, dashed by the turn of Times,
The harder falls, the higher that he climbs.



Let twenty Troops be drawn up round my House; then let two Thousand Halberds
line the Gate-way, and on their Lives, no Noise -- nor none press further. If
it were proper your Eminence could taste a little of our Entertainment, I
should be happy, but since Religious Temperance obliges otherwise, I cease my
Suit -- Is there ought else, my Lord, you would Command?


Only your Licence for an Hour, to Visit Sir, the Duchess Mataloni.


My Lord, you shall have Licence. How her very Name, spite of my Resolves, does
kindle my late Flame. Come hither -- Rock -- what said the Duchess to my Suit?



Why, Sir, at first, she was at her Hums and Haws a little, but I managed her
so, that her Stomach began to come down apace.


Oh, she is sweeter than Arabian Odours.


Ay, Sir, and whiter than the new fallen Snow.


She is so, but prithee praise her not, it Tortures me.


Not Praise her, why, Sir, is there any harm in it, or if you should Enjoy --
her, is that such a Miracle?


Enjoy her, 'sDeath, that word has shot me through -- no more, I charge ye --
my late made Vow of Honesty and Virtue, and the awful Look there of that Holy
Man -- they shall, they must restrain me, but then Beauty and such a sweet
Revenge on Mataloni -- Oh, how my Veins swell!


Pshaw, pshaw, Sir, I hope you a'nt scrupulous -- why, I'll make her as supple
as a Glove for ye, there shall be no need of Courting.


Well, I'll think further on it, in the mean time, you must go wait on my Lord
Cardinal to her.


The Cardinal -- what a Devil, must I Pimp for him too -- pray my Lord,
consider my Place, good my Lord.


Oh, his is only a Visit, and no more.


A Visit -- gad I don't like him -- he's Gray, but not very Good, I believe.


My new Banditto Friend there, shall go with ye too -- Grasso, come hither,
thou see the Love I bear thee, and the Trust I have imposed; take then a
Secret from me; go with the Cardinal, to Visit the young Duchess; the Ring I
gave thee, gets admittance to her -- then plant thy self cunningly ^o hear
their Talk -- and afterwards let me be a partaker -- hah, wilt thou be
diligent?


Nay, if ye doubt me, y' had best employ another.


Enough -- I do not, my good Lord Cardinal, these will direct ye to the
Dutchess's Lodging.


Sir, you Oblige me --


Well, my Lord, I am mightily pleased -- you like my Dres^ so well, and I
think, tho I had not been bred at Court, and perhaps may want a little of their
Air, as they call it -- yet these Jewels don't disfigure me. Odsfish, this upon
my Breast here, cost a thousand Ducats, and this upon my Rump here, as much
more.


Oh, Madam, and adorning so graceful a Person too, they receive an
extraordinary Advantage -- I wonder those she Plundered of 'em, should tell her
the Price.


Humh -- Adorning my Person -- Well, my Lord, you have the prettiest words pop
out now and then to oblige me -- Od^fish, you have, that I could hear ye all
day methinks: But come, let's hear the Music, and Eat and Drink, and be Merry.


What, my Brother is not in the Dumps still, I hope.


No, no, but State Affairs lie a little heavy you must think -- Why truly I
find my self a little Graver since I was a Lady, than I was before.


Come, my Lord General -- Odsfish, what are ye posing on the Music, and
Banquet stays for us -- you act a Courtier rarely indeed; why, you are as dull
as if you were a Gudgeon-catching; come away, and seat your self for shame --
what, we must do great things now.


HOw comes it now good Mrs. Sprat,
You are so Impudent of late?
^' endeavour to forestall my Wares,
And thrust your Nose in my Affairs,
What is't you would be at?

What means the Blowz? my actions show,
I scorn both your Affairs and you;
I hope my Trade is not so small,
To help it, I should yours forestall,
Sure 'tis not come to that?

Come, come, I know you carryit high,
But yesterday the Neighbours swore
That you did all the Herrings buy,
That I had bargained for before.

They lye, I am the very'st Jade
That ever at door a By-blow laid,
If I did any Herrings buy,
I'd have ye know,
Ye filthy Sow,
I've other Fish to fry.

Come, come, you did, you did, ye Quean,
And in the Ale-house cross the Green,
To Breakfast drilled my Husband by.

I'd have ye know.


Ye did, ye Quean.


Ye filthy Sow.


Ye did, ye Quean:


And drilled my Husband by.


I've other Fish to fry.


Ye dirty Mawks -- would I but go
To graft my spouse a Horn or so,
I've Customers of Lords or Knights,
Would be my Friends both days and nights,
And take it for a favour too.

Thou long hast bragged of this I own,
When only Scowndrels of the Town,
Were still employed to till your Ground.

Of which your Husband's one.


He was, but he soon found his dangerous case,
He knows thou art not Sound.

Not sound -- you Trollop -- by this light,
To vex thee, now I'll tell the truth in spite;
He does love me, thy Husband's mine,
Our Hands, our Lips, our -- we join;
And when we sit and Sing, and Play,
Has wished thee Hanged a hundred times a day

I'll slit that Nose.


He says, that Mouth
Is like the Pole, 'twill reach from North to South
And if your there so wide
You know full well,
The Tales men tell,
What they suspect beside.

Ye Carrion.


Ye Mawkin.


Ye Slattern.


Ye Puss.
I'll teach you to slander me thus, thus thus.
I'll teach you to Cuckold me thus, thus thus.

THis 'tis to bear a Brain -- so well I've Plotted, I am unsuspected of the
late Conspiracy -- and now have formed another Protean Plot, to seat my self
securely.


What mean those Objects?


The Heads of your two Mortal Enemies -- Carraffa and Perone, the People bring
to add to your Diversion; and Mataloni had not Hell aided him, had never
escaped; I was so near him, that I reached his Skin he^e, but the Snake crawled
away.


Damn the Jilt Fortune, -- had I hooked him too, my Heart had been at Ease; Oh,
with what pleasure could I employ this sword to rip him open, these Teeth to
bite his Heart, these busy Fingers, to tear the Beard from off his hated Face,
as now from this Cursed Traitor, damned Carraffa.


I hunted hard, tho I missed my Game; and tho some of my Brethren were found
Tardy -- of which some twenty six being since Impeached -- I have seen Executed
-- yet I hope the General heard of my Diligence.


I did, my Politic Father, thou art Honest.


Thou art a Coxcomb, and I'm satisfied.


But this Mataloni still goads my Heart -- hah, have I no way to Revenge my
self? -- Yet now I have it -- his Wife, his Wife must do it, I'm now resolved
on it -- I'll send this Priest to fright her further, and then Attack my self --
A Bottle or two more, will make me fit -- the Prince there must know nothing --
I'll leave him therefore here -- Go once more, mount the Traitors Heads. And,
Brother -- and you my Officers, I invite ye to my Closet for an hour, to drink
a private Brimmer -- come along Boys, we'll have one Glass before we part,
Success to our next meeting in the Cathedral.


Bless the General, Bless the D.


'dsheart, they are all gone, and have left me to be Baited.


Gadslid, did ye ever see such Sneaks as the General and my Major ar^, ^if they
had not flinch'd from the Glass, to go and parboil their Guts with Coffee now --
there's no Spirit in Spanish, poise on it, I hate such Trifling -- if we come to
be Merry, let's go through stitch; where does the Prince's Health stand?


Here 'tis, and o'e^ the Left-hand Thumb it comes to himself; here's your
Health, my Lord -- would I had him in one of our Tan-pits at home.


Ah, he's a precious one --


I must get out some way or other, this rampant Fish-Wife will pelt my Eyes out
else.


My Lord, I think I heard you say, you were never Married, and truly you
deserve to be Prized for it extremely -- Odsfish, a Bachelor has such a
peremptory sort of way with him to Married Men; Oh, faugh, a Married Man's
quite another thing, I know it by my Husband.


So, if Cuckolding this Fish General now were a Revenge sufficient for the
Nobility -- I think I'm in a fair way to Oblige 'em.


Madam Ursula, what thinks your Ladyship of another Song?


Why truly Madam, very well, if your Ladyship will oblige us.


Nay, Madam, the best Voice must be preferred always.


Nay, nay, -- rather than let both your Ladyships bustle about it, I'll do it
my self -- my Lord the Prince, prithee come and sit nearer me -- and don't lie
glaring at me with your Twinklers, but come and hear my Song, 'tis a merry one
I'll promise ye; now how d'e like it.


Oh, 'tis most Ravishingly well, Madam -- thus am I obliged to Lye two or three
times a day at least to keep my self in Favour. 'dsDeath, there's no getting
off: Oh, I think I have it -- I had forgot a business of Importance, which the
General should have seen before; I beg your Prrdon, Ladies, I must be abrupt
and go seek him.


Pshaw, not yet, my Lord, not yet, 'tis time enough to seek him come, come,
pray let our Business be done here first.


Oh, Madam, 'tis from the Vice-Roy, and of prodigious Consequence: Curse on my
Fortune, that envy's me this pleasurable Minute, bu^ I'll dispatch and return,
Ladies, with all haste imaginable.


Well, you know my Closet, my Lord -- and since you must go, pra^ dispatch
quickly -- and you shall find us there; we'll go and settle our Stomachs with a
dram or two of my Water; for you must know, my Lord, I mak^ such Water, such
heavenly Water, it will make a young Fel^ow ^isk up to th^ Moon, and an old
Fellow's Heart dance the Canaries.


I am instructed, Madam, your Humble Servant: 'Tis well I fou^ this Excuse -- I
should have been Drunk too, if I had staid, I find.


Well, Odsfish, he's the Prince of a Man every way -- and we'll hav^ his Health
again before we part, I'faith; Come, let's enjoy our selves, we'll think no more
of the sneaking and pinching of our former days, but hug Fortune, and take
Pleasure in by Belly-fulls; come along, Lasses: What, we must do great things
now.


She's in her private Alcove there -- and the Cardinal's gone to her, I suppose
to help her in her secret Devotion, these Churchmen are rare Terriers, they can
hunt in a dark Corner rarely. Od, she's a lushious Cr^ature, Friend, hast ever
seen her? When he's gone, I'll try if I can Ferret her my self.


Cursed Imp of Beelzebub, what does he say? But d'e hear, Friend, I'm ordered
here unseen, to observe their Actions, let us withdraw then -- the General at
yonder door would have you to wait his coming -- and then give me Notice.


Well, Sir, I hear ye; I do most damnably hate this Fellow, and yet I dare not
quarrel with him -- and yet the Rascal interlopes upon my Business -- and I
find, creeps into the General's Favour every day more and more -- and must Ruin
me in time; say you so, why then be wise, Friend, and Ruin him first -- send
him packing, and if thou hast not two penny worth of Courage, Oons, buy two
penny worth of Rats-bain, and that will do it every whit as well.


I've sent that Fellow on a trivial Errand: because he should not hear the
approaching Passages, and see where my dear Belleraiza comes; Oh, how my Heart
pants with uncommon Joy which my hopes give me of my good Success -- she Weeps,
hah, and looks pale -- and talks with Passion; perhaps these Devils may have
wronged her Virtue -- Oh, Hell, if that be so, I'm lost for ever; I am afraid
to hear, and yet must listen.


Thus every hour they torture me, first, they fright me with my Lord's being
Taken, and then follows the Villain's Brutal Love.


Let your kind Heart with this assurance rest, he yet is free and safe.


Blessed be that Tongue, the pangs and hourly sorrows I must suffer for him, now
I shall bear the better -- for I expect this Evening a fresh Onset, another
odious Love-sollicitation, and now I am prepared.


Prepared for it! how my Impatience burns me -- I'll go forward and try her now
my self.


Oh, this persidious wi^ked faithless Wretch! he swore to me, and bound it also
with solemn Vows and serious Protestations, to be the Author of no more vile
Actions; he promised to lay down Arms too, and then take up his old Mechanic
Occupation -- but his unbala^c'd Head forgets it; thus want of Honour in all
base Born Creatures, make 'em so little value things so Weighty.


Yonder another of his Engines comes -- Oh, how I hate that horrid baneful
Face, and the more horrid purpose he's Employed in, which rather than consent
to, or be forced, I've yet a means left in my power to help me, one dear, dear
R^medy I've yet obtained, to keep my Faith to my dear Lord, and free me.


Take heed best Daughter -- how you offend the Deity, or doubt the aid of
Providence, by using Violence on your self, you have heard self-Murderers
Punishment.


Oh, preach it not, good Father -- Heaven were unmerciful; cruel Extent, to
expect generous Virtue should wa^t to the last Moment for a Miracle.


Heaven guard ye sooner, I do not doubt it will -- your Business seems with us,
Sir -- what's your Commission?


The General expects a private Conference with the Lady -- the Business is not
proper for your Ear, my Lord.


If 'tis a sin Affair, as I suspect, it is most proper that I should be near,
with holy Admonitions to prevent it.


Prevent the sallies of hot Love, my Lord, with cold Divinity, 'tis vain, vain
Labour, good your Grace retire -- to you Madam, I am to tell this News -- your
Lord is Taken, and by the General's Order, Dies to Morrow, unless to night your
beauteous Charms repeal it.


Peace, horrid Screech-Owle -- Oh, for a Basilisks Eyes to blast the Author of
the dreadfulest Tidings that ever forced through the Ear into the Heart.


My Lord, your Absense will be very requisite.


My Presence is much more -- I will not still -- but with my Bosom bare, oppose
the worst that Lust and Rage can offer to her Chastity. Oh, thou bright Mirror
of Celestial goodness, thou Pattern in perfection of blessed Women, think not I
ever will leave thee till I'm Dead, no, we'll both die ever Villainy shall
Prosper; then when the Beams of Immortality have ra^ified this Clod we wear
below, The glorious Stars of Piety and Love,
Shall we mount upwards, and be fixed Above.



Madam, you see the Cardinal's Old and Obstinate, I hope you will consider
better.


It is, it is resolved, I'll do it with a Smile, and calm as Infants in a
Lethargy -- and so prevent the Death of that good Man -- that honest Bishop,
for he's one I'm sure. -- I have considered, Sir,


Now hold my Temper -- well, Madam, what's the result?


Why, Sir, Extremity conquers all Resolves -- my Husband's Death and my own
Misery, are things of Weight -- pray take aside the Cardinal, and mould him but
to give me Absolution, only to satisfy a scrupulous Conscience, and then I'll
give an Answer satisfactory.


Tho that dire Answer gives me Life or Death -- my fatal Curiosity must hear
it. -- A word, my Lord


Now aid me, Love -- ye Powers that value Honour, strengthen my Heart and Hand.



Away -- hold, noblest Daughter da^h the Poison down, famish Despair, still let
us trust to Providence.


Hah -- the Poison -- Almighty Powers, what had I like to have done! Oh, thou
sweet Angel.


Stand off, blackest Devil.


Off my Disguise -- Oh, let thy sight be free, whilst to thy panting Heart, I
give thy Husband -- thy Love, thy Mataloni.


Mataloni, Is't possible! Oh, thou Extreme of Joy!


My Wife, my Soul, my dearest Belleraiza -- forgive my late Curiosity, which
but for this good Lord's preventing it, had damned me past Redemption -- Oh,
thou best of Women.


This is the exactest work of Providence.
The sacred Grace was here even to a Miracle.

How I've adventured, and what Dangers passed, I'll tell at better leisure, let
it suffice now -- this Ring gives means for your delivery, which we'll this
Instant put in Execution.


New Joy so crowds my Heart, I cannot bear it.


Hark'e, some body's coming sure.


'Tis so; here's the Secretary -- hah, and that Villain Jesuit that broac'd the
late Conspiracy -- stand still, my Love, I'll get but the Wind of 'em -- and
then we are safe enough.


Look'e, they're together still -- I think the Devil's in these Cardinals --
when once they get a Woman into their Clutches, they'll never let her go.


Why, Sir, I hope you don't doubt but we can distinguish Blessings Sir, of
which a Woman is not I think, the meanest, when she is Beautiful and Kind which
this must be through mere necessity, she knows she's in the Trap.


And so are you -- good Pole-cat, and your Fellow Vermin there.


Horror -- who is't I see -- the Duke of Mataloni.


The Devil.


Stir not a Foot, Villains -- for if you do, your Souls follow the Motion; and
tho your Crimes deserve immediate Hell, yet from the noble hand of Mataloni --
thus grovelling down, your baseness keeps ye safe. -- Come my fair Love, and my
most honoured Father, this is our happy Moment, let's pursue it. On my Disguise
once more, and in my Chamber I've one for thee, my Blessing; then through the
Guards we'll haste to the Vice-Roy's Castle, and leave those locked up close to
plot new Mischief.


Heaven's Care, admired Mataloni -- go lead on.


Thus does just Heaven atone for cares of Life,
With the best Husband,

And most Charming Wife.


We have made a rare hand on it; a Plague on your Mouse-trap, you ominous
Vermin, let's see now if you can Conjure us out here: let's hear your
Sophistry; break open the Lock there, with a Pox t'e.


I might as well Curse your dull Pate, Sir Scribler, to let a slight Disguise
out-Wit ye thus -- how came he into Trust?


Why the Devil owed me a spite; I brought him to the General first, 'tis true,
mistaking him for a Banditto -- and finding him even bloated with a Discovery;
-- but what's that to the present purpose? What business had you there with the
Duchess? 'Twas to know that, drew me hither after ye, I had been safe else.


I had particular Order, I was to Pump her.


Were ye so, Timothy Transub -- were ye so indeed; and for which pumping
Design, there's a good Thump for ye Rascal: d'sheart, another Interloper in my
Business, come on Rogue, are ye good at Procuring, as soon as ever ye have got
into the Bobtail'd Mode, a swelled Nose and a black Eye, are proper for ye;
I'll make ye look a right Ba^d presently.


This Purse shall do me Justice instantly -- I'll be revenged, nay, tho I loose
the Money, the Spirit moves now, and thou shalt feel my Anger.


Heated with Wine, and fit now for the purpose; Where is this Charming
Duchess, whose bright Beauty ever since I saw her, has inflamed my Heart; my
Heart, that has possession of all Pleasures that Greatness brings in its full
range of Power, shall Sate its Wishes with one Bliss beyond it, the best and
dearest, a fair Ladies Love, then I may boast, I have been truly Happy. -- The
Cardinal is gone hence, but where's the Lady; and where my Creatures, Rock and
Genovino.


Ah, he's Flustered, I see -- we shall have a rare time on it -- would I were
any where, but where I am, tho 'twere in an Oven that had just been heated, I
could not be in a greater Sweat I'm sure.


Hah, are not these they -- or do my Eyes deceive me? Is not that Rock?


The Ghost of Rock, and please ye, but not the real Substance, that was
frighted away with an Apparition of the Duke of Mataloni, that was here just
now.


How he tortures me -- what, Mataloni, Dog-bolt.


Why Sir, in short then, since it must out, the Banditto Captain that you have
Entertained and Trusted -- was that Devil, Duke of Mataloni in Disguise.


Hell blast thy Tongue, and where, where's the Lady, Rascal?


Gone, gone, Sir, gone -- he threatened to Murder us if we cried out or stirred,
and then took her away, and Locked us in -- and by virtue of the Ring you gave
him -- they're past the Guards by this time.


How my Rage Chokes me -- I could tear my self, dash my besotted head, and with
these hands pull from their Socke^s these dull useless Lights -- that could not
guide my sense in such an Exigent -- Sense, Death and Hell, I had no Sense --
no Soul; for had I either, or my Sight, or Feeling -- I must know what my
Nature so Abhorred -- through the mere force of strong Antipathy. Hah, but now
I think on it Dog, 'twas your Officious Villainy first brought him to me -- how
came it? Answer that Slave.


Alack, by chance, my Lord -- mere chance; he said, he had great Business with
ye.


Ah, Mr Secretary, no more Deceits, respect your Conscience, good Mr.
Secretary.


What say thou, art thou privy to any thing? Does he play Fals^ with me?


Not I, my Lord, upon my Soul. What does that Rascal mean?


My Lord, though I see his Conscience is quite ^ear'd, yet I must ease my own
-- the Man is Guilty -- Accomplice with Carraffa and their Faction -- and
bribed to assist the Dutchess's Escape.


Oh, monstrous Hell-hound.


Here's a damned Rogue, for ye, here's a Priest for the Devil -- I hope your
Excellency won't believe him -- for may I be Parboil'd, or Roasted upon a
Grid^Iron my Lord, if ever I saw Carraffa.


Oh, vile, vile Sinner, -- dare thou look in my Face and say this?


Look in thy Face -- why thou confounded Villain -- I confess, thy Impudence
does dazzle me -- but I beseech ye, my Lord don't believe him.


Not believe me, why, my Lord, he owned it a little before you came, upon
which, my Choler being raised, we had a Bustle and some Blows, which is the
occasion of this my disorder both of Head and Habit: -- But for a more
convincing Proof, search him, my Lord, and without doubt, you may find
Carraffa's Purse, in which the Golden Bribe is now about him.


Search me, Satan -- send all thy Imps to do it, I fear 'em not -- but come,
I'll do it my self -- I'll make a plain Discovery, my Lord, Empty my self before
ye -- Oh, Murder, Treason.


The very Purse, by Jove -- and with Carraffa's Cipher on it; Oh, damned, damned
Traitor.


You have made a very plain Discovery, in Troth, Mr. Secretary.


I will be so revenged. -- Here Father.


I am Bewitched -- I'm not able to speak -- Oh, Dog, Dog, Dog.


This Key unlocks all the Doors -- where are my Guards there.


I beseech your Lordship, hear me but a word.


Away Contagion -- Seize that Traitor there, Whip him round the Market-place,
then Hang him in Chains, for Crows and Daws to feed on.


I think now, Friend, I am better than my Word -- I only promised ye a
Whipping, you know -- and now have added something more.


Oh, that my hands were at Liberty, Devil.


Alack, is he the occasion of thy Sentence? have Patience a little, and my
tender Conscience shall help thee to a Revenge -- My Lord, be pleased to read
that Paper.


What's here! a List of the Conspirators in the Powder-Plot, and Genovivino's
hand amongst the foremost -- 'Tis so, I know his Character, and this the Fellow
that the Cardinal spoke of, who made the first Discovery -- Guards, take that
Jesuit too, and use him like the other --


Oh, Devil, hast thou deserted me at last?


So, so come along Priest; -- we shall see now how that sleek Back of yours can
bear the Lash -- and your Neck become a Halter -- and now you may give your
self to the Devil too, if you please.


Well, the gaping Rascals shall not hear me confess any thing; however, I'll be
true to our Order -- who I know, will all vouch my Innocence, pray my Soul out
of Purgatory, and make me a Saint for ^ver into the bargain.


These were both Rogues, and have deserved their Punishment. But now, Sir, to
some Business of more Weight; the Vice-Roy and Great Colateral Council -- have
caused the Art^cles to be Engraved like those of Old of Charles the Fifth and
Ferdinand, all that your Heart can wish* to free the People -- is there
Inscribed with care and diligence. A Marble Monument is Erected likewise, where
in large Golden Letters is Decyphered the Enfranchisement of Naples from all
Gabells -- by Great Massaniello. -- You are desired therefore to meet in the
Cathedral Church to Morrow, where after high Mass and Celestial Music, the
Deed's to be on both sides Sealed and Ratifi^d.


I'll hear no more of trifling Business now, my Head contains a Tempest, my
Brain burns fiercer than AEtna or Vesuvius's Mounts -- I'm mad with Rage, and
therefore let all Nature, like me, be in Confusion; he that speaks of Order and
discretion in Affairs, is my Foe; my hour, shall be Mankind's, and in that
moment when I Wisely act, let them be struck with endless Lethargy: -- am I not
here Supreme? I am; and yet my Soul Wish^s to Sway the rest -- and that the
Globe obeyed my Will -- I would confine the Winds -- stop the due course of
Seas, and make the Sun influence the World by my peculiar Order; but since that
cannot be, let this suffice -- That with a Nod, vast Legions I Command,
And from Tyrannic Yokes have freed the Groaning Land.



My Lord, You must not mind what he says now.


He talks none of the Wisest now, 'tis true, but for all that, I'll wage a fat
Bullock against one of thy Sacks of Meal, Neighbour, that he goes to Church as
soberly to Morrow as the Cardinal himself.


Oh, no doubt on it, no doubt on it.


Where's Valasco? I warrant now his Master's gone to be Hanged, that poor
Rascal will be out at Elbows again.


Ay and out at heels too, if thou out of thy Noble Compassion dost not help to
mend him, Cobbler.


Well, Friends, you'll put the General in mind then, you know 'tis a Business
of Concern.


We will, we will, my Lord.


He has sworn to lay down Arms, and yet I doubt him, for Power, like n^w Wine,
in so young a Head, may well intoxicate and turn the Brain -- yet not to do it,
ushers his certain Ruin; for let Rebellion revel for a while, and by the
Almighty's Suffrage -- plag^e a Kingdom, there will be yet an hour marked out
for Vengeance; this then I Prophecy for Massaniello; Though high on Fortune's
Wheel he's seated now,
A time soon comes, when he must fall as low.



THe First and Second Collections of Mr. D'urfey's Comical Songs: Printed for
Henry Playford, at his Shop in the Temple-Change, Fleet-street, and sold at
most Musick-Shops in Town.

AS some stale Luckless Mis^ress of the Town,
With former Lovers out of Favour grown;
Tries Art in vain new Appetite to raise,
And bring into fresh Play her slighted Face:
In such forlorn condition now are Plays.
The Muses Grace no longer can persuade,
We find their Beauty, or your Taste decayed.
The Season too our Interest does oppose,
Warm Weather and May-Fair are Martial Foes;
For whilst the Great at the Park in Coaches Loll,
And Dames of humbler Fortunes foot the Mall,
And Cities divert themselves at Miller's Droll.
We strut alas, who cease no Pains nor Care,
To empty Boxes, and to Benches bare:
Hear what a Dismal sound from Hollow Walls,
Fills our sad Ears when a fierce Hero bawls.
Thus when you're absent our own Knells we Toll,
And loss of you is our departed Soul:
Hard Fate too, that the Sun that brings us Flowers,
And cheers the Nation round with Genial Powers,
Should to all Harvests be a friend but ours.
Yet thus it is, when as their Zeal's inclined
To praise his Beams, we pray for Rain and Wind:
In Rain to Marrobone no Bowler goes,
And Wind the Ladies from the Circle blows:
But when the Sun shines cle^r, then all are fled,
Whilst we like Cattle in a Parch'd-up Mead,
Condemned to one poor Barren spot of Ground,
Run to next Covert, where cool Draughts are found;
There chew the Cud our Audience turned away,
And drink to better Fortune the next day.
This your hard usage oft has forced us to;
You will not sure such Rigour always show;
Our Second Part needs must indulge your Taste,
'Tis the Rebels Fall, much shorter too than the Last.
Let a regard to both, your Humour sway,
Let some be for the Park, some for the Play.
As for you Bowling Sparks can you find here
No other sport as good this time ^'th' Year,
Is Side-Box quite forgot, and the Masked Dear?
Nay then we must despair we shall prevail,
All Hopes are gone, when Wit and Wom^n fail*


Suitors, Musicians, Masquers, Singers, Dancers, and Attendants.

The Scene Naples, the Time Four Days.


STILL does Heaven's Anger reign; still is poor Naples crushed by the weight of
proud Rebellious Power: Nature, and the whole Face of Things are altered, and
seem to yield the sway to Mad Confusion: Yet in the Hurry of our strange
Misfortunes, methinks I feel a spark of Joy, my Lord,


I humbly thank your Highness; and declare amongst the Plunder of the Harassed
Nobles, though I have felt the worst Barbarity, Rebels could act, or Malice make
inveterate; Yet my relieving my dear Belleraiza, though my ^nnatural Brother lost
his Life for it, has clearly wiped off Fortune's Injuries, and made me once more
happy.


And to Parallel your Joy, my Lord, let me exert my own: I have a Daughter dear
to me as Health, or the Life-blood that warms my Aged Heart; Trained up in good
by an Indulgent Mother, and ever since Kind, Virtuous and Obedient; she by your
timely notice Escaped from Outrage, and e're the Horror of my Houses Burning,
was saved with me to bless you for the Deed.


Almighty Powers, what horrid sounds are these! Plunder and Burnings are the
dismal Knels that Toll perpetually! Black Horror, Revels, and Ruin Triumphs in
the Streets of Naples; whilst in the Viceroy's watery downcast Eyes, we read
the baleful Tidings of Distress: But yet, my Lord, we must not drink Despair;
that Draught let me throw by, and dash the Goblet, urged by the Fiends to
hinder future Blessings.


No, my Good Lord, my Courage is my Antidote against Despair, and keeps the
Poison from me; yet to a Soul less great than mine to see, the strange Revolves
of Fate, the Court's Dishonour, the Ruin of our best Nobility, the danger of
our Starving; all Provisions on pain of Death, being hindered to come near us;
and this comman^ed by a Beggar's Brat; A base Plebeian moulded from a Dunghill!
This to a Heart less brave, my Lord, might shock and force the Soul from her
Religious Ward, to prompt a desperate Action.


Therefore, Faith, and it's Twin-sister, Hope, must rule your Reason.


Therefore it does so; but my Wife, I fear, has other Sentiments; her noble
Spirit, bred from the Princely Race of the Medinae, to be blocked up, and as it
were Imprisoned by the Rabble, breeds a ferment in her Breast, not easy to be
quel^d.


She is brave and Royal -- and disdains to sue,
A Soul Divine, and only worthy you. --

Though her Confinement must be Irksome to her, being blocked up at Land -- yet
the Sea is open; which poor Advantage though of slight regard is, as I
understand, now her best Comfort; for every Evening in her Rich Felluca,
accompanied by my Daughter, who to please her, sings to her Lute, and Charms
the Neighbouring Echoes, between the Castle-Port, and the Wide Ocean, she Rows
to take the Air.


So please your Excellence, the Vice-Queen in hast desires to have Audience.


Tell her she's Welcome. -- More ill News, I fear, has reached her knowledge,
for her Cloudy Brow seems to foretell a Storm. Now Madam -- What's the Matter?


Matter of Death, -- Nay, more, Damnation, were it in my power: Oh that as my
just Anger makes my Breath vent out these loud Complaints, it had the power to
blast this Monster with Eternal Plagues, -- this Screaking Mandrake, this vile
Earth-born Clod, that dares Profanely thus send Saucy Missives to blast the
Eyes, and grieve the Hearts of Princes.


From Massainello?


He! -- the ill-bred Rebel! Writes in a Stile as if he were my Equal, Advice to
me -- that I should speak to you, to you my Lord, as you expect his Favour, --
his Favour, Oh Gygantick Impudence! would make Hell blush, and every Fiend wear
Crimson* To send him back the Duchess Mataloni!


Audacious Slave!


His Ruffian Brother too would see my Niece, -- my dear Fellicia here too as a
Suitor: Oh how a Noble and August Disdain warms every Sinew! -- How the Active
Blood Burns in my Veins, and makes my Heart all flame,
So eager am I to revenge this shame.



Have Patience, Gracious Madam.


'Tis impossible: Such Injuries are past all Moderating: He says, the Duke
there basely stole his Wife, whom he designed to keep there as a Hostage, till
the Articles were Sealed; and if Submission does not atone, and is not made on
the Instant, she too sent back together with my Niece. He ends his Scrowl with
a vainglorious Rant, that he'll send Power to ^etch her back by force; and beat
the Castle-walls about our Ears.


Oh that my Sorrows had but force enough to lay me in my Grave, that I might
rest!


I hope my Love does wish too, I should be with her there.


Or that you and I were Villagers, born in some far remote and peaceful Land,
that War's Confusion never did understand; where we instead of Greatness had
been blessed, with darling Comforts from our daily Labour; where Love still
exercised his Charming Power, and sweet Contentment made us wish no m^re; Where
Anxious Cares of State could never return,
But happy Joys succeed each Night and Morn.



But how shall poor Fellicia hope for Comfort, if from her Father she is forced
away? Oh let me stand the worst of Fortune's Malice, rather than from my Life's
Original, be parted till I'm dead: Besides, to toll me of a Ru^fian's Love, --
tortures


Thou Living Mirror of thy Mother's Sweetness^ in whom I now behold by kind
reflection, the former Joy that used to warm my Heart, take this Assurance from
a tender Father, -- never to separate thy Duty from me, nor yield thee up for
fear of any Torture that Cruelty can threaten.


And what say you, my Lord?


When I consent to send the Panting Heart from out my Bosom, I mean its dearest
Guest, my Belleraiza, -- a Hostage to Rebellious Insolence; may the cursed
Rabble, like a Flock of Vultures, tear me to pieces as a common Prey.


Nor will I ever advise it, -- Villainy is still most slily couched with a
pretence most specious: The Relapse of this uncurbed Plebeian -- wounds my
Breast, with such a hated sense of his Impiety, that I abhor all Motions he can
make, therefore let's trust in Heaven and our Arms.


Your Eminence has spoke my Heart; let's fortify, and to his Face send back
his Insolent Message, with a resolved denial; then rely on Heaven's relief, or
bravely sighting die.


Die! -- 'tis a Pleasure to my Soul to think on it, so we may die revenged -- or
at least frustrate, the barbarous Plots of base Plebeian Mischief.


'Tis what shall Crown our Souls with Endless Bliss for a Pain Momentary.


Which Infants hardly shrink at.


Learn of me ye withering Blossoms of distressed Nobility, how to defy the
Ills of Destiny, and worst of Fortune's, Malice. Steel your Hearts with Honour
first; then with Generous Resolution; and let Aurelia nobly guide your Steps
into the Temple of Perpetual Glory, by a brave Deed irksome to our soft
Natures: Yet Portia and Great Sophonisba were our famed Examples, and when
Lawless Power, and Savage fury threatens with Captivity, - when that hour
comes, mark me ye Twinns of Virtue when you behold my Conquered Spirits faint,
with a bright Dagger drenched in my warm Gore, or my Eyes languish with some
Poisonous Draught, which my own hand has nobly ministered. -- Then choose your
fate equal in each degree,
Scorn poor Rebellious Rage, and die like me.



Thus when a noble Heart inspired with Honour is filled with the sharp sense of
smarting Wrongs -- thus still it vents its Sorrow, -- I must follow her. And
though I see Grief's Fever rages high, perhaps with care, good Reasons may abate
it.


Stay, good my Lord, a moment, for I think I see the Noble Bissignano coming.


'Tis he, my Lord, and in his Cheerful Countenance, I hope I read good News.


Pray Heaven it prove so.


Health to the Viceroy -- and to all the rest, my Gracious Lord, and you my
Noble Kinsmen.


My good Lord, as well as Wretches who are hourly frighted with Cannons
Battering, or Proscription's Terror, as well as those whom a close Siege has
rendered incapable of getting Necessaries, or as well as those by Hunger almost
pined or grip'd by pinching Sorrow, can bid you welcome, we return your
Courtesy. And now desire to know our several Dooms; You are Fate's Minister;
the Tongue of Destiny; -- What Order bring you now? what dreadful Thunder,
since his revolt of Sealing the Articles, and his damned Message to send back
the Duchess; must we leave our half-starv'd Bodies? Hah! what says
th'Leviathan? Who's to be swallowed next?


Himself, my Lord, into the deepest Pit of the Infernals, sooner than such
feared harm, should touch your Highness: No, no, my Lord, I bring ye better
News; the Wind is changed, and his Intoxicated Brain relieved by Rest, which
the full Bowls before distempered, he now resumes his Sense, and seems ashamed
of his late breach of Promise to the Cardinal.


Is't possible! can he relent!


He does wi^h great Concernment; owns too his late rude Message to the
Vice-Queen; and says, the Duke's Escape with his fair Lady was noble and
well-plotted.


This looks too sudden, I fear a Snake lurks underneath these Flowers; --
prepared to sting. -- But what concerning the Articles -- Does he intend --


There lies the best and chiefest of my Embassy, -- his Head grown sober now,
and the hot Fumes of Drinking being abated, with a Look that pictured Gravity
with Awker'd Grace: -- He bid me thus express him: Tell his Excellence, Don
Roderick Pons de Leon, Duke of Arcos, Viceroy of Naples under great King
Philip, that I the General of the Neapolitans -- Tomas -- but vulgarly called
Massainello, after my shame for late Miscarriages, which my Intemperance urged,
do beg his Pardon, -- and will, as I late gave my word, to morrow, meet him in
the Cathedral, there to Seal the Articles of Enfranchisement of the People from
Gabels, and all heavy Impositions pursuant to Great Charles the Emperor's
Charter; and that it may last in perpetual memory, a splendid Monument shall be
erected, with an Inscription writ in Golden Characters, This wondrous A^tion
famous to Posterity.


B^est Turn of Fortune! now the Air clears again, -- and the Sun begins to clear
our droop^ng Plants by Sorrow numbed and blasted. -- But will this Humour hold?


Most certainly, -- his Orders are given out -- Then you my Lord Father: And
though he knew your Eminence's Charity so great, you would Absolve him; yet his
fhame would hardly let him beg it.


This is wonderful! -- But owing all to my Good Lord Cardinal's management,
whose Sacred Wit, and Influencing Reasons, with a Seraphic power of Spiritual
Virtue, have charmed a human Soul into this Clod, and made him melt before the
Beams of Piety.


My Lords, my Heart is full of Joy to find kind Heaven at last has blessed my
happy Labour, -- with such fair hopes of a full Crop hereafter; -- and now I
hold it an especial action that th^ Vice-Queen be instantly informed of this
great Act of Providence; 'twill calm her. -- Hush, the rough Billows that now
wildly Roll,
And quell the storm that Rages in her Soul.



It shall be so, I'll instantly go to her, and then prepare for the Great Deed
to Morrow: -- And since the Change of Empire and of States are done by Heaven's
Immutable Decree, and human Power opposes it in vain; No more the Sacred doom
let us withstand;
Reason directs, the Powers above Command.



Who's there, La Poop? -- Where are ye?


A vot Service, Madam -- will you please to be dress?


No, no, wait a little longer -- this is but my first Pot of Chocolate, I have
drank but ^ix of my Ten Dishes yet.


Ah bless your Ladyship -- you have de ver little Stomach -- you soup, soup,
soup -- de pauvre quantity de Chocolate in de Morning, but you Eat noting all
de day long, besides dat is considerable. Ma foy you will never put your shape
in de fashion, if you piddle, piddle -- at dis rate.


Shape! -- Odsfish, I Cram my self so every day, that I'm ready to break my
Stays -- I can't tell -- what thou would have me do more to make my shape
fashionable.


Ah Madam, de down-right Trute of de ting is you must wear no Stay at all: --
'Tis below de Woman's of Qualitee, -- I mean dat is marry -- to pinsh -- de Hip
or de Belly. -- See dat be no marry, expect de Husband must pinsh a little, --
and reason good. -- But de Wife must let all ting be looses, -- and show full,
plump, -- wid shild, or widout shild, dat is all one, plump, plump, 'tis de ver
graceful fashion mafoy.


Plump, -- nay, if I am taken for one of the Lean ones, the Looker on sees
double, and the Devil made the Spectacles; I'm sure I have not felt any Ribs I
have this Ten years: And I weigh,


Awe dat is noting -- dere is one Relation of mine in France, dat is call
Madamoselle La Poop, dat weigh tree hundred Stone: But see Madam here come de
Lady your Sister, -- and your new Gentleman Usher wid her, who come to Comb
your Head; I hear he is born in England -- but is bred in France, -- or else he
be no fit for your Service, Mafoy.


Oh Madam Ursula -- how fares thy Ladiship's Body? Come Prithee sit thee down,
-- and take a dish of Chocolate, whilst I have my Head ordered, by my new
Fellow here: the great Ladies I hear use Men for their Morning Service; and now
our Condition is altered, we must follow the Mode: What we must do great things
now.


'Tis a good handsome Black Fellow


Which is more than she can say for her self to my knowledge; I found that out
by her whispering me just now.


Well Friend, and Prithee what is thy Name, I have, I think, never asked thee
that yet, did I?


Humh -- not above forty times, Madam; but 'tis natural for Great ^adies to
forget.


Ay, 'tis so. --


What Essence will your Ladyship use to day, Iessamine, Tubarose, or Amber?


The dearest, the dearest always: -- But as I was saying, Humh -- Prithee what
was't, I asked thee just now: Ha?


Oh very well, Madam, that looks mighty great indeed; why you asked me my Name,
and you must know, Madam, that in England I was Christened, Dick Pimpwell, --
but am Dignified since I came hither with the Title of Seignior Ricardo. I'm of
a Family, Madam, that carried no ordinary Reputation there, if you ever knew
any thing of the English Court, you must have heard of the Pimpwells I'm sure.


Yes, yes, we hear frequently both of your Courtiers and Citizens too, and
sometimes have great diversion with 'em.


In History, I suppose Madam.


No, but in Ballads, -- and I think that's the better way by much.


'Gad she's in the right, for the Histories of our former Kings and Nobles are
better done in Ballads, than in any Chronicle I ever saw yet there.


Well, and -- dost hear me, -- What humour are your young Town-fellows of, how
do they wear the day out to divert themselves?


Why in the Morning they cherish two of their Senses, Madam, Seeing and
Smelling: Seeing by the Court they make to a great Looking-Glass; Smelling by
Covering themselves from Head to Foot with sweet Powder; and then at Night they
Indulge the other three, -- Hearing with the Noise of Fiddles; and Tasting and
Feeling with a Whore and a Bottle.


A good merry sort of a Scoundrel, this -- I warrant this Fellow has been a
Player there, or some such thing: -- Well, but I hear they have the name of
Rakehells amongst 'em, and are so horribly given to scandal, that they'll abuse
all Woman-kind, as well those they have to do with, as those they have not; and
rather then not have the pleasure of Tattling, by their Good will they'll say any
thing. --


Ah -- there I must beg your Pardon, Madam, I can name you one thing that by
their Good-will they never say.


What's that, Prithee?


Their -- Prayers, Madam.


No -- why I thought they were most horrible Sticklers for Religion.


Right, Madam, -- they are horrible ones indeed, and 'tis as natural to 'em as
to Slaves in the Mines to Dig their Ore; and like that too is generally
managed, -- for he that toils and labours most about it Ten to one knows the
least of the matter.


And, Ha, ha, ha, well -- as to Generation, and that sort of diversion, what
are -- they are very prone to Coupling, at what Age do they Marry?


Why the Males never by their Good-will, -- but as to the Females, by their
Good-will, as soon as they can speak.


Ha, ha, ha, ye Rascal, well, and as to your State-affairs, we hear there are
great feuds amongst ye as well as here; though the King has done great things for
'em, and they say -- is a very brave Man.


Ay, he is so, Madam, -- but you must know that we English have some Affinity
with the nature of some Dogs we have there, We never receive a good Bone but we
snap at our Benefactor's Fingers.


Ha, ha, why Sister -- this is an Arch Rogue, this Fellow has more about him
than we see.


Ah, a great deal more, I assure ye, Madam, -- your Ladyship shall find I have
notable Parts upon occasion.


Ha, ha, ha, why Sirrah, you're an Arch Rogue indeed, as she says La Poop, told
me thou hast been in France too: What did learn there, Prithee, ha?


Awe, Madam, there I learnt the most material things in the whole World, which
are, to tie a Muff on with an Air, and to make a huge Back-Perruke for a great
Lord, that shall reach down to his Hams: But above all to use like a Gentleman
the Comb and the Puff, in the Lady's Service; as thus, now Madam thus, thus


Odsfish it has a notable scent with it indeed.


And will it take away Freckles, say thou? Well, I'm resolved to try the
Experiment then to Morrow. -- I'll be Puffed all over, for I've a world of 'em
about me.


Were thou ever in Holland?


Yes, Madam, just long enough to spoil my Stomach.


Why don't they dress Meat well?


Yes, if you can allow the General Sauce, for there is but one sort there.


And what's that, Prithee?


Butter, Butter, Madam, -- if you have a cold Jowle of Salmon, and not a Dish
of Melted Butter with it, you affront the Constitution of the Country.


But of what Humours are they, Prithee?


Why they are greater Lovers of good Bargains than good Breeding; they sight
well when there's occasion; and drink largely whether there is or no: -- In
fine, they are the best Skeyters in a great Frost, but the worst Dancing
Masters in Christendom.


Come, Hey where's my Sister Blowze? Oh are ye here! My Brother the General
wants ye to give Orders for the Ceremony to Morrow at the Signing the Articles:
Your Massainello has carried it now I'faith; he's at the Top, and we will keep him
there in spite of his Scruples of Conscience; he would have you likewise invite
the Vice-Queen and her Ladies to a Musick-feast. A Ball I think they call it.
-- 'Tis the Mode amongst Great People. -- Come, come away, and you shall know
more.


Odsfish, Brother -- but my Hair is not done up, you see, nor my Face quite
Patched, is it?


No, Madam, not half: Besides, -- here's two delicate ones, -- that will take a
great deal of time to place wel^; I brought 'em from France, and call 'em Venus
and Adonis: -- The one is for the upper Lip, and the other for the under, and the
witty fancy to have 'em there is -- that they may be perpetually kissing one
another.


Well, well, ye witty Rogue, let 'em kiss one another in the next Room then --
for I must go to my Husband Massainello. -- But do ye hear, Sirrah, I'll prefer
ye. -- Stick to me close; do ye hear?


Zooks, Madam, but here's my Cupid, this must sit Enthroned upon your
Ladiship's Nose, or I'm undone.


Ha, ha, ha, -- Well, Odsfish I like this Fellow strangely, Well Sirrah, --
sti^k close to me, and I'll do your business; do ye hear, -- Hah! times are not
as they have been: What, we must do Great Things now!


In this New Lottery I can't miss a Prize,
When Nobles fall, Valet de Chambers rise. --

WHat? they are coming then.


Yes, and in Pomp, I hear; the Dunghill-Upstart stress'd in Glittering Tissue
-- with his Sword drawn comes foremost of the Band, and proudly at the Head of
fifty Thousand, even Justles with the Viceroy.


The Crawling Snake -- warmed by hot Popular Vapours of Applause, now shows his
Sting, and would be thought a Dragon: Oh why permits the avenging power his
Thunder, to cleave the Oaks, and shatter Marble Rocks, yet leaves this Prodigy
to walk abroad safe and unblasted by Ethereal fire?


Have patience, Madam, and let us mark the Consequence; 'tis bruited he will
lay down all Command, and when the Articles are Signed to the People, return to
his base Function.


He'll be Damned first -- there are too many Woolvish Blood-hounds near him, to
urge on mischief, though he had resolved against it -- to let him keep his
Promise.


'Tis most true, for added to his Grovelling sense of Honour he has a Humour
various as the Winds, which now visited with the Gust of Greatness, blows his
hot Brain to such a Blazing flame, his Soul cannot resist the Rash Emotions,
nor do I like this his pretended Coolness, relating to my Escape, but must
believe, were the ^oor Bird once more within his Cage, her warbling Moans wo^
hardly purchase freedom.


Ah wer^ I so confined, -- my Soul's so weak -- I fear 'twould poorly wait up^n
my Body. -- Yet were my Fate so cruel to submit me to hazard Bondage from this
Hellish Crew, upon the first approach of that dishonour to quell my fears, and
trembling timorous nature: I hope brave Aunt your Hand would set me free,
And give my Fame by Death Eternity.



My dear Fellicia, my Soul should in^luence thine, and make thee Valiant: Oh
how I scorn our present vile Condition, nor could my swelling heart contain it
self at the receiving late a Sawey Message under the Glozing umbrage of
Civility -- from that ^he-Porpess the Fish-wife Blowzabella, -- who by the
Gentleman forsoo^h of he^ Chamber, sent to Invite me to a Ball to Night; Was
ever ^nsolence like it! Shall Medina's Noble Daughter and Wife to mi^h^y
Rod^rick. Taint her self, by breathing Air with the vile Jakes of N^ples! Oh
how a just disdain in^am'd my Bosom!


Your Excellence must needs ^ghly res^nt it; and yet the Occasions of the
present times, the Peace of N^ples ^ett^ing in thi^ Juncture, and Mass^inello
by a slight to his Wife, being pi^u'd migh^ have the humour to revolt, -- urged
your great heart, I hear, to c^rb its motions, and condescend to grant it.


Y'have judged me right, my Lord, I did consent, but with a just Contempt you
may imagine.


By this Music the Choir is coming, and the Viceroy near, who comes through
the Inner part of the Cathedral -- where the Monument's Erected. -- Here your
Excellence may place your self and view the Ceremony.


Bless my Eye, the Pageant appears yonder.


What can the Tinsel Poppet make its Honour too, this is wonderful! -- Again! --
nay then I must Mimic it.


But see, Madam, yonder comes the Fire-drake.


Great Saint the Guardian of us all below,
To whom thy Votaries thus humbly bow,
Smile on thy Sons, that with Devotion Pray,
And bless the mighty Deeds are done to day.

GLory thou Mortal Paradise,
Best Joy of Noble Souls,
That all Delights below the Skies,
Surpasses and Controls.
In Martial Sounds be now Expressed,
And let the Spacious Globe be blessed.
As now our happy Nation,
Sweet Peace her Beauteous Face appears,
Now show your Power ye Tuneful Spheres;
Let Angels Sing and Charm all Ears:
For Wondrous is the Occasion.
'Tis now, our Great Protector St. Gen^aro by my bold ^and has happy Naples
freed, -- and now, my Lord, the heavy Yoke laid by -- that on my Neck I for the
People wore: Thus low I bow to your Authority. -- And as plain Massainello, (a
poor Fisherman) yet in that poorness born to do great Actions, if I've the Law
offended, or your Excellence, I submit my Body to be broke o'th Wheel, or any
Torture that you please to order: Since I have ended well, this great Affair,
What else concerns my life's not worth my Care.



Sir, you have greatly done, -- I wish I could say well, -- yet in one kind I
must confess it is. Your life's secure too -- the King has not proscribed ye,
and I could wish some of these Nobles could as well acquit ye as I, that give
ye what I promised, Pardon.


I humbly thank your Exc^llence.


Come, we will go and see this Commick-Stuff, -- if for nothing else but to
divert the Spleen.


Nay, if 'tis possible to Laugh we s^all certainly have occasion.


Bless us, what a Head she has, and ho^ she jets about and smiles on the Prince
there?


Madam, will your Highness -- please to go; -- Madam, the Duchesses, I must
have your Company too, and pray don't be too cogitabund: I suppose, -- your
Gra^ is concerned a little about these Jewels of yours that you (...) me wear;
but come, get out of your dumps, -- Ods^sh when ^ou and I are better
acquainted, such Tri^es shall break no square^, -- I have enough besides.


Oh Madam! I assure ye, my Thoughts were ^therwise employed.


Humb -- what upon my Ball -- I warrant, -- why I'll promise ye, ye shall have
curious Sport, your Highne^s shall laugh 'till you burst your self.


Was there ever such a Monster?


Come, pray therefore follow me, I think they told me 'twas Manners to go
before her into my own House, -- humh, well, I see Breeding increases in me
wonderfully, and 'tis but reasonable: What, ^ must do great things now?


I am Schooled my Lord, -- but when I see that Beauty, that charming Consort of
the Man -- I hate, -- then -- I rev^ and wish him dead, nay, damned, -- so I
were, -- But no more, shes gon and now I'm cool again, -- And since I've given
my wo^d to treat 'em fairly, aid me Dissimulation -- Gr^at Ma^alon^ and my Lord
Caivano, to excuse what I have done in right of the People, against your States
and You, looks like Dissembling, -- and to beg pardon, Fear: Yet I am sorry,
sorry that you mistaking did such Wrongs, and that I e're had Cause ^o to
revenge 'em.


When of the Cause you are ^he only Judge, Sir, the rash Effects you cannot
wonder at.


Un-bridled Power seldom makes use of Reason, 'tis blind, and all its Actions
are Precipitate, and in such Cases when the Mischief^s done, 'tis little
Satisfaction to be Sorry.


Nay, since y' are so sullen Lords, I'll change the Notion, I'm sorry now that
I have used such Courtesy.


Wrongs have wide Mouths Sir.


Patience good my Lord.


In this present Juncture you know not what you do.


I beg your Pardon, -- and will withdraw for fear of farther Arguments, but
though I'm now crushed by that Lernean Hidra, an Hour may come, -- when his
Hearts-blood shall pay for it.


I'm gon my Lord, Heaven prosper your Intentions.


Furies and Fire, were not those two the Rankest of all the Peoples Enemies, --
Farmers of the Gabells, bloated and gorged with their abhorred Oppressions till I
rose up to quell it; Death, not burn 'em, Gigantic, -- Impudence, and how
dares Mataloni, that lives but by my Leave?


Pray Calm your Passion; 'tis Infirmity and want of Temper in the Choleric
Duke that thus misguides his Reason: And now Son, since your Designs have
gained a happy Period, I do conjure you by my sacred Office, to keep your
Promise and lay down your Arms, so shall you gain a deathless Reputation, and
future Saints shall Consecrate your Story.


Hah, what says the canting Cardinal? Lets hear a little.


You shall have such Provision in retirement as your own Heart can wish --


I expect none, but am resolved, thou best of all the Priesthood, to follow thy
Direction and Disband, -- the Fortune I desire, is only this, my ^ate
Fish-tackling -- Rod and Hook and Line, in lieu of which I here give up my
Sword.


O Lord, O Lord, we are utterly un-done if this hold.


Sure he's distracted! Why Brother de'e know what you say?


Most certainly, and what I mean too Brother.


Remove, cast the Mist from thy dull Eyes, Friend, once see clearly.


Nay, if y' are thereabouts -- I've a Trick left to fetch him about yet: A
Bottle Cosmo, a Bottle with something I'll i^use in it will do his Business I'm
sure; come, we'el prepare for it instantly, -- and snap him as he comes out.


That dreadful Sword inured to Blood and Slaughter, that when I shook it made
all Naples quake, Naples and her six hundred Thousand Souls shake like an O^er,
-- rest in Peace for ever; and with my Power Farewell too these Trappings: Off
ye vain Trifles, -- off ye gaudy


Nay, now your Zeal's too Eager, let me entreat your Patience at this time.


'Tis decent, there are many Eyes upon ye that may mistake this forward Zeal
for Frenzy.


I'm obedient, yet I would do something to show I bid my Farewell to Dignity
freely and with some warmth, -- To morrow Noon shall see it all performed.


My Blessing on thee.


My perpetual Favour.


Thus shall my Fame resound in future Story.
And Bab^s un-born sing Massainello's Glory.

Ricardo.


Madam.


Did you bid the Wench take Care that she provided Sugar and Cinnamon enough for
the Pancakes -- and that she should fry 'em in Oil instead of Butter?


Yes Madam, and that it should be the Sugar of Eight-pence the Pound, that your
Ladyship reserves for high Holy-days, and the best Company.


'Tis well Ricky, 'tis very well done: Mind your Business de'e hear and stick
close to me, and I'll speak to my Husband to get ye the Government you spoke to
me about, -- Well, and did you order the Leg of Pork and Potato's to be sent
her Highnesses Gentlemen, for a second Course?


Yes Madam, and that the Ten-shilling Beer should be Taped for 'em and given
about in Sack-glasses, that it might look the Genteeler.


That's well again, mighty well in truth Ricky: -- And are the Morris,
Ropedancers and Tumblers all ready for the Ball, ha!


All, all, Madam, the Fiddlers too, and the the other Fellow says, he can Bate his
Bulls and Bears, and if you please the Tiger at a Minute's warning.


Can he? Well, Odsfish I love that Sport at my Heart: Besides 'twill draw all
the Great States-Men here, -- they'll neglect the carrying on their great Cause
to Day, to see that I'm sure, -- but harken, a word in thy Ear.


Was there ever such a Supper! The very sight of that huge Conger-Eel there
makes me sick.


'Tis Alamode de Fish-wife, Madam, -- Ha, ha, ha, your Highness sees she treats
in her own fashion.


The Musical Entertainment, I warrant will be a Curiosity.


Methinks her Gentleman Usher there, who is so familiar with her, should lead
her up a Dance.


Now will I whisper with this young Fellow to try if I can make the Prince
Jealous, -- for I'm told, nothing increases Love like Jealousy. -- Well Ricky,
and as to this Government thou were speaking of, -- must I speak for thee, hast
a mind to be a Don, Ricky?


Yes, indeed Madam, to speak the Truth, I've had a huge mind to be a Don -- a
great while.


Well, say no more, thou shalt be a Don -- the General shall do it out of hand:
-- What, there must be a Patent for it I suppose, and thou know his way of
doing that.


Yes, Madam, a Tweak by the Ear, it seems, is his Order of Counsel, and a Kick
of the Breech, his way of passing a Patent.


Right, thou hast it, -- therefore stick close to me, do ye hear, and it shall
be done out of hand, -- I'll have thee kicked on the first opportunity.


Ah thank your good Ladyship. -- A Don, Oh how I'll strutt!


My Hostess's mannerly way of leaving the Company all this while, is somewhat
Novel too, Madam.


She designs to treat us with Variety; Oh now we shall have her again.


So -- does your Highness eat; Odsfish you have a very Piddling Stomach -- why
that Codshead will be cold there, -- Ah you'd have done b^tter by half, Madam,
if you had taken a Whett as I did before hand.


A Whett, what's that I beseech ye?


Why a good Brimmer of sharpening Liquor to prepare your Stomach, -- and by your
Eating so little I find yours to be very cold, -- Will your Highness accept of
a Beer-glass of Nan^s?


Nants, -- well I am horrible unskilled in this new Dialect of yours, and so
ignorant that I must desire to know what that is too.


Odsfish -- not know what Nants is -- a Lady of your Breeding, and ignorant of
heavenly Brandy! Odsfish then Miracles are not ceased.


Ah, this is not a Lady of your strain, Madam, this is the Vice-Queen.


Why if she were an Empress, my Lord, she might know and taste a Cup of good
Nants, I hope, and her Title shrink never a Jot the more in the wetting,
neither, -- But come let's turn the Discourse to hear the Music, and see the
Ball, your Highness shall see how you like our way. -- Come begin there.


WHilst wretched Fools sneak up and down,
Play hide and seek about the Town;
Depressed by Debts, and Fortunes frown,
By Duns too kept in awe:
Whenever my Occasions call,
And amongst my Cre-di-tors I fall,
Iv one fine Song that Pays 'em all;
Fa la, -- la.

Good morrow Sir, I'm glad to see
Your Humour is so brisk and free,
I hope the better 'tis for me.
If you your Purse will draw:
Y've been two Years at Bed and Board,
And I, Lord help me, took your Word,
But now must have what here is Scored,
For all your Fa, la la -- la.

My Purse, sweet Hostess, is but lank,
But I have something else in bank;
And you at home I'll kindly thank,
With charming sweet Sol fa.
We will, sit and Chant from Morn to Noon,
No Nightingal in May or June;
Did ever Sing so fine a Tune,
As fa, la, la, la, la, la, c.

You take me for an Idiot sure,
Will this fine Tune my debt secure;
Or pay my Baker or my Brewer,
Or keep me from the Law,
To buy your Shirts there's Money lent,
Besides in Meat and Drink more spent;
And can you think I pay my Rent,
With fa, la, la, la, la, la, c.

I'll teach thee such a pretty Song
Shall please both Rich, Poor, Old, and Young;
Get thee a Husband Stout and Strong,
Some Country Rich Iack-Daw;
Nay more I'll bring to quit my Scores,
A crew of Topping Sons of Whores;
Shall Drink all Night and Charm the Hours,
With fa, la, la, la, la, la, c.

Ye cunning Rogue this wheedling Talk,
You fancy will rub out my Chalk;
But I your sly design will balk,
When you to Iayl I draw;
Your boasted Song's a foolish thing,
For do but you the Money bring,
You'll find I can already sing,
Fa, la, la, la, la, la, c.

Well since Dame Fortune is my Foe,
And that I must to Prison go,
Let's have a Neat Frisk or so,
And then Rub on the Law.

Well since you're on a merry Pin,
And make so slight the Counter-Gin,
I'll do it, and let the Tune begin
With Fa, la, la, c.

Has not my Dance ill Humour charmed?


I must confess my Blood is warmed.
And heart I hope by love alarm'd.

To laugh, ha, ha, ha, ha.


You think you've caught me, now I smil^,


No that I'll do at Night dear child.


Well I'll the Bailiffs stop a while
To try your Fa la, c.

SWeep, sweep, swe^p,
My Lord and Madam sleep,
Whilst I in the Chimney creep,
And sweep, sweep, sweep.
He nimbly clumb up to the top,
Without a Ladder or a Rope,
And sweep, sweep, sweep,
Who calls the Chimney-sweep?

Heigh ho, Heigh ho, Heigh ho,
Ye bawling Bratt what's here to do?
With this your Sooty Devils trad^,
If with this squalling noise you make,
My Lord and Lady chance to wake,
I vow I^ll break your head.

Oh! Sicely, why so full of wrath?
You know I only mean,
To sweep the Chimney clean,
Lest Soot should fall and spoil the Broth.

You Youngsters have another way to deal,
Pretend to sweep, but come indeed to steal.

Nay now my Honours touched and soon,
I'll make you sing another Tune.

Come, Sirrah, come I've lately lost a spoon.


Can no one be the thief but I?
Ye've found me still an honest Boy;
You know I've kept your counsel too,
And never hinted farther,
What in the Kitchen Larder,
I once saw you and John the Coachman do?

Ye little Rogue, how did you dare,
To peep on such a grand affair?

I saw it and will tell it too,
The Garters you had on were blue;
I^ll publish every thing was done,
Because you tax me with your Spoon.

I did but jest, come let's be friends,
I^ll fetch thee what shall make amends.

Sweep, sweep, sweep,
I saw the Coachman creep.
Into the Stable dark and deep,
When I by chance did peep.

No more of that upon your life,
We are contracted Man and Wife;
And what you then did chance to see,
Was all in'th way of honesty:
We've given our Words and both shook hands,
And that's as firm as Marriage bands.

Get me my Breakfast to my wish,
With no more Spoons thrown in my Dish;
Again upon a Truss of Hay,
You both may in the Stable play;
And I that peep, and sweep and peep,
And sweep, and peep, will nothing say.

I^ll feed thee till I cloy,
My pretty, pretty Boy;
Thou shalt thy Breakfast have each morn.

And you all night shall have your joy.

Thou shalt, c.


Well, what thinks your Highness, is not this Novel as you call it?

'Tis so Extraordinary that I want words to praise it, and therefore intend to
retire and make that the Product of a second thought: Come, my Lord.


Had the Times been settled, I could have laughed at the Extravagance of it well
enough.


And -- I -- 'tis well enough to see once.


Lights -- there -- for her Highness. -- The General speak with me in the
Morning, say thou; Well, tell him I'll come. -- Now Ricky, stick close to
me, thou shalt go too: And if I raise thee to a Prince's fellow,
Thy Hat thrown up cry Viva Blowzabella.



MY Wife so angry, say thou?


Angry, Oh that ever I was born, -- Why do ye think, Sir, she can be pleased?
You may Metamorphose me i^to w^t shape you think fit, you may flea me as you do
one of your Eels, -- and then ins^ad of the Robe of a Lord, put the Shell of a
Lobster upon me -- as your Fishiness shall see good to determine, -- but to
th^nk that the high spirited Blowzabella, -- will shrink from a Crab to a
Craw-fish, and leave a silken Gown with a Gold Galloon for a Grogram Jacket
with a Copper Edging, is but vain Imagination -- I can tell ye but that, Sir.


My Brother then I hear too grumbles at it, -- But when I give my reasons, I
don't doubt. --


Oh bless me! Reasons! -- Reasons to lay by a Noble Habit which made ye fit to
accompany Kings and Princes -- and put on a damned dirty Doublet here, -- which
makes you and my self too, wo be the time, look as if we were fit for nothing
but a Dog-Kennel. -- Zooks do but look upon your self a little, Sir, -- do but
view your Person round -- Ods Sammon and Eels, and Thornback! -- Is this the
Mighty Man, I saw yesterday -- Is this Massain^llo?


Well, well, this Deed will settle my Renown for ever, and I have consulted my
Reason about it.


Reason again, -- Reason, to lay by a Glittering Sword that made ye look like a
General, to take up a confounded Switch the^e to make just the figure of a
sneaking Gudgeon-catcher in a Lands-chap, to leave the Command of all the
Coffers in Naple's Gold, Silver, Jewels, and the Devils and all -- to plunder a
little tyny dribbling Brook for a few Roches and Dace -- Gads-diggers if this be
Reason! --


Well, well, no more of your Disputes, Sir.


Mum -- I have done -- but there's his Brother, and some of his Mettled
Comrades drinking in the n^xt room, that will tell him a piece of their minds
presently. -- Oh here he comes, and the hot-headed Cosmo with him -- if they
can get but to ^luster him with a Brimmer or two, as they have prepared it, --
the Cause is our own still. --


So Brother* -- still with your sluttering Trinkets on? What you dislike my
resolution of laying down I hear.


And reason good, -- what Spirit of sloth has seized on ye the sudden, to ruin
your self and us, and all ^ur hopes?


'Tis that Priest's doings, th^t same long tongued Cardinal, that Reverend
Hypocrite, has debauched the General.


Cousin, you have a Privilege, else I ^us^ tell ye, I should not bear this
Language.


Not from a Friend whose Heart as well ^ acts but ^o serve ye, -- Come, come,
you must, ^ ye, you are imposed upon, flattered, betrayed, the Cardinal with
Inveterate Mataloni, -- and old Caivano -- brood in hourly Counsels how to
destroy ye.


Ha, that again. --


He says the Cardinal with your Enemies Plot to destroy ye, which, they are to
execute that very hour you cease Command; there's one revolted from 'em within,
that was their Servant, who ha^ confessed it all; besides, you might note if
you remember well, at our last meeting some weighty thing hung on 'em, -- by
their rough looks, and surly answers -- to ye.


They were indeed more dogged than was usual.


'Twas from their hopes to snap ye unguarded and unfriended, and if you will
deliver up your Throat. --


No, Cousin, not so neither.


If you will from the Commander of all Naples -- Its power too in your hands,
-- accept their Charity, and stand to th^ courtesy of Mataloni.


Your known vowed Enemy -- who burns with Expectation of your disbanding, that
he then may cope ye, -- when I your faithful Kinsman and your Friend -- can
baulk his Plots, and put it in your power so to revenge your self -- you have
forgot the Duchess.


Forgot her, the Taper was newly extinct indeed, but yet thy Breath revives it.


This is my Province, now I'll put in a word: The Duchess, Sir, sweet as a
full blown Rose in Summer Mornings, -- ever gentle Breezes had blown off the
Pearls, the Dew had sprinkled on it; then a Skin, smooth, soft, and whiter than
the Purest Ermine, and such a shape so charming and provoking -- 'twould make a
God of him that did enjoy her.


Prithee no more, she's gone.


Gone, no, Sir, not from my reach -- I know her haunts, and how to snap her
hourly; nay the whole Covey of them, I've marked my Game, and they are mine at
will. --


Such a revenge now on Mataloni's Treachery were worth the General's notice. --



Oh how my Blood boils with Revenge and Love.


Give me your hand, -- and now believe I honour ye, -- I know you love the
Duchess too, and ye shall have her, -- revoke your Orders for laying down Arms
till things are settled more, -- and if within this hour I bring ye not the
Duchess, and her Niece to Court your favour, -- hold me a Rogue and Liar. --


Thou amazest me!


Oh here's the Female Teizer* Come, now 'twill work rarely.


Do ye hear, you French Kickshaw, Diable La Poop, don't tell me of his Order,
to have me stripped; but carry back those dirty things again, or my Fist shall
pound thee into Powder, -- What Maggot's in your Head now, in the name of
Beelzebub, to dub me to be a Lady, and think to undub me again at a Minutes
warning? Oh I could cry my Eyes out to think French Carcass.


Hey day! wa^ a Deevil is de matra! He command one ting, and see command on
oder ting! -- de Deevil take them bo^h.


Here comes another of the Litter, the Kennel is roused rarely.


Why sure this News is not true that I hear: Odslidikins, what do I see, what
is he got into his sneaking, louzy, nasty Fisherman's Garb again! -- Why
Brother, -- Brother, odd I'm ashamed to call him so now, harkee, do you ever
think. --


Sir, can you ever think.


Buzz -- I shall be worried.


Come, come, no more Spouse, he will consider.


Come, Cousin, pray step in with us and take a Glass or two, amongst some
Friends of ours there, you will find the Servant of the Dukes, hear but his
Story, no doubt you will be satisfied.


Well, I will hear him, but sure it can't be true.


As true as you shall have the Duchess here her self within this hour perhaps
-- the Duke too -- will you believe me then?


Oh Jove for her I'd do or believe any thing.


So he's wrought rarely, -- three or four full Brimmers, I know will fluster
him, so he'll quickly forget all his past Promises: But will this Fellow that we
have hir^d, stand fast and swear without a Blush?


A Blush! Prithee, he was bred a Lawyer, he knows not what it is: Go, go, away
to the Company, -- and be sure you drink him to a pitch; this is my time to
make a Rape on the others. -- Hah -- from this Window I can see the Garden,
where every day they take their Evenings Walks, -- and see by Heaven they are
yonder, the Vice-Queen too, -- this is a Prize indeed, and I that always loved
with Ambition, will push my Fortune now, -- Are the Soldiers ready?


All Armed at the Castle-Gate.


Farewell, -- wish me good Luck then.


That I will for my own sake, -- how have I fired this wild hot-headed Fool, to
^eize the Vice-Queen, and bring me her Niece, -- that ^weet and tender Bud of
Blooming Beauty, Must by my heat be made full blown to night,
My beating Pulse tells me I'm near delight.



This Pleasant Walk so near the Rebels Garrison; curse on the Coward Fates, we
durst not use, till late, the Truce was made, which when I think on, though the
Place be happy, and the Sweets of Nature abound here in their Pride, Clear
Fountains, Flowers of Excellent Natures in Arbors twined, and Sun de^ying
Coverts, though all that can delight the sense dwell here, yet that disgrace
makes it ungrateful to me.


The Ills of Fate, Madam, are no Disgraces, but trials of the virtue of Great
Souls; had sam'd Aurelia never opposed the Darts of Traitorous Fortune, her
Renown had lessened, Her life's swift Sands had then unnoted run,
Whose Glory now shines brighter than the Sun.



Great Souls that so are tried, ought to get Fame, for sure they feel Fate's
worst Serenity; for what can be more sharp than for Nobility -- untainted
Honour, and unconquered Courage, to stoop perforce to gross Plebeian humour,
and yield to their Commands whom they despise?


That would I never do whilst I had life, no with these Hands I would tear out
this Tongue, rather than let it give a vi^e Consent to what my Honour told me
was Ignoble, or should my Eyes give a relenting Glance, and seem by base fear
to betray my Virtue, fired with just Anger I should root 'em thence, and cast
the false Misguiders on the ^loor.


She talks and thinks to do as she has said,
So I think too were I a Captive made;
At least I tell her that I could death de^ye,
Yet Life's so sweet, I am afraid I lye.

Did my Lord tell you he would meet us here?


Madam, he did, as soon as the Affairs were finished at the Council: They
expect this Evening a Resignation under Hand and Seal, of Massainello's Power,
and a ^ull Order for the Disbanding of the Rabble.


I fear he trusts too much, would he were come. In the mean tim^, my dear
Fellicia, let's see that Sarabrand I love so well.


What Friends are you that in the time of Truce dare violate the late Order by
this Outrage?


Such, Sir, as have so little sense of Order, that we are never pleased more
than to break it. -- Come my young Rose you must prepare for the Limbeck.


And you Majestic Beauty -- for a Love so mingled with Ambition, your own Soul
has not a greater sense on it.


What mean the Villains -- Oh -- that a Thunderbolt. --


Oh that a Thunderbolt --
Would fall and clear the Black and Cloudy Air,
Then we should see the Weather would be fair.

Oh, though you kill me, do not hurt my Father, -- he's old and weak, pray pull
him not so hard.


For your sake, pretty one, we will use him Civilly. -- Come, come, Old Sir,
there's no resisting.


Not one Blow to revenge me!


Bear off the Ladies down to the Felluca, and bid the Rowers bring it to the
Shore.


Away ye Slaves, off ye vile Clods of Earth: Hah, dare ye touch me? Then Aid ye
Powers above, -- send down your darting ^lames ye Elements, blast these vile
Wretches with your quickest fires: Let fiercest Vengeance Ravishers pursue;
Burn 'em, Oh Burn 'em, though you Burn me too.



The E^choing sound that wasted through the Trees to me seemed like the Cry of
Women.


I could not hear distinctly, but must ^onder, the Ladie^ are not here, -- this
is the place.


Oh my Lord, I have the saddest News to te^l your Highness, that ever Tongue
yet uttered: -- The Vice-Queen and the Ladies, accompanied with the Dukes
Mataloni and Caiv^o, as they were walking here to take the Air, were seized on
by a Rout of Ruffians; and notwithstanding all Resistance, and the Cries the
Ladies made, no Guards o^ yours being never, are ^or^'d away by Water.


Did thou know any of 'em?


Not by their Faces: But know they came from the Mobb-General's Quarter, --
their Number, Looks, and Actions so frighted me, I crept into a Bush to hide me
from 'em.


Ye Powers that Govern Human Fates below -- end my cursed days, this is too much
to bear.


I have not words enough to comfort him, my Reason's at a loss with this
distress, and all Philosophy would work in vain.


Are all the Stars our foes! Oh cruel Fate, are all thy Darts devoted to
Rebellion! -- And thou the Genius of the wronged Nobility, that for a Series of
Revolving years, did Guard the Honour of our Ancestors, -- where art thou
now! Oh why dost thou desert us?


But above all, the Guardian of our Naples, -- Divine Genaro, our August
Protector, -- from thy bright Palace built on Plains of Light, accompanied with
dazzling Seraphims, and Heaven-born Angels, who sing Hymns of Joy in Visionary
Dreams, to sleeping Mortals, with Mediating Grace, gain Mercy for us, and turn
these dire Afflictions into Comfort.


WEep no more, no longer sigh and groan,
All Heaven's angry Darts are thrown.
A Sacred Council late was held Above,
Blessed with the Presence of Almighty Jove;
Where Pardons Sealed, Peace does your Joys Restore,
And dire Rebellions now shall Rage no more.
See how the Clouds give way,
And Dazzling Atoms Play,
In Consorts Shining Day:
To drive your Cares away.
The great Disposer of all Things,
To Pardon does Incline:
And now to form Disorders brings,
Who late made Peasants tread on Kings,
To show his Power Divine.
Blessed Apparition, saw ye ought, my Lord?


Most certainly, through opening Clouds appeared the Glorious Saint with Visage
full of Joy, -- as a blessed Omen of our future comfort; methought the Spheres
too joined in Sacred Harmony, and a Celestial Voice with Charming power,
piercing my Ears, made all my Senses happy. -- A Sword drawn too!


There was, I saw it clearly, -- which seems to instruct us to use ours once
more, and trust no longer to the fluttering humour, the vain Proposals, or
unminded Promises of this vile whimsical and perjured Rebel.


It must be so, therefore proceed, my Lord. -- And with unwearied Zeal I still
will serve ye, -- for since this last, this Brutal violence too well assures us
of his Breach of Vows, and that the Witchcraft of his dazzling Power, too far
Enchants him to lay down in quiet: Let us resolve to make a Push for all; -- I
lately sought, 'tis true, to reconcile, -- the unnatural Jars, believing what
was done by this bold Fellow was to Ease the People, -- who were oppressed; and
that he would disband, as he once swore -- when that was done; but now this
Villainy has op'd my Eyes to see, -- 'tis a Rebellious Itch to quell the Nobles,
and set up his base Ignominious self, as Viceroy, and turn us to a hated
Commonwealth.


'Tis so, my Lord, 'tis plain, that's his Ambition.


It shall be crushed -- like his vile self to earth, never to rise again; -- Now
you shall see the different Fate between th'Inspir'd Nobles, and the Grovelling
Vulgar, and the base mettle of this new Coined upstart, the Guilding worn away
of his Hypocrisy: Arm then my Lord, and so let all the Court, who with this
Vision of the blessed Gennaro, and my own Reasons, I'll so Influence, Honour in
Naples shall exert its Grandeur, and the Rabble once more know their Slavish
distance.


Oh how thy Sacred Words inflame my Courage, thou precious Gem, amongst a Crowd
of Pebbles, best of thy Function, let me but revenge. --


Revenge, why that shall be the dear twin-word; -- Joined with fair Justice, to
begin the work; -- be but your Highness patient, and bear your Losses, as
becomes your Place, let my Prophetic Brain give you this Comfort: The hour
comes on when the vile Herd shall Groan
Beneath the wonted Yoke, and dread the Nobles Frown.



Now, Brother, you show like your self.


Show* -- Oh happy hour, -- show, S'bud he looks like Alexander the Great, -- I
mean like Pompey, -- I mean like Iulius Caesar, -- I mean like Hannibal, -- I
mean, I mean, like himself, -- and that's a thousand times better than any of
'em; -- Oh rare, rare Sight! 'od I could even hang my self for Joy.


I'll teach 'em how to Plot: Give me my Hat and Feather.


There, there, my Lord, there's the purest Pulvillio in it, and the most
exquisite Essence of Amber, -- 'twill make the Women follow ye in Shoals.


And this shall make the Mataloni Faction, -- and the Caivano's shake


Oh thou bright Raiser of my Towering Glory, thou hast been wanting to my hand
too long; thou that were wont to hew my way to Greatness, and through opposing
Crowds, make Lanes before me, how shall I make amends, and flesh thee first?


Two Kinsmen to the Viceroy were this Morning taken dispersing Libels, -- and
Encouraging the Spaniards to a Mutiny.


Let 'em be brought this Evening to the Market-place, and there on them I'll
try the Temper of my Weapon, -- and take their Heads off with this Blade my
self.


It shall be done, my Lord: -- Odzookers, he has it, now the Medaera works.


How now, what's this! -- what my dear Cosmo! -- So soon returned! --


Well, what success, my brave Adventurer?


What I could wi^h: I have 'em all in the Net, Sir, the Dukes, the Ladies, and
the haughty Vice-Queen to boot; and now I hope you'll think your Kinsman loves
ye: -- You may seize the Dutch, now Sir, she's your Quarry.


Thou Soul of my Contentment, best of Kinsmen


And we will take care to keep ye so. -- The Wine has played its part, I see.


There never was any good to be done with drinking Small-beer, -- but now you
see strong stout Medaera can do Wonders: -- Odshertslikins t'has turned him
inside out, and made quite another Man of him.


Come, Cousin, shall we not see your Prize?


Bring in the Prisoners there.


You may remember, when I met you last, I showed some taste of Courtesy, --
now proud Dons -- should you both Grovel at my Feet, and beg for it, I would
with scorn refuse and spurn ye from me.


Spurn your Companions, base and perjured Monster.-


Thy sordid Villainy can't touch our Souls, -- those are above an abject Rebel's
reach.


Abject, thou wretched Piece of fluttering Folly, thou gay Court-Butterfly,
that I can squeeze to nothing with my Fingers; thou art abject, for what is
that but to be still subservient to a Superior Power, Slave to the Will of him
that Commands, and such art thou to me.


No, thou art Slave to me, for I contemn thee; -- my Soul disdains to breath
its Vital Air, where thy Infection comes, and scorns to answer, or change a
word more, to save my Life.


Be sullen then, I'll Parley with your -- Wife, Sir, -- Madam, your Husband's
Choler as 'tis vain, so 'tis

I have few words, but you may Guess my meaning.


Although I had rather die, yet for some Reasons I must permit him.


Furies and Fire, must I live and see this!


She stands so coldly, and not spit in's Face.


Oh, Madam, I have heard of your Great Spirit, -- and mean to Conjure it. A
word with you anon. For the present, Duke, know you may thank your Lady, for
what no Power on Earth but this her Courtesy -- could ever have gained, which
is a License from me -- to take your Leave of her. -- Go, Captain, bear 'em
both to Prison, and when I send this Ring -- bring me the Lady.


'Tis done, my Lord.


Ay, ay, 'tis done, my Lord, -- any thing in the world, Egad, now things go so
rarely.


Let that Old Seignior be confined particularly: -- I hear he's good at
Plotting.


Ah let me go with my Father, I beseech ye: -- Look in my Face, believe I am no
Plotter, -- I know not what is wrong, much less can do it.


So much the better, you can do something else that is as sitting for ye, you
are my Charge, -- you sha'not want your Father.


Ah happy Miss, the Major will take a great deal of Care of ye, therefore don't
-- be a Child, don't cry, the Major will take a huge deal of Care of ye.


Oh Father, Aunt, Oh Heaven help, help, help.


This Blow must reach my heart; Fate thou hast done thy worst.


Come, come, old Gentleman, I'll see you fast enough, -- now will there come
fifty Ducats at least for a good Lodging; rare, rare times, rare.


Death and Confusion! Can the Sun yet shine, -- such Villainies as these,
methinks, should darken it, blot out all Nature, and return -- old Chaos --
into its Primitive nothing. -- Oh may all Curses. --


Curse on, curse on, a Woman when she Curses, makes still a Blessing follow.


Why am I left, thou Devil?


For the Devil! -- for I intend ^hou shalt Blaspheme so much that he shall
fetch thee Headlong.


What! and thou stand by, thy Goary Paws reeking in Blood of Nobles. Is there a
Morsel through all the Shambles of Damned Reprobates, so proper for his Diet as
thy self, thou that from Infancy were Hell's half-blood, and since still
Trained 'amongst the Infernal Brood? To Beelzebub himself of Kin so near,
Thou'lt hardly change thy Nature, w^n you're there.



I choose an ill one because early taugh^
A Man's good Nature makes -- a Woman nought:
Copying their Mischiefs, I my own pursue,
And the nearer to a Devil, the nearer you.

Thou art as near it as the thing will bear:
Search Hell, a Rebel is the greatest there.
But thus to play the Dilatory Fiend, to Tease me all this while with thy cursed
Figure, and not bring forth the Rack, the Wheel, the Torture, Poison or Sword,
to ease me from thy self, the worst and most infective Plague of all, is the
cursed Quintessence of Cruelty, ^nd I grow Mad with my Despair.


'Tis reasonab^e; I am Mad too, and so are all my People; the Times are Mad, we
should be in the fashion: But now I think on it, I wi^l ask a Question, and if
your Rage can stop, answer me: Were I your Prisoner as you now are mine, How
would you use me?


I must answer, calmly.


As your fierce Nature will permit.


Thus then, as calmly as the Seas wild Surges burnt with Pincers, thy Heart cut
out, and after torn in Pieces with Wild Horses, till there was not the bigness
of a Finger to show the Pattern of a Horrid Villain: But trod and mashed over
all the odious frame, --
And Pounded to the Dunghill whence it came.
There's calmly for ye. -- Now what's my Doom?


Your Liberty: -- What neither Fawning, Prayers nor Tears could purchase; this
frank Confession has obtained, -- you're free; Conduct her through the Guards to
the Viceroy's Castle, -- I do it to show ye, I fear Threats so little, that I
dare all your Power to defeat me; and now resolve I will maintain my own,
because I think it becomes me.


So, Sir, -- and though I have my Life on these conditions, yet I will take it to
contrive thy Ruin; which like a Sybil I do Prophecy shall be performed as late
I ^ention'd it.


If our Blessed Stars kind Influence afford.
I'll Court no Stars or Planets, -- but my Sword.

ONE Minute more, and then the Fatal Message Tolls our sad Separation. Sure two
Hearts fast joined by Love, and framed for one another, never felt a weighty
violence like ours. Indifference gains its point and has its ease; the Days and
Nights are worn away in Pleasures; but to be passionate in Love is deadly; Dire
Fate resolves, grown envious of our Bliss, to rob us of the Paradise of each
other.


Yet this were nothing could we die together; could our winged Spirits like two
friendly Turtles fly to the Mansions of the Blessed above, and there together coo
our Mutual Love: -- Who would not leave this Tottering Tenement, this Hovel
Life with Joy, -- to change so Richly?


Nay, we must die together, my dear Lord; our Lives are one, and when yours
ceases Action, you may assure your self mine is no more.


But I alas! am doomed to Death more cruel than what Tormenters give the common
way, to leave thee here to bear their Barbarous Usage; leave the dear Beauty
which once blessed my Life with Raptures of true Pleasure, to be sullied, Grasped
and profaned by Insolent Brutality; and though I know thy Virtue never will
yield, 'tis double death to think on thy distress.


Yield, no, no, I hope my Dearest is confirmed in that; nor had I suffered late
that nauseous Rebel to touch my Hand, but for your sake, my Lord: I knew my
Face had charmed his Brutal Soul, and that by softening his Barbarity, I could
get means thus to enjoy your Company, which else had been impossible.


I know it, and thank thee for this Blessing Belleraiza!


Speak out, my Lord; in Belleraiza's Bosom all Secrets are secure.


Can thou endure the odious Infamy, that I should turn base Pander?


I hate a Pander.


That, that's the meaning of this Upstart's kindness, believing I'll promote
his Bestial Love to my dear Belleraiza.


Horrid Wretch! cursed Hell-hound!


Now if I find the means, though't be by death to free us both from this
Extreme of Misery', will my sweet Love consent?


With better will, than ever miserable condemned Captive, accepted freedom.


See, the trial comes.
So, hast thou succeeded well?

I have, my Lord, -- though with some little hazard of my Life, being searched by
the Out-guards, -- but naming the Duchess, they discharged me presently, --
and there's the effects of your Commands.


'Tis well done, -- withdraw a while: --


I do, and thus make bare my Breast to meet it; let that dear hand but strike,
I shall find ^eaven before my Soul be ready.


It must be so, ^o leave thee here with Ruffians, -- will to Eternity disturb
my rest, -- for I must die thou know; then if thou love me, thou'lt love
this kind though cruel Resolution, first to kill thee, and afterwards my self.


I do, and on thy Lips bless thee for ever.


Oh my Soul's happiness!


My Heart's so full of hopes to enjoy A^relia, and sat my strong desires with
Princely Beauty, that I am tardy in my O^fice to bring the Duchess to the
General. Here is his Ring, by which his Pleasure's known in all Affairs in Love
as well as Power, -- this is the fatal Circle that must part the Married
Lovers, -- and yonder see they are, Close Billing like two harmless Turtle
Doves,
Unweary still of their Connubial Loves.



We are disturbed; see yonder Glares the Meteor -- that now portends our Ruin.


One moment longer, and we had both been happy.


Madam, you know my Messag^ by this Ring, -- the General expects ye, pray make
hast, for I have Business of my own so urgent, I can wait no delays.


Men in great Places must be full of Business; am not I sent for?


No, no, my Lord, you are fixed in the wrong Station, the Wheel is turned, you
are not now at Court.


And yet my Wife's sent for to Privy Council! What, what is her Business there?


Why, with plain dealing, if you needs must know, her Business there is to make
you a Cuckold.


I have a Message first to send.


What's that?


You, to the Devil, Sir.


Oh I am Damned.


Start not, my Love, nor let thy Cheeks grow pale, but adore Providence for
this happy Accident, that marks us out instead of Fate our Freedom; -- here is
the Ring that guides us through the Labyrinth, by whose Despotic Power we pass
the Guards, and then instead of Death live ever happy.


Now I shall think there is a Joy for Love^s uncommon from the rest in sweet
Elizium; This bliss unlooked for seems like Heaven's care,
Which only those that love like us could share.



But first I must disguise me in his Habit: What, ho, Lorenzo!


What Service, my good Lord?


Drag in that Body, -- and help me in a Business that i^ necessary.


With all my heart, -- Oh are ye h^re Don Dogsface? Yo^ were a Rogue in Office,
I am glad you're paid your wages.


Happy Success thus! may we always prove.


Blessed be this day when Fortune favoured Love.


Come, come, no more Evasions, no more Woman's Tricks, I thought you were too
young for 'em; but to the Point, will you Love me without more stir or
Preambles?


Good, Sir, have pity on me.


Pity, why I have Love for thee, I tell thee, -- that is, I think 'tis Love,
I'm sure I've a mind to thee, -- therefore no more of these dissembling Tears
-- but buckle too without more trouble: Come, will you comply, I say?


Alas, to what, Sir?


Humh -- there's Woman-kind again now, -- they always love to hear it named
before they venture, -- why to my will: -- Come, come, you are not too young to
understand the manner.


Indeed I am, Sir, Oh -- pray don't look so cruelly upon me, I will do any
thing I can to please ye, but for my Love, my good, my poor Old Father had it
all, I never Loved ought besides.


Nay look, if ye practise your Tricks upon me, I must begin the rough Game;
I've no fine words, not I, mine is a downright meaning, and with Love, or
without, I must be satisfied that's in short.


How, Sir, which -- way? Oh do not burn me with your fiery Eyes.


Again -- which way? Gad I must speak it broad, -- she has an Itch to hear it on
my Life.


I'll sing a Pretty Song to please ye, Sir, -- 'twas made upon a poor unhappy
Maid, forced in a Wood by a rude Barbarous Russian, and Robbed and Ravished, --
I know not what that is, but she was sadly ^s'd.


What has she made a Song upon her self before-hand? HE led her by the Milk
white hand into a Covert shady,
He swore he'd give her House and Land* and she should be a Lady.
Her Cheeks were spread with Crimson red; at last he made her squeak'out.
The naughty man a Trick began that Im ashamed to speak out.


Quaint and fine i'faith, what a pretty little warbling Pipe the Gypsy has --
Oh -- how I long to spoil it, -- Come, come, my little Canary Bird, Music is
most proper at Meals, I must fall too now.


Oh some kind Angel now look down and save me: Oh but you ha'nt heard me sing a
merry Song yet, I have of the Devil and a Fryer, how they were playing a Game
at Cross Bunns, and how the Friar Cheated him. THE Devil he pulled off his
Jacket of flame,
The Fryer he pulled off his Cowl,
The Devil took him for a Dunce of the Game,
The Fryer took him for a Fool:
He piqued, and repiqu'd him so oft,
That at last he swore by the Jolly fat Nuns,
If Cards came no better than those that are past,
Oh! Oh! I shall lose all my Bunns.



Ha, ha, ha, -- how the young Cockatrice -- tickles me with her shrill Note, --
But come prithee, now let me strike up my fit of mirth.


Y've never a Fiddle, Sir.


Oh then I'll make use of yours.


Sweet, dear kind Sir, -- A poor unhappy Girl! besides I'm ugly too.


Ye lye, ye Baggage, ye lye, you're handsome enough in Conscience.


Oh that the Earth would swallow me.


Major where are ye?


Oh blessed sound!


Ah Plague of all delays, -- 'twas the Captains voice sure, -- Hah, he's
coming, -- go get ye in ye little Hypocrite, and prepare your self, do ye hear,
I'll be with ye presently. -- Now Captain -- What News --


News that distracts us all: The General's mad yonder, the Duke of Mataloni has
killed Cosmo, and with the Ring freed both himself and the Duchess, -- he's
coming hither with the Prince of Bissignano, but in so strange a humour.


All the better, get our Friends ready Captain, against he cools, to drink him
up again, and be sure contrive to keep him from sleep: I have a little Business
now, but at night I'll second ye.


I'll not fail my part, he has not had a Nap this four days, nor shall not if
Business can hinder.


Let twenty Cannons fire against the Castle: -- Down with the Houses in
Toledo-Street, I will not leave a Don a Hole to Nest in: And in Revenge of
Mataloni's Subtlety, and Cosmo's Death, -- Kill all ye take of them; Burn,
Ravish, Plunder. -- I choke with Rage, and cannot vent my Gall,
Till there's a Desolation of 'em all.



This is stark Frenzy, Sir, for Honour's sake -- think, ever ye Act this
Outrage; -- Has the Duke done more than is natural? And since you have forgot
and broke your Promise, in other things relating to the State, had he been wise
to trust you with his Wife?


Peace, Babbling Fool, Hell take thee quick for naming her.


Then Life's my s^orn, I'll die this moment.


That thou shalt not neither: -- Away with him then, give him Liberty, I'll
take down his proud heart without consining.


And if it ever forgives thee, curse me Heaven.


Thy Looks are cheerful, what good News?


Rare, rare, Sir, the Party you sent after the Duke and's Wife o'retook 'em,
but he being disguised in Cosmo's habit, his Fact not known, was by the Guards
-- neglected, but she's forced from him and brought back to Prison.


Ah -- had the half kind ^ates -- but caught him too, my wishes had been full:
-- But come, however I have his better par^, and that shall serve to cool my
fla^e a little: Come hither Friend; what, thou art but a Captain?


No more, my Lord.


Give me thy No^e, March out and be a Colonel.


I am your Lordship's ever.


Oh Power, methinks I feel thee still more Charming, and my Revenge on Mataloni
s^ems, -- now not so -- hopeless: -- Death, I never name him, but the word
chills my Veins; An Ominou^ Blast, methinks, shrivels my Nerves, -- and makes
my Blood clodd and grow cold as if the word were fatal, -- Pish, -- tis mere
fancy, think on the Prisoner, she shall atone; -- Now Hat^ and Love are equal.


I hear he is in pretty good Humour now, and therefore will venture upon him:
-- Yonder's the Duchess, my good Lord, -- we have got her again; -- why what a
perverse thing 'tis, -- Odd your Lordship even used h^r too civilly; if you
would have taken my Advice, you shou^d have Pinnion'd her, Cramped her, bound
^er to her Good Behaviour: A proud Minx to slight such an Honour.


You're in the right; how dost thou honest Fellow?


Ah -- mighty well, and like your Honour* and especially when I see you smile
and look cheerfully: -- And I can tell ye something will make ye more merry, --
we have set this Vagabond Duke too, -- we will have him if he be above Ground.


I ever found thee diligent: -- What Paper hast tha^ there?


Phugh, a Letter from my Good Lady to your Honour; she is pleased to over-value
my small Parts and please ye. Now for my Governm^nt, -- and Oh the Stars,
Planets, Comets, Meteors, Fiery Flapdragons, and Will-o'th-Wisps stand by me
now, or may ye never more furnish an Almanac. --


Ha, ha, -- why Blowze speaks kindly of thee here.


Ah -- Bless her good Honour -- and forgive me one thing I had like to have
forgot, my Lord, -- I h^ar the People certainly design to vote your Honour --
for Viceroy. --


D'e they, that's well, she writes in thy behalf here for the Government of
Aversi, -- 'tis thine, there, there,


Ah thank your good Lordship, from my Soul, and happy be the To^ that kicks me
to the Government, to which in State I go.


Thus like Immortal, Jove thus uncontrould, shall gr^ Massainello act his
Pleasure, whilst Trembling Nations stand amazed to view him. Is there a higher
Spoke in Fortune's Wheel, th^ where I stand? -- No, but methinks with the
Prodigious height^ my Head grows dizzy. Stay, to morrow I'm a Viceroy, next a
King* then wherefore shines that Sun so far above me; or how dares yonder Moon
and Stars by Night pretend to Ape my Glo^y? Oh my hot Brain, is there a thing
in Nature that is cold? -- A re^l Substance that bears the name -- of Ice? sure
'tis all Fiction, th^ Globe's composed of Fire, the Element's all Flame; and
mine's more fierce than all, and more consuming: I from my Bosom breath a
Hotter Hell,
Than P^aeton on A^rick when he fell.



You have no Leisure now for Grief, my Lord, Revenge must ^ill your Bosom,
thoughts of that, -- cha^m and possess your Senses, 'tis your D^eds and not
your Sorrows now must do you Justice.


Oh let Fate once afford me but the means, but one, one, lucky minute, -- I'll
forgive all my past miseries.


Let us not despair, -- the Pious Cardinal has made a Progress beyond our
Expectation.


He's too old, too dull, and loses time in grave Advising: Our way should be
some deep stroke at a heat, some Stratagem to sink 'em at a Blow, without
depending on Consideration, some Mine to mount 'em up, some Gulf to drown 'em,
or with a wish could we obtain the Lightning Celestial, Blazes of Ethereal
Fire; or Bribe the Thunder Rolling in the Clouds to break just over their
Heads, and mash 'em all; that were a joyful Sight.


But these are Things impossible.


Oh that my Power were half so active as my vigorous Will, -- that this vast
Weed, this monstrous spreading Mushrome, that insolently gave me Life and
Freedom, both from his hands, so m^ch to my dishonour, might feel my Fury in
its noble nature; at least that he might see my Glorious Anger, and my just
detestation of my self, for being cursed so far, so poorly fated to take 'em as
his Courtesy.


'Tis still the nature of Mechanic Villains, to make by insolent action an
Affront, -- what they design a Kindness: I warra^t he looked stately.


Like the World's Emperor, -- as if we all were closed up in a Bubble, which
he could puff to nothing: Oh I am Mad, mad, and could tear my hated self to
pieces; Curse my unhappy Stars, and make a Contract even with the Prince of the
Infernal Mansions, -- so I might perfect my Revenge.


Calmer, calmer, you torment your self too much.


Oh talk not of Calmness, I've a Storm within me, and it must blow before the
Rain will follow, -- Belleraiza, and the Distress of my dear, dear F^llicia, --
both now Confined amongst these worst of Devils, Fury unqu^nchable my Breast
does burn,
I cha^ge my Nature, and a Dragon turn.



I cannot blame her ^or unbridled Passion: Because her grief is weighty; a
sense of Honour too severely great, but you, my Lord, I fear, by her last words
are struck afresh.


'Tis true, the name of Belleraiza shot me, shot me to the Heart, but I have
pulled the Dart out, and will be whole again, -- What's to be done, my Lord?


Immediate Diligence to aggravate the People, whom the Cardinal, -- who by his
virtue always gained their Love, possesses now with Massainello's Madness, upon
which Thousands have ^ate ^volted from him, -- being daily abused, some ki^l^d,
some wounded, as his Humour plea^es, -- and on the least Encouragement we are
told, will turn against him.


Oh that Joyful hour!


Here comes his Gracious Eminence.


And I think the Prince of Bissignano.


'Tis the same, his coming must produce something of moment.


Health to your Highness.


Long and many years happy and flourishing.


This from you, my Lord, the General's Moderator, is somewhat strange.


True, I was Moderator, but not Sycophant; but now believe, my Lord, I am his
Fate, -- he's now stark Frantic, all his Actions show it, worrys the Nobles
that don't Bow and Cringe, and do him Rever^nce as he passes by, as a Wolf does
a Flock of harmless Sheep; -- Kills, Tortures his own Friends, and plays the
Devil, even with those very Rogues that set him up.


And that those Crush him is most natural.


Besides, a Barbarous Action done last Night, too bad to be related -- Innocent
Fellicia your sweet Niece, my Lord, savagely Ravished by his Villain Brother;
at which sad News her Father, Old Caivano, -- being close Imprisoned too, since
died with Grief.


Accursed Dog, Oh, my thoughts murder me! Oh Belleraiza!


Nothing of her is Noised, hope well, my Lord.


And prudently let's manage: Has your Highness spread all those Papers round
about the City, importing from the King a General Pardon to all the People that
lay down their Arms.


Most carefully, -- and find it has the same Effects I wish, for Numbers have
observed it, and Deserted.


Most c^rtainly they have, -- on which occasion the Tyrant-Rebel, though he's
always flustered, has yet a Pang of Fear, and keeps up close, -- doubles even
his Guards, and shows an Apprehension of what I hope will happen.


How shall I come to unkennel this Damned ^ox, this Bloody, this most Hellish
--


Fortune; my Lord, shows ye the way, by me; it is my luck, for now I'll call it
so, to have an Interest in his Night's Con^ident, his Blowzabella, -- she, if
she holds her Humour as 'twas lately, -- will scarce deny me any asked for
favour; nor will she balk at this, if I request it, to give me the opportunity
to see him privately.


It looks with a good face, proceed my Lord.


'Tis the easier to be done, -- because the breach about th^ Blow, the Villain
lately gave me is supposed reconciled, which if ^ e'^e forgive, may this right
hand refuse to do me reason: My Dri^t is unsuspected, and being done, when I
have moulded her, you shall have notice.


Oh that the Wings of Time moved faster! Now I am impatient till the Minute
comes.


Yet too much hast, my Lord, may ruin all: Let us meet once more here, and then
consult about some methods to be used.


'Tis reasonable, -- whilst I assist at the Cathedral, and there by subtl^
means disperse more Papers, and fix the People in their hopes of Pardon.


Six Troops of Spanish Horse, -- shall all be ready against the Signal's given
for our meeting, which I could wish were suddenly.


To morrow, e're the Rosie Guide has ushered in the Sun; in the mean time let
all be husht as Death, -- 'tis Freedom that's at stake, then let's be close and
cautious. Silent as Infants in soft Dreams appear;
Or Lovers -- when they know -- that Spies are near.



LA Poop, Go tell the Ladies that are come to visit me, I suppose to beg
something, -- that I'll not be seen to day; tell I'm troubled with Vapours, and
keep my Chamber.


I ^all, Madam, I have always one Lye ready for your Ladyship ven ever you have
de occasion, -- for me know ver well de Lye be as proper for de File de
Chambre, as de old Gown of her Lady ven she leave off.


Well, my Lord, and as you were saying, give me your hand; nay, nay, you might
have spared that, --


Ay or this Week either, on my Conscience: Well, if my Guts don't come up now,
I'm happy.


Hum, this long Chained Don is very familiar, methinks, but if this hold, I
shall make bold to let him know there are some Governors his Equals, to be
first served; -- Gad my quality shall be known now. I have it: What, we must do
great things now.


Ay, ay, you say enough of my Beauty, and my good shape, now you're in the sit;
but I have had but slender Proofs from a Person as I thought of your Ability.


Hum, what a Devil shall I say now, for the truth is I have always shunned her
as a Hare does a Hound, when she hears the Horn near her.


I beseech ye, Madam, let him mind his -- hem -- hem, and let others -- that
are more diligent -- and men of quality too mind yours.


So, thank my Stars, -- I have a Rival now, -- of a Valet de Chambre.


Time was my Lord, when that face of yours could do something with me, -- but
you Courtiers are so dull in matters of moment, that a Woman of spirit grows
weary of ye presently. -- My Lord, prithee come hither and put this Patch on
right.


Humph, humph, poor Prince how he looks now?


And what Private Business -- hast thou with me, ha, -- Go, you are a Rogue; --
You are so uppish now y're a Man of Quality.


Ay, 'tis even so, I find I'm a mere Cast-away, -- but I must Collogue till I
get my Ends of her however.


Well, my Lord, and what other Business have you with me, besides your Address?
what, you would speak with the General?


Yes, Madam, and about earnest Business concerns him.


Lend him your Key, Madam, dont't go your self t^ introduce him; 'tis below ye:
Besides, you know he'll be every minute troubling ye, for he's employed
continually.


'Tis true, therefore I'll put that trouble off my hands* There, my Lord, that
Key admits ye to him; and now do ye hear, you may negotiate your own public
Business -- without troubling mine in private.


Ay, do ye hear, my Lord, you understand without troubling ours in private.


Blessed Accident, Fortune has thrown that into my hands unexpected, that else I
should have half-damn'd my Soul with Lying and Flattery to get from her,


Oh, when you please: -- Your Servant, my Lord.


Your Servant, good my Lord; -- there, there's the Door, my Lord.


Insolent Rogue, he sees not yet the Fiend that's hovering over him


The General is busy, -- 'tis true, that is, he's Drinking: A Daily Affair
that my Brother Pedro always employs


My Lord, -- my Lord -- how purely -- it sounds, and what a figure I shall
make, when for Air or so, -- I whip over again into my own Country England.
Zooks how my Title will rattle there! -- Here's Don Ricardo arrived, they cry
presently: Then to the Park I scour, then to the Play-house, then the
Side-box, then behind the Scenes, and then prattle with the little pretty Tuzzy
Muzzy, winking, Pinking Rogues; Ah Le Plasire charmant, dear Madam, I beg your
Pardon. -- Gad I was so wrapped with my new Fortune, -- that I had almost forgot
your Ladyship.


Had ye so: Come Sirrah, come your ways in and take a Dram of my Bottle, --
I'll give ye something shall rub up your remembrance presently; Come Ricky --
come Sirrah.


March on Don, march on, Oh happy, happy Rogue! What, we must do great things
now.


Blessed News! The Face of things wears; sudden Change, revolting Crowds throng
hourly to the Castle, -- and beg for Pardon, promising to turn and serve with,
-- The Rebell's humour's now so monstrous grown, that he spares none, murders
his Friends and Kinsmen, Racks and breaks of the Wheel for every Trifle, not
heeding Sex nor Age, Desert nor Quality.


His Madness, we may well believe will last too, he has not slept this Week.


And every day they drink him to a height.


That works for us, -- and makes him do such mischiefs that now the People
Generally hate him; the Vice-Queen's Prayer is heard, for that she may be
thoroughly satisfied with sweet Revenge, which I confess my best Divinity can't
in this Juncture dissallow; -- we only want the generous performance of
Bissignano's -- Promise, -- and Mataloni's Valour to effect it, and then
Revenge is sure.


But who comes yonder, Oh my Tortured Soul! -- Who is't? I see my dear, my
sweet Fellicia.


Had ever Beauty so severe a Blast, or tender Innocence so hard a Fate! The
Ravisher it seems Mad with his Guilt, and fearing 'twould exasperate the People
soon, -- as the Barbarous Action was performed, close covered with a Veil
conveyed her hither.


Bury me quick, Oh do not look upon me, but pity and revenge, Oh if a wretched
ruined Virgin's Prayer can touch your Hearts, pity me and revenge.


My Heart is wounded, and my Reason fails me, -- why such things are, I must
not dare not ask, -- the Mystery of Religion, curbs my thoughts, -- and there
is nothing left me but to wonder: Why Innocence to such distress can fall,
None ever can know but only who knows all.



Welcome, most Noble Lord, -- good Luck I hope has blessed us in your coming.


Good, as 'tis possible, -- here is the fatal Key that opens Hell, where all
the Fiends sit in Triumphant Revels, amongst their Brimming Bowls, fearless of
Danger. -- Now let us plunge 'em to the inmost Cavern, -- where Sulphurous
Caldrons boil, with hottest fury -- I sent a Message to the Vice-Queen lately
-- to get the Blowze the Fish-wife out of the way by inviting her to Music, --
or a Banquet; and she resolves on it; this being done, our way is clear, our
Hearts and Hands are ready to crush this ^dious Mons^er.


Lead, Brave Prince.


And yet it is, below our selves, methinks, to taint our Hands with his vile
Blood -- our Slaves shall do the Drudgery.


I'll be there however, -- lest some damned Accident


Should Intervene and stop the wished Affair.


And I'll go beg, -- your good Success by Prayer.


She has defied my Love, and dares my Cruelty; Is Massainello to be dared, --
no, -- Woman, thou soon shalt find the Thunderbolts of Jove, and all the fierce
Artillery of Heaven -- too weak to balk my Power, -- Yet she Smiles, and when I
talk of Rape -- or Death with Torment, points to the Sky as if from thence she
hoped fresh Succours to relieve her.


Harkee, -- don't mind him, he's got now into one of his moody Fits: -- Come,
come, drink about.


He has sent for the Duchess, -- and I suppose will be somewhat rough with her
Grace, if she keeps her old Humour; -- Ten to one but we shall see some
Scratching, Mewing and Caterwawling between 'em.


Caesar Lubrano, Tursis and Zavalio, three mighty Dons that proudly looked upon
me as I thought with Contempt, shall die to Night, their Houses Burnt and
Plundered; -- nor stop I here, but all their Heads and Hands from Bodies chopped,
and then Nailed upon Crosses, -- shall stand to adorn the Entrance of my
Palace; and had I but that Devil Mataloni, -- but here's one half of him, the
Fiend split in two, this part is Woman.


Well, Sir, what Torture next? you flag and cool, my Courage can endure a
thousand worse, than these I feel of Darkness and of Solitude, -- my Humour too
is fixed just as it was, for know I hate ye still.


And I thee now, so rankly, I could wish thou were a Man, that being of the
stronger Constitution, thou might feel pain the more.


So she has nettled him already, -- there's no moulding her to any thing by fair
means, -- she's obstinate still, -- what a Devil is this Virtue, I wonder that
Women stickle so about, -- They can sell it for nothing, I never heard it was
worth a Groat.


Ah -- the General never went the right way to work with her; if any Woman
denies me impertinen^ly, 'tis but knocking her down, and there's an end of the
matter.


Will you not prove the force then of your hatred? Order the Rack or Wheel, or
any thing, so you dismiss me.


Poor Obstinate, -- art thou so fond of Pain?


Pain -- will be pleasure, so I save my Honour.


Your Honour! Since then -- you're of that so tender -- I thank ye, you have
shown the way to plague ye, -- I am not ignorant, a Woman's Will can when its
stubborn de^ie death and horror, -- if that Fantastic whimsy be secure, --
and I have found one of this sort are you: Your Honour safe, you all my Power
defy,
Then first I'll kill your Honour e're you die.
For to divert my self and my Companions thou shalt here be stripped stark naked
in our view, each charming Limb which Fool's mistake for Beauty, -- exposed
even to my Guards to mock and scorn.


Torment of Torments, what have I heard him say?


Here, seize on her, and use the haughty Mischief as I command, that we may
view the Beauty's she's so proud of, and judge whither perfection or defects
are most excelling.


We shall have some fresh Play presently.


Oh, I have been too rash, -- thus at your Feet -- I beg your pardon, and
repent my words: Burn, tea^ me piece-meal, for provoking ye, invent new
Tortures that were never heard of, -- to glut your Cruelty, and I'll call it
Justice, but let me escape the shame of being exposed.


Oh does it pinch ye now, -- is -- thin skinned Honour so nice that a mere sight
on it makes ye squeak. -- I say uncloth her, for I now, methinks, expect a
certain pleasure, to behold a Body that Mankind oft Damn their Souls for.


Oh I will never rise but rooted here, -- fix till my life forsakes me.


Tear off her hold, -- and strip her instantly; and when she's so disgraced,
take off her Head, and send it to her Yoke-mate Mataloni.


That shall not need, -- he comes to fetch the whole, here's Mataloni's self.


Oh, -- Ecstasy!


Fall on my Soldiers.


Hah surprised! yet you shall buy me dearly, Despair assist me.


Ah -- Coward Fates! had my last minute prospered, -- to reach thy Life, my own
had fled with joy; but thou hast stopped me, Stopped all my Glory -- in its full
career,
And sent the Ambitious Soul I know not where.



With thee die all my Fears: Oh my Soul's Joy, -- once more, I see there's a
kind Star for Lovers.


I cannot speak: Ah let my Eyes express me.


Secure those Rebels; then with speed let's go to meet the Viceroy and the
Cardinal.


Let the Spanish Troops be d^awn up near the -- Castle, ready to publish when
the Word is given the Death of this proud Monster.


They shall, my Lord.


And now thou Glorious Saint, Protector of our Kingdom, thus we thank thee.


Thank thee with Joy for this Propitious Hour,
That frees Glad Naples -- from Rebellious Power.

What is the Pageant come?


So, please your Highness, I saw the Coach stop now at the Gate.


Her Sister too, and the whole Tribe of Fish-wives.


And is the Mask -- prepared as I gave Order?


Yes, Madam, and the Hangman, Death and the Devil ^oo, with their proper
Ornaments, all ready to wait on her.


Her Mackerel Ladyship, -- I dare affirm was never in her Life so Entertained.


Not as she shall be e're I part with her, -- By this time sure the Destinies
have played their fatal Game, and the bold Rebel has in Hell his payment, as
Noble Bissignan^, sent me word, they then had plotted, and the hour's now past,
-- It must be done;th 'uncommon Joy I feel, gives me assurance his Death will
be their sport, -- whilst I divert me with his Mawking here, and show her
Beastly self by a reflection. She comes, ^d with a Pride I warrant, proper. --
Who waits there? Set Cha^ out for her Mightiness -- and her Retinue, and when
the Mask begins, let one stand by her to explain the Figures.


Well, Odsfish, 'tis a happy thing to be a Woman of Quality: Had I been a poor
Jade now, the Devil of any Ball, Mask, or what do ye call it had been made for
me, -- and now look, the Vice-Queen thinks it her duty to show me respect, --
On my word, this is a great point gained.


Ay, Madam, -- I warrant she has some suit or other to your Ladyship; and
faith, Madam, if you ^' take my Counsel, don't be too forward, let her wait a
little, -- 'tis th^ Method at Court always.


'Tis so, Boy, you're in the right. -- Come now, let's hear this Stuff.


Now that your Greatness may understand the Figures, -- you must know that the
first is a Fisherman, and the Dowdy his Wife.


Ha, ha, ha, -- Odsfish that's pleasant enough. -- Well, and prithee what's
the other?


The other is a Monster representing Rebellion.


I warrant that's a troublesome Rascal.


This is a Rascally Fellow, that's got into Office, and serves the o^hers in
their Villainies, his Name is Pride, -- a Pimp, a Scoundrel. --


Odd, methinks, the Fellow has a pretty kind of an Appearance: Gad I think he's
like me: Come, let's hear him.


Oh G^d, what Nauseous Scraggy Rascal's that -- soh -- I abominate the sight of
him.


And I the the other, -- methinks he looks lik^ the Hangman.


Right, Sir, he is one, -- the the other is, Madam, a strange surly positive
morose Fellow, his Name is Death; few of you Ladies like him, he has not Flesh
enough; the other, one that represents Rebellion.


FRom Burning Caves the dreadful'st part of Hell,
Where Fiends with Flaming Tongues in pain Eternal dwell,
And damned by me on Earth in dismal horror yell;
I come to show these Wretches here,
What they are doomed to bear.
I come to show what Torment must ensue,
What endless Plagues are for Rebellion due*
Appear then each Slave
Of Fate, Hell, and the Grave:
Appear in your Terror, and wound their cursed Eyes
With Sulphur perfumed too ye Furies arise.
Ha, ha, ha, ha, we laugh aloud.
We laugh, we laugh aloud,
And of our Fortune still are proud,
When e're to Hell the Rebels crowd.

These to worst Pangs -- Grim Pluto does condemn,
Our heaps of Coals ar^ shovel'd all to them.

And when in Limbo's Freezing Lake,
We in another kind
Damnations Plague expect to find
Proud Rebels still our Places take,
And Grind their G^ashing Teeth and quake.

He may chance to find mercy who quaffs a full Bowl.


And the Whore-master too may make friends for ^is Soul*


But the Rebel unpardon'd for ever shall howl.


He may chance, c.


I warrant that's a troublesome Fellow.


Eyh, Eyh, -- What would the Raw-bon'd Rascal have? Oh hideous! Hands, off
Sirrah. Was ever such an Abuse?


'Tis part of the Entertainment, Madam, you must go with him.


Go with him, I'll see the Devil have him first.


And his Dam, -- the the other here -- Hands off Sirrah; you'll grow saucy
presently.


And what would you have with me ye Impudent Rascal? Do ye see how you soil my
Coat?


Oh he has a Halter, Sir, will cure ye of all Fashions presently. In short,
Goody Fishwife, the Villain your Husband's dead, and yours Madam will be
presently, therefore all ye have to console upon is to hang decently by one
another: But first that you may die in your right Stations, kneel there and pay
your Homage.


Ah -- Treason, Treason, where are my Guards? --


Help, help there, I'm a Lord -- Good People.


Ye Lye, ye are a Pimp, ye Rogue, they must Guard ye to the Gallows.


What can your Mightynesses bow so low, you that so late could dash at the
Nobility, and kick your Kennel-dirt up in their Faces; Hah! can you Truckle now
ye Grovelling Slaves, you're in your right Stations, -- low as your Parent-clod.
Then throw their hated Carcasses on Dunghills, drag 'em to death; at last the
hour is come, though long expected, which my indulgent Genius did reserve to
gratify the labour of my Soul for all its Torments during this Rebellion: --
Mean Souls when wronged, mean Satisfaction take. The great can only be with
Blood repaid,
And Death the least Atonement can be made.



Oh how the Slaves can Truckle, when they find how the Tide runs against 'em!


My ^ord Cardinal -- your Eminence was in the Marketplace; How did th^y relish
my first Proclamation?


Just as all Rabble do in Turns of Times; those that but two days past, would
have stemmed Torre^ts* (...) to the mouth o^ a new mounted Cannon, and ^inger'd
eve^ ^ -- Now when they heard his Death, and found the Tide turn, laid present
hold upon your Act of Grace, and were so far from naming him as General, that
they even rent their Throats with this loud cry, Long live the King, and our
most Noble Viceroy.


Nay more, no sooner had they seen his Body as it lay dead, but with Impetuous
Fury they chopped his Head off first, and next his Hands, and on a Poll exalted
them in view, -- then dragged the Trunk with Horses through the Streets.


Adored be St. Genaro, and the Powers, that to their former Glory have restored
-- Abandoned Naples, and its Ancient Peace: But letting Gratitude peculiar move
At once being blessed with Liberty and Love.



They now even offend me with their Zeal, making the Prospect of my Palace
h^re, their place of Execution! Open that Folding-door, and you may see the
Reward of dire Rebellion.


A dreadful Sight! Yet bears it a good Moral,
Discovering the vain state of Worldly Greatness;
And what a slippery way he treads that chooses
The Path of vain Ambition, -- wanting Power
To keep the great Resolves to which he swore.
Had Massainello when he Signed the Articles,
Renounced his Sway, and modestly retired,
The Action past so Great, so Beneficial,
Would almost have Atoned for his Rebellion:
He had deserved a Golden Statue raised
To keep his ^ame to perpetuity;
But his Ambition blinding his weak Eyes,
Turned his h^t Brain, and br^ke the Reins of Reason.
The Mo^al to all Rebels doth ^long,
They may a while, but cannot prosper long.
And ^eaven's use of 'em is thus made known,
First to ^urge others Crimes, and last their own.

Dressed in the Fashion that I now appear,
My Spanish Garb, and loose disheveled Hair;
A Gay Town-Spark, one of the Toasting Gang
Just now came to me, and thus made Harangue:
Madam, says he, and straight I found by this,
He thought 'twould Anger me to call me Miss;
Your part of being ravished, Ma'am, says he,
Has stopped my Vitals quite, quite ^vish'd me.
Pray let me kiss your Hand; Oh fie, Sir, no:
Nay, Pish, cried I, and put him by just so:
Yet thanked him, that he liked my Part to day.
Burn me, says he, I like you; Damn the Play.
Then muttered something softly in my Ear,
Something of Hundreds settling by the Year.
I coloured like a Rose, and trembled too;
For Heaven knows for 'em what I was to do.
But taking heart I angry answered thus:
What mean ye, Sir, do ye take me for Miss --
A certain Lady we have lately lost?
And at that word finding he'd make more pother,
I started up and said, I'd call my Mother.
At that, says he, and as he spoke it smiled,
Why sure you wont -- you wont be such a Child,
There's none but Babies let their Mothers know,
I was ashamed that he should think me so.
We love the Childish scandal to prevent,
To be thought fit, although w^ don't consent;
So much confused I left him -- this Relation
I leave for you, Sirs, to make Application.
If you forsake our Plays, and I am slighted,
You see at least I one way may be righted,
Young as I am -- Knight-Errant can provide,
That me to Paris will on Cock-horse guide.

