A Poets Trade, like Hazard, does entice;
He's the unlucky Caster, you the Dice.
Constant ill Luck attends at every Throw
You Critics are like Fullhams, high and low,
Yet 'tis his Fate, he can't give over so.
Like a young Wife, just ready to Lie in,
That whines and cries, Ple ne'er come to it again:
When the danger's past, and pains forgotten all,
Her Heart's not broke, She'll venture tother Squawl.
To all new Plays, like Towns besieged, you come,
And each pert husfing Whipster throws a Bomb,
Whilst the trembling Author all the Shot retains
Of several Nations, and their several Brains;
'Tis strange, you Beaux at home should do such harm,
Pray find another Buda, if you'll Storm;
One good sound Battle would some Thought provoke;
For Brains are never seen, till Heads are broke;
From Famous Fletcher's Hint, this piece was made,
All Mirth and Droll, not one reflection said.
For now-a-days poor Satyr hides his Head.
No wholesome Ierk dares lash fantastic Youth,
You wits grow angry, if you hear the Truth,
Old Fumble now, may at Doll Commons strip,
Without being flagn'd by a Poetic Whip.
The Noble Peer may to the Play repair,
Court the pert Damsel with her China Ware.
N^ Marry her, if he please, no one will care.
The Whore too may with Quality be Boxed,
And set up for a Virtue, though She's Poxed.
The Fop in Love may his dull Genius try;
The Soldier Drink, so Quarrel, and so Dye.
The Alderman may Cheat, the Lawyer Lye.
And Satyr now not dare to question, why;
You shall escape too, at the Trading end of the Town,
Your Wit sticks fast, although your Charter's gone;
Therefore brave Knights of the Apron, and the Yard,
All fear of a Satyrick Jest discard;
Let not this Play, through your shrewd censure, fall,
And then cheat on, and prosper great and small,
You shall have Liberty of Conscience, All.

YOnder he is: Oh that Heart-breaking Object,
The Darling of the Times, his Country's honour,
Our Sexes Joy, and Glory of his own,
That was all Bravery, All Wit, All Merit,
Wild as the Winds; lies there bereft of Sense;
Whilst here I mourn, that am the Fatal Cause.
Fall, Fall, ye Tears! and throbb, unhappy Heart!
That, in a luckless Hour, refused such Love;
Threatened by Friends, and forced by Royal Power.
I threw a Dearer, Brighter Jewel from me,
Than ever decked Woman's Beauty.
Oh would to Heaven,
That I had known the Curse of stubborn Will,
Or I had died ever I had done such Ill.
I sighed, and I pined,
Was Constant and Kind
To a Iilt that laughed at my Pains:
Though my Passion ne'er cooled,
I found I was fooled,
For all my Abundance of Brains.
But now I'm a Thing
As great as a King:
So blessed is the Head that is addle!
The dull, empty Pate
Soonest comes to be great:
Fate dotes on a Fool in the Cradle.

Madam!


Ay, Sir.


How goes the World? From thence the Zodiac, the Sun, the Moon and Planets; In
what Meridian are we?


Do but hear me, Sir!


With all my Heart. I know your Cleft Sex are in great Trust with Lucifer: and
can do a man a Favour; a handsome Woman is the Devil's Soul-Broker, a Place
worth ten of his Gentleman-Usher; you shall find I have Court Breeding. Come,
pronounce.


Sir, I am come.


From the Dread Sovereign King; I know it well: I am all Duty, all Courtier,
all Cringe; as supple as my Ladies Page; he is a Gracious Prince, Long may he
live. Belong you to his Chamber?


Not I indeed, Sir, that Place is not for Women!


Not for Women! -- What Place more fit for Women than a Chamber? They were
begot in Chambers! Born in Chambers! Dressed in Chambers! And if you take a
Woman out of her Chamber, you'll find her good for nothing --


For nothing, Sir! Can you say so of me? D' you know who I am?


Most exquisitely.


What is my Name?


Damnation!


How, Sir?


The Gossips called you first Phillissida, because of your little Mouth, and
narrow Gaskins: but you are pust out like a Pumpkin since, Hell Gate's not
wider than a Woman's Conscience.


Fie, Sir, All this to her that loves you!


Love me, nay, that's a Lye! I had but one Love, and her the good King Henry
has taken from me, to bribe his Favourite for his Legs and Cringes. But hush --
no more of that; I must be wary, Pitchers have Ears. Some one may call this
Treason.


That Favourite, Sir, is now in great Disgrace; And the King pitying you, has
sent me hither.


To soak me like a Sponge: Drain all my Secrets, and then hang me up. Ha, I
find it out: This Woman here is sent to undermine me; to buzz Love into me: to
try my Spirits, and make me open and betray my self: Hah, Is not this true?


No indeed, Sir -- Heaven knows I love you too well to betray you!


Such was the Heavenly Music of her Voice,
Soft as the Flute-like Sounds that charmed my Ear,
When my dear Celia loved me, but she's gone:
The Fiend Ambition bears her on his Wings:
She mounts, she soars, and leaves her Vows behind her.

Oh my Cursed Fortune!


Do you weep, let me see? Pray let me taste your Tears. Ha, ha, ha, ha, Rose
Water by this Light: Nine pence a Pint, sold at the Apothecaries: Oh thou
Dissembler! that is, Thou very Woman: All thy Sex carry perpetual Fountains in
their Heads, and make their Eyes spout Mischiefs when they please.

There's nothing so fatal as Woman,
To hurry a Man to his Grave;
You may think, you may plot,
You may sigh like a Sot:
She uses you more like a Slave.
But a Bottle, although it be common,
The Cheats of the Fair will undo,
It will drive from your Head
The Delights of the Bed;
He that's drunk is ^ot able to woo.

Method in Madness, Grace even in Distraction:
I'll never leave him, 'till, by Art or Prayer,
I have restored his Senses to their Office.
Oh most unnatural Vice in silly Women!
We oft refuse what best deserves our Love,
And often choose the contrary! --
Thus Shadow-like, we make the Sentence true,
Follow'd we fly: but if they fly, pursue.
I that this Sun of Virtue could not see,
When long his Beams were hourly cast on me:
Like blushing Flowers wantoned when I shone,
But never his Value knew till he was gone:
Unhappy Sex! Thy Fortune never drew
So great a Blessing as a Love that's true,
But to be sold by Friends, by Coxcombs grieved;
Matched for thy Plague: and born to be deceived.

Sir, Sir! I say once more, The Court's a Glorious Place, and I am much
honoured with the Society of my Wives Noble Friends there. Therefore leave off
your grumbling, and let me have no more of your mouldy Advice, or as I am a
true Courtier, and consequently a Wit --


A Wit! No, no, Sir, you are Iohn Cockle-brain, of Plowden-Hicket, in the
Country of Staffordshire, Esquire.


A Squire, which is as much as to say a Fool; is it? Very well, Sir.


Why the Devil will you be a Wit, Sir, you had as good own your self a Bastard:
For there has not been Wit in your Family since the Conquest.


Sir, if I am a Wit, I will be a Wit, and let my Family rise and deny it if
they dare; But whatsoever I am, Sir, I am sure you are an Impudent Rascal;
and don't you think, Sir, because you found me with a Whore the other Day at
Green-GooseFair, when I was drunk, and I desired you not to tell my Wife; that
I'll bear every Flirt from you. The World would be finely governed indeed, if
every Man's Servant, because he is a Pimp, must pretend to be saucy.


And shall we never go into the Country again then, Sir? Will you run out all
your Estate here, for this confounded Name of a Courtier?


Sir, You saucy Rascal, 'tis a Name that draws Wonder and Duty from all Eyes
and Knees.


Ay, 'Twill draw your Worship's Land within the walls too, where you may have
it, all enclosed and sure: Oh, here comes your Country Uncle, Old Justice Grub,
he'll grub you now in faith; he'll firk you for your Feathers and your
Fooleries. He has had no Drink but Juice of Crabs and Vinegar this week, to fit
him for you. He'll make you a Courtier.


Good morrow, good morrow, Uncle.


Good morrow, Cod'shead: Cockle-brain and Cod'shead are much at one. Own'z!
dost wear that damned Cap upon thy Head with a Summer-fly Flap, like the
Fore-Horse of a Waggon? And dost thou bid me good morrow? Why, you Ninny, you
Nincompoop, you Noun Adjective, for thou can not stand by thy self, I am sure;
must my Family be disgraced and ruined by a flaunting Fopdoodle, that is too
finical to learn any Sense. A Pox on thee, I am ashamed on thee.


Ay there, there, Sir, there's a Courtier for you.


Why, good Uncle, what's the matter?


Gadzooks. What's the matter? why, you Scatterbrain! you Son of a Whore; and
yet I think my Sister was honest: What's the matter? Why you're undone. Thou
art lost. I would not lend thee Two pence on thy Land: Thou art a mere
Bankrupt.


Very well! Very fine indeed: this is but the first Course. I'll leave you
together and go and laugh.


Not too fast, not too fast, Uncle: Pray consider a little.


Not a Jot, Faith! What dost thou do at Court but to be ruined? Hast reckoned
up thy Income? Dost thou know the Value of thy Tenants Sweat and Labour, and
thy Expenses here?


I think I do.


Think, nay, that's a Lye: thou hast not thought these seven Years, to my
knowledge. Thou hast a Wife, a handsome Wife, Men say: Can thou pretend to
have a Grain of Thought, And yet bring her to Court? Ah --


Pray, Sir, what ill can she get there?


A Bastard, Sir, it may be, to inherit your Estate. Ownz! I shall never have
Patience!


Oh Sir, you are Splenetic!


You are a Jack pudding, A Pragmatic Spend-thrift, A Fellow that I would beat
into a Powder, if I had the Law on my side. Can there come any thing of
Essences, Pulvilio's, and Perfumes, more than the Head-Ach? Take your Wife to
task, ye Blockhead, and Thrum her Jacquet well, she'll never be good else;
She's of the right Strain, I know her to a hair; and if thou would be Famous,
beat thy self, for thou deserve it richly.


What your froward Gall can vent on me I bear, but if you rail against my Wife
--


What then?


Why you shall know that I am a Fighter.


A Fool: That fair 1200 l. a Year will shrink into a Tester, by next Summer,
and all to be a Courtier, in the Devil's Name.


Well, Sir: And is not that enough?


You Dogbolt, Enough! Will that Frothy Title keep firm your Credit, Sir? Will
your Spindle. Shanks there ever carry you to win the Goal of Honour? They look
already as they could scarce drag thee over the Kennel, with a Pox to you, good
Mr. Courtier.


Yes, Sir, I am a Courtier, and intend to be a Cherubin. Courtiers are all
Cherubins and Seraphims; and I think I have some Reason.


How, Reason! I have seen a Dapper thing more like a Courtier, set up to scare
the Crows out of the Corn.


Ha, ha, ha, Much good may it do your Heart, Uncle, you are merry, and I could
entertain you with a Joke against your Country Life, were I so disposed; your
Ditches and your Dunghills. I could nettle you in faith.


Ye Jackanapes, Gadzooks! Speak a word more against the Country and I'll beat
thee, I'll swinge thee, before thy Wife and all thy Family: I will in faith,
therefore don't provoke me!


Nay, Why so angry; Uncle? I pass by your Lowing of Cows, Bleating of Sheep,
and your damned Noise of Chattering Rooks in the Morning, that would not let
one sleep. You see I am patient.


Rooks! There's never a Fop at Court has half their Sense, to my knowledge, No,
nor their Harmony: The finest Vocal Music in the World, this Fool calls
Chattering. Ah, thou art a Dunce. I had rather hear a Rook sing than Si Fachi.


Nor do I rally on your fine Discourse, which is commonly about your Dogs and
Horses; and for your part, Uncle, you have a Passion for your Wall Eyed Mare,
exceeds the Love of Women.


Here's an impudent Rascal, here's a Rogue, to debauch my Darling-Mare before
my Face. And the Dog knows too I love her as well as I do my Wife. Why, you
slanderous Villain! Now could I even weep for Madness: Sir, leave your
Prating, or provide your self a Second. Gad -- I'll fight for the Honour of my
Mare, sooner than for any Lady at Court by the half.


Nay, nay, I have done, good Uncle.


'Tis well you have, Sir: Wall Eyed Mare, you Puppy! 'Tis true she's queer of
an Ogle or so; But what then? Look you into the Park, or into your Damned Play
house, and see what Crowds of Female Sins come thither, and then let's hear you
prate.


But, Uncle, why are you so inveterate against the Court? Were you ever there?


Not I, thank Heaven: I got down to other day as far as Charing-Cross, and had
like to have been choked at that distance.


Come, come, Uncle! Leave off your snarling, and ridiculous Anger, and bring
your Wife to Court. I hear she's handsome: let her not live there to be a
Farmer's blowing; and be confined to Serge with Silver Edging; and Petticoats
far coarser than my Horse-Cloath: But give her Velvets, Tissues, Pearls, and
Jewels.


Oh Lord! Oh Lord!


A Coach and Usher, and two running Footmen, and I will send my Wife to give
her Rules.


's Heart! I had rather send her to Virginia, and make her plant Tabaco. This
Fellow's mad.


Sir, How slept your Mistress? and what Visitants are come this Morning?


Sir, as I came out, two Lords were newly entered.


This is great now, do any Lords, Uncle, come to see your new Wife?


No. Lord have Mercy upon her if they did: Heaven keep my Wife, and all my
Issue Female still from their Lordships.


Oh, you are dull and palled! You have no Palate.


This Fellow's a Cuckold too, a rank Cuckold! I smell him: well, God b'w'y':
thou art a rare Coxcomb, and I'll not see thy Folly any longer. When you want
Money, Friend, for a new Fund of Prodigality, I suppose, I shall hear of you;
but not a Penny: let thy own Folly feed thee. Ownz! To be a Cuckold too, that
plagues me most of all -- Ah you senseless Ass! Gad! I have a great mind to
take the Dog cross the Face; A Cuckoldly Rogue. Gadzooks! If I stay I shall
murder him.


A strange dull angry old Fellow this: But just such another Piece to Dirt was
I, before my Eyes were opened by my Wife.


Oh, here she comes: Good morrow, Dearest.

Good morrow, my Jewel. Thou look well this Morning.


Thank thee, Sweet Heart: I have no other reason.


I am glad on it: Now, then to my present business, which is Money.


Faith, I have none left.


I hope you will not say so: nor imagine so base and low a Thought: I have none
left! Are these words fitting for a Man of Honour, and Dignity that shall be.


The Lord knows when: Thou hast been seven Years about it, and yet I am where I
was, Child. But I know thou hast daily and nightly laboured with thy Friends
for my Advancement.


Very well, Sir: And do you pop me off with this slight Answer, in faith I have
none left? in faith you must have!


I must have!


You must have. Nay, stare not, Sir; 'tis true, I must have Money: for be
persuaded, if we fall now, or be but seen to shrink under our fair Beginnings,
'tis our Ruin, and then good night to all, but our Disgraces.


Why, where's the Hundred Pound I gave you yesterday.


Oh that! I lost it at Basset, last night.


Then you may win it at Basset this morning: Why, can you think, Wife, I'll
endure such Doings? Why, how the Devil could you lose all that?


I had horrid Luck, Child: Come, I'll tell thee how. Dost understand the Game,
Honey?


Not I: I understand none of the Game: A Pox of the Game, if this be the Fruits
on it.


Not understand it! Well, I am resolved I'll teach it thee. 'Tis the most
Courtly, the most Grand, the most Graceful Game. And has the finest Terms in it
that ever were heard: As thus now! First, there's the Fasse, then the Alpieu,
or Paroli, the Sept le va, Quinze. le va, Trent. le va, Sonica, nay sometimes
the Soisant le va.


Soisant, and the Devil and all: Why this is Conjuring, Confound it -- What a
damned Game's here, to lose a 100 l. at!


I tell thee, Child, I had the worst Luck in the whole World: I lost a Sept le
va upon an Eight King.


Gadzooks! And wilt lose a King's Revenue at this rate. This is a Game that's
fit for none but Kings and Queens, to play at, for ought that I see.


Ay. 'Tis a Royal Game, indeed; but prithee do but observe my ill Fortune! I
was Fass'd every Card, I set, or when I drew a lucky one it did not go. I had
lost seven Kings before, and made a Sept le va upon an Eight: When to see the
Prodigy of ill Luck, A Citt, a strange Punt, that sat next me, a pert forward
pushing Fellow follow'd the winning Knaves, and won a Quinze le va before ever
I could make an Alpieu: But what vexed me most intolerably, was to see my Fat
Lady Thump Cushion make Paroli, and then a Sept le va upon the same Card, and
when I lost my King four times in one Deal, she, upon a filthy Knave, every
time won Sonica.


The Devil take my Lady's Sonica, and my Lord's too; What a Noise is here with
'em?


I think never poor Punt was so Embarrassed: but I have done: Come, now what
say thou to this Money? I'll soon fetch up my Losses, Sweet Heart: I must
have, let me see 500 l. by to morrow night: nay, never flinch at it; 'Tis for
thy Preferment, thou know.


Nay, faith, I know not what to say to it: 'tis such a Devilish hard World,
that my Tennants write me word they are all running away. The last 50 l. I laid
down for your tall Cousin's Horse and Equipage: He that's going to be an
Officer; And I han t a rag more left, as I am a true Courtier.


Hark you, Sir, have you no Land in the Country?


Why, yes, but I had forgot that.


It must be remembered: some of it must fetch this Money: Thou shalt not lose
Preferment, my Dear, for the sake of a few dirty Acres; Especially when, by my
means, the Sun of Honour is just going to break out upon thee. Dost hear,
Child? This Land must be in London by to morrow Night.


Well, well, if it must, it must: What, 300 Acres will serve the Turn? Hum!


'Twill do very well: And now you speak like a Man, and like a Courtier that
shall be great, and suddenly; I have said it: Well, adieu! you'll dispatch; I
must go get the BassetCards ready; for I expect my Lord's Company, and all the
Punts here after Dinner: Mr. Winnall Taillies, and I am to be his Croupier: If
I want Money I'll make shift to borrow out of my Lord's Fobb.


Well, well, prithee borrow what thou wilt out of my Lord's Fobb. Go, leave me
a little.


Adieu, Child, Adieu, my Precious.


'Tis a good natured ingenious Devil; and does so bustle about the Courtiers to
make me great, and is so caressed by this Lord, and by the other Knight, that
'twould do ones Heart good to see her: that's the truth on it, she must have
this Money; but how to make this Sale handsomely now, let me see! Gad, I am
almost afraid to tell my Man Toby on it, 'twill break the poor Fellow's Heart,
to hear that I am going to sell: but hanged, it must be done, and there's no
more to be said. Who's within there? Toby.


Did you call, Sir?


Ay, honest Toby, I would have you run presently to the Exchange, and there to
Sir Iohn Cutchinele, the Merchant, offer 300 Acres of my Land: Why dost thou
stare so?


Why faith, Sir, see how strangely things will happen, I dream't last night
that you were in Bedlam, and now my Dream is out.


Oh spare your Wit, good Toby, for your Business, Tell him, do ye hear? 'Tis
choice and fertile, and ask upon it 500 l.


Sir, do not do this; pray take my Cap and consider a little: This honest Land,
that you are parting with, hath been true to you, and done you loyal Service.


As 'twas in Duty bound: But whatever happens, my Wife must not want Money: for
if she do, either she or her Friends, I may whistle for Preferment. Go, go,
begone, I say, and when you come back -- look for me in the Presence.


'Tis this damned Wife that is the Cause of all, and this, Oh this is the dear
Marriage Blessing; Man is the Shuttle, and his Wife the Loom; and so they weave
themselves into a Knot, that when 'tis done, they'd hang themselves to untie:
I'll to his Uncle presently, and tell him all, perhaps 'twill stop his Journey,
and make him come and rail, and beat my Mistress: I'd give my Wages to see it
done handsomely: I'll whet him I am resolved.


There's no good to be done upon this Fool, my Kinsman, so I'll into the
Country, presently, and leave him to the Fool's Whip, Misery. Let me see -- I
may recover 20 Miles to night. Ho! Within there -- Some body call a Barber;
I'll be shaved first, however: I shall ride so much the lighter. Call a Barber,
there.


Sir, I have follow'd you in here.


So methinks, Sir.


'Pray what may I call your Name?


My Name? Why my Name is Grub, Sir.


Grub! right: you are a Mohammedan.


The Devil I am.


I know it; but am secret: Of what Faction are you? What Party join you with?


Prithee, I know no Factions, nor Parties, not I: I am a plain Country
Gentleman, and am just going out of Town. What, a Devil, does the Man mean?


Then wear this Cross of White, and where you see the li^e, they are my
Friends: observe 'em well, the Time is dangerous.


I'll wear none of your Cross, not I: I know not what you mean.


Not know my meaning! you may spare your Cunning, Sir, you can pick nothing out
of this: this Cross is nothing but a Cross, a very Cross: plain, without Spell
or Witch craft; search it; you may suspect Poison, Powder, or Wild-fire; but
you are mistaken.


Well, Sir, I see 'tis a plain Cross, what then? What a Plague, is this Fellow?


Then do your worst: I care not. Tell the King, as I am sure you will, of all
my Actions: and so God save His Majesty. This is no Treason.


Tell the King! What a strange, odd, whimsical Rogue is this! But this Town is
full of nothing else: Nothing but Fools and Madmen throng the Streets. I'll get
out on it as soon as I can. Come, where's the Barber?


Here, here, Ready, Sir.


Come, come, away with it quickly: but, do ye hear, Sir? Had not you got the
Itch now, which your Town-Breeding would complement upon my Face? Let's see
your Fingers.


Oh Clear, clear, as a Sucking Infant, Sir.


A smooth-fac'd Rogue: Sir, you are a Whore-Master.


A little given that way, Sir; but I want Money.


Alas, poor Fellow! 'tis great Pity, faith.


If I were a great Man, Sir.


You would keep a Whore, and starve your Wife, as they do.


Yes, Sir.


Very well: Ha, ha, ha. I have not met with a more honest Fellow: a good
handsome, sleek Rascal too! How many Bastards have you, Friend?


Not very many, Sir. I have only two at Nurse, and another a coming -- Will
your Worship be pleased to give me an old Shirt?


No, you Dog; I have a Kid of my own in the Country, that must be served
first. But, my bonny Shaver, you get your Living honestly, I hope? You are not
given to Thieving?


To no Burglaries, Sir, they are troublesome; But for the neat Conveyance of a
Hand into a Pocket, or so.


Hum! 'Tis as I said. Thieves, Fools and Madmen over-run this plaguy Town --
Would I were well a Horse-back.


Oh Sir, undone, undone, all lost, ruined!


How now? What's the Matter? What is there a Fire? ha! Who's there, Toby?


Ay, Ay, Sir, poor Toby, undone, utterly undone.


Be undone, and be hanged! what, a Devil, dost fright me about it? -- Pox -- I
thought the Town had been a Fire.


Sir, If ever you had any Respect for the Ancient Family of the Cockle-brains,
to which that of the Grubs is Worshipfully joined, turn back to our House, and
beat my Mistress.


Prithee, beat her thy self, and be hanged, if thou hast a mind to it.


's Bud. Would I might, I'd strap her with a Vengeance -- Besides my Master is
undone, unless you go, Sir.


I'll not come near him, an extravagant Rascal, he has not a penny of Money; and
I warrant his Land will be going ever long.


'Tis going, Sir, 'tis going now.


What's that? Is he going to Mortgage?


To sell, Sir, to sell -- 300 Acres are doomed this night, unless you stop it,
Sir.


Give me my Hat and Gloves.


What is't you mean, Sir?


300 Acres! Oh intolerable Rogue! I'll be with him: Gadzooks!


Why, Sir, your Beard is not half off.


Pox of my Beard. I'll go with half a Nose to save 300 Acres. Come along, Toby
-- Gad I'll thrash him into Stubble, but I'll change him, I am resolved on it.


Good Luck be with thee, I never had till now Half so much cause to bid God
speed the Plough.


WELL! What Times, Flea-flint? What purchase to night? What Rate bears Money?
Hah!


Pox, not worth a Man's trouble: I have lent but Three Eight and forties yet.


But you'll draw so many Fifties, I hope!


Yes, certainly, I should hardly wait here else: there's no Pawn stirring
neither; not so much as a Table-Diamond, nor my Lady's Locket, the Devil's
in it! I think, this Trade will hardly find a Man Salt to his Radishes; Prithee,
what News about Town, Ned?


Why young Lyonel, they say, is mad.


Mad! Prithee for what?


It seems the King once parted him and his Mistress, who was a rich Orphan,
intending to bestow her on his Favourite; Grief for which Chance and her
Inconstancy has since that time much distracted him, and now in his mad Fit, he
conceits the King designs to hang him, and trap him speaking Treason.


Alas, poor Lyonel! Mad! and mad for Love too! Thou art a Miracle indeed.


What Lady's that?


Sir Jasper Lost-alls's Lady, one that's so much in Love with her Coach that
she's hardly ever out on it: prithee let's observe 'em; I find, by his
fidgeting about, the Bank has stripped him.


Well, Sir Jasper, I have told you of this a hundred times, pray come away now,
I find your Money's all gone, by that sheepish Look of yours. Do ye hear? Pray
let some body order my Coach to come to the Door. You'll never leave this
Basset, Sir Jasper, till you have ruined me. My Coach and Horses there,
quickly. Come, I protest, I'm quite tired with coming up Stairs.


Gad, Madam, to tell you the truth, I have lost your Coach and Horses since you
went.


Lost my Coach and Horses!


Yes, faith, you must even beat home upon the Hoof, there's no Remedy?


Why, Thou Monster! thou dare not, sure, put such an Affront upon a Woman of
my Quality; one that --


One that shall scold with any Woman of Quality in Town, I'll say that for her,
but I'll not stay to hear more on it.


Oh intolerable! Was there ever such a Brute seen! that whilst I was paying an
innocent Visit to my Cousin Doll Feetly here in the House, could have the
Barbarity to lose my dear Coach and Horses, without which, alas! what is a
Lady? How can a Lady subsist without her Coach and Horses? A Husband! A Clown;
A Beast: one I married and got Knighted to have Comfort of him, and now the
Brute, to reward me, has lost my dear Coach and Horses at filthy Basset, the
Devil take him, how does the Monster think, a Lady dressed in a Gown, as I am,
shall foot it Home now?


Ha, ha, ha, ha, this was pleasant enough.


Tree wins, Six loses, Knave wins, Ten loses, Eight wins -- Madam, you lose
the King.


A Curse on all ill Luck; Fass'd so many times, a Paroli, Sept, and Quinze le
va lost in a Moment


Plgue on it, I am stripped too, and this is all the Treasure I have left in this
World.


Well, Sir, do not you complain till you lose that Treasure, I shall wheedle my
Husband and get Flush again within few hours, and then, Sir, perhaps you may
hear from me; in the mean time Good Morrow, 'tis almost Sun-rising, I'll to Bed
now.


She gives me the Ougle to follow her. Oh this damned Itch of Play, yet cannot
I give over, if I were to be hanged. Flea-flint, Prithee come hither.


What's your Pleasure, Sir?


Thou know, I have always been thy Friend, and given thee Barratto freely,
Prithee lend me another Eight and forty upon Honour.


Not without a Pawn, Sir, I have sworn the contrary.


As I am a Man of Honour.


As I am a Man of Honour, Sir, I must not break my Oath.


Thou wilt not do me this Courtesy then.


I cannot, Sir, what, would you have me damn my self for a Trifle: if you have
e're a Pawn? --


I'll give thee Bond and Judgment.


Pish, Paper, Paper, I'll do nothing without a Pawn, I tell ye.


Well, come hither, thou shalt have a Pawn.


Where, what is't?


And such a Pawn, as never was proposed to Man before. -- thou saw that Lady
that went out?


Well, Sir, and what of her?


She is my Mistress, and the dearest Jewel that e're unlucky Gamester pawned
before: One, that I value equal with my Life; yet such a Witchery there is in
Play, that for this Money, I'll contrive it so, that thou shalt be Caressed
instead of me, till I return what's lent.


This I confess is the strangest Pawn I ever heard of, but I lend no Money upon
Faces, Sir, I must beg your Pardon: However I shall make bold to tell the Lady,
what a Faithful Spark she has.


Dog, Rook, Rascal! What a Slave was I to offer such an inestimable Treasure!
Sir, get you gone, or I'll cut your Pate.


Ay, Ay; Rail, rail! Ha, ha, ha.


Cleared -- stripped: by this Light, not a Rag left.


Ha, ha, ha, I won two Hundred Guineas: What's the matter, Jack?


Nothing, nothing, a Pox on him, come, Prithee let's go, and beat up the Rogues
at the Blue-Posts, for a quart of burnt Sherry.


With all my heart, a Plague of this damned Basset-Table.


Do but see, Sir, they're at it still, at this time of the Morning.


Oons speak to 'em, souse in upon 'em, Nephew.


No, pray, Uncle, do you, for my part I'm ashamed.


Gad, and so I will, what's here to do, what a Pox de'e make an Ordinary of my
Nephew's House? a Bawdy-House were a better Name by the half, nothing but
Cheating, and Gaming, and Roaring, and Tearing, Gad-sookers, 'tis past
Suffering, and as I am his Friend, and Uncle --


How now, who have we here, Sir, will you venture Fifty Pieces, here's a Stool.


And there 'tis at your Head, Dogbolt. Draw, Nephew, draw, Toby, draw, draw,
we will Basset the Rogues.


What's here, Treason going forward, I'll make one against ye, Faith.


So, so, now lock the Door upon 'm Toby


Bravely fought, i'faith, why, Uncle, you beat the Madman too, you fought like
Scanderbeg; you are not hurt, I hope --


No, hang 'em, they are all Polltroons, Rogues that have no more Souls in 'em
than so many Fleas, therefore hear me once more, and mark me well: If thou dost
not instantly break this damned Custom, and make thy Wife know her self, Ill
desert thee for ever, never see thy Face, but leave thee to ensuing Rags and
Poverty, a thing not worthy for the Dogs to piss upon


Ne'er think to see honest Toby again neither, I'm too proud of my Parts, to
serve a Beggar, I thank ye.


Do you really think my Wife deceives me then?


'sbud, think it, 'tis past thinking, for I know it.


Sir, she came Home at three a Clock yesterday Morning, and was led up Stairs
between two Thundering Whoremasters, one had a great Patch on's Nose, you may
guess by what, and there they were two Hours in her Chamber: What they did
there, the Lord knows.


'Tis likely, they were Plotting my Preferment.


Plotting to make thee a Cuckold, that's your Preferment.


And a Beggar most certainly.


For she knows no End in Lavishing.


And for Eating and Drinking, she's the very Devil, her Belly is a mere
Parson's Barn, all your Tenants pay Tithe to it, and yet 'tis never satisfied.


The Truth is, she has been given to take a Cup, of late.


A Cup, 'ds Heart I have seen her as Maudlin as a Midwife at a Crying out.


And when she's in her Beer, she's wondrous Chaste; No doubt.


Come, come, once more I say send for her, for my Part, I shall have no
Patience if I see her: send for her I say, and pack her into the Country,
instantly, or never see my Face more.


Well, Sir, your Hearty Love, and Reasons have prevailed, it shall be so.


It shall?


Yes* Sir, it shall be so.


Why, that's well said, Gad, I'll slap thee down another Hundred Pounds in my
Will for this, and let Wives know their Duty.


She has lost a Plaguey deal of Money lately, at this damned Basset, that's the
Truth on it.


A Mint, a Mint, the Devil and all, I know it, for 'tis a greater Cheat, than
the Lottery; 'tis just like giving a man twenty Pounds. to let you lose 100.


But she shall have no more, Uncle.


You're in the right, Boy, it makes 'em Wild and Wanton. I make my young Jade
at home leap at a Crooked Nine-pence: give a Wife Money, give her a Pudding.


Mine has had the Indies.


Ay, Iacky, thou had better have sent her thither by Half, take heed for the
future, now hold fast, and prosper, I'll presently take Horse, and tell thy
Tenants such a Story; this will be joyful News at Plowden, farewell, good Iacky,
be but resolute, and then the Devil, I mean, thy Wife will have no Power over
thee.


Blessings go along with ye, Sir, you have made me a New-Man too.


Farewell, Honest To. I shall see thee in the Country shortly, now little To.
where we will crack a Flagon, and roast Apples, ye Rogue. Farewell. Nephew,
God-b'w'y'. To, your most humble Servant, good Nephew -- Come, my Horse, my
Horse there.


Good Journey to'e, Sir, I'll be with ye to Morrow.


Oons I could leap for Joy, this is the happiest Day.


Go, Toby, and call your Mistress.


But shall she not prevail, Sir, and out-talk ye -- as she used to do? For you
know she has a plaguy Tongue.


I'll not hear her, but rail at her till I am ten Miles off.


If you are forty, so much the better, Sir, for she's so shrill, that, if the
Wind sit right, she'll sound from hence to Barnet.


Go, go, call her hither.


I could leap out of my Skin, my Heart's so light, a Plague of this stinking
Town! now we shall get a little Air, and go a Hunting, and a Fishing again.


Why, what a thing was I, that such a Creature as a Wife could rule me? Do not
I know that Woman first was made for Man's Diversion: she shall know now, a
thing that few -- do, She has a Husband that can govern her.


She's coming, Sir, and in a Plaguy Fret. Stand upon your Guard, Sir.


What Planet reigns? or what mad Whimsy have you now in the Head, that makes
you call me from my Rest, that know I have not been in Bed all Night?


Oh, you shall go to Bed betimes hereafter, and shall be raised again at
thrifty Hours.


What does he mean!


I'll have no more of your Court Tricks, your Honours, your Offices, and all
your large Preferments I'll be content to lose: for, to be plain w'ye, I now at
last begin to smell a Rat,
And understand too late what you'd be at.



The Man is mad sure!


The Woman would have him so; but it shall be a Country Madness then, for I'll
be gone this Morning.


Very fine; and who's Advice is this, Sir, I beseech ye, your Swabber Toby's?


I shall have my Head broke, I see by her Looks.


No one's Advice, good Wife, but my own Reason; therefore make ready.


Sir, I hope you'll stay till the next Ball be past however.


Not I: I have been Balling on it too long, you have kept me here these seven
Years a Balling, treat^ng your Friends, and wasting all my Substance in Riot
and Fine Clothes, which was the way you told me to be preferred: but I find no
such matter, therefore make ready, and in that Gown which you came first to
Town in, your Grogram-Safe-guard and Hood suitable. Thus on a double Gelding
shall you amble, and my Man Toby shall be set before ye.


Hem, hem, well said, Old Stiff Rump, i'faith, I begin to take Heart a little.


And will you go then in earnest?


Yes faith will I, and how dare you oppose my Will and Pleasure? Was not the
Man ordained to rule his Wife?


True, Sir, but where the Man does miss his way, it is the Woman's part to set
him right; so Fathers have a right to guide their Sons in all their Courses,
yet you oft have seen poor little Children that have both their Eyes lead their
blind Fathers.


She has a Plaguy Wit.


A devilish one, Sir, therefore take care of her, she'll talk ye mad else.


Come, come, you're but a little piece of Man.


But such a Piece as being taken away, what would Man do? The fairest, tallest
Ship that ever sailed, is by a little Piece of the same Wood steered right and
turned about.


Ay, that's all one, you shall steer me no longer; I'll keep my Rudder in my
own hand now.


Well said again i'gad, a Plague, how the Jade lears now!


'Tis your Clownish Uncle, I know, that hath put this into your Head, who is an
Enemy to your Preferment, because I should not take place of his Wife; Come, by
this Kiss, Sweet Heart, thou shalt not go.


By this other Kiss, Sweet-heart, I will, and therefore on with your Trinkets;
I know your Tricks. And if Preferment falls e're you are ready, 'tis welcome,
else farewell to Court, i'Faith.


Well, Sir, since you are resolved, I must obey.


You must, therefore about it.


Ay, ay, you must, you must, there's no more to be said.


Go, go, get ready. Women are pleasant things when once a Man begins to know
himself.


But hark ye, Sir, because you use me thus, though I did look for present
Honour this Morning for ye and at such an Hour, yet if it does not come e're I
am ready, which I will be the sooner, left it should, when I am once set on a
Country Life, not all the Power of Earth shall alter me, not all your Prayers,
or Threats shall make me speak the least Word to my Honourable Friends, to do
you any Grace.


With all my Heart.


And never more hope to be Honourable


Not I, I have been tired with hoping, if that be Court Preferment, I have
enough on it.


Nor to live greatly, you shall be so far from the Name of Honour, that you
shall never see a Lord again.


Why, what care I, if you had never seen one, I think your Honour had been
ne'er the worse for it.


But amongst Sheep and Oxen you shall live at home bespotted with your own
loved Dirt, in nasty Clothes, as you were used to do, and, to oblige you, I
will live so too.


And 'twill become ye well, come, the Day wears, therefore make hast, it shall
be my Care to see your Stuff packed up -- Toby -- come.


Ay, ay, Sir, here am I, Lord, how she looks now!


It shall be my Care to gull you, my wise Husband. You shall stay, and more
than that entreat me too, you shall have Honours presently. Who's there?


Madam.


Prithee, bring hither Pen, Ink, and Paper, quickly.


'Tis ready, Madam -- what's the Matter?


Your Master will not stay in Town, he says, unless Preferment fall within an
Hour.


Let him command one of the City Gates, the Mobile are mutinying, or get him
made a Constable, and walk the Rounds at Midnight, to catch Drunkards, any
thing that has Hurry in it will please him.


No, no, I have it for him, I have been prepared a good while for this
Occasion: and when the World shall see what I have done, Let it not move the
Spleen of any Wife, to see me make an Ass of my dear Husband. If they are
Just, and know well how to use a Woman, then it were a Sin to wrong 'em, but
when they grow conceited of themselves, and Ill performers, then show 'em no
Mercy. Here, Carry this Letter to young Clermont, and bid him and his Friends
come hither instantly, and do as I have ordered there.


It shall be done, Madam. A Duce take him, I warrant he intends to pack us into
the Country, to weed his Barley, or churn his Butter; but we'll churn him, and
make Butter of his Brains first, here's that will fit him.


In the mean time, I'll go and dress my self,
In all the Country Clothes, I used before,
Not to be gone, but make the Mirth the more.

Is all packed up, Toby?


All, all, Sir, there is no Tumbler runs through his Hoop, with more dexterity,
than I about this Business, 'tis a Day, that I have longed to see.


Come, where's my Boots?


Here, here, Sir, and now you're a made man.


Ay, Toby, now thou shalt know, I can command my Wife.


I am glad to see it, Sir.


I do not love always to be made a Puppy, Toby.


No, Sir, but yet methinks your Worship does not look right like a Country
Gentleman.


I will presently; give me my the other Hat --


Here, Sir.


So, now my Jerkin.


Yes, Sir.


On with it, Toby, thou and I will live so finely in the Country, Toby, and
have such pleasant Walks into the Woods, and then bring home Riding-Rods, and
Walking-Staves.


And I will carry 'em, Sir, and sturdy Sticks for the Children.


So thou shalt, and thou shalt do all, oversee my Workfolks, and at the Weeks
End pay 'em all their Wages.


Yes, Sir, if your Worship gives me Money.


Thou shalt eat Money, Man.


Beef, Beef, and't like your Worship: as for eating of Money, let that alone.


Give me my Trowzes, and I will make my Wife, thy Mistress, look to her Dairy
well, and to her Landrey, that we may have our Linen clean on Sundays.


And Holidays, Sir.


Ay, and ever we walk about the Grounds provide our Breakfast, or she shall
smoke; I'll make her a good Housewife; she now shall make no Journey to her
Sisters, but live at home and feed her Poultrey fat, and see her Maids in Bed
before her, and lock all the Doors.


Rare, rare, Sir, Why, this will be a Life for King and Queens.


Come, give me my Buff-Belt, and Hanger.


'Tis done, Sir.


So, this is as it should be; now, my Gloves.


Here they are, Sir.


A Riding-Rod now, Come.


There's nothing wanting, Sir.


So, so, How dost thou like me now, hah?


Exceeding well, Sir; Now your Worship looks just like your self; A Man of
Means and Credit; so did your wise and famous Ancestors ride up and down to
Fairs to cheapen Cattle.


Go, hasten your Mistress, and make ready, I long to be on Horse-back.


I'll be ready in a Twinkling, Sir; never was Man so jocund; 'ds heart, I could
dance all the way.


Who's that? Who's that, Friend?


I know not, Sir, I think it is my Master.


Who, he that walks in Gray, whisking his Riding-Rod?


Yes, Sir, 'tis he.


'Tis he indeed, and at all Points prepared for his new Journey: Sirrah, when I
wink upon ye, run out and tell the Gent. below, 'tis time.


I will, Sir.


Mr. Cockle-brain, Good Morrow t'ye.


The same to you, Sir, this is one of my Wife's Court Friends; how simply he
looks now, to see me in this Dress: My Wife's within, Sir, but she's busy.


As she pleases, Sir; my Business is now with you.


With me, Sir! Your Pleasure?


'Tis reported, Sir, I know not whether by some Enemy, maliciously, that envies
your great Merit, and would be ready to sow Discontents between his Majesty and
you; or truly, which on my Faith I would be sorry for, that you intend in haste
to leave the Court.


Faith, Sir, within this half Hour.


Sir.


Is my Wife ready?


Presently, Sir.


But, Sir, I needs must tell you, as a Friend, you should have taken your
Journey privater; for 'tis already blazed about the Court.


Why, Sir, I hope 'tis no Treason, is't?


'Tis true, Sir; but 'tis grown the common Talk: there's no News else, in Town;
and in the Presence, all the Nobility and Gentry have nothing in their Mouths,
but only this, That Mr. Cockle-brain, that Noble Courtier, is now departing
hence: Every Man's Face looks ghastly on his Fellows; such a Sadness, before
this day, I never beheld at Court; Men's Hearts begin to fail 'em, when they
hear it.


Sir, I had rather all their Hearts should fail 'em, than I stay here until my
Purse fail me.


But yet you are a Subject; and beware, I charge you, by the Love I bear to
you, how you do venture rashly on a Course to make your Sovereign jealous of
your Deeds.

For Princes Jealousies, where they love most,
Are quickly found, but they are hardly lost.

Sir, I know not what you mean by this! All the Love that I have found at
Court, is, They have let me spend my Money there.


Have I not still professed my self your Friend?


Yes, yes. You have all professed, but you never proved so yet.


Now, Sir, I will then; because I see you are wise, and give you thus much
light into a Business, that came to me just now. Be resolute, stand stiffly to
it, that you will be gone, and presently.


Troth, 'Tis what I intend.


And, by this Light, you may be what you will. Will you be secret, Sir?


Ay. What's the matter?


The King does fear you.


Sir!


And is now in Council about you.


About me!


About you, Sir, I tell you; you will find he is in Council about you: his
Councellors have told him all the Truth.


What Truth have they told him?


Why, Sir, that which now he knows too well.


Too well! Prithee what is't? If any Rogue has sworn Treason against me now, I
am in a fine Condition!


That you have follow'd him these seven Years, with a great Train, and though
he has not graced ye, yet you have dived into the Hearts of thousands with
Liberality and Noble Carriage: And if you should depart hence unpreferr'd, all
discontented and seditious Spirits would flock to you, and thrust you into
Action; with whose Help and your Tenants, if you were so disposed, who does
know, how great a Part of this yet Peaceful Realm, you might make desolate: But
when the King heard this!


What said he?


He sneezed, and shook, as never Monarch shook before. And to be short, you
may be what you will: but be not Ambitious, Sir, sit down with moderate
Honours, lest you make your self more feared.


I know not what to think of this: his Looks are very serious.


The Gudgeon bites. Oh, here comes Longoville.


Where's Mr. Cockle-brain?


There, Sir, he stands: would you ought with him?


I should hardly sweat thus else. Good Morrow, Sir.


With all my heart, Sir.


His Majesty does recommend himself most kindly to you, Sir.


His Majesty?


Yes, Sir, and has, by me, sent you this Favour, kneel down, and rise a Knight.


A Knight, Sir?


A Knight, Sir, and he does farther request you, not to leave the Court so
soon; for though your former Merits were neglected, after this time, there
shall no Office fall, but you shall stand fair for it as any Man.


What think you now, Sir? Hark you, a Word in your Ear: if you yield yet you
are a Novice.


Do you think so?


Most certainly, therefore be resolute.


I understand you; a Knight, let me see; a Knight. Sir Iohn Cockle-brain! No:
it won't do. Besides, I have known a Cheese-monger a Knight; a hundred
Snivelling, addle-headed Citizens for Cheating, knighted: and Pimps and Cuckolds
innumerable: No, no; I must go, I must desire his Majesty to excuse me.


I'll bear your Knightly Words straight to the King, and send his Princely
Answer back again.


Very well done, Sir, stand out stiffly, a while, 'twill be the better: I know
there is a Tide of Honours coming.


But with my stiff Standing, if I should lose my Knighthood, I should wish I
had been more limber.


Oh, never fear, Sir, 'tis impossible: Hark, there's a Noise below: 's Death,
here's my Lord what de'e call him: pull down your Hat over your Eyes, look
Grave and Sullen. So, so.


Where is this new made Knight?


Hem, hem; who's that? here I am.


Let me embrace you first within my Arms: then call you Lord. The King will
have it so: who does entreat your Lordship, to remember his Message, sent to
you by Longoville.


If you are sneaking, and dare mount no higher, you may yield now. I know what
I would do.


Peace, he observes us. A Lord, Hum, to be Lord Cockle-brain! Pox, I know a
Crook-back'd Fiddler called a Lord: No, no, this is too light too. Besides I
have been sick of a Lord, ever since I met my Lord Mayor the other Day, tied to
his Horse, and with a great Brass Chain about his Neck, weighing of Butter.


You'll return the King some Answer, my Lord.


Yes, my Lord, you may thank his Majesty, but the Lordship is too light. I must
be gone, were he Ten Thousand Kings and Emperors.


I'll tell him what you say, Sir, but I know he'll be extremely concerned.


Oh damnably! the Rogue does it to a Hair. Away, away.


I must, or I shall laugh in's Face.


Why, this was like your self, my Lord.


I think so; The Devil's in it, if that was not stiff enough. But if I should
lose this Lordship by Fooling, my Wife would be plaguy angry. A Ladyship, you
know is a pretty Bauble, enough for her to play with.


Oh, you'll have a bigger Bauble, I warrant you for her to play with. See, see,
here comes the other again.


Give me your honoured Hand, right Courteous Peer, and from hence forth be a
Noble Marquess, the King so wills, and Subjects must obey. Only he still
desires you to consider his late Request.


Faith! You are well now, my Lord. I'd consent.


'sBud -- I'll be one Step higher, since I am so far.


Ha, ha, ha, 'Tis the finest Lord: I am afraid anon, he'll stand upon it to
share the Kingdom with him.


Pox on you. Speak lower.


Troth, I must own the King is very gracious: but that scandalous Ballad of
that abominable Marquess, and that damnable Patient Grizel, has made that Title
so nauseous to me -- If his Majesty would but please to change that.


Faith, my Lord, I believe you may be what you please. Here's another
Messenger.


Make Room here. Where's this Noble Marquess? The King, my Lord, once more has
sent me to you, and finding no Dignity above your Merit, so you will freely
grant to his Proposal, he bids you be a Duke, and choose of whence.


'sHeart, if you yield not now, you are undone: What can you wish to have more
than the Kingdom?


Why then, so please his Majesty, I would be Duke of Dunstable; Because I like
the Sound.


'Tis very apt, Sir: I know the King is pleased. There's your Patent with a
Blank.


Pray give his Majesty Thanks, Sir; and you may tell him now that I will stay.


He'll be a glad man when he hears it, Sir.


I must have vent to laugh, or I shall burst.


Keep your Countenance, and be hanged.


But how shall we keep it from the Worlds Ear, that none undeceive him?


We'll think of that anon: Why, Gentlemen, is this a gracious Habit for a Duke?
For Heaven's sake each one employ his Hand to pluck the Clouds off from this
Radiant Sun, that must shine on us all -- I'll pluck one Boot and Spur off.


And I another.


This scurvey Hat, and plaguy Peruke, do not become his Grace's sprouting
Fore-head: For Shame let's off with 'em.


Now set your Duke-like Foot to this of mine, one pluck will do it.


Hold! Hold! thou'lt pluck my Leg off; prithee go more gingerly to work, my
Grace is yet but tender.


My Lord, I beg your Pardon.


Well -- you have it, Friend.


So, now off with this Jerkin, and throw away that Riding-Rod.


Here, here: on with the new Robe the King has sent.


Robe -- 'Tis but an odd sort of a Robe, methinks: Prithee, what's the Name
on it?


My Lord, 'Tis called a Solyman: 'Tis made in Imitation of the new Sultana's;
this Mode is for the great Lords, as the other for the great Ladies.


Oh ho! Is it so?


So, So, Where are his Grace's Slippers?


Come, come, Sir, all's ready: The Horses are brought out; The Pillion on, and
my Mistress stays in the Hall. Ownz! what's here to do? What a Devil do you
mean, Sir?


My Slippers, Toby, my Slippers.


Slippers! 'sbud, will you ride a Journey in your Slippers?


Oh thou mighty Duke! Pardon this Man, that thus has trespassed in his
Ignorance. Here are your Grace's Slippers.


The poor Fellow is honest -- I pardon him.


Why, what's the matter?


Fellow, he's a Duke. The King has raised him above all the Land.


A Duke! Oh, that ever I was born! Do you hear, Sir, Do you know what I am,
pray?


Chief Gentleman of the Chamber; Secretary, any thing, what you please: you may
be a Lord in time, if things go right.


Do ye hear, Friend? Prithee pull off my Boots too.


No, let them alone, and get thee into the Country presently, and tell my
Uncle what has happened.


'sHeart, here's Luck for you. I'll post thither instantly, and tell his Uncle
this amazing News. Oh what dull Dunghill Country Rogues are we! A Duke!
'sheart, we shall be all Lords at least.


Thus to your Will, as every good Wife ought, I have bent all my Thoughts, and
now am ready.


Oh Madam! I am not worthy to kiss the least of all your Grace's Toes, much
less your Thumb, which yet I would be bold with. All your Council has been to
me as prudent as an Angel's, but mine to thee as dirty as my Boots. Dear
Duchess, there's no going now, we must both stay.


Pray, Sir, don't mock me, nor make me dress and undress like a Fool, because
you find me easy: said I not, the whole World should not alter me, if once I
were resolved; therefore let's away.


Behold, a Knight does kneel.


A Knight!


A Lord.


A Fool!


I say a Lord does kneel, nay a Duke.


In Trowses, Madam.


Without Shoes.


Are you all mad?


No, gracious Lady, if you dare credit your faithful Servant's Word, Your
Husband's made a Duke.


What think you now, Sir?


Ah dear, dear Duchess! I am made by thee for ever, and here in Token, that
all Strife shall end, 'twixt Thee and Me, I let my Trowses fall, and to thy
Hands I do deliver 'em,

To signify, that in all Acts and Speeches,
From this time forth my Wife shall wear the Breeches.

WELL avads! You are welcome home a thousand times, dear Hubby; and will my
Cousin be here so soon do you say?


Ay, I have laid it home to him, i'faith! I have made a new Man of him! we
shall have no more Court Fooleries now!


Why, Hubby, is not the Court a fine Place then?


Not half so fine a Place as my Barn is in Harvesttime.


What, and so many tall, young, handsome, Scotch, French and Irish Wits there,
that come for Preferment? Why, Hubby, I heard here that my Cousin Cockle-brain
was to have been made a Lord.


A Lord! A Loggerhead he would have been made, had not I cleared his Eye-sight,
what with his Wife's Tattling, and her Bullies Bantering him with Honours and
Titles, he was almost mad amongst 'em: but I roused him, i'faith! I got the
better of him at last, and made him forswear ever coming near that damned Town
again. I expect him here to morrow; He's upon his Journey by this time.


What has he forsworn sweet London, to come and live sneaking here in the
Country, Hubby?


Sweet London! 'sbud I warrant this Fool thinks it paved with Nutmegs and
Ginger; ha, ha: -- besides, why sneaking, you Baggage? why sneaking?


Why is not our Country Life a sneaking Life, Hubby?


No, Hubby, and let me hear you call it so again, if you dare: I shall have her
get an Itch of seeing this sweet London, and run away from me there, if I have not
a Care.


Nay, Dear, pray don't be angry! what Preferment can my Cousin expect here?


'sBud, is he not Lord of a Manor? which he may thank me for too, for that was
just degrading, had not I been in the way, and exercised upon him: besides, if
he wants more Preferment, he may be a Justice of Peace, as I am: Lash the
Whores out of the Country; live godlily, and take Bribes, ye silly Jade.


He's coming, Hubby, for look here comes his Man, Mr. Toby.


'Tis he, i'faith! What, Toby -- my Friend, Toby! welcome, faith: Spouse, go
lay down the Pheasant Roger shot this Morning: I suppose my Cousin's alighted
at the Gate, and we must get something to entertain him; go, go; why don't you
move? now I see, Toby, he's a Man of his Word. Ownds run, lay down the
Pheasant, I say.


Your Pheasant must fly into St. Iames's Park if you intend to treat him, I can
tell you that.


Why, is not he come?


No, nor like to come, that's more, Old Fellow.


How, Sauce box! What's that you say? Will he break his Word with me? does the
Rascal dare to affront me?


Rascal! Have a Care what you say, Friend, I have sworn Homage to my Prince,
and hold my Place by my Fidelity, therefore, Friend, keep good Words in your
Mouth. You are but a Justice of Peace.


But a Justice of Peace! Why, you saucy Rascal, what would you have me be, a
Cherubin? Here's an insolent Rogue! He makes nothing of a Justice of Peace.


Not in Comparison of his Grace, or my self, I thank ye.


His Grace! whose Grace, Dog? 'sbud, speak quickly, and don't plague me with
these Riddles, or old Crab shall fly about your Ears? Why does that Scab, your
Master, use me thus? and where is he?


His Mighty Grace is at his House, I suppose.


Mighty Grace!


Nay, nay, Hubby, prithee do not call my Court-Nephew such Names!


Ay, ay, Old Mole hill! things are altered since thou and I met at London: to
be short, the King has made your Nephew Duke of Dunstable: now repent of what
is past, and extend your Manners to me, as my Place deserves, or look to it. I
shall stick upon your Skirts: I shall grub ye!


The Duke of Dunstable, Oons!


Even so, Sir, and greatest Favourite at Court, no better, nor no worse, Sir.


But, Toby, dost not thou dream? Art sure?


Sir, I'll hold no Discourse without my Title. If you want Court Breeding I'll
teach you some. I am styled now Mr. Secretary.


Mr. Secretary!


A little Step to future Dignity. About two Years hence I expect to be a Duke
my self.


The Devil you do! This must be down-right Madness.


Believe so, and be wretched!


Nay, nay, I beseech you, good Mr. Secretary, be not angry! 'Tis such high News
it almost gravels me: I desire only to be satisfied, and if you are sure my
Nephew is a Duke.


As sure as you are Justice Grub, Sir.


And that's pretty sure indeed. Gadzooks, if this be true I have undone my
self, I called him Son of a Whore! But, Mr. Secretary, I have great Confidence
in your Worship's Patience and Mercy.


Well, Mr. Justice, I can wink at Faults.


But if the Sun should dazzle now!


Yet more Doubts! Have you a Nose on your Face?


A Nose! Yes, yes; I am sure I have a Nose.


Why then I am sure he is a Duke.


O Gemini! If our Nephew be a Duke, I wonder what I am, Hubby!


A Fool, Hubby. Pox, prithee hold thy peace; I'll tell thee more anon: this is
the rarest News! We are all made for ever.


I saw the Courtiers bow, and heard 'em cry, Good Health and Fortune to my Lord
the Duke; God bless him, cries another; and to his Grace's right Hand, the
Worshipful Mr. Secretary, says a third: And when I came away to bring this
News, his Chamber was hung with Nobles like the Presence.


I heartily thank you, Sir, I am satisfied. Why, Great as he is, he is my
Kinsman, Mr. Secretary; I am his poor unworthy Uncle.


That's true, Sir; but I could wish his Greatness could make him lose his
Memory; you have been formerly a little saucy with him, you know, Justice.


I have so indeed, a great Failing in troth: I am ashamed on it heartily; and
will repent and mend. What, I warrant his ingenious Lady was the Means of all
this!


Even so, Sir; You know I was for having you swinge her, Gadzooks, I would not
have her know it for a 1000 l.


Nor I have done it for Ten thousand.


For she has ferk'd out all our Preferments upon her own Anvil, as cleverly as
a Smith would do a Ten penny Nail.


Ah, I always thought her an ingenious Person. But now to see what Fortune some
Men have! I might have been a Duke too, if I had had but Luck. I had an Estate
and a Wife as fair as his, that could have brook'd the Court as well as his,
and laid about her for her Husband's Honour. Ah, Toby, had I ever dreamt of
this!


Yet again, Sir?


I cry your Mercy, good Mr. Secretary.


Why faith, Sir, it came above our Expectation: we were wise only in seeking to
undo this Honour: which showed our Dung-hill Breeding, and our Dirt.


'Tis very true, we were both arrant Puppies, Mr. Secretary. 'Tis as his Noble
Grace hath often said, we understood just nothing.


'Tis Time then that we now improve our selves, that rising, as we may, with
our great Master, we may attain some Wisdom with our Places, and not be Fools
in Office, Mr. Justice.


Right; and Troth this Grandeur of the Duke's, my Nephew, I cry thy Mercy that
I am familiar, methinks should make for us. Hum!


How the Fates may order in this poor Thread of Life, as yet I know not; but I
think I was not born to hold a Trencher: Let Time roll on, I shall see what
'twill come to!


Well, The first thing I'll do, I'll fit my Wife for the Court; Buy her new
Clothes, and Trinkets.


That's the Way, Sir.


I was a dull Country Clod, to let my Nephew rise and get the start before me.
But I'll dispatch and put my self in Money.


To buy me fine Clothes, Hubby! O Gemini! And must I go to Court then; And see
the fine Houses, and the fine Horses, and the fine Gentlemen that I have dreamt
of a thousand times, when you have been talking the Night before, ivads I have,
Hubby.


Thou shalt see all: It shall go hard but I'll have Preferment too. I'll about
this Money instantly.


Oh Gemini! I could leap out of my Skin for Joy methinks!


You do well, Sir, and now you talk of Money, the former Business, for taking
up the five hundred Pounds, must be dispatch'd; This little Plat in the
Country lies most fit to do his Grace such serviceable Uses.


By no means, Mr. Secretary; his Grace shall have it of me, 'twill be a Courtly
Complement, to introduce my self.


Why, Troth, I thought so, but would not be too forward.


Oh, by all means, Sin, come, come! pray walk in, Wife, conduct Mr. Secretary
into the Buttery; and desire him to take a Glass of what we have: And do ye
hear, recommend your self handsomely to the great Duke, our Kinsman, and his
Duchess; and write them word you shall attend 'em suddenly. I'll go and
dispatch these Bills, and follow you. Zooks! I hardly know where I am.


Sir, I shall wait on you.


By no means, Sir, 'tis much below your Place.


Come, sweet Mr. Secrecy, please to walk in, I know not what to get that's good
enough for you, for ivads you have made me a joyful Creature!


Keep your Joy till you come to Court, pretty Mistress!


And that shall be quickly, i'faith, since there are Dukedoms, and Don-ships,
and the Devil and all to be gotten so easily: I'll trouble my self no more with
Sowing and Reaping; but laugh and lye at Ease, let the Weather change as it
will: I know I shall be a Devil of a Courtier the first Year; But what then, my
Wife shall shine for us both.

And toy and treat, whilst I wink at the Matter,
But for the rest, odzooks, I'll watch her Water.

It must be carried closely with a Care, that no Man speak to him, or come near
him without our private Knowledge, and then my good dull, honest, drowsy
Husband you shall not hinder me from the Pleasure of Basset: And I will go into
the Country when I please, and not when you think fit.


Let him be kept in's Chamber under Show of State, and Dignity, and no one
suffered to see his Noble Face, or have Access, but we that are Conspirators.


Or else down with him into the Country, amongst his Tenants, where he may
live much safer in his Greatness, and play the Fool in Pomp amongst his
Fellows.


No, he shall play the Fool in the City first: I will not lose the Honour of
the Jest, that shall be given my Wit, for all his Land in the Country.


Alas, poor Duke! I do but think how he will sweat when he finds at last he is
made an Ass on.


Ha, ha, ha, ha.


In the mean time we'll keep a Guard about his Person, that no Man come too
near him, and our selves always in Company have him into the City to see his
Face swell, whilst in divers Corners some of our own appointing shall be ready
to cry, Heaven bless your Grace, Long live your Grace.


'Twill be rare Sport, and shall be as rarely follow'd: I'll teach him to rail
at me for losing Sonica. To think Beauty, such as mine, was only fit to wither
in the Country.


Poor sordid Earth-worm!


I can scarce hold from open Laughter, when I hear him cry, come hither, my
sweet Duchess; let me kiss thy gracious Lips: for this is still his Phrase. I
shall fear nothing but his Legs will break under the mighty Weight of so much
Greatness.


Hark, hark! He's coming: set your Faces right, and bow like Country
Prologues. Here he comes. Room, Room, before there: The Duke is entering.


The choicest Blessings wait upon the Duke.

And give him all Content and Happiness.


Let his great Name live to the end of Time.


I thank you all; and am pleased to give you Notice, at a fit Time, I shall
consider of you: till when be near me: My dear Duchess, prithee let thy Grace
lend me thy Keys; there is a Book of Heraldry in thy Closet, I must peruse.


Here they are, my Lord.


He does it to a Hair.


Is he not a Duke indeed? He's altered so, he's now scarce knowable.


Get Candles there.


Lights, Lights there for the Duke.


His very Stile and Air altered: Why, here's the Effect of Grandeur, Gentlemen.


The Duke! What Duke is this, ha? Do you know him?


'Tis the poor mad Gentleman I told you of; he runs thus over all the Town, and
where he finds a Door open, he enters.


Or is the lucky Favourite made a Duke, He that has married Celia?


What Celia, Sir?


I know not what I say, Sir: you shall not snap me: this is no Treason: I said
only Celia, she was my Love, Sir, in Diebus illis, But now alas!


Where is she, Sir?


Dead! Dead! In yonder Cowslip lies my Dear,
Entombed with liquid Gems of Dew;
Each day I'll water't with a Tear,
Its fading Blossom to renew.
Alas, poor Soul! she died of the Heart-burning, in spite of the Benefit of
Crabs Eyes or Spaw-water, Sir: you are an Apothecary.


Alas, poor Wretch!


You have a strange odd kind of an Apocryphal Phiz; methinks a Face that's full
of hard Words: Zowns, Sir, do ye come to pose me? I am a Scholar.


He knows it, Sir, and knows Celia too, who greets you kindly, and would not
have you be so melancholy.


Thank her; but 'tis too late, tell her! I'll lay me down and die within some
hollow Tree,
The Raven and Cat, the Owl and Bat shall warble out my Elegy.
How do ye like that Dirge now, was it not quaint?


I have found the Book of Heraldry.


A Book of Heraldry! Have you so, Sir?


How now! Who's this? Yes, Sir, that I have: what then?


Here's like to be rare Sport!


We can't miss it, now the Fool and Madman are met.


What then? Why then, Sir, I suppose you were sent to dispute with me about
King Henry's Title: Come on, Sir: I'll be cunning enough, I warrant you, Begin,
state your Point.


A strange sort of Fellow this! does any here know him?


I believe your Grace will find him a Male-content, sent by some Enemies that
envy your new Greatness, to pump your Loyalty with a fallacious Argument about
the King's Title.


Oh, is that the Business? Well; I'll be prepared for him, I'll warrant ye:
Come, Sir, sit down; I'll clear this Business: Henry of Hereford, Son of Iohn
of Gaunt.


Sir, I shall answer nothing, till these Witnesses depart the Room; you must
not think to trap me.


Pray leave us together: I'll have no Man stay; no not my Duchess.


Come, let's go, and behind the Hangings hear this fine Argument.


Henry of Hereford, Son of Iohn a Gaunt, Impeached of Treason by Thomas Duke of
Norfolk, demanded Combat.


Well, Sir, and what then?


Pray give me leave, Sir: But King Richard the second loving and fearing his
great Uncle Lancaster, deferred the Fight, and banished both the Kingdom.


Sir, give me better Reasons for his Banishment, or yield your self confuted.


What, before we have half done. Pray give me leave, Sir.


Pray, Sir, give me leave: I'll give you better Reasons, They swell within me,
and must have vent.


Will you but hear me, Sir?


I'll hear nothing, Sir, till I have filled your Belly full of Reasons: I say,
King Richard, Sir, forbid the Combat, doubting the Justice of his Kinsman's
Cause; and therefore, Sir.


I know what you infer, Sir.


Sir, you know nothing: for then comes Vortigern the Saxon Monarch, and cuts
off the Entail.


Ownds, what Entail? The Devil's in this Fellow; He's running back to the
beginning of the World, if I don't contradict him: why what has Vortigern to do
with Richard the second?


How, Sir, not to do with him? Did they not combat on the Bank of Humber, and
thump each other soundly for the Kingdom, with Bats and Sand-bags?


No, Sir, that ever I could read.


Why then you are a Traitor, and I arrest you of High Treason, for not knowing
History better, and seize you on the behalf of Vortigern.


Pox on Vortigern and you too. Seize me? alas, poor Fellow! know thou who I
am?


I care not what you are: Come along to Prison, and willingly, or I'll plume
thee as a Hawk does a Partridge.


The Devil is certainly in this Fellow: within there? who waits?


Do you rebel? Thus I claim the Combat.


Help, Help, here.


How now? Alas, what's the matter here?


Help, help thy Duke here!


Take him off; forbear his Grace's Person.


A Horse; a Horse; my Kingdom for a Horse: What's here, a Woman, charging at
their Army's Head? then we are betrayed.

I'll mount to you, blue Coelum,
To shun these Female Gypsies;
I'll play at Bowles with Sun and Moon,
And scare ye with Eclipses.

Away, away with him.


How, seized! then here's my Ransom: This was my Father's Sword, I'll call it
Vortigern: It lightens when I draw it, and when I strike it thunders!


Away with him, the Man's mad. How does your Grace?


Indifferent well; but I believe he has broke my Head with the Hilt of
Vortigern.


How did you find his Title, my Lord?


The Devil take his Title and him too. Dear Duchess, prithee go get me a
Plaster.


It needs not, my Lord; 'tis nothing but a Contusion, upon my Honour, and
nothing so good for it as Air. Will your Grace be pleased to see the City?


It shall be so: prepare there. A Plague o'this Vortigern!


Your Grace determines not to see the King.


Not yet: about some ten Days hence I shall be ready.


Clear the way there: Room for the Duke!


Away, before, Bewford, and raise a Guard sufficient to keep him from the reach
of Peoples Tongues, and remember how the Streets must be disposed with Cries
and Salutations: in the mean time, Madam, you keep your State at home.


Ha, ha, ha; thus far 'tis acted rarely: what hereafter I do intend, lies not
within your level, my sweet Friends; nor shall not, till 'tis ripe for a
Discovery.


As I live, from my new Country Aunt, I know the Hand: To the great Lady, High
and Mighty Duchess of Dunstable, be these delivered: Ha, ha, ha, Oh for a
stronger Lace to keep my Breath in, that I my laugh the nine Days, till the
Wonder fall to an Ebb! What high and mighty Blockheads live in the Country!

My good angry Uncle, I find, by the Contents, you want Preferment too, and you
shall have it, or my Wit shall fail me.

Madam, I hope you'll pardon this Intrusion: 'twas told me that a poor
distracted Gentleman, that owes his great Misfortune to my Folly, was seen to
enter here; Pray is it so?


Such a one, Madam, has been here, indeed, but he is gone: Was he your Husband,
Madam?


That he was not my Husband, was the Cause that he is nothing now: cursed
lawless Force, and impious Cruelty, ravished the Blessing from his longing
Heart, and cast a Mist before my feeble Eyes, blinded by Wealth and treacherous
Dignity, I could not see his Merit, till too late.


I hope he's not past Cure, Madam?


There's a Physician learned in these Extremes, that gives me mighty hopes, if
he were taken!


I believe, Madam, my Servants can give you some Account of him: if you please
I'll examine them.


The Courtesy will be both generous and charitable.


Madam, You should command far greater Services than these, if they were in my
Power.


Every Man take his Corner, here am I, you, and you in that place, and as he
comes by, be sure you salute him with loud Voices, and Faces full of dejected
Fear and Humbleness. Away, he's coming.


Fie! How these streets are thronged here with these same rascally People. I am
just come to Town, and, as I am a Gentleman, am almost choked already, with
the very Steam of 'em: They have crowded his Grace almost to Death yonder, they
follow him like a Baboon to the Bear-Garden. There is in the World no true
Gaper like your Citizen: the Bears shall not pass by his Door in Peace, but
that he, and all his Family shall be ready to ride upon the Backs of 'em. Room,
before there.


A Pox on you, keep your Places, and then you may see him till your Hearts ache.

Bless your Grace.


And you, with all my Heart.


Heaven grant your Grace long Life, and happy Days.


Thank thee, good Friend.


Perpetual Blessings crown you.


I thank you all. Longoville.


My Lord!


I'll make a Speech to 'em. Hem, hem!


Silence there, his Grace will make a Speech.


Good People! I shall divide my Speech into three Branches; First, it has
pleased the King, my Master, for sundry Virtues in me, not unknown to Him, and
the wise State, to lend his Hand, and raise me to this Eminence: My second
Branch is to examine how this may seem to other Men, or stir the Minds of such
as are my Fellow-Peers against me; since I desire, and will deserve their
Loves, as I do yours, good People. My third and last Branch is upon Amity, for
as the Tree --


Your Grace had best take care, 'twill be informed the King, your Greatness
with the People.


A Pox on him! he has hindered me from branching into the finest Metaphor, and I
am the worst in the World to get in again when I am once out: My last Branch, I
say, dear Friends, is, Hem, hem! a Plague of this Clermont! is, I say, --
Faith, I know not what it is at present -- But if ever you catch me branching
it again, in this Fellow's Company -- I'll give you leave to hang me upon the
Tree I was speaking of, And so I share my Bowels amongst you all.


A Noble Duke! a very Noble Duke!


Is my Uncle coming, art sure?


As sure as he expects to be made a Duke too, Madam. Lord, methinks, I long to
see his new Country Wife, I wonder how the Creature looks.


Very prettily, as I have heard: 'Twill be Diversion to see how our Court
Sparks will ogle her Country Dress.


Yes, Madam, and paddle in the Palm of her Hand.


Hold your tongue, your Gypsy, and go and see what time the Coach comes in: I
must set another Spring ready to catch the Buzzard, my Uncle; I'll teach him
to preach against the Court and my Town Pleasures. Hark! His Grace, the Duke is
coming. Away, away to your Business.


Your Grace is welcome home.

Why, thank your Grace. How fine these Titles sound, Sweet-Heart, I am well and
merry, never more able to be thy Bedfellow, my Dearest.


Bless us, what a hot Meat this Greatness is!


It may well be, for he has not got a snap these two Months, to my Knowledge,
or is she damned for swearing it.


I thank you, Gentlemen, for your Attendance, and your great Pains, pray know
my Lodgings better and oftner: do so Gentlemen: now by my Honour, as I am a
Prince, I will consider your Deservings. Toby.


Where's Mr Secretary, there? Some body call him.


Mr. Secretary!


Who calls?


His Grace wants you, Mr. Secretary.


Toby.


My Lord.


Be ready for the Country once more, Toby: And let my Tenants know the King's
great Love; say I would see 'em; But the weight of State lies heavy on my
Shoulders, and therefore tell 'em, I expect their Attendance. Go, take up
Post-Horses, and make haste.


I begin to find this under-hand Dignity a little troublesome, and care not
much for jumbling my Honour thus a Horseback. Well, for this once I'll be a
Servant; but when I come back, I'll try if I can set up for a Duke, as well as
others.


My gracious Husband, you must now prepare in all your Pomp, to entertain your
Uncle, who is a Convert now. And with his Wife intends to be here to night.


Alas, poor Country things, how they will blush to see my Grandeur! But I will
be pitiful, Gentlemen, pray be ready, I do intend to morrow early, To show
before my Uncle's wondering Face,
The Greatness of my Pomp, and of my Place.



We'll all be ready. Away, Boys, till to morrow.


This Country Uncle must needs prove a rare new Scene of Diversion.


Most certainly, in the mean, let's to Pontack's to Supper.


ARE all things carried to the Taylor! Roger?


All, All, an't shall please you: che were with 'en by break of Day, along
while avore you were out of your Nest, an't shall please you.


That's well; we must know of the Duke my Cousin, Wife, what Fashion his Grace
will please to have us in? For my own part, I have an old fashioned Velvet pair
of Breeches, that when I have made a new Suit and Cloak of 'em, will steal into
the Presence well enough.


And does your Worship intend to leave Plowden Hicket, and your House in the
Country for good and all, an't shall please you?


As his Mighty Grace, my Nephew thinks fit: 'Tis as preferment comes, Roger!


Gads bread; and thick vine Gown will make Mistress look like a Countess too,
an't shall please you.


Ay, ay, before the Duke and the Court have done with her, I hope to see her
look like a Duchess, Roger. Come, Wife; What are you staring at?


Oh Iemmini! Hubby -- I never saw so curious a place in my life: The Trumpets
and the Drums make so pure a noise, methinks I am almost subtracted with it:
And look, look, Hubby what are these Birds that fly over our Heads?


Ducks, Ducks, Fool.


Good me! and why do they fly about so? And, pray Hubby, tell me who's that
naked Black Man, that holds a thing in his hand so.


O Lord! a naked Black Man with a thing in his hand, was there ever such a
Fool? why, that is a Statue! a Gladiator, a thing set up for Ornament; or to
scare the Rooks here about the Court -- A Pox I can't tell what it's for? Come
prithee, Come along.


Nay, pray Hubby; let me know all the fine things. And what are those that lye
there by the Water side, Hubby.


Geese, Geese, you Fool! odszooks! those! no, those are Gentlemen of the Guard
that lye a Sunning: s'bud She'll tire me with questions! if I stay longer --
Come, come prithee, come away -- Roger! a word.


Lol-throl-lol -- How now! what pretty Country thing is this, that stares at
me? I'll speak to her: Your Servant, pretty Mistress, whither are you a going?


Oh Gemini! what a pure sweet fine young Gentleman is here? Indeed Sir, I don't
know! but I think I am going home with my Hubby!


Her Hubby -- what a pox is that, her Hobby-horse?


You're mistaken here, Friend, She's meat for your Master -- hum hum --


Why then, Friend, I would my Master had her; and so your Servant --


Oh law! Do you know him then! prithee dear Hubby, who is it?


Odzooks! a lowzy Footman, that I would not have had his Grace seen you talk
with for 1000 l.


What, a Footman, with thick vine Silver laced Coat on's back, as sure as cham
here, I should have taken him to be a Knight of the Shire at least, if chad
seen him come riding through Plowden.


Oh thou art come to a new World, Roger, the Lords and the Lackeys are all
brave alike here!


Would I were at home again for my part, and sitting by the fire with old Ioan
-- I'd ne'er come here to seek for parferment, not I; odsooks! the Cries of
the Street, and the rattling of the Coaches have almost mazed me: besides, chant
slep a wink since che come to Town.


Hold your Tongue, ye Clodpole: Don't you see what preferment your Country-man
Toby is come to? And if I can get to be a Duke, as if my Wife manages well, I
intend to be, who knows, but thou may come to be Secretary as well as he
Buffle?


Should not a Secretary Write and Read, an't shall please you?


'Tis all one; some do, and some do not, if he has but a Clark that can, 'tis
no matter whether he can Write and Read, or no? But come, by this time his
Grace is rising: lets go and give our attendance. Nay, prithee come away;
What-a-devil art thou staring at? --


Save you, Sir.


Save the King* Sir


Pray Sir, which is the nearest way?


Save the King, I say, Sir, this is the nearest way.


The nearest way, I mean to the Post house, Sir.


Gad save the King and his Post horse, Sir.


Pray, Sir, direct me to the House


Here must be no directions; you cannot catch me, Sir.


I don't understand you, Sir.


Read Hugo Grotius then. I say you can't catch me, Sir.


Not catch you, Sir?


No Sir, nor can the King with all his cunning Stratagems and Plots, although
he put his Nobles in disguise, never so oft, to sift into my words by course of
Law lay hold upon my Life.


This must be some business that the Duke my Master is by the King employed in,
and he thinks that I, as being Secretary, am acquainted with it -- hum hum.


I shall not need to rip the Cause up to you, nor need you tell me the place
you hold in the State -- I know your Name is Phizgigg.


Phisgigg, Sir!


Ay -- by the Mothers side you come from the Right Honourable the Bominellies;
you give for your Coat Argent, a Polcat Mountant Azure, a Bar direct between
Culters pendant Sables: You are, Sir, sprung of a great Family.


An ingenuous Fellow, this, I warrant him: s'bud, he knows more of me than I
ever knew of myself.


Besides, you have a scar upon the top of your Nose, which denotes Dignity, a
Semicircle upon your Crown, and a double fold upon your right Ear: your Great
Uncle was a Bassaw.


A Bassaw, s'heart, this fellow will make a Great Turk of me presently -- I
have lately come to some preferment indeed, Sir.


'Tis nothing, you shall have more, and greater: Let me see -- You shall be
before Christmas next --


A Duke, Sir.


A Duke at least.


Odsheart! I thought so always! I know I was not born to hold a Trencher: this
is a most admirable Man!


But there is one ill Planet that hangs over you.


An ill one! a lack-a-day -- What is it. Sir?


Saturn! Saturn! you will within this hour be taken up for High Treason!


Bless me! for High Treason!


Has no one seen you talk with me, think you?


Yes, a great many, Sir.


There 'tis, there's your undoing: I am pursued by the whole State! Continual
Treasons laid to my Charge, and all that talk with me fall into the same
predicament. I cannot help weeping, to think you should fall, into such danger
for my sake!


S'heart! would you had been hanged e're I had fallen into the predicament, as
you call it.


You will be apprehended within this half hour, you are beset already -- 'oh --



I'll whip out of Town.


Oh -- then your Head's whipped off the next minute, if you but offer at that. Oh
--


Why the Devil did you stop me, could you not be contented to be hanged by your
self like a good Christian. But on my Conscience, this comes of my Ambition, my
plotting to be a Duke before my time.


Oh, oh, oh!


But, good Sir, is there no remedy?


Yes, yes -- Fate does allow a remedy; but then you must take a Manly
resolution, and suffer your self to be hanged little, to appease the Fates.


Oh a little! pray how little will serve, Sir! for you know there's no jesting
with those things.


Why, two or three hours hanging will do it, I am sure; and if you can endure
that bravely, you will certainly live to be a Great Man.


Oh Lord; 'Tis impossible: I know my Constitution so well, Sir, that I shall be
choked in half the time: But if punishment for a High Misdemeanor, instead of
High Treason would serve turn, I would be burnt in the Hand with all my heart;
if that would appease the Fates.


'Twas generously said; and 'tis pity such Honour e're should be a prey to
Fortune: Take Courage, Friend, I will preserve thy life with hazard of my own.


A Blessing on your Heart.


This night thou shalt be locked within my Doors, and in the Morning I'll so
provide, that in disguise you shall have free access to the Sea-side, and then,
e're any know it, be Shipped away for Bantam.


For Bantam! Gadsooks! that's a devilish way: What shall I do when I am there?
Oh Fortune, Fortune! but come, any thing's better than hanging by the Neck two
or three hours, in hopes to be a Great Man after it.


Follow me softly then, and no more Thoughts of Honour, do ye hear: lest the
Fates frown, and contradict our purposes.


Ah no, no, Sir, my Pride is fallen low enough by this time. This comes of my
Ambition, Rogue, Pimp, Scoundrel as I was -- I must be a Duke in the Devils
name -- Oh, I deserve to be hanged, that's the Truth on it --

Lyonel, Toby go above.


This is his House, and here I saw him enter; his better Angel has directed him
to leave the wandering streets -- poor, Gentleman, would I were able, with as
free a Heart, to set his Soul right, as I am to grieve the ruin of his Sense,
which Heaven forgive me!


If you could win him but to take my Medicine, and get some Rest, my Life upon
the Operation.


I'll call to him: Sir, if you are within, pray speak to me.


Yes Sir, I am within, and will be.

Oh, oh -- Who is't, Good Sir, Who is't?


The Captain of the Guards: take heed you are not seen: there the Disguise
lies; on with it immediately, 'twas what I had provided for myself -- but you
shall be served first now, Friend.


Sir -- here's a friend of yours would speak with you


A Friend! no Sir, you must pardon me -- I am acquainted with no such -- I see
you are a Switzer by your Habit.


Alas! poor Gentleman!


A Switzer! Oh Lord, what will become of me?


Sir, I am a Messenger from her ^ou love: nay, and from her that loves you more
than Life, more than fresh springing Flowers the indulgent Sun; or pretty Birds
enfriar'd their liberty: and can you be so cruel not to hear me?


Let it suffice that you hear me, and hear me loudly, once more, God Save the
King. Come Friend, are you ready -- the Troops are all drawn off, the Coast is
clear now, only the Captain and the Switzer.


And what's to be done with 'em, Good Sir?


We will scow'r 'em, Boy, we will scow'r 'em: you shall bring up the rear. I'll
Charge in the Van! nay, prithee, why dost thou shake so?


Alas! Sir -- 'Tis impossible for me to Charge, I am turned Woman now!


Why then I'll do it myself: This bloody Sword through millions of our Foes
shall be thy Guard, and let thee safe aboard.


Come, Madam, let us be gone: This is no time to stay to tempt his Fury: we will
take a fitter season.


Heaven send it. --


They are gone sure! I can see no body. Oh how I shake! would I were safe under
hatches once, that I might be out of my fears -- Farewell -- the Court now;
Instead of being a Duke, or at least a Baron, I am going the Devil knows where,
to Bantam? And farewell, my dear Lord too -- I shall never see thy Glorious Face
again -- Oh, oh --


How now! Who's here, another Undertaker? Another Plot upon me?


'Tis I, Sir, 'tis I.


I. Why who are you?


Your Friend, Sir -- whom you are sending to Bantam?


Bantam; and my Friend: here's a sly trick now, they know I have no Woman
Friend but one, who is too closely kept from me, to be here: pray, come hither
and let me look on you.


Why Sir, 'Tis I.


You should not be a Woman by your stature!


I am none, Sir -- I am none.


I know it then, keep off:
Strange Men and Times! How am I still preserved?
Here they have sent a Yeoman of the Guard,
Disguised in Woman's Clothes, to work upon me,
To make Love to me, to trap my Words,
And to ensnare my Life, keep off, I say.

Oh do not leave me, I beseech you, Sir, for I shall ne'er be able to find the
way to Bantam, without you.


Ha -- are not these my Clothes?


Yes, Sir, you lent 'em me to make escape in.


Here's an impudent Rogue: First rob me, and then talks of making his escape --
Come, strip, sir -- I'll make an example of you.


Oh Lord, strip, Sir?


Ay, ay, all off Rogue, and presently, or I will pound thee into Mortar.


Oh dear Toby. What will become of thee?


The Drawers too, Rogue; the Drawers.


The Drawers -- Why Sir, I shall be naked, for I've but a half Shirt on.


Sir -- If you have but a half Breech on, I'll see what you have!


Oh the Devil's in this Fellow. I must run for it, he'll flea me else.


Hah, fled -- Why then, like conquering Tamberlain, I carry off the spoils --
Victoria, Victoria.


Wife -- be sure you hold up your Head now; and primm it as you did one Sanday
at Church in the Country, when you put the Parson out of his Sermon, with
staring at you -- and let the Courtiers see you understand your self! do you
hear?


I warrant you, Hubby, let me alone for primming out.


This is a woundy gallant place, an't like your Worship. There's ne'er a
Chamber che ha gone through, but is as big as our Town-Hall at Plowden, an't
shall please you.


Peace! peace, the Door opens, and two Gentlemen are coming this way: Wife,
look to your Roger, be mannerly. I'll speak to 'em. Save you, Gentlemen! belong
you, I beseech you, to his Mighty Grace the Duke?


We do, Sir, and are your Servants. S'life! What pretty Country Creature's
that?


If there be any thing that we can serve you in, to his Grace, Sir, be pleased
to Command us.


Gentlemen both -- I thank you, Roger, your Hat, under your Arm -- Sir! when
did you hear such words before. Wife -- hush -- Answer nothing: let me alone
with 'em. Pray Gentlemen; is it sit so mean a person as myself should desire
the favour, as that you would be pleased to help me to the Speech of the Great
Duke your Master --


Sir, we shall be proud to serve you. Pox on him, what a Tone the Rogue has?


Be pleased, Sir, to discuss your Business, and your Name, And we will
presently inform him of ye.


O Iemini, Roger! I never heard such fine talk in my life; why, our Minister at
home is nothing to 'em.


Ah, thick Gentlemen would make a fool of him, quick alack, they are too vine
to have much Religion in 'em.


Well, well, Roger, I hope to be too fine myself too shortly.


Leave your chattering, and be hanged, and don't discover your Country
breeding, ye silly Baggage -- Grub.


Grub. I cry you mercy, Sir, you are his Graces Kinsman, if I mistake not.


Troth Gentlemen, I think there may be a quart or two of his Graces. Blood in
me -- if I may be so bold.


Sir, no doubt, but you have a gallon of it in you, and we must all be yours,
his Graces Kinsman. And we so much forgetful, 'twas a rudeness, we must beg
pardon for, and beg the favour to welcome you to Town.


Your servant, Sir, they flabber confoundedly, tho.


Oh Lord, what do thick Men mean by Bussing my Master?


Next Madam, to you we humbly address our selves! A Cherubim, by this Light.


This kissing is the worst Fashion in the Court; would they would leave it off
-- Come hither, Wife --


'Tis He! this is the Uncle; I find it now; dost hear Bewf. He must be
preferred too?


And so he shall, if all the Art we have can make him noble. I'll dub him with
a Cuckoldom -- if his Wife will but join issue.


Soft and fair, Sir, we must draw lots about that business.


Throw away that Pole, and be hanged! What a devil dost think we are come to
play a Hit at Quarter-staff! we stand upon our preferment; therefore take care
of your Behaviour, Booby.


Wilt please you, Sir, to walk a turn or two here in the Anti-chamber, whilst
to his Grace we make your coming known.


I thank you, Sir, -- I shall attend his pleasure. Now, Roger, what think
thou: Is not this rare -- ha!


The Gentlevolkes are huge loving, an't like your Worship, Godsdiggers, I was
afraid they would have Buss'd me too.


Oh dear Hubby -- lets never go into the Country again; Foh -- methinks. Plowden
is such a stinking dunghill to this sweet place!


Odsooks -- the door opens now, now hold up your Head, and Primm, be sure.


Oh Iemmini! Is that he, Hubbi?


Ay -- Godsooks is it: make a low Curtsy, quickly ye Jade. Most Gracious Duke
-- my -- poor


Uncle, you are welcome!


Pithy and short.


And stately too, I'll assure you.


Look, look -- the old Gib-Cat is got down on's Knees.


Oh! High and mighty Duke. Your Graces Vassal, far unworthy the nearness of
your Blood -- Wife! down on your Mari-bones.


I swear, the prettiest Wench -- that e're I saw.


Oh! is she so, Sir? -- Come, come, here are the Lots!


Now, Fortune --


Mine by Heaven! and you are to assist me!


We are so! a pox -- take you.


Uncle, you must rise: so must your Lady -- the charge of whom I give to my own
dearest here.


Oh! how you Coxcombs shrugg, and Ogle this new Face already -- 'Tis well my
fine Fops, I shall have an hour for you too!


Now Phill. now Phill. -- now or never little Phill.


Well Uncle -- are you convinced yet of your old Error?


Oh Gracious Duke -- I was a very Rascal -- a Country Rogue! I do beseech your
Grace, out of your mighty Bounty, to lift up your Noble Foot -- and give me
half a score good kicks! Kick me! my good Lord, I beseech you, do it.


No Uncle, not so neither: I remember you a little Familiar with me indeed!


Ah! Zoons I was bewitched, my Lord, merely bewitched, I called your Mighty Grace
Son of a Whore: for which, besides my begging pardon on my knees, I was the Son
of a Whore myself for my pains, my Lord.


Well, well, 'Tis all forgotten, I know it was your zeal, and therefore blot it
from my memory; have you, according to my Orders, resolved your self for Court,
and utterly renounced the slavish Country, with all its Dirt and Care.


I have, so please you.


Have you dismissed too your Garlic Eating-houshold, your Hobnail'd Lubbers,
with their crooked horned Noses, and dry chopped Hands.


All, all, my Lord: All but my Man Roger there!


You mean that Booby yonder -- foh -- how he looks! put him in Livery, or let
me see him no more; away with him: I hate a fellow in Grey, like a Badger!


Oh Lord! What am I to be hanged now?


And have you sold your hangings of Nebuchadnezzar, and the Prodigal, with the
ancient History of Baalam's Ass, pieced out with the Wisdom of Solomon, and the
Two Harlots.


All taken down, my Lord, and ready for a Chapman.


'Tis well, for now your Mind must quite be altered, as your Condition shall
be: One word more in private I must impart to you -- your Ear a little.


In troth, my Lord, I am unworthy.


No more words: Come hither when I bid you:


As I was telling you first, your Husband must learn Basset, and must be no
more your Master.


No forsooth: I warrant you I'll order him.


Change that forsooth for Madam, when you talk.


Yes Madam! Oh Iemini! this is rare, I vow.


Nor must you Eat with him, nor keep him company! If you would make him great;
you see this Duke here,


Yes forsooth, -- Madam -- I mean


He was an Ass when he came first to Town, an arrant Ass: Nay, I may truly call
him just such another Coxcomb as your Husband -- Till I pushed on his Fortune.
No more words now: Come to me to Morrow -- I'll put you in a way --


Yes, Madam, well, Iv'ads I'm sure I shall be a Duchess too, methinks I'm too
proud for a Country Gentlewoman already --


Think on my words, and so farewell for this time: Gentlemen, conduct my Uncle
to his Lodging.


I am your Graces Slave, your Vassal! My Lord -- Ah Gadsooks I am made for
ever.


Oh! for a private place to ease my Lungs -- I am ready to burst! such a pair
of Jades -- were never ridden sure.


Take him aside -- Good Ned, whilst I break in upon the body of his strength,
his Wife.


Advance then, and be hanged, why don't you board her?


Ply her to windward, ye Rogue! she rides fairly.


Faith, Sir, you have taken the most compendious way, to raise your self; if
his Grace stand your friend, you must be a great man!


Why, troth he puts me in great hopes, Gentlemen!


What do you think now, Sir, as first step to your preferment, if you could get
to be Dew-beater!


A Dew-beater; what a Devil's that?


Why, your Office is to walk before the King a Mornings, and beat the Dew off:
I see you have a good large flat Foot for the business.


Yes, yes, my Foot would do well enough, you need no doubt: But what's that
Gentleman doing with my Wife yonder!


Oh, what's matter what they are doing, or Sir, if you love your ease --
suppose you should put in for Gentleman of the Charcole.


Gentleman of the Charcoal.


Ay ay -- To see good Fires made in all the Rooms about the Court, and disperse
News to all the Courtiers that come to warm 'em. This place brings in a mint of
Money, if you can persuade 'em but to pay well.


Ods-heart! I persuade a Courtier to pay well! that were a work indeed -- Put
pray Gentlemen, by your leave, A little -- I don't love to see my Wife hugged
thus!


Not love to see your Wife hugged? have a care what you say, Sir, I would not
have the Gentleman hear you for a thousand pound.


What a Devil care I what he hears: pray, let me go Gentlemen!


Not for the World, Sir, s'life do you know what you do?


Why, what's the matter?


The matter! He's one of the greatest Favourites at Court, And one that can do
any thing with the King; I swear you are a lost Man if you stir.


If you have a mind to Rise, Sir, never mind 'em.


Zoons, Sir, -- They are kissing!


Let 'em kiss, and much good do their hearts, if your Wife can but niggle him
right, Sir -- you are a made Man, I can tell you that.


But Sir, to kiss her, and in that rumpant manner!


Ay, ay, any manner, Sir: they must kiss, and double kiss: and kiss again: or
you may kiss the Post for your preferment.


I know not -- but look, look: he's at it again!


Again and again too: and the more happy Man you: would he would kiss me as much,
or my Sister, or any of our Family.


Good b'we, Hubby, good b'we, Hubby --


Zooks, Sir, but this is unconscionable, do but see, he has taken her into a
private room.


Has he! why then your business will be done, Sir?


Her Business will be done, you mean, Sir.


You'll be the happiest Man by this days work, except the Duke your Cousin, of
any in the Court; For my part I envy you, and will Marry certainly, and not let
every Man out-run me thus; 'tis time to be my own Friend now: I live in Court
here, and teach the readiest way to prefer others, and be a slave myself.


Nay, good Sir -- be not moved -- I thank you heartily for your Instructions,
but --


But, no more but -- but come away.


I should be glad, methinks, to have my Wife with me.


Yet again, your Wife! will you ruin all? Go, go! begone! and take no notice
where you left her: let her return at leisure. If She stay a Month 'twill be
the better -- I tell you once more, that Gentleman can make ye --


A Cuckold it may be.


What he pleases, Sir!


Well -- I will go! and dost hear Phill, don't forget Hubby a Duke, Phill. a
Duke! be sure to remember Hubby! Gentlemen, your most Humble Servant -- I'll
leave 'em together for a time; since 'tis the Court-way -- Gentlemen -- your
most Humble.


Ha ha ha. To me the gulling of this Fool is Venery.


Thus Country-Fops, that of Court-Grandeur heard, Post up to Town; and thus
they are preferred.


TIs somewhat strange; that I have had no Letters, nor no Account of my Affairs
in the Country, since I sent Toby down among my Tenants: I did expect the very
Bells of Dunstable, giving the sound to the near neighbouring Steeples, would
lead the joyful Tidings, like a Train of Gunpowder, from thence to London; But
I hear nothing: Fame has lost her Trumpet, and the loud voice of my young
flourishing Glory is mute as a hoarse Clerk setting a Psalm.

Sirrah, keep back -- here's no place, for such Vermin: This is no Barn for
Beggars.


Beggars! here's a Rogue now! to rank a Great Dukes Secretary, because he
appears a little in disguise, amongst Beggars.


Ye saucy Rascal, you will come on! nay then, I'll try my strength --


How now, what's the matter there?


My Lord, my Lord, the Duke! do you know me: 'Tis I my Lord -- 'tis I.


What! Toby!


Ay! ay! Faith old Toby of the World, that has such things to discover! such a
Catastrophe to tell you: Hark you, Squire of the Curry-comb --


What, Mr. Toby? this is wonderful.


Sure thou hast designed some Farce to entertain me! What is the meaning of all
this! What Catastrophe hast thou to tell me?


Oh! a damned Catastrophe: as I was saying, a Devilish Plot -- Will your Grace
be pleased to call for a clean Shirt: Gad! it will make you sweat through your
Clothes in a moment.


What are all my Tenants run away in the Country? What a Devil can this be?


Nay, that the Fates can tell, not I: I have been no nearer the Country than I
am now: Ah, your Grace little thinks, how dangerous 'tis to be an Officer in
Trust! why, since I saw you, I have been! --


In a Bawdy-house; I believe: Ay, ay; it must be so: And there stripped: this sly
Rogue has been in a Bawdy-house.


A Bawdy-house at Bantam, my Lord -- Too hot a Country for Whoring, I thank
you.


Bantam!


Even so: I was within a stones throw of it, for above two hours, I am sure:
Does not your Grace begin to sweat yet?


To hear you lye, Rascal.


Nay -- if you doubt this -- What will you do when you hear that I have been
hanged, drawn, and quartered for High Treason, since I saw ye.


Away -- Coxcomb -- Thou art drunk sure.


Drunk, it is with the Cup of Sorrow then, nothing but my Tears have moistened
me. Since I saw you last, -- I am as dry as a Bakers Bavin, and fit for nothing
-- but to be thrown in with them to heat an Oven: for since I left your Graces
House.


My House -- what House is that, hah?


Why, this House, your Graces House here!


This House -- why you Son of a Hedge Hog: has it no name, has my House no name!
no Title, Sir -- Dunstable-House, ye Ass. Must a Man be always telling you
these things?


I beg your Graces pardon -- And as I was saying, my Lord -- just as I had left
Dunstable-House, there comes up to me a Devil of a Fellow, Friend, says he --
and stares me in the Face -- You are the Man beset -- Come instantly with me,
and be shipped away for Bantam, or you'll be instantly apprehended, and hanged for
High Treason.


A Devil of a Fellow indeed: it must be some mad Man, sure.


Mad man! no -- he was a Politician I am sure, for he was mightily given to
Music, and Sung one profound Ballad, that to my knowledge, was made of on old
-- Proclamation.


This must be some Spy from some foreign Enemy; coud'st not thou have trained
him to Dunstable-House, that I might have examined him.


No more than I could carry Dunstable-House upon my Back to Dunginess -- Oh he
had a plaguy pate of his own, and was, I am sure, a great Courtier, for he was
in 20 several Minds in the space of a minute. First, he was for clothing me in
a disguise to escape, within a minute after -- Wheigh -- with a Powder le pimp,
He fleas me, as a Cook does an Eel; after which I ran away, and not being able
to get into Dunstable-House by mere chance -- my should Joy, ish borrowed thish
Irish Cloak here of an honest Clanbriggian of my acquaintance; and lay all
night perdue in thy little worshipful place, called Dunstable Privy-house
indeed.


There must be more in this, than at present I see, which at better leisure I
will fist into: In the mean time, get ye in and uncase; You are a fine
Secretary indeed --


The Truth on it is at present, I look more like a Sow-gelder than a Secretary;
the Learned observe, Men of Merits often taste the greatest misfortunes -- Well
Sir, I'll go and uncase, as your Grace Commands -- little does he think that
the Man in the Rug here has his Fortune told to be as great as himself
shortly. But Mum, Toby -- There's some comfort still, however.


Now I have considered o'nt, Since Toby's intended Journey is so crossed, My State
and Grandeur will much more be shown Appearing in my person in the Country; My
Tenants needs must be much better satisfied, with seeing me, than hearing of my
Greatness: It shall be so; I'll down to 'em this Morning. Who waits there?


My Lord!


Go tell your Ladies Grace; that She must rise, I have instant business with
her.


Would your Grace have her rise to do your Business?


Yes that I would, Minx! here's a young Pert Quean already.


My Lord, 'tis cold, and she may catch an Ague!


Why then I'll Trot her till she catch a Fever to it, How now, dare you
dispute?


I am gone, my Lord -- on my life he's mad again.


There is no way to grow popular like Courtesy, A gracious Nod, a wink, or
such a trifle will gain the People Love and Approbation, more than a thousand
Messages, or How-de'es.


-- Oh! are you come, Wife?

What, is the House on Fire, or has your Grace A fit of the Vertigo -- that I
am roused thus?


Oh neither! neither!


What then, in the name of Wonder?


Why, I am resolved, on good Consideration This day to see the Country, and
'tis proper That we set forward early.


The Country -- for Heavens sake, my Lord, What is't you mean? Have you forgot
the King's Request?


Prithee! I'll but show myself: I'll only air my Titles there amongst 'em; and
so return, which, by your leave, good Wife, will be for the King's Honour.


Well, you may leave me here, you know I am breeding.


Oh! Air will do you good.


Besides, I dare not forfeit my Allegiance. Your Grace may do your pleasure.


Your Allegiance! That is, your Duty to obey your Husband: Go, go, I say: and
bid your Maids pack up your things.


Nay, pray my Lord be ruled: you know the Coronet that now adorns your Head,
descended by my management.


Yes, yes: and the other Ornaments that branch there, were all of your
contriving: what then? go and dispatch, I say.


The King will surely hear on it; and Heaven knows What the result may be?


Well, well; I'll venture that: pray spare your Politics, and do as you're
Commanded.


Pray hear me, Sir!


Yet again, Impertinence! where got you this presumption? Am I the Duke, or you?


Well, Sir, tho you are Duke, 'twas I that Dubbed you.


Dubbed me; nay, the truth is, you did Dub me I believe; but no more of that
now: obey my Will, or --


Will no Reason -- take place?


A Woman's Reason! that's good i'faith -- prithee away, go, go, good crooked
Rib, and do not provoke me. I know what thou would say; the King will take
it ill: Alas! thou dost not know, my main design is for his Glory, by this
Expedition, which I'll recount to him at my return, and what I've done for his
security, by diving into the Humours of the People: But these are Riddles to
thee, Child -- Begone, I say, and within an hour let your Duty wait in the Hall,
with your Riding-dress on, do you hear?


Sir, you'll be undone!


A Dunce, shall I not be?


Yes -- by my Faith.


Oh! nay, if you grow Malapert: I must take other measures: Hear me once more;
if all things are not ready in that time, I'll have thee carried like an Essex
Calf, tied Neck and Heels, stuffed in a pair of Panniers: and I my self will
drive thee on before me -- you shall know who I am?


I do too well, for a dull stubborn blockhead, and know not how to mend thee;
s'life, if this Humour hold, I am half undone, for I am engaged this Afternoon
to meet the Widow Tireman, pretty Mrs. Primm, and three or four of the Beaux
Esprits, at my Lady Wagbums this Afternoon, with design to play Crimp, and
break the Bank, the Pareli, and Sept et-l^va, being made by those we have the
design upon, for we have agreed what Cards shall win, and Mr. Shufflewell is so
adroit in managing, that 'tis impossible we should miscarry, and now in the
instant, is this Beast for hurrying me into the Country, but I'll have another
trick to divert that Instantly -- He shall stay in spite of him. Maria!


Madam!


Quick, quick; thou dost not dream, what Eggs are hatching; this Beast is for
the Country again; and all my dear Delights and Joys of the Town destroyed in the
Instant.


The Devil shall have him first.

I'll bring him one shall swear there's a great Flood,

And there's no likelihood to pass this ten days.

Or that a party of 2000 Robbers have sworn to pillage for a week that Road;
you know he loves his Money.


No, no, his Grace must be degraded; there's no way like it: Clermont and his
Friends are all prepared for this last Plot; Therefore be swift as Thought, to
find 'em out, we have but an hour of Trial.


Swift as the Mischief, Madam, never doubt me.

Since Marriage is a yoke two Fools must wear,
The ablest Fool the heaviest part should bear.
Thus let it then my Husbands Neck weigh down,
I'll try to make it easy for my own.

What! lye out two whole nights, and no preferment come, yet; How hast thou
spent thy time?


Oh! very well indeed Hubby! for the Gentleman told me you should be a great
huge Man; very suddenly. And for joy of it you can't Imagine Hubby, how I
briskt up to him!


Briskt up to him, a pox, tho you briskt up to him so mightily! nothing comes
on it, that I see.


Oh! all in good time, Hubby, for he told me the King had knowledge of you
already: And how you were resolved to be a Courtier.


Hush, here comes Mr. Secretary!


Run you, and see the Sumpter got ready; and let my Lords Clothes be brushed,
and laid in order; that Trunks and Boxes see nailed fast, and corded, d'e hear?


What's the matter, good Mr. Secretary!


Oownz! Sir, my Lord's going Post into the Country of the sudden -- I am almost
out of my wits here.


The Country:


Ay ay, Sir, nay, prithee Mr. Justice, you see I've a world of Business upon my
hands -- and do ye hear, put the Women's things in the new Panniers, the Linen,
and the Box of Cordial Waters: Bid Nurse take care of my Ladies Eagle Stone
too: I hear she's breeding.


I will, Sir!


The rest I'll do myself: Oh! how I sweat --


Roger: this suits well for me, for when he's gone, my Wife alone can do my
business better: Odzooks, I strangely long to be preferred, that I may twit my
Neighbours in the Country, and contradict our Parson, that's a main matter.


So 'tis! ant' shall please you: and that will make him contradict all the
Parish.


And never fear me Hubby -- I'll push it forward.


Do, do, Phill. do: Why, well said, Phill: methinks I am o'rejoyd at the
conceit on it: But see, here comes his Grace.


Why, this is well now: though you can talk, I see you understand Obedience.


Very well, Sir.

Alas! 'tis all poor Women were designed for.


Very Good. Very Good! Oh Uncle. I did not see you. Why, I must court your
Patience, some few days to live without me: We Great Men Dive sometimes: 'Tis a
State trick that you are yet unskilled in: But have patience, we shall appear
again to your satisfaction.


Health to your Graces both.


Set forward then: Sure Toby has by this time packed up the things, and seen
the Coach got ready?


Stand, thou proud Man, once more I bid thee stand.


Thieves, Thieves! where are my People all? who waits there?


Let 'em stir if they dare. And thus I am to say: Thou haughty Man, Thou art a
Monster; for thou art ungrateful, and like a fellow of a Rebel nature; hast
flung from his embraces; therefore he bids thee stand, thou Insolent Man,
whilst thus with whisking of my Sword about -- I take thy Honour off; This first
sad Whisk takes off thy Dukedom, Thou art but a Marquess.


What mean you, Sir.


This second Whisk divides thy Marquifate; Thou art yet a Baron.


Oh Lord! Oh Lord!


Prithee be quiet, I'll have no more of thy Whisks: what a Devil dost think I
am an Ass.


You must have patience.


Oh! that ever I was born.


Oh! Oh! Oh! --


Two Whisks are past: and two are yet behind: yet all must come: then not to
linger time, with these two dismal Whisks I quite degrade thee now; Goodman
Cocklebrain: for that sums all your Titles: Thank the King for punishing no
further.


Oh! Undone, undone! I thought what his stubbornness would bring him too?


I am amazed.


This cannot be in earnest, sure.


You'll find it so, Sir.


I am confounded, shot to the Brain, I know not where I am!


Nay -- for your part, my Gracious Lord, the Fates have a far different doom --



How's that, Sir?


Glory attends you, what Honours flow upon you. This Patent will inform your
Grace --


My Grace! s'heart -- if this should be a Dream now And yet I feel the
Parchment in my hand: Good Sir, explain your meaning -- you have transformed
me.


-- Hum, hum!


Thus then in short, my Lord: The King who still so much preserves the memory
of that unhappy Man to let the Honours remain in's Blood, has in his stead, made
you the Duke of Dunstable; And as such, he bids you wear this Robe of State.


Godzooks! Why Phill. Am I awake, Art sure I am awake Phill?


Ods- diggers! I must be a Secretary too I see, there's no remedy!


Ay, ay, Hubby! and did not I make the most of a thing, think you, to get to be
a Duchess so soon?


Zooks, Thou hast made more of a thing, Girl, than ever Duchess did -- I am
all Air: Gad I can fly, methinks -- A Duke already; why this is prodigious.


Your Grace, I hope, will remember your poor Servant.


O Lord, dear Sir -- you shall have any thing.


I must beg leave to make my Court to her Grace, that way I am sure preferment
lies.


Oh! by all means, Sir. Dost hear, dear Wife: we must be civil to these
Gentlemen.


Well, well -- the Gentlemen know I have not been behind hand with 'em.


False Villain: 'Tis as I suspected now, tho late, I see his Treachery, and
will revenge myself, tho I undo 'em all.


Iohn Cocklebrain, tho the Kings Kings Royal Judgment has at last found where
he should place his Honours: it is not fit thou should be quite forgot --
Iohn, come to my H^use, and Eat sometimes, dost hear! I'll get thee into the
Guards, or somewhere, because thou art my Kinsman.


The Guards -- ods-heart I'd as leive 'twere the Gallows. Oh! Oh -- I shall
run mad.


Mad! you Jackanapes! have not I told you of your fantastical Humours a thousand
times: Thou fit to be a Duke! Alas poor Fellow!


My Lord! the Coachman stays: and all your Equipage, ranked by my Care and and
Order, wait your Motion; I have had the Devil and all to do amongst 'em yonder;
but they are ready at last.


Oh! Oh! Oh!


Hey-day! What Farce is now to be acted? What is Mr. Justice going a
Morice-dancing?


Make him cease his babbling, Friends: and then let the poor Rascal know who I
am.


Who you are, why you are a Cuckold, and a Justice of Peace -- I know* who you
are well enough.


How's that? Have you a mind to be hanged, Sir?


Why, what's the matter, are you all mad?


Sir! he's newly made a Duke, down o'your knees, or --


A Duke! yes; and so am I as much? What d'e think I do not know old Justice
Grub?


Nay -- if the Fellow grows saucy, let him be whipped, d'e hear, and then tossed
in a Blanket: 'Tis fit I begin a little severely. 'twill make me the more
terrible.


Away, away with him: you are a saucy Knave indeed.


Why, my Lord the Duke -- help, help.


Oh! Oh!


What a Devil is the meaning of this, S'heart, you will not let me be tossed in
a Blanket, will you?


Not for the World, unbind him, Gentlemen, upon your perils.


Why how now, Bewford, whence comes this Insolence, that you dare contradict
his Graces Order.


His Grace! You'll find he has no such Title!


Oonz -- but I have, Sir, and will maintain it. Dare you sight, Sir? ha.


Oh! Rage will do no good, Sir. To explain all, Gentlemen, thus it is, All you
have acted hitherto, is by mistake, a Courtier, that his Lady made her friend,
made shift to steal his name into a Patent, but now 'tis razed out; and instead
of him the King has chosen this Noble Gentleman; and this is now the Duke.


Hem, Hem.


His Majesty has heard of your wise Conduct, and with this Robe invests you.


Air, air, good friends! by my troth this news warms mightily.


And if for this good news, I may deserve to kiss your Graces Hand, my Lord.


My Hand: Faith Friend I'll have it washed first -- Dost hear, old Fellow:
prithee fetch me a Basin of Water.


Fetch a Halter, Come, draw, draw: I'll fight for it: I'll not be chows'd out of
a Dukedom so, not I: since you have these tricks, I'll take the right way to
secure my Title, and settle it by the Sword. Draw, Draw, I say.


Ay, ay -- Draw, as my Lord Duke says: Zowns! I'll thrash some of you!


Oh! there must be no Bloodshed.


The old Fool has often these Fits: some of you that would deserve my Favour,
take the old Dotard away, and toss him in a Blanket a little: there's nothing
like it to cure his Fits.


How, Sir! a Blanket: s'bud can I bear all this?


Have but patience, Uncle, and I'll speak to his Grace, to take you as under
Butler, or something: I know you come to Town for preferment.


Fool. Cuckold.


Ay, look at home, Uncle! my Aunt has stirred her stumps, you know!


A pox stir her.


Nay, pray Hubby be not so angry: you know I did all for the best.


Hold your Tongue, Whore -- but do you hear Gentlemen! Have I dreamt all this
while of Dignity, and am I really no Duke?


No, no: Friend! a Duke! I prithee call thy Wits again.


What tho I formerly railed against the Court, when I was not preferred -- I
have more Honesty and Conscience now -- for if I am a Duke --


Yet again a Duke! Why, thou art no more a Duke, than thou art a Dromedary; but
as poor a Clumsie, Clod-pated old Justice as ever was drunk with March Beer at
a Sheriffs Feast.


Ownz! How I could swinge these Rogues, if I had my Will -- What, my Wife lye
with a topping Courtier two whole nights, and I no Duke! 'tis impossible?


I tell thee once more, thou art no Duke: I think the old Fellow is bewitched.


No, no; nor you neither, good Yeoman of the Roppets I shall Un-Duke you.


What's the matter now?


Ha! The Usher of the Black Rod! would I were safe at my Lodging.


And I. And I.


Guard -- Seize those Duke makers, disarm 'em: nay, if you struggle, we shall
hamper you: Here's a Warrant to bring you before the King and Council. You are
for disposing the King's Honours, and granting Dignities; let's see now -- how
you'll dispose your Estates to pay 20000 l. a piece Fine -- besides 7 years
imprisonment.


This I have helped ye to, my lewd Court-swaggerers! you are for every Face you
see, you are for flying at all Games: You! but I'll teach you to affront your
Friends.


Ah! malicious Devil, we shall get off some time or other.


And then the World shall know you.


What a fine Jilt you are.


Do, rail, rail; poor fools.


I begin to shake: what is the meaning of all this!


As for your part, my Lord of Lubberland.


Lubberland; prithee Friend thou mistake my Title, I am Duke of Dunstable.


A Duke, a Dog-whipper you are! such a knot of Fools, that the King, instead of
punishing, pities you -- But I shall make bold to turn you out of your
Dignity, my Lord Duke.


Heyday, the World's turning upon wheels, sure, What-a-devil d'e take me for.


For a Fool I take you, I confess.


A Fool, you might as well have taken me for an Alderman, But prithee don't
trouble thy Head, man.


Sir: leave your fooling, and have a care of the Porters Lodge; there are
Whips with Bells: and so I take my leave of all your Graces: you Cocklebrain,
you shall escape for your Wives sake, because she is my Kinswoman -- But for the
rest, away with 'em.


Your Humble Servant, my Lord Duke.


Ah! the Devil take this confounded Town: would it were burnt again -- Will your
Grace have a little more Air.


Thank your Grace; I am very cool of the sudden: Besides, I am reflecting upon
the strange mutability of human Affairs -- But however the world goes, Brethren
-- let's make some show of our Dignity, before we part: What think you of
Dancing the Hey?


Agreed.


To be thus fooled, and in my old age -- well.


Hah! here they are! and in the height of Revelling Pluto, Minos, Radamanthus,
the King of the Infernals, and the Judges.


Oh the Devil: here's the Mad man again --
Come, come away. Come, Duchess, Troop.
I'll not stay an hour in this cursed Town.
D'e hear, Sir, that 500 l. must be paid back again.

Not a penny, Uncle, your Grace shall take it out in Offices --


Plague take you all: Zowns! You Whore, Come away.


Oh! dear Hubby. Shall I never see a Play, nor lye abroad again?


What! you have a mind to be a Dutchest again: have you? Come away, and be
hanged, I'll Duchess you.


A Plague of this cursed Town, if this be all one gets!


Great Pluto -- know that I am Orpheus, and through the dismal shades of
direful night, am come to seek my long loved Proserpine, I'll charm thee God,
with Music, my soft Aires shall lull the Powers of thy barb'rous Empire, and
set my Love at liberty.


Pray, sooth his Humour. Till we can lay hold on him, then never doubt his Cure.


Madam, I thought he had been seized before.


He was, but by main strength he broke away; his Madness still increasing:
These are People placed by the Doctors Order, to humour the distemper.


So, now Madam, never give belief to Art, if you to Morrow, find him not
recovered.


Heaven grant he may, he shall not want my wishes.


Nay, Gentlemen: a little of your help will be convenient.

Brothers by Title, what think you to divert our selves, if we should Act a
Farce, and that we call it The three Dukes of Dunstable.


Not I; I have been in a Farce lately enough: but I am resolved to go into the
Country -- Eat nothing but Turnips 7 years, to recover the Estate I have spent
in waiting for preferment, and never so much as look towards old Sodom here
again.


And thus, Sir, on my knees, I promise ye henceforth to be Conforming to your
pleasure with all the Care, and Diligence, and Duty of a most Penitent,
Obedient Wife, to atone for my past Follies: and no more to heed the senseless
Fopperies of the Town, nor the more senseless Fops remaining in it.


Well -- I am forced to believe thee: We that are Married, have but small
variety of remedy.


I have been fooled my share too. But for my part, ince it is so -- I'll off
with my Mantle de la Guerr here, and into the Barn, and Thresh again: there's no
Revolution of State there, if the Harvest be but good; And if ever I expect to
be exalted again, may I be hanged upon a Beam there, in one of our own
Cart-ropes.

And may no Fool for better Fortune look;
That just from Digging, thinks to be a Duke:

Of which (because it was particularly carp'd at) I desire every one that has
more Wit than Malice, to Judge.

FOnd of his Art; the Poet has to day
Mistook, and made me mad the silliest way;
Pride, Wealth, or Wine, may Frenzy often move:
But that's a strange Brute that runs mad for Love,
Few now, Thank Heaven, such lewd examples find,
'Tis forfeiting the Charter of our Kind;
Shall Men have all, and Women no remorse?
Then let the Cart hereafter drag the Horse.
Let each Eve wrest the Scripture false, and swear;
She was not made for Man, but Man for Her;
No, this had been a most unpardon'd Crime;
Did not the Lady here repent in time.
Besides, the Notion's false, for sure no Man
Can Love so well, and faith no Woman can:
'Tis true, degrees of Madness all may fit,
Some with too much, some with too little Wit,
I have been Mad, or I should ne'er have Writ.
'Tis a Disease that Reigns in every station,
First, amongst Gamesters I have found occasion,
Sometimes to make a pretty Observation;
At Hazard I have seen a Witty Lad
Eat up a Candle, if his luck were bad;
What think ye, Sirs, Was not that Fellow mad?
A Lady too, in Tears has left off Play
(Alas poor Punt,) for losing Sonica,)
But above all, Wine does worst Frenzy raise,
For then Fop comes, and Whistles at our Plays,
Calls some one Whore, that to some Spark belongs,
Who calls him out, and whips him through his Lungs.
This, on our Nation, a vile blot remains
None but the Dutch and English take such pains
To fill the Paunch, and empty all the Brains.
The last, worst sort too, does your Heads invade,
That's Whoring, that Vice makes ye all stark mad:
Not Poverty has power to stop its force,
Poor Rogues, that ne'er could pay their Alehouse Scores
Shall brag they've at Command a Leash of Whores.
To the Camp those Militant Doxies yearly stray
Where each mad flitt'ring Fool that's given that way
To purchase Pox, melts down a whole Months Pay.
Many more Themes of Madness I could name,
And quote; indeed too many to our shame.
But, Sirs, to prove that you have all your Wits,
Let every Critic, that in Judgment sits,
Our Poet to an easy Penance doom,
Wink at small faults, for all of you have some.
^ I Sighed, and I pined, I sighed, and I pined, was constant, was constant,
and kind, to a Jilt that laughed at my Pains; though my Passion ne'er cooled, I
found I was fooled, for all my abundance of Brains; though my Passion ne'er
cooled, I found I was fooled, for all my abundance of

^ THere's nothing so fatal as Woman, to hurry a Man to his Grave; you may
Think, you may Plot, you may Sigh like a Sot, she uses you more like a Slave:
But a Bottle, although it be common, the Cheats of the Fair will undo; it will
drive from your Head, the Delights of the Bed, he that's Drunk, is not able to
Woo.

^ FLed is my Love, for ever, for ever, ever, gone! Oh, mighty Loss! Eternal
Sorrow, Eternal Sorrow! Yet prithee Strephon, why should mourn? For if thy
Celia ^ wont return, to her thou shalt go, to her thou shalt go to morrow; to
her thou shalt go, to her thou shalt go to morrow.

^ TIS Death alone, 'tis Death alone, can give me Ease, for all the mighty
Pain, for all the mighty Pain, I've felt; in his cold Tomb my Heart shall ever
freeze, since hers could never, never melt; since hers could never, never melt,
could never melt.

^ i'll mount to you blue Caelum, to shun those Female Gypsies, I'll play at
Bowls with Sun and Moon, and scare you, scare you, scare you with Eclipses; and
scare you, scare you, scare you with Eclipses.

^ i'll sail upon the DogStar, I'll sail upon the DogStar, and then pursue the
Morning, and then pursue, and then pursue the Morning; I'll chase the Moon
'till it be Noon, I'll chase the Moon 'till it be Noon, but I'll make, I'll
make her leave her Horning. ^ I'll climb the frosty Mountain, I'll climb the
frosty Mountain, and there I'll coin the Weather; I'll tear the Rainbow from
the Sky, I'll tear the Rainbow from the Sky, and tie, and tie both ends
together. The Stars pluck from their Orbs too, the Stars pluck from their Orbs
too, and ^ crowd them in my Budget; and whether I'm a roaring Boy, a roaring
Boy, let all, let all the Nation judge it.

^ IEnny, gin you can love, and have resolved you will try me; silly Scruples
remove, and do no longer deny me: By thy bonny Black Eye, I swear nean other
can move me; Then if still you deny, You never, never did love me.


^ Jockey, how can you mistake, that know full well when you woo me; My poor
Heart does so ache, it throbs as it would come through me! How can you be my
Friend, That thus are bent to my Ruin? All the Love you pretend, Is only for
my Undoing.


Who can tell by what Art
This Chiming Nothing, called Honour,
Charms my Ienny's soft Heart,
When Love and Jockey has won her?

'Tis a Toy in the Head,
And Muckle Woe there's about it;
Yet I'd rather be dead,
Than live in Scandal without it.
But if you'll love me, and Wed;
And guard my Honour from Harms too;
Jockey I'll take to my Bed,
And fold him close in my Arms too.

Talk not of Wedding, dear Sweet,
For I must have Chains that are softer;
I'm of a Northerly Breed,
And never shall love thee well after.

Then since ill Fortune intends,
Our Amity shall be no dearer;
Still let us kiss and be friends,
And sigh we shall never come nearer.
^ IF thou wilt give me back my Love, for ever I'll Adore thee; and for the
favour, mighty Jove, with Souls from Heaven shall store thee: To the Queen of
Shades, she shall advance, and all shall wait upon her; ^ Kings shall Adore her
Countenance, and I'll be her Page of Honour.


