A Virtuous Wife! Why what a dam^'d mis^ake
The Poet's in, to thi^k this Bl^y ca^ ^ake*
Nay, in this age, where Virtue is as scarce
As Truth in Women, Wi^ in the l^s^ Fa^ce,
Or Coin amongst the disbanded Sons of Mars*
Who now to the Farmers Daughters tal^ of Plo^*
Then make them trudge to Town with Toothles^ Br^ts,
That sprawl in the Handbasket, and (...) like C^ts.
No flying from Colour^* ^ade the Capta^ns (...),
Children and ^go^s* kept the^ always full*
If Our House ^ere but so for every Play,
I'd soon deser^ my Virtuous part to day;
A Part, that I am sure, can take ^ith none
But Women, or some Ci^t that pays h^lfe a Crown
To see this Wife, that ^e may curse his own.
So modish Beldam once did break the G^ss
That frighted her ^ith her dum^d ugly Pace*
And why then should I play't, faith I'll give over
Desert the Muses Cause* and play no more;
For Vnderhil, Jevan Currier, Tony Lee,
Nokes, all have better Characters than me.
What Mrs. Barrer! hah -- What's that you say?
Have I a better Character in the Play? --
The Devil I have as soon -- pox! don't collogue
I play a Fool you know, a silly Rogue --

Say what you please, 'tis written with more Art,
Pray tell the Poet so, and there's his Part.

Hold hold, -- 'sdeath are you mad, shall we lye down,
Lose all our shares, nay, and affront the Town?
For shame -- What amongst our ^elves hav^ C^vil Wars?

Pi^h, -- I can live without ye, tha^k m^ St^s*


Without us -- very fine -- g^d she pro^o^es --
Come Mada^ Lofty I perceive your Jokes;
This is a Plot, a trick -- 'twixt you and Nokes --

How me? and what of me, peart brother Tony?


Why Sir, I say you're Mrs. Barrers Crony,
And teach her (...) throw ^p her Par^s*

Ye lye.
And you're a Pimp, a Pand^rus of Tr^y.
A Gripe, a Fumble.

Nay, and you 'gin to quarrel,
Gad ye're a Swash, a Toby in a Barrel,
Would you were here.

I'^aith would I were th^re.


Well, I must do it I see, or lose my share,
Come come -- be friends, I'll Act -- for once I'll try.

Why then all's well again --


And so say I. --


Since then I must this virtuous form put on.
That like old fashioned Clothes, sits well on none.
At least, as you think Gallants, use me well
Praise me, and lye like any Fiends of Hell --
For if you fall, I'll fly from your illusion,
And turn true virtuous Wife to your con^usion.


PRithee good Siren, Sing no more! Do not spread thy Nets to my undoing, nor
draw me any further; I am this hour a Man of business, Business, sweet heart* a
blessing your Function always must give way to. Therefore farewell: nay now
thou wilt be so troublesome. Sirrah, bid the Coachman make ready.


Will ye ever use me thus? I swear you are lately grown so ill natured* my
patience is quite tired -- What Business can you have? or i^ it be so, methinks
my Company should outweigh all.


Well said Lady Vanity -- I warrant you think that glance quaintly with the
Corner of your eye bears an inestimable value, and not to be possibly
deserted.


Not I, I assure you --


O yes! or that the soft Rosie inside of your hand, the Index of youth and
Wealthy Nature deserves Millions of Kisses from the Charmed Adorer; ha! come,
confess, Is not this your thought?


I need not answer, Sir, if you were as ready to have a good nat^r'd Opinion of
me, as you are to vent your ill-natur'd Jest. But, since Rai^lery is your Chief
Diversion, I hope I may tell you, that whatever my Person has, my Love I'm sure
has deserved better usage from you.


How better usage! nay, gad, I deny that, except I have dream't all this while
-- By heaven thou hast like a Usurer, hoarded up my Love for this half year,
withou^ allowing me* wherewith to defray Occasional Expenses; and, that Craving
Creature that expects more, I think is most unconscionable.


And that dull Phlegmatic Creature, that pays less, I am sure is most
ungrateful -- But, Is this Raillery obliging do ye think now? Is this consistent
with the Love you have protested? Are these the fruits of passion?


Passion! fie fie! name it no more! Folly, though but once recited, is too much.
'Tis sh^meful to hear it twice: besides, Madam, Love and Passion are only fit
for vacant hours, the friends of idleness, and fowl weather, when that Divine
Essence our Reason has leisure to let loose our Souls to things transitory --
Tis for a Cloudy season, sweet heart* There's other matters to be performed
when the Sun shines.


And pray what do you call Celestial, ^f Love and Beauty are such transitory
things?


What -- Why, Immortal Wit, true Friends, sprightly Champaign, heavenly Music,
Philosophical Arguments, Exercise, and a number more. Beauty is but a Sewer to
these, a Grace Cup, when the great Banquet is ended, and is used by your true
Lover, as the last Course, fruit is only for the sake of Digestion.


Well -- what you please, you know your power over me.


Ha, ha, ha -- Come, I have done. I'll vex thee no more. Thou know my peevish
temper, and should bear with it -- Come, no more of this April weather;
Heark'ee, I have bespoke a Ring of my Goldsmith for Thee. 'Twill cost me 30
Guinnies, and expect it home this morning -- let that reconcile all -- by
heaven I do love Thee.


You did love me before you were Married: but these Wives are such Covetous
Creatures, They'll be sure to grutch a shilling to another, be their own
Coffers never so full --


Then more, to confirm my Love to Thee, know, that I am grown Jealous of my
Wife, and fear I have Cause --


You have often begun to tell me how your Marriage c^me to effect, and the
cause of changing your name -- but never ended it.


Now listen then. There was a Gentleman, one Beauford, bred up here at our
University, who, about two years since, unfortunately killing a Gentleman in a
Duel, was forced to fly -- but, ere he went, there was a Match propounded by
his Father (and for some time secretly carried on by him) betwixt his Son, and
my now Wife, the sole Daughter and Heir of the old Lord Thorough-good; she
never saw Beauford but once, and then this misfortune happening, the business
was deferred -- till he got his Pardon; but, before he could procure it, the
old man his Father died, leaving his Estate in Trustees hands, till Beauford
should come to age. Now, in this juncture, I nearly resembling him in stature,
and complexion, and being then passionately in Love with Olivia, boldly pursued
the Plot, and, about six Months since, changing my Name for his, as if I came
just then from Paris, made my Address; 'Twas doubtful at first, by reason we
differ a little in Face; but, telling her I had lately been sick of the Small
Pox, which had extremely altered me, it passed clearly, and in a Weeks time I
Married her, then discovered all, and asked her pardon, which she never wou^d
grant, and that's the reason of all our Quarrels and Jealousi^s --


But, What will you do, when the real Beaufort returns? 'twill be no easy
matt^r to persuade him out of his Name.


Nor he me out of my Wife; and, to deal freely, I exp^ct him every day. For,
his Friends have got his Pardon, and expect his return suddenly. How now!


Sir, my Lady is walking down this way.


Begone then my Dear. 'Tis not fit she see thee: but, be sure you come to morrow
to my House, I'll contrive some way to shift her off, and then we'll waste an
hour or two alone.


Will you be sure to remember, a Wife is such a Magnetic kind of Creature,
that I am afraid you'll forget me.


I won't, my honour on my word.


And, Will you still remember your poor Love?


While my Life lasts.


Will you indeed?


Indeed I will; see, yonder she's coming, prithee go.


Well then adieu -- What, won't you kiss me at parting? Lord, that a Wife
should so alter a Man, a Kiss sure can't be mis't.


No, not a Thousand; but prithee now be gone, I am afraid she see's thee --
Amble, wait on her home, and then go to the Goldsmith, a^d see if the Ring be
done -- De'e hear*


Yes Sir, --


Here she comes, now for a Scene of Love, Marriage-gallantry, which, in our
modish sense is down-right Railing, the effect of Jealousy and Negligence, and
as natural to the Marry'd-Tribe, as want of honesty is to those that profess it
-- hem -- pray heaven I have but breath enough, that's all my fear.


What alone Sir! at this time of day, and musing too, this is a miracle, not
one of your Brothers of the Bottle here, nor Dear Friends of the other Sex, to
keep off pelting Melancholy -- this is very strange.


Let there be no Scandals raised upon the Bottle, I beseech you Madam, for, to
my knowledge, the Wine within that Bottle has been a Blessing to a Man, when
his Impertinent Wife has been a Plague to him.


Pardon me, Sir, think not that I find fault with the Wine, for that is our
Friend as much as yours, and often to oblige us, makes the Jealous Husband
sleep soundly* That the VVedlock-Bed may be free from his Midnight unseasonable
railing.


Nay, rather, we may be free from your unreasonable Impertinencies; those
hours Nature allows us for rest, you take the privilege to disturb with your
damned Questions; and, gad I have often answered em as Children say their
prayers, so between sleep and awake -- that I have never considered my own
words, nor your satisfaction.


My satisfaction -- I dare swear you did not, for if you had, you would have
slept soundly, slep^, Sir, as you used to do those nights, when you have been
weary with the Days Fatigue. Your Mouth open, as if you were swallowing the
Jealous Air, th^ was to be vented against me the next morning, and snoring in
such a horrid VVhistling Tone, such a Barbrous Untunable Key -- That the poor
Bellman has often stood frighted at the door, with the apprehension of Ghosts
and Murders.


What's this? I snore? I tell thee, Thou most intolerable provoking Woman;
No Man in Christendom sleeps more silently than I, or with a clearer
Conscience, I thank Providence --


Nay, talk not of Conscience, Sir, for that, to my knowledge is in your
Mistresses power, and she keeps it close shut up in the same purse where she
keeps her Guinnyes.


I a Mistress -- gad would I could get one at a reasonable rate, that I may be
revenged on Thee! well, I'll comfort my self with the hopes, that there may a
chance happen, and then thank your self, that are so ill furnished with new
Charms. That your very expressions, and sometimes Dress is grown
old-fashion'd, and faith I ever hated Stale-Wares I confess* They were never
for my purchase. --


Stale! what is it you think so Stale Sir?


Why, a Wife of six months standing is Stale I think; what a pox -- would you
have?


'Tis the corruption of Matrimony that make us so, if we are. Mix Gold with
Lead, and see if the baseness of the one -- does not Eclipse the luster of the
other.


Ay that Luster you speak of, is so soon vanished, that a man ought to be of a
good sound faith, to believe 'tis to be found in any Woman, much less in the
married Tribe -- for a Woman's like a false Guinney, that at first being little
worn, might perhaps pass current, but once tried by the Touchstone-Mariage, is
found damnably counterfeit, and good for nothing. --


And to requite your Simile, Sir, a dull Husband is like an ill clock, he
always strikes false, and is ever mending, and were it not for fashion sake, I
swear, I think we had better have none.


The Devil's in her, she will have the last word, and* I must be gone in my own
defence. Well Madam, I have other business now than to stand chatting with you;
but assure your self, I shall find a time to requite your Repartee: and so
adieu dear Wife.


Your servant dear Husband.


Very well. There's no harm in this I hope.


Sister, your punishment is like to increase, who do ye think's coming yonder?


I cannot imagine, prithee who?


Beauford: the real Beauford is returned, has got his pardon, and is just come
to Town; I overtoook him just now, he and his Man are coming down this way.


Now Husband be kind to me, if thou can, thou never had more cause. Come,
let's make haste away, for I dare not let him know me now.


For fear of your Husband I warrant! well, if this be the Fate of Marriage,
Heaven keep me in a better mind.


Sirrah, this is the place where we must first pitch our Ten^ in pursuance of
my design. 'Twas here I had the misfortune of the Duel, which has since done
me so much injury in causing my absence* for at that time I had commenced two
Intrigues, that would have sufficiently recompensed my trouble, if the Devil
had not ruled in ^he air, and hedged me into that quarrel*


Ah Sir! he rules in the Earth as well as the Air, and where there's any Wi^e
or Women to be had, you may be sure the Devil's no^ ^ar off. But come Sir, my
Charge, where lodges the Fairy that I am to be Ambassador to? I guess my
Office, I am to be Pimp. Ge^eral still.


No sirrah, you must help me to contrive how to speak with Olivia; a sine
Woman, and think I shall be welcome. But do ye hear, do'nt let me rely upon my
own invention; for 'tis forty to one but I spoil all, for I am the unluckiest
fellow at an Intrigue, I believe, that ever breathed. I have run through more
hazards than ever Don Quixote did, and I think have often escaped as ill.


No faith Sir, you have done very well for your time, I think you were not
pumped and beaten above three times about your last business, were you Sir?


No Rascal, not pumped at all: but the truth is, I was three times swinged
confoundedly.


Ha, ha, ha! great pity in good faith: but see the difference in Constitutions
now: I warrant another man would have been such a fool to have left off, and
ventured no more, and now you are ready for another beating.


A Mistress, but not beating Rascal, nor had the last prevailed so, had I not
been orepower'd; but the Devil's in it, my damned fortune still jades me, for
when I have brought a Plot just to perfection, by some awkward negligent action
or other, I am sure to spoil all again, and then if no skirmish happen, 'tis ten
to one but I am disgraced, and that's all one: as for example, When I was in
Town last, dining at a Judges House, whilst he was in his study settling some
Law-business, I took the boldness to make Love to his Wife.


A very pretty boldness truly -- and yet I think you never saw her before, Sir.


Never not I; pox, I never consider acquaintance in these cases: w^ll, she was
tolerable handsome faith, and of a good complexion, but had one damnable
fault. --


What, Squinting eyes, or rotten Teeth?


Neither sirrah, but damnably given to take tobacco, and very inclinable to
drink Brandy: but in short, we agreed about the business, very well, and faith
in a little time were grown very intimate.


Ay, very intimate; I knew 'twould come to that, a fine Intimacy indeed; why
Sir, do you never intend to have any consideration? What cuckold a Judge? O
Lord! a Reverend Judge -- if you should happen to be a Plotter now, and come to
have any Sessions-house business, you'll be in a fine condition, hanged at
least: -- Mercy on us a Judge!


A Judge! ay a Judge. What a devil is that such a wonder now! Sirrah, here was
the Mischief; My Lord, and she lay in two several Chambers, and I being
commanded thither, came one night with my friend, and lay in another room close
by; about midnight I had occasion to rise, and go to my Lady to discou^se with
her about, some very secret busines^.


Ay ay! Law Cases State politics, and such like. --


Right sirrah -- but returning back again -- in the dark -- as the devil would
have it, that always helps me out at a dead lift -- I thank him -- instead of
going into the right chamber to my friend -- I makes into the other room, and
goes to bed to my Lord --


Ha! ha! ha! very fine indeed --


There did I tell him (thinking it had been my friend) all that had past
between me and this Lady, of a Jewel she gave me, and what time was appointed
for our meeting again -- in fine so much, that the poor old man was even out of
his wit -- for he cries out murder, calls up his servants, hunts about for his
sword, and had certainly killed me, if in this amazement I had not jumped out of
the Window into the Garden, and with the hazard of my Neck and Legs, made my
escape: But what became of my sleeping friend, Heaven knows, I have neither
seen him nor her since.


Why saith, Signior, this was ill Luck, that's the truth on it; but what if it
should be catching now, and that I by following your ill fortune, should have
the ill fortune to be hanged for company -- I question whether the wages you
give would make me amends.


Ah sirrah -- your cowardice* would be sure to secure you.


How now! who are these?


I know 'em, 'tis Sir Frolic Whimsy, an excellent old humourist, one so much
in love with the debauchery and vices of youth -- that he is always complaing
of his Age and impotence, the other is his Nephew, and Ward, one Sir Lubberly
Widgeon, an incorrigible fool, and so used.


Sol, la, me, fa, sol, la -- Come Sir begin.


Hark, a Singing-Master I'll lay my life* let's stand by and listen. --


Give me patience, must I still be thus tormented? troth Sir Lubberly -- let me
tell you -- ye are a very provoking fellow, and had not your Father conjured me
on his death-bed, to look after, ye, and breed ye up well, you should have
looked a Guardian for me, you should Sir Lubberly. --


Come Sir, pray be ruled, and sing your Notes -- Sol, la, come Sir, sol, la, me
-- Come.


Oh give me patience! not yet -- Sir, do not provoke me. Do not I say -- s'bud
sing, and quickly, or by this hand.


Well come what is't* what is't? s'bud must I b^ made a fool thus? -- Well come
'tis all one, what is't?


Sol, sol.


Sol, sol -- look now -- What the devil has he to do with my soul! Oh Lord!
must I be thus used? sirrah! you are a Canting Rascal, and sing worse than the
Vinegar-man, or Clark of Pankridge! sirrah, you are -- oh gods bud, must I be
thus used?


Ay 'tis no matter, 'tis no matter Sir, I must bear with ye: Come sing your
Note Come, Sol, la, me --


Sol, sol -- la me -- pox I shall never do it -- no no, I shall never -- why
this is worse than learning the Catechism, and saying it at Church without
book. --


Well -- I must have patience -- This is common with beginners, I must bear
with ye.


Bear with him! hang him! a Dunce! a Cuckoo! no time, no tune, no ear -- ah --
had thou but known me a young man, I would have made thee ashamed of this
Sir, believe me, I had the prettiest way of singing.


Sings very well Sir Frolic, and very well in Tune.


Ay very well, ha, ha, you lying Son of a whore! very well quotha, profoundly,
he sings worse than the prisoners at New-gate ( To buy us bread) ah that's
heavenly to it.


Sir Lubberlly, you are a foolish fellow, and must, God m^nd me, be taught more
manners! give me patience! is it fit for you to descant on a person of my age
and experience? go to -- ah, Mr. Crotchet, I am the most unfortunate person! I
am grown old of the sudden, as 'twere, I know not how, all my good parts lost,
quite lost as god save me. I am a Cipher now -- good for nothing.


Oh think not so Sir, you are a lusty man. Now Sir, to divert you, I'll sing
you a merry Song. 'Tis not customary with us Professors -- but to oblige you
Sir --


Thank you good Mr. Crotchet. LEt the Traitors plot on, till at last they are
undone,
By hurting their Brains to decoy us;
We whose hearts are at rest, in our Loyalties Blessed,
What Demon or Power can annoy us?
Ambition like Wine, does the Senses confound,
And Treason's a damnable thing.
Then let him that thinks well, see his Brimmer go round,
And pray for the Safety, and Life of the KING.
Let Caesar Live long, let Caesar live long,
For ever be happy, and ever be young:
And he that dares hope to change a King for a Pope,
Let him die, let him die, while C^sar lives long.
How happy are we! when our thoughts are all free,
And blessed in our forced Obedience;
Whilst the politic fool that's Ambitions to Rule,
Still banks at the Oath of Allegiance:
He trembles and flies from his numerous foes,
Like a Dear that the Hunters surround;
While we that hate all, that would Monar^hs depose,
Make the joys of our hearts, like our Glasses abound.
Let Caesar live long, let Caesar live long,
For ever be happy, and ever be young;
And he that dares hope to change a KING for a Pope,
Let him die, let him die, while Caesar lives long.
Ay, this is something. Well -- you have notable skill on my word Sir -- ha!
ce^tainly if I am not very much mistaken, your name is Beauford Sir.


The same Sir, and ever servant to Sir Frolic Whimsy.


Or his Wife.


Sir Lubberly, I have an ambition to kiss your hand.


Sir, that ambition shall be forthwith satisfied.


Sir Frolic -- I'll wait on your Nephew to morrow: I see now you are engaged
--


Your servant Sir -- but Mr. Bea^ford, could I have imagined you would have
been such a stranger, and kept your affair so close from your friend: Troth I
must tell you I take it ill --


Sir! you know 'twas fit a business of that nature should be carried with all
secrecy imaginable -- for if I had been taken ever I could have got my pardon.
--


Ah Sir! you are merry Sir, and shoot wide o'th mark. But to come nearer to ye,
'tis matter of marriage I mean. Methinks Mr. Beauford I might have been
trusted.


Doubtless Sir, very safely. Marriage Sir, What a devil does he mean?


Nay I know not, but my Corns ache; I am afraid here's some mischief towards.


How do ye Sir Frolic? I believe you are not well.


Well in person, Sir, but in troth my Mind is disordered, I cannot drink, Sir;
If I could but drink, my affliction would be the less, but I am the most
unfortunate creature, I cannot last a month, that's certain, unless my faculty
of drinking returns --


Eating signifies nothing, he never was the better for that


No!


Sir -- I have known ye the time, when I should have drunk ye 1 2 4 6 8 bottles
at a sitting, and been never the worse, give me patience, now half a pint
makes me drunk, dead drunk Sir -- I am almost out of my wits -- distracted -- I
cannot bear it.


You must have patience Sir, was ever such an old coxcomb?


What to be drunk with half a pint -- by Bacchus 'tis intolerable -- Pray how
does your Wife Mr. Beauford, is she breeding yet?


My Wife!


How! his Wife -- why Sir he has no Wife.


No Wife -- ha ha! you had best persuade me to that, why I came by your house
not above two hours ago, and saw her at a window --


And I kiss her yesterday as she was coming out of the Church --


Hey-day -- why sure I am in Fairy-Land, a Wife and Family that every body
knows, and I not know her my self.


Harkee Sir, for Heaven's sake let's away, for I believe that old Gentleman is
bewitched, and who knows but the Devil may have power over us too if we s^ay --


Nay -- you may strive to carry it as secretly as your please Sir. But what I
know I know, you have a house here in Chelsey. -- a Wife and a Family, and have
been married above six months.


Thank ye heartily Sir; faith tis the first time I knew on it.


'Tis so -- the Devil is in him for certain.


Pray Gentlemen, which is Mr. Beauford's house?


Thou need go no farther fellow -- here he is himself.


My name is Beauford friend, ha^t thou any business with me?


No great business an't please your worship, only I have brought your Worship
the Ring your Worship bespoke of my Master --


The Ring?


Ownds! These are the finest Wi^ches I ever heard of.


My Master says, if your Lady do not like the fashion, she may have it altered
-- but for the Stones, he dares reposite, they are as good as ever she wore,
and of the right black Water, and true Luster.


POK -- but what is it to me? --


Nay; even what your Worship pleases, ^is at your dispose now --


Why Sir -- you know you bespoke it for my Lady -- see the defect of Memory
now; Ownds! I remember it as well, as if it were but yesterday. Take it Sir,
'tis right.


Well, what's the purch^se friend?


Alas! I know not Sir, your Worship and my Master must agree for that.


Ay ay! a very honest fellow In faith, and of a good pleasing Physiognomy --
harkee! hast thou nothing for me friend? hah?


Oh gods me! yes, your name I think is Amble, Mr. Beauford^ man?


My name is Tro^, Co^in-German to Ambl^, and thou see I am his man. Thou
can not be mistaken.


No no mistaken; I remember, I think I saw you once at the Talbot drinking of
Mumm with my Cousin Scuttle-brain.


Ay the same the same. Well, S^uttle-^rain's a^ honest fellow -- faith he and I
have been old Cronies.


Have you so lack a day! Well Sir, here's your Watch, 'tis very well done, I
assure you; and Sir, my Master bid me tell you, if you can spare that little
Money now, 'twill do him a kindness.


Well, when my Master pays him for the Ring, tell him --


Very well Sir, your servant -- I'll tell him so, god bouy to your Worship --


Friend, thou had best stay and take thy Money, for fear thou see that nor
me no more.


Ah God bless your Worship; you're a merry man. See ye no more quoth^? there's
a jest indeed --


Ay, he jests, he jests -- he's a wagg ^ a ver^ honest fellow -- See him no
more quotha -- ha ha --


What think you of this now Sir? you have no House, no Wife, no Family, not you
I warrant ye, this amazes ye --


Gad and so it does --


Signior, I think 'tis best to draw off with the purchase, lest it be pursued
and retaken --


Well Mr. Beaufort, your care in obscuring your Wife, has made me long to see
my own. For know Sir, that since I saw you last, I am married too, and, tho I
say it, to a Beauty, tho I do not exclude her from the view of the world as you
do your -- but you doubtless have some reason for it -- and I'll urge it no
further, and so farewell --


How? he married, and to a young Woman? I must know more of this; Sir Lubberly,
a word with you. Prithee what young Lady is it your Uncle has married -- hah
--


Ha -- what is she? why would you know now, would you know -- gad it won't do
-- ha ha ha! not a word of the pudding not I ha ha! are you thereabout faith?


ROsie Cheeks and dimpled Chin,
Slow Will of Stenson.
Cole-black Eyes, and Milk-white Skin,
Oh! pretty Pegg of Benson.
The devil take thee for a positive fool; well I must leave it for time to
discover -- as to the the other business, the old Knight, and this Ring -- give me
sufficient cause to believe, I am mistaken for another -- be it so; 'Tis but
fortune thrown upon me, and none of my seeking. Come sirrah* I have an old Aunt
here in Town that I must instantly visit, she's called my Lady Beardly. Her
character I'll give thee as we go along -- how now, who's this?


Hah! I know not; I hope another Witch with a bag of Money.


What a silent Message, and no an answer to be given?

Your name has betrayed both you and me -- for by that means ^am married to the
wrong person. Seek not to instring^ the Marriage vow, since 'tis too late. And
I charge ye, never disturb my evenings Walk. The backside of the Bowling green
--

The Devil; What, married to another, and in my name? 'Tis plain now I have
been undermined, and here's the foundation of all mistakes -- 'Sdeath, I'll
challenge the Rascal instantly. But hold, that will ruin all, for then except
I kill him, I shall never have the privilege of seeing her. No -- to Cuckold
him* There's the revenge. Gad, I have a fair invitation here, and I hope 'twill
succeed, Since he my Mistr^ss got by fraud; By heaven
I'll get his Wife by Fraud, and then we're even.



NAy, prithee dear go in with me, my Lady Beardly will take it ill that you
should come just to the Door, and then away without seeing her.


Sweet Heart -- my Business is too weighty to be controlled by your advice. Go
get ye in -- I'll step over to the Coffee-house to drink a Dish of Tea, and
read the Votes, And then tell her, my Nephew, Sir Lubberly, and I, will wait on
her; Get you gone, I say, farewell --


To read the Votes a very pretty Employment. Well, I will not r^ile much at
thee, nor vex my self; but, this I'll say, he that leaves his Wife when she
desires his Company, to read the Votes, deserves to be Voted a Cuckold as long
as he lives, did the news never so nearly concern him --


Hah! Say thou so? gad, this must be a Woman of Judgment by that sentence;
Sirrah, thou shalt see me board her.


What, in your Aunts house; and, the first thing you do? 'shud, Sir, you ruin
your self.


Hah -- this damned Rogue goes always about to hinder my fortune* Sirrah, I'll
tell thee I'll do it. What a pox thou shalt see me fetch her about Immediately.


Sir, though I am sensible you do not value a beating, yet, by your favour, I do:
It does not agree with my Constitution, and therefore I shall make an
honourable retreat --


I vow to gad, Madam, there was so much wit and reason in what you said, that
it was impossible for me but to be of your opinion; and, if you would take my
advice, Madam --


She should Cuckold her Husband the first thing she did.


Oh heaven's, Beauford!


What, my dear sweet charming Isabella -- Is it you? a thousand thanks to
Fortune for this encounter: What a dull Rogue was I not to know thee sooner?
for, Who but she could have spoken so much Wit and Reason in one sentence?


I was no doubt inspired, by having you so near me; but, you'd say, I have some
reason for my sentence, if you knew all --


Knew all -- Why faith 'tis a little unreasonable, that I that have known all
so often, should now know but a part* Come, be free with me -- Prithee what
is't?


Hah! Why, what so familiar already? 'sbud he has fetched her about indeed --
Well -- go thy ways Bully, thou hast a very dextrous way at it, I'll say that
for thee.


Why then to thy Continual Torment be it spoken, know thou miserable Creature,
that I am Married, and h^ been so almost these two years.


The Devil thou hast. 'sdeath! What a Thunder-clap was that? Married --


Married, Wedded; nay, (and what's worse, and what I fear, will eternally
torture thee,) I have, like an imprudent Creature as I was, strictly bound my
self to the Tyrant Con^cience, utter^ to forsake all wild Company, Knit
Night-Caps for my Husband, and live honestly --


How! honest too! nay then farewell -- Oh fleeting World! but, I hope, thou art
in jest, my dear, for all this.


'Tis too true, Sir.

The Fates have so decreed it. But, however, one spark of Comfort shall be
yours, least you despair; Therefore know, tho I am Married, my Husband is old
--


Old -- oh! that's some amends however.


Oh! is that some amends -- ha, ha, ha! -- here are more Horns a making; for,
I never knew his e^es twinckle so in a morning, but some body or other was a
Cuckold before night.


Ha, ha, ha! -- well, Sir, ^ow I have a little revived your drooping spirits --
I must take the privilege of departing -- I have a visit to make to my Lady
Beardly; besides, 'tis not for my Credit to be seen with such a young wild
fellow -- for, Who knows what people will think --


No more than they have occasion to think I dare answer for 'em -- but, Madam,
you will not be so inhumane, to go away without giving me leisure to express my
self a little; 'tis just like giving a Man a strong Cordial to fetch him to a
minutes life, that afterwards he may die in more torture.


If Life were concerned, Sir, perhaps I might be more merciful; but, yours is
but a kind of Mongrel Epilepsie, a Politic Fit, Sir -- and you Gallants use
it, as Beggars do counterfeit Scars, only to procure pity, which having, you
laugh at us. Would there was order taken that you might be whipped for every such
offence.


How, whipped* 'sbud, I hope 'tis not come to that; come, good Sir, come away.


Peace, Rascal -- but, Madam, do but hear me a little.


Not a word, Sir; the times are altered: and, heaven forgive us what is past:
it shall be my endeavour to procure it.


Amen -- well, I am glad 'tis no worse -- this shows the woman has some
Religion in her however.


To which purpose I will go every morning to the Chapel, and desire, in my
Devotions, to be free from impertinent lewd Company: and then return home,
and, like a true Wife, spend all the rest of the day in my Melancholy
Apartment, and my Nights in the Bed of Honour.


To the Chapel -- very well; I understand ye faith -- the Devil's in it if I do
not thrive at this rate -- this is the second Assignation I have made within
this hour, and luckily with my two quondam Mistresses that I was in quest of --
Olivia I had designed to profit by, but, it seems, I have been undermined by
treachery; but, Sirrah, this last was mine for pleasure -- who now is also
Married, and, no doubt, a great comfort to her Husband.


A very great Comfort -- a Whore is a very great Comfort to her husband without
doubt.


Sirrah, no bug words, there was no Whoredom in the Case; no, faith, I'll say
that for her, she never took a penny of Money.


Oh, oh; then 'tis another case if she took no money: 'tis impossible she
should be a Whore, if she took no Money; ha, ha --


Ay, Rascal, 'tis unreasonable that term should be given her: but, a pox, I
have forgot one material thing, to know her Husbands Name; but, no matter, I
shall know all when I meet her in the Chapel to morrow. I am resolved to
venture thither, though I am afraid the Dogs will bark me out again; and, by
that means, let the Congregation know, how much I am a stranger to the place.


Sir, the truth is, I ever thought your Religion, and the Courage of a
Town-Bully, were very like; for, you care no more for the Church, without the
design of making an Intrigue there, then he cares to fight with a resolute
Fellow, when he h^s the convenience of running away from him.


Very well; but, What the Devil makes my old Lady Aunt so long a coming? I
believe she has taken Physic to day.


Physic? Why, Has she been given to that, and alive still?


Face-Phisick, I mean, Sirrah: Fucus, white Mercury, Fat of Eels, and Iews
Tincture, with which she does so mortify deformity, that her Face in a morning
looks like an old Wall new plastered; her head is unthatch't, like an old
Parsonage, thirteen hairs on one side, and three on the other, and her eyes like
lights at the last snuff: her Chin was long since befriended with a China Beard
of comely thickness, but, t'has been so unmercifully used with her Pincers,
that instead of one dimple, she has made forty: Natures hand shook when she was
making, for the white of her skin fell into her eyes, the gray of her eyes into
her hair, and the red of her Cheeks upon her Nose.


A very beautiful Creature in good faith.


Then she is the most Amorous Sibill, that ever spoke waggish Prophesy;
entertains all the young Fops in the Town, and to end all, has that unnatural
-- impudence to think some of 'em are in love with her. Pox on her, were I not
to have Money of her, I'd ride the wooden Horse e're be troubled with her
impertinence.


Dear Coz -- welcome to England, I protest I am as glad to see you as if you
were my own Son, born of my own body -- thanks good Coz in troth -- you kiss
comfortably -- and pray let me return it -- very good in truth, come, you are
my own flesh and blood, therefore this is no indecency.


If one of her teeth had dropped into his mouth, that would have been a small
indecency I'm sure.


None, none Madam, you do me a great honour.


Why you are grown a handsome Man, in troth, Coz -- tall, well-set, and
strait-limb'd, your leg too very well -- come, I say little, but I have known
the time when a good leg has been no detestable object.


Mine is but indifferent -- but I am glad your Ladyship likes it.


In good faith 'tis well, very well -- and good Coz: how does my Brother do? I
warrant he's grown an old grave Man by this time. Heaven bless us, I have not
seen him this many a year. Tisick, reach me the great Elbow Chair.


Hearty, hearty, but much troubled with the gout.


Alack-a-day, Is he so? -- well, he has been a Wagg in his days -- lord bless
us! I vow he has loved a Wench better then a Psalm-book, Coz: that he has of my
word.


Not unlikely, Madam, but I never heard he kept any


Did ye not? well, that's all one if he did, 'twas privately with discretion,
and not like our Gimcracks now-adayes; yes, yes, he had a little itching that
way, but, in troth, as godly a Religious Conscientious Man every one knows.


Faith, I always held him so: but, Madam, I think Nature intends to renew your
Lease of Life for ever; methinks you look younger than you did when I saw you
last.


Tisick! give me my Glass -- Why truly I think I am not Contemptible for one of
my age. 'This face, with a little setting out may serve.


To fright Children into Convulsions -- Pray how do your Ladyships Teeth hold
out Madam?


Oh Cozen! there you strike me! nor can I without Tears Remember my
affliction, my mouth is almost desolate, Sir -- I have but five and a stump --


But five -- faith, time has been a little Cruel -- but, Madam, you have this
Comfort, your Gums will last Cawdle-proofe a long time.


Small Comfort, alas, the Marks gone, the Marks gone; 'tis this that ruins
the Designs of all Ladies of my age: We can make shift to hide our hair, and
our Aches, and our Wrinkles line, But come to your Business, Coz. I warrant
you want Money.


A little, I confess, for the finishing a Design I have, Madam -- 50 Guinnies
would do my Business.


50 Guinnies -- Well, you shall not want 50 G^innies to further any good
design. Tisick, go fetch me the Green Purse in my Cabinet -- Ex. Tisick. What a
Mistress I warrant. Come, discover, it may be I may find 50 more if I like it.


Do ye hear that Sirrah? we shall roll in Money -- why then to be free with ye
Madam -- 'Tis about a Mistress -- There is a Lady here in Chelsey, one Olivia.


Well -- There is so -- What of her?


She was formerly my Mistress: but, since my last Misfortune, was got from me
by Treachery. However, I believe I might be received still, and if I had this
Money to set my self out --


-- You could Cuckold her Husband, could you, what and must -- I'll be your
Bawd about this Business -- and to Olivia too my Kinswoman, a near Neighbour --
In the name of Virtue! This is a very fine design indeed, must I be your Bawd
-- No Sir, no; I'll put a stop to this presently -- you shall have no
Caterwauling Money of me I assure you -- if you'll be content with the
allowance your Father left you -- so^mdash;if not -- I have no Caterwauling
Money for ye, and so your servant -- ods-heartlikins, must I be your Bawd --


Hark ye Sir -- Pray do me the favour to change me a Tester, I know you roll
in Money --


Damned Rogue, must you play upon my misfortune too. Well, I see my damned Luck
is coming to torment me again -- Death that I should be such a Fool to tell her
name! and Olivia, who, whatever she really is, was always accounted virtuous
-- pox on it -- Well, I must be very impudent -- deny, I meant her, and so bring
it about as well as I can -- hah -- here comes Sir Frolic Whimsy -- I'll try
him --


Mr. Beauford, your Servant -- I have been mediating for you within, but my
Lady is very angry; pray, What was the matter? What Lady is that he speaks of?


Ah Sir! only a small Mistake: My asking for Money was the Cause of her anger,
if the Truth were known. But, she shall find I value as little to receive her
kindness, as she does to pay em: And, Sir Frolic, since 'tis my good fortune
to meet you so opportunely, I will presume to request the favour of you that
she has denied; only to lend me 50 Guinnies -- for a Design I have Sir -- you
shal^ have what security you please.


Sir, the word of a Gentleman is to me sufficient security. I think I have the
sum about me, and it shall be the sooner yours -- because you say it is upon
Design. Pray, What Lady ^s it -- I did love an Intrigue my self when I was
young -- a Cock of the Game I -- but now by heaven I can do nothing -- No
earthly thing upon my Faith; but come, discover, good Mr. Beauford --


My fit of s^aking is come upon me again -- here's more Mischief hatching --
good Sir -- have a care, this may be a trick.


Sir -- in stead of Olivia, I'll tell him of Isabella -- gad, I'll be cunning
enough this time -- I warrant thee, Sir Frolic, I am so well satisfied with
your wisdom, and secrecy, that I can hide nothing from you. Therefore know,
Sir, that this Lady my Aunt spoke of has been my intimate acquaintance a great
while --


Very well Sir -- a single or a married Woman I beseech you?


By good Fortune married Sir -- since my last voyage; which is so much the
better for my design; for you know, a Husband is the most nec^ssary thing
imaginable in such a case; it mak^s the pleasure greater by the safety, and the
sin more sweet, by being the less easy to be discovered --


It does so in truth, it does so; but, her name, good Mr. Beauford, her name?


Faith, Sir Frolic, to tell her Name is not so like a Man of Hono^ -- but,
you are so obliging, that I can keep nothing from you; and, though 'tis true we
have been very intimate, very ^xceeding intimate -- yet I presume to tell you
-- my dear Friend, will no way be a blemish to her reputation -- Therefore,
know Sir -- she is called by the Name of the Incomparable Isabella --


What, Sir -- Pray that again!


Isabella, Sir.


The Devil -- what, my Wife -- give me patience -- give me patience.


Now, Sir -- the Devil's in it, I am utterly unacquainted with the old Cuckold
her Husband, and am damnably afraid of betraying my self to him --


Ah -- no fear of that Sir -- I warrant he's a very dull Rascally Fellow -- hah
--


Dull -- why she says her self, she believes he has not been ^ Man this 20
years.


O give me patience --


But, no matter, she revenges her self some way or other, for, if I am not very
much mistaken, she's with Child now.


With Child -- By the pleasure of generation I lay not with her these ten
Months -- O give me patience!


Now, Sir, as good fortune would have it, meeting her here just now
accidentally -- she appointed an Assignation with me to morrow Morning in the
Chapel --


In the Chapel!


Ay, Sir -- ha, ha -- Is it not a witty Rogue? and this Money that you are
pleased to lend me, is to Treat her, with a little at first, you know 'tis but
civil, for in a little time I expect three times that sum from her; and, to
morrow the business is to be concluded: for, there we are to plot how to mee^
undiscovered by that Jealous, Crazy, Feeble, Impotent Cuckold her Husband --
ha, ha, ha --


Oh the Devil! this is most insufferable -- but by Heroules -- I'll be so
revenged -- In the first place let me tell you -- that you are the Son of a
Whore: in the second place, you shall have not a penny of Money -- and thirdly,
I am resolved to have instant satisfaction.


Satisfaction, For what, Sir? -- I hope you have no concern with this Lady --
she's no Relation of yours.


No -- no -- only my Wife, Sir, that's all --


His Wife! gad I have made a fine business on it.


His Wife? O Lord!


Give me patience: Does Sir Frolic Whimsy live to be thus abused! no, the
Sword ^hall right me -- the Sword shall plead my Cause -- the feeble impotent
Cuckold shall make a feeble impotent Coxcomb of you: Expect it. As for her part
I'll spoil her Chappel-meeting. This is her going to Prayers -- By this light
she shall p^ay no more I am resolved on it -- and, for you, Sir, I'll be with
you instantly.


Now does he look like one that's just apprehended for stealing sheep. 'Tis
well Fornication is no Felony, if 'twere, o'my Conscience that Countenance
would go near to hang him --


Had ever Man such Fortune! such Crowds, such Degrees of damned Chance -- gad,
I believe the Devil is grown Conscientious, and makes me spoil all my Designs,
out of a mere Principle of Kind^ess -- if he had let me had the Money, perhaps
I might have been contented -- but now, in spite of him, I'll go on -- I'll
weary him at his own Weapon Malice. I'll instantly go and meet Olivia in her
Walk the back-side of the Bowling-Green, Then make my peace with Isabella by a
Letter, and so proceed as occasion serves. Come, Sirrah, you might have
hindered this if you had not been a dull Rogue -- but, come your ways with a
Pox to yee^mdash;


Ay, come -- with all my heart -- s bud, I am in a cold sweat.


Come, Sir, come on Sir -- sa, sa -- Why where are ye? Why don't you appear?
Sa, sa


What a Devil -- What's here? my old Uncle Fencing with his own shadow -- ha,
ha -- was there ever such a Co^comb? Do ye hear, Uncle; Don't kill him, 'twill
be Murder -- Uncle; ha, ha, don't kill him --


Where the Devil is this Rogue now?


Rogue, why hanged -- hanged -- Uncle, hanged la^t Sessions: But come, if you
have a mind to breath your self turn to me -- Come, your point -- your guard --
Come, you shall see what I can do.


What you can do?


Ay, what I can do. What a Pox do ye think I can do nothing? sa, sa. There was
in your Guts Uncle.


And there I was on your pate, Sir --


My pate, Sir?


Ay, Sir, on your Back and Shoulders, Sir --


Back and Shoulders, Sir?


And will be all over ye instantly, give me patience. This is fine -- What you
are his Second are ye? I'll Second ye.


What Second, I'll have you know, I am First and Second too Sir, if you go to
that -- what a Devil ails him? why Uncle you should not strike mun, you should
push and push, and then go back, and push again; what a pox you lay on as if you
were Thrashing.


^hank your self then, for interrupting a man when you see he's in passion --


Ay, a man had need be in passion indeed, that fights with his own shadow -- ha
ha ha!


The Rascal is got away -- but I'll be revenged of him, if he be above ground
-- and you there Medley of Clown and Fool; What I warrant you, you have left my
Lady alone now?


No but I have not -- The Monkey is with her -- I left 'em both mumbling of
Chestnuts in the great Parlour.


Did you so, incorrigible Dunce?


Look now -- you are the strangest man -- what a Devil would you have me do?
she can talk of nothing but of White-washing and Painting -- and can talk of
nothing but St. George and the Seven Champions; and what a pox, what discourse
shall we have?


Discourse -- Sir, she expects none -- Do not vex me; Consent to marry this
Widow, and go about it instantly, or look for no favour from me.


Why, what a damned unreasonable thing is this? now that a man must be forced
to marry a Witch Volens nolens, whether he will or no -- pox, I'll hang my self
rather, I'll never -- nay a withered old Witch -- a Bawd too it may be.


No matter if she be; she has the more experience, and though her Face is
homel^, her Bags Sir are comely; her 1000 l. a year is beautiful -- Come, I'll
have no more delay -- either go and address, stick close to her, and quickly
too, or I'll make a better proffit of my guardship then ^ou expect, and so I
leave you to consideration --


Stick close to an old Woman! what an unnatural fool is this -- well, this is
ever the fate of us young Heirs: let our Fathers, leave us never so much,
either by our jilting Wenches, unconscionable Tailors, or cheating Guardians;
gad we seldom come to possession. If I do marry this old Gypsy now -- I shall
be a wretch-Roque, and if I do not marry her, I shall be a poor Roque. Let me
see this old, and crooked, and monstrous ugly -- but then she has Gold that's
young, and pretty, and surprising -- but then again, she has a Tongue will make
a man deaf, a Breath that will blast him, and 1000 imperfections more, and
that's the Devil -- but then again, she has 1000 l. a year, and that's good --
but then a pox, she has Rubies in her face, which shows she drinks Brandy
intolerably -- but then again, she has a fine Ruby in her Cabinet that drinks
none; but then again, she's craggy and tough, and can never be a good Bedfellow;
but then again, I may keep a Wench that can -- ha ha ha! I vow that last thought
has refreshed me extremely -- And dear Money, most powerful Riches, thou hast
overcome me; for thy sake this Hag shall be Courted -- for thy sake will I
pass this dangerous Rubicon, and for thy sake, call this decrepit, antiquated
Megera, the blooming Miracle of Nature --


By heaven 'tis true; the Rascal faced me down, that his man gave me the Ring
this morning, and also gave my man his Watch, when neither he nor I saw either
of 'em.


This must be some strange mistake sure --


Mistake her not, if he had staid a little longer, I had paid him in other coin
than he expected; as for your part, I may chance to get another for ye -- I
mean, if my humour hold, and you appear as pleasing to me the next time I see
you, as ye do now.


I imagined some great uncertainty would attend, ^f you were to promise any
thing; and the pride you have in thinking ye can judge of Beauty, is always far
beyond your good Nature, in bearing with its defects, for you'll sure to be
eager in condemning a Woman, if she does not look well, but are very slow in
commending her if she does --


No faith -- I always speak my thoughts freely, 'tis true, I would not
willingly have my applause bestow^d on ill subjects; but you I'm sure have no
reason to resent it, for I have always been favourable to you --


You never railed at me in your life I warrant.


Never but when I was drunk, and then gad if it had been Treason 'twere all one.


Then since you see the plague and inconvenience of that odious crime, why will
you not desert it, why will you venture to drink again?


A pretty question faith, prithee ask a big-belly'd woman that escaped death
narrowly the birth of her last Child, why she would venture again: why I tell
thee 'tis as natural to us as to thee, Lying, Drunkenness is the Souls
Carnaval, where the noble Essence has liberty to range and divert it self,
uncontrolled by the severe Rules of Wisdom, Nature, Religion, or Honesty: why
would I drink again, there's a question indeed?


I wish you could leave it off for all that -- but now to our Love affair -- be
sure to come in disguise, when next you visit me; for I have often observed a
fellow prying up and down near my window, and guess he's a spy that your Wife
has hired to watch us*


I believe no less, and will therefore follow thy directions, -- How now?


Sir, my Lady is come back again I believe, suspecting something, and is just
coming into the chamber --


The Devil is in her, sirrah! run out and hold her in discourse a little --
Come Madam, step into my study here, and be sure make no noise, in in --
quickly --


A saucy Groom -- what -- stop my passage -- but I am apt to believe it was
done by Order. What Sir, are you frighted at my presence, you make such a
fumbling about the Lock -- pray, if I may presume so far, let me know who it is
you have shut in there -- That you take such care to conceal --


Why a young bashful fellow, a student of my acquaintance, that is gone in to
read a little.


But to be locked in, by your favour, is a little odd, pray what's his reason
for that --


Melancholy Madam, he's much given to melancholy ^esides he desired that he
might not see you.


Not see me!


Ay -- he says he's ready to swooned if he sees any Woman after dinner -- and
for my part, you know I could do no less than grant his request.


Not see a Woman -- he should have little of a Student in him by that -- but
doubtless this is some dull ^egmatick country Clod, whose hard fisted Father,
thriftily getting about 200 l. per annum, in hopes to make his successors
Gentlemen, has placed this stripling in the Inns of Court, where he has learnt
to swear modishly, sc^ape a scu^vy Lesson or two on the Violin -- wear tawdry
Clothes, kiss his Laundress -- but never pay her -- rail at every thing, and
understand nothing --


Gad ye are very free methinks Madam, with a person you don't know -- but let
me tell you (think what you please) the person within enclosed, is a very
ingenious person, ay, and a very handsome person, and though at this time, a
Melancholy, Philosophical person -- yet a person that is generally as good
company, as any person in Christendom -- gad I'll say that for her.


For her -- what then, this is a she-Student all this while -- What her Sir?
what her?


Her -- why him or her -- 'Tis all one -- what a pox, any man may mistake a
word -- Confound it, I have spoiled all --


Come Sir, your Artifice is too weak, now the discovery is so plain, and I am
resolved to see this Philosophical Gentleman e're he goes to secure all -- Let
me peep in, and if there be a man --


If there be, why what a Devil dost think I'd tell a lye? on my honour 'tis a
man, a dull poring Melancholy Rogue; a FellowCommoner.


Base man -- now I am too sensible of your lewdness and ingratitude, and be
confident I'll be revenged at full -- for from this moment, the duty of a Wife,
and the reserved behaviour incident to that name, shall be as far from me, as
Constancy from thee. Now by you Sky it shall, I have sworn it.


So -- I thought 'twould come to this. Well Madam, since you have discovered
the business, recall your patience, and wink at it. 'Tis my first offence, and
who knows, if you show good Nature now, but it may work upon me --.


Wink at it -- What be your Bawd my self! oh Confusion! have I been bred with
such Integrity, taught Virtue from my Cradle, practised it, supplied the office
of a Wife with credit, and ne'er did action that could taint my Inno^ence --
have I been this, to be at last a Pandress -- What, catch my Husband with a
whore, and wink at it?


S'death! Cease your noise, or by heaven I shall grow an^*


No -- from this moment Ill be free as Air; let my self loose to gaiety and
pleasure, wanton and wild as Mercenary Creatures -- I will Sir, and to give you
some reason to believe it, know that there is a Gentleman, one Beauford, ( a
name you are acquainted with) newly returned ^rom Travel, one who has loved me.


The devil! Beauford returned? and you intend Madam to invite him hither, that
he and I may be good company together -- hah --


Not for your company Sir -- whilst I have a Closet in my Apartment to
entertain him in; And if he is not as glad to learn Philosophy of my teaching,
as your Female Student within there is of yours, the Devil's in it.


Is it possible that I can be patient, and hear this Madam? do not presume too
much upon my temper; for assure your self, since you have thus far provoked me;
your Insolence has taken away all guilt on my part, for what ever privilege I
take, I am sure you plead by a contrary Charter, and must own bondage.


Bondage -- I laugh at it -- no Sir, you cancelled your right in that, when you
broke your Marriage vow, and let those frozen fools own it, whose souls are too
narrow and spiritless to revenge their injuries, mine shall be free as thought:
I'll plot the manner instantly, and my proceedings shall to after ages, prove a
Law for all wronged Wives to plague their Husbands with. --


Excellent! Is there a greater fury than a virtuous Wife? no, not in Hell, I am
confirmed in it.


But* why is this Peerl^ss Creature obscured all this while? this compound of
Impudence, Lust, and sophisticated Beauty, flattered by the Devil's Pencil, to
please ye for an hour, and created by him to abuse ye for an age. What dare you
not let me see her?


Yes; gad thou shalt see her, if it be but only to vex thee -- Come forth my
Love -- fear nothing, I'll protect thee.


Oh let me not come out -- shel'll kill me!


By all that's good, who hurts a finger of thee, had better ne'er been born: now
look your fill Madam -- and when you have done looking, know I love her.


Oh that we were alone! thou wretch


Oh save me! save me!


Death and destruction, he kisses her -- who's within there? Mr. Amble --


Here Madam.


Mr. Amble come hither, I ask you pardon for my late passion -- I have observed
you long, and have believed your merits far above your fortune -- pray come
hither, nearer yet -- here is a Ring I love, I freely give it you* start not*
but take it --


How now sirrah; whence springs this Impudence?


I beseech you Madam -- Oh Lord Sir, I cannot help it.


What a Coward -- flinch! come nearer I command ye, there's my hand, kiss it.


Oh Lord Madam --


Sirrah -- be gon, or I'll run my sword in your Guts.


Stay, or I'll cut your Throat -- Kiss it I say --


Oh I beseech you Madam!


Dog, still here?


Oh I am gone Sir* I am gone --


Very well Madam, I see you can find ways to divert your self, without
troubling your Modesty -- in which pleasant humour I'll leave you to your
Coachman* if you please, and part from you with as little regret or concern, as
I would from the Orange-wench in the Play-house -- Come my dear, come --


Well Sir, and I am resolved to be revenged on thee; and tho my Virtue will not
let me do it the right way, yet I'll make thee as jealous as if I did* Beauford
shall be the man, I shall find him in the Walk -- nor can I doubt my wit upon
so fit an occasion. Husbands such niggards of their Love are grown,
That the poor Wife that should have all, has none.
But pining sits, with her allowance small*
Whilst rampant Misses get the Devil and all.



THat row of Trees I remember. Yonder's the Bowling-green, Come sirrah. This is
the place*


Where 'tis ten to one, but we shall b^ well cudgell'd, and so return home
again, like fools as we came.


Cudgell'd! why you cowardly Rascal; who should cudgel us?


Who? why Piccaroons Sir -- Land-Pirats, that are doubtless looking for Prize,
as well as you.


Sirrah -- thou art a cold spiritless Rascal, and only swayed by the motions of
thy fear: but these are Trifles to men of wit and courage, pray -- how came ye
off with your last business, did you deliver my Letter to Isabella?


Ay there's another -- I had like to have made a hopeful journey of that too.
Yes Sir, I delivered it.


Well -- and what said she?


Why, after she had snatched the Letter from me -- she calls to her Footmen to
go and whip that impudent Rascal that came to trouble her, where had not my
legs been my best friends -- I had been tied to a post and slashed as god sa'
me.


Ha ha -- I find this was her cunning, her Husband was upon the sent -- but see
who comes yonder -- ha, it must be Olivia; oh the charming Rogue how she shines
-- sirrah not a word now in contradiction, I charge ye -- for tho I am a little
unlucky sometimes, according as the wind sits, yet for making a Court to a
Lady, I defy all Europe, gad go go, your distance --


I think there are no men with her, that's one comfort.


I see he has picked the meaning out of your Letters --


'Tis he; Now would I give 20 Guineys, my Husband were by to hear the harangue
betwixt us.


So would not I, for this object would so nettle his jealousy, there would be
no enduring him -- I vow methinks, he's a very handsome person, and I believe
of a good Conscience.


A right Town-Gallant Madam, if those are your conscientious persons, and one
that would as soon address to your Ladyship, if he knew the advantages he
should get by it, as any one in Christendom. Prithee observe his demure
countenance -- I see Sir, you will take no warning; you will venture a great
deal of my anger, to enjoy a little of my company.


No Madam, 'twas rather that I migh^ enjoy a great deal of your company for a
little of your anger -- Ah! did you know the languishments, and heart-breakings
I have suffered for you -- well, 'tis gone and past -- and heaven forgive you.


Ay and you too -- ha ho* heart-breakings quotha!


'Tis as destiny pleases to order Sir. But methinks the Beauties of Paris, and
the success that always attended your endeavours, should banish these
resentments from you: I know the little Love you had for me has been dead long
since --


Why the Devil take me Madam, if you are not the only person I adore, and
ho^rly die for.


S'bud! every one he has met these six months, has been that only person to my
knowledge --


You have deserved better I confess -- but Sir, in this age, Merit like Wit, is
never paid the applause due to it, till the owner be past receiving -- For my
own part, I am as comfortless as you, and as destitute of a Remedy; for my
Husband is grown the unkindest man in the World to me.


Ah damn 'em Madam, they are all so now-a-days --


He keeps a Wench under my Nose; nay, is not so contented, but he le^s me see
her, and courts her before my face -- pray give me your advice now Sir; is it
not reason that I should be revenged of him for this?


Reason! ay -- gad, the profoundest Philosophy in the world, has not half so
much reason in it --


I knew it must, See now, what an extraordinary blessing a man judgement is!
had you not ass^r'd me this, I vow I should have been fearf^l how to proceed.


Ah, Madam! would you but take my advice, you should find one Kind humble
servant of more worth than Twenty resty peevish Husbands -- a Husband, Madam,
is the meo^ Bank-rupt of Love* he scores for all he has without ever being able
to repay a penny -- but, a vigorous Lover still brings ready Money -- here's
this for that, without fraud or design -- And, gad, a plain-Dealer in Love is
as necessary as in Merchandise* there ought to be no goods delivered out
without a just Exchange to the full value --


Well, I see you are owner of so much Wit and Reason, that I am resolved to
discover my Design to you -- And also to desire your assistance --


Assistance -- so -- Do ye hear that Sir.


For, since no fair means, entreaty -- nor Love, can make my Husband leave his
lewd Courses, I am resolved to see what Jealousy can do, to which purpose you
shall be my Gallant; Address to me; Court me; Sing -- Cringe -- Bow -- Swear,
and be very Modishly soppish before all Company* which gallantry I will receive
with as ridiculous an affected behaviour, as a Mail-Lady -- an overture with
Mr. Such-a-one, after a Midnight Assignation with my Lord --


Ha, ha, ha -- very well -- I vow to gad, Madam, very well.


Ay, ay -- she's your own, Sir -- She's your own --


But see the Sun declines -- I must be gone, have a little patience, Sir; and,
if you think your time well employed, be here about an hour hence; perhaps
there may a Messenger come that may guide you to a place where we may discourse
further * but, for the present, le^ me entreat you to be gone, here's company
coming.


Your humble Servant, Madam -- I'll be as punctual as the minutes -- Come,
Sir --


It would be now a doubtful question, whether any Woman, but I, would not make
use of this opportunity; he, I find, Imagines the business half done already;
and, there are some of my sex that I believe would think it great pity, that
troublesome Virtue should dash a Man's hopes that means so well, and is so
willing to revenge their Injuries. Heaven! of what corrupted Natures are these
Men, especially when they come to be Husbands: But mine is sure the worst of
all; There's nothing can reclaim him. However, he shall not think I resent it,
for* in appearance, I'll be as careless and as wild as he -- I've a Plot upon
his Mistress too -- 'Tis here well forged, I am sure, and, I hope, will prove
lucky --


Well, Sir; Have you considered on my Imposition? Have you fixed your resolution
to Court this Widow --


I have; I have considered her as the very seething pot of Iniquity, and my
self the Ladle of Discretion, ordained to cool her when she boils over.


But will you Marry her?


Marry her -- a pox o'that word, I never hear it, but it gives me the Griping
of the Guts -- Could you not have named any thing else -- I'll lye with her,
and that's all one.


No, no, Sir; there must be marriage in the Case --


Well -- the Devil take her, I will Marry her then; I will do it in spite of
her intolerable Age, and more intolerable qualities; for, to tell you the
truth, the Devil and I have been drawing Cuts for this two hours, and the
Change has always fallen on my side.


Oh you are merry, Sir I am glad on it, and I assure you, Coz, this Consent of
yours pleases me well: alas -- what I do is for thy good, Child -- and, let
people say what they will, the Lady is rather to be admired then contemned --


I never knew a Witch that was not admired; Oh what fine thin hair she has --
what a delicate low forehead what little pretty ferret hollow eyes, and what a
tall and stately nose? then she must be very harmless, because she is
toothless; then how thrifty must she be, that is so old? and how virtuous is
she like to be, of whom no man can be jealous?


Right, as gad save me. Thy sentiments of her are right --


Then there's Counsel and Gravity, and Dullness; and then little or no Lechery,
which, alas, in young ones is too predominant; besides, that ancient Cornuted
Philosopher instructs us well -- give me, says he, a Pippin that's withered
like an old Woman, and a contrario sequitur Argumentum, give me a Woman that's
withered like an old Pippin --


An excellent Morral Faith -- for, Sir, I have wrought the Fool finely; for;
by this means, wanting heirs to inherit, the Estate must of necessity fall to
me -- ha, I think here she comes -- Come Coz -- let us not miss this
opportunity.


'Sbud -- how my heart pants now -- here, Sirrah, take this Book, be sure to
prompt -- when I am out, do ye hear?


Yes, Sir.


Stay, here's my Wife, and Company with her -- perhaps she may be busy --
stand by, and observe a little -- Come, out with it Lattice -- I like it well
--


SAwney was tall, and of noble Race,
And loved me better then any yen,
But no he liggs by another Lass,
And Sawney will ne'er be my Love again.
I gave him a fine Scotch Sarke and Band,
I put um on with my awn hand;
I gave him House, and I gave him Land,
Yet Sawney will ne'ere be my Love again.
I robbed the Groves of all their Store,
And Nosegays made to give Sawney yen;
He kissed my Breast, and fain would do more,
Good feth methought he was a bonny yen:
He squeezed my Fingers, grasped my Knee,
And Carved my name on each green Tree;
And sighed and languished to ligg by me;
But now he ne'ere will be my Love again.
My Bongrace, and my Sun-burnt Face
He praised; and also my Russet Gown;
But now he dotes on the Copper Lace,
Of some lewd Quean of London-Town.
He gangs and gives her Curds and Cream,
Whilst I poor Saule sit sighing at heam;
And ne'er Joy Sawney unless in a Dream;
For now he ne'er will be my Love again.
Very hot -- sultry hot upon my honour -- phoo -- my Lady Whimsy -- How does
your Ladyship resent it? I shall be most horribly tanned.


'Tis warm, Madam.


Oh hot* hot -- I am ready to fry -- good lack-a-day, how strange is this --
Mrs. Lidia -- pray feel me! pray feel my pulse -- g^d forgive me how it beats,
I see I must Purge and let Blood --


Marry does it, like one of five and twenty -- I assure your good Ladyship.


My Lady Whimsy, Mrs. Lidia, pray feel, I protest I never felt the like! Why
who would think this of one of my age?


'Tis very strange indeed Madam; so is your Complexion too: For my part I have
often wondered how it was possible for your Ladyship to preserve ^our Beauty so
long --


Truly, Mrs. Lidia, it has been a wonder to many -- but art is a rare thing --
you must use art, Mrs. Lidia, if you would look attractively, and live long --
Tissick -- give me my Caraways.


What Art I beseech your Ladyship?


Nay, 'tis worth your knowing in troth. Why Madam -- the Face preservative is,
to be sure to suite your Ingredient to your Complexion -- your Tawny, or
Olive-colour'd skin would look better if it were White; Therefore White must be
added: Then your pale dead Tallow Colour requires a Tincture, and it must have
it, 'tis very necessary, and no more discredit to ye, then 'tis to wear a piece
of thin Gold for the Kings Evil; or a row of Ivory Teeth, when your own have
uncivilly left their habitations.


So now shall we have a Description of her own Imperfections and Deformity, by
a Mysterious advice how to shun em --


Defects in Nature, Madam, must be supplied by Art; 'Tis not only requisite,
but Customary -- and 'tis the knowledge of what ingredient is most natural, is
the main cause of b^ing beautiful -- why now I always us^ a certain blew
re^ection to my face.


How, Blew?


Me^cy on us.


Blew, Madam -- and sometimes when I am sick and out of orde^, Black and Blew
are very convenient: 'Tis a little strange to you, I warrant -- but my
complexion requires it* and I always consult that.


Nay, any one that sees your Ladyships face, may easily guess your great
knowledge in these matters.


Some observations Mrs. Lidia; some observations: I have not, I think, be^n
backward in procuring the good of my Neighbours -- pray let me look on ye --
hold up your ^ead -- a little more -- ay, 'tis so -- a Phillamot would set off
your Face extremely --


'Twould make it Olive-Colour indeed, if you call that setting off.


Olive-colour! ah, you are ignorant Mrs. ^idia, Olive-colour! 'Twould make it
ruddy. Ruddy! there's your Complexion! Why that, which you have on, spoils
your face instead of beautif^ing it -- I have some Powder in Boxes at home
would do ^e a kindness if ^ou would use em.


Have you not a great care Madam -- least some of ^hose Boxes should come to
public view -- you know that would not be for ^our R^putation --


Care, Madam -- yes, I warrant ye; never doubt that: For, if a stranger comes
into the Room -- whip -- they are gone in a moment -- and now you put me in mind
on it, in troth I was damnably frighted once about such a business.


Were ^ou so?


Ay -- I Swear, most strangely frighted, it makes me ready to tremble every
time I think of it -- I'll tell you how 'twas sitting one day dr^ssing my --
'Twas before I was Married, and I think truly 'tis now about Five and twenty
years ago -- sitting, as I was saying, dressing my head, my Husband, who was
then a Servant to me, and one, that though I say it, laid as close seige to me
as any man in Europe could do -- he, I say, stole softly into the Room, and
stood just behind me --


As you were dressing your head?


Ay -- but I presently turned back, and being extremely surprised to see him --
thinking to mend all, snatched up my false head of Brown hair, and Curled
Tower, that lay by me -- (For, to tell you true, my own was ever of a scurvy
colour) and, gad forgive me -- in hast* put it on the wrong way -- ha, ha, ha,
Oh heaven! What a Case was I in -- I looked for all the World like one of the
Satyrs in a Pastoral -- ha, ha, ha --


I vow this was a strange Misfortune indeed -- but, What said the Gentl^man?
Did he not laugh soundly?


L^ugh -- ay -- I warrant ye -- he Laughed, and I Blushed, and he Laughed, and
I Trembled -- for, you must think, I was most terribly fright^d -- as I hope to
be saved -- I had like to have miscarried about it^ I was fain to w^ar an
^agles Stone abo^ me for three months*


^n Eagles stone


Yes, I assure you, the only Sovereign Remedy in the World to keep young
Ladies from miscarrying.


Misca^rying ^ Why* M^dam, you say, this was done before you were M^rry'd* Fo^
he^ven's sake what do^s your Ladyship mean?


Gad forgive me, What shall I say now? -- Did I say before? pray, p^rt Mrs.
Lidia, remember your self, Did I say before? I said after we were Marr^'d I
assure you --


Come, Sit* now I think we may venture -- My Lady Beardly, in all Joy and Duty,
I kiss your Ladyships hand -- in the next place give me the favour to introduce
my Nephew here, Sir Lubberly Widgeon, a man of good quality and parts, and one
that will be proud ^o be graced with your Ladyships, acquaintance --


I (...) his humble servant, Sir.


Well, there's no such Kissing, as whe^e there are no Teeth.


Come, let us take this opportunity to get away, Madam: We'll wait for your
Ladyship in the next walk.


Your Servant, my Deers; I'll oblige my self with your sweet company
incontinently --


The Cause of my waiting on ^ou Madam, is to inform you, That this Gentleman --
loves ^ou --


Ha, ha, ha -- I protest, Sir Frolic -- you make me laugh -- Love me -- why
'tis impossible -- alas, Sir -- I am old, I am old.


Your age has been cautiously considered, Madam: and, though my Nephew be
backward ^n these matters, and unwilling to break the Ice himself. Yet, he
knows as much for his Inches, as any man on this side Rome, I'll say that for
him.


Nay, verily, the Gentleman has a very hopeful Countenance; your Jolt-head --
long Ear* and sober Sheeps look never fails. He should be a Barrister by his
Physiognomy.


He has some Knowledge in the Law indeed -- besides, Madam, he has travelled
most parts of the World, and can discourse of the Manners and Customs of
Nations very elegantly -- ah, he has escaped great Preferments very narrowly.


Well, Sir -- I wish I were younger for his sake, then perhaps I might say
something.


Madam, for ever I'll enclose you here, with the Circuit of this Ivory pale --
What's next Sir?


You'll be the Park --


I'll be the Park, and you shall be the Deer:

^ed where you will, on Mountain, or in Dale,
Graze on my lips, and when those Hills are dry --
When those -- Hills are dry -- are dry -- hum -- are dry;
What's next you Dog?

Stray farther where the pleasant Fountains lie --


Stray further where the pleasant Fountains lie.


Very well -- I vow there's a great deal of pleasure in being Courted, I Swear
there is -- Come, Sir Frolic, pray let us walk down the next walk -- here's
Company coming, and another time, Sir Lubberly, more of this if you please --
but, let the next be ^n Prose I beseech you --


Prose! Well -- it shall sweet Queen; sweet old Queen it shall -- any thing to
please thee my Dear Landabrides.


So, now to my Mistress; in this Disguise I think I need not fear being Dogged
by my plaguy-Wife, or any of her Setters; for she's as Revengeful and jealous
as an Italian that has trepanned his Wife in Masquerade -- Gad, these Wives are
unreasonable Creatures, as headstrong as wild horses, and as unconscionable as
a Jew to a Christian that owes him money. Marriage is a mere Game at Bowles:
where the Wife is the Jack, to which, 'tis true, all our endeavours should
tend. But, how unreasonable is it to expect an excellent Close cast, when the
Bias of our Bowles run clear another way -- Ha -- sure that's Beauford: 'Tis
so, what makes him here?


I think she'll esteem me for a Man of honour: I am sure I am very punctual, as
Faith 'tis true, I ever was in these Cases -- Sirrah, look up that Walk, and
try if you can see any body coming -- Now, Dear Olivia, keep but thy word, and
I am blessed for ever.


Olivia! on my life here's some Intrigue or other going forward -- it may be I
may make a Discovery.


Oh, here comes one I believe that will release my Doubts.


He does look as like a Pimp as another man, that's the truth on it -- I believe
Don, you may venture on him.


Have you no Message to deliver Friend, to a Gentleman that was to be walking
here? no Ticket, nor Appointment, nor no such thing? hah!


From some distressed Lady, or Damsel, that is Destitute of ^uc^or, or so? No
tidings, Friend; no tidings?


Peace Sirrah: Come, I'm sure I'm right, thou art the person.


Why, Faith Sir, I have a Message to deliver.


Very well, a very honest Fellow, Faith; here's money for thee.


No reward, In beseech you Sir, till you know whether I may deserve it or no?
for I must know your name, and by some token or other, that you are the right
perso^, before I can discover any thing.


And all the reason in the world faith -- gad a person of great Conduct, and
understanding this -- I see she's cunning; she chooses her man for these
affairs. Well, to make all things clear friend, in the first place know my name
is Beauford.


So -- oh my propitions fate --


And I am known by the Name and Title of Diggory Brainworm of B^oby-Town, in
the County of Ham^hire, Yeoman.


Keep your distance, sirrah! then as a secure Token, Friend, that I am the
true, real, appointed individual person, know that Olivia your Lady -- and my
goddess -- about an hour since met me here, where after a world of happy
raillery betwixt us, she bid me wait her here, and promised about this time to
send a messenger to conduct me to her -- hah -- What think you now, is this
token enough?


Enough in conscience Sir, and I am now confirmed, you are the right person,
and may therefore be free in the relation; Know then Sir, that my Lady waits
for you, she is alone Sir, and the cuckoldly Fop her Husband is abroad Sir.


Is he! the fool abroad -- ha ha ha!


Ay ay Sir! go on, go on and prosper -- ha ha ha! ^'faith you are a happy man.


Ha ha ha -- thank thee heartily faith; gad thou art a very obliging person --
but thy Lady shall be good to thee upon my account.


On his account -- very good; oh how my heart beats for revenge --


Here's fortune now Rogue! here's fortune! well -- I forgive all my ill luck
past for this days happy success, and is she alone, say thou? and is the
cuckoldly Fop her Husband gone out?


Gone, gone Sir, the coast is clear, and you may go and plunder the wealthy
Magazine without control; he Sir! alas she can quickly pop him out of the way,
when she has any private design -- besides Sir, I was assistant in the
business -- for you must know Sir -- I hate him mortally --


Dost thou? Why then the Devil tak^ me, if thou art not the civilest fellow
that ever I met with -- here; prithee let me be a little grateful to thee --
gad I shall be ashamed of my self ^lse --


Not a penny ^'faith Sir, let me beg you not to offer it.


Well -- This is certainly the first pimp that ever refused money.


But come Sir, come away; methinks I long till you enjoy your happiness.


Ah dear Rogue, and so do I too faith: Here's fortune now Sirrah -- here's
fortune!


Hah! a Wag, you shall have her, wag you shall have her.


Ah dear Rogue, L'am bound to thee for ever --


And poor Cuckold shall be locked out -- ha ha ha!


Ha ha ha! ay no matter, no matter; let him! let him! Pox, what should dull
Husbands do with such blessings?


Ay, right, righ^* wha^ indeed? come, come, go with me, I'll place you both
convenien^ly -- ay wag wag come along*


Thanks my dea^ charming Rogue -- here's fortune now; here's fortune --


My Lady sent me with a message to a Gentleman in these Walks, and the devil of
any living creature I can find, but an old Woman a knitting -- faith I'll even
go home again; oh I think yonder he is --


So, now I think the Fox is shared, and cunningly, and shall accordingly be
used, ever he gets free again -- hah -- This fellow must certainly be her
messenger. 'Tis so -- I know him now, but I'll hinder his discovery immediately
--


Sir, Sir, -- My Lady stays for you -- Oh Lord my Master!


Yes Rascal 'tis I; your design is discovered. Sirrah you come to convey
Beauford to my wife?


Oh good Sir forgive me, I did but as my Lady commanded. --


Well; to make you amends now, do what I command you, take no notice of my
Disguis^ -- but tell your Lady that I dogged you and Beauford to the
Gard^n-house -- and as soon as he was entered -- locked him in. Do this
faithfully, or expect not to live a day -- For if I find thou ^ail'st in the
least scruple, had thou a thousand lives, thou should loose 'em all.


Oh -- I will be very faithful Sir.


Away then, and now for my reveng^ -- I ha^e this Beauford; whatever my Wives
design was in this business -- he I find, had a down-right rank, lewd intent
-- for which I'll reward him* I'll instantly order my servants to be ready, and
whipping, and pumping, tossing in a Blanket, -- all that malice, or ill nature
can invent, I'll inflict upon him -- Let him hereafter demand what satisfaction
he pleases. And since to cuckold me was his intent,
I'll act that Cuckold in his punishment.



OH Gadsbud! Were ever poor Intriguers so used? all my bones are out of joint,
and lye as if they were no kin to one another. 'Tis well 'tis a calm morning,
for a little pus^of wind would certainly shake me to pieces.


'Sdeath - have I used Intrigues so long, know all the quirks and quiddits from
the Maid to the Matron; and at last live to be whipped, and tossed in a Blanket?


Ay, here's fortune you know Sir -- here's fortune! You'd forgive all your past
ill Chance for this happy hour -- Well, I shall be hanged; I am certain on it --
your damned luck will never leave me but at the Gallows?


Sirrah! leave Condoling -- now 'tis unnecessary, and let us plot how to repay
this affront; Olivia, as I was just now informed by her Woman, was not at all
accessory -- This was her Husbands revenge, who it seems dogged her Messenger
-- but how should we know that I was concerned?


Your old friend the Devil, no doubt gave him some private intelligence -- and
if the Truth were known, assistant too -- For the Rogues were shaped like
Furies. And bless us! who knows but they might really be so?


By their unmerciful usage of us, 'tis true, we might guess 'em Furies -- I am
sure the greatest Devil in Hell, could not use me worse.


They mounted me into the Air like a Cat -- I was half an hour a falling --
besides, my Sex is changed, I shall never be my own man again whilst I live, nor
my Wives neither -- There's my s^rrow


My Sex I think is not changed yet -- but by yo^ Sky I'll have ^t changed with
all the speed I can. I'll cross my luck one way or other, I am resolved on it --
Come sirrah we'll to the Tavern. a brisk bottle will ripen ou^ Wits for
Invention, I can get that upon Tick.


To the Tavern^ ay, we are in two pretty decent habits to go to the Tavern in,
are we not? Ounds! how I could cursethat Quean Fortune, for putting this
affront upon the top of my Fan^ily -- To the Tavern quotha? Why we shall be
taken for some of the Wild Irish that come to pilfer and steal, and so sing the
Second part to the same Tune, Of Beating and Kicking --


Faith it may be so -- hush, I think here's a man coming out of a House.


A man! Pray Heaven it is not the Beadle.


Sir Frolic Whimsy by heaven, but 'tis imp^ssible he should know me in this
garb, and if he questions me, I'll counterfeit an Irish man, and gabble in
that Language.


Is there no Law for Corruptions in these Cases? shall a Rascal presume to
cuckold me, and shall not I presume to have his Life or his Money? give me the
Rascal, I'm resolved on it -- how now? What are these that sneak about my door
at this time of the morning? What are you sirrah? hah --


Awe Cram-a-cree -- thee be a pauvre honest Irish-man, and Chris shall save thy
good face.


'Sbud what shall I do now? for the devil a language can I speak but
Pedlars-French. --


An Irish-man -- a Ras^al I believe -- And you there sirrah, what Countryman
are you?


Mo gortogal agi agan aga Highi Lagand Dugutch magan.


A Dutchman, a Thief I believe, both Thieves as gad save me, and come to rob my
house.


Oh-hone -- a Tee^, a got pless thy sheet coontenance, thee ne'er was Teef in
Englands, o my saul Joy, eet was in Irelands, and Teef is very fine Trade
there.


Thegeef, thogou lygyst igin thygy throgote.


What does the Rascal call me goat? Toby Scribble my Clerk hi^her, I'll see
thee soundly slashed, as gad ^ave me, I'll do the King that service -- the poor
rogue^ have no Money I think.


Will-a-loo, oh hone, o hone; 'sdeath what shall I do now? this is worst of
all, for if he dis^overs me, I shall be whipped to death.


Ay* ay, here's fortune too Sir, here's fortune; oh*


Sirrah stand there, and hi^der them from running; hoa, will no body hear me?


What is't I see! Beauford, and in this strange ridiculous disguise -- ha ha ha
--


The Devil, this damned Jilt will discover me.


Ha ha ha! what can this mean? here has some damnable chance happened to him,
and his Signs are to let me know he wants my help, ha ha ha, lord how he looks!
Come prithee my dear, let the poor fellows go this once, do not defer
revenging my injuries by staying to punish these Creatures; 'tis true, they
look like very lewd scur^y Rascals, especially, that tall fellow there in the
Blanket* but come, for my sake let um escape.


I will deny thee nothing; go get ye gone ye Curs, and thank this Lady -- ye
had been swinged else -- and now to my other business, I'll not sleep till I am
revenged of this rascal Beauford, what e're it cost me.


Oh the D^vil go with him, what a fright have I been in!


What here still -- in my life I never saw two such impudent creatures.


Nay Madam, will you not know your poor se^vant?


Ha, ha, ha! Am I company for the wild Irish? are vagabonds fit to be of my
acquaintance?


No Madam, but a friend in Masquerade I hope may.


Masquerade! I swear this is one of the newest Masquerading Habits that I ever
saw, but I suppose 'tis pertinent to your Intrigue Sir, and doubtless there is
some trick in it.


Trick, ay, a damnable one too, if you knew all


Thieves, and a dozen of them? --


Thirteen by this ^ight; I beat a dozen of them my self.


Did you? Why who could rob you then?


A damned lying rogue, he beat them -- he was bound, and thrown into a Ditch,
and had not I helped him out h^d been smothered, ^rrah, not a word more for your
life; I wonder for my part we were not both killed.


And so do I too faith.


But come set your wit at work, and contrive some way tha^ I may be rid of my
Mantle de la guer* here* and then I am wholly devoted yours.


For your man I have a habit, but I swear I know not how to contrive for you,
unless you will make shift with that my Brother, a Rushia Merchant left with
me, when he went to Sea.


Pox, any thing rather than this Blanket, let's see it,


Come in th^n softly.


Ay, ay, come, that I may get rid of my Parliament-Robes too* sbud I hope this
garb will come in fashion e're long, there's many as ridiculous, that has --


Now prosperous Fortune, if ever thou were indulgent to an injured Woman,
assist me, and if there* be a subtilty natural to ou^ Sex, that's capable of
revenging wrongs, Husband be sure of the ^ffects -- I've now a double Cause, my
own and Beauford's -- who has had but a scurvy return for the service he
intended; come Sister give me the Vizard.


What will my Brother think when he comes home, and finds you have deserted his
house?


No doubt but he'll be embraced betwixt hope and fear, but my firm resolution
makes me negligent of that, 'tis only the loss of my company, can make him
sensible of the blessing of it; for the value of a Wife, as of all good things
else, is best known by its want. For if once there be a neglect in Love, the
gordian knot of Wedlock, will so stretch and slacken, that 'tis ten to one but
a witty Adventurer may easily undo it, to tie a faster in its stead; this was
Beaufords opinion, who I think has now sufficiently paid for it -- but I'm
tardy Sister, but no more of this now, be sure to keep council, and expect the
happy result of all -- farewell.


What a mad fellow is this Beauford? wild as a storm, rash, and inconsiderate,
and yet I know not what ails me, ever since I saw him yesterday in the Walks --
he has been continually in my thoughts; methinks his vices too look less ugly
in him than in another: pray heaven these pleasing thoughts breed no heart
burnings: he's handsome, and I have folly enough to love a worse face -- 'tis
but venturing, if I am snar'd, I'll silently mourn my fate in some dogril
Ditty, and get out of the Labyrinth as well as I can.


Ha ha ha!


Ha ha ha -- a very pleasant M^tamorphosis.


A Plague, this is more ridiculous than my Blanket, and I behave my self worse
in this garb, than an Ambassador of that Country does in an English one -- a
pox of your hanging sleeves and strait hose here. Well, that Nation are
certainly the most Clowns of all others, they love no variety, as men of Honour
should, nor ever change their damned old fashions, because they know not how to
behave thems^lves in new.


Ha ha! save ye Don Diego, save ye Don, shall I twirl your Manchatoos, or set
your Ruff Signior? ha ha!


Very well sirrah.


Ha ha! he looks more awkerdly than a Country Grazier in a la^'d Coat*


Ay, or a Clumsie Citizen on a Training-day --


So Rascal, pray get you to the door and watch the old Knights coming back, and
be careful de'e hear? or I shall spoil this mi^th of yours.


I will Sir -- I will -- Don -- Diego quotha, ha ha ha!


I think Sir 'twill be very convenient for you to go too, for I assure you, I
cannot secure my Husbands absence long.


I fear him not Madam, he's gone to his Council, to tell him he's a Cuckold,
and desire his advice, ha ha --


His jealousy will spur him home again sooner than you imagine, and then how
your ^ushia counterfeit company will agree with his rough Italian, is a greater
doubt than you have wit to consider on.


Faith Madam, my confidence like my love, is too fierce to be very thoughtful,
this only I can say for my self, I have three to one against the ill fortune of
his coming, and that is enough to encourage a Gamester. If there do^s a damned
chance come in by the by, I'll honestly bowl about a curse or two -- and
patiently suffer under tribulation.


But what amends Love or Reward, must I expect?


Why you shall have all I have Madam, a hearty sigh from the bottom of my
heart, that I am able to pay, and no more.


P'sh, I mean from my Husband Sir, but I find this agr^ement you propose, not
worth my Signing to* and so adieu.


Nay, if I leave thee so, I am a dull rogue ind^ed -- I'm resolved to have a
parting kiss, come what will on it.


My rich ol^ Widow, I must not be tardy in chase of her, I think the other two
hours chatt will do the business, for she begins to chatter bawdy, and discover
her Writings, and 'tis observed, when once a Widow does that, she's your own*
and faith good Writings, and full Bags, are the strongest motives to raise
passion now-adays, That jolly Poet says -- Face of young Miss is best for
keeping Pony,
But the best part of old Widow is her Money.
But come, a little of my Uncles advice will do well, I heard him go in here.

Oh monstrum horrendum! oh my poor cuckoldly Uncle! Oh thou art bobbed, thou art
bobbed, sure, never was the like seen, felt, heard, or understood, no never --
never


Nay, Sir Lubberly -- pray stay and hear me speak.


Hoblia Castilliano Seignior.


Castilliano Cuckoldiano Seignior -- oh horrid! what in this rampant Habit too?
this is intolerable, but I'll publish instantly -- I'll divulge, I'll be as
loud as Thunder; the Stentrophonical Tool shall be nothing to me -- my Uncle
shall know, I'll inform him immediately How Beauford like a thief of Foreign
Nation,
Has ransacked, rifled, robbed his Wives Plantation.



Fie Sir Lubberly, pray have more regard to my Honour, than to have such an
opinion, I'll assure you there was no such business in agitation.


Agitation -- O Lord there she is again -- agitation.


Sir, upon my Honour I was only teaching her a new Sar^abrand -- I borrowed this
Habit for that purpose.


What, behind the Bed?


What a malicious accident was this?


Peace, I've a trick shall bring all off yet -- well Sir, what ever
constructions you are pleased to make of us; yet 'twill be your best way to be
silent, I shall ruin your Amours with my Lady Aunt Beardly else. I assure ye
that you shall be no Relation of mine, unless you can hear, and see, and say
nothing Sir.


Oh do not talk of making a breach betwixt me and my dear Lady Beardly, I
beseech ye Sir.


Shall I trust t'ye then, will you be silent? is your mouth ^hut up?


Shut up, ay -- as close as a Cockel-shell, not a word of the business: now,
though my Mother were concerned, I'll do any thing rather than break off with
my Lady Beardly: go get in again, go I say; not a syllable not I -- do saith
-- do -- get ye in once more mum -- mum.


Oh your servant Sir, I have no business there not I, nor had I spoke of this,
only you were pleased to say you saw something.


Not I man -- I saw nothing, nor can say nothing, I am dumb and blind, a Fool,
or a Pimp or any thing, and so fare ye-well, prithee get ye in again -- mum --
not a syllable, not I.


Ha, ha! I knew there was no way like this.


'Twas well you had the good luck to find it out, the fool would else have been
very troublesome; but see, here he comes again.


Oh we are undone, undone -- my Uncle is come home, came in by the back door of
the Garden, and is just coming up, a pox on him.


So I find I must to my Blanket again. Damned chance, What's to be done Madam?


I am at my wits ends: Sir Lubberly, run you out and hold him in discourse a
little, while I contrive something.


Ay ay, any thing, any thing.


There's no other way Sir for ye, but to counterfeit my Brother Alexander, new
come from travel, this Habit suits you well -- one side of his face was
blasted, which was the cause of his wry mouth, and loss of an eye; then he's of
a strange waspish temper, this you must strive to imitate; and because my
Husband never saw him but once, if you take care in doing this, I'm confident
'twill not be easy to discover ye.


'Sdeath I shall never do it right -- I shall betray my self.


Nay, if you fail in resolution, you are undone -- come here's a Temple-patch
for your Eye -- let's see now, draw your mouth awry and look upon me -- very
well -- now observe to speak petti^hly


Oh here he comes, now my penance.


This plodding fool is never at home when a man has occasion for him -- how
now* give me patience -- who have we here?


I imagined Sir you would wonder at him -- why, 'tis my Brother Alexander,
newly arrived from Travel.


As gad save me, 'twas a wonder to me indeed -- hah -- why what a monstrous
Habit he has on -- Brother, you're very welcome home -- I am glad to ^ee you
good Brother.


The like to you, Sir, the like to you: but, by your leave, Sir, I am a Man of
few words, you know my humour.


'Tis his way, Sir, you must bear with him.


Ay* ay; with all my heart -- but, good Brother, How stand your affairs since
I saw you last? Do you thrive?


Perhaps I do, perhaps I do not, Sir. I hope I am known to understand my
business, Sir; and therefore will take the privilege not to give you any
account, Sir.


Any account, Sir -- as gad save me, he speaks as if he would fright English
out of its wits: but, Why so long, good Brother?


I am not hot, Sir; nor cold neither, Sir -- What a Pox I know what I am, Sir;
and what I do as well as another, if you go to that, Sir.


A pleasant humour.


Come, Sir, come away; the Devil's in ye, ye can never leave off in a
reasonable time; if the old Cuckold comes and finds you here, you'll remember it
as long as your name's Beauford; I'll tell y^ that.


Hah -- What's this?


Oh confounded Dog -- how now, What Rascall's this?


Hey day -- What new Veg^ry's this -- What a pox do ye stand making mouth's for?
'Sbud, Is this a time for Mummery. Good Sir, come away -- my old fit of the
Palsy is come, and I'm sure there is a beating not far of.


Right, Rascal -- If I and my whole Family are sufficient, assure your self ye
shall be well furnished -- What, hoa -- within there.


O! gads bud; What, more mischief still -- Sir, I vow to gad, Sir, I was not at
all accessory -- 'twas he that contrived all, and drew me in -- however, Sir* I
have a pair of Ears, and a piece of my Nose at you^ Worship's ^ervice; to show
that I am a very honest fellow, and so forth, Sir, -- Oh! What shall I do?


No, Rascal, I'll take no Composition in this Case, Sir. Come away there --
Brother, I beg your pardon, they are so tardy -- 'tis only a small
Entertainment, I have provided by wa^ of Bas^inado or so* I know what your
Rushia humour loves.


Ah plague of your Compliment: 'Sdeath, no way to escape?


O now I think they are coming.


I see there's no way to relieve him -- therefore 'tis policy to secure my
self -- for, whatever he suffers, 'tis requisite I preserve my own honour --


Oh dam her -- was ever such a Jilt -- nay, Sir, pray hear me then -- this
Woman -- here, your damned Wife --


But I'll make ye an Example, I'll teach ye to tempt my Integrity -- I will ye
treacherous Rascals; come, fall on, fall on.


Make ready the Wheel-barrow there -- Sirrah, we'll hamper ye.


Hah, hah, hah -- As gad save, this is some revenge however; So -- so -- well
done Sweet heart; well done in troth -- thou hast troubled thy self too much
dear Rogue, I'faith thou hast.


A scurvy Impudent Rascal: What, seek to corrupt me?


Come, he has his payment -- he will be rampant no more this six months I warrant
him -- Come, let's go, I'faith I'll kiss thee for this -- as gad save I will --
come --


A thousand to one but I had been trepanned. Lord! What a wicked World is this?


Come, come, ye are false as Hell, and shall repent your treachery: and,
whatever you think me, Madam, in matter of ^ove and Intrigue, I'll confirm my
self to be a Man of honour in this, gad I le be sure to keep my word with ye.


Sooner then to a Man you had promised to be a second to, I dare swear.


Ay, especially if I were to fight for you, or some of your Sister Town Jilts;
gad, a Man's well rewarded that fights for a rotten Orange.


You might have elevated your thoughts a little -- but 'tis true, your Talk is
suitable to the Company you keep, Taylors Wives, and Exchange-Wenches, who will
sooth your passion for half a pint of burnt Brandy, and vow and protest you are
the lovingst Man they ever met with.


Very well, you can rally now, Madam; now the Vizard is pulled off, a man may
have the privilege of viewing: this is your integrity in the Devils name, your
dyings, your sighings, and your innocence with a Pox t'ee, but this shall not
bubble me out of my reason.


Your Reason's as Corrupt as your Nature -- pray recollect your self a little,
Sir, let the Fa^e of your fancy wheel a little about this way, if I am not
mistaken matters have been otherwise 'twixt you and me, there was a beginning
of Amours -- when there was none of this Jealousy, but Vows, and Oaths, and
Tears, and languishings, and all that -- I do remember, Sir, there was such a
time.


And ther^ ^as a time too, Madam, when you^ Mercenary Vice lay in your (...),
and not in your Tongue, which perhaps pleased me better (...) a time too, when
you had Innocence, Charms, and Graces, to procure the languishings you speak
of: and when I could have flattered my self with the hopes of gathering that
precious flower, which you Women say you lose -- but never any could find, that
ever I heard of I remember there was such a time Madam.


And might have been so still had not my too easy nature abused me: oh that I
had the power of being inconstant, that I might have the power of torturing ye!


Here they are -- and sure, by their strange carriage to one another, have been
quarrelling -- I'll stand apart and observe.


Torturing me -- ha -- ha -- prithee do not flatter thy self with things
impossible, for my part I must confess my s^lf a true Rover -- I am always for
the pl^asure of Love; but, when it comes to torturing, I thank heaven, can as
easily cast it off as a shoe that wrings me -- yet I can love Women, and, to
your knowledge, heartily; but, if they expect Tears, Heart-burnings, and such
like; Gad, I must beg their pardons, 'tis not my way.


Ah, you know what a fond fool you have to deal with -- ungrateful man.


So, this suites well with my design, and now good luck, lying, and ^lattering
assist me -- heavens! What strange barbarity is this? Can any many be so
destitute of N^ture, Reason, and Humanity, to draw Tears from so incomparable a
Beauty? Ah, charming Creature, too precious for mankind, since used so cruelly!
What Adoration can at^one this Crime* Life is too poor, too mean a Sacrifice.


How now? What a Devil have we here? a young Masquerade, that hopes to
ingratiate himself by taking her part -- Harkee Sir, your absence will be very
necessary; for to stay and proceed further in this business, will perhaps be
more dangerous then you imagine.


Dangerous -- Sir, I love danger -- my name's Dangerfeild -- O from the
dangerous minute of my birth, danger has been my chief Companion -- you shall
always find me ready, Sir, to prove that danger you speak of -- but first,
fair Creature, a word with you.


'Sdeath, this is the most impudent young Rascal that ever I met with; Sir, be
gone, or I shall be provoked too --


Nay, Sir, be Civil, as you're a Gentleman -- I'll speak but a word or two with
her* and then am wholly at your Service: Madam, though my hatred to this
Gentleman makes me disguise my self from him, 'tis fit you should see the face
of your humble Adorer.


By heaven a sweet Creature!


Ah, be ^ Creature, to let my hearts first oblation be its Martyrdom; Why
should a Man, inconstant as the Wind, that lives in Heaven, and yet not knows
his happiness, and rather slights his goddess then adores her, be owner of such
Treasure and I want it? I that have loved ye with a heart so passionate, more
nobly fixed, more constant and more kind than Love can frame in strong
imagination? and, Is there no return, no reward, no answer?


There is, there must -- Oh gods! ^y heart yields faster then he has time to
storm it.


My Fortune's I can boast as great as his and my desire to serve ye far more:
besides, in stead of his base impure love, I'll greet your beauty by the name
of Husband; I'll cure your mangled fame* So well I love ye, I'll Marry ye.


Marry me! Oh happy sound -- and ten times happier, coming from so sweet a
Mouth -- Marry me! Sir, I'm yours, and will be yours for ever and ever, nothing
shall part us Marry me! not time, nor destiny, nor any thing my dear dear --
but, Will you marry me indeed? Oh heaven! this is the Joyfull'st minute I e're
knew; Will you be sure to marry me?


Most certainly; there's my hand on it.


I affectionately; kiss it: Some Gold and Jewels I have of my own too, and they
shall all be thine, dear Creature -- Oh heaven! Shall I be married at last?


A very fine business this: but, sure I shall put a stop to the proceeding, I
must not lose her so for all my fooling. Hark ye, Sir, I suppose you that know
so well how to get a Mistress, know as well how to defend her -- come, draw
Sir* draw.


You see the Advantage you have of me by my short Sword, and therefore
doubtless speak this; but, I conjure ye, if ye are a Gentleman, or a Man of
honour, and courage, defer the matter, and let a Duel decide it too morrow
morning.


No, Sir, delay is ever a friend to Cowardice, and therefore I'll not oblige ye
with it: but, to let ye see I am a man of honour and courage -- there's my Sword
for ye -- now give me yours, and let us fight -- come, come you trifle, Sir,
your Sword, your Sword.


Hold, Sir -- and now stand -- a little further -- dam me, stand off. I say,
Sir, the Ancients did allow policy sometimes to be preferred before valour --
now, I think in policy, 'tis fit I enjoy this Lady before I fight for her, or
else being killed, where's my reward? Therefore, have a little patience, Sir,
too morrow you shall find me ready in this Plain Field, near the Bowling-Green,
till when I give you leave to live, and meditate: but, this Lady must along
with me.


Oh infamous Cowardice! 'Sdeath, Sir, you will not serve me so?


Even so, by this good hil^, Sir. Nay, keep your distance too, or I shall give
you such a mark, Sir -- shall make you wish you had stood farther off, Sir --
now does my fingers itch to swing him a little -- I'm sure I shall never have
such another opportunity.


Hell and Confusion -- was ever man thus used -- Sir, for shame, for shame be
more a Gentleman, and consider your reputation --


Come not nearer Sir -- Sa -- sa -- sa: by Heaven I shall tickle ye if ye do.


Ha, ha! I swear this is very pretty.


Is there no remedy -- How now, Who comes here? Beauford -- 'Sdeath, this is
worst of all.


Oh Plague of Intriguing, I say -- my Bones are certainly all broke, methinks I
can hear them rattle as I go along -- how now, Who's this? --


Beauford, as I live, that has had no opportunity of going home since his
Disgrace -- but has made shift with a strange habit. I'll go and discover my
self to him; 'twill be some part of amends for his late misfortune.


And, Is that your Husband d^ee say -- Oh how I long to be at him. Lend me your
Sword, Madam, I'll revenge my self immediately.


No: I'll have no fighting -- I have given the poor Fellow his life --
therefore must protect him -- but, Sir, Is there no way to revenge your self
but by the Sword? methinks there should here's his Mistress who^ I have also
conquered -- sure methinks there should be a better way Sir, then fighting.


Madam, I humbly thank you for refreshing my memory -- for* I vow to gad I had
clearly forgot the other way -- hah -- his Wife and Mistress both in my power
-- faith, here's occasion for revenge enough, that's the truth on it -- Sir, you
have the good fortune to escape me now, and, I think, have some reason to be
glad on it; I had seconded your Blanket entertainment else I assure ye -- but
there's other matters in hand now -- this Gentleman, this Lady, and I, have
some private business together, Sir, and so farewell t'^e --


Ha, ha, ha -- how he looks -- this happens as I could wish -- and now dear Wit
I thank thee.


Shame and Anger ties my tongue up; but, I'll not sleep till I am revenged,
though the performance hazard my life and fortunes.


And is too morrow the day -- good Madam.


Alas, I am afraid so, Sir Lubberly has no patience -- I know he will never
leave tempting me till the business is done: and I swear I tremble as much as I
did at Fifteen, when I was first Married, I vow I do.


Truly I think your Ladyship perhaps has some Cause; for, in my opinion the
Gentleman is too young for ye.


Too young for me, in troth no -- not an hour too young: marry, would he were
younger, I could bear with him I warrant ye -- there are two things always
further these Marriages -- (Youth and Money) for, if they were not young, we
would not Marry them -- and under the Rose, Tisick, an we were not Wealthy I'm
sure they would not Marry us -- how now, Whose there?


Madam* Sir Lubberly is come to wait on ye.


Od's my life -- here had like to have been a surprise -- Tisick, some Musk
quickly to sweeten my breath -- and reach me hither my Box of Writings -- So,
so; I Vow I was terribly afraid he should have found me smoking Tobacco -- hum
-- 500 l. due on this Bond at Michaelmas. For he that a Bonny Brisk Widow will
Wed,
Must Ransack her Coffers, and creep to her Bed.
How does my dear Lady and Wife that must be -- what, perusing -- well* I have
been with Sir Timothy Ticklecause, and the Settlements are almost drawn; the
happy hour is approaching, 'tis coming, Rogue, 'tis coming.


Your Servant, dear Sir Lubberly, I protest ye make me blush.


Those blushes influence the heavens, and give a radiant tincture to the
Morning; Madam, you are the very Cynthia of perfection.


And you the Phebus of Wit and ^allantry.


Madam, your Person is Natures Essence Bottle, and your mind the Mirror of
Virtue and Discretion -- but now we are talking of Essences -- hugh -- methinks
here is a scurvy smell of Tobaccoe.


Oh faugh -- do not speak of it, Sir -- Sir Lubberly -- I smell none --


Hah -- gad I'm sure I think I smell it -- but, no matter, now to our
business: Shall too morrow be the day? Shall I be happy --


Alas, Sir, I must needs show the Widows failing. I have not power to deny ye
any longer.


Hast not? and, Shall I possess all? -- and, above all thy excellent Person --
without control at Board, Bed, and so forth, ha --


Ay, what you please, Sir -- alas, I'm a poor weak Creature; but, I know,
you'll be as kind as you can, Sir.


Kind -- the Fat Friar to the Black-brow'd Nun shall not be kinder -- we will
never quarrel -- nor throw Tongs and Candlesticks at one another, as the
Custom is, but live and Coo together like two Turtles.


So we will in troth -- and, for my part, I'll never scold.


And I'll never be Drunk -- unless it be with thee, ^nd then you know it will
be Convenient.


It may so, it may indeed: but, there's one thing more my Dear, that I must beg
of thee. Do not keep a Whore; do not fail that way. Let me be sufficient --
Alas I know I shall be loath to spare thee. Therefore keep no Whore I beseech
thee.


Well, I won't, I won't: come, I'll resist temptation for once -- I'll try what
I can do -- and yet gad a Whore would be very necessary -- but, for thy sake
I'll strive against the grain -- come, I will keep no Whore -- I will oblige
thee. Thou shalt serve (...)*


Why* blessing on thy heart! and* when I fail in my a^ection, I'll give you
l^ave to ramble: why never ^as such a Couple as we ^all ^e -- we'll nothing all
day but talk, and chat, and look upon one another.


Ay, and ^it together in two-lin'd Elbow Chairs by the fire side -- and at
night (...) old stories -- then drink a dose of Mi^abilis, go to bed, and snore
hea^tily, and never rise till Twelve the next day.


No, not till three, if you think fit; in troth I am transported strangely -- I
did not think I should ever have seen such happy days again -- I vow 'tis very
comfortable -- then, Sir, we'll live so merrily --


And sing perpetually.


And kiss everlastingly -- Shalllwe not Sir?


Ay, ay -- kiss -- why we'll do nothing else the sir^t Month. Come hither to
me, come hither to me my dear old Queen and let us incorporate.


Ah dear Sir! well, I protest my heart's at my Mouth.


Come away then to Church immediately -- fi^st say grace, and then fall too.
And let all judge whilst thus we are entwined,
If ever pair were fitter to be joined.



Prithee my dear, defer my bliss no longer, oh how I long for the happy minute
t^a^ is ^o complete my Joys! methinks each hour is a day, and each day a
thousand ages, I vow I'm a^aid you begin to repent your promise.


Never fear it, and since you are resolved to venture, go and fetch me the key
of the Cabinet, where your Jewels are, as you promised me, and th^n command me
what you please.


I'll fly swifter than Thought, and am glad any price can purchase thee.


Ha, ha, ha! alas poor silly creature, if thou did but know what an
insufficient -- what a sign of a Husband thou were so eager of, thou would
think the purchase dear at the rate of a^gilt shilling. Sure never was creature
so fond, she haun^s me where ever I go, smiles when I smiled, and is sur^ to
be ^el^ncholly when I am so, and then is eternally vowing perpetual Love and
Constancy. Nay, and what feeds my revenge high, and pleases me most of all, is,
she is now going to deliver me up all her Jewels -- those very Jewels which my
Husband has given her, as the price of his impure Love; and this is so full
satisfaction, th^t my wishes are all bounded -- here comes Beauford too, whom I
must confes^ I have u^'d but s^urvily, in so long delaying the reward due to
his passion, but 'tis his misfortune, for the only satisfaction he desires, is
the only thing I dare not grant him. Well Sir, what now?


Madam, I have waited so long for the happy minute, and have had so little
satisfa^tion on your part, ^hat 'gad I can forbear no longer -- what though
Love did not induce you to recompense; methinks, in conscience you might a
little consider my necessity.


Ha, ha, ha! well, I say Si^, how ^oor are they that have no patience*


Ay gad, I say, how poor are they that have all patience, and no reward for it.


Reward -- ^ye Sir, come do not give me cause to think ye Mercenary, do all
things free and generously; when service comes to be paid once, where lies the
obligation?


And when Love Madam -- like hoarded mettle, lies rusting, and is almost
spoiled for want of use, where lies the pleasure or profit?


Bring but your recompense within the list of Honour* Reason, and Virtue, and
there's my hand, I'll be more free than your wishes in the performance.


Ah dear Rogue -- on this white Altar I could eternally pay my hearts oblations
-- but a word more of Virtue and Reason, and I swooned, my Teeth chatter
already; 'gad 'tis like swallowing an Issicle just after a man has drunk a
comfortable Elixir to warm him. But Madam, in strict sense, what greater reason
is there, than in charitably saving a poor young hopeful fellow from the grave;
or what's more like a Woman of Honour, than to be punctual in keeping her word?


Cucko^lding ones Husband is a glorious point of Honour, I must needs say.


And so it is, and necessary too, as your case stands; let me tell you that
Madam, virtue has nothing to do here, you are to follow the dictates of Love
and Revenge, without the consideration of what is right or wrong. -- As in a
D^el no man of Honour or Courage invited to be Second, stays to debate whose
Cause is best, but boldly pushes on at all adventures -- and makes his friends
Life and Honour equal with his own; he that coldly stands in niceties or
punctillo's, is a Craven and no Cock of the Game, I'll answer for him.


Well then, since 'tis decreed, and that I am to pay ^o dearly for your
service, I'm resolved to have my penny worth out of ye, therefore listen to my
Commands, which obeyed and performed, perhaps I may come to terms.


Oh very well.


My Husbands Mistress is so passionately in love with me, that she has
discovered all her secrets, and is now gone to fetch the key of her Jewels,
that lye in a Cabinet at her old Lodgings, and your assistance I shall want in
the conveying them hither; I had designed you should have share with me, but
since my Love is the only Reward you expe^t, that other profit must be wholly
mine.


Ha! Jewels! gad such helps would be very necessary, as my condition stands,
her love may be won at more leisure -- nay Madam, if you are resolved to keep
your vow, I cannot be so barbarous to


To infringe it, I am not wi^ling -- hah --


No, not for the world ^adam -- but these Jewels how are they to be purcha^ed?
for you know 'tis not requisite for me to go thither my ^elf.


I have considered it, therefore your best way will be to seek out my old
Servant, he tha^ I sent to you in the Walks, he's an honest fellow, and I'm
sure be very careful in the performance; st^y you here, and I'll send her to ye
with the key, this performed, my revenge is complete; and I'll instantly write
a challenge to my Husband to meet me this evening at my Lady Beardly's: perhaps
now he finds his error, he may reform, if not, the Wit and Honour of the
enterprise rewards me, and so farewell to Love and Matrimony.


Hah! Jewels! gad this happens well, for my late extravagant expenses have put
me damnably out of Cash -- and this seasonable recruit, just in this juncture,
proves very happy -- well, I see I have some propitious Stars, though they are
commonly cloud^d.


News, so, he has found it out already, sure there is somethin^ very like a
Pimp in my Physiognomy, for I never went about a bawdy business in my life, but
if my tongue did not discover it, my looks did, and that's all one -- would I
had burnt this Letter, for ten to one but my bones must pay postage for it, the
contents are doubtless Harbengers to another beating.


Sirrah, no more grumb^ing, but let me know the business; how now, What's that,
a Letter you have in your hand there? come let's see it, let's see it.


A pox of ^our Eagles eyes.


Revenge, as it is the solace of wronged spirits, so 'tis a benefit designed by
Heaven, to show the difference between the brave and coward: 'tis the Cordial
drop that sweetens the injuries we have received, and gives us courage to repay
'em; if I should now rashly fight with Beauford about this, she would then be
forwarn'd, and I should frustrate my design upon her -- no, I'll first pursue
the effect of this disguise, I shall have Duelling hours enough hereafter --
hah, and as good fortune happil^* orders it, yonder he is -- now Cunning,
Malice -- Mans best Wit, and Woman's damned Hypocrisy, I implore your
assistance.


Ay, here's your excuse, here's your melting expressions; what she did then
sirrah, was upon compulsion, and against her Will poor soul.


Compulsion, ay that's a fine sham indeed; 'twas a pretty entertainment faith,
to cudgel our bones out of Joint, and then send word she did it upon
compulsion, compulsion in the Devils name.


What! my dear, noble, and most accomlish'd spark of fortune, is it you?
i'faith I am over joyed to see ye, gad I was afraid, I should never have been
so happy again.


Hah, my good and trusty old friend, letme embrace thee.


Ah deer Sir!


Why this is an excess of furtune, too happy for my hopes -- for I was just now
sending my man all over the Town to seek thee.


Why, what blessed chance had I to come so opportunely! Well Sir, and how came
ye off with your last business? faith I heard the ill-natur'd cuckold used ye
very ill.


Ah most damnably, o'ons I was beaten plaguily, and then tossed in a Blanket.


A Blanket! why what an unnatural chance was that? 'sdeath is it possible that
so witty, so amorous, and so politic a man as you, should have such damned
Foot-boys luck to be tossed in a Blanket? as I live 'twas intolerable.


'Twas so -- but I thank fortune I have now the power of revenging my self
sufficiently, for I have at this time both his Wife, and Mistress in my
custody, besides a third benefit, which out-weighs all; which thou shalt know
presently.


How, his Wife too say ye Sir? oh (...)!


His Wife, rogue, his Wife, and she is in so quaint a disguise, that igad I
defy him to find her out, if he has only instinct to make his discovery.


Death and Damnation* -- I shall ne'er have patience.


No faith, to confess the truth to thee, I have been a little tardy in that
business -- and she has hitherto always put me off -- but then it has been with
so many smiles, and with such a soft languishing Air, that my hopes are as
great as ever, besides, 'tis now bounded with an affair I am to do for her: ha,
ha! sirrah, there are Jewels in the case, Jewels which Beverly's Mistress has
given her, in which I'm to share, I thank him for being so bountiful.


Jewels too, Sir -- now fortune be constant.


Jewels, and of Considerable value, all that that Coxcomb was so long troubling
himself to bestow upon her, are ours in an instant; she'll presently be here
he^ self with the Key of the Cabinet, ha, ha, ha! Oh my gall will break with
excess of Contentment.


A very quaint business, I vow to gad, Sir, ha, ha, ha!


Now, as good luck would have it (whom I will never blame again, I am resolved
on it) thou art come exactly at the time to be Messenger, for 'twas Olivia's
desire that yo^ should be sound out, as the person amongst all her Creatures
most fit to be trusted in so weight* a business.


Ah she's a good Lady, heaven bless her: O Propitious!


For you ma^ go unsuspected to her lodging, and bring all off clearly; but I
dare not, for fear of being discovered; for I hear that Jealous Coxcomb watches
for me, as I think he has reason, h'ah, Has he not?


Ha, ha, ay Sir; but I'll warrant we will be cunning enough.


Oh here she comes her self with the Key -- Madam, this is the honest Fellow
the Gentleman ordered to fetch the Jewels.


Well, here's the Key, and pray Friend be careful, for, I assure ye they are of
value.


I warrant ye, Madam; but, 'twould be more easily performed, if you could go a
little way and show me the house, for, to ask questions, will not be necessary;
do but that, Madam, and for the rest let me alone.


That I will with all my heart; this Mask will disguise me a little.


Nay, Sir, I would not have you go, for if you are seen all's discovered.


He says tr^e, stay you here, Sir; come, Friend, and be sure be careful.


Never fear, Madam -- I'll secure the Jewels, and you too with a vengeance.


So, so, this will be some recompense however, for the ill fortune I have had
formerly; I see now the Devil has a principle of Civility in him, and will not
too much disoblige a person that deserves better at his hand -- let me see,
What shall I do with these Jewels, hah? gad, I'll convert them instantly into
Money, all Gold; fine yellow Rogues, and then will so Chine and Chink em in
Beverly's Ears, I'll make him mad, ha, ha, ha! Sirrah, ^ou shall have a new
Livery too, and Money in your Pocket, Rogue; you can provide your self a Whore,
I think, can't ye?


A whore, ay, I'm a fine fellow for a whore indeed; alas Sir all natural
motions were cudgell'd out of me a great while ago, I can hardly remember what
ma^es the distin^tion between the Sexes a whore quotha, alas -- my capacity has
not extended that way a long time.


Ha, ha, ha! and then we'll row and revel like Emperors; oh Madam, the business
is done, I have been diligent you see.


Diligent! the Devil, what, and let Wheedle be carried away so tam^ly by heaven
'tis downright cowardice.


Carried away, ha, ha! that's a pretty jest indeed, why 'tis your man Madam,
the honest fellow you bid me discover the business to; she's gone but a little
way to show him the house, she'll be here again presently.


Oh intolerable blindess and stupidity! this honest fellow you speak of was my
Husband in disguise; I saw him pull his false Beard off, and met her dragging
her along: Oh I could curse!


Her Husband! Confusion, I have made a fine piece of Work on it.


So there's my new Livery gone again.


Come, pray Sir give me the Key of the Jewels, ten to one but your ill luck
will make you lose that too -- if I trust ye any longer -- come, deliver, I'll
do the business now my s^lf: the Key, the Key.


So, I'm a very pretty Fellow, Faith.


Ad'sdeath, What a sneaking look is there? -- you look as if you were Arraigned
for a Rape, and were now going to plead to the Indictment -- come, Where is it?
What a fumbling you keep -- What, can't you find it?


Fumbling, Madam, I don't fumble, not I -- I am looking, I don't fumble, not I,
Madam -- would I were in a Sea Fight!


What, not yet? -- Oh, my prophetic fear -- there must be something in this --
What's the matter? speak -- ' Speak, thou vile Creature! Where is't? Still that
leering Dog-look -- a hundred to one but you've mistook, and given that to my
Husband too.


I vow to gad and so I have Madam.


Ah que sui Malhereux!


Ah Mort dieu Jernie bougra.


This is the most unlucky could possibly have happened; all that my Wit has
been so long toiling for, lost and ruined in a moment: I warrant ye told him
too that I was here with ye in disguise.


Yes, Faith, I told him that too.


Monstrous -- Why this is mere infatuation -- you are the most unhappy person
that ever was.


The unlucky'st Dog that ever breathed, as I hope to be saved.


Well, I have this Consolation however, it frees me from your importunate
Addresses; you cannot sure have the impudence to persist after having failed the
performance of so necessary an Injuction.


Faith, Mad^m, my impudence, like my ill fortune, will never leave me, till it
has undone me. I am a very Spaniel, in Love, Madam; the more my ill usage, the
greater my passion.


Then, to thy terror be it spoken; know (oh most unfortunate person) that I
have fooled thee all this while, made thee a down-right property, and am a very
Miser in affection. In fine, Sir, by the way of Advice, let me tell ye -- you
do but swim against the stream, and vainly dash against the rock of my
Constancy; therefore desi^t in time, do; Marry, grow virtuous, and love
honestly; Look gravely, say your prayers, think on Hell,
Your Ill luck comes by Whooring, so farewell.



Very good -- I have been a Stock-fish to a fine purpose Faith -- think of
Hell in the Devil's name; and gad I will think so much on it, that I will keep
my self from thence, if possible, least I should happen into thy d^mn'd company
again. And now my eyes are open too; 'igad I begin to find that I am but a kind
of a Coxcomb.


Oh do ye begin to find it -- faith you might have found it before now, one
would have thought, 'thas been visible enough.


I have now Mistress, and, faith, little or no money; two necessities
excellently well matched; for a Man that has a Mistress in this Age, and no
Money to give her, is like one that sets a Lawyer to Plead without his Fee,
whatever happens, his business is sure to be neglected -- I have one stake left
however -- this Ring here -- which, as it luckily came to me, shall now as
luckily relieve me -- Sirrah, go you to yonder shop, and bid the Goldsmith come
hither to me.


Ay, ay, come, let the moveable vanish, that we may drink a Bottle, and put our
selves in heart again.


This will make a little blaze; and, let the worst happen 'tis but practising
Reformation at last, and wheedle my old Aunt into a belief of my Conversion,
and then all's well again. Goldsmith.


To buy a Ring, say thou -- in troth it could not have happened in a worse
time: For, I have just hired these Officers to arrest a person, that has lately
put a Cheat upon me; but, come, I will have a little patience to do your Master
a kindness.


Come, Sir, you must dispatch the business quickly, because he says, he's in
haste.


Here, Friend, this is the Ring -- good Stones, I assure ye, and of true
value.


Ay, like enough, Sir -- by Coxbodikins, the very self-same Ring I was cheated
of, and which I made for Mr. Beauford, this was happy fortune I^ack; now
Timothy Touchstone, show thy self to be a Citizen of Wit and Policy, and cramp
this Gallant. And pray how long have you had this Ring, Sir?


How long have I had it, Sir?


Ay; How long have you had it, Sir? and, How came you by it, Sir? -- Look'ee,
Sir, I am a Magistrate, and, with your leave, may ask these Questions: I say,
How came you by it, Sir?


A Constable! Oh gads bud I shall be hanged.


Came by it, Sir? why, Sir, my Grandmother left it me for a Legacy; Sir, it has
been worn by our Family this 500 year: what a Devil do ye think I don't know how
I came by it, Sir?


O damned lye, damned lye!


Very well, Sir; the King has a precious Subject of you, that he has in troth,
that can Cheat his Liege People, and carry it off with such confidence --
Officers, I charge you in the Kings Name to Seize him -- this Ring is mine, he
cheated my Man of it, therefore look to him.


So, a rare business again.


What hoa -- there -- Peter -- come, Sir, we shall publish what you are.


Oh what shall I do? -- now will this plaguy Watch rise up in Judgment against
me too -- Is there no way to hide it? No contrivance? -- Oh that fellows face
frights me worse then a Furies. Oh what shall I do?


Come ye hither, Sirrah; do ye know these persons?


Know 'em, ay, as well as I know my Dame at home, Sir; this is he that had the
Ring and this other here Cheated me of the Watch; I'll fearch, I'll warrant he
has it about him.


Search what pleases thee; but, do not Scandalize the Innocent O Man!


O Man -- What a dickins are you turned Quaker o'th sudden, and have the
confidence to wear your Hat before Mr. Constable? Come, come, strike fail, Will
ye Friend?


Look thee Friend; do not involve thy self in mischief, I profess my self to be
no respecter of persons -- nor will I veil my Bonnet to any one, no not to the
King profecto.


I^le try that Sirrah, presently.


This was your Project, Rogue; this was your Project.


A pox of your Projects: Oh, What will become of me?


Come, come; away with 'em.


This damned City Rascal has no Mercy -- and I see I must send to my old Aunt
for her assistance -- come, Whether would you have us your Polecats?


Oh we will show ye presently -- we will show ye.


And is it all discovered


All, I swear: and only by his damnable misfortune, in mistaking my Husband
for my old Messenger.


Did he tell him you were in Men's Clothes too?


That I think was omitted; he only named a Disguise: but 'twould have been an
excellent Scene of Mirth for thee, had thou but seen how he looked, when I
first railed, and at last discarded him; He was as pale as death, and shook, as
if he had an Ague.


No such occasion of Mirth, if you knew all.


I expect him here at his Aunts presently, and then to observe the harangue
between my Husband and he will be excellent diversion.


But, How shall I contrive to be there? I dare not let my Brother see me with
you, for I have ever made him believe I was ignorant of your designs; but, if I
could be a private Spectator.


Private -- Why 'tis but pinning up your Gown, putting on a Scarf, pulling your
Hood over your Face, and practiceing a little the Chambermaids impudent Gate,
and you may pass for one of my Lady Beardly's Family.


Well; I'm resolved I le venture, if it be only for the sake of seeing so
extraordinary an Encounter.


Follow me then; I think I hear some body coming.


By this means I shall observe Beauford's actions; for I believe I'm allotted
to prove his good genius when all's done.


Prithee Woman do not trouble me, I am busy.


Are ye so? -- why then perhaps 'tis my pleasure to delay that business. I
wonder Sir Lubberly you are not ashamed to use me thus. Why would ^ou let me
fall over the great Form in the Hall, and not give me timely warning? knowing,
like a cruel man as ye are, that the Monkey broke my Spectacles yesterday,
g^ing to read a Proclamation.


I give ye warning -- why what a Devil are ye blind -- Cant ye see neither,
this is worst of all, this raises my dislike of ye to an extravagant degree?
Why hark'ee, speak in your own Conscience, Can you be so unreasonable to desire
me to fall in Love with that Madrid Face of yours? come, I put it to ye, Can
you be so unreasonable?


Madrid-Face, I scorn your words Sir: for, had not Age been a little too bold
here, there's ne'er a Woman in Christendom has a more comely countenance
though I say it: come, I would fain know the defects of it.


Would ye, well, well, have patience, and you shall: Why, in the first place,
^our eyes are sunk so hollow, that a man had need of a perspective Glass to
look into your head to discern 'em; then your Nose is like the Gnomon of a
Dial, which the Sun has warpt for many a year -- but what is a continual
eye-sore to me, is that intolerable Beard of yours -- Why the devil don't you
go to the Barbers? Why don't you shave? o'ons those whiskers are most
abominable.


Ha -- alack-aday, it does sprout indeed, Sir Lubberly, I am the Consort of
your bosom, and you should, methinks, wink at my imperfections: consider, there
is no wife but has external or internal failings; ah Sir Lubberly! you could
have wink d once -- you could have born with this face of mine before ^ou had
your ends -- but now my Nose is like the Gnomon of a Dial. Hah! well, you
verify the old proverb.


What proverb now? come, what proverb?


When the Devil was sick, the Devil a Monk would be, But when the Devil was
well, the Devil a Monk was he.


What a pox then, you make a Devil of me do ye? hah? this is rare impudence,
but I'll fetch your Similes out ye old Jade.


Help help there, why Sir Lubberly are you mad? gad forgive me, are you
infatuated? what swinge your wife the first week of your marriage, before the
Wedding-shooes are warm, as one may say -- oh Villain, Fool, Coxcomb, why thou
art like --


Like -- what more Likes still -- mum I say -- Tace -- I command ye, as you
expect Bamboo should sleep in peace, be silent.


Oh woman, woman, what hast thou brought thy self too!


Come come, have patience Madam, have patience.


Patience -- What a woman of quality as I am, and suffer my self to be thus
used? I have made a fine business of it; in troth I have supported this decayed
frame of Beauty to a rare purpose, if this be the fruits on t! And yet 'tis no
more than what all of us are liable too; Marriage is a thing we are as greedy
of, as a Fish is o^ a bait, though he swallows his destruction: we cannot help
it, it is in our na^ures, nay, we cannot live without it; and then too, if we
do marry, 'tis to these young Rascals, though we are sure it is not us they
love, but our Money; well, I must do something by way of prevention; I'll go
and invite all my Relations and Friends to dinner; it may be good admonition,
may work much upon him; if not, my penitence shall be a warning to my whole
Sex, That they may know how dearly I repented,
That married thrice, yet could not be contented.



How now Sir Lubberly, what flinch from your friends, your guests, and
Relations -- give me patience! this is but an odd way of welcome -- what my
good Lady in tears too -- hah, by my faith this is a little of the soonest Sir
Lubberly.


Ah let her alone, let her alone -- the more she howls, the less she scolds,
you understand me.


Ay ay, Sir, I understand ye, ha, ha, ha! give me patience: What an intolerable
dunce is this Nephew of mine! come no more of this April weather; faith this
ill agrees with a Bride the first week of her Marriage.


Especially one matched so to her hearts content, one that married a young man
for the pleasure of his company, and yet having possession, is not satisfied --
fie -- I swear this can be no fault of his, but the effects of your own ill
nature.


Well Madam, mock on -- it may be your own case another day, when you come to
be old; I as little thought as you to come to this, but you see the consequence
of Love and Folly.


Come good Madam, no more of this, I have an affair to inform ye of. I met your
Nephew Mr. Beauford, just now in the Constables hands, and upon information of
the busin^ss, found it to be a very slight matter; and though for my part, all
things considered, I have of all men, the least reason to stand his friend, yet
thinking my self sufficiently revenged on him, and my good nature prompting me
to forget and forgive, I took him into the next Tavern to know the truth of the
matter, and after we had drunk half a dozen bottles, and debated on the
matter, I desired the Officer to bring him hither to you to make an end, he is
without there, and in my opinion, 'twill be for your credit, to discharge him
as soon as ye can.


In troth and so I will -- who knows -- but I may live to have comfort of him
-- nay Sir, never mump nor lower for the matter, as gad save me, I will have
consolation one way or other, I in troth will I, and there's the resolution of
a wronged Wife.


Then there's the resolution of an enraged Husband


Fie Sir Lubberly, what strike a Woman?


Woman, hang her, she's no Woman -- nor on my conscience was -- ah, if I could
but create a fancy, or find by any Search, Art, or Industry -- that she ever
had been Woman, I could be patient, but to marry a piece of German Clockwork,
that only hangs together like Geometry -- a Hag, a Witch of Endor -- oh 'tis
intolerable!


But will unmanning your self by beating her, help this?


I don't know -- it gives my heart a little ^ase however.


But see, who comes here?


Nay Madam, no drawing back, I am resolved to have my humour.


Dear, Sweet Sir, do not shame me before all this company.


Confound your Sirens note, I am deaf to entreaty. Gentlemen and Ladies pray
view this Creature, peruse her well, she's worth your observation* this piece
of Country dirt was once my Mistress, Lady of my Heart, of all my Love, my
Honour, whose face made me forget a virtuous Wife, to fawn and dote upon her
hypocrysie -- I fell in love with her in a Country village, where her old
Father lived, a peaceful Ploughman, that knew no Heaven beyond a fruitful Crop;
no^ Hell beyond foul weather; there at her Task as she sate spinning, mourning
in tears, the slavery of her life; And those hands that now appear so delicate,
then parched and Sunburnt, turning the rude Wheel; I saw her, pitied her,
quickly wooed and won her.


Very well Sir.


Brought her to Town, cherished her as my life, gave her rich Cloths and
Jewels, made her sit at a new Play amongst the greatest Ladies: in Fine, so
well I loved her, that had she not been less grateful than the Devil, she never
could have deserted me. But mark what creatures Women are
So infinitely vile and fair. --
(as a person of great Wit and Honour satyrically says) this Devil, whose
kindness all proved subtilty, maugre all my Favours left me, slighted me, and
falling i^ love with a smooth-fac'd flashy fellow, had the impudence to court
him, with the very Jewels I had given her; but that, as good fortune ordered
it* I countermanded, and as the reward of your ingratitude, for ever banished
you my heart; and thus in the same gorgeous habiliments I first found you in,
have turned you loose upon the Common. Display the fatal snare, in which men
fall,
And shown proud Iilts, there great Original.



Gad and prudently done too, for the down-right Devil's in them now-a days. But
come, now I have another business: I have a Ticket from the young spark I
lately spoke of, to meet him here, but am afraid he's too much a coward to keep
his word.


Is he so Sir?


I beg your pardon Sir, for my suspicion -- but come, no more words, let's
steal softly off, you understand me.


Ay Sir, I understand ye very well, but I know not what's the matter* I'm in so
good a humour, that I am now more inclined to a reconciliation, than to
fighting* Come faith Sir, let it be so, for what is past, I'll make ye amends,
and because 'tis fit ye know the person that put that pleasant trick upon ye
yesterday, you shall see my Face, how do ye like it?


My Wife! sure 'tis not possible!


Hah! his Wife?


By heaven very possible Sir, and very true I assure ye; I am that v^r^
Numerical person you were speaking of. One that to farther her revenge, has so
long worn these fortunate breeches, that she can hardly consent to return to
quondam Petticoats again; one that has cured your jealousy by giving the cause
to be so, a^d lastly, won your Mistress in spite of your Sword, and Policy.
^ut for ^ou Madam


Hark Sweetheart, if thou wilt accept of half a Crown a week, and be content to
lye in a Garret.


Base treacherous Creature -- ah curse upon my stupidity!


Come to my bosom, thou art mine again -- all -- all my own, and shalt be so
for ever -- for from this moment, all base drossy thoughts, that soiled the
life and lustre of my Judgement, shall vanish; and instead of those, thy
Beauty, Love, Constancy, and Wit, sha^l crown my heart -- blot from thy breast
my faults, and let our union teach the Wild, Roving, and inconstant World, how
they sho^ld Live and Love, my dearest Creature.


This now is like a Husbands love; free as it should be; Which mine shall
^qual, and now I'll boldly say,
Whensoe'er yours was, this is my Wedding day.



Come Sir, and pray let me hear no more of these Frolics, live civilly and
orderly -- and strive to oblige your Aunt -- come, you may if you please, be a
comfort to her in her calamity: We are not so near akin, thank heaven, but we
may comfort one another.


Old Ioan cease your Clack, it offends my Ear: Cousin Beauford, welcome to my
house, I'm your Uncle, do ye see, and there's a respect due; but no words of
that, let the old Women chatter to themselves, make thy address to me boy*
Come, there's a Collation stays within, pray let's all go and toss a bottle or
two -- Coz, give me thy hand, dost hear -- see me often -- do -- igad, thou
shalt be welcome; come Gentlemen, pray let's go.


With all my heart Sir, I'll make one, Mr. Beauford and I have long been at
difference, and many rough Scene has past betwixt us; come, let it end now: for
the injuries I have done you, I as^ ^ou pardon, and will give you what other
satisfaction, you will demand, for those you have done me, I forgive them
freely.


And so do I.


And I.


And I.


And I, h^ has got me many a beating, heaven pardon him, I do.


And further, by way of recompense for loss of this Lady, I promise upon my
honour, that any thing (but her) shall on my (...) be readily tendered, to
express the endearments, I desire to pay Mr. Beauford.


Faith Sir, I am heartily sorry your Comple^ent is lost upon me, but my brains
are grown so watery, and my wit is so thin Sir, with my common Calamity, that I
fear I should make but ungrateful Repartee: I am now studying new Philosophy,
and to baffle my future ill luck, am resolved voluntarily to embrace some
strange misfortune: that being once at the lowest ebb, the Devil may have no
power over me; to which purpose I will instantly marry the most ugly, old,
vicious, mercenary creature I can meet with; and if there can be worse luck
than that, I am mistaken.


Ha, ha! this is an excellent humour i'faith.


Why, what a mad fool art thou? have not I told ye that I would stick by ye?


And will ye marry any Woman, do ye say Sir?


Any Woman, by this light -- thee if thou wilt -- and faith, now I look on thee
again, thou art a very fit person, and I believe the Devil has sent the^ hither
just in the nick, to make thy market* come give me thy hand -- let thy consent
answer it* a^d here I do promise upon the honour of a Gentleman; I mean an
unlucky Gentleman, to marry thee to morrow.


I most Religiously accept of it.


Hold, hold, we must deny this Contract.


Gentlemen, 'tis too late -- but stay now, let me consider her a little, by her
Face she may be a Witch, by her Tongue a Scold, and by her Habit a Whore -- a
very hopeful Spouse in faith; but pray cause her to unvail, for I am resolved you
shall see the worst of her, now my hand's in,


Give me patience -- what -- Madam Lidia!


How -- my Sister!


Now do I expect some stale, rotten, overgrown Chambermaid, some eternal Green
sickness, some compound of Paint and Impudence, that has been suffered to live,
merely to plague mortality; but come, hanged, I'll stand up boldly, and bear my
affliction like a man. Well Sir Frolic, my doom is she, a Witch or a Gypsy.


O'ons, are you mad Sir? -- why 'tis Mr. Beverly's Sister, one worth at least
ten thousand pounds.


What ten thousand pounds?


Sister, this does not suit your Education.


Brother, your pardon, I am now at age, and will not be controlled.


This was more than I expected, but I am glad on it fo^ Beauford's sake.


What, I warrant Sir, you repent your bargain now? come what do ye think on it.


Think on it! the Devil take me Madam, if I am not past thinking; I am all
ecstasy, fear, hope, wonder; but will you really marry me? and are you worth
ten thousand pound, is there no trick in it? gad, the apprehension of my late
ill luck does so torture me; therefore dear Creature tell me; swear, is there
no trick in this upon your soul?


None I swear -- I am resolved to marry ye.


Not a word more, there's a bargain made.


Mr. Beauford, do not flatter your self; your Estate must be consulted, before
we proceed further in this affair; she is my Sister, I am her Guardian too, and
have now 6000 l. of hers in my hand.


Have ye so! I'gad I'll have something else of hers in my hands then, by to
morrow night, I am resolved: and, now I think on it better, your Honour is pawned
to assist me, and I challenge it as you are a Gentleman.


The Devil's in it, that this should happen thus. Here take her, She's yours,
and now he hold to say*
Midst all Ill-Luck, This is your happy day.



Well, if this should be a Dream at last now -- but a pox 'tis impossible, I
have her in my arms here, and if the Devil takes her from me now, gad he shall
take me too. We will go lovingly together.


Come, all's well, all's well: this was a lucky business, faith; but give ye
Joy, Sir, give ye Joy.


Now, if my Grannum there and I were reconciled too, we should be all Friends;
but, How the Devil is't possible, when a Man has such a continual Hagg-look
from her? No, it will not be; 'Sbud, me thinks she looks more like a Witch
every day then other; I shall be haunted ^re long with her I^s, and Fairys;
Well, I'm resolved to spend all her Estate in comforting my heart up* I'm
conscious to my self how much I want it -- for* He that Wedds an old H^gg, that
had three Men before*
H^s o^e Hell on Earth, and another in Store.



ALl you (...) know the (...) disposition,
Mou^n my h^rd fate, and pity my condition*
At 15 years my heart to Love began,
And placed it's dearest happiness in Min*
I Married, Buried, Matched a S^cond time,
Nay, and a third, Was ever such a Crime?
My two first Husbands loved Wine more then Prayers;
One's Heart I broke, the other his Neck down Stairs;
The third Fool I Cornuted -- a mere Logg --
But, this fourth Rogue here beats me like a Dog.
A decent Curse for her that leaves Bandore,
Paints her Hags face, and Marries at Fourscore:
But, least there should be any Matron here,
To whom I may not gratefully appear;
One who perhaps may quite mislike this Dressing,
Matched with a Boy, yet mist the only Blessing:
Who, Miser-like, would reap all Grains that grow,
When she, alas, is much too old to Sow:
Fearing her Rage, I'll change my Sex, and th^
Cast my Snakes-Skin, and thus turn Nokes again.
So State-Fanaticks change to the Party-Royal,
And when they dare Rebel, no more turn Loyal.

