THe weary, hot and amorous God of Day,
Desends into the Bosom of the Sea,
To revel there some pleasant Hours away,
And I, succeeding Regent of the Night,
Till mighty Cynthia rises with new Light,
Over all the gloomy World extend my awful sway:
Nature is g^ne to rest, and Human-kind,
Possessed with Peace of Mind,
En^oy, what in these Grove^, the happy Shepherds find;
Appear my Dazzling Pleiades, appear,
Cynthia intends, to Night, to revel here;
Come, come away,
Come, come away,
Adorned each in her glittering Robe, and shame Approaching-day.

BEhold the Daughters of famed Atlas come,
Adorned with Lustre at great Night's command;
Through ambient Air ten thousand Leagues from home,
We come to Visit blessed Ionia's Land.
Say mighty Queen of Shades what's to be done!
What Wonders must the bright Virgiliae do?
Are we to Mutiny against the Sun,
And let Mankind no more his Splendour view?

No, no, no, no, that's too severe,
No blemish must in your bright Forms appear;
Let Faction be by drossy Mortals shown,
The purer starry Region must have none:
Joy is your business n^w, Joy and Delight,
Great Cynthia comes to revel here to Night.

Then since the Affair is all Dancing and Play,
My light-footed Sisters shall trip it away,
So brisk that the Swains,
That inhabit the Plains,
Shall all at the Sight,
Have a Passion for Night,
And remember no more the dull Charms of the Day*

Bright Star, Sweet Merope, this grant of thine*
Shall make thee equal with my Planets shine;
For now the hour draws near, and to my Sense,
Methinks I feel loved Zephirus's Influence;
The Charming Zephyr, fragrant breezes blows,
See wh^re he comes perfuming every Rose,
And shedding Sacred Odours as he goes.

Night, dear Promoter of Lovers Felicity,
Thou sweet Attoner for Cares of the Day,
Happy disguise of a Virgins simplicity,
Whose guilty Blushes her Heart would betray;
Thou sweet Concealer of her Intrigue,
Which the Day would reveal,
When to a private Bower,
At some Mid-night-hour, whilst the old Dad do snore,
To her Love she would steal.
Then the extremes of true Joy are most ravishing,
When silent Hours indulge our Delight,
Whilst happy Mortals, Loves Treasures are lavishing,
Day still they rail at, but bless the kind Night:
Day the cursed cause of Mortal Debate,
Pride, Ambition and Cares,
With Sol lies dreaming,
Where Thetis is streaming,
Whilst Night, Love and Fate
Rule the World's grand Affairs.

I know, I know, and more am pleased
That we are from his gaudy Beams released;
For by a Light that breaks through yonder Skies,
And a bright Crescent that does rise:
Cynthia I see draws near,
Great Cynthia in her Splendour will appear.

Let Nature then revel in Joy and Delight,
Let Cynthia and Jove be the Chorus to Night,
The God of all Power, and Goddess of Light.


Hark! Hark, Endimion! Listen to these Strains,
The skilful Breath of some contented Swains,
That know the Soul of Life is Harmony:
Mind every Note, observe each softening Cadence;
And when thou hast done feasting thy pleased Ear,
Then tell me if Apollo is not wretched,
Beyond the basest Mortal here below.

Divine Apollo, Jove will soon relent,
Finding his Glories dearkned by the Loss
Of the chief Light of his Eternal Palace,
The God of Music, Wit, and Poetry;
As he is just, he's merciful: I once proved it,
When an abhorred Detractor, the Court being here,
Envying the Grace I found in Iuno's Eyes,
Strove to possess him, that she was too kind;
Then urged him straight to doom me, for Presumption,
To take a Drug brought out of Hell from Proserpine,
Which could cause Sleep perpetual: But Jove,
Scorning his Malice, raised me more to Favour,
And so, no doubt, e're long he will Apollo.
Banish your Grief then, and unclowd your Eye;
These Strains, alas! are dull, when you are by.

Once I indeed was Sovereign of Arts,
When through the dazzling Empire of the Sky,
No Deity aspiring to be famed
Durst vie with me to please my Heavenly Father;
The Lucid Glories circled round my Head;
And when I sung, and touched my charming Lyre,
None durst presume to equal, but admire.

Are ye not still the same?

Oh no, 'tis gone:
My Godhead now is dwindled to Mortality,
My Triumph's turned to Sorrow, which still drop
From my full Eyes, like Showers of Winter Rain;
I now retain no Spark of what's Above,
Or of Divinity, but that I love.

The ambitious Son of Neptune, the fierce Cyclops,
That forged the Thunder for the King of Gods,
Slain by your Hand, I know first caused your Exit:
But of your Love, till now, I nothing knew;
Sure great Apollo is not unsuccessful.

Whiter than Parian Marble, but as cold
Is the Celestial Nymph that I adore;
She has a Face where Beauty sits in State,
Adorned with blooming Sweets, two Starry Eyes,
Bright as her Soul, so Heavenly languishing,
So full of liquid Love, and sprightly Joy,
That an old Critic, dogged from his Cradle,
And bred unnatural, would gaze and wonder;
A Glance should so confound Philosophy;
Her Name is Daphne.

Then I know her well,
She now has Residence in Cinthia's Court.

So Hermes told me on A^risus Bank,
Where late I kept the King Admetus's Sheep,
In (...) Degree Iove's dreadful Rage then placed me:
For her Sake, lovely Youth, I wander here,
Courting the mournful Shades obscurely,
The worst of Mortals now, though late a Deity.

If Love Omnipotence a Curse designed,
I am most Cursed of all poor Human Kind;
Beauty over me so absolute does Reign,
I think it Heaven to Love, although in vain:
Yet all must own the Passion Great and Noble;
A Joy the best of all the Gods has sighed for,
And to obtain it changed Immortal Being.
Oh! Cynthia, thou Extreme of Excellence.
But hold, rash Tongue, thy helpless Woe conceal,
This Mystery, Fate only must Reveal.

Endimion, from the Starry Queen I come,
To Summon your Attendance at their Revils;
By leave from Jove to finish an Affair,
Of some great Consequence, she lately here Descended.
But yet, as if he blamed her Curiosity,
He smiling gave Command, that for a Month,
The time ordained for her Abode on Earth,
That she, and all of us should be Translated,
And in a Mortal State be Subject to
The Accidents, Passions, and Punishments
Of this Inferior World. You'll have good Sport faith,
For ten to one some of our Gods fly out
To try their new Humanity: For my part
If I escape Whipping-post, or Stocks, I'm happy.

With eager Duty I obey the Summons;
'Twill be some Pleasure to stand gazing by,
For though it starve my Heart, 'twill feast my Eye.

Wonder invades my Sense, yet no disguise,
Can hide the great Apollo from my Eyes:
I know that Awful, Godlike Form too well;
And know, besides, 'twas Daphne brought him hither.
Oh! Love, how powerful is thy Decree,
Amongst all the Gods, sure I shall envy thee.
How blessed are those caught in thy charming Snare;
And yet how blessed am I whose Heart's as free as Air.

You're merry, Hermes.

Brisk as the wanton Winds,
That ^iss the Beauty of the blooming Spring:
I have no Female-tyrants to torment me,
Employed with my two Trades, Lying and Stealing:
I've been so full of Business, Love is routed,
I have no time for silly Sighs and Whinings;
The most attractive Nymphs I dare defy,
And all the Shafts in Love's Artiliry.

Take heed, he'll be revenged, unless by Art,
You steal away the Weapons that should wound ye.

By Styx, I'll do it, if e're I catch him sleeping.
Last night I stole out one of Iuno's Teeth;
And 'twould have made you laugh to to see the Goddess
Mumping her Chops, and mumble her Ambrosia,
Like an old Wrinkled Beldam at a Feast.

No doubt 'twas good diversion.

But the most pleasant Theft that e're I made,
Was upon Venus when I stole her Cestos:
When cunning Zephyr fanned her Tinsel-robe,
Discovering the white World of naked Beauties,
To all the wondering Synod of the Gods.

Since your dislike of Love has made you Wise,
I think I ought to Court you for Advice.
What think you of a Woman?

As a Creature,
That a Man is cheated with by Partial Nature.
A fine gay coloured Weed, a gilded Pill,
A dear, damned, pretty, necessary Ill.

Yet Men their Praise in loftiest Wit express.

That's but a smoother carrying on the Jest,
And make the coy Fools easier to Possess.

But Constancy in Love.

Sure never was.
'Tis a dull Notion to explain an Ass.
The constant Wretch that does but one adore,
Has neither Wit, or Courage, to Love more.

This Vice of Roving's natural to Hermes.
But prithee Friend go and Solicit for me,
Thou hast a winning Tongue, practice on Daphne:
Tell her my Love, in influencing Words,
Gain her, and make Apollo thine for ever.

If Lying, which you know is my chief Talent*
Will work upon her, she shall have enough on it.
I'll go, and my best Skill on the Instant prove,
And if a wheedling Tongue, or Tears can move,
The God of Wit shall never dye for Love.

By my Heart's throbbing anguish it appears,
That with Mortality I have its Cares.
Ah! why should Love a Torment prove to me,
That is to others a Felicity?
The Harmony that times their jarring Strife,
And sweetens all the Cares of anxious Life:
Crowning a Mortal with as blessed a Fate,
As a superior Power that did Create.

By these delightful Sounds that charm my Ear,
Too well I find the God of Love is near:
And see he comes Triumphant through the Sky,
Bourn by the Winds that Kiss him as they fly.
In Pan's close Covert I'll my self conceal;
I dare not tempt new Wounds till the old can heal.

By Iove's high State, and all the Court divine,
Once more I swear fair Psyche must be mine.
Whilst from his Palace slily I stole down,
To Exercise my Power on haughty Cynthia,
In this her Interval of Mortal State,
Because she still above defied my Power,
By matchless Beauty I am caught myself:
Oh! she is whiter than my Mother's Doves,
Nay, than my Mother's self, the Queen of Loves.
More Innocent than Virtue in Perfection;
And young as the Morning, when the rosie Nymph,
Blushes to leave the Bosom of her Lover.
With my own Hand I took my fatal Dart,
And wounded, e're I was aware, my Heart.
And now I Rave, I Love to that degree,
To gain her, I'd renounce Divinity.
Yonder she comes: Sing Zephirus, O! sing,
Some happy Strain, some gentle moving thing:
Whilst I with subtle Practice play my part,
And steal into her Fancy by my Art.

MVsing on Cares of Human State,
In a sweet shady Grove;
A strange Dispute I heard of late,
'Twixt Virtue, Fame, and Love:
A Swain that wanted grave Advice,
Their nice Opinions craved,
How he might to Elezian rise,
Or get a Place beyond the Skies,
Or how he might be Saved.
Nice Virtue preached Religion's Laws,
Paths to Eternal Rest;
To Aid his King, and Country's Cause,
Fame councilled him, was best.
But Love opposed each noisy Tongue,
And thus their Votes out-brav'd:
Get, get a Mistress Fair and Young,
Love fiercely, constantly, and long,
And then thou shalt be Saved.
Swift as a thought the Amorous Swain,
To Silvia's Cottage flies,
In soft Expressions told her plain,
The way to heavenly Joys:
She who with Piety was stored,
Her Bliss no longer wav'd,
Pleased with the God they both adored,
First smiled, then took him at his word,
And this they both were Saved.
Cloyed with the noisy (...), the Seat of Care,
As I each Evening hither came for Air,
Harmonious sounds fill all the hallowed Grove,
A charming Confort, singing tales of Love.
Sure Jove his Sacred Choir does hither bring,
But what, Oh! what, is Love, of what they sing?

Love is what does all mortal Joy control,
The best and noblest Passion of the Soul.
Iove's kindest Gift; for, by its Rapture, we
May find the bliss of Immortality.
Sit down fair Charmer, and for your delight,
Love, that has fed your Ear, shall please your Sight.

What Heavenly Visions in this place appear?
And what a beauteous God-like thing is here?
Not to sit by him, were my self to wrong,
For sure he cannot hurt me he's so young.

Now does not Love all other Joys excel?

Alas! what have you done? I am not well.
Methinks I feel an aching throbbing Pain,
Here at my Heart.

That shall be gone again.

Shall it, oh! when?

Dear Charmer, when you prove
So kind to bless me with the fruits of Love.

The fruits of Love! do I the Garden know?
Are they Fruits! where do they grow?
The Pain does now my Heart so strangely seize,
I would give any thing to purchase Ease.

But these are not the Fruits that you must grant.

I sigh, and wish, and know not what I want;
Tell me, what are they?

You must kiss me.

Fie.

Love and embrace me.

For the World, not I:
I never heard so confident a Boy.

A Boy! Do not my Courage by the Stature scan;
Kiss me, and you shall find I am a Man;
Turn this way, Sweet, and the soft Blessing prove
The dear Preparative to Rapture Love.

He wins upon me strangely, and his Tongue*
I fear would charmmy Heart, should I stay long.
And see, methinks, his Frame is altered quite,
And now he's grown up to a manly Height.
Psyche, away, to Cynthia straight retire,
Her Name's a Charm to quench all amorous Fire.
Cynthia the Chaste, sworn Foe to loose Desire.
In the Perfection of all Virtues bright,
Serene and pure, as her own Orb of Light.

Cynthia, nor all the Deities above,
Have Power enough to make Defence from Love;
And since a Kiss your Error makes you blame,
Cynthia you so adore should do the same.

What? Kiss a Man!

So let me gain Love's Fruit,
As you on Latinus-top shall see her do it.

If not, shall I be free?

Free as the Air.

Then I am near the end of all my Care;
For Cynthia never can commit such Faults,
Her Lips must be as guiltless as her Thoughts.

Great Ones, oft scorched with secret Passion, mourn,
Though outwardly no Fire is seen to burn.
That Cynthia loves, in spite of all her Power,
I'll quickly prove, or may I never more
Be charmed by those bright Eyes I so adore.

If that chaste Goddess can enamoured be,
Love never can be thought a Crime in me;
Since 'tis for him in whom all Graces meet.
Heavens! how he charmed! Was ever Tongue so sweet?
The Kiss he sued for how I longed to grant;
His the Petition was, but mine the Want.
Would I had never seen that lovely Creature,
Or else had been of more obdurate Nature;
For now methinks I languish for his fake,
And fear to lose a Good I fear to take.

SHe's mine, she's mine; mine in every tender Part;
Love revels now, and centers in her Heart;
The kindling Sparks within her Breast take Fire;
Care in her Looks, and in her Heart Desire.
Yet still my Promised Justice to pursue,
Proud Cynthia, is to sigh and languish too;
Which I'll perform in th'Instant with a View.
She comes! Stay Zephirus, and wait her here,
And power the soft Infection in her Ear;
I through the Air will instantly take Wing,
And hover over the Covert whilst you sing.

FRom the vast Empire of the Sea below,
Whose secret State no Mortal e're can know,
From Coral-groves, and Banks of Pearl and Ore,
And watery Caves, where Nature hoards her Store,
Lighted by charming Amphetrite's Eyes,
To welcome the bright Goddess of the Skies:
Proud Eolus to day shall lose his Power,
The Wind shall rage no more,
But with a gentle Breeze
Shall languish over the Seas,
Whilst Cinthia's glorious Name,
Great Cinthia's glorious Name,
Shall with repeated Eccho's bless the Shore.
Each River and murmuring Spring,
In honour of Cynthia shall sing,
Who fills us with Joy and Delights,
And guilds with her Beauty our Nights:
For half our Lives Pleasure were gone,
By losing the Light of the Sun,
If she did not counterfeit Noon,
And supply the Defect by a Moon.

I come the mighty Neptune to obey,
The great and happy Monarch of the Sea;
Far as the famous Asian Strands
I daily glide over Golden Sands;
Yet when he calls ne'er durst delay,
But curl my shinning Locks, and straight obey.

And I, that still amongst the swarthy Moors
Roll, roll, roll out my tedious Hours,
In true Obedience hither come with Joy.

And so do I.

And so do I.

And I.

And all with equal Haste, with equal Joy.

But first came I.

And then came I.

Then I.

And all with equal Haste, with equal Joy,
And all, c.

I must confess, were I like you,
Then I should be obedient too;
But know ye puny shallow Streams,
That I the deep, wealthy, and beauteous Thames,
That by Augusta, famous for her Stores,
Wash the delightful Shores,
Had never this way bent my crooked Course,
Had Neptune not controlled my Will by force:
For, like our Natives, I've the common Evil,
Of Plenty proud, and stubborn as the Devil.

Ye Sons of the Ocean, say what's to be done,
The Thames is rebellious and mutinous grown.
He never no more shall his City oblige,
For we'll dam up his Current just close to the Bridge.

Importing of Goods, and his Trading shall fall,
And Citt with his Spouse walk on Foot to Fox-hall.

The Mayor at his Triumph shall grutch at his Charges,
And swear there's not Water enough for his Barges.

Kneel, O kneel, thou stubborn Creature,
Still there's Pity in his Eyes,
Neither Anger nor ill Nature
In his Sacred Bosom lies.
Let thy watery Nymphs around thee
In loud Joy their Duty show,
Lest great Neptune should confound thee,
Keeping back thy Ebb and Flow.
Sabrin, Tamar, Ooze in order
To divert your Goddess come,
Else your Crime to punish further,
Men shall walk where Fishes-swam.
Thames shall be dried up for ever,
If he now dares disobey;
And what was a famous River,
Shall be soon the King's High-way.

See, I obey: Appear, appear
My beauteous Daughters all, and revel here:
When Power formidable grows,
'Tis Folly to oppose.
This let Augusta know,
To whom I all my stubborn Humours owe;
And still am to her ancient Maxim just,
I do obey; I do, because I must.

Each River and murmuring Spring,
In Honour of Cynthia.

To seek Apollo exiled here below,
To cheer his Sorrows, and Iove's Pardon show,
I come -- tho 'tis not fit that these should know.
A Secret of the Gods must Sacred be,
'Tis Chance on Earth, in Heaven 'tis Mystery.

Hail, Cynthia, hail, Night's glittering Deity.

When mighty Jove my Breast did influence
With mystic Rules of his Celestial Sense,
Humility he sacredly Assigned,
As the most charming Virtue of the Mind.
Therefore, though Power unlimited I bear,
And can, whenever I please, unsheathe it here;
Yet now resolved a mortal State to try,
I for a Month will lay my Godhead by;
My Lustre veil, from yon bright Orb remove,
And rank with every Virgin of the Grove.

What an attractive Grace! Inviting Air!
What a Heart-wounding Eye, and Cheek as fair
As in their Glory full-blown Roses bear,
Has that Endimion? Oh! I love so well,
I fancy every Glance or Blush will tell.

Through all the Nations of the Universe,
Where is a Place that's like Ionia blessed?
Virtue and Beauty their old Claims renew,
And their Divine Perfection take from you:
Since your Approach the Groves refined have been,
And the wildest Shepherds now forget to sin.

All Vice from their rebellious Blood is driven,
And now the talk of you equal with Heaven;
Should you another Month these Lawns possess,
The Court of Jove would suffer a Disgrace,
And famed Ionia prove the holier Place.

Oh Vice of Courts! How wretched should I be,
If I were pleased to hear this Flattery?

In this soft-tongu'd Endimion you may find
The vile Epitome of all his Kind.
Men are the grand Originals of Vice,
Trained up in Mischief, Treachery and Lies;
Debauched in Nonage, profit not by Rules;
To Fools are Wits, but witty Women's Fools;
Betrayers of our Liberties and Rest,
And she that scapes them is for ever blessed.

Though some are bad, sure all Men are not so:
Have they no Mark by which a Maid may know?
If in my Bosom any Ill could be,
My very Blushes would discover me.
My Eyes the Falsehood of my Heart betray.

Poor Ignorance, thou art of Yesterday,
Else thou would know we are as false as they.
As skilled in all the Doubles of the Mind,
Deceit; Fool, is the Character of our Kind;
For which of us e're vowed her Love was true,
That had not first learnt to dissemble too.
Men must be fooled, and when this Art we prove,
Fraud stands for Truth, Hypocrisy for Love.

O thou Defamer to thy Sex, a Curse,
Rude Pan himself would not expose 'em worse.
The blasting Breath of Envy could not place
A worse Detraction on the Female Race.
Men well may hear Invectives against them,
If thus they one another do condemn.
Let Music sound, dull Love or Flattery is
A Subject fitter to be heard than this.

Now at my wished Haven to arrive,
I must a deep and subtle Plot contrive:
Infect proud Syrinx with a jealous Rage,
Which nought but Revenging can assuage.
Whilst Cynthia does for her Endimion pine,
And for his Love, wish she were less Divine.

How my transported Soul this Music charms!
How strangely, how effectually it warms!
My Heart's new tremblings troubles my repose,
My cold chaste Zeal too, on the Instant glows.
I rave, and now think Jove of mean degree;
For yonder Youth seems more a God than he.
Heavens! I'm lost, for still the more I gaze,
The more I dote upon his charming Face.
Hence from my sight thou Soncerer! away!
By all my Fame, Death punishes thy stay.
From her high Sphere, can Cynthia ever bow?
To meet a Fate, so despicably low.
Immortal Gods! if ever this can be,
May my own Stars against me Mutiny.
May my Illustrious Brother mount his Throne.
Ordain new Sway, and rule the World alone:
Let Order cease through all the Earth, and Sky;
Matter confused, in huddled Atoms lye:
And Nature lose its Course, rather than I.
My Fate, and Fame in my own Orb must move,
Or there's no Deity worth Cinthia's Love.

AH! well done, well done, Son Clout; I Collin, down with the shaggy Ruffians.
What hoa, Neighbour Collin, what hoa.


Stick to him, Tarbox, turn the But-end of thy Staff to him, Boy; help, help,
there's another Goat upon him.


I warrant thee I have him by the beard, Boy.


Neighbour Collin, Neighbour Collin, what hoa, stand there Flora, and don't be
afraid. What have they odds of us; nay then have at ye.


Cheer, cheer, Neighbours cheer, let me come to 'em, I'll thrash the Rogues,
I'll maul 'em.


They are as swift-footed now as Stags; now we have drubbed their Mettle up,
they run like Grey-hounds.


Gadslidlikins, Neighbour Collin laid about him lightly.


Ah! he thrashed 'em faith, thank ye heartilly, good Neighbour I'm hugely
obliged to ye; and how does my Girl, hum.


How is't Buddy, hah. How dost do Chick, he has not hurt, has he?


No, not much, he made my Arms ache a little with squeezing me so hard when he
took me up first, and the bristles of his Beard has made my Face smart a
little, but I'm well every where else.


Thee poor Buddy, I'm glad on it fackins.


But hark ye, hark ye, how began this Hubbub, Neighbours? come let me know all.


Why to be short then, Neighbour Collin, for I know you are a wise Man, and can
see into a Mill-stone without Spectacles. You must know we live in a most
confounded condition, under this same Goat-fac'd God, Pan, here, and his
shag-rag Family, our Wives and Daughters are not safe one hour of the day for
'em.


An hour, no not a minute, Neighbour; why now for my part, I'm fain to milk my
Cattle my self, I dare not send my Wife out not I, for fear of meeting 'em, and
having her own Milk spoiled.


Well let Tarbox speak, Come Neighbour what say you?


Why they wont so much as let a Cheese stand upon the shelf, but they'll ravish
that too, they'll ravish any thing, nothing comes amiss to 'em, Neighbour.


Body of me, I'm mortified when I think on it; why Neighbour I did but send the
poor Girl out a door to the Well to fetch a Pitcher of water, and whip, one of
these hairy Rag-muffins had trust her up, as a Hawk does a Patridge: and had'nt
we come just in the nick, and relieved her, they would have used her as we do a
wheaten Loaf, every one by this time would have had a slice.


And for a Loaf not cup up before, troth, one slice might have been missed
Neighbour.


Gadsdiggers! and then I should have had a fine Crust, that am to marry her
next Moon; for she's my Sweetheart you must know, Master Collin. Art not Flora?
hah Lamb.


Yes, so my Mother says; but hark ye, what shall I be the better for being so?


Oh! a great deal Chick, a great deal, when thou come to understanding.
There, there's a Plumb-Cake for my Lamb.


Oh good! here's a pure kind Sweetheart: well, I'm resolved now I will have
him.


Go, go home Buddy, and dip it in the Cream Pan, do Lamb.


Oh! God, so I will Ivads.


Ah! poor fool. And thus we are served Neigbours, ever since they came hither,
by this rampant God Pan, and his followers: but Gadzooks Sir, I have it in my
head, do ye hear Neighbours: We'll Rebel and Right our selves; we'll live no
longer under his Government: let's resolve on it.


Why, ay Sirs, now you come to the matter. Hark ye, bring your Ears nearer to
me, and listen to what I say: If you'll be of my mind, you shall not only care
a straw for this God Pan, but for never a one in the whole pack. In short,
Neighbours, we can live without 'em; what you have heard of me, I hope, have not
ye? why folks call me thrasher of the Gods, I am always at open jars with
them, they ne'er oblige me as I would have it, with Corn, Peas, Beans, and so
forth; nor I them their way, for I ne'er go to Prayers, nor ne'er will; and see
who will have the worst on it.


Good Lord! 'tis strange, now to see how folk differ now, I say my Prayers
morning and night, Gadsdiggers I'm afraid to go to sleep else.


Why there 'tis now, I could have told him that by his Face; I can discover a
praying Logger-head, by his pale tallow Phiz, as certainly as a drinker of
Brandy by his red Nose.


Nay for my part, I can't say much for their God-ships not I, but yet methinks,
for this same Cynthia that's comes among us here, to light us to bed, and save
Candles, I can't but think her a virtuous good body enough.


Pshaw, prithee don't talk of her Virtue, she can never be good that goes by so
many Names, 'tis the trick of a Slut Neighbours; believe me, in one place she's
Luna, in a second she's Proserpine, and here, now she's Cynthia; come without
mealy mouth'dness, she's a Jilt, Gadsbud; why what a plaguey trick did she
serve that poor Huntsman, Ac-Ac-Acteon, I think they call him, the honest
harmless Fellow chanced to come by the Pond as she was washing her -- he
happened to give a grin on her, or some such small matter, when presently what
does she do, but bewitches him with the scent of a hard run Stag, gave an
Hollow, and then set his own Dogs upon him.


Ay that was barbarous, in truth Neighbours; then they say here's her Brother
Paul, Paul, what do ye call him? Apollo, Apollo lies lurking about her too, and
comes smelling after a coy Wench, Daphne.


Why what a noise there's made too about his Wit, and Music, why, 'tis true,
the fellow's a good tolerable Harper, and can break a jest at a City Wedding,
or so, that's all, he killed a little rattle-Snake to'ther day, and ha, ha, ha,
he's so proud on it, ever since; besides that Daphne uses him like a mere
Nincompoop, she makes him carry her Slippers, or mend her Stockings, she makes
him a mere changeling.


A Collin, a Collin, a Collin.


Well but Neighbour Collin this God, as you say, may have but small parts, but
pray let's hear what you can say against Iupiter: what can you say against him?


What have I to say against Iupiter, why how now ^lout, what thou wilt not
beard me, wilt thou? what have I to say against him: Come, prithee what hast
thou to say for him? Hum, let me alone Neighbours.


Ay, ay, Neighbour, let him say that. Go on, Clout, go on.


Why then, Odsheartlikins, I must say that this Iupiter is of all the rest, the
most powerful: when he's pleased, the World rejoices, but bless us, when he's
angry, Oh! how I tremble at his Lightning and Thunder.


Oh! Lord, did you ever hear such a damned silly puppy, come you shall hear me
tell the whole story of him. Look ye, this same Iupiter you must know being
sent as soon as he was born, away by his Mother, amongst the Couribaates, a
sort of poor fellows that belonged to Powder-mills, for fear his greedy gut
Father Saturn, who used to breakfast on all his Malebrats, should eat him, got
the knack there of making Sky-Rockets, Squibbs, and such like, and now when the
maggot bites him, he's always whizzing and popping 'em about, and this poor
Animal takes 'em for Lightning and Thunder; ha, ha, ha. Hark ye, Neighbour
Hob, bid him tell us e're a one of his friend Iupiter's good deeds, and then
you shall see how I'll feague him.


Hark ye, Clout, Come, let's hear one of Iupiter's good Deeds? come?


Good Deeds; why I heard he conquered the monstrous Giants, which I think folks
call Titau's, and released his old Father from Prison.


Ay, and when 'twas done, went home with him to his Palace, and lay with his
own Sister -- good.


A Collin, a Collin, a Collin, hey.


Come, come, prithee go on to the rest of 'em.


Why then, but that he's a little too fat and foggy for a jolly companionly
sort of God, what think you of Bacchus?


Why just as much as he thinks of any body else, that is nothing; for he gets
drunk as soon as he rises, and is past thinking all the day after.


Why, marry then Neighbour, what do ye say to him? he's a brave God.


Ay, so the crack goes of him, he is a fighting God, ah! God help him; would I
were to play three Bouts at Flail with him, I'd try whose Sconse was hardest:
I'd spoil his Cuckold-making for one month I warrant ye.


Hey, a Collin, a Collin, a Collin, hey.


But hold Neighbours, there's Cupid, there's a little pretty sweet God for ye.


What do ye call him? 'sbud if you had him grumbling in your Guts, as I had
once, you'd think him as bitter as Wormwood, Gadsooks, that Urchin, Dandiprat,
with a little sneaking Bow and Arrows, does more mischief than all the rest of
'em together: But come now, I'll spare ye the trouble now, of naming the rest,
and show ye at once what a sad pack of Fellows these Deities are, as they call
themselves.


Ay, come, let's hear. --


In the first Place, then for our Home-Deity, God Pan's Worship here; why you
see by his Horns and Goat's Phiz, he's a Monster: Iupiter a lewd unconscionable
Whore-master: Apollo a sneaking Cully, and Fiddler Bacchus a Sott, Mars a Bully,
Mercury a Thief, and Cupid a Pimp: Then to couple 'em neatly with their
Goddesses, Iuno's an envious Scold, Cynthia's an inconstant Jilt, Pallas an
Hermaphrodite, Proserpine a Hag, Ceres a Slut, and Venus a Whore, to my
Knowledge.


A Collin, a Collin, hey.


To end the Matter then, Neighbours, I declare I'm for a Common-Wealth; let us
therefore, nemini conumdiscendre, plot against these Gods aforesaid, and their
Government: We'll have no longer Arbitrary-Power: We'll bring 'em down to the
Station of Constables; Then any one of us, Neighbours, may hope to come into
Office in his Turn.


Hey, a Collin, a Collin, Hey.


Father, forsooth, my Mother stays for ye to Dinner.


Come Neighbours, my Son Clout has a pure Sloop of good Liquor within, we'll
tap it before the Wedding to entertain Neighbour Collin: Son Clout invites 'em
all in.


With all my Heart I fackins, and kindly welcome, as I may say.


What Neighbour, you're resolved to couple to morrow then?


Why truly Neighbour, the short and the long is, Flora and I have a great Mind
to try one another good Luck: she has considered the worst on it.


But is not the Heifer too little to wear the Yoke, Neighbour? You'll think of
that, I hope.


Why truly I have examined Matters as narrowly as I can, and her Mother is of
the Opinion -- no: and she's a very knowing Woman Neighbour. Speak Lamb: What
did Mother say?


She said she was as little every bit her self when she was married, and that
it would do me no hurt at all.


Law ye there now: Besides the Buddy, there be short she's tydy.


Well, and what Mucsik, what Gambols are ye to have Neighbour?


Why Fackins not much: but there will be the Pipe and Tabor, and Blind Will
with his Dulcimer: And then the Frying-Pan and Tongues.


Well, and I'll give thee a Zong: And thou shalt have a Zaumple o^ presently if
thou wilt.


Ay, Gadsookers, with all my Heart, sweet, Master Collin.


Ay, Ay, with all our Hearts, with all our Hearts.


'TWas when the Sheep were shearing,
And under an Oaken Tree,
Dick gave to Doll a Fairing,
Resolved her Love to be.
I long, Sweetheart, to bed with thee,
And though I cannot woo,
I've hey pish, hey puh, hey foo, hey for a Boy.
Sing, shall I come kiss thee now.
Methinks I long to bed thee,
And merrily buckle to.
With hey pish, hey puh, hey foo, hey for a Boy,
Sing, shall I come kiss thee now.
Doll seemed not to regard him,
As if she did not care:
Yet simpered when she heard him
Like any Miller's Mare.
And cunnnigly to prove him,
And value her Maidenhead,
Cried fie, nay pish, nay fie, and prithee stand by,
For I am too young to wed;
She said she never could love him,
Nor any Man else in Bed.
Then fie pish, fie, nay pish, nay prithee stand by,
For I am too young to wed.
Like one that's struck with Thunder,
Stood Dicky to hear her talk,
All hopes to get her under,
This sad resolve did balk;
At last he swore, grown bolder,
He'd hire some common Sow:
For hey pish, hey fie, hey for a Boy,
Sing shall I come kiss thee now.
In loving Arms did fold her,
Here sneak, and cringe, and cry,
With hey pish, hey fie, hey for a Boy,
Sing shall I come kiss thee now?
Convinced of her coy Folly,
And Female stubborn Will,
Poor Doll grew melancholy,
The Grist went by her Mill;
I hope, she cried, you're wiser
Than value what I have said;
If I do cry nay fie and pish, and prithee stand by,
That I am too Young to wed;
Bring you the Church Adviser,
And dress but the Bridal Bed,
Then try though I cry fie and pish, and prithee stand by,
If I am too Young to wed.
Well, this will be curious, I'll say it: Come, come, now let's home and top it
lustily.


Ay, to the Downfall of our monstrous God Pan.


And the rest of 'em I say,


Ay, Ay, and the rest: We'll do well enough without 'em, as Neighbour Collin
says.


Ods heartlikins, here he comes, and the Hum-drum Harper with him: We must get
out of their Sight: Away, away, Boys.


Rough as I am, and in my Nature wild,
Bred up in Rural Caves amongst Savages
That know no Worth, nor understand no Reason;
Yet shall Apollo in his Welcome find,
That Pan, though doomed to Rustical Society,
Knows how to value such Excess of Merit,
Though he wants Words to express it.

In Acts of Friendship there's small need of Words,
And therefore Pan may fairly have Excuse.
Had foolish Midas when he praised thy Pipe,
Extolled thy Courtesy and honest Nature,
Apollo had been baffled even in both.

My Father, though the God of Eloquence,
Yet could not spare me a Child's Portion, therefore
Take my well Meaning for my Compliment.
By Syrinx, whom I love at my Heart's Root,
Once more I swear Apollo is most welcome.

Once more my Thanks to Pan; but hush, no Murmurs,
For if my Eyes deceive me not here comes
The swift-wing'd Pursuivant of Jove.

'Tis he -- how fares my Father Hermes?

Welcome, kind Mercury.

Health to Apollo, and to Off-spring Pan,
To whom I carry most surprising News:
For at the bottom of yon rising Hill,
Close by a silver Brook that girdles in
A Thicket, crowned with Jasamin and Roses;
I saw his Souls best Part the lovely Syrinx,
Weary with hunting stretched at her full length
Lie sighing loud, discovering Worlds of Beauties,
Unveiled and careless to the Amorous Winds.

Perhaps she's wounded, and may now be dead,
Oh dreadful Sound! Away, I'll seek her instantly,
And all my choicest Drugs I'll carry with me:
Amongst which I've some that can even Life retrieve
From the Jaws of Fate, others that can destroy,
Just at a moment, and some of that strange Nature,
They in a Mortal swooned and deadly Sleep,
Can seize on all the Offices of Life,
Whole Years, nay Ages, tell me, good Progenitor,
Was she not wounded?

Faith, Boy, I hope she was not, but can't swear.

I go, I fly, excuse my eager haste, since Love's the Cause.

He's gone, and now my dear Ambassador,
What Comfort for thy Friend?

What you could wish -- Which made me send away
This Scandal of my Blood, this God
Of Sheep-hooks --
Prepare your self, the Nymph is coming hither.

Who, Daphne?

She.

Prithee don't flatter me, nor use thy Humour
Of lying to thy Friend.

'Tis true, by Cynthia.
I must confess you'll have a plaguy Task on it:
For all my Tricks and Wheedles 'twould not do,
Nor could my Tears, my Sighs or Languishing,
Which at some certain times never used to fail me,
Move her one jot -- till at last a happy Lye
(I thank Jove for the Gift) engaged her hither.

Prithee what was it?

I told her a young Mountain-Boar was lodged
Close by this Covert; she, greedy of the Game,
Forsakes the rest of the Nymphs that now are Chasing --
And yonder see she comes; 'tis fit I leave you.
Now, Prince, your Wit, and on this Truth rely,
No Woman yields so soon as she that's Coy.

Sad lonely Groves, and Sun-defying Woods,
The dark Recesses of the Sylvian Gods,
Thickets where never Mortal Foot ever trod,
Where candied Snow in heaps remains unthaw'd,
I've with unusual Patience wandered round,
Yet nothing worth my Javelin have found.
Sure Hermes with a Lye abused my Ear,
Hah! do I dream? or is Apollo there?
'Tis he; and now I'm sure I am betrayed,
He comes, but I'll to Cynthia cry for Aid.
Away, and let me go.

Not till I speak.
If I should lose you thus my Heart will break.

Still am I plagued with the old whining Tale,
Can no Denial, nor no Scorn prevail?
Nay then this Weapon in my just Defence,
Shall free me from this strange Impertinence,
I'll kill ye.

That your Eyes half did before,
Your Javelin now can hardly hurt me more.

My Eyes, Oh Falsehood, senseless, poor and dull!
I swear the God of Wit is grown a Fool.

Reflect, fair Creature, then what Charms you have,
The Wit's a Fool, the Conqueror, a Slave.

Still do ye oppose thus then without Remorse?
What you deny me I'm resolved to force.

Barbarous, Ingrate; must Blood then quench my Flame?
Instead of Kindness is my Life your Aim?
Kindness, Oh Heaven! how doubly fooled is he,
That Kindness hopes from Woman's Cruelty,
When stubborn Humour feeds her Tyranny.
Beauty and Love by Jove were first designed,
The choicest Blessings he could give Mankind,
Lovers with Ease did the dear Treasure gain,
But now coy Rigour grieves 'em with such Pain,
The Joy scarce countervails when they obtain.

Then for a Joy so little worth their Pains,
Why have so many Idiots lost their Brains?
Nay, why will you, so late a Deity,
Descend so low poorly to sue to me?
To me that ever shall thus Coy appear,
He little thinks I have a Love elsewhere.
Begone, for shame -- no blustering will avail,

Love when abused has Privilege to rail.
Your Sex ungoverned Passions hourly rule,
And Natural Error makes ye Love a Fool.
Wit is a Monster that provokes your Rage,
And is as little welcome as Old-Age.
Honest Desert you can disgust each hour,
But Noise and Nonsense ravenously devour.
To all your Mischiefs Virtue is the Guide,
Virtue that feeds the Wolf of your cursed Pride.
Your Sexes awful Cheat, for who ever knew
A Woman proudly chaste, good-natur'd too?
Nay, you shall stay.

Now you shall prevail.
I'll stay against Mankind in my turn to rail,
Man that ne'er thinks he has a happy day,
Unless he finds some Woman to betray:
Man that then eagerly pursues the Chase,
And swears and lies till he grows black in the Face.
How many Tricks to plot our future Pain,
Are every day contrived amongst vile Men?
What Taylors are there damned to frame a Dress,
To make a Coxcomb taking to damn us.
How many Oaths in Volley when they woo,
And yet how sure we are not one are true;
And if a Maid is fated to the Curse,
(...) change her State for better, or for worse;
(...) must the Nuptial Bed with Virtue Crown,
^ho' he the Leavings brings of the whole Town,
And straight dislikes because she is his-own.
Then with vile Sinner, tiring out his Life,
Kecks and makes Mouths at the very Name of Wife.
This, this is Man, this is that precious he,
In Morrals learned --

Rarely, though this may be.
What are the Vices you have named to me?
Consider and repent.

Repent, for what?

For injured Love, and this ungrateful Fault,
Atone for sheding thus my guiltless Blood.
Make me Amends.

I cannot if would:
You are of a Sex I hate, could you change Shape,
Though with a Bear, a Hedg-Hog, or an Ape,
As Nature's Products all -- these love I can;
In these there is no Mischief, but for Man,
Soft Passion in my Breast, no Room can find,
And nothing that's on Earth, can change my Mind.

Behold, fond Lovers, by coy Dames denied,
Behold, the Quintessence of Female Pride:
See here, the fleeting Bliss, for which you toil,
Burn out your Lamps, and wast your precious Oil.
In Woman the grand Disturbance of the Mind,
In either Station, whither Coy, or Kind.
Then hate her -- Ah, how Vain is grave Advice
Pleading against Nature, and its best of Joys;
For though in the Rapture, the sweet Blessing is
So very short, that he that reaps the Bliss,
Can hardly say 'tis this.
Yet Men much more that happy Moment prize,
Than Fame or Wealth, than Crowns or Monarchies.

She comes unlooked for, to this happy Place,
Love brings her hither, to prevent my Labour,
Let us retire, and when I give the Sign,
Be ready with your Skill to entertain her.
She loves him, oh, she loves, sound it ye Winds,
Even to the utmost Confines of the Globe;
Proclaim aloud that Cynthia Loves Endimion,
And he ill Fated Youth does dote on her:
Whilst I am left regardless, and refused,
Nay, though I've forfeited a Virgin's Blush;
And with pale Cheeks, and Eyes all bathed with Tears,
Heart-breaking Sighs, the silent breath of Passion,
And Words unfitting any thing but Love,
Have told him my sad Story but in vain;
To Cynthia he Aspires, Cynthia the Fair,
The Great, the Haughty -- but she shall not have him;
No, I'll oppose their Pleasure though I die;
This I think the Covert of God Pan;
Whom I've observed to be as fond of me,
As I am of Endymion, and though I hate him,
Yet I for once, and merely for my Ends,
Will work upon his Temper; he has a Drug
Given him by Proserpine, and Envious Pluto,
Of such strange Force; and deadly Nature,
That it can cast one into such a Sleep,
That nothing can awake. This is Revenge,
I'll wheedle out of him, to give Endymion;
So shall he be incapable of loving,
And she of being beloved -- But see he comes.

Great Pan, the preserver of our Flocks;
By whose blessed Power we thrive and gain;

Who keeps our Lambs from Bog and Rocks;
Accept the Duty of each bumble Swain.

To Syrinx too; we welcome give,

Syrinx that shall for ever live:
Whilst Love and Beauty can disperse,

Whilst Love and Beauty can disperse,

Their Blessings over the Universe.
Whilst Love and Beauty,
Love and Beauty,
Love and Beauty can disperse,
Their Blessings over the Universe.

Syrinx and Pan, how shall we entertain?

See, see the Satyrs in a merry Vein,
Are coming down this way,
Prepared to dance and Play,
And sing a pleasant Round-Delay.

Last Night when Phoebus went to Bed,
And I my hungry Goats had fed,
I stole to Court,
To see some Sport,
And hearken what the fine Folk said;
Where soon my Heart was made a Prize,
To one that wore black rolling Eyes:
Be kind then Dearest of all Dears,
For I'm in Love up to the Ears.

If you Love me, you must prepare
To clip your Horns, and shave your Hair
Instead of causing Love, you scare.
The Hoofs too hid within your Shoes,
In Bed a tender Maid will bruise,
They must be par'd.

With all my Heart,
Nor will I cry, oh -- at the Smart;

Then come and the new Mode I'll show,
And trick, and dress you like a Beau.

How shall I change this matted Hair?

You must a powdered Peruke wear;

But then my Faces Tawny Red;
Zons what can mend?

It must be flay'd;
With boiling Water I'll begin
To fleece you from that sallow Skin:

'Twill scald, 'twill burn,

Fie, fie -- no, no:
Or if it do,
You must some small Pain undergo,
Or you can never be a Beau.

For Love of thee, I'll do it, my Dear,
Say next what Habit must I wear,
Instead of Hides, and broad Fig-Leaves?

A Coat, with huge, long, slouching Sleeves;
A Hat cocked up with Button fine,
And S^eankirk twisted to your Chine:
'Tis all the Mode --

An apish Sham;
Godzooks I'm better as I am.

Nay, then farewell.

Oh, say not so.

Then do it and dare not answer no,
I can love nothing but a Beau.

Then take me and moddle me just to thy Mind,
Since Beauty much stronger than Reason can bind;
I'll once be a Coxcomb:

Why, then I'll be kind.
What ever Distinction in Morals may be,
When a Female's in the Case,

Every Male is an Ass,
And the Man, and the Satyr agree.



Not only this but every dread Command,
Pan shall with Joy obey, if you will pardon
My rude unpolished Phrase, and let my Service
Atone for my Defects in Conversation.

Be well assured I will.

The Dainties of the Spring, shall please your Eye,
Summer and Autumn too, delight your Taste;
I'll bring the lovely Maid, where clust'ring Grapes,
Full as thy Lip, swelling with sprightly Juice,
Shall give their willing Bunches to thy Hand;
Tall Chestnuts, and the Filbert-Trees in Rows,
Waiting thy Pull, shall bow their Summer Treasure,
And in their turn, the bleeding Mulberry,
Juicy Pomegranate, and the luscious Plum,
Shall pay thee Tribute; nor shall this be all,
For to indulge thy Appetite, my Flocks,
At my Command, shall cast their Kids and Lambs;
And when at Night, cloyed with luxurious Feeding:
Thy Beauteous Eye-Lids fall, in Groves of Jessamine:
In Beds of Roses laid, my airy Quire,
Sweet Nightingales like Flutes, the Thrush and Ozel,
As shriller Flajoletts, with warbling Linnets,
In Consort joined, shall sing thee to thy Rest.

Oh -- heavenly, why this would charm a Virgin,
Were she as Cold as Northern Isicles.

Will you then love me? pray forgive my Bluntness.

Hope well, this is no place for Promises,
And now to let me see, how your Observance
Equals your Love, leave me alone, and instantly.

I'm gone, your Breath can drive me round the World,
And in an Instant stop the swift Career.

Go, and thy foolish Dotage be thy Plague,
It never shall trouble me; here is the Drug,
The fatal Instrument of Female Malice:
And now methinks the Mischief broods within me,
And all my Veins swell with the just Revenge:
To love, and not be loved, what Curse is like it?
Poverty, Sickness, Slavery or Exile,
Famine or Plague, Tortures or Lunacy,
are Ease to hopeless Love -- oh, I'll not endure it,
But in my Love's Defence, let fly at all,
Since I cannot possess, no other shall.

ALL things around me with content are blessed,
And Peace is every where, but in my Breast.
The toiling Swain, more happy than a King,
In wishes bounded, cheerfully does sing.
The Beasts in Plenty feed, the Birds on Trees,
Carol their Loves, and in the smiling Seas
The little Fishes, dancing, seem to say,
Nature is pleased, and gives us leave to play.
The gaudy Sun, revels over all the Fields,
And to his Favourite Flowers, fresh Odors yields.
Who in return of his indulgent Sway,
Unmask to kiss the Bridegroom of the Day.
A general Joy fills all the spacious Earth,
As if 'twere the Creation's second Birth:
And Sadness like some Witch skulked in a Hole,
Can find no Place for Harbour but my Soul.
Oh! wretched State of Greatness when the Mind,
A slave to proud Ambition is confined;
And Love that does the chiefest Joy create,
Is crushed by the unwieldy Bulk of State.

Oppressed with Grief, and almost drowned in Tears.
With throbbing Heart, that true Contrition wears;
The poor Endymion begs, he may have leave
To see, and from your Eyes, his Doom receive,
He says he knows not yet, what is the Fault,
Nor done a wilful Error even in Thought.

Offenders oft their Crimes extenuate,
But he in guilty Matters, of this Weight,
Does well to choose so fair an Advocate
If you but plead, a Pardon must ensue,
By all my Stars, I fear she loves him too.

Had I the fond Ambition to believe
That, Madam, for my sake you could forgive;
I must confess I would petition straight:
But since it is an Honour much too great,
To be importunate would prove a Crime
In pardoning, the Gods best know the Time.

Oh Psyche! thou art nearest to my Love,
Given me in Fancy by mighty Jove.
Forgive me, Sweet, if I have been unkind,
Alas, I am not well, humorous as Wind;
But, for thy sake Submission shall atone,
Go, fetch him in, and then leave us alone.

If this be Love, the Kiss will soon ensue,
And then I'm forfeited to Heaven knows who:
Yet what he is methinks I long to try,
When Inclination prompts, what Virgin can deny?

He comes, and now I must strange Frowns put on,
Talk Daggers to him, though I wish him none.
Would I had chosen here some lowly State,
Free from the Cares and Troubles of the Great;
Where Love, Content, and Innocence agree,
To bless the Swains with Life's Tranquillity,
Endymion then might have looked up to me.
But as I am thus high, and he so low,
I love, but 'tis not fit that he should know.

As a poor Criminal with flowing Eyes
Bows down to supplicate the Deities,
With humble Aspect does his Prayer begin
Begging a free Remission of his Sin;
So I with all humility implore
Your Eyes to dart their angry Beams no more.
That I have many Faults too well I know,
And great ones, since you please to think 'em so;
But in the main Offence am yet to seek.

Your Cunning, and Excuses, are too weak;
You have been insolent, and in each Grove
Proclaimed licentious Stories of your Love;
In saucy Rhymes my Name your Theme must be,
And Cynthia decks the Bark of every Tree.
Eclipsing thus my Fame and Grandeur too,
Speak now, aspiring Fool, is not this true?

The Sacred Name of Cynthia all adore,
And so do I.

But that you loved you swore.

I durst not so presume.

What does he say?
Oh Heavens! my Looks will my Surprise betray.

My Hours in Adoration I employ
You for all Mortal Passion are too high
Love to our Equals well befits the Blood
But not to you.

What then you are too good
Or love another which your Vanity
Perhaps presumes to think does equal me.
This is an Insolence more vile and base,
Dare you affront, and slight me to my Face?
This is a most unpardonable Fault.

She's angry if I own my Love or not;
What must I do? --

This Crime excels the first.

Then, Madam, I could love you if I durst.

A slight Affection still is swayed by Fear:
The perfect Lover never fails to dare.

So much Perfection in my Flame I'll prove,
That were it scanned before the Throne of Jove,
No Mortal ever had so refined a Love.
On this white Altar let me seal the Truth.
This Hand that can create Eternal Youth.
Transporting Odours breathe through every Pore,
That can even Age inspire with Heat once more,
And crazy Nature's worst Decay restore --
White as the Milky Way in yonder Skies,
And sweet as the fragrant Groves in Paradise;
Ah, who could live?
If so much Rapture always were expressed,
With so much Heaven, Youth, Love, and Beauty blessed.
Who would not sigh, and kiss, and ne'er have done?

Oh Gods! What are we doing? away, be gone:
Obscure thy self in Shades, my Anger fly,
Act such another Error thou shalt dye.
Where are my Glories now?
To whom Adoring Nations humbly bowed,
That at a distance kept the Noisy Crowd.
That awful Grandeur which my Beauty graced,
With Virtues pure, immaculate, and chaste,
Destroyed and withered like a blasted Flower,
Oh, shame to Honour and Majestic Power!
When it shall ever be told my Father Jove,
The dazzling Queen of all the Stars above,
Stood listening to a whining Tale of Love.
No, I'll control this Tyrant in my Veins,
Oppose the Power that over my Freedom reigns.
Punish the Offender, that dares so presume,
Who soon shall find my Anger in my Doom.

Punish the Offender that dares so presume,
Who soon shall find my Anger in my Doom.
Oh Fatal Sound! Oh Tyrant Beauty too!
Thou Basilisk, which murder with a View:
Thou flattering Ocean, that in Calms dost guide,
Fond Man at first with smooth deceitful Tide;
To wreck him after in tempestuous Pride.
Extend thy utmost Force, and since thy Doom,
Can give my Griefs a Period, let it come;
Till when I'll thus, of cruel Fate complain,
Despairing Love can know no second Pain.

My glorious Rival in you Vale I met,
Her Eyes with bubbling Drops of Sorrow wet.
But 'twas a Grief which sprung from Love, I fear,
And see, to clear the Doubt, Endymion here:
And by the Posture that I find him in,
Some petty Quarrel has betwixt 'em been.
Oh, Traitor! Oh Ingrate! but hush, my Thoughts:
Here's that shall take Revenge for all his Faults.

How blessed is Man when his Life's Journey ends!

Endymion rise and see what Cynthia sends,
To ease thy Aching Heart, and makes amends
For past Unkindness.

Who names Cynthia?

I, who bring this Cordial from her. Taste and try,
It's wondrous Virtue.

Dearer than Fame or Wealth.

Drink deep, and with a Gusto: come, her Health.

With so entire a Zeal,
My throbbing Heart does the great Pleasure own,
That were it Poison, thus it should go down.

The Draught and thy Prophetic Soul agree:
'Tis Poison; and though no Fatal Quality
Renders it Mortal, it Life's Orders sways;
And thou shalt sleep the R^ant of thy Days.
Ha, Ha, -- it works, the strange Effect begins;
Let this advance the Number of my Sins.
It yet feeds my Revenge.
Since hopeless Love Sleep from my Eyes did sever,
'Tis fit who caused the Curse should sleep for ever.

Amidst all the Anger I Endymion bear
Methinks I cannot leave him to despair.
His Youth may for aspiring Love atone,
Since 'twas a Fault by my Permission done,
See where he lies, his Face all bathed in Tears:
Hah! -- sure he's dead: Oh, my ill boding Fears.
'Tis so; he's gone, -- and by my Rigour died,
Oh! -- Cursed Effects of Greatness and of Pride!
Oh poor unhappy Youth, could not thy Ear
A Woman's false dissembled Anger bear?
Be Beauty henceforth blasted, not adored;
Nor any Charming Influence afford.
Who waits there? Stars, Nymphs, Rivers, all appear:
This Fatal News to Jove my Father bear.
Consult the Oracle his Life to save,
Say I must fetch Endymion from the Grave.
But first Sacred and Harmonious Sound,
Begin and Consecrate this Fatal Ground:
Bring me my Sable Veil, and put it on:
Thus I Eclipse the Lustre of the Moon.
Shade allimy Beams that did the World adorn,
And Nature for Endymion's Death shall mourn.

THE Poor Endymion loved too well
A Nymph Divinely fair.
Whose Fatal Eyes could hourly kill,
Or worse; could cause Despair.
For she had all her Sexes Pride,
And all their Beauty too:
And every Amorous Swain defied,
When ever they came to woo.
Ah! see, oft cried the Love-sick Youth,
The Griefs my Bosom wears,
See, see the Constancy of Truth,
Of their still falling Tears.
Yet She regardless saw him weep,
not minding true Desert:
Which shook him with a Woo so deep,
As broke at last his Heart.
And now upon her Guilty Head
The Sin of Murder lies;
She shrinks and starts to see him dead,
And Pity fills her Eyes.
Ah! see what Creatures Women are:
She loves him more and more:
And now does languish in Despair
For what she scorned before.
Ask the Monarch of the Noon,
Why we lose our Darling Moon?
And if long she hide her Face,
Ask him to supply her Place.
And if long, c.
Look down, Almighty Jove, look down,
And from thy Darling Throne above
Behold the Sorrows that the Land Oppress:
Behold our dismal Loss of Happiness
By Cynthia's Fatal Frowns.
My Stormy Seas mount high,
And in my Face do fly:
And surely Boreas no Obedience owns:
Ah! Pity and Redress
Afflicted Nature's in Convulsions now;
Nor knows she what to do
To gain her past Delight;
And to appease, appease, appease
The Lovely Angry Goddess of the Night.

Ask the Oracles, and straight
We shall know Endymion's Fate.
Nothing hidden lies
To their great Divinities.
Nothing, Nothing, c.

Ask why Youth and Innocence
Punished are for no Offence.
Ask the Gods why they agree
So unjust a Thing should be.
Ask the Gods, c.
Pay your Vows to mighty Jove:
Round his Sacred Altar move:
Pay your Duty and your Love.

Doubt not my power nor question Iove's Decree,
But speak the Mystic Words late taught by me.

The God of Love must be obeyed.

Away!
Apollo for the Oracle does stay.

Attend the Oracle.

When she whose figure like the World's vast Frame,
That's always one, yet never is the same:
Constant, yet waning still when most encreast,
Descends to kiss and make Endimion blessed.
Then that which seems like Death shall take
No more Effect, but he that sleeps shall wake.

And pay your Vows to mighty Jove;
Round his sacred Altar move;
Sing your Duty and your Love.

Methinks the sacred Mystery fill my Heart,
And Iove's Almighty Iufluence inspires me:
I feel his Knowledge and in that his Favour;
For who can be the subject of this Oracle,
But Cynthia; she's the Hieroglifick Figure,
That's like the Globe, still wavering and yet constant:
She is to kiss Endimion, then he wakes,
For 'tis not Death but Sleep that seizes him.
Sleep caused by Charm, or some cursed Drug of Nature:
This she shall know, -- with thanks for her Indulgence,
Who has, I find, my Pardon got from Jove,
And by whose means I soon shall mount the Sky,
And once more gain my lost Divinity;
Now Cozen Hermes, what think you of the Oracle?

As of a Riddle.
Surpassing Sphinx, or any I have heard of,
'Tis only proper for Apollo's Wit,
Which (now he has done loving) soon will solve it.

Oh, you are Satirical I find, 'tis well;
For till you see how I'm revenged, y'have reason;
But to excuse my loving folly, know,
It is through all degrees of humanes so;
Every one bears within his Brain or Blood,
Some Lust by which a Fool is understood.
Pride Millions makes, base Avarice the same,
Honour vast shoals of Fools that sight for Fame.
Merchants are fooled by trust, Courtiers by Vows;
And the City Trader by his jilting Spouse.
Nay the Law and Clergy, whom learned reason fills,
For some known frailty wear the Cap with Bells.
But amongst all reasons that the wise have met,
Love is the best excuse for baffled Wit,
Because the dear Temptation is most sweet:

BLess us, how dark it is, never a Star to be seen; not one pretty little Goldy
locked Planet to comfort us; we have made fine work on it, this comes of
mutining against the Gods, and disparaging our bright shining Lady Cynthia; we
have done rarely, have not we; I always thought what would be the end on it: Ah
Collin, Collin, thou deserve to be hanged by Iupiter.


Ay, the truth is he deserves to be hanged for us all, he was the Ringleader,
'twas he that was so saucy to say, he would dwindle the Gods into Constables;
for my own part, I always thought 'em fit to be Justices of the Peace, or
Churchwardens at least.


If I had thought 'twould ever have come to this, I should never have been so
free of giving my Verdict, for to speak truth, when I did it, my Conscience
rambled up and down in my Stomach, I spoke the word against my will.


You spoke the words against your will! ye lie, you're a Cuckold, and take that,
Sirrah, you spoke the words as freely as a poor Tumbrill Whore does the
Matrimony, when she has got a Cully with an Estate to marry her.


Would I had let the Satyr have done what he would with my Daughter, rather
than by calling your assistance, make the Deities so angry, and the Night so
dark, that I can't find the way to my Wife, though he had put her to the squeak a
little, if she had but kept her own Council, 'twould never have spoiled her
Match, the Girl would have done well enough, my Son Clout would have never an
Inch the less of her.


Gads Diggers, I had rather Buddy had been brought to bed of a whole Litter of
Satyrs, than that pure Barrel of Stingo strong Beer should piss all about the
Cellar so, for my not having light enough to stop the Fosset: a Wise often
brings a Man a Cup of Discontent, but that would have afforded a Brimmer of
Comfort at any time.


Here's a Fellow for ye; this Rogue has not been married so long a time as a
Mid-wife would be making a Bowl of Punch, yet cares not so his Barrel of Stingo
have a safe Spigot and Faweet, if his Wife's Firkenwere taped by the Devil.


Ay, ay, we ought to complain, and curse ye too for offending our gracious
Cynthia: gad I believe you have made her fall into fits with vexing, and that's
the reason she won't shine.


Ye have all less reason to complain for want of her than I; for I am lamed
about it; I broke both my Shins in the dark, falling over a great Form yonder,
then presently run my Face against the corner of a Pale, and broke out three of
my Teeth, and in two Minutes after tumbling down Stairs, fell into a confounded
Cellar last night.


Ah! I into a damned deep Well, this Morning, but what then, I'm as sturdy as
ever: and a fig for a Moon shine, we'll do our work by day light, and honest
Will of the Wisp shall light us to bed instead of her.


Gads Diggers, and I'll say it, now. Collin, you're a sawsy Fellow, and I
remember what you said before of Cynthia, when you called her Jilt: but you
shall find now, some are wiser than some, Gads diggers, I'll peach.


Why then you shall find some are richer than some, I'll bribe off your
evidence with a full bag, and then what becomes of your Peaching, Puppy.


Ay, but I sancy, do y'hear, these burnt Brandy Drinkers that wait upon us will
take no clipped Money, so that you would not bubble them, and for us, we know ye
too well, to trust.


Why if they come from the Devil, as by their looks I'm apt to believe they do;
'twill serve to melt down well enough; I know their way of Trade.


Ay, here comes one will discover whether his Coin be currant or no, presently;
'tis God Mercury, who I hear is ordered to impeach us and hurry us to trial.


Ay, let them try what they can; I'll get one witness or two out of the way,
I'll warrant ye.


How now, what are these the Rogues that Minos and Radamanthus have sent for to
try and punish about defying the Deists?


An please your Worship, your Lordship, your Dukeship, your Godship; my Lord,
we are poor ignorant People, and have been very much seduced, and please ye, we
have been confoundedly led by the Nose, as the saying is.


Led by the Nose, hold your peace, Calves head.


What, then it seems you are the Champion to defend their Iniquities: come
let's hear, what do you say?


Nothing.


You can look saucily I perceive, what are you? hah.


I don't know; look ye shall not catch me.


How, Sirrah, not know your self.


No, may be I don't know my self, but I believe I know you, I'm no Thief.


No Thief, Sirrah.


No, I say, I'm no Thief, peoples Spoons and Forks may lie in quiet for me,
make the best of that again, I say.


You are a rare saucy Slave indeed; Sirrah, do you know who I am.


Yes, I think I do, and harkee, don't you believe because you are a God, that
you should play the Devil with me; nay never frown for the matter; look, I
don't fear ye, and if you'll do any thing upon the square, say but the word,
I'm ready; why you are no more than one of us, now mun.


'Tis very well Rascal; but sure we shall hamper ye.


We; ay, I thought you would want help; and I'll try if I can match your Cock,
faith harkee Brother, thou look: Mars if he will, we'll thrash him, I'll
warrant thee.


Ah, 'tis likely they'll take your part, did you ever hear such a saucy Rogue,
Neighbours let's knock him down.


Say ye so; nay if the Gods and Devils are reconciled, here's like to be a
strange World; but come, fall back, fall edge; I'll stand to it till my Stampers
fail me; come all together if you will, I'll have a brush with ye, faith, I'll
never go to Goal tamely, not I, Zoons, I'll thump some of you.


You that expect favour from the Judges, seize him, and bring him away.


Why Tarbox, Clout, why Hob, Slaves, Nincompoops; ah, ye cowardly Rogues, Zooks
give me fair play, and bring half a Dozen of your shamakin Gods, I'll drub 'em,
bring Iupiter, I'll break his head, I'll Cuckold him; fair play, fair play ye
Rogues.


HOrror surrounds me wheresoever I go,
And each green Covert seems the seat of Wo:
Tremblings and Fear do all my Spirits seize;
And as I walk, methinks amongst the Trees,
Daemons peep out and mock my Miseries.
Oh that I could from Fate Endimion save,
Or could expel the Poison that I gave;
But 'tis too late to wish it.

This is she,
Whose cankered Malice, Pride and Treachery,
Has made me use her as my Property:
Her Envy true desert to none allows,
But still to all her Sex base Rancour shows;
I'll try her with my Psyche's character;
I'll pardon all if she prove just to her.

What lovely Youth is this?

Bright Virgin may
A harmless Boy desire your patient stay,
To tell him where he may fair Psyche find:
Fair Psyche, the too charming, too unkind:
For I have wandered all the live long day,
And stranger to these Groves, have lost my way.

Close by a Brook that glides through yonder Meads,
Abeaten Path to Cynthia's Palace leads,
There you may find the Dowdy you think fair.

Think so sweet Nymph, why then does any there,
Any of Cynthia's Nymphs with her compare:
Pray speak* for I'll believe it from your Tongue,
Another I should think might do her wrong:
Is she not wondrous beautiful?

She's young.

Young as the Infant-Blossoms of the Spring,
And fragrant as the Odors which they bring.
The season smiles whenever she walks abroad.
She's all divine; a Mistress for a God.

Whatever she is, you are in Love I find,
All Colours are alike to those are blind.

My Eyes are not so blind, but I can see
A Heavenly Beauty.

Who has such Beauty?

She.

Alas poor Child, you must instructed be.

Amongst Cynthia's Stars has there a brighter shone?

Ye Novice; yes, a thousand, -- I am one.

But then her Innocence you must allow;
No guilt ever sullied yet her Snowy Brow.
A Virgin Virtue from all Vice so free,
There's nothing purer in Divinity.

That creature well may for a Virtue pass,
And innocent that no Temptation has.

Has she not Charms that every heart does rule?

Charms, thou mean Freckles, pish, the Boy's a Fool;
Her Legs are crooked.

Hah!

Her Eyes are sore.

Monstrous.

A Dowdy, as I said before.

Be dumb, abhorred Detractor speak no more;
But swift Destruction for thy Malice find,
Thou venomed Vermin of the Serpent kind;
Psyche shall be as far above thy fate,
As at this Moment she's above thy hate;
Which to confirm, -- my self I this make known,
I am the God of Love.

And I undone.

I rule all hearts in Earth or Heaven above,
And thou the worst that ever had grace to love,
In my revenge shall fall unpitied.

Stay;
Oh turn nor thus thy charming Eyes away;
But hear me speak and mitigate thy hate:
Repentance to a God never came too late.

No, thy vile Sin deserves severest pain,
Who dares infringe the Laws that I maintain,
Makes the great end of her Creation vain.
The envious Fair has Beauty worse bestowed;
I'll punish thee, to show I am a God.

He's gone, the Monarch of our Soul is gone,
And leaves me here to hate my self alone.
Cynthia by him will my late mischiefs know;
But let him tell, more obstinate I'll grow;
More ills to guard the first I will pursue,
And show what Woman when provoked can do:
I'll to my doting Lover Pan repair,
Wheedle and make him by his God-head swear,
That I am guiltless of that cursed Affair;
And see he comes in the opportunity,
As fit as Hell approved my Policy.
Now Female subtilty inspire my Brain,
And let not Woman have a Wit in vain.

What have you done, why was the fatal Drug,
By me designed so well, so ill employed?
Now by my Herds this act so much hath wronged me,
I curse your Beauty and my foolish Grant.

When you once know the Justice I have done you,
You'll thank me for the deed, he was your Rival.

My Rival.

A most pernicious one, a close Pursuer;
I never could rest in quiet for him.

Villain, I care not then if he were dead:
But is it possible you could do you this for me?

I could do any thing for him I love.

And do you love me.

Do I love my Soul.

My Life.

My Heart.

She stings me more and more:
I'm mad, she never was so kind before;
She's now my own, and meets my Love with Passion.

Oh, thou sweet Devil, dear Dissimulation.

What shall I do for thee?

One thing particularly:
When Cynthia summons us about this business,
As 'tis most like she will, be sure to excuse me,
Vouch and declare that I am innocent,
You are a God, and I a poor weak Woman;
One that has many Foes and want your help;
Do this and boldly, I am yours for ever.

Yes, I will do it, though the Oracle roar
In Thunder louder than a teeming Cloud:
I will my self expound the mistick meaning,
And turn it upon any one but thee;
For thee, Apollo I'll once more abuse,
And save my Love, though I my Godhead lose.

I'm sorry that I bring so ill a Message;
But know from the mighty Thunderer I come,
To summon both of you to make appearance,
Before the bright Assembly of the Gods;
Apollo will again be deified:
And being joined with Cupid has impeached ye
Of poys'ning Endimion; I have command
To bring ye instantly.

Jove must be obeyed:
But who interpreted the Oracle?

Apollo privally to Cynthia, who makes his peace
With Jove, come the time wastes.

Well, well, I go:
They soon will find my Innocence is pure;
I never poisoned him.

Nor I, I'm sure.

I that was wont to tremble at the night,
In solitary darkness now delight:
Welcome, a welcome then thou friendly shade,
That hid'st the sorrow of a love-sick Maid:
Though all the Stars withdraw their Lustre now;
And fate sits cloudy upon Cinthia's brow;
Since her Eclipse, though black Saturnia reigns,
Whilst gazing Nations wonder what it means;
Yet this dear secret benefit is wrought;
Darkness is fittest for a Lover's thought:
Where art thou, thou dear subject of my sighs,
Where dost thou hide thee from my longing Eyes,
And yet convey such Charms into my breast,
That since I saw thee would not let me rest.
Hah, who comes here, by that majestic Mean,
Clouded in sorrow, it showed be the Queen
Going to see Endimion.

Heaven's decree,
Sure can no scandal to my Virtue be*
Unerring sacred Oracles relate,
That I am Mistress of Endimion's fate;
And that a Kiss can a new life create:
A Kiss; ye Powers must divine Cynthia be
A Sacrifice to men's necessity?
My Lips have yet their sacred Sweets retained,
And with unhallowed touch was never profaned:
And shall they now that glory lose, oh never;
Rather than so, Gods, let him sleep for ever.
Who's there.

'Tis I.

My Psyche.

Yes.

Alas!
What fortune brings thee to this mournfu place;
Thy happy hours no stormy cares invades:
Content Love's light, 'tis grief that seeks the shades.

Of that a weighty share I challenge too,
For Madam, I do hourly grieve for you:
Some little sorrow my own cause I lend,
But much more grief for you, my Queen.

Your Friend.

How long must we in dreadful Shades abide?
How long will the starry Queen her Lustre hide?
What says the Oracle? pray give me leave
To know the Mystery, and why you grieve.

Sweet Innocence, the Cause will soon appear,
And therefore all my Discontents read there;
'Tis the Oracle that shows me to prolong
Endimion's life, but does my Virtue wrong.
When she, whose Figure's like the World's vast frame,
That's always one, yet never is the same:
Constant, yet waning still, when most increased;
Descends to Kiss, and make Endimion blessed.
Then that which seems like death shall take
No more effect, but he that sleeps shall wake.

Oh, ye immortal Powers, what's this I read?
If this be true, if it be so indeed.
Upon the Truth my lasting Joy does move;
For when she Kisses him, I gain my love.
Now I remember well, 'twas so decreed.

Now tell me, am I fit for such a deed?
Does such an action suit my state and name?

Yes, and 'twill add to your eternal fame.
Great Jove will crown it, you'll the pattern be,
Of noble Justice, sacred Clemency.

Rather disgraced, that I should stoop so low.

Ah, Madam, if you love me, do it now.

How concerned she is.

Alas, what harm can there be in a kiss,
A touch, a nothing, hardly worth a name;
So innocent, so hurtless to your fame.
That harmless Doves I've seen in sunny weather,
To coo and kiss for half an hour together:
Nay, I have don't, nor thought Lips less sweet,
A thousand times to my dear Paraquite.

Though not my Lips, my Honour may be wronged.

Ah, never since Endimion's life's prolonged:
A pitying Glance on the poor Youth afford;
Think how by him great Cynthia was adored.
By him your Statues was with Garlands crowned;
And though no favour in your Eyes he found,
By him you still was loved, and still renowned.

If he aspires to me, his Love's a fault.

Not when it comes no farther than a Thought.
Ah, Madam, at your feet does Psyche lie.
Kiss him, pray kiss him -- now, now, presently.

Her Zeal, poor Girl, is half turned Lunacy.
Let me consider --

In the mean time see,
The suffocating Nations all like me.
In mystic Rites -- and solemn Songs implore,
This heavenly grant, which will their Moon restore.

BLack and Gloomy as the Grave,
Or Chaos once sad Nature lies;
Some pitying Power the Nation save,
Ere cruel Fate all things destroys.
Let Martial Music loudly charm
This horror of Eclipse away;
Let Trumpets sound, Drums beat alarm,
And sacred Light as lately sway;
That in Groves and in Plains,
The Nymphs and the Swains,
May sing to each other new Joys;
And the Satyrs and Fawns,
Trip ore the green Lawns,
When Cynthia unvails her bright Eyes.
That in Groves; c.

Virtue with pity should be still endowed;
'Tis a rank Vice in Greatness to be proud.
What though the World that I'm a Goddess know,
Fixed in a sphere so high, and he so low;
Yet my conspicuous Grandeur must not be
Example for relentless Cruelty.
Besides, the Oracle of Jove has said
It must be so, and Jove must be obeyed.
Psyche, thou hast prevailed.

Oh happy Hour.

And now you Deities, and every Power
That love the night, days coming luster chase,
And shade the glowing blushes of my face.
Let Phoebus close confined this minute be;
Attractive Thetis, keep him in the Sea;
Till I this strange unusual thing have done,
And the effect of Iove's Command have shown.
Take this Kiss, which Oracles ordain;
Take what no Mortal did before obtain;
Not ever, after thee, must hope again.

The sacred Touch divine Impression makes;
See, from his deadly Swoon the Youth awakes:
Let him his Heaven find in Cynthia's Charms;
My Heav'n's on Earth, whilst Psyche's in my Arms.

Ah! can this beauteous Vision then be true!
My dear dear Charmer, am I sure 'tis you?

'Tis I, thou sweet Perfection of thy Kind;
Ah, round thy Waste, let me like Ivy bind.

But how? what shall I call my Heart's best Joy?

Call me the Sovereign of Sympathy.
But if my common Title thou would know,
The God of Love; all humanes call me so.
With better Title graced, now being thine,

The God of Love; was ever Fate like mine?
Now with my Sex can I with Pride look down,
And above Mortal Bliss can prize my own.
They still must with short scraps of Joy dispense;
But here, for ever, I've the Quintessence.

To the glad World the Light's restored again.

Where am I now! what Visions have I seen!
My Heart yet throbs with the Remains of Joy,
That blessed my Sense, and entertained my Eye:
Eternal Groves, all flourishing and gay;
Refreshing Bloom, and everlasting Day.
Upon a lucid Mount, methought I sate,
And saw the sacred Mysteries of Fate.
Beheld the Furies chase Earth's impious brood,
Whilst Gods were coining Blessings for the good.
But now, methinks, I feel my wonted Pain
Shaking, to mortal Cares returned again.
Yet who a Pain can know when Cynthia's by?
Oh my full heart!

Endimion, yes, 'tis I,
Whose pity was too great to see you lie
So long entranced: but how? how came you charmed?

What your Eyes left undone, your Drug performed.

My Drug! he raves; and I the Infection take.

Admire not, Madam, Miracles you make.
Syrinx from you the fatal potion brought.

From me! Oh impious Wretch, let her be sought;
By all my Stars I ne'er had such a Thought.

Then I am happy beyond mortal Bliss;
For 'tis a Torment to me I confess,
To think great Cynthia was the Poysoner
Of poor Endimion, for Adoring her.
The Heavenly Powers
On Reprobates their Furies exercise,
But cast no Thunder on the Votaries:
Besides, my Love had so much purity,
It could not lessen you, though it exaled me*

Since Harmony Alarms every thing below,
Let Songs of Love, Life's darling Blessing show.

AH, what happy Days and Nights
The fond Lover,
Does discover,
When his Mistress smiles upon him,
To the Heaven of sweet Delights.
Kind Desire,
Mounts him higher,
Every Moment she looks on him:
'Tis the noblest Gift of Jove;
'Tis the greatest Joy above:
Let us then for ever love;
Ever love, ever love;
Let us then for ever love.

Bliss beyond all Thought she feels,
Who's kind Wooer,
Does pursue her,
With a true and constant Passion;
Panting Joy each Pulse reveals.
All her Glances,
Are Advances,
When Love rules her Inclination:
Pray we then to Mighty Jove,
That our Flames may never remove;
But for ever let us love;
Let us love, let us love;
But for ever let us love.

Humours most obstinate Love changes soon.

Love puts the harshest discord into tune.

Inspires the sordid, makes the Miser fine.

Turns humane cares into a bliss divine:
'Tis all transporting Joy, and charms the Heart;
'Tis all in all, and all in every part.

'Tis all transporting, c.

Endimion, take this Crown, and put it on;
The King of Gods adopts thee for his Son:
Wonder not, but receive the Gift from me;
The next to this is Immortality.
Thy sacred Virtues are proclaimed above,
Even in the high and dazzling Court of Jove;
Who will himself descend to honour thee.

So much devotion to the grace belongs,
I must in Blushes pay my gratitude.

And now, since the great Thunderer has endued
Me with new Power, and from the Race of Men
Translated me into a God again,
The Affronts and Injuries I lately bore,
I purpose to revenge.

You have the Power.

Look then upon this slander to her Race;
This very Devil -- with an Angel's face:
False, as a Harlot's Tears, to gain her Will,
Or an old Rebel, Politician's Zeal.
True, Woman, like the first Mankind betrayed,
When Hell and she their precious bargain made.
This Creature, this fair piece of Cruelty;
I blush to speak it, was beloved by me;
The Mistress of my Soul, and fond Desires,
Till her vain folly quenched my hallowed fires.
I was the subject of her scorn and pride;
Jest, and a thousand Vanities beside.
But see the Woman's cheat in being coy;
This seeming Virtue, with a down-cast Eye,
I found this Morning courting of a Boy;
Prattling warm Love, applauding his rare Feature,
Prompted by all the Furies in her Nature.
This moved my Rage, and by the Powers above,
Refusing me, she shall no other love.

To everlasting Shades I her condemn;
First for refusing you, then loving him.

Oh fatal Sound, oh cruel Goddess too,
Upon my Knees thus let me rooted grow,
Until this horrid Sentence you repeal.

To hope compassion, and yet none to feel;
What confidence is this?

Ah, calm your hate.
You once was kinder in your Mortal state.
Am I grown old? and do my Charms abate?

Ah, flattering Mischief -- think not to regain
Affection lost -- I was a Lover then,
That fed your Pride, and bred you to be Vain.
Nay, so divine a Passion I could boast;
My love supplied the heaven I had lost:
But no return, no gratitude I met;
You must be coy:

I but dissembled it.
You say yourself it is the female cheat.

You cannot love, pursue the Humour still:

Forgive me now, and if I can, I will.

What, your young Minion here, for him you'll try?
No, I'll not trust your Sex's fallacy.
He is the chosen Darling you adore,
And I am to be flattered for my Power.
Away, this last Affront's too great to bear;
The Wretch, I'll not forgive, I will not hear.
Your Sex shall know, that Heaven your Beauty gave;
Not to oblige the fool, or fortune's slave,
But to reward the witty, and the brave.

Why then Rage on, and your worst Anger prove;
My stubborn fixed Resolve it never shall move.
Opinion throws a Mist ore Women's Eyes;
And none but those we like, to us are wise.
Witty or brave, not pleasing is defied;
Thus till our Inclination bows our Pride;
Will is our Law, and Fancy is our Guide.

Why, farewell Womankind, and welcome Rest,
That has so long been banished from my Breast.
'Tis proper now to plant new Glory there.
Welcome kind Hermes.

From yon starry Sphere
Jove sends his strict and dread Commands by me,
That Syrinx be accused of th'Insamy
Of Poys'ning Endimion.

Be not seen.
Whilst I examine her.

Night's Illustrious Queen!
How comes it that I must bear this Insolence,
Where Pan can justify my Innocence?

Does Pan affirm it?

Yes, and more can prove.
When this was done, she was in yonder Grove.

Sheering your Sheep, or listening to your Love,
On what Employment, Son?

The horrid Act,
By Drug or Potion had its cursed Effect:
And sure, of such a Drug, I've heard you speak.

Then all our former cunning is too weak,
Mischief assist me.

In excusing her,
You make your self the Hellish Poys'ner;
For 'tis undoubted you or she must do it.

Then since it must be so, the truth shall out.
Much I'm concerned a Rural Deity,
So highly prized, should be accused by me.
But since I now am forced to speak the truth,
'Twas Pan that Poisoned the much-injur'd Youth.

By Hell I'm finely caught.

Through jealous Nature,
That I admired Endimion's shape and feature.
Unruly Love urged him to act this Evil:
Indeed I pity him --

Oh, cunning Devil.
Is this your Love? is this your Constancy?

Talk not of Love, I always hated thee.

And yet you swore your Vows all constant were.

Dull fool, will you believe us when we swear?
'Tis our design to cheat you when we Vow.

There is not such a Fury sure below.
But why thou Fiend on me, this cursed disgrace?

Because I wanted then just such an Ass;
Such a fond loving Fool.

Thou front of Brass,
Did not thou do it?

Alas, he's now quite mad;
Pray let some get the drivelling God to bed.
See, see; he Raves!

What Riddles do I hear?
Come forth, Endimion, let the truth appear.

Nay, if he be revived, my case is clear
The Mischief can no longer wear disguise;
Vain are my Arts, and useless all my Lies.
But stubbornly I will defy their Power,
And from this hated Moment speak no more.
Confession to exclude, I'll thus lock fast
My Lips, and show true Woman to the last.

Endimion, speak.
And as you hope a future grace from me,
Boldly declare the truth who did it.

She.

Yet you are guiltless, and do nothing know;
Winds bear her hence to Caves of Frost and Snow:
She shall be judged, and for this spiteful deed;
To morrow be transformed into a Reed.

And she, for whom the God of Wit once (...),
Proud Daphne to a Laurel shall be turned:
The Minion to a Bramble growing by:
Away with them, I will hear no reply.

Come, let's to Jove, who is, I see, descending,
And mingle with our fellow Deities:
For now on Earth nothing but Joy must be,
Whilst great Latona's Off-spring thus agree.

As when from hudled Chaos Earth was made,
And of the World the first foundation laid:
High on bright Thrones the Eternal Council sate,
To hear the mighty Words that did create:
So a Divine Cabal now fills this place;
Ah, how can I deserve the mighty grace:
My Will does with Desires unbounded sway;
But 'tis a debt too great for me to pay.
Accept then grateful Vows --

You from this hour,
Ore Heaven, as well as here, have half my Power.
Old Nature shall a second Model take,
And to Creations I'll Additions make:
Cherish the brave and good with lasting Praise,
And Crown true Virtue with Eternal Bays*
Disperse the poisonous Seeds that Vice does sow;
Which dug and rooted up, no more shall grow.
The Moon with a New World I will improve,
And thence the Vices of the Old remove:
Dim-sighted-Mortals shall the change allow,
And the great grace of Revolution know.

Love shall be all refined, pure and serene,
And in the rapture there shall be no sin;
But heavenly Souls, who the soft fire does warm;
Long Ages live and love, and think no harm.

It shall not such a plague as Faction know,
The Crowds Religion framed in Hell below:
But all in Peace and firm Obedience move,

And bless the sacred Majesty of Jove.

And bless, c.

THE Loud-tongu'd War, like Thunder,
Comes Echoing (...) the Plains;
And distant Nations wonder,
Which side the glorious Conquest gains.
Tantarra rara, Trumpet sound,
Fill all the Air with Martial Rattle;
Dub, Dub-a-dub, the Noise rebounds,
To urge the Heroes on to Hattle.
The Cannons roar in murdering Flame,
Up to the Skies the Smoke does roll:
Beat an Alarm, they Storm, they Storm;
And now Immortal William's Name,
Resounds from Poll to Poll.

