HOw! the House full! and at a Loyal Play!
That's strange! I never hoped to see this day.
But sure this must some change of State fore-tell;
And the Pit (methinks) looks like a Commonweal;
Where Monarch Wit's bast'd by every Drudge,
And each pert Railing Brumigham's a Judge.
But know, ye Critics of unequalled Pride,
The Dice now give kind chances on our side;
Tories are upmost, and the Whigs defied.
Your Factious Juries and Associations
Must never think to ruin twice, Three Nations;
No, there's one above you has too long had Patience.
Changing of sides is now not counted strange;
Some for Religion, some for Faction change:
And (left Examples should be too remote,)
A Reverend Clergy-man of famous note
Hath changed his Cassock for a Campaign-Co^;
Amongst the Saints doth now devoutly Stickle,
And holy Bag-pipe squeaks in Conventicle.
Another sort there are that roar and rant;
Are Loyal; but all other Virtues want:
Ask their Religion, they cry, What a Pox,
Damn me ye Dog, I'm stanch, I'm Orthodox.
These are as bad as the other every way,
And much unlike my part I act to day;
A Royalist by Nature, not by Art,
That loves his Prince and Country at his Heart;
Addresses loves, to all Mankind is civil;
But hates Petitions as he hates the Devil;
Perfect in Honour, constant to his Friend;
And only hath one fault, he's wondrous kind.
Yet who here would refuse a kind Intrigue;
Faith none; who does it is a Ridgling Whig.
This is his Character, and is't not pity
But such as he bore Office in the City?
How would all honest Hearts their Fates esteem,
Were all our Common-Council-men like him?
How glad to be preserved from Factious Furies,
If such as he was Fore-man of the Juries?
That point once gained, Sedition would want force,
Then equal Justice take it's proper Course;
To hang up those for an Exemplar show,
That have deserved it Twenty years ago.

SAd times! sad times! neighbour Slouch.


Well, well, when 'tis at worst, 'twill mend, neighbor; as the saying is: For
my part, my heart shall never zink 'till the Spring's dry, and my good
Landlords Ale-Tubs out.


Ay, he s a brave man, God shield him. But Neighbour I can tell you there's
parlous news come down last night. They say the great Volk at London-Town will
have him to Coram Fobus for lending the Cavaliers money.


Ay, and for stowing two of 'em up the Chimney, when the house was searched, and
swearing they were only Flitches of bacon.


He had best take care of himself, for that Coram Fobis is a plaguy place, I
can tell him that; if they once get him into Coram Fobis, I promise 'twill go
hard with him.


With reverence t'ee Neighbours -- I had rather ye were all fairly hanged, I
deal plainly with ye.


Why troth, Timothy, when he leaves us -- I believe a good strong cartrope will
be no false Latin to the best of us.


Ich have lived man and boy cham sure this five and fifty years, yet never see
such doings: Why nothing is currant now but zwaggering and tearing and fighting
and roaring.


And stealing Neighbour. You may put in that too --


Stealing, why that's the business of the nation. The Roundhead party make a
Trade on it: The other-side I confess have some conscience in their Dealings.


Ay tis true, they have Conscience as you say, Neighbour, and yet two of 'em
made a little bold with it this morning.


Stole nothing I hope Neighbour?


Only a couple of Cheeses, Neighbour, and a piece of Brawn, my wife had saved
against her Crying out.


Alack the day. Some Welch Officers I warrant, that were stinted ^n diet. But,
Neighbours, me thinks Sir Charles stays long this morning He used to be at the
Oak an hour before this!


Neighbour Bulfinch, ever while you live speak proper. You are not now to call
this only the Oak, but the Royal Oak, d'e see!


Umph, the Royal Oak Neighbour Cop?


Yes fool: And because 'tis a Tree of honour, you see our brave and Loyal
Landlord Sir Charles has pal'd it in, and ordered us to come three times a
week, and kneeling at the Foot of the Royal Oak to drink the Kings Health.


Right Neighbour, he has so indeed. -- But hold you, who comes here? -- who's
this?


Let it be who it will -- stand your ground all.


Contemned by Fortune, and by Love oppressed!
Was ever wretched maid like me distressed?
Forced by wild Passion to commit a fault
Against my sex, my Honour, and my Birth:
Would I had died within my Nurses arms,
Or in my Infant Cradle found a Tomb!
Then had I never seen this dear-lov'd Man,
Nor known the miseries that now pursue me!
But 'tis too late to wish -- for hi Im have lost my friends*
For him, my self; for him, a flourishing Fortune;
And in this strange Disguise, at which I blush,
Have follow'd him in these Tempestuous Times,
And equally embraced his Fate. 'Tis true, I have his friendship,
And covered in this shape his Company --
But to my heart this can no Cordial prove,
Whilst his is friendship; and whilst mine is Love.

Be at peace now, and hold you contented -- Let me alone with 'un.


Good morrow t'e my friends!


Good morrow, good morrow!


Good morrow to you friend!


Do you expect Sir Charles, the good Colonel there this Morning?


Why look you friend! to speak like a Scholar, as they call it, no good can
be expected but in good, mark ye me. And therefore in this vile world of lucky
Knaves and wicked Fools, I think 'tis unreasonable to expect the good Colonel.


Ha, ha, ha, -- by Coxbones Neighbour Cop will hold him tack, I can tell him
that.


That's true indeed. 'Tis very incongruous for a good and wise man to herd with
knaves and fools, but sure here are no such, I dare affirm all hereto be very
honest fellows.


Before your Worship came amongst us we could have taken one another word; but
now the case may be altered.


Why so?


Because you are as much too fine to be honest, as we are too poor to be fine.


Does Honesty consist then in the Clothes?


No, but the Clothes of most of you Courtiers consist upon your honesty.


But is that Currant, will that pass friend?


It must pass, or nothing, amongst a great many of ye.


A bitter fellow -- I have often seen the picture of Honesty painted with a
sober Sheeps look, just like one of yours, and wearing a plain gray Coat.
Prithee can thou tell me the meaning of that?


Oh very easily -- humh; why look you as to the sheep, that I believe was
designed a Bob for you Court-mutton-Eaters: but the sober wise look deciphers
that honesty has no pride; and then by the plain suit is infallibly
demonstrated, that honesty never runs in debt, but always pays his Taylor.


Hey -- well said Cop, well said Neighbour Cop --


Peace, peace Hoa! Sir Charles is coming.


'Tis he indeed! -- I feel my panting heart knows that the Centre of its Joy is
near.


Good morrow to your Worship!


I hope your Honour's well.


Heaven bless you noble Colonel. --


Good morning to you all. And thou great son of Earth,
Thou tall and spreading Monarch of the plain,
That from the Barb'rous rage of Regicides,
The swords of Bloody Rebels, impious Villains,
Within thy sacred Body did conceal
At once the precious Soul of three great Kingdoms,
Thus bowing glow -- Hail to thy reverend shade,
May thou for ever flourish, ne'er decay,
Nor never may the Winter storms annoy thee;
But young and Towering be thy verdant head,
And be thy root fixed and Immovable:
Upon thee let no featherd Traitor perch,
Ravens and Daws, the Emblems of the Times:
Harbour the Thrush that sings of Loyalty,
And Rebel Birds of prey shake from thy Branches.
Some Wine there I fill round and begin Caesars Health with a Huzza --

Why merry be thy heart friend. I see I have not lost all my labour -- I have
heard a good speech for my pains.


The mere effects of my zeal Ned. Thou art sure nothing can make me an Orator
but Loyalty and the Royal Cause.


An't please your Worship may we not drink the Kings Health now we have had Mr.
Cesars.


Caesar is the King, Sir! you have had it already.


Is it so an't please you?


Is it so? why dost not thou know that Caesar is Latin for King, Fool: Ah go
thy ways, sbud I would not be such a dunce for 50 pound.


Ha, ha, ha, what think thou Ned, is not Ignorance a staple Commodity here
in the Country? --


As the posture of our affairs stand we have reason to believe otherwise; for
in this age the most ignorant have wit enough to be rogues, and get estates
from those that are wiser.


Ay, those are the saints of Reformation, the Rebel sneaking, yea forsooth
Achitophel. Tribe, villains that will have a greater fire in Hell than the rich
Glutton has, and their Tongues be hotter. What say thou my kind partner of
Fortune, will they not, hah*


I hope so, Sir.


I know thou dost my best, my dearest friend.


What e're you wish, you may be sure I do.


Nay that's too much. Ned, dost thou see this youth,
This tender smooth-skin'd Twig of Loyalty,
In whom fierce Mars, and Beautiful Adonis
Join to complete an excellence. This youth,
When we were most engaged at Worcester-fight,
And I revenging my great masters Fate
With all the fury Courage could Inspire
And loyalty give power to; this brave youth,
Though twice unhorst in the Crowd, still follow'd me:
'Tis strange, he wink't and fought, yet still came on,
As at the first; at last his spirits fainting,
Lifting his eyes to heaven and to me,
He cried, Take dearest Sir, my last embrace,
And then I shall die pleased.

Kind noble youth.


Something more he would have said, which seemed of moment -- but speech was
lost, and I with careful pains conveyed him thence, then got his wounds well
cured; and now I hold him here.


And here, Heaven knows, only I wish to be.


Sir, Capt. March, and Lieutenant Hazard, present their humble service to you,
and bid me tell you, they should be very glad to drink your health this
morning.


I understand 'em well. Good Heaven! to what strange Acts necessity compels us:
These two I have observed famous for Virtue, for Honesty and Loyal Valour
honoured: Two that had rather give their Patrimonies to grateful merit, than to
know the shame of asking, though in their extremest Fortunes. Yet see how
want, the mould of humane Fate, stamps us for lowest Deeds, when e're he
pleases. Sirrah, Bid my Steward give 'em 40 Pieces, and be you sure that they
have Wine enough; see that they want not any thing I have; and tell 'em I begun
our Royal Master's Health.


Huzza! Come Neighbours, now the Dance, the Dance.


And now another Glass; Come, and remember Mandlin the Millers Daughter by the
by. --


With all our Hearts! come --


Sir, My service to you: Confusion to the King's Enemies.


I'll pledge you Sir! but cannot drink so much.


Not drink so much; nay, then I must suspect thee: Drink, or thou will be
Damned; that's my Position; I hear thou can fight.


A little, Sir.


A little Sir! and gad I never knew but those that could fight but little Sir,
could drink a great deal Sir: Dost thou know the three great qualities of a
Town-Spark?


No!


I thought so: Observe then, First, thou art always to speak truth, unless
amongst the Factious: for there the Province is dissimulation. 2ly, Thou art
never to refuse thy Glass: Nor 3ly, thy Whore. Thy Whore, my Lad. Now which
wilt thou embrace? for two of these three thou must.


Well Sir, if I must, the first and last best suit my temper.


What speaking Truth, and Whoring? Well said true heart, I see the great
business of Generation will go forward however. A Whore Sir Charles will stick
fast to our party whatever Vice fails.


Aye Sir! Would I had your Mistress to make trial of, with all her Dyings,
Languishings, and Graces: gad if I had, I'd pepper her.


Ha, ha, ha! well said my little Ganymed.


Nay, you have reason to be fond of him, if this be not a Slip of your own
Grafting I am mistaken: I fancy he's like you. -- He looks as if he were begot
in the Riot of Appetite. The Youth may come to preferment in time; for to my
knowledge there's many a Noble Peer in this Country would give 100 Guineys for
such a Page.


Let 'em be damned; I love him for his Virtues, besides another reason. There
was a Lady, Ned, young as the blushing morn, as beautiful, an Heiress too, and
wealthy in Possessions, so like this youth, -- only a finer mould* -- that you
could scarce distinguish one from the other, that loved me to distraction.


Oh Heaven! How shall I hide my Blushes.


Very well Sir. I hope you were an able Physician to cure her! -- Oh there's
nothing like madness in an Amour; for, as in such a Condition a man has twice
more strength than he used to have, so a Woman has twice more love; and I
suppose you were very grateful to her.


No: Thou wilt wonder at my Resolution;
She was the Daughter of a cursed Traitor,
A Rogue that sat upon the sacred life of Majesty,
Doomed so much Royal Virtue,
In the rich Blood of that Immortal Prince,
The Nation has been barren ever since;
She being his blood I hated and contemned her,
And sacrificed my Love to Loyalty.

And was she handsome?


So pretty, she was thought a Miracle;
She had a Body framed for excess of pleasure,
So plump, so white, so full of melting Youth --

'Sdeath it makes me mad to hear it.


An Eye that influenced all Souls with passion,
And on her Cheek sat modest temperance,
Whose blushes seemed the Guardian to her Beauty.
She had a skin --

A plague, if you tell me all she had, I shall expire. Such another
Description, and I am no man of this world! And could thou leave her? oh*
thou confounded loyal Dog. Gad if it had been my case, I should have begged his
Majesties Pardon; I should have had another Monarch to obey at that time? Ha!
what say thou my young Apostle of the small Tribe?


Why faith, as you say Captain, I should have asked her a Question or so,
that's the truth on it: A Roundhead's Daughter might have got a Cavalier, that
might have lived to take his Grandfather by the Beard.


Aye, and so have brought Loyalty again into the Right Line.


Now am I forced to echo his lewd sayings, lest silence and my blushing should
betray me.


No! I made a Royal Conquest over my Passions!


Oh I shall faint.


But come! no more of this. Let us be merry!
For Heaven knows how soon it may have end.
See, Ned, if yonder Bumpkin be no got drunk,
Now we shall have good sport with him.
Well Sirrah, what think you of the world to come now -- hah!

Nay, but hold you, honest Landlord, in the first place, Is the world to come a
Kingdom or a Common-wealth?


Heaven is a Kingdom, Sir rah?


Is it? Why then I find the Devil is like to have a Bargain of me.


How Sirrah!


Nay, Look Landlord, Kingdoms are so tottering in these times, that gadzooks
I am for the secure place, be it good or bad.


Why Rogue, is Hell a secure place?


Aye, if it be a Commonwealth; for there if one Devil be your Enemy, another
may be your Friend, so that you need not trust your business with a Court
Favourite, that shall promise you fairly to show his breeding, and cheat you
damnably to show his Wit.


There Boy. Oh brave Cop --.


Why Sirrah! Thou drunken Tossed, Thou dirty Root, Thou Radish! how durst thou
talk of Courts, and Favourites! look to your Plough, you Dog, and to your Wife:
See that her Shoes be clean, and mend her Stockings: But, sirrah, no more of
this, lest thou art damned; for remember I have given you fair warning.


Damned! what and have the Religion to be Drunk? Do not I know that Damnation
has no power over a man when his Soul swims in liquor. If I were sober, 'tis
true I might be in danger; but drunk, Udsbores! I defy the Devil and all his
Rump-Parliament!


There's nothing tries an unsound Intellect like Wine; for if you observe, your
Rogue of Interest then will certainly betray himself.


I have observed it.


'Tis not the Silver nor gold for it self,
That makes men adore it, but 'tis for its Power.

Thy singing has put me in mind of a Song was given me this morning, a thing
very well humoured, and most excellently set; and here I think comes the
Lieutenant opportunely to sing it.


Oh Colonel! You're undone!


No matter, Sir, sing me that Song I gave you lately!


Lord Sir sing! why I have the saddest news to tell you --


No matter I say. Let me have the song, for nothing will I hear till that be
ended.


Death how d'e think, I can have the heart to sing when --


Do it or by heaven I'll spoil thy tuning hereafter -- Come on --


Was ever such a humour. I must obey him.


THe great Augustus, like the glorious Sun,
Long on the Rabble Weeds with Splendour Shone;
Yet all the fruits of his bright influence
Was an Il Odour, Nauseous to the sense;
Long flighted they his grace and Love,
His mercy made them Rebels prove;
Nor would they be kept under,
Like the rude Ancients, that affronted Jove,
Because they never felt his lightning or his Thunder.
Then let 'em be Confounded, Confounded, Confounded;
And so may every Roundhead
That stands not up for King and Laws;
And so may every Roundhead be wretched and Confounded,
That dares, that dares defend the good old Cause.


Now Ned. what think thou?


'Tis very well in the kind indeed Sir.


Now Sir to your story, why what's the matter?


The matter! why Sir, your Estate is sequestre'd, and your house and goods
seized upon.


By whom, Sir,


By Sir Oliver Oldcut, Chairman to the Committee of Sequestrations, and there
is with him one Justice Eitherside, a wicked Limb of the Law, a Damned Orator,
who has got more fees for bawling than others for speaking sense, and they are
attended with a whole Regiment of Redcoats Now Sir who shall sing now?


Why thou inconsiderable Limb of the War, that will I like an April Nightingal,

A pox on all Traitors and private Caballs,
Confound all their Plots and Designs.

How now sequestered -- By the mass then 'tis time to look to our selves
Neighbours.


Here's Monarchy for you now, this comes for standing so stiftly for Monarchy!
Ownds! I am for a Commonwealth.


Why ye villain! such another word and I'll make more holes in your guts than
are in thy tattered Doublet.


Damn *em are they so sly, and sudden in their Executions -- all seized on?


All Sir.


Why farewell Acres! I hope my honourable Committee Rascal has consigned me a
Terse of my Claret, that I may drink my Royal Masters health at parting.


Not a drop Sir.


That's somewhat hard, well, water shall suffice then, the unsophisticated
purling brook, from whom I'll drink large Brimmers every morning thank Nature
and defy adversity.


Oh noble temper! see yonder Sir, they come, fly Sir or I fear you'll be
imprisoned?


Then shall I have more leisure to contemplate. Let'em come on, I'll stand it
to the last.


Let the worst happen I have a friend at London will soon clear us My Mistress
is a secure Card, I am sure of a Trump to win for me. --

Come Gentlemen * let's have a little skirmish for it however -- we will scorn to
be taken basely. --


But three teirce of Claret and but one little Runlet of Sack to all that Beef
and Mutton. 'Tis very strange, hum -- Lawyer! is't not!


Ay, 'tis strange, but these Cavaliers are such damnable soakers, one of them
shall make nothing of five Gallons for his mornings draught. I was informed of
a Dozen Barrels, besides a Cask of Tent that stood up in a Corner.


Tent! ay, where the Divel is that Tent too? if we could have but found that we
had done something; 'twould have been like the very marrow and heart-blood of
the cause -- but to find none at last, nay but one little Runlet of Sack
neither.


So please you this is the punctual place, and there amongst his Tenants
stands the sequestered Knight.


Ha! swords drawn too. Sir, Sir -- how dare you -- with what face I say dare
you -- but hold -- are we strong enough -- are the Redcoats come up! come up
Redcoats and be damned. How dare you Sir brandish a Sword in the very face and
front of Authority, ha -- know thou not who I am O man!


Yes. Thou art one of the Dirty Cubs of Reformation, and has licked thy self
into more deformity than any Brute can possibly Imitate; as to thy honourable
extraction, thy Mother, if my Memory fail me not, sold Turnips.


That's a lie; to my knowledge she sold Apples.


Well she did so, what then, the Woman was frugal, and what then? come, what
was my father? what was he.


Why, he I think aspired to be a Corporal in the low Countries*


A Corporal! by the Lord a Colonel, and as brave a fellow as ever carried a
musket.


A Musket! oh, a worthy Officer indeed.


As to thy self, by clandestine Rapine* Plebeian Tally-mans Extortion, and
cheating the Subject, thou art called Rich and Eminent in the Devils name: Yet
in thy Soul so poor, that thy Bounty would starve a mouse, did not Bribe*pies
now and then contribute to its maintenance. I remember when thou were it elected
Sheriff of Worcester, thou ne'er would Dine beyond a Ninepeny Ordinary. Thy
stately lodging was an unhanged Garret, amongst Rats and Mice, close in an old
blind Ally, butting and bounding on Ale-houses and staples.


Can my honour bear this? no it cannot. Seize him fellows.


Now as I am a Justice I should say keep the peace. But as I am an Orator and a
Lawyer I say knock him down.


Oh well fought Monarchy, bravely done Monarchy.


O sordid Dogs. The Snakes that I have warmed are now the first that sting me.


Damned souless villains! ya're not hurt I hope?


So now lay his crime before him? give him a speech -- Sir Paul confound him
with thy Rhetoric.


Hem, hem. It is I confess wonderful to me, and I believe no less admirable to
all here, that the sagacity, or to speak vulgarly the wisdom of man should
desert him at his greatest need: Art thou mad, oh thou inconsiderable Animal!
art thou infatuated, as the Schoolmen have it, to lift thy fist against the
mighty Elephant the Commonwealth, and have thy brains beaten out by its Naso
or Proboscys -- ho, what shall I say, or indeed what can I not say? well -- I
will say no more till I have time and place, and so bring him away, sirs.

Omnes Huzza.


Lead on! I have yet left a Cask of Tent to comfort me by the way.


Ask him where Sir Paul? ask him where? and you that are his Tenants petition
to my honour, and I'll consider ye.


'Tis base in any man to rail at Fortune,
Since she's a Goddess whose Divinity
Instructs the wanton Clay to know it self;
No (if Adder like I dip my tongue in Venom,
It shall be against the Enemies of my Prince,
The trembling pale cursed Traitors of the Times:
The Plots of Foreign Foes, good Heaven reveal,
Free us from the Mischiefs of a Common-weal.
Let the grant Senate Peace and Union sing,
And to complete our Joys long live the King.

YOu have seen this Royalist then Cousin?


Yes, and observed your eyes, Madam, and the lustre that adorned your face when
you beheld his graceful Carriage, and heard him refuse to compound for his
Estate.


'Tis impossible I could grace my self with a languishing Air like what you put
on to oblige Mr. Heartal, Cousin: I hear you have got his freedom of Sir
Oliver, and methinks it is but reason that I should do the same for the
stranger.


But what if he should not accept it, when 'tis done; for I hear he's a man of
a strange nice critical humour, and scorns to be obliged to a Woman; no, though
'twere for her Maiden head.


I know not that, but one that looks in his face would imagine he valued a
Maiden-head at a greater rate than you speak of: If he balk his Bottle or his
Mistress I'm mistaken -- ah -- there's nothing like a Royalist at a fair Lady.


No, for like a Be he is perpetually Buzzing about, and sucking every flower
he comes near, till at last with tired Wings, and laden Thighs, he returns home
to his Winter-quarters, humming a melancholy complaint for his no better
success in his Rambles.


Let him ramble: I know he has too much honour to wrong in any point a kind
young Lady that loved him -- besides, I am clearly for liberty in Love; your
dull low spirited constant Couple are like two Chickens in a Coop, they are
always either sleeping or pecking at one another.


Liberty; why 'tis like Air to a flame, Life would soon extinguish without it.
But to be Married, in my sense, is the best of Liberty! oh heaven! Marriage is
a heavenly thing sincerely.


I would thou had my Husband to try!


Nay, there I must beg your pardon. Your Politician is the worst at
Love-matters of any: He is settling the Nation abroad, when he should be settling
himself at home with his Wife; and I must confess, I would not willingly marry
a Lump, a Stone, a Log; I would not have a Husband like a School-boys Top, that
should go no longer than just I was a whipping him on.


Ah! Curse on that fatal Command that made the unlucky scourge to such a Top: I
know I was designed for nobler Fortune: But see the Engine comes, and the whole
nest of Insects. Crape go you to Sir Charles's Apartment, present my service
and tell him I design to visit him -- be secret: away.


Not compound -- Gad -- I am gladon't * I am glad on it, faith: The more
stubborn he grows, the richer grow I: Oh soul, wife, are you there? (how d'e
Cousin Aurelia?) Harke'e Soul! Dear heart! you must wipe your mouth, and
prepare to salute these Privy Members of the honourable Committee, at parting
-- Smack 'em heartily d'e hear, -- 'tis cheap enough: ye little Buttock, I*l
tell you more anon -- soul, that is Mr. Alderman Thrum -- Mr. Alderman! pray
make use of my wife. And you Sir Peter Codshead. Sir Timothy you! and my
particular good Friend and Patron Sir Iohn Zownds; 'sbud, I must have you more
familiar with her.


I shall be too bold Sir Oliver.


Bold! peugh -- to her Sir Iohn! lick her over the lips and kiss her again if
thou wilt boy -- she is fine tender flesh * so -- very well; and now I wish
your Honours good rest, with my unfeigned thanks for this days favour. Sir,
light before there I'll wait upon your Honours down.


By no means good Mr. Chairman! you have your Boots -- on


Good Mr. Alderman, 'tis my duty; faith I must.


But you must know that Law, Madam, is the very Sheers, as it were the Cizzers
of Love, and it is a together impossible for a man to be a good Pleader and a
Lover at the same time, Ah -- had I not been a profound Lawyer, I had
positively made the most complete Amorist in the whole world.


Is it not natural to you to be dull now and then Sir Paul?


Why yes truly! 'tis natural for us to be dull. The study requires it. Your
true Blockhead always comes sooner to the Bar than your brisk fellow. Why
that's the reason the people say I am no Lawyer, because I am a man of Wit, and
have the faculty of being dull --


Sir Paul, a man of Wit is a fine thing. Oh I love a well spoken man sincerely.


Or any man else that will but marry thee sincerely.


The^ are lewd beastly Times, Sir Paul; Marriage is out of fashion too; and the
Brutish things had rather take a Tawdrey Creature in nasty Crape, Colebertine
Cornet, dirty Linen, and tattered shoes and slaps, than Marry an unsullied
longing Virgin of fifteen years with a good Fortune, Witty, Beautiful -- and
willing. -- Certainly there's no perfection so admired as Rhetoric; besides it
soonest gets a husband of any thing in the world.


Come Sirrah, come and pull off my Boots. Coz. Aurelia, there's a Lady below
desires to see you, Madam -- pish -- what de'e call her -- Madam -- the tall
young Lady with the green face, that us*d to come hither -- I've forgot her
name -- Come Sir -- make haste --


Mr. Heartall's Sister! and ten to one sent to me with a Message from him -- I
must run to her -- your Servant, sweet Sir Paul.


Sweet Sir Paul! the poor thing's in love with me!
Madam, *Tis death to miss the honour of waiting on you down.

Oh Soul! such news, such Fortune -- pull sirrah -- pull harder -- *Sheart I am
2000 l. a year the better for this days work --


The worse rather.


The stubborn fellow would not compound, not he; 6000 l. a year Estate* and
would not take half; An unreasonable Dog! But the Committee for my sake have
nicked him i'faith; for they have ordered me 2000 l. a year of it, and have
conscientiously divided the rest amongst themselves.


So much the worse still.


The worse! what for 2000 l. a year! Why Soul! Flesh! my bonny bouncing
Buttock, art thou mad, ha! Gad I am so overjoyed, I could dance a Jig. Never
was such luck -- no -- never was -- such --


Now Son of a Whore! now, now, Dog; What, no feeling Rogue -- Could thou not
have told me I was sliding off -- hah -- give me my Slippers, sirrah! But Soul,
as I was telling thee -- I am the luckiest fellow! gad we'll eat and drink like
the Protector now -- we can afford it -- I intend to have a whole Shoulder of
Mutton to morrow Dinner, and some Butter in my Cabbage -- what, I can afford it
now.

And shall the half Bottle of Ale be drunk off without grudging? Shall the Pot
of Warden-Pears be uncovered without a sigh to see how much 'tis wasted? Shall
the Turkey Pie have the privilege to be cut in the sides, and shall the Parmazan
Cheese escape notching too to morrow?


Yes, that it shall you little Buttock; and Ralph shall be Steward, and
Chaplain, and Cook, and Butler, and Gard'ner, and Footman no longer; I'll take
another that shall draw the Yoke with him -- and I'll make me a new Plush Coat
too, and thou shalt be so fine, thou shalt out vie my Lady Mayoress -- what, we
can afford it now!


And have my Train like her held up by a Catch-Pole instead of a Page? put on
my Ermine Scarff, and have my Gold Chain pinned round it, to show the Grandeur
of the City? lose my 100 Pieces a night at Lantraloo, and Cuckold my Husband
with a Cavalier? what, we can afford it now!


Can you so! Cuckold! Cavalier -- humph -- why how now Soul! how now Flesh! how
now Member! What do ye scoff, do ye laugh? do ye flout at my Wisdom, and good
Fortune? gad if I had not had a Brain I had lost it, I can tell ye that! and
good Friends too -- Sir Iohn Zownds swore bloodily up to the point, or else
Counseller Blunder had carried it!


But where is your Conscience all this while Sir Oliver.


Conscience! whiew -- Ah Fool! wilt never be wiser? Conscience! when, did
thou ever know a thriving States-man have a Conscience? Never, Turtle! never,
Crooked-rib, never!


Nor Honesty neither, that ever I could hear.


'Tis needless, useless; we can make nothing on it.
How now, what's the matter?

So please your Honour, the prudent Captain Ionas is at the door, and desires
Admittance --.


Captain Ionas! What's he in the name of wonder?


What*s he*! by the Lord a most ingenious person, a profound Headpiece. He is
the Author of the Intelligences -- 'Tis he that invents all the Miracles, The
fiery Dragons, Armies in the Air, Common-wealth Comets, and so sorth, to
confound and disturb the People -- Oh! He's a man of great use amongst us --
And one that claws the Tories off i'faith -- Dash! Tell him he is welcome, and
admit him -- Go Wife! your Presence is not convenient when State-matters are
divulged --.


Nor yours, when Love matters are performed, I'll swear --.


Sir Oliver, Your entire Servant.


Heartily Yours, good Brother Ionas. Well, you came I know from the Caballists,
and how go matters there?


In truth, Sir Oliver, with great and singular Policy and Vigour; I have not
known the Nation in so good a posture of Affairs this many years as now: The
Weed Loyalty is (thanks to Providence) rooted out, and Interest planted in its
place; instead of Honesty we have Cunning, instead of Conscience a
Commonwealth, and instead of Religion, Money.


Why truly and these are rare times; blessed times Brother Ionas -- Gad I would
not have the Nation grow honest again for a Million, not I.


Faith Sir, between you and me, you need not fear it will; for you know, Sir
Oliver, that we Brothers of the Brain, in troubled Waters always fish best:
'Tis your unsettled Government that we must thrive in -- I rejoice particularly
about your good Fortune to day, Sir Oliver, I heard the O^der of the Committee
in your favour about the Cavalier Knight's Estate.


Yes truly -- they were very civil, I thank 'em; besides, I had Politically made
his Prison a back apartment of my own house, where he shall stay t^ll all
things are settled.


Carefully done Sir*


Nay, if any one muzles a Tory*Bandog better than my self, I much wonder. But
Brother Ionas, 'prithee what News is stirring? I have seen this last Dragon of
the North, and it frighted the Fools rarely. But 'prithee tell me, hast had any
thing new since?


Oh several Sir, every day produces 'em -- I was very hard put to it this last
week, finishing some Miracles for two or three Persons of Quality, my
particular Friends: But I hope, Sir, you have heard of my Mouse, my wonderful
Mouse, ha'nt you!


Mouse! no faith not I! Mouse -- ha ha ha! not I faith! But prithee. how? what
Mouse, Brother Ionas? I confess I heard of a Popish Mouse, that was starved in
a Protestant Cubboard lately, but that can't be it sure!


No sir; this is a better fancy; and of a Mouse lately sent by the Republic of
Venice, a Present to a noble Peer in Town here! a Mouse, Sir, that was inspired
with Speech, and would speak to his Patron distinctly and loudly, Whig, Whig --
Commonwealth -- And then Whig again, three times together, Sir.


Ha, ha, ha! And I warrant this took extremely.


Took! Oh strangely Sir. I assure you, several of the Court of Aldermen were
plaguily startled at it, and to my knowledge, two or three eminent Tory Citizens
have kept their Beds ever since.


Whigg, whigg! But hark ye, Brother Ionas, prithee what is a Whigg -- faith I
have forgot.


Why Sir? A Whigg is you, or I, or -- my Lord; In short Sir, 'tis a Title of
Honour for our Party.


Oh! oh! hum -- is it so?


That's all I know of it: and so, Sir, rest you merry. I'll go and sit an hour
with the Colonel; it may be I may pump something out of him to your advantage,
Sir Oliver.


Faith, and that's true; Do so dear Brother Ionas.


I'll about it, Sir; The snare is laying -- but to another purpose my Politic
Coxcomb.


I never could tell what to make of this fellow; he has been a Quaker, Papist,
Independant, Muggletonian, Fift-Monarchy-man, and all the Sects under the Sun,
and yet never fixed to any of 'em: Hang him, let him be what he will, he does my
Business. I make a very tool of him. Well, 'tis a rare thing to be wise * a
rare thing.


A Phanatick is the Devil's Forge, whereon he forms and fashions all his
Mischiefs. A parcel-Fiend, that I would have painted as the Satyrs were of old*
with Horns and Hoofs; Hoofs, to show his Honourable Descent from Lucifer; and
Horns, to blazon the eternal rest of his Tribe. Come! Thou art Melancholy, my
little Friend: Well, I'll release thee from this trouble; faith 'tis
unreasonable thy youth should share in my Misfortunes though thou art so kind
to offer it.


Dear Sir, If any Melancholy cloud my face, it is for your sake, not my own;
having your company, I can want nothing, since all the blessings I would wish
is there. Yet pardon, if a tear break from my Eye, when I reflect on your past
noble life; and see the man, whose bounty had no equal, reduced to make his
Dinner of a Morsel.


A Morsel! rather a Feast my Friend. Content has made it rich and riotous. In
my Prosperity I could observe how little sufficed Nature, and from thence knew
that all overplus was needless. Besides, is not this better than to lie for a
well-dress'd dish of wild-fowl, or pawn my soul to the Devil, or forfeit my
Honour and Loyalty for a Fricassee or a Ragoust? I have known a Roundhead do it
for a dish of buttered Eggs! Oh! may I feed on Grass, Roots, Berries, Acorns;
drink the green puddle of the standing Poole; any thing that our appetite
counts Nauseous, rather than for the Luxury of Emperors, do the least Act
dishonourable or disloyal.


That there is a Reward for Virtue, the School-men aver to be Infallible: But,
Sir, Plato's Great Year will be so very long a coming, that 'tis but reasonable
one should expect Earnest-money here; 'tis fit we should have part of payment
in this World.


The World, sweet Youth! the World's an arrant Cheat, a very Rook that never
obliges you, but to undo you; And for my part, I am happy that I am no man of
it.


You live Sir, and are a man of it, 'till you come to a better.


No Child, You're mistaken -- he that is honest, and has no money, is no man
of this world. And why the Devil should a man be Ambitious of the no Favour,
when the detected Clod is so vile in all its Qualities; I'll give thee a short
account of it. First, for your Courtier, if necessity pinch you, and you make
your suit known to him, He's deaf -- and in return, tells you a Story of his
Miss, and what a new way of obliging she has. If you go to a Citizen, he wants
Security, the times are hard, yet cannot forbear telling you a lucky hit he had
that morning with a young Heir, which he calls a Bargain, but is indeed a
Cheat.


The Clergy however are more Charitable, without doubt there you may be
furnished.


Aye with Prayers! a hungry Benediction or two perhaps may attend you, with
hands clasped thus, and eyes up lifted. They shall pray heartily for your soul,
but to save it from the pit, not give ye a Penny. This is the World, my Friend,
and the World's Nature. It hates the Wise, the Virtuous, and the Loyal, and
only cherishes the Knave and Fool.


Let it then keep its Nature, you are above it, and shall be ever so. See here,
Dear Sir, what your poor Friend has got for your supply. This Purse of Gold,
the value of a Jewel, my tender Mother gave me when she died, I sold to help
your wants. Nay, pray accept it, else I shall think you do not love me.


My best of Friends, I swear I will not rob thee.


Do ye not love me then!


I do; but must not wrong thee.


If you deny you will.


How shall be grateful! what shall I do for thee?


Only grant me one small request.


Any thing! I swear. What is't?


Promise me, you will never throw me from your Love, nor let me want your
Company.


By thy kind self, and by Heaven, and all that's good, I swear.


Then I am truly happy.


Sir, there's a young Lady below desires to give you a visit.


A Lady!


Young, did thou say? Is she handsome too?


Yes, that she is young* Sir, and of Quality too.


And would visit me? Well, let her come up whoever she be; but of all things a
Woman was the farthest from my thoughts at this time: But I see the Devil
designs to play his old Game over with me, and when he can catch me with
nothing else, he baits his Hook with a Woman; and gad I snap at it as eagerly
as a Spaniel does at a thing thrown him, never considering whether it be good
or bad


I swear she's handsome. Oh how my heart beats!


Yes faith, honest Beelzebub has plaid his part; now will there be within me a
mutiny between the flesh and the spirit instantly.


I do not doubt it, Sir, but being a stranger, you are surprised to see me


Beauty, Madam, always surprises me. But I confess I was never made speechless
so long till now --.


That's a sign, Sir, you were never acquainted with my influence: Oh I have a
wonderful faculty at making men dull --


It must be then either by opposing your Wit, or too nicely viewing your Face;
the one, like the Sun, I confess, dazzles our eyes; and for the other, Madam, I
have manners enough to think it excellent; and then to outvie us with it is no
wonder at all.


How her Eyes dart at him! oh would they were out --


Fie, Sir, this is like a Coward, what yield before any blow is struck; nor
will I own we out vi your Sex so much neither; we have Female Wit at a pinch,
'tis true, when your Masculine Blunder would spoil all. But 'tis for constancy
and virtue we are most famous, for those we are eternally renowned.


Alas! poor souls! and yet I never knew any Lady that broke her heart with
either of these.


Did you ever know a man that broke his heart with over-loving a fair Lady?


No Gad -- but I knew one that broke his back --


Some resty Cavalier I warrant you -- such another mouldy Royalist as your
self.


Faith, Madam -- I am mouldy, damnably mouldy, as you say -- and thou like an
Angel Creature, art come just in the nick to help me, for I am a kind of a
Conserve, and must be used quickly, or all's spoiled --


You Cavaliers are like stumps of Trees upon a hilly Desert, and meet with so
many nipping blasts that you hardly ever sprout up Bud or Blossom --


But, Madam -- when I am planted in a low plashy and fertile meadow at the foot
of a fair Hill, where never Plough has dug, nor savage rifled, the Case will
be altered; the Devil's in me if I do not sprout up then.


But in the mean time, Sir, you are planted here, like a Melon under a Glass*
to keep you from the cold bleak North-wind; and to come nearer to the Business
-- for I love to time things; When did you see Sir Oliver?


Damn him Caterpillar; 'Prithee do not plague me with the thought of such a
Villain -- I have other business now; and as Raillery is often the Cause of
Love, but defers the effect, to come nearer to the matter, as you say, Madam;
Answer me this Queston? Are you Widow, Wife, or Maid?


First, Which of these three do you wish me?


For my part, I wish thee hanged --


First, If thou art a Widow, by that Eagle-Eye of thine, I do suspect thou hast
killed thy Husband, who might be such a Fool as you were speaking of, and break
his heart with over loving. Secondly, Thou hast too much wit to be a Maid I am
sure; no, a Wife for my Money -- I am for a little Adultery against the World,
faith: -- Fornication is a snivelling sin; and, gad I hate to stand sipping in
a half* pint, when I may Carouse a Bottle --


Well, Wife I am then! but to whom think you?


Why, faith I hope some old lame rich, very rich fellow.


No Sir, -- he's neither old, nor lame, but the very Caterpillar that plagues
you so, Sir Oliver Oldcut.


The Devil, it cannot be!


Very true upon my Honour.


Now though I hate the Tribe, yet gad she's handsome, and will lie with her out
of mere revenge: My dear Friend, 'prithee take a turn or two in the next room a
little --


For what Sir?


Nay, prithee no Questions now! art thou so ignorant not to know how matters
go; Can thou not play the true friend, and hold a door upon occasion.


Not for the world, not I. Oh this cursed Creature.


Go, I say, or I shall be angry.


Well -- I'll watch ye narrowly -- I am resolved you shall do no mischief.


And whither have you sent the youth now?


To read a Chapter.


Nay, do not lock the door.


Why so? I know 'twas love that brought thee hither. Thou art so kind to take
pity of my sufferings, and intend to recompense the wrongs thy Husband has
done me.


I do; nay, more I do love you, but 'tis Honourably thus sar, Heaven knows what
it may come to. But I have now so strong a Padlock upon my Conscience, that to
get at liberty, is the greatest difficulty in the world.


Do you but pull back the Bolt of your Affection from your Husband, and for the
Padlock of your Conscience let me alone --


Madam, Sir Oliver is so near, you have hardly time to get out.


Take this Purse, Sir, an earnest of my Love, preserve my Honour, and in any
thing else Command me. The rest another time Farewell.


What can this mean? did she come hither only to railly me? Ah plague of
Women's Cunning; they have more subtle fetches and tricks than a hunted Fox
has. -- She loves me, but Honour forsooth opposes! And who knows but this Money
may be a trick, a design betwixt 'em; Gad I le not trust her -- if she'll
revenge me upon her Husband so: If not as she is that Bandog's Wife, I'm
obliged to have no faith in her -- Oh Sir!

Are you come? Why sure thou were jealous of me just now, thou were so loath to
go.


Indeed Sir I thought she was a lewd Woman, and might do you some mischief. But
now she's gone, I'll take my leave too. 'Tis very late, and I begin to grow
sleepy.


A soft repose attend you -- Hey Swift, who waits there?

Take a Light sirrah, and wait upon my Friend to his Chamber.


Sir! There's no getting out, Sir Oliver I suppose, thinking he had been in his
Chamber already, has locked the Passage door.


Oh Heaven!


The Rascal makes very formal Prisoners of us. But he has obliged me in this
however, for now Sweet-heart I shall have more of thy company; now thou shalt
share a Bed with me.


Was ever such an Accident! what shall I do? This alteration in my Face must
needs discover me --


Go, sirrah, and undress him, take off his Peruke, and give him a Cap. --


Indeed, Sir, if you please to favour me, I had rather sit up and watch by you.


Watch by me, that's a good one faith; Why Sir, I am not afraid of being
stolen away -- Sirrah, pull off his Stockings. --


But Sir I had forgot to tell you -- I have, I have a strange --


Strange, what?


A strange Infirmity Sir, in the night time.


Infirmity! what -- Thou dost not piss the Bed I hope.


No Sir, not that.


Gad I was afraid thou had lost thy retentive Faculty; What other Infirmity?


Why Sir, I am -- I am apt to walk in the night time, and then Sir, I snore
extremely, and shall so sprawl and kick, Sir.


Kick Sir! What the Devil, dost thou think I am made of glass, and afraid of
breaking? What's the matter with the Boy? sure the young Rogue thinks I have
got the Itch. -- Sirrah, pull off his Breeches, and put him on a night Shirt.


By no means, Sir, this shall serve; indeed I shall catch cold if I change. --
It must be so, if I excuse it longer, he will certainly suspect me.


Come, are you ready?


Almost Sir. -- If he should chance to put out his hand in the night, or lay
his leg over me, oh, I am at my wits end!


Hark ye young Spark, pray let me have no Boys Tricks with you now; Do not you
wake me in the morning, by pulling me by the Nose, or Great-Toe, do ye hear --


Sir, I shall not lie so near ye, for I never could endure to touch any one a
Bed. -- Or if out of kindness he should hug me in his Arms, who knows but it
may discover all, and then I am undone.


Come, hast thou done fumbling yet? Gad thou art the most bashful young
Whore-master that ever I met with, (go get the Bed warmed!) Leave blushing ye
shamfac'd Fool, and let me embrace thee: Gad I shall fancy thee some fine Woman
or other, and have a pleasant time on it.

The Drowsy God will heighten my Delight,
In pleasing Fancies I shall waste the Night:
Think though a Youth, thou hast soft Female Charms,
And dream I have my Mistress in my Arms.

THe Morning's come, and with the shades of Night are fled my fears; for I have
not closed my Eyes since I lay down; but like a wary Sentinel carefully watched
the Fort, knowing it lay within shot of the Enemy: The Enemy, what Enemy? 'Twas
such a one, that had Honour been as great a Traitor as Love, the Conqueror
might have set up his Flag of Defiance upon the Walls long ere this; Every time
he turned himself, he frighted me extremely, which made me creep as far to the
Bed-side as possibly I could; yet once I could not forbear, but must put out my
foot softly to his side to touch him; me thought there was a kind of
Consolation in that. Here he comes.


A stranger below would speak with me?


Yes, Sir.


Not another Lady, I hope!


No Sir, 'tis one I have seen often with Sir Oliver; he says his name is Capt.
Ionas.


Damn him! narrow-soul-Rebel: How dares he venture to look a Royalist in the
Face? Sirrah, go and complement him with half a score kicks, and tell him I am
busy.


Gad and so I will, for I confess I do not like his Face.


Yet hold; now I think on it, I may get something out of him that may prove
beneficial: Go, sirrah, admit him; and my little friend retire to the next
room, and leave us alone.


There's my Master Sir.


Sir, not having the Fortune to converse with you before, I suppose you know me
not.


You suppose right Sir.


Sir, I am in the Town here, commonly dignified and distinguished by the name
of Captain Ionas; a man not altogether uninterested in the Affairs of State.


So Sir.


I have heard of your hard Fortune Sir Charles, and being my self a man whose
depth is yet unsounded, and one that hath carefully weighed your Condition, I
have obliged my self to propose a Remedy.


A Remedy for my hard Fortune! Faith Sir that would be a favour worth
communicating indeed! But I beseeth you Sir, what are you that have this power
over Fate: some holy Father in disguise, and intend to read Lectures of
patience to me!


A Holy Father; hum -- He should be a Papist by that gad I'll pretend my self a
Priest, and try him that way: Sir, when you shall know what I am, you'll say
mine is a Title not at all grateful to the Age in these times.


If thou art a Phanatick, as by those sneaking Features, and that set formal
Habit, I do vehemently suspect thou art* thy Title is grateful to these times I
am sure.


Why then to undeceive you I am none. I am --


What in the name of wonder! 'tis very loath to come out.


Are we within our selves! are we private!


Oh very private!


Your Ear then Sir, I am -- A Jesuite.


A Jesuite; faith that is a Quality not very grateful to this Age -- I must
confess.


And my right name is Pope.


Pope -- gad you are very unlucky both in Name and Quality, as times go. But
Master Pope, how comes it that you dare herd amongst Phanaticks? Can you think
your self safe there?


Most secure of all Sir. There are several of us amongst 'em. We converse daily
with 'em, talk Treaon with 'em, drink every night Politic Coffee, and when the
spirit moves, go to a whore with 'em!


A very conscientious manner of living, by my faith, Sir! But are there several
of ye amongst em, say you?


Divers, Sir! And not only amongst them but other Sects; I was my self all last
year chief* Holder-forth amongst the Quakers?


How! the Quakers! what my plain-dealing Friends too! Do they adhere to you?


They Sir are our Brethren, our intimate Bosom friends. Your Quaker is the
Anvil on which we forge our designs, and the Phanatick the person that uses
them. They are both the necessary Tools we work with, and indeed the chief
Implements of our Trade.


Your Trade?


Aye Sir, our Trade you know 'tis a spiritual Trade, we Merchandise Souls as
others do Goods; sell Heaven by Commission, and upon good consideration can
remit all manner of sins in our Transgressing Brethren: I hope you know this.


Faith Sir* I must beg your Pardon, I'll assure ye I know no such matter.


What a Devil does he mean?


What if a Man's Constitution requires a Wench, can you allow him that
cordially, and without scruple of Conscience?


You may have a Dispensation for it; Lord Sir, that you should pretend Ignorance
in these Affairs! A Wench, alas! a Crime of a small moment, and may be absolved
for little or nothing. Sir, I at this time keep two my self.


Why well said Mr. Pope, faith; gad if all the sons of your Mother Church are
such Swingers, she has a very sanctified Brood of ye, I'll say that for Her.


He confounds me more and more. -- Pray, Sir, if I may presume so far, What
Religion are you of?


The best you may be sure, Sir, by being a Royalist, but altogether ignorant of
your Trade, Mr. Pope.


Let me kiss your Hand Sir, I heartily rejoice at it; and now give me leave to
tell you, that my former words were only a Trial of your Virtue, and to my
content, I have found it fixed and unshaken for which I shall for ever honour
you Sir.


This is a subtle Rascal. Well! but to your Business with me good Mr. Pope?


Sir Charles, you are a sequestered man, one that Fortune has dealt very
unkindly with; And that unnatural Villain, Sir Oliver, much worse; therefore if
you have Courage enough to revenge your wrongs, and flourish again; Hark in
your Ear, you a must remove him. You understand me.


Remove him! Whither?


To the Devil, that's the surest place: In short, Sir, you must knock out his
Brains.


Let me consider a little -- This is a rare Rogue.


When he's gone, his places must of necessity fall to me. -- Very good, this
'tis to be Politic, and 'tis ten to one but the Tory Knight does it in a
moment; for as I am informed, He's not worth a Groat, and would do any thing
to get at Liberty.


But, Sir, to escape when 'tis done, will not that be difficult?


Not at all, there's a hundred of our party that hate the damned Chair-man, and
will be ready to assist you: Then 'tis the easiest matter in the world to be
done; for 'tis but laying him cross the Noddle in a morning when he comes to
visit ye; I have an Instrument ready here, 'tis called a Protestant Flayle, I
invented it at Oxford for the good of the Cause; Hah! what think you?


Why, faith I think my knavish Canting Turn toat, Friend Pope thou art a damned
Rascal.


Sir?


A true Son of an Independant Whore, and art deceived in thy Politics -- Why,
thou Dog in a Doublet, were thou such an intolerable Coxcomb, to believe any
necessity could make me commit so execrable a Villainy! Me, a Royalist, that
profess Honour and Honesty? No, as you are Dogs, worry one another. Let the
Hangman be your Executioner. You are below a Gentleman's revenge; but if a good
wholesome swinging will do you any service --


Nay, Sir, if you wo' not, there's no harm done: 'tis well we are private.


Not so private neither, as you imagine, good Mr. Pope --


Another Whelp unkennell'd.


Within there -- Bring three or four Cudgels out --


Cudgels Sir, I am a Gentleman, and wear a Sword.


A Flayle rather, as you were saying, Sir; but that's all one, I am resolved to
bestow an Arbitrary beating upon you Mr. Pope; it may happen to make you loyal,
and a lover of Monarchy. Hey, make haste there.


There's no other way -- I must run for it --


He's fled like lightning.


Ha, ha! Let him go, and be damned, for a Decoying Villain. Death what a
strange Age is this we live in; where no man is the man he seems, does what he
pretends to, nor speaks what he thinks. I have known a Whore argue strongly on
points of Religion, yet within three Minutes has done the Devil considerable
service. I have known a Statesman swear all Rebels against the King were
certainly damned; yet for the sake of Command, within two months after, has
shot his Pistol at him. I have known a Lover vow, what he never meaned to keep;
and a Courtier positively promise, what he never could perform But see, yonder
I think is a Petticoat advancing this way -- Ho! my Lady of the Lake, is it
you?

Well -- and what news from Hell! what project is going forward now?


Aye, you had need talk. 'Tis the best project could have happened for you, I
am sure, if you had but grace to esteem it rightly.


Good Mouldy-box of Marmaled, let me have none of your Instructions: for by
that mortified face of thine, it will not edify. Gad I shall take it worse
from thee, than if an old Bawd should reprove me for my lewd life and
Conversation. Come, come, your Message, your Message --


Ods my life, I have a good mind not to tell you.


Oh fie! you must, you must: Come, there's half a Piece for you.


A shame on you, you are the strangest man: well, 'tis a lucky Project for you,
I can tell you that: why, you must know, Sir, that my good Lady. --


Which in the first place is non*sense.


Slife, but she is a good Lady, marry* and even too good for this world. Well!
she, I say, has with much ad^ procured your freedom of Sir Oliver, upon
condition you are forth coming at any time when she has occasion for you.


Why saith tell her I'll do what I can to be always forth coming for her
occasions; but thou know Sweet-heart, a man's but a man: we are all mortal,
and must sometimes have our failings.


We must indeed, and therefore should hear with 'em accordingly.


Should we so eternal Consumption! oh Heaven! that it should be in the power of
such an Insect to sting me.


Then Sir, here's a Letter for you worth a Broad-piece!


Is it so? and gad thou shalt never say I undervalued it -- There 'tis for
thee.


Oh dear! 'tis too much indeed: But you are such a noble Gentleman, there's no
returning, I know; Your Servant, Sir; Y'have now your liberty to go where you
please; Your Servant, sweet Sir. Your Servant young Gentlewoman --


The Devil take you old Bawd and your Service too; for no other way have I
hopes to be rid of thee.


YOu are now at liberty; therefore fail not to meet me an hour hence, at the
Back-door of our Garden: Have Gratitude enough to think this a favour; and as
you are a man of Honour, keep my Counsel.


Oh, I find She's wheeling about: I knew 'twas impossible for flesh and blood
to hold out when the Devil and the Dear Sin plant their temptations. Philip,
You must excuse my absence for an hour or two; I have some private business,
but at seven I'll not fail to meet thee at the Fleece. Farewell.


This must be some affignation from that Devilish woman -- I know that Letter
could contain no other Business. Oh! I could curse my Fortune and her Beauty --
Well, when a misfortune is not to be remedied, I must have recourse to
Patience, and watch some kind occasion to befriend me --


Lord bless us! what a vine place this London is, neighbour Copyhold. There's
ne'er a house here but's as big as our Parish Church at home, and one can meet
none as one goes along but Lords and Ladies, and great volk.


Why, there 'tis now; Instruct a Fool, and make his answer your self. What
great volk? what Lord did thou meet with, Fool, hah?


Why, was not that a Lord that went by just now in the laced Coat, with such an
ocean of Ribbons in's hat, was not that a Lord, Fool?


No, Fool, that was a Lord's Pimp. I confess the profession is thriving, and he
may come to honour in time* if he be but industrious* He's not the first Pimp
has had preferment to my knowledge.


Pox on you for a purblind Bumpkin. Damme can't you see you Dog.


As gad sa' me my heart was at my mouth for fear he should have drawn his
Whinyard: Who is it, can tell; I am sure he must be some great person by his
Daming and Sinking.


Why, this Damning sinking Person is a lousy Foot-boy to a more lousy Brewer,
that in former times was coupled with his Masters Horses in grinding the Malt,
but since happening into a drunken Aledrinking Parish, has cheated enough to
keep his Coach and Six, with a Pox to him!


A Foot-boy, udslid, if chad known that, old Crab should have walked about his
ears, I'll tell him that.


If these doings last* woe be to all merry Meetings in faith; why one knows not
now who's the Landlord, nor who's the Tenant; which is the King, and which the
Cobbler. They are both equal now as things are ordered. Well, well, prithee let
thee and I walk about our business.


Aye, aye: Let's find the Knight Sir Oliver out, that I may know who I mun pay
my Rent to.


Why, are you mad neighbour Slouch: will you pay it to any body, till you see
which is the strongest side.


Nay, by'r Lady, that's almost out of doubt now; for the young Prince that
should be King, is banished: but however I am lawful Tenant to Sir Charles
Kinglove.


Lawful! Prithee what's Law against the longest Sword! that'I cut all Law in
pieces, and make new ones: don't you see how the ancient* Laws are turned
topsey-turvy, and new ones call the old Kingdom a new Common Wealth.


Why, and the Law have made it so, 'tis so.


Yes while the Protector has 40000 men to back the new Law, and the King none
to oppose 'em.


Why neighbour, our Parliament told us, all Soldiers should be Disbanded when
the Law was settled; and so we need no more Taxes nor free-quarter, now we have
a Law to depend upon.


How like an Oase dost thee Prate! Why, had not the King Law and Right to
depend upon, and yet it would not do against 40000 men.


Well, I say the Law can do any thing.


But make a Mon a Woman.


It can make a Mon swear he's a Woman, or hang him.


Yes with the help of Halberteers, and a Hangman.


'Sdiggers neighbour Copyhold, Thou hast a plaguy Noddle! a parlous pate of thy
own; why, thou make the Law to signify nothing at this rate: What side
should a mon take?


Take Law's side, whilst 'tis strongest.


But how shall one know when that is?


When't has the 40000 men of its side.


But if they are against the Law.


Then be thou against it too, Fool: Had not thou rather have 40000 men on
thy side against the Law, than the Law of thy side against 40000 men!


As the Song says, I perceive Law lies a bleeding.


Aye, and the Head and Fountain of the Law too.


Swoons, I intended to make a Lawyer of my Son, but I am off on it now. --


Off on it, why how came that into thy Noddle, what means hast thou?


Means, Why I breed en' at a Free-School, and if I con raise 40 I. to put 'en
to a Torney* he may come to be Torney*General, and make Laws to settle the
Crown. --


Come, come; be ruled by me Neighbour; my Advice is that you make an Evidence
of him, put en to one of the Protector's Plot-makers, and he may come to witness
against some of the Cavaliers at the High-court of Injustice; and then he's
made for ever; and in time may be able to keep his six Servants, or six men for
his Life-guard.


Peace, peace, Neighbour; here are Soldiers coming.


Come, come; the times will turn Sirs, we have good news comes every day. The
Protector they say is sick, and if the Devil takes him, as I am sure he will;
and suddenly, we shall have good days again. How now Vermin of the Country,
what are you? who are you for Sirrah, the King, or the Commonwealth, -- hah?


Why, an't shall please you Gentlemen.


Look! look! He's at his shall please ye. Slouch, be at silence, and let him
speak that bears the Brain. Noble Gentlemen, and Fellow Soldiers, to speak
affirmatively to the matter, we are for the Commonwealth dee see.


Knock 'em down! swinge 'em, no more words on it, drub 'em confoundedly. --


O mercy good Gentlemen! mercy.


Look Neighbour Copyhold, I shall desire the favour of you, that as you bear
all the Brain, you will hereafter bear all the beating too: for, for you to be
witty, and I to be bruifed for it, zooks I must tell you 'tis a little
unreasonable.


'Tis an ill time for Wit in a time of Civil War; for if they had been as ready
to break Jests as they are to break heads, I for my Wit had escaped a Beating,
and thou, because a Fool, had been beaten more. But for the future, advance
and take thy Fortune, and if thou hast any wit I hope thou wilt be Swinged
for it. 'Tis grown a Custom in this Age, and 'twould grieve me if thou should
miss it.


Here comes more of 'em, now for me; Thou shalt see what a Joke I'll pass upon
'em.


Thomas!


Here Sir.


Go and found me those empty Casks, and try if they are not musty?


Now Badger of the largest size. Who are you for, Commonwealth, or King? hah?


Pox of the Commonwealth; 'tis the very Fundament of Governing; all Tail, and
no Head. No, Sir, we are resolved to be brave fellows, and for the King, we.


'Tis very well, my brace of rusty Plough shares.


Friends, it behooves your Discretion to beat them abundantly; Let their Bones
be, as it were, broken, and their Flesh bruised: for the feed of Contest is in
them, and must be thrashed thence by the Flayle of Reformation.


Hold, hold, Gentlemen! I am for the Devil and Money, as you are. I'll be for
any thing. A pox of your Flayle of Reformation.


A pox of your Fundament, I say, and your jokes too, if this be the fruit on*t.
You may joke long enough before any one will laugh on your side.


Ill times! barbarous times, as you said, Neighbour. No Wit will pass now,
that's the truth on it. How now! who's this? There's no more of 'em coming I
hope!


The Colonel I hear is at liberty, and so is the other witness of my disgrace;
therefore without a Plot to invalidate their Evidence, the credit of our Party
is ruined. A pox on my negligence, and foolish security -- I shall raise a
scandal on our* whole Tribe, by this cursed want of Policy. Well -- there is no
way but to decoy two or three easy Fools to swear some notorious Crimes
against them; by that means to make 'em not be believed. Ah! and yonder
methinks are two fellows very fit for such a Purpose. One of 'em I met this
morning, leading in his hand a pretty fresh Country wench, and, if I mistake
not, he must be a very fit Tool for me to work with. -- How now, my honest
Country-men, what's the news with you? I warrant your heart aches to see so many
Troops of Soldiers abroad, and not a bone about you, but is disordered at these
War-like Preparations! hah?


Why, faith not to belie our selves, our Bones are a little out of order at
present, as you say.


Our hearts do ache about the Troopers, indeed. But 'tis because they are not
hanged, an't shall please ye.


So now has this Fool hedged himself into another drubbing by the by. --


What, some of 'em have wronged you I warrant: In troth I am sorry for it; and
you seem to be such honest fellows, that if you will be ruled by me, I will for
the future defend you against all such injuries.


Ruled -- aye, with all our hearts good faith.


This man now has some Conscience in him, but the other were Babylonian
Infidels.


First, What are you? and what's your Business here in Town!


We were lately Tenants to Sir Charles Kinglove, and I for my part have born
all Offices in our Parish, and kept as good a House, I can take my corporal
Oath, as any Farmer in Worcester-shire: Neighbour Slouch there, has kept House
too; but I think will knock under the Table if compared with mine.


Sir Charles his Tenants! This is as lucky as I could wish. -- I see the Devil
remembers the good Offices I have done him* and will not leave me in distress.
--


And we are going to find one Sir Oliver Oldcut, to renew our Leases, and know
to whom we must pay our Rent.


Sir Oliver Oldcut! why he's my intimate bosom Friend; he does nothing without
my advice: But he*s Sir Charles's mortal Enemy, and if you would oblige him,
you must think of Sir Charles. Well, 'tis strange to see some men's Fortune --
I am the only person in the world that could do you this good office.


Good Lord!


And if you would be trusty and secret, I'd raise ye to a better Fortune than
the renewing your Lease. Hark in your Ear, you can swear to a thing upon
occasion -- umph.


Must the thing be true or false, I pray.


Oh fie, what a question is that in this Age! True or false? why, 'tis all one,
'tis all one, man. If true, there's the more Honour; if false, there's the more
Money: 'tis all one, I tell thee. I see, Friend, your neighbor there has no
great store of wit. --


Wit! hang him Dunce, Dolt, Cuckoo: oons such another word and I'll thrash thee
as I would a Sheaf of Barley. 'Sbud Sir, you seem to be so good a Gentleman,
that I'll swear any thing for you, and so shall my Wife and Daughter. There's
my hand on it.


Nay, nay, hold you; I'll not stand out neither if you go to that.


Follow me then; Be faithful, and be rich. So now will I get Sir Charles and
the other Youth apprehended; then baffle their Evidence against me, and by my
Wit secure my Reputation. Come my good Friends.


An honest conscientious Gentleman, I warrant him!


How is it possible I should think you love me, when you so often suspect my
Fidelity.


What have you done! Oh I shall be ruined for ever.


So far from it, that I have done thee a considerable favour* for my Dear 'tis
impossible now thou should be imposed upon.


But how shall I get a Husband now! Oh that doubt distracts me: if I had but
been married, before you had done this, I had not so much cared.


I confess the dear pleasure had been so much the safer: but however you need
fear no danger, for a Maidenhead is of that obliging quality, that a dull
Husband can no more know when his Wife has lost it, by any experiment he can
make upon her, than a Gamester can be secure, the set Gold is his own whilst
the Dice are throwing: 'tis true, hope and a strong Conceit may do a great
deal.


Aye, but we have done more than by strong Conceit certainly.


We have done nothing but what we should; nay, than what there was absolute
necessity for: I could not live without possession of thee, nor could thou
love me, and not grant me life.


Aye, but the Rules of Virtue, think of that Sir.


How that quick breath, that tender sigh became thee; thy panting heart sent
out its Amorous Summons to bring Loves Champion once more to the Field.


Could we love on virtuously, were we married or so, it were another matter.


Aye, gad that would be a hopeful matter indeed;

Virtuously! why, thy Virtue is involved still in thy Love. Love, that like a
rich and potent Lord possesses, each close Apartment of this Charming Body,
retains thy Virtue for some fitter season, and therefore shuts it up in some
dark Closet, till the Riotous Soul has done its Revelling.


And when it has done, what then Sir?


Then? Why, then Virtue like some Grave Chaplain of a Family, stalks out and
Preaches Temperance to the Senses, until another Banquet be ordained;

And then Virtue, that would against Loves Heaven rebel,
Envies his Joy, and shrinks into his Cell.

But what if I should be sick, and consequently troubled with a scruple in
Conscience?


Why then your only way will be to call your Chaplain Virtue out of the Closet,
and ask him for a dram of the Bottle.


Oh fie, well indeed my Dear, you are a very lewd wicked person, sincerely.


Indeed, my Dear, I am a very mild, passionate, constant, modest Fool,
sincerely.


Nay, I must confess you would never talk more than you should do; ah! would
you had been as reserved in another point.


Rather wish me an Eunuch, faith; 'tis the more obliging Curse, and the only
one I would wish the man that is to be thy Husband.


My Husband! Alas, I shall never have one now.


Yes, a good one, before to morrow night, if thou wilt.


Shall I indeed; who prithee, yourself!


Me? No, I shall make a better Friend than a Husband a thousand times. I am
ready to saint at the name on it, as some are at the sight of a Breast of
Mutton. But what think you of Sir Paul Eitherside?


He's a Fool!


The fitter to be a Husband always: your men of Wit will discern your slips of
Youth, and are often cross, and ill natured.


To be my Lady Eitherside, a Coach and Six; my Valet, and two Footmen: Well, I
swear it may do.


Do? It must do: I know he loves thee to extremity; and let me alone to carry
on the Plot, only observe this, that when we are together, you always slight
me, and prefer him. 'Twill catch the Goose with less trouble.


I warrant ye, and now I love ye more dearly than ever, for this contrivance to
marry me.


And will you always be kind to me?


What! wrong my Husband?


Pish! Prithee no hard words, rather wrong any man than me. Can thou be so
cruel to let me lose thee, to lose the rapting Blessings that waited on the
Heaven of thy Love? No, either swear still to be true to thy Intrigue, or thou
shalt never marry I'm resolved on it. --


Well, you are the strangest man: What would you have me do? Marry me first,
and we I talk of these things afterward.


Promise the Earnest of your Love the Wedding-night; which I hope will be to
morrow -- or --


Pish -- well -- if I must promise --


You must -- come then -- Married thou shalt be, because I believe 'tis
convenient. But I would not lose thee for the world -- Hark, there's some body
coming -- Let's away --


I like the Tune extremely; Prithee sing it again.


Two bonny Lads were Sawney and Jockey,
Blithe Jockey was loved, but Sawney unlucky;
Yet Sawney was tall, well-favour'd and witty,
But Ise in my heart thought Jockey more pretty;
For when he viewed me, sued me, wooed me,
Never was Lad so like to undo me;
Fie, I cried, yet almost died,
Lest Jockey should gang, and come no more to me.
Jockey would Love, but he would not Marry,
And Ise had a dread lest I should miscarry;
For his cunning Tongue with Wit was so gilded,
Tnat I was afraid my heart would have yielded;
Daily he pressed me, blessed me, kissed me,
Lost was the hour methought when he missed me;
Crying, denying, and sighing, I'd woo him,
But ah! much ado had I to gang fro him.
But cruel Fate robbed me of this Jewel,
For Sawney would make him fight in a Duel,
And down in a Dale with Cypress surrounded
Ah! there to his death poor Jockey was wounded;
But when he thrilled him, felled him, killed him,
Who can express my grief that beheld him!
Raging, I tore my Hair to bind him,
And vowed, and swore, I'd ne'er stay behind him.


The Collonel's come, Madam.


Go, make haste and pick those Gilly-flowers, and see the Rosecakes do not
burn.


I was conceiting the narrow Wicket of your Garden-door to be the Gate of
Paradise; and that I was summoned hither by an Angel that loved me. I hope,
Madam, you will exalt the fancy, and not let it fall for want of encouragement.


That were a way to make you turn Reprobate, and Despair. No, Sir, you shall
have Angelical entertainment here: Fair looks, kind words, and a comfortable
exhortation.


So! 'Gad I never had any luck when I touched upon any thing of Scripture, it
always turns to my disadvantage. An Exhortation. I hope, Madam, you don't
intend to make a Saint of me, and treat me with Sacrifice and Prayer?


As I am an Angel I must be punctual in my office.


But thou art an Angel of mortal race, and therefore thy office is different.
--


And I warrant you'll say my influence is rather over bodies than souls; but
I'll not believe it: And since my Dignity is so Divine, 'tis fit I have decent
applause. Come first -- What have you to say to my face?


There's so much perfection in it, that 'tis as impossible for me to commend it
justly, as it would be for me to laugh in the midst of the possession of thy
love: Thy Beauty being as far beyond all applause, as the raptures of thy
enjoyment is beyond all mirth.


Your Servant, Sir. -- Well -- my Neck!


The Alabaster Column that supports Wit's Palace.


So -- my Breasts!


Two Milky Hills of Joy,

Where Cupids lye,
And Lovers dye,
Consumed in Ecstasy.

What, Rhyme too! that could never be extempore, that was stolen I am sure. --
But, come, proceed. My knee --


Your knee! what a Devil, we are not come to the end of the Chapter already,
sure? Nay, faith, Madam, I'll have no dodging; for as I have entered upon the
Text, I am resolved to go through with the Sermon: Therefore either give me
your Question, or y' Gad I'll proceed without my Cue. 'Sdeath this is just like
beginning the first line of a Prayer, and then crying, Amen.


Sir, from the Forehead to the Breast is known land, which you as well as
another may have liberty to treat of: But from the Breast to the Knee is Terra
La, and can be discovered by none but my self.


Yes, by me, Columbus the second, who knows the land of Canaan to a hair, and
affirm its situation to be sub Zona Temperata, the South-East part of the
Globe. And my best way to be sure, is to travel thither. But then, Madam, you
must be my Pilot in the Voyage.


My want of skill will throw you on some Rock or other.


I'll bring the Ship off again, I warrant ye. But, come, this all talking, and
no performing, is so like an old crazy couple --


What would you do? Sure you love me better than to think the open Garden a
fit place for any other business. --


As well as I love you, I find by these Delays you have none for me.


Be ungrateful and think so -- I know not how to help it.


Will you not revenge me upon your Husband? Did you not promise me?


I did, and will perform it, but cannot this way now; think on some other and
try.


A Pox of this place; No Alcove, no Cave, no Convenience; nor can I imagine any
other way.


Study, your Wit did not use to be Barren; Study some pleasant thing.


Well -- I have it: three things faithfully performed -- I will have patience
-- But if failed in -- without enjoyment 'tis impossible for me to think you
love me.


Come then, Fortune for me: What are they?


First, I will have thee pull out two of his soundest Teeth, and send 'em to me
in a piece of paper. Kneel down and Vow to do it.


I Vow.


Secondly, You must contrive some way or other that I may kiss and embrace you
before his face. Vow too, this shall be done.


This too shall be done.


So: Thirdly and lastly, that I may give him three fair fillups on the Nose;
and that he may know it, yet bear it patiently. Vow this too, and I am
satisfied.


I Vow.


Very well! these things carefully performed, I will believe you love me
perfectly; and will with patience wait your opportunity for the last dear and
only favour.


They are difficult; but since I have vowed, I'll do it, whatever happens.


Make haste away, Sir, if you love your liberty, for Captain Ionas, yonder, has
accused you to Sir Oliver for attempting to Fire the City, and the Officers are
now searching for you. Your young friend is apprehended for a Rape (Lord bless
us!) and is just carrying before Sir Paul Eitherside.


Ah, Damn the Treacherous Villain! The Rogue yesterday would have bribed me to
Murder him. And now, for fear I should accuse him, has forged this Fanatical
lye.


Come with me, and I'll secure you from the Officers, and find some way to get
off your friend. Be constant, Sir, and then you will be grateful; for though I
am fettered to this tainted Limb, this Canker of the festring Common-wealth,
yet I have Loyal blood within my veins.


Thou must, I know it. Thou soft lovely Creature. Those that have Wit like
thee, must needs be Loyal.


This Married Lump, this, Husband, is thy shame:
My shame indeed, and Husband but in Name.
And tho in Name I must his Wife appear.

And tho in Name thou must his Wife appear,
Thou art the Mistress of a Cavalier.

IT would be a great stain to my discretion, and I should very much unguild the
Jewel of my judgment, if I should not believe the Circumstances of this Rape.


A Rape! what Villains are these? Your Ear, Sir, by all that's good, 'tis
impossible for me to commit a Rape if I would.


Impossible! Ay, that's a fine Wheadle indeed: Impossible! no, Sir, we don't
doubt but you are Compose mentis for such a business, as well as a bigger man.


Accept of this, Sir --

And afford me but one half hour in private,
And you your self shall own 'tis very impossible.

Half an hour in private! 'Gad I believe this young Rogue has an evil design
upon me too: Else why in private with me? I don't like his Leer; He's an
Arch-Dog, I warrant him. Let's see what he has given me -- hum -- Five Guineys
-- no, it won't do, for Captain Ionas has just now given me Ten.


And, Sir, as I was going to ensnare him according to my promise about your
business: The complaint of this Rape was made me by this honest fellow, and the
Villain soon after was seized. The other that we found going to fire a house,
has made his escape. But I doubt we shall have him e're long.


A rare business, I faith -- What, Sir, will no less Crimes than Burning our
Houses, and Ravishing our Daughters serve your turn -- hah, a fine Boy, faith
-- The Rogue would make an excellent -- (what do ye call him!) What an Eye and
Nose is there? Gad 'tis a very fine Boy.


Call in your Evidence there: you are willing to swear all this, my friends.


Ay, ay, Sir, -- Ay.


We are willing to swear to it, and 't please you, if 'twere as much more.


Ah -- ignorant Dogs.


How, not so, friend, I hope. Give 'em their Oaths, Dash. Captain Ionas, you
will swear too about the other business?


Most zealously, Sir: And with as clear a Conscience, I thank Heaven, as ever
Martyr suffered for Religion --


I believe ye, faith -- And to say truth, these ten Guineys have strengthened
my belief exceedingly --


Ah, Cursed, Perjured Villains: I know 'em now, they were Sir Charles's
Tenants. Well, I see I must discover my self at last. There can be no other
way.


Stand forth, Sweet-heart, and by the Oath you have taken answer to what shall
be demanded.


Sweet-heart, Turn up your Hood.


In the first place, where was this Violence committed?


In the little Parlour, forsooth.


In the Parlour! Lord bless us, why, what a shift was there! Why this might
have been a Murder, as well as a Rape, all things considered.


I have no patience to hear this; Pray, Sir, let me speak.


Pray hear the Accuser, Sir Paul; I think 'tis not fit the Evidence be
brow-beaten or disturbed; for as you were saying, Sir -- This might have come
to have been a Murder.


Nay indeed, forsooth, I was terribly afraid he would have Murdered me; for he
pulled a Pistol out of his Pocket, which did so scare me --


A Pistol too -- why this is worse and worse: And Charged with White Powder, I
warrant, because it should make no noise.


Turn up your Hood, I say, woman, and turn your face to the Jury.


And then he swore bloodily. Phebe, why don't you tell Mr. Justice's Worship
what he swore, child?


First he swore Damn him and Confound him, he would have his Will, or --


Loard bless us!


And then he swore by G, O, D, forsooth; and another new Oath he had by the, by
the twelve Postles.


The Apostles -- Mercy on us, what an invention was there? O Tempora! O Mores!


I'll lay my life there's a Trick in this; and that cunning Villain, Ionas, has
taught this Wench her lesson.


There must be something in it by their so often whispering --


Come, come, let him speak: Let's hear what he can say for himself. What a
Ruby-lip the young Rogue has too?


I say that this is a Villainous Plot contrived against me, and there's not one
word true that these have sworn; but 'tis only done in design to invalidate my
Evidence against Captain Ionas there, who yesterday would have bribed the
Colonel to have Murdered ye.


Ha, ha, ha; Alas, weak malice: you'll do well to produce your witness, Sir,
and then let the Court judge.


Ah wicked wretch! you know you have disabled me of that; but I have yet one
way left to expose thee. Know then, Sir Oliver, that I am --


Hold your peace, Sir: I know what you are well enough: and how dare you, Sir,
defame the worthy Captain, hah -- he Murder me! He that from his Cradle has
held forth against the ungodly. -- He, a Villain! Sir, Sir -- I must tell you
plainly that you are. -- 'Dsbud, 'tis a fine youth -- a smooth-fac'd Rogue; he
makes me smile in the very midst of my indignation.


Besides, to make defence (against one that swears for the Protector) without
Witness, what a Novice art thou? not to know that 'tis not Truth and Justice
that carries a Cause, but substantial Evidence --


Sir, I think there remains no more, but that you commit him to safe custody,
in order to his Trial.


Let him not out, but upon good Bail, Sir Paul; I would have him secured, that
I might know where to find the young Dog.

Captain, a word with you.


I'll follow you, Sir, -- Bravely done, friends, of all hands, and your reward
shall be accordingly. But now begone -- I'll meet you half an hour hence! Away.


Yes, Sir.


Come, come, let's begone; I long to be fing'ring the Money.


Now* Cousin, is your time: you, I am sure, have an interest with him; for 'tis
certain the young Gentleman is wronged.


What shall I do! I dare not discover my self, lest the Colonel should come to
know it: But then to be Imprisoned, is a hated Penance too.


Well, Sir, do ye consider on your condition? have you ten thousand pound Bail?


Not I, Heaven knows!


Sir Paul, -- If I have the Interest in you, that you have often affirmed I
have, you cannot declare it better than in taking my word for his appearance.


Ah, sweet Madam, sooner than any Alderman's in London: Ay, or than my Lord
Mayor's himself, upon my Integrity. Mr. Constable, give him his liberty, and go
about your business.


Sir, he has committed a Rape.


Ye saucy Rascal, let him go, I say.


Madam, though this favour be extraordinary, that 'tis impossible I should be
grateful, yet my Innocence shall soon inform you, it is not altogether
ill-bestow'd.


More of that another time, Sir. Sir Paul, this civility has obliged me at all
times to avow my self your unfeigned, humble Servant sincerely.


Dear Madam, your words have so pow'rfull an influence upon me, that I fear my
breast wants room for the excessive joy; is stuck round with the darts of your
Beauty, like an Orange that is stuck with Cloves.


Sir Paul, Mr. Alderman Thrum is below, and desires your advice in a Law
business; and, Madam, Mr. Heartall privately waits for you in the Drawing-room.


Hush, softly, Fool.


A pox of his business, and Mr. Alderman too, it could not come in a worse
time. Well, dear Saint, I'll but just speak to him, and be with you again in a
moment. 'Gad my Intrigue, I see, goes on rarely -- for she's a swinging
Fortune, and I believe begins to be desperately in Love with me.


Now to my first Love Heartall. What e're becomes of thee, I find I must keep
touch with him.


Go Crape, and convey this young Gentleman privately to Sir Charles: They must
even lye together to night, for we can have no convenience for getting 'em away
till to morrow. Make haste, and see the Servants be all ready for my design.
Away -- I think I hear Sir Oliver coming --

And now to my three Injunctions. If I should fail after having so faithfully
promised, he might have reason to doubt my Wit, as well as my Love. Let me see:
First to pull two of his soundest Teeth out: To be kissed and embraced before
his face: And to contrive him a beating, yet keep him patient. -- Three fine
frolics indeed to do to a Husband, for the sake of a Lover. But hanged, he
deserves it, and I am resolved to try; I used to be lucky at mischief.


O Soul! I have had such sport yonder with the old Alderman -- I have so firk't
him with Wit; so flaug'd him with stinging Jokes, thou would admire, had
thou heard it. 'Gad I never talked better since I was a man. My mouth was as
full of Wit, as the Sea of Water: And I never spent, but out came a Jest, that
put the Table in a greater Roar than there is at Guild-Hall, when one of us is
chosen Sheriff.


Yet had less Wit in it than a Speech made to my Lord Mayor, Penned by the City
Poet, and spoke upon a Pageant.


A Speech made to my Lord Mayor! 'Gad some of those are notable things, I can
tell you that: But as I was saying, we had such laughing: but at what think
thou?


At you.


Me! why how now, you crooked Rib? laugh at me? what at Mr. Chairman? 'Gad I'd
have had a Sergeant at Arms at his back, if I had found that. No, Soul, y' are
mistaken; you are out, I faith: The main Jest was about my laced Cloak.


About your laced Cloak!


Ay, and about his saying that Sir Peter Codshead looked more like a Gentleman
than I; though I proved my Cloak better Laced; my Coat better Velvet; my Body
better Shaped, and my Legs fuller in the Calf.


Thrum, and all you mean, Sir.


Thrum and all: What, do ye grow pert, you little Buttock! hah! am I the subject
of your Jokes? Come, come hither and kiss me for that, and beg my pardon: Come,
Rogue, come, and smite me over the Lips: Look, I ll stand fair.


Kiss you! not for a Million.


How! not kiss nown dear Husband for a Million: That's fine, I faith -- I'll
try that.


If you expect I should live an hour after, forbear, Sir.


Hey day! what's the Devil in thee? why dost thou turn away thy head so? I am
not infectious, am I?


I know not that, Sir: but you are strangely altered of late.


Altered! 'Tis unknown to me if I am: But how, prithee?


Now's your time! Carry it cunningly, and my Lady has promised to reward you
bountifully.


I warrant you; let her not fear me.


Nor me!


But, Soul! prithee how am I altered? in what nature? hah! I long to know what
the Devil ails me?


Sir, so please you, here is a Letter from Sir Ioseph. Oh --


What, has he got a wry Neck too? Come hither, Sir.

From whom do ye say -- he's gone -- what can be the meaning of this? Come you
hither, Sirrah.

Hark in your Ear! take this Note and go to my Scrivners, and tell him --

How now, Sirrah; what are you looking on?

Turn your head this way, Sirrah.


O Lord -- I can't! I can't! Ugh, ugh.


They are bewitched sure. Oh, Doll! prithee, dear Doll, run after that
Bufflehead, and pull him back again by the Ears.


Oh, fough: This is past all enduring.


What the Devil ails 'em all? They shun me as a Town-Rook does a Sergeant in
Term-time. Soul, -- prithee unriddle this Mystery: Are they all mad, or am I?
Udsooks, I'm sure I ail nothing.


Ah, you perceive it not, Sir; and indeed I was loath to tell you, for fear of
making you angry. But since it must out, and that like a good Wife, I am
obliged in Conscience to discover and help your Imperfections. Know, Sir, that
you are extremely troubled with a most insufferable, nauseous, abominable,
stinking Breath.


A stinking Breath!


Most Pestilential Sir! enough to breed distempers in a family. It must of
necessity be occasioned by some ill Teeth. Pray open your mouth, Sir -- Ay,
'tis so -- I see 'em now. -- Look, Crape -- Oh monstrous: they are as black as
Ink.


Ay, or Charcoal, upon my honesty, Sir: Get 'em pulled out quickly, or you are
undone.


Let it be done immediately. Delay not a minute longer. Why, it is enough, Sir,
to poison all your Wit, and utterly ruin all your excellent Discourse of
State-policy.


How! poison my Wit: Run Crape! run and call a Surgeon instantly: 'Gad I'll not
leave a Tooth in my head, rather than the least grain of my Wit should be
damnify'd: Run, run Crape; Ugh, ugh -- I think I begin to find it my self now.


Bid the Surgeon pull out two of the soundest, and be sure to bring two hollow
Teeth with him, to have ready, if he should ask to see 'em.


I have observed that this imperfection is very natural to a Statesman. An
Orator sooner gets it than any other man; for I remember, I my self have often
turned my Ear to hear a famous Politician of this Age speak, when it was
impossible for me to turn my face to him. -- Oh, are you come, Sir; that's
well.

Why! here it seems I am like to be poisoned by a damned confounded couple of
Teeth. Pray look, do ye see 'em?


See 'em! Ay, Sir* too plain: Stop, stop your breath, I beseech you, Sir, --
Ods so -- 'tis well you sent for me in time: Pray, Sir, stop your breath.


Stop my breath -- What a pox, would the fellow have me choke my self? Are they
then so dangerous, do you say?


Dangerous, Sir! I assure you, if the Acrimonious quality of this Aqueous
malignity had dilated it self through the nervous parts belonging to the Dentes
or Teeth, upon the Thorax or Jugular Vein, the Virulity or sharpness of it had
doubtless infected, or, as a man may say, penetrated --


Or as a man may do as well as say. A pox, Sir, I am not at leisure to hear
out your Dispensatory at this time; prithee let thy Tongue wag no more till my
Teeth are out, and then --


Well, Sir, well, I stand corrected -- Sit still, I beseech you, and open your
mouth.


Be sure you take care of my Tongue; I would not have that pinched for a 1000
l.


Good Sir, be patient, I warrant you.


Oh, the Devil go with it; is it gone?


Gone -- Ay, you need not fear, Sir, -- I am Master of my faculty -- Do ye see,
Sir? was this fit to stick in the Jaws of a Politician?


Ods-heart -- it looks like the Tooth of a Camel, rather than a Politician --
Come, come, out with the other -- quickly -- I am impatient; 'Tis, 'tis gone:
'Gad if all the Committee had such Grinders, we should have a great many very
unsavoury Votes amongst us -- Come, come -- awe --


Shut your Eyes, Sir, and turn your Fauces or Jaw-bone towards the North-East.
--


The North-East! Prithee which is the North-East? 'Sbud how dost thou think
'tis possible a man should know the points of the Compass that has such Teeth
in's head.


There, there, Sir, to that Corner: Wink, Sir, pray wink.


Prithee make haste, and out with it.

I am to meet the Cabal to night at the Coffee-house about earnest business. --
Oh, oh my Jaws are torn in pieces.


Pshaw, pshaw, you must have patience, Sir, 'tis not yet out.


It only hangs by a piece of skin, I can pull't out now my self -- Hah --
what's here? Ods-heart, the soundest Tooth in my head -- Oh, Dog, Villain, Son
of a Whore -- I am ruined, spoiled, undone, doomed never to bite any thing
harder than a Custard henceforward: Stand, stand out of my way -- I'll Murder
him.


Bid the fellow begone, Crape.

How, my Dear, has the Rascal mistaken and drawn a sound Tooth? -- Prithee --
let's see it. --


How, a sound Tooth! now out upon him for a blind Villain.


Stand away, I say, and let me come to him; I'll not leave a bone of him
unbroken as big as a Capon's leg -- Oh damned Son of a Whore -- a sound Tooth
--


Ha, ha, ha; this was rarely performed, and one of my great injunctions is
prosperously concluded. But now if the Surgeon should play false, through fear,
and discover the trick; to prevent that, run Crape, and give him his reward --
for money is as great an encouragement to a mercenary fool, as a beautiful
Mistress is to a man of Wit. There's no danger to be feared, where there's such
recompense. Away, there's some body coming.


Was he so very fond, say thou, my Dear?


Oh, to admiration; took my Bail for the Gentleman's appearance at first word;
and was so careful to be Rhetorical and Florid, as if his life lay upon it, or
his preferment sincerely.


Nay, the snare is so well laid, the Woodcock must of necessity be caught.


And can you say we do not live in a very wicked age, where it is counted so
insufferable a piece of folly to Marry.


No, faith, not when we are so lucky to have the good effects of Marriage
without it.


Fie, you should be more generous than to insult.


You, methinks, should be more kind than to call this a wicked age, only for
being passionate and obliging; nay, only for giving you a brisk taste of a
Vessel of excellent Wine, when otherwise you might be condemned to the
Droppings of the Matrimonial Tap, as palled and insipid as a Vintner's Tub full
of dead Wine and Flies.


And is not this a sort of vanity? Nay, now I see it is not in your power to
forbear insulting, for you Men always love the Triumph above the Conquest. Oh,
what a malicious pleasure you take to enjoy her for a Mistress, that you
another -- as a Virgin for a Bride.


Ha, ha, ha: Why, faith, I confess there is a kind of a Tickling in it.


And then to boast of it at the Tavern to one of your friends -- as thus -- Ah,
Jack -- I have the pretty'st Rogue to my Mistress, so soft -- so kind, and not
above 18 at furthest: I lay with her all last night, you Dog -- (A pox, some
damned bulking Whore or other, says he.) A Whore cry you again, Damme, a Person
of Quality's daughter -- I have been intimate with her these two years, and
design now to Marry her off to one of my friends -- because I fear the poor
Rogue is breeding.


Ha, ha, ha; Faith I'll kiss thee for this, and will own some such foolish
vanity we men have; but 'tis with security, for we always take care of Names
and Places. But hark -- I think I hear Sir Paul coming: now to our set
Carriage: I with my Hat off, thus cringing; and as sneaking and demure as the
picture of a Whining Lover before a Novel.


And I as full of ridiculous scorn, as a Court-Lady that mistakes pride and
ill-breeding for becoming state and grandeur, that has the ambition to be
admired by every one, yet by her ill carriage gives every one occasion to hate
her.


Hist! he comes --

This is a cruelty, Madam, I little expected from you --


Sirrah, tell their Worships I*ll meet 'em at the Coffee-house presently.


I think I gave you little encouragement: Pray forbear this discourse, Sir;
indeed you are strangely troublesome --


I love you faithfully.


Y' are the more unlucky, in my opinion: Dear, Sir Paul, your entire Servant.
Lord, I have been so plagued with Impertinencies since you went.


Say you so, Madam: What had I best do now? -- Draw, Sir* Methinks every
Gentleman should have Wit enough to know when his discourse to a Lady is
grateful. Lord! how the poor fellow looks?


Yes, Sir -- I shall know when to speak: and to you, Sir, for whose sake I
perceive I am thus slighted.


Come, Sir Paul, I have some rarities in my Closet; Pray lend me your hand a
little.


Well -- I shall find an hour.


Find an hour, Sir!


Nay, prithee, Dear, Sir Paul, don't mind him, I warrant he mistakes me for his
Landladies Maid or his Sempstress.


'Gad if he threatens me again, I'll take the Law of him; I know how to deal
with such Tories as himself; I'll hoist him into Westminster-Hall with a wet
finger, and so drill him from Court to Court, till he's as poor as a
Church-Mouse, or an honest Attorney.


Ha, ha, ha -- give you, Sir, -- give you joy. Well, I think I have by this
business a little exposed the humour of the times, and shown what uncertain
Merchandise a Woman is, and what luck all young Traders in Love are liable to
-- But by the way of instruction to my Brethren; were I to begin the World again
-- I should sooner suspect an affected coyness, than a careless gaiety; for a
Cracked Virgin is as certainly known by her scornful look, and over-acted
modesty as a private Bawd is by her Lozenges and Practice of Piety. Well -- if
things hit luckily, I shall meet her to morrow night, till when I leave her to
her Coxcomb, -- How now, what's the matter?


Oh, I am undone! lost! ruined! whither shall I fly?


Nay, I am resolved to know who thou art, though I follow thee to Sir Oliver's
bed-side -- Hah -- who's this? what, Ned?


Sir Charles, is't possible? Sure this house is Faiery-land. Why how in the
Name of Wonder came you hither? and what Nun is that you have made do such
Penance?


When I've overtaken her, thou shalt know more; till when, farewell --


What c^n this mean? and how does he dare to venture thus into the house of his
enemy? nay, and like an eager Falcon, Chase his Quarry, even into the very
snare of the Fowler. 'Tis very strange; and if my Mistress were not secure with
her Fool in the Closet, I should be damnably suspicious of a Counter-Intrigue:
but since that's impossible, I am the less disquieted. Oh -- here they come
again.


This is the oddest adventure, Ned, I ever met with -- my little friend here;
my Companion, Phillip, by being this night my Bed-fellow, I have found to be a
Woman.


A Woman!


A Woman by this light, or else I have lost one of my senses.


Ha, ha, ha; this is the strangest chance: but, prithee, how came the
discovery?


Why, Sir, by the help of an especial friend we were secured here to night from
the Officers and Sir Oliver; and being forced to make shift with one bed, we
lay together, when a little while since my Bedfellow being fast asleep. I had
the good fortune to know my mistake, and found in my arms a young Beautiful
Woman, with little round swelling Breasts, white and fragrant Bosom; and, in
fine, all things thereunto belonging and appertaining.


Faith, y' are a very lucky man, Sir; for my part, I could never meet with
these surprising blessings.


Sir, if ever you would oblige a poor unhappy creature, that never meant you
any wrong. I beg you to let me go without making any further discovery.


Oh, to do that, is impossible for me.


When you know me, I fear you'll hate me, and discard me your presence for
ever; which (if you do) I am sure will break my heart.


Thou can not think me sure so barb'rous: What* my dear friend, the faithful
Partner of all my troubles, that in my greatest necessity supplied my wants --
no -- I shall love thee better now than ever.


Oh, if I were but sure of this!


Thou art; let this confirm it. Come, speak boldly.


Since then it must be known, my Name, Sir, is Phillipa --


Ha.


D' ye start -- Nay, then my fears increase, and I am again undone.


Phillipa, what that beauteous Virgin that so much did love me; who, though an
Heiress, left a mighty Fortune to spend her days in discontented Travel.


The very same, Sir.


Phillipa, that disguised at Worcester Fight, so nearly lost her life for me,
that since in all my miseries kept by me, she that I slighted for her Father's
sake; and because he was a Rebel, scorned and laughed at.


She, Sir, the poor unhappy she.


I think I have some Loyalty; yet I should no more have lost the possession of
such a beauty, because her Father was a Rebel; than I should desert the
Mansion-house of my family, because my Father died there.


I conjure you, Sir, by your Loyalty, and that I know is sacred; be not angry
with me; let me not lose you quite, though you cannot love me; all my Estate is
yours; I freely give it: so is my heart the dearest faithful Closet of your
Merit. Look not then on me as my Father's daughter, but a poor Maid that loved,
and was unhappy.


Let my arms seize my heart's divinest Joy, or it will break its Breast to meet
the blessing. But think not, dearest, of my life, thy wealth could charge me
thus? No, that is far below me; and thou art moulded with so many Virtues; so
many splendid Graces shine about thee, that to desert thee, were the worst of
follies: besides, whatever thy Father was, thou art for the King, I am sure:
Hah, art thou not?


Yes from my Soul.


Then thou art mine for ever.

The rest of thy story -- I'll hear within, when thou art warmer clothed.
Come, Ned, thou shalt go with us -- for I believe there's no getting out for
thee to night.


With all my heart, Sir: by this means I shall see my Mistress the sooner.


I hope they are all asleep, and have not heard us -- Come my be^t life.


This was beyond my hopes. --


I have often wondered how a great many of these Sparks of the Town lived so
high, and went so fine: but I find now it may be done without a miracle; for if
they are owners of a good, tough, durable Conscience, and can but be ingenious,
'tis evident there are such fine toys to be had, as fine Clothes and Money.


Ay, there are such Toys as Halters to be had too; I wish we are not forced to
play with them at last.


Halters! ay, prithee keep them to thy self like a shallow brained fool as thou
art; the word is much too low for my imagination; for I intend to swear on till
I am a Person of Quality, and then I know my fate will be different.


Nay, we are pretty well dip't now; we are over boots, thanks to our Stars, and
may as well go forward now as be trapt, and so forced to swear back again. But
prithee what were those two that we saw hooted through the streets just now?
Romans do they call 'em?


Romans! no, nor Apostles neither, Fool: Why, what an Ignoramus is this! he has
no more wit now in his new Clothes, than he had in his old Gray Jacket that he
follow'd the Plough with: They were two men suspected to be Priests, fool; and,
faith, deserved the disgrace for ordering their business no better; had I been
in their cases, I would have got preferment instead of a punishment; I would in
a short time have risen to have been a Holy Fryer after the Order of St.
Dominick.


And so be Hanged, Drawn and Quartered after the Order of the House of Commons.


Not a word more of Hanging, lest I prophecy on thy Fate. -- See, yonders the
Captain and the Cabal; let's go and sit down.


Coffee or Tea. Gentlemen, do ye want any Coffee?


This Coffee house is the Epitome of Hell, where all sorts of male-contented
Fiends are in office. Dost thou see that fellow, Ned, there in the
Plush-Jacket?


That shakes his Noddle so?


The same; that Rogue was one of the Committee of Abjuration, and without doubt
is now speaking Treason to the Rascal that sits over against him.


For heavens sake what's he with the Spectacles?


Why, faith, I think, if it be possible, a worse Villain than the other. One Sir
Timothy Tiburn, that had an Estate given him by the last King of sacred Memory,
sold it lately to raise Forces to fight against this. Prithee look on 'em;
Did thou ever see such a stigmatised Crew?


'Tis ever so, your Coffee-house, I have observed the Mart of the Mobile, and
thronged by people of all sorts and qualities, where your Mechanic may vent
Sedition at an easy rate, and look as big as your Alderman or Grandee.


Let's sit down and observe.


Hum; what's here? Ordered that a Bill be brought in for Naturalising, and this
Question be debated, Whether a Presbyterian Dog's Son may not Marry an
Independent Bitches Daughter, they being Brother and Sisters Children. Why,
what a mad Quaere is this -- Ha -- and here again. Resolved by the Reverend the
Judges of the Law, that it shall be present Death for any Phanatick to hang
himself. -- Tear it, tear it -- don't let it be seen. -- Tear it, I say.


How, Sir! Five hundred Jesuits do you say?


More, Sir; near Six hundred, with Monks, Secular Priests and others.


And found in a Cave in a Garden at Lambeth?


So the Intelligence says, Sir; and you know that can't lye: Besides, upon
occasion I can bring those will swear it.


If he should bring us in again now for this, 'twere fine.


Peace, Fool: why if he should, we must do it.


Pray, Sir, what is supposed to be their design?


Why, Sir, as I am credibly informed, their design was to dig a way under the
Thames to White-Hall.


Under the Thames, Sir!


Ownds, Treason -- I smell Powder -- A second Powder-Plot -- The whole State's
in danger. Under the Thames! why who the Devil would have thought it had bin
possible?


This Plot was hatched in Rome, I warrant you.


These are rare Rogues now.


This lye well spread, is enough to raise a Rebellion.


And you say, Sir, there are several will affirm this to be true.


A great many, Sir; go but to Toby Papscull, at the Sign of the Rams-horn, over
against the Pillory in Cornhill, and you have it printed under their hands.
Hold, I think I have a List of their Names in my Pocket. Oh here 'tis.


Hah, and I profess all worthy Persons -- I know 'em intimately. Let me see --
here's Ieremy Rakehell, Sir Iohn Bullyrock, Iohn Greasy and Sawny Scrubham; all
good men and true.


Who is that* Rakehell, pray Sir?


Ieremy Rakehell -- why, Sir, -- he's a Counsellor at Law.


So.


A very ingenious fellow; I faith, and has the best way of forging deeds, and
picking up Evidence of any in the Inns of Courts* -- Oh, the Rakehells were all
great Lawyers, and ever strong supporters of our Cause.


I believe no less, Sir. But, Sir Iohn Bullyrock, what's he?


He; why he's a pushing Captain, that will fight any thing under the Sun upon
any Cause, without fear, wit, conscience or honesty. Oliver Knighted him for
breaking his head at a Match at Foot-ball.


The Bullyrocks were ever brave fellows: the Protector himself was a Bullyrock
by the Mothers side.


Ay, and a Villain by the Fathers. -- Well, Sir, the next. -- What's that Iohn
Greasy?


Iohn Greasy; why, faith, a notable fellow too. A Tallow-Chandler, that
formerly kept a Melting-house, next door to Doctor Cluttergoods, the great
Orthodox Minister, and politically placed there by our party with design to
stink the Doctor out of the Parish.


A very excellent design, I faith, Sir.


Yes, and deserves only hanging: But who's this last, Sawny Scrubham? that's a
name I never yet heard of.


Why, Sir, he's a red-hair'd Scotchman, that will engage upon his honour to
give the Itch to a whole Army; and to that degree, that in a short time they
shall scratch themselves to Death: A very necessary fellow, faith, and will be
employed suddenly upon a great design.


He will so.


Ha, ha, ha; the Rascals make me laugh at what I hate.


Sir, you are an impertinent fellow to pretend to talk about State-affairs.


Come, come, Sir, I know what I say, and will maintain it.


You pretend to talk of Chronology, and of Genealogy, of the policies of
Princes, and of the King of France. Come, what is the King of France? whose Son
was he?


The Son of his Father, Sir, otherwise called Lewis the 13th, and Grandchild of
Henry Burbon, surnamed the Great: He's one that keeps a standing Army of a
100000 Men; and I suppose will firk us, if we have not more care.


He firk us, 'Gad we have 400 Men in little England, that will snap him up as a
Crow does an Oyster.


They must open their Purses a little more then.


Sir, the Land is rich, and flourishes in security, and that 'tis good policy
to keep a standing Army -- I say 'tis nonsense.


Ask the Protector that, and hear what he says: Ah, would I might advise.


You advise! why, what are you, Sir, if you go to that, that you would advise?


Sir, I am a Man as well as you, though my Profession be but mean.


Why, what's your Profession, Sir?


What I am not ashamed of Sir: I am a Woman's Tailor, Sir.


A Tailor, Sir, and talk of Politics! 'Gad thou deserve to be run through
the Guts with thy own Bodkin. A Tailor! Sirrah, mind your business, and Pad my
crooked Ladies Gown on the right side, that her Bunch may not be seen -- But
never exercise your Needle in stiching the Commonwealth, you Rascal.


Sir, this place is free for any one, and I'll have my pennyworth of Politics
as well as the best of you. I know no reason why a Tailor should not have the
privilege to talk Treason as well as a Knight.


Sirrah, I am a Justice of Peace, and a Counsellor at Law; and you are an
Impudent fellow to contend with a man of my Honour and Authority.


Sir, I have bin Scavenger, and am now a Constable, and care not this for your
Honour and Authority.


Sirrah, I will chastise thee with this Mug.


If you do, I shall show* you Moorfields play.


How, Sirrah; I'll try that.


Hold, Valiant Knight and Tailor, cool your Choler: No bloodshed, I beseech
you; I'm come to qualify the business and divert you: I'll show you a new
Satyr.


A Lowzy shred, an empty Pin-cushion and affront me: 'Gad I'd have eaten the
Rogue up, but that I was afraid his Thimble and Sheers would stick in's Throat.


No more, Sir, I beseech you; he's penitent; and pray have patience and hear
this* 'tis a new Song, was given me this morning -- I'll Sing it you --


Well, come, prithee let's hear it. --


NOw, now the Tories all must droop,
Religion and the Laws,
And Whiggs of Commonwealth get up
To Tap the Good Old Cause:
Tantivy-Boys must all go down,
And haughty Monarchy;
The Leather Cap must brave the Crown,
And Hey then up go We.
The Name of Lord shall be Abhorred,
For every Man's a Brother;
What Reason then in Church or State
One Man should Rule another?
When we have Pill'd and Plundered all,
And Levelled each Degree,
We'll make their plump young Daughters fall,
And Hey then up go We.
We'll down with all the Versities,
Where Learning is professed,
Because they Practise and Maintain
The Language of the Beast:
We'll Exercise within the Groves,
And Teach beneath a Tree;
We'll make a Pulpit of a Cask,
And Hey then up go We.
What tho the King and Parliament
Do not accord together,
We have most cause to be content;
This is our Sun-shine weather:
For if good Reason should take place,
And they should once agree,
'Dzowns who'd be in a Round-head's Case,
For Hey then up go We.
We'll break the Windows which the Where
Of Babylon has Painted;
And when the Bishops are run down,
Our Deacons shall be Sainted.
Thus having quite Enslaved the Town,
Pretending 'tis too free;
At last the Gallows claims her own,
And Hey then up go We.


Ha, what think you?


That you shall be beaten abundantly: Down with him, friends.


There goes more to the beating a Soldier than you imagine -- Have at you.


NOw all my Joys are Crowned, and nothing but the Bond, the sacred Bond of
Marriage can have power to make addition to my Blessings; which shall be done,
and suddenly.


When you please, Sir.


Three days shall be the utmost time; till when, Madam, let me desire you to
keep this garb, and not discover your self to any one, till what I have
designed comes to perfection. -- I have had secret Intelligence of this
perjured Rascal, this Villain that swore the Rape against thee, and intend now
to expose him.


That was a precious Rogue.


I have bin with Council about it, and will by Proxy get him apprehended; till
when, my dear, let no one know your sex or quality, lest it should prevent
proceedings.


I am forewarned, Sir, and will in every thing obey you.


Thou kindest, dearest of thy sex -- how am I bound to thee! thou, that like
the Darling Genius of the Heavens, consigned by Divine Power to reward Virtue
too generously, hast repaid Ingratitude with heaps of dazzling Gold, and much
more dazzling Beauty.


Forty thousand pound and a pretty Lady: 'Gad 'twould make me distracted -- I
should do nothing all day long, but tell my money, and kiss my wife, and then
be most insufferable insolent: but what would make another man proud, I find
makes you ashamed; which, faith, I think is the meaner folly of the two, though
it be more grateful.


However, of the two evils, I'm sure 'tis the best, though, I confess, Ned,
very unfit for thy constitution; for thou, like a factious Statesman, would
be no more contented with a mean folly, than with a mean estate; so that the
consequence might be dangerous, therefore 'tis high time for thee to grow wise.
But who comes here?

What, my man of mickle might! 'Tis Spring always when Nightingales appear. How
dost* thou, Lieutenant?


Noble Colonel, much the better to see you well; why, faith, I have bin
scouring your Coffee* house yonder; I have chastised some of the factious
Rogues for you --


Ha, ha, ha.


And prithee in what old stump or hollow Tree? hast thou lived like a Cuckoo
since we parted -- hah.


What news from our great Master and the Royal Party?


The good news I hear is, that the Protector lies a dying.


'Twould be better news if he were hanged.


And we are all in hopes to see good days again; my ill news is, that the King
wanting a Hundred thousand pounds, can by his Loyal Party be supplied but with
Fourscore; so that he is in extreme distress for the other Twenty to dispatch
an extraordinary affair. Ah; Colonel, did you flourish as formerly? I know you
would be the first to offer this.


So will I now the first. And thus low bend my knee -- with thanks to the
Divine Powers for giving me ability. Now my best Love, show thy self all
Divine; show the sordid World how thy Celestial soul surmounts 'em in an
unequalled Generosity; thou freely gav'st me Wealth, give me then leave as
freely to dispose it to this great advantage, and lay it at my gracious
Monarch's feet. -- Do this, and with a noble freedom do it; and all the
dearest motions of my soul are thine eternally, as firm and constant as the
Centre is to the Earth, or the Sun to Heaven.


Sir, I have done it already; and now I hope you'll think me a Royalist.


Hast thou? that was an Angel's voice, and Millions of Blessings Crown thee for
the Deed. Oh my best Love, how can I e're requite thee?


I heard the news yesterday, and did it with the greatest haste and secrecy
imaginable.


A thousand thanks to the most generous of her sex: And once more humbly thus I
thank the Heavens for giving me this means to serve my Prince. Oh, did he want
as many drops of blood from the dear Centre of my life, my heart, as he does
pounds from my now happy store, should it not freely bleed? Strong in my zeal
beyond Mortality, with my own hands I'd crush the trembling Lump, until the
Noble Loyal Debt was paid.


But hark you, friend, laying these whimsical Transports aside; Are you mad?
what security do you expect for this money?


None, Sir, nor desire it: The Honour I shall gain outweighs all Interest. --


Ay, and yet this is so damned an Age, that there's very few are ambitious of
that honour.


Security: Were it thou not a Fool, whom I sometimes call my Friend -- I would
quarrel with thee for that question* Why thou moderate Coxcomb, thou
Time-server, would thou have me deal with my King as with a Scrivener, or
change the Royal favour of his Countenance for a bargain and sale like a
Plebeian? No, 'tis my glory; I am a friend to the Nation, in being so to him;
Who loves the King, must love his Honour, Grandeur and Prerogative* His Regal
State, which Money must support. -- 'Tis the Nation's Honour and Magnificence,
a noble and becoming Royalty: And he that dares be so, abhorred a thing so
wretched, lost in all discerning eyes to see his Monarch want in such a
juncture, such a time as this; yet be so basely poor, to hoard up Wealth: His
very Soul is dirt, and should be swept hence with the Common Rubbish of the
World.


But 'tis fit the Subject be repaid* Colonel.


A Loyal Subject thinks himself repaid
By purchasing his Country Peace and Honour;
The only just return a King should make*
Who cannot pay each Subject as he would:
The zealous Ancients sacrificed to Heaven,
Raised Altars, built rich Temples to the Deity;
Yet who e're knew the Sacred Power return
One Penny back, but only in effects,
In show'ring grateful blessings for their Zeal;
And so the King does daily pay his People.

To you now this is plain; but there are a sort of men in this Age, that say
they can see better.


They lye --
Your factious busy Coxcombs never see;
Their treacherous fear still makes the object double:
Double their meanings are; their Actions double;
And more than ten times double their false Hearts:
These are the Rogues that look on Government
With as false eyes as thoughts; and gape for Rebellion
As stranded Fishes the return of the Wave,
That wafts 'em back to their own Element.

This plain dealing will hardly get your estate again; Sir Charles; and for my
part, I should be very loath to see such honesty as yours ill rewarded.


Honesty; Ned, in this Age, is a very scarce commodity, because 'tis woven with
Loyalty* and true Loyalty* expects no reward; for that,

Like Charity to the Poor,
Is repaid from the Eternal Store.

I think so, for the Devil a penny it will have from Earthy Coffe^ as times go.


Yet that I have a little Honesty*
I know, because I ever hated Flattery;
I cannot bow the supple head and knee
To an unthinking heap of Wealth and Honour:
Nor tell the gaudy Rebel he does politically,
To side with the Factious City against the King.
I cannot Countenance a wrong Title to be preferred.
Nor shake my head, nor rail at the ill Times,
When I am Conscious, I am one that makes 'em so.
I cannot Lye for Honour, Pimp for Profit,
Plot for Salvation, nor Preath up Commonwealths;
And therefore in my Conscience I am honest.

Faith -- I believe it; and what e're I have said, was only to extract this
Quintessence; this brave opinion from you. And so dear Colonel, your humble
Servant; I have a little business, and must beg your pardon.


Your time's your own, Sir.


Now to Aurelia -- I hope by this she's married.


I am very glad he's gone, for he might else have hindered my assignation with
Camilla, who appointed me here in this Orchard to come and take my second
revenge upon her Husband, which is to kiss and embrace her before his face: The
Scene must needs be pleasant, and therefore I'll not miss it: I think 'tis now
the time; and see the punctual fair one comes just to my wish.


Well, Sir, I have bin plotting for you; and though 'tis a difficult business,
yet to me you shall find all things are easy.


If all things are so easy as you say, Madam, you may oblige me, and change
this for another favour that I shall name; Faith 'twill be all one now your
hand is in.


No, Sir, you are so dangerous in your proposals, that I'll stick to my first
Injunction: Therefore begone to your Post behind you bush -- lest he come and
surprise you.


If he does, he will only think I came to rob the Orchard. --


He will make a shift to guess another sort of Felony.


What's the Sign?


This.


And then invade the Province --


Dash, -- you are sure you have your lesson right?


As you could wish, I beseech you, doubt me not.


There's your reward* Be ready then I think I hear him coming --

Dash --


So please your Honour -- I attend.


Get up into this Tree, and fetch me some of those Pears.


Oh, Soul! here has bin plaguey news within; damnable stratagems since you left
us; my damned Captain Ionas has bin found by the Constable and Officers in bed
with a Whore; and what's more strange, is accused and apprehended for hiring a
fellow to murder me -- Bless us, who would have thought a fellow should smile
in one's face, yet have such a Villainous design -- 'Gad I always took him to
be as honest as the best of us --


And I too I assure you, Sir: But pray who has accused him?


Counsellor Quibble, I hear, and some others that have found out his haunts:
there's a whole Nest of 'em discovered, and they are now Examining before the
Committee.


Fie, fie, Madam, what, this Indecency in an open Orchard? Sir Oliver; Master --
Madam I say, for shame expose not your selves thus in open view; have but
patience till I can get down, and I'll retire and leave you alone.


Leave us alone! what a Devil does the fellow mean?


He's bewitched I believe.


What, not yet? why, Sir Oliver? Madam, the Servants will come and ketch you --
Fie, 'tis a shame such things as these should be done so publicly.


What things, Dunce! what things! the Devil's in the fellow, sure.


And his Dam too, I think.


No Shame, no Decorum, no Modesty -- Well, I am resolved I'll be no witness of
this Slander to the Brethren; I'll leave you to your selves, and then do what
you will -- Hah -- bless me, what's the matter?


What* art thou mad? what modesty? what Decorum should be used more than there
is? hah?


Or what have we done that is a Slander to the Brethren?


What delusions have infatuated me? I do profess, if they be true, and you have
continued in this posture: The Pear-tree is enchanted.


What, the Pear-tree enchanted?


I confess I have heard so, but never could give credit to it.


Whilst I remained above, it seemed to me that there was Carnal Copulation
acted; and that now, Sir Oliver; and then another shape embraced you by turns
in such immodest manner, as forced my Integrity to exclaim against*


This is strange; my Pear-tree enchanted, and I never heard of it before --
Come, get me a Ladder, I'll see what Demon of the Dark inhabits there. This
must be some Liquorish Devil that loves fruit; and I'll Conjure him I warrant
you. Come, bring the Ladder, I say, I'll try what Miracles are here.


Take away the Ladder now, Dash, whilst I give the sign --


Carnal Copulation* I'd fain see e're a Devil of 'em all pretend Copulation
with my Wife -- hah.

Now, who's that? 'dsheart the Colonel, and Kissing her, and she Clasping him
-- Why, Villain, Traitor, why Wife, Strumpet, you lewd Buttock, you. What, this
before my face?


Alas, Sir, you rail in vain; you know the Pear-tree is enchanted.


A pox upon you, what still clung? still locked together? why Colonel, Goat,
Stallion, how eagerly the strong-backt Dog gripes her? Why you Jade you; no
shame! no continency! Bring me the Ladder, Dash -- Pimp, Rogue, bring the
Ladder, I say -- How now, Sirrah; what, must you have a touch too? Here's rare
Rampant-doings; but I'll be with you presently.


This is such a Master-piece of Wit, that I shall for ever admire thee for.


Go -- go in now, and leave the rest to me; but be ready half an hour hence for
the third and last experiment.


I'll not lose the pleasure on it for a Million.


An to please your Honour, I was just bringing the Ladder.

I profess that was very unchristian-like done.


Where? where is this Monster? This Stallion, Kinglove; ha -- I'll firk him,
faith.


Kinglove, what do ye mean, Sir? are you mad?


No Strumpet, no Buttock, no.


I say you are, if you talk of Kinglove's being here, where no living creature
has bin but David there and I.


O Lord, O Lord; why wilt thou? can thou? dare thou affirm this to my face?
hah? Oh thou incomprehensible --


To your face* yes, and prove it too: Were you not told before, that the Devil
was in the Pear-tree? But I'll be slandered no more about it, for I'll have it
instantly felled, if I live.


No, Gentlewoman, the Devil was under the Pear-tree, not in it; what, shall I
not believe my eyes? was not Kinglove here? did not I see him?


How, dear Sir Oliver! what believe your eyes
Before the Wife that in your bosom lies?

On my Integrity here has bin no one but her Honour and my self.


Your integrity, Rogue! why Sirrah, did not you too come in for a snack? did
not I see you kiss and gripe her by the hand -- you lecherous Dog?


O Lord, Sir; Alas, Sir, -- I profess I have not touched any part of Woman's
flesh this seven years.


Why then the Devil is there indeed; and I was enchanted too; for I'll be
sworn, I think I saw all this; I'll vow, I think I saw kissing, and fumbling,
and towzing, and rowzing; but if I am mistaken, I beg your pardon: but the
Devil's in the Pear-tree; and as thou say, Soul, I'll have it felled
immediately.


But could you think I could be so wanton, and to Kinglove too above all men?


Ay, to him too, above all men. No, no, I see I must be mistaken.


He that you shall now know, I have most occasion to hate; for no longer than
this morning I received a Letter from him.


A Letter! rare stuff in it I warrant.


Oh, most delicious Lines; which I committed to the fire as soon as read. But
the insolent Contents were, He desired me in Recompense of the injuries you had
done him, to contrive, that by the way of frolic he might have three fillups
at your Nose.


An Impudent Dog, three fillups at my Nose!


Ay, and this I was to contrive by a Trick; but that you now may see the
unalter'd Candor of your Wife, and know the value of the Jewel you posses; take
but my counsel, and we'll turn this frolic of his a better way.


With all my heart, faith: A Son of a Whore, three fillups at my Nose! Come,
let's about it, I'll take thy counsel to a scruple: A Dog, three fillups at my
Nose!


I have long attended the zealous, but have grown poor upon it; but truly do now
intend, instead of Preaching, to follow Pimping. I plainly perceive it is the
more thriving profession.


Now dearest Madam, I may boldly call you mine, since Marriage hath confirmed
it: Oh that the night were come, that I might take possession.


Not to night, let me beg you, Sir: Come, you must deny me nothing, therefore
give my modesty this satisfaction: To morrow use your pleasure, because I would
not have my Uncle know of our Marriage yet -- Take this Key of my Chamber, and
be sure to come as private as you can: But not to night, Sir Paul, if you love
me.


Oh, Madam, I am impatient; I rage; I am as wild as an enclosed Stag in
rutting-time. But come, since you will have it so, I'll try what I can do, and
pass this night away with dreaming of to morrow.


Do, and I will of you too, and lie and hug my Pillow as if it were my Husband.


Poor heart! Well, till then farewell. To pass away the time, I'll go and see
that Rascal Ionas, who I hear is accused for Perjury.


So great a Villain could expect no less. Well, adieu.
Be you but kind, and I will still be true.

Ay, go, poor innocent Fool, and I'll be with thee by and by for all this; for
I can no more have patience to lye alone, and gnaw the sheets to night, than a
young Wife can the next Month after her lying in: This key she says opens her
Chamber. Silly Rogue, to design to lye alone, and yet give me the key to come
to her: But I know she only denied, because she was ashamed to consent so soon;
and now I have this key. -- I'll surprise her; steal into bed, and give
satisfaction to her modesty the right way. --


Make room: Keep off there: Clear the way.


Officer, look to your Prisoner; he's accused of several notorious Crimes,
therefore take care of him.


This is your way of thriving with a pox t'ye, is it? Ah, would my hands were
at liberty that I might batter thee a little.


Peace, incorrigible Ass, I have known others thrive by it, and so might I --
had I not coupled with such a Hound as thou: But the ill Weeds ever spoil the
good Corn; and when the Eagle condescends to mix with Crows and Daws, Ruin is
inevitable, and Desolation is near.


If you confess any thing, you are damned: Therefore take care, remember you
have taken an Oath.


A precious Rogue -- He little thinks I hear him now.


I care not; you made me take it against my Conscience, and therefore for my
part I'll confess all.


We are not the first that have broke an Oath upon a good account; therefore
hold your self contented.


Take away those Fellows, and that Woman, and let 'em be all Whipped soundly:
Away with 'em.


So, what think you of Swearing now, Rogue, hah?


Even as well as thou think of hanging; which I hope will befall thee e're
long for presuming to keep me company; for on my Conscience 'tis that
Villainous look of thine hath brought me to this: I am sure I was designed by
Nature for better Fortune.


Come, Captain, discharge your Conscience of this great weight. Confess.


Ay, Captain; Come, confess; are not you a Rascal as one may say?


Sir, no man can boast of good Principles; therefore every man's a Rascal, and
you consequently as well as my self.


But I am not such a Rascal to hire people to swear a Rape against a Gentleman,
that in my Conscience I knew to be innocent: I am not such a Rascal good Domine
Ionus.


But you are such a Rascal to take Bribes on both sides, and especially against
the Gentleman you knew to be so innocent: You are such a Rascal, good Justice
Eitherside.


A Damned cunning Dog this is: but hanged, nothing he says will be believed
now; therefore -- I am secure enough.


However, Captain, you cannot deny but you were found in bed with a Whore: you
know this is positively sworn against you.


Heaven forgive 'em for it; I wish my Innocence be no plague hereafter to their
Consciences: 'Tis true (Lodging in the house) I might give the young Woman an
Exhortation or so.


A pox of your Exhortations; they are very feeling ones to that sex.


Nor you never sought to corrupt Sir Charles when he was confined, nor these
two Fellows and the Girl, and afterwards hired 'em to swear notorious Crimes
against the other Witnesses to invalidate their Evidence against you: Nor you
never gave 'em the Sacrament in Lambs-Wool and Plumb-Cake to be secret, did
you?


Not I, Sir.


Make way there: Officer, take care of your Prisoner.


Well, I thank Heaven, I obey cheerfully; and will only speak one word before I
go, that I may be charitable: Therefore good people, what ever you think of me,
I believe you to be good people; very good people; as good Subjects; as true to
the King and Kingly Prerogative; as unwilling to Rebel and Mutiny; and as
heartily Conscientious in your dealings as my self. And so farewell t'ye.


I have gone through all the Rooms, and found not so much as a Cat-stirring; so
that I need not fear being discovered -- Ugh, ugh, she's gone to bed already I
see -- She was resolved to make a long lone night on it since 'twas to be her
last, for I think 'tis hardly Sun set. Come now, I'll softly pull off my
Clothes -- steal in to her, and get her fast in my arms before she wakes --
Let's see which side does she lye on.


Come, Sir, sit down here, and counterfeit your self asleep; and if he gives
you a slight blow or two, have patience, and bear it, that you may have some
time to hear his insolent talk.


Is the Rascal come then?


He's hid in the Alcove in the next room: Sit still, and I'll go fetch him; it
may be to humour the Jest, I may at first say as he does, and rail at you, but
have patience and wink till I give the sign, and then we'll hamper him.


A plaguey cunning Baggage this; I have suspected her ever since the business
of the Pear-tree; but now I'll watch her narrowly; I am resolved she shall put
no trick upon me now, though the Devil himself give her assistance. Here they
come.


This is a trial of thy Wit indeed, for I thought the business almost
impossible.


Oh, Sir, there's few of you Men know how far a Woman's Wit extends. See, yonder
he sits --


Ha, ha, ha, -- I shall never contain my self, I must laugh.


You may, and speak any thing. Come, let's go to him -- you shall hear me begin
-- who could endure, Sir, to lye by such a Lump as this? such a heavy, dull,
insipid Animal, one that's as old at Forty, as another man at Fourscore -- One
that has the unnatural Gout perpetually, and had a Breath would have bred the
Plague, had I not pulled out two of his Teeth the other day.


Ay, a pox take you for it, I say --


Ha, ha, ha, an over-worn decrepit Rascal, that I believe has not bin a man
this 20 years.


Heaven knows whether he has or no; I am sure he would never let me know it.


Very well, Buttock, very well.


But as a Revenge for some certain wrongs lately done me, take, Sir, this
swinging blow of the face --

And, Madam, to complete it, take you this Kiss: The truest Friend of Love.


So, so, so --


And not to be behind hand, Sir, take that from me.


From her too? Very good.


And that and that -- and that for a farewell, my good state Caterpillar -- Ha,
ha, ha. So now I think 'tis time to go, lest he grow out of patience and hinder
me.


He dares not look up till I give the sign; till then we are secure.


The Jade designs to get him away, I see by their standing so near the door, --
But I'll prevent it --


This dear embrace then, and so adieu.

For though thou hast performed thy difficult promise, and therein shown thy
true and passionate Love; yet such is my hard fortune, that being now obliged
by the rigorous Laws of gratitude and honour, I never must again perform this
kindness.


O yes, yes; many, many times embrace your fill: I think you are close enough
now.


Hah -- Hell and the Devil, what's this?


Hey, who's within there? Call all my Servants, my Coachman, Footman, and Groom
and my Gardiner, Cook, Postilion and Butler. Carry the news about the Town,
that I, Mr. Chairman, am a Cuckold; A Cuckold, a notorious Cuckold.


A Cuckold, a Cuckold; who dares talk of a Cuckold before my face, that am
Commander in chief? Witness my Standard here: I am the head of the horned
Flock, and bear the Bell before all the Cuckolds in the Town.


What, more Roguery still? How now, Sir Paul, what's the matter, Sir Paul? 'Tis
the very Eclipse of the Moon sure? And there's a General Cuckoldom in nature.


Why you must know, Sir, that being led by an oblique, or rather inevitable
destiny to perpetrate Acts of Ignominy to my self: I chanced to Correspond,
Convene or enter into a League of Conjugal Quality with your Niece Aurelia
there. But a pox on Tropes and Figures in such a Cause as this: In short, Sir,
I have this afternoon married her; am already abused, and a Cuckold in Folio.


Give me thy hand: not a word more on it: 'Tis the fashion I am a Cuckold too.


What I have done, Sir, the Law shall answer; I hope, Sir, you'll require no
other satisfaction.


No, Sir, no, I know you are for tilting; but I know a better way than so, I
thank you; I'll bring Cook and Littleton to Fence with you, Sir; I'll firk you
like a Tory as you are.


For my part I'll shut my self into my Closet, and never see the Face of man
again.


Ay, you may go, Madam: But as for your Money -- I'll take care of that: Sir
Oliver, I hope you'll see this 5000 l. paid.


Five thousand pound! for what, Boy?


For what? for your Neice's portion: Nay, 'Gad the Law shall firk you too, if
you grow refractory.


Sir, she is not worth five groats; I have kept her this seven year upon
Charity: And now I think on it, there's a hundred pound due to me for Diet and
Necessaries. This must be paid, Sir, or the Law shall firk you if you go to
that.


Well, I see 'tis in vain to resist ill luck: The Devil did owe me an ill turn,
and he has paid it me with a vengeance: Therefore honest Sir Paul, you must
have patience, and bear your afflictions like a man.


For you, Madam, you must even be sent packing after your Niece, and, Officers,
seize on that Ruffian there: I'll teach you, Sir, to make a Cuckold of a
Politician.


You cannot send me into worse company than your own, where ever it is.


Sir, your Malice to me is as ridiculous as your Jest: But for her sake I'll
give you the satisfaction, to tell you, that upon my Honour, and by all that's
Sacred, she's truly virtuous, though I would have revenged my self upon thee, I
must confess; for I did design to get a Royalist upon thy Wife, that should
have lived to pull thee by the Nose.


Very well, Tory, very well: Hold him fast, Officers.


Officers, I command you in the Protector's Name to discharge him. Sir Oliver,
you are hereby also Commanded to re-deliver to this Noble Gentleman all his
Sequestered Lands.

And further, Sir, the Protector bid me tell you he had heard so large a
Character of your Fidelity and Virtue, that he would at any rate buy your
Friendship.


Sir, for my Estate I thank him: but for my Service and Loyal Allegiance, they
are Sacred to my Prince, and shall continue so.


Bravely resolved, Sir, though I could wish you of our side.


Now I am resolved to hang my self; for I'd as leive lose my life as my estate:
A pox on Power, I say: A man can never thrive in an Age where there is another
Rogue that's of greater Quality than himself.


And now my fairest Love, we'll both be happy.


Do ye not forget me then?


Believe I never can: See, Gentlemen, another wonder here this supposed youth.
Companion of my Troubles, he that was charged by Villains for committing a
Rape, is a Woman.


'Tis wonderful!


And shall within these few hours be my Wife -- hah.

Lieutenant, thou art come happily to be a Guest too; hast thou heard the News?
My Estate is surrendered back, and all's as well as ever.


The Protector's very sick, and I suppose has done you this good office, only
as a greater help to his Salvation. Besides, there's a great Rumour that the
times will change.


Let 'em: They are not then like me.
That like a Rock have stood the Storms of State,
As well as Calms, and yet would never change.
My Actions still in this Plebeian Age,
Grounded on Justice, Honesty and Honour,
Shall teach the Erring Natives to be Loyal:
My Tongue ne'er rail at Governments or Laws,
Nor my Sword wound but in the Royal Cause.
To obey my Prince shall be my greatest Care,
Whom Heaven preserve secure as Angels are;
And to sum up all Blessings in a Prayer,
Good Heaven, that dost the Fate of Kings foresee,
Save and defend Great England's Monarchy.

WHat in my face could this strange Scribler see,
(Uds Heart) to make an Evidence of me?
That never could agree with Ignoramus,
But for a Tender Conscience have been famous.
For who are these among you here that have
Not in your Rambles heard of Tory Cave;
That rores in Coffee-house, and wastes his Wealth,
Topping the Gentleman in Scotland's Health.
This part should have been given some hardy Fool,
That had more sense for Interest than his Soul.
I never had the knack of Truth-denying,
Loving Sedition, Loyalty defying;
Nor could I take Ten Pound a week for Lying.
But since 'tis so, I must entreat the pity
Of you our (never-failing) Friends in the City.
For though I was not e're brought up to the Trade,
Like Setting-Dog I may with Art be made.
In time such wholesome Documents receive:
Uds Zooks, who knows but I may stand for Shrive?
And faith, that thought hath roused up my ambition:
Well, Sirs, give me but House-room, and Provision;
Cry up the Play, and always let me find
My Benefactors Bountiful and Kind;
Then, if you want a Swinger at a word,
'Zounds I'll swear for you through a two-inch-Board.

