FOols are the Chief Support of Stage Affairs;
Were there no Fools, there then would be no Players.
From the Country Caf, the Citt, the Man of Law,
The Courtier, and the Coffee house Jackdaw,
To the Clergyman, that Vice so slowly quells,
All have strong Titles to the Cap with Bells:
And I (Curse on it,) am fixed here like a Glass,
For every John a Nokes to see his Face.
Had my kind Stars designed me for a Shop,
Made me some young, pert, lucky, thriving Fop,
I might with Credit all the Town deceive,
And cheat so long till I could fine for Shrive:
At least in Furs, the City Livery wear,
And come to eat a Custard with the Mayor.
Or had my Fate, but that's too fine a Thing,
Designed me some Court Pest to cheat the King,
Conscience would stretch as I had changed condition,
I should have made a swinging Politician.
Or had I been some Canting Babe of Grace,
As for the Pulpit I've a lovely Face,
How could I thump the Cushion! With what Zeal
Have trimmed between a Crown and Commonweal?
I could have drawn the Sisters in by Shoals,
Smugled My Gossipps, soaked the Christening Bowls*
Caressed their Bodies, and refreshed their Souls.
In every several Station and Affair*
I had been happy: But by being a Player,
I'm now obliged to expose your Faults in vain,
Uncertain my Applause, uncertain too my Gain.
Sometimes, 'tis true, you laugh, and then I'm famed;
But oftner some young Spark, whose Vice is shamed,
Cries, Rot the mimic Rogue, would he were damned.
Diseases by ill Appetites are nursed,
The Physic gripes, and the Physician's cursed.
And Players, like Bailiffs, are esteemed by you,
Rogues for Arresting, though the Debt be due.
Some of this Hot-brain'd Tribe, I'm told to Day,
Have led a Potent Power against this Play:
Armed with Resolve, in spite of Justice, throng
To Storm the Muses Fortress right or wrong.
What Pity 'tis, waving that mean Intent,
That so much Wit and Conduct was not bent
Against our Foes, to farther the Descent.
Such Hands, such Hearts, nay, and such Heads beside,
'Oons we had Conquered France by Whitsontide.
The Author therefore, thus besiig'd, does sue
For timely Succour to the Generous few,
To his old Friends, that always came in Season,
And never failed to laugh when they had Reason,
I'll promise some Diversion in my way,
I am to Act a Madman in the Play,
A Part well timed, Sirs, at this time of day,
All are crazed now -- Beaus, Warriors, Cities, Projectors;
The World's the Stage, and all Mankind are Actors.

BLess my Eyes from an Apparition! What art thou? Thou can not be Tom
Quickwit!


As sure as thou art Ned Cunnington the Ungodly, my Brother in Iniquity, and
Fellow-Collegian.


Thou seem my Brother-Collegian indeed by thy Voice and Grimace; but then
again thou may be Brother to some Prince by thy Habit. Prithee let me look on
thee and wonder!


Do, do, Ned, wonder on, whilst I slouch my Hat, and practice the Air of a
Country-Booby of Quality to improve thy Admiration.


Harkee; prithee let me ask thee a civil Question: Hast not made some Nokes of
Quality here about Richmond drunk, and stole his Clothes, hah?


No, ye Rogue; though I am your Brother in Wit, I am no kin to ye in Mischief. I
love to give occasion for Men's Wonders; and there's a Mystery in this Habit,
Ned, surpasses all your Cunning to find out. But come, to examine now in my
turn: Prithee, what Project hast thou now afoot here at Richmond? For by this
comical Disguise, there must be something more than ordinary. What stanch Fool
hast thou to Cully out of his Money? Or, what half-Fool out of Meat, Drink, and
Lodging, hah?


Why to tell thee the Truth, I am intrigu'd here with a Son of a Whore, who is
also the Son of a Knight, and have (thus equipped as I am) been with him to
Night upon a Frolic.


Intrigu'd was an admirable Word there; for thy Bubbles are all used like
common Whores; when thou hast had thy Pleasure of 'em, they are left to their
Fortune. Well, and this Compound makes up one substantial Fool; hah?


Yea, verily; Fools, half Fools, and such like, are Cunnington's Real Estate;
and sometimes I've the luck to have a Wit to provide my Personal. I am a true
Terrae Filius, and flourish by the Abuse of Mankind, wanting seldom or never
Matter to work upon: But if some malignant Planet should reign, whenever you
hear that I am out of Fool, you may reasonably conclude too that I am out at
Elbows.


A little Hardship is a good Whetstone to make Wit sharp; and we poor Fellows,
Ned, that live by 'em, like Black birds, thrive best in hard Weather: For not
being born to Estates for our selves, Fortune has disposed 'em to others with
weaker Brains for us to manage. Now I improve my Talent by Love, Compliance,
Insinuation, c. I love every body, and every body loves me: I oblige all
People; I mimic this or that Sot in Company, to humour perhaps one that's a
worse himself. I flatter and sing to the Women, to get their Tongues on my side
too: And now and then when I am desired by some rich Booby that's worth the
managing, I can turn my Face into a Changeling Grimace, and act like Solon in
the Play; when, as I hope to be saved, I'm all the while bant'ring him, and
thinking him the more comical Solon of the two, as a Man may say.


Why this is an artful Method, I confess; but, for my part, if I should
practice it, I should starve: For to tell thee the truth, I love no body; nay,
what's worse, can hardly counterfeit common Courtesy to the World. The reason
is, I hate all People that I think happier than my self: If that Man has a fine
Coach, I wish his Horses may founder; if this has a pretty Wife, I wish him a
plaguy fit of the Stone, and my self a bed with her: If a third has a rich
Cargo in a Ship, or a fourth a delicate House, I wish one may be sunk to the
bottom, and the other burnt to the ground.


Ha, ha, ha; an incomparable Humour faith.

Well, Ned, I see thou art now about some new Project, and 'twould do thee an
injury to keep thee longer from thy Vocation, therefore I'll leave thee.


Ah, Brother, I smell your drift; my Grannum there must be Ha^binger to some
notable Intrigue. Come faith, impart, I'll assist thee; I'm good at it thou
know.


Ay, but this is a secret only proper for my Sphere of Activity; besides, I
have had this Advice formerly, Keep Cunnington from thy Secret and thy
Mistress, or he'll certainly endeavour to betray the one, and debauch the
other; and so no more wheedling, good Brother. Ha, ha, farewell, farewell.


This Rogue has some profitable Design on foot, that's most certain; and now I
think on it, it may be as profitable to me to over-reach him in it. 'Gad, I'm a
strange odd sort of a Fellow; I do not only envy a Man that's richer than I am,
but that's wittier too; and would by my Good-will engross all the Money in the
World, and all the Sense too. New is my Head as full of mischievous
Contrivance, as a young Thief that is just going to do his Probation Exploit;
and from my Brain I have present information, That the Old Woman that was here
just now, is wove in Quickwit's Design: I'll after, and dog her; these old
Runts are as leaky as Sieves: And if I can, by speaking French giberish
pretending to be a German Astrologer, get to tell her her Fortune, all the rest
of her Secrets shall quickly be laid open. Humph, this may turn to good
advantage of my side too, and be more valued, as flowing from the Fountain of
my own Wit: I hate the poor Satisfaction of being obliged to Fortune for a
Benefit.

That still appears to me the sweetest Gain,
That Springs from the rich Soil of my own Brain.

My Noble Lord de la Fool, your Lordship's most Obedient -- Ha, ha, ha! Why
faith, Tom, I think we have equipped thee with as decent a Garb as any
Whimsical Peer of 'em all need to wear. Prithee cock thy Hat, and strut a
little more.


Oh, Pox, I can do that well enough: But how to act the Madman right, and
bubble the Doctor, there will be the difficulty.


Oh, prithee, affront not thy own Abilities: Thou were a rare Mimicker at the
University, I remember, and I'm sure can not lose thy Talent so soon:
Besides, this is a Doctor for the purpose; Positive, Ignorant, and easy to be
imposed on; one that having a long Worm in his own Pate, solidly believes he
can cure it in other Men's. He was first Apothecary of a Physick-Garden; but
happening to cure the Son of a great Statesman that had cracked his Brains with
studying to out-do his Father, in out-witting the French Councils, got himself
into Money and Reputation, and is now, forsooth, President of the Insanery.


And are you sure the young Lady will help me out at a pinch, and that she only
counterfeits her self mad for your sake?


Most certainly. I have told thee nothing but Truth, upon my Honour. Oh, she's
the Soul, the Miracle of her Sex:

Young, yet discreet, without Ill-nature witty,
Rich without Pride, and without Art is pretty.
Besides, I have often, as a Lesson, told thee, That Sir Charles, her
Fatherin-Law and Guardian, being always an inveterate Enemy to our Family; and
designing her for his own Son, has forced me to this Artifice of thy
Assistance, and that sweet Angel to frustrate all other Pretensions, to act a
witty Scene of Lunacy.


Your Brother Sir Quibble Quere, you tell me, is to be bubbled too; so that I
find I'm to divide my Brains into three several Projects: First, to disappoint
the Guardian: Secondly, to banter the Doctor: And, thirdly, to make a mere Ass
of your Brother, to pay a friendly Tribute to your Wit. As I take it, Sir, this
is my Charge.


Thou hast hit it, dear Tom; 'tis so. He's but my half-Brother thou know,
and can claim but little Obligation upon the score of Affinity. Besides, he's a
Block-head, and I have only hedged him into this Business to stand buff with
his Purse upon occasion, and pay the Expense of it. My Mother did me manifest
wrong by crossing the strain. Her last Husband, old Sir Quibble Quere, was, for
above thirty Years together, an old Court-Follower; but of so harmless a
Character, that though he never bettered himself, he hindered no one else, being
always like a Turn stile, standing in every body's way, and hindering no body.
He was also called here, The Teizer of Richmond, and would ask you more foolish
Questions in a quarter of an Hour, than a hundred wise Men could answer in a
Year: And this Brother of mine is his own, by this Light. See, yonder he comes.
I have told him I've employed thee, and prepared him aptly for the Business --
Now if thou can but answer silly Questions briskly, thou win'st him for
ever.


Brother, good Morrow t'ee.


Oh, Brother, your humble Servant, you're well met, we have been contriving here
for ye; this is the honest Gentleman I told ye of.


Is this Mr. Quickwit, Brother, that I saw when I was at London, he that
mimicked the Madman so comically.


This is that very ingenious Person, Brother.


Oh dear! Well, I'll say it, he did it purely. Sir, your humble Servant.


Sir, I am yours extremely.


Ha, ha, ha, you have dressed him to a T, I see* Brother.


As the Noble Family of the De-la*Fools ought, Brother.


Ha, ha, ha: And pray, Sir, when did you come to Town? Who was your Bedfellow
last Night? Which is your Inn? And what have you for Dinner to Day, Sir?


Four as pretty pertinent Questions as a Man could wish to answer.


Why, Sir, I came to Town yesterday, half an Hour, half a Quarter, and seven
Seconds past Five in the Afternoon: I lodge at Boddycotts, at the Red Lyon: I
have a good Rump of Beef and Carrots for my Dinner: I lay with one Nick Fiery
face, an honest Attorney of Staple-Inn, and had like to have lain with a pretty
Black-ey'd Cook-maid, belonging to the House: And there's an Answer overplus
for once to oblige ye, Sir.


Why merry be thy Heart, you're a pure Fellow, I'll sayt. And prithee who hast
left behind thee in London now?


There's another very pretty Question.


Why faith, about three or four Millions I believe, Sir; I could not well spare
time enough to take all their Particulars.


And prithee how does the Play-House? How does Mr. Betterton, and my old
Friend, Mr. Nokes? Prithee when did he play Sir Martin last, hah? Does Mr.
Sandford Act the Villain still, prithee? And jolly Cave Underhill in Epsom
Wells? How does my Comical Justice do, hah?


Hold, hold, Sir, you're to fast upon me; be pleased to couple your Questions,
and I'm at your Service; but for so many of 'em together, 'Gad I had not half
Memory enough, Sir.


D^'life, thou flagg'st already; hold out briskly, Man.


Dam him, I begin to be in a Sweat.


And how does Mrs. Barry Act now, hah?


Oh to a Miracle Sir -- There he was pretty reasonable.


She plays the Queen in the Spanish Friar better than any Woman in England:
I'll say it, I had rather see her wag after the ^idlers in the Procession there,
than see another Coronation ad'sdiggers. And Mr. Powel, what's he doing
prithee, hah?


Hah; the Devil hah ye -- 'Sdeath, here will be no end of this doing: Why how
the Devil should I know, unless I could conjure.


I mean, what new Part is he studying? Ad'snigs, that Powel's a very pretty
Fellow. Where lies the Scene I wonder? what's the Humour on it? and how does he
contrive?


Hey day, Where? What? and How? nay faith, Sir, if you don't stand to your
Article of coupling your Questions, I can be no longer your Interpreter; and so
your Servant. Oh --


Ha, ha, ha, ha, there's one Bowen too, a notable Joker, hah?


Prithee excuse me now, 'tis so long since I was in Town, that I even long to
hear of all the new things.


Not all at a time, I beseech ye, Sir; the rest will be a new Diversion for you
to morrow.


No, faith, I must have 'em now. And Mrs. Bracegirdle, prithee where is she
now?


Ay, ay, Mrs. Bracegirdle: Come, Tom, your Answer quickly.


So, he has set me a conjuring again.


Well, I'll say it she Acts Statira curiously.
From every Pore of him a Perfume falls.
He kisses softer than a Southern Wind:
Curls like a Vine; and touches like a God.
When I was last at the Play, and she was saying of this, my Mouth, I'll say it,
went to-and-agen, to-and-agen, as fast as hers, and repeated, it after her so
loud, that all the People in the Pit thought I was bewitched.


Ay, and the Devil take me if I don't think thee bewitched now*


Then there's Mr. Dogget, that Acted Solon so purely, O Lord, what's become of
him, prithee?

And then, I'll say it, there's Mr. Bowman, and Mr. Bright, and Mr. Hudson, and
Mr. Hains; and though last, not least in Love, the only remaining Branch of the
old Stock, honest Mr. Kinaston.

So Men in Thunder quit the open Air,
Because the angry Gods are then abroad.
Oh, he has a rare way with him, I'll say it, and a number besides these, that I
have forgot; Prithee, How, and Which, and What, and Where, and Why, and When,
--


Whiew! Nay then your Servant i'faith.


S'death, come away immediately, here's Sir Charles and the Doctor coming down
the Hill; away Tom, I have some more Instructions to give you yet.


Ay, with all my Heart, I shall be blunderbussed with Wheres, and Whats, and
Whens else -- A Plague of his Epileptick Visage, he's gaping for another Quere
I see.


Pox take him, I had above Twenty Questions more ready, but especially about
Hains, and his Fortune-telling; 'gad I will know something about that I'm
resolved, for that's a Material Point.


Therefore, as I was saying, Doctor, look well to your Patient, she is not only
my Daughter-in-Law and Ward, but the Darling Jewel of my Life, the Treasury of
my Son's Hopes too, an Heiress worth Fifty thousand Pounds, who, had not this
delirious Accident happened, should have been this Hour happy in his Embraces by
Marriage.


Fear not, Sir, my Care and Medicines will work the desired Effect.


Madness, Doctor, is but a more extravagant sort of Wit, caused by the
excessive Heat in the Brain: I studied the very Point many Years ago, in the
College at Barcelona; 'tis but the Skill of cooling the Part, and the Patient
presently recovers.


Ay, but, Sir, this is a new Case, and I must do it specifically; for she is
very obstinate, and will take no Medicines; nor do I resolve to make her Blood
ferment, by putting her into a Rage about it, she has Fire enough already; for
about the Age of Eighteen the Heat predominates extremely in her Sex; and then,
if ever they are infected, they become strongly delirious.


Your Reason, Doctor?


Why, Sir, at that Age the warm Quality of their Blood, fermented by the force
and vigour of the Animal Spirits, naturally make 'em half mad: To remedy which
there are but Two ways, which are either to get them Husbands just in the Nick,
or for want of such Provision to send 'em to me.


Why, God-a*mercy Doctor, this old Fellow is too Lepid to be a Whoremaster
sure: If this hoary Elder should be a Rogue now, and make use of a natural
Recipe to cure my Daughters Madness, my Son and I were finely served.


Farewell, Sir; I'll make as quick a Cure of your Daughter as I can, because I
very suddenly expect a Noble Lord under my Custody. Adieu.


This jealous Humour of mine is a great Fault: Here's a poor old Fellow, that
is so much a Cripple, he can scarce drag his Legs after him, and yet I must
suspect him for a Whoremaster. Well, I must go after and humour him, least when
he has cured my Daughter, he should, in revenge, Introduce new Suitors to her,
and so baffle my Son's Designs; who, I think, I see coming down the Hill
yonder, -- Ay, 'tis he, and two more with him; they seem in hot Dispute; I'll
stay a little while longer to observe.


But prithee, a Pox on thee Will, what a Devil ails thee that thou art so
averse to my way of intriguing, when I tell thee, Women, dear Women, are the
only Comforts of my Life, I can neither eat, drink, nor sleep well without 'em?
And my Welch Cousin Rice ap Shinken here is of my own Humour to a Hair; he
chuckles at a White Petticoat like a Turkeycock at a Red one; he's the very
Devil at a Wench; Cat after kind, as the Proverb has it, the Britains were all
Whoremasters from the beginning.


The Shinkins was pear as crete Lovers to the pretty Omans, that is fery true;
the plack Eyes, with the plack Eyebrows, was goot; and when her sees the Red
Lip, the White Skin, and the soft Pubby, then Shinkin's Heart was peat, peat,
peat, like a Drum, by Cadwallader.


Peat, peat, peat! What a Plague can any one above the Degree of a Kitchen,
love a Fellow that makes Fritters of English, as Falstaff says? A Welsh Beau,
with a Head as barren as the Mountains in his own Country. Ha, ha, ha, I'll
never believe it; I'm resolved to abuse these Puppeys for dear Frederick's
sake, whom I know they hate.


The Muntains in her Country was fery goot Muntains, and breed fery goot Sheep
and Coats, look you, and if Williams is Cholericks, that is not much, her will
laugh and be merry, look you, if Williams is Choleric, he, he, he ha.


Ay, ay, Will, you must not think to beat us out of conceit with our selves
with drolling: 'Gad I know a Lord's Wife near St. Iames's that's ready to die
for me; she says, of all charming things in the Universe she admires my Nose.


Ridiculous! I'll near believe such a Satyr upon the Sex: Why there's not a
Negro in Town but can fit her with a better.


Oh, I know him now, this is Hotspur, one of Frederick's Friends, and the Enemy
of our Family.


There is likewise, look you, Williams, the young, sweet, sharming, pretty
Daughter to a crete Shudge yonder, that is in love with Shinkin for his Leg,
look you; here is the Symmetry, here is the Shape, here is the Calf, look you,
and here is the Small, fery goot.


Leg! 'Oons, I have seen a handsomer upon a Gate for High Treason, after it has
stuck parching in the Sun above a Twelvemonth.


Why does not that Welch Runt give him three or four Kicks now with that Leg
the Lady is so in Love with? Sure this will come to something anon; now I shall
see what Mettle the Boy has.


Now Williams is Cholericks again, ha, ha, ha, ha. Harkee, do you know me,
Williams?


Know thee? oh yes, thou art his Ape, both things so contemptible with the
Women, that --


Look you, Williams, if Apes be Signals of Affronts and Disparagements, splut
her shall not find Shinkin so tame.


Phoo, prithee don't mind what he says, Cousin Rice: Come here's that shall
undeceive him presently -- Look Will, to prove to thee what a Favourite I am
with that dear, dear Sex, I will show thee some Favours from 'em; for, to say
Truth, I never took any true Pleasure in an Intrigue with a Woman, if I had not
the Satisfaction of Exposing her to my Friend.


Well said, trusty Knight, the Woman has blessed her self with a true Friend of
thee in the mean time.


Why, I enjoy n 'em to secrecy, Man, so that she's secure enough in
Conscience, as I will thee now; therefore be sure you don't tell any Body: Do ye
hear?


Faith, but I will, Sir, if you tell me any thing.


S'death, not draw yet! What a Plague does he mean?


Pshaw, pshaw, that's all one, I'll trust thee for all that, Faith; why, I've a
thousand things to divert thee with, Man; and, 'Gad take me, have the greatest
Pleasure in the World in telling 'em: First then here's a Billet Deux, from my
Lord Awekings's Daughter, a great Man at Court, and a swinging Politician, who,
having more Business in his Head than to mind his Daughters, gave me
opportunity at the Musick-meeting at London, to make an Intrigue; and the
Creature is now grown so fond, that my Father was fain to design a Wife for me,
here at Richmond, to divert me. Thou shalt hear what she writes: Sweet, sweet,
sweet Tomme, can thou find in thy Heart to be so long away from thy dear,
dear, dear Betty? Ah, sweet Creature! -- 'Gad, I believe I shall wear the
Paper to a Cobweb with kissing it.


S'death, can there be so simple a Creature in Nature?


Prithee mind me. I swear I never go to Bed but I dream of thee, nor ever rise
without crying: My dear, sweet, heavenly Tomme is always in my Thoughts: And if
his poor Betty were half so much in his, I'm sure he would come this Night
through the Boards of the little House in the Garden to see her, as he used to
do. That was our way of meeting, you must know; and, 'Gad, I have been plaguely
incommoded sometimes to get cleanlily to her. But did ever hear any thing so
Soft and Tender? hah!


Never any thing so Silly before, the Devil take me.


Again an Affront! Now where's the first Pass, now Tom?


There is crete deal of Doubts, and Jealousies, and Pribbles, and Prabbles,
which show Loves and Affections, look you.


Then, in the second place, here is a Garter of Sir Thomas Wittal's Lady's,
here at Cue, taken from above her Knee with my own Hand I'll swear; a Locket,
from pretty Peggy, Daughter to one Quicksilver a Goldsmith, at the Caudle Cup
in Lombard-street; a Picture, from dear Ienny Flippant, a rich Widows Niece in
the old* Pall-Mall; a Roman Glove, from sweet Lady Susanna Simple, in St.
Iames's- Square. And more, to show ye that I deal with all degrees of Females,
come hither, Sirrah, there's a piece of delicate Point, from Moll a Sempstress
in the New-Exchange, to make me a Cravat; and a Head of curious bright Hair,
from my Lady Freckles Chamber-Maid, to make me a Peruke.


This is so like these young Rogues, to brag of their Mistresses Favours.


Red and rank as a Fox by Jove: Pox on thee, Bright, dost call it*


And, to show ye that the Prittains are admired too, look you here was delicate
creen Leeks, sent by young Widows of her Cousin Tomas ap Evan, ap Rice, ap
Shones, ap Davy, ap Shinken, as a Token of her Love, and to wear in her Cap
upon St. Davy's Day.


Death, ye brace of Buffoons, what do ye tease me with all this Stuff for?


How, Boffoon, 'Sdeath, and near a hole in his Guts yet? Oh, cowardly Villain!


Stay, stay, I have two things more in my Fob here better than all; first
here's a Bracelet of witty Sophronia's; and, above all, a Seal, with a wounded
Heart engraved upon Coral, of my dear, dear Fulvia's.


Nay, then I'll no longer have Patience, therefore draw, for ye Lye.


The Lye; so, 'Gad I'll whip him through the Midriff my self, if he takes that.


For, first, Sophronia is a Woman of too much Sense to give a Bracelet to such
an Insect: And, secondly, Fulvia is my Friends Mistress, and has no Heart but
for him. Come on, Pox, come both of ye.


Stand to her, Cousin; splut, her will show her a Welsh Thrust.


The Truth is, that last was a Lye; but since the Welsh-man's Blood's up, I'm
resolved to vindicate it: Come, Sir.


Hold, hold Tom, and Cousin come you back; tho, his Insolence deserves
Chastisement, he shall not have it to the dishonour of our Family; I'll take it
upon my self: Come on Sir, you that were so hot.


Ay, Sir, with all my Heart.


Pray Uncle let her go, her has killed no Rascals since her came from Wales.


Prithee, old Gentleman, get you out o'th way, I'm in the humour of killing
him.


Son Tom, it must not be: What's your Name, Sir? you are like to escape this
time.


Why then a Pox on ye all, my Name's Hotspur, and you may see me at the Wells
every Morning; and more, to provoke ye to take Satisfaction, know that I am
Friend to Frederick, and will espouse his Interest in the Heiress to the last;
and so adieu.


Ay, 'tis so, 'tis this rich Heiress is the cause of all these Brawls; but come
Son, since thou hast me of thy side, be confident, Policy as well as the Sword
shall secure her to thee: For above all the World's great Benefits, a Wife is
best in her good Circumstances.

To follow Wars abroad may Honour bring,
'Tis brave Preferment there, to serve the King.

But a rich Heiress here's, a Heavenly thing.


A true Friend is the most solid Good a Man can possess in this World: And
though, dear Will, I ought extremely to thank thee for abusing those two Fools
for my sake, yet I could wish Sir Charles had been absent, least this new
occasion of distaste may cause him to be more vigilant, and so hinder our Plot
upon the Heiress.


Faith, dear Fred, I beg thy Pardon with all my Heart if I did amiss; but the
Devil take me if I could contain my self after hearing such a Preposterous deal
of Impudence and Folly: I could have beaten them with a better Will than a Turk
would a Christian Slave that he found had an Intrigue with his Wife or
Daughter.


Well, well, let's to the Proof, I long, methinks, to be acting my Madman: And
as for Numps here, he'll do his part to a Miracle, I have taught him his Lesson
perfectly.


What, my Lord de la Fool's old Serving-man, he has hit the Family Beard to a
Hair I see, and 'tis impossible he should miscarry; for I am privately informed
the Doctor knows neither of them by sight, and has only heard of a Son of the
Countesses that was mad, and suddenly to be brought to him as a Patient.


The Letter I have given him there expresses all that. But be sure to remember
your Canting West-Country Tone, Numps, and your by-word, 'Odswokers.


Well, well, Why thou can not think, mun, che can forget as zoon as i have
learned it: Why sure chant a bin a Scholar so long but that che can con my
Lesson, 'Odswokers: What, does the Mon take me for a Vool? Umph.


Admirably well, Numps, and there's a Guinea to encourage thee.


The Rogue mouths it as if he had been bred at Taunton-Dean indeed.


Well then, away both to your Tasks: Oh, I long to have the Event answer the
Expectation; get her but off, Tom, and the promised Five hundred Pounds shall
be as ready as the joyful Minute.


I used to be successful in these Matters: But if I should return now, like a
maimed Tarpawling from a Sea-Fight, with a Leg or an Arm lost in your Service,
you can't do less than procure me a Place in the Hospital.


Ah, never fear, there's no such danger.


No, no, the worst on it can be but a dozen or two of Kicks, a Cudgel, a Rib or
two broke, or so, that's all.


Ay, ay, that's a small Matter, you know. Well, what ere comes on it, I'm
resolved to venture; and so Fortune for us: Come along Numps.


Ha, ha, ha: Now shall I be as impatient till I have an Account of this Rogue's
Proceedings, as a young Heir that hears his niggardly Father is sick, is, till
he hears he's dead.


If my Eyes dazzle not, yonder's a Subject very proper to improve your
Patience, a Lady, Fred, a reading.


Sophronia, as I live; ay, Will, this is a Lady indeed, the Wonder of her time:
Dost know her?


Not to Intimacy, and yet enough to hear of your Worship's former Intrigue with
her. What a strange Fellow were thou to desert so fine a Lady? I've heard there
was a Contract between ye.


Some slight Papers, I think, which I know her Pride is too great ever to
expose, or call me to an account ^for. Besides, what's a Promise, when put in
Competition with Fifty thousand Pounds, Will? No, no, she was too wise for me,
her Wit was always too Satirical; a Quality I could never suffer in a Woman:
She'd conjure me with Morals out of Seneca; and run me down an hour or two
together in Argument on the Towns Common Vices; nay, and what I hated worse
than all the rest, though all her Friends knew well enough she loved me, her
Pride, that was too great to let her own it, would make her always use me ill
before 'em.


They call her here in Richmond, The Female Plain Dealer.


They do so, and justly too, for she takes as much Pride in speaking blunt
Truths, as the rest of her Sex do in studying quaint Lies. But see, the Walk
begins to fill, here's more of the Tribe coming.

And if I am not mistaken, Will, there's one of your Acquaintance, if you
had not forgot your little French Pinnace you used to brag of so, Mrs.
Stockjobb.


Forget her! 'D'sdeath, I should as soon forget my Sex; why she's my All, Man,
my Estate Real and Personal: She came hither first as a Protestant Refugee, and
full of seeming Sanctity, but betwixt thee and I, Fred, a very Cheat: She's
Dick Stockjobb's Wife, 'tis true, but a Meet-help to me alone, Fred.


I have heard of that City-Fool, they say he got all his Estate by drawing in
worse Fools than himself to lay Wagers, this Siege, or that Battle, this Fight
at Sea, or that on Shore; and for the late City Crimp of Stockjobbing, a very
Dragon, though in other Matters poor, sneaking, and uxorious; and the French
Woman, I hear, manages him rarely. But, prithee, who is the other, by her
fantastical Behaviour that must be some extraordinary Creature too?


Oh, she's a Rarety of another kind, one Madam Squeamish, she's a Native of
Richmond here, very fantastic and impertinent, as thou say; for which she
has every Summer a new Lampoon made of her, that does so tease her, that she
grows lean upon it, and can't forbear expressing her Resentments in all
Companies.


Well, Sir, I'll leave you to their Management, and the rather, because I see
yonder Philosophical Lady is turning this way, and I am not at present armed
for a Rencounter. Farewell; we'll meet at Night at the Red Lyon.


What Paper's that they are so busy upon? I'll stand aside and listen.


Was there ever so barbarous a Disappointment, Cousin! Expecting a Letter this
Morning from the dear, dear Man I admire beyond all earthly Joy, my Maid brings
me this, with the fold and visage of a Billet deux; but, oh horrid! I had no
sooner opened it, and prepared to feast my longing Eyes with what they
expected, but, faugh! what does it prove to be, but an odious Lampoon, and the
most nauseous filthy thing that ever was heard, as I'm a Virgin!


Dis is now de Barbarity of your Nation: In France we have no Scandal, no
Affront, noting mal a propos: You may sing, you may dance, you may keep de bon
Companee, vid dis great Lord, or toder Gentleman; and yet dere is no dam
Lampoon. Diable! if de Author had dare abuse me so, by dis Hand I would find him
out, and murder him.


Why then you must find him out, and murder him, Cousin; for hear you are for
your Comfort, and swingingly.


By my Faite de Fellow dat did say dis, is de very dam Rascal in de whole
Varle; I will poison him, I will hang, I will have his Trote cut, by dis Hand.


But prithee, Cousin, who is this Hotspur that they slander you with?


'D'sdeath, I can forbear no longer! Why, Madam, this Hotspur is forth* coming,
if your Ladyship has any use for him. By your leave, good Madam: 'Pray let me
inspect this Paper a little.

Damme, if any Rascal has abused us, I'll maul him.


He here; vat sall me do now! Us! vat you mean, Sir? I know you not; you are de
Stranger to me.


Oh fie, Cousin; pray don't let my Company cause a breach of Acquaintance.
Come, you must own him a little.


Pox! prithee don't stand upon Punctilio's now, Fubbs, but help me to find out
this damned Poet. I'll teach him to Lampoon me: I'll slaughter him, by Heaven.


Why really, Sir, 'tis a horrid brutal Trick these Fellows have got: A Woman
can't enjoy her Youth in a degree a little above the Vulgar, but, oh horrid!
she's presently popped into a Lampoon. I did but innocently regale my self
the other day, amongst other choice Female Friends, at my Lady Goodfellow's, with
a Glass or two of Hockamore, and if the beastly Poet, in his next Paper, did
not say I was drunk there, I'm no Christian! O filthy!


Your Servant, Mrs. Squeamish; nay, I have heard all, and as a Friend to
Justice and Morality, although unasked, must give you my Opinion too.


She hear! oh horrid! nay, then we shall be teased to death. She has more
Tongue than twenty Lawyers, and rails with more Malice than a Terrae Filius at
Oxford, that has been just expelled the University.


Dis is ver Deevil of a Woman; I must wheedle her, dere is no oder way. Your
most humble and obedient Slave, dear Madam.


Oh no Ceremony, good Mrs. Stockjobb: But, Mrs. Squeamish, prithee why art thou
so mortally offended at this Lampoon? Methinks the Poet speaks very honestly.


Honestly, Madam! What, to say I was drunk? Oh filthy!


Drunk indeed was a little too uncourtly: Mellow had been a good Word there;
for to my knowledge there were six Quarts drunk in two hours time between four
of ye, besides my Lady's farewel-Bottel of Aquamirabilis. Her fat Ladyship I
hear set a great while before the Sun; and for the rest of ye, your Tongues
were all as glib as a Consort of Midwives at a City-Christ'ning.


Vell, dis I must say of de French, They are de most temperate People in de
whole World; l'Homme du Cour delights in noting but de cool Mead, de Tizzan, or
de Sherbet vid Ice.


Yes, the comfortable Usquebagh, the refreshing Spirit of Clary, or sometime
the cool Brandy and Burrage, good Mrs. Stockjobb.


Oh fie, fie, fie, Madam; de Brandy is de Regale for de Dutch, not de French:
Here is de strange difference, De Brandy will make de French-man as dull as de
Dog, and de Dutch man to fight like de Deevil: Beside, our Native are given to
make Love mush, vich is great Enemy to Drink. De English-man will come drunk to
his Metress, break her Vindow, tear, her Commode, and kick her Lap-Dog, vhen de
French man dare no ^oush one Hair of his Tail, but look like de Fool, and sigh.
Dere is de difference again, all is Cringe, all Obeisance; dere is no Huff, no
mal Visage, no Pesantry in France, ma Foy.


But will you vindicate a Lampoon, Madam? oh horrid!


A filthy Libel dat sall sawzily affront le Femme du Qualite, and have de
impudence to expose --


To expose the good Man your Husband's Cuckoldom, and your close Intrigue with
this Hotspur that is mentioned there; that indeed is very saucy, Mrs.
Stockjobb.


So there's a Bob for me again. Nay, nay, good Madam, turn the Tide of your
satirical Vein another way, I don't like this kind of Raillery.


Oh, cry ye mercy, Sir, you need not tell me your Sentiments; I know an honest
Reflection must needs be Rhubarb to a Man of your Kidney and Character.


My Character! why what's my Character, Madam?


Why troth, Sir, no very good one; and since you'll have it told, 'tis -- let
me see, A lewd, vain, noisy, impertinent, drunken, roaring, debauched
Character.


So, so, she has fitted me for asking Questions.


Come, Sir, for once I'll be a little satirical, and venture to describe the
course of life of all you Men of the Town: In the Morning the first thing you
do is, to reflect on the debauch of the Day before; and instead of saying your
Prayers as you ought, relate the lewd Folly to some other young rakehelly
Fellow, that happens to come to your Leve: The next thing is to dine, where
instead of using some witty or moral Discourse that should tend to improvement,
you finish your Desert with a Jargon of senseless Oaths, a relish of ridiculous
Bawdy, and strive to get drunk before ye come to the Play.


The Devil's in her; she has nicked us to a Hair.


Then at the Play-House ye ogle the Boxes, and dop and bow to those you do not
know, as well as those you do. Lord! what a world of sheer Wit too is wasted
upon the Vizard-Masks! who return it likewise back in as wonderful a manner.
You nuzzle your Noses into their Hoods and Commodes, just for all the world
like the Picture of Mahomet's Pigeon, when he gave the false Prophet his
ghostly Instructions. Faugh how many fine things are said there, perfumed with
the Air of sour Claret! which the well-bred Nymph as odoriferously returns in
the scent of Lambeth-Ale and Aquavitae


'D's heart, what shall I do! I shall never have patience to hear this.


Then at Night ye graze with the hard-driven Cattle you have made a purchase of
at the Play, and strut and hum up and down the Tavern with a swashy Mien, and a
terrible hoarse Voice, which the Lady (to engage your liking) returns with some
awkward Frisks, instead of Dancing, and a Song in a squeaking Voice, as
untunable as a broken Bagpipe. Then supper coming in, the Glasses go about
briskly. The Fools think the Wenches heavenly Company, and they tell them they
are extreme fine Gentlemen; 'till at last few Words are best; the Bargain's
made, the Pox is cheaply purchased at the price of a Guinea, and no repentance
on neither side. What think ye, Sir, am I not a rare Picture drawer?


Faith yes, Madam, and must sure have been a Practiser you self, you have done
it so exactly. 'D's death! no Help yet! Oh, here comes Stockjobb; this was
lucky: I shall be relieved now, sure.


Ho, honest Will, good morrow to thee; good morrow, Cousin Siss, and Madam
your Servant, and so forth. What, and Pegry here too! Why how now, little
Pogry! how does my Deery! how does my Fawn, my Pricket, my Duck, my Dove, and
so forth. Well; does Richmond-Air agree with thee? Does little Hans-in-kelder
kick yet? Hah, Pogry? Prithee how dost like the Prospect? Is't not a sweet
Place, and so forth.


Any, par ma Foy is it de ver fine Place. Dicky, we have valk dis morning as
far as de Mount; dere is de Grove just by de River tout charm^nt, vere is de
most rare place to lie and sleep in, Dicky.


And to make ye a Cuckold in, Dicky.


Ha, ha, ha! Oh your Servant, Madam, Sophronia; are you so brisk already with
your Jokes, and so forth? Do ye hear, Pogry? Madam Sophronia is at her Jokes
slap-dash this morning.


Ay, Cousin, she has been breathing her self upon us.


Her Ladiship's out of danger of a Tissick for this Season, I'll warrant her.


They talk as if she had been beating 'em all, I'll say it. Pray, Madam, why do
they talk at this rate? Where lies the Jest on'^? What is the meaning of your
high Discourse? And when will you Raffle at the Wells again, Madam?


Fool --


Fool! that's nonsense I'll say it. And why Fool, pray, Madam? What, and which,
and where, and when, and --


Hold, hold, prithee, Sir Quibble, let me attack her; she called me Cuckold you
know. Come, Madam, I'll stand ye fair, 'saith: Your Reason, your Reason; come,
slap dash away with it, and so forth.


Why I have skill in Physiognomy, and see it in thy Face: All Humanes are
allotted to some Fate or other, and thine is to be a Cuckold. The dimpled Slit
there upon the Tip of thy Nose, and shaggy meeting of thy Pent-house Eye-brows,
show it plain, To be brief, a Lampoon upon ye all were a meritorious Work:
First you, Mrs. Squeamish, for always railing at it; and yet by your ridiculous
Behaviour perpetually giving cause. Secondly, thee Knight, for being Friends
with Fortune, that allots thee to be bubble^ by thy younger Brother. Next you,
Sir, for the intolerable Town* Vices of Drinking, Wenching, Gaming, cum m^ltis
aliis, as I told you before. Then you, good Protestant Refugee, for wheedling
and co^uting your Dicky there: And last poor Dicky for running about the Town*
Wagering and Stockjobbing, when Pogry has a more proper Job for him to look
after; and so farewell t'ye. Look Sharp, if you would be free from future Scorns;
The less thy Heed; the larger still thy Horns.


Hey, Slap dash, why she's as sharp as Vinegar this Morning, and so forth.


Zooks, so she is, I'll say it: But why the Devil does she rail so: And where
the Devil has she all her Wit I wonder?


Dis Raillery is too morose, she wants de French breeding extremely.


To vindicate a Lampoon? O filthy!


Faith, Dick, Thour't a Fool if thou mind'st what she says, she uses her
Father, Brothers and Sisters in this manner.


Not I, slap dash, she may talk what she will, and so forth, I believe nothing
against Pogry. Come Cousin, Siss, and Gentlemen, I invite ye all to Dinner to
Day, for little Pogry and I here, intend to have the Fiddles, and be merry.
Hey, slap dash, I vow my Heart's as light as a Feather; for I have laid a World
of good Wagers this Morning, I shall get five hundred Pounds by 'em I'm sure;
besides Stock rises to a Miracle: And I've invented two such rare Projects for
the improvement of Tabby Cats Skins for Ladies Muffs, and Spirit of Acorns to
cure Agues, that the whole Exchange rings of it. Come, there you shall know my
Wagers too, and say of me, as that Eminent Common Council-man, some Years
since, did to the then Lord Mayor, Oh how great a Grace from Heaven is a Wise
Citizen!


Well, as I'm a Christian, Sir, if what you have promised me prove to be true,
you have made me the happiest Woman in the whole World.


Hold a your Tongue, and take care you no cross your Star: Come vere sall we be
private?


Have but Patience a Minute, Sir, I'll only go and see what the Doctor is
doing, and come and conduct ye immediately.


Make haste; vat you think de Star will stay for you.


I go, Sir, I go.


Ha, ha, ha, ha, I find this is some old Waiting-woman belonging to this place,
whom I have already turned the wrong side outward, with promising her a
Husband: I have engaged to tell her Fortune, upon Condition she discovers all
her Secrets to me: The first of which shall be, the Discovery of Quickwit's
Design, which I am resolved to ruin, only for the dear sake of the Mischief
that will come of it: I have frighted her damnably already; I have made her
believe I am the Son of the Devil upon a La^land-Witch; and that if she obeys
me, she shall live to be a Countess; but if not, she shall be brought to sell
Save-alls and Card-matches, old Rags, and Small coal in her old Age, and, at
last, die upon a Dunghill near Fleet-ditch. Here she comes, now to my Grimace
again.


Come, Sir, the Coast is clear now: Softly for Heaven's sake; for the Doctor is
just coming up.


If he dare come in my presence, I will conjure him --


Bless me!


Vat you pray! Zoon, Let me no hear you pray -- go, get you gone.


Well, Friend, the Countess has done me the Honour to inform me in her Letter
here, that she relies upon my Skill and Experience to cure her Son, nor shall
my diligence be wanting; but she writes me no Word here, whence the Delirium
sprung: Prithee how came his Brain distempered first; what Accident, what
Cause, hah?


Odswokers, and't like your Worship, all that I know is, they say Master
Toomas was hugely in Love with one of his Lady* Countesses Dairy Maids; and
becase they crossed him, he dissolved with himself to val stark mad upon it:
Her Name was Mopsee, and't like ye, you was parlous Jade, you had a Skin an
'twere any Milk-pan, and a Vace as bright as a Pewter-dish; you was vengenable
handsome, Odswokers --


Odswoker, ha, ha, ha, damn him, What silly Clownish Booby have we got here?


He was come of the ancient Stock of the Pritains, I believe by his Peard: And
look you, Cousin, if he is Pritains, he is Gentleman a-course, and Shinken
will findicate his Honour.


His Honour, ha, ha, ha, why, hark'e, Cousin, the Beggars have long Beard^, are
they all Gentlemen too?


Look you, Cousin, if they are Pritains, they are.


A Man of Quality! supposed to be well bred too, and run mad for a
Dunghil-Drab, a Dairy-Wench! This is very odd. The Name of this unhappy
Gentleman, good Doctor?


Why, Sir, his Name is De la Fool, he's of the ancient Family of the De la
Fool's of the South; their great Ancestor was a famous Officer under King
Harold, who being routed by William the Conqueror, fell mad, and the Disease
has more or less run in the Blood ever since: There is near them another Family
of the De la Wit's too, that are crazed at one time of the Moon; and indeed, it
may be properly said, they divide her between 'em, one being mad in the Wax,
and the other in the Wane.


Nay, nay, 'tis a mad Age here too as well as in the South, and therefore I the
less wonder at it; but my Daughter, Doctor, my Daughter, how does she recover?


More of that, Sir, presently -- Go, Friend, and try if you can decoy my Lord
hither: And go you, Christopher, and bid Marmalet bring her Lady too; there is
no better Cure of Lunacy than by reflection, Sir Charles your Daughter's
Distemper proceeding from disordered Love, makes her still vent the Effects
upon the imaginary Persons; particularly I have observed four, of different
Qualities, which are a Courtier, an Alderman, a Politician, and a Divine.


There were four that did formerly tease her for her Estate indeed; but
proceed, good Doctor.


To sooth her Malady therefore, and that I may the better time my Medicines, I
have ordered four Persons always to stand ready to represent'em, which you and
this Gentleman may now as naturally supply; for she distinguishes very little
as yet. Pray stand in order; and, by the Life of Galen, 'twill make ye laugh
heartily to see what Freaks she'll perform. Well, Christopher, is she coming?


Yes, Sir.


Why then may I never make a good Intrigue more, if this plaguy Doctor instead
of a Cure upon me, would not make me run mad in a Week's time, if I were with
him.


By his Prabbles and his Pratings, I think his Prains in as pad Conditions as
his Patients, by St. Davy.


This new Madman, now being possessed with a Frenzy somewhat near his own, will
very much assist her; therefore I resolve they shall be much together; for I
have some reason to hope the worst is past, because she inclines to Music, and
will often sing very sensibly. Oh, here she comes, pray observe now.


Give me fresh Air, the Place is hot and sultry; the Rooms are warmed with
Lovers scorching Sighs that glow and breath upon me. Is there no remedy? Must I
be crowded thus -- Hah! Who's here? My cringing, complementing, comical,
coxcombly Courtier again, my perpetual Teizer, Sir Thomas Spindle: What
Impudence is this? He has nothing but a silly Place at Court, 250l. a Year, it
won't buy me Pins: he can't settle four Groats upon me, and yet plagues me Four
thousand times in an hour. Lord! how he looks too like a Death's-head in an
Apothecaries Shop, his Lips pale, his Eyes sunk, and his Cheeks as thin as an
Anatomy: A Cordial, a Cordial, Doctor, the Man's dying; did ye ever see a thing
look so?


Lean, lean, Madam, as Lovers generally use to be: I'll advise him to get a
pair of Plumpers against he comes next. She takes your Welsh Cousin for the
Courtier, Sir Charles.


So now she's safe, I'll back again to my Fortune-Teller. I was born to be a
Countess, as I'm a Christian.


She has been horribly mad I find.


As March-Hairs; look you, Uncle, that is the fery plain truth of Matters.


Pox on it, would she would get her Senses quickly, or give me leave to make
Love to some body else: I am like a Fish out of the Water all this while, I
can't live nor breath without intriguing; I've above forty Bille^ deux now
ready sealed that all stick upon my hands, 'Gad take me.


Hah! Sure my Eyes dazzle, who comes next here, what the honourable and famous
Politician, Mr. Votewell?


Pray observe, Sir, she takes your Son for a Politician.


Indeed, Sir, you wrong your self and the Nation, to leave the Affairs of State
for my sake, the French will certainly outwit us in your absence; nay, you
shall not stay a minute longer, indeed you shall not. Go, go, Sir, you must go, the
Committee wants you -- Fie! Fie! A Senator waste his Time in teasing one single
Woman, when he may have the Opportunity of plaguing a whole Nation! Faith it
shall never be said -- Doctor, pray help me, we'll thrust him out.


Ay, 'Gad, would ye would, I shall lose a rare Intrigue else.


Not so, good Madam, he's troubled with the Gout, and too quick a Motion may
injure him; we'll send for a Chair: Hey, within there, fetch Mr. Votewell a
Chair.


Ha, ha, ha, ha, Oh! the intolerable Machinations of a conceited Statesman; but
stay, what more solid Mischief is this approaches me, Hah! sure 'tis
impossible; what, Mr. Alderman Niggle? Nay, then I'm surprised indeed.


Good! you are taken for the Alderman, Sir Charles, look grave and feed the
Humour.


See how he has powdered his Peruke, and smugg'd his old Face up with a
pernicious Design to ruin me. Look how he frisks and hops about to show me
what heat and vigour remains in Sixty five: Ah!

Hands off, I'm resolved you shall not touch me; Fie, Fie, Fie, an old Fellow, and
thus rampant: Ah -- ah -- help, help, Doctor quickly, this Devil of an Alderman
will ravish me.


Oh! Fie, Fie, Madam, by the Life of Galen, there's no danger, the Alderman's
too old.


Look, he frisks, he dances, he jumps; hark'e do ye hear him too, he says he
stews his Gold-Chain in Harts horn Jelly, and drinks it every morning to make
him lusty -- Ah -- he comes upon me again, he will ravish me, He can ravish me,
help, help.


Oons, 'tis impossible, Madam, when did you ever hear of an Alderman that
ravished any Body -- If she were in her right Wits now, i should think she
meant this as a Satyr upon the City, by the Life of Galen.


This is, indeed, the most fantastical Frenzy that ever I read or heard of:
How long does it usually hold her.


Forty minutes together, sometimes more; I have weakened it to forty minutes by
my skill, it formerly held her an hour.


To the dear, soft, white, pretty hand of that super-excellent Lady Mrs.
Gillian Gingerbread; ah, 'gad take me this billet should have been dispatch'd
away this very minute, and here am I playing the fool in a Mad-house.


Nay, pray you Cousins, have patience, she is engaged now with the Fellow in
the Placks, look you, pray you let's hear.


Oh, -- Mr. Tickletext --


Observe now how the humour turns, now she is come to her Melancholy sit, and
takes Christopher for a Parson.


Reverend Mr. Tickletext, Wise Mr. Tickletext, that ever I should live to see
you thus overtaken, to leave your Flock in the Wilderness, to follow me upon
the Mountains, to fall from your zealous and instructive Principles, carnally
to fall in Love, and change the strong motions of the Spirit for those of the
Flesh -- O, Mr. Tickletext --

What will become of your poor Soul?


I've observed she's always extremely troubled about the Parsons Soul, 'tis a
thing worthy observation.


Doctor --


What say you, Madam?


Does Mr. Tickletext drink hard think you?


No, sure Madam, not hard.


Nor Swear, nor Game, Doctor?


Neither Madam, unless it be a Game at Put now and then, for a Bowl of
Lambswool.


For a Bowl of Punch rather, I fear Doctor; ay, 'tis so, I know it by the red
tip of his Nose; the Parson hates Lambswool, he loves the Bowl, the Bowl, the
lusty Bowl; and there alas his poor Soul will be drowned.


His Soul again, pray observe.


Yet, what care I, I'm Mrs. of my own fate, let 'em drink, let 'em roar, let
'em sing, what is't to me I'll do the same.

How vile are the sordid Intrigues of the Town,
Cheating and lying, perpetually sway
From Bully and Punk to the Politic Gown,
In plotting and sotting they wast the whole day.
Let me have Music, and bring in Orpheus there, O, my hard fortune!


So now the Fit's almost spent, let'em come in there, French in Flanders, fell
mad upon it, the Woman cracked her Brain with Pride and Malice, hearing her
Lover say, another was handsomer and better dressed at a ^ourt Ball.


You may perceive by this, Sir Charles, the Frenzy will wear off by degrees, --
but see, here comes my Lord.


Though Cerberus bark, the Cat-a-mountain howl,
Though Winds do roar, and Waves do roll,
Mopsa's my Life, Mopsa's my Soul.

Worse and worse, ah, lack-a-day, ah, lack-a-day, O my poor Master!


His Distemper vents it self much in scraps of Poetry, which shows it to be the
more violent and dangerous.


Why so, good Doctor.


Why Sir, Poetry is a kind of Madness in it self, and must consequently make a
very ill addition to the Patients Distemper. I'll speak to him, what have you
there, my Lord?


Treason, in black and white, -- Though Cerberus bark, the Cat*amountain howl,
I'll conjure for her, I'll go down below into the Devils dairy, there I shall
find her licking the Cream-bowls, or pressing Curds to make Beelzebub a Cheese,
-- Hark, ye Patron, are you the Devil?


The Devil! not I my Lord, bless me, what a question's there.


Nor yet his Dam?


Nor his Dam neither, I'm your Doctor, my Lord.


Bring Mopsa then, I'll drown my self in Tears else,


O, worse and worse! O that i have lived to see this day, odswokers, he had as
notable a Pate, a Vortnight ago as ever a one in our Shire; our Minister at
home was a Bottlehead toun, and now to see the Case so changed, and hear un
talk so like a Vool, odswoker che can't forbear weeping for the heart of me.


O prithee, Pox take thee for a Bumpkin, what a howling dost thou make; ah, my
dear sweet Miss Ginger-bread, 'gad take me, I shall grow as mad as they, if I
am kept here much longer


There is fery goot moralities and observations to be made in this place, look
you Cousins, therefore pray you have patience.


Hast brought her? that's my Boy, ay there she is, I know her now.

By those Pignies, that Stars do seem,
Those Breasts as white as Curds and Cream,
Those Cherry Lips and dimpled Chin,
Tis Mopsa that shall be my Queen.

She makes up to him now, the Distemper works now, they are curing one another,
the two mad Men rise and dance with 'em.


Art thou the Crack-brain'd Fool thou seem to be?


Art thou a white-fac'd Ape as mad as he?
A foolish Female nice and shy,
That never yet trod shoe awry,
Nor suffered youngster by the by,
To have a singer in the Pie?

In spite of Rings and Bracelets gay,
Sweet Junkets on a Holiday,
Or all that silly Men can say
I'm still of Vesta's Train a Maid.

'Tis then for want of Humane Aid.


No, no.


Ay, ay.


No, no.


Ay, ay.


I'm still a Maid.


O fie, O fie!


In thought and deed, and so will die.


You are a Fool, or else you lye, -- but if thou art, go to the Queen and beg
me, for I must hang to Morrow for a Rape, committed upon fifteen Richmond
Virgins, thirty years old and upwards, that have stood the shock of Mankind
most miraculously, there's my Petition, read it and away.


By Heaven 'tis Frederick's Hand, and I find now, this is all seign'd madness,
and a Plot of his to bring me off, O ye dear witty Creature,


Cry ye mercy Sir, by that shaggy Eyebrow, and that


Variety of Madness, he said I was the Devil just now, and now he takes me for
the Recorder.


There, there's your Fee, and pray defer my Sentence, I must not come to the
Gallows, I have Money, let friendless Felons, Fools, and Beggars dangle; I'll
bribe thee well, I must not hang, I've Money.


The mad Fool speaks now methodically, Money indeed will do any thing.


What do I see, a guard to bear me off, and before Sentence, nay then have at
ye, avaunt ye Slaves, ye Pultroons, scour ye Vipers, a rescue, a rescue, fall
on my Friends, down with 'em.


Ah, Plague of our heedless folly to come Armed amongst mad Men, there's no
contending with him.


My Lord, my Lord, 'odsdeath what do ye mean?


Mean to a mad Man, that is fery simple by St. Davy, goot her Lord have
patience, Shinken was her friend and fery humble Servant look you.


My Lord, my Lord, I am the Recorder you know.


The Devil thou art, down with 'em there, a rescue, a rescue.


Am I a Devil again, nay then there's no fence against a flail, I must give way
too.


Ha, ha, ha, so, if this was not well played, I'll n'er Act part again.


Thou art the best of Actors, and shalt be rewarded accordingly, nor shall
honest Numps be forgotten neither.


Odswokers, che can make a Vool of forty such Doctors as this is.


Your Ladyship would make an admirable Actress, faith Madam, to out-wit the
Doctor so artificially -- 'tis a Masterpiece.


Ha, ha, ha, and before the grave Knight and young Fool's face too.


Ha, ha, ha, ha, and but reasonable Madam, what should a Fool do with so fine a
Lady.


O, Sir your Complement some other time, come whilst we have this opportunity
let's into my Closet, and consult about the manner of my escape.


Which is contrived methodically in that Letter there, by your Lover, who I
hope suddenly shall be happy in his reward too.


If faithful Love, and an obedient Wife can make him happy, he may assure
himself of me, I know his Merit, and have a Soul to prize it.

Nor shall the wretched Customs of the World,
That change the sweets of Love to a sordid Bargain,
Ever corrupt my Nature, wealth is a good addition,
And shall be given by me a Slave to virtue,
And wait upon the kind brave Man I love,
Who Weds a Fool, affronts her humane Nature;
Who can be kind to such a Brutal Creature,
'Tis Wit with Love improves the Marriage Charms,
And such a Man is welcome to my Arms.

VEL now, as you hope to be de Countess, and keep your six Footmen and your
Page, dis is all true vat you tell me.


Every syllable in troth Sir, O fie, upon my Integrity I would not tell ye a
Lye for the versal World.


Ver good, vel den I will tell you the rest of your fortune, but first fesh me
de Almanac, dat I may tell de good day from de bad, dat is material point.


Yes Sir, I'll bring it presently -- a Countess, why, well fare thy heart old
Ienny, six Footmen and a Page, odsme I'm overjoyed.


So, I have squeezed her as dry as a sponge already, the Heiress in this House,
that Sir Charles Romance designs for his Son, only feigns her self mad, and
Quickwit is by a Trick to get her away for young Frederick, ha, ha, ha, ha, I
warrant he thinks himself as secure of her now, as a Cat is of a Mouse that he
has between his Paw, ha, ha, ha, alas poor Fool, but if I aim right, he shall
find himself damnably mistaken, for what will I do now, but privately go and
discover all to Sir Charles, so get my self a swinging Reward, and Quickwit a
Plaguy beating, that shall stick by him this Month, ha, ha, ha, 'gad I love
such a mischief with all my heart, how it tickles me, I grow even fat at the
conceit on it. O here comes my Countess, I must dispatch this old Fool first,
and then away -- Mum, now for fortune-telling.


Here's an Almanac and 't please ye.


O let me see, June, June, June, July. Vere be de

Dog-day, dat he de ver good time to make de Intrigue, let me see, you say you
ver born in July.


The fourteenth and shall please ye.


Oh, Ver good, ver good, now shake your left Arm and your right Leg both
together, vich we call in Astrology de simple motion.


Is that right, pray Sir.


Yes, yes, dat will do ver well, dat I must needs say is de ver simple motion
indeed.


But Sir, you tell me nothing all this while, pray Sir, what good fortune shall
I have? and particularly, I beseech ye Sir, to give me leave to ask that
question, that we Maids most desire to know, which is, when shall I be married,
and please ye?


Cry Hymen vid a sigh, one, two, tree time so, now sit cross-legged, and turn de
Gnomon of your face, dat is your nose;


What Mr. Quickwit, and shall I be no Countess after all this.


Zoon Metresse have de patience and understand your good Fortune, he shall live
to be, let me see, Baron of Barn-elms, and if de Planet, dat I see dere say
right, he shall be Duke of Twitnam, Mortlack, and Brainford, go, go presently,
find him out, and make de Love to him, for I see by my Art, dat dis is de
Critical minute, and ver fit for your purpose -- go.


Well, I vow Sir, you have ravished me with your Words Duchess of Twitnam,
Mortlack, and Brainford; why, this is prodigious, Lord to see! how preferment
will puff up a body, methinks a Countess is too small a title now.


Hark you, one word more, if he refuse you, take two, tree more of your Female
Friend vid good Cudgel, and beat him, for de Star do appoint dat way to make
soft his Heart and Inclination, fear noting, beat him but soundly, and he shall
love you for ever after -- Adieu. I must get out and laugh somewhere, or I
shall burst.


Duchess of Twitnam, Mortlack, and Brainford, -- O Lord, methinks I don't feel
the ground I go on! Well, this is a most admirable Person, as I'm a Christian,
and of most profound skill, for he told me some marks about me, as right, as if
he had been by when I was brought into the World. Well, if Cudgelling my Lover
will make me noble, I'll get them that shall lay it on with a good will In
troth, for methinks, I long to be called your Grace, your Grace. Lord, how it
tickles me, pray Heaven my Brain stand firm, for I've heard these new honours
are very intoxicating.


You'll be sure to be ready, Madam, against twelve at Night.


As punctual as the Minute, get you but the door open that can let us into the
Garden, and for the rest let me alone.


For that, let me alone, and do'e hear, Numps, be sure you take your
opportunity to slip out and acquaint Mr. Frederick, that the Coach may be ready
at the time, 'dsheart if we should fail in our business to Night, I should be
poisoned before noon to Morrow, with Pills, Powders, and confounded Potions,
which I see are preparing for me yonder: for Heavens sake, how came you to
escape, Madam.


Why, my being obstinate at first, has made the Fool take an opinion, that he
can cure me with specifics. 'Tis such a positive Coxcomb, that if he once gets
a notion into his Head, there's no removing it, tho never so absurd or
ridiculous. Come, Numps, come you along with me, you must carry a Letter for
me.


A Letter for ye, ah, would you were to be folded up into a Letter your self,
and I were to carry ye to Mr. Frederick, I'd trudge for ye heartily -- I would
odswokers, there's my word still.


Well, Numps, he shall know the good service you would do him, but for the
present let's part, for fear the Doctor should be prying about my Lord de la
Fool -- your Lordships most humble -- ha, ha.


Oh, my poor Master, O, O! odswokers the job goes on rarely.


So, I think I'm in as pretty a way now to get five hundred pounds, as heart
can wish, nothing but the very Devil or my Friend Cunnington can hinder the
happy conclusion now, and I think I have been cunning enough to keep it out of
his reach, I know the Rogue will envy my good fortune, but that will breed
occasion for more mirth hereafter, and when the Guinneas are in my hand once, I
shall have the better gust to rally and laugh at him -- O Mrs. Marmalet, your
humble Servant.


Yours, sweet Mr. Quickwit, or rather, sweet my Lord, I mean not as in the
former counterfeit strain, but in very good truth and reality, I give you your
title as it is to be.


Say ye so, Mrs. Marmalet, I would I were to give you a new Gown upon that
condition.


Ah my Lord, your Grace must give me more than a new Gown before that comes to
pass, -- yet it shall happen.


My Grace, what a Plague does she mean, why hark'e, godd mouldy conserve of
Quinces, I thought you had been more busy in packing up your Ladies things,
than to stand bant'ring here my Grace, what a Devil art thou Mad?


No, no, my Lord, I am not Mad my Lord, you should find me perfect in every
part, if your Grace would please to try me.


Zoons my Grace again.


In brief, great Duke it is your Love I seek, on which depends your fortune, on
which depends, my making or my marring, behold I stand here suing for your
liking, a spotless Maid, a Virgin Cabinet, that fifty years has kept its
treasure close, from Spiders, Moths, and from all other Vermin, till now kind
fate has given a key to you.


Cracked, downright Crazed as I live, this comes of living to be an old-Maid.


Ah, dear my Lord, do not deceive your self, I have my senses right and all
things else thank Heaven.


Why, what a Plague dost Lord me at this rate then? and talk to me of
Treasures, and Cabinets, and Spiders, and Moths, and making, and marring; why
ye Queen Elizabeth's Old Fardingale, ye dirty wrinkled worm-eaten Ruff without
Starch, ye tarnished old fashioned Picture of mad Hecuba in the Hangings, what
dost cant of Love to me for?


Does not my Person nor my Merits move ye, know then, the Stars appoint ye
honours, if you Marry me, you shall become a Duke.


Become a Dog, Pox on ye for an old Carrion, is this a time for whimsies.


It is the time my Lord, the only time, I am told by Art, that if we Marry, we
shall both be Noble, I do beseech your Grace believe my Tears, there are great
Honours budding.


Honours and budding, what a Devil can this plaguy Hag mean by all this?


Good my Lord, Marry me I do beseech your Grace, rolent.


I wont ye old Fool, pox take ye, I wont I tell ye, and get ye gone, and play
your Oafs tricks somewhere else, or I'll kick ye. Marry her, I'd as soon Marry a
Lancashire Witch, that was sick of the Plague.


How, nay then since my hard fate, since no fair means will do, the Stars must
have their way.


My Grace and my Lordship, and Marry, ha, ha, ha, 'gad I believe the old Sibil
has been regaling her self, with a gill or two of Brandy after Dinner, and her
frigid veins having gotten a little warmth, provoke her to think of Marriage,
Marriage with a Pox to her.


Dear Sir excuse me.


Excuse ye, what a Plague's the matter now.


'Tis all for your good, indeed my Lord.


'Dsheart ye dammed Iezabel, be quiet you had best.


'Tis much against my good nature, but


But, what, ye Devil, but what -- are ye bewitched


The Stars will have it so.


-- Oons the Stars.


Do but consent to Marry me, and be a Duke.


Ye Crackbrain'd Idiot.


Of -- Twitnam.


Very well, Witch.


Mortlack.


Fiends and Furies.


And Brainford upon my Honour, 'tis pity Love puts on so rough a visage, but
'tis the fates decree; and I must,


The Devil brain ye, 'dsdeath, stand off, for if I get into ye, I will so
rattle your bones, ye mouldy, mischievous, withered, worm-eaten --


Lost, lost, ruined undown, we are all betrayed and discovered -- how now,
what's the matter here.


A Sibil, a Succubus. 'Gad 'tis well you came in Madam, I would have tried what
power that Witch would have, when I had drawn blood of her.


What Witch, what does he talk of, the Witchcraft is within yonder -- I tell
ye, you're all betrayed, Sir Charles has discovered us.


A Hag, a Nightmare, -- What's that you say Madam, discovered, what's
discovered.


We, we, all of us, some Devil or other has betrayed us, and discovered all our
design to Sir Charles, and the Doctor whom I overheard just now, threatening
such unmerciful punishments to you and poor Numps there, that it almost
distracted me to hear 'em.


Ralph, Tom, and Christopher, and all the Servants of the House are called up
for no good I fear, odswokers, look, look, see if that plaguy word will leave
me now, -- would I had never learned it.


So, I find that I have h^ yet, only a sample of Cudgelling, the main payment
is behind hand, I'm in a very pretty condition faith, but how could this be
Madam, 'dsdeath, who is ^his Devil of a discoverer, what's his name.


That, Sir Charles would not inform the Doctor, being as it seems enjoined him
as a secret, yet thus far told him, that it was an old Comrade of yours, and
one of your own society.


Cunnington, as I live I find it now, it can be no Devil else -- O, Son of a
Whore! O, malicious Dog!


But how he came to know it, that's Witchcraft again.


Ods bodiki^s, my heart misgives me, that I can best tell that, my Con^rers
name was Cunnington, who promised me a Dukedom for the secret ^ with a hundred
Oaths to keep it, and sure a Conjurer has ^ to break his Oath, I must go and be
better ^ as I'm a Christian.


^ mere jest, a Fool to all the Town and Country, ^ know, thrown into the
Ho^sepond.

^ some such thing, that's the (...) on it.


They do; nay, ten to one, or some worse punishment. Numps, prithee contrive
something to help at a Pinch; what shall we do, hah?


Why, truly my Lord de la Fool, if I might advise your good Lordship.


Nay, nay, Pox on it, no jokes now, thou know 'tis honourable enough to
assist Lovers, Numps.


Numps, Numps, what Numps, I'll be Numps no more not I, my Name's Gregory
Golding an Ale-house-keeper here at Twitnam; 'oons, I shall have my Bones broke
here about your Numps, and your honourable Lovers, would I were well out on it,
'odswokers, plague take that word too, would 'twere hanged.


I find Numps would hardly undertake me now folded up in a Letter.


'Sdeath here they come, all contrivance is in vain too, I find I must bear it.


Nay, I am almost in as bad a Case, for I shall be teased out of my Life, by
Sir Charles and the young Blockhead now; but come, let's Act it to the last, my
Lord, let's play our parts well however.


A vengeance on it, I shall make a hopeful part of mine I believe.


Manage you your Daughter Sir Charles, whilst I confront this Rascal. Your
Servant, my noble Lord.


Is Mopsa come from the Black Stigian Fields, where yearly range the Cows of
Proserpine, Tib, Whitehorn, Colly, Redrose, Smut, and Blincko; see where she
sits stroking the swelling Teats, and takes Infernal Cream in Pails of Agate.


Rare counterfeiting Rascal.


How does my Daughter, do the Lovers tease her still, where's the Reve end Mr.
Tickletext, and the Worshipful Mr. Alderman Niggle, ha?


There, there he is, he shakes his Gold Chain at me, and pulls out his hair
purse with fifty pieces, thinking to bribe my virtue, ah * I'll have none on it,
ah * y' are an old Fellow, avaunt, avaunt, ah * ah *


Oh strange! why Doctor, she grows worse and worse.


Extremely. ill Sir, I have been very much deceived in her, I see now I must be
forced to tie her in her Bed, and give her a Purge or two of Sand and
Snow-water to abate this heat, -- she shall take it to Night.


The Devil shall have you first.


And as for my Lord there, I see his fit Increases too, and I must be severe
with him. Go, Christopher, get the Gives and Fetters ready, and call the rest
of your Fellows as I ordered, tell the Surgeon too, I'll have the Skin of my
Lords Head flayed off, and rubbed with Salt and Vinegar.


Oh, Lord --


His Lordship has a wondrous hot Pate; I'll cool it with a Vengeance. You,
Friend,

I think are somewhat crazed too; but 'tis but slight. A good sound whipping
three times round the Orchard will set you right, Numps.


Ah, no Numps, and't like your Worship, no Numps, I'm a poor, Twickenham Man,
merely drawn in as I hope to be saved.


How does your Pulse beat now, my Lord, humph -- do'e know me yet; am I a
Devil, or a Recorder -- Speak, I know your Cure is perfect.


Why then, Faith, Doctor, I thank ye, I'm as well as ever I was in all my Life.


And I too, Odswokers -- again -- would the Devil had that word --


But Fulvia there says nothing, her Distemper reigns still.


No, Faith, now I think on it, I'm perfectly cured too;

Come, Sir Charles, and Doctor, 'tis but a Frolic, a Trial of Wit you see;
hanged, pass it by for once, and give 'em their Liberty.


Not too fast, good Madam. Within there ho,

See these two well beaten, pumped, and tossed in a Blanket, for fear of a
Relapse, and then discharge 'em.


Let 'em be swinged to purpose -- go get you in, I'll speak with you anon.


Nay, nay, Sir Charles, what for a Trick of Wit? 'Twas but a Trick of Wit,
Faith, Doctor.


Oh, Sir, your Wit is out of its Sphere now; and to set it right, I am obliged
to cudgel ye by my Profession. Away with 'em.


This comes of Acting Numps, a Plague o'your Acting


Ha, ha, ha, Farewell my good Lord de la Fool, Ha, ha ha --


'Twas cunningly acted of the Rogues; but now, Sir Charles, what's to be done
with the Lady.


Keep her close up till you hear further from me: Take heed of Visitants, and
more mad Lords, Doctor; I'll go and prepare her once more for my Son, and put
the Case home to her, and her Ingratitude; it may be the Discovery of this
Plot, and her small hopes of serving her own Humour, may make her yield to
mine: But if she be stubborn,

She shall have Cause to curse each tedious hour,
And know too late by me a Guardian's Power.

COme, come, 'twas but a Joke, 'twas no more, Faith. Squire Thomas seems to be
a very honest Gentleman, and a Lover of Business. Prithee Sir Quibble come in
again, and take the other Glass, and so forth.


A scandalous Fellow to say I was an Hermaphrodite, to make a Monster, a Devil,
I can't tell what of me, to disgrace me before the Ladies: But this shall not get
the Heiress from me; I know his drift well enough, it shall not do I'll say it.


Come, come, prithee, come in again.


'Pray excuse me, Sir, I promised my Mother to come home to Supper; and I know
her heart goes a pit a pat, if I'm never so little out of her sight, for fear I
should be stole or come to any harm; besides I must tell ye plainly, I don't
like the Company. I'll drink a Glass here with this honest Gentleman, if you
please, but I would not come in again for a 1000 l.


Well, my Comical Friend, do you entertain the Knight then, I must go mind my
Guests within: Hey, bring some Wine there --


This is one of the silly Heiress stealers, of the other side, I'll banter the
Fool.


Your Servant, Sir, by your Discourse within, Sir, I perceive that you are a
great Traveller.


I have seen I think dis Globe, I mean Europe, Asie, Africa, Americk, or so; dat
is all.


That is all indeed, Sir, you must ride upon the Dogs-star, as the mad Song
says, if you would see more.


Sire, I have seen much more, I have observe too de Globe Celestial; I have
been so high as to hang my Hat upon one Horn of de Moon, and have toush de
North-Pole vid min Finger.


With your Finger, Sir, your Servant again, Sir: Why that's very strange I'll
say it.


Sir, I have live in de Moon-world some time, de Emperor is de ver proud
Monarch, and keep de subject in great awe; de people dere are like de Pigmy, de
man's and woman's not half yard high, but generally wise and ver great
Politicians.


Ods diggers, this is a most excellent Fellow; and pray, Sir, don't those
Politicians of the Moon take us English-Politicians for mad Fellows, hah?


Yes, truly, they do think dat you be all mad indeed.


Prithee what Women are there? Do they dress their Heads as our Cocking Ladies
do here, I wonder.


No, no, de woman's dere have no head at all, de face stand vere de Breast
should, and de Mouth is de Navel.


Oh, Lord, there must be strange kissing I'll say it.


De Creation was ver wise in dat, no woman's is suffer to have head dere, for
fear she should plot Mischief.


Ha, ha, ha, I'll say it an admirable Reason too. But pray, Sir, now lets get
down from the Moon a little; and since you have observed all the People and
Cities in the World, pray, Sir, when was you last at London?


Ven de Sun came last Post from de Antipodi dis morning, dis morning.


Ha, ha, ha, very pretty again, I'll say it: Why then, ten to one, but you have
all the passages of the Town at your Finger's-ends; and, I'll say it, I long to
hear 'em. Prithee what do they do at Court now, hah?


Why de come, scrape, and look ver sharp, den whisper de friend in de corner,
and talk politic one half hour, den oagle Repas du Roy, and make ver low Bow,
den comb de Peruke, take Snuff, and scrape out again; dat is all.


Ha, ha, ha -- that's very like a Courtier I'll say it* Come, come, now for the
City, what are our Men of Gravity doing?


Why fait they follow still dere old Custom -- dat is, contrive to sheate one
anoder; they dat have no stock for Trade, make use of de stock of Impudence, and
sign Policy to lay Wager, so make four, five sheating Bargain over night, and
ver fairly break, and run away next morning.


Well said again i'^ackins; 'gad this is a plaguy sharp Fellow: But come now,
for our Places of Diversion; Prithee how go Humours at the Musick-Meeting and
Play-house?


As for de humour amongst all de rest, I only observe tree sort, dat is, de
(...) (...) Coquette, and de F^dler: de Beau dere make de fine Song, ^o show his
^ s^ she admire de Beau, but laugh behind his back; de Fiddler ^ ^usick, take de
Money, and begar laugh at them both.


Ha, ha, ha, -- Well I'll say it I'll give my Mother the slip some time or
other, and go and see the Humours there I'm resolved; but come now, for the
Play-house.


Noting, noting; dere is noting dere pour Raillery, but de Whore and de Critic,
and two tree dozen of old musty Orange-Wench dat ride upon your Back while de
Musiick play.


Odsdiggers, so they used to serve me, I'll say it: Well, but hark'e now, let's
be a little serious; -- I must know one thing more; heark'e, Do you ever go to
Church -- pray Friend?


Umph, Church!


Ay, ay, Does Devotion thrive? -- I know you must observe something of that
too.


No fait, dere you pose me; for to speak truth, like good Christian, I have not
see de inside of one Shurch dis -- sixteen year, and begar I find de Town ver
mush of my humour; de People and de Priest make de grand difference; he can say
ver little or noting dat they believe, and they, Begar, will do noting vat he
advise; so I never trouble de Shurch at all.


I'll say it, an Admirable Persontoo! Well, dear Signior, you have so much
obliged me, that if you please to come to my House, you shall find every day a
Welcome that --


Why Cunnington, Cunnington, what a Devil art


Is your Name Cunnington, Sir?


Yes 'saith, Sir; But I know I shall be welcome to your House for all that Hah,
ha, ha.


Hah, ha, ha,! What has the Hermaphrodite been bantered again? Ha, ha, ha.


'Slid there's some Trick in this; Odsdiggers, come near my house, and I'll set
my Dogs at ye: A Plague, here comes more of 'em; I shall be laughed to Death if
I stay. I'll say, 'oons Cunnington, I should bave been robbed or ravished in a
weeks time.


You came a little too soon; for I was just going to pump him about the
Heiress.


Phoo, Pox she's secure enough Boy, but I have some fresh play in my head; now
Stockjob's Wife, ye Rogue.


Here she comes, 'gad take me I'll give her my Billet deux presently.


Oh horrid! Cousin, why d'e bring me into all this Company, especially where
that Fellow is, for I am certainly informed, 'twas that horrid Fellow that writ
the last Lampoon upon the Wells.


Have de patience Cousin, me shall find out dat presently, hark'e Sir, you dam
English Pultroon, dare you abuse de Lady, dare you make de dam Lampoon ha?


Not I Madam, you are the most mistaken in the World.


Not that I value the little malice, but to see the bestiality of the Fellow; I
kept my self so reserved, Cousin, all this Summer to avoid censure, that I
refused to receive visits from any Man under the Age of sixty nine, nor ever
went any whither but to Church, and if they did not Lampoon me for that too,
I'm no Christian.


I must get the Rogue off, -- 'Gad take me, Madam, I have


Ah Monsieur, 'tis impossible for me to doubt a Person of such merit, and so
well accomplished as your self. Cousin, I am


She informed by that Puppy, then they 're familiar I find.


Sir, I beg your pardon vid all mine heart, I understand you are de ver
ingenious Person, and understand de Ladies affair.


Nay, I can't positively affirm he was the Person I confess; I only grounded my
suspicion the more solidly, because of his Satirical Phiz; O horrid! methinks
his Face is a mere Lampoon it self.


Come, come, slapdash, and so forth, let's reconcile all mistakes with a Glass
of Wine and a Song, I've a Bowl of Punch ready within too.


There spoke the Soul of the City and so forth, That was done now like a Man of
intrigue.


My dear, dear Charmer, 'gad take me I've had a passion for ye above this six
Months, and if you don't answer my Billet deux there, I shall dye that's
certain.


Dis is de ver agreeable Fellow, but I must show de cunning, and not yield too
soon,

-- O, fie, fie, Monsieur, I am sure you mistake me I am not de Person, 'tis
impossible dat I --


Not the Person, by this dear hand, there's no Person in the World but you, has
the power to charm my heart, your Eyes have made me a very. --


A very fop, Rascal, Dogbolt, -- come, draw, draw, Buffoon, I'll teach you to
be saucy with Women in my Company.


Hey, slapdash, what a Plague's the matter now? keep the Peace there, hey day,
is the Devil in ye all, and so forth.


Death, and Consusion, Cunnington, discover the Plot: Why how was it possible
he should come to know it?


Nay that piece of Witchcraft I am yet to Conjure for, but I can assure you the
beating was substantial, and so had the Blanket been too, if some of Sir
Quibbles Gold, had not bribed off two of the Grooms: but come Si^, take Heart,
for though my Brains have taken occasion hitherto to disoblige my Bones a
little; I have another Plot left yet, not only to make my revenge perfect upon
Cunnington not; but to secure you the Lady, for since I have undertaken it, you
shall have her, though the great Devil, and all his little Imps conspired
against me.


Pox, what vexes me most is, 'tis grown the Common Town talk already, they have
it at the Coffee-house as familiar as the (...).


Prithee how did do to Act the Madman? I'll say it, I'd have given a hundred
Guineas to have seen thee a little; Prithee how did look? and what did say,
I wonder? and when did the Lady come in with her Story? and which way, and upon
what account? and wherefore?


And wherefore good Sir come away quickly, and fetch the Guineas you promised,
for I shall have occasion for a Bribe or too, to carrion the Affair: Farewell
Sir, I see Company coming, stay.


Hah, am I fallen into this Satirical Devils Clutches too, then I'm like to
have a rare Breathing, for I perceive by that malicious Smile with which she
mocks her self, that she has heard of this late business; and is as pleased I
warrant, as prosperous Malice can make a Woman, when she has an opportunity of
being revenged: Well, I am resolved to stand the brunt now, come what will
on'^, I see she's prepared for the Assault, and to beat her out of her Guard,
I'll begin first. What always reading, Madam, still affronting Mankind, by
Invading their Province of

Knowledge, ^ye, this is unnatural; a Lady should no more pretend to a Book,
than a Sword, neither of 'em are proper for het Sphere of Activity.


This, only excepted Sir, this is a Treatise proper for all degrees of People,
'tis called, Sir, an Hospital for Fools, where the most dislempe^'d of that
sort shall be Cu^'d, or at least put into a good way. What think ye Sir, shall
I send it ye, you may chance to have some apish humour in your Brain, or some
foolish act in your Body, that may want a good remedy.


Oh I thank ye, Madam, but must beg your Excuse, to take a Recipe from a Female
Physi^ian, to cure a defect in the Brain, that's a good one Faith: Why that's
the way to make a Man stark Mad indeed: And as for my Body, I had as lieve take
an old Purblind Country Nurse, if I had a mortal Bruise, or Palsy, and I were
certain to have the scandal of a Cripple upon me all the days of my life after.


I don't know what you mean by your Bruise, or Palsy; but considering your
general distemper of Body, '^would be a greater scandal to the Nurse, to take
ye in hand.


Very fine, well certainly there is not another so vain a thing in Nature, as a
Woman that supposes her self a Wit; she fancies all the World must truckle to
her Wit, and admire her Person, and Wit; tho the Wit's as Envious as a Witch,
and often as Ugly.


That might be a fault indeed in the last Age; but in this I never met with any
of your Town Crew, that have Wit enough to cause Envy.


If there's any one, Fool enough to Love her, she'll make him a mere Changeling,
and like a little sullen Chit, of five years old, deny herself the Morsel she
Loves; only to Tease and Vex another, when at the same time her mouth waters,
and she's ready to starve for Hunger; this I think touches your Ladyships
Copy-hold a little; but much good may it do ye with your sullen fit, I know
you'll get a Husband, and a vast fortune by it.


Well Sir, not to be behind hand with ye, in your Frumps, much good may do you
with your Rich Heriess, you'll get a Wife, and a prodigious fortune by her, I
hear too.


Ah Curse on her, I find she knows all.


For m^ part, it were unreasonable for me, to expect you to be constant to my
s^all merit, when you had such a tempting Lump as Fifty thousand Pounds to
cherish your hopes withal; Fifty thousand Pounds, d'slife, there's ne'er a Beau
from Covent-Garden Church to the Tower of London, but shall give his little
Corps to the Devil, every hour of the Day for it.


Nor ne'er a Lady that frequents the Park, Play-House, or the Musick-meeting;
but shall marry a thing one degree removed from a Baboon for half as much.


By which I find Sir, you are not out of hopes, I dare swear you think your
self above one degree removed, tho your last Mad Plot upon the Heiress has
given the world some strange suspicions to the Contrary: on m^ Conscience you'll
return to me again Sir, you'll have some qualm or other come over ye shortly*
then yet drunk, and with a kind of maudlin Repentance, come to beg my pardon,


So far from it, that I rather fear I shall have ye at my Lev^e every morning
shortly, with a pitiful Petition, imploring my Charity, to bes^ow on ^e the
remains of Matrimony.


The remains, Sir, I have Arithmetic enough to know, that take nothing from
nothing, and there remains nothing: Besides a Married Town Bea^ keeps always a
Misers Table, there is so little for his own Family, that he'll never get
thanks, or a blessing from any one that shall expect his remains, take that
from me Sir.


Very well Madam, rally on, rally on, and enjoy your Wit. You have my free
leave, whilst I Enjoy Fulvia, and fifty thousand Pounds, and so farewell; and,
d'sdeath, such another full thrust and I were gone to all Intents and Purposes.


He's gone, and tears my Heart-strings as he goe^*
Whilst I have only the poor Consolation
Of a feigned Mirth, to hide my real Sorrow;
For still I Love this base ungrateful Wretch,
False as he is, and full of all the Mischiefs of his Sex.
I love him still, and have no Peace without Him;
But can I Love a Man that scorns my Love;
That poorly offers up Wit, Beauty, Merit,
A Trophy to the ^ordid Idol, Money;
Can I Love such a Man, and own it too;
No, I will rather Poison, Stab, or Drown;
Revenge my self, on my unlucky self:
Do a thing Barbarous beyond my Sex.
Rather than this base Man shall know I Love him.
Eyes dry, dry your Tears, and keep the Secret in,
Whatever grief I feel, let none be seen,
Tho the strong Passion ne'er so powerful grow,
I'll Choke with Love, rather than let him know.

COme, Come Cousin, you must give me leave to tell ye, I understand an
Intrigue as well as an older Person, to let a young Hectorly Fellow, show he
ha so much command over ye, as to dare to quarrel, and expose ye in Company. Oh
filthy, it shows a familiarity too saucy for Civil Conversation; I hope Cousin
you have not been particular with the Fellow.


Vat you mean by dat Cousin, vat is particular.


Oh horrid, I hope you wont put me to the Fatigue of a Blush, by telling the
Nauseous meaning, that were to deserve to be Lampooned indeed; when a Man is
particular with a Woman, I think there is no great nead of a Sophister to
explain the meaning.


Vel, Vel, Pox take the particular, dat is all one, I assure you I have don vid
him now, and will encourage that fine young Gentleman, dat talk and ^ow, and
rally so vel en Francois; me no endure de Huff de Bounce, de brutal way of Love
no longer. Dear Monsieur Romance, is all French, all Talk, all Air, all
Gallantry, and de oder Gentleman dat speak de Welch is ver fine person too, who
I presume Cousin has de extreme inclination to have de Intrigue vid you.


An Intrigue with me, Oh filthy Fellow, that's a worser abuse than any has
been yet put upon me, for he's the veriest Fop in Nature.


Fop, Oh Mon deu! vat and worth twenty thousand Pounds, dats impossible! Oh, he
is de ver fine Person, and has the greatest tender for you Cousin.


Oh faugh, I shall be Lampooned about him in a Weeks time, i'll lay my Life on it:
Oh horrid, i'll go and l^k my self up; But are you sure he's worth twenty
thousand Pounds Cousin.


Assurement* ^nd will make good settlement, vich is ver much as times go.


See here they come vid Monsieur Stockjobb, who I have wheedle so, and make such
great Fool, that he will believe nothing against me vich my oder cast of
Coxcomb say.


Come, Come, Let's have no brawling nor quarrelling, but sit down lovingly
together, and help off with the Bowl, and so forth; what Pogry, my Dear, my
Fawn, my Pricket, -- and my Cousin Siss^ too; Hey, sla^dash, we'll all sit down
too't Faith.


-- Vat you please Dicky, ven de Husband Command de Wi^e must always be
Obedient, dat is but Reason.


Ah subtle Witch.


-- Come Squire Thomas, and my Welsh Friend, Pray sit round* Here's some Honest
Friends of mine will give us a Catch in three Parts* Cousin Sisse, Prithee sit
down, and so forth.


Oh horrid! Cousin, would you have me give such occasion to be Lampooned, as to
sit drinking filthy Brandy amongst Men?


Filthy Brandy; Twelve Shillings a Gallon, by this Hand, and will certainly be
the best Commodity in the whole Kingdom shortly, -- Harkee, Sisse, such another
Word, and if there be a Lampoon to be got in Christendom, and so forth, I'll
get one for thee.


According to Shinkins Observations, this is not Brandy, look you, but Punch,
which is fery goot to raise Ploods, and cause Plushes* and Pewtys in fair
Ladies, look you, therefore pray you sit down, I pray you now.


Nay, Pray Sir, -- Oh Lord, -- Nay, if you will force me, What shall I do? I am
so ashamed, well if I do, I'll swear I'll drink in my own Cup then, -- Go,
Ponade, and fetch it, it holds three quarters of a Spoonful just.


Dear Madam, Let me be happy with your sweet Hand


You, -- (...),


Vat ail de Ruffian, --

-- Monsieur, I am your most devoted.


His most devoted, Oh rare Jilt, dee fleer Dog bold, I shall have your Nose
anon.


Come, Come, Slap-dash, No more grumbling Will, but take your Cup, and then
let's have the Catch, and so forth.

Why, Cousin Sisse, What hast got there, an Acorn Cup? why a Flea may drink off
that, prithee take one of ours, and so forth.


Oh horrid, not for the World, the quantity of this is enough to suffocate my
Spirits, as I am a Virgin.


By the Lord Mayor, very well performed Boys, Tholl, Loll, Loll, a^ dickins
take it, it won't do now, yet I could have Sung my Sol, Fa, when I was a
Bachelor purely Faith, -- but these Wives, these Wives* spoil all our Parts;
Come, Here's Prosperity to the City and Trade.


And as I was saying Madam.


And as I was saying before Madam.


Sir, I have nothing to say to you, you are strangely troublesome, Dat last
again, I beseech you Monsieur.


Who leaves his Place there, Will. Hotspur, What a Plague dost stand brooding
upon my Wi^e there for, prithee come and take thy Cup, and let the Squire
alone, he has business with her, and so forth.


Business with her, Here's a damned Cuckoldly Son of a Whore, and so forth.


When her is in Wales, look you, her could drink very goot Metheglins with her
Cousin Cadwallader, at the Three Red Herrings and C^een Leeks in Mo^mouth; but
now since her saw you, her Heart has done nothing but thump, thump, and then
her does sigh so sadly, Hey ho, Shinkin, why then, alas, there is now way for
her, look you, but Hey ho!


Love, Oh horrid! the very word is enough to fright me into an Apople^y, would
he would marry me, tho -- as I'm a Virgin.


By this Hand, I believe I could make Monsieur lay forty Wager, and buy Stock
every hour, if it were not for dat rude Fellow dat come and disturb us.


Say thou so, Slapdash, Gad if I had known that, he should have found this
way to the Door before now, an uncivil Person to come to a Citizens Table and
be well entertained, and yet ungratefully endeavour to hinder Business, -- An
idle Scoundrel, to stop the Source, the Life-blood of the City, Trade, -- Gad
I'll complain to my Lord Mayor immediately.


Now has that French Devil told some Lye or other of me, I'll lay my Life,
Harkee Di^k, art thou so very blind, as not to see thy self abused.


Yes, Yes, Sir, I do see my self abused, -- and so forth, -- Sq^ire Thomas,
prithee come hither, Look, Pogry has informed me, ye are a very ingenious
Person, and love Business, Look, what she does I'll stand to, therefore pray
go and Discourse her, she's at your Service.


Oh Witall Coxcomb, what does he mean.


Pray, Sir, no interruption.


'Dsdeath, to say publicly thy Wife's at his Service.


Upon the Score of Trade Sir, and so forth, I know what I do, I warrant you.


The Devils grin at me, I have no Patience, Scoundrel, hands off.


Slapdash, hold her ^ast Squire Thomas, I give my Authority, why this is a
breach both of our Charter and Customs; that a Citizen of London shall not have
the Privilege to dispose of his own Wife, for a Hectorly Fellow of the other end
of Town; Gad I'll complain to my Lord Mayor, the first thing I do.


To take the Wife from the Husband, before his Face, is more than you can
justify, Williams, that is very true.


Thou art a ^ery Ass, Pox on thee for a cracked Welch Harp, Hold your jarring,
or --


No, No, I'll take a Course for this hereafter; In the mean time Pegry, since
this rude Masterless Companion disturbs us here, my Chamber within is private,
there you may settle Affairs, and so forth; Go, go in with her Squire Thomas,
and because no body shall disturb ye, I'll lock ye up d^ see, and keep the Key
my self.


'Dsheart, I shall run mad, why dolt, Madman, wilt thou lock her up with him
too.


Upon the Score of Trade, and so forth, I'll show for once the Husbands
Privilege, without your leave Sir*


Trade, Ay there is a rare Trade going forward; Oh intolerable Cuckold!


Come Sir, you are a Scandalous t*other end of Town Fellow, and my Lord Mayor
shall know it; you shall know that a Citizen of London understands what's
proper for Business: Cousin Sisse, take you your Gentleman into another Room;
nay, nay, no Squeamish trick now, but go, since ye are molested here, I will
have Business go forward in a place that's proper. -- Go, go you after Sir,
I'll be with ye anon.


Ay, ay, There's the Trade going forward too, this is Stockjobbing with a
Vengeance.


Pogry will draw her Fool into some devise or other, I am sure, and now I have
finished this Affair so discreetly, I'll leave this Hector to chew the Cud by
himself, and go and drink a Dish of Coffee with a good Neighbour, a Common
Council-man, and Brother Stockjobber.


A Curse on your City Understanding, and Destruction seize that Jilt, that
tortures me with Love, tho I resolve to hate her, -- damned infamous Creature,
that Yesterday, as common as a Hireling, would have met my Appetite half way,
and cherished it, now taken with a young pert noisy Coxcomb, deserts me
without Blushing; but this senseless Withal, her Husband, shall know, what a
Snake he Fosters, before I have done with him.

And whilst his City Iobbing he's pursuing*
I'll show him where*s another Iobb a doing.

So, I think there's none of the Quaking Fraternity but will own I have
mimicked their Dress well, and play but thy part right Child, that we may
revenge our selves upon this Cunning^on that has so abused us, and th^ I may
chance to be no Duke, I'll be a King to thee in my good will, my Love Child
shall be beyond all Titles and Preferment.


Ah sweet Mr. Quickwit, the Rascal has asked my Pardon since, but I shall never
forgive him for it; for, will you believe me, I have cried about that Business
till I have been as wet as if I had been dipped in a Pail of Water, to think
that I should lift up my Hand against --


Well, well, 'tis all forgot.


To dare Cudgel the Man that --


Well, well, 'twas all Accident, prithee no Tears.


The Man I love so tenderly --


Enough, prithee enough, -- I believe thee.


So tenderly, so very tenderly --


A Pox o'your Tenderness, There is no Plague under Heaven so tormenting as one
of these old Cats, when she pretends to make Love; come, prithee no more of
this Foolery Child, but let us go on with our Plot upon Cunnington; Let me see
what's the Quakers Name that I'm to Act.


Zechiel, And't please ye Sir, my old Lord Fullworths Steward, my Mistresses
Father.


Zechiel, very good, and one that you say has been trusted with all the
Writings of her Estate.


He has indeed, at whose House, Sir Charles (having found her as he thinks a
little more pliant to his Sons Address) intends to meet her this Afternoon, to
discourse about the Marriage, and to that purpose has given that Letter you
have there to Cunnington to show the Doctor, who upon sight of it is to deliver
my Lady to him, and a Note for fifty Guineas, which Sir Charles has ordered
him.


Then you are sure Cunningman has seen this Letter.


Yes, An't please ye, and is merry beyond measure about his success of out
witting you, he left it with me only whilst he is gone to disguise himself like
a Quaker, for in no other Habit will Zechiel admit any one into his House, I
expect him every Minute.


Ay, ay Child, Let him come now as soon as he pleases, we are prepared for him;
and I think I am as much a Quaker as himself, or the Devil's in Iron Gray, the
rest remains in thee to follow my Instructions, do but this Business neatly,
and as for the other Business, thou worst of.


Ah Dear Sir, I swear you bring my Heart up to my very Mouth, I vow you do now,
and I warrant ye Sir, for my part I*ve my Cue perfectly.


First then, instead of this Letter of Sir Charles, give him this of mine
Child, to carry to the Doctor, 'tis sealed with a Wafer like it, and the Hand
is Counterfeited, I'm sure, so exactly, 'tis impossible for him to discover
that, then for the Contents let them operate at leisure.


With all my Heart Sir, and I rejoice from my very Soul that I can do any thing
to pleasure you, and be revenged of him; Hark, here he comes; away Sir to your
Close^, and when we go, be pleased to follow us, and you shall find me punctual
to the least particular.


Do it but Cunningly, and if thou art a Maid by to Morrow Night, why then say,
--


Ah sweet Sir, I understand ye to a Scruple, and Heaven bless ye; well I swear,
-- now my Hearts at my Mouth again.


Hah, hah ha ha. I have been laughing at my self above this half hour, to see
what a Figure I am; I have been Agent in a great many Intrigues in my life
time, but never had any yet like this; this is a Masterpiece, a piece of Wit
like Hains; for here have I insinuated my self so far into this grave Fool, Sr.
Charles, by my subtle discovery of the late Affair; that he has trusted me in
this Habit, to prepare the Old Quaker about the Writings, and afterwards to
bring the Heiress her self to him -- to him! Ha ha ha ha, there's the Jest now;
and to receive as a Reward fifty Guinea's, ha ha ha! Alas poor shallow Knight!
little does he think what's hatching in this Brain of mine: for, what will I do
now? but instead of carrying her to him, keep her my self, and make her Marry
me, or Compound swingeingly, which is all one; there's Wit now! ha ha ha,
there's Mischief! Gad I love Mischief dearly: And when I have had her three or
four Nights, let her hang me afterwards if she can, or any one else for me.


Come Sir, are ye ready? the Doctor's just gone home, -- bless me, to see how
Clothes will disguise one! Why? you look like a mere Ananias.


Ha, ha, ha, don't I? Methinks I am filled with the out-goings of the
over-flowing^, of the Bowel-yernings, and for the humh, and hah!

Let me alone. Come give me the Letter, and be assured, though I Joked a little
the last time, yet I'll not fail to bring a better Business about, e're long
for thee.


Well, well Sir; go and dispatch your own first.


An Heiress, and fifty thousand Pounds! Gad I'm a lucky Dog, ha, ha, ha.


Here's a rare Rogue for ye; had not I discovered the Plot, he had betrayed
his Trust, and got the Heiress for himself; but as things go, will miss of his
aim damnably: Now for my Quaking Faculty I must make one amongst 'em.


Oh Love! How many strange, and different ways
Dost thou disturb the Quiet of our Minds?
If amongst all the Race of Male Deceivers,
With Curious search we chance to find out one,
That we can fancy Honest; some cross Doubt
Straight fills us, with a fear he may prove Haggard,
And then, Alas ^ we split against a Rock.
That ruins us for ever: I dream^ last Night,
Frederick was False, Sordid and Mercenary:
And that he only loved me for my Fortune;
I give no credit to sleeps Idle Whimsies:
But yet it strangely troubles me -- now Christopher.
What Noise is that within?

And 't please ye, some new Lunatics last Night brought hither.


Prithee what are they.


A spindle-legg'd French Taylor; That ever since the VVars, being at a loss how
to get New Fashions for his whimsical Customers, Fatigued his Brain so much,
that he grew crazed upon it.


What, others?


A superannated Maid of threescore and three; who being promised Marriage by a
young Fellow of one and twenty, at the very Conceit on it ran Mad for Joy.


Ala^ for her well who else?


A Covent-Garden Beau, who being obliged to make a Song upon his Mistresses
Paraquite, and sitting up three Days and three Nights, not being able to
produce one tolerable Thought at the Conceit of losing her Favour, lost the
small remainder of his own Senses.


So, what more?


A kept Miss, who being discarded by her resenting Lord, fell distracted, not
for the loss of my Lord, but for her five pound a VVeek.


Go on. --


A Vintner whom his Customers had poisonned with making him taste his own Wine
-- besides a Quaker who is now coming* in here with my Master, of whom he'll
give a better account himself.


I hope Dr. you need no further satisfaction in the truth of my Commission; be
pleased therefore to let the Lady get ready with all possible speed, and the
Note too for the fifty Guinea's; I shall have present occasion for


Very well, Sir, I understand ye -- Christopher --


Christopher! what has Christopher to do in the Business? This is a strange,
Old Formal Coxcomb: He cannot blow his Nose without his Man -- Doctor, I must
desire you to be as speedy as you can; for I've another part to act, as you may
perceive by my Habit: And what a Character Sir Charles gives me, I suppose you
find in the Letter.


Yes, Sir; yes; he has given ye a notable Character: here indeed* Christopher,
go presently, and bid the Barber come hither to shave his Head.


Your Servant Doctor; no Faith; that will be a Courtesy a little unseasonnable
at present, by reason of my haste.


Alas, Poor Fellow! yet stay a little Christopher, where is his Master? Let him
be called in First.


My Master --


He is at the door an't please you; I'll go and fetch him; alas! I'll run Ten
Miles on my bare Feet, to do the poor fellow any good.


Hey day! is she bewitched too? what a Plague do they mean? come, come Doctor,
the Note quickly; and Madam Pray dispatch, I've a world of business to do,
before Night yet.


'Dslife! this is the most comical fellow, I ever saw.


Oh! the dellirium is very strong upon him; d'e hear Christopher? bid your
fellows make haste to strip him, and get ready the Canvass Shape, that he may
have nothing to tear; and a pair of the strongest Fetters for his Legs; d'e
hear? For Sir Charles informs me here, he is by fits very outrageous.


Fits, and outrageous? the Devil's in 'em all, sure: I know what's in the
Letter well enough -- come, come, this is no time for Jokes; Sir Charles will
be impatient till the Lady comes, ye trifle, ye trifle, 'dsdeath! I should have
bin with him by this time.


This is a very Rogue, but I'll manage him presently.


Here's like to be good sport if it holds.


The Letter says too, he will be very Mischievous towards the Change of the
Moon, which is this Evening, but that's no great matter, I can disable him from
that by a good Whipping: He shall have 300 lashes upon the Belly*


The Devil, I shall, -- 'dsheart how I tremble -- nay, nay, if you pursue the
Banter, and intend to affront Sir Charles, there's no more to be said, I must
Inform him, and there's an end on it; But that Letter to my knowledge says
otherwise: I'm sure I read it this Morning, the most sweet, Civil Complemental
thing on my side that ever was penned.


No doubt on it, Sir, no doubt on it: Can you read?


Read; Ha, ha, ha! what a Pox does he take me for one of the Black-guard? This
Coxcombly Doctor's crazed himself, I'll be hanged else -- read! yes, yes, you
shall find I can read,


Proceed then.


Doctor, 'tis proper that I let you know, I have made another discovery of a
Plot, to carry off the Lady you have in Custody. This Rogue, that I send here
with this Letter.


Go on, Sir, go on: I perceive you can read admirably, ( being one of the
Principal Contrivers, -- this is Witchcraft. (...) believe my own Eyes.


Really as you say, Doctor; for a Crazed Person, the Man reads to a miracle.


What Crazed Person, Madam? 'dsdeath! I shall run Mad indeed* if this trade
hold.


Come Sir, to the next Paragraph.


He was formerly a Sharper, and whither he be mad or no; I desire you to use
him as such, for he's one of the greatest Rascals in the whole World, -- as
his Master will better inform thee: -- (...) my Mr. again.


Sir Charles gives ye a notable Character, you see Sir.


'Dsheart Doctor! 'tis all Villainy, Witchcraft, Cunjuration; I'm abused.


The Fetters quickly, Christopher, he begins to ^ave, oh! here's his Master.


Death, and Hell! what Son of a Whore's this -- I'm at my Wits end.


Come Friend, you must inform the Nature of his Madness, that I may Minister
accordingly.


Plainly, since that ungodly season, that I first perceived that the Spirit of
truth was departed from him, I relinquished him, often seriously pondering upon
his State of Reprobation, which plainly I find is worthy be Comiserted by all
the Brethren and Sisters of the faithful.


Oh! Rogue, I know him now, -- Doctor you're abused, Imposed upon, tricked, this
is no more a Quaker then I am. This is an Arch Cheat this is --


Awe Satan, Satan! great, great, is thy power.


He Raves again, take hold of him, and stop his mouth there.


The Tempter is very powerful in him, he turns and winds him* which way he
lists, he goes into his mouth like a Ratt, with a great Head and a long
Tail, and exalts his voice within, in Curses and Exclamations hum! give me
the Engine Woman with which we used to resist the Tempter.


Here 'tis an't please ye; put this into his mouth -- and Satan can have no
Power.


Plainly, I have bin informed he hath bin trained up in the School of Sin
vulgarly called the Play House, where the Devil Adorns himself with toys and
trappings, where the Ears are misinformed and the Eyes misled, where the frail
Son of Man caresieth the Woman inordinately, where he tempts her to Midnight
Gluttony; and whispers into her unhallowed things.


My Heart is ready to leap out to thee for Joy, for he does it so Naturally
'tis impossible he should be discovered, -- how the Fool the Doctor looks too?


Moreover, observe, how outrageously the old Draggon tears him.


Ay, ay, tis time to begin, -- away with him, and give him the Lashes I
ordered.


Plainly it behooveth thee Well, that the Spirit of Truth may once more return;
and the old Man be rooted out, -- now Rogue I think I'm even with thee -- --


Awe -- Satan, Satan, great is thy Power.

But now, to the remaining part of my Charge, I am to Conduct a Woman from
hence, a sinful Woman as it appears to me, who causes with her transitory
Wealth and Beauty, strange Appetites, Boylings and Fermentings in the Heart of
Man.


Well Friend, no more enlarging upon that Subject; here is Sir Charles's Order
in this Letter, who it seems is at a Garden-House here hard by; therefore Madam
-- you had best make haste; you need no disguise but your Masque, for he says
there is a private back way to it which this honest Man has only knowledge of.


Plainly, thou say it.


Was there ever so admirable a Fellow? I'm scarce able to contain my self from
laughing out.


Come, young Woman, and let thy steps be guided soberly* Give me thy Carnal
hand; hah! verily it is exceeding white, and hath an alluringness in the Palm
thereof, which is, as it were, provoking: Hah! this is it now, which stroaketh
the Forehead of Transgression till it become Masterless* and girds us into
the Labyrinth of Misconstruction, from whence we seldom or never come forth our
selves.


What an odd sort of a Canting Rascall's this? and what a does here with one
Woman that has Money? gad I've a Daughter of my own at home has sat pricking
upon a clout at home this Seven Years, and no one has come to her, but an
Attorny's Clark, and City Groser; when this here is beset with all degrees,
Ages and Religions -- well, 'twill be always so; and where the Honny is, there
will the Gnatts, Hies, and Insects be buzzing together, -- Christopher -- my
Cloak, -- I'll take a little Air, and then see how -- the Wedding goes forward.


Gad take me, this was the most Comical adventure that ever the City was famous
for, to lock us up with his Wife, and Niece upon the score of Trade: why? 'tis
an Action ought to be known to Posterity and worthy to be Chronicled in the
City Annalls.


Her Cousin Siss, was fery familliar too when her was alone; there was no pish,
nor fie, nor pray be quiet, look you -- only some little frowns and repukes,
put fery kind looks for all that St. Davy.


If I had not bin obliged to meet my Father here, I would not have left my
little French woman this two hours, but he is so hot upon it to make me Marry
this Heiresse, that he spoils my humour of Intriguing quite, gad take me.


Pray you see, where he comes yonder with the Lady that they call the crete
Wit of Richmond, she that talks, and discourses, and Jeeres, and laughs, and
makes Fools of all the Town by Cadwallader.


By this Light, she's a rare Creature: 'dsheart I'm in Love with her up to the
Ears already; why? she's finer than my little French Woman by half: ay Gad or
my Lords Daughter either, or my Wife that is to be; or my Knights Lady at Cue;
or Jenny in Lumbard Street; or my Widows Daughter; or my Seamstress, my
Chambermaid or any of 'em: I'll write her a Bilet deux immediately, Gad take
me.


Hey Gadsplutt! her will have more Women than the crete Turk has at this Rate,
look you.


Yonder's my Son, Madam; and I am very glad to find you so well disposed, to
the Marriage between him and your Kinswoman; for tho she has lately entertained
some volatile Humours, which Youth may very well Excuse* Yet the Principal
Verbs, her Wit and Virtue, so far counterpoise that.


Her Estate you mean, Sir Charles does so far Counterpoise that --


That the Candor of my Nature obliges me to dislike all other offers for him
that are not possessed with her --


With her -- Land and Houses.


Good Qualities, Madam, having bin since my Noble Lords Death, her Father, a
true honourer of her for her Extraction, merit and --


And Money; is not that a Principal Verb too, Sir Charles?


A delicate Rogue; what an Air and Shape she has? Cousin, Rise prithee turn
about a little.


Money, Madam! What the dirty Slave of our Convenience? She has hit it to a
hair, gad for all that;


Oh Sir, take this from me, since the Golden Age, the World has lost those
Moral Men you speak of: Money is now the Soul o'th Universe: The States-man,
Commoner, and Country-man, Physician, Lawyer, Citizen, Priest, greedily dam
their own for it every day; the man that's Rich must be accomplished too, his
Apish Tricks are Gentleman like Carriage, his silly speeches called refind and
Witty, if he be Prodigal they stile him generous, if Covetous, a close, wise
wary fellow, if he detracts or Lies, he's a fine Courtier, if Blasphemous, a
Wit, if finnical a Beau, if drunk, he's then a merry Jolly Fellow, or if
unmanly Lewd, a Rare Companion.


Ah that dear Sweet little Honey prating Tongue, -- would I had it a little
here, and if a stranger may have privilege to affirm his passion; very good,
gad take me.


I pray you now Cousins make haste, for her has an Intrigue too, look you, her
has promised to meet her Cousin Siss, at seven Precisely.


If Money has these flourishing attributes Madam, what then must virtue have the
chiefest good.


Faith, just, quite contrary, for virtue Sir is generally poor, and Poverty can
give no Bribe for Praise, the virtuous Man that's poor, must be a Fool, a
wretched sort of an uncurrant Coin, that few or none will deal with; Tho he be
wise, his best opinion is thought ignorance, his talk ridiculous, his Person
hated, he still fares worst, yet pays the dearest for it; has he a cause at
Law? it shall be lost, has he a Claim in Love? he shall be Jilted, his
Ingenuity is worse than Witchcraft, and every venial Error past forgiveness.


And if I Love ye not better than both my Eyes, may I be poisoned like a Ratt
at your Chamber door and be accounted the verriest Son of Whore in the World,
instead of your most passionately devoted most humble, and most obsequious
Slave, Thomas Romance* gad take me, there I came off like an Angel.


What a Devil is he making mouths at yonder, how now Tom what are you doing
there?


'D^life if he sees it I'm ruined; nothing Sr. I'm only casting up a Taylors
Bill a little, that the Rogue may not cheat me.


A Taylor's Bill, prithee leave of those trifles and prepare to entertain your
Mistress whom I expect here instantly* with all you ought to thank this Lady
too, her kinswoman, who gives ye her good liking.


Her good liking, gad, would I had it upon her own score; now what would I give
that it were sealed? this were A Rare time to clap it into her hand. -- --


That he has Sir. Charles, he may assure himself, or any one else so that
Traitor Frederick be disappointed, -- let me but frustrate his design and let
the rest fall ou't, as fortune pleases.


Sir Charles here? they have dispatched their business very quickly I see.


Oh Doctor! welcome; you're come in Admirable time, but where's my Daughter?


I hope she's not far of Sir, you are a better guardian than to trust her in
ill hands.


Therefore, I recommended her to yours -- where, where, is she?


Ha, ha, ha, this is fine merriment, why Sir? I desire to know, and whether she
seems pleased since I sent -- her to ye?


Sent her to me! 'dsdeath, what does he mean.


Nay, what do you mean then? sye, sye, Sir Charles; am I a subject fit to make
a Jest on?


Thou make me Mad, to hear thy Ridling; I sent for her by Cunnington, dressed
like a Quaker, who was to bring her to Old Zechiell, her Fathers Steward, where
we have waited long, but no one came.


Why Sir? I gave her to that Quaker, and obeyed the orders in your Letter here,
for Punishing the Impostor, that had contrived to Steal her.


Impostor, what Impostor? here's some Trick by Heaven.


Read, Read the Letter, oh Confusion! how my Heart beats?


Tricked, Ruined, Cheated, abused; this is none of my Letter, nor any of my
orders; some subtle Devil has Counter-feited Cunnington, and on my life carried
her off to Frederick.


Destruction seize the World; to Frederick did ye say, to Frederick?


It must be so, he has doubtless given her to that other Cunning Rogue, and
punished him* I sent for a feigned mischief.


What e're has chanced is Fortunes fault not mine; that Quickwit is the Devil,
and can Act in such variety of Shapes, Hell cannot balk his Cunning.


Very fine; so I perceive I am like to lose my Heiress again; but tis no great
matter, for I've another new Intrigue, and that's all one to me, gad take me.


Here is such Cousining, and Cheats, and Tricks, that Shinkin knows not what to
make on it by St. Davy.


Torture and Death; this is the greatest Plague, the fiends could e're Invent
to vex my Soul: he has her now and without doubt laughs at me.


Hey, mettle to the back too, -- gad take me, I'll warrant her.


The Fifty Guineas too, no doubt are paid by this time: this was a damned
subtle Rogue.


Nay never hide thy self, take one good wish first; may thy dull resty Age
increase diseases, the Palsy, Gout, Snattica, and Stone, and have no better
Doctor than thy self, as for the Attributes of Fool and Cuckold, I need not
grace thee with 'em; those thou hast already, but may thou have none but
Sailors Wives for Patients, and those so Raving Mad that in their Fits each one
may long to have a peace of thee, and Tear thee as the Thracians, once did
Orpheus, or I could now, thou Paralitick insect.


O Villain! Dog, Doctor, are you there? I'll knock his Head off.


More Mischief yet! I shall be murdered now, that's certain.


How, this! is't possible? What, my Friend Cunnington? nay if he were not an
old Coxcomb, thou shouldest have thy penny-worths out of him; that's certain,
for we perceive he deserves it richly; but prithee how gott'st thou off; I was
just sending to thee.


Why, as good luck would have it, just before they had time to Chain me, I made
shift to climb up the Chimney; what kicks and Buffets I've endured for -- you
shall know at more leisure: I (...) only now Breath and time to tell ye, that
if you follow me quickly, you may recover the Heiress again.


Hah, -- what say thou?


Oh thou blessed Angel of a Fellow, go on.


From the top of the Chimney, as I was trying to get down, casting my Eyes to a
little Garden house, not far off, who should I see? but that Rogue in a Quakers
habit, with Sir Quibble and Frederick leading your Daughter cross a Gravel Walk
into an Arbor.


And hast thou marked the place, thou Charming Creature?


Most carefully.


Hah! and shall we get her? speak, speak, thou precious*


I tell ye, ye shall.


What from Frederick? hah! what say thou? speak quickly thou Cherubin.


Oons from Frederick? from all em: ye little Brisk pretty Black-ey'd -- what a
pox, will she Ravish me?


Thanks Fortune, that was unexpected.


Which you should never have known if I could have carried her off my self.


Let's away instantly and fetch the Constable and Watch; come, Tom, and Cousin.


Oh Heaven! this is the happiest turn.


For me it is upon a double Score,
I else had lost one Member, if no more.

This is the happiest moment of my Life.


And mine too, I'll say it.


That was a very close hug; the Knight out does ye Sir Extremely in his
Caresses.


Is not the Parson come yet? dull heavy fellow, how can he loiter so.


Ay, what's his Name, pray Brother when is he to come, and what is he doing all
this while.


Rid^ulous questions! what shall I do with him Tom?


I don't know the Fool begins to smell the Trick and grows Impertinent upon it.


You must discover the truth to him, for he's so brisk upon me, there's no
enduring him.


Why then, Madam? I'll say it, I believe you mistake your Man, this Gentleman is
my Brother; Madam, 'tis I am your Knight; Madam, 'tis, I am he that is to do
the favour.


My Knight, ha, ha, ha.


Ha, ha, ha -- her Knight! Oh fie Brother, you know your self and the Lady
better sure.


Sir Quibble expresses himself very Comical in troth, ha, ha, ha, ha.


Hey da, why what do ye laugh at all so, and where's the Joak? I'll say it I can
find none: Why, am not I to marry the Lady Mrs. Quickwit? and must not I be
then her Knight?


No, no, Sir Quibble there was another Design in it from the beginning.


Alas Sir, what should you do with a Wife? when d'e think you should get her to
be of your side? where would you find an Humour that would be suitable to ye?
and why would you prove the Fatal Consequence of disagreeable Marriage, Sir;
there's four questions, now answer me quickly.


Ha, ha, ha, ha --


Pray, Madam, hold your self contented a little; harkee Brother, have not I laid
out a hundred and fifty Pounds about this business?


Within a small matter, I think; why sure you don't grutch to do a small
kindness for your Brother?


No, but to part with ones Mistress to ones Brother, is a little too much, though
I'll say it; therefore I must tell ye plainly, Brother, I won't do it.


You see the Lady is uneasy, Sir Quibble.


Ay, 'tis all one for that, keep you your distance too, or I'll say it I shall
so tan your Quakers hide, I shall make ye act your Play but ill when you come
to it again else; why sure? though I have bin led by the Nose a little, and laid
out my Money, I can't tell how, I won't lose my Mrs. -- ye Lobrocks what a
Plague I am not such a Fool neither?


If this blunt Fool should beat us both now, 'twould be a pretty jest?


Nay then, there's no time for delays; let go her hand and presently, or I'll
run my Sword into your Heart.


Why then, I'll run mine into your guts; let go my Mistress: No I an't such a
Fool neither I tell ye: Odzooks I'll keep her in spite of ye, ho ho.


Will ye so, Sir? that's more than you can promise long, and so have at ye.


Nay then, stand to it Brother; I'm of thy side again now, I'll say'^.


So, you are ours once again, in spite of Fortune. How now Cousin, what Wounded?


A Plague take your Confounded English Customs, look you, that you cannot get
your Wives and your Marriages, but a Gentleman must have his Pate and his
Prains peaten out about it? well fare her own Country I say, the Prittains
have not such Pribbles and Prabbles, and broken Pates by Cadwallader.

When any Prittain pargains for his Spouse;
He prings so many Seep, so many Cows:
The Pridegroom tells the Pride his Loves intent,
And she kind Fool as quickly gives Consent.
No Swords, Cads plutt, nor Cudgells there prevails;
But kiss and Couple, that's the Way in Wales.

HAD ever Man such Cause to Curse his Fortune? to be so near the longed for
happiness, and then to lose it, doubles the vexation: Oh I could ou^rail now a
losing Gamester; a ^ashier'd Captain; or a Grumbler double Taxed.


And I, a Suburb Bawd just come from Garting: A Plague of my Quakers shape
here; if I had not looked so like a Rogue, on my Conscience I had thriven
better.


I'm sure my loss is irrecoverable, for I must no*re hope to come into Favour
with Sir Charles again, but then the Consolation I have in your sweet promise,
Sir, does I confess allay --


O prithee good Spouse that must be; no more Love now, my Bones smart a little
too* much at present, to let me entertain any Amorous* Motions -- Ah Plague of
their Rusty Bills; that Rogue Cunningman took care they should all fall on me
still; but what's most Comical? As I was running off after you, he comes up to
me and with a grave Face, as if he had known nothing of the matter, invites me
to drink a stand of Ale with him this Evening at Numpses.


Ha, ha, ha, ha -- and wilt thou go?


Ay by this Light will I; and if I can mould that dull headed Fellow once more
rightly, my Witty Antagonist shall have but little cause to boast his late
success -- come Courage, Sir; they shall make Paste of my Bones with their
Battoons e're I give up a Cause I've undertaken, whilst my Brains lye in their
right place: This Evening will prove all, till then farewell -- If I get the
Dice once on my side -- the Golds my own yet; I've Art enough to manage them
I'm sure.


I must follow him and put him once more in mind.


If Fulvia were Heiress apparent to the Universe, there could not be more Wit
nor diligence used obout her. This is the third time our Confederate Forces
have been repulsed: And Faith were I not sensible the Castle were stored: with
the best sort of Ammunition, tempting Gold? I think I should have long since
raised the Siege: I must confess my self to be of that Pagan Opinion, that
there is no one Quality belonging to a Woman, unless it be her Money that can
countervail a Man's playing the Fool in Courting her a Month for: This was my
Plea with Sophronia once, who has some simple passionate Papers of mine still,
that I wish I had out of her hands; my deserting was not so very just its true,
but then 'twas very profitable, and this damned Money has power to make a Rogue
of a Man, often times Constancy, that's most certain?


Nay if you're in a Passion, I'll desist, but if you'll hear, I'll prove it?


What, that Frederick's false! Oh 'tis ridiculous Malice, and I'll not believe
it: I know she loved him her self once, and this is now the product of her
Poph.


False as Brieno to Olimpia in the Story, base, Mercenary, the worst degree of
Falsehood.


Ha ha, ha, ha! you rave, you rave, Cousin; I pity ye; pray go home and let
blood, you are dangerously distempered take my word.


Not with thy Disease, Child, I'm sure; I swear I would not have it for the
World.


You talk as if I had the Gout or Palsy, or a long Family Rheumatism, that
distinguished the Blood of my Relations for ten Ages: What Diseease is't you
mean -- take heed of Scandel Cousin?


Nay, do you take heed on it Cousin? for the Disease that I mean, has generally
some Infection that way, 'tis called a Masculine Calenture, or the Plague of
Man-loving; it often seizes upon. Creatures of thy Age, and is of that strange
Nature, that it dulls and Numbs the Brains as if they were froze, which must be
chased and warmed a long time by Reason and Argument, or else the Patient will
never return to her right Senses.


Lord, that's a terrible Disease indeed, but yet for all its violence, I have
Brains enough left to see a distemper in you too, Cousin; 'tis the Plague of
Greediness, and you use me as the great Sister in a Country Cottage does the
lesser; you would pack me to Bed without any Supper, because you have a mind to
my Bread and Butter.


No, no, Child, the Case differs between us extremely, some may feast with a
Rasher upon the Coals, whilst others ^eck at the very smell: And I must have
thy Stomach before I can be greedy of thy Diet.


Come, come, Cousin, you have stomach enough, nay indeed so much that you grow
sullen with it, and like a little Child, won't eat your Meal till you see the
Plate ready to be given away to another; for as homely a bit as you make of
that Rasher, if I am mot mistaken in the Morsel, you would be glad of it to
relish your Mornings Draught, and for all your Course Name of Rasher, tartly
think it a Gnatt or a VVheat-Ear.


If Frederick be the Wheat-Ear you mean? I had rather have an Old Caoon at the
latter end of July.


Ah, you shall never banter me with that -- you'd think him a young Pheasant at
the latter end of October, if you had him, to my knowledge?


I think him, prithee if his Spesies were chnaged, and he were turned into a
Cormorant, a Buzzard, or an Owl, 'twere all one to me.


Any thing but the Capon, Cousin, you were speaking of, I dare swear for all
your Anger, you have too much Charity, to wish him turned into that.


It does so little concern my Charity, that I should like my Hen with Eggs very
well without any trouble, to know they should never come to be Chickens, and
consequently Cocks of the Game. Besides there is so much ill Blood begot now a
days, and so many Strains Crossed, that if, for the Future, the Sex were all
Capons, ^ question whether the King would lose e're a good Subject by it.


This is your Satirical Vein now. Oh! how you Fatten your self with this
humour, just like a Noncon, that rails at Episcopacy, not or any just reason,
but through self willed Opinion, and ridiculous Envy; else why is Frederick
still the Theme of Railing?


Oh! thou ungrateful Creature, have I not told thee? 'tis through kindness to
thee.


To me, rather say through Hatred to him, because he Loves me*


He Loves thee not, his baseness does deceave thee; Mercenary Soul Covets thy
Fortune; thy Person is the least of all his wishes.


Just so I dream't indeed


That's always a Fools humour, when they have not Brains enough to know the
Courtesy, they term it an Affront.


Well, for all your mighty Wit, this shall not get your Ends; I see your Hatred
and your Envy to him, and consequently judge his Love to me: I'll Marry him in
spite of all the World.


Thou shalt not Marry him, tho all the World assist thee.


How poor is this, and mean, because my merit appears above those in his
deserving Eyes; thy Heart breeds venom, and thy Slanderous Tongue, dissention
between Lovers.


Lovers! Damnation, how She Tortures me? I tell thee once more thou deceived
poor Creature; he does not Love thee, nor cannot Marry thee if he would, which
is a secret; nothing but sweet revenge could e're draw from me.


What, will you Cunjure? shall your plain dealing Faculty Convert it self to
Magic? or do ye carry a little Familiar under your Girdle, to Enchant us upon
occasion; which way will you do this?


That e're the Clock sound Midnight thou* shalt know; in the mean time, let thy
Young Hotbrain'd wild unthinking Head remember this from me.

Love may seem great, that in its self is small;
Looks cover thoughts and interest governs all:
When Damon to an Heiress speaks kind things,
'Tis not for what she is, but what she brings.

She has so much moved the passion in my Soul, my Eyes can scarce contain it?
what discovery she can make, I know not, but long to be resolved; tis true, we
have had so many lets and troubles in this business; as if Providence it self
disliked the proceedings; but still this is no proof; besides he has Sworn his
faithful Love so often, 'twere infamous and dishonourable to doubt it.


Madam, I need not tell you my resentments, nor how I relish your ungenerous
dealings; you have reason enough to guess, and after guessing, have wit enough
to make me satisfaction.


Well, Sir Charles, consideration you know, ne'er comes too late.


Right, Madam, and to show you that I practice it my self, I will forget your
late Discoveries, and once more address my self, an humble Suitor on my Sons
behalf.


I will consider of it, mean time, believe this fairness of your Temper wins me
more, then all your plots and Stratagems before.


Come, come; Slapdash, twill be a Match faith, and so forth; gad I'll say this
for Squire Thomas, he's a Notable person, as my wife informs me; she says he
pushes forward into business mighty well; he'll be a great encourager of Trade,
and so forth.


I hope my Cander and my Love at last, will force ye to be grateful, and to
show how much I prize a Reconcilement; this Night we will have Revels and a
Ball, and I my self will drink one Glass the more, in honour of the Marriage*


Marriage, Sir, is a thing of weight; but as I told ye, Sir, I will consider of
it, and to that purpose beg the favour to retire a little.


Do so, and rest your self against the Evening, for Tom intends to lead ye a
brisk measure i'faith -- so I hope all will be right now, she seems
considerative, which is one great step to Sentiment and Knowledge


Pooh! Slapdash, the woman has it in her head; now Sir Charles, all will go
well I see it.


Now Sir, if you have any regard to your Honour, or the Reputation of a Citizen
of London, as you have formerly flourished upon, come along with me, and you
shall see what a Snake you have fostered up; or to speak in plainer Terms, you
shall see what a Cuckold you are.


Come, you're a rude Hectorly to'ther end of Town fellow, I tell ye^ pray keep
from my House: I a Cuckold because I promote business, and Manage my Wife
wisely for the honour of the City; Sir, I scorn your words, for Gadzookes, I
had rather be an Elephant.


But in the mean time, you are a Beast of another kind, which come but along
with me, shall appear; I will show thee such things, such Monstrous things.


What you have seen Squire Thomas I warrant, go into my Wives Chamber
privately, or so; well what then? tis about business and so forth, she knows
what she does I warrant her.


Ay, but you don't know what she does to my knowledge; come, come* you shall go,
I have lodged 'em all yonder, the Welsh Fop, and his Skittish Devil too; your
Rooms are all taken up and managed for the honour of the City, and so forth.


Why then they are managed according to my desire, and so forth. I defy any
Citizens Wife within the Wails, to have a better head for business than her
self; for I'll hold a Hundred Pounds, she has drawn one of 'em into some lucky
wager or other; nay, nay, prithee hold thy tongue; gad, if thou were it one of
the Apostles, I'd believe nothing against Pogry and Squire Thomas, not I


Why then like an unbelieving Sotas thou art, come and use thy Eyes* nay, nay,
no drawing back -- by Heaven thou shalt go.


To laugh at thee, which I know I shall do and Damnably too, I a Cuckold, -- as
I said before I shall soon be an Elephant I'm sure.


Well, I believe I am an Orginal about Intrigue; I don't think there's the
fellow of me in Europe; gad take me, for now is my Father thumping his Brains,
and plotting to get this Heress for me, and here am I hunting about for
Sophronia, upon another Intrigue: I conveyed a Letter to her just now, by
putting it into the Service Book at Church, then dogged her home hither, -- I
must find her out, for I long to know the success on it.


Well, Shinkins was not much behind her in Intrigues, neither look you, for
her Cousin Siss, was hide her self hereabouts too, who I find loves Corners and
pie places extremely, where gadsplut if Shinkin can find her, her will put her
toot, for corners and pie places are fery full of temptation; but for all her
putting toot, there shall be no Marriages in the Case by St. Davy, there her
will peg her Pardon.


Why, that's spoke like a Man of Intrigue, gad take me, would I had my dear
Angel here, that I am looking for in a Corner.


Softly, softly, take care they don't see ye, she's gon I find at present, but
I know will soon return; in the mean time, pray observe the Dialogue between
these two Coxcombs.


I shall observe to laugh at you Egregiously, that I shall and so forth.


Pogry stays so long that I see I must leave her, and go and seek out my new
Charmer.


Pogry -- de'^ hear, Sir, he begins already.


Well Tom Fool, what of that?


Fie, fie, to desert your intrigue so soon, was to show falsehoods and
inconstancies, which is not like Man of honours, look you.


'Tis intrigue, pray mind that Hint too, Sir.


Jackanapes, what hint, ye Ass you, what Hint?


Pox on it, her over fondness every day tries me more then a Match at Tennis;
here's a Locket she gave me this Morning, which it seems the Fool her Husband
gave her Yesterday.


Humph, -- humph.


A trifle worth about Fifty Pounds I believe, she teases me with such Follies
as these every minute almost.


Look, Sir, so much for the encouragement of Trade, and so forth.


By the Lord Major, the very Lockett that I had of Sir Paul Poundage, the
Goldsmith, to let him have share in my Project of the Catskin, oh! I am
confounded, I cannot believe my Eyes.


Nay, pray Sir don't laugh too extravagantly, Squire Tomas is but opening the
Jest yet.


But the jest best is, the Cuckold admits me into his Wives Chamber every day,
in hopes she will draw me in to lay wagers; when, gad take, me, the only one
that ever laid or intend to lay, was a Brass Shilling against a good one, that
her next Kid will be a Boy.


There Sir, what think, e of that wager too, has she not drawn him in rarely?


Oh Villain! the other End of Town Bully to ruin business too, that's worse then
all; gad I'll speak to my Cousin Touchhole, a Captain of the Trainbands, to
lend me a File of Musquetteers to Shoot the Rampant Dog through the Belly.


Nay, nay, have patience Dick, and don't hinder Trade I say.


Trade, gadzooks, this is the Devil of a Trade.


There's a light in the next Room, and ten to one Sophronia's there a lone, gad
I'll go and see, Cloak and Hat lye you there; if Pogry comes in the mean time,
let her stay, I have her so much at command, she dares not be angry with me.


Flimms and Flames, and put her toot, -- hey Slapdash, why, this is Bawdy-house
fashion right, the Welshman's gon to tickle my Cousin Siss in the next Room
too.


Ay that's all one, 'tis all to promote Trade you know, and for the honour of
the City.


Oh Confusion to the City and all Trade, if this be the Fruits of wagering and
stockjobbing, I have no Patience: I'll go to my Cousin Touch-hole, immediately:
I'll have a dozen Muskets at least.


Nay Faith, stay and see all now, for here's the good Wife coming through the
Garden, and here's the Eopps Cloak and Hat left as opportunely to disguise
thee, as if we had contrived it; here, here, on with it quickly and Practice
his affected Gate, I warrant, you make some strange Discovery.


Na, like enough, but gad I'll send her home again; if I do, she shall ship for
Piccardy with the Next Wind -- A Cuckold, Oons I had rather be an Elephant by
half; but this comes of succouring French Refugees, with a Pox to 'em.


Ah dear Monsieur, I beg your Pardon vid all min Heart, dat I stay so long, but
now I speak of mine Heart dat has bin vid you all dis while, and I only stay to
take de Convenience of de Fool my Husbands being out of de way, to bring off
some small trifles of Gold and Jewels, which are dedicate to de Joy of my Soul,
my Hearts Blood, my Treasure.


Slap dash, here's a French Devil for ye and so forth.


I am so fatigued vid dat Brute, dat I can have patience no longer, and
therefore come to trow my self upon you, vid whom I will henceforth live and
dye, and whom I will follow all de World over.


Why? well said Pogry, rarely done, Pogry, go and be hanged Pogry, good
Protestant Refugee, to Piccardy go, but the Gold and Jewels shall stay in
England, ye Jade.


Oh Diable, vat dam misfortune is this?


Nothing, nothing, Madam, I know your Interest with Dicky, will turn the Scale
immediately; this is all upon the score of Trade.


Oh Confound all Trade, Burn the Exchange, hang up all Wagerers and
Stockjobbers, and the Devil take all business out of my doors, ye Whore; you
are a Protestant, are ye?


Gad take me, I had like to have made a damn'n mistake yonder, for instead of
Sophronia, who should I meet within there, but my Father and the Heiress, whom
he has just carried to his own House, and Commanded me to follow -- Hah, Dicky!
how dost thou?


Why Dicky does wondrous well, Sir, as well as a Cuckold can Sir, that had
rather be an Elephant there; there's Pogry too, go, go, manage your Trade
together, lay another brass Shilling to a Copper one; Stockjob lay Wagers and
be damned together, honest Squire Thomas, and I'll go to my Cousin Touchhole
and get you mauled, Dogbolt, if I can, for all that, and so farewell t'e.


So now you may launch to Piccardy again, and follow your old Trade of
Basketmaking, Jilt; I think I have spoiled your Market pretty well here; for
your part Coxcomb, I'll go and inform your Father of your design upon
Sophronia, that I think will do your business too.


'Dsdeath if he does that, I'm undone for ever, I must after and prevent it.


Ah! dear Monsieur will you leave me then?


Leave thee, ay gad if thou were a Cherubin, and I think that's a Station
remote enough for a French Refuge


Was ever hopeful Intrigue so spoiled -- diable must me go France again too, by
dis hand me will deny dat, me will Rob, me will Pick de Pocket, me will drown,
me will hang before ever me leave Sweet England, to go into France again, dat is
certain.


Come all malice apart, prithee lets be grave no longer, but drown Animosities
in the bottom of the Pitcher; you're an Ingenious Fellow, and I've a mind to
be reconciled to thee, and therefore contrived to meet at this Little Cottage
out of the way, where we may speak our minds freely, -- Come give me thy hand,
shall we be friends?


Prithee, thou can not be a friend to any Body.


Ha, ha, ha, I know you're angry, but faith Tom I could not help it, thou
know tis natural to me to Love Mischief.


Come pull away then.


Come Faith the Heiress health, let's remember her that we have had all this
bustle about; ye witty Rogue you, I'm damnably afraid you'll get her from us
again, for all her Guardian has her so fast.


Very well Sir, insult, insult; you have the Dice, you may do what you please,
ha, ha, ha, gad I should lose another Brace of Fifties if thou should, but I
think I may venture her this once.


Ay, Pox on ye for a Witty Rogue, you have the better of me clearly, my Brains
are quite dulled.


Then not to banter any longer, the Match betwixt young Romance is made up, and
we are to have a Ball at Sir Charles's House immediately: I wait here for some
Masquerading Habits, that I have sent a Messenger to borrow at Twickenham;
there's to be a little Ataque too of Pluto, Orpheus, and Euridice, of my
Composing, and the Music of Mr. Purcels -- here's the Design, I'll show it
thee.


Ay hang ye, you used to be Ingenious enough at these things.


There's a Man without, with a Bundle, desires to speak with ye, and 't shall
please ye. --


Oh! that's well, 'tis the Fellow with the Habits, I must go and take 'em.


Ah Master Quickwit, Numps was a damned sower part for me, it was adswowkers,
but d'e hear, when am I to be paid for it, I was only thrashed confoundedly for
acting so well, -- that's all I have got yet.


Why now the happy Minute's come to make ample satisfaction to us both, and do
but as I advise thee, thou shalt get thy Twenty Pounds presently, and Mr.
Frederick shall have the Heiress into the bargain.


Odswowkers, how can that be, Master Quickwit?


Dost know this Fellow that went out?


Not I, I never saw him in my life.


This is that very Rogue that betrayed us to Sir Charles, and the Doctor, that
procured thy beating, and has ever since frustrated our Plots upon the Heiress.


'Sbud, my Bones ache at the very thought on it; oh Dog Villain, is this he?


This is the very Rascal, who is now gone out for some disguises to make some
Dancing Entertainment there this Evening; now if thou can but get two or
three of thy honest Neighbours to seize him, I'll contrive the Heiress for
Frederick and he shall have the Guinnies ready for thee.


'Odzookes Master Quickwit, I'll do it immediately, for it never could happen
in a better time, for I have three or four Neighbours here drinking in the next
Room, that will do it for Mr. Frederick at a words speaking. --


Away then dear Numps, and call 'em instantly, -- now Fortune favour this once,
and be my Goddess for ever after.


Well, prithee tell me now, how dost like the contrivance, you must know I am
to do Pluto there my self.


Nay, thou art the fittest Person to act the Devil, of any one I know, that
I'll say for thee.


Ha, ha, ha, prithee leave off thy frumps, thou can not forgive me heartily
yet, I see, come faith, give me thy Hand, I'll contract a Friendship with thee.


Ay, that's likely to prove well, why, thou never yet could be a Friend to
thy self, much less to any one else.


Faith, the Heiress and I will drink thy health presently, but you shall
promise me, you won't get her from me again, you witty Rascal -- you shall
faith, ha, ha, ha. --


We're Catchpol'd Ioe -- I'll promise nothing.


How now, what a Devil's the matter now?


Come, Sir, you must go along with us.


With you, whither, forwhat -- 'Oons are the Men mad?


Alas, good Sir, why de'ye pull and haul the Gentleman so, 'Dshart, what's the
matter I say, what have I done?


What has he done Brother? By the Maskins I can't tell.


Tell him he has spoke Treasonable words against the Government.


Secure him as a Traitor, he has spoke some vengenable words -- against the
Government.


Who I, 'dsdeath, I?


Oh, Rogue, Villain, has he so, we'll hamper ye.


A Traitor, nay then there may be Treason in this bundle for ought I know, I'll
secure that.


'Sbud I have said nothing, ye are all mad sure, I tell ye you mistake your
Man, -- Brother, prithee put in a word for me.


No, Brother, no, Treason's a dangerous thing, I dare not meddle in it.


Come, come, away with him to Mr. Soakes the Constables, and then let him deal
with him.


Ay, ay, away with him, away with him.


Pray remember to drink my Health with the Heiress, good Brother.


Away with him, Gentlemen, away with him, ha, ha, ha. --


Ah, plague upon ye, help, help, Murder, Murder.


So, now I'll to Frederick immediately -- the Dice are now on my side -- and if
I don't thrive now by my Hand, I shall despair hereafter.


You'll be sure to keep your promise.


Punctually, keep but my Counsel, and Five Hundred Pounds are thine at the day
of Marriage.


Well, Sir, upon that condition my Mouth is sealed up, and your Father shall
know nothing, but if you abuse my trust, Bilbo's the word, you know what I
mean.


Well, well, not a word more, this plaguy hot-headed Fellow, -- may do me
mischief now, but when I'm once Married, I'll manage him as I see occasion.
--


Since Fredericks ill fortune has made him lose the Heiress, 'tis some part of
Revenge, to make this Fool pay soundly for it.


Come, where are the Music and the Dancers, -- Son Tom, why methinks thou art
lazy in the business.


Mr. Cunnington is not come yet, Sir, with the Habits, but we expect him every
Minute; gad take me, my head runs so much upon Sophronia, that I can get
nothing else into it for the heart o'me.


Well, I am glad to see things in so good a posture at last, by the life of
Gallen, all great advantages are acquired with great trouble -- she's an
Heiress and Rich, the more difficult still to be obtained, but -- Patience and
Industry make all things easy; I forgive her trick upon me with all my Heart,
and shall be well pleased to Top a Bumper at her Wedding.


Oh, Mr. Hotspurr, you're welcome, I see my Son and you are reconciled, and
honourably I make no question, therefore shall be glad to appear your Friend.


Friend, ay, just as the Friendship of the World is, he cares not Threepence if
I were Strapado'd; nor I three Farthings if he were Hanged. --


Oh horrid! to infringe your Word and Honour, is a baseness not proper for a
Gentleman, and I'll discover it to your Uncle, as I'm a Virgin. --


And Gadsplut, to Marry Wildcats, and Harridans, and her knows not what, is
like Fools by St. Davy, and her will discover that too.


How now, what's the matter, Cousin Rice, what is't occasions the Lady's tears.


I'll tell you, Sir Charles, though I confess the odious story ought to be
concealed, but since my* Honour is concerned, it must out.


For now we shall hear a Welsh Intrigue, gad take me, I shall bring a new
method on it by degrees, in all the Countys about England.


You all know my detestation of Lampoons, and the care I have always taken, to
prevent 'em, but you must know, this Gentleman, having long made an honourable
Address of Love to me* upon condition that he defended me against scandal by
Marriage, -- at last I consented.


Gadsplut her only talked of Marriages, look you to keep her from squeaking and
squalling, her intentions were quite other things by Cadway.


Ay, ay, -- Madam, to my knowledge, my Cousin Rice hates Marriage, as much as
you do a Lampoon, you are mistaken in your Man -- gad take me.


The more reprobate Person he, for Heaven knows, Sir Charles, how loath I was to
Intrigue with any Man, and to that purpose, have often ran up into my Chamber,
got into dark Closets, Cellars, Larders, and such by-places, where I thought
the mischief of Man, could not overtake me, as I'm a Virgin.


Where you thought the mischief of Man would soonest overtake ye, as I'm a
Virgin.


Son Tom, Tace, proceed Madam.


But in spite of all my industry, this wild Welsh Creature has still found me
out, and has published himself and me, in so particular a manner, that here I
am in a Lampoon again, and in so filthy a stile, that I vow I'm ashamed to read
it.


What signifies running into Closets, and Cellars, and Larders, was not all her
Doors left open, can her deny that?


Alas, I had not presence of mind enough, to shut the Door upon him, this is my
deplorable case, Sir Charles, and if he does not Marry me, I must never show my
Face in the World again, I am utterly undone, as I'm a Virgin.


Her has been as much undone; look you in Cellars, and Closets, fery often
before Shinkin's found her there, as report goes, and to be prief, her shall not
marry Harridans and Wildcats, and there's, there's the resolution of a true
Prittain, look you.


Never particular with any Person, since I was born before, as I'm a Virgin.


Well, well, go after and tease him, this business must be debated at a more
convenient hour, for I see the Entertainment is going forward, here comes my
Daughter, -- now Tom mind your business.


Cousin, no more, the proofs are clear and manifest, and as you relish my
proceedings, second me.


Against the World, in such a generous action.


Pray, what are these, Sir Charles?


Oh, these are Mummers, some of the young fry of the Neighbour-hood that having
a frolic this Evening, desire to give us a share on it, the Subject is the
stealing an Heiress, and the Figures are Love, Desire, Youth, and Avarice, that
all Court the Lady Pecunia, the design is pretty enough, come let 'em begin.


Here's more, what are these?


Oh, this is Cunnington's contrivance, a little masque of Pluto, Orpheus, and
Euridice, pray let's observe.


They desire to practice with Euridice a little in the next room, and then you
shall see 'em do it perfectly. Come, Madam, this is the rarest contrivance to
escape that ever you had.


Hold, hold, are ye mad? why, Sir Charles, and you Squire Small-brains, you
will not suffer me to be carried off thus before your faces, will ye?


But into the next room to practice a little, Madam.


You are to act Euridice, you know, Madam, and they will only see if you are
perfect in your cue; Mr. Cunnington there, has shown me the whole design.


And Mr. Quickwit, the witty Player here, has shown it me, Sir. Come, Pluto,
you must unmask.


'Dsdeath, Madam, what do ye mean, you wont discover us, and undo all?


Yes faith, Sir, I've a fancy in my head that 'tis not lucky to be stolen to
day; therefore you Orpheus, otherwise called Frederick the constant, you must
uncover too, your singing will hardly get ye a Mistress to night, I can assure
ye.


She discovers us -- Death and Confusion! what new turn's this?


Methinks, Mr. Heiress-stealer, you look very blank of the sudden.


Ay, 'tis so -- this is the Female Devil that has done me this admirable good
turn, I find it now, and my disgrace approaching: Oh! damned! damned Fortune!


What think ye now, Sir Charles? am I not very just to my Guardian?


This is such an affront, as nothing but my Sword can do me justice in.


Gad take me, the Devil's in 'em for plotting, I think; will they never let us
alone?


That Devil Quickwit in the Plot again! I hope you'll give him one good thrust
for my sake.


Nay, no fighting, good Gentlemen: Well, well, Sir, I understand ye, but you
are so hasty --

Look, Sir Charles, here's another part of the Jest remains still, which this
Gentleman Mu^er is wittily concerned in too, who having no ill opinion of
himself, and consequently believing I had a very good one of him, sent me word
he was bailed, and his present design of mumming, bribing some of his Tenants
to act it, and help carry me off; and is really, and in specie, the very
numerical and amorous Knight, Sir Quibble Quere.


Sir Quibble Quere too? why, here are all the Fools in the Nation sure,
concerned in this Plot.


'Dsheart, why will you discover me now, Madam? I'll say it, 'twas the purest
design that ever was laid, but I hope you'll marry me for all this, for you
know I have laid out a pour of Money upon it, and have now a Coach and six
Horses ready at the Garden-gate for ye, I'll say it, you ought to consider now,
Madam; what a dickins, Conscience is Conscience all the World over.


Learnedly argued, Sir Quibble, and you shall see what Justice I'll do you all
presently; first you, Sir, that through the


My contract of Marriage to Sophronia! -- this is the Thunderbolt I always
dreaded, and 'tis fallen with a vengeance.


Read there a base Deceiver's Character, and for thy sake may never generous
Maid, trust thy false Sex to be again betrayed.


Instead of Heiresses and blooming Brides with fifty thousand Pounds, Stick to
your old Doll Commons of the Town,

And cater as you used for half a Crown.


Peace, Witch, Fury, now could I eat that Satirical Devil without Salt for my
Breakfast! Torture and Death! to stay here too, and be baited, is worse than
breaking upon the Wheel! -- Hell take all Heiresses, and all the Sex besides.


Ha, ha, ha, alas poor Brother, I see now I am to be the happy Man.


Troth no, Sir, I must beg your pardon too -- your Estate is wasted with
disbursing Sums to go a Fortune-hunting; nor have you Brains enough to get
another, and to marry a Ninny, a Bankrupt, no, as you used to say, Sir, I a'n't
such a Fool neither.


You may send home your Coach, Sir Quibble, you will have no use for it here,
Gad take me.


Why then a Plague of all Intrigues: I'll go and get drunk, and despise all
Womankind, for I'll say it, I'll ne'er hang my self about the matter, but I'll
have my Money again if there be Law in England, let the Women go to the Devil,
I'll not be choosed out of that; what a Pox, I a'n't such a Fool neither.


Ha, ha, ha, -- thus far, Sir Charles, you see how far I have discharged your
Trust, do ye resolve therefore to deliver up your Guardianship freely, that I
may have generous liberty to pursue my Inclinations.


Madam, with all my heart, before this Company I declare you free to choose a
new Guardian where you please, and to confirm it, take there the Keys where all
your Writings are, and the Power left me by your Father, -- I see she intends
to give her self generously to my Son, and therefore to confine her, were
ungenerous.


There stands the Gentleman, Madam, if you design him happy, the quicker work
the better.


That might have been done, indeed, Doctor, to oblige Sir Charles, but the
Gentleman you speak of, has made a better choice, as this can witness.


How's this! a Letter of Courtship to Sophronia!


Oh! and so full of Passion, Flame, and Darts, that it almost scorched me when
I read it.


Oh Villain! Dol^! Town-Fop! have I been racking my Brains all this while to
get an Heiress to thy purpose! what's the meaning of this, Sirrah?


Why the meaning is, that I love all the Sex, gad take me, and can no more
confine my self to one Woman, than to one Suit of Clothes; if you don't like
the humour you might have got me a better, that's all I know of the matter.


Insupportable Coxcomb! I'll disinherit thee immediately.


More turns and Plots, this is a very Comedy, by the life of Gallen.


So, I find I am like to Cudgel my five hundred Pounds out of my Spark, for the
Devil a pen^y ^e's like to get by the Heiress -- but stay, who the Devil will
she choose, -- if I should be the Man at last.


Since such a general defect of honesty corrupts the Age, I'll no more trust
Mankind, but lay my Fortune out upon my self, and flourish in contempt of
humane Falsehood: as for thy part that hast been a main Acter in this business,
and with contriving wit well managed it, to let thee see the Ingenious still
gets Friends, I will with Gold reward thy Industry, nor shall honest Numps,
may, nor your Co^ade, be either of the^ forgotten, -- but be instantly brought
hither, and share a part of Bounty.


'Tis my Glory, Madam, to be outwitted by you, and if my Brain did any thing
uncommon, it was by you inspired.


Well, (...) Fortune has contrived the business, so I hope, Sir, you think it
time to remember me.


Oh, prithee, dear venerability, have patience a little, thou ^eest all the
Marriages are (...) at present, and 'tis not fit we should be singular, my dear
Antiqu^.


Alas, sweet Sir, but delays you km^w are dangerous, and if I should be balked
in my Expectation, my heart is so set upon'^ that I should anihilate that very
moment, I should dye, as I'm a Christian.


Well, Cousin, what think we now of my Resolution, have I not done Justice?


Most generous Maid, thou art a dear Example for all th^ S^ to copy out thy
Virtue, for that a kind and tender heart like (...), moulded for Love, and
softened with Endearments, should generously on the account of honour, resist a
Traitor, that with strong E^hantments of Vows and Oaths, had long time made
Impression, is a performance heightened to a wonder, and will be reverenced in
succeeding ages.


My eyes in contradiction to the World, have ever (scorning Interest) fixed on
Merit, and led by Love and Generous inclination, have strove to make that
Sentiment appear by a free present of my Heart and Fortune to one I thought as
nobly had deserved 'em. But, oh! the Race of Men are all Deceivers, and my
relief, is my resolve to shun 'em; 'tis, my dear Friend, as thou hast lately
told me, which for instruction I will still repeat.

Love may seeem great that in it self is small,
Looks cover thoughts, and Interest governs all;
When Damon to an Heiress speaks kind things,
'Tis not for what she is, but what she brings.

OF all the Critics met to judge this Play,
The Fortune-Hunters most are feared to day;
Who must be vexed that they've a Brother found
So oddly balked of fifty thousand Pound:
And I confess they have some cause to rage;
The Spark has lost a tempting Equipage,
A Coach, a set of Barbs, such dazzling things,
Nay, six laced Footmen finer than the Kings;
Besides a fine bred Miss embroidered round
With a Rump Croshe^ worth five hundred Pound.
These Gem^ to lose of deep concern must be;
But yet considering the equality,
How oft ye chouce poor Women, is't not fit
Once in an age the Biter should be bit;
To be so often fool'^ I think is civil,
But to be Changelings always is the Devil.
Besides, the truth is, we find out your Arts.
Love guilds your Tongues, but Money guides your Hearts;
In Songs you term ou^ Faces Charming fair;
But 'tis the gilt Charming face our Gold (...) ^ar,
That treats us with your Poetry and Air.
If (she's a swinging Fortune he the cry)
Then gad there's no such Angel in the Sky:
But should Small-Pox, or Poverty invade,
Then, who would visit such a Pol^cat Jade,
And Plague upon her is your Serenade,
Of moderate Worth, or Wealth you'll ne'er allow;
She must be still the Eagle or the Crow:
This The^m occasions our new Scenes to Night,
To show a Woman (...) was in the right*
The Satyr's gentle, and I think 'tis (...),
And only meant to teach y^ to be true.
You should with patience bear the ^ling smart,
Kiss the kind Rod, and take it in good part*
But if you swell, and s^ew a stubborn Heart,
If in your Breasts ungrateful Passions s^ay.
And you should (...) at me, and at the Play;
May the^ (...) dire Revenge pursue ye round;
M^ (...) one that has such an Heiress found;
Lose her at last, and fifty thousand Pound.

