BID 'em their Shrieks and Howlings now refrain,
And let each Soul make Music with his Chain;
For at this Juncture all from pains are free,
And Hell it self shall keep a Jubilee.

It shall be done.


-- -- The happy time is nigh;
I plainly see it, in the Records of the Sky;
The Characters of Heaven with ease are found:
Read there. -- the Universe shall soon be drowned.

The Watery Planets in Conjunction stand,
Ready to pour their Vials over the Land.

The Sea insulting like a Conq'ting Foe,
Doth daily many Islands overthrow;
Still threatening all that does its force withstand:
And only waits for the All-high's Command.

The little Rivulets run swifter on,
As with their hast they'd meet the Ocean,
And add their Force with his, all swell so high;
They seem the Deluge in Epitome.

The Sea, Springs, Lakes, as with some private heat
Boil higher up; Each bubble swells so great,
That every drop seems to push on their Fate.

Thus far with brave success we have prevailed,
And in out direful Projects never failed;
You have not forgot how subtly I did win
The first Formed man, and taught him how to fin:
How shamefully he from his bliss was driven,
And banished from his Paradise, his Heaven:
How since their Off springs toil and live forlorn,
And know their Race accursed before they are born.
It was a Deed, so exquisitely great,
I almost did their lives Anticipate:
And rather than have lost it, I would bear
Double Damnation, doubled with despair:
I saw, that if he fell, the world would fall,
And in his Ruin I should ruin all.

Your Prophecy is just at hand, Mankind
Is grown so imp'ous, there's but eight designed,
To populate the world again,

-- -- -- Those few,
Though from the Deluge saved, we will in the Ark subdue.

That task, Great Moloch, we design for you.


And with such force I will the Ark invade,
I'll cause a new Creation to be made,
For in one day his six I'll ruinate:
'Tis easier to Destroy than to Create.

Go Moloch, and observe the ways of man;
We will bring their period lesser than a span.
In this brave Action let us all comply.

Who doubts th'event, if possible, should die.


Let every Spirit choose his proper Vice,
What he can most prevail in, most entice;
And with your cunningest guiles declare your Art,
Playing your Engines into every heart,
For fear the World turn pious, and repent,
And so this Universal Flood prevent.

By you, Great Sir, was the first Act begun,
You did the Father Ruin, I the Son:
At his Devotions, and in the midst of Prayer,
I raised up Envy, and that caused Despair;
Seeing his Offerings despised, he threw
The Altars down, and straight his Brother slew;
So for the deed a Vagabond was made,
And of each Soul, he met, was so afraid,
He even feared his Murder from his shade.
So by one Act I did both Brothers slay:
Envy alone would the whole World betray;
This is my Chief Delight, this very sin
I've culled from all, to be my Concubine.

That which I most affect is dire Despair,
To fill men's Souls with grief, distrust and fear,
Horrors, and Furies, seize each vital part,
And irk some Maladies shall plague the heart.
In gentle sleep, when their racked Souls repose,
With dreadful Visions I their rest oppose:
Nay, at the Altars as they prostrate lie,
Asking forgiveness of the Deity,
I make 'em, Atheist-like, high Heaven despise,
And 'stead of Prayers, they utter Blasphemies:
With desperate madness they their lives destroy,
And think in dying they shall Bliss enjoy.
They long for Death, and Death must be their end,
To some, the worst of Foes, to them, the happiest Friend.

Pride and Ambition are my darling Joys,
My Minion Pleasures, and my dear Decoys;
With those sweet Poisons, I man's Soul inspire,
Like us, they would be always mounting high'r;
None is contented with his proper State,
But every Slave would be a Potencate:
Proud in Ambition, all to rule are given,
Subjects would Monarchs sway, great Monarchs Heaven.
The Holy Hermits, who all praise defy,
Do cloak their Pride under Hypocrisy:
Their seeming Sanctity their hearts reveal,
And they are proud, in that they Pride conceal.
This lust of Pride in every Soul is seen,
She over all the World is Regent Queen.

You've raised my Spirits high, I long to roam
Lord over all, and view this World in foam:
To see the Cataracts of Heaven fall.
And spread its Waters over this mighty Ball.
'Twas well designed of the Great Conqueror,
And in it he showed his Wisdom and his Power,
For their hot lust a Deiuge does require,
And should he stop, the World would be on fire.

At length, great Lucifer, the Ark is made.


If that be finished, then the World's betrayed.
'Tis joyful News, now the great Period's come,
And all must wallow in the Watery Tomb:
The Birds and Beasts with man confused must lie,
And Fish in their own Element shall dye.

What has been Ages building we will destroy,
In a few days, and in its Ruin joy.

But how it shall be done, I cannot tell,
For Hosts of Angels will keep Sentinel:
And round the Sanctuary always stay,
Questioning all who shall advance that way,
And with strict Guard defend it night and day.

The way is easy, and the passage fair,
Know from all parts all Creatures do repair,
And round the Ark reside, waiting the time,
When to their place of safety they shall climb.
Then with the rest, I in some borrowed shape
Will enter in, and so the Guards escape:
There lurking close, I'll in some Corner lie,
(Few think of danger when it is most nigh)
And soon into their private thoughts will pry.
There at the least advantage I'll fly in,
And teach this great small World of Eight to sin.
If this should fail, I'll fill each Soul with rage,
And all the Ark a Civil-War shall wage;
The Beast with Fowl, Father shall fight with Son,
'Till with Intestine strife they are all undone.

Bravely designed; may the whole Ark be cursed,
And may thou prosper as I did at first.
Whilst you're within Plotting their sudden Fall,
We will hovering be without, and wait your call:
Then we will combine, and at one dreadful blow,
This remnant of the World we loverthrow.

This will prove hazardous and hard to gain,
What cost a hundred years to build with pain,
Was never sure designed to be in vain.

Still with fond Reason you our Acts debate,
Sure we that won the World may conquer Eight.

To me, methinks, it may with ease be done.
For scarce above a Century is (...),
And all the World is in Confusion.
You talk like Fools, such a Cabal as we,
Are able sure to check Eternity;
Retrieve our former States, and mount on high,
Shining all Glorious Monarchs of the Sky.
Such Storms to plague the deep I will prepare,
Shall make Omnipotence it self despair:
Though he be Lord of Heaven, I'm Prince, of the Air.

You've raised my drooping Soul from sluggish sleep,
Methinks I see it sinking in the deep.

If through his anger the great World doth fall,
We will by his Example drown the small.

With Storms and Whirlwinds we our selves will man,
And plunge in the Gulf this huge Leviathan.
But see those Piqus Men, whose Holy Way
And Heavenly life false Woman shall betray:
Their sweet repose of a contented Life
Shall have an end in that cursed name of Wife.
Woman! our only Engine to deceive
Mankind, first taught by Ancient Eve,
And with such Zeal they do the trade pursue,
Hanging out sighs, and smiles, and pearls of dew,
They cheat --
Not men alone, but even us Devils too.
They shift so oft, land roll from sin to sin,
From Pride to Malice, then to Pride again:
Now in this form they fin, then in that shape,
Like Water grasped they do our hands escape;
So if we tempt in Lust, from Lust they fly
To Rage, from Rage to Jealousy.
Yet though we miss 'em here we find 'em there,
And still are sure, although uncertain where;
Nay, they so fast, so swift, sin's Mazes tread,
So surely follow our dire clew of thread,
They are here with us in Hell before they are scarcely dead.
Behold they do Appear.

See where they come, each does such charms display,
My pure Devotions at their sight decay,
And as they pass, they steal my heart a way.
I've often seen 'em Dancing hand in hand,
Yet, with my Zeal, I did their force withstand;
But now I'm lost, to pray is needless now,
For whilst I pray to Heaven to them I bow.

Oh how I faint, my Vitals melt away,
And Love, all-conquering Love, has won the day,
Has entered in, in at these eyes he came,
With a most swift and most surprising flame:
And through each part, each vein, such heat doth run,
It burns more fierce than the Meridian Sun.

Devotion, Incense, Sacrifice and Prayer,
Farewell, you nothing to these Saints compare;
Adieu dear Books, (once my delight) adieu,
Those Golden leaves must be my study now.
All Arts and Sciences in them appear;
View but their eyes, Astronomy is there.
They are that bliss which but to gain we'd die,
Therefore let's hast, let each to's pleasure fly,
And so anticipate the Bliss that's given,
And without Martyrdom obtain our Heaven:
Let's hast, for when such mighty joys are near,
One idle Minute lost out-vies a Year.

When Charming Beauty does appear,
How can you then deny?
You think the Fruit forbid den here,
And if you taste, you die.
Lay your Religion but a side,
That Cloud which hides your eyes,
And you'll for ever here abide,
And call it Paradise.
You'll fast and mortify no more,
When once this Fruit you eat;
For if you taste you'll ne'er give over,
'Tis so Divinely sweet.
Then boldly venture to enjoy,
The Bliss of those above;
This Food doth only Fools destroy,
That know not how to Love.
This Heavenly Tree you may ascend,
With safety and with ease.
See how the Boughs their Branches bend,
Desiring still to please.
The immortal Juice when drunk by you,
Will keep you from all harms,
But if you die, we will die too,
In one an others Arms.
O Divine sound! see they again appear,
More pleasant to the eye than to the ear.
Fair Goddesses, (whose looks are so Divine,)
We all our hearts do offen at your Shrine;
And if our Sacrifice successful prove,
We always shall admire you, always love.

In their addresses still they can't forbear,
But they must court in Sacrifice and Prayer:
Grave Sires, we doubt whether we may, or no,
Accept of that you should on Heaven bestow;
Or if we do, you'll still like Flames aspire,
And mount to'rds Heaven, but not our Charms admire:
Or when our Loves you should again requite,
You'll Sacrifice all Day, and Pray all Night,
And draw Lifes Scene without one Ray of Light.

Grant us but Love, we will lay aside our Zeal,
And though we pray to Heaven, to you we will kneel;
You our Devotion are, Religion, Prayer,
And what we say is true, as you are fair.

By these expressions you our fears remove,
And we may now believe that you can love;
Unless Religions path again you tread,
That perplexed Labirinth, whose fly winding thread
Leads you through Thorns and Briars, when you may
Tread upon Roses, and make sweet your way.

'Tis the worst madness for a man to stay
In darkness, when he might enjoy the day;
Our eyes thus opened now, we plainly view,
Our only happiness is placed in you:
The azure Sky expands its Purple shroud,
And we behold our Heaven without a Cloud.
With Fancies Pencil, we before did grave
Our Heaven, and for a Goddess carved a Slave,
Chained to a Gally in a stormy Sea,
Rowing against Wind and Tide for Liberty,
But never gains his Port: so had we steered
Our Course, had not Loves Beacon thus appeared.
Your eyes those lights are that direct our way,
Like Heaven, they shine with an Eternal Day,
And who e're follows cannot go astray.

Now you confirm all what you said before.


If you believe not, we will say much more.


You've said enough, and we believe you kind,
You see our Blushes do declare our mind,
Our Maiden Modesty they do betray,
As the Suns Rising does confirm the Day.
The Banquet's spread, take, eat, and make good cheer,
There's no resistance nor denials here.

Of all these Dainties only you I choose,
And in Exchange I would the World refuse.

We will follow you, but each so pleasant is,
It is impossible to choose amiss.

O Joys Divine! O Everlasting Bliss!
Sure the High Power cannot deny us this.
To kiss and press these hands, to view those eyes,
The Starry Harbingers to Paradise,
If it be sin to be to bliss enslaved,
No man upon the Earth would e're be saved.
Or if it be, what Mortal would not sin,
If he were sure t'enjoy a Cherubim.

From these ill Hymens shall a Race arise,
Whose Power over all the World shall Tyrannize;
Lead the Earth Captive, and hold Heaven in scorn,
And Kings and Princes shall their Pomps adorn:
Yet though they thus Triumphant Glory get,
They shall fall prostrate at a Woman's feet:
Resign their Sceptre but to stop a frown,
And for a smile they shall present a Crown.
In these all mischiefs and all sorrows dwell:
Were it not for Woman we should have no Hell.
But to his task let every one Repair,
Be circumspect, and tempt each soul with care:
Be sure you make 'em all of Heaven despair.
For the success we hitherto have found;
Let Hell in Universal Joy abound,
And as they play we will here repose a while,
And midst our Torments strive to gain a smile.

They lay themselves down, A Song is Sung, expressing the joy they take in
destroying the World, and how their pains are lessened, in having made so brave
a Revenge. And, in several Figures, Antic Dances are represented; which done,
they vanish, and the rest fly out of sight.

AND is the time so nigh? Can't Tears obtain
A little Truce? Are all men's Prayers in vain?
Will not Oblations his fierce wrath abate?
Nor Holy Sacrifice drive back his hate?
The smell of Incense he was wont to love,
Will not sweet savours mollify, nor move?
Must all our Altars empty titles bear?
Can't bended knees prevail, nor fervent Prayer?
To spotless Souls no Obstacle is given,
Sincerity will open the very Gates of Heaven.

You argue well, but only you alone,
That great Prerogative of Love must own;
A Holy Life has all your Actions crowned,
Therefore both Grace and Favour you have found:
To you and yours the Covenant is given,
All else must die that breath on this side Heaven;
Therefore prepare with speed, for e're the Sun
Hath seven times more, over the Ocean run,
This fatal Doom must come. --

Immense Divinity, there's none can scan,
'Tis too mysterious for the thoughts of man:
Though all the World must perish in the Flood,
Yet in Destruction he is always Good,
His way's unsearchable, no bottom have,
For often he destroys that he may save:
Strange Contradiction! yet as strangely true,
From the old World must rise a happier new:
As in the Vineyards we the old Branches lop,
That from their stock may rise a better crop.

You are the Vintage which such Joys must bring,
You are, at once, both Priest and Offering;
And from your Loins shall rise so vast a Birth,
Your Progeny shall people all the Earth:
Children, like Branches of the Vine, shall spread,
And clasping Tendrils shall adorn your Head,
Clusters of Off-springs from your Stock shall rise,
And new Create in the World a Paradise.

For his great Love how can I Tribute give?
When all's destroyed, to suffer me to Live!
His tender Love is Excellently high,
Thus to preserve so mean a Slave as I:
I do confess, I do his Image bear,
If that's the Reason he my life doth spare,
All Mankind else should in his Favour share.

Man first of an unspotted mould he made,
But with base sin they since his stamp allayed,
And to his Image they such soils have given,
The Coin will never current pass in Heaven.

How then shall I escape, since all do sin?


You with Obedience do your Maker win;
Leave all the rest to him, and but obey,
You need not fear the Resurrection Day.
Then you'll in pleasing Anthems mount on high,
And Hallelujahs sing throughout the Sky.

You've to my Soul such consolation given,
Methinks, like Henoch, I am snatched to Heaven.

Observe the mighty Dictates then in hand,
And with Obedience finish his Command;
Be sure your self, and yours, be ready there,
And of each Fowl, and of each Beast a pair.
Of the clean Beasts the Ark must seven contain,
But of unclean he doth but two ordain:
Take heed you fail not to perform his Will.

With Joy and Gladness I'll his Acts fulfil.


Hail best of men, I now must leave you here,
When the time's nigh I will again appear;
Be circumspect, and guard your thoughts with Prayer,
For the Apostate Angels lurki'th Air,
They'll use all means your tender heart to win,
And with false pleasures tempt your Soul to fin:
All Hail. -- --

All Hail to thee, thou Messenger of Heaven,
With speed I'll act the charge that thou hast given:
But see the Monsters come, with furious rage,
Nor men, nor Angels can their pride assuage,
For against Heaven and Earth a War they wage.
Their killing eyes I must with care escape:
Men monstrous in their natures as their shape.
These, these are they, who have destroyed the Earth;
O wicked times! but, O more wicked birth!

How calm's the Air! What, is his Thunder gone?
Nay then, I'll mount the Sky, and seize his Throne.

The trembling Moon I'll into pieces rent,
And twist the Stars out of his Firmament.

The Sun himself that doth so bright appear,
I'll drag about the Sky by's golden Hair,
Then spurn him in the Sea, and quench him there.

Thunder nor Lightning shall my passage stay,
Angels, nay, Gods shall fall that stop my way.
If Clouds met Clouds, and Storm met Storms, I'd through,
This hand of mine should their whole force subdue:
Whirl-winds shall back upon themselves be driven,
And such Assaults shall to their Guards be given,
They shall be forced to yield, to us, their Heaven.

Let us th'advantage take, while Heaven is fair;
And all these little Mountains let's prepare,
To raise Olympus high'r, methinks the Sun
Leans on the top o'th Hill, let's hast and run,
And as he rests surprise him there.

-- -- -- -- 'Tis vain,
For when we'r there, he's as far off again.

Then on the Hills we must more Mountains rear.


This Mountain then you to the top must bear.


With ease I will perform it, mighty Brother,
That in this Arm, and under this another.

You mighty Mountain I my self, will bring,
And on Olympus to with ease I'll fling.

But see the light o'th Glorious Sun decays.


He hears us, and for fear draws in his Ray;
We Hills on Hills will raise, till we'r so high,
That from their tops we will step into the Sky,
And all their mighty Godheads tumble down,
Placing upon our selves the Imperial Crown:
But see our valiant Brothers hither throng,
We will make Heaven tremble as we march along.

As they advance towards them; great flashes of Lightning are seen breaking
from the Cloud that covers the Sun, after which dreadful claps of Thunder are
heard, the Cloud breaks in two, and a shower of fire falls on 'em and destroys
'em: The Sun on a sudden recovers his light, then Lucifer, Satan, Beelzebub,
Asmoday and Belial, rise out of the Earth.

See where the Trophies of our Triumphs lye,
This is a way makes sure of Victory,
To make 'em first curse God, then cursing die.

There's no Redemption for that wicked state,
Where they sin high, and do repent too late;
And now the World is brought to such a Fate.

They are hardened now, and do their Fates defy,
Despising the great power of the most High.

They are past repentance, and each strives to be
Crowned the most famous man for Infamy:
But see Despair comes melancholy in,
Our surest aim, and mans most dangerous sin.

What have I done that I must thus be driven,
And banished from the glorious light of Heaven?
Bankrupt of hope, I must a prisoner stay,
The World it self cannot my forfeits pay:
What have I done! Let all strange mischiefs be
Summed up, that wait on man, and they are in me;
Whoredom, Pride, Murder, Blasphemy and Lust,
Ambition, Rape, and Envy: all the worst
Ingredients of sin to make me cursed.
And cursed I am, in all I do or say,
Fiends stop my mouth when I'd devoutly pray;
I'd think of Heaven, but they those thoughts expel,
And in its glorious room present me Hell.
Horrors, confusions, all the Plagues that are
Reckoned in Hell, are harboured in despair;
Legions of Devils do my mind possess,
And rob my Soul of its true happiness:
I'm sure I'm damned, what need I then take care
Whither I go, since Hell is every where?
Than to live thus, 'tis better far to die,
And end this endless plague of misery,
All is but Hell, and this shall set me free.

Rejected Love who can with patience bear?
She bids me, though I prostrate fall, despair,
The angry Goddess scorns to hear my Prayer.
Lovers forsook, death before Treasures crave,
And think no Spouse so happy as a Grave,
Then farewell Love, farewell my sweet desire,
Surely these Waves will quench my raging fire.

First to contract, then basely to depart!
Was too too cruel for my tender heart;
For since he's gone I do my self disdain,
I'm turned a Reprobate and Heaven profane,
Run mad with rage, with this I'll ease my pain.

But see Ambition on great Pride attends,
Seldom asunder, and yet seldom friends.

You're too ambitious and too saucy grown,
Thus to intrude when I would be alone.

Most mighty Queen, let me your wrath appease,
I ne'er approach you but on bended knees;
See at your feet where your offender lies,
And for his fault, when e're you please, he dies:
You are the Saint to whom I always pray,
It is for you I languish night and day,
And at your Shrine my Soul doth pine away.

Such flattery, such a deluding Art,
Attends all Courts, but ne'er shall win my heart;
Your sighs, and groans, and prayr's, are all in vain,
And all these Adulations are profane:
You're an Impostor, and with fraud beguile,
But know, none but great Kings shall gain a smile.

That you may look serene, such force I'll bring,
I'll in an instant crown my self a King;
Nay, I'll be more, for with my mighty power,
I'll over all the World reign Emperor:
The petty Kings shall all their Crowns submit,
And lay their Scepters at your Royal feet:
The plenteous World her dainties shall afford,
And choice varieties shall spread your board,
There's not a sense but shall such pleasures find,
When they combine they shall entrance the mind:
I'll ransack Natures Wardrobe, and adorn
You far more brighter than the rising morn.

These I enjoy already, I am Queen,
Of all rich Natures richest Magazeen;
Kings with their Scepters at my feet lie down,
And every Conqueror presents a Crown.

Since no content, to you, on Earth is given,
I'll change my thoughts, and will advance to Heaven;
Where you for Jewels glittering Stars shall wear,
And streaming Lights shall guild your radiant hair,
The Sun shall for us his bright mantle spread,
And we will sleep in sweet Auroras Bed,
Where, like to them, each other we will embrace,
Raising your maiden blushes in your face;
With eager zeal lie panting by your side,
A loving Bridegroom, you a willing Bride;
Free to enjoy, expanding all your Charms,
Throwing your self and love into my Arms,
Where in close twinings through the Air we will fly,
And all the Gods that do our Actions spy,
Shall envy us for our Mortality.
Then if again we would to earth repair,
We will gently glide through the soft yielding Air,
Dissolving both into a falling Star.

Your mind soars high, but I have thoughts much higher,
God like Ideas do my soul inspire,
And I breath nothing now but Heavenly fire.
Seraphs, and Cherubs, shall companious be,
And the bright Angels all shall wait on me:
I scorn all Kings, and their base earths abode,
None shall enjoy my love beneath a God;
And you, Earths Gally-slave, thus to aspire
To raise your thoughts on me! Vile wretch retire,
And in some dirty Creek of the Earth forlorn,
Expire as basely as you're basely born.

I'll follow thee where ever thou dost fly,
I must enjoy, or in pursuit I'll die.

Behold whole Troops of sins the fields surround,
In each dividual sin they so abound,
And with such boldness they all bliss defy,
They'd act their sins though Angels should stand by.
Without allurements they to sin are brought,
Performing crimes we scarce our selves e're thought:
Those are the chief great Agent sins which we
With Triumph view, but Heaven does weep to see.

Yet still we will pursue their direful fall,
'Tis true State-Policy to conquer all,
And not let one survive. -- --

This Gallant deed
Outvies our Labours past, if it succeed:
I'll manage this affair my self, and all
This Holy Tribe into my snare shall fall.

The brave by fortune are in Triumph lead:
A glorious Halo does surround your head;
True Omen of success. --

Hear then the way -- before the mighty Rain
Shall fall, the Angel will appear again;
As they discoursed, I, hovering in the Air,
Heard all they said: he bid him have a care
Of us; by which precaution we may know,
He's not impossible to overthrow.
I'll shake off all these shagged shades of Night,
And will adorn my self with Robes of Light,
Appearing, like to him, all Fair and Bright.
Then with a fawning, smooth, delusive Tale,
I on his tender Conscience shall prevail;
I'll tell him, that the pious Prayers he sent
To Heaven, does the Worlds fall prevent,
And that a longer date is now decreed,
Before the mighty Judgment will proceed:
Persuading him, this concourse of the Earth
Must be dispersed, each to their place of Birth;
That when the fatal Deluge shall be nigh,
All, unprovided, in the Flood may die.

This proposition you have stated well,
A thought, fit only for the Prince of Hell.

In the mean time, lest we should idle be,
In the Holy Tribe, let's raise up Jealousy;
And on true Love we will stamp so base a shape,
They shall mistake embraces for a Rape.

Though they are free from each dividual sin,
We need not fear, if we with this begin;
For with suspicion Legions enter in:
Fear, hate, revenge, all plagues within 'em dwell,
A Jealous Lover is possessed with Hell.

Now to our Gloomy Caverns let us go,
Carrying glad tidings to our States below:
Since all we act prevails with such success,
We, even in Hell it self, find happiness.

They all sink; as they vanish, great Flashes of Fire are seen, and horrid
Acclamations of Joy are heard. The Scene on a sudden changes, and represents
Hell, where sundry Devils are flying up and down, and others in extravagant
postures dancing for joy, c.

SUre Brother, the sad time is drawing nigh,
And this same Scene the event doth Prophecy;
Such a bright Morn, before, sure ne'er did rise
From such a boisterous night, such Gloomy Skies:
Yet still the fragrant Flowers raise up their Heads,
That were beat down by the swift falling Shower,
With lively Grace deck their Ennameld Beds,
And smell far sweeter than they did before.

The proposition you propound is well,
This Stormy Night may the great Flood foretell.
It is so long since any Rain did fall,
That it seems now a Prodigy to all;
And though the Storm was great, yet view around,
The Earth has but its due refreshment found:
And rather doth the Vales adorn, than spoil,
Making the Meadows seem with Joy to smile.
So we by this sad Emblem may express,
Our present state, and future happiness;
The Worlds destruction in the Tempest born,
And our felicity in the rising Morn:
The Suns bright Beams do promise to requite,
With joyful Rays, this Tragedy of Night,
Decking the Day with his Transcendent Light.

Like to himself, his mighty Blessings rise,
Both Infinite, and none can them comprise.

We Heca toombs of Sacrifices owe,
Which on his Holy Altars soon we will rair,
And in thanksgiving we our zeal will show,
For all his Favours, in an humble Prayer.
Yet for the blessed Talent we receive,
Our Stewardship can't satisfaction give.

He ne'er requires returns for what he lends,
So that we manage it for happy ends;
He bestows Grace, which grace if we accept,
In the acceptance we discharge the Debt.

Than the receiving, something more is due,
We must increase, and multiply it too:
For barely to accept the Grace that's given,
Is not the ready way to mount to Heaven.

Grace is the Center where all virtues fall,
And having that we do embrace 'em all:
As in the body of one single Grain,
The species of several more remain.

As each dividual Grain its numerous birth,
And its increase owes to the fertile Earth,
So we for Grace indebted are to Heaven,
Of which a just account must once be given.
Or like neglectful husbandmen, our Crops
Will blasted be, and rob us of our hopes:
So we Heavens Harvest must with care get in,
Or what's a virtue soon will turn a sin.
But this discourse defer, and let us praise
And magnify the eternity of Days.
Come, Sister, to the Altar let's repair,
And the small time we have we will spend in Prayer;
With all sincerity we will him adore,
Mankind can ask, and He'll exact no more:
When to the All-high there's such a Victim given,
Bright Angels wait to carryit up to Heaven.

By all the endearments of a Royal mind,
I love you more than man; so sweet, so kind
Are all your mellowed words, that I rejoice,
And think, when e're you speak, I hear an Angels voice.

And I a Devils tongue. Oh Heavens! that she
Should be so kind to him, so false to me.
To love him more than man! Oh tortured heart!
Sure Jealousy has shot me with her Dart.
What a strange fancy does my mind surprise,
Her Soul, me thought, flew to him, from her eyes,
A glowing heat did in her face appear,
Showing, at once, her passion and her fear.
But I'll observe and watch where they repair,
For now's the time for Sacrifice and Prayer.
And if they should prove false, they both shall die,
And fall a Victim for Idolatry,
For bowing to that Idol in the Eye.

The Scene opens, and represents several Altars with Sacrifices on them, the
Sacrificers devoutly kneeling before them. A Cloud of Fire Descends on the
Altars, and consumes the Sacrifices, then Ascend. A Song is sung all the while
the Cloud rises, expressing the acceptance of their Sacrifice, and then the
Sense changes to the Garden.

What unaccustomed miracle is this,
That Heavenly fire should burn our Sacrifice?
How like a Meteor it trild through the Air,
As swiftly down as upward went our Prayer.
The Omen's good, for by the token given,
Our Prayers and Victims both are gone to Heaven:
But see, from far a Messenger is sent,
Seeming to bear some news of vast portent;
For by his swiftness he out-flies the Wind,
Out-strips the Lightning, and leaves time behind:
And he's already here. -- -- --

-- -- -- Hail mighty Prince,
The news I bring will much amaze your sense;
For by your Holy Prayers, and Pious Zeal,
You the Destruction of the World repeal:
You call back Fate, which does so swiftly move,
So strong's your Mighty Faith, so good Heavens Love,
Mankind is saved, you need not now embark
Your selves, nor Beasts, for all the World's an Ark.
Salvation to you all I must declare,
For Heaven, against the World, proclaims no War.
All wrath's deferred, and now your mighty train
Of Birds and Beasts, must be dispersed again;
Each to their homes, the Beasts to Woods and Brakes,
The Fowl to Meadows, Woods, Springs, Ponds and Lakes:
To confirm which, if you a sign require,
Instead of rain shall fall a Shower of Fire.

I something doubted what was said by you,
But now this token doth confirm it true,
For the All-high doth seldom speak in vain,
Nor cancels that which he doth Pre-ordain;
This very day too, is the last of all,
That he designed before the Rain should fall:
But pardon me, if I mistrustful was,
The strictness of my Duty was the cause,
And the great charge that I received before,
To act his Will, increased it something more.
Besides, our Granaries are full of store;
The Ark's so furnished too, we need no more:
Yet your Commands I shall with speed obey,
They shall be scattered all by break of Day.
To what the goodness of the All-High doth tend,
I must admire, but cannot comprehend.

The deed is done; now if Heavens eye prove blind,
They too shall die, as well as all Mankind.
How frail is man! How brittle Natures Frame!
Their Sense and Judgment bears an empty name;
Their Reason, like their Natures, too are small,
One false Idea can delude 'em all.
So Eve, and the first man I did betray;
Now Noah, second Adam, lead astray:
With a false show, and with a Robe of Light,
I have Eclipsed his reason, stopped his sight,
That he mistakes me for an Angel Bright.
But hold, I brag too soon, from yonder Sky,
The mighty Angel, Gabriel, I espy:
At sight of him my Burnished Rays decay,
My glittering Robes do melt and fade away,
And all the Fiend that's in me doth betray.
I fain would sink and hide me from his face,
But he hath chained me to this very place:
I dread to hear Heavens direful Thunder fall,
That was the Engine first destroyed us all,
That does my Soul and Spirits too confound,
That makes me prostrate fall upon the ground,
And lye here grovelling to receive the wound.

Cursed Impostor! dost thou think the eyes,
Of the All-High can't see thy false disguise?
That he should be by a Fantastic Shade
Deceived, and cous'ned, who the substance made?
No, thy Impostum'd fancy is as vain,
As when you fought with Heaven, in Heaven to Reign
Supreme, and the Empyrean Crown to sway,
Then, then, how soon you fell, and lost the Day.
Think how you rolled into Eternal pain,
With all your numerous astonished Train;
Think but of that, you'll ne'er project again.
But for this deed thou shalt Heavens Vengeance feel,
And on thy Head shall fall its pointed steel,
And sink thee down into the deep Abyss;
Where whirling headlong with a direful Hiss,
The damned themselves shall wonder how you fell,
And you in Hell shall: find a hotter Hell:
For you such Torments shall endure, even all
Hells mighty pains shall show to yours but small.

Since you upbraid me, know, that I defy
The mighty Thunders of your Potent Sky;
For being Prince of all the Heavenly train
That fell, I therefore have the greatest pain:
So b'ing inur'd to Tortures, I can bear
All the Extremities you can prepare,
And still rejoice, I can so far deceive,
As with my guiles to make 'm all believe.
From me that dismal Sentence first began,
That made the All-High wish he had ne'er framed man:
So to perform't, I did their lives pursue.
That I might have a New-born World t'undoe.

These horrid Blasphemies your hate doth vent,
Shall be revenged with direful punishment;
And since you can dispense with pains, prepare
To entertain Heavens Thunderbolts of War.
So now all's safe, you must with care proceed,
To get all Creatures in the Ark with speed,
For e're the Eastern Sun salutes the Skies,
The Fountains of the mighty Deep shall rise,
The great Flood-Gates of Heaven shall open wide
Their Sluice, and fall like an impetuous Tide;
But e're I part, I will each Creature mark,
For fear some Fiend should get into the Ark
In a Beasts borrowed shape: then shall begin
The Rain, and then I'll come and shut you in.

Into what dangerous perils had we fell,
By this Delusion of the Prince of Hell!
Had not the eye of Heaven Protector been,
And saved us all from this unpardon'd sin:
For this great Love we will all thanksgiving pay,
In mem'ry of this sad, yet joyful day,
And ne'er desist till time shall fade away.
In Holocausts, Sin-Offerings, and Flame,
In Holy Anthems, we will his praise proclaim,
And magnify, throughout the World, his Name.

Cursed be his cunning search; can there no shape,
No Plot, the piercing eye of Heaven escape?
I in this Beastly form, thought I was safe,
And often to my self did smile and laugh,
To think how soon, wise Heaven I might beguile,
And all its tedious undertakings spoil;
When Lo, I heard an Angels my stick Charm,
That did my Soul and Spirits both alarm:
Thus roused, I quickly from his presence flew,
As swift as thought, yet still as falling Dew:
The very sense of what he did declare,
Does pierce me deeper, than his Thunder, far.
And I'm ashamed I came so tame away,
And blush to think I durst not disobey;
That my great will's controlled, there lies my pain;
That makes my Hell, and links my direful Chain.
When the great charm is heard in the Deep below,
We, blushing, gaze about, then weep our woe,
Grieve for what's past, then vex for being so.
When most in mischief, then we most are well;
Thoughts of Repentance make our greatest Hell.
To desperate Souls, when the last Trumpet sounds
The word for Ever, Everlasting wounds;
So desperation 'tis our Souls confounds:
But since by Stratagem, nor Ambuscade,
We can't the mighty Force of Heaven invade,
By strength alone, our Force we must declare,
And against the Ark proclaim an open War:
We will the whole power of the four Winds let go,
They East, and West, and North and South shall blow,
Till, by their blasts, the Ark they overthrow.
Then we will rejoice over this conquered Ball,
With dreadful Hollows Triumph in its Fall.

OH wretched State of Man! where shall I fly?
Where e're I look, a thousand Deaths I spy!
Yet by one cause it is all Creatures die;
So Pestilential Air Men's veins does burn,
And all Diseases to the Plague do turn:
Agues and Fevers, all the numerous throng
Of Maladies, that to Mankind belong:
Old Age, and Infancy, and all must have,
For their sure Remedy, one certain Grave,
A floating Tomb formed of a swelling Wave.

In vain, our selves, we title Lords of all,
And with the names of Mighty, Puissant, call.
Great Kingdoms, Nations, Monarchies and Powers,
With idle flattery we say all's ours:
Since every Insect, every Creature can,
This great Plenipotentiary unman;
Nay, through our veins such killing poisons pass,
Each small Distemper breaks the brittle Glass.
But these we fear not, though pernicious they,
Too often take our precious Lives away:
A greater Plague is come, a Draught that will,
Not only Man and Beast, but even Nature kill.

Vain mis-believing Man! Can't death be found,
Nor learnt, but when he's striking of the Wound?
Can't we believe his mighty piercing Steel,
Nor know his Dart before its point we feel?
But now, too late, we see our dreadful Foe,
And strive to shun what we are sure to know;
He stalks along with a Majestic pace,
With direful Desolation in his Face:
Castles and Towers, Rocks, Mountains, all are vain,
All are o're-whelm'd, all covered by the Rain,
And only this doth 'bove the Waves remain.
Too late we now believe our Reverend Sire,
Too late we know his truths, and worth admire:
Now his Prophetic raging Judgment's come,
And in the rapid Waves we find our Tomb.
In vain he preached, in vain good manners taught,
Him and his Precepts both we set at nought,
Which has this dire Destruction on us brought.

O my dear Mother, how the Waves do roar.


My aid, Dear Children, you in vain implore;
I've given you all, and now can give no more:
Unless I do anticipate your fears,
And Drown you all in Deluges of Tears:
Like to a harmless Herd that hastes away,
From a fierce Tiger that would on 'em prey;
And to some safe retiring Covert fly,
Where they in vain their small Defiance try,
Till the poor Dams do with their young ones die.
But I'm afraid, so faint my Spirits grow,
And grief's so great, I shall prevent the blow.

Will you then die, and leave us here alone,
To all things, but to misery, unknown?
Strangers to all, where e're we walk or go,
Companions only to sad grief and woe;
We their acquaintance in all places find,
Marching before, or tracing us behind.

What shall we do? if we stay here we die;
To yonder higher Mountain let us fly,
It is some ease to prolong misery.

Cheer up, my Infants, since no hopes remain,
But that together we must all be slain,
And in one Dismal Grave Entombed must lie;
Thus hand in hand we will prepare to die,
And launch from hence into Eternity.

Here I will grasp. -- --


-- -- -- Here I'll for ever stay,
Till Desolation hurries me away.

Thus then let's go, let each one take their hold,
And Miser-like, I'll perish with my Gold.
So desperate Souls that on their Deaths bed lie,
Take their last Cordial, and then faint and die.

The Scene changes, and discovers a throng of men, Women, and Children on the
highest Mountains, who on a sudden are all overwhelmed with the Waves. The
Scene changes again, and represents Hell, with Lucifer, Satan, Beelzebub,
Asmoday and Belial, sitting in Council in their Pandaemonium; Moloch swiftly
flying down to them.

Hell and Damnation seize this mystic sense,
And Curse upon the eye of Providence;
Such a design, so close, so surely laid,
One should have thought, would all Heavens watch evade;
Hid even to all but Gabriels searching eyes,
Who soon discovered me through this Disguise:
Those piercing eyes that penetrate all bars,
And shine far brighter than the clearest Stars;
From his Transcendent Beams I stole away,
And swift as wind I dived beneath the day,
But his more swifter eyes traced all my way.
I grinning turned me round, and saw the Door
Of the Ark made fast, he standing just before,
With his bright Flaming sword; so now we are
Compelled by Force to proclaim open War.
By this time too, the Waters so prevail,
They over the tops of the highest Mountains scale;
That fifteen Cubits 'bove the Earth they rise,
And by their height they seem to touch the Skies.
So to our War, a stop may soon be given,
Unless we hast, the Ark so high is driven,
I fear, before we go, 'twill sail to Heaven.

Then let us haste, with all our Banners spread,
Blazon'd with all the Trophies of the Dead;
With a large Deluge that to Heaven does flow,
A Shipwrecked Ark, half sinking down below,
And all our Legions following their blow.
Thus let us pass, and through the Deluge glide,
Springing, like thought, above the swelling Tide.

The Scene changes, Representing all destroyed but the Ark, which is swimming
on the Surface of the Waters. All the Devils appear again.

Ho Moloch! loose the Eastern Wind, let go,
Belial, the West, both shall together blow,
You, Asmoday, must rule the Southern Wind,
Ho Beelzebub! the stubborn North unbind,
Whilst I and Satan, like two mighty Whales,
Toss up the Ark, with our impetuous Tails;
And beat and bandy it from Wave to Wave,
Till 'tis impossible for Heaven to save.
Let us all Charge, and with one dreadful Shock,
Sink down this floating World, this swimming Rock;
Which though through Dangers it doth safely ride,
And boldly with its Prow doth sweep the Tide,
Yet not so safe, but that no doubt we may
Make it a brave and a Triumphant day.

Here they all assault the Ark, and almost overturn it. Several Flaming
Chariots full of Angels fly down, from whence breaks Thunder and Lightning,
which drives them headlong into the Deep. The Scene changes, and represents
Noah in the Ark.

What dreadful noise and roarings round us move,
Far be it that we have sinned to lose Heavens Love,
To feel his Wrath, making our bliss become
A Curse, our Sanctuary turn our Tomb.
Escaping Rocks and Shipwrecks, now to find
His Goodness Infinite to be unkind;
But far be it too, I should his Love mistrust,
Who is all Mercy, all Divine, all Just,
Who from his word doth never go away;
His Covenant is Eternal, as the Day.
For he protecting, Rocks, nor Gulphs avail,
Through Seas of Storms we shall in safety sail.

What glorious Trophies ought to adorn my Head,
Since I have Crowned you Lord over all the Dead.

It was from you that I did first begin,
My Father Satan, but my Mother Sin:
So for my b'ing, I'm ready to obey,
And wait your strict Commands both Night and Day;
Where e're you go, I will your train attend,
To see your Enemies or dearest Friend.

For thy great Love I've had thee to the Court,
My chief delight, where all my Friends resort;
Envy, Ambition, Malice, Hatred, Pride,
Lust, Flattery, and all the rest beside,
Too tedious to account: by whose sly ways
And guiles, we've gained our selves Immortal praise.

There I did first grow great, I was before
Naked, and starved, and miserably poor:
When I on Plants and Herbs did feed, and all
That e're the tedious Scythe of Time did fall.
When I in Towns and Cottages did live,
All that I had would no contentment give.
So lean and thin I looked, 'twas only then
I got the name of Sceleton from men;
But since, at Court, I've filled this Rav'nous Jaw,
And with sweet Dainties crammed and gorged my Maw,
That now I am grown so vigorous at heart,
I dare encounter Armies with my Dart.

Nay, more, your mighty Empire spreads so far,
Its boundless circuit does admit no Bar:
So Monarch-like you Reign over every thing,
Except the Ark, you're Universal King.
That Ark, which like the World, if it should be
O'rethrown, you, next to that, will ruin me.
Then shall your Empire end, so soon as I
Do leave this World, you too, your self, must die.

Since I have had such plenty, and such store
Of all varieties, what need I more:
Therefore ne'er fear I will Mankind pursue,
So far, as to be forced to prey on you:
You are forbidden Fruit, and if I try,
To taste of you, I, when I taste, must die,
And lose this Earthly Paradise, and be
For ever lost in vast Eternity.
So for your sake, the Ark shall safely sail,
And over the Waves, as they over all, prevail;
So Heavenly is your face, you shall be seen,
In future Ages, a most Glorious Queen:
You shall be decked in such deluding Charms,
That Kings shall wish to die between your Arms;
Lie panting on your Breast, and with one smile,
You Universal Nature shall beguile.
A Talent but to touch, or glance, or toy,
A thousand for a kiss, the World to enjoy.
Nay, men your company shall like so well,
Within your Tents they shall desire to dwell,
And for your Love shall pawn their Souls to Hell.

You cheer my Spirits now, and I presage
I shall grow mighty in the ensuing Age,
As I have been in this, but that the fall
And price of sin won't be so general:
From Noah's Vineyard, I already spy
Him drunk with Wine, and naked to the eye:
His laughing Son does a sad Curse obtain,
Such are the effects of a distempered Brain.
A Curse which will for ever last, and be
A sad remembrance to Posterity.
Hence Curses, Murders, Whoredom, Rapes, proceeds,
Incest, Blasphemous words, and desperate Deeds;
Hence do most mischiefs rise, therefore my Son,
I call this sin my lovely Paragon:
From whence to you shall many Trophies fly,
By Surfeits, Fevers, Broils, do most men die.

This sin to me is a most welcome guest,
For every Day it yields a plenteous Feast.
But see the Dove with an indulgent care,
Hastes to the Ark, through the mild peaceful Air,
And in his beak an Olive Branch doth bear:
Emblem of Peace, white Parley Flag, which he,
The Ensign waves, to set the Monarch free;
Penned up in the Ark, which on the Mount doth stand,
In safety now upon the stable Land:
Such joy will from this Embassage be given,
As dying Saints, in Vision, view their Heaven.
Therefore with haste you thither must repair,
With sly Temptations bring them to your snare:
I'll follow you, and whilst you make the set,
I, over all, will draw the fatal Net.

Come, Son, like Ice I will to all appear,
Where they slide swiftly on, and never fear;
Seldom look back, to see what does pursue,
But boldly venture, and ne'er think of you:
Until at last they hear the dreadful crack,
In vain they then repent, in vain look back.

Hail Earths preserver, Heaven remembers thee*
And all thy Creatures, all thy Family;
For on the Earth he's caused a Wind to blow,
Has struck the Flood; and made it sink below:
The Almighty Word no sooner heard, but they
With hasty zeal march forward to obey,
And to their utmost Thule swiftly ran,
Sinking in the Deep, from whence they first began.
The Earth her shroud of Waters throws away,
And all appears most pleasant, sweet, and gay:
It seems to be Earths Coronation day.
A New-born Light springs from the Torrid Flood,
And Heaven again declares that it is good:
He is all Peace, and now sends his Command,
You from the Ark depart to Till the Land;
You, and all yours must to the Earth repair,
Each creeping thing, all Beasts and Birds of the Air:
For he this Blessing doth bequeath once more,
Increase and Multiply the World with store.
Hail, and Farewell. --

You hear the Ambrosial Words Divinely sweet,
Like Harmony, when Concords jointly meet.
This immense Goodness, like the All High, doth prove,
Almighty Merciful, Almighty Love;
The Sun to the Earth is reconciled again,
And Heaven reiterates his Grace to men:
Therefore his Name we will with praise extol,
And on the Omnipotent, the Immortal, call,
Even all the Ark shall with one voice declare
Their Love, and sound his Praises through the Air.
So let our thanks for these great Blessings rise
In Hallelujahs, Echoing through the Skies.

But hark, what sweet Hosannas fill the Air,
And charming Notes our happiness prepare;
And in my Breast a secret Joy doth rise,
Whose Symphonies my very Soul surprise:
By this I know the Earth has found his Grace,
He doth the Prodigal again embrace,
And clothes her all in an embroidered dress
Of many thousand Colours, to express
The mighty work of Nature, and her Art,
Enamelling the Earth in every part
With such Embellished streams, in such a hew,
They speak their own and Makers glory too:
With silent Oratory they declare
His Praise, but we in Sacrifice and Prayer.
So in Burnt Offerings, and Holy Fire,
Our Tributary thanks shall to Heaven aspire,
And touch the sense of him and all his Holy Quire.

Since the All-High doth now again restore
The World, I hope he will destroy't no more;
And that his Ancient Love he will renew,
And man no more with such dire wrath pursue.
But on the wicked let thy fury fly,
Let Reprobates with the polluted die;
But let the Innocent thy Grace enjoy;
Let not one Gangren'd Limb the whole destroy:
Accept this Sacrifice, which is designed
In thanks, for preservation of Mankind.
Suffer not time to shake our Glass too soon,
Nor let our Ages Sun-shine set at Noon;
But to our Patriarchs years let them abound,
Then fall, like shedding Roses, to the ground:
That like the Rose, though withered, parched and dry,
We may fall sweet, and in perfumes may die.

With your Oblations Heaven is pleased so well,
He, from the Earth, does a sweet savour smell;
And with the World a Covenant doth make,
He will no more destroy it for Mans sake.
So if again great Storms and Floods appear,
No Deluge shall surprise the World with fear;
He keeps in awe the Cataracts of Rain,
And the vast Sea does to its Channel chain.
As you are Lords of all, and made above
All other Creatures, so must be your Love;
In Love and Quiet Reign, and ever be
From cruel Murders, and Manslaughters free:
For who e're spills the Blood of Man, shall fall
A bloody Victim to his Funeral.
He is Heavens Tyrant, and the Earth's disgrace,
And stabs his Maker in his Creatures Face:
The Earth, Sea, Air, and all the things that grow,
Heaven does for food, and for your use bestow;
Only the blood of Beasts you must refrain,
Since that doth both the Life and Soul contain:
So to confirm his promise, he hath bowed
His Royal Signet in yon rorrid Cloud.
In such a form the painted Arch appears,
As mourning Heaven, seems even to smile, in Tears.

But in such pleasant mourning, such a shroud,
It seems to be an Hieroglyphic Cloud,
Of Grief and Joy, and intermixed so fine,
The Artist, Nature, shows her Work's Divine;
And in the Bow no Shaft nor Arrow's seen,
But the whole scene is peaceful and serene.
With wonder, and amazement, I behold
Those streaks of Light, so mixed with streams of Gold,
It an Enamelled Amulet doth seem,
To preserve Man, and all his Race redeem:
Hung on the bosom of the Sky, to be
A charm to keep the World from Tempests free.

Well dost thou Judge, henceforth shall heat and cold,
Seed-time, and Harvest, their due Seasons hold:
Winter and Summer shall their Course maintain,
And Day and Night shall never err again;
Till Time and Nature too shall both decay,
And the last Trumpet summon all away:
That dreadful sound shall make the Earth to quake,
The Stars fall down, and Heaven it self to shake;
The Sun turn black, the Moon all Blood; till then
Shall all these Blessings be showered down on men:
All Hail Mankind, and when this sign you view,
Think of the Covenant sealed 'twixt Heaven and you.

ACT the Fifth.

LIKE the six days Creation Earth appears,
And all the glorious Pomp of Heaven it wears;
With a transplendent glory every thing
Doth shine, and shows a new-born Infant Spring:
View but each Plant, each Tree, how fair they stand,
Like Trees of Life, each tempt the willing hand,
And every Prospect seems an Eden Land.
View the imbroidred Liveries of the Flowers,
The Eglantine and Jess'min wreathed in bowers;
Observe the flavours that from each do rise,
How through the Air the Balmy Odor flies;
One would in Transport say --
The Earth, in joy, with Heaven doth sympathize.
The Divine Orange whose Immortal Fruit,
With the Omnipotence of Heaven doth suit;
Her fertile growth is in Eternal Bloom,
And Emblems forth Eternity to come.
But, above all, view the rich pregnant Vine,
How with enamelled clusters it doth shine,
Sure this, if any, must be termed Divine.
I'll go and taste the Fruit that seems so fair,
And yet my private thoughts bid me, beware.
Fancy prescribes new Arts, new Methods shows,
And says, the Vine her Fruit thus ill bestows,
And that for higher, nobler ends it grows:
So e're the Sun with his all-parching Ray,
Distills the juice of the udder'd Grapes away,
I will the Dictates of my mind obey.
Between two Planks the liquid juice I'll squeeze,
Then drain it forth, and clear it from the Lees:
The Project's good, I'll hast and try the way,
'Tis pity that this thought should lose a day.

How mighty hot does the Sun dart his Beams.


Let's hast to yonder Crystal purling Streams,
Where there's an Arbor framed by Natures hand,
And on each side with pleasant gales 'tis fan'd;
There let's repose from the fierce scorching heat,
Repast a while, then to our task retreat.

And as we go I'll a strange thing relate,
That bears some hidden Mystery of Fate.
E're the bright Sun his Eastern course begun,
And over the World his purple mantle flung;
By dawn of day, e're he his portion drew
Through his Alembick heat of pearly Dew,
In yonder Mead, as to my task I went,
I saw (strange sight!) the Aged Elephant.
Who for his knowledge, (since the World began)
Excels the whole Creation, except Man:
I saw this Beast, with greedy appetite,
Feed on a poisonous Berry, black as night,
And in its Nature baneful. 'Tis Heavens Will
The outward form should show the inward still;
As Toads are ugly made because they're in Nature ill.

'Tis strange, a Creature of so vast a sense,
Should choose out food of such dire consequence,
Since every simple Beast, by instinct, can
Feed on what's good, and what is bad refrain.

He had not long fed on this fatal Food,
But that his Eyes grew dim, he trembling stood;
His Legs like Pillars that might even Towers bear,
Were, like a Bulrush, wavered by the Air:
His nimble Trunk that cookt him all his meat,
Hung dangling down, and trailed beneath his feet:
On's Ivory Teeth he leaned his drowsy Head,
Then on a sudden reeled, and fell down dead.

Last night in the Eve, when in the Western Bay
The Sun had stopped the swift carrier of Day,
And in the Ocean cooled his fiery Steeds,
As strange a thing I saw in yonder Meads;
One of the straggling Herd strayed to a rill,
Hid with luxuriant Grass, there drank his fill:
He swilled so much, I thought he would have burst,
And at the sight I even quenched my thirst;
But as he strove to turn his head aside,
Some Meagrim seized his Brain, and he in the Water died.

Let's to our Father haste, to know the events,
For these are something more than accidents.

What Prodigy is this! Wood drops forth Blood!
Sure I've not erred in gathering my Food;
And sure there's no forbidden Fruit again:
Heaven has each thing that grows bestowed on Man,
If so, within these Mystic drops, I see,
Lies some Prophetickill that aims at me;
My Soul Prognostics so, Heaven change my Fate,
Oh Heavens! This does my wonder more create,
That a pure crimson hue should dye a black,
And make my ruddy Skin a sable take:
Such a strange change never before befell
To any, but to the Arch-Angels Host in Hell,
And that my Fate, as theirs, should prove severe,
Does 'bove my wonder far increase my fear.
To learn the truth, I'll to my Fathers Tent,
He'll soon expound what by this riddle's meant:
For he who could foretell the mighty Rain,
Small Oracles of Heaven can sure explain.

The godly Man who was so just and good,
Who like a Cedar in the Worlds forest stood,
Who against sins blasts, and Hurricanes prevailed,
At length, behold, is fallen. --
The Guardian senses were surprised by sin,
She undermined the Tower, then entered in,
And seized on mighty Reason's Magazine.
Hell silence kept, when she her Speech began,
And all rejoiced this second fall of Man;
I was, my self, struck with amazement too,
And I am glad I find the Scene prove true:
But why should I admire that he should be
So much o're-seen, since 'twas the same with me,
Drunk with Ambition, down from Heaven I fell,
And like a Blazing Comet shot to Hell. --
This sin must surely pleasant be, like mine,
That should overcome a Man so much Divine;
The Art I will promote, I plainly see,
'Tis good, without the gift of Prophecy:
Mankind most Novelties desires to know,
Therefore in method I this way will show:
First to compound from Simples, then to make
The Compound stronger, they strong drugs shall take,
Then teach to Still; which they shall Spirits call,
A Liquor that shall fatal prove to all,
Nay, some shall drink at their own Funeral.
This Art I'll raise so high, till men aspire
Like us, to drink up Liquid Flames of Fire.
But whilst he sleeps, I'll to his fancy show,
What direful Tragedies from hence shall flow.
Hence shall such deeds proceed shall Nature fright,
Make her start back, and sicken at the sight;
Hence shall the Father with his Off-springs lie.
Pollute the intestine Veils of Chastity:
Incest it self is here too good a sound,
We want a word should with its accent wound.
Hence shall the Child all bonds of duty shun,
The Mother shall be ravished by the Son;
In carnal act lie twined within her bed,
Nay, this lewd Sin shall such contagion spread,
The Living shall enjoy the very Dead.
With unchaste looks, the Mother shall behold
Her Virgin child, and learn him to be bold;
With her false Charms she shall his Soul betray,
To stain the sacred Temple where he lay,
And soil the sheets of Natures secret frame:
But conscious of his guilt and Mothers shame,
He shall, at once, both Murder and Defile,
And on the adulterate Bed his Mother kill:
But when he shall behold her panting bleed,
He shall cry out, Oh cursed Matricide!
Was't not enough thy Mother to pollute,
But thy cursed Hands must add her Murder to it!
Then in despair, like Death, shall ghastly stand,
Grasping his bloody Dagger in his hand;
Then stab his heart, let out the crimson flood,
And doubly stain his Mother with his blood.
This dismal Prologue shall be spoke by Sin,
She shall with Death the Tragic Mask begin,
And to his slumbering fancy draw the Scene.

In vain I come the Prophets Art to try,
He and his Soul are in a Lethargy;
Visions and Dreams the Magic Charmers are,
That to the World these wondrous things declare:
But his enchanted Soul is chained in sleep.
To wake him, the loud roarings of the Deep,
And Thunders of the Sky, would prove in vain,
So stupid is his Soul, so senseless is his brain:
Some conjuring spell has seized upon his mind,
His sense is blasted with a mildew wind.
But see, here stands the Necromantick bowl,
Has drowned the active Spirits of his Soul.
It is a Maxim that proves always true,
Inventions do the inventer still undo;
Yet what to him doth poisonous prove, may be,
To future times, a Sovereign remedy:
But such a Project few would ever try,
To kill themselves to learn the way to die;
And how ridiculous 'twould prove, to see
One drown himself, to know the depth of the Sea.
To tell this news, I'll to my Brothers hast.
But see they are here.

Whither away so fast?


To tell you a strange miracle of Fate.


To free us of our fears the thing relate.


Our Father, as I guess, by what I find,
Hath a new Art discovered to Mankind;
It is an excellent and rare device,
A new-found way how you should Sacrifice.
But not of Oxen, nor of tender Lambs,
Not of male Kids, young Heifers, nor of Rams;
No, no, he scorns the common path that's trod,
Wine is his Sacrifice, and he's the God:
And when he'd offered what he did require,
The Sacrifice did set the Priest on fire.

This intricate discourse that you declare,
Shows you a base and vile contemner are;
Therefore expound this strange Enigma right.

Then View him drunk and naked to your sight.
Come, and behold how strange his eyes are swoln,
His blubbered face with bloated rubies grown:
See how his head hangs drooping to the ground,
Like foundered Vessels ready to be drowned.

Hold back your impious hands, rather than I
Would view this sight, I would this minute die.

It is as dangerous as Heavens decree,
That Man shall die who does his Maker see.

'Tis folly all, and grand stupidity.
As in a Maze I round the Vineyard went,
And little thought to find him here in's Tent,
I wondered where he was, for e're 'twas Noon,
He used the Vines luxuriant Springs to Prune;
And he has Pruned 'em fair! Look, look, and see,
They are in the same disorder, just as he:
They sympathize with him, look dull, and are
Even drunk themselves with their own juice they bear.

Is this the duty of a Son? you ought
Rather to pity him than judg't a fault;
To laugh and jear at Mans misfortunes, is,
An ill Prognostic to a future Bliss;
To mock at others harms, deserves a curse,
Then to deride a Father sure is worse:
And though the Wine his senses drowsy makes,
His Visionary Soul within awakes;
Therefore take heed, for that views all that's done,
And will remember a contemning Son.

Away, away, with this Philosophy,
You talk as you were drunk as well as he.
All danger I despise, Eve, though she saw,
The Tree of Knowledge, never broke the Law
Until she eat, that did contract the crime,
If any then's in fault, it must be him.

Be your own judge, and you'll be guilty made,
For as you saw, you likewise did upbraid.

To view the unseemly posture he is in,
Would make an Angel sure commit the sin,
If it be a sin to laugh: -- but see the Sun,
Unto the Zenith of the World hath run;
And like to him I will my task pursue,
And leave our Holy Father here with you:
Who with the World a mighty Name will gain,
For the contrivance of a subtle brain.
When all his Off-springs shall like Pilgrims come,
To see the superscription of his Tomb,
Oh praise! His Epitaph must thus begin,
Here lies the Aged Monument of sin.

And on your Tomb these Lines engraved may be,
Here lies one cursed all his Posterity.

Come, Brother, to his Tent let's backward go,
And over his Nakedness this Garment throw,
By which we shall our Love and Duty show.

Now to our Labours let us haste away,
The Sun's already past Meridian day,
And make an end of the Task we have begun,
And finish all with the declining Sun.

Here a sumptuous Banquet of all sort of Fruits, especially of Grapes, rise up
out of the Earth. Sin Enters in a rich gaudy loose Attire, and after her
several Devils in the shapes of Men and Women, who make their obeisance to her,
then greet one another with profound Salutations; after which a symphony of
Music is heard, to which they all dance: -- after which, a fair Vineyard
arises laden with beautiful Grapes: Being all placed round the Banquet, and
Sin at the upper end,

Behold a Vineyard big with juice Divine,
Like to the Fur and stately Pine,
Drops forth its Balmy juice:
As Nature silently should say,
This was the only way
To make it fit for use.

Since then Nature doth show,
Which may we must go,
We will squeeze out the Liquor, and call the Juice Wine:

Though flat on the Grape, though thick on the Vine,
See here it doth sparkle, see here it doth shine.

How dull and insipid would every man be,
If it were not for this to make the heart free;
It doth ravish the Soul, and transport the mind,
It teaches to love, to be gentle and kind:
It doth sharpen our wits, and our fancies refine,
Then how pleasant, how pleasant's the Juice of the Vine.

-- It doth sharpen, c.


Here's a Palm for those Souls,
That drink off most Bowls;
And so let the Goblet go round:
For he that drinks most,
Shall the Victory boast,
When his head with this Garland is crowned.
Encircled with Charms,
He shall lie in my Arms,
And his Head in my Bosom I'll lay;
We will sport all the Night,
In joys and delight,
But in Drink we will carouse all the day,

-- We will sport, c.


After several Healths are gone round, they all quarrel for the Garland. The
Women vanish away. Death rises with a Dart in his hand, moving it, by turns, at
every one of them. They all draw and fight, and mortally wound each other; then
reel to several places, and on a sudden sink. Death and the Banquet sinks
presently after them: Sin takes the Garland, and places it on her own Head.
Music is heard, to which she Dances; then vanishes away. --

In what deep Visions gloomy Scene I've lain!
A kind of Death has seiu'd my Opiate Brain.
Where have I been! methinks I've slept an Age,
And in my sleep have been a Pilgrimage;
Rapt in the Spirit, over all I flew,
Did Sea and Land, Rocks, Mountains, Deserts view,
Surveyed the World, each Covert, and each Cell,
And as I think too, I have traverst Hell;
Sure 'twas no Heavenly ravishment (for I
Bright Heaven in my vast progress could not spy)
But an Infernal Vision that arose
From the black sumes of sin. --
There, in a Pageant Mask, I did behold,
A Vineyard rise with Grapes that shone like Gold;
Nay, they so beautiful, so fair did seem,
Methoughts I took and eat 'em in my Dream:
Then a bright Maid, did, of the juice, begin
A Health to the rest, I judged her to be Sin.
For the effects, the causes do declare,
Among themselves began a Civil War;
For on a sudden each his Weapon drew,
And in the fatal feud each other flew:
And what confirms that she was there, her Son,
Grim Death appeared before the broil begun;
Though in his Looks a deadly paleness lies,
Yet I, methoughts, saw bloodshots in his eyes.
He grimly glared around, I judge, to see
Whether he'd made a perfect Victory;
Then, gazing round again, he found out me,
And, with a ghastly Visage shook his Dart,
And, as I guest, 'twas levelled at my heart.
But as he went to strike, I gave a groan,
Leapt up amazed, and found my self alone.
I looked to view the Tragic Scene, but they
Vanished, like Night, at the approaching Day.
My eyes, those Harbingers of the mind, can spy
Things only present, or a Land-skip nigh:
But my Prophetic Soul foresees the Doom,
And all these direful mischiefs are to come.
But what doth rack my tortured Soul, 'tis I
Must be the Author of this Misery;
Posterity will curse my Art, my name confound,
Wishing I were in the Drink, or Deluge, drowned.
But pardon me, O future Age! for you,
May not only learn the sin, but danger too,
And how to shun that which I never knew.
A trembling terror does my heart surround,
And I am loath the Spirit to expound;
It is a Curse against my younger Son,
For his contempt, and his derision:
Servant of Servants, a most wretched Slave,
He shall for ever live, so pass to's Grave,
And like a Pestilence this Curse shall be,
Spreading Infection through his Progeny.
But blessed be Shem, his Race shall be Divine,
For from his Stock shall spring the Holy Line;
And blessed be Japhet's Off-spring. Heaven will them
Enlarge, and they shall live in the Tents with Shem:
Now may my Age in rest and peace repose,
And fall like dew upon an Evening Rose.

Like Heavens Inhabitants my Life appears,
Replete with joys, and free from cares and fears.
Some Cherub sure does in my soul reside,
And to Seraphic Bliss my Spirit guide;
For such transporting ecstasies I find,
Does to immortal Glory lead my mind:
I on an Angels Wing do clip my way,
Leaving the dregs of Life, this clod of Clay,
And mount to Heaven, to an Eternal Day.

Like you, a mighty joy does through me run;
But all my Bliss is by reflection,
As the Moons Light is borrowed of the Sun:
So would my Life wear an Eternal shroud,
But that your Beams do gild the sable Cloud.
So in your Tent I shall desire to stay,
And in soft peace to pass my time away;
That when my circl'd years have gone their round,
I may, like Fleecy Snow, fall gently to the ground.

Since I am cursed, and cursed a Slave to be,
I'll reign a Royal one with Majesty;
He is a Slave that hath an abject Soul,
That dares not fortunes frowns with frowns control.
I do despise her, and contemn my Fate,
'Tis brave to live Magnificently great;
So though a Slave, yet I will rule in State.
There's no such thing as Slavery can be,
I'm under them, they under him, and he
Is unto Heaven as great a Slave as we.
We all pay Homage, and who Homage give,
Is marked a Slave to that Prerogative;
So we must all as Slaves or Equals be,
Or else each man alone's a Monarchy:
But since nor one nor the other it implies,
That he that dares do most should highest rise;
By which it follows, that the bravest Man,
Should be, on Earth, a Land- Leviathan,
And over all maintain Supremacy:
But if a greater rise on Earth than he,
He must resign to him his Sovereignty.
This is my Rule, and shall my Maxim be,
I'll Conquer all, or all shall Conquer me;
And if in th'Enterprize I fail and die,
I'll, in my thoughts, mount Monarch to the Sky.
From Heaven to Earth, on a swift pinioned ray
Of the Suns darting Beams, I've winged my way,
To inform Mankind they should themselves divide,
And into some remoter parts reside;
For from so vast a Multitude will rise
A multitude of endless miseries:
Innumerable Plagues will fall on Man,
From Multitudes all discords first began,
As many winds do form a Hurricane.
So to prevent these ills, Heaven doth ordain,
They in far parts, in Colonies shall reign;
Both Peace and Plenty from this Spring will run,
From distance, sure, friendship ne'er first begun,
Yet the Moons nearness does Eclipse the Sun.
If Men this Moral would observe but right,
Of the embellished Suns dismantled Light,
They would, like him, good deeds for ill requite;
Though robbed of all his Glory, all his Beams,
He guilds her tawny face with silver Streams:
But hark, I'm called, I must with speed away,
Quick as my flight, my Duty does obey.

Tell us no more we must this place resign,
Spoke by false Visions, or what fools Divine;
Let me an Angel see, not Dream I do,
And then, perhaps, I may believe it true.
Where can we gather a more plenteous store?
We are too rich, and Heaven would make us poor.
Where better Live? What place so fair as this?
Where every thing paints forth a Paradise.
This is a trick of Heaven, I understand,
To banish us unto some Foreign Land,
Where we in Woods, and Rocks, and Wilds, shall be
Devoured by Famine, Sickness, Poverty;
So when all's gone, we then too late shall see,
We Masters only are of Slavery*
That we may call our own, and may, perchance,
Entail it too on our Inheritance.
Considering this, and all our future Lives,
How weak our Children, how unapt our Wives
To travel are, 'tis best we here reside,
And in this Plain of Shinar all abide;
Heaven knows we're strong, and able to resist,
But when dispersed, He'll rule us as he list:
The Body Politic, like ours, should be
Knit close together in joint Unity,
And not with one another disagree.
'Tis the same case with us, therefore, with speed,
We ought to some great Action to proceed.
My suffrage is, that we a City rear,
For strength impregnable, for beauty fair;
And lest another Deluge should ensue,
We will build a Tower that shall preserve us too:
A Pyramid which we will raise so high,
The top thereof shall peep into the Sky,
By which we may even Heaven it self defy.

By which we too shall gain Eternal Fame,
And through the World blaze our Immortal Name.

These are my thoughts, and as I judge, 'tis fit
That every Man to the judgment should submit;
But if you can a better way declare,
Speak how it shall be done, and when, and where.

We all agree to what you say, and you
Shall be our Leader and Commander too.

Then let us hast to the Work, this very hour
We will begin to build this mighty Tower;
So many hands will make the Work seem small,
And in an instant we shall raise it all:
The Worlds great Fabric we will imitate,
In bigness and in swiftness too like that,
Built only with a LET IT BE by Fate;
That, when' tis done, we may all stand amazed,
At the Prodigious Work our hands have raised.

We Storms and Tempests then may fear no more,
And hear, beneath our feet, Heavens Thunder roar.

Its top with Diamonds, with burnished Gold,
And Crystal glittering, shall shine so fair;
When Travellers from far the sight behold,
They shall mistake it for the Morning Star.

No, from the Earth its Glory shall be seen,
Not like a Star, (that fancy is too mean)
But like another bright Heaven hung between.

The Scene shifts, and represents the building of Babel, some digging, others
making of Brick, and tempering of Mortar, Nimrod, Joctan, and Saphane giving
them directions. --

To visit Man once more, from Heaven I'm come,
To dash their Pride, and to pronounce their Doom.
See with what frantic madness they rush on,
And with the Tower build their destruction;
For raising that but pulls fate faster down.
Like Icy Mountains they this structure Scale;
When near the top their feet then soonest fail:
Such a preposterous zeal was never seen,
They reach at Heaven whilst their feet tread on sin.
In their Clay frames they would their Souls refine,
As Eve in the Apple thought to be Divine;
But they, like her, their Eden shall forego,
And wander Vagabonds in the World below:
The Hunter shall himself be made a Prey,
His Subjects shall rebel and disobey.
Thus over the Tower I wave this Sacred Wand,
And on Mankind I lay Heavens great Command,
Their Native Language none shall understand;
Each Man a several Spirit shall possess,
And in strange words his stranger sense express:
And though in Tongues they have increased their store,
Yet, Miser-like, they are amidst their plenty poor.
Such horrid jangling of a Hideous noise,
Shall be expressed by each partic'lar voice;
They hoarse with gabling, silently shall go
To Foreign parts, their unknown Fate to know:
And to their wish they shall a Name obtain,
Which to the end of all things shall remain.
But like the dreadful latter end, their Fate
Shall stand a ghast, and for confusion wait:
Their proud Imperial Tower shall by Heavens ire
Fall down, and shrink like Parchment in the Fire.
Once more my fatal Wand I wave around;
Thunder and Lightning fall and crush it to the ground:
Their Babel with their Language shall expire,
What they thought safe from floods shall be destroyed by fire.

They all disperse themselves to several parts of the Earth, but as they go,
with amazement they look back on their Tower surrounded with bellowing Thunder,
and flakes of Lightning. --


