A Clownish Carrier with a Packet of Books to be distributed by the Master of
the Ceremonies, wherein is described the whole design: who dances a
Darbishire Round.

Gives you a Bouree, in the habit of a Thrasonical Gasconian; To let you know,
all Frenchmen are not Butterflies.

Presents the variety of Expressions, made by Motions and Actions of the Body
only; For which we are indebted to the Quaker, the last Inventor of
Ecclesiastical postures, who turned Informer, is like to be troublesome to our
Assembly.

Shows the truest and most genuine steps of Ballet.

Two other Clowns with their Lasses, (a double pair of Northern Tikes) who
dance a Jig, the first-born of a Scottish Bagpipe.

Presents you with a Fantastic Saraband, managed by a Spaniard, To show a
Fantastic Don can be as ridiculous as the most Antic Mounsieur.

Throws you in a Drunkard, with steps proper only to that humour: suitable to
the Windmil of his Pericranium, which motions we owe to the lightness of a
Dutchmans Breeches.

Gives you a Country Dance, performed by Shepherd and Sheapherdesses, in the
habits of Arcadian Pastorals; who set forth the Innocence of their minds, by
the simplicity of their manners.

Presents a Corant single and figured, and a Saraband serious, both ascribed to
the Ingenuity, and Bon mene of a well tempered Frenchman.

An entry of Italian Pantaloons; to show there are Madmen and Fools in every
Country, even at Rome, Paris, and particularly in London.

Presents you (the delight of its age) the Canaryes, first invented by the
lofty Italian, who generally has more wit than honesty.

An entry of Swisses, who had rather fight than dance, but loves the Argent
better then both.

GReat Sir, you've seen Us, like the active Sun
To please the World, through the whole Zodiac run;
Y'have seen the Noble Spaniard Countermand
All France, ith Marches of a Saraband:
And yet with such wise care his Limbs dispose
As if h'ad got the Frenchman in his Hose.
You've seen the Mounsieur move, his Arm, Foot, Knee,
And shrug, as if no Nation danced but he:
His Alamod Corant, his Saraband Pace,
His Bourees; all performed, with the Bon-Grace.
You've seen the Italian dance the Pantaloon?
No Region wants a Madman or Buffoon!
The Arcadian Shepherd in soft measures move.
As if their dancing was their School of Love.
The Bonny Scotchman and his merry Lasses,
At Jigge and Bagpipe all the rest surpasses;
What mischief did (that Scotch-witch) Covenant do,
Who charmed the Organs and the Bagpipes too?
Most Excellent! active Nations! all put down
The British Bard, suffered to Act the Clown.
To move the Carriers pace: or Coupee over
With Packets from proud Calais to poor Dover.
And yet nor Seignior, nor the stately Don
Are much above the middle Region:
Tis well in Rome or Spain, if you can see
A handsome Ball once in a Jubilee.!
O but the Mounsieur, Englands Dancing Master
He walks on Parian Marble, Paris-Plaister!
Like the Element of fire, his spirit soon
Lifts him up, to the Concave of the Moon.
Dances as soft and nimble as the Air;
Who vies with him practises to despair!
Dull Englishman is forct to go to France
To change his Gold wear clothes, and learn to dance.
Since t'must be so, weel strike sail and submit,
Wishing the French more Pride, our selves more Wit.
Grant their Minerva, curious, neat, exact,
What ere they can Imagine we dare Act.
Inspired with Plumbroth we dance every man,
Save (vho eats none) our Presbyterian;
He's pardoned if he move no more, but will
Quietly, with his good Good Old Cause, sit still,
Thanks to the Quaker our Last-mover, he
Listed himself into our Company,
Who went good man! to teach the Pope at Rome,
A Babylon-slip; the Time yet was not come!
But turned our Pursevant, a Lurch, a Pryer;
We wished the Iesuited knave a Cloistered Fryer
Good Saint to show what weight his Talents bear
Begot a Negro, no Christian you may swear!
How ere his various postures heplt to prove,
The British Orb, like other Spheres can move.
England I am sure in former times could dance,
Witness her many Capers into France.

