WHo could expect such crowding here to day,
Merely on the report of a new Play?
A man would think you've been so often bit
By us of late, you should have learned more wit,
And first have sent a Forlorne-hope to spy
The Plot and Language of our Comedy,
Expecting till some desperate Critics had
Resolved you whether it were good or bad:
But yet we hope you'll never grow so wise;
For if you should, we and our Comedies
Must trip to Norwich, or for Ireland go,
And never fix, but, like a Puppit-show,
Remove from Town to Town, from Fair to Fair,
Seeking fit Chapmen to put off our Ware.
For such our Fortune is this barren Age,
That Faction now, not Wit, supports the Stage:
Wit has, like Painting, had her happy flights,
And in peculiar Ages reached her heights,
Though now declined; yet could some able Pen
Match Fletcher's Nature, or the Art of Ben,
The Old and Graver sort would scarce allow
Those Plays were good, because we writ them now.
Our Author therefore begs you would forget,
Most Reverend Judges, the Records of Wit,
And only think upon the modern way
Of writing, whilst you're Censuring his Play.
And Gallants, as for you, talk loud in the Pit,
Divert your selves and Friends with your own Wit;
Observe the Ladies, and neglect the Play;
Or else 'tis feared we are undone to day.

GOod-morrow, Monsieur.

Good-mor', -- good-mor'.

Is Sir Fred'rick stirring?

Pox stir him.

My Lord has sent me --

Begar me will have de revenge; me will no stay two day in Englande.

Good Monsieur, what's the matter?

De matre! de matie is easy to be perceive;
Dis Bedlam, Mad-cape, diable de matie, was
Drunk de last night, and for no reason, but dat
Me did advise him go to bed, begar he did
Strike, break my head, Jernie.

Have patience, he did it unadvisedly.

Unadvise I did not me advise him
Juste when he did ite?

Yes; but he was in drink you say.

In drink! me vishe he had ben over de head
And de ear in drink; Begar in France de
Drink dat van mand drink does not crack de
Noder man's brain; Hark! --
He is avake, and none of de peeple are
To attend him: Ian Villain day are all gon, run
To de Diable; have de patience, I beseech you.

Acquaint Sir Frederick I am here from my Lord.

I will, I will; your ver humble Serviteur.

Good-mor, good-mor to your Vorshippe; me am alvay
Ready to attend your Vorshippe, and your Vorshippe's
Alvay ready to beat and to abuse me; you var drunk
De last night, and my head ache to day morning;
See you here if my brain have no ver good raison
To counsel you, and to mind your bus'nesse.

Thou hast a notable brain;
Set me down a Crown for a
Plaster; but forbear your rebukes.

'Tis vercouragious ting to break de head of your
Serviteur, is it note? Begar you will never keep
De good Serviteur, had no me love youever vel. --

I know thou love me.

And therefore you do beat me, is dat de raison?

Prithee forbear; I am sorry for it.

Ver good satisfaction! Begar it is me dat am
Sorry for it.

Well, well.

De Serviteur of my Lord your Cousin
Be come speak vid you.

Bring him in.
I am of opinion that drunkenness is not so
Damnable a sin to me as 'tis to many; Sorrow
And Repentance are sure to be my first Work
The next morning: 'Slid, I have known some
So lucky at this recreation, that, whereas 'tis
Familiar to forget what we do in drink, have
Even lost the memory, after sleep, of being
Drunk: Now do I feel more qualms then
A young woman in breeding.
Clark! What news from the God of Love? he's
Always at your Master's elbow, he has jostled the
Devil out of service; no more!
Mrs. Grace! Poor Girl, Mrs. Graciana has flung a
Squib into his bosom, where the wild-fire will
Huzzee for a time, and then crack; it
Fly's out at's Breeches.

Sir, he sent me before with his service; he'll
Wait on you himself when he's dressed.

In very good time; there never was a girl
More humoursome, nor tedious in the dressing of
Her Baby.

Hay! here is de ver vine varke
Begar, de ver vine varke! --

What's the business?

De business! de devil take me if dare be not
De whole Regiment Army de Hackene Cocheman,
De Linke-boy, de Fydler, and de Shamber-mayde,
Dat have beseege de hows; dis is de consequance
Of de drink vid a pox.

Well, the Coach-men and Link-boys must be
Satisfied, I suppose there's money due to 'em; the
Fiddlers, for broken heads and Instruments,
Must be compounded with; I leave that to your care;
But for the Chamber-maid, I'll deal with her
My self; go, go, fetch her up.

De Pimp, begar I will be de pimp to no man
In de Christendom; do you go vech her up;
De Pimp --

Go Sirrah, direct her.
Now have I most unmanfully fallen foul upon some
Woman, I'll warrant you, and wounded her
Reputation shrowardly: Oh drink, drink! thou
Art a vile enemy to the civillest sort of courteous
Ladies. --
Oh Ienny, next my heart nothing could
Be more welcome.

Unhand me;
Are you a man fit to be trusted with a woman's
Reputation?

Not when I am in a reeling condition; men are
Now and then subject to those infirmities
In drink, which women have when they are sober.
Drunkenness is no good Secretary, Ienny; you
Must not look so angry, good faith you must not.

Angry! we always took you for a civil Gentleman.

So I am i'troth I think. --

A civil Gentleman will
Come to a Ladies Lodging at two a clock in
The morning, and knock as if it were upon
Life and death; a Midwife was never knocked up
With more fury.

Well, well, Girl, all's well I hope, all's well.

You have made such an Uproar amongst
The Neighbours, we must be forced to change
Our Lodging.

And thou art come to tell me whither; --
Kind heart! --

I'll see you a little better mannered first.
Because we would not let you in at that
Unseasonable hour, you and your rude
Ranting Companions hooped and hollowed like
Mad-men, and roared out in the streets,
A whore, a whore, a whore; you need not have
Knocked good people out of their Beds, you
Might have met with them had been good
Enough for your purpose abroad.

'Twas ill done Ienny, indeed it was.

'Twas a mercy Mr Wheadle was not there, my Mistresses
Friend; had he been there sh'ad been quite undone.
There's nothing got by your lewd doings; you are
But scandals to a civil Woman: We had so much
The good will of the Neighbours before, we had
Credit for what we wo'd; and but this morning the
Chandler refused to score a quart of Scurvy-grass.

Hang Reputation amongst a company of Rascals;
Trust me not if thou art not grown most wondrous pretty.

Stand off, or I protest I'll make the people
In your Lodging know what a manner of
Man you are.

You and I have been intimate acquaintance; --
Why so coy now, Ienny?

Pray forbear: --
You'll never leave till I shriek out; -- Your
Servants listen, hark -- there's some body coming.
My Mistress charged me to tell you she will
Never see your eyes again; she never deserved
This at your hands, -- poor Gentlewoman: -- You had a
Fling at me too, you did not whisper it, I thank
You: 'Tis a miserable condition we
Women bring our selves too for your sakes.

How now Cousin! what, at wars with the Women?

I gave a small alarm to their Quarters
Last night, my Lord.

Ienny in tears! what's the occasion, poor Girl?

I'll tell you, my Lord.

Buzz; Set not her tongue a going again;
Sh'as made more noise then half a dozen
Paper-mills: London-bridge at a low water is
Silence to her; in a word, rambling last
Night, we knocked at her Mistresses Lodging,
They denied us entrance, whereupon a harsh
Word or two flew out, Whore -- I think, or
Something to that purpose.

These were not all your Heroic actions;
Pray tell the Consequence, how you marched
Bravely at the rear of an Army of
Link-boys; upon the sudden,: how you gave
Defiance, and then waged a bloody war with the
Constable; and having vanquished that
Dreadful enemy, how you committed a general
Massacre on the glass-windows: Are not these
Most honourable achievements, such as will be
Registered to your eternal Fame, by the most
Learned Historians or Hicks's Hall

Good sweet Ienny let's come to a Treaty;
Do but hear what Articles I'll propose.

A Woman's heart's too tender to be an enemy
To Peace.

Your most humble Serviteur, my Lord.

Monsieur, I perceive you are much to blame;
You are an excellent Governor indeed.

Begar do you tinke dat I am de Bedlam?
No tinge but de Bedlam can govern him.

Ienny, here's my hand; I'll come and make
Amends for all -- pretty Rogue. --

Ver pret Rogue,
Vid a pox.

What rude French Rascal have you here?

Rascale! Begar ver it nod for
De reverence of my Matre I vod cut off your occupation
French Rascale! Whore English --

Dufoy, be gone, and leave us.

I will, I will leave you to your recreation; I
Vishe you ver good pastime, and de pox
Begar.

I never heard a ruder Fellow. -- Sir Frederick, you
Will not fail the time.

No, no, Ienny.

Your Servant, my Lord.

Farewell Ienny.

Now did all this fury end in a mild
Invitation to the Ladies Lodging.

I have known this wenches Mistress
Ever since I came from Travel, but never
Was acquainted with that Fellow that
Keeps her; prithee what is he?

Why his name is Wheadle; he's one whose trade is Treachery,
To make a Friend, and then deceive him;
He's of a ready Wit, pleasant Conversation,
Thoroughly skilled in men; in a word, he
Knows so much of Virtue as makes him
Well accomplished for all manner of Vice:
He has lately insinuated himself into
Sir Nich'las Culley, one whom Oliver, for the
Transcendent knavery and disloyalty of
His Father, has dishonoured with Knight-hood;
A fellow as poor in experience as in parts,
And one that has a vain-glorious humour to gain a
Reputation amongst the Gentry, by feigning good nature, and
An affection to the King and his Party.
I made a little debauch the other day in their Company,
Where I fore-saw this fellow's destiny, his purse must pay
For keeping this Wench, and all other Wheadle's extravagances.
But pray, my Lord,
How thrive you in your more honourable
Adventures? Is harvest near? When is the
Sickle to be put in the Corn?

I have been hitherto so prosperous,
My happiness has still out-flown my faith:
Nothing remains but Ceremonial Charms,
Graciana's fixed in the circle of my Arms.

Then you're a happy man for a season.

For ever.

I mistrust your Mistresses Divinity; you'll
Find her Attributes but Mortal:
Women, like Jugglers Tricks,
Appear Miracles to the ignorant; but in them-
-Selves the are mere cheats.

Well, well, Cousin; I have engaged that you this day
Shall be my Guest at my Lord Bevill's Table;
Pray make me Master of my promise once.

Faith I have engaged to dine with my dear
Lucy; poor Girl, I have lately given her
Occasion to suspect my kindness; yet for your
Sake I'll venture to break my Word,
Upon condition you'll excuse
My errors; you know my
Conversation has not been amongst ceremonious
Ladies.

All modest freedom you will find allow'd;
Formality is banished thence.

This Virtue is enough to make me bear
With all the inconveniences of honest Company.

The freeness of your humour is your friend.
I have such news to tell thee that I fear
Thou'lt find thy breast too narrow for thy joy.

Gently, my Lord, lest I find the thing too
Little for my expectation.

Know that thy careless carriage has done more
Then all the skill and diligence of Love
Could e're effect.

What? the Widow has some kind thoughts of my body.

She loves you, and dines on purpose at her Brother's house
This day, in hopes of seeing you.

Some Women like Fishes despise the
Bait, or else suspect it, whilst still it's
Bobbing at their mouths; but subtly wav'd
By the Angler's hand, greedily hang themselves upon the hook.
There are many so critically wise, they'll suffer
None to deceive them but themselves.

Cousin, 'tis time you were preparing for your Mistress.

Well, since 'tis my fortune, I'll about it.
Widow, thy ruin lie on thy own head:
Faith, my Lord, you can witness 'twas none
Of my seeking.

Come, bear thy losses patiently.

A pox confound all Ordinaries,
If ever I play in an Ordinary again --

Thou'lt lose thy money:
Thou hast no power to forbear;
I will as soon undertake to reclaim
A Horse from a hitch he has learned in his pace,
Or an old Mastive from worrying of Sheep.

Ay, ay, there is nothing can do it but hemp.

Want of money may do much.

I protest I had rather still be vicious
Then owe my Virtue to Necessity.
How commendable is chastity in an Eunuch?
I am grown more then half virtuous of late:
I have laid the dangerous Pad now quite aside;
I walk within the Purlieus of the Law.
Could I but leave this Ordinary, this Square,
I were the most accomplished man in Town.

'Tis pity thou art Master of thy Art;
Such a nimble hand, such neat conveyance.

Nay, I should have made an excellent Juggler, faith.

Come, be cheerful,
I've lodged a Deer shall make amends for all;
I lacked a man to help me set my Toils,
And thou art come most happily.

My dear Wheadle, who is it?

My new Friend
And Patron Sir Nicholas Cully.

He's fat, and will say well, I promise you.
Well, I'll do his business most dexterously,
Else let me ever lose the honour
Of serving a Friend in the like nature.

No more words, but haste, prepare for the design;
Habit your self like a good thrifty Country-man;
Get Tools, Dice, and Money for the purpose,
And meet me at the Devil about three exactly.

Sir, Sr Nicholas Cully is without.

Desire him to walk in.
Here Palmer, the back-way, quickly, and be sure --

Enough, enough, I'll warrant thee.

Sir Nicholas, this Visit is too great a favour;
I intended one to you; how do you
Find your self this morning?

Faith much the dryer for the last nights wetting.

Like thirsty earth, which gapes the more
For a small shower; we will soak you
Thoroughly to day.

Excuse me, faith I am engaged.

I am sorry for it;
I meant you a share in my good fortune;
But since it cannot be --

What? what good fortune?

Nay, 'twill but vex you to know it,
Since you have not leisure to pursue it.

Dear Wheadle, prithee tell me.

Now do I want power to keep it from you.
Just as you came in at that door, went
Out at this a Waiting-Gentlewoman,
Sent with a civil Message from her Lady,
To desire the happiness of my Company
This afternoon, where I should have the
Opportunity of seeing another lovely brisk
Woman, newly married to a foolish
Citizen, who will be apt enough to hear
Reason from one that can speak it better then
Her Husband: I returned my humble
Thanks for the honour she did me, and that
I could not do my self so great an injury
To disobey her will; this is
The adventure; But since you've business --

A pox on business, I'll defer't.

By no means for a silly Woman; our Pleasures
Must be slaves to our Affairs.

Were it to take possession of an
Estate, I'd neglect it.
Are the Ladies Cavaliers?

Oh, most Loyal-hearted Ladies!

How merry will we be then!

I say, mind your business.

I'll go and put it off immediately.
Where shall I meet you in the afternoon?

You'll find me at the Devil about three
A clock, where I expect a second summons as
She passes toward the City.

Thither will I come without fail; be sure
You wait for me.

Wait for thee, as a Cat does for a Mouse
She intends to play with, and then prey upon.
How eagerly did this half-witted fellow chap
Up the bait? like a ravenous Fish, that will
Not give the Angler leave to sink his Line,
But greedily darts up and meets it half way.

The Sun's grown lazy; 'tis a tedious space
Since he set forth, and yet's not half his race.
I wonder Beaufort does not yet appear;
Love never loyters, Love sure brings him here.

Brought on the wings of Love, here I present
His Soul, whose Body Prisons yet prevent;
The noble Bruce, whose Virtues are his Crimes:
Are you as false and cruel as the times!
Will you not read the story of his grief?
But wilfully refuse to give relief?

Sister, from you this language makes me start:
Can you suspect such vices in my heart?
His Virtues I, as well as you, admire;
I never scorned, but pity much his fire.

If you did pity, you would not reject
This Messenger of Love: This is neglect.

Tis cruelty to gaze on Wounds I'm sure,
When we want Balsam to effect their Cure.

'Tis only want of will in you, you have
Beauty to kill, and Virtue too to save.

We of our selves can neither love nor hate;
Heaven does reserve the power to guide our Fate.

Graciana, --

Sister, forbear; my Father's here.

So Girl; what, no news of your Lover yet?
Our Dinner's ready, and I am afraid
He will go nigh to incur the Cooks anger.

I believe he has undertook a hard task;
Sir Frederick, they say, is no easy man
To be persuaded to come among us women.

Sir.

What now?

I am as impatient as thou art, Girl;
I long to see Sir Frederick here.

Forbear, I charge you on my blessing;
Not one word more of Colonel Bruce.

You gave encouragement Sir to his Love;
The honour of our House now lies at stake.

You find by your Sisters Inclinations
Heaven has decreed her otherwise.

But Sir, --

Forbear to speak, or else forbear the Room.

This I can obey, but not the other.

Sir, my Lord Beaufort's come.

'Tis well.

D'hear, are there not two Gentlemen?

Yes Madam, there is another proper handsome Gentleman.

Come, let us walk in, and give them entertainment.

Now Cousin for Sr Frederick, this man of men,
There's nothing like him.

With curious diligence I still have strove
During your absence, Bruce, to breath your Love
Into my Sisters bosom; But the fire
Wants force; Fate does against my breath conspire:
I have obeyed, though I cannot fulfil,
Against my self, the dictates of your Will:
My Love to yours does yield; Since you enjoined,
I hourly court my Rival to be kind;
With passion too, as great as you can do,
Taught by those wounds I have received from you.
Small is the difference that's between our grief;
Yours finds no cure, and mine seeks no relief:
You unsuccessfully your Love reveal;
And I for ever must my Love conceal:
Within my bosom I'll your Letter wear,
It is a Tomb that's proper for despair.

MEthinks the wound your Master gave you Last night, makes you look very thin
and Wan, Monsieur.


Begar you are mistake, it be de vounde
Dat my Metresle did give me long ago.

What? some pretty little English Lady's
Crept into your heart?

No, but damned little English Whore is creep
Into my bone begar, me could vish dat de
Diable vould take her vid alle my heart

You have managed your business ill, Monsieur.

It was de Raskal Cyrugin English dat did
Manage de business ille; me did put my
Business into his haunde; he did stop de
Tape, and de liquor did varke, varke, varke,
Up into de head and de shoulder begar.

Like soap clapped under a Saddle.

Here come my Matre, hold your peace.

Whither, whither do you draw me, Widow?
What's your design?

To walk a turn in the Garden, and then
Repose in a cool Arbour.

Widow, I dare not venture my self in those amorous
Shades; you have a mind to be talking of Love
I perceive, and my heart's too tender to be trusted
With such conversation.

I did not imagine you were so foolishly
Conceited; is it your Wit or your Person, Sir,
That is so taking?

Truly you are much mistaken, I have no
Such great thoughts of the young man you
See; who ever knew a Woman have so much
Reason to build her Love upon merit?
Have we not daily experience of great
Fortunes, that fling themselves into the arms
Of vain idle Fellows? Can you blame me then
For standing upon my guard? No, let us
Sit down here, have each on's a Bottle of Wine
At our elbows; so prompted, I dare enter into
Discourse with you.

Would you have me sit
And drink hand to fist with you, as if we were
In the Fleece, or some other of your beloved
Taverns?

Faith I would have thee come as near
As possible to something or other I have
Been used to converse with, that I may
The better know how to entertain thee.

Pray which of those Ladies you use to
Converse with, could you fancy me to
Look like? be merry, and tell me.

Twere too great a sin to compare thee
To any of them; and yet you have so incensed
Me, I can hardly forbear to wish thee one
Of'em, Ho, Dufoy!
Widow, I stand in awe of this Gentleman;
I must have his advice before I dare
Keep you company any further. -- How do
You approve the spending of my time
With this Lady?

Ver vel, Begar;
I could vish I had never spend my time in de
Vorse compaignie.

You look but ill, Monsieur; have
You been sick lately?

I have de ver great affliction in my mind,
Madam.

What is't?

Truly I have de ver great passion for dis
Jentel-woman, and she have no compassion
At all for me; she do refuse me all my
Amoure and my address.

Indeed Betty you are to blame.

Out upon him for a French dissembler,
He never spake to me in his life, Madam.

You see, Madam, she scorn me for
Her Serviteur.

Pray, when did you make any of your French
Love to me?

It will break my heart to remember de
Time ven you did refuse me.

Will you permit me to serve you in this
Business, Monsieur?

Madam, it be d'honour for de King de France.

Betty, whither run you?

I'll uot stay to be jeered by a sneaking
Valet-De chambre: I'll be revenged
If I live, Monsieur.

I'll take some other time.

Van you have de leisure, Madam.

By those lips, --

Nay, pray forbear, Sir.

Who's conceited now, Widow? could
You imagine I was so fond to kiss them?

You cannot blame me for standing on
My guard so near an Enemy.

If you are so good at that, Widow,
Let's see, what guard would you choose to be at
Should the Trumpet sound a Charge
To this dreadful foe?

It is an idle Question amongst experienced
Soldiers; but if we ever have a War,
We will never trouble the Trumpet; the
Bells shall proclaim our Quarrel.

It will be most proper; they shall be
Rung backwards.

Why so, Sir?

I'll have all the helps that may be to
Allay a dangerous fire; Widows must
Needs have furious flames; the bellows
Have been at work, and blown'em up.

You grow too rude, Sir: I will have my
Humour, a walk in the Garden; and afterwards
We will take the Air in the Park.

Let us join hands then, Widow.

Without the dangerous help of a Parson
I do not fear it, Sir.

Begar, I do no care two Soulz if de
Shamber-maid ver hang be it not
Great deal better pretend d' affection to
Her, dan to tell de hole Varlde I do take
De Medicine for de clape; begar it
Be de ver great deal better.

Graciana, why do you condemn your Love?
Your Beauty without that, alas! would prove
But my destruction, an unlucky Star
Prognosticating ruin and despair.

Sir, you mistake; 'tis not my Love I blame,
But my Discretion;
Should yet a longer time have been concealed;
Too soon, too soon I fear it was revealed.
Our weaker Sex glories in a Surprise,
We boast the sudden Conquests of our Eyes;
But men esteem a Foe that dares contend,
One that with noble Courage does defend
A wounded Heart; the Victories they gain
They prize by their own hazard and their pain.

Graciana, can you think we take delight
To have our happiness against us fight;
Or that such goodness should us men displease
As does afford us Heaven with greater ease?
See where your Brother comes; his
Carr'age has been strange of late to me;
I never gave him cause of discontent;
He takes no notice of our being here:
I will salute him.

By no means;
Some serious thoughts you see employ his mind.

I must be civil. Your Servant, Sir.

You are my Sisters Servant, Sir; go fawn
Upon your Mistress; Fare-you-well.

Fare-you-well, if you are no better Company.
Heavens! what is the matter?
What saucy sorrow dares approach your heart?
Waste not these precious Tears; Oh, weep no more!
Should Heaven frown the world would be too poor,
(Robbed of the sacred Treasure of your eyes)
To pay for Mercy one fit Sacrifice.

My Brother, Sir, is growing mad, I fear.

Your Brother is a man whose noble Mind
Was to severest Virtue still inclined;
He in the School of Honour has been bred,
And all her subtle Laws with heed has read:
There is some hidden cause, I fain would know
From whence these strange disorders in him flow,
Graciana, shall I beg you to dispel
These Mists which round my troubled Reason dwell.

It is a Story I could wish you'd learn
From one whom it does not so much concern;
I am the unhappy cause of what you've seen;
My Brother's passion does proceed from mine.

This does confound me more! it cannot be;
You are the joy of all your family:
Dares he condemn you for a noble love
Which honour and your duty both approve.

My Lord, those errors merit our excuse
Which an access of virtue does produce.

I know that envy is too base a guest
To have a lodge ng in his generous breast;
'Tis some extreme of Honour, or of Love,
Or both, that thus his indignation move.

Ever I begin, you my sad story end;
You are a Rival to his dearest Friend.

Graciana, though you have so great a share
Of Beauty, all that see you Rivals are;
Yet during this small space I did proclaim
To you, and to the world, my purer flame,
I never saw the man that durst draw near,
With his ambitious Love t'assault your Ear.
What providence has kept us thus asunder?

When I have spoke you'll find it is no wonder.
He has a Mistress more renowned then me,
Whom he does Court, his dearer Loyalty;
He on his legs does now her favours wear;
He is confined by her foul Ravisher:
You may not know his Person; but his Name
Is strange to none that have conversed with Fame.
'Tis Bruce.

The Man indeed I ne'er did see,
But have heard wonders of his Gallantry.

This gallant Man my Brother ever loved;
But his Heroic Virtues so improved
In time those seeds of Love which first were sown,
That to the highest Friendship they are grown,
This Friendship first, and not his Love to me,
Sought an Alliance with our Family.
My Sister and my self were newly come
From learning how to live, to live at home;
When barren of Discourse one day, and free
With's Friend, my Brother chanced to talk of me;
Unlucky accident! his Friend replied,
He long had wished their Blood might be allied;
Then pressed him that they might my Father move
To give an approbation to his Love:
His Person and his Merits were so great,
He granted faster then they could entreat;
He wished the Fates which govern hearts would be
So kind to him to make our hearts agree;
But told them he had made a sacred Vow,
Never to force what Love should disallow.
But see, Sir Frederick and my Aunt.
My Lord, some other time I will relate
The story of his Love, and of its Fate.

How now my Lord? so grave a countenance
In the presence of your Mistress?
Widow, what would you give
Your eyes had power to make me such
Another melancholy Gentleman?

I have seen even as merry a man as
Your self, Sir Frederick, brought to stand
With folded arms, and with a tristful look
Tell a mournful tale to a Lady.

The Divel owes some men a shame;
The Coach is ready; Widow, I know
You are ambitious to be seen in my Company.

My Lord, and Cousin, will you honour
Me with yours to the Park; that may take off the
Scandal of his?

Madam, we will wait upon you;
But we must not leave this Lady behind us.

Cousin Aurelia --

Madam, I beg you will excuse me, and
You, my Lord; I feel a little indisposition,
And dare not venture into so sharp an
Air.

Your Servant, Madam.

Retire; I would not have you stay with me,
I have too great a train of misery.
If virtuous Love in none be cause of shame,
Why should it be a crime to own the flame,
But we by Custom, not by Nature led,
Must in the beaten paths of Honour tread.
I love thee, Bruce; but Heaven, what have I done!
Leticia, did I not command you hence?

Madam, I hope my care is no offence:
I am afflicted thus to see you take
Delight to keep your miseries awake.

Since you have heard me, swear you will be true;
Leticia, none must know I love but you.

If I at any time your Love declare,
May I of Heaven and serving you despair.
Though I am young, yet I have felt this smart;
Love once was busy with my tender heart;

Were thou in love?

I was.

Prithee, with whom?

With one that like my self did newly bloom:
Methoughts his Actions were above his Years.

Leticia, you confirm me by your tears;
Now I believe you loved; did he love you?

That had been more then to my Love was due;
He was so much above my humble Birth,
My Passion had been fitter for his mirth.

And does your Love continue still the same?

Some sparks remain, but Time has quenched the flame;
I hope 'twill prove as kind to you, and cure
These greater griefs which (Madam) you endure.

Time to my bleeding heart brings no relief;
Death there must heal the fatal wounds of grief:
Leticia, come, within this shady Bower
We'll join our mournful voices, and repeat
The saddest tales we ever learned of Love.

WHen Phillis watched her harmless Sheep
Not one poor Lamb was made a prey;
Yet she had cause enough to weep,
Her silly heart did go astray:
Then flying to the neighbouring Grove,
She left the tender Flock to rove,
And to the Winds did breath her Love.
She sought in vain
To ease her pain;
The heedless winds did fan her fire;
Venting her grief
Gave no relief;
But rather did increase desire.
Then sitting with her arms across,
Her sorrows streaming from each eye;
She fixed her thoughts upon her loss,
And in despair resolved to die.
Why should you weep, Leticia, whilst we sing?
Tell me from whence those gentle Currents spring.
Can yet your faded Love cause such fresh showers?
This water is too good for dying flowers.

Madam, it is such Love commands this dew
As cannot fade; it is my love to you.

Leticia, I am weary of this place;
And yet I know not whither I should go.

Will you be pleased to try if you can sleep?
That may deceive you of your cares awhile.

I will: there's nothing here does give me ease,
But in the end will nourish my disease.

The hour is come;
Where's your Master, Sirrah?

He'll be here immediately, Sir.

Is he neatly dressed?

In the very suit he won the other day
Of the Buckingham-shire Grasier.

Take this Letter, and give it me
When you perceive me talking with
Sir Nicholas Cully, with recommendations from
A Lady; lurk in some secret place till he's
Come, that he may not perceive you at his
Entrance. Oh, here's Palmer.
Thom, what's the price of a score of fat
Weathers?

Do they not well become me, boy?

Nature doubtless intended thee for a Rogue,
She has so well contrived thee for
Disguises. Here comes Sir Nicholas.
Sir Nicholas, come, come; This is an honest Friend
And Countryman of mine.

Your servant, Sir; is not the Lady come by yet?

I expect her every moment, -- Ho, here's her Boy.
Well, what news?

My Lady presents her service to you, Sir, and has
Sent you this.

What is the matter, man?

Read read; I want patience to tell you.
Fortune still jades me in all my expectations.

The Citizens wife forced
To go to Greenwitch with her husband;
Will meet some time next week.
Come, come, Wheadle, another time will do;
be not so passionate, man.

I must abuse my friend upon an idle
Woman's words!

Pish, 'tis an accident: Come, let us
Drink a glass of Wine, to put these Women
Out of our heads.

Women? ho Boys, Women, where are the Women?

Here's your merry Country-man.

He took her by the Apron,
To bring her to his beck;
But as he wound her to him
The Apron-strings did break.
A merry man indeed. Sir, my service to you.

Thank you, Sir. Come Mr Wheadle, remembering
My Land-lord, i'faith; would he were even among us now.
Come, be merry man.
Look like an honest man; here's a good health
To all that are so: Top -- here pledge me.

Mr Wheadle, to you.

I'll not abate you an ace. 'Slid, you're not
So honest as I took you for.

If any man baulk his Liquor
Let him never baulk the Gallows,
But sing a Psalm there with' Vicar,
Or die in a dirty Ale-house.
There's a Country-man below desires to
Speak with his Master Palmer.

So, so, thank thee Lad; it is my man, I
Appointed him to call here; he has sold the Cattle
I'll warrant you: I'll wait upon you again
Presently, Gentlemen.

Is not this a very pleasant fellow?

The pleasant'st I ever met with; What is he?

He's a Buckingham-shier Grasier, very
Rich; he has the fat Oxen, and fat Acres in the Vale:
I met him here by chance, and could not avoid
Drinking a glass of Wine with him. I believe he's
Gone down to receive money;
'Twere an excellent design to bubble him.

How it would change his merry note; will you
Try him?

Do you:
I cannot appear in it, because he takes me for his Friend.

How neatly I could Top upon him!

All things will pass upon him; I'll go
Your half: Talk of Dice, you'll
Perceive if he's coming. What money have you
About you?

Ten pieces.

I have about that quantity too, here, take it.
If he should run us out of our ready money
Be sure you set him deep upon Tick,
If he'll be at you, that we may recover it;
For we will not pay a farthing of what we lose
That way. Hush, here he comes.

All my fat Oxen and Sheep are melted
To this, Gentlemen.

Their grease is well tried, Sir.

Come, Sir, for all your riches, you are in
Arrear here.

I'll be soon out of your debts: My hearty
Love to you, Sir.
I had you both in Buckingham-shier, and a
Pipe of this Canary in my Cellar; we'd
Roast an Ox before we parted; should we
Not, Boy?

We'd sing, and we'd laugh, and we'd drink all the day;
Our Reason we'd banish, our senses should sway;
And every Pleasure our Wills should obey.
Come, drink to me a brimmer if you
Dare now.

Nay, if you provoke me you'll find me a
Bold man: Give me a bigger glass, Boy:
So, this is fit for men of Worship: Hang your
Retail Drinkers; have at thee, my brave Country-man.

I'll do all I can for my guts to pledge thee.
Ho, brave boys! that's he, that's he, i'faith; how
I could hug thee now! Mr Wheadle, to you.

I protest, Gentlemen, you'll fright me out
Of your Company. Sir Nicholas, shall we have
The other round.

Let's pause a while. What say
You, Gentlemen, if, to pass away the time,
And to refresh us, we should have a box and dice,
And fling a merry Mayn among our selves in sport?

'Twil spoil good Company; by no means, Sr Nicholas.

Hang play among Friends; let's have a Wench:
And Jenny was all my Joy,
She had my Heart at her will;
But I left her and her toy
When once I had got my fill.
What say you, shall we have her?

We are not drunk enough for a Wench.

Let's sing a Catch then.

Cull. Agreed, agreed.

Begin, Mr Palmer.

I have no design here,
But drinking good Wine here.

Nor I, Boy.

Nor I, Boy.

The art my Boy.

The art my Boy.

Our heads are too airy for Plots:
Let us hug then all three,
Since our Virtues agree,
We will hollow and cast up our Hats.

Enough, enough.

Very good boys all, very good boys all. Give
Me a glass of Wine there; fill a Brimmer: Sir
Nicholas, your Lady.

Pray, Sir, forbear; I must be forced to leave
Your Company else.
Prithee, Wheadle, let's have a Box and Dice.

We shall grow dull. Mr Palmer, what say
You to the business?

I do not understand Dice: I understand good
Pasture and drink. -- Hang the Devil's bones.

He that leaves his Wine for Boxes and Dice,
Or his Wench for fear of mishaps,
May he beg all his days, cracking of Lice,
And die in conclusion of Claps.
Come, come, Gentlemen, this is the harmlesser
Sport of the two; a merry glass round.

Excuse me, Sir; I'll pledge you here.
Come, come, Sir, on Six; Six is the Main.

The Main? what's the Main?

Do not you understand Hazard?

I understand Dice, or hap-hazard!

Can you play at Passage?

You pass my understanding: I can fling
Most at a throw, for a Shot, or a glass of Wine.

Passage is easily learned: The Caster wins
If he fling above ten with Doublets upon
Three Dice.

How Doublets?

Two of a sort; two Cinques, two Tre's, or the like.

Ho, ho; I have you.

Come, set then.

I set you this Bottle.

Nay, nay, set money!

Is it a fair play Mr. Wheadle, I trust to you.

Upon my word a very fair square play; but
This table is so wet, there's no playing upon it.

Will you be pleased to remove into the next Room,
Gentlemen?

I think 'twill not be amiss.

Much better. Come Mr Palmer.

I'll follow, Sir.

If she be not as kind as fair,
But peevish and unhandy,
Leave her, she's only worth the care
Of some spruce Iack-a-dandy.
I would not have thee such an Ass,
Had thou ne'er so much leisure.
To sigh and whine for such a Lass
Whose Pride's above her Pleasure.
Ho brave Boy!

March on, march on.
Make much of every buxom Girl,
Which needs but little Courting;
Her value is above the pearl,
That takes delight in sporting.

NAy, Sir Nich'las, for all your haste, I must
Have a Note under your hand for the tho usa
Pounds you owe me.

This must not be among Friends, Mr Palmer;
Sir Nich'las shall not pay the money.

I had been a Mad-man to play at such a rate
If I had ever intended to pay.

Though I am but a poor Country-man I scorn
To be choosed; I have Friends in Town.

But hark you, Mr Palmer.

Hark me no harks; I'll have my money.

Drawer, take you Reck'ning.

Farewell, Sir; haste into the Country to
Mind your Cattle.

But hark you, Gentlemen; are you in earnest?

Ay indeed; fare you well, Sir.

I took you for my Friend, Mr Wheadle;
But now I perceive what you are.


Never fear him; he dares not to go into the
Field, without it be among his sheep.

Agreed; to morrow, about eight in the morning,
Near Pancridge.

I will have the honour to serve you, Sir Nich'las.
Provide your self a Second, Mr Palmer.

So, laugh:
This is the Sheep that I must fleece.

Here, here, this is the window; range your
Selves here.

Good-morrow, Gentlemen.

Honest Bell-man, prithee lend me they Bell.

Withal my heart, Master.

You Widow, that do sleep dog-sleep,
And now for your dead Husband weep,
Perceiving well what want you have
Of that poor worm has eat in Grave;
Rise out of Bed, and open the door;
Here's that will all your joys restore.
Good-morrow, my Mistress dear, Good-morrow.
Good-morrow, Widow.

Who's that that comes at this unseasonable
Hour, to disturb my Ladies quiet.

An honest Bell-man, to mind her of her frailty.

Sir Frederick, I wonder you will offer this;
You will loose her favour for ever.

Y' are mistaken; now's the time to creep into
Her favour.

I'm sure you've waked me out of the sweetest sleep.
Hey ho --

Poor girl! let me in, I'll rock
Thee into a sweeter.

I hear a stirring in my Mistresses Chamber;
I believe you've frighted her.

Sound a fresh Alarm; the Enemy's at hand.

Whose insolence is this, that dares affront me Thus?

If there be insolence in Love, 'tis I
Have done you this unwilling injury.

What pitiful rhyming fellow's that? he speaks
As if he were prompted by the Fiddlers.

Alas, what pains I take thus to unclose
Those pretty eye-lids which locked up my Foes!

A godly Buke would become that tone a great
Deal better: He might get a pretty living by
Reading Mother Shipton's Prophesies, or some
Pious Exhortation at the corner of a Street:
His mournful voice, I vow, has moved my compassion.

Ay, ay, we should have a fellow-feeling of one
Another indeed, Widow.

Sir Frederick, is it you?

Yes truly; and can you be angry, Lady?
Have not your Quarters been beaten up
At these most seasonable hours before now?

Yes; but it has been by one that has had a Commission
For what he did: I'm afraid should it once become
Your Duty, you would soon grow weary of the Employment.

Widow, I hate this distance; 'tis not the English fashion:
Prithee let's come to it hand to fist.

I give no entertainment to such lewd persons.
Farewell, Sir.

I'll fetch thee again, or conjure the whole Garden up,
Sing the Catch I taught you at the Rose.

HE that will win a Widows heart
Must bear up briskly to her:
She loves the Lad that's free and smart,
But hates the Formal Wooer.
Hold, hold, Sir Frederick; what do you imagine
The Neighbours will think?

So ill, I hope, of thee, thoul't be forced to
Think the better of me.

I am much beholden to you for the care you have
Of my Reputation.

Talk no more, but let the door be opened;
Or else Fiddlers --

Pray hold; what security shall I have for
Your good behaviour?

My Sobriety.

That's pawned at the Tavern from whence
You came.

Thy own Honesty then; is that engaged?

I think that will go nigh to secure me.
Give 'em entrance, Betty.

Ha! who goes there?

An humble Creature of yours, Sir.

Palmer in a disguise! What roguery
Hast thou been about?

Out of my loyal inclinations doing
Service to his Majesty.

What? a plotting?

How to destroy his enemies, Mr Wheadle
And I are very vigilant.

In bubbling of some body, on my life,

We do not use to boast our services,
Nor do we seek Rewards; good actions
Recompense themselves.

Ho, the door opens; farewell, Sirrah.
Gentlemen, wait you without, and be ready
When I call.
Honest Bell-man, drink this.

Thank you, Noble Master.

Here's something to stop thy mouth too.

Out upon you, Sir Frederick; you'll never leave
Your old tricks.

Little did I think I should ever have been brought
To this pass: Love never had the power to rob me
Of my rest before.

Alas, poor Gentleman! he has not been used to
These late hours.

Widow, do not you be peevish now; 'tis dangerous
Jesting with my affection; 'tis in its infancy, and
Must be humoured.

Pray teach me how, Sir.

Why, with kisses, and such pretty little dalliances;
Thus, thus.

Hold, hold, Sir; if it be so froward, put it out
To Nurse; I am not so fond of it as you imagine;
Pray how have you disposed of your brave Camerades?
Have you left them to the mercy of the Beadle?

No, you must be acquainted with their Virtues.
Enter, Gentlemen.

These are men of skill.

I disgus'd 'em for your entertainment.

Well, Sir, now I hope you'll leave me to my
Rest.

Can you in conscience turn a young man
Out of doors at this time of the night, Widow?
Fie, fie, the very thought on it will keep you
Waking.

So pretty, so well-favour'd a young man;
One that loves me.

Ay, one that loves you.

Truly 'tis a very hard-hearted thing.

Come, come, be mollified. You may go, Gentlemen,
And leave me here; you may go.

You may stay, Gentlemen; you may stay,
And take your Captain along with you:
You'll find good Quarters in some warm Hay-loft.

Merciless Woman! Do but lend me thy Maid; faith I'll
Use her very tenderly and lovingly, even as I'd use
Thy self, dear Widow, if thou would but make proof
Of my affection.

If the Constable carry your suspicious person to the
Counter, pray let me have notice of it; I'll send my
Taylor to be your Bail.

Go, go to bed, and be idle, Widow; that's worse then
Any misfortune I can meet with. Strike up, and give
Notice of our coming. Farewell, Widow;
I pity thy solitary condition.

I wonder Sir Frederick stays out so late.

Dis is noting; six, seven a clock in de morning
Is ver good hour.

I hope he does not use these hours often.

Some six, seven time a veeke; no oftiner.

My Lord commanded me to wait his coming.

Matre Clark, to divertise you, I will tell you
How I did get be acquainted vid dis bedlam Matre.
About two, tree year ago me had for my conveniance
Discharge my self from attending as Matre D'ostel to
A person of Condition in Parie; it happen after de
Dispatch of my little affair --

That is, after h'ad spent his money, Sir.

Jan foutre de Lacque; me will have de Vip
And de Belle for your breeck, Rogue.

Sir, in a word, he was Iack-pudding to a Mountebank,
And turned off for want of wit; my Master picked him
Up before a Puppit-show, mumbling a half-penny
Custard, to send him with a Letter to the Post.

Morbleu, see, see de insolance of de Foot-boy English,
Bogre Rascale, you lye, begar I will cut your troate.

He's a Rogue; on with your story, Monsieur.

Matre Clark, I am your ver humble Serviture; but
Begar me have no patience to be abuse. As I did say, After
De dispatch of my affa^e van day being Idele, vich
Does produce de Mellanchollique, I did valke over
De new Bridge in Parie, and to devertise de time,
And my more serious tough^e, me did look to see
De Marrionete and de Jack-puddinge, vich
Did play hundred pretty trike, time de
Collation was come; and for I had no company, I was
Unvilling to go to de Cabarete, but did buy a Darriole,
Little Custarde vich did satisfy my appetite ver vel:
In dis time young Mounfieur de Grandvil (a Jentelman
Of ver great Quality, van dat was my ver good Friend,
And has don me ver great and insignal faveure)
Come by in his Caroche, vid dis Sir Frolic, who did
Pension at de same Academy, to learn de
Language, de bon mine, de great horse, and
Many oder trike; Monsieur seeing me did
Make de bow, and did beken, beken me come
To him; he did tell me dat de Englis Jentelman
Had de Letre for de Post, and did entreat
Me (if I had de opportunity) to see de Letre
Deliver; he did tell me too, it vold be ver great
Obligation: de memory of de faveur I had
Receive from his Famelye, beside de inclination I
Naturally have to serve de strangere, made me
Return de complemen vid ver great civility,
And so I did take de Letre, and see it delivere.
Sir Frolic perceiving (by de management of dis
Affair) dat I was man d'esprit, and of vitte, did
Entreat me to be his Serviteur; me did take
D'affection to his Person, and was content to live
Vid him, to counsel and to advise him. You see
Now de lye of de Bougre de Lacque English, Morbleu.

Monsieur, the Apothecary is without.

Dat news be no ver velcome, begar.
Matre Clarke, go and sit you down; I will but swal
My breakface, and be vid you again present.
Morbleu L' apothecare.

Dear Wheadle, this is too dangerous a testimony
Of thy kindness.

I should be angry with you if you thought so:
What makes you so serious?

I am sorry I did not provide for both our safeties.

How so?

Colonel Hewson is my neighbour, and very good
Friend; I might have acquainted him with
The business, and got him with a File of
Musketeers to secure us all.

But this would not secure your Honour.
What would the world have judged?

Let the world have judged what it would: Have
We not had many presidents of late, and
The world knows not what to judge?

But you see there was no need to hazard
Your Reputation; here's no enemy appears.

We have done our duty, let's be going then.

We ought to wait a while.

The air is so bleak, I vow I can no longer
Endure it.

Have a little patience, methinks I see two
Making towards us
In the next Close.

Where, where? 'tis them.

Bear up bravely now like a man.

I protest I am the worst dissembler
In cases of this nature.

Alon; look like a man of resolution.
Whither, whither go you?

But to the next house to make my Will,
For fear of the worst; tell them I'll be here
Again presently.

By no means; if you give 'em the least occasion
To suspect you, they' I appear like Lions.

Well, 'tis but giving security for the money;
That will bring me off at last.

I see you ride the Fore-horse, Gentlemen.

Good-morrow, Sir.

Come, Sir, let us match the swords.

With all my heart.

He had and a good right Bilbo blade,
Wherewith he used to vapour;
Full many a stubborn Foe had made
To wince and cut a caper.
Here's your Sword, Sir.

Come, Sir, are you ready for this sport?

By and by, Sir; I will not rend the buttons from my
Doublet for no mans pleasure.

Death, you've spoiled all; make haste.

Hang 'em, the Devil eggs 'em on; they will fight.

What, will you never have done fumbling?

This is a shame; fight him with his Doublet on;
There's no foul play under it.

Come, Sir, have at you.

Here, here, Sir.

I am for you, Sir.

Hold, hold, I beseech you, Mr Palmer, hear me,
Hear me.

What's the matter?

My Conscience will not let me fight in a wrong
Cause; I will pay the money, I have fairly lost it.

How contemptible is man, overcome by the worst of
Passions, Fear! it makes him as much below Beasts
As Reason raises him above them. I will my self
Fight you both; Come on, if you dare. --

Prithee, dear Wheadle, do but hear me.

I disown all the kindness I ever had for you:
Where are these men of valour, which owe their
Virtue to this man's Vice? let me go, I will chastise
Their insolence my self.

Dear Wheadle, bear with the frailties of
Thy Friend.

Death, what would you have me do? can I serve
You with any thing more dear then my life?

Let us give them security.

Do you know what it is you would do? have you considered
What a thousand Pounds is? 'tis a Fortune for any one man.

I will pay it all; thou shalt be no loser.

Do you hear, Shepherd? how do you expect
This money?

I expect such security for it as my friend shall advise.

A Warrant to confess a Judgment from you both.

You shall be damned first; you shall
Have nothing.

We will have your bloods.

Let me go.

Dear Wheadle, let it be so. You shall
Have a Judgment, Gentlemen.

I will take care hereafter with whom I engage.

What? you have your tackling about you.
We have Articles for Peace, as well as Weapons
For War.

Dispatch, dispatch then, put me to no more
Torment with delays.

Come Sr Nicholas to the Book; you see we are favourable,
We grant you the benefit of your Clergy. -- Your
Helping hand, good Mr Wheadle, to finish the work.

Take that into the bargain.

You shall have another, if you please, at the price.

We seldom quarrel under a thousand pounds.

We wish you merry, Gentlemen.

Come, let's to the Tavern escape,
And drink whilst we can stand;
We thirst more for the blood of the Grape
Then for the blood of man.
Do you see now what men of mighty prowess
These are?

I was to blame, indeed.

I am in such a passion I know not what
To do: Let us not stand gazing here;
I would not have this known for a Kingdom.

No, nor I neither.

'Tis yet within your power, Sir, to maintain
Our Honour, and prevent this threatening stain.

Forbear this wicked insolence: Once more
I charge you think on your Obedience.

Beauty, what art thou, we so much admire!
Thou art no real, but a seeming fire,
Which, like the glow-worm, only cast'st a light
To them whose Reason Passion does benight.
Thou art a Meteor, which but blazing dies,
Made of such vapours as from us arise.
Within thy guilty beams lurk cruel Fates,
To peaceful Families, and warring States.
Unhappy Friend, to dote on what we know --

Sir, Colonel Bruce, unexpectedly released from
His Imprisonment, is come to wait upon you.

What shall I do! Ye Powers above be kind,
Some counsel give to my distracted mind:
Friendship and shame within me so contend,
I know not how to shun or meet my Friend.

Where is my generous Friend? Oh Noble Youth,
How long have I been robbed of this content?
Though deprivation be the greatest pain,
When Heaven restores our happiness again,
It makes amends by our increase of joy,
Perfecting that which it did once destroy.
Dear Friend, my love does now exact its due;
Graciana must divide my heart with you:
Conduct me to your Sister, where I may
Make this my morn of Joy a glorious day.
What means this sad astonishment!

How can we choose but with confusion greet,
When I your Joys with equal Sorrows meet?

O Heaven! must my afflictions have no end!
I escaped my Foe, to perish by my Friend.
What strange disaster can produce this grief!
Is Graciana dead? Speak, speak; be brief.

She lives; but I could wish her dead.

Rash man! why should your envy swell so high,
To wish the world this great calamity?
Wish the whole frame of Nature were dissolved;
That all things to a Chaos were revolved.
There is more charity in this desire;
Since with our loss, our sorrows would expire.

Here comes Aurelia, sent for my relief;
Heaven knows her tongue can best express this grief:
Examine her, and you shall find ere long
I can revenge, though not relate your wrong.

For pity haste, Aurelia, and declare
The reasons of your Brothers frighting care:
My soul is racked with doubts, until I know.
Your silence and your looks, Aurelia, show
As if your kindness made you bear a part
Of those great sorrows that afflict his heart.

His passion is so noble and so just,
No generous Soul can know it but it must
Lay claim unto a portion, as its due:
He can be thus concerned for none but you.

Kind Maid, reveal what my misfortunes are;
Friendship must not engross them, though it share.
I would not willingly my Love suspect;
And yet I fear 'tis answered with neglect.

My Sister, by unlucky stars misled,
From you and from her happiness is fled;
Unskilful in the way, by passion pressed,
She has took shelter in another breast.

Fate, thou hast done thy worst, thy Triumph sing;
Now thou hast stung so home, you have lost thy sting.
I have not power, Graciana, to exclaim*
Against your fault; indeed you are to blame.

Tell me, did she her promise plight, or give
Your love encouragement enough to live?

It was her pity sure, and not her Love,
That made her seem my passion to approve:
My story was unpleasant to her ear
At first; but time had made her apt to hear
My Love: She told me that it grew her grief,
As much as mine, my pain found no relief;
Then promised she'd endeavour the decrease
Of that in her which warred against my peace.
'Twas in this joyful spring of Love that I
Was ravished from her by our enemy:
My hopes grew strong, I banished all despair:
These glowing sparks I then left to the care
Of this fair maid, thinking she might inspire
My passion, and blow up the kindling fire.

Alas! she, to my knowledge, has been true;
Sh'as spoke and sighed all that she could for you.

When you were forced to end, I did proceed,
And with success the catching fire did feed;
Till Noble Beaufort, one unlucky day,
A visit to our Family did pay;
Newly arrived from Foreign Courts, and Fraught
With all those Virtues that in Courts are taught:
He with his amorous Tales so charmed her ear,
That she of Love from none but him would hear.

That heart which I so long with toil and pain
Besieged, and used all stratagems to gain,
Is now become within a trice we see
The Triumph of another Victory.
There is a fate in love, as well as war;
Some though less careful more successful are.

Do not this opportunity withstand;
These Lovers now are walking hand in hand
In the Garden; fight him there, and sacrifice
His heart to that false Woman's cruel eyes:
If fate be so unjust to make thee fall,
His blood or mine shall wait thy Funeral.

Young man, this rashness must have my excuse,
Since 'tis your friendship does your fault produce;
If Powers above did not this passion sway,
But that our Love our Reason did obey,
Your Sister I with Justice might accuse,
Nor would I this occasion then refuse.

Does Bruce resolve thus tamely to decline
His interest, and like foolish women pine?
Can that great heart which in your breast does dwell
Let your fond griefs above your courage swell?

My passions grow unruly, and I find
Too soon they'll raise a Tempest in my mind.
Graciana, like fond Parents, you're to blame
You did not in its youth correct my flame;
'Tis now so head-strong, and so wild a fire,
I fear to both our ruins 'twill conspire:
I grow impatient, Friend, come lead me where
I may to her my injured Love declare.
Graciana, yet your heart shall be my Prize,
Or else my heart shall be your Sacrifice.
Despair's the issue of ignoble minds,
And but with Cowards entertainment finds.

Heaven grant some moderation to this rage,
That Reason their swel'd passions may assuage.
Oh, Bruce! thou little think the Fates in me
Have to the full revenged thy injury.

Madam, what you have told so much must move
All that have sense of Honour or of Love,
That for my Rival I could shed a Tear,
If grief had any power when you are near.

Leave this discourse; your Mistress you neglect,
And to your Rival all your thoughts direct.

Forgive me, dear Graciana, I have been
By my compassion soothed into a sin.
The holiest man that to the Altar bows
With wandering thoughts too often stains his Vows.

Graciana, you are altered much, I find;
Sine I was here you've learned how to be kind.
The god of Love, which subt'ly let you sway,
Has stolen your heart, and taught it to obey.

Heavens! what strange surprise is this!

Hither I'm come to make my lawful claim;
You are my Mistress, and must own my flame.

Forbear, bold man, and do not tempt thy fate;
Thou hast no right, her Love does right create:
Thy Claim must to my Title here give place;
'Tis not who loves, but whom she's pleased to grace.

Hear me but speak; Bruce, you divide my care;
Though not my Love, you my Compassion share;
My heart does double duty; it does mourn
For you brave Bruce; for you brave Beaufort burn.

Your pity but destroys; if you would save,
It is your Love, Graciana, I must have.

Her Love is mine, she did it now declare;
Name it no more, but vanish and despair.

Death, do you think to conjure me away!
I am no Devil that am forced to obey:
If you're so good at that, here are such charms
Can fright y'into the circle of her arms.

Here is a Sword more fit for my defence;
This is not courage, Bruce, but insolence.
Graciana, let me go, my heart wants room.

My arms till now were ne'er thought troublesome.

Beaufort, I hope you've courage to appear,
Where sacred Sanctuary is not near.
I'll leave you now within that happy state
Which does provoke my fury and my hate.

You must not meet him in the field, to prove
A doubtful Combat for my certain Love.
Beside, your heart is mine; will you expose
The heart you gave me to its raging foes?
Those men want Honour who stake that at play
Which to their Friends their kindness gave away.

Graciana, why did you confine me so
Within your arms? you should have let me go:
We soon had finished this our hot debate,
Which now must wait a longer time on Fate.

None, in combustions blame such sa desire
To save their precious Goods from raging fire.
Banish this passion now, my Lord, and prove
Your anger cannot overcloud your Love.

Your glorious presence can this rage control,
And make a calm in my tempestuous soul;
But yet there must be time; the Sun does bear
A while with the fierce tempests of the Air,
Before he make those stormy conflicts cease,
And with his conquering beams proclaims a Peace.

FArewell, my Lord, I'll to my Friend declare
How generous you in your acceptance were.

My Honour is as forward as my Love,
On equal wings of jealousy they move:
I to my Rival will in neither yield;
I've won the Chamber, and will win the Field.

Your Emulation, Sir, is swoln so high,
You may be worthy of his Victory:
You'll meet with Honour blown, not in the bud,
Whose Root was fed with vast expense of blood.

What, my Lord, as studious as a Country
Vicar on a Saturday in the afternoon?
I thought you had been ready for the Pulpit.

I am not studying of speeches for my Mistress;
'Tis action that I now am thinking on,
Wherein there's Honour to be gained;
And you, Cousin, are come luckily to share it.

On my life a Prize to be played for your Mistress:
I had notice of your Quarrel, which brought me
Hither so early with my Sword to serve you.
But dares so zealous a Lover as your Lordship
Break the commandment of your Mistress? I heard,
Poor Lady, she wept, and charged you to sleep
In a whole skin; but young men never know
When they are well.

Cousin, my love to her cannot make me forget my duty
To my Family.

Pray whose body must I exercise my skill Upon?

You met the man; Graciana's Brother.

An expert Gentleman, and I have not
Fenced of late, unless it were with my
Widows Maids; and they are even too hard
For me at my own weapon.

Cousin, 'tis time we were preparing for the Field.

I wait to serve you, Sir.

But yet with grief, Graciana, I must go,
Since I your Brother there shall meet my Foe:
My fate too near resembles theirs where he
Did wound himself that hurt his Enemy.

So, my Proteus, exactly dressed!
Dexterous Rogue! Is Grace ready in her Jeers, and
Settled in my Lady Dawbwells house?

Every trap is baited.

I'll warrant thee then we catch our Cully:
He's gone to put himself into a fantastic
Garb, in imitation of Sir Frederick Frolic;
He's almost frantic with the very conceit
Of gaining the rich Widow. But hark, I
Hear him coming; slip down the back way,
And to your charge.

Wheadle, and what think you of this
Habit? is it not very modish?

As any man need wear: How did you
Furnish your self so suddenly?

Suddenly? I protest I was at least at
Sixteen Brokers, before I could put my self
Exactly into the fashion; but now I defy
Sir Frederick; I am as fine as he, and will be as mad
As he, if that will carry the Widow, I'll warrant
Thee.

Is it not better pushing thus for a Fortune,
Before your Reputation's blasted
With the infamous names of Coward and Gamester?
And so become able to pay the thousand pounds without noise,
Then going into the Country, selling your Land,
Making a havoc among your Woods, or mortgaging
Your Estate to a scrupulous Scrivener, that will
Whisper it iuto the ears of the whole Town,
By inquiring of your good behaviour?

Excellent Wheadle! And will my Lord
Bevill speak my commendations to his Sister?

She is impatient till she see you, Sir;
For in my hearing, upon the account I gave him
Of you, he told her you were the prettiest, wirtest,
Wildest Gentleman about the Town, and a Cavalier
In your heart; The only things that take her.

Wheadle, come, I will go to the Tavern,
And swallow two whole quarts of Wine
Instantly, and when I am drunk
Ride on a Drawers back to visit her.

Some less Frolic to begin with.

I will cut three Drawers over the pate then,
And go with a Tavern-Lanthorn before me at noon-day.
Come away.

Do not I look like a very Reverend Lord, Grace?

And I like a very fine Lady, Mr Palmer?

Yes in good faith, Grace; what a rogue is that
Wheadle, to have kept such a Treasure to himself,
Without communicating a little to his Friends?

Forbear; you'll be out in your Part,
My Lord, when Sir Nich'las comes.

The truth is, my Lady, I am better
Prepared at this time to act a Lover then
A Relation.

That grave dress is very amorous indeed.

My Virtues, like those of Plants in the Winter,
Are retired; your warm Spring
Would fetch 'em out with a vengeance.

Mr Wheadle and Sr Nich'las are come.

Away, away then, Sister; expect your Kew.

Then march along, Boys; valiant and strong, Boys.
So, lay down the Bottles here.

My Lord, this is the worthy Gentleman
That I told you was
Ambitious to be your Sisters Servant.

Hither I am come, my Lord, to drink
Your Sisters Health, without offence, I hope.

You are heartily welcome, Sir.

Here's a Brimmer then to her, and all the
Fleas about her.

Sir, I'll call her self to pledge it.

Stay, stay, my Lord, that you may
Be able to tell her you have drunk it.

Wheadle, how do you like this?
Shall I break the Windows?

Hold, hold; you are not in a
House of evil reputation.

Well admonished, Sir Frederick Frolic.

This is Sir Nich'las, Sister.

I, Madam, I am Sir Nich'las, and how do you like me?

A pretty Gentleman.
Pray, Sir, are you come a House-warming,
That you bring your Wine with you?

If you ask such pert Questions,
Madam, I can stop your mouth.
Hither I am come to be drunk,
That you may see me drunk; and
Here's a Health to your Flanel Petticoat.

Mr Wheadle, my service to you; a Health
To Sr Nich'las's great Grand-father's Beard-brush.

Nay, pledge me; ha --

You are not quarrelsome in your drink,
I hope, Sir.

No, faith; I am wondrous loving.

You are a very bold Lover.

Widow, let you and I go upon the ramble
To night.

Do you take me for a Night-walker, Sir?

Thou shalt be witness how many Constables
Staves I'll break about the Watchmens ears;
How many Bell-men I'll rob of their Verses,
To furnish a little Apartment in the back side
Of my Lodging.

I believe you're an excellent man at
Quarter-staff, Sir.

The odds was on my head against any Warrener
In all our Country; but I have left it off this
Two year. My Lord, what say you, Do you think
Your Sister and I should not furnish a Bed-chamber
As well as two soberer people? what think you, my Lord?

I, and a Nursery too, I hope, Sir.

Well said, Widow, i'faith; I will get upon thy body
A generation of wild Cats, children that shall
Waw, waw, scratch their Nurses, and be drunk
With their sucking-bottles.

Brave Sir Nich'las.

Wheadle, give me a Brimmer; the Widow
Shall drink it to our Progeny.
Where, where is she gone?

You have frighted her hence, Sir.

I'll fright her worse, if I find her in a corner.
Ha, Widow, I'll follow you; I'll follow you, ha.

The Wine makes the Rogue witty; he
Over-acts the Part I gave him;
Sir Fredrick is not half so mad: I will keep
Him thus elevated till he has married Grace,
And we have the best part of his Estate at our mercy.

Most ingenious Wheadle!

I was not born to ease nor Acres;
Industry is all my stock of living.

Hark, he puts them to the squeek.

We must go and take him off; he's as fierce
As a Bandog that has newly broke his chain.

This way they went; besure you kill the Villain;
Let pity be a stranger to your breasts.

We have been bred, you know, unacquainted with Compassion.

But why, Colonel, should you so eagerly
Pursue his life? he has the report of
A gallant Man.

He murdered my Father.

I have heard he killed him fairly in
The Field at Nasby.

He killed him, that's enough; and I my self.
Was witness: I accused him to the
Protector, and suborned Witness
To have taken away his life by form
Of Law; but my Plot was discovered, and
He yesterday released; since which I've
Watched an opportunity, without the
Help of seeming Justice, for my Revenge.
Strike home. --

We are your hired slaves; and since
You'll have it so, we will shed his blood,
And never spare our own.

Your Friendship, noble Youth, 's too prodigal;
For one already lost you venture all;
Your present happiness, your future joy;
You for the hopeless your great hopes destroy.

What can I venture for so brave a friend?
I have no hopes but what on you depend.
Should I your Friendship and my Honour rate
Below the value of a poor Estate,
A heap of dirt! Our Family has been
To blame, my blood most here atone the sin.
Heavens! what is there an Ambuscado laid!
Draw, dearest Friend, I fear we are betrayed.

Bruce, look on me, and then prepare to die.

O Treacherous Villain!

Fall on, and sacrifice his blood to my Revenge.

More hearts then one shall bleed, if he must die.

Heavens! what's this I see! Sir Fredrick, draw;
Their blood's too good to grace such
Villains Swords. Courage, brave men; now
We can match their Force.

We will make you, slaves, repent
This Treachery.

So.

They are not worth pursuit; we will let them go.
Brave men! this action makes it well appear
'Tis Honour and not Envy brings you here.

We come to conquer, Bruce, and not to see
Such Villains rob us of our Victory.
Your lives our fatal swords claim as their due;
W'ad wronged our selves had we not righted you.

Your generous courage has obliged us so,
That to your succour we our safety owe.

You've done what men of Honour ought to do,
What in your cause we would have done for you.

You speak the truth, w'ave but our duty done;
Prepare: Duty's no obligation.

My Honour is dis-satisfi'd; I must,
My Lord, consider whether it be just
To draw my Sword against that life which gave
Mine, but even now, protection from the grave.

None come into the Field to weigh what's right;
This is no place for Council, but for Fight.
Dispatch.

I am resolved I will not fight.

Did I come hither then only to fright
A company of fearful slaves away;
My Courage stoops not at so mean a prey:
Know, Bruce, I hither come to shed thy blood.

Open this bosom, and let out a flood.

I come to Conquer bravely in the Field,
Not to take poor revenge on such as yield.
Has nothing power, too backward man, to move
Thy Courage? Think on thy neglected Love:
Think on the beauteous Graciana's Eyes;
'Tis I have robbed thee of that glorious prize.

There are such charms in Graciana's Name,
My scrup'lous Honour must obey my Flame:
My lazy Courage I with shame condemn:
No thoughts have power streams of blood to stem.

Come, Sir, out of kindness to our Friends
You and I must pass a small complement
On each other.

Here, live.

My Lord, you've gained a perfect Victory;
You've vanquished and obliged your enemy.

Hold, gallant men.

Before we bleed! Do we here fight a Prize,
Where handsome proffers may for Wounds suffice?
I am amazed! What means this bloodless Field?

The stoutest heart must to his fortune yield.
Brave Youth! here Honour did with Courage vie;
And both agree to grace your Victory.
Heave with such a Conquest favours few:
'Tis easier to destroy then to subdue.
Our bodies may by brutish force be killed;
But noble Minds alone to Virtue yield.
My Lord, I've twice received my life from you;
Much is to both those generous actions due:
The noble Giver I must highly prize,
Though I the Gift, heaven knows, as much despise.
Can I desire to live, when all the Joy
Of my poor life its Ransom does destroy!
No, no, Graciana's loss I'll ne'er survive;
I pay too dear for this unsought Reprieve.

Hold gallant man! Honour her self does bleed;
All generous hearts are wounded by this deed.

He does his blood for a lost Mistress spend;
And shall not I bleed for so brave a Friend?

Forbear, Sir; the Frollick's not to go round, as I
Take it.

Twere greater Friendship to assist me here:
I hope the wound's not mortal, though I fear --

My Sword, I doubt, has failed in my relief;
'Thas made a vent for blood, but not for grief.
Let me once more the unkind Weapon try.
Will you prolong my pain? oh cruelty!

Ah, dearest Bruce, can you thus careless be
Of our great friendship, and your Loyalty!
Look on your Friend; your drooping Country view;
And think how much they both expect from you.
You for a Mistress waste that precious blood
Which should be spent but for our Masters good.

Expense of blood already makes him faint;
Let's carry him to the next house, till we can
Procure a chair to convey him to my Lord Bevill's,
The best place for accommodation.

Honour has plaid an after-game; this Field
The Conq'rour does unto the Conquered yield,

Farewell all thoughts of happiness, farewell:
My fears together with my sorrows swell:
Whilst from my eyes there flows this Crystal flood,
From their brave hearts there flows such streams of blood.
Here I am lost, while both for me contend;
With what success can this strange Combat end!
Honour with Honour fights for Victory,
And Love is made the common enemy.

Ah, Child! --

Kill me not with expectation, Sir.

The generous Bruce has killed himself
For you: Being disarmed, and at his Rival's mercy,
His Life and Sword were given him by the
Noble Youth; He made a brave acknowledgment
For both; but then considering you were lost,
He scorned to live; and falling on his Sword,
Has given himself a mortal wound.

Cruel Graciana, Go but in and see
The fatal Triumph of your Victory.
The Noble Bruce, to your eternal shame,
With his own blood has quenched his raging flame.

My carriage shall in these misfortunes prove
That I have Honour too, as well as Love.

Thy sorrows, sad Aurelia, will declare
At once, I fear, thy Love and thy Despair:
These streams of grief straight to a flood will rise;
I can command my Tongue, but not my eyes.

In what a Maze, Graciana, dost thou tread!
Which is the Path that doth to Honour lead?
I in this Lab'rynth so resolve to move,
That none shall judge I am misled by Love.

Here Conq'rours must forget their Victories,
And homage pay to your victorious Eyes*
Graciana, hither your poor slave is come,
After his Conquest to receive his doom;
Smile on his Vict'ry; had he proved untrue
To Honour, he had then proved false to you.

Perfidious man, can you expect from me
An approbation of your Treachery!
When I, distracted with prophetic fears,
Blasted with sighs, and almost drowned in tears,
Begged you to moderate your Rage last night*
Did you not promise me you would not fight?
Go now and triumph in your Victory;
Into the Field you went my Enemy,
And are returned the only man I hate,
The wicked instrument of my sad fate.
My Love has but dissembled been to thee,
To try my generous Lover's constancy.

Oh Heaven! how strange and cruel is my fate!
Preserved by Love, to be destroyed by Hate!

Oh, Lattice, we have staid for you.

What hast thou done to the French-man,
Girl? he lies yonder neither dead nor drunk;
No body knows what to make of him.

I sent for thee to help make sport with him;
He'll come to himself, never fear him:
Have you not observed how scurvily he has looked
Of late?

Yes; and he protests it is for love of you.

Out upon him, for a dissembling Rascal;
He has got the foul Disease;
Our Coachman discovered it by a Bottle of Diet
Drink he brought and hid behind the stairs, into which
I infused a little Opium.

What dost intend to do with him?

You shall see.

Here's the Tub; where's the French-man?

He lies behind the stairs; haste and bring him in,
That he may take quiet possession of this wooden Tenement;
For 'tis near his time of waking.
Is the Fiddler at hand that used to ply at the blind
Ale-house?

He's ready.

Well, let's hear now what a horrible noise you
Can make to wake this Gentleman.

He wants a helping hand; his eye-lids
Are sealed up; see how the wax sticks upon 'em.
Let me help you, Monsieur.

Vat are you? Jernie! vat is dis! am I
Jack in a box? begar, who did put
Me here?

Good-morrow, Monsieur; will you be pleased
To take your Pills this morning?

No; but I vo'd have de diable take you;
It was you dat did abuse me duss, was
It note? begar I will kille ale de
Shamber-maid in Englande.

Will you be pleased to drink, Monsieur?
There's a Bottle of your Diet-drink within.

Are you de little diable come to torment me?
Morbleu! was ever man afronte in dis nature!

Me-thinks he has ferbon, mine Monsieur,
Now if you please to make your little Address,
And your amoure, you will not find me so coy.

Begar I will no marie de cousin Germain
Of de diable.

What should he do with a Wife? he has not
House-room for her.

Why do you not keep your head within
Doors, Monsieur?

Now there's such a storm abroad.

Why did not you keep your Maiden-heade
Vid in door? begar, tell me date.

Have you any fine French Commodities to sell,
Gloves and Ribbands? you've got
A very convenient shop, Monsieur.

I do hope you will have de very
Convenient haltere, begar.
Jerny, Can I not tare dis tinge in de pieces?

You begin to sweat, Monsieur; the Tub is
Proper for you.

I have no more patience;
I will break dis prison, or I will break
My neke, and ye shall ale be hang.

He begins to rave; bless the poor man.

Some Musique quickly, to
Compose his mind.
How prettily the snail carries his Tenement
On his back! I'm sorry I am but his Mistress:
If I had been your Wife, Monsieur, I had made
You a complete snail; your horns
Should have appeared.

I will have de patience, dere is no oder remede;
You be ale de Raskale Whore; de diable
Take you ale; and I will say no more, begar.

This is a very fine Vessel, and would swim well;
Let's to the Horse-pond with him.

Come, come, he looks as sullenly as a Hare
In her Form; let's leave him.

Your Serviteur tres humble, Monsieur.

Bougre, I canno hang my self; begar I canno
Drown my self; I will go hide my self;
And starve to dye; I will no be de laugh
For every Jackanape English. Morbleu.

Madam, you must expect a bloody consequence
When men of such prodigious courage fight.
The young Lord Beaufort was the first that fell,
After his Sword too deeply had engaged
His Rival not to stay behind him long.
Sir Frederick with your Nephew bravely fought;
Death long did keep his distance, as if he
Had feared excess of Valour; but when they,
Oreloaded with their wounds, began to faint,
He with his terrors did invade their breasts.
Fame soon brought many to the Tragic place,
Where I found my dearest Friend, Sir Fred'rick,
Almost as poor in breath as blood:
He took me by the hand, and all the stock h'ad left
He spent, Madam, in calling upon you.
He first proclaimed your Virtues, then his Love;
And having charged me to convey his Corps hither
To wait on you, his latest breath expired with
The Command.

The World's too poor to recompense this loss.
Unhappy woman! why should I survive
The only man in whom my joys did live?
My dreadful grief!

Oh my Matre, my Matre; who has kill my
Matre? Morbleu, I will --
Oh, de diable, de diable!

What devilish accident is
This? or has the Widow undermined me?

I shall be laughed to death now indeed.
By Chamber-maids; why have you no
Pity, Widow?

None at all for the living; Ha, ha, ha.
You see w' are provided for your Frolic, Sir; ha, ha.

Laugh but one minute longer I will foreswear
Thy company, kill thy Tabby Cat, and make thee weep
For ever after.

Farewell, Sir; expect at night to see the old
Man, with his paper Lanthorn and cracked
Spectacles, singing your woeful Tragedy
To Kitchin-maids and Cobblers Prentices.

Hark you, hark you, Widow:
By all those Devils that have
Hitherto possessed thy Sex --

No swearing, good Sir Fred'rick.

Set thy face then; let me not see the remains
Of one poor smile: So, now I will kiss thee,
And be friends.
Not all thy wealth shall hire me to
Come within smell of thy breath again.
Jealousy, and, which will be worse for thee, Widow, Impotence
Light upon me, if I stay one moment longer with thee.

Do you hear, Sir; can you be so angry with one
That loves you so passionately she cannot survive
You?

Widow, May the desire of man keep thee
Waking till thou art as mad as I am.

How lucky was this accident!
How he would have insulted
Over my weakness else!
Sir Frederick, since I've warning, you shall prove
More subtle ways, before I own my Love.

COurage, brave Sir; do not mistrust my Art.

Tell me, did thou ever cure a wounded heart?
Thy skill, fond man, thou here imploy'st in vain;
The ease thou give does but increase my pain.

Dear Bruce, my life does on your life depend;
Though you disdain to live, yet save your Friend.

Do what you please; but are not those unkind
That ease the body, to afflict the mind?
Oh cruel Love! thou shoot'st with such strange skill,
The wounds thou make will neither heal nor kill*
Thy flaming Arrows kindle such a fire
As will not waste thy Victims, nor expire!

Is the wound mortal? tell me;
Or may we cherish hopes of his Recovery?

The danger is not imminent; yet my Prognostic
Boads a sad event: For though there be no great
Vessel dissected, yet I have cause to fear
That the Parenchyma of the right lobe of the lungs,
Near some large branch of the Aspera arteria,
Is perforated.

Tell me in English, will he live or die?

Truly I despair of his recovery.

Forgive me, Ladies, if excess of Love
Me beyond rules of Modesty does move,
And, against custom, makes me now reveal
Those flames my tortured breast did long conceal;
'Tis some excuse, that I my Love declare
When there's no med'cine left to cure despair.

Oh Heaven! can fair Aurelia weep for me!
This is some comfort to my misery.
Kind Maid, those eyes should only pity take
Of such as feel no wounds but what they make:
Who for another in your sight does mourn,
Deserves not your compassion, but your scorn.

I come not here with tears to pity you;
I for your pity with this passion sue.

My pity! tell me, what can be the grief,
That from the miserable hopes relief!

Before you know this grief, you feel the pain.

You cannot love, and not be loved again:
Where so much Beauty does with Love conspire,
No mortal can resist that double fire.

When proud Graciana wounded your brave heart,
On poor Aurelia's you revenged the smart:
Whilst you in vain did seek those wounds to cure,
With patience I their torture did endure.

My happiness has been so long concealed,
That it becomes my misery revealed:
That which should prove my joy, now proves my grief;
And that brings pain, which, known, had brought relief.
Aurelia, why would you not let me know,
Whilst I had power to pay, the debt I owe?
'Tis now too late; yet all I can I'll do;
I'll sigh away the breath I've left for you.

You yet have power to grant me all I crave;
'Tis not your Love I court, I court your Grave.
I with my flame seek not to warm your breast,
But beg my ashes in your Urn may rest:
For since Graciana's loss you scorned t'out-live,
I am resolved I'll not your death survive.

Hold, you too generous are; yet I may live:
Heaven for your sake may grant me a reprieve.

Oh, no; Heaven has decreed, alas, that we
Should in our Fates, not in our Loves agree.

Dear Friend, my rashness I too late repent;
I ne'er thought death till now a punishment.

Oh, do not talk of death! the very sound
Once more will give my heart a mortal wound:
Here on my knees I've sinned I must confess
Against your Love, and my own happiness;
I, like the child, whose folly proves his loss,
Refused the gold, and did accept the dross.

You have in Beaufort made so good a choice,
His virtue's such, he has his Rival's voice;
Graciana, none but his great Soul could prove
Worthy to be the centre of your Love.

You to another would such virtue give,
Brave Sir, as in your self does only live.
If to the most deserving I am due,
He must resign his weaker claim to you.

This is but flatt'ry; for I'm sure you can
Think none so worthy as that generous man:
By honour you are his.

Yet, Sir, I know
How much I to your generous passion owe;
You bleed for me; and if for me you die,
Your loss I'll mourn with vowed Virginity.

Can you be mindful of so small a debt,
And that which you to Beaufort owe forget?
That will not Honour but Injustice be;
Honour with Justice always does agree.
This generous pity which for me you show,
Is more then you to my misfortunes owe:
These tears, Graciana, which for me you shed,
Ore-prize the blood which I for you have bled:
But now I can no more --
My spirits faint within my wearied breast.

Sister, 'tis fit you give him leave to rest.
Who waits?
With care convey him to his bed.

Hold --
Dearest Aurelia, I will strive to live,
If you will but endeavour not to grieve.

Brave man! The wonder of this Age thou'lt prove,
For matchless Gratitude, and generous Love.

How strangely is my soul perplexed by fate!
The man I love I must pretend to hate;
And with dissembled scorn his presence fly,
Whose absence is my greatest misery!

Hear me, upon my knees I beg you'll hear.
She's gone.
There was no need, false woman, to increase
My misery with hopes of happiness.
This scorn at first had to my Love and me
But Justice been; now it is Cruelty.
Was there no way his constancy to prove,
But by your own inconstancy in Love?
To try another Virtue could you be,
Graciana, to your own an enemy?
Sure 'tis but passion which she thus does vent,
Blown up with anger and with discontent,
Because my Honour disobeyed her Will,
And Bruce for love of her his blood did spill.
I once more in her eyes will read my fate;
I need no wound to kill me, if she hate.

Villains, sons of unknown fathers, tempt
Me no more.
I will make a young generation of Cripples, to
Succeed in Lincolns-Inn-Fields and Covent-Garden.
The barbarous breeding of these London- boys!

Whither do you intend to go, Sir?

To see the wealthy Widow,
Mrs. Rich.

Where does she dwell, Sir?

Hereabouts; enquire; I will Serenade
Her at noon-day.

Where is this poor Frenchman, Girl? he has done me
Good service.

The Butler has got him down into the Cellar, Madam,
Made him drunk, and laid him to sleep among
His empty Cask.

Pray, when he wakes let him be released of his
Imprisonment; Betty, you use your Servant too severely.
Hark, what ridiculous noise is that? it sets my teeth
An edge worse then the scraping of Trenchers.

Madam, a rude drunken fellow, with a Cimbal before
Him, and his sword in his hand, is pressed into your House.

Sirrah, play me a bawdy Tune, to please the
Widow; have at thee, Widow.

'Tis one of Oliver's Knights, Madam,
Sir Nicholas Cully; his Mother was my Grand-mother's
Dairy maid.

Let me go; I am not so drunk but I can stand
Without your help, Gentlemen.
Widow, here is Musique; send for a Parson,
And we will dance Barnaby within this
Half hour.

I will send for a Constable, Sir.

Hast a mind to see me beat him? how those Rogues
Dread me! Did not Wheadle tell thee upon what
Conditions I would condescend to make thee my
Bed-fellow, Widow, speak?

This is some drunken mistake; away with him,
Thrust him out of door.

Help, help, for Sir Frederick.

What's the matter?

He is fighting, Madam, with a Company of Bailiffs,
That would arrest him at the door.

Haste every one, and rescue him quickly.

Widow, come back, I say, Widow;
I will not stir one foot after thee:
Come back, I say, Widow.

Vat de diable be de matre? here is de ver
Strange varke in dis house; de Vemen day do
Cry, ha, ha, ha; de men day do run, day do
Take de Baton, de dung-vorke, and de vire-vorke:
Vat is here, van kille?

You are a trusty Servant, indeed: here you are locked
Up, while your poor Master is arrested, and dragged
Away by unmerciful Bailiffs.

My Matre? Jernie! Metres Bet, let me go;
Begar I will kill alle de bogre de
Bailey, and recover my Matre. Bogre de Bailey.

So, make all the haste you can.

Morbleu! bogre de Bailey!
I will go prepare to kille a thousand Bailey
Begar: Bogre de Bailey.

Well, what news?

Madam, they have arrested him upon an
Execution for Two hundred pounds, and carried
Him to a Bailiffs house hard by.

If that be all, Betty, take my key, and give him
The money in Gold; do you content the Bailiffs,
But let Sir Frederick know nothing of it;
And then let them bring him to my house
As their Prisoner: dispatch.

Pray, Madam, is there not a stray Gentleman
Here, misled by drink?

There lies the beast you look for;
You had best remove him quickly,
Or I shall cause him to be put into the Pound.

If I do not get this fool clear off before he
Comes to himself, our plot is quite spoiled:
This Summer-Livery may chance to hover over
My shivering limbs next Winter.
Yonder sits honest Palmer, my poor Master,
In a Coach, quaking for fear; all that
See him in that reverend disguise,
Will swear he has got the Palsy.
Ho, Sir Nich'las.

I will drink three Beer-glasses to the Widows health
Before I go.

The Widow stays for you, to wait upon her
To the Exchange.

Let her go into her Bed-Chamber and meditate;
I am not drunk enough to be seen in her company.

I must carry him away upon my back; but,
Since things may go ill, 'tis good to make sure
Of something; I'll examine his pockets first:
So, for this I thank my own ingenuity; in this
Way of plain dealing I can live without the
Help of my Master.
Pray, Sir, will you help me up with my burden.

I am sure your Master has his load already.

Carry me to my Widow, Boy: Where is my
Musique?

There is no hopes now;
I'll shift for my self.

Widow, these are old acquaintance of mine,
Bid them welcome: I was coming
To wait upon you before; but meeting
Them by the way, they pressed me to drink --

Sir Frederick! Widow, bid him welcome; he is
A very good friend of mine, and as mad a fellow as my self.
Kiss, kiss the Widow, man; she has a plump
Under-lip, and kisses smartly.

What's here? Cully drunk, transformed into a Gallant,
And acquainted with the spring and proportion of the
Widows lips!

I, I am drunk, Sir; am I not Widow? I Scorn to be
Soberer then your self, Sir; I will drink with you, swear
With you, break windows with you, and
So forth.

Widow, is this your Champion?

You have no exceptions against him, I hope;
He has challenged you at your own weapons.

Widow, Sir Frederick shall be one of our Bride-men;
I will have none but such mad fellows at our Wedding;
But before I marry thee I will consider upon it.

Pray, Widow, how long have you been acquainted
With this mirror of Knighthood?

Long enough you hear, Sir, to treat of Marriage.

What? You intend me for a reserve then?
You will have two strings to your bow, Widow;
I perceive your cunning; and faith I think I shall
Do the heartier service, if thou imploy'st me by the by.

You are an excellent Gallant indeed; shake off
These lousy Companions; come carry your Mistress
To the Park, and treat her at the Mulberry-garden
This glorious Evening.

Widow, I am a man of business, that ceremony's
To be performed by idle fellows.

What wo'd you give to such a friend as sho'd dispatch
This business now, and make you one of those idle
Fellows.

Faith pick and choose; I carry all my wealth about
Me; do it, and I am all at thy service, Widow.

Well, I have done it, Sir; you are at liberty,
And a leg now will satisfy me.

Good faith, thou art too reasonable, dear Widow;
Modesty will wrong thee.

Are you satisfied?

Yes, Madam.

Var are de bougre de Bailey?
Tetibleu, bougre Rogue.

Help, help, Sir Fred. murder, murder! alas, Sir, we
Are not Bailiffs; you may see we are men of an honester
Vocation.

Hold, hold, thou mighty man at Arms.

Morbleu, de Fiddler! and is my Matre at liberty? play
Me de Trichate, or Jegg English, quickly,
Or I will make you all dance
Without your Fiddle; quike.

I am over-reach'd, I perceive.

Kind Widow, thank thee for this release.
Laugh, Widow; ha, ha, ha: where is your counterplot, Widow?
Ha, ha, ha. Laugh at her, Dufoy. Come,
Be not so melancholy; we will to the Park:
I care not if I spend a piece or two upon thee in Tarts and
Cheescakes. Pish, Widow, why so much out of humour?
'Tis no shame to love such a likely
Young Fellow.

I could almost find in my heart to punish my self,
To afflict thee, and marry that drunken Sott I never
Saw before.

How came he hither?

Enquire elsewhere; I will not answer thee one
Question; nor let thee see me out of a Mask any more
This Fortnight.

Go, go into thy Closet, look over thy old Receipts,
And talk wantonly now and then with thy Chambermaid:
I shall not trouble thee much till this is spent;
And by that time thy foolish Vow will be near over.

I want patience to endure this insolence.
Is my charity rewarded thus?

Pious Widow, call you this Charity? 'twill get
Thee little hereafter; thou must answer for every sin
It occasions: Here is Wine and Women
In abundance.

Avoid my house, and never more come near me.

But hark you, hark you, Widow; do you think
This can last always?

Ungrateful man!

She's gone; impatience for these two hours
Possess her, and then I shall be pretty well
Revenged.

Begar, Matre, have you not de ver faithful
Serviteur? you do never take notice of my merit.

Dufoy, thou art a man of courage, and hast done
Bravely; I will cast off this Suit a week sooner then
I intended, to reward thy service.

Begar I have several time given you ver
Dangerous testimony of my affection.

Whither do you carry him?

Sir, there is an old Gentleman below in a Coach,
Very like my Lord Bevill,
Who, hearing what a condition Sir Nich'las was in,
Desired me to bring him to him in my arms.

Let me go; where is the Widow?

What Widow?

Mistress Rich; she is to be
My wife.

But do you hear, Sir Nich'las? how long have you
Courted this Widow?

Mr Wheadle can tell you: trouble me not with idle
Questions. Sir Frederick,
You shall be welcome at any time; she loves men
That will roar, and drink, and Serenade her.

This is some strange mistake; Sure Wheadle, intending
To chose him, has showed him some counterfeit Widow;
And he, being drunk, has been misguided to the true
Widow's house. The fellow in the Coach may
Discover all; I will step and see who it is:
(...) him here, Dufoy, till I return: Gentlemen,
Come you with me.

Where is my Mistress?

Vat Metres?

The Widow.

She be de Metres of my Matre.

You lye, Sirrah.

Begar you be de Jackanape to tell
Me I do lyea.

You are a French Rascal, and I will blow
Your nose without a handkerchief.

Help, help me; Morbleu! I will beat you vid my fist
And my foot, tell you ask me de pardon; take
Dat and date; ask me de pardon.

I ask you pardon, Sirrah?

Sirrah? Tettibleu.

Hold, hold, Dufoy.

Begar he do merit to be beat; he swear he will
Mar your Metres.

I beseech you, Sir Frederick.

My Lord Bevill!

So, he takes him for my Lord Bevill;
Now the Plot will out.
'Tis fit this Rascal should be cheated;
But these Rogues will deal too
Unmercifully with him: I'll take compassion upon
Him, and use him more favourably my self.

My Lord, where is the mad Wench your Sister?

Look you, Sir Nich'las, where is my Lord Bevill Now?

My merry Country-man, Mr Palmer! I thought you had
Been in Buckingham-shire.
And he took her by the Apron
To bring her to his beck.
Never a Catch now, my merry Country-man?
Sir Frederick, I owe this Gentleman a thousand pounds.

How so?

He won it of me at Dice, Wheadle went my halfs;
And we have given him a Judgment for it.

This was the roguery you had been about the other
Night, when I met you in disguise, Palmer:
You'll never leave your cheating and your robbing,
How many Robberies do I know
Of your committing?

The truth is, Sir, you know enough to hang me;
But you are a worthy Gentleman, and a lover of Ingenuity.

This will not pass: Produce
The Judgment.

Alas, Sir, Mr Wheadle has it.

Produce it, or -- Fetch the Constable, Boy.

Sir Frederick, be merciful to a sorrowful Rascal:
Here is a Copy of the Judgment, as it is entered.

Well, who is this counterfeit Widow? confess.

Truly 'twas Wheadle's contrivance; a Pox on him:
Never no good comes on it when men are so unconscionable
In their Dealings.

What, am I cheated, Sir Frederick? Sirrah, I will have
You hanged.

Speak, who is this Widow?

'Tis Grace, Sir, Wheadle's Mistress, whom he has placed
In my Lady Dawbwell's house: I am but a poor Instrument,
Abused by that Rascal.

You See, Sr Nich'las, what Villains these are; they have
Cheated you of a thousand pounds, and would have married
You to a Wench, had I not discovered their Villainy.

I am beholden to you, Sir Frederick; they are Rogues,
Villainous Rogues: But where is the Widow?

Why, you saw the true Widow here a little while Ago.

The truth is, me-thoughts she was something
Comlier then my Mistress: But will not this Widow
Marry me?

She is my Mistress.

I Will h^e none of her then.

Well, I have discovered this cheat, kept you from
Marrying a Wench, and will save you the thousand pounds too.
Now, if you have a mind to marry, what think you of my
Sister? She is a plain brown Girl, and has a good
Portion; but not out twenty thousand pounds: This offer
Proves I have a perfect kindness for you.

I have heard she is a very fine Gentlewoman;
I will marry her forthwith, and be your Brother-in-Law.

Come then, I'll carry you
Where you may see her, and ask her consent.
Palmer, you must along with us,
And by the way assign this Judgment to me.
Do you guard him, Gentlemen.

Come, Sir Nich'las.

How came I hither?

You will be satisfied in that hereafter.

What cursed accident was this? what
Mischievous Stars have the managing
Of my Fortune? Here's a turn with all my heart,
Like an after-game at Irish!

Alon marche, Shentelman shete;
Marche: You make de mouth of
De honest Shentelmen: begar you will make de
Wry mouth ven you be hang.

Letitia, what hast thou been doing here?

Cropping the beauty of the youthful year.

How innocently dost thouspend thy hours,
^ecting from the crowd the choicest Flowers!
Where is thy Mistress?

Madam, she's with the wounded Colonel.

Come then into this Arbour, Girl, and there
With thy sweet voice refresh my wearied soul.

LAdies, though to your Conquering eyes
Love owes his chiefest Victories,
And borrows those bright Arms from you
With which he does the world subdue.
Yet you your selves are not above
The Empire nor the Griefs of Love.
Then wrack not Lovers with disdain,
Lest Love on you revenge their Pain;
You are not free because you're fair;
The Boy did not his Mother spare.
Beauty's but an offensive dart;
It is no Armour for the heart.
Dear Girl, thou art my little Confident;
I oft to thee have breathed my discontent;
And thy sweet voice as oft has eased my care:
But now thy breath is like infectious Air;
It feeds the secret cause of my disease,
And does enrage what it did use to appease.

Hark, that was Graciana's voice.

Oh Beaufort!

She calls on me, and does advance this way;
I will conceal my self within this Bower; she may
The secret causes of my grief betray.

Too rigidly my Honour I pursue;
Sure something from me to my Love is due:
Within these private shades for him I'll mourn,
Whom I in Public am obliged to scorn.

Why should you, Madam, thus indulge your grief?
Love never yet in Sorrow found relief:
These Sighs, like Northern winds to the early Spring,
Destruction to your blooming Beauty bring.

Letitia, peace; my Beauty I despise:
Would you have me preserve these fatal eyes?

Had you less beauteous been, y'ad known less care;
Ladies are happiest moderately fair:
But now should you your Beauty waste, which way
Could you the debt it has contracted pay?

Beaufort, did thou but know I weep for thee,
Thou would not blame my scorn, but pity me.

When Honour first made you your Love decline,
You from the Centre drew a crooked line;
You were to Beaufort too severe, I fear,
Lest to your Love you partial might appear.

I did what I in honour ought to do;
I yet to Beaufort and my love am true;
And if his Rival live, I'll be his Bride,
Joy shall unite whom Grief does now divide;
But if for love of me brave Bruce does die,
I am contracted to his Memory.
Oh, Beaufort!

Oh, Graciana! here am I
(By what I've heard) fixed in an ecstasy.

We are surprised; unlucky accident!
Fresh Sorrow's added to my discontent.

Graciana, stay, you can no more contend,
Since Fortune joins with Love to be my Friend;
There is no fear of Bruce his death; the wound
By abler Chyr'gions is not mortal found.
She will not stay:
My Joys, like waters swelled into a flood,
Bear down whatever their usual streams withstood.

I wonder we have yet no tidings of our Knight,
Nor Palmer, --
Fortune still crosses the industrious, Girl.
When we recover him you must begin
To lye at a little opener ward;
'Tis dangerous keeping the Fool too long at bay*
Lest some old Wood-man drop in by chance,
And discover you are but a rascal Deer.
I have counterfeited half a dozen Mortgages,
A dozen Bonds, and two Scriveners to vouch all;
That will satisfy him in thy Estate:
He has sent into the Country for his
Writings:
But see, here he comes.
Sir Nich'las, I must chide you, indeed I must;
You neglect your duty here: Nay, Madam, never
Blush; faith I'll reveal all. You're the happiest,
The luckiest man --
We're betrayed; death, what makes him here?
Sir Frederick, your humble Servant; you're come
In the luckiest time for mirth; will you but lend
Me your ear? do not you see Sir Nich'las and Grace
Yonder? look, look.

Yes.

I am persuading him to keep her; she's a pretty
Deserving Girl; faith let us draw off a while,
And laugh among our selves, for fear of spoiling
The poor Wenches market; let us, let us.

With all my heart.

We arrest you, Sir.

Arrest me? Sir Frederick, Sir Nicholas.

We are not provided for a Rescue at present, Sir.

At whose Suit?

At Sir Frederick Frollick's.

Sir Frederick Frollick's? I owe him never a farthing.

You're mistaken, Sir; you owe me a thousand pounds:
Look you, do you know Mr Palmer's hand?
He has assigned such a small debt over to me.

How was I bewitched to trust such a villain!
Oh Rogue, Dog, Coward, Palmer!

Oh thou unconscionable Wheadle; a thousand pounds
Was too small a bubble!

Away with him, away with him.

Nay, Sir Frederick, 'tis punishment enough to fall
From my expectation:
Do not ruin a young man.

I beseech you, Sir.

Thou hast moved me, Grace;
Do not tremble, Chuck; I love thy profession too well
To harm thee.
Look you, Sir, what think you of a rich Widow?
Was there no Lady to abuse, Wheadle, but my Mistress?
No man to bubble but your Friend and Patron, Sir Nich'las?
But let this pass; Sir Nich'las is satisfied; take Grace
Here, marry her, we are all satisfied:
She's a pretty deserving Girl, and a Fortune now
In earnest; I'll give her a thousand pounds.

Pray, Sir, do but consider --

No consideration; dispatch, or
To Limbo.

Was there ever such a Dilemma? I shall rot in Prison.
Come hither, Grace; I did but make bold, like a young Heir,
With his Estate, before it come into his hands:
Little did I think, Grace, that this Pasty,
When we first cut it up, should have been preserved
For my Wedding Feast.

You are the happiest, the luckiest man, Mr Wheadle.

Much joy, Mr Wheadle, with your rich Widow.

Sir Frederick, shall that Rogue Palmer laugh
At me?

No, no; Ienny, come hither; I'll make thee amends,
As well as thy Mistress, for the injury I did thee
The other night:
Here is a Husband for thee too:
Mr Palmer, where are you?

Alas, Sir Frederick, I am not able to
Maintain her.

She shall maintain you, Sir.
Do not you understand the mystery of Stiponie,
Ienny?

I know how to make Democcuana, Sir.

Thou art richly endowed, in faith: Here, here, Palmer;
No shall I, shall I; This or that, which
You deserve better.

This is but a short Reprieve; the Gallows will
Be my destiny.

Sir Nich'las, now we must haste to a better
Solemnity; my Sister expects us.
Gentlemen, meet us at the Rose; I'll bestow a Wedding
Dinner upon you, and there release your Judgment,
Mr Wheadle.
Bailiffs, wait upon them thither.

I wish you much joy with your fair Brides,
Gentlemen.

A pox on your Assignment, Palmer.

A pox on your rich Widow, Wheadle: Come, Spouse,
Come.

Graciana, I have lost my claim to you,
And now my Heart's become Aurelia's due;
She all this while within her tender breast
The flame of Love has carefully suppressed,
Courting for me, and striving to destroy
Her own Contentment, to advance my Joy.

I did no more then Honour pressed me to;
I wish I'd wooed successfully for you.

You so excel in Honour and in Love,
You both my shame and admiration move.
Aurelia, here, accept that life from me,
Which Heaven so kindly has preserved for thee.
My Lord, I hope you will my choice allow,
And with your approbation seal our Vow.

In generous minds this to the world will prove
That Gratitude has power to conquer Love.
It were, brave Man, impiety in me
Not to approve that which the Heavens decree.

Graciana, on my generous Rival you*
Must now bestow what to his Merit's due.

Since you recovering, Bruce, your claim decline,
To him with honour I my Heart resign.

Such Honour and such Love as you have shown*
Are not in the Records of Virtue known.
My Lord, you must assist us here once more;
The God of Love does your consent implore.

May Love in you still feed your mutual fire.

And may that flame but with our breaths expire.

My Lord, our Quarrel now is at an end;
You are not Bruces Rival, but his Friend.

In this brave strife your Friendship soared above
The active flames of our aspiring Love.

Dear Friend, thy merits Fame cannot express.

They are rewarded in your happiness.

Come all into my Arms before I rest;
Let's breathe our Joys into each others breast:
Thus mariners rejoice when winds decrease,
And falling waves seem wearied into Peace.

Haste, Dufoy, perform what I commanded
You.

I will be ver quick begar; I am more den half de Mercurie.

Ho, Widow! the noise of these Nuptials brought
You hither; I perceive your mouth waters.

Were I in a longing condition I should be apt
Enough to put my self upon you, Sir.

Nay, I know you are spiteful, and would
Fain marry me in revenge; but so long as I have
These Guardian Angels about me, I defy thee
And all thy Charms: Do skilful Faulkners thus
Reward their Hawks before they fly the Quarry?

When your gorge is empty you'll come to the
Lure again.

After I have had a little more experience of the
Vani y of this world, in a melancholy humour
I mat be careless of my self.

And marry some distressed Lady, that has had
No less experience of that vanity.

Widow, I prosess the contrary; I would not have the
Sin to answer for of debauching any from such
Worthy principles: Let me see; if I should be good
Natured now, and consent to give thee a Title
To thy own wealth again, you would be stubborn,
And not esteem the favour, Widow.

Is it possible you can have thoughts of gratitude?
Do you imagine me so foolish as your self, who
Often venture all at play, to recover one inconsiderable
Parcel.

I told you how it would be, Widow: Less providence
Attend thee, else I shall do no good upon thee:
Fare-well.

Stay, Sir; let us shake hands at parting.

Nay, if thou once art acquainted with my
Constitution, thou't never let me go; Widow, here,
Examine, examine.

Sister, I long have known your inclinations;
Give me leave to serve you. Sir Frederick, here,
Take her; and may you make each other happy.

Now I have received you into my Family,
I hope you will let my maids go quietly about
Their business, Sir.

Upon condition there be no twits of the good man
Departed; no prescription pleaded for evil customs
On the Wedding night.
Widow, what old doings will be anon!
I have coupl'd no less then a pair-royal my self.
This day, my Lord, I hope you'll excuse the liberty
I have taken to send for them; the sight will much
Increase your mirth this joyful day.

I should have blamed you, Sir, if you had restrained
Your, humour here.
These must needs be pleasant Matches that are of his
Making.

What, are they come?

Day be all at de door, begar; every man vid his
Pret Metres, Brid, Whore.
Entre, Jentelmen, vid your Lady, entre vid your great
Fortune: Ha, ha, ha.

Brother, do you see how sneakingly Wheadle looks
Yonder, with his rich Widow?

Brother! is this fellow your Brother?

Ay, that I am.

No, no, Sir Nicholas.

Did not I marry your Sister, Sir?

Fie, fie, Sir Nich'las; I thought y'ad been
A modester man.

Is my wife no kin to you, Sir?

Not your Wife; but your Son and Heir may,
If it prove so.
Widow, resolving to lead a virtuous life,
And keep house altogether with thee,
I have disposed of my own household-stuff, my
Dear Mrs. Lucy, to this Gentleman.

We wish you joy with your fair Bride,
Sir Nich'las.

I will go and complain, and have you all clapped
Up for a plot immediately.

Hold, hold, Sir Nich'las; there are certain
Catch-poles without; you cannot escape,
Without you've a thousand pounds in your
Pocket: Carry her into the Country, come;
Your Neighbours Wives will visit her, and vow
She's a virtuous well-bred Lady:
And, give her her due, faith she was a very
Honest Wench to me, and I believe will make a very
Honest Wife to you.

If I discover this I am lost; I shall be ridiculous,
Even to our own Party.

You are in the right: Come,
Take her, make much of her,
She shall save you a thousand pounds.

Well, Lucy, if thou can but deceive my
Old mother, and my neighbours in the Country,
I shall bear my fortune patiently.

I'll warrant you, Sir, Women so skil'd in Vice can
Dissemble Virtue.

Fie, fie, make de much of your Lady, Shentelmen;
Begar you will find them ver civil.

Dufoy, I had almost forgot thee.

Begar my merit is ver seldom in your
Memory.

Now I will reward thy services; here, enjoy thy
Mistress.

Ver vel, begar; you will give me two tree old
Gown for all my diligence.

Marry come up! Is that a despicable portion
For your greafie Pantaloons?

Peace, peace, Metres Bett; ve will be ver good
Friend upon occasion; but ve will no marry:
Dat be ver much better, begar.

Did you bring the Bailiffs with you?

Day be without: Begar, Shentelmen, You have bin
Made ver sad; and now you shall be made ver mer
Vid de Fiddler.

Ha! cozened with Fiddlers for Bailiffs!
I durst have sworn false Dice might as soon have passed
Upon me.

Bid them strike up; we will have a Dance.
Widow, to divert these melancholy Gentlemen.

Sir Fredrick, you shall command my House this day;
Make all those welcome that are pleased to stay.

Sir Nicholas, and Mr Wheadle, I release you both
Of your Judgment, and will give it you under
My hand at any time.
Widow, for all these bloody preparations, there
Will be no great massacre of Maiden-heads
Among us here.
Anon I will make you all laugh with the occasion
Of these Weddings.
On what small accidents depends our Fate,
Whilst Chance, not prudence, makes us fortunate.

SIr Frederick, now I am revenged on you;
For all your Frolic Wit, you're cozened too
I have made over all my Wealth to these
Honest Gentlemen; they are my Trustees.
Yet, Gentlemen, if you are pleased, you may
Supply his wants, and not your Trust betray.
Poor Wheadle hopes he has gi'n you all content;
Here he protests tis that he only meant:
If you're displeased we're all cross-bit to day,
And he has wheadl'd us that writ the Play.
LIke Prisoners, conscious of the offended Law,
When Juries after the Evidence withdraw;
So waits our Author between hope and fear,
Until he does your doubtful Verdict hear.
Men are more civil then in former days;
Few now in Public hiss or rail at Plays;
He bid me therefore mind your looks with care,
And told me I should read your Sentence there;
But I, unskilled in Faces, cannot guess
By this first view, what is the Plays success;
Nor shall I ease the Author of his fear,
Till twice or thrice, at least, I've seen you here.

