IN these sad Times our Author has been long
Studying to give you some diversion;
And he has ta'n the way to do it, which he
Thought most diverting, mirth, and Comedy:
And now he knows there are enough in the Town
At name of Mirth and Comedy will, frown,
And sighing say, the times are bad what then?
Will their being sad heavy better them!
Or rather won't their sad and heavy cheer
Make these our times worse then they are appear?
Sadness for Physic may be sometimes good;
But cheerfulness should be our daily food;
Without whose most delightful seasoning,
Even life it self were an insipid thing.
'Tis a great happiness when men are sad,
Divertisments may any ways be had:
And we do hope our Comedy to day,
May so divert you, as you all shall say,
Whilst every one some Recreation has,
The best and most delightful ones, are Plays.

NAy but will you hear me a little?


Perhaps I will, perhaps I will not. --
You don't come to chide me I hope?

No, but to give you good counsel rather.


And that's little better then chiding.


And to tell you as a friend what the world says of you.


What care I what it says?


I there 'tis now! you care not for the world, nor the world for you; who live
in it so sequestered from all society: You seem no more a part of the Universe,
then a loose stone in a wall, a part of the building, or Edifice.


Well 'tis my humour, what then?


Then you're as froward as young Children, as wayward as old age; and for
courtesy and civility the chiefest bond of humane Society, you're a mere
stranger to it, and know no more then the very Savages in America.


Ha, ha, ha.


What do ye laugh! and are you not moved with this?


Yes to a little vanity or so, to hear so much of my Commendations.


If you count this your commendations, what do ye count discommendations I pray?


Why to be counted such a silly fool, to have them say of me, Oh! he's a very
good! a very honest man!


And is goodness, and honesty, a discommendation with you then?


I marry is it, as the world goes now adays, when it only serves to fool us,
and makes us but a prey to every knave. --

And what do they say beside?


Why since you'll needs have it, for Madmoiselle Isabella. --


I, what do they say of her?


Why they say, she was not left unto your care by her deceased father, to be
made a slave and prisoner by you.


And was she left unto your care I pray?


Why no, who says she was?


Then meddle with that you have to do withal, -- you'd have me bring her up,
I'll warrant you, as you do your fine Daughters there, to be always gadding
abroad a visiting.


Well.


Or visited at home?


And that too?


And have all your fine youths and Gallants of the Time (who stoop like Pies or
Daws when they peck at fruit, alternaetly, their tails above their becks)
complement them, and give them Balls and Collations?


And what then?


Why then you're a fool, Cousin, and if you were twenty Cousins I'd tell you so;
-- for her, being committed to my care, either to marry her, or see her well
married, I'll bring her up in manner as befits a wife, in the blessed state of
ignorance, she shall see and know nothing; for this seeing and knowing too
much, undid the first woman in Paradise, and has undone all your Women ever
since.


Shu'd your Women but hear you, they'd claw out your eyes for this.


Then she shall have no Books to read in, for that but corrupts them at second
hand; and if she had not learnt to write and read before her fathers death, she
shu'd have never learnt for Sganarelle.


And this you count good breeding now?


Better then your fine Daughters have, I wuss, to be always a' the mode, dressed
up unto the height, as if such Beauties simply of themselves, wear not darts
killing and dangerous enough, but they must be poisoned too? no, I'll keep her
untainted from the vanities of the Time.


Alas! you know she is too wise to be corrupted by them.


No matter for that, I'll trust rather to mine own wisdom, then unto hers, and
keep so strict a hand over her, as she sha'nt be corrupted, though she wo'd.


And I so gentle an one over mine, as I hope they would not, though they could.


Well then since you're so resolved, take you your course, and I'll take mine,
and see who'l have the better of it at the end.


Content, and see:

Here comes my Daughters -- they have done their visit it seems.


And Isabella with them! I like not that.


ANd does he coop you up so?


So as you see.


Nor suffers you to be visited by none.


By none but you, and that he grumbles at too!


How do ye pass your time then -- learn to Preserve perhaps?


I -- to preserve her shoes, if she never stirs abroad.


And yet does he make Love t'ye?


I, as Cats do, or High-Dutch to their Mistresses, you'd think they chid the
while.


And I'd scold as fast, were it to me.


Come you shall go abroad with us and take the air.


He'll never suffer it.


I'll warrant you.


Now! whither away so fast w'ye?


I tremble every joint of me!


Fie for shame! -- e're I'd stand in such awe of any man, I'd see him hanged,
if he were worth hanging.


W'ave entreated our Cousin here along with us to take the air.


for you, you may go if you please; but for her, she shall tarry at home, I'll
have no gadding with her.


Pray let me entreat for her this once, -- we must allow youth some Recreation.


Youth's a fool, and Age is little better; -- she'as Recreation enough at home,
she needs not go abroad for it.


What? to make you Night-caps! or piece your old Stockings at heels perhaps!


I'll none of these Recreations, I, in her whom I intend to make my wife.


Your wife! what should you do with a wife I pray? a dainty Itch well scratched,
or Curry-comb neatly handled, would do your business.


Peace, huswife, you're too bold.


Shall not we entreat so much for her this once then?


No indeed Sha'nt you, and I'd entreat you to come and visit her no more if
this be your business, -- I fear she learns no good of you, so she does not.


More then of you for all your
sour countnance
and venegar men -- i'faith, i'faith were I
as she, if you should use me thus, I'd make
you a Cuckold if ever I married you.

And were she
as you, I think she would indeed;
but as she is, I'll look to her well enough,
she shall have none of your mothers
Daughters for Counsellors.

And if she had, she'd be better counselled then by your father's son, I wuss.


Come, come, leave your prattle, and Daughters go you home, where you're to
expect two honest Gentlemen, in nature of Suitors to come and visit you.


Fine Gentlemen
I'll warrant them!

And look you use them kindly when they come, and entertain them well, do ye
hear?


Ne'er fear it, we will entertain them as they deserve.


Do so then -- so go and take your leaves.


I good Lady Eve begone and take your Tempter there, your waitingwoman along
w'ye.


I'faith, i'faith, were I your Tempter, I'd only tempt you to hang yourself, or
so.


Go, go, begone I say, and I'll but only go dispatch a little business I have
in the Town, and strait ways follow you.

As for you Cousin, I'ave only this to say t'ye before I go, --

Those who seek to be rather feared then loved, shall find themselves rather
hated then feared at last, -- and so farewell.


Very good -- and I've only this to say to you too before you go -- let them
hate me so they fear me, and so farewell to you again.


So -- now get you in and expect no more this liberty, do ye hear? she whom I
intend to make my wife, must imagine my house is all the world, and that
there's no other company in the world but only she and I.


bless me! that imagination would make me desperate!


So -- make your curtsy, and be gone, -- * very good -- and look to your
business, do ye hear!


Which is only to be rid of you, which till I am,

I will be nothing but Plot and Stratagem.


Now let me think a little.


YOnders the waking Dragon that has my Golden fruit in Custody, I'd fain be
acquainted with him.


Let me see, what am I about now? to marry -- very good, an honourable calling!
and if there be any pleasure and contentment in this life, your married man has
it -- I'll go marry presently, I am resolved on it.


He sees you not, to him again.


But stay Sganarelle, consider a little first, how besides the care and trouble
of wife and children, all married men, or are, or may be Cuckolds -- hum! I'll
none of't, marry who's list for me.


He's blind a' this side (sure,) I'll try the other.


Well, I'll take some further time to consider on it; mean time I'll out of Town
as soon as I can, for there's no keeping a woman here without a hundred eyes.


Now, now.


Whoo! what a does here, this is no English Quaker sure, he makes so many
Reverences -- again? sure he's some young Reveller, practising to make his
honours here -- with me Sir?


Yes Sir, I have the happin^ss to be your Neighbour here hard by.


It may be so.


I shu'd be glad of your better acquaintance.


And why so I pray?


Only to come and discourse w'ye sometime, o'th affairs o'th time, and news
o'th Town, as who's married, to whom.


Let them be hanged, what care I.


And what's said or done at Court, amongst the rest, do ye hear the News Sir?


No, nor I don't care to hear it.


No fastening any discourse on him?
I perceive Sir you live solitary
and retired at home.

What's that to you?


And shu'd be glad of company sometimes.


Who told you so?


And i'faith how do ye pass your time at home.


Why, as I please my self.


You do very well in it, and so shu'd every one do that is wise; and if you
please, I shu'd be glad sometimes to come and pass an Eve'ning w'ye, or so.


Serviteur.


Ha, ha, ha!

If he fight at this ward as he speaks, I'll warrant any one for hitting him,
-- Now -- what do ye think of him, and of his brisk replies?


Why I think he's one of the race of the ancient Spartans, or Pythagoreans,
he has so few words with him.


And those he has, are all rusty, and want oiling; the whoreson speaks nothing
but old Iron and Hobnails.


Rather Daggers and Punyards that stab me to the heart; -- what a misery is't
to have her I love, guarded by such a Cerberus as he?


Rather 'tis your happiness; for take this from me, a Woman guarded, is half
won; and he who but delivers her from her Guardian, gains the other half of
her.


I, but how to do it, there's all the difficulty.


Think, think, have you no invention in you? I never saw a man so dull; -- did
you ever speak unto her?


Never.


Nor writ unto her?


Neither.


Why then you've done nothing yet; -- has she no servants to make your
confidents?


None as I know of; only as often as she goes abroad, I follow her; nor does
the Hyacinth that amorous flower, e're follow the Sun with more assidual
regards, then I do her.


But does she take notice of it?


That I know not neither.


Why then you know nothing -- think, think on some way to let her know your
love for shame.


I but what? the more I think on it, the more impossible I find it.


Hang impossibilities! there's no such things in nature, 'tis hope enough, you
love a Woman, and she a living one; Pigmalion only loved the dead Statua of
one, and yet (you see) he put life into it at last. -- Think, think again then,
and I'll warrant you, the brain's a fertile soil; and let our wit but sow
the seed, Time soon will ripen it.


SAy no more, I know the man, and the house he lives at -- Valerio do ye call
him?


So they tell me Sir.

Heaven prosper my plot, as my intent is innocent.


Go, go in, and let me alone with him: Gramercy for this Intelligence i'faith
now I see thou love me.


I, as I do a Snake or Toad.


I! are you such an one indeed! I'm glad I know it, -- no wonder he made me
so many Reverences, and desired to come and visit me, -- I'll none of that I
thank you; that were to let a Thief into my house, or Wolf into my sheepfold;
but he that's vvarn'd is Armed, I'll to him strait, and tell him soundly of it;
-- but stay before I go, let me make all sure at home: Where are my Urchins?
where are my Changelings there?


HEre Master.


Here Master.


These are all the servants I keep, or rather the Parish keeps them, and they
serve well enough to keep my house, there's thrift and policy together now: I
suppose they will be faithful, because they have not wit enough to be
otherwise, Come hither, you must stand modestly whilst I speak unto ye; how
often have I told you of this!

I must go abroad, do ye hear?


I Master.


I Master.


And be sure in my absence you look well unto my house.


I Master.


I Master.


If any Trades-woman come, under pretence of selling their Ware, be sure you
keep them out, for th'ar all Bawds, do ye hear?


I Master.


I Master.


As for the men, I need not tell you how dangerous it is to let them in who
talk to women of nothing but fire flames.


I Master.


I Master.


Then though your Mistress fall into a swooned, be sure you let no Physician in
unto her, for their looking to their waters is altogether as dangerous as
t*others fires.


I Master.


I Master.


So, being so well instrusted, 'go, look carefully to your charge, and my
benediction w'ye.


I'll go for fear the Cat eat up my Bird.


And I for fear the Dog lap up my Porridge.


Now for my other business, this is the house as I take it.

Holla, who's within there?


who knocks there? Oh Sir is it you, you're very welcome.


I'll none of your welcomes.


He's at's old ward again.


Is your name Valerio?


It is Sir, at your service.


I'll none of your services neither, but I come to ask you whether you know
that I am Guardian to a certain Damoiselle called Isabella there.


I do Sir very well.


Well then, if you know it, I need not tell you so -- next, if you know that,
having the disposing of her in Marriage, I intend to marry her my self.


That I know not yet.


Well then, if you don't, I'd have you know so much, and that I take it very
unkindly at your hands, that she can never stir abroad, but you are hanting her
like a Ghost, and following her so, she may as well be rid of her shadow, as of
you.


I Sir!


I you Sir.


Who tells you so I pray?


Marry those who best can tell, even she her self.


There's some comfort, she takes notice of thee yet.


'And besides she bids me tell you that she marks the amorous glances that you
give her too.


Ah, ha, Boys! this works.


And having perceived thus much she would advise you to take some other course,
for this won't do she says.


Why this is clear, she's thine own I'll warrant thee boy.


And this she says she would have told you soon, but that she wanted
opportunity of a fit messenger, and was loath to trouble me.


A notable witty wench!


Well, Sir I'm sorry I've put you to this trouble, and pray tell her I follow
her 'tis true, and look on her, with the same Reverence as adoring Persians
look upon the Sun.


Pray lets have no more of your Reverence; w'ave had enough of them to day
already, and for your looks pray keep them to your self, for if I catch you
looking on her any more. --


What then?


Why then -- I'd entreat you to look on some body else.


Oh! is that all?


And so farewell unto ye.


I dare not bid him farewell again now, least he should be angry -- well what
dost think of this?


I've made him stare like a Pig! little did he look for such a message from
her.


Why she's done thy business to thy hand, and prevented thee.


Peace he observes us, let us in, and think what use to make of it.


I think I have put him to his dumps. I marry here's a virtuous woman now!
that's offended if a man but look on her! where shall you find such another?
and how long would it bee're my Cousin's Daughters would do so much, who dress
up themselves a purpose to be looked upon? but Isabella defyes them all, and I
defy all the world to show me such another; thanks to my care of her, and her
good Breeding and Education.


well, and what think you of our Entertainment now?


Why I think, had we been of the lowest rank of men, no higher then Grooms and
Foot-boys, they could not have entertained us more scurvily, nor with more
contempt and scorn. --

Proud pets! not so much as salute us, nor offer us to sit!


No, nor speak to us, and when we spoke to them, not so much as daign to answer
us with yea nor no!


Then there was such winking and whispering, such laughing and teehying with
them?


I, and such yavvning and rubbing of their eyes, with ever and anon looking on
their Watches, as if they thought the time too long, and were a vveary of our
Companies.


And at last they fairly rose and went away without so much as bidding us
farewell: -- But I know the reason of this, and if I do not fit them for it. --


As how I prithee?


Why I have observed your Damoiselles in Paris here, and almost all France
over, are grown of late as mad with reading your modern Romances, as Don Quixote
was with reading your ancient Books of Chivalry; and look that all who visits
them should be as mad and Romansick as themselves; and cause we were not so,
they slighted us as they did; now will I cloth my Lackey like one of your
Gallants, whom they admire so much, all Fool and Feather, and send him thither,
and see how they'll entertain him.


Content, and I've another as foolish and fantastical as he, who can imitate
all their Cringes and Complements, talk bilk as loud and confidently as any of
them, and throw himself like a Tumbler after the Ladies, and he shall along
with him.


The more the merryer. -- But see here comes their Father Monsieur Bonhomme,
good honest Gentleman, one who speaks as he thinks, and does as he says, and
means well and honestly in every thing.


THis Paris is nothing but noise and hurry, and one loses more spirits in a day
with it here, then they can recover in a month in the Country. --

What Monsieur Du Buisson and Monsieur La Flour? my sons I hope they shall be!
and how i'st ha? have you been with my Daughters?


Yes we have seen them Sir.


And how do ye like them ha?


Their person's well, but their Entertainment not so well.


How so?


Nay for that y'ad best ask them themselves, and so we take our leaves and
humbly thank you for all your courtesies and civilities.


Hovv's this? this is very strange and abrupt? I'll lay my life these scornful
Baggages have said or done somewhat now that has offended them. -- I shall
know that presently, and if they have, they shall hear of 't soundly. --

Who's within there?


what's your pleasure Sir?


Where are your Mistresses?


Above in their Closet forsooth.


What a doing I pray.


Making Pomatum forsooth.


Go call them hither presently. -- I'll no more of these Pomatums, they mean to
undo me with them I think; I could keep half a dozen servants with the milk,
whites of Eggs, and sheeps Trotters, which they spend in daubing their fine
Muzzles every day, -- th'ar quite spoiled again since their Mothers death, she
kept them to their work, but now there's nothing but idleness with them, and
reading of these paltry Romances, that fill their heads with nothing but
vvhimseys and vvindmills that are perpetually turning round; -- vvou'd they
were all burnt for me.


COme, where are you? -- and how did* you use those Gentlemen I pray, whom I
recommended for Husbands t'ye that they are gone away so discontent?


Better then they deserved I'm sure.


How so?


Fine Gentlemen indeed! to begin their addresses to us with Matrimony at first
dash!


And how would you have them begin, with Concubinage, I pray? I'm sure 'tas
been the beginning of all who 'ave meant well and honestly ever since I was
born.


Fie Father, how simply and vulgarly you talk? in truth I'm, ashamed of you! had
the Grand Cyrus begun with Mandana a' this manner, or else Aruns with Clelia,
w'ad had a fine Romance no doubt of it, no longer then the Posy of a Wedding
Ring.


What have I to do with Aruns and Clelia, or the Grand Cyrus either?


Nay father my sister tells you right, for to begin with Marriage, was to begin
at the wrong end, and to take the Romance by the tail, as they use to say.


No father, a hundred Adventures must precede, and a hundred Intrigues, before
it comes to that; as first the Cavalier must see the Lady in some Ball Temple
or public solemnity, and there fall desperately in love with her.


Then by some friend or near parent or so, he's to be brought to kiss her
hands, when he's to endeavour by a thousand Gallantries, to gain her favour and
good esteem.


But not a word of Marriage all this while, until at last in some Terrase or
private walk in the Garden, remote from Company, he's to declare his love unto
her.


When presently in mighty displeasure she's to leave him, and banish him her
presence.


Then is he to pine, languish, and consume away, ('twould pity you to see him)
till at last by mediation of some friend, and's humble submission, her anger is
appeased, his banishment revokt, and he restored unto her favour and grace
again.


But not a word of Marriage, all this while.


Never have done!


Till after a hundred persecutions of Parents displeasures, servants
Treacheries, and Rivals Jealousies, with two or three duels at least (happy if
he scapes with life) by mutual consent he's to steal her away at last, and so
to marry her.


I thought they'd never have done,


This father in true Gallantry now, is to marry a la mode, a la Belle maniere
as they say.


Fidle fadle! without all these ceremonies and ado's, you shall marry these
Gentlemen, and that presently, or I'll know why you shall not, do ye hear? you
Mary and Anne, I say you shall*


Oh father! for heavens Love call us no more by those scurvy trivial names of
Anne and Mary, able to spoil the best Romance as e're was writ.


Yet more Romances!


My Sister tells you true Father, and be you Judge your self, whether Amaranthe
and Polixene, Names which w'ave chose ourselves, sound not a hundred times
better then Mal and Nane, Names only for Orange women, able to shock any
curious ear; out upon it, I wonder you can endure to hear them!


Go to, I say, I'll none of these Amarantha's and Polixens, but have you called
by the names you were Christened by at the Font and Baptism, by your Godfathers
and Godmothers.


Still Father will you be vulgar and trivial? to talk of Godfathers and
Godmothers, Christendom, Fonts, Baptism, and I know not what, as if you were
Catechising! when I pray did you ever read of these in a Romance.


And when did I ever read a Romance I pray?


I that 'tis that makes you so ignorant as you are, if you had, i'faith you
would have better known what belongs to Gallantry and a la mode.


Mode me no modes, but leave these Fopperies, and marry these Gentlemen
presently, or else you both go to a Nunnery, there's the short and the long of
it: My shoulders are too weak I tell you plain, to carry any longer so heavy a
burden as two such as you unmarryed in my house.


For my part father I could be well content to marry, so it were with one I
likt.


And what i'st you dislike in these I pray?


Why a hundred things, first for a man to come a wooing in a plain and simple
leg, without canons, a Hat without Feathers, and so horrible and furious an
indigence of Ribbons and Garniture of his clothes, who could endure it?


Then their Linen was none of the finest, nor o'th best Linniners making
neither:


Besides 'tvvas all plain as my Sock without, or point of Geneva, Venice,
Ragusa, Sedan, or Oreliaek.


What faults they find?


Besides their hair instead of falling handsomely and regularly unto curls, as
it ought to do, either stood wildly staring up an end, or else hang loosely
dangling down as 'f 'twere combed a' the German manner, only with four fingers
and a thumb.


Tush, toys and trifles! Tell me, are they not honest and proper men?


Proper enough I must confess to make Noble men's Porters, or Swizers of the
Guard, and for their Honesties, they look indeed as if they had their
Maidenheads still, and that is as much out of fashion with Gallants, a't'other
side*


Then for their Language 'twas as unfashonable as their clothes, all clownish,
savouring of the Country, far from the Elegance and Gallantry of Court, where
they speak such douceurs, such dainty and delicate things, as 'tis a very
Banquet for Ladies Ears:


Besides do ye think we'd marry only with simple Gentlemen, without any honour
or Titles to set them off, but bare Monsieur du Buisson and Monsieur LaFleur --
one poor Hawthorn bush in France would make four or five as good Gentlemen as
they:


Come, all this is but trifling, and I'll hear no more of it: In a word,
resolve to marry these Gentlemen, or you know what follows; for the rest
whilst you're in the Town I give you free liberty to see and follow the fashion,
visit, and be visited, do what you will, you're Mistresses of my house, and of
your selves; but in point of Marriage I'll be Master, and so farewell.


Alas poor man, in truth I pity him! he is so simple and ignorant, I see the
form was deeply sunk into the matter when he was born, which makes his brain so
muddy ever since.


I must needs say he's a very honest man; but for the Mode and Gallantry 'tis
terra la to him.


This comes o'th want of reading Romances now; I'll warrant ye they reed
nothing when he was young, but only Homelies and dull Morality.


Or at best but the History or Barlaam and Iosaphat.


In truth I have wondered with my self a hundred times, how one so heavy and dull
as he, could ever beget so lively and sprightly a child as I! sure he's none of
my Father, but I am Daughter of some King, or Emperor, lost in my Cradle by
some strange accident, and look e're long, by one as strange for to be found
again, -- I've read of as strange things as these have come to pass.


And I look to marry some Duke or Prince, or Marquis, or Count, at least; I was
a dreamed of one last night.


NOw! what news with you?


Yonders one Marquis Mascarillio, forsooth, has sent his Valet to know if you'll
be within this Afternoon, and please to be visited.


Oh sister! my dream as right as may be.


Go tell him he shall much honour us, but will you never learn to denounce
handsomely, and a la Mode?


Why forsooth?


You should say now, yonder's Marquis such an one, desires to be informed
whether you please to render your self visible or no.

This now is to speak your precious Language, and a la mode.


Well, go and dispatch the Messenger with an answer affirmative, and when you
come again, we will read you a lecture of it. --

Oh my Toutebonne, now w'ar in pass to be famous indeed, when no less then
Marquesses come to visit us!


I, this 'tis to live in Paris now, we might have lived in the Country long
enough, e're ever we had had this honour.


Well, have you dispatcht the Messenger?


Yes forsooth.


Then hearken to your Lesson, -- Always before Company, be sure you elevate
your stile, and speak a Language which none may understand but the Precious
Cabal, -- - that which they understand not they'll admire, and admiration begets
Esteem and Reverence.


As for example, go presently and fetch me my Zephirus hither.


Her Zephirus! what's that!


She means her Fan you fool.


Oh! is that her Zephirus.


And bring the Councellor of the Graces along with you.


The Councellor of the Graces! what's that I wonder?


Her Looking-Glass she means.


Oh now I understand.


And look you do not soil and sully it with reflection of your Physiognomy.


This now is to speak the precious Language, and a la mode, which 'twere to
endear on Ridiculousness it self, for any Damoiselle a la mode to be ignorant
of.


This, only to give you a taste of it, for this time is enough; go now and make
ready the House as we shall do our selves, against he comes, and look you
perfume the Rooms till we may loose our selves in the precious mist.


I go forsooth.


Marquis Mascarillio do ye call him! oh my dear! what a fine name is that?


And he's as fine a man I'll warrant you.


COme, now let's Play a little 'till Master comes.


Content; Hi, hi, hi, hi, hi.


No, but I'll teach you a fine Play now, -- See saw, see saw.


Nay now you play foul play, so you do.


Foul play! what's that?


Why 'tis -- to play foul play.


Oh now I understand.


Now stand you there, and I'll stand here -- and I'll lay you a wager I'll meet
you before you shall meet me.


Come on then:


Lo ye there now.


Nay I met you first.


But you did not:


But I did.


Who's within there?
Open the door here.

'Uds so! 'tis Master knocks;
Go you and let him in.

Go you and you will.


I won't.


And I wont neither.


Will no body come there! are ye all deaf? I'll make you hear.


'Uds so, Master's angry.
I'll go and open the door.

Nay, I'll go.


But you shall not.


But I will.


I'll teach you to take my office from me.


Why how now! what's the matter? hold, hold I say, what beat your Master? Nay
if you'll needs fight, I'll fight with you.


Oh, oh, oh.


Oh, oh, oh.


Here's fine doing indeed! 'tis time to look to you!

Go leave your bawling, and call your Mistress presently.


I'll go.


Nay I'll go.


But you shall not.


But I will.


Again! agree, or I'll make you agree. So this is fine! I'll set you going with
a vengeance. -- Now I know she longs to hear what news I bring.


I'Ve done an Act here, of so bold a strain as well might put a Virgin to her
shame; but Love and my extreme necessity, or never blush, or let them blush for
me. -- Well have ye been there?


I have.


And what says he?


Why he says, He looks upon you or so, sometimes 'tis true, but he means no
harm by it.


And would you believe him? y'ad best say he meant no harm by this too. Just
now as I was standing at my Window to take the air, who shu'd come by but he?
and what did he? but just as I turned my back, threw me this Box with this
Letter in it here, into my Chamber:


How a Letter!


I, and when hawed done, away he went like Lightning, or I had thrown it like a
Thunderbolt at his head; -- insolent as he is! to offer to send his Letters
unto me!


What's in it dost know?


Not I, nor desire to know.


Why hast thou not reed it then?


Not for a world; for but imagine Sir, what dishonour 'twere to me, and
encouragement to him, if he shu'd think, I'd the vicious curiosity to open and
read his Letters!


Let me see it, I'll read it then.


That were the same, for then he'd think 'twere I; -- no pray Sir let me send
it back as 'tis.


Well go thy ways for a mirror of Prudence and Discretion!


Besides words are but air, but when enclosed in Letters once, I should think
their poysnous damp would kill me presently, should I but open them; -- could I
but find one now to send it by.


I'll do it, I'll do it.


And tell him how I scorn to read his Letters.


Let me alone.


Yet Sir, to satisfy your Curiosity, you may read it if you please.


Not I, I promise you, without an Antidote, if 't, be so dangerous as you say
it is.


Well, then pray carry it him as it is; methinks I am in pain until he have it.


I'll soon rid thee of that pain I'll warrant thee, and assure thy self I'll
marry thee a week sooner then I thought to have done, only for this my little
pretty Rogue.


His kindness and unkindness equally does kill, As poison, though sugared, is
poison still.


I, are you good at writing Letters i'faith? I'm glad I know it; you shall find
that I'm as good at carrying them. -- Now could I preach against Love Letters,
and bid your Damoisells by her example take heed of them; for just as
Mountebanks wrap up their poisonous Drugs in paper, so if you look on the
outside of these Letters th'ar are only paper, but open them and look on them
within, you find them poison, very poison, the bane of Virginity, the ratsbane
that makes them swell again; -- methinks I'm in an excellent vein of Preaching
now. --

But to my business, holla, who's within there.


VVHo's there? what Monsieur Sganarelle? your pleasure Sir?


Pleasure me no pleasures, where's your friend? your friend Valerio there, that
is so good at writing Letters.


He's not within at present.


No matter, there give him that Letter, and tell him, his piece won't off, his
powder's damp, and wont take fire, he has mist of his aim this once.


What's all this!


In plainer terms, tell him, Isabella scorns to read his Letters, but he has sent
it back to him, as 'twas sent to her.


I understand nothing of all this now?


And do ye hear? take notice I pray that I deliver it as 'twas delivered Sealed
and unopened, so farewell.


What should the meaning of this be I wonder?


O Hi I'm glad you're come.


Why?


Here has been your old Messenger again.


Who! Sganarelle?


The same, and he has left this Letter for you.


'Tis not a Challenge, is it?


if it be, 'tis from Isabella, for she sent it he tells me.


From her! Oh give it me straight then, that I may kiss it a thousand times;
how's this? the Superscription is to her!


But open it, and see from whom the Subscription is.


Noble Sir, IF I have rightly interpreted your Love,
I hope you will not be so unjust
to misinterpret mine; I am here in the hands
of one I hate, and if you deliver me not
the sooner, death shall; mean time
I am the miserablest alive, unless you find
some way to make me happy.
Yours till Death ISABELLA:
Now, what think you of this piece? i'st not an Original!


Yes Ergasto, and that of such a hand I shall think it no Idolatry to adore:
Now I perceive she is as wise as fair, and I am happy, nor shall I ever rest
till I have made her so:


Ha, ha, ha! what an Ass has she made of him? to make him carry this himself!


Peace, here he comes.


IT does me good to think how blank he'll look when he receives this Letter; I
long to see him, and laugh at him: Now Sir you've received your Letter?


I have so Sir.


And you perceive by it the difference of persons, and how some have the
happiness to be beloved, and others not?


I do so Sir, and must have patience.


Poor man! he's ready to cry again; -- well, and what service will you command
me back? you see, I'm good at carrying Messages.


Why you may tell her Sir, that as I only live for her so I shall die to serve
her.


The poor man's even desperate I see?


And for this Letter here which you esteem so high disgrace, tell her I take it
for the highest grace and favour she could do me.


Even much good do it ye with it, and when w'ar married, you shall come if you
please and give her thanks for it.


How married!


Yes, I'll invite you to my Wedding.


Can you endure this?


Peace, inconsiderate man? i'st fit that I shu'd offend him, who has power to
injure her? -- I'll fright him yet, and see what that will do, -- Hark you Sir,
methought I heard you talk of marrying Isabella.


I did so Sir, what then!


Why then y'ad best to make your Will before, or see me dead, 'twill be
dangerous else, and say, I told you so.


How's this! the mans desperate I think indeed; if he be such an one, I'll not
invite him to my Wedding beshrew me: Hark ye Sir, now I better consider on it,
I mean to be married privately*


Talk of Marriage again?


Cry mercy Sir, if you be so angry I'm sorry I've troubled you, and so
farewell: -- I'll no more Messenges if he be such an one.


So, this will defer his Marriage a while I hope, till I may think on some
prevention, but what I can't imagine?


Come n'er torment nor vex your self, but leave it all to her; imprisoned winds
either enforce their way, or cause an Earthquake; so now sh'as begun she'll
ne'er give over, till she has thoroughly done:


HOlla, holla, these baptised Mules I think have a plot to break my bones, they
do so joult and jostle their Chair against every post they meet.


The Entry's strait Sir, and you'd be carried in.


And good reason, Goodman Faquin, do ye think I'd expose my Feathers to the
humidity of the air, and shoes to the rude assault of Paris dirt?

So now take up y'ur luggage and begone.


You'll pay us first, Sir?


How!


Our Money Sir.


Was ever heard of such an Insolence, to demand money of me?


How would have us live Sir, if you do not pay us?


If you can't live without paying, there's payment for you, and there -- saucy
Rogue, to demand money of such Gallants as I!


But we will be paid in another manner Sir, before you go, for all your Gallantry.


How now! what mean you?


Or pay us our Money, or --


Hold, hold! there 'tis; now thou ask it in good manner, and as thou oughts,
but that's an unmannerly Rogue there: -- Now, are you satisfied?


Yes Sir.


Then begone and leave me.


Stay Sir, now I'll be paid for your beating of me too, before we go, or else.
--


Hold, and good reason, there's somewhat for thee too; you shall find me the
reasonablest man in the world, when you ask things in good manner, and as you
ought. Now are you satisfied?


Yes, I thank you Sir.


No, thank your Ignobility you Rogues; for, but I scorn to draw my Sword upon
such base Faquins as you, by this bright steel I'd killed you both e're this --
this excuse I learnt of a Gallant who was beaten by a Hackny-Coachman the other
day. -- Well, get you gone now, and take heed of provoking my fury another
time.


At your service Sir.

We hope you can't say but w'ave used you civilly?


I, I, I must needs say that: -- So, thus far I have played the Gallant right,
never to fight when I can help it; nor pay debts, but when I cannot choose: --
Now for the Ladies, which is the main business of your Gallants in the world,
and when there are no more to Court and Complement, they may go out of it, as
having no more to do.


MY Ladies desire you to have a little patience, Sir, and they'll instantly wait
upon you.


No hast, no hast, my pretty Carrier of Messages; I can entertain my self well
enough here the whilst, with contemplating the Historical Ornaments of the
place.


Methinks this Monsieur in these clothes, and that feather there, looks just
like some Amphibious Animal, half Bird, and half Baboon.


Now don't I know whether in true Gallantry, I were not to fall on the
Waiting-woman first; I have a gallant Itch come upon me, and cannot hold: Hark
you, hark you sweet heart, suppose one should ask you an Enigmatical Question
now?


Excuse me Sir, I'm none of those I can assure you.


Right! -- Thus whatsoever they understand not, they interpret strait to. --
you know what: -- Come, come, there's somewhat for thee; you must not be so coy
-- you understand me.


Yes very well Sir.


Or else thou were no right Waiting-woman: -- Come then.


Soft Sir, another time* I hear my Ladies coming.


This now is another trick of Gallantry, to have Wenches cozen them of their
money.


And see th'ar hear.


OH Heavens! Oh paradise!

Hai day! this Mounsieur has got the French staggers right.


Most fair, and most accomplished Ladies, If I importune you with my visit, 'tis
your perfections have brought this trouble on your selves, of which I am so
great an Idolater, as where e're 'tis found, I needs must go to reverence and
honour it.


Noble Sir, there's no perfection here, but only what you bring along with you.


Now by your fair Eyes Ladies, which like Suns, illuminate all this other
Hemisphear; your Graces and Perfection are so great, as for Wit, Beauty, and
true Gallantry, you pic, repic, and Capot, all the Ladies in Paris else.


You may say what you please Sir, but we are not so vain to lend the serious of
our belief, unto the Raollery of your Complement, -- I marry sister, this is a
brave man indeed! you may see Nobility in his very Men!


I, and in's fashion and behaviour too! who's there? some Chamber Pulpits
strait.


Some Chairs, some Chairs there, -- please you Sir to sit, here's a Chair that
stretches forth its arms, and should be glad and proud o'th honour of embracing
you.


All here speaks civility even to the Chairs and Stools; but pardon me Ladies,
I would fain tarry, but I see certain dangerous eyes here, that look as if
they'd kill men, or rob them of their liberties at least.


We will warrant you Sir.


Well Ladies, on your security I'll venture this once; nor can I sacrifice my
Liberty any where better then at the Altar of your feet.


Don't ye admire him Sister?


Admire him! I am rapt a thousand degrees beyond Admiration!


And what think you of my Feather Ladies?


Oh, 'tis the very top, and top-gallant of all I ever saw! and you're the true
Ostrich, the other but a counterfeit.


And my Canons.


Oh most heavenly wide!


I can assure you there's more in them by half an Ell Paris measure, then in
any are worn in Town beside.


I never saw the Elegance of Adjustement carried so high by any one before!


I Sister, this 'tis to know the fine of things, the superfine, the very fine
of fines!


And how long Ladies is it since you made this Town happy with your Residence
and abode?


So short a time Sir yet, as we count only by days the age of our being here.


And what do ye think of Paris? is it not the Paradise of all Delights! the
Treasury of all that's rich and precious, and compendium and abridgement of all
wonders and rarities!


'Tis incontestable truth Sir; and I do not see, I protest, how 'tis possible
for any Lady to be saved out of Paris here.


Why now you ravish me! and what Recreations have you had since your arrival
here?


O Lord Sir! w'ave had so horrible a want and dearth of them, as w'ar even
starved and famished again.


I'll carry you to the next new Play that's played, but then you are obliged to
cry it down what e're it be, 'tis the fashion of your Gallants now, and will
get you the reputation of Wits.


That Sir we shall not fail to do, before the Music plays, or Curtain's drawn.


And what acquaintances, Ladies, have you made, since you came to Town?


None at all Sir yet.


I'll bring you acquainted with all the Wits of the new Collection, they come
unto my Chamber every day; and but this morning I'd a dozen of them there; nay,
if please, they shall keep an Academy at your Lodging every week.


O Lord Sir, you'll infinitely oblige us, for only such as they, govern the
Fames of the Ladies here in Town, and with a Copy of Verses cry them up, or
Lampoon, cry them down, when e're they please.


Right; and besides, they can inform you to a half Stanza of all the Verses
that are made in Paris every day, as who made a Madrigal of's Mistress Beauty,
who an Ede of enjoyment, who sent an Elegy to his Mistress over night, and the
answer she made unto't by next day noon.


I, these are things to be known 'bove all your dull Morality and Philosophy.


I, and Divinity too Sister.


Still Ladies you ravish me more and more; and since I see you're delighted with
Poetry, I'll recite you some compositions of mine own.


Beseech you Sir.


For you must know I've a Poetical itch sometimes, and scratch for it on paper
too; amongst the rest you shall hear recited in all your most celebrous
Assemblies here, some hundred Songs and Sonnets of mine, as many Odes and
Elegies, a thousand Madrigals, and Epigrams sans number.


And I'ave a very furious Tender for those Epigrams, methinks th'ar the finest
things!


And for those I shall fit you, for I am turning all Roman story into Epigrams.


And that must needs be rare and excellent! but touching the Verses Sir, you
promised us.


You shall have them as soon as I can entreat them of my Memory; and these they
are, made of a Ladies stealing my heart away, imagine it your selves.

Ah, ha! and have I caught you (as they say,
Mos did his Mare) stealing my heart away.
And wo'd you run awaywith't wheny' avedon;
I'faith, i'faith, for all you'd fain be gone,
I'll make you dearly pay for it e're you part;
Stop Thief, stop Thief, my heart, my heart, my heart.

Rare!


Excellent!


The best as e're I heard!


Do ye mark that Ah, ha! at my entrance into stile, what a natural Expression it
is, as much as to say, are you there i'faith? or have I caught you? as I
express it afterwards ah, ha!


That ah, ha, alone is worth a whole Epic Poem.


Then have I caught you as Mos did catch his Mare; there's an Erudition for you
now? taken neither from Greek nor Latin, but from an English Proverb, nothing
savouring of Homer nor Virgil, and a thousand degrees at least removed from the
Scholar or Pedant.


I, and a thousand, and thousand more to that!


But you'd be ravished now to hear the air, I've set unto't.


Why are ye a Musician too! have you learnt Music Sir?


Not learnt it, but such Gallants as I, know every thing without learning.


Assuredly my dear?


Pray let's hear it Sir.


You shall, but you must consider 'tis a la Cavalier, hem, hem, ah, ha! c.


Oh! most divine! the very Harmony of the Spheres.


I'm enthusiasm'd with it!


'Tis pure Chromatick, this!


Methink 'tis pure Caterwouling, if this be a la Cavalier, I have enough of it.


Did you mark the humouring of the words? how at stealing, the Music stole
away, as 'twere, and then at running, it ran away as fast.


We did, and admired it.


Besides, if you marked it at the word stop Thief, there was such a Hubbub, as
you'd have thought a whole Heu and Cry had been following, the rest was in
stilo Recitativo.


This 'tis now to know the height and depth, the longitude, latitude, and every
dimension of Art!


I can hold no longer, ah, ah!


What aisle you Sir?


Now by your soft and sweeter bosoms Ladies, those perfumed pillows that love
does rest upon! you even ravish my heart out of my breast; methinks it hangs
only by a slender string: Oh, oh, oh! I languish, faint, and die!


Does he not do it rarely Sister? those two Monsieurs who came a wooing to us,
are not worthy to be his Laquys.


I have a certain curiosity to know if he be married, or no.


I, are you there Sister? I'm glad I know it*


And are you jealous Sister? I'm glad I know that too.


Now what's the news with you.


Yonders one Count Iodelet without, desires to know whither you please to
render your selves visible.


Oh! I see you'll learn in time.


How Count Iodelet?


I, do you know him?


Know him! my only Comrade in all our former Wars; why Piladis and Orestes,
and Damon and Pithias were mere strangers and enemies, compared unto us two.


Go introduce him strait.


Count Iodelet! now Ladies I'll promise you, you shall see the gallantest man
in France, and bravest Soldier, brave upon brave, a three pyld brave.


what Marquis, art thou here?


Count! I am ravished to see thee, go and salute these Ladies, that afterward I
may more freely pour out my self into thy Embraces.


By your fair leave Ladies.


And how dost, ha! thou look somewhat pale methinks!


The fatigues of the War, and Vigils of the Court, but I'm resolved to leave
it, there's no reward for men of our merits and deservings now a days, who have
lost our lives in our Countries service.


I, the Children of peace carry all away now, from us the sons of War. -- And
how long i'st i'faith since thou and I met first in the Wars.


Let me see -- some sixteen years as I take it*


'Tis more, 'tis more man, by the same token thou commandst a Regiment of Horse
on the Galleys of Malta.


I, we had hot service there.


But not so hot as afterwards at taking the half Moon at siege of Graulin.


Half Moon! 'twas a whole one man, thou hast forgot.


I think it was indeed, I'm sure I've good reason to remember it, for I
received this Musquetad there, -- pray Ladies vouchsafe to feel here.


A very terrible wound indeed!


I feel nothing but only the nape of his neck.


And I, this other coup de Granad, pray Ladies stoop, and feel here.


A horrible one too!


There's nothing but only the hollow of his Ankle; I think these Gallants swear
nothing but Wounds, there's so many Wounds with them.


But now I'll show you a terrible one indeed.


Oh no, we beseech you Sir, w'ave seen enough already, you'll fright us with
sight of more.


Well, as you please; these are honourable marks and signs what men are.


And that's the reason it seems your Gallants now a days, especially in Ladies
companies, stand with their hands in their Codpieces only to show what men they
are.


And when did see the Duke thine old Comrade?


We supped together yester night, and he has invited me for to morrow to hunt the
Stag with him; wilt' be o'th party sirrah?


I'faith, I cannot, I'm obliged to wait on the Duchess thou wot of, out of
Town.


They are acquainted with all the Grandees of the Town it seems?


More honour for us to be acquainted with them.


But we neglect the Ladies, -- Sirrah as thou came in, these Ladies and I were
discoursing of Verses, and thou art excellent at them I know.


A little at Inpromptuses or extempore ones.


And that's the very Touchstone of a prompt and ready wit!


Thou shalt make some of these Ladies here.


We beseech you Sir.


And the subject shall be of their fair eyes.


You put me strangely to it, Marquess, but I'll try.

Of your fair Eyes Ladies what shu'd I say? what shu'd I say?


I think he knows not what to say indeed.


Pox on it, I can easily make the first verse; all the difficulty is, to make
the second Rhyme unto't.


I think so too.


Well Ladies, pardon me this once I have lately let blood so much in thee
Poetic vein, as my Muse is but weak and feeble yet, but as soon as I shall have
recovered a little strength, you shall see I'll make you as good extempore
Verses (with a little study) as ever you heard.


Mean time what shall we do? shall we carry these Ladies abroad to take the
air?


Content, thou hast thy Coach here Marquess, hast thou not?


Not I, I came in a Chair.


And I've sent mine away.


No matter, 't shall be for another time; -- shall we have a Ball then?


I, but for the Violins? the Animaters of the feet, and paradise of the Ears?


I'll send one of my Valets for them; holla, who's there without? Basque,
Lorrain, Piccard, Burquenot, Bretain, Gascoin, Norman, Perigot, none of these
Valets there? par la mort bleu, there's never a Signeur in all France worse
served then I, I think.


Faith, and I think so too.


To have never a Valet at hand when one has most need of them!


The devil of Valet did they bring along with them.


No matter, ours shall go; but then for filling parts unto our Ball 'twill be
too empty else.


We will send to invite our Neighbours here hard by, amongst the rest Lysette you
shall go to our Cozen Isabella's, and see if the clown her Guardian will let
her come:


I know he will not, wherefore 'tis in vain.


No matter, she shall go only to vex him; -- mean time please you to honour us
so much to accept of a slight Banquet w'ave prepared within, you shall
infinitely oblige us.


You've abundantly regall'd us Ladies with your fairer sights, but we shall wait
upon you.


SO, I'm glad I'm come home; were I the King, I'd make a Law against this
saluting and complementing, the very Rack of conversation that sets every ones
joints a stretching, with I'm your humble servant, and I know not what; -- your
Porters Salutation with a thump o'th back at meeting, and a kick o'th breech at
parting, is not half so troublesome.


I've stolen in after him, and he'll wonder to see me here.


I like your Hollander yet, who goes plodding about his business, and never
troubles himself nor others with good manners; -- besides, 'tis the very
University of lying, for they'll tell you they are your servants, when they think
themselves far better men then you, and say th'ar glad to see you well, when
they'd be far more glad to see you hanged.


Now will I show my self.


How now? how came you here?


Why thorough the door, which way else shu'd I come? you don't take me for a
Lapland witch I hope, to enter by the Chimney riding upon a broom-staff?


I do not know; -- and what would you here I pray?


I'd only speak with Mademoiselle Isabella*


And from whom?


From my Ladies.


And what to do I pray?


This man would make an excellent Catechist: -- why they'd entreat her company
at a Ball.


A Ball!


Yes, there's the Marquess Mascarillio and Count Iodelet at our house, and
they'd desire her to come and bear them company.


Why you are not mad? or dost thou think me so? that I shu'd suffer her go unto
a Ball, especially in such company as those; I'll send her to the Burdell
rather.


Why I hope you take my Ladies for honest women? and I can assure you th'ar
very honest Gentlemen?


No matter for that, your women may be honest women, and men honest men, but
put them together once, and I'll not answer for their honesties.


You won't let her go then?


No indeed won't I, and get you gone the sooner, or I'll set you going.


And can you find in your heart to deny me then?


I indeed can I, and beat you too if you get you not gone the sooner.


I who am so much your servant.


She's at her Complements!


And have always spoke so well of you*


I so you did to day, if you be remembered.


And said, that Isabella would be most happy in marrying you, and that I
wondered at my heart that every one was not in love with you.


And are you lying too?


Now tell me in conscience don't you think this true now?


Perhaps I do, what then?


Why then you're an Ass to believe any one can be in love with that Owls face of
yours, and those Asses ears, which one would swear wear horns, if you were but
married once.


Why thou damned Baggage, how how dare thou provoke me thus?


Or that proper person of yours half Bear, half drill, and all a Beast.


If I could catch you*


And so I humbly take my leave, and rest your most humble servant.


She's at her Complements again! this woman is a compound of all women together,
and he has more ingredients in her then Mithridate or Treacle, but the main is
Mercury and Quick-silver.

But where are my Urchins, where are my changelings there? I'll talk with
them for this.


HEre Master.


Here Master.


Come hither you egrigious Idiots.


Uds so Master's angry.


Did not I charge you to let no Trades-woman in, because I said they were all
Bawds? and do you let waiting women in now? look better to your charge, or

I'll so bang your fools coats, I'll make them stick like players to your
sides: -- Go call your Mistress, and leave your Tumbling tricks.

I must not let her know*

she's invited to a Ball, for fear of stirring up light species in her mind.


HE never sends for me, but I'm afraid my plot's discovered; but custom of
fearing now, has almost made me fearless: Well, have you delivered the Letter?


I, I'ave paid him in his own coin I think.


And what said he?


A great many good morrows, I know not what, but I've poured water to his wine
I'll warrant ye.


Rather oil to his fire, for he is grovvn more violent and outrageous then
ever.


How so?


Why as I'm credibly informed, he intends a terrible Riot on your house, and to
come to night and take me away by force.


Methought he talked somewhat desperately indeed; but how come you to
intelligence of this?


Why this Note with a stone wrapped in it was throvvn into my Chamber vvindovv,
I know not by whom.


I must have that window damned up.


But I imagine by one of my Cozens.


Very like; and what shall we do then?


Why go to him, and tell him soundly of it, ask him if he been it ashamed; you
deal too gently with him, tell him I desie his worst, let him come and take me
away if he dare -- offer to take me away from my dear Guardian!


He shall not, he shall not, ne'er fear, I'll defend you.


You won't sight with him?


Not I beshrew me, I have not so much o'th Cavalier, I thank heaven, to fight and
die for my Mistress, that's just like selling ones horse to buy him Provender,
so plays fools.


Well go then, and tell him withal that less he makes an end the sooner, he'll
put me to terrible straits and plunges, and make me take some desperate
resolution, would I might speak with him, you shu'd hear how I'd rattle him.


I would you did for me, for I'ave no mind to it, now I know what a dangerous
man he is; well, get you in, and let me alone with him.


I go most gladly to avoid his sight, which I so abhor, and hate as I shu'd
fear to go even to paradise if he were there.


I'll marry her, that's certain, for I see she loves me, and there's like to be
no love lost if she holds on as she begins, -- but let me see, it behoves me
now more then ever to look unto my house*

Where are you there?


HEre Master.


Here Master.


I'd best get a couple of Halberds for them, -- come hither I'm to go abroad
do ye hear, and now be sure you be more careful then ever, to let none enter,
especially if any young Gentleman come be sure you keep him out.


I Master.


I Master.


Suppose me the man, now let me see how you'll deal with him.


Get you gone.


Get you gone I say.


Good, and if he go not the sooner thrust him out. Let's see.


Away.


Away I say.


Very good, and if he won't go, beat him soundly, I'll bear you out in it.


Won't you go, I'll make you.


And so will I.


Excellent!

Hold, hold, 'tis well they have no Halberds now, these fools lay on without
any mercy; -- Now suppose he shu'd flatter you, and say, pray let me in, and
offer you money, let's see what you'd do!

What would you take it?


Yes, and then we'd beat him again for offering it us.


That's well,

Well, being so well instructed, go and look well to your charge, and my
benediction w'ye.

This 'tis to do things wisely; now will I go and do my other business as
wisely as I can.


I'm glad ^h'ave almost done within, there was such eating I thought they would
have eat us all; if these be your French Counts and Marquesses, they are the
hungryest ones as e're I saw! then they pocketed up more sweet-meats and
banqueting stuff then twenty Gossips at a Christening. Oh! here they come at
last.


what are the Violins come yet?


Yes Sir.


Let them strike up then, and play me a Corrant, I'll take the hardiess for
Prologue to the Ball to dance you a Corranto Ladies.


You'll much honour us.


Faith if his dancing be no better then his singing, the dancing Bears shall
dance the Tricotees with him for a wager.


Sa -- begin there. Tout beau, tout beau, not so fast, not so fast I say, --
firm, firm, en Cadence, en Cadence and be hanged! Oh Diable! there's no
enduring them, Violins de village!


They play well enough if he could but dance as well, I knew well enough what a
manner of dancer he was.


Come now, lets have our Ball.


OH! have we found you! must you be dancing here, and make us dance attendance
for you at home? there's music for you if you'll needs be dancing.


And there.


How now! what insolence is this.


Hold, hold, this was not in the bargain though.


Had you none, you insolent Rascals, to abuse with your impostures! but these
Ladies here whom we both love and honour.


We will make ye an example for it.


What's the matter do ye know?


The matter's clear, they have been soundly beaten.


Pho! only a wager.


Ne'er trouble your selves, all this is nothing.


Do ye make nothing of a beating then!


Pho! a hundred such things as these pass amongst Friends.


For you, your Gallantry privileges you from fighting; but for him so great a
Soldier, and so brave a man, Brave upon brave, a three pyl'd brave.


Why there 'tis now, the more valiant, hardier to provoke to anger still; but
when their anger's up once, woe to those who provoked them.


Were they but here again you shu'd see now how we would handle them.


Behold them here.


They look methinks as if they could wish them away again.


THere, strip them, strip them, that that these Ladies may see when their
borrowed Plumes are of, what pitiful Jack-Dawes they are.


Why who are they?


Why Ladies if you'll needs have the naked truth, these are our Lackeys.


How! Lackeys!


At your service.


I knew what manner of Counts and Marquesses they were.


Were ever any so abused!


Right Ladies, and that makes us so severe in punishing them.


Nor is this but a light preparative to the punishment we mean to inflict on
them at home.


Dispatch, dispatch there.


There goes the County.


And there the Marquisat.


I am so confounded and ashamed I know not what to say, nor what to do.


Our shame and confusion is no less then yours, that any who had any Relation
unto us, shu'd presume to offer ye this injury and affront.


And we beseech you to believe we had no hand in it, but only in the punishing
it.


And if you think them not sufficiently punished, we leave them w'ye to punish
them more; and so for this time we take our leaves.


Get ye gone ye Rogues, how dare ye tarry here, considering how you've abused
us:


We only tarry to know what farther service you please to command us, if you
need one now to run a race for you behold your man ready stripped:


And I to do the double supersault for you, if you love feats of Activity.


Away ye Rogues, away.


This! to Counts and Marquesses.


Yet dare ye usurp those Names?


Why not, I'm sure if we were elsewhere, we might pass for such, and no body
question it.


Who pays us for our Music here?


Ask Monsieur le Count.


Will you Sir?


Ask Monsieur le Marquess there.


Why thus goes the world, when men once are fallen into adversity every one
falls upon them:


Hark ye, hark ye Sir, do you know me I pray?


The waiting woman too!


Do ye remember how you'd have deboiched me to day? now could I find in my heart
to beat you for it, but that you're sufficiently beaten already.


where are these Bagages? where are these Damoiselles a la mode here?


My Father, here! then we are shamed for ever!


Here's fine doings! fine Revels w'ye, is there not?

Monsieur Du Buisson and La Fleur yonder have told me all; you must have your
Counts and Marquesses, no worse men serve your turns, -- and are these they I
pray?


All that are left of them.


Get ye gone, and that presently too, or I'll not leave you so much as your
skins, but strip you of them as others have of your Clothes.


Come Brother w'ad best be gone and leave this ungrateful place where men of
our good parts for singing and dancing are no more rewarded.


And where naked vertue's not looked upon, but men are more regarded for their
Cloths, then for themselves.


Go, get you in too, for I'm too angry w'ye to chide you now, but when my
anger's over once, expect to hear from me, and that soundly too.


Come Sister lets go and think on some way of repairing our honours.


Will you pay us for our Music Sir?


I marry will I, there's payment for you, and there again, must you be fiddling
here amongst the rest? I'll fiddle you. --

I'am vexed at heart with these foolish Baggages, and shall be more; when once
'tis known in Town, we shall have the Boys hoot them as they pass the streets,
and call one Madam the Countess, the other Madam the Marchioness: besides, I fear
th'as quite broke off the match with these Gentlemen and them; -- I must go
seek to make all whole again, or else I shall not know what to do with them.


YOnder's the house, but I know not what's the matter, I'm nothing nigh so
forwards to knock as I was wont to be; but fall back fall edge: I am resolved,
yet softly, softly Sganarelle, for fear of angring him, -- and see here he
comes already, now have not I breath enough to blow up the bladder of a whiting
mop.


Jam enraged, that I can think of no expedient to free her from this savage
beast?


Peace, yonder he is.


Methought I heard him say, he was enraged. I'm more and more afraid of him.


Now Sir what news with you? you're never without some or other I know.


Pardon me Sir, I'm afraid I trouble you too often.


Not a whit, not a whit, ne'er fear it.


Has strangely changed his Tone and Countenance, what e're's the matter.


But I am but a Messenger, you must consider.


I do consider it.


The Rogue's abominably afraid, now I perceive, faugh! how he stinks!


And what says Mademoiselle Isabella? for I know you come from her!


Why she commends her t'ye, and says that she is credibly informed you intend a
terrible Riot on my house, and to come to night and take her away by force.


Slid! she but instructs thee what thou shu'dst do.


Well, and what more?


And says, that if you make not an end the sooner, you'll put her to terrible
straits and plunges, and make her take some desperate resolution.


Poor soul! it grieves me at heart to think what straits and plunges indeed I
put her to; --

But does she say this indeed?


If you wont believe but go along with me, and you shall hear her say so much
her self; -- I must do any thing to content him.


Slid take him at his word.


Well Sir, since you'll needs have it so, I'll go along w'ye, though
unwillingly.


I can't blame you, for I'll warrant ye a sound chiding: -- I'll but go a
little way, and call you presently.


We will go along w'ye if you please.


Pox on him! would I were well rid of him.

I'll instantly be here again.


what need you make more labours then one of it? we will go together; -- Come.


What before you Sir! pray.


Beseech you.


Never Sir.


Nay't must be so.


To obey your commands then since you'll needs have it so, and show you the way.


This is the first time I think that ever he Complemented.


'Tis strange indeed! but what i'st fear can't do?

that tames wild beasts, and makes him civil too.


COme ne'er deny it, I know it was your plot, and thank you for it, thank you
heartily, they may well stile you their Esculapius, you have done so miraculous
a cure on them, to let them see their follies and vanities, see them to their
shame, and shame unto amendment.


If it be so w'ar most glad of it, for we confess we love them, love them
heartily; but were their Beauties and their Fortunes centuplied, we would not
marry them as they were before; -- I love a little noble Pride in Women, but
hate a disdainful one.


And I a little vanity in the sex, it shows handsomely in them, for vanity in
women it is like allay in Coin, a little no ways abases it, but renders it only
more ductil and pliable.


But in such excess there's no enduring it, and all our whole Estates in a year
or two, would be set flying after the mode and fashions, and one half acre of
St. Germans Fair would consume a hundred of ours in the Country, only in toys
and trifles.


Never fear, for I tell you th'ar quite changed from what they were, and never
Circes so transformed others, nor Proteus himself, as you have transformed
them.


If it be so, 'tis well; but still we doubt it.


And if you won't believe me, but go along with me, and believe your selves.


Well, once more we will venture; but if once more we find our selves deceived --


Ne'er trust me again; for more assurance; I'll go before, and leave you to come
after, mean time pray put your selves a little more in the mode and fashion.


Why so?


For a Certain reason I have, women's affections follow their eyes, and the way
to take the one is to take the other first, they love to see men gallant and
fashionable, and the neglect of it, they take as a neglect unto themselves.


Well, for this once we will follow your advice.


Pray do, you'll oblige me in it, and so farewell, within this hour I shall
expect you.


And we shall not fail to come.


THat's she that sings there:

So, now tarry here a little, and I'll go fetch her strait, but expect a sound
chiding.


And I deserve it, I know not with what face to look on her, but I hope she'll
be so merciful to think t'has rather been want of ability then will, that I've
obeyed her commands no sooner, and that occasion has rather been wanting unto
me, then I to it.


NOw what i'st you'll show me?


That which you'll wonder to see I'm sure:


Some fine sight I'll warrant you:


Look! do ye see who's yonder!


Ha! Valerio!


I knew you'd wonder to see him here.


Help me dissimulation, or else I shall betray my joy to see him.

And was't you that brought him hither?


Who else dost think?


You've done very well, and I'm much beholding t'ye, to bring such Gallants as
these unto your house; I wonder what you mean by it!


Nay, be not angry now, -- I only brought him to hear confirmed by you what I
have told him from you; as first, that you observed well enough how he follow'd
you, and the amorous glances he gave you too.


All this I bid him tell you.


Go too then, these are Truths I hope, -- and you would not believe me now; --
then for the Letter. --


I confess I sent that too.


Go too then, these are truths I hope still, -- and did you not bid me tell him
you were informed he intended a terrible Riot in my house, and to come to night
and take you away by force?


I did so.


Very good still all these are truths I hope.


And that if you made not an end the sooner you'd put me to terrible straits
and plunges, and make me take some desperate resolution.


All this he told me too:


Very good then, all these are truths I hope still.


And are you not ashamed all this being so, that I woman shu'd send unto ye so
oft, and you a man shu'd never answer me; or only by words, not by effects and
deeds: -- Was this done like a Gentleman?


Well said, I told you she would chide you; but thou dost not chide him enough.


I confess your Reproaches are just, but I beseech you to consider all the
difficulties I had, and believe that I'm more unfortunate then criminal. --


Well then, for your greater satisfaction (if yet you be not satisfied) know
there stands a couple of you, of which the one I love, the other hate as much.


Mark that now.


The one is all my pleasure and delight, the other all my pain and torment.


Mark that again.


T'one, finally, I'd have for Husband rather then my life,
The other I'd sooner die -- then be his wife.
Does this content you now?

I child of mine own Education, it does; and in sign of it -- there kiss my
hand.


A special favour.


Well, now if you be satisfied, will you get you gone!


Yes Lady, I go, and since I well perceive who 'tis you love, and who you hate
so much, I shall soon rid you of his hateful sight.


Pray do then, and know in any one Action you can't oblige me more; for I
confess I'd rather see a Basilisk.


Aye, say not so.


Why?


Thou'lt kill him quite, dost not see how sad he is already; -- poor man! I
pity him, but I cannot cry.


Nor shall you laugh long I hope.


What are you here still, I thought you had been gone with a nose thus long at
least; -- now I'm on mine own dunghill I may crow over him.


'Tis well Sir, you're a happy man that may tarry here whilst I must part from
hence; yet shall I never repent my love to her, nor envy her's to you.


Do what you will, so you get you gone, for you know she can't endure to see
your face, wherefore I pray try a little how she'll endure to see your back.


How I could beat the Rogue!


Come, come, lets go and never mind him.


So, so, 'tis very well, Oh what a comfortable sight it is yet a little more,
-- so now 'tis well.


Fie, fie, you jeer him most unmercifully.


No 'tis you, this was but a little pleasant Raillery; but thou were too bitter
with him, i'faith thou were; that of the Basilisk killed him quite: I'll marry
thee presently for that conceit.


How!


I am resolved on it, and tomorrow morning fresh and fasting I'll dispatch the
business.


I'm justly plagued for my dissembling, -- you wont have time sufficient to
prepare and put all things in readiness so soon for the Wedding, Sir.


I'll warrant you a little preparation will suffice.


Nor I to provide my Wedding Clothes.


There's no need of provision.


My Cousins will look to be invited too.


I'll none of these Invitations, 'tis but an unnecessary charge and trouble.


No way to prevent it! -- Oh! I feel my self very ill on the sudden.


'Tis but a qualm that presently will over, I'll but go and see the writings
drawn and look to find you well at my return.


But pray let me not be molested then, for I'll to bed, and hope a little rest
will make me better.


Do, and sleep soundly; and so good night.


What shall I do? this makes me desperate, and just like those who fly great
fierce, rather consider what it is they fly, then whither 'tis they go; so to
avoid his hateful Nuptials, I must do somewhat, and care not what I do. The
worst is dying, and however death be Hateful enough, 'tis lovelier yet then he:


HAving consulted all my love and hate, I am resolved by favour of the night to
leave this loathed house, and take my flight unto Valerio's, I know there is
danger in it,

But those who weigh all dangers may befall e're they resolve, shall ne'er
resolve at all.


SO, I've got the writings drawn. --


Aye me! Who do I hear?


Let me see if I have not lost them.


Envious Fortune! that never yet were it friend to virtuous love, had thou no
time but now to declare thy self an enemy?


No, here they are, I was afeared I'd lost them.


Fixed and surprised 'twixt fear and strong desire,

I neither dare go on, nor yet retire, this is such a misfortune, there is no
remedy against but poison and precipices.


So now I'll go home.


But this is not a time to spend in vain complaints, Somewhat I must do.


Holla! who goes there? I'm afeared 'tis Valerio come to steal Isabella away,
-- Oh for three blanks of courage more, for what I have will hardly serve my
turn.


It shall be so; -- who's there Guardian.?


Isabella!


The same.


What make you here? you said you were ill, and meant to go to bed, and I
thought y'd been in your first sleep over this.


And so I had, but for an extraordinary accident that happened me.


What accident?


Not so hasty I beseech you, -- Why just as I was ready to go to bed, who shu'd
come to visit me but my Cousin Mademoiselle Mary.


At this time of night?


Yes Sir, and what do ye think her business was?


Nay -- I know not.


Nor could you imagine I'll warrant you -- I would I could --


What was't? ha!


Why Sir, having heard it seems that Valerio intended to come and steal me
away to night* --


Oh? that shows that it was she who gave you the intelligence of 't: -- well
on.


What does she, but entreat me of all loves that she might come and take my
place to night.


And so be stolen away instead of you?


Right Sir.


But why this?


Why Sir you must know she has loved Valerio long, and quite despairing of all
other ways, she would needs try this way to gain his love*


And so put a trick upon him?


Yes Sir.


She's nothing else but tricks I think; -- and would you consent to this?


Oh no Sir, but I dissuaded her all I could, and told her what a dishonour it
would be to her, and to my self, till seeing all my dissuasions were in vain, I
seemingly at last consented, intending privately to ask your Counsel and advice
in it.


Where is she?


Within Sir.


Why then go presently and turn her out of doors, I'll no such tricks played in
my house, and why are you out of doors at this time of night? -- let me examine
that.


Why only to see if I could spy you coming, I did so long for your coming
home.


Oh! 'tis well, -- well* go your ways, and do as I bid you: -- Where is she!
let me come to her, you shall hear how I'll rattle her.


Oh by no means Sir, you'll shame her quite, and me too, for she'll think I have
betrayed her t'ye; rather let me by fair persuasions seek first to send her
hence, and then if that wont do, use your discretion*


Do it any ways so you rid the house of her.


And as she passes by, pray seem to take no notice of her*


Well, well, at your request I will not, -- go and dispatch presently:


So, thus far all goes well, Isabella to deceive him, and get away from him,
the rest were only light assays, but this when it is done shall be my
Master-piece.


Here's brave doings! and fine order in my Consins house, I have heard of all
their Rex to day, and would not for twenty pound but have heard of it; but this
surpasses all, to have his Daughters rambling abroad at this time of night
alone, and on such Errants too! were she my charge, I'd break the neck of her;
but Isabella is far from doing thus, thanks to her good breeding and education*
But where are my Urchins, I'll talk with them for this; where are you there?


HEre Master.


Here Master.


Why ye Changelings* ye Idiots.


'Uds so Master's angry!


Did not I charge you to look well to my house, and let none enter whilst I was
abroad, and do ye let your Damoiselles Errant in!


Oh, Oh, Oh.


Oh, Oh, Oh.


Why do ye beat us? we saw none indeed:


Therefore I beat you, you negligent Dog-boults, for you shu'd have seen them,
and kept them out too; -- Well, go your ways, and as you like this, look
better to your charge hereafter.


I perceieve that those who care not how things are done, may trust others* but
those who'd have them well done indeed, must trust unto themselves; here after
I'll look to my house my self, and then deceive me those who can. Hark! I hear
some stirring within, I think she be coming forth.


Well Cousin to disabuse you, in fine, your stay is all in vain, there's no
Valerio comes here to night, I can assure you, my careful Guardian has ta'n
order for that, wherefore I pray be gone.


I like her well, she tells her plainly of it without dissembling.


As for my Clothes you may keep them, and send them me to morrow morning, and
so good night; you'll excuse me that I do not wait upon you out.


Now, now, she's coming, I'll stand close and observe her.


NOw Night, put on thy darkest mantle, and hide me in it.


So -- I'm glad my house is rid of her, which way goes she? what directly to
Valerio's? Here's a desperate wench now? cares not to put fire and tow
together, we shall have a brave flame of it anon.


This is the house, now Love after so many storms and dangers past, here let me
find a happy port at last*


I Am resolved I'll either die, or free my Isabella from her Captivity.


Live, live Valerio, for behold her here*


Ha! Isabella?


The same.


But you lie* though, for all your counterfeiting her, and her voice so well.


I fear now my Valerio may less esteem his Conquest of me, having gained me so
early as has done.


Rather the more, the more a thousand times, for what we gain with difficulty
we use to attribute chiefly to our own industry, but coming by you so easily as
I do, I must attribute all the thanks to you.


I fear I shall be seen here*


Come in then dearest, and hide you in mine Arms.


But by the port o'th Temple I dare not enter, Honour forbids it.


You are a thing so sacred, you make each place a Temple where you are: Mean
time your scrupulous honour needs not fear.

By that port only you shall enter here.


So, get you together with all my heart, pity two houses shu'd be troubled
w'ye, and I'm glad mine's rid of you: Now could I but meet mine honest Cousin
to confer notes together, how I shu'd laugh at him? and see in good time he's
here.


OH Cousin! my dear Cousin well; met, I'm heartily glad to see you well.


And I you; you're grown very kind and Complemental of late methinks! I'm glad to
see it, 'tis a good sign.


Right Cousin, a very good sign, a sign that all goes well, and I congratulate
w'ye.


For what?


Why for the high advancement of Madamoiselles your Daughters there.


To what I pray?


To the Dignity of Countess and Marchioness; -- and how I pray does the
honourable Lords the Count and Marquess their Husbands?


You're very pleasant.


Have I not reason? being allied unto such noble Personages? and where I pray
is your Daughter Mademoiselle Mary, if one might be so bold to ask?


Why at home I think.


Oh! you do but think so; but I shu'd be ashamed were I as you, and she my
charge, not to know for certain where she were.


But why do ye ask the question?


For a certain reason I shall tell you presently, do ye know that house I pray?
and who lives there?


Why Mounsieur Valerio as I take it.


You take it right, and thereby hangs a tale:


What tale?


Why of him and your Daughter, and both together; for the plain truth is,
she's run away from you, and has married Valerio.


It cannot be!


Nay, pray heaven it be no worse; and now I hope you see the difference Cousin
betwixt our two procedures, yours by the way of mildness and gentleness, and
mine by that of rigour and severity.


I see nothing yet, and shall believe nothing of all you say, until I see it
with these eyes of mine.


If that be all your difficulty, you shall soon see it. Holla! who's within
there?


who knocks there?


None but friends; -- Look there, do ye see her now?


Why this is Isabella.


Ha, ha, ha! he's deceived as well as the other there, -- conceal your self
still, and I'll keep your council since he'll needs be deceived, you shall see
how finely I'll deceive: Well, are you contented who e're it be, that he shu'd
marry her?


I am with all my heart; and are you so too?


with all my heart too, there's my hand on it.


Why then I thank you Sir.


How! Isabella!


Yes Sir.


Did I not tell you so!


Poor Sganarelle! how art thou coz'ned then?


And now I hope you see the difference betwixt our two procedures, yours by way
of rigour and severity, and mine by mildness and gentleness?


Now were I a Poet what Lampoons could I make against all womankind.


As for my portion, by good fortune Sir 'twas left in your hands by my deceased
Father to be paid me at day of Marriage.


'Tis confessed, and I shall be ready to pay it whensoe're you please to demand
it.


Then Sir to you, I've nothing else to say, but only to thank you for the care
you've had of my good breeding and education:


And is this the fruit of it?


Even such as it deserves, and when I have any slaves to breed hereafter, I'll
commend them to your care.


And I thank you Sir for all the good offices you've done me of carrying Letters
and Messages betwixt us; without whose mediation I confess w'ad never been so
happy as we are.


Nor I so unhappy* -- mocked and jeered on all sides; Well, I dare not be angry
with them, but when I'm at home my Changelings shall dearly pay for it; -- mean
time my comfort is, you have as little joy of your Daughters as I of her here,
and have as much reason to grieve for the marring of their Marriages, as I for
the making of hers here.


You're deceived Sir, their Marriages are forwarder then you imagine: And here
behold the Bridegroom's come, ready prepared for it.


NAy, if all be Married but I, 'tis time for me to go home, and hang my self;
but first, though it failed the last year, I'll go and preach the end of the
World this year infallibly.


So, now I like you, you appear like Bridegrooms, and your selves, and your
Mistress, needs must like you too. What? my Count and Marquess! I am glad to
see your Honours well.


Quelque chose Monsieur pour boire vostre sante.


Somewhat to drink your health Sir*


What Counts and Marquesses beg?


Yes in Court Sir.


And out of Court sometimes too.


Well, there's somewhat for acting your parts so well.


Gramercy Monsieur.


We thank you Sir.


well, where are your Mistresses?


In the other world I think by this time.


How so?


Why yonders the strangest change and alteration with them, t'one instead of
Romances, reads nothing now but spiritual Books, amongst the rest sh'as got the
Spur of Devotion, and reads it all day, and I think mean*s to lie with it a
nights too.


He shu'd have but a cold bedfellow then that marries her.


The other has got the Sick-mans salve, and instead of making Pomatum, studies
nothing now but making Salves and Unguents for the poor.


Hei day!


And means to go shortly and practise in an Hospital.


There let her practise for me, I shu'd be sorry my wife shu'd smell of nothing
but Salves and Plasters, and talk of nothing but scald heads, and scabbed
skins.


Here's a strange and miraculous Conversion now!


A conversion and a half! I'd rather have my wife bodily then spiritually proud
and vain.


We shall have them preach shortly, and of all things bless me from a
preaching-wife


OH! here they come.


And see there's the Spur of Devotion, and there the Sick-man's Salve, let's
stand close and observe them.


Look Sister, in the first part of the Grand Cyrus here, there's the prittiest
story of the Belle La, as e're thou re'dst:


How's this! is this her Spur of Devotion!


And here's the best Pomatum as ever skinned Ladies face.


And this her Sick-mans Salve? I'am glad of this i'faith.


Why thou lying Baggage did thou not tell me they were converted, and had
quite left off their follies and vanities.


And so they have Sir if one may believe themselves, I'm sure they told me so;
-- Come, come, and leave off your dissembling, you make me be chid for you
here.


'Tis true, we but dissemble indeed.


Oh! that's well yet:


For we are truly converted.


What! more turnings yet?


And mean to leave off this vain and wicked world, and betake us presently to a
Nunnery.


Beshrew me if you do, you shall go alone for me, for I'll not follow you.


Come, come, leave this sooling, and talk no more of Nunneries, but think of
Marriage; behold your Husbands here:


Which?


Why these here, don't you see?


Who, those? with those profane legs there in surplices!


They are turned Fanatics!


And those light shuttle-cock heads that look as if they'd fly?


No, those whom we were to marry, were grave and sober Gentlemen, and far from
the folly and levity of these:


Sure these are the Lackeys again!


Come, come, leave your fooling I say, I tell you these are they.


If they be, we are much beholding to them sure, to inveigh against the fashion
and the mode, and cry out against vanity, whilst th'ar a hundred times more
vain themselves.


Oh now I perceive what they'd be at* -- no, no, far be it from us to prohibit
you any thing you have a mind unto, or seek to be your Masters, but follow the
mode and fashions, read Romances, do what you will, you shall find us always
your servants*


Nay then to show our selves right women, now we may, we will not, but thus we
throw them all away, which had you sought to have made us do by any other way
then gentleness, we would have died e're ever we would have done.


Mean time don't think you have deceived us with your fine plot there, for I
hope by what w'ave done, you see we have our plots as well as you, and could
too if we list deceive you too.


We confess and acknowledge it.


And now we will be idolatrous of the mode no more, nor think that Lady damned
who's out o'th fashion.


Nor call a leg without Canons, a leg in Herauldry, or Hat without Feathers,
the Quakers block.


Nor read Romances so long till we imagine our selves, the Amaranths and
Polixens we read of.


And pray leave off your precious Language too, and speak intelligibly, that I
may understand you.


Enough, enough.


So, so, I'm glad you are so well agreed; -- And now behold this other couple
too, who are in Love agreed as well as you.


Noble Valerio and fair Isabella, we heartily congratulate w'ye.


And we with you.


COme Ergasto, where are you in all this joy?


Now you have got another Companion, there is no need of me, I may be gone.


That's unkindly said, Ergasto, a friend's my better self, and no companion can
be more dear to me then such an one, know him and love him my dear as one whom
you and I have special obligation to.


Come, come, 'tis late, and time each loving couple part, to meet again with
greater joy to morrow, to night's a fast, and Venus vigil, to morrow Heymen's
feast, to which I invite each one that's here my Guest.


What my Count and Marquess, are you here?


At your service.


No, -- we'd rather counsel you to continue Actors still, you did your parts so
well.


Well then*

Gentlemen and Ladies you hear what's said, and we are ready for our parts so
you're content, to be Actors still for your divertisement.


ANd now what
think ye o'th Damoiselles a la Mode?
We hope none grutches money you have bestowed
In seeing them; or if that any here
Thinks that for seeing them theypaid too dear;
We wish that for the mode Damoiselles too,
They ne'er may dearer pay then now they do.


