A Symphony. After which the Scene is discovered, Representing the Maritime
coast of Albion or England, by its white cliffs encompassed with Seas: flocks
of Sheep grazing on the Downs, or tops of them, and Corn fields a far off in
prospective.

Represented by a grave personage with a Book and Torch in his hand. The chief
property of the Argument being to instruct the Auditory, and illustrate the
Scene.

NOthing sounds louder in the month of Fame,
Then Oceanus and Britanias name.
She Queen of Isles, and he the King of Seas,
The marriage now we celebrate of these,
And here invite you Ladies to the feast,
Our fuire, you Gentlemen, our noble guests.
You all are fairly, nobly welcome then,
Pray fall to with your eyes, know our Scene
Is Albion or Britannia, as by these
White cliffs appear, encompassed with Seas.
For the rest, with what affiduall services
He gains her love; and what advantages
Of Pleasure, Glory, Wealth, she gains again,

All this our Scene dos represent, mean while
We hope you Ladies with a gracious smile,
And with your favourable breaths will please
To grace our Scene, and serenat our Seas.
Which if you deign, we are assured then
O'th grace and favour of these Gentlemen.

Oceanus, in a Mantle of Seagreen and Silver; his Hair and Beard, blew (...)
curled, with a Diadem on his head, and a Trident in his hand, mounted on a
Chariot composed of a great Scollop shell, drawn by two Seahorses in swimming
posture; the Chariot gliding on the wheels of watermils to stem the waves.
Encompassed with Troops of Tritons and Sirens.

O Wretched I!
In fire freeze, in water fry.
Example of Loves cruelty!
What freezing cold
When Brittania I behold!
What scorching fire,
Twixt hot desire,
And chilling fear
Assaults my bosom here!
O cruel cruel God of Love
Makes Lovers such dire torments prove.
Thou a God? thou a fiend,
Hast flames unto no other end;
And piercing darts,
But only to torment poor humane hearts.

Flow flow our tears amain,
For who when Oceanus weeps,
Who all liquid Treasure keeps,
Can from liquid tears refrain?
Groan, groan ye all again.
For who when Oceanus groans,
Who even sadds the very stones
Can from sadding groans refrain.

* How oft have I beat at her shore,
Just like some Lover at his Mistress door,
To weary her to a consent,
And yet, and yet she would ne'er relent?
How oft sprinkled the face of Heaven
With tears that bootless back return.
How oft my sighs to winds have given,
That only hissed them to scorn.
How oft complaind to ruthless rocks,
Whilst wanton Ecco only mocks
My moan, and me:
And when all's done, I see
Brittania I no more can stir,
* Then very cliffs and rocks encompass her.

* All contained betwixt these Astericons or starry marks may be omitted in the
reciting.

Here whilst Oceanus makes a stand, four Dutch Skippers enter with Bowles in
their hands, singing, drinking, and dancing: with the lightness of their Song
setting off the gravity of the other: declaring the debauch of such people in a
calm.

COme Boys, who are ever twixt swimming and sinking,
And let us have a rubbers at drinking.
Hai hai
Bowl away, bowl away.
Set me the bias right boys,
And howl up stiff and tight boys.
Drink, drink,
Merrily drink,
While the flagons do clink,
And the Glasses do think,
And good fellows do think,
That the world goes round a round a,
And no body sober be found a.
Fill the bowles full,
Fill the bowles full boys.
Say what they will,
Say what they will boys,
There is no life but in liquor,
Then take it off quicker and quicker,
And fill it up fuller and fuller.
He is no Sailor
In's drink is a failure,
But only should row in a Sculler.

The dance,

Full of reeling and drunken postures (to an extravagant fantastic
Tune)ending in a scuffle conformable to the rudeness of such people: till
Oceanus rousing up himself, at sound of the Boatswains whistle they all cease
their jollity, and run off several ways.

* See
As agitated by some furious wind,
There's storms and tempests rising in his mind.
What a distracted cloudy men he has?
The angry rack of Heaven is in his face*
'Tis natural
Unto us all
Unquiet, troubled to remain
Till we our long desired ends obtain:
But nature ne'er shall to eternity
Produce so unquiet, troubled a thing as he.
See now he dos compose himself to speak
* Those are less dangerous ills that outward break.

BUt why should I despair
To find
Brittania kind
As she is fair?
No longer then in vain
I'll thus complain;
No longer be her scorn,
Whilst I sigh, and weep, and mourn.
A Noble Lover ever should
Do somewhat more then common man,
To make his passions understood,
And show how much he dares and can.
Brittanias love then to obtain,
I'll do things of so high a strain,
Her self shall be enforced to say,
Whatever the event dos prove,
Oceanus only knew the way,
To gain Brittanias love.

British Mariners away,
Hoise your sails, and all to Sea,
Soldiers scour your Armour bright,
And prepare you to the fight,
Brittania to please;
Queen of all Isles, and Empress of the Seas.

Brittania to please, c.

Fear nor wrack, nor death, for i'll,
Be propitious to ye the while;
Some with wealth, some victory, come
Richly and nobly laden home;
Brittania to please,
Queen of all Isles, and Empress of the Seas.

Brittanta to please, c.

Soldiers, Mariners, away,
Why d' ye linger, why d' ye stay?
With joy and gladness all should go,
And happy in the honour too,
Brittania to please,
Queen of all Isles, and Empress of the Seas.

Brittania to please, c.

HOw mighty a Monarch is this love that go
From heavens above,
To depths below,
Which way so ere you tend,
You ner arrive at his dominions end?
What vast extent has his command?
That still,
Makes Sea, and Land,
Obey his will.
And whats more strange again
Makes very senseless things, have sense of him.
In the mean time, sure
That love must mighty be, and pure,
Has all the waters of the main
To purge and wash away it's stain,
And though they altogether came
Yet cod they never quench the flame.
At name of love let none be scandald then
That's so Ethereal, and divine in them,
Ne'er since they both from Chaos came,
Their hearts ever burned with purer flame,
Nor till to Chaos both return
Ever shall with purer burn.

A Symphony. After which Brittania appears inthrond in state with an imperial
diadem on her head. In a bright yellow vest, and green mantle richly embroidered
with Towns and Cities. A cornu copiae, Or horn of abundance under her Arm.
Environed with the sea, unto which 3 Rivers pour forth their urns, that on
the right hand inscribed Severn that on the left Humber, that under, Thames her
situation so contrived as it declares her temperate clime, equally removed from
the Torrid and friged zone.

HAppy Brittania of all Isles below
High heavens the most does bless,
Did Brittains better know,
But their own happiness
Thou whilst all other Nations, are
Together by their limits tied,
To sad calamities of war,
And wide divisions beside,
Which interest of state they call.
Divided from them all,
By situation dost possess
Such unlimited happiness,
Danger must or swim, or fly,
Ere it can arrive at thee,
And thou no other harms may know
But what from civil wars may grow.
*Which oh, far, far,
Be from thee of all other war.
Far far from thee
That deadly viper be,
That dos corode, and tear,
The mothers womb that did it bear;
With wounds more deep, and wide,
*Then any other wounds beside.
But oh fly, fly,
As thou would some abhorred disease,
The abhorred memory
Of such fatal times as these.
Divert insencibly thy mind
To thoughts of more delightful kind.

HOw happy am I of all other Lands,
Have the key both of peace and war in my hands,
And can by none invaded be,
Unless my self invadeth me.
But all may sit content, and glad,
Under their own Arbours shade,
Embraced in the arms of peace
Oh how happy days are these?

Oh how happy, c.

HOw happy am I of all other Lands,
Have the key both of peace and war in my hands,
And can by none impoverisht be,
Unless my self impoverish me,
But all may sit content, and glad,
Under their own Arbours shade,
Admiring of their wealths increase,
Oh how happy days are these?

Oh how happy, c.
But stay what waves are these appear,
The billows rise, yet no storms are near!
O tis the Ocean that dos ride
On the back of a full Tide,
So jolly and so gay,
He were grown young again you'd say.
I see he'll never quit his claim,
Till he enjoys the princely dame.
Who when Brittania heretofore
Betrothed was to the Gallique shore
Nea'r ceased by force and stratagem


Here Oceanus enters as before, and makes his solemn Addresses to Brittania.

Fairer then fairest if your Eyes,
Clearer then the clearest Skies,
Deign to look upon a lover,
Who this bold truth dares discover,
That he loves, and loves most true,
And ne'er loved but only you;
Behold of all fair Isles the fairest,
Dearest, sweetest, and the rarest,
The lowliest of your servants hear,
Suspended betwixt hope and fear,
Awaits from you his destiny
Whether he should live or dye.
* whether he in dead low tides,
Should pine away to be denied,
Or else as he was wont to do,
In lively spring tides visit you.

I neither extremity approve
Nor of overflowing love
Nor 'ith Ebb, that love is best
By moderate passion is expressed.

Meaner excellencies move,
Only unto moderate love,
But Brittanias denies
All things but extremities.

Wonder! Oceanus who was wont to be
So rough, should grow so smooth to flatter me!

How flatten ye? ^nd, Britania is as far
'Bove flattery, as others under are;
Nor can low flattery reach her, more than I
Can with my furging billows reach the sky.
To write her praise my waves are too dilute
To speak it, my inhabitants too ^te
Heavens Ciphers, and Fames Tongue can hardly serve,
*To write, and speak her praise, as they deserve.

Cease cease your vain pursuit
And vainer suit
And know that till you've rendered me
For pleasure, honour and utility,
The most dilicious and content,
The most renowned, and opulent,
Of all the Isles with circling wave
You ever yet surrounded have,
Never hope my love to gain;
Till then cease, your suit is vain.

Most gladly I accept the task,
And no other favour ask;
What ho there? to delight the fair
Let my twin-lights dance 'ith air
On mast topps and on highest cordage dance
Happy presage of the deliverance
Both from danger, and from fear,
Of the storm tossed Mariner.

Castor and Pollux in Grecian military habits, with bright shining stars in
their fore heads appearing dancing in the clouds, in which the ropes are
concealed.

You're not enoufe delighted yet
Wher's old Glaucus? let him get
His activest Phocij, and hear make
Them dance for fair Brittanias sake.

We are so taken with your sports,
And pleasant prospects you discover,
We admit you to our shores and ports
As a friend, though not a lover.

And to your shores and ports we'll bring
Such store of every better things;
Brittania shall, how ever loath,
Admit me as a friend and lover both.

VAlour, the weak so highly prize,
And the strong even deifies;
If any where on earth thou rest,
Tis in the valiant English breast;
Dares o'th raging floats to swim
With but a board twixt death and him.
And if they so admired of old,
Argonants with courage bold.
First put to sea and without fear
Could see Sea-monsters swimming there:
Much more would they admire them who
Both sees and overcomes them too.
With a courage bold as they
Daring dangers of the Sea.
No wonder Fortune then, who (as w'ar told)
Assists the brave, the gallant, and the bold,
In all their fights assists the English so,
But chiefly we to Oceanus ow
These following Naval fights victories,
Our Scene next represents unto your eyes.

A Symphony. After which a Naval fight is represented, while the following Song
is sung, Alluding to a victory the English formerly gained of the French by Sea,
ni^ Sluice in Flanders, when all the French at first encounter leapt overboard
to save themselves, as it was reported to the French King by his Jester, in
vaunting what brave fellows the French were to leap all into the Sea; and how
very cowards the English, when never an one of them durst follow them.

So composed, as the Symphony sounds the Alarm whilst they sing

Alarm, alarm, the Enemy comes,
Sound your Trumpet, beat your Drums;
See the foe comes on amain,
Tack about, the wind to gain;
Charge but the first Squadrons home,
All the rest are overcome.
And see they shift their Sails and stand
With their Rudders all for Land.
Hai hai
Victory victory
How they fly?
How they cry?
How to save our Swords the pain
They leap into the watery main:
And whilst in vain one death they shun,
They headlong to another run.
But yet they care not so from us they flee,
For of all deaths, the terriblest are we.

BRave Fellow-souldiers, unto you
Only victory is due.
I've execution done on none
But those you first have overcome;
Whose warlike spoils, and Trophies here,
I unto Brittania bear.
Witness o'th valiant acts which you have done,
Take breath, take breath awhile,
And intermit your Noble toil,
The better to prepare
Ye to another war.
For see Spains huge Armado come,
For which your Seas have scarcely room.
You'd say, from multitude of these
Did take the name of narrow Seas.
But fear them not, I'll call
Up winds from Eolus den
Shall dissipate them all.
And then
Once put to flight,
Th'ar vanquish ere they come to fight.

The Dance.

Here the four Winds rush in, winged, with swoln Garments and vizards, white
plumes of Herons feathers as pussed from their months; and having danced a
furious Dance, menacing the Spanish Armado; they all rush out to Sea.

And that this victory was chiefly obtained by the Seas and Winds is confirmed
by that saying of Phillip the second, who hearing of the dissipation of his
Fleet, answered, that he had set it forth to fight against men, and not the
Elements.

HAppy, happy those who are
Heavens peculiar Love and care;
With whom the Skies, and Seas, and Winds
Against their Enemies combins!
For when
States by common ways grow great,
Then men
Maligne, and envy their Estate.
But when
To their greatness Heavens conspire,
Then men
No longer envy, but admire.

FAther of trade and sociable band
Binds worlds to worlds and land conjoyns to land
Great Oceanus easy tis for thee
To waft all nations to fair Brittany,
With all they have of precious and rare
Offering up as tribute unto her.
And to her ports all foreign treasures bring
Flowing unto them every precious thing
Until she's rendered by the golden tide
The richest I'll of all the world beside.
But this we chiefly wonder at in thee
Thou can in love so firm and constant be
In all negotiations else, we find,
As ficcle, and inconstant as the wind,
But this is others praise, and not thine own,
This, this, is mighty work of love alone,
And this great love least wonder thou can do
To change our minds, and hearts, and natures too.

A Symphony. After which Brittani^ as before, to her Oceanus with the Trophies
of the former maritime victories.

BEhold the spoils of Nations here,
Thus lowly at your feet I lay.
Of Nations who are taught to fear
Your power, yet they love your sway.
And best supporters of a Throne,
Are love and fear conjo^nd in one.

And best, c.

For fear is slavish without love.
And love is childish without fear.
Best conjunction still dos prove,
When they both united are.
And best supporters of a Throne,
Are love fear conjoynd in one.

And best, c.

Mean time may fair Brittania please,
To accept of them in gracious part,
From him, who offering up of these,
D^s offer up his soul and heart:
And best supporters of a Throne,
Are Land and Sea conjoynd in one.

And best, c.

And we as such from King of seas
Do graciously accept of these,
Who when his latter task is done
May count Brittania his own.

And my swift waves shall faster fly,
Then birds feathered wings 'ith sky,*
Then ships canvas ones 'ith seas,
And (whats yet more swift then these)
Then Joves forked ones in fire,
To accomplish her desire.

Come Europe, swarthy Africa,
Rich Asia and America
Bring your treasures all away
Tributo to pay
Unto Brittanias Throne
Come quickly come.

Here the four parts of the World enter. Asia in Turkish habit, Africa in
Moorish, and all black, America, swarthy in a featherd garment; and Europe fair
and richly clad. And dancing first severally their entrance they deliver their
riches to Oceanus, who presents them to Brittania, in this following Song.

AS to some Eastern Monarchs Throne
Their vassals all with presents come,
So unto Brittanias here.
All the world their presents bear.
Asia Silk, Europa, fruit
Affrique all its wealth to boot.
Neither dos America
Bring less precious things then they.
Besides the riches either Ind,
Unto fair Brittania send,
Fragrant Odours, Gumms, and Spice,
Gould, and Gems, of highest price,
Nothing that the sense can crave,
Or gust desire, but here you have.

Now all the world is pervious made;
And so immense is her command,
Brittania dos extend her trade,
Where ever there is Sea, or Land.

And now that Oceanus hath
Performed the task he was to do,
In compliance with our faith,
It rests that we perform ours too.
Hark Hymen then unto the vow,
I make to Oceanus now
When ever I prove false to thee
May I cease an I'll to be.

And may I be a Sea no more
When I quit Brittanias shore:
(c) While there's Moon, and Months, and Tide,
My love to her shall firm abide.

And mine unto the Ocean
(d) Whilst rivers flow and fountains run.
When we each other cease to love,

(c) He mentions Cynthia or the Moon, who faciliats his accesses to Brittania
(d) and she the fountains and rivers by whom Oceanus insinuates himself into
her bosom, by the one with more occult, by the other with more ways open.

May we both unhappy prove.

And When we each other loath,

May we perish,

Now 'ts time that we by Thames go
The Land as well as main to please,
Who less to have part 'oth pleasures too
May envy our solemnities.

Though Oceanus here too for has cast
His wanton Arms, about many an Lands wast
And as his loose embraces he bestowd
Wyldly from one to the other ebbd and flowd,
Yet now you shall see
Once married he'll be,
As Vxorius or more
Then he was Amorous before.
*Tis not fruition that is dull no no
When they are satiate and full,
Tis men are so.
In heaven theirs no such thing
As surefeiting,
And with immortal viands, none is cloyed
When th'ar enjoyd;
Both born then of immortal race.
Tellus her Mother, Heaven, his Father was
Like Promotheus his pain
*Their joys shall still renew again.

NOw shall Brittanias fame be knowns
From Suns rise to his going down;
And now from pole to pole shall she
Renowned and celebrated be.
Whilst other lands were never known
Unto the watery Ocean,
As buried in themselves shall lie
In dust, and dull obscurity;
None concerned in the care
Of what they do nor what they are.
Now finally shall he and she
Through all the world renowned be.
He for Ring, and she the Gemm,
He Circumference again,
And she the Center whither tend
All his Rhombs and Lines. To end,
He sovereign King of the watery Ball,
And she sovereign Queen of all.
This whilst Fame aloud did voice,
All universally rejoice.
More to which joy then to the feast,
We have invited you our guest.
For other cates divided do grow less,
But joys increase.

A Symphony. When the Scene is changed from a Maritime prospect to the prospect
of the Town, where first is represented a confused crowd of Boys and Girls,
Porters, Knitting women, and such like Rabble, in the streets, assembled at the
cry of new Ballads about a Ballad singer or two, hoarsely and ridiculously
singing this following Ballad to the tune of Packingtons pound.

MY masters all pray hark and draw nigh
To the story we'll tel you by and by,
And he is a foe to Englands Glory
Who is not a friend unto our story,
That tells you with our shipping at sea
How famous and renowned we be.
But oh.
The Hollander he is the sturdiest of all,
And all he meets doth beat and maule,
Yet we beat them, as they beat others,
And still are loving friends and brothers.
King Edgar was first by day and by night,
Did build him a Navy with all his might,
Of ships ten thousand great and small,
As writters report (with lye and all)
When pirats durst as well be hanged,
As appear on our coasts, they were so banged.
But oh.
The Dane, when the English ships they behold
Do tremble more for fear, then for cold,
And when they hear the English comes
They more do trust to their sails then their guns
And away they run to their Lapland witches
To buy them a wind to blow in their breeches,
But oh.
Upon the Mediteranian sea
The Italian triumphs, and who but they?
Until with their ships and Galleys the Turk,
With a vengeance makes the Italians work
But we make very Tattardemallians
Both of the Turk and of the Italians.
But oh.
With the French as oft as the English do fight,
They beat them soundly and give them their right,
And make them at first encounter be glad
To leap over board as if they were mad,
Poor Monsieur who had rather be drowned
Then against the English to stand his ground.
But oh.
Next come the Spaniard in eighty eight
And thinks to conquer all England strait,
But we taught them this proverb at their return
That they came for wool, and went home again shorn,
And since full oft at Cales Canaries
Have paid them soundly for all their figures
But oh.
Now heaven preserve our Navy long,
And make it every day more strong,
And above all, heaven grant that we
May amongst our selves but well agree,
And then a sig for the Spaniard and Dane,
The Italian, the Turk, and the Divel again and Though
The Hollander be the sturdyst of all
And all he meets doth beat and maul,
Yet we'll beat them as they beat others,
And still be loving friends and brothers.

Here all the Rabble vanishes at sight of Brittania and Oceanus appearing
Inthrond in state, c. and sound of delicate Music introducing the last Dance
of two gallantly clad, representing the Nobility and Gentry, who dance to a
Courtly measure. Two in civil black Representing the Burgess Citizen, who
dance a Galliard. And lastly, two Country swains in all their Country bravery,
dancing a Iigg, or Country dance. After which they pause, while this following
Song is sung by way of Epologue.

THe marriage of this Royal pair,
Aloud proclaimed every where,
Nobility, Gentry, Citizen, and
Honest Swain, or Countrie-man,
Every one in dance declare
How highly they contented are;
And having finished their Ball,
For conclusion of all,
There remains no more to do
But to 'declare that you're contented too.


