OF all men those have reason least to care
For being laughed at, who can laugh their share:
And that's a thing our Author's Apt to use
Upon occasion, when no man can choose.
Suppose now at this instant one of you
Were tickled by a Fool, what would you do?
'Tis ten to one you'd laugh, here's just the case,
For there are Fools that tickle with their Face.
Your gay Fool tickles with his Dress, and Motions,
But your grave Fool of Fools, with silly Notions.
Is it not then unjust that Fops should still
Force one to laugh, and then take laughing ill?
Yet since perhaps to some it gives offence,
That men are tickled at the want of Sense;
Our Author thinks he takes the readiest way
To show all he has laughed at here fair play.
For if ill writing be a folly thought,
Correcting ill is sure a greater fault.
Then Gallants laugh, but choose the right place first,
For judging ill is of all faults the worst.

WOuld we were removed from this Town ( Anthony)
That we might taste some quiet: for mine own part,
I'm almost melted with continual trotting
After Enquiries, Dreams, and Revelations,
Of who knows whom or where? serve wenching Soldiers,
I'll serve a Priest in Lent first, and eat Bell-ropes.

Thou art the froward'st Fool --

Why good tame Anthony?
Tell me but this; to what end came we hither?

To wait upon our Masters.

But how Anthony?
Answer me that; resolve me there good Anthony?

To serve their Uses.

Show your Uses Anthony.

To be employed in any thing.

No Anthony,
Not any thing I take it; nor that thing
We travel to discover, like new Islands;
A salt Itch serve such uses; in things of moment,
Concerning things I grant ye, not things errant,
Sweet Lady's things, and things to thank the Surgeon:
In no such things sweet Anthony; put case --

Come, come, all will be mended: this invisible Woman
Of infinite report for Shape and Beauty,
^hat bred us all this trouble to no purpose,
They are determined now no more to think on.

Were there ever
Men known to run mad with Report before?
Or wander after that they know not where
To find? or if found, how to enjoy? are men's brains
Made now adays of malt, that their affections
Are never sober? but like drunken people
Founder at every new fame? I do believe
That men in love are ever drunk, as drunken men
Are ever loving.

Prithee be thou sober,
And know that they are none of those, not guilty
Of the least vanity of love, only a doubt
Fame might too far report, or rather flatter
The Graces of this Woman, made them curious
To find the truth, which since they find so
Locked up from their Searches, they are now resolved
To give the wonder over.

Would they were resolved
To give me some new shoes too: for I'll be sworn
These are even worn out to the reasonable souls
In their good Worships business^ and some Sleep
Would not do much amiss, unless they mean
To make a Bell-man of me: here they come.

I would we could have seen her tho: for sure
She must be some rare Creature, or Report lies,
All men's reports too.

I could well wish I had seen Constantia;
But since she is so concealed, placed where
No knowledge can come near her; so guarded
As 'twere impossible, tho known, to reach her,
I have made up my belief.

Hang me from this hour,
If I more think upon her,
But as she came a strange Report unto me,
So the next Fame shall lose her.

'Tis the next way:
But whither are you walking^

My old round
After my meat and then to bed.

'Tis healthful.

Will not you stir?

I have a little business.

I'd lay my life this Lady still --

Then you would lose it.

Pray let's walk together.

Now I cannot.

I have something to impart.

An hour hence
I will not miss to meet ye.

Where?

In the high street;
For not to lye, I have a few devotions
To do first, then I am yours.

Remember.

Cut his wind-pipe, I say.

Fie Antonio.

Or knock his brains out first, and then forgive him.
If you do thrust, be sure it be to the hilts,
A Surgeon may see throw him.

You are too violent.

To open, indiscreet.

Am I not ruined?
The Honour of my House cracked? my Blood poisoned?
My Credit and my Name?

Be sure it be so,
Before ye use this violence. Let not Doubt
And a suspecting Anger so much sway ye,
Your wisdom may be questioned.

I say kill him,
And then dispute the cause; cut off what may be,
And what is, shall be safe^

Hang up a true man,
Because 'tis possible he may be thievish:
Alas, is this good Justice?

I know as certain
As Day must come again; as clear as Truth,
And open as Belief can lay it to me,
That I am basely wronged, wronged above recompense,
Maliciously abused, blasted for ever
In Name and Honour, lost to all remembrance,
But what is smeared and shameful; I must kill him,
Necessity compels me.

But think better.

There is no other Cure left: yet witness with me
All that is fair in man, all that is noble,
I am not greedy of this life I seek for,
Nor thirst to shed mans blood; and would 'twere possible,
I wish it with my soul, so much I tremble
To offend the sacred Image of my Maker,
My Sword could only kill his Crimes; no 'tis
Honour, Honour my noble Friends, that Idol Honour,
That all the World now worships, not Petruchio,
Must do this Justice.

Let it once be done,
And 'tis no matter, whether you or Honour,
Or both be accessory.

Do you weigh, Petruchio,
The value of the Person, power, and greatness,
And what this spark may kindle?

To perform it,
So much I am tied to Reputation^
And credit of my House, let it raise wild fires,
And storms that toss me into everlasting ruin,
Yet I must through; if ye dare side me.

Dare?

You're friends indeed, if not.

Here's none flies from you,
Do it in what design you please, we will back ye.

Is the cause so mortal, nothing but his life?

Believe me,
A loss Offence has been the Desolation
Of a whole Nam^.

No othe^ way to purge it?

There is, but never to be hoped for.

Think an Hour more,
And if then ye find no safer road to guide ye,
We will set up our Rests too.

Mine's up already,
And hang him for my part, goes less than life.

If we see noble Cause, 'tis like our Swords
May be as free and forward as your Words.

The civil order of this City Naples
Makes it beloved, and honoured of all Travellers,
As a most safe Retirement in all Troubles;
Beside the wholesome Seat and noble temper
Of those Minds that inhabit it, safely wise
And to all Strangers courteous: but I see
My Admiration has drawn night upon me,
And longer to expect my friend may pull me
Into suspicion of too late a stirrer,
Which all good Governments are jealous of.
I'll home, and think at liberty: yet certain,
'Tis not so far night, as I thought; for see,
A fair House yet stands open, yet all about it
Are close; and no lights stirring: there may be foul play
I'll venture to look in: If there be Knaves,
I may do a good Office.

Signior?

What? how is this?

Signior Fabritio?

I'll go nearer.

Fabritio?

This is a Woman's tongue, here may be good done.

Who's there? Fabritio?

I.

Where are you?

Here.

O come for Heavens sake!

I must see what this means.

I have stayed this long hour for you, make no noise,
For things are in strange trouble here, be secret,
'Tis worth your care; be gone now, more eyes watch us,
Than may be for our safeties.

Hark ye?

Peace: goodnight.

She's gone, and I am laden; fortune for me;
It weigh's well, and it feel's well; it may chance
To be some pack of worth: by the Mass 'tis heavy;
If it be Coin or Jewels, It is worth welcome:
I'll ne'er refuse a Fortune: I am confident
'Tis of no common price: now to my Lodging:
If it be right, I'll bless this night.

Tis strange,
I cannot meet him; sure he has encountered
Some light of love or other, and there means
To play at in and in for this night. Well Don Iohn,
If you do spring a leak, or get an itch,
Till you claw off your curled pate, thank your night walks:
You must be still a boot-haleing: one round more,
Tho it be late, I'll venture to discover ye,
I do not like your out-leaps.

Welcome to Town, are ye all fit?

To point Sir.

Where are the Horses?

Where they were appointed.

Be private, and whatsoever Fortune
Offer it self, let us stand sure.

Fear us not.
E're you shall be endangered or deluded,
We will make a black night on it.

No more, I know it,
You know your Quarters?

Will you go alone Sir?

Ye shall not be far from me, the least Noise
Shall bring ye to my Rescue.

We are counselled.

Was ever man so paid for being curious?
Ever so bobbed for searching out Adventures,
As I am? did the Devil lead me? must I needs be peeping
Into men's Houses where I had no business,
And make my self a mischief? 'tis well carried;
I must take other men's occasions on me,
And be I know not whom: most finely handled:
What have I got by this now? what's the purchase?
A piece of evening Arras work, a Child,
Indeed an Infidel: this comes of peeping:
A lump got out of laziness; good white bread,
Let's have no bawling with ye: 's death, have I
Known Wenches thus long, all the ways of Wenches,
Their Snares and Subtilties? have I read over
All their School-learning, dived into their Quiddits
And am I now bumfidled with a Bastard?
Fetched over with a card of five, and in my old days,
After the dire Massacre of a Million
Of maidenheads? caught the common way, in the night too
Under another name, to make the matter
Carry more weight about it? well Don Iohn,
You will be wiser one day, when ye've purchased
A Heavy of those Butter-prints together,
With searching out concealed Iniquities,
Without commission: why, it would never grieve me,
If I had got this Ginger-bread: never stirred me,
So I had a stroke for it: 't had been justice,
Then to have kept it; but to raise a Dayry
For other men's Adulteries, consume my self in Candles,
And scouring work, in Nurses, Bells, and Babies,
Only for Charity, ^or Mere I thank you,
A little troubles me: the least Touch for it,
Had but my Breeches got it, had contented me.
Whose ever it is, sure 't had a wealthy Mother
For 'tis well clothed, and if I be not cozened,
Well lined within: to leave it here were barbarous,
And ten to one would kill it: a worse sin
Than his that got it: well, I will dispose on it,
And keep it, as they keep deaths Heads in rings,
To cry Memento to me; no more Peeping:
Now all the danger is, to qualify
The good old Gentlewoman, at whose House we live,
For she will fall upon me with a Catechism
Of four hours long: I must endure all;
For I will know this mother: come good wonder,
Let you and I be jogging: your starved treble
Will waken the rude Watch else: all that be
Curious night walkers, may they find my fee.

Sure he's gone home:
I have beaten all the Purlews,
But cannot bolt him: if he be a bobbing
'Tis not my care can cure him to morrow morning
I shall have further knowledge from a Surgeon --
Where he lies moor'd to mend his Laks.

I am ready,
And through a world of dangers am flown to ye,
Be full of hast and care, we are undone else:
Where are your people: which way must we travel?
For Heavens sake stay not here Sir.

What may this prove?

Alas, I am mistaken, lost, undone,
For ever perished, Sir for Heavens sake tell me,
Are ye a Gentleman?

I am.

Of this place?

No, born in Spain.

As ever you loved honour,
As ever your desires may gain their ends,
Do a poor wretched Woman but this Benefit,
For I am forced to trust ye.

You've charmed me,
Humanity and Honour bids me help ye;
And if I fail your trust --

The time's too dangerous
To stay your protestations: I believe ye,
Alas, I must believe ye: From this place,
Good noble Sir, remove me instantly.
And for a time, where nothing but your self,
And honest Conversation may come near me,
In some secure place settle me. What I am,
And why thus boldly I commit my credit
^nto a Stranger's hand, the fears and dangers,
That force me to this wild course, at more leisure
I shall reveal unto you.

Come be hearty,
He must strike through my life that takes
You from me.

He will sure come. Are ye all well armed?

Never fear us.
Here's that will make 'em dance without a fiddle.

We are to look for no weak Foes, my Friends,
Nor unadvised ones.

Best Gamesters make the best Play,
We shall fight close and home then.

Antonio,
You are a thought too bloody.

Why? all Physicians
And penny Almanacs allow the opening
Of Veins this Month: Why do ye talk of bloody?
What come we for, to fall to cuffs for apples?
What would you make the Cause a Cudgel-Quarrel?

Speak softly, gentle Cousin.

I will speak truly^
What should men do allied to these Disgraces,
Lick over his Enemy, sit down, and dance him?

You are as far of the Bow Hand now.

And try,
That's my fine Boy, thou wilt do so no more Child.

Here are no such cold pities.

By St. Iaques,
They shall not find me one: Here's old tough Andrew,
A special Friend of mine, and he but hold,
I'll strike 'em such a Horn-pipe: knocks I come for,
And the best blood I light on; I profess it,
Not to scare Costermongers; if I lose my own,
My audit's lost, and farewell five and fifty.

Let's talk no longer, place your selves with silence,
As I directed ye; and when time calls us,
As ye are Friends, so show your selves.

So be it.

Nay Son if this be your regard.

Good Mother.

Good me no goods, your Cousin and your self
Are welcome to me, whilst you bear your selves
Like honest and true Gentlemen: Bring hither
To my House, that have ever been reputed
A Gentlewoman of a decent and a fair Carriage,
And so behaved my self?

I know you have.

Bring hither, as I say, to make my Name
Stink in my Neighbours Nostrils? Your devices,
Your Brats got out of Elegant and broken Oaths?
Your Linsey-wolsey work, your Hasty-Puddings?
I foster up your filtch'd Iniquities?
Y' are deceived in me, Sir, I am none
Of those receivers.

Have I not sworn unto you,
'Tis none of mine, and showed you how I found it?

Ye found an easy fool that let you get it.

Will you hear me?

Oaths? What care you for Oaths to gain your ends.
When ye are high and pampered? What Saint know ye?
Or what Religion, but your purposed lewdness,
Is to be looked for of ye? nay, I will tell ye,
You will then swear like accused Cut-purses,
As far off truth too; and lye beyond all Falconers:
I'm sick to see this dealing.

Heaven forbid, Mother.

Nay, I am very sick.

Who waits there?

Sir? (Within.)

Bring down the Bottle of Canary Wine.

Exceeding sick, Heaven help me.

Haste ye sirrah,
I must even make her drunk; nay gentle Mother.

Now ^ie upon ye, was it for this purpose
You fetched your Evening walks for your Devotions,
For this pretended holiness? no weather
Not before day could hold ye from the Matins.
Were these your bo-peep Prayers? you've prayed well,
And with a learned Zeal watched well too; your Saint
It seems was pleased as well: Still sicker, sicker.

There is no talking to her till I have drenched her.
Give me: Here Mother, take a good round draught,
'Twill purge Spleen from your Spirits: deeper Mother.

I, I, Son; you imagine this will mend all.

All, I faith Mother.

I confess the Wine
Will do his part.

I'll pledge ye.

But Son Iohn.

I know your meaning Mother; touch it once more.
Alas you look not well, take a round draught,
It warms the blood well, and restores the colour,
And then we'll talk at large.

A civil Gentleman?
A stranger? one the Town holds a good regard of?

Nay I will silence thee there.

One that should weigh his fair name? oh a Stitch!

There's nothing better for a stitch, good Mother,
Make no spare of it as you love your health;
Mince not the matter.

As I said a Gentleman,
Lodge in my House? now Heaven's my comfort Signior!

I looked for this.

I did not think you would have used me thus^
A woman of my credit: one, heaven knows,
That loves you but too tenderly.

Dear Mother,
I ever found your kindness and acknowledge it.

No, no, I am a fool to counsel ye. Where's the Infant?
Come, let's see your workmanship.

None of mine Mother;
But there 'tis, and a lusty one.

Heaven bless thee,
Thou had a hasty making; but the best is,
'Tis many a good man's fortune; as I live,
Your own eyes Signior; and the nether Lip
As like ye, as ye had spit it.

I am glad on it.

Bless me, what things are these?

I thought my labour
Was not all lost, 'tis Gold, and these are Jewels,
Both rich, and right I hope.

Well, well, Son Iohn,
I see y^'re a Wood man, and can choose
Yoar Deer, though it be in the dark, all your discretion
Is not yet lost; this was well clapped aboard:
Here I am with ye now, when as they say
Your pleasure comes with pro^it; when you must needs do,
Do where you may be done to, 'tis a wisdom
Becomes a young man well: be sure of one thing,
Lose not your Labour and your time together,
It seasons of a Fool, Son, time is precious,
Work wary whilst you have it: since you must traffic
Sometimes this slippery way, take sure hold Signior,
Trade with no broken Merchants, make your Lading,
As you would make your rest, adventurously,
But with advantage ever.

All this time, Mother,
The Child wants looking to, wants meat and Nurses

Now blessing of thy heart; it shall have all,
And instantly; I'll seek a Nurse my self, Son,
'Tis a sweet Child: ah my young Spaniard,
Take you no further care Sir.

Yes of these Jewels,
I must by your good leave Mother: these are yours,
To make your care the stronger: for the rest
I'll find a Master; the gold for bringing up on it
I freely render to your charge.

No more words,
Nor no more Children, (good Son) as you love me.
This may do well.

I shall observe your Morals,
But where's Don Fredrick (Mother?)

Ten to o^e
About the like adventure: he told me
He was to find you out.

Why should he stay thus?
There may be some ill chance in it: Sleep I will not,
Before I have found him: now this Woman's pleased,
I'll seek my Friend out, and my care is eased.

Believe Sir, 'tis as possible to do it,
As to remove the City; the main Faction,
Swarm through the Streets like Hornets, and with angers
Able to ruin States, no safety left us,
Nor means to die like men, if instantly
You draw not back again.

May he be drawn,
And quartered too, that turn^ now, were I surer
Of death than thou art of thy fears, and with deaths
More than those fears are too!

Sir, I fear not.

I would not break my vow, start from my honour,
Because I may find danger; wound my Soul,
To keep my body safe.

I speak not Sir^
Out of a baseness to ye.

No, nor do not
Out of a baseness leave me: what is danger
More than the weakness of our apprehensions?
A poor cold part of the Blood? who takes it hold of?
Cowards and wicked livers: valiant minds
Were made the Masters of it, and as hearty Sea-men
In desperate storms, stem with a little Rudder
The tumbling ruins of the Ocean.
So with their cause and Swords do they do dangers.
Say we were sure to die all in this venture,
As I am confident against it: is there any
Amongst us of so fat a sense, so pampered
Woul^ chose luxuriously to lie abed,
And purge away his Spirit, send his Soul out
In Sugar-sops, and Syrops? give me dying,
As dying ought to be, upon mine enemy,
Parting with mankind, by a man that's manly:
Let 'em be all the world; and bring along
Cain's Envy with 'em, I will on.

You may Sir,
But with what safety?

Since 'tis come to dying,
You shall perceive, Sir, that here be those amongst us
Can die as decently as other men,
And with as little Ceremony: On brave Sir.

That's spoken heartily.

And he that flinches
May he die louzy in a ditch.

No more dying,
There's no such danger in it:
What's a clock?

Somewhat above your hour.

Away then quickly,
Make no noise, and no trouble w^ll attend us.

Give me the Candle: So, go you out that way.

What have we now to do?

And of your life sirrah,
Let none come near the door without my knowledge,
No not my Landlady nor my Friend.

'Tis done Sir.

Nor any serious business that concerns me.

Is the wind there again?

Be gone.

I am Sir:

Now enter without fear --
And noble Lady
That safety and civility ye wished for
Shall truly here attend you: no rude tongue
Nor rough behaviour knows this place, no wishes
Beyond the moderation of a man,
Dare enter here: your own desires and innocence,
Joined to my vowed obedience, shall protect ye.

Ye are truly noble,
And worth a woman's trust: let it become me,
(I do beseech you Sir) for all your kindness,
To render with my thanks this worthless trifle;
I may be longer troublesome.

Fair Offices
Are still their own rewards: Heaven bless me Lady
From selling civil courtesies: may it please ye
If ye will force a favour to oblige me,
Draw but that Cloud aside, to satisfy me
For what good Angel I am engaged.

It shall be.
For I am truly confident ye are honest:
The piece is scarce worth looking on.

Trust me,
The abstract of all beauty, soul of sweetness,
Defend me honest thoughts, I shall grow wild else.
What eyes are there, rather what little Heavens,
To stir men's contemplations? what a Paradise
Runs through each part she has? Good Blood be temperate:
I must look off: too excellent an object
Confounds the Sense that sees it. Noble Lady,
If there be any further service to cast on me,
Let it be worth my life, so much I honour ye,
Or the engagement of whole Families.

Your service is too liberal, worthy Sir,
Thus far I shall entreat.

Command me Lady.
You make your power too poor.

That presently
With all convenient hast you would retire
Unto the Street you found me in.

'Tis done.

There if you find a Gentleman oppressed
With force and violence, do a mans office,
And draw your Sword to rescue him.

He's safe.
Be what he will, and let his Foes be Devils,
Armed with your beauty, I shall conjure 'em.
Retire, this Key will guide ye: all things necessary
Are there before ye.

All my prayers go with ye,

Ye clap on proof upon me: men say Gold
Does all, engages all, works through all dangers:
Now I say beauty can do more: The King's Exchequer,
Nor all his wealthy Indies, could not draw me
Through half those miseries this piece of pleasure
Might make me leap into: we are all like Sea-Cards,
All our endeavours and our motions,
(As they do to the North) still point at beauty,
Still at the fairest: for a handsome Woman,
(Setting my soul aside) it should go hard,
But I would strain my body: yet to her,
Unless it be her own free gratitude,
Hopes ye shall dye, and thou tongue rot within me,
E're I infringe my faith: now to my rescue.

YOu will not all oppress me?

Kill him in the wanton eye: Let me come to him.

Then you shall buy me dearly.

Say you so Sir?

I say cut his Wezand, spoil his peeping:
Have at your love-sick heart Sir.

Sure 'tis fighting.
My Friend may be engaged: Fie Gentlemen,
This is unmanly odds.

I'll stop your mouth Sir.

Nay then have at thee freely:
There's a Plumb Sir to satisfy your longing.

Away: I hope I have sped him: here comes rescue^
We shall be endangered: where's Antonio?

I must have one thrust more Sir.

Come up to me.

A mischief confound your fingers.

How is it?

Well:
'Has given me my Quietus est; I felt him
In my small guts, I'm sure 'has feez'd me:
This comes of siding with you.

Can you go Sir?

I should go man, and my head were off,
Never talk of going.

Come, all shall be well then,
I hear more rescue coming.

Let's turn back then;
My scull's uncloven yet, let me but kill.

Away for heaven's sake with him.

How is it?

Well, Sir,
Only a little staggered.

Fact. Let's pursue 'em.

No not a man I charge ye: thank's good Coat,
Thou hast saved me a shrewd welcome: 'twas put home too,
With a good mind I'm sure on it.

Are you safe then?

My thanks to you brave Sir, whose timely valour,
And manly courtesy came to my rescue.

Ye had foul play offered ye, and shame befall him
That can pass by oppression.

May I crave Sir,
But thus much honour more, to know your name?
And him I am so bound to?

For the Bond Sir,
'Tis every good man's tie: to know me further
Will little profit ye; I am a stranger,
My Country Spain, my name Don Iohn, a Gentleman
That came abroad to travel.

I have heard Sir,
Much worthy mention of ye, yet I find
Fame short of what ye are.

You are pleased Sir,
To express your Courtesy: may I demand
As ^reely what you are, and what mischance
Cast you into this danger?

For this present
I must desire your pardon: you shall know me
E^re it be long Sir, and a nobler thanks,
Than now my Will can render.

Your Wil^'s your own Sir.

What is't you look for Sir, have you lost any thing^

Only my hat in the Scuffle; sure these fellows
Were night-snaps.

No, believe, Sir: pray use mine,
For 'twill be hard to find your own now.

No Sir.

Indeed ye shall, I can command another:
I do beseech you honour me.

Well Sir then I will,
And so I'll take my leave.

Within these few days
I hope I shall be happy in your knowledge.
Till when I love your memory.

I yours.
This is some noble fellow.

'Tis his Tongue sure.
Don Iohn?

Don Frederick?

You're fairly met Sir?
I thought ye had been a Bat-fowling: prithee tell me,
What Revelations hast thou had to night,
That home was never thought of?

Revelations?
I'll tell thee Frederick. But before I tell thee,
Settle thy understanding.

'Tis prepared Sir.

Why then mark what shall follow. This night Frederick,
This bawdy night.

I thought no less.

This blind night,
What dost thou think I have got?

The Pox it may be.

Would 'twere no worse: ye talk of Revelations,
I have got a Revelation will reveal me
An errant Coxcomb whilst I live.

What is't?
Thou hast lost nothing?

No, I have got I tell thee.

What hast thou got?

One of the Infantry, a Child.

How?

A chopping Child, man.

Give you joy Sir.

A lump of lewdness Frederick that's the truth on it:
This Town's abominable.

I still told ye Iohn
Your whoring must come home; I councilled ye:
But where no grace is --

'Tis none of mine, man.

Answer the Parish so.

Cheated in truth.
Peeping into a house, by whom I know not,
Nor where to find the place again: no Frederick
'Tis no poor one,
That's my best comfort, for 't has brought about it
Enough to make it man.

Where is't?

At home.

A saving Voyage: But what will you say Signior,
To him that searching out your serious worship,
Has met a stranger fortune?

How good Frederick?
A militant Girl to this Boy would hit it.

No mine's a nobler venture: what do you think Sir
Of a distressed Lady, one whose beauty
Would over-sell all Italy?

Where is she --

A Woman of that rare behaviour,
So qualified, as Admiration
Dwells round about her: of that perfect Spirit --

I marry Sir.

That admirable Carriage,
That sweetness in discourse; young as the Morning,
Her blushes staining his.

But where's this Creature?
Show me but that.

That's all one she's forth-coming,
I have her sure Boy.

Hark ye Frederick,
What truck betwixt my infant?

'Tis too light Sir,
Stick to your charge good Don Iohn, I am well.

But is there such a Wench?

First tell me this,
Did you not lately as you walked along,
Discover People that were armed and likely
To do offence?

Yes marry, and they urged it
As far as they had spirit.

Pray go forward.

A Gentleman I found engaged amongst 'em,
It seems of noble breeding, I'm sure brave mettle,
As I returned to look you I set in to him,
And without hurt (I thank Heaven) rescued him,

My work's done then:
And now to satisfy you there is a Woman,
Oh Iohn, there is a Woman --

Oh where is she?

And one of no less worth than I told ye;
And which is more, fallen under my protection.

I am glad of that; forward sweet Frederick.

And which is more than that, by this nights wandering,
And which is most of all, she is at home too Sir.

Come let's be gone then.

Yes, but 'tis most certain,
You cannot see her Iohn.

Why?

She has sworn me,
That none else shall come near her: not my Mother
Till some doubts are cleared.

Not look upon her? what Chamber is she in?

In ours.

Let's go I say^
A Woman's Oaths are wafers, break with making,
They must for modesty a little: we all know it.

No I'll assure ye Sir.

Not see her?
I smell an old dog trick of yours, well Frederick,
Ye talked to me of whoring, let's have fair play,
Square dealing I would wish ye.

When 'tis come
(Which I know never will be) to that issue,
Your Spoon shall be as deep as mine Sir.

Tell me,
And tell me true, is the cause honourable?
Or for your ease?

By all our friendship, Iohn,
'Tis honest and of great end.
I am answered:
But let me see her though: leave the door open
As you go in.

I dare not.

Not wide open,
But just so, as a jealous Husband
Would level at his wanton Wife through.

That courtesy,
If ye desire no more, and keep it strictly,
I dare afford ye: come, 'tis now near Morning.

Nay, the old Woman's gone too.

She's a Caterwauling
Amongst the Gutters; but conceive me, Peter,
Where our good Masters should be?

Where they should be,
I do conceive, but where they are, good Anthony --

I, there it goes: my Master's bo-peep with me,
With his sly popping in and out again,
Argued a Cause.
Hark.

What?

Dost not hear a Lute?
Again?

Where is't?

Above, in my Master's Chamber.

There's no Creature: he hath the key himself man.

This is his Lute: let him have it.

I grant ye; but who strikes it?

An admirable Voice too, hark ye.

Anthony,
Art sure we are at home?

Without all doubt Peter.

Then this must be the Devil.

Let it be.
Good Devil sing again: O dainty Devil,
Peter, believe it, a most delicate Devil,
The sweetest Devil --

If you would leave peeping.

I cannot by no means.

Then come in softly,
And as you love your Faith, presume no further
Than ye have promised.

Basco.

What make you up so early Sir?

You Sir, in your Contemplations.

O pray ye peace Sir.

Why peace Sir?

Do ye hear?

'Tis your Lute. She's playing on it.

The House is haunted Sir,
For this we have heard this half year.

Ye saw nothing?

Not I.

Nor I Sir.

Get you our Breakfast then,
And make no words on it; we'll undertake this Spirit,
If it be one.

This is no Devil Peter.
Mum, there be Bats abroad.

Stay, now she sings.

An Angels Voice I'll swear.

Why did thou sh^g so?
Either allay this heat; or as I live
I will not tr^st ye.

Pass: I warrant ye.

To curse those Stars that men say govern us,
To rail at Fortune, to fall out with my Fate,
And tax the general World, will help me nothing:
Alas, I am the same still, neither are they
Subject to helps, or hurts; our own desires
Are our own Fates, and our own Stars, all our Fortunes,
Which as we sway 'em, so abuse or bless us.

Peace to your Meditations

Pox upon ye.
Stand out of the Light.

I crave your mercy Sir;
My mind o'r charged with care made me unmannerly.

Pray ye set that mind at rest, all shall be perfect.

I like the Body rare; a handsome Body,
A wondrous handsome Body; would she would turn:
See, and that spiteful puppy be not got
Between me and my light again.

'Tis done,
As all that you command shall be: the Gentleman
Is safely off all danger.

Rare Creature!

How shall I thank ye Sir? how satisfy?

Speak softly gentle Lady, all's rewarded,
Now does he melt like Marmalad.

Nay, 'tis certain,
Thou art the sweetest Woman that eyes ever looked on.

None disturbed ye?

Not any Sir, nor any sound came near me,
I thank your care.

'Tis well.

I would fain pray now,
But the Devil, and that Flesh there, of the World,
What are we made to suffer?

He'll enter;
Pull in your head and be hanged.

Hark ye Frederick,
I have brought you home your Pack-Saddle.

Pox upon ye.

Nay, let him enter: fie my Lord the Duke,
Stand peeping at your Friends.

Ye are cozened Lady,
Here is no Duke.

I know him full well Signior.

Hold thee there Wench.

This mad-brain'd fool will spoil all.

I do beseech your Grace come in.

My Grace,
There was a Word of Comfort.

Shall he enter,
Who ever he be?

Well follow'd Frederick.

With all my heart.

Come in then.

Bless ye Lady.

Nay, start not, though he be a Stranger to ye.
He's of a Noble strain, my Kinsman, Lady,
My Country man, and Fellow-Traveller,
One bed contains us ever, one purse feeds us,
And one Faith free between us; do not fear him,
He's truly honest.

That's a lie.

And trusty:
Beyond your wishes: valiant to defend,
And modest to converse with, as your blushes.

Now may I hang my self; this commendation
Has broke the neck of all my Hopes; for now
Must I cry, no forsooth, and I forsooth, and surely,
And truly as I live, and as I am honest
'Has done these things for nonce too; for he knows,
Like a most envious Rascal as he is,
I am not honest,
This way: he has watched his time,
But I shall quit him.

Sir, I credit ye.

Go, salute her Iohn.

Plague of your Commendations.

Sir, I shall now desire to be a trouble.

Never to me, sweet Lady; thus I seal
My Faith, and all my Service.

One word Signior.

Now 'tis impossible I should be honest.
What points she at? my Leg I warrant, or
My well-knit Body: sit fast Don Frederick.

'Twas given him by that Gentleman
You took such care of; his own being lost in the Scuffle.

With much joy may he wear it: 'tis a right one
I can assure ye Gentlemen; and right happy
May he be in all fights for that Noble Service.

Why do ye blush?

'T had almost cozened me,
For not to lye, when I saw that, I looked for
Another owner of it; but 'tis well.

Who's there?
Stand ye a little close: come in Sir.
Now what's the News with you?

There is a Gentleman without,
Would speak with Don Iohn.

Who Sir?

I do not know Sir, but he shows a man
Of no mean reckoning.

Let him show his Name,
And then return a little wiser.

How do you like her Iohn?

As well as you Frederick,
For all I am honest; you shall find it too.

Art thou not honest?

Art thou an Ass?
And modest as her blushes? What a blockhead
Would ever have popped out such a dry Apology,
For his dear Friend? and to a Gentlewoman,
A Woman of her Youth, and Delicacy,
They are Arguments to draw them to abhor us.
An honest moral man; 'tis for a Constable:
A handsome man, a wholesome man, a tough man,
A liberal man, a likely man, a man
Made up like Hercules, unslack'd with Service:
The same to night, to morrow night, the next night,
And so to perpetuity of pleasures,
These had been things to hearken to, things catching;
But you have such a spiced consideration,
Such Qualms upon your Worship's Conscience,
Such Chil^lains in your blood, that all things prick ye,
Which Nature, and the liberal World makes Custom,
And nothing but fair Honour, O sweet Honour,
Hang up your Eunuch Honour: That I was trusty,
And valiant, were things well put in; but modest!
A modest Gentleman! O wit where wast thou?

I am sorry Iohn.

My Lady's Gentlewoman
Would laugh me to a School-boy, make me blush
With playing with my Cod-piece-point: ^ie on thee,
A man of thy discretion.

It shall be mended;
And henceforth ye shall have your due.

I look for it: how now, who is't?

A Gentleman of this City,
And calls himself Petruchio.

I'll attend him.

How did he call himself?

Petruchio,
Does it concern ye ought?

O Gentlemen,
The hour of my destruction is come on me,
I am discovered, lost, left to my ruin:
As ever ye hay pity --

Do not fear,
Let the great Devil come, he shall come through me: first
Lost here, and we about ye?

Fall before us?

O my unfortunate estate, all angers
Compared to his, to his --

Let his, and all men's,
Whilst we have power and life, stand up for Heavens s^ke^

I have offended Heaven too; yet Heaven knows --

We are all evil:
Yet Heaven forbid we should have our deserts.
What is a?

Too too near to my offence Sir:
O he will cut me piece-meal^

'Tis no Treason?

Let it be what it will: if a cut here,
I'll find him cut-work.

He must buy you dear,
With more than common lives.

Fear nor, not weep not:
By Heaven I'll fire the Town before ye perish,
And then the more the merrier, we'll jog with ye.

Come in, and dry your eyes.

Pray no more weeping:
Spoil a sweet Face for nothing? my return
Shall end all this I warrant ye.

Heaven grant it may.

This man should be of Quality and worth
By Don Alvaras Letter, for he gives
No slight recommendations of him:
I'll even make use of him.

Save ye Sir: I am sorry
My business was so unmannerly, to make ye
Wait thus long here.

Occasions must be served Sir:
But is your name Don Iohn?

It is Sir:

Then,
First for your own brave sake I must embrace ye:
Next, for the credit of your noble Friend
Hernanda de Alvara, make ye mine:
Who lays his charge upon me in this Letter
To look ye out, and
Whilst your occasions make you resident
In this place, to supply ye, love and honour ye;
Which had I known sooner --

Noble Sir,
You'll make my thanks too poor: I wear a Sword Sir,
And have a Service to be still disposed of
As you shall please command it.

That manly courtesy is half my business: Sir,
And to be short, to make ye know I honour ye,
And in all points believe your worth like Oracle,
This day Petruchio,
A man that may command the strength of this place,
Hazard the boldest Spirits, hath made choice
Only of you, and in a noble Office.

Forward, I am free to entertain it.

Thus then:
I do beseech ye mark me.

I shall Sir.

Ferrara's Duke, would I might call him worthy,
But that he has razed out from his Family,
As he has mine with Infamy, This man,
Rather this powerful Monster, we being left
But two of all our House, to stock our Memoires,
My Sister Constantia and my self; with Arts and Witchcrafts,
Vows, and such Oaths Heaven has no mercy for,
Drew to dishonour this weak Maid, by stealth,
And secret passages I knew not of,
Oft he obtained his wishes, oft abused her,
I am ashamed to say the rest: This purchased,
And his hot blood allayed, he left her,
And all our Name to ruin.

This was foul play,
And ought to be rewarded so.

I hope so;
He escaped me yesternight:
Which if he dare again adventure for --

Pray Sir what Commands have you to lay on me?

Only thus; by word of mouth to carry him
A Challenge from me^ that so (if he have honour in him)
We may decide all difference between us.

Fair, and noble,
And I will do it home: when shall I visit ^e?

Please you this afternoon. I will ^de with ye;
For at a Castle six mile hence, we are sure
To find him.

I'll be ready.

My man shall
Wait here, to conduct ye to my House.

I shall not fail ye Sir.

How now?


All's well, and better than thou could expect, for this Wench here is
certainly no Maid; and I have hopes she is the same that our two curious
Coxcombs have been so long a hunting after.


Why do ye hope so?


Why? because first she is no Maid, and next because she's handsome; there are
two Reasons for you: now do you find out a third, a better if you can: For take
this Frederick, for a certain Rule, since she loves the sport, she'll never
give it over. And therefore (if we have good luck) in time may fall to our
shares.


Very pretty Reasons indeed. But I thought you had known some particular that
made you conclude this to be the Woman.


Yes, I know her name is Constantia.


That now is something; but I cannot believe her dishonest for all this: she
has not one loose thought about her.


It's no matter, she's loose in the hilts by Heaven. There has been stirring,
fumbling with Linen, Frederick.


There may be such a ^lip


And will be Frederick, whilst the old Game's afoot. I fear the Boy too will
prove hers I took up.


Good circumstance may cure all this yet.


There thou hit'st it Frederick, come let's walk in, and comfort her; that she
is here is nothing yet suspected. Anon I shall tell thee why her Brother came,
(who by this light is a noble Fellow) and what honour he has done to me, a
Stranger, in calling me to serve him. There be ^rons heating for some on my
word Frederick.


COme Sir, who is it keeps your Master Company?

I say to you, Don Iohn.

I say what woman?

I say so too.

I say again I will know.

I say 'tis fit you should.

And I tell thee he has a Woman here.

I tell thee 'tis then the better for him.

Was ever Gentlewoman
So frumpt off with a Fool? well saucy Sirrah,
I will know who it is, and to what purpose;
I pay the Rent, and I will know how my House
Comes by these inflammations: if this geer hold,
Best hang a sign-post up, to tell the Signior's,
Here ye may have lewdness at livery.

'T would be a great ease to your age.

How Now?
Why what's the matter Landlady?

What's the matter?
Ye use me decently among ye, Gentlemen.

Who has abused her, you Sir?

Od's my witness
I will not be thus treated, that I will not.

I gave her no ill Language.

Thou lie lewdly.
Thou took me up at every word I spoke,
As I had been a Mawkin, a ^irt Gillian;
And thou think, because thou can write and read,
Our Noses must be under thee.

Dare you Sirrah?

Let but the Truth be known Sir, I beseech ye,
She ra^es of Wenches, and I know not what Sir.

Go to, thou know too well, thou wicked Varlet,
Thou Instrument of evil.

As I live Sir, she's ever thus till Dinner.

Get ye in, I'll answer you anon Sir.
Now your grief, what is't? For I can guess --

Ye may, with shame enough,
If there were shame amongst ye; nothing thought on,
But how ye may abuse my house: not satisfied
With bringing home your Bastards to undo me,
But you must drill your Whores here too; my patience
Because I bear, and bear, and carry all,
And as they say (am willing to groan under)
Must be your make-sport now.

No more of these words,
Nor no more murmurings Lady; for you know
That I know something. I did suspect your anger,
But turn it presently and handsomely,
And bear your self discreetly to this Woman,
For such a one there is indeed.

'Tis well Son.

Leave off your Devil's Matins, and your Melancholies,
Or we shall leave our Lodgings.

You have m^ch need
To use these vagrant ways, and to much profit:
Ye had that might content
(At home within your selves too) right good Gentlemen,
Wholesome, and ye said handsome. But you Gallants,
Beast that I was to believe ye --

Leave your suspicion:
For as I live there's no such thing.

Mine honour;
And 'tw^re not for mine honour.

Come, your honour,
Your house, and you too, if you dare believe me,
Are well enough: Sleek up your self, leave crying,
For I must have ye entertain this Lady
With all civility, she well deserves it
Together with all service: I dare trust ye,
For I have found ye faithful: when you know her
You will find your own fault; no more words, but do it.

You know you may command me.

Worshipful Lady,
How does thy Velvet Scabbard? by this hand
Thou look most amiably: now could I willingly
(And 'twere not for abusing thy Geneva print there,)
Venture my Body with thee. --

You'll leave this ropery^
When ye come to my years.

By this light,
Thou art not above fifteen yet, a mere Girl,
Thou hast not half thy teeth --

Prithee Iohn
Let her alone, she has been vexed already:
She'll grow stark mad, man.

I would fain see her mad,
An old mad Woman --

Prithee be patient.

Is like a Millers Mare troubled wi'th' Tooth ache.
She makes the rarest faces.

Go, and do it,
And do not mind this fellow.

What, again!
Nay, then it is decreed: though hills were set on hills,
And Seas met Seas, to guard thee, I would through.

Od's my witness, if ye ruffle me, I'll spoil your sweet face for you, that I
will. Go, go to the door there's a Gentleman there would speak with ye.


Upon my life Petruchio; good dear Landlady carry him into the dining-Room, and
I'll wait upon him presently.


Well Don Iohn, the time will come that
I shall be even with you.

I must be gone: yet if my project hold,
You shall not stay behind: I'll rather trust
A Cat with sweet milk Frederick; by her face.
I feel her fears are working.

Is there no way,
I do beseech ye think yet, to divert
This certain danger.

'Tis impossible:
Their Honours are engaged.

Then there must be murder,
Which Gentlemen, I shall no sooner hear of,
Then make one in it: you may, if you please Sir,
Make all go less.

Lady, were it mine own cause,
I could dispense: but laden with my Friends trust,
I must go on though general Massacrees
As much I fear --

Do ye hear Sir; for Heavens sake
Let me request one favour of you.

Yes any thing.

This Gentleman I find is too resolute,
Too hot, and fiery for the cause, as ever
You did a virtuous deed, for honor's sake
Go with him and allay him, your fair temper
And noble disposition, like wished showers,
May quench those eating fires, that would spoil all else^
I see in him destruction.
I will do it.

And 'tis a wise consideration,
To me a bounteous favour: Hark ye Iohn,
I will go with ye.

No.

Indeed I will,
Ye go upon a hazard; no denial;
For as I live I'll go:

Then make ye ready,
For I am strait a Horse-back.

My Sword on, and
I am as ready as you^ what my blessed Labour,
With all the art I have can work upon 'em,
Be sure of, and expect fair end: the old Gentlewoman
Shall wait upon ye, she is discreet and secret,
Ye may trust her in all points.

Ye are noble;
And so I take my leave.

I hope Lady, a happy issue for all this^

All Heavens care upon ye, and my prayers.

So,
Now my mind's at rest.

Away, 'tis late Iohn.

What Symptoms do ye find in him?


None, Sir, dangerous, if he'd be ruled.


Why! what does he do?


Nothing that he should. First, he will let no Liquor down but Wine, and then
he has a fancy that he must be dressed always to the Tune of Iohn Dory.


How? to the Tune of Iohn Dory?


Why? he will have Fiddlers, and make them play and sing it to him all the
while.


An odd fancy indeed.


Give me some Wine.


I told you so. -- 'Tis Death Sir.


'Tis a Horse Sir. Dost think I shall recover with the help o^ Barley water
only?


Fie, Antonio, you must be governed.


Why Sir? he feeds me with nothing but rotten Roots, and drowned Chickens,
stewed Pericraniums and Pi^-maters, and when I go to bed, (by Heaven 'tis true
Sir) he rolls me up in lints with Labels at 'em, that I am just the man in the
Almanac, my head and face is Aries place.


Will it please ye to let your Friends see you opened?


Will it please you, Sir, to give me a brimmer? I feel my body open enough for
that. Give it me, or I'll die upon thy hand, and spoil thy custom.


How, a brimmer?


Why look ye Sir, thus I am used still^ I can get nothing that I want. In how
long time can thou cure me?


In forty days.


I'll have a Dog shall lick me whole in twenty.
In how long can thou kill me?

Presently.


Do it that's the shorter, and there's more delight in it.


You must have patience.


Man I must have business; this foolish Fellow hinders himself; I have a dozen
Rascals to hurt within these five days. Good Man-mender stop me up with Parsley
like stuffed Beef, and let me walk abroad.


Ye shall walk shortly.


I will walk presently Sir, and leave your Salads there, your green Salves and
your Oils, I'll to my old diet again, strong Food, and rich Wine, and try what
that will do.


Well, go thy ways, thou art the maddest old fellow I ever yet met with.


I have told ye all I can, and more than yet
Those Gentlemen know of me; but are they
Such strange Creatures say you?

There's the younger,
Don Iohn, the errant'st Jack in all this City:
The other, time has blasted, yet he will stoop,
If not o'rflown, and freely on the Quarry;
He has been a Dragon in his days But Tarmont,
Don Ienkin is the Devil himself, the dog-days,
The most incomprehensible Whoremaster,
Twenty a night is nothing; the truth is,
Whose chastity he chops upon, he cares not.
He flies at all; Bastards upon my conscience,
He has now in making multitudes: The last night
He brought home one; I pity her that bore it,
But we are all weak Vessels, some rich Woman
(For wise I dare not call her) was the Mother,
For it was hung with Jewels; the bearing cloth
No less than Crimson Velvet.

How?

'Tis true Lady.

Was it a Boy too?

A brave Boy; deliberation
And judgment showed in's getting, as I'll say for him,
He's as well paced for that sport --

May I see it?
For there is a Neighbour of mine, a Gentlewoman,
Has had a late mischance, which willingly
I would know further of; now if you please
To be so courteous to me.

Ye shall see it:
But what do ye think of these men now ye know 'em?
Be wise,
Ye may repent too late else; I but tell ye
For your own good, and as you will find it Lady.

I am advised.

No more words then; do that,
And instantly, I told ye of, be ready.
Don Iohn, I ll fit ye for your frumps.

I shall be:
But shall I see this Child?

Within this half hour,
Let's in, and there think better.

Sir, he is worth your knowledge, and a Gentleman
(If I that so much love him, may commend him)
That's full of honour; and one, if foul play
Should fall upon us, (for which fear I brought him)
Will not fly back for phillips.

Ye much honour me,
And once more I pronounce ye both mine.

Stay, what Troop
Is that below in the Valley there?

Hawking I take it.

They are so; 'tis the Duke, 'tis even he Gentlemen,
Sirrah, draw back the Horses till we call ye,
I know him by his Company.

I think too
He bends up this way.

So he does.

Stand you still,
Within that covert, till I call: he comes
Forward; here will I wait him: to your places.

I need no more instruct ye?

Fear me not.

Feed the Hawks up,
We'll fly no more to day: O my blessed Fortune!
Have I so fairly met the man?

Ye have Sir,
And him ye know by this.

Sir, all the honour,
And love --

I do beseech your Grace stay there, and
Dismiss your Train a little.

Walk aside,
And out of hearing I command ye: now Sir
Be plain.

I will, and short;
Ye have wronged a Gentleman, beyond all Justice,
Beyond the Mediation of all Friends.

The man, and manner of wrong?

Petruchio;
The wrong, ye have dishonoured his Sister.

Now stay you Sir,
And hear me a little: This Gentleman's
Sister that you named, 'tis true I have long loved,
As true I have enjoyed her: no less truth
I have a Child by her. But that she, or he,
Or any of that Family are tainted,
Suffer disgrace, or ruin, by my pleasures,
I wear a Sword to satisfy the World no,
And him in this Cause when he pleases; for know Sir,
She is my Wife, contracted before Heaven,
(Witness I owe more tie to, than her Brother)
Nor will I fly from that Name, which long since
Had had the Churches approbation,
But for his Jealous Nature.

Your pardon Sir; I am fully satisfied.

Dear Sir, I knew I should convert ye; had we
But that rough man here now too --

And ye shall Sir.
What hoa, hoo.

I hope ye ^ave laid no Ambush?

Only Friends.

My noble Brother welcome:
Come put your anger off, we'll have no fighting,
Unless you will maintain I am unworthy
To bear that Name.

Do you speak this heartily?

Upon my Soul, and truly; the first Priest
Shall put you out of these doubts.

Now I love ye;
And I beseech ye pardon my suspicions,
You are now more than a Brother, a brave Friend too.

The good man's over-joy'd.

How now, how goes it?

Why, the man has his Mare again, and all's well:
The Duke professes freely he's her Husband.

'Tis a good hearing.

Yes, for modest Gentlemen. I must present ye:
May it please your Grace
To number this brave Gentleman, my Friend,
And noble Kinsman, amongst the rest of your Servants.

O my brave Friend! you shower your Bounties on me:
Amongst my best thoughts Signior, in which number
You being worthily disposed already^
May freely place your Friend.

Your Grace does me a great deal of honour.

Why, this is wondrous happy: But now Brother,
Now comes the bitter to our sweet: Constantia.

Why, what of her?

Nor what^ nor where do I know:
Winged with her fears, last night, beyond my knowledge,
She quit my house, but whither --

Let not that --

No more good Sir, I have heard too much.

Nay sink not,
She cannot be so lost.

Nor shall not Gentlemen;
Be free again, the Lady's found; that smile, Sir,
Shows you distrust your Servant.

I do beseech ye.

Ye shall believe me, by my Soul she's safe.

Heaven knows I would believe Sir.

Ye may safely.

And under noble usage: this Gentleman,
M^t her in all her Doubts last night, and to his Guard
(Her fears being strong upon her) she gave her Person,
Who waited on her, to our Lodging; where all respect,
Civil, and honest Service now attend her.

Ye may believe now.

Yes I do, and strongly;
Well, my good Friends, or rather my good Angels,
For ye have both preserved me; when these virtues
Die in your Friends remembrance --

Good your Grace
Lose no more time in Complements, 'tis too precious,
I know it by my self, there can be no Hell
To his that hangs upon his hopes.

He has hit it.

To Horse again then, for this night I'll crown
With all the Joys ye wish for.

Happy Gentlem^n.

This is the maddest mischief, never Fool was so ^ub'd off as I am, made
ridiculous, and to my self, to my own Ass; trust a Woman, I'll trust the Devil
first, for he dares be better than his word sometimes. Pray tell me, in what
observance have I ever failed her?


Nay, you can tell that best your self.


Let me consider.


Let them talk, we'll go on before.


Where did thou meet Constantia, and this Woman?


Constantia! what are these Fellows? Stay by all means.


Why Sir, I met her in the great Street that comes from the Market-place, just
at the turning by a Gold-smith's Shop.


Stand still Iohn.


Well, Constantia has spun her self a fair thread now: what will her best Friend
think of this?


Iohn, I smell some juggling, Iohn.


Yes, Frederick, I fear it will be proved so.


But what should the reason be dost think of this so sudden change in her?


'Tis she.


Why, truly I suspect she has been enti^'d to it by a Stranger.


Did you mark that Frederick?


Stranger? who?


A young Gentl^man that's newly come to Town.


Mark that too.


Yes Sir.


Why do you think so?


I heard her grave Conductress twattle something as they went along that makes
me guess it.


'Tis she Frederick.


But who that he is Iohn.


I do not doubt to bolt 'em out, for they must certainly be about the Town. Ha!
no more words; come, let's be gone.


Well.


Very well.


Discreetly.


Finely carried.


Ye have no more of these Tricks?


Ten to one Sir, I shall meet with 'em if ye have.


Is this fair?


Was it in you a Friends part to deal double? I am no Ass Don Frederick.


And, Don Iohn, It shall appear I am no Fool: Disgrace me to make your self
thus every Woman's courtesy; 'tis boyish, 'tis base.


'Tis false: I privy to this Dog-trick? Clear your self, for I know well enough
where the wind sits, or as I have a life --


No more, they are coming, show no discontent, let's quietly away; If she be at
home our Jealousies are over, if not, you and I must have a farther parley Iohn.


Yes, Don Frederick, ye may be sure we shall: but where are these Fellows? Pox
on it, we have lost them too in our Spleens, like Fools.


Come Gentlemen, Let's go a little faster;
Suppose you have all Mistresses, and mend
Your pace accordingly.

Sir, I should be as glad of a Mistress as an other man.


Yes, of my Conscience would thou, and of any other man's Mistress too; that
I'll answer for.


With all my Gold?


The Trunk broke open, and all gone.


And the Mother in the Plot?


And the mother and all.


And the Devil and all: the mighty Pox go with 'em: belike they thought I was
no more of this World, and those trifles would but disturb my Conscience.


Sure they thought, Sir, you would not live to disturb them.


Well, my sweet Mistress, I'll try how handsomely your Ladyship can hang upon a
pair of Gallows, there's your Master-piece. No imagination where they should
be?


None Sir: yet we have searched all places we suspected; I believe they have
taken towards the Port.


Get me then a Water-Conjurer, one that can raise Water-Devils, I'll port 'em,
play at Duck and Drake with my money? Get me a Conjurer I say, enquire out a
man that lets out Devils.


I don't know where.


In every Street Tom Fool, any blear-ey'd people with red heads, and flat noses
can perform it. Thou shalt know 'em by their half gowns, and no breeches. Find
me out a Conjurer^ I say, and learn his price, how he will let his Divils out
by the day. I'll have 'em again if they be above Ground.


Your Grace is welcome now to Naples; so ye are all, Gentlem^n.


Don Frederick, will you step in, and give the Lady notice who comes to visit
her?


Bid her make haste, we come to see no curious Wench, a nightgown will serve
turn. Here's one that knows her nearer.


I'll tell her what you say Sir.


Now will the sport be to observe her alterations, how betwixt fear and joy she
will behave her self.


Dear Brother, I must entreat you --


I conceive your mind Sir, I will not chide her.


How now?


You may Sir: not to abuse your patience longer, nor hold ye o^f with tedious
circumstance; for ye must know --


What?


Where is she?


Gone Sir.


How?


What did you say Sir?


Gone: by Heaven removed. The Woman of the house too.


What, that reverend old Woman that tired me with Complements?


The very same.


Well, Don Frederick.


Don Iohn, it is not well. But --


Gone?


This Fellow can satisfy I lie not.


A little after my Master was departed, Sir, with this Gentleman, my Fellow and
my self being sent on business, as we must think on purpose.


Hang these Circumstances, they always serve to usher in ill ends.


Now could I eat that Rogue, I am so angry. Gone?


Gone?


Directly gone, fled, shifted, what would you have me say?


Well, Gentlemen, wrong not my good opinion.


For your Dukedom, Sir, I would not be a Knave.


He that is, a Rot run in his blood.


But hark ye Gentlemen, are ye sure ye had her here? Did ye not dream this?


Have you your nose Sir?


Yes Sir.


Then we had her.


Since ye are so short, believe your having her shall suffer more construction.


Well Sir, let it suffer.


How to convince ye Sir, I can't imagine, but my life shall justify my
innocence, or fall with it.


Thus then -- for we may be all abused.


'Tis possible.


Here let's part until to morrow this time; we to our way, to clear this doubt,
and you to yours. Pawning our honours then to meet again? when if she be not
found --


We stand engaged to answer any worthy way we are called to.


We ask no more.


To morrow certain.


If we out-live this night Sir.


Come, Don Iohn, we have somewhat now to do.


I am sure I would have.


If she be not found, we must fight.


I am glad on it, I have not fought a great while.


If we die --


There's so much money saved in Lechery.


HOld Cons, hold, for goodness hold, I am in that desertion of Spirit for want
of breath, that I am almost reduced to the necessity of not being able to
defend my self against the inconvenience of a fall.


Dear Mother let us go a little faster to secure our selves from Antonio; for
my part I am in that terrible fright, that I can neither think, speak, nor
stand still, till we are safe a Ship-board, and out of sight of the Shore.


Out o^ sight of the Shore? why, do ye think I'll depatriate?


Depatriate? what's that?


Why, ye Fool you, leave my Country: what will you never Iearn to speak out of
the vulgar road?


O Lord, this hard word will undo us.


As I am a Christian, if it were to save my honour (which is ten thousand times
dearer to me than my life) I would not be guilty of so odious a thought.


Pray Mother, since your honour is so dear to ye, consider that if we are
taken, both it and we are lost for ever.


Ay Girl, but what will the world say, if they should hear so odious a thing
of us, as that we should depatriate?


Ay, there's it, the world; why, Mother, the world does not care a pin if both
you and I were hanged; and that we shall be certainly, if Antonio takes us, for
running away with his Gold.


Protest I care not, I'll ne'er depart from the demarches of a person of
Quality; and let come what will, I shall rather choose to submit my self to my
fate, then strive to prevent it by any deportment that is not congruous in
every degree to the steps and measures of a strict practitioner of honour.


Would not this make one stark mad? Her stile is not more out of the way, then
her manner of reasoning; the first sells me to an ugly old fellow, then she
runs away with me and all his gold, and now like a strict practitioner of
honour, resolves to be taken, rather then depatriate, as she calls it.


As I am a Christian, Cons, a Tavern, and a very decent Sign; I'll in I am
resolved, though by it I should run a Risco of never so stupendous a Nature.


There's no stopping her: what shall I do?


I'll send for my Kins-Woman and some Music, to revive me a little; for really,
Cons, I am reduced to that sad imbecility by the injury I have done my poor
feet, that I'm in a great incertitude whether they will have liveliness
sufficient to support me up to the top of the stairs or no.


This sinning without pleas^re I cannot endure; to have always a remorse, and
ne'er do any thing that should cause it, is intolerable. If I loved money too,
which (I think) I don't, my Mother she has all that; I have nothing to comfort
my self with but Antonio's stiff Beard, and that alone, for a Woman of my
years, is but a sorry kind of entertainment. I wonder why these old fumbling
fellows should trouble themselves so much, only to trouble us more. They can do
nothing, but put us in mind of our graves. Well, I'll no more on it; for to be
frighted with Death and Damnation both at once is a little too hard. I do here
vow I'll live for ever chaste, or find out some handsome young fellow I can love;
I think that's the better;


Come up, Cons, the Fiddles are here.


I come. -- Companions will quickly make an end of all she has stolen, and
then 500 New Pieces sells me to another old fellow. She has taken care not to
leave me a farthing; yet I am so, better than under her conduct: 'twill be at
worst but begging for my life;

And starving were to me an easier Fate
Than to be forced to live with one I hate.

It will not out of my head but that Don Frederick has sent away this Wench,
for all-he carries it so gravely: yet methinks he should be honester than so;
but these grave men are never touched upon such occasions: mark it when ye
will, and you'll find a grave man, especially if he pretend to be a pre^e man,
will do ye forty things without remorse, that would startle one of us mad
Fellows to think of. Because they are familiar with Heaven in their prayers,
they think they may be bold with it in any thing: now we that are not so well
acquainted, bear greater Reverence.





Say you so? what now if I should go up and dance too? It is a Tavern. Pox of
this business: I'll in I am resolved, and try my own fortune; 'tis hard luck if
I don't get one of 'em.


I don't know Sir.


May I have the honour to wait upon you?


Yes, if you please Sir.


Whither?


I tell ye I don't know.


She's very quick. Would I might be so happy as to know you Lady


I dare not let you see my face Sir.


Why?


For fear you should not like it, and then leave me, for to tell you true, I
have at this present very great need of you.


If thou hast half so much need of me, as I have of thee Lady, I'll be content
to be hanged though.


It's a proper handsome Fellow this; if he'd but love me now, I would never
seek out further. Sir, I am young, and unexperienced in the World.


Nay, if thou art young, it's no great matter what thy face is.


Perhaps this freedom in me may seem strange; but Sir, in short, I'm forced to
fly from one I hate, if I should meet him, will you here promise he shall not
take me from you?


Yes, that I will, before I see your face, your shape has charmed me enough for
that already; if any one takes ye from me, Lady, I'll give him leave to take
from me too -- (I was a going to name 'em) certain things of mine, that I would
not lose, now I have you in my arms, for all the Gems in Christendom.


For Heaven's sake then conduct me to some place where I may be secured a while
from the sight of any one whatsoever.


By all the hopes I have to find thy face as lovely as thy shape, I will.


Well Sir, I believe ye, for you have an honest look.


'Slid I am afraid Don Frederick has been giving her a character of me too.
Come, pray unmasque.


Then turn away your face; for I'm resolved you shall not see a bit of mine
till I have set it in order, and then --


What?


I'll strike you dead.


A mettled Whore, I warrant her; come if she be now but young, and have but a
nose on her face, she'll be as good as her word: I'm even panting for breath
already.


Now stand your ground if you dare.


By this light a rare creature! ten thousand times handsomer than her we seek
for! this can be sure no common one: pray Heaven she be a Whore.


Well Sir, what say ye now?


Nothing; I'm so amazed I am not able to speak. I'd best fall to presently,
though it be in the Street, for fear of losing time. Prithee my dear sweet
Creature go with me into that corner, that thou and I may talk a little in
private.


No Sir, no private dealing I beseech you.


'S Heart, what shall I do? I'm out of my wits for her. Hark ye, my dear Soul,
can thou love me?


If I could, what then?


Why, you know what then, and then should I be the happiest man alive.


I, so you all say till you have your desires, and then you leave us.


But, my dear Heart, I am not made like other men; I never can love heartily
till I have --


Got their Maidenheads; but suppose now I should be no Maid.


Prithee suppose me nothing, but let me try.


Nay, good Sir hold.


No Maid? why, so much the better, thou art then the more experienced; for my
part I hate a bungler at any thing.


O dear, I like this Fellow strangely: hark ye Sir, I am not worth a groat, but
though you should not be so neither, if you'll but love me, I'll follow ye all
the World over; I'll work for ye, beg for you, do any thing for ye, so you'll
promise to do nothing with any body else.


O Heavens, I'm in another World, this Wench sure was made a purpose for me,
she is so just of my humour. My dear, 'tis impossible for me to say how much I
will do for thee, or with thee, thou sweet bewitching woman; but let's make
haste home, or I shall never be able to hold out till I come thither.


And art thou sure it was Constantia, say thou that he was leading?


Am I sure I live Sir? why, I dwelt in the house with her; how can I choose but
know her?


But did thou see her face?


Lord Sir, I saw her face as plainly as I see yours just now, not two Streets
off.


Yes, 'tis even so: I suspected it at first, but then he forswore it with that
confidence -- Well, Don Iohn, if these be your practices, you shall have no
more a Friend of me, Sir, I assure you. Perhaps though he met her by chance,
and intends to carry her to her Brother and the Duke.

A little time will show. -- Gods so, here he is;
I'll step behind this Shop, and observe what he say's.

Here, now go in, and make me for ever happy.


Dear Don Iohn.


A pox of your kindness, how the Devil comes he here just at t^s time? Now will
he ask me forty foolish Questions, and I have such a mind to this Wench, that I
cannot think of one excuse for my life.


Your Servant Sir: pray who's that you locked in just now at that door?


Why, a Friend of mine that's gone up to read a Book.


A Book? that's a quaint one i'faith: prithee Don Iohn what Library hast thou
been buying this Afternoon? for in the Morning to my knowledge thou had never
a Book there, except it were an Almanac, and that was none of thy own neither.


No, no, it's a Book of his own he brought along with him. A Scholar that is
given to reading.


And do Scholars (Don Iohn) wear Petticoats now adays?


Plague on him, he has seen her. -- Well Don Frederick, thou know I am not
good at lying, 'tis a Woman I confess it, make your best on it, what then?


Why then, Don Iohn, I desire you'll be pleased to let me see her.


Why, faith Frederick, I should not be against the thing, but ye know a man
must keep his word, and she has a mind to be private.


But Iohn you may remember when I met a Lady so before, this very self same
Lady too, that I got leave for you to see her Iohn.


Why, do ye think then that this here is Constantia?


I cannot properly say I think it Iohn, because I know it; this Fellow here saw
her as you led her in the Streets.


Well, and what then? who does he say it is?


Ask him Sir, and he'll tell ye.


Sweet heart, dost thou know this Lady?


I think I should Sir, I have lived long enough in the House with her to know
her sure.


And how do they call her prithee?


Constantia.


How! Constantia?


Yes Sir, the Woman's name is Constantia; that's flat.


Is it so Sir? and so is this too.


Oh, Oh.


Now Sirrah, you may safely say you have not born false witness for nothing.


Fie, Don Iohn why do you beat the poor Fellow for doing his Duty, and telling
truth?


Telling truth? thou talk as if thou had been hired to bear false witness
too: ye are a very fine Gentleman.


What a strange confidence he has? But is there no shame in thee? nor no
consideration of what is just or honest, to keep a Woman thus against her will,
that thou know is in love with another man too; dost think a Judgment will
not follow this?


Good dear Frederick, do thou keep thy Sentences and thy Morals for some better
opportunity, this here is not a fit Subject for 'em: I tell thee she is no more
Constantia than thou art.


Why won't you let me see her then?


Because I can't: besides she is not for thy turn.


How so?


Why, thy Genius lies another way; thou art for flames, and darts, and those
fine things: now I am for the old plain down-right way; I am not so curious
Frederick as thou art.


Very well Sir; but is this worthy in you to endeavour to debauch --


But it there no shame? but is this worthy? what a many buts are here? If I
should tell thee now solemnly thou hast but one eye, and give thee reasons for
it, would thou believe me?


I think hardly Sir, against my own knowledge.


Then why dost thou, with that grave face, go about to persuade me against
mine? You should do as you would be done by Frederick.


And so I will Sir, in this very particular, since there's no other remedy; I
shall do that for the Duke and Petruchio, which I should expect from them upon
the like occasion: in short, to let you see I am as sensible of my honour, as
you can be careless of yours; I must tell ye Sir, that I'm resolved to wait
upon this Lady to them.


Are ye so Sir? Why I must then, sweet Sir, tell you again, I am resolved you
shall not. Ne'er stare, nor wonder, I have promised to preserve ner from the sight
of any one whatsoever, and with the hazard of my life will make it good; but
that you may not think I mean an injury to Pe^ruchio, or the Duke, know Don
Frederick, that though I love a Wench perhaps a little better, I hate to do a
thing that's base, as much as you do. Once more upon my honour this is not
Constantia; let that satisfy you.


All that will not do. --


No? why then this shall.


This is an insolence beyond the temper of a man to suffer; -- thus I throw off
thy friendship, and since thy folly has provoked my patience beyond its natural
bounds, know it is not in thy power now to save thy self.


That's to be tried Sir, though by your favour.


Come, Sir, are you ready?


O Lord, Sir, your Servant.


What's here fighting? let's part 'em. How? Don Frederick against Don Iohn? how
came you to fall out, Gentlemen? What's the Cause?


Why Sir, it is your quarrel, and not mine, that drew this on me^ I saw him
lock Constantia up into that house, and I desired to wait upon her to you;
that's the Cause.


O, it may be he designed to lay the obligation upon us himself. Sir, we are
beholden to you for this favour, beyond all possibility of --


Pray, Sir, do not throw away your thanks before you know whether I have
deserved 'em or no. O, is that your design? Sir you must not go in there.


How, Sir, not go in?


No Sir, most certainly not go in.


She's my Sister, and I will speak with her.


If she were your Mother Sir, you should not, though it were but to ask her
blessing.


Since you are so positive, I'll try.


You Shall find me a man of my word Sir.


Nay pray Gentlemen hold, let me compose this matter. ^hy do you make a scruple
of letting us see Constantia?


Why, Sir, 'twould turn a man's head round to hear these Fellows talk so; there
is not one word true of all that he has said.


Then you do not know where Constantia is?


Not I, by Heavens.


O monstrous Impudence! upon my life Sir, I saw him shut her up into that
house, and know his temper so, that if I had not stopped him, I dare swear hy
this time he would have ravished her.


Now that is two Lies: for first he did not see her, a^d next the Lady I led in
is not to be ravished, she is so willing.


But look ye Sir, this doubt may easily be cleared; let either Petruchio or I
but see her, and if she be not Constantia, we engage our Honours (though we
should know her) never to discover who she is.


I, but there's the point now, that I can ne'er consent to.


Why?


Because I gave her my word to the contrary.


And did you never break your word with a Woman?


Never before I lay wi^h her; and that's the case now.


Pish, I won't be kept off thus any longer: Sir, either let me enter, or I'll
force my way.


No pray Sir, let that be my Office, I will be revenged on him for having
betrayed me to his friendship.


Nay ye shall not offer him foul play neither.
Hold Brother, pray a word; and with you too Sir.

Pox on it, would they would make an end of this business, that I might be with
her again. Hark ye Gentlemen, I'll make ye a fair Proposition, leave off this
Ceremony among your selves, and those dismal threats against me, phillip up
cross or pile who shall begin first, and I'll do the best I can to entertain ye
all one after another.


Now do my fingers itch to be about some bodies ears for the lo^s of my Gold.
Ha! what's here to do, Swords drawn? I must make one, though it cost me the
singing of ten Iohn Doryes more. Courage brave Boy, I'll stand by thee as long
as this Tool here lasts; and it was once a good one.


Who's this? Antonio? O Sir, you are welcome, you shall be even Judge between
us.


No, no, no, not I Sir, I thank ye; I'll make work for others to judge of, I'm
resolved to fight.


But we wo'n't fight with you.


Then put up your Swords, or by this hand I'll lay about me.


Well said old Bilbo i'faith.


Pray hear us though: this Gentleman saw him lock up my Sister into that house,
and he refuses to let us see her.


How Friend? Is this true?


Nay good Sir, let not our friendship be broken before it is well made. Look ye
Gentlemen, to show ye that you are all mistaken, and that my formal Friend
there is an Ass.


I thank you Sir.


I'll give my consent that this Gentleman here shall see her, if his
information can satisfy you.


Yes, yes; he knows her very well.


Then Sir. go in here if you please; I dare trust him with her, for he is too
old to do her either good or harm.


I wonder how my Gentleman will get off from all this.


I shall be even with you Sir another time for all your grinning.

How now? where is he?


He's run out of the back door Sir.


How so?


Why Sir, he's ran after the Gentlewoman you brought in.


'S death, how durst you let her out?


Why Sir, I knew nothing.


No thou ignorant Rascal, and therefore I'll beat something into thee.


What, you won't kill him?


Nay come not near me, for if thou do^t by Heavens I'll give thee as much; and
would do so however, but that I won't lose time from looking after my dear
Sweet -- a pox confound you all.


What? he has shut the Door.


It's no matter, I'll lead you to a private backway by that corner, where we
shall meet him.


A Young Woman say thou and her Mother?


Yes, just now come to the house. Not an hour ago.


It must be they, here Friend, here's money for you; be sure you take 'em, and
I'll reward you better when you have done.


But Neighbour how -- hup -- shall I now -- hup -- know these these Parties?
for I would -- hup -- execute my Office -- hup -- like -- hup -- a sober
Person.


That's hard; but you may easily know the Mother, for she is hup -- drunk.


Nay -- hup -- if she be drunk, let -- hup -- me alone to maul her, for -- hup
-- I abhor a Drunkard -- hup -- let it be man -- Woman, or -- hup -- Child.


Ay Neighbour, one may see you hate drinking indeed.


Why Neighbour -- hup -- did you ever see me drunk? answer me that Question:
did you ever -- hup -- see me drunk?


No, never, never: come away, here's the house.


Oh, whither shall I run to hide my self! The Constable has seized the
Landlady, and I'm afraid the poor Child too. How to return to Don Frederick's
house, I know not; and if I knew, I durst not, after those things the Landlady
has told me of him. If I get not from this drunken Rabble, I expose my honour;
and if I fall into my Brother's hands, I lose my life: you Powers above, look
down and help me, I am faulty I confess, but greater faults have often met with
lighter punishments: Then let not heavier yet on me be laid,
Be what I will, I am still what you have made.



I'm almost dead with running, and will be so quite, but I will overtake her.


Hold Don Iohn, hold.


Who's that? Ha? is it you my Dear?


For Heaven's sake Sir, carry me from hence, or I'm utterly undone.


Phoo pox^, this is the other: now could I almost beat her, for but making me
the Proposition: Madam, there are some a coming that will do it a great deal
better; but I am in such haste, that I vow to Gad Madam --


Nay pray Sir stay, you are concerned in this as well as I; for your Woman is
taken.


Ha! my Woman?

I vow to Gad Madam, I do so highly honour your Ladyshp, that I would venture my
life a thousand times to do you Service. But pray where is she?


Why Sir, she is taken by the Constable.


Constable! which way went he?


I cannot tell, for I run out into the Streets just as he had seized upon your
Landlady.


Plague o'my Landlady, I meant the other Woman.


Other Woman Sir! I have seen no other Woman never since I left your house.


'S heart, what have I been doing here then all this while? Madam, your most
humble --


Good Sir, be not so cruel, as to leave me in this distress.


No, no, no; I'm only going a little way, and will be back again presently.


But pray Sir hear me; I'm in that danger --


No, no, no, I vow to Gad Madam, no danger in the World; let me alone, I warrant
you.


He's gone, and I a lost wretched, miserable Creature, lost for ever.


O, there she is.


Who's this, Antonio? the fiercest Enemy I have.


Are ye so nimble-footed Gentlewoman? If I don't overtake you for all this, it
shall go hard --

She'll break my wind with a pox to her.
A plague confound all Whores.

But, Madam, be not so angry, perhaps s^e'll come again.


O Kinswo^an, never speak of her more, for she s an odious Creature, to leave
me thus in the lurch. I that have given her all her breeding, and instructed her
with my own Principl^s of Education.


Protest, Madam, I think she's a Person that knows as much of all that as --


Knows, Kinswoman? There's ne'er a Woman in Italy of thrice her years knows so
much the procedures of a true gallantry, and the inf^llible Principles of an
honourable friendship as she does.


And therefore, Madam, you ought to love her.


No, fie upon her, nothing at all, as I am a Christian: when once a Person
fails in Fundamentals, she's at a period with me. Besides, with all her wit,
Constantia is but a Fool, and calls all the Meniarderies of a bonne mine,
affectation.


Indeed I must confess, she's given a little too much to the careless way^


Ay, there you have hit it Kinswoman, the careless way has quite undone her.
Will ye believe me Kinswoman? as I am a Christian, I never could make her do
this, nor carry her body thus, but just when my eye was upon her; as soon as
ever my back was turned, whip, her elbows were quite out again: would not you
strange now at this?


Bless me sweet goodness! But, pray Madam, how came Constantia to fall out with
your Ladyship? Did she take any thing ill of you?


As I'm a Christian I can't resolve you, unless it were that I led the dance
first; but for that she must excuse me, I know she dances well, but there are
others who perhaps understand the right swim of it as well as she; Constantia
--


How's this? Constantia?


I know no reason why I should be debarred the privilege of showing my own
parts too sometimes.


If I am not mistaken that other Woman is she Don Iohn and I were directed to,
when we came first to Town, to bring us acquainted with Constantia. I'll try to
get some Intelligence from her. Pray Lady, have I never seen you before?


Yes Sir, I think you have, with another Stranger, a Friend of yours, one day
as I was coming out of the Church.


I'm right then. And pray who were you talking of?


Why Sir, of an inconsiderate inconsiderable Person, that has at once both
forfeited the honour of my concern, and the concern of her own honour.


Very fine indeed. And is all this intended for the beautiful Constantia?


O fie upon her Sir, an odious Creature as I'm a Christian, no Beauty at all.


Why, does not your Ladyship think her handsome?


Seriously, Sir, I don't think she's ugly, but as I'm a Christian, my Position
is; That no true Beauty can be lodged in that Creature, who is not in some
measure buoyed up with a just sense of what is incumbent to the devoir of a
Person of Quality.


That Position, Madam, is a little severe, but however she has been incumbent
formerly, as your Ladyship is pleased to say; now that she's married, and her
Husband owns the Child, she is sufficiently justifi'd for all she has done.


Sir, I must blushingly beg leave to say you are there in an error. I know
there has been passages of love between 'em, but with a temperament so
innocent, and so refined, as it did impose a negative upon the very possibility
of her being with Child.


Sure she is not well acquainted with her. Pray Madam, how long have you known
Constantia?


Long enough I think Sir; for I had the good fortune, or rather the ill one, to
help her first to the light of the World.


Now cannot I discover by the fineness of this Dialect, whether she be the
Mother or the Midwife: I had best ask the other Woman.


No Sir, I assure you, my Daughter Constantia has never had a Child: a Child!
ha, ha, ha; O goodness save us, a Child!


O then she is the Mother, and it seems is not informed of the matter. Well
Madam, I shall not dispute this with you any further; but give me leave to wait
upon you to your Daughter; for her Friend I assure ye is in great impatience to
see her.


Friend Sir? I know none she has; I'm sure she loathes the very sight of him.


Of whom?


Why, of Antonio Sir, he that you were pleased to say had got my Daughter with
Child. Sir -- ha -- ha -- ha --


Still worse and worse; 'Slife cannot she be content with not letting me
understand her, but must also resolve obstinately not to understand me because
I speak plain? Why, Madam^ I cannot express my self your way, therefore be not
offended at me for it; I tell you I do not know Antonio, nor never named him to
you: I told you that the Duke has owned Constantia for his Wife, that her
Brother and he are Friends, and are both now in search after her.


Then as I'm a Christian, I suspect we have both been equally involved in the
misfortune of a mistake. Sir I am in the derniere confusion to avow that though
my Daughter Constantia has been liable to several addresses, yet she never has
had the honour to be produced to his Grace.


So then you put her to bed to --


Antonio Sir, one whom my ebb of fortune forced me to enter into a negotiation
with, in reference to my Daughter's Person; but as I'm a Christian with that
candor in the action, as I was in no kind denied to be a witness of the thing.


So, now the thing is out. This is a damned Bawd, and I as damned a Rogue for
what I did to Don Iohn: for of my conscience, this is that Constantia the
Fellow told me of. I'll make him amends what ever it cost me. Lady, you must
give me leave not to part with you, till you meet with your Daughter, for some
reasons I shall tell you hereafter.


Sir, I am so highly your Obligee for the manner of your Enquiries, and you
have grounded your Determinations upon so just a Basis, that I shall not be
ashamed to own my self a Votary to all your Commands.


So, I'm once more freed from Antonio; but whither to go now, there's the
question; nothing troubles me, but that he was sent up by that young Fellow,
for I liked him with my Soul, would he had liked me so too.


Which way went she?


Who?


The Woman?


What Woman?


Why, a young Woman, a handsome Woman, the handsomest Woman thou ever saw in
thy life: speak quickly Sirrah, or thou shalt speak no more.


Why, yonder's a Woman: what a Devil ayls this Fellow?


O my dear Soul, take pity of me, and give me comfort, for I'm even dead for
want of thee^


O you 're a fine Gentleman indeed, to shut me up in your house, and send
another man to me.


Pray hear me.


No, I will never hear you more after such an Injury, what would ye have done
if I had been kind to ye, that could use me thus be^ore?


By my tro^h that's shrewdly urged.


Besides, you basely broke your word.


But will ye hear nothing? nor did you hear nothing? I had three men upon me at
once, and had I not consented to let that old Fellow up, who came to my rescue,
they had all broken in whether I would or no.


Faith it may be it was so, for I remember I heard a noise^ but suppose it was
not so, what then? why then I'll love him however. Hark ye Sir, I ought now to
use you very scurvily, but I can't find in my heart to do it.


Then God's blessing on thy heart for it.


But a --


What?


I would fain --


I, so would I: come let's go.


I would fain know whether you can be kind to me.


That thou shalt presently; come away.


And will you always?


Always? I can't say so; but I will as often as I can.


Phoo! I mean love me.


Well, I mean that too.


Swear then.


That I will upon my knees: what shall I say?


Nay, use what words you please, so they be but hearty, and not those are
spoken by the Priest, for that charm seldom proves fortunate.


I swear then by thy fair self, that look so like a Deity, and art the only
thing I now can think of, that I'll adore thee to my dying day.


And here I vow, the minute thou dost leave me, I'll leave the World, that's
kill my self.


O my dear heavenly Creature! --


Well, well; why don't you go then?


Who's this, my old new Friend has got there?


O have I caught you Gentlewoman at last? Come, give me my Gold.


I hope he takes me for another, I won't answer, for I had rather he should
take me for any one than who I am.


Pray Sir, who is that you have there by the hand?


A Person of Honour Sir, that has broke open my Trunks, and run away with all my
Gold; yet I'll hold ten pound I'll have it whipped out of her again.


Done, I'll hold you ten pounds of that now.


Ha! by my troth you have reason; and Lady I ask you pardon; but I'll have it
whipped out of you then Gossip.


Hold Sir, you must not meddle with my Goods.


Your Goods? how came she to be yours? I'm sure I bought her of her Mother, for
five hundred good pieces in Gold, and she was abed with me all night too; deny
that if you dare.


Well, and what did you do when I was abed with you all night? confess that if
you dare.


Umh, say you so?


I'll try if this Lady will help me, for I know not whither else to go.


I shall be shamed I see utterly except I make her hold her peace. Pray Sir by
your leave; I hope you will allow me the Speech of one word with your Goods
here, as you call her; 'tis but a small request.


I Sir, with all my heart. How, Constantia! Madam, now you have seen that Lady,
I hope you will pardon the haste you met me in a little while ago; if I
committed a fault, you must thank her for it.


Sir, if you will for her sake, be persuaded to protect me from the violence of
my Brother, I shall have reason to thank you both.


Nay Madam, now that I am in my wits again, and my heart's at ease, it shall go
very hard but I will see yours so too; I was before distracted, and 'tis not
strange the love of her should hinder me from remembering what was due to you,
since it made me forget my self.


Sir, I do know too well the power of Love, by my own experience, not to pardon
all the effects of it in another.


Well then, I promise you, if you will but help me to my Gold again, (I mean
that which you and your Mother stole out of my Trunk) that I'll never trouble
you more.


A match; and 'tis the best that you and I could ever make.


Pray Madam fear nothing; by my love I'll stand by you, and see that your
Brother shall do you no harm.


Hark ye Sir, a word; how dare you talk of love, or standing by any Lady, but
me Sir?


By my troth that was a fault; but I did not mean it your way, I meant it only
civilly.


I, but if you are so very civil a Gentleman we shall not be long friends: I
scorn to share your love with any one whatsoever; and for my part, I'm resolved
either to have all or nothing.


Well my dear little Rogue, thou shalt have it all presently, as soon as we can
but get rid of this Company.


Phoo, y' are always abusing me.


Come, now Madam, let not us speak one word more, but go quietly about our
business; not but that I think it the greatest pleasure in the World to hear
you talk, but --


Do you indeed Sir? I swear then good wits jump Sir; for I have thought so my
self a very great while.


Yo've all the reason imaginable. O, Don Iohn, I ask thy pardon; but I hope I
shall make thee amends, for I have found out the Mother, and she has promised
me to help thee to thy Mistress again.


Sir, you may save your labour, the business is done, and I am fully satisfied.


And dost thou know who she is?


No faith, I never asked her name.


Why, then, I'll make thee yet more satisfied; this Lady here is that very
Constantia --


Ha! thou hast not a mind to be knocked o^ the pate too, hast thou?


No Sir, nor dare you do it neither; but for certain this is that very self
same Constantia that thou and I so long looked after.


I thought she was something more than ordinary; but shall I t^ll thee now a
stranger thing than all this?


What's that?


Why, I will never more touch any other Woman for her sake.


Well, I submit; that indeed is stranger.


Come Mother, deliver your Purse; I have delivered my self up to this young
Fellow, and the bargain's made with that old Fellow, so he may have his Gold
again, that all shall be well.


As I'm a Christian Sir, I took it away only to have the honour of restoring it
again; for my hard fate having not bestowed upon me a Fund which might
capacitate me to make you Presents of my own, I had no way left ^or the
exercise of my generosity, but by putting my self into a condition of giving
back what was yours.


A very generous design indeed. So, now I'll even turn a sober Person, and
leave off this wen^hing, and this fighting, ^or I begin to find it does not
agree with me.


Madam, I'm heartily glad to meet your Ladyship here; we have been in a very
great disorder since we saw you -- What's here, our Landlady and the Child
again?


Yes, we met her going to be whipped, in a drunken Constables hands that took
her for another.


Why, then, pray let her even be taken and whipped for her self, for on my word
she deserves it.


Yes, I'm sure of your good word at any time.


Hark ye dear Landlady.


O sweet Goodness! is it you? I have been in such a peck of troubles since I
saw you; they took me, and they tumbled me, and they hauled me, and they pulled
me, and they called me painted Iezebel, and the poor little Babe here did so
take on. Come hither my Lord, come hither; here is Constantia.


For Heaven's sake peace, yonder's my Brother, and if he discovers me I'm
certainly ruined.


No, Madam, there is no danger.


Were there a thousand dangers, in those Arms, I would run thus to meet them.


O my Dear, it were not safe that any should be here at present, for now my
heart is so o'erpress'd with joy, that I should scarce be able to defend thee.


Sister, I'm so ashamed of all the faults, which my mistake has made me guilty
of, that I know not how to ask your pardon for them.


No, Brother, the fault was mine, in mistaking you so much, as not to impart
the whole truth to you at first; but having begun my love without your consent,
I never durst acquaint you with the progress of it.


Come, let the Consummation of our present joys, blot out the memory of all
these past mistakes.


And when shall we consummate our Joys?


Never; We'll find out ways shall make 'em last for ever.


Now see the odds 'twixt married Folks and Friends: Our Love begins just where
their Passion ends.


PErhaps you Gentlemen, expect to day
The Author of this fag end of a Play
According to the Modern way of Wit
Should strive to be before-hand with the Pit,
Begin to rail at you, and subtly to
Prevent the affront by giving the first blow.
He wants not Presidents, which often sway
In matters far more weighty than a Play:
But he no grave admirer of a Rule,
Won't by Example learn to play the fool.
The end of Plays should be to entertain,
And not to keep the Auditors in pain.
Giving our price, and for what trash we please,
He thinks the Play being done, you should have ease.
No Wit, no Sense, no Freedom, and a Box,
Is much like paying money for the Stocks.
Besides the Author dreads the strut and men
Of new praised Poets, having often seen
Some of his Fellows, who have writ before,
When Nel has danced her Jig, steal to the Door,
Hear the Pit clap, and with conceit of that
Swell, and believe themselves the Lord knows what.
Most Writers now ad^ys are grown so vain,
That once approved, they write, and write again,
Till they have writ away the Fame they got;
Our Friend this way of writing fancies not,
And hopes you will not tempt him with your Praise,
To rank himself with some that write new Plays:
For he knows ways enough to be undone
Without the help of Poetry ^or one.

