LEt your tunes, you sweet-voic'd spears,
overtake him:
Charm his fancies, open his ears,
now awake him. begin.

Fancies are but streams
of vain pleasure:
They who by their dreams
true ^oies measure;
Feasting, starve; laughing, weep;
playing smart, whilst in sleep
fools with shadows smiling,
wake and and find
hopes like wind,
Idle hopes beguiling.
Thoughts fly away, Time hath past'em
Wake now, awake, see and taste'em.
That I might ever slumber, and enjoy
Contents as happy as the soul's best wishes
Can fancy or imagine, 'tis a cruelty
Beyond example, to ulurp the peace
I sate enthroned in, who was't plucked me from it.

Young man look hither.

Good; I envy not
The pomp of your high office; all preferment
Of earthly glories are to me diseases,
Infecting those found parts which should preserve
The flattering retribution to my thankfulness;
The times are better to me; there's no taste
Left on the palate of my discontent
To catch at empty hopes, whose only blessedness
Depends on being miserable.

Raybright
Thou drawst thy great descent from my grand patron the Sun;
whose priest I am.

For small advantage;
He who is high-born never mounts von battlemen
Of sparkling stars, unless I be in spi^it
As humble as the child of one that sweats
To eat the dear-earn'd bread of honest thrift.

Hast thou not flowed in honours?

Honours, I'd not be baited with my fears
Of loosing em, to be their monstrous creature
An age together, 'tis beside as comfortable
To die upon the embrodrie of the grass,
Un^ded, as to ser a world at gaze,
Whilst from a pinnacle I tumble down
And break my neck, to be talked of, and wondered at.

You have worn rich habits.
Fine Ass-trappings.
A Pedler's heir turned gallant, follows fashion,
Can by a cross-legged Tailor be transformed
Into a Jack a napes of passing bravery:
'Tis a stout happiness to wear good clothes,
Yet live and die a fool -- mew.

You have had choice
Of beauties to enrich your marriage-bed.

Monkyes and Parakeetoes are as pretty
To play withal, tho not indeed so gentle.
Honestie's indeed a fine jewel, but the Indies
Where it grows is hard to be discovered, troth sir
I care for no long travels with lost labour.

Pieasures of every sense have been your servants,
When as you've commanded them.

To threaten ruin,
Corrupt the purity of knowledge, wrest
Detires of better life, to those of these
This scurvy one, this life scarce worth the keeping.

'Tis melancholy, and too fond indulgence
To your own dulled affections: sway your judgment,
You could not else be thus lost, or suspect
The care your ancestor the Sun takes of ye.

The care, the scorn he throw; on me.

Fie, fie;
Have you been sent out into strange lands,
Seen Courts of foreign Kings, by them been graced,
To bring home such neglect.

I have reason for it.

Pray show it.

Since my coming home I have found
More sweets in one unprofitable dream,
Then in my lives whole pilgrimage.

Your fantasy
Misleads your judgment vainly, sir in brief
I am to tell you, how I have received
From your Progenitor, my Lord, the Sun,
A token, that he visibly will descend
From the celestial orb to gratify
all your wild longings.

Very likely, when pray:
The world the whiles shall be beholding to him
For a long night, new married men will curse,
Tho their brides tickle for it, oh! candle and la^thorn
Will grow to an excessive rate in the City.

These are but flashes of a brain disordered.
Contain your float of spleen in seemly bounds,
Your eyes shall be your witness.

He may come.

Hence, hence, thou shame of nature, mankindes foil:
Time whips thee from the world, kicks thee, and scorns thee.

Whip me from the world, why whip? am I a dog, a cur,
a mongrel: baw waw. Do thy worst, I defy thee.
I will roar and squander,
Cozen, and be dr^nk too;
I will maintain my Pander,
Keep my Horse, and P^nok too;
brawl and scuffle,
sh^ft and shuffle,
Swagger in my Potmeals:
Dams rank with;
do mad^ranck with
Roaring bores and o^tmeals,
Pox a time, I care not,
being past 'tis nothing:
I le be free and spare not*
sorrows are lives (...):
melancholy
is but folly,
Mirth and youth are plet^.
Time go hang thee,
I will bang thee,
Though I die in co^ers.
And what think you of this, you old doting ^oth-eaten bearded (...) as I am
Folly by the mothers side, and a time-bred Gentleman, I will sing thee to
death, i^ thou (...) me; Cannot a man of fashion, for (...), put on now and
then his working-day robes of humility, but he must presently be subject to a
Beadles rod of Correction; go mend thy self Caniball, 'tis not without need,
I am sure the Times were never more beggarly and proud, waiting-women flant it
in Cast-suits, and their Ladies fall for em; knaves over-brave wise men, while
wise men ^and with cap and knee to fools: Pitiful Time! pitiful


Out foul, prodigious, and a bortive birth;
Behold the sand glass of thy days is broke

Bring me another, l'le shatter that too.

No; you have misspent thy hours, lavish fool, like
The circuit of thy life, in ceaseless riots
It is not therefore fit that thou should live
In such a Court as the Suns Majesty
Vouch safes to illuminate with his bright beams.

In any Court, father bald-pate, where my granam the Moon shows her horns,
except the Confistory Court, and there she need not appear; Cuckolds Carry
such sharp Stelettoes in their fore-heads, l'le live here and laugh at the
bravery of ignorance, maugre thy scurvy and abominable beard.


Priest of the Sun 'tis near about the minute,
thy Patron will descend, scourge hence this trifle;
Time is ne'er lost, till in the common Schools
Ofimpudence, time meets with wilful fools.

Farewell 1538, I might have said five thousand, but the others long enough a
Concience to be honest Conditioned, pox on him; it's anotable railing whipper,
of a plain Time whipper.


You heard the charge he left.

I, I, a may give a charge, a has been a petty Court holder ever since he was a
minute old, he took you for a fore-man of a Jurie


Pray sir, what are you?

No matter what, what are you?

Not as you are, I thank my better fates,
I am grand child to the Sun.

And I am Cousin german, some two or three hundred removes off, to the Moon, and
my name is Folly.


Folly, sir of what quality?

Quality; any quality in fashion: Drinkeing, Whoring, Singing, Dancing, Dicing,
Swearing, Roaring (...) oisting, Lying* Cogging, Canting, lcetero, will you have
any more.


you have a merry heart, if you can guide it.

Yes faith; so, so, I laugh not at those whom I fear, I fear not those whom I
love, and I love not any whom I laugh not at, ^retty strange humour, is't not?


To any one that knows you not, it is.

You must a void.

Away away, I have no such meaning indeed-la.

Hark the fair hour is com, draw to the Alter,
And with a mazement, reverence, and comfort
Behold the broad eyed lamp of heaven descending, -- Stand --

Oh brave!

Stand.
Glorious and bright, lo here we bend
Before thy throne, trembling, attend
Thy sacred pleasures, be pleased then
To shower thy comforts down, that men
May freely taste in lifes extremes
The influence of thy powerf^ll dreams.

Let not my fate too swiftly run,
Till thou acknowledge me thy sun.
Oh there's no joy even from the womb,
Of frailty: till we be called home.

Now am I an a^ ant rascal, and cannot speak one word for my self, if I were
hanged.


Ray-bright.

It calls ye, answer.

Lord and Father.

We know thy cares, appear to give release,
Boldly make thy demands, tor we will please
To grant what ere thou say for*

Fair beamed sir;
I dare not greedily prefer
Eternity of earths delights,
Before that duty which invites
My filial piety, in this
Your love shall perfect my hearts bliss;
If I, but for one only year,
Enjoy the several pleasures here,
With every season in his kind,
Can bless a mortal with.

I find
Thy reason breeds thy appetite, and grant it
Thou master'st thy desire, and shall not want it;
To the spring garden let him be conveyed,
And entertained there by that lovely maid:
All the varieties the Spring can show,
Be subject to his will.

Lights Lord, we go.

And I will follow, that am not in love with such fopperies.

We must descend, and leav a while our sphere
To greet the world -- ha, there does now appear
A circle in this round, of beams that shine,
As if their friendly lights would darken mine:
No let em shine out still, for these are they,
By whose sweet favours, when our warmths decay,
Even in the storms of winter, daily nourish
Our active motions, which in Summer flourish
By their fair quickening dews of noble loves:
Oh may you all like stars, whilst swift time moves,
Stand fixed in firmaments of blessed contents:
Mean while recreations we present,
Shall strive to please; I have the foremost tract;
Each season else begins and ends an Act.

Welcome the mother of the year, the Spring;
That mother on whose back age ne'er can sit.
For age still waits upon her that Spring the Nurse;
Whose milk the Summer sucks, and is made wanton.
Physician to the sick, strength to the sound;
By whom all things above, and under-round
Are quickened with new heat, fresh blood, brave vigour,
That Spring on thy fair cheeks, in kisses lays
Ten thonsand welcomes, free as are those rays
From vvich thy name thou borrowest: glorious name!
Raybright, as bright in person as in (...)

Your eyes amazed me first, but ^ow mine ears
Feel your tongues charms, in you move all the spears.
Ch Lady! would the Sun, which gave me life,
Had never sent me to you.

Why! all my veins
Shrink up, as if cold Winter were com back,
And with his frozen beard have numm'd my lips
To hear that sigh fly from you.

R^und about me
A firmament of such full blessings shine,
I in your sphere seem a star more divine
Than in my Fathers Chariot; should I ride
One year about the world in all his pride.

Oh that sweet breath revives me! if thou never
Part'st hence (as part thou shalt not) be happy ever.

I know I shall.

Thou to buy, whose state?
Kings would lay down their crowns, fresh Youth wait,
I charge thee, on my darling.

Madam I shall,
And on his smoeth check such sweet roses set,
You still shall sit to gather then, and when
Their colours fade, brave shall spring again.

Thou (without whom they that have hills of gold
Are slaves and wretches) Health that can nor be sold
Nor bought, I charge thee make his heart a tower
Guarded, for there lies the Springs paramour.

One of my hands is writing still in heaven,
(For that's Healths library) the other on the earth
Is Physics treasurer, and what wealth those lay
Up for my queen, all shall his will obey*

Mortality sure falls from me*

Thou! to whose tunes
The five nice Senses dance; thou that dost spin
Those golden threads all women love to wind,
And but for whom, man would cut off mankind.
Delight not base, but noble, touch thy Lire,
And fill my Court with brightest Delphic fire.

Hover, you winged Musicians, in the air;
Clouds leav your dancing, no winds stir but fair.

Leav blustering March --
What bird so sings, yet so does wail,
'Tis Philomel the Nightingale;
Iugg, Iugg, Iugg, Terue she cries,
And hating earth, to heaven she flies -- Cuckoo.
Ha, ha, hark, hark, the Cuckows sing
Cuckoo, to welcome in the Spring.
Brave prick-song; who is't now we hear!
'Tis the Larks silver leer a leer:
Chirup the Sparrow flies away;
For he fell too't ere break of day.
Ha, ha, hark, hark, the Cuck^ows sing
Cuckoo, to welcome in the Spring.

How does my sun-born sweet-heart like his queen;
Her court, her train.

Wondrous, such ne'er were seen.

Fresher and fresher pastimes, one delight
Is a di^ease to th'wanton appetite.

Music take Echoes voice, and dance quick rounds To thine own times in
^epercussive sounds.


Enough? I will not weary thee, pleasures change*
Thou, as the Sun in a free zodiac range. --

A company of rural fellows, faced
Like l^vers of your Laws, beg to be graced
Before your Highness, to present their sport*

What is't?

A Morris.

Give them our Court:
Stay, these dull birds may make thee stop thine ear,
Take thou my lightning, none but Laurel here
Shall escape thy blasting; whom thou wilt confound
Smite; let those stand, who in thy choice ^it crowned.

Let these then, I may surfeit else on sweets.
Sound sleeps do not still lie in Princes sheets.

Beckon the Rurals in, the Country-gray
Seldom ploughs treason, should thou be stolen away.
By great ones, that's my fear.

Fear it not Lady;
Should all the worlds black sorceries be laid
To blow me hence, I move not.

I am made
In that word the earths Empress --
Are not these sports too rustic?

No; pretty and pleasing.

My youngest girl^, the violet-breathing May,
Being told by Flora that my love dwelt here,
Is com to do you service, will you please
To honour her arrival.

I shall attend.

On them, and bid my rosie-finger'd May
Rob hills and dales, with sweets to strew his way.

An Empre^s, say thou, fallen in love with me.

She's a great woman, and all great women wish to be Empresses; her name, the
Lady Humour.


Strange name, I never saw her, knew her not:
What kind of creature is she?

Creature! of a skin soft as Pomatum, sleek as Jellie, white as blanched
Almonds; no Mercers wife ever handled yard with a prettier breath; sweet as a
Monkeys; lips of cherries, teeth of pearl, eyes of diamond, foot and leg as --



And what's thy name?

'Tis but a folly to tell it, my name is Folly.

Fumorand Folly; to my listening ear
Thy Ladies praises often have been sung,
The trumpet sounding forth her graceful beauties.
Kindles high flames within me to behold her.

She's as hot as you for your heart.

This Lady, called the Spring, is an odd trifle.

A green sickness thing, I came by the way of a hobbyhorse letter of Attorney,
sent by my Lady as a spy to you: Spring a hot Lady, a few fields and gardens
lass, can you feed upon sallets and tanzies, eat like an Ass upon grass every
day at my Ladies, coms to you now a Goose, now a Woodcock, nothing but fowl;
fowl pies, platters all covered with foul, and is not fowl very good fare?


Yea marry is't sir, the fowl being kept clean.
My admiration wastes it self in longings
To see this rare piece, I'll see her; what are Kings, were not their
Pleasures varied; shall not mine then? should day
Last ever, 'twould be loathed as night.
Change is the sauce that sharpens appetite;
The way, I'll to her.

The way is windy and narrow; for look you, I do but wind this Cornet, and if
another answer it, she coms.


Be quick then --

Is this that slower the Spring so dotes upon?

This is that hony-suckle, she sticks in her ruff.

A bedfellow for a Fairy.

Admired perfection!
You let my praises to so high a tune,
My merits cannot reach em.

My heart-strings shall then,
As mine eye gives that sentence on thy person;
And never was mine eye a corrupt Judge,
That Judge to save thee would condemn a world,
And lose mankind to gain thee; 'tis not the Spring*
With all her gaudy arbors, nor perfumes
Sent up in flattering incense to the Sun,
For shooting glames at her, and for sending
Whole quires of singers to her every morn,
With all her amorous fires, can heat thy bl^od
as I can with one kiss.

The rose-lipp'd dawning
Is not so melting, so delicious.
Turn me into a bird that I may sit
Still singing in such boughs.

What bird?

A Ring-tayl.

Thou shalt be turned to nothing but to mine,
My Mine of pleasures which no hand shall rifle
But this, which in warm Nectar bathes the palm:
Invent some other tyres; music; stay; none

Hoy-day.

New gowns, fresh fashions, I am not brave enough
To make thee wonder at me.

Not the Moon
Riding at midnight in her crystal Chariot,
With all her Courtiers in their robes of stars
Is half so glorious.

This feather was a bird of Paradise,
Shall it be yours.

No Kingdom buies it from me.

Being in fools paradise he must not lose his bauble.

I am wrapped.

In your mothers smock.

I am wrapped above mans being, in being spher'd
In such a globe of ^arities, but say Lady
What these are that attend you.

All my attendants
Shall be to the sworn servants.

Folly is sworn to him already, never to leav him.

He.

A French Gentleman that trayls a Spanish pike. A Tailor.

We Mounsieur, hey nimbla upon de cross caper, me take a de measure of de
body from de top a de noddle to de heel and great toe, oh stish de fine: dis
collar is cut out in anger scurvy, ohais beeshes pincha de bum, me put one
French yard into de toder^ose.


N. French yards, they want a yard at least.

Shall I be brave then?

Golden as the sun.

What's he that looks so smickly?

A Flounder in a frying-pan, still skipping, one that loves mutton so well, he
always carries capers about him; his brains lie in his legs, and his legs
serve him to no other use then to do tricks, as if he had bought em of a
Juggler, he's an Italian dancer, his name --


Signior Lavolta (Messer mio) me tesha all de bella Corantoes, galliardaes,
piamettaes, capeorettaes, amorettas dolche dolche to declamante do bona robaes
de Tu^cana.


I ne'er shall be so nimble.

Yes, if you power quick-silver into your shin-bones, as he does.


This now?

A most sweet Spaniard.

A Confecianador, which in your tongue is, a Comfitmaker of Toledo, I can teach
sugar to slip down your throat a million of ways.


And the throat has but one in all, oh Toledo!

In Conservs, candies, marmalades, sinkadoes, ponadoes, marablane, Bergamo^u,
aranxues muria, lymons, berengenas of Toledo, oriones, potataes of Malag^, and
ten millions more.


Now 'tis ten millions, a Spaniard can multiply.

I am your servidor.

My palate pleased to what's this last?

I am a Gun that can roar, two stelettoes in one sheath, I can fight and bounce
too, my Lady by me, pre^ents this sword and belt to you


(...) Mistress.

Put (...) on.

^le dri^ you how to give the lie, and stab in the punto, if you dare not
^ight, then how to vamp a rotten quarrel without ado.


How: dare not fight! there's in me the Suns fire.

No more of this, dances awake the music*
Oyes! Music!

No more of this, this sword arms me for battle.

Com then, let th^u and I rise up in arms,
The field embraces, kisses our alarms.

A dancer and a ^ailor, yet stand still: strike up-Dance.

Oh! thou enticing strumpet, how durst thou
Throw thy voluptuous spells about a Temple
That's consecrate to me.

Poor Spring, goodie herb-wife;
How dare thou cast a glance on this rich jewel
I ha bought for mine own wearing.

Bought! art thou sold then?

Yes, with her gifts, she buys me with her graces.

Graces! A Witch.

What can she give thee.

All things.

Which I for one bubble cannot add a sea too.

And show him a hobbie-horse in my likeness.

My Raybright, hear me; I regard not these.

What dowry can you bring me?

Dowry! ha! is't com to this? am I held poor and base?
A girdle make, whose buckles stretched to the length
Shall reach from th'artick to th'antartick pole:
What ground soever thou can with that enclose
I'll give thee freely, not a Lark that calls
The morning up, shall build on any turf
But she shall be thy tenant, call thee Lord,
And for her rent pay thee in change of songs.

I must turn bird-catcher.

Do you think to have him for a song?

Live with me still; and all the measures
Plaid to by the spheres, I'll teach thee;
Let's but thus dally, all the pleasures
The Moon beholds, her man shall reach thee.

Divinest!

Here's a Lady.

Is't come to who gives most?
The self same Bay tree into which was turned:
Peneian Daphne, I have still kept green;
That tree shall now be thine, about it sit:
All the old poets with fresh Laurel Crowned,
Singing in verse the praise of chastity;
Hither when thou shalt come, they all shall rise,
Sweet Cantoes of thy love, and mine to sing:
And invoke none but thee as Delian King.

Live by singing ballets?

Oh! base, turn poet, I would not be one my self.

Dwell in mine arms, aloft we'll hover,
And see fields of armies fighting:
Oh! part not from me, I will discover
There, all but books of fances writing;

Not far off stands the Hipocrenian well,
Whither i'll lead thee, and but drinking there,
To welcome thee, nine Muses shall appear:
And with full bowles of knowledge thee inspire.

Hang knowledge, drown your muse.

I, ^, or they'll drown themselves in Sack Claret

Do not regard their toys,
Be but my darling, age to free thee
From her curse, shall fall a dying;
Call me their Empress; time to see thee
Shall for get his art of flying.

Oh! my all excellence.

Speak thou for me; I am fainting.

Leave her, take this and travel, tell the world
I'll bring thee in to all the Courts of Kings;
Where thou shalt stay, and learn their languages;
Kiss Ladies, revel out the nights in dancing:
The day, manly pastimes; snatch from time
His glas^e, and let the golden sands run forth
As thou shalt jog them, riot it, go brave;
Spend half a world, my Queen shall bear thee out:
Yet all this while, tho thou climb hills of years,
Shall not one wrinkle sit upon thy brow,
Nor any sickness shake thee; Youth and Health,
As slaves, shall lackey by thy Chariot wheels;
And who, for two such jeweller, would not sell
The East, and West Indies; both are thine, so that --

What?

All lies gallap over the world, and not grow old, nor be sick; a lie; one
gallant went but into France last day, was never his own man since, another
stepped but into the low Countries, and was drunk dead under the table, another
did but peep into England, and it cost him more in good morrows blown up to
him under his window, by Drums and Trumpets, then his whole voyage, besides he
run mad upon it.


Here's my last farewell, ride a long with me;
I'll raise by art, out of b^se earth, a palace;
Whither thy self, waving a Crystal stream,
Shall call together the most glorious spirits
Of all the Kings that have been in the world;
And they shall come only to feast with thee.

Rare!

At one end of this palace shall be heard
That Musique which gives motion to the Heaven;
And in the middle Orpheus shall sit and weep,
For sorrow that his Lu^e had not the charms
To bring his fair Euredice from hell;
Then at an other end --

I'^e hear no more;
This ends your strife, you only I adore.

Oh! I am sick at heart; un^hankfull man
'^is thou hast wounded me, farewell, she is led in.

Farewell?

Health, recover her; sirrah Youth, look to her.

That bird that in her nest sleeps out the spring
May fly in Summer, but with sickly wing.

I owe thee for this pill, Doctor.

The Spring will Dye sure.

Leather?

If she does, Folly here is a kind of a foolish poet,
And he shall write her Epitaph.

Against the morning
See it then writ, and I'll reward thee for it.

It shall not need.

'Tis like it shall not need, this is your Folly,

He shall be ever yours.

I hope ever to be mine own folly,
He's one of our fellows.

In triumph now I lead thee; no, be thou Caesar,
And lead me.

Neither; we'll ride with equal state
Both in one Chariot, since we have equal fate*

Each do his office to this man your Lord;
For tho Delight, and Youth, and Health should leave him,
This Ivory gated palace shall receive him.

OH my deer love the Spring, I am cheated of thee;
Thou had a body the four elements
Dwelt never in a fairer; a mind princely?
Thy language like thy fingers, Musical.
How cool were thou in anger, in thy diet
How temperate, and yet sumptuous; thou would not waste
The weight of a sad violet in excess;
yet still thy board had dishesnumberlesse.
Dumb beasts even loved thee; once a young Lark
Sate on thy hand, and gazing on thine eyes
Mounted and sung, thinking them moving skies --

I ha don my Lord: my Muse has pumped hard for an Epitaph upon the late
departed Spring, and here her lines spring up.


Read.

Read; so I will, pleas you to reach me your high ears.

Here lie's the blithe Spring,
Who first tanght birds to sing;
Yet in April herself fell a crying:
Then May growing hot
A sweating sickness she got,
And the first of June lay a dying.
Yet no month can say
But her merry daughter May
Stuck her Coffin with flowers great plenty.
The Cuckoo sung in verse
An Epitaph over her hearse,
But assure you the lines were not dainty.

No more are thine, thou Idiot; hast thou none
To poison with thy nasti^iggs but mine,
My matchless frame of nature, Creations wonder,
Out of my sight.

I am not in it, if I were, you'd see but s^urvily; you find fault as Patron^
do with books, to give nothing.


Yes balled one, beastly base one, blockish away;
Vex me not fool, turn out a doors your rorer,
French Tailor, and that Spanish ginger-bread,
And your Italian skipper; then sir, your self.

My self! Carbonado me, bastinado me, strapado me, hang me, I'll not stir; poor
Folly, honest Folly, jocundary Folly forsake your Lordship; no true
Gentleman hates me, and how many women are given daily to me (if I would take
em) some not far off know; Tailor gon, Spanish figg gon, all you but I --


My waiters coited off by you, you flea them;
Whence com these thunder-bolts, what furieshaunt you?

You.

She!

Yes, and thou.

Baw waw.

I shall grow old, diseased, and melancholy;
For you have robbed me both of Youth and Health,
And that delight my Spring bestowed upon me:
But for you two, I should be wondrous good;
By you I have been cozened, baffled, and torn
From the embraces of the noblest creature.

Your Spring.

Yes she, even she, only the Spring:
One morning spent with her, was worth ten nights
With ten of the prime beauties in the world:
She was unhappy never, but in two sons,
March a rude roaring fool.

And April a whining puppy.

But May was a fine piece.

Mirror of faces.

Indeed May was a sweet creature, and yet a great raiser of May-poles.


When will you sing my praises thus?

Thy praises, that art a common creature.

Common!

Yes, common: I cannot pass through any Princes Court, Through any Country,
Camp, Town, City, Village, But up your name is cried, nay cursed; a vengeance
On this your debauched Humour.


A Vintner spoke those very words last night, to a company of roaring boys,
that would not pay their reckoning.


How many bastards hast thou?

None.

'Tis a lie, be judge by this your squire else.

Squire! worshipful Mr Folly.

The Courtier has his Humour, has he not Folly?

Yes marry has he, folly; the Courtier's humour is to be brave, and not pay
for it; to be proud, and no man cares for it.


Brave Ladies have their humours.

Who has to do with that, but brave Lords.

Your Citizens have brave humours.

Oh! but their wives have tickling humor^.

Yet don.

Humour Madam, if all are your bastards that are given to humour you, you have a
company of as arrant rascals to your children, as ever went to the gallows; a
Collier being drunk jossell'd a Knight into the kennel, and cried 'twas his
humour; the Knight broke his coxcomb, and that was his humour.


And yet you are not common.

No matter what I am:
Rail, curse, be frantic, get you to the tomb
Of your rare Mistress; dig up your dead Spring
And lie with her, kiss her; me, have you lost*

And I scorn to be found.

Stay: must I lose all comfort, dearest s^ay;
There's such a deal of magic in those eyes,
I'm charmed to kiss these only.

Are you so? kiss on, I'll be kissed some where I warrant.

I will not leav my Folly for a world.

Nor I you for ten.

Nor thee my love, for worlds piled upon worlds.

If ever for the Spring you do but sigh, I take my bells.

And I my hobby-ho^se, -- Will you be merry than, and jawfand.


As merry as the Cuckows of the spring,

Again.

How Lady, lies the way?

I'll be your convoy,
And bring you to the Court of the Suns queen,
(Summer a glorious and majestic creature)
Her face out-shining the poor Springs, as far
As a sun-beam does a lamp, the moon a star.

Such are the spheres I'd move in, attend^: us Folly.

I muse, my nimble Folly stays so long.

He's quick enough of foot, and counts, I swear)
That minute cast away, not spent on you.

His company is music, next to yours;
Both of you are a Consort; and I, your tunes
Lull me asleep, and when I most am sad,
My sorrows vanish from me in soft dreams:
But how far must we travel, is it our motion
Puts us in this heat; or is the air
In love with us, it clings with such embraces,
It keeps us in this warmth,

This shows, her Court
Is not far off, you covet so to see:
Her subjects seldom kindle needless fires,
The Sun lends them his flames.

Has she rare buildings.

Magnificent and curious; every noon
The horses of the day bait there, whilst he
(Who ^n a golden Chariot makes them gallop
In twe^ve h^urs over the world) alights a while,
To give a love-kisse to the Summer queen.

And shall we have fine sights there?

Oh!

And hear more ravishing music?

All the choristers
That learned to sing in the Temple of the Spring;
But her attain such cunning, that when the winds
Roar and are mad, and clouds in antic gambols
Dance over our head, their voices have such charms,
They'll all stand still to listen --

Excellent.

I sweat like a pampered jade of Asia, and drop like a Cob-nut out of Africa --



Back: whither go you?
Oyes! this way.

None must pass:
Here's kept no open Court; our Queen this day
Rides forth a hunting, and the air being hot,
She will not have rude throngs to stifle her -- back

And did break her heart then*

Yes with disdain.

The heart of my deer mother nurse the Spring,
I'll break his heart for 't^ had she not a face,
Too tempting for a Jove.

The graces sate,
On her fair eye-lids ever, but his youth
Lusting for change, so doted on a Lady,
Fantastic, and yet fair; a piece of wonder:
They call her Humour; and her parasite Folly,
He cast the sweet Spring off, and ^urn'd us from him;
Yet his celestial kinsman, for young Raybright
Is the Snns darling: knowing his jorneying hither
To see thy glorious Court, sends me before
To attend on you, and spend all my hours
In care for him --

Obey your charge -- oh thou builder,
Of me thy hand maid! Landlord of my life,
Life of my love, throne where my glories sit;
I ride in trynmph on a silver cloud;
Now I but see thee.

Rise; is Raybright come yet.

Not yet.

Be you indulgent over him,
And lavish thou thy treasure --

Our princely Cousin Raybright,
Your darling, and the worlds delight, is come.

who with them.

A goddess in a woman, attended
By a prating saucy fellow, called Folly.

They'll confound him, but he shall run,
Go and receive him.

Your sparkling eyes, and his arrival, draws
Heaps of admirers; earth it self will sweat
To bear our weights; vouchsafe, bright power, to borrow
Winds not too rough from Aeolus, to fan
Our glowing faces

I will: ho Aeolus;
Unlock the jail, and lend a wind or two,
To fan my girl the Summer.

I will.

No rorers.

No.

Quickly.

Fly you slaves, Summer sweats; cool her.

Hay-makers, Rakers, Reapers and Mowers,
Wait on your Summer-Queen,
Dress up with Musk-rose her Eglentine bowers,
Daffadills strew the green,
Sing dance and play
'Tis Holy day.
the Sun does bravely shine
on our ears of corn.
Rich as a pearl
coms every girl,
this is mine, this is mine, this is ^ine;
Let us die, ere away they be born.
Bow to the Sun, to our Queen, and that fair one
com to bebold our sparts,
Each bonny lass here is counted a rare one,
as those in Princes Courts.
these and we
with Country glee
will teach the woods to resound,
and the hills with eccho's hollow:
skipping lambs
their bleating dams
amongst kids shall trip it round,
for joy thus our wenches we follow.
Wind, jollie Hunts-men, your neat Bugles shrilly,
Hounds make a lusty cry:
Spring up, you Faulconers, the Partridges freely,
then let your brave H^ks fly.
Horses amain
ever ridg, over plain,
the Dogs have the Stag in chase;
'tis a sport to content a King.
So ho ho, through the skies
how the proud bird flies,
and sousing kills with a grace,
Now the Deer falls, hark how they ring. --
Leav off, the Sun is angry, has drawn
A cloud before his face*

He is vexed to see
That proud star shine near you, at whose rising
The Spring fell sick and died; think what I told you,
His coins will kill you else.

It cannot -- fair Prince!
Though your illustrious name has touched mine ear:
Till now I never saw you, nor never saw
A man whom I more love, more hate,

Ha Lady!

For him I love you, from whose glittering rai^s
You boast your great name, for that name I hate you,
Because you killed my mother, and my nurse.

Killed he my grandmother, Plenty will never
Hold you byth' hand again.

You have free leave
To thrust your arm into our treasury
As deep as I my self: Plenty shall wait
Still at your elbow, all my sports are yours,
Attendants yours, my state and glorie's yours;
But these shall be as sun-beams from a glass
Reflected on you, not to give you heat
To dote on a smooth face, my spirit's too great,

Divinest!

Let her go.

And I'll go after, for I must and will have a fling at one of
her plum-trees.

I ne'er was scorned till now.

This is that Alteza,
That Rhodian wonder, gazed at by the Sun:
I feared thine eyes should have beheld a face,
The Moon has not a clearer, this! a dowdy,

An Ouzle, this a queen-apple; or a crab she gave you.

She bid's you share her treasure, but who keeps it.

She point's to trees great with child with fruit, but when
delivered grapes hang in ropes, but no drawing, not a drop of
wine: whole ears of corn lay their ears together for bread, but
the divel a bit I can touch.

Be ruled by me once more, leave her.

In scorn, as he does me.

Scorn! If I be not deceived, I ha seen Summer go up and
down with hot Codlings; and that little baggage, her daughter
Plenty, crying six bunches of Raddish for a penny.

Thou shalt have nobler welcomes, for I'll bring thee
To a brave and bounteous house-keeper, free Autumn.

Oh! there's a lad -- let's go then.

Where's this Prince, my mother; for the Indies
Must not have you part --

Must not?

No; must not.
I did but chide thee like a whistling wind
Playing with levy dancers: when I told thee
I hated thee, I lied; I dote upon thee.
Unlock my garden of th'Helperides,
By dragoons kept (the Apples being pure gold)
Take all that fruit, 'tis thin^.

Love but my mother, I'll give thee corn enough to feed
the world.

I need not golden apples, not yourcorn;
What land so ever, the worlds surveyor, the Sun
Can measure in a day, I dare call mine:
All kingdoms I have right to, I am free
Of every Country; in the four elements
I have as deep a share as an Emperor;
All beasts whom the earth bears are to serve me,
All birds to sing to me, and can you catch me
With a tempting golden Apple,

Shee'^ too good ^or thee;
When she was born, the Sun for joy did rise
Before his time, on^ly to kiss those (...),
Which having touched, he stole from them such store
O^ ligh^, she shone more bright then e're before:
At which he vowed, when ever thee did die,
He would snatch them u^, and in h^s (...) sphere
Place them, since ^he had no two stars so clear.

Let him now sna^ch them up away.

Away, and leav this Gypsy.

Oh! I am lost.

Love scorned, of no triumph more then love can boast.

This strump will confound him.

She has me deluded --

Is Raybright gon.

Yes, and his spiteful eyes
Have shot darts through me.

I, thy wounds will cure,
And lengthen out thy days, his followers gon*
Cupid and Fortune take you charge of him.
Here thou, my brightest Queen, must end thy reign,
Some nine months hence I'll shine on thee again.

YOur entertainment, Autumns bounteous queen,
Have feasted me with rarities as delicate,
As the full growth of an abundant year
Can ripen to my palate.

They are but courtings
Of gratitude to our dread Lord the Sun,
From whom thou draw thy name; the feast of fruits
Our gardens yield, are much too course for thee;
Could we cont^act the choice of natures plenty
Into one form, and that form to contain
All delicates, which the wanton sense
Would relish: or desire to invent to please it,
The present were unworthy far to purchase
A sacred league of friendship.

I have rioted
In ^urfets of the ear, with various music
Of warbling birds; I have smelt perfumes of roses,
And every flower with which the fresh-t^im'd earth
Is mantled in: the Spring could mock my senses
With these fine barren lullabies, the Summer
Invited my then ranging eyes to look on
Large fields of ripened corn, presenting trifles
Of waterish petty dainties, but my taste
Is only h^re pleased, the other objects claim
The y^e of formal, these are real bounties,

(...) can transcend thy wishes, whom the creatures
Of every age and quality posts, madding
From land to land, and sea to sea to meet,
Shall wait upon thy nod, Fortune and Cupid,
Love yield thy quiver, and thine arrows up
To this great Prince of Time, before him Fortune,

Power out thy mint of trea^ures, crown him sovereign
Of what his thoughts can glory to command:
He shall give payment of a royal prize
To Fortune, Judgment, and to Cupids eyes.
Be a Merchant, I will freight thee
With all store that time is bought for.

Be a lover, I will wait thee
With success in life most sought for.

Be enamoured on bright honour,
And thy greatness shall shine glorious.

Chastity, if thou smile on her,
Shall grow servile, thou victorious.

Be a warrior, conquest ever
Shall triumphantly renown thee.

Be a Courtier, beauty never
Shall but with her duty crown thee.

Fortunes wheel is thine, depose me,
I'm thy slave, thy power hath bound me.

Cupids shafts are thine, dispose me,
Love loves love, thy graces wound me.

Cup. Live, reign, pi^e is fames jewel;
We obey, oh! be not cruel.

You ravish me with infinites, and lay
A bounty of more sovereigntie and amazement,
Then the Atlas of mortality can support --

Whats here.

Nay pray observe.

Be my hearts Empress, build your kingdom there.

With what an earnestness he complies.

Upon my life he means to turn Costermonger, and is projecting
how to forestall the market; I shall cri^ Pippins
rarely.

Till now, my longings were ne'er satisfied,
And the desires my sensual appetite
Were only fed with barren expectations,
To what I now am filled with.

Yes we are filled and must be emptied, these wind fruits have distended my
guts into a Lenten pudding, there's no fat in them, my belly swells, but my
sides fall away, a month of such diet would make me a living Anatomy.


These are too little, more are due to him,
That is the patternt of his fathers glory;
Dwell but amongst us, industry shall strive,
To make another artificial nature;
And change all other seasons into ours.

Shall my heart break, I can contain no longer.

How fares my loved Humour?

A little stirred, no matter, i'll be merry:
Call for some Music, do not; i'll be melancholy.

A sullen humour, and common, in a dicer that has lost all
his money.

Lady! I hope 'tis no neglect of Conrtesie
In us, that so disturbs you, if it rise
From any discontent, reveal the cause,
It shall be soon removed.

Oh! my heart, help to unlace my gown.

And unlace your petticoat.

Saucy, how now! 'tis well you have some sweet heart,
some new fresh sweet heart; i'm a goodly fool to be thus plaie^
on, stalled, and foiled.

Why Madam?
We can be courteous without stain of honour;
'Tis not the raging of a lustful blood
That we desire to tame with satisfaction:
Nor hath his masculine graces in our breast
Kindled a wanton fire, our bounty gives him
A welcome free, but chaste and honourable.

Nay 'tis all one, I have a tender heart, Come, come, l^'s drink.


A humour in fashion with gallants, and brought out of the
low Countries.

Fie! there's no music in thee, let us sing.

Here'^ humour in the right trim, a few more such toys
would make the little world of man run mad, as the Puritan
that sold his conscience for a May pole --

The m^aning of this mirth.

My Lord is coming.

Let us attend, to humble our best thanks,
For these high favours --

My dearest Lord, according to the injunction
Of your command, I have with all observance,
Given entertainment to this noble stranger.

The Sun-born Raybright, minion of my love,
Let us be twins in heart, thy grandsires bea^es
Shine graciously upon our fruits, and vines:
I am his vassail-servant, tributary:
And for his sake, the knigdomes I possess,
I will divide with thee, thou shalt command
The Lidian Tmolus, and Campanian mounts,
To nod their grape-crownd heads into thy bowles,
Expressing their rich juice: a hundred grains
Both from the Beltick and Sicilian fields,
Shall be Congested for thy sacrifice
In Ceres fane, Tiber shall pay thee Apples,
And Sicyon Olives, all the Choicest fruits,
Thy Fathers heat doth ripen.

Make me but treasurer
Of your respected favours, and that honour
Shall equal my ambition.

My Pomona,
Speed to prepare a banquet of novelties;
This is a day of rest, and wo^th whiles,
Will sport before our friends, and shorten time
With length of wonted revels.

I ob^ y:
Will it please you Madam, a retirement
From these extremes in men, more tolerable,
Will better fit our modesties.

I'll drink, and be a Bacchanalian; no, I will not;

Fe'ne what humour pleases.

Raybright, a health to Phoebus -- Drinks.
These are the Peans which we sing to him,
And ye wear no bays, our cups are only
Crowned with Lyeus blood, to him a health --

I must pledge that too.

Now one other health
To our grand Patron, called, good fellowship;
Whose livery, all our people hereabout
A^e called in. --

I am for that too.

'Tis well, let it go round, and as our custom i^
Of recreations of this n^ture, join,
Your voices, as you drink, in lively notes;
Sing Ios unto Baccus.

Hey hoes, a god of winds, there's at least four and twenty of them imprisoned
in my belly; it I sigh not forth some of them, the rest will break out at the
back door; and how sweet the Music of their roaring will be, let an Irishman
judge.


He is a songster too.

A very foolish one; my Musiques natural, and came by inheritance; my father
was a French Nightingale, and my mother an English wagtail; I was born a
Cuckoo in the Spring, and lost my voice in Summer, with laying my eggs in a
sparrows nest; but I'll venture for one, fill my dish; every one take his own,
and when I hold up my finger, off with it.


Begin.

Cast away care, he that Loves sorrow,
Lengthens not a day, nor can buy to morrow:
Money is trash, and he that ^ill spend it,
let him drink merrily, Fort^ne will send it.
Merrily, Merrily, Merrily, Ohho.
Play it off stiffly, we may not part so: merrily c.
Wine is a Charm, it heates the blood too,
Cowards it will arm, if the wine be good too;
quickens the wi^, and makes the back able;
scorns to submit to the watch or C^nstable.
M^r^ly, c.
Pots fly about, give us more Liquor;
Brothers of a rowt, our brains will flow quicker;
empty the Cask, score up, we care not,
fill all the Pots again, drink on, and spare not,
Merrily, c.
Now have I more air then ten Musicians, besides there is a whirlwind in wind
in my brains, I could both caper and turn round.


Oh! a Dance by all means,
Now cease your healths, and in an active motion
Bestir ye nimbly, to beguile the hours.

I am for you in that too, 'twill jogge down the lees of these rowses into a
freer passage; but take heed of sure footing, 'tis a slippery season; many men
fall by rising, and many women are raised by falling --


How likes ^ur friend this pastime?

Above utterance,
Oh! how have I in ignorance and dullness,
Run through the progress of so many minutes;
Accusing him, who was my lifes first author,
Of slackness and neglect, whilst I have dream't
The folly of my days in vain expense,
Of useless taste and pleasure; pray my Lord
Let one health pass about, whilst I be think me
What course I am to take, for being denison
In your unlimited courtesies.

Devise a round,
You have your liberty.

A health to Autumns self.
And here let time hold still his restless glass,
That not another golden sand may fall
To measure how it passes.

Continue here with me, and by thy presence
Create me favourite to thy fair progenitor;
And be mine heir.

I want words to express
my thankfullnesse.

What ere the wanton Spring,
When she doth diaper the ground with beauti^s,
Toils for, comes home to Autumn, Summers sweats
^ither in pasturing her furlongs, reap^ng
The cropp of bread, ripening the fruits for food,
Autumnes garners house them, Autumnes jollities
Feeds on them; I alone in every land
Traffic my useful merchandise, gold and jewels,
Lo^dly possessions, are for my commodities
Mo^gag'd and los^, (...) Chief moderator
Between the che^k-parch'd Summer, and the extremes
Of Winters tedious frost; nay, in my self
I do con^aine another teaming Spring*
Surety of health prosperity of life
Belongs to Autumn, if thou then can hope
To ^nherit immortality in frailty,
live here (...) time be spent, yet be not old.

(...) the Sun, you are the years great emperor.

On now, to new veriety of feasts;
Princ^ly contents are fit for princely guest^, Exit --

My Lord I'll follow; sure I am not well.

Surely I am half drunk, or monstrously mistaken, you
mean to stay here belike.

Whither should I go else?

Nay, if you will kill your self in your own defence, I'll
not be of your Jurie --

You have had precious pleasures, choice of drunkenness;
will you be gon?

I feel a war within me,
And every doubt that resolution kills
Springs up a greater in the years revolution;
There cannot be a season more delicious,
When Plenty ( Summers daughter) empties daily
Her cornucopia, filled with choicest viands.

Plenties horne is always full in the City.

When temperate heat of^ends not with extremes;
When day and night have their distinguishment
With a more equal measure.

Ha! in contemplation.

Troubling himself with this windy-gutts; this bellyaking Autumn; this Apple
Iohn Kent, and warden of Fruiterers hall.


When the bright Sun, with kindly distant beams
guilds ripened fruit.

And what fine meditation transports you thus,
You study some Encomium
Upon the beauty of the gardens Queen,
You'd make the paleness to supply the vacancie
Of Cinthia's dark defect.

Madamllet but a green sickness chamber-maid be thoroughly steeled, if she get
not a better color in one month, I'll be fors^ited to Autumn for ever, and
fruite-eate my flesh into a consumption.


Come Raybright, whatsoer'e suggestions
Have won on thy apt weakness, leave th^se empty
And hollo^ sounding pleasures, that include
Only a windy substance of delight,
Which every (...) alters into air:
I'll stay no longer here.

I must.

You shall not,
These are adulterate mixtures of vain follies; I'll bring thee
Into the Court of
Winter, there thy food:
Shall not be sickly fruits, but healthful broathes,
Strong meat and dainty.

Pork, Beef, Mutton, (very sweet Mutton, veale Venson, Capon, fine ^at Capon,
part^idge, Snite, plover, larks, Teale admirable Teale, my Lord.


Mystery there, like to another nature,
Confects the substance of the chois^st fruits,
In a rich candy, with such imitation
Of form and colour, 'twill deceive the eye:
Until the taste be ravished.

Comfits and Carawaies, Marchpaines and Marmalades Suger-plums and P^ppin-pies,
ginger bread and Walnuts


Nor is his bounty limited, hee'le not spare
T'exhaust the treasure of a thousand Indies.

Two hundred pound suppers, and neither fiddlers nor broken glasses reckoned,
be^ides, a hundred pound a throw, ten times together, if you can hold out so
long.


You tell me wonders!
Be my conductresse, l'le fly this place in secret;
Three quarters of my time is almost spent,
The last remains to crown my full content.
Now if I fail, let man's experience read me;
'Twas Humour, joined with Folly, did mislead me.

Leav this naked season,
Wherein the very trees shake off their locks,
It is so poor and barren.

And when the hair fall's off, I have heard a Poet say, 'tis no good sign of a
sound body.


Com let's go taste old Winter's fresh delights,
And ^ well with pleasures our big appetites.
The Summer, Autumn, and the Spring,
As 'twere conjoined in one conjugal ring;
An emblem of four Provinces we sway,
Shall all attend our pastimes night and day;
Shall both be subject to our glorious state,
While we enjoy the blessings of our fate:
And since wee've notice that some barbarous spirits
Mean to oppose our entrance, if by words
They'll not desist, we'll force our way with swords.

HEar you the news neighbor?


Yes, to my grief neighbor; they say our Prince Raybright is coming hither,
with whole troops and trains of Courtiers; wee'r like to have a fine time on it
neighbor^.


Our Wives and Daughters are, for they are sure to get by the bargain, tho our
barn be emptied, they will be sure to be with barn for it: Oh! these Courtiers,
neighbours, are pesti^ent knaves; but ere l'le suffer it, l'le pluck a Crow with
some of em.


Faith neighbor let's lay our heads together, and resolve to die like men,
rather then live like beasts.


I, like horn-beasts, neighbor; they may talk and call us Rebels, but a figg
for that, 'tis not a fart matter; let's be true amongst our selves, and with our
swords in hand resist his entrance --


What such murmurings does your gall bring ^orth,
Will you prov't true, no good coms from the North;
Bold saucy mortals, dare you then aspire
With snow and ice to quench the sphere o^ fire:
Are your hear^s frozen like your clime, from thence
All temperate heat's fled of obedience:
How durst you else with force think to withstand
Your Princes entry into this his land;
A Prince who is so exc^ll^ntly good,
His virt^e is his honour, more then blood;
In whose clear natu^e, as two ^uns, do rise
The attributes of Merciful, and Wise:
Whose laws are so impartial, they must
Be counted heavenly, cause they are truly just:
Who does with princely moderation give
His subj^cts an example how to live;
Teaching their erring natures to direct
Their wills, to what it ought most to affect:
That as the Sun does unto all dispense
Heat, light, nay life from his full influence,
Yet you wild fools, possessed with giant rage,
Dare, in your lawless fury, think to wage
War against heaven, and from his shining throne
Pull Jove himself, for you to tread upon;
Were your head^ circled with his own green Oak,
Yet are they subject to his thunder-stroak;
And he can sink such wretches as rebel,
From heaven's sublime height, into the depth of hell.

The divel a can as soon, we fear no colours, let him do his worst; there's many
a tall fellow besides us, will die rather then see his living taken from them,
nay even eat up; all things are grown so dear, there's no ^nduring more mouths
then our own, neighbor.


You're a wise fellow, neighbor, prate is but prate; they say this Prince too
would bring new laws upon us, new rights into the Temples of ^ur gods, and
that's abominable, we'll all be hanged first --


A most fair prete^ce,
To found rebellion upon conscience;
Dull stubborn fools, whose perverse judgments still
Are gov^rn'd by the malice of your will,
Not by indifferent ^eason, which to you
Coms, as in droughs ^he elemental dew
Does on the parched earth, 'twets, but does not give
Moisture enou^h to ma^e the plants to live:
Things void of soul, can you conceive that he,
Who^e every thought's an act of piety,
Who's all religious, furnished with all good
That ever was comprised in flesh and blood,
Cannot direct you in the fi^est way
To serve those powers, to which himself does pay
True zealous worship* nay's so near allied
To them, himself must needs be deified --

Save you Gentlemen! '^is very cold, you live in frost, you've Winter still
about you.


What are you sir?

A Courtier sir; but you may gue^, a very ^oolish one, to leav the bright beams
of my Lord, the Prince, to travel hither; I have an Ague on me, do you not see
me shake: Well, if our Courtiers, when th^y com hither, have not warm young
wenches, good wines, and fires to heat their bloods, 'twill fre^z into an
Apopl^xie; farewell frost, l'le go seek a fire to thaw me, l'me all ice I fear
already.


Farewell and be hanged, ere such as these shall eat what we have ^weat for,
we'll spend our bloods; com neighbours, let's go call our company together, and
go meet this Prince he talks so of.


Some shall have but a sour welcome of it, if my Crab ^ tree cudgel hold here.


'Tis, I see,
Not in my power to alter destiny:
You're mad in your rebellious minds, but hear
What I presage, with understanding clear:
As your black thoughts are misty, take from me
This as a true and certain augury,
This Prince shall com, and by his glorious side
Lawrel-crown'd conquest shall in triumph ride,
Armed with the justice that attend's his cause,
You shall with penitence embrace his laws:
He to the frozen northern clime shall bring
A warmth so temperate, as shall force the Spring
Usurp my privilege, and by his Ray
Nigh^ shall be changed into perpetual day.
Plenty and happiness shall still increase,
As do^s his light, and Turtle-fo^t^d Peace
Dance like a Fairy through his realms, while all
That envy him shall like swift Comets fall,
By their own fire consumed, and glorious he
Ruling, as 'twere, the force of destiny,
Shall have a long and prosperous reign on earth,
Then fly to heaven, and give a new star birth.
But se^, our star appea^'^, and ^rom his eye
Fly thousand beams of sparkling majesty.
Bright son of Phebus! welcome, I begin
To feel the ice fall from my cris^ed skin;
For at your beams the Waggoner might thow
His Chariot, axell'd with Rephean snow;
Nay, the slow moving North-star having felt
Your temperate heat, his i^icles would melt.

What bold rebellious Catives dare disturb
The happy progress of our glorious peace*
Contemn the Justice of ou^ equal laws,
Profane those sacred rights, which still must be
Attendant on monarchal dignity.
I came to frolic with you, and to cheer
Your drooping souls by vigour of my beams;
And have I this strange welcome! reverend Winter!
I'm come to be your guest; your bounteous free
Condition does assure, I shall have
A welcome entertainment.

Illustrious sir! I am ignorant
How much expression my true zeal will want
To entertain you fitly, yet my love,
And hearty duty, shall be far above
My outward welcome, to that glorious ligh^
Of heaven, the Sun which cha^es hence the night;
I am so much a vastaile, that I'll strive,
By honouring you, to keep my faith alive
To him, brave Prince, tho you, who do inherit
Your fathers cheerful heat, and quickening spirit;
Therefore as I am Winter, wo^ne and spent
So far with age, I am Times monument;
Antiquities example, in my zeal,
I, from my youth, a ^pan of Time will steal
To open the free treasures of my Court,
And swell your soul with my delights and sport.

Never till now
Did admiration beget in me truly
The rare matched twins at once, pity and pleasure;
So royal, so abundant in earth's blessings,
Should not partake the comfort of those beams,
With which the Sun beyond extent doth cheer
The other seasons, yet my pleasures with you,
From their false charms, doth get the start as far
As heaven's great lamp from every minor star.

Sir! you can speak well, if your tongue deliver
The message of your heart, without some cu^ing
Of restraint, we may hope t^ enjoy
The lasting riches of your presence hence,
Without distrust or change

Winters sweet bride,
All Conquering Bounty, queen of harts, life's glory,
Natures perfection; whom all love, all serve;
To whom Fortune, even in extreame's a slave,
When I fall from my duty to thy goodness,
Then let me be ranked as nothing.

Come you, flatter me.

I flatter you! Why Madam? you are Bounty;
Sole daughter to the royal throne of peace.

He minds not me now.

Bounties self!
For you he is no soldier dares not fight,
No Scholar he, that dares not plead your merits,
Or study your best Sweetness, should the Sun,
Eclipsed for many years, forbear to shine
Upon the bosom of our naked pastures,
Yet where you are, the glories of your smiles
would warm the barren grounds, arm hartless misery,
And cherish desolation. Deed I honour you,
And as all others ought to do, I serve you*

Are these the rare sights, these the promised Complements.

Attendance on our revels, let delight
C^njoyn the day with sable-footed night;
Both shall forsake their orbs, and in one sphere
Meet in soft mirth, and harmless pleasures here;
While plump Lyeus shall, with garland crowned
Of triumph-Ivie, in full cups abound
Of Cretan wine, and shall dame Ceres call
To wait on you, at Winters festival:
While gaudy Summer, Autumn, and the Spring,
Shall to my Lord their Choicest viands bring.
We'll rob the sea, and from the subtle air,
Fetch her inhabitant, to supply our fare.
That were Apecious here, he in one night
Should sate with danties his strong appetite.
Begin our revels then, and let all pleasure
Flow like the Ocean, in a boundless measure --

Wit and pleasure soft attention,
Grace the sports of our invention.

Conceit peace, for Detraction
Hath already drawn a faction,
Shall deride thee.

Antic leave me;
For in laboring to bereave me
Of a sch^lars praise, thy dotag: -- Shall be hist at.

Here's a hot age;
When such petty p^nmen covet
Fame by folly, on, l'le prove it
Scurvi^ by thy par^, and try thee
By thine own wit.

I defy thee,
Here are nobler Judges, wit
Cannot suffer where ^hey sit.

Prithee foolish Conceit, leave off thy set-spe^ches, and come to the conceit
if self in plain languages; what goodly thing is't, in the name of laughter?


Detraction do thy worst, Conceit appears,
In honour of the Sun, their fellow-friend,
Before thy censure; know then that the spheres,
Have for a while resigned their orbs, and lend
Their seats to the Four Elements, who joined
With the Four known Complexions, have atoned
A noble I ague, and severally put on
Material bodies; he^e amongestem none
Observes a difference; Earth and Air alike
Are sprightly active; Fire and Water seek
No glory of pre-eminence; Phlegm and Blood,
Choler and Melancholy, who have stood
In c^ntrari^ties, now meet for pleasure,
To enterain Time in a courtly measure.

Imposs^ble and inproper; first to personate insensible C^eatures, and next to
compound quite opposite humours; fie, fie, fie, i'^s abo^inable.


Fond ignorance! how dare thou vainly scan
Imp^ssibility; what reigns in man
Without disorder; wisely mixed by nature,
To fashion and preserve so high a creature.

Sweet sir! when shall our mortal eyes behold this new
pe^ce of wonder;
We must gaze on the stars for it doubtless,

See, thus the cl^uds fly off, and run in chase,
When the Sun's bounty lends peculiar grace.

Fine in faith; pretty, and in good earnest; but sirrah scholar; will they come
down too?


Behold em well, the foremost represents
Air, the most sportive of the Elements,

Animble rascal, I warrant him some Aldermans son; wondrous giddy and
light-headed; one that blew his patrimony away in feather and Tobacco.


The next near him is Fire.

A choleric gentleman, I should know him, a younger brother and a great
spender, but seldom or never carries any money about him; he was begot when the
sign was in Taurus, for a rores like a Bull, But is indeed a Bell-weather.


The third in rank is Water.

A phlegmatic cold piece of stuff, his father me thinks should be one of the
Dunce-table, and one that never drunk strong beer in's life but at festival
times, and then he caught the heart-burning a whole vacation and half a Term
after.


The fourth is Earth.

A shrewd plodding-pated fellow, and a great lover of news; I guess at the
rest, Blood is placed near Air, Choler near Fire, Phlegm and Water are sworn
brothers, and so are Earth and Melancholy.


Fair nymph of Harmony, be it thy task
To sing them down, and rank them in a mask. --
See the Elements conspire,
Nimble Air does court the Earth,
Water does commix with Fire,
To give our Princes pleasure birth;
Each delight, each joy, each sweet,
In one composition meet.
All the seasons of the year,
Winter does invoke the Spring,
Summer does in pride appear,
Autumn forth its fruits doth bring,
And with ^mulation pay
Their tribute to this Holy-day;
In which the Darling of the Sun is ^om,
To make this place a new Elifium.

How do these pleasures please?

Pleasures!

Live her^,
And be my Lord's friend, and thy sports shall vary
A thousand ways, invention shall b^get
Conceits as curious ^s the thoughts of chang^
Can aim at.

Trifles: progress over the year
Again my Raybright, therein like the Sun,
As he in heaven runs his circular course,
So thou on earth run thine, for to be fed
With stale delights, breeds dullness and contempt;
Think on the Sp^ing.

She was a lovely Virgin.

My royal Lord!
Without offence, be pleased but to afford
Me give yo^ my true figure, do not scorn
My age, nor think, cause I appear forlorn,
I serve for no use, 'tis my sharper breath
Does purge gross exhalations from the earth;
My frosts and snows do purify the air
From choking fogs, makes the sky clear and fair:
And though by nature cold and chill I be,
Yet I (...) warm in bounteous charity;
And can, my Lord, by grave and sage advice,
Bring you to the happy shades of Paradise.

^hat wonder; Oh! can you ^bring me thither?

I can direct and point you out a path

But where's the guide?
Quicken thy spirits, Raybright, I'll not leav thee,
We'll run the self same race again, that happiness
These lazy, sleeping, tedious winters nights
Become not noble action.

To the Spring
I am resolved -- Oh! what strange light appears;
The Sun is up sure.

Wanton Darling look, and worship with amazement.
Oes! gracious Lord.

Thy sands are numbered, and thy glass of frailty
^ out to the last: here in this mirror
Le^ man behold the circuit of his fortunes;
The (...) of the Spring dawns like the Morning,
Bedewing Childhood with unrelish'd beauties
Of gawdie sights; the Summer, as the Noon,
Shines in delight of Youth, and ripens strength
To Autumns Manhood, here the Evening grows,
And knits up all felicity in folly;
W^nter at last draws on the Night of Age;
Yet still a humour of some novel fancy
Untasted, or untried, puts off the minute
Of resolution, which should bid farewell
To a vain world of weariness and sorrows.
The powers from whom man does derive his pedigree
Of his creation, with a royal bounty
Give him heal^h, youth, delight for free attendants
To rectify his carriage: to be thankful
Again to them, Man should cashier his riots,
His bosom whorish sweet-heart, idle Humour;
His Reasons dangerous seducer, Folly; then shall
Like four straight pillars, the four Elements
Support the goodly structure of mortality;
Then shall the four Compl^xions, like four heads
Of a clear river, streaming in his body,
Nourish and comfort every vein and sinew.
No sickness of contagion, no grim death
Of deprivation of h^alths real blessings
Shall then affright the creature built by heaven,
Reserved to immortality, henceforth
In peace go to our Altars, and no more
Question the power of supernal greatness,
But give us leav to govern as w^e please
Nature, and her dominion, who from us,
And from our gracious influence, hath both being
And preservati^n; no replies but reverence.
Man hath a double guard, if time can win him;
Heavens power above him, his own peace within him.


