POssible? -- Dessandro quit from his Command of the Citadel? so sharply too?
Brushing times, my Lord: Pray, by virtue of what offence?


It may be treason to ask their wisdoms that; But the huge Mountebank, the
vulgar Rout quarrelled with's Religion, because 'tis not in the smallest Print:
And the King was to say nothing.


Good King: I could wish something, and heartily if I durst: Well, from grave
hypocrisy and beardless wisdom, good heaven deliver us: Nothing in his great
Fathers Memory, to hold him worthy of his place?


That makes him taste it to the extremity of Sense and Anger.


Let us but slight some Gull, or his gay dress (whose Clothes* and Folly, are
his sense of honour) how it will conjure up his blood, and bend his Brow? And
can Dessandro want a just and valiant anger to feel the merits of so brave a
Father, and his own (kept at a noble height) rendered disgraced and fullied? he
may believe a' has deserved better, both in his father and himself: But how
does his Resolution take it?


As Fire and Air comprest, when struggling they break forth in Thunders; or the
vexed wind amongst a Grove of Trees, spending his Scorn and Rage.


Men of his Soul and Constitution cannot play with their Passions; and stroke'
um tame, so provoked.

The Duke.


Let him be confident of me, in something more worthy of himself, then the
Command he has lost; and bid him use my Promise.


We are the Creatures of your Favour, and but own our lives to acknowledge it.
--


Here's State embroidery: -- but pray'e, what holiday things be they that
spread so in his Train? I don't remember I left such faces in the Court.


The first of them stalks in a knighthood, like A Boy in a Dutch Burgers
doublet; and 'tis as much too wide for him; a' his travelled, and speaks
Languages, as a Barbers Boy plays of the Gitterne; And those gay Clouts Sir came
out on's Fathers Shop.


His Remnants: the Other: that looks like the Age to come, which must be worse
then this.


His Fortune and Industry has preferred him to be Barber and Pimp; Two men's
places, till of late our Noblemen, growing frugal, do find one may do both the
Employments.


It is both thriving and gentile.


Gentile indeed; for they have produced Knights, and made Statesmen of broken
Citizens (with the help of a Wife) But he whose youth and sorrow shows him like
a fair day, set in a Cloudy Evening is --


The Lord De Castro; I know him, and me thinks some sparks of his Father, great
Valesco's Character, shines in this young man, through all the darkness of his
Fate.


That Name alone, has glory enough to make him a brave presage to us: Duke's
Fathers Character was derived and circled in himself; And a full age of Men
shall rarely show another of so much great and balanced Man in it.


They are all Court Fancies: Pageants of State, and want allowance both of
Brain and Soul to make their Blood and Titles weight.


He was strangely shuffled to the Block.


That Blow did bleed Castile too weak, and left us in a faint and sickly pang.


The Pulse, Sir, of Castile beats in another temper then when you left it.


I find it: The City wears a Cap, and looks as if all were not right there.


Except their Wives.


The Court me thinks has strangely changed Complexion too.


Those that deride us say --
The Clergy has caught the Falling Sickness;
The Court, a deep Consumption; and that
The Commons have the Spleen.

I know not what disease the Court has; but the Lords look as if they had over
sate themselves at Play, and lost odds; so scurvily.


How does your Lordship find the Ladies?


I have not been amongst um yet, to take up my Arrears; only had the Court
happiness to kiss her hand, who in her self, contracts them all for Grace and
Lustre, the Widow Duchess Claudilla.


Why there my admiration leaves you; I Grant her a brave and Courtly Girl: has
trim and dazzle enough of white and red, to attract the eye, like an indifferent
Copy, Flourished with Golden trailes; but place your Judgement nearer, it
retreats and Cries you mercy for the mistake: At distances, she is a Goodly
Landscape.


Alas, her blooming beauties yet languish and Pine over her Husbands Hearse,
like Roses scattered from the Mornings brow, into the days Parched Lap.


Their Spring will shine again, Grow Glorious and Fruitful in the Arms of her
De Flame; It is my hearty wish to their Affections; That Count does bear an
honoured Character from all that knows him.


A brave young man, and one that is more Honour to his Title than it to him;
But when must their Hymenial Tapers flame? and she offer her Turtle Pantings at
the Altar, Purpling the Morn with Blushes as she goes and scatter such Bright
Rays, as the Sun may dress his Beams with for that days Glory.


After he has Celebrated his Sister to Dessandros hand, he will not defer those
Minutes Long, and he thinks himself behind in some expression of their
Frienpship, until the knot meet there.


Cleara is a Lady of a sweet and honoured Fame.


All other of her Sex are dull and sullied imitations, Pale Glimmerings, set by
her: What ever the modest fictions of sweetened Pens has meant, she is their
Moral.


You speak like one that knows what Virtue is, and can love it.


I thank the Duke, he has a Right Soul; But, Prithee no more of these sad
Consolations, they hang upon my heart like ponderous w^ights at trembling wyres:
Or like the dull Labourings of that Clock which groaned our dear Father's Fatal
minute.


I have done.


I could chide this tame and phlegmy vapour from my blood: Our Passions melt
into soft Murmurs, like hollow Springes: -- the Manhood of cold hinds would not
be tempted to this sense, but leap with rage in their eyes; Brother, it would;
and wake them into Tempests; A wretched Fly, would show its spleen.


This Anger will but show men where you bleed and keep the wound still Green.


The Scar will stick for ever: -- Oh; the dark Hypocrisy and Juggling of our
Times? Great Men are Slaves to Slaves, and we are theirs: The Law's a Tame
Wolf, Cowards and Fools may stroke with Giving hands, while he shall Couchant
lie, and wagg the Tail; but show his Fangs at you and I: A Noble wish is
dangerous; is't not my Lord?


What Dessandro?


The Vulgar's a Kennel of black mouthed dogs that worry men's deserts and Fame:
my Curse fester in their Temples.


Prithee Dessandro, collect these Scattered thoughts.


I'll hollow them through all the world, and say it again; Worth and Honour now
are Crimes, and Giants against the State: My Lords; shall's be merry and talk
something the Hangman may thank us for?


Treason? I vow Dessandro, I speak the worst ex tempore, of any man living.


I could mutter it well enough; but I'm to marry A City Widow, and buy a Place
at Court.


When I have sold my Land we will venture on A Merry Catch, and ever subscribe
your Servant Noble Dessandro.


I shall find a Time and Place to pay your Lordship the Account of my
engagements.


Brother, my Attendance calls me to the King; I'll wait upon your Lordship, if
y' are for the Court.


Your Lordships Servant thither. --


So streams divide and Ruffle by their banks; My Brother's of a safe contracted
bosom; Can strangle his labouring Rages in their thought; When they do tug
like poisons at my breast, until I give them Air: But I'll observe and Creep
into Men's Souls: Hug my dear Anger to my self, until it gnaw my Entrails
through, that men may Court my patience, and discourse, As now they shun it.
And when black night has stretched her Gloomy limbs, and laid her head upon some
Mountain Top (bound up in foggy Mists) then keep my haunts by some dull
groaning stream with screeching Owls, and Bats, there pay my broken thoughts
unto thy Ghost Valesco: Echo shall wake and midnight, to help me Curse their
souls that thrust thee to thy grave, whilst I will hang about Nights neck until
the Moon do wake to Rescue her.


Dessandro? You must not be angry my Power came short -- of my desires to serve
you; We will try some other way: You see by what Engines the Times move; The King
refers all to his Council; and though they do not tie his hands, they hold 'em
by a strange Courtesy: I'm but a single Looker on: Perhaps they may take
notice of me for his Brother; that's when they please too: But this came
nearest to me, upon the engagement of my honour to deny my friend, and one
whose single Faith had been enough for all the Kingdoms safety, the holding of
such a Trifle as the Citadel.


It has recompensed me in part to know where that Close annoy lay which wounded
me in the dark: I shall now collect my self against it, and know My Lord, where
my poor life and powers are to be prostrate: Could I enlarge them to my wish
they might appear Sir, to your Highness use.


I know how far you can, bravest Man; your worth has taken fire here, where I'll
preserve it in a Noble Flame. -- My greatest thirst of Fame is my expression to
Men of your Merit, who cannot want A friend whilst I have power to be one: But
I am scanted and weakened in my desires, else Famed Valesco had not yet slept in
his dust to please the Common hangman, nor Men of glorious Parts live shrouded
in obscute homes, like pamphlets out of date.


You are the Patron of our honoured Actions, and all their Glory meets and
Circles in your Fame.


I will disengage you from this forced complement; It keeps me at too great a
distance from that bosom, where I would Lodge a friend, Dessandro: I must
tak't unkindly too, that in the Scroll of all your Friends, I stand dashed out
a stranger to your Joys.


My Lord?


But you shall not steal the Day so: I'll be one at the Ceremony, though the
Bride tell me in a blush, I came unwisht for.


'Tis but the busy voice, that like the Night-mare rides men; And can find
strange Shapes and prodigies. in the Clouds: I must Confess, Cleara has the
engagement of all Her virtues and a Brothers on me; When it concerns me nearer,
it must not be A Secret to your Highness, to whom all thit's derived to my Poor
life and Fortune is a Just debt.


You know the way unto a Friend, If you can think I have power enough to make
me so.


Sir I was only showed to the world to be talked on: Fortune (I thank her) has
given me many knacks to play with in her mood, but taken um away again
scurvily, to tell me, I was not born to any real Purpose, And I wish nothing
she can give me.


She will acknowledge her mistake, and Put on her smiles to Court your merits.
La Gitterne? Is the King come from his sport?


He dines abroad, my Lord.


Colonel, this Day you shall bestow on me: I owe the Dutchels Claudilla a
visit; Make ready straight; we will spend a dinner time there, and the afternoon
at Tennis.


This does but find our Melancholy out and cast it in a Minutes Trance; when
one soft Accent from Claudilla's voice leaves nought that's earth about me. My
Souls in her Elizium and every Sense immortal, dilated into joys: Heaven
becomes attentive, and the soft Winds put on their perfumed Wings to hover near
those Lips: That Blush does show the Sparkles of some incensed thought; My poor
expressions Rob ye; But I appeal to this white hand for pardon.


Sir, my thoughts are all acknowledgments of that delight I hear and see you
with, what dress so e're you please to send your Courtship in to try um: We
have outlived those Arts, and Common Charms, and need not seek our hearts in
scattered Flames, as those, whose Lesson yet, is at the hand or eye; our hearts
have read Loves deep Divinity, and all his amorous Volumes over; We must write
Stories of our Love, my Lord.


And chaste ones, Madam: How glorious the Frontispiece would show with great
Claudilla's Name, tied in a true Loves knot to her De Flames: Though the great
distance of your shining Attributes both of Blood and Virtue, considered in the
poverty of mine, would draw squint eyes, and Envy to my stars; but speak your
Name Creat as the example of your goodness, and make it worth the imitation of
all Noble minds that shall but read your Love and sweetness; which (most
excellent of your Sex) Condescended unto me, who else had Languished in a heap
of Ashes.


My Lord; you have found an easy way into my heart, and won me from my self
e're I could call my thoughts to resistance; Such strength brought your
Deserts: But now I hope, nay can be Confident (best Sir) they are treasured in
a Breast, whose Virtues will preserve them with themselves.


Oh Madam!


It may be some Discourse, that when first I entertained your Love, I had not
yet given the world, and my dead Husbands Earth, a full account of sorrow, or
paid his memory a years just rent of Tears: But I appeal to my own heart; and
you my Lord can say --


Your heart has been but too Severe unto it self, And I can say, I have not
seen a beam, break from those eyes, but through dark Clouds and showers; Or
like the Sun, drenched in the swelling Main; Nor a Look with the least Comfort
of a Smile in it; Nay, Divinest Madam; Now you do but Chide Heaven in your
Tears; and cannot Raise the dead.


True Sir.


Tears are but shallow murmurs of our Grief. I envy not his Grave a Tear, but
owe all Noble mention to it; yet Madam, I did hope You had discharged the smart
and Cruelty of Grief from your soft breast: And would call your beauties to
their Natural springs: -- Look on your self (rare Lady) in this change With
what high Flame and Rapture it becomes you: So breaks the Morning forth of a
crystal Cloud; And so the Sun ascends his glittering Chair, And from his
burnished Locks shakes day about; The Summer puts not on more delights and
various Glory, than shines in bright Claudilla; And shall the Grave exhaust
their pride and Youth? --


Madam, the Kings Brother gives you a visit.


Who's with 'em?


The Colonel, your Lordship calls Friend.


Dessandro?


Let's meet them Sir. --


I'm in Arrears yet unto your Grace.


A Widows entertainment Sir, you please to honour.


I wish the hours but short that brings the Night you are to lose that Name in;
And then, to what Length your own desires wooed spin um: Widow, Madam? There's
disconsonancy in the Name, me thinks: Claudilla Widow? Duchess, and still
Widow (like a Cypress cast over a bed of Lillies) darkens your other Titles;
'Tis a weed in your Garden, and will spoil the Youth and beauty it grows nigh:
A word of Mortality, or a Memento Mori, to all Young Ladies: And a Passing Bell
to Old ones: Indeed, it is a mere Privation; and all Widows are in the state of
Out-lawes, till Married again.


Your Highness holds a merry opinion of us Poor Widows.


I say Virgins are the Ore; Widows the Gold tried, and Refined.


A Fair young Lady and Widow, is A rich piece of Stuff Rumpled: An Old one's A
blotting Paper: A Man shall never write any thing on, she sinks so. Dessandro?
your Comment.


Friend, you are dull of the sudden.


He is not well.


Not well, Sir?


Not well Madam.


Dull? Shall's to Tennis? I have sore Pissollets will pay your borrowed time,
Dessandro.


Your Pardon Sir; I am unfit to wait on you; My life hangs in a Dew upon me;
And I have drunk Poison.


Ha? A Physician with all speed; Dessandro?


Dear Sir?


Cleara? Lend me thy hand -- So -- I'm struck upon a Rock. --


He's dead; I shall not overtake him.


Look to the Lady.


He swells like a stopped Torrent, or a Teeming Cloud; Have I no Servants there?
--


What a sudden storm is fallen?


How fares the Lady?


Madam?


As you are tender Natured, let no hand Close his eyes but mine: I am come back
thus far to take my farewell on his cold Lip.


Sister, Let thy warm blood flow back: Thy Dessandro lives, my Girl.


Oh! may I not see him?


You shall.


Give me leave to make this opportunity happy on your hand: How? Not vouchsafe
it?

What a Tyranny shot from her scornful eye? Where have I lost my self and her?
There's a cross, and Peevish Genius haunts my Hopes; A Black and envious
Cloud; and I must get above it; Not kiss your hand? Is your blood surfeited?
I'll quit this scorn: Indeed, I will, Coy Madam: Thou, that art Lord of my
proud Horoscope; Great Soul of Mysteries; kindle my brain with thy immortal
fires -- That if I fall, my Name may Rise Divine, So Casar's Glory set, and so
set Mine. --


Brave Canary; Intelligent Canary, that does refresh our weak and mortal
bodies; I will have thee Canonised Saint Canary, at my own Charge: And call my
eldest Son Canary: Yet for a man to love thee at his own Cost is damnable, very
Damnable, and I defy it -- And Siss is the blithest Lass in our Town For she
sells Ale by the Pound and the Dozen; Ale? hang Ale.


By your Worships leave, I would speak with Seign'or Silliman, the Duchess
Steward, an't like ye.


Would you speak with Seignior Silliman, an't like ye?


Please God, and your Worship, an't like ye.


In what Language would you speak with him --


Yes verily, I would speak with him, an't like ye.


At what Posture?


Marry from a friend, an't like ye.


Very good, my friend: Did ever say thy

Prayers in the Canary tongue?


My Prayers, an't like ye? Your Worship's disposed to be merry: I have a Wife
and seven small Children, an't like ye, to wind, and turn, as they say, simple
as your Worship sees me here, an't like ye.


Pox a Wives; I'll not give a Gazet for thy wife; she's tough, and too much
Powdered: Fetch me thy Daughter, thy youngest Daughter, Sirrah, If the Creature
be a Virgin and desirable: Look ye! There's money to buy her Clean Linen: I'll
have a Bath of rich Carnary, and Venus milk, where we will bath, and swim
together, like so many Swans, and then be Called Seignior Jupiter Sillimano.
But is she Mans meat? I have a tender Appetite, and can scarcely digest one in
her Teens.


Does your worship think I would be a Judas, an't like ye? She's as neat a
Girl, and as Tight at her business as the back of your hand, an't like ye: But
Heaven bless ye, and Cry ye mercy: If you be his Worship here's a Letter from
the Lady De Prate, an't like ye.


The Lady De Prate (mark me Sirrah) is a Noble Lady; we say so. --

I never knew what Bondage was till now, I fear the Gilded Hart you sent me was
enchanted -- (oh -- oh) I long to see you -- -- (hum -- hum) therefore let me
have the happiness to know the Place and Time -- (even so) as you love her
that blushes to write this -- Yes, yes, I'll Enchant ye: I'll Time and Place
ye: Surely, there's something more about me, then I can perceive: Grant that I
may bear my Fate discreetly: I never knew what Bondage was --

till now: Well; 'Tis Heavens Goodness: For what am I silly wretch, to such a
Lady as she that writes so pitifully unto me: It would over-come even a heart

of Flint: Good Gentlewoman -- As you love her that blushes to write this --

hum -- yes, yes; she knows I love her: It will work -- I can't contain my good
nature. --


Here he is, and stands like a Map of sundry Countries.


One would take him for some foreign beast, and that Fellow to show him; how
the Gander Ruffles and Prunes himself, as if he would tread the Goose by him?


'Tis a pure Goat.


And will clamber a Pyramid in sent of's Female.


The Wenches swear he kisses like a Giant still, and will ride his heats as
Cleanly, as a dieted Gelding: Let's fall in: Seignior Silliman! My best wishes
kiss your hand.


Continue me worthy the Title of your Servant Sir.


I am very glad to see you well, and hope you are in good health, and sound
Gentlemen.


And when shall's draw Cutts again for a Wench, Seignior, hah?


Your pleasure to say so.


The Slave's rose drunk, of my life.


Please you to take Notice of my worthy Friend here.


Your Admirer, Sir.


Slave to your Sedan, Sir.


God bless the good Duchess, and all that love the King, I say Gentlemen,
an't like ye.


Pray Sir, what News abroad, or at Court?


News, quoth a? Indeed Sir, the truth is, I am a Shoemaker by my Trade; My
Name is Latchet; And I work to some Ladies in the House here, though I say it my
self; And yet the Times were never harder, nor Leather dearer.


This winter will make amends; you shall have horse hides cheap; horse hides,
dog cheap.


Cheap? quoth a; Why Sir, I'll tell you (for you look like a very honest
Gentleman) I am put to find a Pike my self; and must, the Parish swears, or
lose all the Shoes in my Shop.


'Tis very brave: Why you look like a Champion And have a Face, the Parish may
Confide in.


Fide? quoth a; Sir; be Judge your self, if ever you knew the like: I have been
at the Trade this forty years, off and on: and those Childrens shoes I have
sold for six pence, or a groat, upon some occasion, we now sell for twelve
pence, as they say.


Then the misery is, you get the mo^e.


More? quoth a; Pray Sir a word? you are a Courtier, if I may be so bold: They
say we must all be fain to shut up shop, and mortgage our Wives to the
Soldiers: D' ye hear any such talk, Sir?


Some buzzing: but the blades will not accept'um without special articles, and
a stock of money, and plate to keep the babies they shall beget valiant.


Valiant? quoth a; Truly Sir, I'll tell ye, on the truth of a poor man: My Lady
De Prates foot is but of the sixes; and yet we pay five Pistols A Dicker.


My Ladies foot but of the sixes? you lye Sirrah; By Saint Hugh, there's never a
Lady in the Land has a Prettier Foot and Leg, if you ha not spoiled um with your
Calves skin, Sirrah.


Why? the sixes is a good han'som size for a Lady.


Lady? quoth a; my life for hers, there's few Ladies in the Court goes more
upright: Nor pays better, I'll say that.


You say that? Foh; I scorn to wear an inch of leather thy Nasty flesh shall
handle.


Oh, your worthy friend, Signior; and an elder in's parish; A Pike-man too, for
the Republique: Come, come, A shall be Shoemaker to us all: Can trust?


Trust? quoth a; My Name's Latchet, Sir, I served Eleven years to my Vocation,
before I could be free: and have drank many a good bowl of Beerith' Duchesses
Cellar, since that.


I like a man can answer so punctually to a thing,


Thing? quoth a; It is our Trade, Sir.


Spoke like the Warden of the Company.


I am at extremity of wonder.


The story may deserve it Lady, when you shall Cast your thoughts upon the Man
it Treats on, the Circumstances, and progress of my Love: Nay, it may raise
your Anger bigher than your wonder, and work the modest pantings of your breast
into a Hectic Rage: I saw this tempest gathered in a Cloud dismal and black,
ready to break its womb in storms upon me: And I have cast my Soul on every
Frown and horror you can arm your passion with: I have held conflict with the
wilder Guilt and tremblings of my blood to rescue it: But Heaven, and my angry
Fate, has thrown me grovelling at your feet: And I want soul to break the Charm.


This is a strange Mystery, to betray my virtue with your own, and I shall sin
to hear it.


If pity be a sin, lock up those beauties from the view of men, or they will
damn all the eyes that look upon you.


Has your blood lost all the virtue it should inherit? And think you by this
treacherous siege to take my Honour in? Let me shun you, or you will talk me
Leperous.


Do Madam -- Tear up the wounds your eyes have made -- I'll keep them bleeding
Sacrifices to your Cruelty; And when cold death has cast his gloomy shade over
this dust, perhaps you may bestow one gentle sigh to hallow it; when you shall
know The height of my desires was but to dye worthy of your pardon, without the
ambition of a bolder thought; And still had scorched, and smothered here
without a Tongue, only to beg your mercy to my Grave.


Play not your self into a shame will rust your brightest worths, and hide your
Dust in Curses, and black Fame: I now shall think your valour Flattered, that
can sink it to such effeminate and Love sick Crafts for our stale Women to
mollify the Usher with. Dessandro has a Fame, high and active as the voice it
Flies on: And could you wander from your religious self in such a Dream as
this? Cleara's virtue has an Interest near your heart should wake you to your
first man again.


Cleara still is here in the first Sculpture of her virtues, and I their
honourer.


No more! -- My grief and shame are passionate to find so much bad man, got
near your heart, and show this sick Complexion in your honour, more tainted
then the Face of your Imposture -- you have plaid the excellent counterfeit,
and your skill does make you proud, you cannot blush. --


She's gone; -- A Star shot from her eye, and lightened through my blood: I must
provide for Thunder, and thy Revenge De Flame, as horrid as thought can shape
it.


Sir?


Proud Love? I'll meet thee with burning sighs and bleeding Turtles at thy
shrine.


This is too bold a hazard for your health, which yet sits wan and troubled on
your Cheek.


Madam?


Indeed I'll chide ye.


Oh, Cry ye mercy; -- some retired meditations.


I shall observe them, Let me but leave you with the Joy to know I stand not in
the hazard of that Frown.


We'll kiss next time.


Sir?


Or never.


Ha? de'e know me?


So well, me thinks we should not part so soon: our hearts have been more
ceremonious, and hung in panting sighs upon our Lips to bid adieu: one kiss
must now sum up all, and seal their General Release: I know Cleara more
constant to her virtue, and brave mind, then to ask heaven idle questions --
'Tis Fate, not Will --


So -- I feel thy Marble hand lye here: 'Tis cold and heavy: how my poor heart
throbs under it, and struggles to find Air? Not one kind sigh lend thee a gale
for yonder haven? -- It's gone -- Quite vanished -- beshrew me, it was a most
horrible apparition, I would not see it again in such a cruel look for all my
hopes; yet it held me gently by the hand, and left a warm farewell there, as my
Dessandro used: As my Dessandro? said I? oh! how fain my hopes would mock my
apprehension; and that my sorrow? I'll woe thy pity with my Groans kind earth,
and lay my throbbing breast to thine until I am dissolved into a Spring, whose
Murmurs shall eternally repeat this Minutes story.


Ha? --


drowned in her own Tears? Sister? Cleara?


I had a gentle slumber; and all the world (me thought) was in ^ midnight Calm.


Dear Girl. (...) up those sad eyes my cold doubts. Prithee tell me, is our
Dessandro dead?


Heaven defend.


Not? what then in all the volumes of black destiny and nature, can throw you
into this posture? -- Unkind Cleara; why dost dissemble it? I see him
breathless on thy Cheek, and lost.


Lost for ever.


My fears did prompt me so; For ever? -- there's horror and amazement in the
thought: See Cleara; my eyes can over-take thee: Gone at so short a farewell
friend? Death, thou art the murderer of all our joys and hopes.


Sir, Dessandro's well; very well; we parted even but now.


What?


Oh Brother? I have lost a jewell that he gave me and I shall vex my eyes out.


Beshrew this serious folly: you have vexed my blood into a sullen fit.


You shall not chide me -- Tell me? did ever in thy life meet with a Grief
that made thy poor heart sick, and did divide thy sleeps and hours into groans
and sighs?


Never; thank my indifferent Fate.


Nor in the Legend of some Injured Maid that made thine eye to pause, and with
a Tear bedew it.


I cannot untie Ridled knots, Cleara.


Come; I'll but dry mine eyes, and tell you a story that shall deserve a groan.
--


TUsh -- They had only tongue malice; and that great Zeal the seemed to owe to
Rome, was unto themselves, and their own Estates; what were they, but wranglers
in Schools and Law? and studied words to make men guilty. They lived at ease;
and slept in purples and warm furs; But bold minded Cataline, threatened their
wise sleeps.


There was too much attempt and fact in it.


'Twas fact then to look sour on a Gown-man: they were mere Citizens: Jealous
of their Wives, and Daughters: That Condemned um too: --


there's a Lethargy in our blood: We sleep and dream away our Lives. If such
wore purple for well talking, what shall he merit that Cures the wounds and
smart his Country groans with?


The People shall enshrine his Name with Reverence, and fill their Temples with
his Statues: 'Tis the great end we are all born to.


Which can't be, whilst by-respect shall closely wound the bosom of our Laws
and Freedom: For what was't Less, that took our Father's life?


In whose blow, the heads of all brave men were threatened.


Then if we dare not do a general good, yet let us secure our own dear lives
and honours.


The State is full of dangerous whispers.


There's an Impostume swells it.


Would 'twere lanc'd.


Spoken with the soul of Cassius; we have the cure, and may do it with a little
stir: But then we must deal like true Physicians of State, And where we find it
ulcer'd, though in our selves, friends, and allies, not lay soft effeminate
hands on it: Nature has made us nearest to our selves: And I would pay the last
warm drop of blood from all these veins to see the hopes and honours of our
blood (that's now benightned in our Fathers fate) dawn on De Castro's youth
again.


No Dessandro; Those hopes are lost upon a high and angry sea: And I must see
fools and stale Parasites (whose Progeny ne'er bled one drop, nor had a valiant
thought to serve their Country) begin A spurious Issue on my birth-right, that
will, on Tiptoes Collossus like, bestride us and grasp our Fate.


Take me into thy bosom, brave man; we meet Like Amorous streams, and as we
ought; our honour, life, and fortunes, have but one hea^t: Give me thy hand De
Castro; This Sword --

our Father h^th oft made Glorious in the blood of De Castro's foes: And I'll
not doubt, how much it prompts thy valiant soul: Oh Brother! Tears, and some
sad discourse is all that we have paid him yet: Strangers can be far braver in
their sense unto his Fame: The tears we ought to shed, ought to be blood, De
Castro; Blood, warm from their veins, that made us weep in streams, and mingle
it with the dust of vulgar feet, as they did his. Swear by all the Glorious
acts of our great Ancestry, their hallowed Urns, our Fathers injured memory,
and all the hopes and honour we derive from them, to pay his blood a sad
account in some revenge, worthy his Ghost, and our bold hands.


All which religiously, I vow to.


And I: So; Now we are Brothers by as strong Divinity as Nature: I'll not
break open the design, till we shall hear't confirmed by higher warrant: Anon,
meet at the Duchess Dowager's.


Claudilla's?


Yes, where you shall hear something worthy the encouragement of our Fathers
spirit in thee: I am now to wait upon the Duke; he that keeps us what we are.


The Duke? -- I have the Game in view, and now discern, what I must pay him for
my Place.


You are full of thoughts, my Lord.


Brother, our Lives are on the Cast: But 'tis not that does interpose them:
There's something in my fears still presents Cleara; Take heed Dessandro -- A
Virgins tears leave sad and Fatal prints.


Your wishes are a brothers: but those dreams chill not my sleeps: Think on
that concerns us near And be Active.


I shall not fail ye: Farewell. --


Colonel Dessandro?


Your Lordships pardon: Which way walk you?


As you please to dipose me: My business now defigns it so: 'Tis there in
short --

I love his gallant mastery of a mans self: I looked his temper would a flamed
about my ears: Not a sparkle in his brow, nor the least change of blood.
Strange! I have seen him ruffled into a storm, and all fury: Now, not a frown
nor smile.


De Flame? -- well -- My Lord, this is a down flat Challenge.


I brought it for one.


I accept it, with thanks to your Lordship, and shall be ready to serve you in
any power I have.


'Tis not worth it, Colonel.


The Lord De Flame's angry, it seems that fortune should give me right without
his hand in it, he has turned his style high and strangely on me: But I shall
coolly respite that, till we have room to argue it. That he is far more worthy
his expectation in the Duchess, I can Confess: that's no assent Sir to my
quarrel; nor yet a law to her: For those whom her thoughts please to think most
worthy, are so to her.


But does not bind the opinion of another.


Nor that opinion her Freedom.


Yet there be rules in virtue, from which all noble Judgements should take
their Level, even in love it self.


If it be thought she's too partial in her grace to me, I shall dispute it, as
'tis questioned.


I come not to add exceptions or to make any.


I stand not in so cheap a Rank, but that her favour may make my services as
meritorious as his Lordships: And can engage as much blood and Fame for it.


You know him of a Noble breast, and one that will not slatter weak pretences
into Truths, nor let um work with such impressions on his Soul, did not his
Honour bleed in it? Sir, I come as one that ever honoured your great parts, and
wish that you could think on it over again: Think how black you must expect that
morn to rise upon your wishes, When you lead her to the Altars; where the faint
Lights with blew and Ghastly Flames, will receive ye; And all the things of Holy
Ceremony Present pale Glimmerings to your eyes, to fright your Bride back unto
her first vows: And then, me thinks, each Tear and Groan the Fair Cleara lends
to over-take ye, should show a speaking Fury to untwine your trembling hands.


No; Nor all the squadrons hell can spare, to aid them: though her Brother led
them on, and you brought up the Rear.


Sir?


Pish -- The meanest thought Claudilla pleases to bestow here (under this
humble Guard) must be without the affright (my Lord) of all the dangers in his
Muster: Stare they like Giants on me, and in Armies: As for Cleara, If she held
flatering glasses to her thoughts which rendered um wide and Airy, they must
not forfeit me: you may deserve her better: I'll not start Sir a scruple from
his demands, and yours, expect it, and so farewell. --


Farewell? -- The Time?


I shall think on it.


Shall? -- It must not so tamely be thought on.


How?


I spoke it, Sir.


Are your sent to own the Quarrel?


No; but look on it with so much Soul, as I think it as honour to wear a Sword
in it.


Go; Go hang it in your Mistresses Chamber, It stink* Sir of Perfume.


It may Sir (for Destiny has many ways to the wood) Cut your throat; And then
I'll gived your Foot-boy.


My throat, Pirez? that saucy thought has ruined thee. --


Hold, hold, Colonel.


My Lord, you're hurt.


I must owe him this fort't.


Can talk yet?


Command your passion: See how the Common herd come Gazing in: do not become
their talk and wonder: Noble Dessandro? Put up my Lord: -- thank ye --


Sir, my Lord Duke sent me to tell ye he expects your Company.


I wait on him -- bid the Ladies tear their clean smocks to wrap you in.


Insolent Man.


Again? --


Was not I about to tell you so? they would be afraid of True men when we came.


Ber Lady, but that mun not serve their Turns; For we must know flatly which
was Plantan, which Defendam or we shall discharge but a sorry Conscience to the
Kings Justice.


I'll take my Oath upon the Corporal Bible, I saw two glittering Swords run a
Tilt, and two to that, if need be.


Neighbours, I cannot tell; we are old men, or should be at least; some of us
have lived threescore years and upwards in a Parish, as they say, I name no
body; and therefore it is good to be sure, make all our tales bonum fidrum* For
we are not all one mans Children: And yet, if I be not mistaken, I am sure I
saw three more, and Glittering ones indeed, as you call them: God bless every
good man and woman from the like: they even earned my heart, and yet by my Fay,
I am a hundred and two, come the time.


You tawke like sucking Infants: Neighbours, I'll be sworn If I were to take my
oath before the best man living, High or low, there was twenty drawn swords,
little and great; I'm sure, I might a seen um, like a fool, had I been worth my
head; but my little boy Jack did.


La there; And that same's a murrain wise boy, if you mark him; and will see a
thing, I warrant you, as soon as the wisest of us all, were he twice as old
again.


I could a seen too at his bigness, for all I'm Lame now, God help us; you
remember the Powder Plot.


Powder Plot? quoth a; I shall not forget while the world stands.


Nor I, were I to die a thousand deaths.


That very day was I working in our Garret.


Say you so?


Nay, Neighbours beshrew me this may be true, for I have known this man here,
able to do as tight a days work by noon, as the tallest fellow the King keeps
(God bless him) take him from top to toe.


All's one for that; mark me; There has not been a glasse-window there, time
out of mind, since I came, nor after: And I tell you truly (I'm a false Liar
else) I smelt the Powder as hot as if it had been done the next day.


See, see, the wind; the wind neighbours is much God bless us.


Go too; I am no made fool, though a born fool my Masters; True, the wind may
be something as you say: but if there had not been something else, I would not
give a fart for it: I did not work at Court with a Master Carpenter, for
nothing, my boys; and see the Kings Grace fasting and full


as I did, to a hairs breadth, as they say: Let me alone for Casting my Cards,
give me but ground enough; And yet I can neither write nor read, Heaven make me
thankful.


Heaven make us all thankful; I have seen the King too, in my Prime, and gave
him a beck upon his milk-white Steed, as near as one should say what's this, and
all his Royal Lords and Ladies sporting.


I, I, those were the days (peace be with um) a poor mans tale might be heard
at Court: There is some Lords and Ladies now, were lousy then.


Go thy ways, by the Rood; Nay, he'll have his old tawk, for all the world, up
and down.


It was ever my condition; I care not who knows it; And yet I never scath't the
least sucking Child that begs his bread: but little does another man know where
the Kings shoe wrings him, but those that wear it, as my Mother would often
say, and she lived long enough to know it.


Nay that's certain; The King's but a Man, as we three are; No more is the
Queen, if you go to that: Did you never hear of my Uncles observations? he's
but a poor knave (as they call him) but such a knave as Cares neither for King
nor Kaesar, the Least on um.


Then he may be hanged, Neighbour Palmer.


If he be, he's not the first that has been hanged for Treason, I hope.


That frown was shot with pretty tyranny from your brow; but this kiss shall
sacrifice me to my Claudilla's bosom.


You'll sully your honour in it: widows are but rumpled stuff.


That again? by all my hopes, and by thy self, the next and greatest --


Your Brothers Crown's betwixt us.


I did it but to sharp De Flame, into some expression of his Wit and Love.


Alas! he sighs all.


And like some Crude Chaplain, spits most of his mind.


Yet the Tame Dove can Tire me sometimes with penned speeches, when we're alone,
and flatter; I'm resolved to bestow him on my woman.


Now he can come to hand: -- ha, ha* thinking men never Love heartily, unless
they be dank Powder.


His Courtship is like thick Embroidery upon slight stuff. I must confess, I
never loved the man; only as a Rich Gown out of Fashion, for a days change
sometimes at home when I take Physic.


You may wear him as you please, and to what purpose; his honest nature was
meant you so: but Dessandro is the Man of Men (I must confess) that I could
wish most near you now.


Dessandro!


And suddenly, before your honour blush too palpably: I have discovered him,
and his devotions.


Then your brains was in his Plot.


'Twas his own.


Stolen from some Romance or Play, but for De Flame.


One wheel will move another to the Period.


Methinks his soft and easy spirit should be the fitter Engine, and more pliant
to your Aim.


He has too much of Venus in his mixture; all his desires would be at home
still, in the circle of those eyes: the other is all Fire and thinks that Fame
too cheap that's found so near; And there will want such men abroad.


But, where's my honour, Duke?


Locked in my heart and Cares: the King must die Claudilla, to smooth the way,
and lift us to our wishes.


That still is talked on.


His last Glass is now turned, and runs apace: He gives thee to Dessandro; and
is your Guest: and that Night receives eternal thanks for it: Then (my Fair)
Dessandro cannot want lustre and honour for your bed: Nor thy commands what all
Castile can give.


I understand not, Sir.


Thou shalt in time; oh my Claudilla! my best and nearest Joy, our Loves have
been entire as a flame: one Center to our thoughts and wishes, and Crown our
bosoms with delight and safety -- but they are come --


I have not known so little of his Fame -- to be a stranger to his worth: Sir I
honour it: Nor am I so proud and dark in my opinion, to think I stand upon my
self, but stoop in honour to one of his deserts and blood: This is the way, my
Lord, I ever summed up Man, and sets his Titles down but for Ciphers.


Observe.


Which will most clearly show his merits, and heighten them in value to you:
For, Madam, look on him in the Spring of his deserts, and you'll say, Titles are
but narrow Spheres: And if honoured actions be the soul and breath, he's then
above them and stands in the First Rank of men.


I shall want life to pay this debt.


But with your Graces favour, I must be tender here, For I stand a tall Mark to
Voice and Censure, and need not tell your Highness with what strong
expectation the Count De Flame hath long time visited me.


If you will stand engaged, Madam -- I am silent.


No Sir -- But --


You expect honour, and Fortune to your Bed: I know Castile owns not a Subject
(I'll not except my self, and had I another Freedom, I should not speak my
wishes in a second person) that Looks not with Ambition on you: But Madam,
weigh them all: Take but off their Grains of fortune he shall hoist them into
the air: And to my wish, he's come -- Dessandro, your name was mentioned
happily, I hope -- Let me present his value, to your Graces hand: And to a
Sister, Madam, I would say, her bosom.


You purchase our poor Lives too highly, Sir


I would have rich Jewels set to their worth, and shall be proud to give any
advantage unto his: The Duchess shall not slight me in it: I will be heard
against the proudest Courtship that shall charm her. Come my Lord, what sport
will you win some Ducats at?


I will lose some at any your Grace pleases.


My Brother has got a fortunate hand of late against all the Court: I cannot
rise at even terms from him.


I saw him draw deep from your Grace, last night.


Two thousand Ducats; but I expect um with interest again.


I cannot pawn my self to the unworthy ends of Flattery and Complement: but
this honour out-bids value of a thousand Lives: what this poor glimpse of
expression can show me in: Saints, are not more unfeigned in their prayers, then
I to serve you.


I shall not doubt how much I may be indebted to your Noble wishes: but let me
add, Sir, He that Lays out for me without my warrant, shall scarcely put it on
my account for thanks, much less, Debt.


Not good devotions?


Them I desire, and shall repay.


Then pay back mine.


I'm not to learn my prayers, Sir.


Teach me yours, that I may turn the virtue of their charms back to your
bosom.


Colonel, mine would hardly please you: I never pray for wars.


You have back-friends, my Lord.


That some malignant cloud does interpose the Kings cheerful Favour, I am most
sensible.


It would spread to me too, if they durst.


Had they but so much virtue left, they durst own their names by, I should make
pale envy blush.


Come, we'll to Cards; and leave them to parl.


Madam, but mean it in a smile.


What?


Love.


Fie.


Yet stay; The air has busy wings: but give the thought Consent: and I will
take it in soft whispers from your Lip.


You will.


I feel it creep in Flames through all my blood.


Sir, the Count De Flame.


With a black Evening in his face.


Oh! my faithful Achilles, I came to give you Joy.


Who? me, Sir!


My virtuous friend, and you.


Of what?


Of your entertainment under him: y'have a brave Commander and he a -- I cannot
be angry enough to tell you what.


I begin to doubt his Wits, he looks so Ghastly.


Yes; I see a Devil in those eyes that makes my hair. stare upward, False
woman: My love durst scarce doubt before, what now I find, and tremble at. But
Heaven has wrath in Ambush, and Scorpions stings.


For what? my Lord.


Duchess, thy Perjury, and warm engagements to this -- this huge Impostor.


Sir, a has Cracked his brains with Poetry -- pray forgive him --


Count? you know what privilege this Roof can give you, on my Anger; or else, I
should make your Frenzy Tongueless: Don't requite it barbarously on her that
gives you leave to live by it: gather your scattered wits up: Go home Sir, and
Repent.


Privilege? -- I'll, meet thee in a Ring of flames, or on the Tempest of some
billow, upon whose back the raging North wind strides: Yet I'd not have thee
lose one spark of thy full man in Noise and Air: that when next we greet, I may
find thee worthy my Revenge. This Frailty, now protects thee.


Uncivil man! know the way back, or I shall let that Justice loose upon ye,
you deserve.


Your Centaur there, you mean; he must stare bigger to move a hair of mine.


Ye sha' not stir, Sir: As you love me do not: Let him die Mad.


Do; kiss him; and clap his Cheek.


And circle him in my Arms from your Pale envy; does that make you some -- Look
ye --


He shall not blossom there.


A shall, though thou dost bribe the Fairies with thy soul.


Madam, your Commands will hold me till I scorch away; I am in Flames, and
Torment: And there's not so much mercy under heaven, but your own, would let
him use that Tongue a minute longer. Thou hast seen this Sword reeking from
Hilt to Point, and sweating showers of Blood over thy head, whilst I bestrid
thy life and Rescued it against many gallant Foes, And durst thou tempt it to
thine own throat now? Prithee begone; And let's meet no more There's something
in thy youth I still can love; and will forget to call thee to account for
this; be wise unto thy self; And ask this Lady Pardon.


Oh my Blood! must I bear this? I am more cold then Marble sure.


Within there? where's his Grace?


At Cards, Madam.


Oh cry ye mercy; your baked meats sha'not cool for me; I only wish that they
may choke ye: That paper Sir I sent, would be worth your noble Answer.


'Tis there again, and has stopped the use I took it for.


Ha? -- I'll make thy Name a boys Play, and kill thee on the threshold of thy
door.


Go, go, and take your Rest: when you are recovered, I may own you.


Thou hast not Blood enough to answer this --


You tell me strange ones.


But true ones.


Nice windings.


This Duke can strangely back his purposes where they like him: 'Tis a fair
lift to Dessandro's fortune: his stars shined.


True; sh'has a spacious Fortune; But I shall tell your Lordship, what perhaps
you know not.


You may.


She has no blood: From her first, an honest Trades-mans wife, who left her
very rich and handsome: The Duke (as he still keeps a kennel for that purpose)
had her presented to him for his Game: Removed her from the Cucko'os nest into
another Sphere, but with all Caution, and private slight: And you must Imagine,
now she spreads a larger wing stirs not abroad, but studded like the Night,
with Flames: And at length becomes the Courts discourse and wonder; but still
kept the Country her retiring place.


Unknown?


Or unsuspected, as the Dukes Instruments dealt it: And the young Henriques
being in those parts with our Kings brother for sport, casually (as 'twas
plotted) visits her house: Falls in love and married her: This is the Epitomie.


I hope the Duke Bereo, had no dull hand in it.


'Tis thought (only by me Sir) keeps his acquaintance to this day.


It must be Fatally answered some where; heaven has a Justice.


The Preparation makes huge Noise.


'Tis well the King's a Guest; Their Triumph might miscarry else.


The King gives her in Church: Methinks the Count De Flame, must needs be all
Flame at it; And I believe Sir, your affront bleeds freshly in him.


It must be put to an Account somewhere.


To return his Challenge and honour with such a scorn must work such a spirit
to high extremes.


The saddest story is his Sister.


A Rose new Blown, and flung aside to wither in her sweets; Poor Innocence;
That has much changed my opinion of Dessandro.


His Resolution, and Ambition, are like vast Trees whose spreading tops hide
their own Roots from the kind Sun.


Let out unto so vast a Pride, as shades all his natural virtues, or makes them
grow up rank and sower: The event will tell us all.


I wish it without blood. Your Lorships for the Solemnity?


My Attendance ties me to his Majesties Person.


My best wishes to your Lordship.


SO: By this time the confines Ring of our great Solemnity.


She became his hand bravely, with so skilful a brow, as if the first Fruits of
her honour, were to be gathered yet.


Our Duke will lick his Lips at this nights sport.


And wind her up for him, 'twill go hard else.


That shall not hinder our sport, I hope.


Expect the Steward and his Bottles, I'll warrant you


The Ladies too? we shall not tickle heartily else.


When the great ones are bedded.


In the old Place?


It's Corner Lobby.


You belong to the Duke De Bereo Sir?


Who told you so?


A Friend that would commend me with a poor suit unto you Sir, if you be
Signior De Loom.


But this is no year for suit; Sir.


Mine brings thanks ready told Sir, Look ye? All double Pistolets, Signior.


Sir, I shall try my Power, and be ready in any service te'e, for my friends
sake.


De'e know who 'tis?


Hum -- No matter; I'll undertake your business.


Sir, can you please to pardon some light Gold?


You shall find me a Gentleman in any thing for my friends sake.


Nay Sir, It weighs a hundred pound at all Peradventures.


And I'll tell you one thing of my self Sir, more then perhaps my friend
remembered; I am very honest where I take; and every man is not to be trusted
with matters of such Consequence: A very Fair purse, I assure you.


Nest and Birds are all your own.


Your business is done, believe it Sir: Please you to kiss the Kings hand into
the bargain?


At fitter opportunity, let me be ambitious of your offer: but I shall woe your
Courtesy to be only a looker on now.


Any thing Sir, you can make worthy your request Nay-I hope you do not wish me
forfeit

good manners -- As I'm virtuous --


I am a stranger to the way: Gentlemen? know your selves, I beseech you.


To obey you Signior.


Sir you need not speak on it to this man: he's but my Lords Barber: Since you
command it so --


Light, light Revenge! heave up thy gloomy Tapers that thou may see thy
smeared Altar shine in blood: Come my Cleara; my better soul, whose gallant
mind will leave thy Name in the first place of Women, And raise thee Temples
(bravest of thy Sex:) I could expire on thy Cheek, and pay thee reverence my
most excellent Sister.


Just heaven, and your brave virtue (my dearest brother) has wak'ned my dull
breast and trembling Sex: I do not feel one Pale or Coward thought: but all
high, and active to my wish.


I see it Lovely in thy brow, like the Gleaming dawnings of the morn when day
first kindles; yet our Presage is fair.


The Duke --


Now Innocence, guard thy self, the woolf is up: see how mischief teems and
quickens on their brow: some black thing is spawning: Night must be Midwife
to it: If we stay, my Poniard will break loose.


Who's that?


Some of the Duchess Servants, I believe Sir.


Your hand will lay a new foundation to a Kingdom; And I am busy how to divide
it with thee, when we can call it ours.


'Tis his last night with Mankind: The Poison Sir will do it so subtly:
whilst he but holds the Knife, the least warmth attracts, and so dispreads


it self through his blood and spirits. Not any struggling for it with nature:
his life steals from him in a gentle slumber.


Grow in my bosom; till you spread to the first honours of your wish: My
fortune is too narrow for your merits to whom I owe it, all my Power, brave
friend


Come my Masters; The great ones shall not have all to themselves: we'll have a
Civil bout or two, to get us a stomach to Bedward, my sweet hearts.


Noble Mr. Steward!


Brave Mr. Steward!


The Fire of my respects shall ne'er go out unto you.


Nor mine be Quenched.


Here Cook? here's a bit for you to lick your Lips at And here's clean Napery
for you Butler

take it --


So, so; I am almost spent; every man to their Function


The Night begins to frown at our uncivil stay* And Hymens Tapers do burn out a
pace: Good Night; you shall not stir a foot Dessandro.


All the wishes of a Bridal bed Crown your wishes and embraces.


And all the blessings of true Joy


To bed to bed.


You are as melancholy as day when Sun sets; I hope you do not doubt my
promise.


No.


Ye sha' not: I'll not leave you till the Grant be yours be Confident; And
that's more then a Courtier is bound to by his oath. Sir, where are you? why
you were living but even now; could speak, and sense too: have you seen any
thing against nature, or stomach? hum -- Sweet heart, has thy Master any fits
o'th Mother?

or Falling-sicknesse? Pretty knave; 'tis pity this face was made for breeches.


Ha?


I am glad you are come to your self again.


You are pleasant.


I would ha'you so: I have provided some mirth and good company for you: Please
you but spare an idle hour from your sleep, we'll allow't again in the total of
your business (I must not lose his money) If you can smile you sha'not want a
subject: besides, we shall have the wit of a handsome Lady or two, and hear
their voices.

Look ye Sir! here's the Imprimis of the house Mr. Steward himself, whose
Company may be worth your observation -- Seignior Silliman, this Gentleman is
a friend of my Lord Dukes; pray let him know he's welcome.


I am but the Duchesses poor Steward Sir, but my place is at your Command,
Sir: you sha'not have me Claim kindred of her for all that: yet -- Sir Thomas
De Loom here, can say something if he please, Sir.


Thank ye Sir.


Look ye Sir Thomas! I never fail; here be the perquisites of life and good
Company: There's that will elevate voices; come, disburden thy self, in that
Lobbie, my honest rational Camel; Is this Gentleman dumb? he can say nothing
but Thank you Sir.


I fear he's Planet-struck.


'Tis great pity: yet he makes very gentle signs.


I'm got into a dark and slippery Labyrinth, and grope but by a spark, whilst
every pause is fatal -- No. It had miscarried; and the Kings presence was a
sacred guard: now to break in upon them, were to betray our lives to nothing:
sure Heaven will not lose the glory of such a Justice, and by a hand so justly
engaged.


The Ladies; Good Girls; this deserves a double thanks -- Here's a Gentleman
whose merits may invite him to your acquaintance, Ladies.


I shall ever study that due honour, by all the Ambitiousnesse of your humble
Servant, Sir.


You may please to pardon her, whose demerits makes her modest in their
expressions to honour you Noble Sir.


You engage a poor Life to your virtue.


What, Ladies? have you put um together for a brave Boy to night?


That's as the Dice run, Sir.


The Colonel will find a piece of service on it to night


If he put her to the worst, 'twill be worth her pardon being so tried a
Soldier.


If his valour should be short-breath'd, a retreat may be honourable sometimes.


If he fight not flat Coward, and made it in policy.


Sir, we have read over Aristotles Politiques and Polibius, to that purpose.


Who calls Policy the very breath of all war.


And so by your Ladyships good license, in all Battalions, leaguers,
skirmishes, sieges, invasions, parleys, treaties, truces, and other cessations.


Excellent Ladies.


For the Theoric.


We can say some thing to the practique too, Seignior.


Both concerning your postures and motions, as which may be necessary for
service: her Ladyship has written a small tract for her private experience to
show how they may be reduced, and a Man exercised with far less trouble, but
with as much Activity, and proportion of comfort.


For body* and service, Madam?


I mean so: I warrant you this Gentleman understands me.


And will not your goodness bestow it on the public? It would rank your Name
amongst the illustrious benefactors of the general Cause.


I know not what I may Sir, when the Press is fit for a woman of my Quality: Is
this Gentleman a Soldier?


That ambition has grown with me from the Cradle, Madam.


I shall render my self with more endeerment to your worth, and ever subscribe
to Soldiers as the bravest Men.


The Duchess, I hope will use of your opinion; But Madam, had I the use of
that key for an hour or two, I would take some notes in short-hand behind the
hangings.


You would?


Yes indeed, my precious wit, I should.


That Key?


Seignior? pleases you to think our humble invitation, worthy the grant of
your society.


I could wish the trouble of ten lives more, to be accepted in your Command,
Fairest of Ladies,


Were all our days multiplied into years, and those years to lives, 'twere but
a span of time to study our thanks in* --


Madam? Lady? --

I never knew what Bondage was until now -- I fear the Golden heart you sent
me, was enchanted: I long to see you --


What do ye mean Sir?


Ha, ha, ha: hum -- Nothing, Madam, but there be them that love a good nature
with all their heart: that have Four hundred pounds a year, and money in their
purse, to be Knighted, if need be.


Wit and opportunity assist me -- The Thing will make an excellent husband for
the times: And Four hundred pounds a year is a Considerable fortune to boot: I
must take him at his bound, or perhaps dye in the Lift of stale Chambermaids, A
Court plague for a misspent youth and service.


I am a Gentleman already, else the Heralds took my money for nothing: And
methinks Madam, you and I might --


What Signior?


Be as wise as our Forefathers.


You and I?


Yes; what say ye to you and I? is not you and I good Spanish? Why Madam, I am
able to warm my own sheets, and get Children without the help of a Doctor, and
can kiss as warm and Close -- And you shall swear my breath is sweet.


You're merry Sir, beyond my apprehension


Pardon me Lady if I be: I mean no harm I protest.


very witty.


I am, what I am: but I was never beholding to any living thing for thus --
much wit: I might a been an arrant younger brother, but for my mother; thereby
hangs a tale Madam: And yet I cud a danced my Cinque pace in Greek at a dozen:
Alpha, Beta, Gama, Delta, cost me five shillings: can you believe me Lady? By
this Light you shall wear this Diamond: There; shat; shat have it; shat, shat:
shat have it,


There is such sorcery in your words.


No: No: No: Troth love me: come; thou shalt; by this -- nay never sigh, my
dear, they are all orient, sweet wench: thou art worth all Spain for a good
disposition --


You will undo me Mr. Steward.


Pish: who I undo thee? My life, thou dost wrong me: can find in thy heart to
think so? away away.


But is this profession, honourable Sir?


I scorn to deal upon dishonourable terms: Do I kiss like a man that would
Propound dishonourable conditions?


Men are so nice and cunning.


Dost think me a Jew? swear me to any thing.


Well, you have taken a Poor heart at advantage and make me blush to confess
it.


Kiss me; here's my hand till death us do part: Thine more then mine own,
Signior Bouche overte, Sillimano: Sealed, and delivered: but I hope Lady, there
is no Quit rent to be paid out of this Copyhold.


Not for your life Sir.


Lawful possession then, and you are mine own


So; let um drench their souls in Laughter: Kindle thy Noble heart into a
Flame, my Sister: Fate cannot give, nor we ask more unto our cause: All things
conspire and Prompt us to it: Just, and Divine revenge; I'll strew thy midnight
haunts with Cypress wreaths, and wear thee in rich Medalls: Propitious
Goddess: This night thy wan, and meager Cheek shall blush and smile with warm
and wanton blood: Night grows heavy eyed and droops her slumbering head in her
dark bosom: And now their Rage and Lust, will make them ripe to bleed: Let us
embrace, and interchange a sigh or two, Cleara: what e're become of me, thou
wilt wear Chaplets in Elizium.


My hopes and Joys are yours (dear Sir)

And heaven I hope will not divide them.


See what a modest blush, sleep has cast over their Guilt.


Here is a look Tyrants would bashfully gaze at and fear to think it mortal:
Glorious hypocrisy! virtue is at wonder in her self, and looks pale, to own
what she has given.


I should mock heavens Justice, to let um dream their souls away in such a
calm: We'll startle them into horror of their sin, and then let them see the
vengeance they deserve.


Ye chaster powers, to whom I and my Virginity groans; May every drop breath
incense to your Justice, whilst thus I break their springs open.


Oh: -- Dessandro? -- oh -- whose hand's that?


Cleara's, Cleara's, carry that name in thy last breath down to the shades of
Lust and Perjury.


So quick, and brave Cleara?


Oh!


Madam, Madam, your sleeps are troubled -- whose there, De Flame?


Raise not thy voice an accent: If thou dost, by my eternal hopes and soul,
this strikes it back unto thy heart: See thou revenge sit Pale upon the
Point? 'Tis steeled with Virgins curses, and shall fly like lightning through
thy blood: And it is a Justice thy vast pride hath lost thee to.


Oh! what hast thou done? A deed that Flinty Scythians and curled Ethiops would
hide their eyes from.


Our Revenge shall wear a Glorious title: Know thou that injured face? It is
Cleara's, injured Cleara's.


Cleara?


What see thou on that brow?


Murder!


Horror and Guilt unto thy soul.


I'll not be tamely butchered, Coward: without there? Help help help.


Whirlewinds and Earthquakes cannot do it; think on thy sin.


Thy Perjury.


Thy Lust.


Cleara? Oh -- thou hast a skilful hand in Murder: Help, Help, Murder.


So falls a wretched Statue from its haughty station: when Fate, would make it
ominous and fright a state. What a thick cloud steems from his tainted blood:
The Air shrinks back, and with dull wings fans it from heaven.


Murder! Murder! 'Twas his voice.


It was his voice.


The Key?


Gone!


Cut from my side; I am betrayed.


Look search the Room: where's the stranger?


The Door is fast.


You may come in; make up your wonder there


My Lady Murdered?


You have astonished Heaven,


And pulled eternal curses on your head.


They'll fall like brittle shafts upon my shield.


Unjust Dessandro! yet on thy Lip I'll tender my last vows, that the world may
tell, I loved thee Dead -- and this -- and this --


Hold; hold that cruel hand: Cleara? Sister?


Cleara? This is a horrid Scene, my Lord.


'Twould not be worth my Name, did it not strike Amazement through your souls,
and leave a paleness on his Cheek that hears it. But here; here I could melt!
Transfuse my brains through my sad eyes, till they wept blood, dropped their
Jelly forth: She was a Jewel, too rich for our dull Orb:

When valiant blood ne'er Pales at the Event.


A Sad Court indeed, My Lord.


As sad a Kingdom where the news is spread: men that hear it, stand struck, as
if their own passing-bells did call unto them.


Kings Glasses are as brittle as their meanest subjects; their footings as
slippery, and uncertain: He was a brave Prince, and his Life will be memorable
in Castile.


His death is much admitted for the sudden strangeness of it: What opinion give
the Physicians on it?


You have a hard Name for it, if I could think on it.


Not suspicion of Poison?


How, my Lord? by whom would ye suspect it?


Nay, I dare suspect none, nor don't: but such Quirks of State I have read of,
in the days of old.


I never saw him discount a day with more content and freedom; his very
thoughts were hearty.


'Twas a fatal one, and will give a sad discourse to out Posterity; and leave
it on Record, in bleeding characters.


The Count's resolution had too much blood cruelty in it.


Dessandro urged as much as mortal sense could groan with.


I now call to mind, still as he spake and glanced upon Cleara's face, I had
strange startlings in me.


As the Times have.


The Times? my Lord; For what?


The King's Death, Sir.


Why my Lord? the Times are not of the worst presage, though that may cloud
them a little.


I am no Booker, Sir, nor Lilly; to prognosticate what seven years may travel
with: but I could with the price of knaves may fall.


Your Lordships virtues command not a more humble and observant creature.


This Fellow must be muzzl'd.


Who's that?


The Duke's thing; his trifle broker.


The King's now.


Castile did never hear more news, I fear.


We shall now see the fine Turns and games of State.


When Fools and knaves chase Trump.


Now Heads and Points will be the sport.


The King will have the heads then, I believe.


Observe um.


So near?

-- Heavens bless your Majesty: he'vens keep your Majesty;

Please you to hear your most faithful Subjects?


Who are they that bark so?


A Rout of Porters, Prentices, and Sailors Wives; with such a spawn; who are
modest Petitioners your Majesty would give'um leave to govern you in some
matters of State, and humbly pray, to be admitted of your Privy Council. Here's
another Sir, from the most Reverend Bags of the City, to purchase all the
Churches of your Majesty, for Ware-houses. And this, Sir, from the Corporation
of Weavers, Cobblers, and Feltmakers; that you would please to give um leave to
fire all Universities, and Schools of Learning, that the Profane might better
see the Truth.


No more -- Their stinking breath will stifle me: keep back their Clamour:
wealth and ease has made the Rascals wanton and profane their Alligeance -- My
Lord, Honour and the Laws bleed in them, until a Justice stop their Issues,
which our own care shall take a speedy account of. -- -- Sampayo? --


I shall, my Lord. --


Oh! My Lords; we are circled in a Tide of Grief, where every billow threatens
a Grave: but in your Loves, out hopes takes new life, which we as zealously
shall sacrifice again to you, and you^s -- Let me be beholding t'ye for -- a
minutes Conference with my own sad thoughts. --


So -- Take breath my hopes, whilst we with pride look upon the world behind
us, and then Survey the Glory of our progress, and success -- The print of
every step is glorious; and me thinks we stand like Rome her self, in midst of
all her Triumphs, when her threatened head Leaned on the spangled breast of
Heaven, and justled with the Gods: From whose Imperious frown the world took
all her Laws and Dooms: Yet her vast story shall look pale to mine: and Time
begins his great Example here: Castile, thou now shalt blush for thy neglect:
I'll print thy scorns on thy own brow, till my revenge look lovely as Romes in
her bright Flames to Nero: And Nature shall repent, that she mistook the man,
Fortune meant thine. Then up my Soul, and from thy Glorious stand, see thy proud
hopes and wishes Court thee: Thou hast been bashful yet, and hid in blushes --
make room for thy more spacious thoughts --

And let the Petty world know this; all things Depend upon the breath of Gods
and Kings.


There, there; Lay that in the place; so so; here; help to spread this Carpet:
Quick, quick.


Will our new King be here to give the forked herd an oration?


An halter: Thou dost so fumble: -- but what's the general voice of the Kings
death? -- Here's the mourning for that bat.


Marry, some think he died against his will, and others that his Brother --
where stands this? -- will bury him very Royally --


Hum -- And others think if thou were hanged when 'tis thy due, there would be
quickly a knave less; dispatch, dispatch, I hear them coming.


Pray by your Leave; Make way; give back there, for shame, Sir, you press so
hard upon the Judges, they scarce have liberty to breath: Clear the Bar: Peace.


My Lord -- Here's none but knows you, and I believe do greive to see you
stand thus; and for a fact of such a bloody Nature; A Gentleman of your fair
hopes and Fortunes, blood and spirit, and other excellent Parts, all cast upon
untimely hazards by such an Act (as indeed I know not how to name it) you
needs must therefore be worth our Grief: And I presume you are not now to know
the Laws and Customs of this your Country, with what Religious care they look
unto the safety of our Lives and our Estates, with what strictness on
Perpetrations of such a Die --

2. Especially where innocent blood is shed: And therefore we being but the
Tongues of the Law, (my Lord) may hope you will interpret the Justice of it,
clearly from our Mouths --


Please you, most Reverend Lords, Is there ought else but this, I am to stand
Accused for?


Not that we know.


Then, my good Lords, you need not labour much to find out Circumstances to
condemn me: Nor do I wish or think, My Lords, to satisfy the Law, by talking
in my own defence: Nor will I brand my self with such a Fear, much less hope,
as to bespeak a melting Tear. That were to wish the Act undone, and rob my
Justice of a Glory, I would be torn to Atoms for: No; I come to meet the Law:
And if your Wisdoms can contract the spacious Volumes of it int' one doom, I
sha' not startle, or divide my breast. My resolution was above't, when first I
undertook to be my own Law and Judge --


I grieve to hear this Language from you* It tastes much from the man that you
have seemed my Lord, stain not your Noble and Religious Fame with such an
Atheism.


Look back into the deed my Lord: see what a Tide of blood pursues you, and
breaks upon your soul in Angry Seas.


Look back to our Fame, Grave Lords, the blood and honour of our Family: Nor
think it my vain Glory to urge it here since the cause does. There has not yet
in all the ages it hath served the State, one stain fallen on our Scutcheon: And
although, my Lords, these honours are derived to us in a vast circle of time
and blood, the passage must be still through our veins; and so are treasured
here as heat in Fire; so as the least taint in us reflects a blush on the First
virtue of our great ancestors, and what has man called sacred, but his honour?
That dwells not in the smiles of Fortune: Nor can she place the Fool or Coward
in the rank. And can your wisdoms think ours so cheap as to become the scorn
of such?


My Lord, 'twould better satisfy all those that know you to hear your Grief,
then Passion.


Oh? Cry ye mercy: he was your Lordships kinsman: yet I will add, he basely did
betray a Love and Innocence more noble then a thousand of their Lives (Poor
Cleara) Perjured his Faith and honour, and quite dissolved their holy ties, in
the Lascivious arms of her, whose name shall not take honour from my breath.


We spend time; Pray give those Ladies leave to speak.


My Lords, the King is come to fit amongst ye.


Stand back there ho; you; Goodman Roundhead, you'd best breath in the Kings
face: Pull back your horns Sir -- de'e mutter? take that, and crowd Further:
The Rogues are as hollow, as a vault, and sound like one with a blow.


Within -- The King. the King, Whooe.

What's the matter?


De Castro? is this a Mask, or Apparition?


-- seize on the Traitor --


Ha?


Hence; Monstrous thing.


Traitor?


Yes; and a foul one -- My Lords, suspend your wonder -- we thank ye --
Prodigy to thy blood we have given you leave to wanton in your Guilt, and see
at what mighty impiety it would reach, to fasten you the surer in your toil:
-- take your places; -- durst thou derive the Glory of our Grandsires to thy
self; whilst with unnatural hands thou tearst their Graves up, mingling blood
and shame with their blessed dust? Have we not shared our Kingdom with thee? Let
thee into our heart nearer then nature, if possible? And could all this beget
no better thanks then Poison? the very thought unnerves my Joints.


Treason? -- who dares avow it Sir? or Charge the least stain upon my Loyal
bosom, and make it good? I challenge all Mankind, and envy from the nether
Hells; 'Tis but some engine to betray me to you.


I did but quit a sin which would have betrayed us both eternally, and bore so
sad a shape of horror, as it affrighted all within me, and like a Frenzy held
me till I had purged it from my bosom.


Had thy revenge no other way but this, to undermine the virtue of Nature
against it self? My Lords, there's forgery in it; Poison? and Treason? It did
amaze my innocence: Sounds, that my blood do shiver at: And did not I see his
Fathers Treason blush yet on his brow, I should not think Castile infected with
the thought.


My Lord De Castro? What proof or circumstance have you to urge this Clearer to
his Highness?


Grave Patriots of the Law: give me your leave in this, that would blemish the
honour of my Fame for ever. Let him produce but any that may accuse me to your
Reverend Judgements, and Bereo will lay down his head to the Block: But I know
your wisdoms will discern a plot in it: and how fair he stands incompetent
against me in Faith and Honour.


What say you my Lord?


Sir, what I have told your Majesty, my Life shall make good on any torture: My
Brother being dead, Heaven only and my Conscience can clear it: And to quit my
Innocence of malice, your own Conscience must tell you, my Lord, that when
first you used my Brother to ensnare me, and pressed it in the Duchess Garden,
how much I argued to divert you: But then --


My Lords? I desire Justice reparation on the Villain.


My Lord De Castro? -- The King has pleased to give us your Relation, in which
(though the least tenderness cannot be impertinent to his sacred safety)
there's nothing that can raise the Law to any Argument, which may reach the
Duke, scarce as a Peer, which looks upon him as the second man, in whom all our
safeties all and hopes are stored: Not to be touched with every Jealousy, but
at a high and Reverend form of Proof.


Let me appeal unto your self, Dread Sir! -- which of my actions or Services of
state can be suspected? and do you not perceive that where his Father left, his
Treason would begin?


Help me, dear Truth, or else I shall suffer for my Loyalty: Great Sir, be
pleased --


That most Judicious Judge has well observed, there is an Envy in his soul
would reach from you to your Succession, and leave the Character of his Fathers
Treason on it in blood and Ruin: Wretched man! Trust me, I grieve for thy slide
from piety; and when I look upon the love and pity I have cast away on such a
thing, I repent my easy faith: Good Heaven! what will men fall to?


Take the Count unto the Citadel, and let none be admitted to him, upon peril
--


If? my Lord. Can yet that scruple stay behind?


See? Royal Sir, I have met a miracle, that


Dessandro risen from the Dead?


Dessandro?


The vilest wretch alive, who throws himself at your feet in tears of blood,
and so much horrid guilt as calls for all the wrath of this, and the other
world: Not daring to lift my hopes to any pardon; oh Sir! 'twas he (backed by
that bad Prince and other giddy hopes) that would have seduced my Brother to
that Act against your sacred Life.


Wo'd it went no further? Duke De Bereo? Can now your brow change colour?


'Tis all Imposture.


Fie, fie; Don't glory against heaven that hath left thy Sin no subterfuge.


You wo'd not fright me from my self?


Well. our Guard?


May it please --


Rise. -- what wo'd ye say Sir? --


Under your gracious License this -- we found our princely Lady, and the Lady
Cleara cold in their clodded gore: This Colonel, so spent in expense of blood,
as we co'd not say alive: For that half spark of heat left in his veins, was
then even going out: our care having preserved and kindled it to life again
after his shattered Faculties could pant and breath, he called for Pen and Ink,
and caused us write what there contained.


Of too much truth; And I blush for those few drops of blood, I have left to
expiate.


I am betrayed and Lost -- Could be in love with that faint Life, for one
poor minutes smile, to betray it to ignominy and Law? I cu'd trample on thy
skull, until thy reeking brain sparkled about the dust: See how busily they
contract their Dusky brows? Consult things safely, and let some reverend
Statute be ordained, in honour of all Cowards: De Castro? For this good service
know, 'twas I that laid thy fathers head upon the block: Complotted with the
Portuguez to make him guilty to the King: And envying that he spread with so
much shadow in the state, by a Close Faction rendered him odious to the people:
An Engine I knew cu'd not fail: I hurried thee to the Duchess wanton bed,
Dessandro; knowing De Flames high blood, would quit the debt I owed thee --


He's proud all mischief can call him Patron.


Nor had I shared the pleasure of a kiss to you or him, but that our purpose
needs would have it so.


Sir?


The Language is plain and true.


Then Claudilla was your Court Mistress, Duke 'twere profanation to say
whore.


Young Lord, I can forgive that language in a suffering man.


Forgive it?


Forgive it -- and had De Flame himself enjoyed her bed, and reaped the
scattered minutes of our love, he must a found another Gloss more safe and
honourable.


Must? -- what saw you in me did promise so tame a thing, as to feed on your
high Scraps? Glorious mischief.


My Lord, I beg your mercy; And to deserve it will weep the remnant of this
unworthy Life unto Cleara's Name.


All mankind has my Peaceful wish, but this black speckled Serpent, whose Load
doth make the Earth to Groan and sweat.


My fair Claudilla? me thinks I see thee Lovely in that ghastly trim of death,
while yet thy soul was struggling through thy Cruel wounds.


The day begins to frown and Creep into eternal night: We'll bed together in
one Grave, Cleara: Castile shall hide us in a golden heap, and name me with her
patriots for taking this foul monster from her bosom,


I'll find thee in the Myrtle Groves below, and leave a story that shall tell
the world how much I loved thee


Desperate Atheists,


You were before hand Sir.


Y'have overtaken me -- the world is hid in a Cloud, and shrinks to Chaos -- Oh
-- whither must I wander in this mist? -- so, so -- I feel thee glide away, and
leave me sunk upon a Quicksand.


What a thirst of blood burnt up their hearts that they must Quench it in their
own?


Hast thou not Air enough, my panting Soul? -- Oh -- what a stitch is coming.


Would thou had better loved thy self and us: For while thou prized the
honour of that blood we prized thee with it: Oh Ambition? The Grandam of all
Sin, that strikes at stars with an undaunted brow, whilst thus thy feet slide
to the nether Hell* Like some vast stream that takes into its womb all springs
that Neighbour by it, and would proudly carry all their Currents in its own;
swells over its banks, and wantons like a Tyrant -- Take hence the sight: It
stirs our inclination.


Long live the great and good King of Castile.


We thank ye, and just heaven which hath (unto wonder) unknotted all these
mischiefs, and kept us safe: And because we do not Love to use the Laws in
their extremity, or execute with Blood where we can moderate without* But
chiefly Dessandro, to endeer ye more to Heaven in your acknowledgement, We do
enjoin you to some Religious House of Orders: There by an humble Life, to
expiate your Guilt.


Upon my knees I do acknowledge your God-like mercy.


De Castro; Our thanks shall make your Loyalty exemplary to all times: Nor with
we to live longer than to gain the Faith of all: That we may find our Self and
Title most secure, and greatest in your Loves; which gives us more than giddy
Fortune can --

This is our Fate, and to the Wise is known,
All Goods without Us, are not sure our own.
In tenui Labour est; at tennis non Gloria.


London, Printed for R. Crofts, and are to be sold at his Shop at the Crown in
Chancery-lane under Sergeants-Inne, where you may be furnished with most sorts
of Plays.


