AS when a nauseous Visor in the Pit,
Grossly abuses, without Sense or Wit,
All justify her merited disgrace,
If they unvail the grievance of the place,
And show the drab in her own ugly face.
So, Gentlemen, we hope for your excuse,
If in Return of a damned dull Abuse,
We pluck the Visor off from the other house:
And let you see their natural Grimmaces
Affecting Youth with pale Au^umnal faces.
Would it not any Ladies Anger move
To see a Child of sixty five make Love.
Oh!
Lord,
Now you must know, I've heard some people say,
Should this House fail, where do you think to Play?
Why thus, in short, my answer I declare,
If we must be overcome, I will take care
Never to be their Prisoner of War:
Nor Tug an Oar at the New Theatre.

NOW, my Arapsia, now the time draws near
That I must see the Face I ought to shun,
Because it brings my Shame too near my view^
Yet ought to love it too, my Son, my Son,
My only Darling Son: What can he think
Has made me keep him distant from my sight
Now above Fifteen Years? In spite of all
His begging Letters, that he might return,
Yet still I kept him back. What can I say?
I have forced him, by the Duty which he paid me,
To lose ten Years Revenue of his Fortune;
And would have done it still, but he is now
Resolved to come: Help me, Arapsia, now,
Thou that best know my Crime,
I cannot bear the thoughts of seeing him.
What shall I do? he wonders, and has reason,
Why I can thus forget a Mother's Love
To her dear only Son; and yet I do not,
Cannot, nor ever will forget it.

Madam, why do you discompose your self
For what your Conscience cannot blame you?
It was a fatal Curiosity, 'tis true,
But meant so well.

'Twas not well done, excuse it not, Arapsia:
'Twas Disobedience was the cause of it:
My cruel Husband left my Bed, thou know,
For several Years before; and Heaven can witness,
'Twas not for any Fault by me committed:
I always was a very humble Wife;
I loved him still, for all his great Unkindness,
And tried all Ways to gain his Heart again,
But 'twas in vain: then you proposed the way
You thought would do, and that, alas! undid me.
I strove to charm him in another room,
While Night and Darkness favoured my Design,
But little thought I entertained another.
Cursed be the Day, the Night, I sought that Remedy:
Why hindered I the Pleasures of my Husband,
When 'twas not in my power to give him any?
He used me like a dear and only Friend,
I wanted nothing but a wanton Love:
I ought to have been like him, so much himself,
That my Desires should then have ceased with his.
Women, take care, cross not your Husbands Wills,
Force not your Kindness when it is distasteful,
'Twill not retrieve their Loves, but bring your Hates.

Madam, this fatal Accident's a Secret
No body knows but me, nor guesses at it:
And I believe you know my Heart so well,
You cannot doubt my true Sincerity:
Clear up your Looks, and see your dearest Son;
Think what has happened was by Heaven's permission,
Which may have further Ends than we can see.

Dear, dear Arapsia, what is best to do?
He comes to night, let all things be prepared
To make him think that he is truly welcome
(As he indeed is); see that Eromena
Be kept out of his sight, I cannot bear
To see 'em both together: Where's Cleonista?

In the Garden, with my Lady Marguaretta.

To your Discretion I leave all my safety;
If Heaven will bless me to dispose my Son
According to his Birth, Honour, and Fortune,
I shall believe Heaven has not quite forsook me:
I then, perhaps, may see a Child of his,
That I may own the Aim of all my Wishes.
Poor Eromena,
Unhappy only in thy Parents; but no more
Of that, I find the thought disturbs me.

Madam, what is your pleasure I should do
For the reception of your Son? Your Friends
And your Relations long to see him,
And will be here, I do believe, to night,
All coveting to see how you receive him.

Let all be done that's fit for me to do*
Keep Eromena from the Company;
I know not why, but I am much disturbed
When I but think on her;
My Genius does foresee some fatal Accident
May make me yet more wretched than I am.

Madam, your Apprehension is not right,
You do create Unhappiness to your self;
Let me advise you once again, remember,
That which is past we never can recall.
I will about the business you command,
Heaven compose your thoughts.


By pardoning my most unwilling Sin:
See me, ye Powers, a poor and wretched Creature,
Miserable only in offending you,
Though most u^willingly;
Why am I punished for another Crime?
Sift all my thoughts, Just Heaven, and thou wilt see
I have no Wish aims at offending thee.
Then let not my Misfortune be my Crime,
But ease my thoughts, and fix 'em only thine;
So may the rest of my unhappy Life
Be free from Conscience, that unconquered strife.

Come, my Dear, methinks I can't call you Aunt, you look so charming, I'm sure
you don't look like my Uncle's Wife; What could possess you, with all your
Youth and Beauty, to marry my old covetous nasty Uncle?


The Devil, I think: would I had been hanged when I entertained but the least
thought of him; but I had taken it into my Fancy, that an old man would be so
fond of me, but now you see how he uses me.


Why there 'tis now; had not you better have follow'd the dictates of Nature,
which, I am sure, never inclined a Woman of eighteen to an old fellow of
fourscore? But what has he done to provoke you so this morning?


Why Cousin, I went into the Garden to gather a Nosegay, and stooping down, I
found a piece of Paper, and having little else to do, I walked on, and tore it
bit and bit; he follow'd me as fast as his old limping Legs could carry him,
and has taken a conceit, that it was a Billet-deux sent to me, or hid in some
Bush in the Garden; and, thank my Stars, he's now breaking his Back with
looking under every Leaf that can but hide the bigness of a Cockleshell.


Methinks this Adventure should make you forgive the Occasion that is his
Jealousy, since I think he has chosen a Punishment as bad as any one could
wish him, considering his Years.


There's nothing bad enough for him. Well, I will rail so much when I see him,
I'll make him hate me so, he shall let me alone to do what I will.


Have a care what you do, for since you are truly virtuous, you would be
thought so; and, I dare say, your Discretion tells you, this is not the way to
keep up that Character, by provoking him to expose both himself and you.


Why what would you have me do? Have you seen in your Life but the least sign
of Fault in me? Have I given him but the least cause for Distrust? therefore I
here resolve to take my own way, and at least to make my self merry with my
Misfortune; I'll be as imperious as a jealous Woman that has been faulty her
self before Marriage, and just come to the honour of the title of Wife; I will
give him more false Occasions to believe I abuse him, than a City Wife can give
her Husband true ones: therefore, dear Cousin, aid and assist me in this honest
Design, for you shall know all my Intrigues so, that you may justify me when
it is gone far enough.


Well, Madam, I leave it to your Discretion, and in all justifiable Actions I
will be ready to serve you as sincerely as my self, and I am sure you can have
no other.


I thank you Madam: Oh, here comes your Lover Gabinius, Segerdo too, and Capt.
Conall: Now, were I resolved to humour my Husband, must I immediately go up to
my Chamber, there sit and work with my Maids; but, as my Resolution is, I am
resolved to stay and see the Effects of sweet Liberty.


Your Servant Madam; yours, Madam, and always so, and may I every morning see
you thus, thus beauteous as a new-blown Flower, and cheerful as the Spring.


My Lord, you're in a pleasant humour, and I think I shall do well to keep it
up; in order to which, I'll let you know here stands the happiest Wi^e in the
World, so changed, so resolved upon true Liberty, nay, so real Mistress of it.
--


Why, is her Husband dead?


No, no, but his Authority is; she has laid aside the Italian Custom of
Slavery, and is assuming an English Freedom of the Wives there.


But how will she bring it about?


We must all assist her, she'll tell you her way, which well managed, must needs
do. Come hither Capt. Conall, could you find in your Heart to make Love to my
Aunt in Jest, for I guess her Design turns upon that Hinge?


Yes, and in earnest too, if she'll give me leave.


Then you are not the man for our purpose, for I am not carrying the Jest too
far.


Pray, Cousin, let me choose my own Man to make my use of, which will require a
little time to consider of; let me have but a few Words with this melancholy
Gentleman, and I'll let you know what Resolution I shall take.


Nay, if she fixes upon him, she's in a fine condition indeed, for I am
deceived if his Inclinations are not so fixed, as never to be in humour to jest
with another.


See, see, she'as made him smile; poor Gentleman, I truly pity him.


You would, I'm sure, if you knew so much of him as I do, how he will walk
whole hours and not speak a word, and when he speaks, he talks of Eromena; his
Passion is now grown to such a height, that when he's with his Father, by
accident he talks of Eromena. His Father's almost distracted to see his Fancy,
or his headstrong Fate, to lead him to a Love so much beneath him: He kept it
from his Father's Knowledge as long as he could, but now he knows it, he grows
careless, and gives his Passion greater Liberty: I wish she could find some way
that might answer her Ends, and divert him, if possible.


My Lord, I have observed and known your passion for the fair Eromena, and though
I could advise you to the contrary, yet since I see your Love has held long,


Madam, what your Designs are I am a stranger to, but you have Bribed me by so
dear a way, I never will dispute with your commands: But, alas! she has forbid
me ever to write, ever to speak, nay, ever to see her more. O! I lose all the
show of Manly Resolution, and sink beneath my Sorrows when I think on it: I came
this morning, thinking to take my last Farewell, if it must be my last, but you
have revived a little my poor hopes.


I will consider, my Lord, of some means that may be for you^ service, and, I
hope, for mine.


Well, my Lord, has fair Margaretta imparted her Design to you, for we are not
worthy of it? You look a little livelier than you did.


I never saw this Beauty that is so happy to charm my Lord Segerdo; pray,
Madam, do me the Favour to let me know who she is, I have heard something of
her being a Foundling, but never any thing else.


Sir, she is a Foundling, my Mother going into the Country for a little Air,
just before my Father died, found this young creature thrust out by an
unnatural Parent into the World, laid in a little Cradle, with a Note writ
on it, I think these were the words: A wretched Birth has been thy Doom,
Do thou prevent the Il^'s to come.
My Father died before my Mother did return, but when she came, she brought the
little Creature with her, and she did prove to me a good Companion, I was not
above three or four Years older: my Mother took great care of her, and scarce
did make a difference 'twixt us in any thing. Truly I think she wants nothing
but the addition of Birth and Fortune to make her complete in all things; she
has a sweet Disposition, discreet to a wonder for one of her Years, and is
Mistress of all Qualifications that belong to a Woman of Quality, and I often
believe her such. -- Oh madam! I see my Uncle; now let's see what you'll do.


I suppose the Morning might have smelt as well without my Wives company; pray
go by your self for the future, unless you'd have me believe your Morning Walks
are to produce Evening Wakes: Thou little careless Chit, can't you be contented
to have your Fellows by your self? methinks you should; and you ought to be a
little more cautioned, for the honour of your Family, than help to make your
own Uncle a Cuckold. But where's my Wife? Oh, there she is, with my Lord
Segerdo; that's well enough, he has got the Matrimonial Maggot in his Head for
Eromena, so I believe I may trust her with him; and yet how know I, but he may
bring Letters from somebody else, for these loving Fools are all apt to pity
one another.


Sir, your Servant; I hear my Lord Corna^o returns from Travel to night; I
shall rejoice to see him, I hear he's a complete Gentleman, pray, Sir, do you
expect him?


Yes, Sir, I shall be glad on it, not only for the natural Cause of his being a
Relation, but for the Charge he'll take off my hands. My Sister has made me
manage his Estate in his absence, much against my will, but 'twas to serve her.
-- pray Wife go up into your Chamber, I would speak with you, I must speak with
you.


I know your Business, and I think it may be done at any time as well as now.


You won't go up then? Don't provoke me to expose you and my self before
Company.


You can't expose me more than I have my self.


I believe so; a rare Character you give your self! what, have you writ an
Answer to the Letter you found in the Garden? or, has the party been here to
take it by word of mouth?


In short, Sir, I will not go up to be locked into my Chamber, this is a Night
of rejoicing, I will stay and see my Cousin Cornaro; and I am sure my Lady
Berengaria will not think the worse of me for it; if you don't like it, pray
stay and watch me, for I am resolved to have some comfort of my Life for all my
uneasiness.


Come Sir, don't deny so reasonable a Request.


Well, well, I must not say much now, but when I have her in my clutches, I
will sit her.


So, so; my Lord Segerdo has follow'd his Heart, which the young Lady has got
from him, Conada, she's really very handsome; pray Heaven he ever get it again.


I see him yonder, see, she shuns him, and comes this way to make him lose the
opportunity of speaking to her: pray, Ladies, let us befriend a poor unhappy
Lover, and quit this place; let us retire, and visit my Lady Berengaria, whom,
I warrant, longs to see her Son, and thinks this day the longest that has come.



So, so, my Wife begins to show her self already, but what can I do to get her
under my dominion again, my devilish Niece has instructed her, but I will
contrive a way if possible to put her out of conceit with young Fellows, as
well as punish my Niece: I'll make her I don't know what yet, but if I see the
Fellows hanker after her, I am afraid I shall not follow my policy. Well
something is in my head that I hope will do me good against this invincible
Plague a young Wife. Well, I was mad in my old age, else I should never have
married, and set up a Trade to break so soon: So here comes another that has a
mind to be dabbling with Matrimony, would he were as old as I, that I might see
one Man more as wretched as my self, and I should be contented.


Fair Eromena do not fly from me,
I have no design to prejudice your Honour;
Were I a Ravisher you could do no more.
Look on me once, behold my Youth,
Take pity of my sufferings, you know I love you,
Fairest Eromena, and cause I love, don't
Tyrannize too much.

My Lord, you cannot call it so in me,
But friendship rather: I fly from you
With a design to cure you of this Passion,
Your only Curse: how wretched should I make you,
Should I receive this Love? No, no, my Lord,
I know my self too well ever to listen to you,
My most unhappy Fate ne'er designed me yours.
Think who I am, a stranger to the World,
Born in obscurity, may be basely born,
Remember that.
And may it bring back all your generous Thoughts.

I have thought, I've thought on all that you can say,
Use not your Eloquence in such a Cause,
And think not Heaven trusted you with Wit
To use it against your self, like a self Murderer:
I can find no effects in what you say,
But Love increasing, wracking my poor heart;
You have poured your charming Poison
Through my Eyes into my breast:
And now you see the mischief you have done,
You would destroy the Bowel, you show your
Friendship but 'tis now too late.

I show my duty still, and will persist in it,
All you can say can never change my mind.

There's something in my Person or my Humour
That turns your heart against me: Tell me,
O tell me what it is, if 'tis my Humour,
I'll change it even to the low submission
Of a Slave;
I'll lie whole hours, whole days beneath your Feet
And hear my faults, and learn the way to mend 'em.
I wish I could as easily change my Person,
If 'tis what you can't like; but oh! remember
To make up these faults, my Heart, my Soul
And Life, all, all, is yours.
Were you what you could
Wish your self in all things, in Birth,
In Fortune, Beauty, you cannot wish for more.
Could you with me submit to lead your Life
Before the rest of all the Youth you have seen?

My Lord, I have something in my nature
(Let my unhappy Birth be what it will)
That scorns deceit: Therefore I think
It is my duty now to speak the Truth.
Were I what you could wish me be in all things,
In Quality or Fortune* or were you willing
(As you seem to be) to take me as I am,
And make me yours, I here protest
I think I could not love you.

What need of further questions?
This is enough to cut off all dispute:
Yet I will ask you one more, and 'tis I think
The last, since you have gone so much
Beyond my wish, add to your cruel
Generosity, and tell me truly do you
Love elsewhere? if so, I have nothing else
To do but to try to break the Fetters
You have given me, or else
Sink with the weight.

My Lord, I do assure you, by all my hopes
In Heaven or Earth, I do not.

Then there is hopes still.

None my Lord, there's none.
I owe you more than ever to deceive you.

Strange resolution! not love elsewhere,
And yet never love me:
Who knows but your generous Heart
After the thousand services I shall pay,
May Love again.

My Lord, you have no faults,
I am my self the greatest fault, by my own lost Condition,
Were I of Quality equal to yours,
My heart might then have the same Inclinations.

Take then the
Last and only answer left, of all mankind.
I find I cannot like you.
Sure I am reserved for some unhappy Fortune,
For were I not, I could not be so blind:
I am thrust into the World against my will,
And all my Actions have the same force over me;
It is against my will I show you Scorn;
It is against my will that I refuse you,
For I must own my self so much to blame.

Enough, enough, you've struck a
Thousand Daggers to my Heart, I have no
Hope, now, raise me some Rival, Heaven!
As much despised as I am, that I may show
What I could do to gain her.

Farewell, my Lord, I've held too long Discourse,
For which I hope you will not Censure me,
Nor think it but a Woman's Policy,
For I shall soon convince you of the Contrary:
Once more Farewell most worthy Nobleman,
That can in contradiction to the World
Find out a Charm in honest Poverty:
May this most unexampled Generosity
Prevail with Heaven to change
This wretched Love to one so mean as me,
Into a Passion for some happier Maid;
And if not so, may all Heavens Glory shine
Into thy Soul, and make your Love Divine.

Turn yet once more, behold me at your Feet,
Oh! do not force me for your wondrous goodness,
To Curse my self, for this most wretched Fate:
Must I never see you more, what shall I say?
Oh! do not look with all that coldness on me:
Farewell then Cruel Maid, I hope for ever
'Tis false, I do not wish it, never can,
But will persist to love you to my Death.
Thus on my Knees I beg of Heaven for thee,
It won't Revenge thy ridged Cruelty,
But Love thee still, though you're unkind to me,
Ne'er may you feel the Torments I have born,
Nor have your Faithful Love repaid with scorn.

PRay Gentlemen be all in readiness, is all the Music come? The Dancers and
all the rest that are to entertain the Company with the Masque.

Yes Madam.


Go then and see all be done in order, remember you have a Noble Lord now to
serve

Come fair Eromena, do not look sad, nor think because my Lord is coming 'twill
take away any of that kindness my Lady has ever shown you.


Madam, should she take all her Favours from me, I had no reason to complain; I
am her Debtor, and so little likely ever to pay again, that 'tis but Justice
not to let me run too much of the Score.


Take care still to preserve that grateful temper of owing your misfortunes, by
which means you keep in mind the Obligations that are laid upon you. Come,
don't Sigh!


I cannot help it, what I am I know not, but this I know, my soul disdains the
very thoughts of Baseness; and yet I am not ashamed of Misery, since it has
given a Noble Lady a glorious opportunity to show the first of Heavenly
Virtues, Charity.


No more, I spoke not to afflict you, nor raise a bashful thought of Poverty,
to check your Nobler Thoughts; She that loves Virtue for its own sake, and not
for Policy, is rich enough in all things.


Arapsia, I heard a noise below, I believe my Brother's come, or some of the
Strangers that are to be here, pray enquire. Margaretta, I long to see my
Brother, I hear a mighty Character of him ^s to his Person and Temper: Pray do
you take care to guard your Heart, for all you are my Uncles Wife, I can't
swear you won't wish for my Brother.


Faith, if I do wish for him, he'll be the first of Men that I ever wished for,
for the sake of their Persons yet.


Nay truly one would think so by the choice you made of my Uncle.


Well, Madam, you may say what you please of my Husband and your Uncle, but I
wish his Person and Years were his only Faults.


Truly I think they are faults enough, without any other additions. Eromena,
come, you shall in with us.


Pardon me, Madam, I am not fit to appear before your Great Relations in this
homely garb of being unknown, it may be they may think me what I am, a Beggar,
and take it as too great a Confidence to come into their Presence.


Fie Eromena, I did not think you could have made so weak an excuse; are you a
Companion fit for me and not for them: Come, you shall go, your Beauty will
make you valued, together with the Virtue that I believe waits on you in all
your Actions.


Madam, you Command, and I Obey in all.


Gentlemen, I give you many thanks for doing me and my Son this Honour, and
must own to you I did not think Heaven had so great a Blessing now remaining
for me; this is the only joy I ever can receive.


Fie Madam, your Joys are many that you have to come, your Son will bring you
the Joy of seeing him a Complete Gentleman: you'll live a new life in him, to
see him happily Married to some Noble Lady, to see his pretty Children play
about you, and a thousand pleasures you cannot guess at yet.


No more than you can at the Torment


Madam, my Lord is come, just lighted at the Gate.


Conduct him up, how do you Sister?


Only a little overjoyed.


Thus let me Kneel and beg your Blessing, Madam, and then let me bless all
those Heavenly Powers that have through many dangers brought me back safe to the
best of Mothers.


Her overjoy to see you has wrought this strange effect, she'll soon recover.


Let me embrace him, oh! my Dear, Dear, Son,


Madam, I owe to you a double Duty, my Fathers Death has placed it all in you,
and may I be as cursed as hateful Disobedience e're can make me, when I forget
to pay to the most nice degree all that I owe you.


Sir, I must now bid you welcome, and believe me Nephew, I am truly glad to
see you. And so I'm afraid is my Wife; how she stares upon him!


Sir, have you forgot you had a Sister, which though she was but young when she
parted from you, has heard enough of your Perfections to love you though unknown,
accept her welcome too.


Dearest Sister, pardon my ignorance, I should have flown into your tender Arms
to show my joy, had I but known you first; but don't think me a less loving
Brother.


Now do I know by my silly Uncles looks he's afraid my Brother should see his
Wife, but, I'll tease him. Brother, here's a relation as much a stranger to you
as I was, an Aunt of yours.


How! this Lady my Aunt? she does not look like my Mothers Sister.


No, nor your Uncles Wife, but yet she is so.


Yes Nephew, I have played the Fool in my old age and have married.


I give you joy, Sir, and you Fair Lady, this Gentlewoman I know but cannot
call to mind.


My Mothers Woman, Brother, one that I am sure remembers you, and is glad to
see you.


I beg your Pardon Sister, who's that young Lady stands behind my Mother. Is
she a Relation too?


Oh Brother, have you found out her, I'll take a time to tell you who she is.


Madam, I count my self most truly happy to see so many Friends about me.

But above all that I once more see you and my Dear Sister.

Let it not take from the respect I ever bore you my most kind Relations, that
I prefer them two.


My Son, to show thee and all the World*
The real joy I have to see you,
Notwithstanding many here have believed
It unkind in me to keep you so long abroad,
I here declare I do esteem this happy
Meeting the only wish I had remaining;
And to Celebrate this joyful Night,
I have provided something, I hope will entertain
You. -- Sit my most Worthy Friends.

What not one look, one last farewell,
Do not refuse to see me when I am Dead,
As I soon shall be, and 'tis my only wish
When I'm dead to have you once behold
This wretched Body, and wish I had not met
So hard a Fate.

You have my eternal wishes for your safety
And success in every thing, but me:
Pray my Lord no more, the place
Is inconvenient.

My Lord, though I am but a Stranger at present,
Yet I presume to bid you truly welcome,
And shall wish a greater friendship with you:
I never saw I think so Fair a Creature.

Sure, if I mistake, not my new Cozen eyes Er^mena
A little more than ordinary, and methinks
I am vexed at it, what can it mean, I am sure
I can have no design upon him my self,
But yet I'll observe a little.

Cornaro, this Gentleman my Lord Gabinius
Is a Lover of your Sister, and has my consent
For his Marriage, which was only deferred
For your return; your Sister will be glad
Of your approbation.

Madam, you are the only judge, and my consent
Must follow yours: What says my Sister?
Is't your own desire, come do not blush:
'Tis no dishonour to you to wish to marry
With the Man you like.

Let us remove out of this place,
I do believe your Supper waits you.

Madam, it does.

Come Son, your Journey may have discomposed you,
We'll make what hast we can to give
You rest: this is the way.

Madam, I wait on you.

What sudden Passion's this I feel?
A strange uneasiness has seized upon me,
Something disquiets me, but I know not what:
Segerdo here, I am vexed, I am disturbed,
For I would think a little, but upon what I know not.

Madam, you seem as if some unwelcome thought
Had discomposed the calmness of your mind*
I only stayed to offer you my Service,
It may be you believe you shall not now
Have from the Lady Beringaria that former
Kindness which you did possess, if you think so,
Accept from me the benefits you want,
I ask for nothing in return but your acceptance.

My Lord, you do mistake my Looks,
I know of nothing of those fears you speak of,
And should be most ungrateful to believe 'em,
But I must thank you for your offered favour,
Though that would be a wretched Fate indeed,
Should I be forced to accept them.

It is then such a misery to receive
The favours of a Man asks no return.
The time will come, pardon the Prophecy,
When you shall wish you had received my friendship,
And even then it shall not be denied,
But flung beneath your Feet to tread upon,
Sure that will Conquer your Obdurate Heart:
I take my leave and will no more disturb you,
But happy in the thought I once may serve you,
Shall now enjoy all satisfaction I can have without
You, let that time come good Heaven,
That to my Bosom she may ^ly for aid,
And I may help the mourning lovely Maid.

How wret^hed is my Fortune thus lost to my
Self? those unhappy Parents that brought me to the
World, had better have bestowed a burying on me,
Though it had been alive, than sent me here
To be the object of all Peoples Charity;
This Man, because he thinks I want it,
Dares to hope my Poverty may more prevail
Than natural inclination for his Love,
Love! What is Love? I never felt it yet:
Why do I sigh to name it?
A sad and melancholy thought possesses me,
Oh! woeful State! no Friend, Father, or Mother
To ease my loaded heart in their dear Bosoms,
And sigh my Sorrows to their tender Councels:
Heaven be my Guide! which only can be so.
Lend me a Clue to pass this Forest World,
And give me Virtue to escape those Briars
Which covered over with Roses look so Fair:
Give me a Heart submitting to thy Will,
And Blessed or Wretched to obey thee still.

Nay, nay, for Heavens sake Captain do not follow me, for my Husband will be
after me in an instant.


Let him come, what care I; look ye, you'll be used scurvily enough for being
with me: He'll never believe you have used me as you have done: It shall be my
business for the future, to make your Husband believe what he fears is really
come to pass.


Really Captain, let him think what he will, it will never turn to your
advantage with me; therefore let me entreat you to be good-natur'd, and not
help to make my life more uneasy than it is.


And you would really have me go? I know you'll say so, but I know your Sex too
well to believe you, this seeming aversion you Women use to try your Power as
you call it, 'tis a foolish Policy in your Condition, for whilst you are
keeping off, in expectation of more pains taking on my side to Court you, the
end of my Courtship will be quite blown up; your Husband will be here, and
prevent the bewitching answer of I'll see you another time, and convince you,
you are deceived, ever to believe I can be prevailed upon, and then tell me the
Dear Place, consider you have but a little time, and come to this kind answer;
and suppose I have said all you could ever expect from the most true sincere
Adoter you can ever have.


So, Sir, I am very much obliged to you, for your good opinion, but assure your
self, you will meet with no such kind answer from me, therefore pray leave me
before you force me to use you worse than will be proper for me to do, or you
to receive.


And can you have so much of Folly, and so little of the Woman, really to
refuse the Love of a young Fellow, and have such a wretched old nasty Husband,
gad, well thought on, now I think on it, you are obliged to me for making love
to you; for no body but I would accept of you after such a Monster.


You shall not have the making him a Monster: But pray, Sir, leave me, or I
must quit the place.


And will you really hold this Opinion, that you are obliged to value that
thing called a Husband? then now hear me, and see what effect your Justice will
be. I will Torment you wherever you go, Plague you with Letters, throw them
into your Window, if you wont receive them, you shall not dare to peep abroad,
but you shall meet some-body or other, that shall solicit you in my behalf, and
if all the ways which I can think on take no effect, I'll to the last Revenge
of a disappointed Lover, Swear I have had all I wished to have, report it so
privately public, it shall be one of the greatest Secrets was ever known by
the whole Town, and at last it will infallably come to your Husbands ear, and
then you know what follows.


To answer your good-natur'd threat, know, that there is no Secret you mean to
render, but shall be privately public before-hand: and for my Husband, perhaps
I should be glad he really believed what you threaten, but to let you see how
much you mistake the way to gain any thing with me; know, that it is to make my
self easy, I condescend to be uneasy. 'Tis something mystical I confess, as
most Women are, but my real design, time will best explain. So, Sir, I hope I
have convinced you, how little to the purpose all your Revenge will be, and
take my leave. Your Servant.


So, she really believes I have some grand design upon her. But Faith she's
mistaken, for I have no design but that which most young Fellows have upon
every Pretty Woman they see: And yet, Pox on her, her seeming resistance, though
I know it to be such, is a greater inducement than I have found lately. The
Women make themselves too cheap to be valued, and the easiness of the worst of
'em makes the best not minded, If I thought I could not easily compass this
business, it would make me wonderful diligent: well, I have a mind to try her,
and if I find She Cannot long enough preserve the Field,
I'll think no Woman but in time must yield.



TO night no doubt, has been a night of rest to all but me, for a long Journey,
a long Entertainment, Friends and Feasting; the true content of seeing my Dear
Mother, and all my dearest Kindred, has not been able to compose my mind, or
make me lose my self in one hours sleep. What should the reason be, fain I
would say, I know not, but I find I am too full of the sight of that young
Charming Maid.

Good Morrow, Brother, you see I take the Privilege
Of a Relation, in visiting you thus early:
But, I hope, dear Brother, you will not think
It too great a Freedom; For, though you are my Brother,
Our Acquaintance has been so short as might
A little check this forwardness.

Dear Sister, I hope you'll not repent of your good Nature,
To a Brother that is really a stranger to this part of the World;
You must inform me all things:
Who is that my Uncle has married,
She seems a pretty good humoured Woman.

Why, truly Brother, I think o'my Conscience
If she had not more Patience than Beauty,
She could never away with her uneasy Life:
For my own part, it has almost turned my heart
Against Matrimony; and all that keeps up any fancy that way,
Is the Consideration, that 'tis impossible for a young Man
To have the humours of an old one; or, at least,
They won't look so wretchedly at five and twenty,
As at almost five score.

But pray who is that young Creature I saw last night,
You promised to inform me.

O, Brother, have a care, let not your Eyes be Charmed
With that fair Maid, for she will never grant
You any Favour she may not give with Honour:
Besides, it would be cruelty indeed to seek to gain
Her heart; for should you do it, you'd kill a poor
Unhappy Gentleman? My Lord Segerdo dotes
On each look, each frown she gives, as for
A Wife, I know you must despise her,
And so must all your Friends -- But I'll tell
You more as we walk this morning.

Is my Mother come out of her Chamber?

No, nor never does till some hours after this
Time, nor sees any body, let the Occasion be what it
Will: The time 'twixt this and then, I will employ
In telling you poor Eromena's story.

Come Sister, let us walk then, for I really long
To know it, and believe I have a thousand pleasures
In seeing you thus good to one in misery;
For sure we ought to pity one another,
And 'tis one of the most excellent gifts we have to
Bestow Favours on all those whom Virtue
Recommends.

Well Wife! how do you like Liberty.
You see I am a very complaisant Husband,
And gave way when I saw you engaged.

Sir!

Lord bless us! you seem to be very ignorant.
I warrant you don't remember your discourse
With Captain Conall after Supper:
You did not believe, I suppose, that I was so near you.

Sir, I have done nothing to be afraid of your
Knowledge, and since you pretend to know so much,
I wish you knew all.

Knew all! Lord bless me; it would be very hard indeed if the Husband did not
know all: But, you are afraid, I suppose, that I should know more than I like.


Nay, how can it be otherwise -- You can like nothing, or at least you seem to
like nothing, for you desire nothing.


If I did desire any thing, you are not able to supply me, unless with
something I did not want, that is, a false heart, which is the only substantial
thing thou hast; for in thy self thou art really nothing, and art Good for
nothing.


'Tis true, I have made nothing of my self.


Why, thou only true Image of a Lucifer in Petticoats, why did thou marry me,
if thou thoughtst me so insignificant.


Because I did not think you so insignificant as I found you, I thought you
significant enough for my purpose.


What to be made a Cuckold? Look you, Mistress,
If you thought that, you were mistaken,
For I can no more bear to be a Cuckold,
Than a Blazing Star, and should think it
Altogether as unlucky.

I am of Opinion, you'll make a Cuckold sooner than a Blazing Star.

O, thou Devil sent to torment me.
You know my destiny that way
Better than any one under the Sun,
And 'tis a great deal of pity it should be
So much in your hands (oh! I am running
Out of all bounds, and shall forget my design)
And yet, my dear, since a Man's honour must
Be trusted with some body, I could not have put mine
Into the hands of any body that would have used it better.

I believe so too?

What, then I suppose I deserve all the ill usage you can put upon me.

All I shall put upon ye, you deserve.

Very well; Then I am to be a Cuckold by means of my own merit.

I suppose so, for your destiny may over-rule mine.

A rare excuse for making a Cuckold, truly;
So then, the fault is mine, not yours?
O Marriage, thou Bane to mankind:
The first unhappy wretch that drew that Lot
Had the excuse, not to have seen before:
But all the rest that in the snare are caught
Have nought but shame and folly at their door.

Do you rail for nothing; then what will you do
When you have reason indeed -- O, silly Men?
I never in my Life observed but she that injured
Her Husband, took still care to hide it,
And was secure whilst the poor sincere and virtuous
Wife pleased in her Innocence, lay liable to real Censure
Husband, I have one trial of your patience to make,
And if it answer my expectation, I shall have reason
To bless your present causeless jealousy.

Madam, the favours you have promised
Are too much the business of my heart:
Ever let me rest without pursuing them;
You have drawn this constant trouble on your self
By your exceeding goodness.

My Lord, I shall be glad if I can serve you,
Though I fear I cannot do it now? I did expect
You would be here this morning, and sent my Woman
To Eromena, to desire her to walk with me:
But I understand she has had but ill rest to night,
And will keep her Chamber longer than is usual.

Can sleep be churlish and not stay with her:
I cannot blame it then for leaving me.
Love still has fears, but sure the worst are mine?
I fear, dear Madam, Cornaro's fallen in Love
With Eromena, I have a way to find if it be true;
I could not rest last night for thinking of it --
I see him coming: Dear Madam, contrive to leave
Me with him.

So sad a story and so good a Character
Of one so young, I have not heard indeed,
And dearest Sister, let me beg you to continue
All your goodness to her; I will in all I can
Oblige you to it -- Is not that my Aunt --
My Lord, and Madam, I beg your pardon,
I did not see you sooner.

My Lord, I hope you'll pardon me for leaving you a little, but 'tis in so good
Company, you may have more reason to be angry for my return than going -- Cozen
give me leave to talk with you for a Quarter of an hour -- Your Servant,


My Lord, I fear I do disturb you:
Lovers are always troublesome, even to themselves
And then much more to others that have no relish
Of what their pleasure is -- I do presume
You are no Lover, Sir?

If I were Sir, your Example would not
Encourage me to continue so: for I understand
The pleasure you find is very little.
But, my Lord, has this fair Creature never given you hope? Has she still us^d
her Rigour and disdain.

Too sure, she'as always told me her Aversion, but I must Love her still --
Love and Disdain have both possession in me; Love bids me Court her still, with
humbleness: Despair tells me Love will not prevail, and bids me try some other
way to get her in my power, for since she does not love elsewhere, her Virtue
will instruct her to forgive an action occasioned by Despair and Love.


You will not ravish her?


Far be the thoughts of such an Act from me.


What do you mean then?


I would by your assistance take her away from hence, and would desire your
Family not to take notice of her, that she may believe her self forsaken by all
the World but me. Then sure she would consent that I might have her.


And would you have me Connive at such an Action? I do excuse you, Sir, for the
shortness of our acquaintance has not informed you that Cornaro's Soul would
not shut out a Dog that once has had protection here, much less a fair
unfortunate young Maid.


And do you, Sir, resent nothing but this, has Eromena no share in all your
anger? why do you blush, my Lord? 'Tis no Crime, nor Wonder neither for a young
Lord to Love a Beauteous Lady.


He has touched me to the Soul.


My Lord, because indeed I cannot rest, if I should think the World believed me
guilty of such an Action, as you heard just now -- I'll tell you all the truth.
Last night I saw you, Sir, at your Return from your long Travel; you saw me
too, I do believe, and jealous Love, which always sees too much, made me
observe your Eyes, and all your motions; I saw you were in Love, I do believe,
ever you could know it your self. This was the reason why I came this morning,
and by this story have forced you to show too much Concern not to be really in
Love with Charming Eromena.


Why would you know this?


Because like some unhappy wretches my wants make me the greater Prodigal. I
had but little peace, and now have thrown even that away. Oh! Eromena! Cruel
Eromena!


Fair, Charming, Lovely Eromena,
What does those words tell you my Lord,

That I am lost, for she will sure Love you,
But when she does remember this, my Lord,
The moment that you take her for your Wife
My life must end.
I can live without her, all my desire is, I may
Take leave of her and never see her more.

My Lord, I promise you the thing you ask;
Though, may be, I shall have no greater Comfort
Than sighing at her feet in vain as you have.
What is there in her heart that's so impenetrable,
That she could ever resist such merit, and how
Can I presume to hope, when you have been denied?

Flatter me not, my Lord, you shine above me,
In every thing can Charm the Young and Fair,
Pity me rather, that am forced to own
My Rival, will deserve all he can wish?
Farewell, my Lord, be generous to one would wish
Your Friendship, were you not his Rival:
Let me but know how my misery should increase
And I'll take care it shall not want it's due:
And think to check the happiness you'll have,
That your success must send me to my Grave.

Oh! Restless night, or rather restless Love
For day I find no kinder than the night:
Reading, the soft deluder of the mind,
Is now no Friend to me, but rather does increase
What I would shun. Books make us read
What we would blush to hear, the pleasing tales of Love?
Oh! Love! 'tis here described! This, this is my Disease;
I feel a softness at my wretched heart
That waits but till 'tis asked to throw it self
Beneath the feet of him it does adore?
What Eromena hast thou seen thy Love,
Desired, Solicited, Courted by a Man
That Envy cannot find a fault withal,
To give now unasked to one perhaps
That will revenge the scorn that thou hast shown:
Let me not think on that, my woes are many,
But thought makes 'em worse --
Upon this Bank I'll lay my restless body.
Thou God of Peace, Compose the unquiet mind of the
Most wretched Creature that did ever petition thee.

What can I suffer if I give my Love to that poor
Virtuous Maid? Has not another equal in Birth
Offered as much, and has she not refused him
It may be Heaven reserves her heart for me,
And see she's here, my fate has guided me
To what I wish -- She sleeps, her face is lovely
And her Charming Eyes, though they are covered,
Pierce me to the heart; her Rosie Lips though they speak not,
Invite the lookers on to taste their sweetness -- And, I must --
What, to kiss her is no Crime; It may be she'll not wake,
But if she should, I'm sure she cannot blame me
They that will leave Locks open to a Thief,
Must needs expect a Robbery.

Ha! who's this commits this
Rudeness? My Lord, is't you?

Oh! Chide me not for what has made me wretched,
The tasting of those Lips has quite undone me,
Unless I may again, fair lovely Maid,
You that were born to do nothing but wonders,
That have transformed me from the thing I was,
And in the space of one poor night have made me
Your everlasting slave: I am no longer Master of my self,
Put this first time I ever speak to you,
I offer you my Life, my Heart, my Soul:
Oh! Love! now work a wonder on us both
And touch her Heart, as thou hast surely mine.

What does he say? Oh Heavens! I feel it true
My pain I'm sure is Love, and Love for him.
Rise, good my Lord, and do not by this needless Ceremony
Call up to my Remem^rance all my woes,
My wretched Poverty, and obscure Fate, nor die my Cheeks
In deeper blushes than your new pretended Love has raised.

Oh! Call it not pretended, nor expect I e^er can rise
Till I have moved your heart to know 'tis real
And confess it too -- See, see me here, O Lovely Charming Creature;
Turn not away but look upon me in this humble posture
May be it may move your pity; nay, I will force you,
And follow still with Humbleness and Love,
Till you at last shall say. You know I Love you.

Call up thy Courage, hapless Eromena,
Oh! I begin to find I'm lost indeed;
Struggle a little heart, give not thy self away
The first attack --
Rise, good my Lord, or I must kneel with you.

Oh! no! you shall not kneel, nor will I rise:
But hugging thus your knees, I do Conjure you
To give my Love both hearing and acceptance --
If since the moment that I saw you first,
I've had one minutes thought but only you
Or any wi^h, but of the gaining you;
Some power that hears me punish strait my falseness,
But if my vow is true,
Now touch her heart, and fix her mine for ever.

'Tis done, 'tis done, I find I am so now,
And 'tis too late now to Recall my Fate.

She faints, what sudden illness overcomes my Love,
Speak, speak, oh speak, my Dearest, Charming Woman.

Away my Lord, loose me from your Arms, and add not
Fresh confusion to my Soul by thinking on the weakness
You've surprised me in. Oh! let me go.

Oh stay and hear me a little longer,
Let me but know why you now fly from me,
After the Confirmation of a Love you ought to pardon,
Speak, do you believe I love you?

My Lord, I do not know yet, I wish I did.

Oh! do not say you know not! take my only last assurance:
I do not offer you a vicious Love,
But only that which holy marriage gives;
Speak once again, is that a Confirmation?

It is, my Lord, but such a one I must take from you
And from another, I am sure I will not.

What said you, did I hear you right;
Are not my Scenes scattered in the storm of Love:
Will you ne'er be another?

Heavens; what have I said! unwary Tongue,
Thus to betray the secrets of my heart:
I said, my Lord, that I would never marry.

Yes, me: you must, or see else most miserable.
What can I say to move you, take this Sword
And pierce my heart, if you'll not grant your Love.

Oh! Beringaria! how might I betray thee,
In ruining thy only darling Son,
How make thee curse that noble Charity
That raised this Serpent to destroy thy quiet.

No pity yet: Heavens, how she does distract me*
And all I can resolve on's Ruin, Death or Her.
Once more I kneel to move that stubborn heart
With my own breaking? Now, O hopeless Conquest.

I have recalled my sinking Gratitude.
And Virtue now assumes its former place:
I'll cast my eyes no more upon the object
That could prevail to make me do a thing
Against all Laws of Hospitality.
Fly then Eromena, from that bewitching Tongue.
I must look on him, for methinks I tear
A piece of my own Soul away, when I resolve to go:
But one look more -- O, I was flying to his Arms
The more I do dispute, the less I find I'm able
To forbear to tell him, I love him, die for him
And cannot live without him -- O Love! Love! Love!

It is enough, oh, Heaven! let me rejoice,
I saw Love sparkle from her shining eyes;
Who shuns the Battle, is half overcome,
She flies to be pursued, and I will fly
To over-take the Treasure of my Soul.
Oh Love! thou supreme power, behold thy last
Of wonders, that has excelled the rest.
But hold, let not my Soul with this success
Neglect completing of my happiness,
Now is the time to perfect all my Joy.
Thus to her Arms with wings of Love I'll fly,
And if not live for her, before her dye.

WHat did you say? I could not hear you right,
Does Heaven then think my miseries not enough,
Can it be possible? Cornaro fallen in Love with Eromena,
Who told you this? Alas! what have I done
In all the actions of my past unhappy Life,
That I must now be sentenced to this Fate?
Alas! I'm sorry that I told it you;
But now must tell you that my Lady Margaretta
Over-heard all their Discourse this Morning in the Garden,
I do believe it is no more than a light Young-man's Love,
That vanishes upon the least resistance:
You know that Eromena's truly Virtuous,
And need not fear her condescending to his unlawful Love,
And then his spirit is too great ever to think
Of making her his Wife: Let me advise you,
Propose a Marriage to him with my Lord Segerdo's Sister,
The Lady is of the best Family in Venice,
And a great Beauty too, her Fortune rather
Exceeding what he can propose, say you have
Proposed it to her Father, and that he seems
Well inclined to it, and if you can't succeed with him,
Lay your Commands on her to marry Lord Segerdo:
This will be a means to prevent any ills may happen.

I thank you, and perceive your Counsel good,
Let it be put in speedy execution,
Do you inform her my fixed Resolution,
That she must marry Segerdo suddenly:
As for my Son I'll use a Mothers Power,
And if that fail, depend on you to make her comply
With my Commands, one way sure I may succeed.

Madam, I think I see my Lord coming down,
Propose it now, it cannot much surprise him,
Since such great Fortunes as the Lady is are sought
After too much to let the least minute be lost.

I will, away, and leave me, and to your design with Eromena.
Heaven Bless my Son: Rise, Cornaro, Rise,
And know I'll bless thee more in Deeds than Words.

You always were a most Indulgent Mother,
O, let me find the same Indulgence still,
'Tis you alone can make me Blessed or Wretched,
Upon my knees I beg your will to Bless me,
Since 'tis alone in your Almighty Power.

To show how much my will complies to bless you,
Ill let you know what I have done for you:
But first my Son, how stands your heart to Marriage,
Could you like that State, the only earthly blessing
Of the Good and Virtuous, and Curse of all the Wicked,
That know not how to use so great a Blessing:
And for that Reason turn depravers of what they
Understand not.

So true a sense I have of that most blessed State,
(If between two that Love, whose hearts Heaven has joined)
That I believe it the first Taste to future Bliss:
I mean in Heaven.

'Tis well my Son, I joy to see you so differing
From our present Youth, who in the Arms of some
Loose Courtesans wast all their Health and Means,
And despise the kind advice of all that let them
See their Errors. Now Cornaro, to prevent these Snares,
For you are now of fitting years to marry,
No Boy, but of Manly years: I do propose it to you,
Consider well, and let me have your answer.
There is a Lady whose Birth is equal, if not above you,
Whose Beauty is I think the greatest I have seen,
Her Fortunes much Superior to yours,
And her Virtue not to be blamed by Envy or Detraction:
What think you Son of such a Lady?

I have not seen the Lady.

But you may, I have already moved it to her Father,
Whose consent follows your liking.

Madam, I thank you, but how knows the Father
The Lady may like me.

She's all Obedience, her liking waits upon her Fathers will.

Madam, I must own, I should not think my Wife
Liked me the better for being an obedient Daughter:
Are these the marriages that Heaven makes,
Unseen, unknown to one another.

I would have you see this Lady, it may be
The thoughts that you may have her easily
May pall your sickly taste: I charge you see,
Nay, strive to love her too, wait on your Sister,
She goes there to carry the good news to Lord Segerdo,
That he shall now have Eromena, that proud fool,
That is so blind to her own happiness, she shall now,
Against her will, accept that blessing she can never merit;
Consider well, and as you're obedient
May Heaven prosper thee, or curse thee ever?

Oh! Heavens, what said you, Madam, recall your blessing,
So you do your curse, leave me to chance --
What now remains, must my Love, my Eromena
Become another, and must I know it, and yet not prevent it,
I should be then a Boy? O the curse of such a night,
That I should lie lamenting in my bed
And think another revelled in her Arms?
Keep me from such a thought you pitying powers,
Or I shall run through all extremities
And kill this happy Fortune, cursed Rival,
And see she's here, my darling only Joy,
In spite of duty receive the endless vow*
Of a most constant, though unhappy Lover.

Lost and undone; Oh! wretched Eromena!
Let me not hear the name of Love again,
Sure there is poison in a Lovers Tongue
That breaks the heart, it prays too,
How should I be so cursed else? I am Commanded
By her whom yet I never knew, do an injustice
In ^ight of all known aversion to marry
Lord Segerdo, or seek my wretched bread in desert fields;
What have I done? I ask no more than bread,
The meanest slave that walks about the house
Has sure as much as that without Conditions.

Oh! Cruel Mother! has then the Tyranny you s^ewd
To me, been but forerunner of a wrong to her,
What should the cause be, tell me, Eromena;
Do you think my Mother knows my love to you?

Alas! my Lord, mock me not so again,
I am not born to be beloved by you.
But this pretended Love of yours I find
Has been discovered; for which, Arapsia told me
My Lady Beringaria's Commands, she bad me
Have a care, 'twas honester to leap into my Fathers bed
Than to give way to such Ingratitude,
And break the heart of her that had preserved me.

Nay, then it is too late to trifle longer,
And we must both be wretched if we do.
Once more, O thou who only can preserve me,
(For know I am Commanded too to marry
A Woman that I never saw) fling not my Life
Thy own and all away, but give me Heaven,
By making me thy own: O think a little;
On thy resolution depends our future Fate:
Say, can thou see me made another, speak?

I do confess, I cannot, nor must I ever consent
To be your Wife; for should I, O, what Mountains then
Would hide me from her anger her Just Reproaches,
And a guilty Conscience more terrible than all?

I would, and shroud thee in these longing arms
Till I had stif^'d apprehension in thee,
And made thee own thy fears were needless there.

Oh! let me go, tempt not a yielding heart
A thing not worth your taking, when so easy.

Consider we both are ruined if we do delay:
Oh, think on that my Mother will undo us,
Perhaps we never may meet again.

Let us never meet so I preserve my Virtue,
I've fortified my reason once again,
And can submit to any thing but baseness.

Then must we part for ever.

Indeed we must; I'll in some Cloister hide me from the World.
Farewell, I find I never must see you more,
To prevent the miseries must fall upon you,
When I'm removed, there will be no marriage forced upon you;
No Lady then -- Once more farewell for ever.

Stay yet, and see the effect of all your prudence,
The minute that you leave me is my ruin.
Oh! Cruel Creature, can you see me thus; I vow
Here on my knees, unless you are my Wife
Never to marry: And will you leave me?
Well, it shall be so; I will be left alone to Fate,
Which has decreed, I ^uust not live without you.

O Heavens, I cannot bea^ to part with him --
Come back, my Lord, but turn yo^r eyes away,
And do not see my blushes when I tell son
I am no longer Mistress of my passion,
But with a heart softened with mighty Love,
Take the impression you are pleased to wish,
I love you dearer than my Life or Soul;
Receive me to your arms your Lawful Wife,
And match my Love to a sincere obedience.

Oh! Joy! Oh! too Transporting Joy, that takes away
The sense that does receive it, but I will struggle
With my Conquered Soul, that faints with the excess
Of its own happiness, to grasp her thus for ever
To my heart -- Oh! all my Joy, my real Heaven on Earth:
This moment now shall join our hearts for ever.

Oh! what have I done; what makes my heart thus tremble?

Oh! do not now reflect on any thing,
But on the means to finish our Uniting,
Which shall this hour be done -- Meet me, my Life,
Half an hour hence, in the low Grove beyond the
Garden-Wall, there I'll provide the Priest shall join our hands.
Pleased in my Loves Embrace, my fairest Wife,
I'll then look down on those ambitious Fools
That choose the vanity of gaudy Pomp
Before the real Joys of Peaceful Love:
Let Interest feel a check unknown before,
I'm blessed in her dear arms that I adore.
No Crowns can ever my ambition move,
Nor warm that heart that's given up to Love.

Madam, though I must not presume to wait on you upon my own account, yet being
employed, I could not avoid giving you this trouble, and desiring you to do my
Lord Segerdo, the favour to try if you can give this last Letter to Eromena.


Sir, I shall endeavour to serve my Lord, though really Enomena did mightily
press me not to desire her to receive any more Letters, but I'll do my best,
Captain.


Oh! what a look was there! it has quite broke all my Resolutio^s. I must speak
once again -- Madam, have you no pity yet? What Task must I go through, to
obtain a certain blessing you can bestow?


Pray Captain, speak no more upon that subject, I would not run the hazard of
being tempted.


Say you so; then I am sure this is my time.


My Husband?


Pox o'that damned word; 'tis like the thought of a Trial and Execution, when a
Man's going to Fight an honourable Challenge.


Do you call this Challenge so honourable?


Yes certainly, when a Man has declined the Combat, you have leave then to use
him as you please; 'tis your Husband's Case. Come, my Lovely, Charming,
Bewitching, Creature, my Soul is in a Flame, I shall consume to ashes in a
moment.


I must make my appointment quickly, least my Husband should really come and
prevent me.


Tell me then by these lovely Eyes, when shall I come? When will your Husband
be abroad? Oh! O tell me quickly, least some cursed accident or other should
prevent the most desired pleasure of my life.


Nay, Captain, 'tis not so far gone neither: But if I had a mind to make an
Intrigue, I believe I could not have a better opportunity than I shall have to
day, for my Husband is to be abroad about an hour hence, at a place where he
will be some hours, and then if any body had a mind to come to me, it were but
their putting on some Women's Clothes, and slipping up those back stairs into my
Woman's Chamber; and if I had a mind, I could but open my Chamber' door and come
to them for an hour or two, and no body the wiser -- But, Heaven forbid I
should do so wicked a thing -- Well, Captain, farewell, and mind what I say to
you, I'll be sure to do what I can for my Lord Segerdo?


So, so, I'gad my Judgment never failed me yet, I was sure of this: I
understand her well enough, and though I am not mightily in Love, yet I can't
resist the present. Temptation, I'll run to Segerdo, and tell him her answer;
and then to a she Friend to borrow some disguise, the rest depends on Fortune
and the lucky hour. The Women are sure never to fail me -- Well that would some
men give to be so prosperous in all their attempts of this nature as I am? Gad,
I would give a great deal not to be so successful, it would make me relish my
Ladies with a sharper Appetite. Well, however, I won't lose my time now, it is
not a thing to be slighted till about four hours hence, and then she may take
her leave of me, and really I wish That she may have the same desire to part,
For faith, I should be loath to break her heart.



Tell me now quickly, don't delay a moment: How do you kno^ the Truth of what
you say? Speak! oh speak! whlist I have life to hear you.


Madam, I set my Lady Margaretta's Woman to watch and overhe^r all their
discourse in the Garden, where I saw them walking, but she was called away by
her Lady before she could know the result, but she says, all she could find out
was, that when Cornaro proposed marrying her, she insisted upon her Gratitude
to you, so that I hope her resolution will prevent the mischiefs you apprehend.
Or if there is no other way, 'tis but your telling him the Truth: or if you
will not let me take that Office.


Oh! help me now if there are Powers abo^e,
Or I shall lose all my remains of Reason:
O! 'tis gone! I find 'thas le^t the place it did inhabit,
And ^ies up higher to you l^fty R^ion.
Come, Come Arapsia, help me to a Dagger,
I'll cut all Eromena's Veins and let the blood
Mingle with Clay to make her self a monument.
The wretched Creature
Shall sink to shades like Clouds beneath the Sun,
To clear that sky Cornaro shall appear in?

Madam, I hope there is no Dagger, you're too impatient, a little time will
diss^pate these Clouds, you know the Remedy, should he mean to do the worst you
can fear; 'tis b^t to tell him on her the truth, and that will sure prevent it.


Oh, 'tis the worst of Remedies; and sure distraction
Will seize on me for ever, when 'tis known --
Let me consider -- All this train of sorrow
Is the effect of following thy Counsel: Now let me know
What I can do to mend this: Tell me a way that will
Not make me wretched, and then
I'll thank thy Cursed, Damned Contrivance:
But as it is, though it is most unreasonable,
I loath and hate thee for^t, yes, hate my self:
Find out a way, be sure you do, a safe one,
Or look to see me mad, to see this hand armed with a
Raised Dagger to destroy you, my self, and Eromena?

Madam, you are indeed unreasonable to lay
This blame on me, because the effect ha^'t answered
Your design.

Let me not think! O, let me fly, fly from that Enemy,
To my Repose, Remembrance, restless Remembrance,
That blots out all the good of my whole life,
To double all the bad: What, with my Son,
Oh! let me think no more! My Son and Daughter!
Ha, by this time may be they are Man and Wife:
If it be so, I'll get a Cloud to hide me,
And bear me from that Judgment I must have:
Can I shun that? no, no, it cannot be.
Then let me suffer bravely, like the first of mortals,
Punished for such a sin, oh! 'tis glorious to suffer
For the greatest Crime was ever done by Woman:
I'm lost in misery, find, find me not Heaven,
I dare not ask, nor hope to be forgiven.

Alas! I fear her reason is not right;
What's to be done in this extremity,
I'll run the hazard to disclose this secret,
And make Cornaro swear not to reveal it
Even to his Mother; his Love will then of course
Cease to Eromena, and she may then marry my Lord Segerdo,
This, as I think, is the most likely way -- But stay,
Perhaps he does not love her to that degree,
But that he may by Arguments be persuaded
To marry her his Mother has proposed;
I'll try all ways to keep the thing Concealed,
But to prevent the worst, I must reveal it.

Well, I wish all that have a mind to make Cuckolds may be married Men
themselves to see how good it is. I have been tormented more in my thoughts
than a poor Felon the night before Execution, for my Fate is as certain as his,
though not so dangerous: sure 'tis not come to pass yet; there may be a way to
prevent it: I have observed that damned Captain hanker hereabouts. Well, I must
find a way to dispose of her to make my self easy in a little time.


Oh! Sir, pray forgive me, my taking that naughty Woman's part, alas! I did not
know then what I do now.


Why, what do you know? Oh, Ruin and Destruction* I find it is past, and all
the World can't recall it; I'll tear her to pieces, did I marry her for this;
did she not promise to Love, Honour, and Obey me till death us did part; and
does she think making a Cuckold ever a one of the Conditions.


Pray Sir, don't be too much disturbed, for though my Aunt be to blame, yet it is
not so far gone but you may prevent it.


Oh! let me but know how this time, and I'll be sure to prevent the like danger
for the future.


Truly Sir, I must beg your pardon for having too good an opinion of your Wife;
but, what I have to tell you is, that I over-heard just now.


Oh! Tell me, my dear Niece, thou hast now convinced me, there are Women that
can be good, but it must be in Policy then and not in any sense of Justice, or
because they knew not how to be otherwise.


Why truly, Sir, you must understand, that walking in the Garden, I over-heard
my Aunt make an appointment with the Captain to steal up the back stairs about
this time or a little after, dressed in Woman's Clothes, and that she would slip
out of her own Chamber and meet him in that which joins to yours: Which has
really troubled me so, that I could not rest till I had told you.


I thank you Niece: though since you've been a means to bring this certain
plague to mankind about, I had as live you had let your information alone.


Sir, 'tis in your power to prevent this mischief, for you may see at that door
when the Gentleman will slip up the back Stairs, and so may order the Servants
to bang him soundly if you please; which I would do were it my Case. Consider
good Uncle, and consider you have but a little time; and pray don't tell my
Aunt.


Can this be true, tho I always seemed to suspect it,
Yet I never believed it could come to pass.
Let me consider, What cou`d provoke her to be so spiteful,
It cannot be my Person, nor my Age, nor my Discretion:
For as to my Person, in my Opinion, no young Fellow
Can boast of a handsomer, and as for my Age,
'Tis rather an advantage than otherwise; for I have
More Wit than a younger, and certainly more Experience:
And as for my Conduct, which comes from my Discretion,
All the fault she can find with it is, that I'm afraid
Of losing her -- What could she see in that slim-gutted Captain,
To prefer him before me? And in what Clothes must sin
Be dressed to make it outshine a good Reputation.
So, so, the Fox is snapped in his Trap, thanks
To the bait that caught him -- Pedro! Pedro!
Oh! Pedro! cannot you help me in my design.

What is't, Sir, I'll try?

Why Pedro, there is a Rogue has a design to Corrupt my Wife and is just stole
up the back stairs in Woman's Clothes, I believe to Ra^vish her -- Now I've a
mind to try if her designs be honest or no; t^ which purpose, I would have you
go get me some of the Maid dressings, and provide a great many Men, for I will
be revenged of thi^ Infernal Dog?


Yes, Sir, but must I bring all the Servants, Women and all?


No, no; but now I think on it, do you stay at the bottom
Of those stairs, that when I begin to Ferret,
You may turn the imprisoned wretch up again;
But you must have two or three of the Servants with you,
Call 'em to you presently, I'll dispose of the rest
With me, go to your Post, and be sure come in
When you hear a great noise, and don't stay too long
For fear of the worst, I'll but go and disguise my self,
That I may proceed upon sure grounds, and find out
My damned Wife^s design, though one would think
I might know that pretty well already -- Oh! I find
The Disease too strong ever to hope to be cured.

Well, Cozen, now the design draws to the Comic part,
Pray Heaven it prove so: I begin to fear for
My old Man, and yet, you say you heard him
Order all the Servants to be near him.

Yes, yes; what are you afraid on? you have
Nothing to do as I know of, but keep your self
Concealed in some place, 'till 'tis fit time to appear.

Come then, let's go: But pray forgive me,
For I can't help being afraid for my old Man.

She stays very long, sure she'll come at last,
'Tis very melancholy sitting thus in the dark;
I cannot hear the least noise, what should be the meaning
Of her stay, unless it be to surprise me the more with Joy
At her coming: These Women are subtle Creatures
When they have a mind to improve a pleasant moment,
Sure no body can come here without her permission.
Hark, I think I hear her coming.
Sure it must be she; but I'll say nothing 'till I'm certain.
Sir, Sir, where are you, my Joy?

Here, here, my Angel, come to my arms, and let me bless
The kind consenting moment that brought me to
Thy dear embraces.

So, so, the Rascal would be very loving I find.

Why does not my Love speak? or does she check by her silence the fond delay of
not making use of those moments Love has given us: Come, come then, my Love --
nay, must I draw you to it? Did you meet me alone for this? Well a little
struggling may be necessary.





Heavens Madam! you have lost all the precious time you should have bestowed
otherwise; is it your Husband think you.


Yes, I am afraid; Go down the back stairs, but don't discover your self; we'll
find another opportunity.


Certainly you designed I should lose this --
But I can't stay to reproach you.

So I have saved my Wife's honour and my own:
But now for my Revenge; I had not best own my self,
For fear he should fall soul upon me --
Oh! here he comes again.

Heavens, Madam, the bottom of the stairs is beset
With Servants as if they watched for some body,
I'm afraid our meeting is discovered -- Can you conceal
Me no where for an hour, till the search is over?

What shall I do? I cannot think of a place;
Oh! these cursed Dogs to stay so long,
I shall not be able to Counterfeit much longer.

Ha! 'tis well, I am provided, Madam, fear not,
I^ll protect you; where is the Gentleman, who I suppose,
Believes I have wronged him: Dares he not appear
To Revenge himself in person.

No truly, and the wiser he, for these Rampant
Whore masters are commonly desperate fighters,
Especially in a Trollops Quarrel.

I know not in the dark, which is which,
But 'tis good to be sure, My Master can't blame me for my care.

Oh, Rascal, what shall I do now, I shall be
Discovered, and consequently beaten to death.

Madam, I am sorry for this accident, which I have
Drawn upon you, and as you have been Innocent,
I wish they would let me justify it at the price of my life.

Heavens! what's the matter?

Margaretta there, who have I been Fighting for?

Why for her Husband: I suppose your design
Was rather to injure his honour than protect it.

What's the matter, I can't understand you?

That's strange: Why Wife, I've only supplied your place, this was the Man and
this the place, and I only saved you the Labour.


I believe I only can clear this mystery, did not I tell you my Aunt was to
meet a Gentleman in this place; now I am informed since 'twas a mistake, for my
Aunt never designed to come at him.


No! what came he here for then?


To make you see a Wife may Cuckold her Husband if she has a mind to it. Now she
happened not to be in the humour.


Pray Madam, did not you appoint to meet me here, you must excuse me, for my
Reputation is a little in danger now; I mean as to my understanding.


No, Sir, I told you I could do such a thing, not that I would, and if you'll
examine my last words, you'll find it so.


Would these were your last words.


Joy begins to grow very troublesome, I have a mind to cry for it? Wife, if thou
make this appear, thou shalt be the Husband, and I'll be Ruled and Governed
by thee.


What then, I have been made a property all this while to gain a Wife Liberty
not to make use on it: But I think it becomes me now to be a little serious --
Sir, I have undergone some blows in your house, which my honour will not carry
any longer, therefore, because I scorn an old man's Courage to contend with,
pray engage some Relation or other in your Quarrel, and let me hear from him to
morrow morning.


Nay, good Captain, since your injury has been less than the benefit, you have
brought to me, let me beg you not to persist in your Resentment, the thing
shall never be known to your dishonour; the reason I made choice of you in this
affair was, because I could not find another, but you that could have given my
Virtue any Character, if I had refused, and therefore did this to satisfy the
World that she that could deny you, might be trusted any where.


Madam, upon second thoughts, I resolve not to take any notice of this,
provided it be kept secret.


So, Aunt, that Complement did the business -- Come, Sir, my Uncle now, I dare
swear, will be very glad of your Company to night -- Uncle, ^w the Gentleman is
reconciled, we'll be very merry: My Lord Gabinius. knows of this design, but
nothing about the Captain; he is in may Apartment, and will be glad to see
you.


(...), I don't know what to say, I must make a Speech in praise of Women,
though I don't believe there are any so good as thee in the World. She that at
twenty years c^ Love fourscore,
Can meet a Lover a^ut the door,
That to Convince a jealousy Husbana can
Appoint the Meeting, yet not meet the Man;
Be true to Age, and slight her Lovers fires,
Can have the means and not have the desires;
She is a Wise, and 'tis this Wife indeed
That does no guide, but her own Virtue need.



THe morning's come, and now comes all my care
How to prevent this mischief without bringing more.
'Tis late, I think, and yet no body stirring,
Su^e sleep has taken here his Habitation:
I must contrive some way to see Cornaro,
Speak with him before his Mother rises,
For should she see we whispered,
Her poor Soul's so apprehensive
And fearful of the least discovery,
She'd break my whole design, and may be
The means, that what she most does fear
May come to pass.

Madam, good morrow, I find I'm early here,
It is a time for none but Lovers sure
To rise at, but I've been
Disturbed all night, with dreams that would not let me
Rest; I came to see how all
Did here, how Eromena does,
Cruel, Unkind, yet Lovely Eromena?

I think the Family is well, my Lord,
And doubtless, Eromena's so, I hope,
She'll know when she is offered well, and no longer
Withstand her interest, and your happiness.

Alas, her interest is secure elsewhere:
You do not know my Lord Cornaro loves her:
He, like a Torrent, bears down all my hopes.
But this ungoverned passion in my Soul
Puts me to strive to make him wretched too.
A drowning man will hang upon a Twig,
And I'll not sink while I've so fair a hold,
But pull him with me since I needs must fall.

The way my Lord, which I suppose you mean,
Ought to be taken Ill, but Love excuses you:
I'll tell you now a better way to serve you,
But I must do it; it, depends on me,
Suppose that I could make Cornaro quit her.

Impossible, it cannot, cannot be,
Her eyes can never make so slight a wound,
Her beauty is peculiar to her self,
A Pattern Heaven made upon a Trial,
But found it dangerous to make another.

I'll tell you, Sir.
Were she this morning going to be married,
Nay, in the Temple, answering to the Priest;
Nay, farther yet, laid in her Bridal Bed,
Cornaro waiting for the Virgins call,
To lay him by that Maid you both adore,
I have a story, only for his ear,
Should make him leave her there.

Take care, Aspasia, do not so obey
Your Ladies orders, who I know approves not
Of Eromena's Marriage with Cornaro;
Do not, I say, by any base detraction,
Take from that Virtue all may wonder at,
But none can ever follow.

I do not mean, my Lord, that which you think:
I know the Maid is nicely Virtuous:
But, Sir, can you bear all dishonours else,
Which may have been her Fate, but not her Fault?

Yes, yes, Aspasia, that I would with Joy,
And wish with all my Soul to have the Trial:
But tell me then, O say, what can it be
Should make Cornaro leave so fair a Bride.

Sir, I will trust you with a Secret,
Which you will not reveal for your own sake;
When you have Eromena for your Wife,
She is Cornaro's Sister, no matter how:
My old Lord, you well know, had many Mistresses,
This is the secret I'm going to reveal.
Let not my Lady know it, 'tis not proper,
No body knows this story but my self:
When you believe I've told Cornaro, Come,
You'll see strange alteration in his looks,
And this* I think secures your happiness,
If it consists in having Eromena.

If --
Oh, can you think there's happiness without her.
This News is pleasing as 'tis unexpected,
'Tis both ways so, for now I know her Birth,
'Tis noble too, though 'tis the worst way so:
Hark, here's one coming; 'tis Cornaro sure,
I'll go to give you opportunity,
Blessed be this morning above all be bl^st,
That piti^d my swoln Griefs, and gave me rest.

So, here's one satisfied:
I wish with all my Soul Cornaro were so.
Why do I fear, it is not my concern,
'Tis his, who ought to thank me for my care,
And will, I think, or else he is unjust.
But see, he's here, I will retire a little,
And think on the best way to tell my story,
Heaven grant I may succeed
Without discovering all: I hope I shall.
I'm fearful still, but oh, assist me Heaven,
And as my aim is honest, may I prosper.
She's mine, she's mine, the beauteous Eromena,
These Arms last night enclosed the lovely Maid,
Heaven's! In all other Loves we form the pleasure
Much greater than it is,
But I had made it less than what I found it,
I cannot bear the Joy I have within me,
Were but my Mother pleased, that thought disturbs me,
Sure she'll forgive a Crime which Love committed,
Let it be how it will, I have her now
And she is all my own.

My Lord, I've waited all this morning
To speak with you: I should have don't last night,
But could not find you.

I'm glad to see you, and will wait on you
Any where else, if this place be not convenient.

My Lord, last night my Lady ordered me
To wait on you, and keep you still in mind
Of the Commands she gave you, about your Marri^ge
With the Lord Segerdo's Sister, and by me
Desires to know your Resolution*

Madam, 'tis this! I will not marry her,
But with submission to my Mothers Right
Over her Son, desire she'd give me leave
In this the last great action of my Life,
On which my future happiness depends
To make a choice my self.

Sir, I dare promise you she will, and except
One Person,
You may have leave to marry whom you please.

Who is that Person whom I am debarred.

My Lord, there has been whispering amongst the Servants,
And those who have more Curiosity than Business,
That you are fallen in Love with Eromena?
This is the reason, I suppose, which makes
Your Mother press you to resolve,
For, to be plain, 'tis she you are forbid.

And all the rest Heaven knows I do despise.

My Lady farther bid me say, That
If by your discourse I found the Rumour true,
To tell you from that hour you resolved
Any such thing as gaining Eromena,
That hour she'd shut her self from humane Eyes,
And in Distraction end her wretched Life.

And all this is because poor Eromena
Is most unhappy in her Birth and Fortune:
Oh! the curse of Money,
The sure destroyer both of Love and Friendship;
'Twill bring a common Courtesan to Repentance,
And make her wish she'd lived on Bread and Water:
And would you have me prize it?
No, no, Arapsia, since my Mother keeps
A Woman's Mercenary Quality,
I'll show the World her Son has no Inheritance
But what is noble, therefore to cut off all desputes,
For I perceive that it must come to this,
I here protest before the face of Heaven
Never to marry ought but Eromena.

And is this, Sir, your final Resolution?

It is, Arapsia, but I'd have you think
I'd not have shown this seeming disobedience,
Had not my Mother ta'n the way she has,
Not only upon me, but upon Eromena,
Commanding her to force her Inclinations,
And marry Lord Segerdo,
But to prevent it I'll not lose a moment
Till I have shown the World she's mine for ever

My Lord, I have a secret to impart,
Which I am sure must stop you in this Love,
But you must swear by all the sacred ties
That can bind Men, never to speak of it,
Not even to your Mother.

If what you say be to remove my Love,
I'd have you save your self the needless trouble,
For tis impossible, it cannot be?
I love my E^mena more than Life,
And do not Love her like a Boy whose Love
So longer lasts, than till it see's another:
B^t ^ith a manly passion, not to be removed,
M^thinks it is m^ Duty as well as Inclination.

It is, I must confess, indeed your Duty,
For not to hold you longer in suspense,
She is your Sister.

How!

She is Indeed my Lord.

How, and which ^ay? She's not my Father's Child,
I'm sure, he did long before she was born.
Do not, Arapsia, strive by these mean ways,
Inventing stories, which must be proved false,
As soon as told, to break a passion, which
Must break my heart ever you can bring about.

My Lord, it is no story, which I speak of,
But a firm truth, such as will bear the Test
Of the most strict Examination?

It must be this way then, my Mothers Bastard?
Ha! can that be; then thou must be the Bawd:
You could not know the story else so well;
Is this the secret which I must not speak off:
Call back thy words, and swear thou'st told a lye,
Or by the Rage, which if thou dost speak truth
Must take the place of Duty, and Revenge
My injured Fathers wrongs, I'll fly.
Even to this Mother, who has shaken hands
With honour to part with it for ever;
Just now I'll fly, and make her Infamy so loud,
'Till she shall gladly do the thing she threatens,
And never show her Strumpets face again.

What^s to be done now? I must prevent
The worst by telling him the worst.
My Lord, the promise that I did desire,
And then this Action shall be plainer made;
If not, I'm dumb upon this story ever,
Remember 'tis never to tell your Mother.

I swear by all things Sacred, by those powers,
Those only powers that ever can make me happy,
Never to speak on it to my Mother.

Then thus it is, my Lord, I will not run
Through all the passages between my Lady
And your Father, for you know, my Lord,
They parted Beds some years before he died.
But I would have your Lordship call to mind,
The night before that you were sent to Travel,
You'd past an Engagement with a young
And foolish Maid in the House to meet that night:
Your Father had made such another appointment,
Which was by one discovered to your Mother;
And my unhappy Lady, in her stead,
Resolved to meet her Husband, but by Accident
She did mistake the room, and came to you:
But in the morning slipping from her Husband,
(As she believed) for fear of a discovery,
She met my Lord, just come from his Intrigue?
And then she found too late her fatal error.
You may Remember your remove was sudden,
And, to be short, poor Eromena was
The first-fruit of that nights most unnatural meeting,
And is your Daughter now as well as Sister,
Born some few months after your Father died.

It is impossible, I'll not believe it,
It is a trick devised to break the marriage.

By all that's Good and Sacred it is True.

It is impossible to be supposed,
'Tis all a trick, but have a care, 'tis dangerous
To trifle with me now, and I must have
More Witnesses before I can believe.

Who is it you can have but her whose Soul
Must leave her Body when she finds you know it.

By Heaven, the very thought has stunned my re^son.
But stay, let me consider: Yes, I will.
I'll know the truth from this unhappy Mother.

Alas, my Lord, do not forget your promise.

Away with promises; my Life, nay Soul,
Depends upon this knowledge: What, my Daughter!
And by my Mother too! Oh! double mischief,
If it be false expect thou wretched Creature,
Thou that hast thrown my Soul upon the wreck,
Expect such Vengeance, for thou hast told a story,
Would stagger Nature, make her shrink to nothing,
For being capable of such an error.

Alas! I do repent I have told it you,
But 'tis too true, and see my Lady comes:
I cannot bear to see the grief 'twill cost her,
But since you do resolve to know the truth,
Break not your Mothers heart in the discovery.

Cornaro! have you thought of my proposals?
For all are Friends to my design but you:
I have but the care of well disposing thee,
And the^ lie down in my cold grave in peace.

What shall I say, I dread the discovery,
And yet must know it now -- Madam, I beg,
If I must marry, that you'd give me leave
To make my choice my self.

With all my heart,
If you make choice of one that suits your honour,
She's yours, and you shall have my free consent.

I thank you on my knees. I love a Maid
To that degree, I cannot live without her,
I cannot think of loving any other.
Since you must know ever your consent be had,
I will presume to tell you who it is,
'Tis Eromena.

Ha! what was't you said?
Oh! never let me hear that word again,
'Tis fatal both to yours and my Repose:
Is this the Match you would prefer before
A thousand others?

Madam, I love her that has made the beauty,
And, for a fortune, you know well I want none.

Name it no more, take the whole World before you,
Make choice of the most abject Creature living;
I will receive and own her for my Daughter:
But do not think on her, unless that minute
You do resolve to see me mad indeed:
O Heaven! I beg you'd stop this coming mischief,
And in exchange let me have thousand plagues
Were never heard of yet.

O Mother, Mother, I am lost indeed,
This has almost confirmed me, Answer me
One Question more and I have done for ever:
Is Eromena then my Daughter, and born of you?
Why do you Change or Colour?
Help, help, within there.
Look to my Mother* her silence has undone me.
Oh, Heaven! can it be true:
My Daughter, Sister and my Wife, and all
My married bedded Wife! Why oh! Heaven!
Did you permit nature to make this stumble?
Where was the Sacred power of Instinct now?
That foolish boast of undiscerning nature,
Could it permit so gross an Act to master all its policy;
What, my Sister, Daughter, Wife, all in one Woman?
Oh, Heaven! Complete thy Vengeance, and strike me to the Center.

Help, help, within there.

Who told the secret? did you mention it?
Cornaro, where art thou now? Dead, then I am safe,
A stab to either will prevent my shame:
Who are you here, that crowd about me so?
Stand off, I say, I am Cornaro's Wife,
Let me run to him, how does my dearest Son?
What Wife and Mother? that was a mistake:
Give me a draught of poison presently,
Will you not fetch it, has my Infamy
Made me despised, and not to be obeyed,
Even by my Children, nor my Servants neither.

How fares my Lord?

A little at a loss,
A fatal Love has ruined poor Cornaro,
Let me entreat you, Ladies, to take care
Of my unhappy Mother, and Gentlemen
You will oblige me much, if you'll retire,
And leave me for some time
A little to recall my wandering reason.

Let me not see him ever whilst I live,
I^ll have a veil shall cover me with night;
Do ye think the dead know what we do, when living?
They say they do.
My Husband then knows of this accident,
And calls me Strumpet! Yes, I hear him speak it,
But I'll wipe out this stain in nature, and then
Go to my dead Husband, Chaste and Entire.
O, quickly* quickly, show, show me the way.

O, sad state! 'till now unkown to all the World but me,
What had I done just Heaven, to be so cursed as to be made
A sad example to the babbling World,
To follow the advice of Resolution? I should not live,
But here's a sight must now for ever Curse me:
O, does she know my shame?

Alas, my Love, why in that Mournful posture,
Why are you sad? Oh! cheer your looks with mine,
You^e often said, my Lord, you loved me dearly
And can you have a grief now I am yours?
Alas! I fear our Marriage is revealed:
I see a sad distraction in the House;
O, speak to me, my Lord, is it not so?

Oh! Eromena! Eromena!

Why do you sigh my Love?
You were prepared for this before, and had resolved to go
To Rome with me, and there to pass our days,
If that you found your cruel Mother would not forgive
The Violent effects of our stolen Loves.

Fly! fly, Eromena, from a wretch that has undone thee,
Destroyed that lovely form, plucked up by the roots
That beauteous Flower, and planted it with nought but stinking Weeds.
With Shame, with Infamy, and sure Dishonour.

What means my Life? thou could not be so cruel:
O, do not turn away my only dear,
If I've offended, let me know my fault,
And if 'tis not too great to be forgiven,
Look on my true submission, and receive me.

Some pitying power reveal to her, her Fate,
I cannot do it -- prithee, leave me here,
For I have something which disturbs me so,
That even thy Company is irksome now.

I will, my Lord, obey you whilst I live;
Nay, I will be your Slave, if you Command it,
I think it does become me to be so:
Could Wives but see how very odiously
Authority becomes 'em; how much more like
The Courtesan than Wife, it does appear;
They sure would blush, that by their proud behaviour
They rank themselves with the most vicious Women.

Can I hear this, and know the loss I've had,
Yet keep within my Temper;
Farewell, farewell, all thoughts of patience now,
Thus on the Earth I'll throw my cursed body,
Sure it should open to receive a weight
Too heavy for it to bear: Oh! Eromena!
Lost Eromena, quite undone by me:
Thou had been happy had thou never seen me;
Fly, Eromena! Fly, I do Conjur^ thee!
Oh! last night, last night, never to be possessed again,
Yet to my Arms I'll snatch thee,
And print a thousand kisses on thy Lips:
But from a Father now, and not a Husband.

Let it be so, I'll love you as a Daughter,
And since you please to banish me your bed,
Thus on my knees I give this humble kiss,
And do receive your dear Paternal Love,
So you will love me in what name you please,
My Soul, I'm sure, is Chaste and never was Touched
With any loose desires.

Oh, Eromena, can thou be so Chaste as thou
Hast said: Can that dear Heaven of Beauty consent to be
The idle part of the Creation: Can that Charming Body,
Fit to bring forth an Angel like it self,
Be by my means deprived of all the honest Joys
Of Loyal Wives? -- But why do I reflect upon thy
Beauties? that after this sad hour must never see thee more.

What, will you banish me your sight and all,
Kill me then, I cannot bear it, kill me, or I shall fall
By my own hand, and miss the last of pleasures left for me,
The dying in your arms.

Oh! Eromena, did thou know thy Fate thou would
Not wish my hand should come so near thee?

Come, tell me then, to excuse thy perjury -- I would
Be glad I owed this strange indifference to any thing,
But to thy want of Love.

Wilt thou be patient then, and bear thy Fate?

I think I can. I have been used to misery.

Oh! I can't tell it; yet I will -- Let me but lean my head upon thy Bosom
thus, and not see thy Confusion,
Nor show my own,

Oh, Heavens! I do begin to fear, but what I know not.

Who's there; Ha! together? Let me separate you,
You two incestuous Monsters -- 'Tis not they,
This is my Husband: do not chide me, Sir, for what I did
Was for the love of you, 'twas Love that did occasion
My mischance -- Can you forgive it? I'll weep thus at
Your feet a thousand, thousand years, to beg your pardon

Oh! Heaven and Earth! see, Eromena, see,
Thy only Mother sure as she was mine;
Thou never had another, nor another Father,
Than thy wretched Husband: It was the work of Fate,
And thou art now my Daughter, Sister -- Oh Heavens, and my Wife:
Fly reason, fly, why dost thou stay to curse me,
Had thou been kind, thou had not staid so long.

I hope, my Lord, I do not understand you.

Too well thou dost, this is thy Fate and mine.

Oh! Heavens! What have I done?

See there she is in that false Husbands arms!
Does she engross my Husband and my Son?
Nay then 'tis time a quick dispatch:
Take that thou only ruin of my Life and Fame.

Oh! Mother, Mother, do not kill your Child;
Oh! cruel Woman, what is't you have done!

Sent her to Heaven, to know if ever
I shall arrive there; for if I may, I must take care,
I have a great deal of business to do before I can
Provide for such a journey; but, if not, I shall have
No trouble, for all's packed up for the other place already.

Oh! Eromena! may I call you Wife?
Is this the happiness I have designed?
What have I done? Good Heaven, what have I done?
To be more cursed than all mankind besides.
Oh! Eromena! those pale looks now tell me
All thy wretched life is past.

I thank the blow upon my knees: I do,
And do with joy receive this first of blessings
From my most noble Mother -- Life had been a Curse
I could not bear -- Sir, how to look on you, I do not know,
But let my ignorance excuse me, both to the World and you:
Oh I am in pain, but you will call it a pleasure,
Because it brings me now a sure release.
Oh! Father, Father, give me your blessing too,
A Pass-port for me to the other World,
And let me hide my face within your Bosom,
And give you back that life you did bestow.

If she be dead, what have I then to do?
Oh! Eromena dead, vanished like a deluding dream
Of happiness; for sure this was a dream --
I find I wake to curse the World and all Mankind,
My self and all -- If I should live, I should turn Monster sure --
Hence, with a thought of life; Weep Eyes,
And burst your strings that hold you in, that I may escape
The shame of seeing the face of mankind more.

What, are they so close? I like not that,
But 'tis no matter, since I know that they must part.
Rise, Corna^o, rise, behold a Friend that's truly sorry
For thy misfortune, though 'tis the only thing
Could make him happy.

What barbarous wretch art thou? that buildst
Thy happiness on another ruin -- Oh, Eromena.

I do forgive thee thy mistaken anger,
And own the disappointment is too great,
Easily to be born -- Speak, fairest Eromena, speak,
May I now hope a reward for all my sorrows past,
Since all your wishes for Cornaro now
Are turned to duty for a kind Relation?

Hence wretch, come thou to Triumph over misery?
Base and Unworthy, have I not Grief enough?
Not yet enough, must thou add more? do I not bear enough?
Have I not caused this dear poor wretches death?
Is not that load enough?

Ha! is Eromena dead? What, cold, pale, dead;
The object of my Soul, my only wish;
Are these my promised hopes -- Inhuman wretch?
And did thou murder her? Oh, Eromena!
Unfortunate, Fair Creature, I shall not stay
Behind thee long -- Oh! let me leave my Soul
Here on thy Lips; and if Heaven have pity,
Make me now like thee.

Hence; how dare thou touch my Wife before my face?

Thy Wife! take care, Cornaro, brand not thy self
With such an Infamy, I know she is thy Sister.

Why then you know the Truth, I tell thee she is both
Wife and Sister, nay, and Daughter too; she's all she can be,
In one Woman.

How dare thou be alive
After this Action, marrying thy Sister, and robbing me
Of all my Joys on Earth, by murdering the poor wretch?
Oh! Eromena! Let me die now at thy feet.

Judge me, Just Heaven! have I done a wilful fault?
Yes, I have indeed by Marrying against her Will that bore me,
Had I but been obedient, half my misery I had escaped,
How can thou upbraid my lost Condition?
Were thou of humane race, thou could not do it,
Could any Creature Triumph over a wretch suffering the Law?
Just breaking on the Wheel; Thou see me worse than that --
Rise, Rise, I say; or I shall add yet to my cruel Actions,
And kill thee as thou lie.

It would be like thee; I draw this Sword now in a
Noble cause -- To Revenge poor Eromena's murder, that
Had no fault but being kind to thee.

Heaven grant thee Vengeance equal
To thy Wish, I thank thee now, Segerdo,
Thou hast prevented self-murder, all my miseries end here.

How fares my dearest Brother?
What was the cause of this unhappy Quarrel?
How, Eromena dead!

My Lord, how is it with you?

Like one who in a fright, securing what he thought
His own, mistakes and takes another Treasure,
And for that innocent Theft's Condemned:
So, I by the All-seeing powers, am cast
For doing that, which but to think of doing,
Would make me wish I never had been born:
Arapsia knows the story of our misery,
And after I am dead, may tell it you,
But let it not be told whilst I'm alive --
My Lord, Segerdo, you have been unkind,
In thinking me consenting to Eromena's death,
She did receive it from my Mothers hand --
Gabinius, I've but little time to talk with you,
Besides, I am in pain, which hinders me --
Come, Sister -- Take her, Sir, and with her all the Fortune
I shall leave behind me; and let not the misfortunes
Of her Family be ever mentioned to her when she's yours;
For you will hear a story of that horror
Will turn your Eyes to Water when 'tis told.

Oh! Heavens! Where's my Lord Gornaro?

Here, here, Arapsia, come thou to add a drop
More of affliction to my whole Sea of sorrow.

Alas! my Lord, you'll find this is a Sea;
Your wretched Mother, madder than hunted Lyons,
Flies about to every Room, has cut her body
With a hundred slashes, her Arms, her Face,
Are all to pieces cut, I wonder in that Tide of Blood,
That life can stay so long, and not Ebb out?
Oh, here she comes, stand between me and her,
I fear she'll kill me.

Oh, happy I, that cannot longer live;
This sight without a wound had struck me dead.

Ha! dost thou fly from me thou she deceiver,
That knows so well to guide Wives to Destruction?
Had I been patient, this had been prevented!
What, my Son, art thou a dying too?
Why, what should we live for, to be the jest
Of every fool that had a mind to laugh;
Would it not make the cruel laugh to see this bloody Floor,
This blood shed, but for one nights mischance?
Oh! 'twas a Glorious night, Say, was it not!
Speak, can you repent of it, I am sure I do?
Oh! Cornaro, Life is wasted now --
But must thou dye, this is hard indeed,
Poor youth, thou suffer for thy Mothers faults.

Remove this woeful object to her Bed.

Dear Mother, let me wait you to your Bed.

No, no, no more of Beds. --
May I not hug him now -- Dear, dear Cornaro,
Let me dye in thy Arms --
Ha! see, see, there's my Husband come
To blast my Eyes and curse me for the Birth of Eromena.
What, is she dead; Why, what need we dye then:
The cause is now removed -- Why, what are you
That dare to contradict me, and say I must not live,
Nor poor Cornaro! ha, Husband again!
Why do you force me to you; had you been kind alive,
This had not been -- Why do you tear me thus,
you torturing Spirits; I come, I come! --
Off all, to make my body bare for suffering --
So, now 'tis well -- Pull, pull -- Give me
Thy hand, Cornaro, and we will go together,
Nothing now shall part us -- Open thy Sulph'rous
And Eternal Mansion, receive us both,
we sink together now -- Lost in a hopeless state, behold we come,
Thou must receive us, for Heaven has no room.


Gone! she's gone, and my Descent draws near:
Prithee Gabinius bury us all together in one Grave,
And set forth to the World our Innocence,
Which poor Arapsia can inform you in --
The only secret left is, That yesterday Eromena
Was made my Wife; Last night received us both
Into one Bed -- Oh! that happy, but most horrid night*
Has lost us all our Lives: Come, Eromena,
Daughter, Sister, Wife, it is no sin that I embrace thee now, Life struggles
hard, but it must yield at last.
Death's hand is come, and all my Torments past.


What have I seen? Grief stifles all my words*
From this sad place I will in haste remove,
^ller'd shall be this body after this; In a close Cell I'll waste my Life
away,
And never wish to see the open day.


Comfort your self my dearest Cleonista,
Within we'll know this most unhappy story.
It may be when that's known you will not be so grieved,
But think them much more happy in their Deaths.
Sir, (My honoured Uncle now)
After the decent burial of these three,
We'll then begin to think upon our Nuptials,
And may it prove a happier marriage than this last: Let no one censure poor
Cornaro's Fate,
But think it hard, he was Unfortunate:
Though Virtu^ here have not met its due Regard,
There is a place where it must have Reward.



