WHat need our Work a Prologue? shall it
Be decked, when none knows what to call it?
It is, you may be bold to say,
No Tragy-Comedie, no Play;
For none but Pluto's Courtiers are
Vilians and Tripans Act it here:
Nor yet a Farse you can it call,
That hides, but this uncovers all;
Cruel Lust the good man kills,
Fraud the Court-Triumphant fills;
And they hate even those they kiss;
Good men ill rewarded is;
And the Chaste are poor, while Vice
Lords it by Adulteries:
And when they have performed this Play,
Our Poet will work the other day;
And he'll once more betray their Guiles,
And Counter-plot their chiefest Wiles.
Yet, truly Friends, I've no intent
Yet to be held a Fool in Print.
NOw you Rogues, here is like to be brave times, the Sword, the Sword; and
Liberty.


What Sword? what Liberty?


Why Sirrah, to lie with thy Wife, or Brandy's Wife: here is my Commission, you
sons of sinners; read, I am, in short, Marshal General by Commission from --


No body: Pox on it, Brandy le^'s be gone, this is a Brandynian lie or
Commission; we'll not venture hanging under such a preheminenc, Privilege and
Profit.


If this be your great preferment, I have the same, it cost me Five Pounds when
I first marched under Pluto; you told me there was a new Court to be erected,
and that Coff, Philo's House should be plundered.


Peace you thick scull'd slave, look who's there: even Pluto himself with his
Privy Council. Let us withdraw.


By your favour, Sir Foulmouth, I am for your Westminster-Hall Damme. Do you
think that I will be a bubble to your hooks: my Sword ever hated a damned
English Jury.


Give me leave to give you your 200 l. and I am gone; I wish I could as well
part with my Dub, as I can give you your 200 l. I would never be for you more:
yet be ruled, and I will put you in a kind of an Arbitrary way.


As much as you can: but give me my 200 l. again, then go drink all night, and
the next morning forget 'tis a Hall-day, Lose your Clients Cause, 'tis not the
first time you took a Fee, when you did not understand your breviate.


Then farewell Pluto. I believe you will find the bold Britain at Grays-Inn of
my mind --


He is gone; and now he is gone, what is he but a blackmouthed bawling
senseless fellow, one that can only throw dirt on an honest Witness without
Cavere? Law he hath none: but why do I rage? I am resolved to take thy counsel,
Dear Lack-Latine and Practice, and you Instrument will be a great advancer of
our design, therefore let us go in and settle our Affairs.


Truly Sister Pitfall, I did not like Proserpines last nights discourse, I know
her birth, she was Sweet-Scents daughter, and you were born in Cheshire out of
Saltpetre, and my self of the old Charcole's Family in Staffordshire; and I
pray mingle us together, and we are as good as Gun-powder, and have been as
soon Fired and Blown up as her Highness was: -- But I will no longer endure her
French tricks: Do you mark how she cogs a Die? O she outstrips you far, Pitfall!


And I always lose on Sice-Ace.


What in his own name? I mean the Devils name, I must speak plain to you Cap.
Ignorance; I say again, what? doth Pluto intend by our Summons to make us
Jury-men? Be it, I am resolved to do nothing without a fat Buck out of Enfield
Chase, and 20 pieces beside: Who do you think is like to be Foreman, marry, Sir
Confident Empty-Scull, a mere plain Ale Rogue? O, I hate a Rogue that will be
drunk with Ale; besides he can neither Write nor Read, neither has wit to know
how to say agreed. But hold, here is Tipst aff coming, I think, look about you.
We shall, I warrant you receive Orders from Pluto's Court.


You Gentlemen Hecks of the Jury are to make your personal appearance to morrow
at 8 a clock in the forenoon exactly at Pluto's Court; and I am to desire you,
that you will neither drink, nor go to Sodom this night, because weighty
affairs require your more than ordinary courage: and after your Verdict is
delivered, you shall find Pluto's Cooks dressing you a good Dinner under the
Sun next to Hell Gate.


Well Tipstaff, is this all? what, nothing in hand? then I shall be sick in the
morning: I would his Highness had sent Bub or Brandy, we might have held out
with them 6 or 7 hours.


Farewell VVorthies of matter of Fact.


Well brother Jurors you remember eight a clock to morrow. We'll not be long
upon the Evidence; for Pluto's Dinner may then be spoiled: me thinks I see Col.
Judgement and Want-Credit, knuckle deep in Venison Pasties: in the interim lets
loose no time: I am for the Sack shop: Farewell.


Farewell and be hanged, that's twice God b'w'y'


Let us sit down, and hear the Commission read.


Do you read it, and then my dear friends you will thereby understand what
Officers and Instruments are designed for you.


What Treason's this black Council of the Deep? Do you intend without my
knowledge here to settle your selves, and leave me out? am not I (as the Diverb
says) the Grey Mare? what if I lost the other night 200 l. in Sice-Ace's
company, which by the clack of Caerion Pitfall's everflitting tongue came to my
Pluto's ears? did I abate ought of my grandeur, or let fall my Pride? And shall
I now admit --


Patience Proserpine, if you'll a while withdraw, you shall find things done
answerable to your mind, Side --

But friends, are you willing that Proserpine shall be joined with you in the
Commission of Over and Terminer? she may do us good service, for she has a
notable Head, though at Play her luck be nought, but that Peccadillo I have
forgiven: speak Gentlemen, are you willing she shall be joined?


Yes so, if it please your Highness.


Then interline her name, and let her sit as one of Us.


I first desire to be heard one word, that is, if her Highness offer to speak
French, there are 2 or 3 damned English Jury-men that will be very cross, and
spoil the Verdict, your Highness therefore must engage her to leave off that
while she sits in Court.


Well moved, and like a Bishop or Ordinary.

Call Proserpine in -- You are welcome Madam, pray sit quiet till the Commission
be read.


Tell not me of quiets, before I'll be obliged to that, I'll know how I stand
in the Commission, or else you shall keep no quiet Sessions here: you know I
made a disturbance at a greater meeting than this.


Stop a Pin there.


What, because you and I were out of favour for it. But proceed to Read if you
will.


You Rascal Crier, must you be called on to do your duty. Make an O yes, and
proclaim silence.


Pluto and Proserpine, Lord and Lady of the Deeds of the under world, c. send
greeting: To our Right Trusty and well beloved Sir Edward Lack-Latine my
Recorder, Post Practice my Solicitor General, Dick Instrument my Remembrancer,
and to our Trusty Shackles our Jailor, Cap. Bub, and Cap. Brandy Setting-Dogs,
and Turn keys to Shackles, with Tipstaff, Surribus, Want-Practice, c. Know Ye,
That forasmuch as Truth, Virtue, and a Quiet Life is like to be promoted
against the Interest of our selves by a damned Turk named Coffo-Philo. We of
our Princely Grace and Favour do Authorise you to meet, whereof 3 of you to be
a Quorum, and that you cause Jurors to come before you. to enquire the best way
to destroy the growth of this Coffo Filo, for Reasons best known to our selves.
--


Read no further.


Why? are you pleased Madam?


No.


What is the Reason?


Because all our Titles are not in the Front of the Commission, as Captain
General --


Prithee, Wife, Peace, that Title I dare not own. Mum for that -- -- But M.
Recorder tell the Court your opinion, what is the best way to stifle this
Heresy of Coffo Philo.


May it please your Highness, I desire to be truly informed whether you will
take an Arbitrary way, or what way.


Any way to do my business.


Would your Highness have him so stopped, that he shall never appear.


Pish, I tell you S. Edward I would have him stocked up by the Roots; for if
any branches be left, they may first grow to overtop me, and then make me
shorter by the Head.


Let me advise your Highness to Indict him in 17 Indictments, some for his
Life, and others for Forgery, c. But you must have some witnesses to swear.


Why, I my self will swear, who swears more? Dammmee I never heard such a
question; You Shackles, S. Edward, and Bub, and Brandy will all swear: yea and
there is Instrument an excellent swearer; you know how diligent he was to get
and suborn swearers in wronged M. Fitton's Cause.


Spare me a word: what if Shackles, with Bub, Brandy, and others go to
Coffo-Philo's house, and rifle his Closet, seize his goods, and frighten his
wife and children; in this attempt you must be sure to send Coffo-Philo's
Brothers to Shackle's house; and when you have entered, you must send some of
your Troop to keep Guard there, under pretence of Authority, I will swear he
owes me 500 l. and that will colour the work.


O most excellent S. Edw. no more of Dub, and 200 l. for a Fee, thou deserve
2000 l.


Besides, I advise your Highness to employ Shackles with his setting-dogs at a
close scent upon Coffo-Philo himself; however, enter 13 Actions in your own
Court, make use of any bodies name, 'tis no matter, this will hinder his
growth.


Bravely moved Post-practice.


I humbly move that the Warrant may be signed, and Shackles sent about his
work.


The Jurors are at the door, and are impatient to be gone under the Sun next to
Hell, to their dinner.


Call in the Fore-man, and then discharge them till to morrow; hang a little
charge, Coffo-Philo shall pay all at last.


Sister Pitfall, what do you think is the meaning of the Court, that it sits so
long? I do mightily want S. Edw. and am undone at play with these Triers.


Gentlemen, I hope you will have us to a Play to day, for our Husbands are so
buisie grown, that we have nothing from them either night or day, but starts in
their sleeps; you were telling me Sister how your Husband starts in his sleep.


True it is; for he not only starts, but cries out -- O Conscience! Here I
could have you Coffo-Philo: run him through, and then we shall be quiet.


Alas dear sister; And my Husband tother night cried out, I am Damned, I will
kill Pluto that is the cause of it: Poor Coffo-Philo, I ask thee forgiveness.
-- But hear me sister Sice-Ace, and you Gentlemen Triers; When I kept a
Seamstress shop in the Strand, but more particularly, when I was an Actress at
the Play-house in Vere-Street, I was in bed with a Man. (This was before I was
married) who laying hold of me, cried out, You damned Whore 'tis you have
undone me; and alas, I never lay with him but that night, and thus --


Fie sister, Did you let out your Salt-pit before marriage?


Why Madam, do not I know your good Ladyship? but you dare not say so much
before your Gallant, the pitiful shabbed Tryer.


Peace Ladies, Hark! we are called for into Court.


There is your Warrant Shackles, use your dexterity and art; I know there is
Bub, and Brandy, and all those Four Gentlemen will do their parts -- I was a
dreamed Gentlemen, that just such an honest fellow as Shackles and you
Gentlemen, were employed to take Coffo-Philo; and, methoughts, one of you did
cunningly run his Sword into his Belly, so that he dyed; this was so slily
done, that it was no hard matter to make it Accident: It cannot be termed
Murder by any Law, nor so much as Manslaughter; for as our mortal enemy, if he
be killed cunningly or foolishly, I can get -- you know what I mean: you most
excellent friends, farewell, and try what can be done for a friend.


May it please your Highness to have the Jury sworn?


Yes, give them their Oaths.


S. Confident Empty-Skull, come to the Book.

You shall well, but not truly try the matter in question named in the
Indictments between our L. Pluto, and Coffo-Philo; and such a Verdict give, as
may take away his Life and Goods, c. and destroy him root and branch. So help
you Pluto. Kiss this Carbine and Belt.


Is not here enough at a time?


No, all to the Book at once.


The same Oath your Fore-man hath taken, you for your parts shall well and
truly keep. So help you Pluto, or a Pay-day.


Gentlemen Hecks of the Jury, Coffo-Philo stands here Indicted for that he
being no Soldier, nor in Pay, nor Roll, departed from his Colours against the
Statute Anno tertio Hen. 8. cap. 5. We will prove him guilty of that Statute,
no matter for his being in the Roll, or being no Soldier, or not in pay: To
prove this, his Highness swears, and Instrument, and many others.


Give his Highness the Book.


Damme 'tis true; what is it you mean?


Now swear Instrument.


I do swear, (because I dare do no other) that his Highness swears true.


Gentlemen of the Jury, I desire to take a General Oath to all the Indictments
at once, and S. Edw. and Instrum. will do the like.


That shall serve, for 'tis past twelve.


And I have taken but 4 pipes of Tobacco to day.


We do swear, that the whole contents of these 17 Indictments are true.


We have evidence enough, let us deliver our Verdict.


Agreed.


A Verdict.


Hold M. Fore-man, who pays the Jury?


I will be paid, before I agree to deliver the Verdict.


Verdict not me, for I'll no Verdict till after Dinner, and Money.


And so we say all, except our Fore-man Empty-skull.


You are very bold with the Court; either deliver your Verdict, or I'll send
you to Shackles


I, do Husband, fort bone fet mon Dieu, mon Dieu Cockeu d'Angletere.


Madam, what is that you say, Dieu Gwin Cuckol? I am half a Britain; I do say
you curse us in down-right stark Welch: Dieu Gwin, is White God; but as you
pronounce it, it is Rogue in White; Grave and Cocken, is a mere Cuckold of the
Mountains: give me the price of the Whisk I gave your Ladyship when I gave 5 l.
to boot, besides 12 l. 10 s. for Belt, House, and Feathers, and I will quit the
Troop presently: I observed when we were sworn, it was on a Carbine belt; I
knew, and told some of my fellows then, we should have a French exaction on us.


I protest when I saw it, I began to think --


Madam, as brisk as you call us in French, you will give us leave to ask our
own in English: Pray Madam, give me the Diamond Ring that was my Grand-mothers,
which I gave you to come into the Troop, and I will quit it presently.


Then Madam, let me speak too; for I gave 50 l. besides riding six months for
nothing, and yet paid for my preheminencies, profits, and privileges, Belt,
Hooses, and Feathers, and Arms to the Adjutant. Give me but my 50 l. and I will
say such a prayer, which I will leave in charge to my posterity; it shall be
but short, these 3 or 4 words, from being under the Command of Pluto, and his
Emissaries, Goodness Defend us.


My Husband, sela set un frepone.


Ha Madam! have I caught you, calling us names in Irish? Hone, is mutinous
Rogue; I do speak in behalf of some of my brother Jurors, pay us but the 18
Months we rid in the Troop for nothing, we'll never trouble you more; then we
say far tutor; or far futre, French Madam: I think I have plundered you of
some of your French.


Well concluded brother Plunder, and in your own name too. That's most like an
old Jury-man, as much as to say, I could Kick -- you may imagine, and -- tan
were he either Pluto or Pan.


Jurors withdraw.


You mean for altogether sure; Farewell: well this -- Employment makes good the
old Proverb, If the Devil set at work, he will pay wages too.


Jurors withdraw.


You mean for ever; for I find the Proverb good, as I said before, the Devils
wages! As for my dear Brother Hecks, and Jury-men, do but observe, now his turn
is served, he cares not for us, we may go hang ourselves. I am sure honest men
will not keep us company, they know how we have forsworn our selves; I hope
Coffo-Philo will undo all we have done, and at last will destroy this
ill-founded Arbitrary Court; but since it is so, come, let's go and wait the
good hour.


May it please your Highness, we have taken Coffo-Philo's Books, seized his
Goods, and left a Guard in his house.


Well done, but who have you left there besides?


Mrs. Sorrow, and her Children.


Damme, have ye not turned them out? 'twill prove a mischief; run and do it
now, or else we shall lose all.


We'll go; But Sir, we mist narrowly of him: for had it been but dark, or no
body present but my Comrades, it had been done, you know what I mean -- I, alas
I laugh at Man-slaughter,


Pray Gentlemen give me leave to take such Papers as belong to other men.


Damn you, and your bawling Imps: touch a Paper, and I will run this Sword into
your belly.


What great book is that, Damme I will have it? who hath your Husband's Cloak
and Periwig?


You, for any thing I know.


You lye, I have them not; for Instrument hath the Cloak, and S. Edw.
Lack-Latine hath the Periwig.


By what Authority do you act this, Gentlemen?


Go look, Is it not enough that Pluto sent us? behold our carriage, by that you
may know whom we serve.


Mrs here is a Gentleman at the door desires to speak with you.


I come to him


Here is a Gentleman that hath been with my L. General, who believes your
breaking into my house, and behaviour there, is contrary to Law. This will be
examined one day.


Go hang your self till then: we serve a Captain General.


However, pray M. Shackles, let me have a Bed for my Children.


Not to save your life, I had rather be hanging you, as I must your Husband.


Then take off the Soldiers that keep Guard in my house, and burn out wastfully
my Fire and Candles.


Speak such another word, and I will turn your neck round, you
damn'd-bitch-whore.!


O unheard, but condemned Innocence!


You Brandy, and the rest, look to the Books and Papers, and take them all up,
dispatch, send for Porters and Carts, and carry them all away to Pluto's Court;
and for you Brandy, after I am gone, I will get a Guard constantly to be kept
in the house, you shall overlook them: your chief diligence must be to dog
Sorrow's Children, and by that means take Coffo-Philo.


Bravely contrived Seignior Shac.

Well Gentlemen, I must have one Quart and a Pipe.

I'll but step. There are the Keys, see that nothing be stirred.


Poor woman, here is my self, and Lieutenant Well-meaning; as also Ms. Merely
drawn in, are heartily sorry that the Rogue Shackles uses you thus: Nor is his
baseness in words and threats all; for if ought come in his way, he will stuff
his breeches full of Linen, and one thing or other every time he goes home
sticks to his Limetwig Fingers.


That Rogue Shackles will be hanged, so will Brandy.


Pray Gentlemen, as you seem to be civil, get me but my great Bible, and my
Childrens clothes out, and I will hold my self much engaged to you for your
kind Charity.


Mist. your Childrens clothes were carried away last night; I must tell you, I
see two of Pluto's friends with Practice, take Hangings and Pewter.


Thank you Gentlemen -- but I hear Shac. his voice.


Gent. we have taken Coffo-Philo, and his Brother, we fetched them out of London
by Pluto's only Power; but a pox take him, the Judge hath taken Bail, and
things go cross, neither power above nor below can hurt him, he is so clear
from what he is Indicted for: what then will become of the brave swearing
against -- I would I had the 200 l. I gave Proserpine for my Shackles. I have
brought my self doubly into trouble, for I kept Coffo-Philo's Brother in my
house Prisoner 24 hours: but this is my comfort, the Court is now sitting,
where they are going on with such unheard of ways, that I am sure we shall
master this great Hogan -- but I would fain have him dead or banished, And it
shall not want for swearing if that will do.


Here is Cap. Swear-at-all would speak with the Court*


Call him in.


May it please your Highness, Coffo-Philo and his brother are taken, and are
bailed.


Damn ye for a fool, I would not have had it known that he was Bailed: hang
your self and your news, get you out of the Court.


Damn me? damn you, and your Actions; is this all I have for my news?


We must clog this Coffo-philo and his Brother with feigned Actions. Now,
Practice, and Lack-Latine, Instrum. and all to work, and use your wits.


I will presently make an Oath in the Duchy that he owes me 50 l. and I will
make it such a Debt as shall colour our seizure of his Goods and House.


Mr. Constable, this is the place of the unlawful Assembly, which my Mr. told
you of, and according to your Warrant, pray disperse this Arbitrary Court: if
you w'ont help, M. Posse Comitatus is now passing his green wax Roll before 4
of my Ms. Stewards.


Sir I will first knock at the Court door, and send in my business by one of
their own Officers: and if I receive any opposition, then I will trouble M.
posse Comitatus.


Knock then.


Who are you Sir, that are so rude by knocking to disturb our Court?


I take you to be rude to ask me such an impertinent question, I must tell you
and your upstart Court, I am come from my Master, and I am a sworn Servant to
his Honour, and have in my Hundred, 50 sworn Servants under me: but why do I
trouble my self with giving you an account? I tell you my Masters name is MAGNA
CHARTA, and if you will but look out into the street, you shall see what a
goodly, strong, well composed Gentleman he is.


Pray Sir, give me leave to look out and take a view of him, for I would be
glad to know your Master, that I may give an account to the Court of his
Quality and Train.


Do then, and tell the Court I stay without, and expect to be called in.


Pluto, defend me, what do I see! why, on my Conscience our Pluto, with all his
Train, is but a French Mushrom to this goodly sight, I have enough, O the
presence of that man, I pray Heaven it sets not an end to our Rule.


Oh, Oh, O me! -- May it please your Highness, yonder are without 2 surly
fellows, and into the Court they will come: one's name is Tip-tip-the-Staff,
and the other a downright blunt fellow, I think they call him Constable of
Height, and he says he is a sworn servant to M. Carter, and Ms. Magna! pox on it
'tis a hard name his Mast. is called by; but may it please you, and as I
suppose it will not be very pleasing to your Highness, He stands in the street,
whither I looked and saw him, a pox on him, he almost frighted me; Carter call
you his name, bless me! I tremble to think on him; and he hath with him another
like himself, I think they call him M. Petition of right: I am sure I am not
mistaken in his name.


Damn thee for a dull Rogue, thou tell us an imperfect story without head or
tail: nay, thou art so shallow, that thou can not remember his name; Carter,
a plague on him, what Carter dares be thus bold?


Sir, you interrupt me; there are with this M. Magnus or M. Carter, twelve
grave and well countenanced Men wrapped in Lambskins or Far; and besides, there
were I know not how many more in Quoifes like my Grand-mother, and such a
number of men in black long robes, that I wondered what they were; and thrusting
them, I perceived some of them had Pens and Inckhorns by their girdles, others
were taking Notes, and all addressed themselves to this longnamed man, who has
30 odd additions to his name, some call them Chapters, as 12th. 7th. 29th. c. I
hearkened to their Language, and by and by in another place one repeated Anno
9. Hen. 3. another read tertio and quinto of Edw. 3. the hearing of this (for I
took them for Conjurers) has almost frighmen me out of my wits: And I assure
you, that one of the Gentlemen in Far is as like that troublesome fellow that
sent me to the University of Newgate to commence, for beating my Shoemaker that
was so bold as to ask me for money, he lent me to pay my Dr. that cured me of a
Clap; but I am sure for one of those Furred Gentlemen, I have seen the
Constables beat away the Coaches and Car-men out of his way in the street; Nay,
I am sure he is the man that sent Cap. Bub, Brandy and Bluster to Newgate, for
hunting on the high-way near Barnet.


By your favour, Surribus, it was neither Bub nor Brandy that was sent, 'twas
Cap. C. and Cap. A. and they poor hearts were hanged: but poor Bluster was
wronged in that business, for I was the man; Only I took his horse, and thence
grew the mistake: but I was glad the Rogues did not peach me, and my Dan cropped
Nag: O sweet Hounslow-Heath.


My friends, no differences now, for every one must help: I smell a Rat, and
therefore be loving, and build up one another, else our Kingdom is short-liv'd.


Who to take this man to be, that this long imperfect story is told of, I know
not, I begin now to be afraid.


Pox damn him, 'tis that fart of a fellow, old troublesome Magna Charta, We are
bound to see the worst of it; Call in the Constable -- but be sure no
difference appear, nor any altering of Countenance -- Throw out a Demi Oath or
two, look fierce and big, and shake your Swords and Carbines now and then --
Call him in, call him in.


Friends, if I may so call you, what is your business, and the reason of your
haste? you see we are Armed, and do you think with those two wooden sticks, and
your hasty words, to frighten us? Let your Mast. be who he will, damme he is
but a clown, he is not a-la-mode, per ma foy, parle vous Francols.


Sir, I care not for your high words, nor your Conquered Nations Gibble Gabble,
my Mast. will be hard enough for you at any Language; for several of his
Attendants are clad in French and Latin, which he will force you to
understand, though you could neither Write nor Read: But Sir, in plain English,
in my Mast. name, from whom I am come, and by his Authority to me committed, I
Adjourn your Court, with all its Arbitrary proceedings, for ever and a day.


You Adjourn my Court, your Mast. can have no Cognisance of what I do.


Yes Sir, but he has, and will take Cognisance of you, and your Actions; for
Coffo-Philo hath delivered him a Petition, which was the cause of his sending
me.


Damn Coffo-Philo, and your Mast. too: Gentlemen, stand to your Arms, We will
not be surprised.


Pray, hold, Pluto, let us hear who his Mast. is, you are the most passionate
-- that ever was. Sir, -- M. Constable. pray tell me the name of your Mast.


Why, Madam, so I would; but Pluto plunders my meaning before I speak, as
friends and foes were plundered in Britain -- Welch for that.


Damme Rascal, do you speak of Oxford or Newark? Sirrah, be your Mast. what he
will, he durst not then have stirred, I have hanged as good men as you, a
High-Constable or two in a morning for not -- dogs, must I hear this, and wear
a Sword?


Constable, Go on, pray go on.


I say, my Mast. is Magna Charta, a very old man. He was born in Nono of Henry
the 3d. and then Christened: his Godfathers were the King, Lords, and Commons:
thirty Parliaments have since that been Witnesses of his Confirmation, and
attested his birth and power; he hath such a trick in Nature, that every
Parliament gives and adds strength to his days: And I must tell you here of
this pretended Court, that my Mast. hath a small Officer called Posse Comitatus
belonging to him, that will fall foul with you, and disperse you, if you resist
his Power: besides, his Children the Commons love him so dearly, that they will
raise Money, Men, Armies, and all to preserve him, and keep his Honour
inviolable.


Pluto, Pros. and you the rest of the black Instruments of darkness, I am come
to cite you to appear in Men's. Michael. before my Mast. Magna Charta, in his
great Hall at Westminster, to answer Coffo-Philo, and 500 younger brothers,
with Pierce-heart, Sir John Morley, old Cicel our neighbour at Enfield, with
many others; as the Military ground men, and Fitton: -- where you are to answer
for many Riots, wrongs, and high misdemeanours. And therefore Constable dis-arm
them.


You M. Troublesome, I will have l'argent per ma foy, or else I'll not part
with my Sword.


Now these vexatious varlets are fled, Pray Husband get what money you can, I
do not like this Magna Charta; for I have heard Haly the first, and worst say,
that Magna Charta cares no more for a Lord, or Great Man, than you do for a
petit frepone de la Guard: Nay, he says, That he has prosecuted the highest
Subjects, and sometimes hanged them, as Empson, Dudley, and 100 more of his
Infringers: I'd have you for avoiding danger, to buy a Bashaws place in Turkey;
for methinks I could make a rare Bashaw's wife; There is no Magna Charta.


Pox damn it, there is a kind of little Magna Charta, that is the Alcoran, and
Bow strings, and I hate choking; besides, the Janisaries are as mutinous as
our common Soldiers, and often knock their Vizier on the head; Nay, the
Grand-Seignior, if a General do but cheat him in his Muster-Roll, sends him a
Bow-string; and then -- he may go hang himself.


Is it possible? fer futre la Gran Seigner; what then will you do with this
damned English Magna Charta?


S. Edw. Lack. now we know it is Magna Charta that takes Coffo-Philo's part, we
had best while we are together to examine our own strengths and weaknesses. And
therefore Wife I beg your silence, till we have examined Cap. Intelligence, who
is ready to make Report, are you not Captain?


Yes Sir, but I cannot give an account to the Court of all: for one of Shack.
setting dogs, with M. Want-Practice, sit close at Coffo-Philo, whence in a
little time you will know much more; in the mean time, I must beg all the
Honourable persons of this Court, that they will take no exceptions till I have
told out my tale.


You shall not be interrupted.


Then first; for you S. Edw. Lack. there is a man here in Town that knows you
ever since your Mother sold Ale: and that after you came to be M. Harper's boy
at Chester, you made Practice, which since you have well improved -- I -- and
he knows of the Letter that got you your Barr-Gown, and the occasion: and told
all the story of your contrivance with Granger, and the false Oath you made
against C -- to get his Goods: yours is too long a story to relate, therefore
here is your black Bill of Fare in writing, signed and examined by Alex.
Fitton, Carr, and Percival Hart, but transcribed by Coffo-Philo.

For your part M. Practice, your name is like an infectious disease -- honest
men never use your name, but they do as the Papists, at the name of the Devil,
sign themselves with the Cross, or God bless me from that Knave in grain M.
Practice.

As to you M. Instrument, you are known in Cheshire, ever since you led your
Fathers Pack-horse that carried his Peddlers Ware; but known better by the name
of Engine Dick, that informed against the Cavaliers in S. Geor. Booth's
business: and then, as your Father was made a Sequestrator, so you had 3 s. per
diem allowed you by those Usurpers, to attend the Sequestrator; yet they held
you but for a silly fellow: and S. Edw. Lack. for 20 s. preferred you to be his
Instrumant.

But for you Shackles, you are called in London, lying, broken Dick, who
cousened all your Creditors, and to the great disgrace of the Guards sheltered
your self from your just Debts: but to hear Coffo-Philo tell the story of your
life, how often imprisoned, and how you were condemned to be boiled alive in
Oil for a Coiner, would make one wonder: in a word, you are hated even amongst
your own Comrades.

For you Brandy, your life is generally scandalous and infamous for beating
your Wife, although she often -- deserves admonition, or something else, or her
Neighbours do her wrong: but laying aside a bushel of ill qualities, that which
S. Edw. Massey tells of you, is unpardonable, how you would have killed him
when he declared for the King at Gloucester; and was the last man of the
Soldiers that opposed Gen. Monk in Gloucester: the story is too large to relate,
therefore take S. Edw. Massey's own Certificate.

For you Bub, you are looked upon as a poor spirited fellow; that for a dinner,
bub, and ease, will swear any thing: the most empty-scul'd, cock-brain'd fellow
that ever was made a Cuckold: your Neighbours call you foul mouth, and blew.
lips.


Pray, Cap. hold a little, what do they say of my Wife? speak freely, ( Wife
you shall not be angry.)


They say, that Proserp. though the grey mare is the better horse, and wears
the breeches, playing away her money freely, many an undone younger brother
hath been set at Humber, Picquet in a night.


Pray Husband let me speak a word; you did allow me the selling of 5 or 6
places in a year, and then I had 300 l. a year for my allowance, besides other
ways of progging for money, therefore I may afford to Play, 'tis my own: only,
I confess I owe Coffo Philo 300 l. which I borrowed on my Jewels, as you have
heard.


Pray where is my Charge, Cap. Intelligence?


There it is in writing, take it, with a comment upon it, and a many great
Authorities against all your unjust Arbitrary proceedings; and I have put you
to the cost of one copy of the Statute of Anno tertio Car. and the reason why
I brought it, is, because your Highness is much blamed for sending your two
Daughters into France to be bred Papists in a Nunnery, where your eldest
daughter Charnock, torments her self, and cries out, she will be a Protestant,
or else she will destroy her self, to the great admiration and pity of Sir
Thom. Arpe, who hath sent to have the poor young Lady sent for away to
England. --

Nay Sir, should I have paid for all the copies of the Charge against you, my 4
s. a day would not have held out: but I must have a dead pay for what I have
done already, or else you may -- go look.


Dear Cap. Intell. read them to me, and then we will Adjourn the Court, or else
this foolish troublesome fellow Magna Charta will secure us all under his
Shackles.


Give me the papers I will read them.


Prithee do, and I would have you Sir Edw. Lack. to make notes on what you have
read.


Anno 9. H. 3. Cap. 29. Magna Charta runs thus.

No Free-man shall be taken or Imprisoned, or be disseized of his Free-hold, or
Liberties, or Free-Customs, or be Outlawed or Eriled, or any other ways
destroyed: Nor We will not pass upon him, nor condemn him, but by lawful
Judgement of his Peers, or by Law of the Land; We will sell to no man, We will
not deny or defer to any man either Justice or Right.


Read no further of that, which is the next?


Sir there are so many more, that it would be too tedious a work to read all:
but if you please I will read the Conference between the Lords and Commons,
concerning this great liberty of the Commons.


Pray do, but if there be any Latin, pray English it as you read, because of
Sir Edw. and my self.


I will read it.

The Commons having taken into their serious consideration the matter of
personal Liberty, and after long debate thereof an divers days, as well by solemn
Arguments, as single Propositions of Doubts and Answers, to the end no scruple
might remain in any mans breast unsatisfyed; they have upon a full sea^ch, and
clear understanding of all things pertinent to the Question, unanimously
declared.

That no Free-man ought to be committed or detained in Prison, or otherwise
restrained by the Command of the King or Privy Council, or any other, unless
some cause of the commitment, detainer or restraint be expressed, for which by
Law he ought to be committed, detained or restrained.

And they have sent me with others of their Members, to represent unto your
Lordships the true grounds of such their Resolution, and have charged me
particularly, leaving the reasons of Law and Presidents for others to give your
Lordships satisfaction, that this Liberty is established and confirmed by the
whole State, the King, the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons, by
several Acts of Parliament; the Authority whereof is so great, that it can
receive no Answer: save by Interpretation or Repeal by future Statutes; and
those that I shall mind your Lordships of, are so direct to the point, that
they can bear no other exposition at all, and sure I am they are still in
force.

The first of them is, the Grand Charter of the Liberties of England, first
granted in the seaventeenth year of King John, and renewed in the ninth year of
King Henry the Third, and since confirmed in Parliament above thirty times; The
words are thus, Cap. 29. Nullus Liber homo Capiatur vel Imprisonetur, aut
Dissesietur de Libero Tenemento suo, vel libertatibus, vel Liberis
consuetudinibus suis, aut utlegatur, aut exuletur, aut aliquo modo destruatur,
nec super eum ibimus, nec super eum mittemus, nisi per Legale Judicium Parium
suorum vel per Legem Terrae. These words, Nullus Liber homo, c. are express
enough, yet it is remarkable that Matthew Paris, an Author of special credit
doth observe Fol. 432, that the Charter of 9. Hen. 3. was the very same as of
the 17 of King John ( in nullo dissimilis, are his words,) and that of King
John he sets down verbatim, Fol. 342, and there the words are directly, Nec
eum in carcerem mittemus; And such a corruption as is now in the print, might
easily happen 'twixt 9. H. 3. and 28. E. 1. when this Charter was first
exemplified; but certainly there is sufficient left in that which is extant to
decide this question, For the words are, That no Free-man shall be taken or
Imorisoned, but by the lawful Judgement of his Peers, which is by Jury Peers
for Peers, ordinary Jurors for others who are their Peers, or by the Law of the
Land, which words (Law of the Land) must of necessity be understood in this
notion, to be by due Process of the Law, and not the Law of the Land generally,
otherwise it would comprehend Bond-men (whom we call Villains) who are excluded
by the word Liber; for the general Law of the Land doth allow their Lords to
Imprison them at pleasure without Cause; wherein they only differ from the
Free-men in respect of their persons, who cannot be Imprisoned without a cause:
And that this is the true understanding of those words ( per Legem Terrae) will
more plainly appear by divers other Statutes that I shall use which do expound
the same accordingly; And though the words of this grand Charter be spoken in
the third person, yet they are not to be understood of Suits betwixt party and
party, at least not of them alone, but even of the King's Suits against his
Subjects, as will appear by the occasion of the getting of that Charter, which
was by reason of the difference betwixt those Kings and their People, and
therefore properly to be applied unto their power over them, and not to
ordinary questions betwixt Subject and Subject. Secondly, the words Per Legale
judicum parium suorum, immediately preceding the other of Per Legem Terrae, are
meant of Trials at the King's Suit, and not at the prosecution of a Subject;
And therefore if a Peer of the Realm be Arraigned at the Suit of the King upon
an Indictment of Murder, he shall be Tried by his Peers, that is Nobles, but if
he be appealed of Murder by a Subject, his Trial shall be by an ordinary Jury
of Twelve Free-holders, as appears in 10. E. 4. 6. 33. H. 8. Brook titl.
Trials 142. Stamford Pleas of the Crown, lib. 3. cap. 1 folio 152. And in the
10. E. 4. it is said, such is the meaning of Magna Charta, by the same reason
therefore as per judicium parium suorum, extends to the King's Suit, so shall
these words per Legem Terrae. And in 8. E. 2. Rot. Parliament. memb. 7. There
is a Petition that a Wrote under the Privy Seal went to the Guardians of the
great Seal, to cause Lands to be seized into the King's hands; By force of
which there went a Wrote out of the Chancery to the Escheater to seize against
the form of the grand Charter, that the King nor his Ministers shall out no man
of Free-hold without reasonable Judgement; and the party was restored to his
Land, which shows the Statute did extend to the King. There was no invasion
upon this personal Liberty, till the time of King Edward the Third, which was
eftsoons resented by the Subjects; for in 5 Edw. 3. cap. 9. it is ordained in
these words;

It is Enacted, That no man from henceforth shall be attached by any
accusation, nor forejudged of life or limb, nor his lands, tenements, goods,
nor chattels seized into the Kings hands, against the form of the grrat
Charter, and the Law of the Land.

25 E. 3. cap. 4. Is more full, and doth expound the words of the grand
Charter: And thus;

Whereas it is contained in the great Charter of the Franchises of England,
that none shall be imprisoned, nor put out of his Freehold, nor of his
Franchises, nor Free Custom, unless it be by the Law of the Land: (...) is
accorded, assented and established, That from henceforth none shall be taken by
petition, or suggestion made to our Lord the King, or to his Council, unless it
be by Indictment, or Presentment of his good and lawful people of the same
Neighbourhood, where such deeds be done in due manner, or by process made by
Writ Original at the Common Law; nor that none be out of his Franchises, nor of
his Free-holds, unless he be duly brought in answer, and forejudged of the same
by the course of the Law: And if any thing be done against the same, it shall
be redressed, and holden for none.

Out of this Statute I observe, that what in Magna Charta, and the Preamble of
the Statute is termed by the Law of the Land, is in the body of this Act
expounded to be by process made by Writ Original at the Common Law, which is a
plain interpretation of the words ( Law of the Land) in the g^and Charter. And
I note, that this law was made upon the Commitment of divers to the Tower, no
man yet knows for what.

28 E. 3. cap. 3. is yet more direct (this Liberty being followed with fresh
suit by the Subject) where the words are not many, but very full and
significant.

That no man of estate or condition that he be, shall be put out of his lands,
nor tenement, nor taken nor imprisoned, nor disherited, nor put to death,
without he be brought in answer by due process of the Law.

Here your Lordships see the usual words of the law of the land are rendered by
due process of the Law.

36 E. 3. Rot. Parl. n. 9. Amongst the Petitions of the Commons, one of them
being translated into English out of French, is thus;

First, That the great Charter, and the Charter of the Forest, and the other
Statutes made in his time, and in the time of his Progenitors, for the profit
of him, and his Commonalty, be well and firmly kept, and put in due execution,
without putting disturbance, or making arrest contrary to them by special
command, or in other manner.

The Answer to the Petition, which makes it an Act of Parliament, is,

Our Lord the King by the assent of the Prelates, Dukes, Earls, Barons, and the
Commonalty, hath ordained and established, That the said Charters and Statutes
be held, and put in execution according to the said Petition.

It is observable, that the statutes were to be put in execution, according to
the said Petition, which is, that no arrest should be made contrary to the
statutes by special command. This concludes the question, and is of as great
force, as if it were Printed; for the Parliament Roll is the true warrant of an
Act, and many are omitted out of the Books that are extant.

36 E. 3. Rot. Parl. n. 20. explaineth it further, for there the Petition is:

Item, As it is contained in the Grand Charter, and other Statutes, that no man
be taken, nor imprisoned by special Command without Indictment, or other due
process to be made by the Law, and oftentimes it hath been, and yet is, that
many are hindered, taken and imprisoned without Indictment, or other process
made by the Law upon them, as well of things done out of the Forest of the
King, as for other things, that it would please our said Lord, to command those
to be delivered which are so taken by special Command, against the form of the
Charters and Statutes aforesaid.

The Answer is,

The King is pleased, That if any man find himself agrieved, that he come and
make his complaint, and right shall be done unto him.

42 E. 3. cap. 18. agrees in substance, when it saith, Though that it be
contained in the Great Charter; that no man be taken, nor imprisoned, nor put
out of his Free-hold, without process of the Law; nevertheless divers people
make false suggestion to the King himself, as well for malice, as otherwise,
whereof the King is often grieved, and divers of the Realm put in damage,
against the form of the same Charter; Wherefore it is ordained, That all they
which make suggestions, wall be sent with the same suggestions before the
Chancellor Treasurer, and his grand Council, and that they there find Sureties
to pursue their suggestions, and incur the same pain that the other should
have had, if he were attainted, in case that his suggestion be found evil: And
that then process of the Law be made against them without being taken and
imprisoned against the form of the said Charter and other Statutes.

Here the Law of the Land in the grand Charter is explained to be without
process of the Law.

put to answer without presentment before Iustice^, or matter of Record, or by
due Process and Writ Original, according to the old Law of the Land. And if any
thing from henceforth be done to the contrary, it shall be void in the Law, and
holden for Error.

But this is better in the Parliament Roll, where the Petition and Answer which
makes the Act, are set down at large.

42 E. 3 Rot. n. 12. The Petition.

Item, Because that many of your Commons are hurt and destroyed by false
Accusers, who make their accusations more for their revenge and particular
gain, then for the profit of the King, or his people; and these that are
accused by them, some have been taken, and others are made to come before the
Kings Council by Writ, or other Commandment of the King, upon grievous pains,
contrary to the Law: That it would please our Lord the King, and his good
Council, for the Just government of his people to ordain, That if hereafter any
accuser purpose any matter for the profit of the King, that the same matter be
sent to the Justices of the one Bench, or the other, or the Ass^zes, to be
enquired and determined according to the Law: And if it c^ncern the accuser or
party, that he take his suit at the Common Law; and that no man be put to
answer without presentment before Justices, or matter of Record, or by due
Process, and original Writ, according to the ancient Law of the Land; And if
any thing hence forward be done to the contrary, that it be void in Law, and
held for Error.

Here by due Process and Original Writ, according to the ancient Law of the
Land, is meant the same thing, as, Per Legem Terrae in Magna Charta; and the
abuse was, That they were put to answer by Commandment of the King.

The Kings Answer is thus:

Because that this Article is an Article of the Grand Charter, the King will
that this be done as the Petition doth demand.

By this appears, that Per Legem Terrae in Magna Charta, is meant by due
Process of the Law.

Thus your Lordships have heard Acts of Parliament in the point; but the
Statute of Westminster the first, cap. 15. is urged to disprove this opinion,
where it is expressly said, That a man is not Replevisable, who is committed by
the command of the King; therefore the Command of the King without any cause
showed, is sufficient to commit a man to prison. And because the strength of
the Argument may appear, and the Answer be better understood, I shall read the
words of that Statute, which are thus:

And forasmuch as Sheriffs and others which have taken and kept in prison
persons detected of felony, and oftentimes have let out by Replevin such as
were not Replevisable, and have kept in prison such as were Replevisable;
because they would gain of the one party, and grieve the other. And forasmuch
as before this time it was not certainly determined what persons were
repleviable, and what not: but only those that were taken for the death of a
man, or by Commandment of the King, or of his Justices, or for the Forest. It
is provided, and by the King commanded, that such prisoners as before were
outlawed; and they which have abjured the Realm, provors, and such as be taken
with the manner, and those which have broken the Kings Prison, Thieves openly
defamed and known, and such as be appealed by provors, so long as the provors
be living, if they be not of good name, and such as be taken for burning of
houses feloniously done, or for false money, or for counterfeiting the Kings
Seal, or persons excommunicate taken at the request of the Bishop, or for
manifest offences, or for Treason touching the King himself, shall be in no
wise Replevisable by Common Writ, or without Writ; but such as be indicted of
Larceny by Inquests taken before Sheriffs or Bailiffs by their office, or of
light suspicion, or for petty Larceny, that amounts not above the value of
twelve pence, if they were not guilty of some other Larceny aforetime, or
guilty of receipt of felons, or of commandment, or force, or aid in felony
done, or guilty of some other trespasses, for which one ought not to lose life
or member; And a man appealed by a provor, after the death of the provor, if he
be no common thief, nor defamed, shall from henceforth be let out by sufficient
Surety, whereof the Sheriff will be answerable, and that without giving ought
of their goods. And if the Sheriff or any other let any go at large by Surety,
that is not Replevisable, if he be Sheriff or Constable, or any other Bailiff
of Fee which hath keeping of Prisons, and thereof be attainted he shall lose
his Fee and Office for ever. And if the under-Sheriff, Constable, or Bailiff of
such as hath Fee for keeping of Prisons, do it contrary to the will of his
Lord, or any other Bailiff being not of Fee, they shall have three years
imprisonment, and make a Fine at the Kings pleasure: And if any withhold
prisoners Replevisable, after that they have offered sufficient Surety, he
shall pay a grievous Amerciament to the King; And if he take any reward for the
deliverance of such, he shall pay double to the prisoner, and also shall be in
the great mercy of the King.


Dam me, this is a damned Argument, I do not like it; for by this I find I have
run into a Praemunire, for keeping Coffophilo and his Brother in Prison under
Shackles, and keeping guard in his house: neither can you, Gentlemen, keep your
plunder by this Argument to try by Peers: Why, there was never the peer of
this.


Pray Sir, who shall Captain Bub, and Brandy, and my self keep harmless? I find
the Proverb true, He that is born to be hanged, shall never be boiled in Oil.


Will swearing do no good to hang this Coffo-philo?


Peace, Gentlemen, we shall have need of all your swearing: Oh that a Jury
would believe! here are arrant Knights -- of the Post: stand to it Shackles,
you shall all swear and be d --


Tis true: Post Practice you swore home to hang your Country-men, when they
were for the King, at the rising in Lincolnshire.


No rubbing of old sores, Gentlemen, here is a new Ulcer will want curing.


Do not quarrel, Gentlemen, I'll teach you your Neck-verse. Would to Heaven I
might have the favour to read mine. Such of you as are without benefit of my
Function, as some of you are, and therefore I will make you Paper Wills, that
shall last seventeen year in the lining of a doublet.


Practise, Pray read that damned Statute against Captains cousening and
defrauding their Prince and Soldiers, there is two of them, read them both;
the one of Henry the Seventh, and the other of Henry the Eighth.


I will.

Forasmuch as the King our Sovereign Lord intends, by the grace of God, to
send over the ^a a great Army, trusting thereby, not only to preserve this his
Realm in its ancient ^ante and honour, etc.

Howbeit, many times by the inordinate covetousness of Captains retained with
Princes, before this time, Great part of the number of Soldiers for whom such
Captains have indented with Princes at time of need, have lacked of the number
of Soldiers; whereby great jeopardy hath ensued, inrecuperable damages may
ensue, if remedy therefore be not seen and had; Be it therefore ordained by
Authority of this present Parliament, That if any Captain be retained, or
hereafter shall be, to serve the King upon the Sea, or beyond the Sea, or in
feat of War, which have not his or their whole and perfect number of Men and
Soldiers, according as he shall be retained with the King, or give not them
their full wages, without abridgement, as he shall receive of the King for
them; he shall for such default, forfeit to the King all his goods and
Chattels, and his body to the prison; and that every Captain and petit Captain,
and all other, having under them retinue of Soldiers at the Kings wages,
shall, upon the pain aforesaid, pay to the retinue of the Soldiers, and every
of them tho wages rateably, as is allowed unto them, by the King our Sovereign
Lord, or the Treasurer of his Wars, without lessing, or withdrawing any part
thereof, c.



The Statute of Anno septimo H 7. cap. 1. is also very strict against your
Highness; but, Sir, I will read one Statute more to this particular.

April, demand, receive, or take of the Kings Highness, or any of his
Treasurers, any wages for any more Soldiers, then served in such manner and
form, as the wages was paid for, sr for any more days, then such Soldiers
served, and do not note the day of every Soldiers entry into wages, and day of
his death, and departure, and deliver the same in writing to such Treasurers as
shall pay the wages, c.


Hold, this is worse and worse.


Give me leave to read but one Statute more, and that is against sending
Children to be bred beyond Sea in Papist houses.

Forasmuch as divers ill-affected persons to the true Religion established
within this Realm, have sent their Children into foreign parts, to be bred up
in Popery, c.

Be it Enacted, etc. That in case that any person or persons, under the
obedience of the King, his Heirs and Successors, at any time after the end of
this Session of Parliament, shall pass, or go, or shall convey, or send, or
cause to be sent or conveyed any Child, or other person, out of any of the
Kings Dominions, into any the parts beyond the Seas out of the Kings Obedience,
to the intent and purpose to enter into, or be resident, or trained up in any
Priory, Abbey, Nunnery, Popish University, College, or School, or House of
Iesuites, Priests, or in any private Popish Family, and shall be there by any
Iesuite, Seminary Priest, Friar, Monk, or other Popish Person, instructed, c.
being thereof lawfully convicted, in, or upon any Information, Presentment, or
Indictment as aforesaid, shall be distnabled from thenceforth to sue, or use
any Action, Bill, Plaint, or Information in course of Law, or to prosecute any
suit in any Court of Equity, or to be committed to any Ward, or Executor, or
Administrator, or any person capable of any Legacy, or Deed of Gift, or to bear
any Office within the Realm, and shall lose and forfeit all his Goods and
Chattels, and shall forfeit all his Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments, Rents,
Annuities, Offices, and Estates of Free-hold, for and during his natural life,
c.




Read no further, I am guilty of all these Statutes, and many more; and
therefore Proserpine, I will immediately make my Will. Call the Ordinary, he
hath a rare faculty in making Wills in Paper, to last seventeen years in the
lining of a Doublet.


I have not half done, give me leave to read all.


Read all and be damned.


Hen. 3. Anno 9. cap. 30. Magna Charta runs thus:

No Freeman shall be taken, or imprisoned, or be disseised of his Freehold, or
Liberties, or Free Customs, or be outlawed, or exiled, or any otherwise
destroyed, nor we will not pass upon him, nor condemn him, but by lawful
Judgment of his Peers, or by the Law of the Land; we will s^ll to no man, we
will not deny, or defer to any man either Justice, or Right.


Read no further of that, which is next?


The next is the Learned Conference in Caroli primo, between the Lords and
Commons, concerning the Great Liberties of the Commons.


Prithee read, but when you come to Latin, English it as you go, because of
Sir Edward and my Self.


Sir, I am not satisfied, that your Highness should make your will yet, for Sir
Edward and I have lately consulted; and fain would be at the other touch.


Right; I am resolved to venture my Neck after my Ears, 'tis but a venture; and
now you have money good stood store, you do not know, but Coffophilo may either
die, or be tired out for want of money.


Well, let me hear which way now, Gentlemen, how many Actions is now against
him? and how many have been tried?


We have tried in all seventeen, and there yet remains five more.


How many hath he cast us in?


All.


I am for no more Trials, till my Trial be over for my Perjury.


Bishop, let me tell you, your Parishioners are now totally your enemies, since
they heard you was such a Knave, to plead the Engagement, in Bar to a poor
Cavalier-Minister, that sued you in the late Times for money; his name was
Green, a poor sequestered Minister, whose Conscience was not free to take the
Engagement: and thus the poor Gentleman lost his suit. Your Wife may well be
mad, if half be true, as I was told by one of your Parish, the child sent in
the basket --


Hold, no more.


SIr, pray read this.


What is't Shackel?


'Tis Latin.


Read it.


Practice, give it me, Carol. secund. Dei gratia: How! what this attach the
body of Pluto? --


O me Good Behaviour! I am a Peer.


I, there is not the Peer of your Highness: now, what's to be done?


Did not Proserpine tell us that Magna Charta cared no shore for a Great man,
then if he were petete frepone de la guard in a just cause.


May it please your Highness, I would have you remove Carr by Writ to the
Fleet, by this means it may be done; First, enter three great Actions against
him and his Brother in the Exchequer; next, file two Bills in Chancery, and
take out five other Writs to torment him if he stir abroad: This will do his
business.


How, in my own name, or his Lawyers?


There is Monsieur Francois Pembertonia, he that picked the hole in your
evidence against Coffophilo; next, Seignior Francisco, alias honest, just, and
able Viningtoniences, and Honourable stout Colmaneburg, Grave, and as honest
Symsoniack. Lastly, Seignior Ofley Lego.


Damme that -- he -- Lego is down right a name of War -- Lego -- Leiger, a Town
besieged; I will send these five Hectors of the Bar, five Triers, or five
Hecks will they fight?


O no Sir.


Damme, I will send for French Lawyers -- sons of the little French Lawyer,
they shall both fight them, and carry the Judge a Challenge too, if need
require.


Pray send your Dub to fight one of them.


How do you mean? at Law?


Pox on him, he is rotten; give him Sack and Tobacco, and he'll make a shift to
bawl; but Law, as Pluto observed, he hath none.


Gentlemen, all's to no purpose, let us fall to making of Wills, for I see that
what we intended against Coffophilo, hath overtaken us, as the Poet hath it.

Fallite fallentes ex magna part profanum
Sunt genus: in laqueos, quos posuere cadent.
Cousin the Couseners; commonly they be
Profane: let their own snare their ruin be.



Tell me Sir, what you would have done, and I will use my uttermost skill.


Write there: Whereas I Pluto being surprised with an infectious Disease,
arising by frights, from the breath of Westminster-Hall, and finding my courage
not sufficient to bear my Distempers, though once I thought I could have hushed
Death, and silenced, or at least outbrav'd Magna Charta, do make this my last
Will and Testament in manner following:

Imprimis, I give to Fitton all his Estate, hoping he will let you, my Doctor,
be Parson of Gansworth, and also suffer Sir Edward Lack-Latine, Edward Dicket,
and both the Hollingsheads to enjoy their Leases I gave them for their good
Services: you know Sir, they will stick at a mark, if swearing will do it, as
well as Instrument.

Item, I give Mr. Blundall his Estate, but the Rogue that betrayed him a
Halter.

Item, I give Delamere Forest to the Commoners and right Owners, only I
cannot forget the damned Clowns that rose against us, when we went to enclose
their Common.


Pray Sir be not disturbed, but go on.


Item, I give the Military Ground and House to the Military Company; but for
their Goods and Library, they are gone -- Gentlemen, you all shared in that
plunder, but you Instrument more especially.


Pray be not in passion, but go on.


Item, I give Sir John Morley the Grant of Newcastle, with the Honours, because
his Grant is older then mine, and the Country doth not love me.

Item. I give fat Will Loven his project of getting the Harringtons Estate,
forfeited for Treason, and relapsed to the Crown ever since Hen. 7. and Hen 8..
If I had gone on with that design, I should have added to all my other
wickedness, the ruin of many Families.

Item, I give Percival Hart his Estate, because that damned blockhead Ward,
together with you Lack-Latine and Instrument put me upon so open a design.

Item, I give Enfield Chase to the right Owner old Salisbury, because he hath
two Lives in the Chase before me.

I would give Halsall to satisfy the Mortgage, and pay my Fathers debts, but
Damme, Proserpine will want Tools for Cards and Dice.

For that Rogue Coffophilo, Magna Charta threatens he will Administer, as
chiefest Creditor, and pay Coffophilo his damages.

And now my worthy Friends of the Sword and the Law, and the rest of the
Faculties, I do desire your excuses, for I am spent, and do not find any
surplusage of Estate, which will remain as Assets to bequeath to you, only I
give you free leave either to hang, drown, or poison your selves, any way to
speed and hasten your passage to our Infernal Kingdom.

And lastly, for you my Dear Proserpine, I am glad I took thy counsel, and sold
my Place, for reany money will do thee good when I am gone; and if this
Coffophilo were by thy industrious Art knocked on the head, peradventure our
Tragy-Comedie would never come upon the Stage: But alas! it nips my Soul to
think, that Mortals shall Act thy Part and mine on their Stage, with the Worlds
Applause, to our eternal Infamy.


SPectators, is it your desire to find
Such Witty Jests as please a joyful mind?
Go seek them where they are, sure they are to be had,
'Tis not VVits recreation to be sad.
Wit must avaunt, with all its Levities,
Where heaviness becomes the Obsequies:
For, if it be true, sad Objects do require
Sad Thoughts, sad Words, and sad Attire.
Then do not (pray) my Muse for dullness tax,
Since lighter Fancies suit not with her blacks.
But, stay my Muse, thy Lines let PLUTO read,
They will conduct him to a Grave or Bed;
Where, when the Curtain's drawn, each active part
will move, without instructions from Black Art;
His nature motive is, in quest of ill,
Stated in mischief, all his ablest skill;
Neither know right from wrong, till wrong be done
Fix Nature will, to condemned Customs run:
Unchangedly, who to his sins can set.
A certain end, when hath he never met
Blushes once from his hardened forehead thrown,
Who is it sins, and is content with one?
No, no, our PLUTO hath mauy in store,
And longs to Act them ore and ore:
But Magna Charta stopped his intent,
By a late Attachment, which he sent.
Unto Sheriff -- to execute,
Which makes the Devil very mute;
And now stands bound unto his good behavior
And must neither kick, nor strike, nor swager:
And therefore now, since Pluto is in bands,
Let each with me rejoice, and Clap their hands.

