AS stubborn Atheists, who disdained to pray,
Repent, tho late, upon their dying day,
So in their pangs, most Author's racked with fears,
Implore your mercy in our suppliant prayers.
But our new Author has no Cause maintained,
Let him not lose what he has never gained.
Love and a Bottle are his peaceful arms?
Ladies, and Gallants, have not these some Charms.
For Love, all mankind to the Fair must sue,
And Sirs, the Bottle, he presents to you.
Health to the Play, (drinks.) even let it fairly pass,
Sure none sit here that will refuse their glass.
Othere's a damning Soldier -- let me think --
He looks as he were sworn -- to What! -- to drink. (drinks.
Come on then; foot to foot be boldly set,
And our young Author's new Commission wet.
He and his Bottle here attend their doom,
From you the Poets Hellicon must come;
If he has any foes, to make amends,
He gives his service (drinks) sure you now are friends.
No Critic here will he provoke to fight,
The day be theirs, he only begs his Night;
Pray pledge him now, secured from all abuse,
Then name the health you love, let none refuse,
But each man's Mistress be the Poet's Muse.


THUS far our Arms have with Success been Crowned. -- Heroically spoken, faith,
of a fellow that has not one farthing in his Pocket. If I have one Penny to buy
a Halter withal in my present necessity, may I be hanged; tho I'm reduced to a
fair way of obtaining one methodically very soon, if Robbery or Theft will
purchase the Gallows. But hold -- Can't I rob honourably, by turning Soldier?


One farthing to the poor old Soldier, for the Lord's sake.


Ha! -- a glimpse of Damnation just as a Man is entering into sin, is no great
policy of the Devil. -- But how long did you bear Arms, friend;


Five years, an't please you Sir.


And how long has that honourable Crutch born you?


Fifteen, Sir.


Very pretty! Five year a Soldier, and Fifteen a Beggar! -- This is Hell right!
an age of Damnation for a momentary offence. Thy condition fellow, is
preferable to mine; the merciful Bullet, more kind than thy ungrateful Country,
has given thee a Debenter in thy broken Leg, from which thou can draw a more
plentiful maintenance than I from all my Limbs in perfection. Prithee friend,
why would thou beg of me? Dost think I'm rich?


No, Sir, and therefore I believe you charitable. Your warm fellows are so far
above the sense of our Misery, that they can't pity us; and I have always
found it, by sad experience, as needless to beg of a rich Man as a Clergyman.
Our greatest Benefactors, the brave Officers are all disbanded, and must now
turn Beggars like my self; and so, Times are very hard, Sir.


What, are the Soldiers more charitable than the Clergy.


Ay, Sir, A Captain will say Dam'me, and give me Six-pence; and a Parson shall
whine out God bless me, and give me not a farthing: Now I think the Officers
Blessing much the best.


Are the Beau's never compassionate?


The great full Wigs they wear, stop their Ears so close, that they can't hear
us; and if they should, they never have any farthings about'em.


Then I am a Beau, friend; therefore pray leave me. Begging from a generous
Soul that has not to bestow, is more tormenting than Robbery to a Miser in his
abundance. Prithee friend, be thou charitable for once; I beg only the favour
which rich friends bestow, a little Advice. I am as poor as thou art, and am
designing to turn Soldier.


No, no, Sir. See what an honourable Post I am forced to stand to, My Rags are
scarecrows sufficient to frighten any one from the Field; rather turn bird of
prey at home.


Grammercy, old Devil. I find Hell has its Pimps of the poorer sort, as well as
of the wealthy. I fancy, friend, thou hast got a Cloven-foot instead of a
broken Leg. 'Tis a hard Case, that a Man must never expect to go nearer Heaven
than some steps of a Ladder. But 'tis unavoidable: I have my wants to lead, and
the Devil to drive; and if I cannot meet my friend Lovewell, (which I think
impossible, being so great a stranger in Town) Fortune thou hast done thy
worst; I proclaim open War against thee.

I'll stab thy next rich Darling that I see;
And killing him, be thus revenged on thee.


Oh these Summer mornings are so delicately fine, Pindress, it does me good to
be abroad.


Ay, Madam, these Summer mornings are as pleasant to young folks, as the Winter
nights to marri'd people, or as your morning of Beauty to Mr. Lovewell.


I'm violently afraid the Evening of my Beauty will fall to his share very
soon; for I'm inclinable to marry him. I shall soon lie under an Eclipse,
Pindress.


Then it must be full Moon with your Ladyship. But why would you choose to
marry in Summer, Madam?


I know no cause, but that people are aptest to run mad in hot weather, unless
you take a Woman's reason.


What's that, Madam?


Why, I am weary of lying alone.


Oh dear Madam! lying alone is very dangerous; 'tis apt to breed strange
Dreams.


I had the oddest Dream last night of my Courtier that is to be, Esquire
Mockmode. He appeared crowded about with a Dancing-Master, Pushing-Master,
Musick-Master, and all the throng of Beaumakers; and methought he mimicked
Foppery so awkwardly, that his imitation was down-right burlesquing it. I burst
out a laughing so heartily, that I wakened my self.


But Dreams go by contraries, Madam. Have not you seen him yet.


No; but my Uncles Letter gives account that he's newly come to Town from the
University, where his Education could reach no farther than to guzzle fat Ale,
smoke Tobacco, and chop Logic. -- Faugh -- it makes me Sick.


But he's very rich, Madam; his Concerns join to yours in the Country.


Ay, but his Concerns shall never join to mine in the City: For since I have
the disposal of my own Fortune, Lovewell's the Man for my Money.


Ay, and for my Money; for I've have had above twenty Pieces from him since his
Courtship began. He's the prettiest sober Gentleman; I have so strong an
opinion of his modesty, that I'm afraid, Madam, your first Child will be a
Fool.


Oh God forbid! I hope a Lawyer understands business better than to beget any
thing non compose. -- The Walks fill a pace; the Enemy approaches, we must set
out our false Colours.


We Masks are the purest Privateers! Madam, how would you like to Cruise about
a little?


Well enough, had we no Enemies but our Fops and Cits: But I dread these
blustering Men of War, the Officers, who after a Broadside of Dam'me's and
Sinkme's, are for boarding all Masks they meet, as lawful Prize.


In truth Madam, and the most of 'em are lawful Prize, for they generally have
French Ware under Hatches.


Oh hideous! Of my Conscience Girl thou'at quite spoiled, An Actres upon the
Stage would blush at such expressions.


Ay Madam, and your Ladyship would seem to blush in the Box, when the redness
of your face proceeded from nothing but the constraint of holding your
Laughter. Did you chide me for not putting a stronger Lace in your Stays, when
you had broke one as strong as a Hempen Cord, with containing a violent Tihee
at a smutty Jest in the last Play.


Go, go, you're a naughty Girl; thy impertinent Chat has diverted us from our
business. I'm afraid Lovewell has missed us for want of the Sign: -- But whom
have we here? an odd figure! some Gentleman in disguise, I believe.


Had he a finer Suit on, I should believe him in disguise; for I fancy his
friends have only known him by that this Twelve-month.


His Mien and Air show him a Gentleman, and his Clothes demonstrate him a Wit.
He may afford us some sport. I have a Female inclination to talk to him.


Hold, Madam, he looks as like one of those dangerous Men of War you just now
mentioned as can be; you had best send out your Pinnace before to discover the
Enemy.


No, I'll hale him my self.

What, Sir, dreaming?


Yes, Madam.


Of what?


Of the Devil, and now my Dream's out.


What! do you Dream standing?


Yes faith, Lady, very often when my sleep's haunted by such pretty Goblins as
you. You are a sort of Dream I would fain be reading: I'm a very good
interpreter Indeed, Madam.


Are you then one of the Wise Men of the East?


No, Madam; but one of the Fools of the West.


Pray what do you mean by that?


An Irish-man, Madam, at your Service.


Oh horrible! an Irish-man! a mere Wolf-Dog, I protest.


Be not surprised Child; the Wolf-Dog is as well natured an Annimal as any of
your Country Bull-Dogs, and a much more fawning Creature, let me tell ye.


Pray good Caesar, keep off your Paws; no scarping acquaintance, for Heaven's
sake. Tell us some news of your Country; I have heard the strangest Stories, --
that the people wear Horns and Hoofs.


Yes, faith, a great many wear Horns: but we had that among other laudable
fashions, from London. I think it came over with your mode of wearing high
Topknots; for ever since, the Men and Wives bear their heads exalted alike.
They were both fashions that took wonderfully.


Then you have Ladies among you?


Yes, yes, we have Ladies, and Whores; Colleges, and Playhouses; Churches, and
Taverns; fine Houses, and Bawdy-houses; in short, every thing that you can
boast of, but Fops, Poets, Toads and Adders.,


But have you no Beau's at all?


Yes, they come over, like the Woodcoks, once a year.


And have your Ladies no Springes to catch 'em in?


No, Madam; our own Country affords us much better Wild-fowl. But they are
generally stripped of their feathers by the PIayhouse and Taverns; in both
which they pretend to be Critics; and our ignorant Nation imagines a full Wig
as infallible a token of a Wit as the Laurel.


Oh Lard! and here 'tis the certain sign of a Blockhead. But why no Poets in
Ireland, Sir!


Faith, Madam, I know not, unless St. Patrick sent them a packing with other
venomous Creatures out of Ireland. Nothing that carries a Sting in its Tongue
can live there. But since I have described my Country, let me know a little of
England, by a sight of your Face.


Come you to particulars first. Pray, Sir, unmasque, by telling who you are;
and then I'll unmasque, and show who I am.


You must dismiss your attendant then, Madam; for the distinguishing particular
of me is a Secret.


Sir, I can keep a Secret as well as my Mistress; and the greater the secrets
are, I love 'em the better.


Can't they be whispered, Sir?


Oh yes, Madam, I can give you a hint, by which you may understand 'em --


Sir, you're Impudent --


Nay, Madam, since you're so good at minding folks, have with you.


Help! help! help!



Villain, unhand the Lady, and defend thy self.


What! Knight-Errants in this Country! Now has the Devil very opportunely sent
me a Throat to cut; Pray Heaven his Pockets be well lined. --

Have at thee -- St. George for England. --

My Friend Lovewell?


My dear Roebuck!

Shall I believe my eyes?


You may believe your ears; 'Tis I be gad.


Why thy being in London is such a mystery, that I must have the evidence of
more senses than one to confirm me of its truth. -- But pray unfold the Riddle.


Why Faith 'tis a Riddle. You wonder at it before the Explanation, then wonder
more at your self for not guessing it. -- What is the Universal cause of the
continued Evils of mankind?


The Universal cause of our continued evil is the Devil sure.


No, 'tis the Flesh, Ned. -- That very Woman that drove us all out of Paradise,
has sent me a packing out of Ireland.


How so?


Only tasting the forbidden Fruit: that was all.


Is simple Fornication become so great a Crime there, as to be punishable by no
less than Banishment?


I gad, mine was double Fornication, Ned -- The Jade was so pregnant to bear
Twins; the fruit grew in Clusters; and my unconscionable Father, because I was
a Rogue in Debauching her, would make me a fool by Wedding her: But I would not
marry a Whore, and he would not own a disobedient Son, and so --


But was she a Gentlewoman?


Pshaw! No, she had no Fortune. She wore indeed a Silk Manteau and High-Head;
but these are grown as little signs of Gentility now a-days, as that is of
Chastity.


But what necessity forced you to leave the Kingdom?


I'll tell you. -- To shun the insulting Authority of an incensed Father, the
dull and often-repeated advice of impertinent Relations, the continual clamours
of a furious Woman, and the shrill bawling of an ill natured Bastard. -- From
all which, Good Lord deliver me.


And so you left them to Grand Dada! -- Ha, ha, ha.


Heaven was pleased to lessen my affliction, by taking away the she Brat; but
the the other is, I hope, well, because a brave Boy, whom I christened Edward,
after thee, Lovewell; I made bold to make my man stand for you, and your Sister
sent her Maid to give her name to my Daughter.


Now you talk of my Sister, pray how does she?


Dear Lovewell, a very Miracle of Beauty and Goodness. -- -- But I don't like
her.


Why?


She's Virtuous; -- and I think Beauty and Virtue are as ill joined as Lewdness
and Ugliness.


But I hope your Arguments could not make her a Proselyte to this Profession.


Faith I endeavoured it; but that Plaguy Honour -- Damn it for a whim -- Were
it as honourable for Women to be Whores, as men to be Whore-masters, we should
have Lewdness as great a Mark of Quality among the Ladies, as 'tis now among
the Lords.


What! do you hold no innate Principle of Virtue in Women?


I hold an innate principle of Love in them: Their Passions are as great as
ours, their Reason weaker. We admire them and consequently they must us. And I
tell thee once more, That had Women no safe guard but your innate Principle of
Virtue, honest George Roebuck would have lain with your Sister, Ned, and should
enjoy a Countess before night.


But methinks, George, 'twas not fair to tempt my Sister.


Methinks 'twas not fair of thy Sister, Ned, to tempt me. As she was thy
Sister, I had no design upon her: but as she's a pretty Woman, I could scarcely
forbear her, were she my own.


But, upon serious reflection, Could not you have lived better at home, by
turning thy Whore into a Wife, than hear by turning other Men's Wives into
Whores? There are Merchants Ladies in London, and you must trade with them, for
ought I see.


Ay, but is the Trade open? Is the Manufacture encouraged, old Boy?


Oh, wonderfully! -- a great many poor people live by it. Tho the Husbands are
for engrossing the Trade, the Wives are altogether for encouraging Interlopers.
But I hope you have brought some small Stock to set up with.


The greatness of my wants, which would force me to discover 'em, makes me
blush to own 'em. Ned, I had a great Journey from Ireland hither, and would
burden my self with no more than just necessary Charges.


Oh, then you have brought Bills?


No, faith. Exchange of Money from Dublin hither is so unreasonable high, that
--


What?


That -- Zoons I have not one farthing. -- Now you understand me?


No faith, I never understand one that comes in forma pauperis; I have not studied
the Law so long for nothing. -- But what prospect can you propose of a supply?


I'll tell you. When you appeared, I was just thanking my Stars for sending me
a Throat to eut, and consequently a Purse: But my knowledge of you prevented me
of that way, and therefore I think you're obliged in return to assist me by
some better means. You were once an honest Fellow; but so long study in the
Inns may alter a Man strangely, as you say.


No, dear Roebuck, I'm still a friend to thy Virtues, and esteem thy Follies as
Foils only to set them off. I did but rally you; and to convince you, here are
some Pieces, share of what I have about me; Take them as earnest of my farther
supply, you know my Estate sufficient to maintain us both, if you will either
restrain your Extravagancies, or I retrench my Necessaries.


Thy profession of kindness is so great, that I could almost suspect it of
design. -- But come, Friend, I am heartily tired with the fatigue of my
Journey, besides a violent Fit of Sickness, which detained me a Month at
Coventry, to the exhausting my Health and Money. Let me only recruit by a
relish of the Town in Love and a Bottle, and then --

Oh Heavens! and Earth!


What's the matter, Man?


Why! Death and the Devil; or, what's worse, a Woman and a Child. -- -- Oons!
don't you see Mrs. Trudge with my Bastard in her Arms crossing the field
towards us? -- Oh the indefatigable Whore to sollow me all the way to London!


Mrs. Trudge! my old acquaintance!


Ay, ay, the very same; your old acquaintance; and for ought I know, you might
have clubbed about getting the Brats.


'Tis but reasonable then I should pay share at the Reckoning. I'll help to
provide for her; in the mean time, you had best retire. -- Brush, conduct this
Gentlemen to my Lodgings, and run from thence to Widow Bullfinch's, and provide
a Lodging with her for a Friend of mine. -- Fly, and come back presently. --
Turk to the Field, attended by his Concubines and Children; and I'm afraid
these are but parts of his Retinue. -- But hold -- I shall not be able to sustain
the shock of this Woman's Fury. I'll withdraw till she has discharged her first
Volley, then surprise her.

Hush, hush, hush. -- And indeed it was a young Traveller. -- And what would it
say? It says that Daddy is a false Man, a cruel Man, and an ungrateful Man. --
In troth so he is, my dear Child. -- What shall I do with it, poor Creature? --
Hush, hush, hush. -- Was ever poor Woman in such a lamentable condition?
immediately after the pains of one Travel to undergo the fatigues of another?
-- But I'm sure he can never do well; for tho l can't find him, my curses, and
the misery of this Babe, will certainly reach him.


Methinks I should know that voice. --

What! Mrs. Trudge! and in London! whose brave Boy hast thou got there?


Oh Lord! Mr. Lovewell! I'm very glad to see you, -- and yet am ashamed to see
you. But indeed he promised to marry me, Lovewell, that he's such a handsome
Man, and has so many ways of insinuating, that the frailty of Woman's Nature
could not resist him.


What's all this? -- A handsome Man? Ways of insinuating? Frailty of Nature? --
I don't understand these ambiguous terms.


Ah, Mr. Lovewell! I'm sure you have seen Mr. Roebuck, and I'm sure it would be
the first thing he would tell you. I refer it to you, Mr. Lovewell, if he is
not an ungrateful man, to deal so barbarously with any Woman that had used him
so civilly. I was kiuder to him than I would have been to my own born Brother.


Oh then I find kissing goes by favour, Mrs. Trudge.


Faith you're all alike, you men are alike. -- Poor Child! he's as like his own
Dadda, as if he were spit out of his mouth. See, Mr. Lovewell, if he has not
Mr. Roebuck's Nose to a hair; and you know he has a very good Nose; and the
little Pigsny has Mamma's Mouth. Oh the little Lips:! -- and 'tis the best
natured little dear -- -- Lovewell, I believe the Child knows you.


Ha, ha, ha! Well, I will give it my Blessing.

Come, Madam, I'll first settle you in a Lodging and then find the false Man,
as you call him. --



The false man is found already. -- Was there ever such a lucky discovery? --
My care for his preservation brought me back, and now behold how my kindness is
returned! -- Their Fighting was a downright trick to frighten me from the
place, thereby to afford him opportunity of entertaining his Whore and Brat.


Your conjecture, Madam, bears a colour; for looking back, I could perceive 'em
talking very familiarly; so that they could not be strangers as their pretended
^uarrel would intimate.


'Tis all true as he is false. -- What! slighted! despised! my honourable Love
trucked for a Whore! Oh Villain! Epitome of thy Sex! -- But I'll be revenged.
I'll marry the first man that asks me the Question; nay, though he be a
disbanded Soldier, or a poor Poet, or a senseless Fop; Nay though Impotent I'll
Marry him.


Oh Madam! that s to be revenged on your self.


I care not, Fool! I deserve punishment for my Credulity, as much as he for his
Falsehood And you deserve it too, Minx; your persuasions drew me to this
Assignation: I never loved the false man.


That's false, I'm sure.


But you thought to get another piece of Gold. We shall have him giving you
Money on the same score he was so liberal to his Whore just now.



So much for Friendship -- now for my Love. -- I have not transgressed much. --
Oh, there she is. -- Oh my Angel!


Oh thou Devil! --


Not unless you damn me, Madam.


You're damned already; you're a Man.


You're a Woman, I'll be sworn. -- Hey day! what giddy Female Planet rules now!
By the Lord, these Women are like their Maidenheads, no sooner found than lost.
-- Here, Brush, run after Pindress, and know the occasion of this. --

-- Stay, come back -- Zoons, I'm a fool.


That's the first wise word you have spoke these two months.


Trouble me with your untimely Jests, Sirrah, and I'll. -- --


Your Pardon, Sir; I'm in down-right earnest. -- 'Tis less Slavery to be
Apprentice to a famous Clap-Surgeon, than to a Lover. He falls out with me,
because he can't fall in with his Mistress. I can bear it no longer.


Sarrah, what are you mumbling?


A short Prayer before I depart, Sir. -- -- I have been these three years your
Servant, but now, Sir, I'm your humble Servant.


Hold, you shall not leave me.


Sir, you can't be my Master.


Why so?


Because you're not your own Master; yet one would think you might, for you
have lost your Mistress. Oons, Sir, let her go, and a fair riddance. Who throws
away a Tester and a Mistress, loses six-pence. That little Pimping Cupid is a
blind Gunner. Had he shot as many Darts as I have carried Billets deux, he
would have laid her kicking with her heels up e're now. In short, Sir, my
Patience is worn to the stumps with attending; my Shoes and Stockings are upon
their last Legs with trudging between you. I have sweat out all my moisture of
my hand with palming your clammy Letters upon her. I have --


Hold, Sir, your trouble is now at an end, for I design to marry her.


And have you courted her these three years for nothing but a Wife?


Do you think, Raskal, I would have taken so much pains to make her a Miss?


No, Sir; the tenth part on it would have done. -- But if you are resolved to
marry, God b'w'ye.


What's the matter now, Sirrah!


Why, the matter will be, that I must then Pimp for her. -- -- Hark ye, Sir,
what have you been doing all this while, but teaching her the way to Cuckold
ye? -- -- Take care, Sir; look before you leap. You have a ticklish point to
manage. -- Can you tell, Sir, what's her quarrel to you now?


I can't imagine. I don't remember that ever I offended her.


That's it Sir. She resolves to put your easiness to the Test now, that she may
with more security rely upon t^ hereafter. -- Always suspect those Women of
Designs that are for searching into the humours of their Courtiers; for they
certainly intend to try them when they're married.


How came thou such an Engineer in Love?


I have sprung some Mines in my time, Sir; and since I have trug'd, so long
about your amorous Messages, I have more Intrigue in the sole of my feet, than
some Blockheades in their whole Body.


Sirrah, have you ever discovered any behaviour in this Lady, to occasion this
suspicious discourse?


Sir, has this Lady ever discovered any behaviour of yours to occasion this
suspicious quarrel? I believe the Lady has as much of the innate Principle of
Virtue (as the Gentleman said) as any Woman: But that Baggage her Attendant is
about ravishing her Ladies Page every hour. 'Tis an old saying, Like Master,
like Man; why not as well, like Mistress, like Maid?


Since thou art for trying humours, have with you Madam Lucinda. Besides, so
fair an opportu^ity offers, that Fate seemed to design it. -- Have you left the
Gentleman at my Lodgings?


Yes, Sir, and sent a Porter to his Inn to bring his things thither.


That's right -- Love like other Diseases, must sometimes have a desperate
Cure. The Shool of Venus imposes the strist Diseipline; And awful Cupid is a
chastning God; He whips severely.


No, not if we kiss the Rod.



Of my Conscience the fawning Creature loves you.


Ay, the constant effects of debauching a Woman are, that she infallibly loves
the Man for doing the business, and he certainly hates her. -- But what Company
is she like to have at this same Widows, Brush?


Oh the best of Company, Sir; a Poet lives there, Sir.


They're the worst Company, for they're ill natured.


Ay, Sir, but it does no body any harm; for these fellows that get Bread by
their Wits, are always forced to eat their words. They must be good natured,
'spight of their Teeth, Sir. 'Tis said he pays his Lodging by cracking some
smutty Jests with his Landlady overnight; for she's very well pleased with his
natural parts.


What other Lodgers are there?


One newly entr'd, a young Squire, just come from the University.


A. mere Perigatetick I warrant him. -- A very pretty Family. A Heathen
Philosopher, an English Poet, and an Irish Whore. Had the Landlady but a
Highland Piper to join with 'em, she might set up for a Collection of Monsters.
-- Any body within.


Yes, you are, my Friend. All my thoughts were employed about you. In short, I
have one request to make, That you would renounce your loose wild Courses, and
lead a sober life, as I do.


That I will, if you'll grant me a Boon.


You shall have it, be it what it will.


That you would relinquish your precise sober behaviour, and live like a
Gentleman as I do.


That I can't grant.


Then we're off; Tho should your Women prove no better than your Wine, my
Debaucheries will fall of themselyss, for want of Temptation.


Our Women are worse than our Wine; our Claret has but little of the French
in it, but our Wenches have the Devil and all: They are both adulterated, To
prevent the inconveniences of which, I ll provide you an honourable Mistress.


An honourable Mistress! what's that?


A virtuous Lady, whom you must Love and Court; the surest method of reclaiming
you. -- As thus. -- Those superfluous Pieces you throw away in Wine may be laid
out. --


To the Poor?


No, no. In Sweet Powder, Cravats, Garters, Snuff-boxes, Ribbons, Coach-hire,
and Chair-hire. Those idle hours which you mispend with lewd sophisticated
Wenches, must be dedicated --


To the Church?


No, To the innocent and charming Conversation of your virtuous Mistress; by
which means, the two most exorbitant Debaucheries, Drinking and Whoring will be
retrenched.


A very fine Retrenchment truly? I must first despise the honest jolly
Conversation at the Tavern, for the foppish, affected, dull, insipid
Entertainment at the Chocolate-house; must quit my freedom with ingenious
Company, to harness my self to Foppery among the fluttering Crowd of Cupid's
Livery-boys. -- The second Article is, That I must resign the Company of lewd
Women for that of my Innocent Mistress; That is, I must change my easy natural
sin of Wenching, to that constrained Debauchery of Lying and Swearing. -- The
many Lies and Oaths that I made to thy Sister, will go nearer to damn me, than
if I had enjoyed her a hundred times over.


Oh Roebuck! your Reason will maintain the contrary, when you're in Love.


That is, when I have lost my Reason, Come, come; a Wench a Wench! a soft,
white, easy, consenting Creature! -- Prithee Ned leave Musteness, and show me
the Varities of the Town.


A Wench is the least Variety -- Look out -- See what a numerous Train trip
along the street there --


Oh Venus! all these fine stately Creatures!

Fair you well, Ned. --

Prithee let me go: 'Tis a deed of Charity; I'm quite starved. I'll just take a
snap, and be with you in the twinkling. -- As you're my friend.-I must go.


Then we must break for altogether? --

-- He that will leave his friend for a Whore, I reckon a Commoner in
Friendship as in Love.


If you saw how ill that serious face becomes a Fellow of your years, you would
never wear it again. Youth is taking in any Masqurade but Gravity.


Tho Lewdness suits much worse with your Circumstances, Sir.


Ay these Circumstances. Damn these Circumstances. -- There he has Hamstring'd
me. This Poverty! how it makes a Man sneak! -- Well prithee let's know this
Devilish Virtuous Lady. By the Circumstances of my Body I shall soon be off or
on with her.


Know then, for thy utter Condemnation, that she's a Lady of Eighteen,
Beatiful, Witty, and nicely Virtuous.


A Lady of Eighteen! Good. -- Beautiful! Better. -- Witty! -- Best of all -- --
Now with these three Qualifications, if she be nicely Virtuous, then I'll
henceforth adore every thing that wears a Petycoat. -- Witty and Virtuous! ha,
ha, ha. Why, 'tis as inconsistant in Ladies as Gentlemen; And were I to debauch
one for a Wager, her Wit should be my Bawd. -- Come, come; the forbidden Fruit
was plucked from the Tree of Knowledge, Boy.


Right. -- But there was a cunninger Devil than you, to tempt. -- I'll assure
you George, your Rhetoric would fail you here; she would worst you at your own
Weapons.


Ay, or any Man in England, if she be Eighteen as you say:


Have a care, friend, this Satyr will get you torn in pieces by the Females;
you'll fall into Orpheus's fate.


Orpheus was a blockhead, and deserved his fate.


Why?


Because he went to Hell for a Wife.


This happens right. --


Ay, but Ned, my Circumstances, my Circumstances. --


Come, you shall not want Money.


Then I dare attempt it. Money is the Sinews of Love, as of War. Gad friend,
thou't the bravest Pimp I ever heard of. -- Well, give me directions to sail
by, the name of my Port, laden my Pockets, and then for the Cape of Good Hope.


You need no directions as to the manner of Courtship.


No; I have seen some few Principles, on which my Courtship's founded, which
seldom fail. To let a Lady rely upon my modesty, but to depend my self
altogether upon my Impudence; To use a Mistress like a Deity in public, but
like a Woman in private: To be as cautious then of asking an Impertinent
question, as afterwards of telling a story; remembering, that the Tongue is the
only Member that can hurt a Ladies Honour, tho touched in the tender part.


Oh, but to a Friend, George; you'll tell a Friend your success?


No, not to her very self; it must be as private as Devotion. -- No blabbing,
unless a squalawling Brat peeps out to tell Tales. -- But where lies my Course?


Brush shall show you the house; the Ladies name is Lucinda; her Father and
Mother dead; she's Heiress to Twelve hundred a year: But above all, observe
this: She has a Page which you must get on your side; 'Tis a very pretty Boy; I
presented him to the Lady about a fortnight ago; he's your Country-man too; he
brought me a Letter from my Sister, which I have about me. -- Here you may read
it.


Ay, 'tis her hand; I know it well; and I almost bush to see it.

Dear Brother, A Lady of my acquaintance lately dying, begged me, as her last
request, to provide for this Boy, who was her Page. I hope I have obeyed my
Friend's last Command, and obliged a Brother, by sending him to you. Pray
dispose of him as much as you can for his advantage. All friends are will, and
I am

Your affectionate Sister, Leanthe.



All friends are well? Is that all? not a word of poor Roebuck. -- I wonder she
mentioned nothing of my misfortunes to her Brother. But she has forgot me
already. True Woman still. -- Well, I may excuse her, for I'm making all the
haste I can to forget her.


Be sure you have an eye upon him, and come to me presently at Widow Bulfinch's
-- (To Brush.) -- Well, George, you won't communicate your success?


You may guess what you please. -- I'm as merry after a Mistress as after a
Bottle. -- All Air; brimful of Joy, like a Bumper of Claret, smiling and
sparkling.


Then you'll certainly run over.


No, no; nor shall I drink to any body. --


Tal -- dal -- deral -- One -- Two. -- Tal -- dal -- deral -- Coupe -- -- Tal
-- dal -- deral -- Very well -- Tal -- dal -- deral -- Wrong. -- Tal -- dal --
deral Toes out -- Tal -- dal -- deral -- Observe Time: -- Very well indeed,
Sir; you shall dance as well as any Man in England: you have an excellent
disposition in your Limbs, Sir: -- Observe me, Sir.

And so forth, Sir.


I'm afraid we shall disturb my Landlady.


Landlady! you must have a care of that; she'll never pardon you. -- Landlady!
-- Every Woman, from a Countess to a Kitchen-Wench, is Madam; and every Man,
from a Lord to a Lackey, Sir.


Must I then lose my Title of Esquire, 'Siquire Mockmode?


By all means, Sir; Esquire and Fool are the same thing here.


That's very Comical, faith! -- But is there an Act of Parliament for that, Mr.
Rigadoon? -- Well, since I can't be a Esquire, I'll do as well: I have a great
Estate, and want only to be a great Beau, to qualify me either for a Knight or
a Lord. By the Universe, I have a great mind to bind my self Apprentice to a
Beau. -- Could I but dance well, push well, play upon the Flute, and swear the
most modish Oaths, I would set up for Quality with e're a young Nobleman of 'em
all. -- Pray what are the most fashionable Oaths in Town? Zoons, I take it, is
a very becoming one.


Zoons is only used by the disbanded Officers and Bullies: but Zauns is the
Beaux pronuncation.


Zauns --


Zauns --


Yes, Sir, we swear as we Dance; smooth, and with a Cadence. -- Zauns! -- 'Tis
harmonious, and pleases the Ladies, because 'tis soft. -- Zauns, Madam. -- is
the only Compliment our great Beaux pass on a Lady.


But suppose a Lady speaks to me? what must I say?


Nothing, Sir. -- you must take Snush, Grin, and make her an humble Cringe --
Thus:


O Lard, Sir, you must never sneeze; 'tis as unbecoming after Orangere, as
Grace after Meat.


I thought People took it to clear the Brain.


The Beaux have no Brains at all, Sir; their Skull is a perfect Snush-box; and
I heard a Physician swear, who opened one of 'em, that the three divisions of
his head were filled with Orangere, Bourgamot, and Plain-Spanish.


Zauns I must sneeze --


Of fie, Mr. Mockmode! what a rustical expression that is. -- Bless me! -- you
should upon all such occasions cry, Them me. You would be as nauseous to the
Ladies, as one of the old Patriarks, if you used that obsolete expression.


I find that going to the Devil is very modish in this Town -- Pray, Master,
Dancing-Master, what Religion may these Beaux be of?


A sort of Indians in their Religion, They worship the first thing they see in
the Morning.


What's that Sir?


Their own shadows in the Glass; and some of 'em such hellish Faces, that may
frighten 'em into Devotion.


Then they are Indians right, for they worship the Devil.


Then you shall be as great a Beau as any of 'em. But you must be sure to mind
your Dancing.


Is not Music very convenient too? -- I can play the Bells, and Maiden Fair
already. Alamire, Bifabemi, Cesolfa, Delasol, Ela, Effaut, Gesolreut. I have
'em all by heart already. But I have been plaguily puzzled about the Etymology
of these Notes; and certainly a Man cannot arrive at any perfection, unless he
understands the derivation of the Terms.


O Lard, Sir! That's easy. Effaut and Gesolreut were two famous German
Musicians, and the rest were Italians.


But why are they only Seven?


From a prodigious great Bass-Vial with seven Strings, that played a Jig called
the Music of the Spheres: The seven Planets were nothing but Fiddle-strings.


Then your Stars have made you a Dancing-master?


O Lard, Sir! Pythagoras was a Dancing-master; he shows the Creation to be a
Country-Dance, where after some antic Changes, all the parts fell into their
places, and there they stand ready, till the next squeak of a Philosopher's
Fiddle sets 'em a Dancing again.


Sir, here comes the pushing Master.


Then I'll be gone. But you must have a care of Pushing, 'twill spoil the
niceness of your steps. Learn a flourish or two; and that's all a Beau can have
occasion for.



Oh, Mr. Nimblewrist, I crave you ten thousand pardons, by the Universe.


That was a home thrust. Good Sir. I hope ya're for a breathing this Morning.
Mockmode, you will make an excellent Swords Man; y're as well shaped for
Fencing as any Man in Europe. The Duke of Burgundy is just of your Make; he
pushes the finest of any Man in France. -- Sa, sa -- like Lightning.


I'm much in Love with Fencing: But I think Back-Sword is the best play.


Oh Lard Sir! -- Have you ever been in France, Sir?


No, Sir; but I understand the Geography of it. -- France is bounded on the
North with the Rhine.


No, Sir, a Frenchman is bounded on the North with Quart, on the South with
Tierce, and so forth. 'Tis a Noble Art, Sir; and every one that wears a. Sword
is obliged by his Tenure to learn. The Rules of Honour are engraved on my-Hilt,
and my Blade must maintain 'em: My Sword's my Herald, and the bloody Hand my
Coat of Arms.


And how long have you professed this Noble Art, Sir?


Truly, Sir, I served an Apprenticeship to this Trade, Sir.


What are ye a Corporation then?


Yes, Sir; the Surgeons have taken us into their's, because we make so much
work for 'em. -- But, as I was telling you, Sir, I professed this Science till
the Wars broke out: But then, when every body got Commissions, I put in for
one, served the Campaigns in Flanders; and when the Peace broke out, was
disbanded; so among a great many other poor Rogues, am forced to betake to my
old Trade. Now the public Quarrel's ended, I live by private Ones. I live
still by dying, as the song goes, Sir. While we have English Courages,
French-Honour, and Spanish Blades among us, I shall live, Sir.


Surely your sword and skill did the King great service a broad.


Yes, Sir, I killed above fifteen of our own Officers by Private Duels in the
Camp, Sir; killed 'em fairly; killed 'em thus, Sir. -- Sa, sa, sa, sa. Parry,
parry, parry, --


What's the name of that Thrust, pray, Sir?


Oh Lard, Sir, he did not touch me; not in the least, Sir. The Foil was
cracked, a palpable crack.


A very palpable crack truly. Your Skull is only cracked, palpably cracked,
that's all.


Well, Sir, if you please to teach me my Honours -- My Dancing-Master has
forbid me any more, lest I should discompose my steps.


Your Dancing-Master is a Blockhead, Sir.



I forgot my Gloves, and so --


Oh Sir, he calls you Blockhead, by the Universe.


Zauns, Sir --


Zoons, Sir.


I have more Wit in the sole of my foot then you have in your whole body.


Ay, Sir, you Caperers daunce-all your Brains into your heels, which makes you
carry such empty Noddles. Your Rational's reversed, carrying your
understandings in your Legs. Your Wit is the perfect Antipodes to other Men's.


And what are you good Monsieur, sa, sa? Stand upon your Guard Mr Mockmode,
he's the greatest falsify in his Art; he'll fill your head so full of French
Principles of Honour, that you won't have one of Honesty left. His Breast-plate
there he calls the But of Honour, at which all the Fools in the Kingdom shoot,
and not one can hit the Mark.


You talk of Robin Hood, who never shot in his Bow, Sir. -- You Dancers are the
Battledoors of the Nation, that toss the light Foppish Shuttlecocks to and
again, to get your selves in heat. -- Have a care, Mr. Mockmode, this Fellow
will make a mere Grasshopper of you. -- Sir, you're the grand Pimp to Foppery
and Lewdness; and the Devil and a Dancing-Master, Dance a Corante over the
whole Kingdom.


A Pimp, Sir! what then, Sir? I engage Couples into the Bed of Love, but you
match 'em in the Bed of Honour. We only juggle People out of their Chastity,
but you cheat 'em out of their Lives. We shall have you, Mr. Mockmode, grinning
in the Bed of Honour, as if you. laughed at the Fool who must be hanged for
you. -- Which is best, Mr. Nimblewrist, an easy Minuet, or a Tyhurn Jig?


Don't provoke my sword, Sir, least that Art you so revile should revenge it
self; for every one of you that live by Dancing should die by Pushing, Sir.


And every Man that lives by Pushing, should die Dancing, I take it.


Zoons, Sir! what do ye mean?


Nothing, Sir; -- Tal -- dal -- deral. --

This takes the Ladies, Mr. Mockmode; this runs away with all the great
Fortunes in Town. Though you be a Fool, a Fop, a Coward, Dance well, and you
Captivate the Ladies. The moving a man's Limbs pliantly, does the business. If
you want a Fortune, come to me -- Tal -- dal -- deral --


No, no, to me, Sir. -- -- sa, sa, -- does your business soonest with a Woman.
A clean and manly extension of all your parts -- -- Ha -- Carrying a true
point, is the matter. -- Sa, sa, sa, sa. -- Defend your self.



Oh goodness! what a Room's here! Could not these fellows wipe their feet
before they came up. And here's such a tripping and such a stamping, that they
have broke down all the Ceiling. You Dancing and Fencing-Masters have been the
downful of many Houses. Get out of my Doors; my house was never in such a
pickle. -- You Country Gentlemen, newly come to London, like your own Spaniels
out of a Pond, must be shaking the Water off, and bespatter every body about
you. --


Zauns, Madam --


He's tainted. These cursed Flies have blown upon him already.


Sa, sa -- Defend Flankonade, Madam.


Ah, Mr. Mockmode, my Pushing and Dancing days are done, But I had a Son, Mr.
Mockmode, that would match you -- Ah my poor Robin! -- he died of an Apoplexy;
he was as pretty a young man as ever stepped in a Black-Leather Shoe: he was as
like you, Mr. Mockmode; as one Egg is like another; he died like an Angel --
But I am sure he might have recovered but for the Physicians -- oh these
Doctor's! these Doctors!


Bless the Doctors, I say; for I believe they killed my honest old Father.


Ay, that's true. If my Robin had left me an Estate, I should have said so too.
--


Zauns, Madam, you must not be melancholy, Madam.


Well, Sir, I hope you'll give us the Beverage of your fine Clothes. I'll
assure you, Sir, they fit you very well, and I like your fancy mightily.


Ay, ay, Madam. But what's most modish for Beverage? for I suppose the fashion
of that alters always with the Clothes.


The Taylors are the best Judges of that -- But Champaign, I suppose.


Is Champaign a Taylor? Now methinks that were a fitter name for a Wig-maker.
-- I think they call my Wig a Campaign.


You're clear out, Sir, clear out. Champaign is a fine Liquor, which all you
great Beaux drink to make 'em witty.


Witty! Oh by the Universe I must be witty. I'll drink nothing else; I never
was witty in all my life. I love Jokes dearly. -- Here, Club, bring us a Bottle
of what do ye call it? the witty Liquor.


But I thought all you that were bred at the University should be Wits
naturally.


The quite contrary, Madam, there's no such thing there. We dare not have Wit
there, for fear of being counted Rakes. Your solid Philosophy is all read
there, which is clear another thing. But now I will be a Wit by the Universe. I
must get acquainted with the great Poets. Landlady, you must introduce me.


Oh dear me, Sir! would you ruin me? I introduce you! no Widow dare be seen
with a Poet, for fear she should be thought to keep him.


Keep him! what's that? They keep nothing but Sheep in the Country; I hope they
don't fleece the Wits.


Alas, Sir, they have no Fleeces; there's a great cry, but little Wool.
However, if you would be acquainted with the Poets, I can prevail with a
Gentleman of my acquaintance to introduce you; 'Tis one Lovewell, a fine
Gentleman, that comes here sometimes.


Lovewell! By the Universe my Rival; I heard of him in the Country. This puts
me in mind of my Mistress. -- Zauns I'm certainly become a Beau already; for I
was so in love with my self, I quite forgot her. -- I have a Note in my
Pocket-book to find her out by. --

Six-pence for Washing. -- Two pence to the Maid. -- Six-pence for Snush -- One
Shilling for Buttered Ale-By the Universe I have lost the Directions. -- Hark
ye, Madam; Does this same Lovewell come often here, say you?


Yes, Sir, very often. -- There's a Lady of his acquaintance, a Lodger in the
house just now.


A Lady of his acquaintance a Lodger in the house just now? of his
acquaintance, do you say?


Yes, and a pretty Lady too.


And he comes often here, you say? By the Universe! should I happen to lodge in
the same house with my Mistress? I gad it must be the same. Can you tell the
Woman's Name? -- Stay -- Is her Name Lucinda?


Perhaps it may, Sir; but I believe she's a Widow, for she has a young Son,
I'm sure 'tis legitimately begotten, for 'tis the bravest Child you shall see
in a Summers-day; 'Tis not like one of our puling Brats of the Town here, born
with the Diseases of half a dozen Fathers about it.


By the Universe I don't remember whether my Mistress is Maid or Widow: But a
Widow, so much the Better; for all your London widows are devilish rich they
say. She came in a Coach, did she not, Madam?


Yes, Sir, yes.


Then 'tis infalliblly she. -- Does she not always go out in her Coach?


She has not stirred abroad since she came, Sir.


Oh, I was told she was very reserved, tho 'tis very much of a Widow. I have
often heard my Mother say, that sitting at home and silence were very becoming
in a Maid; and she has often chid my Sister Dorothy for gadding out to the
Meadows, and tumbling among the Cocks with the Haymakers. I gad I'm the most
lucky Son of a Whore; I was wrapped in the Tail of my Mothers Smock, Landlady.



Oh but this Lady, Sir. --


Madam here's a Gentleman below wants to speak with you instantly


With me, Child? Sir, I'll wait on you in a minut.



Is that the Witty Liquor? Come, fill the Glasses. Now that I have found my
Mistress, I must next find my Wits.


So you had need, Master; for those that find a Mistress, are generally out of
their Wits. --


Come, fill for your self.

But where's the Wit now Club? have you found it?


I gad Master I think 'tis a very good Jest.


What?


What! why, Drinking. You'll find, Master, that this same Gentleman in the
Straw Doublet, this same Will in the Wisp, is a Wit at the bottom. --


By the Universe now I have it; The Wit lies in the Jingling: All Wit consists
most in Jingling. Hear how the Glasses rhyme to one another.


What, Master, are these Wits so apt to clash?


Oh by the Universe, by the Universe this is Wit.

My Landlady is in the right. -- I have often heard their was Wit in breaking
Glasses. It would be a very good Joke to break the Flask now?


I find then that this same Wit is very britle Ware. -- But I think, Sir,
'twere no Joke to spill the Wine.


Why there's the Jest, Sirrah; all Wit consists in losing; there was never any
thing got by it. I fancy this same wine is all sold at Will's Coffee-house. Do
you know the way thither Sirrah? I long to see Mr. Comic and Mr. Tagrhine,
with the rest of 'em. I wonder how they look! Certainly these Poets must have
something extraordinary in their faces. Of all the Rarities of the Town, I long
to see nothing more than the Poets and Bedlam. -- Come in, Club; I must go
practice my Honours. -- Tal -- dal -- deral. --



Oh Mr. Lovewell! you come just in the nick; I was ready to spoil all, by
telling him that she was a Stranger, and just now come.


Well, dear Madam, be cautious for the future; 'tis the most fortunate chance
that ever befell me. 'Twere convenient we had the other lodgers of our side.


There's no body but Mr. Lyrick; and you had as safely tell a secret over a
Groaning Cheese, as to him.


How so?


Why you must know that he has been Lying-in these four months of a Play; and
he has got all the Muses about him; a parcel of the most tattling Gossips.


Come, come; no more words; but to our business. I will certainly reward you.
But have you any good hopes of its succeeding?


Very well of the 'Squire's side. But I'm afraid your Widow will never play her
part, she's so awkward, and so sullen.


Go you and instruct her, while I manage Affairs abroad.


She's always raving of one Roebuck. Prithee who is this same Roebuck? -- Ah,
Mr. Lovewell, I'm afraid this Widow of yours is something else at the bottom;
I'm afraid there has been a Dog in the Well.



So, Sirrah! where have you left the Gentleman?


In a friend's house, Sir.


What friend?


Why, a Tavern.


What took him there?


A Coach, Sir.


How do ye mean?


A Coach and Six, Sir, no less, I'll assure you, Sir.


A Coach and Six!


Yes, Sir, six Whores and a Carted Bawd. He picked 'em all up in the street,
and is gone with this splendid Retinue into the Sun by Covent-Garden. I asked
him what he meant? he told me, That he only wanted to Whet, when the very sight
of 'em turned my Stomach.


The fellow will have his swing, tho he hang for it. However, run to him, and
bid him take the name of Mockmode; call himself Mockmode upon all occasions;
and tell him that he shall find me here about Four in the afternoon, -- Ask no
questions, but fly. -- So. -- His usurping that name gives him a Title to Court
Lucinda, by which I shall discover her Inclinations to Mockmode, whose coming
to Town has certainly occasioned her quarrel with me; while I set the Hound
himself upon a wrong scent, and ten to one provide for Mistristess Trudge by
the bargain. 'Tis said, one can't be a Friend and a Lover.

But opposite to that, this Plot shall prove;
I'll serve my Friend by what assists my Love.


MEthinks this Livery suits ill my Birth: but slave to Love, I must not
disobey; his service is the hardest Vassalage, forcing the Powers Divine to lay
their Godships down, to be more Gods, more happy here below. -- Thus I, poor
Wanderer, have left my Country, disguised my self so much, I hardly know
whether this Habit or my Love be blindest; to follow one, perhaps, that loves
me not, tho every breath of his soft words was Passion, and every accent Love.
Oh Roebuck!



This is the Page, Love's Link-boy, that must light me the way. -- How now,
pretty Boy? has your Lady beaten you? ha? -- This Lady must be a Venus, for she
has got a Cupid in her Family. 'Tis a wondrous pretty Boy, --


Oh Heav'n's! is the Object real, or are my eyes false? Is that Roebuck, or am
I Leantbe? I am afraid he's not the same; and too sure I'm not my self. --


What offence could such pretty Innocence commit, to deserve a punishment to
make you cry?


Oh Sir! a wondrous offence.


What was it, my Child?


I pricked my Finger with a Pin, till I made it bleed.


Such little Boys as you, should have a care of sharp things.


Indeed, Sir, we ought; for it pricked me so deep that the sore went to my very
heart.


Poor Boy! -- here's a plaster for your sore Finger --


Sir, you had best keep it for a sore Finger.


Of my Conscience the Boy's witty, but not very wise in returning Gold. --
Come, come, you shall take it.


That's the fitter cure for my sore Finger. -- -- The same dear Lips still. Oh
that the Tongue within them were as true!


By Heavens this Boy has the softest pair of Lips I ever tasted. I ne'er found
before that Ladies kissed their Pages; but now if this Rogue were not too young,
I should suspect he were before-hand with me. I gad, I must kiss him again. --
Come, you shall take the Money.


Oh how he bribes me into Bribery; -- But what must I do whit this Money, Sir?


You must get a little mistress, and treat her with it.


Sir, I have one Mistress already; and they say no man can serve two Masters,
much less two Mistresses. How many Mistresses have you, pray?


Umh! -- I gad the Boy has pos'd me. -- How many, Child? -- Why, let me see. --
There was Mrs. Mary, Mrs. Margaret, Mrs. Lucy, Mrs. Susan, Mrs. Judy, and so
forth; to the number of five and twenty, or thereabouts.


Oh ye Powers! and did you love 'em all?


Yes, desperately. -- I would have drank and fought for any one of 'em. I have
sworn and lied to every one of 'em, and have lain with 'em all That's for your
Encouragement, Boy. Learn betimes, Youth; young Plants should be watered. Your
Smock face was made for a Chamber Utensil.


And did not one escape ye?


Yes, one did, -- the Devil take her.


What, don't you love her then?


No, faith; but I bear her an amorous grudge still; something between Love and
spite. -- I could kill her with kindness.


I don't believe it, Sir; you could not be so hard-hearted sure: Her honourable
Passion, I think, should please you best.


O Child! Boys of your age are continually reading Romances, filling your Heads
with that old bombast of Love and Honour: But when you come to my years, you'll
understand better things.


And must I be a false treacherous Villain, when I come to your years, Sir? Is
Falsehood and Perjury essential to the perfect state of manhood?


Pshaw, Children and old men always talk thus foolishly. -- you understand
nothing, Boy.


Yes, Sir, I have been in Love and much more than you, I perceive.


It appears then, that there's no service in the World so educating to a Boy,
as a Ladies. -- By Jove, this Spark may be older than I imagine. Hark ye, Sir;
do you never pull of your Ladies Shoes and Stockings? Do you never reach her the
-- Pincushion? Do you never sit on her bed-side, and sing to her? ha! -- Come,
tell me, that's my good Boy. --


Yes, I do sing her asleep sometimes.


But do you never waken her again?


No, but I constantly wake my self; my rest's always disturbed by Visions of
the Devil.


Who would imagine now that this young shaver could dream of a Woman so soon? --
But what Songs does your Lady delight in most?


Passionate ones, Sir; I'll sing you one of 'em, if you'll stay.


With all my heart, my little Cherubim. The Rogue is fond of showing his parts.
-- Come, begin.

How blessed are Lovers in diguise!
Like Gods, they see,
As I do thee,
Unseen by human Eyes.
Exposed to view.
I'm hid from you;
I'm altered, yet the same:
The dark conceals me,
Love reveals me;
Love, which lights me by its Flame.
Were you not false, you me would know;
For though your Eyes
Could not devise,
Your heart had told you so.
Your heart would beat
With eager heat,
And me by Sympathy would find:
True Love might see
One changed like me,
False Love is only blind.

Oh my little Angel in voice and shape --

I could wish my self a Female for thy sake.


You're much better as you are for my sake. --


Or if thou were a Woman, I would --


What would you? Marry me? would you marry me?


Marry you, Child? No, no; I love you too well for that,. you should not have
my hand, but all my Body at once. -- But to our business. Is your Lady at home.


My Lady! What business have you with my Lady, pray Sir?


Don't ask Questions. You know Mr. Lovewell?


Yes, very well. He's my great Friend, and one I would serve above all the
World -- but his Sister.


His Sister! -- Ha! that gives me a twinge for my Sin. -- Pray, Mr. Page, was
Leanthe well when you left her?


No, Sir; but wondrous melancholy, by the departure of a dear Friend of hers to
another World.


Oh that was the person mentioned in her Letter, whose departure occasioned
your departure for England.


That was the occasion of my coming, too sure, Sir. -- Oh, 'twas a dear Friend
to me! the loss makes me weep.


Poor tender-hearted Creature! -- But I still find there was not a word of me.
-- Pray, good Boy, let your Mistress know here's one to wait: on her.


Your business is from Mr. Lovewell, I suppose, Sir?


Yes, yes.


Then I'll go.


I've thrown my cast, and am fairly in for it. But an't I an impudent Dog? Had I
as much Gold in my Breeches, as Brass in my Face, I durst attempt a whole
Nunnery. This Lady is a reputed Virtue, of Good Fortune and Quality; I am a
Rakehelly Rascal not worth a Groat; and without any further Ceremony, am going
to Debauch her. -- But hold. -- She does not know that I'm this Rakehelly
Rascal, and I know that she's a Woman, one of eighteen too; Beautiful, Witty.
-- Of my Conscience upon second thoughts, I am not so very Impudent neither. --
Now as to my management, I'll first try the whining Addresses, and see if
she'll bleed in the soft Vein.



Have you any business with me, Sir?


Thus looked the forbidden Fruit, luscious and tempting. 'Tis ripe, and will
soon fall, if one will shake the Tree.


Have you any business with me, Sir? --


Yes, Madam, the business of mankind; To adore you. -- My Love, like my Blood,
circulates through my Veins, and at every pulse of my heart animates me with a
fresh Passion. -- Wonder not, Madam, at the power of your Eyes, whose painted
Darts have struck on a young and tender heart which they easily pierced, and
which unacustom'd to such wounds finds the smart more painful.

Oh Traitor! Just such words he spoke to me.


Hey day. I was never so attacked in all my Life. In love with me, Sir! Did you
ever see me before?


Never, by Jove. --

-- Oh, ten thousand times, Madam. Your lovely Idea is always in my view,
either asleep or awake, eating or drinking, walking, sitting or standing;
alone, or in Company, my fancy wholly feeds upon your dear Image, and every
thought is you. -- Now have I told about fifteen lies in a Breath.


I suppose, Sir, you are some conceited young Scribler, who has got the
benefits of a first Play in your Pocket, and are now going a Fortune hunting.


But why a Scribler, Madam? Are my Clothes so course, as if they were spun by
those lazy Spinsters the Muses? Does the parting of my Fore-top show so thin,
as if it resembled the two withered tops of Parnassus? Do you see any thing
peculiarly Whimsical or ill-natur'd in my Face? Is my Countenance strained, as
if my head were distorted by a Stranguary of Thought? Is there any thing
proudly, slovenly, or affectedly careless in my Dress? Do my hands look like
Paper moths? I think, Madam, I have nothing Poetical about me.


Yes, Sir, you have Wit enough to talk like a Fool; and are Fool enough to talk
like a Wit.


You called me Peot, Madam, and I know no better way of Revenge, than to
convince you that I am one by my Impudence. --


Then make me a Copy of Verses upon that, Sir.

How do ye like the Subject, Sir?


'Tis a very copious one.

-- It has made my Joll rhyme in my Head. This it is to be thought a Poet;
every Minx must be casting his Profession in his Teeth. -- What: Gone;


Ay, she knows that making Verses requires Solitude and Retirement.


She certainly was afraid I intended to beg leave to dedicate something. -- If
ever I make Love like a Poetical fool again, may I never receive any favour but
a Subject for a Copy of Verses.



I won't dismiss him thus; for fear he Lampoon me. -- Well, Sir, have you done
them?


Yes, Madam, will you please to read.


Oh Heaven I can never bear it.

I must devise some means to part 'em.


Sir, your Verses are too rough and constrained. However, because I gave the
occasion, I'll pardons what's past.


By the Lord she was angry only because I did not make the first offer to her
Lips.

-- Then, Madam, the Peace is concluded?


Yes, and therefore both parties should draw out of the Field.


Not 'till we make Reprisals; I make Peace with Sword in hand, Madam, and till
you return my heart, which you have taken, or your own in exchange, I will not
put up. And so, Madam, I proclaim open War again. --



Oh, Madam! yonder's poor little Crab, your Lap-Dog, has got his head between
two of the Window-bals, and is like to be strangled.


Oh Lard, my poor Crabby! I must run to the rescue of my poor Dog; I'll wait on
you instantly. -- Come, come, Page. -- Poor Grabby! --


Oh the Devil chock Crabby! -- Well, I find there's much more Rhetoric in the
Lips than in the Tongue. -- -- Had Buss been the first word of my Courtship, I
might have gained the Outworks by this. Impudence in Love, is like Courage in
War; tho Both blind Chances, because Women and Fortune rule them.



Sir, my Lady begs your pardon; there's something extraordinary happened, which
prevents her waiting on you, as she promised.


What has Monsieur Crabby rubbed some of the hairs off his Neck? Has he
disordered his pretty ears? she won't come again then?


No, Sir; you must excuse her.


Then I'll go be Drunk. -- Hark ye, Sirrah; I have half a dozen delicious
Creatures waiting for me at the Sun; you shall along with, me and have your
Chocie. I'll enter you into the School of Venus Child. 'Tis time you had lost
your Maiden-head, you're too old for Play-things.


Oh Heavens! I had rather he should stay then go there.

But why will you keep such Company, Sir?


Nay, if y're for Advice, farewell: Men of ripe understanding should always
despise What Babes only practise, and Dotards advise.


Wild as Winds, and unconfined as Air. -- Yet I may reclaim him. His follies
are weakly founded, upon the Principles of Honour, where the very Foundation
helps to undermine the Structure. How charming would Virtue look in him, whose
behaviour can add a Grace to the unseemliness of Vice!



What is the Gentleman gone?


Yes, Madam. He was instantly taken ill with a violent pain in his Stomach, and
was forced to hurry away in a Chair to his Lodging.


Oh poor Gentleman! He's one of those conceited fools that think no Female can
resist their Temptations. Blockheads, that imagine all Wit to consist in
blaspheming Heaven and Women. -- I'll feed his Vanity, but starve his Love.

And may all Coxcombs meet no better Hate,
Who doubt our Sex Virtue, or dare prompt our hate.

Two as good Lines as ever were written. --

I gad I shall maul these topping fellows. -- Says Mr. Lee,

Let there be not one Glimpse, one Starry spark,
But God's meet Gods, and justle in the Dark.
Says little Lyrick,
Let all the Lights be burnt out to a Snuff,
And Gods meet Gods, and play at Blind-man's buff.
Very well!
Let Gods meet Gods, and so -- fall out and cuff.
That's much mended. They're as noble Lines as ever were penn'p. Oh, here comes
my damned Muse; I'm always in the Humour of writing Elegy after a little of her
Inspiration.



Mr. Lyrick, what do you mean by all this? Here you have lodged two years in my
house, promised me Eighteen-pence a week for your Lodging, and I have ne'er
received eighteen farthings, not the value of that, Mr Lyrick


This living on Love is the dearest Lodging -- a Man's eternally dunned, tho
perhaps he have less of one ready Coin than the other. -- There's more trouble in
a Play than you imagine, Madam.


There's more trouble with a Lodger than you think, Mr. Lyrick.


First there's the decorum of Time.


Which you never observe, for you keep the worst hours of any Lodger in Town.


Then there's the exactness of Characters. --


And you have the most scandalous one I ever heard.


Then there's laying the Drama. --


Then you foul my Napkins and Towels. (...)


Then there are preparations of Incidents, working the Passions, Beauty of
Expression, Closeness of Plot, Justness of Place, Turn of Language, Opening the
Catastrophe. --


Then you wear out my Sheets, burn my Fire and Candle, dirty my House, eat my
Meat, destroy my Drink, wear out my Furniture -- I have lent you Money out of
my Pocket.


Was ever poor Rogue so ridden? If ever the Muses had a Horse, I am he. --
Faith Madam, poor Pegasus is Jaded.


Come, come, Sir, he shall not slip his Neck out of the Collar for all that. Money
I will have, and Money I must have; let your Play and you both be damned.


Well, Madam, my Bookseller is to bring me some twenty Guinea's for a few
Sheets of mine presently, which I hope will free me from your Sheets.


My Sheets, Mr. Lyrick! Pray what do ye mean? I'll assure you, Sir, my Sheets
are finer than any of your Muses spinning. -- Marry come up.


Faith you have spun me so fine, that you have almost cracked my Thread of
Life, as may appear by my Spindle-shanks.


Why sure -- Where was your Thalia, and your Melpomene, when the Tailor would
have stripped you of your Silk Waistcoat, and have clapped you on a Stone-doublet?
Would all your Golden Verse have paid the Sergeants Fees?


Truly, you freed me from Gaol, to confine me in a Dugeon; you did not ransom
me, but bought me as a slave; So, Madam, I'll purchase my freedom as soon as
possible. Flesh and Blood can't bear it.


Take your course, Sir. -- There were a couple of Gentlemen just now to enquire
for you; and if they come again, they shall not be put off with the old story of
your being abroad, I'll promise you that, Sir,


Zoons! if this Bookseller does not bring me Money --

Oh, Mr. Pamphlet, your Servant. Have you perused my Poems?


Yes, Sir, and there are some things very well, extraordinary well, Mr. Lyrick:
but I don't think'em for my purpose. -- Poetry's a mere Drug, Sir.


Is that because I take Physic when I write? Damn this costive fellow, now he
does not apprehend the Joke.


No, Sir; but your name does not recommend'em. One must write himself into a
Consumption before he gain Reputation.


That's the way to lye abed when his Name's up. Now I lye abed before I can
gain Reputation.


Why so ad^r?


Because I have scarcely any Clothes to put on. -- If ever man did Penance in a
White Sheet --


You stand only sometimes in a White Sheet for your offences with your
Landlady. Faith, I have often wondered how your Muse could take such flights,
yoked to such a Cartload as she is.


Oh, they are like the Irish Horses, they draw best by the Tail -- Have you
ever seen any of my Burlesque, Mr. Pamphlet? I have a Project of turning three
or four of our most topping fellows into Doggerel. As for Example; --

Conquest with Laurels has our Arms adorned,
And Rome in tears of Blood our anger mourned.
Now, Butchers with Rosemary have our Beef adorned.
Which has in Gravy Tears our Hunger mourned.
How do ye like it, Mr. Pamphlet, ha? -- Well --
Like Gods, we passed the rugged Alpine Hills;
Melted our way, and drove our hissing Wheels;
Through cloudy Deluges, Eternal Rills.
Now observe, Mr. Pamphlet; pray observe.
Like Razors keen, our Knives cut passage clean
Through Rills of Fat, and Deluges of Lean.

Very well, upon my Soul.


Hurled dreadful Fire and Vinegar infused.


Ay, Sir, Vinegar! how patly that comes in for the Beef, Mr. Lyrick! 'Tis all
wondrous fine indeed.


This is the most ingenious fellow of his Trade that I have seen; he
understands a good thing. --


No, Sir, Paper is so excessive dear that I dare not venture upon'em.


Well, because you're a Friend, I'll bestow'em upon you. -- Here, take'em all.
-- There's the hopes of a Dedication still.


I give you a thousand thanks, Sir; but I dare not venture the hazard; they'll
ne'er quit cost indeed, Sir.


This fellow is one of the greatest Blockheads that ever was Member of a
Corporation. -- How shall I be revenged?



Sir, there are two Men below desire to have the Honour of kissing your hand.


They must be Knaves or Fools, By their fulsome Complement. Hark ye --


Since you have got Company, Sir, I'll take my leave.


No, no, Mr. Pamphlet, by no means! we must drink before we part. Boy, a Pint
of Sack and a Toast. These are two Gentlemen out of the Country, who will be
for all the new things lately published; they'll be good Customers. -- Come,
sit down. -- You have not seen my Play yet? -- Here, take the Pen, and if you
see any thing amiss, correct it; I'll go bring'em up. -- -- Stay, lend me your
Hat and Wig, or I shall take cold going down Stairs.


This is a right Poetical Cap; 'tis Bays the outside, and the Lining Fustian.
--



Sir, you're the King's Prisoner.


That's a good Fancy enough, Mr. Lyrick. But pray don't interrupt me, I'm in
the best Scene. -- I gad the Drama is very well laid.


Come, Sir.


Well, well, Sir, I'll pledge ye. Prithee now good Mr. Lyrick do'nt disturb me.
--

And furious Lightnings brandished in her Eyes.
That's true Spirit of Poetry.


Zoons, Sir, do ye banter us?


Gentlemen -- I beg you pardon. How do ye like the City Gentlemen? If you have
any occasion for Books to carry into the Country, I can furnish you as well as
any man about Paul's. Where's Mr. Lyrick.


These Wits are damnable Cunning. I always have double Fees for Arresting one
of you Wits. All your Evasions won't do; we understand trap, Sir; you must not
think to catch old Birds with Chaff, Sir.


Zoons, Gentlemen, I'm not the Person; I'm a Freeman of the City; I have good
Effects, Gentlemen, good Effects. Do ye think to make a Fool of me I'm a
Bookseller, no Poet.


Ay, Sir, we know what you are by your Fools Cap there.


Yes, one of you Wits would have passed upon us for a Corncutter yesterday; and
was so like one, we had almost believed him.


Why Gentlemen, Gentlemen, Officers, have a little Patience, and Mr. Lyrick
will come up Stairs.


No, no; Mr. Lyrick shall go down Stairs. He would have us wait till some
Friends come into rescue him. Ah these Wits are Devilish Cunning. --



Ha, ha, ha. Very Poetical Faith; a good Plot for a Play, Mr. Mockmode; a
Bookseller bound in Calves-Leather. -- Ha, ha, ha. -- How they walked along
like the three Volumes of the English Rogue squeezed together on a shelf.


What was it, what was it, Mr. Lyrick?


Why, I am a States man, Sir. -- I can't but laugh, to think how they'll sponge
the sheet before the Errata be blotted out; and then how he'll hamper the Dogs
for false Imprisonment.


But pray what was the matter, Mr. Lyrick!


Nothing, Sir, but a Shurking Bookseller that owed me about Forty Guinea's for
a few lines. He would have put me off, so I sent for a couple of Bull-Dogs, and
Arrested him.


Oh Lord, Mr. Lyrick, Honesty's quite out of doors; 'tis a rare thing to find a
man that's a true Friend, a true Friend is a rare thing indeed! -- Mr. Lyrick,
will you be my Friend? I only want that Accomplishment. I have got a Mistress,
a Dancing and Fencing-Master; and now I want only a Friend, to be a fine
Gentleman.


Have you never had a Friend, Sir?


Yes, a very honest fellow; our Friendship commenced in the College-Cellar, and
we loved one another like two Brothers, till we unluckily fell out afterwards
at a Game at Tables.


I find then that neither of ye lost by the fet.

But my short acquaintance can't recommend me to such a Trust.


Pshaw! Acquaintance? -- You must be a man of Honour, as you're a Poet, Sir.


But what use would you make of a Friend, Sir?


Only to tell my Secreets too, and be my Second. -- Now, Sir, a Wit must be
best to keep a Secret, because what you say to one's prejudice will be thought
malice. Then you must have a Devilish deal of Courage by your Heroic Writing.
--

But know, that I alone am King of Me.

Heavens! sure the Author of that Line must be a plaguy stout fellow; it makes
me Valiant as Hector when I read it.


Sir, we stick to what we write as little as Divines to what they preach. --
Besides, Sir, there are other qualifications requisite in a Friend, he must
lend you Money. Now, Sir, I can't be that Friend, for I want forty Guinea's.


Sir, I can lend you fifty upon good security. -- 'Twas the last word my Father
spoke on his Death-bed, that I should never lend Money without security.


Fie, Sir! Security from a Friend, and a Man of Honour by his Profession too!


By the Universe, that's true, you are my Friend. Then I'll tell you a Secret
--


Now will this plaguy Wit turn my Nose out of Joint -- I was my Master's Friend
before, though I never found the knack of borowing Money; though I have received
some marks of his Friendship, some sound drubs about the Head and Shoulders, or
so. I have been bound for him too, in the Stocks, for his breaking Windows very
often.


Mr. Mockmode, you may be imposed upon. I would see this Lady you court. I know
Mr. Lovewell has a Mistress named Lucinda; but that she lodges in this house, I
much doubt.


Imposed upon. That's very Comical. -- Ha, ha, ha! you shall see, Sir; come. --
Pray Sir, you're my Friend.


Nay, pray; Indeed, Sir, I beg your

Pardon; you're a Esquire, Sir.


Zauns, Sir, you lie, I'm not a Fool; I'll take an affront from no man. --
Draw, Sir.


Draw, Sir. -- I gad I'll put his Nose out of joint now.


Unequal numbers, Gentlemen.


I'm only my Master's Friend, his Second, or so, Sir.


What's the matter, noble Squire?


You lie again, Sir. Zauns, draw. --


Ha! -- a blow! -- Essex, a blow -- yet I will be calm.


Zoons, draw, Sir.


Oh patience Heaven! -- Thou art my Friend still.


You lie, Sir.


Then thou art a Traitor, Tyant, Monster.


Zauns, Sir, you're a Son of a Whore, and a Rascal.


A Scribler.


Ah, ah, -- That stings home. -- Scribler!


Ay, Scribler, Ballad-maker.


Nay then -- I and the Gods will fight it with ye all.

France ne'er will comply
Till her Claret run dry;
Then let's pull away, to defeat her:
He hinders the Peace,
Who refuses this Glass,
And deserves to be hanged for a Traitor.
Now, my Mirmydons fall on; I have taken off the odds.
Dub a dub, dub a dub, to the Battle.
Zoons Gentlemen, why don't ye fight? -- Blood fight. Oblige me so far to fight
a little; I long to see a little sport.


Sir, I scorn to show sport to any man.


And so do I, by the Universe.


And I, by the Universe:


I shall take another time.


Here Rascal, take your Chopping-knife, -- gives Club his Sword. and bring me a
Joint of that Coward's flesh for your Masters Supper. -- Fly, Dog. --


Auh! -- This fellow's likeliest to put my Nose out of joint.


Now, Sir, tell me, how you durst be a Coward?


Coward, Sir? I'm a Man of a great Estate, Sir; I have five thousand Acres of
as good fighting ground as any in England, good Terrafirma, Sir, Coward, Sir!
Have a care what you say, Sir. -- My Father was a Parliament Man, Sir, and I
was bred at the College, Sir.


Oh then I know your Genealogy; your Father was a Senior-Fellow, and your
Mother was an Air-pump. You were suckl'd by Platonic Idea's, and you have some
of your Mothers Milk in your Nose yet.


Form the Proposition by Mode and Figure, Sir.


I told you so. -- Blow your Nose Child, and have a care of dirting your
Philosophical slabbering-bib.


What do ye mean, Sir?


Your starched Band, set by Mode and Figure, Sir.


Band Sir? -- This fellow's blind, Drunk. I wear a Cravat, Sir?


Then set a good face upon the matter. Throw off Childishness and Folly with
your hanging-sleeves. Now you have left the University, learn, learn.


This fellow's an Atheist, by the Universe; I'll take notice of him, and inform
against him for being Drunk. -- Pray, Sir, what's your Name?


My name? by the Lord I have forgot. -- Stay, I shall think on it by and by.


Zauns, forget your own Name! your memory must be very short, Sir.


Ay, so it seems, for I was but, Christened this morning, and I have forgot it
already.


Was your Worship then Turk or Jew before? -- I knew he was some damned bloody
Dog. --


Sir, I have been Turk, or Jew rather, since; for I have got a plaguy
heathenish Name. -- Pox on it. -- Oh! now I have it. -- Mo -- Mock -- mo --
Mockmode.


Mockmode! Mockmode, Sir, Pray how do you spell it?


Go you to your A, B, C. you came last from the University.


Sir, I'm called Mockmode. -- What Family are you of, Sir?


What Family are you of, Sir?


Of Mockmode-Hall in Shropshire.


Then I'm of the same, I believe. -- I fancy, Sir, that you and I are near
Relations.


Relations. Sir! There are but two Families; my Fathers, who is now dead, and
his Brothers, Colonel Peaceable Mockmode.


Ay, ay, the very same Colonel Peaceable. -- -- Is not he Colonel of Militia?


Yes, Sir.


And was not he High-Sheriff of the County last year?


The very same, Sir.


The very same; I'm of that Family. -- And your Father died about -- let me see
--


About half a year ago.


Exactly. By the same token you got drunk at a Hunting-match that very day
seven-night he was buri'd.


This fellow's a Witch. -- But it looks very strange that you should be
Christened this morning. I'm sure your Godfathers had a plaguy deal to answer
for.


Oh, Sir, I'm of age to answer for my self.


One would not think so, y're so forgetful. 'Tis two and twenty years since I
was Christened, and I can remember my name still.


Come, we'll take a Glass of Wine, and that will clear our understanding. We'll
remember our friends.


You must excuse me, Sir. -- This is some Sharper.


Nay, prithee Cousin, good Cousin Mockmode, one Glass. I know you are an honest
fellow. We must remember our Relations in the Country indeed, Sir.


Oh, Sir, you're so short of memory, you can never call 'em to mind. You have
forgot your self, Sir. Mockmode is a Heathenish Name, Sir, and all that, Sir.
And so I beg your pardon, Sir. --


Now were I Lawyer enough, by that little enquiry into that fellow's Concerns,
I could bring in a false Deed to cheat him of his Estate.

Where the Devil is thy Master? You said I should find him here.


'Tis impossible for you, or me, or any body, to find him.


Why?


Because he has lost himself. The Devil has made a Jugglers Ball of him I
believe. He's here now; then Presto, pass in an instant. He has got some damned
business to day in hand.


Ay, so it seems. -- I must be Squire Mockmode, and court an honourable
Mistress in the Devils name! Well, let my sober thinking Friend plot on, and
lay Traps to catch Futurity; I'm for holding fast the present. -- I have got
about twenty Guinea's in my Pocket; and whilst they last, the Devil take George
if he thinks of Futurity. I'll go hand in hand with Fortune.

She is an honest, giddy, reeling Punk;
My Head, her Wheel, turn round, and so we both are drunk.


HEre, here,-Page; your Lady has sent you some Sweet-meats; but indeed you
shall not have 'em till you hire me.


She sent sower Sauce, when she made you the Bearer.


Prithee now what makes you constantly so melancholy? Come you must be merry,
and shall be merry, I'll get you some Play-things.


I believe you want Play-things more than I. -- But I would be private
Pindress.


Well, my Child, I'll be private with you; Boys and Girls should still be
private together; and we may be as retired as we please; for my Mistress is
reading in her Closet, and all the Servants are below. -- But what Concerns
have you? I'm sure such a little Boy can have no great business in private.


I will try thee for once

-- Yes, Mrs. Pindress, I have great inclination. --


To what? To do what, Sir? -- Don't name it: -- 'Tis all in vain. -- you shall not
do it, you need not ask it.


Only to kiss you. --


Oh fie, Sir! Indeed I'll none of your kisses. Take it back again

Is it not the taste of the Sweet-meats very pretty about my Lips?


Oh hang your liquorish Chaps; you'd fain be licking your Lips, I find that.


Indeed, Mr. Page, I won't pay you the Kisses you won from me last night at
Cross-purposes; -- and you shall not think to keep my Pawn neither. -- Pray give
me my Hungary-bottle. -- As I hope to be saved I will have my Hungary-bottle --


-- I'm stronger than you. -- I'll carry you in, and throw you upon the bed,
and take it from you. --


Help! help! I shall be ravished! Help! help!



What's the matter? -- Oh bless me!


Oh dear Madam, this unlucky Boy had almost spoiled me. Did not your Ladyship
hear me cry I should be ravished? I was so weak, I could not resist the little
strong Rogue; he whipped me up in his arms, like a Baby, and had not your
Ladyship come in --


What, Sirrah, would you debauch my Maid? you little Cock-Sparrow, must you be
Billing too? I have a great mind to make her whip you Sirrah.


Oh dear, Madam, let me do it. I'll take him into the Room and I will so
chastise him. --


But do you think you'll be able, Pindress? I'll send one of the Men to help
you.


No, no, Madam; I could manage him with one hand. -- See here, Madam.


Hold, hold. -- Is this you that the little strong Rogue had almost Ravished?
He snatched you up in his arms like a Baby. -- Ah Pindress, Pindress! I see
you're very weak indeed. -- Are not you ashamed, Girl, to debauch my little Boy?


Your Ladyship gave me orders to make him merry, and divert his melancholy, and
I know no better way than to tease him a little. I'm afraid the Boy is troubled
with the Rickets, and a little shaking, Madam, would do him some good.


I'm tired with impertinence, and have other business to mind.


I hope your Ladyship entertains no ill opinion of my Virtue.


Truly I don't know what to think on it: but I've so good an opionion of your
sense, as to believe you would not play the fool with a Child.


W'ere all subject to playing the fool, if you continue your Resolution in
marrying of the first man that asks you the Question.


No, my mind's changed; I'll never marry any Man.


I dare swear that resolution breaks sooner, than the former. Lovewell should
with an amorous whine and suppliant cringe tell you a formal story, contrary to
what we suspect, would you not believe him?


What, believe his vain assertations, before the demonstration of my senses?
No, no; my Love's not so blind. Did I not see his Miss and his Child? did I not
behold him giving her Money? did I not hear him declare he would settle her in
a Lodging?


But, Madam, upon serious reflection, where's the great harm in all this? Most
Ladies would be over joyed at such a discovery of their Lovers ability. The
Child seemed a lusty chopping Boy; and let me tell you, Madam, it must be a
lusty chopping Boy that got it.


Urge no farther in his defence; he's a Villain, and of all Villains that I
hate most, an hypocritical one. The Ladies give him the Epithet of modest, and
the Gentlemen that of sober Lovewell. Now methinks such a piece of Debauchery
sits so awkwardly on a person of his Character, that it adds an unseemliness to
the natural vileness of the Vice; and he that dares be a Hypocrite in Religion,
will certainly be one in Love. -- Stay, is not that he?


Yes, Madam; I believe he's going to the Park.


Call a couple of Chairs quickly; we'll thither Masked. This day's adventures
argue some intended Plot upon me, which I may countermine by only setting a
Face upon the matter.

For as Hypocrisy in men can move,
Here's the best Hypocrite in Female Love.
On even scores designing Heaven took care;
Since Men false Hearts, that we false Faces wear.


I'll rack thy Reputation, blast thy Fame,
And in strong grinding Satyr Gibbet up thy Name.
What, in a Rapture, Mr. Lyrick?


A little Poetical fury, that's all. -- I'll Esquire him; I'll draw his
Character for the Buffoon of a Farce; he shall be as famous in Ballad as Robin
Hood, or Little John; my Muses shall haunt him like Demons; they shall make him
more ridiculous than Don Quixote.


Because he encountered your Windmill-Pate. -- -- Ha, ha, ha. -- Come, come,
Mr. Lyrick, you must be pacified.


Pacified, Sir! Zoons, Sir, he's a Fool, has not a grain of sense. Were he an
ingenious Fellow, or a Man of Parts, I could bear a kicking from him: But an
abuse from a Blockhead! I can never suffer it.

Pert Blockhead, who has purchased by the School
Just sense enough to make a noted Fool.
That stings, Mr. Lovewell.

Pray, Sir, let me see it.


This is imperfect, Sir: But if you please to give your Judgment of this Piece.
--


Ay, you Poets mount first on the Shoulders of your Predecessors, to see
farther in making Discoveries; and having once got the upper-hand, you spurn
them under-foot. I think you should bear a Veneration to their very Ashes.


Ay, if most of their Writings had been burnt. I declare, Mr. Lovewell, their
Fame has only made them the more remarkably faulty: Their great Beauties only
illustrate their greating Errors.


Well, you saw the new Tragedy last night; how did it please ye?


Very well; it made me laugh heartily.


What, laugh at a Tragedy!


I laugh to see the Ladies cry. To see so many weep at the Death of the
fabulous Hero, who would but laugh if the Poet that made 'em were hanged? On my
Conscience, these Tragedies make the Ladies vent all their Love and Honour at
their Eyes, when the same white Handkerchief that blows their Noses, must be a
Winding-Sheet to the deceased Hero.


Then there's something in the Handkerchief to embalm him, Mr. Lyrick, Ha, ha,
ha. -- But what relish have you of Comedy?


No satisfactory one -- My curiosity is fore-stall'd by a fore-knowledge of
what shall happen. For as the Hero in Tragedy is either a whining cringing Fool
that's always a stabbing himself, or a ranting hectoring Bully that's for
killing every-body else: so the Hero in Comedy is always the Poet's Character.


What's that?


A Compound' of practical Rake, and speculative Gentleman, who always bears of
the great Fortune in the Play, and Shams the Beau and Esquire with a Whore or
Chambermaid; and as the Catastrophe of all Tragedies is Death, so the end of
Comedies is Marriage.


And some think that the most Tragical conclusion of the two.


And therefore my eyes are diverted by a better Comedy in the Audience than
that upon the Stage. -- I have often wondered why Men should be found of seeing
Fools ill represented, when at the same time and place they may behold the
mighty Originals acting their Parts to the Life in the Boxes. --


Oh be favourable to the Ladies, Mr. Lyrick, 'tis your Interest. Beauty is the
Deity of Poetry; and if you rebel, you'll certainly run the Fate of your first
Parent, the Devil.


You're out, Sir. Beauty is a merciful Deity, and allows us sometimes to be a
little Atheistical; and 'tis so indulgent to Wit, that it is pleased with it,
though in the worst habit, that of Satyr. Besides, there can appear no greater
Argument of our Esteem, than Raillery, because 'tis still founded upon
Jealousy; occasioned by their preferring senseless Fops and Wealthy Fools to
Men of Wit and Merit, the great Upholders of the Empire.


Now I think these Favourites of the Ladies are more Witty than you.


How so, pray, Sir?


Because they play the Fool, conscious that it will please; and you're a Wit,
when sensible that Coxcombs only are encouraged. I wonder, Mr. Lyrick, that a
man of your sense should turn Poet; you'll hardly ever find a Man that is
capable of the Employment will undertake it.


The reason of that is, every one that knows not a tittle of the matter
pretends to be a judge of it. -- By the Lard, Mr. Lovewell, I put the Critics
next to Plague, Pestilence and Famine in my Litany. -- Had you seen 'em last
night in the Pit, with such demure supercilious Faces -- their contemplative
Wigs thrust judiciously backwards; their hands rubbing their Temples to chaff
ill nature; and with a hissing venomous Tongue pronouncing. Pish! Stuff!
Intolerable! Damn him! -- Lord have mercy upon us.


Ay, and you shall have others as foolish as they are ill-natur'd; fond of
being thought Wits, who shall laugh outrageously at every smutty Jest; cry,
Very well, by Gad; that's fine, by Heavens; and if a Dystich of Rhyme happens,
they clap so damnably loud, that they drown the Jest.


That's the Jest. The Wit lies in their hands; and if you would tell a Poet his
Fortune, you must gather it from the Palmistry of the Audience; for as
nothing's ill said, but what's ill taken; so nothing's well said, but what's
well taken. And betweeen you and I, Mr. Lovewell, Poetry without these laughing
Fools, were a Bell without a Clapper; an empty sounding business, good for
nothing; and all we Professors might go hang our selves in the Bell-ropes.


Ha, ha, ha. -- But I thought Poetry was instructive.


Oh Gad forgive me, that's true; To Ladies it is morally beneficial; For you
must know they are too nice to read Sermons; such Instructions are too gross
for their refined apprehensions: but any Precepts that may be instilled by
easy Numbers, such as of Rochester, and others, make great Converts. Then they
hate to hear a fellow in Church preach methodical Nonsense, with a Firstly,
Secondly, and Thirdly: but they take up with some of our modern Plays in their
Closet, where the Morallity must be Devilish Instructive. -- But I must be
gone; here comes the Esquire. What in the name of wonder has he got with him?


That which shall afford you a more plentiful Revenge than your Lampoon, if you
join with me in the Plot. To the better effecting of which, you must be
seemingly reconciled to him. --

Let's step aside, and observe 'em while I give you a hint of the matter.



This is very fine Weather, blessed Weather indeed, Madam; 'twill do abundance
of good to the Grass and Corn.


Ay, Sir, the Days are grown a great length; and I think the Weather much
better here than in Ireland.


Why, Madam, were you ever there?


Oh no, not I indeed, Sir; but I have heard my first Husband (Rest his Soul)
say so; he was an Irish Gentlemen.


I find, Madam, you have loved your first Husband mightily, for you affect his
tone in discourse. -- Pray, Madam, what did that Mourning cost a Yard?


Oh Lard, what shall I say now? 'tis none of mine.

It cost, Sir; let me see -- it cost about -- but it was my Steward bought it
for me, I never buy such small things.


By the Universe she must be plaguy Rich; I will be brisk.

Pray, Madam -- I -- I pray Madam, will you give us a Song?


A Song! Indeed then I had a good voice before, Mr. Roebuck spoiled it.


Mr. Roebuck? was that your first Husband's Name, Madam?

She'll spoil all.


No, Sir; Roebuck was a Doctor, that let me blood under the Tongue for the
Quinsy, and made me hoarse ever since.


By the Universe she's a Widow, and I will be a little brisk. Madam, will you
grant me a small favour, and I will bend upon my knees to receive it. --


What is't, pray?


Only to take off your Garter.

Zoons, her thick Leg will discover all. -- By your leave, Sir, have you any
pretensions to this Lady?


I don't know whether this be an affront or not. --


No, Sir.


No, Sir! I gad that must be Wit, for it can't be good Manners. -- Sir, I
respect all men of sense, and would therefore beg to know your Name.


No matter, Sir; I know your Name's Mockmode.


By the Universe, that's very Comical! that a fellow should pretend to tell me
my own Name! -- Another Question, if you please, Sir.


What is it, Sir?


Pray Sir, what's my Christened Name?


Sir, you don't know.


Zauns, Sir, would you persuade me out of my Christened Name? I'll lay you a
Guinea that I do know, by the Universe. --

Here's Silver, Sir, here's Silver, Sir; I can command as much Money as
another, Sir; I am at Age, Sir, and I won't be bantered. Sir.


Sir, you must know, that I baptize you Rival; for your Love to this Lady, is
the only sign of Christianity you can boast of. -- And now Sir, my name's
Lovewell.


Then I say, Sir, that your Love to that Lady is the only sign of a Turk you
can brag of. -- I wish Club were come.


Sir, I shall certainly Circumcise you, if you make any farther pretensions to
Madam Lucinda here.


Circumcise me! Circumcise a Puddings end, Sir. -- Zauns, Sir, I'll be judged
by the Lady who merits Circumcission most, you or I, Sir. These London-Blades
are all stark mad; --

I met one about two hours ago, that had forgot his Name, and this fellow would
persuade me now that I had forgot mine. Mr. Lyrick is the only man that speaks
plain to me. I must be Friends with him, because I find I may have occasion for
such a Friend; I'll find him out strait.


Madam, will you walk. --



Now my doubts are removed.


Mine are-more puzzling. There must be something in this, more than we imagine.
You had best talk to him.


Yes, if my Tongue bore Poison in it, and that I could spit Death in his face.


If he is lost, your hard usage this morning has occasioned it.


I'm glad on it; I've gained by the loss, I despise him more now than e're I
loved him. That Passion which can stoop so low as that Blowze, is an Object too
mean for any thing but my scorn to level at.


This were a critical minute for your new Lover the Esquire I fancy; Mr.
Lovewell's disgrace would bring him into favour prefently.


It certainly shall, if he be not as great a Fool as t'other's false.


You may be mistaken in your opinion of him, as much as you have been in Mr.
Lovewell.


No, Pindress, I shall find what I read in the last Miscellanies very true.

But two distinctions their whole Sex does part;
All Fools by Nature, or all Rogues by Art.
SCENE continues.



'Sdeath! what a Coney-burrough's here! The Trade goes swimingly on. This is
the great Empory of Lewdness, as the Change is of Knavery. -- The Merchants
cheat the World there, and their Wives gull them here. -- I begin to think
Whoring Scandalous, 'tis grown so Mechanical. -- My modesty will do me no good,
I fear. -- -- Madam, are you a Whore?


Yes, Sir.


Short and pity. -- If ever Woman spoke truth, I believe thou hast.

Have you any business with me, Madam?


Pray, Sir be civil; you're mistaken, Sir. -- I have had an Eye upon this
fellow all this afternoon.


Very likely, Madam; for I imagined you modest.


So I am, for I'm married.


And married to your forrow, I warrant you!


Yes, upon my Honour, Sir.


I knew it. I have met above a dozen this Evening, all married to their Sorrow.
-- Then I suppose you're a Citizen's Wife; and by the broadness of your bottom,
I should geuss you sat very much behind a Counter.


My Husband's no Mercer, he's a Judge.


Zoons! A Judge! I shall be arraigned at the Bar for keeping on my Hat so long.
-- 'Tis very hard, Madam, he should not do you Justice: Has not he an Estate in
Tail, Madam?


I seldom examine his Papers; They are a parcel of old dry shrvel'd Parchments;
and this Court-hand is so devilish crabbed, I can't endure it.


Umph! -- Then I suppose, Madam, you want a young Lawyer to put your Case to.
But faith, Madam, I'm a Judge too.


Oh Heavens forbid! such a young Man?


That's, I'll do nothing without a Bribe. -- Pray, Madam, how does that Watch
strike?


It never strikes, it only points to the business, as you must do, without
telling Tales. Dare you meet me two hours hence?


Ay, Madam, but I shall never hit the time exactly without a Watch.


Well, take it. -- At Ten exactly, at the Fountain in the Middle Temple. Cook
upon Littleton be the word.


So -- If the Law be all such Volumes as thou, Mercy on the poor Students. From
Cook upon Littleton in Sheets deliver me.



What! engaged Mirmydon! I find you'll never quit the Battle till you have
cracked a Pike in the Service.


Oh dear friend! you're critically come to my Relief; for faith I'm almost
tired.


What a miserable Creature is a Whore! whom every Fool dares pretend to love,
and every Wise Man hates.


What, morallizing again! Oh I'll tell thee News, Man; I'm entered in the Inns,
by the Lard.


Pshaw!


Nay, if you won't believe me, see my Note of admission.


A Gold Watch, boy?


Ay, a Gold Watch, boy,


Whence had you money to buy it?


I took it upon tick, and I design to pay honestly.


I don't like this running of the Score. -- But what News from Lucinda, boy? Is
she kind? ha?



Ha! there's a stately Cruiser; I must give her one chase. -- I'll tell you
when I return.


I find he has been at a loss there, which occasions his eagerness for the Game
here. I begin to repent me of my suspicion; I believe her Virtue so sacred that
'tis a piece of Atheism to distrust its Existence. But jealousy in Love, like
the Devil in Religion, is still raising doubts which without a firm Faith in
what we adore, will certainly damn us.



Is your name Mr. Roebuck, Sir?


What would you have with Mr. Roebuck, Sir?


I have a small Note for him, Sir.


Let me see it.


Ay, Sir, if your name be Mr. Roebuck, Sir.


My Name is Roebuck, Blockhead.


God bless you, master.


This is some tawdry Billet, with a scrawling Adieu at the end on it. These
strolling Jades know a young wholesome fellow newly come to Town, as well as a
Parsons Wife does a fat Goose. 'Tis certainly some secret, and therefore shall
be known.

SIR, MY behaviour towards you this morning was somewhat strange; but I shall
tell you the cause of it, if you meet me at Ten this night in our Garden; the
Back-door shall be open.

Yours Lucinda.



Oh Heavens! certainly it can't be! L, U, C, I, N, D, A; that spells Woman.
'Twas never written so plain before. Roebuck, you're as true an Oracle, as
she's a false one. Oh thou damned Sybil! I have courted thee these three years,
and could never obtain above a Kiss of the hand, and this fellow in an hour or
two has obtained the back door open. Mr. Roebuck, since I have discovered some
of your Secrets, I'll make bold to open some more of 'em. -- But how shall I
shake him off? -- Oh, I have it; I'll seek him instantly.



Here, you Sir, have you a Note for one Roebuck?


I had, Sir; but I gave it to him just now.


You lie, Sirrah, I am the Man.


I an't positive I gave it to the right person; but I'm very sure I did; for he
answered the Description the Page gave to a T, Sir.


'Twas well I met that Page, Dog, or now should I cut thy Throat, Rascal.


Bless your Worship, Noble Sir.


At Ten, in the Garden! the back-door open! -- Oh the delicious place and hour!
soft panting breasts! trembling Joints! melting Sighs! and eager Embraces! --
Oh Ecstasy! -- But how to shake off Lovewell? -- This is his nicely Virtuous!
Ha, ha, ha. -- This is his innate Principle of Virtue? Ha, ha, ha.



How now why so merry?


Merry! why, it would make a Dog split, Man; Ha, ha, ha. -- The Watch Sir, the
Watch; Ha, ha, ha.


What of the Watch? you laugh by the hour; you'll be run down by and by sure.


Ay, but I shall be wound up again. This Watch I had for a Fee, Lawyer: --
Should I ever be tried before this Judge, how I should laugh, to see how
gravely his Goose-Caps sits upon a pair of Horns. Ha, ha, ha.


You're Horn-mad. Prithee leave impertinence. I received a Note just now.


A Note! 'Sdeath, what Note! what do ye mean? who brought it?


A Gentleman; 'tis a Challenge.


Oh, thanks to the Stars; I'm glad on it.


And you may be signally serviceable to me in this affair. I can give you no
greater testimony of my Affection, than by making so free with you.


What needs all this formality? I'll be thy second, without all this
impertinence.


There's more than that, Friend. In the first place, I don't understand a
Sword; and again, I'm to be called to the Bar this Term, and such a business
might prejudice me extteamly. So, Sir, you must meet and fight for me.


Faith, Lovewell, I shall not stick to cut a Throat for my Friend at any time, so
I may do it fairly, or so. -- The hour and place?


This very Evening, in Moorfields.


Umph! How will you employ your self the while?


I'll follow you at a distance, lest you have any foul play.


Which if you do. No, faith Ned, since I'm to answer an appointment for you,
you must make good an assignation for me. I'm to meet one of your Ladies at the
Fountain in the Temple to night. You may be called to the Bar there, if you
will. This Watch will tell you the hour, and shall be your Pass-port. Let me
have yours. --


Oh, was that the Jest? Ha, ha, ha. -- Well, I will answer an Assignation for
you sure enough. Ha, ha, ha. -- How read lie does the Fool run to have his
Throat cut?


How eagerly now does my moral Friend run to the Devil, having hopes of Profit
in the Wind! I have shabb'd him off purely. -- But prithee, Ned, where had you
this fine Jewel?


Pshaw! a Trifle, a Trifle; from a Mistress. -- Take care on it though. But hark
ye, Goerge; don't push too home; have a care of whipping through the Guts.


Gad I'm afraid one or both of us may fall. But do ye hear, Ned, remember you
sent me on this Errant, and are therefore answerable for all mifchief; if I do
whip my Adversary through the Lungs, or so remember your set me upon it.


Well, honest George, you won't believe how much you oblige me in this
Courtesy.


You know always I oblige my self by serving my Friend. -- I never thought this
Spark was a Coward before.


I never imagined this Fellow was so easy before. --


That you're a Fool.


That you're an Ass.



Mr. Lovewell, a word w'ye.


Let it be short, pray Sir, for my business is urgent, and 'tis almost dark.


I'm reconciled to the Squire, and want only the Presentment of a Copy of
Verses, to ingratiate my self wholly thoroughly. Let me have that piece I lent
just now.


Ay, ay, with all my heart: -- Here, -- Farewell.


Now, Sir, here's a Poem, (which according to the way of us Poets) I say was
written at fifteen; but between you and I it was made at five and twenty.


Five and twenty! -- When is a Poet at Age, pray Sir?


At the third night of his first Play; for he's never a Man till then.


But when at years of discretion?


When they leave Writing, and that's seldom or never.


But who are your Guardians?


The Critics, who with their good will, would never let us come to Age. But
what have you got there?


By the Universe, I don't know; 'tis a Woman's hand; some Billet-deux, I
suppose; it jostled out of Lovewell's Pocket. We'll to the next Light, and read
it.



Oh how I reverence a backdoor half open, half shut! 'Tis the narrow Gate to
the Lovers Paradise; Cupid stood Sentry at the entrance; Love was the Word, and
he let me pass -- Now is my friend pleading for Life; he has a puzzling Case to
manage Ten to one he's Nonsuted; I have gulled him fairly.



I've got in, thanks to my Stars, or ^ather the Clouds, whose influence is my
best Friend at present. Now is Rocbuck gazing, or rather groping about for a
Fellow with a long sword; and I know his fighting humour will be as mad to be
balked by an Enemy, as by a Mistress.


Hark, hark! I hear a Voice; it must be she. -- Lucinda!


True to the touch, I find. Is it you, my Dear


Yes, my Dear.


Let me embrace thee, my heart.


Come to my Arms. --


'Slife! a Man!


'Sdeath! a Devil! -- And were thou a Legion, here's a Wand should conjure thee
down --


We should find whose Charms is strongest.



Mr. Roebuck? Sir? Mr. Roebuck?


That's a Woman's Voice, I'll swear. -- Madam? --


Sir.


Come, my dear Lucinda; I've staid a little too long; but making an Apology now
were only lengthening the offence. Let's into the Arbor, and make up for the
moments misspent.


Hold, Sir. Do you love this Lucinda you're so fond of hauiing into the Arbor?


Yes, by all that's powerful.


False, false Roebuck! --


Madam, do you love this Roebuck, that you opened the Garden door to so late?


I'm afraid I do too well.


And did you never own an affection to another?


No, witness all those Powers you just now mentioned.


Revenge your selves, ye Heavens. Behold in me your Accuser and your Judge.
Behold Lovewell, injured Lovewell. -- This darkness, which opportunely hides
your blushes, makes your shame more Monstrous.


Ha! Lovewell! I'm vexed 'tis he, but glad to be mistaken. -- Now Female Policy
assist me.


Yes, Madam, your silence prolaims you Guilty -- Farewell Woman.


Ha, ha, ha.


What am I made your scorn?


Ha, ha, ha. -- This happens better than I expected. -- Ha, ha, ha. -- Mr.
Lovewell!


No Counter-plotting, Madam, the Mine's sprung already and all your deceit
discovered.


Indeed you're a fine fellow at discovering deceits, I must confess, that could
not find whether I was a Man or a Woman all this time.


What, the Page!


No Counter-plotting, good Sir, the Mine's sprung already. -- Ah, Sir, I fancy
Mr. Roebuck is better at discovering a Man from a Woman in the dark, than you.


This discovery is the greatest Riddle! -- Prithee, Child, what makes thee
disguised? But above all, what meant that Letter to Roebuck?


Then I find you intercepted it. -- Why, Sir, my Lady had a mind to put a trick
upon the impudent Fellow, made him an Assignation, and sent me in her stead, to
banter him, But when I tell her how you fell into the snare, and how jealous
you were. -- Ha, ha, ha.


Oh my little dear Rogue! was that the matter? --


A Man! 'Twas certainly Roebuck. --

He certainly was here, and I have missed him.
Fortune delights with Innocence to play,
And Love's to hoodwink those already blind.
Wary deceit can many by-ways tread,
To shun the blocks in Virtues open Road,
Whilst heedless Innocence still falls on Ruin
Yet, whilst by Love inspired, I will pursue;
What Men by Courage, we by Love can do.
Not even his falsehood shall my Claim remove;
From mutual Fires none can true passion prove;
For like to like, is Gratitude, not Love.


ON what new happily Climate am I thrown?

This house is Loves Labyrinth; I have stumbled into it by chance. -- Ha! an
Illusion! Let me look again. -- Eyes, if you play me false, (Looking about)
I'll pluck ye out. -- 'Tis she; 'tis Lucinda! alone, undressed, in a
Bed-Chamber, between Eleven and Twelve a Clock. -- A blessed opportunity! --
Now if her innate Principle of Virtue defend her, then is my innate Principle
of Manhood not worth Two-pence. -- Hold, she comes forward. --


Unjust Prerogative of faithless Man,
Abusing Power which partial Heaven has granted!
In former Ages, Love and Honour stood
As Props and Beauties to the Female Cause;
But now lie prostitute to scorn and sport.
Man, made our Monarch, is a Tyrant grown,
And Woman-kind must bear a second Fall.

Ay, and a third too, or I'm mistaken. -- I must divert this plaguy Romantic
humour.


While Virtue guided Peace, and Honour War,
Their Fruits and Spoils were off'rings made to Love.

And 'tis so still; for (Raising his Voice.)
Beau with earliest Cherries Miss does grace,
And Soldier offers spoils of Flanders Lace.

Ha! -- Protect me Heavens! what art thou?


A Man, Madam.


What accursed Spirit has driven you hitherto?


The Spirit of Flesh and Blood, Madam.


Sir, what Encouragement have you ever received to prompt you to this
Impudence?


Umph! I must not own the reception of a Note from her. Faith, Madam, I know
not whether to attribute it to Chance, Fortune; my good Stars, my Fate, or my
Destiny: But here I am, Madam, and here I will be.


If a Gentleman, my Commands may cause you withdraw; If a Russian, my Footmen
shall dispose of you.


Madam, I'm a Gentleman; I know how to oblige a Lady, and how to save her
Reputation. My Love and Honour go linked together; they are my Principles: and
if you'll be my Second, we'll engage immediately.


Stand off, Sir; the name of Love and Honour are burlesqu'd by thy Professing
'em. Thy Love is Impudence, and thy Honour a Cheat. Thy Mien and Habit show
thee a Gentleman? but thy behaviour is Brutal. Thou art a Centaur; only one
part Man, and the other Beast.


Philosophy in Peticoats! No wonder Women wear the Breeches;


Honourable Love is the Parent of mankind; but thine is the Corruptor and
Debaser of it. The Passion of you Libertines is like your Drunkeness; heat of
Lust, as the other is of Wine, and off with the next Sleep.


No, Madam; an Hair of the same -- is my Receipt -- Come, come, Madam, all
things are laid to rest that will disturb our Pleasure, whole Nature favours
us; the kind indulgent Stars that directed me hither, wink at what we are
about. 'Twere Jilting of Fortune to be now idle, and she, like a true Woman,
once balked, never affords a second opportunity. -- I'll put out the Candle,
the Torch of Love shall light us to Bed.


To Bed, Sir! Thou hast Impudence enough to draw thy Rationality in Question.
Whence proceeds it? From a vain thought of thy own Graces, or an opinion of my
Virtue? -- If from the latter, know that I am a Woman, whose modesty dare not
doubt my Virtue; yet have so much Pride to support it, that the dying Groans of
thy whole Sex at my feet should not extort an immodest thought from me.


Your thoughts may be as modest as you please, Madam. -- You shall be as
Virtuous to morrow morning as e're a Nun in Europe, the opinion of the World
shall proclaim you such, and that's the surest Charter the most rigid Virtue in
England is held by. The Night has no Eyes no to see, nor have I a Tongue to
tell: One kiss shall seal up my Lips for ever.


That uncharitable Censure of Women, argues the meanness of thy Convertation.


Her superior Virtue awes me into coldness. 'Slife! it can't be Twelve sure.
-- -- Night's a Liar.


Sir, if you won't be gone, I must fetch those shall Conduct you hence. --! my
Eyes are dazzled sure,


By Heavens she has a mind to it! -- Oh, 'tis at your service with all my Soul.


Wrong not my Virtue by so poor a thought. -- But answer directly, as you are a
Gentleman, to what I now shall ask: whence had you that Jewel?


I exchanged Watches with a Gentleman, and had this Jewel into the bargain. He
valued it not, 'twas a Trifle from a Mistress.


A Trifle said he? -- Oh Indignation! slighted thus! -- I'll put a Jewel out of
his power, that he would pawn his Soul to retrieve. -- If you be a Gentleman,
Sir, whom Gratitude can work up to Love, or a Virtuous Wife reclaim, I'll make
you a large return for that Trifle.


Hey-day! a Wife said she!


What's your Name, Sir? and of what Country?


My Name's Roebuck, Madam.


Roebuck.


'Sdeath! I forgot my Instructions. -- Mockmode, Madam. -- Roebuck Mockmode, my
Name, and Sir-name.


Mockmode my Esquire! it can't be! But if it should, I've made the better
Exchange. -- Of what Family are you, Sir?


Of Mockmode-Hall i^ Shropshire, Madam. My Father's lately dead; I came lately
from the University; I have fifteen hundred Acers of as good fighting Ground as
any in England. -- 'Twas lucky I met that Blockhead to day.


The very same. -- And had you any directions to couat a Lady in London.


Umph! -- How should I have found the way hither else, Madam. What the Devil
will this come to?


My Fool that I dreamt of, I find a pretty Gentleman. -- Dreams go by
contraries. -- Well, Sir, I am the Lady; and if your Designs are Honourable,
I'm yours, take a turn in the Garden, till I send for my Chaplain, you must
take me immediately, for if I cool, I'm lost for ever.


I think I am become a very sober Shropshire Gentleman in good earnest; I don't
start at the name of a Parson. -- Oh Fortune! Fortune! what art thou doing? If
thou and my Friend will throw me into the arms of a fine Lady, and great
Fortune, how the Devil can I help it! Oh but, Zoons, there's Marriage! Ay, but
there's Money. -- Oh but there are Children; sqawling Children. Ay but then
there are Rickets and Small-Pox, which perhaps may carry them all away. -- Oh
but there's Horns! Horns! Ay, but then I shall go to Heaven, for 'tis but
reasonable, since all Marriages are made in Heaven, that all Cuckolds should go
thither. -- But then there's Leanthe! That sticks. I love her, witness, Heaven,
I love her to that degree. -- Pshaw, I shall whine presently. I love her as
well as any Woman; and what can she expect more? I can't drag a Lover's Chain a
hundred Miles by Land and a hundred Leagues by Water. -- Fortune has decreed it
otherwise. -- So lead on, blind Guide, I follow thee; and when the blind lead
the blind, no wonder they both fall into -- Matrimony.

Oh my dear auspicious little Mercury! let me kiss thee. -- Go tell thy
Charming Mistress I obey her Commands.



Her Commands! Oh Heavens! I must follow him.


Page, Page.


Oh my cursed Fortune! balked again! -- Madam.


Call my Chaplain; I'm to be married presently.


Married so suddenly! To whom, pray Madam?


To the Gentleman you met going hence just now.


Oh Heavens! your Ladyship is not in earnest, Madam?


What, is Matrimony to be made a Jest of? don't be impertinent, Boy; call him
instantly.


What shall I do? -- Oh, Madam, suspend it till the morning, for Heaven's sake.
Mr. Lovewell is in the House; I met him not half an hour ago; and he will
certain^ kill the Gentleman, and perhaps harm your Ladyship.


Lovewell in my house! How came he hither?


I know not, Madam, I saw him and talked to him; he had his Sword drawn, and he
threatened every body. Pray delay it to night, Madam.


No, I'm resolved; and I'll prevent his discovering us; I'll put on a suit of
your Clothes, and order Pindress to carry her Night Gown to the Gentleman in
the Garden, and bid him meet me in the lower Arbor, in the West Corner, and
send the Chaplain thither instantly.


Hold, Fortune, hold; thou hast entirely won;
For I am lost. Thus long I have been racked
On thy tormenting Wheel, and now my Heart-strings break.
Discovering who I am, exposes me to shame.
Then what on Earth can help me?


Oh Lord, Page, what's the matter? Here's old doings, or rather new doings.
Prithee let you and I throw in our Two-pence a piece into this
Marriage-Lottery.


You'll draw nothing but Blanks, I'll assure you, from me. -- But stay, let me
consider of the business.


No consideration; the business must be done hand over head.


Well, I have one Card to play still; and with you, Pindress.


You expect though that I should turn up Trumps?


No, not if I shuffle right.

-- Well, Pindross, 'tis a Match. Be gone to the lower Arbor at the West Corner
of the Garden, and I'll come to thee immediately with the Chaplain. You must
not whisper, for we must pass upon the Chaplain for my Lady and the Gentleman.
-- Haste.


Shall not I put on my New Gown first?


No, no; you shall have a Green Gown for your Wedding in the Arbor.


A Green Gown? -- Well, all Flesh is Grass.


Make haste, my sponse, fly.


And will you come? will you be sure to come? -- O my litlte Green Gooseberry,
my Teeth waters at ye. --


Now Chance. -- No, you're blind.

Then Love, be thou my Guide, and set me right;
Though blind, like Chance, you have best Eyes by Night.


Mr. Lyrick abroad, say thou? and Mockmode with him?


All abroad, my Mistress and all.


I don't understand this. -- Brush, run to Lucinda's Lodgings, and observe
what's a doing there: I spied some hasty Lights glancing through the Rooms; I'll
follow you presently.

-- Can't you inform me which way they went:


Perhaps Mr. Mockmodes's man can inform ye.


Pray call him.


Mr. Club, Mr, Club.


What is the follow deaf?


No, Sir; but he's asleep, and in bed. -- Mr. Club, Mr. Club.


Augh --

I'm asleep, I'm asleep; don't wake me. -- Augh.


Here's a Gentleman wants ye.



Pox of your London-breeding; what makes you waken a Man out of his sleep that
way.


Where's your Master, pray Sir?


Augh. -- 'Tis a sad thing to be broken of ones rest this way.


Can you inform me where your Master's gone?


My Master? -- Augh --


Yes, Sir, your Master,


My Master? -- Augh -- What a Clock is it, Sir? I believe 'tis past Midnight,
for I have gotten my first sleep -- Augh. --


You're asleep still, Blockhead. Answer me, or -- where's your Master?


Augh -- I had the pleasantest Dream when you called me -- Augh -- I thought my
Master's great black Stone-horse, had broke loose among the Mares -- Augh --
and so, Sir, you called me -- Augh -- and so I wakened.


Sirrah,


Zauns, Sir! what do ye mean, Sir? My Master's as good a Man as you, Sir; Them
me, Sir?


Tell me presently, where your Master is, Sirrah, or I'll dust the secret out
of your Jacket.


Oh, Sir, your Name's Lovewell, Sir!


What then, Sir?


Why then my Master is -- where you are not, Sir. -- My Master's in a fine
Ladies Arms, and you are -- liere, I take it.


Has he got a Whore a Bed with him?


He may be Father to the Son of a Whore by this time, if your Mistress Lucindae
be one, Mr. Lyrick did his business, and my Master will do her business I
warrant him, if of the right Shropshire breed which I'm sure he is, for my
Mother nursed him on my Milk.


Two Calves suckl'd on the same Cow -- Ha, ha, ha. Gramercy Poet, has he
brought the Play to a Catastrophe so soon? A rare Executioner, to clap him in
the Female Pillory already! Ha, ha, ha.


Ay, Sir; and a Pillory that you would give your Ears for, I warrant you think
my Master's over head and ears in the Irish Quagmire you would have drowned him
in. But, Sir, we have found the bottom on it.


He may pass over the Quagmire, Sirrah, for there were Stepping stones laid in
his way.


He has got over dry-shod, I'll assure you. -- Pray, Sir, did not you receive a
Note from Lucinda, the true Lucinda, to meet her at Ten in her Garden to Night.
-- Why don't you laugh now? Ha, ha, ha.


'Sdeath, Rascal, What Intelligence cou^d you have of that?


Hold, Sir, I have more Intelligence. You threw Mr. Lyrick his Poem in a hurrey
in the Park, and justled that sweet Letter out of your Pocket, Sir. This Letter
fell into my Master's hands, Sir, and discovered your Sham, Sir, your Trick,
Sir. Now Sir, I think you're as deep in the Mud as he is in the Mire.


Cursed misfortune! -- And where are they gone, Sir? Quickly, the Truth, the
whole Truth, Dog, or I'll spit you like a Sparrow.


I design to tell you, Sir. Mr. Lyrick, Sir, being my Master's intimate Friend,
or so, upon a Bribe of a hundred Pounds, or so, has sided with him, taken him
to Lucinda's Garden in your stead, and there's a Parson, and all, and so forth.
-- Now, Sir, I hope the Poet has brought the Play to a very good Cata -- Cata
-- what do ye call him, Sir?


'Twas he I encountered in the Garden. -- 'Sdeath! Tricked by the Poet! I'll
cut off one of his Limbs, I'll make a Synelepha of him; I'll --


He, he, he! -- Two Calves sucked on the same Cow! -- He, he! --


Nay then I begin with you.


Zauns! Murder! Them me! Zauns! Murder! Zauns!


I have been peeping and crouching about like a Cat a Mousing. Ha! I smell a
Rat -- A Sword and Hat! -- There are certainly a pair of Breeches appertaining
to these, and may be lapped up in my Ladies Lavender, who knows! --



What, Sir? What are you doing? I'm ruined tricked. --


I believe so too, Sir. -- See here. --


By all my hopes, Roebuck's Hat and Sword. This is mischief upon mischief. Run
you to the Garden, Sirrah; and if you find any body, secure 'em; I'll search
the House. -- I'm ruined! -- Fly. -- Roebuck? -- what hoa? -- Roebuck? -- hoa?



Dear, dear Lovewell, wish me Joy, wish me Joy, my Friend.


Of what, Sir?


Of the dearest, tenderst, whitest, softest Bride, that ever blessed Man's Arms.
I'm all Air, all a Cupid, all Wings, and must fly again to her embraces. Detain
me not, my Friend.


Hold, Sir, I hope you mock me; though that it self's unkind.


Mock you! -- By Heavens no; she's more than sense can bear, or Tongue express.
-- Oh Lucinda! should Heaven --


Hold, Sir; no more.


I'm on the Rack of Pleasure, and must confess all.
When her soft, melting white, and yielding Waste,
Within my pressing Arms was folded fast,
Our lips were melted down by heat of Love,
And lay incorporate in liquid kisses,
Whilst in soft broken, sighs, we caught each other's Souls.

Come, come, Roebuck, no more of this Extravagance. -- By Heaven I swear you
shall not marry her.


By Heaven I swear so too, for I'm married already.


Then you're a Villain.


A Villain, Man! -- Pshaw! that's Nonsense. A poor fellow can no sooner get
married, than you imagine he may be called a Villain presently. -- You may call
me a Fool, a Blockhead, or an Ass, by the Authority of Custom: But why a
Villain, for God's sake?


Did not you engage to meet and fight a Gentleman for me in Moorfields?


Did not you promise to engage a Lady for me at the Fountain, Sir?


This Lucinda is my Mistress, Sir.


This Lucinda, Sir; is my Wife.


Then this decides the matter. -- Draw.


Prithee be quiet, Man, I've other business to mind on my Wedding-night. I must
in to my Bride.


Hold, Sir; move a step, and by Heavens I'll stab thee.


Put up, put up; Pshaw, I an't prepared to dye; I an't, Devil take me.


Do you dally with me, Sir?


Why you won't be so unconseionable as to kill a Man so suddenly; I have not made
my Will yet. Perhaps I may leave you a Legacy.


Pardon me Heaven's, if pressed by stinging taunts, my Passion urge my Arm to
act what's foul,


Hold.

'Tis safest making Peace, they say, with Sword in hand. -- Pll tell thee what,
Nod; I would not lose this Nights Pleasure for the honour of fighting and
vanquishing the Seven Champions of Christendom. Permit me then but this Night
to return to the Arms of my dear Bride, and faith and troth I'll take a fair
Thrust with you to morrow morning.


What, beg a poor Reprieve for Life! -- Then you're a Coward.


You imagined the contrary, when you employed me to fight for ye in Moorfields.


Will nothing move thy Gall? -- You're ^ase ungrateful.


Ungrateful! I love thee, Ned; by Heavens, my Friend, I love thee. therefore
name not that word again, for such a repetition would over-pay all thy favours.


A cheap, a very cheap way of making acknowledgment, and therefore thou hast
caught, which makes thee more ungrateful


My Friendship even yet does balance Passion; but throw in the least grain more
of an affront, and by Heaven you turn the Scale.


(Pausing.) No, I've thought better; my Reason clears: She is not worth my
Sword; a Bully only should draw in her defence, for she's false, a Prostitute.


A Prostitute! By Heaven thou lie.

-- Thou hast blasphemed. Her Virtue answers the uncorrupted state of Woman, so
much above Immodesty, that it mocks Temptation. She has convinced me of the
bright Honour of her Sex, and I stand Champion now for the fair Female Cause.


Then I have lost what nought on Earth can pay. Curse on all doubts, all
Jealousies, that destroy our present happiness, by mistrusting the future. Thus
mis-believers making their Heaven uncertain, find a certain Hell. -- And is she
Virtuous? -- sound the bold charge aloud, which does proclaim me Guilty.


By Heavens as Virtuous as thy Sister.


My Sister; -- Ha! -- I fear, Sir, your Marriage with Lucinda has wronged my
Sister; for her you courted, and I heard she loved you.


I courted her, 'tis true, and loved her also; nay, my Love to her, rivalled my
Friendship tow'rds; and had my Fate allow'd me time for thought, her dear
remembrance might have stopped the Marriage. But since 'tis past, I must own to
you, to her, and all the World, that I cast off all former Passion, and shall
henceforth confine my Love to the dear Circle of her Charming Arms from which I
just now parted.



I take you at your word. These are the Arms that held you.


Oh Gods and Happiness! Leanthe!


My Sister! Heavens! it cannot be.


By Heavens it can, it shall, it must be so -- For none on Earth could give
such Joys but she -- Who would have thought my Joys could bear increase?
Lovewell, my Friend! this is thy Sister! 'tis Leanthe! my Mistress, my Bride,
my Wife.


I am your Sister, Sir, as such I beg you to pardon the effects of violent
passion, which has driven me into some imprudent Actions; But none such as may
blot the honour of my Virtue, or Family. To hold you no longer in suspense,
'twas I brought the Letter from Leanthe; 'twas I managed the Intrigue with
Lucinda; I sent the Note to Mr. Roebuck this afternoon; and I --


That was the Bride of happy me.


Thou art my Sister, and my Guardian-Angel; for thou hast blessed thy self, and
blessed thy Brother. Lucinda still is safe, and may be mine.


May! -- She shall be thine, my Friend.


Where is Lucinda?



Not far off; though far enough from you, by the Universe.


You must give me leave not to believe you, Sir.


Oh Madam, I crave you ten thousand pardons by the Universe, Madam. -- Zauns,
Madam, Them me, Madam.


By your leave, Sir --


Ah, Cousin Mockmode! -- How do all our Friends in Shropshire? --


Now, Gentlemen, I thank you all for your Trick, your Sham. You imagine I have
got your Whore, Cousin, your Crack'. But Gentlemen, by the assistance of a
Poet, your Sheely is Metamorphosed into the real Lucinda; which your Eyes shall
testify. Bring in the Jury there. -- Guilty or not Guilty?



Oh my dear Reobuck! And Faith is it you, dear Joy? and where have you been
these seven long years?


Zauns! --


Hold off, stale Iniquity. -- Madam, you'll pardon this? -- (To Leanthe.


Indeed I won't live with that stranger. You promised to marry me, so you did.
-- Ah Sir, Neddy's a brave Boy, God bless him; he's a whole arm full; Lord
knows I had a heavy load of him.


Guilty, or Not Guilty, Mr. Mockmode?


'Tis past that; I am condemned, I'm hanged in the Marriage Noose -- Hark ye,
Madam, was this the Doctor that let you blood under the Tongue for the Quinsy.


Yes, that it was, Sir.


Then he may do so again; for the Devil take me if ever I breath a Vein for ye:
-- Mr. Lyrick, is this your Poetical Friendship?


I had only a mind to convince you of your 'Squireship.


Now, Sister; my fears are over. -- But where's Lucinda? how is she disposed
of?


The fear she lay under of being discovered by you, gave me an opportunity of
imposing Pindress upon her instead of this Gentleman, whom she expected to wear
one of Pindress's Night-Gowns as a Disuise. To make the Cheat more current, she
disguised her self in my Clothes, which has made her pass on her Maid for me;
and I by that opportunity putting on a Suit of hers, past upon this Gentleman
for Lucinda, my next business is to find her out, and beg her pardon, endeavour
her reconcilement to you, which the discovery of the mistakes between both will
easily effect.


Well, Sir, (To Lyrick.) how was Plot your carried on?


Why this Esquire (will you give me leave to call you so now?) this Esquire had
a mind to personate Lovewell, to catch Lucinda -- So I made Trudge to personate
Lucinda, and snap him in this very Garden. -- Now Sir, you'll give me leave to
write your Epithalamiu^?


My Epithalamiu^ I my Epitaph, Screech Owl, for I'm Buried alive. But I hope
you'll return my hundred pound I gave you for marrying me.


No, But for Five hundred more I'll unmarry you. These are hard times, and men
of industry must make Money.


Here's the Money, by the Universe, Sir, a Bill of Five hundred pound Sterling
upon Mr. Ditto the Mercer in Cheapside. Bring me a Reprieve, and 'tis yours.


Lay it in that Gentleman's hands.

The Executioner, shall cut the Rope.

Here's Revelation for you! --


Oh thou damned Whore of Babylon!


What, Pope Joan the second! were you the Priest?


Of the Poet's Ordination.


Ay, ay, before the time of Christianity the Poets were Priests.


No wonder then that all the World were Heathens.


How do ye like the Plot? would it not do well for a Play? -- My Money, Sir. --
(To Roebuck.


No, Sir, it belongs to this Gentlewoman. -- Lyrick.



You have told me Wonders.


Here are these can testify the truth. This Gentleman is the real Mr.
Mockmode, and much such another person as your dream represented.


I hope, Madam, you'll pardon my dissembling, since only the hopes of so great
a purchase could cause it.


Let my wishing you much Joy and Happiness in your Bride testify my
reconciliation; And at the request of your Sister, Mr. Lovewell, I pardon your
past Jealousies. You threatened me, Mr. Lovewell, with an Irish, Entertainment
at my Wedding. I wish it present now, to assist at your Sisters Nuptials.


Army last going hence, I sent for 'em, and they're ready.


Call 'em in then.


I must reward your Sister, Mr. Lovewell, for the many Services done me as my
Page. I therefore settle my Fortune and my self on you, on this Condition, That
you make over your Estate in Ireland to your Sister, and that Gentleman.


'Tis done; only with this Proviso, Brother, That you forsake your
Extravagancies.


Brother, you know I always slighted Gold;

But most when offered as a sordid Bribe.
I scorn to be bribed even to Virtue;
But for bright Virtues sake, I here embrace it.
I have espoused all Goodness with Leanthe,
And am divorced from all my former Follies.
Woman's our Fate. Wild and Unlawful Plames
Debauch us first, and softer Love reclaims.
Thus Paradise was lost by Woman's Fall;
But Virtuous Woman thus restores it all.

The Innocent Mistress a Comedy, Written by Mrs. Mary Pix.

The Modern Conveyancer, or Conveyancing Improved, being a choice Collection of
Presidents on most Occasions drawn after the manner of Conveyancing now in use.
By the greatest hand of the present Age, of which some are still living.

Consisting of Settlement of Estates upon Marriages, Bargains and Sales,
Ecclesiastical Instruments, Mortgages, Leasses, c. With an Introduction
concerning Conveyancing in general. The Second Edition with Additions. Both
Printed for Fran. Coggan in the Inner-Temple-Lane.


