MOst Sacred Majesty, whose great deserts,
Thy subject England; nay, the world admires:
Which heaven grant still increase: O may your praise,
Multiplying with your hours, your fame still raise.
Embrace your Council: Love, with Faith them guide,
That both as one bench by the others side;
So may your life pass on, and run so even,
That your firm zeal plant you a Throne in Heaven:
Where smiling Angels shall your guardians be,
From blemished Traitors, stained with perjury.
And as the Night's inferior to the Day,
So be all earthly Regions to your sway.
Be as the Sun to Day, the Day to Night,
For from your beams Europe shall borrow light:
Mirth drown your bosom, fair Delight your mind,
And may our pastime your contentment find.

WHy so thus do I hope to please;
Music revives, and mirth is tolerable:
Comedy play thy part and please;
Make merry them that come to joy with thee:
Joy then Good Gentiles, I hope to make you laugh;
Sound forth Bellona's silver tuned strings;
Time fits us well, the day and place is ours.
Nay stay minion, stay, there lies a block;
What all on mirth? I'll interrupt your tale,
And mix your music with a Tragic end.

What monstrous ugly nag is this,
That dares control the pleasures of our will?
Vaunt churlish Cur, besmeared with gory blood,
That seem to check the blossom of Delight,
And still the sound of sweet Bellona's breath:
Blush monster, blush, and post away with shame,
That seekst disturbance of a Goddess name.

Post hence thy self thou counterchecking Trull,
I will possess this habit spite of thee,
And gain the glory of this wished Port.
I'll thunder music shall appal the Nymphs,
And make them shiver their clattering strings,
Flying for succour to their Danish Caves.
Hearken, thou shalt hear noise
Shall fill the air with shrilling sound,
And thunder music to the Gods above:
Mars shall himself breath down
A peerless crown upon brave Envies head,
And raise his chival with a lasting fame:
In this brave music Envy takes delight,
Where I may see them wallow in their blood,
To spurn at Arms and Legs quite shivered off,
And hear the cries of many thousands slain:
How lik'st thou this my Trull? 'tis sport alone for me.

Vaunt bloody Cur, nursed up with Tigers sap,
That so dost quail a woman's mind:
Comedy is mild, gentle, willing for to please,
And seeks to gain the love of all estates;
Delighting in mirth, mixed all with lovely tales,
And brings things with treble joy to pass.
Thou bloody, envious, disdainer of men's joys;
Whose name is fraught with bloody stratagems.
Delights in nothing but in spoil and death,
Where thou may trample in their lukewarm blood,
And grasp their hearts within thy cursed paws:
Yet vail thy mind, revenge thee not on me,
A silly woman begs it at thy hands;
Give me the leave to utter out my Play.
Forbear this place, I humbly crave thee hence,
And mix not death amongst pleasing Comedies,
That treats nought else but pleasure and delight:
If any spark of humane rests in thee,
Forbear, be gone, tender the suit of me.

Why so I will; forbearance shall be such,
As treble death shall cross thee with despite,
And make thee mourn where most thou joyest,
Turning thy mirth into a deadly dole,
Whirling thy pleasures with a peal of death,
And drench thy methods in a sea of blood;
Thus will I do: Thus shall I bear with thee,
And more, to vex thee with a deeper spite,
I will with threats of blood begin the play,
Favouring thee with Envy and with Hate.

Then ugly monster do thy worst,
I will defend them in despite of thee:
And though thou think with Tragic f^me^
To prove my Play unto my great disgrace*
I force it not, I scorn what thou can do*
I'll grace it so, thy self shall it confess,
From Tragic stuff, to be a pleasant Comedy.

Why then Comedy send the Actors forth,
And I will cross the first step of their Trade,
Making them fear the very dart of death.

And I'll defend them mangre all thy spite;
So ugly fiend farewell till time shall serve,
That we may meet to parley for the best.

Content Comedy, I'll go spread my branch,
And scattered blossoms from mine envious Tree,
Shall prove two Monsters spoiling of their joys.

Anselmo?


My Lord and friend,
Whose dear affections bosom with my he^,
And keep their domination in one Orb;
Whence near disloyalty shall root it forth,
But faith plant firmer in your choice respect.

Mcuh blame were mine if I should other deem,
Nor can coy fortune contrary allow:
But my Anselmo, loath I am to say I must enstrange that friendship:
Misconsture not, 'tis from the Realm, not thee:
Though Lands part bodies, Hearts keep company:
Thou know that I imparted often have
Private raltions with my Royal Sire
Had, as concerning beauteous Amadine,
Rich Aragons bright Jewell: whose face (some say)
That blooming Lillies never shone so gay:
Excelling not excelled; yet lest report
Does mangle Verity, boasting of what is not
Winged with Desire, thither I'll straight repair,
And be my fortunes at my thoughts are, fair.

Will you forsake Valentia? leave the Court?
Absent you from the eye of Sovereignty,
Do not sweet Prince, adventure on that task,
Since danger lurks each where, he won from it.

Desist dissawsion,
My Resolution brooks no battery,
Therefore if thou retain thy wonted form,
Assist what I intend*

Your miss will breed a blemish in the Court,
And throw a frosty dew upon that beard,
Whose front Valentia stoops to.

If thou my welfare tender, then no more;
Let Loves strong Magic charm thy trivial phrase,
Wasted as vainly as to gripe the Sun:
Augment not then more answer; lock thy lips,
Unless thy wisdom s^re me with disguise,
According to my purpose.

That action craves no councels,
Since what you rightly are, will more comm^nd,
Th^ best usurped shape.

Thou still art opposite in disposition.
A more obscure servile habiliment
Beseems this enterprise.

Then like a Florentine or Mountebank.

'Tis much too tedious, I dislike thy judgement,
My mind is grafted on an humbler stock.

Within my closet does there hang a Cassock,
Though base the weed is, 'twas a Shepherds,
Which I presented in Lord Julius Mask.

That my Anselmo, and none else but that,
Mask Mucedorus from the vulgar view:
That habit suits my mind, fetch me that weed.
Better then Kings have not disdained that state,
And much inferior, to obtain their mate.
So, let our respect command thy secrecy,
At once a brief farewell,
Delay to Lovers is a second Hell.

Prosperity fore-run thee: Auckward chance,
Never be neighbour to thy wishes venture,
Content and Fame advance thee. Ever thrive,
And glory thy mortality survive.

O horrible terrible! Was ever poor Gentleman so scared out of his seven
senses? A Bear? Nay sure it cannot be a Bear, but some Devil in a Bears
doublet: for a Bear could never have had that agility to have frighted me.
Well, I'll see my father hanged before I'll serve his Horse any more: Well, I'll
carry home my bottle of hay, and for once make my fathers Horse turn Puritan,
and observe Fasting days, for he gets not a bit. But soft, this way she
followed me, therefore I'll take the other path, and because I'll be sure to have
an eye to her, I will shake hands with some foolish Creditor, and make every
step backward.


O fly Madam, fly, or else we are but dead.


Help Segasto, help, help sweet Segasto, or else I die.


Alas Madam there is no way but flight.
Then haste and save your self.

Why then I dye. Ah help me in distress.


Stay Lady, stay, and be no more dismayed,
That cruel beast most merciless and fell,
Affrighted many with his hard pursues,
Prying from place to place to find his prey,
Prolonging thus his life by others death:
His carcase now lies headless void of breath.

That foul deformed Monster, is he dead?


Assure your self thereof, behold his head.
Which if it please you Lady to accept,
With willing heart I yield it to your Majesty.

Thanks worthy Shepherd, thanks a thousand times.
This gift assure thy se^f contents me more,
Than greatest bounty of a mighty Prince,
Although he were the Monarch of the world.

Most gracious Goddess, more than mortal wight,
Your heavenly hue of right imports no less,
Most glad am I, in that it was my chance
To undertake this enterprise in hand,
Which doth so greatly glad our princely mind.

No Goddess (Shepherd) but a mortal wight,
A mortal wight distressed as thou see;
My father here is King of Aragon,
I Amadine his only drughter am,
And after him sole air unto the Crown:
Now whereas it is my fathers will,
To marry me unto Segasto,
One whose wealth through Fathers former usury,
Is known to be no less then wonderful;
We both of custom oftentimes did use,
(Leaving the Court) to walk within the fields
For recreation, especially the Spring,
In that it yields great store of rare delights:
And passing further then our wonted walks,
Scarce entered within these luckless woods,
But right before us down a steepfall hill,
A monstrous ugly Bear did hie him fast
To meet us both: I faint to tell the rest.
Good Shepherd but suppose the ghastly looks,
The hideous fears, the hundred thousand woes
Which at this instant Amadine sustained.

Yet worthy Princess let thy sorrow cease,
And let this sight your former joys revive.

Believe me Shepherd, so it doth no less.


Long may they last unto your hearts content,
But tell me Lady, what is become of him?
Segasto called; what is become of him?

I know not I, that know the powers divine,
But God grant this, that sweet Segasto live.

Yet hard hearted he in such a case,
So cowardly to save him (...) by flight,
And leave so brave a Princess to the spoil.

Well Shepherd, for thy worthy valour tried,
Endangering thy self to set me free,
Unrecompenced sure thou shalt not be:
In Court thy courage shall be plainly known,
Throughout the Kingdom will I spread thy name,
To thy renoun and never dying fame:
And that thy courage may be better known,
Bear thou the head of this most monstrous beast,
In open sight to every Courtiers view:
So will the King my father thee reward.
Come let's away, and guard me to the Court.

With all my heart.


When heaps of harms do hover over head,
Tis time as then (some say) to look about,
And of ensuing harms to choose the least,
But hard, yea hapless is that wretches chance,
Luckless his lot, and caitiff-like accursed,
At whose proceedings Fortune ever frowns:
My self I mean most subject unto thrall:
For I, the more I seek to shun the worst,
The more by proof I find my self accursed.
Ere whiles assaulted with an ugly Bear,
Fair Amadine in company all alone,
Forthwith by flight I thought to save my self,
Leaving my Amadine unto her shifts:
For death it was for to resist the Bear,
And death no less of Amadines harms to hear.
Accursed I, in lingering life thus long:
In living thus, each minute of an hour
Doth pierce my heart with darts of thousand deaths:
If she by flight her fury doth escape,
What will she think?
Will she not say, yea flatly to my face,
Accusing me of mere disloyalty.
A trusty friend is tried in time of need
But I, when she in danger was of death,
And needed me, and cried, Segasto help,
I turned my back and quickly ran away,
Unworthy I to bear this vital breath,
But what, what need those plaints?
If Amadine do live, then happy I,
She will in time forgive and so forget:
Amadine is merciful, not Iuno like,
In harmful hearts to harbour hatred long.

Clubs, Prongs; Pitchforks, Bills: O help,
A Bear, a Bear, a Bear.

Still Bears, and nothing but Bears.
Tell me sirrah where she is.

O sir, she is run down the woods,
I saw her white head, and her white belly.

Thou talk of wonders, to tell me of white Bears.
But sirrah, did thou ever see any such?

No faith, I never saw any such:
But I remember my fathers words,
He bad me take heed I was not caught with the white Bear.

A lamentable tale no doubt.


I'll tell you what sir, as I was going a field to serve my fathers great Horse,
and carried a bottle of hay upon my head: Now do you see sir, I fast hudwinkt
that I should see nothing, I perceiving the Bear coming, I threw my hay into
the hedge, and ran away.


What from nothing?


I warrant you yes, I saw something: for there was two load of thorns besides
my bottle of hay, and that made three.


But tell me sirrah: the Bear that thou did see,
Did she not bear a bucket on her arm?

Ha, ha, ha, I never saw a Bear go a milking in all my life. But hark you sir,
I did not look so high as her arm, I saw nothing but her white head, and her
white belly.


But tell me sirrah: where dost thou dwell?


Why do you not know me?


Why no, how should I know thee?


Why then you know no body, and you know not me; I tell you sir, I am goodman
Rats Son of the next parish over the hill.


Goodman Rats son, whats thy name?


Why I am very near kin unto him.


I think so, but whats thy name?


My name? I have a very pretty name. I'll tell you what my name is, my name is
Mouse.


What plain Mouse?


I plain Mouse, without either w^lt or guard.
But do you hear sir, I am a very young Mouse, for my tail is scarce grown out
yet; look here else.

But I pray you who gave you that name?


Faith Sir, I know not that, but if you would fain know ask my fathers great
Horse, for he hath been half a year longer with my father than I have been.


This seems to be a merry fellow,
I care not if I take him home with me:
Mirth is a comfort to a troubled mind.
A merry man a merry Master makes.
How say thou sirrah, wilt thou dwell with me?

Nay soft sir, two words to a bargain. Pray what Occupation are you?


No Occupation, I live upon my lands.


Your lands? away, yea are no Master for me. Why, do you think that I am so mad
to go to seek my living in the lands among the stones, briars, and bushes, and
tear my holy day apparel? not I by your leave.


Why, I do not mean thou shalt.


How then?


Why thou shalt be my man and wait on me at Court:


Whats that?


Where the King lies.


What is that King, a man or a woman?


A man as thou art.


As I am: Hark you sir, pray you what kin is he to goodman King of our parish
the Church warden?


No kin to him, he is the King of the whole Land.


King of the whole Land! I never saw him.


If thou wilt dwell with me thou shalt see him every day.


Shall I go home again to be torn in pieces with Bears?
No not I, I will go home and put on a clean shirt, and then go drown my self.

Thou shalt not need, if thou wilt dwell with me, thou shalt want nothing.


Shall I not? then here's my hand, I'll dwell with you: And harky on sir, now you
have entertained me, I'll tell you what I can do, I can keep my tongue from
picking and stealing, and my hands from lying and slandering I warrant you as
well as ever you had any man in your life.


Now will I to Court with sorrowful heart, rounded with doubts: If Amadine do
live, then happy I; yea happy I if Amadine do live.


Now brave Lords, our wars are brought to end,
Our foes the foil, and we in safety rest:
It us behoves to use such clemency in peace,
As valour in the wars;
Tis as great honour to be bountiful at home,
As conquerors in the field.
Therefore my Lords, the more to my content,
Your liking, and our Countries safeguard,
We are disposed in Marriage for to give
Our Daughter unto Lord Segasto here,
Who shall succeed the Diadem after me,
And reign hereafter as I tofore have done,
Your sole and lawful King of Aragon.
What say you Lordlings like you of my advice?

An't please your Majesty, we do not only allow of your Highness pleasure, but
also vow faithfully in what we may, to further it.


Thanks good my Lords, if long Adrastus live,
He will it ^l^ require your courtesies.
Tremelio, in recompense of thy late valour done,
Take unto thee the Catelone a Prince,
Lately our prisoner taken in the wars:
Be thou his keeper, his ransom shall be thine:
We'll think of it when leisure shall afford:
Mean while do use him well, his father is a King.

Thanks to your Majesty, his usage shall be such,
As he thereat shall have no cause to grutch.

Then march we on to Court, and rest our wearied limbs.
But Collin, I have a tale in secret fit for thee,
When thou shalt hear a watch-word from thy King,
Think then some weighty matter is at hand,
That highly shall concern our state,
Then Collin look thou be not far from me,
And for thy service thou to fore hast done,
Thy truth and valour proved in every point,
I shall with bounties thee enlarge therefore,
So guard us to the Court.

What so my Sovereign doth command me do,
With willing mind I gladly yield consent.

Tell me sirrah, how do you like your weapons?


O very well, very well, they keep my sides warm.


They keep the dogs from your shins well, do they not?


How, keep the dogs from my shins? I would scorn but my shins should keep the
dogs from them.


Well Sirrah, leaving idle talk, tell me,
Dost thou know Captain Tremelios chamber?

I very well, it hath a door.


I think so, for so hath every chamber:
But dost thou know the man?

I forsooth, he hath a nose on his face.


Why s:o hath every one.


That's more then I know.


But dost thou remember the Captain that was here with the King that brought
the young Prince prisoner?


O very well.


Go to him, and bid him come unto me:
Tell him I have a matter in secret to impart to him.

I will Master, what's his name?


Why Captain Tremelio.


O, the meal-man; I know him very well,
He brings meal every Saturday; But hark you Master,
Must I bid him come to you, or must you come to him?

No sirrah, he must come to me.


Hark you Master, if he be not at home,
What shall I do then?

Why then leave word with some of his folks.


O Master if there be no body within,
I will leave word with his dog.

Why can his dog speak?


I cannot tell, wherefore doth he keep his chamber else?


To keep out such knaves as thou art.


Nay by Lady then go your self.


You will go sir, will you not?


Yes marry will I* O tis come to my head:
And he be not within, I'll bring his chamber to you.

What, will you pluck down the Kings house?


No by Lady, I'll know the price of it first.
Master, it is such a hard name I have forgotten it again:
I pray you tell me his name.

I tell thee Captain Tremelio.


O Captain treble knave, Captain treble knave.


How now sirrah, dost thou call me?


You must come to my Master. Captain treble knave.


My Lord Segast. did you send for me?


I did Tremelio, Sirrah, about your business.


I marry, whats that, can you tell?


No not well.


Marry then I can, straight to the Kitchin-dresser to John the Cook, and get me
a good piece of Bief and Brewis, and then to the Buttery hatch to Thomas the
Butler for a Jack of Beer: and there for an hour I'll so belabour my self, and
therefore I pray you call me not till you think I have done, I pray you good
Master.


Well Sir, away.


This it is, thou know the valour of Segasto.
Spread through all the kingdom of Aragon,
And such as have found triumph and favours,
Never daunted at any time: but now a Shepherd,
Admired in Court for worthiness,
And Segastoes honour laid aside:
My will therefore is this, that thou dost find some means to work the
Shepherds death: I know thy strength sufficient to perform my desire, and to
love no otherwise then to revenge my injuries.

It is not the frowns of a Shepherd that Tremelio fears:
Therefore account it accomplished what I take in hand.

Thanks good Tremelio, and assure thy self,
What I promise, that I will perform.

Thanks good my Lord: And in good time:
See where he comes; stand by awhile,
And you shall see me put in practise your intended drift.
Have at thee Swain, if that I hit thee right.

Wild Coward, so without cause to strike a man:
Turn Coward, turn: now strike and do thy worst.

Hold Shepherd, hold, spare him, kill him not:
Accursed villain, tell me, what hast thou done?
Ah Tremelio, Trusty Tremelio, I sorrow for thy death,
And since that thou living did prove faithful to Segasto,
So Segasto now living will honour the dead
Corps of Tremelio with revenge.
Blood-thirsty villain, born and bred in merciless murder,
Tell me, how durst thou be so bold,
As once to lay thy hands upon the least of mine?
Assure thy self, thou shalt be used according to the Law.

Segasto cease, these threats are needless,
Accuse me not of murder, that have done nothing
But in mine own defence.

Nay Shepherd, reason not with me,
I'll manifest thy fact unto the King;
Whose doom will be thy death, as thou deserve.
What hoe: Mouse come away.

Why how now? what's the matter?
I thought you would be calling before I had done.

Come help away with my friend.


Why, is he drunk? can he not stand on his feet?


No, he is not drunk, he is slain.


Flain? No by Lady, he is not flain.


He is killed I tell thee.


What do yo use to kill your friends? I will serve you no longer.


I tell thee the Shepherd killed him.


O did he so? But Master, I will have all his apparel if I carry him away.


Why so thou shalt.


Come then I will help: Mass Master I think his mother sung looby to him, he is
so heavy.


Behold the fickle state of man, always mutable, never at one.
Sometime we feed our fancies with the sweet of our desires:
Sometimes again, we feel the heat of extreme miseries.
Now am I in favour about the Court and Country,
To morrow those favours will turn to frowns.
To day I live revenged on my foe,
To morrow I die, my foe revenged on me.

No passenger this morning? what not one?
A chance that seldom doth befall,
What, not one? Then lie thou there,
And rest thy self till I have further need:
Now Bremo since thy leisure so affords,
An endless thing, who knows not Bremoes strength,
Who like a King commands within these woods?
The Bear, the Boar dare not abide his sight,
But haste away to save themselvess by flight.
The Crystal waters in the bubbling brooks,
When I come by do swiftly slide away,
And claps themselves in closets under banks,
Afraid to look bold Bremo in the face.
The aged Oaks at Bremoes breath do bow,
And all things else are still at my command.
Else what would I?
Rend them in pieces, and pluck them from the earth,
And each way else I would revenge myself.
Why, who comes here? with whom dare I not fight?
Who fights with me and doth not die the death? Not one.
What favour shows this sturdy stick to those
That here within these woods are combatants with me?
Why, death, and nothing else but present death.
With restless rage I wander through these woods,
No creature here, but fears Bremoes force:
Man, woman, child, beast, and bird,
And every thing that doth approach my sight,
Are forced to fall, if Bremo once do frown.
Come, Cudgel come, my partner in my spoils:
For here I see this day it will not be,
But when it falls that I encounter any,
One pat suffices for to work my will.
What, comes not one? then lets be gone,
A time will serve when we shall better speed.

Shepherd, thou staft heard thine accusers,
Murder is laid to thy charge:
What can thou say? thou hast deserved death.

Dread Sovereign, I must needs confess,
I slew this Captain in my own defence,
Not of any malice, but by chance:
But mine accuser hath a further meaning.

Words will not here prevail.
I seek for justice, and justice craves his death.

Shepherd, thine own confession hath condemned thee;
Sirrah, take him away, and do him to execution straight.

So he shall, I warrant him:
But do you hear Master King? he is kin to a Monky,
His neck is bigger then his head.

Come sirrah, away with him,
And hang him about the middle.

Yes forsooth, I warrant you, come you sirrah:
A, so like a sheep-biter a looks.

Dread Sovereign, and well beloved sir,
On bended knee I crave the life of this condemned Shepherd, which heretofore
preserved the life of thy sometime distressed daughter.

Preserved the life of my sometime distressed daughter!
How can that be? I never knew the time
Wherein was thou distressed: I never knew the day
But that I have maintained thy estate,
As best beseemed the daughter of a King.
I never saw the Shepherd until now.
How comes it then that he preserved thy life?

Once walking with Segasto in the woods,
Further then our accustomed manner was,
Right before us down a steep fall hill,
A monstrous ugly Bear did hie him fast
To meet us both: now whether this be true,
I refer it to the credit of Segasto.

Most true an't like your Majesty.


How then?


The Bear being eager to obtain his prey,
Made forward to us with an open mouth,
As if he meant to swallow us both at once:
The sight whereof did make us both to dread;
But specially your daughter Amadine,
Who, for I saw no succour incident
But in Segastoes valour, I grew desperate:
And he most coward-like began to fly.
Left me distressed to be devoured of him,
How say you Segasto, is it not true?

His silence verifies it to be true: what then?


Then I amazed, distressed all alone,
Did hie me fast, to escape that ugly Bear,
But all in vain; for why he reached after me,
And hardly I did oft escape his paws.
Till at the length this Shepherd came,
And brought to me his head.
Come hither boy, lo here it is, which I do present unto your Majesty.

The slaughter of this Bear deserves great fame.


The slaughter of a man deserves great blame.


Indeed occasion oftentimes so falls out.


Tremelio in the wars (O King) preserved thee.


the Shepherd in the woods (O King) preserved me.


Tremelio fought when many men did yield.


So would the Shepherd had he been in field.


So would my master, had he not run away.


Tremelio's force saved thousands from the foe,


The Shepherds force hath many thousand more.


Aye Shipsticks nothing else.


Segasto cease to accuse the Shepherd,
His worthiness deserves a recompense;
All we are bound to do the Shepherd good.
Shepherd, whereas it was my sentence thou should die,
So shall my sentence stand, for thou shalt die.

Thanks to your Magestie.


But soft Segasto, not for this offence*
Long may thou live; and when the Sisters shall decree,
To cut in twain the twisted thread of life,
Then let him die, for this I set him free,
And for thy valour I will honour thee.

Thanks to your Majesty.


Come daughter, let us now depart to honour the worthy valour of the Shepherd,
with our rewards.


O Master, hear you, you have made a fresh hand now,
I thought you would beshrow you: what will you do now?
You have lost me a good occupation by this means:
Faith Master now I cannot hang the shepherd,
I pray you let me take pains to hang you,
It is but half an hours exercise.

You are still in your knavery,
But since I cannot have his life,
I will procure his banishment for ever: Come on sirrah.

Yes forsooth I come. Laugh at him I pray you.


From Amadine, and from her Fathers Court,
With gold and silver and with rich rewards,
Flowing from the banks of gold and treasures:
More may I boast and say: but I
Was never Shepherd in such dignity.

All hail worthy Shepherd.


All rain lousy Shepherd.


Welcome my friends, from whence come you?


The King and Amadine greet thee well,
And after greeting done, bids thee depart the Court;
Shepherd be gone.

Shepherd take Law-legs: fly away Shepherd.


Whose words are these? came these from Amadine?


I, from Amadine.


Aye from Amadine.


Ah luckless fortune, worse then Phaetons tale,
My former bliss is now become my bale.

What, wilt thou poison thy self?


My former heaven is now become my hell.


The worst Ale-house that ever I came in, in all my life.


What shall I do?


Even go hang thy self.


Can Amadine so churlishly command,
To banish the Shepherd from her fathers Court?

What should Shepherds do in the Court?


What should Shepherds do among us;
Have not we Lords enough on us in the Court?

Why, Shepherds are men, and Kings are no more.


Shepherds are men, and masters over their flocks.


That's a lie, who pays them their wages then?


Well, you are always interrupting of me:
But you were best to look to him, lest you hang for him when he is gone.

And you shall hang for company,
For leaving me alone.
Shepherd stand forth and hear my sentence.
Shepherd be gone within three days, in pain of my displeasure,
Shepherd be gone, Shepherd be gone, be gone, be gone, be gone.
Shepherd, Shepherd, Shepherd.

And must I go? and must I needs depart?
Ye goodly Groves, partakers of my songs,
In time before when fortune did not frown,
Pour forth your plaints, and wail awhile with me;
And thou bright Sun, the comfort of my cold,
Hide, hide thy face and leave me comfortless;
Ye wholesome herbs and sweet smelling savours;
Yea each thing else prolonging life of man,
Change, change your wonted course,
That I wanting your aid, in woeful sort may die.

Ariena, if any body ask for me,
Make some excuse till I return.

What and Segasto call?


Do you the like to him, I mean not to stay long.


This voice so sweet my pining spirit revives.


Shepherd well me^, tell me how thou dost.


I linger life, yet wish for speedy death.


Shepherd, although thy banishment already he decreed, and all against my will,
yet Amadine --


Ah Amadine, to hear of banishment is death:
I double death to me: but since I must depart, one thing I crave.

Say on with all my heart.


That in absence either far or near,
You honour me as servant to your name.

Not so.


And why?


I honour thee at Sovereign of my heart.


A Shpeherd and a Sovereign, nothing like.


Yet like enough where there is no dislike,


Yet great dislike, or else no banishment.


Shepherd it is only Segasto that procures thy banishment.


Unworthy wights are more in jealousy.


Would God they would free thee from banishment,
Or likewise banish me.

Amen I say, to have your company.


Well Shepherd, since thou suffer thus for my sake,
With thee in exile also let me live,
On this condition Shepherd thou can love.

No longer love, no longer let me live.


Of late I loved one indeed, but now I love none but only thee,


Thanks worthy Princess: I burn likewise,
Yet smother up the blast:
I dare not promise what I may perform.

Well Shepherd, hark what I shall say,
I will return unto my fathers Court,
There for to provide me of much necessaries
As for my journey I shall think most fit.
This being done, I will return to thee;
Do thou therefore appoint the place
Where we may meet*

Down in the valley where I slew the Bear,
And there doth grow a fair broad branched beech
That overshades a well, so who comes first,
Let them abide the happy meeting of it both.
How like you this?

I like in well.


Now if you please, you may appoint the time.


Full three hours hence, God willing I will return.


The thanks that Paris gave the Grecian Queen,
The like doth Mucedorus yield.

Then Mucedorus for three hours farewell.


Your departure Lady breeds a privy pain.


'Tis well Segasto, that thou hast thy will*
Should such a Shepherd, such a simple Swain as he,
Eclipse thy credit famous thorough the Court?
No, ply Segasto, ply, let it not in Aragon be said,
A Shepherd hath Segastoes honour won.

What, hoe Master, will you come away?


Will you come hither, I pray you, what is the matter?


Why, is it not past eleven of the clock?


How then sir?


I pray you come away to dinner.


I pray you come hither.


Here's such a do with you, will you never come?


I pray you sir, what news of the message I sent you about?


I tell you all the Messes be on the Table already.
There wants not so much as a mess of Mustard, half an hour ago.

Come sir, your mind is all upon your belly,
You have forgotten what I bid you do.

Faith, I know nothing but you bad me go to breakfast.


Was that all?


Faith I have forgotten it, the very scent of the meat hath made me forget it
quite.


You have forgotten the Arrand I bid you do.


What Arrand, an arrant knave, or an arrant whore?


Why thou knave, did I not bid thee banish the Shepherd.


O the Shepherds Bastard.


I tell thee the Shepherds Banishment.


I tell you the Shepherds Bastard shall be well kept,
I'll look to it my self: but I pray you come away to dinner.

Then you will not tell me whether you have banished him or no?


Why I cannot say banishment if you would give me a thousand pounds to say so.


Why you whorsen slave, have you forgotten that I sent you and another to drive
away the Shepherd?


What an Ass are you? here's a stir indeed:
Her's Message, Arrant, Banishment, and I cannot tell what.

I pray you sir, shall I know whether you have drove him away?


Faith I think I have, and you will not believe me, ask my staff.


Why can thy staff tell?


Why he was with me too.


Then happy I, that have obtained my will.


And happier I if you would go to dinner.


Come sirrah, follow me.


I warrant you I will not lose an inch of you now you are going to dinner: I
promise you I thought seven years before I could get him away.


God grant my long delay procures no harm
For this my tarrying frustrate my pretence:
My Mucedorus surely stays for me,
And thinks me over-long, at length I come,
My present promise to perform;
Ah what a thing is firm unfeigned love!
What is it which true love dares not attempt?
My father he may make, but I must match:
Segasto loves, but Amadine must like
Where likes her best: compulsion is a thrall?
No, no, the hearty choice is all in all.
The Shepherds virtue Amadine esteems.
But what, methinks the Shepherd is not come;
I muse at that, the hour is at hand.
Well here I'll rest till Mucedorus come.

A happy prey; now Bremo feed on flesh:
Dainties Bremo, dainties thy hungry paunch to fill;
Now glut thy greedy guts with lukewarm blood:
Come fight with me, I long to see thee dead.

How can she fight that weapons cannot wield?


What can not fight? then lie thee down and die.


What must I die?


What needs these words? I thirst to suck thy blood.


Yet pity me, and let me live awhile.


No pity I, I'll feed upon thy flesh,
And tear thy body peece-meal joint by joint.

Ah now I want my Shepherds company.


I'll crush thy bones between two Oaken trees.


Hast Shepherd, hast, or else thou come too late.


I'll suck the sweetness from thy marrow-bones.


Ah spare, ah spare to shed my guiltless blood.


With this my Bat I will beat out thy brains;
Down, down I say, prostrate thy self upon the ground.

Then Mucedorus farewell, my hoped joys farewell;
Yea farewell life, and welcome present death.
To thee, O God, I yield my dying ghost.

Now Bremo, play thy part.
How now? what sudden chance is this?
My limbs do tremble, and my sinews shake,
My unweakned Arms have lost their former force:
Ah Bremo, Bremo, what a foil had thou,
That yet at no time was afraid,
To dare the greatest Gods to fight with thee,
And now wants strength for one down driving blow?
Ah how my courage fails when I should strike!
Some new-come spirit abiding in my breast,
Saith, spare her Bremo, spare her, do not kill:
Shall I spare her that never spared any?
To it Bremo, to it; say again:
I cannot wield my weapon in my hand,
Me thinks I should not strike so fair a one:
I think her beauty hath bewitched my force,
Or else with me altered natures course.
Ay woman, wilt thou live in woods with me?

Fain would I live, yet loath to live in woods.


Thou shalt not choose, it shall be as I say,
And therefore follow me.

It was my will an hour ago and more,
As was my promise for to make return;
But other business hindered my pretence.
It is a world to see, when men appoints,
And purposely on certain things decrees,
How many things may hinder his intent:
What one would wish, the same is farthest off,
But yet the appointed time cannot be past,
Nor hath her presence yet prevented me:
Well here I'll stay, and expect her coming.
Some one or other is pursued no doubt.
Perhaps some search for me, tis good to doubt the worst:
Therefore I'll be gone.

Hold him, hold him, hold him: here's, a stir indeed; here came hue after the
Crier; I was set close at mother Nips house, and there I called for three pots
of Ale, as tis the manner of us Courtiers; Now sirrah, I had taken the
maidenhead of two of them, and as I was lifting up the third to my mouth, there
came, hold him, hold him: now I could not tell whom to catch hold on, but I am
sure I caught one, perchance a may be in this pot; Well I'll see, mass I cannot
see him yet; well I'll look a little further; mass he is a little slave if he be
here: why here's no body; all this is well yet. But if the old Trot should come
for her pot, I marry there's the matter: but I care not, I'll face her out, and
call her old rusty, dusty, musty, fusty, crusty Firebrand, and worse then all
that, and so face her out of her pot: but soft, here she comes.


Come you knave; wheres my pot you knave?


Go look your pot, come not to me for your pot, twere good for you.


Thou lie thou knave, thou hast my pot.


You lie and you say it, I your pot? I'll know what I'll say.


What wilt thou say?


But say I have it and thou dare.


Why thou knave, thou hast not only my pot, but my drink unpaid for.


You lie like an old* I will not say whore.


Dost thou call me whore? I'll cap thee for my pot.


Cap me and thou dare;
Search me whether I have it or no.

How now sirrah, whats the matter?


O flies Master, flies.


Flies, where are they?


O here Master, all about your face.


Why thou lie, I think thou act mad.


Why master I have killed a dungcart full at the least.


Go to sirrah, leave this idle talk, give ear to me


How, give you one of my ears*
Not an you were ten masters.

Why sir, I pray you give ear to my words.


I tell you I will not be made a Curtal for no mans pleasure.


I tell thee attend what I say,
Go thy ways straight and rear the whole town.

How, rear the whole town? even go your self, it is more than I can do: Why,
do you think I can rear a town, that can scarce rear a pot of Ale to my head,
I should rear a town, should I not?

Go to the Constable and make a privy search,
For the Shepherd is run away with the Kings daughter.

How? is the Shepherd run away with the Kings daughter, or is the Kings
daughter run away with the Shepherd?


I cannot tell, but they are both gone together.


What a fool is she to run away with the Shepherd; why I think I am a little
handsomer man then the Shepherd my self; but tell me Master, must I make a
privy search, or search in the privy?


Why doest thou think they will be there?


I Cannot tell.


Well then search every where,
Leave no place unsearched for them.

Oh now I am in office: now will I to that old Firebrands house, and will not
leave one place unsearched: Nay, I'll to the Ale-stand, and drink so long as I
can stand; and when I have done, I'll let out all the rest, to see if he be not
hid in the Barel; and if I find him not there, I'll to the Cupbord, I'll not
leave one corner of her house unsearched, in faith ye old Crust, I'll be with you
now.


Enough of music, it but adds to torment,
Delights to vexed Spirits are as dates
Set to a sick man, which rather cloy then comfort:
Let me entreat you to entreat no more.

Let your strings sleep, have done there:


Mirth to a soul disturbed, are Embers turned,
Which sudden gleam with molestation,
But sooner lose their sight for it,
Tis gold bestowed upon a Rioter,
Which not relieves but murders him.
Tis a drug given to the healthful,
Which infects, not cures.
How can a Father that hath lost his Son,
A Prince both wise, virtuous, and valiant,
Take pleasure in the idle acts of Time?
No, no, till Mucedorus I shall see again,
All joy is comfortless, all pleasure pain.

Your Son (my Lord) is well.


I prithee speak that thrice.


The Prince your Son is safe.


O where Anselmo? surfeit me with that.


In Aragon, my Liege, and at his parting,
Bound my secrecy,
By his affections love not to disclose it:
But care of him, and pity of your age
Makes my tongue blab what my breast vowed, concealment.

Thou not decievest me,
I ever thought thee what I find thee now,
An upright loyal man.
But what desire, or young-fed humour
Nursed within his brain,
Drew him so privatelie to Aragon?

A forcing Adamant,
Love mixed with fear and doubtful jealousy,
Whether report gilded a worthless Trunk,
Or Amadine deserved her high extolment.

See our provision be in readiness,
Collect us followers of the comliest hue
For our chief guardians, we will thither wend;
The Crystal eye of Heaven shall not thrice wink,
Nor the green Flood six times his shoulders turn,
Till we salute the Aragonian King.
Music speak loudly now, the season's apt,
For former dolours are in pleasures wrapped.

Now Mucedorus, whither wilt thou go?
Home to thy father to thy native soil,
Or try some long abode within these woods?
Well I will hence depart and hie me home,
What hie me home said I? that may not be:
In Amadine rests my felicity.
Then Mucedorus do as thou did decree,
Attire thee Hermite-like within these Groves:
Walk often to the Beech, and view the Well,
Make settles there, and seat thy self thereon:
And when thou feel thy self to be a thirst,
Then drink a hearty draught to Amadine,
No doubt she thinks on thee,
And will one day come pledge thee at this Well.
Come habit, thou art fit for me:
No Shepherd now, an Hermit must I be:
Methinks this fits me very well;
Now must I learn to bear a walking staff,
And exercise some gravity withal.

Here's through the woods, and through the woods,
To look out a Shepherd, and a stray Kings daughter:
But soft, who have we here? what art thou?

I am an Hermit.


An Emmet, I never saw such a big Emmet in all my life before.


I tell you sir, I am an Hermit,
One that leads a solitary life within these woods.

O I know thee now; thou art he that eats up all the Hips and Haws: we could
not have one piece of fat Bacon for thee all this year.


Thou dost mistake me:
But I pray thee tell me, whom dost thou seek in these woods?

What do I seek? for a stray Kings daughter,
Run away with a Shepherd.

A stray Kings daughter, run away with a Shepherd,
Wherefore, can thou tell?

Yes that I can, 'tis this; my Master and Amadine walking one day abroad,
nearer these woods then they were used (about what I cannot tell) but towards
them comes running a great Bear. Now my Master pla^d the man, and ran away, and
Amadine crying after him: now sir, come, me a Shepherd, and he strikes off the
Bears head, now whether the Bear were dead before or no I cannot tell, for
bring twenty Bears before me, and bind their hands and feet, and I'll kill them
all: now ever since Amadine hath been in love with the Shepherd, and for good
will she is even run away with the Shepherd.


What manner of man was he? can describe him to me?


Scribe him, ay I warrant you that I can; a was a little, low, broad, tall,
narrow, big, well favoured fellow, a jerkin of white cloth, and buttons of the
same cloth.


Thou describest him well, but if I chance to see any such, pray you where
shall I find you, or whats your name?


My name is called Master Mouse.


O Master Mouse, I pray you what office might you bear in the Court?


Marry sir, I am Rusher of the Stable.


Oh, Usher of the Table.


Nay, I say Rusher, and I'll prove mine Office good: for look you sir, when any
comes from under the Sea, or so, and a dog chance to blow his nose backward,
then with a whip I give him the good time of the day, and strew Rushes
presently, therefore I am a Rusher: a high Office I promise ye.


But where shall I find you in the Court?


Why, where it is best being, either in the Kitchen eating, or in the Buttery
drinking: but if you come, I will provide for thee a piece of Beef and Brews
knuckle deep in fat: pray you take pains, remember Master Mouse.


Ay sir, I warrant I will not forget you.
Ah Amadine, what should become of her?
Whither should thou go so long unknown?
With watch and ward each passage is beset,
So that she cannot long escape unknown.
Doubtless, she hath lost her self within these woods,
And wandering to and fro, she seeks the Well,
Which yet she cannot find, therefore will I seek her out.

Amadine, how like you Bremo and his woods?


As like the woods of Bremoes cruelty:
Though I were dumb and could not answer him,
The beasts themselves would with relenting tears
Bewail thy savage and inhumane deeds.

My love why dost thou murmur to thy self?
Speak louder, for thy Bremo hears thee not.

My Bremo, no, the Shepherd is my Love.


Have I not saved thee from sudden death.
Given thee leave to live that thou might love,
And dost thou whet me on to cruelty?
Come kiss me (sweet) for all my favours past.

I may not Bremo, therefore pardon me.


See how she flies away from me,
I will follow and give attend to her.
Deny my Love? A worm of Beauty,
I will chastise thee: come, come,
Prepare thy head upon the block.

O spare me Bremo, love should limit life.
Not to be made a murderer of himself.
If thou wilt glut thy loving heart with blood,
Encounter with the Lion or the Bear,
And like a Wolf, prey not upon a Lamb.

Why then dost thou repine at me?
If thou wilt love me, thou shalt be my Queen,
I'll crown thee with a chaplet made of Ivory,
And make the Rose and Lilly wait on thee:
I'll rend the burley branches from the Oak,
To shadow thee from burning Sun.
The Trees shall spread themselves where thou dost go,
And as they spread, I'll trace along with thee.

You may, for who bu^ you?


Thou shalt berfed with Q^ails and Partridges,
With Black-birds, Larks, Thrushes, and Nightingales.
Thy drink shall be goats-milk, and Crystal water,
Distilling from the Fountains and the clearest Springs:
And all the dainties that the woods afford,
I'll freely give thee to obtain thy love.

You may, for who but you?


The day I'll spend to recreate my love,
With all the pleasures that I can devise:
And in the night I'll be thy bedfellow,
And lovingly embrace thee in my arms.

One may, so may not you.


The Satyrs and the wood-Nymphs shall attend on thee,
And lull thee asleep with music sound,
And in the morning when thou dost awake,
The Lark shall sing good morrow to my Queen,
And whilst he sings I'll kiss mine Amadine.

You may, for who but you?


When thou art up, the wood-lanes shall be strewed
With violets, Cowslips, and sweet Marigolds,
For thee to trample and to tread upon:
And I will teach thee how to kill the Dear,
To chase the Hart, and how to rouse the Roe,
If thou wilt live to love and honour me.

You may for who but you?


Welcome sir, an hour ago I looked for such a guest,
Be merry wench, weel have a frolic feast,
Here's flesh enough for to suffice us both,
Say sirrah, wilt thou fight, or dost thou mean to die?

I want a weapon* how can I fight?


Thou want a weapon, why then thou yieldst to die?


I say not so, I do not yield to die.


Thou shalt not choose, I long to see thee dead.


Yet spare him Bremo, spare him.


Away, I say I will not spare him.


Yet give me leave to speak.


Thou shalt not speak.


Yet give him leave to speak for my sake.


Speak on, but be not over-long.


In time of yore, when men-like brutish beasts
Did lead their lives in loathsome Cells and Woods,
And wholly gave themselves to witless will:
A rude unruly rout, then man to man became
A present prey; then might prevailed,
The weakest went to walls;
Right was unknown, for wrong was all in all.
As men thus lived in their great outrage,
Behold one Orpheus came (as Poets tell)
And them from rudeness unto reason brought,
Who led by reason soon forsook the woods,
In stead of Caves they built them Castles strong,
Cities and Towns were founded by them then:
Glad were they, they found such ease,
And in the end they grew to perfect Amity.
Weighing their former wickedness,
They termed the time wherein they lived then,
A golden age, a good golden age.
New Bremo (for so heard I thee called)
If men which lived tofore as thou dost now,
Wild in woods, addicted all to spoil,
Returned were by worthy Orpheus means:
Let me (like Orpheus) cause thee to return
From murder, blood-shed, and like cruelties.
What should we fight before we have a cause?
No, lets live and love together faithfully:
I'll fight for thee.

Fight for me, or die: or fight or else thou die.


Hold Bremo, hold.


Away I say, thou trouble me.


You promised me to make me Queen.


I did, I mean no less.


You promised that I should have my will.


I did, I mean no less.


Then save the Hermits life, for he may save us both.


At thy request I'll save him, but never any after him
Say Hermit, what can thou do?

I'll wait on thee, sometime upon thy Queen,
Such service shalt thou shortly have as Bremo never had.

Come sirs, what shall I never have you find out Amadine and the Shepherd?


I have been thorough the woods, and thorough the woods, and could see nothing but
an Emmet.


Why I see a thousand Emmets, thou meanest a little one.


Nay, that Emmet that I saw was bigger then thou art.


Bigger then I? what a fool have you to your man?
I pray you Master turn him away.

But dost thou hear, was he not a man?


I think he was, for he said he did lead a salt-sellers life round about the
woods.


Thou would say a solitary life about the wood.


I think it was indeed.


I thought what a fool thou art.


Thou art a wise man: why he did nothing but sleep since he went.


But tell me Mouse, how did he go?


In a white Gown, and a white hat on his head,
And a staff in his hand.

I thought so, he was an Hermit, that walked a solitary life in the woods.
Well, get you to dinner, and after, never leave seeking till you bring some
news of them, or I'll hang you both.

How now Rumbelo, what shall we do now?


Faith I'll whom to dinner, and afterwards to sleep.


Why then thou wilt be hanged.


Faith I care not, for I know I shall never find them:
Well, I'll once more abroad; and if I cannot find them,
I'll never come home again.

I tell thee what Rumbelo, thou shalt go in at one end of the wood, and I at
the other, and we will both meet together in the midst.


Content, lets away to dinner.


Unknown to any, here within these woods,
With bloody Bremo do I lead my life;
The Monster he doth murder all he meets,
He spares none, and none doth him escape:
Who would continue, who but only I,
In such a cruel cut-throats company?
Yet Amadine is there, how can I choose?
Ah silly soul, how oftentimes she sits,
And sighs, and calls, Come Shepherd, come:
Sweet Mucedorus come set me free,
When Mucedorus (Peasant) stands her by;
But here she comes: What news fair Lady,
As you walk these woods?

Ah Hermit, none but bad,
And such as thou know.

How do you like your Bremo and his woods?


Not my Bremo, nor his Bremo woods.


And why not yours? methinks he loves you well.


I like not him, his love to me is nothing worth.


Lady, in this methinks you offer wrong,
To hate the man that ever loves you best.

Ah Hermit, I take no pleasure in his love,
Neither doth Bremo like me best.

Pardon my boldness, fair Lady, since we both
May safely talk now out of Bremoes sight,
Unfold to me, if you please, the full discourse,
How, when, and why you came into these woods,
And fell into this bloody butchers hands.

Hermit I will: Of late a worthy Shepherd I did love.


A Shepherd (Lady) sure a man unfit to match with you.


Hermit, this is true: and when we had --


Stay there, the wild man comes,
Refer the rest until another time.

What secret tale is this? what whispering have we here?
Villain, I charge thee tell thy tale again.

If needs I must, lo here it is again.
When as we both had lost the sight of thee,
It grieved us both, but specially thy Queen,
Who in thy absence evers fears the worst,
Lest some mischance befall your Royal Grace.
Shall my sweet Bremo wander through the wood,
Toil to and fro, for to redress my want,
Hazard his life, and all to cherish me?
I like not this quoth she:
And thereupon crave to know of me,
If I could teach her handle weapons well.
My answer was, I had small skill therein:
But gladsome (mighty King) to learn of thee:
And this was all.

Wast so? none can mislike of this:
I'll teach you both to fight, but first my Queen begin,
Here take this weapon, see how thou can use it.

This is too big, I cannot wield it in mine arm.


Is't so? we'll have a knotty Crab-tree staff for thee;
But sirrah, tell me, what says?

With all my heart I willing am to learn.


Then take my staff and see how thou can wield it.


First teach me to how hold it in mine hand.


Thou hold it well; look how he doth,
Thou may the sooner learn.

Next tell how, and when 'tis best to strike.


'Tis best to strike when time doth serve,
Tis best to lose no time.

Then now or never it is time to strike.


And when thou strike, be sure to hit the head.


The head?


The very head.


Then have at thine.
So, lie there and die, a death (no doubt) according to desert,
Or else a worse, as thou deserve worse.

It glads my heart this Tyrants death to see.


Now Lady it remains in you
To end the tale you lately had begun,
Being interrupted by this wicked wight:
You said you loved a Shepherd.

I, so I do, and none but only him:
And will do still as long as life shall last.

But tell me Lady, since I set you free,
What course of life do you intend to take?

I will disguised wander thorough the world,
Till I have found him out.

How if you find your Shepherd in these woods?


Ah! none so happy then as Amadine.


In tract of time a man may alter much:
Say Lady, do you know your Shepherd well?

My Mucedorus, hath he set me free?


He hath set thee free.


And lived so long unknown to Amadine?


Ay that's a question whereof you may not be resolved:
You know that I am banished from the Court,
I know likewise each passage is beset,
So that we cannot long escape unknown,
Therefore my will is this, that we return,
Right thorough the thickets to the wild mans Cave,
And there a while live on his provision,
Until the search and narrow watch be past:
This is my council, and I like it best.

I think the very same.


Come let's be gone.


Nay soft sir, are you here? abot^ on you
I was like to be hanged for not finding of you:
We would borrow a certain stray Kings daughter of you,
A wench, a wench sir, we would have.

A wench of me? I'll make thee eat my sword.


O Lord, nay, and you are so lusty, I'll call a cooling-card for you: O Master,
Master, come away quickly.


What's the matter?


Look, Amadine and the Shepherd* O brave.


What minion, have I found you out?


Nay that's a lye, I found her out my self.


Thou gadding huswife, what cause had thou
To gad abroad?
When as thou know our wedding day so nigh?

Not so Segasto, no such thing in hand:
Show your assurance, then I'll answer you.

Thy fathers promise my assurance is.


But what he promised he hath not performed.


It rests in thee for to perform the same.


Not I.


And why?


So is my will, and therefore even no.


Master with a none, none so.


Ah wicked villain, art thou here?


What need these words? weigh them not.


We weigh them not, proud Shepherd I scorn thy company.


Weel not have a corner of thy company.


I scorn not thee, nor yet the least of thine.


That's a lie, a would have killed me with his pugs-nando.


This stoutness Amadine contents me not.


Then seek another that may you better please.


Well Amadine it only rests in thee,
Without delay to make thy choice of three:
There stands Segasto, a second here,
There stands the third: now make thy choice.

A Lord at the least I am.


My choice is made, for I will none but thee.


A worthy mate (no doubt) for such a wife.


And Amadine, why wilt thou none but me?
I cannot keep thee as thy father did;
I have no Lands for to maintain thy state:
Moreover, if thou mean to be my wife,
Commonly this must be thy use,
To bed at midnight, up at four,
Drudge all day, and trudge from place to place,
Whereby our daily victual for to win;
And last of all, which is the worst of all,
No Princess then, but a plain Shepherds wife.

Then God gee you good morrow goody Shepherd.


It shall not need if Amadine do live,
Thou shalt be crowned King of Aragon.

O Master laugh, when he is a King, I'll be a Queen.


Then know that which neretofore was known:
I am no Shepherd, no Aragonion I,
But born of Royal blood: my Father's of Valentia King,
My Mother Queen; who for thy sacred sake
Took this hard task in hand.

Ah how I joy my fortune is so good.


Well now I see Segasto shall not speed,
But Mucedorus, I as much do joy
To see thee here within our Court of Aragon,
As if a kingdom had befallen me this time:
I with my heart surrender her to thee.
And look what Right to Amadine I have.

What barns door, and born where my Father was Constable? a bots on thee, how
dost thou?


Thanks Segasto, but you leveld at the Crown.


Master, bear this and bear all.


Why so sirrah?


He says you take a goose by the Crown.


Go too sirrah; away, post you to the King,
Whose heart is fraught with careful doubts,
Glad him up, and tell him these good news,
And we will follow as fast as we may.

I go Master, I run Master.


Break heart, and end my pallid woes,
My Amadine, the comfort of my life;
How can I joy except she were in sight?
Her absence breeds great sorrow to my soul,
And with a thunder breaks my heart in twain.

Forbear those passions gentle King,
And you shall see twill turn unto the best,
And bring your soul to quiet and to joy.

Such joy as death, I do assure me that,
And nought but death, except of her I hear,
And that with speed, I cannot sigh thus long:
But what a tumult do I hear within?

I hear a noise of over-passing joy
Within the Court: my Lord be of good comfort,
And here comes one in hast.

A King, a King.


Why how now sirrah, what's the matter?


O 'tis news for a King, tis worth money.


Why sirrah, thou shalt have silver and gold if it be good.


O 'tis good, 'tis good Amadine.


O what of her? tell me, and I will make thee a knight.


How a Spright, no by Lady, I will not be a Spright.
Master get you away, if I be a Spright, I shall be so lean
I shall make you all afraid.

Then (Sot) the King means to make thee a Gentleman.


Why I shall want parrell.


Thou shalt want for nothing.


Then stand away, strike up thy self, here they come.


My gracious Father, pardon thy disloyal daughter.


What, do mine eyes behold my daughter Amadine?
Rise up daughter, and let these embracing arms
Show some token of thy Fathers joy,
Which ever since thy departure hath languished in sorrow.

Dear Father, never were your sorrows
Greater than my griefs:
Never you so desolate as I comfortless:
Yet nevertheless knowing my self
To be the cause of both, on bended knees
I humbly crave your pardon.

I'll pardon thee (dear daughter) but as for him.


Ay Father, what of him?


As sure as I am King, and wear the Crown,
I'll be revenged on that accursed wretch.

Yet worthy Prince, work not thy will in wrath, show favour.


I, such favour as thou deserve.


I do deserve the daughter of a King.


Oh impudent! A Shepherd and so insolent.


No Shepherd I, but a worthy Prince.


In fair conceit, not princely born.


Yes Princely born, my Father is a King,
My Mother a Queen, and of Valentia both.

What Mucedorus, welcome to our Court,
What cause had thou to come to me disguised?

No cause to fear, I caused no offence;
But this, desiring thy daughters virtues for to see,
Disguised my self from out my Fathers Court,
Unknown to any in secret I did rest,
And passed many troubles near to death:
So hath your daughter my partaker been.
As you shall know hereafter more at large:
Desiring you, you will give her to me,
Even as mine own, and Sovereign of my life,
Then shall I think my travels all well spent.

With all my heart, but this,
Segasto claims my promise made tofore,
That he should have her as his only Wife,
Before my Council when he came from war.
Segasto, may I crave thee let it pass,
And give Amadine as Wife to Mucedorus?

With all my heart, were it a far greater thing,
And what I may to furnish up their rites,
With pleasing sports and pastimes you shall see.

Thanks good Segasto, I will think of this.


Thanks good my Lord, and whilst I live,
Account of me in what I can or may.

Good Segasto, these great courtesies
Shall not be forgot.

Why hark you Master, bones what have you done?
What, given away the wench you made me take such pains for? You are wise
indeed. Mass and I had known of that, I would have had her my self: faith
Master now we may go to breakfast with a wood-cock-pie.

Go too sirrah* you were best to leave this knaverie.


Come on my Lords, lets now to Court,
Where we may finish up the joyfullest day
That ever hapt to a distressed King:
Were but thy Father the Valentia Lord,
Present in view of this combined knot.
What shout was that?

My Lord the great Valentia King,
Newly arrived, entreats your presence.

My Father?


Prepared welcomes give him entertainment;
A happier Planet never reigned then that
Which governs at this hour.

Rise honour of my age, food to my rest:
Condemn not (mighty King of Aragon)
My rude behaviour, so compelled by nature,
That manners stood unknowledged.

What we have to recite would tedious prove
By declaration, therefore in and feast,
To morrow the performance shall explain
What words conceal: till then Drums speak, Bells ring*
Give plausive welcomes to our brother King.

How now Envy; what blush thou already?
Peep forth, hide not thy head with shame,
But with courage praise a woman's deeds;
Thy threats were vain, thou could do me no hurt,
Although thou seemd'st to cross me with despite,
I overwhelmed and turned upside down thy blocks,
And made thy self to stumble at the same.

Though stumbled, yet not over-thrown,
Thou can not draw my head to mildness:
Yet must I needs confess thou hast done well,
And plaid thy part with mirth and pleasant glee:
Say all this; yet can thou not conquer me,
Although this time thou hast got,
Yet not the conquest neither.
A double revenge another time I'll have.

Envy spit thy gall;
Plot, work, contrive, create new fallacies,
Teem from thy womb each minute a black Traitor,
Whose blood and thoughts have twins conception:
Study to act deeds yet unchronicled,
Cast native monsters in the moulds of men;
Case vicious devils under sancted robes;
Vnhasp the wicket where all perjuries roost,
And swarm this ball with treasons, do thy worst,
Thou can not (hell-hound) cross my steer too night,
Nor blind that glory where I wish delight.

I can, I will.


Nefarious Hag begin,
And let us tug till one the mastery win.

Comedy, thou art a shallow Goose,
I'll overthrow thee in thine own intent,
And make thy fall my Comic merriment.

Thy policy wants gravity, thou art too weak;
Speak friend, as how?

Why thus,
From my foul study will I hoist a wretch,
A lean and hungry meager Canibal,
whose jaws swell to his eyes with chewing malice;
And him I'll make a Poet.

Whats that to the purpose?


This scrambling Raven with his needy beard,
Will I whet on to write a Comedy;
Wherein shall be composed dark sentences,
Pleasing to factious brains;
And every otherwhere place me a Jest,
Whose high abuse shall more torment then blows.
Then I my self (quicker then lightning)
Will fly me to the puissant Magistrate,
And waiting with a trencher at his back,
In midst of jollity rehearse those gauls
(With some additions) so lately vented in your Theater;
He on this cannot but make complaint
To our great danger, or at least restraint.

Ha, ha, ha, I laugh to hear thy folly:
This is a trap for boys, not men, nor such,
Especially deceitful in their doings,
Whose staid discretion rules their purposes:
I and my faction do eschew those vices:
But see, O see, the weary Sun for rest,
Hath lain his golden compass to the West,
Where he perpetual bide, and ever shine,
As Davids off-spring in his happy Clime.
Stoop Envy, stoop, bow to the earth with me,
Lets beg our pardon on our bended knee.

My power hath lost her might, Envies date's expired.
And I amazed am.

Glorious and wise Arch- Caesar on this earth,
At whose appearance Envie's stricken dumb,
And all bad things cease operation:
Vouchsafe to pardon our unwilling error,
So late presented to your gracious view,
And weel endeavour with excess of pain,
To please your senses in a choiser strain.
Thus we commit you to the arms of night,
Whose spangled carcase would for your delight,
Strive to excel the day: be blessed then,
Who other wishes, let him never speak.

Amen.
To Fame and Honour we commend your rest,
Live still more happy, every hour more blessed.


