NO more let Perseus Noble Story
Carry away the public Glory:
Nor let Andromeda the fairt,
With this our Virgin Star compare,
Nor Let St. George (though Englands Saint)
Of his Grand Legend longer vaunt:
Nor let the Maid, whom Dragon green,
(The fairest Monster ever seen)
For killing Maids, and such prey stealing,
If we may credit Doctor Heyling.
Let not that Maid, nor any other,
(Always except the Virgin-Mother)
Stand in so great Italica
As Does the Virgin of this day.
That Virgin Sacrifice that died
With Veil unvailed, and Zone untied,
Upon her Fathers Oath ill made,
And worse performed, aside belayd;
And that of Iphigenia
(If those be two) they must give way:
And Lipsius-Virgin in his Gown
Is by our Virgins Dress put down.
(Alas his Gown could nought procure,
Critics and Poets still are poor!)
See how she rides! See how she comes!
Alarmed in with Fifes and Drums:
Not Venus with the bribed Winds
Blowing her Hair (the Snare of minds)
And all her fluttring blind array
Of Cupids, that fore-run the way;
Not in her richest Pearly Shell,
Nor yet Proserpina for Hell
When the great Lord of wealth (her love)
Did all the Entrails of his Earth improve,
To catch (the not so taken Maid)
In's Ebon Carre made Light afraid,
And richest Stones, benighted day,
Did so much Gallantry display:
As when our Virgin and her Pages,
The Pride of this, the talk of Ages
That are to come, did pass the street
In Satin all from head to feet;
'And every Virgin who stood by,
'Wish'd secretly, O would that I
'Were of the Mercers Company!
The sight was rare, but envious clouds,
The glorious day in showrs beshrowds;
And Winds in Malice, or in Love
To sport or court her highly strove.
Avaunt you hollow Issue of the Earth,
And Mountains vast unruly Birth,
Play with our Naval sights and toss
The Barges; there's the smaller loss:
Prostrate your selves before that Barge
That carries now the Cities Charge;
Those red white streamers now are come,
And do command you to be dumb;
Or if you'll blow, your breath dispose,
To fill them like the red white Rose:
That all the Asure Thames may tell,
The Mayor is coming by the smell.
Will you not cease? then Canons roar,
And fire them off from Lambath shore.
The Winds they are but four, and you
Are thirty strong, in open view.
Gunner the Lintstock straight prepare,
And we will thin foul winds to air:
Or if our Virgin do desire,
We'll turn you all from air to fire.
When so translated you will be
More like unto Virginity.
For Rain, and Earth, and Winds are gross,
But rarefied they lose their dross:
Then you will proper Convoys be
For this great Act of Charity:
Which is of Love a grateful strife,
To deck a Virgin for a Wife?
And by the Trophies of an hour,
To make her a perpetual Dower.
'Which makes the Virgins who stood by
'Wish heartily, O would that I
'Were of the Mercers Company.

