We'll hear no more in his defence:
Did not our cousen's speedy flight upon
His banishment, confirm both guilty?

Your pardon, I have done.

Yet (gracious Sir) --

Sister, desist from the renovation of our vain petition, formerly denied,
or many weighty reasons, still retaining
Their necessary virtue; and employ
Your urgent prayers for somewhat, that may win
Our free consent, yet not detract from justice:
And, what our power can give, be confident
You may command. But, for Pausanio's doom,
It was decreed irrevocable; then
Press not our resolution for remission.
But with his punishment, behold his crime,
And you will find Justice, when't sentenced him,
Was more then merciful, our stricter Laws
Exacting life, whose rigour we appeased
With gentler banishment. Let it suffice,
That your quotidian intercession hath
Moved us to such a mercy, as the most
Will rather censure partiality,
(His ill is known so well). And by your fair
Persuasions, do not seek in the worlds eye,
To make us impious. Our transmarine friends,
(The still admirers of our purer Laws,)
Do not more seek for peace, then desire us
A precedent for their perverted justice,
Whose bright sword w'have so continued from
The infectious rust of innovation; and must do so.
Therefore (virtuous sister)
Press it no farther. Fate, in its decree,
Is not more fixed, more resolute than we.

I have taught my busy tongue an obedient silence;
Yet, were your eyes spectators of those tears,
Those tear-begetting tears, my sad-sweet friend
Hourly pays her fathers memory,
'T would mollify your heart, (thought on it doth mine)
Were your kind ears the attentive auditors
Of her faint sighs, and you not echo them,
Your heart were heartless rock. Oh Sir, vouchsafe
Her grief but hearing, and her sweet-tongu'd sorrow,
Will charm your restrained pity.

What, statuiz'd Hippolyto?

No, royal Sir, a little womaniz'd,
I sucked it from my mother, and 'twill out.
We are not made of marble, but are men.
And, but I know your zeal to sacred Justice,
I should (with hope t'obtain) presume to beg
Compassion, with her Highness, from your Majesty,
For the late exiled father, of that yet sorrowing Lady. --
But --

But what, Hippolito? Recollect thy self;
Pausanio was thine enemy.

But how deserved, omniscient heaven can witness,
Best knowing the religious sympathy
^ have with his sad sufferings.

Spend not the least of thy too precious thoughts
On such a worthless subject. Let him suffer,
And unpi^tyed. His mere ingratitude to thee,
Setting aside his great offence,
Is offence great enough to pull down an affliction
Beo^ nd infliction: he suffers worthily.
No more of him. -- Yet, sister --

Ha! surely his resolution cannot so soon stagger:
Pray heaven it prove so, or all my plots miscarry,
And I am miserable.

I use my possibility; but alas,
To one, whose griefs distract her, comfort is,
As Physic to the dead, effectless:
Who by sage counsel, would suppress her sorrow,
Are heard, but not regarded. Fruitless are
The hours spent in persuasion. But who sooths
Her melancholy with fair hopes, that time
May repossesse her Father, with his yet lost honours,
Not, alone, attracts her eye and ear,
But gains her heart.

Oh blessed intelligence!

Trust me, I pity the poor Lady, and wish,
Her lavish fathers prodigality,
T'enrich her brother, and her fair self with virtue,
Had not forced him turn bankrupt.
Her then needless sighs,
Had not raised up such floods of cruel tears,
To drown her joys. We wore him in our breast,
Whilst loyal; but, when he left his virtue,
We cast him off, dreading a further danger.
But for those pair of spotless innocents,
His children, they still survive, receiving
Warmth from the sun-shine of our favour,
Which they enjoy deservedly: Martiano
Hath a spirit, as bold,
As temperately resolute, which we must cherish;
And his sisters; souls,
(Like a huge Diamond in a mount of Ore)
As rich in virtue, as her exterior parts in pulchritudes perfection.

Though't be pure truth, from him I like it not.

Pray let her have all due respect from you,
As she shall have from us.

Her merits challenge more, then my performance
Can pay her virtue, though my endeavour's aim
Be wholly for her grieved hearts tranquillity.

When next you see this sorrow-clouded Beauty,
Let her sweet sadness know, our self in person,
Before expected, will persuasions bring,
To alienate her griefs.

Gracious Sir, I shall.

Come my Hippolito.

Laughed at'm?


Oh sir, extremely -- she laughed until she leaked, she wept with laughing.


It could not be, at them; they were too serious; upon mine honour, I ne'er
composed a copy of more pure poetry, and dressed in such rich language; in my
opinion, they were exquisite


No doubt, Sir, and yet she might laugh at'em. Our women of this age are grown
so wise, that what we think meritorious, they believe ridiculous; and sometimes
it falls out so, they err not ever.


Pooh! the style was too lofty, and the conceit tickelish and profound; her
weak capacity could not reach the meaning.


It may be so: What was the subject?


Her self the general, and every part particularised.


Why there's it; will you tickle a woman's profundity with a lofty style, and
she not laugh at the conceit? it is impossible.


Well, I do hope to nose Vatimius yet, and marry fair Rosania my self.


And leave the Lady Dianetta to wear the willow?


No, I'll court her for a Mistress, the other for a Wife^ 'tis providently
usual -- Who's that knocks?

Some needy Tailor in his
Apprentises thread-bare cloak; or Seamster, in pitiful foul linen, is come
(with lamentation) to woo for money.


Signior, your Shoo-maker, very importunate, desires some short conference with
you.


Say ^'me abroad.


Sir, it boots not, he knows your constant hour too well; says, you are ne'er
caparrison'd till twelve.


Tell him, he's a rogue, and he lies.


Not I, Sir, 'twill bear an action; call a man a rogue for telling truth! If
you have not what he comes for, money, at least give him good words.


I never shall endure his importunity.


I have a present means to give him sudden motion. --


What dost mean?


So now, be angry, that the straitness of your boot, forced you to cut it, or
you could not have worn 'em: and seem impatient.


Let me alone.


Good-morrow to your Worship.


In good time, Sir. What? you come for money, but are like to go without. Pox
on your neat work; I must cut new boots, or cannot wear 'em; besides, incur my
Lord's displeasure; who very now in great haste sent for me. Another would
return 'em on your hands, but I am merciful, and you know it well enough,
therefore presume: but have a care, for if this trade hold, you'll quickly
break.


I am afraid so.


Sir, I desire your pardon for these, your next shall make amends.


They shall? and when?


By tomorrow this time.


Go to, fail not, if you fail me, I'll fail you.


Nay, that's sure enough.


Thou necessary villain; let me hug thee.


Peugh, this is nothing, I have seen a hundred of these tricks in Town. Now
must you make a virtue of necessity, and neatly tie it up with this new
fashioned Ribbon; and, ere tomorrow at night, 'twill prove a fashion.


Excellent Carlo! Again? who's there now? But 'tis no matter, now I know the
trick on it, I shall be even with some more of ye.


The Lord Hipolito hath sent for you.


I attend.


Tax not my courage (dearest friend) I dare
As much, as man; when warranted by virtue.
The day's not more antipathetical
To night, then my bold Soul to coward Fear.
But oft we see temerity o'rethrow,
What wise delay might have prevented.
Protraction is not ever dangerous,
But sometimes advantageous; nor is
My sure revenge remitted, because deferred:
No, no, it vegetates, and when mature,
With ease, I'll shake the vengeful fruit, that bears
A certain ruin with it, upon the heads
Of the conspirators, and all at once
Crush them to dust. But my design, as yet, is green.

I not suspect your courage, Martiano,
But tardity^ for, though our Proverb saith,
He that goes slow goes sure; yet, he that hastes,
Hath first his ends. I can but counsel you,
And proffer my assistance.

Both which, Ausonius, I accept with gratitude:
I may have just occasion to put
Your noble friendship to a trial:
Till when, I ever shall acknowledge
The great engagement my demerit hath
Unto your goodness.

Do, put me to the proof;
Then shall my actions speak my real heart
Better, then my harsh tongue, unpractique in
The ceremonious falsities of France,
(So much in fashion with our antic age.)
My All is thine, and when I prove perfidious,
Kill me; till then, trust me.

Thou art all constant goodness, and my Friend.
In that poor Monosyllable, th'inestimable riches
Of our love, lies thesauriz'd.

Importunate affairs which envy me
The pleasure of thy company, exact
Me, for some few hours.
Be circumspect, and underneath your thoughts,
Your secretest thoughts, let our discourse lie couched;
There's danger in the appearance. Passion
Too often drives man beyond his reason;
And a rash tongue betrays a resolved heart.
Good counsell's ever seasonable. Be wise.
And diffident. Hippolitus feigned friendship
Portends no good, his aime's beyond your reach.
Be confident, your fathers enemy
Can never be your real friend, his tongue
And heart must needs be dissonant.
Credit not his soft language; for most sweet
The Sirens sing, when they intend to slay.
Be firm in your revenge, th'injurious wrongs
Of good Pausanio cry loud for it; let him have it.

Could I conceive his injuries grew from that root of
Malice, I would --

You are not ignorant, 'tis more then whispered

Were he the man, though skulked in some obscure
And unknown cavern, in the remotest part
Of the wide Universe, my impetuous rage,
More swift and terrible than lightning,
Soon would find him out;
And soon as found, dissect him into Atoms,
Which my just hand should dissipate about
His silent Mansion, that the guiltless earth
(Abhorring such commixture) might entreat
The furious justice of some stormy gust,
To snatch his ashes from her purer dust.
And hurry them to hell.

Passion transports him. -- Reassume your reason,
And once again be vigilant.

My thoughts afflict me, sure it cannot be,
Hippolito should wear so smooth a brow^
And have a craggy heart; experience
Yet often proves the contrary. The Sea,
But now calm as a standing Lake, flattering
The secure Mariner, in few minutes space,
Furrows his front, and threatens him with wrack.
And among a thousand seeming friends, 'tis rare
To find one pair, whose meaning's their expression,
Among formal friends; then what can I expect
From a known enemy? Ha! -- ^tis doubtful --
But my revenge must not be idly grounded,
Upon slight thought, but fundamental truth.
I would not for the world, blur my pure soul
With any black mistake; -- yet ^'le suspect what may be,
And 'tis wisdom; hasty fools
Build on the ^ottile-sand of self-opinion,
Whilst the patient prudent laugh at their sad ruin.
I must make farther trial, then if I find
Him guilty, I'll soon ease my troubled mind.

I'm now securely fixed in the Duke's bosom,
My power equals his; his greater title
Only distinguishes. So politic Syres,
T'advance their sons low fortunes, by a Match
Deserving better, let them bear the name
And glorious sound of Land lord, when th'entrado
Runs th'old course into their Coffers.
'Tis my command that executes, the Duke
But countenanceth the act. Petitions flock to me,
And, as my pleasure shall decree, are granted or opposed.
I've dressed my self in such humility,
That all men's hearts are mine. Our neighbour Cardinal,
(That favoured Prelate) from the opressed people,
Hath not more hourly imprecations,
Than I prayers, smiles, and obsequious cringes
What content, to perfect my beatitude, affords
The world that's yet deficient,
But beauteous Lucebella? the rich crown
Of all my joys, for whose unvalued love
My honour lies at stake, nay, my dear life,
Were I discovered: whose wilful Father
Despised my humble suites, and with denial
(Cold as a Northern congelation)
Nip'd my then germinating hopes; besides,
When but a Neophyte in our Masters favour,
Maliciously he sought to eclipse my glory
With a cloud of ruin; which to retaliate,
My timely plots have sent him far enough;
Yet knows he not who hurt him. So wise men
Vengeance take, whilst th'inconsiderate fool
Threatens, and fails. Pausanio I am now
Above thy malice, and resolved to win
Thy peerless daughter, or grow old in sin.

Summoned by your command, (my honoured Lord)
My ever-ready duty brought me, to wait upon you pleasure.

Fumante, thus in short^
I have perceived, and oft, your jealous eye
Hath glanced at Dianetta more of late,
Than any other Lady of the Court.

My Lord! --

And she deserves respect, she's fair; besides,
You have enjoyed with freedom a vouchsafty,
That others dare not hope for, many hours
Of sweet discourse with her, a certain symptom
Of mutual affection -- You are happy,
Whilst I --

My Lord, I've many Mistresses;
But, who's most courteous, she predominates.

No jealously, Fumante,
I know the boundless love you bear her, and
The power you have with her; how that your absence
Doth not more torture her afflicted soul,
Than presence hilarate her heart. Therefore
I sent for thee, on whom my hopes depend:
For now's the time wherein thou may express
Thy gratitude, for all my liberal favours,
Profusely shewr'd on thee: Nay more, endear
Me to thy love, and our two souls unite,
For perpetuity.

(I scent the project, he would inoculate.
Now must I turn pimp, -- hum -- well:
Would I were the first had undergone,
That now much practised function for a Patron.
'Tis a familiar age
For you, (my gracious Lord) to whose great bounty
I owe more, than the too-short remnant of my life
I wish to live, that my whole care and study,
Employed for your contentment may effect it.

Grateful Fumante! Oh -- my troubled breast,
Doth nourish flaming sulphur.

Wee^l have it quenched, and speedily.
Her quick rolling eyes are characters of kindness.
The other day, (speaking of my Verses) she said,
My words were charms, and that the Lady must be
Insensible, -- of stone, -- that could withstand my method --
I'll put her to the proof -- Courage my Lord!
The Lady's yours

Mercy pronounced to the Delinquent, bears
Nothing so sweet a sound, -- I am all joy --
Dearest Fumante! -- imagination
Of what's to come, transports me -- prithee how,
How, my Fumante? enform me of the way.

With admiration, often I have heard
Her speak your merit, and affirm, the Duke
Looked with her eyes, when his election made
Your worthy self the object of his favours.

On! -- prithee on!

The Court (not without cause) might boast of you;
For Florence, nor the world, could ever produce
Your Honour's parallel.

My hopes best comfort! On.

Added t'your gifts of nature, goodl^ feature,
Were those of the mind, sound judgment, tempered valour,
Relieving bounty, and humility,
Attracting hearts: in fine all graces, which
Required are, to make a man complete,
Unanimousl^ flocked into your breast,
As to th^ir proper center, and there fixed, dwell.

Oh! I shall surfeit with excess of joy.

Were it possible, her willing tongue could stretch
A praise beyond deserving, you should hav't;
Which is a proof sufficient she affects you.
N^w 'twere a necessary policy, my Lord,
To tickle her in th'ear with th'like report,
From you, concerning her, it cannot choose but take:
And if that fail her mean condition,
Being far beneath your honours;
Large promises, (lusts sugared bait) and some ^erformance,
(The life of expectation) will forcibly prevail.
Despair not, for the stuff we have to work on, is
Malleable -- My Lord, she is a woman.

Whom means Fumante?

Fair Dianetta.

Dianetta?

Yes: was't not she your honour spake of?

Erroneous apprehension, dull Fumante,
Thy jealousy, and my credulity,
Equally fool us. My now present griefs,
Exceed my late imaginary joys --
Why did my rage procure the Generall's banishment?
Was't not for beauteous Luc^bella's love?

Your Lordships word obliged me to believe so.

'Tis a pure truth, then turn not an Apostate:
For my sublime soul fixed in the pure heaven
Of her transcendent beauty, (where doth shine
The glory of perfection) disdains
Inferior community.

Your naming Dianetta, made me
Suppose the contrary. For, we of the Court
Are rarely bondslaves into constancy.

'Tis a confessed fault, would 'twere amended.
But now take my intentionst
My virtuous fair, with much impatience,
Brooks her loved father's absence, and admits
Of no society, but sadness, whilst
My grief-swoln heart doth languish.
Now to avoid suspicion (for I doubt
Martiano's haughty spirit) and to confirm
Me in her good opinion, with haste,
Repair to Dianetta, that she, through you --

Now I conceive: may give intelligence
To Lucibella, of the constant faith
You have vowed unto her goodness --

Right -- and withal,
(For this point is the soul of my design)
How my assiduous supplication is,
To impetrate the Dukes remission for Pausanio.
Let her speak comfort plentifully, for
Thus assure her, I'll never cease my suit,
Till I obtain his gracious grant. Do this, and --

And more, (my Lord)
Be confidently cheerful, and expect,
Ere long, a prosperous issue.

Go, and kind fate wait on thee, if she prove
Kind, I am too great, ever to know remove

Love hath a strange consuming faculty,
Wastes not alone the spirits, but the purse.
Variety of change, will shortly make me
Change variety. It hath cost me, since that I
First made love unto Rosania, at least
Two thousand pistols in very clothes; and
Yet she cannot fancy me; 'tis strange -- I
I wear 'em well enough -- ha!

Yes, Sir;
(For I can get none of'em till they be
Past wearing.

And
My judicious Tailor tells me, I become my cloths.
I'm open to thy view, deliver thy opinion.

Faith, Sir, your cloths become you.

Your clothes become you, villain.
He swears, that the compaction of my body is beyond
Compare, and takes delight to look upon my waste.

(I cannot blame him, he lives by your great waste.)

And yet, your clothes become you!

Your Pardon, Sir; the phrase is usual.

Use it no more, because it is so: When any thing is
Common, it is worthless.

That's a Court Maxim.

Go, Sir, discharge the Taylor presently
^ will not, as most Gallants do, still spend,
Whilst I have where with all, but pay,
That when I want to spend, then spend I may.

Per-lady, no small policy.

This suites the forward issue of a new fashion; yet, am I almost confident,
she'll make it elder by a month, then that I gave my man a year since. Well, I
must humour her; but if she continue thus, when we are married, we must wear my
woods upon our backs, or (like thTortoise) carry our houses about us. 'Tis rue
mored, I shall have her, which I've confirmed, although she never made me any
promise, and I strongly believe 't; for I am termed the object of the Ladies,
and the exact Courtier: Should it go otherwise, I should be bravely laughed at.
But I'll to her, and know a certainty, for I can scarcely hold out any longer.


Vatinus, well mett^ So early ready? and so quaintly dressed? Trust me, this is
not ordinary, but I suppose, the Dukes intended visit to Lucibella, with the
Princess, with whom Rosania goes, occasioned this unaccustomed expedition.


I do confess ingenuously, it did!
But I must wait. My Lord, your humble servant.

That such a solid judgment, and sweet beauty,
Should rashly throw the treasure of her love
On a mere glorious outside, troubles me past wonder.
Imperious love! placest thou charms in clothes?
Are gay apparel, and a rich-loind purse,
Such powerful attractions? Yes, 'tis plain:
Whilst the reward of vertue's cold disdain.
When I discovered my religious flame,
With an unfeigned passion, and my soul
Almost expiring with each heartless sigh;
What answer, but, she pitied me: whilst he
Must quaff the Cordial, that should comfort me.
Women, your love admits no other Laws,
But this, ye love not therefore, but because
By this, my Lord the Duke is on the way,
To pay his promised visit to your sister.

She'll take your personal information, for an honour.

'Tis the least service I can pay her merit.

There goes an honest Lord; and, but Ausonius,
There's scarce another in the Court.
Where might a man turn his eye to find a third?
Torment unto my blood, Hipolito.

(His rising must prevent my fall^ he shall
Be General -- hal 'tis concluded: and see a
Most opportune recountre.)
What, wedded still to sadness, Martiano; ever alone?

Better alone, then ill accompanied.

How's this?

My honest thoughts are constant subjects to
My upright soul; Treason and Adulation
Were ne'er known to them. You'll say, 'tis strange,
But 'tis a simple truth. Now should I slack
The awful reins, and let 'm rove, they might
Rebel, having so great a precedent (my Lord.)

Is this disjointed talk to us? know you; who we ar^?

Disjointed talk to us? know you, who we are?
Yes: I do know, Hipolito: our names have b^t an equal sound.

However, more manners and less familiarity.
Would well become you; else you will grow contemptible.

More manners less familiarity; contemptible?
My potent arm (where in the purple blood,
Of wronged Pausanio lively flows)
Shall chastise thy mad folly, and maintain
My fathers Son the Nobler -- now's the time for trial.
Who (though unjustly exiled) hath a breast
Harbouring more real worth then the carved
Monuments of all thy decease'd Ancestors
Can brag off -- heaven he weeps!
This may be but delusion -- on!
What though you be our Masters Minnion?
That doth not lend addition to your blood,
'Tis Virtue that ennobles; every way
I am at worst, your equal; which denied.
Let our impartial swords the cause d^cide.
What means Hipolito?

I never hear your banished Father named,
But grief through my kind eyes, evaporates,
The sad mist from my kinder heart, and leaves
It obvious.

This cannot be dissembling --
My Lord your pardon! my rash credulity,
And filial love to parent,
Enforced my heart to a foul misconstruction,
How that your power which the Duke contrived
My fathers sad remove; the reason, this:
Because you held him for an Enemy;
And in a supposed just revenge, I thought
To kill you; yet not ignobly.

Adulterated age! Monstrous ingratitude!
Is my so noble friendship, pious sorrow,
Uncessant mediation, all my services,
Both to, and for your father, thus rewarded?
Arm! for I'll teach thy rage a better temper --
Was it for this? my long continued prayers,
For your advance (yet until now effectless)
At length, have won the yielding Duke to make
Your worthlesse-selfe his general? nay brought
His Royal person to confirm it on you,
Brought him an honour to your habitation,
For this? -- but I tryffle -- betake you to your
Guard^ Why do you not put forward?
Doth abject fear restrain your fury?

No 'tis a thing I hate, as I do love
True vallour^ the late War proclaimed it: nor
Because you're f^vourit to the Duke for could,
It enter in my thought, you wronged my father?
Were you Jove's Ganymed? my noble anger
Would force mere attempt high-heav'ns invasion,
And from the O^ympicke thunders riffled arms
Throw headlong my revenge to ^artarus.

O^ -- thou'st damned spirit

T^ prosecute sweet vengeance,
I could do things, me thinks impossible:
B^u^less be that hand, usurps a sword;
A^ainst a friend! now I am calm, and beg,
What must not be denied, your goodness pard^n;
And, henceforth, I vow to wear you next my soul.

First -- Nay, pray receive my sword!
And if you doubt of my reality?
Rip up my breast, where you shall find a heart
Worthy your friendship.

Kind Sir, enough: I am all faith -- The Princess.

Martiano, the Duke, within expects you.

Madam, I attend.

The Lord Hipolito will deserve your love,
Whose faithful mediation hath accompanied
Our long important suit, for the old General.

As sent from heaven.

This confirms all the rest:
What devil suggested me to this mistake?
Once more, Sir, your forgiveness?

Martiano, take it, and a friend! but hence
Let reason rule, and not be ruled by sense

WHat think ye, Gentlemen of Lucibella.

She spake sweetly and wisely.

Well, she's the glory of her sex.
I never heard a suite of such importance,
Urged which like modesty ^t'was strange the duke
(After to powerful aplea) could still,
Remain inexorable.

Sir, nothing less: justice best speaks a Prince,
When mercy yokes his great Prerogative
With vulgar censure: should he, now, reverse
(At a fair Ladies prayers) his former doom,
And call Pausanio home, which all the Lords
Entreaty, could not win him to, d'yee think
The busy-Commons gravidated heads,
(Which generally, from nothing, coin conceits)
Would not bring forth foul whispers, since they know.
Him for a Traitor.

I've heard a Tenent (besides that of his sanctity)
How that a Princes great Prerogative,
Maintains him not-erronious (the truth
Of either, I dispute not, since authouriz'd)
Which believed, the people dare not murmure.
However, mercy no less becomes a Prince.

Faith Sir, their insolency, here of late,
Is grown to such a height, that Majesty
Lies trampled on; they dare do any thing.

'Tis too true.
And more then time their great impiety,
Were by a stricter hand suppressed

Here are a pair of States-men, such another
Not to be called out of Christendom, to over throw it,
One a fool, ^' other a flatterer, I must not
Leave them, for my mirth;
But hark ye Gentlemen! 'tis more then thought.
That the the old Gennerall, is grossely injured

Fools are of that opinion.

Yes, yes, fools; none, but fools.

I am of that opinion; am I a fool?

You a fool, my Lord?

I do protest I hold Pausanio noble.

Come, come, my Lord, it is unsafe
To harbour such opinions, when the laws
Have proved him guilty of foul treason.

Hum -- are you of that faction?
I shall observe you more hereafter.
I only speak to ye, my grave judicious friends,
But no more of that.
What think ye of the great honour, late conferred
On Martiano? he's now created General;
And hath a haughty spirit.

Spirit too much, I fear; but yet the duke.
Was ill-advis'd, until a farther proof,
So great an honour, rashly, to bestow,
Took from a Traitor, on the Traitors son,

Right: who (for ought we know) may be a Traitor?
The Duke was much too blame, and without question,
The whole Court are of our opinion.

Yes, yes, fools; none, but fools.

How's this?

Now I hope you will not question me, for my opinion;
I am even with ye.

We? not we, my Lord; we are your friends.

Nay now ye dare not
And I am glad on it
See the ladies.
Such seemed the beauteous Goddess, when she got.
The golden ball, on happy Ida's top;
Else had the Trojan-youth bestowed the prize
On Juno, or the Martiall-maid.
Rosania, well; how e're you slight my love,
My captived soul will your true martyr prove.

I've not neglected the performance of
All your desires.

You much oblige me.

Enough, enough, I do not like the subject.

That's but an evasion, because she would not have
Her love to me discovered: how shall I be blessed, with wit, and beauty?

Your serious thoughts (my Lord) are taken up
With business for the state; you have left courting.

Lady, I was projecting --

Oh purge your brain of projects, I advise you.
They breed contagion, that infects the state;
And will, or make you deadly sick, or kill you.

But mine is lawful.

Law it selfe's unsound.

Yet, Lady, mine is just and honest.

That would be rare and strange: what i'st? --

She fi^s him every way and she hath ashrew'd wit,
And I shall love her the better for it: even thus.
Will she cross me, to exercise her Genius --

You love a Lady, and would have her give you the
Monopoly of her heart; and, for the obtaining
Of the Patent, give her yours.

I would: Is it not fair, and equal?

As't may fall out: yet you may pay too dear; --
But it concerns not me.

She's yet immovable: hard-hearted fair! --

Signior Fumante, I had your amorous verses.

He send her verses? --

But the exuberance of your praise, was only due
To Venus self; and (if my memory fail me not)
The Author so intended them, in the last Court-Masque.

The Author Madame?
How, hath she found out that? --

Yes Sir! the major part of them I'm sure were none.
Of yours: but blush not! you're not the first, by
Multitudes, guilty of this felonious fault, 'tis common.

Yet ne'er the less absurd.

By Phoebus self, I swear!
The invention genuinely was my own.
I not deny, but mine might simulize
The others learned-straine.

Yea; good wits will jumpe.

For now the sterile soil of forced invention.
Is over-wrought, therefore not, so productive
Of variety: what theme can you propose.
That largely hath not bin discussed on?

Scarce any: therefore your excuse is the more passable.

The duke --

Madame you have exceeded in our entertainment.
Which you may judge ill recompensed, having denied.
Your only suite: but consolate
Your greived heart, which better hopes: for when.
Your Presence, shall, an honour bring, with it,
Unto our Court, our gratitude shall give
Your bounty a just proof, that we deserve it.

What means the duke? --

Till when-I think 't an age-your leave --
The Arabian gales breath not so sweet a scent
On blushing Roses.

Your Grace leaves too much honour which your handmaid.

Fairest -- farewell!

The duke departed strangely.

Some thing hath crept into,
His noble breast, that troubles him,
What ere it be?

I partly guess the cause.

Pray heaven no want in us, or misperformance.
In his entertainment, hath wrought this alteration!

Be feareless!

No; rather your abundance: in plainer terms,
^adame, I think your beauty hath subjected
His stouter heart, and doubting, now your loves
Reciprocation, since his great opposing.
Your sad petition, his obduracie
Feeling the heat of Cupids flames become
More flexible: witness his kind invitall
To the Court, his grateful promises of all
Due performance, and his encouragement
To lively consolation; but most,
His Heart-betraying salutation
Just at parting: through which I well perceived,
(As if his breast had bin transparent crystal)
The rankling relic Loves kind cruelty
Had left behind -- nay (Madam) we can judge

Propitious be thy divination!

I would not for the world.

Why? could not love him?

Yes, before any He living:
Nay set aside the attraction of his person
Which, though external, is most powerful;
With all the internal virtues, that enrich
His nobler mind: as he is your brother
He might share bliss with me: but as he is
A tyrant to my virgin tears effus'd
In such abundance, me^kely at his feet.
Whereby to expiate my fathers guilt
From his too strict remembrance and reduce
him to his native home, that so mine eyes
(Happy in their aspect) might strain the rest
through my excess of joy; as he is thus
Merciless to deny me this I could be pity l^s, --

Sweetest shake off this misbecoming sorrow^
And these sad weeds, that shrow'd it for, than now,
Never more cause of gladness: tyer thy sel^e
Like to thy self! and help revive the Court
(Grown dull through thy long absence)
With thy presence!

(Dear Madam) do! for if the Duke be taken?
As certainly he is (or I have no inspection)
Believe your father now at home! for that must follow.
He never can expect love from you,
'Till he have made him recompense.

Very true: therefore pray be advised!

Good Madam!

Nay come, you shall be ruled, and go to Court.

Chiefly, to give a demonstration
Of my obedience to the Duke his summons;
Next to pleasure ye; and last (if possible)
Too lose part of my grief, which heaven knows
Is in supportable^ I will wait on you -- But by our sacred friendship!

To me no exorcisms.

Then Question not your brothers passion!

I shall observe --

Come gentle boy, thy untouched heart is light,
Thou can express another sadness in
A pleasing tone, and yet remain unmoved:
Sing me the melancholy ditty, which thou said
Would please me.
weep on, sad Soul! and may thy tears make thee memorative of hers! y^t notxs
to grieve thee;
For though thy disrespective beams carrouz'd, unsatissi'd, those streams her
goodness may relieve thee: Th'obdurate stone,
By oft distilling drops, is wrought upon:
Sigh on! until thy frozen breast, be with dissolving -- warmth possessed! then
weep again!
Till thy repentant sorrow show each tear, and sigh, from her did flow hath
bin repayed with ten; and then she must.
Or love again, or lived esteemed unjust.

Tis well: leave us!
What a combustion rages in my breast!
And how small hope to quench it! righteous fate!
What horrid sin, unknown to my clear soul,
Have I committed, meriting so great
A punishment? than which, none -- temporal
More cruel: to love and be disdained!
Is there prevention? she, whose sea of tears
(That might have melted Rocks) the abyssus of
My greedy rigour hath carrous'd without
Sense of satiety; can she have left
One drop to pity me? --
She whose sad sweet complaints, could not but charm
The bloody Moore, and teach his fierceness, mildness;
I've heard neglectingly: can she retain
Compassion, for one hath bin so cruel?
Superfluous question! -- but stay better reason:
Say I call home her father -- if at length,
After whole years, great pains, large sums, consumed
In the delaying law, we but recover
The desperate principal! travel nor charge
Is thought on, we're contented: why maint she
(Forgetting her past griefs) be satisfied?
I am resolved -- but then where's Justice -- oh! --
No matter^ -- ye celestial dwellers,
In Capital Letters, register this truth!
I fall to frailety, but by a temptation
That your divinities, if upon earth, could not withstand:
Which seen I may find pardon

There is no safety can associate sin;
Some thing must be donne.

Hipol to discoursing to himself?
Thus obscured, I may over hear him.

The Duke is strangely changed: his wonted mirth
Forsakes him; and his mind-disclosing-speech
Speaks him all sadness: his dejected looks,
Soft lingering pace, and solitary loneness,
Faint-heartless-sighs, and jealous apprehensions.
Are the true badges of a deepe-struck-Amorist.

There you rubbed my wound.

Hum -- it troubles me extremely,
To know the certain cause of his distemper.

Kind Hipolito, thy whole care's for us,
Whereas we're grown quite careless of ourselfe,

May be the peereless Lucebella.

What of her?

(The splendour of whose eye might enfuse warmth
In the half frozen Cossack, and enforce
Him throw away his friendly furs) hath caught.
H^s yielding soul -- I would not for a world --

Why? I can hold no longer.

Ha? -- how easily might my secure thoughts
Have bin surprised?

Be not amazed! but feareless! we have heard.
Thy kind expressions tending to our welfare;
My dear Hipolito, what recompense,
For thy continual care, can there be, worth
Thy acceptance? when as my dukedom is
Too poor a restitution.

Gracious Sir, all I can does but duty,
Therefore too well rewarded by your royal notice.

Thou art all virtue. But when you pronounced
The very cause of my sick hearts disease,
Naming fair Lucebella, why stopped you?
Then with a faint conclusion (I would not for a world)
Blast my hopes?

I'm put to it; but am armed --

Say (my H^polito) -- wrack not my expectation!
Dost thou suspect her virtue?

What, If I confirmed her vicious? it would worke^
But oh that were a sin, for which damnation
Would seem a punishment too easy -- I have it

Why muttu^'st, to thy self?
And leave our demand unsatisfied?

Sir, your pardon!
My anxious thoughts, with which my brest's replete;
Caused this neglect of duty.

Then answer us: dost thou believe her such
As the best female, through temptation, may be, Frail?

Chaste and religious, as the virgin Nun,
For ought I know.

She is, she is; my soul for hers, she is:
With haste, dispeed our letters to Pausanio,
Entreat him home, wo him to pardon our
Not pardoning him! tell him we are his friend,
Intend to call him father; restitute
Him any thing -- all things -- Jam 'ore joyd.
But what? dost thou repine at our felicity?

No: but, rather, pray for its increase.

What then, writes discontentment, on thy brow?
We do command your nearest thoughts.

(Great Sir) you know my home-bred nature, blunt
As simple, not inured to sooth error
With flattery, so heap sin on sin; but prone
T'extirpate vice, and cherish virtue: then
Shall I behold, with violating hands,
Your self, that should maintain justice, usurp
Her sacred-sword, and, with the desperate point,
Wilfully vulnerate your precious soul,
When as you may prevent it? and not be truly greev'd?
Oh no! these tears (the intrusive witnesses
Of the fixed love I bear him) do lament
Pausanio's absence: yet my pious heart,
Limits my ready wishes, for a squared rock,
Of perfect Adamant, I'd not have him here,
And the impardonable sin upon
Your tortured conscience, with the living scandal.
Devouring your noble name, and Ancestors;
When as Posterity
Viewing the annalls of your happy reign,
Among your better deeds, there registered,
Shall find this matchless piece of partial justice;
And, in the ears of your surviving off-spring,
Read, Here have we the else good Cosmo,
For a Precedent of ill: will they not curse you?

Oh --

But my too-forward tongue willing to express.
My zeal to goodness, hath transgressd; and now
I have discharged my duty, if you please?
Cut off my head! --

Rise, my divided soul! would the great trains,
That throng the Courts of Princes, were like thee!
But, now, what means to keep me from thi^ guilt,
And yet be happy? my Hipolito.

This only: of late young Martiano,
With great entreaty oft hath urged
Me to desire your Majesties consent,
That he might visit his long absent father:
Now, give him your grant! and for the rest
Let me alone: his fair sister
Affects your Grace, suffize it, that I know it:
But her brother opposes all that bashful virgins --

We understand thee: and thy words bring comfort;
Tell him he hath our leave, with power to use
Our Galleys, when, and where, he please:
We long to hear of his departure.

I'll hasten it: Sir, be you but cheerful,
For if I fail? hate me!

Be prosperous! --

So: now to Martiano, then the games on foot;
I must not trust his friendship, but at distance.
Had not the good evil spirit furnished
My great necessity? from what a precipice
Had I fall'ne head-long to perdition?
I'm deeply in, then on! if I must fall?
Better for treason, then things trivial. --

To be married to Vatinius? this false report
Puts me besides my patience: the very man I
^oath above all the imitating A^es in the Court:
'Tis true, he and Fumante both, have oft with
Oaths, professed they loved me; which I ever slighted,
And plainly told them, that I could fancy neither.
I wonder upon what ground 'tis fabrick'd! --
Upon my life, merely his own report; no
Otherwise; but I shall fit him; this comes of
Public Courtship: 'tis well it is no worse.
I would not have it reach the ears of the Princess
For any good --. Honorio, I am now resolved to
Make amends, for my long past unkindness,
Thy constancy doth challenge it.

Hell to my soul? -- whore my Sister?

Let reason cool your boiling blood; lest that
Impatience rob you of sweet revenge.

It cannot:
My vertue's proof against all opposition:
Bring him before my rage, though payled round,
With a^ed millions, ^augre their resistance,
I'll heiw him peace-meale, then to revenous Kites
Throw his luxurious Carcase -- wast for this
His Siren tongue invited her to Court,
To strumpet her? -- bett his lust had chose
His only sister to make black with guilt.
Or mounted his own mother -- who r my sister?
These the promised hopes of consolation? --
Dishonour Lucibella?

For heavens sake moderate your fury?
Or, we both are lost.

Perish the whole world with us, rather than
One grain of our dear honour! fiery flames
Run through my frighted veins, and consume me,
Before I shall do justice; patience
But a little; I'll instantly return,
And bring the libidinous heart of this moechatour
A present for you, pointed on my Steel.

First you must cut your passage through me?
This is childish rashness; and not the fruit
Your vows to patience, and secrecy,
So fairly promised: had I known your temper
To be thus volatile? no torment should
Have forced persuasion, or the name of friend
Have wrought this secret from me: gived me back?
Or I will ransack all your In^rals for it.

Why I am your friend, and (but for you) had lived
In ignorance, whilst the lascivious Duke
Might have brought black dishonour on our house,
And I lost my revenge, but, to your love,
I owe more then a thousand lives; for now
I know his dark intentions, and can
Prevent th'm, by killing them in the bud.
Perform then your free proffer, join with me!
Remember it alike concerns you -- you
He would have made his cursed instrument,
The damned Bawd to his soul lust (my Lord)
You -- oh heavens! -- the good Hipolito.
Can you hear this, yet not be moved?

I can seem so, and compass my revenge
With greater safety; when you rashly run
Your neck into the nuze; and not alone,
Your own; but seek to ruin him, that was
And would be, your best friend. It is unsafe
To play with the awful Lyons curled maine,
When waking; but a sleep, your pleasnre may
Command his very heart.

I am to blame: Forgive me; Sir,! the cause
Must needs distemper the most able brain:
You were about to counsel me, pray on!
You said the course was sure, and might be sudden:
I vow all patient observance.

Then thus.
Some twelve Moons since, you may remember
The solemn vow Sicanio freely made
Unto your father, whose supply preserved
His person, people, galleys, from the yoke
Of Turkish bondage; when Reo^bbassa
That proud commander, with his whole Armado
Set on his weaker power, which (by multitude)
'Ore Mastered, after a cruel fight,
Sicanio, and the Sicilian Cavalleirs
Ready to yield themselves unto their mercy,
Pausanio, and his power were descried
A aloof, making from Malta; when the wind
Favouring their course, ere a full watch was out,
Brought them inken of the Turks; your father by
Their flags, knew them for foes, and freshly charges
Upon their Admiral (till then victorious)
Who (after many) by one dangerous shot.
Receav'd 't wixt wind, and water, quickly sunk.
The rest (disabled by the former: and
More weakened by the latter fight) revenge,
Not valour animated on; and now
A bloody fight begins; but seven short hours
Declares your father Victor: for the Turk
Beat out by new supply, clapps on all sail,
And flies; leaving their intended prize unto
Your father: who (proud that it was his fate,
To serve the Prince) makes himself known,
Supplies what war had made d^ficient,
And takes leave to whom Sicanio, thus:
Valiant Pausanio, our great Preserver,
May heaven be just in sending thee like streit^
Not that we wish thee ill; but that we may
Express our gratitude, for this deliverance,
And your great love:
For all our lives, and force of Sicilly,
Are tied to your disposal: So, parted.
Now, Martiano, haste you thither, and make known
To him your griefs; and if that he be noble,
Now's the time to show it.

But if in case, alleging he is friend
To Florence, he deny me his assistance!

'T were sin to doubt his Princely word -- how here,
Upon your first advise of ill success,
I'll have the duke dispatch'd; and't will be safe.
For, in your absence, what suspicion can
Move any to think you interested therein; -- ha?

Rare, above thought (...) my constant letters
Shall acquaint you withal passages:
I will away to night; the wind sits fair.

Indeed your business doth require wings.
Success wait on you? --

This better change, will much rejoice your
Brother; who, 'bove his own, preferrs your welfare.

May it prove wroth his joy; I rather fear.
My griefs increase, than their redress -- I go
Unwillingly -- and yet I know not why --
But 'cis the Princess sways me.

See Martiano's come to wait upon you thither.

To Court! rather to a Bordello -- Sister,
This bravery becomes you well -- yea and abroad --
But best at home: let not my plainness cause
Your amazement! the duke hath undermined you,
And wants but putting to the burning match,
Of blowing up your honour:
Anon you shall know more; I must this night
For Sicilly; my dear Ausonius
Will supply my room, till my return, whom I
(By letters) will inform of all proceedings -- away.

Is this the joy! will unkind fate for ever
Lowr'e! is there no mitigation^

Be wisely patient! or you be^ray
My else-sure revenge.

Now thou speak like my friend.

But I lose precious ^ime:
In, and know all: oh gods, be now but just!
Then shall this lustful flame burn him to dust.

LAdy your seeming cruelty, hath much.
Afflicted me, but your now real promise
Of mutual amity, and protestation
That 'twas but for aitrial of my faith,
Dissolves my frozen hopes to melting joy: and heart
I do present you with the constant'st heart.
That purest vows, e're plighted to a Maid -- Sallute.

'Tis but exchanged for one, whose as firm faith
Resolves the chastest love, that virgin -- blushes
Ever betrayed to Man.

May permanent felicity crown both,
Our resolutions! Madam, your persuasive reasons.
Command me patience till the Princess leave,
And your then ready love, shall perfect this
Our begun happiness: in the interim,
I will endeavour some quaint stratagem.
To shame my brace of boasters, whose jactations,
Have, with your modesty, abused my passion.

The very project my slight vengeance aimed at:
Would 'twere affected!

Oh doubt it not! their policy's not so preventive,
But we may easily compass it:
Only, thus far, be pleased to be assistant;
When that Vatinius courts you, let your praise
Be of Fumante, and his Poetry:
And when Fumante, Vatinius in your eyes
A complete Courtier, and becomes his clothes
Be best in Florence: and for the rest, let me alone:

I shall observe: and so I take -- my leave.

All joys wait on you: now for my mimique gallants.
And luckily here's one, fretting, as if some busy
Wasp, had with her stinging tail, offended his
Worshipps nose; unseen, I will observe him.

It can not be.

'Tis credibly so reported Sir.

Vatinius marry her?
What, in the name of merit, can her eye
Discover in that indigested lump,
Worthy so sweet a purchase? but uncase
His disseas'd body, and the dullest eye
Will soon perceave what a Consumption
Intemperance hath bred there: out of boots,
His legs are, but a booty for a Buzzard.
And, but take off his artificial locks
The french men (that first wanted) first invented;
And against the sun perspicuously you may
See, what a plenteous lack of brains,
His noddl's stored with; which causes him conceit himself a complete
gentleman.

How right his malice hath described em both!

What imperfections gay apparel covers?

True: whilst deserving virtue, unregarded,
Walks in a thread bare vestment.

This is observable: 'tis not the goodly out-side speaks a man.

But I have heard, Sir, that he's possessed with a very great.
Estate; and who hath wealth hath all things: he
Shall be reputed virtuous, valiant, noble, wise,
What not? and questionless 'tis that she aims at: as for
His defects, she may (as other Ladies) supply them in
A proper, able, well limbed, gentileusher, who with
Alacrity and fidelity shall discharge his office, to
The no small contentment of his Madam; yet
Seemingly-be-check'd, and rayl'd on in his feellows
Presence, for now performance of his duty.

A bitter knave.

But are there, who do so?

Are there? why where will you find a
Lady that doth
Nor so? (I mean, I Florence) nay worse in sport
With their Marmosits, and smooth skinned dogs,
A beastly, quality for a Lady: though the now frequent
Custom of it; lessons the crime.

Well, it vexes me beyond all patience, to be
Thus affronted, by such a worthless Widgeon;
Would I durst fight with him!

'T would prove a foul Combat; a woodcock with
A widgeon.

Why sir, what should cause your fear? upon my
Knowledge, the fight of a drawn sword will make him swooned.

I will not trust him: nor is it good jesting with
Edged tools.

Yet have I seen you quarrel; and on the Piazza,
Draw upon a gentle man, for smiling (as you thought)
At your new fashioned ha^t, or spur leather: and with
Vociferous language, threaten inevitable slaughter.

'Thats been, when some have held me, them?

That's very true -- and he without a sword too

Nay I dare quarrel with the best; and with uncivil
Language abuse any man; nay I dare yet go
Farther (rather then be thought a coward) send
A challenge; but under hand, take up the quarrel,
Though at the expense of a Collation of ten
Pistoletts. I can't endure these dangerous passado'^.

But if, with honour the affronted cannot put it
Up but you must fight, or be esteemed pusill animous,
How then?

Then I acquit him with the severe law's against
Duels, and what great want of judgement 'tis to
Undertake them, when for a slight word-reputation,
We commit a murder, yet not obtain our vengeance
Without loss of our own lives, which mere temerity
Forfeits unto the Law; requesting him to entertain
The Noblest thoughts of me, I am a Gentleman,
Ready to give best satisfaction when but called in
Question, on any ground, but Tuscany; where the too
Rigorous laws makes it unsafe to combat, c.

This may prevail with some: but say he be implacable?

I how then?

Why then, with politic patience, I resolve rather
To suffer a dry private beating, which breaks no bones;
Than ^un the arischa of my life, with dangerous poking.

I shall try your temper.

Then y' are resolved to let him have your Mistress?

No I'll forbid the baines.

Not so: but, first, I'll hear this news confirmed,
And then I may do something: mean time you
Must give out that Lucebelia's desperately sick.
It is the Lord Hipolito's Command: their's a reward --

Fumante, met as wished!

What is Honorio's pleasure?

To pleasure you, my friendship hitherto hath still confirmed it.

Which ever l've acknowledged, and for which
I place you next my heart.

And theirs a peace of service now in my power,
Will deserve that place; if you dare venture on it,
But I err to Question, knowing your courage, and
Impavid spirit; when honour bids you On.

I both have propenfitude to dare, and power to do.
Say! what is't!

Vatinius, whom fame gives out for truth
Shall wed Rosania, conceives that you
Have grossely injured him; sor it appears
She now begins, to slight him, of which neglect
He judges you the Author; because
Flowting him to his face; for the bad wearing
Of his good clothes, she emulates your garb;
Vituperating his dull courtship, applauds
Your fluent vein; reputes him worthless, and
Your self deserving; and upon this ground's
Resolved to challenge you to single Combat.
Now if my friendly counsel (only tending
To your dear credit, and future good) may
Be prevalent; 'twere not amiss you did prevent
His peremptory challenge with another;
Which greatly must disanimate him; denoting
You are truly sensible of the wrong he hath done you,
In basely skandalizing your merit to your Mistress.
-- Oh! oche torto? -- which he
Hath often in my hearing done: so shall
You justly chastise vice, and re-obtaine
Rosania's favour.

But there is danger in it.

No more then in beating an English Spannel, which
Will love you the better ever after for it. Vatinius is
A true bred Courtier; and had rather see an evil
Spirit, then an unsheathed Spado -- however, let
Me know your place of meeting, and I'll see there
Shall be no bloud-shed: for a wholesome beating
Will do him most good, nor would I have you
Purple your bright sword, in blood of a poor Coward
'Twere dishonour.

I am resolved.

The time, and place?

Six in the Evening, in the grove behind the palace.
You'll not fail to meet!

Fail! -- I swear I would not miss the sport
For any good -- yet use him gently -- for
I pity him.
Only it is against my honest nature to hear my
Friend abused, and see so sweet a beauty subject
Her self to such a glorious nothing -- when
Suggested to it, only, by fraudulent information.

I'll inform him, and reform him too,

'Twould prove an easier tasque to teach an english.
Bear speak French -- you say you think she loves you!

Think!

And hath bestowed upon you many favours!
As leave to kiss her hand --

Her hand!

Yes! that's a favour: but I understand you -- you
Have been more familiar, you are happy! --
And she hath graced your many presents with
Her kind acceptance!

She hath

And all this Vatinius contradicts -- oh lying Raseal!

I'll contradict him, and presently about it --
You will not fail to meet?

Doubt it not! -- but when you have greatest need --
Be confident I'll prove a broken reed. --

You could have loved him then!

Before he fell from virtue, as my self
Divided, might affect the other half.
But since stained with corruption,
His memorie's most loathsome.

Whence then proceeds this strong oppugnance to
My fair proposition^ efflagitation? if from your hate?
Be, what your angel-form doth seem to speak
You, mercisull^ and with one stroke dispatch
Me, and my griefs! but say, I cannot love you;
And that subverting blast, shall (in a trice)
Shake my hie flaming heart to frigid earth
So ease me: whereas merciless delay
But torment adds unto affliction:
Say (Lady) do you hate me!

That were to make me worse then ungrateful,
No (my Lord) I cannot be so irreligious, as
To hate the man that loves me; I do honour
Your great virtue, and with a perfect zeal
Respect your worth: be then but confident
Of your own merit, you may be assured
You have an equal interest in my heart,
With any he that breathes: but for reply
To your great suite, thus.
By that firm love, your seeming pious vows
Induced me to believe most real, and
By what's more dear to you; urge it no further
For I've no power to grant, what you request.

Madam you much amaze me.

I've vowed virginity (my Lord) till it shall please
Hard fate to be more gentle, and exchange
My injured father's infortunity,
For's former dignities; it misbecomes
My sad condition to entertain, till then,
Least hope of joy: therefore (good Sir,)
Desist! my faithful vow is fled beyond recall

Not the least word falls from that powerful tongue
But doth predominate over my strongest passion,
Teaching it subjection -- Madam,
I am all patience and obedience.
Yet give me leave to hope!

My Lord, I would not be so sinful, as
To counsel to despair.

Then, till another meeting shall revive me, divinest fairest,
Permit my loyal lip, on your pure hand,
T'inscribe the figure of my perfect love,
Obvious to none but you, that when those eyes,
(For this hands sake) do glance upon the print,
You may remember, reading there your servant --

As for the rest, I'll follow your advice.
The dukes unbridled lust rages beyond.
Suppression, and (but for this brave Lord)
Had driven him hither, to my honours ruin:
Bad age! what dare not sinful man attempt?
I must admit no visits, his report
Hath made me dangerously sick; which may
Work with his wild distemper, and preserve
My honour free from blemish; if that fail?
Here is a noble hand that will -- prevail.

Lady, you brother, with first favourable wind,
Will reach our Port; here's letters which advise
Of all occurrents, please you retier, and peruse them.
Your brothers letters have enform'd your father,
Of this design, who connot long be absent.
I must, with speed, dispatch one to Legorne,
Unto my Substitute, to render up
The Fort to Martiano: '^is of great importance:
The Prince, in person, to express his zeal
To your deserving father, with great power,
Accompanies my friend, and vows redress.

Heaven thou hast heard my -- prayers.

Immediately I follow.
Martiano, thou 'rt hicher to successful;
Nor would I have thy rash credulity
O'rethrow this great defigne, and so betray,
Thy weakeness to eternal shame:
Which to prevent I must detain these letters
Directed to Hipolito; 'tis unsafe.
To trust his smoothness: if he be our friend?
We nobly shall embrace him, in -- the end?

How look^d she on thee? Iacamo.

As a fleet street-Barber, on a twopenny Customer;
Or a Clyent-cloid Lawyer, on a half fee: bad me
Tell you, she scorned your glorious jewell, and inglorious
self; only this short precept, rellisht of kindness, if not of love.

What was't?

Marry to follow the example of Fumante; he's
A complete Gentleman, and (in her eye)
The most deserving man in Italy.

Shame, and fear possess him! -- here --
Deliver this unto his proper hands.

It would be strange, if this should prove a Challenge.

'Tis as Honoria told me -- well I have follow'd.
His advice, upon his faithful promise of assistance,
But if he fail? -- Fumante will perform --
I shall be sure to have it how ever -- would,
'Twere to do again! -- but her's Honoria. --
'Tis done my Lord.

Spoke like a Conqueror.

But. --

But what man?

Nay, do not think I fear him!

Pugh^ let Cowards fear!

I so they do --

And such, whose smutty souls the wildfier of
Foul guilt corrodes! (as it doth his) best innocence is guard against all
danger.

Yet I could wish -- Hono What?

I were more valiant --
But 'tis no matter -- I am resolved. --
Y' have past your word to bear me out? --

I have; and will perform.

Faith -- I have no stomach to it.

Even as you please: the shame will be your own;
Yea; and the loss too: the loss of such a one,
As not the Court can parralell -- udds foot,
You'll make your self the common laughing stock
To all the Pages, Lackeys -- nay the Grooms
When they want matter to stir up their mirth,
Will teihie out your name.

Pages, Lacquyes, and the Grooms -- hum --

But, above all, Fumante.
(Whose heart's no bigger then a small pin's head)
From this your fear, will collect courage, and
Every minute publicly affront you;
Whereas your letter will make him look
Far paler then the paper, seconded
By an undaunted-Spirit.

I marry -- there's it.

Sufficiently I've truly told you what he is,
A mere man of March-peine; if you dare venture
On him? so: if not? and he deceave you of your Mistress,
It concerns not me: I have discharged the office
Of a friend; think on it! farewell!

Nay Sir -- I will meet him!
I'll not be beat, and laughed at too.

I'll want my will then --

Yet he was a Commander, in the last employment.

Why so might you, or any man had money:
Desert not ever wears the Plume: he knew
There was no danger in 't, yet certain pay:
Such wars would make every faint heart
Turn soldier. Well prepare! the time draw^s on.

You'll meet at Six? I build upon your promise.

If I fail, flea me! Coraggio --

Are you blind, you Buzzard?

Are you blind you Buzzard?

Is your Master at home?

Is your Master at home?

I have business with him.

I have business with him.

Do you mock me? ha?

Do you mock me? ha?

Yes, my Master is at home.

Yes, and my Master is at home.

Y' are very pleasant, but I'll change your note.

Say you so? then have with you.

What uncivil broil is this! for shame put
Up your swords! the street's no place to quarrel in.
How fell ye out? (my honest friends)

An't please your honour, I have a letter to deliver to Vatinius, whom this man
serves; and fairly asking him Whether his Master were at home, or not? he
echoed still my words: I loved not to be jeered, and thus it grew.


And I have another letter for F^mante, whom that man serves. I questioned him
a like, but jeered him not: yet I could do no less then to defend my self.


A more fit occasion, I could not hope for --
That two such noble spirits, as your selves,
Should serve such worthless Patrones^ --
Here's a reward -- I love to cherish virtue.

We are your humble vassalls.

Come, come, join hands! your business to each.
Others Master caused this mistake: be friends!

Now we perceave it did.

And now I have a undertaking for ye, which performed, I'll make what I have
given ye fifty pistols.


Do but command? 'tis done.

Well; first perform your Patrones charge! 'tis duty: then dress your wounds;
which are not many, nor yet mortal: and two hours hence, down in the walks,
behind the grand palazza, meet me! where I'll instruct ye.


We shall attend your Lordship.

Be firm, and private!

As your own thoughts, Sir --

Jacamo, I cry thee mercy: we're good friends again, I'll stay for thee at
Catarina's, where I'll spend my crown, for confirmation of our after
friendship.


And I'll not fail to meet thee instantly --

I much rejoice to see this long^ wished alteration in your Lady: may heaven,
by a continual addition of new comforts, confirm her joy.


I, with my soul, desire the same^ poor Lady she doth need it.


'T was much beyond my expectation (hearing the late report) to see so many
decent smiles dimple her cheeks; and hear such pleasant accents flow from her
long greefe-ty'd tongue.


Indeed the change was sudden, yet for some private end, known only to her
self; she desires a confirmation rather than contradiction, of this report.


I cannot keep so great a comfort from the Princess; but they're one soul.


How bears the duke his passion? they say he's near distraction.


So please you walk, I'll tell you my opinion:
We must not miss the Combat, and the houre's at hand.

What stare ye at? do ye make us your wonder?
Begon^

So please your Grace. --

Yes, it doth please us, leave us!

We obey --

I guess the cause of this distraction,
But must keep sealed my lips, until his passion
Vent somewhat that may warrant my expression:
Wherefore, thus obscured, I will observe him --

Can the virgins, and their goodness great protectess,
(Sacred Diana,) suffer foul disease,
(That fatal Minister of certain death)
T'enthrone himself, in the Majesticke-seat
Of my faire's rosie-excellence, and there
(With a tyrannicke-quatefaction) threat
The sudden dissolution of so pure,
A vivid temple, where her honoured name
Lives with a reverentiall fear, yet not
Be moved to pity? such an omission,
Forbid perfection! where's your wonted power
For your own glory, make it manifest!
Lest your bare Altars know no Votary.

If the least trespass done to majesty
Be treason, Hippolito's a Traitor in the highest.

But oh -- my praye'r is sin: All powerful love,
'Tis your divinity Mortality
Thus Rivals, death's an inamorat turned
And wo's, to's chill embraces, a beauty
Far fairer than thy Mother, quick let fly
A leaden headed shaft procuring hate
In his cold breast! lest his, more ready, should
Prevent thy veng'ance, and deprive thee of
The sweetest sacrifice that e're enriched
Thy hallowed shrine -- see where the ghastly fiend
Sits proudly on her couch, and uncontrolled
Saucily courts her -- (may contagion
Be thy companion! and the horrid grave
Your place to couple in!) whilst the afflicted
Shrinks at his grim aspect, and turns away
From his frozen-salutations -- now he's moved
And levels at her heart -- divinest Love!
Cease his destroying dart! and in its room
Place thine of Gold, then wound him with his own,
Even to destruction! so shalt thou prove
A glorious victor, I, she, live and love.

It is, as my prophetic soul informed me,
And now for my discovery

How durst thou interrupt our privacy? Have we no power?

But calm that stormy brow^ your grace forthwith
Shall feel the ease I bring you.

Dost thou mean to kill me?

Perish my soul! rather then prove a harbour
For such Rebellious thoughts.

Nay I believe thee loyal; but alas
My griefs are at that height, that nought but death
Can slack them.
If thou bring comfort? (good Honorio)
My needy soul lies open to receive it. Prithee speak!

I know your griefs; and therefore come to tell you
You are abused, and nourish in your breast
Infection that will kill you.

Leave this abstrusenesse, and be plain!

'Twil startle you, but your command's my warrant.
Hippolito's a Traitor, and doth wrong
The royal trust your goodness hath repo^'d
In him.

How's this! no more: you're not a weary of
Your burdenous breath, that you thus wake our anger

Sir, what I've spoke, to the last warm drop within me
I'll boldly justify: nor i'st opinion,
Fond supposition, or regardless malice,
Poorer revenge, or hope of airy honour,
That thus imbold'ns me, but a religious care
My pious duty hath for your Highness safety,
That 'tis truth; but honour my advice with your acceptance.
I will inform your Majesty a way
Shall make your eyes, and ears my witnesses.

Thou should be honest!

When I prove otherwise, may my perfidious trunk
On the disgraceful tree, feed carrion!

I am resolved! wait us within; but take heed!

My All lies on it --

Honorio, so intimate! I like it not

If he prove false, there is no faith in man;
Religion is but form, and prayer hypocrifie

I can't expect the fruit of my laborious plots until
I h've made sure Martiano; which now I will endeavour.
So please your Grace I have some words to speak
Will --

Trouble us: our thoughts are taken up --

Is it even so? -- then -- how am
I changed
Timorous flesh -- why shake thou! -- conscience,
I know thee too -- too soon -- I'll after
And submit to gentle mercy -- but
My proud spirit rebels, and whispers me
You're safe! -- Fear; thus I cast thee off;
My soul hath but one partner in her secrets
And he's a tried honest knave -- I'm yet secure;
Heaven how this bug-bear conscience did affright me
Fumante, saw you the Duke!

He, and Honorio, are now in private conference.

Let your intelligence be ubiquitary!
There may be something now compounding, that
We shall not relish: I like not this Honorio --
Have you heard nought fall from him might concern
The prejudice of our affairs!

But what I told your honour touching Pausanio.

Better he had bin tongue-ty'd!
Pray let your care be waking! the time requires it --

Fear not! my gracious Lord!
What from Vatinius!

If our proverb be true; that saith, there is no smoke but where there's some
fire, you should be valiant; for your denomination as well as action, denotes
you to be vapour; consequently full of choler: Whether that be, or no valour!
I dispute not: our Sudden trial will prove the better Touch-stone. That you
have affronted me, and grocely, is, and that I will be revenged for the
affront, shall be, most certain: therefore at six in the evening, in the
grove of Sicamores, expect such fury, as provoked justice can inflict on so
notorious an offender! which is (at least) death, by the hand of the injured
and therefore enraged

I cannot doubt Honioro's friendship,
I will meet him, and the hour's at hand

From this balcone, we shall behold all passages.

Pray heavens they do no harm!

Hang them painted parrots! they'll but prate.
But who be these?

Why this is all.
For both are so hen hearted --
That I much doubt if one dare look on the other.

I'll swear for one, is to other do but frown?

And I as much for to other.

There's it: then but consider the insupportable abuse.
They've put upon the Lady, and my self;
Ye must confess, yet truly, my revenge
Is too -- too -- merciful.

In truth, and so it is.

Nor shall ye pleasure me alone, but both your Patrons: when each (like a good
servant) shall beat his Master's Enemy; which themselves, will be afraid to
do: besides revenge the hurts you have received; through their occasion.


It will be rare.

But then we lose our service.

Leave that to me! for there's the trophy of my revenge.
I'll make 'em thank ye too --

That would be fine in faith?

I'll do it -- but I hear footing.
That hedge will keep you secret

This is the place; but no Fumante come:
If 'twere but possible he were more fearful
Than my self, and stay away -- what honour,
I might win.

I'll spoil your growing hopes, hum, hum, hum.

But oh vain hope! -- that was his voice.

How the wretch trembles!

My Executioner is come --
But no Honoria to reprieve me To him Fumante.

He's come indeed!

Would I were well at home! but there's no flinching.

He's yonder, and descries me: there's no retiring,
Now should Honorio fail? I'm lost.

I must set a face 'ont: -- Sir, you keep touch.

I'm not behind the hour you prefixed.

Nor would I mispend time, now you are come,
You cannot but imagine the cause of this our meeting.

Not on your part: but I come to receave.
Strict satisfaction, for disgraces, which
Your forward tongue, in the hearing of my Mistress,
(The fair Rosania) most unworthily.
Have put upon me.

He means to sight --
Can you as well acquit your self, of the ignoble wrongs committed by your
self, unworthily, against me? as I of what you charge me with; this meeting,
rather will confirm our former friendship, then breed farther difference.


I'm glad 'tis come to this --

I'll break that union.

As I'm a Gentleman! --

Oh fearful protestation!

I ever honoured you; wherefore could not detract.
From your desert: then but relinquish claim
Unto Rosania (for I have her promise)

Oh shameless impudence!

And l'le remain your servant.

The first I cred it, but the latter honour forbids.

Then let our swords decide it -- oh for Honoria!

Stay! -- a pox on my credulity! this is no Coward.
I hate these idle quarrels touching women.

I hope he will compound --

Not that I doubt the justness of my cause,
Or fear your naked steel: the world knows me.

Yes, for a fearful Coxcomb.

But that I would not kill a friend for such a trifle.
Yet give I up no interest; but if
You'll be content with her own verdict? we will
Refer our selves to her, yet save our honours.

'Tis not unreasonable; agreed. --

On! spare them not --

Jaca. Ye must not part so calmly.

We are betrayed; the Guard.

This is Honorio's falsehood.

Will not you yield your sword then?

Yes, yes most willingly: oh, oh,

Ye must be fighting? -- ye shall have fighting.

Not we! oh -- I protest not we! -- oh

Nay (good Sirs) it is sufficient!

Not yet -- not yet.

Oh, oh, oh -- mercy Gentlemen!

My toes are wearied.

So are my arms.

I'm sure my back parts are --

We yet dare hardly trust ye in one room;
Ye must be severally imprisoned.

Imprisoned?

Yes: know ye not, that 'tis against law to fight a duel?

Oh my good lord, unless you now befriend us,
We must to prison.

Then ye have fought?

Not we.

Yet have bin soundly beaten.

Trust me, I could come no sooner, but for a small
Matter I'll undertake to free ye from these Catchdolts.

We'll give any reasonable consideration.

Yea, and thank 'em too; so we escape.

I'e motion 't to 'em: they are of my acquaintance.

Dianetta, let us descend! and laugh at 'em.

My Lord you may command us.

I must acknowledge it a Courtesy.
I have prevailed; for too double pistols, ye are free:
But you must take it for a favour too.

Oh by all means.

There's, Gentlemen, for each ^o good quadruples,
With many thanks --

Ha, ha, ha, ha, ha,

The Lady's -- oh for a charitable halter!

Now could I wish my self, any thing but my self

Nay, never hang the head! your insolence hath
Well deserved it: and now my verdict:
I hate ye both, as do the Scoti a py'd-Protimyst;
And this is my election --

Is it even so? then hang the head indeed!
Why we are both deceav'd.

What think you now of kissing her white hand?
You more then think she loves you.

Ha, ha, ha ha,

No more my Lord; I pity the poor Gentlemen.

She should be free, because pitiful. --
I'll try her constitution.

I should have done my self, what these t^ll.
Men have performed for me; but I knew they
Would use ye more gently -- know ye your tormentors?

Carlo?

Iacamo?

The very same:

Oh our shame!

I see you are truly penitent; if now,
Ye but assent to what I shall propound,
We'll hide your equal shames in privacy.

As you are noble?

Upon my honour.

Be it what it will we both consent.

Receave then into grace again your servants!
They are stout fellows, and what each hath done,
Hath bin but for his Patron.

We humbly thank your Lordship.

We pardon both; and beg the like of ye.

Ye have it; and hereafter be more careful
Of your honour! then y' are well.

And pray remember that it still hath bin
An approved Maxim, shame will follow sin.

THis seeming-sanctity cozens the world
As did the soft words that (with power) fell
From the smooth tongue of that false Traitor, Me.
I walk invisible to any's knowledge,
And (through Honorio's counsel) have discovered
Treasons, which my too charritable faith
Could never have receav'd for truth; if not
My self confirmed the certain witness?
Ingratefully-presumptious-Man,
If thy sublime thoughts throw thee from that hight
Where my deceav'd love placed thee? may thy fall
Live a preventive-patt'rne with thy folly
For the age to come! thou art worth no mans pity.
What mean these loud, and sudden acclamations?

Martiano, and the heir of Sicillie,
With hostile troupes, invaded have the town;
The castle's, by Ausonius, yielded up
To farther their de^igne: with them take part,
The inconstant Cittyzens, whose forward faith,
Ruled by their strong persuasions, much doth doubt
The justness of Pausanio's banishment,
And have resolved remission of his doom:
Disorder throngs the streets; yet no bold-hand,
Managing the rude sword, dare disobey
Its brave Commanders noble charge, but all
Enjoy their own with quiet: the soatious Court,
With every narrow-cantone, only is
Examined for your person, by the Gennerall;
Who greeves for your escape: Hipolito.
(The chiefest Agent in this proud attempt)
Is of their bosom counsel, and (I fear)
Intends a farther mischief -- what's to be done?

My joys are yet above my griefs; and I
Bless gracious heaven (zealous of its own glory)
That destined thee the pious instrument
To guard me from their malice: 'tis apparent
The Gods take part with us, whose purer wills
Abhor the opposition of humane
Policy: wherefore, in this disguise,
I'll live obscured, until that Industry
Have satisfied my curiosity, in all particulars.

It cannot but be safe.

What? Lucebella takes me for no other,
Then Padre Stephano, my reverend Confessor?

She, and your Princely sister, still remain
In that desired error.

'Tis well: hath she not yet seen her rebellious brother?

Not yet.

'Tis fit that we be present at their meeting. --

Silence the noise of that disturbingdrumme!
And not a soldier, upon pain of death,
Exceed our given Commission! we intend
No less then honour warrants. --

'Tis noble as your self.

Having, by Martiano, understood
The real cause of our just undertaking;
It must appear impertinent, to trouble
Your Wise ears, with needless repetition:
Wherefore (assured of your full satisfaction)
Each may depart, unto his peaceful home,
And there, (without the least suspicious thought)
Possess what fate hath given him.

Long live Sicanio!

Grave Cittyzens, and loving Countrymen,
We seek not furtive spoil, or thirst for blood;
Nor shall the ill tutour'd soldier,'f^re your faces,
Force your dear wives; but each enjoy his spouse
As he was wont: the untouched virgin may
Yet sleep securely, and not fear a rape;
For not the meanest man, among these many,
But values honour above sinful gain;
Rest satisfied with this, and all retire
Unto your proper dwellings! but, withal,
Pray be retentive of those burd'nous wrongs
Your good old General (who hath hugged danger,
To purchase your dear sa^etys) now's oppressed with^
And if our mildness, with your justice meet,
The Wars are ended, and ye most ^creet.

Martiano, shall have justice, Martiano shall have justice.

To each my equal thanks.

See friend, the Princess. and your Sister

Should my discourteous fate deny my heart
Admittance, yet my dazzled eyes have leave
Freely to wonder, though my profane thoughts
Cannot conceive the excellence dwells there.
Surely divinity hath chose residence
With frail mortality, for all the virtues
Po^ts have stellifi'd, at once, shine there:
She approaches -- Martiano, have you the
Honour to call this beauteous Lady, Sister?

Royal Sir, I have.

I swear you're happy! happy beyond expression!
I'm lost in midst of conquest --

A goodly Gentleman! --

First (faire^ sweetness) let my rude Salute
Express the fervent zeal I had to serve you;
Lest you, with thanks anticipate, what was but duty.
The Phaenix boils with Wormwood -- all Odours
Aromaticall breathe there.

Sir, the Princess.

Madam, if that my misplaced sallutations have
Deserved your hard construction? think upon
Your equal glories! and the thought thereof
Will reconcile the error to your favour.

Great Sir, it was but justice; therefore needs no Apology:
If that my jealous fears prove true? her eyes
Already have exhaled his melting heart,
And, left behind, my ruin.

Father, at more convenience,
We shall desire farther conference;
Till when, let the pure truth, I've uttered win
A creditable room in your opinion.
For by my fixed hope of future bliss!
My thoughts were all innocuous.

Enough; and so were his. I kept the Key,
That opened, to my view, the treasury
Of his rich soul; have searched the intrinsik'st part thereof,
But never found a sin so damnable, lodged there:
You'll find he is abused.

This Friar may work much mischief,
If not timely prevented!

Royal Sir,
The high summed debt, due to your noble goodness,
Greatly exceeds all language, or acquittance;
All I can pay your bounty, is true thanks,
Sent from an humble heart devoted to
Your Princely virtue, those I'll bring you dayly^
Nor shall I doubt of your fair acceptance,
Since the pleased gods expect no other offering
For the large-all-they lends us.

'Tis the voice of some sweet tongued Cherubin
My sense is blessed with! -- Gracious Madam, deign
Me but the glorious title of your servant
And the reward's past merit.

I shall be proud to be your highness hand-maid

Oh, who would not!
I feel the pangs of tyrant love already.

And (beauteous madam) though we came with power
(Expecting opposition) threatening ruin;
Banish all thought of fear! for the sharpe points
Of our yet peaceful swords, shall vulnerate
Each one his owners breast, before disturb
Your quiet; we brought with us, love linked with
Resolution; and were your brother here?
He were as freely safe from outward harm,
As where he is; though placed within the Altar.

He hath a noble soul.

Your power is great indeed: but if you bring
Love to associate it? I find no cause
Why I should doubt or fear.
My jealousy imboldn'd me beyond civility --
But it hath eased my heart.
'Tis the Dukes character and Signet how came you by it?

Himself, it seems, did on set purpose leave it
Upon my study table, when he came
Last to confession.

Gentlemen, examine it no farther! but elect
Among ye one more sit! it is too great
An undertaking, for so weak a man
As my unable self: alas (my lords)
My humble thoughts, accompanied with quiet,
Do trembling-look at soverainty, nor would
They be intreig'd it'h great affairs of state:
But in the private contentation they
Do now enjoy, would period their date

Uds will, don't refuse it! would 'twere proffered me!

Martiano, Ausonius, Honorio, none but's more fit
Then I.
The Dukes command must be obeyed.

Will no persuasions take place?
Bear witness heaven, with what unwillingness
I do receive this enforced honour!

Finely dissembled -- ^

Long live Hippolito --

My thanks to all: and since it is my fate
To undergo this glorious yoke, I shall
Endeavour by the purchase of your loves,
To maked seem light. What's now amisse'ere long
Shall have redress.
Mean while, let our best entertainment speak
This royal strangers welcome.

Your nobleness endeares us.

As Misers in a phantasm, enjoy
A mass of goodly treasure, upon which
Their fond imaginations do feed, until
The sleepy God (disposed to mock their hopes)
Unlock their abus'd-senses; when awaked
And missing their suppos'd-possession, they
Do greeving-wish that their deluded fancies
Ne'er had fabrick'd so brave a guilded-Nothing
So thy short dream of dignity expired
(Vain glorious man) thou'lt repent the susception;
When thou, too late, shalt wish thy winged thoughts
Had flown at lower distance, and not dared
A fight so near the beams of Majesty.
This condescended power, can't but prove
The temper of his mind; and if I find
His inclination close with my great doubt,
I must appear my self, and root him out --

A reasonable man, would think I had bin beaten sufficiently, to make my
rampant flesh lie couchant: I'll be sworn there's scarce room left for a
single sold, about my body, of its native hew, but all's soffisticated by the
abusive cudgel, and yet all will not do -- I have an extreme itching to be
mounting some Court Madam, and (above the rest) Dianetta, whose late compassion
promised very fairly, were it but effected; were quit with my poetique rival, I
have resolved to try the encounter, and first, I'll prove her temper with rich
presents; which graced by her reception, access must follow -- however, 'tis
but disgesting of a denial -- or (at worst) another beating; which, when a
man's once used to, seems nothing: and see where luckily she comes oh for this
winning language.

Lady if my request come not unseasonable,
I shall importune your seeming hast to afford
Me some few minutes conference.

For present, pray excuse me my affairs are now important.

I shall await your leisure,
Mean time, so please your goodness to enrich
This poor gem, by your wearing; the donatour
Will hold himself much honoured, and remain
The humblest of your Creatures.

It were discourtesy (kind Sir) to slight
So free a proffer; and although I hold
My self incapable of merit; yet
I Question not the worth of you the giver,
But shall retain it till convenience shall
Acquaint me with your further pleasure --

She must be mine! though gon, I feel her coming

The abundant joys my almost sated breast
Conceives for this unlooked for greatness, swells
My jocund heart to such a boundless height
That the stretched strings would crack, if 'twere not for
This private vent? Courteous stars I thank ye!
Nor will I easily part with your free gift,
No, no, 'tis of too great a price: what can
Be more contentive then supreamacie?
To have such numerous payres of servile eyes
Attend our nod! as many pliant knees,
Bow at our beck! officious feet to move
With swiftest pace to execute our will!
And the whole court, in competition, for
Our coveted regard! ha? is't not brave?
I faith it is! once more (kind stars) I thank ye!
And then to steer ^he helm of the great state,
What course we shall think fit, or throw down
Or raise, when, whom we please can there be bliss
On earth exceeds this? Liberal Fate,
Still I must thank thy bounty -- Now the way
To keep in this blessed state -- (for 'tis esteemed.
No less policy to preserve then purchase)
Must be the Dukes remove; which might be done
With safety, and facility, could I learn
Out his abode? which promises may win
From his late confessor (for there's hypocrisy
Even in sanctity) whom I must employ
In other weighty matters, which if fate
Prosper for heaven, I scarce would change estate

However, her profession, hitherto,
Speaks her so much your friend, that I believe
When she shall know, by me,'tis in her power
To further this your love; her gratitude
(Consulting with her noblest thoughts) will counsel
Her brave soul, rather to dye Loves Martyr,
Then live esteemed ungrateful.

That were a cruel kindness -- Reverend Sir,
Be but memorative of what I've told you!
And 'tis sufficient --

Poor Iulia! we're allied by 'our hard fortunes
Well as blood; nor do the causes differ, you
Pursuing, with a furious love, my rival
And I yours^ yet neither's zeal respected.
There's yet away to prevent all -- the Prince --

Will not your grace acquaint me with your grief?
'Tis not impossible, but I may ease you.

Thou mighst do much i^deed!

Why? do you doubt my faith?
Then I conjure you, by those many vows
So freely made to me of constant friendship, to disclose
Your troubled thoughts! left I justly suspicious
That my best deeds have found no credit with you;
Do, with this desperate point, rip up my breast
For you to find the error.

It shall not need; I know it full of worth;
But oh -- thy Sister -- thy Sister, Martiano --

What of her?

I love thy beauteous Sister; whose election
^ fear hath promised future happiness
To some one more deserving.

Your equal breathes not.

Yes.

Who?

Hipolito: and now you know the very cause, assist
Me with your powerful intercession^
I cannot doubt success.

Sir, she's at her own disposal; nor am I
Versed in the soft way of amorous courtship,
A sword, and horse have ever bin my minnions:
Yet what the privilege of a brother, joined
With honest plainness, way persuade her to,
Be full ass^r'd; shall not be wanting^ So
I humbly take my leave

If she consent? --

She doubly sins.

Against whom? and how?

Heaven and her friends.

Be charitable (holy father) and
Delay not your resolves!

Divinity not curiosity,
Made me partakers of your privacy
Whereby I h've heard your real tongue confirm
What I fore knew a truth, your ardent love
To the fair Lucebella -- but alas
My pious plainness (should I utter what
Religion prompts me to) could not but meet
(So fragil's wilful man) contempt and malice.
Wherefore the breath I'd thought to have employed
In satisfying your demand, I'll spend
In prayers to heaven, that you may shun the mischief
Unlawful love suggests you to, and place
Your purged affection on the glorious object
Fate hath provided for you.

Oh leave me not unsatisfied! to doubt,
Will more afflict my troubled soul, than all
That you can utter: and (grave Sir) so much
Am I an enemy to those twined sins you mentioned,
That what e're falls from your lips
I shall believe oraculous: be free,
In your expression! whilst I give your words,
A willing, faithful hearing.

They will concern your souls eternal quiet;
For he that seeks to separate those hearts
Heaven hath united, sins beyond all hope
Of sweet remission. Noble Sir, call back
Your fruitless, cause misplaced, affection!
Forth' absent Duke, and Lucebella have
Exchanged mutual vows, (which live recorded
Above the clouds) and fix your deserved love
On her, that mourns for you to the prejudice,
Of expetible health! who, prized below
Her worth, is still her rivals equal -- 'tis --
Though I have no Commission (but what
Our holy order bound to further good,
Doth warrant) to disclose this secret,
The incomparable Princess Julia --
But you seem troubled?

Where there's no power to help, responsive grief,
Shows friendly: -- But, reverend Man, your charity
Deludeth your too facile-faith, the Duke
Loved her ignobly, which provoak'd her brother
(Tender of her dear honour) to a rage
His fathers sufferings could not tempt him to;
And drew from her an everlasting hate:
Iv'e heard their tongues confirm it.

But that religion bounds my ready lips,
A killing curse would issue forth, and cease
Upon the cause of this foul scandal -- Sir,
The Duke made me familiar with his thoughts,
The thoughts most dear to him believe'^ he is abused;
I know it.

I nor condemn nor justify; yet shall
(Upon your affirmation) repute
The duke still truly noble: for the rest,
I shall with more deliberate thoughts consider,
What may be most expedient; affairs
Of so great consequence, ask not a sudden,
But well weighed resolve^ Father farewell! --

Holy Angels guard you!
How is the goodness of a gracious Prince
Abused through easy-confidence? those men
Our favours most reflect on, are the first.
Revolt from their profession, and rebel
Against their second makers: faithless Age!
Direct me heaven in the best course, whereby,
I may repair my bleeding honour, and
Over my detractours get the upper hand --

I tell thee seriously his importunity
Did almost weary me; and, but to promise
Success to his desires, I'd no way left
To shake him off.

In faith, it may impair your credit;
For he will brage ont'.

He shall have no such cause, as I intend to handle him: and see, he keeps as
constant to me as my shadow.


Well, I'll leave you --

Lady, why do you seek to starve my hungry hopes.
By cruel tardity? mine is no suite in law
(Though't hath dependence in the Common Pleas)
Brookes not protraction; my desire hath
A greedy-stomack; and the quick performance
Of your past promise, only can afford
Satiety: speak then some comfort (dearest)

Ah -- but my honour.

An aerie word, quite out of fashion

But then ye men are so inconstant --

Contract all hearts together, and you shall.
Find, in this one, the quintessence extracted,
Which I thus sacrifice unto your beauty --
Speak then, Lady; oh when? and where? the happy time? the blessed place?
when, Lady? oh when? and where?

This Evening; my lodging.

Confirm it with a kiss! --

But you'll be talking on it, to you Companions?

Let me be guelded then! In such a case,
I would not trust my Confessor.

Well, at the hour convenient, I'll send you notice
By a trusty Messenger: till when, farewell!

Since the engagement of your noble word.
I can not doubt performance: Lady, your hoping servant.

Madame, should I deny what you have urged!
My guilty tongue would speak a falsehood, that
My purer heart abhors: I must confess,
I love Sicanio; but not beyond
Those limets, which strict modesty allows
Severest Maids, or holy writ doth warrant.

They're too too large.

I apprehend your fears: Madame, be pleased
To entertain this serious truth with joy!
Although the Prince be full of merit, and
The man, to whose free goodness all our house,
So deeply stands engaged; though gratitude,
And the daily mediation of a brother,
With the authorised love to my own good,
Strive to persuade my yet unwilling heart
To meet his noble flame: the constant zeal
I've vowed to your sweet friendship reprehends
My too forgetful thoughts, and challenges
A duty from me linked with detriment,
Which, thus, I pay your virtue: I've resolved
(And to that purpose have returned him answer)
Rather to purchase, with my death, your peace;
Then live a Princess, to disturb your quiet.

Thy unexampled goodness, Lucebella,
Strikes me with admiration: yet begets
A thought-distracting doubt that makes me poor
For all the wealth of thy so precious love.

If you suspect my true sincerity!
I will confirm it with a righteous oath,

Oh wrong not my belief? alas despair,
Of making thee amends, 'tis true, obliges me --
But the duke my brother must do that office for me.

There you make me sad -- but -- and yet I should
Be glad to see him: do you think the duke is well?

His Confessor hath so assured me; who alone,
Knows of his residence: besides,
^a yes he will shortly come, and cl^are himself
Of the dishonour put upon him, touching thee.

Pray heaven he may! however I forgive him

There goes the fair occasion of my soul's grief:
Poor Bankrupt Nature, woe that large expense,
Of thy rich store to prove more pitiful!
If not for mine, yet for thine own sake beg
That thy impoverished stock may be supplied
Again, from her, with plenty; lest after-births,
Produce deformity;
And Cytherea (thou whose tender heart
Hath sadly sobbed as mine, when a like touched
By cold disdain) entreat thy tyrant son
To show to me such mercy, as thy self,
In the like necessity, expected! so
Shall thy sacred Altars smoke with incense,
Myrrh mixed with Myrtle berries, and the choice
Of whitest Turtles: where as Mortals wounded,
And not regarded, grown to despair, neglect,
Your ceremonious-rites, pull down, and trample
On your holy Altars --

Y^ had a foul soul indeed.
But son, Beware that your repentance be
More then formal; for 'tis no dallying with
Just heaven; whose searching eye discovers all
The hidden secrets of mans heart: you may deceave
The blinded world, and your dear soul, but oh
The irrecoverable loss is yours.
Therefore be sure y' are serious! fate's decree
Can't be deluded by hypocrisy

I cannot blame your diffidence, my life^
Hath bin so sinful: but your doctrine of
Sure mercy, upon true contrition, hath
Wrought from my softened heart a pious grief
Will purge it from pollution-holy man, --
These are no feigned drops, but real tears --
I've bin exceeding sinful, and they must
Fall faster yet.

My foolish pity, should I stay, would tempt.
My justice to forgive him --
Son, this sorrow doth rejoice me; yea, and heaven.
Who's pleased with your conversion: I must attend.
The Vespers, but my prayers shall still wait on you.
Son be constant --

Else may I fail of mercy!
Away dissembled grief, I must forget you!
This Fryer's no other then his habit speaks him,
Religious. I've sounded his deep thoughts,
And find his faith firm to his Master: heaven,
That I could say so of my self! -- but 'tis too late.
No matter -- and though't be death.
To him shall blab the secrets of confession,
I was too rash in my communication;
A smooth insinuating tale may cut,
My secure throat, when I least dream of danger:
Which to prevent, because, he's fit for heaven,
I'll find him out the nearest way -- the means,
Fumante. -- so the rigour of the law,
Sends him the other way; and I rest safe:
'Tis a good plot! and a bad Age to trust
One's life, and honour in another keeping;
And my hand in I'll thorough-stitch with the rest
My maine Projection prospers not: her heart,
Continew's told as glaciated snow
On the bleak Euxine Promounts: nor can I
Perceive a sign of change; my rivals are
Too powerful -- I must forget her too -- but not revenge --
My love of late is grown ambitious,
And aims at the fair Princess -- ha? -- that done,
(And I despair not but it shall) I were,
Beyond the reach of malice, free from feare-

A message unto me requiring hasty answer?
My fair threescore- and twelve- what i'st?

Fair an't shall like you, but not yet full threescore till come the day of
innocents, when I, and my late dead husband (peace be with his bones!) were
borne: he prized this face indeed and termed it fair, and oft (full of desire)
with speaking touches, would bewray his fondness -- thus; then in my bosom,
and, ne'er was well but when a piddling with -- my double chin: a kind poor fool
it was! and then his lips (wearied in my due praise) would crave refreshment on
the red velvet pallet of my soft cheeks, which I (kind as himself) must give
him thus -- and thus -- which he receav'd


Another will kill me -- she hath a breath loathsomely-strong as the corrupted
^ncke of a dead horse-fed-hound --


A lass extremes in any thing are hurtful: yet (as they say) though he is
not, my widowhood hath youthful friends; such as not think my, yet passable
face, and years contemptible -- A Fort, cause ancient, ^s not to be forsook;
whilst stored with munition -- I'm able yet for service.


Pike-proofe I'll warrant thee:
I mean thy hide --

Yea, and chaine-shot proof too -- and may
Content a reasonable man.

I shall make trial of thee: but to the point.

Shall you? you'll find^ me mettle to the back: and though my eyes be no
twinn'd-suns, as be young Dianetta's; you may see babies there, that (as they
say) may take you.


This pals^'d tongue will ne'er lin shaking.

And I dare wage the profit of my present
Employment, that when, you have tried us both,
Your self shall say I've pleased the better.

A bawd I think.
My able fair one do you belong to Dianetta?

I am the private entry through which you safely may walk unto your desires;
indeed the very key that opens to success.


I apprehend you, and will be your friend:
Here's an earnest of it.

The first I do accept: nor will
I refuse.
The last coming from you: -- well, 'tis,
The prettiest bashful babble, as e're man
Played with: she'll show you sport in faith: although
At first (as Maidens should) she seemed unwilling;
Nor need I tell you how she dotes on you, this
Nigh^ will give you a full satisfaction.

But how, and where?

Your way must be through me -- I'll be
Your Convoy.

With all my heart: lead on?

But use, the youngling gently! or you may spoil her gate: which will give
wild indition to some about the Court, as wanton as your self, and then you
know her honour. --


It shall not loose a grain: come let's go.

They say, the quickly hot, are quickly coold: --
But come -- you are even such another --

Well, have a little patience, anon --

Well, I conceave -- but look you do.

I warrant you.

THe dearest thought within me will not dare.
To attempt a farther satisfaction --
Now (my too credulous fair^) I hope you see,
What a Commanding power you have over me --
Had I bin sinful? then --

Good Sir, no more.
This iteration but aggravates
My sorrow; heaven, for black iniquity,
Expects but true compunction: which pad,
It's justice is appeased: then be not you
Less merciful, neglecting these my tears,
Shed for my misbeleefe! indeed I'm now
All confidence, if you dare credit me?

Before an Oracle!
Then spend not so profusely those rich drops!
The least of which is treasure to redeem
A captived king.

Yet all too little to call home again a banished father.

Oh be more pitiful! and not torment
My penitent remembrance! you have read,
The inside of my soul, could you believe
The character? and know my new inten^

With the same strength of faith you have of me, I do.

Enough: I am confirmed.
Life of my joy, for a too long short season,
I must entreat your pardon; you know the occasion.

You cannot be too quick in your dispatch.
Nor yet too careful of your person, for
The^ villain's made of mischief,

I'm much indebted to your careful love

You'll not forget Sir, what I urged for my --

I guess your doubt: no,
I'll look upon thy brother, as a brother;
As part of thee, -- part of my better self;
He may have ground for his bold act; for s^ce
Hipolito's found false in one, I must suspect his faith,
In all things -- your leave
I'm yet but language, therefore can but seem
Cleared of what charged with; but when next we meet
My accuser shall acquit me, and you see it --

But Sir, the man that's rational must know
Advisednesse to be a friend unto
A great design, and patience the maine help,
Either resolve to stay her father's answer,
Embrace the princes love (by far the fitter)
Or else hoist ^aile homeward.

Your advice comes now unseasonable ^
I've eat Lotus, and cannot live but here;
Nor love, but her.

Yet wisely moderate these extremes!
You perceive distemper gives occasion
Of too much liberty to the neglectful soldier,
Which breeds in the army inconvenience!
You came with resolution to serve
A brave deserving friend, then do not let
A thought for your own private end, detract
From your intended nobleness! but arm
Your royal self with commendable patience
until desired success crown your endeavours?
'T will ad unto your virtue.
Nor can it but be sudden, hourly
Pausanio is expected, whose arrive
Will make you happy: nor have you least cause
Thus to afflict your self, she never yet
Having returned denial.
But as a sweet example of obedience,
Judgement, and modesty humbly crave respit
Till her absent father (at whose dispose she is)
Came, and consented. Good my Lord be cheerful!
This unnecessary sadness makes us all droop.

Though't be against my humour ( Leontinus)
You shall sway me, I know you wise, and faithful.

I would be both -- but look, your friends --

Martiano, those unaccustomed frowns
Speak discontent -- the matter?

His father's slow pac'd-haste (my gracious Lord.)
Deceiving his too early expectation,
Makes him much doubt his welfare.

Come, come, be fearelesse^ Fate will be more just,
Having prepared him so great happiness,
Than't keep the enjoyment from him.

'Tis my chief hope; and yet it troubles me.
For should the Duke (and 'tis no idle fear)
Obtain from Genoua, or Naples power,
And steal upon our weakened forces (of late
Grown careless) want of his supply would strike
A gash in our design, and shrewdly puzzel us

Not a whit: come be your self again!
We're strong enough: yet see the idle Soldiers
Exercised daily to prevent emansions,
And keep our scouts abroad continually.
Martiano, away with all sad thoughts,
And let's enjoy our selves:

Your highness mirthful inclination
Must make the saddest here rejoice

'Tis manly and becomes him.

Oh -- that it were not forced!
We're all the invited guest of Lord Hipolito,
Let's thither and quaff a lusty draught unto

what is't a match!

Most willingly.

Hear in this quiet grove, I did appoint
Honorio to meet me: till his approach,
Upon this flowery bank; I will repose my self.

I've tract the Friar hither, and have sworn
To kill him; but were he not a churchman,
I should not undertake him -- and yet I've heard
Of some that have bin dangerous -- and see how
Handsomely he's laid for my black purpose --
So lie's the harmless issue of the ewe
A prey for the voracious woolfe.
I could not take him better prepared then praying
But stay! he stirs.

If that my sense deceav'd me not, I heard
One speak? or 'twas the voice the wind gave to the leaves.
Honorio?

Di' you expect company? then I must be brief.
You may tell tales in the other world, not here.

You are deceived: I'll be as brief as you

Oh -- I am slain.

Not yet I hope; but yet be sure you shall be!

You cannot be so cruel!

Can thou expect the contrary after so great
A Villainy!

Your pious form speaks you religious,
And that is shown in nothing more then mercy.

Then by that saving mercy you implore;
And the hope you have to obtain it; let your breath;
(Your now expiring-breath) aid your faint tongue
In the delivery of an honest truth
May merit my forgiveness, and please heaven;
Whither y' are going, if the devil do
Not tempt you the wrong way?

Oh --

What hideous groan was that?

Honorio? then am I safe --

My Lord y' are opportunely come to be
A witness to the true confession of
This desperate sinner, whose sick soul o'recharg'd
With hellish mischief thought to vent it here.
He would have murdered me.

Unheard of insolence!

Lessen your admiration! I'll answer the attempt.

Speak soulelesse villain; who set you on work!
Or if you have a soul, I'll kill that too.

Father, forbear!
Leave it to me, Sir, I know a better way --
The thought of death will fright him:
I fear your wound is mortal.
See how his frighted blood flies from his face,
And leaves behind it paleness! let's remove
Him to my neighbouring lodgings, where he shall
Want nothing that may make for his recovery.
The air, so late, is hurtful: Father your hand^.
He bleeds a fresh, and fast: let us dispatch --
So -- So.

I do begin to saint: charitable Sir, forgive me!

I do, and shall with my best prayers invoke
The gods forgiveness for you

It shall be given out, y' have slain the Fryer,
And mark the sequel --

I was never so abused since I was swadl'd, have I lived to the eye of the
world thus long unspotted? and now (through my own folly) must appear thus
besmeared? did I'scape going to the grave my last rash undertaking, to be sent
up in the air, like a cased bladder; and let fall again that my posteriors
rebounded? then footed too, by half a dozen hard toe'd Rascals that had no
more mercy then the clowns hobnail'd Shun have of a foot ball, when they play
a match? to be tossed (like an unhappy Cat) in a foul menstruous blanket wool'd
with fleas, which the wise mother of the Maids, thirty years since, for her
two fold accommodation, placed in the garret to purify the gilded brimms of
the close stool pan, and keep smalecole in, to kindle the Ladies fire with:
was that your glorious coverlet to entertain me? curse on the courtesy; I
have had but a cold entertainment -- but an ill welcome.


I think you will not brag o^t.


Then -- which is worse -- I fear they'll turn me out of doors, thus -- as I
am -- like one of Vulcans limping priests (for I am lamed) and not suffer me to
enjoy the private privileges of this cool yard, so shame me to eternity --
hum -- 'twould be but harsh dealing.


Yet short of your deserving


But not to be avoided, were they resolved? I now begin to see my error, and
find that shame still follows sin; my unfeigned sorrow shall implore her
pardon, for my presumptuous insolence, which obtained, I have done courting.

Think what we will of women, this I find
They may be truly virtuous, yet seem kind --

They may, Vatinius: and I am glad of your conversion.

Dianetta hath o^e heard your penitential lamentation, and is content not only
to forgive, but to forget what ever's past -- provided, you be serious, and not
fall again to your abusive trade against Ladies.


I've had too much of it Lady.
Let my now real grief, with your forgiveness
Gain your more charitable opinion.
For when I prove other than the admirer
Of your chaste self, and all your virtuous sex,
May my disgrace be published and I
Live and dye scorned.

Sir, I freely do forgive you,
Here take again your charmelesse Jewels and hereafter^
Be more careful of your own, and others honour!

Nay, since y'have wrought so great a cure they are
Well deserved.

Pray keep 'em, as the sacrifice of my conversion!

Their worth my thanks, Sir,
In the next Room a Fire waits on you --

I must remain your humble Convert.
And now I do believe there are some
Honest women

Not go to the banquet, dearest friend, the cause?

There is a sadness hath usurped my breast
That mirth can ne'er remove: I am unfit
For company, nor would I see the Prince.

I know the motive of this melancholy,
And now will give you speedy remedy;
If that the sad remembrance of your late
voluntary kindness, thus afflict you?
Take back again your killing courtesy!
Pursue with an unenvi'd freedom.
Your begun love! I did but try thy friendship;
Nor would I buy the greatest terrestrial comfort
At the dear rate of thy thoughts least disturbance.
No, Lucebella, live and love the Prince!
And may the powers divine perpetuate
Each others loves reciprocation,
Till arm in arm, ye soar up unto heaven,
And, there, fix glorious stars! If angry death,
(For that I robbed him of a greater purchase)
To cross your happiness, send you the sad news
Of my cold stay with him; bring, to my grave
One friendly sigh, and a religious drop,
And, on it, they'll create aspiring perfumes, which
Will usher me the readiest way unto Elizium --
Thy hand -- and now farewell!

Stay, thou sweet miracle of perfect friendship!
And may divinity whisper unto thy soul
What I shall speak is truth!
If penitence for the resignation of
Sicanio's love to you, or the least thought
Of him, doth greeve me? may eternal shame
Blast all my better hopes!

What infidel, but would believe thee?

It will alike perturb your breast, when you
Shall hear the story, which I'm engaged to tacitize.
For a set season; but e're long (with safety) I may give you satisfaction
mean time I'll wait upon you to the Lord Hipolito's; and promise to be merry.


Y' have made me sad too;
But we'll endeavour to overcome it --

I'm sorry for the untimely death of the good fryer, and for the villains
flight, that flew him, whom my impartial justice should have made a terrible
example for prevention of like impiety.


He worthily deserved it --

Sir, there's your seat.
Come Gentlemen (t'a void superfluous Ceremoney)
Each place himself!

'Tis a commendable freedom, I hate this idle complement.

But yone's the glory of the Banquet.
Lady's ye greatly honour me; and bring.
The best sweets with ye -- please ye sit? --
Were the duke here, the table were complete?

At naming of the duke, how her glad blood
Sprang in her cheeks, and there imprinted, left.
Her hearts true meaning visible -- she loves him.

Your Grace is -- sad ont'h sudden.
Give me a boule of wine! and see it go round --
Ist't done as we commanded? --

It is my Lord; and tempered handsomely.

Unto the Princes health, and hers whom most
His royal thoughts now honour.
-- Here's that will expel sadness: -- fill to the Prince!

Madame to you --
To Iulia.
Sir I freely pledge you.

Hold, noble Sir, here can be nought but treason.

How knows he that --

The duke -- what devil brought him hither?
My royal Master -- how am I blessed? --
I now was wishing for you, and good heaven.
Hath heard my prayers, and sent you: oh let me kiss
That royal hand.

A way impostour! Honorio, do your office!

Hipolito, I do arrest you for high treason.

I obey; and do desire no other session^
Then this brave assembly.

'Tis granted.

Now -- who be my Accusers?

Padre Stephano; to whom you did confess
The wrongs your mischief plotted against Pausanio.

His mouth was timely stopped he'll blab no more

And more -- by gifts, and promises you thought,
To tempt his loyalty to reveal the place
Of my abode, with full intent so murder me,
And to usurp the dukedom, then marry Lucebella:
Can you acquit your self?

Yes, of all he can accuse me with.

Summon the fryer to appear!

I fear him not till domesday --

Sir, I'm now too full of thoughts
To express your deserved better welcome, or
Apollogize to this my abused justice injured,
Ever long shall I do both; in the interim
I do entreat your patience to hear
This accused man acquit himself: for me,
I dare not stay the trial, I once loved him,
And yet retain much softness --

We all rejoice for your so safe return.

I ever told you what 't would come to.

Well, be not yet too confident!

'T was only that, by all our friendship! I heard
The friar was dead.

I am satisfied.

My Lord, the hope I have of your integrity.
Forbids me sorrow, till I see just cause:
It is no scandal to be charged with treason,
But to be proved a Traitor.

I not expect least favour, but refer
My cause to righteous heaven: if I be found
Guilty of what charged with; let justice
Spare no punishment, I've merited
The lawe's extremest rigour

The friar is come,

Death to my soul! is't possible? Fumante too?
Then I am lost.

It was reported you were slain, and by Fumante.

That rebel to religion so decreed it,
But heavens preventing hand put by the blow.
And we both live to witness against him.

And I.

Still mischief upon mischief: how the devil --
When most we need him, faulters with us.

Nay't shall out, my conscience torments me.
This purse of gold hyer'd me to a treason.
Will strike your souls with terror, when ye heare't. All but the Princess,
and himself, (had not the Duke Inspired from heaven come in) I should have
sent, To death's cold tenements, with a draught of wine, commix'd with a
strange drug would not have wrought

In eight days after, that the blinded world,
Might have imputed your untimely ends,
To excess of wine.

Horrid, and damnable!

I do confess 'twas I that wronged Pausanio,
That would have slain the duke, betrayed your plot,
Poisoned the Prince, you, your sister, and the rest,
And all for Lucebella's scorn, nor do I greeve.
For ought but that I cannot have revenge upon
Those villains have betrayed me unto shame.

Insolent devil, wee'I have thee fleaed alive

I must not die alone^ the law condemns
The body of that father to the fire,
That shall divulge the secrets of confession;
And I glory in my revenge.

My heart bleeds for the good old man.

Sir, spare that needless sorrow!
For now I see the mischievous intents
Of that blood thirsty-sinner, know 'tis I
(Through the means of that good Lord) am your preserver.

My royal Brother.

Earth open me a living-grave may hide
Me, and my guilt! else my high swollen heart
Break op'e my breast, and find one!

Your expectation's frustrated: I am no friar.

'Tis vain to hope for mercy,

Pinnion him fast! and locke him up in darkness!
His execution we defer until
Pausanio be arrived, in hope that heaven
Will give him yet repentance

Beyond my hopes --

Fumante, as for your ignorant attempt against us,
We reconfirme our promised pardon: but,
For your perjured testimony against
The most abused of men the old General,
Condemn you the just summ^ of fifty thousand dukets.
To be paid Pausanio: Hipolito's estate
Shall make the satisfaction more complete;
And during life confine you to your living in the Country.

Your gracious roy all Sir, as just --

And for that you consented to this mischief,
We banish you the Court; and give^ your hier
To make a holy Chalice -- for the Altar,
Nor doubt we of your pardon since it lies
Within our power to make ye ( To Mar and Luc. fair amends.
For you (brave Sir) your great engagement to
Pausanio, and the justice of his cause.
Pleads your excuse for breach of Covenant,
Y' are still a friend to Florence: nor repent
That I'm acquainted with your breast, we will
Continue friendly rivals, only pass
Our Princely words to stand to what her father
Shall freely give consent to.

I agree -- and yet that Lady --
But love's deaf, well as blind.

To arms (great Sir) not sarre off we descry.
Bright shining-troupes, bravely marching forward.

More discontent?

Soldier, there's a reward -- It is my father.
Be not dejected, Sir! oh sister now our joys are ripe
I'll forth, and meet him.

We will along -- with you.

Whilst we prepare to give him royal welcome^
Oh Lucebell^, let not thy remembrance.
Look back at what is part! for then --

All's buried in oblivion.

Confirm it with the seal of mercy^ a kind kiss!
The gods had their Nepenthe from these lips.
Sister I am familiar with your fears,
But know Sicanio's full of worth: forget 'em!

Since you are safe, and my friend once more happy,
I cannot fear.

Nor shall you have least cause: I know the worst
And am resolved to embrace it.

Thou art all virtue
Beat a soft March within, then enter
Pausanio, Sebastiano-disguiz'd, and
Company of Soldiers, and pass over the Stage.

Y' are fairly caught.

What treachery is this?

No treachery, but a tolerable trick
Allow'd in war; ye must along with us.

Cowards, and villains.

This rage will do no good
March continues, Pansanio
And his company re-enter.

Sound a Parley!
Ho? from the Walls?

Whom doth my glad eyes look upon --

Father.

I am that wronged Pausanio, whose soft heart
(Joyful to see my persecutor) melts
It self to womanish profuseness.

We'll haste to thy embraces --

Dear father make me happy in your blessing?

Best comfort to my age, arise! and heaven
Look favourably on thee! thou retai^'st
(My Girl) thy wonted sweetness
In despite of grief.

Next to good heaven,
The thanks belong unto the Princess.

Oh let me kiss that bounteous hand! my heart
Was never proud^ but when it did you service

My nature's not to do thus, but in answer
Of such deserving drops, mine eyes rain tears --
Oh my Pausanio, be kind, and pardon
The error of my blinded justice; heaven
Can witness with me, that my will's untainted

I must believe it; I had a legal trial,
And by suborned witness, was condemned
To undeserved death; but then your mercy
Stepped between, and saved me: whereas (had you
Desired my end) I had unjustly died
And yet 'it had appeared justice -- I am still
Your loyal humble subject --

Rather the better half of my dear soul! rise!
But where's our loving kinsman? he is wronged too?

I left him here; since, have not heard of him
Nor have I brought this power to increase
But to suppress rebellion --
Where is that enemy to virtue? I dare not
Call him, Son.

The Prince, and he went both to meet you.

Here's our best booty Sir,

Free them!
In you (Royal young Man) 't was nobleness
To attempt your injured friend's releasement;
For which my grateful soul shall daily pay
Your virtue tributary-thanks. In him
'Twas monstrous impiety: thy rebellious blood
Never had birth from these pure veins. I do
Disclaim all interest in thee; and beg
The sentence of the Law may pass on him.

Oh that were too unnatural: consider
It was his filial love to your wronged self
Provoke'd him to it.

The natural love of father never should
Make him forget the pious zeal he owes
His lawful Prince; obedience, loyalty
Are the sweet perfumes penetrate the sky:
Like it, no sacrifice such welcome finds
'Moung the celestial dwellers; nor than mutiny
And stiffe-neck'd disobedience, any crime
More strictly punished: what though injury
Plotted my banishment? (patience virtue!)
He knew my spotless faith was purely free
From foul contaminating treachery,
And should with equal patience have smiled
On my sad sufferings, interested in
My harmless innocence succeeding time
(The aged sire of vennerable Truth)
Had then on the swift wings of loud tongued fame,
Hurried his worth through the wide world; no mouth
Have mentioned his bare name, but with a kind
Of reverence, due to such a son, and subject
Whereas now (fallen from the virtue he professed
He lives (in spite of death) a cankered stain
To all posterity. Those numerous tongues,
That might, in emulation of his merit,
Have truly bin employed, will now as justly
Brand him with name of Traitor -- Bastard O my blond

Sir.

Bends thy disloyal knee in hope of pardon?
Can such impiety meet with mild mercy, or in
Earth, or heaven? no, no the gods are just
And thou hast lost thy hope of both.

Of neither, Sir:
The Duke is made of gentle pity, and
Upon my true contrition, hath forgiven
The error of my supposed duty, for which grace
Prostrated thus -- I humbly kiss his feet! --
And for my foul fault in the eye of heaven,
My penitential tears will purge all guilt
And make me a pure sacrifice for their
Sweet mercy.

Martiano, rise! you have our favour^
Be worthy of it! your youth hath had its swinge
But your now-better'd-judgement I hope will counsel
Your stout heart to execute, only, what's noble.

My honest actions shall hereafter speak
My soul's intentions.

Well, the gods forgive thee^ and now I turn
Petitioner, and must not be denied.

Command our Dukedom!

I only ask the life of my accuser; that he may have
A longer time to make his peace with heaven.

Go call him forth! --

Pausanio, you must resolve one doubt:
The Duke, and I are rivals in our love
To your fair daughter, yet are both engaged
To stand to your election.

Then I bestow her here: I've heard the Duke
Loved her ignobly (though I know the contrary)
And twill but take the scandal from her virtue --
To make her this amends. --

The which I do most willingly: and in my prayers --
I'll hourly bless the gods for this --
My so great happiness --

I hear the Princess loves you, who deserves
A greater fortune then the earth affords;
Cherish it, worthy Sir.

I see y' are full of thoughts: here -- I resign my right in Lucebella; not
that I am weary of my happiness, but choose, rather, to suffer nobly; then have
loved Chronicles report I used a stranger prince discourteously. Take her!


Heaven put better thoughts -- in him.

I may receave with honour, now; what I before rofus'd. I thankfully accept her
-- but, as freely, do Return her -- and may peace, Wait on your blessed
Conjunction! -- here's my choice, If, Madam, you consent? --


Her blushes do confirm, what her toomodest
Tongue is loath to utter. --

The Gods shewre down their choicest
Blessings on ye!

Iulia. We thank ye.

Her dowery shall be answerable to her descent --

Since things go thus success full, Madam I hope
We also have your leave? here comes my choice.

Ye have, and joy between ye ^

Rosa. We humbly thank your Grace.

Lady, we 're glad y' have chose so w sely.
Hipolito's late honours we -- confer on you!
You must be dear to us 't was he that brought
These obscured truths to light.

Honorio, you were ever an honest real friend.

And so will dye.

If a black soul, purged from its sinful filth
By penitential sorrow, more then hopes
For glorious Paradise? I'll not despair,
Of your forgiveness.

The pardon I would ask heaven for my self
I wish to you, and heartily forgive you.

So we do all, and joy in your contrition,

Your honours are bestowed, but we'll provide for you.

He's only truly happy who is good,
Not who is great: goodness, and greatness like known enemies, do rarely meet:
In the humble valley, better be a shrub
With secure peace, then, on the aspiring top
Of a proud hill, a Cedar, still exposed
To certain danger. Beauty, honour, wealth,
My quondam friends, whilst I affected folly,
For ever I renounce ye: pious virtue,
(Who, whilst I knew ye, was a stranger to me)
Since hath taught me, that y' are (at best) but air
Vannish'd, before enjoyed: the foul corruption,
My unstay'd youth sucked in at Court, prayers
And sad tears distilled from true repentance,
Shall wash a way: the remnant of my span
I'll spend religiously; my hourly votes,
For your prosperities, I'll daily, duly -- pay
To gracious heaven: this habit shall invest me
One poor petition,
Though undeserved, vouch safe to grant, the last
I mean to beg: my new borne virtue give
life to, through your remembrance! former ills
Bury in kind oblivion! that my name
May live unblemmish'd, in despite of -- shame.

I doubt not but his fall
Hath raised his soul to heaven.

Be sure ye be in readiness! --
Y'have almost made a fair conclusion,
Yet I have power to change the the Scene. --
Were I revengeful?

What means this progedie?

Read in this face! --

So many months together yet not know
The friendly part'n^r in my sufferings?
Worthy Sir, pardon my ignorance!

Our noble kinsman?

That late dispis'd-Sebastian -- but no more;
Hipolito's confession hath cleared all doubts.
This act was only to express my loyalty:
Had I bin thirsty for your blood, or state,
To make me great, and Lucebella mine?
This minute might effect it -- but, thus low
Humbled, I do confess my self your highness zealous
Subject.

Our happiness is now complete --
Let me engrafft thee on my soul! --
But Cousin how joined you with Pausanio,
Yet he unknown to you, until this instant!

I heard of his abode at Naples, whether
(When I had news of his bold sonne's revolt)
I went to get you aid, and from the king
Obtained it: Pausanio (desirous
To manifest his faith unto your Majesty.
In this intended service against his son)
Sought for Command: I (knowing his intents
Well as his valour after conference)
Gave him the Gennerall's place (although my beck
Commanded the whole army) yet kept my self
Secret in this disguise, till I should see
The final end, with which I'm now made happy.
And may your now rising joys never know Set!

Amen to that! once again,
My noble Cousin, forgive my rash belief!
Great ones, by this example, plain may see
There can no safety come of flattery.
Now haste we to the consummation of
Our Nuptial rites!
Those joys, culled out of danger, are most sweet,
Let us bless heaven they thus concent'rd-meet.


