ENvy and Faction rule this grumbling Age,
The State they cannot, but they shake the Stage,
This barren trade some would engross, still hoping
From our poor Port, to banish Interloping:
And like the plodding Lawyers, take great care
To elbow blooming merit, from the Bar:
In every Age there were a sort of Men
As you do now, damned all was written then.
Thousands before 'em less provoked their Pride
Then one poor rival straining by their side,
Such vermin Critics we expect to find,
For Nature knows not how to loose a kind
The stinking Poll Cat, nor the Mole that's Blind.
But against old as well as new to rage,
Is the peculiar Frenzy of this Age.
Shackspear must down, and you must praise no more
Soft Desdemona, nor the Jealous Moor:
Shackspear whose fruitful Genius, happy Wit
Was framed and finished at a lucky hit
The Pride of Nature, and the shame of Schools,
Born to Create, and not to Learn from Rules;
Must please no more, his Bastards now deride
Their Fathers Nakedness they ought to hide,
But when on Spurs their Pegasus they force,
Their Jaded Muse is distanced in the Course:
All that is now has been before tis true,
But yet the Art, the Fashion may be new:
Though old Materials the large palace raise,
The skilful Architect deserves his praise.
If nothing please, you are not nice, but sick,
'Tis want of stomach, ever to dislike.
On our past Poets, petty Juries sit,
The Living sink beneath your present spite,
As if this were the doomsday of all wit.
But Beaus and Ladies for your selves be wise
You'll break our Lottery if none draw a Prize
For this one night, do as kind Lovers u^
Tie up strict Judgement and let fancy loose.

HOW empty this Town is grown, since this unlucky War. I have traversed the
Streets, and have not met with one of my Acquaintance: The Play Houses are
silent; the Bowling-Greens abandoned; not a Visor stirring in the Mall: I have
beat it one the Hoof quite through the City; Ransacked our old quarters, and
Rendezvous; and cannot start one Honest Fellow to communicate my thoughts with:
Nor so much as a Whore roving about to pick up Coach hire: Well, if this wicked
lewd Town continues under so strict a Discipline and Reformation, it will be
high time to bid adieu to this scene of Sin and Seacoal: And trudge down to my
last Reserve of Country Friends, the Topers: There's a sure Card for good
plain wholesome Eating and Drinking: A change of Raiment for these Martial
habiliments, and a Patent, to Sponge the Manufacture of the Nation, Potent
Beer: Well -- I see I must turn over a new Leaf; And now I think out, I have
as much Learning as is Necessary for a Country Parson, and shall have Wit
enough, to accept of A handsome Chambermaid with a fair Living to boot, when my
Patron has given her Earnest for a Son and Heir -- and said Grace to the
Banquet -- Tom Fulham welcome I say into our ancient Territories and Dominions
of Covent-Garden --


My dear Friend, Jack Scaredevel! Welcome into my Arms! But the Circumstance
of your Campaign-garb; together with the Circumflex of your Whiskers, had
almost removed you, out of the Landmark of my Remembrance.


And the roughness of your Tarpawling Habit, had almost josled you out of my
thoughts: I was wondering what was become of that proper Bean, that could not
stir without a Coach or a Chair at Midnight: Lest the Dampness of an injurious
Mist might put his Wig out of the Curl: Or the roughness of the Wind
discompose it: But I am glad to see thee clear come off, Lad.


Yes faith -- I am clear come of and as Lank as a shotten herring! I have mewed
all my Feathers, and nothing left to bless my self, or pawn for a Reckoning:
But prithee, Dear Jack! what Booty amongst the Bourghers? what plunder amongst
the Boors? what rich Trophies has thou brought home to Dazzle us?


Just as much as you see: The Boors fled into Villages and secured themselves
with a safeguard: And the Bourghers were still to nimble for us -- They never
suffered it to come to a Seige but Capitulated before hand; or surrendered on the
first Summons -- and very Civilly turned Tennents to the French, who as civilly
received em, paying their old Rents and Customs: and a new fine into the
Bargain. And having Marched us off our Legs, turned us like Hackneys to Graze in
Winter Quarters till the next Spring -- But how hast thou acquired this
Honourable Mayme, and made a shift to halt home a Cripple -- that the last
winter could out-run a Legion of Bailiffs? and out strip a Constable at the
head of the Fleetest pack of his Hounds the Watchmen?


Fortune of the War, an unlucky Splinter in the late Engagement, but tis in a
fair way of Recovery -- I wish I could as soon recover my broken Condition: of
which this Empty Town gives me but a Mellancholy-Prospect.


Come Bully Tar. Never let us despair of good Fortune. We that (to the envy
of the Sharpers) have like Oil floated on the Tide of Business, will not fear
to be stranded in this low Ebb of affairs: Twas well thy right hand Escaped
that unlucky Splinter: which might have disabled the best Artist in
Christendom: Ah that surprising Top: that nimble side, that dextrous
management, that gallop and change, that Legerdemain! that clever Conveyance of
the Doctor, can never want while there are Cards, Dice or Quick-Silver stirring
in this Nation.


Twas well my careful Friends gave me some breeding.


Rather give the just praise to thy own Industry: Thy Father was Broke ere thou
wast fit to go to the Hospital -- whence thou came a Raw-Boy -- and had
the good Luck to strike in an under Agent to a knowing Gang, and improving the
Talent of thy towardly Genius, quickly picked up a Competent stock of Knowledge:
and insight into Men and Manners. Which, with thy Natural assurance bore thee
out in all Company.


But your high Extract Don Bravo remains as obscure as the Head of the River
Nile, or the Barren Mountains, where you were first reared, and your true name
as unknown: I have heard thee answer to above a Grand-Jury of Christian Names:
And as for Monseur Scaredevil -- I suppose it is your Name of War: gained to
your immortal Fame by some honourable Achievement. And why may not you be a
Herald to your self as well as a Godfather: and derive your pedigeree from what
Hero God or Devil you think fit? But a late curious Antiquary has Searched
deep into your Original. And the first station he traced you in, was an under
Usher to a Country Fencing-School. And being quit of that Honourable
employment, you promoted your self a Spunger at a Billiard Table, and for
making a Lucky thrust in a quarrel, were adopted a Brother of the Blade, where
sometime you flourished on the Salary of a Hackny Second to all Comers,
without Consideration of Honour, Quarrel, principle of Friendship, or Justice,
and full as Mercenary as the Swisse, would throw down your Arms, unless the
ready Gelt were produced on the Spot, then invading all Companies with wondrous
Confidence, you failed not upon hard drinking to make some advantage of the
Reeling Company.


Well -- thy rallying has shown thee a man of Parts: And for thy malice I will
recommend thee for one of the Club when they sit in Conjunction to hatch the
next Lampoon: Prithee why should thou and I turn Satirists on one another
misfortune? and like hot-braind Disputants betray the blindness of each others
Cause, to the malicious Censure of the by standers? who like sly Atheists will
take the Advantage to ridicule us both: let us like the Distressed States
combine against all rich and wealthy Strangers and set up for a Pyraticall
State?


Your advice is good -- but such designs must be shadowed under a fair
pretence, and false Colours must be used to decoy the prize within our power --
no Fish will bite at a bare Hooke. And every Novice will take us by our Trim
for Picaroones. And will rather choose to run to rights on a strange shore, than
come within command of our shot -- I have been Cruising here these two Days and
cannot discover one Sail may administer Comfort.


But here is a Lucky Rogue, spreads his Canvas, may make us all savers, and
repair our Shipwrecked Fortunes -- while the painted Jay is mustering his
glittering Equipage, and priding himself in his borrowed plumes. I will
prepare you with a hint of his Character. This Knight is one of the Cocking
Top-Fools in the Town, born to an Estate able to bear out his most Extravagent
Folly. He brags much of his Valour, and knowledge in gaming and other the
modish arts of the Town: but is at the bottom a rank Bubble, and a fitting
Tool to be wrought upon by wiser men: But the Fox must sometimes flatter this
Daw, that he may drop his Chese for a Song. But you will ken him upon the first
view: Sir Noisy Parrot, we are your most humble Servants, and rejoice at our
most Lucky-Fortune (being just arrived) to encounter the very life and spirit
of Wit and good humour: Were the whole Race of Modish well-bred Sparks quite
Extinct your single Example were enough to restore and qualify the Age.


You are the approved Rule and Standard of all Gallantry: a pattern sitting for
the world to imitate and Copy, having the absolute Ascendant over all the
Ladies which you govern without Control.


No faith Gentlemen, my wit and good humour is grown very Dull of late: I am so
damnably over-run with Honourable Love, my thoughts are wholly taken up with
raptures and contemplations: making my Court and Addresses to the bright Object
of my Devotions, which has put me to a continual pumping my Brains till they
are as dry as Saw-Dust.


Certainly that Lady must have more than a humane wit, that can hold repartee
with so prodigious a Master of it, or can defend her self against the attaques
of so invincible a Conqueror.


I have not given Nature a fillip, or cloa'd my Body with a Brimmer this week!
And my parts and faculties grow rusty for want of Scowering and Furbishing: But
I have made a discovery of most delicious Burgundy! Just stolen in from France,
and to avoid all scandal we will be very drunk in private, and hear the
History of our Campaign-Friends on the other side of the water. Pox on it if I
had not bin engaged in this Foolish passion. This Love intrigue: I should have
made a figure among 'em. But now I am like to Flux; Marry and Settle, and am
Condemned to raise up Issue to my Fore-Fathers! And sleep forgotten with my
Country Ancestors.


Your Friends are concerned your Amours and engagements have disappointed them
of the honour of your Company? And you lost the fair Opportunity of Signalizing
your self in Arms and raising up Trophies to your Immortal name! But the little
Archer will be obeyed: and lead grim Mars where he pleases in Triumph. But for
the History of our Heroes engaged in the War, it shall be deferred till we have
the honour to kiss your hands over a Bottle.


And drink a health to all the Sparks and Sharpers abroad: not forgetting their
poor disconsolate Misses, that sit languishing and forlorn at home: Poor Souls!
They have run through a long Lent of Penance and Mortification: I would
willingly have the Fiddles, a Treat, and the Diversion of Ballum Ranckum with
Loose. But such a frolic, if smoked might cause a rupture in our Matrimonial
Treaty, which is now far advanced. But for the present we must banish Venus out
of our Calender, Jolly Bacchus shall rejoice our hearts, and be our Dominical
Letter, making our Eyes sparkle like flaming Carbuncles; but at present I am in
hast to pay a visit to my Mistress: but must call in the way for a Copy of
Verses made in praise of her excellence, though I may Justly boast I have as good
a fancy as any of the Ryming Tribe. But my thoughts are too busy to trouble my
head about such Trumpery.


Then we must conclude you are smitten to some purpose? when you Dabble so deep
in Poetry!


I am grown lazy and cannot perform all offices at once and therefore have
provided my self with a Journeyman Poet -- a certain Reteiner to the Muses, and
let him Rook now and then a Guinny to twelve to encourage his fancy: And I
believe he has as pretty a way of Cooking up a piece of Invention, as most of
their Thread bare Mystery! Well Gentlemen; call me exactly at Four at the Rose
Tavern.


We will not fail --


This Fool is much admired among the Ladies for a Wit, and a Gallant. And among
the Fops for a man of parts: He brags much of his cunning Knowledge of the
Town, and talks of false Dice when he has 'em in his hand. When to those that
have the Courage to attack him, he it as secure and humble a bubble as ever was
bit, at Cole under the Candlestick! He has not good nature enough to do a
Friendly office: But must be Driven like a Deer into the Toil. Frank Fox, a
Man of a generous Nature, that will help a Friend at a pinch; And has courage
to call any man to account, that fails to make him a suitable Return. --


Welcome my brace of Warriors! you from the Camp, You from on Board, as your
several habits seem to confirm me! And how go matters among the Hero's of the
Age?


We sought not our private Advantage abroad: our end was the honour and service
of our Country!


This public concern ought to be encouraged and rewarded: But some malicious
spirits will suggest, 'twas hopes of pay and plunder engaged you in the War:
Else who can think that men of Wit and Sense: wholly disinterested in any
Forreign-French quarrel, should voluntary engage their mercenary Hands in all
sorts of Cruelty and Barbarity: without pretence of Justice. To every Brave and
Gallant man all Just and fair respect is due; but this Town of late has been so
pestered with a sort of young raw confident pretending Fops, who returning from
abroad, by their Grimace, nauseate all men of Discerning sense. I saw the other
day a young Spark returned in Triumph from the Campaign, Strutting and
Swaggering with a most dreadful Meine, Cocking and looking as haughty as if he
had retaken the Imperial Standard, or accomplished some wonderful achievement:
hoping with his arrogant Looks to Hector the world into a Belief that he had
changed his Nature, as well as his Garb: His discourse was embroidered with
Flowers he had culled out of the Gazet, mixed with some French Terms of art,
which Jargon of Discourse, he mingled and put most awkwardly together. But though
this Ass was so well disguised in the Lions skin, the dull Annimal was quickly
discovered by his Brayeing and exalted Ears, and Exposed to the scorn and
Contempt of the Company.

They smelt the Fop out in the shining Vest.
Apes will be Apes though in rich Scarlet dressed.

Such pretenders talk much of Robin Hood that never had the honour to shoot in
his Bow, and give occasion to those that live at ease at home to rally poor
Soldiers, that for their sakes expose themselves to hazard and fatigues
abroad.


'Twere unkind in you to suspect, I would join with the ill natured World in
such a baseness; Though I cannot sufficiently contemn such pretending Blockheads:
I know how to value men of Merit: That may be reduced by the uncertain Chance
of War, which often happens to the most free and Generous Spirits: I know you
to be men of mettle, and Blades that deserve to be adorned in richer Scaberds:
Here Gentlemen, command my present Stock; -- some strange Americans in a Map,
or some Heathen Prince to be showed in Bartholomew Fair for money: Meet me at
the Rose at two. And then I shall Communicate a matter to you, In which I shall
desire your assistance? in the mean time I must walk a turn or two here in
Expectation of my Father. Your Servant --


Well go thy ways for an honest Worthy obliging fellow! And though his noble
Nature is cramped with a griping Fathers bare allowance, yet he knows how to
serve a Friend at a pinch.


He's a sharp Lad and knows the World: and how to place a benefit to advantage.


While some ungainly Fellows manage their kindness so Awkwardly they affront
those, they pretend to serve, and made them blush that they are beholding to
such Brutes.


This generous assistance has rescued us from the Gulf of Despair, and we will
serve to the hazard of our lives: of which his last words seem to hint, he
should make a sudden proof. How many rich sordid Heirs wallowing in endless
wealth that can present profusely to a flattering Bawd -- or a Jilting painted
Mercenary Whore; but would be damned ere they would oblige an honest brave
wanting Friend; Let's Divide his Benevolence.


Forty Guinneas to a Do it.
I have an old Suit in Limbo will Equip me to a hair.

But my Wardrop is past all redemption, I must to the Brokers and rig my self
against the Time, we will meet at the Rose.


Is Mr Scattergoods further Mortagage prepared?


It is, Sir Worldly --


And have you drawn a Warrant to Confess Judgment in Ejectment? That I may have
the Stirrup ready to mount into the Saddle of possession, I believe I have
advanced to the full of the Estate: -- The Auctions in the East-India Company
run very high at present, and I am resolved to dispose of my stock there, and
place it upon Terra firma: on a fat Mortgage? or a Purchase -- Let my Daughter
know I would have her receive Sir Noisy's Address for Marriage, he has a great
Estate in Land and Money? and refers the Settlement to me. Who will take care
to hamper him, and secure her Fortune; on this Marriage: That it shall not fall
into Huckstirs hands, and be Extravagantly spent and Squandered, She ought to
look on this Match as a great Blessing, and not grow perverss and Humoursome
like her Brother. I am to meet Sir Noisy at my Councils Chamber, when 'tis dark
-- go home.


I was at your House to Pay my Duty and am glad to wait you here.


Excuse me Sir. I am not Supple enough to return your Complement, and for your
Duty Sir, 'tis but a word of Course, pray Sir, know the use of you Hat: there
needs no Ceremony between us, a man of ripe Age, and one might have made me a
Grandfather, if he would have used the means, but a wilful humour blasted my
hopes.


I hope Sir you will be entreated to pass by this single act which looks like
Disobedience. You have taught me Sir, that Love and Friendship ought to be
chosen; and not Compelled, and to Marry without Love, is to bind a living Body
with a Dead: When ever I design that knot, I will be solely Governed by your
Judgment.


I must refer you Sir, in what concerns your self to stand and fall by your own
Management, I will not be so Idly Curious to concern my Thoughts for him I
cannot Govern: And for your Debts. They were not Contracted, by any fault or
Encouragement of mine: Heaven has blessed you Sir with helps, my youth could ne'er
pretend to: and yet I weathered Fortunes utmost malice. I went a raw School-Boy
to Oxford. And but a freshman when the War begun: I Left the Studious for an
Active life: and finding none preferred at Court, but for some by Interest, or
Downright money, I was condemned to take the Luckier side. From thence rose
Gradually to be a Colonel. Finding an Heiress fitting for my purpose, I
married her, without considering either Wit or Beauty. An Estate was the only
thing had the Witchcraft to enchant and fix my happiness. Then secured by the
act of Indemnity, I bid adeiw to all Military Employments: my Wife, dying Early
I have above Ten Years remained a Widower, unwilling to overcharge my Family
with a second Brood: But having in you met a Disappointment in my Designs, I
resolve henceforward to please my self, and choose a partner in my Bed and
Fortune.


Let your indulgence wink at what is past: my Care shall still comply with your
Commands.


Then you shall find me an indulgent Father?


The Conduct of this old man vexes me!
His starched behaviour over-Ceremonious:
As if his Malice studied for revenge:
I would not drive him to a Desperate humour:
To fix his Thoughts upon a second Match;
Or Marry my Cast Mistress:
Who in her Pride may Lord it over me!
And seek my torment for Apostasy:
None know how sweet Revenge is to that Sex?
Which I'll prevent, and marry her to Parrot:
Hedge in a Sum shall clear me of my Debts?
Which his Indulgence made me first contract
And now abandons me unto the World.
'Tis this compels me to an Act immorrall
Which I my self condemn, but cannot avoid:
He who constrains me thus to stretch my Wit.
And forces the occasion pardons it.
Why are your Looks so Melancholy Plot?

I am considering (a point you take but little care off.) how to stop mouths of
your barking Creditors; which if I find not some to silence, I shall be
swallowed alive in prison: and you may live to make Dice of my Bones: I am so
disturbed and alarm'd with their Threats and dunning Epistles, that I can take
no repose? If your Father did but know my hand was with you, and my friendship
to you had involved me in this affair I should be discarded from his Service.


Well Plot: what Expedient have you thought upon to stop this dangerous Leak;
which threatens to sink our Crassy Vessel, and prove a common ruin to us
both.


I declare I am at a loss -- what says your Father? will he not advance?


He is so offended with my refusing that Squintifego-Crump for a Bride, that he
has discarded me with my bare allowance to buckle with the World.


He had set his heart upon that Match: 'Twas his darling Device: which he had
sat long a hatching: but your obstinate refusal blasted his hopes. and made him
desperate-mad: Disappointing him of the rich Harvest he had so long Dreamt of:
Hang it, why should a Tyrannical Father think to compel his only Son to marry
an Heiress worth Sixty Thousand pounds, contrary to his Inclination, though he
bribed him with a Settlement of 1500 l. per annum. And secured the rest after
his Death. Had you had the Grace to have Complied, these petty Debts would not
have stung us like Hornets, as now they do: Then you had amazed and dazzled the
world with your shining Epuipage. And appeared the Glory and envy of the Town:
The enchanting Ladies would have adored and cried you up for the most happy
Conqueror and you might put their hearts under what Contribution you had
pleased, you cannot guess Sir at the Magic power of Riches, which can in a
moment transform a Seseless Brute into an accomplished Gentleman.


What need I despair, or poorly Compound for a Despised Livelihood, when my
Fortune stands fair before me, and assures me all things will succeed most
happily: None can Disappoint me of my Fathers Estate: And I had rather be a
Gally-Slave, than chained to the Embraces of her I hate.


Though Love is adored as a powerful God among the Superstitious Troop of idle
votaries: yet to Wisemen, he's but an Empty nothing, and used as a Cloak to
cover politic designs: Love and Religion Serviceable Tools:
To the Wise Artist: Dangerous to Fools.



Hold a little Sir: let me stop you in the Career, of your Harangue: and
entreat the assistance of your Talent to matters in hand.


I stand Corrected Sir: and must own that a Florid Philosophical Discourse
will be as unseasonable and ridiculous in our present Condition as Sir
Hudibrass grave set of Moralls in the Stocks: 'tis better Imitating the Wiser
Conduct of Court Preachers, that never disgust their Audience with a dangerous
Truth: and by that means run the hazard of bilking themselves of a long hunted
preferment. But is there no means left to mollify your obdurate clutch-sist
Father? Did you urge your Necessities home?


With all the winning Rhetoric and art of persuasion I could, but his heart
was not to be softened with all my Arguments; and like a Diamond bore it without
any Impression: He told me, since I had refused the Settlement he had proposed:
and disappointed him of the satisfaction of seeing me married: it was the
Effect of my roving Fancy: He had known many like Gipsies, better pleased to
follow their own humour and Inventions then confine themselves to any settled
Course of Life: and was pleased to find he was related to a Son that had Wit
enough to Swim in the world without being beholding to the Bladders of his
Friends assistance.


Then 'tis but reasonable since he condemns you to live by your wits he should
feel the first Stroke of your Fancy.


And I have a Project just now teeming in my brains shall make us savers to the
Tune of a Thousand -- But of that hereafter. How does my Sister receive Parrots
addresses?


Who? my good Friend and Patron Sir Noisy? He has chosen me of his Cabinet
Council in this affair, and prime Confident: He is smitten up to the Hilts with
your Sister!


How does she receive him?


Very coldly.


I like it the better, and am resolved you shall do a double Favour, in ridding
her of a troublesome Gallant; and assisting in a Marriage, Designed between the
aforesaid Knight your Friend, and a Damsel of my intimate acquaintance. You
may easily bring it about because he trusts you!


Of your acquaintance! nay then he will have a fine time on it -- Sir I must
heartily beg your pardon in this Case: I would be ready to do you any Service
my self. But my Conscience will not let me dispense with a Breach of Trust:
What? betray a Friend: you must hold me Excused!


Betray a Friend, betray a Coxcomb! There is no more obligation for a Man of
Wit and Sense to keep the peace or Friendship with a Fool, then for a Turk to
observe Articles with a Christian, or a Papist with a Heretic. There's a
mutual parity required in the bonds of Love and Friendship, and where one side
is turned Bankrupt, the other on Course remains no longer bound: And for
Conscience 'tis but a blind Stalking-Horse! to cover designs: A sham pretence,
not to be spoke of among men of wit. But to remove all Scruples, Accomplish
this, and for it, and your Services past and to come: I will confirm you an
Annuity of one hundred pounds per annum. under hand and Seal, payable on my
Marriage or my Fathers Death.


Sir I am much edified by your Learned Distinction, and must confess you have
such a strange Winning bewitching power over my frail foolish Nature, a very
Tempting Motion, which I cannot refuse being accompanied with Gain.


I fear it will be heard to trap the old Fox.


I rather distrust the young Fop, who is naturally apt to Blink and Boggle: But
the old one is by long Success: grown confident and will swallow the Bait.

All Novices are Shy: But a new Trick
Does the Old Gamester most securely Nick --

This fellow has a subtle Brain, and a Genius sit for Business: he had his
first seasoning, under a petty-fogging Solicitor. And there grew well
acquainted with the Nicking part of Business, but straining a Knavish point too
high, was forced to fly beyond Sea for the safety of his Ears: till the
persecution was past, and there accomplished himself in all Foreign as well as
Domestic Politics: At his return Fortune threw him on my Father's Service,
where by his Dexterity of management, He has wound himself into his affairs,
and is become Prime Minister in the Conduct of his most important matters. I
have by degrees drawn him over, and fixed him of my party, and by that means am
Master of all my Fathers Secrets, which come within the Sphere of his
knowledge. And knowing only Interest could secure him, I have promised him
Mountains, when Fate calls the old man aside, and in the mean time drew him in
to be bound for my Debts, which will oblige him to any hazardous undertaking,
will work him out of his engagements, I must make use of him to advance an
other hundred pound. Credit is like a Pump grows dry for want of working, one
hat full of water puts it in Tune, then you may serve your self and friend, and
fill your Cisterns against a further occasion.

Earnest Business gives you this trouble and I request you will meet me at
Rosamonds Pond at Eleven this morning. I shall be habited. c.

Madam you have served me with a Process of Love in nature of a Bill deux, to
which I answer I am at present no Idle Fellow; but oblige to take up one
Hundred Pounds, if I can persuade an honest obliging Person to lay it down: Now
if you, or any kind Friend of yours, will advance me such a Sum? I will give
you personal Security; or be Bound Body for Body.



Mine is an Affair of Consequence and might concern you to make a more serious
Answer?


I have been so bit under Vizours that I am under a Promise to be no more
deluded, Except you convince me, you're a new Face?


Then I remove all obstructions to the Treaty: I own my Credentialls bare
Faced.


And it is a very pretty one. Let you and I retire to my Lodging? hard by: and
adjust matters in private?


Hold Sir, I am but an Ambassadress; and claim Protection by the Law of
Nations: And if you press me further, I will call in the Mobile to my
Assistance.


Well thy Beauty has engaged me to meet; but if you Gilt me, I will be revenged
on those two twinking Stars if ever I meet 'em.


I must wait my Ladies coming, 'tis much about the time of her coming from
Church, she has been at prayers she may be Lucky in this Adventure? Oh! here
she comes.


Well, did you deliver my Letter?


I did, and he has assured me he will meet at the hour.


My Brother has proposed him for a Husband:
Rendering his Character and Fortune Fair:
But Friendship like to Love proves often Blind.
Misleading the frail Judgment into Error:
It most concerns me nearly to Descry
The Rocks and hidden Quick-Sands of his humour.
And the rough Passions which infest his mind:
I cannot be too Curious in my Search:
On which my Future happiness depends:
He once may Lord it ore my Mind and Fortune!
If I in this disguise meet him by Chance
He will appear to me in his true Colours.
A sudden Speech discovers more the heart
Then Courtship made by studied rules of Art.
The weakest Lover will provide Disguise,
To hide his failings from his Mistress Eyes:
Through this Disguise I as a spy may see,
The unwary posture of the Enemy;
Like a Dark Lanthorn Vizors are designed,
To light before, while all's concealed behind.

MY Dearest Nurse, by whose Counsel I have hitherto conducted my self let your
advice rescue me from this Insolent pretender Sir Noysy Parrot whom I most
perfectly hate.


And you desire my opinion? Therefore I will first shut the Door; for it is
very improbable where there is more then two Women concerned, Counsel should
be long concealed.


I have an Aversion for this troublesome Fellow, that talks sleeping and
waking without staying for, or expecting an Answer: His discourse is set to
the tune of his own Praise or Commendation, Extolling and valuing himself (as
he imagines) on his nightly Debauches, Quarrels, Rencounters, Duels disorders
and the Love of many great Ladies who languish and dye for his sake: Though none
regard, or give belief; to his Fabulous and Romantic Adventures.


It will be dangerous in you to oppose the Currant of your Fathers humour and
cross his design: and you will find him Resolute Batt when he sets upon it.
Therefore it will be best to comply with his humour and dissemble obedience:
least you may run the Risk your brother has done for his Obstinacy: Bid Sir
Noisy welcome with all the Gaiety imaginable; that he may fancy by the freedom
and indifferency of your humour you were bred up amongst those talking treating
Gossiping Intriguing Ladies: That will toss a Bottle and take up a Story in
their ears upon occasion. Hint it to him, since your Father will have it so,
you are very indifferent in the point of Marriage: will comply with his fancy,
but choose with your own: That you look on Marriage as a humane Politic
Invention, a sort of a Smith-field-Bargain where inclinations are bought and
Sold: or swopt away for present Interest. Carry it on with Gaiety and Gallantry
of Humour: Talk much of Plays, Music, Meetings, Balls the Mall, and freedom of
Conversation: And I'll secure you he shall be the first shall recant, and pay a
round forfeiture to be well off the Bargain. If he declines his Courtship your
Father will have no reason to Complain, for though Men are never so depraved
and Debauched in their own Principles, they wish their Wives should be Examples
the other way.


Well Nurse I am satisfied you have proposed the true way to bring me off, and
I will try to Act it to the life; when he comes next the whole Scene shall be
changed and I will over do it with Extravagant whimsy and Frolic, and so
nauseate his appetite that he shall never after think of Matrimony.


Well, we will go in and prepare our selves for Action, Study our Qs and
rehearse our parts and I will be near and prompt, if I find your Natural
Modesty at a loss, I be ready to assist, and I'll warrant you we will send him
away like a Dog with a rattle at his Tail.


Do you think the Spark will meet?


He looks more like a Cavaleir then to break his Word.


Prithee give me an exact Account of what past at the delivery of my Letter?


At first he laughed and told me he was a Man of business, and had abundance of
Irons in the fire, and could not be spared to wait on these Vain, Idle
assignations. That he was just going to take up a hundred Pounds if he knew any
person would be so civil to lay it down. I told him if he knew the fair Lady
sent the Letter he would court the occasion. He replied he had been so often
bantered with Letters and Mask's that he was resolved never to stir one foot on
such sleeveles errands except my Face would persuade him. For he hated an old
acquaintance worse then dirty Linen, a dunn, or a Bill of Exchange without
money to answer it. I discovered my Face and found grace to engage him to meet
at the time and Place. Well madam, are you not under some concern to meet this
dangerous man of War, that has been flushed with so many Victories? He has made
many a poor heart sigh, or the world fowly belyes him. Love is often Imperious
and domineering and will not be checked and governed by Reason.


Doubt not, I shall defend my own with Gallantry and Resolution. But I'll
advance him the Money on certain Conditions which if he breaks I'll hate and
despise him.


Courage madam, the Enemy approaches.


By all the fair Tokens of my Letter of advice: Madam, you are Consigned
hither. And I am to be the happy Factor of so complete a Cargo?


You talk like a Merchant, come hither on some design of purchase or Exchange.
But I must declare my self an utter stranger to the affairs of your
Negotiation. I hope I may Sail here, under the protection of the Kings
Chamber, in these narrow Seas: without any embargo, constraint or further
Examination from any Pikaroon that Cruises here for Purchase.


You may perceive by this Letter,


Sir you see I do not agree in habit with your Description, and rather believe
you are some pirate, or Corfaire that haunt this Coast to snap a Prize, under
false Colours and pretence?


My Colours truly declare what Prince I serve: But I have greater Reason to
suspect your Truth, that conceal your Commission with your Face? But my open
pretences give me a fairer Character.


The Ladies that haunt the Boxes, and travers the Mall, enquiring after every
proper Gentleman's Circumstances, make a Figure there, know Mr. Fox's fair
Expectations: But no Woman of Fortune will venture for Better for worse,
without ample Settlements and a seperate Maintenance, if Husbands should prove
base, unkind, or unjust; in these Cases 'tis good to have Two strings to ones
Bow.


I know some have had Twenty, and worn 'em to the Stumps.


Those are a fort of Roving Spirits: But a sober Musician will try what Melody
can be made on a Trump Marine with one single String, rather then entertain a
Scandalous Consort.


But Madam, since you are so well acquainted with mine: Let me be beholding to
you for your own Character?


That will avail you nothing: our Circumstances differing in every Point, and
I like other Artists can paint my Description as fair as I please. You having
had no sight of ^e Original to contradict it: But to comply with your desire: I
am a Widow, my days of mourning with my Garments are almost at an End: My
husband died rich and Loved me passionately; and it was my Care to preserve it,
till misfortune parted us: he left me in full possession of all which many
think Considerable enough.


Your person is more valuable then the Indies: And I am most infinitely charmed
with your wit and humour. Let me beg you will remove that dark Cloud which
obscures the Noblest Object.


Want of knowledge is the True mother of Devotion: And a convenient distance
often makes us adore those Mysteries, which on a more familiar acquaintance, we
should slight and despise: If you think it worth your enquiry, I will preserve
it for a further interveiw: Let my first injunction request you will press it
no further which will oblige me to more freedom hereafter: But if your
Curiosity makes you pry further into my reserve, instead of your promised Juno,
you will meet an empty Cloud, or at least will prove so to you --


Madam your Commands oblige me more then an Oath or an Act of Parliament. I beg
your pardon, for my inquisitive humour, and will press no further: I am wrapped
up into the Heavens of Imagination! Your Wit and Conversation has raised me
into an Extazy: Your shape mean and charming accents of your Voice, has
ravished me from my self. Vlisses when he past through the Consort of the Sirens
was not more Transported.


'Twas well his forecast had piniond him to the Mast, to secure him from those
fluttring Designs, would have ensnared his Life.

But I must not permit you to proceed in this rapture: 'Tis possible time may
discover such a Face, that may damp your Devotion and put it out of humour.


There never was so fair a Temple built but was inhabited by something divinely
Excellent.


When Fancy has raised you to the tipptoes of your Imagination: you must at
last consider your Mistress attributes are but mortal: Sudden passions like
furious Earthquakes, cause a Commotion and Expire; whereas more Calm and
regular sits are more permanent and lasting. The information I have given you
in my own affairs encourages me to enquire after the History of your Amours: A
person of your youth and Temper, cannot but have intrigues on foot: Deal
sincerely with me, for if Time are Accident shall discover your falsehood, I
shall suspect you vehemently in the rest.


I condemn the rigour of my Misfortunes without my fault: Chance at a
Masquerade, brought me acquainted with a young handsome Woman: Beautiful to a
miracle; she lived in a solitary house in the outskirts of the Town: with an
Aunt, as her Governess. I made my frequent visits, but with a Caution under a
false name: And at last made a Discovery she was kept by an old Gentleman: My
Curiosity did not press to know further. We continued in this happy
Circumstance, for some time: When a cross accident blasted all my hopes and has
made an Eternal Separation: But I am still ready to Sacrifice my life for her
Interest and Service: But must for ever abandon her love: I can charge no fault
on her or my self; but the odd Capriciousness of my Fate distracts me: And this
Madam, is the sole Intrigue and Correspondence I have entertained or engaged in
for some time.


You have surprised me with a strange Riddle, I want an Oedipus to expound it,
but I must Credit it, because it is vouched by you, and the Concern, with which
you tell it, gives it the more lively faith.


It is a Secret too true, And I wish it may be still a Riddle, which nothing
but the Rack or Torture should have extorted from me, but your Ladyships
Command.


I leave you Master of your Thoughts!


Madam your enchanting Conversation has engaged me beyond my time: But must beg
you will appoint when I may make my self once more happy in your Conversation:
It will be Cruel to condemn my heart, and not allow me time to put in further
Claim.


What business hurries you away so fast?


'Tis of import, and calls me into the City.


I'll hold my life to raiss a Sum of money to Cary on some fresh design.


You guess like a Conjurer, which must be provided or else my projects will
miscarry.


Well, rather then all shall be lost in fumo! I will venture a hundred Guinneas
on your project: if that will do you any service; 'Tis my Stock at Basset: And
for once, the Table shall want a Gamester: my Servant has it in a Purse, you
may take it by Consent, upon this Condition that you repay it, before you make
Courtship or profession to another Mistress: But if you are strongly Tempted,
you may have a Dispensation from me! when I see you next.


Madam, I blush to accept this favour, which looks like robbery in me, if I
wore the Mask!


I'll ask no Note under your hand I have a good witness by.


My Heart assures me I can never fail.


At four I'll meet you here: Leave me to my Freedom without a Spy.


I kiss your hands.
Never was Man so generously obliged --

I doubt not, but you have won on his noble Nature.


'Tis better to sound his principles. with the loan of a trisling Sum, then put
my whole Fortune in his hand; and be cheated of it at a lump, by such a
faithless Banker, I am at a loss to expound this riddle of the Masquerade, but
I will use my utmost art to Dive into his Breast, I cannot be satisfied till I
master it: And if he Loves -- He cannot hide it long --


Lord Madam, I am surprised.


Charity obliges us to help him in this Distress: Rub his Temples. Oh he
revives and opens his eyes.


Oh when will my Misfortunes have an End!
I thank your Charity that brought me back!
Or else my Miserable life had here concluded.

You're welcome Sir once more to breath the air,
Lend him your hand and raise him from the Ground.

Madam -- I thank your Charity and beg your pardon*
If I enquire what Gentleman was that,
That held discourse with you before my Coming?

A perfect Stranger I met here by Chance.


Oh Madam -- pardon a Distracted Woman;
Plun'gd by misfortune in Eternal ruin,
Who in few hours envied no mortal State.

A Woman! Madam you Surprise me much!
And though your borrowed shape misled my Guess
I cannot repent of serving so much Beauty.
I see your weak Limbs ill support your Body
Accept my Servants Arm?
She will conduct you to my Coach that waits,
And I'll attend you to your Lodging.

Madam ten thousand thanks for your assistance.


What if this Stranger prove the Masquerade,
I am on fire, till I pump out the Secret --

Madam Sir Noisy's come,
To Serenade you with the Fiddles.

Is the Wine and Coloured water prepared?


So like you cannot distinguish it by your Eye.


Tis well -- admit him. Noisy Parrot, you are welcome, since my Father has
given you admittance; you are Patron here.


I am glad to wait on you in so good a humour: it used to be more Lowering and
Tempestuous -- And therefore I brought the Fiddles to appease the Storm.


That is allayed by your Company; a Woman's Countenance, does not always show
her real meaning: But since you have brought the Music, we will have a minuet.


I am Surprised to find you in so good a humour


I see Sir Noisy I can tire you out -- Sit down and Breath a while and we will
to it again. I perceive this exercise has made you Dry -- Betty bring Wine, and a
Collation -- Come Sir Noisy? since the Fates will have it so, here's to our
better acquaintance -- fill him his Glass -- to the whole Legion of your
Mistresses -- alon's Monseiur Chacon l'ver. Noisy I am resolved I'll Imitate
your Example every way, and first we will discard all jealousy: for that will
disturb our happiness. When we are Married the Law installs me your Sultana;
your Mistress of State, And I in days of Triumph am to wear your Golden
Trappings, as your Charging Palfrey: Neither shall I be out of humour if you
divert your self, with an easy pad, on ordinary occasions: by the by; provided
you return home to your quarters safe and Sound, and in the mean time the
Necessity of the Family may be supplied: Marriage is like to prove a tedious
Journey, and will hold out one of our Lives: And therefore it will be good to
support Nature with all Comfortable refreshments, of which I take the Bottle to
be a main one, which constan^ly feeds the Lamp of Love. And none but the
foolish Virgins will want that precious Liquor for a recruit.


And madam, I'll be bold to drink the aforesaid Health, to our further
Acquaintance.


The deeper the Sweeter. You see I make you welcome, after the German Fashion:
Who contract all amity and friendship over a Bottle: and faith, plain dealing
is a Jewell now a days; and it is good to let every one know betimes what they
must trust to: But since you have pressed the Music let 'em divert us with a
Song.


Madam! I design to treat you with an air of my own Composing and setting.


Indeed Sir Noisy this must be very Charming?


Sir Noisy, I perceive you're in a perfect Rapture, these Hiperbolicall
Expressions treat your Mistress like an Idol, be pleased to command the Music
to sing the new Dialogue of Women's freedom that's much more agreeable to my
humour.


Madam I will.


How have I performed?


To the life: the poor Idiot stands amazed at your freedom: Carry it on with
fresh humour, and I'll warrant you, you nauseate him: For ever prosecuting his
Love further. That torrent of discourse that used to roll so volubly from his
Tongue, without sense or Consideration, has now left him; he is grown
Speechless, quite run down and insipid.


I this is to the purpose. We will ne'er live sneakingly at home with my Father,
to be curbed with his Musty Morrals: but take the full swing and scope of our
humour. First, we will furnish a large splendid House, where we may have Elbow
room, with servants and Equipage suitable; and by the way you must forswear
living in that nasty dull place, the Country. Where with much ado, we may once
in a Moon Scrape Company together to make a Game at Whisk, or Lantraloo; or a
Country Dance. We will live constantly in Town, and when our dear diversion the
Play-Houses are shut up, and all grows dull here, we will down to Tun-bridge,
where while you fret your self at the Groom-Porters, I will divert my self at
the Royall-Oak, spend all the Morning Raffling at the Wells, and the Evening in
Conversation and Dancing: and thus the time shall slide insensibly, with all
mirth and Jollity: and I will lead a life more like your Friend, or Mistress
then your Wife: But I must Article you must always keep a Coach for me to make
my seperate Visits: You shall not enquire into my affairs: Neither will I
trouble my head with yours: We will keep a free open table to entertain our
Friends. And for other matters I shall leave it to my Fathers Care to secure me
a seperate Maintenance, and make provision against all mischances.


Well Madam, we shall be an envied pattern to the World: Let me beg the Favour
to Seal the Bargain upon your lips.


Well Sir, for once I am contented, you take it as a liker, before Marriage;
But I must be more shy of my Favours: till you are fast in a trap: When the
parson has said Grace, you are welcome to use your pleasure; in the mean time I
must be more upon the Reserve: least if you should entice me to be to free,
before hand, you might fly of from your Bargain; Some have bin served so to my
Knowledge.


Madam, there is no danger I can Repent.


Well, say and hold; I always resolved I would marry a brave fellow: that
should stand by me, and justify my honour and reputation, right or wrong: I
Scorn a little sneaking fellow, th^s is easily run down; encouraging others to
pretend to more familiarity then is true, and that will provoke a Saint.


It will indeed: Well madam, I will leave no stone unturned to bring this
matter to a sudden Conclusion.


And I will lend my helping hand. Sir Noisy, we will not part with dry Lips:
one Glass more to the happy Consummation of our wishes.


With all my heart: Your Servant.


Hold hold Sir Noisy: who could have thought you would have bin such a Clown?
to steal away without taking leave. Noisy, you make me blush to mind you of
your Duty.


I'm glad I got off Sober, but this strange freedom amazes me.


Well madam, you have acted your part with all Gallantry: I'll secure you this
dunghill cock will never have spirit to wheel or strike one stroke more in the
Battle: you see he is perfectly cowed and dares not show his face! you have
baffled his pretensions, and cut him down in his own way!


I believe he is grown Crop-sick of the bargain. If we see him no more to day,
you shall Visit him to morrow! And entertain him with a hideous Character of my
Wantonness.


I doubt not but He's already well enough satisfied.


Well I must blush and ask pardon; that have strained a point of Modesty to be
rid of so vain a pretender.

Of proffered Dainties we suspect the Savour.
Where most were courted, seldom prize the Favour.

Your kindness, Madam, infinitely binds me
What I shall ever be, must own your Bounty,
Who brought me from the Dungeon of Despair.

This storm blown over all will then prove fair,
The Stars ne'er meant that face for black Despair.

What can I hope in this distracted state
That am a perfect stranger to the World
And want a faithful Friend to give me Council.

Madam! you freely may Command my Service,
And Women prove as trusty to each other
As great Heroes: And conceal their Secrets.
But while you labour thus to stifle thoughts
They often suffocate, or fester inwards,
And breed a hidden Gangrene in the Mind;
Open your Grief and give your Passions vent,
The very telling it will Ease your Heart:
And I'll apply my utmost Skill to serve you.

Then I will freely make you my Confessor,
Be not severe or kill me with a frown:

Your Face assures me yours are Venial failings!


I wish my faults to you transparent were,
Which I condemn, but never can declare:
When to arraign my self, it is my Choice
Shame hides my Face and robs me of my Voice.
Madam some business interrupts us now:
I beg you call on me: I am still at home!
Conceal your self a Moment in this Lobby
And those back stairs conduct you to your Coach.

But I'll make bold to Listen.
It is as I expected. I'll watch the Issue.

My absence made me seem a Criminal,
I from your sight concealed my Guilty Face
And hid me from the person I adore.

Since I once more enclose you within these Arms
Nor Time nor Fate shall e're divorce me from you!
Happy that hour when at a Masquerade,
Thy Wit and Beauty charmed my panting Breast,
And first inspired thy Love into my heart!
Which Was till then a stranger:
My Heart then melted and dissolved within me!
A race of Golden Days did then appear
Love was our Theme all day, and every Day a Year.

Our Love in blooming Youth is in the prime
And like pure Gold works perfect from the mine:
Till thoughts and Care the Mettle does debase
And mix it with a dull and Gross allay.

Love at this Envied pitch should ever stay.


Our fruitless wishes can't arrest the Sun
That great Machine of Heaven must still proceed
And having touched the highest Southern point, from thence declines:

Then since we find our selves Each hour decay,
Our Bodies like a Clock at first made perfect;
Until the Spring, and well disposed wheels
Wear out, and falter in Career of motion,
Loosing its pulse, no more points to the Hour.
Since hours fly, each Minute lets improve
And think all time is lost, that is not spent in Love!

Yet that self moving Clock may be disordered:
By some mischance disabled to perform
Or strike, until restored and put in tune.

Then we must wait with patience until Art
Or Time restore it to perform its office:
For Love can pardon and supply defects!
But, dearest Life, be free and tell the Cause
What made you steal away from me abruptly?

When in our infant Love you smiled upon me:
Though your Aunt stormed and I received repulses
Yet I cut through the Billows by your light.
At last convinced it was in vain to strive
Against the stream of our united Love:
She thought it safest to conceal our Converse
From the old Dragon, watched the Golden Fruit,
I interlop'd and drove a private trade,
And never minded who touch on the Coast
Till by his Picture you betrayed the Secret.
I at that sight grew pale, my colour faded
And shot a discomposure through my frame,
Starting as I had met my Fathers Ghost!
Which you perceived, I told you twas a Qualm
That suddenly benumbed my fainting Spirits.
And while your Friendship went to fetch a Cordial
I stole away.

And was that kindly done?


I strait retired home reflecting there
That he who oft had proved our sport, and maygame;
Was my own Father -- 'twas then I found
Nature unknown to us had placed a Bar
So strongly fixed no Art nor time could shake it.

Then I alone can cut that Gordian knot:
Which I want strength to break or skill to loose.
And Death alone shall end this tedious Life.

Hold! hold!
Let not a rash and inconsiderate Act
Deprive you of the power to Repent
Of Errors past, and wash them white with tears,
And Heaven will say Amen, to our Endeavours:
But if grown deaf unto those checks of Conscience
We still persist, it swells to rank Rebellion:
We defy, Heaven and set a mark for Vengeance,
Whose thunder never fails to hit the white.

Could I be once assured this change of Fortune
Proceeded not from your inconstant humour?
I could support this hated separation,
And live recluse never to see mankind.

That were to hard a task for Youth to relish
Which is not prone by Nature, to such strictness:
I doubt not if your Beauty will be ruled,
To raise your Fortune to a pitch of Envy.

Thou art alone the Scope of all my Thoughts,
The joy, the light, the comfort of my Eyes:
And since my heart is robbed of that content,
What further can I hope, wish or desire;
When all my happiness in thee lies Buried?

Never despair! the Sun shines every where;
Fortune may doubly recompense the loss:
Your late adorer now becomes your Friend,
That still will lose his Interest for your Service
And time may in a moment Change your Passions
Transferring fancy on some other object
Where it may thrive and prosper:
Cast all care on me, compose your Thoughts
And I'll inform you more when next we meet

My Friend? So from this hour I still may call you
Rest ever happy, blessed, and fortunate:
Though I despair for ever of repose.

Well you must get my new Garniture ready, for I must shift as quick as a
Player between the Acts, let me have all new and change and vary my shape, that
my Gallant may forget his invisible Mistress and have his eyes dazzled with my
Costly ornaments and Jewels. My Brother assures me he will dine here to day.
Well Girl I have made such a discovery that amazes me. Though I am satisfied in
the Main.


How do you find the Spark?


Just and honourable. But I will now put on all my Charms that I may the
better Judge of his Constancy to his Mistress in the Mask.


If he should quit all his interest in her, and fall in love with you on the
first sight.


That would argue to great a levity and blemish him in my Esteem: leaving me to
distrust that such an Inconstant Rambler like Mercury can never be fixed. But I
will try him at both weapons, which has the greatest Influence my Face and
Gravity at home, or my airy Conversation abroad in the Mask.


'Twill puzle a Casuist to distinguish between your Natural and Politic
Capacities.

By several ways the train of Love he fires,
He Courts your Wit, your beauty he admires:
Then let us guess which Charms most by the Event;
Beauty in view, or wit on the cold Scent.

I Hope your Friend has left you in a sober Temper. He tells me, though his
Conscience will not give him leave to serve your delights, yet he shall make it
his sole Study to advance your Interest and well doing in the World. He always
use to behave himself so rudely and scurvily to me, that I hated him mortally;
but now he has changed his note and speaks kindly and feelingly to me: that my
heart melts within me, and I love the very ground he goes on. And though I
understand there is a cessation of Arms between you, yet he shall command me
any earthly thing. He tells me he will marry you to a young rich Knight and
Baronet, and that you shall be Ladyfied and keep your Coach and Six, and live
in the Country in a Stately House as big as a Palace.


Thou art always busying thy head about Vanity.


So is every thing that does not jump with your humour: What shall I say if my
old Master comes, for he will haunt and be prying about?


Tell him I am in Bed: there he will find me. I need not Counterfeit.


Lord! what a hurrican and Commotion this young fellow has made, and has so
turmoiled our affairs: before he came preaching here, all things went on
swimmingly: now they are quite of the hooks: I wish Fortune had never conducted
his feet within these doors: ever since our matters have gone Retrograde, as
Mr. Gadbury says: I always advised you against this poor indigent young Fellow:
I opposed him what I could, till I saw it was to late: But I was forced to use
my utmost art of dissimulation, to Cloak your Infidelity: and made the old man
believe that he had the sole possession: did so sweeten and Cajole his fancy:
if he had smok'd the least he would have discarded us both, and turned us out
of House and home: and then what reparation could your fine young, slim,
smooth-fac'd Friend, have made? Yet still you remain in an obstinate perverse
humour: I am ashamed to see what cold advances you make to the old Gentleman's
Complements and Caresses: well, if you will not Buckle, and apply your self to
be more Complaisant, you will ruin all my Care, and we must bid good Night
Landlord: and loose the best Friend that ever you had since your Mother bound
your head.


Forbear to torture me, thou cursed Engine of the Devil and all mischief: 'twas
thy Flattery that first seduced and Debauched me then a Child, and betrayed me
into his Arms: where I destroyed my honour and Conscience for your private
advantage: and foolishly bartered away my Virgin Treasure, for Glass, Bells,
and Baubles.


I don't know what you mean by Glass, Bells, and Baubles. But I am sure we made
his Pocket bleed good full substantial Guinneas. And he would have come deeper
if you had had sense enough to have managed his humour and not been too forward
and coming. Madam it is the wisest way to strike your fortune while the Iron's
hot, and not let his affection cool for want of your Complacence. I am sure I
made a good bargain for you, if you had had Grace or known how to have managed
and improved it.


Thy arts and insinuations have misled me, and made me the most despicable and
infamous of all Creatures, for which I curse thee and hate my self, and hope
Death will are long put an end to my misery.


Well this is nothing but a Flatus of the Hipocondraick, a Hurrican of Passion
that will quickly blow over: her necessity will make her Strike sail to her old
Lover while I make advances to ensnare the young one, he is a fine delicate
well shaped person, and I effect him strangely. Ah! those charming deu eux they
are most lusciously ingageing. And why may not I like a lucky Bowler Strike out
my young Mistress and lodge in her place; or at least in the way of preferment.
She has so glutted and palled his appetite with her repeated fulsome kindness,
while wisdom should keep them hungry to prize loves Banquet, all honey moons
soon cloy with the repeated treat, Chapon boulie, (as the French Proverb says)
is not always welcome. I have seen a horse up to the eyes in fresh pasture,
break through a dangerous hedge for worse. I love such a rambler that in his
return like a spring-tide covets all: a fresh Countenance gives fresh Courage
to the Encounter.


This young widow Friendly's Sister, is a most Beautiful delicious Creature,
in the Blossom of her youth and much improved since I saw her, of a most noble,
proper, charming Shape and Mean: And like a Melon just ready, of an inviting
Eye, an engaging Face; Composed with all Modesty: That while it stays you to
Gaze an admire; it proudly bids you keep your awful Distance? If her
reservedness would admit of a lighter Mixture of Humour like that Free, Airy,
Sharp Poignant Conversation of my Masked Mistress: She would be unparalleled.
But what if this Park Lady should prove no Sham of the Bristoll Rock, but a
real Diamond of a Considerable Character. Then She will out-weigh all
Competition: These two Load-Stones do so strongly Attract my Heart. That (like
Mahomets Iron-Coffin) I am poys'd supported in the Air between Both: I wish
Fate would quickly decide my Fortune. For now I am too rich in Imagination.

Oh madam you are come luckily to decide the Controversy!


I find you alone! how can you differ with your self? But however you appeal to
a very weak Judge.


I know your Honour; and cannot doubt, you will be Biased by Interest: Madam
you have shown your self a Prophetess: For it is fallen out just as you
foretold. I dined this day with a Rich, young Widow, just come to Town.
Handsome to a Miracle, with all the freshness of the Country Air in her Face:
and as Beautiful as a Rose newly blown: If your Idea had not worked strongly in
my mind, and retained me in due Obedience, I had professed my self her Lover
and Adorer.


I am like to have a hopeful Servant of you, that are always provided with a
Dispensing power in your Sleeve, against all former engagements, and
obligations: If your inconstancy should have left my poor Heart in the Lurch
after you had fooled it, into a paradise of Fancies. I should have been in a
fine Condition.


If her Beauty Conquers, and leads me Captive, How can I resist or help it. You
ought in time to Discover your Charming Face, and reclaim my wavering Heart:
For Adoration which only dwells in an Airy vest of Contemplation, will quickly
vanish; without it be fixed upon some outward visible Object: Fancy is but a
Camelion-Diet, and cannot support it self, without some fit matter to prey
upon. How can I confirm my allegiance to you, that it is possible owes it
already to another.


For that you have my word already. And I have more reason to suspect your
promise. Come tell me truly: Did you not Court this fair young Widow?


No faith: not at all. But I was civil as became my Respects to her Quality!


Did you not say some fine charming thing, which won upon her? tell the Truth
upon Honour and I'll forgive you.


I rather believe she thought me an insensible Blockhead, that had so little to
say on so fair a subject and occasion; and so kind and gracious Invitation!
Well Madam, if you know any Impediment, why I cannot be Successful in my
Addresses to you? It would be Infinitely kind to discharge me, ere I Engage my
heart too far; which will oblige me in honour never to retreat on foot, but
push on Victory, by most furious attacks, Mines, and Countermines! And study
Stratagems of war to bring you to a speedy Surrender!


You think I am a very faint-hearted Warrior to talk of Capitulation. Before
you have drawn down your great Guns, or Mounted your standing Battery.


I am at present a Soldier of Fortune, quite out of employment, I was born to
be continually in action, but if I should admit a habit of Laziness, it might
corrupt my youth and turn to a Disease.


There's no Danger; you that have bin accustomed to these French Engagements.
But Caution should view the ground and provide against a treacherous Ambush,
which has disabled many from future Service, and take care to make you pass a
Quarantine of health: before admitted to so dangerous Conversation: And if once
I discover your fickle Temper, that cannot defer your prying Curiosity a
moment, I shall be glad I have so soon found out your humour, and will not envy
my Country Rival, such a Conquest, detesting that ungrateful man, that could so
easily forget his promise, and engagements: Without pride, or Vanity, I can
boast my self, her Equal in Fortune, my Reputation without a Blemish -- And
for my Face, I must leave it to Judgment. Though if my Glass and Friends have not
Flattered me, it may pass muster. I do not desire to be hunted by pretenders: I
hate the persecution of such Fops: yet doubt not, but my Eyes have Luster and
Vigour enough to warm one single heart, and make my self happy in his only
Friendship: For your further pretentions, I resign 'em wholly to your own
Dispose.


Madam, I entirely submit till your pleasure shall remove that Cloud that
Eclipses your brighter Beams. Nor will I saucily enquire a Reason.


Well Sir your pardon's Sealed and meet me here to morrow.
Then I'll unveile this Curtain to your sight,
And Clear all doubts before to Morrow Hight.

All things are now agreed and Settled you have your full Instructions


I'll warrant ye we wont fail a tittle in the Execution.


This Plot is so well laid it cannot miss.


We want our chief Ingineer, young Fox.


He will meet us on the Spot, Sir Worldly stays within expecting the Coach from
Sir Noisy. All things are fixed -- Gentlemen, I doubt not you come here to
serve your Friend with Secrecy and Caution. There needs no Scruple, since all
care is taken none but our selves are privy. You Scaredevil shall take the
reigns of Government, and in a feigned shape and voice deliver your Message to
Sir Worldly --


I'll do it, I have long since been versed in the Coachman's art for the sake of
a fair Mistress I enjoyed under that disguise.


I'll see him in the Coach, then haste in my disguise to play the Ruffin.


Every man to his Post -- away --


I expect my Nieces Gallant here every moment, and I will try my utmost art to
captivate, his fancy in the mean while. I'll practise ore my Airs, and
postures.

That Smile was very taking and becoming --

That Glance was sharp and killing -- Just like an arrow from a Parthian Bow --


That Rolling eye Surveys all at one Motion, and Cries have at you all --

That enticing damnable Leer, is most engaging, and serves to fly a Lover to a
Mark --

That grave affected look with the feigned accent of the Voice, is ravishing --


Those Languishing Eyes enchant a heart --

But when you would Inspire and shoot the Spirit of Love, then Ogle him thus --
Steadfastly -- look babies in his eyes, fetch a deep sigh, and gripe his hand;
Then leave and gaze upon him, and say some fine soft thing, or use some toyish
wagish Action -- thus --

That Palpitation of the breast is moving --

When a witty Smutty jest is broke that admits a double construction, Cover
your Face with your Fan, stifle a laugh as forced by the Conceit --

So much for this time. --

But this Dress does not set off --

The nasty vapours of this Dunghill Town, darkens my Complexion into a languid
paleness, and then 'tis just to waken the Roses -- But nasty whitewash stinks
like the Devil Foh -- If I miss him now, I'll to his levy to morrow, and try if
I can rouse him to honourable Satisfaction.


We have secured the old Lion fast in the Toil, and threatened him sufficient
with the Bowstring, and will leave the rest to your own management. If there be
occasion you will find us at the Rose. We make no Articles with you who have
already redeemed us: but leave it frankly to your own discretion.


For this Job, I'll secure you each a hundred. And if the Match with the
Knight take, one hundred more.


We hope for a good Market with him before we've done.


We are your fellow labourers, and one hand must wash an other We expect but
500 l. ready, which we know where to take in a Casting net. For Bonds and Bills
they are a Chip in Porridge.


Well, Speed the Plow Gentlemen.


Now we have secured him to our sole management in this Lone new-Built
unfurnished house, far enough from all neighbours: Put the matter home to him
in your feigned hollow Counterfeit voice, make him Dispatch the order for the
thousand Guinneas: I know his strong Box will bleed that Sum. Which will do my
Business, without smoke or further trouble, and redeem all.


I would have you appear in their two several shapes: It will Terrify the more,
as if they were present: I have already Given him the proposal: Are you secure
of our two Friends the Co-operators?


I have known 'em sufficiently: Neither of 'em, but would suffer the Rack, ere
they would reveal a Syllable, if they should Think of muttering a word, they
would betray themselves to no purpose: And be hooted like Owls into the wild
Desert. I have known some of them trusted with money, would have given the
slip; but I never knew any of 'em betray the life of a Friend, That were to
dishonour themselves and starve. These are a sort of Bravo's, that never leave
their Engagement unperform'd; And fear neither man nor Devil: But religiously
keep their words to a Tittle: And support themselves on that sort of
Reputation: And never Boggle through fear, but are stanch to in the main.


We will in and see how the physic works with the old man.


What cursed luck have I had, to be Trepanned and picked up for Hawks meat, and
forced to this unreasonable Composition of a thousand Guinneas for my
Discharge, or loose my Life, and leave my whole estate a windfall to my
Ungracious Son? Well, I am the willinger to comply, because it satisfies me, He
had no hand in it: He might Draw the knot and secure it all to himself at once
-- There is no trifling with Destiny. I must send to Plot to pay the money out
of my Escritoire -- But this must be accomplished ere I can have my Liberty -- I
am fast in the Trap, and a man will hazard all to save his Life.


We are Men of Honour, and live by keeping our words: you having done your
part, shall immediately be set at Liberty: Dispatch -- your life depends upon
your Resolution. Do not Trifle when all's at Stake, we'd rather have your money
then your blood. But one of 'em, we have Sworn to take within this hour.


I'll write, where it shall be complied with, and send my Key and a Token: Give
me Pen and Ink.


Here Sir, Write Effectually, for your own sake: that we may have no further
trouble.


I will.


then we will conduct you hood-wink'd from this place, and leave you free in the
open field.


Welcome my Brace of Worthies Castor and Pollux: where both shine bright and
fair, no storm can hurt: Welcome my Bullies of the Land and Sea: now you have
changed your Hues and Shapes, you smell no more of Gunpowder, He of Tar; Here's
to the brave Youths are gone to serve the French abroad: They have Culled and
stripped the Root and Branch of Covent-Garden: for their Service; and made a
Nosegay of those Rank weeds: I wish some of our old Scourers here: The Watch
and Beadles finding our forces weak, begin to insult: And drive us to our
Trenches!


You shall Command us Sir to Scower these rusty Halberds from the Parade: And
fix our Standard up in Triumph!


My noble Friends! and hardy men of mettle, I shall be proud to join in the
Detachment: Here's to the Mistresses of our young Warriors: whether they tread
the Stage, or mewed up Close, secured with Lock and key, till the return of
their loved Paramours, That they may meet 'em with Limbs safe and Sound, by no
French hurt Disabled from performance.


To you the Ladies Sir are much beholding: who comfort them in absence of their
Friends: Their not so dull, but they return your kindness.


My Thoughts are only fixed on noble Game. And scorn the abject offer of the
Stage: or Herd of Trading Mercenary Misses; I have enjoyed where Peers have
missed their Aim.

Oh! There's a Difference* twixt brisk noble Blood
And the Dull offspring of the Dunghill Brood.

But we who claim our Birth from humble Shrubs may Sport under the shadow of
the Cedar, and sometimes hope to get a happy wind-fall.


Here is a high health to every worthy Lady disdaining to debar her noble
Person: to the Embrace of any but her equal: In Merit, Birth, and rich
accomplishments.


Agreed, and to those noble Courteous Ladies love a good turn when 'tis
Discreetly offered: who wipe their mouth and say no harm is done; How I despise
the base and Common Game: Wild-foul and Venison in the Blood takes me.


I am for a frolic too and would venture hard for a dainty Bit: But if a man
is once taken within the forbidden purleius of the Law: He often pays more then
his Skin is worth for his Ransom; I am not for breaking into great men's
enclosures: Coursing these Fera Nature. These open Diversions of the Field, is
lawful; without running the hazard of breaking ones neck into one of these
dangerous pit-falls, which I avoid and detest: Deer that run Wild in the
Forest show more-sport, and are better Breathed, then what is Cooped up within
a Narrow Pale, or pinfold. Tis not the meat. but 'tis the stomach got by
Exercise makes the pleasure of Eating: A clean Country Lass worked up into good
humuur shows more Diversion, then the proud Stall-fed Lady of the Court: Who
will make you wait her leisure! while she is pleasing her self with some smooth
Page or some such insignificant Utensill.


Every man to his Delight, and Pleasure; one mans fancy must not be a Rule or
Guide to sway others Judgment: And Gentlemen Here's to your Cheap Diversion with
your next well breathed Country Milk-Maid.


With all my heart: Why Sir, do you think the Blessings of nature are the less
to be valued for being cheap, and common? The Sun, who is the light and life of
the World; And the common Air wherein we breath, cost us nothing, yet chiefly
to be valued above All other Enjoyments: without which we cannot subsist one
moment! 'Tis our Folly often pays extravagant dear, for these unnescessary
Delights.


Let's wave this Argument, and not wear it thread bare and while we have ease
and leisure value our own happynes, indulging our selves under our Vines and
figtrees at the Fountain head the Rose, Crowned with a Nosegay of rare Wines,
Choice Music and the bright Sparkling Eyes of the kind Damosells, rather then
be sows'd and Pickled in a Storm for Months together, without hopes of seeing
Land: Eating Sea-beefe and biscuit, with many a cold gulp of stinking Water,
mixed with Beveredge for Consolation.


Or to be house'd, and case'd up in Canvas in the Camp, sweating in the Summer
like a hot-house: Or after a hard tedious March for want of the Baggage stretch
on the cold ground without a Canopy, and wake in the Morning with our limbs
frozen like a dish-clout. A Country Tapster with his Lasses about him, leads a
life like the Grand Seignior in his Seraglio.


It makes me sigh at my misfortune, that I whom the World must own for so
eminent a Virtuoso, so well read in Men and Manners, so great a Philosopher,
Mathematition, Astrologer, Lawyer, States men, Painter, Architect and so able a
Casuist: I might have out rivaled the greatest Generals, both by Sea and Land:
had not the Inchantin of the Ladies stopped me in the Careire of my Honourable
designs.


Their softness oft disarmes the bravest Spirits, and makes them like Hercules
exchange their awful Club for a distaff.


Ay, this spurs on my Revenge upon both Sexes, for Heaven be thanked I am not
much guilty of good nature that is the blind side of a man. And where I find a
Lady holds a fair unspotted Reputation, I insinuate my self into her
Conversation, and by my confident behaviour persuade the world I have a great
Interest in her: and never leave, till I have fixed a Scandal upon her which I
Industriously promote and spread: and this pleases me far better then Bestial
Enjoyment.


But this humour may bring Quarrels upon you.


No not at all: for I can work it in such a sly manner the Fools never
perceive it, or if they do I can forswear at a pinch, or place it upon some
woman that shall be nameless, or upon some great Person shall be past their
finding out: with whom I can play the Pimp or the Parasite, and having wrought
him into a belief of my honesty and sincerity, I easily win on the unguarded
hearts of his nearest Relations, whither Wife, Sister, or Mistress; (which way
my Talent closely lies) To which purpose I have already qualified my self with
all the Romances extant, whither Greek, Latin, Italian, French or Spanish:
And write a Billet deux to a Miracle: I can unriddle the most Occult Cipher:
and where a Knotty Case is started, I have a Spirit of wrangling will never be
convinced, and weary them by my Subtle distinctions till I make them knock
under the Table. And if it had not been for my cursed lame Leg at the
University, I had writ a Critic on all the Classic Authors.


The World is to sensible of your Prodigious Parts.


I tis that gives an Alarm to the World and makes them afraid to trust me, for
if I were once brought in to Play they would be glad to Court me. But now I
resolve seriously to apply my self to Business, and have laid the Scene to be
chosen in a Country Town, where I have already drunk up the Cuckolds, and
entertained their Wives at a Ball; who were ravished with my Dancing, and
praised my handsome Foot and Leg I Gad.


Sir Noisy here's to that; and all the Appurtenances: and that it may always
bear away the Bell.


He's drunk already -- ^int the discourse of Box and Dice.


Sir Noisy you are a great Virtuoso and understand the frail Dye and Tackle:
We are just come over raw, and it would be a great favour if you would
communicate your Knowledge?


I'll do it with all my heart -- And while the Boy fetches the Dice, I'll tell
you how I bit an old Cavaleir that had been a deep Bubler in his time; I
carried him to my house, and denied him to his Wife, was upon the Hunt for fear
of me: I out watch him and played him Blind, and then managed him at my one
discretion -- Oh here comes the Drawer, sit down and I'll show you clever
management which is not yet divulged -- Pray Gentlemen keep it private for your
own sakes,


Most securely -- we will practise it at more leisure, this will win a mint of
Money.


Here we have the Tower of London to a Turnip. Here's your health.


He begins to Totter, souse him deep with the other Bumper.


This last pull has overset the Bell -- he is now grown past the Knowledge of
Box and Dice.


No matter let's rattle the Box and Dice a while to put off, and Quarrel as at
deep play -- Come Sir Noisy set deep -- keep the door shut and it will prove
the same thing.


But he's fast a sleep how shall we win the Money.


That we have done already by dint of Drinking, let me alone to face him down
we did it fairly -- I'm sure he never dares to contradict it -- Now Fulham
speak in thy heart if this is not as fair away as thy false Dice -- come let's
be impudent and share it before his Face, 'tis something above fourscore
Guinneas, there's forty for you -- the rest I'll be Accountable for --


I'll fetch a Bill --


You ought to pay Sir, you have stripped Sir Noisy and my self.


This was a Lucky hand -- whats's a Clock Drawer?


'Tis now just Three?


There's your Bill, and a Guinnea for your waiting: Dispose Sir Noisy on a Bed
within, while we chastise our Bodies on the Chairs till morning.


Did you pay the one thousand Guinneas I ordered you by Note?


I did Sir, and here's your Keys.


'Tis well.


A Woman waits to speak with you without.


Send her in -- To what end should I discompose my self, and pull off the
Remainder of my hair for madness: As if my Baldness could recompense my Loss?
No, I'll digest it calmly: And set it down as a punishment for my Sins and
Folly, and bar the Door against a further mischief.


Sir I come to wait upon you, according to my Duty, and acquaint you I have
found some great Disorders at your house. I have observed a young Gentleman
frequent it, and privately admitted, and dressed Suppers, of which I fancied he
eat part. Yesterday my young Lady came home in mans Clothes with another Lady;
And other persons, now frequent the house. Her Aunt tricks her self up like a
Lady, Painted, Perfumed and Patched.


For me to ask a reason, would but betray my weakness unto their Shams and
Follies: I'll pry into the matter, and resolve my self. If She proves false:
I'll hate my self, and quite forsake all Women's Conversation.


I wonder to see him bear the Loss of his money so patiently! But he's a
Philosopher! I have overheard all their Discourse, and this new Design; which I
must prevent, or Sir Noisy's Marriage with the Niece will miscarry Fullham and
some of the Tars shall press him as a Seaman on Board. And there secure him
till the Business is over; It shall be so, I'll presently about it.

Since the old Fox resolves to undermine
My Counterplot Shall Baffle his Design.

THis hard lodging makes a man woundy amorous, I wish fortune would obliege me
a kind Mistress next my heart, I would so welcome her; but time will provide
all things for the accommodation of the Industrous -- Fullham shake your ears,
and rise you Sluggard; you see the morning Smiles and promises a lucky day.


Prithee do not wake me from my pleasant dream.


Arise you slugard, for we have money now, to turn idle dreams into real
Enjoyments. Noisy awake.


This alarm has rows'd him. I'll up and see what he wants.


Do, and get us a cold Tankard of Rambowse, and we will have a further
Consideration of your diligence.


Sir, I fly to serve you.


What think you if we dash the Tankard with a lusty dram of Cool Nantz? 'twill
raise his mettle, keep up his Spirits, and make the Match we design, go down
the Glibber.


Well thought on. I'll send a Porter for a Pint, and prime it in an instant.


Sir Noisy, how did your Champaign work with you last night?


It proved stronger then I imagined and makes me spit Cobwebs this Morning.


What was in your mind to propose play, I lost my stock out of pure
complaisance. This Blundering Scaredevil has run a stock by that means; pox out
I have dearly welcomed him on Shore.


Yes faith; Chance has been kinder to me then was her Custom, and I hope this
glimpse of fortune, would prove a lucky omen to my future undertakings. I never
saw Sir Noisy so eager of Play. At first he run deep into my stock. But I
rallied and routed him horse and foot, and brought off his Watch for a Trophy
at ten Guinneas.


Sirrah! Did I play last night?


Yes Sir I heard the Box and Dice at work a long time.


Well 'tis no great Matter, 'twas only the money I picked up at the ordinary,
and for my watch I'll pay you the ten Guinneas upon demand.


Your word's sufficient -- is the Tankard ready.


'Tis Cocked and Primed.


Sir Noisy here's your health -- about with it Fullham.


I, here's some virtue in this, 'tis good to restore and comfort the noble
parts.


Give me the Tankard, I'll take a lusty draught who would not be drunk over
night for the satisfaction of a cool Mornings draught? Oh how it hizes as it
goes down, but I'll have the other bout.


I'll warrant you this will put you in good humour. Oh for a kind wench to rub
us down after this hard exercise.


No, my thoughts are Elevated above so vile a Contemplation, they are but trash
and rubbish: I have found out a Constellation of most transcendent Beauties,
'tis but looking out sharp and you may Compass a Duchess, as soon as an
orange-wench: But you must take greater Caution least it be smoked: Quality
invites with a greater life and Gustoe. I have lately enjoyed a Beauty of Women
of the highest Rank and degree.


Now it begins to work.


You carry the Matter very sliely and like White Powder hit the mark without
Noise. You are no open Courtier, no haunter of the Play-house, or Drawing-room;
what Art have you to bring these Ladies to the Lu^e, of sure you must walk in
an invisible Cloak.


When I meet the ravishing Beauties in the Mall, Basset-Table, or elsewhere: I
make no application in Public, because of the niceness of their Reputation,
but I fly them to a mark with my eye, and by the help of a female friend clap
Salt on their Tail, and the business is done. For they are easily persuaded to
meet so able a performer, one that can give so ample satisfaction. My name's up
I gad, and now I may lie abed and have Chamber practise more then I can turn my
hand to.


Doubtless all the world is sensible of your great abilities.


We will petition, to be taken in as assistants and Coadjuters in the School of
Venus.


Quality is too Nice to admit of Rivals, it is a Jewell of value, and must not
be Sullied with profane hands. There is a pleasure, and a Gustoe in it,
delights nice and generous Palates; and what would a man baulk for his
Pleasures and delight. I have known a Bully supported by a chance hit, disdain
all Butchers meat: longing for the most delicious Bits, and the choicest Wines,
indulging himself in all voluptiousness: present largely to a Mistress: As if
his small, and only stock, would hatch and breed in his Breeches, like
Fortunatus his purse. I have seen another beg or borrow half a Crown to treat
himself with a bon-Christian-Pare, though he had not wherewith left to satisfy
his hunger at the three-penny Ordinary. Another that his left whole stock a
Crown as earnest, for a Dog-fish, went home and pawned the rest of his Equipage
to furnish out the Treat. Costa que Costa I am resolved to indulge my self.
Plot.


I am come to find out my young Master Fox, I have a writing for him to Seal,
and the Parties stay in the next Room. I thought he had been here.


Plot here's Sir Noisy's good health.


Sir your good health. -- Ah Sir I wish you were provided of so good a fortune
as Young Mr. Fox is like to have. He is forthwith to marry a rich Merchants
Daughter worth Threescore thousand pounds; I saw the young Girl, she is now
about Seventeen: But bred up with so much foolish Modesty and Innocence, she
curtsy'd to the footman carried the writings. Her Aunt told her he was a
Servant, she blushed and replied, she took him for some noble Person by his
Laced Coat, I was ashamed to see so much Beauty so strangely bred.


What writings are they.


Here young Fox Covenants, that in Consideration of her Aunts care and pains,
in her no breeding her Niece; to give her one hundred pounds for her life, for
which she sells and delivers her said Niece. So Subtle Sir Worldly marries his
Son without a Penny expense, and it is possible the old Fox will cheat him of
his ready money into the Bargain. But I must in and wait for his coming.


Sir Noisy. It would be a pleasant Jest, If you should give over the pursuit of
Sir Worldly's Daughter, and snap up this rich Prize; carry her down into the
Country and breed her up to your own liking.


I should say more, if I were secure of her fortune.


Plot's your Creature, he can tell you all: But if he joins with you, he must
run the risk of being turned out of Sir Worldlys Service, if you make him your
Steward, he will have no cause to repent: 'Tis all one to the Aunt who has her,
so she may be secure of the hundred pounds a year; 'tis but altering the name:
Plot will bring it about.


But that may breed ill blood between Frank and me.


If you clap it up of a sudden, none will concern himself for a Woman that you
have already enjoyed; besides you may say it was Plots device and you know
nothing of his concern in the matter.


Well I'll in and consult with Plot, if I find it feasible I'll Squeese wax in
Fox's place, and go through stitch.


This Fool will be bubbled in spite of our teeth and therefore it is reasonable
we should share in the purchase.


Our last Job past cleverly upon him, and I fancy he thinks he really lost his
money.


I know I could easily persuade him.


Welcome my dearest, and my bosom friend,
Our breeding, and our Constant Education,
Has formed our love and humour to the same;
Like two kind Twins each others Counterpart.

Few know the Joy and comfort of a friend,
Dividing Grief, that it is scarce perceived;
And makes the floods of Joy come double on us,
Washing away all Sorrow.
We were adopted Sisters from our Childhood,
Till riper years united us to friendship.

A secret Sympathy appeared in both,
As if one Soul informed our several Bodies,
We writ, we speak, we thought like one another.
Endeavouring to improve each others fancies.

Your riper Genius, had the mastering Power,
On whom mine waited as a weak desciple,
And like an echo made a faint return:
Like our two Lutes tuned to an equal pitch
When yours was struck, mine made a trembling motion;
And gave a dumb consent.
When cruel Fate did for some time divorce us
We kept the Vestal fire of love alive
Like a Recluse I sat and mused alone
And on your bright Idea did Contemplate.
Our hearts the Epitome of natures Book
In which we read all with a running look.
To Cultivate mans wit they plant and Toil,
Which of their accord shoot in your happier Soil.

Madam your kindness puts to great a value,
Upon that Spirit, I but Copy from you,
Your witty Letters of the Town affairs
Mixed with Remark of other serious note
Has raised your worth, and Canonised your fame
Above the admired Sibells of this age.
Among that Troop, my Brother does admire,
Your Wit, your Beauty, and your manly Sense:
Vowing had he lived in the Infant world,
When Dowry and Portion never had a name
But men by Constant Service proved their Love:
His Faith and Duty had over come all Rivals
And though as yet, he's made no formal tender
His heart being full of love ore flows the bounds.

My life and friendship are bound up with yours
Like the firm Union of the Steel and Loadstone.
Which move, incline, meet, and embrace each other;
While none discern whence comes the attractive Power.

I blush to praise my Brother to my Friend
Whose long acquaintance needs no information:

Your Brother's Virtue claims respect from all,
Whose Native Gallantry in every action.
Distinguishes his Judgment,
But if my mind stood more indifferent to him
Your sole Command should allways Sway the Balance.

I thank you for this Grace: Our faithful friendship,
Is like a league made by our selves defensive
Excluding man, would proudly make us Slaves:
And of a gracious Lord, would prove a Tyrant.
Like Salvage Turks, exclude us heavenly bliss,
To make our Bodies servile to their Pleasures:
But we must stand on our prerogative,
And make them find we still command the reigns,
And steer them as we please.
Should the Brute Animal once know his strength
In vain we would restrain his head-strong will:
While haughty men, tamely Submit, and wait;
Upon our Pomp, and Ceremonious State;
Present, Lye, Flatter, Weep to make us Sport:
While we at last consent to what we else must Court.

I thank you for your Care and vigilence, otherwise my Dad might have disturbed
and Turmoyl'd the whole affair, he must remain in Limbo till the Marriage with
Sir Noisy is fixed, and then redeem him.


Sir Noisy has concluded and sealed to the Aunt, and is mustering up his Coach
and Equipage to pay his first Visit: if he like her person, he will instantly
marry her.


'Twill not be reasonable for me to appear till the Ceremony is past, then
twill be time enough to give them Joy.


Well Sir Noisy you have such an engaging, winning way, with you; a Woman can
deny you nothing: But Really Sir Noisy you push this matter on too furiously.
You must give the oor Innocent Girl, some time to prepare her self for so
weighty a concern: I have hitherto kept her so Ignorant she will not guess
what you mean by your addresses.


I'll crack the Ice of her Virginty, and then carry her down into the Country
instruct there by degrees at more leisure.


Man was designed as the sole Lord and Ruler of all below: And to mould Woman
like wax into what form and shape he pleases when once she has tasted of the
tree in the middle of of the Garden of delight, her Eyes will be enlightened to
know whats what, then she'll soon despise the toys and Baubles she once
admire'd.


Let me alone to infuse Understanding into her, I am young and Vigorous.


but that makes me afraid to commit her into your hands, she is green and
tender and must not be handled to roughly: But since you resolve to bring her
Maidenhead to the block: make her drink a hearty Glass of Wine, and tell her
'tis part of the Ceremony, it will raise her mettle encourage her Spirits, and
make her suffer with less apprehension.


I'll warrant you madam I will pursue your instructions.


I doubt not but it will be infinitely for your satisfaction.


I long to see this pretty Charming Creature.


Plot says she's very handsome and doubtless will engage your fancy: for her
being Country bred (as it goes in the World) it is a great happiness. Your
Polite conversation will instruct her in her duty perfectly according to your
own mind and humour.


Come in Child, hold up your head thus fashioned -- so -- when was your Dancing
Master here?


Yesterday forsooth.


Very well Child -- make this Gen^leman a low Curtsy -- Child this Gentleman is
a worthy Knight, that your Uncle has sent hither for your Husband. You must bid
him welcome.


Oh Lord foorsooth Aunt his Face feels as rough as a Nutmeg grater.


But he can wipe it away with a washball, and make it as smooth as a Bowling
Green.


Mistress I am come to Court you for my Wife.


You are welcome as my Aunt prayed me to tell you.


Well Child this Noble Knight is come to make you his Lady.


Oh Lord! Aunt forsooth what's that.


He will lead you to a man in black, there you must say some words join hands,
and be married; and then you must lye in a Bed together.


Oh Lord! forsooth I shall be ashamed to lye with any Body but you:


But now I must lye with this Gentleman.


Oh dear that will be very fine, but will he be as good as his word?


That I will, if you will kiss and Love me.


I'll do my best Sir.


And I hope to please you better before you and I part.


I vow Aunt he takes away my breath.


But now you are his, he may take a greater Liberty; and you are bound to do as
he would have you.


Nay I vow he makes me ashamed.


My Dear! you must go with me to be Married.


My Dear! that's a fine Honey Sugar-candy word, you may carry me where you
please.


Well I would not have believed a pretty Woman could have been brought up in
such Ignorance: Yet I perceive in her some Glimmering of Knowledge: I doubt not
but I shall quickly improve her Fancy.


Come my Lads, let us Crown the Table in the Dutch Fashion, that we like Ducks
in warm weather may kiss and tipple our fills. In this vast Punch Bole is
contained Celestial Liquor: 'Tis all Prise Brandy and as true as ever came
from Nantz. Guard the Bowl Boy, least a high Sea should overset it.


There is no danger of smooth Water in the Thames. But I perceive Master you
are already half Seas over.


But Drunk or sober Mate, I know my business. Place your selves Doxyes. You
love to sit admiring the reflection of your Beauty in the Punch Bowl. Here's
your health.


We return you the thanks of the Table: and we doubt not to match a Rowland to
your Oliver.


Coxon, what Pressed men have you brought, let them appear and muster before the
Women, that they may Pick and Choose.


Thou art a lying Knave, thou had rather the bread should mouldy on my hands,
then I should spare a bit for Charitable uses.


Thine was a cut loaf, and therefore I did not expect the kissing crust: but I
think I had best to lock it up and put you to short Allowance.


Where every man carrys a picklock about him how can you secure it, except I
stand Sentry.


I wish I were the richest Cuckold that ever trod the Exchange.


I doubt not that would advance your Fortune, as high as Cuckolds point.


I hate these skulking Rogues that hide themselves from the Kings Service.


'Tis a base quality, but they have generally a tenderness for life and would
avoid broken Bones; since they can get better pay in a Merchant man or a
Collier.


For my part I always cry neck or nothing, the King loves no Cripples.


This Rogue to save his Bacon lodged in a Conduit upon straw.


If such a cold Lodging agrees with his Constitution he shall have no Punch to
warm it, but you may give him a kick to stir his Blood.


This great He-Whore, I found in Essex at harvest in Petticoats; his fellow
labourers the wenches, were loath to part with their freehold, having found the
sweetness of his Temper. One Jayd hung about him like the Jackanapes on the
horse, at the Bear-garden; But would not for the delights of her body venture
her Carcase on board. This Rogue, I found with a wench just going to be
married. She down of her knees that the Ceremony might proceed, that the parish
might have tittle to keep the next Bastard. I had patience till the Job was
over, drove him on board, and Consummated my self. This fellow a Brickmaker,
was set to me by his Wife in a passion: But when she found he was going, she
would have pawned her Child's whistle to have redeemed her plaything: But he
gave her a kick and bid her look after her kidds, for now the King had made him
free and bid adieu to his Slavery, resolving he would no longer make brick
without Straw.


Here Sirrah here's a cup of Punch for your noble resolution. What fellow's
that in the Whiskers --


He was taken by our Lieutenant and delivered with Special orders not to be
parted with till he came.


Then I suppose he knows him for ^ of moment. Make room come sit down Whiskers.


I thank you Sir, better here then among the lousy Seamen.


You are welcome on board, here's my Leiutenants health in pure Nantz Brandy
as ever was tipped Supernaculum. What does he Scruple it, you must know a Bumper
of Punch is your Garnish on board, and must be paid here as well as in the
Counter, I suppose Brother you can take Charge to the Northward.


I beg your pardon, I am a stranger to these matters.


That wont serve your turn. here's our Captains health.


I have a weak head and you must hold me excused


By that fine expression, I know this fellow is a Land-lubber and I will take
pleasure to use him as such a dog deserves. What Scruple our Captains health?


Better sit quietly in the Stocks, then be drunk in such Swinish Company.


Come let the health pass.


Will a Goose Swim Oh Master what Storms you and I have been in, that was a
blusterer cast us away on the Coast of Holland.


Pox ont that was but a flea-bite to what I have seen, I have been Tossed on the
Cape of good hope, where at every send of a Sea, I could have touched the Moon
with my finger, and at the next have pulled the devil up by the pate: The
hugest Mountains have looked like Warts, and the Peak of Tenariff like a
Sugar-loafe. In the Dreadnongh, a Thunder-bolt split our Main mast, and a flash
of lightning fired me a Pipe of Tobacco, a Sulpherous cloud of fire rolled
round the deck, and I swept it off with the Swab. The poor Master looked as
pale as a clout, half dead and frozen with fear. I took the whipstaff out of
his hand and steered her to a Cows thumb. I have been in a storm when to
lighten the Ship we have threw Gold and Silver overboard by whole-Sale, as much
as would have ransomed the King God bless him, yet the hard hearted Sea roared
the louder for more: I was more troubled with a fellow came from Rome, that
would have preserved some Agnus dei's, Relics and other precious trinkets,
which he reserved for a London Market, I ordered them to be thrown overboard
together, which presently decided the difference and made it plainly appear his
movables were of less value then his life: I told him when he was on shore he
might find Ingenious Artists would easily repare the damage if he had the grace
to vouch they came from Rome. And so Gentlemen have among you blind harpers.


Our Master would monopolize the trade of lying, but I will put in for my
snack. Spaniard who in a great Storm invoked the Virgin at Loretta, by the
sweetest kindest obliging Saints names that I expected to have seen her appear,
and strokeing his beard with great gravity, complemented the Sea at such a rate
as made the by standers laugh. Oh thow most mild and Gentle Sea! Oh thou most
Noble Rich and Generous Sea! Oh thou most comely fair swelling Sea! Let us
prevale with thee, to aswage thy mighty billows and become more calm and
temperate: Casting away his obliging expressions on the deaf Boisterous Waves.
He vowed to the fair Lady if she would set him safe on Land, he would light up
a torch to her glory bigger then the Monument in London. I touch him with my
elboe to mind him, he was not to extravagant in his promises. But he whispered
me she was a good Lady and if he once got on dry Ground, she would accept of a
farthing Candle in full satisfaction. The Company was divided into several
Caballs, and every one was devoute in his own way. Some sung Psalms and Hymns:
some accosted their several Saints some were muttering of Spells which they
thought more available, but few or none addressed themselves to him that they
were sure had power to help them.


Mate you are in a Comical humour -- Suck your face you Baggage or else you
shall never be welcome to a dram of the Bottle.


Wherever you hide it, I will never sleep till I have my fill of it.


Why you Jade do you think I'll make his Majesties Ketch a Bawdy-house.


What need you scruple that, when it has been done before hand by your betters.


How do you know that, you Cocatrice? Scatter no words I say.


By hear-say my dear.


Oh 'tis well your come off, or else honour would have divorced me till the
return of the next Voyage. But if at my coming home after a two years voyage I
find you ready to fall on Sunder, the Parish shall keep its own Children, but
at present I pass by the last Brat.

Here are a sort of Fiddlers aboard, bring them out, and let them rub out their
Guts for my diversion, and let the Rascals sing us a Song, that the Punch may
trole down to some tune. The force of this great Bomb has blown off some of our
Bull dogs, but we will fall on with a new detachment, and sound the bottom ere we
part.


Never trouble your self, I'll warrant you they have not been Idle


Go muster the Buttocks, I make you the Mistress of my Ceremonies, while I sit
here in State, here Cockatrice your health -- I am resolved to get you with
Child this night, and then none can injure my love in my absence.


And when I have my owners goods on board, I can pick up what Passengers I
please.


Go to, you're a pert baggage, get them together while I sit here to be diverted
and smoke a pipe.


I have some Friends to come on Board and design to treat them chere-intier,
and now you are to drunk for Business.


I'll warrant you Sir, I can mind the main chance I will instantly on shore,
and and summon in all the young Jolly handsome Seamens Wives that do all for
Love.


Let them be Young and sound, and no man on our part shall engage, till he has
passed your examination and has allow'd him practick. If you put one rotten Egg
upon us, we will see you keele-hald for our diversion.


If I deceive you I'm ready to undergo that discipline.


Sir I have ordered your Prest-man to be delivered you.


I thank you Sir, and am your humble Servant.


Well they are Married and the Lusty Knight will to bed in a moment: This sort
of diversion puts odd fancy's in my head: And since young Fox is so full
Gorged, he will not stoop to the Lure, I will drive the Nail where it will go.
This Fulham is a lusty handsome proper Fellow. He is rough and bousterous, and
will quickly humble a Woman, without harkening to Capitulations: Besides he has
a great hand with Sir Noisy: and if he and I should set our Horses together, we
could manage him as we please.


I just parted with Sir Noisy, and drank a Stirrup cup to his good Journey, by
this time he's mounted.


I'll warrant you are Sorry you are out of Employment?


That might quickly be if you pleased. 'Tis merry in the Hall, when Beards wag
all; You look too Charming for an Aunt I should have taken you for a Maid.


Sure you think Ten years between my Niece, and me; has wrought strange
alterations.


Your Beauty like the purest Gold oft tried
Does from Loves Furnace rise more puryfy'd:
While Youth is mixed with follys gross allay
Without some granes will never pass in pay.
Like fresh green wood averse unto Loves fire,
By slow degrees is warmed into desire;
Whereas as the Jolly well experienced Dame,
Pays Love for Love and Triumphs in the Flame.
Youth like the Dog-Star burns beneath the Line,
While riper Years make a more temperate Clime.
And like new Wine enrages boiling Blood,
But when grown fine by Age, grows safe and good.

Your Reason is very Powerful and I am charmed with your Conversation: Your so
like my first dear Love, that I am ravished with your Company.


my heart is inflamed with your Beauty: this fair opportunity makes a Thief,
and I am to blame if I do not plunder a kiss.


You cannot Rob another of what she is willing to bestow: I look on you as Sir
Noisy's Friend, and therefore may safely commit my Honour into your hands; and
I know you Scorn to take this opportunity to be rude.


Not except you force me to it.


Force me then I defy you.


So I thought.


But I would have you to know, I have hitherto lived in the World without
Scandal: and will spit in any mans Face will offer an unhandsome thing to me.


Then you are welcome to spit in mine, for I must make bold.


Nay do not be uncivil I charge you in the Kings Name, If you should force me
I can hang you.


That would be but an unkind return to one that vows your service, but if it
must be come doleful Death.


I see by your Eyes you have some wicked design upon my Honour, but I will not
stir one Foot into the next room.


Nay hold, now I have you fast by the Chain you shall go, and if you force me
to break it, I'll carry it to the Tavern and melt it down for Consolation.


Why you treacherous Villain! you will not make use of this advantage to rob
me of my Honour? Well I vow I'll be revenged.


If I do not please you, hang me and spare not.


Well let the Stars bear witness I am Innocent of this Folly, forced like an Ox
to the Slaughter, and hamper*d like a Bird in a snare. And now I defy your
baseness -- do your worst.


So I will in an honourable way.


Nay I vow I'll cry out. Sir Noisy, Sir Noisy, Sir Noisy. I am quite spent with
Straining my Voice, Oh! thou base Fellow! I'll bawl so loud the Neighbours
shall here me, except you stop my mouth with your handkerchief.


I gad and that was well thought off.


I Am well pleased with your contrivance to free your self from that Impudent
pretender Sir Noisy Parrot, who having got your Fathers Approbation thought to
invade and carry you by right of Conquest. Parents should strive to win our
minds, by fair, and gentle Methods: and not force their Childrens Inclinations
like ridged Tyrants.


But Madam I must beg if he should return to plague me, you will lend your
assistance to laugh him out of Countenance?


That I will, and engage if ever he be so audacious to return, we will drive
him out of the Field. But my Friend, it will be reasonable since I so freely
engage in your Quarrel, you should be my confident and assist me. I have
already had two interveiws with your Brother Fox in mask unknown, and by
Chance: entertained him with all Raillery and freedom. The same day he dined
with my Brother and me, I changed the Copy of my countenance and received him
with all gravety, he not guessing I was the Jolly Lady in the Mask: He told me
at my next meeting in the Mask, my face had strangely shaken his Constancy, and
pressed me to discover mine by way of Antidote: But I insisted I expected a
firmer proof of his Constancy and obedience, ere I obliged him so far: and if
he slighted my Conversation he was at liberty to pursue his Conquest upon my
Country Rival: He submitted and vowed fidelity, and I received him into
Favour: If I find him a man of strict honour and Justice, It will sooner take
with me then the sparkling fancies of an airy Wit. And if he has engaged his
Inclinations to the Lady in the Mask when he discovers me to be the same, it
will prove a double Conquest: I will not doubt you can be unfaithful to me for
the sake of a Brother when one of the same Relation has already vowed himself
your Servant. And if I had discovered any unworthy Quality in him I would
acquaint you with it, to avoid his pretensions.


My heart is now calm and even like a standing water, and I could wish it would
so remain, without the Flux, and Reflux of a passionate tide agitated and
driven at the mercy of the winds; sometimes rising with the floods of Joy,
above the banks of moderation: and afterwards descending into the Gulf of
Sorrow and despair. Fortune chains us Women like Prentices, to the will and
humour of our Husbands, who must rise or fall by their care and Management;
while the distracting cares of Families and Children devides our hearts, and
spirits us away into remote and distant Countries and by degrees Supplant that
kindness which at present governs our hearts.


The Love I owe my Husband, is a seperate duty, and does not interfer with our
Friendship: which like a chain firmly unites our hearts, whereon the least
stroke given, is by both sensibly felt: Then let us twine our weak defenceles
Vines about the arms of two strong Neighbouring Oaks, who still shall join in
Friendship to support our Interest, and honnour: against the Canker of all
envious Tongues, where they may flourish to our wishes and still preserve our
Friendship.


On what a ticklish ground our happiness depends, so many cares distract our
choice, that Labouring fancy sits down unresolved.


Then let our Prudence steer the wisest course, and leave the rest to chance.
But hold I perceive my Gallant at a distance bringing your Brother as a Spy,
let's shift our walks they cannot Know our habits and I'll instruct you
further.


I beg your pardon I have trained you hither, where I expect to meet a Lady
whose Wit has much engaged me. She brings a Friend or Servant with her, but
keeps her face and Character still in the dark, and I would beg when you see me
accost her, you draw the other Mask aside, and pump out what you can to clear
my doubts of her Condition. I at this interveiw will fix the Matter or break of
further Correspondence, and bring you as a witness. Had not I been engaged in
this blind Business, I had paid homage to your Sisters Eyes, whose Beauty and
reserv'dness charmed me strangely for whom I own a most profound respect, and
cannot make a tender of my Service, while this Intrigue depends.


Sir you have reason in your fair proposal. I know my Sisters caution, has
still preserved her Reputation Spotless: my Friendship would not engage her in a
doubtful matter: when you have cleared that point, and shall be constantly
resolved to quit all dangerous rambling: You shall command my best assistance.


Your Friendship Sir obliges me -- One of these Ladies by her Stature and mean
should be her I told you of, but altered in her habit.


Oh Servant, I had much ado to be punctual to my word this Lady knows: You
have obliged me with a double favour and brought your Second: this Lady else
had wanted Conversation. Your pardon Sir, while we discourse apart.


The Star Light of your Sparkling Diamonds Madam,
Suite your be nighted Vizour.
Remove that shadow from your shining Orb
And chase the Egyptian darkness from my heart.

I once designed this for my Wedding Garb
Resolving then to have cleared every doubt
Making my fortune worthy your acceptance.
But since your Jealousy did not confide
But brought a Friend for a discovery,
I will suspend though not Casheir your hopes:
I know your late Intrigue.
Which now is blasted with an envious Star
And your Addresses to the Country Lady,
But you suspend to make a declaration
Till you can make an estimate of me.
But while divided Interest hunts two Hares,
An accident oft chops to miss them both.
And if you'll prove a noble generous Lover,
give me your hand, and take me at a Word.

Though I'm Enchanted with your Wit and Humour,
I dare not make so rash a hood winked Bargain.

My hasty proffer puts you to a loss:
But Company draws near to interrupt us,
Let's change our Walk?

Sir you have infinitely diverted me with your discourse, and therefore I must
beg the favour of your Advice upon some Circumstances which tend to my
disquiet.


You may command my service.


I am now upon the stroke of Eighteen, and quite tired out with going to
morning prayers, where I am continually pestered with a troublesome sort of
insects they call Fops, and Beau's; that infest the neighbouring Pews, buzzing
about ones Ears, who though they despair of the Body, will study to deflower
Reputation. And therefore I judge it convenient (by way of prevention) to marry
out of the way, and having put my Husband into full Possession, let him from
thenceforward take care of it for his own sake. For if these busy Fools should
lay a train to blow up ones good name, it will be difficult to retrive it, or a
Husband, to Justify honour and reputation: and at last be forced to take up
with a sneaking Jealous, one of whom I shall have reason to be ashamed: or
forced to turn Nun and lead Apes in Hell.


I perceive by your discourse you are in no great likelihood to fit your self
with a Husband ready made, and twill be too late to bespeak one, you must take
your Chance.


You speak like an Oracle: what think you of a sweet natured easy Complaisant
Person?


Such a fool were a blessing, many a Lady would have jumped at heretofore, and
have bidden battle to any would have snapped him out of their hands. But it was
in times of Yore, when abler men were at hand to supply his place. By this
means she secures to her self the sole rule and government, and is installed
Plene-Potentiary, But so absolute a domination, scarcely counterveils the
nauseous trouble and conversation of such an intolerable Coxcomb; who often
misled by evil Counsel, proves an unmanagable beast, and like the Elephant
when he is gauld turns on his own part, trampling down all that oppose him.


But a wise woman will govern in public no more then is reasonable, and leave
his misdemeanours to a Curtin-lecture in the morning fresh and fasting -- But
what think you of a brisk airy Spark?


As a mere dancing singing noisy empty nothing, one that Cuffs the Cushion so
often abroad, he is seldom in humour to hold forth at home, But leaves the
neglected Sine Cure to shift for it self; If you rouse the stupid churl with
any concern for himself, or his estate, he shuns you like an offended Ghostly
Father, or a School Boy broke loose from his book; He squanders his favours all
over the Town, and is never better pleased, then when his Gilting Mistress
sevearly rallys his Orthodox Spouse, owning him for a fine sweet natured
accomplished Gentleman, Oh then she melts his Heart and his Purse to the last
Penny.


What say you then to a fine dressed well shaped Beau?


He was a Fop of the last Edition, and finding his Monky antic tricks and
Gimmcracks would no longer pass in his Autumnall Years, reforms his manners and
customs, and sets up for a sober formal ill natured person, frequents the
Coffee-house and turns a snarling Critic, and like old women in rancour and
spite: turn malicious witches. And considering he has misspent the best of his
time frequents the Church, Play house, music meetings and Dancing-Schools to
make himself a saver upon some young Giddy-braind Fortune, retires with his
wife into the Country, least she should pay his old Scores.


What say you to a Learned Sot, or a downright Lawyer or a Virtuoso?


'Twould grieve a Lady to be troubled with such a hum drum Studious dunce
allways poring over his Books and forgetting his duty to his own flesh and
Blood: But the drudge is ready, when she is minded to resort to him for
Counsel, manages her case gratis: If she were not unreasonable she would not
complain of her standing Counsel though she scarce vouchsafes him thanks for
his pains, but robs our poor Peter of his fees for the sake of her beloved
Paul. He is no Fool at the bottom though she often makes him one: He permits
her to Rule his Family, and dispose of his movables at pleasure. If he lives
not to long, his Industry makes her no looser by the Bargain.


You give me no Encouragement to venture with any of the aforesaid Persons, let
me be beholden to you for your more serious directions, how to pass away this
foolish transitory Life, and keep so great a happiness as Love and Friendship
alive; though raked up in the Embers.


Madam you say right, for though love makes a Bon-fire to welcome you home, it
will hardly keep the Embers alive to warm us when you go to Bed. The joys and
transports of love like Lightning dazells us, and then follows the thundering
Noise of Pekes, Jelousies, Hopes, Fears, turmoils, vexations, troubles and
disappointments like the successive hot and cold Fit, of a Fever and Ague, of
which women made of a refined mold and of a more noble Original and Extraction,
are more sensible of the jarring discords. But how to preserve so great a
happiness will lye under the direction of a deeper Philosopher then I can
pretend to be. Yet I must comply with your Ladyships desires and venture on
some chance directions a Sketch of a fancy -- Let Beauty, Fortune, a good Wit
and disposition concur in your Choice, which Blessings singly are but
melancholy Company when you are joined for your Lives: Let him be a man of
Virtue and Honour of a Steady humour and disposition, not given to be peevish
or froward, or unreasonable opinionated hugging himself in the chair of the
Scorner. If little quarrels do arise give way to each other, and never
prosecute them with eagerness and contention, but let the next glass of Wine,
like a Cup of Lethe drown the remembrance. So may your young Love like new Wine
not glut and cloy with the sweetness of the first Enjoyment, but drink the more
refined pure and sprightly during your Lives, being a continual Feast and
Sauce for every days Enjoyment.


Oh save me Sir, from this unworthy man!
Whom I came here to meet upon his Letter
Which basely he disowns, denys his Vows
And threatnes Vengeance if I give not up
My Solemn Contract under hand and Seal.
But I resolve to engage all my Friends
To Vindicate my Spotless Reputation:
Having renounced his honour and his Faith,
And changed his fancy for some other Beauty.

Thou base unworthy and most perjured Woman!
Take there your hundred Guinneas your first Bribe,
I Scorn the thought of such dishonest practise,
And thee the Inventer of so gross a Lye.

So here the Letter written with his hand
Kindly Inviting me to meet him here.

Base Forgery and Witchcraft.
My Passion swells me past all bounds of Reason!
I'll drown the Hag in the neighbring Canal.

Hold Sir I must oppose your Violence!
Un hand her Sir!
This Letter seems all written with your hand,
Vouched with a Contract under hand and Seal:
This Ladies Meine appears of Quality
Equal to whatsoever she pretends.
And if your Courtship has prevailed upon her
Redeem your soily and now do her right.

'Tis not the Rack or Torture should compel me,
It makes me mad to think,
That you should easily believe so gross a slander.

I ever will renounce the name of Friend
Where I perceive such base and double dealing,
This one discovery has made me happy,
Else thou would still have sheltered under Friendship
And lurked to hide thy base intent. Thou Crocodile
That lie in ambush for my Sisters Fame
Then feign a tear ore them thy falsehood ruined.
Madam you shall command my Sword to right you,
And wipe this Stench and Nuisance from the Earth
Since happily I saw the Bassalisk,
I now defy his future machinations:
Draw and defend your life.

hold Sir! forbear,
Else you may act a Mischief you'll repent
Through heat and passion, which I well can clear.

Men of your sort are used to skin the Soar
And leave the rotten Coar within to fester,
But I will spill that poison on the earth
Unless you poorly beg your life and pardon.

That Sir perhaps may prove too hard a Chapter,
My Sword unsheathed never petitioned yet.

I'll guard that life you force me to defend --

Hold Brother --

Hold --

Hy! what's here to do? a trial of skill
And the fair Ladies drawn in as Sticklers to the Quarrel.
Raised by the Magic of the Ladies Eyes!
Is by their Smiles composed: When in my own defence
I raised my Sword it never could design
To pierce that Breast: I rather would have died.
Welcome dear Friend into thy Brothers Arms.

Welcome my Friend and Brother:
And pardon Sir this Foolish may-gaym quarrel?

'Tis I alone must blush and beg your pardon:
My false pretentions Raised this sudden quarrel,
By this seign'd claim I tried your Gallant temper
And found you both most perfect every way.
I own your worth has justly won upon me,
And I had held you longer in suspense
Had not this sudden Gust blown of my Mask.

Then I must bless that storm your wit has raised,
Which hurried me into so safe a Harbour.
Madam I beg you will confirm my hopes,
Since wit and Beauty join to fan desire
Who can oppose such a resistless fire?

This does confirm you Master of my Fortune:
In times of Innocence,
E're Subtle heads devised long Settlements
And perplexed clauses made things intricate,
One single Turf conveyed a vast Estate.


And I'll ne'er quit it until death depart.

I cannot Brother make you a return,
For Interesting your self in my concern;
Which binds me ever to become your Servant.
This Lady's Eyes have power to reflect
The true Idea of your Generous mind.

My secret Vows have made me long your Servant,
And been a true devote unto your Shrine:
My Sister knows my Heart was still your Slave.

I know his constant and sincere Affection,
Then let me beg you will accept this hand,
That will present a Heart has long adored you.

Sister if I have power to sway your mind,
I beg our Families may be united.

Should I refuse,
My self I banish from what most I Love;
While your Example blindly I obey,
I without thinking give my self away.

To a disparing heart this balm is sure,
Your gracious hand could only work the Cure.

At last this lucky quarrel cleared the doubt,
Or else these Forts had many Months held out:
So boisterous waves in high wrought Seas are known
To meet, and kiss, and presently grow one.

You've told me all the story of your Niece,
Which calls a guilty Blush into my Cheeks,
But henceforth be to me an utter stranger:
The Goods are yours and all the Furniture,
Go and be Huckster to an other bargain.
I who have long by Wisdoms Compass steered
Through the Rough Seas and threatening Rocks of danger
Into the Ports of Profit, and of Honour;
Find now some Remora arests my Vessel,
Detaining her against the Wind and Currant:
Either the prosperous Gale of Fortune leaves me,
Or I want wit to trim and shift my Sails.
I late was forced to pay a heavy Ransom
For this unlucky head to the Banditty,
And glad I escaped so too.
And when my cares, had treasured up my heart
In Leonora's Love was disapointed;
And when I thought to search all in disguise,
By an unlucky chance or close design
Was Spirited on Shipboard.
At my return I found my Mistress married
By the Contrivance of my Son -- should I resent it
As I have Reason, I must then Revenge it:
And my Revenge is blunted by my Nature,
Or my divided house must drop to pieces.
I must forgive his faults or raise a Scandal
On my past Actions.
Pardon his Clemency who punished my Purse,
And had it in his power to use me worse.

I kneel to ask your pardon: I would not presume
Had not this Lady joined in the request
In hopes that you will grant your free Consent,
To make us happy.

Madam I must prevent you,
Unless you'll make me kneel for Company:
I give my full consent to your desires,
And pardon all offences of this Boy.
Rise Sir, and I pray heaven to make you happy.

I used to plead some interest in your favour
And pray,
That as our Family has still been joined
In Friendship -- now you will Unite their Love,
In this my Sister and my Brother Friendly.

Madam you Ravish me with this good News,
And now my Girl has chosen with my Eyes.
I wish all four may ever prove most happy.
My heart is swelled and pent in narrow bounds,
As mighty tides meeting Lands Floods of Joy,
Over flow the Banks and with excess destroy.
I must retire a while.

I know my Fathers infinitely pleased
But time must work it to his satisfaction,
And calm the troubles raised within his breast.
I saw the Aunt,
That told him of Sir Noisy's Marriage,
With his young Wife.

I know that whole Intrigue, by a strange chance, and that she's bound to you
for her Advancement: I'll never think you worse for your good Nature, and
putting of old household stuff to best advantage.


For faults are past I humbly beg your pardon.


Sir Noisy and his Lady, and other Friends are without to wait on Sir Worldly.


It is his vanity to show his pretty Wife I'll out and introduce 'em.


I brought my Wife to wait on Sir Worldly, a young Innocent Foolish harmless
Girl whom I intend to breed up in my house in the Country, and instruct her to
carry her self in Company: She has no skill in the Minuet, and Sings but one
tune that I have taught her: Poor Soul she cannot manage a Bottle decently
with a Friend, nor has not confidence to -- make the Glasses clash in Chorus.


But your Lady looks as if she had good natural parts, I dare swear her ready
Genius will improve upon your Instruction, and quickly play her lesson upon
sight. I wish you all happiness, though I cannot so well digest your Cross-biting
me of my Mistress.


Dear Frank, I always desire to hold a fair Correspondence with thee, and am an
humble Servant to these Fair Ladies.





Sir Noisy, I will wish your Lady Joy -- Madam your humble Servant?


I thank you forsooth.


Pretty Innocence.


Madam I dare not pay you what respect is due in outward show:
But my heart is your Slave.
And having Shipwrecked by my Folly
I am by chance redeemed from utter ruin:
Oh I could weep with tears of joy and grief,
For my good Fortune owing to his Friendship,
And loosing him whom I hold once so dear.

But now your Friend is turned into my husband.


I wish you Joy, and that they ne'er may prosper
Would wish to disoblige so good a Lady.

I am acquainted with your story, which still lies here concealed: I wish your
conduct may redeem your faults, and well atone what's past, and for my sake
accept this Ring a pledge of Friendship.


Madam you honour me.


This day has crowned my Joys, and here I bid adieu to Love and Vanity. Sir
Noisy you are welcome so is your Lady, you are the greatest Strangers -- Son
Friendly, I Settle Ten Thousand pounds upon your Marriage, and will not stint
my hand as you are kind unto Clarinda. To you my Son I give your mothers whole
Estate for present mantenance, and the remainder at my Death. And now my
thoughts are fixed upon my Children, who are my joy and hopes: I cannot now
seperate your Interests. Whosoever makes me first a Grandfather I give a
Thousand pound.


Sir Noisy has brought some men of Art to entertain you with a Dance, if you
please to sit.


My Folly has convinced me of this Rule,
Young men Instruct, while oid Fops go to School.
I own with Shame what I have oft been told,
That of all fools there's none can match the Old.

THou Life of all the Sun whose Grace
Enlightens this fair Hemesphere,
Where Noblest Beauties fainter rays
Like Stars by day-light disappear.
Thou Miracle with Heavenly Fire
Doest kindle Love in every heart,
In whom the Graces do conspire
Joined with the Muses utmost art.
My Wit is dazzled with thy Eyes,
My heart is ravished with thy Voice;
Lend me Loves wings that I may rise
Not by my merit, but thy choice.
Man. I took the faithless Callow from the Nest
And Nursed thee in my Breast,
Taught thee the grounds and notes to Chirp and Sing,
But when thou felt the Spring
Thou did despise my Care unkindly Roam
Abroad regardless of my Love, neglecting home.
Woman. For all thy care and kindness past 'tis true
Grave Sir, my thanks are due;
But thou design'st to slave me as a Wife,
And Cage me for my Life:
Beauty for ^loysters Nature did not mean,
While every b^sh presents a brisk young Valentine.
Man. Thy Vows assured me and our hands did join,
Thou ever would be mine,
That no seducing Bird of Song or Prey,
Should Spirit thee away,
I claim thee as my right, thou ^earl of price;
Purchased with all my Stock my lovely Paradise.
Woman. 'Twas man grown false, or weak that first did plot
To knit this Gordian Knot,
By Tyrant Customs strive to fetter Love,
Whose Nature is to rove:
When fancies glutted, Birds fresh mates may choose,
Yet none are shamed, divorced, or wealthy Jointures loose.
Urge Constancy no more, those feeble ties
Avail not to the Wise,
Who would a Costly Vessel rig or trim
Never to let her Swim.
My Inclination bids me wildly range,
And love in every Port, to barter and exchange.
ONe hand up a loft
Swab the Coach for and aft
For the Punch Council strait will be fitting,
For fear the Ship roll
Sling up a full Bowl
For their Honours let all things be sitting,
In an Ocean of Punch to Night we will all Sail
In a Bowl, whereof Sea room we never can fail.
Chorus. With full double Cups, we will liquour our Chops
And then trim the Sails with a hoe up hoe,
But we will drink e're we go, we will drink e're we go.
The Winds veereing aft
Then loose every Sail
She'll bear all her Top-sayles a trip,
Heave the Log from the Poop
It blows a fresh gale,
And a just Account on the board keep,
She runs you Eight knots, that's Eight cups to my thinking,
That's a cup for each knot should be filled for our drinking.
Here Mess Mate. Thanks Skipper.
'tis a Health to the King.
While the Starrboard watch drinks, let the Larrboard watch Sing.
Here's to thee Peter. Thanks honest Jo.
About let it go.
In our Bowl still a calm is how e're the Winds Blow.
The Quarteere must cun
While the fore mast man steers,
Each health to the Port where tis bound,
Who belayes 'till tis a Brimmer
Is drubbed at the Geeres
And the Health of each we must sound.
To our Noble Commander his honour and health,
Let him drown and be damned refuses the health.
What news on the Deck hoe
It blows a mere Storm
She lies a try under the Mizzen,
Why what if she do
Will it be any harm
If one Bumper more does us all reason.
The Bowl must be freed boys, in spite of the weather,
Yea, yea, -- huzah, let us all haul together.
Chorus. With full c.
WHat differing designs we Women lay
She to avoid, and I to snap the Prey:
Virtue, and Fortune, makes her Luster great:
Raising that Value, I but counterfeit:
We hold our Sexes Charter by deceit,
The Pious seeming Saint proves oft a Cheat:
Why should you grutch, if an old battered Lover
Pass for a Maid, in a fresh gilded cover?
For what e're trips she makes, she ne'er miscarrys,
But proves a perfect Virgin when she marries,
Our Fop by seeming Innocence is caught,
Few Eagle eyes, discern so nice a fault,
And while his roughness Ravishes a kiss,
We seem transported at the unknown Bliss.
Methinks I hear Pride and ill nature Cry
Why is sin blessed, and scandal raised so high
Out brass'ning Beauty Birth and Quality:
How many wandering Rovers, chance does fix,
From humble Pattens raised to Coach and Six.
Faith 'tis not worth your thoughts, for as some say
The world is but a Stage, our life a Play:
Why should We be astonished at the matter
If Strolling Miss mounts on our Proud Theatre.
Now we should Court your favour to our Play,
And Pardon for our Authors first Essay,
Hoping this Rugged Bench wont prove severe
To his first fault, let him for once go Clear:
In doubtful durance Pensive he remains,
Till your good pleasure shall strike of his Chains:
And Sir's if this a maiden session proves,
Let us alone to fit you all with Gloves.

