what because he killed Adolphus must he dye?
Shall Love be martyred by your cruelty?
Perhaps Adolphus gave him a just Cause;
His Life's then forfeited by Honours Laws.
But why should you be thus concerned to make
Conradine wretched for Adolphus' s sake!

I'll tell you Brother; we contracted were,
And though he's dead, he still is living here. --
Shall I go to his Bed who took my Life?
I'm made a murther'ess when I'm made his Wife. --
His Wife! that were to load my Soul with guilt;
What! Crimson over this black with what he spilt?
And dye my Soul more black than these? She'll approve
Of the worst Treasons who can Traitors love.
By Heaven; these Tears, (which offered unto you,
Divine dear Saint, I count a sacred dew)
Nay by thy self I swear, if ever I see
That Dog, this Hand shall be his Tragedy. --

There is no hopes, nor is it just to move
Her to wed him who has destroyed her Love.

I can't endur't, he's proud and saucy; shall
My Husband's Brother slight me? -- No, his fall
Must be contrived, or I shall burst with hate;
But it is wisdom to conceal his Fate.
I'll give it Wings, yet so that none shall dream
I am the poysoner of a balmy Stream;
I'll use such Words shall only friendship sound,
Yet give his Credit such a secret wound
'Shall gangrene so insensibly, that he
Shall plunged be, before he thinks of Misery.
For she's a Fool, who armed with love or spite,
Will not inflame the World to increase her light.
Did he not say my Parentage was base?
(Though not base born, yet of an obscure Race?)
And that his Brother raised me by his Love,
To what I could not hope? will not this move
Me to Revenge? Yes Fool, yes, thou shalt find,
Though meanly born, I have an high flown Mind
Which resents affronts. I (that Nettle-plant)
Will make the Cedar stoop to servile want;
Yet guild it all with Love, no show of strife,
I'll weeping wound, and smiling take thy Life. --
-- His Life! that's murder. -- But it must be done,
And then his Place goes to my Brother's Son;
Thus will I raise my own Relations, and
Give Check-mate to his Honours, and his Lands,
This neither Men nor Gods shall Countermand.
Good morning to your Grace.

And you my Dear,
Go to my Brother, say I want him here.

How does brave Eustace, Sir? He is unkind,
I have not seen him here to day, my mind
Prompts me to fear some Mischief; this last night
Methought I saw him environed with Light:
In his right and left Hand two Comets stood,
Which in a Moment did convert to Blood;
The Light was clouded, his Vilage grew pale,
His Tongue did falter, and his Feet did fail;
And sinking thus into my Arms he cried,
"Farewell base World, farewell, and smiling died.
Pray Heaven this my Dream does not fatal prove.

Oh no; 'Tis but the extremity of your Love;
The end of which is trembling careful Fears,
Just as excess of Joy distills in Tears.

Such Tears my Fate never gave me Cause to shed,
Unless by being honoured with your Bed;
And sure if any thing can cause it now,
'T will be the good success of those I know
You love, of which I'm sure he has great part,
He's so obliging, can dissolve a Heart
Of Ice into a flaming Stream of Love;
He is not mortal sure; the Gods above,
Dissembling for a while their Bliss, came down,
And took his shape to glorify their own,
And weary of the Earth do now return;
Can less than Comets wait them to the Urn?

Fie, you do so much over-load his Bays,
And injure Heaven with your luxuriant Praise.

Eustace, you troubled the Duchess last night,
And she is scarcely yet out of the fright;
I left her to her self, and must you come?
Was it for you d' you think I left my Room?

The Duke rallys, I thought you were dead,
Which clouded me with Fears, and storms of Tears;
But now the Sun is up those Clouds are fled.

Madam, I curse my over-saucy Stars
For whispering to your Peace the sound of Wars,
Yet cannot choose but bless their kindness too,
Since they have made me so esteemed by you.
Why would you thus abuse your Thoughts on one
Who lives or dyes by your Command alone?
Sir, here are Warrants for you signature,
For Forty thousand Crowns.

You are sure
There's no mistake; I leave it to your care,
Both of my Honour and your Trust beware.

If ever by deceit or negligence
I abuse your indulgent Confidence,
May my honour be to dark oblivion hurled,
Nay, let me be a By-word to the World;
Which is much worse; for a true born noble Spirit,
Would rather be forgot, than live to inherit
The sooty Off springs of black Calumny;
Such are still dying, and yet never dye.

'T was not distrust, or giddy Jealous-fear;
But caution made me speak, your Souls too clear,
To be eclipsed by waining-earthy Dross.
Wealth bought wish Honour is the greatest loss.

Brave Eustace is so nice in Honours Cause,
He'd rather lose his Life then break her Laws;
So true to Justice, and so just to Truth;
Goodness in him is aged, and a youth,
Old because from the beginning it was so;
Young cause it does greater and greater grow;
And if he does not nip that forward Bud,
He'll run into excess by being good:
You had no reason then my Lord to fear,
Your Caution's fond, extravagant your Care:
For should the Heavens prove frail, the Gods untrue,
Yet Eustace cannot be unjust to you.

How shall I thank your kindness? The whole store
Of Rhetoric is banckrupt, Thoughts are too poor
To fancy the rough Draught of a return.

'Tis but a Vizard, underneath's thy Urn. --

You'll show your Gratitude, and Kindness too,
By the well performing of my Birth days Ceremonies.

Sir, you,
Like Heaven, my Duty Service do approve,
What I do for my Honour you count Love;
I'm in your Debt, can I wipe out the score
Of obligations, by being obliged more?
That is a thrifty Payment.

'tis the fashion
To borrow on, and pay with Reputation --

We'll say no more, your Debt is current Coin,

If you distrust his Bond, you shall have mine.

Though you do not want Instructions, yet
Observe these Rules of mine;
Let not your mind gape at the Full-moon-tyde
Of Wealth, so far that Honour be denied
Her Rights; but let your gains be just and true:
He loses all who gets another due.
Be civil unto all Men as you can,
He who's the bravest is the humblest Man.
Beware of Bribes for they are basely foul,
Sins bawdy Panders who corrupt the Soul.

Your Rules I will observe as sacred, and
As such I shall observe your least Command.

There needed not that strain, I know you're just;
He who has noble Thoughts cannot distrust.

And therefore my design will easier be;
I'll sow his Seed, the Profit reap for me.

Lost if I see her, if I don't I dye,
How is my Soul plunged in extremity!
If Fate when I was born did then contrive
To make me dye, why did Heaven make me live?
Why did not Death rifle my Mothers Womb?
And stop these Curses with so blessed a doom?
Yet gentle Eustace pity my distress,
Plead with her once more for my happiness.

Excuse me, Sir, I will not be so unjust Brother,
To Court her to what she so much hates.

Adieu, I'll to some melancholy Shade,
Heaven may at last cure these Wounds she has made. --

My Friends you're welcome all; what service now
Do your Commands oblige me with?

We bow
Unto your Honour in an humble suit.

-- When Friends Petition, Reason may dispute
Whether 'tis Friendship speaks: what wound have I
Unwilling given to make it pine and dye?
Use not such Crab-fac'd distance to your Friend:

It is your kindness thus to condescend,
Our Fortunes are too narrow, Minds too poor;

He who's a true Friend is the greatest store.

These gaudy Apples have a rotten Core,
They're Cankers to true Honour, and they bring
In their Mouth Nectar, in the Tail a Sting.

To morrow Morning, when the Duke's at leisure,
I'll him move in your Business: I take pleasure
In being serviceable to my Friend.

Your Goodness is a World, none knows its end.

We kiss your Hand

He speaks for all I see;

I humbly kiss your Feet.

A Ladies Lap dogs Flea
Would be adored by him, oh how he Cringes!
His Tongue, nay, his whole Body hangs o'th Hinges
Of Profit, he'll weep, smile, court, and scrue
Himself into more shapes than Proteus knew:
For bawdy Game. Brave Eustace is too kind
Unto these Serpents.

Eust.How is my Mind
Ensnared with Love! oh! how is my Soul twined
In the cruel Shackles of her downy Hair! --
Yet they are precious Chains, a glorious Snare. --
-- But Reason bids me not enslave my Soul to
Woman, her rise was but Rib-high, 'twas Man
Was made the Head (the Metropolitan) --
-- Reason, thou art unreasonable; she
Is Empress of the World who subjects me:
Venus does sometime blush, sometime look pale,
To see her self out-shone, and wears a Vail.
Smooth-tongu'd- Minerva swears Apollo got
This Eloquence; she comprehends it not.
Diana does forget the Chaste Lucrece;
Rome never knew this Ladies like, nor Greece.
Frowning Bellona casts her Armour by,
Swears it was ravished from her by her Eye.
Thus Beauty, Learning, Chastity and War,
Do homage to this more illustrious Star.
Presume not then to love, only admire,
For fear her Eyes do burn thee in their Fire. --
-- Not love for fear? -- Fears base, for if I burn,
I go a happy Comet to my Urn.
Increase thy Flames then, if she cruel prove,
I dye her Martyr, sacrifid to Love.

-- You need not fear,
There is no danger, the Coast's clear;
Pol on the Arras cannot prate
Of our solemn sweets to any, that
Elm courted by, the too-fond Vine
Will not declare; you see they twine,
And tacitly upbraid our cold
Neglect. Will you live to be old,
And lose your dear delights? faith try;
You rob your self when you deny:
Your Blushes shall not speak, I'll fan
Them into paleness, and that wan-
Ness shall not accuse, that Death-
Look I'll make ruddy with my Breath.
Let's then by now fufilling Love,
Anticipate those Joys above.

What have I done to fan yoor beastly Flame,
That it dares be so saucy as to name
Its rude Desires? Has my Deportment been
So light, you think, it must be poised with Sin!

Dare be so saucy! had you been
Diviner than the Paphian Queen;
Or had the fondness of great Jove
Adopted you to be his Love,
And I a dirty Scullion born,
You could not then have used more scorn;
You might have given an Answer free
From Pride or Incivility:
You could but chide your Foot-boy so.

He's better bred, and honester I know.
Tell me not of the greatness of your Blood,
"'Tis he alone is great who dares be good.
You Exercise your Power to do ill;
In thus controlling you your greatness kill.
Can he be Noble who does basely stoop
To pampered Sense, and make his Honour droop?
Can he be Gallant who does quit the Field
To vaunting Lust? Is't Valour thus to yield?
No no; that Prince who has a Peasants Mind,
Is but a gaudy Bladder crammed with Wind.
Honour is poised with Virtue, 'tis not light,
Some men were born, others made Lords in spite.
For Nature angry with the Father, gave
A Son should prove an honourable Knave;
This may plead fashion, and so pardon get.
But when men shall be Beasts, (I'll not repeat
Those many ways they make them so) then 'tis
Nature does plague Birth with an Emphasis:
She is ingenious in her Vengeance, when
She makes the best by Birth the worst of Men.
Titles of Honour I know the Duke can
Give, you must make your self a Noble man.

Love firmly rooted never finds remorse,
It must enjoy by favour or by force.

Do not delude your self, there are those nigh
Will soon divert your black intent.

I'll try.

Idana, Idana.

Fredrick shant know you would abuse his Wife,
For that would cost or him or you a Life.
But come no more unto my House.

So fooled! it must not die without repair: --
-- I hav't: The World will think her foul, because fair:
I'll say she is my VVhore; nay swear it: thus I
Will be revenged to see her Honour die.

You throw away, dear Sir, your generous Passion;
I cannot make a just Retaliation,
You are so far abov't yet you shall fee
I'll Honour you as much as you Love me.

Your Love does Wealth, Honour, Bliss comprehend,
Has he not all who has so brave a Friend?

You are an Artist, Sir, I quit the Field,
My Language must; my Love shall never yield.
Yet I'm afraid that too will too weak prove,
Your Merits bind me, you love, because you love:
I love for Gain; you can no Reason give
For yours to me. So do the Gods, who live
Only to love poor Mortals, so do you;
And that Love which is Heavenly must be True.

In striving to pursue this Copious Theme,
I cut against the Grain, swim against the Stream:
You do out-do me, I'll my Top-sail lower;
Your Language and your Love have the sole Power.

I'll say no more, but keep that in my Breast;
Which, though can't, would seem Flattery if expressed.

If he were not her Husband, she might prove
Mild to my Suit, and gratify my Love:
Or were he not my Friend, to have my will,
Perhaps commanding Love might make me kill
Him, the only Thwart to my Desires, and try
By Fraud or Force to spot her Purity. --
-- But that's against both Divine and Humane Law. --
-- Love makes it lawful, though to break all Law. --
-- Honour will not deceive any who trust
To her, and honesty bids me be just
To all, in all things; 'tis strict Virtues will
We bear Fates Tortures not committing ill.
I'll love her then; but with that sacred Flame
Shall not Honour blot, nor deface Friendships Name.

I'Ve promised it unto Eustace his Friend,
If you command I know he'll not, contend,
But willingly, and with great Joy submit
To lay his Interest at your Nephews Feet.

Far be that, Sir: You know all kindness shown
To him, I ever reckoned as my own

The next opportunity I have of conferring any thing
Worthy of Thierrie, I'll not forget him.

Let him enjoy't, it is not worth my strife;
He shall surrender't shortly with his life.

THe Duke does love him, therefore we must be
Subtlely friendly in our Treachery:
He thinks my Flames are Loyal; but they are
Only to melt him into woeful care.
I'll laugh to see him plunge without relief
In sweaty Anger and in briny Grief.
Let him, like Niobe, weep into Stone,
Useless to all, regarded to by none:
Then tickled with that Pleasure, I shall die
In Raptures, as I loft Virginity.

-- Since 'tis your Pleasure I'll obey your Grace.

'Tis for your Profit your Son gets his Place.

-- I am his Bosom; can I break my Trust
To one so Faithful, so exactly Just? --
Hence Treachery, what! shall a Woman's Hate
Triumph over Goodness? -- I'll divert that Fate. --
-- But she proposes Wealth, and Honour too;
What will not any for those Beauties do?
They captivate all with their golden Hair;
Evaporate then Friendship into Air.

Besides all this, he's Honours Advocate,
A God to Virtue; but to Vice a Fate.

He takes not Honour in the new-mode's Sense;
But weighs it in the Scale of Conscience.

He's Natures Darling, and the Muses Dear;
And yet can teach even Mars to break a Spear.

Rob the VVorlds Cabinet, and ransack Fame;
You cannot equal then brave Eustace's Name.
He is in one word (that we may not time spena)
The greatest Soldier, Courtier, truest Friend.

-- With what regret do I found forth his Praise!
-- How do I curse when I trim up his Bays;
My towering Thoughts disdain to be out-flown;
Envy all Encomium's that are not their own:
My Soul's as lofty as the best; I hate
So mean a thing, as second in a State.
Nature made all Men naked, Beggars, and Kings:
'Tis Fortune only turns the Scale of things.
If she should make my Sovereign's Scepters mine,
I'd think my self as Sovereign and Divine
As he; and on him from that Wheel look down,
With an upbraiding Smile, disdainful Frown.
Eustace I'll strike at first; and when I'm in
(Ambition can digest the greatest Sin)
I'll level at the Duke; the Attempt is brave;
I gain if loose; a Subject is a Slave.
The Duchess in all this shall be the Scale
I'll take the height of this Attempt by her pale
Looks, frequent Blushes, broken Sighs of late,
Argue she's Prisoner unto Love or Hate,
Or both; and if I'm not mistaken, I
Saw my self seated in her amorous Eye;
If so, I'll make her love Baud to my Lust,
These two Flames joined shall burn the Duke to Dust.

-- Not love you! Why?
Cause you're so killing perfect, must love dye?
You not beloved! whose high flown Eloquence
Sacred Sybilline, dictates does dispense!
The Rhetoric of your Face with silence can
Speak threats unto the Gods, but death to Man.
When Phyrrha and Deucalion threw the Stones,
And from thence sprang both Male and Female ones;
Nature intended Love, else you would feel,
Instead of Flesh, those Flints and Hearts of Steel;
She mollified those Stones, increased desire,
She took away the Flint, but left the Fire.

That Fire you speak of ought to be refined
In the chaste Furnace of a Godly Mind:
The Gods allow love's Flame, yours Lusts will prove,
Would Eustace have me lose my Love by Love?
Love's Fire's divine, Divinity is just.
O Heavens! Can Eustace be eclipsed with Lust!
Fredrick's your Friend; from yours he draws his Life,
Fie Eustace, fie, would you abuse his Wife?

-- Could any Mortal Eye transpierce the Sphere,
And see what the just Gods are doing there,
How they eternal Joys give to the Good,
And do revenge Adulteries and Blood;
Or did they think the Thunderer was near,
The very worst of Men to sin would fear;
D' you think me then so impudent, that I
Dare sin when such a Deity is nigh?
No Madam, no; may Heaven exclude me there,
And you me hate (a greater Hell by far)
If my Flame's not as just as theirs above,
The very abstract of the purest Love.
I crave but to enjoy your Company,
To kiss your Feet, your heavenly Beauty view;
To feed upon your Voices Harmony,
Heaven is not Heaven if all this is not true:
And if your Servant covets more than this,
Like Lucifer may I lose all my Bliss.

Eustace is Eustace now, methinks I see
In him all Glory, all Divinity;
And since his Thoughts nothing but Virtue are,
As I before, am still his Worshipper.
Eustace shall Fredrick, Fredrick Eustace be,
Except in Bed, one and the same to me;
This is true Love, Lust is the Beasts delight,
That beams the Sun, this darkens blackest Night.
When Eustace is deposed, my Son shall
Be Treasurer, I Lord General;
To gain Honour, who does not think'tis fit
To baffle Friendship, is not stored with Wit.
There's your Commission

Sir, I still must be
Indebted to your great Civility
How I applaud my Wit for this new Power,
He raises me to make himself fall lower;
^is Envy's Lechery to make Men fall
By that they built to save themselves withal.

Post away, relate it to the Duke in the most odious
Terms maginable,
Then return to me disguised.
I'll mitigate these Flames in which I burn,
Or kindle those shall bring me to my Urn.
How are they encumbered who do wear a Crown;
They cannot truly call what's theirs their own;
All rob the Prince, Theft's not Theft in that thing;
'Tis godly Policy to cheat the King.
The Sycophant oils us with Flatteries,
Our Gold is angled at by avarice;
The ambitious Worms would over-top their heuer,
The envious wretch would starve our Princely State,
All strive to raise themselves, or whet our Fate;
Nor are we free from Traitors when we are dead.
Did not Rodulphus tell me but just now,
(Treason sole regent sate upon his Brow)
That he; Rodulphus! would more loyal be
Then him, who from me takes his Pedigree? --
More Loyal! ha! -- was not the Accent there? -- Yes --
-- My Brother false? -- No, he a Traitor is --
-- But why do I Condemn him thus? -- Yet can
Eustace, brave Eustace, be less then a man?
(For Traitors are Beasts, Monsters) -- Yet we know
Blood Royal thinks that Nature does it owe
A Crown; Eustace may think himself as fit,
In Majesty, in Wisdom, and in Wit,
To sit at Helm as I -- He cant break his Trust --
-- The best corrupted though prove most unjust.
I'll therefore watch him, and the informer too;
Perhaps he talks but what himself would do.
So let him play a while with this first Bait,
False-sighted Jealousy can pick deceit
Out of true Loyalty, now Eustace shall
Not talk of Honey, but he'll extract Gall;
And I'll so feed his Humour, blind his Sense,
He'll Duty check, and Treason recompense.
God save your Grace.

Oh! what! Rodulphus! joy;
You are turned Soldier, count the Court a Toy;
It is a Miracle to see you here,
A day of Jubilee when you appear.

Your Grace is merry, Soldiers must obey
Their Officers, else 'twere a Puppet-play;
Female Suns shine at Court; Rodulphus can
Feast his Eyes on his Mistress; who's a Man,
My General, brave Eustace, I adore;
I'll never think of Women any more.

Methinks Rodulphus -- (none do hear but we)
Himself might be the General, had not he
A Soul too narrow to contain the Fire
Of his dear Princess Libussa's desire;
And in my Judgment, he deserves it, far
Beyond that vulgar Shadow, painted Star. --
-- The Duchess told me this her self; if you
Have not Faith to believe that it is true,
Come to her Bed-Chamber, I'll place you where
You all our close Discourse shall over hear.
She weeps for Joy when I begin your name;
Yet those dews are soon dried up in Loves Flame.
She sighs, and weeps again to cool Desire,
Alas! those oily drops increase the Fire. --
Rodulphus did not know who was his Slave
Before I told. For this my Fee I'll have;

Ha, ha, ha, All this I knew before; we wise men must
Make many Trials before we do trust. --
Rodulphus might be General (ha, ha, ha.) Yes I
Will Eustace be, and Duke, or bravely dye.
I'll wait upon her Grace.

-- Lord Treasurer or Lord General -- Let's see --
Which of those Titles is the best for me --
-- Faith Treasurer, for I love Gold; beside
A Cannons Language I could never abide,
(Not that all Soldiers think they must fight, no;
The Duke I fear would have few, thought they so.)
'Tis a rough Dialect, but Gold's smooth Tongue
Makes Angels dance unto its heavenly Song;
That then I'll choose shall make all Men admire
My State; a Generals but a Powder Fire.
Ha, ha, ha, Who'd be a Soldier? he's a flash can't hold,
Unless the Treasurer feeds him with Gold.
I do allow their Officers are bright;
If I (their Sun) contract my Beams, 'tis Night.
How am I ravished with these Thoughts! I'll live
In greatest splendour; there's nought shall reprive
The least of Pleasures from my ravenous Sense;
The Stars from me shall take their influence,
Bending to my will all Men's Humours, he
Shall be Atheist thought who does not worship me;
In Beds of Down I'll revel without care,
In richest Chariots take the pregnant Air;
Which drawn by two more Horses than the Sun,
My uncontrolled Course like him I'll run;
How will the Virgins court me! the whilst I
Only laugh at their forced Virginity. --
The Duchess in all this I must obey,
She does expect, I dare not make her stay:
Let her conceive rough Plots, I'll bring them forth,
My Tongue shall lick and form them into worth.

You're punctual Leopaldus.

Your Graces Will
A Law is to your Slave.

Unless to kill
Your Master.

Such a thought your Grace never bred,
You'd almost dye to raise him was he dead.

He's close, I'll give his Wit a Bone to pick. --
Not kill proud Eustace! hence you puny Chick;
How can you else be General?

This Hand,
Was it Commissioned by your Command,
Should tear my Heart before your sacred Eyes;
Dare I do that, and yet not sacrifice
Eustace to your hate? Yes, if greater far.

Not for my Love, but to be Treasurer.
Base Traitor to thy Master, thou shalt dye
For this foul Treason.

(Enter Lewis.) Why?
Was not that sealed Box to Leopaldus sent?

It is, but he came hither whilst it went,
So missed it.

There are the Writings: That's all.
Ha, ha, ha, ha.

How did my proud Heart fall;
His Plumes when your Grace called, 'twas a great fright.

Day's welcome after the most; tedious Night.
Now to the Affair. You must hatch jealousy
In the Duke of Eustace his Fidelity
In both his Offices. Let some trick be
Found out to make him think he aims at me;
I with my kindness will so rub the sore,
It shall not heal, but fester more and more;
Yet do it secretly that none may know,
That he his Downfall unto us does owe;
I know you're wise, it is your own Affair,
Therefore it does concern you to take care.

Are all the Sirens Habits made, and the Music perfect:
1 Masquer, Yes.

Pray let them be very exact, for
I value my Reputation
In the well performing of this Masque.

Dares Eustace then commit such Crimes as those?

Your seeming Friends are still the basest Foes;
I hate you, Brother, for this Black-mouth'd Deed;
Do you, his choicest Flower, turn a Weed?
Ill root you out of my Thoughts for this; you shall
Have little cause to glory in his Fall.

Madam what needs this heat, 'tis for his good
I tell the Duke.

A way corrupted Blood;
Black Parasite, whose Soul knows nought but Vice,
'Tis crammed with Pride, Envy and Avarice;
You're just to flalshood, to all Truth untrue;

I am as just to Friendship, true, as you.

'Tis saucy, Sir, I hope you will not show
Your self unkind to Carlos, Sir. I know
This Accusation's false. If not, than I
Desire to school him for this Vanity.
Seem not to know it, chide him not for this;
'Tis against his Will if he has done amiss.

Well, Madam, I am calmed; for he that can
Still ward the Hilts of Vice is more than Man.

Was it not bravely acted.

To the Life,
My Knowledge and my Judgment were at strife,
Whether it was in earnest or in jest,
So naturally urged so strongly pressed.

They who do seek to undermine the Wise,
Must Nature use with Art to blind their Eyes.

How does Rodulphus like his Regiment?

Well,
I humbly thank your Honour; they are all
Men who deserve so brave a General.

Oh no Rodulphus; all the World can tell
Their bravery is in their Colonel.

If Fortune does not play the Jade, they shall
Soon see their Colonel their General. --

Who says that I'm no Deity? when they
Who rule the Heaven shall wonder at this Clay;
Great Jupiter shall not only look down,
But even descend this glorious Earth to Crown.

What makes the Hills to dance! the Mountains play!
The Groves cut Capers! whose is this Holy-day!
My Flocks do skip, and every Bird does sing;
For whom's this great mirth made!

Behold! this King.

Wonder not Pan, a God's born on
the Earth,
The World must needs move in a Sphere of mirth.
Wonder not Pan, a God's, c. as before.

What Melody is this! whence are these Charms?
Far sweeter than my Sirens!

Natures Arms.

Sing Sirens sing; Nature's immortal; we
Must bow unto her New-born Deity.
Sing Sirens sing, Nature's, c.
as before.

Hail glorious Prince, all I can do will be
To make Ten thousand Ladies dye for thee.

Break thy Bow, Cupid; the amorous Tackling tear,
Thou art no God; all love is seated here.
Break thy Bow, break thy Bow, Cupid, for we
Must bow unto this New-born Deity.

What Stern-sweet-beauty's this makes Mars afraid!]
My Valour's rivalled.

I'm glad 'tis no Maid.

Sing Venus, forget thy Adonis; for he
Was not so fair as this new Deity.

Thus when good Kings are born upon the Earth,
The Host of Heaven is ravished with mirth.

THe Great Duke of Schawden does defy thee Great Baldwin, and is resolved
after Twenty days, to lay wast thy Dominion by Fire and Sword, to be revenged
for thy execrable murthering his Nephew the brave Conradine.


Tell the proud unjust Duke thy Master; that he
shall dearly pay, for endeavouring to cloud our Rays with
such detestable Actions.
For though his force and hatred is so great,
VVe'll drown his Anger in a Bloody-sweat.
I know you're wise, it is your own Affair,
Therefore it does concern you to take care. --
It does I know, and I'll be careful too,
Who of the Devil knows what she may do?
Base Traitor thou shalt dye said she: --
And who can tell? she may in earnest be:
No, Duchess, no, you shall not cozen me.
I'll go to Eustace and disclose the Plot,
Unload my self of guilt; -- but they will not
Believe my Accusations, and thus I
Revealing Treason Traitor-like shall dye.
I must go through now I've begun; 'tis base
To falter in the middle of a Chase.
Don Lewis left it here.

Be gone. -- What's this
A Ruby! Topaz! and an Amithyst! --
Dull plumbeous Brain. What a Hen-hearted Slave
Was I to doubt the Duchess, can one have
Surer Proofs of her Loyalty than this?
Faint Jealousy does often judge amiss:
Do not these Jewels and this Gold infer,
That I shall be advanced Treasurer?
I'll follow't now with eagerness, I doubt
Not but to succeed when he's justled out.
Am I not well disguised, is not this Hair
An exact Vizard? and are not these Pair
Of Moustaches well ordered? ha!

As well
As though your Honour fetched them out of Hell;
So black, so horned, and so deceitful too,
The Devil's in Men sure when they do woe,
Or else they would not so transform themselves
For nothing but to please these waspish Elves,
Who, if they did not court, would court themselves.

That's too Satirical, but, prithee how
Dost like my Mask, Philippo, could thou know
Me, had I not foretold thee my design?

O, Sir, your Virtues through these Clouds do shine,
Clothes cannot hide that Part which is Divine.

You must be exercising of your Wit;

'T has slept so long I fear I've smothered it.
I must contrive it so,
That he stay here, and I in chief may go
Against the Duke of Schawden. --
Yet if he goes, he secretly shall fall
By me, and I'll return the General.

Another Regiment then must be raised.

But will you venture Eustace in this Fight?
Should he miscarry, you loose all your might
At one blow; for as soon as he is lost,
Your Bed-rid Dukedom will give up the Ghost.
He is the Soul of Valour; should they see
Him fall, your bravest Martialists would flee
Like frighted Sheep before the Wolves, none shall
Resist, but with a meek Devotion fall
A Sacrifice to him; some out of fear,
Others, because he is gone, hate to live here;
Let him stay here for a reserve at last
To grapple with Death when all hopes are past.

Madam, to keep him here's to loose the Day,
What strength remains when the Soul's taken away?

Those Court-silk-worms, whose sophisticated Fare
Is Peace, sauced up in Pleasure, whose Palates War
Does nauseate; who with ease Ermine their Gown,
Mind not their Princes Interest but their own;
Should we sit still and let the Commons sweat
Alone, they would our Honour from us get.
Had I Ten thousand Lives, each drop of Blood
Should be exhausted for my Countries good.

Great Sir, your Fame
Has made the World enamoured with your Name;
You need not bring a Letter to be known;
There's nothing Great nor Good that's not your own.
Since you have put your Rays under the Cloud
Of Nancy, let my poor House be allow'd
That Honour; Ferdinando may be as free,
As if he was brave Otho. Exeunt.

Otho! he!
Letters from him! -- from Otho! -- that shall be
Matter wherewith I'll feed my Villainy.
By thus matching my Sister with the Brother of the dead Conradine, I shall
create a Peace upon Honourable Terms. He who muzzles the Jaws of the Sword,
does his Country as great a Service, as he who vindicates her honour by it. Yet
I will keep it secret, that it may be more valued; for we are apt to prize
those Blessings most which come unexpected.


Come Boys let's bid adieu to these Thred-bare knitty Jirkins, these Spawns of
Peace; she who never gave Soldiers any thing but a king Bellies and itching
Backs.


Faith if we had lain still any longer, every one I think had been a General; I
believe I can Muster Ten thousand, besides what have had the strapado, and been
turned out of Service.


But now we'll ruffle in Silk, and be lousy with Credit: Brace our Bellies
with Provocatives; make our Souls tide it to Elysium in Wine, then have an
Alderman's Wife to close up the Stomach.


Take it off you mean.

Faith I must have half a dozen to cure my Itch.

No, one with her Husband's best new Suit and clean Shirt will do it; for they
are famous for such Cures.

I do his noble praise admire,
And emulate his worth; but Cupid's Fire
Catch from the Eyes.

h' has your Picture.

I will
He live and dote upon my Picture still.
I'll marry none by Proxy; Kings in that
Are then their Subjects more unfortunate.

'Twas not report that raised Otho's Love,
Or your Effigies did his Passion move;
But he has seen you, Madam; from your Eyes
The Fire was kindled for this Sacrifice;
He offers a true broken Heart; Quench not
That holy Flame your Beauty has begot.

What's got by Beauty will with Beauty fade,
When the Sun sets we are left in the Shade;

Beauty is not External, but Divine,
He does adore the Features of your Mind;
You are the Fountain of Divinity;
Through you all Glory, Bliss, and Goodness run,
The Heavens do boast of your Affinity;
Your splendent Eyes renew and beam the Sun.
Should you be angry, and withdraw your Light,
The World would grovel in eternal Night.
Let not, let not your too much Cruelty,
Give cause to doubt of your Divinity.

How does he plead against himself? 'tis he
By whom I'm Conquered, he has fettered me.
Justice as well as Mercy's in the Gods,
One Hand holds Blessings, and the other Rods
To punish proud Offenders. Sir, can I
Think Otho does count me his Deity;
When in his first address I read such Crimes?
O Heavens! the Pride of Men in these our Times!
Can the Proud Otho think that I'm Divine,
When Scrivener-like he courts me thus by Line?
The Path to Conquer her is strait, thought he,
And easy. 'Tis a sign he Honours me;
Did he so much admire what he writ,
To think that I'd be ravished with his Wit?
Or did he think himself, (great Man!) too good
To come himself? Or thought he travail would
Cool the Glow-worm flashes of his hasty Fire,
Or me quite void of what should raise desire?
Or does he think I must be his by fate?
'Tis fit I scourge his Confidence with hate.

Madam.

No more; I'll not hear one word more.

Your Laws are Sacred, I your Will adore.

Your humour's peevish, Sister.

Brother, I
Owe you a great respect I know; yet why
Should you usurp a Power over me?
Love's not begot by any force; 'tis free.
I will obey your modest Mandates still;
But marry whom I please, not whom you will.

There's no resisting Woman's wild desire, --
Pray let your Reason mitigate your Ire. --

I'm glad she is so cruel --

What thing is Love! of what is it begot!
Sure they who know it best do know it not;
It is a sudden fire, a secret flame,
It has a thousand, yet not one true Name. --
Hell's chiefest Agent's Lust, Love takes its birth
From that; sure then Love is Hell upon Earth;
To me it is, for I'm hurled in a Fire,
In which I burn, and shall yet never expire.

If these.three fail, how cursed is my fate;
There's neither God of Love, nor Friend of hate.

Now by my Life this News does make me fear --
Letters from him! his Confident too here
By Eustace entertained! If so, I m sure
That Traitor has my Dukedom made secure
Unto himself. -- Prithee what's best to do? --
I'll his Commission seize.

That's not safe, you
Must do it by degrees, no rash ways try,
Fetter his Gyant-strength with Policy,
Send him unto St. Enay, tell him that you
Can trust none but Eustace himself to view
That Fort; he gone, you must pick out some one
Who Treason hates, to crush Rebellion
In the Egg; him make General.

I see
Some hope yet left through thy sagacity;
And did not gratitude, my safety would
Invite thee to be General; 'Tis good
To scourge Rebellion with an Iron Whip;
Thy forward Zeal for me will make thee strip
Those Traitors of all means to do me harm;
I'm safe under thy Conduct and thy Arm.

Mere Nature honours Kings; you bind me now
By Gratitude to keep my Allegiance Vow.
If ever I violate my Fealty, may
That Crime give Wings unto the Judgment day.

I doubt not; but dost not know any more
Who are charmed with the Beauty of this VVhore
Ambition? what Officers are they
With whom he does intend this Game to play?

Fredrick's Bosom, him you must remove,
Not out of Jealousy, but seeming Love;
Give him a better Place, though far more worse;

I'll Honour him with Master of our Horse,
Because he is the good Eustace his Friend.

'Tis fit indeed they ride unto their end.

Those Subjects who dare so usurp the Crown,
Do but exalt themselves to tumble down.

I'll not that humble fear, nor thy weak frown,
Ten thousand Lives to wear a minutes Crown.
I sigh, weep, mourn, rejoice, I freeze, I fry?
How am I scourged with uncertainty! --
Sing me the Song thou sungst last night; ah me!
I'll with my Sighs and Tears thy Chorus be.

Descend ye gentle Angels; see
A Wretch hemmed in with Grief;
All Misery's summed up in me,
Look down and bring Relief;
Let your kind Breath and Wings fan my rude Fire,
Not like my Sighs and Tears which feed desire.
Woe Tyrant Cupid for Relief,
(If such a God there be)
Paint out, murmur to him my Grief;
A Friend would pity me;
Tell him how devilish is his damned Fire,
Let him stand farther off, or else come nigher.
Must Beauty still be joined with Grief?
Take that then quite from me,
Or else take this, and give relief
To what you first gave me;
O Gods! Can you be plagued with hellish Fires!
I am your Image; Image my Desires.

Or give me more, or take what strength I have,
That melting I may drop into my Grave.

I'll write to him, invite him to come here,
All Clouds must fly when the Sun does appear.

I will enclose your Letter in mine.

I want Money, Sir, to furnish me for this Expedition,
and your Honours Clerk denies me my Pay.

You're troublesome, you're troublesome, away.

Such Officers are Enemies.

Next time he writes unto Otho, see
You carefully that Letter bring to me,
It may concern our Business;

I'll obey
Your Graces will with great Devotion.

They
Who a Kings Favourite would tumble down,
Must make his Vices justify their own.
Cruel Gertrudo; but more Cruel Love,
Thus to inflame my Soul, and yet not move
In her Desire; under this blessed Shade I
Will sit and pray to be so too; to dye
Is a great Blessing to the Happiest Men;
What is it to the Miserable then?
Why did ye make us subject unto Passion?
Why did ye give us Tongues wherewith to speak?
If we must subject be to this strict fashion,
Not to relate our Loves though our Hearts break? --
Tis Man's Extortion, we may be as free
In that as they, or wrong the Deity.
For they made nothing but was for some use --
Otho loves me, I Ferdinando; may
Not I let him know it without abuse
To Modesty? If not we're worse than Clay.
I'll un-Lanthorn my Flame, no longer I
Will hover in this strange uncertainty.

As when Men from some pleasant Dream awake
Wish they might always sleep for that Dreams sake;
And can't but fancy happiness a while
(So does desire our willing Sense beguile)
So 'tis with me; for rising from that Shade,
Methinks I am a Constellation made.
And wish I might Eternally lye there,
The Mellody of her Complaints to hear. --
I'll after her and give my Griefs a Grave.

Fredrick's made Master of the Horse, we have
A Boy to be our Colonel.

'Tis brave
When Butterflies do give the Falcon Laws,
And painted Peacocks clip the Eagles Claws:

O 'Tis Rodulphus's Plot; There are two more,
Right Sons of Mars, quite turned out of Door,
And for it made Bed-chamber-men.

By Jove,
But that our General's brave, I'd scorn to move
By such Men's Orders.

If there is Treason hatching, I think I
Should then stay here to cherish Loyalty;
Or crush that Monstrous Egg; but since you do
Command me, unto Stenay I must go:
For he who does dispute his King's Command,
No Subject is, but the Crowns Countermand,
I cannot fathom't; Treason's budding, yet
The Armies Head must be lopped off; 1s't fit
I should be busied about a little Fort,
And leave all else Confused? --
There's something more in it; -- But since I'm free
From the least stain, it cannot injure me.
You are but young, and must not be ashamed of
Directions,

Your Commands to me are
Lovely, and like a Loadstone draw me
By their Motion; all my Actions shall point
Directly at your will.

And that's your Honour;
You too, Captains, must make me still your Rule,
Consult me always: For you must know those
Men whose Places you inherit are not
Well satisfied, and are studying your
Ruin with eagerness; and though they smile,
They are cruel Traps, varnish'd but to beguile --
With greater ease, uncloset not your Souls
To all, they'll quickly be unrivetted,
From your Bodies if ye do

We'll observe
Your Instructions to a Tittle.

These are dull Fools, and may be drawn aside
Unto all Villainies, when I'm their Guide;
Fight with Devotion against their Prince, cause they
Believe they can't err when I lead the way.
What then?
That does not prove him Traitor, the best Men
Are most abused; Fame's Falfe, Suspition's grudge,
And Jealousy is an unequal Judge;
Rodulphus may forge it: In this Age, all
Think 'tis Religion to supplant; the fall
Of Princes Favourites Nature Contrives;
She Envy roots, as soon as Heaven breaths Lives. --
Yet let him plow the Deep, and fetch from thence
Legions of Devil's to delude my Sense;
Scale great Jove's Fabric, seduce Angels there
To come and own his Accusations here:
They'd make me fear 'twas true, yet never move
My Heart against Justice to extirpate my Love;
I'd hear him speak, not damn, cause I distrust;
Kings are not Men till they can be unjust.

I've left a Letter with Leopaldus. ( Ferdina.) Go
Fetch it, I'll inclos't in mine.

Sir, may I know
How soon you will return.

In Ten days; See
You are not idle in your Courtship; she
Seems better humoured now; and when he's come
She'll melt; Courtship at distance is but dumb.
Fear not her frowns, pursue your Amorous Sense,
Be bold, it is a pleasing violence;

I cant wait on you; 'tis much against my will,

Duty takes place of Ceremony still.

This is great kindness, Sirs.

Men are bereft
Of Comfort, when they are in darkness left.

Fancy paints Death.

No marvel if we run
To take our leaves of our departing Sun.

The Sun sets but to rise.

Thought we not so,
You'd see us all depart before you go.

Go! -- that word's Hell.

Let us wait on you Sir.

The Soul gone, the Trunk's so benumbed can't stir.

I'm wracked to leave you; but it must be, when
I come our Friendship will be new again.

In Grief and Discontent we'll make our Urn,
There will we buried be till you return.

When Earth's not Earth, Sea Sea, till then't must be
That great Men shall be gulled with Flattery.
Can he
Distrust my Conduct? or my Loyalty?
Though I'm Master of the Horse, I might have been
A Colonel too; Plurality's no Sin;
Or Venial at most, 't might be forgiven,
Since 'tis their Tract who point the way to Heaven. --
Dos he think I'm no Soldier; no, his Eyes
Has dazzled been to see the Prodigies,
This Hand has hewed out for his safety. -- yet. --
Kings are not Gods because they can forget.
Booted my Lord!

Yes Fredrick I must go.

Give me leave to wait on your Lordship.

No,
You must stay here.

You do but take the Air
I do presume; your Lordship rides not far.

But unto Stenay.

Unto Stenay! you!
Can you be spared!

I know-not; but'tis true --
Why dost thou muse.

My Lord I like it not;
There is some juggling in it, some dirty Plot
Upon my Life; you're sent away, and my
Commission's seized, by -- I know not why.
Vlric and Bruno are uncaptain'd: they
Who've done this have an after Game to play;
Godfrey's Son's made Colonel; Is't a time,
When we should be at top to learn to climb?
He's but Seventeen, scarce knows to draw a Sword;
He is not taught to speak should give the Word.
Then there are two more, in the room of those
I named, would tremble at the name of Foes;
I grieve to think my Country shall be lost,
Conducted by those have been on the Post --
Traitor Rodulphus, he is soaring still,
A Raven, though's Wings are imp'd with Doves Quill.

I've weighed these things to Fredrick, and can't guess
Rodulphus false to me

I, nothing less.

'Twas I raised him; can he be so depraved,
To destroy that by whom himself is saved?

Ill Men are Enemies to Goodness; they
Delight to see them ragged made them gay:
You are too good to think all Just.

I see
You're Captive still to dreaming Jealousy.
'Tis the Dukes Love, says he, you I can trust,
I know not that Rodulphus will be just.

Well, Heaven avert what my Dream's do foresee;
To trust all's the High-way to beggary.

Though I beleiv't, I'll not his Mood foment,
'Tis Treason to encourage Discontent --

NOT gone last Night! and in her Chamber too
Till Three this Morning! O Gods! What to do?

Could I, 'twere Sin to tell, -- Good Deeds love light,
But theirs were masked with the Clouds of Night.

Thou speak as though she were false to my Bed,
By all the Gods or prove't, or, Dog, you're dead.

Prove it! who can? But is not a Nights stay
Alone with her enough?

Screech-Owl away --
Yet stay and tell me more, or I'll advance
Thy Head on yonder Tower.

Circumstance
Is all the Proof in such a Case; we may
Conclude the Sun's not far at break of day.
How careful is she for Eustace his good?
She draws Life from his Breath.

Nearness in Blood
Allows that kindness.

But, Great Sir, no kin
Can check the Passions of unruly Sin.
How uncontrollable is pampered Lust!
It makes the very worst of Deeds most Just,
To gratify its Sense: Nero's Mother
Could not divert his Flames; nought can smother
Those Hellish Fires: They who make Lust their God
Justice despise; contemn the Avenger's Rod;
Such a one's Eustace and the Duchess too. --
These Jewels were not sent to him by you.
No, these are Trophies of his Antes desire,
The Sparks declare her base incestuous Fire.
Pardon, Great Sir, this boldness; on my Knee
I beg; 'twas forced by Zeal; Truth should be free.

These are great Circumstances, Sir; yet more
Must be found out to prove a Queen a Whore.
And shall by thee, or thou a Traitor prove;
Shall Subjects undermine their Sovereigns Love?
Guard Enter. Carry him to the Tower during our Pleasure.

I've built my self a Castle.

This Treasure
Sent by my Wife to Eustace, and his stay
All night affrights me. Heavens! What can she say
To justify this Action? it appears
Odious to me yet.

What all in Tears!
Why is your Grace to day so sadly dressed?

With what Convulsions are their Souls oppressed,
Who are forced to accuse those they love best!
That Case is mine.
Next unto You, my poor abused Love
Unto your Brother Eustace still did move,
Because I thought him (pardon't Gods above)
More than Divine.
But how does he reward my Love! (Cursed Fate!
Heavens! Why was I made thus unfortunate!)
He Courted me, -- he Courted -- (base ingrate)
How shall I speak?
He Courted me; would you believ't? to lye
With him last night; (unheard of Infamy)
Eustace, where is now thy Divinity?
Deceived Heart break;
When I repulsed him, he replied, what then
Did those Jewels you sent me mean? we Men
Know Ladies Presents give for Love again;
Come, come, your Eyes
Say you meant so -- When by your Soul I sent
Them to be matched and polished, my intent,
By Heaven, was altogether Innocent.

-- By Jove he dyes:
For he that would defile his Sovereigns Wife;
Waits but a fit time to enshare his Life.

Pardon his Life; he may repent in time,
When Age comes on our Thoughts are more sublime.
How can the Ship sail without a Pilot?
In what disorder will an Army be
Without a General? Come then your self,
And head your own Party if you mean to
Prosper; for I do not find it easy
To gain Compliance, you being absent.
Dispose therefore of your Affairs into
Trusty Hands, and make hast hither, where you
Shall find all things prepared according to
Your desires; but leave none of your Courage
Behind you, for we are to deal with
Resolute and Politic Enemies. Howere
I'll not distrust, for I am Confident
They'll vanish, when you appear to
Countenance the Endeavours of your -- Eustace.

Ungrateful Eustace, could thou serve me so!
But I'll reward thee; Let's to Cbuncel go.
The Packquet was gone before I came.

Gods! What will Otho think when he receives
An Invitation from Eustace to come hither. --
But it can't be helped.

-- Godfrey made Treasurer!

'Tis too true, and Rodulphus General.

Was Eustace raised so high, to make his fall
The greater?

What! And shall we Soldiers see
Brave Eustace suffer this Indignity
Without Revenge?

No, By great Mars I'll take
My Troop, and face the very Palace Gate;
And there dispute his Right with my last Breath,
Who dyes for him finds Honour in his Death.
Shall not we share Fortunes Captain?

Yes.

What! now!
Let Eustace come first; till then smooth your Brow,
Make all your Discontents march in the dark,
Fetter your Tongues, the fiercest Dogs don't bark.

We shall obey your Orders till he come.

We'll write this night to bid him make haste home.

A silly shallow Lad; could better tell
To lead a Dance, than be a Colonel,
Yet Ap'd General.

I, though the spruise
Young Gallant, would grow quickly out of use?
A thing made up of Words, a Courtier, fit
To Fire the Ladies with a flash of Wit.
His Tongue was very fleet off of the Score;

Ay, it has run its Master out of Door.
He thought twas fine to hear the Ladies laugh
At his pumped Wit; when, alas! do but waff
A Straw about your Head, and they will giggle;
Their Blood is so refined does alwaystickle.

Besides, good Manners make them keep the Mode,
They laugh, are pleased with all, be it bad or good;

And Policy sometimes does make them smile,
Thereby they do the Gallants much beguile;
Who think they understand what they do not:
'Tis a deceitful pretty Female Plot.
Yet this pleased him

Indeed all his Designs
Were womanish;

How Honour multiplies
Merit! he is naturally as dull
And empty as the meanest; yet his Name,
Boyed up by the Duke's smiles gave wings to Fame.

My Lord, we heartily Congratulate
Your New-born Honours; may they despise Fate.

When Time has snowed your Head with Silver Plumes,
Soaring leave them, and greater reassume.

I thank ye Sirs; ye're kind my Friend, ye're kind?

How do my Fears congeal my Hopes? I freeze
In Winters of Despair; and by degrees
My Heart blood turns to Isikles; O may
These Clouds just Powers end in a Sunshine day. --
Yet these Death whispers force me to distrust
I ne'er shall Eustace see -- Then Heaven's unjust.

Should he come to a legal Trial, he
Would let the World (by me yet blinded) see,
How Innocent he is? how great our Guilt?
Then all our Labours and our Hopes are spilt.
No, I'll divert that Stream.
Indeed 'tis just
You take away his Life; but then you must
Regard your Honour; he is of your Blood:
Oh that so great a Prince should not be good!
Yet let not his prodigious Treasons blot
The divine Veins of Lorein's Crown; let not
The World say Treason from the Stem Royal came;
(Not that his Vice can vitiate your Name)
Yet because he is your Father's Son.
Salve his bright Fame, and take his Life alone;
So shall you prune the Vine, not hurt the Root.

I like your Counsel: but how shall I do it?

This Friend of mine I'll send to Stenay, he
Shall strike him with a deadly Lethargy;
A Pill neatly conveyed into his Wine,
Sends him to sup with Death, with Pluto dine:
And though it works so suddenly, none shall
Surmise his Death was preternatural.
Thus by anticipating, Sir, his Fate
You'll undermine the Ground-work of his Hate.

See it be done without delay.

I will;
You need not hasten murderous mind to kill.
Gosbert take Post, and in thy Act prove true:
I have Commission now for what I do.
I see the Port: For when Eustace is dead,
The Crown shall be too heavy for thy Head:
'Twill make it ache, blind Duke: Thou gone, strait I
Rise circumvest with Beams of Majesty.
But first I will revenge Clementia's Scorn;
Her Husband shall suspect he wears my Horn.
Then let him act the Tragedy; I'll feed
My hatred with delight to see her bleed.

Your Advice, old man, about this Fort.

Why, an't please your Honours Goodness; your sweet
Worships Wisdom has thought it accessory
To direct it on the South-west part --

Yes,
That is the most advantageous place.
But concerning the pulling down of Houses.

Why an't please your Lordships Excellency --

Dispatch, Friend, and leave your Ceremonies.

Money? why an't please your Graceless Goodness,
I shall not be so ill bred, do ye see, to ask
Tour Worship for Money, do ye mark mark me Sir,
Till the work be deformed.

Prithee Fellow
Leave thy Deformities, and give my Lord
A more handsome account.

I thank God I
An't so beggarly, do ye mark, but I can
Stay for my Wages till I have preserved
It, do ye mark; I'm a deficient man,
Church-warden of the whole Parish, do ye mark,
An't please you.

Ay an't please your Mightiness,
My Husband is a mighty deficient
Able man, as I conceive.

I believ't,
Woman, because you have conceived. But friend very
Answer me, what Houses must be pulled down?

Why an't please your Highness Worship.

A
Pleasant fellow, my Lord, ha, ha. --

One Toll-thief,
He is a Miller and my near Kinsman,
My Father's Grand father (who was a Smith,)
Was he not Julian?

Prithee prate no more.

I'll read my dear Clementia's first.
What pretty Plot she feigns to bring me home.
But what says Fredrick, he brings no such News.

-- Ha! What's this! O Gods! O damned abuse!
Fredrick's Mad -- How does your Master you?

I left him well.

-- Is it his Hand? -- too true --
-- He does but jest, Ferdinando will clear the Doubt.

-- Gods! did ye sleep when this was brought about!
Or have ye forgot Justice, and will take
Vengeance on good Men for the wicked's sake? --
-- It is resolved.
And were I by the Infernal Host withstood,
I'd vindicate my Honour with their Blood;
Get Post-horses immediately.
I'll come as swift as Lightning to their Eyes;
Vengeance exact is when it does surprise.
I'm raised 'tis true, but yet your Subject; dare
Not step into your Bed; 'tis fitter far,
For Gods to taste that ravishing delight;
Your luster would not cherish, but affright
Such weak eyed mortals as your Servant; were
I a Duke made, I might be lodged there,
Perhaps with Confidence; till then I can
Do you no good. 'Tis Spirit makes the Man.
But your Divinity does check desire,
Not Warm my Blood. I tremble at your Fire.
When Lust enjoys its object, it does cool.
Who trusts a Woman's Gratitude's a Fool. Aside.

To kill the Duke is barbarous; 'tis too black
A Deed yet for my Soul to undertake --
-- But if Rodulphus thirsty passion move,
More on Ambitions Wings than those of Love,
He never will yield to gratify my Sense,
Until my squeasie Conscience can dispense
With this religious Scruple. -- Were he not
My Husband, pity should be soon forgot;
And I would make him Fuel for my Flame --
-- Why that were Murder; and this but the same. --
-- 'Tis done. Who fears to strike her Husband's Life,
Does not deserve to be Rodulphus's Wife.

-- Gone last night -- If he had staid till day
I'm sure he had been gone. But I'll away.

The Man's mad, if he had staid he had gone;
How can that be? Is go and stay all one!
What say you Boy? you are a Scholar.

Now if I don't unfold this Fellows Riddle;
Which none but himself and the Devil
Can do, my Father will swear my School-money
Is thrown away (which he may very safely)
But I thank God he has not much wit (though he
Is Mr. Mayor;) I shall fool him well enough. --
Sir, the Gentleman's a Scholar, speaks figuratively:
The Common Discourse of us Learned is Enigma's
To the Populace; But I'll unfold it to you.
Gone is spelt g. o. n. e. (for we may add a Letter sometimes.)
Now no, in Latin, is not, which being joined with go signifies
Not to go, so go and stay is all one.

You see the Benefit of breeding our Son a Scholar now.

I do, I do Love, I do.

Can you hope to enjoy what I've denied
Brave Otho? Is it Folly or your Pride
That does entice you thus to Vanity?

No it is Love, and for that Love I dye;
Madam; when I my Passion did declare,
'Twas not in hope you'd ease it, no, Despair
Possessed my too-aspiring Soul; I knew
Death was prepared for him who dares love you.
My design was only to let you know,
That I unto my Grave your Martyr go,
That passing by my Tomb pity might move
You to a Sigh or Tear for buried Love.

I cannot help Men's Follies, if they will
Destroy themselves, it is not I who kill;
And if I should on your Grave shed a Tear,
'Tis not cause Love, but madness brought you there:
I'd have you live then, let it not be said,
Ferdinando was born, lived a Fool, and died mad.

-- I'd have you Live. -- 'Tis kindness that -- But she
Would have me live, yet not live happily.
But why do I distrust? did I not hear
Her say she loved? how childish is my fear --
Then, Madam, must I dye? What! no Reprieve,
Let Smiles disperee those Frowns, and yet say live;
Was you made Beautiful to be unkind?
Then Beauty is but Cruelty refind;
But sure you are all Glorious within:
Heaven's greatest Glory is to pardon Sin;
Then since you are Divine 'twill be yours too.
If you destroy me, can it profit you?
How can I sing your Praises in my Grave?
What Honour is't to triumph over your Slave? --
-- But why do I expostulate? 'tis just,
Your Anger burn presumptuous Love to Dust.
Over my Grave a weeping Stone shall lye
(How will those Tears upbraid your Cruelty!)
With this Inscription; Here Ferdinando lies,
Martyred by Cruel-fair Gertrudo's Eyes;
Love was his Crime. O let it not be said,
Those Beams killed, which have Power to raise the Dead.
What though you have Otho denied,
It neither argues Vanity nor Pride
In me to court; common consent does prove,
We can no Reason give for Love but Love;
King's have to Beggars stooped, and great Queens Flames
Have kindled been by Grooms. Love is the same.
Yet Otho cannot boast one drop of Blood
So great, but that in these Veins runs as good.

-- What Prodigies are Men in these our Times!
They dare commit the very worst of Crimes;
And that with greatest Confidence; nay more,
They take delight to read their own Faults over;
For fear they'd not be Registered by Fame,
They write them down themselves, to 'em let their Name;
Cause they're depraved, and can do nothing well;
They strive to be famous for doing ill;
Of that unhallowed Brood art thou, profane
Abuser of Good, to Honour a Stain:
And think me of that Sect, else would not dare
To urge thy Passion with so little fear.
Can I think he can tell how to be Just,
Who to his Friend so basely breaks his Trust?
Can I hope thou wilt ever be true to me,
VVho's false to the Laws of Hospitality?
My Brother lodged thee here to be an Actor
For Otho, but you're turned thine own Factor.
Think thou thy Flatteries can me entice?
Why: to Love thee, is to be in Love with Vice --

Yes 'twas a Dream -- Mad Ferdinando could not see
Such Happiness was never designed for thee?
Read thy Lifes Story, in every Line thou'lt find
The were born but to show Heaven can be unkind.
The Devil's sooner raised than laid; my thought
Is still aspiring, though 'twas mocked with nought. --
-- A Thousand Ducats a Reward for me,
Who thought the world mine own? well Duchess see
The Event; the time will come when you may want
My Service, and your Treachery recant.
How mad am I! It is but Three days since
I would have courted him (such influence
Had Love on me) But now he sues I fly,
I who fear Death am the only Cause I dye. --
-- Fool that I was, so sharply to reprove
His Flames first Offerings. -- Come take Vengeance, Love,
Study new Torments to afflict me, till
My Humour's Complasent made to my Will. --
-- Cursed bashfulness! -- But why would I believe
Her Dictates, she was made but to deceive
Our Sex of Pleasure, and her Blushings are
Not Types of Innocence, but Crimes infer.
Yet on this Text do all old Mothers preach;
Shun Man, be coy. -- These against Nature teach;
For when they've had all the Pleasure they can,
They say fly that deceitful Creature man;
It is Apocrypha, no Divine Truth,
Hatchd but to blast the Pleasures of our Youth.

Rodulphus, here so late! how do my Fears
Prompt me to think my Horns out vie my Ears. --
-- I'll sift my Wife; if she trips in the least,
I'll Cook her defiled Limbs for the VVorms Feast.

OUt Crocodile,
Thy words are steeped in Tears, thy Actions kill.
Did I not see him came out of my Doors
At One this morning? Curse on all such Whores.
Was not his Doublet all unbraced? and he
Even tired with Pleasure? this I did not see;
No, I was drunk, yes, or perhaps mine Eyes
Were Traitors to my sight.

May I never rise
From these chaste Knees, nor in that General Day,
If I have seen him here these Two Months.

Pray --
Yet I'll not give thee time,
I'd sink thee lower, if I could, than Hell. --
-- What have I done! murdered my Wife! my dear!
Ha! dead! what have I done! ha! Clementia: Here,
Here, my Clementia, does thy Fredrick stand,
O'rewhelm'd with Guilt and Tears. -- Give me thy hand,
I'll snatch thee from that watery Tyrant's Arm. --
-- But I'm the Tyrant, I have done the harm. --
Blind Jealousy. -- My Life I'll sacrifice,
And with my own Blood write thy Elegies. --
Ha! cheated! what means this Reprieve! her Soul
Bids me live to revenge Rodulphus foul
Slanders and Treacheries: Tnat done I'll fall
T'appease thy Ghost, wait on thy Funeral.

Heavens!

What means your fright? how is Clementia? well?
Speaks not my Friend? how does Clementia?

We -- ll.

You're strangely discomposed; pray let me know
The Cause; I hope you count me not your Foe.

Re-volving all your Wrongs, Angers just Flame
Kindled my Thoughts into Revenge. You came
And raised my Joys unto extremes, (for who
Can escape Raptures when he does see you?)
These Two contrary Passions meeting, strove,
And Anger would have overcame my Love.
And I, not able to endure their Heat,
Lost my Senses in a shivering Sweat.
This was the Cause, Sir, of my Ecstasy.

I'm glad my fright
Is past. At first I thought eternal Night
Had sabled-o're Clementia's Beams.

No, she
Is gone to Church to pray for you and me.

She's good; her early Soul seeks Heaven betime;
'Tis a steep way, who thinks to reached must climb.

The other Regiment of Foot shall march to morrow:
And on Thursday the Horse: I never saw men more
Cheerful, nor march with a greater Resolution, indeed
Confidence.

'Tis a good Omen. But what of

no murmuring I hope.

Not a whisper.

They'll forget him.

I wish they may; but now
He's returned, I advise your Grace to secure him:
He may beget Mischief.

Let's in and consult.

Not come to Court, that's worse than all the rest:
Condemned unheard? how happy then! how blessed
Is Treason and all Traitors, if they can
So easily puff down the Loyal Man!
Here comes my Friend. How does the Duke? what News,
Welpho?

I'm busy, Sir, pray excuse
Me, I can't answer all such Trifles.

How!
'Tis he sure.

Yes, but you're not General now.

Oh my Friend Arnulph!

Good Sir, don't trouble me,
I'm in great hast,

This is the highest degree
Of sin! base Raskals.
Here comes one I'm sure
Is honest.

'Tis unsafe to be secure.
How does Lodovick.

Good Sir, what do ye mean?
It is uncivil thus to intervene;
You see we are in discourse.

But that they are
Below my Passion, or my meanest Care,
I'd kick them into Atoms: But here's one
Will reconcile me; his Soul is too high-flown
To stoop to that vile thing, Ingratitude.
My Friend, what news? how does the Duke.

You're rude,
'Tis not fit Traitors should Court-Secrets know.

How -- Tell the Duke I kicked you, Sirrah, go.

Cursed Cows have but short Horns, thy Glass is run,
For thou shalt set before to morrow's Sun.

What Flies are these? they play in the Sun-shine
Of Great Men's Fortunes; but the Frost decline. --
Now to be Great is a great Infamy,
Birth is become a Cloak to Villainy.
He that for gain does scorn to sell his Love,
And in misfortunes bitter North-winds proves
As constant as the Loadstone's to that Pole;
He is the truly gallant noble Soul.
It can't be worse, I am now desperate;
Boldness perhaps may contradict my Fate;
Fortune is Valours Friend. I'm sure to have,
If not her Love, the kindness of a Grave.
Now will I know my Happiness or Doom.
Those who are plunged in Misery do find
Pity from all; there is a secret kind
Of Sympathy in Man to Wretches: none
Did ever weep on the Gallows yet alone;
As many wait on him as on the Throne;
All striving to excuse the Fact; thus he
That's legally condemned, by them's set free,
And has as many Plaudits as the Chair
Of Justice Curses which did bring him there. --
Blessed Criminal: Lovers are wrackd with care,
Pitied by none, all laugh at their despair.
Yet as some Murderers have escaped a while,
(The Devil lulls the hopes but to beguile
With greater Hell) and been condemned for what
They thought not of, (much less committed not.)
So 'tis with me: Love's Treason; but you wave
That, and condemn me for a perjured Slave;
For being false to Otho: O Heaven!
Your Justice equal is, the Cause uneven.
I do Gertrudo love; 'tis just I die:
Is it not just too that the World knows why?
Can ye not punish sin without a Lye?
To be Gertrudo's Martyr, is to go
To Heaven clad with more Glories than ye know;
But to dye branded with such Crimes as these,
How could ye think my injured Soul to appease?
For if from thence I should chance to look down,
And smell that Name stink which was once my own;
Gods! I should be transported with that Flame,
I'd leave ye to descend and own my Name;
For; let me be Hells Mark, if I don't prove,
I have not injured Honour by my Love.

If that were clear, though I will not profess
To love you more yet, I will hate you less.

'Tis all I beg, to mitigate your Hate,
Who thinks to gain your Love must Banckru ptFate.
Then see Otho's Surrender, Madam, see,
Has he not given you away to me?

H' has quitted me, my Brother cannot now
Praise his own Choice, nor can he disallow
With Justice mine; neither with Justice can
I deny him who is so brave a Man;
For since he has his Honour justifi'd,
I wrong my Love should his suit be denied;
Yet Modesty would mince it, and I fear
To speak as much as he's afraid to hear. --
My hatred's vanishd, and we are now Friends. --

Love will begin I hope where Hatred ends.

Heavens! how deformed his Vice! methinks his Face
Is monstrous, he's of some; prodigious Race;
Sure Pluto with a Succubus did join,
Get him, ill Nature with ill Shape did twine;
On purpose that he might of all be known
To be his eldest, nay his only Son.
Yet how, dull Fooll, did Friendship blind my Eyes:
How easily can Hell its shapes disguise?

What means your melancholy Friend?

Dare call
Me Friend? Thy Friendships Diabolical.
I see thou hast not lost thine Honour yet.

I may my Life, but that I'll never quit.

How dare thou then my Sister Court, and prove
False to Otho.

Can any resist Love?

That's no Excuse; none must against Honour Sin,
You might have loved her, and not injured him;
Silenced your Flames, sown your Tears in the Sands.

Honour too weak is when Love Countermands.

Love's but an humorous Itch, Honour's Divine;

The Gods Love is so too: and so is mine.

They break not Friendships Vows to purchase Love,
Thine is but Persidy disguised in Love.

Where Love does Rule, all must obey his Laws,
Or Traitors be, blame not the Effect but Cause.

He who does Sin, himself's the very Cause,
And must be punished for it by Human Laws,
And by Divine; the Devil does entice,
But he must pay for it who commits the Vice:
'Tis thou hast Honour broke, and Friendship too,
If Love did cause it I'll kill the Cause in you.

Hold -- one word more -- How rash is Jealousy,
Unjust and Barbarons!

To save, their Lives what will not Cowards say,
Did I not hear thy Perfidy? away
Impostor, thou hast Honour slain, I come
To Sacrifice thee on her mournful Tomb.
Pardon, Sir, this rude Office; I protest
I do the Dukes Commands with great regret:
'Tis his Pleasure that you and that Noble
Stranger be secured.

How saucy Rascal,
Let's turn our Points, Sir, and these Sheep will fly.

Hold, 'tis my Soveraign's Will, we must obey.

He has writ to be heard, I can't deny
That Justice, 'tis the greatest Tyranny.

No, Sir, 'tis Mercy; if he Pleads he'll prove
Himself a Traitor; is it not then Love?
Not only to forgive, but to conceal
Faults.

The vulgar will say h'has none; to reveal
Thus my Kindness to him will hate create
In them to me, they'll say I've edged his Fate.

Is't fit that Kings should fear their Subjects Frown?
The pampered Jade tumbles his Rider down.
Will you, to gratify the Vulgar, show
The World your own Blood is Corrupted? No,
Let them surmise; Kings should move in a Sphere
Will blind those Subjects Eyes dare come too near.

Were he our Son, and should a Traitor prove,
Justice should quite blot out Paternal Love.
On Thursday we will hear him.

No, no, I
Will that prevent; to morrow he shall dye.
Where art thou gone, my dear Clementia, where?
Hast thou so soon forgot thy Eustace here?
Art thou in Prison? thence wing a Sigh, send
It to thy now twice fettered Friend:
I'll Echo all thy Sighs, and Pearl thy Tears,
Poise thou thy Griefs, I'll Counterpoise my Cares;
And see which does o'er-ballance; Can there be
A difference 'twixt thine and my Misery?
Art thou dead my Clementia? Then am I --
Hence Sacrilegious Thoughts, she cannot dye,
She's only slipped int' Immortality.
Yet thence descend, and tell what Transports were
In Heaven amongst the Gods when thou came there;
Tell how the ravished Angel Quire did sing,
When thou appeard'st to Glorify their King.
-- Ha! pale and wet! my dear Clementia? how!
How were thou thus abused! Come, tell me now.
What gone! did come but to delude my Sense?
To show me Heaven, then leave me in suspense. --
If it will not defile thine Eyes and Ear,
To see thy Slave, and his Petitions hear,
Look down; and tell what Miscreant snatched thee hence,
That I may Vengeance take for his Offence.
Let me Revenge, I say, trust not to Jove,
He'll gratify that Traitor with his Love.
For had not the Villain don't, thou had been here,
And he still languishing till thou came there:
Let me revenge, Clementia, I will try
To find out Tortures beyond Cruelty.

I know you silently do murmur that
Your Services have been neglected: what
Yo've lost by Time, I pay with Interest now:
I did delay't on purpose, but to know
Your Temper, to see how you'd bear't, but you
I find even to the unjust can be true.

Where Duty binds, there no Rewards are due,
I'm largely gratified in serving you.
Who serves his Prince only for Gain, serves Gain,
And not his Prince; Madam, the Loyal Vein
Holds not one drop which it does not impart,
With all obsequiousness to cheer the Heart:
Kings are the Heart. We the Veins, must them feed,
If the Veins are Corrupt, 'tis fit they bleed.

Your Principles are honest; but yet they
Should cherish those which do good Blood conveigh;
Go with this Letter to Rodulphus, he
Has Orders to Reward thy Loyalty.
By your leave Duchess; before I farther go;
The Business, and my Reward both, I'll know. --
Perhaps it is to hang me, that I may
Not unvail her Clouded Deeds to the day.
The Duke on Thursday will his Nephew hear,
How sooty we, how snowy he'll appear!
To morrow murder him; the next night I
Will give the Duke a Posset; he shall dye.
Then will our Loves mount by their fall, all hate
Cease. Let the Messenger have the same Fate.
Indeed! 'tis well -- I'll do it -- If it does hit,
They both shall dye, and I'll be Treasurer yet.

My Regiment is yours

My Troop

I do
Acknowledge, Sir, no General but you.

The Army is all yours, except those few
Peacock plumb'd-upstart-Officers, whom you
Can frown to Dust.

Why will your Honour Cloud
Your self.

We'll cry for Justice, cry aloud;
Not with a Female Tone, but with a Voice,
Shall make Rodulphus tremble at the noise.

If you will give the word, we'll make the World
Look pale, it shall be to a Chaos hurled;
And even then your Word can all revive.
And make it in due method, once more live.
Why will you be contemned? when with a Breath
Of Wrath, you rival may, nay, conquer Death.

O how exactly wicked's the World grown!
They'd court even Angels to Rebellion. --
These Tempters I'll discard; Treason will find
Too many ways alone to attack the Mind. --
My Friends, I thank your Valour and your Love;
But yet I'll find a milder way to prove
My Honour was never stained; who'd purchase Fame
With the sweet Treasure of a loyal Name?
Go home and check your Giant Thoughts. I will,
As I have always, think ye my Friends still.
Those are rough Men; I thought Fred'rick had been
More honest or more wise, than to be seen
A Champion for Disloyalty; I fear
Your Smiles on me are Counterfeits, not clea^;
For this I know (whatever he may pretend)
He who'd destroy his King, would kill his Friend.

Eustace is too severe; I did not mean
To include the good Duke in this Bloody Scene;
My thirsty Passion at Rodulphus drove;
If, whilst my just Revenge with my Anger strove,
I dropped some Words might Treason Countenance,
Pardon't; Religion was lost in a Trance;
And whilst my Heart strove to be just, my Tongue
(Grief stifling Reason) did my just Thoughts wrong.
Yet had thou Eustace the same Cause, I think
'T would force thy Well-built Loyalty to sink.
Hear then (my Griefs are keen, they'll pierce thy Heart;
Friends do in Joys or Woes bear equal part)
Summon Religion to endure this Blow,
Thou who hat'st Treason, wilt prove Traitor now.
Rodulphus my Clementia did abuse.

Ha! sdeath!

I thought you'd startle at the News;
That Traitor told the Duke that she and you
Had exchanged Hearts; she all your Treasons knew.
And now she's lost, have I not cause to fear
That Dog has trapp'd her, and they are wracking her?

-- Hence Coward Loyalty: O Heaven, O Hell,
I you invoke; Justice and Plagues pour down
On her Black Murderers, on Lorain's Crown,
Or bless us, show us here Clementia's well. --
-- They are dull: O Anger! O Revenge! O Spite!
(More Gods than they) blind with eternal night;
That puppet Prince, that earthen God, who shows
No Symptom's of a King, but only those
The Prince of Torment's known by: 'tis fit he
Who is so like him should Hell's Vice-Roy be --
Call the Officers; sound a Charge; sound it home.
O here they are; thanks noble Friends, come, come,
Come follow me, follow your Leader, Boys,
We'll drown the Thunder with our Cannons noise,
-- But he's my Prince; -- Love and Revenge must rest
Satisfied; our Lives are in our Kings Breasts:
If they will be unjust, we must submit;
Heaven sees, and that alone can punish it.
Then pardon, Loyalty, this Crime; who can
Be silent now, is less, or more, than Man.
Rodulphus though by this Right hand shall die,
Though for that Act I lost Eternity.

I know my Lord, you that think I have been
An Actor in this Tragedy of Sin.
But when great-bellyed Time is brought a-bed,
Bald truth will take that Scandal off my head.

O impudenee!

If I can't be believed,
Let that. I hope you are now undeceived.

I never loathed my Bonds till now; were I
But at liberty to scourge that wretch Rodulphus,
I'd smile on Death.

My Lord, you are at liberty: I so much hate
Rodulphus's Treachery, I'll wing his Fate:
Appoint your time, I'll wait on you and let
You forth the private way. Eust. Thanks good Sebastion.
But what's to be done.

I will a Letter frame
(For I can counterfeit the Duchess Name)
Unto Rodulpus; wherein he shall be
Commanded to wait on her at Seven this night
In the Garden, and bring Godfry and Thierrie
With him; there you may punish them all, they'll
Have only their walking Swords with them.
Thus will you vindicate your self, and prove
Them greatest Traitors who've professed most Love.

Yet let them bring their fighting Swords, I hate
To trepan even Traitors to their Fate:
We Three alone will meet them, there's no odds
But this, they fight against, we with the Gods.
The greatest sign of an heroic mind,
Is to die nobly when our death's designed.

Thus do I bring them all unto their Graves.
They who'd be great in this World must be Knaves.

Give it the Duke with your own Hands; make hast.
How Princes are abused! how Truth's down-fac'd!

We'll not fail to wait upon her Grace.

So thou,
Ordained the Priest, shalt be the Offering now.

The Duchess intends to poison you with a Posset this night.


-- Pish, pish.


Well met Rodulphus.

Not so Well I fear;
What of the Devil make these Fellows here --

Start not; We're Friends, there is the Duchess hand.
Dost see me, Dog? Execute her Command.
Can thou read, Hell-hound?

Yes.

yet do not look
That thou shalt ever be saved by the Book;
'Tis past the Clergy's Power; such Crimes as these --
Heaven it self cannot pardon.

To appease
The injured Ghost of my Clementia; see
Her Fredrick comes to be revenged on thee.

No, that's my Duty. --

Come bravely then, come all;
I'm pleased to see that others with me fall.

My Crimes out-ballance his; sin is a load
Lies heavy when stern Justice cries for Blood.
Eustace, thou can not escape. --
-- Alive yet?

Kill him some Friend.

Thanks honest Albert.


Death o'my Soul! my Lord and Master dead!

All slain! See Eustace how Heaven strikes Traitors. Do ye see that Hand?


Tis mine.

There you invite Otho to invade me.

He desired my Sister for a Wife; and I, considering 'twould conclude a Peace,
did incline to it, and Writ him that Invitation; it being against her
Inclinations to marry one she had never seen. By my now expiring Soul 'tis
true; there's his Letter to me.


-- How black's Ingratitude! I loath my Deeds:
Pardon't; my Soul more than my Body Bleeds --

You never courted the Duchess to Vanity?

No, by all the Gods, that Letter will assure you.

All my Joys are consumptive. How pale they're grown? Be not so lavish, every
drop's my own.


Such Cordials even with rough Hell can strive,
Quite nonplus Fate, and make a dead-man live.
Death is too weak when in thine Arms I twine;
I grow Immortal by thus being thine.
If your Grace is not satisfied, I can clear all your Doubts. When Conradine
knew Gertrudo's hatred to him was impregnable, he sent word to the Duke of
Sohawden, that he was murdered by your directions, knowing he should thereby
Create a War: then putting himself into a disguise, feigns a Letter from his
Brother Otho to Eustace; wherein he asks his Sister for his Wife, upon
Conditions of Peace, as you see, and names himself Ferdinando; who instead of
courting her for Otho, courts for himself: If Gertrudo had still been obdurate
to all my Stratagems, then the Duke of Schawden should have mediated for me;
For I am that unfortunate (supposed happy Conradine.)


Gozelo, go to the Duke my Uncle, and relate this sad Story; tell him the last
Whispers of my departing Soul, were, that he would not injure this good Prince
by any Acts of Hostility: Since the Cause is taken away let the Effect cease.
Farewell my Gertrudo. --

Was any so tormented here on Earth;
My Life is dead, and thence my Grief takes birth.
To suffer pain after death's Hell, thus I
Am dead, and yet tormented I can't die.
What shall I ask, Great God's? what shall I crave?
O give me back my Life, or. give a Grave.

Tell me, Rodulphus, did Clementia stain
My Bed with thee? speak truly; death speaks plain.

No, she was chaste.

Finish thy Conquest death,
For fear I poison the world with my Breath.
I slew Clementia, give me no reprieve,
'Twould be the greatest torment now to live. --

Live! who can! her death was all Mankind's Tomb;
Life died with her. Blessed Soul I come, I come, --

How monstrous is Libussa grown! I see
With melting Eyes her gross deformity.
Ah cruel Aunt, but more hard-hearted Wise,
At once to strike his Honour and my Life.

Nay, do not rail before you know 'tis true;
I'm not so great a Churl, there's some for you.
Rodulphus come; thu^ ha^d in hand we'll go
Either to Joys above, or Joys below:
No matter which; in either we shall find
Eternal Joys when thus our Loves are twined.
When all our Plots are crossed here, every Breath
Is redious, there's no Blessing left but Death. --

I triumph now, Malice could wish no more,
For since they are dead, I die the Conqueror.
And though I could not the besieged Crown take,
Be this my Monument, I made it shake. --

What a Blow's here! But why did Vengeance strike
The Good with the Unjust? must all fare alike?
Is Justice blind? and cannot Vengeance see?
But shoots at this or that, at him or me?
Because Heaven's alarm'd with Sins thundering call,
Does that hurl Darts, and cares not where they fall?
Must Eustace die because Rodulphus's Fault
And Libussa's threatened Heaven with an Assault?
Cowards to bring two Enemies to their ends
Would hazard more than twenty of their Friends.
Is Heaven turned dastard? or were their Sins so great
They could not them without such loss defeat?
'Twas none of these that made them snach thee hence,
But Love would not Delay thy Recompense.
Blessed Soul; when after Ages read thy Story,
The Eye of Faith will dazzle at its Glory.

Kind Gentlemen, APplaud our Play, and take these Prayers among yet
May neither Wine nor Women ever wrong ye.
When you get Wives, may they be Chaste and Fair;
Or if they be not, may you think they are:
In the mean time send ye handsome Wenches.
And when with Comb in Hand you mount the Benches,
May you rise just in such a Lady's Eye,
As may applaud that active Gallantry.
May you never want the Joys of Love and Wealth,
Unspotted Honour, and unphysick'd Health.
In spite o'th Art, may you Drink Wine that's lusty:
And when the want of Money makes you musty,
May your kind Mistresses and Taylors trust ye.

