THE COMMITTEE, A COMEDY. Written by the Honourable Sir ROBERT HOWARD.

LONDON, Printed for Henry Herringman, and are to be Sold by R. Bentley, J.
Tonson, F. Saunders, and T. Bennet. M DC XCII.

SCENE LONDON.

TO cheat the most Judicious Eyes, there be
Ways in all Trades, but this of Poetry:
Your Tradesman shows his Ware by some false Light,
To hide the Faults, and slightness from your Sight.
Nay, though 'tis full of Bracks, he'll boldly swear
'Tis excellent, and so help off his Ware.
He'll rule your Judgment by his Confidence,
Which in a Poet you'd call Impudence;
Nay, if the World afford the like again,
He swears he'll give it you for nothing then:
Those are words too a Poet dares not say;
Let it be good or bad, you're sure to pay.
-- Would 'twere a pen'worth; -- but in this you are
Abler to judge than he that made the Ware:
However his design was well enough,
He tried to show some newer fashioned Stuff.
Not that the name Committee can be new,
That has been too well known to most of you:
But you may smile, for you have past your doom;
The Poet dares not, his is still to come.
NOW out upon it, how dusty 'tis;
All things considered, 'tis better
Travelling in the Winter; especially for us of the better sort,
That ride in Coaches; and yet to say truth, warm weather is
Both pleasant and comfortable: 'tis a thousand pities
That fair weather should do any hurt. Well said, honest
Coachman, thou hast done thy part: My Son Abel
Paid for my place at Redding, did he not?

Yes, and please you.


Well, there's something
Extraordinary to make thee drink.

By my Whip, 'tis a Groat of more
Than ordinary thinness. --
Plague on this new Gentry, how liberal they are. Farewell,
Young Mistress; farewell, Gentlemen: Pray when you come by
Redding let Toby carry you.

Why how now Mrs. Arbella?
What, sad? why what's the matter?

I am not very sad.


Nay, by my honour you need not;
If you knew as much as I. Well --
I'll tell you one thing, you are well enough, you need not fear
Who ever does; say I told you so, -- if you do not hurt your
Self: for as cunning as he is, and let him be as cunning as
He will, I can see with half an eye, that my Son Abel
Means to take care of you in your Composition, and will
Needs have you his Guest: Ruth and you shall be Bed-fellows.
I warrant that same Abel many and many a time
Will wish his Sisters place; or else his Father ne'er
Got him: though I say it, that should not say it, yet I do
Say it -- 'tis a notable Fellow. --

I am fallen into strange hands,
If they prove as busy as her tongue --

And now you talk of
This same Abel, I tell you but one thing,
I wonder that neither he nor my Husband's Honour's
Chief Clerk Obadiah, is not here ready to attend me: I
Dare warrant my Son Abel has been here two hours
Before us 'Tis the veriest Princox;
He will ever be a galloping, and
Yet he is not full one and twenty, for all his appearances:
He never stole this trick of galloping; his Father
Was just such another before him,
And would gallop with the best of 'em: he and Mistress Busie's
Husband were counted the best Horse-men in Redding, I and
Berkshire to boot. I have rode formerly behind Mr. Busy,
But in truth I cannot now endure to travel but in a Coach;
My own was at present in disorder, and so I was fain
To shift in this; but I warrant you, if his Honour, Mr. Day,
Chair-man of the honourable Committee of Sequestrations,
Should know that his Wife rode in a Stage-Coach, he
Would make the House too hot for some. -- Why, how is't
With you, Sir? what, weary of your Journey?

Her tongue will never tire --
So many, Mistress, riding in the Coach
Has a little distempered me with heat.

So many, Sir? why there were but six. --
What would you say if I should tell you,
That I was one of the eleven that travelled
At one time in one Coach?

O the Devil! I have given her a new Theme --


Why, I'll tell you -- Can you guess how 'twas?


Not I truly. But 'tis no matter, I do believe it.


Look you, thus 'twas;
There was, in the first place, my self,
And my Husband, I should have said first; but his Honour
Would have pardoned me, if he had heard me;
Mr. Busy that I told you of, and his Wife;
The Mayor of Redding, and his Wife;
And this Ruth that you see there, in one of our Laps --
But now, where do you think the rest were?

A top of the Coach sure.


Nay, I durst swear you would
Never guess -- why --
Would you think it;
I had two growing in my Belly,
Mrs. Busy one in hers, and Mrs. Mayoress of Redding
A chopping Boy, as it proved afterwards in hers;
As like the Father as if it had been spit out of his mouth;
And if he had come out of his moth, he had come
Out of as honest a Mans Mouth as any in forty Miles
Of the head of him:
For would you think it,
At the very same time when this same Ruth was sick,
It being the first time the Girl was ever coached,
The good Man Mr. Mayor,
I mean, that I spoke of,
Held his Hat for the Girl to ease her Stomach in. --
-- O are you come,
Long looked for comes at last.
What, -- you have a slow set pace,
As well as your ^ally scribble sometimes:
Did you not think it sit, that I should have found
Attendance ready for me when I alighted.

I ask your Honour's pardon; for I do
Profess unto your Ladyship I had attended sooner,
But that his young Honour, Mr. Abel,
Demurred me by his delays.

Well, Son Abel,
You must be obeyed,
And I partly, if not, guess your business;
Providing for the entertainment of one I have in my eye;
Read her and take her:
Ah, is't not so?

I have not been deficient in my care, Forsooth.


Will you never leave your Forsooths?
Art thou not ashamed
To let the Clerk carry himself better,
And show more breeding than his Master's Son?

If it please your Honour, I have some business
For your more private ear.

Very well.


What a lamentable condition has
That Gentleman been in, faith I pity him?

Are you so apt to pity men?


Yes, men that are humorsom,
As I would children that are froward;
I would not make them cry a purpose.

Well, I like his humour, I dare
Swear he's plain and honest.

Plain enough of all conscience;
Faith I'll speak to him.

Nay prithee don't, he'll think thee rude?


Why then I'll think him an Ass. --
How is't after your Journey, Sir?

Why, I am worse after it.


Do you love riding in a Coach, Sir?


No, Forsooth, nor talking after riding in a Coach.


I should be loath
To interrupt your Meditations, Sir:
We may have the fruits hereafter.

If you have, they shall break loose spite of my teeth;
This Spawn is as bad as the great Pike.

Prithee peace: Sir -- We wish you all happiness.


And quiet, good sweet Ladies, --
I like her well enough. --
Now would not I have her say any more, for fear she
Should jeer too, and spoil my good opinion;
If 'twere possible, I would think well of one woman*

Come, Mrs. Arbella, 'tis as I told you,
Abel has done it; say no more: take her by the hand, Abel.
I profess she may venture to take thee for better, for worse:
Come, Mrs. the honourable Committee will sit suddenly.
Come, let's along. Farewell, Sir.

How, the Committee ready to sit. Plague
On their Honours; for so my honoured Lady,
That was one of the eleven, was pleased to call 'em.
I had like to have come a day after the Fair:
'Tis pretty, that such as I have been, must compound
For their having been Rascals.
Well, I must go look a Lodging, and a Solicitor:
I'll find the arrantest Rogue I can too:
For, according to the old saying,
Set a Thief to catch a Thief.

Dear Blunt, well met,
When came you, Man?

Dear Careless, I did not think to have met thee
So suddenly. Lieutenant, your Servant;
I am landed just now, man.

Thou speak as if thou had been at Sea?


It's pretty well guest, I have been in a storm.


What business brought thee?


May be the same with yours:
I am come to Compound with their Honours.

That's my business too;
Why, the Committee sits suddenly?

Yes, I know it;
I heard so in the storm I told thee of.

What storm, Man?


Why, a Tempest as high as ever blew from
Woman's breath: I have rode in a Stage Coach, wedged in
With half a dozen; one of them was a Committee-man's
Wife; his Name is Day:
And she accordingly will be called,
Your Honour, and your Ladyship; with a tongue that
Wags as much faster than all other women's, as in the
Several motions of a Watch, the hand of the minute
Moves faster than that of the hours* There was her
Daughter too; but a Bastard without question;
For she had no resemblance to the rest of the notched
Rascals, and very pretty, and had wit enough
To jeer a man in prosperity to death. --
There was another Gentlewoman,
And she was handsome, nay very handsome;
But I kept her from being as sad as the rest.

Prithee, how man?


Why, she began with two or three good words,
And I desired her she would be quie^
While she was well.

Thou wei't not be so mad?


I had been mad if I had not, --
But when we came to our Journey's end, there met us two
Such formal and stately Rascals,
That yet pretended Religion,
And open Rebellion ever painted:
It was the hopes,
And guide of the honourable Family, viz.
The eldest Son,
And the chiefest Clerk-rogues --
-- -- -- -- -- -- -- And hereby hangs a tail.
This Gentlewoman I told thee
I kept civil, by desiring her to say nothing,
Is a rich Heir of one that died in the
King's Service, and left his Estate under Sequestration.
This young Chicken has this Kite snatched up,
And designs her for this her eldest Rascal.

What a dull Fellow were thou,
Not to make love, and rescue her?

I'll woo no Woman.


Would thou have them court thee?
A Soldier, and not love a Siege!
How now, who art thou?

A poor Irishman, and Christ save me, and save you all;
I prithee give me Six-pence, gad Mastero.

Six-pence? I see thou would not lose any thing
For want of asking. Here, I am pretty near,
There's a Groat for thy confidence.

By my troth it is too little.


Troth, like enough:
How long hast thou been in England?

Ever since I came hither, i'faith.


That's true; what hast thou done
Since thou came into England?

Served God and St. Patrick, and my good
Sweet King, and my good sweet Master; yes indeed.

And what dost thou do now?


Cry for them every day, upon my soul.


Why, where's thy Master?


He's dead, Mastero, and left poor Teg;
Upon my soul, he never served poor Teg so before.

Who was thy Master?


Even the good Colonel Danger.


He was my dear and noble friend.


Yes, that he was, and poor Teg's too, i'faith now.


What dost thou mean to do?


I will get a good Master, if any good Master would
Get me; I cannot tell what to do else, by my soul, that
I cannot; for I have went and gone to one Lilly's;
He lives at that house, at the end of another house,
By the May-pole-house; and tells every body by one
Star, and tother Star, what good luck they shall have;
But he could not tell nothing for poor Teg.

Why, man?


Why, 'tis done by the Stars;
And he told me there were no Stars for Irishmen:
I told him he told two or three lies upon my soul;
There were as many Stars in Ireland as in England,
And more too, that there are; and if a good Master
Cannot get me, I will run into Ireland, and see
If the Stars be not there still; and if they be,
I will come back i'faith, and beat his pate,
If he will not then tell me some good luck, and some Stars.

Poor fellow, I pity him; I fancy he's simply
Honest: Hast thou any Trade?

By, bub bub by, a Trade, a Trade! an Irishman a Trade!
An Irishman scorns a Trade, that he does; I will
Run for thee forty Miles; but I scorn to have a Trade.

Alas, poor simple fellow.


I pity him; nor can I endure to see any miserable
That can weep for my Prince, and Friend. Well, Teg, what
Say thou if I will take thee?

Why, I will say thou wilt do very well then.


Thy Master was my dear friend; were thou with
Him when he was killed?

Yes, upon my soul, that I was, and I did howl over
Him, and I asked him why he would leave poor Teg;
And i'faith I staid kissing his sweet face, till the
Rogues came upon me and took away all from me;
And I was naked till I got this Mantle, that I was:
I have never any Victuals neither, but a little Snuff.

Come, thou shalt live with me; love me
As thou did thy Master.

That I will i'faith, if thou would be good too.


Now to our business; for I came
But last night my self; and the Lieutenant and I
Were just going to seek a Solicitor.

One may serve us all; what say you, Lieutenant,
Can you furnish us?

Yes, I think I can help you to plough
With a Heifer of their own.

Now I think on it, Blunt, why did not
Thou begin with the Committee-man's Cow?

Plague on her, she lowbell'd me so,
That I thought of nothing,
But stood shrinking like a dead Lark.

But hark you, Gentlemen, there's an ill-tasting dose
To be swallowed first; there's a Covenant to be taken.

Well, what is that Covenant?
By my soul I will take it for my new Master,
If I could, that I would.

Thank thee, Teg -- A Covenant, say thou?


Well, where is that Covenant? --


We will not swear, Lieutenant.


You must have no Land then.


Then farewell Acres, and may the dirt choke them.


'Tis but being reduced to Teg's equipage;
'Twas a lucky thing to have a fellow that can
Teach one this cheap diet of Snuff.

Come, Gentlemen, we must lose no more time;
I'll carry you to my poor house, where you shall lodge:
For know, I am married to a most illustrious person,
That had a kindness for me.

Prithee, how did thou light upon this good fortune?


Why, you see there are Stars in England,
Though none in Ireland: Come, Gentlemen,
Time calls us; you shall have my story hereafter.

Plague on this Covenant.


Curse it not, 'twill prosper then.


Come, Teg, however I have a Suit of
Clothes for thee; thou shalt lay by thy Blanket
For some time: It may be thee and I may be
Reduced together to thy Country fashion.

Upon my Soul, Joy, for I will carry thee
Then into my Country too.

Why, there's the worst on it,
The best will help it self.

Welcome, sweet Duck; I profess
Thou hast brought home good Company indeed;
Money and moneys worth: if we can
But now make sure of this Heir, Mrs Arbella,
For our Son Abel.

If we can? you are ever at your (Ifs;)
You're afraid of your own shadow; I can tell you
One (if) more; that is (if) I did not bear you up,
Your heart would be down in your Breeches
At every turn: well, -- if I were gone,
There's another If for you.

I profess thou say true,
I should not know what to do indeed;
I am beholding to thy good counsel for many
Good thing; I had ne'er got Ruth
Nor her Estate into my Fingers else.

Nay, in that business too you were at
Your (Ifs:) Now you see she goes currently
For our own Daughter, and this Arbella shall be
Our Daughter too, or she shall have no Estate.

If we could but do that, Wife?


Yet again at your Ifs.


I have done, I have done; your counsel,
Good Duck; you know I depend upon that.

You may well enough, you find
The sweet on it; and to say truth, 'tis known too well,
That you relied upon it: In truth they are ready
To call me the Committe-man: they well
Perceive the weight that lies upon me, Husband.

Nay, good Duck, no chiding now,
But to your counsel.

In the first place (observe how I lay a design
In Politics) do ye mark, counterfeit me
A Letter from the King, where he shall offer you great
Matters to serve him, and his Interest under-hand.
Very good, and in it let him remember his kind
Love and Service to me: This will make them look
About 'em, and think you some body: then promise them
If they'll be true Friends to you, to live and dye
With them, and refuse all great offers, then whilst 'tis warm
Get the composition of Arbella's Estate into your own power,
Upon your design of marrying her to Abel.

Excellent.


Mark the luck on it too, their names sound alike;
Abel and Arbella, they are the same to a trisle,
It seems a providence.

Thou observe right, Duck,
Thou can see as far into a Millstone as another.

Pish, do not interrupt me.


I do not, good Duck, I do not.


You do not, and yet you do;
You put me off from the concatenation of my discourse:
Then, as I was saying, you may intimate
To your honourable Fellows, that one good turn
Deserves another. That language is understood amongst you.
I take it, ha.

Yes, yes, we use those Items often.


Well, interrupt me not.


I do not, good Wife.


You do not, and yet you do;
By this means get her composition put wholly into your hands,
And then no Abel, no Land, -- but -- in the mean time
I would have Abel do his part too.

I, I, there's a want I found it.


Yes, when I told you so before.


Why, that's true, Duck, he is too backward;
If I were in his place, and as young as I have been.

O you'd do wonders; but now I think on it,
There may be some use made of Ruth;
'Tis a notable witty Harlotry.
-- You were so, when I told you
I had thought on it first, -- let me see, it shall be so:
We'll set her to instruct Abel in the first place;
And then to incline Arbella, they are Hand and Glove;
And Women can do much with one another.

Thou hast hit upon my own thoughts. --


Pray call her in;
You thought of that too, did you not?

I will, Duck; Ruth, why, Ruth.


Your pleasure, Sir.


Nay, 'tis my Wife's desire that --


Well, if it be your Wife's, she can best tell
It her self, I suppose: do ye hear, Ruth, you may
Do a business that may not be the worse for you:
You know I use but few words.

What does she call a few? --


Look you now, as I said, to be short,
And to the matter, my Husband and I do design this
Mrs. Arbella for our Son Abel, and the young
Fellow is not forward enough you conceive, prithee give
Him a little instructions how to demean himself,
And in what manner to speak, which we call address,
To her; for Women best know what will please Women;
Then work on Arbella on the other side, work, I say,
My good Girl, no more but so: you know my custom
Is to use but few words. Much may be said in a little,
You shall not repent it.

And I say something too, Ruth.


What need you, do you not see it all
Said already to your hand, what say thou, Girl?

I shall do my best. -- I would not lose
The sport for more than I speak of. --

Go call Abel, good Girl. By bringing this
To pass Husband, we shall secure our selves
If the King should come; you'll be hanged else.

Oh good Wife, let's secure our selves
By all means, there's a wise saying, 'Tis good to have a
Shelter against every storm. I remember that.

You may well, when you heard me say it so often.


O Son Abel, do ye hear.


Pray hold your peace,
And give every body leave to tell their own tale. --
D'hear, Son Abel, I have formerly told you
That Arbella would be a good Wife for you;
A word's enough to the wise: some endeavours must
Be used, and you must not be desicient. I have spoken
To your Sister Ruth to instruct you what to say,
And how to carry your self; observe her Directions as
You'll answer the contrary; be consident, and put home.
Ha Boy, had thou but thy Mother's pate. Well,
'Tis but a folly to talk of that that cannot be;
Be sure you follow your Sister's directions.

Be sure, Boy. --
Well said Duck, I say.

Now, Brother Abel.


Now, Sister Ruth?


Hitherto he observes me punctually,
Have you a Months mind to this
Gentlewoman, Mistress Arbella?

I have not known her a Week yet.


O cry you mercy, good Brother Abel.
Well, to begin then, You must alter your posture,
And by your grave and high demeanour make your self
Appear a hole above Obadiah; lest your Mistress
Should take you for such another scribble scrabble as he is,
And always hold up your head as if it were
Bolstered up with high matters, your hands joined
Flat together, projecting a little beyond the rest of your
Body as ready to separate when you begin to open.

Must I go apace or softly.


O gravely by all means, as if you were loaded
With weighty considerations so. -- Very well.
Now to apply our prescription: Suppose now that I
Were your Mistress Arbella, and meet you by
Accident; keep your posture so, and when you come
Just to me, start like a Horse that has spied
Something on one side of him, and give a little gird
Out of the way on a sudden; declaring that you
Did not see her before, by reason of your deep
Contemplations: then you must speak, let's hear.

God save you, Mistress.


O sie Man, you should begin thus; Pardon,
Mistress, my profound Contemplations, in which I was so
Buried that I did not see you: And then as she answers proceed.
I know what she'll say, I am so used to her.

This will do well if I forget it not.


Well, try once.


Pardon, Mistress, my profound Contemplations,
In which I was so hid, that you could not see me.

Better sport than I expected.
Very well done, you're perfect: then she will answer,
Sir, I suppose you are so busied with State-affairs,
That it may well hinder you from taking notice
Of any thing below them.

No forsooth, I have some profound
Contemplations, but no State-Affairs.

O sie, Man, you must confess, that the weighty
Affairs of State lie heavy upon you; but 'tis a burden
You must bear, and then shrug your shoulders.

Must I say so, I am afraid my Mother will be angry,
For she takes all the State-matters upon her self.

Pish, did she not charge you to be ruled by me;
Why, Man, Arbella will never have you;
If she be not made believe you can do great matters
With Parliament Men, and Committee Men;
How should she hope for any good
By you else in her composition.

I apprehend you now, I shall observe.


'Tis well at this time, I'll say no more;
Put your self in your posture so:
Now go look your Mistress;
I'll warrant you the Town's our own.

I go.


Now I have fixed him, not to go off
Till he discharges on his Mistress. I could burst with laughing.

What dost thou laugh at, Ruth?


Did thou meet my Brother Abel?


No.


If thou had met him right,
He had played at hard head with thee.

What dost thou mean;


Why, I have been teaching him to woo,
By command of my Superiors, and have instructed
Him to hold up his head so high, that of necessity he must
Run against every thing that comes in his way.

Who is he to woo?


Even thy own sweet self.


Out upon him.


Nay, thou wilt be rarely courted;
I'll not spoil the sport by telling thee any
Thing beforehand; they have sent to Lilly,
And his learning being built upon knowing what most
People would have him say:
He has told them for a certain, That Abel shall
Have a rich Heir, and that must be you.

Must be.


Yes, Committee-Men can compel more than Stars.


I fear this too late;
You are their Daughter, Ruth?

I deny that.


How?


Wonder not that I begin thus freely with you,
'Tis to invite your confidence in me.

You amaze me.


Pray do not wonder, nor suspect, --
When my Father, Sir Basil Throughgood, died, I was
Very young, not above two years old: 'tis too long
To tell you how this Rascal, being a Trustee,
Caught me and my Estate, being the sole Heir unto my
Father, into his gripes; and now for some years
Has confirmed his unjust power by the unlawful
Power of the times: I fear they have designs as bad as
This on you: You see I have no reserve, and endeavour
To be thought worthy of your friendship

I embrace it with as much clearness,
Let us love and assist one another. --
Would they marry me to this their first-born Puppy?

No doubt, or keep your composition from you.


'Twas my ill fortune to fall into such hands,
Foolishly enticed by fair words and
Large promises of assistance.

Peace.


Mrs. Ruth, my Master is demanding your company,
Together, and not singly, with Mrs. Arbella;
You will find them in the Parlour:
The Committee being ready to sit,
Calls upon my care and circumspection to set in order
The weighty matters of State,
For their wise and honourable inspection.

We come; come, dear Arbella, never be perplexed,
Cheerful Spirits are the best Bladders to swim with:
If thou art sad, the weight will sink thee:
Be secret, and still know me for no other than what
I seem to be, their Daughter. Another time
Thou shalt know all particulars of my strange story.

Come, Wench, they cannot bring us to compound
For our humours; they shall be free still.

In Faith my sweet Master has sent me to a
Rascal, now that he has; I will go tell him so too:
He asked me why he could not send one
That could speak English. Upon my soul, I was going
To give him an Irish knock; the Devil's in them all,
They will not talk with me; I will go near to
Knock this man's pate, and that man, Lilly's
Pate too, -- that I will: I will make them
Prate to me, that I will. How now,
What Noises are that? --

New Books, new Books, a desperate Plot
And Engagement of the bloody Cavaliers:
Mr. Saltmarsh's Alarm to the Nation, after having
Been three days dead, Mercurius Britannicus, c.

How's that? now they cannot live in Ireland
After they are dead three days!

Mercurius Britannicus, or the Weekly Post,
Or, The Solemn League and Covenant.

What is that you say?
Is it the Covenant, have you that?

Yes, what then, Sir?


Which is that Covenant?


Why, this is the Covenant.


Well, I must take that Covenant.


You take my Commodities?


I must take that Covenant, upon my soul now, that I must.


Stand off, Sir, or I'll set you further.


Well, upon my soul, now I will take
That Covenant for my Master.

Your Master must pay me for it then?


I'faith now, they will make him pay for it
After I have taken it for him.

What a Devil does the fellow mean?


You will make me stay too long, that you will;
Look you now, I will knock you down upon the ground,
If you will not let me take it?

Stand off, Sirrah.


I'faith I will take it now.


What a Devil ails this fellow?
He did not come to rob me certainly,
For he has not taken above two
Pennyworth of lamentable Ware away;
But I feel the Rascal's fingers; I may light
Upon my wild Irish again, and if I do,
I will fix him with some Catchpoles that shall
Be worse than his own Country Bogs.

And what say you, noble Colonels, how and how
Do ye like my Lady? I gave her the Title of Illustrious
From those Illustrious Commodities which she deals in,
Hot Water, and Tobacco.

Prithee how come thou to think of Marrying?


Why, that which hinders men from those
Venereal Conditions, prompted me to Matrimony,
Hunger and Cold, Colonel.

Which you destroyed with a fat Woman,
Strong Water, and stinking Tobacco.

No, faith, the Woman conduced but little,
But the rest could not be purchased without.

She's beholding to you.


For all your mocking she had been ruined
If it had not been for me.

Prithee make but that good?


With ease, Sir, why look you, -- you must
Know she was always a most violent Cavalier,
And of a most ready and large Faith; abundance of
Rascals had found her soft place, and perpetually
Would bring her News, news of all prizes,
They would tell her news from half a Crown, to a
Gill of hot Water, or a Pipe of the worst Mundungo:
I have observed their usual rates; they would borrow
Half a Crown upon a story of five thousand Men up
In the North; a shilling upon a Towns revolting,
Six pence upon a small Castle, and consume hot Water
And Tobacco, whilst they were telling news of Arms,
Conveyed into several parts, and Ammunition hid
In Cellars; that at the last, if I had not married,
And blown off these flies, she had been absolutely consumed.

Well, Lieutenant, we are beholding to you
For these hints; we may be reduced to as bad: See
Where Teg comes. Goodness, how he smiles.
Why so merry, Teg?

I have done one thing for thee now, that I have indeed.


What hast thou done, Man?


I have taken the Covenant for thee,
That I have upon my Soul.

Where had it thou?


Had it thou; I threw a Fellow down, that I did,
And took it away for thy sweet sake; here it is now.

Was there ever such a fancy? why did thou think
This was the way to take the Covenant?

Ay, upon my Soul that it is; look you there now,
Have not I taken it; is not this the Covenant?
Tell me that then I prithee.

I am pleased yet,
With the poor Fellows mistaken kindness;
I dare warrant him honest to the best of his understanding.

This Fellow I prophecy will bring me into
Many troubles by his mistakes: I must send him on
No Errand but, How do ye; and to such as I would have
No answer from again: -- Yet his simple honesty
Prevails with me, I cannot part with him.

Come, Gentlemen, some calls; how now, who's this?


I am a Rogue if I have not seen a Picture
In hangings walk as fast.

'Slife Man, this is that good Man of the Committee
Family that I told thee of, the very Clerk;
How the Rogue's loaded with Papers; Those are
The winding sheets to many a poor Gentleman's Estate:
'Twere a good deed to burn them all.

Why, thou art not mad, art? well met Sir;
Pray do not you belong to the Committee of Sequestrations?

I do belong to that honourable Committee,
Who are now ready to sit for the bringing on the work.

O Plague, what work, Ras --


Prithee be quiet, Man; are they to sit presently?


As soon as I can get ready, my presence being material.


What, were thou mad; would thou have beaten
The Clerk when thou were going to compound
With the Rascals his Masters.

The sight of any of the Villains stirs me.


Come, Colonels, there's no tristing;
Let's make haste, and prepare your business, let's not lose
This sitting, come along, along.

What's the meaning of this, I'll try to steal by him.


Pardon, Mistress, my profound Contemplations,
In which I was so hid that you could not see me.

This is a set Form, -- they allow it
In every thing but their Prayers.

Now you should speak, Forsooth.


Ruth, I have found you;
But I'll spoil the Dialogue.
-- What should I say, Sir?

What you please, Forsooth.


Why, truly, Sir, 'tis as you say; I did not see you.


This is lucky.


No, Forsooth, 'twas I that was not to see you.


Why, Sir, would your Mother be angry if you should?


No, no, quite contrary, -- I'll tell you that presently;
But first I must say, that the weighty affairs lie
Heavy upon my Neck and Shoulders.

Would he were tied Neck and Heels?
This is a notable Wench; look where the Rascal peeps too;
If I should beckon to her she'd take no notice;
She's resolved not to relieve me.

Something I can do, and that with some body;
That is, with those that are some bodies.

Whist, whist,
Prithee have some pity?
O unmerciful Girl.

I know Parliament-men, and Sequestrators;
I know Committee-men, and Committee-men know me.

You have great acquaintance, Sir?


Yes, they ask my opinion sometimes.


What weather 'twill be; have you any skill, Sir?


When the weather is not good, we hold a Fast.


And then it alters.


Assuredly.


In good time -- no mercy, Wench.


Our profound Contemplations
Are caused by the constervation of our Spirits
For the Nations good, we are in labour.

And I want a deliverance. Hark ye, Ruth,
Take off your Dog, or I'll turn Bear indeed.

I dare not, my Mother will be angry.


O hang you.


You shall perceive that I have some power,
If you please to --

O I am pleased! Sir, that you should have power;
I must look out my Hoods and Scarfs, Sir, 'tis a most time to go.

If it were not for the weighty matters of State
Which lie upon my shoulders, my self would look them.

O by no means, Sir, 'tis below your greatness:
Some luck yet; she never came seasonably before.

Why how now, Abel got so close to Mrs. Arbella,
So close indeed; nay then I smell something:
Well, Mr. Abel, you have been so used to secrecy
In Council and weighty matters, that you have it
At your Fingers ends: Nay, look ye Mistress, look ye,
Look ye; mark Abel's Eyes: ah, there be looks.
Ruth thou art a good Girl, I find Abel has got ground.

I forbore to come in, till I saw your honour
First enter; but I have o'r heard all.

And how has Abel behaved himself, Wench, ha?


O beyond expectation: if it were lawful, I'd undertake
He'd make nothing to get as many Women's good
Wills as he speaks to; he'll not need much teaching,
You may turn him loose.

O this plaguy Wench!


Say thou so Girl, it shall be something
In thy way; a new Gown, or so, it may be a better penny:
Well said, Abel, I say, I did think thou would come
Out with a piece of thy Mothers at last: --
But I had forgot, the Committee are near upon sitting.
Ha, Mrs. you are crafty; you have made your
Composition before-hand. Ah, this Abel's as bad
As a whole Committee: Take that Item from me;
Come, make haste, call the Coach, Abel; well said, Abel, I say.

We'll fetch our things and follow you.
Now Wench, can thou ever hope to be forgiven:

Why, what's the matter?


The matter; coud'st thou be so unmerciful,
To see me practiced on, and pelted at, by a Blunderbuss
Charged with nothing but proofs, weighty affairs,
Spirit, profound Contemplation, and such like.

Why, I was afraid to interrupt you; I thought
It convenient to give you what time I could,
To make his young honour your Friend.

I am beholding to you, I may cry quittance.


But did you mark Abel's Eyes?
Ah, there were looks!

Nay, prithee give off, my hour's approaching,
And I cannot be heartily merry till it be past:
Come, let's fetch our things,
Her Ladyships Honour will stay for us.

I'll warrant ye my Brethren, Abel is not in order yet,
He's brushing a Hat almost a quarter of an hour,
And as long a driving the lint from his black Clothes,
With his wet Thumb.

Come, prithee hold thy peace,
I shall laugh in's Face else when I see him come along:
Now for an old Shoe.

Shall I read your Honours last Order, and give you
The account of what you last debated?

I first crave your favours to communicate an
Important matter to this honourable Board, in which I shall
Discover unto you my own sincerity
And zeal to the good Cause.

Proceed, Sir.

The business is contained in this Letter, 'tis from
No less a Man than the King; and 'tis to me, as simple as I sit
Here: Is it your pleasures that our Clerk should read it?

Yes, pray give it him.

Mr. Day, We have received good intelligence of your great worth,
And ability, especially in State-matters; and therefore thought
Fit to offer you any preferment, or honour, that you shall desire,
If you will become my entire Friend: Pray remember my
Love and Service to your discreet Wife, and acquaint her
With this; whose wisdom I hear is great: so recommending
This to her and your wise consideration, I remain
Your Friend, C. K.


C. K.

I, that's for the King.

I suspect who brought you this Letter.

O fie upon it, my Wife forgot that particular. --
Why, a Fellow left it for me, and shrunk away when he had
Done, I warrant you he was afraid I should have laid hold
On him: You see Brethren what I reject; but I doubt not
But to receive my reward: and I have now a business
To offer, which in some measure may afford you an occasion.

This Letter was counterfeited certainly.

But first be pleased to read your last order.

What does he mean that concerns me?

The order is, that the Composition arising out of
Mr. Lashley's Estate, be and hereby is invested and allow'd to
The honourable Mr. Nathaniel Catch,
For and in respect of his sufferings and good service.

It is meet, very meet, we are bound
In duty to strengthen our selves against the day of trouble,
When the common Enemy shall endeavour to raise
Commotions in the Land,
And disturb our new built Zion.

Then I'll say nothing, but close with him, we must
Wink at one another; I receive your sense
Of my services with a zealous kindness. Now, Mr. Day,
I pray you propose your business.

I desire this honourable Board to understand,
That my Wife being at Redding, and to come up in
The Stage Coach: It happened that one Mrs. Arbella,
A rich Heir of one of the Cavalier Party, came up also in,
The same Coach; her Father being newly dead, and her
Estate before being under Sequestration: My Wife, who
Has a notable pate of her own; you all know her;
Presently cast about to get her for my Son Abel;
And accordingly invited her to my House; where, though
Time was but short, yet my Son Abel made use of it:
They are without, as I suppose; but
Before we call them in, I pray let us handle
Such other matters as are before us.

Let us hear then what Estates besides
Lies before us, that we may see how large a
Field we have to walk in.

Read.

One of your last Debates was upon the Plea
Of an Infant, whose Estate is under Sequestration.

And sit to be kept so till he comes of Age,
And may answer for himself; that he may not
Be in possession of the Land till he can promise
He will not turn to the Enemy.

Here is another of almost the like nature;
An Estate before your Honours under Sequestration:
The Plea is, That the Party died without any --
For taking up Arms; but in his Opinion for the King:
He has left his Widow with Child, which will
Be the Heir; and his Trustees complain of wrong,
And claim the Estate.

Well, the Father in his Opinion was a Cavalier.

So it is given in.


Nay, 'twas so I warrant you, and there's a young
Cavalier in his Widows Belly; I warrant you that too;
For the perverse Generation increases; I move
Therefore that their two Estates may remain in the hands
Of our Brethren here, and Fellow Labourers,
Mr. Joseph Blemish, and Mr. Jonathan Headstrong,
And Mr. Ezekiel Scrape, and they to be accountable
At our pleasures; whereby they may have a godly
Opportunity of doing good for themselves.

Order it, order it.

Since it is your pleasures, we are content
To take the burden upon us, and be
Stewards to the Nation.

Now verily it seems to me
That the work goes forward, when Brethren
Hold together in Unity.

Well, if we have now finished, give me leave
To tell you, my Wife is without, together with
The Gentlewoman that is to compound: She will
Needs have a Finger in the Pie.

I profess we are to blame to let Mrs. Day wait so long.

We may not neglect the public for private
Respects. I hope Brethren, that you please to cast the
Favour of your Countenances upon Abel.

You wrong us to doubt it, Brother Day.
Call in the Compounders.

Come, Duck, I have told the honourable Committee
That you are one that will needs endeavour
To do good for this Gentlewoman.

We are glad, Mrs. Day, that any occasion brings you hither.

I thank your honours. I am desirous of doing
Good, which I know is always acceptable in your Eyes.

Come on Son Abel, what have you to say?


I come unto your Honours, full of profound
Contemplations for this Gentlewoman.

'Slife, he's at's lessen, Wench.


Peace, which Whelp opens next?
O the Wolf is going to bark.

May it please your Honours, I shall presume
To inform you, that my Son Abel has settled his affections
On this Gentlewoman, and desires your Honours favour
To be shown unto him in her Composition.

Say you so, Mrs. Day? why the Committee have taken
It into their serious, and pious consideration; together
With Mr. Day's good service, upon some knowledge
That is not fit to communicate.

That was the Letter I invented.


And the composition of this Gentlewoman is consigned
To Mr. Day, that is, I suppose, to Mr. Abel, and so consequently
To the Gentlewoman. You may be thankful, Mistress,
For such good fortune, your Estate's discharged,
Mr. Day shall have the discharge.

O dam the Vultures!


Peace Man.


I am willing to be thankful when I understand the
Benefit. I have no reason to compound for what's my own;
But if I must, if a Woman can be a Delinquent,
I desire to know my public censure,
Not be left in private hands.

Be contented, Gentlewoman, the Committee does this
In favour of you; we understand how easily you
Can satisfy Mr. Abel; you may, if you please, by Mrs. Day.

And then good night to all.


How, Gentlemen! are you private marriage Jobbers,
Do ye make markets for one another?

How's this Gentlewoman?


A brave noble Creature.


Thou art smitten, Blunt; that other Female too,
Methinks shoots fire this way.

I desire your Honours to pardon
Her incessant words; perhaps she doth not imagine
The good that is intended her?

Gentlewoman, the Committee for Mrs. Day's sake
Passes by your expressions; you may spare your pains,
You have the Committees resolution, you may
Be your own Enemy if you will.

My own Enemy.


Prithee peace, 'tis to no purpose to wrangle here;
We must use other ways.

Come on, Gentlemen, what's your case?


Arbella, there's the down-right Cavalier
That came up in the Coach with us.
-- On my Life there's a sprightly Gentleman with him.

Our business is to compound for our Estates.
Of which here are the particulars,
Which will agree with your own Survey.

The particulars are right.


Well, Gentlemen, the rule is two years purchase,
The first payment down, the other at six months end,
And the Estate to secure it.

Can you afford it no cheaper?


'Tis our rule.


Very well, 'tis but selling the rest to pay this,
And our more lawful debts.

But, Gentlemen, before you are admitted,
You are to take the Covenant;
You have not taken it yet, have you.

No.


Upon my Soul but he has now; I took it for him,
And he has taken it from me, that he has.

What sport are we now like to have?


What Fellow's that?


A poor simple Fellow that serves me. Peace, Teg.


Let them not prate so then.


Well, Gentlemen, it remains
Whether you'll take the Covenant?

This is strange, and differs from your own Principle,
To impose on other Men's Consciences.

Pish, we are not here to dispute, we act
According to our instructions, and we cannot admit any
To compound without taking it; therefore your answer.

Why was it for no matter then that I have taken
The Covenant. You there, Mr. Committee,
Do you hear that now?

No, we will not take it, much good may it do them
That have swallows large enough;
'Twill work one day in their Stomachs.

The day may come, when those that suffer for their
Consciences and honour may be rewarded.

I, I, you make an Idol of that honour.


Our Worships then are different, you make that
Your Idol which brings your Interest;
We can obey that which bids us lose it.

Brave Gentlemen.


I stare at 'em till my Eyes ache.


Gentlemen, you are men of dangerous Spirits,
Know, we must keep our rules, and instructions, lest we
Lose what providence hath put into our hands.

Providence, such as Thieves rob by?


What's that, Sir, Sir, you are too bold?


Why in good sooth you may give losers
Leave to speak; I hope your Honours out of your bowels of
Compassion, will permit us to take over our departing Acres.

It is well you are so merry.


O, ever whilst you live, clear souls make light hearts;
Faith, would I might ask one question?

Swear not then.


Thou shalt not covet thy Neighbours Goods;
There's a Rowland for your Oliver; my question is only,
Which of all you is to have our Estates: or will you
Make Traitors of them, draw 'em, and quarter them.

You grow abusive.


No, no, 'tis only to entreat the honourable persons
That will be pleased to be our House-keepers, to keep them
In good Reparations; we may take possession again
Without the help of the Covenant.

You will think better on it, and take this Covenant.


We will be as rotten first as their hearts
That invented it.

'Slife, Arbella, we will have these two men;
There are not two such again, to be had for love nor money.

Well, Gentlemen, your follies light upon your
Own heads; we have no more to say.

Why then hoist Sails for a new World:
D'hear, Blunt, what Gentlewoman is that?

'Tis their witty Daughter I told thee of.


I'll go to speak to 'em, I'd fain convert
That pretty Covenanter.

Nay, prithee let's go.


Lady, I hope you'll have that good fortune,
Not to be troubled with the Covenant.

If they do, I'll not take it.


Brave Lady, I must love her against my will.


For you, pretty one, I hope your Portion will
Be enlarged by our Misfortunes; remember your benefactors.

If I had all your Estates,
I could afford you as good a thing.

Without taking the Covenant?


Yes, but I would invent another Oath.


Upon your Lips.


Nay, I am not bound to discover.


Prithee come, is this a time to spend in fooling?


Now have I forgot every thing.


Come, let's go.

Gentlemen, void the Room.

Sure 'tis impossible that Kite
Should get that pretty Merlin.

Come, prithee let's go; these Muck-worms will have
Earth enough to stop their mouths with one day.

Pray use our Estates husband-like, and so our
Most honourable Bailiffs, farewell.

You are rude: Door-keeper, put 'em forth there.


Come forth, ye there; this is not a place for such as you.


Ye are a Rascal, that you are now.


And please your Honours, this profane Irish-man swore
An Oath at the door, even now, when I
Would have put him out.

Let him pay for it.


Here, you must pay, or lye by the heels.


What must I pay, by the heels? I will not pay by
^ h^s, that I will not, upon my soul

Here, here's a Shilling for thee, be quiet. --


Well, I have not cursed you now, that I have not:
^ ^ I had cursed then?

That had been Six-pence.


Upon my soul now, I have but one Six-pence, that I
^ ^ave not: Here, though, I will give it thee for a Curse; there
Mr. Committee, now there is Six-pence for the Curse before-hand,
Mr. Committee, and a Plague take you all.

Hark ye, Arbella, 'twere a sin not to love these men.


I am not guilty, Ruth.


Has this honourable Board any other Command.


Nothing farther, good Mrs. Day: Gentlewoman,
You have nothing to care for, but be grateful
And kind to Mr. Abel.

I desire to know what I must directly trust to,
Or I will complain.

The Gentlewoman needs not doubt, she shall
Suddenly perceive the good that is intended her,
If she does not interpose in her own light.

I pray withdraw; the Committee has passed their
Order, and they must now be private --

Nay, pray, Mistress, withdraw -- So, Brethren, we have
Finished this day's work; and let us always keep
The Bonds of Unity unbroken, walking hand in
Hand, and scattering the Enemy.

You may perceive they have Spirits never to be
Reconciled; they walk according to Nature, and are
Full of inward darkness.

It is well truly for the good people, that they
Are so obstinate, whereby their Estates may
Of right fall into the hands of the chosen, which
Truly is a mercy.

I think there remains nothing farther,
But to adjourn till Monday: Take up the
Papers there, and bring home to me their
Honours Order for Mrs. Arbella's Estate: So,
Brethren, we separate our selves to our
Particular endeavours, till we join in
Public on Monday, two of the Clock;
And so Peace remain with you.

BY my faith, a sad Story: I did apprehend this Covenant
Would be the Trap.

Never did any Rebels fish with such Cormorants; no
Stoppage about their throats; the Rascals are all swallow.

Now am I ready for any Plot; I'll go find some of these
Agitants, and fill up a blank Commission with my Name.
And if I can but find two or three gathered together,
They are sure of me; I will please my self, however,
With endeavouring to cut their throats.

Or do something to make them hang us, that we may
But part on any terms: Nothing angered me but that
My old Kitchen-stuff-acquaintance looked another
Way, and seemed not to know me.

How, Kitchen-stuff acquaintance!


Yes, Mrs Day, that commanded the Party in the
Hackney-Coach, was my Father's Kitchen-maid, and in
Time of yore called Gillian. How now, Teg?
What says the Learned?

Well then, upon my Soul, the Man in the great
Cloak, with the long Sleeves, is mad, that he is.

Mad, Teg!


Yes i'faith is he; he bid me be gone, and said I was sent
To mock him.

Why, what did thou say to him?


Well now, I did ask him if he would take any Counsel.


'Slife, he might well enough think thou mock him.
Why, thou should have asked him when we might have
Come for Counsel.

Well, that is all one, is it not? If he would take any
Counsel, or you would take any Counsel, is not that all one then?

Was there ever such a mistake?


Prithee ne'er be troubled at this; we are past Counsel:
If we had but a Friend amongst them, that could but slide
Us by this Covenant.

Hark ye, Colonel; what if you did visit this translated
Kitchen-maid?

Well, how is that? a Kitchen-maid? where is she now?


The Lieutenant advises well.


Nay, stay, stay; in the first place I'll send Teg to her
To tell her I have a little business with her, and desire
To know when I may have leave to wait on her.

We shall have Teg mistake again.


How is that so? I will not mistake that Kitchen-maid?
Whither must I go now, to mistake that Kitchen-maid?

But d'hear, Teg? you must take no notice of that, upon
Thy Life; but on the contrary, at every word you must say,
Your Ladyship, and your Honour; as for Example, when you have
Made a Leg, you must begin thus; My Master presents
His service to your Ladyship, and having some business with
Your Honour, desires to know when he may have leave
To wait upon your Ladyship.

Well, that I will do: But was she
Your Father's Kitchen-maid?

Why, what then?


Upon my Soul I shall laugh upon her Face, for all
I would not have a mind to do it.

Not for a hundred pounds, Teg; you must be sure to
Set your Countenance, and look very soberly before you begin.

If I should think then of any Kettles, or Spits, or
Any thing that will put a mind into my head of a
Kitchen, I should laugh then, should I not?

Not for a thousand pounds, Teg; thou may undo us all.


Well, I will hope I will not laugh then? I will
Keep my mouth if I can, that I will, from running
To one side, and tother side: well now, where does
This Mrs. Tay live?

Come, Teg, I'll walk along with thee, and show thee
The house, that thou may not mistake that however;

Prithee do, Lieutenant, have a care, Teg,
Thou shalt find us in the Temple. Now, Blunt, have I
Another design.

What further design can thou have?


Why by this means I may chance see these women
Again, and get into their acquaintance.

With both, man?


'Slife thou art jealous, dost love either of 'em?


Nay, I can't tell, all is not as 'twas.


Like a man that is not well, and yet knows
Not what ails him.

Thou art something near the matter: but I'll
Cure my self with considering, that no woman can
Ever care for me.

And why prithee?


Because I can say nothing to them.


The less thou can say, they'll like thee the better*
She'll think 'tis Love that has hamstringed thy tongue:
Besides man, a woman can't abide that any thing
In the house should talk, but she and her Parrot;
What 'tis the Cavalier girl thou lik'st?

Can thou love any of the other Breed.


Not honestly, -- yet I confess that ill-begotten
Pretty Rascal never looked towards me, but
She scattered sparks as fast as kindling Charcoal;
Thine's grown already to an honest flame: Come,
Blunt, when Teg comes we will resolve on something.

Come now, a word of our own matters; how dost
Thou hope to get thy Estate again.

You shall drink first; I was just going to ask you,
How you would get yours again; you are as fast as if
You were under Covert-barne.

But I have more hopes than thou hast.


Not a scruple more; if there were but scales
That could weigh hopes; for these Rascals must be hanged
Before either of us shall get our own; you may eat and drink
Out of yours as I do, and be a sojourner with Abel.

I am hampered, but I'll entangle my self
With Mr. Abel's conjugal cords: nay -- I am more
Hampered than thou think; for if thou art in as bad
Case as I (you understand me) hold up thy finger.

Behold, nay, I'll ne'er forsake thee, if I were not
Smitten, I would persuade my self to be in love,
If 'twere but to bear thee company.

Dear girl, hark ye, Ruth, the composition day
Made an end of all; all's ago.

Nay, that fatal day put me into the condition
Of a Compounder too; there was my heart brought
Under sequestration.

That day, wench?


Yes, that very day with two or three forceable
Looks 'twas driven an inch at least out of its old place;
Sense or reason can't find the way to it now.

That day, that very day, if you and I should like
The same man?

Fie upon it, as I live thou make me start;
Now dare not I ask which thou lik'st.

Would they were now to come in that we might
Watch one another eyes, and discover by signs;
I am not able to ask thee neither.

Nor I to tell thee; shall we go ask Lilly which 'tis?


Out upon him; nay, there's no need of Stars;
We know our selves if we durst speak.

Pish, I'll speak if it be the same, we will draw cuts.


No, hark ye, Ruth, do you act them both,
For you saw their several humours, and then watch my
Eyes, where I appear most concerned;
I can't dissemble for my heart.

I dare swear that will hinder thee to dissemble
Indeed, -- Come have at you then, I'll speak as if I were
Before the honourable rascals: And first, for my brave
Blunt Colonel, who hating to take the Oath, cried out
With a brave scorn (such as made thee in love I hope)
Hang your selves, rascals, the time will come when those
That dare be honest will be rewarded; don't
I act him bravely, don't I act him bravely?

O admirably well, dear wench, do it once more.


Nay, nay, I must do the tother now.


No, no, this once more, dear girl, and I'll
Act the tother for thee.

No forsooth, I'll spare your pains, we are right,
No need of Cuts, send thee good luck with him I acted,
And wish me well with my merry Colonel
That shall act his own part.

And a thousand good lucks attend thee;
We have saved our blushes admirably well, and relieved
Our hearts from hard duty -- but mum, see where the Mother
Comes, and with her, her Son, a true exemplification or
Duplicate of the original Day. Now for a charge.

Stand fair, the Enemy draws up.


Well, Mrs. Arbella, I hope you have considered
Enough by this time; you need not use so much consideration
For your own good; you may have your Estate, and you
May have Abel, and you may be worse offered.
Abel, tell her your mind, ne'er stand, shall I, shall I --
Ruth, does she incline, or is she wilful?

I was just about the point when your Honour
Interrupted us. -- One word in your Ladyships ear.

You see forsooth that I am some body, though you
Make no body of me, you see I can prevail; therefore
Pray say what I shall trust to;
For I must not stand, shall I, shall I.

You are hasty, Sir.


I am called upon by Important affairs;
And therefore I must be bold in a fair way to tell you that
It lies upon my spirit exceedingly.

Saffron-posset-drink is very good against
The heaviness of the Spirit.

Nay, forsooth, you do not understand my meaning


You do, I hope, Sir; and 'tis no matter,
Sir, if one of us know it.

Well, know? who are all you?


What's here, an Irish Elder come to examine us all.


Well know, what is your names, ever one?


Arbella, this is a Servant to one of the Colonels; upon
My life, 'tis the Irishman that took the Covenant
The right way.

Peace, what should it mean?


Well, cannot some of you all say nothing?


Day. Why how now sauce-box? what would you have?
What have you left your manners without? go
Our and fetch 'em in.

What should I fetch now?


Day Do you know who you speak to, Sirrah?


Well, what are you then? upon my soul
In my own Country they can tell who I am.

You must not be so saucy unto her Honour.


Well, I will knock you, if you be saucy with me then.


This is miraculous.


Is there none of you that I must speak to now?


Now, wench, if he should be sent to us.


Well I would have one Mrs. Tay speak unto me.


Day. Well, Sirrah, I am she: what's your business?


O so then, are you Mrs. Tay?
Well, I will look well first,
And I will set my face in some worship; yes indeed that I will;
And I will tell her then what I will speak to her.

How the fellow begins to mould himself.


And tempers his Chops like a hound that has lapped
Before his meat was cold enough.

He looks as if he had some gifts to pour forth;
Those are Mr. Day's own white eyes before he begins
To say grace: now for a speech rattling in his kecher,
As if his words stumbled in their way.

Well, now I will tell thee, I'faith my Master
The good Colonel Careless, bid me ask thy good Ladyship --
Upon my soul now the laugh will come upon me.

Sirrah, sirrah, what were you sent to abuse me?


As sure as can be.


I'saith now I do not abuse thy good Hon. I cannot
Help my laugh now, I will try again now; I will not
Think of a Kitchen then: my master would know
Of your Ladyship --

Did your Master send you to abuse me, you
Rascal: By my honour, Sirrah?

Why dost thou mock thy self now joy?


How, Sirrah, do I mock my self?
This is some Irish Traitor.

I am no Traitor, that I am not; I am an Irish
Rebel; you are cozened now.

Sirrah, Sirrah, I will make you know who
I am, an impudent Irish Rascal.

He seems a dangerous Fellow, and of a bold and
Seditious Spirit.

You are a bloody Rascal, I warrant ye.


You are a foolish brabble bribble Woman, that you are.


Sirrah, we that are at the head of affairs
Must punish your Sauciness.

You shall take a knock upon your Pate, if you are
Saucy with me, that I shall; you Son of a Roundhead, you.

Ye Rascally Varlet, get you out of my Doors.


Will not I give you my Message then?


Get you out, Rascal?


I prithee let me tell thee my Message?


Get you out, I say.


Well then I care not neither; the Devil take
Your Ladyship, and Honourship, and Kitchenship too: there now.

Was there ever such a Scene? 'tis impossible
To guess any thing.

Our Colonels have don't, as sure as thou livest, to
Make themselves sport; being all the revenge that is in
Their power: look, look, how her Honour trots about,
Like a Beast stung with Flies.

How the Villain has distempered me!
Out upon it too, that I have let the Rascal go unpublish'd,
And you can stand by like a Sheep: run after him then, and
Stop him; I'll have him laid by the heels, and
Make him confess who sent him to abuse me:
Call help as you go, make haste I say.

'Slid Arbella, run after him, and save the poor
Fellow for Sakes sake; Stop Abel by any means,
That he may escape.

Keep his Dam off, and let me alone with the Puppy.


Fear not.


'Uds my Life, the Rascal has heated me. -- Now I
Think on it, I'll go my self, and see it done: a saucy Villain.

But I must needs acquaint your Honour with one thing
^st concerning Mrs. Arbella.

As soon as ever I have done. Is't good news, Wench?


Most Excellent; if you go out you may spoil all;
Such a discovery I have made, that you will bless
The accident that angered you.

Quickly then, Girl.


When you sent Abel after the Irish-man,
Mrs. Arbella's Colour came and went in her Face, and at last
Not able to stay, slunk away after him for fear the Irish-man
Should hurt him: she stole away and blushed the prettiest.

I protest he may be hurt indeed; I'll run my self too.


By no means, forsooth; nor is there any need on it;
For the resolved to stop him before he could
Get near the Irish-man; she has done it upon my Life;
And if you should go out you might spoil the kindest
Encounter that the loving Abel is ever like to have.

Art sure of this?


If you do not find she has stopped him,
Let me ever have your hatred; pray credit me.

I do, I do believe thee; come, we'll go in where
I use to read: there thou shalt tell me all the particulars,
And the manner of it: I warrant 'twas pretty to observe.

O, 'twas a thousand pities you did not see it,
When Abel walk'^ away so bravely, and foolishly after this
Wild Irish-man: She stole such kind looks from her
Own Eyes; and having robbed her self, sent them after
Her own Abel; and then --

Come, good Wench, I'll go in, and hear it all at
Large; it shall be the best tale thou hast told these two days.
Come, come, I long to hear all. Abel for his part needs
No News by this time, come, good Wench.

So far I am right; Fortune take care for future things.


At whose Suit, Rascals?


You shall know that time enough.


Time enough, Dogs; must I wait your leisures?


O you are a dangerous Man; 'tis such Traitors as you
That disturb the Peace of the Nation.

Take that, Rascal: if I had any thing at liberty
Besides my Foot, I would bestow it on you.

You shall pay dearly for this kick before you are
Let loose, and give good special Bail: Mark that, my
Surly Companion; we have you fast.

'Tis well, Rogues, you caught me conveniently;
Had I been aware I would have made some of your scurvy
Souls my special Bail.

O, 'tis a bloody-minded Man; I'll warrant ye this
Vile Cavalier has eat many a Child.

I could gnaw a piece or two of you, Rascals.


How is this! Blunt in hold! you Catchpole,
Let go your prey, or --

Murder, Murder.


Faith, Careless, this was worth thanks, I was fairly going.


What was the matter, Man?


Why, an Action or two for Free Quarter, now made
Trover and Conversion: Nay, I believe we shall be sued
With an Action of Trespass; for every Field we have
Marched over, and be indicted for Riots, for going at
Unseasonable hours, above two in a Company.

Well come, let's away.


Now upon my Soul run as I do; the Men in red
Coats are running too, that they are, and they cry, Murder,
Murder, I never heard such a noise in Ireland, that's true too.

'Slife we must shift several ways.
Farewell, if we escape we meet at night; I shall
Take heed now.

Shall I tell of Mrs. Tay now?


O good Teg, no time for Messages.


This way, this way; Oh Villains, my Neighbour
^sh is hurt dangerously;
Some good Soldiers, follow, follow.

I am quite out of breath, and the Blood Hounds
Are in a full cry upon a burning scent: Plague on 'em,
What a noise the Kennels make? what Door's this
That graciously stands a little open? what an Ass am I to ask?
Teg, Scout abroad; if any thing happens extraordinary,
Observe this Door; there you shall find me: be careful,
Now by your favour, Landlord, as unknown.

It was well observed, Obadiah, to bring the
Parties to me first, 'tis your Master's will that I should, as I
May say, prepare matters for him; in truth, in truth
I have too great a burden upon me: yet for the public
Good I am content to undergo it.

I shall with sincere care present unto your Honour
From time to time such negotiations as I may discreetly
Presume may be material for your Honours inspection.

It will become you so to do, you have the
Present that came last.

Yes, and please your Honour; the Gentleman
Concerning her Brothers release, hath also
Sent in a piece of Plate.

It's very well.


But the Man without, about a bargain of the Kings
Land, is come empty.

Bid him be gone, I'll not speak with him;
He does not understand himself.

I shall intimate so much to him.


Why how now? what rude Companion's this?
What would you have (what's your business? what's the
Matter? who sent you? who do you belong to? who! --

Hold, hold, if you mean to be answered to all
These Interrogatories, you see I resolve to be your Companion;
I am a Man, there's no great matter, no body sent me; nor I
Belong to no body: I think I have answered to the chief Heads.

Thou hast committed murder for ought I know?
How is't, Obadiah?

Ha, what luck have I to fall into the Territories
Of my old Kitchen acquaintance; I'll proceed upon the
Strength of Teg's Message, though I had no answer.

How is't, Man?


Truly he came forcibly upon me, and I fear
Has bruised some intellectuals within my Stomach.

Go in and take some Irish Slat by way of
Prevention, and keep your self warm. Now, Sir, have you
Any business, you that came in so rudely as if you did not
Know who you came to. How came you in, Sir Royster?
Was not the Porter at the Gate?

No truly, the Gate kept it self, and stood gaping
As if it had a mind to speak, and say, I pray come in.

Did it so, Sir? and what have you to say?


I, there's the point; either she does not, or will
Not know me: What should I say? how dull am I? Pox on it,
This wit is like a common Friend, when one has need on him,
He won't come near one.

Sir, are you studying for an invention? for ought
I know you have done some mischief,
And 'twere sit to secure you?

So that's well, 'twas pretty to fall into the head
Quarter of the Enemy.

Nay, 'tis even so, I'll fetch
Those that shall examine you.

Stay, thou mighty States-woman, I did but
Give you time to see if your memory would but be so
Honest, as to tell you who I am.

What do you mean, Sauce-box?


There's a word yet of thy former employments,
That Sauce: you and I have been acquainted.

I do not use to have acquaintance with Cavaliers.


Nor I with Committee-mens Utensils; but in
Diebus illis, you were not Honourable, nor I a Malignant.
Lord, Lord, you are horrible forgetful, Pride comes with
Godliness, and good Clothes; what, you think I should
Not know you, because you are disguised with curled Hair,
And white Gloves. Alas, I know you as well as if you were
In your Sabbath-days Cinnamon Waistcoat, with a silver
Edging round the Skirt.

How, Sirrah?


And with your fair hands bathed in Lather, or
With your fragrant Breath, driving the fleeting
Ambergreece off from the waving Kitchenstuff.

O, you are an impudent Cavalier! I remember
You now indeed; but I'll --

Nay, but hark you the now Honourable,
Non obstante past conditions; did not I send my Fool Man,
An Irish-man, with a civil Message to you;
Why all this strangeness then.

How, how, how's this; was't you that sent
That Rascal to abuse me, was't so.

How now! what, matters grow worse and worse?


I'll teach you to abuse those that are in
Authority: Within there, who's within?

'Slife, I'll stop your mouth, if you raise an Alarm.


Stop my mouth, Sirrah, whoo, whoo, ho.


Yes, stop your mouth, what are you good at a
Who, bub, ha.

What's the matter, Forsooth.


The matter? why here's a rude Cavalier has
Broke into my House; 'twas he too that sent the Irish Rascal
To abuse me too within my own Walls: Call your Father, that
He may grant his Order to secure him. 'Tis a dangerous Fellow.

Nay, good pretty Gentlewoman, spare your motion,
What must become of me? Teg has made some strange mistake.

'Tis he, what shall I do, (now invention be equal to
My Love) why, your Ladyship will spoil all? I sent for
This Gentleman, and enjoined him secrecy, even to you your self,
Till I had made his way. O fie upon it, I am to blame; but in
Truth I did not think he would have come these two hours.

I dare swear she did not; I might very probably
Not have come at all.

How came you to come so soon, Sir; 'twas three
Hours before you appointed.

Hey day, I shall be made believe I came hither
On purpose presently.

'Twas upon a message of his to me, and please your
Honour to make his desires known to your Ladyship, that he
Had considered on it and was resolved to take the Covenant,
And give you five hundred pound to make his peace, and bring
His business about again, that he may be
Admitted in his first condition.

What's this? d'hear, pretty Gentlewoman.


Well, well, I know your mind, I have done your business.


Oh, his stomach's come down!


Sweeten him again, and leave him to me;
I warrant you the five hundred pound and --

Now I have found it: this pretty wench has
A mind to be left alone with me, at her peril.

I understand thee; well, Sir, I can pass by rudeness
When I am informed there was no intention of it; I leave
You and my Daughter to beget a right understanding.

We should beget Sons and Daughters sooner:
What does all this mean?

I am sorry, Sir, that your love for me
Should make you thus rash.

That's more than you know, but you had a mind
To be lest alone with me; that's certain.

'Tis too plain, Sir, you'd never have run your self
Into this danger else.

Nay, now you're out; the danger run after me.


You may dissemble.


Why, 'tis the proper business here; but we lose
Time; you and I are left to beget right understanding,
Come, which way?

Whither?


To your Chamber or Closet.


But I am engaged you shall take the Covenant.


No, I never swear when I am bid.


But you would do as bad?


That's not against my principles.


Thank you for your fair opinion, good Signior
Principle, there lies your way, Sir, however I will own so much
Kindness for you, that I repent not the civility I have done,
To free you from the trouble you were like to fall into;
Make me a leg, if you please, and cry, Thank you: and so the
Gentlewoman that desired to be left alone with you, desires
To be left alone with her self, she being taught a right
Understanding of you.

No, I am revited; nor shall you march off thus
With flying colours: my pretty Commander in chief, let us
Parley a little farther, and but lay down ingenuously the true
State of our Treaty. The business in short is this, We differ
Seemingly upon two evils, and mine the least; and therefore
To be chosen, you had better take me, than I take the Covenant.

We'll excuse one another.


You would not have me take the Covenant then.


No, I did but try you, I forgive your idle looseness;
For that firm virtue be constant to your fair principles
In spite of fortune.

What's this got into petti-coats -- but d'hear,
I'll not excuse you from my proposition, notwithstanding
My release: Come we are half way to a right
Understanding -- nay, I do love thee.

Love virtue, you have but here and there a patch
Of it; you're ragged still.

Are you not the Committee Day's Daughter?


Yes, what then.


Then am I thankful, I had no defence against thee
And Matrimony, but thy own Father and Mother,
Which are a perfect Committee to my nature.

Why are you sure I would have matched with a
Malignant, not a Compounder neither.

Nay, I have made thee a Jointure against my will;
Methinks it were but as reasonable, that I should do something
For my Jointure, but by the way of Matrimony honestly
To increase your Generation; this, to tell you truth, is
Against my Conscience.

Yet you would beget right understandings.


Yes, I would have them all Bastards.


And me a Whore.


That's a coarse name; but 'tis not sit a Committee-
Man's Daughter should be too honest, to the reproach
Of her Father and Mother.

When the quarrel of the Nation is reconciled, you
And I shall agree: till when, Sir --

Are you here then? upon my should the good Colonel
Blunt is over-taken again now, and carried to the Devil,
That he is, I'saith now.

How, taken and carried to the Devil!


He desired to go to the Devil, that he did, I wonder of
My should he was not afraid of that.

I understand it now; what mischief's this?


You seem troubled, Sir.


I have but a life to lose, that I am weary of: come, Teg.


Hold, you shall not go before I know the business;
What do ye talk of?

My friend, my dearest friend is caught up by rascally
Bailiffs, and carried to the Devil-Tavern; pray let me go.

Stay but a minute, if you have any kindness for me.


Yes, I do love you.


Perhaps I may serve your friend.
O Arbella, I was going to seek you.

What's the matter?


The Colonel which thou lik'st is taken by Bailiffs;
There's his Friend too almost distracted: You know
The mercy of these times

What dost thou tell me, I am ready to sink down!


Compose your self, and help him nobly; you have no
Way but to smile upon Abel, and get him to bail him.

Look where he and Obadiah comes; should either
By providence -- O Mr. Abel, where have you been this long
Time? can you find of your heart to keep thus out of my sight*

Assuredly, some important affairs constrained my
Absence, as Obadiah can testify, Bona fide.

I can do so verily, my self being a material party.


Pox on 'em, how slow they speak.


Well, well, you shall go no more out of my sight; I'll
Not be satisfied with your Bona fides: I have some occasions
That call me to go a little way; you shall even go with me,
And good Obadiah too: you shall not deny me any thing.

Is it not meet I should, I am exceedingly exalted;
Obadiah thou shalt have the best bargain of all my Tenants.

I am thankful.


What may this mean?


Ruth, how shall we do to keep thy swift Mother
From pursuing us?

Let me alone, as I go by the Parlour where she sits,
Big with expectation; I'll give her a whisper that we
Are going to fetch the very five hundred pound.

How can that be?


No question now. Will you march, Sir?


Whither?


Lord, how dull these men in Love are! why to your
Friend. No more words.

I will stare upon thee though.


I, I, we thought how well you'd get Bail.


Why, you unconscionable Rascal, are you
Angry that I am unlucky, or do you want some Fees?
I'll perish in a dungeon before I'll consume with throwing
Sops to such Curs.

Choose, choose, come along with him.


I'll not go your pace neither, Rascals; I'll go softly,
If it be but to hinder you from taking up some other
Honest Gentleman.

Very well, surly Sir, we will carry you where you
Shall not be troubled what pace to walk; you'll find a
Large Bell, blood is dear; not yours is it? a farthing a pint
Were very dear for the best urine you have.

How now, are these any of your Friends?


Never if you see Women, that's a Rule.


Nay, you need have no scruple, 'tis a near Kinsman
Of mine, you do not think I hope that I would let you suffer --
You -- that must be nearer than a Kinsman to me.

But my Mother doth not know it.


If that be all, leave it to me and Ruth, we'll save
You harmless: besides I cannot marry, if my Kinsman be in
Prison; he must convey my Estate as you appoint; for 'tis
All in him, we must please him.

The consideration of that doth convince me.
Obadiah, 'tis necessary for us to set at liberty this Gentleman,
Being a Trustee for Mrs. Arbella's Estate; tell 'em therefore
That you and I will Bail this Gentleman -- and --
D'hear, tell them who I am.

I shall. Gentlemen, this is the honourable
Mr. Abel Day, the first-born of the Honourable Mr. Day,
Chair-man of the Committee of Sequestrations, and I
My self by name Obadiah, and Clerk to the said
Honourable Committee.

Well, Sir, we know Mr. Day, and Mr. Abel.


Yes, that's I, and I will bail this Gentleman; I believe
You dare not except against the Bail: nay, you shall have
Obadiah's too, one that the State trusts.

With all our hearts, Sir --
But there are Charges to be paid.

Here, Obadiah, take this Purse and discharge them,
And give the Bailiffs twenty shillings to drink.

This is miraculous.


A brave Lady: I'faith Mrs. we'll drink your health.


She's to be my Wife, as sure as you are here;
What say you to that now?

That's impossible; here's something more in this:
Honourable Mr. Abel, the Sheriffs Deputy is hard by in
Another room, if you please to go thither,
And give your Bail, Sir.

Well, show us the way, and let him know who I am.


Hark ye, pretty Mrs. Ruth, if you were not
A Committee-man's Daughter, and so consequently
Against Monarchy, two Princes should
Have you and that Gentlewoman.

No, no, you'll serve my turn; I am not ambitious.


Do but swear then that thou art not the Issue of
Mr. Day, and though I know 'tis a lye, I'll be content
To be cousen'd, and believe.

Fie, sie, you can't abide taking of Oaths; look,
Look how your Friend and mine take aim at one another:
Is he smitten?

Cupid has not such another wounded Subject,
Nay, and is vexed he is in love too;
Troth 'tis partly my own case.

Peace, she begins as need requires.


You are free, Sir.


Not so free as you think.


What hinders it?


Nothing, but I'll tell you.


Why, Sir?


You'll laugh at me.


Have you perceived me apt to commit such a rudeness,
Pray let me know it?

Upon two conditions you shall know it.


Well, make your own Laws.


First I thank you, y'have freed me nobly; pray
Believe it, you have this acknowledgment from an
Honest heart, one that would crack a string for you,
That's one thing.

Well, the other.


The other is only, that I may stand so ready,
That I may be gone just as I have told it you; together
With your promise, not to call me back: and upon these
Terms I give you leave to laugh when I am gone. Careless,
Come stand ready, that at the sign given
We may vanish together.

If you please, Sir, when you are ready to start,
I'll cry one, two, three, and away.

Be pleased to forbear, good smart Gentlewoman,
You have leave to jeer when I am gone, and am just going;
By your spleens leave a little patience.

Prithee, peace.


I shall contain, Sir.


That's much for a Woman to do.


Now, Sir, perform your promise.


Careless, have you done with your Woman?


Madam --


Nay, I have thanked her already; prithee no more
Of that dull way of gratitude; stand ready, Man, yet nearer
The Door: so now my misfortune that I promised to
Discover, is, that I love you above my sense or reason:
So farewell, and laugh; Come, Careless.

Ladies, our lives are yours; be but so kind as to
Believe it, till you have something to command.

Was there ever such humour?


As I live his confession shows nobly.


It shows madly I am sure, an ill-bred Fellow, not
Endure a Woman to laugh at him!

He's honest, I dare swear.


That's more than I dare swear for my Colonel.


Out upon him.


Nay, 'tis but for want of a good Example;
I'll make him so.

But d'hear, Ruth, we were horribly to blame, that we
Did not enquire where they lodged, under pretence of sending
To them about their own business.

Why, thy whimsical Colonel discharged himself off
Like a Gun: there was no time between the flashing in
The pan, and the going off, to ask a question: but hark ye,
I have an invention upon the old account of the
Five hundred pound, which shall make Abel send
His Pursuivant, Obadiah, to look 'em.

Excellent! the Trout Abel will bite immediately at
That bait: the Message shall be as from his Master Day, Senior,
To come and speak with him; they'll think
Presently 'tis about their Composition, and come certainly.
In the mean time we'll prepare them with Counter-expectations

You have it, peace, see where Abel and the gentle
Squire of low degree, Obadiah, approaches, having newly
Entered themselves into Bonds.

Which I'll be sure to tell his Mother, if he be
Evermore troublesome.

And that he's turned an arrant Cavalier,
By bailing one of the Brood.

I have according to your desires given freedom to
Your Kinsman and Trustee; I suppose he doth perceive
That you may have power in right of me.

Good Mr. Abel, I am sincerely beholding to you,
And your Authority.

O sie upon it, Brother, I did forget to acquaint
You with a business before the Gentlemen went.
O me, what a Sieve-like memory have I,
'Twas an important affair too.

If you discover it to me, I shall render you
My opinion upon the whole.

The two Gentlemen have repented of their obstinacy,
And would now present five hundred pound to your good
Honourable Mother, to stand their Friend, that they may be
Permitted to take the Covenant, and we, negligent we,
Have let them go, before we knew where to send to them.

That was the want of being used to important affairs;
It is ill to neglect the accepting of their conversion,
Together with their money.

Well, there is but one way; do you send Obadiah
In your Father's Name, to desire them both to come to his House
About some business that will be for their good, but no more;
For then they'll take it ill; for they enjoined us secrecy;
And when they come, let us alone: Obadiah may enqui^e
Them out at some Tavern.

The Bailiffs did say they were gone
To the Devil* Tavern to pay a reckoning.

Hasten thither, good Obadiah, as if you had met
My Honourable Father, and desire them to come unto
His House, about an important affair that is for their good.

I shall use expedition.


And we will hasten home, lest the Gentlemen should
Be before us, and not know how to address their offers;
And then we will hasten our being united in the
Bonds of Matrimony*

Soft and fair goes far.


Did ever Man get away so craftily from the thing
He liked; terrible business, afraid to tell a Woman what she
Desired to hear; I pray heartily that the Boys do not come
To the knowledge of thy famous retreat; we shall be followed
By those small Birds, as you have seen an Owl pursued.

I shall break some of their Wings then.


To leave a handsome Woman, a Woman that came
To be bound Body for Body for thee; one that does that
Which no Woman will hardly do again.

What's that?


Love thee, and thy Blunt Humour; a mere chance,
Man, a thing besides all the venerate Stars.

You practice your Wit to no purpose; I am not
To be persuaded to lie still, like a Jack-a-lent to be cast at;
I had rather be a Wisp hung up for a Woman to scold at,
Than a fixed Lover for 'em to point at:
Your Squib began to hiss.

Peace, Man, here's Jupiter's Mercury, is his
Message to us, trow?

Gentlemen, you are opportunely over-taken
And found out.

How's this?


I come unto you in the name of the Honourable
Mr. Day, who desires to speak with you both about some
Important affair, which is conducing for your good.

What train is this?


Peace, let us not be rash, Teg.


Well then.


Were it not possible that you could entertain this
Fellow in the next room till he were pretty drunk?

I warrant you that now, I will make him and my self
Too drunk for thy sweet sake.

Be sure, Teg -- some business, Sir, that will take us
Up a very little time to finish, make us desire your patience
Till we dispatch it: In the mean time, Sir, do us the
Favour as to call for a glass of Sack: in the next room
Teg shall wait upon you, and drink your Master's health.

It needs not, nor do I use to drink healths.


None but your Masters, Sir, and that by
Way of remembrance.

We that have the affairs of State under our
Tuition cannot long delay; my presence may be required
For the carrying on the work.

Nay, Sir, it shall not exceed above a quarter
Of an hour; perhaps we'll wait upon you to Mr. Day presently*
Pray, Sir, drink but one glass or two; we would wait upon you
Our selves, but that would hinder us from going with you.

Upon that consideration I shall attend a little.


Go wait upon him, now Teg or never.


I will make him so drunk as can be upon my Soul.


What a Devil should this Message mean?


'Tis too plain; this cream of Committee Rascals! who has
Better Intelligence than a State-Secretary, has heard
Of his Son Abel's being hampered, in the cause of the
Wicked, and in revenge would entice us to Perdition.

If Teg could be so fortunate as to make him drunk,
We might know all.

If the close-hearted Rogue will not be open mouthed,
We'll leave him pawned for all our scores, and stuff his Pockets
With blank Commissions.

Only fill up one with his Master's name.


And another with his Wife's name for Adjutant General,
Together with a Bill of Ammunition hid under Day's House,
And make it be dug down, with scandal of Delinquency.
A Rascal to think to invite us into Newgate!

Well, we must resolve what to do.


I have a fancy come into my head that may produce
An admirable Scene.

Come, let's hear.


'Tis upon supposition, that Teg makes him drunk,
And by the way 'tis a good Omen that we have no sober
Apparition in that wavering posture of frailty; we'll send him
Home in a Sedan, and cause him to be delivered in that
Good natured condition, to the ill natured Rascal
His Master.

It will be Excellent: how I pray for Teg
To be Victorious!

Gentlemen, will you have any Music?


Prithee no, we are out of tune.


Pish, we never will be out of humour. Dost hear,
Can sing us a Malignant Sonnet?

I can sing many Songs. You seem honest Gentlemen.


Cavaliers thou mean.
Sing without any apprehension.
NOW the Vail is pulled off, and this pitiful Nation
Too late see the gull of a Kirk-Reformation,
How all things that should be
Are turned topsy turvy;
The Freedom we have,
Our Prince made a Slave,
And the Masters must now turn the Waiters.
The great ones obey,
While the Rascals do sway,
And the Loyal to Rebels are Traitors.
The Pulpits are crowded with tongues of their own,
And the Preachers spiritual Committee-men grown,
To denounce Sequestration
On Souls of old Fashion,
They Rail and they Pray,
Till they quite preach away
The Wealth that was once the wise Cities.
The Courts in the Hall
Where the Lawyers did bawl,
Are turned into pious Committees.

This Song has raised my Spirits: Here, sing always
For the King; I would have every Man in his way do something
For him; I would have Fiddlers sing for him, Parsons pray
For him, Men fight for him, Women scold for him, and
Children cry for him, and according to this rule,
Teg is drinking for him: but see,
See and rejoice where Teg with Laurel comes.

And the vanquished Obadiah with nothing fixed
About him but his Eyes.

Stay, sing another Song in the behalf of
Compounders if thou can, that the vapours of the Wine
May have full power to ascend up to the firmament of
His truly reformed Coxcomb.
COme, Drawer, some Wine,
Let it sparkle and shine,
And make its own drops fall abounding;
Like the Hearts it makes light,
Let it flow pure and right,
And a Plague take all kind of Compounding.
We'll not be too wise,
Nor try to advise,
How to suffer and gravely despair:
For Wisdom and Parts
Sit brooding on hearts,
And there they catch nothing but care.
Not a thought shall come in
But what brings our King,
Let Committees be damned with their gain;
We'll send by this stealth
To our Hearts our Kings Health,
And there in despite he shall Reign.

This is sport beyond modest hopes. How I will
Adore Sack that can force this Fellow to Religion. The Rogue
Is full of Worship.

Well now, upon my Soul, Mr. Obed.
Commit sings as well as the Man now:
Come then will you sing an Irish Song after me?

I will sing Irish for the King now.


I will sing for the King as well as you. Hark you now.


That is too hard stuff; I cannot do these and these
Material matters.

Here now, we will take some snuff for the King -- so
There lay it upon your hand; put one of your Noses to it now,
So snuff now. Upon my Soul, Mr. Obed Commit will make
A brave Irish-man.

I will snuff for the King no more. Good Mr. Teg,
Give me some more Sack, and sing English for my money.

I will tell you that Irish is as good and better too.
Come now we will dance: Can you play an Irish Tune?
Can you play this now.

No, Sir, but I can play you an excellent Irish Jig.


This is beyond thought: So this motion
Like a tumbled Barrel has set the Liquor a working again.
Now for a Chair.

Drawer, who waits there?


What do you want Gentlemen?


Call a Chair presently, and bring their Chair into
This room; here's a friend of ours overtaken.

I go, Sir.


Teg, thou hast done miracles, thou art a good Omen,
And hast vanquished the cause in this overthrow of this
Counterfeit Rascal its true Epitome: And now, Teg,
According to the words of Condemnation, we will send him
To the place from whence he came.

Upon my should he's dead now, shall I howl as we do
In Ireland.

How's that, Teg.


Yo, yo.


No more, good, Teg, lest you give an Alarm to the
Enemy. Welcome, honest fellow; by your looks you seem so.

How Colonel, have you forgot your poor Soldier Ned.


Why, this is a miraculous pursuit of good fortune,
Honest Ned; what turned Chair-man?

Any thing for Bread and Beer, noble Colonel, shall I
Have the Honour to carry you.

No, Ned, is thy fellow honest?

Or I'd be hanged before I carry a Chair an inch with him.

'Tis well -- look you, Ned, that fellow is Mr. Day
The Committee-man's Clerk, whom with wonderful industry
We have made drunk: Just as he is, pack him up in thy Chair,
And immediately transport him to his Master Day's house;
And in the very Hall turn him out. There's half a Crown
For thy pains.

If I fail, say Ned's a Coward: Come shall we put your short
Winged worship into your mew. Come along.

Farewell, Ned: Teg, come, you must carry some
Money to one or two confident friends of mine;
We will pay our Reckoning at the Bar, then go home and laugh;
And if you will plot some way to see our enchanting Females
Once more; they make me so long --

Dispatch quickly I say, and say I said it; many
Things fall between the lip and the cup.

Nay, duck, let thee alone for counsel. Ah,
If thou had been a man.

Why then you would have wanted a Woman,
And a helper too.

I profess so I should, and a notable one too, though
I say it before thy face, and that's no ill one.

Come, come, you are wandering from the matter;
Dispatch the Marriage I say, whilst she is thus taken with
Our Abel. Women are uncertain.

How if she should be coy?


You are at your iffs again; if she be foolish,
Tell her plainly what she must trust to, no Abel, no Land;
Plain dealing's a Jewel: Have you the Writings drawn
As I advised you, which she must sign?

I, I warrant you, duck; Here, here they be.
Oh she has a brave Estate.

What news you have.


Look you, Wife.


Pish, teach your Grannam to spin; let me see.


May it please your Honour, your good neighbour
Zechariah is departing this troublesome life: he has made
Your Honour his Executor, but cannot depart
Till he has seen your Honours.

Alas, alas, a good man will leave us, Come, good
Duck, let us hasten: Where is Obadiah to usher you?

Why Obadiah, a Varlet to be out of the way at
Such a time; truly he moves my wrath. Come, Husband, along,
I'll take Abel in his place.

What's the meaning of this Alarm? there's some Carrion
Discovered; the Crows are all gone upon a sudden.

The she- Day called most fiercely for Obadiah;
Look here, Ruth, what have they left behind?

As I live, it is the Day's bunch of Keys, which he always
Keeps so closely: -- well -- if thou hast any metal,
Now's the time.

To do what?


To fly out of Egypt.


Peace, we are betrayed else; as sure as can be, wench,
He's come back for the Keys.

We'll forswear 'em in confident words, and no less
Confident countenances.

An important affair hath called my Honourable Father
And Mother forth, and in the absence of Obadiah I am enforced
To attend their Honours, and therefore I conceived it right
And meet to acquaint you with it; lest in my absence you
Might have apprehended, that some mischance had befallen
My person: therefore I desire you to receive consolation;
And so I bid you heartily farewell.

Given from his mouth this tenth of April, he
Put me in a cruel fright.

As I live, I am all over in such a dew as hangs about a
Still when 'tis first set a going; but this is better and better:
There was never such an opportunity to break prison.
I know the very places holes in his Closet where the
Composition of your Estate lies, and where the Deeds of my
Own Estate lie. I have cast my eye upon them often
When I have gone up to him in errands, and to call
Him to dinner. If I miss, hang me.

But whither shall we go?


To a friend of mine, and of my Fathers, that lives
Near the Temple, and will harbour us; fear not, and so set
Up for our selves, and get our Colonels.

Nay, the mischief that I have done, and the condition
We are in, makes me as ready as thou art: come let's about it.

Stay, do you stand Sentinel here, that's the
Closet-Window; I'll call for thee, if I need thee; and
Be sure to give notice of any news of the enemy.

I warrant thee, may but this departing Brother have
So much string of life left him as nay tie this expecting Day
To his Bedside, till we have committed this honest Robbery --
Hark! -- what's that -- this apprehension can make a noise
When there is none.

I have 'em, I have 'em; nay the whole covey,
And his Seal at Arms bearing a Dog's Leg.

Come make haste then.


As I live here's a Letter counterfeited to the King,
To the Rascal his rebellious Subject Day; with a remembrance
To his discreet Wife; nay, what dost thou think these are?
I'll but cast my Eye upon these Papers that were Schismatically,
And lay in separation: what dost think they are?

I can't tell; nay prithee come away.


Out upon the precise Baboon:
They are Letters from two Wenches, one from an increase of salary
To maintain his unlawful Issue; another from a Wench
That had more Conscience than he, and refused
To take the Physic that he prescribed to take away
A natural Tympany.

Nay, prithee dispatch.


Here be abundance more; come run up, and help
Me carry 'em. We'll take the whole Index of his Rogueries?
We shall be furnished with such arms, offensive and defensive,
That we shall never need
Sue to him for a League. Come, make haste.

I come.


Come open this portable Tomb: 'Slife here's nothing in it;
Ferret him, or he'll never bolt. It looks as if we had brought
A basket Hare to be set down and hunted.

He's dead.

Dead drunk, thou mean; turn up the Chair, and turn
Him out as they do Badgers caught in a Sack: Shake,
Man; So, now he sallies.

What's this? we are undone.


Mr. Teg, will you dance, Mr. Teg.


Put a good Face on it, or give me the Van. O, 'tis Obadiah fallen.


Nay, and cannot rise neither: d'hear, honest Friends,
Was this zealous Gentleman your freight.

Yes, Mistress, two honest Gentlemen took care of him, seeing
Him thus devoutly over-taken.

It was our Colonels that thought Day sent him to trapan
Them as sure as can be.

No doubt on it; how unmerciful they are, Arbella,
Every minute to do something or other to increase
Our whimsy -- Are you paid?

Yes, Mistress, -- 'Slife we shall be paid double.

Stay, where did you leave the two
Careful-minded Gentlemen.

Why do you ask, Mistress?

For no hurt. Can carry us near the place?

Yes, Mistress, sure there's no danger in Women.

What dost mean?


The same that thou dost, to see 'em if I can;
Is't near Temple-Bar?

Hard by, Minstress.

Come in, there's my Friend lives hard by; fear not,
We can never fly so concealed -- May that Nightingale continue
His note, till the Owl Day returns to hear him: Come,
Honest Fellow, stay over against the place where you
Left the Gentlemen; we have some business with them;
We'll pay you, and they'll thank you: so good night, Mr. Day.

I warrant you, Mistress. Come along, Tom.

Some small Beer, good Mr. Teg.


He made a good end, and departed as unto sleep.


I'll assure you his Wife took on grievously;
I do not believe she'll marry this half year.

He died full of Exhortation. Ha, Duck,
Should be sorry to lose me?

Lose you; I warrant you you'll live as long as
A better thing -- Ah, Lord, what's that?

How now! what's this? how! -- Obadiah --
And in a drunken distemper assuredly!

O fie upon'e, who would have believed that he
Should have lived to have seen Obadiah overcome with the
Creature? Where have you been, Sirrah?

D -- d -- drinking, the Ki -- Ki -- Kings's Health.


O terrible, some disgrace put upon us, and shame
Brought within our Walls; I'll go lock up my
Neighbour's Will, and come down and show him
A Reproof. -- How -- how -- I cannot feel my Keys -- nor --
Hear 'em gingle: Did thou see my Keys, Duck?

Duck me no ducks; I see your Keys, see a Fools
Head of your own: Had I kept them, I warrant they had been
Forth coming: You are so slappish, you throw 'em up and
Down at your Tail: Why don't you go look if you have
Not left them in the Door?

I go, I go, Duck.


Here, Abel, take up this fallen Creature, who has
Left his uprightness; carry him to a Bed, and when he is
Returned to himself, I will exhort him.

He is exceedingly over-whelmed.


Stand away, I say, and give me some Sack, that
I may drink a health to the King, and let Committees
Be damned with their gain.
Where's Mr. Teg?

Undone, undone, robbed, robbed; the Door's left
Open, and all my Writings, Papers stolen, undone, undone.
Ruth, Ruth!

Why Ruth, I say, Thieves, Thieves!


What's the matter, Forsooth? here has been no Thieves,
I have not been a minute out of the House.

Where's Ruth, and Mrs. Arbella?


I have not seen them a pretty while.


'Tis they have robbed me, and taken away
The Writings of both their Estates. Undone, undone!

This came with staying for you, Coxcomb,
We had come back sooner else: yes, slow Drone, we must
Be undone for your dullness.

Be not in wrath.


I'll wrath you, ye Rascal you, teaching you,
Drunken Rascal, and you sober Dullman.

Your Feet are swift and violent; their motion
Will make them fume.

D'lye too, ye drunken Rascal?


Nay patience, good Duck, and let's lay out
For these Women; they are the Thieves.

'Twas you that left your Keys upon the Table
To tempt them: ye need cry, good Duck, be patient. Bring in
The drunken Rascal, ye Booby, when he is sober he may
Discover something. Come take him up; I'll have 'em hunted.

I rejoice yet in the midst of my sufferings, that my Mistress
Saw not my rebukes. Come, Obadiah, I pray raise your self
Upon your Feet, and walk.

Have you taken the Covenant? that's the question.


Yea.


And will you drink a Health to the King?
That's the other question.

Make not thy self a scorn.


Scorn in thy Face; void, young Satan.


I pray you walk in, I shall be assisting.


Stand off, and you shall perceive by my steadfast going,
That I am not drunk. Look ye now -- so, softly, softly; gently,
Good Obadiah, gently and steadily, for fear it should be said
That thou art in drink: so, gently and uprightly, Obadiah.

You do not move.


Then do I stand still, as fast as you go.


What, stay all day? there's for you, Sir;
You are a sweet Youth to leave in trust; along you
Drunken Rascals, I'll set you both forward.

The Philistines are upon us, and Day is broke loose
From darkness, with keeping has made her fierce.

Out, you drunken Rascal, I'll make
You move, you Beast.

COme along, Sir, I'll teach you to take Covenants.


Will you teach me then; did I not take
It then? why will you teach me now?

You shall pay dearly for the blows you struck me,
My wild Irish, by St. Patrick, you shall.

What have you now to do with St. Patrick? he will
Scorn your Covenant.

I'll put you, Sir, where you shall have worse liquor,
Than your Bonny-Clabber.

Bonny-Clabber! by my Goships hand now you are
A Rascal if you do not look Bonny-Clabber, and I will break
Your pate if you will not let me go to my Master.

O you are an impudent Rascal. Come, away with him.


How now, hold, my Friend; whither do
You carry my Servant?

I have arrested him, Sir, for striking me, and taking
Away my Books.

What has he taken away?


Nay, the value of the thing is not much;
'Twas the Covenant, Sir.

Well, I did take the Covenant, and my Mastero took it
From me, and we have taken the Covenant then, have we not?

Here, honest Fellow, here's more than thy Covenant's
Worth; here, Bailiffs, here's for you to drink.

Well, Sir, you seem an honest Gentleman; for
Your sake, and in hopes of your Custom, I release him.

Thank ye, noble Sir.


Farewell, my noble Friends -- so -- d'hear, Teg.
Pray take no more Covenants, -- Have you paid the money
I sent you with?

Yes, but I will carry no more, look you there now.


Why, Teg?


God sa'my Soul now, I shall run away with it.


Pish, thou art too honest.


That I am too upon my Soul now; but the Devil is
Not honest, that he is not; he would not let me alone
When I was going; but he made go to this little long place,
And the other little long place; and upon my Soul was carrying
Me to Ireland, for he made me go by dirty place like a loch
Now; and therefore I know now it was the way to Ireland:
Then I would stand still, and then he would make me go on;
And then I would go to one side, and he would make me go
To the other side; and then I got a little farther, and did
Run then; and upon my Soul the Devil could not catch me;
And then I did pay the money: but I will carry no more
Money now that I will not.

But thou shall it, Teg, when I have more to send;
Thou art proof now against temptations.

Well then, if you send me with money again, and if I
Do not come to thee upon the time, the Devil will make me
Be gone then with the money: Here is a Paper for thee,
'Tis a quit way indeed.

That's well said, Teg. --


See, Sir, Providence hath directed us; there is one
Of them that clothed me with shame, and the most malignant
Among the wicked.

Soldiers, seize him, I charge him with Treason;
Here's a Warrant to the Keeper, as I told you.

Nay, no resistance now.


What's the matter, Rascals?


You shall know that to your cost hereafter,
Away with him.

Teg, tell 'em I shall not come home to night, I am engaged.


I prithee be not engaged.


Gentlemen, I am guilty of nothing, that I know of.


That will appear, Sir: away with him.


What will you do with my Master now?


Be quiet, Sir, or you shall go with him.


That I will for all you now.


Teg, come hither.


Must not I go with you then?


No, no, be sure to do as I tell you.


Away with him, we will be avenged on the scorner,
And I'll go home and tell my Duck this part of my good fortune.

So far we are right, now, honest Fellow, step over
And tell the two Gentlemen, that we two Women desire
To speak with them.

See, Mistress, here's one of them.


That's thy Colonel, Arbella, catch him quickly,
Or he'll fly again.

What should I do?


Put forth some good words, as they use to
Shake Oats when they go to catch a skittish Jade.
Advance.

Sir.


Lady -- 'tis she.


I wish, Sir, that my Friend and I had some convenience
Of speaking with you: we now want the assistance of
Some noble Friend.

Then I am happy; bring me but to do something
For you; I would have my actions talk, not I: my Friend
Will be here immediately; I dare speak for him too --
Pardon my last confusion; but what I told you was as true
As if I had staid.

To make Affidavit of it.


Good over-charged-Gentlewoman,
Spare me but a little.

Prithee peace, can thou be merry, and we in
This condition. Sir, I do believe you noble, truly worthy:
If we might withdraw any whither out of sight,
I would acquaint you with the business.

My House, Ladies, is at that Door, where both
The Colonels lodge: Pray command it, Colonel Careless
Will immediately be here.

Well now, my good Master will not come;
That Commit Rogue Day has got him with Men in red Coats,
And he is gone to Prison here below this Street;
He would not let me go with him i'faith,
But made me come tell thee now.

O my heart -- Tears by your leave a while --
D' hear, Arbella, here, take all the trinkets, only the bait that
I'll use; accept of this House, here let me find thee, I'll try my
Skill; nay, talk not.

Careless in Prison! Pardon me, Madam, I must
Leave you for a little while; pray be confident,
This honest Friend of mine will use you with
All respects till I return.

What do you mean to do, Sir?


I cannot tell, yet I must attempt something,
You shall have a sudden account of all things;
You say you dare believe,
Pray be as good as your word; and
Whatever accident befalls me, know I love you dearly:
Why do you weep?

Do not run your self into a needless danger.


How, do you weep for me? pray let me see, never Woman
Did so before, that I know of, I am ravished with it; the
Round gaping Earth ne'er sucked showrs so greedily,
As my heart drinks these: Pray if you love me, be but
So good and kind as to confess it.

Do not ask what you may tell your self.


I must go, Honour and Friendship call me: Here,
Dear Lieutenant, I never had a Jewel but this; use it as
Right ones should be used; do not breath upon it, but
Gaze as I do, -- hold -- one word more; the Soldier that
You often talked of to me, is still honest.

Most perfectly.


And I may trust him.


With your Life.


Enough, -- pray let me leave my last looks fixed
Upon you -- So, I love you, and am honest; be careful,
Good Lieutenant, of this treasure -- She weeps still --
I cannot go, I must --

Madam, pray let my House be honoured with you;
Be consident of all respect and faith.

What uncertainties pursue my Love and Fortune.


Come, give me the bundle, he now the habit;
'Tis well, there's for your pains, be secret, and wait
Where I appointed you.

If I fail, may I dye in a Ditch, and there lie,
And out-stink it.

Now for my wild Colonel; first, here's a Note,
With my Lady Day's Seal to it, for his Release; if that fails
(As he that will shoot at these Rascals must have two Strings
To his Bow) Then here's my Red-Coats skin to disguise him,
And a string to draw up a Ladder of Cords, which I have
Prepared against it grows dark; one of them will hit sure,
I must have him out, and I must have him when he is out:
I have no patience to expect -- within there -- ho. --

You have not a Prisoner, Sir, in your Custody,
One Colonel Careless?

Yes, Mrs. and committed by your Father Mr. Day.


I know it; but there was a mistake in it; here's a Warrant
For his Delivery, under his Hand and Seal.

I would willingly obey it, Mrs; but there's a general
Order come from above, that all the Kings Party should be kept
Close, and none released but by the States Order.

This goes ill; may I speak with him, Sir?


Very freely, Mrs. there's no order to forbid any to come
To him: To say Truth, 'tis the most pleasant'st Gentleman.
-- I'll call him forth.

O'my conscience every thing must be in love with him;
Now for my last hopes; if this fail, I'll use the Ropes
My self.

Mr. Day's Daughter speak with me?


I, Sir, there (...) is.


O Sir, does the name of Mr. Day's Daughter
Trouble you; you love the Gentlewoman, but hate his Daughter.

Yes, ^ do love that Gentlewoman you speak of most
Exceedingly.

And the Gentlewoman loves you: but what luck
This is, that Day's Daughter should ever be with her to spoil all!

Not a whit one way; I have a pretty Room --
Within, dark, and convenient.

For what?


For you and I to give Counter-security for
Our kindness to one another.

But ^ Day's Daughter will be there too?


'Tis dark, we'll never see her.


You care not who you are Wicked with; methinks
A Prison should tame you.

Why, do you think a Prison takes away blood
And sight? As long as I am so qualified, I am Touch-wood, and
When ever you bring fire, I shall fall a burning.

And you would quench it.


And you shall kindle it again.


No, you will be burnt out at last, burnt to a coal,
Black as dishonest love.

Is this your business? Did you come to disturb my
Contemplations with a Sermon? Is this all?

One thing more; I Love you, it's true; but I love you
Honestly, if you know how to love me virtuously, I'll free
You from Prison, and run all Fortunes with you.

Yes, I could love thee all manner of ways;
If I could not, freedom were no bait; were it from death.
I should despise your offer to bargain for a lye. -- but --

Oh noble -- but what?


The Name of that Rascal that got thee: yet I lye
Too, he never got a Limb of thee. Pox on it, thy Mother
Was as unlucky to bear thee: But how shall we salve that;
Take but off these encumbrances, and I'll purchase thee in
Thy Smock; but to have such a slaw in my Title.

Can I help Nature?


Or I honour? Why, bark you now, do but swear
Me into a pretence, do but betray me with an Oath, that thou
Were not begot on the Body of Gillian,
My Fathers Kitchen-maid.

Who's that?


Why, the honourable Mrs. Day that now is.


Will you believe me if I swear?


I that I will, though I know all the while 'tis not true.


I swear then by all that's good,
I am not their Daughter.

Poor kind Perjured pretty one, I am beholding
To thee; would damn thy self for me?

You are mistaken, I have tried you fully;
You are noble, and I hope you love me; be ever fl^m to
Virtuous principles: My Name is not so godly ^ one
As Ruth, but plain Anne, and Daughter to Sir ^ Thorowgood,
One perhaps that you have heard of, since in the World he
Has still had so loud and fair a Character: 'tis too long to tell
You how this Day got me an Infant, and my ^ate
Into his power, and made me pass for his ^ Daughter,
My Father dying when I was but two years ^.
This I knew but lately, by an unexpected meeting of an ancient
Servant of my Fathers: but two hours since Arbella and I
Found an opportunity of stealing away all the Writings that
Belonged to my Estate, and her Composition: ^ flight
We met your Friend, with whom I left heras soon as I had
Intelligence of your misfortune, to try to get your liberty;
Which if I can do, you have an Estate, for I have mine.

Thou more than --


No, no, no Raptures at this time; here'd our disguise
Purchased from a true hearted Red coat* here's a ^
Let this Line down when 'tis almost dark, and you shall draw
Up a Ladder of Ropes; if the Ladder of Ropes be done sooner,
I'll send them by a Soldier that I dare trust; and you may,
Your Window's large enough: As soon as you receive it
Come down; if not, when 'tis dusk, let down your line;
And at the bottom of the Window you shall find yours,
More than her own, not Ruth, but Anne.

I'll leap into thy arms. --


So you may break your neck: If you do, I'll jump too;
But time steals on our Words; observe, all I have told you:
So farewell. --

Nay, as the good Fellows use to say, Let us not part
With dry Lips. -- One kiss.

Not a bit of me, till I am all Yours.


Your hand then, to show I am grown reasonable.
A poor Compounder.

Pish, there's a dirty Glove upon it. --


Give me but any naked part, and I'll kiss it as a Snail
Creeps, and leave sign where my Lips ^id along --

Good Snail, get out (...) your hole ^st, think of
Your business. So fare

Nay, preth^e he not* ^am'd that thou art loath
To leave me. 'S^id, I am a Man, but I'm as ar^ant a Rogue, as thy
Quondam Father Day, it I could not cry to leave thee
A brace of Minutes.

Away, we grow foolish -- farewell -- yet be careful --
Nay, go in.

Do you go first.


Nay, sie, go in.


We'll fairly then divide the Victory,
And draw off together. -- So -- I will have the last look.

N^ words; I do believe, nay, I know thou art
Honest I may ^ thank thee better.

I scorn any encouragement to love my King, or those
That serve him. I took Pay under these People,
With a design to do him Service; the Lieutenant knows it.

He has told me so, no more words, thou art a noble
Fellow; thou art sure his Window's large enough?

Fear it not.


Here then, carry him this ladder of Ropes: So now give
Me the Coat; say not a word to him, but bid him dispatch
When he sees the Coast clear; he shall be waited for at
The bottom of his Window. Give him thy Sword too if
He desires it.

I'll dispatch it instantly, therefore get to your place.


I warrant ye.


Have you done every thing then? By my should now,
Yonder is the Man with the hard name; that Man now, that I
Made drunk for thee, Mr. Tay's Rascal; he is coming along
There behind, now upon my Should that he is.

The Rascal comes for some mischief. Teg, now, or
Never play the Man.

How should I be a Man then?


Thy Master is never to be got out, if this Rogue
Gets hither; meet him therefore, Teg, in the most winning
Manner thou can, and make him once more Drunk, and it
Shall be called the Second Edition of Obadiah, put forth
With Irish Notes upon him; and if he will not go drink with thee.

I will carry him upon my back-side, if he will not go;
And if he will not be Drunk, I will cut his Throat then, that
I will, for my sweet Master now, that I will.

Dispatch good Teg, and dispatch him too if he will
Not be conformable; and if thou can but once more
Be Victorious, bring him in Triumph to Lieutenant Story's,
There shall be the general Rendezvous: Now or never, Teg.

I warrant you, I will get drink into his Pate, or I will
Break it for him; that I will, I warrant you: He shall
Not come after you now.

Good luck go with thee: The Fellow's faithful and
Stout; that fear's over: Now to my station.

The time's almost come, how slow it flutters?
My desires are better winged: how I long to counterfeit
A faintness when I come to the bottom, and sink into the arms
Of this dear witty fair! -- Ha, who's this?

Here, Sir, here's a Ladder of Ropes, fasten it to your
Window, and descend: you shall be waited for.

The careful her creature has sent it -- but d'hear, Sir,
Could you not spare that implement by your side; it might
Serve to keep off small Curs.

You'll have no need on it, but there 'tis, make haste,
The coast is clear.

O this pretty she Captain General over my Soul
And body; the thought of her musters every faculty I have:
She has sent the Ropes, and stays for me; no danger of the
Ropes, ever slide down with that swiftness (of desire of haste)
That I will make to thee.

All's quiet, and the coast clear; so far it goes well;
That is the window, in this nook I'll stand, till I see him
Coming down.

I cannot see my North Star that I must Sail by, 'tis
Clouded, only she stands close perhaps in some corner;
I'll not trifl time, all's clear; Fortune, forbear
Thy tricks, but for this small occasion.

What's this, a Soldier in the place; Careless,
I am betrayed, but I'll end this Rascals duty.

How, a Soldier! betrayed! this Rascal shall not laugh at me.


Dog.


How Blunt!


Careless!


You guess shrewdly; plague, what contrivance
Hath set you and I a Tilting at one another.

How the Devil got you a Soldiers habit?


The same Friend for ought I know, that furnished you.
This kind Gentlewoman is Ruth still. Ha, here she is;
I was just ready to be suspicious.

Who's there?


Two notable charging Red-coats.


As I live, my heart is at my mouth.


Prithee, let it come to thy Lips, that I may kiss it;
What have you in your lap?

The Ladder of Ropes: How a Gods name got you hither?


Why, I had the Ladder of Ropes, and came down by it.


then the mistake is plainer; 'twas I that sent the
Soldier with the Ropes.

What an Escape was this! come, let's lose no time;
Here's no place to explain Matters in.

I will stay to tell thee, I shall never deserve thee.


Tell me so when you have had me a little while. Come*
Follow me, put on your plainest Ga^b; not like a Dancing
Master, with your Toes out. Come along,
Hang down your head,
As if you wanted pay. So.

Are you sure of this, Neighbour Chat?


I'm as sure of it, as I am that I have a Nose to my Face.


Is my --
You may give one leave methinks to ask out one question.
Is my Daughter Ruth with her?

She was not when I saw Mrs. Arbella last; I have not
Been so often at your Honours House, but that I know
Mrs. Arbella, the rich Heir, that Mr. Abel was to have had,
Good Gentleman, if he has his due; they never suspected
Me for -- to buy things of my Neighbour Story, before she
Married the Lieutenant; and stepping in to see Mrs. Story
That now is; my Neighbour Wish-well, that was; I saw, as
I told you, this very Mrs. Arbella, and I warrant Mrs. Ruth
Is not far off.

Let me advise then, Husband.


Do, good Duck, I'll warrant 'em.


You'll warrant when I have done the business.


I mean so, Duck.


Well, pray spare your meaning too; first then
We'll go our selves in person to this Story's House, and in the
Mean time send Abel for Soldiers; and when he has brought
The Soldiers, let them stay at the Door, and come up himself;
And then if fair means will not do, foul shall.

Excellent well advised, sweet Duck:
Ah let thee alone. Be gone, Abel, and observe thy Mother's
Directions. Remember the place. We'll be revenged for
Robbing us, and for all their tricks.

I shall perform it.


Come along, Neighbour, and show us the best way,
And by and by we shall have news from Obadiah, who is gone
To give the the other Colonels Jailer a double charge to keep
The wild Youth close. Come, Husband, let's hasten. Mrs. Chat,
The State shall know what good service you have done.

I thank your Honour.


Pray, Madam, weep no more; spare your tears till
You know they have miscarried.

'Tis a Woman, Sir, that weeps; we want Men's reasons
And their courage to practise with.

Look up, Madam, and meet your unexpected joys.


Oh my dear Friend, my dear, dear Ruth.


Pray none of these phlegmatic hugs; there, take
Your Colonel, my Captain and I can hug afresh every minute.

When did we hug last, good Soldier?


I have done nothing but hugged thy infancy, ever since
You Ruth turned Annice.

You are welcome, Sir, I cannot deny
I shared in all your danger.

If she had denied it, Colonel, I would have betrayed her.


I know not what to say, nor how to tell, how dearly,
How well -- I love you.

Now can't I say I love him, yet I have
A mind to tell him too.

Keep't in and choke your self, or get the rising of the lights.


What shall I say?


Say something, or he'll vanish.


Do ye not believe I love you, or can't you love me?
Not a word? could you -- but --

No more, I'll save you the labour of Courtship, which
Should be too tedious to all plain and honest natures:
It is enough, I know you love me.

Or may I perish whilst I am swearing it.


How now, Jack!


O Master, undone! here's Mr. Day the Committee-man,
And his fierce Wife, come into the Shop: Mrs Chat
Brought them in, and they say they will come up, they know
That Mrs. Arbella, and their Daughter Ruth, is here:
Deny 'em if you dare, they say.

Go down, Boy, and tell 'em I'm coming to 'em; this pure
Jade, my Neighbour Chat, has betrayed us; what shall I do?
I warrant the Rascal has Soldiers at his heels: I think I
Could help the Colonels out at a back Door.

I'd dye rather by my Arbella; Now
You shall see I love you.

Nor will I Charles forsake you Annice.


Come, be cheerful, I'll defend you all against
The assaults of Captain Day, and Major General Day, his
New drawn up Wife; give me my Ammunition, the Papers,
Woman. So, if I do not rout 'em, fall on; let's all dye together,
And make no more Graves but one.

'Slife, I love her now for all she has jeered me so.


Go fetch 'em in, Lieutenant, stand you all drawn up
As my reserve -- so -- I for the Forlorn Hope.

That we had, Teg, here to quarrel with the Female
Triumphing Day, whilst I threw the Ma^e Day out of the Window.
Hark, I hear the Troop marching; I know the she Day stamp
Among the tramples of a Regiment.

They come, Wench, charge 'em bravely,
I'll second thee with a Volley.

They'll not stand the first charge, fear not;
Now the Day breaks.

Would 'twere his Neck were broke.


Ah ha, my fine run-aways, have I found you?
What, you think my Husbands honour lives without intelligence.
Marry come up.

My Duck tells you how 'tis -- we --


Why then let your Duck tell 'em how 'tis;
Yet as I was saying, you shall perceive we abound in intelligence;
Else 'twere not for us to go about to keep the Nation
Quiet; but if you, Mrs. Arbella, will deliver up what you have
Stolen, and submit, and return with us, and this ungracious Ruth.

Anne, if you please.


Who gave you that Name pray?


My God-Fathers and God-Mothers in Baptism; on, for
Sir, I can answer a Leaf farther.

Duck, good Duck, a word; I do not like this
Name Annice.

You are ever in a fright, with a shrivell'd heart
Of your own. Well, Gentlewomen, you are merry.

As newly come out of our Wardships, I hope Mr. Able is well.


Yes, he is well, you shall see him presently;
Yes, you shall see him.

That is with Mirmidans, come, good Anne, no more
Delay, fall on.

Then before the furious Abel approaches with his
Red-Coats, who perhaps are now marching under the Conduct
Of that expert Captain in weighty matters; know the Articles
Of our Treaty are only these: This Arbella will keep her
Estate, and not marry Abel, but this Gentleman; and I
Anne, Daughter to Sir Basil Thorowgood, and not Ruth,
As has been thought, have taken my own Estate,
Together with this Gentleman, for better for worse: we were
Modest, though Thieves, only plundered our own.

Yes, Gentlewoman, you took something else,
And that my Husband can prove; it may cost you your Necks
If you do not submit.

Truth on it is, we did take something else.


Oh, did you so?


Pray give me leave to speak one word in private
With my Father Day?

Do so, do so; are you going to compound?
Oh, 'tis Father Day now.

D'hear, Sir, how long is't since you have practised Physic?


Physic, what do ye mean?


I mean Physic; look ye here's a small prescription
Of yours: do ye know this hand-writing?

I am undone.


Here's another upon the same subject; this young one I
Believe came into this wicked World for want of your preventing
Dose; it will not be taken now neither; it seems your Wenches
Are wilful: nay, I do not wonder to see 'em have more
Conscience than you have.

Peace, good Mrs. Anne, I am undone if you betray me.


The Soldiers are come.


Go and send 'em away, Abel; here's no need,
No need now.

Are the Soldiers come, Abel?


Yes, but my Father bids me send 'em away.


No, not without your opinion, Duck; but since
They have but their own, I think, Duck, if we were all Friends.

O, are you at your ifs again; do you think they
Shall make a Fool of me, though they make an Ass of you:
Call 'em up, Abel, if they will not submit;
Call up the Soldiers, Abel.

Why your fierce Honour shall know the business
That makes the wise Mr. Day inclinable to Friendship.

Nay, good sweet heart, come, I pray let us be Friends.


How's this! what am not I ^it to be trusted now?
Have you built your credit and reputation upon my council
And labours, and am not I ^it now to be trusted?

Nay, good sweet Duck, I confess I owe
All to thy wisdom. Good Gentlemen, persuade my Duck
That we may be all Friends.

Hark you, good Gillian Day, be not so fierce upon
The Husband of thy Bosom; 'twas but a small start of frailty;
Say it were a Wench, or so?

As I live he has hit upon it by chance: now we
Shall have sport.

How, a Wench, a Wench! out upon the Hypocrite.
A Wench! was not I sufficient? a Wench! I'll be revenged,
Let him be ashamed if he will: call the Soldiers, Abel.

Haste, good Abel, march not off so hastily.


Soft, gentle Abel, or I'll discover, you are in Bonds;
You shall never be released if you move a step.

D'hear, Mrs. Day, be not so furious, hold your peace;
You may divulge your Husbands shame if you are so simple,
And cast him out of Authority, nay and have him trv'd for
His Life: read this, remember too I know of your Bribery
And Cheating, and something else* you guess, be Friends,
And forgive one another; here's a Letter counterfeited
From the King, to bestow preferment upon Mr. Day, if
He would turn honest; by which means I suppose you
Cousened your Brother Cheats, in which he was to remember
His service to you; I believe 'twas your indicting: you are the
Committee-man, 'tis your best way: nay, never demur;
So, kiss and be Friends. Now if you can contrive handsomely
To cozen those that cozen all the World, and get these
Gentlemen to come by their Estates easily, and without
Taking the Covenant, the old Sum of five hundred pound
That I used to talk of, shall be yours yet.

We will endeavour.


Come, Mrs. Arbella, pray let's all be Friends.


With all my heart.


Brethren, Abel, the Bird is flown, but you shall be
Released from your Bonds.

I bear my afflictions as I may.


What is this now? who are you? well, are not you
Mrs. Tay? well, I will tell her what I should say now?
Shall I then? I will try if I cannot laugh too, as I did, that I will.

No, good Teg, there's no need of thy Message now;
But why dost thou lead Obadiah thus?

Well, I will hang him presently, that I will; look you
Here Mrs Tay, here's your Man Obadiah, do you see that now?
He would not let me make him drunk; no more that
He would not; so, I did take him in this string, and I did tell
Him if he did make noises, I would put the Knife into
Him, that I would upon my Soul.

Honest Teg, thy Master is beholding to thee in some
Measure for his liberty.

Teg, I shall require thy honesty.


Well, shall I hang him then? It is a Rogue now; who
Would not be drunk, that he would not.

I do beseech you, Gentlemen, let me not
Be brought unto death?

No, poor Teg, 'tis enough we are all Friends;
Come, let him go.

Well, he shall go then; but you shall love the King,
Or I will hang you another time, that I will by my Soul. Well,
Look you here now, here is the Man that sung you the Song,
That he is; I met him as I came, and I bid him come hither
And sing for the King, that I did.

D'hear, my Friends, is any of your
Companions with you?

Yes, Sir.


As I live we'll all dance; it shall be the celebration
Of our Weddings: nay, Mr. Day, as we hope to continue
Friends, you and your Duck shall trip it too.

I by my Soul will we; Obadiah shall be my Woman too;
And you shall dance for the King, that you shall.

Go, and strike up then, no chiding now, Mrs. Day;
Come, you must not be refractory for once.

Well, Husband, since these Gentlemen will have
It so, and that they may perceive we are Friends,
Dance.

Now, Mr. Day, to your business, get it done as soon as
You will, the five hundred pound shall be ready.

So, Friends, thank honest Teg, thou shalt flourish
In a new Livery for this: Now, Mrs. Annice, I hope you and
I may agree about kissing, and compound every way.
Now, Mr. Day, if you will have good luck in every thing,
Turn Cavalier, and cry, God bless the King.

BUT now the greatest thing is left to do,
More just Committee, to Compound with you;
For, till your equal Censures shall be known,
The Poet's under Sequestration:
He has no Title to his small Estate
Of Wit, unless you please to set the Rate.
Accept this half years purchase of his Wit,
For in the compass of that time 'twas Writ:
Not that this is enough, he'll pay you more,
If you your selves believe him not too poor:
For 'tis your judgments give him wealth, in this,
He's just as rich as you believe he is.
Would all Committees could have done like you,
Made Men more rich, and by their payments too.

