THe New Utopia! Is't not pretty too
If this our Comedy more strange things show
Than all Romantic Tales you've heard of old
Of love and honour? (though more lately told.)
And that you Ladies, see your Sex above
The power of men, and so command their love?
But where's the Art to form these gay things here,
Led by that Angel Wit, you Critics fear?
Who (Devil-like) to Poets teach despair:
Nay more; I'll thus of our men Actors say,
They slight perhaps how you'll receive this Play,
Like lazy Hirelings having shared their Pay:
But for us Women, we protest to Act
Above the men (who are obliged by pact)
And with that vigour will perform it too,
You'll wish your own Amours were acted so:
Though 'tis your interest to be pleased to day
To encourage Poets (after him) to pay
As much beforehand ere we act new Play.
And then 'tis Odds you'll find such cautious wit
That few will venture who have ill ones writ,
To be by Critics and themselves cross-bit;
The excuse the Poet gives, it was wit him
Perhaps like such who in discourse and Wine,
Think all they write and say is fine,
Till wiser thoughts the past condemn^
Yet he presumes that most of all you here
Have been content to pay Six days as dear,
When but a petty farce has been your Cheer;
But I'd almost forgot that you may take
A forfeit for each bolder word I speak.
Though it has past, nay held good Prologue sense,
To have dared you with less wit than confidence,
Like those Romantic favours some dispense:
'Tis here with Writers as with other men,
Suppose them rich, their wit you make so then:
Do the like now; and you perhaps may find
You' are not Cozened more in being kind.

BOy! Fetch me a glass of Sack; Or no matter --

I do not feel I want it, besides I scorn That these gray-hairs shall be
beholding to A dram of artificial mirth, I'll keep a Cordial still within me,
here.


What mean you Sir?


To be from this day young again.


That's impossible, Sir.


'Tis in my power, Boy; I find that Age Is partly affectation, a ridiculous
gravity, Worse than folly, or dotage. Hast thou writ the song out fair I gave
thee?


I have writ the Rhyme true at least, Sir; And that's it which makes the
music.


Away, away; I should be loath To make such a Satirical repartee to any of our
Poets: Give me the song.


Shall I sing it?


No Boy, I'll not entertain my self at The Second hand; should a Lady offer her
voice As amorous as I feel my self to be, I'd Rather desire her pardon, and
make use of my natural Air


This master of mine was ever inclined to mirth;

But this has so much of the extreme, that did I but Observe such another
Example, and were old enough To be skilled in the Stars, I should judge We had
a various world towards.

THough Nature, some tell, grows old, grows old,
And youth and age decay;
In spigbt of all her winters cold
I merrily sing
My ages spring:
And can love at this day,
And can love at this day.
Whilst on my head these hairs do show,
That time is old, not I
Unless his hours more youthful slow
And Autumn meet
With Summers heat;
Who else must live and die
Less pleasantly than I.

Away boy set my Lute Viol in order --

I would be yet merrier did I know how -- And teach time to grow young again.
My joints I feel can spring a caper yet --


Fie Sir Adam Meredith! What so vain? I am Sorry I find cause to rebuke it, in
a man Of your years.


Good Sir Grave Solymour do not infect me With your austerity: as I bear the
name of Adam So I will endeavour to be the first Man of mirth Of my time.


What a vain world have we towards? an old Man Turned young again?


Were I beholding to charms, like AEson, your gravity might call me in
question; Or were I infirm, and diseased; or knew Woman that despised my mirth,
age, or me, as Perhaps (though somewhat younger) you may find; I might have
cause to be less jovial, but So long as I am resolved to be youthful, Fate do
thy worst.


O times! O manners!


What call you good times, or manners, but Such as conspire most with our
delights? Be it War or peace, I am resolved to maintain my Humour; and when I
am dead, my life shall Oblige some Poet or other by spiriting Comedy with my
Character.


You have good luck if you escape Whilst you live: there are writers amongst us
Of such barren inventions, as they are forced to Character the living, and
could it but produce Reformation amongst us, Satirical Poets were The most
useful of all professions in Utopia.


What call you Reformation?


The suppression of vanity and vice.


I have heard of such a Sect in England That would inveigh openly against all
these, yet loved their Regalio's, and the close embrace in private, I hope you
are not of the same complexion,


There's nothing more hard than to dissemble safely --

But Sir though you censure freely, I hope I may deserve so much of your
Charity to Be taken as I profess my self to be.


I'll be as candid, as you can deserve, or desire me.


To requite your favour, I'll put you in Mind of what you have cause to
consider.


With all my heart, Sir.


But whether 'twill fit your jolly humour I make a question.


You need not Sir, I am prepared for all Things, the world can impose on me; a
Non-resident: Priest lives not so much sine cura, as I do, And will do.


You might remember, we are this day in danger Of being unmanned.


How unmanned? Prithee how?

I should as unwillingly want any thing that belongs to Manhood, As any man of
twenty in Utopia.


Or what is worse (if not prevented) our women. May this day claim the
Government of us, and Our Country, by an unhappy custom sometime Practised
here. Is this no judgment on our Vanities?


A mere happiness! the only mirth I looked for: I know our Law says, their
time is come, And happy our Common-wealth, that is like to Exchange Clubs for
Diamonds.


But more unhappy Ancestors. Where was their Judgments, their resolutions in
gratifying the Weak and vainer sex, with such a Law? 'Tis torment to My senses.


But in mine the most natural of all Governments. Was not first man, then
woman? So in dominion here Our constitution says, that they and we must rule by
Turns: Though as a man, I could be well enough content My own sex might be
still superior; but be merry and Amorous, and no matter, Knight.


That any man upward of 60 years should be thus Extravagant! Well Solymour;
though thy inclinations May be as prone to vice, there is some honour in thy

Dissimulation: A gilded pill deceives the eye, though Not the taste.


Mr. Frankman, well met.


Sir Adam, I joy to see you! I perceive there's no Decay of Mirth in you,
whatsoever there is in nature.


Thanks be to heaven, I feel none: My gray hairs Do not lessen my Genius, but
rather improve it by Putting me in mind of the silver Age, of which the Poets
sung so merrily in times past; and were sixteen My Rival, I should think that
woman too blame, That would not make me her choice.


God a mercy old boy.


And how do the Ladies of our acquaintance?


You would not make love to them?


Were I sure they would not neglect me for these gray hairs; I'd say
something.


A merry heart may do much, you know what Times are towards us.


I know, I know; and have been winning of Sir Solymour; but he's so austere.


Oh he's a man of magistracy, though I believe no better A member of the
Common-wealth, than he should be.


And must blush with others; if I lay down my authority. At the foot of a
petticoat: are you for a resignation Mr. Frankman?


Not violent, but rather indifferent; since the Law allows it Though I doubt not,
we have some Magistrates of your grave Sense, that will unwillingly resign.


May heaven reward them!


But when I consider the Novelty, To see this Lady vie With the other, for
beauty, place, and superintendency; 'Twill be such a gay government.


And so sportive and aerie, that an Anarchy under them Would be pleasant.


Our predecessors, have been cursed in their Cradles, or what Is worse, fooled
by their Wives.


Do not torment your self so much, good Sir Solymour; the Utmost time is but a
year and a day, and 'tis odds, if they Obtain it, whether 'twill last to the
next Moonlight, as Matters may fall out.


Were it not for our sins, I should hope better things, But the time we live
in, is degenerate, and vicious, above All others.


A mere vulgar error, maintained by some peevish examples Of formality, and
age: Are not the Sun and Stars of the same Temper, and heat they ever were: The
Elements likewise the Same, and consequently our constitutions that depend on
These, not more variable or degenerate in this than in other ages Of the world:
but if your past youth have offended, or That you have any clandestine sin lies
heavy on your Conscience, 't will become your gravity in due time, to Repent,
and acknowledge it.


God a mercy, young heart, thou hast spoke my sense To purpose.


And touches home, but I hope ignorantly --

I should be loath to blush for my hypocrisy. Ha -- what noise is this;


Hoboys, Sir: In my younger years they were used On the stage to represent
state and triumph.


And he at the end on it? then we shall have an Enterlude to purpose.


By your leaves Gentlemen, I would be excused The hearing of it.


You shall not take it by your favour Sir, until you Know the occasion of his
presenting himself thus.


A ha -- boys --


I beseech you Sir, I love no instrumental sound, to which Purpose I have
caused all the instruments in my house To be broken.


I fear a sign of no good nature in you.


Or a strange antipathy to mirth.


Victory! Victory, fellow Citizens, of Utopia!


Such an extravagance as this, a man would leap down A precipice to avoid.


The great Mogul has not invaded us, and is beaten off?


And thereby hangs a tale boys, and thereby hangs a tale boys.


Proceed thou spirit of joy.


May not I withdraw yet?


Give him the hearing first; -- It may concern our common-Wealth -- Go on Sir.


Why to tell you true Gentiles, as be it known to all the World, I hate lying.


That parenthesis might have been spared.


And as I am a Gentleman of truth, and honesty, as I said before. --


Yet again! Would I were in a Mill that I might not hear the Whilst.


Then know all absent and present that I Tom Foppering Having bin the last
night, at some odds with my Wife, and so Forth; as you know, 'tis not easy for
married People to be Always even with one another.


A pleasant contention I hope.


We fell at last to single duel.


Naked I hope.


As old as you are, you're mistaken, I had my shirt on And she her smock.


O Monstrous! Above the patience of Socrates to endure!


Have a little more, he's coming to a period.


And, as I said before, being both naked, or which is all One, I in a smock,
and she in a shirt, as I told you already.


This is one symptom of a liar -- he wants memory -- But no matter. --


We fell to hand and foot. --


And nothing else?


And to say truth I had the better on her by a fall or two, And brought her to
such a submission, that for my sake She'll not attempt to rule in private or
public.


Mark that Sir Solimour; would the rest of our Females could be so compounded
with.


Nay more to our greater joy, fellow Citizens, I made her Give me her word that
she would oppose her sex in our Behalfes, if they did but offer at government.


Is this certain?


She promised it on her knees, as I love stewed pruines.


Lo you there Sir, and yet you are so severe, you would Not hear so much.


I confess my error, and beg your pardon, Sir; you may be Taken notice on for a
Patriot of your country.


A Parrot rather, for in my sense he talks by roat.


By your leave Gentlemen.


I hope you'll conveigh this good news, as occasion Serves.


And extol my exploits with due praise.


Your deserts oblige it.


A stiff piece of formality.


And used such discourses against mirth, and vanity! --


O he has got lately into office (perhaps beholding to his Money, which
sometimes creates honour, and preferments, sooner Than wit or honesty -- You
pleased him Mr. Foppering To a hair.


I am glad to do my friends, and the public, service.


Mr. Peacock well met.


And so are you Mr. Frankman, and you, Sir Adam. But For you Mr. Foppering, I
am more than your tres humble Serviteur.


I return your salutation in my mothers tongue, for want Of a better, Sir,
giving you my embrace thus.


O here were a sight indeed to trouble Solymours Patience -- but Mr. Peacock --



Your ready observer --


Sparing my return of your complement; had you been here Even now.


What then? Sir?


Why you have lost the seeing of such a sight.


A sight Sir.


Yes Sir, and such an one as the glory of Rome can't parrallel Your friend Mr.
Foppering hath had such a victory, and Triumph upon it.


Good Sir, no more; a slight passage betwixt my wife and me.


'Tis your Modesty to call it so.


Nay Mr. Foppering, if you will conceal from your friend.


Why in good faith, Mr. Peacock, to tell you true, I am Ashamed to mention it;
I had only a single Combat With my wife, and as I may tell you and the rest of
my Friends, had something the better on her Lady-ship.


Abating the folly, I have not met with such a jolly passage I konow not when.
--


You must allow a little.


With all my heart, proceed.


And yet you'll grant her a smart one, as most this Clime hath produced.


That I confess Sir, but as we men of valour say, The more Danger, the more
honour.


Passion on my heart, a brave expression: O that I had a Wife too! --


To what purpose? --


Marry that I might beat her more to purpose Than ever woman was beaten; but
though I am not so happy to have a Wife, I have a mistress I dare be bold with;
I'll go presently And swaddle her soundly.


Do, do, Mr. Peacock; if she be a woman, she cannot but Deserve it.


By no means Sir, 'twere unjust --


I beseech you Sir, permit me as you love my honour.


That's a motive indeed.


And you shall see what a triumph I'll show you, (shall out do Fopperings) with
a Drum and flying Colours, which I assure You, in contempt shall be made of her
Petticoats.


Spare me, spare me, Frankman, I shall die laughing else.


Come! you shall help to persuade --


With all my heart; I was never against reconciliation, whether It were with
man or woman.


Well Sirs, if you had not interceded, I had paid her Coat for her, I'd have
you to know, I do not fear Taffetty, when 'tis in my way.


On my Conscience thou can act the part of a man under A Petticoat -- but
enough of this matter. We must now be serious.


'Good faith; 'Twas my business Sir, Tho'I took this heat In my way, a man must
stand upon honour you know Sir.


I confess you could not well do otherwise, and such a President as Mr.
Foppering to emulate.


Excuse me Sir, I have no such ambition but by way of Discourse, or so forth.


Is not this pleasant Meredith?


It tickles me over and over; I could find in my heart to Make a Copy of verses
on the occasion; I find my wit Youthful too; I thank my Stars.


By no means, 'twould dishonour your Muse, and is rather a Fit subject for our
Lampooners that want invention Otherwise.


But to be serious, as you were saying Sir, I would ask You a capital question.


What is it?


Why, I would desire your judgment whether my periwig be A la mode or no? or
what say you Sir? or you Sir?


A capital question indeed amongst many of our Gallants.


Why Sir, I judge it fits as well on your head, as it would On any mans it sits
worse.


Would mine did deserve one as good.


And for my Clothes Gentlemen?


Exact to a Thread.


In good sooth -- I am afraid they are not fantastical Enough as the world goes
-- but I have provided others With such an invention!


As how! as how?


Why, as I am called Peacock, so I am resolved my habit: Shall be various, that
is to say, as much as in me lies, I Will Carry my Name on my back; Is not this
an invention?


Excellent! there's not such a Toyish thing thought on, since Vests were first
in use.


But an hours patience, and if my Taylor be not perfidious And break his word
with me, you shall behold me Peacock-like indeed -- I'll speak to him about it,
Presently.


You can't do better.


Ladies, your humble servant.


You preserve your mirth still, Sir Adam.


And shall do, fair ones, as long as I have to do With flesh and blood, the
fires of love are not Extinguished yet, I thank providen c.


A sprightly piece of antiquity.


And of any ingenious humour: were I courted by him, As I am a Virgin, I think
I should not have the heart To deny him.


Madam -- I am yours.


You have my thanks, but I shall hardly take you At your word.


I am sure you'll not be so unkind to forget.


Not that we have talked of love, or so -- pray Ladies, forward, the time is
expired already.


For what?


To possess and enjoy what belongs to us -- mark that, You Sons of earth.


They'll not allow us to be sons of women shortly.


And she that will quit her share in government, may She never have an
obsequious servant, or obedient Husband.


That were too much Madam.


A Brisk Lady i'faith.


Now by your leave Gentlemen --


I am sorry you afford us so short a happiness, your Company's a second life to
me.


We have some affairs with our body politic.


I see they will have a pull for the Government Come off how we can -- but
wheres Foppering?


I had some occasion to step aside a little.


And your Wife here, I could not have thought it.


But I did Sir, on some Considerations.


I suppose so.


Prithee follow her and keep her in humour (if Possible) it may be of concern
to our common-wealth.


You shall command me Sir -- but if I come within her Reach, it shall be
against my will --


A Bragadochio Fop, and assure as I live his wife beats him.


I would not wish to see it, though 'twere some diversion, as He carries the
matter.


Some of the Chief Magistrates of Utopia, Desire admittance.


Wait on them hither --


By your favour Sir, you must be here, your years Require the respect.


You must excuse me Sir, I have done with debates and Councels of this kind,
and the world's welcome to me, Which way soever it turns, thanks to my Genius.


You are much altered of late.


For the better I hope -- but to your business, here is my place.


And mine here --


The business, fathers, That requires our consideration, is a high point of
Government.


And of no less concern, than whether we men shall govern, Or this
Common-wealth have women Magistrates that in order Of nature should be our
subjects.


Prudently stated.


Though it be acknowledged that our Law doth give Them right at this time.


But not executed within mans memory, I take it.


That's granted.


And may be therefore, the more reasonably prevented.


Besides the vanity scandal, such a government may produce.


Spoke like Sir Grave Solymour.


What pains does he take to be thought -- Better than he is?


'Tis his way, 'tis his way; tho 'I am ashamed that a man Of his age, should
have a disposition so antipathiz'd To mine.


These things being considered -- I judge it suitable to Our Gravities and
discretions, to detain the power in Our hands.


The world cannot but applaud it.


But what shall we do to govern our wives in the mean time?


That's a question indeed fellow Citizen, considering how Absolute they rule at
home.


And as much affect it in private affairs, in so much that Sometimes the
management of Kingdoms, and States, comes Under their power; What think you
Genlemen?


That I am happy in being not marri'd.


And I, that I am able to love yet.


Fie, you are not serious.


And speak from the question.


I suppose some of your Gravities will be able to apply it, as Your Wives may
handle the matter.


O Gentlemen!


What's the business?


Outrageous things in agitation! our Women are turning Mankind, and using of
their vigours the wrong way.


That were a strange Metamorphosis.


I saw at least a dozen uppermost with men under them, Who lay as flat as
flounders; the Streets crowded, and Disordered; sweet-hearts and their servants
together by the Ears; Husbands beaten by their Wives twice over.


And how escaped you?


Excuse me Sir; you know my superintendency -- Besides Potts, Kettles,
Dripping-pans, and Skillets, such Weapons As I thought women would not have
fought with Out of doors, have made such batteries, and broke many A hard and
horned forehead, I suppose --


This will make work for Tinkers.


Enough to employ that Trade in my conscience an age.


What a Moon of madness are we come to?


But you have undertaken for your wife Sir?


As far as the best member I have can serve the Common-Wealth 'tis yours: in
the mean time, I'll see what becomes Of my Spouse amongst the rest --


An obliging person -- Gentlemen your assistance.


To do any but fight with women or cats.


Rather let us endeavour to bring them into humour, and So quit their pretences
that way.


I fear 'tis impossible! Here are some Of the Female Party.


And Foppering's wife one of them.


Were he present, 'Tis odds we should see a smart Combat Betwixt them.


Now Gentlemen; you that deny our Authority, make it good and meet us man To
Woman, if you dare.


Well said spirit of Venus.


There's my Glove to second her, take it up who please,


I'll rather kiss it, and return it you again.


This surpasses Amazonian impudence.


Or rather shows us that women will do more for power Than Love, we seldom
find they venture to die for that; I Presume to say so much in your behalf,
Madam.


Keep your distance Sir, and know with the rest you have But one hour to answer
our demands --


That's too much by one Moiety, it shall be but half an hour.


And to whom must we apply?


To those with us, who represent the good women of the Nation.


Instead of the good people, one of our old Common-wealth's Terms.


Is there no accommodation to be had?


Not any, until the power's first acknowledged ours.


Without which you shall have War, private and Public; The Plagues of Egypt
shall be short of what We Women will inflict on men that are disobedient. I
suppose the most of you have Wives or Mistresses, or both, And so adieu --


A menace to purpose.


A Fury could not have expressed the like.


What Catastrophe are we like to suffer?


A Gentle one at worst, I'll warrant you, 'Tis but being Amorous, and pleasant.


Ha! what noise is this? more alarms towards? Would I were fairly rid of my
office.


Or that I had given up mine to my Wife, without A demand -- my forehead will
ache for it I fear.


Again, again.


'Tis a Trumpet.


Our women are taking horse then.


To scratch us with their Nails think you?


O I am astonished!


Have you no wool to stop your Ears?


I fear I shall never hear more.


Ha, ha, ha! I cannot choose but laugh, should I die for it.


You need not apprehend; the Drum and Trumpet Speak comfort and sound a parley.


Then let us breath a while -- and so repent of our sins.


Do, good Sir, with the rest of this reverend presence, withdraw; Put on your
night-Capps, and so consider what's to be done.


Your advice is obliging and discreet.


Come Meridith.


I Wish I knew how to advise your Gravities.


Your counsel has been ever prudent.


But things are come to such an Exigent.


And the more violent, for the persons we have to deal with Being women.


Besides many of them wives, that have been in full command Already.


I must confess it is the fate of most Cities (tho'a deplorable one) To suffer
under the female Yoke: Every puss that dares but Scratch, will offer at
supremacy.


And make not a few of us greater beasts than we should be, besides --


Methinks this creature, Woman, much resembles the Eel, on Which there's least
hold to be taken by the tail.


Your Gravity says right: 'Tis a slippery propriety we have In that Sex.


But hard to be reformed, since so spiteful a decree Of Nature, that the most
serious can hardly resist it, nay Content to make love sometimes their
recreation and Leisure.


We must acknowledge it.


I wish we could not, but as the Poet sings; Et mentem dedit ipsa Venus: 'Tis
in us, and will have To do with us.


Here comes Mr. Frankman.


I beseech you, what news?


Not better Sir, than I could wish -- our women Are violent still.


Not to be compounded with on reasonable terms?


There are but few of that Sex, will usually hear Propositions of that kind.


Suppose we are content to govern with them?


And so join body politics?


Or that we might govern by day, and they by night.


An Empire so divided, I think I might comply with.


I judge you would Sir, but they require a dominion Somewhat more absolute I
fear; besides most wives have A larger Prerogative already, than you mention.


That's granted,


But an immodesty, and sin as big as impudence to Own it.


'Tis not denied -- Nor can I blame you for repining At these days, Sir
Solymour.


To have power of life and love too.


I Confess it severe -- but for such as have wives I suppose they may hold
their Capacities, with the Assistance of some others, to serve their Cures: for
us that Have none, We must do as well as we can: Women Are like
fruitful-Fields; if they lie fallow 'tis our Own faults -- but let that pass.
You must remember Your utmost time is expired.


Is there no withholding? What Says Sir Adam Meridith?


If you mean Power, let it pass, and be merry without it. The Females have
gotten the rein in their Mouths, there's No pulling of them back: I have
persuaded all my Friends And acquaintances to comply.


Is't possible?


O Sir, I would not lose the pleasure of their regency To tell my years back
again.


You see Magistrates, how we are divided in opinion.


Is there no remedy?


None as I suppose; you have moved a Nest of Hornets That have stings some
where.


And will be about your ears presently, except you conform.


Since there is no prevention I comply.


Away, away Sirs, lest the time be elapsed and they inflict Punishment for it,
or put us in the Stocks, as some, Non-con-Formist-Priests deserve amongst us.


We shall haste with ceremony and observance.


Lest you hear the Drum and Trumpet again, to put you In mind of your duty --
away, away --


So, so: the work's done.


I would not have it undone, for any pleasure I know; The Novelty must be
delightful; and to speak truth Our Masculine Common-wealth like others in the
World Hath been factious enough.


There's a Magisterial spirit of division in the best, that Ever I read of, and
not seldom destroys it self: -- but To observe how our horned Citizens will
wear their Brow Antlers, under this new Militia, and government, and such A
Common-wealth of love towards.


As will put down Love's Kingdom I warrant thee. The more won anish, the more
interest for men of Kind complexions.


Were I a woman, for thy humour's sake, I think I should love and admire thee
-- Who have we here; Peacock?


And dressed so like himself: I

Wish you Joy of your new habit.


'Tis a new mode I confess Sir, but I hope it suits Both my name, and Genius.


O to a Feather Sir: I dare commend your fancy so Far -- and where had you the
Pattern?


As far off as the Indies: I thought none nearer Airy Enough for me.


A pleasant and ingenious people, I have heard much of 'em.


O Sir, they can make bows and arrows out of a red Herring: and for their
Clothes, they make them as you see Mr. Peacocks, by using the Feathers of
Parrots, and Paraqueto's.


You are in the right, Mr. Frankman.


And can they fly when they have done?


I know not that, and yet I suppose them as near a Kin To Icarus, as any Nation
living -- Prithee Peacock Let me be beholden to thee to describe some other of
Their qualities.


Why Sir, they have an especial faculty of uttering Their minds in verse on all
occasions, and though they Walk in Feathers like Birds, as you see me, yet they
Are very profound in speech that way.


And affect poesy it seems.


He means I suppose the least part on it which is rhyme.


I thank you for your information: in my whole Time I have not heard the like.


But to return to your self again, whom I conceive to be No small wonder
amongst the rest in agitation amongst Us. --


'Tis my desire I assure you to be the greatest:


I perceive it is; The Owl among the Birds Will be nothing to what you'll be.


I hope so Sir; and to tell you truly, I have such an Affection to that Bird,
as I have altered my Coat of Arms, on that Consideration.


As how Sir, as how?


Why Sir, by placing the Owl there instead of the Eagle, Being a Bird not only
more admired, but fitter to blazon A Coat than any other. I hope the heralds
will be beholding To me for this invention.


By my heart a pleasant Imagination.


And reason too, since they have been so indiscreet hitherto As to express
Coats of Arms as obscurely as the Egyptians Did their Hieroglyphics. A man
cannot guess whether Originally they belonged to an honest man, fool, or Knave
-- but then Sir, for your Courtship?


What call you that?


He means love: A man of thy years and understand the Word no better!


And but even now confessed he had a Mistress


Now I conceive you Gentlemen; a little warm tickling Thing, I have felt it ere
now about me, sleeping, and waking.


The very same.


Why then I would have you to know, my Amours (as I take It a Modish word.)


It is so.


That is to say my Amours, shall be of a newer mode And most suitable to my
humour, and this Airy habit. To which purpose I have lately bid Adieu to my
Mistress I told you of.


I could not have believed a man of your complexion Could have been so cruel.


In good faith, Gentlemen, I could contain no longer, And was fain to entreat
her patience --


You have not beat her I hope, as you threatend you Would, on a late occasion.


No, by my life; and gave her as good Sugar, as ever was Given in words; but
told her, she must excuse her friend Jack Peacock, if henceforward he did not
love her so Well as himself.


If that be all 'tis excusable, since few love in this age. On other terms; the
more shame for Cupid.


But Sir, I gave her to understand I would be in love With my self only, and
that I was resolved to think that I am the Venus and Cupid, and not she.


This is somewhat extraordinary in deed.


And when came this humour into your Imagination?


But two hours ago, as I read the Fable of Narcissus, And have been so troubled
ever since I cannot come at My own face to kiss it, that to be revenged of Fate
I have broken a Dozen looking Glasses within this half-Hour: O I could so hug
these Cheeks of mine!


I wish you could come at your posteriors with it.


Nay I can kiss any place that belongs to me, I have Begun with my Breast as
sweetly as if they had been Dugs Of Venus, next to my Arms, and embrace my
self Thus -- then kiss my hands and Sigh, and so forward To my great Toe.


O Admirable! half a Dozen humours as new as This, would restore Comedy again.


Of which our Poets are in such want, or so barren of Invention, that without
being a Naso, 'tis easy to scent Their Fox-like-thefts, from Plays and farces,
to which they Not seldom add their own rank libells to complete their Number
of Characters.


And in this Motley manner abuse their friends and Acquaintance.


I, and one another too, I have known it done.


O sweet self, sweet self! would to Heaven that Nature Or Art could afford me
such another self.


This is such another Narcissus.


But a greater Fop than the other was feigned to be -- and I have a device will
fit him to a hair.


'Prethee let him know it.


How shall I love thee and admire thee enough, my sweet Pretty sine delightful
self -- O that I might be such Another self unto my self.


Well Sir, suppose I put your desires in a way to be served.


To be made such another man as I am, do you mean Sir?


What else Sir; to be such another man as you are without Staying the time to
beget him, that's your desire?


The very same Sir.


Ha, ha; ha! he would be made two and yet continue still one. There's no miracle
above it.


And thus I advise you: There's in the City a man that I have heard of, who
undertakes to effect strange things Without the help of Nature, nay, for a need
in spite of Her Teeth.


As how Sir?


Why, by extracting of Essences, and Quintessences, with which He pretends to
make Gold as fast as one will butter Eggs, or any thing out of nothing if he
pleases.


This is the person I would know above the world. And what his profession?


He is called a Virtuoso in general, but held to be a Kind of Magician and
Chemist together, and so forth.


He will not raise a spirit I hope.


Not that any body shall ever see I'll warrant you, however By his Art he
pretends to as great matters; as Restaurations of Nature, making the Elements a
new, out Of which he can draw fire as pure, as that with which Prometheus
kindled life in man first; and such feats as these.


Away Sir, to him by any means! but where shall I Find him?


That I forgot indeed, why he lives very near the Labour In vain, if you open
your mouth in the next Street You'll hear of him, and withal let him know I
Commend you to him. -- I know he's fool enough To believe as great an
impossibility.


I wish that my Feathers would supply me with Wings That I might fly to him. --



You have sent him away in a Mood indeed; Nay, Believing that this Miracle
shall be effected of him.


The vanity of his humour and weakness of his sense Does sufficiently comply to
that purpose -- Besides There's no better way to reform folly, than when it
suffers By it's own Extravagance: Too much of self-love in any Kind deserves
some punishment.


A most ingenious piece of Justice.


And yet 'tis observable that soolery, as well as Knavery, has ever had a
favourable growth amongst us.


Like that we see in Tulips, there's none more gaudy. Than the fool, or of
better esteem -- I suppose there May be found as good a Metaphor for the
latter; but Give us Mirth, and honesty with it, and no matter on What Systeme
the world moves. --


One that is as excellent in his kind as the other.


But not of so singular a Genius, as to be in love with himself.


Well brain of mine, I am beholding to thee for something.


I think not: now Mr. Foppering! how go matters?


So, so, Gentlemen.


Is that all from a man of thy invention?


My friends of Mirth, you shall not say that Tom Foppering Has not something
extraordinary to say, if occasion serves.


I thought so -- but hast not been at Civil wars with thy Wife again.


For my wife Sir, she and I agree as we please, and sometime Differ, if we
think fit, though we know not why: There's Destiny in Marriage as well as in
something else -- you Know of.


We conceive you to a thread.


But I can tell you of a greater female wonder than you Have heard of yet, will
you believe me?


As far as we have cause at least.


Fie, fie, you must allow something more to a friend Than that comes to; 'tis but
an ordinary Civility as the World goes.


You shall have it then.


Why then I must tell you, we have strange times towards.


That may be believed; and Women to govern.


But my proof that we shall have such, is more miraculous Than all.


Proceed, we are a little in haste.


Nay, you must not be in too much haste neither, there are Degrees in all
things; but to come to the matter.


Do 'prethee, I hate prolixity, as I do ill humour.


'Tis somewhat of the biggest to get out.


Swallow it back again.


But you shall have it egregiously -- and know that I Tom Foppering saw this
very Moon.


Where is she? this is day, and the Sun shining.


Nay, and you'll put me out, who can help it.


Suppose it the Moon then.


Why then Sir, I saw that very Moon, you and I suppose, put On a Milk-maids hat
in yonder Grove last night.


And did not you make love to her?


In good sooth I could not choose.


You had been to blame else, and so acted Endymions Part to purpose. -- ha --


Nay, you know I can do as much with hand and foot As another -- but it fell
out we were prevented so Unluckily.


As how, 'prethee?


Why an unlucky Owl, gave a Whoop, and frighted her. To the very place you see
her shine in now.


That's the Sun once more, Animal.


But left this Slipper behind her, which I will kiss Often, and call her
Mistress still.


A Slip-shoo'd Moon.


But friends not a word to my Wife.


Or if she knew it, she'd hardly be jealous.


By the next Moon-light or before, you may know More perhaps of her favours.


In the mean time this tale of thine, does equal, if not' Surpass, the greatest
Doctor of Fables amongst all the Poets.


That's the ambition of my ingenuity, Sir.


I believe thee Tom! What a Dialogue had this been to have Punished Sir Grave
Solymour with.


And the Exclamations he would have made against vanity Enough to have tired a
dozen Vestals one by one. I was never so sick of Age, as since I knew his
Gravity.


Please you Gentlemen that I go and make a relation to Him on purpose?


You shall not at this time. See here Are some of our Lady Magistrates.


How! Men, and come thus boldly towards us! where are Your manners?


I suppose you know we are Dames now.


And Pliant ones I hope, I should be loath to live an Hour longer else, as
quick as I feel life about me.


A smart humour of an old one.


But we are now to think of power, and men after As occasion serves.


But play not the Tyrant with us Ladies, we wish Your Dominion well, provided
you'll love, and so forth.


My husband here! I'll stop a little --


'Twill not belong e're we shall acquaint you with what We require in order to
your obedience.


We are your subjects already Ladies -- but to tell you truth -- Here is a
Gentleman that is a small dissenter, having Had some difference lately with his
wife, about Supremacy.


A small contest Ladies, as much as came to a blow with the Smart of my hand;
or so.


And somewhat betwixt your feet, was't not?


I thank your remembrance; but I am so good natured that I chastise her first,
and forgive her afterwards.


Do you so Sir?


Nay, make it good now Sir.


And has bragged I should be no Mistress Magistrate Of the Common-wealth, has he
not?


I suppose he will not deny it.


Excuse me Sir, as I am a man in favour with the Stars I am in haste? --


I'll stay it a little -- And have the other Slipper of the Moons to sind; have
you so Sir?


As sure as she dropped this in yonder Grove Wife!


In the mean time, I could find in my heart to make Use of it about your pate.


Do not profane it so I beseech thee, though to tell thee the Truth, I cannot
choose but be in love with her horns.


Perhaps I may bestow a pair on you in time -- and then For your belying of me,
and our Sexes Authority.


Thou know I love to talk for my Credit, or so.


And disparage my superiority, do you?


By both my ears, which are at thy service, I Scorn it Wife.


Would I could come at thy tongue as well.


No more good Madam.


Am I fit to govern now Sir ah?


By this hand of thine, which I kiss thus, and honour as the Sceptre of my
obedience, Thou art, as thou know I was Never against it betwixt our selves.


You must interpose Ladies, or here will be a battery at least.


La. Enough, enough, Madam.


And remember you come not near my bed till I command you.


Not I, by my manhood, of which thou hast had so often The better.


Perhaps I'll next send you to travail, and be sure if I Do, you return a fine
Gentleman.


I'll do my utmost endeavour, Wife.


It may be, come back a verier fool than he went: I have known it so in some.


In the mean time expect my further orders -- and take a care How you tell any
more tales of the Moon.


Away, away Tom! -- But for this accident we should Not have been rid of him so
pleasantly.


But I'll be in love with the Moon, in spite of her Teeth, if I please.


Ladies! I beg your excuse for this passion of mine, though 'tis m^ Fortune to
have a Husband of a more weak and impotent Sense, than some others in the
World.


We conceive you, Madam! --


A few more examples of this kind were motives enough For us to use our
Legislative power against marriage; it Makes people fall so foul upon one
another.


That would live kindly otherwise. And consequently such a Mischievous
Conjunction,


For what concerns my interest in a husband, might I Not be thought partial, I
should give my vote with the First.


And how would you provide for love, Ladies, then. As Many years as I tell, I
should be loath to live without it.


God a mercy for thy Quaere i'faith old boy.


Methinks he should not be one and twenty by his humour.


Bating his age, I have not known any thing more Taking.


But for your Quaere, 'tis as easily resolved as asked, There being many other
ways to provide for the Toy you Talk of.


And may please flesh and blood as well I judge.


Besides we women are not so little acquainted With those soft Intrigues, as to
want due Caution, Without being beholding to a Matrimonial vow, which Men make
no more conscience to break, than to gather Black-berries, or kindling of fire
abroad, when their Own will not burn at home.


Gravely resolved! Here comes

Our President, and other of our Magistracy.


I perceive by your familiarities the men have complied.


We dare assure it you.


In order to which, you'll soon have the acknowledgments Of our late
Magistrates.


'Tis well they have saved us the labour of obtaining our Rights otherwise.


What a Race of Amazons would these make?


Please you, to our affairs now.


But first Ladies I have a favour to entreat.


What is it?


That we join in a Dance, and as you have the Power Oblige us with a little of
your mirth.


'Tis something unseasonable. -- But what say you Ladies?


I am not against it.


Nor any of us.


Begin then, and take your Lady, Sir.


By your favour Madam.


And I'll be here! --


And let the Tune be, A merry world my Masters.


You should have said Mistresses.


I meant as much.


For your Mirths sake you shall lead the Dance, Sir.


I acknowledge it a favour Madam.

Now Ladies you have not found Me old.


You have youth in abundance still,


Were it not for a blush I would say something a little More kind.


Ladies we are yours.


And if you have such another merry subject as

My self under your republic blame me for it!


Since you allow me the honour of

Being your president, my place is here.


With all acknowledgment.


And what shall be our future Government?


Say, we elect a Monarchess amongst our selves.


I dissent by your favour Madam, because not so natural In our Sex to endure a
superior.


Right Madam, and the very reason, that induces not a few of us To be out of
love with Matrimony, which doth rather establish The Tyranny of men, than the
Law of nature.


Well said, smart one.


And has made her Husband sensibe accordingly. --


Is there not a government to be thought on, that admits neither Equal nor
Superior, because it is most natural for Us Women to endure neither.


That's Impossible.


I find my inclinations to Anarchy.


And why, Madam?


Because most suitable to change.


A reason womanish enough.


But that's no Government -- My vote is rather For a Common-wealth, not only as
it has been here before In Men, but as it brings us to a nearer equality.


But how shall we agree on wit, servants, and especially Beauty, since the most
capital Emulation amongst women Is like that of the Goddesses, who shall be
thought fairest.


That we must take upon our servants word, or trust our Glasses for -- but what
say you to a Common-wealth?


I'll follow my President. Eug. And I. Omn. And all.


Then from this hour begins our fair Republic.


Some of the City desire admittance.


They have it. Your business Citizens?


'Tis in the name of this City and Country, to present your Fair, and Gracious
Republic, with all these representations Of power that belonged to us as men.


A discreet Citizen!


And speaks home to our purpose,


But for your Charter, we'll Grace your City so far as to Grant a new one to
your Wives.


Nay Ladies entitle not our wives supreme, though you Command us.


Let us continue our Prerogatives over them we beseech you.


How, how, how, the command of your Wives?


A very Treason, President, that would except their Wives the most trusty and
sure confidents of our Government.


Away, Away!


You brow-Antler-men.


Things of more forehead than brain.


Speak against our Prerogative, you wagtails, to Little purpose!


Nay Ladies, you must be more moderate.


You must excuse us in this case.


In which consists so essentially our supremacy.


Cit. Good Ladies hear your President.


For my share I'd be content with a reasonable accommodation.


But were you a wife!


I know not how my mind might alter then.


What we may determine in this case, ought to be With due respect and caution
-- and for your Wives, they May continue yours.


We thank your Grace.


A Comfortable Expression!


We do not mean absolutely, so long as you please, But whilst they please, and
you deserve their respects.


And are obedient Husbands, mark that Citizens. --


Lad. There we comply.


Let me have power on mine, until she's old, I'll Desire her no longer, as I am
a true Citizen of Eutopia.


And so of mine, whilst she is good conditioned, or honest, I ask no more.


I was married but yesterday, and if you do not mitigate This decree, 'tis odds
but she may long for change already, And part with me before I have had so much
as the better Of her Virginity.


That were severe indeed.


Better an inconvenience, than a general mischief.


My spouse is old, and to save her a labour, I am Content to depart from her
first, if your Republic Shall think fit to allow it.


I suppose you would.


But that were against charity.


And the humanity we allow.


Right, Madam: When the flower is gone, there is no reason To cast away the
root.


I rather conceive we ought to judge them old, when we Find occasion, and not
they presume to censure us for being so.


Betwixt both Sexes some mean were necessary, For which you shall be referred
to our Courts, where every Particular Case shall have due respect, and justice.


But for Alimony, in case of separation?


I suppose when that's in question the men must sue Us.


As you are Superior they must, but not be vexed With delays by way of
retaliation, as some of our Sex may pretend to have been: all cases shall have
a Just and soon dispatch -- you agree Ladies?


All with our President.


So much is for your comfort, Citizens.


Since we must be overwiv'd, and topped every way, We cannot but acknowledge it.


And so we humbly take our leaves. --


Having thus resolved of our government, 'twill be Requisite to consider how we
shall maintain it. In relation to Peace and War.


A necessary consideration: and no less the concern Of our ambitions and
honour.


And must we likewise in imitation of the warlike Amazons lead our Sex to
battle?


If cause require, we must.


I hope there's none of us but dare.


Or we'll be more masculine than ever were those martial Females, and lead the
men, who shall serve as soldiers Under us commanders.


I long to be a Captain.


I suppose I have showed you the way how to have the Better of men at home, in
beginning with my Husband; Wherefore I expect no inconsiderable command
otherwise.


But I hope, you'll not be obliged to fight; I should Be sorry to be your leader
on such an account.


And I to be a follower, though I should as unwillingly Turn tail as any she
amongst us.


Within we'll more at large debate of this and other Our concerns.

And by our Rule let us instruct men so,
That they may yield our virtues greatest too.

Not acknowledged by your Father yet?


Nor ever like, if heaven be not more my friend than he.


Who does teach repentance, he ne'er means to practise: The common road of all
Hypocrisy.


I blush for his sake.


And so do I; To see him declaim against vice, yet Privately affect it, as if
there were no way to reform Prodigality, without being in love with
Covetousness


Thence comes my injury and grief, for though his Nature be Severe, and not so
good as I would wish my Father: his Covetousness does far exceed it.


A vice as universal as love, Featlin -- But this is such A hideous Crime, I
know not what to call it in him.


My Mother dying in my Infant years, as I was her only Most unfortunate Son, He
as an Example of covetousness And Cruelty in Fathers, disposed of me for a
small sum (though Very young) to be brought up; and since permits me not into
His sight.


And for no cause.


Not as I ever knew, or can judge any, except he has Inclination to marry, and
have other issue, or else give his Estate for his future Glory to erect an
Hospital, or such Like act to preserve his Memory.


He is not so charitable, and use thee thus! A parish does not Apprentice out a
Beggars child a cheaper way, or a Gentleman his by-blow, lest he should blush
in the Future to own his issue -- Dost thou not know him now?


I did not until lately showed him, nor will he know me If he might, by any
application I can gather.


What kindness has providence vouchsafed thee For thy subsistence hitherto?


Some Jewels, which my Mother dying committed to a hand Of trust, have been the
means I do appear so like my Self; My manners I have travelled to improve;
visited Camps, and Courts abroad, as the most generous Schools Of youth -- But
what will be my future destiny?


Trouble not thy self with Fate, as 'tis hidden from us, So let it take care of
it self and us too, for Frankman. Be merry, and think my Sword, purse, and best
wit shall Be at thy service.


Your expressions are too great and many applied to Me so much a stranger to
you.


I do believe it just; that's obligation to a Gentleman. Besides the Government
is now the women's.


I understand it, Sir.


Thou hast a smooth face, and the Common-wealth has Many soft, and fair members
to be laid hold on.


Some Ladies I have visited, and perhaps have my Concerns of love besides; so
far I'll be Ingenious with you.


And much joy may it do thy heart! For my part, I had as leave see a Castril
sport With the Wine, as a man generous and youthful, That has nothing to do
with Venus. --

Sir Adam Meredith! --

Here's a Gentleman that will deserve your acquaintance.


And is he Airy, Jocund, and gay, as his age declares him?


Doubt it not Sir, though at present he suffers by some concern, You shall know
more at leisure.


Why then, I embrace thee brother youth as a Socio of My Mirth; thy father
cannot wish thee better.


Would he did but as well -- A humour I have not Observed at his years.


What are years to me? Though time has snowed on my head, I have a Summer in my
heart, and am firm at the Center still, Lad.


May it continue Sir!


There's little doubt of that; 'thas been long his humour, Rather improves of
late.


O! here's Peacock come again. --


One of the newest humours extant amongst us.


I believe it.


If you knew all you'd say more -- He's in love with Himself.


That's no great novelty, since the greatest part of mankind Have kindness
enough for themselves.


But he comes nearer Narcissus.


Or rather exceeds him.


And as you see, admires his looks, his proportions, and when He has done,
makes love to himself all over.


And to his Feathers too, methinks. --


I'll tell you what he has endeavoured besides; make good What I say, Peacock!


as far as these Feathers can fly I am at your service Mr. Frankman.


Thou Bird of Manhood, I thank thee -- And thou hast Been with the Artist I
told thee off --


I have Sir. --


And has he performed?


To my utmost desire Sir; and like a most skilful Chemist Has extracted the
same man as I am -- out of me.


Look you there Gentlemen, he has been made twice without Being well begotten
once -- I told you there was more Miracle behind. --


By which means I am now in love with my self, twice Over, (that is to say) I
am doubly the same.


As two individual things may be in one, that's his Meaning! --


This is novelty indeed.


Our Country is famous for nothing so much, and I hope I am Some part on it my
self, I should be angry with my age otherwise -- and how was this effected?


Why Sir, by only bidding me blow pretty hard into a Cruciter, I think he calls
it.


A Crucible -- thou Coxcomb! --


And what next?


Why Sir, I infused so much of my self into it, that meeting With fire and Air,
artificially working together, perfected At last such another gross substance
as I am.


This is a perfect Chemist I warrant him.


A Quack that I advised him to, for a little diversion, And punishment of his
folly together.


And more for your comforts Gentlemen, he'll make you all as Many times over,
if you please. Alas! he can make men As fast as they do Puppets; but that he is
not willing To increase the price of Bread-Corn, he has told me his Mind so
far.


And what was his price? I suppose he used you well.


I assure you Sir, This second production of my self stands Me but in twenty
nobles betwixt friends.


I knew he would use you kindly.


By this good light, a man cannot get a child by the By, so cheap, let him use
the best husbandry he Can.


And when shall we see this other self of yours?


Why Sir, so satisfy your curiosity, I will appear In my double person
immediately. --


By any means Sir, methinks I long like a Maid in love, till I behold this
prodigy.


Why Sir, I was but hard by a putting on another Habit, the Artist desiring
that he or I in him Might continue a space with him while I was Talking with
you here.


And be sure bring this great Master of Art with you. I would not lose the
curiosity of seeing him.


I shall Sir, on your secrecy.


Fear nothing.


Nay; 'prethee dispatch.


I shall Gentlemen, and if any of you have a mind to Be made once more as I am,
you may have it done.


A most new and excellent example Of self-love.


A sign the world and time renews again -- has not his Character been upon the
Stage yet?


I believe not; Though the age has been so ransacked for humour, That men are in
some fear to converse freely, lest they be Heard again in the next new Play.


That's some good fortune for him I'll assure you. But see -- here comes the
man-maker.


Your name Sir?


I am called Orlando Curioso.


A very Emphatical name.


'T was bestowed on me in Spain; I assure you Sir, as no Small honour to my
Art.


Nay, 'prethee let his Denomination alone, I'd as soon study Arabic or learn
his Art (that signifies little more than Hard Words) as hear it twice.


O Sir, I remember you now, and have read your cures and works Set up like
Trophies on posts and pillars of our City; Where amongst other things you
undertook to reduce Age to Youth, and turn hair silvered over like mine By
time, to a brown-colour, and soft as Gostimores -- Is't not so?


And am ready to undertake it if you'll prove my Experiments.


You shall excuse me Sir, I am young enough without it, I thank this heart of
mine.


I do such like feats, with some negligence Of my Art, and deeper Science, as
the restoring of men And women to their first vigour, producing of hair As long
as Perriwiggs, though they have shed from the Skull by siccation, and baldness,
or other defects above Or below. If I look in a mouth, I know what tooth Will
decay, and the minute when, preventing it accordingly.


And what more? I know you are but on the outside Of your Art yet.


If a Lady be curious would know her fortune by her hand, I spare her the
labour and tell it by her eye.


A pleasant Symptom.


And most possible of all the particulars he has named yet.


Or if she have a mind to dream pleasantly, she shall do It, as well at 50, as
at 21. and so to fourscore or upwards. If a man or woman wear but a ring that
has a small Tincture of my Art, they shall fall in love without being Beholding
to Hymen.


Why, so they do already, Buzzard.


Besides I have my several Spirits of Sulphur, Mercury And Salt.


The last of which will powder Beef, will it not?


I have printed it's use (amongst others) to that purpose. And for my Sulphur
and Mercury, it does wonders As some Gallants can witness.


Cures the Itch, does it not?


And what is got by the worst of Itches too -- then for My Spirit of Salt of
the world.


A soul of Salt we shall hear of.


And not enough for the Earth to produce.


Nor the Sea neither; together with my Elixar proprietatis, Et procreationis.


That's a new word, the other I have known sold before.


But never worth my buying.


No more of hard words.


To conclude then, with the two last mysteries of my skill, I do all that can
be desired by men and women.


That they shall not decay or dye.


The first I can say much to, for the latter I may undertake It in time --
there is a Paracelsian Recipe for that, called Ens naturae, as likewise how to
make men (as you'll witness I perform) though not effectually practised by any
man, Besides my self to this day.


And can you make a wise man out of a fool as easily, since The World does
beget fools enough, without help of your Art.


I do not say as easily, wherefore I do not care to effect many Artificial
Examples of that kind, though nature (according to The learned) gives but one
soul to all things in the most differing Bodies. If I am to deal with a
wiseman, (as our art of Chemistry has been beholding to some so far as To
honour it by the ruin of their estates) I deal one Way with him, if with a
fool another; let this worthy Gentleman be my testimony.


A pertinent one.

And have you performed this wonderful propagation of him In so short a time?


I am as well prepared in an hour as in seven years.


I believe so.


Not any wait, as is usual (with Other Artists) on the most superlative
operation I Undertake to produce.


I will justify thy Art Scholar, as I am doubly a man of Thy making. Observe
here, Gentlemen --


How they kiss like Twins of two years old.


But he thinks he kisses himself all the while, that's The jest on it -- and how
many men have you made in This manner before.


Not many Sir, or desire it, because not so gracious to Mankind, Who are
willing to continue their natural way of Generation; Though I have had
application made to me to that purpose From an Island newly inhabited in the
Atlantick-Ocean, where They are necessitated (for want of people) to engender
with Baboons, Drils, and Monkeys.


You are famous abroad as well as at home then? --


As you see Gentlemen! Where I gain confidence and sit Instruments, my
endeavours are not wanting.


I suppose so.


'Tis not every Tree produces Cherries, nor every Quarry Diamonds; There must
be a propensity in nature to assit Art.


And these your examples?


O my dear self, my dear self! How shall I love Thee enough, my dear self?


A pretty kind of love.


And this Eye, this Lip, this Cheek of mine, which no longing Maid living shall
rob me of.


She were but ill sped if she did: but methinks the other Speaks not.


Ga, ga, ga, ga, ga, ga, c.


But offers at it.


Ga, ga, ga, ga, ga, ga, c.


His name?


He is called Euphorbus, in honour of Pythagoras's own Transmigration.


And is he to be always dumb?


A still-born perhaps.


Da, da, da, da, pa, pa, pa, pa, c.


He gargles words pretty towardly already, as children usually do; In time Sir,
he may speak too, though in order of Nature, speech Comes not so soon as life.


I care not much if I talk always for him, and if any body has Any thing to say
to him, they shall be answered by me in him.


Ha, ha, ha -- one tongue serve two men.


Would it might serve two women too, the world would Not be so busy as it is.


Gentlemen, your excuse: my works require me.


But hark you Sir, remember you do not practise to make More men; for this time
I'll excuse you for Mirth's sake.


I understand you Sir. --


Who have we here?


One that will tell you he believs as much.


But not in love with himself too? is he?


No, but what is worse, dotes on his own lying, nay Sometimes will tell his
tales so long until he be in love With them as much as if they were truths --
after the manner Of some Poets, who dote on their fictions, though they abuse
Credibility and truth together -- Meridith has heard him as Well as I.


With Admiration!


But why does he continue Looking upwards thus?


O he seems to be in love with the Moon.


Ever since his Wife beat him with a slipper he pretended to Have found of
Cynthia's own wearing. -- But you Shall soon inform your self -- Mr. Foppering?


Cry your mercy Sir, I was very busy. --


And have you found the other slipper of the Moon's yet?


I shall have that or a greater favour from her.


Are you sure on it?


Though I have talked, or can talk as largely as you, or any Man, I'd have you to
know I am serious now.


Very good Sir, proceed.


And so I will, as sure as she put her hand out of yonder Cloud to me but just
now.


This is a Novelty fit to embrace with these.


How they continue kissing still!


And shall break their Bellies if they can with it Before I part them.


If Cynthia be but a virgin! I say no more --


You'll have her virginity then you mean.


Marry will I Sir, there shall be no other man in the Moon Besides my self,
whatsoever the Poets my masters report Of Pan, Endymion, or any shepherd of
Arcadia: and I Suppose a Gentleman may be allow'd as much privilege by Her
Lady-ship in point of fiction, or otherwise.


This is rarely pleasant.


And the more, because his humour does rather heighten Than decrease.


Mr. Foppering.


What joy here's towards.


Mr. Peacock. --


And somewhat more yours; though the same yours still.


As how Sir?


Why; I am doubly made.


By whom?


By a Virtuoso, an Artist, a Paracelsian, who has produced This man out of me.


And I'll embrace your twofold self then -- nay more I'll report it for a
truth, and swear it when I have done. I have wanted such a story a great while
-- though I thank Heaven I have some fictions of my own.


Ha, ha, ha, - methinks I could laugh as many years More than I have lived, to
be thus surprised with humour.


To which I'll undertake to add some mirth.


Oh, oh! that kiss was a little too hard.


He begins to speak now.


You are mistaken Sir, 'twas I in him.


Nay, friends you have hugged sufficiently.


Can a man make too much of himself Sir?


I think he may! What say you, if it were varied with a dance?


With all my heart Sir.


And mine, I was just thinking of it.


Ta, ta, ta, ta, ta, ta.


He could find in his heart to speak again.


Now for the dance Sir.


You'll perform that doubly too.


I'll assure you, I will; nay, I'll out do the imitation Of Dotterills in my
double self -- if I move An Arm here -- I move there another --

If a leg, my same leg answers me again in his:

To which purpose you shall see me dance.


Let me be a witness to this miracle I beseech you, Since I am not beholding to
my invention for a greater.


Ha, ha, ha. There's no containing from laughter, Was there ever such an
Antique as this?


I think not.


Well, Gentlemen, thanks for our Mirth.


You should have more, but that I have some desires To with-draw thus, and make
much of my self.


And I have occasions of some concern.


To know of one Almanac-maker or other when the Moon will rise: farewell,
farewell.


Who's this, my Father leading of Celinda --


Sir Grave Solymour handing of a fair Lady. Who could Have expected such an
object amongst the rest?


And treads with such a demure Gravity as the Spaniard Does, when leading his
woman to the next Couch, could I But prove him guilty of such a formal
transgression.


We'll not interrupt them.


By no means -- but be sure Featlin thou fal'st on the rear Of him; I have
something in the wind, I'd have thee smell out Further.


I conceive you Sir, though the sight be not so welcome.


All this expressed to me Sir?


Call it my Justice Lady -- who am not led by Common appetite to admire alone
the beauties of your Face, but with it join your other virtues.


For your complement I must thank you at least.


I can explain my conceptions better: I do not find that in this Giddy world of
women's rule, you have filled a seat of Magistracy in scorn of us that governed,
or given the busy Tongues of men occasion to discourse.


I live, Sir, free and innocent, I hope.


It speaks your modesty and sober prudence, which renders you Fit to receive
the addresses of my gravity, for which I'll so Far reconcile unto your sex, as
to declare my self your Lover.


I will not say I hate you for it; nor shall I much deny But that I live as you
observe, enough reserved unto my Thoughts and privacy.


And therefore fitter that your bosom close so grave a Secret as my love; I
would not for my wealth, the vain And ruling women should report that in this
hour of their Vanity, Sir Grave Solymour met with a Dart of Cupid, Or were
toying with a Mistress, though the delights of Venus Have a charm upon the
stout, and wisest hearts, as unresisted By the Armed Soldier, as the
States-man's gravity.


A Gown-man that is willing to steal to a Petticoat --

Well Sir; I now conceive you fully.


Do, and enjoy me so.


But as you are pleased to allow me your respects, and the Attribute of being
wise, so it behoves me to consider.


What, my fair Creature?


How and when to love you?


Do my sweet; but let the time be short: Loves flames like Fire, devour
themselves when too long smothered.


Besides our female Magistracy have not as yet resolved Upon their Laws of
love; I suppose they intend to Make some.


Let them for themselves, but not for us, and would no Less become my gravity
to consult their approbation; We'll be a Common-wealth unto ourselves, all
delights Shall flow on thee to be bought with Gold, (which I Spare not to feed
my secret pleasures;) my Jewels made Thy Ornaments and my self thy greater
treasure -- nay Look not on me as I am in years, or have a wrinkle on My brow.


That's no wonder Sir, The Fox is gray before he's good.


I can perform Lady, doubt it not.


By no means Sir -- but what must I do to recompense This bounty?


Love, and be secret.


That's in my power I confess -- but were you used to Exclaim so much against
vanity, and have now such an Itchtowardsit.


The cautious man will act, but hide his crime, 'tis wise Hypocrisy; which
caused me often to blame men's levities And vainer inclinations which express
those Symptoms of the Heart should be reserved: 'Tis scandal that makes sin,
not Sin the scandal.


A most solid piece of Lechery

I crave your pardon (Sir, I Thought Sin had been something more than a word.


'Tis so when scandalous and known, that even a God was Censured (as wiser
Poets tell) being taken in embrace: Nature invites to secrecy, and all her
operations acts so, Which does instruct the cautious Deer to guide his soft
and Amorous Hine unto some Covert to be there enjoyed.


A cautious way of concupiscence

well Sir, I perceive You want no manhood, and I'll touch it to the quick.


With all my heart Lady.


Then soberly thus, were you ever married?


Some long time past.


And have you not a Son?


I think I had one.


And is he living?


I wish him so -- and that's some blessing* I never did affect To dally with my
Cradle, or the permitting of the expense That youth requires, parents that love
themselves know How to be more provident; like to the Bird that early Does
discharge her young ones from her care, and nest that bred Them -- some small
provision I have allow'd his education, And leave the rest unto his wit and
fortune.


A sober sort of ill nature -- nor would you see him, perhaps Don't know him
now.


Some Sixteen years have been elapsed since I beheld Him young, and sooner
would I keep my Coffin in my Sight than him that hopes to be made happy by my
death; Or with an evil eye, behold the riches I possess, of which He is not to
partake; nay more, perhaps might envy or Oppose my will and choice, or think my
love and bounty is Too great, although it purchase such an object as your self.


Perhaps he might.


Let these assure you!

They are bright and Orient.


No Sir, you shall keep your stones for some other time or Service! though I know
well a present is one of the first, and most Considerable Expressions 'twixt
servant and Mistress -- you are not In haste I know.


No more, than what is proper for our loves, and hope you'll Soon deserve this,
or a richer favour.


When I do, I shall expect it.


I like this answer well -- and I'll be no less sparing of my Cost When I have
enjoyed her -- a feat our Gallants practise

Often -- But Lady, loves time is not so slow as that We tell, and all his
Counsels like his acts should be swift And pleasant; too long a frost's
unpleasant to the spring.


The day is not far spent, although the first that dates Our body politic --
some business does require me, Within an hour; you'll know more of my
compliance.


Till when farewell: and remember 'tis loves prudence to Be secret.


Doubt it not Sir.

Well politician, if I do not fit your hot desires For this, may I lose my
virginity to a Constable.

Mr. Featlin! you are come according to my wish, I Have such news to tell you.
--


As how prithee?


Why, I have such an interest in your father to do you Service, thou could
not have wished the like.


Perhaps I should not --.


Thou would, since 'twill assure his favour, and what is (wanted More by the
considerable part of his estate.


It must be a strange Artifice can have the better of his Severity and
covetousness.


Leave it to me, I'll make him pliant as the Glove I wear, Be assured on it, as
I wish thee well. --


I hope thou dost -- But by what means?


By a common and easy Method, why man he loves me Abominably.


Is that a way to cure my sufferings? which must give a greater Wound, my
fathers love to rival mine; all my afflictions. Summoned could not have
equalled this.


Be not suspicious but expect the end, 'tis that completes An action.


I fear too soon.


But see, we are interrupted; I must apply my Self to our female Politicians.


Celinda! -- false unto my Love -- 't were strange,

But Riches are too oft Precedent when they Rival want, -- Or perhaps some
stratagem only of her wit, and so would Hold my thoughts suspended -- I know
not what to judge.


Madam, we expected your assistence

In our Councels.


Some affairs required my absence which I hope you'll Pardon, nor do I want
desires to serve the interest of Our fair Re-publick.


We doubt it not -- but now we are on a point Deserves it most, I mean of Love.


A most necessary consideration.


In order to which, I think fit it should be enacted that No man presume to
make love first, except he be Commissioned by our Re-publick for that purpose.


A just motion, and becomes our superiority.


But where's our Modesty, if we begin to woe?


That's to be no Clause in our Act.


Nor need it be our concern -- there are some of us Can be as bold and never
blush for it.


Besides there is some state in restraining the bold Presumptions of men, in
making their addresses To us with their caps, and knees, and frivolous
Services; that we are sometimes not a little vexed with Their importunities,
and our habitations as much troublld. With these Spirits of love, as Women of
pleasure are, That have too frequent visits from our Town Hectors,


There is some weight in this consideration.


And will save fools the labour of making love.


Would I had prevented the Fop my Husband That way too -- but as the case
stands, I do well Enough.


I am for it -- 2. Lad. -- And so am I.


And I indifferent.


And so in hats, and feathers, a woeing shall we?


And boots and spurs too, if occasion requires; I'll have some in readiness on
purpose.


And so have I.


But Ladies a little moderate this decree, and as men Have had the superiority
in love, and marriage; let Them be the first Movers still, and you the last.


No, no, we'll begin and end too.


A Common-wealth of love towards indeed.


But if this violence continue I shall be soon Weary of my office.


Then for another consideration, of which we Wives are Not a little sensible --
which is, the Abilities of men.


How mean you, Madam?


I mean internal, and external, I have some reason To move for both.


As likewise a Consideration of the old, and fusty pieces Of antiquity, who
have such relics of their sinful Youth, as they will offer at love in spite
of nature.


Out upon 'em, let's banish them our Common-wealth.


That were too extreme as the other's immodest.


By your favour no more, than if I bargain for a pair Of Gloves, I look whether
they are handsome and well Made; or on a horse, and consider whether he be
sound Of wind and limb: besides, Innumerable objections Which are not
convenient, or decent to be made, but as We give private Judgment.


Besides that, it is a just retaliation of the Intrigue which men are bold to
hold with our Waiting-women and Chamber-Maids, to discover If possible, our
least imperfections.


As whether we have sweet Breaths, good teeth, and the Hair that we wear our
own, or in what part Wanted, nay will question our very complexions too, That
we cannot use a small Fucus without their discourse And Censure, and so have a
Jury of their wits sit upon Every feature about us.


Perrhaps Lampoon us and our Husbands when they have Done.


In so much as we cannot receive Court-ships, keep our Decorums, formalities,
and state, as we should do.


Or be suffered to grow old in quiet for them.


That's a hard case believe me.


A most insupportable one.


Ladies, this is too womanish, and violent -- let me moderate.


I could find in my heart not to hear reason in their Behalf.


Nor I, except I like it, or such as may be superseded By our wills, when we
find occasion.


Spoke like a Commonwealths woman.


Nay we must hear our Precedent.


By any means.


Then mark what I propose -- say, we appoint women Commissioners, who shall
satisfy your desires with Prudence and modesty.


That word Modesty may be prejudicial.


I mean such as shall pass due Censure on the humours, Inclinations and other
qualifications of men; giving us Information accordingly.


This sounds discreet.


And of Latitude enough.


I was never against it.


Nor I, nor I, nor I.


And so give us a list of those who are fit to make love, Marry, or continue
still Platonic.


For Platonic; my vote is to strike them out of The Particular, as Drones
that would have the Honey Of Courtship and do nothing for it.


By any means.


They shall be excepted then -- and for the rest we'll Have our inquiries that
shall be sufficient.


Let it be effectual, and speedy.


It shall be done to day, though the first of our Government.


To day, to day, to day:


And the last of my being your Precedent, Ladies, If this mood hold.


WEll, Frankman, here are pretty decrees legible: I Believe we have yet a more
jocund world towards --


Let it come and welcome; but methinks this clause sticks In a tender place of
me, Meridith: not to make love Without a dispensation; or except such as are
pleased to be our Mrs. give the onset First, I did not expect such limitations
from this fair Re-publick.


Better, and better, by my love and manhood, to see them Bestow their addresses
first, and Cry, Your humble Lady ready To serve you, how well you look to day,
would I might Be so happy to be preserved in your thoughts, and the like
Dallyings we use to them, which will be such a pleasant Inversion of our
amours, there's nothing can parallel it. --


Nay, I believe 'twould puzzle a better Poet than ever writ Of the Art of
loving: for my part, if we escape a Jury of Women with Spectacles commissioned
to make a survey of Us naked, 'Tis more than I look for.


Let the Bona Roba's do what they please, I am without and Within the same.


There's no superiority to be expected but lying uppermost, And that I suppose
they will allow us.


Who have we here?


The noble Polidor -- but the world's altered since he left Us a Common-wealth
of men.


Most noble Sir! your arrival's welcome here.


Exceeding welcome!


I thank you kindly -- and since I parted from this Country on the public
service, I find our State Has suffered no small Metamorphosis in changing of
Our Sex that governed.


They claimed it as their right.


I think they might, although we have but few Records can show the practise,
which tells us that The women of this age have more confidence than their Sex
had formerly.


For my part Sir, I could not find in my heart to Contest against the
government of Ladies. --


Besides here was such a Caterwauling with the whole sex, And their Talons of
power so egregiously manifested On some visages of our over-wiv'd Citizens,
till they yielded Their Necks to their Yoke, that there was no withstanding. --



I cannot blame them to submit, if the assault was so Fierce.


Many of us could not choose but smile, and let it pass.


And I amongst the rest; though the experience I have had In the world might
prompt me otherwise, the youth I Find about me did forbid it.


You preserve your frank humour still, Sir?


Rather increase it -- I should be loath that in the last Scene of my life
whenever it comes, my spirits should Fall.


And who are the most remarkable Politicians?


Why, every mans Wife and Daughter in their several capacities.


Their Husbands cannot choose but fare well then.


I suppose they have not beheaded any of them yet, Though they make bold to cut
off their entails. It may be They will draw up new Indentures with others
shortly if Cause require.


A strange revolution of things.


To which purpose I expect love should be made to My self by some of them.


Are they to begin then?


'Tis a Decree fixed here, and in most Streets; at one Of which places I
observed a woman pictured in a hat And Feather, Booted, and Spurred, ready to
take her wooing Progress.


And was it not pleasant?


As a Novelty I confess, and 'tis odds but some of them Will put on Arms, and
make War shortly.


Were not our men too kind to give them the trouble.


Or for want of enemies fight with one another.


Such as take upon them to be the chief Patronesses of Their Re-publick are the
Ladies, Serina, Crispina, Eugenia.


Serina too! I thought she had been without this ambition.


Some did expect as much, but Power has no few Idolaters of that Sex amongst
their other superstitions.


How does she carry it?


With moderation becoming a Lady of her Birth, and in All extremes as much as
in her lies tempers the rest. In So much that were this monstrous Democracy of
ours Transformed into Monarchy, she might deserve to be A partaker in the
Throne.


It speaks her worth.

Here Comes Serina.


And with her Celinda, an ingenious Lady.


In some discourse, we'll wait their leisure --


Is't possible he should attempt your virtue?


With as much zeal as if I had spread my Art for him.


And yet would have the world believe otherwise, Which gained him such an
exemplary repute Of a sober Magistrate with the vulgar.


But Madam, there are many Maxims of Hypocrisy With such Politicians as are, or
would be in power, While Covetousness or some few Grains of amorous
Concupiscence betrays their frailty: Let the world be governed By
Commonwealths, or Princes, 'tis odds that one or both Of these vices will have
some Predominance.


I hope 'twill not be so, whilst Women rule; besides this Action of Sir Grave
Solymour offends the law we have Established, which says, that men should not
begin their Courtships to us.


And especially when they offer them the wrong way; could I devise some just
punishment for him, I hope the Act Would be excused by our Re-publick.


It shall have my vote at least -- if not to enlarge It, if Cause shall
require.


That does my business.


I perceive that Polidor's returned.


But this day -- By your leave Madam. --


Serina, I was just wishing an opportunity to wait On you, which you now
prevent.


I am little more reserved than when I saw you last.


But power in women, as well as love, will have its Distance.


I never acted yet the Tyrants part, nor shall begin With you.


I know you are Gracious.


Such thoughts can only elevate the mean of Man-kind That forget themselves and
duties when raised to greatness; I do not curl a lock the more because our Sex
does Govern -- And so farewell Sir. --


Short and sweet.


But I hope 'twill not end so.


Nay Madam! you must not part thus -- you'll Remember I am Polidor.


And that's as much as I think sit to do at this time, If you offer more, you
know our Law --


By your fair self.


Take heed Sir how you swear, we have lately made a Law Against Lovers Oaths,
and Perjuries -- but to assure you I Forgive you --


May I have your hand for it.


Yes, and lead me by it -- but if you offer at love --


I hope she'll save him the labour and begin, According to our new mode of
wooing.


If she does not do as much as that comes to, She's not such flesh and blood,
I take her for.


Her Extraction's eminent, and his (if well examined) From our ancient Stock of
Princes, and should they But mix souls kindly, what a change might this Various
state of ours receive?


As I wish men and women well, it should have My consent.


By your favours Gentlemen!


Oh, Mr. Peacock, is it you? and where's your other Self Euphorbus?


Perhaps he has made his transmigration into Some other body already.


I left him Sir behind (that's I in him) to deliver a Message, I thought fit to
express my self.


Such a Consubstantian as this would exceed all Pythagorical wonder, and
belief.


But to be serious.


And such a jest present as thy self.


O here comes his other Manhood.


By your leave a little Gentlemen, I must First make much of my absent self
before I Acquaint you with my business.


Was there ever such a hugging as this?


O, O, O, -- my Mouth, my Eye, my Ear will be kissed off.


And 'twere in his belly, I dare say he would digest it.


Did you not hear his tongue wagg even now?


Who! I hear my self! I hope I do. --


And so bitterly, that I believe there's Tears in's eyes yet.


I'd have you to know, I am no whining Lover, though this Be my self Lover.


This had been a humour to have entertained Democritus.


Or rather that other Philosopher that wept for the folly of men. But Sir -- to
your desire, we are in haste.


And mine is a nimble question -- I desire to be resolved Whether in this
womanish state of ours (as I would be Some Novelty amongst the rest) you hold
it requisite that We who are two in one should make love together Likewise.


A very pertinent question!


And would put the most serious Ladies of our Country To a smile to answer.


In my judgment your best way will be to make Your applications to that Sex,
who can better resolve you: Though I believe if you can make your double unity
Good, you may not be unwelcome to some.


Suppose then you were the Lady, I would kiss My hand thus -- and so in him. --


Then sir, when I presume to the Cheek, as I do To yours.


Hold, hold I prithee.


And for this old Youths likewise, -- I would do thus!


And shalt for that word, and welcome too, if there were Ten of thee more.


Away, away, that I may wipe my mouth In quiet.


And if I meet with an Amour I will kiss her as I am One, and for the rest I
will perform it as I am two, that Is to say twice in once. --


Well, Frankman, thou hast been a little guilty With this Mountebanck Virtuoso
of this extravagancy.


I confess it, being willing to inflict some punishment On his folly, it being
a Sin that is ever best corrected By it self.


See here comes Sir Grave Solymour. -- with his Codds Head in cuerpo -- one
that I abominate as my Antipathy in Age, or a Satyr against mirth.


I conceive you -- and though he seems in haste Shall we stay him, and tease him
a little?


Till he fret himself to death, for Meridith.


You shall give the first onset, Sir Adam.


Content, content.

And whither in such haste good Grave Sir.


I suppose you have nothing to do to examine me.


Not your business if I could guess it. However I'll Presume to tell you that I
wonder you have not yet Took up your stand underone of yonder pillars, And
there made your exclamations against vanity, where I assure you Sir, are things
worth your perusal,


I know it, I know it; but impose not on my thoughts At this time!


There's not such a contrariety betwixt any of the Elements As is in the
dispositions of these two pieces of Antiquity, And no less pleasant to observe.


By my troth Sir, but that you are a man of patience, I might have expected you
had come to have hanged Your self yonder. --


Good Sir, leave me, I have urgent occasions.


I mean to give you Counsel for your good, Sir.


Me Counsel, Sir?


I say you, Sir, -- and tell you plainly the dangers you may Incur, if you do
not immediately lay aside your stiff Formality, set speeches against Sin; in
order to your Conformity with our female Government.


I will be changed into an Hermophrodite rather, And be slave to both Sexes at
once -- but I remember I am in haste, Sir.


But take good speed along with you Sir, and as you Are kind to your self, be
gay, sportly; Hawk, Hunt, Sing, Dance, and strive to cut Capers, as I can, and
will To instruct you --

Now Frankman Do thou give him the other heat -- I know thy wit is ready On all
occasions.


To save your Lungs a labour, Sir, I'll do my best.


Another Comical Satyrist to fall on me?


You may make Mirth on it, if you please, Sir.


What do you mean by thus irritating me Mr. Frankman? Or has any of the
Predominant Ladies Given you commission to abuse me.


So Grave a man as you are, restrained from the Enjoyments of flesh and blood
-- I cannot blame you to be moved Sir, nay though You cursed a little, I think
the Crime might be Forgiven you.


Rather let us pray for them.


You mean as some Professors do, whose Satirical Devotion may pass for
Execration and prayer together.


Good Sir, no more.


In the mean time, give me leave to hint you a little.


Hint me to pray, Sir.


Only some general notions to be added to your Letany.


So you will cease this molestation of me, I am Content that you Curse, nay
Curse effectually all Woman Kind.


Of this Common-wealth you mean?


Not one to be exceped -- but such I design To enjoy. --


As for example, that to spite their future pleasure There might be no
procreation with their help: But rather that posterity might be continued as
easily As Fly-blowings, or come together by chance like Epicurus's Atoms --
this had been an execration on Their Re-publick indeed.


Enough, enough, Sir.


Or in stead thereof (if you think fit) that every member Of it be debauched by
the men they govern -- have I hit you there Sir?


As it is their desert I comply -- Let that suffice at This time, I beseech
you.


You have done pretty well I confess.


I know it, nor shall it be mentioned to your prejudice By me, and so farewell
Grave Sir.


This Scene of vexation was pleasant.


I had ends in it: come, I'll tell thee more as we walk, And next to acquain
Featlin. --


I cannot but smile in spite of my temper To think how this Satirical
compliance of Mine against women, will render me unsuspected In my Amorous
design -- He that knows not How to dissemble, knows not how to live, was a Wise
Apothegme of the Ancients; and I'll add, to Love with dexterity and free from
the Scandal of Tongues: He that purchases a Mistress, buys love at His own
rate, but he that marries, rather sells himself -- Celinda must be just, and no
less private In my reception; since beneficial Interest does Oblige it, the
surest tie of love; which must yield Me a revengeful pleasure in the enjoyment
Of so fair a member of this Anti-common-wealth. But yet me thinks I find some
fears about me, Like a man that intends a theft within sight of The Gallows. --


But here she is -- Posts by Your leave.


Dispatch Sir, dispatch.


I was hasting to thee, but that I met with an Interruption, I could have
cursed by the way -- And are we secure and quiet?


Without noise so much as the falling of a Mousetrap.


Excellent, fair one, I thank my stars and thee.


And I mine as much, for conspiring to do our loves Justice, I'll lead you the
way.


To a part of thy bed I hope.


You are right Sir, but it shall receive You by day to avoid suspicion.


A safe device -- Come, thou shalt be my down there, I need no other softness
-- my Imagination's on Fire till I enjoy thee. --


It must be she; I know it by her voice -- and in My Fathers hand, in whose
address to her consists A higher injury than my being so long neglected and
Forgotten in his thoughts, -- what's my Misfortune!


O here's Featlin! What in a fit of Melancholy! And in such days as these! fie
man -- fie --.


O that Father of mine.


Would he were married to a Gypsy, provided his Estate were thine.


I thought my afflictions gentle, until confirmed That Celinda did receive his
addresses.


But I have turned the tide I warrant thee, and put him In such a hideous
apprehension of the Superscription of these objects, and his danger,

That he will as soon hang on one of them as proceed, For thy further security;
and so aggravated the matter, As I made him as good as curse Mothers, Wives,
and Daughters, together with their whole Re-publick.


But what's all this to me, when this very minute He was received by Celinda.


Art' sure on it?


Or my Sense fails me.


And did I hope! If not, the Common-wealth of Jury Had never such a Pharisee,
and Publican together as He is. --


I wish I could deny it justly.


Mr. Frankman and Mr. Featlin, My Lady Celinda Desires the presence of you
both, with what speed You may, in her Lodgings.


What's the business?


A Woman's, you know what that means.


Then 'tis love.


And marriage together it may be. Sir Grave Solymour was just ending with a
Sack-possit As I came to you.


Did not I tell you?


A mischief on her if it prove true, Featlin.


You'll be there Gentlemen?


'Tis like we may.


And if you please, invite some other of your friends.


This is strange! and yet methinks I

Like well that we are to be present -- Courage Featlin; there must be good
some way or other Towards thee.


I know not what to think!


Celinda's wise, and love has many Intrigues; think No more, but follow me. --


HEre lies Celinda, the treasure of whose beauty I must now possess, and 'tis
my riches she'd enjoy: but I'll deceive her there: however Gold I thank thee;
thou Art indeed the God of love, and Poets did mistake thy Charms, whilst they
forgot in thy refulgent shape to Paint their Venus and their Cupid; since thou
can Beauty win to be thy prostitute, and virtue captive though

Immured like Danaa -- she stirs -- and I must stir her Too. -- Lie thou there
-- Gown -- And with thee I put off my gravity. The Monarch or the Magistrate
can keep but little State in these enjoyments, where the Peasant and the
beggar's Part's the same with theirs, Since 'tis our natures highest Comedy --

Ha! my hopes are blasted in this spectacle. Some evil Spirit or Devil to
punish my Hypocrisy.

What shall I do to secure my shame and safety?


You need not fear Sir, and so many of your friends. Ready to serve you.


I am glad of this, I faith, Sir Solymour, I see you can Be amorous at your
years as well as I at mine.


Was there ever such an unwelcome salutation. Oh my Torment! --


I wonder Gentlemen! by what authority you presume To disturb our intended
embrace.


This is no dumb Devil I perceive. --


For my part I'd have you to know, I mean nothing But what is honourable to
this worthy Knight; as I Hope to be my Lady Solymour, 'tis true Gentlemen.


How! my Lady! Night-hag.


It seems a contract.


And wanted nothing but consummation.


Which you have rudely hindered, I thank you.


Nay, you shall complete your business if you Please, the World knows I never
loved to spoil Sport.


As you are men, have so much mercy on me As to permit I escape out of this
snare I am Got in.


That's impossible! the Doors are all locked Or guarded.


And by women too!


What would you have Gentlemen, I confess my Folly deserves a Curse as loud as
all their Tongues Can express together.


Perhaps they may tease you a little.


Or meet in a full cry of their body politic, That were sport indeed.


And Lady you had best be ready to receive them.


I shall, Sir, with all expedition. --


Here comes Tom Foppering, I took a course he Should not fail.


He come too?


No less than the man in the Moon I assure you Sir.


Good Sir, what has the earth or I to do with him Then, let him go to his
fellow subjects in the other World I beseech you.


Now it works.


I hope to good purpose.


And can thou make good this fiction?


A fiction Sir! upon my sincerity a miracle.


And shall we take thy word for it?


If you know where to have a better proof for a Miracle than ones word comes
to, you may get it Where you can, however you shall have no more For this.


Come to an end, Tom.


Why I'll tell you Sir, as you know I wish her highness Well, and so forth.


The story of her slipper we have heard already; but this Of her face should
imply a greater Prodigy.


To tell you true Gentlemen, as I was now calculating Her motions from the top
of my house, she was Pleased to slip off this face of hers and put it upon
mine, In the same manner you see it.


An Astronomical Liar too!


There are none greater, if their calculations were well Observed.


Since Copernicus his time or before she hath not vouchsafed Such a favour to
any man -- As I hope to finish the Other part of her calculation, 'tis true
Sir.


Let me never know mirth if I believe thee not in that.


And then you are to receive the other Part of her face, are you not?


What else Sir?


How like you this Dialogue Sir Solymour?


Would I were not the greater Fool. --


Joy, joy, transcendent joy, Sir; you are wished it both By the Moon and I
abundantly.


What do you mean Bedlam?


To salute your happy inclinations; I did not believe That so Grave a man as
your self would have honoured Love, these days of frailty -- but since you are
In that predicament. --


What then Sir?


Why, I have put on my Moon as you see on purpose To wait on you.


Gentlemen, persuade his Silence -- I shall be mad too Else, before he has done
with me.


'Tis impossible, he will have his run.


Besides my design in giving you a visit at your lodging With four Drums, six
Trumpets, and a Consort of 22 Violins With Flutes, Recorders and Dulcimores.


To be bated thus with a Lunatic! A cry of Hounds Were Music to it.


And next, Sir, I will have a Ballad sung on This subject to salute your Love,
and you, in the morning, I know a ten Groat Poet shall compose it.


Methinks your years should teach you Compassion.


Who! I, old Sir! who has youth then? -- go on a little For that Ladel. --


No Sir, here's one shall divert him -- The Lady, Sir. --


This entrance is worse than all the rest.


As I am a servant of the Moons, and she a Lady of the Night and love, I wish
you happy.


I thank you Sir, Though I could desire of Heaven (might it be granted) that my
complexion were some-What more Grateful, to this Knight my Lover.


O Monstrous! she calls me Lover too!


And you'll prove her to want no flame I'll warrant her: There's AEthiopia Sir
on the other Side of the Tropic you are to pass.


I have heard those Sun-burnt females are most Delicious in embrace.


Are they so Sir?


And have the spring within them, though they want It without. --


If you get a Mag-py Child (as there may be some Danger) I'll invite my self
Gossip.


And I your Partner.


I thank you Gentlemen!


If you have mercy and are men, spare me.


Then for her Complexion, it resembles my Mistress The Moon's, when in an
Ecliptic Conjunction. For which cause I like it better than that white Meager
Face of my Wives.


Do you so, Sir?


These she Teasers come to increase the Cry,


Contain! let me persuade you.


You shall till convenient time.


Let me screen my self behind you Gentlemen By turns.


But take care your Moon be not seen.


I'll do my endeavour, Sir.


And for you most abominable Sir, an infringer of Our most sacred law of love
by making your Lascivious attempt on this Lady.


Putting aside the punishment you deserve in being a Sober ill example, like a
malicious secluded member Of our late Government.


As also of a Hyppocrite and Sinner together.


And more ill natured and Covetous than a Jew of Our new Synagogue.


Then for a Father, I'll witness, he is little Inferior to Herod. --


What a Nest of Hornets have I stirred?


For which you are censured by our body politic To espouse this beautiful
Black, which the hand. Of Fortune presents to your embrace.


O me! the stings of all your Satyrs meet in this. -- Did you say, marry her?


Or which is all one, you are concluded Man and Wife Already.


That was the Close I looked for.


I conceive thee.


Is there no remedy?


Not except you hang your self.


Madam, I must thank you for this.


I did it to have you beholding to me As you'll find; in the mean time, to
deceive the Deceiver has some excuse.


Well, Solymour, it has been thy fate, notwithstanding All thy policy, to
heighten the part of a cautious Coxcomb.


And so I give you joy.


And I by my Manhood could bestow some Capers On this day of Hymen.


I'll excuse your Mirth, Sir.


Ladies, I thank your justice.


Impudent above her complexion too.


But it must not end thus -- and have I found you -- thou Moon Calf -- thou?


Save me Ladies, and Gentlemen -- or as thou art A good Common-wealth's Woman
have mercy on A Citizen.


Were I not so, you should feel my Fingers! --.


Oh, Oh, Oh.


You should Sir. --


I do, I do! nothing but the fingers of a Fairy Could pinch so deep.


Indeed Sir.


Good Queen Mabb spare me. --


Must I be a Lady of Dominion and have a Husband Called the man in the Moon,
must I? --


I meant my self thy man, and thou the Moon all the while, Wife; that is by way
of Metaphor.


You had best tell how many embraces you have Given me more than I required,
and so for Manhood Sake belly us both; or feign I have more servants Than really
I have, and call it Metaphorical, you Had Sir?


But pardon Metaphor I beseech thee for Love's Sake, and Poetry.


Well, Sir, as I am favourable to Poetry, I'll pardon Your fictions at this
time; so as your fools fire produce No more. --


I'll have nothing to do with the best Moon that Ever shined since thou wilt
have it so; and yet Methinks this affront might have been spared to Cynthia,
Under Correction -- Madam. --


Withdraw Sir, and know I expect your further submission.


Away, away, whilst the storm ceases.


Since a man cannot be believed who can help it.


An over-wife, though a little one --


And were I her Husband, I should be in love with The Moon in earnest before
her.


Pardon me Madam, that my respects were Interrupted by that necessary rebuke I
gave that Titular thing called my Husband -- but hope the Example may be of
good use, as you may have Occasion to exercise your matrimonial Dominion


The Counsel of a Fury added to my affliction.


I shall lose no prerogative that becomes a Wife Or a member of your
Re-publick.


For Which you may deserve a signal respect.


More Birds of a Feather to gaze at my folly.


Nothing but a brace of Peacocks for the last Course, Sir.


Would there were a limb of one of them in your Belly; I shall be whoop'd at by
every Owl before They have done with me.


An odd sight.


I have heard of his humour before --


Nay, blame me Sir, rather, since I must Acknowledge I caused them to come
hither to present Their respects to you, and your Lady.


Did you so, Sir?


And art thou the sprightly Black the Lady of Night And beautiful blossom of
darkness?


Ha, ha, ha, blossom of darkness.


The Bride of this Gravity's, and Sister of Hymens.


He has raised her descent, Sir, something for your sake.


O the perplexity I am in -- a night of Cynthia's Revels In which all the
Lunatics are at liberty.


Be resolute Sir and stand the worst.


Would I were dead, or any thing to be freed.


I am glad to hear it. --


Had I but known this night of joy sooner, I would Have been doubly feathered,
as you see I am in him And he in me.


And I likewise, as I am two in him, and he two in me, am At your service.


The Miracle increases now.


As far as they please to believe it.


Ha, ha, ha.


An Insinitum of vexation.


And next I would have been at thy service in as Many Capacities -- that is
thus for me, and thus for Him.


And thus for me, and thus for him.


As here's one lip, there's the other -- and so likewise for The rest of these
Ladies. --


We are beholding to you Sirs, as I am a Wife.


I thank you Gentlemen, and as you are mine in several Respects, I will be as
many times yours.


O my fate, I shall wear a horn, and caused by so Sooty a Sinner as this.


And be glad if you escape so Sir.


But that we are merciful and pity failings, you Had been worse dealt with.


Is that possible.


Ladies all your pardons, I have Performed my Devoirs, and so I doubly take my
leave.


And I as doubly too.


Farewell, pair of Wonders --


You have passed a severe sentence on this Knight.


I thought it justice to consent considering every Circumstance.


You are just in all things.


I should be sorry, Sir, if the public or you have Cause to complain of the
power I possess -- though at This time I shall propose something may concern you,
Please you observe a space. --


What does she mean? --


As sure as I live, Serina is beginning her address To Polidor, by virtue of
our late Decree.


What if she does, I suppose Cupid has more use Of his Darts, than to aim only
at her -- though I confess Polidor, for a man, is a mark indeed.


Our President, Sir. --


More of their Clamours yet!


I hope not so, Sir.


Nor needs it Lady Solymour.


Was ever man married thus?


You own the Decree, Ladies?


All, all.


And next you may withdraw with your Lady, Sir.


Must I hand her too? No, she shall have but one of My fingers. --


I'll take hold of the longest finger then.


Take Comfort, Sir, however.


Hast thou any to give me?


I shall be sorry not to my endeavours as occasion Serves -- I perceive he does
not know me yet.


And be near him to proceed as we shall advise.


I understand thee, dear Celinda. --


For other irregularities of men that Concern our Sex, we may proceed against
them As cause shall require.


And for such as have Wives, to make it more Enormous, if they presume to begin
their Amours First; In good faith I was thinking to have brought In a charge
against mine.


Though she has pinched him to purpose -- as we Can witness.


And for nothing but pretending he is in love with The Moon.


But that I could not be so severe, with the frailties Of a man, I have
received services from.


And what shall we decree against such, that Intrigue by the way of servants,
and yet as perfidious To their Mistresses as any Husband of 'em-all


Say we establish a High Court of Justice of Love?


That were a new way of acting Tyrannic love indeed?


But I hope no Tragedy.


I am not against it; provided, we do men and our selves Right, by insisting on
merit, and such other perfections As are justly ours.


You have spoken my sense, Madam.


I do not like so well that word, Merit.


No matter, Madam, you have Beauty.


And should be sorry to quit my fair interest, did I Stand for a Venus with the
proudest she living.


In the mean time behold what I present to your Considerations, a Catalogue of
Lovers according to the Inquiry of our women Commissioners.


An ingenious account.


And suitable to our instructions.


If there be any here you think well on, you may Bestow a look on him if you
please.


Our President should have the liberty to begin first.


By any means, Madam.


I am fixed already: but I'll lead you the way.


Nay Ladies not too many of your beams Together.


The more the merrier.


If I mistake not Ladies, too many of your kind Aspects have been particularly
united on some deserving Objects here.


I know where I looked first.


And so do I, by your favour Madam, -- I hope the Eye of a Wife may be as well
understood as ever A Virgins of you all.


And I remember where I looked too.


And so do I! --


That look meant me Frankman.


I perceive it.


And I forget not whom I beheld.


And I by your leave, Ladies.


This is Mirth indeed Frankman.


A pleasant sort of Loves lightning, and some of us must Be his Thunderbolts it
seems.


But Ladies, how will you determine betwixt Your selves, in Case that several
of you affect one Man?


Why, in that case we may decree him a public lover.


That were a particular injury.


No matter so it be a public good, by your favour, Madam.


Rather, let us establish a High Court of Justice Of love to determine our
differences.


I looked for this. --


There's no reason for a dissenter.


I am for it.


And I. -- Omn. -- And all.


And I comply as willingly.


And when shall our High Tribunal of love meet?


In some minutes under an hour! You have Your summons to appear, Gentlemen.


I dare promise for all, that we will not fail you.


God a mercy, thou sinner of Sixty.


A lively piece of antiquity.


The design takes to my wish; how do you Like it Polidor?


'Tis such a novelty, Madam, I know not how To judge it handsomely.


Leave it to me --

Nor do I doubt our Stars will be unkind.
Since Love has yet more Wonders left behind.

I Hope, Ladies, you have sufficiently implored the Humorsome God of Love to
compose your differences.


I can answer for my self, and hope well of the rest.


I doubt not your Modesty.


But we expect it shall not diminish the least part Of our State and interest.


As I am a Wife I am obliged to do no less, hoping to Have the Vote of all this
fair Society in my behalf.


We shall not dissent.


But to do justice on your selves now, will be the Difficulty; since in my
thought your Eyes met too Particularly, as you beheld the men: and it were
strange if A common-wealth should not have variety enough for So many Women as
we are here.


I judge so, Madam.


The persons that fall under present Consideration, will be these Gentlemen
here, Though a small Number of the Catalogue.


For Mr. Frankman, Madam, I dare answer for the Language of my Eye, so far, as
to acknowledge him A deserving Gentleman.


But by your favour, Lady, I have had him in my thoughts Ever since I was a
Wife.


And I ever since I was a Virgin.


I would say something too, Madam, -- but let that pass.


And for Mr. Featlin here, what woman can have the heart Not to think well of
him.


And such a neat built man as he is.


And what say you to this, Celinda?


I'll leave him to the best pretender, Madam, -- my Love shall not go farther
than my wit is able to Make it good.


We are now under Censure i'faith Boys.


And if they disable me from being a lover, my years Have ill luck.


I wonder that Celinda's justice has not found me yet.


O, their thoughts are so full of universals, there's no Room for a particular
Amour yet.


And what for this Grave Gentleman?


He shall have our Supersedes, if he please.


Or to recreate him, let him be our general Platonic?


And so have our society at times of eating; I have Heard he's pleasant.


Methinks he might deserve better.


And think so still if you please.


Dost' hear this Meridith?


I do, and smile at their mistake, -- I their Platonic?


And then for Polidor.


He too within your aims?


The most accomplished person in our Common-wealth, Why is he not here?


I long to survey him.


But I had him in my eye before you, Lady: by My Membership of this State, we
have not justice President, and a man wanting we think well of.


This sounds too much of Anarchy in love, the worst Of Mischiefs to all humane
Government.


But practised under all we conceive, Madam.


A Wives condition were a severe one otherwise.


It shall never have my vote.


Nor mine, Serina.


As it may Authorize dishonest actions, I likewise do defy It; but as I love my
wit, my beauty, or take pride to be Respected (a pardonable frailty in our Sex)
I'd have It paid me too as many ways -- A woman may be A Saint of Loves, and
yet have more than single Adoration.


By my life, brave, and witty.


She has it in abundance, man.


You may be allow'd your sense, Crispina, but till you Better reconcile --
Serina, is no more your President Celinda! --


Serina is with-drawn in discontent, And Celinda with her.


I did expect it, and guess which way the stream of things Are bending.


This breach was sudden.


No matter, we may proceed without her.


Or choose another in her stead.


Gentlemen, your patience-and your counsel, Ladies.


The Ladies are in consultation about us.


Perhaps they will choose us by lots or else play us together Like a battle
Royal of Cocks.


But I have designed my match otherwise, if Fortune Be not peevish and hinder
me.


In the mean time, let us sing, three Merry Boys, and three merry Boys, and
three merry Boys are we.


Here comes Foppering -- but I'll fright him away -- Hark you Tom. --


What's the matter Sir?


Strange matters are in handling by the women, Tom.


But I desire to have nothing to do with their hands or fingers.


I know thou would not, Tom.


I had only an extraordinary complement to have Presented their High Court of
love, and thought to Have asked your advice whether I may Presume to except my
Wife.


Thou shalt not have to do with her, or them, at present. And for thy Wife, she
is in such a Mood.


Let her go whistle above or below then. -- I'll not Make much of her now.


She is at present like Tow, ready to take fire with The least spark of
passion. -- Away, away, -- I would Not have thee seen.


And is she angry, say you then? -- Why then I'll not Provoke her so much as by
my submission now; She shall be pleased better first.


Be gone, I tell thee.


But if you can intercede for my humiliation or so; you Conceive me Sir, -- and
you Gentlemen.


Some other time we'll undertake it.


I thank you heartily, Sir, and in gratitude will tell You a more extraordinary
tale, than I have told you yet. --


Enough, enough. --


And well we are rid of him, I was apprehensive that His Mirth might have
prevented a better expected.


Not to proceed, were a diminution of our privilege, And might teach men to
neglect our Authority, or what Is worse, to slight our loves.


I am resolute in the cause.


But I hope with modesty.


Crispina shall be our Speaker.


And so avow our prerogative by her mouth; she'll manage It like a Town-wit I
warrant her.


Indeed Ladies! and a Wife of the Re-publick in place?


With your leave, Madam.


They have decreed to assault us now.


And I'll charge them as home, I warrant thee.


Then by my leave you may.


But it shall be to defeat your intrigue, if my Wit does not deceive me. --


They have chosen a Speaker to my wish, and I am prepared For her.


Suppose, Gentlemen, that some of us should resolve to Express our good opinion
of you. I do not mean you.


What you please, Madam.


Ha, ha, ha.


Or that you Mr. Frankman were the man I bid to Love me?


Why, in that oase, Madam, I would answer the supposition By another
supposition; as, supposing that any of These Ladies were your Rivals, and that
you designed Me for your self, which Heaven avert from your Thoughts


Mark that, Ladies.


Nay Mr. Frankman will deal with'em well enough I warrant him.


How! Heaven avert it, say you so, Sir?


Marry do I, and dare swear it before your Tribunal Of Love too, if you please.
-- How Madam! Command my love?


I put it to you as a Supposition, Sir.


Why then, Lady, you must unsppose again -- ha, ha, ha, Bid me love? why, 'tis
scarce within the Power of The Stars to command it.


You dare not, Sir, affront our Power.


A power to command love; was there ever such A Solecism in Nature; besides,
you mistake The Prerogative you have decreed to your selves; I must be bold to
tell you so; and more, that were You Coy, and proud as Pallas, your Own law
Must humble you. --


How so! presumptions Sir?


Alas, Madam, Cupid has conspired with your Councels More happily for us, than
the most ambitious Lover Could have hoped for, -- you will have the privilege
To make love first?


What Then, Sir?


Why much good do you with it -- and begin; but remember As it does invert our
Common Mode of Courtship in the First tender of our respects, so we may expect,
(and Reasonably too) the same observances from you women, The privilege of Lady
Mistresses being no longer yours: In short, you have pulled down your Altars of
love And have set up ours.


Was there ever such an affront to Cupid, and women In power together?


I must be plainer yet: and assure you that you have Put it justly in our power
to expect, not only that you Should first offer your affections; but with the
exemplary humilities of men, when lying at the feet of Their Mistresses, as by
saying, I am, Sir, your humble Lady To serve you -- how happy were I to have
the least Of your good opinion! What a foot, and hand have you, And eye that
sends forth rays more bright than those of Diamonds, and wounds with every beam
a Lover; and So till you come (for want of hair) to our Periwigs, And admire
them as much.


This were fine indeed.


Nay, after you have performed all this, remain In doubt whether we'll receive
it, or no, but give You as endless and insupportable delays as such Of your Sex
usually do, when proud, fair, rich, and Witty, are completed in one individual
woman -- If this be not Justice, according to your determination Of making
love; I submit to your judgments, Ladies.


God a mercy Sophister! thou hast puzzled their reasons I warrant thee.


I was beholding to thy wit for the hint, Meridith:


I am glad it did you service.


And with such a retortion on themselves?


What say you to this Ladies?


I doubt the argument is unavoidable.


And contradict our decree.


I confess the consequence was overseen by us.


Why let us revoke it then, and make a better in its Stead.


'Tis necessary, since we are like to have no lovers Otherwise.


Rather than so, I'd consent to give up our Government.


We must think of some other expedient. In the mean Time, I'll vouchsafe you my
pardon.


And your love too, I hope, Madam, by that Eye

She gave me first --

And last, I dare conclude it.


His wit has taken me.


And so for you Sir, I suppose we may do the like.


I thank you, Lady: -- but you shall choose some Other Gallant in stead of me
for your service. --


And what for me?


Good picture of time, nothing.


You have been admitted a Platonic already, By our particular dispensation.


Me a Platonic, Lady? 't had been better said to AEson, after he renewed his
years, and youth -- Me a Plaionick? I'll sooner renounce Plato, and all His
spiritual Doctrine of Love, ten times over, Than suffer the affront to flesh
and blood of mine. Me a Platonic?


Well Sir, I will allow your years a greater respect Since you desire it.


And can deserve it too! but do not hope for a return Unless you value me at
the price of one and Twenty in man-hood, I'll not go under a day, fair One, and
on those terms, love, embrace, and welcome; which If thou dost with me, I'll
make thee know, thou art To wish thy self younger for my sake, and not me for
Thine.


I conceive you, Sir -- such a humour in age, what's more Taking? --


Eugenia, thou hast closed this Scene more kindly than I looked for -- Come
Ladies --


Well, Frankman, thou hast showed thy self a true Wit indeed.


I told you, I should bow the proudest she amongst them.


And has given some shock to their dominion over us.


Why I designed it man; and if we do not set up What we please now, 'tis our
own faults; I knew From the beginning of this day, that the Power would Be our
Sexes again, with more pleasure than before.


Serina made the first breach.


Were she rewarded though with a greater dignity Than I'll name, I could afford
it her.


She affects Polidor, no less deserving in his birth And virtues.


Away to thy Father, Featlin, Thy design ripens a pace.


I was just going to him, Sir.


I did not think that providence had blessed Sir Grave Solymour with so hopeful
a Son.


Here comes Peacock, and half naked too.


An odd spectacle of mirth.


I'll dispose of him accordingly -- In the mean time Wait you on Polidor --

How now, Peacock?


The most sad man living, Sir.


Whats the matter?


The matter Sir? why I have lost my self, Sir.


And thou here?


I mean Euphorbus, my other lovely being in my self.


But how come thou to be half uncloath'd too?


Why Sir, as I was this afternoon asleep, having Laid my fine Vest of Feathers
by me, I had it stolen Away from me, my Pocket picked too, and, as I suppose, By
that self of mine, Euphorbus.


A good moral of self love; than which nothing More deceives us -- but to
undecieve thee, I'll tell Thee Jack, that self of thine was but a Link-Boy
Designed to abuse thy Credulity, and for the Artist You dealt with, he's
obscured already, besides not Worth a revenge.


Is't possible, Sir? then I have been abominably cheated By that pretended
Virtuoso you directed me to.


I did consent for thy good, he should practise on thee A little, since 'twas a
just punishment of thy humour Of self affection, and may all that dote too much
Upon themselves deceive themselves accordingly.


I care not for my money, If I had but my suit of Feathers again!


No matter whether thou hast for no, or thou may have As good. --


Do you think so! I'll try all the feather Shops in the Town, before I'll rest
then.


In the mean time thy part of Comedy shall end here: Be gone Jack -- as thou
art a lover of Modes and dress I would no thave thee seen in such a plight as
this.


And have you power or other means to accomplish this Design, Serina?


I doubt it not, and know most noble Polidor, that as this Day began with
women's rule, so it shall end propitious To my Countries happiness and my
acknowledgments of your Desert.


I need no other proof than your virtue -- here's Frankman.


And must be acquainted how I proceed; Mr. Frankman?


Your Will, Madam.


How came you off with the Ladies?


With victory enough, Madam, in so much that I judge They could be contented to
rule jointly with us now.


And by what means?


By a small heat of argument, on the account of Love Madam, the most subduing
passion. --


My design is half perfected, by this ingenuity of his -- And what for
Crispina. --


Why, as proud, and stout as she is, she plies, and shall More yet, as I hope
to order matters.


You will deserve her best affection.


And for my friend Meridith here -- the wonder of age And love, he has made
such a fair Progress with Eugenia Too.


A virtuous and discreet Lady.


I was fain, Madam, to come up close to her, and bid her Expect what her youth
could hope, from mine -- till we Came to such a kind repertee by looks, that I
suppose She could even have sung, I like his humour well, and I like his humour
well. --


A pleasant one I assure you.


And shall be, till life and I take leave Madam.


Besides he is a person no less generous, in all his actions I must own him
such.


You shall be sure to prove me so, when you command My service.


There needs nothing, but to insist on your prerogatives as men.


Which we will be certain in the end to have the Better of Women kind, or I know
nothing of Flesh and blood. --


And be sure, you neither receive their address or make love On any terms,
giving the like intimation to all you think Fit -- the other part of the design
shall be mine and Celinda's. --


I am prepared to serve it -- but With your leave first.


I know your affair, come Polidor, and you Gentlemen.


And do you hope to bed with me at night, You Ethiopian Matron, do you?


I shall expect, Sir, the due respects, and observance of a Wife.


Indeed sooty, Madam.


The very reason, Sir, that Chimney-sweepers are more Regarded in our Country
than in any other, because They come so near the complexion of our Ladies.


Or else for my greater Curse, thou were begotten by one at Home and so foisted
on me.


By your leave Sir, I must taste your lips

'Tis my privilege to begin, our Law says.


Would I could tell where to hire some Villain to Strangle her.


I have made my self known to him.


That's well: but be sure to keep back the Plot, till our design be perfected:


Leave it to me.


Serina expects me -- I'll but salute him now.


Besides, Sir, we Moors are held in pleasure to transcend The most beautiful
embraces, the world (as well as Those under our Meridian) affirms it.

Whilst we such amorous Feats can do,
The fair would wish to act and know,
Which makes it hard with us to prove
Whether Honour greater is than love.

She abuses me in Rhyme too! though it be the Curse of Poetry.


Your servant Sir.


She here to second her?


To serve you, I am.


My fair Trapanner I desire no more of your service --


And provided you will but hope well from me -- Perhaps may yet oblige your
good opinion --


Is that possible, after decoying me to this mischief?


Good Father be more comfortably persuaded, and if you are Not pleased to
expect well from her, trust to my Endeavour.


If thou can relieve me in this affliction, this Cross Of mine will prove a
welcome providence in obliging My love for ever to thee.


I do not doubt it Sir.


Though I confess it a just punishment of my vicious inclinations And hypocrisy,
together with my too long injurious Neglect of thee.


You have no design to do me wrong I hope --


As you are a woman, not I, Lady.


She is rather an African Serpent in the Sun-burn'd form Of woman, there is
danger in changing words with her.


But if I provide a Spell, Sir, shall charm your Quiet and freedom?


Do you assure it?


As I am honest, and obedient, I do, so you express Your self a Father.


My love, and Estate shall confirm thee, Take all, or what Part thou wilt, of
which I must acknowledge my covetousness has too many years injuriously
debarred thee.


Here comes the women, Sir, -- please you to confirm it Within.


With my hand seal heart --


I could have wished Ladies, that the men had been more Moderate in their
resolution -- But here it is at large.


And confirmed by all these hands.


Not a considerable person in the Common-wealth almost, But has set his name
here.


And that malapert toy, my Husband too?


I do not find his name here -- but it may be those You like as well.


Not receive, or make love, except we part with our power! A bold demand,
Ladies.


And before we have governed one day.


It seems they conclude we shall be necessitated to yield Before night. --


You see how firmly they have resolved, and under the Honour of their hands
too, not to love in any kind, on Other terms.


Part with our power? why, 'tis that which Princes fight for, Politicians
deceive for, nay, Mistresses love for.


I and women marry for; I did, I am sure, chiefly On the account of governing.


'Tis doubtless some trick of these men to obtain the Supremacy we possess.


I judge so, Madam.


They are men, I doubt not, and let 'em live in our country And not love if
they can -- for my part I should rather Be content to starve my affection a
while, than not Maintain our rule -- though perhaps I have something Might
concern me, as much as another woman. --


A magnanimous resolution!


But I fear the consequence.


O, Ladies, if ever for loves sake you will conclude On any thing, you must do
it this minute.


What's the matter?


You must live, and love alone else, the men are all leaving Of our Country,
and you'll not have a man of sixteen in Utopia, By Sun set.


Is it certain?


Why then let us be content till the Boys come to be men.


I doubt that will be too long for some of our constitutions.


Right, Madam, and might prejudice us more than our Power is worth, there is no
living without 'em.


A Barbarism not to be admitted by our Sex.


I have heard of a Chemist, that undertakes to make men, If true, now were a
time to employ him.


But the cheat's discovered and he's run away.


Nay, Ladies, you must presently determine, the Ships are taken, the Wind
fair, and whereas I Said a man, we shall not have otherwise a Boy To play with.


Not a boy to play with, neither? -- have we not Power to restrain these bold
Insolents from making This attempt.


If we could I conceive it were to little purpose, unless we Can command their
loves.


Mr. Frankman going too! well! I have a woman's heart, I Find.


And Meridith too! methinks I am unwilling our Country Should want such an
ornament of age.


Let us put our selves wholly in Serina's hands, and comply As she shall think
fit.


Content, content.


And will you all submit to what I shall conclude, or Determine?


As we are women we will.


That may prove a fickle assurance.


As we hope to love, and be beloved again, Madam.


That's somewhat surer -- And since you are thus unanimous Know 'tis for some
reasons my design and not The men's, -- see here, they come, will answer For the
rest, and acceptably I hope.


We need not doubt it. --


I suppose we may make love first now -- but Keep back yours, Sir, a while, I
have some Reasons.


You shall advise me. --


And now, Meridith, what think thou on that Sprightly cast, Eugenia darted
on thee?


Why, did I not give her beam for beam, think Thou?


Well said -- and for you Crispina, as you are stout and Proud --


What then Sir?


Why, I'll grant thee so much victory, as to bid me Take thee, 'tis something
like the decree you made, But it shall be only with the spiritual language Of
thy eye -- Nay that's too much of Madam Haughty.


'Tis a hard case, Sir, if I have no look to please you.


Now, she comes, i'faith, methinks I am even abed

Withthee in that cast -- and in this something

More -- give me thy hand, and as I am a Frankman I'll love thee, and so forth.


I am yours then it seems.


I hope to both our happinesses -- there is no such Wife As a proud woman makes
when humbled, like the Stately'st Horse that seems most comely under the Rider.


Eugenia, your affections are fixed here. -- If I mistake not. --


I must acknowledge it.


But I'll save her the labour, Madam, to bid me take her: I know thou love
me, and lik'st my humour well too, and If I do not enjoy thee as cheerfully --
may I be never More called the youthful Meridith.


I shall as much rejoice your love, and though at such a disstance 'Twixt our
years, we are united, (so seldom an example in my Sex) I'll bear the Censure,
since pleasant humour's More to be esteemed, and cements faster love Than youth
and beauty.


For which I'll be thy mirthful companion, friend And Husband, and will live
with thee merrily up, and More merrily down.


I cannot blame her to be taken, and his disposition so Pleasant.


Notwithstanding I am a Wife, I might have expected Something like an Amour too
-- but there is time For all things.


Doubt it not, Lady.


I should be sorry, if I could not dispose of my virginity With content too,
when I please.


Here comes Sir Grave Solymour.


More conventions of women to Increase my vexation.


You need not apprehend it father -- this is but your last Scene, and I'll make
it a short one.


I have performed all things you required of me.


And I'll free you from this black Wife in spite Of the decree is past.


You will not do me such an injustice Sir.


No, he shall not, but I will -- the Plot is mine And I'll discover it my self,
to deserve his favour With you; look you here, Sir, 'tis but a Blackamoor Boy,
and my Page -- I hope Ladies there

Needs no decree to annul this marriage.


Celinda has obliged you Knight.


I thank her, Madam, since she has done me No greater Mischief


And reconciled you to your Son, likewise.


Most fully, Sir, I thank him, and with a settlement of His Estate on me.


I knew this only could effect it on your covetousness, and do your Son
justice, whom you had Long injured -- wherefore you ought Sir to pardon The
design,


I do, I do, -- since there's no remedy. --


For which your so worthy affection -- I offer my Self and fortune yours.


It is but justice.


I was yours without it, and am so now.


There's no more for me to do.


Nothing, Sir! --


But to reform your self and that square pretext Of Gravity, by which you have
not a little abused Better meanings than your own.


I will than immediately retire, and live, (if I can) A forgotten
Commonwealths man. --


A happy riddance, believe me.


You have obliged me, Mr. Frankman, with the rest.


You should have thanked the Ladies too, but that I'll do for you. --


There's yet a higher justice to be done unto you Polidor -- nor is't unknown
that in your veins Is still preserved, that Royal Blood, which first gave
Nourishment unto this Countrey's ancient stock Of Kings.


We all acknowledge it.


And from my mouth I dare pronounce you here Our Monarch -- I know you will
accept it.


I were injurious otherwise unto your love And Justice, though time by
introducing long these Forms of State, obscured the light and glory Of my first
Ancestors.


But to be more conspicuous in your self.


You shall partake it with me, Serina, and more, I Will acknowledge that 'tis
thy love and virtue made Me King.


You have already Sir, above my expectation or desert.


Long live Polidor and Serina, King and Queen.


And to you all I'll soon express the value that I have for your affections.


We do not doubt it, Sir.


For me, I'll only beg, that when our Countrey's Enemies Shall dare provoke
your Arms, you'll bid me be your Soldier.


With Eugenia's leave thou shalt, nay called in honour. Of thy Youthful Age, my
youngest Captain.


I thank you, Sir.


You are contented Ladies with this change.


With all submission, Sir.


And is an universal joy in this most happy end Of both Republics.


But I hope, Sir, Wives shall not lose their legislative Power in ruling of
their Husbands.


For such as will submit, we'll make no law to Hinder them.


Then you are a King indeed.


Nature has made for men her Salique-Law Given Women to continue men, not
govern, And though both Sexes here have held Republics (A usage different from
all other Countries) In each example they may wisely see No rule's so good as
lawful Monarchy.


THe Stages Zany, or the Miss that's kind
Poets their Intercessors Wisely find:
The fool's your favourite, and the Miss can play
A far more welcome part anotherway;
But stay, this Jest must not proceed too far,
Our women govern here -- as well as there,
Beauty is sacred, and a Satyr thence
Is like a Clap in Cupids kinder sense.
Then let them pass with their Heroic guilt,
And Prologue borrowed from a Hat and Belt.
Farce may be used in the Romantic way,
Like Pudding Jack turned Hector in a Play.
We'll act such fools our Poets can suppose,
Rather than Hero's imitating those,
Yet mine I hope so far with theirs complies,
That Foppering you'll excuse for telling lies.
A Fools bold Lunacy my part does show,
But more Heroic Cinthia's Hero know.
Great AEsop did by Fools the Wise direct,
Allow our Author's hear the same effect,
He for your sake his Comick-Muse thus dressed,
But hopes the Moral is above the Jest:
And if y' are kind upon our Poets score,
We Actors, in that favour, hope for more.

