THE SURPRISE, A COMEDY. Written by the Honourable Sir ROBERT HOWARD.

LONDON, Printed for Henry Herringman, and are to be Sold by R. Bentley, J.
Tonson, F. Saunders, and T. Bennet. M DC XCII.

Scene SIENNA.

SInce you expect a Prologue, we submit:
But let me tell you, this Excise on Wit,
Though undiscerned, consumes the Stock so fast,
That no new Fancy will be left at last.
Wit's not like Money; Money though paid in
Passes about, and is received again:
But Wit when it has once been paid before,
There it lies dead, 'tis currant then no more.
Nor must we plead for what we do present,
As in Law-Cases, by a Prcedent:
Poets and Mountebanks in this strange Age
Practise with equal hopes upon the Stage;
For 'tis expected they should both apply
To every Humour some new Remedy:
And one's as likely every man to please,
As the other to cure every man's Disease.
-- But you are welcome all; and what men say
Before a Feast, will* serve before a Play:
Here's nothing you can like: Thus he that writes
Or makes a Feast, more certainly invites
His Judges than his Friends; there's not a Guest
But will find something wanting or ill dressed.
The Proverb but thus varied serves I fear;
Fools make the Plays, and Wise-men come to hear.
TIS strange, Sister.


'Tis true, Brother.


Perhaps it is; but few such Wonders have been heard of.


Nor ever such a Wonder caused it.


There needs indeed a powerful Charm to raise up Spirits fettered long in Age.
(They say, that) Love is the Soul's business here, when Youth seems to promise
it shall have a long share in Time; but his is fitted for its Journey; Age
already hath packed up all his Faculties.


Fie, fie, 'tis otherwise with him; he endeavours, nay, and (I think) believes
he shall grow young again: the warmth of Love serves for the heat of Youth.


Where (in the name of wonder) could this Love find entrance in his breast? or
how live there? it has no blood to feed on; Nature sure in him is at low ebb.


There needs small Fuel (Brother) to assist her influence; she li^e the Sun,
warms all things with her sight, yet is not wasted with expense of heat.


You speak a Miracle, Sister. --


-- You seem troubled, Brother.


Not much -- but -- I did believe, when my dear Father left us to his care, he
did not apprehend my Uncle apt for such a folly; and I little thought to have
been first saluted with this News at my return from Travel.


My Uncle still pretends to remain just to us; and I believe he will.


It may be so: But when is this hot Lover to be married?


Tomorrow morning.


But what moved her consent to take this Mummy in her Ams?


She's all obedience to her Father, and with him my Uncle's Wealth pleads high.
I do believe she thinks choice were a sin, and would seem guilty to her self,
as if she fell from perfect Innocence, if that a partial thought for any should
make a way for passion in her breast.


Then it seems her Father woos; I hope my Uncle spares his pains. -- But
Sister, since we are in discourse of Lovers, 'tis not unseasonable to ask for
yours, the brave Cialto; the last Intelligence I had was of his glorious
Victory; such a Laurel ne'er yet adorned a Brow so youthful. Believe me, Sister,
though you may be cruel, and unconcerned, I must confess I share in all that's
his good fortune.


Alas, Brother, since that time his condition is much altered.


Ha -- you amaze me: -- Why do you appear so sad? He is not dead I hope.


No, perhaps his Life is now the greatest part of his misfortune.


Still I am lost in admiration. What changes a little time produces?


The Story is too long to tell you; only for what concerns my self, I have
observed, that since the loss of all his Fortunes, he shun^ all occasions of
seeing me. -- My Uncle will be with us presently; I would not therefore engage
my self in a disorder, which the relation of his miseries cannot but bring upon
me.


Where is my Uncle?


Abroad upon a strange design. He has employed the best Wits in Sienna to make
a Song, or indeed an Apology, for his doting at these years; and that which he
likes best when he salutes his Mistress, must to morrow be presented before her
Window.


I am amazed; yet I'll suspend my thoughts and trouble (if I can) till fitter
time.


See, Brother, where he comes;
Business and Love are mingled in his postures.

How he mumbles to himself! sure he does chew the cud of some set Speech. What
an amorous look was there? -- with that amiable smile? -- which only adds a few
wrinkles in new places.


Pray let's stand close; He's near beginning; a rising wind you know is ever
ushered with a murmur.


How am I swelled by expectation! as the day breaks before the rising Sun, so
is Emilia's fair approach prepared within me, by a precious sense of happiness.


Peace; he has hit a fault, and now begins to hunt again.


O, these be they; now to my choice; for I resolve to morrow, before the
Wedding, one of them shall be sung, that which I judge will best describe my
Passion. -- Let me see, --

Could thou be yet more fair or good,

This Fool begins with impossibilities,

Ple have none on it: -- What this other?

Since fancy makes all Women fair, --

Worse and worse, he lies abominably: What ways are our Poets got into, they
cannot make a Song without a Lie, a Vapour, or Impossibility? There's none of
these has hit my fancy yet: Once again. -- Oh, this I like well; a very pretty
Masque, short, and full of variety; the Charges wont to be great, -- let me
see, -- here is a Hymen, a Cupid, a Charon, and the Destinies: for the Hymen a
saffron Robe and a Torch, -- hang cost at such a time; it shall be presented
instead of a Song before her Window, when I first appear; 'tis better than
after the Wedding at night, when every body's sleepy. Now I'll go see my
Nephew, and bid him welcome from his Travels.


Step out, Brother, there's your Cue.


Can these Lovers see, trow?


My dear Nephew I -- were thy brave Father living, thou could not fill his
Arms and Breast with a mo^ welcome joy; I'll be sworn thou art returned with
all advantages in Fame and Person.


Your kindness, Sir, sees more in me than your Eyes.


Nay, believe me, Nephew, I joy in it; and that I could not do, were it not
visible what cause I have sor't.


I wish I may continue, Sir, worthy your fair Opinion.


And how, Man? Merry still?


I take nothing to heart, Sir; It seems you do; for my Sister tells me, I am
come seasonably to see your Joys made perfect every way, at least as you
imagine.


Oh, Nephew, 'tis past Imagination. Nephew, thou can not fancy what she is;
in Woman kind no president is found to show thee her: But you it seems do
apprehend that all my future Actions will show me more her Husband than your
Uncle.


You mistake me, Sir; neither my Nature nor my Fortunes yet are pressed with such
mean thoughts; what I have said was more my care for you than for my self; I
would not have your last days shut up with Folly or Misfortune.


Fear not, fear not; I must be happy; it is an injury to her to doubt it.


He is unreasonably possessed.


But I forget -- My dearest Niece, you shall perceive that neither my concerns
nor passion hinder my just care of thee, my best Samira. I have provided such a
Fortune for you;

Nay, start not at it. -- 'Tis the rich Heir, young Brancadoro; this day he
comes to visit thee, we will quickly make it up. -- Come, good Nephew, I have much
to do; within I'll tell thee all my mind.


How --


Peace, Sister.


Marry Brancadoro! Is that the happiness I hope, I may depend? I shall enjoy
with him the Curses of his ill-got Wealth, and rise upon the poor Cialto's
ruins. Oh what a Crime was my feigned Cruelty! Me thinks I am as guilty as this
thriving Asses Father, and seem an accessory to all Cialto's wrongs, because I
did not openly declare my Passion for him; that would have rendered me incapable
of being now a Party: It is too much.

That poor Cialto at one time should find
Both me and Fortune equally unkind.

Morrow to your Honour; how do you like your Cloths?


I like my Cloths well enough, but my Man Jocamo says, you are such a dear
cheating kind of Tailor, that I vow he'll have me turn you away; my last
Mourning Suit did not cost me half so much.


Your Man is a pick-thank Knave. Call me Cheat! I'll ne'er work stitch for ye
more as long as I live, unless you pay me for calling me Cheat.


Nay, stay, stay; what a devilish Fellow are you now to exact upon me, because
you see I love you? The Devil take you for me; what Composition must you have?


I'll have forty shillings, and I'll have it in Gold too.


Pox take you for me; will not Silver serve your turn, when you know I love
Gold so well? Pray ye heartily, now Jack, take Silver.


I vow Gold, or fare you well.


Stay, and be hanged then; here, here; now are you good Friends, Jack? nay, I
vow now speak truth.


Yes, I vow I forgive you


Look ye here's my Man. What a devilish Rogue are you to rail at my Taylor
Robin, and say he cheats me?


Pray Sir view his Bill; in the first place here is fifteen Shillings a Yard
for Stuff of half a Crown.


Why look ye there now Jack; what a strange Rogue are you now to cheat me so?


What a strange piece of Ignorance is your Man, to call it Stuff? I protest my
Lord 'tis of the same piece that the King of France his Wedding Suit was on; the
Stuff is called Adam man he; King Haccamantacu sent the King of France three
pieces of it; and I bought this of his Tailor a purpose for you; and your wise
Man calls it Stuff, forsooth.


Look you there now, you blockheadly Fool you; what would you more? prithee how
do ye call the Stuff, and the King that sent it, Jack.


The Stuff is called Adam man he, and the Kings Name is Haccamantacu.


What a Mountebank Rogue is this?


I vow that's fair satisfaction; I would not for my Money but know this; I vow,
I vow, 'tis very pretty.


Pray ye ask him why he sets down forty Shillings for making a riding Coat.


Nay, but I vow, Jack, the Devil take ye for me, for being so base; why forty
shillings now?


There is ten Shillings for making your Coat, and thirty Shillings for a
Port-hole for your Sword to peep out at.


Why, is not that very fair now? Why, art thou grown a stark Fool now? Prithee,
Jack, what is a Port-hole? I vow thou hast the pretriest Names.


A Port-hole is, as the vulgar have it, a kind of Slit; but in France it is
called Port-hole, and is made with a whiff down here, and a whiff down there;
they are very chargeable.


I vow, thou art a pretty Fellow: but has the King of France his Port-hole made
with a whiff down here, and a whiff down there, as mine is?

But here's Villerotto; I vow I must talk

A little wiser to him.

How dost thou like my Cloths, Villerotto; are they not brave, fit for my
quality?


Exceeding brave, Sir.


I longed to be out of Mourning, to show my self; for whilst my Father lived I
never could appear.


No, he was ashamed you should.


Besides, I hate this Mourning, it makes my hands so devilish dirty; and I will
not wash them till my Mother dies; and when I have done Mourning for her, I'll
wash them for good and all. -- Well, and what says my Council?


Why, they say, Sir by these Writings Cialto has no justice to ^edeem, nor can
it bear dispute in any Court of Equity.


Why, this 'tis to have a wise Father;
As he has ordered it, 'tis not a Farthing matter
If I were an arrant Ass.
Thou say, my Council says,
There's no relief can now be had.

None, Sir, -- but by the Senate.


That were ^ine i'saith,
To save him they had a mind to ruin,
Which my Father helped to do (Peace be with him)
And died when he had done; two Courtesies at once.

But suppose, Sir, the Senate wants his Conduct,
They can be kind again on such occasions.
Only the obeying part of Men
Observe the rules of Honour in their Friendship.
They can as quickly too produce the sum,
And compel you to give him up his Land.

But they won't, I hope.


So do I; but how if such a thing should be?


Pish, pish, they'll not displease me,
They use to borrow money of my Father;
Yet for all that, it puts me just in such a sudden sweat
As the stumbling of my Horse uses to do.

I shall hardly work him to it. --
But, Sir, 'tis not amiss to talk of things
That may be; Plots of prevention are not made
Extempore; nor is haste a Friend to Counsel:
Besides, I take it,
You go the ready way to make Cialto
Yet more your Enemy.

How so?


You are about to rob him of his Mistress,
The fair Samira; what kindness can you expect,
When you possess at once his Love and Fortunes?

What care I. -- How now? -- what's your business?


Signior Castruccio, Sir, presents his Service to you,
And has by me sent you a Counter-part
Of the Writings which concern your Marriage.

Oh, I thank him; 'tis very well.


How's this? it seems strange to me,
You should agree with him, and never ask
The Ladies free consent.

Why, dost thou think I need doubt that?
Would any Woman be so simple to refuse me?
Why Man, there have been many of them have fallen
Stark mad for me at first sight.

Will it not be dangerous for you to go?


Whither?


To visit your Mistress? you may meet Cialto there.


Let him be afraid of me if he will.


I doubt he will not.


I am told the pitiful Fellow dares not come near her now;
This 'tis to be poor: And I go boldly;
This 'tis to be rich.

But if he should hear you were like to have her,
It might perhaps move him --

To what?


To cut your Throat.


Let him be hanged: But if Signior Castruccio
Admit such Russians in his House, Pll send her word
Flatly, Pll have nothing to do with her.

But your Writings and Covenants, --
You can't in honour break them.

I care not; who dares sue me? If any do,
I am rich enough to make them weary on it;
Though I confess I like the Gentlewoman well enough.

Yet there's another way would do your business.


Say thou so? nay, and there be another way,
I care not if I take it, so I may do nothing
Unbefitting my Estate and Quality.

You'll pardon, Sir, this liberty I take;
It springs from my affection to you;
For ever since I came into your Service,
All your concernments have been mine.

I do believe it, and have trusted thee
With every thing; and for my part, I have told
Thee my mind, I care for any body
As little as they care for me;
Thou may see I love thee,
Otherwise I regard no body that is not richer than my self.

What an insensible stock have I to work on?
But you forget what I propose, Sir.

No, I do not; 'tis that I should have Samira;
Why say no more, I will have her.

You consider not the danger of Cialto's revenge.


I care not for Cialto, nor her neither;
I can let her alone, if there be such ado about her.

But you may prevent it.


How, prithee?


Why, if Cialto were once dead,
There were no further trouble;
You might enjoy his Mistress, and his Fortune.

Would he would die then.


Men do not use to do it for a wish.


Why, how then?


Would you hang your self if Cialto should desire it?


It may be I would, if I were as poor as he;
For this is the case, -- say now --

Now will he ramble again into another matter. --
But, Sir, he does not think himself so poor
As you imagine, while he lives in hope
That what you now possess of his may once
Again return; yet if he be unwilling
To depart this World, he may be forced.

Which way, which way?


Why, for a little money, Instruments
May be found.

To do what?


To kill him.


Um, that may be found out,
And so good-night to my Estate.

Nay, if you please, Sir, he shall live, and do you
The Courtesy to cut your Throat.

Talk no more, good Villerotto; another time,
Another time, and that in private too.
I hope no body has heard us; men may hear
At a distance: I have heard of a Conjurer
That could make a Glass for a man to look in,
And hear his Enemies forty miles off.

Do you believe such stories?


The Devil may do much, that's certain:
But for the present I am going to see my Mistress,
Fair Samira; 'tis fit I should see her
Before I Marry her.

'Twere strange if he should Marry her
Before he saw her. --
Why, are you near marrying her?

To morrow, man, to morrow; her Uncle and I
Make but one business on it.

To morrow, Sir, and her leave yet unasked!


What needs that? her Uncle has done it for me.
Thou hast the Agreements; I must away.

This suits with my Designs: --
And yet it startles me,
To have so dull a Fool to work on:
But easy paths do seldom lead us to revenge;
Let them be rough, as are the ways
Through troubled Seas, I'll tread 'em.
The base injury I received from Cialto,
Cashiering me from my Command for a petty plunder,
And a Rape (as the Wench called it) was the first cause
That brought me to Brancadoro's Service,
Whose Father was his mortal Enemy;
By which means I hope to find a time
To right my wrongs upon Cialto's heart.

Come, my best Daughter, this day thou shalt
Be made a happy Woman; fear not, fear not,
Nor look upon his age with prejudice;
Age is far steadier than Youth, Emilia;
He'll never make thee jealous.

No more than an Eunuch would, I dare swear for him.


You speak, Sir, as if you thought me altered,
Or else as if I still had been an Hypocrite;
But truly, Sir, you need not doubt me,
I do believe I shall be happy with him,
Because a Blessing waits upon Obedience:
You might command me against my inclination,
But I am blessed with such indifference,
That 'tis no trial of my Duty, Sir,
To give my free consent.

That's my best Girl; get thy self ready,
The Bride-groom's near at hand; I must about,
There's nothing done if I be not at their elbows.

The Devil had as good be there.
Why, how is it, Mistress?

Very well, Bottolo, I thank you.


I wish it may continue so, Mistress.


Dost thou fear I shall be sick?


Nay, I can't tell; it may be the Palsy
Or Cough of the Lungs is not infectious;
You are going to venture, Mistress.

What dost thou talk of?


Why, of that which is nothing else
But talk, of Old Age;
Sure, Mistress, it will never agree with you;
Has not your Father persuaded you
You're above Fifty? And that you were born
Before the Battle of Lepanto?

Why should he do that?


Why, 'twere convenient he should
Either persuade you, that you were old, or
That Castruccio were young.

Away, you Fool.


Well, Mistress, hang me if ever frosty day
Did well at Fruit-time; for my part, I wonder
The old Gentleman has no more Conscience
Than to marry you --
If I were worthy to advise you, Mistress, --

Peace, you Fool, and be not rude.


Go thy way. -- I am half persuaded
Thou art no Woman, or at least
Thou dost not know thou art one,
More than by thy Petticoats. -- Well, --
If thou art pleased, thanks to the Powers Divine;
For my own Cares I'll try the power of Wine.

I Should not thank you for this Visit then. --
Fie, my dearest Friend.

Forget that Name, and me; I tried
To begin first no more to think on you;
But (...) (...) (...) in my temper;
My fondness of you had a power above
My generous Reason.

Is there a generous Cause for breach of Friendship?


It were a guilt to say I am your Friend:
Wonder not; for I'm grown so miserable
That Friendship would be paid to me
As unseasonably as to Men in graves,
Where dissolution wraps up every Title,
And buries Names with Things.

What storm tosses his noble Soul!
Why does my Friend thus wrong himself and me?
I (...) (...) think the brave Cialto's Mind
Had been so much within the reach of Fortune;
Use her as thou would a fantastical Woman,
If thou would have her kind, slight her.

Pray say no more; you understand me not;
Nay, spare your Lectures; after this I fear
That we must meet no more. -- Farewell.

You are too quick; think with your self;
Sure you may be persuaded, e're you go,
To see my Sister.

Ha! -- that was too severe; departing Souls
Are sometimes thus called back with cruel kindness,
To share more miseries on Earth. --
Did you not name your Sister?

How he's moved! --
Yes, I did; my Sister Samira.

You might have spared the Explanation;
I have her Name engraved in several Characters,
By Love and Fortune. -- Why do you stare upon me so,
As if you were amazed at my disorders,
That are not ignorant of my disasters,
Nor of my Passions? What do you think?
Is't not a pretty mingle?

See, my Sister.


How, Samira! -- 'tis she. --
With what an horror now that lovely Shape
Appears, that I have so much joyed to gaze on!
Such a confusion would an Angel bring
Upon a Man laden with Sins,
As I am with Misfortunes. --
I am so much amazed I cannot find my way!

Cialto.


Stay; what means this strangeness?
Come, 'tis too much forced.

Cruel Miranzo, cruel in your kindness,
That only holds so fair a Mirror to me,
To let me see how much I am unhappy.

You are mistaken, and throw a blemish on her;
She is the same she ever was.

Why, that was cruel still to me.
I complained not, fairest Samira,
That you were so, when I was Fortune's Favourite;
And sure I will not hope for pity,
Now I am turned her Slave.

As my thoughts were never moved
With Arguments drawn from Prosperity; so believe,
I shall have no aversion for the Virtuous,
Although Unfortunate.

Oh, do not with mistaken Charity
Attempt to palliate my Disease;
'Tis Fortune's Plague, that's never to be cured;
I shall infect those I come near, -- and yet --
I love you still -- above -- all --
I have such Tides of Passions when I but name you,
Much more now I see you, that my words
Are over-slown, and like drowned men
Disorderly pop up, and sink again.
Distempers seize me, -- I talk wildly too, I fear.

I understand you not; pray recollect
Your self, speak freely to me.

Why do you both express such wonder in your looks?
Is misery so strange?

Why, Sister, you are still insensible;
If you ever loved Cialto, tell him now;
And be not like the rest of the mean World,
To own nothing that is unhappy.

If I say little, Brother, I give you leave
To think my grief stops more my words,
Than want of kindness for Cialto:
Yet to content you, hear me --

Hold --
Your pity, if you've any, comes too late;
Those gentle Tears that once had been my Blessing
Do now but aggravate and haste my destiny.
Just so the drops of Heaven, which first caused
The thriving Plant to spring and flourish,
When by some rough and fatal accident
Its shaken roots have lost their hold,
Then the soft rain no longer gives it life,
But makes it perish faster.

Oh my heart! The throng of all his griefs
Has crowded in my Breast, and I must speak
Or burst. -- Cialto.

Sir.


What's the matter?


Your Uncle, Sir, is coming hither,
And with him Signior Brancadoro.

Signior Coxcomb -- Mischief on his unseasonable Visit.
Has not my Uncle pressed you, Sister,
To morrow when he Weds, to Marry with
This Fool Brancadoro?

Most earnestly, even to threatening me.


^e may be injurious. --


How! would the Fool purchase my Love,
As his damned griping Father did my Fortune?
I have not mortgaged sure my Wishes to him.
If I am urged this way I shall grow weary
Of politic patience, nor with tired hopes
Wait longer the false Senates leisure.
-- Still adored Samira, am I not too confident,
That in all my miseries, when I do not nourish the least hope
Of e're enjoying you my self,
I should now seem jealous of you.

Have I showed my self so easy, that you need fear
I will be sacrificed unto a Fool?

Peace, they come; be temperate, Cialto.


Come, Nephew, (for so I dare venture to call you.)


Heaven send us joy of our wise Kindred.


Ha, upon my conscience that's Cialto;
I know him by his fierce looks; 'tis he, I vow:
I am like to have a fine wooing on it.
Would I were hid under a Bed,
Or behind the Hangings, I would breath
No more than a Mouse that sleeps all the Winter.
Why, wh, what a terrible look was there!
D'hear, Uncle? I protest I left one of my Gloves
Behind me in the Window, and I'm afraid
It will be stolen.

Why, you have them both on.


I had forgot, like an Ass as I was, to hide one.


Come, come on.


Nay, as I am an honest Man,
There's my Almanac with Notes and Memorandums in it,
I'll go back and come presently.

Fie, Nephew, my Niece sees you.


You an't tell how she likes me, can you, Uncle?


O, ^ear not that.


Never stir, Uncle, I have mighty need --
-- I must needs do you know what.
He looks vengeance surely:
He makes me wink as bad as a flash of Lightning would.

Come, Nephew, what are you bashful?
Niece, this is the Person I told you of,
That to morrow will make you an happy Woman,
And be an evidence of my care and kindness.

I need no such testimony, Sir.


What does she say, Uncle, that she has no need of me?
Why then I have no need of her;
I'll be beholden to no body living.

No, no, you are too mistrustful.
Come, Niece, prepare against to morrow,
To be made Mistress of the greatest Fortune
Sienna boasts of.

I think I can tell some few particulars without Book,
Of some small Lordships that serve my turn
To cover this poor out-side, and some slight
Equipage of Servants and Attendants. --
Now dare not I proceed to particulars, for fear
I should come to name that wild-looking Mans Estate,
Which should make up the Catalogue.
I'll tell you a pretty Jest, Mistress;
A Friend of mine would have had me married
A Kinswoman of his, -- and --

I would you had, Sir.


Why, how should I have had you then?


I must have been content, Sir.


Nay, I thank you for that; so I might have forfeited
My Covenants to your Uncle; I may be sued
If I don't marry you to morrow.

How's this!


Peace, does this Coxcomb move you?


'Tis as he tells you, Niece.


I wonder, Sir, you should dispose of me so absolutely,
Without allowing me some larger time.

You had need consider indeed for such a Fortune.


Is there nothing but Fortune to be thought on?
Consent springs not alone from Wealth:
Marriage you know admits no separation;
And if Affections should not be united,
The Persons must be miserable.

Hey day, no more of this Love-Logick:
What, you would have it a Romance,
And after some long time, and strange Adventures,
Discover pity for your Knight Errant.
Remember, your Father left you to my care;
If you marry not Brancadoro to morrow,
I'll throw you out of it.

'Tis strange, Sir, that you should press me thus,
So suddenly to dispose my self for ever.
What say you, Sir? I hope you are so civil
As not to urge it.

Why, I say, A bargain's a bargain.


This is monstrous! I can hold no longer.


Consider, you may do hurt.


I care not -- Signior Castruccio,
I think it does not much become you
To force your Niece to any thing;
Her Father ne'er believed that you would use
The Trust which he reposed in you, to such an end.

Nay, for my part, if she be'nt as willing as I,
A sig for her, and you too.
-- I am horribly afraid.

How the Ass shakes and bristles both together.


Signior Cialto, I wonder more that you
Should give your unasked Counsel, to disturb
The Advancement of my Niece and Family.

He can make large Jointures indeed,
Thanks to his Father's base and griping practices.

You are uncivil in my House.


You are old, and Samira's Uncle;
These are Protections; you may say any thing:
But I would not advise this wealthy Coxcomb,
For all your Articles, to venture upon Marriage;
'Twill be dangerous, Signior Brancadoro.

Pray leave my House, Sir; I desire no such
Rude Company.

Pray, Sir, go; this does no good.


Come, you are to blame; you may do injury.


Pardon me, fair Samira, I am gone;
My Prayers were heard, could but your happiness
Be divided from all Mankind, though I am one.

He's gone; -- would I might never live
If I have not a great mind to bolt the door after him.
Now perhaps I shall venture to say something,
If I knew what. -- He won't pop back trow, will he?

Come, Niece, you will hereafter thank me for
This happiness; I know you will command
Him and his whole Estate.

Nay, she may do what she will in reason;
But if I'm urged I am as stout and surly
As the stoutest of 'em, let it be Man or Woman.
This Gentleman thought to bluster me
Out of my Bargain; but I think he was deceived;
He had best let me alone.

Seem to comply, dear Sister; I'll tell you why hereafter.


I hope, Sir, you will allow me a few hours
To think, perhaps to persuade my self
To an obedience which you press so much.

Do, my good Niece; for to morrow
I must needs have your Company:
Speak for your self, Nephew.

I can't tell what to say, for fear
This ^ Fellow should peep in again:
Yet I'll set a good face on it.
Did you know my Father, Mistress?
Who's that at Door?

I have seen him, Sir.


I doubt he listens; -- well, I care not,
I am resolved Villerotto shall get his Throat cut,
That he shall. -- And now I will speak boldly.
Why, Mistress, he would have been your Father-in-law,
Had he lived to it, I had helped you to a wise Father,
I can tell you that.

Would he had had a wiser Son.


As for my Mothers part --


She brought forth an Ass.


I'll speak a bold word,
Though I say it, that should not say it, --

You promised, Sir, to leave me to my thoughts
For a few hours.

Well Virgins will be modest; Come, Nephew,
We'll leave her to her self to day; to morrow
She shall be yours, or mine no more.
Your Brother, I hope, is more sensible than you
Of your own good; you know my mind; Farewell, --
Be wise.

Your Uncle gives you good Counsel, Mistress;
Farewell till to morrow; In the mean time
I'll go find Villerotto;
I dare not for my ears venture to marry,
Unless he makes safe this furious Cialto,
Then I shall keep all quietly,
Or else I may perhaps be invited to an honourable Duel,
Which how I can endure --

Farewell, Niece, and prepare to make
Your self and me truly happy

Now, Brother, to what purpose
Did you advise me to seem willing?

I have some thoughts which only want of time
Yet hinders me to ripen; I like not
My Uncle's picking Quarrels thus, all's in his power,
He may do mischief; therefore seem to consent;
Yet fear not, though the Wedding is so near,
At the last Minute I know a way to free thee;
Within I'll tell thee my design:
This Mushroom never shall be yoked to thee.

Now, Sir, do you yet believe it is a consequence,
That you must not expect to live, if proud Cialto does?
Or would you have the Parish Priest to make you Friends,
And all the Neighbourhood invited to the reconciling dinner?

Why thou see I looked thee out for the nonce
To know if thou can have him quickly dispatch'd;
Why Man, I cannot marry else.

Well, be secure, reckon that insolent Enemy
To your Repose and Fortunes, in his Grave:
-- But see, Sir -- yonder are an odd parcel of Men,
I think I have seen the face of one of them before;
If I mistake not, they are a sort of People
Fitted by their own wants for my designs.
Retire, Sir, and leave me to sound them.

But be sure, Man; be sure, I say:
If thou should miss, and Cialto find me married, --
Um -- I might give my life for a farthing.

Fear not, fear not. Save you, Gentlemen.


And you, Sir.


You seem Persons that have not been
So kindly used by Fortune as your merits
Might justly challenge; your carriage speaks you
To have been Men of Action.

We have seen danger, Sir, and have not shrunk;
When those that live at ease have shook to hear
The Story told.

'Tis pity, at least to our frail Reason it so appears,
That neither Virtue nor Courage should be safe
From mixtures of Necessity.

We are used as our Swords are;
When the danger's past, hung by.

And yet if such as you, whose haughty minds
Brook not the sight of other Men's Enjoyments,
Or think it barbarous injustice to starve
Amidst that Plenty which your Swords
Secured or purchased; if such Men as you
But snatch at some small share,
You would be punished certainly.

We have found that.


Nay, the Clergy would declare your Souls
In dangerous condition.

Yes, damned, without dispute.


Come we are betrayed and fooled;
Those that have power over us
Confirm themselves by Cruelty and Cheating;
One they call Justice, the other Policy.
Mean while the poor must starve, or else be whipped;
The Soldier out of War want, or be hanged;
Nature's relieving Laws are lost in theirs;
And she whispers unto man his own advantage;
If he be guilty then in that pursuance,
The fault still cests in those that urged the Act;
The rich and powerful part of Men
Are answerable for those deeds
To which they force the poor and the necessitous.

Oh admirable Reason!


'Tis most profound, and never to be answered.


Are you convinced then?


Yes, yes, yes.


Then I may tell you, I have a business for you,
If you dare attempt it, in which there will not be
Much danger, but great profit.

Pish, Danger's our Companion;
Name the thing, Sir.

Follow me then to a more private place,
Where you shall know your task; my own Sword
Shall share a little with you, as far as I dare;
I may, for ought I know, keep with the boldest.

No News yet, and the dangerous time so near!
And she for ever may be lost to me,
And forced into a Fool's Embraces!
For though she never can be mine, I cannot
Suffer she should be another.
-- I hardly can be jealous of Miranzo;
Yet Friendship it self is not security enough
To give him credit for Samira; I dare not trust
That Treasure thus uncertainly; I must prevent
The quickest way; Friendship and Fate
Have their slow pace; but Passions will not wait.

Whither so fast? hey day, which is now
Predominant, Love or Fortune? One of'em
Is ever vexing thee.

'Tis well you can continue merry.


Come, what's the matter?


Nothing.


That's unkind.


Pray urge me not.


Is there any thing to be concealed from Friends?


Yes, trouble and misery.


No more, or find some other friend.


You do not well to press me thus;
It will not please you when you hear it.

Pray let me know it.


You shall; but I must beg another thing.


What's that?


Only to save you and me trouble;
Pray when you have heard it give no Counsel.

O, by no means, Sir, not for a World.


Why, 'tis no great matter, -- I'll kill Brancadoro.


How!


Nay, your Wonder is as unnecessary as your Counsel.


Have you considered what you said?


Yes, and I find it reasonable, I admire you do not.


Faith not I; I think 'tis an unreasonable thing
To kill an Ass; some think that Fools are damned
For their original Ignorance; thou would not
Send him to Hell on thy Errand, would?

Ha, ha, should I for fear of sending him to Hell,
Let him enjoy my Heaven here! --
Perhaps it grows indifferent to you.

Do you suspect that Brancadoro's wealth
Has bribed me, Sir? I thank you.

I do not say, it has; but yet --


But yet! it looks scurvily: A Friend when he's jealous
Is like a Child that's froward;
He knows not why he's out of humour.
Come, trust all to me, you shall not be deceived;
I've a design; spare me but for a few minutes.

Me thinks your kindness gives me greater joy
Than a bare Friendship could: -- all thoughts
Of my revenge on others vanish; -- yet --
When I am too much pressed with Misery,
Be but so kind to give me leave to die.

It shall be so, if I can frighten him,
And make him decline the Marriage with my Sister;
It would be excellent; for certainly he's a rank Coward:
See where most luckily he comes.
Now Fortune; -- yet if this fail I've a sure remedy at last.
Noble Signior, I was going to look after you.

What, I warrant your Sister sent to me;
I am coming.

No, Sir, 'twas a business of another nature.


Nay, I cannot stay to talk of business now.


You must, Sir.


Must, Sir!


I think you must; your Honour will enforce you.


Why, what has my Honour to do with it? Must!


It concerns it; and I must beg your pardon,
That am th'unwilling Messenger.

Why, if you be unwilling, let it alone;
I'll excuse you.

I dare not, Sir; I am obliged so far
In common ties, that every Gentleman
Is bound unto another by; I was
Unhappy that it was required from me.

Well, another time, another time.


None but this can serve, Sir; 'tis the last request
That you will have from Signior Cialto.

The last! well, that mollisies somewhat; What is't then?


Why it seems reasonable, that you have his Fortune,
And are now going to possess his Mistress;
He but desires that you would now be pleased
Fairly to take away his Life too.

What's this! I hope I am not discovered
By Villerotto! Fairly, quoth he!

Life in his condition is but useless to him.


Why he may hang himself.


That he's unwilling to do; you shall try
To free him with your honourable Sword.

I'^ not try, Sir.


You must, Sir; and for that end he stays for you
Hard by the Nunnery, in the Cypress Grove.

There let him stay; you know, as well as I,
I am ^nga^'d, and cannot come.

No engagement, Sir, ought to be above your Honour.
Besi^s mine will engage me not to receive
So slight an Answer.

Why, 'tis your Sister I am going to marry;
Is it not?

I consider not that, Sir.


If Cialto sends me a Challenge,
I hope I may appoint my Time and Weapon.

That I think you may. Sure he dares not fight, does he?


Why then tell your Friend from me, I'll meet him the
Next day after I'm married, any where:
I'll not delay such matters as these.

Why, he has Courage sure.
But, Sir, 'tis handsomest to end these matters quickly.

So 'twere, Sir, if a man were free;
But since I am engaged I will be married first;
And then have at him.
If he be in haste to fight, let him fasten a Quarrel
On somebody else, to pass away the time
Till I am married.

'Slid, he amazes me.


Thus, Sir, I shall preserve my Honour every way;
I hope he understands himself as well as I do.

There is no help, this will not do.
How the Rascal has cozened me! -- well --
Who knows but he may be valiant?
This is your resolution, Sir.

I marry, Sir; nor will I alter it.


I shall acquaint Cialto with it, Sir,
And then attend you to your Nuptials:
Farewell, Signior.

You shall be welcome, Sir; there will be
A fine fight, I pay some on it.
Ha, ha, how I have conzen'd'em!
Miranzo has no mind I should have his Sister,
And so they agreed to frighten me from it; I found it;
Poor silly Fellows, 'twas too late; I have promised
To meet Cialto the next day after I am married,
That is the next day after he is dead;
'Tis the same thing; -- 'em -- but
If Villerotto should fail I were in a fine case,
Positively engaged to fight with him;
I'll look him, and make sure work;
I grow horribly afraid to think of fighting,
Though I never intend to come to it.

What has this Rascal persuaded us to!
Nay, rather, what have I persuaded my self to!
To fancy I have Courage, and know all the while
What a dangerous Lie 'tis to own it;
For I had talked so loudly of my killing,
That 't was very probable I should be set to work;
And as luck is, 'tis to kill one
That will not easily be killed, unless
I could catch him asleep:
Would this Rhetorical Gentleman had his Money again.
He gave me Earnest very formally.
The Devil's to raise Forces, and he's his Agent
To give the Press-money.
Here come my engaged Friends:
What made ye stay behind?

Why the Gentleman, you know who --


That hired us to do you know what.


Had still more to say to us, he's very earnest


I had rather he were in jest.


He promises to double our Reward,
If we strike home, and lose no opportunity;
We shall hardly have such another Bargain.

That's likely; for 'tis very probable
We may be hanged for this:
I find I have more Conscience than I thought I had.

As good hang as starve; nay, Captain,
If you're in Dialogue with Fear and Conscience,
I have done.

I do but cast the worst to try your Spirits:
I am a Villain if Fear be not Gentleman-usher
To Conscience; I thought I had had no such thing;
Now, I am afraid, I find,
I have a most troublesome stock of it.
-- Um -- the Devil has sent his Resident again;
The Fiend Knew I had a good thought or two,
And his Agent's come to treat for 'em;
Yet if I fall back, he'll cut my Throat, that's certain.

Gentlemen, some new thoughts made me overtake you;
'Tis to tell you, I am now resolved
Still to keep near you, that no opportunity be lost,
No^ I robbed of my part in the Action.

I would afford any one a pennyworth of my share.


It were a fault to doubt your Courages;
But words waste time; no more:
Go presently and stay for me
In the Cypress Walk that leads unto the Nunnery.
This Captain methinks looks something suspiciously;
I must not be long from them:
My Sword shall make sure work.
How -- my wise Master!
What business sends him hunting after me?

Villerotto, hast bargained? Castruccio has sent
Me word that he has got his Nieces consent:
But all's one for that; if thou can not get
Him killed, they sha'nt get me to marry,
For a reason best known to my self:
Yet prithee bargain as cheap as thou can;
For all that I dare trust thee though
To use thy own discretion.

I will do more than use my own discretion;
I'll use my Sword too: Go marry, Sir,
And think not of a dead Man.

Hast got him dispatch'd already?


As good, Sir; 'tis sure.


But had I best marry before it be quite done?


Fear not, Sir; trust to my care and faith.


But be sure.


Nay, if you suspect me, Sir.


Why then I'll venture, fall back, fall edge;
Let him meddle with me if he dares.
Dispatch quickly, good Villerotto.

Yet again!
He needs not doubt me, if he knew all;
But when 'tis done I must propose
Some considerable Conditions to set up for my self,
And leave his wise Worship:
He dares not but consent; the guilty must
Submit to be the Slaves of those they trust.

HOW that Fire-brand the Cook sputters!
There's no coming near to have a cut for Breakfast.
I am a Villain if the Butler too
Be not grown as outrageous a Beast as he.
What coil's here! -- O Mother, -- how! --
What, you in a pelt too! Do the Quinces prove rotten?
Or is all the Bisket-slabber spilt?

Out upon thee, thou take care for nothing;
She has been my Charge these seventeen years,
And I do not mean to quit my care yet a while.

Yes faith, Mother, you must deliver up;
She's going to have another Governor,
And as luck will have it, as old as your grave self:
We are like to plant our fair young Twig
In hopeful soil; does it not trouble you, Mother?

What's that to thee, Sirrah? Thou art ever full
Of roguish thoughts; the Man may do well enough;
Age is not so contemptible.

Nay, I dare swear, Mother, you believe
You could entertain the youngest of them all
With wondrous prowess.

Come, leave your prating; the Bride-groom's
Near at hand, with such a gallant Troop;
They are hard by: Nay, I'll tell thee what --
Out upon it, -- what do I here!
The Jolly will be spoiled.

O take care of that by all means;
The old Gentleman will need it.

How now, Sirrah? what, loit'ring here?
The Company's just coming to the Gate;
Get you gone, and mind your business within.
-- Why Daughter, Daughter.

Your pleasure, Sir.


Be ready there, Daughter; the Bride-groom
Will salute you with Music presently.
I had almost forgot the chiefest News;
This day the fair Samira, Castruccio's Niece,
Must marry the great and rich Brancadoro's Heir.
Be ready, Daughter, I cannot stay. -- Hark, -- they come.

Governess. Taccola.


Here, Sweet Charge.


Come, it must be your part to tell me the Names
Of every one; have you informed your self?

Yes, yes, I know them all.


Peace then, and observe.


What be these Men?


They bear Love's Ensigns:
You know the Gentleman that follows.

Yes, yes; who's he that leads his fair Niece?


The wealthy Brancadoro, who is to marry her this day*
They say he's an Ass, though his Trappings be rich.

A sudden Wedding! But what young Man
Is that which follows next?

I marry, that's his fine Nephew Miranzo,
Newly returned from Travel.

Peace, they begin.


When Loves great God Commands, I never stay.


Then light it thy Torch.


For that I hither came,
And see 'tis ready to receive a flame,
Whenever by thy powerful Summons pressed.

Then light at that aged Lovers breast.


Where Time has been destroying, can there be
A warmth for him, much less a flame for me?

Those grosser flames that ^eed on wanton hearts,
Burn not in his; the sharpest of thy Darts
Had found no way, where Nature frozen lies,
But that 'twas thawed by fair Emilia's Eyes.

Call hither all thy Votaries to gaze,
That with such Fires thy Altars still may blaze;
Not fed with loose Desires, but purest Hearts;
So I my Torch may save, and thou thy Darts.

But stay, what dismal Apparition's this,
That mingles horror with approaching bliss?

Charon I am, that o'r the Stygian Waves
Waft only Fares that first have passed through Graves:
From thence I came, where all the Destinies
Do sit and smile at these unequalities:
'Tis vain to sing an Hymeneal note;
Light not thy Torch, for I prepare my Boat.

Why, Charon, why?


Know, I did lately view
The Fatal Sisters, whilst his Thread they drew;
The last remains were on the Distaff put,
And one prepared the feeble twine to cut.

Fond Fool, go back again, and thou shalt find
So fair a Thread with his so firmly twined,
No Destiny will venture to divide
A Life that is with fair Emilia's tied.
Gaze, and submit.

What's this appears more bright,
Than Souls prepared for the Elysian Light?
Appear, appear, you Fatal Sisters, come
Before a Power that can reverse your doom.
See, they obey; 'tis just that Love and Fate
Should on the fair Emilia's Nuptials wait.

First I resign my Arrows and my Bow.


The Fates submit their dreadful Ensigns too


Charon will leave his unfrequented Shore,
And at Emilia's Feet lay down his Oar.

Ascend, ascend, you happy Shades, and move
In various measures with the God of Love.

They come, they come, hark, hark, our charmed Ears
Are struck with Music from the moving Spheres.

How my Eyes are chained unto that glorious Object^
She acts like what she is, a Miracle;
And I am lost in wonder!

Good Morning to my fairest Mistress:
May but my Joys this day, be yours for ever;
I know not how to wish you more.

Uncle, must I bid her good-morrow too?
These Spirits have so amazed me, I can scarce fetch my breath.

By all means.


Why then, -- Good-morrow, Mistress; 'tis Signior Brancadoro
Bids you good-morrow: I wish you as good luck as my self.
As I suppose, you may have heard of me;
For I am going the way of all Flesh too.

If i could speak, I find I cannot join
In Wishes of this nature: How my Soul struggles in me!

Come down Daughter, and meet us in the Hall,
So to the Temple, where all Complements
Are quickly ended. Come, Son, your Ceremony
Defers your happiness.

The lovely Apparition's vanished; O for a spell
To call it back again; but the black Spirits only
Are subject unto charms, and not the brighter Angels:
At what a distance she surprised!
Had the great God of Love ns'd other Eyes,
He had at rovers vainly shot his Dart;
Hers had the power alone to carry level to my heart.
How hapless must my destiny needs prove,
That in one instant both despair and love!

Good Bottolo, set these things upon the Shelf;
I must stay here to give my Lady her Things,
She's coming down this way; I had forgot
Her Vail; nay, prithee do so much for me.

Well, well; Pox on it, I take no joy in this Wedding.


Nay, prithee no discourse now, honest Bottolo.


O rare! honest Bottolo! before night
You'll scold at this honest Bottolo.

Thou deserve it twice, where I do it once, Sirrah.


What's the matter?


Nothing, Mistress. -- Ah, 'tis a thousand pities.


Have you brought my Things, Governess?


Yes, my sweet Charge.


Where's the Company?


They all stay for you in the Hall.


I go, I go.


Stay, stay, fairest Maid.


What's your pleasure, Sir?


I dare not tell her 'tis to gaze on her.
Madam, the business I must acquaint you with
Deserves a privacy; please you to command
Your Woman for a minute to withdraw.

Leave us a little, Governess.


By my troth a comely Gentleman; had luck been,
This might have made the better Husband.
Pray, Sir, be not tedious, here's business to be done.

Not by the old Gentleman.
I am a stranger to you, Madam;
My business will seem strange too.

Pray quickly, Sir; I am staid for.


That's part of it.


Of what?


Why, of my business, to desire you not to go.


What mean you, Sir? why do you gaze so wildly?
I hope your thoughts are not so much unsettled
As your looks; why do you desire me not to go?

Why, you go to be married, do you not?


Yes; what do you mean? Pray leave me.


I must not, nay, I cannot leave you.


Not leave me! What is the business
That thus unseasonably you stay me for?

I know I have done ill to trouble you;
But who can help it; Love and Whirlwinds
Will have their giddy courses.
The story's short, I saw and loved you.
Wonder not; Lightning burns at a flash,
When lesser Fires do by degrees consume.

It is not well to give me this strange trouble.
How did you come to meet me?
Pray say no more; I must obey and marry.

Do, and be happy. -- 'Tis true,
I might have died without afflicting you;
For that I ask forgiveness.

I forgive you freely.


This then finishes my Wooing.


Hold; you do not mean so madly!


I mean thus, soberly.


Where is your Reason and your Justice, Sir ^
Think on it; would you rob another of his right?
Your near Relation too!

Not by dying, do I?


That offends Heaven, at whose disposal
You ought to be.

I am so; you are my Heaven here,
And you dispose me to my Fate.

Why do you cruelly disturb me? I know
You dare not be so injurious as to
Destroy at once your self, and all my peace.

You mistake; Alas! I have not courage enough to try
Whether or no I can endure to live.

Oh, you have ruined me! what shall I do!


I am sorry I have troubled you, indeed I am;
But you began to plague me first:
I was at peace with Woman-kind; that is,
I loved none till your eyes began the quarrel.

What would you have me do? how can I now
A void this Marriage, ready for the Temple,
Engaged by my Obedience, and my Promise!

You may pretend a sudden sickness, Madam.


I need not much pretend it;
But what is your design in this?

I dare not name a Pardon at the first;
I only beg to be Reprieved, that I may try
If it be possible to love you less,
And you may try to love me more:
But if you think it too much mercy to Reprieve me,
Pronounce my Sentence quickly, you shall find me
Your faithful Executioner.

You press me strangely;
I dare not be the cause of any murder:
Live -- I will not marry; by all that's good I will not:
But from this time see me no more,
Cruel disturber of my Peace.

I lost mine first by seeing you;
And though I promised to obey one Sentence,
Yet this is too hard, dying's easier:
I cannot promise never to see you more and live.

Be gone, and leave the most unhappy of all Women.


I go, remember only this Vow I leave behind,
Never to live to see you wretched or unkind.

Ah me! -- I need not wholly counterfeit
Sickness; I have an Ague in my thoughts,
Which shakes my Soul; I shall grow faint indeed.
Governess.

O, sweet Charge, there's old calling for you.


I cannot go yet; lead me to my Chamber;
I fear I shall grow ill.

How, how!


Prithee peace.


Why, what, a God's name, hath this young Fellow done?
What is he gone and left you?

Nothing, nothing; prithee along, I faint.


Hey day, what doings there's within!
Signior Brancadoro has lost his Mistress;
By this time they are hunting on a cold scent,
Or else have quite given her over.
I wonder my Mistress had not the wit
To run away, and hide for good and all,
From her old Caterpillar.
Hark, there's a new Noise within,
And louder too than ever; I'm a Villain
If I don't fancy I hear Taccola's shrieks
A note above them all; what should this mean?

O, Bottolo, did thou see my Mistress? As I live and breathe,
I never took more pains a Squirrel-hunting,
Than I have done in seeking her;
I would give any thing in reason to any
That could but bring Tale or Tidings of her.

That reasonable Reward would prove a Julio.


Come, Bottolo, prithee come and help to look her.


I had rather help to hide her from such
A covetous vapouring Coxcomb.
How now!

O Bottolo, Bottolo! run, run, Bottolo.


Whither, Sir?


Any whither; run, run, fetch a Physician quickly.
O, my Daughter, my Daughter!
What, art thou here yet?

Why, what ails my Mistress?


Dying, dying; she fainted suddenly,
And lies without a sign of life.

A pretty Wedding towards; poor Soul,
Who can blame her to be afraid to be clasped by an old Ivy,
Whose embraces never suffer any thing to prosper?

Art thou not gone yet? Run quickly, Sirrah,
To Leonardo the Phycisian; make all the haste thou can.

I knew there would no good come of this Wedding,
First or last. I go, Sir, I go.

O mischief! No hearing of my Niece!


My Daughter, my Daughter's going.


And my Niece is quite gone:
Every corner has been searched, but no finding her.
Oh, oh, what a sad day is this!

Never a hopeful Morning so o'recast!


O my Mistress! O my Niece! Undone, undone.


Let's in and advise together;
I have sent Bottolo for a Physician.

There's yet some hopes; the subtle Politician,
That cannot reach his ends in peace, throws all
Into disorder.
He snatches others first from their enjoyments,
And that makes way for his designs.
I find we are alike; for Peace must be
More fatal than Love's Civil War to me.
What a world of thoughts now offer
Their troublesome service to me!
Would my Man Baptista were come:
Heaven prevent mischance; I cannot doubt his truth:
I trusted him to help my Sister's flight to the Nunnery;
No way was left at last but that,
To cozen Brancadoro of her:
The Fool had almost flown her to a Mark.
O Cialto, -- I have strange News to tell thee.

Your looks express as much.
I thought sorrow and wildness
Had hung upon no brow but mine.
Where have you been? What is the Wedding finished?
Why are you thus confused? -- ha! -- where's Samira?

Not married to Brancadoro, nor ever shall.


O, my best Friend, pardon my fears;
How safe I am in thee! But where is she?

You shall know presently;
I appointed my man Baptista
To wait my coming to this place;
But an accident has brought me sooner than I thought.

Bless me! What accident?
In thine eyes appears
A strange disorder.

No, no, no great matter; we may be friends, Sir,
Now at your own rate; I am turned Lover too.

Why, 'tis impossible! Who Miranzo^
He that used to brag his heart was fortified
With scorn and cheerfulness!

O, Sir, I rejoice you are in such perfect memory;
But see, Baptista is returned. Now, -- what News?

As you directed, Sir, I found an opportunity
That favoured the design your Sister had:
The idle Persons, that had no business
But to mind others Actions, I got
Into the Cellar, whilst she made her escape.

To the Nunnery.


Thither she told me she would go.


'Tis well.


How! to the Nunnery! she may be willing to stay there,
'Tis probable; for nothing here below
Is worth her Love: I find I cannot yet
Submit; my Passion will resist,
Though Heaven it self does prove my Rival.

Cialto, friend Cialto; he's gone.
Hey day, how Love tumble^s about!
Yet I admire not now at this distraction*
For mad men wonder not at one another.

But, Sir, I have str^ws to tell you;
The fair Emilia, with her old Governess,
Is fled to the Nunnery too.

How! is't possible?


'Tis certain, Sir; and to that purpose
She left a Note upon her Table:
All the House is in an uproar,
And fancy 'twas a Plot between the Ladies.

Above my hopes she then has kept her word,
Not to bestow her self; but what a Devil
Does she do at the Nunnery?
That may be worse than the other; if she should
Turn Nun now; like enough; when people are crossed
And vexed, they grow Religious presently.
I must do something. -- How my thoughts work,
Heaving like labouring Moles within the Earth!
Ha, Baptista.

Sir.


Hast thou not told me thou hast a Brother is a Friar?


I have, Sir, in the next Convent.


Could thou not prevail with him to lend me
A little of his holiness?

What mean you, Sir?


Nay, I mean none of his Prayers nor Meditations;
At this time I have no use for a good thought:
'Tis his Habit only for a few hours; I'll not abuse it,
On my honour; Thou dare trust me, dare not?

You cannot doubt that, Sir; and I am sure
My Brother's thoughts of you are as mine are:
I'll try presently, if you please, Sir.

Come, I'll go along with thee;
For my design requires some haste:
Thy care and love shall be requited.

Worse and worse; my Daughter, my Daughter!
Cozened, abused and cheated!
Signior Castruccio, Brancadoro, where are you?

What's the matter?


Oh, my Daughter! gone, fled, run away,
With her old Beldam.

How, fled and gone!


Gone, gone.


My Mistress showed her the way.
Villerotto shall let him alone now,
If I could but find him. No Wedding, no Killing.

How now? any News yet?
Where's my Nephew Miranzo?

He's not in the House, Sir.


We are all abused and cheated.


I am cozened too of my Mistress* but as long
As I can keep my Money, the care's the less.

It is in vain longer to vex our selves;
Let's in and consult; then, if we judge it (...),
We will go together to the Nunnery,
And there make our demands,
You for your Daughter, I for my Niece.

You advise well; come, let us not delay:
Signior Brancadoro, you must along too.

With all my heart; I long to see
What the meaning of these tricks are:
Every body's cozened, as well as I.

We are marvellously kept on duty; not one Alarm yet?


Our Scout is watching for Intelligence;
To say truth, the Gentleman takes a world of pains.

Would he would take less; he pays well,
And 'tis no matter how long 'tis doing.

What are you squeamish still, Captain?


Pox on it, I can't conceal my villainous apprehensions
From these Rascals; without doubt the Rogues
Are as timorous as I am, though they hide it better.

How now? what's here to do?

Nay, do not seem angry:
This is strange rambling on your Wedding day.

Impudent Rascal, unhand me:
How dare you assumethe boldness to examine me?

Spoil not your good face with frowns;
'Tis to no purpose; You must be my prisoner.

Your Prisoner, Slave!


Yes mine, till I know
In what condition you have left my Master;
Your flight's suspicious; perhaps you've murdered him.

No, the Fool's alive to thank you
For your officious rudeness.

If he be not, your life shall satisfy.


'Tis not in our bargain to deal with Women.


There's something more than ordinary;
For guilty persons use such flights;
Here, take her away.

What, will you murder me? help, help.


Stop your mouth, or I'll spoil the passage to it,
And make an hole to let your Clam^ ^
By the way, before they climb up to your Throat.
What have we here? more Quarry ^wing?
How the Covie's scattered?
Sure 'tis she; 'tis, 'tis Emilia.
Here has been some mischief practised*
I'll seize her too, else ^other will want company.
Stay, who are you?

Ah me!


Whither this way so ^st?
May be you cannot speak for want of A^,
I'll give you vent. -- I thought so, -- 'tis she.

Oh, I am ruined.


Troth, like enough; and possibly you have deserved it.


Pray stop me not; but rather, if you have pity,
Conduct me to the Nunnery.

O, do your mischiefs prompt you to a refuge?
I'll find you out a place of safety.
Two of you come along with me;
Bring them along too.

Rascal, what dost thou mean to do with us?


Nothing with your Antiquity.


Conduct us to an Officer of Justice;
We dare appear, Sir.

Stop her mouth; I'll consider what to do with you;
Bring ^long, I say.
Do y^it here till I return;
A ^inu^ brings me back.

Why, this is horrible Injustice;
We must only it seems do the worst work.
Why, methinks one might serve this unconscionable stomach:
But it may be we, like Serving men,
May be permitted to fall to after him.
This plunder though ought to be divided
Among us that did the duty.

'Tis but reasonable; perhaps he thinks
That full temptation cannot live
In our hunger-starv'd bodies.

Before I saw these sprightly Wenches
I thought so too; but I am not hungry now:
A Man has never any stomach
When he is over-heated.

Whist, whist; this way, this way:
Now bravely seize the prey, he's coming directly to you.

Pox of the News: Now have I no mind
To the Wenches neither; this fear can lay that Devil,
That will obey nor hunger, nor poverty.

Come, follow me; thrust home and sure.


I, I, so we might.


Doubt not your full reward.


Thanks, holy Sir; and pray be confident
That I have no design nor thought
Which may abuse this habit.

You are too noble.


In that rest assured; now Sir retire,
I need no farther your protection.

Heavens direct and send you peace of mind.


Thanks, holy Father.
Baptista, wait at my Uncle's House till you hear from me;
I shall need nothing now but an old Shoe cast after me.

I will not fail, Sir. This is strange!
He uses not to be so disturbed.

Love's constant diet is not hope, I see;
For mine would then be starved; but it is still alive,
And strangely on despair knows how to thrive.
Yet think, Cialto, how preposterous 'tis
To fear the loss of that which 'twere unworthy
In thee now to wish.
But though the Sun must at a distance shine,
It would beget an horror in Mankind,
Should they but fear he would for ever set.
Though in this place she rises a degree
Up towards Heaven, yet she sets to me.
Ha! who are these, whose dismal looks
Are seconded by their postures! --
Which is your way, Gentlemen?
You stare as if you had lost it.

No, we know our way, 'tis to thy heart,
And thus we force it.

'Twill be hard to find.


What horrid Act is this! How, Cialto!


Villains, make up; sure I have sped him.


So bold, Sir?


Bold as your self, Sir. -- It is in vain;
Hell take these Rascals.

What caused this foul play, Sir?


Holy Sir, you know as much as I.


How do you feel your self?


Hurt, Sir; but not to any danger, as I guess;
Yet I bleed: Your timely aid
Makes my life yours; I should not have expected
Such a relief from any in your Habit.

How, Cialto, do you not know me? -- not yet?
Look again; sure if you loved me,
There's no disguise could hide Miranzo from you.

How, Miranzo! O, my Friend, what means this Habit?


You bleed; I dare not spend the time to tell you.
All my story; I doubt here was foul play.
One of these Villains I know to be Brancadoro's Servant:
But whither were you going?

To the Nunnery; but pret he satisfy my longing,
What's to be done in this disguise?

A very pious work, I can assure you; -- why, --
I am going to confess my Mistress.

Thy Mistress!


You may remember my Uncle was in a fair way
To Marriage.

Why, is he not married?


No.


How so?


I frighted his Mistress away, and in this Nunnery
She has taken Sanctuary; her I am going to confess;
I should be abominably out of Countenance --

At what, Man?


Why, if she should confess, amongst her sins,
That she loved me, for one.

You would absolve her, would you not?


Yes, and her Penance should be to continue in her Sin;
But we trifle here, forgetting thy condition.

Pish, I scarce feel my hurts.


Come, our Adventures lie together; lean on me;
Nay, yet more; counterfeit enough, 'twill move the more
Pity; thy Wounds and my Habit will without doubt
Open these charitable Gates.

What is your business, Father?


I am sent from Father Vincentio, unto the Lady Emilia.


Here's no such person.


How! 'tis not the Custom of holy places to deny truths.


Nor is it now practised.


Why her Father sent away Father Vincentio,
Immediately to dispatch some holy Man,
To reconcile her troubled Spirit,
Which caused her to fly hither.

She came not to this place.


Nor Samira, Castruccio's Niece?


By all that's holy, neither.


I dare not but believe you,
Pardon me for pressing you so far.

All Peace dwell with you.


How, not here! did you not mistake, Miranzo?
And have forgot, and sent her to some other place?

I am amazed!


Do not wonder; you cannot lose your Sister, sure.


Not lose her!


I hope so; for 'tis probable she knows your mind.


I scarce understand yours, nor do you know your own;
If you do, 'twill be ingenuous to speak it plainer.

If I should be jealous, or dislike any thing,
It would seem ridiculous; such humours
Are only fit for those that either hope,
Or else are in possession. -- Farewell. --
I wish your Sister happy.

Stay; -- consider this is the second time
That you have started into mean suspicions:
You will repent.

I do repent that I pursued your Sister
With a Passion that hath out-liv'd all my prosperity,
As if a Ghost should love; for 'tis not I,
But 'tis Cialto's shadow that you gaze on.

'Tis indeed his shade, or something less,
That bears no shape of him, nor of his mind.

I know it but too well; -- yet perhaps
You may have so much Friendship left, at my request,
To give it out that I am dead.

What's your design in that report?


You will not do it then.


I would know why.


Nay then.


Come, your humour shall have its course,
I'll do it without a question:
But why should I report that you are dead?

You said you would not ask me; nor need
You fear to give out an untruth; it may be shortly so:
In the mean time I must disguise my self,
As from henceforward I shall every day
Resemble less and less what once I was.
Things running to decay grow every moment
More unlike themselves; and so do I.
That at the last the name of Friend
Will not fit you or me; for I shall be decayed,
Never to be repaired again; and we must part
Still more and more, till at the last our distance
Will grow so great that none will guess
We ever were united: So Lines
Both from one Centre drawn, still more and more divide,
Till for the World at last they grow too wide.

I forgive thee, poor Cialto; for I am sensible
What a distraction governs thee, by the confusion
That throws my thoughts into as much disorder;
For I have raised a War where Peace still flourished,
In the calm Empire of Emilia's Breast;
And she is fled from me back to her peace.
-- Yet --
What is the meaning that my Sister fails?
I know not what to think; I stand like one has
Lost his way, and no Man near him to enquire it of.
Yet there's a Providence above that knows
The roads which ill Men tread, and can direct
Enquiring Justice: The Passengers that travel
In the wide Ocean, where no paths are,
Look up, and leave their Conduct to a Star.

TRoth, Captain, I did not perceive
That daring Valour you talk of.

Thy fears blinded thee, else thou might have seen
What furious thrusts I exchanged with that Devil
In a Friars Habit. You are a Courteous Gentleman,
To lend your Sword at such a time.

He came behind me on the sudden,
And wrenched it from me:
Who would have suspected a Friar for such tricks?

All our reward is lost; if we might have it,
I think we should be ashamed to ask it;
He that hired us was hurt himself.

Why, 'twas his own cause, and his own fault;
As for Example, I'll show you what he should have done;
Observe me. --
How now -- what Apparition's this, as a Friar?
I hope, 'tis not another fighting Friar.
'Slid, 'tis he; my villainous apprehensions
Go as true as a Sun-dial.
What an unlucky posture he has found me in,
Would my Sword were up to the hilts in him
Or a Dunghill, or any thing that would but hide it.

What, more mischief towards? I am provided for them now;
They are those very Rascals: -- I know that blustering
Fellow again: Now Heaven prosper my designs;
I have a fair occasion to improve them.
How now, Gentlemen? What means a Weapon drawn?

We, Sir, are Men that have been used
To handle Swords; when there's no War to employ them,
We play with them in Peace: I hope 'tis no offence
To have a kindness for our best Friends.
Sure he knows us not. --

Alter your Countenance as much as possible,
Captain; perhaps he may not know us.

I'll seem blowing my Nose, and so hide my face. --
'Slid, I have no Handkerchief to do it with.

You stare as if you did not know me.


Know you? how should we know you?


No? that's strange; one of you was so civil
To lend me a Sword lately;
Can you yet call me to remembrance?

We know not what you mean; if we were Friends,
We are not now at leisure to answer idle questions.

Nay, you must stay; come, no blustering;
I am provided now, look you --
I shall not trouble you for a Sword again.

Would he had mine, where I could wish it.


I am sorry I have an unpleasant question to ask you;
But yet it must be answered.

Must!


Yes, must; and you will do it calmly,
For all your stormy looks.
Bladder, if thou continue thus to swell,
I'll make an hole to let out your vain humour.

'Tis well you are a Man of Peace, or else --


Not half so much as he is.


Never at peace with Murderers; Impudent Villains,
Who hired you to that damned act
Of murthering the generous Cialto?
Had not your feet been nimbler than the Sword,
I'd paid you your just hire, Sir -- Come, confess.

We are undone. -- Lord, how our Captain looks big,
And trembles all at once!

We do not understand you.


Well, I cannot stay to parley;
Here, take away these Rascals Swords.

How, our Swords!


Come, come; nay, it must be so;
I know your gentle natures.

Why, Sir, I deny nothing to one of your Coat,
Or else --

You would deliver them however.


Good Sir, disgrace us not.


Pox on it, would that were the worst;
How the Rogues stand upon their credit?

Disgrace you! is that possible? Come, deliver, deliver,
Or you shall have ours, d' see, where you do not wish them.

Well, our Religion obliges me to this; but it shall be upon
Condition you use it well till you return it;
'Tis a good Blade.

If the Blade be good, you shall have a Knife out of it,
'Tis your only Weapon, this was not well mounted.

Well, Sir, you are merry, and we take our leaves.


O, by no means; you must deliver your selves up too.
Here carry these Gentlemen Murderers
To Cialto's Kinsman; these are the Rogues
He has been looking for; I leave them to his Examination.

O, good Sir, we will do any thing.


A way with them; I'll follow at a distance,
If they stir; and d' hear --

Yes, Sir. -- Come, my Masters.


What say you Friends? umh --
This was a good Bargain; we shall never have such another:
How plaguily you guessed! we are not likely
To live to make another: What say you
To a Dialogue with Fear and Conscience?

Why, if we hang we shall be in no more wants,
And you'll be in no more frights, Captain.

Come along, Gentlemen of the peaceable Blade:
But, d' hear? if you can yet be honest,
And confess truly and penitently,
You may escape, I'll undertake it.

We will confess all we know, Sir.


Yes, and more too, if that will do it.


Come, despair not then.


If they be here, we will fetch them out with a vengeance;
Knock, Bottolo, break the Gate down.

They are deaf, or else at Prayers.


I, so they had need, to ask forgiveness
For all their tricks. How out of Countenance, Uncle,
Will my Mistress be when the sees me?

And my Mistress too, Nephew.


Why there's one comfort yet, they did not run
After other Men; I'd have made any Man smoke
That should have been so bold to have ventured
On my Mistress. -- What, no body come yet? -- Knock again;
These be sine tricks.

Not a distressed Damsel yet appears
Out of the sacred Castle: -- Now one bolts;
We shall have a godly Exhortation,
Whether we get any Women, or no.

What means this earnest knocking at the Gates?


What a foolish question's that? we would come in.


Our Laws forbid that men should enter here.


Fiddle faddle, I'll come in, and fetch others out too;
See who shall say me nay,

Use no rude force, 'twill be a disrespect
To Heaven, as well as want of manners:
Is there a cause for all this passion?

Yes, that there is; here you shelter every Run-away;
Bring them out, or I'll seeze you.

Why he'll beat her; 'tis a fierce Hector.


What is it you demand, or whom?


Why, we demand Samira and Emilia;
Here is her Uncle, and the others Father:
My Name's Signior Brancadoro; you have heard on it,
I warrant you, e're now.

I know not what you mean.


'Tis true, holy Maid, such we have lost,
And hicher they are fled.

Certainly, Sir, there are none such here.
But I'll go in and ask the truth.

We thank you.


'Slid, if she had not left her tricks and denials,
I would have hit her a dowse in the chops.

Like enough; perhaps he ne'er struck any body in his life,
And now would flesh himself upon a woman.

Here are no such persous as you enquire for.


How, how! why my Daughter Emilia left a Letter
Upon her Table, expressing she fled hither,
For some trouble she had within her.

There's some abuse in this; for but even now
There was a Friar that enquired for these Ladies;
He held a Gentleman seemed hurt to death:
He was earnest, as you are; but he was satisfied,
As you may please to be.

No, it does not please us to be satisfied,
Nor will we be satisfied; let's in and search.
-- That hurt Gentleman was Cialto, without question.
-- Now if I could but find my Mistress.

I hope you do not mean to be injurious.


I hope you do not think it lawful
To conceal Children from their Parents; this would be
The refuge then of every wilful Child.

Pray believe you are not now abused;
By our best hopes there are no such Persons
Within our Walls; we would not for a world deny a Truth.

This is strange; but we must believe.


But we may choose whether we will or no.


Heaven restore all you have lost,
And then preserve it to you.

We thank you.


I'll not thank her; a pox of her truths;
I'll not be cozened by any holy Juggler of them all.

Come, let's not neglect to enquire some other way;
'Tis vain to linger here.
Signior Brancadoro, what course take you?

I'll go about a little business, and presently
Set some to enquire; if she be above-ground, I'll have her.

Farewell, Signior; we will lose no time neither;


Some comfort yet, that I have such fair hopes:
Cialto's dead; now I shall keep my Estate quietly;
And if I could but find my Mistress, I should have her too.
Now the roaring Lion's dead, I dare look after my Prey.
Well, -- what's best to do? let me consider.

What, is he studying; why the Devil
Does he thus seem to search for prudent thoughts,
That has not lodging in his Brains for one?
Yet he studies; something is in the matter.
Fortune, that brought those beauteous Prisoners under
My power, prosper me now in driving of my Bargain. -- Sir.

How now? -- O Villerotto, come just in the nick;
I want thy advice and help; my Mistress
Is not here at the Nunnery.

How, Sir! not at the Nunnery! why, you told me that
Emilia had left a Note upon her Table,
That she was fled hither; and is neither here?

Pox of her Note; neither she nor Samira are here.


Who told you this?


Why, a little harlotry Nun.


She lied sure.


I said so; I was going once to hit her a Cuff of the Ear,
But that she told me some good News.

What was that?


She told me a Gentleman was dying, and a Friar
Has carried him away; that's you know who.
Hast heard any News?

Yes, your Enemy is dead.


For certain?


So 'tis reported generally.


Why, I have nothing then to fear but his Ghost;
And if that should be troublesome, I'll quiet him,
If Christendom can afford a Conjurer.
Now if I could but find my Mistress. -- But Villerotto,
If any of the Rogues should be taken that know thee.

I hope not, Sir.


Hope! -- is't come to that? Art not sure, -- ha?
Now shall not I sleep one wink this Night;
I shall do nothing but think and dream,
And dream, and think of Judges, Sergeants, Bars,
And Hangmen; would I had ne'er meddled with it.

There is a way, Sir, to secure you.


Name it, name it, good Villerotto.


I must go plant, Sir, in another Country;
Then you are safe.

Why, faith and troth I shall be loath to part with thee;
But what must be, must be; Friends must part.
-- Would I were well rid of him.
If thou think it ^it, I shall be ruled.

And consent I shall be gone.


But against my will, as I'm an honest man;
For let the worst come to the worst, I know thou would not
Betray me, -- would thou, Villerotto? -- ha?

Nay, I cannot tell what operation
A Rack and Torture might have on me; I am flesh and blood.

So am I too, I know it by my shaking.
This was a bugs word; -- would he were gone.
Nay, Villerotto, 'tis for thy safety too as well as mine,
That I consent; when would go?

Soft, Sir something is first to be considered on.


What's that? what's that?


First tell me, Sir, is there no news of the Ladies?


No, no; neither tale nor tidings.


Have Signior Castruccio nor Moreno
Heard nothing neither?

Not a syllable; I have told you all.


Are not the old Gentlemen much troubled?
You bear your Losses pretty well, Sir.

I have took on too, that I have,
As much as the best of them; it has made me
Ready to hang my self; but while my Money's le^t
I shall not part with this World easily; yet I would give somewhat
More than I'll say, to get my Mistress once again.

What would you give, Sir?


Nay, nothing, unless I were sure to have her,
And then sure she would not run away again.

What would you give to marry her?


I, I, that's the business that I am to look after;
I must get some Heirs quickly,
For fear the Brancadoro's Race should cease.

That were pity. --
But if I could be instrumental, nay, the only means
To find your Mistress out, and then marry her to you; what then?

Why, she may run away afterwards, for ought I know.


But what if I should put you to Bed together? after that
'Twill be too late for her to take her flight.

I marry, Sir; do this, and I'll give thee twenty Crowns.


I thought so. -- You are wondrous bountiful:
But not to trifle longer, look you, Sir,
If you sign this for my comfortable Subsistence, I'll be gone;
'Tis to secure you in a certain Safety:
And into the Bargain I'll help you to your Mistress;
You shall wed her, and Bed her.

What is't? let's see.


There's the Sum, Sir.


How! Two thousand Crowns a year!
I'll give two thousand of my Teeth as soon.

Why then, Sir, take your chance, and I'll take mine:
I must not starve, nor will I.

But if thou should not help me to her.


Then I'll be gone, and forfeit my Reward.


I would fain have her; but I would fain keep my Money:
But if I don't, he'll betray me, or cut my Throat;
'Tis a terrible dogged Fellow.
Well, Villerotto, I'll think on it; come along, we'll go try
If we can drive a Bargain: -- But dost know where she is?

That I do not tell you; 'tis enough, I'll run the venture.
Hark you, Sir.

Ha! -- 'tis he; 'tis Brancadoro and his Rascal,
That did attempt Cialto's Life: Fortune sure
Has offered them thus fairly to me, to make some use of:
I hope they know me not; I'll try:
Save you, Gentlemen; -- may it not appear rude to ask you
If you know one called Signior Brancadoro?

Yes, I know him as well as I know my self.


I have a little business with him, Sir,
And would be glad to know where I might find him.

Why, did I not tell you I knew him as well as my self?
That's as much as to say, I am he, if you mean
The Honourable Brancadoro, Son
And Heir to Brancadoro, who was lately
The great rich Senator.

'Tis he, Sir, I mean, whose known worth
Made it a duty in me to acquaint him
Of a black Scandal some wild Tongues have cast upon him.

What's the business? if they talk of me,
I'll make 'em hold their Tongues.

How's this!


It will deserve your Ear, Sir:
The cause that made me knowing of your wrongs,
Such I dare call 'em, was by some discourse
That happened of the unfortunate Cialto's Death;
There 'twas reported, that an idle Fellow,
Who takes on him the Title of a Captain,
Gives out that he was hired by a Servant of yours
To murder him; and they talk as if the Captain,
And his lewd Companions, had been secured,
At least searched after, by the direction of a Friar,
But what Friar I could not hear.

Plague on that holy Rascal.


Hey, hey, a Friar! what Friar, Villerotto?


Why the Devil do you ask me? I know no Friar.
O the damned Coxcomb!

They grow concerned; it works.


Villerotto, d' hear? if thou could be sure to help me
To Samira, and then would be gone into another Country,
I would sign the Writing.

I'll do it, Sir; nor shall you set your hand to it,
Till I have showed you I can do it: -- But hark you, Sir,
If you shall then refuse it, I'll betray all.

Like enough; I must do it.


Ha, -- a lucky Fancy mingles on the sudden
Among my crowding Thoughts; 'tis excellent;
This Friar may be a ^it person, -- I'll try him. --
Let me see, -- 'tis right. -- If I join Brancadoro to his Mistress,
That way my Fortune's gained; and to be safe,
This Friar shall make Emilia mine;
That done, her Friends will never endure to see
Her Husband hanged; though Brancadoro share part of the Feast,
Yet by his leave I'll taste both Dishes first. -- Sir,
Pray give me leave to ask this honest Friar
Some Questions in relation to your Service.

With all my Heart.


You cannot tell, Sir, whether these Rascals
Are yet in Custody, or not?

No, Sir.


Nor could you hear what Friar this is?


I am almost a Stranger in Sienna.


I like that. --
You have expressed a great Kindness and Respect
For my Master Brancadoro; possibly, Sir,
I could propose a Service you might do him.
That might deserve a large Reward.

I should be glad to have that in my power, Sir.


Perhaps men of your Profession may scruple
To do a thing in private, without the allowance of all Parties.

What mean you, Sir?


Hark you, a word in private.


Let me alone, Sir, to make good the Title,
And fit the Party ready for possession.

O happy Accident! I am ravished with my good Fortune.


What means all this? I'll try the bottom of it.


Come, Sir, be cheerful, and be confident.
In a few hours, I'll make you safe and happy.
If your Occasions, reverend Sir, permit you
To undertake what I have mentioned to you,
I'll show you suddenly your Clients.

I am ready, Sir.


You must engage to Secrecy.


Upon my holiness.


Nay, you have forsworn that already in your discourse.


Upon my life, Sir.


Come, Sir, to your House then, there you shall see
What I will do in order to my promise. -- Sir,
I hope this reverend person shall receive
Rewards proportionable to that Service
He is engaged to do you: -- but --
When we come there you must be pleased to use
A little patience, till I have brought together
The persons you must tie in sacred Bonds.
I'll on before, Sir,

I shall observe all you direct.


What does he mean, trow?


I cannot guess; but I believe 'tis something
In order to your Service.

Nay, 'tis a notable Fellow; and you would say so,
Did you know as much as I:
As cunning as my Mistress is, he'll go near
To hunt her out, let her make as many Doubles as she will.
Come, Sir, I'll bid you Welcome at my House;
'Tis not the worst in Sienna; you shall take a full View of it.

You oblige me, Sir.


So, now to my Prisoners:
A single Beauty could not have the power
To keep my Blood thus at high Tide; if one
Permits my Veins to find but the least Ebb,
The other makes 'em rise, and so kept always
Flowing by one or t'others Eyes:
And like my Blood, my Flames find no retreat:
-- I must allay my Fires, -- or waste --
In this expense of Heat. -- Come forth, come forth,
My Lady Brides, you should have made such Fools
Of Men. -- 'Tis not amiss to give you Joy.

What means the Villain?


O give him gentle words, his Looks are dreadful.


Give him Rats-bane.


O speak gently to him! when I was a Girl
They used to frighten me with such a one. -- I tremble.

Fear not, Emilia; the Villain dares not wrong us.


But the Villain dares revenge his Wrongs.


Who has injured thee?


He that did it will do so no more,
I can assure you.

What dost thou mean?


Why, this Wound, as shallow as it is,
Was Fathomed by Cialto's Sword,

Pish.


'Tis true indeed; but I was more bold with him,
And put in farther; he had no time
To make a Will; I doubt he left you nothing.

What dost thou mean, -- Screech-Owl?


Oh, you have no mind to understand;
This 'tis plainly, Cialto's dead;
I killed him in my own Defence.

Villain thou lie, in every thing thou lie;
He could do nothing basely; nor could thy power
Reach his generous Life.

Why, in good truth, 'twas he that stirred my Blood,
And made this Hole to let it out at; but
As Luck would have it, 'twas not deep enough:
I saw his Error, and did rectify it;
I thrust my Sword two or three Inches deeper,
And that laid him to rest.

O Heaven protect us.


Why now you run on that Mistake again;
No help can come so quickly as you'll want it.

Thou dost not mean to ravish us, dost thou, Varlet?


Us! can thou be ravished, old willingness?


How do you know, Jackanapes,
Whether I am willing or no? you never tried yet.

Nor ever will: This she Devil will ravish me.
Be quiet, or I'll slit your Tongue; d'see this.

O for some help! I'll tear the Villain.


Peace, pray peace, let me beg again;
Good Sir, let's go, why do you fright us so?
You dare not be so wicked as you talk.

Pretty; their different tempers bring to my enjoyment
Variety of Bliss; in her Embraces
I shall enjoy a Calm, and childish Innocence;
In the other, loftiness of Mind and Spirit,
As if kind Nature had presented now
All that she could produce for me to rifle.

Do you not hear me, Sir? I pray release us:
You have no cause to keep us Prisoners;
Yet we will pay a Ransom.

Why, so you shall before you go,
Pretty one; is't more unjust for you to be my Prisoners,
Than me to be your Slave?

Our Slave!


Nay, put not on a scornful look;
I shall not beg your pity.

But we are willing to beg yours, good gentle Sir.


Beg not so meanly, he dares not injure us.


O, by no means; why that Frown?
Those Storms shall cast away no Heart of mine;
I'll force my way to harbour in your Arms.

What do you mean?


I mean to make my self as Fortunate
As Man can be in his full-crown'd Wishes;
I will enjoy you both.

Which two do you mean?


Pox on thee, would thou be one? --
Nay wonder not, nor bless your selves, unless
It be in Admiration of my Justice,
Showed to the equal power of your Beauties;
You may see the Image of it every day;
'Tis in the labouring Be, that gathers sweetness
From every Flower that contends in Beauty.

By that Smile he should go near
To venture on us all.

Monster, dare thou entertain a Thought of such a Villainy?


Alas, 'tis past that, I am almost ready for Action;
Yet for all that you shall be honest Women
When I have done.

For Heavens sake, Sir, what mean these dark Expressions;
I hope they include no Evil.

Not any; perhaps you may scruple it
A little at the first; but I'll allow you
Some small time to consider on it:
What an excellent Contrivance 'twill be!
You shall have all Love's stolen and sweetest Joys,
And yet be honest; come prepare.

For what?


For my embraces.


For those of Snakes first.


O, mine are gentler far.


Villain, thou --


Pray peace, and let me beg once more,
Upon my Knees; 'Pray, Sir, do not affright us,
I know you cannot mean the thing you threaten;
You are too wise, by our unhappiness
To bring on your own ruin.

Ha, ha, why you will not publish your own shame;
This will not do; no, if I were sure
That death waited for me, as soon as I had crowned
My Passion and Revenge, I would think it
A good bargain, to chop a little time for so much satisfaction.

Be merciful, and kill us.


That's to be cruel to my self -- but I trifle time,
A little business calls me; be wise, and meet
My embraces willingly; if not, know your doom;
For by those Powers that govern me, Love and Revenge,
I'll sacrifice both your enjoyments to them, --
So ponder till I return.

Ah, Madam, what shall we do?


Die, Emilia.


When, Madam?


Presently.


Alas, I tremble at your naming it.


Why do you shake? you must dye one day?


I know it, by that time I may be willing;
Old Age, or a Disease may make it welcome,
At least more gentle, than it now appears
By an approaching violence -- but --

O rather with a juster apprehension
Recount the lingering Torments a Sickness
Or old Age may bring on; a violent Fever
May make the Body a Furnace for the Soul
To suffer, not to live in; or old Age
May take away our Reason, and the use of Sense and Faculties,
And rob the Body and Soul both of their Eyes: this way
A minute's pain assures felicity for ever.

Which way should we do it?


See, this I had still about me in all my fears
Of being forced to be made Wife to Brancadoro:
Why do you wink? the brightness of it shines
Most lovely in my Eyes, when I but think
What service it may do in sending us
To a perpetual Peace.

Can a Soul be carried through a stream of Blood,
To peace in the other World? is't not a Sin to destroy Life?

'Tis to avoid a greater sin we do it:
Dare you, nay, can you live stained with this --
I tremble more to name or think on that,
Than on the death that will prevent it.
But I have given you my Opinion,
And will afford you my Example:
If you stay behind me you will repent,
Among those miseries that I am freed from.

Oh! do not speak of leaving me behind you,
To the rude passions of this horrid Villain;
I know not how to live without you,
Nor dye, but as you teach me;
Pray blame me not, nor take it ill of me:
Sick Men, though they are told, and do believe
That health is offered in a bitter potion,
Shrink at the taking of it; 'tis no more in me:
I know, at last I shall choose death, rather than shame;
-- Yet I know not how I shall endure to hurt my self,
I have cried when I have but cut my Finger.

That only was, because 't was unexpected;
Your resolution now for a just cause
Will make this welcome, and prepare you for it.

I fear I shall hardly strike home, --
Then I may suffer all that shame and mischief
I would avoid; pray therefore grant me one thing.

What is't?


To kill me first.


That were to commit Murder.


Why, have you a better title to your own Life,
Than unto mine? you purchased one no more
Than you did the other; there is no contract, or permission,
Granted from Heaven, that allows the difference.

But alas, my sweet Emilia,
I never shall endure to hurt thee.

Nor your self neither, did not that virtue prompt you
Which bids me beg it, and then the Argument's the same for me.

Pretty reasoned; but it will be needless
To dispute this; I know my fair Example,
In dying first, will arm thy feeble hand,
With double strength, to force a passage
For thy unstained Soul to fly with mine,
Where every thing is in perpetual lustre.

Shall we know one another there?


No question of it, else this bad World
In something might exceed the best.

You have confirmed me, Madam, pray forgive
My simple, if not unbeseeming fears;
'T was no dispute my virtue did admit of,
But a confusion brought upon me suddenly,
By nature, and still flattering hope, Reasons, and Virtues Enemies.
Come, dear Emilia, we'll prepare our selves,
And make the circumstances of our Death
Familiar to us; for 'tis practice only
Takes the sharp nature off from things,
And gives them new ones, that at the last
We shall be so much strangers to the thoughts,
Or the desires of Life, that all will seem
Already done, which we resolve to try,
And we shall both seem dead before we dye.

WHY do I still pursue, what still must fly,
And what I dare not wish to overtake?
It seems like the pursuit of night, which follows day
In the same track, and yet can never reach it;
That distance nature did for them decree,
And honour has designed the same for me:
Yet still there is a mutiny within
Against those Laws which honour strictly makes;
And Passion like a cunning Traitor sets
The name of liberty on its own Rebellion.

Sir.


Ha, Baptista!


A word, Sir, in your Ear -- My Master, Sir, by chance
Has lighted on the Villains that attempted you;
He thought it fit that you should first examine 'em,
As Kinsman to your self, and to that end
Has sent them to you; farther, he bid me tell you
That in a little time you will perceive
You wronged him in your thoughts.

Prithee say no more;
My thoughts have so much disproportion in them,
That they are neither just nor equal unto my self, or him;
Has he not sent his Pardon by thee?

He can take nothing ill of you, Sir,
Perhaps he did admire a little.

He is a perfect Friend, and can love one
Whose Mind is lost, as well as Fortunes.
-- Now, Gentlemen, have you received your Wages?

For what, Sir?


For killing my Kinsman Cialto.


We hope he is not dead.


D' you hope so, Rascals; Come confess
Every Circumstance, how it was done,
And who hired you to it; if you miss a tittle -- or --

This Gentleman told us,
If we did confess, we should not suffer.

Well, if you do it truly, and afterwards
Perform all I enjoin you, I will make good his word:
Come, who hired you?

It was an ill minded Man, Sir.
One that belonged to Signior Brancadoro.

Was it his Masters instruction?


I, no doubt on it, Sir.


Did he say so?


Yes, and more too.


What more?


Why, he told us, it was an honourable action,
And therefore would share in it himself;
And accordingly he said his Master should reward us.

You know him when you see him?


Yes, yes, Sir.


Good Sir, let us not suffer, we have your word.


Trust to it; have you any more to say?


Nothing, Sir, of any consequence.


Well, what trivial thing have you?


When we were waiting, Sir,
For that worthy and unhappy Gentleman, Cialto,
A couple of silly Women by chance came by, and the Rascal
Snatched them up too; all was Fish that came to his Net.

How, Women? what Women? speak, quickly, ha --


Why does your Worship grow angry?


Speak, Dogs, what Women?


What a Rogue was I to name them,
'Slid, 'tis he himself.

You must be over-doing it.


Plague on you, did not you advise to tell all?
Nay, more than all if need were?

It may be it was Samira and Emilia: Rogues, what Women?


Good Sir, we know not;
But he talked of their running away
Upon their Wedding day,
And took them, as he said, upon suspicion
Of Murdering his Master Brancadoro.

It must be they, the circumstance assures it.
O you Dogs, did you help take them! I'll send
Your mischievous Souls to that Devil that instructs them.

O good Sir, we hope you are the Gentleman,
And there's no hurt done, O good Sir,

Remember your promise, Sir.


We have more to confess, Sir;
Or if you please, we'll unconfess it all again.

I had forgot to ask, what did the slave do with them?


He sent them Prisoners to his Master's House, as we think.


O Heavens! Rogues, Prisoners! Come along with me;
For if I find you tell me any lies,
I'll spoil your Throats from venting any more.
Come, good Baptista, help guard the Rascals;
If they but offer to stir, kill 'em.
I'll carry back to the Slaves heart
All these intended mischiefs,
And break upon them like a Whirl-wind,
Wrapping them up together into nothing.

Come, come, Emilia, dry those tender Eyes,
We are not going to be miserable,
But to be safe from miseries.

Would it were past; I am willing to reach
My journeys end; yet I start like one
That travels in the night, in unknown ways;
For we must through darkness,
Wander in places, from whence none that went
Ever returned to tell us what they were.

O do not shake thy virtuous resolution
With feeble apprehensions; 'tis a journey
That we must one day take: All the dispute
Which can be raised is only from the loss
Of some uncertain time, which yet perhaps
May prove so full of miseries, you'd wish
That Fate which now you would so much decline.

My resolution's firm; for all my shakings
They are but starts which sometimes nature makes;
As Wolves kept tame may now and then
Provoked by appetite, or some displeasure,
Start into actions like their usual wildness,
Before they were reduced to an obedience;
So 'tis with me, though I have brought my nature
To a tameness, and submission:
Yet at the unwelcome prospect that it takes
Of my intended dissolution. --
It starts within me, and would fain break
Those severe Fetters, Virtue and Reason ties them up with.

Here take thy choice then;
This Knife by chance
Taccola had about her: which will you have?

The Dagger, if you please; that seems the sharpest,
And will be best for my weak hand.

Nay do not weep that we shall dye;
But smile to think how we shall live in Fame.

I must weep, since I must part with you.


We shall meet again so quickly,
Thy tears will be but thrown away: --
Now hide that fatal Friend unto thy honour,
And when I strike, strike too, that we may sail
In one another Arms, and go to rest together.
-- See, the Monster comes, be resolute.

Fear me not.


How fare my beauteous Prisoners? what is't,
Sadness, or modesty that fixes thus
Your down-cast Eyes? come, come, I'll be more ingenuous,
And acknowledge the happiness I shall enjoy;
But you must be bashful; go in, go in,
And there I'll hide your blushes, that if you please,
You shall unseen blush that you were unwilling.

Sure thou can not be such a prodigious Monster;
Hast thou neither fear of earthly punishment,
Nor Heavens vengeance?

Pish, I'll not trifle, nor defer my joys
A minute longer: Thus, I'll force you two -- how! --

Are you amazed? were you so unacquainted
With all good, nay, with any thought of it,
That you could never think there might be Women
That would prefer their death before dishonour?

Indeed I have read of a foolish Lucrece;
But I believe the story otherwise
Than perhaps you may do; yet if you have
A mind to imitate that wilful Matron,
Kill your selves as she did, when you know what was done.

Stop thy lewd breath, thou Monster;
We need not to be told when we should dye,
We are prepared, but not as your damned tongue
Directed us.

And this you think will stop me;
No, your Romance trick will not do:
I know you dare not venture to hurt your selves;
And therefore -- thus --

Strike, Emilia, strike home be sure.


Hold excellent Ladies, hold;
Pardon my cruel curiosity, that led me
To make this trial of you; you have showed
There is a virtue, which I thought impossible
To live with Women; I have called back to me
The Opinion of your Sexes steadfast goodness,
Which has been so long banished from me.

Can this be real!


You see it must be so; 'tis no faint repentance,
Charmed from your tears, or sad expressions,
Which might be feigned in Women; but my conversion
Comes from the real knowledge of a virtue
That would have shook Mans Faith to think in Woman.

This amazes me.


Why do you wonder? is't not possible
A Man may once grow good? why do you mistrust?
Are you not in my power still? take heed, fair Saints,
Of sharing any guilt, that seems like mine,
So slowly to believe goodness in Man,
As I have done in Woman: you know what Virtue is;
I scarce knew it till you taught it me;
And you will be more guilty than I was,
If you believe as slowly as I did.

Sure 'tis real?


You then will know it, when I have restored
You to your liberty, as you have done
Me to my long-lost goodness.

If this be real, we shall believe our selves
As much preserved by you, as if another
Had been the intended Ravisher; for 'tis greater
Virtue to rescue us thus from your self,
Than from another; as much as 'tis harder
To overcome our Passions, than an Enemy:

I glory much in that high Character
You raise me to; pray give me leave to seal
My Pardon on your fair hands? nay, permit
My most ambitious Lips to receive it
Upon those noble hands that were to write
The horrid Tragedy, with your virtuous Blood.

Ha, deceived?


Ah me?


I cannot but laugh to think how we have cousen'd
One another; did you believe I was turned virtuous?
Troth I never thought you were so foolish to be so really.

Dost thou take pains to appear Devil?


No, not at all; I do it easily:
The truth on it is, I feared you might have acted
Some pretty odd fantastical Scene,
Perhaps to let a little blood out, and then
Talk sinely, whilst the purple drops distilled;
Calling your selves, your Virtues Martyrs;
Then, in a tone most neatly counterfeited,
Fall into high notions of meeting in Elysium,
And walking in perpetual springing Groves,
Or some strange imagined pleasure;
Perhaps all the while believe as much as I:
But by this means you might have lost some of that blood,
Which I have so much use of for to stir you.

Monster, Devil, wilt thou not permit us a way to dye?


Kill us, Sir, and yet we will believe you gentle.


After I have done, you may do what you please.
-- Come. --

Help, help.


Help, help.


Plague of this clap of thunder;
I'll dispose of you,
And spoil the spring of your chops.

Some help, good Heaven.


Let's stop our breaths,
Or tear the Devils Throat out.

No help left us!


Who should help you? I have gaged
Your foul mouthed hound, she can fill up the cry no more:
Yield quietly, or I'll drag you -- thus --

Help, help, murder, murder!


What noise is this; blast me! are my Eyes true?
Or is that blessed shape ever before them?
It was their cries. Hold, what's the matter?

Ha, who wanted your sacred Company
Before your time.

I heard a noise, Sir, and I did not know
Whether you might not be in danger.

You see I am not;
Wait where I told you, till I send for you.

Then 'twas the Ladies, Sir, cried out, it seems.


What then?
Is it a usual call for you when Women squeak?

O Sir, for Heavens sake help us: we shall be --


Stop your mouth, or I'll stop it for you.


Good Sir, use no violence; perchance the Ladies
May be a little frightened from reason,
If you but give them time.

O Heaven! are all Men ill? under that habit
Can there be hid the love of sin?

Well, be gone;
I want not your advice, nor your assistance yet.

If you please, Sir, I will endeavour to persuade them:
I can prove that necessity may excuse many things,
That would be sinful, uncompelled -- if you please, Sir.

No, no, be gone; you grow impertinent.


But if you please, Sir, to hearken to my opinion.


Hang your opinion;
I do not like this Fellow; I'll trust him no more.
Ha, -- what noise is this.

A seasonable interruption.


Villerotto, why where have you been, Man?
I have been looking you up and down all the House:
Here's Bottolo come from his Master,
And has strange news for me, he says:
I told him I cared not a farthing what 'twas.
-- But for all that, I wonder what it should be?
-- How now, what here, Villerotto?
Ha -- hast got her? hast got her i'faith? prithee let me --

You had best spoil all, Sir, and destroy
The pains I have taken for you?

Nay, prithee, I will but --


Come, you shall not But; have not I been careful,
And dare you not trust me now? Come along with me.

What, I must salute her first, Man, in good manners.


You must not, 'tis unseasonable;
I have not wrought her yet enough -- Nay* --

But why thy Sword, drawn Man?


You shall know the reason suddenly:
Come, be quiet, and I'll perform all I promised.
-- Hell -- how I am troubled with him: Come, Sir.

Push me no pushes; I will not go;
And see who dares make me.

Come, you must, Sir.


'Slid, whose Master? You or I? take heed of my fury.


Good Signior Brancadoro, help us; hear us.


To be fooled again;
You have not a mind to be cousen'd
Once more, have you?

What's that to you? I will hear 'em.
'Slid, I will stay, and I will not go yet.

I'll betray all, if you play the Fool thus:
Come, you must go now; Bottolo stays for you.

I will not, I say.


Go, go.


I'll follow him, and get some help.


Hold, Sir, you my worthy spiritual Counsellor;
Stir not, nor attempt to come near the door;
If you do -- no more but so:
Within there, ho! -- You Rascals, how came this Friar in?

He told us you appointed him when he heard a noise,
That he should come.

Pox on your credulous Coxcombs; now remember
You hear me say, if he offers to come out, let me
Find him dead: Stir not, but guard the door;
He has robbed our Masters: -- If you fail, I'll cut your throats.

Yet I am pleased that I am brought to die before her.
That with my last breath,
Which seldom unsuccessfully Petitions,
I may at once beg of the fair, and wronged Emilia,
Forgiveness, and belief; -- yet I would know
A little more, if it were possible.
My Passion makes me vainly inquisitive.
I must do it; yet it is but an idle curiosity
To ask for news the minute I must die.

What means this Friar? does that Habit harbour
An Instrument sitted for that vile Monster?

Was there not a great noise, Ladies,
Something like Women's Cries?

They were our Cries, Sir.


If you cannot help us to live with Honour,
Help us to die; we had two Weapons:
Arm us but again, he has yet not disarmed our Minds.

Would I knew how; would you accept it
As a true witness of my sorrow, if I die first
In the opposing that mischief I know not which way to prevent?

Ah me, we do not ask of you to die,
But to help death to us.

'Tis impossible.


Strangle us then. Why do you turn away your tread?
It is a Charity to grant it.

Alas, I need not say I must deny; you will believe it
When I let you know you ask it of Miranzo.

Miranzo!


My Brother.


Fair Emilia, 'tis the criminal Miranzo,
That loves Emilia still.

O Miranzo! I blush to think how you increase
My sense of Dangers, while you are mingled with 'em.

I see I am to blame in all Conditions,
To wish your Kindness; I but strive to nourish
A Sickness that sends Infection to your Peace.

What must become of us?


Thus naked as I am, I will defend you;
And with my Breast I'll dull his Sword, perhaps his Cruelty.

O do not talk more cruelly; Death is gentler,
Which you may help us to.

Ah Brother, be not so rash, do not deceive your self;
A thousand Lives lost in our Defence
Would not give stop to his lewd Purposes:
Heaven sure will send some Remedy. O Brother! O Cialto!

Forgive me dearest Sister, I had forgot
To tell you, Cialto lives; though this Villain was one
Of them that did attempt his Murder.

O do not flatter me, for I shall grow
As much out of love with Death, as even now
I was with Life. -- Is there no hope?

The Villain has appointed them to murder me,
If I attempt but to go forth. -- Ha, --
Now I think on it, it was the Friar
He gave them charge of: I am none; I'll try
If they will let me out; so I may call
Some help.

O take heed!


'Tis but attempting. -- But first
I'll set the Friar in the best posture I can.
Here, Sister, support my Shape a little,
To countenance my Design; -- nay, no trifling. --
So -- now to your Prayers, -- within there, ho: --
^. How now, who are you?

A Friend of Villerotto's, who left me to
Stay a little while for your Assistance:
Now I am going, have the greater Care
Of the Friar there; he may venture to escape,
For he has robbed your Master.

We warrant you: Sir Friar, you had not best try to bolt.

I have done ill, I dare not venture
Them a minute; Honour and Reason turn me back --
Blessed Opportunity, -- Rogue --

How now, what do you mean, Sir.
Help, help.

So, I have something now to frame an Argument
For my self with, and to Dispute a little.

Now you may kill us; you have got a Sword*


Dear Emilia, do you believe, I know not how
To make a better use of such a Weapon?
-- Pray weep not, do not unman me now.
Hark, a Noise.

Ha, Miranzo, are you Metamorphosed from a Friar?


Do you stare Monster? is a Sword bright Metal?
The Mirror that can only show
The affrighting shapes of thy unheard of Villainies.

Alas, I have not been afraid a long time;
I have forgot what 'tis. -- Hark, a Noise.
Dispatch him quickly, you shall tell no News, Sir.
-- Ha, who is this new Face for?

This shall tell thee, Villain.


Hold --


Miranzo, rob me not of that Revenge,
Which only can belong to me
-- Hark, a noise, -- guard the Passage, or we may all be lost.
Nay, trifle not; -- hark, the Noise increases, dispatch.
-- Now, Sir, do you stare to see Cialto,
Whom you hired Rogues to Murder?

I do not stare, nor am I frightened:
What, you're not dead it seems?

O, Cialto!


Ha, since thou hast given me cause
To view thee with a strict survey, my Eyes
Are grown clear sighted,
And find thee not the Villain which thou seem,
But what thou art; the base Borazzo.

'Tis well, we know one another then.


Excellent Rascal, has your hot Revenge
Been raked up all this while?

Could thou expect less from me, whom thou hast disgraced
And ruined, by Cashiering me from my Command?

And what can thou expect, Villain,
But that Fate thou did design for me?

My Sword says no.


Hold, hold, I command you hold, Cialto:
Hold, Sir, I will engage for your Forgiveness.

My Forgiveness! this is my Indemnity.


Do not hang upon me, unless you mean
To have me murdered in your Arms.

Nay, I think I may drive this through your Shield.


For Heavens sake let me go.


And Heaven protect you.


Now, Sir, what think you?


That I shall presently be quiet, and think no more. Help, help.


'Tis vain to call, no man has Charity
Left for thee; trouble not thy Throat,
Unless thou hast some Devil to call upon.

Let me embrace my dear Cialto,
For whom still ready Victory spreads her Wings,
When ever his wav'd Sword gives her but the sign.

Can Miranzo forgive all those distracted Jealousies
My miseries begot within me?

You injure me to ask it; go dry Samira's Eyes.


I dare not now approach you, fair Samira,
But as I would those Powers (I durst not hope to reach
With any thing but Prayers:) Permit me to receive forgiveness.

For what?


For pursuing you with all my miseries.


If you loved me as well as you profess,
My kindness would infuse such joy into you,
As would admit no sense of your Misfortunes.
Cannot my Love and Passion for you, have as much power as a little sleep,
To render you insensible of Miseries,
To which you only give afflicting Natures?

Fool that I was, to think that I could be wretched,
Whilst you were kind; forgive me dear Samira:
Permit me, fair Emilia, to kiss your hands too.

Generous Sir, I owe an equal Obligation to you.


Now spare me a minute.


What means he?


I know not.


Signior Brancadoro, I think Miranzo told me once,
You did engage to fight with me.

Now I guess; peace, this will be good sport.


I, that was when I was married to Samira. But not else.


Would marriage make you Valiant?


When I have tried, you shall know my mind.


By no means, Signior; I shall forbid the Banes:
But I must have your Answer now; look ye,
Here are two Swords, take your choice.

What does he mean?


Nay, stand still.


Here, Sir.


'Tis neither here nor there, I'll not fight
With any man that has a less Estate
Than my self; such a one ventures nothing.

Troth, you will hardly fight then


Why, what care I; if there be no body fit
To fight with me I hope they know nothing yet.

But, Sir, as I remember, you have something
Did once belong to me; are you not weary of it?

It's no matter whether I am or no.


Pray let me have it again.


So you shall, when I have nothing else to do with it.


You are severe, Sir; I will assign you your Money
That you lent, to receive it of the Senate.

No, do it your self, Sir.


I'll fetch others to persuade you:
Miranzo, pray look to the rich Gentleman.

What is the meaning of all this?


I guess now, you'll perceive all presently.


Oh! Mir. How is it?


Too well; I have life enough to spend in Curses.


O Devil!


He makes me tremble still.


Now, my most wealthy Signior, do you know these Gentlemen.


Not I; 'tis not likely that I should be acquainted
With such Ragamuffians.

Do you know them, angry Sir?


Yes, I know them to be rascally Cowards;
Ten such would not venture to cut one Throat.

Why, you need not be angry; they have not had their full hire.


They deserved none, they did not do their business.


I know the Rogues now:
Why, Villerotto, thou wilt not betray me, I hope.

What was that business they should have done?


Why, cut your Throat.


Brave Villain! Do you see, Signior?
These were your Pensioners; the confidence it seems
Of their performances, made you so bold,
To promise when you were married to fight with me;
That was after I was dead, as you believed.
But now, Sir, the Hangman shall end our Quarrel.

Good Sir, speak softly? I vow, that Villain persuaded me,
And told me I should never keep my Land
In quiet else, nor ever have my Mistress.

Compound, Signior; 'tis your best way.


What say you, noble Undertakers?


Why, Sir, we must confess --


'Tis needless, Sir, 'tis needless; I will do any thing.


Offer him his Estate again; you are rich enough besides;
You'll cheat somebody else in a little while of as much more.

No, Sir, I am not wise enough to do it;
My Father's gone, peace be with him; he perhaps
Might have given a say to some such matter.

Are you willing? you may hang else.


No, I can't endure that I'm sure, nor hardly the other.


Come, Cialto; Signior Brancadoro,
So he may have your Friendship, is content.

What to do?


To restore your Estate again.


Well, I love peace; he shall have an Assignment
To receive his Money from the Senate.

That I shall never get; but I must consent.


Fear not, Signior; you have the Public Faith for it.


Now, Samira, I can forgive my self, if I presume
With my restored Fortunes too.

Take heed, Sir; for if you name it,
That generous cause that forced me to declare
I loved you, will urge me to despise you.

I am charmed.


I hope, noble Signior, you will forgive Villerotto too.


You are deceived, Sir, 'tis not Villerotto;
'Tis Borazzo. an ancient Friend of mine.

Pray forgive him, Sir; he may repent.


Yes, I do repent.


That's well said; of what?


Why, that I did not rifle those Treasuries,
And leave you nothing to enjoy, but what
I feel, the Torments of a vexed Soul:
I should have sitted them for your Embraces,
And would have taken care you should have known it.

Bold impudent Dog,


He was still furnished with too great a Courage;
So much boldness was not fit to have been trusted
But in a Frame where it was balanced with much Virtue.

Come, we will force him to be good.


I think it must be forced.


He will die snarling.


I would die biting.


Would he had been hanged before he bit me.


Here, come hither, you that were once his Creatures;
Take him up, that he may be delivered from us,
Into the hands of the severest Justice.

Do you believe my Spirit will endure
Tamely to wait upon a formal Sentence,
And stay till you shall force it out of doors?
No, I will hear these Wounds so wide,
I'll make it room enough to go, if it be willing.

Away with him.


What, no Body to be found in the house? --
Hey day, what's gathered together! My Master! my Mistress!

See, Emilia, your Father, and my Uncle.


Gentlemen, no words; you remember our Bargain.


Doubt us not.


O, my dear Father, are you still as ready to forgive me as you were wont?


If I were angry, the sight of thee
Would bring a Joy enough to force it from me.

Your pardon, Uncle, joined to this, will make me and Emilia happy*


Is't so? was this the Trick on it? Well, well,
What must be, must be; I am Friends, Nephew;
I was partly in the Fault my self; I dare swear
I made thee half in love, with praising her.
Well, -- I am glad all troubles are at an end:
But she shall still be so much mine, that I may give her to thee.

You honour me, to own a Title in me.


One Pardon more, Sir, for me, that in
No other thing will ever disobey you.

What say you, Signior Brancadoro?


I say any thing, Sir. -- God's my life, I can scarce hold from crying.


Many things, Sir, may seem strange to you;
But you shall know it all at better leisure.

Come, no more; but let forgiveness
Dwell in every Breast: Back to the Nuptials now again;
This will scarce seem an interruption:
Come, let's away; our Meat is hardly cold yet.

The God of Love, if he can borrow Eyes,
Will be more pleased with this new Sacrifice;
Since by that change which he himself has made,
More equal Hearts are on his Altar laid.


