THREE Ways there are, and all accounted fair,
To gain your Favour: Begging, Borrowing, Prayer.
If as a Beggar, I your Alms implore
Methinks your Charity should aid the Poor;
Besides, I never begged of you before.
If I address by Prayer, and loud Complaints
I then oblige ye, for I make you Saints;
And sure none here can think it Superstition,
To pray to Saints that are of no Religion!
If Invocation will not do my Work,
A Man may borrow of a Jew or Turk;
Pray lend me Gentlemen your Applause and Praise,
I'll take it for as good as Currant Bays;
And if I ne'er repay it, 'tis no more,
Than many of you Sparks have done before:
With this distinction, that you ran indebt
For want of Money, we for want of Wit.
In vain I plead! a Man as soon may get
Milled Silver, as one favour from the Pit.
-- Hold then -- now I think on it,
I'll even turn Thief, and steal your kind Affection,
And when I've got your Hearts, claim your protection:
You can't Gazette me sure for such a crime,
Since neither Mare nor Lap-dog, I purloin:
While you Rob Ladies Bosoms every day,
And filch their precious Maiden-heads away;
I'll plead good nature for this Brat the Play:
A Play that plagues no more the thread-bare Theme
Of powdered Beaux, or tricks of the Godly Dame,
But in your humours let's ye all alone,
And not so much as Fools themselves runs down.
Our Author tried his best, and Wisemen tell,
'Tis half well doing to endeavour well:
What though his poor Allay runs not so fine;
Yet, let it pass as does our present Coin;
For wanting fairer Ore, and riches mould
He stamps in Brass, what others print in Gold:
Smile on him but this time, the next perhaps,
If he guess right he may deserve your Claps.

MANY I've liked, and some Enjoyed,
But if I said I Loved, I lied.
Inconstant as the wandering Be,
From once touched Sweets I used to flee;
Nor all the Power of Female Skill,
Could curb the freedom of my Will:
Clarinda only found the Art,
To Conquer and to keep my Heart.
THis is is a Day of Mirth and Jollity my Clara.


'Tis so, for such as can be merry, Mr. Friendly.


Why not for us my Love, we have a Noble President, and methinks should Imitate
(through Envy) this their happiness.


I am not of your Opinion.


Why not my Fair?


I'll tell you, because I purpose not to Marry.


Prithee be serious, and reform that Thought: Think of my past Service, and
judge by that my future; weigh all the respect I have paid you long, and ever
loved you beyond my self.


I know your Weakness, and will reward it too.


I am sure you will, you must be kind; And can you think an Answer of this
killing Nature, a just return for all my faithful Love?


As to that I have already said.


Oh speak, from whence this Coldness doth arise! Be at least so kind as to tell
me that; Is it some late Disgust you have conceived of my Person; or rather
your desire, (I fear) of some unworthier, happy Creature, base in the Attempt,
as you unkind in thinking of a Change; If neither.

I must impute it to your Woman's Will,
Still pleased with what it fancies, Good or Ill.

Be it what it will, thus it is, and with this Answer pray rest satisfied; there
is but one way ever to win me, and draw me unto Marriage, which whosoever
finds, 'tis like he may have me, if not, I am still my own.


Oh name it then! Thou dearest Treasure of my Life! my Soul! my All! I am in a
maze of Ecstasy, to think there's any means to gain you, and hope you'll be so
kind to tell me how I may be happy.


I'll retire a while; and with my self resolve what must be done, and in the
tend send you my Resolution.


I'll here expect it: What more can I desire, than now be satisfied and know my
Dooom.

Suspense is the worst Torment we endure.
'Tis Knowledge makes the Wound both safe and sure.

How now Jack! What all alone Man?


No, for I have heard some say, Men are ne'er less alone, then when alone. The
reason I suppose is this, because they have Crowds of Thoughts, that still
perplex the Mind; which would be like the Soul retired and free, thereby to
enjoy that sweet Repose, which nought but that can Grant.


Pshaw! Pox of this Morality and dull Stuff; Prithee let us be Merry, and
Entertain the Bride and Bridegroom. Ods fish there a parcel of rare Creatures
wihin! But of all Mrs. Clara for my Money.


And truly, I am of your Opinion Mr. Spruce; for setting aside her present
Melancholy and Discontent, I think she is beyond Comparison with any other.


Od's nigs, I know the Cause of her Disorder.


What I pray?


Why, I'll tell ye; In all Conditions of Estates, Professions, and Degrees, in
Arts or Sciences, ye know there's a kind of Envious Emulation.


Right.


So in this of Arabella's Marrying; for Clara being Lady of much the same Birth
and Quality, Grieves I -- suppose to see her Rival get the start of her.


Troth like enough.


You're Pleasant Gentlemen -- Or else because she having had so many Courtiers
--


And you among the rest Jack.


She now perhaps does cast a more favourable Eye upon some one that does not
like her.


Why Faith, and that may be too.


Sir, my Mistress presents her humble Service to you, and has sent you this
Letter; pray Heaven it be to your liking Sir.


I thank the kind Lucy: There, there's for the Postage Girl:



Clara.



'Tis as I feared, and what I know she most desires: Mischief, and Murder, are
all her Sexes Practice, and Delight? Yet such is the Extravagancy of my
Passion, I must obey the Mandate, tho to my certain Ruin: 'Tis strangely
difficult, and does require Mature Deliberation.


What has Friendly left us?


I believe the Letter was the occasion, it may be it was a Challenge.


A Challenge! No, no; Women don't use to bring Challenges, I rather believe
'tis an Amour; And that Letter as you call it a Billet Deux, which is to
Conduct him to the place appointed, and in some Sense you may take that for a
Challenge.


And she the Civil Embassadress to usher him in.


Yes, yes, but see the Bride and Bridegroom, with the rest of the good Company.


Son Bonvile, what call ye the Gentleman we met at the Garden Door?


Friendly Sir, a most approved and worthy Gentleman, and one of my chiefest
Guests.


Ay, ay, it may be so: But yet me thought he seemed somewhat displeased, tho
Son, Hah, What think you?


No sure Sir, he cannot be Angry, when his Friend's so happy.


I can't tell Boy, but I believe there's something more than ordinary in the
matter, Why should he leave the Company else? And Mrs. Clara I miss her too;
Why Gentlemen, why do you suffer this?


Unknown to any Sir, she withdrew soon as we rise from Table.


Sick of the Maid perhaps; because she sees you Mrs. Bride her Quondam
Play-fellow Married before her, Heh Gentlemen; heh!


'Troth like enough Brother Merry-man.


Go, go, find her out for shame Gentlemen; and do not stand idle thus, Od's
bobs, when I was a Young fellow and invited to a Wedding, I used to frisk and
Jump, and so bestir my self, that I made all the Green-sickness Girls in the
Room blush like Rubies. Ah, hah! I was a brisk Fellow in those Days, I'faith,
and used to Cut Capers a Yard high: Nor am I yet so Old, but I can take a round
or two still -- Come, come Gentlemen, lets in again and firk it away, shall we
not?


Withal my Heart Mr. Justice.


Why that's well said Mr. Spruce, Ods bobs it was, and I thank you heartily.


Come Madam, you must along with us, without you all's nothing.


I'll wait on you Gentlemen; if you will give me leave Sir.


Oh my best Joy! This Day you may Command.


That's right, that's right I'faith Gentlemen! This Day she Commands, and he
for ever after. Ods bobs I have done so my self, and hope I shall do so still.
Sister Venture, May I presume to ask if my Brother can say as much?


Yes Brother, I think he may, I freely Give him leave.


Observe that Brother, she freely gives you leave: But who Gives leave the
Master or the Servant?


You are Merry Brother, and truly you have reason, having but one Daughter and
see her Married as you would have her.


Yes, I have one thank Heaven! You would be glad Sister you could say so, but
your Barrenness does give your Husband leave (if he please) to look for Game
elsewhere.


Well, well Sir, tho you jeer me, and make a scorn of my Sterility --


No, no, not I Sister, I scorn not your Sterility, nor your Husbands Virility
neither.


My Husband's Virility! Pray spare my Husband; for he has not been so Idle as
you imagine; He may have an -- Offspring abroad for ought you know, that you
never heard of.


Oh fie Wife, You will not make it public will you?


And yet he keeps himself within compass for all that.


If you love me Winny --


Na, I say no more, but thereby hangs a Tale.


Say thou so old Girl? What and has he been straggling then? Nay, nay I know
he is a Ventersome Man; And a -- Merchant of small Wares sometimes, especially
when he can get a good Commodity: I love him the better for it I'faith, Ods bobs
I do -- A notable spark with a Young Wench in a corner, Is he not? A true Chip
of the old Block, his Father I warrant him -- But Sister, I have something to
say to you in private, concerning my Daughter.


By your leave Good Folks, Is Master Venture the Merchant here I pray?


Oh Nurse! I am glad to see thee, How does my Boy?


Very well, I thank Heaven Sir! He grows bravely I assure you. 'Tis a Chopping
Lad I promise you, and as like your good Worship; As if he had been spit out of
your Mouth.


Softly, Nurse softly.


I protest 'tis one of the forward'st Infants in the Universe; Lord! how it
will Crow, and Chirup like a Sparrow! I am afraid Sir he is about Teeth, for he
Dribbles extremely, if so, Your Worship must provide him a Silver Corral with a
Whistle and Chain.


Well, well, he shall have every thing Nurse, my Wife shall send them to ye; in
the mean time, there, there's a Piece, to buy the a Pair of Gloves, and so
leave us, for I am busy at present, therefore steal away behind me, and slip
out at the back Door.


Yes Sir, I am gone, Heavens bless your Worship, a Piece! Marry! and that's a
sufficient Charm to lye up any Nurses Tongue in Christendom.


Well well, it shall be done. Come Brother we are mist I warrant you amongst
the Young Fry, let's to them and, Dance till our Legs ache again, come I'll lead
the way.


We follow you.


Heaven in its excess of Goodness, bestowed no greater Blessing on Mankind than
that of Friendship -- To Murder any one is a Crime unpardonable! But a Friend!
-- And of all Friends the nearest to my Heart, -- 'Tis such an Imposition that
Hell it self 'till now could never parallel; And yet this Devil of a Woman has
power over me beyond all Virtue. I am distracted in my Thoughts, and know not
what to do; yet something must be done without delay, or else I lose her quite:
And yet I fear 'tis most Impossible, for Friendship left the World, when
Justice fled, and all who now do wear that Name are the worst of Hypocrites,

Like Counterfeited Coin on which is seen,
The formal Stamp; but sordid Dross within.

My Friend alone and Thoughtful? say for what
That you alone appear with Discontent,
When all my Friends Congratulate my Bliss?
Is it because (which I durst ne'er suspect)
Your Love to me was not entirely true?
Or else perhaps, this Crown of Happiness
You think Misplaced, and Envy it not yours.

Forbear such cruel Words --
How can you entertain a Thought so Vile
Of him whom so long you have called your Friend*
May all the Blessings Heaven can bestow
On us poor Mortals in this World below,
Crown all your Days, and may you nothing see
But flowing Tides of sweet Felicity;
But I, alas! --

Alas! What means my Friendly?
Much hidden Grief that wretched Word portends,
Which thus disturbs the Quiet of my Friend?
But come disclose it to me,
And since the Burden is too much for one,
I'll bear a part to ease thy troubled Breast.

Oh Bonvile!
Seek not to force this Fatal secret from me --

I must know it, by my best hopes I must.

Oh no! I cannot, Nay I dare not --

How dare not trust a secret to a Friend?

Oh Bonville, Bonville! Call me not your Friend,
That Names strikes horror to my very Soul.

Ha! Art thou then a Stranger to that Name?

Indeed I am, and must be so for ever now.

Yet hear me Friendly; Deny me if thou can,
Fixed as a Rock, I vow I'll here remain,
Until I have forced this Dire secret from thee.

Pardon me Sir, I hope you soon will hear it,
But I --

Yet stay, and since entreaty can't prevail,
By all the Friendship which you once professed,
By all that's Holy, both in Heaven and Earth,
I now Conjure thee to impart it to me,
Or by this Life --
Hold, hold, and since I can no longer hide it
Know 'tis my Honour then which lies at Stake.

Thy Honour! How? Proceed.

By chance a Quarrel happened to arise
Betwixt another and my self, The Field,
Time, Place, and all appointed,
Nay Seconds must assist us in the Deed:
I have relied on many seeming Friends,
Such as profess the bare and empty Name)
And all refuse to venture in my Cause.

Is this all?

All, Is it not enough? To see my Reputation, (the Lifes Blood of my Soul)
Nay all that's Dear, in Danger to be lost.

Not while thy Bonvile lives and wears a Sword:
May all things frown that I would have to smile,
May I live Poor, and Dye despised by all,
If I out live the ruin of thy Honour!
Tell me the time my Friend?

Oh, spare me that, for, if once known the time,
You'll Cancel this your promise, and recall
Your Friendly proffer.

Away with these Excuses, come the time

At Seven this Evening

The place?

Barn-Elms:
Oh the fatal place! Where I too well foresee,
The certain fall and Ruin of my Honour!

No, Thou shalt not stay to forfeit thy loved Honour,
Come I'm ready to assist my Friend; and will along with you.

Alas! What mean you?
Of all my Friends on you I ne'er Relied;
But sure I Dream, I Rave, by Heavens I'm Mad!
My Bonvile leave his Wife? And on his Wedding Day?
His Bride whom he perhaps may ne'er Enjoy?
And all for me? O most unhappy Man!

Pleasure before my Friend I'll ne'er prefer,
Nor is it lost, tho for a while delayed.

Are you then resolved to go?

I am, as fixed in my Resolve, as is the Libertin in Vice,
Which Death alone can part.

Yet stay, and think what it is you undertake,
Recall this Rash and sudden Resolution,
Least you repent, alas when it is too late.

This were enough to shake a weaker Soul,
But mine it moves not; like to a Mighty Oak,
I'm placed above the Storms of Fear or Doubt.

Sir no more, the Bride,

Oh, Heavens defend me!

What ails my Dearest Life?

I've lost the Key of this Chain I wear about my Neck
And of these Bracelets, Oh! Unhappy Omen!

No, no, my Love; I found it as it lay at Random in your Chamber, and fearing
it might be forgot, or lost, have laid it by; 'Tis safe my Love.


Indeed I'm very glad you've found it, but yet --

Yet, What my Dear? from whence proceeds that sigh?

Alas, I know not!
Some busy Genius Whispers to my Soul,
The loss of this upon my Wedding Day
Portend's a greater e're the Day be past.

Banish such Fears, let's in and see our Friends.

Indeed they all expect you; come I'll lead the way.

I'll go with you. Barn-Elms you say?

Yes that's the place, at Seven precisely;

I'll meet you on the Exchange, and go together;
If you are there before me, Take a turn or two.

Oh my Dear Bonvile! Art thou then the Man?
The only, only Man that I can call Friend,
And only Friend that I am bound to Kill?
A Friend, that for my sake would stake his Life,
Leave a Chaste Brid! and untouched Nuptial Bed
For me base Man, nay worse than Savage Beast:
The generous Lyon, never kills his kind
They say, although provoked to utmost rage;
Yet I vile Monster, more ungrateful Man,
Thus unprovoked, must kill my Brother Creature,
And which is worse, my Dear and only Friend!
All for the pleasure of a Foolish Woman.
O cruel Woman thus to Command
A Task so hard, Yet what I can't withstand!
Oh! thou rare Copy of the Original,
By which free Man at first received his fall;
For she not only would her self undo,
And all her Sex, but Damn all Mankind too.

A Younger Brother! 'Tis a poor Title, and very hard to bear with: The Elder
Fool inherits all the Land, whilst we are forced to follow Legacies of Wit, and
get them when we can. Why should the Law, by which we are deprived of equal
Portion with the First-begotten, not bind our Fathers to cease from
Procreation, and so as well deprive us of a wretched Being, as of the Thing we
cannot be without: No, no, our Mothers ne'er will consent to that, they love to
groan and squall, tho at the same time the Gallows eccho's to their Groans, and
both together labour for us. From the first we travel forth -- to'thers our
Journey's End. All this I know, yet I must forward: To beg, my Birth will ne'er
consent to; and borrowing is quite out of date -- Yet starve I cannot, nor
murder I would not: It must be the Highway then, the old Trade we poor honest
Rogues are forced too -- This Place will serve for a Beginner well enough -- A
Beginner did I say? Yes; for this is the very first day I open Shop -- Fortune,
they say, uses to help the Bold, I hope she will be kind to me. Ha! who have we
here? A Gentlewoman well rigged, and only a Servant with her, She may be a
Prize worth the boarding, and faith I'll venture hard but I'll carry her.


This way, say thou Symon, with Friendly?


Yes forsooth Mistress, with Mr. Friendly.


Alas! I'm tired and cannot travel further; my Heart is full of Fear, and yet I
know not why, nor can I tell why he should use me thus; -- It is not common
sure for Men to leave their Brides upon the Wedding-day: And yet I cannot tell
but it may be so! O wretched State of Marriage, and of Love, if this be Love!
Here will I lie me down, and rest a while Arabella's sad Complaint; tell him, I
grieve, I faint, I die; tell him any thing that may stay him.


Yes Forsooth.


Entreat him to return; nay, urge him all thou can to make him come again:
Nay haste, good Symon, fly if thou can, for I can stir no further.


Well, well, Forsooth, I am gone.


Alas, how wretched and forlorn am I!

I she whom once so many did admire,
Whose Wit and Charms the coldest Hearts could fire!
Now wretched Maid, and most unhappy Wife,
In Sighs and in Complaints must end my Life.
Abandoned by my Husband* e're enjoyed,
With thoughts of Pleasure, yet untasted, cloyed.
He leaves me now to my sad Frights a Prey;
O, my dear Bonvile! whither dost thou stray?
Unheard, alas! I make my amorous Moans;
The Winds and Waves refuse to bear my Groans:
Echo her self can't suffer my Complaint,
But with repeated Sighs grows tired and faint.
Where to find him, good Heaven direct me!
For losing him, I more than lose my self.

I must after her, she's worth my Acquaintance, and has good Movables about
her I perceive, what e're the Ready is. The next Turning has a most convenient
Hollow for the Purpose, and there I'll make her sure. Now Luck, or never.


I'm at a stand already, and know not where I am.


I'll direct you, Madam; Well overtaken.


Bless me, Sir, What are you?


A Man.


An honest Man, I hope?


Yes faith in some Respects, I'm very honest, but not altogether so; I were not
fit to live in the World if I were too honest, Child.


Alas! then I begin to fear: Pray tell me what you are?


Why, faith, an honest Thief.


How, honest, and yet a Thief? I never heard they were of Kin before; Pray,
Heaven, I find it now.


Indeed I a very honest Thief.


Well, Sir, since that's your Title, pray use me kindly: Nay, I'm sure you
will, there's something in your Looks which speaks you mild and noble.


Yes, I am a Gentleman, and you shall find me so; for I'll not offer you the
least show of Violence, or offer to corrupt your Chastity; tho indeed you are
tempting Eair, and might inflame a colder Heart than mine: Yet Ravishing's no
part of my Profession as yet; or if it were, you look so charming Innocent, you
would disarm my wildest Thoughts.


Blessings on your Goodness!


Are you a Maid, or Wife?


I am both, Sir.


Then this it seems is your Wedding-day, and these the Hours of Interim that
keep you in that double State?


Indeed you are in the right.


Come then, I'll be brief, and hinder not your desired Hymen. You have some
superfluous Toys I see about you, which you must deliver; I mean, that Chain of
Gold and Pearl about your Neck, and those pretty Bracelets about your Arms,
(pray, Heaven, they prove not Emblems of the combined Hemp which is to halter
mine); come, Madam, pray deliver 'em.


Nay, I entreat you, Sir, to take 'em, for I cannot give 'em, they are locked
you see, and truly I have not the Key about me; it may be you are furnished
with Instruments that may unloose 'em, I pray do.


No faith, Madam, I'm but a Beginner in this same Business, and am wholly
unprovided of any Pick-lock Tools besides this Sword.


O, good Sir, do not show me that, 'tis too frightful; pray hurt me not, for I
do yield them freely: Use your Hands, perhaps their strength will serve to tear
'em from me without more ado. Some Pain I'll quietly endure, provide you do not
hurt me much.


Alas, dear Lady, I'll use you as gently as I can


Not much, Sir.


I am glad on it, -- S'death, I can't do it.


No Sir, nor shall not now: You a Highway-man and guard your self no better:
Come, Sir, what Money have you? Deliver quickly.


Not a Cross by this foolish Hand of mine!


How, no Money, 'twere pity then to take this from thee;


No, by my Life!


I do believe you, and now pray hear me -- Here on my Knees, in sight of
Heaven, I make this solemn Protestation, That if you'll but forbear the Rifling
of this Chain and Bracelets, and go but with me Home, by all the Vows which I
this Day have plighted to my dearest Husband, I will deliver you in Money the
full Value of these I wear, and cannot for my Life get off.


Ha! Ready-money is the Prize I look for; it passes without suspicion every
where, when Chains and Jewels are often stopped and called for before the
Magistrate: But --


Nay never doubt! You saw I gave you my Advantage up, and questioned not my
safety at your hands, pray fear not yours in mine.


I know not what to do.


Pray tell me, Sir, did you ever think a Woman true?


I have heard of some, but very few.


Will you add one more to your belief?


I think I may, for they were fewer than the Articles of my Faith, therefore I
have room for you, and will believe you -- Yet stay, you say you'll ransom your
Jewels with Ready-money when you come Home; so you may, and then discover me.


Shall I repeat the Vows I made?


No, for I'll trust you; and if you do betray me, then Mercy upon me, and
Farewell. I knew a Gentleman that had been a Courtier at Whitehall fifteen
Years, and he was buried e're he took a Bride: 'Tis very strange you'll say; and
may be my Case in another way.


Come, Sir, never fear: A Man and afraid; Fie, fie!


Give me your Hand, I'll wait on you; and if you are (as I believe you) True
and Just, you are the World's Wonder! Come, Madam.


Jack, Who's this?


O Ieminy! I'll be hanged if it be not Goodman Compass, that they said was dead
three Years ago.


Od's Life, and so it is!


O London! sweet London! Do I live to see thee once again? My Eyes are full of
Brine for Joy. And if my dear Peggy be but living still, I shall cry 'em out.


Goodman Compass, I am glad to see you; You are welcome home.


Thank you, good Lad: Honest Jack here too? Why, thou art grown a little Man
since I saw thee last: What, is that thy own, heh?


I am fain to keep it, you see, whoever got it; it may be other Men's Cases as
well as mine.


Thou say true Jack: But whose pretty Knave is it?


My Dame's where I live.


And not thy Master's?


Nay, nay, I can't tell that neither: My Master loves it as well as if it were
his own, and for ought I see better than my Dame.


A very good Lad by my Troth!


But, Goodman Compass, I can tell you News, Your Wife has a brave Boy too of
her own, not above a Quarter old, as big as two of this.


Ha! say thou so, Jack? Ha, ha, ha, by my Troth I am heartily glad to hear
it: I'll give thee a dozen of Ale, and thy News be true, Boy.


I assure you 'tis very true: All your Neighbours can tell you the same.


Ha, ha, ha! But a Quarter old, and so lusty, say you? What plaguy thundering
Boys are got now-a-days: I Gad, I shall split my Sides with Laughing; Ha, ha,
ha. -- But, Jack, I have been loath to ask thee all this while, for fear of ill
News, how does my Wife?


O never better, nor ever so lusty and handsome -- And truly she wears better
Clothes than she was wont, especially on Holy-days: she has Silk-Gowns, and
Lac'd-Petticoats, and fine Holland-Smocks too, they say, that have seen 'em:
And some of our Neighbours say, they were taken up in Cheat


Like enough, Jack; and there they must be paid for -- Well, good Lads, go and
tell my Wife the joyful Tidings of my Return.


That I will with all my Heart, for she heard you were dead long ago.


Nay, I'll go along with you Jack.


Come then.


Well, Peggy, if I am one of the Livery, I thank thee for it: The Cuckolds are
the greatest Company in all the City: And we have more Aldermen among us, than
all the other put them together.


O my dear sweet Honey-suckle! Art thou alive? I am glad


O, ho! good Spouse, give me leave to shed a few pearly Tears; the Fountain of
Love will have its Course: And tho I cannot Sing at first sight, yet I can Cry
you see. I am as it were new come into the World; and Children Cry before they
Laugh, a long time you know.


Yes; and so thou art new born indeed to me, my Numpy; for I was told you were
dead long since, and never thought to see this dear sweet Face of thine again:
I heard thou were dived to the bottom of the Sea, and that you never did intend
to see poor Peggy more.


He, he, he, I was going down, as you say Peg, but I thought better on it, and
turned back: I heard an ill Report of my Neighbours there; the devouring
Sharks, and other Sea-Monsters, whose Company, to tell you the Truth, I did not
like; and therefore resolved to come home and bide with thee my Girl -- Come
kiss thy poor Hubby, kiss me I say, for Sorrow begins to ebb apace.


A thousand, thousand Welcomes home dear Numpy!


An Ocean of Thanks, kind Peggy: Well, and how goes all at Home? What Lank
still, poor Peg? Will it ne'er be full Sea at our Wharf?


Alas, Husband, what do you mean?


A Lass is it, or a Lad, Wench? I should be glad of both; I looked for a pair
of Compasses long before now.


What, and you from home, Love?


I from home? Why tho I was from home, and other of our Neighbours from home,
does that follow that every body else is from home?


I am pleased you are so merry, Husband.


Merry, nay I'll be merrier yet; why should I be sorry? I hope my Boy's well,
is he not? Od's fish, I look for another by this Time.


Boy, what Boy, Deary?


What Boy! why the Boy I got when I came home in the Cock-boat one Night, about
a Year ago; You have not forgotten it, I hope, I think I left behind me for a
Boy, and a Boy I look for.


I find he knows all -- What shall I do?
O dear Husband, pray pardon me.

Pardon thee; why I hope thou hast not made away with my Boy, hast thou? Od's
death I'll hang thee, if there were never a Whore more in London, if thou hast.


O no; but your long Absence, and the Rumour of your Death,


Venture, quoth a, I can't blame thee Peg; for Wapping, if it were twice
Wapping, can't hold out always, no more than Redriff, Limehouse or Shadwel, nay
or the strongest Suburbs about London; and when it comes to that, wo be to the
City too, Girl.


Consider, Husband, I'm but a Woman, neither the first or last that have done
the same; and truly I won't deny but I have a Child.


Have you so? And what by Consequence must I have then, I pray?


If you'll forgive me this Time, it shall be so no more, indeed and indeed, now.


Well, well, I will forgive thee, Peg, upon this Condition, that you tell me
who it was that fell foul aboard thee, and sprung this Leak in thee.


O dear Husband!


Nay, no Excuses, for I must know.


Why then truly it was Mr. Venture the Merchant.


I am beholding to him, and would requite his Civility, if his Wife were but as
willing, tho he be one of our Merchants at Sea, he shall give me leave to be
Owner at home; and where is my Boy? what, shall not I see him?


Yes if you please, good Husband: He's nursed at Bednal green; 'tis now too
late, to Morrow will be better.


Come then we will home and to bed.

Let other Fools repine at Scoffs and Scorns,
I'll teach the Cuckold how to hide his Horns.

Was the like ever known, that a Bridegroom should absent himself on his
Wedding-Day?


'Tis somewhat strange indeed.


And the Bride too my Daughter, she's out of the way: Why what should be the
meaning of all this, Od's bobs I can't tell?


Perhaps they are busy Brother, privately conferring Notes together: You can't
tell but that the young Man may have a stomach to his Supper, and fall too
unawares, and we ne'er the wiser.


Od's nigs, very true; what would you say then Sir, if they should be stolen
away, and a-bed together seriously?


What would I say? marry I would say, Speed 'em well: And if no worse News ever
comes to me, I'll be hanged if e're I cried for it.

How now, what's the Business with you?


Business enough, Forsooth; for I have the strangest Tidings!


Of any One that's lost, Woman?


No forsooth, of One that's found again, an't please you.


O, he was lost then it seems.


Her Business is with me, I believe Brother; is it not, Woman?


Yes, Sir.


Come hither then,
How, returned?

Yes indeed, Sir, and all discovered.


Ah Curse on the Wind that blew him ashore.


Aye* so say I Sir, and did not sink him when he was going.


Well, well, be sure you do not let him come near the Child.


I warrant you, Sir, if you charge me to the contrary.


Yes, I do strictly charge you as you tender my Displeasure.


Well then let me alone -- Besides, Sir, he intends to come to morrow morning
with his Wife and see him.


I'll meet him there; and if he chance to be there before me, be sure to keep
the Child safe, and not let him touch it.


I warrant you, let me alone.


So, so, Heaven be praised, they are not both lost I see, here's the Bride, my
Daughter, come again.


Father, and Gentlemen, I desire ye to treat this Stranger here with all
Respect and Generosity: He's a loving Kinsman of my Bonvile's, who kindly came
to congratulate our Wedding.


Sir, you are heartily welcome, Od's bobs you are.


Welcome to all of us.


Seriously, Sir, and so you are.


But where's the Bridegroom, Girl? Od's bobs we're all at a Nonplus here, at a
stand, quite out; the Musics ceased, and we all look as tho there were neither
a light Heart or Heel among us; nay, my Cousin Clara too as cloudy as on a
washing Day.


'Tis then because you will not dance with me, Sir.


'Tis I alone have cause to be sad, if this Day's Happiness could admit of any:
But I've long reasoned with my pressing Thoughts, and from them drawn some
Symptoms of Relief. Suppose this Day hath been long since appointed by my dear
Bonvile, to meet some foe, and right his injured Reputation: Nay, say he
fights, alas! Why should I fear, when all the Powers above, that guard true
Love and Innocence, will never see him fall.


Prethce peace, good Girl hold thy tongue; Od's bobs thou'lt make us all
Cowards, to hear a Woman preach up Valour thus.


Well, Sir, I have done: But pray entertain this Gentleman kindly for my sake.
Indeed I was afraid when I saw him first.


Ha! what does she say? Od's Death she'll tell!


Being in search of my dear Bonvile, I had quite lost my Way when he most
opportunely came unto my Aid, and gave me many marks of his Esteem in my
distress of Fears; nay more than this, which I'll declare at large.


Death and Hell, she'll betray me.


Well, Gentlemen, since the Bridegroom's absent, I must supply his Place: Come,
when I have waited on you to your Pleasure, I will return to Bonvile yet.


What a trembling Trade's this, when Conscience, that should be our only Guide,
flies and leaves us to our accusing Guilt. A Thief! the very Name and Thought
chills my Blood, and makes me tremble like an Ague-fit. A Dog, nay every Bough
that moves, puts us in fear of present Apprehension. Sure I shall never thrive
on this Trade: Perhaps I need take no further Care, I may be now near to my
Journey's End, or at least in a fair way to Newgate, and from thence to Tyburn,
the only Place that we poor Rogues can claim for an Inheritance. Trust a Woman,
and with a Matter of such Importance, what a simple Dog am I? I could find in
my Heart to run away: And that were base to run from a Woman; I can lay claim
to nothing but her Vows, and those the Women seldom or never mind.


So, Sir, now you shall find a Woman as good as her Promise; Here are 20
Pieces, the full Value, on my Life, of what they cost.


Pray, Madam, do not thus suspend my doubtful Soul; but if you do design to
ensnare my Life, speak, speak freely: Or if the Constable be at the Door, let
him show his Staff of Authority, perhaps I may corrupt him with a Bribe.


How! base ungrateful Man, do you suspect my Faith? Nay then, Father, Uncle,
and Gentlemen, where are you?


How now, how now! What's the matter, Girl?


For shame, will you not entertain your Kinsman here a little better; you leave
him here alone, as tho you despised his Company.


Is that all? I thought the Bridegroom had been returned: Sir, pray pardon this
Rudeness; But indeed I had quite forgot you, quite forgot you, as I hope to be
saved: But what makes you tremble, Sir, are you ill disposed.


Think you he hath not reason to be ill-disposed at this cold


Come pray, Sir, shake off this Dullness, and participate of our
Mirth, Od's nigs do.

I am very well, Sir, I thank you, only the Gentleman is a little under a
Mistake.


It may be so, Ay, ay, it may be so; I vow I thought you had trembled, but I
believe it might be my own Hand; you must pardon me, I was stiffer once.


Sir, your humble Servant.


But, Gentlemen, what think you of an Adventure?


Adventure whither?


Why, to the East-Indies? I have a Vessel, Gentlemen, called the Sea-Horse,
bound thither, and to morrow I do expect her to sail. Now, Gentlemen, if you'll
venture, ye shall have fair Dealing, that I'll promise you. And for the French,
you need not fear them* for she is a smart new Vessel: Nay, she hath a Letter
of Mart too, and twenty brave roaring Boys on both Sides her, Starboard and
Larboard: And I intend to go as far as Marget down with her, 'twill be as good
as Physic to me.


A very good Motion, Sir, I begin, there's my ten Pieces.


And, Sir, if a proffered Love may be accepted, be pleased to take my ten
Pieces with you.


Yours above all the rest, Sir.


That's kindly said, Sir, and I thank you: Now pray venture Ten more for my
sake.


Alas, Madam, it's a younger Brother's Portion.


At my Request, Sir, venture the other Ten; if you want, I'll supply you with
as many more.


With all my Heart then: Come, Sir, if you please, I'll double mine: So now
she's got her Gold again, and I am now no Thief,


You may command it, for I am always at your Service: But pray your Pleasure?


My Request, Sir, is, to have the Honour of keeping you Company to Sea, for I
have a great desire to see Marget.


Sir, I shall be very happy in your good Company.


I hope you will be both better acquainted e're you return; and by that time
your Kinsman may be here to make you more welcome.

And for the Gold at my Request you lent,
I'll double it to give you more content.

Why should I fear, since she is proved so just?
I'll quit my Trade: Now Jack Catch do thy worst.

COME my brave Friendly, I think we are here the first: Your Enemy is not yet
in the Field; let's walk a Turn or two, perhaps by that time he may arrive.


I'm very confident that he's here already.


Thy Looks, me-thinks, speak Conquest sure thy own; an ardent Rage has kindled
both thy Cheeks.


Like a red Morning, Friend; which still foretells a stormy Day to follow -- And
now I well observe your Face, me-thinks it waxes pale, there's Death in it
already.


How, Friendly, do you then take me for a Coward? My face look pale, and Death
in it already? By Heaven, should any but my Friendly dare to tell me what thou
hast said, my Sword should ram the base Affront down the cursed Villain's
Throat. But you are my Friend, and I must only chide your Error. But prithee
tell me who is it you are to fight with, for as yet I am ignorant both of the
Cause and Person.


Ha, his Name! Did you enquire his Name?


Yes.


I dare not yet reveal it for fear of --


For fear of what?


O Confusion! I know not what to say!


How, afraid to tell his Name? Then I begin to doubt the Justice of your
Quarrel.


Too well you may, for by yon' setting Sun, that Globe of heavenly Light I
swear, I come to kill the only Man that strives to save my Life -- Man did I
say? Nay more than common Man, for those the World abound with; but such a Man
besides, all this vast Land affords not.


By this your large Encomium of your Friend, I'm afraid 'twas Wine first made
your Quarrel, and thereupon this Challenge did ensue.


O no! I call the Powers above to witness, that in all the Course of our
unhappy Friendship, I to my knowledge never did receive the least Affront or
Injury from him.


How came this Challenge then?


O dear Friend, the noblest that Man could ever boast of: Sodom, fair without,
but rotten at the Heart: But then I found out Bonvile, my only dearest Friend.
Bonvile no sooner heard of my Engagement, but flew unto my Succour with as much
Bravery, as a great General hastened by Alarms, marches to meet the Foe: You
left your Nuptial Bed perhaps to meet your Death. O unheard-of Friendship! My
Father gave me Life, 'tis true; but you, my Friend, support my Honour. All this
for me, while I, ungrateful Man, thus seek your Life: For to my eternal Horror
be it spoke, you are the Man whom I come here to kill.


Ha!


Too true alas! there read the Warrant for your Death.


'Tis a Woman's Hand.


Yes, and a bad One too, they all speak fair, write foul, but mean worse.


How! kill me? Sure, I dream, and this is all Delusion, or else thou dost it
only to try thy Friend.


O, from my Soul, I wish it were no more. But read, read on, see how I'm
fettered in a Circe's Charms -- I love beyond Imagination, love even to
Madness, and must as madly do a Deed will damn me to the hottest Flames of
Hell.


And woo't thou kill thy Friend for such a Woman?


Alas! I must, you see I am commanded, commanded too by Love; Love more
powerful than all the Sacred Ties of Friendship, therefore draw, and guard thy
self.


Not I by Heaven! What would thou have me draw and kill my Friend?


There thou stab my Soul. O where, where is now my Resolution fled? A fatal
Blast has struck me; a sudden Horror shot me through the Heart; a Trembling seized
my Knees, that I can hardly stand, and all my Vital Powers methinks seem dead;
yet Love's the Fire must kindle all again, therefore I charge thee draw, or
naked as thou art, I will assail thee.


I am defended against all that thou can do, in having Justice on my Side,
and Friendship too to back it.

But since Humanity now bears so sway,
To this unguarded Breast come make your way.
Strike home be sure.


That were a barbarous Murder.


How can the Effect prove different from the Cause? Or how can any thing but
damned Barbarity ensue a Woman's much more damned Design? Who would expect
Reason from one that raves, or hope for Mercy in a Tyger's Den? Believe me,
Friendly, all this may sooner be; Mercy may sooner dwell among the Salvage
Wolves and Bears, than in a Woman's Breast.


O, my too rigid Fate, to place me thus on such a dangerous Precipice, that
wheresoever I turn my self for help, I see my Ruin still before mine Eyes.


Medea sent thee, was to kill thy only dearest Friend, was it not?


Alas! it was.


Then here, all Friendship dies between us; thus hast thou killed thy Friend,
and satisfied that infernal Hag, thy cursed Mistress, who thus commanded thee:
Away, I say, begone, and never see me more.


Ha!


Yes, base ungrateful Wretch, farewell, Bonvile's now thy Enemy; therefore do
thou draw and guard thy spotted Life.


How, Friend!


Friend did thou call me? On forfeit of thy Life that word no more; the very
Name of Friend from thee, shall be a Quarrel: How can I tell but that thou
love my Wife, and therefore feigned this damned Design to draw me from her
Arms?


How! wrong thy Wife? O no, I never had a Thought so vile! Yet you must forgive
me, indeed you must, by all that once was dear to me; and what I dare not
mention more, by Love and Honour, I implore thy Pardon -- Still art thou deaf
to my Complaints? -- Nay, then upon my Knees I will enforce thy Pity. Behold
me, Bonvile, prostrate at thy Feet, crawling for Mercy, swimming in Tears, and
almost drowned with Shame; extend thy Arm to help me, as you're a Man, be
God-like in thy Nature, and raise me from the Grave; turn thy Eyes on me, and
sink me not with Frowns; O save me, save me, or I fall for ever.


As soon shall Heaven reverse the Fate of Hell, as I recall what I have said, or
plant thee in my Breast again.


Nay, then I am lost to thee, and all the World besides.


Thou art indeed for ever lost to me; see what a miserable Wretch thy Folly now
has made thee: A Creature so far below my Pity, that I despise and scorn thy
base Submission, and will never hear thee more, more.


Say but thou hast forgiven me, and I will ask no more.


I never will.


O cruel Bonvile!


More barbarous Friendly: Hold off, or I will use thee like a Dog, tread thee
to Earth, and spurn thee like a Slave, base as thou art.


Still thou art my Friend --


Thou lie, I have abjured the Name.


Let me but go with thee.


Not for the World; I'd rather venture my self with Crocodiles, catch the last
dying Gasps of some poor Wretch infected with the Plague, than trust my self
with thee.

Farewell, I leave thee with the greatest Curse,
Condemned to Woman, Hell affords no worse.

Death and Destruction, am I thus despised! Condemned to Woman's Lust, and
scorned by Man. By Bonvile too, after imploring, like a School-Boy, at his Feet
-- My Blood boils high, and scalds my very Heart! My inward Grief calls on me
for Revenge, and I am all on fire! O that I had the proud Bonvile here now at
my Feet, I'd use him worse than he did me before.

But since that open Force yields no Relief,
Private Revenge shall ease my swelling Grief.
With Thoughts of Jealousy I'll fill his Soul,
Which shall its Powers of all their Rest control.
Thus for a Woman I've begun a War,
And for her sake must damn my Soul like her.

Indeed you must pardon me, I can't let ye see the Child; to tell you the
Truth, I am commanded to the contrary.


Commanded! Prithee who commanded thee?


The Father.


The Father, Why who am I?


Not the Father sure, the Civil Law has found it otherwise.


The Civil Law found it otherwise! Why then the Uncivil Law shall make it mine
again, I'll be as dreadful as a Shrove-Tuesday to thee; for I'll besiege thy
squalling caterwauling Castle, with my Friends the Mob, and gut thy stinking
Nursery, but I'll both see and have my Child.


Harkee, Goodman Swabber, say but half so much again, and I'll call the
Constable, and lay Burglary to your Charge. You would not be so hot if the
Enemy were in view, nor if you had to do with any body but a poor innocent
Woman, so you wou'd'nt.


Good Husband be patient, and let me alone with her: Come, come, good Nurse,
let him see the Boy.


Indeed I dare not Goody Compass: The Father first you know delivered me the
Child, and ordered me to let no body see it. He pays me well and weekly for my
Pains, and therefore I'll do as he bad me, so I will.


Why thou white Bastard-breeder; Is not this Woman here the Mother?


Yes; I grant you that.


Do you so? Well, and I grant it too; And is not the Child then my own by the
Wives Copy-hold?


The Law must try that.


The Law! What then you think I'll be but its Father-in-Law? I tell thee, all
the Wit and Law 'twixt Cuckolds-Point and Westminster-Hall, shall not keep my own
dear Flesh and Blood from me, I warrant you that. No an't does, I'll be hanged
at the Main-yard: Why, who, dost think, uses to get my Children but my self?


Nay, I can't tell, you must look to that, for my part I ne'er knew you get
any.


Say thou so? Why, look you, do but put on a clean Smock, and try me, if
thou dare, I'll hold thee three to one I get thee with Child before I leave
thee: Heh! what say thou?


I'll see you hanged first -- Nay, pray be quiet, and don't offer to spoil my
Milk. Lord, you are as boisterous as my Husband was the first Night we were
married: Pray, Goody Compass, take off your Cur, or else he'll bite me.


No never fear him, Nurse, he's not so furious I assure ye.


O! here's my Master, the Child's Father, now talk with him.


Good morrow Neighbour, good morrow to ye both.


Both! Good morrow to you and your Wife too, if you go to that.


I would speak calmly with you, Friend, if you think fit.


I know what belongs to Calm, and a Storm too; and if you please, a cold word
or two with you.


With all my Heart.


I understand that you have tied your Mare in my Ground.


My Mare, Friend, nay I assure you 'twas only my Nag.


Your Nag? Well your Nag then let it be: Hark, Sir, to be short, I'll cut off
your Nag's Tail, if-e're I catch him there again.


Pray hear me, you are too rough to maintain --


I say, Sir, you shall maintain no Child of mine; my Wife does not bestow her
Labour for that purpose.


You are too passionate --. I will not maintain --


No marry shall you not.


The Deed I have done to be lawful, I have repented it, and given Satisfaction
to the Law, my Purse has paid for it; therefore I would treat milder with you if
you'd be pleased.


Yes, yes, I am very well pleased, and shall be better pleased if you can serve
me so still: For, look you Sir, one of these Days I shall to Sea again, you
know where my Wife lives; yet you'll but lose your labour, for get as many
Children as you can, I assure you, you shall keep none of them.


I think you are mad.


Why, if I am Horn mad, what's that to you?


Nay then, since you are so rough, I tell you plainly you are -- a --


A what? What am I, heh?


A Coxcomb.


A Coxcomb! a Cuckold you mean, and you a Fool for your pains.


The Child is mine, I am the Father of it, and will keep it.


Yes if you can, I know you will. But pray tell me, is not my Wife the Mother?
You may be as far from being the Father as I am, for my Wife's acquainted with
more Whore-masters besides your self; ay, and as crafty Merchants too, let me
tell you that.


No indeed Husband, I had to do with no body else, 'twas he begot, indeed and
indeed now. Yet for all that, the Child's mine, I bred it and bore it, and I'll
have it and keep it, so I will.


Pray hold there Mrs. Jill-flurt, the Child's my Husband's, and he shall have
it, or I'll tear your Eyes out, ye Whore you.


Good Words, Mistress; do ye hear, give good Words you'd best, or I shall tell
you your own.


I'll have no more to say to ye, the Law shall determine it; in the mean time
Nurse keep the Child for me, there, there's Money for thee.


There's Money for me too, keep it for me, Nurse; give him both thy Duggs at
once, I pay thee for the right one, Girl.


I have two Hands, you see Gentlemen; this does but show ye how the Law will
hamper ye; even thus you'll be used, Gentlemen, if you go to Law.


It can't be helped, for I won't lose my Right.


Nor I mine for all you're a Merchant.


Nor I mine for all I did not bear it.


Nor I, tho but a poor Sailer's Wife.


Well, fare ye well, we shall meet in another Place -- Come Winny.


Ay, ay, I'll meet you when and where you dare, and do your worst, I fear you
not: By the Lord Harry the World's come to a fine Pass, that we must go to Law
for our Children. No wonder the Lawyers are all so rich, yet e're the Law shall
have a Limb, a Leg, a Joint or Nail of this same Boy,

'Tshall cost me more than a whole Child in getting,
Some win by play, and standers by with Betting.

From whence came that Letter, Niece?


From Putney, Sir, and from my Husband.


And pray be free; Does he tell ye the Cause of his leaving you so abruptly on
his Wedding-day?


Yes, Sir, yet this had been sufficient to have let me known what he is gone
about, without the formal Addition of an Epistle.


That, why what is that I pray Madam?


His Will, Sir, wherein he makes me his sole Executrix.


Will! why what the Devil does he mean, seriously I can't find it out?


Why, Sir, he's gone to fight.


How fight, Madam! On my Soul then I believe Friendly's Second.


You're in the right, he is so, and I am lost for ever!


O foolish Friendly, this thy Mistake has made me the most wretched of
Woman-kind! Such variety of Thoughts load my afflicted Breast, that I know not
what to think: I rave, am mad, not knowing what my Folly may produce; I fear
for both, for both my Heart does bleed.


Miserable Maid! nay, miserable Wife! but much more miserable Widow! O my dear
Bonvile!


Duce take me, if e're I saw a Company so Phlegmatic in all my Life: Mr.
Venture, prithee let's have a Song to pass away the Time, and put Life into the
Bride.


With all my Heart, Mr. Spruce: Here, who waits? --


Your self, Sir, you mean?


Nay all of us I protest.


Ay, ay, all of us.


A Woman's Love

And Man's is such,

Still too little,

Or else too much.

Men are Extremes,

And Women too,

All, all are false,

All, all like you.

You'll swear and lie,

If you'll believe,

And sigh and die,

Yet still deceive.

Your Vows and Oaths,

Your Smiles and Tears,

Are all but Baits,

Are all but Snares.

To win a Heart,

And then destroy,

The easy Fool,

The promised Joy.

I'll have you offer no more your Pretending,


Nor will I suffer your modish Dissembling:


For Honour commands,


And Freedom withstands,


What you?


And you.


I know would have me be, your Slave,


I know would have me be, your Slave.


O, no, no, no!


No, no, no, no!


I never will agree,


I ever will be free.


Daughter, Daughter! Where's my Daughter? I say, Where's my Daughter? O Girl, I
have the best News to tell you --


What of my Husband, Sir?


No, no, of your Cousin, Girl, of your Cousin.


What of him, Sir?


Such a Cousin, Girl, such a dear Cousin he is, as Alexander the Great, if he
were alive, might be proud and boast of.


You're welcome here again, Sir; You've made but a short Voyage, pray what
occasioned your Return so speedily?


Madam, I render you ten thousand Thanks; Your Generosity and Goodness has
wholly made me yours; I am the humblest of your faithful Admirers.


Forbear such lavish Gratitude; You're too profuse in your Acknowledgment of
your small Favours. But pray be brief, and let me know the happy Occasion of
this your sudden Return, I long methinks to hear it.


Madam, you may command me -- Not to molest the Company with the Recital of
every vain and needless Circumstance; 'twas briefly thus. Scarce had we passed
by Marget on our Course, when on a sudden, from the Top-mast head, a Sailor
cries, All hands Aloft, three Sails ahead: With that we rumidg and clear our
Deck, our Gun-room armed, and all things now are ready for a Fight. The Ships
before descried, with warlike Stems cut the resisting Waves, whilst from their
Pendants fluttering in the Air, we found they were three Dunkirk Privateers;
they having made our English Cross advanced, salute us with a Broad-side, to
make us strike and yield: But we, who ne'er knew as yet what 'twas so cowardly
to yield, and not regarding their unequal Odds, fell boldly on, returning Fire
for Fire. The Engagement then grew desperate, for they on either Side fired in
amain, whilst we withstood their Force. At length they boldly grappled, and
laid us close aboard, and we as bravely beat them off again.


But now, Daughter, mark what follows, for that's worth all, I faith it is;
therefore go on, dear Cousin go on.


Sea-room at length we got; when (as Fate would have it) an unlucky Shot struck
both the Captain and Lieutenant dead. Then we began to fear, and all our noble
Hearts were trembling with despair.


No, no, not all Daughter -- But you shall hear more -- Ods bobs you shall.


How could it be otherwise, when both our Commanders now were lost? therefore
to strike was all the Talk --


Ay, ay, now Daughter, now comes the Play, the other was only the Prologue.


But Fortune favouring, and the Wind springing a fresh Gale, we got clear off
and tried to make a running Fight.


Ay, but Cousin, how did we do all this? by whose Order and Direction?


Pardon me, Sir, 'twas of so small Moment, that already it has slipped my
treacherous Memory.


Oh, ho! has it so! Ha, ha, ha! But it has not mine, I thank you, no marry has
it not, as you shall hear -- Then he, with an undaunted Spirit, started up
amongst the Sailors, and --


Nay pray Sir --


By the Foot of Pharaoh I'll not be balkt; he, I say, with an Heroic Voice
cried out, Courage brave Boys, Charge and Discharge amain; come I'll supply
your fallen Captain's place. At this blessed News they all fell on again, with
ten thousand times more Fury than before: Victory, Victory, was all their cry,
whilst he my Cousin here, whom I shall ne'er forget, for by the Lord, methinks,
I see him in the Fight this very Instant, now running this way, now running
that way, now down to the Gun-room to encourage those that fought there; now
upon the Deck again, still crying out, Fear not, brave Boys, the Day will soon
be our's.


O pray, Sir, let me entreat you to forbear, you make me ashamed, I protest, to
hear you.


Ashamed, say you? Ha, ha, ha.


Good Sir, go on.


I will, I will -- At length the proud French swallowing too many of our
English Balls, two of 'em very fairly cried, Your Servants Gentlemen, farewell,
and down they went. The other having lost most of her Men, resolved to leave
us; but we being too nimble, overtook her, clapped some Men aboard, and brought
her in a Prize: And this my brave Man of War here, was the first that boarded
her with Sword in Hand.


Of all this I was an Eye-witness.


And so was I.


And I, and all of us.


Yes, and many more stout Boys besides.


Sir, we are all indebted to your Valour; such Voyages as these, from small
Venturers, in time may make us great Merchants.


Well, never was Fight better managed before, that's certain.


No, never, never!


Better, say you? No nor half so well.


If it were in our Power, we'd make him Admiral, so we would.


Gentlemen, 'tis to your Valours all, that I am indebted for the Honour I have
gained: And that I may not seem wholly ungrateful, there, there's something in
token of my Thankfulness.


Heaven bless your Worship.


Come Cousin, we will withdraw into the Parlour: And if these honest Friends will
be pleased to drink what our House affords, they shall be welcome.


Thank you Mistress with all our Hearts.


Well, this Mr. Summerfield is a brave Fellow, Gadzooks he is.


Ay Tom so he is; had it not been for him, we had all been taken on my
Conscience.


On my Soul and so we had: O if you had but seen him when he boarded the
Monsieur, it would have made you laugh 'till you had split your Sides. He came
up to the Captain o'this fashion with a Slap -- ha! and gave him such a
back-handed wipe, that he cut off his Head as genteelly, as tho he had served
seven Years Apprenticeship to it.


Gentlemen, Mr. Summerfield desires ye to be merry, and has sent you this to
drink his Health.


O, the Lord bless him, he's a fine Gentleman, and so pray tell him, and withal
give him our hearty Thanks; Dost hear Boy?


Yes, yes, I will.


What is't Brother?


Punch by this Light!


Hoo-ra, Hoo-ra, Viva Mr. Summerfield, Viva, Hoora.


Here's a Health to jolly Bacchus,
Here's a Health to jolly Bacchus,
Hi ho, hi ho, hi ho.
For he will merry make us,
For he will merry make us,
Hi ho, hi ho, hi ho.
Then sit ye down together,
Then sit ye down together.
Pshaw! Pox of the this old Song, prithee let's have a Dance.


With all my Heart; strike up Music.


So, well done my Lads, now let's aboard amain,
And suck our Faces over and over again.
Brandy we've got enough, by this blessed Chance,
We will nothing drink but Punch, when we get France.

Hoora! Hoora!

WElcome Gentlemen. Please to walk into a Room?


Aye Boy. Come Mr. Pettifog, please you sit.


With all my Heart; Come Mistress.


What Wine will you be pleased to drink, Gentlemen?


Ask the good Woman: speak Mistress.


Canary for her; I know what relishes her Palate best. A Quart of brisk Canary,
Boy.


Ye shall have the best in England. -- Coming, Coming, Sir.


What call you this same Tavern, Mr. Attorney?


The King's Head, Sir.


The King's Head: Marry, it has a good Neighbour of Guild-hall. It takes many a
fair Pound upon that 'n Account, I warrant you.





Sir, Here's a Glass of the richest Canary that ever came over, the very
Quintessence of the Grape I assure you.


Say thou so? Why then there's a Tester for thee, and so leave us --. Come,
Mr. Pettifog,


I thank you kindly, Sir. -- Mrs. my Service to you, your Husband's good
Health.


With all my Heart indeed, Here my dear black eyed Rogue, thy n'own good
Health.


Thank you Peg, thank you, so now let's mind our Business.


Show a Room, Drawer.


Here Sir.


Ne'er a private Room?


No Sir, the House is full.


Ods fish, whom have we here, my Wife's Merchant, with his Lawyer?


Ye know we promised to give him a Meeting here.


'Tis true we did so, -- but come to the Business in hand.


Well, bring us a Bottle of your best Red.


You shall have it, Sir.


And what do you think of my Cause, Mr. Dodge?


O we shall carry it most certainly: You have Money to go through with the
Business; and ne'er fear but we'll trounce them swingingly.


I warrant you think it very strange, Mr. Dodge, that I am at this Charge and
Expense to bring a farther Charge upon me.


Not I, I assure you, Sir, for I know you are a wise Man, and know very well
what you do; besides you have Money, Money enough, Sir.


Why the short and the long of the Business is this; I made a Purchase lately,
and in that I did estate the Child (about which I'm sued) Joint-Purchaser with
me in all the Land I bought.


Right Husband; and you know 'twas I that advised you to make the Purchase, and
therefore I'll never give my Consent to have the Child brought up by such a
stinking Tar-barrel as now sues for him; he'd only bring him up to be a
Swabber; no, no, he was born a Merchant and a Gentleman, and he shall live and
die so.


You are a worthy Gentlewoman upon my word, there are but few of such a noble
Temper: But what makes the Fool of the Husband then so troublesome; does he not
know when he's well?


So 'tis a sign.


A Blockhead, to proclaim his own Disgrace, and make himself laughed at.


That's not it, he hopes to be the better by what is settled on the Boy.


O, God's so, that's true: But never fear, I'll be hanged if he carry it, for
you have Money, as I told you, Sir, before: but see, Sir, there they are.


Yes, Yes, I saw them before: but come, where's our Wine?


Here Sir, -- Coming, Coming, Sir: Philip, speak up in the Mermaid, and bid
Jack light a Fire.


Well Mr. Pettifog, and what think you of my Suit, Sir?


Why look you Sir, the Defendant you know was arrested first by a Latitat in an
Action of Trespass.


Yes, and a Lawyer told me, it should have been an Action of the Case, did he
not, Wife?


I have no Skill in the Law you know Husband, but the Gentleman did say so,


Aye, but your Action of the Case in this Point is too ticklish.


Well, but pray tell me, do you think I shall overthrow my Adversary?


Without all doubt, the Child he says is none of yours, What of that! I marry a
Widow, and am by Consequence possessed of a Ward. Now shall not I have the
Management of that Ward? Now Sir you lie at a stronger Ward, for Partus
sequitur ventrem, says the Civil Law: So that if you were within the Compass of
the four Seas, as the Common Law goes, the Child must be yours, that's certain.


Say you so, Sir, Why then the Child's my own, for I have been a Coaster these
five Years and more; and so my Service to you: Guild-hall have a rare time
on it, by the Lord Harry.


They are as it were both Judge and Jury themselves.


And O how they will laugh at their Clients when they sit in a Tavern, and call
them Fools, Blockheads and Coxcombs, and then whip up their Causes as nimbly as
a Barber trims his Customers on a Christmas-Eve; a Snip, a Wipe and away.


That's very common, you shall have the like at a Nisi prius.


Here's a Gentleman, one Mr. Justice Merryman, enquires for Mr. Ventere the
Merchant.


Here Boy, desire them to walk up.


Your Servant, Gentlemen, your Servant: Counsellor Blunder and I have been
canvasing the Business of this your Difference; and I believe, Brother, the Law
will determine it as we have done; for it is point blank against you.


If it is, I must be contented: Well Sir, the Child's your Wife's, and you
shall have it; and to endear you the more to 't, I'll settle my part of the
Estate on you and yours for ever: Give me your Hand.

We now are Friends.


Why that's well said.


We all are Witness to the Agreement.


All, all.


Nay I scorn to be outdone in Civility; therefore if you please I have a Gallon
or two of Prize-Wine, and half a Dozen of good sound Bruges-Capons, which I'll
treat you and this good Company with at Supper; but no more Mutton, no not a
bit.


Well Brother, I'm glad you're Friends: Ods bobs I am. But come, let's home
now, and see what's become of the Bride and Bridegroom: Farewell Friend,
farewell: Come we'll pay at the Bar.


Come Peg, Come and kiss me.


Aye, aye, you have Reason, she has earned you a good Fortune; and need not
venture to Sea any more: Yet one thing let me advise you, 'tis Counsel worth a
good Fee, for it cures Cuckoldom.


Say thou so, come let's hear it.


This it is, Make a flat Divorce between your selves, be you no longer her
Husband, nor she your Wife: Two or three Hours after meet again, salute, woo
and wed afresh, and so the base Name of Cuckold's blotted quite. This has been
experienced and approved by many.


'Tis excellent I faith, -- There, there's for you, and I thank you. Peg, I
renounce thee, -- nay and I renounce my self too from thee; thou art now a
Widow, Peg; I'll go hang my self two or three Hours at one of the Main Yards,
and so long thou shalt go drown thy self. Then we'll meet in
White-Chappel-Fields, as it were by chance, and woo and wed again.


With all my Heart, kind Sir, fare you well.


Farewell Widow, remember Time and Place; and d' you hear, Put on your
Sabbath-day best Clothes.


I will, I will.


Sir, I am beholding to you for your good Counsel.


No, Sir, you have paid me for 't, but I hope you do not intend to follow your
own.


What is that?


Why, you said you'd hang your self.


No no, I have thought better on it, for I'll go drink my self dead drunk, then
wake again, wash my Face, and meet the Bride.


That's well said, and I'll accompany you, and wish you Joy.


Joy, Sir, I have it Sir already, in a good Estate got by a Chopping Boy.


Was ever Fortune like to this of mine? Who for the Smile of a vile simple
Woman, have acted thus against my very Soul, all to please a Creature, whose
next Command perhaps will higher mount, it may be light on my self, as now it
did on Bonvile.


Ha! Friendly, here alone. Now, now, my Fears begin.


Madam, I am, and like those noble Knights in former times, after subduing all
their Ladies Foes, returning with the joyful News of Conquest, receive her
trembling to their longing Arms, and claim her as their own, so I --.


What mean you, Sir?


Madam, You are obeyed, your hard Commands fulfilled; at your Request I've
killed my Friend, nay and my best of Friends.


How? killed your Friend for me.


Indeed 'tis true.


Then thou art truly wretched: But say, say quickly, who's this unhappy Man
whom thy Mistake hath thus untimely killed?


Bonvile.


Bonvile said you? My Blood with an unusual Course runs backward from my Heart!
Horror has seized my Soul! A thick black Mist has overcast my Sight, and I am
not the same: but speak, O speak again, Was it Bonvile?


Why should you seek to iterate my Guilt, by a Rehearsal of that dreadful Name?
Too sure, alas! it was: Bonvile 's the Friend I've killed.


Cursed be the Tongue that spoke it, but doubly cursed the Hand that did the
barbarous Fact.


Why Madam, was it not your Command to kill my Friend; nay more, my best of
Friends?


Yes, and I thought my self your best of Friends.


I hope you would not have had me murdered you?


No Monster, no.


These are Riddles.


Fool, our whole Sex is made of nothing else: Thou may sooner untie the
Gordian Knot, expound the Problems of the monstrous Sphynx, and read what is
decreed in the mysterious Book of Fate, than unfold a Woman's sly malicious
Meaning.


Very well; she first set me on to do this most accursed of Deeds, and now
upbraids me; nay would hang me for 't: These are the Tricks of all her damning
Sex. O Woman, Woman, Woman, dear devilish Woman, farewell.


Stay Friendly, all I have said was only to try your Constancy; and whether
you'd repent of what you've done. But tell me truly, is Bonvile surely dead?


Indeed he is.


'Tis bravely done, and I adore thee for 't. By Heaven I love thee now, even
unto Dotage!


Was ever Change like this? The subtlest Labyrinth Wit could ere invent,

What mean you, Madam, by this seeming Transport?


O Friendly, Friendly, I am all over Ecstasy! Thou hast done a Deed that
ravishes my Soul. At once thou hast killed my dear and only Friend, and slain
the fatal'st Enemy I had.


What more Riddles Madam, pray explain your self.


I will; I will declare a Secret which till now I never did disclose: I loved
that Bonvile whom thou now hast slain, not as I ought to do, but with a Woman's
Love, which he never did know: And Yesterday when I beheld the fatal Marriage
ended, then like a Merchant walking on the Downs, sees a rich Vessel of his
own engaged, and after took, and born away a Prize: So I, after I'd seen my
Bonvile lost, (for so he was to me) resuming all the Malice of a Woman,
resolved never to entertain one Thought of Love again; but lead a Life as
Lapland-Witches do, only on others Ruins: Then when you approached me with the
hateful Sound of Love, to dash your Hopes, and put a Period to your growing
Passion, I bid you kill your best and dearest Friend?


True.


Now the best Friend to one in Love, is Love it self.


O my cursed Stars, that wrapped me up in such a black Mistake, What have I
done?


Done! Why you have done bravely, why do you tremble?


An inward Guilt lies heavy on my Soul, and Horror with all her dreadful Forms
still haunts my Sight. And did you love this Bonvile?


The Queen of Beauty never doted more on her beloved Adonis than I on him.


And now as much you hate him: O the unheard-of Inconstancy of Women! All that
they have is feigned; their Teeth, their Hair, their Blushes, and their Smiles;
nay their very Conscience (if any such they have) is feigned; all counterfeit
and false: Let them wash, patch and daub themselves with all the Helps for
Nature that Art could e're invent, still they are Women: And let 'em rob all
India of its store to adorn themselves therewith, still are they not all that
thing called Woman: I know not what to do, for I love and hate this Creature
both at once.


What ails my Friendly?


But Bonvile yet must feel his Enemies Rage; shall he succeed in Love, whilst I
am crossed in mine? No, it must not, cannot, nay it shall not be.

Four Heads I have, to make a Plot not common;
Malice, Revenge, the Devil, and a Woman.

What will you leave me then?


Leave thee; yes, for ever: Fly thee as I would a Blast from Hell. Thou art thy
self a Hell; thy base detested hateful Woman's Breath infects the purest Air:

May my Friend's Blood, which I for thee have spilt,
Light on thy Head, and yours be all the Guilt.

Gentlemen and Neighbours, as you have been Witnesses to our Divorce, so shall
ye now be Evidences to our next Meeting, which I look for every Minute.


I came for that Intent, Neighbour.


I thank you: well, I do not think but you'll all see me come off with as
smooth a Forehead, and make my Wife as honest a Woman as a Man would desire
sometimes, I mean of her Rank; and a teeming Woman, as you know she has been:
Nay, I do not think but the Child too will be found to be as lawful a Child as
any Couple of unmarried People can beget.


We long to see it Neighbour Compass, that so some of us may do the like upon
the same occasion.


You 're in the right, old Stitch of the World: But soft, see where she comes
with a whole Bundle of as good sound Maidens as her self.

Stand aside a little, and mind me I pray.


Agreed, agreed.


Good Morrow fair Maid.


In truth Sir you are mistaken in both, for I am neither fair, nor yet a Maid.


No, what are you then I pray, a Wife?


That indeed I was, but alas, -- I am now a Widow.


A Widow say you? Nay then I must make bold with you; for look you, your Case
is somewhat like mine, I being a Husband without a Wife.


Aye marry, this is something like.


They begin well, let them go on.


How long have you been a Widow, good Woman? Nay pray do not weep forsooth.


I can't choose but cry, to think of the great Loss I had.


Why, was he an honest Man?


Honest quoth a', I vow and protest he was as honest a Man as e're broke Bread.
O I shall never have such another.


By my Faith now Mistress you have had a great Loss indeed, for an honest Man
is not to be found every where, nor in every Street.


The Rogue's witty.


Aye, aye, let 'em go on.


And how long is it since you lost this honest Husband?


O dear, his Memory is too fresh; and the Sight of you doubles my Sorrow.


The Sight of me, say you; why, was he so like me?


As one Apple to another; your two Hands are not more alike.


Nay then I cannot blame thee to weep: An honest Man he was I warrant him; and
you have had a mighty Loss, that's the Truth on it: But was he proportioned like
me, so well limbed, and of such a wholesome Complexion, heh!


No Twins were ever more alike.


Well I love, his Memory is still better and better: and how many Children did
he leave behind him?


Only one, Sir.


A Boy or a Girl?


A dainty fine Boy, Sir.


Just my own case still; my Wife (rest her Soul) left me a Boy too, a lusty
chopping Boy of his Age (as they tell me, for I never saw it).


So is mine.


And what Profession was your Husband of?


A Seaman.


Heigh! my own Faculty too! And can you like a Man of that Profession again?


Yes surely, for his dear sake, whom I loved so tenderly, I shall always esteem
a Sailor.


Shall you so? why then here's your Man: What say you, Is't a Match?


Dear me, I am so ashamed, and yet to speak the Truth, I do like you hugely,
and would like you better still, if it were not for one thing, which a little
troubles me.


What's that?


Why, you know sometimes we are forced to endure the Absence of our Husbands a
long while, me happen many Years, and then if there be any Slip in us, (as long
Vacations will make Lawyers hungry) the World is apt to censure and scandalize
us; and brand us with wanton Living and Incontinency; when alas! if they would
but consider our Condition, and the mighty Longings we often naturally have for
Flesh and Blood, they would not blame us, so they would not.


Come, come, no Matter, can thou love me, Widow?


Ah, if I durst but speak my Mind, I know what I would say.


Durst, why who do you fear? here's none but an honest Gentleman, some few
Friends and Neighbours; let them hear a God's Name what you would say, and
never blush for the Matter.


Aye, aye, speak Neighbour, pray speak your Mind, and fear not.


I shall be thought too weak to yield at first Sight.


Paw! paw! that's only Nicety.


Well then I do love him dearly and dearly, so I do.


And I thee with all my Heart and Soul.


Marry will we, Neighbour Luff and Mrs. Bride, will ye give us a Song?


With all my Heart, come Neighbour.


Faith and Troth I love thee dearly,
Tho I do but bluntly woo,
Prithee then resolve me clearly,
Whether I am beloved by you.
Long I shall not keep a pother,
Like a senseless whining Beau;
If you won't I'll court another
Who will never say me no.

Friend, your self, nor Humour neither
With my Fancy disagree,
Yet I must find clearer Weather,
Ever I venture out to Sea.
Court another at your Pleasure,
Win her in the Honey moon,
She may chance repent at leisure,
For believing you too soon.

Leave your damned Fantastic Trials,
Which procure a Lover's Pain,
Pox upon these sham-Denials,
'Tis but spending time in vain.
With Embraces happy make me,
Nature framed you to be kind;
Kiss me, and the Devil take me
If I ever change my Mind.

I'll pursue the good old Fashion,
Practise still by those are wise,
Thoroughly try my Lover's Passion,
E're I let him grasp the Prize.
Spite of Oaths you would forsake me,
Should I let you once embrace:
If I kiss, the Devil take me,
Till the Parson has said Grace.
Since then the Nation
Has made it a Fashion,
Let's send for a Black-Coat, whilst we're in the Mind.
But it is damned Slavery,
And Priestly Knavery,
That Parsons must conjure e're Lovers be kind.

So, so, here now shall we be Man and Wife again to Morrow, as good as ever.
What tho we met as Strangers, we may happen to love ne'er the worse for all
that -- Gentlemen and Neighbours, I invite ye all to my Wedding.


We will not fail you, and wish you Joy.


Did not I tell you that I would fetch it cleverly off?
Let any Man call me Cuckold if he dares now.

'Tis slander in him I assure you who-ever does.

Nay it will be Petti Lacenary at least, and without Compass of the General
Pardon too: And for the Child, let me hear him that dares say, I am not the
Father.


Sure none will dare dispute it.


Or that my Wife that is to be, is not as honest a Woman as some other Men's
Wives are.


No question of that.


O how fine and smooth my Brows are now!


Aye but when you're married, they'll come to themselves again I warrant ye.


My Friends, if you please, you may call me Mr. Bridegroom now, for the Guests
are all bidden to the Wedding.


We know it, Mr. Bridegroom, they are indeed, and we'll not fail you upon our
Words.


Come then, brisk Widow, e're the next Ebb and Tide,
I'll be thy Bridegroom, and thou shall it be my Bride.

MR. Summerfield, I now am truly happy, my Prayers at last are heard; and
Heaven has restored my Husband to my Arms.


I just now heard the joyful News, and thought to have been my self the welcome
Messenger of his Return, but find I'm come too late; have you seen him?


No; as yet I have not.


'Tis somewhat stange!


Others perhaps may judge it so, but my uncommon Joy for his Return, admits no
other Thought, but those of Transport for his Safety.


O happy Bonvile! How I admire and wonder at thy Choice!


The nearest way to a secure Revenge, is private Malice, which, like a Spark
long lying hid amongst neglected Ashes, by the least Blast of Wind becomes it
self a Flame -- Ha! who have we here? Thrice blessed Occasion! which thus have
offered me at once the Scope of my revengeful Wishes. 'Tis Arabella and her
Darling Summerfield, one who, in the Bridegroom's Absence, is grown thus
intimate with his beloved Bride. A strong Foundation on which I'll now erect a
brave Revenge; I'll step aside and observe them.


Sir, I hope he'll soon be here, and return the Kindness you have shown me; so
I take my leave, with hourly expectation of a much-long'd for Husband.


And I, with a Gratitude never to be forgotten, kiss your fair Hand, and hope
that all things will answer your Expectation.


Ay, 'tis so, now must I counterfeit a friendly Face to make a farther
Discovery.


The Question I must confess is somewhat familiar, and in my Opinion improper
for a Stranger at first sight; but yet I ne'er disowned it to a Gentleman --
'tis Summerfield.


Summerfield! Sir, I kiss your Hands; and must congratulate your good Success,
but more admire your Valour. Had we many such noble Commanders on board our
Fleet, we need not fear it where e're it sails.


Pray, Sir, stretch not your Love into Flattery, 'twill make me then suspect
your Kindness. And the Author of this Story was too much my Friend I see, since
he has given you this so very partial Account, the more to augment my Fame.


O! that's your Modesty, Sir: But if I might be so happy as to be honoured with
your Acquaintance --


Sir, the Honour (if any) would be wholly on my Side; therefore I desire to
know your Name.


Friendly, Sir.


An Acquaintance, I suppose, of Mr. Bonvile's.


One that thinks himself much honoured in being stiled his Friend.


I have often heard your Name indeed before; but till now Fortune never
afforded me the sight of you.


You of all Men ought to bless Fortune, who still has been indulgent to you on
all Occasions; and scattered her Favours on you, with as prodigal a Hand as tho
you were her sole Care and only Minion.


What mean you, Sir? Again you exceed the Bounds of Love and Friendship; I
never thought any of Bonvil's Friends could be guilty of so base and vile a
thing as Flattery: But, pray, unfold your meaning.


'Tis this; I just now saw you part with the Bride, with such courteous
Actions, as spoke no small Esteem in her kind Favour; and therein I think you
the happiest of Men.


How!


Mistake me not, I only as a Friend applaud your Happiness, bless the Influence
of your kinder Stars, and praise your Fortune that hath given you this sweet
Occasion.


What Occasion, Sir?


Of being serviceable to the fair Virgin Bride in her extremest need, after
her being so unkindly left, nay, on her Wedding Day, by an ungrateful Husband,
in doing her those neglected Duties, her Youth and Beauty justly did demand.


On my Life some Plot against the Bride: I'll sound him 'till I find the very
Bottom --


No, Sir, they're too precious to be omitted: But I hear you two call Cousins,
comes your Kindred by the Merryman's or the Bonvile's?


Neither! we were wholly Strangers 'till of late, and 'tis a word of Courtesy
only interchang'd between us for some private Reasons.


This goes as I could wish.


I desire you not to grow too inward with me, on so short an Acquaintance: Not
that I'd have you think the Lady of so base a Disposition to grant me any
thing beyond the Rules of Decency and Honour. The only Favour I e're received
from her, was a Present of those Bracelets she wears about her Arms, and that
Chain of Gold and Pearl she has about her Neck; all which either of us may own
without a Blush.


How, the Chain and Bracelet, say you! Those were the first Tokens of her
Husband's Love.


Methinks you look concerned at what I've said; yet I have said no more than
what I am obliged in Honour to maintain, and will: therefore I hope, as you're a
Gentleman, you'll not turn Informer.


O pray think not so poorly of me.


Tell her I'll wait on her immediately.


Sir, your humble Servant.

Tell her I'll wait on her immediately, said he; this must be Arabella that
he's going to: Better still.

The Work's begun, now I am made or lost;
He runs the best who holds out to the Post:
And all the Comfort in Adversity,
Is to see others as miserable as me.
Who have we here? Old Merryman! As I live 'tis he!


O Master Friendly, you're happily returned: But where's my Son-in-Law?


Alas, Sir, the unhappy Bonvile is --


Is, is, what is he? Heh! speak* is he living, or is he dead; or what's become
of him?


O! that I had the Marble Niobes Heart! Or that I had sucked the Milk of Wolves
and Tigers; so that I might have told, without the least remorse of Sorrow,
what now I dare not, nay, I cannot speak, for fear at once I melt my self in
Tears, and break your aged Heart.


Then I suppose he's killed; say, is he not? Hast thou enticed him from his
Bride for this, thou inhumane Wretch? Yet speak, and tell me truly, for I'm
prepared to hear the worst of Ills; Is he then slain?


No, Sir, but dangerously wounded.


Not mortally, I hope; but whereabouts is he so desperately wounded? In his
Arms, his Legs, or Body?


Neither, Sir, but in as perfect Health as when he left you.


Strange! sure thou art all over a Mystery, and form'st these Riddles to try my
Wit.


No, Sir, for all I have said, you in effect will surely find I told you he was
wounded, did I not?


Yes, you did.


And so he is.


But where, where about, I ask you once again?


I see you force the unwilling Secret from me -- Why, he's wounded.


He's wounded, he's wounded; but where, where is he wounded?


In his Fame, Honour and Reputation, more mortal than a thousand fleshy Wounds.

For such slight Baubles, Cures are oft obtained;
But injured Honour ne'er can be regained.

How! how! how's this! wounded in his Honour, say thou? Tell me the Villain
that has defamed him, and this good old Sword shall slit the Rascal's Windpipe.


O, Sir, your Daughter, your Daughter, Sir --


Ha! what's that? what's that? is she injured too?


No, no Sir, my falling Tears quite drown my feeble Voice, I cannot utter what
I fain would speak -- Your Daughter's false, false to her Bonvile! And by the
help of her beloved Summerfield, has robbed my Friend of all he could call
Dear, I mean his Fame.


A Pox of your Crocodile's Tears. Why, Sirrah, Sirrah, do you call my Daughter
Whore? Hey, Swords and Daggers, Blunderbusses and Pistols, shall I bear this?
Hark you, you my Friend, and no Friend, what a Kin do you take me to be to this
Gentlewoman, Heh?


Her Father, Sir.


Audacious Villain, O that I had thee in some private Corner, where none could
either see or hear us, this Sword should justify my Daughter's Honour; I'd
Whore you with a Pox to you, so I would.


Your Pardon, Sir, I only did inform you as a Friend, that by your fatherly
Admonitions, you might refrain her from her undecent Course.


Pox of your friendly Intelligence.


The Jewels which her Husband did present her, as the first Sign and
Confirmation of the happy Contract, she to my certain Knowledge has given to --


To whom, to whom thou wicked Slanderer? tell me, Sarrah, quickly, quick,
quick.


To Summerfield.


Ha, ha, ha, the Fool makes me laugh; Ha, ha, ha, why 'twas but just now that I
saw em on her Neck and Arms.


She was no Woman, had she not the Sense to get them against her Husband's
coming.


But pray tell me, how is't possible that she could part with em, when they
are locked on, and the Key with her Husband?


O, Sir, that's no Question to be asked in these Times: Women have found a way
to make use of other Keys besides their Husbands: And no doubt but Summerfield
has got a Key will open your Daughter's Lock as well as Bonvile 's.


Sirrah you lie, you lie Sirrah; and I'll tell thee thou lie, again and
again, so I will. Nay, and I were to pay a 100 Pounds for every Lie I give
thee, as Men do Twelve-pence for every Oath they swear, I would spend all the
Thousands I am worth, in giving thee the Lie. 'Tis likely indeed, that such a
brave Gentleman as Summerfield, that fought at Sea like a Dragon to save my
Life, should shorten my Days on Land in ruining my Daughter; therefore once
more I tell you you Lie.


'Tis very well.


Do you hear Sir, have you told this Lie to any body else but me?


I am no Informer, Sir.


Why then for fear you should, do ye see, draw,


Bonvile here with Clara too, excellent. This goes to Arabella, and may it
increase the Storm.


My Father in Anger.


O Son, Son, Son! dear Boy, welcome home, Od's bobs you are.


I humbly thank you, Sir; but am sorry to see you so disturbed.


Nothing, nothing, only Mr. Friendly and I have had a Word or two, that's all,
that's all.


About my going with him, I suppose; but that's past, and I hope, Sir, you'll be
so kind as at my Request to pardon him.


Indeed Son it was something else; By the Lord Harry I can't forbear laughing
at the Coxcomb, Ha, ha, ha; He told me, Ha, ha, ha, that one Summerfield, a
very honest Fellow as ever lived, is grown exceeding familiar with my Daughter,
your Wife.


Ha! my Wife.


Yes, your Wife, and that he had received Love-Tokens from her.


How, Love-Token from her!


Aye, aye, Love-Tokens I called 'em when I was a young Man: Nay, the Rogue was
so impudent to tell me, that she had given him those Jewels which are locked
about her Neck; Ha, ha, ha.


The Jewels about her Neck, said you?


Aye, what ails you Man that you change Colour so? 'Tis all a Lie Boy I warrant
thee: And had thou not come just in the Nick of Time, I think of my
Conscience I should have cut his Throat.


As I will your Daughters if I find her false: Death, Hell, and Furies, am I
made a Monster already?


What, Sir, are you returned for this?


Hark y' Son, hark you; suppose that this Mr. Friendly should have a secret
Inclination to your Spouse, d' ye see; and therefore, by reason he can't obtain
his Desire, possesses you with Jealousy to make a Breach 'twixt you and your
Wife. Od's bobs, I don't know, I can't tell what should be the meaning of his
carrying you away on your Wedding-Day else, heh, Son, heh.


Has the Italian Plague then infected you, that you stand thus unmoved?

But see here's your Bride.


And her beloved Adulterer with her! Death and Damnation, must I stand still
and see this?


Hey day! what the Matter now?


Bonvile here with Clara! Alas too true I find what before I scarce dared to
think was so. Is Bonvile then a Traitor, and false to Arabella?


Madam, at last I've found the precious Jewel that you so long have sought in
vain.


Wear it your self Madam, I lost it, and it must be mine no more.


What means this sudden Alteration?


Ods bodikins, as you say, what does she mean? Are ye both mad, heh?


Sir, I'm come to pay my Respects to you, and humbly beg a farther Knowledge of
--.


Of whom, sweet Sir, my Wife or me?


Ha! your Wife.


Yes Sir, my Wife, I think the word needs no explaining.


Pray, Sir, at my Request bear with him, he's strangely out of Order I assure
you.


The Jewels are as I left 'em; but the Jewel of her Heart is lost and thrown
away. -- Madam, I sent you my Will, did you receive it.


Yes, I did.


Let me see it.


You shall.


Sir, I desire a Word or two in private with you,


With all my Heart, Sir.


What's that, what's that, I'll have no Whispering, Gentlemen.


There's your Will, Sir. --


'Tis well now as you've changed your Mind, I'll change this too, and find
another to supply your Place: There's no harm done, the Marriage is not yet
consummated, and you are free to enjoy any, so am I.


As you please for that: A Man may make a Garment for the Moon, count all the
Stars which twinckle in the Skies, or empty the vast Ocean, Drop by Drop,
sooner than please a Mind so light, so various as yours.


Ods bobs, what's this you talk of, altering your Will?


Yes, Sir, I am so resolved, and will see 't performed within this Hour: My
Lawyer lives hard by, and so farewell.


Farewell thou peevish Boy, I can alter my Will too so I can, marry can I; I had
left him 20000 Pound after my Death, and he shall see I can find another
Executor too. Within this Hour did he say, Gad I'll be with one as soon as he,
unless he rides Post to the Devil, and that's the nearest way to a Lawyer.


I'll follow him, and assuage his Passion.


By no means, Sir. -- But now I think on it, I'll go with you, and find him out:
But did you ever see the like, did you ever see the like? Come Sir, come follow
me.


Dear Arabella, what can all this mean?


Can you be doubtful of the Effect, who are your self the Cause?


I the Cause, Inform me how?


O Clara, Clara, your Sirens Voice has drawn my Bonvile from these spotless
Virgins Arms, and made me ever wretched!


Who (if thou ever lov'dst me, as once you caused me to believe you did) has
taxed me with a Crime so foul, as I abhor to hear it only named?


Friendly.


O Arabella, forgive and pity me, who am indeed the innocent unhappy Cause of
all those Griefs which now afflict you both; which I'll relate in brief, if you
will please to withdraw one Moment with me.


With all my Heart.


Come then:

And since your Ruin I did first conspire,
I'll all appease; thus Fire's expelled by fire.

Sir, do you take me for your Friend?


Why d' you ask me such a Question, Sir? 'twere base Ingratitude to entertain
any other Thought.


Why then d' ye see, Sir; as you are my Friend, you must not fight my Son
Bonvile.


Not fight him Sir! you amaze me.


Aye, aye, aye; that's all one: I understand your dumb Signs and your low
Whispers, the French Mode all over, to smile and grin a Man in the Face, and at
the same time privately cut his Throat. Therefore prithe be ruled by me, and
don't fight him, for should you kill him, my poor Girl would break her Heart,
quite break her Heart.


Heaven be my Witness, I ne'er entertained a Thought like it!


That's well, that's well, I am heartily glad on 't, ods bobs I am heartily
glad.


Sir, as I am a Gentleman, I scorn to deny my Words, but there's my Author,
whether good or ill.


Who, he? He, do ye mean him?


Yes, Sir.


True, Sir, I am; For at his Return to Town from Barn-Elms, it was my Chance to
meet him; and after a ceremonious Complement or two, I found him diving into my
private Thoughts concerning the Bride your Daughter: I, not to be behind-hand
with him, joined Wit with Wit to sound his shallow Soul. I told him then, how
her Jewels once were mine; but the manner of my obtaining them, I for my own
sake did conceal from him; and now, if you're disposed, I'll here relate it.


Let it be before all this Company then: What, and my Son and Daughter too so
loving again? Nay then all 's well, ods bobs it is, and they shall hear it, ods
bobs they shall.


I have heard the Story, Sir, already; and Friendly, you I pardon too, for
Enemies in War take all Occasions to undo each other; yet tho I am your Enemy,
I'll be generous still, and make you Master of your wished for Mistress.
Friendly, whom I know you both admire and love.


Sir, 'tis what I first ought to have begged of you: And that the World may'nt
tax this innocent Lady of a Crime to her purest Thoughts unknown, I'll here
begin my Story from my first Acquaintance to this happy Hour.


Prithee do.


The first time that I e're beheld her Face, I would have robbed her.


Ah Rogue! What, a Thief, a Thief, what would you have robbed her of?


Not her Honour, I assure you, Sir, but only of those Jewels which she wears.


Ods bobs, thou were it an honest Thief, for that I faith he was.


They being fast, I could not get 'em off without some Harm and Pain to her:
which for the Indies I'd not have done. And she, in answer to my Civility,
brought me home, and ransomed them with the full Price in Gold, (with which I
made my Venture) and the more to hide my Shame, she honoured me with the Title
of her Kinsman.


Ay, ay, and so she might well, for she was a little cunning Thief too, to
steal the Gold she gave you from her Husband; 'twas all his now, but that's no
matter, proceed.


The rest you know already, Sir.


Ay, so I do, ods bobs I do, thy Valour my brave Boy, thy Valour, for which
I'll do for thee, that thou shalt never need to rob again I warrant thee; ods
bobs I will. But come, come, we lose time, for we have another Wedding yet to
see performed, but that shall be done within.


Then farewell all ye treacherous Paths of Vice,
Which lead Men blindfold to their End,
In time like me repent you that are wise,
And by Restraint your vicious Courses end.

Were I to ask of Heaven its greatest Bliss
On Earth, it could bestow not one like this.
After a Storm the Sun still shines most bright,
And from the Chaos sprung the purer Light.

A Day like this sure yet has never been,
Wherein such various Changes e're were seen.
Fortune to Day that worked my Overthrow,
Has made me happy in a Minute now.
Blessed with a virtuous Wife my Days I'll spend,
And ne'er trust Man, lest I mistake my Friend.

YOU met with good Intention to be witty,
And rally the Grave Cuckolds of the City;
But disappointed of your Recreation,
I in your Looks can read the Play's Damnation.
Lord! how ye stare to find an honest Bride,
A thing you think a Monster in Cheapside.
Whither you boast that you so often come,
And leave your Footmen to perform at home.
Yet 'tis no little Comfort to us however,
You oftner bring the Estate than get the Heir.
Unjustly therefore you your Fortune blame,
She's kinder to your Blood than to your Name.
After all this, I know you think it Pity,
That I should break the Custom of the City:
I hear a Beau cry, 'tis some damned Mistaker;
A Cheap-side Virtue, City-Cuckold maker.
This is a Fault no Gentleman can pardon,
It gives Cheapside the Sins of Covent-Garden:
We must refine on Vice, and take new Measures,
Since dull chained Cits invade our darling Pleasures.
Take my Advice, employ at home your Backs,
Or Locket's Revels may revenge Pontack's:
This Cuckolding to you's a losing Trade,
That pay for making, and for being made.
The Ladies will my Character excuse,
And not condemn a Virtue which they use.
If any here be guilty of Transgression,
'Tis of Necessity, not Inclination:
They'd be contented in their proper Houses,
Could they reform their unperforming Spousess
Yet if some wanton Appetites there be,
How many are there that can fast like me.
Those are enough, if I have their Applause,
The Poet has his End, and I my Cause.

