SElect Citizens in the Morning all
At Seven a Clock, do meet at. Drapers-Hall.
The Masters, Wardens, and Assistants, Joins
For the first Rank, in their Gowns faced with Foyns.
The second Order do, in merry moods,
March in Gowns faced with Budge and Livery Hoods.
In Gowns and Scarlet Hoods Thirdly appears
A youthful number of Foyns Batchellors.
Forty Budge Batchellors the Triumph Crowns,
Gravely attired in Scarlet Hoods and Gowns.
Gentlemen. Ushers which white Staves do hold
Sixty; in Velvet Coats and Chains of Gold.
Next, Thirty more in Plush and Buss there are
That several Colours Wave, and Banners bear.
The Sergeant Trumpet Thirty six more brings,
Twenty the Duke of York's, Sixteen the Kings,
The Sergeant wears Two Scarfs, whose Colours be
One the Lord Mayors, to other's the Company.
The King's Drum-Major follow'd by Four more
Of the Kings Drums and Fifes, make London roar.
Seven Drums and Two Fifes more in Vests of Buff
March with Waste-Scarfs, and Breeches of Black Stuff.
Two City Marshals mounted and attended,
Are by the Company with Scarfs befriended.
And (next to the Drums) do Troop it in the Rear.
But the Foot Marshal doth the next appear;
Who puts them all in Rank and File, and wears
A Shoulder Scarf as broad and rich as theirs.
Attended by Six persons that dare do
What e're their Marshal may Command them to,
Next the Fence-Master troops, and (to defend him)
Divers with drawn broad bright Swords do attend him.
Many poor Pensioners that march in the Rear,
With Gowns and Caps, Standards and Banners bear;
A numerous Troop of Persons that are poor,
In Azure Gowns and Caps, one hundred more,
With Javelins and with Targets are all Actors,
And bear the Arms of their good Benefactors.
By the Foot Marshals Judgment they are guided,
And into six Divisions are divided.
Ranked out by two and two: The first that stirs
Are the poor Company of Pensioners;
But in the front of them orderly be
Placed the Ensigns of the Company.
In the Rear of them four Drums and one Fife more,
Then Pensioners in Coats described before.
Persons of worth who do in Martial manner,
Bear each of them a Standard, or a Banner.
Four Trumpets more to them, and in their Rear
Two of the Drapers Ensigns march, which bear
(As by the Herald Painter is expressed)
The Draught of their Supporters, and their Crest:
Six Gentlemen-Vshers in order trudge,
And after them the Bachelors in budge:
Marching in measured distance, and endued
With Order, This Division doth conclude.
In the Rear of them six Trumpets do appear,
And after them two Gentlemen, that bear
Two Coats of Arms, which appertaining be
To the City and the Drapers Company.
Then do march up Eight Gentlemen that wears
The Golden Chains, then the Foins Bachelors,
In amicable measure, move like Friends
Filled with one Joy: So this Division ends.
Two Gentlemen in Velvet Coats arrayed,
March after them with two Banners displayed;
Then succeed them Ten Gentlemen-Ushers more,
In Coats and Chains of Gold described before;
And gradually after them you'll see
A very worthy large Society;
With each of them a Gown and Livery Hood,
And all Lord Mayors in the Potential Mood.
In the Rear of these (with silver sounds to fit ye)
Do fall in divers Trumpets of the City;
And after them two Gentlemen accord,
To bear the Arms of the City and my Lord:
And then the Gentlemen with equal distance
That usher in the grave Court of Assistants.
In the Rear of them, four Drums, six Trumpets, be
Ordered to bring up the Catastrophe.
Three Gallants gradually follow them,
Bearing the Banners of the Diadem.
Kings, Queens, and Cities Ensigns, which engages
Six Gentlemen to wait on them as Pages;
The Masters and the Wardens bring up all.
And thus equipped, they march from Drapers-Hall
To my Lords House, where the Aldermen and He
Take Horse, and rank according to Degree:
Which being done, the whole Body in State
Doth move towards Guild-Hall, but at the Gate
The new Lord with the old Lord Mayor unites,
Guarded by Gentlemen, Esquires, and Knights.
Then thus attired, with Gown, Fur, Hood, and Scarf,
March all through Kings-street down to Three-Crane-Wharf;
Where the Lord Mayor and the Aldermen discharge
A few Gentlemen Waiters, and take Barge
At the West end of the Wharf; and at the East
The Court Assistant, Livery, and the best
Gentlemen-Ushers: Such as stay on shore
Are Ushers, Foins, and the Budge Bachelor:
Who for a time, repose themselves and Men,
Until his Lordship shall return again:
Who now with several Companies make hast
To Westminster, but in the way is placed
A Pleasure-Boat that hath great Guns aboard,
And with Two Broad-sides doth salute my Lord.
They Row in Triumph all along by the Strand,
But when my Lord and Companies do Land
At the New Palace-Stairs orderly all
Do make a Lane to pass him to the Hall;
Where having took an Oath that He will be
Loyal and faithful to His Majesty,
His Government, His Crown and Dignity,
With other Ceremonials said and done,
In Order to his Confirmation;
Sealing of Wri^s in Courts, and such like things,
As show his power abstracted from the King's,
He takes his leave of the Lords and Barons, then
With his Retinue he re-treats again
To the Water-side and (having given at large
To the Poor of Westminster) doth Re-imbarge,
And scud along the River 'till he comes
To Black-Fryers Stairs, where Guns and thundering Drums
Proclaim his Landing; when he's set ashore,
He is saluted by three Volleys more
By (the Military Glory of this Nation) the Company of Artillery-men, under the
Conduct of the most accomplished for Arms and Arts, the Right Worshipful Sir
Thomas Player, Knight, they being all in their Martial Ornaments of Gallantry;
some in Buff with Headpieces, many of Massy Silver. There is also the old
Warlike Honour of this Nation, bravely revived, and is at this time a most
Heroic Rarity; which is, that divers Gentlemen Archers, completely Armed, with
long Bows and Swords, with War Arrows, and Pallisades, with Hats turned up on
one side, on which are tied large Knots of green Ribbon, formed into a Regiment,
march under the Command of the Right Honourable Sir Robort Peyton Knight, and
Colonel of the said Regiment.

From Black Fryers Stairs they march through a Gallery of the aforesaid
Batchellors and Gentlemen-Ushers, who did not go to Westminster; and likewise
the Pensioners and Banners being set in Order, ready to march, the Foot-Marshal
leads the way, and in the Rear of the Companies up Black-Fryers Stairs by the
Channel up to Fleet-Bridge, and sothrough Ludgate-Street and S. Paul's
Churchyard, into Cheapside, where his Lordship is entertained by the first
Scene or Pageant, as follows.

A Temple erected according to the Composite Order in Architecture, on whose
extremity, eminently elevated, stands the Figure of Atlas bearing a Monde.
The whole Structure is artfully beautified with proper, various, and rich
Gilding and Painting; in the Medium of the Frontispiece of this Temple in a
Throne-like Seat, majestically sits MINERVA the Goddess of Arts and Arms,
and round about her are properly and distinctly placed the Seven Liberal
Sciences, viz. Grammar, Logic, Rhetoric, Arithmetic, Music, Astronomy, and
Geometry, all of them attired in apt significant Habits as Ladies, according to
their several Functions, as follows.

1. Grammar, In a Cloth of Silver Robe, a green Mantle, dark brown Hair; on her
Head a Wreath of Bays, the leaves tipped with Gold; Scarlet-colour'd Silk
Stockings; white Buskins laced with green Silk and Silver Ribbon; in her hand
the King's Banner.

2. Logic, In a Purple Robe semined with Stars of Gold; a carnation Mantle,
fringed with Gold; a light brown Hair; on her Head a Wreath of Myrtle;
Pearl-colour'd Silk Hose; red Buskins laced and surfled with Gold Ribbon;
holding in her right Hand the Cities Banner.

3. Rhetoric; In a florid Robe of divers coloured Sarsenet, on it a Gold
Mantle; a fair Hair, and on her Head a Chaplet of Flowers elegantly
interweaved; Rose-colour'd Silk Hose; yellow Buskins, laced with Sky-colour'd
Ribbon; and in her Hand a Banner of my Lord Mayors.

4. Arithmetic; Enrobed with Cloth of Gold; a white Sarsenet Vail, maculated
with divers Figures; a bright Hair; a Coronet of Gold, on which are many
Characters in black; watchet-colour'd Silk Hose; purple Buskins, laced and
surfled with Aurora-coloured Ribbon, bearing the Companies Banner.

5. Music; In a Rose-coloured Robe; a Shoulder-Scarf embroidered with Flowers,
fringed with Gold and Silver; a bright flaxen Hair, entramel'd with
various-coloured Ribbon, on which is a Garland of Roses, Lillies, Carnations,
Tulips, Pansies, with all variety of Blossoms; bearing a Banner of the Kings.

6. Astronomy; In a sky-colour'd Robe sprinkled with gold Stars; a Scarf of
Gold; a black long curled Hair; an Imperial Crown, the Moon in front, gold
Stars round about, and, on the top, in the room of the Cross, a Figure of the
Sun; watchet Buskins starrified with Silver, laced with gold Ribbon surfled;
Bearing a Banner of the Virgin, the Drapers Patroness.

7. Geometry; In a grass-green Robe; a Scarlet Mantle fringed with Silver;
black-brown Hair; on her Head a Coronet of Battlements and Towers like a
Fortification in Silver, and Gold, viz. the Battlements Gold, and the Towers
Silver; purple Silk Stockings; Gold Buskins laced with Scarlet Ribbon; bearing
the Banner of Sir Henry Fitz-Alwyn, a Member of this Company, and the first
Lord Mayor of London, who continued in that Dignity 24 Years without
intermission.

Lastly, in front, at the Foot of Minerva, sits a very grave Person
representing GOVERNMENT, in a long purple Robe lined and faced with Ermine; a
short Border of grey Hair, on which is a close Cap embroidered with Gold; and
upon that a purple Velvet four-corner'd Cap; in his Hand a Book well bound and
strung, a pair of Cordivant Gloves with rich large tops embroidered with Gold,
personating the old Roman Orator CICERO.

BY great Minerva's Charms, from Shades below
I'm raised from rest, to Celebrate this Show;
My Name is Marcus Tullius Cicero;
A Roman, One, whom Providence did please
T'illuminate with all the Sciences,
(Which here are circumsedent) I am sent
To personate a Civil Government,
And here to meet (as I do understand)
A Prefect armed with a Praetorian Band;
I mean, his Censors and grave Senators.
The Praetorship, my Lord, this Year, is yours;
I wish you good success, Sir, in th'Event,
For there's no living without Government.
Let Justice guide your Heart; you'll have to do
With many Men, and many Natures too:
Let nothing bias you, Friendship nor Pelf;
Give good Example; live upright your Self:
The Ruin of a Nation then begins,
When Purple Robes do cover Scarlet Sins;
Old Rome experienced it, her fatal Story
Can say, it made her sink in all her Glory.
Let all your Passions and Affections be
Confined within the bounds of Equity.
Correct those Knaves, who by false force and might,
Would Hector modest men out of their Right.
Let not your Pleaders, at what rate they please,
Daunt, and discourage honest Witnesses;
Cut off Offenders; let that gaudy Witch
The silken Miss, be lashed out of her Itch:
Purge this fair City from such foul Pollution,
The Laws are good, put them in Execution.
If Malefactors be not kept in awe,
Lust, Theft, and Murder will become a Law.
Vail not your Virtues; I have understood
By Fame, that your Abilities are good
In points of Learning, therefore I bring these,
Minerva, and the Seven Sciences,
To gratulate your Dignity, and be
A happy Omen to your Maioralty.
Distribute Right to all, be it friend or foe:
These were the Maxims of old Cicero.
The Speech ended, the Scene sails through the Ocean of the turbulent
Spectators, who like Billows dash themselves against one another, with as much
noise and no less ^anger: And his Lordship, with his Right Worshipful Retinue,
advances through Cheapside, where against Milk-street End his passage is
obstructed, and his Patience invited to behold a second Pageant, the
particulars of which are manifested in these succeeding Explanations.

IS a Chariot of Triumph (according to the Scythian mode of Building) lostily
erected, and curiously embellished, in accurate decoration, with variety of
rich work in Gilding and Painting, with divers Landscapes and Martial Trophies,
upon whose eminent Seat is mounted in mighty Majesty a proper Person, every way
adapted to represent Victorious TAMBERLAIN, who at the first was no more than a
common Shepherd, with his gray Coat, Scrip, Sheep-hook, Bottle, Bag, Dog, and
Tar-box, and kept Sheep on the Mountains of Scythia; but in process of time, as
Fortune would have it, he rose to the height of a great General, who with
900000 Soldiers overcame Bajazet the Great Turk who had 500000 Soldiers, and
after the Victory put him in an Iron Cage, which was carried about to be his
Foot-stool when he got on his Horse (as Bajazet told him he would have done to
him if the Victory had been his). This Battle was fought Anno Christi 1398.

A Person of middle Dimensions, of terrible Aspect, morose Disposition, yet
seldom passionate, cool and attentive in Counsels, patient in Designs, wise in
Direction, bold in Execution, just in Government, austere in Commands, severe
in Punishments, and liberal in Rewards; in a Vest of silver, with a purple silk
Shash about his waste, a Scimitar by his side, a large Cloth of gold Tunic
down to the ground, white Buskins with gold Ribbon, a bare white Neck, a pendent
Jewel in his left Ear, a very small black Beard, no Hair on his Head, a silver
Turbat, with a rich Jewel, a Sprig, and three Falls, blew, white, and
aurange-colour; a Coronet of Gold round about the top of his Turbat; in his
Hand a Banner of the King's: Attended with all those Warlike Representators
which properly wait on so great a Conqueror, who sit beneath him in his
Chariot, viz. Discipline, Conduct, Courage, and Victory, thus properly arrayed.

1. Discipline; A Man, in a scarlet-coloured silk Robe; a silver Mantle fringed
with gold; black curled Hair, with a Coronet of Trophies; a Scimitar by his
side; silver Buskins laced with watchet Ribbon on yellow Stockings; bearing the
King's Banner.

2. Conduct; In a Robe of French green, a Scarf of gold, bright brown Hair, on
his Head a Wreath of Oak, a Scimitar by his side, purple Hose, red Buskins
laced and surfled with silver Ribbon; with a Banner of the Lord Mayor's.

3. Courage; A Person of Heroic Visage, with short brown Hair, on it a golden
Coronet, a flame-colour'd short Robe, a sky-colour'd Scarf fringed with Silver,
blush-colour Hose, blew Buskins with carnation Ribbon; in his Hand a Banner of
the Cities.

4. Victory; In a Purple Robe, a Scarf of Gold; bright Hair, on it a Wreath of
Laurel tipped with Gold; yellow Buskins surfled with purple Ribbon; a Scimitar
drawn, and on it several Gold Crowns and Laurel Wreaths; bearing a Banner of
the Drapers Company.

This Chariot is drawn by the Supporters of the Companies Arms, which are two
golden Lions pellited; on which are mounted two Negro Princes in Robes of Gold,
girt about with carnation Scarfs, crowned with Coronets of divers-coloured
Feathers, which are Tamberlain's Postilions, and advance, one the King's, the
other the Lord Mayor's Banners; these Lions are led by two Asian captived
Princes, in Royal Robes and Crowns of Gold.

Tamberlain rising up, makes this Address to his Lordship.

THough I in this Victorious Garb appear,
Armed with a Gauntlet and my Scimitar,
I was a Shepherd, that with watchful pains
Kept divers Flocks of Sheep on Scythian Plains:
And hearing that the worthiest of all Trades
Triumph today, I come from silent Shades
Of Rest, to add some lustre to the Day,
And without ostentation display
The Grandeur of a Shepherd: My Great Name
(Long since recorded in the Book of Fame)
Is TAMBERLAIN, who marched with no lessthen
An Army of Nine hundred thousand Men,
Took BAJAZET Prisoner, with all his Power,
Their Great and August Turkish Emperor,
Caged him, and dragged him, ordered him as he
Freely confessed he would have ordered me,
Had he been Victor.
Thus with my Shepherds Life I did begin,
I governed Flocks of Sheep and Fields of Men.
But here's a Person, by whose reverend hue
I can discover is a Shepherd too.
That Title, Sir, cannot impair Your Fame,
Kings, Princes, Priests, and Prophets own that Name.
You have a Flock that may, for ought I know,
Try both Your Conduct and Your Courage too:
In this Great Fold many fierce Spirits lurk,
As hard to be reduced as the Great Turk.
There is a Wolf doth neither bark nor grin,
Which eats the Sheep, and puts himself in the Skin.
When such as these break in, You may, my Lord,
Like me, lay down Your Hook, take up Your Sword.
But if Love will reduce such as do stray,
I must confess it is the happiest way.
These Lions which in Triumph now draw me
(Rid on, and led by Captive Princes) be
Supporters to the DRAPERS COMPANY;
Who do with liberal Expense display
Their Love in Triumphs for Your Lordship's Day;
To whom You now are an united Brother:
Long may You live to honour one another.
This Oration concluded, my Lord gave evident demonstrations of Acceptance,
and with the Right Worshipful His Praetorian Retinue, the Scarlet Senators,
they troop it through the throng; but by the way my Lord is civilly intercepted
with

BEing FORTUNES BOWER, which is an elegant beautiful Square Edifice, erected in
the Center of a Spring-Garden, decorate and adorned with the delectable
Embroidery of Festoons and Cornucopia's, containing all varieties of Flowers
and Fruits which every Season of the Year produces. In the most eminent and
conspicuous position of this Structure, sits the benevolent and generally
adored Goddess BONA FORTUNA, in a Robe of Gold interweaved with Purple, a
Carnation Mantle richly adorned and embroidered with variety of precious
Jewels, a long curled bright lovely brown Hair, a triple Crown upon her Head
clouded and beamed, (in the form of that Charge which is upon the Worshipful
Drapers Corporation Coat) Carnation silk Hose, purple Buskins laced and surfled
with Sky-colour and Gold Ribbon; in her right hand a green silk Banner charged
with Crowns, Scepters, Globes, Myters, and Crosiers, Or. and in distinct
vicinities about her sit her Triumphant Favourites, viz. Prosperity, Gladness,
Peace, Plenty, Honour, and Riches.

1. Prosperity, In a Scarlet coloured silk Robe, a Mantle of Silver, flaxen
Hair long and curled, a Wreath of Laurel pointed with Silver, Pearl Hose,
Purple Shoes with Aurenge-colour'd strings, holding a a Banner of the Virgin,
the Drapers Patroness.

2. Gladness, A Lady of smiling Countenance, in a green Robe, a Mantle of
divers Colours, embroidered with Flowers, a bright brown Hair, curled, with all
coloured Ribbon, a Garland of Myrtle, yellow Silk Hose, Sky-colour'd Buskins
laced with Carnation Ribbon, bearing a Banner of the Kings.

3. Peace, In a white Robe semined with gold Stars, a Carnation Mantle fringed
with Gold, a dark brown Hair, a Crown of Olive, Gold-colour'd Hose, silver
Buskins laced with Carnation Ribbon, with the Cities Banner.

4. Plenty, In a Vest of Gold and Silver upon Roman Bases of Carnation, richly
adorned with silver and gold Lace, a green silk and silver Mantle, purple
Buskins laced up with gold, a blackish curled Hair, a Wreath of Fruits, Leaves,
and Flowers, in one hand a Cornucopia, in the other the Golden Fleece.

5. Honour, In a purple Robe powdered with Stars of gold, a scarlet Mantle
sringed with gold, black Hair, on it a Diadem, watchet silk Hose, white Buskins
laced with gold Ribbon; bearing a Banner of my Lord's.

6. Riches, In a Robe of Silver embroidered with Gold and Jewels, a watchet
Mantle fringed with Gold, fair Hair, a Dukes Crown, Carnation silk Hose, gold
Buskins laced with silver and gold Ribbon, bearing the Companies Banner.

In the Front of this Stage, before the Bower, is planted the Ram, being the
Golden Fleece, which is the Companies Crest, on which rides a beautiful Boy
with flaxen Hair, crowned with Roses, in a Robe of white Sarsenet, and a
Carnation Mantle fringed with Gold, white Shoes and Stockings, bearing the
Banner of the Virgin.

His Lordship coming to a convenient Stand, Fortune makes an Address to him in
this Speech:

THough I appear now in Great Plenty's Bower,
I ne'er was here presentially before,
Yet am that Goddess the whole World adore.
I fill the Seaman's Sail, and guide his Keel,
When in the Raging Ocean he doth reel:
Before my Shrine the Greatest Princes kneel.
When Jason with his Argo fetched the Fleece,
Assisted with his Demi-Gods of Greece,
By my Great Power 'twas gained, and there it is.
My Name's Bona Fortuna: It is I
That wait on every good Society,
And am the Genius of this COMPANY,
The Ancient Famous DRAPERS, Men of Treasure,
That are beatified with Peace and Pleasure;
Who Govern by Right Rule, and Live by Measure;
That temperately Trade upon the Growth
Of their own Nation, hating Pride and Sloth,
Cutting their Coat according to their Cloth.
Their Manufacture doth in England grow:
And in the Winter, when Boreas doth blow,
And all the City wears a Veil of Snow,
For Cloth and Books Men will have more to do
In Paul's Church-Yard than Pater-Noster-Row:
Fortune has said it, and it shall be so.
'Tis for Your sake, My Lord, that I appear:
When You launched forth, 'twas I was at the Steer
To guide You hither, and I'll guard You here.
When CAESAR'S Seaman a strong Storm sailed through,
He calmed His Pilots Fears, letting him know,
He carried CAESAR, and His Fortune too.
I am the Emblem of a POWER Immense,
Fortune by Name, but (in the Sacred Sense)
I Typify ETERNAL PROVIDENCE.
My Honoured Lord, the KING Embarks You now
For a Year's Voyage; doubt not, though Storms blow,
The Power that brought You on, will bring You through.
And as Your Power doth from CAESAR spring,
Assume His Courage too in every thing:
He's blessed, that doth obey GOD and the KING.
His Lordship moving further, showing manifest Symptoms of his Acceptance in
the Pageant and Speech, meets another Scene of Drolls near St. Laurence-lane
end.

WHich is a kind of Chase, artfully contrived with Trees, Grass, Bushes, Birds,
Flowers, Shepherds, Shepherdesses and Sheep on one part of the Stage; and on
the other side Persons at Work, as, an Old Woman Spinning of Yarn for woollen
Cloth, another as busy Carding of Wool, a third is Picking of it; and in the
middle of them are a crew of mad frolic Shepherds, piping, dancing, tumbling,
curveting, with many ridiculous gestures, which the worse it is done, the
better it pleases, being intended for a description of Disorder, and an
elaborate expression of Confusion; where since no Song can be heard, I have
omitted it, because it would be rendered as ineffectual as the sound of a Lute
in a Whirlwind.

This Droll being past, the Foot-Marshal having placed the Assistants, Livery,
and the Companies on both sides of King's-Street, and their Pensioners with
their Targets hung on the tops of their Javelins; in the rear of them the
Ensign-bearers, Drums and Fifes in the front; and hasten the Foins and
Budg-Batchelors together with all the Gentlemen-Ushers to Guild-Hall; where his
Lordship is again saluted by the Artillery-men with three Volleys more, which
conclude their duty: His Land Attendants pass through the Gallery or Lane so
made, into Guild-Hall; after which the Companies repair to the Hall to Dinner;
and their several Silk-works and Triumphs are likewise conveyed into
Blackwell-Hall; and the Officers aforesaid, and the Children that sit in the
Pageant, there refresh themselves, until his Lordship hath dined at Guild-Hall;
where, to make the Feast more famous, his Lordship is illustrate with the
splendour and presence of Their most Excellent Majesties, The Duke of York,
Prince Rupert, the Duke of M^mouth, the Archbishop of Canterbury, and all the
other Bishops, (at this time in London.) all the Resident Ambassadors and
Envoys, all the Lords of the Privy Council, all the principal

Officers of State, all the Judges, Sergeants at Law and their Ladies.

His Lordship and the Guests being all seated, the Music of the City are in
readiness to express their skill, and finger their Violins and Lutes with good
skill and excellent humour, and aster a new Lesson or two being played, a Person
of a good Fancy with a Musical mouth, begins a new Song in Commendation of the
Founders of New Bethlehem.

THis is a Structure fair,
Royally raised;
The pious Founders are
Much to be praised,
That in such times of need,
When Madness doth exceed,
To build this House of Bread,
Noble New Bedlam.
'Tis beautiful and large
In Constitution,
Deserves a Liberal Charge
Of Contribution.
If I may reach so high,
To sing a Prophecy,
Their Names shall never dye
That built New Bedlam.
Methinks the Lawyers may
Consult together,
And Contribute, for they
Send most Men thither;
They put'em to much pain,
With Words that cramp the Brain,
Till Bedlam's filled with Plaintiff and Defendant.
Quacking Physicians should
Give Money freely,
They maculate Men's Blood,
And make them feely;
With Hydrargyrum Pills,
Their Reasons and their Wills
They ruin, and this fills
Most part of Bedlam.
So good a Work as this,
Cannot want Actors;
But I'll no more insist
On Benefactors,
But hint, such as I see
Hypochondriac be,
And are in some degree
Fit for New Bedlam.
That Amorous Soul that is
In Love a Quaker,
And doth adore a Miss
More than his Maker,
Decks her in Silk and Far,
Then turns Idolater,
Kneels down and Worships her,
He's fit for Bedlam.
The young Man that has got
A golden Talent,
And hath a brain-sick Plot
To seem a Gallant;
That richly is arrayed,
Spends Land, and Shop, and Trade,
To be a Hector made;
Is fit for Bedlam.
The City-Lad that sings,
Rhymes, drolls, and dances,
And all his business flings
Away for Fancies;
He that lets his Angels fly,
Until he's not worth one Penny,
To study Poetry,
Is fit for Bedlam.
Whilst some with Brandy burn
Their Guts with drinking,
Philosophers do turn
Their Heads with thinking;
He who is such a one,
As studies for the Stone,
Til's Brains and his Money's gone,
Prepares for Bedlam.
That Churl who Gold hath won,
And dares not use it;
But hath a squandering Son
Doth game and lose it:
His Brains do greatly err,
He that with Water clear
Would fill a Colander,
Must do it in Bedlam.
He that with an Estate
Weds a poor Beauty,
Who to Disdain and Hate,
Turns Love and Duty;
It doth his Reason daunt,
He has a Bargain on it,
Worse than the Elephant,
And's fit for Bedlam.
I could tell many more,
(I have enrolled um)
Should I declare my store,
As I have told um;
With Mortar, Brick and Stone,
Could they their Building run
From thence to Islington,
'Twould never hold um.
Dinner being ended, and Night approaching, his Lordship being attended by a
private Retinue of his own Company, takes Coach, and is conducted to his
Mansion House in Lumbard-street (where Sir Robert Vyner and Sir Ioseph Sheldon
kept their Maioralty) without that troublesome Night Ceremony which hath been
formerly, when St. Paul's Church was standing.

When his Lordship is housed, those that attend on him depart with order and
convenience; and the Triumphs and Silk-works are by the care of the Masters
Artificers lodged for that Night in Blackwel-Hall, till the next Day following,
and then they are to be conveyed to Drapers-Hall. To close up all, the Artists
and Artificers (each of them deserving ample Commendation) bid you Good Night.


