MY honoured Lord and Lady,
May that great hand that made ye
Supply this cheer
From year to year,
And may no strength degrade ye.

I am a bold intruder,
Which makes me seem the ruder;
But the City is
Much used to this
Since civil War subdued her.

We are no Lance-presadoes,
No Basket-hilt Bravadoes;
When you know our Names
You'll love our fames,
We deal not in Grenades.

We come not to invade ye,
Or subt'ly to persuade ye;

I am Truth (in a word)

I am Plenty, my Lord,

And I am Love my Lady.

Let Buff-coat and Feather

Go drumming together:

We fear not the force of Invasion.

The Voice and the Lute

Makes a better dispute,

Love hath the best art of persuasion.

But stay, methinks our Melody is dull,
We want a voice to fill the Chorus full.

Truth, where is Peace, (Truth) her absence is no wonder,
For Peace and Truth have been long time asunder:
Where is she gone? we will haul her in with Cables.

Peace seldom goes where Churches are made Stables.

Peace never comes amongst those sad disasters,
Into that Land where Servants beat their Masters:

Peace seldom into such confusion comes
Where City Charters are made heads for Drums.

Peace loves good men, that profess what they'll dye for,
Not such as make Covenants stand for a Cipher.

Peace ne'er comes where Brother doth fight against Brother,
Nor where Protestations drive out one another.

Peace knows that the Sword men will ne'er be true friends,
For Colonels like Cobblers are awl for their ends;
She never appears, (though she very much pity)
Where a bunch of Bandoleers are the keys of a City.

When wisdom's wanting,

And zeal is canting,

Then rage is ranting,

And Peace lies panting.
Then blame not the words of our Tongue or our Pen,
We shall ne'er hold our peace till we get her again:
For Love, Truth, and Plenty must quickly decay,
As experience will tell us when Peace is away.

But now Peace is gone
And hath left us alone,
What other foundation can we build upon

Let courage come rule.

I fear he's too cool.

If he leave Love and Plenty, and Truth, he's a fool.

Can fury out-brave him?
'Tis Truth that must save him;
Go call him: ( Plen.) I can not, the Prentices have him.

Go tell him our need,
Our Liberties bleed,
And say that my Lord doth command him with speed.
Plen At that word he comes.

Boys beat up your drums,
Are Sword-men abroad, and we picking of crumbs?
Have we the bold Valour, the Wealth, and the Wit,.
And shall we be shallowly cheated of it?
Truth, Plenty, and Love, you all are well met,
In honester Causes ye ne'er ventured yet,
We serve a brave Master, who for public good
Will hazard his Fortune, his Fame, and his Blood:
Let Love, Truth, and Courage, and Plenty endeavour
To wait on his person, and serve him for ever.
Then let every voice like a well skilled Musician
Discover the progress of Pride and Ambition.

The basest condition
Is Pride and Ambition,
It rifles and stifles
True love and Allegiance.
'Tis never contented
Till Time hath consented
To take off and shake off
The bonds of Obedience*

It was a shrewd weed in
The Garden of Eden.
It drew out and threw out
Poor Eve and her Adam.
'Twas one of the strange ills
That cast down the Angels
So steep and so deep
That no measure can fathom.

It is but a sad sort of sinning
And ends with a terrible taste,
It shows like a Saint in beginning,
But looks like a Devil at last.

Ambition strikes every thing dumb
That dams up the way of her hope*
It often doth aim at a Kingdom,
And frequently ends in a Rope.

Then since bold ambition doth work such disasters,
Why should we be Monsters in hope to be Masters;
That City shall hold out in spite of all weather,
Where Conscience and Courage are coupled together^

