THE Citizens designed for the Duty of the Day assemble about seven of the
Clock in the Morning at Skinners Hall.

1. The Master, Wardens, and Assistants, in Gowns faced with Foyns.

2. The Livery, in Gowns faced with Budg, and their Hoods.

3. Divers Foyns Bachelors, in Gowns and Hoods.

4. Near upon Thirty Budg Bachelors in Gowns and Scarlet Hoods.

5. Thirty Gentlemen-Ushers in Velvet Coats, each of them a Chain of Gold about
his Shoulder, and a white Staff in his Hand.

6. Thirty other Gentlemen for bearing Banners and Colours, some in Plush
Coats, and some in Buff; they also wearing Scarfs about their Shoulders of the
Companies Colours.

7. Several Drums and Fifes, with Red Scarfs, and the Colours of the Company in
their Hats, Red and Yellow.

8. The two City-Marshals, riding each of them on Horse-back, with six
Servitors to attend them, with Scarfs and Colours of the Companies.

9. The Foot-Marshal, and six Attendants, with the like Scarfs and Colours.

10. The Master of Defence, with the same Scarf and Colours, having ten
Persons of his own Quality to attend him.

11. Threescore Pensioners, accommodated with Gowns and Caps, each of them
employed in carrying of Standards and Banners.

12. Divers other Pensioners, in Blue Gowns, White Sleeves, and Black Caps,
each of them carrying a Javelin in the one Hand, and a Target in the other,
wherein is painted the Coat-Armour of their Benefactors.

Being thus, in every Punctilio, accommodated,

They are by the Foot-Marshal divided into seven Divisions, and ranked out two
by two, beginning with the inferior part of the Standard-bearers; and in the
Head of them are placed two Drums, one Fife, and one Gentleman bearing the
Companies Ensign.

In the Rear of them, two Gentlemen bearing Banners, being the Arms of deceased
Benefactors.

After them march the aged Pensioners in Gowns, and in the Center of them fall
in two Drums beating the Switzers March.

In the Rear of them fall in three Drums, one Fife, and two Gentlemen in Plush
Coats, bearing two Banners or Ensigns: After them fall in six Gentlemen-Ushers;
And in the Rear of them, the Budge Batchellors.

The next successively, following them, two other Gentlemen bearing two other
Banners or Ensigns; After them fall in six Gentlemen-Ushers; And after them the
Foyns Batchellors.

In the Rear of them fall in two Drums and a Fife; then two Gentlemen, the one
bearing the Lord Mayors, the other the City-Banners: After them, twelve
Gentlemen-Ushers; And after them, the Court of Assistants.

In this Equipage of two and two (till taking in his Lordship and his
Attendants) the whole Body march toward Guild-hall, and from thence through
King's-street toward the Three-Crane Wharf and Vintree, and there they enter
their several Barges, his Lordship at the Stairs next Westminster, the Company
at another pair of Stairs, and the Gentlemen-Ushers, and Budge Batchellors, and
Foyns Batchellors to their Place of Refection.

His Lordship being Landed at Westminster, and performing the accustomed
Ceremony at each Court, and come to the Exchequer-Bar, the Lord Chief Baron
makes a Speech to him, which being ended, the Lord Mayor and his Retinue
marching round Westminster-Hall, repair to their several Barges, and hasten to
Baynards-Castle, where the Bachelors are ready set in order by the
Foot-Marshal, as in the Morning, to attend him; and both Bodies conjoined, do
march up Paul's-Wharf-Hill, into the Church-yard, and so into Cheapside, where
his Lordship is entertained with the first Pageant, which is thus described.

Represents a Wilderness, consisting of variety of Trees, Bushes, Shrubs,
Brambles, Thickets, inhabited and haunted with divers Wild Beasts, and Birds of
various kinds and colours. In the Front of this Scene are two Negro Boys,
properly Habited, and mounted upon two Panthers, bearing the Banners of the
Lord Mayor's and the Companies Arms. In the Rear of these, in the same Pageant,
is erected a stately Structure, formed in the Figure of a Pyramid, with four
Triumphal Arches; and in the Front-Arch sits a Person who represents
Orpheus, habited in a Silk Robe striped with many colours, his Shoulder adorned
with a large Scarf of Cloth of Gold, on his Head a long and crispy hair,
invested with a Caesar's Wreath of Laurel, all the Leaves tipped with Gold; in
his Hands a Lyre with strings of Gold, on which he appears in the posture of
playing; on his Legs are Buskins, laced with Silver, after the Roman mode; upon
each Wing of him a Satyr properly habited; which together with the Wild Beasts
are continually moving, dancing, curveting, and tumbling to the Music of a
Satyr, which is playing on a Ho-boy; amongst the which an active Bear takes
hold of a rope (which is pendant from a very high rope extended cross the
street) with his teeth and paws, showing sundry tricks. In the rear of Orpheus
is a beautiful woman, in a glorious and proper habit, representing Amity; a
long disheveled hair, on her head a Coronet of Gold, and in her right hand a
Javelin. Lastly, elevated on the highest part of the Pyramid sits a female
Negra richly and properly adorned with Silver, Gold, and Jewels, representing
Africa. Orpheus standing up to the person of the Lord Mayor, speaks this
following IN the First Age when Innocence began
To spread her Splendour in the Soul of Man,
Union filled all the Universe with free
Felicious and Seraphic Harmony.
All parts of the Creation did consent,
And the world was one well-tun'd Instrument:
Dog, Bear, Wolf, Lamb together did agree,
Nature it self knew no Antipathy.
But when the Peace was broke by mans Transgression,
Revenge with Rage and Ruin took possession;
Disorder rioted, and (in conclusion)
Old Amity was turned into confusion.
But Orpheus whose person I present
(The Hieroglyphic of good Government)
By the sweet power of his harmonious hand,
Reduced their salvage Natures, made'um stand
Listen, attend, and with their active paws
Dance and conform their feet to Musics Laws.
Such is the power of Concord, and Consent,
The very soul of humane Government.
Then, my most honoured Lord, since'tis your due,
I do resign my Instrument to you,
That can play better to Men's differing ears:
The Type must vanish when the truth appears.
This City (which my Pageant doth express)
May very well be called a Wilderness.
A Wood where all the Wild and Brutish Creatures
Lie lurking in the Dens of men's bad Natures;
Which, if you can reduce, you will be famed
For quelling more than ever Orpheus tamed:
No doubt but your endeavours will be shown
And you'll perform it (if it can be done.)
Your Wisdom, Prudence, Temperance, and Fate
Have marked you, for this City's Magistrate;
This City which inflamed with its own guilt,
In seven years time was Burnt and may be built:
Thanks to your Lordship, and those prudent powers
Which joined with you, the City Senators.
My Lord, it is your Destiny to rise
From one of the most ancient Companies
In this Metropolis, we hope you're one
That will restore our long-lost Union.
'Twill make us Rich, and Righteous, and please God,
Firm to our Friends, fierce to our Foes abroad.
Union breeds Peace, and Plenty in a Land;
But Cities self-divided, Cannot stand.


The Speech being concluded, his Lordship and his Retinue move through
Cheapside, and by the way is represented to his view this second Scene, or
Pageant following.

IS a most Magnificent and Imperial Palace of Pleasure gloriously adorned, and
exceedingly enriched with several Shields of the Cities, the Lord Mayor's and
the Companies respective Arms; as also with many imbellishings and beautiful
exornations from the Base to the extreme altitude of the Superstructure in a
pyramidical Figure. In the front sit four female Figures rich and properly
habited, representing Justice, Temperance, Peace, and Plenty; with four Nymphs
in different Robes, sitting at their feet as Attendants, bearing Banners, with
the Emblems painted on them; intimating the nature, faculties, function, and
quality of the precedent Virtues whom they attend. And on the most high and
eminent part of this Structure, is elevated a person aptly attired,
representing Fame; on her Head a Crown of Gold, on her Shoulders Wings of
divers coloured Feathers, and in her Hand a Trumpet, on which is hung his
Majesties Royal Banner of Great Britain, France, and Ireland, whom God long
preserve.

His Lordship having sufficiently viewed this beautiful Building, and the
Figures; he with his Attendants retire into the Guild-hall to Dinner, where the
Tables wait to supply their Appetites, furnished with more Plenty, and Variety,
Cookery, and Curiosity, then is to be had in any one place at any one time,
amongst the most Celebrious Feasts in the Christian world, where his Lordship
attended by the Waits of the City is accommodated with variety of excellent
Music both Loud and Soft, Vocal and Instrumental, amongst which this ensuing
Song in Parts receives the regard of his Attention. COme let us concord
In a Verse to my Lord,
Whose Tables do shine
With Viands and Wine;
Whose Welcome and Wishes
Are free as his Dishes:
Good Claret will warm ye,
Here's nothing can harm ye,
Canary doth make but a few sick;
My Lady invites ye
To all that delights ye,
Whose spirit and words
Agree with my Lords;
Then taste the fat bounty
Of every County;
Here is no misprision,
All points of Division
Are banished but what's in the Music.
Let joy and health,
With peace and wealth
Support his power who is
The prop of Londons fair Metropolis*
Lord of that City, now the Seat
Of all that we call good and great;
Into whose lap is daily hurled
The various treasures of the world;
Here is at all times to be had
The best of good, and worst of bad:
Here men get wealth with switch and spur,
And change their Fustian into Fur;
But, at the last, to crown their pains
Their wisest Free-men are in Chains.
Here young Sons of indulgent Mothers
Grow richer than their Elder Brothers.
Then let the Cities Health go round,
May it in treasure still abound,
And be with Peace and Plenty Crowned.
Here Justice and Mercy are very well mixed,
The Sword and the Scabbard are faithfully fixed,
Which are born upright, not concealed like a Hanger*
And truly some say it was ne'er drawn in anger:
For foulest Offenders are better kept under,
When Justice and Passion are farthest asunder.
Dame London's secure, the King so hath kept her
Therefore let her Sword submit to his Sceptre:
Then who can the power of my Lord Mayor withstand,
Whilst he doth present the great Lord of the Land.
Then Lady London let thy Beams
That Town where Tyber streams,
Till all the world enrich the Thames.


This Song being sung and applauded, a cheerful and temperate Cup of Wine goes
about; in the mean time the Consort of Music play two or three suits of Airs;
which being ended, they make provision for a piece of Drollery to be sung in
Parts, and Shapes by these three, viz. FRom how-d'ye calt Town in what call
y'um zhere, To Lungean cham come, Lord what vine folks are here; Sure thick is
the place Ich zmell the good cheer: I will knock at the gate then -- what ho! God
be here.


What are you Sir?

A West-Country mon Sir.

Good Bumpkin forbear,
Such Hobnails as you are do seldom come here.

Uds zooks here sa fellow would make a man swear;
Ich come to speak Sir with Mr. Lord Mayor:

What to do Sir?

To see his vine Doublet, his Chain, and his Ruff,
His Beaver, his Gown, and such vinical stuff:

And what do you think of a kick or a cuff?

If my whip will but hold vaith chill give thee enough;
And well laid on.

Hold hold prithee Country-man be not so hot.

I have a great mind to lay a long lace on thy Coat.

Prethe tell me thy name, and my Lord Mayor shall know it?

My name is Tom Hoyden, what zayst thou to that?

Tom Hoyden?

Though you abhor us, and care not for us,
Without us you can no be.

We can live without you, and your rural rout,

Did we not victual your house
My Lady Mayress with all her Fairies
Would zhit as small as a Mouse.

We have money.

And we have honey.

We have the Silver and Gold.

We have fuel.

And we have Jewel,

And we have zheep in the vold.

We have Silk enough.

We have milk enough.

We have treasure untold.
We have means and case.

We have Beans and Peas,
Bacon hold belly hold.

We have forces.

And we have horses.

And we have powder and shot.

We have Pullets.

And we have Bullets.

And we have spirits as what.

We have Honours.

And we have Manors.

And we are walled about.

But when we begin to keep our Cattle in
Vaith you'll quickly come out.

We have Galleys.

And we have Valleys.

And we have Cannons of brass:
We have Feathers,

And we have Weathers
On Mountains matted with grass.

We have Wine and Spice, Sugar, Fruit, and Rice.

We have good Barley and Wheat,
And were we put to t, better can live without
Money than you without meat.

Then since 'tis so that we cannot be
Without one another, let us two agree;
Let the Country prove fruitful, and City be free.
No Climate in Europe so happy as we.

He that would be made by a Soldiers Trade,
Let him be encouraged by me:
For never did any men gain by the Blade
As we have in Forty three.

What Gallant is that?

It seems a Soldat,

Good morrow.

Good morrow to thee.

Why how now, good Friends, what, all for your ends
Will you make up a Peace without me?
You know in a word the Power of the Sword.

A Cannon can conquer a King.

A sharp Sword will make a City to shake.

Vaith you have the World in a Zling.

Compare the whole Land to the Parts of a Man*

The Countrey's the Legs and the Toes.

And, without a Riddle, the City's the Middle.

The Soldier's the Head.

And the Nose.

Though now we wear Blades, we once were of Trades,
And shall be whilst Trading endures:
Our Officers are, although Men of War,
Some Goldsmiths, some Drapers.

And Brewers.

They fortunate are, and valiant in War.

They were so.

Che very well knew them.

Some of them were Lords.

Some of 'em wore Cords,
And went up to Hangum tuum.

Do you get increase, we'll guard you with Peace,
The Sword shall not come where the Ax is:
We ll take off your Cares, we ll take off your Fears.

I but when will you take off our Taxes?

We keep Nations from ye, that would overcome ye,
Whilst you do Plow, Harrow, and Thresh:
The Frenchman's our own.

Faith, What's bred in the Bone
Will hardly get out of the flesh.

Then, Sir, the City still shall fit ye
With what you deserve

The Country Cow-man, and the Plow-man
Will not let thee starve.

With Buff and Beaver we will ever
Bless thy Back and Head.

We'll give thee yearly Wheat and Barley,
For thy Beer and Bread.

I will give thee Silver, and enough good Ammunition.
I seal to this Condition.

And so do I, in truth.

I will spend my Blood, Sir.

And I will waste my Treasure,

To do the Soldier pleasure.

Why now I thank ye both.
Let the City, the Country, the Camp, and the Court,
Be the Places of Pleasure, and Royal Resort:
And let us observe, in the midst of our Sport,
That Fidelity makes us as firm as a Fort:
A Union well-grounded no Malice can kurt.



At the Conclusion of this Droll the Second Course comes in. In the mean time
they sound a Lesson on the Ho-boys, Cornets, and Sackbuts; and after all the
Varieties are orderly marshalled upon the Table, the Music are prepared with
another Representation to salute his Lordship, which consists of three Parts,
viz. WAw's me, that ere che did see
Thick vamous vine Zity;
Two year vrom Zummerzet-zheer
Hath quite convounded me.
A Zittizen in the Country did say
To me, Tom Hoyden, Leave making Hay,
Go zell thy Land away, take Money vor't,
And buy thee a Place at Court;
Leave off thy Leather Breech, Brown Bread, and Milk,
Go there, and be clothed in Zilk.
One hundred Pieces will there
Buy vower score Pounds a year:
Thou zhalt be every day dressed,
Quoth he, in Tunic and Vest;
A dozen Dishes, each day thou dost dine,
Shall be zerv'd to thee with ^gs and Wine.
Thought I, if thic be true, ch^ll speedily
Zell all, and a Courtnol be:
Ich sold my Corn away, Cattle and Cart.
And now cham not worth a Vart.
No man was ever so zarv'd;
For Ich am welly ztarv'd:
Gay Gallantry neat and vine,
But neither Meat nor Wine.
The Buttery Hatch is vlown off of the Hooks,
And the Deel's run away with the Cooks;
Not so much Zuet in the Kitchen as can
Zerve one for a Zop in the Pan.
Thought I to zelf, if it be so,
Which way do the Taxes go?
Now Ich am into London Town come,
'Chave zmelt out the Dining-room,
Rare Meat, and Music is got
To play't in piping hot;
Although that Gallants of Honour may boast,
I see that Zitizens rule the Roast,
And will be Conquerours unto the deeth,
If it come to be tried by the Teeth.
That Government's good where a Zurloin of Beef
Is made a Commander in Chief.

London now begins to show it self,
And in Splendour again to appear.

Ich know not where nor how to bestow my zelf,
Though by chance cham gotten in here.

Rome was not, in her high Degree,
More glorious than this will be:
Though in Rubbish lately 'twas hurled,
'Twill be a Sight for all the World.

Of zight and zent i have had my will,
But my Gut is empty still.

Zweet Sir, kind Sir.

What's your design with me?
How came You here?

In at the Gate:
Neat Sir, vine Sir, che come to dine with thee,
Drink Zack, --

Butler, look to your Plate;
Since such Whipsters amongst us are,
'Tis reason we should beware:
In the Shapes of Country Elves
Cheats do often hide themselves,

Though i have been choosed by Londonous men,
I have not yet learned to cheat again.

I have good report as any in London, Mon,
Where che was born, in Zummerzet-zheer;
'Twixt Cart and Court Ich now am an undone Mon,
Vool'd and gulled.

But how came thou here?

Sold my Lond for a Place at Court;
But now Ichave nothing vor't:
It was by a Zitizen's means
Che vorzook my Bacon and Beans,
Cow, and Plow, and Harrow, and Corn,
Lond, and Place, and Gilt forlorn.

Some forsaken dangerous High-way-man,
And hast late committed some evil.

You're mistaken, that ne'er was my way, Man.

Carter turned Courtier may cousin the Devil.

But a Zity-mons Vaith and Troth
Is able to chose them both.

Get thee gone to Zummerzet-zheer,
Thou shalt stay no longer here.

The Country did not zerve ye so
In Zixty vive, six years ago.

When the Zity was in calamity
By the Fire, we zhew d our true Hearts,
Love and pity, good will and amity.

So ye did in your Twenty-pound Carts.

Though one Zity in Vlames did smother,
Our Waggons did zave another.

'Tis confess d, the Cash in the Chest
Builds another Phoenix Nest.

Shall che feed now?

Prithee go in:
Ingratude's a monstrous sin.

Room for a Lad that hath been a Guest
At many an Honourable Noble Feast.
How comes t about
That I am now left out,
Who lately was so eminently in request?
From a concealed Committee I came,
Oliver Faction is my Name,
I love as life
To sow the seeds of Strife
'Twixt Father, Mother, Sister, Brother, Husband, and Wife.
My Nature too is like my Name,
All peaceful Minds abhor it;
I put all Nations in a Flame,
And give them Reasons for it:
I deal debate
In Church and State,
And bring all in Combustion;
With Low and High
I can comply
From Scarlet Robe to Fustian.
Zealous Factions I can spur,
With Yea, and Nay, and Never stir:
But at the Court
It is my sport
To do as they would ha me;
With Soldiers there
I curse and swear
The desperate word of dam-me.
The Roundheads and the Cavaliers
I filled with falsehood and fears,
A Covenant I made
To further my Trade,
And set them together by the ears.

What vellows thick that doth so ztare.

I wonder how he came in here,
Where e're he goes
Conspiracy he shows,
Which commonly doth terminate in deadly blows.

Let's kick'n out.

A while forbear.

I will whipp'n till he stinks for fear.
Let's stand aside
And hear his begging pride,
He'll utter something now which he doth use to hide.

It joys me much to find it hot
With Brother against Brother;
I laugh to see how close they plot
To ruin one another.
Small trifles are
The seeds of War
Copes Surplices, and Rochets,
Formalities
Will make men rise,
Whose heads are full of Crotchets.
Down with Dagon cries the Zealot,
We will vanquish Pope and Prelate;
And then to work
Like Jew and Turk
Misguided by a Pigeon,
The tother stares,
And struts and swears
He fights for his Religion.
Then in come the Bodkins and Whistles,
And Roses do Covenant with Thistles.
They fight and they die,
This is brave news quoth I.

See see how he sets up his bristles.

What are you Sir that come
Into this peaceful room?
Where Amity attends
Our Loyal Citizens.

A Juggler that can show State Tricks,
Such as were done in forty six.

Then follow follow me
All you that factious be;
You that are discontent
Against the Government,
I le bring ye amongst valiant fellows
That can lead ye.

To the Gallows.

If any man's ambition
Dislikes his own condition,
Provided he be wise,
I le teach him how to rise;
I le make a Brewer with his sling
To sway the Sceptre of a King.

A failing Citizen
I can make whole again.

Go seek them out elsewhere,
There's no such persons here.

If such a work thou can go through,
I will warrant thoul't find enough to do.

If any Prentice wash
Away his Masters Cash,
In swaggering draughts of Wine,
That fellow shall be mine:
At two years old I le make him free,

And vit'n for the Triple Tree.

Renounce ill and leave off the Villainy
You did in forty six,
When writing and fighting did beggar and kill many;
But now we have found your tricks.
Your Council nor all the bad wit is in
Your scull, can turn the tide:
You sha not, nor cannot comply with a Citizen
That will support your pride.
Their hearts now with faith and reality
Are united so much unto Loyalty,
Love true Religion and Loyalty,
They to the Sovereign power do fix;
Your new knacks will never prevail with us,
They did so frequently formerly fail with us,

Therefore thou shalt to the Jail with us.

Prithee forbear thy whips and kicks.

Prithee let me go fair and free,
I did never do hurt to thee.

Yes you did it in forty three.
When your Measels did blunder me.
And if cham not much mistaken,
Icham very sure twas you
That did vilch my Beans and Bacon:
Cattle to Battle were took from Plow,
Ye did leave me never a Horse nor Cow.

Where was this?

In Zummerset-zheer.

I do confess my men were there,
But 'twas in the time of War,
Where huddles and troubles were high and hot,
And I hope that now it is quite forgot.

Get thee gone away from this place.

Or thy Tunic Iche mean to lace.

I will never injurious be
To the City Society.

If I should put trust in thee.
I know that no man would trust me.

Let me stay and thou shalt see
I'll merrily, cheerily drink a free
And a hearty Cup to his Majesty.

On these terms I'll let thee stay;
But yet before we drink we'll pray
That this ascending City may
By Fire or Sword know no decay,
Until the very very latter day.

Then in a Chorus of Prophetic Spirits
We'll sing forth her fame, and her name, and her merits.

No Cities that are shall ever compare
With London fetched out of the flames,
The City of Rome shall in pilgrimage come,
And Tyber shall bow down to Thames.

No Fabrics that be are like this City
For Structure and beautiful Beams.

Rome shall with her glory so famous in Story,
Make Tyber pay Tribute to Thames.



In this honest, innocent, pleasant, and amicable Recreation the Afternoon is
wasted; and Dinner being concluded, the foot Marshal doth rally all the
scattered Retinue of his Lordship, and reduce them to their primitive Order as
in the morning; only the Pensioners instead of Javelins and Targets carry
Torches for lighting his Lordship, and Aldermen, and the Companies in their
return from Guildhall; and both bodies being once more joined together after
Dinner, march up Kings-street towards Skinners-hall, where the Pageant called
the Wilderness makes a stand; and the aforesaid Orpheus speaks the second
Speech following. My Lord,
THE Company on whom I wait,
Command me to salute you at your Gate,
With their fraternal hearty wishes; may
Your joys exceed the glory of this day.
May never night approach them, never ill
Divert them, but be fair and rising still:
May you in Traffic no disaster know,
Your riches never ebb, but ever flow,
Piety be your practice, and the poor
Never go empty handed from your door.
May you grow up in Honours seat, and prove
A Subject for your King, and Cities love.
May you live centuries of years and see
Your self still young in your Posterity.
And so your Company bids (in your own right)
Good morrow to your Glories, not good night.


Which ended, and his Lordship entered his house, all depart in order, as the
convenience of night will permit; and the several persons appointed to attend
the service of the day, take especial care to lodge the Silk-works and triumphs
in some secure place, till they can remove them to Skinners-hall, in regard
they are of some weight, and the burden of the day was heavy to the
undertakers.

After this Copy, as I thought, was perfected by the Committee, and the Papers
gone to the Press, I was further advertised, that there would be another
Pageant, which is a Forest, properly accommodated with several Animals,
Sylvans, Satyrs, and Wood-Nymphs sitting and stirring in very good order; the
Nymphs attired in various coloured Robes, and (in the front) are two Negroes
richly adorned with Oriental Pearl and Jewels, mounted upon two Panthers.

Near to the presence of the King, Queen, Duke, and other Beams of the Royal
Family, near Milk-street end is a Stage erected and fixed, where the much
magnified Jacob Hall and his Company express the height of their Activity in
Tumbling, and the like.


