THE generous Citizens selected for the Order of this days Triumph,
(consenting with Ancient Presidents,) come together about Seven of the Clock in
the Morning, according to Custom.

The Foot-Marshal ranks them out, two and two, beginning with the Pensioners in
Gowns, and in the Front of them places the Companies Ensigns, Four Drums, and
one Fife; in the Rear of them falls in Six Drums and one Fife. After, the
several Pensioners in Coats, bearing several Banners and Standards; after them,
Six Trumpets; after them the Gryphon and Camel, Ensigns, Six Gentlemen-Ushers;
after them, the Budg-Batchelors, which conclude this Division.

In the Rear of those, fall Six Trumpets, after them Two Gentlemen bearing Two
Banners, the one of the Cities, the other of the Companies; after them follow
Eight Gentlemen-Ushers, and then the Foins-Batchelors, concluding this
Division.

In the Rear thereof first falls in, the King's Drum-Major and Four other of
the King's Drums and Fife; after them Two Gentlemen-Ushers bearing Two Banners,
the one the Kings, the other the Cities; after them Ten Gentlemen-Ushers,
habited as is set down before; and after them the Livery, which ends that
Division.

In the Rear of them fall others of the City-Trumpets, after them Two Gentlemen
bearing the Banners of the City and the Lord Major, Twelve Gentlemen-Ushers
appointed as aforesaid follow them, and after the Court of Assistants, and put
a period to that Division.

In the Rear of them falls the Serjeant-Trumpet, after him Sixteen other of the
King's Trumpets and Kettle-Drums; after them three other Gentlemen, bearing the
King's, the Duke of York's, and St George his Banner; after them Fourteen
Gentlemen-Ushers, to follow them are appointed Four Pages; and after them, The
Master and Wardens, which terminate the First and Chief Division.

Thus Accomplished, they March from their place of meeting to Clothworkers
Hall, beginning with the Pensioners, until the Marshal comes and makes a Halt
at the Gate, till such time as his Lordship and the Aldermen are mounted.

Which being done, the whole Body move toward Guildhall, where the Lord Mayor
Elect joyneth with the Old Lord Mayor and his Retinue; so all of them march
through King's-street down to Three-Crane-Wharf, where the Lord Mayor,
Aldermen, and their Attendants take Barge; also the Grocers Company do likewise
Embarge; whilst the Residue remain behind, viz. the Gentlemen-Ushers; the
Budg-Batchelors and Foins-Batchelors repair to places of Refreshment.

The Lord Mayors, the Grocers, and the several Companies Barges hasten for
Westminster, and near the Temple, his Lordship is accosted with Two Pinnaces
rigged and manned like Men of War, and beautified with divers Flags and
Streamers, who Salutes his Lordship with several great Guns.

Which being past, His Lordship, the Aldermen, the Company of Grocers, and
other Companies landing at Westminster, have a Lane made them, through which
they pass to Westminster-Hall, and there having performed several Ceremonial
and Customary Duties and Obligations, as, an Oath to be True and Faithful to
His Majesty and Government established; Sealing of Writs in the Court there
held, and having taken leave of the Lords and Barons of the Exchequer, c. and
doing some Charitable offices to the Poor of that Place, return to their
Barges; a Lane being made, as before, for their passage to the Water-side, and
there orderly Embarge.

His Lordship, with those attending him (the Companies,) Land at Pauls-Wharf
and other places, in order to their Stands in Cheapside; Where He and They are
Saluted with three Volleys, by (the Military Glory of this Nation) the Company
of Artillery-men, under the Conduct of the Worshipful Sir Thomas Player; they
being all in their Accomplishments of Gallantry, as Soldiers. From Pauls-Wharf
they march before my Lord Mayor and Aldermen, through Cheapside to Guildhal.
Those that went not to Westminster, viz. the Pensioners and Banners being set
in order, ready to March, the Foot-Marshal leads the way, and in the Rear of
the Artillery-Company, up Pauls-Wharf Hill to St Paul's, where his Lordship is
entertained by the first Scene or Pageant.

Which is upon this Stage: In the Front is erected the Crest of the Worshipful
Company of Grocers, being the figure of a Camel of magnitude, lively carved,
and aptly painted, on whose bunch-back (in a riding posture) sits a
Negro-Boy, beautifully Black, betwixt two Silver Panyers that are fraught with
several sorts of Fruits, as Raysons, Almonds, Figs, Dates, Prunes, and other
variety of Grocery Wares; which, when the succeeding Speech is spoken, he
scatters abroad amongst the People. This Negro holds in one hand a Banner of
the Kings Arms, his Bridle Red and White Ribbon, the Companies Colours, on his
Head a Garland or Wreath of Feathers; at each side of him, on his Right hand,
sits a beautiful Virgin-Lady representing Tellus the Goddess of the Earth,
in a Green Mantle, and a Blossom-colour'd Robe, a Garland of Roses; in one hand
a Banner, in the other a Shield painted with Trees and Flowers. On his Left
hand stands a well-featured Virgin who doth prefigurate Labour, in a Robe of
Ash-colour fringed with Silver, a Mantle of Carnation e^ with Gold, a White
Straw-Hat turned up on one side, with a great Knot of Scarlet and Silver Ribbon;
in one hand a Silver Spade, in the other a Golden Sickle or Pruning-hook.

And, in the Rear of this Camel, in a sublime Seat of Sovereignty, sits
PALLAS the Goddess of Arts and Arms, with long, thick, bright, curled Hair; on
her Head a Silver Helmet, on which is stuck a tall flourishing Plume of Red
Feathers, consisting of a Sprig and divers Falls, with Silver Armour, and a
Golden Gantlet; Carnation Bases Embroidered with Gold; and from the right
Shoulder to the left Side is a Blew Scarf trimmed with Silver; a short Sword by
her side, with a rich Hilt: on her Feet Silver Buskins laced with Scarlet
Ribbon, in one Hand a Lance, in the other a Book open; and on several Descents
beneath Her, in equal order, sit Six Figures, viz. ASTREA the Goddess of
Justice, in a Crimson Mantle trimmed with Silver, over a sad-coloured Robe; on
her Head a Wreath of Baize, in one Hand a Sword, and in the other a pair of
equal Scales. Next to her is seated PRUDENCE, in a Purple Robe embroidered with
Silver, a Mantle of Cloth of Gold, a Chaplet of divers-colour'd Flowers,
bearing in her right Hand a Caduceus, and in her other a Banner. Next to her
sits FORTITUDE, in a Vest of Silver; about her Neck a Corslet of Gold,
holding in one Arm a Pillar of Marble, and in the other Hand a Shield Vert,
charged with an Armed Citadel or Tower, Argent, bearing a Flag on the
Battlements, Gules. On the Left hand of Pallas, in Correspondent Order,
sits, first, LAW, a proper Lady, aptly attired, having on her a long, Sable,
plain Robe, with a Mantle of Scarlet, and on her Head (adorned with long,
curled Brown Hair) a round flat Velvet Cap, turned up with a Rose of Diamonds:
next to her sits PIETY, in a White Robe, with a Black Mantle, a Book in one
Hand, and an Hour-glass in the other; and on her Head a bright, long Silver
Vail reaching all over her Shoulders: and next to her sittteth a Sober person
representing GOVERNMENT, in a Scarlet Robe faced with Furs; about her Neck a
Chain of Gold, and on her Head a Cap of Maintenance; in one Hand the Kings
Banner, in the other the Cities. His Lordship being fixed in the posture of
attention, Pallas rises up, descends to the Stage, and makes Address in
these Expressions.

The First SPEECH, spoken by Pallas.

I Am the Deity of Arts and Arms,
That do by Sciences and loud Alarms
Give Orders to the Universe, from me
Doth issue both Art and Artillery;
My Name is Pallas, by me Men are endued
With Justice, Law, Prudence and Fortitude.

