MArtino?

Signior Francisco? you're the luckiest Gentleman to meet
Or see first in a morning: I never saw you yet
But I was sure of money within less than half an hour.

I bring you the same luck still.

What you do not?
I hope Sir you are not come for an other Warrant?

Yes faith, for an other Warrant.

Why there's my dream come out then. I never dreamed of a buttock but I was sure
to have money for a Warrant. It is the luckiest part of all the body to me: let
every man speak as he finds. Now your Usurer is of opinion, that to dream of
the Devil is your wealthier dream; and I think if a man dream of that part
that brings many to the Devil, 'tis as good; and has all one smatch indeed;
for if one be the flesh, th'others the broth: So 'tis in all his members and we
mark it; if Gluttony be the meat, Lechery is the Porridge, they are both boiled
together, and we Clerks will have our modicum too, though it conclude in the
two penny chop: Why Sir, Signior Francisco.


'Twas her voice sure,
Or my soul takes delight to think it was,
And makes a sound like hers.

Sir, I beseech you.

It is the prettiest contrived building, this:
What Poesie's that I prithee?

Which Sir, that
Under the great brass Squirt?

I that Sir, that

From fire, from water, and all things amiss,
Deliver the house of an honest Justice?

There's like to be a good house kept then, when fire and water's forbidden to
come into the Kitchen. Not yet a sight of her? this hour's unfortunate. And
what's that yonder prithee? O loves famine, There's no affliction like thee. I,
I hear you Sir.


You're quicker eared than I then: you hear me
Before I heard my self.

A gift in friendship
Some call it an instinct.

It may be
The other's the sweeter phrase though; Look you Sir,
Mine own wit this, and 'tis as true as turtle;
A Goose-quill and a Clerk, a Constable and a Lanthorn,
Brings many a Baud from Coach to Cart, and many a Thief to one turn.

That one turn helped you well.

'Tas helped me to money indeed for many a Warrant. I am 40. dollars the better
for that one-turn; and 'twould come off quicker it were ne'er a whit the worse for
me. But indeed when Thieves are taken, and break away twice or thrice one after
an other, there's my gains; then goes out more Warrants to fetch'em again: one
fine nimble villain, may be worth a man ten dollars in and out a that fashion;
I love such a one with my heart, I, and will help him to escape to, and I can;
hear you me that: I'll have him in at all times at a months warning: nay, say I
let him run like a Summer Nag all the Vacation: See you these blancks, I'll send
him but one of these bridles, and bring him in at Michaelmas with a vengeance:
nothing kills my heart, but when one of 'em dyes Sir; then there's no hope of
more money: I had rather lose at all times two of my best kindred, than an
excellent Thief: for he's a Gentleman I'm more beholding to.


You betray your mystery too much Sir. Yet no comfort?
'Tis but her sight that I waste precious time for,
For more I cannot hope for, she's so strict,
Yet that I cannot have.

I'm ready now Signior.

Here are blank Warrants of all dispositions, give me but the name and nature
of your Malefactor, and I'll bestow him according to his merits.

This only is the excuse that bears me out,
And keeps off impudence and suspicion
From my too frequent coming: what name now
Shall I think on, and not to wrong the house?
This Coxcomb will be prating. -- One Astilio,
His offence wilful murder.

Wilful murder? oh I love a life to have such a fellow come under my fingers;
like a beggar that's long a taking leave of a fat lowce, I'm loath to part with
him, I must look upon him over and over first; are you wilful? y'faith, i'll be
as wilful as you then.


Martino?

Mistress?

Make haste, your Master's going.

I'm but about a wilful murder forsooth, I'll dispatch that presently.

Good morrow Sir: oh that I durst saymore.

'Tis gone again, since; such are all lifes pleasures,
No sooner known, but lost; he that enjoys 'em
The length of life, has but a longer dream,
He wakes to this in the end, and sees all nothing.

He cannot see me now; i'll mark him better
Before I be too rash: sweetly composed he is;
Now as he stands, he's worth a woman's love,
That loves only for shape, as most on's do:
But I must have him wise, as well as proper,
He comes not in my Books else, and indeed
I have thought upon a course to try his wit: Violetta.

Mistress.

Yonders the Gentleman again.

Oh sweet Mistress
Pray give me leave to see him.

Nay take heed,
Open not the window and you love me.

No, I've the view of whole body here, Mistress,
At this pore little slit, oh enough, enough,
In troth 'tis a fine out-side.

I see that.

Has curled his hair most judiciously well.

I there's thy love, now, it begins in barbarism: she buys a Goose with
feathers, that loves a Gentleman for's hair; she may be cozend to her face
Wench. Away: he takes his leave. Reach me that letter hither, quick* quick
Wench.


Nay look upon it, and spare not: every one cannot get that kind of Warrant from
me Signior. Do you see this prick in the bottom, it betokens power and speed, it
is a privy mark, that runs betwixt the Constables and my Mr. Those that cannot
read, when they see this, know 'tis for Leacherie or Murder, and this being
away, the Warrant comes gelded, and insufficient.


I thank you Sir,

Look you; all these are Nihils,
They want the punction.

Yes, I see they do Sir,
There's for thy pains, mine must go unrewarded.
The better love, the worse by fate regarded.

Well, go thy ways, for the sweetest Costomer that ever Penman was blessed
withal: now will he come for an other to morrow again; if he hold on this
course, he will leave never a knave in the town within this twelve month: no
matter, I shall be rich enough by that time.


Martino?

Say you forsooth.

What paper's that the Gentleman let fall there?

Paper? Tis the Warrant I hope, if it be i'll hide it, and make him pay for it
again. No Pox: 'tis not so happy.

What i'st Sirrah?

'Tis nothing but a letter forsooth.

Is that nothing?

Nothing, in respect of a Warrant Mistress.

A letter? why 'tas been many a mans undoing Sir.

So has a Warrant, and you go to that Mistress.

Read but the superscription; and away with it:
Alas it may concern the Gentleman nearly.

Why Mistress, this letter is at home already.

At home, how mean your Sir?

You shall hear Mistress. To the deservingst of all her Sex, and most worthy
of his best respect and love, Mrs. Philippa Brandino.


How Sir, to me?

To you Mistress.

Run, as thou love my honour, and thy life,
Call him again, I'll not endure this injury:
But stay, stay now I think on it, 'tis my credit,
I'll have your Masters Counsel: ah base fellow
To leave his loose lines thus; 'tis even as much
As a poor honest Gentlewoman's undoing,
Had I not a grave wiseman to my Husband:
And thou a vigilant varlet to admit
Thou care not whom

Alas 'tis my office Mistress.
You know you have a Kirtle every year,
And 'tis within two months of the time now,
The velvets coming over: pray be milder; a man that has a place must take
money of any body: please you to throw me down but half a dollar, and I'll make
you a warrant for him now, that's all I care for him.


Well, look you be clear now from this foul conspiracy
Against mine honour; or your Masters love to you
That makes you stout, shall not maintain you here;
It shall not: trust to 't. --

This is strange to me now:
Dare she do this, and but eight weeks to New-years tide?
A man that had his blood as hot as hers now, would fit her with
French Velvet: I'll go near it.

If this be a wrong to modest reputation
Be you the censurer Sir, that are the Master
Both of your fame and mine.

Signior Francisco?
I'll make him fly the land.

That will be hard Sir;
I think he be not so well feathered Master,
He has spent the best part of his patrimony.

Hark of his bold confederate.

There thour't bitter;
And I must chide thee now.

What should I think Sir?
He comes to your man for Warrants.

There it goes then;
Come hither knave: Comes he to you for Warrants?

Why, what of that Sir?
You know I give no Warrants to make Cuckolds,
That comes by fortune, and by nature Sir.

True, that comes by fortune, and by nature; Wife
Why dost thou wrong this man?

He needs no Warrant Master, that goes about such business, a Cuckold-maker
carrys always his warrant about him.


La: has he answered well now? to the full?
What cause hast thou to abuse him?

Hear me out I pray:
Through his admittance, he has had opportunity
To come into the house, and court me bodly.

Sirrah, you're foul again me thinks.

Who I Sir?

You gave this man admittance intoth'house.

That's true Sir, you never gave me any order yet
To write my Warrants in the street.

Why sure thou take delight to wrong this fellow, Wife:
Hah, cause I love him.

Pray see the fruits: see what has left behind here:
Be angry where you should be: there's few Wives
Would do as I do

Nay I'll say that for thee
I ne'er found thee but honest.

She's a beast
That ever was found otherwise.

Read Martino,
Mine eyes are sore already, and such business
Would put'em out quite

Fair, dear and incomparable Mistress, --

Oh! every letter draws a tooth me thinks.

And it leads mine to watering.

Here's no villainy?

My love being so violent, and the opportunity so precious in your husbands
absence to night, who as I understand takes a journey this morning.


Oh plot of villainy.

Am I honest think you Sir?

Exactly honest, perfectly improov'd: on, on Martino.

I will make bold dear Mistress, though your chastity has given me many a
repulse, to wait the sweet blessings of this long desired opportunity, at the
back gate, between nine and ten this night.


I feel this Ins-a-Court man in my Temples.

Where if your affection be pleased to receive me, you receive the
faithfullest that ever vowed service to woman -- Francisco.


I will make Francisco smart for it.

Show him the letter, let him know, you know him;
That will torment him: all your other courses
Are nothing Sir to that: that breaks his heart.

The strings shall not hold long then: Come Martino.

Now if Francisco have any wit at all,
He comes at night; if not, he never shall.

Nay mark, mark it Francisco: It was the naturalest courtesy that ever was
ordained; A young Gentleman being spent, to have a rich Widow set him up again:
to see how fortune has provided for all mortalities ruins; your College for
your old standing Scholer, your Hospital for your lame creeping Soldier, your
Baud for your mangled Rorer, your open house for your Beggar, and your Widow
for your Gentleman: ha Francisco?


I Sir, you may be merry: you're in hope of a rich Widow.

And why should not thou be in hope of an other, if there were any spirit in
thee, thou art as likely a fellow as any is in the company. I'll be hanged now
if I do not hit the true cause of thy sadness; and confess truly y'faith; thou
hast some land unsold yet, I hold my life.


Mary I hope so Sir.

A Pox ont, have I found it? 'slight away with it with all speed man. I was
never merry at heart while I had a foot: why man, Fortune never minds us, till
we are left alone to our selves: for what need she take care for them, that do
nothing but take care for themselves? why, dost think if I had kept my lands
still, I should ever have looked after a rich Widow? alas, I should have
married some poor young Maid, got five and twenty children, and undone my self.


I protest Sir, I should not have the face though, to come to a rich Widow with
nothing


Why, art thou so simple, as thou make thy self? dost think y'faith I come
to a rich Widow with nothing?


I mean with state not answerable to hers.

Why there's the fortune, man, that I talkd on;
She knows all this, and yet I am welcome to her.

I* that's strange Sir.

Nay more to pierce thy hard heart, and make thee sell thy land if thou'st any
grace: she has amongst others two substantial Suitors,

One, in good time be it spoke, I owe much money to,
She knows this too, and yet I'm welcome to her,
Nor dares the unconscionable Rascal trouble me;
Sh'as told him thus, those that profess love to her
Shall have the liberty to come and go,
Or else get him gone first; she knows not yet
Where fortune may bestow her, she's her gift,
Therefore to all will show a kind respect.

Why this is like a woman: I have no luck in it.

And as at a Sheriffs table, O blessed custom,
A poor indebted Gentleman may dine,
Feed well, and without fear, and depart so,
So to her lips, fearless I come and go?

You may well boast, you're much the happier man Sir

So you would be, and you would sell your land Sir

I have heard the circumstance of your sweet fortunes:
Prithee give ear to my unlucky tale now.

That's an ill hearing; but come on for once Sir.

I never yet loved but one Woman.

Right, I begun so too; but I have loved a thousand since.

Pray hear me Sir; but this is a mans wife.

So has five hundred of my thousand been.

Nay see and you'll regard me.

No? you see I do,
I bring you an example in for every thing.

This mans wife

So you said.

Seems very strict

Ha, humh.

Do you laugh at that?

Seems very strict you said,
I hear you man, y'faith you are so jealous still.

But why should that make you laugh?

Because she seems so: you're such an other --

Nay Sir, I think she is.

You cannot tell then.

I dare not ask the question I protest
For fear of a repulse, which yet not having.
My mind's the quieter, and I live in hope still.

Ha, hum: this 'tis to be a landed man. Come, I perceive
I must show you a little of my fortune, and instruct you:
Not ask the question?

Me thought still she fround Sir?

Why that's the cause fool, that she looked so scurvily.
Come, come, make me your woman, you'll ne'er do it else,
I'll show you her condition presently.
I perceive you must begin like a young Vaulter, and get up at horse-tail,
before you get into the saddle; have you the boldness to utter your mind to me
now, being but in hose and doublet? I think if I should put on a Farthingale,
thou would never have the heart to do it.


Perhaps I should not then for laughing at you Sir.

In the mean time I fear I shall laugh at thee without one.

Nay you must think friend, I dare speak to a woman.

You shall pardon me for that friend; I will not think it,
till I see it.

Why you shall then: I shall be glad to learn too, Of one so deep as you are.


So you may Sir; Now 'tis my best course to look mildly, I shall put him out at
first else.


A word, sweet Lady.

With me Sir? say your pleasure.

O Ricardo,
Thou art too good to be a woman long.

Do not find fault with this, for fear I prove
Too scornful, be content when you're well used.

You say well Sir. Lady I have loved you long.

'Tis a good hearing Sir. If he be not out now i'll be hanged.

You play a scornful woman? I perceive Ricardo, You have not been used to
'em: why i'll come in at my pleasure with you: alas 'tis nothing for a man to
talk, when a woman gives way too't: one shall seldom meet with a Lady so kind,
as thou playdst her.


Not altogether perhaps: he that draws their pictures must slatter 'em a
little, they'll look he that plays 'em should do it a great deal then.


Come, come i'll play the woman, that I'm used too,
I see you ne'er wore shoe that pinched you yet,
All your things comes on easy.

Say you so Sir?
I'll try your Ladyship faith: Lady well met.

I do not think so Sir.

A scornful Gom,
And at the first dash too: my Widow never gave me such an answer, i'll to you
again Sir.

Fairest of creatures, I do love thee infinitely.

There's no body bids you Sir.

Pox on thee thou art the beastliest crossest Baggage that ever man met
withal; but i'll see thee hanged sweet Lady ere I be daunted with this: why
you're too awkward Sirha.


Hang thee base fellow.

Now by this light, he thinks he dost indeed,
Nay then have at your plumb-tree faith, i'll not be foild,
Though you seem to be careless Madam, as you have enough wherewith all to be,
yet I do, must, and will love you.


Sir, if you begin to be rude, i'll call my woman.

What a pestilent Queens this? I shall have much ado with her I see that; tell
me as you're a woman Lady, what serve kisses for? but to stop all your mouths.


Hold, hold Ricardo.

Disgrace me Widow.

Ait mad, I'm Francisco?

Signior Ricardo, up, up.

Who is't Francisco?

Francisco quoth a? what are you mad Sit?

A bots on thee, thou dost not know what injury thou hast done me, I was in the
fairest dream, this is your way now, and you can follow it.


'Tis a strange way me thinks.

Learn you to play a woman not so scornfully then,
For I am like the Actor that you spoke on,
I must have the part that overcomes the Lady,
I never like the Play else. -- Now your friendship,
But to assist a subtle trick I have thought on,
And the rich VVidows mine within these three hours.

We should be proud of that Sir.

List to me then.
I'll place you too, I can do it handsomely
I know the house so well, to hear the conference
'Twixt her and I, she's a most affable one,
Her words will give advantage, and i'll urge 'em
To the kind proof, to catch her in a Contract,
Then shall you both step in as witnesses,
And take her in the snare.

But do you love her?
And then 'twill prosper.

By this hand I do,
Not for her wealth, but for her person too.

It shall be done then.

But stay, stay Francisco,
Where shall we meet with thee some two hours hence now?

Why hark you Sir.

Enough, command my life,
Get me the widow, i'll get thee the wife.

Oh that's now with me past hope; yet I must love her,
I would I could not do it.

Yonder's the villain Master.

Francisco; I am happy.

Let's both draw Mr. for there's no body with him; Stay, stay Mr.

Do not you draw till I be ready too,
Let's draw just both together, and keep even.

What and we killed him now, before he saw us?

No, then he will hardly see to read the letter.

That's true: good counsel marry.

Marry thus much Sir, You may kill him lawfully, all the while he's a reading
on it, as an Anabaptist may lie with a Brothers wife, all the while he's a
sleep.


He turns; he looks: Come on Sir, you, Francisco,
I loved your father well, but you're a villain:
He loved me well too; but you love my wife Sir,
After whom take you that? I will not say
Your Mother plaid false.

No Sir, you were not best.

But I will say, in spite of thee, my wife's honest.

And I, my Mistress.

You may, i'll give you leave.

Leave, or leave not, there, she defies you Sir;
Keep your adulterous sheet to wind you in,
Or cover your forbidden parts at least,
For fear you want one; many a lecher may
That sins in Cambric now.

And in Lawn too Master.

Nay read, and tremble Sir.

Now shall I do it Mr? I see a piece of an open seam in his Shirt, shall I run
him in there, for my Sword has ne'er a point.


No, let him foam a while.

If your Sword be no better than mine, we shall not kill him by daylight, we
had need have a Lanthorn.


Talk not of Lanterns, he's a sturdy Lecher,
He would make the horns fly about my ears.

I apprehend thee: admirable woman,
Which to love best I know not; thy wit, or beauty.

Now Sir, have you well viewed your bastard there,
Got of your lustful brain? give you joy on it.

I thank you Sir, although you speak in jest,
I must confess, I sent your wife this letter,
And often courted her, tempted, and urged her.

Did you so Sir?
Then first before I kill thee, I for-warn thee my house*

And I before I kill thee, for-warn thee my office; dye to morrow next, thou
never get Warrant of me more, for love, or money.


Remember but again, from whence I came Sir,
And then I know you cannot think amiss of me.

How's this?

Pray hear him: it may grow to a peace:
For Mr. though we have carried the business nobly, we are not altogether so
valiant as we should be.


Peace, thou say true in that: what is't you'd say Sir?

Was not my Father, (quietness be with him)
And you sworn Brothers?

Why Right: that's it urges me.

And could you have a thought that I could wrong you,
As far as the deed goes?

You took the course Sir.

To make you happy, and you rightly weighd it.

Troth i'll put up at all adventures Mr.
It comes off very fair yet.

You in years
Married a young Maid: what does the world judge think you?

Byr'lady Mr. knavishly enough I warrant you,
I should do so my self.

Now to damp slander,
And all her envious and suspicious brood,
I made this friendly trial of her constancy,
Being Son to him you loved; that now confirmed
I might advance my Sword against the world
In her most fair defence, which joys my spirit.

Oh Mr. let me weep while you embrace him.

Francisco; is thy fathers soul in thee?
Lives he here still? what, will he show himself
In his male seed to me? give me thy hand,
Me thinks it feels now like thy fathers to me,
Prithee forgive me.

And me to, prithee.

Come to my house, thy father never missed it.

Fetch now as many Warrants as you please Sir,
And welcome too.

To see how soon mans goodness
May be abused.

But now I know thy intent
Welcome to all that I have.

Sir, I take it:
A gift so given, hang him that would forsake it.

Martino, I applaud my fortune, and thy Counsel.

You never have ill fortune when you follow it.
Here was things carried now, in the true nature of a quiet Duello;
A great strife ended, without the rough Soldier, or the --
And now you may take your journey.

Thou art my glee Martino.

SErvellio.

Mistress.

If that fellow come again,
Answer him without me: i'll not speak with him.

He in the Nutmeg-colourd band forsooth.

I, that spic'd-Coxcomb Sir: Never may I marry again
If his right worshipful idolatrous face
Be not most fearfully painted, painted, so hope comfort me,
I might perceive it peel in many places,
And under's eye, lay a betraying fowlness,
As Maids sweep dust of the house, all to one corner,
It showed me enough there, prodigious pride
That cannot but fall scornfully. I'm a woman,
Yet I praise heaven, I never had the ambition
To go about to mend a better Workman,
She ever shames her selfi'th' end, that does it.
He that likes me not now, as heaven made me,
I will never hazard hell to do him a pleasure;
Nor lye every night like a Woodcock in past
To please some gaudy Goose in the morning:
A wise man likes that best, that is it self,
Not that which only seems, though it look fairer;
Heaven send me one that loves me, and I'm happy,
Of whom i'll make great trial ere I have him,
Though I speak all men fair, and promise sweetly,
I learn that of my Suitors, 'tis their own,
Therefore injustice 'twere to keep it from 'em.

And so as I said sweet Widow.

Do you begin where you left Sir?

I always desire when I come to a Window, to begin in the middle of a sentence,
for I presume she has a bad memory of a woman that cannot remember what goes
before.


Stay, stay Sir, let me look upon you well,
Are not you painted too?

How, painted, Widow?

Not painted Widow, I do not use it trust me Sir.

That makes me love thee.

I mean painted Gentleman,
Or if you please to give him a greater stile Sir;
Blame me not Sir, its a dangerous age I tell you,
Poor simple dealing women had need look about 'em.

But is there such a fellow in the world, Widow,
As you are pleased to talk on?

Nay, here lately Sir.

Here? a Pox, I think I smell him, 'tis Vermillion sure, ha: oil of Ben, do
but show him me Widow, and let me never hope for comfort, if I do not
immediately gueld him, and grind his face upon one of the stones.


Suffices y'have expressed me your love and valour, and manly hate against that
unmanly pride: but Sir, i'll save you that labour, he never comes within my door
again.


I'll love your door the better while I know it Widow; a pair of such Brothers
were fitter for Posts without door indeed, to make a show at a new-chosen
Magistrates gate, than to be used in a Woman's Chamber: No, sweet Widow, having
me, y'have the truth of a man, all that you see of me, is full mine own, and
what you see, or not see, shall be yours: I ever hated to be beholding to art,
or to borrow any thing but money.


True, and that you never use to pay again.

What matter i'st? if you be pleased to do it
For me, I hold it as good.

Oh, soft you Sir I pray.

Why 'yfaith you may and you will.

I know that Sir.

Troth, and I would have my will then if I were as you.
There's few women else but has.

But since I cannot hav't in all Signior, I care not to have it in any thing.


Why you may hav't in all, and you will Widow.

Pish, I would have one that loves me for my self Sir,
Not for my wealth: and that I cannot have.

What say you to him that does the thing you wish for?

Why here's my hand, i'll marry none but him then.

Your hand, and faith.

My hand, and faith.

'Tis I then.

I shall be glad on it trust me: shrew my heart else.

A match.

Give you joy, sweet Widow.

Joy to you both.

How?

Nay, there's no starting now, I have you fast Widow,
You're witness Gentlemen.

We'll be deposed on it.

Am I betrayed to this then? then I see
'Tis for my wealth; a woman's wealth's her Traitor.

'Tis for love chiefly, I protest sweet Widow,
I count wealth but a fiddle to make us merry.

Hence.

Why you're mine.

I do renonunce it utterly.

Have I not hand and faith?

Sir, take your course.

With all my heart; ten courses and you will Widow.

Sir, Sir, I'm not so gamesome as you think me,
I'll stand you out by law.

By Law? O cruel merciless woman,
To talk of law, and know I have no money.

I will consume my self to the last stamp,
Before thou gett'st me.

'Life, i'll be as wilful then too: I'll rob all the Carriers in Christendom,
but i'll have thee, and find my Lawyers money:

I scorn to get thee under forma pauperis,
I have too proud a heart, and love thee better.

As for you Gentlemen, i'll take course against you;
You came into my house without my leave;
Your practices are cunning, and deceitful;
I know you not, and I hope law will right me.

It is sufficient that your husband knows 'em,
'Tis not your business to know every man,
An honest wife contents her self with one.

You know what you shall trust to, pray depart Sir,
And take your rude confederates along with you,
Or I will send for those shall force your absence:
I'm glad I found your purpose out so soon.
How quickly may poor women be undone.

Lose thee? by this hand i'll fee fifteen Counsellours first, though I undo a
hundred poor men for 'em, and i'll make 'em yaul one an other deaf, but i'll have
thee.


Me?

Thee.

I, fret thy heart out.

Were I he now
Il'd see thee starve for man before I had thee.

Pray counsel him to that Sir, and i'll pay you well.

Pay me? pay your next husband.

Do not scorn't gallant: a worse woman than I,
Has paid a better man than you.

1 Why how now sweet Widow?
Oh kind Gentlemen,
I am so abused here.

Abused?

What will you do Sirs? put up your weapons.

Nay, they are not so easily drawn, that I must tell you you, mine has not been
out this three ears; mary in your cause Widow, 'twould not be long a drawing.
Abused? by whom Widow?


Nay, by a beggar.

A beggar? I'll have him whipped then, and sent to the house of Correction.


Ricardo? Sir.

Ricardo? nay by the mass, he's a Gentleman beggar, he'll be hanged before he
be whipped. Why you'll give me leave to clap him up I hope?


'Tis too good for him; that's the thing he would have,
He would be clapped up whether I would or no methinks;
Placed two of his companions privately,
Unknown to me, on purpose to entrap me
In my kind answers, and at last stole from me,
That which I fear will put me to some trouble,
A kind of verbal courtesy, which his witnesses
And he forsooth call by the name of contract.

O politic villain,

But I am resolved Gentlemen,
If the whole power of my estate can cast him,
He never shall obtain me.

Hold you there Widow,
Well fare your heart for that y'faith.

Stay, stay, stay,
You broke no gold between you?

We broke nothing Sir.

Nor drunk to one an other?

Not a drop Sir.

You're sure of this you speak?

Most certain Sir.

Be of good comfort wench, i'll undertake then
At mine own charge to overthrow him for thee.

O do but that Sir, and you bind me to you,
Here shall I try your goodness. I'm but a woman,
And alas, ignorant in Law businesses,
I'll bear the charge most willingly.

Not a penny,
Thy love will reward me.

And where love must be,
It is all but one purse now I think on it.

All comes to one, sweet Widow.

Are you so forward?

I know his mates Attilio and Francisco,
I'll get out process and and attach 'em all,
We'll begin first with them.

I like that, strangely.

I have a daughter run away I thank her,
I'll be a scourge to all youth for her sake:
Some of 'em has got her up.

Your daughter? what Sir? Martia.

I a shake wed her,
I would have married her to a wealthy Gentleman,
No older than my self, she was like to be shrewdly hurt Widow.

It was too happy for her.

I'm of thy mind.
Farewell sweet Widow, i'll about this strait,
I'll have 'em all three put into one Writ,
And so save charges.

How I love your providence.

Is my Nose board? I'll cross ye both for this,
Although it cost me as much o'th'other side,
I have enough, and I will have my humour.
I may get out of her, what may undo her too;
Hark you sweet Widow, you must now take heed,
You be of a sure ground, he will overthrow your else.

Marry fair hope forbid.

That will he: mary le' me see, le' me see: pray how far past it between you
and Ricardo?


Farther Sir
Than I would now it had, but I hope well yet.

Pray let me hear't: I've a shrewd guess of the Law.

Faith Sir, I rashly gave my hand and faith
To marry none but him.

Indeed?

I, trust me Sir.

I'm very glad on it, I'm an other witness,
And he shall have you now.

What said you Sir.

He shall not want money in an honest cause Widow,
I know I have enough, and I will have my humour.

Are all the world betrayers.

Pish, pish, Widow.
Y'have borne me in hand this three months, and now fobd me
I've known the time when I could please a woman,
I'll not be laughed at now; when I'm crossed, I'm a Tiger;
I have enough, and I will have my humour.

This only shows your malice to me Sir,
The world knows you have small reason to help him,
So much in your debt already.

Therefore I do it,
I have no way but that to help my self;
Though I lose you, I will not lose all Widow;
He marrying you, as I will follow't for him,
I'll make you pay his debts, or lye without him.

I looked for this from you.

I have not deceived you then:
Fret, vex, and chafe, I'm obstinate where I take.
I'll seek him out, and cheer him up, against her,
I have no charge at all, no child of mine own,
But two I got once of a scouring woman,
And they are both well provided for, they are in the Hospital:
I have ten thousand pound to bury me, and I will have my humour.

A man must have a time to serve his pleasure,
As well as his dear Friend, I'm forced to steal from 'em,
To get this night of sport for mine own use*
What says her amiable witty letter here?
'Twixt nine and ten, now 'tis 'twixt six and seven,
As fit as can be; he that follows Lechery,
Leaves all at six and seven, and so do I me thinks:
Sun sets at eight, its 'bove an hour high yet,
Some fifteen mile have I before I reach her,
But I've an excellent horse; and a good gallop,
Helps man as much as a provoking Banquet.

Here's one of 'em, begin with him first Officers.

By virtue of this writ we attach your body Sir.

My body? 'life, for what?

Hold him fast Officers.

The least of us can do it, now his Sword's off Sir,
We have a trick of hanging upon Gentlemen,
We never lose a man.

O treacherous fortune,
Why what's the cause?

The Widow's business Sir,
I hope you know me?

For a busy Coxcomb,
This fifteen year, I take it.

Oh you're mad Sir,
Simple though you make me, I stand for the Widow.

She's simply stood for then: what's this to me Sir,
Or she, or you, or any of these flesh-hooks?

You're like to find good bayl before you leave us,
Or lye till the Suit's tried.

O my loves misery.

I'm put in trust to follow't, and I'll do it with all severity;

Build upon that Sir.

How I would curss my self.

Look, here's Francisco,
Will you believe me, now you see his qualities?

'Tis strange to me.

I tell you 'tis his fashion,
He never stole away in's life from me,
But still I found him in such scurvy Company;
A pox on thee Francisco wilt never leave thy old
Tricks, are these lowsy Companions for thee?

Pish, pish, pish.

Here they be all three now: 'prehend 'em Officers.

What's this?

I gave you warning enough to make away,
I'm in for the Widows business, so are you now.

What, all three in a noose? this is like a Widows business indeed.


Sh'as catchd you Gentlemen, as you catchd her,
The Widow means now, to begin with you Sir.

I thank her heartily, sh'as taught me wit: for had I been any but an ass, I
should have begun with her indeed: by this light, the Widows a notable
House-wife, she bestirs her self, I have a greater mind to her now thau ever I
had: I cannot go to prison for one I love better I protest, that's one good
comfort, And what are you I pray Sir, for a Coxcomb?


It seems you know me by your anger Sir.

I've a near guess at you Sir.

Guess what you please Sir,
I'm he ordained to trounce you, and indeed
I am the man must carry her.

I, to me.
But I'll swear she's a beast, and she carry thee.

Come, wher's your Bail Sir, quickly, or away.

Sir, I'm held wrongfully, my Bayls taken already.

Where i'st Sir, where?

Here they be both: pox on you, they were taken before I'd need of 'em, and you
be honest Officers let's Bail one another, for by this hand, I do not know who
will else: -- 'odds' light is he come too? I'm in for midnight then, I shall
never find the way out again: my debts, my debts:


I'm like to dye in the hole now.
We have him fast old Signior, and his Consorts,
Now you may lay action on action on him.

That may I Sir, y'faith.

And I'd not spare him Sir.

Know you me Officers?

Your bounteous worship Sir.

I know the rascal so well, I dare not look upon him.

Upon my worth deliver me that Gentleman.

Which Gentleman?

Not you Sir, you're too hasty;
No, nor you neither Sir: pray stay your time.

There's all but I now, and I dare not think he means me.

Deliver me Ricardo.

O sure he lies.
Or else I do not hear well.

Signior Ricardo.

Well, what's the matter? you may go, who let's you?

It is his worships pleasure Sir to Bayl you.

Bayl me?

I will, I Sir, look in my face man,
Thou'st a good cause, thoul't pay me when thour't able?

I, every penny, as I am a Gentleman.

No matter if thou dost not, then, I'll make thee,
And that's as good at all times.

But I pray Sir,
You go against the Hair there.

Against the Widow you mean Sir,
Why 'tis my purpose truly, and against you too,
I saw your politic Combination,
I was thrust out between you: here stands one
Shall do as much for you, and he stands rightest,
His cause is strong and fair, nor shall he want
Money, or means, or friends, but he shall have her,
I've enough, and I will have my humour.

Hang thee; I have a purss as good as thine.

I think they are much alike, they are rich knaves both.
'Heart, and I take your railing at my Patron Sir,
I'll cramp your joints.

Let him alone sweet honey,
I thank thee for thy love though.

This is wonderful.

Oh Ricardo,
'Tis seven, struck in my pocket: I lose time now.

What say Francisco?

I have mighty business,
That I ne'er thought on: get me Baild, I'm spoiled else.

Why you know, 'tis such a strange miraculous courtesy,
I dare not be too forward, to ask more of him,
For fear he repent this, and turn me in again.

Do somewhat and you love me.

I'll make trial faith
May it please you Sir: -- 'life if I should spoil all now?

What say Ricardo?

Only a thing by'th'way Sir,
Use your own pleasure.

That I like well from thee.

'Twere good, and those two Gentlemen were Bayld too,
They are both my witnesses.

They are well, they are well:
And they were Bayld, we know not where to find 'em,
Let 'em go to prison, they'll be forth-comming the better,
I have enough, and I will have my humour.

I knew there was no more good to be done upon him,
'Tis well I've this, heaven knows I never looked for it.

What plaguy luck had I to be ensnared thus?

O, patience.

Pox O your comfortable ignorance.

Martino, we ride slow.

But we ride sure Sir,
Your hasty riders often come short home Mr.

'Bless this fair company.

Here he's again too,
I am both shamed, and crossed.

See thou who's yonder, Martino?

We ride slow, i'll besworn now Mr.

How now Francisco, art thou got before me?

Yes, thank my fortune, I am got before you.

What no? in hold?

I, of my troth poor Gentleman,
Your worship Sir, may do a good deed to Bayl him.

Why do not you do it then?

La you Sir now, my Mr. he has that honesty
He's loath to take a good deed from you Sir.

I'll tell you why I cannot, else I would Sir.

Luck I beseech thee,
If he should be wrought to Bail me now, to go to
His wife, 'twere happiness beyond expression.

A matter but of controversy.

That's all, trust me Sir.

Francisco shall ne'er lye for it; he's my friend,
And I will Bayl him.

He's your secret friend Mr.
Think upon that.

Give him his liberty Officers,
Upon my peril, he shall be forth coming.

How I am bound to you?

Know you whom you cross Sir?
'Tis at your Sisters suit, be well advised Sir,

How, at my Sisters suit? take him again then.

Why Sir, do you refuse me?

I'll not hear thee.

This is unkindly done sir.

'Tis wisely done sir.

Well shot, foul malice.

Flattery stinks worse sir.

You'll never leave till I make you stink as bad sir.

Oh Martino, have I this for my late kindness?

Alas poor Gentleman, dost complain to me?
Thou shalt not fare the worse for it: Hark you Master,
Your sisters suit said you?

I sir, my wives sister.

And shall that dant you Master? think again,
Why were it your mothers suit; your mothers suit,
Mark what I say, the dearest suit of all suits,
You're bound in conscience sir to bayl this Gentleman.

Yea, am I so, how proov'st thou that Martino?

Have you forgot so soon, what he did lately?
Has he not tried your wife to your hand master?
To cut the throat of slander and suspicion;
And can you do too much for such a man?
Shall it be said, I serve an ingratfull master?

Never Martino; I will bayl him now,
And 'twere at my wives suit.

'Tis like to be so.

And I his friend, to follow your example Mr.

Precious Martino.

You've done wondrous well sir.
Your sister shall give you thanks.

This makes him mad sir.

We'll follow't now to the proof.

Follow your humour out,
The widow shall find friends.

And so shall he sir,
Money and means.

Hear you me that old huddle.

Mind him not, follow me and i'll supply thee,
Thou shalt give all thy Lawyers double fees,
I've burryed money enough to burry me,
And I will have my humour.

Fare thee well once again my dear Francisco,
I prithee use my house.

It is my purpose sir.

Nay you must do it then; though I am old, I'm free.

And when you want a warrant, come to me.

That will be shortly now, within this few hours.
This fell out strangely happy. Now to horse,
I shall be nighted; but an hour or two
Never breaks square in love; he comes in time
That comes at all; absence is all loves crime.

COme, come, let's watch th'event on yonder hill,
If he need help, we can relieve him suddenly.

I, and with safety too, the hill being watched Sir.

Have you the Blew cotes and the Beards?

They are here Sir.

Come, come away then, a fine Cock shoot evening.

Kuck before, and Kuck behind, c.

Troth you're the merriest, and delightfulst company Sir,
That ever Traveller was blessed withal,
I praise my fortune that I overtook you Sir.

Pish, I've a hundred of 'em.

And believe me Sir,
I'm infinitely taken with such things.

I see there's music in you, you kept time me thought
Pretty and handsomely with your little hand there.

It only shows desire, but troth, no skill Sir.

Well, while our horses walk down yonder hill Sir,
I'll have an other for you.

It rids way pleasantly.

Le' me see now: one confounds an other sir,
Y'have heard this certainly: Come my dainty Doxes.

Oh, that's all the Country over sir,
There's scarce a Gentlewoman, but has that pricked.

Well, here comes one I'm sure you never heard then.
I keep my Horse, I keep my Whore,
I take no Rents, yet am not poor;
I traverse all the Land about,
And yet was born to never a foot:
With Partridge plump, with Woodcock fine
I do at midnight often dine;
And if my Whore be not in case,
My Hostess daughter he has her place;
The Maids sit up, and watch their turns,
If I stay long the Tapster mourns;
The Cook-maid has no mind to sin,
Though tempted by the Chamber lin;
But when I knock, oh how they bustle,
The Ostler yawns, the Geldings justle.
If Maid but sleep, oh how they curse her!
And all this comes of, Deliver your purse sir.

How Sir?

Few words: quickly come, deliver your purse sir.

You're not that kind of Gentleman, I hope sir,
To sing me out of my money?

'Tis most sit
Art should be rewarded: you must pay your Music sir
Where ere you come.

But not at your own carving.

Nor am I common in it: Come, come your purse sir.

Say it should prove the undoing of a Gentleman?

Why sir, do you look for more conscience in us, than
In Usurers? young gentleman, y'have small reason for that y'faith.

There 'tis, and all I have; and so truth comfort me,
All I know where to have.

Sir, that's not written
In my belief yet; search, 'tis a fine evening,
Your horse can take no harm: I must have more sir.

May my hopes perish, if you have not all sir,
And more I know than your compassionate charity
Would keep from me, if you but felt my wants.

Search, and that speedily: if I take you in hand,
You'll find me rough, me thinks men should be ruled,
When they are so kindly spoke too, fie upon it.

Good fortune, and my wit assist me then,
A thing I took in haste, and never thought on it:
Look sir, I've searched, here's all that I can find,
And you're so covetous, you will have all you say,
And I'm content you shall, being kindly spoke too.

A pox of that young devil of a handful long.
That 'as afraid many a tall thief from a rich purchase.

This, and my money sir, keeps company;
Where one goes, the other must; assure your soul
They vowed never to part.

Hold, I beseech you sir.

You rob a prisoners box, and you rob me, sir.

There 'tis again.

I knew 't would never prosper with you;
Fie, rob a younger Brother, oh take heed sir,
'Tis against nature that, perhaps your Father
Was one sir, or your Uncle, it should seem so
By the small means was left you, and less manners.
Go, keep you still before me, and do you hear me;
To pass away the time to the next Town,
I charge you sir, sing all your Songs for nothing --

Oh horrible punishment. -- A Song:

Honest Gentleman.

How now, what art thou?

Stand you in need of help?
I made all haste I could, my Master charged me.
A Knight of worship; he saw you first assaulted.
From top of yonder hill.

Thanks honest friend.

I taste this trick already. --

Look, he's gone sir,
Shall he be stopped; what is he?

Let him go sir;
He can rejoice in nothing, that's the comfort.

You have your purse still then?

I, thanks fair fortune,
And this grym handful.

We were all so afraid o'you,
How my good Lady cried Ohelp the gentleman,
'Tis a good woman that: but you're too mild sir,
You should have marked him for a villain faith
Before h'ad gone, having so sound a means too.

Why there's the jest man; he had once my purse.

Oh* villain, would you let him escape unmasacred?

Nay, hear me sir, I made him yield it straight again,
And so hope bless me, with an uncharged Pistol.

'Troth I should laugh at that.

It was discharged Sir,
Before I meddled with it.

I'm glad to hear't.

Why how now, What's your will?

Ho, Latrocinio, Occulto, Silvio. --

What are you caught sir?

The Pistol cannot speak.

He was too young,
I ever thought he could not; yet I feared him.

Y'have found out ways too merciless to betray
Under the veil of friendship, and of charity.

Away sirs, bear him in to the next Cops, and strip him.

Brandino's Copps, the Justice?

Best of all sit, a man of law?
A Spider lies unsuspected in the corner of a buckeram bag, man.

What seek you sirs? take all and use no cruelty,

You shall have Songs enough.
How round the world goes, and every thing that's in it,
The Tides of gold and silver, ebb and flow in a minute:
From the Usurer to his Sons, there a current swiftly runs,
From the Sons to Queens in chief, from the gallant to the Thief,
From the Thief unto his Host, from the Host to Husband-men;
From the Country to the Court, and so it comes to us again.
How round the world goes, and every thing that's in it,
The Tides of gold and silver, ebb and flow in a minute.

What time of night is't?

Time of night do you call it?
Its so late, 'tis almost early Mistress.

Fie on him, there's no looking for him then;
Why sure this Gentleman apprehends me not.

'Tis happy then y'arrid of such a fool Mistress.

Nay sure Wench, if he find me not out in this
Which were a beaten path to any wiseman,
I'll never trust him with my reputation;
Therefore I made this trial of his wit,
If he cannot conceive what's good for himself,
He will worse understand what's good for me.

But suppose Mrs. as it may be likely,
He never saw your letter?

How thou plyest me,
With suppositions? why I tell thee wench,
Tis equally as impossible for my husband
To keep it from him, as to be young again,
Or as his first wife knew him, which he brags on
For bearing children by him.

There's no remedy then,
I must conclude Francisco is an Ass.

I would my letter, wench, were here again,
I'd know him wiser ere I sent him one;
And travail some five year first.

So h'ad need methinks,
To understand the words, methinks the words
Themselves should make him do it, had he but the perseverance
Of a Cock sparrow, that will come at philip,
And can nor write, nor read poor fool, this Coxcomb
He can do both, and your names but Philippa,
And yet to see, if he can come when's called,

He never shall be called again for me sirha.
Well, as hard as the world goes, we'll have a Song we nch,
We'll not sit up for nothing.

That's poor comfort though.

Better then any's brought, for ought I see yet? So set to your Lute.

1 If in this question I propound to thee
Be any, any choice,
Let me have thy voice.
2 You shall most free.
I Which had thou rather be
If thou might choose thy life,
A Fools, a fools Mistress,
Or an old mans wife?
2 The choice is hard, I know not which is best,
One ill you're bound too, and I think that's least.
1 But being not bound, my dearest sweet,
I could shake off the other.
2 Then as you lose your sport by one,
You lose your name by the other.
1 You counsel well, but love refuses,
What good counsel often chooses.

I have got my self unbound yet: merciless villains,
I never felt such hardness since life dwelt in me;
'Tis for my sins: That light in yonder Window
That was my only comfort in the woods,
Which oft the trembling of a leaf would lose me,
Has brought me thus far, yet I cannot hope
For succour in this plight, the world's so pittiless,
And every one will fear or doubt me now:
To knock will be to bold, i'll to the gate,
And listen if I can hear any stirring.

Was ever man so crossed? no 'tis but sweat sure,
Or the dew dropping from the leaves above me,
I thought'thad bled again: these wenching businesses
Are strange unlucky things, and fatal fooleries,
No mar'l so many gallants die ere thirty,
'Tis able to vex out a mans heart in five year,
The crosses that belong to it: first arrested,
That set me back two mangy hours at least,
Yet that's a thing my heat could have forgiven,
Because arresting, in what kind soever,
Is a most Gentleman-like affliction:
But here, within a mile of the town forsooth,
And two mile off this place, when a mans oath
Might ha'been taken for his own security,
And his thoughts brisk, and set upon the business,
To light upon a roguy flight of Thieves,
Pox on'em, here's the length of one of their whistles,
But one of my dear Rascals, I pursued so,
The Gaol has him, and he shall bring ou'ts fellows:
Had ever young mans love such crooked fortune?
I'm glad I'm so near yet; the Surgeon bad me too
Have a great care; I shall never think of that now.

One of the Thieves come back again? I'll stand close;
He dares not wrong me now, so near the house,
And call in vain 'tis, till I see him offer't.

'Life, what should that be? a prodigious thing
Stands just as I should enter, in that shape too,
Which always appears terrible.
What ere it be, it is made strong against me
By my ill purpose. For'tis mans own sin
That puts on armour upon all his evils,
And gives them strength to strike him: were it less
Then what it is, my guilt would make it serve;
A wicked mans own shadow has distracted him:
Were this a business now to save an honour,
As 'tis to spoil one, I would pass this then
Stuck all hells horrors i'thee: now I dare not.
Why may it not be the spirit of my Father
That loved this man so well, whom I make haste
Now to abuse? And I have been crossed about it
Most fearfully hitherto, if I well think on it;
Escaped death but lately too, nay most miraculously;
And what does fond man venture all these ills for,
That may so sweetly rest in honest peace?
For that which being obtained, is as he was
To his own sense but removed nearer still
To death eternal: what delight has man
Now at this present, for his pleasant sin
Of yesterdays committing? alas, 'tis vanished,
And nothing but the sting remains within him.
The kind man baild me too; I will not do it now
And 'twere but only that: how blessed were man,
Might he but have his end appear still to him,
That he might read his actions in the event?
'T would make him write true, though he never meant.
Whose Check so ere thou art, Fathers, or Friends,
Or Enemies, I thank thee, peace require thee;
Light, and the lighter Mistress both farewell.
He keeps his promise best that breaks with hell.

He's gone to call the rest, and makes all speed,
I'll knock what ere befalls, to please my fears,
For no compassion can be less than theirs.

He's come, he's come; oh are you come at last sir?
Make little noise, away, he'll knock again else.

I should have bin at I stria by day-break too,
Near to Valerias house the wealthy Widows,
There waits one purposely to do me good.
What will become of me?

Oh, you're a sweet Gallant, this your hour?
Give me your hand; come, come sir, follow me,
I'll bring you to light presently: softly, softly sir. Exeunt.

I should have given him up to all my thoughts
The dullest young man, if he had not found it;
So short of apprehension, and so worthless,
He were not fit for woman's fellowship;
I've been at cost too for a Banquet for him;
Why't would have killed my heart, and most specially
To think that man should ha'no more conceit;
I should have thought the worse on's wit for ever,
And blamed mine own for too much forwardness.

Oh Mistress, Mistress.

How now, what's the news?

Oh, I was out of my wits for a minute and a half.

Hah?

They are scarce settled yet Mistress.

What's the matter?

Do you ask that seriously?
Did you not hear me squeak?

How? sure you're out of thy wits indeed.

Oh, I'm well now,
To what I was Mistress.

Why where's the gentleman?

The gentleman's forth-comming, and a lovely one,
But not Francisco.

What sai'st, not Francisco?

Pish, he's a coxcomb, think not on him Mistress.

What's all this?

I'ave often heard you say, ye'ad rather have
A wise man in his shirt than a Fool featherd,
And now fortune has sent you one, a sweet young gentleman,
Robbed even to nothing but what first he brought with him,
The slaves had stripped him to the very shirt Mistress,
I think it was a shirt, I know not well,
For Gallants wear both now adays.

This is strange.

But for a face, a hand, and as much skin
As I durst look upon, he's a most sweet one;
Francisco is a child of Egypt to him:
I could not but in pity to the poor gentleman,
Fetch him down one of my old Masters Suits.

'Twas charitably done,

You'd say Mistress, if you had seen him as I did.
Sweet youth, I'll be sworn Mistress he's the loveliest
Proper'st young gentleman, and so you'll say your self,
If my Masters clothes do not spoil him, that's all the fear now,
I would it had been your luck to have seen him
Without'em, but for scarring on you.

Go, prithee fetch him in whom thou comend'st so,

Since fortune sends him surely we'll make much on him;
And better he deserves our love, and welcome,
Than the respectless fellow 'twas prepared for;
Yet if he please mine es never so happily,
I will have trial of his wit, and faith,
Before I make him partner with my honour,
'Twas just Francisco's case, and he deceived me;
I'll take more heed of the next sor't; perhaps now
To furnish his distress, he will appear
Full of fair promising Courtship; but I'll prove him then
For a next meeting, when he needs me not,
And see what he performs then when the storm
Of his so rude misfortunes is blown over,
And he himself again: A distressed mans flatteries
Are like vows made in drink, or bonds in prison,
There's poor assurance in 'em: when he's from me,
And in's own power, then I shall see his love.
'Masse here he comes.
Never was star-cross'd gentleman
More happy in a courteous virgins love,
Than I in yours.

I'm sorry they are no better for you,
I wished 'em hansomer, and more in fashion,
But truly Sir, our house affords it not:
There is a Suit of our Clerks, hangs in the garret,
But that's far worse than this, if I may judge
With modesty of men's matters.

I deserve not
This, dear, and kind gentlewoman, is yond' your Mistress?

Why trust me, here's my Husband young again,
It is no sin to welcome you, Sweet gentleman.

I am so much indebted, courteous Lady,
To the unmatched charity of your house,
My thanks are such poor things they would but shame me.

Beshrew thy heart for bringing o'him: I fear me
I have found wit enough already in him,
If I could truly but resolve my self
My husband was thus handsome at nineteen,
'Troth I should think the better of him at fourscore now.

Nay Mistress, what would he be, were he in fashion,
A hempen curse on those that put him out on it,
That now appears so handsome, and so comely in clothes
Able to make a man an unbeleever,
And good for nothing but for shift, or so
If a man chance to fall in the ditch with better?
This is the best, that ever I marked in 'em,
A man may make him ready in such clothes
Without a candle.

I for shame of himself Wench.

My Master does it oft in winter mornings,
And never sees himself till he be ready.

No, nor then neither, as he should do Wench.
I am sorry gentle Sir, we cannot show you
A courtesy, in all points answerable
To your undoubted worth: your name I crave sir.

Ansaldo, Lady.

'Tis a noble name Sir.

The most unfortunate now.

So do I think truly
As long as that Suites on.

The most unfitting,
And unprovidest sir of all our courtesies,
I do presume is that y'have past already,
Your pardon but for that, and wee'r encouraged.

My faithful service, Lady.

Please you Sir
To taste the next a poor slight Bancket, for sure I think you were*
Unluckily prevented of your supper sir.

My fortune makes me more than amends Lady,
In your sweet kindness, which so nobly shown to me,
It makes me bold to speak my occasions to you:
I am this morning, that with cleerness now
So cheerfully hastens me, to meet a Friend
Upon my states establishing, and the place
Ten mile from hence: oh, I am forced unwillingly
To crave your leave for it, which done I return
In service plentiful.

Is't so important?

If I should fail, as much as my undoing.

I think too well of you, to undo you sir,
Upon this small acquaintance.

My great happiness.

But when should I be sure of you here again sir?

As fast as speed can possibly return me.

You will not fail?

May never wish go well with me then.

There's to bear charges sir.

Courtesy dwells in you.
I brought my horse up with me from the woods,
That's all the good they left me, against their wills too,
May your kind breast never want comfort Lady,
But still supplied, as liberally as you give.

Farewell sir, and be faithful.

Time shall prove me.

In my opinion now, this young mans likeliest
To keep his word, he's modest, wise, and courteous;
He has the language of an honest soul in him:
A woman's reputation may lye safe there,
I'm much deceived else, he has a faithful eye
If it be well observed.

Good speed be with thee sir;
He puts him to it y'faith.

Violetta.

Mistress.

Alas, what have we done wench?

What's the matter Mistress?

Run, run, call him again; he must stay tell him;
Though it be upon's undoing, wee'r undone else,
Your Masters clothes, their known the Country over.

Now by this light that's true, and well remembered,
But there's no calling of him, he's out of sight now.

Oh what will people think?

What can they think Mistress?
The Gentleman has the worst on it: were I he now
I'd make this ten mile, forty mile about
Before Il'd ride through any market town with 'em.

Will he be careful think?

My life for yours Mistress.

I shall long mightily to see him again.

And so shall I, I shall never laugh till then.

IT goes well hitherto, my sweet Protector.

I, and shall still to the end, to the end my honey,
Wherefore have I enough, but to hav't go well sir?

My whole State on it; thou overthrowst him Widow.

I hope well still sir.

Hope? be certain Wench:
I make no question now, but thou art mine,
As sure as if I had thee in thy night-geer.

By'r Lady, that I doubt Sir.

Oh 'tis clear wench
By one thing that I marked.

What's that good sweet sir?

A thing that never failed me.

Good sir, what?

I heard our Counsellour speak a word of comfort
Invita voluntate, hah, that's he wench,
The word of words, the precious chiefy's faith.

Invita voluntate, what's the meaning sir?

Nay there I leave you, but assure you thus much,
I never heard him speak that word in my life,
But the cause went on's side, that I market ever.

Do, do, and spare not: thou would talk with her.

Yes, with your leave, and liking.

Do, my adoption,
My chosen child, and thou holdst so obedient
Sure thou wilt live, and cozen all my kindred.

A Child's part in your love, that's my ambition sir.

Go, and deserve it then: please me well now;
I love wrangling a life Boy; there's my delight,
I have no other venery but vexation,
That's all my honey now: smartly now to her,
I've enough and I will have my humour.

This need not ha'been Widow.

You say right sir.
No, nor your treachery, your close conspiracy
Against me for my wealth, need not have been neither.

I had your fairly, I scorn treachery
To your woman that I never meant to marry,
Much more to you whom I reserved for wife.

How, wise?

I, Wife, Wife, Widow, be not ashamed on it,
It's the best calling ever woman came to,
And all your grace indeed, brag as you list.

Ha, ha.

I grant you sir, But not to be your wife.

Oh, oh.

Not mine? I think 'tis the best bargain
That ere thou made i'thy life, or ever shall again,
When my heads laid: but that's not yet this threescore year,
Let's talk of nearer matters.

You're as near sir
As ere you're like to be, if Law can right me.

Now before conscience, you're a wilful housewife.

How?

I, and I fear you spend my goods lavishly.

Your goods?

I shall miss much I doubt me,
When I come to look over the Inventorie.

I'll give you my word you shall sir.

Look too't Widow,
A night may come will call you to account for it.

Oh if you had me now sir in this heat
I do but think how youl'd be revenged on me.

I, may I perish else; if I would not get
Three Children at a birth, and I could o'thee.

Take off your yongster there.

Take off your Widow first,
He shall have the last word, I pay for it dearly;
To her again sweet Boy, that sides the weaker.
I have enough, and I will have my humour.

O Brother see I'm up to the ears in law here;
Look, Copy upon Copy.

'Twere grief enough if a man did but hear on it
But I'm in pain to see it.

What sore eyes still Brother?

Worse, and worse Sister; the old woman's water
Does me no good.

Why, 't'as helped many sir.

It helps not me I'm sure -- Marti, Oh, oh.

What ayls Martino too?

Oh, oh, the tooth-ach, the tooth-ach.

Ah poor worm, this he endures for me now.
There beats not a more mutual pulse of passion,
In a kind husband when his wife breeds child,
Than in Martino; I have marked it ever,
He breeds all my pains in's teeth still: and to quit me,
It is his eye-tooth too.

I, I, I, I.

Where did I hear late of a skilful fellow,
Good for all kind of Malladies? true, true sir,
His flag hangs out in town here, in the Cross Inn,
With admirable cures of all conditions,
It shows him a great travelling, and learned Emperick.

We'll both to him Martino.

Hark you Brother,
Perhaps you may prevail, as one indifferent.

I, about that sweet Widow.

True; speak low sir.

Well, what's the business, say, say.

Mary this Brother.
Call the young man aside, from the old Woolf there,
And whisper in his ear a thousand dollars
If he will vanish, and let fall the Suit,
And never put's to no more cost and trouble.

Say me those words good sir, I'll make 'em worth
A chain of gold to you, at your Sisters wedding.

I shall do much for that.

Welcome sweet heart,
Thou come most happily, I'm bold to send for thee
To make a purpose good.

I take delight forsooth
In any such employment.

'Good wench trust me

How Sir, let fall the Suit? 'life I'll go naked first.

A thousand Dollars sir, think upon them.

Why they are but a thousand Dollars, when they are thought on.

A good round sum.

A good round Widow's better,
There's meat and money too. I have been bought
Out of my lands, and yielded, but (sir) scorn
To be bought out of my affection.

Why here's even just my Universitie spirit,
I prized a piece of red Deer, above gold then.

My Patron would be mad, and he should hear on it.

I pray what's good Sir, for a wicked tooth?

Hanged, drawn, and quartering; is't a hollow one?

I 'tis a hollow one.

Then take the powder
Of a burnt Warrant, mixed with oil of Felon.

Why sure you mock me.

'Troth I think I do sir.

Come hither honey; What's the news in whispers?

He will not be bought out.

No? that's strange Brother.
Pray take a little pains about this project then,
And try what that effects.

I like this better;
Look you sweet Gentles, see what I produce here
For amities sake, and peace, to end all controversy;
This Gentlewoman my charge left by her friends,
Whom for her person, and her portion,
I could bestow most richly, but in pity
To her affection, which lies bent at you sir,
I am content to yield to her desire.

At me?

But for this jar, 't had ne'er been offered.
I bring you flesh, and money, a rich heir,
And a Maid too, and that's a thing worth thanks, sir:
Nay, one that has rid fifteen mile this morning
For your love only.

Honey, hearken after her;
Being rich, I can have all my money there:
Ease my purse well, and never wage law further.
I have enough, yet I will have my humour.

Do you love me forsooth?

Oh infinitely.

I do not ask thee, that I meant to have thee,
But only to know what came in thy head to love me.

My time was come sir, that's all I can say.

Alas poor soul, where did thou love me first prithee?

In happy hour be it spoke, out at a window sir.

A window? prithee clap it too, and call it in again:
What was I doing then should make thee love me?

Twiriling your band-string, which me thought became you so generously well.

'Twas a good quality to choose a husband for: That love was likely to be tied
in Matrimony, that begun in a bandstring: yet I have known as much come to pass
ere now upon a tassell. Fare you well Sister; I may be cozend in a Maid, I
cannot in a Widow.


Art thou come home again; stickst thou there still?
I will defend thee still then.

Sir you malice
Will have enough on it.

I will have my humour.

Beggary will prove the sponge.

Sponge in thy gascoyns,
Thy gally-gascoyns there.

Hah brave Protector.

I thought 'twould come to open Wars again,
Let 'em agree as they will; two testy Fopps,
I'll have a care of mine eyes.

I, of my chops.

Away, out with the Banner, send's good luck to day.

I warrant you; your name's spread Sir, for an Emperick.
There's an old Mason troubled with the Stone,
Has sent to you this morning for your counsel,
He would have ease fain.

Mary I cannot blame him sir.
But how he will come by it, there lies the question,

You must do somewhat sir, for he's swoln most piteously,
Has urine in him now was brewed last March.

'Twill be rich geer for Dyers.

I would 'twere come to that sir.

Le' me see, i'll send him a whole Musket-charge of Gun-powder.

Gun-powder? what sir, to break the stone?

I by my faith sir,
It is the likeliest thing I know to do it,
I'm sure it breaks stone-walls, and Castles down,
I see no reason, but't should break the stone.

Nay, use you pleasure sir.

'Troth, if that do not
I have nothing else that will.

I know that too.

Why then you're a Coxcomb to make question on it.
Go call in all the rest, I have employment for them.
When the high-wayes grow thin with Travellers,
And few Portmantues stirring, as all trades
Have their dead time we see; Thee very, poor takings,
And Lechery cold doings, and so forwards still;
Then do I take my Inn, and those Curmoogions,
Whose Purses I can never get abroad,
I take 'em at more ease here in my chamber,
And make 'em come to me, it's more state-like too:
Hang him that has but one way to his trade,
He's like a mouth that eats but on one side,
And half cozens his belly, specially if he dine among Shavers,
And both-handed feeders: Stratio, Silvio, and Fiducio,
I will have none left out, there's parts for you.

For us? pray let's have 'em.

Change your selves
With all speed possible into several shapes
Far from your own, as you a Farmer sir,
A Grazier you, and you may be a Miller.

Oh no, a Miller comes too near a Thief,
That may spoil all again.

Some Country Taylor then.

That's near enough by'r lady, yet I'll venture that;
The Miller's a white Devil, he wears his theft
Like Innocence in badges most apparently
Upon his nose, sometimes between his lips;
The Tailor modestly between his legs.

Why pray, do you present that modest thief then,
And hark you, for the purpose.

'Twill improve you sir.

'Twill get believers, believe that my Masters,
Repute and confidence, and make all things clearer;
When you see any come, repair you to me
As samples of my skill; there are few arts
But have their shadows Sirs to set 'em off;
Then where the Art it self is but a shadow
What need is there my Friends? make hast away sirs.

Where are you Sir?

Not far man; What's the news?

The old Justice sir, whom we robbed once by Moon-light,
And bound his man and he in haycock-time
With a rope made of horse-meat, and in pity
Left their Mares by 'em, which I think ere midnight
Did eat their hay-bound Masters both at liberty, --

'Life, what of him man?

He's enquiring earnestly
For the great man of art; indeed for you sir:
Therefore withdraw sweet sir; make your self dainty now,
And that's three parts of any profession.

I have enough on it.

How now, what thing's this?
Now by this light, the second part of the Justice
Newly revived with never a hair on's face,
It should be the first rather by his smoothness,
But I have known the first part written last:
'Tis he, or let me perish, the young Gentleman
We robbed, and stripped, but I am far from knowledge now.

One word I pray Sir.

With me gentle Sir?

Was there not lately seen about these parts sir
A knot of fellows, whose conditions
Are privily suspected?

Why do you ask Sir?

There was a poor young gentleman robbed last night.

Robbed?

Script of all y'faith.

Oh beastly Rascals.
Alas what was he?

Look o'me, and know him sir.

Hard-hearted villains, strip? troth when I saw you
Methought those clothes were never made for you sir.

Want made me glad o'em.

'Send you better fortunes sir:
That we may have about with you once again.

I thank you for your wish of love, kind sir.

'Tis with my heart y'faith; now store of coin
And better clothes be with you.

There's some honest yet
And charitably minded: how, wha'ts here to do?
Here within this place is cured
All the griefs that were ev'r endured.
Nay there thou lie, I endured one last night,
Thou can not cure this morning; a strange Promiser.
Palsy, Gout, Hydropick Humour,
Breath that sticks beyond persumer,
Fistula in ano, Ulcer, Megrum,
Or what disease so ere beleaguer 'em,
Stone, Rupture, Squinancie, Imposthuma,
Yet too dear it shall not cost 'em.
That's conscionably said y'faith.
In brief, you cannot I assure you
Be unsound so fast, as I can cure you.
By'r Lady, you shall pardon me, i'll not try't sir.

Martino, is not yond my hinder parts?

Yes, and your fore parts too Sir.

I trow so,
I never saw my hind parts in my life else,
No, nor my fore ones neither: what are you sir?
Are you a Justice pray?

A Justice? no truly.

How came this Suit to you then?

How, this Suit?
Why must he needs be a Justice sir, that wears it?

You'll find it so: 'twas made for no body else.
I paid for it.

Oh strange fortune, I have undone
The charitable woman.

He will be gone.
Martino, hold him fast, I'll call for aid.

Hold me? oh curss of fate!

Oh Mr, Mr.

What ayls Martino?

In my conscience
Has beat out the wrong tooth, I feel it now,
Three degrees of.

Oh slave, spoiled a fine Penman.

He lackd good manners though: lay hands of me?
I scorn all the deserts, that belong to it.

Why how now? what's the broil?

The man of art
I take you sir to be.

I'm the professor
Of those slight cures you read of in the Banner.

Our business was to you most skilful sir,
But in the way to you, right worshipful
I met a thief.

A thief?

With my clothes on sir,
Let but the Hose be searched, i'll pawn my life
There's yet the Tailors bill in one of the pockets,
And a white thimble that I found in moon light,
Thou saw me when I put it in Martino.

Oy, oy.

Oh, has spoiled the worthiest Clark that ere drew Warrant here.


Sir, you're a stranger, but I must deal plain with you,
That Suit of clothes must needs come oddly to you.

I dare not say which way, that's my affliction.

Is not your worships name Signior Brandino sir?

It has been so, these threescore year and upwards.

I heard there was a robbery done last night
Near to your house.

You heard a truth then sir,
And I the man was robbed.

Ah that's too gross
Send him away for fear of farther mischief,
I do not like him, he's a cunning knave.

I want but aid.

Within there.

Ceize upon that impudent thief.

Then here me speak.

Away;
I'll neither hear thee speak, nor wear those clothes again,
To prison with the varlet.

How am I punished?

I'll make thee bring out all, before I leave thee.

Y'have took an excellent course with this bold villain sir.


I am sworn for service to the Common-wealth sir,

What are these, learned sir?

Oh they are my patients.
Good morrow, Gout, Rupture, and Palsy.

'Tis farewell Gout almost, I thank your worship.

What no, you cannot part so soon, I hope?
You came but lately to me.

But most happily,
I can go near to leap sir.

What you cannot?
Away I say, take heed, be not to venturous though,
I've had you but three days, remember that.

Those three are better than three hundred sir.

Yet again?

Ease takes pleasure to be known sir.

You with the rupture there hernia in scrotum.
Pray let me see your space this morning, walk sir,
I'll take your distance strait: 'twas F. O. yesterday:
Ah sirha, here's a simple alteration,
Secundo gradu, ye F. U. already,
Here's a most happy change; be of good comfort sir,
Your knees are come, within three inches now
Of one an other; by to morrow noon
I'll make'em kiss, and justle.

'Bless your worship.

You have a hundred prayers in a morning sir.

Faith we have a few to pass away the day with:
Taylor, you had a stitch.

Oh good your worship
I have had none since Easter: were I rid
But of this whoreson Palsy, I were happy;
I cannot thread my needle.

No, that's hard,
I never marked so much.

It comes by fits sir.

Alas poor man: what would your worship say now
To see me help this fellow at an instant?

And make him firm from shaking?

As a steeple,
From the disease on it.

'Tis to me miraculous.

You, with your whoremaster disease, come hither;
Here, take me this round glass, and hold it steadfast,
Yet more sir, yet I say; so.

Admirable.

Go, live, and thread thy needle.

Here Martino:
Alas poor Fool, his mouth is full of praises
And cannot utter 'em.

No, what's the malady?

The fury of a tooth.

A tooth? ha, ha,
I though't had been some Gangrene, Fistula,
Canker, or Ramex.

No, its enough as 'tis sir.

My man shall ease that straight, sit you down there sir,
Take the tooth sirha, daintily, insensibly:
But what's your worships malady, that's for me sir?

Marry pray look you sir: your worships Counsel
About mine eyes.

Sore eyes? that's nothing too sir.

By'r Lady I that fell it* think it somewhat.

Have you no Convulsions? pricking aches sir,
Ruptures, or Apostemates?

No by my faith sir,
Not do I desire to have 'em.

Those are ^res,
There do I win my fame sir: quickly sirrah,
Reach me the eye-cup hither: do you make water well sir?

I'm all well there.

You feel no grief in the kidney.

Sound, sound, sound sir.

Oh here's a breath sir, I must talk withal
One of these mornings.

There I think y'faith,
I am to blame indeed, and my Wises words
Are come to pass sir.

Oh, oh, 'tis not that, 'tis not that.
It is the next beyond it; there, there, there.

The best have their mistakings: now I'll fit you sir.

What's that sweet Sir, that comforts with his coolness?

Oh soverign geer: wink hard, and keep it in sir.

Oh, oh, oh.

Nay, here he goes, one twitch more, and he comes sir.

Auh, ho.

Spit out* I told you he was gone sir.

How cheers Martino?

Oh, I can answer you now Master,
I feel great ease sir.

So do I Martino.

I'm rid of a sore burden, for my part Master,
Of a scaled little one.

Please but your worship now
To take three drops of the rich water with you,
I'll undertake your man shall cure you sir
At twice i'your own Chamber.

Shall he so sir?

I will uphold him in it.

Then will I do it sir.

How lively your man's now?

Oh I'm so light me thinks
Over I was.

What i^'t contents your worship?

Even what your worship please, I am not mercenary.

My purse is gone Martino.

How, your purse sir?

'Tis gon y'faith: I'ave been among some Rascals.

And that's a thing
I ever gave you warning of Master, you care not
What company you run into.

Lend me some money: chide me anon I pre' thee.
A pox on 'em for vipers, they ha'suckt blood o'me.

Oh Master.

How now man?

My purse is gon too.

How? I'll never take warning more of thee while I live then, thou art an
Hypocrite, and art not fit to give good counsel to thy Master, that can not
keep from ill company thy self.


This is most strange sir: both your purses gon.

Sir, I'd my hand on mine, when I came in.

Are you but sure of that; oh would you were.

As I'm of ease.

Then, they are both gon one way, be that your comfort.

I but what way's that sir?

That close knave in your Clothes he has got 'em both,
'Tis well y'have clapped him fast.

Why that's impossible.

Oh tell not me sir: I have known purses gon,
And the Thief stand, and look one full in the face,
As I may do your Worship, and your man now.

Nay, that's most certain Master.

I will make
That Rascal in my clothes answer all this then,
And all the robberies that have been don
Since the Moon changed; get you home first Martino,
And know if any of my wives things are missing,
Or any more of mine: tell her he's taken,
And by that token he has took both our purses.

That's an ill token Master.

That's all one sir,
She must have that or nothing, for I'm sure
The Rascal has left nothing else for a Token.
Begone, make hast again; and meet me part of the way.

I'll hang the villain,
And 't were for nothing but the Sowce he gave me.

Sir, I depart ashamed of my requital,
And leave this seal ring with you as a pledge
Of further thankfulness.

No, I beseech you sir.

Indeed you shall sir.

Oh, your worships word sir.

You shall have my word too, for a rare gedtleman
As ere I met withal.

Clear sight be with you sir;
If Conduit-water, and my Hostess Milk
That comes with the ninth child now, may afford it.
'Life, I feared none but thee, my villainous toothdrawer,

There was no fear of me; I've often told you
I was bound Prentice to a Barber once,
But ran away in the second year.

I marry,
That made thee give a pull at the wrong tooth.
And me afraid of thee: what have we there sirs?

Some threescore Dollars in the Masters purse,
And sixteen in the Clerks, a Silver seal,
Two or three Amber beads, and four blank Warrants.

Warrants? where be they? the best news came yet.
'Masse here's his hand, and here's his Seal I thank him,
This comes most luckily: one of our fellows
Was took last night, we'll set him first at liberty,
And other good Boys after him: and if he
In the old Justices Suit, whom he robbed lately,
Will come off roundly, we'll set him free too.

That were a good deed faith, we may in pity.

There's nothing done merely for pity now adays,
Money or Ware must help too.

Give me fortune, give me health,
Give me freedom, I'll get wealth.
Who complains his fate's amiss,
When he has the wide world his?
He that has the Devil in fee,
Can have but all, and so have we.
Give us fortune, give us Health,
Give us freedom, we'll get wealth.
In every Hamlet, Town and City,
He has lands, that was born witty.
HOw well this Gentleman keeps his promise too?
Sure there's no trust in man.

They are all Francisco's,
That's my opinion Mistress: Fools, or false ones.
He might have had the honesty yet y'faith
To send my Masters clothes home.

I those clothes.

Colliers come by the door every day Mistress,
Nay, this is Market-day too, Powlterers, Butchers,
They would have lain most deintily in a Panyer,
And kept Veal from the wind.

Those clothes much trouble me.

Faith, and he were a gentleman as he seemed to be,
They would trouble him too I think;
Me thinks he should have small desire to keep 'em.

Faith and less pride to wear'em, I should think wench,
Unless he kept'em as a testimony
For after-times to show what misetie
He past in his young days, and then weep over 'em.

Weep Mistress? nay sure me thinks he should not weep for laughing.


Martino? oh we're spolld wench, are they come then?

Mistress, be of good cheer, I have excellent news for you, comfort your heart,
what have you to breakfast Mistress, you shall have all again, I warrant you.


What says he Wench?

I'm loath to understand him.

Give me a note of all your things sweet Mistress,
You shall not lose a hair, take it of my word
We have him safe enough.

Olas, sweet wench
This man talks fearfully.

And I know not what yet
That's the worst Mistress.

Can you tell me pray,
Whether the Rascal has broke open my desk or no,
There's a fine little barrel of pom-citrons
Would have served me this seven year, oh, and my fig-cheese.
The fig of everlasting obloquy
Go with him if he have eat it, I'll make haste
He cannot eat it all yet, he was taken Mistress
Grossly, and beastly, how do you think y'faith?

I know not sir.

Troth in my Masters clothes,
Would any thief but a beast been taken so?

Wench, wench.

I have grief enough of mine own to tend Mistress.

Did he confess the robbery?

O no, no Mistress
He's a young cunning Rascal, he confessed nothing;
While we were examining on him, he took away
My Masters purss and mine, but confessed nothing still.

That's but some slanderous injury raised against him.
Came not your Mr. with you?

No sweet Mistress.
I must make hast and meet him pray dispatch me then.

I have looked over all with special heedfulness,
There's nothing missed, I can assure you sir
But that Suit of your Masters.

I'm right glad on it That Suit would hang him yet I would not have him hanged in
that Suit though, it will disgrace my Masters fashion for ever, and make it as
hateful as yellow bands.


O what shall's do wench?

'Tis no marvel Mistress
The poor young Gentleman could not keep his promise.

'Alas sweet man, he has confessed nothing ye wench.

That shows his constancy, and love to you Mistress:
But you must do it of force, there is no help for it,
The truth can neither shame nor hurt you much,
Let 'em make what they can on it, 'twere sin and pity y'faith
To cast away so sweet a Gentleman,
For such a pair of infidel hose and doublet,
I would not hang a Jew for a whole wardrobe on 'em.

Thou say true wench.

Oh, oh, they are come again Mistress.

Signior Ansaldo?

The same mightily crossed Lady,
But past hope freed again by a Doctors means,
A man of art, I know not justly what indeed,
But pity, and the fortunate gold you gave me,
Wrought my release between 'em.

Met you not
My husbands man?

I took such strange ways Lady
I hardly met a creature.

Oh most welcome

But how shall we bestow him now we have him Mris?

'Alas, that's true.

Martino may come back again.

Step you into that little Chamber speedily sir,
And dress him up in one of my Gowns and head-tyres
His youth will well endure it.

That will be admirable.

Nay do it, do it quickly then, and cut that Suit
Into a hundred pieces, that it may never be known again.

A hundredth? nay ten thousand at the least Mris.
For if there be a piece of that Suit left, as big as my nail,
The deed will come out, 'tis worse than a murder,
I fear 'twill never be hid.

Away, do your endeavour, and dispatch wench,
I've thought upon a way of certain safety,
And I may keep him while I have him too,
Without suspicion now: I've heard of the like:
A Gentleman, that for a Ladies love
Was thought six months her woman, tended on her
In her own garments, and she being a Widow,
Lay night by night with her in way of comfort,
Mary in conclusion match they did together,
Would I'd a copy of the same conclusion:
He's come himself now, if thou be a happy wench
Be fortunate in thy speed, I'll delay time
With all the means I can: oh welcome sir.

I'll speak to you anon wife, and kiss you shortly,
I'm very busy yet: Cocksey-down, Mem-berrie,
Her Manner house at Well-dun.

What's that good sir?

The widows your sweet Sisters deed of gift;
Sh'as made all her estate over to me wench:
She'll be too hard for 'em all: and now come buss me
Good luck after thieves hansell.

Oh 'tis happy Sir
You have him fast.

I have laid him safe enough wench.

I was so lost in joy at the report on it
I quite forgot one thing to tell Martino.

What's that sweet blood?

He, and his villains sir
Robbed a sweet Gentlewoman last night.

A Gentlewoman?

Nay, most uncivilly and basely stripped her sir.

Oh barbarous slaves.

I was even fain for woman-hoods sake
(Alas) and charities, to receive her in,
And cloth her poor wants in a Suit of mine.

'Twas most religiously done: I long for her;
Who have I brought to see thee think thou woman?

Nay Sir, I know not.

Guess, I prithee heartily:
An enemy of thine.

That I hope you have not sir.

But all was done in jest: he cries thee mercy,
Francisco sirha.

Oh; I think not on him.

That Letter was but writ to try thy constancy,
He confessed all to me.

Joy on him sir,
So far am I from malice, look you sir;
Welcome sweet Signior; but I'll never trust you sir.

Faith I'm beholding to thee wife, for this.

Methinks, I enter now this house with joy,
Sweet peace, and quietness of conscience,
I wear no guilty blush upon my cheek
For a sin stamped last midnight: I can talk now
With that kind man, and not abuse him inwardly,
With any scornful thought made of his shame:
What a sweet being is an honest mind?
It speaks peace to itself, and all mankind.

Martino.

Master.

There's an other robbery done sirha,
By the same party.

What? your worship mocks,
Under correction.

I forgot to tell thee
He robbed a lovely Gentlewoman.

O Pagan,
This fellow will be stoned to death with Pipkins,
Your women in the Suburbs will so maule him
With broken crew^es, and pitchers without ears,
He will never dye alive, that's my opinion.

Look you your judgments Gentlemen, yours especially
Signior Francisco, whose mere object now
Is woman at these years, that's the eye Saint I know
Amongst young Gallants, Husband, you have a glimpse too;
You offer half an eye, as old as you are,

By'r Lady better wench: an eye, and a half I troa,
I should be sorry else.

What think you now sirs
Is't not a goodly manly Gentlewoman?

Beshew my heart else wife.
Pray soft a little Signior you're but my guest remember,
I'm Mr. of the house, I'll have the first buss.

But Husband, 'tis the courtesy of all places
To give a stranger ever the first bit.

In Woodcock or so, but there's no heed to be taken in Mutton;
We commonly fall so roundly to that we forget our selves:
I'm sorry for thy fortune, but thou'it welcome Lady

My Master kisses, as I've heard a hackney man Cheer up his Mare, chap, chap.


I have him fast Lady, and he shall lye by it close,

You cannot do me a greater pleasure Sir,

I'm happily glad on it.

Me thinks there's somewhat whispers in my soul,
This is the hour, I must begin my acquaintance
With honest love, and banish all loose thoughts;
My fate speaks to me from the modest eye
Of yon sweet Gentlewoman.

Wench, Wench.

Pish, hold in your breath Mistress,
If you be seen to laugh, you spoil all presently,
I keep it in with all the might I have -- puh.

Pray what young gentleman's that sir?

An honest boy y'faith,
And came of a good kind: dost like him Lady,
I would thou had him, and thou be not promised,
He's worth ten thousand Dollars.

By this light Mistress, my Master will go near to make a match anon, me thinks
I dream of admirable sport Mistress.


Peace, thou art a drab.

Come hither now Francisco,
I've know the time, I've had a better stomach;
Now I can dine with looking upon meat.

That face deserved a better fortune Lady
Than last nights rudeness showed.

We cannot be
Our choosers sir in our own destiny.

I return better pleased, than when I went.

And could that beastly Imp rob you forsooth?

Most true forsooth,
I will not altogether sir, disgrace you,
Because you look half like a Gentleman.

And that's the Mothers half.

There's my hand for you.

I swear you could not give me any thing
I love better, a hand gets me my living;
Oh sweet lymon-peel.

May I request a modest word or two Lady
In private with you?

With me sir?

To make it sure from all suspect of injury,
Or unbeseeming private, which heaven knows
Is not my aim now, I'll entreat this gentleman
For an ear witness unto all our conference.

Why so, I am content Sir,

So am I Lady..

Oh Master, here's a rare Bedfellow for my Mistress to night,
For you know we must both out of Town again.

That's true Martino.

I do but think how they'll lye telling of tales together
The pretiest.

The pretiliest indeed.

Their tongues will never lyn wagging Master.

Never Martino, never.

Take heed you be not heard.

I fear you most Mistress.

Me fool? ha, ha.

Why look you Mistress: faith you're faulty, ha, ha,

Well said y'faith, where lies the fault now gossip.

Oh for a husband; I shall burst with laughing else,
This house is able to spoil any Maid.

I'll be revenged now soundly of Francisco
For failing me when time was.

Are you there Mistress? I thought you would not forget that
How ever, a good turn disappointed is ever the last thing
That a woman forgives, she'll scarce do it when she's speechless,
Nay, though she hold up her whole hand for all other injuries,
She'll forgive that but with one finger.

I'll vex his heart as much as he mocked mine.

But that may mar your hopes too, if our gentlewoman be known to be a man.


Not as I'll work it;
I would not lose this sweet revenge me thinks
For a whole fortnight of the old mans absence,
Which is the sweetest benefit next to this:
Why how now sir, what course take you for laughing?
We are undone for one.

Faith with great pain,
Stifle it, and keep it in: I have no receipe for it.
But 'pray, in sadness say; What is the Gentleman,
I never knew his like for tedious urgings,
He will receive no answer.

Would he would not Sir.

Says I'm ordained for him: merely for him,
And that his wiving fate speaks in me to him;
Will force on me a jointure speedily
Of some seven thousand Dollars.

Would thou had'st'em sir: I know he can and he will.

For wonders pity; What is this Genleman?

Faith shall I tell you sir,
One that would make an excellent honest husband
For her that's a just Maid at one and twenty;
For on my conscience he has his Maidenhead yet.

Fie, out upon him beast.

Sir, if you love me.
Give way but to one thing I shall request of you.

Your courtesies you know may lay commands on me.

Then at his next solicitings, let a consent
Seem to come from you; 'Twill make noble sport sir,
We'll get joincture and all; but you must bear
Your self most affable to all his purposes.

I can do that.

I, and take head of laughing.

I've bide the worst of that already Lady.

Peace, set your countenance then; for here he comes.

There is no middle continent in this passion,
I feel it since, it must be love, or death
It was ordained for one.

Seignior Francisco,
I'm sorry 'twas your fortune, in my house sir,
To have so violent a stroke come to you:
The gentlewoman's a stranger pray be counselled sir,
Till you hear further of her Friends and portion.

'Tis only but her love that I desire,
She comes most rich in that.

But be advised though,
I think she's rich heir, but see the proof sir,
Before you make her such a generous Jointure.

'Tis mine, and I will do it.

She shall be yours too,
If I may rule her then.

You speak all sweetness.

She likes your person well, I tell you so much,
But take no note I said so.

Not a word.

Come Lady, come, the gentleman desertfull,
And O my conscience honest.

Blame me not, I am a Maid, and fearful.

Never truth came perfecter from man.

Give her a lip-taste,
That she her self may praise it.

Yea, a match y'faith: my house is luckily for 'em
Now Martino.

Master, the Widow has the day.

The day?

She's overthrown my youngster.

Precious tidings,
Clap down four Woodcocks more.

They are all at hand Sir.

What both her adversaries too.

They are come sir.

God bid the Cook serve in two geese in a dish.

I like your conceit Master beyond utterance.

Welcome sweet Sister; which is the man must have you.
I'd welcome no body else.

Come to me then sir.

Are you he' faith, my chain of gold? I'm glad on it.

I wonder you can have the face to follow me,
That have so prosecuted things against me,
But I have resolved my self 'tis done to spite me.

O dearth of truth.

Nay, do not spoil thy hair,
Hold, hold I say, I'll get thee a Widow somewhere.

If hand and faith be nothing for a Contract,
What shall man hope?

'Twas wont to be enough, Honey.
When there was honest meaning amongst Widows,
But since your bribes came in, 'tis not allow'd
A contract without gifts to bind it fast,
Every thing now must have a feeling first:
Do I come near you Widow?

No indeed sir,
Nor ever shall I hope: and for your comfort sir,
That sought all means t'entrap me for my wealth,
Had Law unfortunately put you upon me,
You had lost your labour, all your aim, and hopes sir:
Here stands the honest Gentleman my Brother
To whom I've made a deed of gift of all.

I that sheh' as y'faith, I thank her Gentlemen
Look you here sirs.

I must not look for pleasures
That give more grief if they prove false, or fail us
Then ever they gave joy.

Ha'you se've me so widow

I'm glad thou hast her not, laugh at him honey; ha, ha.

I must take one that loves me for my self:
Here's as old Gentleman looks not after wealth
But virtue, manners, and conditions.

Yes by my faith: I must have Lordships too Widow.

How sir?

Your manners, virtue, and conditions Widow.
Are pretty things within doors, I like well on 'em,
But I must have somewhat with out-lying or being
In the tenure or occupation of me such a one: ha?
Those are fine things indeed.

Why sir, you swore to me it was for love.

True; but theirs two words to a bargain ever
All the world over, and if love be one
I'm sure mony's the other; 'tis no bargain else:
Pardon me, I must dine, as well as sup Widow.

Cry mercy, I mistook you all this while sir.
It was this ancient Gentleman indeed,
Whom I crave pardon on.

What of me Widow?

'Alas I have wronged you sir; 'twas you that swore
You loved me for my self?

By my troth but I did not.
Come, Father not your lies upon me Widow:
I love you for your self? spit at me Gentlemen
If ever I'd such a thought, fetch me in Widow:
You'll find your reach too short.

Why you have enough you say.

I, but I will have my humour too; you never think of that, they are Coach
horses, they go together still.


Whom should a Widow trust: I'll swear 'twas one of you
That made me believe so: mass, think 'twas you sir
Now I remember me.

I swore too much
To be believed so little.

Was it you then?
Beshrew my heart for wronging of you.

Welcome blessing,
Are you nine faithfully now?

As love can make one.

Why this fills the Common-wealth so full of beggars,
Marrying for love, which none of mine shall do.

But now I think on it: we must part again sir.

Again?

You're in debt, and I, in doubt of all,
Left my self nothing too; we must not hold,
Want on both sides makes all affection cold:
I shall not keep you from that Gentleman,
You'll be his more then mine and when he list
He'll make you lye from me in some sour prison,
Then let him take you now for altogether sir,
For he that's mine shall be all mine or nothing.

I never felt the evil of my debts
Till this afflicting minute.

I'll be mad once in my days: I have enough to cure me, and I will have my
humour, they are now but desperate debts again, I never look for 'em,

And ever since I knew what malice was
I always held it sweeter to sow mischief.
Than to receive money; 'tis the finer pleasure.
I'll give him in his bonds as 'twere in pity
To make the match, and bring 'em both to beggary,
Then will they never agree; that's a sure point,
He'll give her a black eye within these three days,
Beat half her teeth out by Alhall outide,
And break the little houshold-stuffe they have
With throwing at one another: O sweet sport.
Come Widow, come, i'll try your honesty
Here to my honey y'have made many proffers,
I fear they are all but tricks: here are his debts Gentlemen:
How I came by 'em I know best my self.
Take him before us faithfully for your husband
And he shall tear 'em all before your face Widow.

Else may all faith refuse me:

Tear 'em honey
'Tis firm in Law, a consideration given:
What with thy teeth? thoul't shortly tear her so
That's all my hope, thoud'st never had 'em else
I've enough, and I will have my humour.

I'm now at liberty Widow.

I'll be so too
And then I come to thee: give me this from you Brother,

Hold Sister: Sister.

Look you, the deed of gift sir, I'm as free
He that has me, has all, and thou art he.
1. 2. How's that?

You're bobbed, 'twas but a deed in trust
And all to prove thee, whom I have found most just.

I'm bobbed among the rest too: I'd have sworn
It had been a thing for me, and my heirs for ever;
If I'd but got it up to the black box above
I had been past redemption

How am I cheated?

I hope you'll have the conscience now to pay me sir.

Oh wicked man, sower of strife and envy, open not thy lips.

How, how's this?

Thou hast no charge at all, no child of thine own
But two thou got once of a scouring woman,
And they are both well provided for, thei'r in the hospital,
Thou hast ten thousand pound to bury thee,
Hang thy self when thou wilt, a slave go with thee

I'm gone, my goodness comes all out together.
I have enough, but I have not my humour.

O Master, Gentlemen: and you sweet Widow
I think you are no forwarder yet, I know not,
If ever you be sure to laugh again,
Now is the time.

Why what's the matter wench?

Ha, ha, ha.

Speak, speak.

Ha, a marriage, a marriage, I cannot tel't for laughing: ha, ha.

A marriage do you make that a laughing matter?

Ha: I, and you'll make it so when you know all,
Here they come, here they come, one man married to an other.

How? man to man?

I man to man y'faith
Ther'l be good sport at night to bring 'em both to bed;
Do you see 'em now, ha, ha, ha.

My daughter Martia.

Oh my Father: your love, and pardon sir.

'Tis she indeed Gentlemen.

I have been disobedient I confess
Unto your mind, and Heaven has punished me
With much affliction since I fled your sight;
But finding reconcilement from above
In peace of heart; the next I hopes your love.

I cannot but forgive thee now I see thee,
Thou fledst a happy fortune of an old man,
But Francisco's of a noble family.
Though he be somewhat spent.

I loved her not sir
As she was yours, for I protest I knew't not,
But for her self sir, and her own deserving,
Which had you been as foul, as you've been spiteful
I should have loved in her.

Well, hold your prating sir,
You're not like to loose by it.

Oh Violetta, who shall laugh at us now?

The child unborn Mistress.

Be good.

Be honest.

Heaven will not let you sin, and you'd be careful.

What means it sends to help you, think and mend,
You're as much bound as we, to praise that friend.

I am so, and I will so.

Marry you speedily,
Children tame you, you'll die like a wild beast else.

I by my troth should I, I've much ado to forbear
Laughing now, more's my hard fortune.

O Master, Mistress, and you gentles all;
To horse, to horse presently, if you mean to do your Country any service.

Art not ashamed Martino, to talk of horsing so openly
Before young married couples thus.

It does concern the Common-wealth and me,
And you Master, and all: the Thieves are taken.

What sai'st Martino,

Law, here's Common-wealths-men,
The man of art Master, that cupt your eyes
Is proved an arrant rascal: and his man
That drew my tooth, an excellent purse-drawer,
I felt no pain in that, it went insensibly:
Such notable villainies confessed.

Stop there sir:
We'll have time for them: Come gentle-folks,
Take a slight meal with us: but the best cheer
Is perfect joy, and that we wish all here. --

A Sport, only for Christmas, is the Play
This hour presents to you; to make you merry,
Is all the ambition 'thas; and fullest aim
Bent at your smiles, to win it self a name:
And if you edge be not quite taken off,
Wearied with sports, I hope 'twill make you laugh.
STay, stay, Sir, I'm as hungry of my Widow
As you can be upon your Maid believe it,
But we must come to our desires in order,
There's duties to be paid, ever we go further;
He that without your likings, leaves this place,
Is like one falls to meat, and forgets grace.
And that's not handsome trust me, no,
Our rights being paid, and your loves understood,
My Widow, and my meat, then does me good;
I have no money Wench, I told thee true,
For my report, pray let her hear't from you,

