THE generous Citizens, selected for the order of this days Triumph, (according
to the dictates of Ancient Form and Custom) assemble together at Seven of the
Clock in the Morning, at Grocers-Hall.

These Persons are set a part for the Duty of the Day, who meeting at the Time
and Place aforesaid, proceed as follows.

The Foot-Marshal ranks them out, two and two, beginning with the Pensioners in
Gowns, and in the Front of them, places the Companies Ensigns, Four Drums, and
one Fife; in the Rear of them fall in the several Pensioners in Coats bearing
several Banners and Standards; after them, six Trumpets; after them the
Gryphons and Camel Ensigns, (the Supporters and Crest of the Worshipful Company
of Grocers) and six Gentlemen Ushers; after them the Budg-Batchelors, who
conclude this Division.

In the Rear of those, fall six Trumpets; after them, two Gentlemen bearing two
Banners, the one of the Cities, the other of the Companies; after them follow
two Gentlemen-Ushers, after them the Foins-Batchelors, concluding this
Division.

In the Rear thereof first fall in the King's Drum-Major and four other of the
King's Drums and Fifes; after them, two Gentlemen-Ushers bearing two Banners,
the one the King's, the other the Cities; after them, ten Gentlemen-Ushers,
habited as is set down before; and after them the Livery, which ends that
Division.

In the Rear of them fall others of the City Trumpets, after them two Gentlemen
bearing the Banners of the City and the Lord Mayor, twelve Gentlemen-Ushers
appointed as aforesaid follow them, and after them the Court of Assistants put
a period to that Division.

In the Rear of them falls the Serjeant-Trumpet, after him sixteen other of the
King's Trumpets and Kettle Drums; after them three other Gentlemen, bearing the
King's, the Duke of York's, and St. George's Banner; after them fourteen
Gentlemen-Ushers; to follow them are appointed four Pages; and after them, the
Master and Wardens, which terminate the first and chief Division.

Thus accomplished, they March from their Place of meeting to Gold-Smiths-Hall,
beginning with the Pensioners, until the Marshal comes and makes a Halt at the
Gate, till such time as his Lordship and the Aldermen are mounted.

Which being done, the whole Body move toward Guild-Hall, where the Lord Mayor
Elect joyneth with the Old Lord Mayor and his Retinue; so all of them march
through King-street down to Three-Crane-Wharf, where the Lord Mayor, Aldermen,
and their Attendants take Barge; also the Grocers Company do likewise Embarge,
whilst the Residue remain behind, viz. the Gentlemen-Ushers. The
Budg-Batchelors repair to places of Refreshment.

His Lordship, the Aldermen, the Company of Grocers, and other Companies,
landing at Westminster, have a Lane made them through which they pass to
Westminster-Hall, and there, having performed several Ceremonial and Customary
Duties and Obligations, as an Oath to be True and Faithful to His Majesty and
Government established, Sealing of Writs in the Court there held; and having
taken leave of the Lords and Barons of the Exchequer, c. and doing some
charitable offices to the Poor of that place, return to their Barges, a lane
being made as before for their Passage to the Water-side, and there orderly
Embarge.

His Lordship, with those attending him (the Companies,) land at Black
Fryar-stairs, in order to their Stands in Cheapside; where He and They are
saluted with Three Volleys by (the Military Glory of this Nation) the Company
of Artillery-Men, they being all in their Martial Ornaments of Gallantry, some
in Buff with Head-pieces, many of them massy Silver. From Black-Fryar-stairs
they march before my Lord Mayor and Aldermen through Cheapside to Guild-Hall.
Those that went not to Westminster, viz. the Pensioners and Banners, being set
in order, ready to March, the Foot-Marshal in the Rear of the
Artillery-Company, leads the way along by the Channel up Ludgate-Hill, through
Ludgate into St. Paul's Church-Yard, and so into Cheapside, where his Lordship
is entertained by the first Scene or Pageant.

UPon a large Stage, in the Van, is exhibited the lively portraiture of a
well-grown Camel, so curiously Carved and Exquisitely Gilded that it appears
like a live Animal in a Hide of Massy Gold, and is the Crest upon the Arms of
the Worshipful Company of Grocers. This Camel is backed by a young Negro-Boy,
sitting betwixt two Silver Hampers plentifully stored with all sorts of Fruits
and fragrant Spices, and what ever else is pertinent to Grocery; which after
the Subsequent Speech is delivered, the Negro with a Prodigal hand, scatereth
abroad in the Tumult, where you might see an hundred persons confusedly
scrambling in the dirt for the Frail Achievement of a Bunch of Raisins, or a
handful of Dates, Almonds, Nutmegs: This Negro-Boy is habited in an Indian Robe
of divers Colours, a wreath of various coloured Feathers on his black woolly
head. Silver Buskins laced and surfled with Gold, a Bridle of white and red
Ribbon (the Companies Colours) at each hand of him sits a Virgin, one of them
Representing Industry in a Robe of Russet coloured Silk, a Green Sarsenet
Mantle, a Peruke of dark brown hair, about which is a Wreath of Flowers and
Fruits, watchet Silk Hose, gray Buskins laced with Crimson Ribbon; in one hand
she bears a Silver Pruning-Hook, in the other a Banner of the Campanies. The
other Person is a beautiful young Lady Representing Fortune, in a Yellow Robe,
a Purple Mantle, a long curled bright brown Hair, a golden Coronet upon his
Head, Carnation Silk Hose, and Yellow Buskins, laced with Silver Ribbon; In her
Left Hand she bears a green Shield, Charged with a Ship under Sail; and in
her Right Hand a Banner of my Lord Mayors.

And in the Rear of this Pageant is a Fortress, properly called, The Fortress
of Government, Founded upon a Rock of Adamant, whose Walls are of Brass, in a
Quadrangular form, Embattail'd, with several Turrets and Bulwarks, on which
great brazen Guns, mounted upon Carriages, are planted; and (within these Walls
(Situate in the Centre) is erected the grand Golden Tower Royal, on which is
displayed a very large Banner of the Grocers.

FIDELITY, arising up from her Seat with an obedient Bow, addresses to his
Lordship in this Congratulation following.

MUch honoured Lord, This Structure you behold,
Whose outward Walls are Brass, and Tower Gold,
Armed in such Martial manner, doth present
The faithful Fortress of Just Government.
The Adamantine Rock 'tis built upon,
Merits the Name of True Religion.
The Walls are made of Union, and well known
To be Entire; Truth is the Corner-Stone.
The Battlements are Concord, Bulworks be
Built, Manned, and Governed by Integrity.
The Guns are Laws of wholesome Institution,
The Gunner puts them all in Execution,
When Justice gives Command; This golden Tower
Is built by Policy, and held by Power.
Which is in all, and every degree,
The Seat of Government, and Sovereignty:
Loyalty, Vigilance, Fortitude, and Wit,
With Constancy, and Concord, govern it.
Who all (by turns) do take Orders from Me,
That bear the Title of Fidelity.
And though this Fort, thus Armed and Topped by Glory,
Is but a Model built by Allegory:
The Moral's pertinent and pregnant too,
It intimates your Government and You:
Without these Virtues, which are here set forth,
A Magistrate will want much of his Worth.
Rebellion, Fraud, Whoredom, and Felony,
In a short time, will grow greater than He.
But you, my Lord, are furnished with all these
Virtues, and of this Fort deserve the Keys.
'Tis for your Company a Store-House made.
This laden Camel, bears part of your Trade,
Which backed by an Indian, Sallies from the Fort,
To express their Plenty, and to show you Sport:
All which, with every good that Traffic brings
This Year, desires the Shelter of your Wings.
Because you are with all the Graces plumed;
And 'tis by most Wise Virtuous Men presumed,
That with true Justice, Piety, and Power
You'll show your self, a faithful Governor.

This Speech thus ended, and my Lord expressing some Signals of acceptance,
his Honour advances with his Right Worshipful Fraternity (the sage Senators of
the City) further forward into Cheapside; where he is again intercepted by two
distinct Stages, on which are eminently planted two great Golden Gryphons the
Supporters to the Coat Armour of the Grocers Company, on which are Vigorously
mounted two Active Negro's, in rich East-Indian Vestments, with Coronets of
many Coloured Feathers; the one of them bears a large Banner of his Lordships
Family-Coat; and the other as large a Banner of the Grocers Corporation-Coat,
and at the Corner's of both these Stages, fit four Figures in the Habits and
Ornaments as hereafter is described. 1. Love, 2. Honoour, 3. Courage, 4.
Courtezy.

And in the Rear of these Gryphons, on another Stage is a Scene of great
Splendour designed for.

A Shrine, or Indian Structure erected according to the Doric order of
Architecture, adorned with lively pieces of Imagery round about, and* on the
high extremity, is exalted a Masculine lively person, richly Vested in a Silver
Robe; a Sky-colour'd Mantle, a long bright hair, Crowned with a Coronet of
Pensils, of all Colours, holding in his Right hand a Banner of the Kings, and
represents the Triumph of Tranquillity, called Ovatio

This Temple-like Fabric in frontstands so open, that with easiy perspicuity
every Common eye may discharge it's sight up to the high Altar, on which an
East-Indian Deity called OPVLENTA, a Representative of all the Intrinsic
Treasure in the Oriental Indies, and is their Tutelary Goddess, before whose
Shrine the Idolatrous Natives after the preparation of a long Feast) with Pagan
Piety, and diabolical Devotion, prostrate themselves with all the adoration
imaginable.

Her Face and Hair are Black; her Ears are adorned with two rich Pendants of
great round Oriental Pearl, her Shoulders, Breast and Neck, are bare, on which
is a Necklace of Diamonds; she is Crowned with a Coronet of Sun-beams, her Robe
is of all Colours, richly interwoven with Silk, Gold, Silver and Jewels; a
Scarf of Gold, Silver Buskins, laced with Gold Ribbon; in one hand she advances
a Golden Sceptre, in the other she bears a Banner of the Kings.

Beneath her sit three Black Indian Princes, viz. Animalia, Mineralia,
Vegetabilia, who bear in their hands each of them a great Golden Key of 18
inches long, as principal Clavigers or Key-keepers to all the Treasuries of
India, and generally to all Human Nature; Comprehending the diversities of
Traffic and several Commodities, which our Noble English Merchants bring from
India to England, by whom the Druggests are furnished from thence, with Barks,
Woods, Roots, Fruits and Gums, Ambergreece with divers Aromats; which by the
learned directions of the Physician, wisdom of the Chemist, and art of the
Apothecary are extracted and compounded for Curation and Conservation. The
Grocers are supplied and plentifully stored with all sorts of Spices, as
Pepper, Cinnamon, Cloves, Mace Nutmegs, also with Rice, Mastich, Sanders of all
sorts, with variety of fruits, and other Commodities too numerous for
Repetition.

In several Conspicuous and Convenient Vicinitys, about this Shrine fit the
Representatives of six Eminent Indian Cities, in several rich Indian Habits;
with the figures of Cities upon their heads, worn as Crowns or Coronets, and
are distinguished by these well known Appellations, viz. FORTAM, SARABAIN,
TVBAN, MATVRA, SVRAT, and BANTAM, the last of which is the City of most
Traffic, frequented by Portuguese, Dutch and English, in which every day are
three several Markets. The Habits of these three Princes first mentioned, are
thus properly distinguished.

My Lord Mayor being attentively prepared, The Goddess Opulenta, rising up from
her Seat, with a Majestic behaviour doth oblige his Lordship's regard, to the
Delivery of a Speech.

This Clime, is England sure: it doth present
So much of Honour, Union, Government:
And this must needs be London, who in Stute
(As Fame tells me) this Day doth celebrate
The Inauguration of their Magistrate.
This must be He. I wish him good Event,
His Presence doth presage good Government.
Then I address my Self (much honoured Lord)
To you, that bear the Civil, City Sword.
And I have brought Three Princes with me: These
Are they that Keep my Oriental Keys,
Vegetabilia, Animalia and
Rich Mineralia, under whose Command
Are all the Treasures of the Indian Land.
Six Cities do attend me too, but none
So bright and beautiful as is your own.
Here's Fortam, Sarabaia, Tuban, (that
Yields Spice) Matura, Bantam and Surat.
Cities, great Sr. whose Traffic hath been free,
To your Lordship and the Grocers Company:
Who do this Day, (moved by your high Deserts)
In Triumphs pay the Tribute of their Hearts.
Because their good Lord Mayor's Power doth Spring,
From Honour's Fountain, in my Lord, the King.
The Head of four great Kingdoms, yet would be
(Such was his Candor and Urbanity)
A Member of the Grocers Company.
May you prove prosperous, and (when you please)
You shall command my Cities and my Keys;
My Deity it self: But I divine
You do adore a Power greater than Mine,
A God, that doth all other Gods excel,
Imitate Him, and you will Govern well.

His Lordship, well pleased with the Aptitude of this Composition, and the
promptitude of the Emphatical Speaker; expresses some Demonstrations of
Approbation, and moves through the Multitude, until a Scene of Delight, doth
invite him to a Stand, which is an Indian Plantation, with its Governor, the
Speaker, with several Labourers, Planters and Drolls; both for Utility and
Jucundity, Profit and Pleasure.

UNder the declivity of a Verdant Hill, which the Floriferous hand of Nature
had Crowned with a diverse coloured Diadem of Flowers, inclining to that fertile
point of the Compass, which is the Empire of Austere. On a rich Vale is situate
a copious Plantation of Spices, as Woods of Cinnamon, pleasant Groves of Nutmegs
and Cloves, Orchards of Lemons and Oranges, surpassing those of Spain,
representing a Plantation in that part of East-India called the Island of
Zelon, not far distant from the Point of India called Cape Comerin, which for
fertility may be compared to any Country in the whole Universe.

It abounds in Odoriferous Aromatical Spices, with whole Woods of the best
Cinnamon that ever the Sun saw; also there are found the best Smaragds, Rubies,
and Ambergreece throughout all Asia. In this Island, the place of greatest note
is Colmucki, the Seat-Royal of the chief King of that Island, situate on a
Capacious Bay in the South-West of it, and of most Trade in all this Country;
many great Ships laden with Cinnamon, Gems, Elephants, and other Indian
Commodities going yearly thence.

But in this Representative Plantation in that Island, on an eminent
conspicuous Position sits Aromatario, the Governor of it, thus habited and
accommodated: In a Robe of Scarlet-colour'd Silk and Gold; a Mantle of Purple
and Silver; a black curled Peruke; a Coronet of Gold, pointed with several
sorts of Indian Trees which stand erect, as if growing about his head; green
Buskins starrified with Gold, and laced with Silver and Gold Ribbon; in his hand
a Banner of the Companies. Beneath him sit four Figures, representing Toil,
Traffic, Treasure, and Triumph, thus accoutred.

1. TOIL. In a gray silk Robe; an Orange-colour'd Mantle edged and fringed with
Silver; a brownish curled Hair; a wreath of Leaves; green Nutmegs, Cloves, and
large Mace: gray Silk Hose; sky-colour'd Buskins laced with yellow Ribbon: In
one hand a Shield painted with Mattock, Spade, and Grassing-Knives; in the
other hand a Banner of my Lords.

2. TRAFFIC. In a Sand-colour'd Robe of Silk; a Sea-green Mantle, fringed with
Silver and Gold; a fair curled Peruke; a Coronet upon his head, bearing on the
top the figure of a Ship under Sail: In one hand a shield Argent, charged with
the four Winds, Perflant; in the other hand a Banner of the Cities.

3. TREASURE. In a Cloth of Gold Robe; a watchet Silk and Silver Mantle; a long
brown curled Peruke; a Coronet of Gold, richly adorned with Jewels; Crimson silk
Stockings; Gold Buskins, with purple and silver Ribbon; a Banner of the
Companies.

4. TRIUMPH. In a Robe of Carnation and Silver; a Mantle of diverse-colour'd
Feathers, tipped with gold and silver; a black long curled Peruke; a Ducal Crown
of gold, with a Plume of Feathers of several Orient Colours; Pearl-colour'd
Hose; silver Buskins laced with Pink-colour'd Ribbon: In one hand she bears a
Target Vert, charged with the similitude of a Triumphant Chariot OR; in the
other hand a Banner of the Kings.

The front part of the Stage is planted with variety of Trees, bearing all
sorts of Spices and Fruits, as Oranges and Lemons, Citrons and Pomegranates;
with several Planters and Labourers at work, some Digging, some Planting,
others Pruning, Dressing, and Gathering; with divers Drolls, Piping, Dancing,
Tumbling; and sundry kinds of Mimical Gestures, Antic Motions, Ingenious
Confusion, and Studious Disorder: But a general cessation, and silence being
proclaimed, Aromatario their Governor standing up in the posture of an
Address, delivers this following Oration to his Lordship.

ILlustrious Lord, under whose wise Commands
The chiefest City in Great Britain stands,
Aromatario the Governor
Of this Plantation, doth present his Power,
And Profits to Your Praetorship, whose Wit
And well-known Worth can Govern Him and It:
I do not to Your Honour's Hands prefer
The Gifts of Gold, of Frankincense and Myrrh:
Nor can I offer up the Golden Fleece,
But Smaragds, Rubies, Pearl, and Ambergreece,
Gums, Aromats, and Spices of the best,
More Odoriferous than the Phoenix Nest,
Or her own Flames, whose Ashes on that Hearth
At once produce both Funeral and Birth.
But You, My Lord, in Sweets excel that Flame,
Who have the Precious Ointment of Good Name,
No Aromats like His, that is Endued
With Justice, Prudence, Temperance* Fortitude*
No brighter Jewels in both Indies be
Comparative to Faith, Hope, Charity.
Love, Loyalty, Sincerity and Truth,
(The Honour of old Age, Glory of Youth)
These are those Jewels, which when Just men have
They never dye, but bloom even in the Grave.
You being thus Enriched, well may the Voice
Of your Elector's, Triumph in their Choice,
And so do I, who wish you the best Fate
That ever blessed a Happy Magistrate.
My Planting People now shall Sing and Play.
Fall to your Sports, This is My Lord Mayor's Day.

The Speech thus ended, and the Acclamation over, a stout Planter, with a Voice
like a Trumpet, distendeth his copious Chops, and holloweth out this Sonnet;
and all the rest of the Workmen and Drollists sing the Chorus, whilst the
Porters bear the Burden.

WIth Mattock, Spade, Pruning-Hook, Shovel, Sieve,
What a Life of Delight do we Labourers live?
The bonny brisk Planter (for delving designed)
Hath Health in his Body, and Peace in his Mind.
Though this as a Curse in the Scripture we read,
In the Sweat of thy brows thou shalt purchase thy Bread.
Yet by Patience and Labour, in Digging and Dressing,
The old Curse is Converted into a new Blessing.

With Cinnamon, Cloves, Mace, and all other Spice,
We Planters have planted a New Paradise.
We feel no Effects of the Faults that was Adam's,
Here's Pepper for Gallants; and Nutmegs for Madams.
We work, and we Sweat, yet are never the worse;
At the most we have but a Spice of the Curse.
But by Patienoe and Labour our Treasure increasing,
Hath made a Conversion on it into a Blessing.

For London's great Grocers we Labour and Work,
No Plots against Princes in our Heads do lurk:
We Plant, Set, and Sow, likewise for the Physician,
But Plant no Rebellion, and Sow no Sedition.
The Grocers and Merchants are Men of Renown,
They are just in their Trading, and true to the Crown.
And we faithful Planters; since all this is so Sirs,
Let's Pray for King Charles, and his Brethren, the Grocers.

The Song being Sung, they all fall to their Drolleries, and the Foot-Marshal
having placed the Assisants, Livery, and the Companies on both sides of
King-Street, and their Pensioners with their Targets hung on the tops of the
Javelins; in the Rear of them the Ensign-Bearers, Drums and Fifes in the Front,
and hasten the Foyns and Budg-Batchelors; together with the Gentlemen-Ushers to
Guild-Hall, where his Lordship is again Saluted by the Artillery-men, with
three Volleys more, which conclude their Duty: His Land Attendants pass through
the Gallery or Lane so made into Guild-Hall: After which, the Companies repair
to their respective Halls to Dinner, and their Silk-works and Triumphs are
likewise conveyed into Blackwell-hall, and the Officers aforesaid, and the
Children that sit in the Pageants, there refresh themselves, until his Lordship
hath Dined at Guild-Hall.

His Lordship and the Guests being all seated, the City-Musick, after a little
consideration and consultation one with another; conclude to habit themselves
for the performance of a Song of three Parts in Stilo Recitativo; or a Musical
Interlude Presented by three Persons; Crab, a West-Country-man; Swab, a Seaman;
and Self, a Citizen.

Thic New-made Zitty zeemeth ztrange,
Zinc last time thee did zee't;
Cham vinding out the Royal-Change,
To try if the con meet
Some honest plain West Country-mon,
That we may go and Doin,
And zit and chat and gulge a Can,
For that is wellafoin.
Thic is the Exchange that zhoins so pure,
Che ne'er zaw Building neater:
They burned it down on purpose zhowr
To buildne up the better.
Here all the zity Mezles meet
In vest and velvet Rocket;
And here a woundy crafty Cheat
One day did pike my pocket.
'Tis very yearly day it zeems,
For there are view Men come,
Within thic hour they'll vlow in streams,
A Mon con get no rome.
But who comes here, that doth appear
Rigged like a Mon a war:
'Tis a black-wall-ey'd Zea-mon, zhowr

A Sail, a Sail, a Sail,
The Sea-man's come to sight;
Whose Star-board
And Lar-board
Hath been bruised in fight.

A flail, a flail, a flail,
Iche tell the Mon of zeas
Your Sailors
Are failors,
Without Pork and Peas.

I have stood
Bathed in my Blood
When a Brazen Broad-side roars;
My Men dying,
No flying.

Zhips ha no back doors.

Where so e're
Enemies were,
I would chase them like a flock:
And fly at 'em,

From Chatham,
Up to Wapping Dock:

The dreadful; name of Drake,
In thundering Eighty Eight;
Whose Courage
Did forage
For the Spaniard's Plate.
I have with Art and ease,
And Valour on the Seas.
Out-run him,
Out-done him.

What picklid lies are these?

I did once dive
Down at Queen-hive.
I did it all at one jirk,
And under Water
Two hours after,

Rise again at Dunkirk.

Why thou Sheep-biter, how dare thou interrupt me?


Why thou zhip-zhiter, I did but make up Rhyme, for in my conscience thou
had almost zung thy reason out of breath. You said you were two hours under
water, and I thought I would get you a zhore to dry your Daublet.


What at Dunkirk? amongst Strangers?


Yes, why not? zhour the purchasers of that place may allow an English-mon to
dry his Daublet there, che believe they have bargain good enough on it.


My Fame rings
Abroad among Kings;
My Valour is Renowned:
In Salt River
I was never

Born to be drowned.


And what mean you by that Sir -- Speak.


Iche mean you'll have Rope enough about you to devend you vrom drowning:


Sirrah! you have saucy Interpretation: and I could find in my heart to
chastise you with my Cane.


I am a UUhipster Sir. I carry my weapon in my hand, cham not avraid of a whole
Team of Tarpaulins, for I cham zvre you ha'nt a broadzide of Brass Guns in your
Pocket.


Go, thour't a Tarbox.


How, Brother Pitch-barrel?
But, who coms heer?

By his venerable pace, and posture, it should be one Mr. Self a Citizen.


Zelf? Iche think that be a great Name in every Town and Country, especially
amongst the Longeners. But I don't know'n.


Thou art a pretty Comical Fellow: what's thy Name?


Why sir cham not azham'd of my Name, my name is Crab.


Gaffer Crab? a Land Crab? I have seen a great many of your Crawling Kindred in
the Indies, Gaffar Crab.


Gaffer Crab? Crawling Kindred? doth the Meazle take me for a Crablouse? Iche
could find in my heart.


How now, what's the matter?


Faldera, Laidera, Taldara leero


You are very actively merry Mr. Crab.


Yes, I can Crab it away I warrant ye, as well as any zea- Crab o ye all.


O! the valiant strife
Of a Seaman's Life,
Whose Fame is never fading.

Though the Change be full,
Yet the City's dull,
And droops for want of Trading:
It is to little purpose now our weighty Bills of Lading.
Shop keepers know not what to do.

The Contry mon doth Plow and Zow,
Harrow, Weed and Reap and Mow;
But yet is like to starve on it.

The greatest sort of Business now
Is Mam your humble Servant.

What the reason is,
That doth cause all this
I gladly would be guided:

Want of Amity
Breeds Calamity,
We are too much divided;
By Atheistick persons too,
Religion is derided.

With Arguments as light as Air,

Opinion's got in Reason's Chair,
And would control the great affair
Of Man's Eternal being.

The new-vound slights have spoiled our zights,
And caused this disagreeing.

Though the Citizens,
With Tongues and pens
Are new distresses faining;

They do veast their Chopps
With zhugard zopps
And vamous Entertaining:
Yet they cry out that by their zhopps,
They have but little gaining.

They Keep both Town and Country house.

They veed on Capon Pig and Goose.

In Sack and Claret they Carouse,
And spread their plumes in Training:

And yet as if not worth a louse,
They are every hour Complaining.

Through the Ocean curled,
We surround the World
For Merchandise to serve ye:

And the Country Cheap
Brings Bread and Meat,
That Uamine may not ztarve ye.

You live at home in Wealth and Peace,
Whilst we do rock and shelve it,
You wallow in Delight and ease.

We zend you Bacon Beef and Peas,
Whilst we do ditch and delve it;
And don such zimple Clodes as this,
When you wear zilk and velvet.

In your vain dispute of every thing,
Y' are very much misguided;
As it is the Chamber of the King
It should be so provided;
Therefore let no dissention spring,
This Argument's decided.

Your London Tables do excel.

Y' have forty dishes at a meal;

And yet ye neither buy nor sell;
But suffer diminution.

You veed on Uesant, Cock and Teal
Yet cry out Persecution.

Though in Dust and Ashes it lately was hurled,
This City may Vie with all parts of the World.
For true Uniformity, Substance, and Show.
These Fabrics all Buildings in Europe out-go.

But if that no Trading come into the Town,
The City is up, but the Citizen's down.

In Storms and in Tempests, through Waters and Fires,
The Sea-man doth fetch what the City-desires;
From all points of the World we bring Treasure untold,
Musk, Ambergreece, Silk, Silver, Jewels and Gold.
'Tis by the success of the Sea-man's Affairs,
The City's supplied with Shreves and Lord Mayors.
Through Europe, to Asia and Africa we fly,
In Russia we freeze, and in India we fry;
The Antarctic and Arctic we visit by turn,
In one we are frozen, in the other we burn.
We venture by dangerous Seas, Sands, and Shelves,
To bring Wares to the City [Crab.] wealth to your zelves

Our City's the Market, to vend all our Wares,
And Money's the Marrow of all our Affairs,

UUe zarve ye with wheat and malt, wool, milk honey*


It is much for our Love [Crab.] I but more for your money


You'll sacrifice all the fat Sheep in your fold,
To the beautiful Idol of Silver and Gold.

Your Sheep and your Ships do replenish our stock,
And therefore God prosper the Fleet and the Flock:
The one in the Winter-time keeps us warm,
The the other brings Treasure, and guards us from harm
If we want your Traffic, and you want our Coin,
Like Members, let's all in one Body Conjoin.

Since Union and Concord bring Plenty and Peace,
And Amity is the kind cause of Increase:
Let Love from Division our fancy's release,
And all our Dissentions ever cease. --

Dinner being ended, and Night approaching, his Lordship being Attended by a
private Retinue of his own Company, takes Coach, and is Conducted to
Goldsmiths-Hall (where for this Year he doth intend to keep his Mayoralty)
without the Night-Ceremony which hath been formerly, when Old St. Paul's was
standing. When his Lordship is Housed, those that Attend on him depart with
Order and Convenience; and the Triumphs and Silk-works are by the care of the
Masters-Artificers lodged for that Night in Blackwell-Hall 'till the next day
following, and then they are conveyed to Grocers-Hall. To close up all, the
Artists and Artificers (each of them deserving ample Commendations) bid you all
Good Night.


