THe Persons appointed for the Service of the Day, meet about Seven of the
Clock in the Morning at Goldsmiths-Hall.

1. The Master, Wardens, and Assistants, in Gowns faced with Foyns.

2. The Livery, in Gowns faced with Budge and their Hoods.

3. Divers Foyns Bachelors, in Gowns and Scarlet Hoods.

4. Thirty Budge Bachelors, in Gowns and Scarlet Hoods.

5. Sixty Gentlemen Ushers, in Plush and some in Velvet Coats, each of them a
Chain of Gold about his shoulders, and a white Staff in his hand.

6. Thirty other Gentlemen, for carrying Banners and Colours, some of them
being in Plush Coats, the other in Buff.

7. The Serjant Trumpet, and Thirty six Trumpets more, whereof Sixteen are His
Majesties, the other the Duke of York's: The Sergeant Trumpet wearing not only
a Scarf of the Lord Mayors Colours, allowed by his Lordship as his Fee, but
also another of the Companies Colours.

8. The Drum Major to His Majesty, wearing a Scarf of the Companies Colours
cross his shoulders; four more of His Majesties Drums and Fises attend the
Service, also seven other Drums and two Fifes more, each of them (except His
Majesties Servants) are habited in buff-coloured Doublets, black Breeches, and
Scarfs about their wastes.

9. The two City Marshals, riding each of them on Horseback, with six persons
to attend them, with Scarfs and Colours of the Companies.

10. The Foot Marshal and six Attendants, with like Scarfs and Colours.

11. The Master of Defence, with the same Scarf and Colours, having persons of
his own Science to attend him.

12. Many poor Men Pensioners, accommodated with Gowns and Caps, each of them
employed in bearing of Standards and Banners.

13. Divers other Pensioners, in green Gowns, red Sleeves and Caps, each of
them carrying a Javelin in the one hand and a Target in the other, whereon is
painted the Coat Armour of their Benefactors.

Being thus ordered: They are by the Foot Marshal divided into several
Divisions, and ranked out by two and two, beginning with the Pensioners in
Gowns, and in the Front of them places the Companies Ensigns, four Drums and
one Fife, which is the lowest and most inferior Division.

In the Rear of them fall in four Drums and one Fife, after them the several
Pensioners in Coats, bearing several Banners and Standards; after them four
Trumpets; after the Unicorns and Crest Ensigns of the Company, six Gentlemen
Ushers; after them the Budge Bachelors, which conclude the next Division.

In the Rear of those fall six Trumpets; after them two Gentlemen, bearing two
Banners, the one of the Cities, the other of the Companies Arms; after them
follow eight Gentlemen Ushers, and then the Foyns Bachelors, which make up
another Division.

After them two Gentlemen Ushers bearing two Banners; after them ten Gentlemen
Ushers, habited as is set down before; and after them the Livery.

In the Rear of these fall other of the City Trumpets, and after them two
Gentlemen bearing the Banners of the City and my Lord Mayor, and then the
Gentlemen and the Court of Assiants; these conclude that Division.

In the Rear of them fall in four Drums and six Trumpets; after them three
other Gentlemen bearing the Kings, Queens, and Cities Banners; and after them
four Gentlemen Ushers; to follow them are appointed four Pages, and after them
the Masters and Wardens; which conclude all the Divisions.

In this Equipage they March from Goldsmiths-Hall to his Lordships House,
beginning with the Pensioners, until the Marshal comes, and makes a halt at the
Gate, till such time the Lord Mayor and Aldermen are mounted.

Which being done, the whole Body move towards Guildhall, and at Guildhall Gate
the new Lord Mayor joyneth with the old Lord Mayor and his Attendants: So all
of them march through King-street down to Three-Crane Wharf, and then the Lord
Mayor, Aldermen, and their Attendants, at the West end of the said Wharf take
their Barge; the Court of Assistants, the Livery, and the Gentlemen Ushers of
those three Divisions, at the East end of the said Wharf; whilst the residue of
the Retinue that remain behind, viz. some Gentlemen Ushers, the Budge
Bachelors and Foyns Bachelors, repair to places of repose.

The Lord Mayors, the Goldsmiths, and the several Companies Barges hasten to
Westminster; and near White-Fryers a Pleasure-boat adorned with Flags and
Streamers salutes his Lordship with several great Guns. His Lordship, the
Aldermen, the Company of Goldsmiths, and other Companies landing at
Westminster, have a Lane made them, through which they pass to the Hall: And
there, having performed several Ceremonial Duties and Obligations, as an Oath
to be true and faithful to His Majesty and Government established, with Sealing
of Writs in the Courts there held; and having taken leave of the Lords and
Barons of the Exchequer, c. and doing some charitable offices to the poor of
that place, return to their Barges; and a Lane being made as before, for their
passage to the Waters side, they there imbarge.

His Lordship, with those attending him (the Companies) land at Pauls-Wharf and
other places, in order to their Stands in Cheapside, where he and they are
saluted with three Volleys by (the Military Glory of this Nation) the Company
of Artillery Men, under the Conduct of the most accomplished, for Arms and
Arts, the Right Worshipful Sir Thomas Player, they being all in their Martial
Ornaments of Gallantry; some in Buff, with Head-pieces, many of massy Silver,
(of whose Honourable Society, his Lordship hath been a worthy Member.) From
Pauls-Wharf they March before my Lord through a Gallery of the aforesaid
Bachelors and Gentlemen Ushers, who did not go to Westminster; and likewise,
the Pensioners and Banners being set in order, ready to March, the Foot-Marshal
leads the way, and in the Rear of the Artillery-Company up Pauls-Wharf-hill to
the South Church-yard of St. Paul's, where his Lordship is entertained by the
First Scene or Pageant, as follows.

A Large Triumphant Chariot of Gold, richly set with divers inestimable and
various-colour'd Jewils of dazleing splendour, adorned with sundry curious
Figures, Fictitious Stories, and delightful Landscapes; an Ascent of Seats up to
a Throne, whereon a Person of Majestic Aspect sits, The Representer of
Justice; Hieroglyphically attired, in a long Red Robe, and on it a golden
Mantle fringed with Silver; on her Head, a long disheveled Hair, of Flaxen
colour, curiously curled, on which is a Coronet of Silver; In her left Hand, she
advances a Touch-stone, (the Tryer of Truth, and Discoverer of Falsehood,) In
her right Hand, she holds up a golden Balance, with Silver Scales,
Equi-ponderant, to Weigh Justly and Impartially; Her Arms dependent on the
heads of two Leopards, which Emblematically intimate Courage and Constancy:
This Chariot is drawn by two Golden Unicorns, in excellent Carving work, with
equal Magnitude, to the Life; on whose backs are mounted two beautiful
Raven-black Negrees, attired according to the dress of India; on their Heads,
Wreaths of divers coloured Feathers; In their right hands, they hold golden
Cups, in their left hands, two displayed Banners, the one of the Kings, the
other of the Companies Arms. All which represent the Crest and the Supporters
of the Ancient, Famous, and Worshipful Company of Gold-Smiths.

My Lord Mayor, with the Aldermen, drawing near and viewing the Curiosity of
this Model, is Complemented by the Figure of Justice, in this Congratulatory
POEM.

what Reverend Person doth approach my Sight,
Filling my Soul with Intellectual Light?
That Velvet Robe and Collar, Answers strait,
'Tis Loyal LONDON's new-Sworn Magistrate:
Who is to guide his Course through this Years Tract,
'Till Phoebus have run round the Zodiac.
And there's much hope that He in Truth will shine
No less than Sol in his Ecliptic Line.
Then I address my Self, Great Sir, to you,
To whom this Touch-stone, and these Scales are due:
The Sword of Justice, your own hand doth Gripe;
You are the Truth, my Lord, I'm but the Type:
The Active Power is seated in your Breast,
You are the Heart, I only am the Crest
Of your Indulgent Company, who now
To Serve you, have sent their Supporters too,
Unicorns, with such Antlers, that when
Your Fame shall be envenomed by Vile men,
May prove safe Antidotes, for here of late
The best of men have born the worst of Fate.
But you, my Lord, by Dignity of Spirit,
Vrbanity and Probity do merit
The Love and high applause of every Creature
That is endued with Virtue and good Nature.
No matter what malicious Persons vent;
A bad man's Praise, is a Disparagement:
But all Wise-men will their due Praises bring
To You, that serve your COUNTRY, and your KING.
The Speech being ended, his Lordship giving a signal of acceptance, and rides
with his Retinue through Cheap-side, where he is Jocally obstructed by a Second
Pageant of Humour, Fancy, and Drollery, delineated in this Manner.

IN the Rear of this Pageant is a Rustic Building in a Quadrangular form,
where sitting on four Neeches, are four Figures; on the right Hand sits
Bacchus, a Person of a swarthy Complexion, with short brown curled Hair, wearing
a loose Robe of Purple, a Scarf from the Right Shoulder to the left side, of
Grapes and Leaves, a Garland of Ivy on his Head, in his right hand a large
Rummiken half filled, and in his left hand a Banner of my Lord Mayors.

On the left side sits Sylvanus, God of the Woods, in a long Russet Robe,
painted all over with Trees, Birds, and Beasts; on his Head, a Peruke of long
curled grey Hair, and about it, a Chaplet of Oaken leaves, intermingled with
Sprigs of Acorns, and their Apples; in his right Hand a Wood-bill, with a long
Silver Staff, and in his left, a Banner of the Companies Arms.

In the Rear, upon a Third Angle, sits Phigalia, a Dryad, or Wood Nymph, in
a Robe of French Green, with a Scarf of Gold; a long curled brown Hair, and
about her Head a Garland of Wild-flowers, and under her left Arm a Cornucopia,
of wild Fruits; and in her right Hand a Banner of the Fishmongers. On the
Fourth Angle, another Nymph, with a Silk Ash-colour'd Robe, with a Scarf,
fringed with Green and Silver, with a Banner of the City.

The ascent to this Rustic Mansion, is natively embroidered with Brambles,
Thorns, and Briars, of all sorts, bearing large visible clusters of Berries,
red, black, and green, Hipps and Haws, c. with small Trees, laden with wild
Fruits; and at the foot of this building on the right Hand, under Bacchus,
flourishes an orderly planted Vineyard, wearing green and yellow Leaves, as in
Autum, intermingled with large Clusters of plump Grapes, with Vinitorians and
Vine-dressers, in naked Tawny Shapes, with Grapes and Leaves bound about their
Heads and Middle.

On the left hand is a Forest, properly accommodated and wildly adorned with
variety of Trees, Ravenous Beasts and Birds, Inhabited by Satyrs, which are
formed like Goats from the middle downwards, with Goats Feet, and Men's Heads,
with short black curled Hair, and upright Horns, with hairy Bodies.

Also divers Wood Nymphs the Dryads, and Hamadryades, significantly attired,
in green Silk Robes, and gray Silk Mantles, fringed with Gold and Silver,
wearing about their Heads, Garlands of Wood-bine, Honey-Suckles, Wild-Roses,
Marjoram, and wild Thyme; Their action properly is Dancing in Rings, which the
Sylvans and Satyrs perceiving, they mingle in their Measures, and Dance with
them several Art-less Roundelays, to the Music of a Piper.

His Lordship having delightfully past a short space of time in the observation
and survey of this ingenuous Model of Rusticity, the Pageant moves one way,
and my Lord another, until he come against Bow-Church, where a Third Pageant
doth interpose, and his Lordship is kindly intercepted with a Scene called the
Orfery, according to this following Description.

ON a very large Pageant, is a very rich Seat of State, containing the
Representor of, the Patron to the Goldsmiths Company, Saint Dunstan, attired in
a dress properly expressing his Prelatical Dignity, in a Robe of fine white
Lawn, over which he wears a Cope or Vest of costly bright Cloth of Gold, down
to the ground; on his Reverend grey Head, a golden Mitre, set with Topaz, Ruby,
Emrald, Amethyst and Saphyr; in his left Hand he holds a golden Crosier, and
in his right Hand he uses a pair of Goldsmiths Tongs: Beneath these Steps of
Ascension to his Chair, in opposition to St. Dunstan, is properly planted a
Goldsmiths Forge and Furnace, with fire and Gold in it, a Workman blowing with
the Bellows: On his right and left hand there is a large Press of Gold and
Silver Plate, representing a Shop of Trade: And further in front, are several
Artificers at work on Anvils with Hammers, beating out Plate fit for the
forgery and formation of several Vessels in Gold and Silver. There are likewise
in the Shop, divers Wedges or Ingots of Gold and Silver. And a Step below St.
Dunstan, sits an Assay Master, with his Class Frame and Balance, for Trial
of Gold and Silver, according to the Standard. In another place, there is also
disgrossing, drawing, and flatting of Gold and Silver Wire. There are also
Finers melting, smelting, fining, and parting Gold and Silver, both by fire and
water. And in a March before this Orfery, are divers Miners in Canvass
Breeches, red Waistcoats and red Caps, bearing Spades, Pickaxes, Twibills and
Crows, fit to sink Shafts and make Addits. The Devil also appearing to St.
Dunstan, is caught by the Nose at a proper Qu. which is given in his Speech.
When the Speech is spoken, the great Anvil is set forth, with a Silversmith
holding on it a Plate of Massy Silver, and three other Workmen at work,
keeping excellent time in their orderly strokes upon the Anvil.

His Lordship having well surveyed the Curiosity of the Design, the good order
of the Scene, with the variety and aptitude of the whole Concern: Being
attentively fixed, St. Dunstan rising up, all the Workmen cease, whilst he
makes Addresses to my Lord, in this ensuing Metrical Congratulation.

FRom gloomy Shades of blessed Elizium, I,
That am the Master of your Mystery,
The GOLDSMITHS Patron, Dunstan, come to grace
Your Triumphs, and conduct you to your Place
Of Government, where you, My Lord, as MAYER,
Are chose to add an Honour to the Chair
Of God-like Equity, and there to do
What Justice, Law, and Truth shall prompt you to:
Where I shall safely guard you from all Wrongs,
The Devil himself dares not come near my Tongs:
Behold the Experiment -- So shall all those
Suffer, that dare maliciously oppose
London's LORD MAYOR, whose Value has been tried,
And found intrinsically purifi'd:
So are the Company of which you're free,
For Truth and Treasure, a Society
In all parts fitted to adorn Great States,
And prove a Nursery for Magistrates,
Who are well pleased in this Triumphant Show
To express their loving Services, and do
More than They've done these Fifty Years 'till now.
Then, may it please Your Lordship, cast your Eye
Upon this Working-place, the Orferie,
And view the Artificers employed by us,
Not for the Silver Shrines at Ephesus
To Deify Diana: for our Plate
Is formed for Household Use and Feasts of State.
With Pickaxe, Spade, and Twibil, there march Miners;
Here are the Melters, Smelters, and Refiners;
And in that place are Labourers and Coyners.
Then hey for Goldsmiths-Hall, GOD, and St. George!
Here is the Assay-Master, there is the Forge:
And this small Press doth massy Plate afford.
Take Courage, Sir! I prophecy, My Lord,
That for Gods Glory, and the Good of Men,
You'll once more see the Golden Age again.
May you for ever live free from Disasters:
So, Benedicite -- Work on my Masters.
The Speech being ended, the Workmen all fall to work again, and his Lordship
giving manifest Signs of approbation, advances toward Guildhall, but near St.
Laurence-Lane end he beholds a new occasion for a halt, where he is saluted
with the delightful prospect of a Triumphant Pageant, for Beauty and
Magnificence every way correspondent to this Description.

THe Temple of Apollo elegantly Erected, according to the Corinthian Order: On
the top of which, upon a Pedestal eminently elevated, fitteth a beautiful young
Person, representing the Sun, with lovely long curled yellow Hair, his Head
circled with a Glory of Scintillations, imitating a Ring of Rays or Sun-beams,
attired in a golden Vest, a silver Scarf, on which hangs a silver Quiver of
Arrows, fearhered with gold, a silver Bow in one hand, and the Kings Banner in
the other. At the foot of this Pyramid, in equal order and in circular session,
sit the Representers of the Four Quarters of the World.

A proper Man-like Woman, in a short purple Vest, skirted with Labels, richly
embroidered with gold, reaching down half way the Thigh; a short Petticoat of
Cloth of silver, laced round about with divers gold Fringes, reaching down to
her Knees; a pair of scarlet silk Stockings, silver Shoes, tied with purple and
gold Ribbon; a silver Scarf from the right Shoulder to the left Side; a short
Sword in a Crimson Velvet Scabberd, with the Chape and Hilt of Gold; a long
dark brown Hair, curled in rings; on her Head a War-like Beaver or Helmet,
after the Roman Fashion, of Gold, and in the Socket of it behind, a Sprig with
divers falls of Feathers; in her left Hand a silver Buckler, and in her right
Hand a Banner of the King's Arms.

A Majestic Person, having short curled light-brown Hair; on her Head, a
golden Turbat, on which is an upright Sprig of several coloured Feathers, with
a Rose of Jewels, of great compass, upon the Turbat; a Scarlet coloured silk
Robe, richly Laced down to the bottom with very broad silver Lace; a gold and
silver Scarf, and in it a Scimitar, with a gold Scabberd and a silver Hilt; in
her right Hand a silver Lance, in the other the Banner of the City.

A tall Person, with a Face, Shoulders, Breast and Neck, all black, with Ropes
of large round Pearl, about it, and also about her Arms; Pendants of great
bright Jewels, hanging down from her Ears; a black woolly-curl'd Hair, on it a
Coronet of upright Feathers; an Indian Gown very rich, of divers Colours; a
Girdle of Feathers about her middle; a Sky-coloured Scarf worn like a Shoulder
belt; a Quiver of Arrows at her Back, an Indian Bow in her left hand and a
Banner of my Lords in her right.

A strait stout Person, with a Tanned Face, Neck, and Breast, with a triple
Chain of Diamonds about her Neck; sleek black Hair; a Coronet of Gold, with a
great plume of Feathers; rich Jewels in her Ears; a short Vest of Gold, on
short Bases of Silver; Sky-coloured-Silk-hose, and Silver Buskins, laced with
Gold Ribbon in puffs; in the one hand a Dart, in the other a Banner of the
Companies.

About these four Quarters of the World, in a Quadrangular form fit the Four
Seasons of the Year; Spring, Summer, Autumn, and Wintsr, all kindly Attired.

A grass-green Robe, Painted with many coloured Flowers, proper to the Seasons
production, as Violets, yellow Daffodils, Daisies; the Peach-Tree in Blossom,
Cornelian-Trees in blossom; a long bright Hair, and a Garland about her Head of
Sweet-Bryer, Wall-flowers, Stockgilly-flowers, Flowers de lis, Lillies of all
natures, Tulips, double Pionies; In her right Arm, a Cornucopia, containing
French Hony-Suckles, Cherry-Tree Blossoms, Plumb-Tre^s in Blossoms, pale
Daffadil; and in the other Hand, a Banner of the Kings.

A French green Robe, Painted with Pinks, Roses, Damask, Red, White and Yellow*
Hony-Suckles, French Mary-golds, Gilly-flowers, Lillies of the Valley; and on a
Head of long brown Hair, a wreath of Flowers, mingled with Fruits, as early
Pears, Plumbs, Green-Figs, Ginnitings, Quadlings, Cherries, interlayed with
Lavender-flowers, Raspes, Vine-leaves, and Flowers; in one Hand a Silver Rake;
in the other a Banner of my Lords.

A Person of brown Complexion, with long yellow Hair; about her Head a wreath
of ripe Wheat, and Barley, mi^gled with Berries, Filberts, Mus^ Melons,
Queen-Apples, Poppies of all Colours, Quinces; wearing a Robe, Coloured
Foli-mort, Painted with Holy-oaks, Meddlers, Bullices, Services, Grapes with
red, green, and yellow Leaves; Apricots, Kathern-Pears, Pom-waters,
Moncks-hoods; in one Hand a Silver Sickle; in the other, a Banner of the
Companies.

An Old Man, with a white-grey Hair and Beard, in a grey Gown girt about his
Wast with a Girdle; a pan of Charcoal lighted, with one Hand over it; about his
Head a Wreath of Carrots, Turnips, Leeks, Parsnips, Skirrots mixed with
Rose-mary and Bays, and a Cabbage Cap; a Bandalier of Onions, worn like a
Belt; bearing in the other Hand, a Banner of the Fishmongers.

My Lord being prepared with attention, Europa rises up, with application to
his Lordship, in this Poetical Composition, as follows.

THis Rich Resplendent Temple round and high,
Is Dedicated to the Deity
Of bright Apollo; He that doth inspire
Man's Intellectuals with Sciential Fire:
Who, by his Influential power, doth hold
Commerce betwixt the Goldsmith, and the Gold.
We Four that have our Banners thus unfurled,
Do personate the Four Parts of the WORLD:
Those are the Seasons of the Year; which (guided
By the Sun's Course) are equally divided.
My Name's Europa, who (led by Opinion)
Am come to view this Part of my Deminion
With these my Neighbours: ( London holds Commerce
With all the Regions of the Universe;)
And hearing they have made so wise a Choice
Of their Chief Magistrate, come to Rejoice,
And bid you Welcome to your Justice Seat;
A Place that your own Merit will make Great.
Your Temperance, your Piety and Pity,
Will captivate the Hearts of the whole City:
And I have pregnant Cause to think (My Lord)
You'll oftner use the Balance than the Sword;
For (like the Goldsmiths Crest) you'll find it fit,
To exercise the Touchstone of your Wit
More than your Weapon, though, without dispute,
When properly provoked they're both acute,
And at all times shall serviceable be,
To the KING, the City, and your Company.
The Loyal Goldsmiths, who, for your dear sake,
With Cost and Care did these Provisions make
For this Days Triumph, and (by Judgment led)
Bring all their Members to attend the Head.
May Plenty spread her Wings over your Fold,
May both the Indies furnish you with Gold:
That as you Place of Office is of Trust,
You may have Power and Treasure to be Just.
Thus Europe doth congratulate your Day
As a Debt due, and though she cannot pay
The Principal, be pleased (at her Request)
To accept good wishes for the Interest:
May the Four Seasons, with Weeks, Days, and Hours,
Prosper your Rule, My Lord, This Year is Yours.
The Speech being ended, the Foot-Marshal, placing the Assistants, Livery, and
the Companies, on both sides of King-street, and their Pensioners with their
Targets hung on the tops of their Javelins in the Rear of them, and the
Ensign-bearers, Drums, and Fifes, in the Front; he hastens the Foyns and Budge
Bachelors, together with the Gentlemen Ushers, to Guildhall; where his
Lordship is again saluted by the Artillery-men with three Volleys more* which
conclude their Duty: His Land Attendants pass through the Gallery (or Lane so
formed) into Guildhall; after which, the Companies repair into the Hall to
Dinner, and the several Silk-works and Triumphs, are likewise conveyed into
Blackwel-Hall, and the Officers aforesaid, and the Children that sit in the
Pageants, there refresh themselves until his Lordship hath Dined at Guildhall;
where (to make the Feast more famous) his Lordship is dignified with the
Gracious Presence of the King and Queen, together with Their Royal Highnesses
the Duke and Duchess of York, Prince Rupert, the Duke of Monmouth, the
Archbishop of Canterbury, and all the other Bishops at this time in London, all
the Resident Ambassadors and Envoys, all the Lords of the Privy Council, all
the Principal Officers of State, all the Judges and Sergeants at Law with their
Ladies. His Majesty, with the Duke of York and Prince Rupert, Dines at a Table
raised upon the Hustings at the East end of the Hall: The Foreign Ambassadors,
the Lords of the Council, and others of the Peerage and Nobility, at the two
next Tables raised on each side of the Hall. The Lord Mayor and the Aldermen
Dine at a Table raised at the West end of the Hall, and the Citizens of the
Liveries at several Tables which fill the whole Body of the Hall.

His Lordship beginning the several Healths of His Majesty, the Queen, and
Their Royal Highnesses, the Hall is filled with Shouts and Acclamations. After
Dinner, His Majesty is entertained with a Royal Banquet, glorious to the Eye,
and delicious to the Palate, served in with excellent conformity.

The whole Service managed with as good order and decency, as the Circumstances
can possibly admit, nothing being omitted by the City, that may express their
Duty to Their Majesties, and the humble sense they have in particular of their
Royal Appearance.

^
LEt all the Nine Muses lay by their Abuses, their ralling and drolling on
Tricks of the Strand,
To pen us a Ditty in praise of the City, their Treasure and Pleasure, their
Power and Command,
^
Their Feast and Guest so temptingly dressed, their Kitchens all Kingdoms
replenish:
Their Lives and Wives in plenitude thrives, they want neither Meat nor Money:
^
In bountiful Bowls, they do succour their Souls, with Claret, Canary, and
Rhenish:
The promised Land's in a Londoner's hand, they wallow in Milk and Honey.
For Laws and good Orders, L. Mayor and Recorders,
And Sheriffs, with Councils, keep all in decorum,
The Simple in safety from Cruel and Crafty,
When crimes of the Times are presented before them
No Town as this in Christendom is
So quiet by Day and Night:
No Ruffin or Drab dares pilfer or stab,
And hurry away by flight:
Should dangers come, at Beat of Drum,
(It is in such strong condition)
An Army 'twould raise in very few days
With Money and Ammunition.
For Science and reading, true wit and good breeding,
No City's exceeding in bountiful Fautors,
No Town under Heaven doth give, or has given,
Such portions to sons, or such dowries to daughters.
Their name and fame doth through the world flame,
For Courage and gallant Lives:
No Nation that grows, are more cursed to their foes,
Or kinder unto their Wives:
For Bed and Board, this place doth afford
A quiet repose for Strangers;
The Lord Mayor and Shrieves take such order with Thieves,
Men sleep without fear of dangers,
For Gown^en, and Swordmen, this place did afford men
That were of great Policy, Power Renown;
A Mayor of this City, Stout, Valiant and Witty,
Subdued a whole Army, by stabbing of One:
A Traitor, that ten thousand men gat
Together in War-like swarms,
And for this brave Feat, his Red Dagger is set
In part of the City Arms,
Should I declare the Worthies that are,
And did to this place belong,
'Twould puzzel my wit; and I think it more fit
For a Chronicle than a Song.
One meanly Descended, and weakly attended,
By Fortune befriended, in this City placed;
From pence unto crowns, fro crowns unto pounds,
Up to hundreds, and thousands hath risen at last.
In chain of Gold, and treasure untold,
In Scarlet, on Horse-back, to boot;
(To the Joy of his Mother) when his elder Brother
It may be, has gone a foot
Such is the Fate of temporal State;
For Providence thinks it fit,
Since the Eldest begat must enjoy the Estate,
The Youngest shall have the Wit.
Plague, Famine, Fire, Sword, as our stories record,
Did unto this City severely fix:
And flaming September, will make us remember
One Thousand Six Hundred Sixty Six,
When House and Hall, and Churches did fall;
(A Punishment due for Sin:)
No Town so quick Burned into Ashes was turned,
And sooner was Built again.
Such is the Fate of London's Estate,
Sometimes the has a sorrowful Sup
Of Miseries Bowl; But to quicken her S^ul,
For Mercy doth hold her up.
Our Ruins did show, five or six Years ago,
Like an object of wo to all eyes that came that came nigh (...)
Yet now 'tis as gay as a Garden in May;
Guildhall and the Exchange are in statu quo pri^
Our Feasts in Halls, each Company calls,
To treat them as welcome Men:
The Muses all Nine do begin to drink Wine;
Apollo doth Shine again.
True Union and Peace makes Plenty increase,
And every Trade to Spring:
The City so Walled, may be properly called
The Chamber of CHARLES our King.
Our Princes have been (as on Record is seen)
Good Authors and Fautors of love to this place
By many good Charters, to strengthen our quarters
With divers Indulgences, Favour, and Grace.
Their Love so much to London is such,
They do, as occasion calls,
Their Freedoms partake: For Society sake,
Kings have been made free of Halls.
If City and Court together Consort,
This Nation can never be undone:
Then let the Hall ring, with God prosper the King
And bless the Lord Mayor of London.
But for this honoured Company, whose kindness this day
Prepared all these Triumphs, we have something to say
For all their future Welfare, we heartily Pray
That the Goldsmiths, the Goldsmiths,
The Gold and Silver Goldsmiths may
With Gold and Silver Plenty,
And Treasures never empty,
Thrive on 'till the latter Day.
Dinner b^ing ended, His Lordship, being attended by a Retinue of his own
Company, takes Coach and is conducted to his own House, a very stately
Structure, and every way accommodated with Beauty and convenience for a Seat of
Mayoralty. When his Lordship is housed, those that attend on him, depart with
decency and order. The Triumphs and Si^kworks, are by the care of the Masters
and Artificers, lodge^ for that night, in Blackwell-Hall, 'till the next day
following.

INformation coming too late, we are constrained to put a remarkable and
Heroic Rarity, into th^ narrow limits of a Postscript; which is, that divers
Gentlemen Archers, completely Armed, with long Bows and Swords, with War-Arrows
and Pallisades, with Hats turned up on one side, upon which ar^ knots of green
Ribbon; formed into a Company, March under the Command of Sir Robert Peyton, Knight.

There is newly R^printed Choice Airs and Dialogues, to Sing to the Theorbo or
Bass-Viol, being mos^ of the newest Airs and Songs su^g at Court and at the
Public Theaters, Composed by several Gentlemen of His Majesties Music, to
which in this new Edition are added many more new Songs, and also Those Songs
sung in the famous Play called the Tempest, sold by Iohn Playford, near the
Temple Church.


