HOW long is't since you saw I pray,
That strange old fashioned thing called a New Play.
Or how long indeed do ye think 'twill be,
Before you taste that longed for Novelty?
You may set your hearts at rest for this Age,
Union and Catcaells have quite spoiled the Stage.
Time was the Poets could cock, look big, and cry,
Damn these saucy Players, let's all agree,
And starve the Rogues, the Times friends turned be,
And I am turned Poet, there's Farce do ye see.
But now to my Geatheration friends,
What quick return, or what concise amends.
Have you my ever honoured ever dear,
Renowned, whistling Patrons made appear
To him that is your servant every where?
My Name's Mr. Jevon, I'm known for and near.
But no more words in so much Company,
Satisfaction I must have and quickly;
Or Gad, I'll leave off writing directly.
Let me have a pledge of it now you're here,
Or in your Balls you may forget I fear.
Be favourable to this same piece at hand,
And do ye hear friends don't, shall I, shall I stand.
If I in Pocket find you dive for Catcall,
I'll let down Curtain, He tell ye that all.
Catcalls well tuned might do well in Opera's,
They'd serve for Hoboys to fill up a Chorus.
Or in a French Love Song, observe you now,
A Cadmeus Pur Qua, Pur Qua, Meme Vou.
Begar Monsieur it be De pretty Whyne,
Ki La D'ance De Mineway, Oh it be very fine.
Dances you have and various here to Night,
But they are English all, all English quite.
Throughout, English Songs, Farce English too,
That's French Sense,
All Non-sence without any more ado.
Kickshaws like this serve for a Lenten Dish,
If not for Flesh, pray let it serve for Fish.
And since Penance at this Time's in fashion,
Come three Days for Mortification.

GOOD Husband stay with me to Night and make an end of the Holiday at home.


Peace, peace, and go Spin, for if I want any Thread for my stitching, I will
punish you by virtue of my Sovereign Authority.


I warrant you: But you'll go to the Ale-house, spend your Money, and get drunk,
and come home like Old Nick, and use one like a Dog.


How now Brazen-Face do you speak ill of the Government? I am King in my own
House, and this is Treason against my Majesty.


I don't understand your stuff, but prithee don't go to the Ale-house.


Well then, I will not go to the Ale-house, I have made an appointment with Sir
Richard Lovemore's Butler, and am to be Princely drunk in Punch at the Hall
Place; we shall have a Bowl big enough to swim in.


O Lord Husband, the new Lady they say will not suffer a Stranger to come into
her House, she grudges a draught of Small Beer, and several of this Town have
come Home with broken Heads from her Ladyships own hands for but smelling
Strong Beer in her House.


A Pox on her for a Fanatic Jade, she has almost distracted the good Knight,
but she's abroad feasting with her Relations, and will scarce come home to
night, and we are to have much Drink, a Fiddle and Gambals.


But her Fanatic Parson will disturb you.


If he does we will toss the Hypocrite in a Blanket, or kick the sanctified
Coxcomb to a Jelly.


O dear Husband let me go with you, we'll be as merry as the night's long.


Why how now you bold Bettress, what would you be carried to a company of
Smooth-faced, Eating, Drinking, Lazy Servingmen; Rogues whose nourishment runs
all into Lechery? No, you Jade, I will be no Cuckold.


I'm sure they would make me welcome, you promised me I should see the House:
Sir Richard and the Family have not been there since you married and brought me
to Town.


Why thou most audacious Strumpet, dare thou Dispute with me? go home and
Spin, or else my Strap will wind about thy Ribs.


He that has the best Wife,
She's the Burden of his Life,
But for her that will Scold and will Quarrel;
Let him cut her short
Of her Meat and her Sport,
And ten times a day hoop her Barrel.

We poor Women must be Slaves and never have any joy, but you men run and
ramble and take your swing.


Why you most Pestilent Baggage will you be hoopt? be gone.


Well I must go.


Here now I think of it, here's six pence for you, get Ale and Apples, stretch
and puff thy self up with Lambs Wool, rejoice and revel by thy self, be drunk
and wallow in thy own Sty like a Sow as thou art.


He that has a Wife, c.

I would our blind Minstrel and our dancing Neighbours were here that we may
rejoice a little while, our Termagant Lady is abroad, I have made a most
Sovereign Bowl of Punch, and I have a good hoard of Wine and March Beer.


We had need rejoice sometimes, but our devilish new Lady will never suffer it
when she knows it.


I will maintain it there's more mirth in a Gally than in our Family, our
Master Sir Richard is the worthiest Gentleman, nothing but Goodness, Sweetness
and Liberality.


But here's a House turned topsy turvy, from Heaven to Hell since her coming
hither.


We are all alike, none of us can escape her rage and fury.


His former Lady is a Saint in Heaven, and lived so on Earth, all Mildness and
Gentleness.


Ay, Rest her Soul, she was, but this is inspired with a Legion of Devils, and
one plaguy Non-Con Parson worse than all, that makes her lay about her like a
Fury.


I'm sure I always feel her in my Bones, she has an Instrument of Correction
made of Whale-bone, and for fear I should forget her good usage, she refreshes
my Memory every quarter of an hour: if her Complexion don't please her, or she
look yellow in a morning, I'm sure to be laid on and look black and blue for it.


Pox on her, when I carry up her Breakfast I dare not come within reach of her:
I have some six broken Heads already. A Lady quoth a! a Shee-Bear is a civiller
Animal: she has robbed me of my Cunny-Skins, my Kitchin-Stuff, and all my
Vails; and brought a damned eating godly Fellow with her, that scarce will be
content with five Meals a day.


None of you have been used as I have.


That's because none of us had a Spade-Beard of a Foot long.


I that have lived five and forty year in the House, and had for twenty years
preserved a reverent Beard, which made me noted for Wisdom and Discretion
through all the Country, and she to demolish this poor Beard in an instant.


I beseech you, by what means did she depopulate and waste your Fruitful Chin?


Why it was ruined by Fire, with her own cursed hands she singed it off; she
said it always smelt of Brewis, and was a Sponge that soaked up more March Beer
in a month than any six the ablest Drunkards in the Hundred could in a year: I
saved nothing but this same one Sprig that grew upon a Wart, and that by my
Nail.


What pity 'twas to lose such an emblem of Gravity and Wisdom.


Ay, I am become a shame to my Neighbours and dare not show my Chin before 'em:
Oh that Beard, that poor Beard, what Authority it had amongst 'em! I had even
as live she had gelt me.


I believe thou had, thy Beard was of as much use as any Implement about
thee.


Methoughts he looked like one of the old Patriarchs, in the Arras I have seen
an old Eastern King, in a Mortlack hanging very much resembling his Physiognomy.


Oh Mrs. Iane you do my poor Beard too much honour, but farewell dear Beard, I
shall never see the like of Thee.


No, a man may as well hope to have two crops of Oak Timber from the same
place, as two such Beards from one Chin in an Age.


Pish, what hurt does the loss of a Beard do? I was making a Shift for her,
and she did not like my Lacing it down; she turns the wrong end of her Fan,
strikes me on the Mouth so hard, that she beat out 2 of my Butter Teeth: A
shame on her light Fingers.


She makes the Coachman chain the Footmen to Posts, whip 'em with Dog-whips,
and stands by to see the Execution.


Heaven have mercy upon my poor Master, this devilish Termagant Scolding
Religious Woman will be the death of him, I never saw a man so altered all the
days of my Life.


There's a Perpetual motion in that Tongue of hers, and a damned shrill Pipe
enough to break the Drum of a man's Ear, I wonder my Master does not kick her
and her Parson out of doors.


Her Parson, her Weaver; I believe he never had any Orders, but an inward
motion from his Stomach, which inclines him to eat more than a Wolf, and this
motion is an inward Call.


(within.) Why, Cook Iohn, Cook, where art thou?


I'm here, this is his outward Call; now is he almost famished for his second
Afternoons Luncheon.


Why, Iohn, why dost thou neglect me? my Spirits are exhaled, evaporated in
Study and Labour; I feel as it were a strange kind of emptifulness, I have not
eat this two hours,


A Pox on him, set him fast by the Teeth or else he will disturb us.


I have a couple of cold Chickens, some Westphalia Bacon, and Christmas Pies.


For your Christmas Pies I defy them, they are abominable Scandalous, and
Idolatrous, they savour of Rome, they are so many Fortifications wherein the
Whore of Babylon intrenches her self, I will down with them, I will beat them
down, my zeal will not suffer such Popery in this House; ye are my Flock, I
will see that that Wolf the Whore does not prey upon you and devour you: down,
down I say with all her Outworks and High-places, her Superstitious and
Idolatrous Structures and Buildings, whether in Minced Pies or otherwise: Your
Christmas is an Idol, a very Idol truly, have I not seen him in a Profane Mask,
in the Habit of an old Man with a long Spade-beard, and the deluded Rout have
worshipped and fallen down before him? your Bagpipes are as Pagan Organs, and
your Wassalers lewd and filthy Choristers unto Satan, I may not bear these Rags
of the Smock of that Scarlet Whore, my Spirit rises, my Zeal boils and
bubbleth up as it were within me, I am transported with a holy Fury: But do you
hear Iohn Cook send up those Chickens.


What both?


Yea both with some Westphalia Bacon, and do you hear, Iohn? a Tart; and you
Mr. Chipp let me have a Bottle of Sack, a Bottle of Ale and a Bottle of March
Beer, by help of this refreshment I shall be able to hold out till Supper. Fare
ye well till that time.


What shall we do with this base snivelling Hypocrite? he'll spoil our merry
meeting.


'Ill warrant you 'tis but putting out the Candles and we'll make him weary of
his Canting, when e're he comes among us.


So his Provision's gone up.


He's fast by the teeth for one hour.


O welcome, welcome, here's to our wish, the Minstrel and our Neighbour! Oh old
Acquaintance, Goodman Iobson, how dost thou?


By my troth I am sharp set towards the Punch, and am now come with a firm
Resolution though a Poor Cobbler to be as drunk as a Lord, I am a true English
heart, and look upon Drunkenness as the best part of the Liberty of the
Subject.


Why did you not bring your Wife with you?


Because here are Waggs, young Rogues, and a Man may be a Cuckold before the
King's Health can go round.


Iobson we'll have a Catch, strike up Blind Will: Ah Iobson I have heard thee
outsing the Lark or Nightingal, thou art heard above all the Church, let there
be never so many Voices, thine will still be predominant.


Ay and he holds out the Note of one Verse till the Clark begins to sing the
next, he has a pure Wind.


Ay I'm pretty good at a Psalm, I have some reason for it, I have stiched Soles
this thirty years to those Psalms you spake of.


Come, let us fetch out our Bowl of Punch in solemn Procession. Now let us have
a Catch in honour of Punch.


While you Court a damned Vintner for such nasty Liquor,
As worse was ne'er swallowed by dull Country Vicar,
And the insolent Rascal will draw what he pleases,
While Boys you may kick 'em when Masters y'intreat 'em,
And from Drawers you up into Aldermen beat 'em;
But they get your Money and you get Diseases.
Stumme Brimstone, Lime, Arsnick, fond Drunkards bewitch,
While the villainous Host not content to be rich,
By Brewing and Poison sells that by false measure,
No Liquor like Punch gives delight to the Soul,
When we drown all our Cares in the bottom' of the Bowl,
Sincere are our Joys and immortal our pleasure.
We brew for our selves and we know each ingredient,
As well for our health as our mirth is expedient,
And who ever drinks Punch shall live merry and long,
It spurs up Jade nature and quickens the blood,
Which if it finds bad it ne'er fails to leave good;
And while we drink Punch we shall ever be young.
And after that I'll bring up the Rear with a swinging Turkey-pye, and a mighty
Gammon, besides much Pies and other Appurtenances belonging to our Office.


Here's our Master's Health in a Bumper. Huzzah.


Our Ladies Confusion in another. Huzzah.


What means this Lewd, Profane, and Babylonish noise, ye Popish Locusts, ye
Idolatrous Vipers, this sanctified Place is become a Denn of Wicked ones. Thou
Blind misleader of the blind, with thy Lewd Anti-Christian Squeaks, avaunt,
avaunt, I say Beelzebub, avaunt.


Hold, hold, what do ye mean?
Ye Sons of Darkness I defy you,
I can suffer for the truth, I am a witness.
Blind him and gag him.


Bind him hand and foot.


I will flee away from farther Persecution, Vipers my Lady will come, she will
to your Confusion.


And as you like this do you come again.


A Pox on him; to our Business now he is gone. The King and all the Royal
Family in a Bumper. Huzzah.


Are you ready for your Collation?


No, no, we'll have a bout at Blindmans-buff and a Dance first.


Ay, ay, come I'm old Dog at that, blind me, perhaps I'm as great a Master at
Blindmans-Buff as any one in Europe, no dispraise to any man.


O Heaven and Earth! what's here within my House! is Hell broke loose! what
Troops of Friends is here, sirrha you impudent Rascal?


My dear be patient 'tis Christmas, a time of Mirth, of Jollity, it has always
been the Custom of my House to give my Servants Liberty in this Season, and
all my Country Neighbours used to meet, and with their innocent Sports divert
themselves.


Prithee hold thy prating, meddle with your own matters, can't I tell how to
govern my own house without your putting in an Oar? shall I ask you leave to
correct my own Servants?


Good Lady, I thought this had been my House, and those my Servants, and those
my Tennants.


Did I bring a Fortune to be thus abused, and snubbed before my Servants, do you
call my Authority in Question you inhumane Monster? Look you to your Dogs,
your Kites and filthy Cattle, your Faulconers, Huntsmen, and your nasty Grooms
abroad, I'll make you know 'tis my Province to govern here, nor will I be
controlled by e're a Hunting, Hawking, unthinking Knight in Christendom.


A Pox upon all Fools that shall marry for money, I am married to a continual
Tempest, Strife and Noise, Canting and Hypocrysie are the daily Portion I have
with her; but I'll not bear this long, if I by force oppose her, she falls into
fits, and raves worse than any one Bedlam.


You stinking Scoundrels, and you filthy Jades, I'll teach you to Junkit thus
and steal my Provision, I shall be devoured by you.


I thought Madam we might be merry once upon a Holiday.


Holiday, you Popish Cur, is one Day more Holy than another? and if it be
you'll be drunk upon it, you Rogue, that by your late Demolished Beard, thought
your self an Example to the Family, is this your Example?


Come you Minx, you impudent Flourish are you gigging after an abominable Fiddle?
all Dancing is whorish, Huswife.

O Murder, murder, she has pulled off both my Ears.


Madam, for shame, remember your Sex and Quality.


Remember your own fools head, shall you instruct me?


Madam, I rejoice that your Ladyship is returned.


Oh good and holy man, how came my Family in my absence thus Debauched,
Drunken, Profane and Superstitious?


When my Ears were first offended with these Lewd Noises, I came down grieved
in Spirit, and rebuked them, commanding them to surcease from these
Superstitious and Idolatrous Rites, which they Sacrifice to that Idol, that
beastly Idol, old Father Christmas, and while my Spirit was full of Godly
Chastisement, they did extinguish the Lights, surrounded and hemmed me in, and
these Instruments of Satan did buffet me even unto great anguish, and I am sore
bruised in Body.


Alack good man! Oh ye Spawn of Belial the Fry of the bottomless Pitt, how now
sirrah, who, are you in the Bumble you Buzzard?


I am an honest Psalm-singing Cobbler, Madam; if your Ladyship would go to
Church, you would hear me above 'em all there.


I'll try thy Voice now.


Nounz what a Pox, what a Devil ails you?


O Prosane Wretch, wicked Varlet.


Thou Son of the old Serpent, avaunt thou Frog of the Lake of Darkness.


Avaunt thou Coxcombly Son of a Whore of the new Light.


Be gone, Avaunt, Be gone from within these Walls.


What will you wrestle a Fall with me? Come on. Take that Lusty Lug you Rogue
of a Saint, with a pound of Ear of each side.


Impudent Villain, has he not hurt the Good man?


He hath very much disordered my two Ears, and bruised me exceedingly.


You deserve it for a meddling Coxcomb, go to your Book you ignorant Fop and
road, and rely more upon good Sense, and less upon your new Light.


Oh wicked vile wretch, was ever poor Lady so miserable so horridly miserable
in a Brute to her Husband as I am, I that am so Pious, so Good and Religious a
Woman?


She is an holy, a sanctified Vessel truly.


He that has the best Wife,
She's the Burden of, c.

O Rogue, Scoundrel, Villain.


Remember Modesty.


Are you gone, Sirrah? I'll rout the rest of you: I'll spoil your squeaking
Treble.


O Murder, murder, I am a dark man, which way shall I get hence? Oh Heaven! She
has broken my Fiddle, and undone me, my Wife and Children.


Here Poor Fellow come this way, take your Staff, there, there's money to buy
two such Fiddles; go, there's your way.


Heaven preserve your Worship, bless you sweet Master, here's a Change indeed,
little did I think to live to find such Doings at this Hall-Place.


You are very Liberal, must my Estate maintain you in your Profuseness?


Go up to your Closet, Pray and compose your mind.


Oh wicked Fellow to bid me pray.


A Man cannot be completely cursed without a Wedding, but there is such a thing
as separate maintenance and a Joynter-House, which she to morrow shall try, by
the help of Heaven, I will no longer bear this nuisance in my House. Here, where
are my Servants, what must they be frighted from me? within there, Chipp, come
here and see who knocks there.


Within there, where are my Sluts, ye Drabs, ye Queens: Lights there.


Sir it is a Doctor that lives ten mile off with his man, he practises
Physic, and is an Astronomer and a Cunning-man, your Worship knows him, he can
make Almanacs, and help men to their Goods again.


Sir I am benighted, 'tis so dark I cannot see my hand, I cannot possibly reach
home, and therefore knowing the Bounty of your Worships Hospitality, I desire
the favour to be harboured under your Roof this night.


Out of my house you lewd Conjurer, you Witch, you Magician.


Avaunt thou Instrument of Satan, I defy thee and all thy Works, thou wicked
Sorcerer avaunt.


If you stay in my house, you shall be worse used here, than your Predecessor
Dr. Lamb was in the City.


Here's a turn, here's a change, which if I have any Art she shall smart for.


You see Friend the Case is altered with me, I am not Master of my House, but
e're to morrow this time I'll be Monarch here: go down the Lane friend, and
about half a Quarter of a mile off, you'll see a Cobblers house, stay there some
little time, and I'll send my Man that shall conduct you to a Tennants house,
who shall take care of you.


Thanks good Sir, I'm your humble Servant, but you Noncon with your surious She
Disciple there, shall have some proofs of my Magic Art this Night.


Come Lady you and I must have some Conference.


Yes I will have Conference and Reformation too in this house, or else I'll
turn thee inside outwards.


My mind misgiveth me, these Varlets have left some good thing in the Bowl
there, but hold, is it not a Wassaling Superstitious Spice-Bowl, let me see,
hah! it is very comfortable and edifieth, there's a huge Island of Tossed, Nutmeg
and Sugar, I will attack it, it is Cheering, I have a Paper with some Parmazan
in my Pocket, which will eat very well with it, this is also a pleasing Liquor,
I will drink plentifully of it and eat Tossed exceedingly: ah my Spirits are
cheered as it were, and are excited unto Joy and Gladness.


Oh that sweet tooth'd Lickerish Hypocrite who is always eating, and looks as
if he had never eaten.


His meat does himself no more good than his Doctrine does others, stand close,
you'll see him devour that Punch-Tost, he will never be contented without all in
the Bowl.


It will disguise him most wickedly, and make him as drunk as one of the
Profane.


It doth begin to invade my upper Region, my Pericranium doth seem to be
somewhat inclined unto Giddiness, hah the Room appears to turn round.


He is overtaken.


'Tis a very seasonable time, I'm just going to knock to Supper, and my Lady
won't eat without his Grace.


Go quickly, he's in a sweet Pickle for a Grace of a quarter of an hour long as
he used to make 'em.


Where am I? am I in the Buttery or my own Closet, a most excellent Spice I'll
promise you.


Where are you Mr. Noddy? Supper is on the Table, and my Lady stays for your
Grace.


Is it Supper time say you, now I think of it I begin to be hungry.


Pray Sir make hast my Lady stays for you?


What is the matter with me? I think my Feet are asleep, I cannot use them, my
Eyes are somewhat dim too, which is the way?


Ay the Rogue hears my Master intends to turn over a new Leaf, and he has a
mind to wind about, but this shall not serve his turn, he's a Fanatic Rogue
still.


Pray Sir mend your Draught if you please, you are very welcome Sir.


Thank you heartily good Woman, come I'll give you some requital, I'll tell you
your fortune?


Oh! Pray do Sir, I never had my Fortune told me in my Life.


Let me behold the Lines of your Face?


I'm afraid 'tis none of the cleanest Sir, I have been about dirty work Sir all
this day.


Come, 'tis a good Face be not ashamed of it, you shall show it in greater
Places suddenly.


Oh dear, I Sir? I shall be ashamed mightily, I want Dacity when I come before
great Folks.


You must be confident I charge you, and fear nothing, there is much happiness
attends you.


Oh me, this is a rare man Heaven be thanked.


To morrow before Sun Rise you shall be the happiest Woman in this County.


How, by to morrow? Alack a day, how can this be?


No more shall you be troubled with a Surly Husband, that shall Rail, call you
names and strap you.


Lord how came he to know that? he has a Familiar: indeed my Husband is
somewhat rugged, and in his Cupps will beat me but it is not much, He's an
honest painful Man and I let him have his way, pray Sir take the the other Cup of
Ale.


Thank you, to morrow you shall be the richest Woman in the Hundred, and ride
in your own Coach.


O Father now you jeer me.


By Heaven I do not, but mark my words, be confident and bear all out, or worse
will follow.


Where is this Queen, here Nell, what a Pox are you drunk with your
Lambs-wool?


Oh Husband! here's the rarest man, he has told me my Fortune.


Pox on you, and has planted my Fortune too, a Lusty pair of horns upon my
head, has he?


Thy Wife's a virtuous Woman, and thoul't be happy.


Come out ye hang Dogs, ye Jugglers, ye cheating Villayns, must I be Cuckolded
by such Rogues as you are, Mackmaticians and Almnack-makers?


Prithee peace Husband, we shall be rich, and have a Coach of our own.


A Coach! a Cart, a Wheele-Barrow you Jade, by 'th mackin She's drunk, bloody
drunk, get you to bed you Strumpet.


Oh mercy on us, is this a taste of my good Fortune?


You had better not have touched her you surly Rogue.


Out of my House you Rogues, or I'll run my Nall up to the handle in your
Buttocks?


Farewell you Paltry Slave?


Get you out you Rogues?


What? Ho my Spirits, Nadir and Abishog, ho!


Here, we're here.


Praesto, all my Charms attend:
Here this Night shall have an End,
You shall this Cobler's Wife transform,
And to the Knights the like perform;
This bed the Cobler's Wife I ll charm,
The Knight's into the Cobler's Arm;
Let the Delusion be so strong,
That none shall know the Right from wrong.
The Non-con Parson so affright,
That he may ever Rue this Night;
Scare him from his Little Wits,
And his Hypocritick Fits.

All this, this Night we will perform,
In a Whirl-wind, in a Storm.
In Lightning and in Thunder fly,

And muster all the Clouds in the Sky;
Attend me till the Dawn of Day,
And then you may go sport and play.
Hold, here comes Sir Richard's Man: he'll guide us to our Lodging, let us meet
him to Horse.


Well my dear Friends, though you have found my House in some disorder, I
cannot but rejoice to see you, the sight of Friends will lighten great
afflictions.


Some years have past, since we have been merry together.


We have not met these five years: Marriage, Travel, Business, and your
Retirement, Sir Richard, have thus separated us.


Us that for several years, of pleasant Frolic Youth were ne'er asunder.


I call methinks a pleasant Season back, here's a brimmer to our old
Acquaintance.


About with it.


But now 'tis late, we keep you out of Bed from your new Wife.


A Wife! Oh Friends take warning, marry not, I say, do not marry.


Why? you have a handsome Lady and a rich one.


Oh Gentlemen, I would be glad to have the Witch of Endor, were she alive
instead of her; I am linked to an Amozonian Devil, such a Thalestris, such a
perpetual Fixen, and a Shrew, such a Tongue, that 'twould be a Blessing to be
lodged in London, with a Silver-Smith under me, a Brazier over head, a
Trunk-maker and a Peuterer on either side of me, and all of 'em Industrious
Rogues to boot; a Blessing I say in Comparison of her continual Clamour, all
those Noises in consort are soft and gentle Harmony to her one single Voice.


Methought she looked somewhat proudly, her Countenance between Scorn and
Anger.


She wished crooked Pins in every bit of meat you eat, and Poison in every
Glass of Wine you swallowed.


Say you so, 'tis time for us to leave you then.


No, fear not, this Night is the last of her short Reign, I have sent for her
Father to dine with me to morrow, and after dinner I will pack her away with
her separate maintenance, and then we'll spend the Christmas in Freedom, Mirth
and Jollity, and I am overjoyed you are here to be Witnesses of my Proceedings.


Sir, my Lady commanded me to tell you, She'll rout you and your Lewd
Companions, if you come not away presently, I hope you'll pardon me.


Tell her I come, I am sent for. But here's the other Brimmer to my
Deliverance.


Away with it.


I lay my whole misfortune now before you, I have not only married an
Indefatigable Scold, but a Phanatick into bargain; nay, I have married her
Chaplain too, who was, I take a Weaver, and ordained himself by virtue of
outward Grace and inward Knavery, have a care I warn you of a Bigot or Zealous
Woman, for be she never so wicked, she will be always so full of spiritual
Pride, She'll think you a Limb of Satan.


'Tis a just observation.


And for a Chaplain, I would as soon have a Russian in my House, for he must
Govern or the Wife will Rage.


Right, Then, my Friends, I conjure ye have a care of separate maintenance, a
damned invention to make Whores and cursed Wives as bad, I would not marry the
Queen of Sheba were she alive, upon those Conditions.


All this daily Experience tells us.


A Curse of an Owl that must try and would not trust Experience; but at his
own cost another Point is, for I am bound in Charity to warn you, have a care
of an ill born or ill bred Woman, there is as much in the Strain, as in Horses
or Dogs, we all take after our kind.


You are in the Right of it, I have not heard a better Preaching.


And for breeding, though almost all Women are Fools, yet those that are well
bred, by the help of that will behave themselves with some Discretion and Good
manners at least, and now in what a Case am I, that am under all these Curses
which I warn you from? how irksome must it be to me, who with my first dear
Wife, that St. in Heaven, had all the happiness that man on Earth was capable
of?


'Tis hard, but like to be as short.


One more to the memory of my former Wife, a Brimmer to help to dround my
sorrow for this.


Let it go round: we knew her.


She deserved all honour.


Now shame upon you and your filthy Companions, I'll make your Glasses and your
Bottles fly, and that Lewd Minister of your Debauchery, your Butler I'll rout
him, for not bringing me the Key of the Cellar a Rascal.


Your Pardon, we are going.


Going? yes, to make one another drunk and sott all Night about it, ye may be
ashamed ye Beasts, why do I call you Beasts, Beasts, I scorn to be drunk like
you.


This Gentlemen is my sweet Lady.


Gentlemen! your fellow Scots, your guzling Drunkards, get you to bed ye
Spunges?


Light the Gentlemen, your Fires are ready, you see I am under Correction sweet
Princess.


If you in one, would sum up every Curse,
Take such a Spouse for better and for worse.
WE have had a hard Tug to give these Gentlemen's men their Belly's full.


But at last we have left 'em quickly up tosome Tune.


I am Bouzy and right for mischief; let's execute our design upon Non-con.


Have at him, are your Jack-chanes and humming Tops ready?


They are, I have 'em here, he must be drunk with a Pox to him, and could not
say Grace.


A Curse on him, he staggered against my Side-Table, and brake twenty shillings
worth of flint Glasses. And though we all deposed against his Drunkenness, our
Pious Lady called us perjured Rogues, and said he had eaten some thing that did
not agree with him.


And when we could not get him to himself, my Lady said it was an Apoplexy.


Ay, and made me heat a Frying-Pan red hot, to hold over his Pate; from which
she had made the hair be shaved off.


Nay She has employed all her skill in Physic upon him, She has laid a huge
Caustick-Plaister between his Neck and Shoulders to raise blisters, which will
make him roar before morning.


His Head's all raw with the singeing, if he had not begun to roar, I believe
She would have Carbonado'd him, for his Apoplectic Drunkenness.


What Sport it will be when he wakes! he'll wonder what the Devil they have
done to him, he'll be plauguy sore.


Now he has almost slept out his first sleep, he'll wake half sober, devilish
sick, and in pain, and 'twill be a fit time to begin our Persecution upon him.


I am afraid we shall make him distracted with the Fright.


If we make him mad he may get some wit by the bargain, he's now so dull a
Rogue that any alteration would be for the best.


Come put on the shapes.


Here, the Dogs will fit me, Iohn Cook shall be the Bear, and you shall
represent great Beelzebub himself.


Agreed, hang on your Chains, list how the Rogue sports like a Sackbut, let's
withdraw into our Tyring-Room, and then Enter.


Mr. Chip, why Butler Chip, I say some small Beer, give me an Ocean of small
Beer, I will swim in small Beer.


He's between sleeping and waking, now to our Work.


Mercy on me where have I been? I am all on Fire, and my head all burnt, is the
Bed or the Room on Fire? fire, fire, fire, hah Heaven what Noise is that! hah
it is Satan verily, what Friends are those in Chains? Oh Faith, Faith! where
art thou? I am frail, frail, even as one of the Satan! sweet Satan, dear Satan,
spare me, thou mistake me, tempt me not, I am not Righteous, I am wicked, yea
even as one of the Profane. I am an Hypocrite truly, a zealous Hypocrite
verily: Oh spare me, oh! oh! sweet Satan, dear Satan spare me.


This is enough in the dark, now let him behold ye?


Oh, oh, I conceive there is a Light now in the Room, let me see if I dare open
my Eyes: Friend is this comes to me? it is like a Dog, oh! oh! I conjure thee,
Friend! say Satan forbear, oh what's here the Chief Devil! I dare not see any
more, oh sweet Beelzebub, spare me, mercy good Satan.


Art thou a true seared Hypocrite?


Yea I am, I am.


Falsely zealous, and truly seditious?


Oh, oh, I, I am Sir.


Most immoderately given to thy Gut?


Yes, yes, my great delight is in Creature comforts.


The chief motive to thy Zeal, those Creature comforts, thou get'st by thy
Hypocroisie.


Oh, oh! yes verily.


By this thou hast committed Carnality with Elders Wives and Daughters; and
hast been much given to Concupiscence.


'Tis true, most exceedingly.


You use not Copulation with the wicked, for fear of Scandal?


No, I engender only with the Righteous: Good Sir, have done, I am half
dissolved.


By this thou get'st thy self made Executor and Trustee.


Oh yes, it is the chief end of my Profession to prey on Orphans.


Oh Rogue! ha what a dreadful Thunder-Clap was that.


What a storm is this arising?


Gods body what a Clap was there, it shook the House.


Come let us be gone, we have tormented him enough.


No, no, this storm will help us better to affright him.


The Rogue shall no longer rail at auricular Confession, who, has confessed as
he thinks to the Devil.


Oh! I am almost dead, sure the Fiends are gone, and have carried this end of
the Building with them at that last Clap.


Come, come tother bout.


Ay, come, come.


Hah Tom! what's this? we are four now.


Why Ned? we were but three, ha! one, two, three, four?


Ha Iohn! what's the meaning of this? who is this?


Nay, what a Pox know I? I am sure we were but three, we are increased one in
Number.


Foh, what a stink of Brimstone's here.


Let me see, what is he a doing?


There is silence, now let me peep out. Oh Heaven!


Here Parson eat this Toad, here will you eat this Toad?


Oh Heaven what's this! my Hair begins to stand on End.


Eat this Toad I say.


Oh, no good Satan, I hate a Toad, it is too like Fish, and I could never
endure Fish, because the Papists eat so much.


Who will eat a Toad?


Oh the Devil, the Devil, oh! oh!


Help, help.


The Devil, the Devil.


If ever I fright any Body again, may I suffer the Strappado.


What noises are these? here are Thieves in my House; what, ho where are my
Servants?


Here Sir, we are got up, there have been most horrible Disturbances in the
Parson's Chamber, he roars like a furious Bull with the Dog about him, listen.


The Devil, the Devil: Murder, help, help.


Hang him the Rogue's drunk still, is it he that has disturbed the House?


Oh the Devil, the Devil, avoid thou Tempter.


What is the matter here?


Oh Sir Richard, we have been so disturbed with Noises, we thought some Rogues
had got into your House, and were committing a Robbery.


It's nothing but a Drunken Zealot, that has been troublesome in his Cupps, and
he has disturbed the House.


Drunk! I defy thee and all thy works.


Ha, what Apparition is that?


Apparition, whose, where?


I shall soon make your Apparition vanish.


I have seen a Vision this Night.


What of Malt and Hops, Punch and Stratsbury Brandy, or a Fools-head in a
Looking-glass? take him and lock him into his Chambers.


Oh for Heaven's sake! 'tis haunted with Devils, I have been tormented all
Night: They have laid a Plaster of melted Btimstone upon my Shoulders, and
singed my Head with sulphurous Flames, oh the Devil, the Devil!


You shall disturb the House no more to Night: Gentlemen, I am sorry that this
Phanatick Preacher should disturb you, he was drunk last Night and fancies he's
haunted with Devils, he's nothing but frighted with the Thunder and Lightning,
at this time of the Winter.


Which has been the strangest I ever heard, I thought the House had fallen
down, or at least part of it.


Such Thunder in this Winter Season is prodigious, methinks it should fright
the Women out of their Wits.


I could not wake my sweet Lady, She lay as if She were dead, I believe it is
her property to be silent in a storm, and ever tempestuous in a Calm.


See what's a Clock by the Pendulum.


'Tis within less than half an hour of five.


'Tis almost time to think of hunting: you told us we should see your Harriers
run.


Let's to our Chambers and rest an hour or two; we have Game just by.


With all our Hearts.


Bid the Grooms be ready, Butler, Do you call us; and Cook be ready with a
Breakfast, come Gentlemen our way is the same.


Well met, 'tis time we now be gone,
Already all our Work is done;
The Transformation's wrought so sure,
The Doctour's time it shall endure.
The Lady's in the Cobler's Hut,
The Cobler's Wife to'th Knight is put;
And we defy the sharpest Sight,
E're to distinguish which is Right.

What has the Devil been abroad to Night? I never heard such Thunder-Claps and
such a Storm, I thought my little House would have flown away. But now all is
clear, and 'tis a fine Star-light Morning. Come I'll to work: Winters Thunder
is Summers wonder.


In Bath a wanton Wife did dwell,
As Chaucer be did write;
Who wantonly did spend her Days
In many a fond Delight.
Upon a time sore Sick she was,
And at the length did Dye:
Her Soul at last at Heavens Gate
Did knock most mightily.
Then down came Adam to the Gate,
Who knocks there quoth he?
I am the Wife of Bath she said,
Who fain would come to thee.
Thou art a Sinner Adam said,
And here no place can have:
Alack for you good Sir she said,
Go Gipp you doting Knave.
How now? what impudent Ballad-singing Rogue's that, that dare wake me out of
my sleep? I'll have thee flayed thou Rascal.


Why? what a Pox, does this Jade talk in her sleep, or is she drunk still.


I will come In in spite, she said,
Of all such Churls as thee:
Thou art the cause of all our Pain,
Our Woe and Misery.
Thou first broke the Commandments,
In pleasure of thy Wife.
When Adam heard her tell this Tale,
He ran away for Life.
Why Villain, Rascal, Screech-Owle; a worse Noise than a Dog hung in the
Pales, or a Hog in a great Wind. Here where are my Servants? come and hamstring
the Rogue.


Why, how now you saucy Jade, you confounded Quean, you must be drunk with
Conjurers, you shall have money for Lambs-wool, you whoreson Drab.


Death! what Dog is this? where's my Bell? I can't find it to ring, where's my
Servants? I'll toss the Dog in a Blanket.


She is asleep sure, and all this is a Dream; the Conjurer told her she should
keep a Coach, and she is dreaming of her Equipage, ha! ha!


Why Husband, Sir Richard do you hear this Insolence?


Husband! Sir Richard! what a Pox has she Knighted me? my Name is Zekel too,
here's a jest indeed!


Hah he's gone, he's not in the Bed, Oh Heaven! where am I? foh, what favour is
this in my Nostrils! here are stinking Leather Breeches, and a Leather Apron,
here are Canvas Sheets and filthy ragged Curtains, a Beastly Rug and Flock-Bed:
am I awake? or is all this Dream? what Rogue is that? Sirrah! where am I? who
brought me hither? Rogue! what Rascal are you?


This is most amazing, I never heard such words from her, so God save me, if I
take my strap, I'll make you know your Husband, and teach you a little better
manners, you saucy Drab.


Oh astonishing impudence! you my Husband! I'll have you hanged you Rogue, I'm
a Lady sirrah, let me know who gave me a sleeping Potion, and conveyed me
hither.


A Sleeping Potion, a Pox on you, you drunken Jade, you had a sleeping Potion,
has not your Lambs-wool done working yet?


Where am I? where has my damned villainous Husband put me? why, Iane, Lettis,
where are my Queens?


Ha, ha, ha, what does she call her Maids? the Conjurers have not only made
her drunk, but mad too.


He talks of Conjurers, sure I am bewitched, ha! what Clothes are here? here's
a Linsey-woolsey Gown, a Calico Hood, and a Red-Bays Petticoat, and Shoes
with Hobnails, I'm removed out of my own House by Witchcraft, what shall I do,
or what will become of me?


Hark the Hunters and the merry Horns abroad, why Nell you lazy Jade! 'tis
Break of Day, come to work, come, come and spin you Drab, or I'll swinge your
lazy Hide for you; Pox on you must I be working two hours before you in a
Morning?


Why Sirrah, you impudent Villain, do you know me?


Know you, yes, and will make you know me before I have done with you.


I am Sir Richard Lovemore's Lady, how came I here?


Sir Richard Lovemore's Lady, no not so bad yet, She's a damned stingy
Phanatick Whore, and plagues every one that comes near her, the whole Country
curses her.


Nay then I'll hold no longer, you Rogue, you insolent Villain have at you.


This is more than e're I saw by her, She's mad sure, I never had an ill word
from her before, come Strap I'll try your mettle; I'll fetch you out of your
Drunken Fits you maukin, come, come on Huswife.


Oh murder, murder! I'll pull you throat out, I'll tear your Eyes out, I'm a
Lady sirrah, Sir Richard Lovemore will hang you for this.


Why Neighbour Iobson, what is the matter? I was going to fodder my Cattle, and
hear murder cried here.


Oh Fellow, do you know Sir Richard Lovemore?


Ay marry do I well enough, he's my Landlord, he's as honest a Gentleman as any
is in forty mile o'his head.


Prithee Neighbour don't mind her, She was drunk yesterday with Conjurers,
She's mad still, and I can't get her up to her Spinning-work.


Oh help me, I'm Sir Richard Lovemore's Lady, conveyed hither I know not how,
to be tormented and lamed by this outrageous Villain.


Did not I tell you she was mad, come out you Jade, I'll fetch you to your
Spindle.


Hold you Neighbour, this is a pretty Whirlegig? I know my Lady right well and
Goody Iobson too, ah Goody Iobson I'm sorry to see this, you are mad indeed, my
Lady Quo she.


What a Pox, do you think I don't know my own Wife? that mole under her left
Eye?


A Lady? no Neighbour Iobson, you're ten times a better Woman no Dispraise to
her, She's the hearteats Jade that e're came in the Parish, the whole Country
curses her.


Oh he has bruised me, and larned me, and I am almost dead with the stench of
this filthy place, either I am removed by Enchantment, or they have given me
Opium, and in a dead sleep they have brought me hither, are you in earnest?
look on me, do you not know my Lady Lovemore? I'll give you a hundred pound and
carry me home.


Why you mad Beast, you my Lady Lovemore? A Pox on her, I know her well enough,
she gave me three or four damned Blows of the Pate last Night, in her own
House.


I did so, I remember you now, I did give you those Blows on the pate, in my
House last Night.


Why Goody Iobson, why do you think I'm blind? I do not know my Lady? a plaguy
Quean, why all the Country rings of her.


This is a Conspiracy of Rogues.


Help, help, if She be not my Lady, she has learnt of my Lady.


Is this the Rogue my Husbands revenge upon me? here's Clothes, here's filthy
Rags; ob foh! oh miserable Woman! I shall be delivered and make 'em rue for it.


Come, come you Quean, I'll make you leave your fooling, come to your Spindle,
or else I'll lamb your Hide, you were ne'er lamb'd so since you were an Inch
long. Take it up you Jade.


Hold, hold, what shall I do? I can't spin.


Oh! I thought I should bring you to your self to work, I'll into my Stall,
'tis broad day now, why, when you awkward Jade? I think her Brains are turned,
She has forgot to spin.


I know this place, I'll try my Feet, I'll run into the Town, some body will
succour me there sure.


What does the Jade run for it? I'll after her.


What Heavenly dreams I have had this Night? methought I was in Paradise, upon
a Bed of Roses, and of Violets, and the sweetest Husband by my side; sure it
was a Dream, Ha! where am I now? bless us! what sweets are these about me? no
Garden in the Spring can equal them, not Buds of Roses with the Dew upon them,
am I upon a Bed? the Sheets are Sarcenet sure; no Linen ever was so fine, what
a gay silken Robe have I gotten? Oh Heaven I dream! I dream nothing but Point
and Lace, and Gold, and Fringe. Oh let me never wake! nothing but Gold, fine
Works and Carving: oh Father what a Glass is there! there's a sumptuous Carpet
upon the Table and silver Plate, sure I died to night in my sleep, and am gone
to Heaven and this is it!


Now must I go to be called Whore or Jade, and fifty other Names, I must wake
an alarm that will not lye still till Midnight at the soonest, Madam. Madam.


Lord who this, what say thou sweet Heart?


Sweet heart, O Lord Sweet heart! the best Names I have had these twelve Months
from her, have been Whore or Jade: Madam, what Gown and what Ruffles, will your
Ladyship please to wear to Day?


Oh Lord what does she mean? Ladyship, Gown and Ruffles, sure I am awake now, I
remember the Cunningman!


Say you Madam?


The same I did yesterday Child.


Mercy upon me! Child! here's a Miracle!


Is my Lady awake, and have you had e'rea slipper or a shoe flung at your Head
yet?


Oh no, I am overjoyed, she's in the kindest humour, nothing but Love and
Sweetness, go to the Bed and speak to her now, now is your time.


You laugh at me, now is your time says she, what to have an Eye beaten out or
another Tooth? Madam.


What say thou Girl? Father, what would she have?


What work will your Ladyship have me do to day? shall I work Plain-work, or go
on my Parchment?


Work say thou, why? 'tis holiday Child, no work to Day.


Oh mercy, am I or she awake! or do we both dream?


Did not I tell you?


Here's a blessed Change!


If it continues we are all made, we shall be a happy Family.


Who's that?


Now shall I be condemned to the Dog-whip, instead of a Breakfast.


Some Billets for your Ladyships fire?


That's a good Boy.


O Lord! O Lord, is that my Lady?


Go Sir, she's in rare humour.


Prithee Sweetheart give me my things, I'll rise, I can't abide to lie in Bed.


Have I my senses or not, Good Lack?


This Cunning-man is a rare Man: he said I must bear it out, I'm amazed? I know
not what to do.


Here's your Ladyships Morning Gown.


Where are my Eyes? they are Dazzled, this is a Robe fit for an Angel to wear.
Bless me, I shall not know my self.


Your Ladyships Chocolate's ready.


Mercy on me what's that? 'tis some Garment sure! well put it on then
Sweetheart.


Put it on Madam, I have taken it off, 'tis ready to Drink.


Drink say's she, I mean, put it by, I don't care for Drinking.


Now go I like a Bear to the stake, to know what her Scurvy Ladyship will have
for Breakfast, how many Rascally names shall I be called!


You are mistaken, there never was such a change, she's nothing but Goodness,
you'll be overjoyed to hear her.


You arch Dog! I'll lug you by the Ears Sirrah, if you play the Rogue with me.


Oh! Iohn Cook you'll be out of your wits to see this change, oh! she's the
sweetest Lady.


What the Devil are they all mad!


Madam, here's the Cook come to know what your Ladyship will please to have for
Breakfast.


Oh Lord there's a fine Cook: He looks like one of your Gentlefolks.


Here's Humility! what a Conversion's here?


Hey what's to do here! what the Devil's the matter! my Head turns round:
where am I? honest Man! I looked for Rogue or Rascal at the best.


Oh Madam that will lye heavy upon your Ladiship's Stomach: he will get you some
rare dainty Dish immediately.


Do then even what twoo't good Mr. Cook.


Good Lord! good Mr. Cook! Ohcis a sweet Lady.

Chip, kiss me, prithee kiss me I say: I'm out of my Wits. We have the rarest
Lady, the sweetest Lady that ever Men served: go and be astonished as I am.


You shamming Rogue, I think you are out of your Wits indeed; what the Devil
does he mean? the Maid looks merrily too.


Chip the Butler is come Madam to know what your Ladyship will please to drink:
Come near Mr. Chip. You'll be amazed.


Good Mr. Chip, let me have some good Small Beer when my Breakfast comes up.


Mr. Chip! Mr. Chip! I shall be turned into a Stone with amazement. Madam,
would not your Ladyship please to have a Glass of Frontinuque or Lachrimoe?


Oh me, what hard Names are these! I must not betray my self.


Heaven and Earth, I'm amazed! here will be Joy! go get you in and be happy as
I am. Joy, Joy.


The Cook has been bantering I do know not how long Do the Butler banter too?


Madam the Coachman is at the Door.


Come in good Coachman.


Will your Ladyship please to take the Air to day? if so, which will you have
the Coach or the Chariot?


Thank you, which you think convenient.


O Heaven! the Sky will fall, what's this?


Sure I cannot be awake, how overjoyed they all seem to wait on me, Oh notable
Cunning man, I'm the happiest Woman, I grow giddy with my happiness, I'll
retire and give Heaven thanks for this,


Common-Prayer Book! here's a turn, what will Non-con say? your Ladyship has
none, but here's my Master's.


Thank you Sweet heart.


How do you like this Gentlemen? we have had a smart turn or two.


I never follow'd fleeter Dogs that had any Noses.


I hate your mere fleet Hounds, that kill presently in view, it is as bad as
coursing.


Methinks there's Pleasure to see 'em hit it off at a fault, as well as there
is in a hard riding.


And to see the Doubles, and Shifts an old Hare will make for her Life, faith
beyond a Fox.


I spare my Horses to day which made me come home so soon, but to morrow you
shall try my Fox-hounds, and then Gentlemen I will lead you a dance.


Sir, here's the rarest News.


There never was the like, Sir you'll be overjoyed and amazed.


What are ye mad? what's the matter with you?


How now? what's the matter? here's a new Face in my Family, what all joy and
mirth, what does it mean, or is it a Christmas Gambal?


Oh Sir the Family is turned topsy turvy, we are almost distracted, we are the
happiest People.


I cannot contain my self, my self, my Lady, Sir my Lady.


what is she dead?


Dead! no Heaven forfend, she's the best Lady, the sweetest Lady.


Oh the dearest, kindest Lady, you are the happiest man Sir living.


Never was such a change, such a miracle, why, all the House will lay down
their Lives for her.


She has obliged us all the kindliest and the sweetliest, we'll live and dye
with her.


Ay, all, all of us, long live her Ladyship, God bless her Ladyship.


Oh She's the best Lady in the World, I could kiss the Ground she goes on.


I could lick the Dirt of her Shoes, she's the sweetest, gentliest natured Lady
breathing.


Why? give me Breath a little, what do you mean?


'Tis true, 'tis true Sir, go into her your self, and be witness of her strange
change, none but Heaven could work such a miracle.


This is most astonishing, Gentlemen you see how I am surprised, if you please
to dress, I'll in and see the meaning of this Wonder, I'm impatient till I go
in.


Sir you may put off your Boots and dress first, She's at Prayers with the
Common-Prayer Book in her Closet, and will be private for half an hour.


How, Common-Prayer Book? new Prodygies! what miraculous Power has been here at
work? my Friends, if this be true I shall rejoice indeed.


True, ay 'tis true enough, long live Sir Richard and his Lady, Heaven bless
'em both, Huzah, Huzah.


I well remember the Cunning-man warned me to bear all out with Confidence, or
worse he said would follow, I am ashamed and know not what to do with all this
Ceremony; I am amazed, and out of my Senses, I looked in the Glass, and saw a gay
fine thing I knew not, methought my Face was not at all like that I have seen
at Home, in a peace of a Looking Glass fastened upon the Cupboard. But great
Ladies they say have flattering Glasses, that show them far unlike themselves,
whilst Poor-folks Glasses show em as they are.


Oh Madam, Here's my Master now returned from Hunting.


Oh Heaven! this goodly Gentleman my Husband?


My Dear; I am extremely pleased to see my Family thus transformed to all the
joy imaginable, which as they tell me, you have created in them.


Sir I shall be always overjoyed, at what gives you delight, and shall be ever
glad, if I can please your Family.


Oh Divine Softness! this Gentleness of thine transports me.


Alas Sir what am I? I am ashamed of my own meanness, I shall be glad to be a
Fellow Servant here, you are Lord of all Sir.


Dear Creature, if thou continue thus, I had rather be Lord of thee than of
the Indies.


You make me Blush Sir; I hope I shall have Grace never to be otherwise.


I am astonished, can this be Real?


All that's good above can witness for me: I am in earnest.


Rise sweetest Creature, what has wrought this admirable change?


Alas! I never did offend you nor any of them.





It was not I; I sure was not my self then, indeed, I find my self so much
changed, I scarce know who I am?


It is a blessed change.


It is so, I have that pleasure in my mind; that every thing I see ravishes me
with joy, such a sweet House, such brave Furniture, such ready loving Servants,
and so noble, so sweet a Lord and Master: Oh Father! I know not where I am
methinks!


Heaven be thanked for this: I would not lose this Dear, this Blessed Creature,
for all the Wealth and Power that King's can boast off.


'Tis sure Heaven's doing: and I can never have another mind, 'tis wondrous
that I ever had methinks.


And I am confirmed: Joy! Joy! Oh heart make room for Joy! it will overwhelm
you else, upon my knees I kiss this dear, dear hand: Thou art so rare a
Creature, I shall worship thee.


Nay hold Sir! pray Sir! what do you do? Indeed you make me cry, I am so
ashamed, oh Father! so brave a Gentleman to kneel to me? 'tis My duty to do
that.


Hold heart, I say contain thy self, where are my Friends, my Servants, call
em all, and let em be witnesses of my happiness.


O Lord! how shall I behave my self before these Gentlefolks.


And wilt thou never child, nor quarrel with me more, and show thy fury
amongst my Servants?


I'll cut my Tongue out first, oh Lord I chidel.


I have one thing more, wilt thou go to Church with me, and leave the snivelling
Conventicle?


Yes surely Sir, I'll do what e're you please, I'll have nothing to do with
Fanatics, they are a Melancholy ill conditioned People.


Sure t'was an Angel spoke in thee, thou art the best of all thy Sex, I hope
thou art convinced that the Phanatick Chaplain was drunk last night; would
thou let me discard him, there wants nothing then to complete my happiness.


Yes, Heaven forbid else: what shall I disobey my Lord and Master?


Let me embrace my Dear, my Love, and prithee seal this promise with a kiss.


Oh rare sweet man! he smells all over like a Nosegay, Heaven preserve my wits.


Gentlemen, behold this day, here stands the hapstiest man that the sun shines
on, I am transported beyond my senses: I hear proclaim a Jubilee to all my
Family these three months: Summon in all the Country, I'll keep open house,
send for my Fiddlers, Hoboys, Trumpets, and all Instruments of joy: let all the
Bells in the Hundred Ring, let the Seeples Rock, and let the Ringers Drink
enough: here stands the best of Women and of Wives, the kindest and the
gentlest Mistress to her Servants: and she that has given me all this
happiness.


Lord Sir, you put me out of countenance, I blush, I'm sorry that I ever angered
any of you, indeed i'll do you all the good I can, I should be to blame else.


God bless my Lady, long live her Ladyship, we'll live and dye with her.


My Dear you did affront these Gentlemen last night, speak to em.


Indeed, I was not my self, i'm sorry that I was uncivil, I hope in time to
mend.


We are your Ladyships humble Servants, and largely must partake of the great
joy, which now possesses all the Family.


Joy, Joy, to both the Bridegroom and the Bride; 'tis a new Wedding.


'Tis true; some three months since, I did espouse her Body, this day I'm
married to her mind, this is a perfect Wedding: go send for all my Tenants,
there shall be nought but Feasts and Revels here.


This will be a brave time, how I shall joy to see it.


Your Fiddlers were going by, having heard that my Lady would not allow of
Music, but I called em in.


You did well; my Dear, do you not love Music?


Oh! I love nothing better.


That's my joy, my life; call in my Music: Gentlemen, i'll make em sing a
very unfashionable song to you, in the praise of marriage, a peace of my own
Poetry in my last Wives time.

Let the vain Spark consume his store,
In keeping an expensive Whore,
For others to employ.
For all those snares, and baits he pays,
Which she for other Gallants lays,
And he must least enjoy.
Keep Whores then as perfumes you wear;
Of which your selves have the least share:
Of other's claps partake.
Your Bodies bring to'th Surgeons hands,
And to the Scriveners all your Lands:
And give her your last Stake.
While with reason we bless the Fate,
That brings us to the Marriage State,
The only happy Life.
The chief enjoyment in a King,
No Wealth, no Power, such joy can bring;
As does a Wife, a tender Wife.
There can be no true Friend beside,
So oft does interest divide;
But they are so conjoined.
By this most Sacred Rite are grown,
That they are not one flesh alone,
But they are both one Mind.

Sir, here are some Country Neighbours hearing of the happy conversion, desire
to dance before you.


Let them come in.


What means this lewd noise; this most profane abominable Jigging? Lady I
must rebuke thee, in pure zeal, I must rebuke thee, I cannot bear it.


Thou insolent fool be silent, I will have no Phanaticks, no Law-Breakers
within my Walls, especially no Hypocrites, you were drunk last night you Swine.


I defy thy words, it was a fit, I was taken with a fit, a grievous fit: Lady,
what say you, are you become like one of the wicked ones?


I will obey my Lord and Master, his will is mine.


Retire to your Chamber, you shall not be seen this day, to morrow I will tell
you more of my mind.


What's this, she is not as she was; Iampridem mulieri no credas no mortuoe
quidem; I may not go, I will not retire, my Zeal tells me, I must rebuke
thee, and I will thunder in thine Ears.


Turn him out.


I may not go, I say I will not retire, my Zeal transports me, I am become
furious.


Father you are welcome, doubly welcome; I sent for you upon another occasion
than I now find: Heaven has ordered things another way, we are all transported
with excess of joy, my Dear salute your Father.


Good Heaven! my Father; what means this sure? I shall be distracted, but I
must bear it out.


What means this, 'tis superstitious, and favours of Idolatry?


'Tis nothing but her great Humility.


I like it not.


I shall endeavour then to please you Sir.


'Tis well, I am glad to see you and my Son-in-Law well; but what's the cause
of this unwonted joy of this transport?


The Cook has knocked to Dinner: let's in, you there shall have a full account,
and be a joyful witness of our Happiness.


Was ever Woman yet so miserable? I cannot make one in the Village yet
acknowledge me, they sure are all of the Conspiracy, this wicked Husband of
mine has laid a Develish Plot against me, I for the present must submit that I
may get an opportunity into my hands for my Design, here comes a Rogue I will
have strangled, but now I yield.


Come on Nell, art come to thy self yet?


Ay I thank you, I wonder what I ailed, this Cunningman put Powder in my Drink
most certainly.


Powder! the Brewer put good store of powder of malt in it that's all, Powder
Quoth she, ha, ha, ha!


I never was so days of my Life.


Was so, no, nor I hope ner'e will be so again, to put me to the trouble of
strapping you so Devilishly.


I'll have that Right hand cut off, for that you were unmerciful to bruise me
so.


Why? Faith I'm sorry for it, but it did you a great deal of good tho, why? you
would have been mad and called your self my Lady Lovemore till this time else,
why come, why don't you Spin?


I can't you have bruised my Arms so, when they are well I'll work hard.


That's my good Girl, I'll buy some Plums to make thee a minced Pie, come let's
be friends, faith kiss and friends.


Oh cursed impudent Rascal, what does he say?


Nay, prithee now, faith I won't strap thee so no more.


I must stay till this be well, before I forget it.


Ounz if you go to that, I will kiss you.


Oh soh, how the Beast stinks of Cheese, Leather-apron, Pitch, Grease, foul
Linen and old Shoes.


Why Neighbour Iobson? Why don't you put on your Bond, and go to the
Hall-place?


Why, what's the matter?


Matter! why? there's such a change, they are all out of their Wits, there's
open House to be kept there till Candlemas, all the Tennants are sent for, why
you'll loose your Dinner.


What do I hear? here's fine work indeed.


What the Devil is to do there? is that Damned Jade my Lady dead?


Nay I know not, we shall hear when I go, the Bells ring, do you not hear 'em?
and there's order given for all the Parishes hereabouts to ring, Barrels of
Beer, Flagons of Brandy and Money for the Ringers, and Alms to all the Poor
are ordered.


Death what's this? Here's a rout when I am gone, did they pack me away for
this, I shall have all my Estate run out.


Come, come, make hast.


Husband, shall not I go with you?


Why, what all'st thou? Did not I tell thee I would strap thee yesterday for
desiring to go, art thou at it again?


What does this Villain mean by strapping, and yesterday?


What a Pox, I have been married but six weeks, and you long to make me a
Cuckold already, stay at home there's good cold Pie in the Cupboard. But I'll
trust you no more with strong Beer Huzwife.


Well, you will have your way, I must do what you bid me.


That's a good Wench, God be with you, come on Neighbours.


And I'll be there not long after you, sure I shall meet some there that are
not of the Conspiracy.


Son-in-Law Sir Richard I long to see Mr. Noddy, methinks I did not eat the
meat with Appetite since he did not bless the Creature.


Sir to tell you the truth he is very sick, he was drunk last night, I am sorry
to say it to you.


Son-in-Law, I know you are a Lukewarm Formalist of the Episcopal way, and you
are glad to say it, but I believe it not.


Pardon me Sir, I do not use to lye, the whole Family are witnesses of it.


I fear me they are all too much of the same Batch, will my Daughter affirm
this?


I must needs say what Sir Richard says.


Come Gentlemen, perhaps he might e're he was aware be overtaken with the
Creature, he might be transported perhaps with Zeal and so the sooner
overtaken, and so 'tis not a sin, but a frailty in him that is Righteous: I
must see him.


But 'tis a sin in us: very good Doctrine.

Though Zeal stand Sentry at the Gate of Sin,
Yet all that have the Word pass freely In.

I am sorry to see you ill Mr. Noddy.


Bless your Worship.


Now we have dined let him give Thanks.


Here's a Riot and a Rout, you sirrah, Butler, Rogue.


Why how now? what a Pox is to do with you? who are you?


Impudent Varlet! don't you know your Lady?


Why how now you Quean? here, turn this Madwoman out of Doors.


S' Life you Rascal take that sirrah, why sirrah? don't you know your Lady? my
Lady Lovemore, hands off, I am she you Rogue.


Why you faucy Jade? Huzwife have a care here's a good pump, we'll cool your
Courage for you.


Why Iane? Huzwife, sure you do not forget me?


Forget thee Woman! why? I never remembeed thee, I ne'er saw thee in my Life.


Oh wicked Slut! I'll give thee cause to remember me.


Oh murder! murder! help, help!


How now, what Uproar's there?


You Jade, Lattice! what won't you know me neither? I'll make you know your
Lady.


Help, help!


What's to do there?


Why? here's a Madwoman falls a beating and lugging us, and calls her self my
Lady.


Some Christmas frolic, some Neighbour has a mind to be merry.


I warrant it is a Bess of Bedlam.


Oh here's my Chaplain, sure he is not of the Conspiracy against me! Mr. Noddy!
Thou art an holy man.


I am so Woman, what would thou have with me?


What are you blind? do you not know me because I have these filthy Clothes on?
look on my Face, I am the most injured, the most abused Lady that ever yet drew
Breath.


Lady! Woman, art thou not mad in truth?


Why sirrah, are not you my Chaplain? You base Villain, did not I lay on the
Plaster to your shoulders, and a red hot Pan to your Head last Night, and
saved your Life?


Oh Heaven! this is the Sorceress that bewitched me this Night, lay hold on her
she is a Witch.


Why Master Noddy? art not thou troubled in Spirit? it is surely a Trick, a
Gambal.


My Father here! I am so distracted with my grieff and sufferings I did not see
you, but now I must embrace you, and never leave you till you succour and
revenge me, for the most Barbarous usage that ever Lady suffered: speak, will
you not speak to me, Honoured Father?


I know thee not, I fear thou art some lewd woman; be gone, hands off.


Nay, then I am desperately miserable.


She a is Witch and did confess it to me, I will have her burnt.


Stand by, there must be something more than ordinary in this Business.


What the Devil can this mean?


What should it mean? some poor Madwoman is got loose.


Why? I never saw thee, thou my Wife? poor Creature I pity thee.


Nay 'tis in vain to hope for Redress from thee, thou wicked Contriver of all
my Misery.


How I am amazed! is that I there in my Clothes, that have made this
disturbance? oh Father! I am here in these fine Clothes, how can this be? and
yet to my thinking I am there, I am so confounded and affrighted, that I shall
begin to wish I were with Zekell Iobson again.


To whom shall I apply my self? or whither shall I fly? oh Heaven what do I
see! Is not that I there in my Gown and Petticoat I wore yesterday? how can it
be when I am here? I can not be in two places at once.


Surely no, unless thou were it a Bird, but come Sir let's be deaf to these vile
Gambals and retire.


Poor Creature she's stark mad.


What in the Devil's Name, was I here before I came hither? that I should come
hither, and find that I was here before I came is the strangest thing to me,
let me look in this Glass, Oh Heaven I am confounded, I know not my self, if
that be I that's represented in the Glass, I never saw my self before.


What incoherent madness is this?





Ay that must be the Devil that's in your Likeness, remember my strap you
Quean.


How inevitably wretched am I?


O Lord, I am afraid my Husband will beat me that am on yonder side?


Gallants pray pardon her, she was drinking with a Conjurer last Night, and she
has been mad ever since, and says she is my Lady Lovemore.


Poor Woman take care of her, and do not hurt her, she may be cured of this.


Cured, yes and please your Worship, you shall see me cure her with this strap
immediately, Huzwife do you see this?


Hold, hold, pray do not beat me Zekel.


What says my Dear? Does she insect thee with madness too?


I am not well, my head turns round.


Wait on your Lady in.


I beseech your Worship don't take it ill of me, she shall never trouble you
more.


Take her home and use her kindly, I'll send my Physician to her shall cure her
I warrant you.


Thank your Worship most kindly, come Nell.


What will become of me?


How now, where's my Father-in-Law?


He has taken Coach, he bid me tell you he loves no Christmas-Gambals, and he
took this for one.


It is a very odd one take it all together, as e're I saw?


Methought there was a Method in her madness, she did not know her self in the
Glass.


And if you observed, your Lady uttered some strange words.


She did so, which did very much amaze me.


But that I have not much Belief in Magic, I should have odd thoughts of this.


Now you have put me in mind of it, there was something in the latter part of
this story, very strange and very surprising.


Sir, the Doctor who called here last Night, desires a word in private with you
on earnest Business.


What can this mean? bring him to me.


We'll take a turn and wait on you suddenly.


Your servant Gentlemen, be gone Servants.


Low on my knees I fall, and beg your pardon, and put my Life into your hands,
I have exercised my art of Magic on your Lady, I know you are an honourable
Man, and will not take my Life, who might have still concealed it from you, if
I had pleased.


Methinks you have brought me to a glimpse of misery, too great for me to bear,
is all my happiness come only to a short Live'd Vision and a Dream?


Sir I beseech you fear not, if there be any harm towards you, I freely give
you leave to hang me.


Can Magic bring me any thing but ill?


I never yet did mischief by my Art, there are Aerial Spirits I command which
do no hurt, they are Sylphs.


What have you done? inform me.


I have so transformed your Lady's face, she seems to be the Cobler's Wife,
and charmed the face of Iobson's Wife into the Likeness of your Ladies, and
when the storm arose, my Spirits removed each to the others Bed.


Oh miserable wretch thou hast undone me, I am fallen from the top of all my
hopes, and still must have a most tempestuous Wife, that fury whom I never yet
knew quiet, since the first minute I had her.


If that were all, I could continue the Charm for both their Lives.


I'll have no happiness from Hell, all my Blessings must come from Heaven, and
I will hang you if you will not undo your Charm, let the event be what it will.


I'll do it in a moment, and perhaps you'll find it is the luckiest moment of
your Life, I can well assure you your Lady will prove the best of Wives, give
me your pardon Sir.


Upon condition you undo the Charm I will.


It shall be done, and you shall find all my Praediction true.


Hold there is yet a material thing, which I must know.


I will resolve you Sir.


May be to Crown this mischief I have suffered, the Cobbler may perhaps have
made me Cuckold.


Then cut this Throat, for e're she was transported to that Bed; the Cobbler was
got up, besides he has done nought but beat her ever since, and you are like to
reap the benefit of his Labour.


Go about the business, i'll send for him and her.


I can assure you, there's no staying for you in this Family; my Lady has
yielded all up to my Mistress's power.


Why look thee Edward Chip; thou art mistaken in me, I can conform in many
things, rather than leave so good a House and so good People.


Where there is so much eating.


At least though I cannot conform inwardly, I will conform outwardly; and that
will do your business as well, give us some Wine, they shall see what I can do.


With all my heart, Gentlemen you are come in good time to be merry with Mr.
Noddy.


Ay God I'm in a merry humour.


Here's a pretty turn.


Give me a Beer-glass, here's the King and all the Royal Family, Huzzah: to
either, here's Sir Richard Lovemore's, huzzah: the to'ther, nay Gad take me give
me a third, here's my Ladies, huzzah: pledge me all of you, and let every
Bumper be a facer thus.


Is that a facer, faith it is very pretty.


Nounz I'll have you to know, I can be as good Company as e're a he that wears
a head.

He that wears a brave Soul, and dares honestly do,
He's a Herald to himself and a Godfather too.

Here's a Transformation.


Come faith, let's sing a Catch.

A Boat, a Boat, haste to the Ferry,
For we come over to be merry;
To laugh and Quaff, and drink old Sherry.

Here's a turn; here's a Hypocritical Rogue, I think we shall have Ovid's
Metamorphosis in this House, but I am too much concerned to mind this
Diversion: but where are my Friends I wonder.


Come on Friends, and fall heartily to our Christmas Gambals after a Rouse or
two.


What you tell us Sir has much of wonder in it.


It is prodigious if it prove true.


Come now, lets have a dance.


Now Parson let's have one Christmass-Gambal, we'll play the Black-smith.


Ay come with all my heart, how is that?


Come we'll show you, you shall down first, here, lye down upon this form.


Ay come, come, Gad I'm almost drunk.


Come I'll play the Smith and blow the Bellows, ye are my two Journey-men.


We are ready.


Be sure you lay him on.


How now Iobson, have you brought your Wife with you?


Yes and please your Worship, she's here at the Door, a little from the House
she fell into a Swooned, I thought I ne'er should have recovered her. But at
last a tweak or two by the Nose, and half a Dozen straps has done the Business,
here where are you Huswife, come in?


Light there 'tis very dark.


O Heaven and Earth, what's this my Lady?


What does he say, is my Wife changed to my Lady?


I thought the other was too good to be my Lady.


Heaven to punish me most sharply for my Crimes, Heaven left me to suffer under
the power of Enchantment, I am fully sensible of all my faults, and since I
abhor 'em and detest my self for them, I hope that Heaven and you will pardon
me, here will I kneel and fix till I have procured yours at least, and Heaven
be witness to my Resolutions. The Remnant of my Life shall be employed in duty
and observance of you, if you'll vouchsafe to take me to your Bosom.


Rise Madam I forgive you, and if you be sincere, you'll make me happier than
all the Enjoyments of the world could do.


What a pox must I lose my Wife thus? where the Devil is my to'ther wife?
here's conjuring indeed.


Oh Sir the strangest accident has happened, it has amazed us, and almost
bereft us of our senses, my Lady was in so great a swooned we thought she had
been dead.


And when she came to her self, she proved another woman.


Ha, ha, that's a Bull indeed.


She is so changed I know her not, I never saw her face before, O Lord is this
my Lady!


I shall be beaten again.


I thought our happiness was too great to last.


Fear not my Servants, Sir let 'em all be called in, I will give ease and quiet
to your Family, I am a hearty Penitent, good Servants I acknowledge I have
Heaven has given me another mind, it shall be my endeavour to make ye all
happy. I'm sure no Mistress shall outdo me in Kindness and in Gentleness.


Hold in this mind, thou wilt be the best of women, and I the happiest of men,
the other was false and short lived Joy, but this I hope will long continue.


May Heaven wreak all its vengeance on me if once I alter from this Resolution,
or e're I contradict your will again.


This is a day of wonders.


My head turns round I must go home, why Zekel what are you there?


Look you, look you now, hey day, what a Devil, what's that Queen my wife?
here's a rare business, Gad I dare not come near her.


'Tis rare indeed, we have all this day been under the Power of Enchantment, to
which Heaven knows there was not my least Consent. Heaven often turns even the
malice of Devils to produce a good end, this is no doubt a happy change, I'll
celebrate it with all the joy I did proclaim, for my late short lived Vision.


To me 'tis happier than my Birth-day was.


Now Madam since you have resigned your will to me, where is the Chaplain?


Here Mr. Noddy where are you? he's in the Buttery, here come in.


Behold your saint here.


I do confess my self in the wrong.


Go Hypocrite, I discard thee.


Discard me for what, Nounz I'll conform, what a Pox do you mean?


Thou wicked Wretch, thou scandal to thy own Profession, would thou
maliciously thus bring one on ours, by thinking to conform by being vicious?
detested Beast be gone, carry him to his Chamber, our Church condemns all such
Debauchery, though such vile wretches would bring a scandal on it. Give him ten
Pound, and in the Morning send him packing: here Iobson take they fine wife.


But hold Sir, did not your Worship Sir make me a Cuckold under the Rose?


No upon my honour nor ever kissed her till I came from hunting, she was my
Bedfellow for a little while, and for this happy change, I'll give thee with
her five hundred Pound, buy store of Leather, and be my Shoemaker, I'll help
thee to all the Custom in the Country.


He boys I am a Prince, a Prince, come hither Nell, come to thine own dear
Zekel, I'll never strap thee more.


Indeed I have been in such a dream, I'm quite weary of it.


Can your good Ladyship forgive my strapping your good Ladyship so very much.


With all my heart, the joy of this blessed change makes all things good again.


Forsooth Madam will you please to take your Clothes, and let me have mine
again.


No thou shalt keep 'em, and I'll preserve thine as Relics.


Gentlemen let me present you to my Wife.


We wish your Ladyship all the joy your heart can hope for.


May all your Life be ever happy Madam.


Gentlemen pray pardon me, and I think I was a Madwoman last night, Heaven now
has brought me to my self.


No more of this Subject.

Proclaim my joys in every place aloud,
Bonfires surround my house, let the Bells ring,
Let's dance and revel, feast, carouze and sing.

Long live my Lady and Sir Richard.


Now let me speak if I may be so bold,
Nought but the Devil sure can tame a Scold.

COme Nell, prithee while I dress for the Dance speak something in my behalf to
these Friends of mine here, for I'm sure they are all Friends.


Who I Zekel? Oh Lord you know, I wand dacity when I come before great Folks.


How now Huzwife dare you dispute it? remember my strap you Quean.


Hold, hold good Husband, I'll try what I can do?


Oh most curious fine Gentlefolks, I hope you will pardon me for being so bold,
but ne'er stir, I'll never let you alone till I find you kind to poor Zekel,
for he's as pretty a Fellow as e're strapp'd Wife.


Why how now, what a Pox is all this for? what speak an Epilogue in Prose? (the
Devil) I could have done that my self you foolish Jade. For example now,

Look you Huzwife, there's as good Prose as any is in England, but I must have
it in Verse, all beaten Verse, away with it.


YOU cannot sure ungenerously refuse,
The first address of a young tender muse;
So modest that she ne'er attempts to fly,
Up to the lofty pitch of Comedy:
Farce is her aim, the persons low and mean,
Humble the language homely it the seen.
Let this poor shrub secure from censure grow,
For all the Critiques stormy rage too low:
If you'll your thundering indignation vent,
Let it on lofty bombast all be spent.
Applauded nonsense where sad lovers pine,
And Hero's rant and fight and cry and whine;
And the old buskins empty swelling strains,
That cracks the Player's lungs and Poet's brains.
These, these are triumphs for your forces fit,
But who upon a Droll e're spent his wit;
Or crititiz'd on Merry Andrew yet?
Whilst all the lofty Frigates you attacque,
Pray let in safety pass this little smack.
Your shot against us will wast 'ith empty sky,
The whistling bullets over our heads will fly;
We lye so low your Canon mount too high.


