CLARICILLA, A TRAGI-COMEDY, The Scene SICILY.

Written by THOMAS KILLIGREW, IN ROME.

DEDICATED To His Dear SISTER THE Lady SHANNON.

LONDON: Printed by J. M. for Andrew Crook, at the Sign of the Green Dragon in
St Paul's Church-yard. 1663.

SEleucus, you know the soul of our Design lies in the speedy and silent
execution of the Plot; let us not then presume in their security till we fall
in our own; but go, and when they have begirt the place give us notice, that
with our Charge they may at once fear and feel their danger, and by us be
clothed in Ruin ere they know whose Livery they wear -- This, if Fortune be
kind,


I should blush at this, if there needed more Arguments to confirm I shall be
victorious than the reward proposed; for had the Gods intended the far-fam'd
Claricilla's Virtues a Reward for Treason they would not then have left her
Virtue such a Guard, whose power hath stood amongst Traitors when yours fell
upon the faith that bore it.


You oblige me, Sir, and this goodness makes me beg you would be pleased to let
me once again call to your memory some particulars of that tedious story which
so often in my miseries I recounted to your Highness: This Traitor Silvander
having by my love gained an interest, and by my smiles climbed over the Heads
of all his Fellows in the strength of that trust grew too powerful for me, and
in a Battle (where my cause only struck) our Forces being not half the
Traitors number we lost the day, to which Theft, not Conquest, was joined the
Murder of my Brother and loss both of my Crown and Daughter.


That fault the Gods will punish; but his usurpation of the Princess, and
intended Rape which in a forced Marriage he labours, are those that blow my
rage.


'Tis true, it has always been his aim, but his Love, by Heaven appointed for
his punishment and our Guard, has given her a constant power over him, which we
have so directed that she has prevailed with him to quit his greatest strength,
and retreat with her to this private Villa, where now he remains attended only
with some few Troops of Horse: This opportunity we owe her piety, that has put
it in our power to strike for our Revenge and Right again.


Arm, Sir, and behold how in the obedience to your commands they are lost;
Ruin in silence like Growth steals upon them; they are now empal'd, and
destruction hovers yet undiscovered to the Prey; but defer not, for Night makes
haste away, and the Cause hath such a Glory cast about the Soldier that it
forces Day, and Victory in their resolution waits but your Command to send her
forth.


Sir, pray be pleased to give these Iost men their Dooms; the Signal's yours.


'Tis an Honour, and I accept it -- And thus I give it, Follow me.


And that Soldier that refuses such a Signal, let his weighty fears sink him
where he stands. Come, Seleucus. Exit King.


Come, Seleucus had not wont to be the Word upon a Charge; O Love, thy power
hath disarmed me, or rather Envy hath disarmed my Love; could it be else that I
should stand thus unspirited in Claricilla's cause, while others gild their
Swords in her revenge? it could not be -- Hark, how eagerly they pursue my


COme, Timillus, let us haste to the Charge, lest our Friends believe Fear
declined our Peace; and we are early enough, if we succeed, to let them see we
have brought the wishes of Friends.


Faith, if we do not succeed we shall find we came too soon, I am sure I
shall; In an overthrow I am certain to get my share; when I live to want an
Enemy my Friends shall knock me of the head; for I thank my Fates, Fortune has
been as bountiful of her mischiefs to me as an Enemy could wish, and that's but
a hard condition, you'll say, for a man that cannot ask rewards when he does
well.


Mention not that here where reward grows within thy reach in every daring
forehead; and if Timillus dares not gather them he must go without 'em; jests
brings none of the swords harvest home.


You are ever thus snappish till I am angry, and then I fight to my own ruin
not mine enemies; one would think you might allow a man his humour, and not be
forced to fight your quarrel, but he must fight your way too.


Prithee no more, leave this discourse and follow me.


And what wilt thou do, Jacomo?


Who I? I'll follow my Master.


No prithee, let us be friends, choose some other place, for I'm resolved to
keep that my self till I am beaten from it.


You're merry, Sir, but I have seen them clawed ere now that have taken it; but
I hope you'll find better fortune.


A pox of Fortune, she has no such thing as good or bad belongs to her; follow
me and if we gain the day I'll give her thee.


FLy, Madam, and leave 'em, for these enemies bring our freedom.


Be constant heaven.


What, ho Claricilla, gentle Claricilla, dost thou fly me too? nay then I'm
lost indeed; thou might have had mercy, though no love, and preserved me for
thine own sake; for in this fall of mine thou hast a hand in ruining thine own
Temple; nor can thou after this ingratitude be termed the just, however the
fair Claricilla. -- No, since Claricilla's cruel I will not stir a foot that


'Tis not you I look for, -- 'Tis something that shot


'Tis so; this youth but saw her, and he's overcome. -- Stay, what ere thou
art, that once again I may see thy face, and read the story which Love and
Anger appears so mingled in. -- Now, By all our gods, 'tis nobly writ; and had
I met it when I commanded fortune, I would have studied thee, and by
obligations have grafted thee my friend; but since that power is gone, by this
-- and my name, I command thee be my Priest, know Silvander the unfortunate
calls thee back.


Silvander! Oh ye gods! what power ye give to treason?


Prithee youth, no noise; I was a traitor, but true to Love. A King, and yet
his power commanded me; and could my love to Claricilla have consented to have
worn such a Jewel in less then a Crown, or been satisfied to have seen her whom
I preferred before the gods stand second to any; thou in all thy wounds and
faith which thus adorn thee, should not have out-shin'd me this day in
loyalty.


Love and Treason mixed! know, though thou hast proved thy self a cunning
Chemist in attempting to destroy that noble body; yet I have that here shall in
spite of all thy adulterate mixtures restore and fix it: Guard thee.


Prithee threaten not, for though I prophecy thou bring my winding-sheet,
yet thou shalt see my smiles in scorns wreathe it about me; and yet I mean not
to fall unlike a Soldier, nor be buried without my Rights about me, my sword
upon my breast thus: and therefore guard thee.


Guard me! 'tis the office of the gods. -- To kill thee is to do the execution,
and the way as safe as that the Ministers of Justice tread: and were it as
noble as just, I would command thee hold thy neck out; but I scorn such ways to
my revenge; and therefore take an equal trial. -- Yield, and your Person's
safe; for 'twas against your cause, not you, I drew my sword, which scorns
Silvander upon the ground.


Hold, and ere this darkness hath quite shadowed me, hear my story; that as
thou hast punished my treason, thou may pity my misfortune: and thus (when I
am gone) report of me, Silvander bowed to a cruel power, who when he had
offered all that a Lovers thought could compass, and the power of a King worn
only to serve in when that power lessened, and my offerings came to be in the
heart, not hand, the way to his mercy was shut, and my prayers because
unperfum'd unheard, and I the offerer thus made the sacrifice: Oh gentle youth,
would any bow to such a power as flies us in our miseries, or worship that
image which thus falls upon her Priest.


Unfortunate indeed, as all men are that build upon faults; but I will not say
I pity thee; for where a King once grew to sow pity is the worst of changes.


This way he went, Sir, if he be mortal; but his stay's so short that we but
seem to follow in the tract he makes.


Let us lose no time then in overtaking him, that we may assist his work.


I will not fight a foot farther that way; if there be no enemies backwards,
I'll make some; S'death, I'll not take Mars his leavings in the field.


Come Seleucus, turn this fire the right way, and 'twill light thee to find out
honour.


It has don't; but to day she's so busy in obeying one mans fortune that my
wounds are not currant pay to purchase her.


We're sure he's this way, for here's his mark; where ere he goes he makes
death his character; know you this that bears it?


Know him? yes, this stroke killed not a traitor, but treason it self fell
here: this is Silvander, and he's gone. -- Envy, be not prophetic; his aims
beyond a Crown: it must be Claricilla then, ye gods! whither else tends this
youths flight, or what but she will satisfy; when a King cannot make his
quarry! this doubt makes me pursue him, though to a dangerous knowledge.


SUre this stranger knows me not; he pursues me as if I were part of the enemy.


O stay; for know, since I have once again seen my fate I'll read it what ere
it be, 'tis written in so fair a book. -- See, unconfident of my arms I beg
your stay; he begs that dealt death as


Sir, I know not guilt enough to beget a fear; yet if you mean me no harm, why
do you pursue me, and neglect the advantage Fortune throws upon your daring
youth? have you such choice of honours you scorn to stoop for this you have
ventured so far for? what dress would you wear? what beauties would your youth
put on to make it lovely, when those wounds a Crown and conquest cannot
satisfy? when your heart thinks these no harvest, where would your sword sow
your hazards to reap one more glorious?


Fair soul go on; and whilst you blame the effect, I'll read, the cause, and
thus look upon the conquest; Crown and reward I struck for, and if ever I have
triumph it must pass through those Arches in gentle smiles; and whilst I enjoy
this happiness, let the Crown and Victory pass by as the lesser good. Nor would
I give this sight to possess the blessings that attend them both.


Heaven grant this fruit be from a noble stock, and yet 'tis safer 'twere not;
for I fear I am not proof against such virtues; 'twas the dress my Melintus
wore when he appeared most comely (nor need I doubt him) for never honour grew
where 'twas not sowed; Sir, you forget your wounds, they exact a care.


No, fair one; I am now pouring Balm into them; and could I hope you would
afford this way of cure, it would be one health not to be healed. -- Why do you
turn away, and let my truths fall ere they reach your ears? is it your fears
that would remove


Sure I have heard that voice. -- Sir, for heavens sake, wound me not with
doubt, but tell me who you are.


Are there no lines in all this misery that you can call to mind? -- Nor the
print of one joy left which you set there.


Oh yes! there is.


O Claricilla! -- Soul of honour, why do you not in charity quit your virtue,
'tis single here, that I may throw off my pain.


O Melintus, you must not wish it; Melintus can bravely suffer, he's a
Soldier, Loves Soldier, but Honours Leader; let me weep my soul into thy
noble breast; this payment I can make to none but to thy self; those tears that
were due to absence sadness paid thy memory; Oh let me rest upon thee, my joys
are too great a load to bear; and feel how the Melintus here beats to meet
Melintus there.


Oh ye gods, 'tis Paradise sure; the way was so ^gged that lead to it.


'Tis a great power we serve; nor is it more seen in his punishment that parted
us, then in this reward; but let us not, my soul, unhandsomely, or saucily,
express our joys; it may displease those powers that have been thus
favourable; and my Melintus had not wont to sacrifice to himself and forget the
gods.


Oh gentle Claricilla, remove not from me; for you mistake the posture, the
breast is Loves Altar, and the seat of friendship; and for sacrifice, is not
Claricilla a fuller offering in either kind then a Cake or Spice? but I submit,
for Melintus shall never know a reason that contradicts Claricilla.


Yet let us remember what we owe to your safety; your wounds too (but that I
know Melintus ever placed dangers behind his Love) I should ere this have
prompted you to a care of.


For my wounds, the cause will heal 'em; to me you owe nothing for your
deliverance; your freedom grew here, and your enemies mistaking the place, in
search of my dangers, dug it out; and you shall find this truth in the
beauty of the scars they leave. Oh Claricilla, thy faith makes me smile through
all this blood; but hark, I fear we are pursued; this upon your fair hand, and
then let me hide my love and name under my disguise.


Good night, Melintus; for thou hast now put out the light, and like Love
himself thou art blind, and thou art all I worship of that god.


See where the Eagle stands, my fears were true; the Princess in his hand too,
he holds her like his prey in the foot. --


What I did well was rewarded in the act; and for this Lady I am so far from
hoping she should be my prisoner, that I would have suffered all the miseries
of war ere struck one blow against her freedom.


Here is a Prince whose youthful fire blown with desire to serve your Highness
has through thousand dangers, this day, courted your favour, and in his hand
you'll seem more aptly worn.


Madam, though his friendship seem to direct, your highness has an interest
that commands here; and 'tis honour enough if you please to let me kiss your
hand.


Sir, civilities are always fruitful, and beget civilities, if they meet with
honour; which I hope shall not be wanting to give a a growth to what you
venture here.


Madam, I see 'tis not my opinion only, but this Lords too, that I am unworthy
of this honour.


If it be an honour, Sir, wear it; you first secured it.


Will you make your hand the reward of Fortune then, and scatter your favours
so that they may be had for stooping? is that an honour due to the first comer?
if so, I grudge it not, for such favours and upon such ties he may wear; else I
should be loath to stoop to her that bows to him.


You are insolent.


Thus, Madam, be pleased to accept your due, and then give me leave to exact
mine. -- Sir, let not your interest here


Yes, but if thou were from this place I would make thee pay dear for one which
should on thy heart write, Thou were but my factor; and all the honour thou art
thus proud of but my store.


You promise to your self too fair; and noises fright only when we are ignorant
of the cause, and there's too much in thee to have a dangerous depth.


Hold, Seleucus, -- Sir, when you know his good, you will pardon this ill, nor
do I conceive it an injury to show by his envy what value he sets upon your
glories; and I make no doubt when his reason hath purged this choler from his
honour, you'll find him a healthy friend, and his acquaintance not subject to
these sickly passions; if he does, as of a surety, command my faith to make
this good.


Come, prithee leave thy fooling, and let me see it; I hope 'tis not dangerous.


No, no, ne'er fear it; this narrow Lane will ne'er prove my High-way to
Heaven.


Prithee come away then, we shall be observed to be so long together.


Hang observers, for I am sure I ne'er had any.


STrip those Slaves, and to the Bank chain the Cowards; Slavery is no new thing
to such as fear: and Tullius, loose the Rhodian on the Star-board bank:
Me-thinks that Fellow looks as if he were unjustly yoked with his misery; in
the heat of the sight I saw him shake his Chain like a fierce Dog held from the
Chase.


Sir.


Urge me no more; Justice as well as Blood has an interest in the Revenge I
take; and that makes it healthy, though it may be that which Anger hunts would
taste as sweet.


Sir, your pardon; 'tis my ignorance in the cause of your displeasure made me
mediate for them.


And because Tullius shall not think that Manlius would in misery expect the
compassion that he would not give you shall


Sir, not that I doubt you have one, but the desire to know it, makes me beg
you would relate the cause; Tullius can be but faithful when he has heard it,
and that I hope is not to be questioned now.


Know then, in that day when Treason flew above Justice, and false Silvander
enriched by his Master's trust out-vy'd the noble King with his own bounty, who
too late found his love had not gained a Friend, but begot a Traitor, 'twas in
that day the brave Thisander fell. The interest I had in this fault Heaven, I
hope, hath pardoned as well as punished; but to be short, our party having
gained the day, the Crown and Beauty that attended it, the fair Claricilla fell
into the hands of false Silvander, where her virtues by daily seeing them
dispersed the Cloud Ambition had set betwixt my Loyalty and me, and then too
late I repented what I had done; yet not willing to despair before I had
attempted something, I undertook an act, which if Heaven had smiled on, might
have redeemed my forfeit Honour; 'twas to heal the wounds I had made with the
blood of the surprised Traitor, whose fall I had decreed in the midst of all
his false glories.


How came it, Justice was so absent in her own cause?


His sins it seems were not ripe, nor this punishment that Heaven designed him,
which by I hope this is fully paid: But to the parcular; one night being in the
Princesses chamber contriving her escape, which we resolved should be ere I
gave the blow, a Guard seized me, and no cause given; I was sent unto my ruin,
as he designed, there your gratitude preserved me, I afterwards learned the
occasion of my imprisonment; these men whom Fortune now has given into my power
urged the lust-burnt Traitor to a Rape upon the Princess, and with a forced
Marriage counselled him to confirm his Title, blowing in his eat that there was
love betwixt the Princess and me, which if his care removed not would be a
hindrance to his designs; from his guilt and jealousy grew that necessity
which made me receive the command my better fortunes gave your merit: And now
judge whether or no there be a justice in this punishment.


'Tis visible they bow under a weight that justice hath laid upon them, and my
Galley is both a Prison and a Sanctuary.


Is this Manlius, and the cause of his disgrace?


But see the Slave I have sent for, Tullius; Was he bought or taken?


'Tis one of that Ging defended the Rhodian when we lost so many men in fight.


I remember the story; but how came it he was left when you sold the rest?


They did not like the price; besides he was dogged, and that made me put him
to the Oar.


Of what Country art thou, and thy name?


Of no Country, -- nor no name, in Chains; Slave is a being -- That what has
been is of no force against; else my Name and Country are not things to be
ashamed of.


Yet if you think they have power to gain your freedom you are too blame to
keep 'em hid.


I have vowed never to discover either till I have my freedom, and I will not
break my vow.


Why so dogged in your answer?


Why not? What is there in my fortune that needs fear a worse condition? or
what danger in a Slave worth your consideration what he says? If you dare a
venture good deed, give me credit for one and set me free.


No, no, we must not be forced to a benefit. Tullius, command the Galley to put
from shore, and lie loose to night to be ready if there be occasion offered, we
will stay a shore to night and expect what issue this days trouble hath.


Yes, I was of the Rhodian Ging, and chief, though you know it not; and had our
Seconds been men of souls and not made up of fears, might have plaid your parts
now. To what a miserable condition am I fallen? The last Mart, because I was
wounded, no body would buy me, the soul of a Slave in their esteem not weighing
down his limbs: Ye Gods, either send me liberty or take your gifts again:
Honour and her Issue, Courage, Justice, Faithfulness, are of no use to me; Who
would be judged by a Slave? Courage in Chains, what can it hurt? or to be
faithful, of what use when we are not trusted? O my fate! Why was I born free?
Had I been bred a Slave I could have sung in Chains; nay, to have perished in
them had been dying in my Calling; but to fall from greatness, and without a
fault be punished with the guilty! nay, where the guilty escape! False Rhodes!
my Curse kindle a fire within thee; the freedom that my soul brought thither
threw me into her dangers which their Cowardice had made such certain ruin in
their apprehension that not one amongst them had man enough to look upon their
fears; I then a God was held, because I durst venture thus to become a
Sacrifice.


YE Gods, by what ways or marks should men follow what is good? when virtue it
self does not always keep one path; when Claricilla who has all I know of
virtue shall quit the God-like attribute of Truth, and the Guard which
Innocence secures her from impious men with, and fly for safety to an Excuse?
She denied my visit at the price of a Lie, and at that rate of sin bought a
strangers company: Olinda assures me he's at this time with her; but why do I
thus without dangers bark against him, and let this Tree without a Root, this
Lie stand in my prospect? It shall not, I will see her; and since she can so put
off her Honour, as to lie for one man, who knows but she may lie with two?


YOu have now heard all the passages of my life since that sad day we parted to
this joyful hour; which if poor Philemon had lived to see, how happy had we
three been!


Have you not heard of him since his loss at Rhodes? Do you believe him dead?


My love makes me believe what I fear, for he had many wounds; besides, I know
his Ransom would have pleased the Conqueror better than his bonds, for they
were Pirates; but no more of this sad subject now.


O Melintus, grow not weary of mentioning a Friend; though it be sad, 'tis
just, and let that bear the weight; had Philemon lived to have seen me and
Melintus lost, we should have spent our days in your story ere suffered your
name to have past un-mention'd. Philemon, to his Friend a Lamb, and in such
softness he always wore his Lions heart; Philemon, whose youth had growth with
us, a Plant by the same hand set, a flower from our own stock, and all his
sweets akin to us; and we ought to be allied to his misfortunes too: but why do
I teach Melintus? 'tis boldly done to give Laws to him that is such a Master in
the rights of friendship.


To let you see I love Philemon, I do not grudge him that precious dew; and
gentle Claricilla, to witness my soul hath one consent with yours, See, I can
bear you company in your own Sex.


O ye Gods! he weeps, Melintus weeps; What Agony must this noble Youth feel
when his Soul sweats such drops? Pardon me for thus stirring thy grief.


Do not think I left the subject because I was weary of the discourse, or could
enough mention Philemon, that durst be my Friend when 'twas certain ruin; and
now he's dead I break no trust to tell you the cause was a greater tie than any
effect it had. Know, Philemon was in love with Claricilla, and it was with
Claricilla and not himself; for when by my trust he found your softness had
received impression from my constant love, and you were pleased to call me your
Melintus, I became his too; and to serve us in our wishes was all the Heaven he
aimed at. And now (my Soul) you must either confess me unworthy, or else grant,
such daring courage, and such fearful love as Philemon commanded, could never
sink from the soul of Melintus.


Since Melintus hath begun, take my confession too; know I saw it long ago, and
decreed rewards of friendship for the noble youth; but when 'twas beyond my
power to cure, it had been cruelty to have inquired the pain, and therefore
would not see what I pitied. And now you have all the secrets of my heart;
those of joy thy friendship multiplies, and those of grief; thus thou divid'st
the pains.


O lay the whole weight here.


Madam, Seleucus upon earnest business, as he pretends, will see you.


How? will see me? Tell him --


Nothing, Madam, he knows too much already; and though my Anger, which Envy and
your Cause begot, was grown to such a destructive height that I could not rule
it till it found mine own ruin in your frown, yet a Soldiers envy is no sin;
nor ought his anger be punished by his friends, when he appears not in love
with his fault, nor seeks to justify it. This day I begged leave to crave your
pardon for my offence; and your Highness refused my visit, and made an Excuse
to admit this -- Madam, 'twill be Silvander and my self laid against you by
many services, when it shall be known you were overcome by a single one, and
yielded at first sight to a stranger.


Seleucus, when I take you for my friend I'll take your counsel, and not till
then; for the services you urge they have been always dressed so in commands that
they appeared unbecoming.


Madam, you did not look with equal eyes upon them, else their passion would
have appeared their greatest beauty; and I never spake Loves language more than
when I was least a Poet.


The love of Subjects to their Prince is duty; and those whom we pay we do not
thank; the Hireling ought to serve.


Madam, you speak as if I served for bread, and forget that Subjects are
Heavens servants; and 'tis the Gods that appoint us Kings, and I am doomed to
it. 'Tis that, not want that makes me a Subject, which condition your Highness
is not exempt from. But I wonder what mighty Prince this is that thus
vouchsafes to hide himself.


This insolence here?


Your pardon, Madam, 'tis my Q. your Sex cannot strike, and 'twas the respect
which this place claims made me stand his mark thus long-Now to you who this
second time have with scorn looked upon my temper when a calm has hid it. Know
in the best of all thy ills, thy love, thou art a Traitor; else thou durst not
hope this Princess would be food for servants; and though thy fawning on thy
Masters feet hath been cherished so that thou hast left the Crumbs there, and
are now set by him, snatching at his own dish.


This to me?


Yes, to thee whose pride hath now but begun its leap, which I prophecy will
end at his throat; nor are such Dogs strange in this state. Remember yesterday,
when one of that hated breed fell unpitied.


Sure you take me for a Coward, you durst not urge me thus else.


No, Sir, that would secure you; nor do I believe, though you have many faults,
coward any of them.


I'll expect you in the garden then.


I'll follow you -- Madam, let not this threatened strom fright you; your
interest lies in the security of my innocence, which cannot fall here.


O that Melintus would hear my Reasons for what I say ere accuse me for having
too much woman in my suit, and then I would tell him he must not fight, at
least not now.


Not fight? My honour is concerned.


And my honour is concerned; twill look like fighting for me; and I hope,
Melintus will not set that at stake against opinion, especially when his
courage is so far from being in question, 'tis become a Proverb. Besides,
though you conquer you are lost; you see his interest in my Father makes him
not look with justice on your merits; and to kill his creature may threaten
your own ruin, but these Arguments have their period in fears still; and
therefore I'll not urge the reasons they bring, as of force against the danger
that honour threatens.


And those that come not so attended are commands to Melintus, who covets only
to keep those beauties of his mind, that you may not be put to make excuses for
your love.


Then gently thus, let me prevail with you to appoint a farther day, to
determine this angry question, whilst I acquaint my Father with his ambitious
hopes, which he not dreams are levelled at me, and consequently the Crown; I'll
tell him of his insolence now, and at the Battle; then I will urge the late
treason, and bid him call to mind the dangers that Traitors hopes threatened,
which sprung from this root. I know 'twill startle his soul; and if it fail to
ruin him, yet 'twill take the edge o'th Kings faith off from what he says, and
with jealous eyes he will look upon his growing greatness; and when he is thus
shook, thus parted from the Cedar that shelters him, then let thy justice pour
a storm upon his head: And now by the power Melintus hath given me I command
him deliver his honour for a time into my protection; this (if I have not
appeared too careless of mine own) you cannot deny me.


You have overcome me, take my honour which I have preserved through thousand
hazards, I freely give it you, and now rest secure I am yours for ever; for my
love and honour being gone, what remains is fit for nothing; I will not meet
this angry man; his insolence shall have justice on her side; and I will give
him cause to scorn me.


Melintus shoots his presents, and then they wound, not oblige; courtesies done
unwillingly is throwing the frozen into the fire, where too much heat kills the
charity, and proves but altering, not rescuing the danger.


Pardon, Madam, if you find me unversed in the way that leads to dishonour; for
though I submit to your reason, yet Seleucus nor the world (to whom he will
barely tell the fault) will know what argument with-held me.


Pray obey me once without dispute; and I hope this cloud is all that is left
of many that lowr'd upon our joys, and we shall see a clear evening yet to
crown our wishes. Farewell.


HEnce Love, and thy pale dew of tears be gone; Revenge and her beauteous
purple, 'tis to thee I bow, Love cannot now reach my ends; though at first I
stalked with it, 'twas indeed a proper Nurse, and rocked the Cradle while my
designs were young; but now they walk alone waited on by my resolutions and
confident of my strength; I need not such her milky miracles, to confirm my
faith; nor ought the event (though ill) be laid to me; for to dare speaks the
great soul, not the success; since Prophets well seen in things to come have
been themselves o'retaken with an unknown doom; but stay, the business now in
hand requires my being present here. -- Now, Sir, you're something slow in
justifying, though quick in doing injuries; sure you


'Tis true, injuries are things I am as slow to justify, as commit; they are
commonly the children of choler, and such bastard issue shame the Parents; and
if through weakness at any time I get them I hide them if I can with
satisfaction.


Words are too near akin to heal words; your sword hath a more certain cure,
and I repair to that, draw. -- Do you not understand the word? draw.


First hear me; that I came un-invited, and now am going without taking leave,
shows 'twas choice put me upon these hazards, not necessity; and that I dare
fight I have it written in my face, here under my enemies hand, to witness; and
such torn Ensigns tell the bearer fled no dangers; let that satisfy 'tis not
fear binds my hands, and yet I will not fight.


'Twas the cause I see gave you fire; and I am ashamed to call that man enemy
which I must bid twice draw his sword, which do or I'll kill thee.


I tell thee I will not fight.


You will not fight? By my life I'll kill thee then.


When I will not fight any body may do it; but when I will thou can not; and
once again I tell thee I will not fight, nor dare thou kill me.


Not dare? why what hast thou about thee that can protect thee from the justice
this brings?


Thou hast that about thee that protects me; and though I hate thee yet I can
be just.


Do me justice with your hand, your tongue has lost his power; draw your sword,
'tis her proper emblem, or, By my anger, thou art lost; nor shall this new kind
of coward save thee; Turn, and do not tempt me, or, By him that rules the day,
I'll kill thy fame too with a cowards wound in thy back.


Thou dare not do it; I know thou wilt not take so little for thine honour;
it cost thee too dear to be sold so cheap as to take a naked life, that's
undefended, for it; thou see I am resolved not to fight to day; so bound by a
resolution that coward could not lose it, therefore in vain thou tempt'st me.


Why the devil did you take this resolution against me that long to fight with
you?


'Tis but for a time.


Will you then hereafter?


Yes, by all my hopes; and nothing but this resolution then in thee shall
protect one of us.


Till this fit be over, then, I'll leave you.


'Tis strange, having both one business, our way should lye so several,
Claricilla, thy commands can put me into any form, that can bow me thus.


WAs the Prince in the garden when you left him?


Yes, my Lord; and he had newly parted with the King; he's this morning to make
his visit to the Princess; your Lordship is appointed by the King to accompany
him.


You saw not Olinda since?


No, my Lord.


Go find her and tell her of this visit; bid her single her self from the
company, tell her I must speak with her this morning -- Claricilla will think
me very bold, to dare thus soon to press into


MAdam, the Prince is without attended with Seleucus, and desires to kiss your
Highness hand.


Wait him in; this Prince is in report a man of a noble soul, I guess his
business, and must with pain impose that which will sound what depth of honour
is in him. -- He comes.


Now those clouds which thus long have hid your virtues, and that storm is
again blown over; so that your Highness begins to break like your self among
us; Appius is come, though unconfident in the success, labouring with ambitious
hopes to beg you will give the services of his life leave to wait upon your
happy days.


Ere your Highness proceed be pleased to hear a suit that I must blushing make,
and to your own ear only; and if you please to retire with me I shall acquaint
you with it.


Command me, Madam.


Olinda, a word with you.


This way then.


SIR, 'twas his Counsel, thus, by a trust, to oblige your Highness to be our
friend, rather then by injuries (which has been the common way of States) to
decline your pretensions.


'Twas charitably done not to let my hopes lead me too much astray; and since
'tis to so gallant a Rival as Melintus, I shall without envy, though not pain,
lay down my hopes.


He's now in Court, but yet unknown; 'tis the stranger that yesterday made such
way to my rescue; at first I fled him that with such love pursued; for his
disguise kept me ignorant who it was; within I shall acquaint you with our
design, and beg your counsel; and sometime this night I would fain speak with
him in the Garden.


I shall not fail to serve you.


The stranger! is he the man, and must you meet him in the Garden this night?
this shall to Seleucus; I'm sure of my pay, for I have my reward already.


I See 'tis neither so easy, nor so safe to be a Villain, as I thought; 'tis
true, wicked any fool may be; but to be a Villain and Master in that Art, oh
the baseness that we stoop to! the hated means, the loathed subjects that with
Chemists patience we must extract our ends through! and when the work's done we
have but whet the sword of Justice, and with our own hands pulled down unpiti'd
dooms. -- The thought strikes amazement into my soul, which has not yet
consented to my ills: What shall not I fall to, that could consent, for the
knowledge of a secret, to make my self the steps by which a Whore climbed to
her ambitious lust? the baseness of the act hath awaked my sleeping honour; and
I'll be honest ere I'll again pay such a rate for sin. No Love, its thy
cruelty has begot this distraction in me.


Ha! upon the ground? up, my Seleucus, up, I am yet breathless; my Love in her
descent has made such haste that it begot a fire in the motion that had like to
have burnt our Cupid's wings.


What ails thee? is it impudence, or distraction begets this boldness; what is
it that thou thus labour with, has it no name?


It had a name, and 'twas called a secret whilst but by two known, and
Claricilla's secret; but it shall become a general knowledge, I overheard it
when she gave it to the Prince, and by this name, the only secret of her soul;
she is in love, and by honour engaged, Does that move you? when you know to
whom, your love will sacrifice her to your anger: 'Tis the st anger; and but
that her bashfulness could not name him aloud, I now might have told you who he
was, for she named him, and he is this night to meet her in the Garden; the
Prince is of their party too, and has promised to quit his pretension, and
only stays to serve her in her love; so there's but I faithful to Seleucus;
now, do I rave or no?


No, my Olinda; 'tis I that rave, and beg of one that lives upon another alms.


Thus would I sacrifice the Gods should they scorn what I love.


Thou art my Goddess.


Will Seleucus then be just, and reward that faith that thus has flown over
those poisonous Plants, and from them with danger sucked this honey-secret?
Will he, I say, be just, and give me leave to unlade this precious Dew in his
gentle bosom, and there find my Hive when I return from travelling in his
service?


Thou shalt have any thing, but be gone now, 'twill breed suspicion to be seen
with me alone: Art certain they are to meet to night?


Be gone! Seleucus, there was more discretion than love in that Injunction.
Urge me not to jealousy; for I that could betray a Mistress and a Friend for
love of thee, if injured, I would have thee know, for my revenge my love shall
go. But I hope better, and I obey.


This the King shall know -- Yield at first blow! 'Tis worshipping a stranger
God, and a sin in honour though he were so -- But stay, who are these? the
Prince and the stranger. He,


Be pleased to urge it as a thing you are displeased with, and that the
Princess made it her complaint, and desired your Highness would acquaint his
Majesty with it; and Sir, when you have completed this work which thus nobly
you have begun, and finished your creation, command us and our happiness as the
Creatures that owe their being to your favour.


Noble Melintus, when I have served you, 'twill but pay the expectation your
early faith gave me credit for.


Look, Seleucus! Sir, I hope his ears have not met our words. Your pardon, Sir.
I'll step off ere I am discovered; after I have this night waited on the
Princess in the Garden I shall in your Chamber acquaint you with all our
proceedings, and there hope to hear how the King entertains the complaint
against this great man; 'tis the first step to a Favourit's fall when the
Prince will hear complaints of him -- I kiss your hand.


This Letter will make me seem not to have seen them; Dissimulation do thou
assist me, and I'll break as 'twere from a cloud of thoughts; and chance that
threw me into this way -- My Lord, the Prince, whither so fast with your spoil?
Me-thinks I see conquest in your eyes. How did the Princess entertain your
noble offer? Do you not find the path that leads to her heart untrod by Lovers
feet? Were not her Guard of blushes called to defend her against your assault?
Loves treaties, my Lord, are strangers to her maiden ears.


Against impious men the Sanctuary is no Guard, else the reserved modesty with
the privilege of birth and beauty that wait upon the Princess might have
defended her against your saucy flames, which too late have aimed at the top of
thy Masters house; but that injury was not so great as this, that thou durst
think thy Poison would not break her Crystal, but with this injurious hope
believe she should conceal thy insolence, which I'll spread.


Ha! Is't come to this? either prevent this danger, or thou art lost, Seleucus:
The Prince is flying with my ruin to the King; Thanks yet to his choler that
thus has armed me. Passion is no deadly Weapon; we hear her noise before she
does the execution, and then we arm. Now, my brain, be ready with excuses, thy
woman's weapon, to defend me.


IS it possible?


Sir, if you please but to go to your Daughters Chamber you shall yet find the
storm not laid which her anger raised, to think such a scorn should be designed
for her.


Some one go find Seleucus, and command him hither immediately; we'll take him
with us, and by all our Gods this poisonous ingratitude that swells him thus
ambitiously shall burst him.


I cannot stay, for I have earnest business with the King; Are you sure he is
not in the Lodgings? in your return you shall find me in the Garden; if I meet
him there -- Hold, Carillus, the Kings here.


Seleucus!


Sir, I have been this morning in search of you, I have a business for your own
ear only, let your Guard attend, Sir.


Yes, it shall stay. Noble Appius, your pardon, I'll meet you at my Daughters.


This morning I have discovered --


So have I, that which thou shalt rue, fond Wretch.


Sir!


Impudence, with what brow dare thou thus meet my fury? Think thou to
escape? Art thou again raising new Treasons ere the fire has consumed the
Sacrifice for our last delivery, again to put my preservation into the power of
a miracle only to relieve me? No, thou shalt find thy ingratitude hath
destroyed my mercy, and begot an anger that shall consume thee. Seize him.


That you have the power of the Gods, and I am subject to your Thunder, is
confessed: but my innocence protect me; as yet I know not the cause why it
singles me out. 'Tis true, I came to see you dressed like Jove, for now 'tis just
you wear your Lightning, but not for me who have with longing sought you to
deliver the greatest service that ever yet my faith pleaded reward for; but why
you thus meet me in displeasure, Heaven strike me if I can guess; nor do I
believe I am guilty; for you proceed not with me as I were a Delinquent, the
worst of which are heard ere condemned: But I see you repent your favours and
desire my fall, which is the time I ought not to out-live; and therefore by
this wound I'll plead my faith and readiness to serve.


Disarm him.


They cannot; but when I am gone you'll hear a mischief my life might have
prevented.


Hold, or I shall conclude thy fear of deserved torture makes thee thus by a
sudden stroke execute thy self.


Fear? No, I fear butone more than a King trembles at, and that's the Gods, and
him; and to let your Majesty see I apprehend not Torture, thus I throw away all
dangers that my own act threatens; and now, Sir, be so just as to let me know
the cause of your anger e're it strikes.


Were not you this morning with my Daughter, and there made the traitorous
offer of your love?


Yes.


Yes! Dare thou avow it, and know how lately that danger threatened our
ruin in Silvander?


Will you be pleased to hear me? if I be guilty punish me; if not, give me
leave to tell you, a King can only cure such a wound as your suspicion, Sir,
hath given my diligent faith, which has ever been watchful in your Majesties
service.


Speak, let him loose.


Know, Sir, though I am amazed to find this news before me, I came now from
the Princess Chamber, drawn thither by an occasion; which if you please to lend
your ear to, I am confident you'll say I had reason for what I did.


Can you prove this?


Can I prove it? Yes, Sir, I can prove it; but Jealousy is a Weed whose Root
lies so many ways that if once it take growth it is hardly dug out; and this
sad truth (if once suspected, and never confident) is fallen upon me, else what
I shall say would find a faith with you; but I desire not now to have my words
clear me; take but my counsel, and I shall give your Majesty the satisfaction
you desire; seem still to frown on me, and require not the Princess company
this night in the Court; the rest, Sir, in your ear. -- Will this confirm you I
am loyal, and by several


Come, Seleucus, this trouble shows thy loyalty; you are my friend, and shalt
ever have an interest here.


Yes, I will have an interest in the Crown, whatever I have in thee; and now
thou believe thou art safe thy dangers but begin.


'TIs a brave clear night, and something may be attempted


Who's there? lye down, why do you kick me? ye gods! one would think this bed
were large enough; if the earth be not, where shall the wretched lye? that thus
you kick me out as if you wanted room?


Up I say, leave your snarling, you dog; sleeping in your watch?


If I am a dog, why should I be punished for obeying nature, the only Deity
that beasts bow to? if not, why am I refused the benefit of reason?


Are you grumbling? look to your duty; you'll find you have use of other
thoughts else.


Oh ye gods! why do you thus load a youth? I was not proud when I was bowed to;
nor ever with repinings did I bow to you; why then on my free-born soul do you
lay the load of slavery, and thus let your justice sleep, that she does not now
guide my prayers; but suffers them to lose their way 'twixt heaven and my
sufferings: which I have been so long acquainted with, that I am now grown a kin
unto my woes, allied unto my oar, where I have set, forced to unwilling haste,
sighing for my freedom, till through a thousand eyes I have sweating wept my
miseries: oh look down in time upon them, ere I yield to those irreligious
thoughts that tempt me to question my faith; for ye cannot blame me if I grow
weary of praying, when I find that mighty power that threw me here want mercy
to break the snare.


Strike an Anchor through the body of the slave; he has not hurt you, I hope.


No, he has mist me.


What urged the villain to this bold undertaking?


Unless the opportunity that the night afforded, and the nearness of the Town
made him attempt it for his freedom, I know not else.


Look that to morrow early as the day the dog be sacrificed to the parting
shades, that their black may still be friendly to our deliverance; and do you
hear, let him be broke upon an Anchor, that, on Hopes Emblem, the wretch may
meet his despairing cross. -- When dogs thus fly at their Masters, 'tis just we
strangle them, neither their kind nor use considered; go, Tullius, let the
watch be set, and some good guard put into the wood to secure the Passage from
the Town.


It shall.


Tullius, did the Peasant say the King was crowned again, and the Usurper dead,
and the Princess to be married to the stranger, Prince Appius, that came in aid
of the King; and that Seleucus has been in some disgrace to day?


So the fellow says, for certain.


To morrow then we'll fit us with our disguise, and to Court we'll go; for now
virtue sits at Helm and holds the purse; gratitude will find some reward for me
that wished well to her power; for this night see the Galley at road, and when
the watch is set, to rest; and to morrow call at my Cabin.


I shall.


Lye you there, and let no body, without exception, trouble, till I call,
unless some dangers threaten, then give me notice.


Methinks, in that condemned slave I read mine own fortune, whose cross fate
hath forfeited him to eternal bonds for stoutly attempting his freedom; which
if ever it comes within my power, here stands another marked for sacrifice, if
he fails in the attempt; for death frights not me, nor binds the innocent, but
comes to set them free; I cannot let it sink with patience into my thoughts, I
have not man enough, nor Religion to continue an acquaintance with that virtue
that says, endure: when I consider I was ^orn a Prince by the consent of all,
distinguished from a Chaos of common people, created their head, and so stood
the man of men, till this misfortune struck me, in which I am not sure I shall
have a burying place; for a slave can call so little in this world his own,
that the very earth he wears about him is not his, nor can I command this
handful, not this, not mine own clay: But lost like yesterday; when my Masters
Fiat comes, I fall and dissolve to the first Mass of things.


SO, now leave us; and if any body ask for me, say, I am laid to rest.


I shall. -- And where you rest too.


Dear Timillus, is Jacomo ready with the horses?


He is, and waits us at the Postern.


Let us not lose a minute then of this precious time; 'twill be a reward for
thy faith too, when they shall say Timillus had a hand in this great work:
prithee, let thy friendship secure the passage that leads from the Kings
lodgings.


So, now have I an honourable excuse to take cold with; 'tis a strange bold
venture he makes; and a confident virtue, that of hers, that dare trust
themselves in the hands of my opinion, when I am alone to guess how they mean
to employ this opportunity.


Madam, 'tis not the fear of my particular that makes me urge this sad parting,
but your interest which is joined to it; and when your Highness is concerned,
'tis a civility to fear, and an obligation to doubt my joys; for Claricilla
knows despair is no sin in Loves Religion.


Let me not understand thee, nor let not reason bind up that you urge; oh
Melintus, 'tis the first time that ever I was grieved to hear thee in the
right; and you must pardon it; for though parting be the only way to confirm my
joy, I cannot consent at such a rate to buy my happiness.


Thus you increase the wished number of my bonds; the Prince until my return
will observe all your commands, and assist us in our escape, and by his favour
countenance the act; for Messina, if my Father commanded there in chief, I
could not hope a greater power then I am confident Pelius will allow your worth
when you arrive there; and e're this Moon hath felt her change, I will again
attend you with the Galleys here.


Must you then be gone? and again with absence spi^ our loves into a thread
which is fastened to our fates; I hope that no distance may find the end; say,
must you go? must it needs be so?


I would there were not such a strict necessity, but that I might say, no.


Well, since it must be, resolved then, but not contented, I submit unto my
fate; and thou Lawrel-tree which so oft hast been a witness of our sad parting,
if within thy Bark the angry god hath with the trembling Virgin any of his
passion hid, thou know what pain they feel that with longing love follow
their flying joys; and see, look, Melintus, casting mine eye by chance, I have
spied one of the witnesses of our infant love; do you remember when we changed
our characters, and with them printed our faith on this yielding bark, 'twas
then but a small scratch we gave; but now like our miseries by time increased,
'tis in her tender side to a large wound grown.


Why should we not for ever grow thus? why should


Oh hold, give me no contract, gentle Melintus; no ties but love; these are
bonds I scorn to throw on such who from mine eyes can go.


Doth this object satisfy, have I performed, nor no?


Yes. Claricilla, this act, when thy story shall be written, will not appear a
kin unto the rest, that have had honour and duty still their guide, and not
thus lead astray by passion.


Sir, I must not be beaten from my strength here, though you frown; a fault, I
confess, but dishonour has no share in it.


Sir, you came a friend, and you are a stranger; nor will I while I labour to
punish commit a fault by being ungrateful; or break the laws of hospitality, by
laying hands upon you; only thus much, the injuries you have done me and the
Prince bid me tell you, if to morrows Sun set upon you within my Court, his
shades will bring yours upon you.


Revenge, you are prosperous, and in my anger this is lost; Craft, be thou as
friendly to my designs upon that shallow Prince, and I alone stand fair for
Claricilla still; I'll watch how it works; oh how he'll fume anon!


The wounds that amazement gives strike all our senses, and like lightning
destroy without a breach; and yet I see some food for, my Revenge; and whilst
that fuel lasts this flame shall not perish. Seleucus, come back, and let your
friend stay.


Carillus, stay; what, your fit is off then I perceive, and you can be angry
upon your own score, and fight when women are not by you.


Yes, thou shalt find I can, fond man! and the flame that thou hast kindled in
my breast I will husband so that it shall consume thee; and neither hold it so
high as to lose it in my choler, nor so low as to let patience tread it out.


Spare your threats; your words wound not; when I refuse to fight upon a
strange resolution then rant and rail, and I'll excuse it.


No, I am no Railer; I could wish thee rather a more glorious Enemy, on whose
name scandal of no kind had ever lighted; by my life I wish it, and that thou
were clear from this base act, whose weight has sunk all the honour that swam
in thy blood; and I am ashamed to think this necessity forces me to offer one
so lame in honour, and in passion blind, to the power I worship; for the
imperfect are not fit for sacrifice.


I hope you have none of those faults, but will become an Altar. Lead the way,
and you shall find Seleucus dares follow without being pulled to slaughter.


Under the Woods side that borders on the Haven will be a fit place; 'tis near
the Town, and I believe free from company.


There I'll meet you then.


Hist, hist, to him. So, now they are come within my way


HAste to Prince Appius, and desire him immediately to do Melintus fall, my
night at Court is come too; and in that vast Element I'll shoot, and be no more
remembered.


SEe, here come two of the long-staff-men that struck so desperately under the
Hedge to night; I hope to apprehend one of them by virtue of this Warrant.


Bold and injurious Seleucus still.


Let your anger pass, and hear what I say, for this is the last talk I'll have
with thee what ere thou art; Know, since first thou crossed these eyes my
Jealousy and Envy have waited upon thee; and now I have gained my end; 'twas
to see whether Conquest grew upon thy Sword or no, when this (not used to lose)
should go forth thy Enemy and Rival; and therefore guard thee, and with thy
Sword only make reply.


'Tis my wish, for words are not the weapons I fight with.


Do you hear, Carillus, may not you and I fall to at this feast before your
Lord has supped?


Yes, and be mine own Ca^ver too.


That I believe, for I ever took thee for a sawey Serving-man.


I am lost.


Does your load sink you? thy faults will grow too heavy anon.


I know no fault but that I am unfortunate.


Lie there Talker.


A pox upon thee, thou hast don't.


Yield, or by my hopes in thy heart I'll write my Conquest.


Strike, Dog; I'll perish ere I'll have so base a sin to answer for.


Hold, or I'll write the same story here.


Ha! Timillus fallen? though it speaks his praise, my Friend calls for revenge,
and thus I bring it.


I fear no single arm.


Be prosperous, Carillus, and I will call thee Friend, the Saver


A pox of Fortune, have I escaped the Master so often to be served in thus, like
broken cold meat for the Serving-men? I find I cannot live, I begin to have
serious thoughts -- No, Faith, I am


Hold, if thou hast honour, and tell me who thou art, that strik'st with such a
constant fortune.


I have no leisure now -- O Timillus, speak to thy unfortunate Friend, whose
acquaintance hath never brought thy faith to any thing but misery and dangers:
How dost? I hope thy wounds are not mortal.


No, nor our troubles; would they were, that we might once see an end of them
-- But no more of this now. I hear a noise, and I know we shall be pursued;
therefore make haste


For shame urge like thy self, if thou would have me take thy counsel; bring
my Friend into a danger, and leave him there? No, Timillus, we grew Friends,
and we will fall together


Leave me, and provide for thy safety, or by my life I'll betray thee, and tell
who thou art; nor will I, if thou stay, attempt the possibility of my own
cures. S'Death? because I could kill my Enemy, must I destroy my Friend?


Why thus passionate!


If Melintus loved me he would obey the passion of his Friend, and not chide --
Hark, you will be taken, step into the


Farewell, Timillus, I obey.


This way they went, Sir, and here lies one.


Seleucus slain?


And here lies Carillus.


Who's the third?


A Bird of the same flight, that had worse luck than my fellows; for my wings
only broke, that I might live miserably, to make sport for the Fool that laid
the snare; Shall I never be so happy as to be knocked of the head when 'tis to
do me a courtesy?


The bodies are yet warm; bring them with all possible speed to the Town, that
no care may be wanting to save my Friend; bring him along too, he shall find
our love till he be well; I will not offer a ruin to my Friend; when he's
repaired he'll scarce be a full satisfaction. Some other pursue the bold
Murderer; if he once come within my reach he shall find his Sword has no power
to protect him against that which my justice brings.


So, thus much honour I am sure of; but how much more I know not, do you my
Friend?


No, Sir; and yet I think you'll find what you deserve.


You're courteous and liberal of your opinion, and therefore I will not be
sparing of mine; it may be I shall be honourably hanged for having a hand in
killing Seleucus.


It may be so.


WHat noise is this that thus circles us?


This noise is every where, and begirts us round; I'll go wake Manlius, 'twill
be worth our care to search the cause.


Stand, who goes there?


I, Tullius; Have you waked the Captain?


No.


'Tis time he were waked.


Hold.


How now!


'Twas his command, that no man, without exception, should come to him till he
had notice, nor be called unless some danger threatened.


Did you not hear the noise?


Yes, but noise is no danger, nor will I call him.


You will not call him? Who am I that thou dare tempt me thus? Call him, and
call him quickly, or thou shalt call thy last.


I serve but one Master, and him I will not call; nor shall you break his rest
while I can hinder it.


Do not play with my anger; by all our Gods with a wound I'll make my way; and
it shall lie over thy belly (Slave) if thou provok'st me.


Wounds are easily given to naked men; and thou wilt sooner bring 'em than I
fear 'em.


S'Death! braved by my Slave? Thus, Villain, and then I tread under my feet thy
scorned earth.


Help, Manlius, help.


Unloose thy hold, or by my vexed soul I'll print Deaths cold Seal on thy
Heart.


I will not loose it: O my Vow, to what strict Laws thou


Ha! what sudden cry was that called for help? -- The Rhodian grappled? How's
this? and Tullius under? Let go, or I'll part thee with death. Is this a
posture for a Slave?


No; if I would have been a Slave I had been safe, and you it may be might have
felt these wounds.


Tullius, what mean these wounds?


Wounds are the food of Slaves, else I deserve not these for my faith; but
Loyalty is against kind in me, and therefore I am punished for obeying your
command, which was that no man without exception, should pass this way till I
had given you notice, which he would have done, and because I refused him thus
my faith's rewarded.


Is this true?


In part 'tis; the Wood this night was full of noise, and I awaked with the
Alarm, would have given you notice, and he refused to let me pass, and
therefore --


You would have killed him? -- Come, 'twas not well, such a piety as
faithfulness among Slaves is so scarce it ought to have been cherished not
punished. Every day by one act or other this Fellow begets my wonder, Honour
and Courage still striking in him -- Come hither; once again I command thee
tell me who


I see you have honour, Sir, and therefore presume when you shall know I am
bound by a Vow never to disclose my self whilst I am in bonds, you'll call it
Religion, not disobedience, when I refuse to tell.


Wilt thou be faithful when thou art free?


I will be faithful though I am not free.


Vow that, and I will immediately knock off thy Chains.


Arm but my hand, and set me free, and then I'll take a Vow; and having sworn
faith to thee all the earth's wealth shall


Here, by this I manumize thee; and if thou prov'st a Gentleman, henceforth
thou art my Friend, however thou art free.


And, Sir, since your pity hath thus made my joys put off my fears that I
should have fell forgotten, and returned to my Mother Earth like her common
Issue -- Thus in thankfulness with eyes to Heaven bent, and a soul full of
gratitude, I vow a constant faith to virtue, and --


To what strange fate am I reserved, or by what sin have I pulled down this
Curse of a general hate that all paths I tread are armed against me? Ha! more
Enemies? Nay then, Melintus, yield, for 'tis visible thou war with Heaven.


What art thou that with such pains hast to this place hunted thy ruin, and
thus with injurious wounds in the dead of night awaked our anger?


Prithee go forward with thy injury; such another Charm will call back my
anger, and then I shall be safe; for it hath ever yet been prosperous, though
that success made me unfortunate.


Leave thus vaingloriously to urge your former success, for 'twill be no ground
now to build a future conquest on; and therefore yield thy Sword, and quickly,
before I command it and thy head; Know my power here rules even thy fate.


Yield my Sword? By what other privilege do I hold my life among my Enemies?
Prithee look upon me, and if thou can read these Characters, they'll tell thee
I was not born to yield; and though


I'll dispute no longer; Seize him; if he resist, in his heart seal the first
stroke of thy freedom.


Ha! Melintus!


He named me; What art thou that call me by my name? Ye Gods, is misery so
near akin that by instinct the wretched know me?


How now! 'what do you muze on? Had you daring only while you were unarmed?


No, 'twas a consideration of the baseness of the act, not fear, made me stop,
and the remembrance that I am free held me from staining that maiden liberty
the Gods have sent me with so base an act as to strike where there's three to
one: besides, his posture and his habit speak him a Gentleman, and his
misfortunes rather to be pitied than increased.


A help from Heaven if this be real.


Slave, and ungrateful, thou shalt find thou hast too soonmention'd thy
freedom; Fool, only free in hope; and this act hath but increased thy load of
chains. Curse thy self for thy increase of miseries shall make thee find
you are more a slave then ever.


Do not deceive thy self; look there and here. -- And


Death, dog dost thou brave me with my courtesy? draw, Tullius, my thirsty
rage will be quenched with nothing but the slaves blood.


Heaven! for ought I know we are by thy direction thus cast two to two; if not,
I'm sure by honour we are -- here, take this sword.


Now, Tullius, thou shalt see how mortal thy power is, which so like a god thou
wear among thy slaves. Revenge and freedom guide me to thy ruin; and you,
Sir, strike to prevent the use of such an opportunity; a vow forbids me to tell
you who I am -- Now the wound that thou basely gav'st me when I was bound


I have but few words.


I am your choice then.


As it happens.


I am slain, and by my Slave bound for ever.


Nay, then I'll smiling fall now I have my revenge; for I see thou were born to
be a slave, and all thy acts of honour were but distempers in thee; and now thy
nature is strong thou appear'st thy self a slave in thy soul; come, what stays
thee, I have a breast so clear it defies thy Poniard, Traitor.


No, I was born free, and Manlius's rage once over he will say he has injured
me: -- And, Sir, as I drew my sword against my Master when Honour bad me; so
when you shall seek


My wonder waits upon all this fellows acts.


What art thou that thus in less then a man hides more then a god?


What am I? a soul with her old clothes on, a slave with wounds and crosses
torn; and yet in better fortune I have known your face.


If thou hast mercy in thee tell me who thou art.


Mark me well, dost thou not see thy self here? not yet? -- Now I am sure thou
dost in these Crystal drops; friendship will guide Melintus to know Philemon.


Philemon! Oh ye gods! new weights to sink me!


Oh! 'tis a powerful rod that Melintus friendship strikes with; a thousand
miseries have smote upon this rock; but never any that made water issue through
till now.


Oh Philemon, Philemon, what cannot friendship do? 'tis from her living springs
this dew falls.


Melintus and Philemon! good heaven, what change hath begot this misery? Oh
noble Princes, upon my knees I beg, when Manlius.


Manlius! is this Manlius? he was Claricilla's friend.


'Tis Manlius, and I hope a fair day will break from this bloody evening.


Your pardon, Sir, or here upon my breast return the wounds my rage directed
against yours.


Repeat it not, Sir; you make me but call to mind my shame, which I must ever
blushing wear when I remember a slave could look further into honour then my
self.


Oh Melintus, I have a story for thee, that we shall weep out together.


When I look upon thee, I am distracted to think the gods would consent thus to
let their temples be ruined, and virtue always walk naked like truth's Emblem,
while better fates clothe the wicked.


Dear Melintus, let not the sense of my misfortunes urge a consideration from
thee at the rate of sin, nor dare those powers which I know thou fear.


I have done, noble youth; yet when I look upon thee, joy and amazement will
seize me, I have strange things to tell thee, but this nor time nor place. --
Who is this that thus unfortunately met thy anger?


A stout and grateful fellow; 'twas the Captain that saved me when I was doomed
to death by the Usurper, Silvander, because I designed Claricilla's freedom.


He stirs; heaven, I hope, will not let the guilt of one accidental fault hang
upon this evening to cross our joys.


I am sorry, since there dwelt such honour in him, that he proved my enemy;
this was the Pirate took me at Rhodes, in that unfortunate fight where we were
parted.


Pray help him aboard my Galley, where we may all repose until to morrow; and
resolve what is to be done in this new change in Sicily.


Lay thy hands here, Melintus, for these bonds can only set Philemon free.


I Have done; passion can be a friend to none, she's so unconstant; give her
way, and she destroys her self; if I had been so fortunate to have spoke with
you last night, I had prevented this sad chance; for I knew Melintus's anger
would take a dangerous leap, when by amazement he had contracted it.


If I could have feared such a danger, I should not have been so absent with
the remedy; but I am not satisfied how it was discovered by the King; yet if
civility had not prevented me ere now I had spoke my fears; and long since
said, beware of Olinda.


Olinda! she betray me! it cannot be, 'tis such a common fate I blush to think
it; I cannot fear a punishment that comes such a road way; and yet I'll observe
her: but pray what said Timillus, was Melintus wounded?


Not dangerous, some slight hurts he had, and upon our approach he took covert
in the Wood; Timillus says he is resolved in some disguise to attempt to speak
with you; and my counsel is to send some one that's trusty in search of him.


I shall; and then if you please we'll walk into the Garden.


I'll wait upon you.


I Rejoice that this day has proved so fortunate as to bring your youth a
freedom with less sadness, then last nights storm threatened.


Sir, my safety is a debt I owe your watchful mercy, that thus amongst the
earliest of your joys could let your noble pity hunt for so lost a thing as
Ravack.


Now we are arrived we have no spare time to clothe truth fine, therefore give
my naked faith a hearing; I am confident you will not refuse to take our
fortunes in this design, whose innocence, though we are thus forced to hide
with the marks of guilt, and slaves habits, yet know there is so much justice
on our side, that though we fall in the attempt, and this haste prove but
running to embrace the stake, yet we shall in our stories be distinguished, and
live in the glorious shine which breaks from the Brows of Honours Martyrs.


I am but one, and I'll not say I shall be fortunate; but I am certain I shall
attempt any thing that may speak my gratitude.


Give me leave to break this discourse; and since you are pleased to trust me
with this service let me not lose time; but while this expectation is in the
Court let me see whether I can walk unseen, or no; and because Seleucus danger
was only loss of blood, they will be more intent about him then if he had
fallen; I'll be gone, the day grows old, in the Garden you say 'tis likely I
shall find her, and the Prince is a young man, fair haired.


Yes.


I am instructed.


'Tis the mind I see that binds or sets us free; for that being satisfied we
have made our fears our sports, and thus mask in our miseries; but, by my life,
the earnest they once were in makes me start to think thee thus miserable in
jest.


Philemon's love is more fortunate then Melintus; for it sinds kind ways to
express it self, while I unfortunate only wish and cry how fain I would rejoice
in the lasting knot, which we have thus triply tied: By blood, by love, by
miseries alli'd.


THis place returns my forgotten miseries, by calling to mind how happy once I
was; but who are these?


Who's that that walks there?


I know not, is he not of your acquaintance?


No, Madam; walk on, and mind him not.


Who would the man speak with all?


What would you, friend? would you speak with the Princess?


Yes, Sir; Madam, I am one that wants, but cannot beg; yet when I have put off
my blushes, be pleased to cast your eye upon a Soldiers scars, and pity a
Gentleman bowed by misfortunes, not faults, to this wretched lowness; if then
your bounty find not a charity, your pardon, and I am gone.


A Soldier is the god I worship, and to him I offer this charity. -- Here take
all that at this time I have about me; pray,


The name of Soldier is such a common Theme to beg with, and a disguise so
many cheat under, that I should not dare ask like my self, but that I can show
under the honoured hands of those Commanders where I served, who and what I am;
and had it been my fortune to have met the brave Princess, Melintus, and
Philemon here, the service I once did them they would not have seen unrewarded.


Prithee softly; dost thou know Melintus and Philemon? say, and be not amazed I
ask thus hastily; where did thou know them? gentle Soldier, speak.


Yes, Madam, I do know 'em; and here under their hands I have to show the
service I did them, which if you please you may read.


Prithee has't of late heard of Philemen, or can thou tell whether he be
alive or no; or can thou give any account of Melintus lately?


Oh yes, yes, he can; read there and satisfy your self. Oh noble Manlius,
where is Melintus, where is the Galley, where is Philemon? why do I stay,
cannot you guide me, will not you guide me, will not Prince Appius go? I am
resolved I will, and be miserable no longer here, where Religion, Friendship,
Duty, Love no harvest bring; all my endeavours here as vainly beat the air, as
the Impostors beads that fall without a Prayer; say, shall we go? will you
remove me from this place so full of danger, to my friends? look, he writes to
me to come, and shall I stay? no, no, Melintus, I obey; and were it to shrink
into the earth I'll meet thee, and no longer with my prayers protect this
ungrateful place from the punishment her treacheries call down. Let fools like
Beads-men to the Altar bow for others sins; I'll pay none but mine own vows.


We must follow her, Sir, and within counsel or charm her passion.


IS there no hope of Carillus life?


No, my Lord.


Will Timillus escape?


Yes, my Lord, his wounds were slight.


But he shall not, nor shall fortune have power to add another sickly week to
his hated days, wait all without. -- My hopes are blasted, nor must I expect
ever to gain my ends by fair means from Claricilla, I have wound up her hatred
to so great height; and 'twere folly to hope a peace from a woman crossed in her
love; no, no, policy or force must gain the pleasure I am at. -- Who's


Sir, the King.


Oh Sir, hide me from my shame, or my blushes will not let me look upon you;
the disgrace brands me with coward for ever, that I should be overcome when
nothing but a Traitor struck; a thing which ought to have been the scorn, not
fear of honest men when they are armed.


Quiet thy self, and be not troubled at such a scorned subject; I come to tell
thee ere this shame be over, while I can with justice frown, I would have
Claricilla married; and how to work our ends we'll now resolve.


Sir, there's a Sea-man without desires to speak with you; he says he has
earnest business that concerns the State.


Admit him.


Diffimulation, thou that so oft hast been prosperous in thy attempts upon the
innocent, once let virtue owe thee for a service.


What's your business, Sir, that so hastily requires a hearing?


Ha! the King! I must not know him; Sir, be pleased to command your servants
off, and I shall whisper a service shall claim a reward, which I will not
require till it be perfect.


There needs no whisper here; for if it concern the Kingdom speak it to the
King.


The King! thus low I beg your pardon, Sir; and then give me leave to ask
whether it be worth your care, or no, to have Seleucus.


softly.


Dost thou know where he is? can thou direct my anger which way to seize the
Traitor? if thou can propose thine own reward, and take a Kings word, thou
shalt have my power to effect it.


Sir, I will not bargain; but in snort, thus; I have been faulty; and a Pirat
speaks the kind; but 'twas while the fault was in fashion here, and a thief
(Silvander) wore the Crown; your pardon for my past faults is the reward I beg
for this service; which if I were not confident I could do I were mad thus to
wake your anger with a deluded hope. But to the business; early this morning
there came to my Galley (which now rides in the haven) two strangers, as they
pretended, that had unfortunately in a duel slain one that had a near relation
to your Majesty, and by many arguments pleaded my protection; which at first
sight their miseries engaged me to, and I undertook to serve them: one of them
(the fair-hair'd-man) gave me a Letter to deliver to the Princess, from whom he
says I should have great rewards if I would be faithful; I undertook it; and if
this may procure my peace, when you please to command me, they are dead.


The Letter, prithee let's see the Letter; 'tis he for certain, but who the
second should be!


I cannot guess.


Thy pardon, and a reward for thy faith, upon my life, thou shalt receive.


Hast thou the Letter?


Yes, Sir.


Ha! Melintus and Philemon, their hands subscribed to this treason; see
Seleucus, 'tis Melintus and Philemon that in disguise have waited our
destruction; the gods are just still, and now from the height of all their
impious darings have let them fall into our punishments; look, they urge
Claricilla to an escape by the assistance of this honest Soldier; they assure
her she may safely make it, and call all this treason flying from slaughter;
assist me, Seleucus, that I may invent some strange torture to afflict their
falsehoods.


Is this possible?


Work on, Mischief, till their rage has blinded them; that in the dark I may
the easier lead them to their ruin.


Melintus and Philemon, 'tis no new danger, this; my rage distracts me; and in
the strength that anger lends me I can perform all you can require from a sound
and healthy friend; but do it quickly, Sir, before I am unbent; and thus by her
assistance reach their ruin.


It cannot be she should consent to my destruction.


It cannot be! then he were a fool, and only sowed dangers, to reap dangers;
think you he would lose his heaven to place another there? no, 'tis visible, he
loves; and that has been the cause moved all his darings; and that he loves the
Princess, does that start you? call to mind the surprise in the garden, what
rage will that meeting fill your breast with, when you shall know 'tis no
aerie, hopeless, single Love; no Cupid with one Wing that threatens now as when
Silvander struck, these have made the imperfect Boy a perfect god betwixt 'em;
and with return of eternal faith have given both wings and eyes, and direct by
their bold souls; what to do is now upon the wing, and flies with more certain
danger in your Court then death, or fire.


This is a dangerous truth; and if my Daughter consent to their desires, they
dye.


To be secured of which, seal this Letter, and deliver it this honest man; and
let him deliver it to your Daughter, and urge her answer, which when he has,
let him return with it to your Majesty; this will guide your justice which way
to steer; and your anger shall only find the guilty; and the act being just,
consequently 'tis safe; for the guilty have no revenge to follow their fall.


I am resolved, if she consent they fall; dispatch him with the Letter, and let
me have an answer at my Chamber.


Sir, now you consent to be safe, be not troubled, but leave the rest to me. --
Now to our business, I'll immediately Olinda; and to her I'll address you; to
be false now is to be faithful.


And that makes me so false; but stay, Sir; I have a mind to make you indebted
to me for a greater benefit then you dream on.


Whither tend'st thou?


To assure you I intend to be faithful, and to oblige my self; to make which
good I'll put my life into your hands; and if you dare obey my directions, I'll
propose away that with safety you may reach your revenge; a Crown, and
Claricilla.


Claricilla! can thou propose a way to gain her? let but that appear,
through fire and water, opposed dangers, greater then cowards fears create I'll
fly to embrace it.


Within I'll instruct you, and then I'll obey the Kings directions for the
Letter; which will be one step to advance our plot, and if it thrive, what I
shall be I'll leave to your own bosom to resolve.


What thou shalt be? why, thou shalt be my bosom.


I Wonder he stays so long; I am afraid his reason will not prevail with my
Father and Seleucus; and though I was by strength of your argument persuaded to
it, yet I am sorry I consented to let them know 'tis Melintus whom they pursue,
a name already subject to their hate: but heaven I hope will direct all.


If I were not assured that Manlius were honest, I should not have ventured
thus to persuade you to discover where your health lies; but when I am secure
that those in whose power he is will with their lives protect him; and his
discovery is only a bait to draw his enemy into his power; I must again desire
you will with patience attend the issue of what is well designed, however it
may meet a cross.


Oh Madam, I am laden with joy; and the strangeness of the burden makes me
thus sink in the way; I have discovered who 'tis that betrays you, 'tis Olinda;
Seleucus made it his boast; but you must not yet take notice of it, but seem to
rely upon her faith as a means of your escape, which is consented to by all,
under a hope that they shall seize you and your friends together; I cannot tell
you all the particulars now; only thus much, our designs have taken as I could
wish; this Letter by their consent is returned to you; had you seen the care
your Father took that the violence the seal met might not be perceived, you
would have laughed; they expect your answer, and I have promised to bring it
immediately, which must be, that you will meet Melintus this evening without
delay, your woman only in company; and to be received from the Garden-wall;
this being dispatch'd I'll to the King and show it him, and there make all
sure; Sir, you must be pleased to mingle your self in the presence; and there
cheerfully accept any Proposition the King shall make, which shall only be what
we resolve on within; and then I'll to my boat, and there in smiles pitch the
bloody toils, wherein we'll take these hunters, and make them our prey.


Lose no time, for heaven's sake, 'tis a strange torture; do not you, nor you,
feel it? thus to be delayed in the path that leads to brave Melintus.


Madam, we'll lose no time; be you ready to obey yours, and I'll strictly
observe my part; and I hope the next thing we discourse of will be the
sacrifice due to heaven, for our deliverance.


'TIs about the time that Manlius bid us expect his return; if we be so happy
as to see Claricilla, what kind of habit will thy joy wear? I am afraid mine
will be clothed in a paleness, for I cannot promise my self strength enough to
bear such unexpected happiness.


Prithee think not of it, let it steal upon us; I find I have not man enough to
meet her without trembling; the very thought has struck a coldness through my
blood; and now you have told her that I love, I could easier dye for her then
speak to her; for though my love has none, yet I shall still have a guilt about
me when I but look or speak to her.


Dear Philemon, we believed thee lost when I told the story; and I did it that
thy friendship might live in her noble mention.


Sir, your pardon for that we entertain ourselves when you stand by, to whom
me-thinks Love should not be a stranger.


I have a story too, but this no time to tell it.


Noble Princes, do 'you not find me strangely altered with the joy that now
possesses me? the Princess is well, and salutes you both, and the Prince kisses
your hand.


Prithee let us partake the joy; Will the virtuous Claricilla come? Say, Have
we an interest in this joy too?


Yes, but I have a thousand things to tell you, which if you will attend and
follow my directions, we shall ere to morrow Sun see all our wishes crowned;
but let us in, for we lose time, the day will be too short to bound our
business in; and only thus much know, we but the metal bring, the Gods will
have the way, and form to our deliverance the work of their own hands.


Let us softly follow, and give thanks with hearts that upwards look; for
gratitude is to mercy both the Bait and Hook.


THis Soldier was sent from Heaven I think to take care of me, all things run
so even that he takes in hand; the Princess hath consented, the King I have
persuaded to go in person and surprise her, the Prince too will bear them
company, and what then? -- My joys want a name; Melintus, Philemon, and the
King, must die, Their fate which is, I have said it. The Prince shall live, but
first I will show him Death to engage him in my action, upon no other condition
shall he wear his head. O the several habits their humours will be in that
Rage, Envy, Fear, and Amazement will breed in their wretched thoughts, when
they shall find my words pronounce their doom, possess me of Claricilla, whose
beauties increased by the sweetness of force will make me more a King than all
the power that a Crown can give. But I lose time, and neglect my part in my own
affairs; the King and Prince I must see meet at the place, where they must
stand but as Witnesses to the receipt of all my part in Heaven, a Crown and
Claricilla.


THis is the place he appointed we should wait for him, and 'tis much about the
time he bid us expect him; if they come we shall profess a joy we hoped not; he
brings revenge along, whose fruits the Gods have been pleased to feast with,
and the sweets we see makes them from us Mortals with fiery injunction still
enclose the Tree.


Hark, I hope he comes, the Moon is friendly, 'tis he.


Are you ready?


Yes, yes.


Be resolute then, and still, for they are coming.


Are we right?


Yes, Sir.


Where's the Soldier?


He's stepped before.


Sir, I refrained to tell you what the occasion was till now, because I was
ashamed to let you know my Daughters fault till you might be a witness of it,
and then you would not wonder at my displeasure, when you perceive she could so
put off her honour as to leave me lost in my promise to your self, and hope of
a wished Heir to succeed me here.


Sir, I hope some mistake has begot this doubt; the Princess ever promised a
fair return of love to your Majesty, and I shall be glad to find you are
deceived.


No, Sir, 'tis too true; for had not Seleucus his faith been watchful this
night she had made her base flight into the loathed embraces of a Traitor and a
Subject, nor does she yet know she shall be prevented.


I am sorry, Sir, your doubts have so much reason to build upon.


We are called.


This way, your hand.


Manlius, do they know how to distinguish me?


Yes, I have given them a Sign.


Is it long to the time she appointed?


No, Sir, 'tis the hour she commanded me to wait; one of you look out, and if
you spy a fire call, that we may approach to the Garden-wall with the Boat.


I go.


If it be possible let Olinda fall by the board, I'd have her dead, she'll be
talking else.


I have made a Light from the Princesses Window.


Quickly then set to the Wall; and do you hear Rhodian?


Leave that to me.


Dost think they'll come? Dost thou believe I shall be happy? My Love was ever
of her bliss afraid.


You need not fear, I am confident your thoughts will be prosperous, I hear the
water dash. Who's there, the Soldier?


Yes, 'tis I. Who's there, Olinda?


Yes, and the Princess.


Come to the next corner, we are all ready, be speedy.


You are safe, the Slaves are the men I told you of; your Father, Appius, and
Seleucus are all here; but be confident.


Stand close till they be off the Wall, and Olinda come, for she is guilty too.


Fallen by the board, and not to be found? S'death, Slave, thy life shall
answer the neglect.


She perished by her haste, no fault of mine.


Leave your prating, Sirrah. Madam, your pardon for this unfortunate accident,
your Maid is lost, fallen by chance by the board, and drowned; I should not
dare to look you in the face after this but that I am confident I shall show
you other Friends that are as dear to you.


My Maid lost! O set me back again, this ill omen foretells a greater danger.


Can there be danger to Claricilla where these Friends are?


Ha! Traitor to my Love and me, What hast thou done?


Thou art a Traitor, unworthy, no more a Daughter, but the sin and shame of my
blould; Fool that thou art, could thou thou believe that thy base passion
could walk id so close a disguise that my anger could not find it: no, thou
art deceived; and to urge thee to despair, know, thy obscure Paramours,
Melintus and Philemon, (the two Wolves to my heart) thou hast thus with safety
cut away, put off to the shore, and there thou shalt behold their ruin.


Yes, Put off, that's the Word, and then put off hope, and in amazement behold
the Lightning that's wrapped in this swoln cloud, which now breaks, and in death
shoots your several fates.


Heaven, thou art just; and 'tis equal to let me fall in the design I laid to
destroy those noble youths; but for thee, I will not look upon such an hated
Traitor when I am so near my home.


No, you must be witness first to the Marriage of this Princess, then you shall
both be a Sacrifice to our Hymen.


Thy wife? I smile upon thee; thou art so base a thing thou could never find
my anger yet; my scorn was ever strong enough to strangle thy hopes.


Anon 'twill be my time to smile when died in thy Father's blood, my Revenge
shall force all their Sweets from thee which I will gather in the presence of
thy Paramour; nor shall he or these have liberty to die before I have enjoyed
thee; but that act once past the Earth shall not redeem their Lives; Do you
perceive how small a share you are like to have in this Kingdom?


I am glad to see thee grown to such a height of sin; for now my hopes tell me
the Gods will not suffer such a Dog to bay them long, their Lightning will
shoot thee, Monster.


Sir, stay not to talk, but away to Neptune's. Temple; when we have performed
what you resolved there, then to the Gally, and end your hunt.


Bind them then, and let's be gone.


WHo's there?


'Tis I, Jacomo; we are lost if you stay this night, your Friends aboard are
betrayed to the King, and the Princess that was this night to meet him is
surprised in her journey by the treachery of a Soldier that they trusted; and
if you attempt not your escape you are lost; your Window's large and stands
upon the Haven; if you can swim, this night leap in, and I'll be ready on the
shore to receive you, with dry Clothes and Horses, to convey us to our safety;
if you stay you perish.


Nay, I can swim, but the season is somewhat too cold for that pleasure; I
could be glad to have the wounds the mad Dog gave me cured without being
drenched in Salt-water; but however if you'll assist me, I'll leap far enough.


What hour shall I expect you?


At Twelve.


Till then Farewell.


There's some comfort yet, where there is a way, when leaping forth a Window
can do it; Well, if I get free if ever I come into any company that think it
lawful to love any woman longer than a man has use of the Sex, they shall geld
me. By this hand I have lain with a hundred unsound Wenches with less danger
than I have looked upon this wooing, this scurvy honourable Matrimony, which is
so dangerous a thing the very standers by are not safe. I must swim but for
wishing well to it; but from this time either Melintus shall quit his
honourable way to his Loves, or I'll leave him to the honourable dangers.


STand, now Priest do your office.


Has this impious Traitor bound the hands of Justice, that thus she lets him
proceed to mischief, and will not in her own battlestrike? Must the innocent
fall and none defend them?


Yes, fair one, and in their usual way show their power, which thus from the
meanest of the earth Heaven has raised me a Guard for your Virtues.


Ha!


Who is so much a Slave that he can let this sin chain him for ever?


How's this?


We that have together born our miseries, and with a harsh fate worn out our
weary days, have not amongst them all met one that will lie so heavy on us as
this base act if we assist the Traitor.


Sir, be free, and let honour only draw your Sword.


Kill that Traitor, Slave.


Free the King -- Fool, can thou yet read the miseries thy hated life shall
feel? Here Melintus tells thee what they are.


Melintus!


Yes, Melintus, whilst Philemon and Manlius triumph in the Victory their
Loyalty has gained over thy insulting treacheries -- Sir, to you I kneel for
pardon, for thus venturing to threaten dangers; all else are acquainted with
the Plot we laid to discover to your abused trust this wretched Monster.


The Prince, Sir, was of Council in all we did.


And we have his consent, Sir, to be happy.


Of all I ask a pardon whom my doubt has injured; and I'll no longer cross your
joys, you have my consent, and Heaven crown your wishes; but for thee, thy
villainy shall destroy thee.


Madam, to your virtues which my mischiefs still have hunted thus low I bow,
and when with repentant tears I have washed the way let my last breath find
your faith. That I loved the rate I would have paid speaks how much; and since
from him I derive these miseries, by his power which you have bowed to I beg
and conjure your mercy that it may in pardon find me; and then with a wound
here I'll give Balm to those under which my honour now languishes.


Disarm him.


Attempt it not.


Hold, I forgive.



