THE SEEGE OF URBIN. A Tragy-Comedy.

Written by Sr WILLIAM KILLIGREW, Vice-chamberlaine to Her MAjESTY.

OXFORD, Printed by Hen: Hall Printer to the UNIVERSITY, for Ric: Davis, 1666.

Sir, I Have perused your Plays, and in them find,
Abundant Riches to adorn the mind;
Beyond the pleasure of the Ears, and Eyes,
Which are delighted most with Levities.
Selindra's Characters so great! and good,
Maintained throughout; if fully understood!
Shows, none did ever better Plot contrive,
Or represent a Dead show more alive!
Pandora tells, how virtuous Women may
Make vicious men, cast all their ills away;
Such wanton Wit, in Ralliery, so writ!
Virtue her self, may hear, and practise it.
I judge, that by Ormasde's, you design,
To teach how Friendship's, more then Love, divine!
Yet have such Characters of both expressed,
You leave no Argument, to choose the best.
This Siege of Urbin, more then all does show;
That you, true Images of Virtue know,
And to improve the world, your skill impart,
That we may learn to imitate your Art.
'Tis want of wit, and judgment in this Age,
If we discern not what adorns the Stage!
When passions high, and to the life expressed!
Do not raise flames in every worthy breast;
When Florio with such subtle Art, beguiles
Our souls concern, to mingle tears with smiles;
What more can Plays afford? or we desire?
When to our Recreations we retire!
We wish for lines, our reason may Command,
Not such as breaks our brains, to understand.
You have a noble Pen, and fancy such!
To be more Eloquent, would be too much!
S. T.
SIr, since I had the happiness to read
The Siege of Urbin; I hear, others plead
That All may see it, and plead with such success;
That now you'll wave the Stage, and grace the Press.
'Twill much oblige the Nation, for they'll find
Your Play stamped with the Figure of your Mind;
The Poem's Noble, nothing Vulgar in it;
You coin not Bullion at the Common Mint,
As we do, whose low souls no Art can raise:
Nay even when Lov's infused into our Plays,
Slow as a Drug, that in the body lies,
Our Phansy works; yours, like a Spirit, flies,
Nor does your excellence alone consist
In Love's soft Parleys: you do Soldiers list,
And carry on designs of War and State,
Formed in a Camp and Court which you create.
And though new Poets, like new Stars, appear:
Yet still you rise above their highest Sphere.
'Tis true, they write great Characters; but then,
How o^ten speak their Great like meaner men;
You make a Prince do all things like a Prince,
That's Argument sufficient to evince
The Dictates that from deepest Reason slow,
Which learned Poets dream but of, you know,
If then, He, that has greatest latitude
Of Knowledge merit most; I may conclude
The ^aurell's yours, justly transplanted now,
From off the Schollar's, to the Courtier's brow.
R. Stapylton.
SIr, When I read your Play methought I saw
The persons Enter and go off, you draw
All Parts so speaking, so to Life, that I
Felt my Ears cozened by my well pleased Fie,
And thought I heard the Actors, which did there
At once present a Play and Theater.
All passages contrived by such just Laws
As crown the best of Poets with Applause,
And challenge to your Wit the freshest Baize
Which can be gathered from clapped Hands, and Praise.
The whole Intrique a Labyrinth, which you
Through all the windings furnish with a Clue,
By which the wondering Traveller is Led
Through ways past finding out but by your Thread.
The Plot and Scenes wrapped up in such disguise*
As when a fine Cloud darkens the bright Skies.
Yet so, as this shade turns at length to Light,
And a fair Day-break issues forth of Night.
The Lovers parts, which tread our Modern Stage,
Are the Reproach, and Dullness of our Age.
Where a young Gallant fighting for his Whore
With a curled Rival, at a Tavern Door,
The Drawers called to reconcile the fray,
With Parish Constable, do make the play.
Your Fancy doth in higher Regions move,
And teach great Princes princes ways of Love.
Kindling in noblest Breasts the noblest fire,
Which to fruition by great Deeds aspire.
Thus your Lorenzo raised a generous Flame
In his great Mistress by a VVarlike Fame,
And made his wounds, and Dangers first obliege
His Silviana rescued from a Siege.
And thus your Florio did all Hearts surprise,
First by her Valiant Sword, then conquering Eyes
In whose concealed sex you both sexes place,
Mars in her Courage, Venus in her Face.
Nor is't a wonder, if thus beautified
Some wished her for their Bridegroom, some their Bride.
Such Marriages are only framed by you,
Who know to he Loves priest, and Poet too.
M. C.
MIracle of Nature, by no Arts taught;
Borne beyond Learning; with such fancy fraught!
That all thy Poems do the World surprise,
To find such Treasure, under such disguise.
Such parts, with so great modesty concealed,
Doubles their value, when they are revealed.
Thy Characters of Love, and Friendship show,
Thy heart's the Fountain, whence those Virtues flow.
We Fictions write, the Poets chiefest part!
Thou paint'st thy self, and thy own pattern Art.
E. F.
Reader, Instead of justifying my idle hours thus spent; or begging your
applause, for what you may not like; I desire you to excuse my confidence, for
Printing so high Complements, from my kind Friends; who have here Poetiz'd in
praise of what I fear you will not find! Yet if no Stones be flung at me, but
by those that would be really displeased, to be so prays'd: I have hopes to
escape, 'till some other kind of Marterdome be found for

Your most humble Servant W. K.
LAdies, Our Author does by me declare,
Your Characters are still his chiefest care;
That what he does present to Public view,
He would have as Excellent, as he thinks you;
If then his great respect, does make him raise
A Figure rarely practiced in our days?
To set a Lustre on your sex, that may
Your reserved Virtues to the World display!
He hopes his Age, his fancy may excuse,
If it fly low for a Romantic Muse!
But if the Ladies! Florio's part approve!
He fears no men, who dare pretend to love;
And then, if all who love, do like his play!
No matter, what the rest o'th World do say.
WHat noise was that? or did I dream? it seemed my Fathers voice, to hasten me
to Church! The dismal thought of that sad sound, frights my Soul, with
apprehension of approaching misery! -- a thousand Images of strange terrors, do
in various shapes appear, and bring all the sad stories I ever heard, of
forced Marriage, afresh into my memory! -- if I consent to marry him, or do at
all comply! the guilt of our ensuing evils will be mine! -- My heart shrinks
for fear, at these Ideas of such ills to come! that I will try to think my self
into the other World. --


Help Madam, help! for Heavens sake help! or I am lost!


What frights thee thus, what danger threatened thee?


Oh Madam! the Villane fled, as you approached! --


She has deceived me by a trick, and I must now dissemble.


Madam, tis ominous, to celebrate your Wedding Eve in sighs! -- when the Sun
sets in a dark Cloud, we say the Morning will be foul.


True Melina, but if the Sun do set in a red Sky! the same Augurs say, the
Morning will prove fair.


Some bright red Evenings, make us judge so! but a bloody coloured Sky! often
foreshewes some dismal accident at hand.


No more; thou hast for an hour or too, reprieved me from the grave; -- but
this Handkercher will do the work, as well as that Dagger Melina! now I am
resolved to dye!


And I, as fully bent, to accompany your Ghost, unto the other World: dye when
you will!


Thou hast no Argument for death!


Yes Madam, I cannot part with you, my sense of your many favours, does work
the same effect in me, your troubles do bring you.


To lay thy blood on my head Melina, will be cruelty, not love! and so create a
sin upon my Soul, I thought not of!


'Tis in you to prevent that evil, by preserving your self, and me, who will
not live without you; have we not sucked the same Milk, and ever since been
bred together!


Did ever servant love a Mistress thus!


Did ever Mistress love a servant! as you have me! more like a near relation,
then your made!


High gratitude! thy returns, are beyond my obligations. -- But would thou
have me live? and marry that Monster I abhor.


No, I would have you put the Marriage off, by a fained sickn^sse, for a while!
and try some less dangerous remedy; then Il^e assist.


I have twice done so, and by it more insenc'd my angry Father, who now has
vowed, dead or alive, he will to morrow carry me to Church.


What if he do?


At the Alter then, i'll sacrifice my life; if not now.


Is there no way but Death?


Yes, I have a way to help my self; if thou will here engage thy Faith, not to
reveal, but to assist in my design! my hard hearted Father shall not in such
hast, hurry me to Church; -- my thoughts are hon^st, and my actions shall be
honourable: -- say Melina, shall I trust thee? or must I die?


I will engage; so you will vow to me, not to fall by your own hand!


I do, I do: -- haist now my dearest friend, fetch presently Melina! and
immediately be gone.


Men Madam!


I men, in show!


And whither then?


Nay, if you raise doubts already! my first resolve, returns.


Will you not admit me to consult in the affair; you now think fit to trust me
with!


Yes, yes, but we have no time to counsel now! -- you have heard, how Ferraras
hot-headed Duke, prepares an Army for a War with Urbin? and hopes by force to
get the Princess Silviana for his Wife; against her Brothers, and her own
consent.


I have heard such a discourse!


That discourse is true Melina; -- and we must now haste to URBIN in our
disguise; there as Silvianas Volunteer, I'll fight; and try what my Romantic
destiny will be? -- a foreign enemy may give the death I seek; which my own
hands tremble at!


But Madam!


No butts Melina, you must now obey,
Make haste to shift our habits, and away.

WE have escaped their out guards strangely; they will be round about the Town
this night Luco;


Will you stay the siege Sir?


I had not else come hither;


Have you an Argument? and a concern, worthy of such hazard Sir.


I come (led by my Fate) to seek an Argument, that may prove worthy of greater
hazard, then I shall meet with here; men who put to Sea on great designs,
must not shrink at every Cloud, in apprehension that a storm is near; but if I
find no business worthy my danger, I can retreat at pleasure.


You will be engaged in honour, and must not stir.


If so, I shall abide it cheerfully; Maluezzo, go you back immediately, while
the way is open, and see all done at home, as I directed.


I shall be careful Sir.


Luco, take you a private lodging for me, before it do grow dark, and in this
place, or on the next Rampire, you shall find me.


Happy, and blessed occasion! for my cross fate the best! here I may fall
without the crime of my own hands, acting in my long wished for Death! here
unknown without pity or reproach, I may Sacrifice my loathed life to appease
my enraged Father; whose unnatural impositions have destroyed me. Methinks
Melina our disguise, becomes us excellently well, and this Town besiedg'd, will
keep us undiscovered while we stay; -- what says my fellow Soldier? can
thou fight?


If my Argument to put on Breeches, were the same with yours Madam! I should
like this habit, and your design, much better then I do; you fly the man you
hate, and I leave him I love, to wait on you.


I see thy Complement in its best dress, (Fidelity;) but tis now two late to
sigh, or to repent; we are engaged past retreating and must on.


I wonder Madam you do not shake to think what hazards you must run? this
looks like leaping into the Sea, to avoid Shipwreck; the cure more desperate,
then the evil you fly from.


Not more desperate Melina! I cannot fear, nor fancy an evil, beyond the
embraces of that rich rotten Carcass, my unkind Father would match me to; as if
guilding a sad heart, would make it happy! 'Tis easy to consent to dye, when we
consider how much better 'tis to be in Heaven, then here Melina.


True Madam, if we be sure, this were the way thither! but how shall we answer
at the Resurrection? for our Vira-goships? for ou^ own, and others blood, thus
shed! if our Needles should prick our Fingers! and those small wounds fester to
Gangreens! that were to dye in our own callings; but this way to fall, is a
kind of self murder, and beyond my Faith to merit Heaven, by doing mischief
to our selves and others, who have no way offended us.


I have no thought of mischief in my heart towards any, nor is my Nature less
smooth then thine, but my stars have ordained me a Rugged Fate that I cannot
subdue.


Allow all this, the means you still propose, are hopeless, as the end you
aim at; -- How will drawn Swords look in our weak ha^s? how soon will feeble
strokes discover our faint hearts? and lay us open to reproach.


Thou art mistaken Melina, 'tis courage, and not strength, that is ^o necess^y
here; when Multitudes fall on, none can observe, whose Sword does the
Execution; -- but thou shalt stay at home, while my despair, leads me, where
danger strikes the greatest terror; thou know part of my younger days, led
with my banished Father, in wild Mountains, there trained for this work at
hand! but my business is now to dye, as thine to live, 'tis not thy Valour, I
engaged to this adventer, but thy fidelity; who after my decease, must witness
to the World, the truth of my sad story, least our sex be scandalised; -- you
shall not ^ight Melina.


If I survive? will a relation from me, your fellow wanderer, have credit with
the World? I fear your flight from home, and such a Romantic death, may prove
eternal scandal to your Name: Innosence, is not enough to justify so bold an
Act!


Conceal me then; -- I carry here an innosence, beyond the reach of Censure;
and though I fly that moving Sepulcher at home, I have a courage, that dares
meet again my old acquaintance, the Ravening Wolf, and hungry Bear, rather
then be so buried while I live!


Is all this danger, to avoid the man that you dislike? no inclination for
another, you would have?


Had I been so weak! as to like any! I had not found strength, for this bold
adventure; -- prithee sweet Melina, do not betray me by thy fears, I did
believe thee bold, and a fit Confident, or I had near imparted my design.


I must confess, I did not fear to go at midnight in the dark, through our
long entries, to meet my Lover; those joys, were ever above the thought of
shadows, but these dangers are of a higher Nature Madam, our lives, and
Credits both at stake.


Fie Melina, dost thou own courage, in actions void of Modesty? and shrink when
honour bids the hazard! -- thou make me tremble now indeed, lest some guilt
of thine, should pull a cross Fate on us.


Remove those thoughts of me, and all your fears together, for I am Armed with
such a virtuous confidence, as will shrink at no danger, you dare look on; but
will vie Perils with you, when occasions call me to it.


Bravely resolved; thus then let us in private, practice how to wave our
Swords! lest we show ignorance, when we have use of Amazons we read, have done
great things, and my spirit prompts me, to an honourable death, before a
wretched life, which makes me thus endeavour, to fall worthy a Noble Character,
for after times to pity, -- or to praise, and wonder at!


I am now fully confirmed Madam, and hope to see you fight like the brave Maid
of Orleance, who drove the English from those parts of France, when almost all
was Conquered, by that Warlike Nation! --

-- So that in after Ages, your Renown,
May out-shine hers, that saved the Gallique Crown!

If France do that bold Virgins valour own!
Why should not we, now make that wonder none?

To what Angels Face, and Heroes Arm, do I owe my Life? or has great Mars put
Venus figure on? my amazement is beyond the sense of my deliverance; -- what
are you Sir?


A stranger, here but now ariv'd.


Are not you hurt?


I feel none Sir; pray who were those assaulted you?


Banditee, who in such times of War, stand in corners to take Cloaks!


If this be all the danger, our drawn Swords will bring us? I shall


Are these Enemies Sir?


They are my good Angels Luco, from Heaven sent to guard me; -- have you taken
lodgings?


I have.


But I must first attend you to your house Sir, lest these


We yet have none, but were inquiring where to lodge, when you came by us.


The house that I now came from has Room for all.


Pray let us lodge together, that I may find some way to serve you, who have
engaged me so highly.


We shall gladly be obliged, as you desire, and will wate on you.


By your daring courage, I judge you come to serve the Duke, against this
insulting Enemy, as I do.


We seek employment;


Have you an address to any in this Court?


We have none, but come to serve as Volanteers:


My purpose is the same, we may do well to make our first visits presently to
Court, and show our intents to serve the Duke, if you approve it; let us see
our Lodgings, and then go.


I shall be wholly guided by you Sir.


Show the house Luco. --

-- Methinks that face has in it something more!
Then in my Life I ever saw before.

Has the Enemy taken spade in hand Camillo?


Yes Sir, and is already breaking ground:


We'll entertain them at break of day, with a sharp Sally, to give them an
assay of what courages they are to meet with, let our Troops be ready by day
break.


All shall be ready Sir; but methinks the night were fitter for our Sally.


I like not Sallying in the Dark, 'tis subject to great mistakes, and such
accidents, as often makes the best designs uncertain; No Camillo, the Sun
shall see, and show the vigour we charge with, 'twill raise our Hearts to
higher actions, then a dull shade is worthy of!

Our glitring Swords, and our enraged Eyes,
Will show how much we do their War despise!
And amongst their Soldiers such amazement s^ing,
They shall not fly, the Ruin that we bring.

Take courage Silviana, this War will not prove so terrible, as your fears
suggest!


My apprehension Sir, is not more, then does become my Sex; when Nations are at
stake, and my interest must be decided by the hazards of a War; -- is it not
time to sigh? and pray, I and to tremble at the thought of such an evil!
though my innosence, and your valour, may be Crowned with Victory, it must be
purchased by the blood of Loyal Subjects.


Let them who force the War, shake at the event! and answer for the evils.


These Gentlemen new come to Town, desire the Honour


You have chosen an ill time, to visit URBIN Gentlemen; when the Alarms, and
hazards of a besieged Town, allows no hours for entertainment, or for rest.


To hazard, we come hither Sir; -- honoured Trophies gained in so just a
War! are glorious invitation to virtuous minds, and fill our hearts with sure
Predictions of a good success.


You Prophecy like a friend, and I have Faith for what you say, -- do these
youths belong to you?


No Sir, I met them but an hour since, where they saved my life, by rescuing me
from five or six Banditee, -- they come to serve you in this War.


Your looks invite me to inquire your Country, and qualities, that I may find
a fit employment for such worthy persons, who set honour at so high a rate.


My name is Fernando, and his Florio, my ambition Sir, is not above a
Volunteere, I understand not to Command; -- but Florio I confess looks like
somewhat more then he is pleased to own.


My fancy does concur with yours, -- and I shall study to welcome both, as
well as this disturbed time permits me; this occasion makes us wink at such
Banditee for the present, who are bold on all attempts, and in this War may
be of use; but I should not have judged this fair youth fit to manage Arms!


Your Highness will have other thoughts, when you see Florio in the field! the
Enemy will find him man enough!


What part of Italy is so happy? as to have bred such early virtue*


I am of Pisa Sir; my business is to see the World, and improve my knowledge
by my Travels.


Of PISA Florio! know you any of note there?


All Sir.


Pray Sir, let us two fight in the same Troop, that we may emulate each others
actions, in your service.


The contest will not be equal, -- your looks will strike more terror in an
Enemy, then Gentle Florios Sword can do; I will prevail with this young
Soldier, (if I can)! to secure the Ladies, while we Sally, his courage will
abate their fears, who apprehend more danger then is cause for.


Sir, I shall curse my soft faint looks, if they belie my heart, that covets to
get honour by my Sword, as much as he, that can frown Fernando, or quit the
Town before I sleep.


This storm which I have raised is more bewitching lovely, then thy calm
gentle looks were. --

-- If you have yours, and I have my desire;
Let me again embrace what I admire!

I pass for no body all this while! but if my good Sword hold!


The Dukes in love Madam, and talks like one of us, to this Adonis.


They look great, as if they would do service, worthy my brothers highest
complements.


We are all ready for the Sally Sir; I wish your Highness would reserve your
self for the next occasion, we shall have work enough of this kind; the Enemy
is strong.


I will not be diverted, but my self will lead you on; -- here Camillo, -- let
these strangers charge in your Troop, next to your self; they appear to be of
quality, and no doubt have courage to merit what honours we can give them.


They shall be my care Sir.


Call for my Arms, 'tis time that we make ready. --

-- Retire, lost your fears Silviana may
Our best displease, and doubting men dismay.

I have a heaviness about my heart Rossina, which I cannot remove!


Your Highness too much apprehension of the Dukes danger, looks like doubting
those powers, which protect Princes in all just causes.


I cannot contradict you, nor can I be less concerned, because this War is
on my account, though I be guiltless, the proved Prince of Ferrara demands our
Principallity in Dowre, by which he shows to have but small esteem of me; the
Dukedom must be intayled on me, and my Brother tied from a second Marriage?
thus his ambition, not his love, makes War, for the enlarging his Dominions!


Pray Madam be pleased to retire into the Castle, the Duke is now on sallying:


Whiter so fast Mariana? why so frighted my Phylora?


We came from the Tower next to the Port, Madam.


And from thence, what saw you? to beget this Terror!


We saw the Duke all in Armour, riding before his Troops, with so much terror,
and such a dust! that we durst stay no longer, but ran trembling down, to be
near your Highness in this danger.


So then our own Troops, and their dust, have conquered you, stout Soldiers! I
thought by your amazed looks, the Enemy had been entering of our Ports. -- Let
me have notice when my Brother does return.


Are Petruchio, and Morosino both Dead?


Both slain Sir.


They shall have solemn Funerals: who did deserve more honour, then I can give
their Memories; -- I saw 'em fall, and hoping to relieve 'em, had lost my
self, if brave Fernando, with young Florio, had not come timely in to save me:
-- I owe my life to you Gentlemen, and must declare, this great success is
wholly due unto your Valours; 'twas you that Rallied us when routed; twas you
that forced the enemy to his first retreat, and you have brought us off with
honour, when all was desperate!


You over value our endeavours Sir; 'twas our good fate to come in timely, but
your own valours won the day.


This humility looks greater then your actions; -- Fernando, I entreat you take
Command of all our Horse, in place of slain Petruchio, -- and have the same
suit to Florio, that he will command my Guards in place of Morosino fallen.


Your Highness has great Commanders here more worthy of this Honour, -- I have
such engagements on me, that I can accept of no employment, longer then this
Seedge lasts.


You over load me Sir, with a charge too great for my years to undertake.


Your Officers will ease you of all the painful part; though I yet know you
not: --

-- My purpose is, to show how much I prize
That virtue, which appears through your disguise.

My prayers are heard, and you are safe returned!


I owe my life Silviana, and you your thanks to these Gallant men, -- Fernando
has showed us how to command, and how to fight, and taught all the offices of a
great Soldier.


Your complements are such Sir; as I dare not Answer, because I must not own
them:


Here I present you Silviana, with this Ages wonder! such


If your discourse were not of War, I should believe you did describe a
Mistress rather then a man.


You have said truer then you think Silviana; for I shall court Florio, as
Mistress of all the Joys that I can fancy, and love him! like some divine
substance, I have no name for!


You make me blush so much Sir, that I must hide my self.


Stay Florio, and I will talk no more thus; but by my favours judge hereafter,
at what rate I value such a Miracle of Nature, in show more fit for Venus, then
the rough discipline of Mars; Florio shall be my bosom friend, my surest guide
to Virtue, and Renown!


I am wearied Sir, and beg your permission to retire a while.


Take your own time Florio.


Brother, is this Raillery? or do you design to set up your young favourite,
for the Court Idol? if so brave a man, will allow such ^lattery? we will all
adore him too: -- But suppose some Lady should gain an interest in Florio's
heart? how will you bear such a partner in his friendship?


What you but jest of, is my real wish, that fair Rossina, or some other Lady
could lay such fetters on him, as might keep him ever here; -- And if my favour
can invite any to this Victory on Florio, I will make his Fortune suitable to
Hers, who ere she be!


I do submit to try my Fortune, but how must I proceed? I shall never learn to
Woo Sir.


You shall have our assistance Rossina.


If you can persuade him to love, leave the rest to me.


If Rossina be serious! she shall want no assistance; -- but Fernando can do
more then all, if he will join! -- we may hope success!


I shall be willing to Endeavour as you desire, and doubt not Florio will
embrace such advancement, as you design him; -- I Florio, with some concern,
before I gain an interest: -- Silvianas Eyes have struck me through, Fame was
short in her Relation.


If it be not Rossinas good Fate to get his Love? I invite you Ladies all, to
try the Magic of your several Beauties, to engage him so by love, that he may
live here with us.


What all at once? the poor man will be smothered with Ladies hearts; -- you'll
fright him from all our Sex Sir; pray let Rossina try her single Fortune first.


Let us retire and order this affair
Within, though it seem slight, 'tis worth our care.

The Duke is grown so fond of Florio, he regards none of us.


'Tis two true, I wish we did know how to help our selves!


Methinks it were an easy work, to raise such jealousies between Florio and
Fernando, as might make them destroy each other, and save us the labour. -- I
have put fancies in bold Fernando's Head, to make him Envy Florios interest in
the Duke, and cast out words, as if his aim were Silviana, and as if the Duke
complied.


I shall take my time to second what you say; but let us consult farther, you
Camillo, have the greatest loss of the Dukes savour, and if I observe you
right, have envy, and power enough, to execute your Revenge: we must not great
things attempt without good advice. --

-- Though our design want neither skill, nor Wit;
Being ill, it will ask power to manage it.

I shall contribute what I can, to crush these strangers, ere they grow too
strong for us to grapple with; but let us first advise the Duke, if our
counsels do not prevale? --

-- Such Vipers must be smothered in the Nest,
Least they in time do blast our Interest. --
-- See, the Duke returns; Corbino, speak you first, and we will second what
you say.


Sir, we have had a serious debate concerning the strangers, and your favours
to them; which they have bravely merited! but yet Sir, some of your best
Subjects have apprehension, that your Value may grow less for them, and they
become remiss thereon.


He speaks my sense Sir; I would not live to see you loose your peoples hearts,
by such neglect of them!


What is your opinion Camillo? do I over value the benefits received? from
these new men!


I do believe you do Sir; and have begot a censure by it, I could wish were off
again.


Of what kind Camillo.


Of too much contempt of our own Nation, with a kind of Adoration! for the
Strangers; as if they alone defended URBIN! and by their Swords only! you
expected Victory! This Sir in duty, we offer to your serious thoughts; who
have Commands, our selves too high, to envy any honours, you can place on
them.


I did look on their merits I confess, above my recompense! and by my
favours, hoped to raise their noble hearts to higher actions in this War: But
I shall be more cautious, then to discontent my Loyal Subjects, who grudge
such benefit, as I bestow on gallant men, that saved my Life!


Has what I said, offended Sir?


No, no, 'tis your love of me, and care of my prosperity!


NOble Florio, we have had no time since we first met, to congratulate our
good Fortunes here.


It multiplies my happiness, that you approve the Dukes kindness to me Sir.


'Tis somewhat extravagant I confess; -- such violent affections seldom last,
Florio.


I could wish his favour somewhat less, lest it raise great men's envy on me.


'Tis well weighed, for I observe Camillo, with other Lords, look displeased at
our advancement, pray observe them better, least I mistake.


I see it too, and have endeavoured what I can, to gain their loves.


That is wisely done, but you may secure your interest here, by marrying into
some great Family; by whose power, and Allies, you will be looked on as a
Native, or at least be able to contest with any, that shall design against
you.


What you mention, was proffered me last night, with old Corbino's wealthy
Daughter Mariana, and an hour after, I was advised to treat with Camillo, for
his fair Niece Rossina.


Which do you incline most too?


They are Beauties both, and seem equally endowed with Virtues, fit for their
great Births; but I am preingaged, and can comply with neither.


So young, and so constant! is a wonder! (I see Borosco Silviana is his
design!) I here the Duke intends to woo you for Rossina, and I hope you
wisely will consider, what wealth, and honours will be proposed with her; and
not in a Romantic gallantry, prefer some slight promise made in your own
Country, before so great advancement.


I shall never entertain a thought, that may change my fixed heart, from its
first Center, to gain this Dukedom by it.


I do not like this ('tis the Princess!) may I know if your heart inhabit here?
is any Lady of this Court, so happy? to gain an interest in Florio.


No Lady here Sir; I assure you, but by my observations, I find you are not
free from a growing passion, (allow me but so much) and I shall soon guess,
that Silviana can be only worthy of Fernandos


Remove but one doubt, and I am thine for ever; -- does not your own desire
that way, raise your jealousy of me? and make you enquire, what you fear to
find.


By all that's good, -- I have no wish for Silviana, but will serve Fernando
with all my interest; pray Sir believe and try me.


I do believe, and will trust thee with my heart; I love the Princess, and
would gladly make some trial towards my design to gain her; which is the
true cause of my engaging in this War: -- and now Florio, I assure you my
quality is such, as she may own my love, for I am --


Hold Sir, I will know no argument but Fernandos worth, to engage me to serve
him.


You are my good Angel hither sent.
To guard and guide me in my Banishment.

My Lord, the Council of War stay till you come to u'm.


I follow, -- Florio I have much to say when we meet next.]


Why Florio, do you absent your self so much? is Fernando a better friend then
I? who dote more on thee, then Lovers on their Mistress Eyes, when their kind
hearts comply.


Though Fernando be a Noble Friend he has but a second place in my heart, --
your favours are above the reach of any other person in the World!


Now you flatter me, -- I can allow you to entertain a bosom Friend, of the
other Sex before me, but no man Florio, must be my Rival, this jealousy
speaks my esteem, that willingly would have thee ever in my sight, as the best
object to fix my heart on, that I may Emulate thy Virtues.


May my ingratitude be highly punished, when I do value man or Woman, more then
I do you Sir.


I have loved, or have believed so! and yet this Friendship Fernando, has his
dislikes too! and many of my greatest Subjects cannot hide their Envy at my
smiles on Florio! There must be something more then I discern in this new kind
of passion, which I have no name for! but an impulsive Friendship, which I
cannot, nay I dare not wish were less; Florios person is clad in so rich
Virtues, as delights my Eyes, and captivates my heart, beyond all the beauteous
Women I have seen! so that while Florios virtues lead me on, I cannot doubt my
fate, nor slack my admiration!


You look displeased Silviana, and something pale of late!


I want your wonted kindness Sir; how can my looks be cheerful? when Florio
like a sullen Cloud, does interpose between the Sun, that used to shine on
me?


You chide me kindly Silviana; and in return, I wish Florio were a Prince,
that I might part with him to you, and by so rich a gift, express my value of
you both.


My wish reaches only to enjoy your conversation as before; I have no design
to rob you of your Souls delight in Florio, but do not like that he alone,
should have you to himself, while I, and all the World do seem neglected! by
which you suffer more then you discern.


Suffer Silviana! is it a Crime to value Virtue? or to be grateful to the man
has saved my life! my favours duly weighed, do not yet reach his merit.


I undervalue not his worth Sir; but grudge he should engross you to himself.


Your judgment, by this jealousy, is Eclipsed; else you would with me discern
the inviting Arguments for such a friendship, as I desire to fix here! 'tis
Friendship Silviana, a word so often used, and so little understood! that we
loose the highest happiness this World affords, not knowing how to improve so
Divine a Virtue! 'tis unity of Souls, the Saints enjoy above, and take delight
to see us practise here on Earth! 'tis Florios Virtue I admire, his rich heart
I seek, a Treasure of more worth, then all the glittering honours, I can ever
heap on him.


What answer can I make to this? but blushes; let my blushes Sir, speak for the
heart you prize so much, too much!


Come Silviana, if you will smile on him for my sake, he shall not rob you of
my converse, pray let him kiss your hand.


I will Sir; for I have a full esteem of his great Virtue; -- Florio merits
much, but not all your heart Sir; I claim a Sisters part; -- Florio if I can
serve you here? you may employ me to my Brother boldly.


Madam, I am many times surprised by the Dukes favours, so much too high for me
to own, that I do wish them less.


That is beyond my desire Sir, I would not lessen his favour to you, but would
participate my Brothers love.


This is worse still! the Duke sets him on to court his Sister! but Florio is,
I hope, too Noble to wrong me, that trust him; -- and yet the Princess is a
high Temptation, I must prevent the evil


I intend this night, my self to Sally, and with all my power, to fall on their
last work.


That will be too much Sir; I dare undertake with a small party, to destroy all
they have yet done.


Pray brother leave this Sally to your Officers, and not on all occasions
hazard your own person; -- may you not rely on Fernando for his Conduct?


It shall now be so, but you would never have me fight Silviana.


Madam, you honour me so much, that I tremble at what I undertook; -- I can
encounter all the hazards of a War, with less concern; lest by an ill
success, I lessen your opinion of my conduct: -- but yet thus Armed with your
commands! it were a crime to doubt! -- Great Sir; I beg the sole command this
night.


You shall Fernando, and I will rest secure, when so great skill, and courage
meet with such a Noble soul, 'tis to be trusted, as my self were present.


I beg the honour Sir to kiss the Princes hand, for this great favour done me.


My thanks to Silviana for this value of my friend.


Fernando has already showed he needs no additions Sir.


I can have no addition, beyond your Highness good opinion. --

-- My hearts engaged by Silvianas Eyes,
To waste it self in daily Sacrifice;
With smothered sighs my doubt full state bemoan,
Until the Priest, and Alter make us one.

These Mushrums are grown steeple high already! -- to persuade the Duke
against them, were to advance them higher.


I differ in opinion from you all, these strangers come to fight for us, and
you envy those civilities, the Duke affords them.


Is it so necessary; to have a favourite Longino? and he a stranger too!


You talk as if we were Princess, and our Master at our dispose, he must
hear, see, and like only what agrees, with our fancies, or our appetites does
please, and so would make the Duke, the only slave in his Dominions! not allow
him the freedom of a friend, which is the highest humane consolation; unhappy
men! whose malice, and ill nature, participate th^ curse of Hell, while you
remain on Earth; never discerning, or at least not relishing those Angelical
delights, which virtuous hearts enjoy, by loving, and obliging one another in
great Courts; and seldom happy those Princes, who permit detractors near them.


You are too severe Longino, we have no Traitorous thoughts, but set a true
value on our Prince his favour, which we fear to loose.


I fear you have Malicious hearts, and then, I am not fit for your converse,
that grumble at what you ought to thank Heaven for: -- take heed that your
ingratitudes, do not make our Lamb, put on his Lions skin; and fright you
into better manners.


We must not be so free before Longino, he has a grain or two of simple
honesty, too much for us! -- now he is gone, we may proceed; -- my Letter
will destroy Fernando, if you approve it, and he gone, young Florio will want
skill, to order his affairs against us all I say let us down with Fernando
first.


Let us see this Letter you so much confide in.


FErnando, we wonder you so long delay, what you so boldly undertook, we know
you have credit any night you please, to set open the South Port, next our new
work, and let us in! your reward is ready for you.

Yours L.L.

This no doubt will raise a jealousy, but from whom must this be sent? by whom
brought hither? and how found?


I'll say the Trumpet which came this morning to fetch a pass for a Herald,
about the interview, did loose it, I found it, read it, and my self will show
it to the Duke; who can disprove this? --


Though I like not this shallow plot thus laid,
I will your Counsels with a better aid.

I am intangl'd Melina, in such snares, as I shall near get out of.


Pray Madam speak that I may understand; -- your snares, and entanglements, be
Riddles to me; -- love is love, and may be called so.


Love Melina! is there such affinity between love, and hate? as thou can not
distinguish them, in me!


I allow you to hate the old fool you fled from; but methinks the Dukes
favours, with his so great merit, might produce affection from the same Root,
that affords you hate to one who has no merit.


Thy Argument may justify a gratitude, fit for a Vestal Virgin to profess;
but love (as I have heard) is of another nature, full of fine fancies, and such
gay delights, as will near comply with my design to Dye.


True Madam, but if you were so happy, as to find an object fit to change your
hate, to love; it would convert your thoughts from Death, and be a good
Argument to live.


Where can thou fancy such an object Melina? fit to restore my thoughts to
Joy, or life!


The Dukes love, deserves a Multiplied return of kindness from you.


Can thou believe his friendship to me as a man? can have any value for a
woman wanderer? though no degree of love, have habitation in my heart, my
Judgment, and Religion, might persuade me to own so great a blessing; if the
Gods should send so strange deliverance! so wonderful a change of Fate! for my
unworthiness.


I like well these Judicious thought, and will hope your Mallady may in time
find a cure, good natures slow with gratitude, and both together, fill the
World with love; it is, or it will be Love Madam, though you yet discern it
not.


The Gods defend our Sex, from such a president in me! a Woman to love first!
would be a Prodigy.


All this I allow, so you will love the Duke, if he love you first.


If thou dost think it possible, that I can be in danger of such a slavery as
love? for heavens sake show me a quick remedy; For all the stories I have read,
present that passion, worse then hate; and in all Ages, has produced examples,
to deter our Sex from Love; though I am yet safe, the Duke is somewhat more
then other men; -- Give me an Antidote Melina, that I may be strong against the
Duk's assault, if he make any! lest I find here a double invitation to the
grave.


You shall be provided Madam.


He has a soul so full of Gallantry, so rich in Virtue, and so great renown!
I tremble at my second thoughts of thy discourse; and would not for the World
engage my freedom, on the hazard of so high contest! if thou hast a remedy
against Love? show it now, that I may doubly Arm, against so great an Enemy!


I have a sure one Madam, that which cured me, and does cure all the World!
'tis the only approved remedy.


And shall I have it? if I stand in need!


Yes, if you please to Love him, that Loves you; and this is a remedy that
seldom fails to cure by fruition.


Thou art wanton merry, and talk thou care not what, to make me so; can
having what we wish most, lessen its value?


'Tis but too plain, by having our wish, we come to know, that our desires in
love, had raised our fancy above what we can ever find; This knowledge doth so
check the wing of fancy, and desire, (that love) as a thing once past his
height, must naturally decline; and fade; such is the general frailty of all
Creatures, to have the like certain period of decay; This makes some of our
Sages, studied in the point, now teach, that virtuous transparent friendship,
is a greater, and more durable felicity then love; but I believe you Madam have
your wish already, to the first part of this opinion, you are beloved, where
you love; and will in time judge of the whole argument, by your own experience.


If Love be not Friendship too! 'twere a sad Fate to Love, but I am so far
from having what you wish me, this way Melina, that my despair, is my
unhappiness; -- can the Duke love me a Woman? as now a man, when he shall
find his favourite Florio, such a counterfite! will it not beget suspicions of
my credit? and all tho^e glorious actions I have done, become my scandal? --
Then if his doutage should pass by all these just exceptions! may he not think
my quality unfit to be his Wife? -- These thoughts fill my fancy with such
doubts Melina! that when I consider my condition, it makes me desperate.


And gives me hopes of better days, Madam! when the Duke shall know you a Lady
of the same blood with Princes; and shall inquire the true cause of your
disguise, he will be more in love then now; -- pray let me inform him, and try
your destiny.


No Melina, no, I do conjure thee by thy first vow, and now by all my interest,
not to discover me; for if I outlive this Siege, I will return, and take a
holy habit on me, lest my sex suffer by my folly, and the World, think I came
co seek a man, rather then avoid one.


Pray Madam. --


Hold, I will here no Argument against my resolve; obey me, or you will destroy
me; Love, thus I blow thee off! Death is my business here.


Though I do not approve what you think fit,
I know I must to your command submit.

Florio, I observe you love to be retired of late, and I who seek your company,
can seldom have it.


My heart has no joy like pleasing you Sir; and my retirements are most
employed, in studying how to show my gratitude, that


That's kindly said: -- I hear Florio that Camillo proffers to settle a great
Fortune on his Niece the Fair Rossina, if you can love her, which I do wish,
that I may not fear to loose, what I see so much delight in!


'Tis an honour I cannot accept Sir, because my heart is preingaged unto
another, so fixed! that nothing less then Death, can ere dissolve it!


'Tis a clear answer; but to me so harsh, I dare not inquire further; -- and
yet I must, or by my doubts shall suffer more! -- Does the Person you love so
much, live here? or may she be brought to dwell with us.


The last of these is not impossible, and yet there is great difficulties to
effect it; -- pray Sir leave me to my own endeavours, and I may bring what you
desire to pass, for your favours have so far engaged me, that my Soul
labours to contrive, how I may live ever in your sight; believe me Sir, I know
no Joys on Earth, beyond your favours to me.


Thou dost revive me Florio, -- he (looks so great! that I could wish his fancy
were fixed on Silviana;) -- may I yet know your quality? I have some reason to
inquire, what may concern your happiness, and mine.


Your Highness does forget your promise, not to press, what does concern me
not to reveal.


You chide me handsomely, -- I only had a sudden thought, where to find a
fit match for my dear Sister Silviana.


I can fit her Sir, with such a man, as all the Ladies of the Court will envy!
-- 'tis Fernando, whose quality I know is greater then appears.


Thou hast dashed all my hopes at once, I did wish you Florio, would have
thought my Sister worthy of your self.


And much too worthy Sir, I swear by all my hopes, my heart is preingaged
where only Death can seperate.


You come Silviana aptly, to decide a difference between me and Florio, I was
inviting him to offer up his heart to you, -- but he prefers your happiness
so much above his own, that he recommends Fernando before himself.


I Madam, and do assure your Highness, that Fernandos Birth does equal his
great actions, and will be worthy your best thoughts.


Why thus concealed then?


He is resolved by services to lay some obligations on you Sir; before he do
reveal himself, as also to let the Princess see, what for her sake he
ventures, ere he speak of Love.


I found this letter at the Port Sir; as it dropped from the Enemies trumpet.


To Fernando! give it him!


Pray read it first.


Why should I read his letter? 'tis not handsome.


Such Ceremony in a besiedg'd Town, may prove Prejudicial, pray Sir read it.


Who opened it?


I did Sir; when I saw an Enemy loose it; 'twas my duty to see the inside.


This is the Enemies design, and was lost on purpose to be found, to make us
jealous of so brave a man, that he may beat them no more; -- Burn it, and say
nothing, Fernando has given testimony of his Truth, beyond the reach of
scandal.


Does any dare to question Fernandos truth Sir?


Pray Sir, let Florio give his judgment on the letter! then burn it.


This is easy to decipher, this comes not from the Camp, I suspect a nearer
plot! Fernando and my self, are much envied for your favour Sir.


Does your Lordship reflect on me, for such a guilt?


If I did, you should soon know it.


Pray Sir; let not sine words deceive you, but consider Fernando may not
probably be sent hither by the Enemy, we know not who he is, nor whence he
comes! have no caution for his Faith; why may not he at the next Sally do?
what that Letter does invite! 'tis my duty Sir to advise you to send him out of
the Town, before the evil be too great to remedy.


Your Zeal unto your Country Corbino, makes you too bold, to charge a seeming
guilt, upon a Person of his Worth; grounded only from a letter let fallen on
purpose to abuse us; suppose they should Write the like to you! -- I shall
think how to find this mischief out, and if within our own Walls, so base an
Act be proved* it shall be severely punished.


Fernando, you shall this night Sally, with what force you please.


Not 'till he has cleared himself Sir, -- read this Fernando.


This is a ^light trick Sir; the Enemy that Writ this; is within our Walls; my
name is not Fernando.


If a disguised person! there is more cause of jealousy, then I saw before.


Then raise a double Jealousy, for my Name is not Florio; -- when strangers
would be concealed, we change our Names, -- not to be hid from you we dwell
with; but from those at home, who may pursue! -- Fernando and I are a like
guilty Sir.


I am not apt for Jealousies, nor can I see so foul a guilt ^in Fernandos
face! -- Sir, though Prudence might justify your restraint, I am above fear
this way, -- be still free, and command in chief; this night the Sally shall
be wholly as you order it.


This considence would make a Traitor honest; but Sir, to secure your great
Lords fear of me, I will retire, till I can Write an answer to the Enemy, such
as will soon assure my Innosence; -- but yet on second thoughts; I have a
better way! -- you will trust me Sir you say!


I do.


Then will I this night by my Sally, give them such an answer, as that letter
does deserve: and if the guilt be within your own Walls! I shall make them
blush at my return, for aspersing of my innosence.


I will be Hostage Sir till his return, and suffer Death if Fernando do prove
false.


Fernando cannot by this Sally, more
Confirm me, then I am assured before.

Where is this Fire?


'Tis in Lord Corbinos Lodgings.


Knock, knock louder.


Fire, fire, come up and help, 'tis in my Fathers closet, the Fire breaks out
there.


From whence is the Mischief?


'Tis in Corbinos lodging Sir; I have sent after him*


The great danger is now over Sir;


Pull down the next wall, that it pass no further.


My Lord Borosco, pray set some to guard our goods.


Have not our Enemies at home done this? to divert us in the time of sally,
what news from Fernando?


He is but now sallied, hark the Alarm is begun.


And the Court on Fire at the same time! 'twere good to double all the guards,
there may be more danger in this Fire, then yet appears.


The guards are strong enough, send more hands to quench the Fire.


They have mastered the great slame Sir, but not yet quenched the Fire.


Look to his Papers, put them in again, -- What's here? Fernando! see Florio!


'Tis a soul copy of the forged Letter from the Enemy, 'tis the same hand Sir;
now you see our jealousies are just.


I shame to see so great a villainy.


My Closet burnt! and all my goods destroyed! Oh unhappy man!


It had been well thou had thy self been burnt in it, look here vile wretch!
what this fire has brought to our hands! -- thou may well tremble at such a
crime, for I will make thee an example, to terrify this Nation from like
villainy! -- you of the Guard, divide all this Treasure among your selves, for
your pains, in quenching of the Fire; -- and Florio, see this wretch a close
Prisoner; that Fernando may behold what punishment, such treachery shall find
from me.


Pardon great Sir, loss of your wonted favour, begot this envy in me, I beg
your mercy Sir,


Such mercy as so base a crime deserves, expect: -- while Fernando sheds his
Blood for us, you stamp a brand of Treason on so clear a merit! --

-- So great a mischief, with so base intent;
No villain but Corbino could invent,
-- away with him.


What news from the Port?


Fernando has slighted their last work Sir; and beaten them out of their new
Trenches, he pursued so far, that their whole Camp is now in Arms, while
your Troops retire in safety. Fernando is by this time alighted at the Court.


Fernando has made good his undertaking, let us meet him with our discovery, to
welcome his return; -- what will you do Silviana.


I shall attend, that you may see I can
To virtue bow, though not adore the man!

Pedro, where is the Duke gone? where the Princess? and where be all our goods?
-- I saw you under the window, when I threw down my red Cabinet; pray where be
they all?


The Duke, and Princess, are gone to meet Fernando, but before he went, the
Duke gave the Plunder of all the Traitor Corbinos goods, unto his Guards, who
quenched the Fire.


If my Lord be twenty Traitors! I am none, all my goods were thrown down with
his, (but that Red Cabinet, Pedro!) doest thou know which of the Guard took
that?


You are concerned as if your Portion lay within that little compass! -- were
all your Jewels there Clara?


The greatest Treasure I have, is there, Letters Pedro, Letters of Love, from a
Gentleman, that --


That, what? that has, or would do something, you are ashamed to own! is't not
so or so?


Neither Pedro, there is nothing in any Letters, I shall blush at.


That may be too! -- but say; are you so far gone? as to admit of no other
Suitor?


Leave this fooling Pedro, he seeks me an honourable way.


Which of the honourable ways? sweet Clara!


Marriage.


Then I am safe, and may be merry without danger.


Now you have talked me out of my conserne for my Cabinet, pray inform me who
Florio is! and how it happens! that he has no affection, for any of our Ladies!


If you will direct me to a Conjurer! I shall inquire, what Florio does impart
to none; -- Come Clara, let us not trouble our heads, with what your Lady, or
my Lord thinks! but let us be merry when we meet.


Keep your distance good Pedro, and then be as merry as you please! my credit
is not in the Cabinet, as you suppose! nor yet am I at your dispose.


Why so coy bright Beauty? my approach is civell.


I can neither by your looks, nor language discern that!


If you were not engaged unto the letter man! I should have shew'n my esteem of
your perfections, in a more serious way Clara, I can now have no design, but
mirth, since you declare for a pretender, whose lines you lay up as Relics!


You did mistake me Pedro, I only said, that a Gentleman did seek, but I told
you not, that he had found my heart, which is yet as free as yours.


I am caught! and must come quickly off: -- dear Clara, I


You are doubly deceived now Pedro; I have no design on your sweet Face, your
Lord, and you, will be both secure in URBIN, from being ravished by our Ladies,
or their Servants! if you can direct! who has my lost Cabinet; I'll thank ye;
if not! Adieu good Pedro.


I am glad I am thus freed.


Fernando, we bring you joyful hearts, instead of such Triumphal ornaments,
as your high Actions merit.


You honour me too much Sir, but if the Princess own my indevours! I may hope
the scandal of that letter, sticks not on me.


We have found the foul copy of that forged Letter, in Corbinos Closet, and
the Author of it, shall ere night, suffer as he deserves!


Pray Sir forgive him, as I do, his design has done you good, I had not
ventured full so far, but to wipe off that scandal; -- and now Sir, for
Marianas sake, I beg that you will pardon her old Father.


She shall have all his Lands immediately, but I must deter others from the
like horrid actions; -- if I had believed him! and imprisoned you; what a
mischief might that Barbarous beast have led me to! Princes who pardon such
crimes, will near be free from the like Vipers, who devour the good Names of
the innocent, 'tis our work to cherish truth, and virtue, and to banish such
Monsters as Corbino, from the converse of men: he is condemned to the Dungeon
while he lives! 'tis fit that you retire Fernando.


Now they are gone, I will congratulate your victory, with some good hopes,
that Silviana may comply.


Florio is my good Angel still; yet I must pity Thee.
Unhappy Youth, exposed in^o a crowed
Of Beauties, where thou freely art allow'd
To look, and choose! invited to enjoy
A full variety! in hope to cloy.
Or ^ix thy fancies, which by Nature grow,
Beyond the power of satisfying so!

If Youth, of Beauty must be still afraid*
Why were those Glorious Objects ever made?
Beauty to Age, is like a painted Fire,
Warmes not; though it create a faint desire,
That mocks the appetite of Old men's Eyes,
With Youthful wishes, but near satisfies;
Cause Age repines, much oftner then recants
Past follies; still lamenting what it wants!

If brightest Beauties cannot youth reclaim!
Nor raise an Old mans fancy to a flame;
By such experience taught, we may conclude,
Our Passions, do our Judgments still delude;
Which leads us on to Idolize a Face,
Without inquiring the intrincique grace!
Florio take heed, when Lovers soar too high,
They seldom find a lucky Destiny.

My fortune, and my fate in love, will near
Be worth my care, nor worthy of your fear;
I will within impart what I have done,
And show, how Silviana may be won;

Corbino is got o^ at Fernandos intercession, and we are safe.


Safe indeed, and freed from all employment in the State, these strangers are
now ^ix'd, unless you Camillo help us to remove u'm!


I have away to do it, if you Gentlemen will join, to free your selves, from
this foreign yoke.


We*l live, and dye with great Camillo.


Thus then fellow Soldiers, at the next general sally, we will engage our two
young Leaders, into the midst of the Enemies, and then retreat so suddenly,
they shall be cut in pieces, ere they see their danger.


Good, very good; but when will this Sally be?


Suddenly I hope, for since Fernandos return, my scouts bring news, that the
Enemies whole forces are drawn up, to countenance their men, while they repair
the works Fernando slighted; so that when he has slept a little, I will set
Florio on Fire, to seek their own destruction; by begging the command my self,
that he and Fernando may take rest, which will inflame them to go with us, as
private men.


Loose no time then, for while such mischief cools,
We may be 'taine in our own traps, like sooles.

How fairs Rossina? does Florio yet approach?


He has no time yet Madam, and I am not in h^ste.


He loves but little, that cannot sin ^e a time to show it.


The love of such young men, is like stubble set on Fire; which gives so short
a heate it warm's not.


What is your opinion of Fernando's gravity?


He looks of late, so much concerned, with his great Offices* that such
inconsiderable things as we, are not worth his thought, and is preingaged to,
I believe.


'Twere well if any of us, could get one of these constant Lovers, to change
our breed! -- our young Gallants, do throw their Hearts at Ladies ^ea^s so
fast; we cannot take them up, before we find them tumbling at an others f^et.


A very good state Argument Floremella. --

-- Ift come to voting! thou shalt have my voice
For both, or either of them, at thy choice.

Pray Madam, let these Ladies stand a little off, that I may impart an a^ai^e
of consequence.


Rossina pray go not away, you are out of hearing now.


'Tis time Madam to let you know, that Fernando loves, and is of quality fit
for you to own: ^ his respect^ so great, he presumes not yet to beg the
honour of one visit, nor will own his quality, until this war be over, that
his actions, may parallel his greatness; and yet for your sake Madam, is
become a volunteere.


I am obliged my Lord to you, that think me worthy of the man, you honour most!
but I shall admit no courtships, from the greatest Prince in a disguise; nor is
it fit for me to guess at, what he designs to hide.


My business now, is only to invite your Highness, to look^ on Fernandos
actions favourably, and when his merit has raised such a value of him, in your
heart, as you could wish he were a Prince! I here engage m^ honour, you shall
find him such.


I have no wishes of that Nature Florio, nor do I fancy such a Romance; but who
ere he be! that wares such virtue in so bright a case! he merits my civility.



What you have urged Camillo, I approve; and you shall sally with what power
you please, since we have men enough, our frequent skirmishes, will weary their
new Soldiers.


Another sally Sir so soon!


Camillo undertakes it with his Brigade alone; you, and Fernando shall both
rest.


Pray Sir lay no commands on us to stay at home, when great Camillo sallies; I
know Fernando, will be more troubled then my self, our business here is to
gain experience, and we must loose no opportunity to learn.


Will Lord Florio allow us Natives, no time to show our conduct? and our
courage, to serve our Prince? without his assistance; as if he coveted, the
sole glory of the War.


You do mistake me my Lord, my business is to learn; I have no thought to
Eclips your glorious actions, which I desire to immetate; and with your
permission, do beg the Dukes leave, that Fernando, and my self, may ^ight as
Volunteers, only to observe how you command!


By no means Florio.


I must not be denied Sir; for I already suffer by my not sallying last, your
people say, I have got honours, and offices enough, to keep me from farther
hazards: and this will be Fernandos fate too; if he go not with Camillo! Sir,
we are resolved to be in every sally, which if you deny! our credits will call
us to ask your pass, that so we may return to our Countries, with our
honours safe.


If I cannot entreat! nor yet command your stay; I do unwillingly consent; --
Camillo, they are in your care.


We will both wait on your Lordship.


Was not this well designed Borosco? I knew how to inflame young Florio so, as
to press on, to both their ruins: -- we must charge home at first, they once
engaged, we will retreat, and leave them to a sure destruction.


His fancy of Volunteers, gives opportunity to place them both in our first
Ranks, without jealousy.


And by them, I will place a score of my boldest men, with direction, that they
suffer not the strangers to advance a foot before them, for the honour of our
Nation: -- You Borosco, shall stand with the Reserve, just without the Port,
and my Order is, not to move till I send for you; which shall be too late to
rescue our fine Gallants; I have given Orders out already for a present sally;
-- we must make haste; --

Before it do grow dark, that no mistake
Our thus well ordered plot, may useless make;
A mischief well designed, we count half done,
Before the active part, be yet begun.

Is Camillo yet gone out?


They are, and my Troops are drawing forth!


Though I hope Camillo will have no need of your Reserve; yet be vigilant
Borosco: be vigilant as you will answer it with your life! I have by much
entreaty, prevailed with Florio to stay with me.


I shall observe my orders, I have the Generals direction Sir.


And mine! go now, lest you be stayed for! -- Longino,

-- Accidents in War, do too often show,
That no experience, can all harms foreknow.

This is the strongest sally Sir you ever made, and yet you apprehend it most!


I do indeed, take more care now, then formerly, because I now know the value
of those I venture; besides a slight mishap to us besieged, may fright our
friends abroad, from sending in their promised aids: -- I have intelligence
Tigillo, of some Treacherous design upon the strangers lives; Camillo envies
them, but if any Plot to their prejudice appear, Camillos life shall answer
it.


Never was sally thus trebly ordered! -- we may thank Florio for all this
providence, and to say truth, he does deserve it; from the Duke, and us; though
I fear Camillo loves him not! -- hark, they are at it now, -- this is my Post.


All is not well, the discontented Lords, had private, and late meetings.


The Duke has Spies on them.


Camillo does retreat Sir; on the first charge retreates! and hath left a small
party engaged in ^ight!


Longino.


Sir.


Lead my guards out, and bid Borosco advance with speed, or he shall Dye for
his delay!


I shall Sir.


This looks like a design as full of mischief! as Camillos heart of envy; it
makes me tremble, to think what danger, brave Fernando may be in.


Camillo retreates Sir; in great haste, without a stroke retreates: nor will
Borosco stir, Longino cannot make him move; Fernando is engaged past hope of
rescue.


Fernando is betrayed Sir: we must be quick, or he is lost!


If Camillo still retreat! the design is plain; and time for me to hazard
now? Camillo dyes for this base Act, -- This is the plot, this the treachery!
death, and confusion fall on Camillo. -- my Horse, my Horse.


Where is Fernando?


Lost by his own rashness.


Or by your base retreat, without a stroke, destroyed! there's a reward for
Treachery, or Cowardice, which you please! faces about! Tigillo, I command thee
on thy life, to kill Borosco at the head of all his Troops, and lead his men
after me: there mischief is too evident!


I have my due, that did ill execute, what I so well designed! our Retreat was
too sudden; not to engage at all, made our design


This confession will please the Duke.


The noise grows loud my Lord, from the Tower, we may see what is doing in
the Camp.


We came too late, to rescue brave Fernando!


Borosco is dead Sir; as you commanded.


I will reward thy courage, and thy faith Tigillo. -- a thousand curses follow
those Traitors to their graves, death cannot expiate their villainies; -- But we
must now consider how to redeem our Gallant friend!


By a quick Sally, give them no time to breath; but with all your strength,
fall on their head Quarters; and fetch him off by a strong hand: -- give me the
conduct Sir; and if I fail, I'll fall in the attempt.


This suits with Florios gallantry, and friendship to Fernando, but if your
success, prove short of your design? he, and we may so be lost: -- I rather
think to ransom him for Gold.


Fernando Sir is well, and by the Enemy well used, he has a small guard, and a
great Tent, in the head Quarter, I got the word, and so escaped.


Let us consult within.


Stay Soldier, have you the word?


I have Sir; 'tis Ferrara.


Dare you be my guide this night, to fetch Fernando off? if I with a few more,
do hazard to his Tent? which you seem to know!


Yes Sir, I dare dye in such good company!


No more, take that purse, and attend me at my Lodging; I'll suddenly be
there.


Be not dejected Sir; such accidents in War, are frequent, and the bravest
men most subject to your misfortune.


To be your prisoner Sir, is not my trouble, but to be betrayed! so basely
forsaken by Camillo and the rest, without a stroke! looks like a Treachery,
you understand not! -- it must be so; Florio was too easily persuaded to abide
at home! -- there, there was the design, for my captivity! that in my absence,
he may be the man! -- what is my ransom Sir; name the sum, and I'll procure
it; -- and return like a consuming flame amongst them.


No sum, no Ransom, for if I understand you right! the young favourite
Florio has betrayed you, he jealous that your services, might out-shine his
pretences to the Princess Silviana, and make void the Dukes solicitations on
his behalf; (for thus my Camp discourses) to my amaze and wonder! that the
fond Duke should reject me; and choose so unknown a man, as Florio! but if his
design be, to raise a private Gentleman unto his Dukedom? -- 'tis great
injustice to choose Florio, before you; -- (I hope this angry man, will do my
business!)


The Dukes doatage is so great on Florio, that he knows no joy like his
advancement! -- But Florios falsehood, calls my revenge* to cut off all his
hopes that way, for if Silviana do consent, to Crown his aspiring thoughts!
this hand, shall at the Alter, stab him to the heart.


You are free Sir; and this moment may depart; all Ceremony laid aside, I take
my leave; loose no time Sir in such affairs, delays are dangerous! Francisco,
-- command the Captain of the watch, to attend Fernando to the City gate. I
wish you happiness.


I accept your favour to depart, but am not yet resolved to what place.


By all means return to URBIN Sir; now you are free! -- Let not Florio boast,
so strange a Victory!


I understand all your kindness Duke, but did not think, I had appeared so
tame! so mean! to remove Florio, for his pretence; Camillos treachery, was
from a just envy, because he lost that favour, which I gained; -- I can excuse
him, and Borosco, on the same account, but Florio to comply! and the
ungrateful Duke! -- they merit my revenge. --

-- If guilty both! it is decreed;
The Duke, and Florio both shall bleed.

Treason, treason.


Guard thee Fernando, I'll dye by thee: but where is the Enemy? I see no danger!


Thou art my danger, what mischief brings thee hither in disguise!


Mischief Fernando! have you no better welcome for a friend.


For such a Friend! that dared to sleep at home, when I was lost.


Oh barbarous! you know the Dukes commands, and importunities were such! as I
could not refuse to stay; and you consented too; yea I have blushed ever since,
and come now by a greater hazard, to wipe off that shame, which I could not
prevent.


You rather come with this excuse, to invite me to a second trust, by which
you, and the rest, may some more certain way destroy me; but to such
faithless friends, I shall return no more.


Does this hazard, and my tried friendship, merit such language? the Duke too,
is well repaid, for his severe justice on Camillo, who himself, with his own
hand slew, for his base Treachery to you: -- and on his command, Borosco fell,
by young Tigillos Sword: -- what expiation do you seek? what satisfaction for
Camillos crime, can you demand? if all this be argument for so unworthy a
distrust? how can innocence be justified? -- Pray Sir take more time to judge
of this, and now trust your self with me: I have the word, and can securely
pass, I have a bold party too, who stand ready at the Port, to favour our
Retreat.


I need them not, I have my freedom, and have taken leave, can pass whither
and when I please, but my Judgment on all this, I cannot suddenly sum up, and
therefore will not go.


What testimony can you wish? what assurance have? beyond this voluntary
hazard of my life, to lead you to the Princess Silviana; from whom, you may
inquire my friendship, and my Faith! if this be an abuse! you have then a cause
to show your courage, and may call me to account! but if all this convince you
not! leave me here a Prisoner, in your place; and so revenge those wrongs you
only dream of.


No, to betray, is worse then to be betrayed! I scorn to act a treachery that
I so much condemn in others; -- I am now resolved to go, and to suspend all
further thoughts of jealousy or discontent: -- and if my passion for the
Princess, hath mis-led me into unworthy thoughts of you, or of the Duke; I
shall gladly do any penance you'll inflict.


Your own sense, for your mistake, will prove a sharper penance, then we can
wish.


Though I have Arguments for my distrust,
Yet Florio, and the Duke may both be just!

TO what strange hight Florio! will thy daring heart aspire? at what point of
honour rest! that I may rejoice thy dangers past, without new fears for more
ensuing hazards coming on.


The Gods directed what I did, and friendship could expect no less, Fernando
would have done much more for me Sir.


I do believ't, but yet methinks, your large soul might afford some room for
me, so much a friend! as to be considered in my concern for all the dangers
you are in.


Such a presumptuous thought in me, had been a crime, when great Fernando's
life and fortune was at stake, against a compliment!


I yield, Florio must ever conquer. Be General Fernando, and you Longino,
Command the Horse; -- Tigillo take presently the City Keys from young
Camillo, and be you Governor of URBIN; he shall know, that obedience to his
Prince, is above his duty to a Father; -- if any can make clear proof of more
conspirators? they shall have all their lands, and goods for their reward; --
now Fernando! did I apprehend with cause? were not my private cautions of
Camillo, worthy your best Providence?


I could not guess at Camillos mischief I confess; so great a malice! from a
gallant man, I never met before; but when Envy, and Revenge (Ambitions twin
children) do wed their Parents cause, no reason can so natural a rage
withhold, nor any limits such unbridled fury bound! when the high hopes, that
all their fancies aimed at, were cut off, by those honours heaped on us. This
makes me reflect with some compassion, on your severity to persons of their
worth, who had no crimes, but what grew from too much value of your favour
Sir; I wish that our successes had been less, or your rewards not full so
much! Though narrow hearted Princes often blush at merits beyond their wills to
recompense, yet some great souls like yours, too often overvallew, and reward
such services as ours, when a kind mention, with a smile, would amply satisfy:
pardon Sir my sorrow for the loss of those two great men, who fell on my
account, that shortly must resign all the envied Offices I hold; and thereby
show how small an Argument their hasty Envy took for such a ruin as they
designed on me; which in few days might have been diverted; for this Siege
ended, I must be gone Sir, as I have frequently to you, and them, declared in
public; and now to leave so many mourne^s, where I have deserved so well! will
very much eclips my memory when I am gone.


I have no argument but their crime, to justify their punishment; though your
clemency might have spared them; a less severity would not become me.


Camillo at his death, confessed his guilt* and exclaimed against his own too
hasty a retreat.


We know too much of their conspiracy.


I wonder why my brother stays thus long, from seeing me.


He has had but little time to order his affairs; Camillo, and Borosco being
both dead, their commands are of great consequence.


I have not heard of the like villainy! -- what news Tigillo? how does my
brother?


Well Madam, but much troubled for Camillos wickedness, against those he so
much loves; he sent me to excuse his visit to your Highness, until he have
dispatch'd some great affairs, that do require his presence.


Are the two strangers well?


Not both Madam, Fernando has some hurts: but nothing dangerous.


Is not my brother much pleased to have his Florio safe returned?


He is indeed, somewhat fonder then I could wish, but can your Highness fancy
a fitter subject? for so high a concern; who ere beheld a Nobler object? for a
Prince's favour?


I do not know so fit a man, to make his favourite as Florio; but to dote so
much on him, as to consider none of us! takes from my Brothers Judgment, and
lessens our love to him, I am glad to see him pleased, but to see him lost in
admiration of a man! is not well; -- Rossina come, --

-- Let us retire, until the Duke appears,
To raise our hopes, or satisfy our fears.

Madam, there is an Officer without, who desires access to your Highness, he
has a Paper in his hand, he says of great concern! and must himself deliver
it.


Admit him, -- Tigillo, pray stay in the next Room.


Madam, I come from the Enemy, sent by the Duke of Ferrara, to mingle with your
Troops, which sallied last; -- amongst whom, I got into the Town, thus in
private, to excuse to you alone, the mischiefs by this War, brought on your
People.


No, 'tis beyond excuse Sir: but why this to me in private? if from Ferrara
sent! why not in public to the Duke.


'Tis not his purpose Madam, to humble himself unto your Ferrara do desire
thus to lay himself at Silvianas feet (to show what love can do!) his courage
is too high, to stoop before the greatest Prince on Earth.


Tell your high hearted Master then, my brothers interest and mine, are so
mingled* that neither his force, nor subtlest Art, can ere divide us; tell him
I despise his Love, who with an Iron rod does woo; -- his former Menaces
became him better, then this flattery; I'll hear no more.


Then give Judgment Madam ere you go, on the guilty person you despise; for if
my love cannot prevail! to excuse what I have done; Let me by your doom fall;
-- Ferrara is at your mercy.


Sir; Your excuse is bolder then your Crime, thus to surprise me in disguise,
is as offensive as your War; and works the same effect in me, who see through
all your designs, but can discern no love! -- 'tis our Dukedom you expect,
and so much labour for, not me.


This War, and my disguise, are both the effects of Love Madam, and at worst,
can be looked on but as trials, whether by your brothers, or your own
aversion, I have been rejected! -- I led my Army hither, to remove his
constraint on you, (as I suppose) and now freely offer up my self a sacrifice,
to your dislike, if by that I fall neglected! such is the power of Love, it
makes the greatest dangers, most delightful!


Such Romances take not me, your first approaches, and all your Treaties were
accompanied with such unreasonable demands, and such Rude threats; as showed
you were a man of Blood; -- no Characters of gentle love appeared; -- I
remember also the Succession was your maine Article: that must be settled, or
you would not have me! by which you bound my Brother from a second Marriage,
and would take me, as an appendix to the Crown! and through all this! I must
now discern your unvisible love! -- no Sir, though the Principallity must be
my beauties foil, to raise esteem in you: I can set a value on my self^, above
the Dukedom you aim at.


Madam:

Though I come hither, lifted high, on the delightful wings of hope; despair
must now be my Reserve, for my Retreat: yet thus by your scorns, armed for
your Revenge; I shall rather smile, then shrink at your Brothers malice: after
this repulse from you! and shall glory here to fall, Lov's Martyr, at your
feet.


You shall be safe from all harms here Sir, -- I will secure your safe
return, though I answer not your hope, you shall not suffer Tigillo, pray see
this Officer safe conveyed to his Camp.


No Madam, now I have put off that cloud, which did secure my passage hither,
(by which my undertaking is performed,) to put it on again, may look like
fear! as if I valued safety, at a higher rate then Honour? I will therefore
with an open face, --

-- Now I have kneeled at Silvianas feet,
Pass on, through all the dangers I can meet.

My endeavours, and my wishes, do concur for your security, but if you suffer
ought, by your own rash choice: I shall take care that you have no pretence, to
lay a blemish on my innocence: -- Tigillo wait on the Duke as I direct: -- I
will answer it to my Brother.


I shall not doubt to do, what you command Madam.


I am sad to think Tigillo, on those evils, which Silviana compels me in
honour, now to Act. --

-- For since no submission, can make her relent,
We are obliged to fight, though we repent.

Madam, What want you? will you think your self into the other World?


I wish I were so happy! no Melina, I am doomed to more disasters here.


Pray impart the trouble of your mind, that I may argue on your griefs, a
little to divert you.


Thou wilt raise my distemper higher, by thy discourse! but yet I'll try; -- I
was thinking Melina, how much better it had been to have stayed at home, and
suffered all my Fathers anger; -- still saying no to his unjust commands; I
might so have showed a much more becoming courage, by such sufferings, then
thus by ^lying them; -- for had he forced me to the Church! (so often
threatened!) he could not there compel me to comply; -- I might at worst, have
dyed on that account, with honour! -- as now with infamy!


If you pursue these thoughts! they will distract you; 'tis childish to look
back, when you must pursue, the Fortune your first thoughts have led you to! --
does not the Dukes love, grow higher and higher still? -- why then do you
create evils in your fancy? beyond what can happen!


Oh Melina! had I not better dye? then ever own my self a Woman! when the Duke
shall find the favourite he dotes on, to be a transformed wanderer! how will
he hate himself, and me, for placing such a scorn on his great Name for ever:
-- I love, and honour him so much! I dare not seek the happiness I wish, but
must undiscovered dye; -- to save my reputation, and his Fame.


These are waking dreams Madam.


And then, if Fernando, should discover me! how will his honour be concerned?
what vengeance will his just anger find out for me? -- there is but one way
Melina, besides Death.


May I be trusted with it? you have made me Sadder then I looked for.


The Siege ended, I'll return, and take a Cloister; where I will wash away my
shame, in Penetentiall Tears; -- and if I dye before* I do conjure thee
Melina, to conceal my sex; I have adventured what I can, to get an honourable
death, and 'twill not be; which makes me apprehend, some sadder Fortune does
attend me.


Madam: I have thus far against my judgment, and my interest, been wholly
governed by you; but now I see you will destroy your self, I am resolved to
let Fernando, or the Duke know your condition, to prevent a greater evil.


How Melina! wilt thou betray my trust? and prove a Traitor at the last! thou
dare not do so great a villainy!


Rather then see you ruined, I will do any thing! -- what crimes? what guilt
frights you into this despair? I will no longer be accessory to your
destruction, now I can bring you off with honour.


Stay Melina, -- so, now 'tis my fault, if you discover me, by all my hopes*
'le k^ll thee instantly, unless thou dost now swear, not to reveal me; speak
quickly: -- for when thou art dead, I will by my own hand dye by thee.


Hold, and I will, -- by this I swear, as you desire. --

-- But that I do a greater mischief fear,
Your threatened death, should not have made me swear.

False villain, to lift thy hand against thy Lord!


I did assault him Sir, in my unjust fury.


Florio has no unjust fury, Pedro must be faulty!


By truths self I swear he is not: the fault was only mine, Pedro has made me
see my error: -- look Sir, we are one again.


I do believe it now, -- But what then has caused this great distemper in you
Florio? -- am not I yet worthy to be trusted with your concerns?


How can I express more value of your favours? then I have Sir, I wish not to
live an hour beyond them, by all that's good, I do speak Truth.


I know not how to urge a trust, you are resolved against: but I plainly see,
you have a troubled heart, -- say Pedro, what is that afflicts your Lord? is it
within my reach?


Had you come a minute sooner Sir? you might have known, but now I have sworn.


Pedro no more: -- Great Sir, I do confess I have a grief, which I do shame to
own, least you should despise, what you now seem pleased with: for my heart
knows no grief, but doubts to hold your favour!


You can have no interest, that I will not make mine: Speak Florio, is it
Silviana?


No Sir, but what ere it be, I will in time overcome it, and appear before you
with a cheerful face again: I beg you will no more inquire it, for I am well
already; your kindness cures all the evils, ever can belong to me.


And do I appear so slight a man? that you can fear my favours cannot last!
which still increase! you wrong me much, by so unjust a jealousy.


No Sir, 'tis my own unworthiness, that frights me; lest I in time, appear
incapable of these honours you allow me: I find the stock of credit I have
gained, begins to fail so fast! that my distractions make me giddy, on the
thought of a senister Fate.


No more of this it troubles me. -- I am now going to my Sister, whom I have
not seen since my last sally: shall I have your company?


I attend you Sir.


I have had so much to do Silviana, I could not get free before: and am now
come to beg your assistance, in an affair of mine.


Of what nature Sir: your looks show trouble in your mind.


My trouble is for Florio, who has some hidden discontent, that will I fear
take him from us! -- and I have hopes, that you may find, what he will not
reveal to me.


Do you take me for a wise Woman brother? such as deal by Magic; how is it
possible? that I should know Florios heart? if he will conseale it!


I only wish you would inquire; -- he may say more to you, then me.


I obey you Sir: -- pray my Lord be pleased to satisfy the Duke, by telling me,
what those troubles are, he so much apprehends; and if the cure do lye within
my reach, you shall command my best endeavours to serve you.


I dare not dally with such Excellence; -- one great trouble is, lest Fernando,
(my dear friend,) should perish, by your neglects Madam.


You see brother, he has no concern of his own worth naming; he dotes on
Fernando, more then you on him.


I never can express more gratitude unto the Duke, and you Madam, then by
recommending Fernando to your thoughts, what can be fancied in a man? more then
we all see in him?


Birth to equal mine!


Does that only hinder?


I cannot yet resolve you.


I beg Sir, that you will obtain me the Prince's leave, to bring Fernando to
kiss her hand.


I shall not deny your suite Florio, as you do mine; -- Sister, pray admit his
visit, when I appoint the time.


You have my consent my Lord, when the Duke approves it?


Madam, I prize^ this favour you allow,
More then wreathed Laurels, on Fernando's brow.

This is a dagger at my heart, Florio is false, and I too tame!


Fernando stay.


I beg your pardon Sir, for interrupting of your privacies.


We have done, and were now parting: -- What news from the Enemy?


Our out guards have taine a Prisoner, who says, on some intelligence from
Ferrara, they are resolved to storm us, as their last hope, and do prepare for
it with speed.


We will be ready for them; --

Our Walls are strong, and men so brave within!
To startle at their storming, were a sin.

I have got leave to bring Fernando to the Princess, on a private visit; but
where to find him, I know not! -- 'tis some happiness to do a friend that
courtesy, which none can do for me.


Yes, I could do more for you, if you'll permit me? 'tis strange that so much
wit and courage, should produce such folly, and such fears! -- I find my
judgment, is worth twenty such as yours, and I must be bound by oath, to make
no use of it.


Pray leave d^scoursing, and find out Fernando; I would speak with him; --
make hast, my heart grows light to think what joys I bring Fernando.


Oh Sir; I have sent to seek you!


And too soon have found me, thou grear dissembler!


What means Fernando, by this injurious language to his friend?


I have no Ears to let in thy bewitching charms a second time!


Was ever Injury like this? what have I done, to loose your favour?


Thou Court the Princess, against thy faith given, and my trust; I have no
words for such a Treachery as thine! those flattering Eyes, and thy false
Tongue, shall ne'er deceive me more.


Can Fernandos great Soul, admit so mean a thought? of such a Faith as mine
to serve him!


I have no time to talk, -- Death is due for such a Treachery as thine, were
this place sit to throw my fury on Thee!


You lessen your own worth Sir, by raising groundless jealousies on me; did
not my love, and innocence forbid! I would by silence seem to own the guilt you
fancy, and with open Arms, now meet the Death you threaten; and I so often
wish for! -- But I am more your servant then you discern, and dare not comply,
to bring so great an evil, as shedding innocent blood! on Prince Lorenzos
head!


Ha! dost thou know me?


Yes Sir; or I would not shun death proffered from your hand! which I have by
many hazards sought! though not on this account! -- yet I can show great
Lorenzo, a better Argument then his unjust jealousy, to sheath his sword here!
for I have (too confident of my intrinsic Virtue,) contracted such high
guilts, your Highness never can forgive! (yet Silviana shall be yours.)


Though I understand thee not, thou hast said enough, to raise my wonder, above
my anger! 'till I know more!


Have you never seen a Face like mine at Pisa?


Not that I remember, or did ever know!


Nor shall do now! -- on second thoughts, your unknown Enemy, calls for Death
Sir; I have wronged you much! and my self much more.


No, thou hast charmed me by some Magic spell, I dare not touch thee, -- who
art thou?


You should never know, if by any hand but yours, I could by death have been
concealed! -- can you not yet call to mind your unfortunate Cousin Celestina,
in this face? -- have my crimes, altered me so much?


Celestina as a man! do all the wonders I have seen! can it be?


Too true Sir: -- pray let your Sword now do, what I have Florence will be
howted at! -- but when I am dead, you may conceal my Name, and not participate
my shame; who do now appear so strange a Monster to my self! that I shall
blush to death, if your Sword prevent me not.


Is lovely Celestina then! my envied Rival, for the fair Silviana.


You have no Rival Sir; the Princess sent me now to bring you to her, on a
private visit: -- do you believe me yet?


As an Angel sent from Heaven; I believe thee! but thy good news cannot stay
these Tears, for thy self now shed: -- poor Celestina; I have heard thy sad
story, and thy ill natured Fathers Tyranny, thou fled'st from; -- all thy
friends have mourned for thee as dead, or so lost! as never to be found again!


I am not so happy Sir!


Nor I so miserable to loose so great a friend; -- how shall I divide my heart?
between Silviana, and Celestina; to thee I owe my life twice saved, and all my
interest in Silviana, by thy help gained: -- all that I have, my being and my
bliss, I must derive from thee; my deer, deer, Celestina.


This kindness is more comfort, then I did ever hope to find on Earth! I wish
that I coiuld die, thus happy, before the Duke does find his Florio is a
counterfeit! -- I fear. --

-- His honour will engage him to despise,
A wandering Woman, in so strange disguise.

Lay by thy fears, and put on such a hope as will become thy Virtue, and thy
Birth; this Romance will end well, the fond Dukes friendship, will soon turn
to love, when he shall see a possibility that Florio may be his! dost thou love
him?


I have not dared to entertain a thought, that might lead me to hopes of such
a happiness on Earth.


Let that hope, take its first rise now from my Endeavours; for when I see my
time to unmask us both, i'll do it for thy advantage Celestina; -- but why did
you thus long conceal your self from me?


Fear to offend you Sir; which was my quarrel with Melina, who thretn'd to
discover me to you, when the Duke found our Swords drawn.


Is Pedro Melina too! -- where get you such manly hearts? and vigour to act
such wonders!


Alas Sir, I did but draw my Sword, and wave it about my head, my weak blows,
were only in search of death; but it seems the powers above, propitious to my
innocence, have turned the rugged Fate I sought, into glorious Trophies I
deserve not; discontent at first, then despair, threw me into all the dangers
I could find: -- but this discovery, has reduced me to a Woman, I can now
tremble at my own shadow, my courage is quite gone, and I now shake, to think,
what I have done!


You must hold up your Character, till I see time to own you, and to declare
my self; which shall be suddenly, my dear Celestina, thou shall it be my good
Angel still; -- we'll visit the Princess, and first reveal our selves to her;
-- trust me to manage your interest with the Duke, as you have mine with
Silviania; we must now prepare for the great Interview: -- which the Enemy so
much desires; -- take courage Celestina, --

-- Where Beauties force, with virtue does combine,
They cannot fail to prosper a design.

Dear Pedro, take care of me, they say we shall be stormed, and sacked! pray
what is sacked?


All the Maids above fifteen years old, by the Enemy found in Town, must be
put in Sacks, and thrown into the River.


This is a short warning, to provide against so great an Evil! but I hope you
may find favour to preserve me, sweet Pedro take me to thy care.


I shall do my best for thee, if I fall not in the Assault! a good Day pretty
one.


Why in such haste?


I am commmanded to attend the Interview, and must be gone.


I understand not what that is!


Why, 'tis a Committee of Inspection, on the Princess Silviana.


You confound me Pedro, with hard words, is it any thing about the Sacks? and
the River! I am so afraid! I know not what to do!


Take courage Clara, I will preserve you, as my friend: I shall be missed, if I
stay longer now!


Thank ye dear Pedro; -- but I will hide my self how ever!

-- This young white livered Boy may courage lack!
To keep me from the River, and the Sack.

What be your demands Lodovico? what is the Argument of this Parlye, you have
desired.


Silviana is my Argument, whom you detain more like a Prisoner, then a Sister
you ought to love, and honour, by matching with some Prince, fitter for her
Birth, and Beauty, then a Nunnery! which your thrifty kindness, would persuade
her to.


And you bring us this War, with your advise, to teach us better purposes!


I do! lest my councels prevail not; -- I have at a distance professed love,
and treated long in vain, which brings me now in Person, to demand Silviana
from captivity.


Is it her Person, or my Dukedom? you expect? which invites you to this
insolent way of Wooeing?


'Tis both, and what both our Parents did design, when we were Children, in
case you left no issue Male.


Silviana is now of Age to please her self, and if she desire it; I may treat
farther on fit Terms.


Madam: I have wav'd the common way of wooing, to appear before you with such
an Army, as will justify my love, great as my self! and worthy of your best
favours; which I fear your brother does obstruct.


I never heard 'till now, that love, and terror, did inhabit in one breast;
fright me you may, but win me never, by the desolation you have made; a lover
by such bloody Characters set off, is what ever I shall fly from. --


Now Sir, does this show my compulsion for a Nunnery?


I see she has her lesson perfect, you all comply, to send me home with
scorns! yet I must lay before you, the evils of a Town taken by assault,
where fire, and sword, do often without limits sway! which is my last argument,
and what I hope; will invite Fernando (who knows the accidents of War,) to
mediate such a Peace, as will divert the desolation that may follow.


'Twill not become me, to advise against the interest of the Prince I serve; --
For if my intelligence be true! your City of Ferrara, is, or will soon be; in
more danger of the Fire, and Sword you mention, then Urbin at present is: --
'twere an Infamy irreparable, to suffer the Princess Silviana, to be ravished
from her brothers Arms, by one she is so much averse to! -- such force Sir, can
have no pretence to love!


Are you of that opinion too? -- Sir; this confirms what I have heard, and
what in my Camp so freely is discoursed! that your great General, is an
ambitious Lover; -- But if Silviana can submit to so mean approaches! I shall
scorn the competition, though in my just anger, I lay this City Levell with
the Earth.


The mean General you slight so much, has never yet presumed to look with
confidence, on the fair Princess Eyes; so far from daring to pretend, or own
that love you so boldly guess at! that my addresses are yet clothed in the
humble habit of a Servant; to be Silvianas Soldier, I account more honour,
then to be Ferraras Duke. --


This insolence, I shall in few Hours correct.


You judge amiss, and will in few hours find, this hand can crush Ferrara
into Air! --

-- When every drop of Blood in Urbin shed,
Shall be repaired with a Ferrarians head.
-- But that I dare not do any thing that looks like ingratitude, for those
favours I received, when I was Prisoner in your Camp; though I know the
freedom, which you gave was on design that my enraged Revenge, might open you
a way to your pretence for the Fair Princess: -- yet benefits received must be
owned, as they appear unto the World! and on that account, I can forget these
reproaches, thrown out against you know not who! and ask your pardon for my
too hasty, harsh reply, and embrace you as my friend, I, and serve you too! in
any way, that will not prejudice my Faith, engaged unto this Princess.


This calm language is more insolent, then your pretence! which I scorn
alike; Arm you for defence, lest we give Laws to your high courages; --
Madam, I have no wish so ill, for your contempt of me, but I can sorrow to see
you fall so low, as this Soldiers love.


Madam, Thus often urged; I beg your leave to challenge this great Prince, to a
single Combat in your sight, then judge by our success, whether Fate approves
of my humility, or of his insolent Lodovico, your Rival is your equal, and my
Army now, by my command is at Ferraras gates: -- yet I^le take no advantage of
my power, (so much more then yours!) but with my single sword, will justify my
love to Silviana, does transend all your pretences; and yet before we fight, I
once more proffer you my friendship, with a faithful heart.


Lorenzo Duke of Florence! who we thought in France: I accept the Combat, and
with my Sword will justify my claim, against so brave an Enemy.


This combat I must not allow here; -- Lodovico, if you reject the Duke of
Florence friendship! and contemn mine: you may retire in safety, but if you
please to storm us: we are prepared to smile, when you frown most.


Those frowns you slight so may prove Fatal unto Vrbin.


Why have you made such hazards, in this disguise Sir.


My Fathers sudden death called me in hast from France, where I heard of this
War thretning you: -- I shall inform you at more leisure, how I became
concerned for Silviana, which brought me in this disguise to her rescue.


How can I return this obligation! to a Prince, so much greater then my self?


One smile from Silviana, will be a full recompense for all my service; on that
foundation, I shall raise high hopes, that she approves my love.


Smiles are but slight expressions of a grateful heart Sir; but if you can
build the Noble structure of true love? on such uncertainties! I must consider
of so weighty a concern, before I smile: -- Love is a History, so many ways
described, I do not know a harder riddle to expound, then what Love is.


Love is indeed a Mystery, full of such strange varieties, that all the World
endeavours to fix it, according to their own fancies; so absolutely
contradictory in most men, that some think lov's Centrick happiness, will near
be found; though all pretend to have it. But Madam I am guided by those Rules,
that Heaven directs my worship unto it; -- my whole heart is wholly yours, and
my unforc'd Marriage is the undoubted Testimony of that truth; all meaner
passions which we in gaytye call love, deserves a meaner name; -- when I lay my
life, and fortune at your Feet, and set my Crown upon your head, I have no
better arguments for Love.


Nor I a thought that contradicts what you have said Sir; but dare not rashly
answer your desires, lest it suit not with the esteem you have of me.


No more of this now Silviana, -- we must prepare for an assault; -- 'tis their
last hope! Lorenzo, whom will you appoint for General?


Who but Silvianas Soldier! can pretend to that honour Sir; give me your
Orders as before.


I obey, -- this Paper does order every man his Post, by which you see I have
had thoughts of this before.


I wish Sir, you would change Florios Post, and give him the charge to guard
the Castle, where the Princess may be by him secured, from all accidents.


I thank you for this care, it shall be so.


How have I deserved this from you Sir?


You have enough deserved my care Florio, and I who know the Duke would account
your loss, (next to his Town) the greatest do justify my council, to have you
as safe as honour will allow.


Lorenzo is my friend.


But not mine, give me leave then, as I ought, to lead my guards where your
self fights in person Sir, and I will be content to change my Post.


Let it be as he desires Sir; yet I must again advise you to secure Florio
next your self, he may prove worthy of all your care, and of your highest
favour Sir.


He is already so, but you speak in a mysterious tone methinks!


This assault, I conceive will be their last attempt, and I would gladly
prevent a mischief that may trouble you; -- I know Florios worth now, -- get
my Arms Luco.


They are ready Sir.


Lorenzos words, and his behavior show,
Something of Florio, more then I yet know.

Sir? by the several noises in the Camp, 'tis evident they make ready for an
assault!


We have fair warning to defend our selves, our men are mad to be upon the
Wall.


Lead them presently unto their Ports, as great Lorenzo shall direct: 'Twas
bravely done to give us warning, and to keep his word, shows mettle Gentlemen!
-- where is Prince Lorenzo? and where Florio gone?


We met them just now Sir, in the Lobby, which joins to the Princess Lodgings.


This is no fit time for complements, -- go to your several commands, I shall
be with you suddenly.


Madam Lorenzo begs the honour to kiss your hand, before the assault begins,
that as your Soldier he may fight this day.


Forenzos merit, justly may expect what I can serve him in.


Madam; I seek not yet a favour beyond your owning of me for your Soldier, --
I suppose my actions, and my looks, have better showed, then now my language
can, how much I love!


It did not become me to inquire more of you Sir, then you were willing to
reveal, yet Florio long since did let fall words, to make me know your
quality, did equal mine; and I only wondered why you thought not fit to trust
me with it.


Because I would first know your opinion of me Madam, else my Name, not I,
might have wooed for me, and if thus I had been rejected! I might have retired
in my disguise, without a pnblique scorn, of being refused; which Ferraras
prow'd Duke, would have much rejoiced at; but if you Madam will so far honour
me, as to allow your Soldier now to kiss your hand, on his hope of future
happiness, I have no doubt of our success.


Yes, and shall have my prayers for your Protection.


May your happiness, equal your virtues Madam, I must hasten to the Walls.


When I have brought the Princess to her lodgings, I will find out the Duke,
and follow you.


You shall go now Florio, this is no time for Ceremony, my brother is unsafe,
when you are from him. --

-- Heaven guard the Innocent, and only smight,
The bold invadors, of another Right.

The enemy comes on so fast Sir, you can hardly reach your Posts in time.


I come, -- Lorenzo is by this time on the Walls, haste every man unto his
Post.


I was sending for you Florio, -- call for my Arms, and bring those I bespoke
for Florio too, we will put on our Arms together, and fight near to one
another; -- make hast.


Let me retire to the other Room Sir; and put mine on there.


No, I will have you Arm here, that I may see how my fancy sits you!


I fear Sir, that this may look like such a presumption, as I dare not own; --
to be thus habited, will raise a Censure on me.


On my head let the Censure fall, 'tis my will; -- make more haste, lest we be
missed!


I am at your dispose Sir.


Be vigilant, but not over bold; let judgment guide thy Florio, that no blow
fall in vain; -- reserve thy greatest vigour, 'till some eminent occasion call
for such relief, as may be worthy of thy hazard.


I shall observe all your directions Sir, my chief business is, to guard your
Person; which if I do not! let the Gods turn from me, when I call on them.


I shall be safe in thy care I know, -- methinks this Copy, does equal the
best Original, I ever saw presenting Pallas; stand off a while, that now
Pigmalion like, I may adore the figure I have made; -- though nature bravely
had her part performed before, yet Art, and fancy I perceive, may such
additions give, as will natures best workmanship set off.


You make me blush so much Sir, that I shall forget to frown, when I shake my
javelin at the Enemy.


Thy smiles will make that weapon useless, on all that do behold thee; --
though we to Deities alone our Temples build, and shrines set up, if Florio be
this day, as prosperous as before! I will for him a Golden Statue make, that
after ages our Palladium may extol, above that unfortunate, famed Patroness of
Troy.


Hark Sir; we may be wished for, while we dally here.


Come then, the Victory must sure be ours, -- the Enemy will sooner charge a
flaming Cloud, then Florio in this dress!


The assaults begun Phylora, and my brother not yet there!


Lorenzo orders all, and we are sate by his great courage, and his skill in
Arms; and yet by this noise round the Town, it seems the Walls are every where
attached.


'Tis so Philora, and we are a lost prey, to their greater numbers, the Temple
is a fitter place for us.


The Gods are every where, and our good wishes are received as prayers.


That shout was from the Enemy, now I despair!


Your fears create mistakes Madam; that shout was near us, it must be from
our own men! that joyful noise was victory to us, it can be nothing less then
victory! where is that courage sled? you had the other day! when I was frighted
without cause.


A Town thus stormed! has somewhat more of terror in it, then all the former
sallies had; my heart shrinks now with apprehension, and dismay.


Madam, The day is ours, the Enemy is quite beaten off, and the great Duke of
Florence, with Longino in the head of all our Horse, is now sallied on the
Rear of the Retreating Enemy.


My thanks to Heaven for our success, -- the several noises from the Walls,
created such variety of fears, that I was much dismayed till you came in.


There was argument enough for apprehension Madam* for the Wall was gained, and
the Duke your Brother, sore oppressed with multitudes, was beaten off; and fallen
amidst the press, where his high courage, rather tired, then vanquished, had
been lost; if the all conquering Florio, with his guards, had not come timely
in to his relief; who with such vigour, and such force renewed the fight, that
the amazed Enemy, ran headlong from the Walls again, and struck such terror in
the rest of their assailing friends, that altogether sled, in great confusion
to their Camp.


All this I do rejoice at; but methinks those shouts of joy, are changed into a
dismal silence on the sudden! why do not the streets ring, with acclamations
for our Victory? good Heaven preserve the Duke, I have some apprehension that
he may be hurt.


No hurt appeared at my departure, only Florio was beaten down, by an
accidental shot, at random from the slying Enemy; after which, I saw him
stand; though but weakly.


Let us retire Phylora, till my brother does arrive.


A Surgeon, a Surgeon, my Dukedom for a Surgeon! -- gently, gently set him
down, Florios death strikes deep! friendship I find takes faster hold on
hearts then love! -- poor youth, he slew quick as lightning to my rescue, and
as I fell, (oppressed by Multitudes;) he scattered them like frighted Birds, at
an approaching storm; -- and thus by saving me, has lost himself; by an
accidental shot from the beaten flying Enemy! -- but sure the Gods will not
permit, that so great virtue from the World be taine, lest offended Nature into
its first Chaos shrink. --

-- Through sudden horror, and a just disdain,
To hold the World up, after Florio slain.

Now Surgeon show your skill, while I power out my prayers to Heaven for his
recovery.


Oh Silviana! I am undone, -- Florio is slain, friendship is ravish^d from the
earth! and all my joys sled with it! -- speak Surgeon does he live?


Here is life Sir, but little hope of long continuance, unless what we apply,
do suddenly show better signs.


By what unknown crimes have I provoked Heaven? when virtue is thus punished!
thus to show me Paradise, and cast me into Hell, is more then Nature can submit
to, and not repine.


We bring you joy Sir; and a full viory, with this great prisoner.


Here is no room for joy Lorenzo, I am destroyed by victory! see where Death
in Triumph sits! prowder of that prey, then for all the Heroes in past Ages
fallen.


Ha! Florio slain! how could this happen after I was gone! and the day won!
-- I may now curse my self, for not preventing this, -- how short are those
glittering joys we so much labour for! when all the glories we have gained,
are in a moment turned into heart breaking griefs! -- I am undone too!


He received this wound in rescuing me; -- can bold Lorenzo weep? and be so
much concerned for me? -- is he as great in sorrow? as in Arms? -- will he
outfight? and now outweep me too! ye Florios soul and mine expyre together; --
Oh Lorenzo! you cannot fancy what I feel! the loss of such a friend, is
unsupportable;


Alas Sir, your sorrows will go higher yet! when you know who Florio is! -- I
have a greater loss in Florio, then you discern, or can pretend to! which
will no longer now be hid: -- hold Surgeon, -- and let the Ladies help to
undresse her, she is a Lady, and my near relation Sir, who loves you more, then
you love Florio.


A Woman Lorenzo! Oh do not mock me with a hope to make this loss beyond
Mortallity to bear: a Woman! let me gaze on this dying wonder; 'till my Eyes
drop out, -- (and lov's me, as I do Florio!) that is impossible! -- this is a
fatal blow indeed! -- Oh Sister! now your help! -- Surgeon if she live, thou
shalt be, whatever I can make thee great: work, work, apply the rarest
remedies, -- some help from Heaven, or I am lost! a Woman! Florio a Woman! and
in my rescue dye! and love me too! Oh this is much, too much to know, and to
outlive.


Pray Sir, a little patience, her Eyes have some small motion now, -- Ladies
your help is useful here.


Gently dear Silviana, kind Philora gently, every touch she suffers, grates on
my heart; -- Florio thy love was not well managed; -- the more I think, the
more I am amazed! -- give her life, or strike me dead! a Woman!


I Sir, a Woman, and of Noblest birth!


I value not her birth, 'tis Virtue thus adorned, that I adore! Silviana! and
may live! run good Alphonso, run.


Whither Sir; and why!


Fetch my Mothers Diadem, and Royal Robe, fly now Alphonso Lorenzo! I will
swim in blood, to overtake her Ghost, when ever she departs.


Now she is dressed, pray give her leave to rest a little.


My Prophetic soul foresaw some mighty evil towards, when I desired that
Florio might not fight to day.


One word of Woman, had prevented all; -- to conceal her Sex Lorenzo, was as
cruel, as unkind; that known; she had been safe, and I most happy.


I now wish that I had broke my Oath to Celestina, and run all hazards by it.


Now I understand those her mysterious vow's, so often made to me; which I then
took for gratitude; -- how blind was love! -- rather how powerful is thy
Deity, Oh love! what mighty things do those by thee inspired produce? when the
weak hands of this soft sex, can raise such Emulation in the bravest men! --
and can outdo us too! in what they undertake: -- how strangely dull was I,
that did not all this while by sympathetic Love, her Sex discern, through
this disguise?


Help me Lorenzo to put on these Robes, -- so, -- now Sir, you shall see that
I do credit what you have said; -- and in assurance of her love to me, here in
the sight of Heaven, I take this Lady to my Wife; thus she shall live, or thus
dye my Dutch; -- Silviana, --

Our victory does yet so dismal show,
No ruin could have caused a greater woe.
-- My heart, my heart Lorenzo, shrinks away so fast, that I shall fall; -- how
dull were we Silviana? to think such beauty could belong to man!


Or such courage be in Woman found!


Lorenzo, I am distracted with so many wonders breaking out at once! that my
shatred heart, can yet find no joy to entertain so great a Guest as you; nor
inquire what accident did bring you hither?


Fame of Silvianas Virtues, brought me hither Sir; where I unlooked for, met,
poor Celestina, my unhappy Cousin, who --

-- Did, from her Fathers rigid kindness fly,
Led by her stars, to this sad Destiny.

Did ever any Age such mischief know?
Or two such courages such sorrow show?

If Celestina live? Urbin shall shine in Triumphs, to speak Lorenzos welcome:
-- but if she Dye, I have no life that I can call a minute mine; I must not,
will not, cannot survive so great a loss!


She wakes, she wakes! and looks up cheerful.


Fly to the Temples, and rich incense burn, proclaim a public Feast
throughout the Town; let all the holy Orders in Procession go, make solemn
vow's to Heaven, for Celestinas life!

-- Now let the City, there Devotions pay,
For Victory; and keep this Holliday!

Is this a vision? or is it real what I see? these Robes I understand not, --
the Duke kneeling! the Princess, and Lorenzo weeping! -- I do either dream! or
I am dead! -- why all this to me?


To the Duchess of URBIN, this is due; Heaven Celestina has heard my prayers,
and will I hope, preserve your life, to raise my despairing soul, above the
World, if you consent? Triumphant love, with such resplendent Rays adorned,
will change these sullen Clouds, into a glorious shine, throughout my Land; and
every heart rejoice at our Felicities.


Lorenzo then, has made himself, and me known to you Sir; -- which does beget
such shame, as makes my soul retire, from what it most joys in: -- can you
value such a counterfeit as I?


Can I be thankful! for the greatest blessing, men have on Earth? all had been
well, if Lorenzo had declared you sooner!


My business was to dye unknown, lest my disguise, should raise a scandal on
my Name for ever! Lorenzo knew me not till yesterday.


This disguise Celestina, has by mistakes brought all this evil on us; let us
no more mention it; but implore Heaven for your recovery.


How will you dispose of your great prisoner Sir.


As my friend, now Celestina lives! these Arms shall be your only bonds, while
you are with us; -- I owe all the felicities I now Florio, nor found Lorenzo
here, without this War: And if Lodovico can submit? to what the Gods have
thus decreed; we may be ever friends; but I shall impose no Rules for you to
follow, who are as free here, as at Ferrara; for I intend a Jubilee to all, who
will participate my joys.


Though my success, affords no argument for joy, I can acknowledge your
civilities; and must submit unto those powers, who order our designs,
according to their wills, not ours.


I have a heart to serve Lodovico too; if it may be received!


Since victory has decided our contest, 'twere useless to hold up such
animosity, as can afford no remedy; I shall therefore strive to regulate my
heart, unto my Fortune.


We must now beg your pardon Sir, and yours Silviana, our high transports,
for these strange accident, have too long diverted our respects for you Sir.


If Silviana do yet dare to own me? little Ceremony will be needful here.


If I had not long since seen through your disguise! somewhat of greater worth,
then your low Equipage allow'd; you had not found so quick a passage to my
heart.


'Tis my part to join your hands, now you avow your hearts united: I wish you
as much joy Sir, as you have helped me to, by Celestinas Love.


I can have none beyond, what I rejoice to see you have Sir.


How is it Celestina? does your heart with your health comply? to make me
happy?


Yes Sir, now all my doubts are vanished, I have time to look back on my
despairs, with pleasure; and to rejoice, and wonder at your love! so much
beyond my merit, or my hope!


Though habits sexes often may divide,
They could not Celestinas virtues hide;
Which gave such Lustre to young Florios name,
It rais^d my wonder! and begot this ^lame.
Which ever must admire that blessed disguise,
When Florio showed me Celestinas Eyes.
Thus mighty Love Triumphed, in friendship dressed,
Though his Magnetic Virtue, seemed suppressed.

EPILOGUES we know, if well fitted! may
Either excuse, or else set off the Play!
But our Fantastic Author does believe,
His Doublet may be wor'ne without a sleeve!
He will no Epilogue allow; the Pit
He says, of late, hath surfeited of Wit;

Into these Deeps; and now too far advanced
Without a Rudder: Yet if friends! you may
With gentle Gales this guidlesse Bark convey
Through all its dangers, to the wished Port;
And so prove Pilots of the noblest sort.

