PANDORA, A Comedy.

By Sir WILLIAM KILLIGREW, Vice-Chamberlaine to Her MAJESTY.

OXFORD, Printed by Hen: Hall Printer to the UNIVERSITY, for Ric: Davis, 1666.

LOvers to You I come, without a Bribe,
From one that boasts himself of your own Tribe,
And therefore hopes, that your good Natures may
On his behalf, above your Judgments sway:
What you'll see here is natural, all pretence
He disavowes, to Wit, or Eloquence:
With Friendship he presents you, and with love,
Such as are wont in his free breast to move;
Such passions as he feels, our Author writes,
And humours such, as he observes, indites:
From Conversation bringing to the Stage,
What he does think, will please the presents Age.
And if you do not grudge your time here spent,
He will accept it for a Complement.
COme Geta, our Lords have no more use of us, we may go sleep!


'Tis a fair time indeed to sleep, when day begins to break? -- this is a lewd
life, that our Lords do lead.


Why man? the Night was made for labourers to rest; and for great Lords to
Revel in, come away.


My Lord, is not half so ill as thine.


What's that to thee, or me, come away; we'll go to Beggars Hall, and be as
merry as our Lords.


No, no, I will no more ^ully my Credit, in thy company; I converse with our
tall Dary-maid, who affords me Honours, thou can not guess at Sanga! Oh the
great Felicities! that do belong to chaste embraces? as I imagine!


I like Embraces well.


I mean by Wedlock man:


A Cox comb thou art, and a Cuckold thou wilt be; adieu Fool.


Adieu Rogue.


Botts on thy slippery heals; we are undone!


Let us draw, and stand upon guard, I hear some call within!


What was that strange noise, you made?


At the bottom of the stairs I fell, which gave the Alarm to the Dogs, and
they waked all the Family!


Oh my Lord! what have you done? all the House are up, pray stand close a
while, -- are you alone?


Yes, yes.


Thou art a very Villain Clearcus, thus to betray a poor Wench, that loves
thee; and to force me accept a Favour I abhor to think on.


Be the blame mine, I have no joy in any thing, unless my friend participate;
-- If I have any skill in Woman; you will thank me for this favour, and say,
you never had the like of Angelica.


Suppose she will not consent? must I ravish her? -- you say she knows not of
my coming.


I swear she does not.


Would I were out again, these Romances please not me; -- pray how must I
proceed?


Thus, she is in Bed, the Room is dark, I'll entertain her with discourse,
while you undresse; then I'll retire, and soon return with Light, to let her
see, my friend and I, must be as one man to her.


I wonder all Women do not hate thee, thou doest abuse all them that trust
thee.


You are deceived Lonzartes, such silly Girls, do take it for a complement, to
recommend them to a Noble Friend!


Well, I must now be subject to thy will, and do submit to do, what I detest!
-- me thinks this is a kind of Rape I undertake; -- thou art too wild for my
Converse Clearcus.


Hold your peace.


Hist, hist, my Lord!


Here, here.


Give me your hand, softly, softly, follow me.


How does Lonzartes bear his Suppression Aristonicus? now he is full-man grown.


Like a wise man Sir, that will not seem to see, what he cannot remedy.


I have better thoughts for him, then he has for himself; if Clearcus spoil
him not!


When more years have overcome some evils, incident to youth* I hope he will be
worthy your highest favours Sir.


Some of you should advise him to a little more sobriety, then Clearcus will
allow of; -- I apprehend Silvander, that the Corinthian will quarrel, for my
refusing to treat his Marriage with Theodosia, whom I design another way: --
she has aversion to him.


The Princes's may be excused for her dislike, unto so fierce a man, the
Corinthian Prince, is all Fire, and fury, which does fright, not win
affection.


If Theodosia will be advised by me, I shall provide better for her; -- you
know Lonzartes right Silvander! if he were reclaimed, I would wish him to my
Daughter.


I have some thoughts Sir, that Lonzartes does consort with wild Clearcus, and
complies in all his Vanities, only to avoid your jealousy, of his higher
thoughts of interest in the State! he is no fool Sir.


I wish it prove not too much his Nature, to be so debauched, for he has not
higher thoughts of State-interest, then I have for him; he has been wronged
Silvander, and I will endeavour to do him right, if he will be worthy of it.


Why this grave face to me Lonzartes?


Thou art so wild, that I have lost my credit by conversing with thee, which I
must redeem, by keeping better company hereafter.


Wisely resolved, and in good time declared; -- I have indeed observed, that
you of late converse with Ladies, and delight in rich laced Satin, and in
Silver Petticoats; as if you meant to turn Apostate; from the freedom we have
had, and now seek your game in secret, my Lonzartes.


If I should, pray which is most Honourable? and most suitable to my Quality?
The daily terror of getting such diseases as inhabit your dark houses, has
frighted me into better purposes.


Your Quality! I wish your Prince-ship had all the Ladies you desire, so I
might have like freedom with their Maids.


I shall not spoil your Market, but leave you those cheap Cattle, at your own
price.


See the difference now, between your Pride, and my Humility; you have studied,
learned discourses too, such as must justify your conversion (as you call it)
but have never weighed the difference of our crimes; -- such thoughts
Lonzartes, do move my tender Conscience, to take what I can find, for ready
money; which I freely enjoy, without those frights you daily feel.


Thou dost mistake me, and exclaimest against crimes, I never understood.


You can counterfeit I know, and may cozen all the World, but me! I will not
give my freedom up, to such follies as you serve, to be Master of all your
wishes.


I shall not labour to convert you, but will take leave to despise your mean
ways, while you envy mine.


Envy! by Violinus Eyes, I do despise you, and your ways, and will wager any
thing you dare, that I enjoy this night a beauty more exact, then any cloth of
Gold-Dame you treat with, I envy you! no, I pity you Lonzartes, that after
such experience, at your years, you should be fooled so; confess now
seriously, if you have ever met a better shape, a softer, or a whiter skin, or
any more sweet, or more bewitching fair, and lovely, then my Angelina.


If I have not! what then?


Why? she shall be Fine, and rich arraid, when I so please! I can call her
Sultaness too! and by my fancy, raise her above those, the World allows of.


I do believe thee, and thy fancy, alike extravagant.


But why so serious on the sudden? and so dull? you shall have good Cheer, and
good Company to night, at the old place.


I shall get an ill Conscience by it!


That sauce, agrees not with the Dainties we must feed on, pray lay by your
Conscience, until morning.


I wish I were well rid of thee, all thy Rhetorich shall never engage me, to
meet such company again.


Why pray, how can you spend your time better?


I do begin to hate my self, and will love thee no longer.


Very good; -- Are not you the most debauched man in Syracusa? (except my
self!) how come you by this impudence? to blush for going to a merry meeting?
Is not your own Lodging, beyond a Scandal? are not all the Wenches in that
Street, your Pensioners? -- not love me; I will study to scorn you, and your
love for ever; I despise a man, that does forsake his Principles.


I begin to hate thy over-much lewdness, and to see my own Deformities.


Not love me!


Come, I do love thee, too well I love thee, shall we go home, and put off this
meeting?


Lonzartes, though I do love your Friendship, I do hate this Humour in you,
that thus would lay a blemish on me.


See Lindamira, the two wild Princes are in our way, how shall we get by them?


Put on a confidence beyond theirs, and 'twill amaze them!


Can that be?


I'll be your Forlorn Hope, do but second me, and I'll secure your pass this
time; -- You'll see them start, shoot aside, as from a Basaliske! the honest
Woman!


Barbarous! -- I have heard indeed, they shun all virtuous Women!


They always look over us, as if they saw us not; but where they have an
interest, or hope to gain it, they can like subtle Serpents, humbly creep, to
flatter, and betray.


A prize, a prize Lonzartes, each of us one; let us reconcile for this booty,
and dispute at leisure; -- yon close walk invites; which will you assault?


Neither, they are both virtuous?


Who knows that? have they done sucking?


Dost thou think there be none virtuous, beyond their infancy!


Yes, much too many, but I hope better of these; give me the Woman, and keep
her virtue to your self: -- I'll charge them both, there may be a Critical
minute for me; -- fair Ladies.


Hold my Lord, you are out at first, one of us is very brown I assure you.


You do not think your self so, or if you do, you think brown the best Madam.


I do indeed, think my Beauty such, as may prejudice your Lordship, if you
dwell on it; which gave me boldness, to interrupt your set Speech; lest you
engage past retreating; -- our business is to find the Princess.


And ours, to entertain those, who have nothing else to do.


How would you entertain us my Lord?


As young Gallants, use to treat Fair Ladies; with love, and our best service.


I have no employment for so great a Servant as your Lordship, and for love, I
understand it not.


That you may do, is my ambition.


Nay, if you be come to ambition already! I guess your love will grow to such
a Monster, in a moment, that I dread the thought on it.


You cut me off so short, you cannot apprehend, what I would say.


Therefore I do it, because I do not care to hear.


What have I done Madam, to merit this neglect from you?


In the behalf of all our sex, I am the chosen Champion, against all men, who
do believe all Women do admire them.


When shall I have leave to speak? that I may inform you better.


When I have done.


When will that be?


When I am gone.


How can you be informed in absence?


As much as I desire to know, I know already, -- my good wishes shall attend
your Lordship; -- come Teretia; we may find the Princess in the other walks.


Now Sir, how do you like this Ladies mettle?


Why, well, I like her, and her humour very well.


You thought her a sure prize.


I did but hope so at the first, now I am sure of her, she is my own, if ever
we do meet alone; -- by this severity, she has cozened Teretia, and you, and
confirmed me.


I must laugh, to think how thou art mistaken, in this innocent freedom
virtuous women use, and would give a good sum, to see thee but converse a
Month or two, with persons of Honour, which I believe would reclaim thee, and
fix those virtues, now lost in a Chaos of wild actions.


I marry, if you could show me a Woman, that would not be won; I would fancy
some delight, to pass away an hour to two, at idle times; but all that I do
meet with are mine, before I wish it, so that I am always forced to stand upon
my guard amongst them.


That's no wonder, amongst those women you converse with; -- shall I choose you
a Mistress? and if you get her! let the reproach be mine.


Shall she be worth my pains? if so! I will think on it, when I have time to
throw away; -- come will you go with me yet?


I'll stay here a while.


I'll go before then, and make ready for you.


What pity 'tis, such parts should be so drowned! --

Though I resolve to quit, I'm guilty still,
If longer I do countenance his ill.

Lonzartes, I have been laughing at Lindamiras relation of Clearcus humour; she
says, she has abused him his own way, in the behalf of honest Women, whom he
declares against.


The encounter indeed was pleasant, but the success is beyond her guess! for
she thinks, that her neglects, have dashed his hopes, by which he is grown
confident, that her seeming scorns, were only to dazzle our Eyes, while he
doubts not to gain an interest.


I wish him joy my Lord, of his quick Victory, the next encounter, will decide
this difference of Opinions.


But how dare you Lindamira, enter the lists of Wit, with young Clearcus, who
has the sharpest tongue in Syracusa.


There is no contest so easy, his whole discourse to Women, is ever of love,
or something like it! and does believe that all our souls, delight in nothing
else, which makes me interrupt him still as he begins, and never hear him out.


Is that civil, to a person, of his Quality?


Is he not angry, when you slight him so?


No Madam, I am his mirth, and he is mine.


If Pandora would permit! I do fancy his conversion might be wrought by her,
and his Eclipsed virtues, made to shine brighter then his vices do.


'Twill be a Noble undertaking Madam.


I wish he were within my cure.


We'll join our forces Lindamira, for I shall easily consent unto so good a
work, as may reclaim so great a person as Clearcus; a man so near allied unto
the Duke! but how must this Charitable work be done?


If you Madam, will admit his visits? for a Month or two, the cure of course
will follow; for he who never yet conversed with civil Woman, will surely be
concerned, when he shall see the harmless mirth, that virtue does allow, to
persons of your Quality!


So, I be obliged no further then to civil visits, his birth does require that
for him, which I deny to no man.


Leave the rest to me.


How happy are you Cousin, that may dispose of your self as you please! I must
speak, and look, and move, as my Father, and the State directs me.


Great Princes indeed, are bound to some strict Rules, most subjects understand
not?


Your Highness complains without a cause, we hear the Duke will leave you to
your own choice, only he will recommend.


When Parents recommend, 'tis so like command, it frights me to think whom it
may be.


Now you are safe from the Corinthian, have no fear until you see occasion for
it.


I wish my dear Cousin, you would marry too, I should then like it better: I
now dread to put on that yoke, by all the World so much desired?


Will my being in the pound, get your Highness out of it? why would you have
me run the hazard, to loose that happiness I now am sure of? by a single
life; -- If men did ever appear in their own likeness! we might choose some
one, amongst many, worth the having, but in our sights, they are always
disguised in such shapes, and humours, as they believe we like best, and so
cozen us, and themselves too; for if they make us unhappy; it seldom fails,
but we make them so.


No Oracle ever spoke truer; I am of your Sect Madam, (as to matters of Faith!)
yet I would gladly have a Husband, though it be dangerous to put my heart into
another keeping, (And as my learned Author says,) to give my freedom up,
unto I know not whom! (nor ever can do, till I have him) -- this were a sad
condition Madam, if we had not the same Arts to cousin them, that think to cousin
us.


Would I could get a merry heart, like yours Lindamira.


I'll present your Highness with a piece of mine, I have enough for both.


Madam, the Prince calls for you.


I attend him, pray Cousin go with me to my Father.


A few such excellent Women, would make this World a Paradise! -- how have I
walked in the dark, 'till now? how strongly been misled, by my affection to
Clearcus? that have approved, and acted in all his ills, begun upon design,
and led on, till custom has almost changed my nature, but will no more now.


How now Lonzartes? walking alone? take heed the Devil find thee not at
leisure.


A greater then thy self, can hardly find me.


Very gravely replied, if I mistake not, you are whimpering after some great
Lady, and now practising to play the fool wisely, to spend your time, adoring
you know not who, nor why!


Thou art still in the wrong.


Let us meet then, at the old place to night.


That's a freedom, I shall never take more, you have converted me, beyond all
the Homilies I ever read, you have made me ashamed of my self for being so long
like you.


Oh Hypocrite! what new piece have you got? that I must not be trusted with;
come tell me, and I'll cry up your Austere purpose, and rail at your
conversion, as if I did believe it!


When you see me next in ill company, Lam then that Hypocrite you mention.


Out upon these tender Consciences, they spoil more mirth, then they are worth;
let old folks hear Homilies, while we enjoy the time we have, and not whine
away our youth, on dreams of virtue, which signify we know not what!


Peace Clearcus, thou are not half so ill as thou appear, but dost glory in
talking worse, then thou can be.


What should we talk of more, then what we most delight in?


Of nothing less, because we often do delight, in what we ought not own; --
Is't not enough to offend the Gods through frailty, which perverse nature does
invite us to; but we must provoke Heaven, beyond sense, and appetite, by our
discourse, as if we studied to defy those Powers, we ought to tremble at.


I hate Hypocrisy.


And I abhor to aggravate my crimes, by such unnecessary boastings, as thy
wild brain delights in; when I offend, I am sorry for it, dost thou all honesty
despise, all virtue slight?


How Lonzartes, will you confine honesty, and virtue, to the fruition of one
Woman only? Fie, what a scandal is this to mankind? as if there were no
honesty, nor virtue but in such chaste breasts as yours? what an affront to this
good company, pray speak Gentlemen, is any here of his opinion? can you
Lonzartes show me one young man, that looks as he were guilty? or any so old,
who would be thought so weak? -- Is this a fit design, to set up your Title to
the Dukedom?


I see this is not the hour for your Conversion.


Nor shall ever live to see that hour, I hope.


Nor you I fear, ever live to taste, and relish the true felicity obtained, by
such a conquest on thy self; but I will pray for thee, and thy conversion.


I had rather your Lordship were at Jerusalem, then see that day of my
conversion; what have I done Lonzartes? to deserve such ill from you, do not
provoke me to a revenge.


Revenge, for what?


Can you ask for what? suppose the Gods should hear your prayers, and turn my
heart, how miserable a man were I, how should I spend my time, for forty years
to come; Is it not enough to forsake your cause, but you must seduce me too?
Lonzartes, if you pray for me, I shall curse you heartily; I dare stay no
longer with him.


If this brave man this humour could expel,
His Virtues would his Vices far excel.
I have put on this Cloak of wantonness only to avoid being thought a serious
man, left the Duke grow jealous of my pretentions to his Crown; -- while the
Duke is civil, and I am safe; -- he shall be so too? -- But if I find designs
against me; I have Friends, and force enough, to gain my right by this; -- Oh
but Theodocia does unman me quite; -- when I look on her, all these high
thoughts do vanish, and I become the humblest creature in the Court:

I have no Title, that I ere shall own,
Unless she deign to raise me to the Throne.

OH Cloris, Cloris! what strange unwonted pains I feel? what fears? what new
disease congeales my blood? -- if it be love, 'twill not offend the Gods,
because my soul does now rejoice to find, Beauty and Virtue so divine, that
both may be well worshipped at one Shrine.


Are you talking in your sleep Lonzartes? or is it some divine meditation, thus
transports you?


You are too rude Clearcus.


I cry you mercy Sir, you can be angry then I see; I thought your conversion,
had set you above such passions, as we wicked men are subject to.


I do confess thou did make me start, and speak hastily, but I am not angry,
nor can be with thee:


I'll try your temper presently, -- Oh! Beauty, and Virtue so Divine! both may
be worshipped in one shrine; Ha, ha, ha.


What of this, you heard me repeat an old Song.


An old Song, to a new Tune Lonzartes: dost thou pray for my Conversion this
way? must I get a Cloris to sigh after? -- as thou dost; -- I have heard all,
and have observed thee too, I and do guess who Cloris is, -- come, tell me
quickly, that way to oblige me to silence; for if by my own skill, I do
discover her, I'll lay thee open to the World, tell me who Cloris is, left I
tell thee; Adieu.


How can he discover that I love? when I know it not yet my self! -- Yet I may
admire her, and by my adoration of her Virtues --

-- Be by them, from all meaner passions freed,
When this new virtue, shall my vice exceed.

What the Devil ails my Lord? his wonted mirth is changed into hey hoes, and
twenty times a day, he sends me on sleeveless Errands, that he may be alone; I
think Lord Clearcus will prove the wisest man at last; -- I have been five
times this morning to enquire, if the Princess be in health! if she be
stirring, or if near ready! if she go to the Temple! -- And after Dinner I must
enquire, if she have dined! if she comes forth in public! if she ride abroad;
and thus twenty times a day, he tires me, with these silly Errands, when I
might ask them all at once, and save much labour; I'll try if I can find some
way to contract these Embassies; -- 'tis well for my Lord, that his man is
wiser then himself.


Do not my looks Lindamira enough express, what I would say?


Yes, to me, who do discern your passion thus suppressed, more clear, then by
those loud noises, which some Lovers most delight in.


But how shall I be assured, this is not Raillery?


Cannot you judge by my looks, as well as I by yours? what kind of security do
you require? I have no Citizens that will be bound for my good behaviour!


A serious word or two, with a kind look confirmed, will secure me against the
World.


Will this look serve? and I am yours, suffice for words? with this hand given
from my heart! engage beyond your wish.


It does, may I be --


Nay, no strong lines I beseech you, make me not jealous by professing more,
then I expect.


I am confirmed, past ever doubting more.


I shall try your temper, if my merry humour hold!


'Tis that free innocence, takes me!


And that I can afford enough of, at an easy rate.


Your Lordship was going another way, pray let not me divert you, my lodging is
far off.


Madam, I have long sought an opportunity to kiss your hands there.


You may do it here, and save the labour of going so far for nothing.


Do you call that honour nothing, which I do prize above the World? and would
give all my interest on Earth, to purchase one kiss of your fair hands, by a
free consent.


The World is little beholding to your Lordship, for so low a value, that will
give all your interest on Earth, for a kiss of my Hand, and this, I must in
civility, look, as if I did believe.


I'll swear it Madam.


That's as easy done, as said, but I am hard of Faith.


How shall I obtain more credit?


I'll show you a short way; bring me a conveyance of half your Land, and you
shall have two kisses of my hand, three if you please; and as you like your
Market, you may have more, for the other half of your Estate! and this is much
cheaper, then to give all the World at once for such an honour!


Why do you mock me? who truly love, and honour you, above all women! by those
Fair Eyes I do.


How can I believe it? when I know you talk thus, to every woman that you meet.


May my hopes near prosper, if you are not the only object of my heart.


No touching good my Lord, my affairs calls me away, I must be gone.


And I must wait on you home Madam.


I'll rather stay here this Twelve-month, then give your Lordship that trouble.


Am I such a Monster, in the opinion of all women, as you make me?


I must take care you make not me one; -- Oh happy deliverance!


This is such a piece of nicety, as I near met before; -- these are no company
for me.


Stay Clearcus, I would speak with you; -- my Cousin Pandora tells me, you
Court Lindamira, which her self does not much deny.


I am practising I must confess, how to talk to Ladies, and have learnt some
speeches to that purpose, whereof Lindamira has had her share.


You have mocked her then! and intend her only for your mirth!


Methinks his silence, and that leg, shows more love to me, then I know what
to do with.


Excellent Girl! how she plays with his wanton humour!


Nay, if Lonzartes fall on me too? I shall be over-whelmed with wisdom.


Now there is some hope of him, his look is Civillized already.


Are you not pleased Clearcus? to see the whole Court concerned for you? to see
your self so valued, methinks it should stir up the Noble Blood of your great
Ancestors, to set you on to such actions, as may out-shine their stories, and
not loose one day more, in your wild ways.


Madam, Your Language, and your looks, agree with your great Soul; I can be
proud to be so taught, when the Princess Theodocia, and you direct, 'twere
great stupidity to show neglect; but in my Opinion Madam, one of a family is
enough to be a Saint; -- 'twould take from great Lonzartes credit, and render
his conversion no rarity* if I should become virtuous too, in the same year.


Pandora, and I, are much obliged to you, for your good opinion of us, I wish
all our Sex were so too.


My opinion, and my practise, differ very much Madam; I do honour virtue in
your Sex, as much as any man; but my Talent lies the other way, Lonzartes does
enough illustrate the Platonic Name, and Eminently maintain, that high
S^raffick flame, which is above my reach.


Tell me now Clearcus, is there not more relish in this Conversation? then
with your Getinas, and your Angelinas! -- that blush shows well, there is some
hopes of grace in that blush.


Hold your prattling, my conversion does not belong to you.


I hope I may direct you to a Lady, that will work that wonder.


Hold your peace then, till we be alone.


We'll be gone Pandora, and not hinder so good a work; -- you shall neither of
you go with us, ^but if you please Clearcus, Lindamira may walk with you a
little longer.


No Madam, I have enough of her already, she out-wits me; we shall near agree.


I have got credit enough for a young Soldier, by my honourable retreat, from
so hot a charge.


Let us now pursue our Argument, for thy Conversion.


It comes on a pace; -- what a fine Gentleman are you grown, since the Spirit
of Chastity has possessed you? and you hope th^t I will live chaste, that I may
have the honour, and felicity to be in love! -- to be a fool! to entangle my
self in nets that I shall near get out of! I'll none of it.


Let my old Friendship so far prevail, that on my request you will sometimes
converse with ^andora, if thy visits do engage her to undertake thy cure! and
she do work that Miracle! she must value what her self has made worthy of her
self; for so wilt thou be, if thy wandering fancy, were once fixed?


So then all this bussle, is to make me in love; though you know, I have been a
thousand times in love already.


I Clearcus, I know thy thousands, but I would have thee once in love.


I never will be mad, as you are; yet to give you, and the World satisfaction
in this point; I will condemn my self to one Months penance, and make
experiment to look, and talk as idly with Pandora, as you do with your
Divinest Cloris! -- If I were sure Pandora were not to be won; I could fancy a
pretty kind of pastime, by raising my desires to hopes of what I cannot have!
but I could never meet a Woman yet, that was impregnable; and my nature is not
capable of being converted, by any that I can conquer; -- Pray Sup at my
Chamber this night.


I will not fail, if you will go with me unto Pandora? --

And visit her, while this good motion's warm,
Against all your fears, I'll fit you with a charm.

I go.


Lindamira, you must be my second, they will be two to one else.


Gladly Madam, I cannot wish a gentler Enemy, then him that thinks he has me at
his mercy.


But if you be over-sharp upon him, you may hinder the great work, we
undertake! and make him hate all honest Women for our sakes.


I shall use him with more Art, and lead him on with hopes, that all our Sex do
scramble for him; -- if I can fit his Fancy, and his Wit, I'll engage him in a
concern for you, and then manage my young Gallant to my will, till I confute
his common places, so often urged to the prejudice of Ladies, I cannot fancy
better sport, then to see (...) mad in love with you Madam.


The Gods forbid, I would not cure him at that rate, for my own sake, and his;
left that prove a greater evil, then he now has; I shall be very careful, to
give him no encouragement, for thoughts of that nature, my undertaking is not
beyond a common civility, as to all others of his Rank.


That will do it, if I mistake not; -- and catch you both I hope, -- here he
comes?


Madam, I have brought my Friend, to kiss your hand.


Thus far Madam, in order to my engagement, I have given you the trouble of
the first visit, I ever made against my will.


Your Lordship, does me honour; came you now from Court?


Yes Madam, and left the Princess Theodocia in great complements with her kind
Father, who has now declared against the proud Corinthian, and given Theodocia,
her free choice where she please.


You tell me News, beyond my hopes, this will raise the Princess drooping
Spirits again; I wonder she is not here by this time.


The Duke and she, are not yet parted Madam; -- how now Lindamira, are you
tonguetyed? no welcome for my Friend, to encourage him to like of civil
company; -- You look as if you feared to loose your Gallant.


No, no, she knows she has too fast hold of my heart, to part so easily.


'Tis honour enough for me, to be in the number of your Martyrs Sir.


How long have you two been acquainted?


Ever since last night Madam.


And dost thou sigh already?


'Tis only to give you warning by my harms.


I thank your care, but I am armed against the World^


That's good News Lonzartes, there is some hope, she has made firm resolves
against Wedlock; that I may assault her with security. --


You may, you may.


Madam, You speak, as if you held mankind at a defiance.


By way of Marriage I do, but I can value all men that I see worthy.


He must be a bold man, who does design beyond the favours you allow, but have
you made vows against marriage Madam?


No vows, but such resolves, as are unchangeable.


You are severe to men.


If all Women were of your opinion Madam? how should the World be Peopled.


I marry Madam, that was well urged.


I thought Lindamira you would have been on my side.


So I am, when you are in the right, this is our common cause; Suppose you
bring these two Lords, and they bring twenty more, to be of your judgment, and
this Heresy should spread; what will become of us, who think of nothing else
but Marriage?


She tells you true Madam, when her own concern is at stake, you may excuse
her.


I do, and will make good my argument alone.


Never to marry Madam?


Never my Lord, is my full resolve.


You are the happiest, and the wisest Lady living! and I the joyfullest man, if
you'll permit me to adore you at this distance, for I am of your own opinion
Madam.


Two Fannaticks well met.


So long as your respects be free from love, my house is open to you.


You are all witnesses, that this Lady does adopt me her avowed Gallant, on the
conditions before mentioned: -- you give me leave Madam to talk of love, and to
carry up this jest, as high, as he who really does love.


I do, so it be ever in public; all private visits, and all whisperings are
excepted.


'Tis enough Madam; -- This is a pretty kind of Entertainment, I never thought
of: Lonzartes, thou art in the right, this will he sport beyond my hope.


But how does Lindamira like, to see her new Gallant, thus taken from her?


'Tis her own fault, she might, have ^ix'd me another way, if she had been
wise!


Indeed Lindamira, I thought not of your concern, and did conclude too rashy,
but I will use my interest on your behalf.


-- 'Twill not be needful Madam, I know all his professions to you, are meant
to me.


Very prettily contrived, -- This is a new kind of wit, I never heard of; so
then you are to love me, in spite of your Teeth, and I you, and I you, in spite
of mine; what will this come to at last?


Mirth man, all the year a constant mirth: -- Is not this better then spending
your time in a smoky house, with your old Acquaintance?


I cannot tell you that, till I have tried this, as long as I have the other.


Pray my Lord, do not peswade your Friend, all this earnest is a jest, I allow
you as much mirth as you please, so the conclusion be serious.


We must leave the success unto the Fates; -- Clearcus may in time have pity
on you Lindamira, he does not yet believe, you are in earnest.


Nor ever shall do Madam, till I see her heart break, and then 'twill be too
late.


He dissembles well, for so young a Scholar Madam.


We have don^ all well methinks, and now tis time that we retire.


How soon may I make my next visit to you Madam?


As often as you please my Lord, at public hours.


How did I perform my part Madam?


You fell too soon into your humour, he sees you mock him.


That's all I aim at, he has too much wit to be abused; my only business is
to let him see, that he cannot cozen me; -- I believe you will see this Sceen
changed, at his next visit, if I have any skill, you will be troubled with him.


I am armed at all points, against all men, and him most.


Oh Cousin! I am freed from all my fears, and come to rejoice with you.


I have rejoiced already Madam, and have begun a Sceen of mirth, will hold us
long; -- Had your Highness come a little sooner, you had found the late
Convert Lonzartes, and his Friend Clearcus here, who is become my avowed
Gallant, and looks as if he liked our company already.


Then you have hopes to cure him; -- Pray order it so, as I may come to your
next meeting, my heart is now so light, that I could play with any thing; --
Can I have no part in your Comedy?


For two reasons, your Highness can only be a looker on, 'tis petty Treason to
make love to you, though in jest; and then your beauty is too dangerous to be
dallied with; these be edge-tools, too sharp for us to play with.


Why may not Princes participate in such innocent mirth^ we make stricter Rules
then need; true virtue will shine through such thin clouds, without a
prejudice, and be above the reach of vile Tongues.


I Madam, if you could show a rule, to distinguish between Innocence, and
Guilt; -- But we often see that Angelical virtues are aspersed, by malicious
tongues, and no quality exempt, from rude censures.


I differ in opinion, Princes may enjoy harmless mirth, as freely as we; to be
too much reserved, does look like disguise.


I would be so merry Lindamira, as should defy all scandal, and with an open
face, justify it to the World; to wear always a stiff-state look is
intolerable.


Private persons may be bold that way, when few Eyes observe, -- But Princes
are set on Pirameds, for all to see, and imitate.


You shall not fright me from your mirth, with this grave Lecture, are they not
both, my near Relations, whom you endeavour to reclaim? why may not I share it
so worthy a design, -- I fear Lindamira she doubts lest I may gain her Gallant
from her.


She may well be jealous, if your Highness undertake him, I shall have small
hopes, if you two quarrel for him.


Why Lindamira? is Silvander vanished?


No Madam, the more Trophies I can fairly get by Victories on others, will
raise his Conquest higher, who gains me from the rest.


Thou art safe, and may say any thing, Silvander is thy security, against
all scandal, though you carry it thus unconcerned, the secret spreads.


'Tis time it should do so, now we do own
Our love, 'tis fit the secret should be known.
Your Highness may assist, while you look on,
Though only we, the active part do own.

Let us retire to council then.


What is thy business honest Geta? How does Lonzartes thy brave Lord?


My Lord is in good health of body Madam, his brains are only out of order.


How meanest thou Geta, has he got a blow on his head?


Only some fumes from his heart Madam, makes his head addle, 'tis called the
Spleen of late, and much in fashion; his Lordship does desire to know the
Princess mind this morning, what she means to do all day?


This will be a hard question, to the Princess fasting, why would he know all
this now?


Because he has some great affairs for me to manage, and cannot spare me to
ask, so o^ten as I use to do.


Of what nature, be thy particular queries Geta?


He would know how she slept last night? in what health now? by what hour she
will be dressed? when to her devotions? and then, where she walks this morning?
and if she dine in public? then, how she intends to pass her time till
night? else I must come twenty times, for what you may at once dispatch me.


And does Lonzartes send thee, to enquire all this at once?


These Women are so silly, they cannot reach a deep design;


Oh! is that the matter? I can fit thee with one answer to all these; -- Tell
thy Lord, the Princess did take cold last night, and will keep her bed all day.


I like it well, and wish her Highness would do so this month.


Out Traitor, I'll make thy Lord brain thee for that wish.


Why Madam? I meant no harm, 'twas but to save you the trouble, and me the same
questions to morrow, and so on till Doomsday, I think!


Well Sir, for this time, I'll not complain of you, this Jest shall excuse
your knavery.


This will be a play-day for me, I like this lying a Bed well.


TEll me then, who Cloris is!


Thou art so mad, I dare not trust thee.


I will know now, or break all friendship!


I have not interest enough, to make a visit yet, and thou would have me own,
that I do love, before I do!


Tell me but who she is! what your hopes are! and what you wish! that I may
join, in your design.


I have yet not design, nor any hope, for what I wish!


But do you think any Woman may not be, what you can wish? if you approach her
the right way!


Thou art so much Devil grown, thou can not discern the Angelical nature
that is in those, who are virtuous of that Sex; thou hast no tincture of
goodness left, but art become a Monster of man-kind!


All this, will not fix your Herecy on me! I shall never learn to flatter a
few grave Matrons, to be laughed at, by all that are worth wishing for! --
come, shall I know Cloris yet? this is the last time of asking.


Ere long, you shall; if I do prosper in my pretence!


Oh! is it come to a pretence! then look to your self, lest I discover Cloris
to the World! and make you wish, that you had trusted me.


Where did you leave my Father Lonzartes?


I have not seen the Prince to day Madam.


I was told, that you were just now walking with him.


That may well be Madam, for his brains do crow of late; -- do ye see how he
stands; Lonzartes, the Princess speaks to ye.


To me, does your Highness command me any thing?


Did not I tell you Madam, that his brains are turned, he neither hears, nor
sees of late; The Idea of his Seraffick love, takes him wholly up, from all
converse with us mortals.


Hold your prating, or I shall be angry.


What has made you so grave of late Lonzartes? all your wo^ted mirth is gone.


No man is always in good humour Madam.


He's in Love Madam, on my knowledge, over head and ears in Love.


In Love, Lonzartes, I thought you had not been at leisure, to be in Love; --
'Tis your fault Clearcus, that have not councilled your friend better.


Thus am I chid for your follies, who reject all my Councels, and refuse all my
approved Antidotes, which do preserve me against that Serpent (you call Love)
while he conversed with me, he was safe Madam.


Thou hast fooled enough Clearcus, the Princess, and all the company are weary
of it: -- If your Highness allow him this freedom, he will grow troublesome.


Is it Love Lonzartes? or is Clearcus only merry with you?


Your Highness knows him too well, to credit all he says this way, he is at
this time, very angry, that I have chid him for his lewd life, and hath
with-drawn my self from his ill company, which he im^putes to my being in Love.


I say he is in Love, most seriously in Love; shall I unmask this grave
Reformado, and show you the Lady now?


If Lonzartes be content, I would gladly see her, whom he thinks worthy of his
heart.


No matter for his consent Madam, so you like it: -- And thus I


I lament the loss of such an honour.


Thou art become a pretty fool Clearcus, dost thou not observe how all the
Court do laugh at thee?


Yes, and shall make them laugh at you, e're I have done; if Pandora will make
the next trial.


I am content to try, what this will come to.


Now Sir, have at you; -- Tis not your good fortune neither Madam.


How can you make Lonzartes an amends, for all this abuse?


I will give him present satisfaction, if your Highness will permit me to
bring him to you?


To me! think you Lonzartes is in love with me?


Tis a Cloris in the Clouds, one much above his reach, which you only are
Madam.


With all my heart, I shall be proud to own his conversion, as a Trophy of my
Honour.


See if his guilt do not make him avoid the trial; -- stop him Lonzartes, the
Princess calls you.


I'll cut thy Throat.


He threatens me, -- guilty I'll warrant; -- now Madam, do you see no alteration
in his face? -- no change yet? speak all, -- you a^e all assistants in this
judgment.


It will disturb a Saint, to be thus subject to the fancies of a fool.


Be not disturbed Lonzartes, you take this in earnest, which we look on as a
jest, only to pass the time; Clearcus has more wit, then to be in earnest.


I hope your Highness will not prefer his follies, before my professions,
who disclaim such a presumption.


If you turn this jest to earnest Lonzartes, I shall believe Clearcus; -- I
take it now as Ralliery; -- I wonder Lindamira you get not hold of some young
Lovers heart?


I have twenty in store Madam, more then I know what to do with.


Then you allow as many Lovers, as you can get, and mean to choose the best.


I think tis credit for Women to be admired and honoured by worthy men; it
shows a value, to move so many, to a general esteem, and must be the Woman's
fault if she deserve a censure.


You are in the right Lindamira, men may design, but Women may destroy, faster
then they can build; my thanks, unto Clearcus for our mirth.


Mirth ought to be our business Madam. --

-- The angry Gods affords cross Fates, to give
Us griefs enough, and troubles while we live.

We were now discoursing of your Gallant Pandora, have you hopes to work this
miracle.


This Lady and I, have ventured our credits on his conversion Sir.


To reclaim him, were a good work; but suppose he fall in Love with either of
you.


At his peril that, let Lindamira look to her self, I am safe.


I have a sure retreat Sir, 'tis but seeming to comply, and he will give ore; for
he can love none that he can conquer, and I am resolved rather to be
vanquished, then not to be rid of him, when I see my time.


Could all her Beauty with my love expire,
Her flowing Wit, would still create new Fire.

You two I know, come now from exercising of your Troops.


No Sir, we went hence just now; I wish my Troop here to guard me.


Have you an Enemy in view Clearcus?


I have many Sir, that have robbed me of my peace, I cannot sleep of late, but
have a thousand fancies, which do set my brains on fire.


Take heed it prove not love.


That is the danger Sir, for if Pandora do keep her resolve for single life; I
may be in love; for I do feel strange alterations, that I know not what to make
of!


Have you no affection left for me my Lord? can you so soon forget your last
nights professions?


Now Sir, you see how I am assaulted, I shall be pulled in pieces presently.


Silvander and I, will secure you from Lindamira.


If I were assured you could Sir, I should like her wit, and humour well, --
but I fear, -- if I should be in earnest, she would be so too.


You see his inclination is for me Madam, so that what ever he shall say to you
hereafter, is meant to me.


Nor so, nor so, sweet Lady, I do respect Pandora, above all her Sex; you throw
out hooks, to catch young Gallans, she neglects those are laid for her, that's
my danger.


What riddle is this Clearcus? dost thou desire that thy desires may not be
answered?


Yes Sir, from some persons, for if my love be returned, all ends in the
fruition, (as most Examples show,) But if Pandora keep her resolve for single
life, then I can raise my fancy while I live, to Adoration of her Beauty, and
that Virtue, with a continual delight, which will last while I last, so she do
never yield!


You are then my Lord, the happiest lover living, for you will find my Cousin,
just as you wish.


Pray Madam, answer not too fast for me, for if I find Clearcus a person of
such Noble Nature, beyond what I did ever hope to mee^ in man; I may change my
Opinion of men, for his sake; and therefore 'tis best to find some other sport,
lest we destroy each other.


Look you now? I am Treypand!


Start not Clearcus, she but mocks you, you are both engaged for ^his Month,
to entertain us, and your selves, no going off now.


I shall not break Covenants.


Nor I Madam, though I do sometimes reminde you, of your resolve against
Marriage, whereon depends my bliss, secure me but of that, and I am ever yours.


I shall endeavour what I can, to give you that satisfaction.


I kiss your fair hand on that word, which has given new life to my doubtful
heart, and now I do defy Lonzartes gravity, to put his heart in a more loving
dress, then mine shall be hereafter.


If Lonzartes can love too, my wonder ceases!


He is my servant Sir, and has a chief part in the Comedy.


I like your pastime well, but me thinks Lonzartes looks as if he were
compelled unto his part, and will do it scurvily.


That's the sport Sir, and will afford the more variety.


I shall be glad Sir, if I might be excused.


By no means Servant, what an affront is this, that I must beg your favour, in
the face of the whole Court to own me?


You must not be so grave Lonzartes, all is for our mirth.


Now Sir, have not I done your work for you?


Would thou were hanged, hold thy peace.


Give me better words, or I'll talk aloud.


Was ever man thus hampered between jest and earnest?


They are comparing Notes in private; there's Treachery in their Faces; I'll
play no more.


When begins the love Clearcus? this is only talking of it.


It is begun already Sir; if I had not valued this excellent Lady above the
World; I had not taine this care to secure my interest to a perpetuity.


Madam, you are not to believe a word of this, for he has with the same grave
Face, sworn the same to me but yesterday.


That was in jest Madam, but now every action of my life, shall justify each
syllable I utter unto you.


I shall endeavour to believe it my Lord^, and yet allow you the same Christian
liberty with Lindamira, and the rest, as you had before.


Madam, you speak, as though you did not value my respects, now my whole soul
is set to serve, and honour you alone.


I must confess, I cannot change my faith, so fast as you do your discourse; --
And then, as I remember, my lesson is to keep my distance, lest I loose my
lover.


True Madam, as to comply, but you are to see, and credit my ambitious love,
and to admit it with the same esteem, I serve you.


How can I do that, and not return you love for love? and then you will despise
me; pray my Lord, at your next visit, bring my part in Writing, that I may not
err in it.


She is in the right Clearcus, you now seem to seek such contradictions, as all
the Court will laugh at; consult with Lonzartes, against your next visit.


If he will follow my advise, he may do well Sir; -- now we are alone, tell me
what crotchets next? prithee make me understand what thou would have Pandora
do?


I think you were best release me the residue of my Month, that I may go seek
my wits, where I last left them; -- must I see none of my old friends, until
this Month be over?


If you consider your promise, not see one of them.


Then shall I be lost, if those preservatives be all forbid me; I do find
already love will be Predominant.


The better for you if it be; -- let us now talk seriously; -- suppose Pandora
may be won, can you fancy a happiness on Earth, beyond having her?


Yes, I do fancy that having twenty, is better then any one in Christendom!


Thou dost not love then, else, that one beloved, has more variety then a
thousand.


Make but that good, I'll marry her to morrow.


You think then she is already at your dispose.


When she once sees that I am in earnest, she will be, who will have her; and
the truth is Lonzartes, I do like her best of all I ever talked with, and have
great fear that I shall be like other men, who never value what they have,
which makes me covet what I cannot get.


Suppose some other do obtain her, while you are thus long resolving?


Nay, I am resolved no other shall ever have her.


And you resolve for her too.


Yes, she cannot in honour engage to any, while I pretend.


Art thou turned fool, to think thus? be more serious, or thou wilt be
despised.


Why do you not allow me some relief then? to live a whole Month honest, will
put my blood into a flame; I have tempted all I meet, and all within these
Walls prove honest.


By your own experience then, you will find that Courts are Nurseries of
virtue, and are only scandalised by such wild persons, as would have the
clearest innocence aspersed, that their own guilts might be no wonder; -- you
find few virtuous persons, amongst Censurers.


That's true, but take heed Lonzartes, you do not lead me into snares that will
destroy me, for I already find some inclination; towards Pandora, which I am
ashamed to own, lest I be laughed at.


You have reason, for there can none of us believe thee.


You have made me a fine Gentleman in a few days: -- if Pandora be of your
mind, adieu to your Philosophical Love.


I hope thou art too fast to free thy self. --

Thou play with flames, which undiscovered burn,
Until they do thy heart to Ashes turn.

Did ever man betray himself as I have done? by putting Fetters on in jest,
which already are become so fixed, I cannot shake them off, but must humbly beg,
to be allow'd to worsh^p that Divine Nature, I so much despised in virtuous
Women, and must now confess: --

If I do neither Faith, nor Favour find,
The God of Love is just, though he be blind.

If your Highness do consider Lonzartes's Worth, and his great Birth, as it
deserves; whose Ancestor was not many Ages since, by yours, but by this
Dukedom, on a nice point, (as I have heard;) so that to me Lonzartes's love,
looks like a Divine direction, to his Restoration.


I am of Pandora's mind for single life, and have as small a value for that
idle passion you call love, as she.


Your Highness may as well judge what they do in China, as guess at our
Felicities that Love? -- I can kiss the ground that my Silvander treads on,
with more relish, then all other joys can bring me.


You have high fancies that lead you on to hopes, which you may never find.


Those hopes are more delightful! then an Age of dull life without them; if
your Highness did converse as much with me, as with Pandora, I should convert
you.


Why do you not then change her severity, against men?


I had not the honour to be known to her, before her heart was set another way;
but yet I^le try what I can do.


I wish Silvander may answer your expectation Lindamira; but if such honour,
and such bliss accompany your loves, why thus long carried on in the dark? and
why not yet avowed.


'Tis now avowed unto the Duke, though I took time to know my Gallant, before I
did admit his Love, and on long trial found his silent looks, did speak more
truth, then such loud noises, as most passions make; we whisper our hearts to
one another, with a sincerity beyond the reach of loud professions.


You praise Silvander as if you meant to sell him.


He is no Prince Madam, and is therefore safe from you.


The less safe, if I so pleased; -- do you believe his virtue, and his love so
great, that I could not win him from you, for a Friend of mine?


I do, and shall not think him a loss, who can be won from me, by the greatest
Princess in the World?


If I could once see such a man, I might change my opinion.


Why don't you try Lonzartes?


He is too much concerned to be played with; -- you dare not venture your fine
man then?


I dare, and do desire it withal my heart, and do voluntarily engage, not to
work against your Highness.


And I am resolved to try his faith to you, it may cure Lonzartes to see
himself neglected, when another chosen, though but in jest, for I can pity,
though I do not love him.


And 'tis my desire to have Silvanders faithful love, made Eminent by this
temptation.


In what humour left you Clearcus my Lords?


In such as does become his greatness Madam.


Most brave men are often puffed up with vain glory, that does Eclipse those
virtues, which themselves do over-value.


Your Highness is severe to men, but all are not so vain.


Most are, when we do value them too much, -- yet I confess I am well pleased,
when I find men worthy my esteem.


How does that appear? when your Highness does despise mankind by your
resolves against them.


To show how much you are mistaken; help me to unpin this Jewel; -- wear this
Silvander for my sake; I'll own it to the World, that I do value men of Worth.


Madam, I understand not what this kind of favour means; I hope your Highness
does not choose me for mirth.


Do you Silvander raise mirth from my Favour? -- come with Lindamira; -- I do
command you to stand near us, within hearing; -- I will not run the hazard
of any Censure, by this trial to satisfy my curiosity, concerning Lovers, such
high Romantic Lovers! who soar above the reach of all temptations.


I shall obey you Madam, though I desire it not.


Can you guess Lonzartes, what this tends to?


Tis a Riddle far beyond my understanding.


Wake, wake Silvander, the Sun shines bright upon thee; Theodocia dotes on thy
Virtues, and will advance thy youth, much faster then thy own wishes can
propose.


How Lindamira! have you so mean thoughts of me?


So high thoughts, why may not the Princess neglect the Corinthian, for you?
such things have been in story.


You speak, as if you wished it.


Can I wish you well, and not applaud it?


You cannot fancy me a greater curse, unless your own heart be turned against
me.


The Princess desires your company in the next Room; I can stay no longer.


I have so much to think on, that I know not what to say; -- the Princess
unexpected favours, with Lindamira's no concern, begets such wonder, as does
amaze me! -- I will not go; -- and yet I must, or make my self Ridiculous, by
judging what I cannot guess at.


Have I thus long adored the Princess? and still approached her with the same
trembling, I draw near the Alter, for this scorn at last! -- before my Face, to
Court a man, she knows engaged unto another, a man of so much lower quality
then I; this I confess does make my Faith stagger; -- Silvander was as much
surprised as I, -- Lindamira too, was out of tune; -- If Theodocia can go less,
this change will be more my admiration, then her virtue was.


Now Madam, whither so fast?


To see which way the wind blows; -- pray my Lord, where is your heart now?


In the Princess lodgings, with yours; -- or can you tell me better where your
own is?


I change my mind so often, that I know not where I left it last.


Are you no more concerned? Suppose Silvander change his opinion? Princess have
mighty power to overcome men's hearts.


Why then his opinion will be changed? -- I cannot value him, that leaves to
value me; -- methinks my Lord, the Princess favour to Silvander, should abate
your passion for her.


My desires go no higher, then to look, and wonder at her perfections! my
Esteem cannot be called love, beyond what Duty, and Obedience does allow; --
but how does Silvander receive this great Honour?


They are now in private; you may judge by his exalted looks when you see him
next; -- I am glad your Lordship is no more concerned.


This is a forced discourse Lindamira, pray do not mock me, who have a true
value of your worth.


The truth is, the Princess often angered at my confidence in Silvanders love;
only now tries if she can shake his faith, by higher propositions; -- and my
hope is, that his Virtue may beget in her, some better thoughts for men, which
will do your business, and confirm mine, for Silvander is above temptation;
and I think Lonzartes does deserve what he desires.


You oblige me to say, your confidence does merit the greatest faith from man;
but is Silvander of your Plot?


No, 'twould then be none, nor I no trial have of his sincerity.


These are dangerous sports, and we too late may find them so; the Princess and
you are both too bold, and do too much rely on your own beauties.


If Silvander can be won, I can smile at such a loss.


'Tis easy to say so, when you fear it not; but I have seen stout hearts fall
to pieces by such a blow; -- you have settled my heart again, and I advise you
from these dangerous sports, lest they blow up your joys, when you are most
secure: we know our present minds, but cannot foresee what we shall like to
morrow: --

Our Nature with such frailty is endowed,
Tis well if present moments be allow'd!

Is your heart my Lord so fixed on Lindamira, that no Person, nor any Argument,
can e're prevail with you to change?


Our Souls Madam, are so united, that I hope death can only make that
separation.


Can no Fortune, nor any Quality invite you to Honours, and Happiness, beyond
what you can ever hope from Lindamira? Nor a greater Beauty dis-ingage your
heart from her?


None can ever move me to a thought of change Madam.


What if she have chosen higher, and gives way for your preferment also.


I can smile at all this, when your Highness is so merry; -- Lindamira and I
Madam, do understand a happiness, can never be dissolv*d; we are above
temptation.


Suppose my Father be her choice, will you pretend to love, and hinder her
advancement, by your claim? -- Suppose my dear Couzin Pandora, have like
affection unto you; and puts on this severity to others, in design only to
gain you? will you let such a Beauty, of so high virtue and extraction dye for
you?


Your Highness sure does fancy what is impossible? -- but if all this were so,
I could dye in gratitude to serve Pandora, but do prefer Lindamira's love,
and virtue, above the brightest beauty, or greatest Empire this World has.


Can there be such worth in men? how have I been mis-informed? Silvander, and
do not deal so freely, as I expect.


By all that's -- I am sixth, past altering; -- if your Highness knew the joys,
which do accompany united hearts, you would sooner undertake to pull down Stars
from Heaven, then hope a separation, where true love Triumphs.


I am fully satisfied, that Lindamira has what she deserves, a worthy Lover; --
appear now Lindamira, and call in Lonzartes, with the rest: -- I am converted.


Here Madam, you are coupled by the Gods, Silvander does deserve your
confidence; -- Now wear that Jewel, I before gave you in jest Sir, as a mark of
my Favour, for your approved virtue.


Has your Highness any better thoughts for Marriage, then you had?


I have found an honest worthy man, beyond my expectation; -- Lonzartes you
look sad.


My heart is not so full of Feathers as it was, but is of late become a lump of
Lead.


We have indeed been all too serious of late; come Lindamira, let us find some
entertainment to refresh us on the Sea this Evening; Lonzartes, you, and
Clearcus may go with us, if you please?


Your Highness does honour us; -- what these various fancies tend to, is above
my understanding; -- As Nature has framed Women of a more refined matter, then
us men, so she has given to some, Souls so much above ours Excellent, that
their Intrincique purity, dazzles our Judgments, more then their brightest
Beauty does our Eyes; -- Theodocia is certainly without blemish; -- yet may
have some notions of my love, which she thinks not fit to cherish, because she
likes not me: -- And yet may have a virtuous concern for my Birth, and
sufferings, such as her good Nature is unwilling to destroy; -- 'Tis
Theodocia's Excellencies makes me thus humbly seek my Right, as her Gift; else
my Sword should make my way to ascend this Throne, which is my own; -- but no
more of that yet: --

-- For if I can be rightly understood,
My Love may save the expense of so much blood.

MAdam, 'Tis a felicity to love you though neglected; by what Name then shall I
call my Joy? Now you allow my Love, to what height raise my thoughts? -- Shall
I dare to enter upon such a state of bliss? -- To be thus snatched into so much
Light, from the long Chaos I have lived in, may prove more ruinous to me, then
that Hell I came from.


My Lord, you speak a new Language I understand not.


Alas Madam, I have this night seen Visions! and do find my passion, growing
much above my own command; -- For when I look on your Eyes, I forget that there
are Gods, and shall do such Idolatry to you, as will provoke them, to make me
more miserable, then you can wish me happy; -- But when I consider how vast a
Chasme, your resolves have made between us; I sink into such an abyss of
misery, that I can nee'r get out of.


I understand you less, and less; -- The more you say, the more you do
confound my judgment.


All this Madam, is only to let us see, how he could talk; if any Woman were
worthy of his real love; -- pray my Lord proceed, -- I shall take Notes and
edify.


Your mirth Madam, is now out of season, when every word I utter, flows from
my wounded heart.


Why do you not speak to me then? who can change my mind as often as your self?
I was made for you; this Lady is impregnable.


I yield Lindamira, let not your wit destroy a man, that does submit to mercy;
I beg quarter.


Oh! do you so?


'Tis enough Lindamira, that he does confess himself overcome, let it be
Registered amongst our Victories; -- And now my Lord, what is your next desire?


My next Madam! I have scarce begun with this, you do mistake all I say for
mirth; Does not my looks and Language show an Alteration? -- All those
Chymeras, that did possess my idle head, are vanished, and I become a serious
man: -- Your Miracle is already wrought, and I now see the only way to my
Felicity, is to gain what I so much contemned.


Excellently well Acted, this might cozen twenty, that did not know him.


You shall do well my Lord to pursue this new path, until you do obtain a
general opinion of your virtue; But I hope you would not have us credit it at
first sight!


Though my love cannot yet gain credit in your esteem, do not deny me the joy
to think, that you see how much I love, and honour you.


This is too serious for our Comedy my Lord.


Nothing can be too serious Madam, to express my love, by which the Gods are
pleased to bring me to them; thus by forbidding what might entice me to slight
Paradise, by having had you here: -- 'Tis fit then that I submit, and raise a
joy from what I am now too apt to repine at, for 'tis a blessing to be so fixed,
as Antidates my Elizium here on Earth; this Souls joy will endure like its own
nature, unto Eternity.


What think you of this Lindamira?


I think he is in love, he talks such nonsense!


You are cured then Clearcus, and will unto the Prince confess your conversion,
if we call you to it?


Propose a way for my acknowledgment, and try.


Let us take time Madam to consider of it, lest we loose half the Entertainment
by our haste, and so spoil the jest.


Madam, let not this Ladies mirth prevail with your good nature, to afflict a
man, who can live only by your smiles.


I must confess I have some pain, to hold in my smiles thus long, for this
serious way of fooling, I expected not from you my Lord.


Why Madam, do you take all this for jest still?


Yes indeed do I.


By all the powers above, I do Adore you, next to them I Worship.


That's no Oath Madam, for he Worships none:


I have the same thoughts Lindamira, and am safe.


What a Monster am I grown, give me credit Madam, or give me death? -- If I do
not love you, let Jove strike me with sudden thunder, or I will gladly seal
what I have said with my best blood, if nothing less will satisfy.


Hold Clearcus.


Oh! let him alone, he will not hurt himself, he only hopes to fright us.


My Lord you fright me now, and since you think fit to turn our Commick Scene
into a Tragedy; I shall quit my part in it; and from this time, admit no
farther visits from you: -- Let us retire Lindamira, his converse grows
dangerous.


This had been my fate, had I engaged a little farther, and this the fruit of
chaste, virtuous love; What a folly 'tis, to give our freedoms up, unto the
will of Women, so humbly to obey, those we are Created to command: -- But I am
safe yet, and will now play with them, at their own game; and through a seeming
sorrow for my rejection, laugh at them, who think to laugh at me.


A good day unto my Friend.


You speak too late Lonzartes, this is a fatal day, and I am studying how I may
make it more Eminent by Death, then by my sufferings.


Why what's the matter man? have you visited the Ladies before they are dressed?
and made them froward.


Thy love Lonzartes has ruined me; -- yet I thank thee for my conversion, I
shall now dye a sober man.


Thy looks speak some disaster, tell me the worst, that I may join to find a
Remedy.


In a word then, I do love Pandora, as she deserves, and did so to the life
express my love; that in spite of Lindamiras mirth, she did believe it, and
has forbid my farther visits.


'Tis not possible that she can be so fooled, she forbad thee in jest, come let
us go to her now.


I'll swear she did forbid me, and in great anger turned from me, I dare not
go.


This is pretty, would thou have me believe thou love?


Lonzartes, I am not in humour to be played with.


Nor I in humour to be fooled; what would thou have me say, when thou
talk thus to me? thou in love! Ha, ha.


What shall I say? what do, to beget faith in thee? -- Pandora's resolution
against Marriage, which I so much rejoiced at, is fatally become my scourge,
and I must dye, or have her.


That's the only way to obtain belief; do but hang thy self, and then a
Printed Ballad (The Dary-Maids greatest Faith;) will make them swear thou
dyedst for love.


Do my looks agree with so much jest? does not my Face declare, my heart does
love?


No, nor ever can do to me, would thou have me belie my self, that thou
may laugh at me? these shallow Plots are lost on me.


This is right, had I been fooled into the Platonic pound; I might have
knocked my head against the Walls, and never been believed; -- Thus I blow away
those bubbles, ^hose airy Lectures of chaste love! which lead silly mortals
into slavery; -- Ha Sanga.


Your pleasure Sir.


Go presently, and summon all that merry Crew, (who danced the other day,) to
sup with me this Night; and bid the Music come.


I go Sir*


I will retreat while I am safe, and be Armed against my Wise, Virtuous, Chaste
Friends, with their Cobweb Nets, so subtly laid to catch me; -- Thus I throw
all their Enchantments off; -- And now like the Grand Seignor, after some great
Victory atcheiv'd; -- I will retire to my Seraglio.


You tell me a story beyond belief Theodocia, Clear^us plays with you all this
while; he love?


If Pandora be mistaken, he will triumph over Women-kind for ever*


I wish it were no worse Sir, 'tis I who now am to be pitied, who for the
common sport, and for his good, have brought an evil on my self, I cannot
bear.


Why Pandora, he is descended of our own Blood, and his Estate proportionable
to his Birth? so that if you can raise his Virtues above his vices, you'll have
no cause to murmur at his love.


True Sir, if I were nor engaged to a single life, much might be said, to set
Clearcus's merits above mine.


Is there no dispensation for such resolves Madam? when it may be disputed,
whether the gods approve them? -- They give us Laws enough, we need none of
our own making.


My heart will nee'r consent to alter my resolves.


We shall have enough to do then.


Let us all agree to laugh him out of it.


You will find little cause for mirth, when you see Clearcus next Madam.


Can so few hours, alter a man of his temper, so much?


He is ashamed of his first Principles, and is angry at that shame; He hates
himself for loving, and loves so much, he dares not wish it less; This mixture
of passions, does beget such a confusion of thoughts, that makes him look as if
he had fed on nought but sighs, and tears this twelve Mounth; and I fear we
shall have cause to turn our laughter into sorrow for him.


I'll give him Commands that shall divert him; -- come with me Theodocia.


'Tis great pity so brave a man should be so lost.


'Tis so Lindamira, but how can it be helped? must I become mad, because he is
so; -- 'Twas not a rash word, by chance let fall, but on debate and mature
judgment, because I saw none so happy after Marriage as before; -- Why may not
I then live and dye, as free as I was borne?


You see why, because the Gods do not allow so great felicity on Earth, as
might keep us from ever wishing to be with them; pray who ever heard of a pair
of true Lovers, that desired to be in Heaven, if they might stay here till
Doomsday? 'Tis therefore for our good, that such united hearts are so rarely to
be found on Earth; take heed Pandora, that you bring not more evils on your
head, then you fore-see.


I must now bear my Fortune as I may.


Though you have not met with many happy Marriages, I have heard of some, who
all their lives have had a constant Spring of Love; their passions so high, and
joys so great, each striving to raise the others happiness above their own;
this I believe, and hope for; -- Methinks till I am married, I am a thing laid
by, as if forgotten by the Gods.


'Tis not high passions, nor great joys, I doubt to find, but their
continuance; -- suppose the Gallant Lovers, to the Wars be sent, what
terrors will possess their frighted Ladies, 'till their return? and if
miscarry? what will their whole lives have to joy at after?


Those who stay at home, may have equal dangers, these are anticipated dreams
of evils, that may never happen; then you conceive not the joy those dangers
bring, when they are over; this World affords us nothing to relish our delights
by, but such accidents, as love, which some fears, and dangers bring; 'Tis
sharps, make sweet, the sweeter!


But if I am satisfied with less joys, without those pains you find so
useful, why must I try to gain more happiness? then I do wish for, when I
have joys enough already.


Joys enough Madam! there is no such thing in Nature, as enough of what we
love.


I am weary of this idle talk.


And I know no better Entertainment.


How think you Silvander, is Clearcus what he seems?


Lonzartes knows him best Madam.


I do believe he loves, though I seem not to credit him, and am now resolved to
play with his passion, as he has done with mine; 'twill entertain the Princess
rarely, to see how I shall anger him.


Is he enough fixed? to be so abused, for if neither Men, nor Women have any
faith in his budding love, he may fly off for ever.


I am now going to see what humour he is in.


I'll wait on you.


Pray do, and let me know how I must behave my self, that would not hurt him.


I can direct you best, if you'll trust your self to me!


I shall trust you as far as any, in this affair; let us consult within.


Welcome my dear Friends, I will be no more seduced by grave Lonzartes
fooleries; this night shall re-unite us, while we live: -- Is the Musique come?


Not yet Sir.


I have broke through their Nets, and now the day, and night are ours to Revel
in; we will be so merry, that our hearts shall seem much lighter then our
heels.


Lonzartes, and Silvander are without.


They are come as I could wish, I'll entertain them, as they deserve; they are
my kind, chaste, virtuous, well-wishing spies; -- pray Sanga, shut the windows
close, then call them in, and say, that I am grown sad of late, monstrous sad!
-- Now for a grave face to suit with my


Softly pray; -- for a strange Melancholy has seized him on the sudden; -- He
is now talking to Pandora.


She is not here!


He entertains her Idea in her absence, with the same passion, he would her; --
the only sure way for a lovers happiness; -- hark.


Blessed Angel, turn not away; -- these tears must be my daily Licence, offered
at your feet; if you refuse this Tribute? from my captived heart, you'll turn
the Elizium I enjoy, to Hell: Oh stay! and take my Soul with thee; -- that
gentle look! that: --


Why so sad fond lover? let not one repulse dismay so great a Clearcus, and to
raise thy drooping Spirits by new hopes!


Or to laugh at my affliction! whose Soul is sunk so low by my despair, that
all my Spirits are vanished; I must submit to my Cativity Lonzartes.


That sigh had almost blown me over, yet I am glad to see this, and am now full
satisfied thou art in love, in love Clearcus; -- let me embrace my
fellow-Prisoner, we will now shake our shackles, to the same sad tune together.


I know you come to mock me; but I must bear it.


Oh no! who can have so hard a heart? we pity you, and have some fears
Pandoras heart will break, when we relate your mighty sufferings; -- but if I
should sit thus in the dark? would it create the like Angelical Idea in my
brain, Clearcus?


This is barbarous, to catch a Lyon in your Toils, and bait him like an Ass;
-- thus to render my passion Ridiculous, will beget Pandoras scorn, and may
prove my destruction!


If she discern not your passion, how can she proportion her favours, to your
merit?


Do I deserve this mirth from you? thus to heighten my affliction.


Do you not? -- all that I can do this Twelve-month, will not bring me on equal
terms, for thy abuses: -- remember how you held me to the Ladies, and made me
your mirth, by which scandal, you destroyed my credit with the Princess, this
is my revenge, ha, ha.


'Twas a great scandal indeed! to procure you the Princess leave to love her;
by my means you have obtained a happiness, beyond your hopes, which all your
whining Poetry, or your Eternal sighs, could never reach; -- for which
special service; -- prithee good sweet Lonzartes spare me: -- by our old
Friendship I do beg: -- by


Well then, if I find you do continue thus humbly penitent, and truly thus
afflicted, I will show more mercy, then I found from


I marry Lonzartes; now, thou talk like a Philosopher, now, thou prescribest
the only remedy for our disease! Sanga, -- bid the Music strike a cheerful
Air, and then call in those Friends in the next Room: -- Nay, if you allow
this way of cure? I shall soon expel loves venom from my heart, into my
heals.


What is all this Clearcus? art thou mad still?


I am wise, and do not mean to quit my cool, pleasant, flowery paths, for your
consuming flames of restless love, who walk on tops of Steeples, and at that
height, plead, that your chaste desires, are pleasing to the Gods; -- But I, who
know the end of such fair flashes, as at first appear, with such folded Arms,
and down cast looks, are but steps, to approach the Ladies fingers ends; --

-- Then by degrees grown bolder, you aspire,
Till nought but ruin, quench the subtle fire.

what doest thou mean by this mysterious language? and this Rabble here?


I mean to follow thy advise, -- to sigh only when I make love to Ladies,
(their backs turned) I mean to dance, and sing as often as I can, that their
neglects may pierce no deeper then their Eyes discern; -- here Lonzartes, this
Girl will cure the bite of a Tarantula, and drive the poison from thy heart.


Out Hypocrite; -- is this thy love unto Pandora? was all thy passions
counterfeit, the other day?


No, 'twas fairly growing up to equal thine in all sincerity of Noble thoughts;
But the nice Lady, would not permit it to take so deep root as yours, before
she blasted all my hopes, and in a moment let me see, that love is like a
bitter po^ion, which many taste, and flying away, rather choosing their disease,
then so ill a relished remedy; This made me return to my old Antidotes
Lonzartes; -- what think you of a heat or two, before you go? -- call in the
Musique.


Pandora was to blame, to throw him off so rashly.


Let us retire Silvander, this Air is infected.


Go whine fond Lover, go whine, I say, go whine,
While we cheer our hearts with Wenches, and Wine,
I say go whine.

I do not wonder that he is fallen off, 'twas what I feared, when his passion
went so high; I saw Pandora was concerned, but we will bring it on again.


You are mistaken Madam, all he said then was jest, for he is now as mad as
ever; -- I left him Incirculed with six wild men, and as many wanton Girls,
prepared to Dance, and Revel all the Night.


There is no harm in Dancing my Lord, unless they do catch cold; you judge
Clearcus by what is past; but when I see him with Pandora next, I'll give my
opinion of his concern.


By what means may their meeting be procured?


We'll think on it.


I am sorry Lonzartes, that Pandora has cast off Clearcus, which has occasioned
his relapse, when a little patience, would have settled him in the way of
virtue.


'Tis every way, what I expected not; his love was as strange, as his
rejection, and his relapse in the old humour, beyond all the rest; -- I know
not what to think of him.


Let us bring them once more together, and I'll undertake to guess at both
their hearts; it may be govern them.


I Madam, but how shall they be brought together? when both, would rather see a
Basaliske, then one another.


You may be mistaken my Lord, who judge by what you see, when 'tis our
business, and our virtue, not to show our hearts, 'till a full trial, that men
are worthy of them; -- then you forget, that Clearcus conversion, must be by
one, he cannot conquer.


But if he will neither conquer, nor be subdued, how can his conversion follow?


If your Highness can contrive an interview, I have a fancy in my head, that
may reconcile them, and effect what we all wish.


I will send presently for Pandora, and entreat my Father, to pretend some
business, to call Clearcus hither.


He will suspect.


Let him come, no matter what he suspects.


Do you Lonzartes, once more see what humour he is in. --

-- We must endeavour, and not fear to try,
But trust the Event, unto their destiny.

I ever thought Clearcus did but mock, and laugh at their designs; his Brain
is not yet ripe for serious Love: -- But how does Theodocia look on Lonzartes?


With much neglect Sir.


That is not well, have you Silvander instructed Lindamira, that she may inform
Theodocia of Lonzartes Title to this Dukedom? and how much better then a
Foreign Prince, her Marrying him, will be applauded by our people, who are not
ignorant of his pretence.


I have Sir, and the Princess gives a serious ear to it, though she yet makes
no reply; a little of your Council, and Authority, I believe may incline her to
a better value of him.


That shall not be wanting, Lonzartes is all that I can wish in a Successor; --
and his love looks so without design, that I will cherish it, and try to win my
Daughter to comply.


Your Highness will gain a double interest in all your Subjects hearts, by this
honour to Lonzartes, who has merits proportionable to your favour, and his
birth, all which his love gives Lustre to.


I see it Silvander, and will recompense his Faith, and his Humility, with my
advice to Theodocia, who yet knows not his story.


The Princess must needs hear, what every body talks, and all do wish!


I shall now inform her fully of Lonzartes Right, too long held from him: bid
him meet me at my Daughters Chamber; I will no longer hide my purpose for him:
--

-- His Birth and Virtue, with his constant Love,
Declares he never can unworthy prove.

NO, I'll never see her more.


Do you not love at all?


Nor ever will, methinks Love is like a smooth Water, that invites men to Bath,
and tumble in it with delight, until they be destroyed by Serpents, which in
the bottom undiscovered lie.


What means this simile?


This Serpents bite, has Metamorphized you into a whining lover, into the
shadow of a man, of late become a shape without a Soul; why must I busy my
head with such Chymeras's, when I can please my self, to my hearts wish, my own
way? -- Prithee sweet suppressed Prince, do not forsake me thus, for specious
shows of happiness, or vaner hopes of better days, then you will ever find
in Court; -- You are now safe, but when you grow wise, and serious, it will in
the Dukes head great jealousies create; to let him see your Virtue may be
dangerous; and your pretence appear worthy of his fear.


That hazard is better, then what I now suffer, in the opinion of my best
Friends, who believe this wildness, is my Nature, or such as may beget a habit
in me, which I can nee'r put off; and thus my security in this disguise, may
become my ruin; -- I wish I could persuade you Clearcus, to show forth that
Virtue, all the World would wonder at.


To what end I pray? if the good Duke would give me employment fit for his
Kinsman? and worthy of my Sword, I could soon be my self: But now I have
nothing else to do, and therefore play away my time in folly; and 'tis a hard
question which is best? for we know that too much wisdom, does undo more men,
then it advances, or else begets Eternal slavery, to State Affairs, where the
wisest, ever walk on needles points; -- I have weighed these things, and do
believe 'tis better to maintain the peace, and the security I now live in,
unregarded, then to be advanced according to my birth.


But you will loose the Dukes favour, and become contemptible to the whole
Court, if you continue thus extravagant, what design can I have, by my desire,
to see you great and glorious?


Have I not tried, and been misled: yielded to your wise Maxims, against my
own better judgment, and been rejected in the height of my endeavours, to be
(as you call it) great, and glorious, is not this true? does not Pandora with
the whole Court, scorn me but for seeming. wise.


Yes, in part, because they believe it not.


I will no more of your advice, 'till you can cure your self.


I have an Honourable Argument for my love.


Who has not? until he be despised!


Was it not your own desire to be neglected? did you not declare against all
Women, that you could conquer? you left Pandora no way for Victory, but by
rejecting you; so that I can conclude a good su^csess, from what you raise
despair.


Ha! think you Pandora did reject me, in compliance with my humour only?


What else? can she be angry with you, for loving her too much?


You do surprise me with a discourse I looked not for; -- but I will be no more
abused; -- I will not see her.


How can you be reconciled then? shall she make love to you?


No, I abhor that thought, beyond her anger, a woman Woo, that were
preposterous!


Will you treat by Ambassadors? and Wed by Proxy?


Nor so, that's only fit for Princes, who cannot meet to treat.


Will you have her? if she declares she would have you?


I shall never like her change of mind.


Can' you tell whether you would have her, or not?


That's a harder question, then the other.


Will you have her by compulsion?


That were a Tyranny, would make her hate me ever.


Shall the Duke by his Prerogative power, in spite of both your teeth, compel
you both to compliance?


Let me think on this a little, at first sight this looks likely to agree us:
-- if two impossibilities can make one possible? this might do our business.


Well, what do you resolve?


Nothing, why do you tempt me to farther evils? -- I know not what to resolve,
nor what to say; -- but will no more of love, my heart shakes at the thought of
my last trial; -- I blush to think how much less then man I was, and how much
more then Woman, I created her, in those few hours I loved; --


The Duke calls for Lonzartes.


I'll attend his Highness presently*


I take you for my Friend Lonzartes; -- do not discourse me into a Ruin, you
will share in.


I have no Rule for friendship above my desire to see you happy.


I believe it Sir, and beg your pardon for my distracted language; -- I must
attend the Duke too.


And I.


You tire me Lindamira, and chide me for a fault, I cannot own; I had no other
way to free my self.


You might have checked his approaches with somewhat less severity, your
rigour may beget despair in him.


Despair of what? my undertaking was only on the Dukes command, to afford him
civil visits, which I have done, in hope of his conversion.


You did give over, before the work was perfected.


You speak as if the design to set him free, were to enslave me, to the humour
of a mad man.


The wildest young men, do often prove the soberest at the last; and the truth
is Madam, we do all desire to see you, and Clearcus, convert one another; so to
beget that unity of hearts, which the World seeks most.


Do you believe that I, who have a prejudice against the best of men, can e're
esteem the worst?


If Clearcus were under that notion! I should have other thoughts; but when I
consider such men reclaimed, do often make good Husbands I have hopes of him.


If his wildness were his only fault, time, and experience might reclaim him.


If these be your only Exceptions Madam, I wish you would trust me to manage
this affair.


You must not talk me into an Intreque, which I avoid; -- I do not love him.


You will do, when you have him, I know many have done so after Marriage, who
did not before.


That is too bold a venture for me, who have no faith in men; and those
Examples you mention so rarely to be found, my courage dares not undertake it;
pray no more of this.


The Princess desires your company at Court this Evening.


I did intend to wait on her.


I have given you Arguments enough on his behalf, which his dejected looks you
see declare; -- Your favours Theodocia should not be restrained, because his
adoration is so great, he dares not beg them; come near Lonzartes.


Lonzartes's Worth is understood, beyond the weak Rhetoric of flattering
words; he cannot wish to be more valued, then he is by me.


Nor will I ever sue for favours, beyond these you now afford me Madam; -- may
I confirm my hopes, by understanding what you say, my own way?


You may, for since my Father does so much advise for Marriage, I may alter my
opinion, when I find just cause to value men, above my resolves against them.


For Heavens sake Madam say no more, my breast cannot contain these spreading
joys you give me, my hopes increase too fast, for my despairing heart, to
comprehend these honours you allow, without an Ecstasy!


Theodocia, I shall nee'r revoke the freedom I have given, to make your own
choice, though I direct you to Lonzartes, to whom our Ancestors have done
wrong.


This your indulgence Sir, makes me more cautious, how I proceed; -- Marriage
is a concern so great, I dare not at once resolve it, and the same day choose
the man: -- I can yet only say, that I have altered my opinion, in favour of
Lonzartes.


My Amazement, and my concern are too great, to answer Madam, my felicity is
above the reach of a reply.


Theodocia, I have given you my best Council, and my full consent to please
your self.


I thank you Sir, and I will endeavour to regulate my heart to your advise, and
to Lonzartes wish; -- give me but time to examine, and approve, what I am
willing to submit to.


How is it Madam, that you quit the field? before your undertaking be
performed.


I have done my part Sir, which was on your command, to allow him civil visits;
and to entertain the Princess, I complied with Lindamira, to try how our
Raleary would work on him, which did produce so unlooked for an effect, that I
was forced to quit my part, to save my self:


Were you in danger to be lost then? -- I did not think Clearcus had prevailed
so far; but if he be reclaimed, he will be worthy your esteem.


Your Highness did mistake me, I was in no danger to be lost through love, nor
at all concerned; for a man who does declare against all worth in Women, where
he can get an interest: pray Sir, make me understand what you would have me do?


We would have you marry Clearcus.


Whether he will or no; -- if I consent, can you prevail with him?


Do you comply, we'll try what we can do?


I would not be Treypand into a Marriage, I am so much averse to, in confidence
of his old humour, think my self secure, and be so lost!


You may venture safely Madam, you see he is so great a Coward, that he only
dares pursue them that fly him, do but charge, and he will run away.


If I were sure of that! I would seem any thing, to be freed from farther
trouble.


Trust me Madam, he is now worse then ever.


Lonzartes, pray use your interest to bring him to us now.


Do you think Cousin, we have a design to harm you?


No, but your Highness disputes me into a condition, your self does not
approve; pray show me the way to this felicity, that I may credit what you say,
by what you do.


Will you then engage to marry Clearcus? the same day I marry?


Shall I choose your man? as you would mine?


Suppose I have already chosen.


I thought your Highness had been of my opinion; But if provided, I give you
joy.


Now you run too fast the other way, I am only towards marriage.


That journey seldom proves long Madam, when we look towards it.


That was said like a sage Sibell, the quintessence of truth, in few words,
'tis but a willing mind, and then --


Prithee Lindamira help me to be rid of this uncertain man.


I know no better council, then to be in love with him, or to seem so, for if
he should take you at your word, and marry, that may do your work; for I once
knew a Lady, who chose to marry an importunate Suitor, that she might be rid of
him, and was so; for soon after marriage, they parted, and never met more.


You are always in jest, I would have serious council now.


You have had my story twice over, to no purpose.


By all my observations, I cannot judge, whether Clearcus, or you Pandora, be
most extravagant.


Your Highness may do well, to put them into the College of half mad Folks,
where they will either cure one another, or become quite mad together; when
their disease is known, some remedy may be found; 'tis now past judgment, what
either of them aisle!


Lindamira says well, 'tis very strange you will not declare so far, as to
let us see how we may serve you.


Do but leave me to my self, and I am well Madam.


Many sick people are of that opinion, when in most danger, and must therefore
by their friends be governed.


As many healthy people, think themselves sick, when they are not, and by
seeking Remedies for nothing, do create evils, they never can find cure for;
such high passions as Lindamira's, do never let us rest in peace, but do create
perpetual storms.


You argue well Madam, if a dull calm, were the only happiness, appointed us
on Earth, then one degree from being a sleep, would prove our greatest bliss;
-- sure no age did e're produce, two such Icy-hearted Ladies, as the Princess,
and you.


Here comes a Homely, and a Jig hand in hand; -- now for the second part to
the same tune, Of love me, and love me not.


Clearcus, it troubles me to see you delight in a retired darkness, or else to
walk in such clouds, as we cannot see through; I would persuade you to regain
Pandora's good opinion.


Is the mystery of love, to be discussed in public Sir?


With us, who are so near alli'd unto you both; I think it may, because we all
know what you both profess in private, and now desire to hear, what you will
face to face avow; and we entreat you Pandora, first to show, why you threw off
Clearcus.


You do amaze me Sir, to examine me as a Criminal!


You have no cause for this displeasure Pandora, but mis-judge our love and our
respects; we know your worth, and would to the World Illustrate that virtue,
you design to smother by a single life; I allow your purpose, did become your
younger days, and did express an Angelical innocence; but I question whether
now, on mature judgment, you may not do better for your self, and us, to
reclaim Clearcus.


You demand impossibilities from me, for if I should change my mind, he will
change his too; Pray show me a rule to reclaim him by, before you do condemn
me.


We only desire you will afford him the same civility, as did first induce him
to adore that Virtue he despised before.


I have done this.


You did begin, but you gave over too soon.


And all her kindness but in jest too Madam, which he discerned.


How do you answer this? Lindamira was of your Council.


I undertook him but in jest, and was by him enjoined to such severity, as I
performed, and 'twas then thought, the only way to vindicate our Sex, and to
work his conversion, which he at first did counterfeit so well, as to deceive,
and fright me from his farther visits.


Was his love so terrible?


To me it was, who thought him incapable of ever having noble thoughts, for any
of our Sex.


But when you found him growing worthy, why did you not cherish that virtue? as
your own Creation.


Because she feared, her Virgin vow might be defiled, by owning such a
Man^child of her own begetting; for he began to ask her blessing, 'till she
laughed him into so great anger, that one day he proffered to kill himself,
which gave end unto our Comedy.


If his cure had lain within the reach of Raleary, I had gloried in my part,
but never shall consent to enslave my self unto the humours of a man, who
cannot be a minute in one mind; his imaginations are beyond the Moon, and would
have, he knows not what*


Clearcus, you have heard your charge; -- Guilty or not Guilty?


Guilty Sir.


I shall never want your good word Madam; -- Lindamira tells you true Sir, I am
guilty.


Of what?


Of all the crimes, that offended Lady does object; pray Sir pronounce my doom,
and put me out of pain.


Will you submit then, and obey it?


If it can put me out of pain, I will?


I doubt it not; -- my sentence is, that you revive that love you showed unto
Pandora lately.


Oh Sir, the very name of Love, puts me into a shaking fit; for Heavens sake,
give me Halters, Poisons, Daggers, any means to let out life, rather then renew
those torments, which I felt that hour I loved.


Pray Sir, give me leave, to put him some Interrogatories.


Do so.


Your Lordship has confessed, that you have loved one hour, and must have some
reason why you loved no longer; show us that reason, or for ever hold your
peace, and submit to judgment.


How Clearcus, nonplust by a Judge in Petticoats?


Why Madam? many of our Sex have puzzled the wisest men; -- give him leave to
think a little; but if what I have said, has struck your Lordship dumb, hold up
your Finger, -- 'tis enough; -- He has


Pandora I entreat you to try Lindamira's charm, give her your hand, she deals
not with the Divel.


The Divel I work by Sir, is truth, dressed in her rich Robe of Innocence; -- if
truth do not convince both these Delinquents, my charm will have no power on
them; -- My Lord you have in this great Assembly, often said, that you could
never value any Woman you could win; -- if now you have found this Lady, as
impregnable, as you can wish, she is your fate; -- hold Sir, remember you are
dumb, 'till I Clearcus will forsake the Field: -- I shall therefore only put
your hands together, no marriage, nor no contract make, only desire that you
will thus hand in hand, retire a while with me in private, to apply my charm,
who now do pray, that all the evils which ever did befall the most unhappy
lovers, may light on him, or you, that shall their hand remove, before my
charm does work; now come with me.


What the issue of this will be, I cannot guess; -- Now Theodocia, I must
remind you of Lonzartes, who dares not approach you, on his own behalf, who is,
what you can wish, to make you happy; and I do again invite you to Crown his
unparalleled Humility, with a bliss, he presumes not once to mention, lest it
offend you; I have also a State Argument you understand not Theodocia, your two
interests in this Dukedom, thus united, will make it flourish; -- Lonzartes
has been wronged.


I know his wrong Sir, and have observed his sufferings, or I had never dallied
with his love; Lonzartes's clear Soul is adorned with more glories, then this
Crown will bring him.


If then your hearts agree, give me your hands; -- here Lonzartes is the best
reward I have, to encourage modesty, and worth; whey they do in one heart
combine, as now in thine.


Great Sir, I am so much surprised, so over-loaden with my joys, that I have
nought but blushes to express my gratitude; -- nor know I how to welcome this
unlooked for honour from the Princess, who dains to raise her humblest Servant
from her feet, to set me on a Throne, incirculed with more joys, then that you
now restore me to.


Keep still your Character Lonzartes, as I will mine, high transports in love,
are not long lived, I fear.


I shall be Madam, whatever you direct, though this unlooked for happiness, do
raise my heart above my own command, for such an excess of joy, is hard to
manage.


I may now wish your Highness Joy I hope, now your Fannatick love, conformes to
the Law of Nations; -- Now you may talk your pleasure against high passions
Madam; -- and methinks you Sir, do look as if you liked this better then that
wise Sect of airy Lovers, whose Philosophy doth teach, not to desire, what
they can never reach.


You are Madam the best Philosopher I ever met, and do deserve to have a Golden
statue in Loves-Temple set.


But how have you disposed of your Fantastic couple? 'tis that great work,
must Crown all your undertakings Lindamira.


That goes on excellently well Sir, I have left them sitting on a Couch, with
their hands still ^ixt, eagerly gazing on each others Eyes, as if through them,
they could discern the inside of each others Hearts; by their no motion, and
their stedy looks, I can foresee they will be of one mind suddenly.


Why could not we see this Experiment?


Oh Madam, my charm will not work in company; Lovers will seemingly despise,
what they like most, only to deceive observing Eyes; I believe they held off
thus long, for shame to own what they had so publicly declared against; and to
themselves will hardly dare to let their hearts appear these two days; --
they must look themselves into an Agreement, for no words can ever reconcile
their first Principles.

If their hands, do not their hearts discover,
I'll no more pretend to charm a Lover.

May we not peep at the hanging, and stand unseen.


Let us not turn this serious work into a jest, unless Lindamimira do approve
it; none shall stir that way.


I can place you so, as you may see and hear too.


Pray Sir be pleased to look on them, our Testimony may be of use.


Come then.


Your Highness must stand silent, or you'll hinder my Projection.


We will, we will.


Turn not away those beauteous lights, have guided me to Heaven; nor look as if
you were in pain, to see my heart thus changed, from a rude distraction, to an
ecstasy of Bliss; from a deformed Satyr, with a confused Chaos of dark
thoughts, and blacker actions, by your glorious Beauties, and brighter Virtues,
new formed into the Figure of a man, Emulating those Excellencies I admire in
you: -- Oh turn this way, and own what is your own Creation; by your
perfections raised from what was worse then nothing, to something now, too
worthy to be cast away; I should this happy hour believe my self were in
Elizium; did not this fair, soft Hand, and those bright Eyes assure me I yet
live; from whence some divine instinct, teaches my rude nature to adore, what I
never understood before.


I do not like to be thus long left alone, to be exposed unto your passion, and
the Worlds censure; Lindamira has deceived my trust; -- I now see your plot,
and her design discover, but will no longer suffer the abuse.


Be not so cruel unto your self and me, think on the curse hangs over us, if we
remove our hands 'till she return.


'Tis too much foolery, to give faith to!


Remember we complied, to what she said; by which her words are Registr'd in
Heaven, and have engaged the Gods by our consent.


'Twas rashly done, and I repent; -- when will this subtle Sorceress return? my
innocence will justify my blind consent, to which I was misled by my fidelity
and trust, and will no longer fear to take away my hand.


Oh take not your hand away, until the holy Charm have rectified your heart,
and therein created so much Charity, as in a moment may remove your scorns, and
teach you love; for I, who so long slighted your neglects, and fled all civil
favours from your Sex, do now tremble at the thought of parting hands, until
our hearts like them, become united.


Do you believe Lindamira Mistress of such Magic? that her words have power to
reconcile dissenting hearts, like ours:


Yes, I find them work on me, and hope the same effect on you, else why sit we
here obeying those commands she left? why fear we to offend those powers she
did invoke? -- when you consider this, I hope you dare not stir a finger
towards such impiety!


Though Lindamira's virtue be approved, I was surprised by her enticing words,
and by the Duke compelled to do, I know not what; -- and therefore will no
longer now obey.


Stay, oh stay, and let the fatal curse strike me alone; my guilts have
merited what e're can fall on me; -- Do but command me to remove my hand, and
I'll obey; that you may see how much your power prevails, above my fear of
Lindamira's threats: If so, I may divert your harms: I will against my Nature,
and my Faith, destroy all hopes of future bliss, to pull this ruin on my self,
which else may light on you: -- Say, must it be?


If I command your hands remove, and her curse should after follow you, my
unblemished innocence may suffer more, then all your crimes can merit: -- I
have no faith in charms, nor cause to apprehend her curses can reach me, and
yet --

-- My doubts and fears, my reason does dismay,
I know not what to do, nor what to say;
The Wonder is so great, I am afraid,
Some god this Serpent, has an Angel made,
And now endowed him with Celestial Art,
To force obedience from my stubborn heart.

'Tis worthy your consult, before you do destroy a body and soul: here, a
ready Sacrifice to set you free, for now I find that Lindamira's charm does
higher work!

And now again, that dazzling light display,
Which did my heart in flame the other day:
Ye Gods, I do implore your power to move,
The bright Pandora, to allow my love;
'Twill be the same, if now Clearcus dies,
By Thunder struck, or by Pandora's Eyes!

Lindamira's virtue, and her wit, are much more powerful, then her charms; --
(which I contemn,) but you my Lord, have now by chance thrown out such words, I
shake to think on; -- Your body and your Soul, are now at stake, you say; --
and by your looks I read, you think our Fortunes, and our Fates, depend on my
reply; -- and so do I; -- this is then too great a work, for so few minutes to
dispatch; we must look up Clearcus, and from above seek aid! --

'Tis piety, when we our hearts submit,
To undergo, what e're the Gods think fit.

'Tis so, let us hasten to the Temple then, there Celebrate: --

This happy issue of so strange contest,
Wrought by the gods, must by the gods be blessed.

Where is this powerful Sibell gone? whose Sacred Charms do dis-inchant
fantastic hearts.


I am here Sir, with witness enough, to hold Pandora to her word.


Let me adore thy Divine virtue Lindamira? who hath showed such skill, to raise
dead folks to life; for we were dead in follies, and are now become true
converts Sir.


This is great News, you are both well come to your Wits again, which does
declare Lindamira a great Artist.


What says Pandora for her self?


I have both ways done too much, either to excuse, or justify my self;
silence becomes me Madam.


Let the Clock strike twice, before we credit what they say, or else make all
sure, by I Clearcus take thee Pandora, c.


Lindamira is my Oracle; -- give me your hand Pandora, and yours Clearcus.

May they most wretched live, and cursed dye,
Who shall this knot endeavour to untie.

My prayers concur with yours Sir, and now dear Cousin, what I wished is come
to pass, that you and I might on the same day be Married:

Thus for our good we see the Gods fulfil
What they design, though much against our will.

Your great example Madam, is sufficiennt to lead me from all my own resolves
to follow you, and if now Clearcus be reclaimed, we must own all our happiness
to Lindamira's wit, who has conquered both, when neither of us could subdue the
other; And now Clearcus I hope will seek occasions to show the World by his own
actions, the Noble stock he is descended from.


By your permission Madam, I shall set my heart towards my Prince his, and my
Countries Service; -- I beg employment Sir, on the next Galleys you send out,
lest idleness corrupt my busy brain.


Mark that Sir, he is already wavering; Madam take heed, how you take the
spirit of uncertainty, (in the habit of a man.)


You speak too late, the uncertain man is now my certain fate.


Some diversions are necessary Madam, to look on the same objects ever, dulls,
and tyres the best Eyes; but Lindamira can say nothing, I dare contradict.


You shall command in Chief Clearcus, to show the World, the vigour you have
too long hid.


Joys on joys, light on Clearcus head.


May those joys be Multiplied on you Sir; my Redeemer, and now become my
Prince.


We must conclude this happy day Lindamira, by joining Silvanders hand with
yours, if your mirth will give us leave to be so serious.


That is a serious jest Sir, I have long looked for.


Come near Silvander; -- which of you two is most pleased now?


I sir.


Who spoke first?


I Sir.


This is a good Omen to a joyful life; may you be both as happy, as ever love
made any.


We are happy to our wish Sir.


He speaks for himself Sir, on hopes of more then he may find.


We'll Celebrate these Weddings suddenly, and see that Lindamira's praise be
in loud Hymenealls Sung through all the City, to encourage the like Virtuous,
and Noble undertakings.


I thank your Highness for your good opinion, but shall love you for this gift
of my Silvander, above all your other favours; Now Silvander,

Let us dwell Arm in Arm, and daily show
Our loves increase, that all the World may know
Our hearts; Now the Fair Princess does confess,
That Wedlock may afford true Happiness.

LADIES, Our Author has so great Respect
To your Fair Sex, he fears some gross Defect
In his best Characters, may prove so short,
Of your perfections, he needs pardon for it.
If such sad fate, do now attend his Play,
In's Cloak, thus muffled, he will sneak away;
But if you liked, he will on tip-toe go,
That all the World, may the proud Author know.

