LOVE AND FRIENDSHIP, A Tragy-Comedy.

Written by Sr WILLIAM KILLIGREW, Vice-Chamberlane to Her MAJESTY.

OXFORD, Printed by Hen: Hall Printer to the UNIVERSITY, for Ric: Davis, 1666.

MY Lords, the Queen sends me to let you know
That she is safe, and her whole Fleet secure.

The Queens safety, is welcome News to all,
Though from the Castle top, we saw the fight;
None could so clearly the success discern;
As to rejoice for her security,
Till you arrived.

'Twas bold, and bravely done, with less numbers
To assault so great a Fleet, so near home!
I wonder how they got Intelligence?
So just, to know the Queens return from Greece.

To Assault us, was far from their design;
They fell by chance amongst our Ships in the night,
As they were passing by; found us secure,
And unprepared for such an accident:
So we together Sailed, 'till day appeared;
Then our great Admiral, and his brave Son,
With their two Squadrons, did begin the Fight:
-- The Queens Ship was attaqued on every side,
In which, Ormasdes by the Gods was placed,
That by his hand, Cleandra might be freed,
As by a Miracle! her dangers such!
And his Achievements so beyond them all!
That my Relation, 'would Romance appear,
To tell you, how he acted every where.

I hope this accident, will now persuade
The Queen, that she no more such journies make:
Great Princes to such visits are not bound,
Where Complements do so great danger bring.

Though Cleandra's visit, may not admit
Of a State Argument to justify
A danger; -- She had reason to return
Some high respect, unto the Grecian Court,
Where she so long, in so great splendour lived,
Before she had this Citherean Crown:
Nor was it now amiss to show the Power,
And Glory, of so great a Fleet, as Greece
Nee'r saw before! by which, our renewed League,
Will be more valued, and our Nation feared.

I have no Argument for a dispute;
-- This visit past, she needs no other make;
But Sir, how comes Ormasdes here again?
What great Affair, occasions his return?

How can the Grecian Empire so long spare,
So great a Captain? and so much beloved.

That happy Emperor; who has no War,
Did give Ormasdes liberty once more,
To grant Cleandra's suit, for his return,
That he may now confirm, what he has won,
Lest his late Trophies in the Zelnian War,
Be tumbled down! for we may doubt! those Kings
Who border Zelnia, will not long endure
Such loss; as will Cleandra's Crown secure.
Though her great Ancestor that Kingdom won,
And left it to his most unhappy Son;
Who all those Princes Tributaries made.
That in Affection called him to their Aide.

Hark Nearcus, hark how the People shout!
As if the Queen were now, come near the shore;
Pray Sir, command the Guards advance with speed,
Unto the Port; Nearcus, I do fear,
The Queen may land, while we are tri^ling here.

The Gods have given you a full Victory,
And all your Fleet will be in Port, by Noon.

I have thanked the Gods, Titus, and do see
Yours, and your Sons merits, in this great work:
But have not words that can express my thanks
To brave Ormasdes, for preserving me;
Had you seen my danger, when the bold Turks
With assured Victory, my Cabin forced!
And how by his hand, from that Ruin freed!
You would with me admire, if not adore
The force which Rescued, with so great a Power!
My fear, my wonder, and my joy, so mixed,
I had no time for any thought betwixt
My danger, and my safe deliverance,
Which did the price of that great work enhance!
The bloody Trophies of Ormasdes Sword;
Surpas'd what Mars to Hector did afford.

He faints, this remove to Land, makes him weak;
-- How do you Sir?

My soul, Titus, shrunk away, much ashamed,
To hear my service by Cleandra famed,
Too much for any modest man to own,
That my weak Arm, should rescue her alone!

I am amazed, thus suddenly to find
The Gods so cruel, who have been so kind!
Thus to Eclips the joys they freely gave,
Shows they repent the mercy, which did save;
Ormasdes death, will now so dismal be,
I cannot sacrifice for Victory.
Unless the Fates this mischief do divert!
It will our Triumphs, into Tears convert.

His wounds show not the danger you conceive;
Madam, you Prophecy so great an ill,
The Fates themselves, will tremble to fulfil.

I am well Madam, only blush to hear,
That my slight wounds, should be so much your care;
If great Cleandra, do mean Acts admire,
Brave men, will not to high Attempts aspire.

Madam, the public joy for your return,
Does show how much we did your absence mourn.

My Peoples joy brings me great happiness,
And your love, my Lords, my true value has:
But still I must your gratitudes direct
Unto Ormasdes, by whose powerful hand,
Cleandra was preserved, and now restored.

Madam, you reward my small endeavours done,
With praise above, the merit of a man!

I can afford Ormasdes as much Worth,
And Honour, as the Ancient Heroes had,
So he will me such gratitude allow,
As suits with my great benefits received; --
-- What Fleet Nearcus, lies within our Port?

'Tis from Treconia Madam, here's Arrived
A brave Ambassador, from that great King,
Who here has long expected your return;
His Equipage is Rich, and with him shines,
A Lady he calls Sister; hither come,
To wonder at the Glories of your Court,
While we do all admire, their Princely Port!

He shall have present Audience, to excuse
His long attendance; give him a respect:
Beyond the reach, or thought of a neglect;
-- Do you Nearcus, bring him to us now; --
-- Cleobulus, what news from Zelnia?

The frontiers have been frequently attaqu'd,
Since you went hence, but no great damage done.

I beg the honour Madam to chastise
Those haughty Rebels, for their Insolence.

The whole World knows, Ormasdes can command
The fortune of a War; why then should you?
As if your Name were yet obscure! desire
New dangers? But you covet a Renown,
Beyond the value of the Zelnian Crown;
Else, you'd secure my People from their fear,
By your consent to be my Vice-Roy there.

Such proffered gifts from Princes, are not used
To be neglected, and much less refused!
But I must not your Majesty permit,
To load me with an honour so unfit!
As will Eclips the merit you allow,
When gifts shine brighter, then my Actions do.

Is there no way Ormasdes to remove
These niceties? must I for ever own
Your benefits? and make you no return!
How little do I seem to your great Eye?
Who scorn I should your service gratify.

I have in Greece, all my relations left,
To serve you Madam, and am hither come,
With a sixth zeal to wish, and to obey,
What ever you command! and only fear
My inclination may my tongue direct,
To beg what you'll deny: though I affect.

Though I your suit dislike, I will consent,
And from your happiness, raise my content.

With your permission Madam, I would beg
Leave to retire unto the little Lodge,
Within the Forest, half a League from hence,
Where after all my Travels, I may find
Ease for my body, and refresh my mind,
With the soft solace of a private life,
Free from Affairs, and Courts Eternal strife.

This is far beyond my fears Ormasdes!
'Tis no wonder you my favours slight!
When you do our society dislike.
But I will not your purpose now oppose,
Though I your counsels, and your friendship lose;
Who in debates can speak, in fight command,
And order all, that in disorder stand, --
-- Can nothing alter your desire from this?

Not, unless troubles be preferred to bliss.

Ormasdes, it shall be as you desire,
And freely, when you please, you may retire.

Though I a while absent my self from Court,
I shall be ready to lay by my Books,
When you do call me to put Armour on,
Stories tell, that great men the like have done.

Though I know no example, I believe
What e're Ormasdes shall make choice to do,
May be a president, that will engage
Brave men to follow, in the future Age.

Your Majesty in this, has given me more content
Then all the favours proffered me before.

Is this his humour? or some fancy grown
From passion for some Love, to us unknown;

No, Titus, he has ever been observed,
A great contemner of Amores, and does
True friendship more esteem, then idle love.

The more like now to be so much concerned,
When touched; our mortal bodies are so frail,
That we may love, and know not what we ail!
Why, does your Majesty think friendship can
With as much force as love, transport a Man?

Not to such frensies, as wild brains Create,
When fancy cannot change the course of Fate --
-- When love to Faces with the Face decay,
A virtuous Friendship will for ever sway. --
-- I wish you, Titus, when he first retires,
To try how far your Friendship can prevail,
To get the secret from Ormasdes soul;
'Tis for his good, that he his griefs impart*
True friendship will allow a little Art,
When the design does nothing more import,
But bringing of Ormasdes back to Court.

I shall be joyed, and happy if I can
Bring back to Court! so Excellent a Man.

The Ambassador attends your Majesty.

Admit Him.

Madam, my Master, the Treconian King,
Salutes you in these Letters, and by me,
Congratulates your Zelnian Victory;
But does lament, that he no share acquired,
In that great Conquest, he so much desired:
He was ambitious, Madam, to command
In that near War, and not as neuter stand.
When strangers merits do such Triumphs claim,
While he to you unknown, sat still with shame.
But since Ormasdes conduct, and his skill,
With such high Valour, has fulfilled your will.
He envies not so great a Soldiers praise,
But would have shared in his Triumphant Baize.

If I had known Valeriana's mind,
He might my thanks have shared, and not repined.

I have commission also, to propose
A League between your Kingdoms, and your selves,
Such, as new Conquered Zelnia will secure,
That Cithereas peace, may long endure. --
-- Your Beauty Madam, more then Crowns invite,
Valerianus wishes to unite
Your hearts; and then, your Scepters may
Be double fixed, when both do love obey.
He begs, that he in person may appear,
To plead his love, and treat this great affair.

Valerianus friendship I approve,
But never shall consent to treat of Love;
'Twould raise my dead Lords Ashes in his Urn,
If I should to a second Lover turn?
Your great Kings proffered League, I do embrace,
With fit Affection, and a cheerful face: --
Declaring to the World, how I respect,
His person, though I must his suit reject.

I shall acquaint my Master, -- and beg leave
I may your Majesties commands receive,
Without the Ceremonies that belong,
To a State audience, in a formal throng.

You shall have free access, as you desire,
And now my Lord, I must a Suitor be,
That your fair Sister will in Court appear!
Who, I am told, is come to visit me.

That, Madam, should have been my next request,
That you, my dearest Sister, would permit,
To kiss your hand, who does attend without.

Will you, Ormasdes, please to bring her in?
And make my excuse, who did not know
She was so near.
If you had brought her to the Audience!
She should have been as welcome as you wish.

Though all the World adore Cleandras Name!
On the faint notions of a Common Fame:
I now can testify! and will declare,
Your virtues, to your beauties equal are.

Your compliments require not a reply,
You over-valew my civility.

You do me, and my Country, honour more,
Then any Lady ever did before.

I have done my self a favour Madam,
And 'tis your Majesty that honours me;
The fame of Citherea I confess,
May Princes hither bring, but my address,
Is to Cleandras self, that I might see,
The virtue famed for such Divinity.

Madam, if you such flatteries throw out,
You will your welcome spoil, and make me doubt
You rather come to mock, then to admire!
On such another word? I shall retire.

I can be silent Madam, while I live,
But must speak truth, when you this freedom give.

We then will change our argument, and place,
Lest I do chide, whom I intend to grace.

Did you observe, with what forced modesty
The Ambassador suppressed his anger?
When his Masters suit, so briskly was denied.

Yes, and how sudden his sad looks changed,
When bright Cleandra did so soon admit
His private visits; as if himself were struck!
And did no further press his Masters suit.

I have other thoughts, that made me believe,
The Lady he calls Sister, is his Love.

Such things have been, and Mariana may
His Mistress be; whose beauty in my Eye,
Does far surpass Cleandras Majesty.
And now you put these thoughts into my head,
I did observe Marianus Eyes and his,
Did a long practised silent language show,
While they by turns did entertain the Queen.

But I had second thoughts, led me to think,
I did sometimes perceive Marianas Eyes,
On brave Ormasd^s fixed; and seemed to take
Such a survey, as Purchasers do make.

I doubt Mariana has not an estate,
To purchase him, at great Cleandras rate.

Let us observe them better next, and see
If it be Art; or their simplicity.

I have undone my self, Mariana!
For now beyond resistance I do love;
And find Cleandr will by her neglects,
Dash all my hopes, and turn from my respects.

There does not a just cause to me appear,
For such a doubt; much less to raise despair:
Because Cleandr runs not at first sight,
Into the Arms, of such a wandering Knight.
Though your State Arguments, cannot procure
To Treat; she may but a short Siege endure,
When as your self, a King you do appear!
The Castle may be won, by love, or fear.

No Mariana, I have heard, and seen
Too much, the brave Ormasdes stands between
Me, and my happiness, his retirement
Is to cloak their close Love, and to prevent
Pretenders; or such scandal, as would rise,
If openly in Court, without disguise!
Such unproportion'd love should ere be known,
Which shows they dare not their affections own.

What need such dissembling? to hide that love,
Which all the Cithereans do approve;
And publicly do pray, his great Renown,
Might be rewarded with Cleandra's Crown.
To public fame, I therefore credit give,
They not in love, but in true friendship live.

Such friendship between man, and woman, may
Amongst silly people make a holy-day.
No Callenders of mine, shall ere admit
Of a Red Letter, for a counterfeit.

The Gods defend, Brother.

Why, Mariana? what is your concern?
To blush, because we do their crimes discern!
Can you believe, that a Platonic flame,
Has power to Canonize Cleandras Name?

I blush for you, who now so boldly dare,
Against the person that you love! declare.

Your words, and looks, do not at all agree,
But shame for your Ormasdes infamy.
He is the man in Marianas Eye,
Whose blushes would his vices justify.

Though I his virtues honour, and admire
The glorious Actions of his life, my heart
Is not in any danger to be lost.

When a heart is so well lost, Mariana!
'Twill soon be found, I did believe my own,
As fast fixed as yours, yet at first sight
Of the fair Queen, 'twas from its center forced.

I, Brother, your business was to lose it.

But the blind Deity considers not
Our purposes, he wounds at random still; --
-- I wish thou would ingeniously confess,
If in thy thoughts Ormasdes be not grown
The handsomest, and gallantest of men;
Whose famous actions, in our western World,
May well excuse thy wonder, and thy Love;
-- I wish thy beauties could his heart engage,
That I might have no Rival for the Queen.

To oblige my dear brother, I will try,
What may be done, for your security.

Thy whole life, never can oblige me more*
-- Ormasdes is a great Prince in Greece,
And I for thee, will make him greater yet,
By my additions in Treconia;
If you can think him worthy of your Love?
-- Our forces joined, may double conquest gain;
When severed, both endeavours may prove vain.

While you talk thus, I had as good confess:
What you so much believe, and do allow,
I gladly would obtain, if I knew how.

That was well said, let us to Council then --
Suppose ^ Court the Queen in my own shape*

I think 'tis best that you do first inquire,
How far the subtle Queen does stand engaged
Unto Ormasdes, that you may not kneel
To her, if she unto another bow?

It will not be amiss, that I inquire,
Of some great man in power, who I may bribe: --
Such as Cleandra's trust does most admit,
To plead my Masters cause, and argue it: --
-- What if I first Ormasdes self do try?
'Twill search his love, and his fidelity.

I am not fit to judge, nor can advise;
But will with prayers assist your enterprise.

I'll visit him, and if he guilty be,
I shall confound his great security.

I fear you sooner will your self destroy,
Then by your furious passions him annoy.

Will you go with me to Ormasdes Lodge?
Lest I disturb his solitary Soul,
And with my rude breath, harm the man you love.

I'd rather be the subject of your mirth,
Then great Ormasdes should such rage discern,
As from your Arguments will soon arise.

No, I'll approach him with my gentle looks,
As calm, and smooth, as virgins when they smile,
Such as our tender yielding hearts beguile;
But if Ormasdes do a lover prove!
He will my hopes and fears to anger move; --
-- Soon quench these Flames, or make them brighter burn!
Do you attend the Queen 'till my return.

I never lived till now, you think me dead --
Does my dear friend believe, what I have said?

Sir, if the friendship you allow, be more
Then an Airy name? you will now permit,
That I as freely speak, as I do love.

Titus friendship would have honoured Cato,
And now my self am prouder of advise.
From Titus, then for all my victories.

Thus then Cleandra thinks, and so do I,
This lonenesse will your sorrows multiply*
Passions concealed, do nourish discontent,
But if revealed, much mischief may prevent:
'Tis my ambition to obtain this trust,
If great Ormasdes thinks I dare be just!

By all our* I know no discontent,
Nor has my quiet breast a passion in it. --

Hold Ormasdes, hear me out; who now come
To let you know, that I, and many more
Who love you, do believe that you repine,
Because Cleandra is so much reserved;
And dare not own the passion that you have.
-- If this be your trouble, trust it to me;
And you shall soon perceive, what I can do,
In satisfaction to your highest wish:
-- I do so far encourage, and assure,
What I have mentioned; Is the Nations hope;
Who pray that great Cleandra may comply
In all, that will Ormasdes satisfy.
Thus my affection, has my heart expressed,
And I expect an answer I may trust.

What you have uttered, Titus; I believe,
And scorn to think such friendship can deceive.
By the same sacred tie, I you conjure,
To credit me, who seriously do vow.
I only chose this solitary life,
To ease my body, and repose my mind;
I have no passion, nor do grief sustain,
Nor have a wish beyond Cleandras smile,
And Titus friendship; which I'll near beguile.

Sir, I am bound to credit what you say,
And shall no more endeavour by discourse,
To alter such well grounded purposes:
But must we never hope for your return
To Court? where you with the same freedom may
Enjoy, what private hours you can desire,
And not thus put the World so wholly off;
Which surely was, with all its glories made,
For use of man, and its felicities
To be by us enjoyed, without a crime.

Yes, Titus, but we vain men mistake,
And from our fickle Infancy propose,
Glittering felicities we never find,
For as we grow up to the enjoyments,
Of what riper years bring with them, we see
That our desires do daily higher grow,
And our fruitions, but foundations lay,
To entertain our busy brains, a new way:
So that we seldom contentation have,
In what we do possess; but forward look,
And only find some pleasure in the way,
Towards the end we aim at; which obtained,
Brings not those real joys, we did expect;
Only affords some rel^sh which invites
Our Idle fancies, to seek new delights;
-- How unhappy then, is our best happiness?
When no fruitions, can our fond hearts bless.
Still subject to unsatisfied desires,
That from quenched Ashes, does beget new Fires.
Thus all our Appetites, do make us slaves,
And from our Cradles, lead us to our graves.

Have the Gods only given us active souls?
And no objects, fit for them to fix on?

To think on those Gods, will afford our hearts,
A full variety, of lasting joys;
With which our earthly fancies cannot mix,
When on Celestial happiness we fix.

I shall e're long this argument revive,
And show, how you are buried alive!
Where is that valour, and that virtue gone?
Whither that courage fled? I doted on.
Though you can passion, and desire sustain,
You must not quit the Court, as if disdain
Of all the glories that a Court can give,
Could not persuade you there again to live*
-- I must now leave you to attend the Queen; --

A clearer virtue I have never seen.

Madam, shall I return without a hope?
No gracious answer to my Masters suit!

Mr Lord, I fully have declared, that way.

Never to marry Madam!

'Tis my opinion now.

Will you permit my Master to appear?
Whose person may bring Arguments to prove
It necessary to allow his Love.

By no means my Lord, I shall not admit
His visit, if he come on that affair!
But must against his coming now declare:

How can you, Madam, thus declare against
A person, and a passion you see not?
Or prejudge, what you will think hereafter!
His presence, may change this severity.

I have considered all that can be said,
Urge it no more.

Brother, -- Sir, -- what do you ail? what strange looks
Do you put on? you will be discovered!

I, Mariana, 'tis now my business,
To try if this Scene changing, may not change
Cleandra's stubborn heart; when she shall see
This borrowed habit thrown away, if then
She scorn my Love, I will break off the League,
And in my own Right will a War declare,
For her so lately conquered Zelnian Crown,
And there will try, if her concealed Gallant,
The great Ormasdes, may once more be drawn
From Sanctuary, to defend her Right,
From my just rage; -- I will now visit him.

This humour is not fit for complement.

Fear not, Mariana, I'll not wrangle now,
My business is to bribe that mighty man,
And make him plead my cause to the fair Queen,
-- But if I find him rotten at the heart!
I shall unmask him, spite of all his Art.

That is what I fear.

YOur Lordship by this visit, honours me;

My visit brings you business of the State,
You must not take it for a Complement.

What is your business then?

I have observed, Ormasdes, the Queens sense
Is yours, in her Affairs of Consequence,
She moves by you; this brings me to consult
My Masters Marriage, for a full result!
For I conceive Valerianus Name
Of so great Credit! and so high a Fame!
That our two Nations, by our Princes joined;
Though our surrounding neighbours were combind,
Our Territories would be safe, and we
Should thank the Gods for such Tranquillity.
But when a Lady Rules, they may presume,
And their Rebellious Principles assume;
If great Ormasdes shall be called away,
And fair Cleandra left alone to sway.

I know Sir, that Cleandra does esteem
The stout Treconians friendship, as she ought;
And I know she honours your brave young King,
Whose martial Acts, have gained him through the World,
A character so noble, and so great!
That she with joy this proffered League, does treat*
Only dislikes the Marriage you propose,
On good State Arguments, as I suppose,
In judgment, and affection to her Son,
She will not raise a Rival to his Crown.
And for her angry Neighbours, she believes
The Zelnian War, has so much wisdom taught,
They will not suddenly, unurged, provoke,
A Queen, so powerful, and so fortunate.

Suppose Valcrianus take offence?
And look on this neglect, as an affront!
Because he only did propose this League,
To introduce his suit, which he conceives,
Will both our Nations equally advance;
But if laid by with scorn I suppose he then,
Do join with your old Enemies? and claim
His Fathers Title to the Zelnian Crown;
What may the hazards, and the issue be?
If a new war, dispute your Victory?

I will not Prophecy the sad event,
That so unjust a War may justly bring
Upon so Gallant, and so wise a King!

Suppose then, that I have his Commission?
To lay by the Treaty of this new League,
Until the Marriage be agreed unto;
And if denied! I must Proclaim his Right
To Zelnia; and your late Conquest bring,
To a new question, with a Powerful King.

If Valerianus be so fixed, we must
No hazards fear, in Wars that are so just.

Your great successes have high thoughts begot,
Above your Conquest, which I value not?
But wish such evils as we now foresee,
May be avoided by our industry;
For 'twill become your Wisdom, and your Trust,
T'advise Cleandra to this happy Match;
Wherein if you prevail, I have full power,
Now to confer on you, the first, and best
Of our Treconian Principalities.

You do me wrong, and are in this unjust,
To think that I will break Cleandra's trust,
Which I do value 'bove your Masters Crown!
And therefore boldly will advise the Queen
Not to admit it his suit, on Arguments
Which must an evil consequence produce,
To her Sons Right, if she Comply,
And by it, lessen her own Dignity.

If my employment, anger did allow,
And my own Honour would permit, to strike
A Book-man! this rude language, I'd correct.

If the Queens honour were not more concerned!
In a respect to your employment due;
You soon should find, how little I do value you!
The Book-man would not from your Master take
This Insolence; but for Cleandras sake
I do forbear; pray visit me no more.

Fear it not; when Valerianas knows
How little worth, Cleandras honour is!
He will this League, and her Alliance scorn;
Who puts Ormasdes into this Disguise,
To hide her Lover, from her Peoples Eyes?

This is beyond sufferance.

Hold, Ormasdes, I heard his Insolence --
-- Sir, you have leave to go aboard your Fleet,
Where you only can be safe; begone then,
Without reply be gone; for if it be known!
What you have said! my People may revenge
My wrong, before your Master do me right. --
-- Ormasdes you must in this, my will obey,
Your wonted judgment must your passion sway:
While I by a quick War, with Fire and Sword,
Require such Justice as he must afford.

Madam, the Conduct of that War I beg.

If you this passion will lay by till then!
You shall: But no more of this anger now;
I came to take the Air this Afternoon,
But will defer it, 'till another day.
-- Pray be pacifi'd, you shall not stir out;
I do entreat, and do command you stay.
Titus stay you, 'till this heat be over.

Titus, my friend; I have a flame within,
That will consume my heart, if you help not!

Do you doubt my assistance, to serve you,
In any way you can prescribe a friend?

I'll rather thank thee for it, then doubt thy love,
The Ambassador can this night hardly reach
Coriola! where we, in a swift Boat
By break of day, to morrow may Arrive;
If some hours hence! we in the dark, embark!

I guess your purpose, and I will obey;
Yet I would gladly have an Argument,
To justify what you intend to do;
Lest Foreign Princes should condemn our State,
That Laws of Nations rashly violate;
And so Cleandras honour, suffer more,
Then by his Insolence, she did before.

How can he justify those words he spoke?
His rude language, the Law of Nations broke.
For when a Public Minister puts off
That Sacred shadow, which should him protect;
And dares in such vil'd language give affronts,
To a much greater Monarch then his own!
That minute, his Commission did expire;
When he his Cloak of Majesty laid by;
And like a Ruffen, talked so lavishly.

This I confess, is reason for revenge,
But if the World our Action not approve?
Pray think, what we shall urge for our excuse,
In case we can no president produce?

A president Titus! where will he show,
That Nations do Ambassadors allow
To be so barbarously base, as he?
When he dares make his Act, a president!
I will another show, and kill him for it.
In the first Age, no presidents, were known,
And in ours, this shall be my Creation:
'Tis not Cleandras work, nor is it thine;
The glory or the shame is only mine.
Titus my heart would break, if I permit
That man to brag, as he will do at home;
How he has braved Ormasdes to his face!
And on Cleandra thrown so foul disgrace.

Since I your resolution cannot change,
Pray name the place, and hour, and I'll not fail.

Some three hours hence, we'll at the Ferry meet,
Where a swift well-man'd Boat, you must provide,
My motion may some jealousy beget,
Of what we do intend; and must perform;
If our best speed, can but this Mad-man reach?
I shall his fury, better manners teach.

Madam, you are now got so near my heart,
That I am sad to think that we must part.

And I too soon do find, that I too late
Am now involved in my Brothers Fate.
We leave our hearts behind, though we now fly,
This place by our impulsive Destiny.
My soul has not a wish, can send me hence,
If I could stay on any just pretence.

Why may you not stay here Mariana?
And let him go, we will a friendship make,
Such as thy virtue justly may expect,
And my affection give, if here you'll live?

I am unhappy Madam, who must be
At his dispose, has done you injury,
So great! that I must suffer while I live.

Rather then you shall suffer, I'll forgive.

Your pardon is, beyond your power, I fear,
Unless you will admit his Master here?

His pardon then is far beyond my reach,
If for his King, his own concern be such!
And yours, so much for him; I must consent
To part with both; yet I could be content,
To see him for your sake, I and forget,
What he so rashly has against me said,
Thy tears for him, have satisfaction made.

My brother is already on his way,
And has ordered Boats for me to follow,
Where I expect to find his rage too high,
To hearken to such mercy, as I bring,
Unless Cleandra will admit his King*

I have not seen such useless rage before;
Whom but himself can his mad fury harm?

It is a Riddle I dare not expound.

Dare not Mariana? am I so low
In your esteem? you dare not let me know,
What you dare do? this secret I confess,
Has only power to make me love thee less.

I cannot, I have sworn not yet to say
What 'tis, to him I'm doubly tied to obey:
But since your goodness, can so soon forgive,
So great a Crime, I'll try to bring him back,
And if I can prevail, for his consent,
I'll show the cause of his distemperment. --

You have his pardon, and may now pursue,
Your own design, to bring him back with you;
But if he choose to go, and set you free,
Your self shall be much welcomer to me.

Your words encourage me to take no leave,
But cherish hopes which may my heart deceive,
With present thoughts, rather to smile then mourn,
As a good Omen to my quick return.

You Nearcus, shall conduct Mariana
To Coriola, and at your own house,
As you pass by; pray treat her as my friend.

I shall be careful in it, Madam.

I love her, and am somewhat more concerned
To part with her; then I can make you see!

She has by her behaviour, gained esteem
From all the Court, and from the Nation too.

I wonder Titus none of you lament,
When so great Beauty from the Court is sent!

Your Majesty has showed enough for all.

I do mean Love, Titus, and did expect
Her beauty, should have fired a hundred hearts!
And by the powerful charms of her bright Eyes,
O're-ruled our Citherean Destinies.

My heart, Madam, has been so often burnt,
There is no substance left, that can take fire;
Indeed I wonder how the rest have escaped!

Nearcus, and my self, had other thoughts
Of this great beauty, which did secure us;
We do Mariana for his Mistress take,
Few Sisters Travel for a Brothers sake!

How Cleobulus! have you any ground
For this? to justify so vile a thought*

Only the freedom, which they daily used,
With this new way, for Men who have no Wives,
To carry Sisters into Foreign Courts!

Though not in use, it does not sure deserve,
A censure so severe! such Innocence,
In Mariana, did to me appear,
That I should sooner judge her good, if bad,
Then blemish such perfections by a thought
It cannot be! so Insolent a Guilt!
He durst not own! nor such a scandal raise,
On his own name! and on his Country too!
I command you to suppress this thing,
I am ashamed a Cithereans heart,
Should entertain a thought of such a Crime!
We bring our own Worth in question then,
When we asperse the Worth of other men.

They were but thoughts, as rashly then taken up,
As now thrown out; with no design to wrong
The Innocent; I wish her virtue may
Our thoughts convince, and she be justified.

Keep firm there my Lord, for all those who live
Near Princes Ears, should weigh how they let fall
A word that may a Woman's Honour blast;
If I were apt to credit your report?
And on your ground less jealousy affront
Such virtue! what a sin were it in you?
To make me guilty of so great a Crime!

I am sorry for my rash opinion,
Since it offends your Majesty so much!

It is the bane of Courts, when we permit
Those near us, to asperse the Innocent;
If our strict Laws for petty theft, gives Death?
How much a greater punishment is due
For robbing a good name? a sin so vil'd,
And so unknown! no punishment was made
By way of Prophecy, for crimes to come!
If I did think this malice from your heart,
I would for ever banish you my Court.

Your Majesty does raise your anger now,
Above my guilt; which had no mischief in it.

I am no farther angry with you now,
But take occasion to declare my sense,
Against all such, as defame Innocence.
'Tis a Prince his chief business to be Just,
The Gods impose on us no higher Trust!
We have no petty faults, to answer for,
Universal Justice, is our great work,
And those who shall divert it, to destroy
The Fame, or Fortune of an Enemy,
Deserves to be thrown off with Infamy.

I have not seen the Queen in such a heat!
You have offended her some other way?

Not that I know of, in this kind ever!

What Devil, made you talk thus to her now?
You knowing that she is so good her self,
She makes a doubt, that any of her Sex
Can do amiss! and 'tis great Nobleness!

There is a kind of pixe Divel, dwells
In many Courts, that haunts our idle heads,
And prompts us, when we know not what to say;
To entertain great Princes with reports
Of others, so to please, and pass the time;
This foolish spirit, I think, entered me.

You gave Cleandra cause, for your reproof,
For how can Princes judge Malice from Mirth?
When cunningly thrown out, with specious shows,
Of probabilities; when those aspersed,
Are never called to answer for themselves,
The Queen did excellently well, to chide
You, whom she Loves; that none may ere presume
The like hereafter! for if Princes be
Born Credulous? Malicious persons may
Defame a Nation, if they please, this way.

I know I was to blame, but from this day,
I'll hold my peace, 'till I know what to say.

Where are we now my Lord? this house stands well

It is my poor habitation, Madam;
Here I must treat you, by the Queens command,
'Tis the mid-way unto Coriola.

'Tis a Noble, and a most pleasant Seat;
Has it no Mistress, Sir? Are you single?

I am only that way, happy Madam;

You have a Mistress then? or do you call
It happiness? that you as yet, have none?

Will you please Madam, to view the garden?

That piece methinks, does look as if it lived.

I do prefer that smiling Figure first;
Whose hand is it, my Lord?

I have not skill enough to know the hands,
Though I love Pictures: -- pray observe the next,
Is not this sleeping Venus rarely done?
See how that Cupid in the Tree, stands off!

'Tis rare indeed, that Satyr, and the rest
Of the whole piece, is excellently good!

Let us look into the next Room, my Lord.

This way they went, and this way must return.

The Doors are locked, and we can pass no way.

Is this by accident? or on command?

Let us attend a while, and we shall see
From the next Chamber window, where they be.

I have no Argument for further talk,
And now am weary grown, with this long walk;
Where is the beauty? you so much admire!
Your praises have in me raised some desire,
To see this wonder of our Sex! that I,
May judge your skill, and with your choice comply.

She is here already, oh she is here!
A brighter beauty, never can appear!

Why do ye lock the Door, my Lord? why kneel
To me! you make my heart some tremblings feel
By this surprise; and I do doubtful stand,
What of kind Treachery, you have in hand!
It looks! -- yet, like a Lionness betrayed
Into the Toils; I scorn to be afraid.

I have no Argument for either now,
But a distracted heart; that knows not how
T'excuse, what I have done! -- 'tis love, has brought
Me to this Precipice, and too late taught,
That I from hence, shall head-long tumble down,
If you disdain to save; oh do not frown!
Rather take this, and while you may, prevent
Your own near ruin, and my rash intent; --
-- That angry look, and those enraged Eyes,
Pierce like quick Lightning, from the stormy skies;
They melt my heart, and make me trembling stand,
To beg what Love, and Nature may command.

Love! do the Cithereans by such Arts!
Such force! and treachery! win Ladies hearts?
Fie, fie Nearcus, this does not agree
With Love! nor with Cleandras trust to thee;
I shame to find such ills! and blush to chide:
-- Repent, and I thy infamy will hide;
Oh! 'tis the basest of all crimes to be
Justly condemned, for infidelity;
And with a treachery, my trust beguile,
Beyond the story of the Crocodile.

What dares not love attempt? when it goes high,
Like mine? your ships are ready, oh too nigh!
The wind is fair; and I, no time but this,
To woe; no other means to reach my bliss!
The Queens command, and my desires here meet,
To throw my life, and fortune, at your feet;
That by this desperate course, you now may see,
Your love, or scorn, I make my destiny.

Nearcus, how would you prevail my dreams!
Instruct me not, to answer such extremes!

I would have you Mistress of me, and mine,
Before we part, made so, by vows Divine:

'Tis a short warning, to a work so great!
Is this Cleandras Love? and this your Treat,
To strangers? do you think my lips, my heart
Does hold so loose? as at first sight, to part
With it to you? what do you find in me,
So slight? that looks like so much levity.

If you'll afford more time? I will proceed
With caution, and respect! and shall take heed
How I offend; if you'll resolve to stay,
Or to comply, my passion will obey.
-- If not! I must this desperate course pursue,
And trust my ruin or success to you
-- Who does in desperate attempts engage,
Can seldom at first sight, th'event presage:
-- Love led me on, and reason comes too late,
Now to retreat; this Fortune, is my Fate.

Your language, and your looks, do rather threat,
Then woe; which does in me such scorn beget,
As to an Enemy, that does invade,
-- That Innocence, you have bereft of aid;
And boldly dare impose on a free heart,
What should be won by Love, not such base Art!

Give me but time to woe! and I will fear,
And tremble in your sight; with zeal appear,
And the same duty, I approach the Gods,
When my offences, make me fear their Rods!
It is not I, (as your affairs do stand)
But high necessity, makes me command;
That all the remnant of my life, you may
Triumph! for my ambition's to obey.

Think you by force, that I shall ere think fit,
To yield my self to such a counterfeit?
I am not born unto so mean a Fate,
As to submit unto the man, I hate:
Nor will I be thus frighted, to comply
With so contemptible a destiny.

I must confess, I can by no disguise
Lessen, or hide the guilt, of this surprise;
But by some greater crime, more amply show,
That a distracted passion may soon know,
To act such evils, as I fear to think;
But do not set me in despair thus sink;
Speak so, as that I may some hope retain,
And you'll restore me to my self again.

Stand by vil'd man, and let me pass, who waits?

None within call; that now can help! the fates
Themselves have not the power to set you free,
Nor can you hope for safety; but from me!
No storm at Sea, nor in it ships on Fire;
Creates more terrors then my wild desire
Brings me! here is a Tempest in this breast,
Above all them; since raging Love possessed
My heart, I am become a walking storm;
Reason and Virtue, are both wracked, no form
Observed, while this confusion bears the sway,
None knows to govern; but must all obey,
If we cannot resist; then to cry no,
Is madness, when we must to ruin go!

I have no power, but must my brothers will
Obey; I must his mind, not yours fulfil;
Lest his great pride, and anger may destroy,
What you'd preserve, and frustrate all your joy.

If my high birth, and quality do prove
Less then your own, I will expect no love;
But hazard all my hopes, on his consent,
Let his denial sign my punishment.

If your birth equal mine, and he consent
To join our hands! I have no argument
Against your hopes; but must be Mistress still,
Of my own heart; not part with my free-will;
Yet now Nearcus, I do promise you,
What truth and honour dictates, I will do.

Unless you both do ere you go comply, --
You shall soon see, that I know how to dye.

Pray call my servants down, that I may see
Your truth, and find my self at Liberty.

Now Madam, that my life's at your dispose,
Your self secure, I humbly do propose,
You will before the Gods, confirm by vow,
What you have freely promised to me now.

By all those powers, I'll keep my promise made,
And never fail to own, what I have said.

It is enough, a kiss of your fair hand,
Must satisfy the Man, you may command;
Nearcus has no soul, cannot be blessed,
Until his love, with love you do invest.

THis Piazzo Cleon, is Magnificent;
I have not seen any so Beautiful!

It shows the Princes Treasure, and their minds,
Are alike great, who can so soon Erect,
So vast a City, which in every part,
Deserves to be as much admired, as this!

We may walk through it, ere my Sister comes!

You may, the River side is your best view.

There is a Boat now coming to the shore.

Those who land, seem to be of Quality!

I see no Woman yet with them appear!
They are very brave, and come towards us!
Do any of you know, who these may be?

Young Titus landed first, but as I think
It is Ormasdes, who now leads the Troop:

If so! I must expect some angry words,
From the offended Queen.

What means this kind of rudeness Gentlemen?

It speaks my business, who am hither come,
To scourge that pride, you so much glory in.
And with this hand, that insolence chastise,
Which boldly durst endeavour to defame,
By base surmises, great Cleandras Name. --
-- Titus, I beg as you love my Honour,
If I do fall! let none come in to help!
-- Sir, you shall have fair play, that we may see,
How Insolence, and Courage do agree!

I shall soon satisfy the doubt you make;
-- Stand off; he dyes that stirs to my relief;
Or by a word let fall, does make me known!

Ormasdes hold; it is a King you wound!
It is Valerianus you fight with.

My self a Prince of Greece, of the same blood
With our great Emperor, will justify
What I have done; and to the World declare,
If any man do wrong me in disguise!
I do his Titles, and himself despise.

Oh Gods! my prophetic soul, did long since
Fore-see this Evil! oh let not --

Hold Valeriana; there are no Gods!
Nor shall one Altar in my Kingdom stand,
To honour those we foolishly call Gods!
I will Erect new Temples unto Chance,
Which giddily, thus governs us below.

Take heed Sir, lest you do provoke those powers!
(You now despise!) to punish your contempt!

I will not own those Gods, those empty names,
Who cannot shelter us from public shames!

The Gods be just, and you are much to blame,
'Twas not Ormasdes, who the King ore-came:
It was his Virtue conquered your offence,
Your guilt gave Victory to Innosence.

Will you become my Judge? will you condemn
My life, and Honour? A fit Sacrifice,
To your beloved Ormasdes fatal Sword;
Fool, from this hour, I do thy blood disclaim,
And will forget I ever knew thy Name;
-- Erillos, let my goods be sent aboard,
I will not stay a minute longer here,
Then my necessity compels me to.

I have prevailed with the much injured Queen,
To lay her anger by, and to forgive
Those rash words you spoke, and have her leave
To bring you to her sight again, with hopes
She may her inclinations change, when known!
Your fury did proceed from Love alone.

My love is vanished, and my heart too full
Of my revenge, to think of my return;
Till I can pull Cleandra from her Throne!
I hope Ormasdes will take care of you,
Who plead his cause, and are to love, so true!

Sir, though your wounds be slight, if you remove!
So soon? we cannot answer for your life.

I'll rather dye at Sea, then live on shore,
Make haste good Cleon; lead me to my Boat.

Will you leave the Princess, in a strange land?
Thus unkindly cast her off; for ever?
Because her Love did argue for your good!

And thee, that dares so boldly her excuse,
Who does my honour, and her own abuse.

Look Sir, she dyes! your unkindness kills her.

She cannot do her self and me more right,
Then to dye now! but she cannot depart,
While great Ormasdes, Triumphs in her heart! --
-- See how his Name, her fainting soul revives!
Lead on, or I shall laugh to see her dye!
That can raise Trophies for my infamy.

What cruelty is this? to leave me here!
Who love him better, then he loves himself;
-- You'll be all ruined, if you stay with me!

What we have said, has ruined us enough,
If his unruly rage, can reach so far?

I think 'twere best that you return to Court,
And do Cleandra's proffered friendship try,
I have all your Brothers Jewels here,
Which will defray your charges while you stay.

'Tis a plentiful provision for us;
But where is young Nearcus, all this while?

He has not yet appeared, since we Arrived.

Madam, can you forgive, what I have done?
And own the Author of so great a crime?
Who saw not then a Princess in disguise,
But was captived by Mariana's Eyes!

My Lord, I do forgive, and shall forget,
So you repent! and I will serve you too,
With all my power, and interest in the Queen.

If that be all, would I had guilty been,
Of greater crimes, then my good natured sin.

Madam, we hear your Brother is unkind,
But by Cleandra's favours you may find,
Some means to reconcile you unto him.

I am most happy in Cleandra's love.

Will you permit Ormasdes in your Boat?
Or shall he seek some other passage home?

I could have wished Ormasdes less concerned,
Or that his courage had not been so great;
But cannot quarrel him on this account;
He was obliged to right Cleandra's wrongs;
And must in Justice be applauded for it.

Madam, I thank the Gods for my success,
And now with the same breath, can humbly beg,
That you'll forgive, what they so late approved!

Sir, it will not become me, his Sister,
-- Now to congratulate your Victory,
Who have just cause, to mourn my Brothers Fate;
From whence my own misfortunes, have their date:

Madam, shall we attend you to your Boat?

Let Titus order all, as he thinks fit!
I am ready now for my remove.

The Queen is troubled, and her Guards are sent
With speed, Ormasdes Quarrel to prevent:

She must secure the Ambassadors return,
Lest all our Neighbour Nations do complain,
And say, we give occasion for a War;
Which the Treconians claim cannot pretend,
Nor the rejected Marriage justify.

Valerianus has an ancient claim
To Zelnia, which may beget a War!
If the Treconians do a quarrel seek?
There wants no title to a Prince provoked.

Ormasdes will rejoice, to see that day!

He is our Nations Darling, and deserves,
Cleandras favour; but methinks he looks
As if his heart were higher then his head!

I have been lately chid for juggling looks,
And dare not say, what I believe, I see.

You tell such wonders from Coriola.
That I want faith for them! how comes this News?

Madam, a Messenger but not Arrived,
Saw the Combat done, and heard Nearcus say,
They would attend Valerianas back,
Unto your Majesty; (whereas the wonder?)
Princes have been in foreign Courts disguised!

But have you ever such strange humours found?
A Prince, where Vice and Virtue is so mixed!

No, I have not, nor such a president!
As now Ormasdes gives us to correct
Such impudence, as near before was known.

If I were not concerned, I should approve,
What he has done, though now I must not own?

For public thanks on his behalf, I move. --
-- Why should we thus, our honest thoughts disguise?
When Virtuous Actions Virtue justifies.

Had not Ormasdes stirred! by Arms I might
Compel his Master to have done me right.

By War, thousands of guiltless persons might
Have suffered, for one mans over-sight.

You have reason Titus, and I shall Judge
Ormasdes Act, as he deserves from me;
Who with my Nation, am so much obliged,
I must approve, whatever he will own!
-- Let the young Princess lodgings be prepared,
Fit for my Friend, and Sister to a King.

You are welcome Madam, and I am glad
To have you on these terms; do not weep
To part with, what your virtue could not keep!

I am happy, by my unhappiness,
For by your favour Madam, I may find
Some remedy, for my afflicted mind.

Be sure, what Citherea can afford,
Is yours; and all Cleandra does command,
With me rejoice, to see you safe returned;
-- But where is Ormasdes? I must chide him.

He is retired Madam to avoid your sight.

Ormasdes thinks it duty, and respect,
Not to appear at Court, till you direct!

Pray fetch him hither now; I hope you can
With me forgive so Excellent a man!
Whose passion never does his reason sway,
But follows on, when virtue leads the way.

I have no anger to Ormasdes, since
Young Titus did my Brothers crime relate,
I hope this letting blood, will do him good,
When this affront at home is understood!

Your Justice, and your Charity is great,
And I do see no reason but you may
Admit Ormasdes in my company;
I am informed, he has a slight hurt too!

My furious Brother will be glad indeed!
That brave Ormasdes, by his hand does bleed.
This accident, if you'll be pleased to call
My Brother back? may reconcile us all.

I never shall consent to his desires,
Though I my anger, and revenge remove,
In complement to you, whom I do love.

Madam, if doing Justice, have displeased!
I do repent, and now your pardon beg.

Since his great insolence, and your revenge,
No Age can parallel! both must submit
To such a censure as the World thinks fit.

Your pardon Madam, is not all my suit,
I beg your interest to obtain like grace
From this sad Lady! my wole Soul is vexed,
To see such innocence, so much perplexed.

I can now secure you there Ormasdes,
She does discreetly Judge, what you have done,
Was, what a man of honour could not shun.
-- Is not this truth Valeriana? speak?

Yes Madam, I do think, I did say so!

What sudden change is this? can your soft heart,
Conceal a thought of ill? towards the man
You have excused? and seemed to smile upon!

She does love Ormasdes, and I am lost.

Pray leave us, all with-draw! to the next Room: --
-- What have I said? that can disturb you thus?
Impart your griefs, and I will share in them.

I dare not show them with an open Face!

And why, you cannot have a guilt so great,
That I cannot forgive; speak it freely.

Has not my face, my guilty heart betrayed?

I understand you not!

-- I am safe then, and may my sorrow hide.

Madam, what means this talking to your self?
While I stand by neglected! is your trust
So great? that you can doubt I will be just?

I doubt my self great Queen, and fear not you;
She's jealous of me, and my thoughts too true!
She loves Ormasdes, and most unhappy I,
Am forced to smile on my own Tragedy;
I know no way to hide my broken heart,
Unless I do immediately depart! --
-- Madam, I beg your Pardon, and your Pass,
I must begone, lest I too late alas!
By my distempers here, deserve your blame,
And raise my memory, eternal shame.

You are not well sure, this distracted talk,
Requires Physicians to consult, I'll send; --

Oh no! there needs no more consult for this,
You only can restore me unto bliss!

And can you doubt, that I will not?

I ^ear so!

What I can do, be you assured, I will.

What I desire, may be more prized by you,
Then is the Citherean Diadem!
-- Will you know now? and if not grant! forgive?
For I am desperate on the sudden grown.
And am resolved to make my weakness known.

Speak it aloud, or in my bosom breath.
The troubles of thy soul, let not a thought
Be hid, but freely show, how much you trust
My love, and you shall find me kind, and just.

Do not you Madam, value Ormasdes
Person? and his service above all men's?

Yes, I do.

You are Just, and Worthy; -- and I am --

Help, help, some help there!

'Tis love, upon my life!

Leave us again, the dangers over now;

I beg your permission to retire.

My best wishes still attend Ormasdes.

What can I say, t'excuse what I have done?

Speak plainly your full thoughts, and I'm your friend;
But if you longer dally with my love!
You will my friendship, unto anger move.

I know you have discovered by my words,
That your esteem of him, you boldly own,
Becomes the ground of my distraction;

You love him then! that look declares it now!
And so do I, or I would nee'r consent,
To give him unto you; if this cure grow
Within my reach! Ormasdes shall be yours.

Is not your Majesty engaged to him?

Indeed, I am not so in Love with him,
But I can second your desires; and will
With all my power endeavour to persuade
Ormasdes, that he meet with open Arms,
So great a blessing, by the Gods designed;
Though I must part with what I value most,
Your passion never shall by me be crossed.

Madam, your kindness to me flows so fast,
That I am now in danger to be lost,
By my abundant joy for this success
You give, of unexpected happiness.

Remove these sullen clouds, from thy fair Eyes,
And be thy self again, for I will show
Ormasdes suddenly, how great a bliss,
The Heavens prepare to Crown his Virtue with.

The Gods reward you with your highest wish!
That you may never want, what you desire,
My spirits fail so fast! I must retire.

Do so; what's this. I have so rashly done!
Thrown off Ormasdes I depended on!
Must I persuade him quit that interest here,
Which for my sake, he purchased so dear!
-- How ill shall I repay his service past?
If I advise, this banishment at last;
What a rash promise, has my pity made?
By thus proposing my improper Ay'd!
Though by the secret charms of Sympathy,
Her passion won my reason to comply;
I must on this employment Titus use,
My Honour will my active part excuse.
-- But if his Arguments should not prevail?
And by my nicety, the business fail?
-- If she should perish so? and I repent
Too late, that ill! which I may yet prevent;
-- I must about it then, and loose no time,
Lest my nice complements do prove a crime!
-- My faith is past, and I will now proceed,
Though brave Ormasdes do condemn the Deed.

Madam, my desperate State, and high transport,
You may complain of, though not blame me for it;
Your Eyes, like bright misguiding Fires, betray
My wandering soul, and make me loose my way.
'Tis now too late, to see that I am lost,
Led by those guides, to this obdurate coast,
Where neither Rocks appear, nor crossing Tides;
Yet this expected safety, ruin hides!
-- But I must claim you by a solemn vow,
Made in the sight of Heaven; and am come now,
To prove my Birth, which you will not deny,
Is with your own of equal Quality;
These are such Arguments, for your consent,
I cannot think, you dare your vows repent.

It cannot well be thought, and much less said,
That I repent a promise, never made;
How could such hasty words, strict vows appear?
Which my surprise, then made me speak in fear!
When you to seize me, stretched those Lions paws,
And threatened against all Hospitable Laws!
Worse then Death to me; what might I not do?
To get from such a Monstrous Beast as you!

Did my humility such danger threat?
Or my submission, with such horror treat!
Were it even so, as you your self have said!
I might my own conditions, then have made.

Did you not all my Servants first exclude?
And me into a lonenesse so delude,
As that no rescue could be had! to free
Me from your Traitorous Captivity.
When you with humble looks, strong fetters laid,
And words let fall, which made my soul afraid;
And caused me use some little Art, to gain
Your trust, that I my freedom might obtain.

'Tis true indeed, and you reproach me well,
Or else you might another story tell!
For I confess, I did too much! to prove
The humble passion of a gentle Love;
And much too little, now to justify
My high affections, or my fact deny.
Had I with vigour, my first step pursued,
You might have wished my vows, with yours renewed.

You talk, as now, I at your mercy were;
As if you still might threat; and I must fear!
But I shall make you know your self, and me,
If you proceed not with more modesty!
And shall soon let Cleandra understand,
How well you treated me! on her command.

Though I do shake, and tremble at your frown,
Cleandras anger, cannot bow me down.
For if my suffering no compassion move,
Nor your past vows, make you regard my Love!
You shall then see, how little I esteem
This Life, you will not with a smile redeem!

I am not thus ungrateful as you say,
So I may be secured another way;
-- I did not threat, till you aspersed my Name,
By this false promise, you unjustly claim.
For though your Birth flow from a Noble Spring,
'Tis something less, then Daughter to a King.
And more, I must the secret now impart,
That brave Ormasdes long since, had my heart.

Madam, I have no Plea beyond my Love,
If that, do of too mean a value prove!
Think how your honour stands engaged by vow,
And that my All, depends upon it now!
Yet here I do before the Gods profess,
To quit my Title, if my Birth be less!

From Nearcus, the Gods will me protect,
Who boldly must a subjects claim, reject.

Which I am not; but a Prince Nobly born,
As is Cleandra! though you now do scorn
The Man, who laid his greatness at your feet,
Without a thought, of Royalty to meet!
Your Virtue, and your Beauty did engage
My heart to Love; and did create that rage,
You now so much condemn; and make me shame
I did no more, who was so much to blame!

You do amaze me! knows Cleandra this?

She yet does not, but must do, when I plead!
My Title to Valerianas Bed.
For Madam, you can only now be mine,
Made so by humane Laws, and by Divine.

What ere you are! I do much scorn to think
Of being compelled, and will strong poison drink,
Rather then be by such a trick betrayed,
Or of your scandalous reports, afraid;
Your first attempt was base; and now as vain
Your hopes are; you are a Prince! I do disdain
To have a thought for him, who poorly can,
Demand, what's given to another man.
I must this Injury at last reveal,
And to the Queen, for Justice now appeal.

I am content, then let Cleandra judge.

I'll hear no more.

What a strange heat I feel, that always burn,
Yet do not waste, cannot to Ashes turn!
But like a Fire-flaming Statue stand,
To warn the World, not to approach this Land;
Ye Gods! how cruel is your doom? that she
Melts not; but should an Icy Mountain be,
Of power to kindle such tormenting Fires,
Where her own frozen heart, has no desires.

I Shall allow your Argument for War,
If the Treconian do provoke so far!
But how shall I, Valeriana free?
From her fierce Brothers great barbaritie;
And how Estate her in her Mothers Land!
If her mad Brother, should that right withstand!
Though she do now desire but what's her own,
If he should dye; She must Ascend that Throne.

I have heard so, and that, by my rash Act,
She suffers, which makes me repent the Fact!

Her virtues, do her beauty far excel,
And in my judgment, have no parallel;
What is your thought? will not the man be blessed?
Whom Gods with such felicities invest!

I doubt not Madam, her perfections may
In hearts of Men; above her Sceptre sway.

She has won me, to a concern so high,
As if my own, were the same Destiny
With hers; my thoughts do labour where to treat
A Marriage, with some Prince, worthy so great
A Queen; can you Ormasdes find me one
To recommend? will Greece afford us none?

Madam, if Citherea can produce
None fit! for Greece, there will need no excuse; --

I think so too, unless Ormasdes will
Himself, thus my prophetic foul fulfil:
That does such glories, and such joys foresee,
As may endure unto Eternity. --

Me Madam! does your Majesty think me
A man, worthy of so great Felicity?
Alas I am too old, now to begin
To Love! you may as soon learn me to spin;
-- My Sword, and Armour, into Needles turn,
As teach my Age, in Youthful flames to burn.

'Tis you Ormasdes, are the man so blessed,
Her love to you, she has to me confessed;
And me in honour has engaged to try,
If I can now persuade you to comply.

Madam, I hope you do not thus abuse
Your servant, cause my nature does refuse,
Such correspondence with your Sex, as might
Engage a braver Man; Oh do not fight
Against my weakness! that must now confess,
I never unto Lady made address;
And only chose this solitary place,
That I might here some quiet thoughts embrace.
-- Sure Madam, you mistake; how can it be?
That she should covet such Antipothy!
-- Can the good Gods to her be so unkind?
To let such excellence, become so blind?

Think you her self knows? what her self desires?
Or that she has no sense, of those quick fires,
That do consume her! can you doubt such Love?
Which through despair, did then so mortal prove!
That but to name Ormasdes, she did Dye,
'Till you appeared, to change that destiny;
-- And when you all retired, she did confess,
Her life depended on her good success;
Your Glorious Acts, had raised so loud a Fame,
That she was first in love with your great Name!
Which brought her hither, with a full intent,
To Judge, and Justify, that Argument.

Madam, I must believe what you avow,
And do so far your Argument allow,
That it has raised in me, a greater War,
Then I was ever in; and am so far
From slighting this affair, that I descry,
My certain Ruin, by this Victory.
The Gods cannot afford less punishment,
If I refuse to hear! and if consent!
I'm lost to all my joys on Earth; for Fa^e
Has not in store, nor can the Gods create
An evil, I fear more, then to deny,
What you command; though a sad Destiny;
-- Can nothing less then my destruction? save
This Excellence? from an untimely Grave!

If I could see this danger you foretell?
Ormasdes harms should make no other well!
Though Valeriana do my pity move,
Ormasdes friendship, is before her Love
In my esteem; but if this match unite
Your hearts? it will our Children then invite,
To imitate our friendship, and so ^ye
Fast knots, for everlasting Amity.

My mind can move my body any way,
But my hard heart, will not my will obey;
My utmost power, my soul to mourn shall teach,
Because my Affection, is beyond my reach!

If you oppose not, but your Ear will lend,
I doubt not, but the Gods your heart will bend
This way, and your good nature in short time,
Will make you wish for, what you judge my crime*

Although I cannot wish, and must not choose,
I would not Madam willingly refuse,
What you advise; but boldly meet my Fate;
That no one thought, may a vain fear Create,
Lest you should judge my slackness for neglect,
Because I grasp not, what I cannot affect.

Can you such pleasure take, in this disguise?
Be thus retired? and all that's good despise,
When offered! do you fear? or scorn to meet
This Excellence now fallen at your feet!
-- Is your great heart Ormasdes, only made
For dangerous attempts? shall it be said?
This Paragon of all our Sex! now dyes,
Because Ormasdes, does her Love despise!

No Madam, I do suffer more, then she
Does for her self! hers is my misery;
I dare not virtue, with vain hopes abuse,
I cannot love; and therefore do refuse
To dally with so bright a Saint, whose Shrine,
Compels all hearts to bow before't, but mine;
I am not capable of Love; not blessed
That way! my heart's with other flames possessed.

All flames you feel, would vanish, did you see
Valeriana in such misery;
As she endures! now fetching her last breath,
Enquiring your health, neglecting her own death.
Thus my compassion has her sorrows learned,
I weep her Tears, while you stand unconcerned!

Madam, your passion does my pity move,
Though my dull heart cannot consent to Love;
My resolution is now fixed; I'll try
My self to vanquish, or her Martyr Dye!
-- I swear, I did not hear that she was ill,
And now it does my soul with horror fill,
For her concern; no danger is so great,
But I will rather dye in it then, retreat.

'Tis bravely said, but dare you try the effect,
Of one short visit? after such neglect!

Thus provoked! if your Majesty stands by!
I will not such a visit now deny.

You speak, and look, as if you meant to fright,
Much rather, then revive her by your sight!

Madam, to Complement, I have no skill,
Nor can be pleased, if loved against my will!
Yet sensible, and civil, I can be,
Though it do prove unfortunate to me.

When shall I bring this comfort? to revive
Her fainting soul; if she be still alive.

Is she really so weak; so soon grown
Thus ill? I have no skill, in this unknown
Mystery of love! but will boldly try,
What I can do, for her recovery.

High passions do weak bodies sooner bring
To the Graves mouth, then any other thing;
Her despairs, are of a much longer date,
Though sudden sickness do break out thus late;
-- When I your humour, did a first rehearse,
And showed, how your whole life had been averse
To Love; she sighed, and presently grew pale,
Despair that minute, made her spirits fail;
And so transported by her fancy, fell,
As if my doubts, had rung her passing bell.

Though I cannot speak, nor do yet know how
To look; I'm ready to attend you now!

I fear so sudden, and so great a joy!
As your approach; may equally destroy!
Let me her heart prepare, that by degrees,
She may but hope retain, before she see
The comfort, that your visit brings; and then
Ormasdes may ere long, prove best of Men.

Madam, I do my self to you submit,
Pray order me in all, as you think fit.

You shall then stand unseen, while I do tell
This welcome story, which will make her well:
And then by what you'll see, you may observe,
How my true friendship will from both deserve!
Who have no wish beyond Ormasdes good,
When time shall make me rightly understood.

Madam, I have now no more to say,
But that I will your Majesty obey.

You shall not stir Ormasdes till I send.

Did you not meet Cleandra going out?

Yes, but I have business of importance,
Pray let us withdraw, and be more private.

Come this way then: --

Why have you drawn me to this inner Room?
Is the secret, of so piercing quality?
That fewer Walls then these, cannot contain it!

It is my Lord of a high nature grown,
I must impart it to your self alone;
-- You and I must kill one another now;

May not I live? though you are pleased to dye?

No Sir, since 'tis decreed that I must die.
I am resolved to have you Company.
-- There's a Sword, the same with mine, defend you.

Hold a while* --
-- May not I know the cause of this hatred?

I have no hatred, yet endeavour must,
That we together may revert to dust.
Though you by chance have robbed me of my right
-- I'd not out-live Ormasdes, if I might!

From whence does this strange kindness to me grow?
Say, for I will not fight, until I know!

This then, will teach you to defend your self:

I shall call my Servants, unless you now show
The cause of this distracted fury?

I will: --
-- Valeriana's my Quarrel;
She throws neglects on me, and dotes on you.

You are mistaken sure, and much abused!
It is not possible! -- She dotes on me!
Who never courted Lady in my life!

By all that's good, she told me so her self.

This must be some design, beyond my reach!
But if true? from whence does my guilt arise?
Who never heard of your pretence, 'till now!
Nor have a serious thought for hers, to me;
If such a folly, do her heart possess;
Am I to answer for her guiltiness?

I do accuse you, of no guilt at all;
But joy to think, if by my hand you fall;
It will Create in her such misery,
As will adorn my death with Victory.

If such revenge, and malice you intend,
Where is the Love, that you so much pretend?

We'll talk of that, as our two souls expire;
She flattered me with hopes, that blew my Fire,
She threw out vows to marry me, and now
In hope of you, disowns that holy vow.

Made vows to marry you! and yet love me!
Pray show me how, this story does agree?
I swear, I never had a thought of Love
To Lady in my life; and will now quit
The interest you pretend, rather then fight --
For such imaginary Dreams, as this.

You must Fight.

No, disarm him, -- so, now leave us alone, --
-- Nearcus, I have loved you, and shall still,
If you'll permit! what does this story mean?

By Hey -- Valeriana did engage
To marry me; if my Birth equalled hers!
But now repents, in hope to marry you.

This story grows stranger, and stranger still,
Does your Birth equal hers? on which you ground
Your Title, and on which her vow was made.

It does, Ormasdes, and did hers exceed,
When I first urged that sacred Vow she made;
She but a Subject, unto me appeared.

And are you other now?

Yes, have you not heard that Prince Orontes,
Brother to our late King, had a young Son
Called Leonatus, who by sad mishap,
Fencing with the Prince, hurt him in the Eye,
Of which hurt he dyed; and the King enraged,
Made vows to Sacrifice the Murderer;
As if the mischief, purposely were done!
In order to his own Succession; --
-- (After Cleandra;) who was then married,
To a young Prince in Greece, and settled there.

I'ave often heard the Queen, with sighs lament
Her Brothers loss, by that sad accident:
And say, she pitied Leonatus death,
As innocent! for that unhappy youth,
She heard, was drowned, endeavouring to escape
Her Fathers Vengeance, he unjustly vowed.

She was mis-inform'd, my Lord, he yet lives;
'Twas by this fatal hand, her brother fell;
And I accursed, that have thus long survived!
To fall a mis-becoming Sacrifice,
To Love; by a disdainful Ladies Eyes*
After so long concealment, and so safe!
By Old Nearcus, put in this disguise,
Bred as his Son; but now, I life despise;
And call to have that Justice on me done,
Which I have used much industry to shun.

You tell me wonders, of a different kind,
Of which I shall enquire; and if I find
Valeriana stands engaged to you?
And all this story of your self prove True!
I will my best endeavours soon employ,
This gross mistake of me, to rectify.

If my address, do find no good success!
The business of my life, shall be to dye,
And whether by your hand, or by command
From our great Queen? it is the same to me,
The Princess must my life, or death decree.

I shall conceal your Name, until I see,
I may reveal it with security;
And in few hours, if my desires succeed!
You shall from all your doubts, and fears be freed.

You will oblige me ever, if you do!

My hour is come, to wait upon the Queen,
Unto Valeriana, where this News,
I hope will bring me off, from the first Rock: --
-- By Valeriana to be thus loved!
And by Cleandra, for another wooed!
And by Nearcus killed, I know not why!
To me is a new kind of Mystery.

Is not the Queen returned to Court yet?

No, Madam.

I wish she were; my heart dissolves so fast!
That I do find, I shall few minutes last.

Your fancy does your weakness much increase,
This passion, is the worst of your disease.

Oh Madam! you are much wished for here.

Let all withdraw, I must be private now,
Only do you Ormasdes, stand unseen; --
-- How is it with my friend?

I'm glad that you are come to close my Eyes,
My spirits waste so fast, that I must dye!

I hope not yet Valeriana.

A lass Madam, I had not lived till now,
But for the joy my broken heart conceives,
In hopes to hear Ormasdes is grown well,
Before I leave this World.

'Twas the distemper of an Ague fit,
And he is now so far from being sick,
That he without, begs leave to visit you.

Me, did you say? to visit me Madam!
Will Ormasdes visit me? is it so?

Yes, he's without, and does by me desire
You will admit him; -- Why are you silent?
Now my endeavours prosper to your wish!

Does wise Cleandra think it will be sit?
That I in such a passion leave this World!
As I shall do, if I see Ormasdes! --
-- I shame to think that he should see me dye,
Yet cannot choose, but wish it heartily!

Shall I call him in then? why do you doubt?

Oh Madam, I dare not see him; must not!
You have said something, to bring him hither!
Makes me fear to see him; it must not be!

Pray see him, and let this great crime, be mine;
His presence, may your troubled heart revive.

He cannot Madam, for 'tis now too late!
I do feel here, the heavy hand of Death,
Is crushing me to Air.

Ormasdes your help! she dies, she dies!

By all our Gods, I will dye with her then!

She lives again! Ormasdes your help now; --
-- So, let her head lye a little from us.

For Heaven sake Madam, tell what I must say?
Or what now must do? is she not dead still?

Does not her hand inform you, that she lives?
Is it not warm?

Oh yes! 'tis warm, but I, who never dared
Thus boldly touch a Ladies hand till now;
Understand not how to use it, as I ought!

There needs no other kindness, then you show,
-- How is it now Valeriana?

Well Madam, too well, I fear, to last so:
I dare not look that way, because I blush
To think how I have scandalised my Sex!
And how Ormasdes now is justified!
In his contempt of Women, for my sake!
I have no power to take away my hand,
Yet dare not own, to leave it with him longer.

Oh why? what has Ormasdes ever done?
Justly to merit this dissertion?

Pray Madam, say something in my behalf;
Either to hide, or to excuse my shame.

Turn this way then, and let your Eyes excuse
That guilt, which will Ormasdes disabuse.

She looks desperately ill!

'Tis only weakness, and no danger in it;
Pray call her Servants, and let us retire.

Retire! you have engaged me now so far,
That I must see the Battle won, or lost!
Before I can consent, to a Retreat.

'Tis late, and she must sleep.

Why Madam, so she may, though I be by!
I'll sit as silent as the God of sleep,
And here attend, while her tired servants rest.

You will not watch all night Ormasdes?

Oh but I will Madam; watch night, by night,
Till she recover! This is my fixed Post,
Appointed by the Gods; not your command,
Nor any force, has power to take me hence;
While this good Sword will hold for my defence.

Why so fierce, and violent Ormasdes?
I am much joyed, to see you thus concerned!
And on this quarrel, am not like to fight
With such a man at Arms, by Candle-light!

For Heaven sake Madam, pardon my rash words,
And disrespect unto your Majesty;
For I do scarce know what I say, or do;
I am become a stranger to my self,
So suddenly transformed, that I would hide
Me from your sight, if I durst stir from hence!

I will forgive, so you'll let me direct
Your future actions, I'll your Love protect!

If you'll command? -- I gladly will obey.

You must submit, to what she does appoint.

Most willingly.

Does our discourse, these sighs, and tears produce?

You have said nothing that will need excuse.
These Tears slow from joy, and gratitude,
To you great Queen, who by this act, include
More pious pity, then past stories tell; --
To make Ormasdes counterfeit so well!
-- This thought raised those unruly sighs you heard,
And Madam, now it makes my soul afraid,
To see so great a courage thus submit,
To flatter me, because you think it fit;
-- At your command, to put on this disguise,
In kindness unto one, he does despise.

Do you then think his kindness counterfeit?
Can his great soul consent, to such deceit?

I can yet find no argument, for ground,
To change so great contempt, as I have found,
Into so high esteem! as he does now,
By your advice, in charity allow;
That my last minutes, may some pleasure have,
He yields, to send me smiling to my grave.

You cannot judge so ill, of him you love;
Nor can so brave a man, so worthless prove!

I do confess, I should be glad to find
All real that I see; and his great mind
The same brave Character he had, maintain
Through his whole life; and not that glory stain;
But if it be real, this comes now too late,
His kindness cannot change the course of Fate!

Think not of Death, for if you will endure
The Trial? I will undertake the Cure;
I see your sufferings do compassion move,
Which in most generous hearts, does turn to Love.

Madam, I know not what, you do call love,
Nor how in that fantastic Sphere to move!
I cannot talk the language Lovers use,
When they design fair Ladies to abuse;
Nor can I yet, by this experience guess,
If Love, or a distraction, does possess,
My heart? give me but leave to watch this night,
That while you sleep, I may my heart invite,
To tell me what it ails! if it be Love?
What all the World allows! I shall approve:
And then, I'll rather dye, then e're forsake
What I avow, or what I undertake.

Pray Madam, give him leave to watch this night
Some serious thoughts may set his fancy right.
He has lain often on the frozen ground,
On less occasion, and more danger found.

I shall not rest then, though you think it fit,
I shall condemn my self, if I submit.

'Tis somewhat more then custom does allow,
I must confess; but how to help it now,
Who knows? you see he is resolved to beat
Us all, if we but mention his Retreat.

Pray let not this my first suit be denied,
But give me leave to sit on yonder side,
As silent as sleep self; my body shall
Be fixed, as is that figure on the Wall.

Let him Valeriana, pray consent,
'Twill prove his honour, or his punishment!

Who can have more care? who so fit as I,
To watch? who am resolved with her to Dye.
-- Good rest unto your Majesty.

He'll turn me out, if I refuse to go!
-- But why Ormasdes do you tremble so?

This shaking fit may to a Fever turn,
And I, e're day, in Loves bright flames may burn.

ALl Eyes are shut, all hearts can rest, but mine,
I've something here, that will not let me sleep:
-- Tis Love, I am bewitched, or it is Love!
That thus disturbs my body, and distracts
My mind; no other passion works like this!
Well then, if it be Love! where's the wonder?
The wisest, bravest, and the greatest men,
Have been in Love as much, or more then I;
-- But why then was I, thus long without it?
Why did not bright Cleandras Beauty burn?
Why was not this Fire kindled until now?
How comes Valeriana by this power?
To wound me deeper, then Cleandra did!
My Kind, loving heart, how comes this to pass?

Ha! Her spirit by that sigh informs me,
That doubled groan, struck through my wavering soul,
Oh thou Divinest power! what ere thou art!
I do submit, Valerianas groans,
Are all sufficient Arguments for Love!
It seems, my stony heart, was proof against
All charms, but deep fetched sighs, and dying groans;
By which, 'tis now made supple, and so soft,
That it is ready to take any form;
That sick Valeriana shall direct; --
-- Great God of Love, forgive my past neglects,
And now restore this Lady to her health,
Then I with Insense will thy Altars load,
Thy Temple with those Trophies, now adorn,
Which my whole life prepared, for Mars and Jove.
Since they allow me to submit to Love!

Drusilla.

Madam, your Servants do all sleep, but I.

I would not have waked you, Ormasdes.

You have not Madam, I have not slept yet;
Pray let your Servant know what 'tis you want!

I want assurance of a thing I doubt.

Can I give you that assurance?

Yes.

And will you not lay that command on me?

Do they all sleep?

They do.

Ormasdes I would know, what I do fear,
You are pre-ingag'd never to tell me;

By your fair self, I swear, I'm not engaged
In any kind, but may, and will impart,
What ever in my knowledge, you inquire.

My first doubts does still remain, that the Queen
Upon assurance of my sudden death,
Has won you, thus to flatter my last hours,
Like glittering Sun-shine upon dying Flowers.

Madam, by all that's Holy, she has not:
What shall I say? what do? to gain your Faith?

You have done it now; I am satisfied.
And do believe all's truth, Ormasdes speaks,
But I do fear this truth appears too late.

Why Madam? have you made vows against me?
Will no repentance? nor no penance serve,
To wash away my Sins against your Sex;
Will you, that Universal quarrel wed?
And bring destruction on your servants head?

Vows Ormasdes, and those against you made!
Oh do not take away the Joy you gave,
By such a thought; I never wished, nor prayed,
For blessing upon Earth, beyond your Love,
Which you in charity, so amply show,
That I do doubt I dream, what I enjoy.

Madam, you do now misjudge my passion,
To call that charity, which may be love
For ought I know; this so late acquaintance,
With my new heart, is short, and my transports
So great, it must be madness, if not love:
For, give me leave to swear, that I will know
No other Joys then yours, nor thoughts admit,
But with design to serve, and honour you.

I do now wish the Gods my life would spare,
And make me worthy of Ormasdes care.

Madam, you speak a Language of respect
To me, who merit nothing but neglect;
Your favours flow so fast, they over-whelm
My heart with joys, and raise my soul so high,
It turns amazement into ecstasy!

I should not talk thus, if I did not see it;
Tis harde for you now to hide, then shew't:
I do not fear your passion will go less,
But doubt by death to loose, what I possess.

You cannot dye Madam, I have no fear
To find so great a curse, from Heaven sent,
I only doubt I sleep! and fear to wake
Lest this abundant bliss should vanquish quite,
And so involve me in Eternal Night;
May I presume to beg a favour yet?
Which will my fancy ^ix, and so confirm
My doubtful soul 'tis real, and no dream.

You may.

I beg that Ring you wear; but if of price
Too great for me? pardon my Avarice.

'Tis a trifle, ask something of more worth.

Sure nothing can of greater value be
If you repent, what you now promised me.

You ask, what is not in my power to give!
My dying Mother with this Ring, bequeathed
Her curse, if ever I did part with it!
But to the man I meant to make my Lord.

'Tis a charm not to be dissolved, by me;
Who dare not touch it, on the terms you name;
I was ambitious to wear it Madam,
But only as your servant, not your Lord.

It never can be had, on easier terms;
Ormasdes you must have this, and me together,
Alive or dead, you must have both, or neither.

All my Limbs do tremble, at what I hear,
I dare not understand the words you speak,
Lest my mistakes, do give you an offence,
Beyond a pardon, for such impudence.

You do not mistake me, nor can you err!
If you'll avow, this kindness that you show.

By all our Gods, I think my flame is Love,
I know no other name for what I feel,
But if you doubt? propose a way to try,
And as it proves, declare my destiny.

I will consider on some way to try,
But must submit unto this drowsiness,
For some minutes time, 'twill take me from you!
Pray Sir, command the Music now to play.

She has talked her self into a Repose,
Now I will try to get a little Rest.
That my tired fancy, may at last be fixed.

So -- when he calls to mind, what I have said;
He can expect no more, then I now give;
-- Great goddess of pure hearts, protect my fame,
And this rash act, forgive; which frights me now;
To such repentance, with such sudden pain,
I am resolved to take it off again,
-- His hand is so fast closed, I cannot do it;
And to wake him in the attempt, is worse;
Such boldness may a double censure get,
I blush to think how rashly I begun,
And now repent the folly I have done: --
-- His hand opens: --
And now 'tis mine again,
Oh blessed accident!

Wake them not; has Ormasdes walked to night?
From that corner, hither, in his sleep?
Did any of you hear them talk in the night?

Not I Madam.

Nor I.

I heard none stir Madam.

The Queen; is it so late?

You have had a hard Lodging my Lord.

I have had the happiest night Madam;
And am Richer far then both the Indies; --
-- Ha! I am undone, undone for ever!

What look you for my Lord? what have you lost?

I had it now, just now, on this finger!
I look for Treasure Madam, worth the World;
-- 'Twas no dream, it must be here abouts!
-- I beg your pardon Madam, for this search,
Which does concern my life, and honour too.

This is the strangest passion, I ere ^aw,
Has your great loss, no name to know it by?

Yes, I have lost Valerianas Ring.

You did but dream, see, 'tis on her Finger:

How! 'tis so indeed, do I not dream now?
Or do the Gods us men with shadows mock?
When we do seek such great felicities,
As they allow us not to have below!
-- What a strange height of bliss? am I fallen from?

Has this one night, such mutual friendship gained?
That the prophetic Ring, could be obtained!

I know not what to say, nor what to think!
I know not when I sleep, or when I wake!
Yet must believe that Ring, was mine this night;
And I have lost that Treasure* Childishly:
Some kind friend strike me hard, that I may feel
I now am waking; your pardon Madam,
For my disaster makes me almost mad.

How have you slept Valeriana?

Very well Madam, for one so weak!

Did you not wake about mid-night Madam?

Not that I remember.

Was ever man so much abused in's sleep?

Ormasdes, what means your disordered looks?

He finds his waking fancies, are much less
Delightful, then his sleeping happiness.

I dream't Madam, that Ring you prize so much,
Was this night, by you, put on my Finger;
When a thousand, thousand joys fell on me,
Which now waking, I have no name for.

My Ring Ormasdes! and on your Finger!
And by me put on! 'twas a dream indeed!
I hope, you do not waking, think it fit,
That I should waking do so bold an act.

Madam, it does not become me to say
I wish, what you do not allow; nor dare
I tell so great a lye, as to deny,
The joy I dreamed of, when I thought I saw,
And did believe I felt, it once was mine.

'Tis far from my serious thoughts Ormasdes,
After such high passion, as I have showed,
Now to raise any discontent in you,
But do not lessen your esteem of me,
By the acquisition of such favours,
As you your self, in others would condemn!
Have we not both, at first sight, done enough,
To justify, what we profess; I fear
Too much on my part, did not Cleandra
Own, all that she has done, on my behalf.

I submit, and will wish, and think, and do
What the wise Queen, and you advise me to.

Ormasdes has not lost his time I see,
Nor my design for your recovery,
Fallen short! the Gods in their good time will bring
You to give, and him to accept the Ring.
May your new friendship never know decay,
But freely both command, and both obey:
-- I must now leave you for an hour, or two.

Madam, is this a fit time to enquire
Nearcus Story? may I now desire
You, to unriddle the bold claim, he makes.

You shall hereafter have it all at large,
Only know now, he used a violence,
In show, with such unparalleled deceits!
Such insolent demands, so cunning couched!
His threats, with humble looks, so plain disguised;
That at first sight, I found, I was surprised;
Then, to avoid his purpose, I was forced,
To use such doubtful words, to bring me off,
His madness did interpret his own way;
While I was safe, by what I wisely said,
To farther my escape, when so afraid!
Thus was Cleandras trust, and mine abused;
A baser treachery, was never used.

You have informed me fully of his fact.
I suddenly will find Nearcus out,
And hurl such vengeance, on his cursed head,
That all the World shall say, 'tis well he's dead.

'Tis strange, I hear not of Ormasdes yet!
If he oblige me really! I'm his,
If not! I shall resume my first resolves,
This his delay, begets more jealousies,
Then my impatient burning heart, can bear. --

-- Now Sir, how have I prospered in your hands?

As you deserve.

How is that?

With much scorn rejected.

Is that my merit, in your opinion?

In mine, as in Cleandras, and in all!
Who have heard the ground of your false claim,
Which the fair Princess, and her Servants tell;
-- A Treachery so base, an act so foul!
That all do think, Nearcus has no soul.

This you dare justify?

I had not dared to tell it else! me thinks
My looks might show, my business was to find
You out, and now to let you know, I must
Defend the Princess, in a cause so just.
-- Before I knew Valerianas heart,
Or was at all acquainted with my own;
I judged your cause, against her innocence.
But now informed the right from all, I find
No argument, in Justice to compel,
Such a forced promise to Nearcus made,
Should now to Leonatus be performed.
Your juggling Arts, and your disguised Name,
With your unworthy force, ore throws your claim.

You are become a subtle Orator,
Since you conversed with Ladies; but I shall
Your great Eloquence, with this steel convince;
I am not to be frighted by big words,
We now must try the temper of our Swords.

We must indeed, though I lament, my hand
Should harm a man, unto the Queen aly'd.

Shall that scruple, and this good Sword once more,
Teach you to call for help? as heretofore!

I may change your opinion, with my own.

Come then.

Get Surgeons for Nearcus presently;
My hurt is slight.

'Tis by your good nature, Valeriana,
That this mans evil spirit threatens us,
Had you revealed Nearcus treachery!
His punishment had suited with his crime.

Madam, I do confess my lenity
May have emboldened him to higher ills,
Which my just complaint, might have prevented;
But then, how hard a censure should I gain?
By ruining so Eminent a man!
Who from his principles of honour fell,
Through love to me, though I contemned his hopes,
His passion made me pity his distress,
So far, as his first error to forgive,
In hope he might in better order live.

You argue well, and ought to justify
Your gentle disposition, to forgive.
Mercy, does a young Princess, much adorn,
But I am bound to vindicate my self,
My Nation suffers, if I be not just,
To punish crimes like this! I break my trust;
He is the first, that ever da^'d asperse
The Citherean Name, by such a fact,
As no past Chronicle, can parallel!
I shake to think, how great your danger was!
And how much greater might have been my shame,
To trust a man, who values not his fame.

Let not his faults your anger higher raise,
The punishment he feels, by ill success,
Is a just doom, for his unworthiness.

His sentence must, to after times appear,
Lest my story be blemished with a thought,
That I did wink at such a crime as this!
My people will exclaim, the Gods will frown,
If such a wickedness unpunisht pass!
He must dye Valeriana, his house
Be burnt, the ashes scattered in the Air,
With prayers to appease our Citherian Gods,
We cannot offer a less Sacrifice.

For my sake, let his doom, be banishment.
If I have any favour in your Eyes?
Make not me guilty by that Sacrifice.

Rise Madam, you shall govern as you please.

Ormasdes, are you hurt, by that vil'd man?

It is too little, to be called a wound!
I come now, to beg Nearcus pardon;
'Twas I that did enforce him to this fight.

And I, most wronged, who freely do forgive.

The wrong was done to me Valeriana,
I put you in his power, my trust, he broke;
My honour, for your safety, was engaged!
Our Nation suffers, by his Villainy;
The Citherean honour calls for Justice,
Against so barbarous a breach of Faith;
Nor was it you provoked, but were compelled
By him to fight, for innocence aspersed!

Madam, though I shall never justify
Nearcus actions; his misfortune may
Admit excuse; Because humane nature
Is subject to passions, which the best men
Can never manage, as they ought! how then,
May Valeriana's beauty guilty be?
That did excite Nearcus love; and led
Him into this distraction, past his power!
To manage his own heart; (as we think best;)
If so! 'tis she has turned him to a Beast;
But when your Majesty shall call to mind,
The gallant service by this Mad-man done;
You will then pity his Distraction.

What means this boldness?

Madam, I come not to beg your pardon,
But to justify my actions, and my self;
Against Ormasdes, who does now with-hold
Valeriana, my betrothed Wife,
Confirmed by vows, in presence of the Gods.

Now Ormasdes! is he fit for pardon?

Yes Madam, as a distracted person!

Why do you wrong my person, and my cause?
To call my just Title, a distraction;
Do me Justice Cleandra, or give me Death!

You may have both your wishes in good time:
Cleobulus, guard him to the Castle.

Pray Madam, let his doom be banishment,
Because his Crime, went not beyond intent.

Madam, he must thank you, for his life then;
-- Cleobulus, see him a close prisoner,
Until his wounds, permit his Banishment.

I do your proffered mercies, all refuse,
And either Death, or Valeriana choose.

Lead him to banishment: make him obey.

Hold a little: -- Cleandra look, this way,
Tis Leonatus calls; he who at foils,
The young Prince your Brother slew;
And fled your Fathers rage, (until his death!)
Then sheltered by this borrowed Name, returned,
And in Nearcus Family secured,
By this disguise; lived as his only Son,
Who dyed, as I returned; -- is it death yet?

No, this insolence, shall not change your doom,
Nor your confessed disguise, (long known to me,)
Force a punishment beyond the merit
Of that sad mishap! which I believe
Was fatal accident! no purposed crime!
Though my Father looked on his only Son,
By your hand slain, with such revenging rage!
As might his loss become, and him engage
To throw out vows, that Justice should pursue,
So great a Traitor, as he then thought you;
For your succession after me, became
His fancies object, which increased your blame.
-- But I, who have exactly been informed,
Of my dead Brothers love, and yours, now must
For that sad accident, to you be just,

I'll rather quit my innocence, then own --
Your mercy, when you Justice do deny;
Give me the fair Princess, or give me death.

I cannot with Justice, give you either;
How can I, a free Princes will compel?
Or how Ormasdes true pretence deny?
Or how afford you death, for that offence,
Which your unlucky hand, did act by chance.

Would I had dyed, the day of my return,
Since great Cleandra dares not do me Right;
But suffers false Ormasdes to possess,
What is my due; I all your mercy scorn,
And will the worst of Tyranny endure.

I have employed you as my Brothers friend,
Thus long, not at his Murderer connived!
And until now, by force compelled, my face
To frequent smiles, in favour of your worth,
While my heart ached, to think what you had done!
But you of late, unworthy our great Name,
Have scandalised the Citherean Fame,
Boldly to own a Crime so great! as may incense,
The World to question your first innosence!
Which clearly shows, you are for mischief built,
That dared to entertain so base a guilt!
-- My mercy may prove sin, unless betimes,
My Justice do prevent your farther crimes.

Must I be held? and baited thus to death!
Be torn, and tortured by a Woman's breath?

See my Command obeyed Cleobulus.
-- I shall take order for an Equipage,
Fit for your great, and shall now confine
You to an Island near, from whence you may
Return, if you out-live me, and mine!
-- Remove him hence.

Hold a while! -- curse on, curse light on you all,
For this unjustice, which you mercy call;
Tyrants, cruel Tyrants, your juggling Art,
Lay by, and strike a Dagger through my heart;
-- If Ormasdes any honour have in store?
He'll fight another bout upon the Shore,
As I take ship; and if I chance to Dye!
My soul shall then applaud thy Victory,
And sing thy praise to the infernal Ghosts,
That they may choose thee Captain of their Hosts,
When thou come down! -- Let not a Ladies word
Destroy, by piercing deeper then thy sword! --
-- Will you not answer? cruel, and unjust!
Ye Gods! why put you Scepters into Women's trust?
Who crushes me to raise a Cowards Name!
Whom I will in the Elizium fields Defame,
No honoured Ghost of Troy, shall there own thee,
The Grecian, and the Roman Souls, with me
Will trample on thy Cowards neck, with scorn,
-- Poor shadow of a gallant man, only born
To lye in Ladies laps, perfumed, and curled!
-- I'll Post thee Coward, in the other World.

Tis strange, that none of us should know him!

The general opinion he was drowned,
Made us not see through his disguise;

But his strange passion does amaze me most.
Ormasdes wedding, will his frenzy cure;
When love does see no possibility,
Desires, and hopes, will vanish by degrees.

We see dispairs, work often other ways.

He has disturbed me, but I'll forget him;
-- Valeriana come, let us consult,
The Ceremony of your Wedding-day,
Ormasdes joys, and yours, will blow away
The farther thought, of Leonatus crimes.

Our Wedding Madam! I see no reason
For so great a haste! now we are secure.

Madam, since you have raised my hopes so high!
It were a sin to doubt my destiny!
Yet say, when shall my thoughts so fixed remain?
That I may never think I dream again.

Ormasdes, not too fast, we must proceed
With much discretion, to so great a deed!
The Eyes of all this Nation, do behold
Our actions, and may think my part too bold,
If I again shall do; what I repent!
It would deserve a double punishment;
My over-hasty Love, was once my crime,
I must redeem that fault, by taking time
To finish, what so violent begun,
Lest into greater errors, I do run; --
-- A year or two's delay, will add much grace
To our young Love, which Time cannot deface.

Why have you led me forth, with gentle gales?
Into this dangerous deep? why filled my Sails,
With such propitious winds? us would convey
Me safe to my wished Port, the nearest way.
Why do you now abstruct this happy course?
As if you wished for storms! or something worse!
Why thus forsake the Light? to sailith^ dark,
As if you sought out hazards, for this Bark,
In which, you are the only freight, that I,
Can fear to loose; by my mortality.
Oh! do not then my Joys to time betray,
Lest you do ruin all, by your delay!

How Valeriana! must this Scene of Love,
Fall from its height? and now no farther move!
Does your quick conquest of Ormasdes? make
Him less worthy? when we such prisoners take,
As might our selves command! if they will serve!
We cannot give them more, then they deserve;
Consider well, lest you, your self destroy,
If thus, you do defer Ormasdes joy!

Madam, you, and the World too well do know,
My love to him, can now no higher grow!
I only thus stand off, lest he despise,
A conquest gained, without an enterprise.
And that by injured Sex, hereafter may
Judge of my innocence, by this delay;
Honour forbids, that we in haste engage,
Rash actions often, ill events presage.
Though I, (like a tall Ship that spreads her sails,
When she is carried on, with prosperous gales;
To her wished Port!) do sigh, to be delayed,
And blame the Remora, by which I'm staid.

Honour, and fancy, at great distance stand;
You have no argument for this command,
But your own nice, unnecessary thought,
By which your Virtue, may become a fault!
Tis true, that my neglects to Woman kind,
May urge, that I should now no favour find;
Till my whole life be spent, to gain a bliss,
To crown my latests hours with joys, like this!
I do confess such judgment were my due,
From all the women in the World, but you; --
Who have no argument, nor a pretence,
Why you should prove the Rod for my offence:

Ormasdes true, I only now would prove,
By some short time, the temper of your Love;
And show the World, that mine was not in hast,
Though its first motion moved so fierce and fast!
It makes me blush to think, that this great Queen,
And her whole Nation, have such weakness seen!
As all commanding Love, forced me to show,
Oh! 'tis a bold attempt, when Women woo!

What ere the vulgar think, great Princes may,
The dictates of their greater souls obey;
'Tis a self-doubting sin, when you alone,
Dare not avow, what Gods, and men do own.

These cautious ways, are only fit for such
As have suspected virtues; you are much
Above the reach of Censures; -- 'twas I,
That wooed him first, mine be the infamy,
Who boast the active part, with the success,
And would not for the World, it had been less!
It does become me, now to see your hands
United, as your hearts! -- If my commands
Be slighted! and my self not understood!
When I require what's for your mutual good,
I shall repent the kindness, I have shown,
And wish, you never had Ormasdes known.

Madam, when you command, I must submit;
-- But will Ormasdes waking think it fit?
Now to accept this Ring? and safer keep
What he desires, then when h' last did sleep;
I had some pleasure, and no little pain;
To put it on, and steal it off again.
But now, since Gods and you, do all agree!
Receive this bond of my Captivity.

I kiss the hand, that freely gives it now,
May thunder strike me dead, when I do bow
To other Earthly Power, or wish a bliss,
That Heaven can give, the Gods allowing this!
Ormasdes heart, shall into incense turn,
And in bright flames, before this Altar burn;
So long as my fair Saint, does not despise,
To look upon so mean a Sacrifice --
-- To you great Queen, I know not what to say,
How to express a gratitude, that may
Declare the glory of your life to be
A perfect pattern, for Posterity.

Brave Lord, your Triumphs, and your Trophies still
Increase our wonder! and our Nation fill,
With such Esteem, as all my people may,
With Honour, keep your Wedding, Holy-day.
And in our Story, after Ages show,
Friendship, and Virtue, did together grow.


