The Scene SARDINIA.

ARe the Galleys come from Rhodes?


Yes, Sir; they arrived this evening.


Then we're all in readiness; and if the gods smile upon us, those proud
Sisters shall find they have pulled down fire by playing with my anger; thus to
pretend a vow to peace, and feign a Law by which they're bound not to arm but
in their own defence: come, 'twas treacherously designed; and since in our
greatest danger they could leave us to that sudden ruin that then threatened
all our Nation with a foreign yoke, they shall find (now our virtues have
wrought through that storm) what enemies we can be, whose friendship they have
despised; till in their bosoms I have thrown all those miseries of war, whose
single name was such a terror to them; but where's our Sister? did you call
her, Cleon?


She went this evening, in her Galley, to take the air.


When she returns tell her, I must speak with her. -- And (do you hear?)
Eumenes! let all things be in readiness to put to sea, with the morning tide.
The wind stands fair still?


Yes, Sir; the wind's south.


What said the Captain of the Galley that you took, had they notice of our
intent?


Yes, Sir; he says they had intelligence, but they are so unprepared for war
that the knowledge was no advantage; they received it as men stabbed in their
sleep, that wake only to find their dangers certain.


Their falsehoods have begot their fears, and now like cowards they fall upon
their own swords. Eumenes, let the slaves be well fed to night.


FLy Madam, save your self while we with our faiths oppose the pursuers; for
know, Philon will lay his body a willing sacrifice to intercept your danger.


Oh Cozen, which way shall we take? I know not where we are; why did you land
here? he durst not have pursued us to the harbour; my Brothers fleet, now in
readiness to depart, would have protected us.


This way the slave ran that went to call for aid.


Hark, Madam, we're pursued; 'tis now no time to talk, upon my life, it is
Gillippus, and the bold Pirate I fear knows the value of the prize he hunts.


They come, take some other way, and try if you can divert their chase whilst
we take Covert in these woods.


FOllow Mates, for we have in chase the wealth of Kingdoms; one whose maiden
mine the gods would dig in, nor has her virgin earth been wounded yet for that
precious metal, but keeps her Indies still unconquered; if we gain her, we need
sail no more to find uncertain fates; she's prize enough.


Slip not this opportunity then; you know not how long fortune will Court us;
which path took she?


I know not; let us divide our selves; I'll take this.


Hipparchus, Hipparchus; what glorious things were those that fled us, as if we
durst hurt 'em?


They were handsome women, man.


Were they but women?


But women! no, but women. -- What ail'st thou?


I'm sure they are more then man; for I never saw any of that sex that made me
tremble, yet these did; and with a cold fear the memory dwells in my breast
still.


What? thunder-struck by a woman! courage, man. Black eyes though they lighten
yet they do not use to shrink our


These do not use to fight, do they? -- If they do, by all Hipparchus, do not
mock my misery; but tell me, hast thou seen many such? are such forms usual
amongst'em? this has Medusas power, in a beauteous form, and I am changed to
weeping Marble.


By this good day, he's in love; could I be so, how happy should I be; for I
have been pretty lucky in the sex; and could I have loved all that I have lain
with, what a share of heaven should I have had? -- Look how he stands now!
Pausanes! what dost mean, let fall thy weapon when thou pursu'st a Wench?


A Wench! what's that? I thought of none.


What is a Wench? why, the greater part, and the handsomest; and that they are
not the better part of woman, is yet to be disputed.


How can thou distinguish 'em? how dost thou know a Wench?


How do I know'em? several ways, but the best and certain'st, is by feeling
'em.


But that I know from our rocking in the Cradle it still has been so, I should
wonder how we two came to be friends; there's such contrarieties even in our
natures, that both looking on one and the same heavenly form, we should thus
from the same subject draw such different thoughts; for whilst I was
Philosophysing upon her diviner part, and preparing how to worship her, thou
were casting to pollute her; but, prithee tell me, were it not better to find
those beauties that adorn her, the clothing of a perfect goddess, then such a
falling image?


Faith, in serious thoughts (which handsome women ought not to be mingled with)
worship is a good thing; but to have them worship me I should think were
better. -- But, prithee put off this serious discourse now; this is no time to
talk when we have such prey in chase.


Fare thee well; but that I know thee stout, faithful to thy friend, and one
that speaks worse of himself then any other dares, I'd tear thee from my
bosom; but when I know this, and how strictly thou wilt pay thy vows to
honour, thou shalt dwell for ever here.


YOu are very fair; let that remove your wonder, how I dare again gaze upon
that excellence. -- Why do you frown? is it your innocence, or your beauty,
that you mistrust?


No, Monster; 'tis not to see thee play thy part that troubles me; but to think
that heaven fails in hers, thus to leave virtue without a guard, while lust and
rapine grow strong in mischief; as if the innocent were created white, only to
be fit to take the murderers purple.


As you have mercy remove that threatening danger;


Away; thy oily tongue, nor bloody hand can prevail, thy slattery and thy
force; I am by my resolutions above both, for Love and his soft fire thou never
felt it, nor know that god but by the name: These thy false stoopings
conclude thou can not worship, that thus durst again by force attempt me;
that heart that truly loves nobly suffers; and knows that god of passion is to
the longing soul both the hunger and the food; and if his heaven be not reached
by knees, their hands dare not, nay cannot; yet may thou live to love, and
me, I wish it not to glory in, but to punish thee.


Are you so resolved? then I'll kneel no more; but frowning gather all thy
sweets; begging Lovers teach women a way to deny, Hipparchus, take to your
charge this fair folly, and as your eyes look to


Think thou thy threats can fright me? no, I cannot so much doubt the care
of heaven, as to think that power, whose providence considers the fall of every
little Bird, will sleep now, and o'resee the ruin of a Kingdom; no, Monster, I
defy thee.


Away to the Galley; there, when we have got the booty, I'll meet you.


'Tis a lovely form; with what a scorn she bears her fortune!


Sir, I am but a stranger to you; yet if you durst disobey this bad man, and
give me freedom, I will not say I can reward such a benefit; but I am certain I
can be grateful; can you do it?


If I durst be dishonest, Madam, I think I could.


Dishonest, Sir! if it were not mine own cause I would dispute the act; but
since'tis for my self, I'll urge no more; for know I can with less pain be a
prisoner then twice beg my freedom; obey him, Sir.


With pain and blushes, Madam, I shall.


Ha! 'tis she, and bound, Hipparchus! whither dost thou lead that innocence?


Our Captain delivered her to me, with command to carry her to the Galley.


Hold, Hipparchus, at what price hast thou accepted this unbecoming office?
'tis not like thy self; the brave hunter dotes not upon the quarry; nor had
Hipparchus wont to fight for spoil.


Nor does he now; nor ever shall so faulty a conquest hang upon my name as to
make me blush the victory: She was delivered me a prisoner by our Captain, as
the Jewel of his soul; and she can witness that to my faith he left the
securing her to the Galley; and Pausanes knows Hipparchus dares not break a
trust.


Alas! thou mistake this service; for to do this act is breaking trust with
heaven; thou break with the gods, thou break with them that gave thee
credit for thy courage, and thine honour, and sent thee forth their Soldier to
fight for them; and this is their day of Battle; here's the virtue on whose
side thou ought to bleed, the innocence in whose cause they bid thee dye to
live a conqueror with them; now thou fly, now thou run away; Hipparchus
flies, meanly vanquished, as if by a panic fear terror-struck, for he is
beaten by a mistake, and conquers for his enemy, while he loses his same at
home.


Hold, what means Pausanes thus with injurious words to wound his friend?


I injure thee! I wound Hipparchus! I throw a scandal upon my friend! ye gods
strangely punish Pausanes when he does so.


What do you less, when you upbraid me for my faith, and with art of words
labour to make me appear faulty? as if you did not know the law by which we are
bound is not alike with freemen; we are his slaves, and for our loyalty have
been rewarded with these privileges above our fellows; would have me kill
the cause of his bounty, and in justice, for my treachery, become a slave, and
make that which was my fate my punishment? I tell thee, Pausanes, I could not
be free here, should I do this act.


Defend me, ye powers, from this youth; his honour brings greater dangers then
the traitors bands. Sir, pray plead


Thou see how tamely I have pleaded, and in calmness urged my reasons; once
again, by our wounds and blood so oft together shed that their mixtures have in
their fall upon the earth


I see thou hate me, else my Reasons would prevail, and thou would leave to
prefer a Prisoner or a Face before thy Friend, and his faith given; and
therefore know, though your friendship do plead, when 'tis thus wilfully
against mine Honour, I can be deaf.


Thou can be any thing, and I can weep to find it: Ye Gods! would I have
used Hipparchus thus? -- O Heavens! that ever I should call thee Friend! --
Hipparchus, stay; I have one


Pausanes!


Your Sword.


Hear me speak.


No words, her freedom or your Sword.


Why then I draw; and Pausanes knows I will not be beaten into an opinion; and
since thou hast drawn thy Sword I will not yield her, my honour forbids me.
Thou art injurious to think thy force can prevail beyond thy Reason and thy
friendship; for I tell thee, Pausanes, thy anger should not start me if I could
make thee an Enemy.


Defend your self.


Will you yet give me leave to be faithful?


No, Hipparchus hunts his will, not his faith.


As you have honour hold, and let a Virgins tears that shall fall to Seas
divide your anger but till my Prayers can confirm your friendship.


Look upon her tears and these wounds, whose anguish thy friendship not thy
sword brings, and then weigh the act: I would thou had been ten Enemies
rather than one Friend, to have disputed this cause.


MAke all possible speed aboard with the Booty, they pursue us close -- Command
Hipparchus and Pausanes ashore to guard us; Tell 'em our Scouts are beaten in,
and the Kings party presses upon us -- Ha! what means this? What makes she
ashore?


That which thou can not make aboard; she has made an honest man; and if thou
dare make another she may have two Friends.


Hipparchus, resolve this Riddle.


This woman whom you gave to my trust Pausanes would have released; and when
his Arguments, as Friend, could not prevail, meanly, he threw off his faith,
and by force attempted to take her from me.


Slave, did I for this prefer thee when at the Sack of Tunis thou becam'st my
Prisoner, and by thine own confession were a thing without a name, and could
neither from men nor country claim a being? now thy Treachery shall make thee
as dark an Exit as thy base soul had entrance.


I scorn thy threats, from this death I shall begin to live; till now I lay
wrapped in rust, and the Canker fed upon my fame; from this act I shall adopt a
name which till this minute I despaired of since that fatal day in which old
Perseus fell, in whom only lived that knowledge we so hunt for; and
Hipparchus, if thou continue thou'lt be ashamed to find. For the bounties
thou urge, Gillippus, what were they but making us a better kind of Slaves,
commanded Commanders, empaling our free souls so that we could employ but one
virtue, our courage, since we served thee; and that has thrown us into dangers
honour would be ashamed to own, and brought wounds that leave these blushing
scars. This, when Hipparchus has let fall his passion, will make him tremble to
find he could not fear but bleed for a Traitor, and struck against a virgins
honour, and in his rage sold his Friend to buy his will: Then, then,
Hipparchus, the wounds thou now art proud of will


Ha!


Villain, hast thou not yet enough laid open thy treacherous soul? Art not
satisfied to be false thy self, that thus thou labour to shake his tried
faith? Hipparchus, kill him, kill even his memory, that the ungrateful Slave
may fall like a Dog, and leave no name behind him -- yet hold, he shall not die
so nobly, nor find such Hipparchus, Strip the Slave, and upon a Tree stretch
the Traitor's body; there let him hang alive like the condemned fruit to the
fruitless Tree, doomed thither to live a death; and would count that Murder
that threw him there Mercy, if it would come and break the snare.


Bloody Villain, dare thou command this with a belief thou should be
obeyed? What is he that has so much Hell about him, that dares execute what thy
bloody rage imposes?


Gentle Soul, plead not for Pausanes, nor grudge him this glorious end; for now
I fall, what I could not have lived with him, Honour's servant.


Away with him, and see it done; or by the Gods he pulls his own fate down that
disputes it.


He that trembles at death let him die; 'tis just. Hold -- Sir, witness my
wounds, I dare be loyal; and when my faith was given I swam through the
Streights of Friendship to serve you; yet though I did this, because my faith
was given, and Honour told me I was in the right; Do not think I will be so
faulty to my Friend as to start at your frown more than his sword, or be
frighted to the Murder of my Brother.


Ha! what's this?


No, Gillippus, I have no such aguey courage, nor comes my honour so by fits.
Know, though I durst not break my trust, yet. I dare disobey your impious
commands: nor can you call it Treachery when to your face I disavow it: Frown
not, for whilst I have mine old guide, Honour, there's no act brings so dark a
hazard but Hipparchus will strike a fire from it shall light him through.


My Rage, whither wilt thou hurl me? Draw, Mates. -- Villains, though my anger
has lost her tongue, yet her hands are


There, defend thy self; Fear not, Madam, these are our Enemies.


Now I have my wish.


At this rate take it.


Think thou I would not buy her freedom when my blood could purchase it?
Have I lived as if I feared wounds? thou can scarce be mine Enemy after this
favour. O that I could kiss it, thou should kill me ere I would take my lips
from it.


For what fate I am reserved I know not, but I am resolved to shun this if it
be possible -- Help, Rape, Murder, Murder.


Bind these, and pursue the rest. Sister, well met, Come you along with me.


YOu are my Sister, but I beg you will urge me no more; thy softness was
betrayed, and because they were penitent thou though them innocent; I tell
thee, Lysimella, if they could have hoped to have born thee hence thou should
have seen Lust and Pride flow naturally in them; 'twas their fear made them
fawn; Away with them to the Galley.


Our fears?


Had we escaped misfortunes till we met fears, thy Army, King, might have found
a Grave ere they had seen us bound; and to let thee see we have no shaking
souls, this threatened misery shall not make us or fear or fawn on thee.


Peace, Hipparchus, let him see us die ere touch an Oar; 'twill resolve him what
we dare do.


Has my Brother lost all his nature? Then I shall not wonder that I have lost
the interest of a Sister. Can you be a King and have Sortanes; Sir, look upon
their wounds; ye gods! ought any thing that chance owns make men fall so low
that we esteem'em less than beasts? See, they bleed still; Can you leave'em
like Dogs to lick these wounds, whose every drop of blood, I can witness, fell
a sacrifice to honour: O 'tis a fault, a fault (I fear) the Gods will punish;
as if men in misery had no souls, or slaves did not upwards look.


Hold, Sortanes, unbinde 'em. Sister, they are your Prisoners, and as you
please dispose of 'em, and think not my nature cruel, or that I frowned upon
them, for Kings do often so upon the fault when they pity the man; yet if I get
the head of this Serpent, Gillippus, he shall find our justice with its full
weight but we'll crush him.


Now I kneel to you, Sir.


What means my Sister? Rise, my occasions give me leave only to say Farewell;
this accident has retarded me some hours beyond my resolution. Till my return
my power I leave with thee, my Sister -- And Philon, obey her as my self.


The Gods guide and bless the King.


Sortanes, command the Officers aboard, and give order the Galleys be all loose
with the next Tide.


Cousin Philon, pray let your care provide for those men.


O Hipparchus, I am lost ere I have found my self, and have fought for bonds;
Come my Friend.


That title confirms my life; for now I find my rage did not destroy my self,
and through thy wounds let out thy friendship, with joy I live to redeem my
fault.


O Hipparchus! This be my witness, thy friendship grows here, nor were thou
faulty at all to me, nor do I want an Argument Hipparchus, are the wounds I
fear; those the Sword makes are remedies, and if deep enough bring a certain
Cure.


This way, Gentlemen.


We shall follow, Sir.


NOble Gillippus, thus to venture your self and fortunes in our hazard is an
obligation we know not how to pay; for the preparation you speak of brings our
certain ruin, if by treaty we cannot appease his fury.


Pray, Madam, from whence springs his anger?


'Tis just you know the cause of this War that thus venture your self into the
dangers of it: this Island blessed beyond our Neighbours with a fruitful peace
drew us into a consideration how we came to be so happy; and in the search we
found Ambition had no dwelling here: for our custom admits no one man chief,
which kept all from that sin: our Government is here in the hand of a Priest
and Judge, which are chosen by lot, not faction; and their power remains to
them during life, if they obey our Laws; the breach of one of which Laws has
begot this danger; for when our Predecessors made their vow to peace, a Law was
then enacted to prohibit our taking Arms but in our own defence.


This Law the King credits not; for when we returned it as the Reason that
forbad us to yield that aid to him he then implored, he says we urged it but to
hide our Treachery, and concludes we assisted his Enemy because we would not
fight for him; so that now having laboured through that storm that threatened
Sicily his rage bends this way.


And at a time when we have neither Arms nor Counfel to defend us: now, Madam,
the punishments your Fathers have called down pursue us banished for abusing
the Oracle and trust reposed in them. Theagines being chief Judge and Memnon
chief Priest of this Island, their Counsel and your Brothers swords were aids,
which we shall best find when to our despairs we feel the want.


Yet let us not quit our selves when we must fall; the dearer we sell our lives
the greater fame will wait us; nor have our men forgot to fight, though we have
left to invade.


Spoke like a Soldier: How is the Town fortified towards the Harbour? for
there your danger will begin.


'Tis no regular Fortification, yet 'tis in defence.


Madam, I beseech you remove your fears, they are ill omens here: Speak,
Courage, you know not what Miracles we may act; the night comes on apace, pray
retire to your rest, while Cremnofeld, Dion and my self, go set the Watch, and
provide for the entertainment of these strangers that come so rudely without
inviting.


We'll go and join our strength of prayer with our Arms, which I hope will
protect us, though they fail to conquer them.


I'll but order my Galleys to join with yours, and be ready in the Harbour to
board 'em as they come straggling in, then I'll meet you upon the Guard.


Eucratia is the Word to night, Farewell.


Farewell, shallow Fools. Think ye Gillippus will sell his blood for airy
honour? No, 'tis Revenge or the satisfying some other Lust engages; me
therefore, I'll to my Galley, and while this dark protects us command Zenon to
launch from the Harbour, and in a little Creek lie loose and undiscovered with
his Galley, 'tis wisdom to secure a Retreat; nor will I again put my happiness
in the power of Slaves whose Treachery wracked my soul, and deprived me of the
pleasures I had promised to my self, in the embraces of the fair Lysimella: but
these faces have removed that pain; for he that like me loves beauty, where
e're he meets it sows his Love, and when he enjoys it reaps his Mistress.


WAs the Fleet within sight of Land this morning?


Yes, Madam, they hung about the Isle of Asmarae these four days, kept back by
contrary Winds.


When returns the Galley that came from my Brother?


This Tide she puts off.


This opportunity then will advance my Design. Have you fitted those Prisoners
with a Disguise?


Yes, Madam.


Hark, what's that, a Lute? Are they musical?


One of 'em plays and sings.


Prithee, let's hear.


FOnd Pausanes, let not thy Love aspire
To a hope of coming higher:
But let thy faith grow under a Cloud
Of being not allow'd.
And still pursue thy Love till she like well
To know it, but thou not tell:
Next thy care must be, she not perceive
Thou believe sh'has given leave:
Thy love and sufferings thus being humbly told,
And not a sigh too bold,
Nor with a look speak, or let a fear be proud
To be discerned, lest thou love too loud.
Whilst fairly thus thou dost thy love pursue,
Pretending nothing due:
Who knows but that in time her heart may grow
To wish thee well whether she will or no?
By such soft steps as these and slow degrees,
And ever on his knees,
Pausanes still shall approach his bliss,
But not come near enough to miss:
But at a distance look and love;
And see Lysimella far above:
Yet not wish her descending to my sense,
Or hope of meeting but by influence.
Call him hither. -- Now, Lysimella, arm thyself with


DO thou speak, while I collect my self; yet do not, why should I refuse by my
disorder to speak her power? if Hipparchus, it is not; these are valiant fears,
and I'll speak to her even what my heart sends out; for by my life, all that I
resolved of I have quite forgot.


But do not rashly tempt her to a scorn.


Scorn! Oh no, Hipparchus! if ever her softness hath felt Loves power she knows
his proper language is free prose, and their distractions wrap the powerfull'st
truth; confined Verse tells us they are too much themselves, nor is he
afflicted who can compose his sufferings. -- See where she stands.


Rise, your freedom is the bounty of another, and the thanks not due to me; I
sent for you to tell you my Brother is now upon a design for Sardinia, but has
been staid by cross winds, so that you may o'retake him ere he lands, in a
Galley which this morning is bound for him, and in this disguise striking on
his party unknown, pay his bounty.


Arm us, Madam, and you shall hear how deep we'll plow, how thick we'll sow
their wounds too, but we'll reap the honour, my mistake has lost me in striking
against your virtue; and now we are friends so that Pausanes and Hipparchus
undivided draw, I think we shall not easily be overcome; for give me leave to
say we are not often conquered but by our selves: and then though Pausanes be
victor, Hipparchus triumphs.


We can be grateful, Madam, though not fortunate.


That's my Q. pray, let me be thankful too, lest you think I can only counsel
it: within this Cabinet I believe is in value as much in the sum; for any other
consideration take this too.


'Tis just, Madam, that you throw this scorn on me; for I confess the fault
looked as if I had fought for money: which opinion my refusal now I hope will
remove.


Pray take it; why should you receive wounds for me?


I do not let my self out to dangers, nor is it my trade to fight: wounds and
blood are neither my daily labour nor the sweat of my brow; they are honours
and pay themselves: if I have courage, 'tis a gift the gods sent me freely, and
as their blessing freely I'll dispense it.


Your pardon, Sir, I meant no injurious upbraiding, for by my life I do not
think you faulty: if you will not be rewarded, yet give me leave to supply your
wants.


I kiss your charity.


What to give him I know not; Oh unequal Law, that binds us women, and forces
me to let him perish, because I know how to save him! I must not stay, I know
you're friends, and what the one has is but the others store, I wish ye may be
fortunate. My last words, e're I knew what you were.


O stay! unbind me ere you go; and hear my soul laboured with admiration of
your beauties; but since I was blessed with knowledge of your diviner part, all
your acts from honour sprung have collected those sparks your eyes kindled;
and they are blown to a flame here, here it burns, and though this Altar
(divinest) be built upon the meanest earth, scorn it not; for my offering shall
be of the purest love; and my sighs shall constant incense breathe.


What thou might have done I know not; but I'm sure thou can not now,
thou hast said too much: Go fight, fight, for thou know not how to love. Oh
woman, woman, woman still!


Not love! what stranger then is this that's got in here, and wanders so to
seek; not love! 'tis he or cowardice crept in, no third cause can beget the
fears, the tremblings I labour with; Oh! teach me how to know him.


That stranger when thou meet him at the eye thou wilt find he is conceived
in fire, and in an instant grows to perfect form; thence in fullness of time he
takes his birth into the heart which is his world; there if he prove a healthy
love he lives in silence, the tongue has no part 'ith birth of gallant loves;
nor are they long lived that make their Exits that way; the true births of love
know no delivery. But where they took their life through the eye, this is love:
thine a short-liv'd passion, I fear.


My passions are no faults, Madam, when I master 'em; when we do not serve them
we command admiration; or should I yield to 'em, could any passion be
unbecoming that has so beautiful a cause as the fair Lysimella, who (I fear)
has been used to such Hecatombs of hearts, that my single one being but a
slaves might well be scorned at your shrine; yet if you be that power that my
thoughts have worshipped, you must confess he that offers all, though a beggar,
sacrifices equal to a King. O turn not from me, but be like those gods you bow
to, which though they give and guard


Plead no more, if thou love thou wilt prefer me; I must not, dare not
understand, I am too much a party to hear him


O do not show the several ways you have to wound: may the fire for ever
inhabit in those eyes, but do not in frowns dart it this way.


Be gone then. And consider what thou suest for, a slave by his passion
crowned, and a Princess by her enthroned.


Do but believe I love, 'tis all I beg; strike me heaven, if I have so faulty a
wish as to attempt the unshrining such a power, or would live to see your
beauty fall from this vast national adored condition, to make them my petty
household god. O say! do you believe I love?


Yes, yes; I believe and fear.


O continue that friendly faith; I'll at a distance kneel, for 'tis a wealth
I'll pray for, fight to keep, and weep to part with: and if that way of
obtaining, that way of keeping, and this sense of


Peace, be gone. Lysimella collect thy self, for thou art lost. O ye gods,
would ye had given more, or that I had known less of honour.


Hipparchus, my friend, I find my misery, and conjure thee that if thou
out-live us, steal some of my ashes into her Urn, that in our earth being
become equal we may become one.


This is strange, yet 'tis the best kind of anger; and the storm is to friend,
if I can judge a woman.


EVmenes, now the Soldiers are landed let 'em be drawn Battalia; we'll charge
this instant, and not give 'em leave at land to collect their loss at sea.


They were Gillippus's Galleys that boarded us; yet I saw not the Pluto there;
her brazen Prow had wont with the earliest to bathe in blood her Proserpine.


That injury hath brought some fuel to my rage, to see they have given harbour
to that traitor, that twice has attempted the rape of my Sister; and in
advowance of his fault, in his Prow he wears the hellish president for that
black deed.


Lose no time then, but while they are scattered with their dangers, and their
fears strike for us, let us bring that justice their treacheries have called
down.


Away, every man to his charge.


Oh Hipparchus, the joy to find Gillippus here has dispersed all my sad
thoughts. Ye powers that rule our fates! if Pausanes have any of you to friend,
give me Gillippus, this day, within my swords reach.


So, now my friend speaks like himself; and when thou strik'st not at thy self,
thou stand safe; but hark we must away.


THis is no time to talk now; they have begirt the Town, and will instantly
attempt to storm it, the immediate danger calls for resistance, not counsel;
Dion, go you to the gate that's next the harbour; and, Cremnofield, take you
the charge of the Princess's persons; I'll to that Port against which the Kings
Standard is advanced; if we must fall, let us not go out faintly.


The gods protect us.


'TWas Gillippus; he fled, and left me to the multitude; Oh Hipparchus, pursue
the chase, and if thou overtak'st him, thou'lt find the coward embossed with
running from me; if thou can set him up, Bay him till I come; and as thou
love me, let me not lose the honour of his fall.


Are you sure he's this way?


Yes, yes; I'm certain 'twas he.


THey have forced the Town, and there's no hope of safety, unless I can recover
my Galley, S'death; I am accursed of late; I hunt nothing but unprofitable
wounds. -- Leucanthe, the Princess! as I could wish; yet if fortune would
smile, here were a prize would heal all my unlucky wounds.


Oh Gillippus, we're lost, our lives, our honours and our gods, subject to the
rage of the common Soldier.


Will you venture then to follow me? if we can gain the Port I have a Galley
may secure you.


Oh guide me; which way, noble Gillippus?


Come Zenon, follow, for there's no abiding here; hell I think fights on their
side, for 'twas nothing less then a devil that forced, and then pursued me
through our Guards; By day it self, he struck as sure as if he had been the
fate he brought; my flight could scarce out-strip his conquest.


They pursue us still; away, lose no time.


THis way, this way, Eumenes, the gallant Reapers went; sure by this their
sickles are dulled, and their hands weary with griping such full victory; when
the word was given they charged through their fellows, and like lightning
scaled and leaped the wall, where once entered, cowards lose not faster then
they gained ground; I was amazed to see their charge, 'twas as if they had
flown, not fought for conquest.


They are not clothed proper for the Parts they Act; either their honour or
condition is misplaced.


If they survive, this day, inquire'em out, and then, when we can reward we'll
admire, now we'll assist the work.


Ha! the King! fly Madam, haste to my Galley and save your self.


Thou shalt not long impeach my stay; do you stare?


Hell take thee.


What have you, at length, found daring to look upon the dangers? is the
dead-doing Zenon, so famed for his bold deeds?


Yes Euemenes, Pelius dares, though Zenon durst not; does the name of Pelius
start thee? know, false man, all thy darings cannot protect thee from the
justice this brings, for the injuries


What act of mine during that time were you concerned in.


Hast thou forgot the fair Zenonia? methinks the half I borrow, for my
disguise, from that name, should prompt thy soul to a remembrance of the vows,
the false vows thou made her.


False vows?


Yes, boasting her the conquest of thy vanity; when with thy perjured breath
thou beg for that thou valu'dst not, merely to affront my passion which
pursued her with all those truths of love, thou feignedst; yet never reaped a
harvest for all my pains. But this is not the injury that wakes my anger; 'tis
thy scorn, not thy love of her engages me to think it should be in any mortals
power to scorn that deity which I sacrifice to.


How do you know I scorn her?


Say thou dost not; say thou wilt return and pay those vows of love, and by all
our gods I'll kneel to thee; for if thou'lt love again (although my Rival) her
love shall guard thee, and from henceforth thou shalt be my friend; but if thou
proceed thus to triumph in her miseries (whose pains I feel, though she be
insenble of mine) thou shalt find, though I cannot entreat her love, yet I can
force Revenge from her darkest Caves.


What does Pelius see about Eumenes, that he should take him for a fool or
coward; thus to think I would trust a Rival, or fear an enemy? and now I know
the reason of thy hate, if thou should swear thou art my friend, I'd tell
thee thou lie; if mine enemy, why, I do not care.


Do you slight my proffered friendship? do you believe this language?


Yes, I understand it, and you shall find it by the answer I'll make.


This ring was hers, and shall witness I have punished his falsehood. --
Gillippus wounded!


Yes, Zenon, but not slain, and yet the King struck home; I found 'twas folly
to resist his force, unless I could have conquered his whole Army; and
therefore wisely I preserved my self for better days. -- Saw thou the
Princess Leucanthe since?


Yes, she's fled toward the West-port.


Who's this? Eumenes fallen! well, pursue Leucanthe, gentle Zenon; and if thou
findst her tell her of my escape, say thou left'st me aboard the Galley; and if
she know not where her Sister Eucratia is, tell her she's with me, who
negligent of her own danger impatiently expects her coming to the Galley, where
I'll go and wait your coming.


Yes, I'll go, but not to assist thy treachery, yet I'll bring her if I can;
she has an interest in Zenonia; and if I can thus bring her into dangers, my
protection of her honour will endear me to her; and so engage her to be my
friend to Zenonia, the thoughts of whom my soul will ever labour with.


UNhand her.


She's my prisoner, and I will not lose her.


Dare thou be a Soldier and speak that falsehood?


I first seized her, and I'll keep her.


Had thine age been able to have kept flight with me, thou should have seen
me hunt her through the streights of a thousand wounds, and mow down all the
weeds that grew about her; yet then, then this Laurel protected by her own
virtue stood safe in the midst of all that Lightning; and let me tell thee, the
same cause that kept me from laying violent hands upon her makes me spare thee;
'tis a reverence that in some measure thy silver hairs command.


I defy thee and thy naked Chin, Talker; this plead for me, nor shalt thou
find a gray Coward here; Bind her, and then we'll dispute whose she is.


Bind her! Look upon her, and then tell me on which part of that divine form
thou dare hang a Chain.


I'll dispute no more, unhand her, she's my Prisoner or but Earth.


Remove from her breast that threatened danger, or by our Gods thou art Earth.


Think thou Procles will quit his aged Honours for fear of a Boy proud in
his first wounds?


Boy, nay then defend thee.


I know not too which is guiltiest, but I can ill preserve mine own.


She's gone, there's something whispers to me, Protect her; I'll follow her --
There, take thy Sword, I will not rob thy age in


I thank thee, and may thine be no less fortunate than this has been, and thou
buy thy Honours at a cheaper rate.


Had I lived to have finished my Revenge on that Traitor Gillippus, and from
his bosom torn the knowledge of our selves, which in a golden Relic the Tyrant
wears about his neck, and still with threatened loss would a we us to our faith,
then, Hipparchus, I could have died in peace.


Whither did you go to find these wounds?


In pursuit of the fair Eucratia, I follow'd her through all her miseries, but
not with intent to add to them, but to guard her from the raging lust of the
common Soldier, till at length some of her party met us, and to them I owe
these wounds.


This disorderly possessing the Town will ruin us; the wounds we received since
the Conquest are more than we got in the Attempt; the Cowards fears have in
their despair struck deeper wounds than their courage knew how to deal.


This way, Madam.


O Zenon, Haste, I know not which I fly to with greater zeal, my Sister or my
safety; Is it far?


If you can pass the Port you're safe. Ha!


Stand, the Word?


The Word! Death, if thou refuse us passage.


Or a Virgin's thine for ever, if thou dare let my innocence escape this
ruin. O speak, Death and Dishonour pursue us close. O speak, Sir; Shall I
pass?


Pass! Yes, fair one, I dare let you pass, and through all hazards serve you; O
Pausanes, live to counsel me; something like thy description I feel here.


Shall we pass, or no?


Smooth your brow, your frowns will make no way here.


My Sword shall then.


No, Zenon, thou know it never could when Hipparchus denied thee passage.


Ha! Hipparchus!


Yes, Zenon, Hipparchus; who to let this Lady see how much he dares do in her
cause, he will not only give her a passage, but with it all his peace of
mind, and do thou thank her for this Sanctuary; for were it not that thou
had taken hold on that Altar the Murder of Eumenes here I would have
punished; but such is the power of that Deity that I can defer my hate, nay,
forgive thee, if she'll confess thy Sword or Faith hath sacrificed ought to her
deliverance.


He has, he has, and he only can guide me to a hope of safety. Gentle youth,
the Gods reward thee -- Hark, I am pursued, if thou hast power divert their
rage.


Your name, leave but that to call upon in my danger, and then I'll plant my
self here an Enemy to all that dare pursue your softness. O do not hide your
name from me, nor leave me to bow to a Power I know not.


My name's Leucanthe, the unfortunate Leucanthe; gentle youth, May all thy
wishes fall upon thy head. Away Zenon.


Now, Hipparchus, had I Reason once?


Leucanthe, the Princess Leucanthe, is it not?


Yes, Soldier, Leucanthe, the Princess Leucanthe, Which way went she?


This way she went, Sir; but I must beg you'll not pursue her.


These are the Soldiers I so much admired. Is it your ignorance, or do you
wilfully strike out the reward your daring youth has this day merited?


If we are faulty 'tis wilful; but this act (we hope) owns no guilt.


Is it not a fault thus to blot the Conquest, whose greatest beauties are gifts
of your own hands?


My soul has vowed, and I see it written yonder, not to suffer any one to pass
this way whilst my Sword and I can impeach their stay.


And I, though weak in body, am strong in friendship; my Friends vows shall
ever be my cause.


You see our resolution, Sir, and we dare die.


And I dare fight, and thus force my passage.


O! hold, Sir, and hear me speak.


Shall I pass?


Your self can witness what faith I brought to your cause; my charge ushered
pale death about the field; and when I found him lazy and waiting upon Fate I
leaped from his lean side, and with my Sword dealt more deaths than he.


Pursue that act still, and let me hunt this scornful Lady till with miseries I
have made her wild heart tame, the Conquest will be perfect then.


All's done already; I fought to Conquest, and Cowards only strike afterwards.
A Foe that flies is your Slave, and no longer deserves the name of Enemy.


Shall I pass?


'Tis ssaughter you pursue, and will stain all those honoured wounds your
Conquest gave; but for this Princess, whose virtue I bow to, O, Sir, can you be
so blinded with your rage as to avow a War with her?


Leave counsel and obey; Mercy and Justice are specious shows, but to obey is
your best Sacrifice, which if thou offer not, by mine anger I'll offer thee.


Obey! Yes; the Gods I'll obey, and strike against all that strike at them;
Know, you command a Free-man, one that chose your party, and none of that
number that was born under you; And yet I beseech you, Sir, attempt not your
passage here; for I must not betray her safety as to defend her cause we eakly.


Are you so resolute?


O Hipparchus! hold; Remember 'tis the King, lift not thy hand against him;
this Victory will be full of Curses. O for strength enough to part them!


This by his habit should be a Commander to him, (since I must feel the misery
of bonds) I'll yield my self. Defend me, Sir, I am your Prisoner, my name's
Eucratia.


Hold your Swords; he that adds another stroke to War shall feel the weight of
this.


Blessed chance.


Eucratia! Are you Eucratia?


Yes, and a Princess, till thy ambitions (King) hunted me to my ruin.


O Eucratia! Soul of sweetness, that wretched King see prostrate at thy feet;
and if thou can not pardon, tread upon my neck, and let thy virtues sink me
to my Grave: there's something divine about thee which in an instant has from
my temples torn the Laurel reward of all my bleeding wounds, and from a
conquering King made me all thy Slave -- Command me something.


Help, Sir, to save the Princess Leucanthe that's lost, sold to lust and rape,
if you redeem her not suddenly,


Unfortunate Leucanthe, I foresaw this danger, sad Fate! O my Sister!


Leucanthe! Which way went the Ravlsher? O Sir, your pardon.


I saw Gillippus, in the Pluto, bear her from the shore.


Gillippus! 'tis false, pray (Madam) remove your fears, my self slew him in the
battle.


O Sir, he has abused you by some wile; for on my life I saw him since your
encounter.


Let me die, if this be false.


O Sir! now I claim your offer, and beg, not Command, you will not complete
your Conquest, and pursue this Ravisher.


Soldier, thy faith in her cause has been already tried, Do thou provide one
of the swiftest Galleys for this Expedition. Come, Madam, we'll all go to save
this Innocent: Some one help this wounded Youth aboard, and see he want for no
care; such virtue shines not every where.


Sir, his courage has obliged me, and he shall be my care; he found me when I
was fallen into the rage of the common people.


I kiss your hands, Madam; and 'tis happiness enough that I have lived to serve
such a virue as is seated in the fair Eucratia.


Command a Cessation of Arms, and let all Acts of War cease here; for the fair
Eucratia is now the Conqueror.


URrge not his condition, I must not so mistrust the Justice of those Powers I
bow to as to fear they would leave me to such a scorn; a common Slave? No,
Philon, if there were not chance in his condition, their tongues would have
doubled under such a Load, as Love. A Slave's heart would have had too many
hungry wants upon it to have found leisure to have begged for Love.


This, under favour, is no Argument; and though I fear a want in their blood,
yet I believe they have wit enough, and their craft perhaps took hold of some
pity which your Highness shew'd'm; for under favour, Madam, your mercies were
even to weakness, and but that I fear to displease you, I could say, he but
returns love. -- This will move her; and as my faith and duty thus low bows so
my honour bids me defend you, especially when you have so dangerous an enemy as
your passion to engage my faith against: look but upon your habit, examine the
nature of this act, and you shall find you walk blinded to your honours ruin;
have you not thrown off your sex, the honour of a Queen, and now appear
clothed in blushes, and disguised with faults? but this were nothing if my
fears were false, which tell me, this habit is lined with as faulty
resolutions; nor can you condemn those that know you not, if they conclude you
have, with your sex, thrown off your modesty too.


Oh! Jam lost for ever.


No Madam, if you stay, you're safer for this attempt, by having found your
error; I confess, to this journey I carry nothing but obedience; had you fled
to meet a plighted faith, through darkest hazards I would have waited on you;
but when you fly to follow one you know not, a slave too, that perhaps flies
from you. Nay grant him a Prince, can your honour be safe when you pursue? Oh,
Madam, when you were your self, and from your Reason collected truth, and from
that rock would in Arguments give law to Love; I have heard your powerful
Reasons conclude, that a Queen is safer that is pursued by a slave, if he keep
the path of love, then the greatest Monarch of the earth could be, should she
pursue a god; and now upon my knees I beg you would not at this rate reward the
ambition of a wretch.


Oh Philon, Philon, thou art cruelly faithful, and unsensible of my sufferings;
can prescribe an abstinence! but had thou my Fever upon thee thou would
drink (ambition) why? say he has that Giant fault; yet 'tis a glorious sin, and
without it not one among all the Synod of the gods had filled his seat, and
'twas their fears that made it sin in us; yet, in Loves Religion 'tis
meritorious still to aspire to a Mistress; and that love that gives, but will
take no Laws, has called it gentleness, not savage Nature, for a servant to
leap even at the heart of his Mistress: yet thus much I'll satisfy thy faith;
by the honour of my mothers ashes, he wooed first, and in such words as my
resolution only could deny; and for his nature, how stout, how gentle, how full
of honour, judge you that were witness of his actions.


Madam, I see you are resolved, and then I know you will not want an argument;
and now I know not whether 'twere a blessing, or no, their protection brought,
since you believe they love.


If thou'lt turn away I'll blush, and tell thee why I believe he loves; thou
saw his friendship could not divide him from me; it made his virtues faulty
passions, searching with blushing wounds an enemy in his friends breast. Oh my
Cozen! when I think on this, and call to mind how for my freedom he stood as if
h'ad been immortal, and intending only that, let the false Gillippus wound his
stout breast, which when he will defend, none, save the thunderer, or a friend
can hit; oh Philon, Philon, when I consider these miracles, why should I be so
wicked as to conclude him less then a god that acts 'em? and now take a secret
from me (for I will satisfy thee even with a faulty act) which may look like
vanity; but turn thy face, and hear me; I know my Cozen is full of honour; and
I know, with all that honour; he loves me, this confession I would have died
with e're it should have been forced from me, but to confute th^e, for it makes
thee a party here, and thy love as unfit to give counsel, as mine incapable to
take it; and now I conjure thee follow and obey me, that will obey my fate; nor
shall the winds that now begin in storms to plead against me, prevail; I am
resolved; and this night I'll to sea, and in her greatest


Oh Madam, to be born your Kinsman was one blessing, but to find I have a
friends place in your thoughts, two; and that you know I love, and not I tell
it, is a joy beyond all but what your love brings; forgive me, and henceforth
I'll obey not counsel. Your Galley shall instantly be ready; thus I have gained
all my ends in love, by having no unworthy ends upon her I love.


O Love, do thou prosper my intent, and a Virgin shall thy Priest become; and
these great truths in all thy Temples shall be sung how in thy infant hand thou
grip'st a bow larger then Joves; so that, when thou thy darts let fly
immortality is no guard, for oft they have through his lightning shot and
struck the thunderer: thy Religion's easy, thy Law light; for thy Tables hold
but one act one Commandment; obey, and we cannot miss the way; let none then
say this youthful god or cruel is, or blind, since from disobedience grows all
the strange crosses and dangers that we find.


GEntly Son; lay him down, and bow him forward; more


He sighs, there's some comfort in that.


Sad condition for his age, when 'tis a joy to hear him sigh.


Good heaven! what does age abroad at this time of his life?


Sure he has wandered far that has missed a resting place in his evening; and to
be piti'd when he's forced to seek his Inn thus late at night.


Sure he was of some Religious Order, by his habit.


No matter for his habit, pull it off, and fetch him my gray Coat; dry now is
better then rich.


Which opinion if he had held, perhaps his had been dry now.


Good heaven, what a night's here! this evening promised dangers, but not like
this; sure this Bark was one of that Fleet that we saw off the Point last
night, if we can recall life, he may inform us who they were.


He stirs, and sighs still.


Wretched, wretched Theagines; what mercy is this at length has found thee? was
my self only saved of all this wrack?


All else perished.


Oh! that I had missed this charity too! my friend, aged Perseus, my Brother,
brave Memnon, and my Son, the hopeful Pausanes, all these my former losses have
robbed me of my griefs, which else these poor men would have required of me; O
equal heaven! thy abused Oracle, and breach of vows, thou now but beginn'st to
punish. Father, by thy habit thou art vowed unto the gods; if then like me
thou'lt not be punished for perjury, again deliver me to the doom they
appointed, and in the watery womb of the Sea entomb me.


Oh, Sir; despair not; they appoint us better then we can choose, and in our
greatest fears surprise us with their mercies.


Hear but what I am, and thou'lt be afraid to harbour me; for where ere I go,
there vengeance pursues me; my name's Theagines, once Judge of Sardinia, and
blessed with all that men call happiness; Children, Wealth, and power to save or
destroy where I lived, and though our State forbad Kings, all but that name I
possessed; my Brother too, whom they have punished, reigned chief Priest when I
ruled as Judge, equal in our births, equal in our blessings, in our power
equal, and in our faults too alike guilty, but not alike punished; for he I
fear is lost for ever; but the fault which now they are busy in punishing, is
this; 'twas enjoined by our Predecessors, as a grateful offering to peace,
under whose protection we found such benefits as all our neighbouring Countries
wanted; that it should not be lawful for any to take up arms but in their own
defence, nor upon pain of perpetual banishment send their Sons abroad, lest
they might bring home the dangerous customs of other Countries; this law was
made, and with it vows of the strictest ties; this vow we vowed, and to this
Law with oaths were bound.


What danger could that bring you?


O Father, this Law we broke; and the curse of this vow pursues us; for know,
we had each of us a Son and Daughter; which blessings made us covetous to have
our Sons succeed us in our honours; and therefore thought to breed them abroad,
where they might learn'to rule: thus by ambition blinded we abused the Oracle,
and told the people 'twas the will of the gods our Sons should be sent abroad;
and I affirmed if they commanded, the Law assented. Then to the charge of a
faithful friend we gave our children, who were so young they knew not
themselves what they were, with a command to breed 'em fit to be Princes; but
neither to the world nor themselves discover that they were so. Long this fault
lay not hid, for the abused Oracle unasked complains, and to the incensed
people tells our falsehood; by them we were banished, never to return till we
had found our Sons, which was some mercy; but alas! Fate was juster then the
people; for our Sons are lost, my friend dead, and my Brother in our Pilgrimage
by a strange accident divided from me. Now ought I to hope for mercy, or wish
to out-live these losses?


As yet you are not secured that these are losses; nor has any assured you they
are dead; therefore defer this sadness, and let me lead you into my Cabin.


Oh let me lean upon thy aged shoulder; for I have a load will sink me.


Do, do; sad time when I can be a stay to a Prince! Son


THe gods protect us, and recall this judgment,


Hence, ye dogs, leave your howling; S'death, have we lived as if we hoped for
mercy, or expected protection from our prayers? be gone, and endeavour; every
wise man rules his stars, and may defer that fate which prayer cannot alter,
see if I have not lost my power? why stay ye? who plies the Pump now, she'll
founder through the slaves negligence.


Why should we labour against heaven that has decreed our ruin? there's no
hope, we are all lost, the sea already is our grave.


Villain, thou shalt not dye by water, I'll be thy fate. -- And yours if you
stay.


See if the storm has not wrought in her Element of water too, and blown it in
tears from her eyes.


Would it had blown the fire thence too, the earthy part would not wound me; my
danger and their beauty in those active Elements lye; for in her living Jeat
the fire bears sway.


I know his resolution, but I'll watch him.


We are alone; I must not lose this opportunity; will you yet grant my suit,
and yield me love? or must I follow the examples of the gods, and in a storm
compass my will? say, will you give, or shall I force?


Is this a time for love, when the raging storm drowns thy words? Oh thou
abused power! who thus enraged pursues us even to the last of all our name; and
for abused sacrifice will the Priest in judgement offer? if thou hast decreed
my fall, take it while I am fit for sacrifice, while I am pure, and my virgin
snow unsoil'd. Protect me from this ravisher, whose impious heat burns his
hated


Cease to call, and yield me love; thou see all the ship is busy with
apprehension of our danger, which my love will not give leave to fear; thoughts
of thee so take up all the room here, that care of my self cannot get in.


Away, unhand me; consider the dangers and misery thou


Dangers! 'tis but noise only; and to me no new thing to see the Elements thus
at war, and strive to run again to their first Chaos. Thousands of times have I
naked stood their rage, when the element of fire has shot his angry flame into
the yielding main, as if he had meant to wound her god with his forked
lightning; this I have seen, and felt the mischiefs the unruly winds beget when
they break prison, and force from the entrails of the earth a dangerous birth;
and still their dangers were but noise.


O impious man! hast thou seen their power, and felt a mercy above it, and dost
thou slight it?


Slight it? no, nor fear it; nor would you apprehend it were you acquainted
with the uncertainty of this element, and with me had seen these dangers grow
from nothing. A thousand times I have looked upon her smoothest brow, and heard
the false winds whisper to her, till their flatteries have wrought into her
bosom, and there filled with ambition the covetous element that would aspire
at heaven, being thus seduced, discovering even to the eyes of men the secrets
of her womb; this I have seen too, and wrought through these dangers; nor will
I believe any thing can save me when I cannot save my self: will you yield? or
you'll find other dangers.


Oh strange daring! O heaven! quench his saucy flames, or


Away, I'm deaf.


Villain, wilt thou sin while their Plagues hang over thee; and add to thy
faults while they are punishing? Oh ye winds, take Hipparchus, unknown name of
honour, guilty by chance, by fate only faulty; oh! that thy sword were here to
defend us both.


Ha! is there another that you love? nay then the earth


But it shall, veer more sheat, hale, tack aboard; who's at helm? Master, set a
yare man to the helm, steer thus, thus.


Done 'tis.


Peace.


Hell take thee for thy interruption.


Low're your main-sail, 'twas your fault we laod our bonnet to; full, full.


Done 'tis.


Strike her fore-sail, here's a gust will bear our Mast by the board else.


How now, Master, is she tight?


No, a pox on her for a Whore, she leaks, but we have girt her: port, port
hard.


Done 'tis.


What Galleys are those that chase us? the Admiral's one.


I believe the King's aboard, she has stood with us all this day.


No matter what they are; would we had no worse enemies to deal with; who keeps
the lead there?


O them a deep, fifteen fathom and a half, oh!


What ground have you?


Corral.


Corral, hell and confusion; we are upon the Rocks of Asmara, luff, luff-hard,
and veer, tack, hale your sheat aboard; Boatswain, brace your fore-sail, bring
her in the wind, be yare Mates, clap the helm a lee, bring her upon her stays,
we're lost else.


Keep the lead going.


They are howling already, what's my fate's my fate, and it may conquer; but I'll
never yield to it, nor sink while these oars


LOose the slaves, we want men to trim our sails.


O Hipparchus, that we had but the Pluto here to bustle with this storm; this
is a painted whore, her back's too weak to bear her burden.


Look out, Pausanes, the Galley that we chased is sinking.


The gods protect the Princess; see, see, she has escaped that gust, and now
they bear up with the land.


Let us steer with 'em, we may save some; port, port hard.


Done 'tis.


Who's at the helm? slaves, we'll bring our sails into the wind, veer more
sheat there; for heavens sake, Gentlemen, to your Cabins and pray.


We have changed our course to bear up with the Galley that's in distress.


Is the Princess in that Galley?


I, she's there, and her virtue interceding a safety against all their hopes or
merits.


In with the lead there: Ho, the cunnery, due west, west,


Mates, clear an anchor to drop, ere she strikes; heave out the long-boat
there.


O ignorance of man! 'tis best seen in divers ways that knowledge runs in; this
their art and wise directions is to me distractions. O Madam! let me add to
these dangerous multitude of waters my tears, that my repentance may wash off
this stain. 'Tis not the Sea I sink under, but my faults to you. Can you
forgive my blindness that have led you into these dangers? Accursed be that
Traitor Villain that brought 'em into this extremity. That on land I could have
redeemed, but this all these waters cannot expiate.


They are not dangers fright me, though yours be joined to them, for which
Heaven knows I have a pain; you have proved such a friendly Enemy, my griefs
concern not my self now, for I am only in the power of Heaven, and the Gods
are no less strong at Sea than Land; for though their wonders dwell in the
deep, yet their mercies wait there too.


O divine Eucratia! let me kneel to thee, and in this storm call upon thy name
to save me.


Tempt not those Powers which must protect us, but join with me for my lost
Sister, poor Leucanthe, who is not only subject to this storm, but the dangers
too with which a Traitor's lust begirts her. O Sir! I know to die spotless is
now her Prayer and all her wishes but what we pray against, a wrack.


'Twas her Galley that we chased, the Villain was forced to run ashore; nor
will we fail with our endeavours to seek her safety: but O! she strikes: O!
we're lost, she strikes: O!


Man the Long-boat, not a man enter till the King and Queen be in: Sir,
descend, the Ship strikes, but we are near the shore, the Long-boat now is all
our hopes.


THe fire of lust, and warmth which that heat lent gave me strength to resist
the coldness of the water, and to my appetite and longings the Powers that
saved me: If I can call back her life I'll sacrifice this Lamb; I made Zenon
bind her, that she might not have her will ere I had mine; the knot in my
teeth I held that when I could keep her no longer she might slip; for my love
'tis vowed to the living not to the dead; and when I cannot what I would I will
what I can; to yonder fire which guided me to this safety I'll bear my load,
when she begins to live I'll seem to die; and so I'll handle the chance, and in
oily words cloth this service, faintly pleading Pardon for my past faults, as
if I had only life enough to tell her the obligation she owes me: then if I
find her melt, by degrees I'll let her charity prevail, and slowly seem to
recover: but if she seem to rejoice in my fall, and my prayers fail, by all the
Gods hers then shall not prevail.


THe storm begins to cease, and this our miraculous deliverance calls for a
hearty and speedy sacrifice; Let the Long-boat immediately search the wrack for
the Princess Leucanthe.


What other Vessel's that? Some of the wrack swims still.


'Tis a Sicilian Galley by her Flag.


O Sir! look, they swim still in charity as a Sacrifice for our deliverance,
if it be possible save 'em; the Youth strikes the Waters with unskilful Oars: O
save, save the Innocent.


Be at peace, Madam, if it be in man I'll save 'em.


What do you mean?


To leap in.


'Tis desperate.


'Tis honest, nay 'tis honourable; and when can a young man die better, or hope
to have his end waited on with braver Mourners? Thou see I have hunted from
danger to danger all my life but to find a name, or one to own me, and cannot
compass it; therefore to choose I'll leap into this danger; for from this
glorious end I may in story force one; and therefore leave to counsel, and leap
in with me; and let us through this as a thousand other dangers together
labour; then if I faint, Hipparchus may be by; and if Hipparchus faint, Am not
I there? Farewell, if thou wilt not follow, Farewell for ever.


He's gone, Pausanes, Friend, steer thy Course to yonder fire, there I'll meet
thee, and if it be possible, assist thy brave resolution.


Ye Gods! What strange kind of men are these?


SO, here I'll rest my Burden; she begins to recover her strength, and Reason
works apace; she called for help, but


O save me, save me, Gentle Youth, I am betrayed.


Hark! again.


Ha! Where am I? What place is this?


Now Gillippus, hide thy Snares cunningly, and then thou may catch this Bird.


Ha! wet? -- Good Heaven! now my fears return with my Reason, and I remember
the danger I was in by a storm at Sea. -- Ha! What's this? A man laid by my
side? Sleeps he, or is he dead? Good Heaven protect me, How came I here? --
Who's this? Gillippus? Bless me! he's so wicked, Me-thinks his Ashes should be
dangerous. Hark! he groans. O! that faithful stranger, little does his soul
fear what miseries his bounty has brought me. Hipparchus the Traitor called
him, or my busy mind deceived me.


Yonder's the fire which my Friend, will steer his desperate Course to. Ha!
What do I see? Leucanthe, and Gillippus dead by her?


Who's that named Gillippus, Zenon?


What, alive?


Hipparchus! Nay, then I see my fate pursu es me.


Art alive? -- Ye Gods, take this in sac ifice while I offer that --


'Tis he, 'tis the Youth that saved me -- O Sir, protect me from this Ravisher.


If he escape me now I'm strangely cursed; Do you stare, Sir?


I bleed apace.


I'm wounded.


Nay, it has a mouth, would it had this tongue in it.


You can fall when you are not dead; if thou jest now take that in earnest.


Hold, I'm unfit for such a sudden Exit; O she's lost, she's lost, for ever
lost.


O Sir! Spare him a little time to throw off that load that sinks him.


O Madam! to what danger has my mistake of service brought you? Are you not at
war with all our Sex for the Treacheries of this Villain?


How do you, Sir? Alas, he faints!


I bleed apace, and I fear my wounds are deeper than I apprehended; for I feel
a darkness now begin to close mine eyes. O Madam! Madam!


O! I fear he's lost; Good Gods, send some aid and counsel to a wretched Maid
whom ye have pursued with change of cruel fates. O that I had died ere I had
seen this Youth; unfortunate Leucanthe, to see thy Love thus in the Cradle
bloody, born only to add another cause of grief.


This way I heard some body cry for help, and 'twas mingled with the noise of
Swords; What's here, a man wet and wounded? Good Heaven! last night thou little
expected'st such a land fate: More misery! Whence are they? A woman too? 'Tis
some Murder sure. I'll take my Sword, those that could so destroy their youth
will not spare my age.


What art thou, Father, that pitiest our sad fates? Come hither and I'll teach
thee how to mourn.


Is he dead thou mourn thus? Let me see his wounds, Hold up's head, he
breaths, Bow him forward while I fetch a Balsam, whose sovereign power (if the
vital parts be not perished) will restore his health.


Run, run; O my Joy! if thou dy'st, upon thy Tomb I'll lay Marble rough as thy
fortune, and on it set fixed a living statue till with my tears I have
polished it.


So, pour this Balsam into his wounds, and bind them up, and stay his head
while I go find the Hermit's Son, he shall help to bear him to my Cabin.


Bring 'em to yonder fire; and while Euoratia applies her charity to the Youth
I'll assist Pausanes.


Eucratia! Who named Eucratia?


Why, dost thou know Eucratia?


Know her! Yes, Leucanthe.


Father!


'Tis she.


O ye Gods! your hands are visible through all this change.


Who are those about the fire?


Leucanthe and Theagines. O Sir! we're blessed beyond our


Eucratia here too! O remove my doubts, by what fate are we met thus strangely?


'Twill ask a longer time, Sir, than her charity now can spare to tell.


Father, they are all acquainted, and yet in my conscience they never appointed
this meeting.


What's here? A woman's breast in a Doublet? Ladies, some of your hands will be
more proper here, this habit belongs not to the Sex it clothes.


A woman!


Yes.


Sortanes, have you never seen that face?


Yes, on my life.


'Tis Lysimella.


Here, O here! Who called wretched Lysimella?


Madam, your charity has found my Sister, my Friend, all that I call dear; and
see if a cross fate has not attempted to snatch her hence: O persist in your
charity, and a little dispense with your joy, and try to save her.


If my blood could save her, to every vein I would a passage give, and through
those thousand streams pursue her safety.


More of that Strong-water, and give him leave to breathe.


Here, put on this loose Roll, and hide her Disguise.


Some charitable hand convey me to Hipparchus, that from my dying lips I may
breathe him comfort. About my neck you'll Pausanes bosom, in which (I heard
one Perseus tell, who that day fell in battle) was writ in Characters their
Names and Country, which yet they know not.


Perseus! Who can tell tidings of the aged Perseus?


That can I -- At the sack of Tunis he fell by my hands, when I took those
youths Prisoners, they called him Father -- O! I feel I'm sinking, but whither,
O whither, Mercy, Mercy, Heaven.


I am wrapped in amazement at these things; these are Pausanes?


This.


On thee then fall a blessing; but on thee my Son a thousand, thousand
blessings; all that a weeping Father can with penitent


What have I lived to see?


Oh, Leucanthe and Eucratia, see your long lost Brothers.


Though my part be strange; yet these wonders make it seem nothing, there's
such providence in the chances; how fares my Lysimella?


Oh Brother, can you forgive this fault? I heard some body name Pausanes, where
is he?


Here.


There! and not come to Lysimella? oh! my fears will end this wrack, speak; by
all the honours of thy youth, I conjure thee, is he dead, or no?


No, upon my life, he lives and is found a Prince.


A Prince! and will not my Brother then --


Why dost thou hide thy blushes in my bosom, think thou I can be cruel to
Lysimella? no, no; since I saw thee I have felt thy pain, and now can love too,
but dare not promise I shall be fortunate.


Can I add to your joys? if I can, Sir, let this Priest witness my vows to the
King.


Will it please the King to retire to my homely Cell, 'tis free from storms,
unless you bring 'em with you; I have lived long there, but never felt any save
what my sins brought. Some skill too I have in herbs, and fortunate (I thank
the gods) I have been in my attempts in Surgery; and hope they'll smile upon
these Patients too, I find no danger of death amongst 'em: and when I have my
Salvatory laid by, then I'll take up my Beads; for the Priest, I see, must
complete the joys of these happy pairs, my interest in which I'll no longer
hide. -- Oh speak Eucratia, think thou the gods will accept an offering from
aged Memnon's hand again, that


My Father!


Memnon, my Brother! oh welcome!


Let me interrupt your joys, lest their excess prove dangerous; and to the gods
that have wrought this blessing, let us pass on to sacrifice.


Lead on, Theagines, while we these young men bear off, on each of which a
Virgin shall like their good genius wait; the story, how we came to be thus
happy, we'll defer to a fitter time, when health and Hymen shall wait on these
Princes, to set their Prisoners free, and prove Loves Fetters Liberty.



