THE PRINCESS: OR, Love at first Sight. A TRAGI-COMEDY: The Scene NAPLES and
SICILY.

Written in Naples BY THOMAS KILLIGREW.

Dedicated to his dear Niece THE LADY ANNE WENTWORTH, WIFE TO The LORD
LOVELACE.

LONDON: Printed by J. Macock, for Henry Herringman; and are to be sold at his
Shop at the sign of the Blew-Anchor, in the lower Walk of the New Exchange.
1663.

SLaves, you have her? you have your Throats shaved with a short sword.


By what title is she yours? We fought for her.


And by our Laws you ought to stand to your Lot.


By what Laws? By the Roman Law, you Rascals? broad-sword-law; besides she
looks as if she were sweet and sound, which are things you'll scarce bring a
President, to prove your interest by.


We will not quit our shares for words; We have swords.


And no money; Go ye Rascals: do you show your teeth? Go, truss, be gone, to
the next woods side, there speed with your Ploughs; do you threaten me with
your cold Iron?


Your odds makes you presume, but if we meet you alone, of the Guard.


Then I'll cut thy Throat.


No, we'll spare you that labour, and have yours cut.


Yes, yes, I know thou art good at killing, by Attorney.


S'death, come away, follow, We shall a have time.


And that's all, but a wheel and a crowd, that thy end can claim, --

How now? weeping? come, dry, dry; I'll be a Father to thee. Art honest?


Dare not you be honest too?


Honest? Faith, pretty one, he that dares fight is as honest a Soldier as
needs to be.


O! ye Gods.


They are the prettiest kind of commodities, these women, that a man can deal
in, there is nothing like 'em, but ready money.


Pray, Sir, leave talking, and fall to, that we may have


Not a bit, go home to your Doll, and fall to your cold meat, friends.


Hang her, she's old.


Speak reverently of her Age, the Jade brought great loads to our pleasure, in
her youth, and must not be forgotten.


O but this, Sir, has such an excellent face.


Away, you Rogues, old chins, and naked chins, Boys of the first beard, and
find distinction? must your weak stomachs have face-sauce, before you can fall
to? the sex (you Varlets) was enough, when I was young; and I confess they have
been sad days with me, since the Face and Petticoat came in esteem: look where
she lies, (what? weeping, pretty one? now if I should dote in my latter days,
and draw in at my eyes a punishment, they say the Gods are just, and may,
through my doublet, punish the sins of my youth -- Hum, I'll think no more
on it; -- Faith I must kiss thee.


O Sir, be not so barbarous as to bring those dangers you have beaten hence;
why do you lay such rude hands on me? Think you, the innocence of Maid and
Virgin have no power to


A Maid! by my faith, its strange, I should ha'jugded you at the second age,
when women fall; have you no witness of what you say? I have no faith your
witness, or I kiss.


Away, unhand me, and force me not to call down a Plague to guard me, scorn not
my words, if thou dost this wickedness, thou wilt find the curse of an injured
Maid strike as sure, as lightning, and as fatal; nor can all thy skill and
courage defend thee, but despairs will find thee, and inhabit in thee, till
thou art dissolved in the horrors of thy fear. But if this calm, which seems to
allay


By this light she talks unhappily, should I keep her company, I must beg; no
more of this discourse, pray.


Let me be safe in my Honour, and I'll be silent, and beside the reward that
heaven will pay you, my Ransom shall be what you'll name.


You have prevailed, and shall be free from force; but take heed of talking of
Heaven before these; to tempt them with such promises, is bidding them to their
loss; for what can such fellows hope for there, but to become some odd Saints
without Holy-daies?


Lieutenant, you are somewhat free in your Opinion of us.


Why, dost thou sweet heart, hope for better? look upon him has he not a
promising face? I'll prophecy, Crabb, continue in thy calling, and thou art
safe, for thou hast endeavoured long, and I fear not, but hast made good
friends below, and may be of a good rank in hell.


Faith, Lieutenant, me thinks, you spurred fairly forwards, and, upon my
Conscience, will be richly damned.


Who I? Faith and troth I think I shall, and yet, while


I hear our Captains voice.


Away, take her to my quarter, and, upon your lives, no Insolence; pray step
off with them, till I see what occasions this noise.


I will go, But if this be Treachery
Know, though 'tis easy to abuse the Gods,
Yet it is heavy for to bear their rods.

Away, you are safe.


SIR, these are some poor Rogues.


Hang 'em then for being poor.


Cannot our prayers find thy Mercy?


A pox upon your prayers, they could not protect thee; hang 'em I say.


Hold Sir, mistake not these Men, for, if I guess right, they are no beggars.


Bring the Torture then.


I believe, I know a way to gain the Truth without a Rack: There is a Wench --


I, What became of her?


She's in my power, and talks not like a beggar; by this day, she threatened me,
and frighted me from my pleasure, she proffered a Ransom too, things that
beggars never dream on.


Where is she? We will load her with chains, till they confess.


Patience a little, and I'll instruct you; do but threaten to kiss her, (you
understand me) and, upon my life, she'll tell all.


To the Dungeon then with these, and fetch her; but dost thou hear, Lieutenant,
is she likely? is it a handsome Wench? dost thou see ready money in her face?


O, 'tis a proper Wench, and bravely built, such Eyes, so black, so great, of a
Beauty that is currant every where, Then her Cheeks, and such Lips; ha! by
this hand I could ha dwelt for ever there.


She came luckily for this Mart; what became o'th Boys we took a swimming in
Baio?


They are safe, and will be ready for the same freight.


And all will scarce quit cost.


Faith Captain, we have no luck of late, our old Soldiers are immortal too,
they will not die, there comes no profit that way of late; When the Moor was
Captain, in his years there fell as many of those rotten plums, as were worth
ten thousand Drachms.


And since my reign, I cannot count a thousand. The young Cicilian, the bold
Cilius, is returned too, and now I have no hope to continue another year.


Which? he that was the Prisoner?


Yes, the same, his hopes stand fair for the next Election, nor shall I envy
him if he gain it, for it's a gallant Fellow, and indeed ought to command here.


Faith Captain, a competent ill nature (I thank the Gods) I have gained in the
service, and to me 'tis indifferent who is Captain, for I must be Lieutenant
still, till my lot falls, and yet I have so much gratitude as to be angry with
old Tullius.


Why dost thou blame a Man for desiring to live?


By my Faith, when a Man desires it so unreasonably, I do; he knows he cannot
live, and yet he has not so much good nature as to die; what if he may linger
out this month? he'll die the next, and then your reign expires.


Marry, and the Villain is rich, and 'twere not amiss to be his Heir.


If he die in time; but if he live he will not be worth one Drachma; for since
they told him he could not escape, The slave that grudged himself Bread before
eats Gold now, and considering you are his Heir, it is your Gold he eats; would
I had such Title to his Estate, by this light, I'd choke him, slave.


Thou art in the right, if he die this month, I am his Heir, by the Laws of
our Band, if next, he that succeeds; and I am certain, he made his Fortune
under me.


Why I, there's the point, Faith Captain, if you please, I'll go speak with him,
and try what good nature will do, it may be he will hear reason, I'll urge how
much he is bound to you.


Thou may go, but I'm afraid it will be lost labour.


A party of Romans taken, where? guide my hate, that with fatal wounds I may
empty their proud veins.


How now Cilius, what Rage is this?


O Teresius, can you be content, because our persons lie hid, to let our shames
continue visible, and thus sleep out the sufferings of our Country? I past over
her bosom in my Journey, Oh! had you, with me, seen the general calamities she
groans under, ruined even to a Chaos, and the wretched people, grown so
degenerate in their sufferings, that they begin, with joy, to obey the
insulting Conqueror.


It is wisdom now to obey.


Wisdom? Is Teresius grown so tame, to think so? let the Dogs, not Cilius,
practise it.


Why thus impatient?


Our Country and our miseries call for our swords to protect her, and to see
you thus tame makes me so.


This rage serves her as little -- And 'tis now in vain to attempt their ruin,
whose Conquest has taken such firm root.


Those that bled in the last battle thought not so.


To what rash attempts would your rage guide you! is the sad issue of that day
no example which our brave Prince Facertes was forced to survive, and adorn
their Triumphs? But that being past, he had died upon the Hook, nor could the
Intercession of Virgilius letters have deferred the doom, though he bestrid him
in the heat of battle, had not the far-fam'd Sophia, in his approaching Fate,
called to mind that which he (though an Enemy) protected her Brother from, and
in the instant kneeled and embraced Caesars knees, divinely pleading, Pallas
inspired her, and with her own Beauties clothed the Virgin, and with such
power the Goddess moved in her, that when Caesar gazed upon her blew eyes he
left to be Caesar, and rather obeyed then granted, and to be her Father could
scarce secure him from being fettered with those white wrists which circled his
imperial knees.


Was Virgilius then in the Power of Facertes, that day, and did he let him
escape, did he fawn upon the Roman?


It was but to return the Piety Virgilius showed his Foster-father, who (you
know) protected him in that sad day our King was slain, and, by his power, he
grew able to give that last blow for his Countries Freedom, which when the aged
Nigro saw inclining to the Romans, covetous to have his Age set in some
glorious Act, he charged the youthful Virgilius, but over loaded with Courage,
his silver hairs sunk under the Roman, whose Piety bestrid him like his Father,
vowing to sacrifice upon that breast, sooner then wound it.


'Twas done like the Son of the first Julius; These are degenerate, and succeed
only in the others Fortune, not his Merit, Yet -- had I been by --


What could your single Arm have done?


Killed Virgilius, in Revenge of the Rape the Roman Ploughs has made upon my
Mothers womb. For other Parent then my Country, I yet could never find. Oh!
that I had been that day with the brave Facertes, who knows but I might have
dug a glorious Monument in some lucky wound, given in the face of this
admired Virgilius, and after such a Fortune, I could have smiled, and, unshook,
stepped into my gray. Or if slav'd, such bold truths I would have uttered, they
should not have destroyed me for cold Example, but rather because Rome durst
not let me live. And yet I beg if there be any Power favourable to Cilius, let
it set within my swords reach this Virgilius, this King of Men, This Sicilian
scourge, that makes us kneel and kiss our Afflictions; Then, then, Teresius,
thou shalt see, how with this sword I'll hunt his pale Soul to her last home.


'Tis a Gallant Youth, how his Spirit boils, to be in Action.


If I be chose Captain of our Band, by all our bondag'd Gods, in some disguise,
I'll see that Rome, I will Teresius, and with a few wounds well dealt, gather a
numerous Revenge; say, would not you obey, if I command, to join in such a
Sacrifice, where, to fall, The Off'ring is as glorious, as to stand the Priest,
and such attempts are becoming Sacrifice for Men, let Women incense burn, it is
properer for us to expiate with wounds, then Prayer or Fasting, and had those
we vainly dealt in Sacrifice been given upon our Enemies, our Herds had now
been fair, and Rome Ashes.


May all thy thoughts prove Prophetic, and here I vow to obey what ere thou
injoynest. -- Though it be not safe to let thee know the Reason, nor the
Interest thou hast in thy Countries sufferings.


Sir, will you come to the Examination, The Prisoners are at the Quarters.


What Prisoners?


The Romans.


Why are they not staked?


There's a Woman amongst'em.


You will not stake her, will you?


No, I make no war with Women.


If she must die, I beg the staking of her.


What is she?


More then young, and handsome, and one that talks unhappily; I know not --


I'll go see her; Captain, I'll meet you at the Oak.


I'll to my Quarter, and attend you.


O Let me stretch my self, and thus enlarged possess my Joys; for know, my
longing Soul made a Crown a Burden, and with greater joy I have put off an
Empire, then thou thy chains; and now transported with my hopes, the Bird that
from the Cage is flown, and broke that Prison, where she was wont to mourn, and
sings all Tunes at once, That Bird, I say, cuts not the yielding Air with more
joyful Freedom, then I, to find my self, and delivered from that imprisoning
state.


Sir, Thus far I have obeyed your Commands, which enjoined me to accompany you
from Gallia hither: But what your design should be, that makes you thus, with
Joy, quit your Command there, and be pleased to find your self unknown and hid
in a disguise at Naples, I cannot guess, nor shall I be so rude to ask; for
sure if it were fit I knew it, you, that dare trust your sleeping self in my
power, would not hide it from me.


Does not my Friend guess, whither I am bound?


Not the particular; but I am certain 'tis some great design, to conquer which,
you thus in ambush lay the great Virgillius.


The Body was made the Souls slave, and now but serves her to advance my ends;
nor is my Mind less, or thoughts more subject to fear, then when an Army
compassed me.


Sir, That you are alone makes you not less in my esteem; for it is not your
power I admire, (the loss of mine own tells me, that's mortal) but your Mind;
which, when Virgilius is nothing but what my Memory gives life to, will make me
worship his Monument.


No more, Prince Facertes, my Friend, and to confirm him take a secret, by
which I'll bind him to me for ever; for secrets have stronger ties then Love, or
Vows; for whilst thou hast Honour that binds thee, the other may by mistake or
Passion (which Friendship's self is subject to) fall even to hate.


Then, when I have honour, I shall know your design.


When thou hast! O Facertes, my friend, it was born with thee; and where it is
not natural, swords cannot acquire it; Take therefore into thy heart all the
secrets of mine, and in a word, all my hopes, and all my fears, Cicilia.


What of her, Sir?


She is all my hopes, all my wishes, and all my fears; and if she smile, I am
fortunate: for know, my journey is to lay at her feet my self, and all that
Conquest gave me. What thinks Facertes? will she accept it, and not destroy the
destroyer? For nothing can be conquest, where she suffered, but height of
Murder.


What, do I hear my prayers forestall'd, and those joys Our Country ought to
sacrifice for, offered to us? I hope Virgilius is not still pleased to triumph
over our miseries, and throw a scorn upon that, which he thought worthy of his
sword?


Have you not yet forgiven what was my fate? while these thoughts dwell in
thee, I must not hope Facertes will join the power of a Brother to assist my
wishes.


If you are real, you shall tread upon my neck, but if this be scorn, 'tis so
unlike my friend, and so unbecoming the brave Virgilius, that I should not fear
to call him enemy, nor despair his conquest.


Real, Facertes! why when have I jested with my friend? Real? yes, as thy vows
to Sophia. Never start, nor put on amazement, was I less worthy of a trust,
because thou though me worthy to have been thy enemy? call me friend, and
hide thy love? Either thou hast not found the knowledge, or lost the value of
thy friend: I tell Prince Facertes, she, whom he sacrifices to, has greater
ties upon me as Friend then Sister.


That I do love the divine Sophia, witness my part of heaven, which is all thou
hast left me to swear by; but if thou hast gained the knowledge of that secret,
by jealous guesses, purchased treachery, or with thy power hast wrought upon
her sex to betray her innocent affection, draw thy sword, for, by all our Gods,
no


I am innocent, and you are angry; here read that, it will tell you, you have
injured me.


Can Virgilius pardon me, and still have patience to learn me how to conquer
Nations first, and then my self, by his great Example?


Your friendship I shall never decline; and if Sophia be just, you have a
warrant for you faith of mine. When I went for Gallia to take command of those
Legions there, at parting, we fell into discourse of you, and the
never-enough-admir'd Cicilia, whose beauties and virtues she always mentioned
with admiration: I confessed to her, that her former descriptions had engaged
my affections to your Sisters fame so much, that I was resolved, in some
disguise, to see her. O're-joyed with this news, she recommended you to me for
a guide, And though I ever admired the honour I found in Facertes, yet I
confess, I made a little stop ere I resolved to put my self in the power of
one, whom I had tempted with such a ruin, as obeying my Fathers injunctions,
had made me lay upon your suffering Country; to remove which doubt she blushed
out this secret; I asked her then, why she suffered thee to be led in triumph?
she said, she pleaded against it, what she durst, and had she loved less, she
could have said more, but seeing her own guilt, she feared it might have been
trouble to all: Now if this truth can satisfy Facertes, that I have not
wronged him, and now I beg, he'll give me leave to return his vows, to Cicilia;
and now I conjure thee by that power which thou hast given her, in Sophia's
name, here to bury all thy fears, all thy anger, all remembrance that I was a
misfortune to thee, in return of which upon thy breast, the Altar of
friendship, I'll lay mine a sacrifice, and vow my self to fair Cicilia, and her
Country, a constant friend.


Oh! Sir, The joys you load your slave with, I wish you may find, when you sigh
under such a pleasing burden, as the enjoying all your wishes brings. And if
my prayers be prosperous, Virgilius will prove our Physician, and the wounds he
gave, but Prescriptions, and we have bled for our health only.


From hence then, I'll count my conquest over Facertes, and think I have
brought more strength to our Empire, by his friendship, then his Country.


If you intend a sudden journey, give me leave to furnish you with a Galley, I
have some acquaintance in the Town; I'll dispatch, and meet you presently upon
the Mould: will you not send, to see whether your Sister be arrived at Baio?


Yes, and we'll touch there, as we go.


When I kissed her hands, to go for Gallia, she said, she was immediately to
retire to Baio.


We need not bid each other haste, since Love's our guide.


HItherto, fair one, your beauty has preserved you; but let not your pride
teach you, from success, to scorn a proffered love, that brings safety with it;
for me, I confess I durst not enter where that beauty guarded; there was
something in that Angel from that stroke me, and I boast a wound received from
you, more then a conquest over another.


This Act shows you truly valiant, and this fear, you pay the Gods, is courage:
Fools and Cowards only dare their power, and you shall find success and
conquest still await you, when you strike not against them; and my prayers
shall invert the kind of this offering, and make a sacrifice of that which is
duty: and you shall receive a reward for paying, as if you had given Hecatombs.


Faith, pretty one, I am pleased with what you say, though I understand it not,
Pray, what kind of place is yours, in heaven? By this hand, I think she keeps
the sweet-meats, or else, is woman Butler there.


Alas, Sir, I am so mortal, I am subject to you: for heaven, I know it not, but
by faith, and that tells me, when I am injured, my curses wound, and when
served, my prayers heal.


Then you have nothing to show, under the hands of those, what do ye call'um?
those Gods?


Nothing, but the examples of their justice; which, with punishment, visit the
wicked.


Now do I begin to find, I was a fool, and this wench a talker, By this hand I
thought she had had some of the Gods in Liveries, at her Elbow, and there's no
such thing, all is but a dream; but I'll be no longer fooled by my fears.
Faith, pretty one, let's try whether they be at leisure, or no; or if they be,
they cannot have the face to punish us for those faults they were so subject to
themselves.


They are in a sad condition, that instead of repentance, seek examples for
their sins; and the second is worse then the first; as insolence, is worse then
weakness: why do you lay such rude hands upon me, You will not destroy what you
have built?


Wait without.


Are you there? Then I am prevented, a Pox upon my


Lieutenant, is that the Prisoner, you spoke of?


Yes Sir.


Thou lie.


Sir.


I tell thee, its false, its here the Prisoner stands.


That's she, I spoke of.


Leave us then.


Ye Gods, new miseries.


Why so; there's but three steps to a woman's bed, liking, alone, and consent.
Two of them he has past already, if she consent, I would he might pay her: look
how they gaze, This is Love, and I have bought wit, But if a long staff keep me
from the next, let 'em geld me.


Fair one, what Country boasts these Beauties?


Sir, I can answer for my self, But for those Beauties, you speak of, let them
find a friend, I have misfortunes enough to busy my time, and I find it
business enough to make it appear fit to live: The thoughts of beauty, are fit
for those that have fortunes like their faces, and if mine be like my fortune,
(as a friend I counsel you) not to let your eyes dwell longer here, for its a
dangerous habitation, Not safe to me, that am native there, and I should mourn
more for your dangers, then mine own, for I know how to be just, but I could
never find, how to be fortunate.


A Curse find him, and all passed Plagues be but stored for him, that would
seek to deface that Temple, and what ere your modesty can urge. -- Thus I'll
pay my duty, for I know, such a


If you kneel, I must kneel too, for the guilt is no less to take a worship
where it is not due, then to pay it.


But if the guilt be equal, pray refuse not to receive an unfeigned one.


I dare not rise, while you kneel; for although the fault be equal, yet
civility makes this fitter.


I'll not dispute; for know, should you command, through sin, I'd serve you;
and therefore you may be confident, I'll obey you, when you command me shun it;
and here, with shame, I confess, I came prepared with lust, hungry with sin,
and looked to have met a sacrifice to me. -- But I have found the power, and
now return as from the Altar, struck with holy despairs, and shall feed on what
I have already fed my eyes and ears with.


Sir, I find there's honour in your breast, but I fear that safety dwells not
every where; for the Soldier that you found with me, repents him of the good
that saved me.


He dares as soon suck in a Pestilence, as breathe on that air, I frown in; he
is my slave, and to my will his fate is tied, if he dares breathe ought but
obedience, 'tis his own sentence; say, fairest, shall he live, By our Gods (but
to serve you) he should not. What, ho! Lieutenant, Sirrah, what was it you
said, to disturb this calm.


Faith little Sir, something that tended to the use of handsome women.


Slave, did thou look upon her, and not kneel? by her self, I swear (purer
then which our Temples show nothing) if any act or word of thine shall
henceforth pay less reverence here, then at the Altar, thou art Earth; mark me;
this shall wound the into Earth.


Sir it shall, and I'll call it justice, death has taken six I think, and is
drunk with her beauty, a pox upon me: I must be praising her forsooth.


Sir, you need not threaten, the reward is not worth the hazard, and I am safe.


The reward! oh, that it were to be purchased at the rate of Kingdoms, then the
sword might gather those Beauties! but they are neither within the compass of
conquering, nor dying for, else I durst say, after all my wounds and triumphs,
see your slave; but now I am lost in my despairs.


Sir, Truth has such affinity with truth, that I can scarce hide one from you,
which I fear will be displeasing.


To serve you, is the first thoughts of my heart, and since I cannot, my self
be happy, let me contribute my Power to make you so; dare you tell me who you
are?


A vow forbids me.


Sir, the Captain expects you.


Me? I'll wait him presently: Lieutenant, see you cheerish your first act, and
with honour treat this Lady, and you shall command me; your pardon, fair one,
our Captain commands me hence, but you shall be safe from all dangers, but what
your sadness brings, and I shall be proud to be called yours, though despised.


Witness heaven, all that honour can spare me is yours; And therefore I beg you
will not injure me, to say I despise you: When we have not, we cannot pay, and
I shall mourn to think I must dye your Debtor.


Madam, But I can admire and sacrifice in thoughts, pray command me to do
something for you, oh! that these five tedious days were wasted, that, without
a treachery, I might say, you are free, but if you can find a strength to
resist these miseries, till then, By our Gods, you are as free as they, and as
readily I'll obey you.


Sir, your first bounties make me happy; and since I have your protection for
my Honour, all the rest, when they are blown over, bring but a pleasure in the
relation.


I must go -- There is a necessity that forces me to obey, I cannot else
command your safety. -- Lieutenant.


Sir.


Need I say again, Protect this Lady?


No Sir, By this hand, he hath gelt me with a look, Madam, will it please you
to walk?


Yes Sir, I'll follow you, and I hope I shall not be ashamed to follow my
Facertes, whose Soul, I think, holds Intelligence with this Soldier; and were
it not that I been accustomed to see such Virtue, this would start me.


FLy, oh fly, and save your self, Madam, This Piety will give wings to your
Innocence; for it is just, ye Powers,


No Father, The fears and nicities of our Sex I have long since banished hence;
and so many have been my days of mourning, that I thought not to have shed a
tear for any new misery; But this is a loss I could not foresee, and by
surprise this grief has got into my heart, look, if I have not tears left. --
Oh! ye Heavens, Where is that Justice and Mercy we sacrifice to? Why were you
absent when his sword struck in your own cause? He faints. Wounds, and Age!
There is a kind of Sacrilege in this Murder, and I could be wicked in my
anger, to see his faithful youth preserved thus to a punishment, and, instead
of a reward, see him pursued like the wicked, and his Age set in Blood.


O excellent Maid! let not my ruin beget faults in thee; Nigro could wish; am
I not blessed with my Countries cause to die in, while a Princess mourns at my
Funeral, and an Angel Virgin is


He's dead. --


Hands off, This is my Prisoner.


She's finely built, I think she was furnished for the Mart.


I'll have her Clothes, I spied them first.


I'll have her, and let whose will take the rest; I desire but to be lost in the
wood with her, for a night, and let him take her that finds her in the morning.


He were a bold fellow, that would come after thee.


Come, leave this squabling, lest the Lieutenant come, and then you get not a
bit.


Faith, and thou art in the right, and I confess I would be glad to find a way
to be revenged for the last he took from us.


I could tell you how to do it, and profitably too, if you would all take my
counsel.


Propose, propose.


Then quit your thoughts of this dainty bit, and lets away with her, and the
rest, to Naples, and sell 'em, This fine


Agreed, Agreed.


Thus rigged then, lets away, But we had best leave one to tell our Captain we
are put to Sea, in pursuit of a Galley that bore the Roman Eagle, that will
take off suspicion while we are absent; then we may return, and say, they out
sailed us.


I'll stay, but remember my share.


What, dost thou think we are Thieves amongst our selves? Come, help draw these
dead Bodies into the Wood, we will bury them when we return.


Bring her away too, and take care of her, lest she spoil her self, and undo
our Market.


Come, pretty one. -- Nay, you must part.


Fools, you pull on your Fates, and labour to steal that Vengeance that would
find you were you hidden in the Earth; and my Prophetic Soul tells me, I go
but to see you punished.


What says she?


I know not what she says, but I hope she lies; do you hear, what kind of
Women are your Witches?


A pox, they are old, Come Mistress, Dangers and handsome Women dwell not
together; if they do, let me fall into them. --


WHat were those Romans, that fell to my share?


They were taken when the pretty Wench was taken, that Cilius would have had.


Did you deliver 'em to the Lieutenant, and bid him come hither with his
Account?


I left 'em there, and bid him come to your Worship, but I found him a little
troubled, he had been at the Soldiers; but the fellow is wilful.


But I have taken an order to bring him to Reason.


Whoreson Clown, refuse to pledge me or die; Rascal, neither drink, nor die.
Umh.


How now, Lieutenant, what passion's this?


Rogue, refuse to dye, or drink my Captains health, at my suit, and yet confess
a Beer-glass would kill him.


Oh! is that the cause?


I'll swear, he is very unreasonable.


And ought to be put to death, for refusing a health.


That was spoke like my Captain, and I'll kiss his foot, nay, nay, do not hold
me, let me go, let me go, I say, that I may kneel, and wish thou may live,
till I refuse a Beer-glass.


What hast thou there?


A Julip.


What are the ingredients?


Simple Aqua-fortis, to warm his stomach. Dog, offer to live, when wine is a
poison to him?


You shall not poison him.


No, I'll get his Doctor to prescribe it, and then 'tis Physic.


No, no poison.


Then he'll live.


No I have prevented his living, for I was afraid thou would not succeed.
Thou hast no Oratory, thou can not persuade, Then, thou art so subject to
choler; Did you mark the old woman you met at my Quarter? it was his wife. In
six words, I made a price with her, to kill him, without any of the
difficulties you found in persuading him.


Captain, you are weak, Captain; I not Eloquent? your Argument is weak; Death,
do you think 'tis no more to persuade one to dye, then to hire another to kill
him.


No.


Stand fair, and I'll confute you. Crabb.


Lieutenant.


What wilt thou give me to kill him.


Come, leave your fooling, and give me your Account.


Am I Eloquent then?


Yes, yes, give me your Account, and I'll believe you Eloquent, what's this?


Your Account.


My Account?


Yes, and an Eloquent Account.


What's here? paid, lent, given, and rests due; faith it's an Eloquent account
indeed: But Lieutenant, is this all?


All? why would you have more?


Kind Lieutenant, I would have an Account.


Why have you not an Account? All is but this over and over; but if you'll give
it me again, you shall have a longer Bill.


But Lieutenant, Eloquent Lieutenant, is that all that's left of my four
thousand Sestertia.


Why, what account should I make you? would you not pay what you owe? and lend
a good fellow that drinks fair; or is your Charity dead to pretty sinners in
their necessity, and militant in the world?


But grant these uses, what is the sum? what paid, what lent?


Why, what you will.


Very good. But what means this, Rests due, of whom must I enquire for that?


Of me Torrafuco, lodging at the sign of the Lieutenant.


Crabb, knock, and if the Party be within, tell him, I would speak with him,
and require an Account of certain living creatures that were given to his
trust, Women and Children.


They, Sir, are increased, the Moore has a Calf running by her side, of his own
getting, the other Barbary is with Foal to; and she that you sent to day had
like to have been leaped in his Collar.


The Alarm, Sir, is given, from the shore, and the Lyon is in chase of a Galley
that bears the Roman Eagle, and Cilius waits directions at your Quarter.


Tell him, we come, and, do you hear, get the Leopards Gang ready; what will my
careful Steward do, visit the sick? Pray, let the Prisoners be bathed first,
and well fed, against the Mart.


Crabb.


Here, nobel Lieutenant, I am always ready to serve. -- When he is in this
humour I cleanse his Pockets, and that's my Revenue.


Crabb, talking is not good for me when this fit is upon me; for I find, I am
subject to grow angry, weak and drowsy.


Therefore you must master your passion, at first, ere it grow upon you; but
there is no speaking to you when you are in an Argument.


I find thee an able man, and therefore I'll lean upon thee: what's that,
Crabb?


What's what, Sir?


I felt a live thing in my Pocket, Crabb.


It may be your worships breeches are torn.


I will reward thy faith with a Trust, Crabb, here, to let thee see, how dear
thou art to me, keep my Tobacco-box.


Noble Lieutenant.


No thanks, but help to lay me down behind some tree, in the shade.


Your worships head is full. -- I could have gelt him, the slave has drunk
himself stiff.


Crabb, Crabb.


Here, here.


Prithee stick a bough for a mark, that thou may find me again, lest I be
lost in my thoughts.


I shall, I shall.


CAptain, a word with you, I have viewed your ware, but is there any special
piece amongst 'em?


As you see; they are young, and sound.


Will you give a trial?


With the eye, and the tongue, question, or search them, nothing else.


Not a little freedom alone? you were not wont to be thus hard.


Faith, we have had no luck of late, Mistress, this is the first Mart we have
made this month.


And you come to our house, it shall cost you nothing.


At what price do you hold that fine thing?


That? it is the cream of our Mart, she will cost two thousand Sestertia.


Is she a maid?


I'll warrant that, if I sell her.


Come, a thousand is fair, and take you the profit of the first night.


No, altogether, or nothing, view her, she is worth the money naked.


But, my friend, I hope you have tried your self, ere now? are you fruitful?


Yes, Mistress, and if you agree upon the price, you shall find me a faithful
servant; and for the sport, if I raise you not a Crop from the Common, geld me.


Geld thee? Marry God forbid man; I'll lame thee first, art sound too? else I
may live to curse your doings.


Sound as a Bell, and as ever you hope to be satisfied, buy me.


Away, away, you're a wag, is your breath sweet, let me smell, you are very
forward, pray turn, and let's see your price,


Thank you, may his back never fail you.


Faith, you are too dear. -- Stay, here comes the Prince Bragadine, the
Viceroys Son.


How now, Soldier, what famous Prize is that?


A Greek Sir, a Virgin.


What's her price?


Two thousand Sestertia.


It's dear, and yet its a proper Wench.


My Sister not arrived yet at Baio? its strange.


No Sir, not yet, but she has been expected these ten days.


What crowd is that?


The slave-mart is held to day.


What stranger is that?


Was that fellow drunk?


Either drunk or worse.


Is that excellent piece to be sold?


Yes Sir.


She is not, who can buy her? or who dares set a price upon that Beauty?
Fairest, what Country is (at this time) cursed with your absence, for sure 'tis
perpetual night when you are thence.


Greece, Sir, is my Country, more particulars I must not tell.


Fools that we are, to call our selves Conquerours of Greece, when one slave,
one handful of that Earth, has power to conquer me, and lead me bound, even in
my own Country.


It is not becoming your youth, nor fortune (how great so ever) to make a scorn
of those miseries which chance throws upon the Innocent.


A strange curse find me when I scorn you; dare you not tell me what you were
before this ruin?


I must not, Sir.


And are there no statues fixed in the Temples, or History, that preserves your
Story? must all but your Beauty sink with this ruin?


Sir, if you will buy her, take her upon her price; if not,


Fool, thou can not sell her, for thou know not how to value her, yet
cozen thy self; what dost thou ask?


Two thousand Sestertia.


Is that all?


All! yes.


And is she free when that is paid?


Yes, if you please.


Madam, not to call you mine, but to have a power to appear yours, give me
leave, with the loss of mine own, to find your Freedom. Go fetch two thousand
Sestertia. -- unbind her.


What mean you, Sir?


They are proper here; and I beg you will not refuse (when Honour consents) to
release me.


I hope my miseries will not beget Ingratitude in me, for I confess, 'tis some
Joy in the midst of these troubles, to find that Honour that shines throughout
this act; and though my bonds be as new and strange to me as your self, yet let
me say, if there be a faulty thought that bids you hope to find a slaves heart
here, you are deceived; for I would sooner sell my self to slavery, or, by a
wound seek a freedom.


By thy self, by thy Angel self, I approach thee with thoughts as pure and as
constant as those our Vestals wait on the holy flame with; and but that I know
you would scorn a Sacrifice that's offered by profane hands, those Attributes
are given to the Gods I'd kneel and pay to you.


Soldier, the Prince would speak with you.


Which is that fine thing you spoke of?


That that the stranger stands by.


That stranger, know thou that stranger?


No, not I.


Now by the sins of my youth, 'tis a God-like form! -- Why do they pull the
Woman so?


How now, unhand her Villain, is she not free?


You have not paid your money, and I must not lose my Market you talked, and
another ha's gon through with the bargain.


Another, what other?


One that will find the way to her Sex, before you'll come to kissing her hand:
take her away.


Slave, dost thou glory in thy Villainies? -- There, now let


What have you done, Sir?


Fairest, begun a Justice I hope the Gods will finish.


How, killed! whose act is this?


Mine, and I'll answer it; some one that knew him follow me, and take the money
for this Lady.


That Woman I have paid for, and I will not quit my purchase; either yield her,
or I shall force her.


I know what 'tis command, but never yet heard that voice (unless an Oracle)
that I would have obeyed when the Speaker frowned, and thou look not like him
whose voice is thunder.


Gallant Youth.


I cannot talk, Sir, but I shall take my own.


Touch her not, yet I have patience, let her alone. -- Nay, if you will be
insolent, I'll punish it if I can.


Kill the Dog.


Hold Sir, as you have any sense of Honour, hold for shame, betray not thy Fame
so poorly as to let a slave share in thy Revenge; this base odds calls thee
Coward, though thou conquerest.


Who made you a Judge of mine Honour?


So, I fear you'll find your Treachery no guard.


This way, this way he is gone, seize her and secure her to the Princes house,
whilst we follow him.


VIllains, whither tends your Rage?


To revenge: yield, or thou art dead.


Slaves, leave to pursue that stranger, or I'll send those shall shake your
wretched souls out of their Cases.


What's she?


What ere you are that thus have lent your pity to a stranger, in distress, may
you never know what 'tis to want a pity.


To buy a slave?


Upon him, alive or dead, we'll have him.


Ha! the Prince engaged, draw.


HEll upon you all, where were your Mercenary swords when they should assist?
S'death, to let a single stranger, in mine own door, brave me, and none by, to
kill the dog? who now is escaped, to brag that he snatched from Bragadine a
slave that he bought and paid for.


Sir, we could not Prophecy, your Highness would go out; and none called us;
But for the slave, she is at home, and safe, The Sailers brought her, and are
now in pursuit of the stranger.


If she be safe, let's lose no time, but follow them, lest he escape, with his
glories, which which way went they?


This way, Sir.


HOw do you, Sir?


Not well.


What accident was this?


Oh! Facertes, I have seen my Fate, and I conjure thee by all our friendship,
not to call me weak, nor dispute with my passion, but obey thy friend, and
suddenly, or I am lost for ever; for her innocence, I fear, will be no guard
against their power; and without impiety I may mistrust the Gods, for they
already have slept, and let her fall into misery; oh, Facertes, I am a slave to
a slave, and to hers my Fate is bound. And Temples, not chains are due to her;
and when thou see her thou wilt forgive me this change, for she has a Beauty
against which thy honour must arm, else thy love will be no more a guard then
was my resolution.


All this for a slave!


Oh! do not revile her; for when thou meet her, thy wonder and repentance
will make but one thought, and like me thou wilt be lost in a maze.


This is strange.


I confess it; yet when the world was innocent before the bloody sword taught
her pride by conquest, and learned the thirsty wool to drink the purple dye,
till it grew enriched with the farfetch'd stains, such innocence and beauty as
waits on her might any where have claimed a sacrifice.


Sir, though I grant all these beauties, yet to me they bring like miseries to
those the swift lightning leaves the wretched husband-man; who instead of full
joys, reaps from those wounding fires nought but weighty griefs; yet I'll obey
you, though in this chance I foresee my own despairs, to the little hopes I had
of happiness. Farewell.


Why do you conclude so? must you of necessity be miserable, if I be happy? are
my friends joys the less, because mine are full?


Pardon me, Sir, if you find me troubled to see all my hopes withered, and
those wounds you gave my suffering Country now despairing of a cure.


O friend! friend! has that word no power?


Yes, and that makes me slight my interest; for I am so accustomed to
misfortune, 'tis almost natural to me: But when I think on whom you throw your
fortune, youth and fame, I find a greater trouble as your friend, then as I am
the lost Facertes; for you know not what she is; your love hunts thus in the
dark, A slave, a thing set at sale for lust.


That, that, Facertes makes me rage; and again by all that's powerful I conjure
thee fly with me to her rescue, before such a ruin find her.


Virgilius, Sir, Virgilius stay; I must obey him, or he's lost.


Draw thy sword then, and let me see thee plead with that against her enemies,
as thou did against me at Siracusa, and I'll conclude all hopes from that
powerful Argument.


Sir, I never used my Arguments to spare my sword; nor was my tongue now drawn,
because I meant that should sleep: See 'tis drawn, but in vain you hope a
service from it, as your self; and therefore stay here, while I fit you with a
disguise.


Be speedy then.


I shall, but pray retire a little, this place is too public, I'll return
immediately.


I'll stay at the corner. --


May I be bold?


With whom?


With you, Sir.


No.


Sir, your pardon.


For what? I forgive thee.


Sir, I would beg.


Here, I'll prevent thee, if thou wilt let me go. --


No, Sir, my business is no money; 'tis your self must satisfy me.


Thou art mistaken sure, thy business was to my man.


No, Sir, I go upon no such Errands. Did you not fight for a slave even now?


Yes, what of her?


Are you he?


Yes, I tell thee.


Farewell then, till you are at leisure.


Prithee stay.


No, Sir, your man is busy.


Prithee excuse my trouble, which gave not ear to thee at first.


That's he, why stays she so long to deliver her Message? she is angry.


For once I excuse; you and look hereafter you entertain a woman with more: But
to the business; the slave you wot of -- (oh! that eye of yours) there lies a
wag in it that will make a world of mischief,) you know not who it hath struck,
pray heaven I get not a wound.


Nay, to your story, good Mother, and leave this wandering.


Mother? whose Mother, good-man boy? I am a Maid.


You mistake me, I meant, Mother of my joys, and so you will be if you can lay
by this youthful fire that makes you thus subject to choler, and proceed with
your story.


Yes, yes, do you jeer me?


I can endure no longer; Sir, what ere you are, take my faith for your safety,
and make this house your sanctuary; something concerning that slave I would
deliver to you.


Are you there, Hell and mischief find you.


Madam, who ere you are that offers this charity to a stranger; know, I dare
enter though I saw my ruin in the door. For fear I never found his pale den
yet, though I have oft trod those paths that led both to dangers and to death;
and I should scorn my self, could I apprehend him now where beauty has the
guard. Which way do your commands guide me?


That door.


Now a public Pox go with thee, that thy face may serve thee in no stead;
malicious Villain, to call up my dead fears that had wont to tell me I had lost
my time; proud scurvey fellow, to put me thus in despair; and if he had any
good nature, he would have offered me a kindness, in courtesy to have
comforted me; I shall not eat to day; had he but called me Whore, yet it had
been tolerable, for that carries youth with it. But old Mother? Rascal, none of
thy Mother. But I'll be revenged.


CRabb, Crabb.


Oh!


Crabb, what's that groans?


Help, help for charity, more wounds, or remedy.


Ha! what's that? help, where am I? 'tis a man making his will, I'll be his
heir, ha! what's here? a man wounded? this is that Rogue, Crabb; he has robbed
him, and laid him here to make me accessory.


Help, if you have charity.


With all my heart, and prithee, do me the favour to live till we come to my
Quarter.


If I do, I shall discover something pleasing to you.


Marry, I'll carry thee, for thy testimony, there is nothing else in this case
can save me. -- You are no Rogue, Crabb! Who did this?


Not he.


That's good evidence for me.


Nor I, by this hand, you must quit me, while you can speak.


I acquit you both.


Witness, witness, Crabb.


Where did you find him?


Find him? by this hand, he found me and lay down by me, as I was asleep.


Why, faith he is going a long journey, and came to take you with him, Thou art
good company; but to leave this discourse, take my business: Our Captain would
have you go visit the sick party, and see whether he will be persuaded yet or
no to dye.


I hate to see the Rogue; I have such battles in my head, since morning, yet
I'll go, while I am near him, and take you charge of this old man in the mean
time, and see him carefully dressed.


So, lean upon me, what Rogues were these to use an old man thus?


WHo's there?


Where is this old fellow, is he alive still?


Yes, Sir.


Bring him out, to take a little fresh air.


Is he come again? why did you let him in? he'll be a lasting a tedious
affliction to me.


How now? how is't, how is't man?


Neither live nor die in peace?


Yes, dye in as much peace as you can.


When my time comes; but I hope a man may have leave to live out his days; my
Physician says, I may escape yet.


Your Physitian's an Ass, and you give him too great Fees.


He tells me I may escape this fit, if I can recover mine enemies; for he
assures me, my greatest danger is my heir.


Does he say so? I cry him mercy then, he is a knowing man, I believe so too:
and you may, perhaps, at a great charge, recover; but, in my opinion, you had
better dye, and take our prayers with you; for to recover would but incense the
Captain, and lose your friends.


Sure my Captain would be loath to lose me; he ever loved me.


Why I; and yet you refuse him to dye, and think much to hasten your journey a
day or two, for his sake.


Alas, I would be glad to serve my Captain in any thing that lies in my power,
I'll pray for him, and I hope he will excuse me for desiring to live, and serve
him.


You may flatter your self, but I'll assure you, he takes it very ill at your
hands, that you, of all his company, should refuse him such a kindness, nay,
not to appear willing to do it, if it were in your power; But thus, with an
unnecessary charge, endeavour to live, crossing the disease that would be
friend him.


Alas, I do nothing to cross it, I do but suffer.


Will you promise me that, and let the disease alone, it will be some
satisfaction to him, and to us that are your friends, to see that you endeavour
to satisfy him.


That I'll promise you: and from henceforth I'll seek no remedy, but put my
self into the hand of his friend, as you called it.


Then you shall see how carefully we'll provide for you; for I hope you do not
think, that we or he desires this, because he is loath you should live two or
three days; for what were that to him, but that he is to go out then; and the
next Captain will be your heir.


Alas, Sir, how can I help it? 'tis against my will, if any body be my heir.


Well, look you keep Covenants, and endeavour to dye finely; banish your
Physician and gelly-broth, I'll provide noises to keep you waking. Crabb,
provide two Drums to beat here their watch a piece; and do you hear, beware of
a good diet.


As you have charity, let me rest, those Drums are Daggers to me.


Nay, you'll be unreasonable again, I see it.


Oh misery of wealth!


I Confess, my first thoughts were like my self, faulty: but now I have gained
by losing a desire, and I shall serve you faithfully in your love.


All my fears are, that he will violate her.


He dares not do it, I have conjured him from it, and when it may serve you,
I'll boast my power, though purchased with a fault; and though your virtue
secured you from that power, yet where sin has interest, mine never wanted a
Command; and I know he dares not stand those frowns which your goodness melted
into tears.


No more, when we have sighed for our faults, they vanish with the same air;
yet I fear him, though I believe your power great; for he that dares be a
coward will stop at no wickedness within his reach.


I made him ashamed of that base act, and vow not to pursue you; yet I counsel
you not to stay long in this Town after you have her.


What time did he appoint to bring her?


He parted hence just as you entered, with a promise immediately to return; and
if he should find you here, I am afraid it would prejudice my power to serve
you; else I should rejoice to be seen where so much honour dwells.


Your civilities and mercies, Madam, showed to me, a stranger, I shall with a
grateful mention acknowledge through the world; pray, what time will your
commands enjoin my return?


It will not be safe, Sir, to come at all; But pray be pleased to send a friend
after dinner, and you shall have notice of his first departure, what time that
will be; yet I know not, for I am so miserable, I cannot now be good, but with
a wicked pretence, There is another door leads into a street less frequented
then that you entered at.


Which way must I take to find it?


I'll guide you, Sir.


IT is well, happy discovery; now I shall be revenged at full; was it not
enough to have his pride throw a scorn upon me, but she must revile me too?
Fool, in scorn thou called'st me Mother, and thou shalt find the Malice of an
old Woman here, that in her years, not desires, is aged; one that has lost that
Mercy-kindling fire which should plead for thee, and prevent that youthful
Malice, whose fruitful mischiefs shall make thee old in miseries; nor shall
Religion, nor beauties of thy youth, protect thee from that dangerous hate thy
scorns have bred, till thy despairs have taught thee how killing a Malice hot
Lust in cold Limbs pursues. -- The plot is here; Jealousy, 'tis thou must work
my ends, with that I'll assault the Prince, and from the wounds it brings, reap
my Revenge; for Jealousy, though it leave no scars behind, yet with desperate
wounds it assails the Mind.


THis, by the description of the house, should be the place that holds my
miseries: from what a second height of happiness am I fallen? Virgilius is
young, and I fear, the guilt of having so many ways ruined me will make him
hate me for being innocent; But I am resolved, and will rather fall by
misfortunes then faults; and, for the excellent Sophia's sake, will serve him
till he blush to command me. And when his passion is over, he shall confess, I
can bear a loss better then he rule a victory. But what are Julian Deity, and
filled the Triumph of that Monarchy, that thus your rage pursues us? must all
our Fortunes be slav'd to a slave, and bound with chains to chains. -- Ye
Gods! What Cicilia my Sister?


What said he?


It is she. Blessed chance. Ye powers of Sicily, your hands are visible in
this; forgive Facertes that confesses, Men may the metal bring, but the form of
our happiness the Gods appoint us still.


FAith, Sir, hanging of 'em will be but a hindrance to your self; 'tis true
they are Rogues, and have no Conscience, yet, at the worst, they are so much
horse.


I say, hang 'em.


I say so to, if hanging were a punishment, but to them 'tis freedom.


No more dispute, but hang 'em slaves, to rob me now when I am quitting my
Command.


Well, they shall be hanged, but they shall stay till they be hungry, and have
digested their full Cups; if if you hang 'em now they're full and drunk,
they will think they have but swallowed awry or surfeited; and instead of being
punished, the Rogues will go out like Senators.


The old Soldier confesses they were of Sicily, and of Quality, and now sent
for a Present to the Emperor, and that was the Vice-Roy that was slain, he
would have yielded good money.


And one of the slaves confessed the Woman was of such a Beauty, and so
ravishing, that they fought who should purchase her.


There had been a fellow for your Bird at home, two such fleas would suck a Man
to death.


Come, talk no more on it now, there's no remedy, Go prepare those others for
the Mart, and see the slaves hanged: What? how do they look? is't a handsome
freight?


Yes faith, Sir, there will be a jolly number with the Boys; and I would advise
you, Sir, not to show the Women and the Boys together, for they will spoil the
sale of the Wenches.


Why then we'll sell the Women first.


Who these Sicilians should be, troubles me; if we made haste we might hear
some news of her at Naples, for there they were sold.


To morrow we'll provide for the journey; Lieutenant, see every thing in
readiness.


Something I'll do, to give one of them her Freedom, as sure as you count her,
though you refuse to sell it me.


Is the old fellow dead?


No. But I have prevailed with him to quit his Physic; and I am certain, he
hath neither eat, nor drank, nor slept since.


Let's go see him.


Cilius is melancholy for the Wench.


No matter, I'd rather he were angry then lost; for though he know not his own
value, I know it, Come let's leave him.


'Tis not Treachery to save the Innocent. I'll do it.


i'll sacrifice to Fortune, she shall henceforth be the Power I'll worship, to
whom I owe this unexpected Joy, she ha's tamed Lust, till it was Love, and lent
only so much sin to the wicked as served me; and I that could not stand safe
among the Innocent, find a security among the wicked. -- Facertes?


Look here, ere I speak my news, Does not Virgilius see a Joy break like a
Glory round about my Brow, to distinguish this my first happy hour?


It is thy Friendship that sympathizes mine. Oh Facertes, such an accident hath
happened since thou left'st me, that I must wink, rub mine eyes, and call all my
Reason to secure me I do not dream.


What e're your Joys are, they must give place to mine; for they are yours and
mine, not as we are barely friends, but from the assurance that we shall ever
be so.


I confess thy Joys bring to me a greater Comfort then mine own, prithee give
them a Name.


Do you believe a second view of her you have seen will not render her common
to your eye? or, to possess those Beauties make them cheap in your Opinion? if
not, I am happier then you, and when ever you enjoy your wishes I reap mine.


By our Friendship I beg this blessing from you, yet this is not strange where
Friendship is not strange.


The slave is my Sister but by what accident fallen to this misery I know not.


Who? the famed Cicilia?


She. Never free till now, and this fall was but to raise her to a greater
height.


Then I mistrust my Joys; they grow too near a height to continue.


Are you sorry, Sir, it is she? Then it was not Chance changed our first
design; is she less worthy of your Love now then before? I should be sorry to
find your ignorance of what you valued preferred before your knowledge; or is
there some second face you have met hath blotted out this too?


O Facertes, why art thou so subject to mistake thy Friend?


If I mistake, why are you so sad? I found you full of joy.


Not that 'tis she makes me sad; for, witness Heaven, I have no wish beyond
her,; Her Eye circles my Heaven, and till I have place in her esteem I am in
Hell.


Why should that suspicion make you sad, considering you are, and what you have
done for her? Besides, am not I here with a Brother and a Friends interest?


Who I am, That, Facertes, begets my despairs; for that 'tis I is all Arguments
against me; will she not, when she sees me, call to mind a Father (whose piety
the Gods spared) fallen, to satisfy the lust of Empire? are not yet the wounds
bleeding, and the yoke still laid upon her suffering Country? Now judge what
can be said of hope, when this pleads against me. Oh Facertes, thou hast not
read thy Sister, thou look with a Brothers eye, This fate I prophecy from
one sight; and let me tell thee, if she be worthy of Virgilius she must hate
Virgilius.


Sir, I confess my friendship made me oversee what I was reconciled to, and now
I begin to fear; yet when she shall know how I have been obliged, That mercy I
found from the fair Sophia, her honour will guide her to return Virgilius; for
though it makes her to resent your injuries, yet she must be just to her, and
then her gratitude secures you; for though she has honour, yet she has woman
too, and mercy is as great an attribute as justice, and she cannot be always
angry.


Against any thing but her frown I could arm, and this night be happy. For by a
strange chance I have found a way (if she consent) to release her.


By what accident came you to that power? have you seen her since?


No, but this place is too public; let's retire, and you shall know all; and
when I would my Sister know, I'll read her through thy observations; but here
let thy interest give way to my love.


I shall obey, Sir.


MY thoughts can find no rest; Love, wilt thou not quit me in Prison? art thou
covetous of my chains too? Fool! hast thou not miseries enough of thine own?
And yet I ought not to revile him; for he that hath filled my heart is full of
honour, and could he guess my fate, I know he would quit a Crown, as a burden,
and seek a freedom in these chains. The Gods are just, to let me fall into
these miseries, that we may taste what 'tis our ambition imposes upon others,
guilty only as I was, by being too weak. -- Whose that? come in; Prisoners keep



Madam, I come to tell you, our Captain has refused to sell me your freedom,
and to morrow is the Mart at Naples; But if you dare trust him, whose
misfortunes have made him appear your enemy, I'll gage a life to save your
honour, and give you freedom. The plot is already laid, and those that were
taken with you I have already acquainted with it.


Sir, I shall willingly obey any directions, without a thought of fear, for
sure there's no condition below this.


I will not now dispute this misfortune, but remedy it if I can; know, to
morrow (lest the accident surprise you ere we put to sea) I have so ordered,
that all the slaves that row in the Galley shall be loose, the Captain is my
creature, and my self will still wait upon you, and be your guard; but be
pleased to sit still when the word is given, and let us work your fate; But
once free, command Cilius where you please, your friends too shall privately be
armed.


Sir, what to say in return of this, I know not, and if you that can be thus
gallant, thus good, cannot likewise from that honour that directs you now, find
a reward, I fear you will lose this good deed.


It is a debt all honest men owe your virtue; and I but obey my genius, for I
know not what it is, but something whispers to my soul, and bids me serve you,
and when my life can purchase you a good, you shall not need command it; I
beseech you no reply, a Soldiers prayers (that seldom importunes heaven) I
hope will protect you. --


How now, what's the news?


I should speak with you, Sir.


Madam, I'll wait upon you straight. -- Are they all ready?


I have done it, they are all resolved, I gave them their lives for it; and let
him swear when he sees them there, 'tis no matter: they are all loose and
armed, their chains are but for show.


No matter for his rage, let him storm; once aboard, we are masters, for he's
but one, and what's a General without obedience? his power we give, and if a
multitude knew their own strength, who can command that beast?


I'll away, and send the other Galleys off before, lest they assist him.


Be faithful, and I'll make thee fortunate.


Sir, never fear it, I have said it, and I'll do it; he that refuses to be a
knave for a handsome woman, may he dye honest, and be executed for a knave.


Where's the Lieutenant?


Here, Sir, I have waited this hour for you.


Come, shall we go see the sick man?


I'll follow you, Sir.


NO rest! no ease! O miserable, miserable riches! some drink, O, some drink,
ere this thirsty flame hath licked up all my life, meat, any thing to satisfy
this wolf here.


Have patience, it cannot last above a day or two, about which time I hope to
see you quit of all the troubles of this world.


Let me sleep then, quiet those Drums, that I may dream of meat and drink; is
there nothing to eat, no drink? oh misery of miseries! -- Who's there?


The Captain, Sir, and Lieutenant are come to see you.


Is it they? not a word then that I am hungry or thirsty, I'll buy thy silence
at any rate.


How now, how is this sick man, where is he?


He has vomited such stuff, since the Lieutenant went; sure, that your worship
gave him was good against an Impostume.


By this good day, the same water that eat Crabb's knife; what shall we do with
this Rogue? a hole in his side, big enough to creep in at, will not kill him.


Let's speak with him.


Who's there? my noble Captain, and kind Lieutenant; thank you for this visit;
truly, it joys me to see you both here, and


I am glad to find you thus merry, and so resolved; 'tis the part of a good man
to prepare and dye cheerfully.


I told you, you would find him well prepared; and what think you, is not Sack
and Bacon better then Barley-water and soaked Chickens?


I confess, I was a fool then, but now I'll pledge you all the Sack I refused
then; and to let my Captain see I resolve to dye, and serve him, look you but
on, and I'll eat all the Gammon alone, but you must not tell the Physician.


Give me a knife and some Bread, fill, fill a bowl of Sack, and bring it
hither. Lord! Captain, you would not think how it


I am beholding to you; fill, fill the sack.


Help to set me up.


Hold, give me the Cup; I'll begin a health to the sick man.


No, pray give me leave to begin my noble Captain's? pray, pray let me begin
it.


No faith, I'll begin.


Pray drink to me then.


Why, you are very merry.


A Flincher, -- Two draughts to one Cup?


This wine was musty, taste it.


Let me taste it, it may be 'twas an ill bottle, the wine's good wine,
admirable wine.


Give me a bowl, I'll pledge it with a better will, because I see you do not
desire it should succeed.


Alas! I desire to live but till I have drunk your health; To me good Captain,
I'll pledge it with all my heart.


I hope so, I should take it ill to have you refuse me, for any nice scruple of
your health.


As you did me, and cry, a Beer-grass would kill you.


Alas, I was a fool then, but now I am very desirous to redeem that fault; To
me good Captain, your wine cools.


Your hat Captain.


Oh! it's true.


Nay, pray drink, and spare your Complement.


Prithee give me a bit of that Gammon, to taste my Wine with.


Pray help him and me too, I would fain taste whether it be as good as the last
was.


Yes faith, 'tis good, here Crab.


Nay pray let me drink to Crab.


No, by my faith, it shall go round.


Let me taste, was not your Wine musty too?


Here's none.


Fill, fill Crab, and drink to me, for I long to do thee reason, and begin my
Captains.


It's an excellent Gammon, taste.


Some more, pray, to taste.


Where shall I carve you?


Any where, any where.


Sir, here's your Wine; will you pledge your health?


So, so, now I am happy; Noble Captain, a thousand times


Hold, a pox take you, Crab, for a cozening Rogue, you have put water in it.


No, by this hand.


No, by my life.


Let me taste, I'll not trust you.


Why taste, Noble Lieutenant; oblige me so far, as to let me drink my own
health; nay Lieutenant, Noble Lieutenant.


Now, was it not pure?


Hup! by my Faith it was pure indeed; here fill it again, give him a Brimmer.


I pray never spare me, Lieutenant, you were somewhat harsh the last time you
were here, but I'll drink to you.


I was angry then, because you refused to pledge me; but now you'll drink, I am
your Friend.


The Wine, where's the Wine?


Here's none left Sir, shall I fetch another bottle?


Is all gone?


Yes, Sir.


All gone?


Go fetch another, for he shall pledge me, this trick shall not serve's turn.


Pledge me, alas, Sir, rather then my life I'd pledge you.


No, no, thou shalt not; faith Captain he's now good natured, spare him; it
will but make him sick; and troth he's an honest fellow when he is himself.


He shall pledge me.


Alas, Sir, when we are sick, the best of us are unreasonable sometimes.


Lieutenant, Noble Friend.


I warrant thee, pray Sir let me excuse him for this time, he shall kiss the
Cup only.


I swear I'll drink it, not pledge my Captain, and 'twere present death I'd do
it, fetch some Wine?


Nay, then I'll pardon you; for since I find you willing, I'll excuse your
weakness.


Let the Wine alone, Crab.


Lieutenant.


Spare your thanks.


Lieutenant.


You know the Captain loves no Complements.


Farewell. Thank you for my Wine.


Captain.


Farewell, Farewell.


Captain, one word before you go.


What's the news?


Pray let me drink; for the truth is, I must either eat and drink or die.


How's that? and would you drink and live?


Why thou impudent Rogue; yesterday it was, if I drink I die, now some drink or
you are dead.


Nay then he shall not drink, is this your professions?


Well Gentlemen, I see you're resolved I must die; let me but have my fill, and
I'll die tomorrow.


Why, faith, it is but abstaining till tomorrow, and then you are sure of it.


And is it not all one how I die, so I be dead tomorrow? if it be alike to you,
pray let me choose; for if Surfeit or Famine can but kill, pray let me surfeit.


I am indifferent how, so it be done.


Call me spade if it be not.


And look we have no Equivocation, but see you be dead tomorrow.


I fear he will prove a Rogue.


I hope you would not desire that I should lay violent hands upon my self.


Marry the Gods forbid, lay violent hands upon thy self; no, no, now you have
consented, I'll get one shall do it for you.


Give me some drink, and do what you will with me afterwards.


Set the Vessel by him.


But is it Sack, Lieutenant? is it Sack? excuse me if I be punctual too?


Give him a Bowl.


Give me another, give me a third.


Farewell, Farewell, look you be dead to morrow, or by these hilts I'll apply
my Dagger to thy side, and that will be a certain cure; come, Sir, will you
please to go?


Captain, Captain, stay a little and see me die, give me another


By this light, the Rogue is drunk.


Now do I not see any Reason, why I should die.


But I shall give you a Reason to morrow.


To die with all this Sack about me! No, I am immortal, let those die that are
dry. -- Hum, give me my sword.


Come leave him, he is drunk.


How now, what would you have?


You'll give me leave to wait on my Captain down?


No Ceremony, good Tullius, no Ceremony.


It shall be yours Captain, indeed it shall be yours.


Alas, Sir, give him leave to take cold.


Nay, if it must be so, I obey.


Nay, why Lieutenant, what do you take me for? how do you think I have been
bred?


Remember to morrow.


Remember to morrow, let to morrow remember me.


THis is the Place, Love be thou propitious, and let my fears prove false;
hereabout should be the door.


It is true, I have promised him, when he comes, to deliver you; but he has
vowed to use you with Honour, do you not know him?


No Madam, this is the first time I ever saw him.


Pray what Country claims your Birth?


Greece, Madam.


Pray grow not in Love with your griefs, but give some part of 'em to me, that
now but begin to be sad.


Why should you be sad, that know no grief of Mind? have you lost Friends? or
forfeited Freedom?


Fair one, I am more a slave then you; for I am bound by faults, and none can
set me free; your miseries are but for a time, and I can release 'em, and yet
cannot command my own Fate.


What strange misery can you apprehend? do you love unfortunately?


No, I love happily, but I have fallen unfortunately, and no length of days
can set a period to my misery; I love, but cannot hope a return, for I should
hate him I love if he could love me; yet, as his Honour forbids him that, and
me all hopes to enjoy him, so if he be a perfect Man he hath Mercy too, and he
may pity and forgive, though not love Paulina.


I would ask another Question, but that I am afraid it would search too near
your griefs; dare you trust me with the knowledge who it is you love? can I
serve you?


You must not, and therefore cannot, for it is the stranger that fought for
you. When first my Eye met his, it shot a flame in here, and the nobleness of
that Act (which was sacrificed to you) shook me, and waked my sleeping Honour,
and I began to find desires that till then were strangers here, for they had
more of love then blood in them. -- What's the business?


There's a young fellow without desires to speak with you.


Your pardon.


I have spoiled your sport if all hit right.


MAdam, I come from that stranger that this morning your Charity preserved,
what directions do you command me in his affairs of Love!


Sir, you are welcome, and from him all is so; This night I would desire him
meet in the garden, where he shall receive her.


I must beg the favour to speak with that Lady, I have a message to impart to
her.


You shall command any thing my power can serve you in, there she comes, and
I'll wait upon you straight.


What shall I say to her? my joys have robbed me of my Tongue.


It is he that this morning named me in the street. -- Sir, have you any
commands for me?


No Madam, I come to serve, if you'll please to enjoin; and though a poor
Sicilian, yet I know what duty all that wretched Nation owes your Excellence.


Me Sir! sure you mistake.


No, Madam, I cannot mistake, nor can any miseries so cloud your Beauties, but
through all the Innocence and Majesty of such a Princess will appear; sure you
will not deny the name of Cicilia?


To you, Sir, I will not, yet I conjure you to conceal me, and let me know to
whom I stand indebted for this Civil opinion.


My name is not worth your knowledge, but my fortunes I boast of, for I had the
honour to be a Soldier, and a Prisoner with your Princely Brother, and fell
with him the same day when we lost the battle at Siracusa.


Who, Facertes? where is he, at Rome! Oh, tell me how does he bear the
Insolence of that unworthy Conqueror? It is many years since I saw that
beloved Brother, did he never speak of me?


Yes, Madam, I have often heard him mention you with Tears, and like a Brother
give your Character to the fair Sophia, sister to Virgilius, who saved his Life
when he was doomed to the hook.


The Hook? Oh, ye powers, why do you let this wicked Tyrant thus triumph over
our miseries? But for Virgilius, that false seed of the old Tyrant, that's
young and false, and cruel in his youth, let him find some curse, strange as
his wickedness.


Madam, upon my life, you injure him; for, my soul to pawn, he loves your
Brother: and had no share in that guilty Triumph, for he was then in Gallia.


Oh, thou art deceived, he envies my Brother, and cannot love; and when he
could not by force conquer him, by falsehood he sought his ruin.


I perceive, Madam, you are a stranger to the Prince's affairs at Rome.


What are they? new miseries?


Have you not heard how, at the Triumph, the fair Sophia and he, in a look,
changed hearts, and that now he has his freedom?


No, this is the first time that I heard of it.


Madam, I saw him free; and (by his friendship with Virgilius) 'tis hoped he
shall marry the Princess Sophia: But this is a secret I dare not give to any
ear but your own.


My Brother and Virgilius friends? 'tis false, it must be false, I know he is
too much my Brother to make a Friendship there.


His Love to the Sister, and her merits, who has a virtue equal to her Beauty,
made him forget the injuries which Virgilius (in ambitious honour, not malice)
threw upon him; besides, it will be a guard for Sicily hereafter, and Facertes
gains his ends upon them.


Pray no more of this discourse; I hope my Brother has no ends beyond his
Honour; it cannot be he should forget mine and his own injuries, or so bury a
Brothers and a Fathers loss; but if absence can do all this, yet his Honour is
with him, and that may tell him how glorious, in story, a Slave appears, whilst
he keeps his Honour; and how mean and poor that Prince is that sells it for his
passion.


Excellent Maid -- Madam, I am sorry my discourse displeased you.


I would I were with him, or I would I could but write to him.


Madam, if you'll please to write, I'll deliver it him.


No, Sir, that would be too great a trouble, for I believe, those Occasions
which drew you hither are of more consideration then a letter.


None of such importance as to serve my Prince; 'Tis true, I have a Comrade, a
Prince that has disguised himself into that condition, and is resolved, under
that private habit, to see the world; a scurvy Accident befell him to day, upon
the Mole, at the Slaves Mart, where he escaped hardly with his life; some
wounds he has too, which will retard him, I fear, till my return.


Was it not this morning? a young man, brown-hair'd?


Yes, it was about a slave he saw, and fell in love with; and while he stayed
for money to redeem her, another bought her; I was not at the beginning, but, I
thank my fate, I came time enough to his Rescue.


Is he safe then?


Yes, Madam, but so impatient, for fear some violence should be offered to her,
I am now going in search of her; for I know he will find no Peace, till he has
gained her freedom.


Is he a Prince, say you, and in love with that Slave?


Yes, Madam, and now his soul labours in pain, to know what condition she is
of; but I hope his flame is made of young men's fire, such as will not last.


Why do you hope so?


Because I have the honour to be his friend; and though I serve his passion,
yet I should be loath to see him continue his Love for a Slave, that has
nothing but miseries for his Honour to work upon.


A Prince! then all my Prayers fall not to the Earth, nor lose their way 'twixt
heaven and my miseries.


Your prayers, Madam? how, under pardon, are you concerned in his love or
birth?


You are a Soldier, and by your honour I conjure you; you are a Sicilian, and
now I'll take the power you gave, and command you; or by my Brother and his
friendship I enjoin you.


What, Madam?


Nothing, nothing; ye gods! whither am I falling? down,


Nor will I be so rude as to press a Secret from you; yet your Brother, Madam,
should not serve you more faithfully, nor more willingly, then I.


I must not, no, I will not; yet I durst tell you, but 'tis not like Cicilia,
nor the Laws that she has ever followed.


Madam, your name has given Laws, and Cicilia's Acts have ever stood Examples,
as unquestioned as unimitable: and by your self, I beg this trust.


Then, as you are a Soldier, take it, and protect it, (I know no guilt,) why
should I fear? I was that slave he fought for; and I rejoice, the man I honour
is so favoured of the Gods.


O Madam, this is a blessing beyond my hopes; dare you trust me to discover who
you are? I'll first sound whether his Love aim with honour, and by degrees work
upon him till I have found the secrets of his heart; he shall despair too, and
in fear spend some days; But at length dare you not let him know there is a
hope? pray leave it to me, I'll see all the Laws of Love observed, he shall
doubt, and hope, and you shall defer his Joys; But still


Sir, I have not said I love, nor will not, till I hear him say so first; I
confess I hope he loves, and what that hope can be called I acknowledge.


Then all my Joys are full -- Nay, my Sister, you must not turn away.


Sister?


Did I say Sister?


Yes, and if my Ears abuse me not, this morning you called me sister.


Then I'll hide my self no longer from thee; and since you could confess to a
stranger you hoped he loved, I claim so


Oh, my Brother, why did you hide your self from me? is it true you told of
your self? are you in love? shall not I know your story, that I may rejoice in
your joys?


Thou shalt know all, but let me not now defer the Prince's joy, who waits
without and suffers in the doubts which longing love brings.


The Prince without? is that a truth? pardon me, for since you have deceived me
once, it is lawful to suspect.


Yes, and there is another truth which I durst not discover till thy love
warranted it me: But now know the man thou hated'st is the man thou love; for
Virgilius is that Prince; but when thou hast made an acquaintance with him thou
wilt confess thy ignorance only could hate him.


Virgilius, then I am miserable!


Do not say so, but take a Brothers knowledge of him, I have tried him, friend
and enemy, and by both find him pure; and I conjure you, give me your griefs,
and believe my love before your hate of the man you love.


Is it Virgilius then?


By thy self, it is he.


Swear not, unworthy; witness the Gods, that saw and piti'd not my griefs, with
what pain I lost thee; yet that was nothing, compared to this affliction, that
finds thee thus; Go boast to thy friend, what success thy treachery, assisted
by a Brothers interest, has gained upon a Sister, overcome with misery.


Why do you accuse me thus? have I injured you? is it a fault, to tell you your
opinion wrongs a gallant man?


Were he a God, and his friendship of so sovereign a nature, it would protect
us against their rods, when with a plague they make a curious search amongst
men: were he this, yet, in thee and me 'twere sin to sacrifice to him; and I
would sooner oppose that plague which only wounds my mortal part, then meet
Virgilius as a friend.


Why do you conclude me so unworthy, as to call him friend without a
satisfaction?


Thou art not Facertes; he knows there can be no satisfaction: did he not ruin
our Country? fell not my aged Father under a Roman sword? is not Lucius, our
Brother, lost? and his Ghost still wandering for want of Funeral Rites: But if
thou art Facertes, remember how his falsehood let thee adorn a triumph; but
these are past. Am not I this day sold a slave? does not our Country still
bleed; and whilst we talk, the licensed lust of the common Soldier add new
crimes? Oh! my Brother, let me not have reason to repent that nearness, but
learn to hate him; and while he is in our power take a brave revenge; that he
would do something to redeem these faults is no Argument to prefer him before
your Country; and though it be gallant in him to love, yet in thee or me a low
mean sin.


Had he not said all this, had he not condemned himself, I had done it; but
when I see his youth soul-sick with love, and full of despairs, ready to
sacrifice himself to redeem the misfortunes of a conquest (which he was but a
servant in) I must tell Cicilia, when he leaves thus to be an enemy, I must be
a friend, for I scorn to hate what loves me; but he loves thee, and to destroy
him now is murder, and not revenge.


That he loves I owe him nothing, for it was chance and fate; and that I love
him will be no guard: if I did not love him, 'twere easy to destroy the thing
I hate; but it shall be my glory, through my love and loss of peace, to find
revenge.


But his love was no chance; this journey we designed by the counsel of his
Sister, whose interest pleads here, and we were bound for Sicily, and his
intents were to heal, by marriage, the wounds you thus lament in our Country;
and if now you destroy this means of peace, you have ruined it; Cicilia has
destroyed her Country, and to obey her passion wilfully sacrificed our freedom.


Still thou blow new fires; were your designs for Sicily and me? what has
rendered me so cheap to my Brothers thought, as to believe I would receive such
a visit from a vain swoln Conqueror, promising to himself success? But he shall
find I dare, and can scorn him; and now if I had all the passions that our sex
ever yet sunk under, I'd forbid him to my self; and he and you shall find
Cicilia's mind not subject to his conquest.


Women, when they have said they are angry are half revenged; and friends, when
they have avowed a quarrel. I know her soul full of softness, however her
fortune makes this war betwixt her nature and her justice. -- Sir, you have
heard, I fear, the little hope she gives; yet she loves, let that secure you.


Will you take my opinion of your Sister hereafter? This I


What shall we do?


Something I will do, pray, let me serve her in some disguise, till she be
freed from this place while I have an interest here.


If I can, I'll persuade her to escape this night.


I would I had spoke with her, I would fain say something to her before I dye.


Dye, Sir?


Yes dye, Facertes, now when I would fainest live; for why should I linger here
when that which makes her excellent must render me miserable? for had she
forgiven me, I could not have forgiven her; for she has justice, and I despair;
farewell Facertes, I'll meet thee at the Galley.


Pray stay, Sir, you shall speak with her, and it may be she cannot find that
strength against you.


If you'll gain me the liberty of speaking with her, I shall gladly do it; and
then what I will do shall ask no long time to consider.


Pray, Sir, follow me.


I dare not press in there; I that have forced a passage through the world dare
not enter there where love only has the guard.


THey are now there; she is false, and you abused; she threatened me with
wounds, unless I would obey her, and invite him to her bed, and the slave would
scarce be won to come.


But has she given the slave to him that I presented to her to day?


She has given him all, and to lay the greater scorn upon you, to your enemy,
she is one who loves the slave, and wants the common excuse of being wooed.


Was this the reason she commanded me not to pursue my revenge? Fool, it shall
now fall on you both.


You must be speedy then; for this night they are gone, and the garden is the
appointed place to receive the slave in; but if you'll obey my counsel, they
shall find their graves there; and then the old woman will laugh at the young
Rascals.


But how shall I come to this opportunity of revenge?


Go arm your self, and take such to your assistance, whose faith you have
tried, and bring'em in the evening to our garden, where I'll place you so, that
you shall have a full view of them, and take your revenge safely.


The Moon will assist us, for she shines early this night. -- This in earnest.


Sir, I expect no money, I have said, I love you.


O, excuse me till to morrow.


I thank you, Sir, -- How all these young things are subject to oversee a woman
when she is stricken a little in years! and this Fool too, whom I choose,
because I thought all had been alike to fools, and yet see how hardly he is
drawn on; as I live, but that there is one young man that I love, I would make
him kill'em both, and take the wench; Ah! farewell the memory of my dear
Britain, Gorgianus; well did he deserve to be their Patron, he never refused
and old woman, but they knew his virtue, and while he was young called him
home. O happy Island, that has one young man in it that will be charitable to
the old woman: Every one strives to feed the young till their bellies burst
again, while we praise and beg, and can scarce get'em to sell us their ware. --
How now, what have we here? oh is it you? I'll retire.


If thou hast not lost all thine honour, By the memory of thy Fathers ashes, By
that chaste Mother, whose memory thou so oft hast worshipped, give me leave to
retreat to my strength, and while I have power preserve my honour, lest there
be none left in our family, for thou hast thrown off thine, as if it had been a
burden to thee.


Dare you not hear him speak? if you have no Argument to deny what he said, why
do you accuse me of weakness, when I was conquered?


I dare not longer hear him speak? for all the weakness that our sex or nature
is subject to plead against me, and I have only honour to defend me; yet I can
give you powerful Reasons that can destroy all his hopes.


No, no, give 'em him when you see him.


'Tis just you fly me, 'tis just you scorn me, and here I stand mine own judge,
my own accuser and executioner too, if you frown, and bid me strike.


Sir, you mistake me, if you think I scorn you; there are other ways, and just
ones, to be revenged without a fault.


Facertes, you do not covet a revenge more then I thirst to give it; and now I
know what you desire, with wings I'll haste to serve you.


You cannot, her fruits are seldom sweet, unless we pluck them our selves.


Let me beg you will not pay such a rate as your innocence for it, can you not
forgive? Is there nothing can expiate what my fate was only guilty in? for I
was never faulty to you.


Nothing; my honour tells me I must not find a peace, -- But my heart tells me
I belie it.


Oh, do not frown; can you not be just but you must be angry too? The Judge
that speaks the Malefactors fate, and tells him to morrow thou shalt dye, he
does it because it is just, not that he is pleased with the wretches misery.
Oh, be you but so merciful; let my doom come but as a necessity from you, and
not appear to affect my miseries.


Brother Facertes, what shall I say? Cicilia, be thy self, or thou hast lost
the glory of thy revenge.


No, divinest, do not wrong me so, as to think I plead for life; 'tis for your
pity only that I beg; do not you destroy me, command some one that the act but
adds to his guilt; stain not with blood that innocence, nor with cruelty
punish cruelty.


No, Sir, I know your friend has said enough to secure you I cannot be cruel;
but since such a sullen fate attends me that my passion will rob me of the
revenge I hoped to have had on you, I'll take it on my self; and if thou love
through my own wounds, strike thy false heart which I see, yet have no power to
punish.


False? oh, do not say so, any thing, but false.


Did thou not plead thus, till thy Arguments prevailed with my Brother, that
Brother under whose Sword thou fel^, and found protection, though his enemy?
did thou not vow there he should not be led in triumph, who else would not
have lived? for he defended himself only to let thy pride see thou could not
overcome him; and when he had taught thee with his sword that he could conquer,
he yielded to let thee see he durst dye.


Dare you be judged by that Brother?


Yes, when he is himself; but these injuries are silent, when I call to mind
that barbarous rage that did not spare the aged snow of my honoured Father.
What glory could his death add to your conquest, whose heart had not blood
enough to stain the sacrilegious weapon.


Oh! Madam, for these misfortunes which call me their head, I plead the duty I
owed a Father, whose Battle I fought; and it became me to obey mine, as it does
you to mourn yours.


Then, to these add the vanity of this journey, promising your self a victory
over our hearts too; and because your sword is forbid in this war, alone you
undertook the journey; as if Virgilius name were enough to slave the world.


Madam, witness Facertes, how full of despairs I obeyed my fate, and your
misfortunes will quit me of vanity; for when they had set a rate upon your
beauty, when there was a price made for the excellent Cicilia, yet then I durst
not hope a purchase. Vain, false and cruel! think me any thing but such a
monster.


Oh Brother! cruel Brother! Sir, if I have injured you, I shall teach you to
forgive by forgiving greater faults: my faith, and my faith, alas, that can
neither advantage me, nor prejudice Virgilius.


Do not say so; 'tis the saving balm; 'tis mercy it self; and your faith of me
must save me here, as mine hereafter; Oh, Divinest, stop not your mercy, but
let it fall here; your eyes are full of pity; let that precious dew drop upon
my thirsty heart, and save me, ere despair hath licked all my life thence; Turn
not away, but look upon me as I appear in repentance, in the whiteness of my
Cicilia, strewed upon the Earth in submission. Behold me, and view me, not as I
stand stained with thy miseries, but speak to me, and speak mercy, Mercy whose
figure thy fair self wears, and adorns; O let her softness guide thy tongue,
and let my Souls bleeding sadness make thy fathers wounds dumb.


Oh, ye gods, why did not ye make him Innocent? pray Sir, Why do you kneel?


For mercy, is there no mercy? your tears should be


No, Sir, my tears have Prophetic misery, and so much weakness in them, they
deserve your pity.


Oh, Madam, do not call it weakness, This is Charity, and her Alms yields a
double benefit, and adorns as well as saves; Oh, my fate, would you had made me
any thing that's most scorned, rather then an Enemy here.


That had been too great a Blessing; for kno^ Sir, you do not, more then I,
wish your Innocence, or with sadder thoughts mourn your guilt.


She must not see this Passion; Sir, pray let your love give way a little to
Our safety; Paulina is coming, and 'twill be dangerous, by the discovery of
yours, to put her Love to a despair; Sister, I hope your Reason has found a way
to be reconciled to this Prince, whose misfortunes I know cannot deserve your
hate; when your Justice guides; pray let her not see you here.


I can forgive him, and you; But I can ne'er forgive my self; and something
I'll do shall save my honour.


Pray, Sir, put off this sadness, and solicit Paulina to deliver her this
Night; is she as unsensible of your Love as she appeared to be?


She is all honour, all her self; All thy Sister, and I happy only to be more
miserable.


Pray retire, before Paulina comes.


I'll follow you.


This way we shall meet her, courage Sir; After Parley Woman's wars give Quarter
still, and she cannot long be cruel.


ARe you all provided?


Yes, Sir, how many are they?


Three is the most; give me a Pistol, 'tis about the time she appointed, stay
here, and whistle, if she comes; I'll look out.


This wench has every day a Quarrel; I killed two for her, the last Olympic.


Marry, the gods send her many Quarrels, peace Brings us no harvest; Who comes
here?


The Moon is up, and he not come. They are upon departure; This Coward will
fail me, and they will escape, and the Rascal will scorn me to death.


Who's there?


'Tis I, whose that? the Prince?


No, Madam, but one of his Creatures.


Who's that? Ennius? why, where have you been many a day?


Faith, I durst not be seen till last night.


You promised me a visit once, but you broke your word.


Lets retire, and call my Lord; I'Ie pay it now.


Follow me then, is my Lord this way?


Yes, let me guide you.


Who's that passed by?


It's the old Woman, that serves Paulina.


O, are you ready, Sir, you have stayed the utmost time; she expects him with
longing thoughts, they are all provided, and a Gally lies ready at the Mole, to
convey them away; but if your hearts be true, we will stay their Journey.


We are all ready, and resolute.


Follow me then, I'll see you placed where they must pass by.


Lead the way.


WHat return to make you, for this good Act, I know not; But I shall ever
admire you for daring (in so wicked a Place) to be so singly good.


I, that durst be wicked, ought not to dispute now; but with shame to look upon
my faults, and offer this, as my first sacrifice, to witness I repent; and may
my wishes prove fortunate, and make you happy in that Love that makes me
miserable.


You cannot be so miserable as I, -- That must love my


Madam, are you ready, they stay at the Garden gate, shall I let them in?


Yes, yes, and see the gates shut that lead to the street.


All is safe, pray make haste.


Wee'le meet you, call at my window.


THis Moon is friendly, come, pray let not this cloudy sadness hang upon our
Joys; you see she consented to put her self into your protection; her tears too
are your warrant, for all Women's storms are past when those showers fall.


I do not now grieve for fear she should be angry, but that I am so unlucky as
to deserve it; and my Friends can witness my heart never sinned against her,
yet something lies heavy upon it I cannot remove; for my fears tell me she'll
take some Revenge upon her self; for you saw it was her Passion, not her
reason, that forgave me.


I know her Religion will protect her against her self, and she has too much
honour, to wish health, and put poison in the Cup; and though she threatened
revenge, yet she scorns to take it when she is reconciled.


Oh, she is too Excellent to be false; Peace. Whose there?


Is the Galley ready, they Expect you.


All's ready, lead the way.


Follow me.


Stand close, I hear 'em come.


Stay here, while I return, with the Key.


This is the Garden.


Oh! This may be just: but whether it be fair, or no, Heaven, thou see.


How do you, Sir?


Why well, Facertes; The Bullet but glanced.


Oh my sister, If thou hast a hand in this Treachery, may Plagues sudden and
lasting find and sink thee with despairs, when mercy flies thee as thou hast
done thy honour; nor shall all


Why dost thou rage and curse her, still mistaking that excellent Maid? Upon my
Soul, she has no hand in it, she is too full of Honour, to take so base a way to
her Revenge, or seek by Treachery a life that's only worn to serve her; and
when she frowns, may command me put it off.


Draw your sword then, and take my counsel, if your strength fail not, and
fall, as if their malice had been more prosperous,


No, Facertes, let me die here.


Unfortunate Youth, Murder, Villains, where are you, you accursed Actors of
this black deed? do you hide already Cowards? dare you not look on your Act?


It was my Brothers voice that cried Murder.


I heard a Pistol, where's Olympia?


Hark, there's some body comes.


Villains, dare you not yet appear?


Yes, fool, we dare, and laugh upon your miseries.


Yes, an old Woman will laugh; fool, thou had better have destroyed thy
Mother, then with scorn have awaked my Malice, now where is all your young
wits? am not I proved a Mother of your Joys? fool, I am revenged now.


What cry was that?


How now, what ails you?


Oh me, oh me, I am dead.


Then, though our miseries be great, they are not so ill as I feared; what
moved thee, Villain, to this base Act?


Revenge, fool; though thou, I could forgive a wound, and such an Injury as
to have her I call mine possessed by another?


Villain, thou shalt dearly pay for this base Act; Rise, Sir,


Oh!


Ha, alive?


Yes, and I hope shall find so much Mercy as to punish thy Treachery.


Draw, Ennius, we have yet as many swords as they.


I warrant you, Sir, and as good hearts.


Traitor, thou want the cause.


It is they, they are set upon, I hear their swords too; let's haste, our
presence may bring some aid; for Heavens sake, let us not look on and see them
murdered.


Hold, as thou hast Mercy, hold; and as thou hast faults, show Mercy.


Yes, in this Justice, for Justice is ever merciful.


There, Villain, There's thy treacheries first reward; thou art going for thy
last.


Ha! upon the ground, Facertes, what accident is this?


Where's the Prince?


Here, how fares Facertes?


Well, only a little scratched.


Sir, I hope you believe I had no hand in this Treachery.


No Madam, we know the unworthy cause.


What was it?


All our Joys (within this minute) had a cloud on them; and I confess, I was
afraid it had hid my Sisters faults, whilst I feared a mistake of Justice had
betrayed thee to a Murder; yet then in his wounds the Prince was himself, and
collected; I chid my mistrust; see, he bleeds still, does not that expiate?
This is twice he has shed it in sacrificing to thy liberty; and now to be angry
is wilful and humour, not honour.


Do you command, Cicilia shall obey; for I confess, the Prince is Master of
that honour I but talked of; will you mediate a pardon for the Injuries my
Passion threw upon him? and I shall joy to find I was mistaken.


O Madam, do not speak of pardon, for your Innocence knows not the way to that
Injury I could not forgive; But I will not talk; for I should hate my self, if
I had words to express this Joy.


Ha! The Prince slain, and Olympia dead? as you love your safety haste hence;
he whom your Justice has found is the Vice-Roy's Son, and its present death if
you be taken.


No distraction; The Galley is ready, and waits us at the Mole, thither we'll
immediately; Sister, dare you yet put your self into the Princes Protection?


Yes, but not now; when I am free I will; and as I refused at first, because it
was early, so now, because it is forced, and looks like giving upon the
Death-bed; and I would be loath to become the Princes Legacy.


I beseech you, let not a nicity interrupt my Joys; but trust me with your
protection, till I have made good my vows to your Brother, whose Joys my
Affairs have deferred: But when you see him possessed of his Country, then I'll
kneel for a Blessing in the fair Cicilia; dare you bid me hope?


I promise to do what honour shall warrant ^ and when these wounds are healed,
I shall not call it weakness that makes me yield to my passion.


This Cloud is blown over by Fate; and now I'll smile and prophecy, through all
our wounds and tears, a joyful issue.


We'll for Sicily first, the Vice-Roy being dead they dare not refuse my
Authority; besides, if they do, the Army is mine, and that shall secure
Facertes. Madam, what Commands have you to enjoin me, that I may return this
favour?


When you appeared a private Man and compassed with dangers you had a power
here, which now is turned to duty; and I beg a protection in your company, for
the Prince was known to have an Interest here; and to be found dead in my
Garden will bring a certain ruin upon me; For that I am Innocent will be no
guard, but I shall fall now to expiate my other faults; and I confess, I would
fain live now, for I am certain I repent, and shall ever sacrifice to the
Prince Virgilius as my good Genius.


Sure we shall not deny you a safety, to whom we owe all ours.


No Complement, but this way through the Garden to the Galley, the wind is
somewhat high.


The Clouds are black, we'll keep under the shore, that if need be, we may put
in upon the Coast of Calabria.


Not I, as I live.


Let me beg that Olive branch sign of Peace; and witness Sicily.


THe Captain has refused to give me the freedom of her I Love, but if the
Lieutenant keep his word, I shall make him repent it at as sad a rate as I bear
my misery; 'tis not Love, sure, that afflicts my Heart, for I have heard 'em
say, That it is a soft and gentle Passion, which strokes and courts the Mind,
and his


How, Sir, upon the ground? up, Sir, the Soldiers are prepared, and expect
your presence only to finish the work; The slaves too are loose and privately
armed; and when he is once aboard, give but the sign, and be Master both of him
and her. -- Fie, Sir, what means this dejection? up, for shame.


See Lieutenant, I am grown the obedient'st thing that


Bondue, pray? you have found your Man indeed.


The Angry Gods to send Men and bold wounds, not cowardly thoughts and Women
when they will, call Cilius to the Earth again.


Death! what aisle you, Sir?


Oh Friend! this trouble of my Mind is sent like some new disease to scourge
thy Friend, and act what sword and sickness could not do; and my despair will
throw me upon some horrid Crime, against which 'tis in vain to oppose or Arms
or Virtue; The Tyrant-Boy Lords it over my Heart, and now he has wounded me
will make me kiss the Dart.


Oh! is this it you complain of? Let me know Man or boy that dares wrong you;
By this hilt, I will send him on a cold Errand.


Thy threats are vain, for my griefs are a disease I never felt before; The
remedy too is hid from Gods and Men, the Maid, the lovely Maid thou gav'st me.


A pox on her, the Wench, is she the cause? was she not sound, Sir?


Sound!


I, sound, by this hand for all that I know she was; I am a Dog if I touched
her; and but for a kiss or two you had her as pure as I found her.


Peace, Beast.


By this Light, Sir, I am in earnest, and unless 'twere Crab had a touch, --
for no body else was alone with her, 'tis that old Rogue has spoiled her.


Villain, Slave.


Why, in passion, Sir? you are not the first; why this, what a pox, a Clap is
no such dishonour to a Soldier.


Peace, wretch.


He is modest; a Plague upon her for a dissembling prating Whore: By this hand
I would have ventured my life she had been sound.


Dog, dost thou know her whom thou thus profan'st?


Know her? mischiefs know her and the whole sex, they are nothing but
dissimulation: why do you strike me? you beg of me to be your Baud, and are
angry for a mischance, thank your self; you were never quiet till you had a
bout with her.


He will mistake me still.


Mistake you? 'Tis you mistake your self; can I help it if you have a Clap; if
you will tell me what you ail, there are ways and easy cures enough for such
chances, without the sword; you have but one remedy for all diseases, that
damned sword, you think, can cure all.


Fool, thou hast profaned a Maid with thy base thoughts purer then thy
Prayers.


I understand not your Raptures; if she has given you a touch, I'll help you to
a Surgeon, and my self to another; if you'll be modest and lick your self
whole you may.


How natural 'tis for him to apprehend such dangers as he has found. Fool, thou
hast mistaken me all this while, and would thou have been silent I had told
thee; 'tis her Eyes that have wounded me, and my disease is Love, desperate
Love; if I can judge of that strange Passions; for 'tis Love for her that dies
for another; hast thou a remedy for such a wound in the Mind?


Love, is that your disease? I am glad 'tis no worse; by my troth, Sir, if you
will starve with meat before you, I will bury you, but I will never pity you;
Love and Marriage are the only two mischiefs that belong to the Sex which I
have not had, and therefore can only prescribe you Wine and Women for a
remedy.


Prithee no more and if thou lov's^ me, let thy kindness excuse my Passion,
without making Mirth of my misery.


Now. cannot I be angry with him though I bleed; Sir, I would fain serve you if
I knew how. Can you tell what 'tis your Love would have? what does the blind
Child cry for, would he lie with the Wench? by this hand I will fetch her to
you once more, if I thought that would cure your disease.

No more as you are a Soldier, by your Honour no more; your Honesty in other
things excuses your Ignorance in this; no more I say. Alone I will find my
remedy; and this sword, as I said before, has a Cure for all my miseries; for
he that dares die may defy the worst of Fates.


Faith, Sir, but he that dies for a Woman in Italy is but a small friend to the
Sex and Lachrymae, and by my consent should be buried in a feather-bed.


WHat, are you all resolved?


Yes, Sir, release us and we'll do it.


Or must I make an Oration to persuade you to this Geer?


No, Sir, we need no persuasions.


Methinks you should not, considering I humbly desire you not to be hanged, and
shall take it for an obligation, if you will throw away your cold water, and
pledge me in Greek wine, and entreat your worships to quit these iron Jewels,
and hard benches, for Gold-chains and pretty Wenches.


Sir, we hope you do not mean to abuse us, and show us this heaven only in
words.


By this good day I am real, and you shall all be loose and armed; and when he
comes aboard, put off speedily, and then discover your selves; if he resists,
kill him, if not, only bind him; by these hilts, I have order to hang you every
man, and mine own safety tells me I were best to do it.


Oh! Lieutenant, noble Lieutenant, you know we have been honest Rogues to you
always.


All but my friend that would cut my throat the other day, because I would not
give him my Wench.


'Tis true, Lieutenant, I was faulty, and you may leave being a Lyon, and take
revenge upon a Dog; but you know you spoil a good fellows drinking when ever
you hang me; and it may be, you'll not find one to bear my part in your Catches
when I am gone; and then you'll wish you had not been so revengeful.


No, you Rogues, you know I am of a most merciful nature, and that makes you so
presumptuous; and to confirm you, I'll have all join hands, and you shall see
what a miracle I'll work; so now, circle me about while I conjure up a spirit
that shall tell me all your thoughts, and you mine.


Bacchus bow, to Bacchus sing, with wine and mirth let's conjure him.




Juno's deceit,




Lo I appear, lo I appear.

Bacchus bow, to Bacchus sing, with wine and mirth let's conjure him.
Ariadne's wrongs,









Kind God in Bottles here.

Drink and I will appear.
Drink deep and I am here.

To Bacchus bow, to Bacchus sing,
'Tis wine and mirth that conjures him.
By this blood of the Vine,
Thus poured on thy shrine;
By this full glass
To the last kind lass,
'Twas a girl twice nine
That clasped like thy Vine.
By this and that appear, appear, appear
Kind and kinder God in Bottles here.

Lo I appear, one kind bottle more and I will dwell here.

Then thus again we will conjure him
Because he has propitious been.
Hence this glass, a poor and single sacrifice,
A Hecatomb in this bottle dies,
By the men that thou hast won,
And the women thou hast undone.
By the friendships thou hast made,
And the secrets thou hast betrayed.
By this cure of our sorrow,
Thus charmed till to morrow.
Appear, appear, appear

Kind God in bottles here.

Lo I appear, lo I am here,
And there and there;
Lo, I am every where.



Is Bacchus a Devil, Lieutenant, that he obeys your charm? I thought he had
been a God.


Faith, that is as he is used, and may be both; But I mean he shall play the
Devil now; and therefore each man take into his hand one of these Familiars;
and when he has sucked the secret from him, let him release the spirit into the
Cellar again.


But what secret, Lieutenant?


Converse with that spirit, and he will instruct thee: whisper to him thus. --
Hup, and thou shalt find liberty slip down thy


Hast thou met him yet?


Not yet, but I believe he's hard by, for I met his baggage; I could be angry
to think he should have so many fine Wenches and we none.


He's in the right, anger and lust, liberty is hard by, I warrant


Yes, but good Lieutenant, call to the devil for one Bottle more, and let it be
burnt sack.


It is too late, yonder comes our chief, The brave Cilius.


Chief, Lieutenant? We have no Chief, Lieutenant, but liberty.


How now, Lieutenant, what noise is this?


We have been consulting, Sir, about this business; I, and my fellow Soldiers
here, -- I have ground the Rogues to such an edge they will cut iron; and being
persuaded they are free, you may command them like Dogs.


Haste then to the Galley, I'll stay the Captain and his company till you are
aboard; and honest friends when this is done, command your own and my power to
serve you.


Long live Cilius, long live Cilius.


Thanks to all, did the storm last night do no mischief amongst the Galleys?


I had taken six when I lay down, and it did but rock me.


Pray lose no time, but haste aboard; for I must wait upon the Captain.


Fear not us; how now, who have we here?


Gentlemen, and my fellow Soldiers, I have an humble suit to you.


What is't, what is't?


That I may have leave to live.


Live? why not?


You must ask my Lieutenant that, he knows the reason better then I; for he has
a bill of my hand, to be dead to morrow.


Thou art a fool, here's nothing but liberty; and he that dares drink shall
never dye.


Nay, I'll drink, so I may live.


Hum! Fellow Tullius, no covenants, no conditions for drinking while you live,
drink freely.


Join hands, and sing aboard, there's liberty.


MAdam, be confident, for it shall not be in his power to wrong you, my self
will be your guard.


Sir, last night (but that I threatened, not to out-live his injury) he had
forced me.


We appeared upon her call, and with our cries made him suspect the noise might
have given notice to the Soldiers.


Force you? he dares not do it, by our Laws he dies, or any that forces a
Virgin after she is in our public Treasury, which you are now; for your price,
Madam, if you were sold, is to be divided; 'tis true, if he will marry you,
that privilege he has as Captain; he pays our shares, and takes you, but from
all those dangers, my life and honour to pawn, I'll secure you.


The gods, Sir, I hope, will reward this goodness, and join with you to protect
our Innocence.


Will it be long, Sir, ere we go to the Galley?


No, he is now coming with the rest of the Slaves; I beseech you be not sad, it
looks prophetickly, and 'tis a kind of ill Omen; The Soldiers are all firm for
you, I dare not stay; for to be seen with you might breed Suspicion. -- I kiss
your hand.


Be not dejected, Madam, you see by what strange means your stars have raised
you a power among your Enemies. This gallant youth will not be so false as to
deceive your trust; and once in Italy Sophia's name is guard enough.


Sir, had you named your self, or Country, The famed Nigro had found no
Enemies here; for we are all a part of that unfortunate Island, that are thus
forced to live by spoil of them that have destroyed us; and I am sad to think
of the misfortune of Our Princess, especially this last Accident, wherein the
virtuous Cicilia suffered; But for those slaves whose falsehood were the Authors
of her Misery, This day the Dogs shall, upon the hook, find a Justice.


Sir, I have no joy now left; for I have seen all my Masters family ruined; and
Our Country sold to slavery, yet if we make haste, we may again redeem the
unfortunate Cicilia; for being sold at Naples, 'tis not likely they will so
suddenly remove her.


We are this morning bound thither, the Slaves Mart is held there to day.


What do I hear? Nigro named, was not that he my Brother saved in the Siracusan
battle?


Yes, Madam, and that was he that saved the Prince Facertes in that battle
where his Father fell.


And the Princess Cicilia was she that Prisoner that the slaves stole? Oh, my
Facertes, then thy hopes and mine are sunk.


Have patience, Madam, lest you discover who you are; these new griefs of their
lost Princess may bring a certain ruin upon us, should they know how near a
relation you have to the cause.


I am instructed Sir, what are they that stand bound?


Roman Prisoners, slaves for the Mart.


Though their Tyrannies have made them odious; yet when I see them miserable it
finds a pity.


Are you ready, Sir, all stays; The wind is fair too.


Did the storm do no harm, last night? it was very violent for the time.


Not much, the Galleys were well moored, only the Lyon drove.


Come Sir, We have now a double Occasion; and I hope we shall in Naples find
our last hope; Cilius, bring off the Slaves, and follow.


I shall follow, to your pain, Come Madam, now let your prayers strengthen our
designs; for where they side, the party cannot lose.


MAdam, the unfriendly winds have forced us to an unfrequented place, and
brought new troubles; but I hope your virtue can arm against them.


I am so used; Sir, to misery, that this is a common chance, and here only the
Gods war with us.


Pray let me serve you, your charity deserves a greater care then this.


Madam, the unruliness of the weather made you lose the benefit of last nights
sleep; pray repose here while we watch, lest some rude passengers interrupt
you.


I cannot sleep, Sir, I have too many cares, and waking thoughts upon me,
Brother; how does our Friend do?


She will not rest neither, she seems to be less able to bear troubles then
you; pray give Example, and try to sleep, lest sickness find you, and add a
heavy accident to your other misfortunes.


If the Prince will sleep too, I will try to betray my


Till you are safe I cannot; but I'll kneel by you; are you not afraid of me?
for 'tis my fortune and cross fate that brings you all these troubles; and
where I am you cannot be happy; say Divinest, am not I troublesome to you?


Oh, Sir, do not make me blush, to say you are welcome; for I grieve more, that
you are so unfortunate as to have a share in my miseries, then that I was
unfortunate; for I have now no wish, but that the Prince Virgilius had no
Interest in the cause.


No more of sadness now; but pray try if you can take some rest.


'Tis not sadness now; there is a Joy in this grief; and when we are happy,
'tis a pleasure to recount our passed miseries.


What noise is that?


It draws nearer.


Some Bacchanale, by their Song, -- whether tends this noise, turn back again,
there's no way this way.


Sir, we have seen strange things, and therefore let us go.


How now, my Friend, who would you speak with?


With none of you; pray turn, and take another Path.


Turn, no not we; and I advise you not to stop us, for we have a world of Sack
about us, and our way lies this way.


Lieutenant, by these hilts, 'tis he that killed our Corporal, he that fought
for the Slave at Naples.


Is it so? Look about, it may be, she is here too.


What do you stare at?


I look for a thing that troubles you; Oh, there it lies; come fellows, we will
help 'em to carry it.


Away, be gone, or I'll make thee curse the time thy erring feet strayed this
way.


Draw, Mates, Sir, we dare fight; you shall not brave us Naples.


Draw, Facertes, these are the same Pirates we charged when thy fair Sister was
sold at Naples.


Yes, yes, these are they, and we will sell your worships there.


Lose no time, for that Horn was a Call, and I fear some aid.


Though courage be a virtue, and beauteous conquest courted amongst men, yet
murder has no share in either; and those that be disarmed cannot be called
enemies, nor their death conquest; and if ever you knew what it was to want it,
you'll find mercy, and hear me, a kneeling Virgin that never bowed to any (but
the Gods) before, and save my Brother.


And save thy Brother?


If there be any thing that's dear to thee, by that I conjure thee; save him.


Fair one, I have already unfortunately struck against one who now commands my
fate; and know, I do not use to war with miseries; or if I could, who durst
destroy what your prayers protect? or what desperate fool hope a safety, when
your prayers have called down his ruin? -- Take his life, unbind him, and bind
me, if you cannot forgive; for know, there is one in Beauty, Innocence and
Miseries so like you, that I glory to serve you; for 'tis a kind of sacrifice
to her; for whose dear sake had you interposed those eyes, you had divided us
more then seas; and would I were able to say too that she were free as well as
safe; and something, it may be, I shall do for that liberty too.


May your Prayers, your Sword, nor your Love never find a stop, but such as
adds glory to the conquest, for being thus good, thus merciful.


Madam, I cannot talk. -- Soldiers, carry these to the Captains Quarter, and
with your lives protect them from all insolence; let them be apart with the
Romans, and stay with them till I come. Your pardon, Madam, I must hence, lest
this accident discover a Plot, whose good success may make me capable to serve
you; if it miss, it brings a ruin where I must love, and cannot hope return.
Sir, you that know so well how to deal wounds, I am certain will forgive them.


Sir, I never hated the person of mine enemy, much less you that have proved a
friend.


I dare not stay; your pardon. Be careful of your charge; and do you hear, be
speedy, and meet me at the Captains Quarter; my peace dwell for ever here.


I am paid, how the slave has notched me!


How do you, Sir?


How do I? why thou see I am spoiled: a dozen of Surgeons will scarce repair
me; how now, what are those?


Prisoners, Sir.


There's some comfort in that, come, bring 'em away, bring 'em away, set half a
dozen of Surgeons to work.


Oh Facertes, I fear the Prince is lost.


HA! gone, fool that I was, whither did my rage guide me? I have fought and
conquered to my ruin, as rashly and unreasonably as beasts, forgetting the
cause for which I fought; they are gone, which way shall I take? Love, either
guide me to her rescue, or to my grave.


I am paid; what a case I am in -- The Bottle is whole,


This was my Lieutenants plot, All the world is my Enemy; how they have hacked
me, it is a scurvy trade, this fighting it wears out ones clothes, worse then
drinking; I will hide me in this Wood till the storm is over; and if I get safe
to Naples, Celia and I will live out my few days merrily, and spoil my Captains
plot; I


Sure I heard Tullius his voice; who's there?


I am pursued, yet if I can counterfeit dead well, I may live; My fear will
betray me; O that I were valiant enough but to lie still; I never found the use
of courage till now: Lord, how I shake!


'Tis his voice; Tullius, Tullius, prithee stay a little.


'Tis my Lieutenant; if he should take this opportunity now, and kill me, and
say the Enemy did it, and share with my Captain in all I have; Oh, the misery
of Wealth! men can neither be happy with it, nor without it; I dare not look
towards him, I'll creep backward, and run away.


The ill-natur'd Rogue is gone, and left me; I shall bleed to death before any
Friend finds me; Now the Rogue is revenged upon me for the frights I put him in
to day.


Hum! say you so, bleed to death -- His wounds have healed mine -- Now do I
grow strong, and valiant -- Lieutenant


Faith, quite spoiled, I fear the Rogues have made lanes quite through me;
prithee help me to my Quarter, for I am faint.


Has been something uncivil with your Breeches, I smell it, -- How fell you
out? did he refuse my Captains health?


No, no, there was no wine in the business, yet there was a Wench, the other
half of mans mischief; but 'tis no time now for to talk, for unless thou
help me to a Surgeon, thou wilt find me a mortal Lieutenant. -- Give me thy
hand good Tullius, oh! what


Alas! farewell, noble Lieutenant, We must all dye; there is a tall man, and a
fair drinker, gone; I will say that for thee.


Why Tullius, thou wilt not leave me in this misery? I have not fingers enough
to stop the holes; get a Surgeon, or I shall dye.


'Tis sack, pure sack, and 'tis pity it should leak thus; but


A pox o'this fooling, 'tis unseasonable; be but kind to me, and thou shalt be
my heir.


How! your heir? By this light, and 'tis well considered, now I think on it; I
will be thy heir, or at least a careful steward for my Captain; let me see,
this sword has a good guard, this hat and feather how sits it?


What dost thou mean?


This Buff-coat will not be amiss neither. --


Villain, unhand me.


Nay, nay, you must part.


Dog. --


And these Breeches too, and this Doublet, I'll wear them for your sake; nay,
no resisting.


Slave, Villain.


See how impatient you are, come, come, you are going to another world (as you
say) quit the thoughts of these transitory things now, and prepare to dye
finely like a fine gentleman, and a Lieutenant.


Hell take thee, slave.


'Tis more then ever I got by a Legacy before; by my faith, 'tis a fair Coat; a
pox take'em that cut it thus: Now for the Breeches.


Why, thou wilt not murder me?


No, no, only borrow your Breeches; for look, Sir, what need you such gay
things as these now when you are going to lie alone in the dark?


Oh! misery of miseries!


Ha, ha, this revenge is better then long life.


O inhumane slave!


What noise is that?


'Tis vengeance, slave; I will make thee curse thy self.


Silence, my small friend, or else I have a Plaster of cold


Patience, oh patience.


I, I, come when she will, you will have use of her; this noise draws this way,
I must pluck him into the wood, and then I'll cut his throat; you had best
bethink you of some odd prayer, for it must be so.


Murder, Villain, Dog.


Come, come along, Sir; why should you grudge to dye when I am to be your heir?


Oh misery, misery of miseries, is there no revenge?


WHence grew this sudden Alarm?


I fear, from the discovery of the Plot; if it be so, we are lost for ever.


Lead them in and bind 'em, and some one run for a Surgeon.


What are these, Sir?


I know not; pray heaven they be worth the purchase: We have paid dear for 'em;
prithee help me off.


Facertes! 'tis he, and women in his company; I will not suspect him she that
is jealous; sets a cheap rate upon her self; for if he be worthy of such a pain
as jealousy, he cannot be so faulty as to deserve it.


I am amazed, 'tis the Princess Sophia.


Sophia?


What miseries do I see, Madam, to add to mine own afflictions; I never thought
I should have lived to see the day wherein I should have grieved to have met
the fair Sophia.


Why are you afflicted to meet me now?


Oh! Madam, my love begets my sorrows; for what shall I think? my thoughts are
divided, to meet your Highness, where license sows, and sin reaps; here, where
rage fetches her fire, and murder bathes his bloody hands; and unsensibly
recounts in security the treacherous stabs.


Say this guilt be here, must I be subject to the infection?


I do not think you are guilty, yet my fears tells me, where tired lust retires
to pant, such beauties as adore the fair Sophia, must kindle fresh fires.


Why do you wound me thus with your suspicion, and rob me of the joy I had to
see you? 'tis not kindly done to add such a pain to my misfortune; had you
fallen into the power of our sex, though sold to sin; like these, I could have
died sooner then have injured you so as to think you would-out live your
honour; and when you are just to me, you will not believe I prize mine so
little as to sell it for a shamed life.


Oh! divinest, pardon my love, whose fears still apprehend the worst.


Madam, let the impatience that begets this rudeness excuse it while I profess
my self, by all ties, yours; for though, till now, a stranger to you; yet I am
one that owes your civil mentions a life, which your mercy lent this
unfortunate Brother.


Speak, Facertes, is this the Princess, Cicilia?


This was; but what she is now the Gods only know.


Oh! Madam, in love and miseries we are become one; and my whole stock of tears
I would waste here, could that wash off my Countries crime, or remove the
stain.


I have forgot my part of them; so new and so strange are the favours you and
your gallant Brother have loaded us with, that his dangers now are all my
fears.


My Brother! where is he? have you seen him?


Yes, Madam; and I fear he is at this instant hunting, with certain danger, our
uncertain safety.


Ha! the same Prisoners that were stole, and sold at Naples.


Upon my life, Sir, 'tis true.


'Tis, 'tis she, and the Prince Facertes too.


The honoured Nigro?


Alive? oh ye Gods! This day is full of your hands; and all is like you
(wonder.)


Rise, why do you kneel? oh, lay that aged head here; where are we? what
strange place is this the Sicilian Deity is run to hide her self in?


Though I do not know thy face; yet to Facertes name, here kneels a subject,
and one of those your dead Father called faithful, my name Terresius.


Terresius?


Yes Terresius, Nigro, that with him from the same battle, when you fled with
this gallant Prince, bore away the hopeful Lucius; we have run strange fortunes
since; but I durst not tell him what he was, lest his fiery nature should have
pulled on a certain ruin.


My Brother Lucius living?


Yes, Sir; and that, I hope, will expiate the fault my ignorance this day
committed.


Where is he, Sir?


I left him pursuing the victory, but I'll haste and tell him this news it will
stay his rage, which else may pursue his own ruin upon his friends.


For heavens sake haste, lest he and the Prince Virgilius meet; for either of
their conquests brings my ruin.


Let me accompany you.


I dare not, Sir, for yet the Soldiers know you not; and their mistake of duty
to me may bring on a sad consequence.


For heavens sake lose no time, but haste to prevent this danger.


I'll send an Officer, Sir, to guard you; and then with safety you may come but
till then; I beseech you stir not.


Pray, Madam, what blessed chance brought my Brother to have the power to serve
you.


Defer that story till a fitter time, and haste now to the saving of your
Brother.


Pray lead the way, lest our ceremony hinder our charity.


If you'll give me leave to command, I'll obey; you must not refuse me your
hand; oh! that the Gods had made our Countries join thus in peace.


THey cannot escape; I have fired their Galley, and mine lies loose, in wait
for any that shall come to their aid. Miserable Virgilius! unfortunate that I
am, preserved only to a greater loss; this way a Soldier (whose dying words
could only guide me) said they took; I'll hunt them to their den but I'll find
the monsters.


THe Galley fired, and the Lieutenant slain; Hell upon him, he has crossed all
my designs; Fate thou art Fate still, but whither just or no thus to strike
against the intentions of the honest, the Gods be Judge; All my hopes are sunk;
that excellent Maid is lost too, and I shall appear guilty and treacherous to
her; But if I find the cursed Incendiary, with his hateful Blood I'll quench
the flame: Take that path, if you find him, call.


Sir, this is he.


This, by description, should be him I seek.


What art thou, that walk with such confidence in these forbidden Woods?
Know, thou hast kindled a fire nothing but thy Blood shall extinguish.


Unless thou wilt fall too, and make one in that ruin, I counsel thee
immediately to deliver (without repetition) those whom thy treacherous odds
have ravished hence.


I will not revile thee, because I mean to fight with thee; Yet I would gladly
know whence thou art, that hope with thy threats to wash off this glorious
colour, and shake those fruits that Conquest gave a growth to here.


Rome claims my Birth.


So it does of him I hate more then the loathed Issues of the Earth.


What art thou, that dare avow such a hatred of a Roman to a Roman's face?


I am of Sicily, the unfortunate subject of your Rage.


So is she I prefer equal with the Gods; yet her interest in the Nation shall
not protect thee that art so base as to make spoil of thine own nest.


You'll find words of no force here, and thou look as if thou would not
yield upon entreaty.


Nor can thou conquer me, when I fight in her cause, though thou take the
odds of his sword.


His? he dares not strike, where he sees my sword drawn upon a single opposite.


You will not deliver these Ladies then?


I'll give thee all my glory first; yet I know thou art the Author of all those
miseries that shall succeed; for had not thou burnt my Galley, I had decreed
their safety, but now thou hast sold them to perpetual slavery.


The guilty never want excuses, but I shall punish both those falsehoods.


Soldier, upon your life stir not a foot to my rescue, I scorn to live upon
Charity.


I'll talk no longer, their freedoms or thy sword; for my vows are writ in
Heaven, never to sheath this sword till I found them or a Grave.


One of them I'll guide you to, or miss my aim. -- Fortune,


Will you yield, or try a farther Fate?


No, Roman, we may be overcome, but we scorn to yield.


Ask thy life, or thou art dead.


No, when thou can give it, 'tis not worth asking.


Then 'tis not worth taking.


What noise is that?


I know not, Sir.


Draw, and kill any thing that offers to rescue me; for when Cilius cannot
stand alone in this cause, let him fall for ever.


I would thou had not deserved my sword.


Stand, he that advances a step as Friend or Enemy, till they have done, shall
kill or die.


How now, Sirrah? Cilius, if the name of Facertes or Cicilia have a power,
you'll cease to be an Enemy there.


Or if the brave Virgilius be satisfied with shedding of Scicilian Blood, he
will now spare the lost Lucius, and reconcile himself


Prince Lucius!


Virgilius!


Yes, Sir, Virgilius, and there are coming those whose Interest in either will
quickly clear this doubt.


Sir, by the name of Brother; I conjure you to defer this hate till you have
heard us speak.


And if I have a Sisters interest it will disarm Virgilius.


Sister? what strange accident brought thee hither? -- Madam, will you pardon
that uncivil Joy that passed you to find


Yes, Sir, if you'll help me find a friend to Virgilius, and a lost Brother to
Cicilia.


Terresius, unfold this Riddle, amazement yet with-holds my sword, and has
almost bound my Reason; what means this shuffling of Facertes, Cicilia,
Virgilius and Lucius together? Those names, and this dearness, what means it?


Dare you trust me?


The honoured Nigro.


Or me, whose faith you have bought; and give us leave to reconcile this
wonder?


Madam, I am all your slave, and when your hand deals it destruction shall fall
on Cilius unresisted.


Dare you show your breast? 'tis all I beg.


Yes, fair one, and every thought of it shall to you be visible.


Here, here, 'tis a thousand witnesses to prove the lost Lucius.


'Tis so, and upon his knees Teresius begs his pardon for keeping this secret
so long from you; But now it comes accompanied with many blessings; see here
your Brother, the Prince Facertes, and the Excellent Cicilia, whose Loves have
been by Fate appointed to restore our Country to her long-lost liberty.


And if Lucius finds a part of this Joy, let him with friendly arms embrace
Virgilius, who is now a Brother, and ever a Friend.


Dare you from my hand take him?


That I have been thus long silent, let the wonder you have begot plead for me;
And, Sir, that we durst be Enemies should


Sir, your last act assures Virgilius, who cannot believe he is safe till you
embrace him; for I know, such an Enemy as Prince Lucius reconciled will prove a
conquering friend.


The Gods make this friendship as lasting as 'tis strange.


Madam, doth this change bring no hope to Lucius? must he still be the
despairing Cilius? dare you not yet tell me who you


Yes, my Name's Sophia.


Ha, the Princess Sophia?


Yes, Lucius: But why is my Brother sad? does he mourn my Interest there?


No, Sir, I neither mourn yours there, nor the Excellent Sophias here; but I am
hunting out a way to bear my self like Lucius in this great day; your hand,
Madam, -- Here Facertes from Fate receive this Jewel, 'tis a Wealth I cannot
hope to possess, but by being unworthy of it; and it shall be Lucius his glory
to say, To keep his Fame, he gave that away.


Let no replies defer the Joys that attend this day.


To the Temple then, while with healing sacrifice Virgilius loads the Altars.


I shall follow, if Lucius will lead the way. Thus blessed, and thus embraced,
more a God then they.

Yet lest we leave our Enemies behind,
Let's know how these our Judges stand enclind.


