THE Parsons Wedding, A COMEDY. The Scene LONDON.

WRITTEN AT Basil in Switzerland: BY THOMAS KILLIGREW.

DEDICATED TO THE LADY URSULA BARTU, WIDOW.

LONDON: Printed by J. M. for Henry Herringman, and are to be sold at his Shop
at the sign of the Blew Anchor, in the lower Walk of the New-Exchange. 1663.

No more, I'll sooner be reconciled to want, or sickness, then that Rascal; A
thing, that my Charity made sociable; one, that when I smiled would fawn upon
me, and wag his stearn, like starved Dogs; so nasty, the Company cried foh upon
him; He stunk so of Poverty, Ale, and Bawdry. So poor and despicable, when I
relieved him, he could not avow his calling, for want of a Cassock, but stood
at Corners of Streets, and whispered Gentlemen in the Ear, as they passed, and
so delivered his Wants like a Message which being done, the Rogue vanished, and
would dive at Westminster like a Dabchick, and rise again at Temple-gate; The
ingenuity of the Rascal, his Wit being snuffed by want, burnt clear then, and
furnished him with a bawdy Jest or two, to take the Company; But now the Rogue
shall find he has lost a Patron.


As I live, if I had thought you would have been in such a fury, you should
never have known it.


Treacherous Rogue, he has always rayl'd against thee to me, as a danger his
Friendship ought to give me warning of; and nightly cried, yet look back, and
hunt not, with good Nature and the beauties of thy Youth, that false Woman; But
hear thy Friend, that speaks from sad Experience.


Did he say this?


Yes, and swears ye are as unsatiate as the Sea, as Covetous, and as
ungrateful: that you have your Tempest too; and Calms, more dangerous then it.


Was the slave so Eloquent in his malice?


Yes, faith, and urged, you (for your part) were never particular, and seldom
sound.


Not sound? Why, he offered to marry me, and swore he thought I was chaste, I
was so particular; and proved it, that consent was full marriage, by the first
Institution, and those that love, and lie together, and tell, have fulfilled
all Ceremonies now.


Did he offer to marry thee?


Yes, yes.


If ever then I deserved from thee, or if thou be deer to thy self, as thou
hast any thing thou hop'st shall be safe or sound about thee, I conjure thee,
take my Counsel; Marry him, to afflict him.


Marry him?


If I have any power I shall prevail; thou know he has a fat Benefice, and
leave me to plague him, till he give it me to be rid of thee.


Will you not keep me then?


I keep thee? prithee, wilt thou keep me? I know not why men are such Fools to
pay? We bring as much to the sport, as Women; Keep thee? I'd marry thee as
soon; Why? that's Wedding sin; No, no keeping I, that you are not your own, is
all that prefers you before Wives.


I hope this is not real.


Art thou such a stranger to my humour? Why I tell thee, I should hate thee if I
could call thee mine, for I loath all Women within my knowledge, and 'tis six
to four if I knew thy sign I'd come there no more; A strange Mistress makes
every night anew, and these are your pleasing sins; I had as live be good, as
sin by course.


Then I am miserable.


Not so, if you'll be instructed, and let me pass like a stranger when you meet
me.


But have you these humours?


Yes faith; yet if you will observe them, though you Marry him, I may perchance
be your Friend; But you must be sure to be coy; for to me the hunting is more
pleasure then the Quarry.


But if I observe this, will you be my Friend hereafter?


Firm as the day; Hark, I hear him; I knew he would


'Tis well, something I'll do.


Open the door, I say, and let me in; your favourite and his Tithes, shall come
no more here.


Yes, but he shall; 'tis not you, nor your braced Drum, shall fright me hence,
who can command the souls of men; I have read Divine Seneca; thou know
nothing but the earthly part, and can cry to that, Faces about.


Thou read Seneca? thou steal his Cover, to clothe thee, naked and wicked, That
for money would sell thy share of the Twelve, and art allow'd by all that
know thee, fitter to have been Judas, then Judas was for his treachery.


Rail, do Rail, my illiterate Captain, that can only abuse by memory; and
should I live thou could read my Sentence, I should never die.


No ungrateful, live till I destroy thee; and thankless Wretch, Did all my care
of thee deserve nothing but thy malice, and treacherous speaking darkly still?
with thy fine, No, not he, when any malicious discourse was made of me, and by
thy false faint, No, Faith; Confess, in thy denials, whilst thy smiling Excuses
stood a greater and more dangerous Evidence against me, then my Enemies
Affidavits could have done.


I'll lie for never a lean Soldier of you all.


I have, for thee, slave, when I have been wondered at for keeping Company with
such a face; But they were such as know thee not; all which thy looks deceived,
as they did me; They are so simple they'd Cousin a Jury, and a Judge that had
Wit would swear thou ly'dst, should thou confess what I know to be true, and
award Bedlam for thee; 'tis so strange and so new a thing, to find so much
Rogue lodge at the sign of the Fool.


Leave this injurious language, or I'll lay off my Cassock, for nothing shall
privilege your Braggers tongue, to abuse me, a Gentleman, and a Soldier
ancienter then thy self.


Yes, thou were it so; and now I think on it, I'll recount the Cause, which, it
may be, thou hast forgot, through the variety of sins; It was a Hue and Cry
that follow'd thee a Scholar, and found thee a Soldier.


Thou lie; thou, and scandal have but one tongue, hers dwells with thy
Cowards teeth.


Oh! do you rage? nay, I'll put the cause in Print too, I am but a skirvy Poet,
yet I'll make a Ballad shall tell how like a faithful disciple you follow'd
your poor Whore, till her Martyrdom in the Suburbs.


I'll be revenged for this scandal.


Then shall succeed, thy flight from the University, disguised into Captain
only the outside was worse Buff, and the inside more Atheist, then they
furnished with an Insolent Faith, uncharitable heart, envious, as old Women,
cruel and bloody as Cowards; thus armed at all points, thou went out,
Threatening God, and trembling at men.


I'll be revenged, thou poor man of War, I'll be revenged.


And why so bitter? whose house is this? who dares tell this story?


Why sweet? hath he not treacherously broke into our Cabinet, and would have
stolen thee thence? By these hilts, I'll hang him; and then I can conclude my
Ballad with, Take warning all Christian People by the same: I will, you lean
Slave; I'll prosecute thee, till thou art fain to hide in a Servitors gown
again, and live upon Crumbs with the Robin Red-breasts that haunt the Hall, your
old Mess-Mates; Do you snarle? I'll do it, I will, and put thee to fight with
the Dogs for the Bones that but smell of meat; those that your hungry Students
have polished with their teeth.


If you do this, good Captain, Lieutenant, and Company (for all your Command, I
think, is within your reach) I say, if you dare do this, I shall sing a song of
one that bad stand, and made a Carrier pay a dear Rent for a little ground,
upon his Majesties high-way.


How now, Mistress Wanton? What's this? What's this?


This? 'Tis matter for a Jury, I'll swear, and positively, I'll hang thee,
I'll do it, by this hand, let me alone to swear the Jury out of doubt.


But you are in Jest, Mistress Wanton, and will confess (I hope) this is no
truth.


Yes Sir, as great a truth, as that you are in your unpay'd-for Scarlet; Fool!
did think, I'd quit such a Friend, and his stayed fortune, to rely upon thy
dead pay, and hopes of a second Covenant?


His fortune? what is'st? Th'Advowson of Tybourn Deanery?


No, nor Rents brought in by long staff-speeches, that asks Alms with frowns,
till thy looks and speech have laid violent hands upon men's Charity.


Let him alone, I'll warrant, he will never be indicted for drawing any thing but
his tongue, against a man.


Very good.


Dear Mrs Wanton, you have won my heart, and I shall live to dote upon you for
abusing this impetuous Captain; will you listen to my old suit? will you marry
me, and vex him? say, dare you do it, without more dispute?


'Twas a good Question; she that dares marry thee dares do any thing; she may
as safely lie with the great Bell upon her, and his Clapper is less dangerous
then thine.


Why, I pray?


What a miserable condition wilt thou come to? his wife cannot be an honest
Woman; and if thou should turn honest, would it not vex thee to be chaste
and Paxat, a Saint without a Nose? what Calendar will admit thee, by an
incurable slave that's made of Rogues flesh, consider that.


Why, that's something yet; Thou hast nothing but a few scars, and a little old
Fame to trust to, and that scarce thatches your head.


Nay then I see you're base, and this Plot (not Accident,) and now I'doe not
grudge him thee; go together, 'tis pity to part you, Whore and Parson, as
consonant.


As Whore and Captain.


Take her, I'll warrant her a breeder, I'll prophecy she shall lie with thy
whole Congregation, and bring an Heir to thy Parish, one that thou may
enclose the Common by his Title, and recover it by Common Law.


That's more then thy dear Dam could do for thee, thou Son of a thousand
Fathers, all poor Soldiers, Rogues, that ought mischiefs, no Midwives for
their Birth; But I cry thee Mercy, my Patron has an Estate of old Iron by his
side, with the Farm of old Ladies he scrapes a dirty living from.


He earn from an old Lady? hang him, he's only wicked in his desires; and for
Adultery he cannot be condemned, though he should have the vanity to betray
himself; God forgive me for belying him so often as I have done; the
weak-chin'd slave hired me once to say, I was with Child by him.


This is pretty, Farewell; and may the next Pig thou farrow'st have a promising
face, without the Dads fool or Gallows in it, that all may swear, at first
sight, That's a Bastard; and it shall go hard but I'll have it called mine; I
have the way, 'tis but praising thee, and swearing thou art honest before I am
asked: You taught me the trick.


Next Levy I'll preach against thee, and tell them what a piece you are; your
Drum and borrowed scarf shall not prevail, nor shall you win with Charms
half-ell-long, (hight ferret Ribbon) the youth of our Parish, as you have
done.


No, lose no time, prithee study and learn to preach, and leave railing against
the Surplice, now thou hast preached thy self into Linen; Adieu, Abigal, Adieu,
Heir apparent to Sir Oliver Marre-text; To Church, go, I'll send a Beadle shall
sing your Epithalamium.


Adieu, my Captain of a tame band, I'll tell your old Lady how you abused her
breath, and swore you earned your money harder then those that dig in the Mines
for it. Exit Captain. A fart, fill thy sail, Captain of a Gally Foist. He's
gone, come sweet, let's to Church immediately, that I may go and take my
Revenge; I'll make him wear thin Breeches.


But if you should be such a Man as he says you are, what would my Friends
say, when they hear I have cast my self away?


He says? Hang him, lean, mercenary, provant Rogue; I knew his beginning when
he made the stocks lousy, and swarmed so with vermin we were afraid he would
have brought that Curse upon the County; He says? but what's matter what he
says? a Rogue, by Sire and Dam; his Father was a broad fat Peddler, a what do
you lack, Sir, that haunted good houses, and stole more then he bought; His
Dam was a Gypsy, a pilfering canting Sibyll in her youth, and she suffered in
her old age for a Witch; Poor Stromwell, the Rogue was a perpetual Burden to
her, she carried him longer at her back then in her belly; he dwelt there, till
she lost him one night in the great Frost upon our Common, and there he was
found in the morning candid in Ice: a pox of their Charity that thawed him, you
might smell a Rogue then in the bud, he is now run away from his Wise.


His Wife?


Yes, his Wife; Why, do you not know he's married according to the Rogues
Liturgy? a Left-handed Bridegroom; I saw him take the Ring from a Tinkers
Dowager.


Is this possible?


Yes, most possible, and you shall see how I'll be revenged on him; I will
immediately go seek the Ordinance against Reformadoes.


What Ordinance?


Why, they do so swarm about the Town, and are so destructive to Trade and all
Civil Government, that the State has declared, No person shall keep above two
Colonels and four Captains, (of what Trade soever) in his Family; For now the
War is done, Broken breech, Wood-monger, Rag-man, Butcher, and Link-boy,
(Comrades that made up the ragged Regiment in this holy War) think to return
and be admitted to serve out their times again.


Your Ordinance will not touch the Captain, for he is a known Soldier.


He a Captain? an Apochryphal Modern one, that went Convoy once to Brainford
with those Troops that conducted the Contribution-Puddings in the late holy
War, when the City ran mad after their Russet Levites, Apron-Rogues, with horn
hands; Hang him, he's but the sign of a Soldier; and I hope to see him hanged
for that Commission, when the King comes to his Place again.


You abuse him, now he's gone; But, --


Why? dost thou think I fear him? No Wench, I know him too well for a Cowardly
slave, that dares as soon eat his Fox, as draw it in earnest; the slave's noted
to make a Conscience of nothing but fighting.


Well, if you be not a good Man, and a kind Husband --


Thou know the Proverb, as happy as the Parsons Wife, during her Husbands
life.


SEcret, give me the Glass, and see who knocks.


Niece, what, shut the Door? as I live this Music was meant to you, I know my
Nephews voice.


Yes, but you think his friends has more Music in it.


No Faith, I can laugh with him, or so, but he comes no nearer then my lace.


You do well to keep your smock betwixt.


Faith, Wench, so wilt thou and thou be wise, from him and all of them, and
be ruled by me, we'll abuse all the Sex, till they put a true value upon us.


But dare you forbid the travelled Gentlemen, and abuse them and your servant,
and swear, with me, not to marry in a twelve month, though a Lord bait the
hook, and hang out the sign of a Court Cupid, whipped by a Country Widow; then I
believe we may have mirth cheaper then at the price of our selves, and some
sport with the wits that went to lose themselves in France.


Come, no dissembling, lest I tell your servant, when he returns, how much
you're taken with the last new fashion.


Madam, 'tis almost Noon, will you not dress your self to day?


She speaks as if we were Boarders; Prithee, Wench, is not the dinner our own,
sure my Cook shall lay by my own Roast till my stomach be up.


But there may be Company, and they will say, we take too long time to trim.
Secret. Give me the flowers my servant sent me, he swear 'twas the first the
Wench made of the kind.


But when he shall hear you had Music sent you to day, 'twill make him appear
in his old clothes.


Marry, I would he would take exception, he should not want ill usage to rid me
of his trouble; as I live, custom has made me so acquainted with him, that I
now begin to think him not so displeasing, as at first; and if he fall not out
with me, I must with him, to secure my self. Sure (Aunt) he must find Sense and
Reason absent, for when a Question knocks at his head, the Answer tells that
there is no body at home; I asked him, the other day, if he did not find a
blemish in his understanding, and he swear a great Oath, Not he; I told him
'twas very strange, for Fool was so visible an eye-sore, that neither Birth nor
Fortune eould reconcile to me.


Faith, methinks his humour is good, and his purse will buy good company, and I
can laugh and be merry with him sometimes.


Why, pray, Aunt, take him to your self, and see how merry we will be; I can
laugh at any bodies Fool, but mine own.


By my troth, but that I have married one Fool already, you should not have
him. Consider, he asks no portion, and yet will make a great jointure; a Fool
with these conveniences, a kind loving Fool, and one that you may govern, makes
no ill husband; Niece, there are other Arguments too, to bid a Fool welcome,
which you will find without teaching; think of it, Niece; you may lay out your
affection to purchase some dear wit, or judgement of the City, and repent, at
leisure a good bargain, in this Fool.


Faith, Aunt, Fools are cheap in the Butchery, and dear in the Kitchen; they
are such unsavoury infipid things that there goes more charge to the sauce then
the Fool is worth, ere a woman can confidently serve him, either to her bed or
board; then if he be a loving Fool, he troubles all the world a days, and me
all night.


Friendship-love, Madam, has a remedy for that.


See if the air of this place has not inclined Secret to be a Baud already. No,
Secret, you get no Gowns that way, Upon my word; if I marry, it shall be a
Gentleman that has wit and honour, though he has nothing but a sword by his
side; such a one naked is better then a Fool with all his Trappings, Bells and
Baubles.


Why, as I live, he's a handsome fellow, and merry; mine is such a sad soul,
and tells me stories of Lovers that died in despair, and of the lamentable end
of their Mistresses (according to the Ballad) and thinks to win me by Example.


Faith mine talks of nothing but how long he has loved me; and those that know
me not, think I am old, and still finds new causes, (as he calls them) for his
love; I asked him the other day if I changed so fast or no.


But what think thou, Secret; my Nephew dances well, and has a handsome
house in the Piazza.


Your Nephew? not I, As I live; he looks as if he would be wooed; I'll warrant
you, he'll never begin with a woman till he has lost the opinion of himself; But
since you are so courteous, I'll speak to his friend, and let him know how you
suffer for him.


Him! marry God bless all good women from him; why, he talks as if the
Dairy-maid and all her Cows could not serve his turn; then they wear such
baudy-breeches, 'twould startle an honest woman to come in their company, for
fear they should break, and put her to count from the fall of them; for I'll
warrant, the year of the Lord would sooner out of her head then such a sight.


I am not such an enemy now to his humour as to your Nephews, he rails against
our sex, and thinks by beating down the price of women to make us despair of
Merchants; But if I had his heart-strings tied on a True-lovers-knot, I would
so firk him till he found physic in a Rope.


He's a scurvey tongued fellow, I'm sure of that; and if I could have got a
staff, I had marked him.


What did he do to thee, Secret?


Why, he swore, he had a better opinion of her then to think she had her
Maiden-head; but if she were that Fool, and had preserved the toy, he swore he
would not take the pains of fetching it, to have it; I confess, I would fain be
revenged on them, because they are so blown up with opinion of their wit.


As I live, my Nephew travels still; the sober honest Ned Wild will not be at
home this month.


What say you? will you abuse them and all the rest, and stand to my first
Proposition?


Yes, faith, if it be but to bury my servant, Sad; for he cannot last above
another Fall, and how, think you, will your servant take it?


Mine! oh God help me, mine's a healthy Fool, I would he were subject to pine
and take things unkindly; there were some hope to be rid of him; for I'll
undertake to use him as ill as any body.


As I live, I am easily resolved; for if I would marry, I know neither who nor
what humour to choose.


By my troth, Madam, you are hard to please; else the Courtier might have
served turn.


Serve turn! Prithee what haste, Secret? that I should put my self to bed with
one I might make a shift with; when I marry, thou shalt cry, I, marry, Madam;
this is a husband without blushing wench, and none of your so-so husbands; yet
he might half overcome my aversion, I confess.


Overcome! I think so, he might have won a City his way; for when he saw you
were resolved he should not eat with you, he would set himself down as if he
meant to besiege us, and had vowed never to rise till he had taken us in; and
because our sex forbad force, he meant to do it by famine; yet you may stay,
and miss a better market; for hang me, I am of Secrets opinion; he had but two
faults, a handsome fellow, and too soon denied.


'Tis true, he was a handsome fellow, and a civil, that I shall report him; for
as soon as it was given him to understand; I desired he would come no more, I
never saw him since, but by chance.


Why did you forbid him?


There were divers exceptions; But that which angered me then, was, he came with
the Kings Letters Patents, as if he had been to take up a wife for his
Majesties use.


Alas! was that all? why, 'tis their way at Court, a common course among them,
and was it not one the King had a great care of? when my mother was alive, I
had such a packet from the Court directed unto me, I bid them pay the Post, and
make the fellow drink, which he took as ill as I could wish, and has been ever
since such a friendly enemy.


Nay, as I live, she was for the Captain too; his Scarf and Feather won her
heart.


Truly, Madam, never flatter your self; for the Gentleman did not like you so
well as to put you to the trouble of saying, no.


Lord, how I hated and dreaded that Scarf and Buffc^at?


Why, Mistress Pleasant, a Captain is an honourable Charge.


Prithee, Secret, name them no more, Colonel and Captain, Commissioner,
Free-quarters, Ordance and Contribution; When Buff utters these words, I
tremble and dread the sound; it frights me still when I do but think on them;
Cuds body, they 're twigs of the old Rod (Wench) that whipped us so lately.


I, I, and they were happy days, Wench, when the Captain was a lean, poor,
humble thing, and the Soldier tame, and durst not come within the City, for
fear of a Constable and a Whipping-post; they know the penal Statutes give no
Quarter; Then Buff was out of countenance, and sculk'd from Ale-house to
Ale-house, and the City had no Militia but the Sheriffs-men; In those merry
days, a Bailiff trod the streets with terror, when all the Chains in the City
were rusty, but Mr. Sheriffs, when the people knew no evil but the Constable
and his Watch; Now every Committee has as much power, and as little manners,
and examines with as much ignorance, impertinence and authority, as a Constable
in the Kings key.


See, who's that so loud?


The men you talked of, newly come to Town. --


Remember our covenants, get them that can, all friends; and be sure to
dispatch the Plot, to carry them into the Country, lest the brace of new-come
Monsieurs get them.


Those flesh-flies? I'll warrant thee from them, yet 'twas foolishly done of me
to put on this gravity; I shall break out, and return to my self if you put me
to a winters wooing.


A little patience does it; and I am content to suffer any thing till they're
out of Town: Secret says, they think my pale face proceeds from my love.


Does she? that shall be one hint to advance your designs, and my revenge; for
so she be cozened I care not who does it, for scorning me, who (by this hand)
loved her parlously.


Sir, what shall I do with the horses?


Carry them to Brumsteds.


What shall I do with your worships.


Mine? take him, hamstring him, kill him, any thing to make him away, lest
having such a convenience I be betrayed to another journey into the Country.
Gentlemen, you are all welcome to my Country-house; Charing-cross, I am glad to
see thee, with all my heart.


What? not reconciled to the Country yet?


He was not long enough there to see the pleasure of it.


Pleasure? what is't called? walking or hawking, or shooting at Butts?


You found other pleasures, or else the story of the Meadow is no Gospel.


Yes, a pox upon the necessity. Here I could as soon have taken the Cow, as
such a Milk-maid.


The wine and meat's good, and the company.


When, at a Tuesday-meeting the Country comes in to a match at two shillings
Rubbers, where they conclude at dinner what shall be done this Parliament,
railing against the Court and Pope, after the old Elizabeth-way of preaching,
till they are drunk with zeal; and then the old Knight of the Shire from the
boards end, in his Coronation breeches, vies clinches with a silenced Minister,
a Rogue that railed against the Reformation merely to be eased of the trouble
of preaching.


Nay, As I live, now you are to blame, and wrong him, the man's a very able
man.


You'll be able to say so, one day, upon your wives report; I would he were
gelt, and all that hold his opinion: By this good day, they get more souls then
they save.


And what think you of the Knights Son? I hope he's a fine Gentleman, when his
green Suit, and his blew stockings are on; and the welcomest thing ^live to
Mrs. Abigail, but Tib and Tom in the Stock.


Who, Mr. Jeoffry? Hobinol the second; By this life, 'tis a very Veal, and he
licks his Nose like one of them; By his discourse you'd guess he had eaten
nothing but Hay; I wonder he doth not go on all four too, and hold up his leg
when he stales; he talks of nothing but the stable. The Cobblers Black-bird at
the corner has more discourse; he has not so much as the family-jest, which
these Coridons use to inherit; I pos'd him in Booker's Prophesies, till he
confessed he had not mastered his Almanac yet.


But what was that you whispered to him in the Hall?


Why, the Butler and I, by the intercession of March beer, had newly reconciled
him to his Dads old Cod-piece Corslet, in the Hall; which, when his zeal was
up, he would needs throw down, because it hung upon a Cross.


But what think you of my neighbour? I hope her charity takes you.


Yes, and her old Waiting-womans devotion; she sighed in the Pew behind me; A
Dutch Skippe^ belches not so loud, or so sower; my Ladies miserable sinner,
with the white (...) she does so squeeze out her prayers; and so wring out,
Have (...) upon us; I warrant her, she has a waiting-womans sting in her
conscience; she looks like a dirty souled Baud.


Who is this, my Lady Freedom's woman that he describes?


The same, the Independent Lady, I have promised to send her a Cripple or two
by the next Carrier; her subject husband would needs show me his house one
morning; I never visited such an Hospital, it stunk like Bedlam, and all the
servants were carrying Poultisses, Julips, and Glisters, and several Remedies
for all Diseases, but his; The man sighed to see his Estate crumbling away; I
counselled him either to give or take a ounce of Rats-bane, to cure his mind.


She is my Cozen; but he made such a complaint to me, I thought he had married
the Company of Surgeons Hall; for his directions to me for several things for
his Wives use, were fitter for an pothecaries-shop then a Ladies Closet.


I advised him to settle no Jointure, but her old Stills, and a Box of
Instruments upon her; she hates a man with all his Limbs; a Wooden-leg, a
Crutch and Fistula in Ano, wins her heart; her Gentleman-usher broke his leg
last Dog-days, merely to have the honour to have her set it, a foul rank Rogue,
and so full of salt humours, that he posed a whole College of old Women with a
Gangrene; which spoiled the jest, and his ambling before my Lady, by applying a
hand-saw to his gartring place; and now the Rogue wears booted Bed-staves, and
destroys all the young ashes to make him legs.


I never saw such a nasty affection; she would ha done well in the incurable; a
Hand-maid to have waited on the Cripples.


She converses with naked men, a^ handles all their members though never so ill
affected, and calls the Fornication Charity; all her discourse to me was flat
bawdry, which I could not chide, but spoke as flat as she, till she rebuked me,
calling mine beastliness, and hers, Natural Philosophy; By this day, if I were
to marry, I would as soon have chosen a drawn whore out of mine own Hospital,
and cure the sins of her youth, as marry a she-Chirurgeon; one that for her
sins in her first Husbands days cures all the crimes of her Sex in my time. I
would have him call her Chiron, the Centaur's own Daughter; a Surgeon by
Sire and Dam, Apollo's own Colt, she's red-hair'd too, like that bonny beast
with the golden Mane and flaming tail.


You had a long discourse with her, Jolly; what wa'st about?


I was advising her to be divorced, and marry the Man in the Almanac; 'twould
be fine pastime for her to lick him whole.


By this day, I never saw such a Mule as her Husband is, to bear with her
madness; the house is a good house, and well furnished.


Yes, but 'tis such a sight to see great French Beds full of found (...), sons
of Bachelors, Priests Heirs, Bridewell Orphans; there they lie by dozens in a
Bed, like sucking Rabbits in a dish, or a row of pins; and then they keep a
whole Dairy of milch Whores to suckle them.


She is successful, and that spoils her, and makes her deaf to counsel; I bad
him poison two or three, to disgrace her; for the Vanity and Pride of their
remedies make those Women more diligent then their Charity.


I asked him why he married her; and he confessed, if he had been sound he had
never had her.


He confessed, she cured him of three Claps before he married her.


Yes, and I believe some other member (though then ill affected) pleaded more
then his tongue; and the Rogue is like to find her business still, for he flies
at all; My God, I owe thee thanks for many things; but 'tis not the least, I am
not her Husband, nor a Country Gentleman, whither I believe you cannot easily
seduce me again, unless you can persuade London to stand in the Country; To
Hide Park, or so, I may venture upon your Lady-fair days, when the Filly
Foales of fifteen come kicking in, with their Mains and tails tied up in
Ribbands, to see their eyes roll and neigh, when the Spring makes their blood
prick them; so far I am with you by the way of a Country Gentleman and a
Beer-drinker.


For all this dislike, Master Jolly; your greatest acquaintance lies amongst
Country Gentlemen.


I, at London, there your Country Gentlemen are good Company, where to be seen
with them is a kind of credit; I come to a Mercers shop in your Coach; Boy,
call your Master; he comes bare, I whisper him, Do you know the Constants and
the Sadds of Norfolk? yes, yes, he replies, and strokes his beard; they are
good Men cry I, yes, yes; No more, cut me off three suits of Satin, he does
it, and in the delivery whispers, Will these be bound? pish, drive on Coachman,
speak with me to morrow.


And what then?


What then? why, come again next day.


And what if the Country Gentleman will not be bound?


Then he must fight.


I would I had known that before I had signed your Bond, I would have set my
sword sooner then my Seal to it.


Why, if thou repent there's no harm done, fight rather then pay it.


Why, do you think I dare not fight?


Yes, but I think thou hast more wit then to fight with me; for if I kill thee,
'tis a fortune to me, and others will sign in fear; and if thou should kill
me, any body that knows us would swear 'twere very strange, and cry, there's
Gods just judgement now upon that lewd youth, and thou procur'st his hang-mans
place at the rate of thy Estate.


By this hand, he is in the right; and for mine I meant to pay when I signed;
hang it, never put good fellows to say, prithee give me a hundred pounds.


'Tis true, 'tis a good ganty way of begging; yet, for being killed, if I
refuse it, would there were no more danger in the Widows unkindness, then in
your fighting; I would not mistrust my design.


Why I, there's a point now in nicity of Honour, I should kill you for her;
for, you know I pretended first; and it may be if I had writ sad lines to her,
and hid my self in my Cloak, and haunted her Coach, it may be in time she would
have sought me; not I, by this hand, I'll not trouble my self for a Wench, and
married Widows are but Customary authorised Wenches.


Being of that Opinion, how can thou to think of marrying one?


Why, faith, I know not, I thought to rest me, for I was run out of breath with
pleasure, and grew so acquainted with si^, I would have been good (for
variety;) in these thoughts, 'twas my fortune to meet with this Widow,
handsome, and of a clear Fame.


Did love her?


Yes, faith? I had Love, but not to the disease that makes men sick; and I
could have loved her still, but that I was angry to have her refuse me for a
fault I told her of my self, so I went no more.


Did she forbid you but once?


Faith, I think I slipped a fair Opportunity, a handsome wench, and three
thousand pounds per annum in certainty, besides the possibility of being saved.


Which now you think desperate?


That is you; Cross or Pile, will you have him yet or no?


Peace, observe them.


Faith no, I do not despair, but I cannot resolve.


Who are those?


Captain, whither in such haste? what defeated? call you this a retreat, or a
flight from your friends?


Your Nephew, and his Governor, and his Friend! here will be a Scene, sit
close, and we may know the secret of their hearts.


They have not met yet since they returned, I shall love this bay window.


Prithee let me go, there's mischief a Boiling; and if thou shake me once
more thou wilt Jumble a lye together I have been hammering this hour.


A pox upon you, a studying lies?


Why, then they are no lies, but something in the praise of an old Ladies
Beauty, what do you call that?


Who are those?


I'st not the Captain, and my Friend?


Ned Wild? Tom Careless? What ail thou, dost thou scorn my embraces?


I see you have never been abroad, else you would know how to put a value upon
those whose careful observation brought home the most Exquisite Garb and
Courtship that Paris could sell us.


A pox on this fooling, and leave off Ceremony.


Why then agreed, off with our masks, and let's embrace


Faith, say, where have you spent these three years time? in Our Neighbour
France? or have you ventured over the Alps, to see the seat of the Caesars?


And can tell us (Ignorant, doomed to walk upon our own Land) how large a seat
the Goddess fixed her flying Trojans in.


Yes, yes, and have seen, and drunk (perhaps) of Tybers famous stream.


And have been where Aeneas buried his Trumpeter, and his Nurse; Tom looks as
if he had sucked the one, and had a Battle sounded by the other, for Joy to see
our Nation ambitious not to be understood or known when they come home.


So, now I'm welcome home, this is freedom, and these are Friends, and with
these I can be merry; for Gentlemen, you must give me leave to be free to.


So you will spare us miserable men, condemned tc London, and the Company of a
Michelmas Term, and never travelled those Countries that set Mountains on fire a
purpose to light us to our lodging.


Why this is better then to stay at home, and lie by hearsay, wearing out your
selves and Fortunes like your clothes, to see her that hates you for being so
fine, then appearing at a Play dressed like some part of it, while the Company
admire the Mercers and the Taylors work, and swear they have done their parts
to make you fine Gentlemen.


Then leap out of your Coach, and throw your Cloak over your shoulder, the
Casting Nets to catch a Widow, while we have seen the world, and learned her
Customs.


Yes, Sir, and returned perfect Mounsieurs.


Yes, even to their diseases; I confess my Ignorance; I cannot amble, nor ride
like S. George at Waltham.


Yet, upon my Conscience, he may be as welcome with a trot, as the other with
his pace; and faith, Jack, (to be a little free) tell me, dost thou not think
thou had been as well to pass here, with that English Nose thou carryedst
hence, as with the French tongue thou hast brought home?


It is an Accident, and to a Soldier 'tis but a scar; 'tis true, such a sign
upon Mr. Jolly's face had been as ill as a Red Cross, and Lord have mercy upon
us, at his lodging door, to have kept women out of Court.


For ought you know of the Court.


I know the Court, and thee, and thy use, and how you serve but as the
handsomest movables, a kind of Implement above stairs, and look much like one
of the old Court Servants in the hangings.


But that they move, and look fresher, and your Apparel more Modern.


Yet, faith, their Office is the same, to adorn the Room, and be gazed on:
Alas! he's sad, Courage man, these riding clothes will serve thee at the
latter day.


Which is one of their grievances, for nothing troubles them more then to think
they must appear in a foul winding sheet, and come undressed.


Gentlemen, I am glad to find you know the Court; we know a Traveller too,
especially when he is thus changed and Exchanged, as your Worships, both in
Purse and Person, and have brought home foreign visages and Inscriptions.


Why that's their perfection, their ambition to have it said, there go those
that have profitably observed the vices of other Countries, and made them their
own; and the faults of several Nations, at their return, are their Parts.


Why there's Jack Careless, he carried out as good stable manners as any was in
Suffolk, and now he is returned with a shrug, and a trick to stand crooked,
like a skirvy Bow unbent, and looks as if he would maintain Oil and Salads
against a Chyne of Beef; I knew a great Beast of this kind, it haunted the
Court much, and would scarcely allow us (fully reduced to Civility) for serving
up Mutton in whole joints.


What, silent?


Faith, the Captain is in a study.


Do, do, Conn the Rivers and Towns perfectly, Captain; thou may become
Intelligencer to the People, and lie thy two sheets a week in Corrantoes too.


And could you not make Friends at Court, to get their Pictures cut ugly, in
the Corner of a Map, like the old Navigators.


Wee'le see, wee'le see.


I'll interrupt them; Servant, you're welcome to Town; how now, Nephew? what,
dumb? where are all our travelled tongues?


Servant! who doth she mean? By this hand, I disclaim the Title.


Captain, Secret has taken Notes, and desires you would instruct her in what
concerns a waiting Woman, and an Old Lady.


Very good, yet this shall not save your Dinner.


Nay, while you are in this humour I'll not sell your Companies; and though
Master Jolly be incensed, I hope he will do me the favour to dine with me.


Faith, Lady, you mistake me if you think I am afraid of a widow; for I would
have the world know I dare meet her any where, but at Bed.


No more Aunt, wee'le come; and if you will give us good meat, weel bring good
humours, and good stomachs.


By this day I'll not dine there, they take a pleasure to raise a spirit that
they will not lay, I'll to Banks's.


A Pox forbid it, you shall not break Company, now you know what we are to do
after Dinner.


I will consent, upon condition you forbid the spiritual Non-sence the age
calls Platonic Love.


I must away too; But I'll be there at Dinner, you will join in a Plot after
dinner.


Any thing, Good, Bad, or Indifferent, for a Friend and Mirth.


I must go and prevent the Rogues mischief, with the Old Lady.


AWay, unworthy, false, ungrateful; with what Brow dare thou come again into
my sight, knowing how unworthy you have been, and how false to love?


No, 'tis you are unworthy, and deserve not those truths of Love I have paid
here; else you would not believe every report that Envy brings, and condemn,
without hearing me, whom you have so often tried and found faithful.


Yes, till I too credulous had pity on your tears; till I had mercy you durst
not be false.


Nor am not yet.


What dost thou call False? is there a treachery beyond what thou hast done;
when I had given my Fame, my Fortune, my self, and my husbands honour, all in
one Obligation, a sacrifice to that Passion; which thou seem to labour with
despair of, to tell and Brag of a conquest over a Woman, fooled by her Passion,
and lost in her love to thee, unworthy; --


By this Day, 'tis as false as he that said it; hang him, son of a Bachelor;
a slave that envying my Fortune in such a happiness as your love, and chaste
embraces, took this way to ruin it; Come, dry your Eyes, and let the guilty
weep; if I were guilty I durst as soon approach a Constable drunk, as come
here; you know I am your slave.


You swore so, and honour made me leave to triumph over your miseries.


Do you repent that I am happy? if you do, command my death.


Nay, never weep, nor sit sadly, I am Friends, so you will only talk and
discourse; for 'tis your company I only covet.


No, you cannot forgive, because you have injured me; 'tis right woman's
Justice; Accuse first, and harder to reconcile when they are guilty, then when
they are Innocent, or else you would not turn from me thus.


You know your youth hath a strong power over me; Turn those bewitching Eyes
away; I cannot see them with safety of mine honour.


Come you shall not hide your Face, there's a Charm in it against those that
come burnt with unchaste fires; for let but your Eyes or Nose drop upon his
heart it would burn it up, or quench it strait.


No Cogging, you have injured me; and now though my


So, the storm is laid, I must have those Pearls -- she shov'd me away with
her mouth, I'll to her again.


Where are you? what do you take me for? why you


Uncivil! By thy chaste self, I cannot, Chick; thou hast such a terror, such a
guard in those eyes, I dare not approach thee, nor can I gaze upon so much
fire; Prithee, Sirrah, let me hide me from their power here.


You presume upon the weakness of our sex; what shall I say or do? Tyrant Love!


There's a charm in those Pearls; pull them off; if they have a Frost in them,
let me wear them, and then we are both safe.


I would you had taken them sooner, I had then been innocent, and might with
whiteness have worn my love which I shall ne'er out-live.


Dear, do not too fast pour in my joys, lest I too soon reach my heaven.


Be gone then, lest we prove (having gained that height) this sad truth in
Love; The first minute after noon is night.


Part now? The Gods forbid; take from me first this load of joys you have
thrown upon me; for 'tis a burden harder to bear then sadness; I was not born
till now, this my first night in which I reap true bliss.


No, no; I would it had been your first night, then your falsehood had not given
argument for these tears; and I hate my self to think I should be such a
foolish fly, thus again to approach your dangerous flame.


Come, divert these thoughts; I'll go see your Closet.


No, no, I swear you shall not.


You know, I am going out of Town for two days.


When you return, I'll show it you; you will forget me else when you are gone,
and at Court.


Can your love endure delays? or shall business thee from hence remove? these
were your own Arguments; come, you shall show it me.


Nay, then I perceive what unworthy way your love would find; Ye Gods, are all
men false?


As I live, you shall stay; come, you ought to make me


Ah! As I live, I will not, I have sworn; do not pull me, I will not be damned,
I have sworn. --


As I live, I'll break your Bodkin then, a weeping Tyrant! Come; by this good
day, you shall be merciful.


Why, you will not be uncivil; you will not force me, will you? As I live, I
will not.


Nay, and you be wilful, I can be stubborn too.


Hang me, I'll call aloud, why Nan! nay, you may force me; But, As I live, I'll
do nothing.


A Pox upon you, are you earth'd? The Rogue has got her Neck-lace of Pearl; but
I hope he will leave the Rope to hang me in, how the pox came they so great? I
must have some trick to break his neck, else the young Rogue will work me out;
'tis an excellent old Lady, but I dare not call her so; yet would she were
young enough to bear, we might do some good for our heirs, by leaving such a
charitable brood behind; she's a woman after the first kind; 'tis but going in
to her and you may know her; then she'll oblige so readily, and gives with
greater thanks then others receive, takes it so kindly to be courted. I am now
to oblige her (as she calls it) by professing young Wilds love, and desiring an
assurance; she's sensible of his sufferings, which though it be false, and
beyond my Commission, yet the hopes of such a new young thing that has the
vogue of the Town, for handsomest, 'twill so tickle her age, and so blow up her
vanity, to have it said, He is in love with her, and so endear her to me for
being the means that the Parsons malice will be able to take no root; -- She
comes, I must not be seen. --


Give me that Letter I'll swear, you shall not read it.


Take it, I'll away, What time shall I call you, in the evening? there's a Play
at Court to night.


I would willingly be there, but your Ladies are so censorious, and malicious
to us young Ladies, in the Town, especially to me, because the Wits are pleased
to afford me a visit, or so; I could be content else to be seen at Court; Pray
what humour is the Queen of? the Captain of her Guard I know.


The Queen? Who's that knocks at the back-door. --


Smooth my Band, I know not, go down that way, and look you be not false; if
you should be false, I'll swear, I should spoil my self with weeping.


Farewell, in the evening I'll call you.


Who's there? Captain? Where have you been all this while; I might sit alone, I
see, for you, if I could not find conversation in Books.


Faith, Madam, friends newly come to Town engaged me, and my stay was civility
rather then desire, what Book's that?


I'll swear he was a Witch that writ it; for he speaks my thoughts as if he had
been within me; the Original, they say, was French.


Oh, I know it, 'tis the accomplished Woman, Your self, he means by this, while
you are your self.


Indeed, I confess, I am a great friend to conversation, if we could have it
without suspicion; But the world's so apt to judge, that 'tis a prejudice to
our honour now to salute a man.


Innocence, Madam, is above opinion, and your fame's too great to be shook with
whispers.


You are ever civil, and therefore welcome; pray, what news is there now in
Town? for I am reclus'd here; unless it be yours, I receive no visits; and I'll
swear, I charged the Wench to day not to let you in; I wonder she let you come.


Faith, Madam, if it had been my own business I should not have ventured so
boldly; But the necessity that forces me to come concerns my friend, against
whom if your mercy be now bounded with those strict ties of honour, and cold
thoughts which I have ever found guard your heart, My friend, a young and
handsome man, is lost, is lost in his prime, and falls like early blossoms; But
methinks you should not prove the envious frost to destroy this young man, this
delicate young man, that has whole bundles of Boys in his Breeches; yet if you
be cruel, he and they dye, as useless as open Arses gathered green.


Good Captain, out with the particular, what way can my charity assist him; you
know by experience I cannot be cruel, remember how I fetched you out of a
swooned, and laid you in my own bed.


That act preserved a life, that has always been laboured in your service; and
I dare say, your charity here will find as fruitful a gratitude.


But, I hope, he will not be so uncivil as you were; I'll swear, I could have
hanged you for that Rape, if I would have follow'd the Law; but I forgave you
upon condition you would do so again; but what's this young man you speak of?


Such is my love to you and him, that I cannot prefer mine own particular
before your contents; else I'd have poisoned him ere I'd have brought him to
your house.


Why, I pray?


Because, he's young, handsome, and sound parts; that I'm sure will ruin me
here.


His love may make all these beauties, else I have an honour will defend me
against him, were he as handsome as young Wild.


Why I, there it is; that one word has removed all my fears and jealousies with
a despair; for that's the man whose Love, Life and Fortune, lies at your feet;
and if you were single, by lawful ways he would hope to reach what now he
despairs of.


Let him not despair, Love is a powerful pleader, and youth and beauty will
assist him; and if his love be noble I can meet it; for there's none that
sacrifices more to friendship-love, then I.


My friends interest makes me rejoice at this; dare you trust me to say this to
him, though it be not usual, pray speak; Nay, you are so long still a resolving
to be kind: Remember, charity is as great a virtue as chastity, and greater, if
we will hear nature plead; for the one may make many Maids, the other can but
preserve one: But I know you will be persuaded, let be my importunity that
prevailed, shall I bring him hither one evening?


Why do you plead thus? pray be silent, and when you see him, tell him he has a
seat here, and I --


Out with it, what is't? shall he call you Mistress? and his Platonic?


Away, away; Me?


No niceness, is't a match?


Lord, would I were as worthy as willing (pray tell him so) he shall find me
one of the humblest Mistresses that ever he was pleased to honour with his
affections.


Dare you write this to him, and honour me with bearing it? I confess, I am
such a friend to friendship-love too that I would even bring him on my back to
a mid-nights meeting.


If you will stay here, I'll go in and write it. --


Madam, I forgot to ask your Ladyship one Question.


What was't?


There happened a business last night betwixt Mr. Wild and one Jolly, a Courtier
that brags extremely of your favour; I swear, if it had not been for friends
that interposed themselves there had been mischief, for Mr. Wild was extreme
zealous in your cause.


Such a Rascal I know; Villain, to bring my name upon the Stage, for a subject
of his quarrels, I'll have him cudgeld.


And I'll swear, he deserved it; for the quarrel ended in a Bet of a
Buck-hunting-nag, that sometime to day he would bring a Neck-lace and chain of
Pearl of yours (not stolen, but freely given) to witness his power.


Did the vain Rascal promise that?


Yes, but we laughed at it.


So you might; and, as I live, if the Neck-lace were come from stringing I'd
send them both to Mr. Wild, to wear as a favour, to assure him I am his, and to
put the vain slave out of countenance.


I marry, such a timely favour were worth a dozen Letters, to assure him of
your Love, and remove all the doubts the others discourse may put into his
head; and faith I'd send him the chain now, and in my Letter promise him the
Neck-lace, he'll deserve such a favour.


I'll go in and fetch it immediately, will you favour me to deliver it?


I'll wait upon your Ladyship.


I'll swear you shall not go in, you know I forswore


Hang me, I'll go in; does my Message deserve to wait an Answer at the Door?


I, but you'll be nought.


O, ne'er trust me if I break.


If you break some such forfeit you'll lose; Well, come in for once.


You are so suspicious.


I'll swear, I have reason for it, you are such another man.


IS he gone?


Yes, he's gone to the old Ladies, high with mischief.


Fare him well, easy Fool, how the Trout strove to be tickled, and how does
this Ring become me? Ha! they are


Besides the good custom of putting so much Gold in 'em, they bring such
conveniences along.


Why I, now I have but one to please; and if I please him, who dares offend me?
and that Wife's a fool that cannot make her Husband one.


Nay, I am absolutely of Opinion, it was fit for you to marry; but whether he
be a good Husband or no.


A pox of a good Husband, give me a wise one; they only make the secure
Cuckolds, the Cuckold in grain; for die a Husband that has wit but with an
Opinion thou art honest, and see who dares wash the colour out; Now your fool
changes with every drop, dotes with confidence in the Morning and at Night,
jealous even to Murder, and his Love (Lord help us) fades like my Gredaline
Petticoat.


This is a new Doctrine.


'Tis a truth, Wench, I have gained from my own Observations, and the Paradox
will be maintained. Take wise Men from Cuckolds, and fools to make them; for
your wise Man draws eyes and suspicion with his visit, and begets jealous
thoughts in the Husband, that his Wife may be overcome with his parts; when the
fool is welcome to both, pleases both, laughs with the one, and lies with the
other, and all without suspicion; I tell thee, a fool that has money is the
Man. The wits and the we's, which is a distinct Parreal of Wit bound by it
self, and to be sold at Wit-hall, or at the sign of the Kings-head in the
Butchery; these wise things will make twenty jealous, ere one Man a Cuckold;
when the family of fools will head a Parish ere they are suspected.


Well, I see one may live and learn; and if he be but as good at it now, you
are his own; as he was, when he was your Friends Friend, (as they call it) you
have got one of the best hiders of such a business in the Town; Lord, how he
would Sister you at a Play!


Faith, tis as he is used at first; if he get the bridle in's teeth he'll ride
to the Devil; but if thou be true, we'll make him amble ere we have done;
the Plot is here, and if it thrive I'll alter the Proverb, The Parson gets the
Children, to, the Parson Fathers them.


Any thing that may get Rule; I love to wear the Breeches.


So do we all, Wench; Empire? 'tis all our aim; and I'll put my ranting Roger
in a Cage but I'll tame him; he loves already, which is an excellent Ring in a
fools nose, and thou shalt hear him sing. --

Happy only is that Family, that shows
A Cock that's silent, and a Hen that crows.

Do this, I'll serve you for nothing; the impetuous slave had wont to taunt me
for beating of my Husband, and would sing that song in mockery of me.


In Revenge of which, thou (if thou wilt be faithful) shalt make him sing.

Happy is that Family that shows
A Cock that's silent, and a Hen that crows.

GO, you are a naughty Man; do you come hither to rail against an honest
Gentleman? I have heard how you fell out, you may be ashamed on it, a Man of
your Coat.


What? to speak Truth and perform my Duty? the world cries out you are a scabbed
sheep, and I come to tar you, that is, give you notice how your Fame suffers
in the opinion of the world.


My Fame, Sirrah? 'tis purer then thy Doctrine, get thee out of my house.


You uncivil fellow, do you come hither to tell my Lady of her faults, as if
her own Levite could not discern 'em?


My own Levite? I hope he's better bred then to tell me of my faults.


He finds work enough to correct his dearly beloved sinners.


And the Right Worshipful my Lady, and your self, they mend at leisure.


You are a saucy fellow, Sirrah, to call me Sinner in my own house; get you
gone with -- your Madam, I hear, and (Madam) I could advise, but I am loath to
speak; take heed, the world talks, and thus with dark sentences put my
Innocence into a fright, with you know what you know good Mistress Faithful;
so do I, and the world shall know too thou hast married a Whore.


Madam, a Whore?


No, Sir, 'tis not so well as a Madam-whore, 'tis a poor Whore, a Captains cast
Whore.


Now bless me, marry a Whore? I wonder any Man can endure those things, what
kind of Creatures are they?


They are like Ladies, but that they are handsomer; and though you take a
privilege to injure me, yet I would advise your Woman to tie up her Tongue,
and not abuse my Wife.


Fie, art thou not ashamed to call a Whore, Wife? Lord bless^ns, what will not
these men do when God leaves them! But for a Man of your Coat to cast himself
away upon a Whore, come Wench, let's go and leave him! I'll swear, 'tis
strange, the State doth not provide to have all Whores hanged or drowned.


I, and 'tis time they look into it, for they begin to spread so, that a man
can scarce find an honest woman in a Country; they say, they're voted down now,
'twas moved by that charitable Member that got an Order to have it but five
miles to Croyden, for ease of the Market-women.


I, I, 'tis a blessed Parliament.


That I have plaid the fool, is visible; this comes of rashness; something I
must do to set this right, or else she'll hate, and he'll laugh at me, I must not
lose him, and my revenge too, something that's mischief, I am resolved to do.


NOW is the Parsons Wife so contemptible?


No, but I'm so full of that resolution to dislike the sex, that I will allow
none honest, none handsome; I tell thee, we must beat down the price with our
selves, court none of 'em; but let their Maiden-heads and their Faces lie upon
their hands, till they're weary of the commodity, then they'll haunt us to find
proper Chap-men to deal for their ware.


I like this, but 'twil be long a doing, and it may be ever they be forced to
sell, our bank will be exhausted, and we shall not be able to purchase.


I, but we will keep a credit, and at three six months, thou and the Captain
shall be my Factors.


You had best have a partner, else such an undertaking would break a better
back then yours.


No partners in such commodities, your Factor that takes up Maiden-heads, 'tis
upon his own account still.


But what course will you take to purchase this trade with women?


I am resolved to put on their own silence and modesty, answer forsooth, swear
nothing but Gods nigs, and hold Arguments of their own cold Tenants, as if I
believed there were no true love below the line, then sigh when 'tis proper,
and with forced studies betray the enemy, who seeing my eye fixed on her, her
vanity thinks I am lost in admiration, calls and shakes me ere I wake out of my
design, and being collected, answer out of purpose. Love, divinest? yes, who is
it that is mortal and does not, or which amongst all the Senate of the Gods,
can gaze upon those eyes, and carry thence the power he brought? This will
start her.


Yes, and make her think thee mad.


Why that's my design; for then I start too, and rub my eyes, as if I waked,
then sigh and strangle a yawn, 'till I have wrung it into tears, with which I
rise, as if overcome with grief; then kiss her hands, and let fall those
witnesses of faith and love, bribed for my design. This takes; for who would
suspect such a Devil as Craft and Youth to live together?


But what kind of women do you think this will take?


All kind of women, those that think themselves handsome; it being probable,
concludes it real; and those that are handsome in their opinion, that small
number will believe it, because it agrees with their wishes.


And when you are gone, it may be they sigh, and their Love breaks out into
Paper, and what then?


What then? why then I'll laugh, and show thee their Letters, and teach the
world how easy 'tis to win any woman.


This is the way, and be sure to dislike all, but her you design for; be scarce
civil to any of the sex besides.


That's my meaning, But to her that I mean my prey, all her slave; she shall be
my Deity; and her opinion my religion.


And while you sad it thus to one, I'll talk freer then a privileged fool, and
swear as unreasonably as losing Gamesters, and abuse thee for thinking to
reclaim a woman by thy love, call them all bowls thrown that will run where
they will run, and Lovers like fools run after them, Crying, Rub, and fly, for
me; I believe none fair, none handsome, none honest, but the kind.


We must make the Captain of our Plot, lest he betray us; this will gain us
some revenge upon the Lovers to whom I grudge the Wenches, not that I believe
they're worth half the cost they pay for them; and we may talk, but 'tis not
our opinion can make them happier, or miserable.


Jolly, Will, where hast thou been? We had such sport with the Parson of our
Town, he's married this morning to Wanton.


Who? the Captains Wench? he's in a good humour then; as you love mirth, let's
find him, I have news to blow his rage with, and 'twill be mirth to us, to see
him divided betwixt the several causes of his anger, and lose himself in his
rage while he disputes, which is the greater; your opinion, Gentlemen; is this,
or his Wench, the greater loss?


What hast thou there? Pearl! they're false, I hope.


Why do you hope so?


Because I am thy friend, and would be loath to have thee hanged for stealing.


I will not swear they are honestly come by; but I'll be sworn, there's neither
force nor theft in it.


Prithee, speak out of Riddles, here's none but your Friends.


Faith, take it, you have heard the Captain brag of an old Lady, which he
thinks he keeps close in a Box; but I know where hangs a key can let a friend
in, or so: From her, my brace of worthies, whose wits are dulled with plenty,
this morning, with three good words, and four good deeds, I earned this toy.


The mirth yet, we will all share; I am in pain till we sind him, that we may
vex his wit that he presumes so much on.


Let's go, let's go, I will desire him to let me see his Wench; I will not
understand him if he says she's gone.


I'll beg of him, for old acquaintance sake, to let me see his old Lady.


Hark, I hear his voice. --


Which way?


The Game plays it self; begin with him, Ned, while we talk, as if we were
busy, we will take our Q.


When I put off my hat.


'sBlood, I thought you had been sunk, I have been hunting you these four
hours. Death, you might ha left word where you went; and not put me to hunt
like Tom Fool, 'tis well you are at London, where you know the way home.


Why in choler? We have been all this while searching you; come, this is put on
to divert me for claiming your promise, I must see the Wench.


You cannot a dad, a dad you cannot.


I did not think you would have refused such a kindness.


What's that?


Nothing, a toy, he refuses to show me his Wench.


The Devil he does; what have we been thus long Comrades, and had all things in
common, and must we now come to have common Wenches particular? I say, thou
shalt see her, and lye with her too, if thou wilt.


What? in thy dumps, Brother, call to thy aid thy two edged wit; the Captain
sad? 'tis prophetic, I'd as live have dreamt of Pearl, or the loss of my
teeth; yet if he be musty, I'll warrant thee, Ned, I'll help thee to a bout; I
know his Cloak, his long Cloak that hides her; I am acquainted with the Parson,
he shall befriend thee.


'Tis very well, Gentlemen; but none of you have seen her yet?


Yes, but we have, By thy self, by thy anger, which is now bigger then thou; By
chance we crossed her, coming from Church, leading in her hand the Parson, to
whom she swore she was this day married.


And our friendships were now guiding us to find thee out, to comfort thee
after the treachery of thy Levite.


Come, bear it like a man, there are more Wenches, What hast thou spied? --


His Pearl, I believe.


Gentlemen, I see you are merry; I'll leave you; I must go a little way, to
enquire about a business.


Has got a sore-eye, I think.


I will only ask one Question, and return.


No faith, stay, and be satisfied.


Do, good Brother, for I believe there is no question that you now would ask,
but here's an Oracle can resolve you.


Are those Pearl true?


Yes?


And did not you steal them?


No.


Nor he did not buy them with ready money; But took them upon Mortgage of
himself to an old Lady.


Dwelling at the sign of the Buck in Broad-street; are you satisfied, or must I
play the Oracle still?


No, no, I am satisfied.


Like Jealous men, that take their wives at it, are you not?


Well, very well, 'tis visible, I am abused on all hands; But Gentlemen, why
all against me?


To let you see your Wit's mortal, and not proof against all.


The Parson hath shot it through with a Jest.


Gentlemen, which of you, faith, had a hand in that?


Faith, none; only a general Joy, to find the Captain over reached.


But do you go sharers in the Profit, as well as in the Jest?


No faith, the Toy's mine own.


They are very fine, and you may afford a good penny worth, will you sell them?


Sell them? I, where's a Chapman?


Here, I'll purchase them.


Thou? No, no, I have barred thee, By and Mayn, for I am resolved not to fight
for them; that excludes thy purchase by the sword; and thy wench has proved
such a loss, in thy last Adventure of Wit, that I'm afraid, it will spoil thy
credit that way too.


Gentlemen, as a Friend, let me have the refusal, set your price.


He's serious.


Leave fooling.


Why if thou could buy them, what would thou do with them.


They're very fair Ones, let me see them, me-thinks they should match very well
with these.


These, which?


Which?


They are true.


Yes, But not earned with a pair of stolen verses, of, I was not born till now,
this my first night, and so forsooth; nor given as a Charm against lust.


What means all this?


What? why 'tis truth, and it means to shame the Divel; by this good day, he
repeats the same words with which I gathered these Pearls.


Why then we have two to laugh at.


And all Friends hereafter, let's fool altogether.


Gentlemen with the fine Wits, and my very good Friends do you, or you, or he
think I'll keep you Company, to make you laugh, but that I draw my honey from
you too?


Come, come, the Captain's in the right.


Yes, yes, the Captain knows it, and dares tell you, your Wit, your Fortune,
and his Face, are but my Ploughs; and I would have my fine Mounsieur know, who,
in spite of my Counsel, will be finer then his Mistress, and appears before
her so curiously built she dares not play with him for fear of spoiling him;
and to let him know the truth I speak, To his fair hands I present this letter,
but withal give him to understand, the Contents belong to me.


The Pearl are sent to me.


I deny that, unless you prove you sent me; for the Letter begins, Sir, this
noble Gentleman, the bearer, whom you are pleased to make the messenger of your
love, and so forth; And now you should do well to enquire for that noble
Gentleman, and take an Account of him how he has laid out your Love, and it
may be he will return you Pearl for it; and now Gentlemen, I dare propose a
peace, at least a Cessation of Wit (but what is defensive) till such time as
the Plot which is now in my head be effected, in which you have all your
shares.


So she knows I have not the Pearl, I am content.


She'll quickly find that, when she see's you come not to night, according to
my appointment, and hear's I have sold the Pearl.


Here then cease our Offensive War.


I'll give you Counsel worth two Ropes of Pearl.


But the Wench, how came the Parson to get her?


Faith 'tis hard to say which laboured most, he, or I, to make that Match, but
the knave did well; There it is (if you assist) I mean to lay the Scene of your
mirth to night, for I am not yet fully revenged upon the Rogue; for that I know
him miserable is nothing, till he believe so too; Wanton and I have laid the
Plot.


Do you hold Correspondence?


Correspondence? I tell thee the plots we laid to draw him on would make a
Comedy.


Sir, the Ladies stay Dinner.


And as we go I'll tell you all the story, and after Dinner, be free from all
Engagements, as we promised thee; and follow but your directions, I'll warrant
you mirth and a pretty Wench.


Agreed, any thing that breeds mirth is welcome.


Not a word at the Widows, let them go on quietly, and steal their Wedding too.


I heard a Bird sing, as if it were concluded amongst the Couples.


They have been long about it; my Couze is a girl deserves more haste to her
Bed, he has arrived there by Carriers Journeys.


But that I hate wooing, by this good day, I like your Aunt so well and her
humour she should scarce be thrown away upon Pale-face, that has sighed her
into a Wedding Ring, and will but double her Jointure.


Why I, thus it should be, pray let us make them the Seat of the war all
Dinner, and continue united and true among our selves, then we may defy all
foreign danger.


And with full Bowles let us crown this peace, and sing, Wit, without war, no
Mirth doth bring.


WAs she deaf to your report?


Yes, yes.


And ugly, her Abigail, she had her say too?


Yes, yes.


And do you walk here biting your Nails: do you think I'll be satisfied with
such a way of righting me?


What would have me do?


Have you no Gall? be abused and laughed at by a dull Captain, that a strict
Muster would turn Fool? you had Wit, and could rail, when I offended you, and
none so sudden, none so terrible, none so sure in his Revenge, when I
displease you.


Something I'll do.


Do it then, or I shall curse that e're I saw you Death, let the sign of my
Lady, an out of fashion whore, that has paid for sin, ever since yellow starch
and wheel Fardingales were cried down, let her Abuse me, and say nothing? if
this passes.


As Christ bless me, but I did (sweet heart:) and if it were not Church livings
are mortal, and they are always hitting me in the teeth with a man of your
Coat, she should find I am no Church man within, nor Mr. Parson but in my Coat;
Come to Dinner, and after Dinner I'll do something.


I shall do something will vex some body.


Will you please to come to Dinner? the Company stays.


Come, let's go in.


No, I must walk a little to digest this breakfast, the guests else will
wonder to see I am troubled.


Come, let this day pass in Mirth, spite of mischief, for lucks sake.


I'll follow you, and do what I can to be merry.


Why, he stands already.


Peace, let me alone, I'll make him Jostle, like the Millers Mare, and stand
like the Dun Cow, till thou may milk him.


Pray break him of his miserableness, it is one of the chief Exceptions I have
against him; he reared a puppy once, till it was ten days old, with three hap'
worth of milk, and then with his own Dagger slew it, and made me dress it:
blessed my self to see him eat it, and he bid me beg the Litter, and swore it was
sweeter and wholesomer then sucking Rabbits, or London Pigs, which he called
Belmens issue.


Hark, he calls me, we must humour him a little, he'll


YOu re welcome all, but especially Master Jolly; no reply, with I thank your
Ladyship.


I beseech you, Sir, let us never be better acquainted.


I shall endeavour, Lady, and fail in nothing that is in my


I rejoice at it, for the less Love, the better welcome still.


And as ever you had an ounce of Love for the Widow, be not Friends among your
selves.


Aunt, though we were at strife when we were alone, yet now we unite like a
Politic State against the common Enemy.


The common Enemy, what is that?


Women, and Lovers in general.


Nay, then we have a party Niece, claim; quickly, now is the time, according to
the Proverb; Keep a thing seven years, and then if thou hast no use on it
throw't away.


Agreed, let's challenge our Servants; by the Love they have profes'd, they
cannot in honour refuse to join with us; and see where they come. --


Sir, tis done.


Be secret and grave, I'll warrant our design will take as we can wish.


Sweet Mistress Pleasant.


Servant Sad.


Madam.


We are threatened to have a War waged against us, will you not second us?


With these youths we'll do enough, Madam.


I'll swear my Servant gave hit for hit this morning, as if he had been a
Master in the Noble Science of Wit.


Mine laid about him with spik and span new Arguments, not like the same Man,
his old sayings and Presidents laid by.


Thus armed, then, we'll stand and defy them.


Where's your Points, sure Aunt, this should be your Wedding day, for you have
taken the Man for better for worse.


No, Nephew, this will not prove the day that we shall either give or take a
Ring.


Hang me, if I know you can go back again with your Honour.


Or in Justice refuse him Liberty, that has served out his time; either marry
him or provide for him, for he is maimed in your service.


Why Servant Sad? you'll arm; my Nephew has thrown the first dart at you.


Hast hit, hast hit?


No, Captain, 'twas too wide.


Too wide? Marry he's an ill Marks-man that shoots wider then a Widow.


We are both in one hole, Captain; but I was loath to venture my Opinion, lest
her Ladyship should think I was angry; for I have a good mind to fall upon the
Widow.


You're a constant Man, Master Jolly; you have been in that mind this
twelve-months day.


You are in the right, Madam; she has it to show under his hand, but she will
not come in the List with him again; she threw him the last year.


Come, shall we eat Oysters? Who's there? call for some Wine, Master Jolly; you
are not warm yet, pray be free, you are at home.


Your Ladyship is merry.


You do not take it ill, to have me assure you you are at home here?


Such another invitation (though in jest) will take away Master Sadds stomach.


No, faith, Ned, though she should take him, it will not take away my stomach;
my Love is so fixed I may wish my wishes, but she shall never want them to wait
upon hers.


A Traitor, bind him, has pulled down a side; profess your Love thus public?


I by my faith, continue Master Sad, give it out you Love, and call it a new
Love, a Love never seen before, we'll all come to it as your Friends.


Gentlemen, still I Love; and if she to whom I thus sacrifice will not reward
it, yet the worst Malice can say, is, I was unfortunate and misfortunate; not
false made me so.


In what Chapter shall we find this written, and what verse? you should preach
with a Method, Master Sad.


Gentlemen, if ever he spoke so much dangerous sense before (either of Love or
Reason) hang me.


Madam, my Love is no news where you are; Know, your scorn has made it public;
and though it could gain no return from you; yet others have esteemed me for
the Faith and Constancy I have paid here.


Did not I foretell you of his Love? I foresaw this danger, shall I never live
to see Wit and Love dwell together?


I am but a poor Soldier, and yet never reached to the Honour of being a
Lover; yet from my own observations, Master Sad, take a Truth; 'tis a folly to
believe any Woman loves a Man for being constant to another, they dissemble
their hearts only; and hate a Man in Love worse then a Wencher.


And they have Reason; for if they have the grace to be kind, he that loves the
Sex may be theirs.


When your constant Lover, if a Woman have a mind to him, and be blessed with so
much grace to discover it; He, out of the noble mistake of Honour hates her for
it, and tells it perchance, and preaches Reason to her Passion, and cries,
miserable Beauty, to be so unfortunate as to inhabit in so much frailty.


This counsel makes her hate him more then she loved before; These are
troubles, those that love are subject to, while we look on and laugh, to see
both thus slav'd while we are free.


My prayers still shall be, Lord deliver me from Love.


'Tis Plague, Pestilence, Famine, Sword, and sometimes sudden death.


Yet I love, I must love, I will love, and I do love.


In the present tense.


No more of this Argument, for Loves sake.


By any means, Madam, give him leave to love, and you are resolved to walk tied
up in your own Arms, with your Love as visible in your Face, as your
Mistresses colours in your Hat; that any Porter at Charing-Cross may take you
like a Letter at the Carriers, and having read the superscription, deliver
Master Sad to the fair hands of Mistress or my Lady such a one, lying at the
sign of the hard heart.


And she, if she has wit (as I believe she hath) will scarce pay the Post for
the Packet.


Treason, how now Niece, join with the Enemy?


A health, Ned, what shall I call it?


To Master Sad, he needs it that avows himself a Lover.


Gentlemen, you have the Advantage, the Time, the Place, the Company; But we
may meet when your wits shall not have such advantage as my Love.


No more of Love, I am so sick on it.


By your Pardon, Mistress, I must not leave Love thus unguarded, I vow my self
his follower.


Much good may Love do him, give me a Glass of Wine here; Will, let them keep
company with the blind Boy, give us his Mother, and let them preach again; hear
that will, he has good luck, persuades me 'tis an ugly sin to lie with a
handsome Woman.


A pox upon my Nurse, she frighted me so when I was young with stories of the
Devil, I was almost fourteen ever I could prevail with Reasons to unbind my
Reason, it was so slav'd to Faith and Conscience; she made me believe Wine was
an evil spirit, and Fornication was like the Whore of Babylon, a fine face, but
a Dragon under her Pety-coats; and that made me have a mind to peep under all I
met since.


Fie, fie, for shame, do not talk so; are you not ashamed to glory in sin, as
if variety of women were none.


Madam, we do not glory in Fornication; and yet I thank God, I cannot live
without a woman.


Why, does your Ladyship think it a sin to lye with variety of handsome women?
if it be, would I were the wicked'st man in the company.


You have been marked for an indifferent sinner; that way Captain.


Who I? No faith, I was a fool, but and I were to begin again, I would not do
as I have done, I kept one; but if ever I keep another, Hang me; nor would I
advise any friend of mine to do it.


Why, I am sure 'tis a provident and safe way; a man may always be provided and
sound.


Fie upon this discourse.


Those considerations betrayed me, A pox; it is a dull sin to travel, like a
Carriers-horse, always one Road.


Fie, Captain, repent for shame, and Marry.


Your Ladyship would have said, Marry, and repent; No, though it be not the
greatest pleasure, yet it is better then marrying; for when I am weary of her,
my inconstancy is termed virtue, and I shall be said to turn to grace. Beware
of women, for better for worse; for our wicked nature, when her sport is
lawful, cloys straight; therefore, rather then Marry keep a Wench.


Faith, he is in the right, for 'tis the same thing in number and kind; and
then the sport is quickened, and made poignant with sin.


Yet 'tis a fault, faith, and I'll persuade all my friends from it; especially
here where any innovation is dangerous; 'twas the newness of the sin that made
me suffer in the opinion of my friends; and I was condemned by all sorts of
people; not that I sinned, but that I sinned no more.


Why I, had thou been wicked in fashion, and privily lain with every body,
their guilt would have made them protect thee; so that to be more wicked is to
be innocent at lest safe; A wicked world, Lord help us.


But being particular to her, and not in love, nor subject to it, taking an
Antidote every morning, before I venture into those infectious places where
Love Beauty dwells; this enraged the Maiden, Beauties of the Time, who thought
it a prejudice to their Beauties to see me careless, and securely pass by their
conquering eyes; my name being found amongst none of those that decked their
Triumphs. But from this 'tis easy to be safe, for their Pride will not let
them love, nor my leisure me. Then the old Ladies that pay for their pleasures;
they, upon the news, beheld me with their natural frowns, despairing when their
money could not prevail; and hated me when they heard that I for my pleasure
would pay as large as they.


Gentlemen, take warning; a Fee from every man; For by this day, there's
strange counsel in this confession.


Captain, you forget to pledge Mr. Careless; here, will you not drink a cup of
wine, who's there? Bring the Oysters.


Yes, Madam, if you please.


Proceed, Captain.


Fie, Mr. Wild, are you not ashamed to encourage him to this filthy discourse.


A glass of wine then; and I'll drink to all the new married Wives that grieve
to think, at what rate their Fathers purchase a little husband. These when they
lie thirsting for the thing they paid so dear for.


These, methinks, should be thy friends, and point thee out as a man for them.


Yes, till the faithful Nurse cries; Alas, Madam, he keeps such a one, he has
enough at home; then she swells with envy and rage against us both, calls my
Mistress ugly, common, unsafe; and me, a weak secure fool.


These are strange truths, Madam.


I, I, but these Oysters are a better jest.


But she's abused that will let such reason tame her desire, and a fool in
Loves School; else she would not be ignorant that variety is such a friend to
love, that he which rises a sunk coward from the Ladies bed would find new
fires at her Maids; nor ever yet did the man want fire, if the woman would
bring the fuel.


For Gods sake, leave this discourse.


The Captain has a mind we should eat no Oysters.


Aunt, we came to be merry, and we will be merry, and you shall stay it out;
Proceed Captain.


Fie Captain, I'm ashamed to hear you talk thus: Marry, then you will have a
better opinion of women.


Marry! yes, this knowledge will invite me, it is a good encouragement, is it
not think you? What is your opinion? were not these Marriages made in Heaven?
By this good day, all the world is mad, and makes haste to be fooled, but we
four: And I hope there's none of us believes there has any Marriages been made
in Heaven, since Adam.


By my faith, 'tis thought the Devil gave the Ring there to.


Nephew, I'll swear I'll be gone.


Hold her, Ned, she goes not yet; there's a fourth kind of women that concerns
her more then all the rest, Ecce signum -- She is man; (as they call it) but
for a Wencher no Argument prevails with your Widow; for she believes they have
spent too much that way, to be able to pay her due benevolence.


As I live, I'll be gone if you speak one word more of this uncivil subject.


Captain, let me kiss thy cheek, for that Widow; you understand this, Widow? I
say no more; Here Captain, here's to thee; as it goes down, A pox of care.


Jesus! Mr. Jolly, have you no observations of the Court, that are so affected
with this of the Town?


Faith, they say, there's good sport there, sometimes.


Mr. Jolly is afraid to let us partake of his knowledge.


No faith, Madam.


By this drink, if he stay till I have eaten a few more, I'll describe it.


What should I say, 'tis certain the Court is the bravest place in the Kingdom,
for sport, if it were well looked to, and the Game preserved fair; But as 'tis,
a man may sooner make a set in the Strand. And it will never be better, whilst
your divine Lovers inhabit there.


Let the King make me Master of the Game.


And admit us Laiety-lovers.


I would he would; for as 'tis, there's no hopes amongst the Ladies; besides,
'tis such an example to see a King and Queen good, Husband and Wife, that to be
kind will grow out of fashion.


Nay, that's not all, for the women grow malicious, because they are not
courted; nay, they bred all the last mischiefs, and called the Kings chastity a
neglect of them.


Thou art in the right; An Edward, or a Harry, with seven Queens in Buckram,
that Haught among the men, and Stroked the women, are the Monarchs they wish to
bow to; they love no tame Princes, but Lyons in the Forest.


Why, and those were properly called the Fathers of their People, that were
indeed akine to their Nobility; now they wear out their youth and beauty,
without hope of a monumental Ballad, or Trophy of a Lie-bell that shall
hereafter point at such a Lord, and cry that is the royal Son of such a one.


And these were the ways that made them powerful at home; for the City is a
kind of tame Beast; you may lead her by the horns any whither, if you but
tickle them in the ear sometimes. Queen Bess, of famous memory, had the trick
on it; and I have heard them say, In Eighty eighty, ever I was born, as well I
can remember, she rode to Tilbury on that bonny Beast, the Mayor.


I would I might counsel him; I'd so reform the Court.


Never too soon; for now, when a stranger comes in, and spies a Covey of a
Beauties, would make a Falconer unhood, before he can draw his Leash he is
warned that's a marked Partridge; and that, and every he, has by their example a
particular she.


By this light, the six fair Maids stand like the Workingdays in the Almanac;
one with A scored upon her breast, that is as much to say, I belong to such a
Lord; the next with B for an elder Brother; C for such a Knight; D possessed with
melancholy, and at her breast you may knock an hour ever you get an answer, and
then she'll tell you there's no lodging there; she has a constant fellow
Courtier that has taken up all her heart to his own use: in short, All are
disposed of, but the good Mother; and she comes in like the Sabbath, at the
weeks end; and I warrant her make any one rest that comes at her.


I marry; but if she were like the Jews Sabbath, it were somewhat; but this
looks like a Broken Commandment, that has had more work done upon her, then all
the week besides.


And what think you, is not this finely carried? you that are about the King,
counsel him, if he will have his sport fair, he must let the Game be free, as
it has been in former Ages; then a stranger that has wit, good means, and
handsome clothes, no sooner enters the privy Chamber, and beat about with three
graceful legs, but he spring a Mistress that danced as well as he, Sung better,
as free as fair; those at first sight could speak, for wit is always
acquainted: These fools must be akin ever they can speak; and now the friends
make the bargain, and they go to Bed ever they know why.


Faith, he's in the right, you shall have a Buzzard now hover and beat after a
pretty Wench, till she is so weary of him she's forced to take her Bed for
covert, and find less danger in being trussed then in flying.


And what becomes of all this pother, after he has made them sport for one
night, to see him towse the Quarry, he carries her into the Country, and there
they two fly at one another till they are weary.


And all this mischief comes of Love and Constancy; we shall never see better
days till there be an Act of Parliament against it; Enjoining Husband not to
Till their Wives, but change and lay them fallow.


A pox, the women will never consent to it; they'll be till'd to death first.


Gentlemen, you are very bold with the sex.


Faith, Madam, it is our care of them; why you see they are married at
fourteen, yield a Crop and a half, and then dye, 'tis merely their love that
destroys'em; for if they get a good husbandman, the poor things yield their
very hearts.


And do you blame their loves, Gentlemen?


No, not their love, but their discretion; let them love, and do, a Gods name;
but let them do with discretion.


But how will you amend this?


Instead of two Beds and a Physician; I'd have the State prescribe two Wives
and a Mistress.


Ho! it will never be granted; the State is made up of old men, and they find
work enough with one.


We will petition the lower House, there are young men, and (if it were but to
be factious) would pass it, if they thought the upper house would Cross it;
Besides, they ought to do it, Death! they provide against cutting down old
Trees, and preserving high-ways and Post-horses, and let pretty Wenches run to
decay?


Why may it not come within the Statute of Depopulation? As I live, the State
ought to take care of those Pretty creatures; Be you Judge, Madam; Is't not a
sad sight to see a rich young Beauty, with all her Innocence and Blossoms on,
subject to some rough rude Fellow, that ploughs her; and esteems and uses her
as a chattel, till she is so lean, a man may find as good Grass upon the
Common, where it may be she'll sit coughing with sunk Eyes, so weak that a Boy
(with a Dog) that can but whistle, may keep a score of them?


You are strangely charitable to Our Sex, on a sudden.


I know not what they are; but for my part, I'll be a Traitor ere I'll look on,
and see Beauty go thus to wrack; it is enough, custom has made us suffer them
to be enclosed; I am sure, they were created common, and for the use of Man,
and not intended to be subject to jealousy and choler, or to be bought or
sold, or let for term of lives or years, as they are now, or else sold at
Out-crys; Oh! Yes; who'll give most take her.


Why do not some of you, Excellent men, Marry, and mend all these Errors, by
your good Example?


Because we want Fortunes, to buy rich wives, or keep poor ones, and be loath
to get Beggars, or whores, as well as I love 'em.


Why, are all their Children so that have no fortune think you?


No, not all; I have heard of Whittington and his Cat, and others, that have
made Fortunes by strange means; But I scarce believe my Son would rise from
Hope, a half penny, and a Lambsskin; And the Wenches commonly having more Wit
Beauty then Money, foreseeing small Portions, grow sad, and read Romances, till
their Wit spy some unfortunate merit like their own, without money too, and
they two sigh after one another, till they grow mysterious in Colours, and
become a Proverb for their constancy; and when their Love has worn out the
cause, marry in the end a new Couple, then grown ashamed of the knowledge they
so long hunted, at length part, by consent, and vanish into Abigail and
Governor.


Well Gentlemen, Excuse me for this One time; and if ever I invite you to
Dinner again, punish me with such another discourse, in the mean time let's go
in and dine, meat stays for us.


Faith Madam, we were resolved to be merry; We have not met these three years
till to day, and at the Bear we meant to have dined; and since your Ladyship
would have Our Company, you must pardon Our humour; here Mistress Sad, here's
the Widows health to you.


NEphew, how do you dispose of your self this afternoon?


We have a design we must pursue, which will rid you of all this troublesome
Company; and we'll make no Excuse, because you peeped into our privacies to
day.


Your humble servant, Ladies; Gentlemen, we'll leave you to pursue your
fortunes.


Farewell Widow, may thou live unmarryed till thou run'st away with thy self.


No, no, When that day comes, Command the humblest of your Servants.


Farewell Aunt; sweet Mistress Pleasant, I wish you good fortune.


Farewell, farewell Gentlemen; Niece, now if we could be rid of these troublesome
Lovers too, we would go see a Play.


Rid of them? Why, they are but now in season; as I live,


I, but the world will talk, because they pretend; and then we shall be sure to
meet my Nephew there, and his wild Company, and they will laugh to see us
together.


Who will you have? Tym the Butler, or Formal your Gentleman Usher? I would
take Philip the foreman of the shop as soon.


Let's mask our selves, and take Secret, and go alone by water.


Yes, and follow her like one of my Aunts of the Suburbs; it is a good way to
know what you may yield in a Market; for I'll undertake, there are those shall
bid for you before the play will be done.


As I live, Madam, Mistress Pleasant is in the right; I had such a kindness
offered me once, and I came to a price with him in knavery; and hang me, if the
Rogue was not putting the earnest of his affection into my hand.


Let's go to the Glass-house then.


I'll go to a Play with my Servant, and so shall you; hang Opinion, and wee'le
go to the Glass-house afterwards; it is too hot to Sup early.


Pray Madam go, they say 'tis a fine Play, and a Knight writ it.


Pray let Secret prevail, I'll propose it to the Lovers; in the mean time go
you, and bid the Coachman make ready the Coach.


Alas, Madam, he's sick, poor fellow, and gone to bed, he could not wait at
Dinner.


Sick?


Why, see how all things work for the young men, either their Coach, or a Foot;
Mr. Constant, what think you of seeing a Play this afternoon? is it not too hot
to venture, this Infectious time?


Fie, Madam, there's no danger, the Bill decreased Twenty last week.


I swear, they say, 'tis a very good Play to day.


Shall we go, Niece?


Faith 'tis hot, and there's no body but we.


Does that hinder? pray Madam, grudge us not the favour of venturing your self
in Our company.


Come, leave this Ceremony, I'll go in, and put on my Mask; Secret shall bring
you yours;


No, I'll go, and put it on within.


BY this day, you have nettled the Widow.


The Captain neglected his dinner for his mirth, as if he had forgot to eat.


When did he oversee his drinking so?


Gentlemen, still it is my fortune to make your worships Merry.


As I live, Captain, I subscribe, and am content to hold my wit as Tenant to
thee; and to night I'll invite you to Supper, where it shall not be lawful to
speak till thou has victual'd thy Man of War.


Shall's be merry? what shall we have?


Half a score dishes of meat, choose them your self.


Provide me then the Chines fried, and the Salmon Calver'd, a Carp, and black
sauce, Red-Dear in the blood, and an Assembly of Woodcocks, and Jack-snipes, so
fat you would think they had their winding Sheets on; And upon these, as their
Pages, let me have wait your Sussex Wheat-Ear, with a Feather in his Cap; Over
all which let our Countrey-man, General Chyne of Beef, Command: I hate your
French pottage, that looks as the Cook maid had more hand in it then the Cook.


I'll promise you all this.


And let me alone to Cook the Fish.


You Cook it? No, no, I left an honest fellow in Town, when I went into Italy,
Seignior Ricardo Ligones, one of the ancient house of the Armenian
Ambassadors; if he be alive he shall be our Cook.


Is he so Excellent at it?


Excellent? You shall try, you shall try; Why, I tell you, I saw him once dress
a shooing-horn, and a Joiners apron, that the Company left Pheasant for it.


A Shooing-horn?


Yes, a shooing-horn; marry, there was Garlic in the Sauce.


Is this all you would have?


This, and a Bird of Paradise, to entertain the rest of the night, and let me
alone to Cook her.


A Bird of Paradise, what's that?


A Girl of Fifteen, smooth as Satin, White as her Sunday Apron, Plump, and of
the first down: I'll take her with her guts in her Belly, and warm her with a
Country dance or two, then pluck her, and lay her dry betwixt a couple of
sheets; There pour into her so much oil of Wit as will make her turn to a man,
stick into her heart three corns of whole love, to make her taste of what she
is doing, then having strewed a man all over her, shut the door, and leave us,
wee'le work our selves into such a Sauce as you can never surfeit on, so
Poignant and yet no Hogough; Take heed of a hogough, your Onion and woman make
the worst sauce; This shook together by an English Cook (for your French
seasoning spoils many a woman) and there's a Dish for a King.


For the first Part, I'll undertake.


But this for Supper; Capt. No more of this now; This afternoon, as you are
true to the Petticoat, observe your Instructions, and meet at Neds house in the
Evening.


We will not fail.


I must write to Wanton, to know how things stand at home, and to acquaint her
how we have thrived with the Old Lady to day.


Whither will you go to write?


To thy house, 'tis hard by, there's the Fleece.


Do, and in the mean time I'll go home and dispatch a little business, and meet
you.


Make haste then.


Where shall I meet you?


Whither shall we go till it be time to attend the design.


Let's go to Court for an hour.


Do, I'll meet you at the Queens side.


No, prithee, we are the Mounsieurs new come Over; and if we go fine they will
laugh at Us, and think we believe Our selves so; if not, then they will abuse
our clothes, and swear we went into France only to have our cloaks cut
shorter.


Will you go see a Play?


Do, and thither I'll come to you, if it be none of our Gentlemen Poets, that
excuse their writings with a Prologue that professes they are no Scholars.


On my word this is held the best penned of the time, and he has writ a very
good Play; By this Day, it was extremely applauded.


Does he write Plays by the day; Indeed a man would ha judged him a labouring
Poet.


A Labouring Poet? by this hand he's a Knight; upon my recommendation venture
to see it; hang me if you be not extremely well satisfied.


A Knight and write Plays? it may be, but 'tis strange to us; so they say
there are other Gentlemen Poets without Land or Latin; this was not ordinary;
prithee when was he knighted?


In the North; the last great knighting, when 'twas Gods great Mercy we were
not all Knights.


I'll swear, they say, there are Poets that have more Men in Liveries, then
Books in their studies.


And what think you, Gentlemen, are not these things to start a Man? I believe
'tis the first time you have found them lie at the sign of the Page, Foot-men
and gilded Coaches; They were wont to lodge at the thin Cloak, they and their
Muses made up the Family; And thence sent Scenes to their Patrons, like Boys
in at windows, and one would return with a Dublett, another with a pair of
Breeches, a third with a little ready Money; which, together with their credit
with a company, in three Terms you rarely saw a Poet repaired.


This truth no body denies.


Prithee let us resolve what we shall do, lest we meet with some of them: for
it seems they swarm, and I fear nothing like a Dedication, though it be but of
himself; For I must hear him say more then either I deserve or he believes; I
hate that in a Poet, they must be dull, or all upon all Subjects; so that they
can oblige none but their Muse.


I perceive by this you will not see the Play; what think you of going to Sims,
to Bowles, till I come?


Yes, if you will go to see that Comedy; but there is no reason we should pay
for our coming in, and Act too; like some whose interest in the Timber robs
them of their Reason, and they run as if they had stolen a Bias.


Resolve what you will do, I am contented.


Let's go walk in the Spring-garden.


I'll do it for Company, but I had as live be rid in the Horse-market, as walk
in that fools fair; where neither wit nor money is, nor sure to take up a
Wench; there's none but honest Women.


A pox on it, what should we do there? let's go and cross the Field to Pikes,
her kitchen is cool Winter and Summer.


I like that motion well, but we have no time, and I hate to do that business
by half; after Supper, if you will, we'll go and make a night on it.


Well, I must go write, therefore resolve of somewhat; shall I propose an
indifferent place where 'tis probable we shall all meet.


Yes.


Go you before to the Devil, and I'll make haste after.


Agreed, we shall be sure of good Wine there and in Fresco, for he is never
without Patent snow.


Patent snow, what doth that project hold?


Yes, faith, and now there is a Commission appointed for Toasts against the
next Winter.


Marry, they are wise, and fore-saw the Parliament, and were resolved their
Monopolies should be no grievance to the People.


Farewell, you will be sure to meet.


Yes, yes.


BId them ply him close and flatter him, and rail upon the old Lady and the
Captain; and, do you hear, give him some hints to begin the story of his life,
do it handsomely, and you shall see how the Sack will clip his tongue.


I warrant you, I'll fit him.


When he is in his discourse, leave him and come down into the Parlour, and
steal away his box with the false Rings that stands by his bed-side; I have all
his little Plate here already.


Make you haste, I'll warrant you I'll dress him.


SIR, the Lady Love-all passed by even now.


The Lady Love-all? which way went she.


To the rich Lady the Widow, where your Worship dined.


'Tis no matter; here, carry this Letter, and bring an answer to the Devil
quickly; and tell her we'll stay there till the time be fit for the design.


JAck, How goes the world? Bring us some bottles of the best Wine.


You shall, Sir; your Worship is welcome into England.


Why look you, who says a Drawer can say nothing, but anon, anon, Sir? score a
quart of Sack in the half-moon.


Your Worship is merry; but I'll fetch you that, Sir, shall speak Greek, and
make your Worship prophecy, you drank none such in your journey.


Do it then, and make a hole in this Angel thou may creep through; who is't
that peepes, a Fiddler? Bring him by the


A Taylor, an't like your Worship.


A Taylor? hast thou a stout Faith?


I have had, an't like your Worship; But now I am in despair.


Why then thou art damned; go, go home, and throw thy self into thine own Hell,
it is the next way to the other.


I hope your Worship is not displeased.


What dost do here? a Taylor without faith, dos't come to take measure of ours?


No, I come to speak with one Master Jolly, a Courtier, a very fine spoken
Gentleman, and a just Counter, but one of the worst pay-masters in the world.


As thou love me, let's keep him here till he comes, and make him valiant
with Sack that he may urge him till he beats


I'll charge him: Here drink, poor fellow, and stay in the next room till he
comes.


I thank your Worship, but I am fasting; and if it please your Worship to call
for a dozen of Manchets that I may eat a crust first, then I'll make bold with
a glass of your Sack.


Here, here, drink in the mean time, fetch him some bread.


Will your Worship have me drink all this vessel of Sack?


Yes, yes, off with it, 'twill do you no harm.


Why do you not take some Order with that Jolly to make him pay thee?


I have petitioned him often, but can do no good.


A pox upon him, petition him, his heart is hardened to ill, threaten to arrest
him; nothing but Sergeant can touch his Conscience.


Truly, Gentlemen, I have reason to be angry, for he uses me ill, when I ask
him for my money.


Where is Master Wild, and Master Careless?


I hear his voice.


Let the Coach stay. How now, who would he speak with?


Do not you know?


Yes, and be you Judge if the Rogue does not suffer deservedly; I have bid him
any time this twelve month but send his wife, and I'll pay her, and the Rogue
replies, no body shall lie with his wife but himself.


Nay, if you be such a one.


No more they shall not, I am but a poor man.


By this hand, he's drunk.


Nay then, I arrest you in mine own Name at his Majesties Suit.


As I live, thou shalt not beat him.


Beat him? I'll kiss him, I'll pay him, and carry him about with me, and be at
the charge of Sack to keep him in the humour.


Help, rescue, I'll have his body, no Bail shall serve.


Sir, yonder is a Gentleman would speak with you; I do not like his followers.


What are they, Bailiffs?


Little better.


Send him up alone, and stand you ready at the Stairs feet.


How can that be?


It is the Scrivener at the Corner, pick a Quarrel with him for coming into our
Company; the Drawers will be armed behind them, and we will so rout the
Rascals; take your swords, and let him sleep.


What Scrivener?


Cropp the Brownist, he that the Ballad was made on.


What Ballad?


Have not you heard of the Scriveners Wife that brought the Black-moore from
the holy Land, and made him a Brownist; and in pure charity lay with him, and
was delivered of a Mag-Pie; a pied Prophet; which when the elect saw, they
prophesied, if it lived, 'twould prove a great enemy to their Sect; for the
Mid-wife cried out, 'twas born a Bishop, with Tippet and white-sleeves; at
which the zealous Mother cried, Down with the Idol; so the Mid-wife and she in
pure devotion killed it.


Killed it? what became of them?


Why, they were taken and condemned, and suffered under a Catholic Sheriff,
that afflicted them with the Letany all the way from New-gate to the Gallows,
which in Rog'ry he made to be set up Altar-wise too, and hanged them without a
Psalm.


But how took they that breach of Privilege?


I know not, Gregory turned them off, and so they descended, and became
Brown-martyrs.


And is the husband at door now?


Yes, yes, but he's married again to a rich Widow at Wapping, a Wench of
another temper, one that you cannot please better then by abusing him; I always
pick quarrels with him, that she may reconcile us, the peace is always worth a
dinner, at least. Hark, I hear him. -- Save you Mr. Cropp, you are come in the
nick to pledge a health.


No, Sir, I have other business, shall I be paid my money, or no?


Yes.


Sir?


You asked whether you should be paid your money, or no, and I said, Yes.


Pray, Sir, be plain.


And be you so, Sir; how durst you come into this Room, and company, without
leave?


Sir, I have come into good Lords company, ever now.


It may be so, but you shall either fall upon your knees, and pledge this
health, or you come no more into Lords companies, no, By these hilts.


'Tis Idolatry; Do, martyr me, I will not kneel, nor join


Either kneel, or I'll tear thy Cloak, which by the age and looks, may be that
which was writ for in the time of the Primitive Church.


Pay me, and I'll wear a better; it would be honestlier done, then to abuse
this, and profane the Text; a Text that shows your Bishops in those days wore
no Lawn-sleeves; and you may be ashamed to protect him that will not pay his
debts; The cries of the Widow will come against you for it.


Remember, Sirrah, the dinners and suppers, fat Venison and good words, I was
fain to give you, Christening your Children still, by the way of Brokadge; count
that charge, and how often I have kept you from fining for Sheriff, and thou
art in my debt; then I am damned for speaking well of thee so often against my
conscience, which you never consider.


I am an honest man, Sir.


Then ushering your wife, and Mistress Ugly her daughter, to Plays and Masques
at Court; you think these courtesies deserve nothing in the hundred; 'tis true,
they made room for themselves with their dagger Elbows; and when Spider your
daughter laid about her with her breath, the Devil would not have sat near her.


You did not borrow my money with this language.


No, Sirrah; then I was fain to flatter you, and endure the familiarity of your
family, and hear (nay fain sometimes to join in) the lying praises of the holy
Sister that expired at Tyburn.


Do, abuse her, and be cursed; 'tis well known she died a


Ar't serious? By that light, I'll consent, and take it for an infinite
Obligation if thou wilt teach the rest of my Creditors that trick; 'twill save
me a world of labour; For, hang me if I know how to do it.


Well, Sir, since I see your resolution, I shall make it my business.


Prithee, let's be rid of this fool.


Fool? let him pay the fool his money, and he'll be gone.


No, Sir, not a farthing; 'twas my business to borrow it, and it shall be yours
to get it in again; nay, By this hand, I'll be feasted too, and have good
words; nay, thou shalt lend me more ever thou get'st this again.


I'll lay my Action upon you.


Your Action you Rogue, lay two.


Lay three for Battery; What have we here? a she Creditor too? who would she
speak with?


She looks as if she had trusted in her time.


Would you speak with any here, old Gentlewoman?


My business is to Mr. Jolly.


From your self, or are you but a Messenger?


My business, Sir, is from a Lady.


From a Lady? from what Lady, pray? Why so coy?


From a Lady in the Town.


Ho! ho! from a Lady in the Town; Is it possible I should have guest you came
from a Lady in the Suburbs, or some Country-madam, by your riding face?


I think we have routed the Rascals. Faithful? what makes thy gravity in a
Tavern?


Sport, it seems, for your saucy companions.


Ho, ho, Mull, ho; No Fury, Faithful.


'Tis well, Sir; my Lady presents her service to you, and hath sent you a
Letter, there's my business.


Prithee, who is her Lady?


The Lady Love-all.


Oh, oh, does she serve that old Lady? God help her.


God help her: Pray for your self, Sir, my Lady scorns your prayers.


Faithful, come hither; Prithee is thy Lady drunk?


Drunk, Sir?


I, drunk, or mad, she'd never writ this else; she requires me, here, to send
back by you the Pearl she gave me this morning; which sure she'd never do if
she were sober; for you know, I earned them hard.


I know? What do I know? you will not defame my Lady, will you?


By no means, this is by way of counsel; fie, give a thing, and take a thing;
if he did not perform, he shall come at night, and pay his scores.


'Tis well, Sir; is this your return for my Ladies Favours? shall I have the
Pearl, Sir?


No; and tell her 'tis the opinion of us all, he that opens her stinking Oyster
is worthy of the Pearl.


You are a foul-mouth'd fellow, Sirrah; and I shall live to see you load a
Gallows, when my Lady shall find the way to her own again.


If she miss, there are divers can direct her, you know; adieu, Faithful, do
you hear? steal privately down by the backdoor, lest some knavish Boy spy
thee, and call thine age, Baud.


Prithee, who is this thing?


'Tis my Ladies Waiting-woman, her Baud, her she Confesfor, her self at second
hand; her beginning was simple and below stairs, till her Lady finding her to
be a likely promising Baud; secret as the Key at her Girdle, obedient as her
thoughts, those virtues raised her from the flat Peti-coat, and Kercher, to the
Gorget and Bum-roll; and I remember 'twas good; sport at first, to see the
Wench perp! ext with her Metamorphosis; she since has been in love with all the
Family, and now sighs after the Levite; and if he forsake her too, I prophecy,
a Waiting-womans curse will fall upon her, to dye old, despised, poor, and out
of fashion.


Why do you not hang out a painted cloth? and take two pence a piece, and let
in all the tame fools at door, those sons of wonder that now gape, and think
you mad.


'Tis no matter what they think, madness is proper here; are not Taverns
Bacchus his Temples, the place of madness, Does not the sign of madness hang
out at the door?


While we within possess our joys and cups, as full of pleasure as weeping
Niobe's afflicted eyes were swelled with grief and tears; Blessing on the cause
that made our joys thus complete; for see Plutus in our Pockets, Mars by our
sides, Bacchus in our head, self-love in our hearts, and change of Virgins in
our Arms, Beauties whose eyes and hearts speak love and welcome; No rigid
thinkers, no niggard beauties that maliciously rake up their fire in green
sickness to preserve a spark that shall flame only in some dull day of
Marriage; let such swear and forswear, till (of the whole Parish) they love
each other least, whilst we wisely set out our cobwebs in the most perspicuous
places to catch these foolish flies.


He's in the right; dost think we retreated hither to beat a bargain for a
score of Sheep, or dispute the legality of Votes, and weigh the power of
Prerogative and Parliament, and club for concluding Sack, or read the Fathers
here, till we grow costive, like those that have worn their suffering Elbows
bare, to find a knowledge to perplex'em? A pox on such brain-breaking thoughts;
avoid them, and take with me into thy hand a glass of eternal Sack, and
prophecy the restoration of senses, and the fall of a Lover from grace, which
our dear friend, Mr. Jolly, will prove to whom the Lady Love-all (by Faithful
lately departed) sent for the Pearl you wot of.


But, I hope, he had the grace to keep them.


No, no; I'm a fool, I.


Was not my Boy here?


No, we saw him not.


A pox of the Rogue, he's grown so lasy.


Your Boy is come in just now, and called for the key of the back-door, there's
women with him.


Oh! that's well, 'tis Wanton; I sent for her, to laugh over the story of the
old Lady and her Pearl; where have you been all this while, Sirrah?


I could overtake the Coach, Sir, no sooner.


The Coach? what Coach?


The Lady Love-alls.


The Lady Love-alls? why what had you to do with her Coach?


I went to give her the Letter your worship sent her.


The Letter? what Letter?


That your worship gave me.


That I writ, at Neds house, to Wanton?


The Letter you gave me, Sir, was directed to the Lady Love-all, and she
stormed like a mad-woman at the reading of it.


Why, thou wilt not beat the Boy for thy own fault? what Letter was it?


'Twas enough, only a relation of the Pearl, wherein she finds her self
sufficiently abused to Wanton.


Now, Gentlemen, you have two to laugh at.


A pox of fooling, let's resolve what to do, there's no denying, for she has
all the particulars under my hand.


You must resolve of something, for she's coming, and stayed only till the
back-door was opened.


How did she know I was here?


Your worship bad me tell her, you would stay here for her.


How came this mistake?


Why, the Devil ought us a shame it seems. You know I went home to give Wanton
an account how we advanced in our design; and when I was writing the
superscription, I remember the Boy came in and told me the Lady Love-all passed
by.


And so, it seems, you in pure mistake directed your Letter to her.


Well, resolve what you'll do with her, when she comes.


Faith, bear it like men, 'tis but an old Lady lost; lets resolve to defy her,
we are sure of our Pearl; but lest we prolong the war, take the first occasion
you can all to avoid the room; when she's alone, I'll try whether she'll listen
to a composition.


Have you no friends in the close Committee?


Yes, yes, I am an Essex man.


Then get some of them to move, it may be voted no Letter.


I, I; and after 'tis voted no Letter, then vote it false, scandalous and
illegal, and that is in it; they have a president for it in the Danish packet,
which they took from a foolish fellow, who presuming upon the Law of Nations,
came upon an Embassy to the King without an Order, or Pass from both houses.


Hark, I hear her coming.


Sir, I received a Letter, but by what accident I know not; for I believe it
was not intended me, though the contents concern me.


Madam, 'tis too late to deny it; is it peace or war you bring? without
dispute, if war, I hang out my defiance; if peace, I yield my weapon into your
hands.


Are you all unworthy? your whole sex falsehood? is it not possible to oblige a
man to be loyal? this is such a treachery no age can match; apply your self
with youth and wit to gain a Ladies love and friendship only to betray it? was
it not enough you commanded my fortune, but you must wrack my honour too, and
instead of being grateful for that charity which still assisted your wants,
strive to pay men with injuries, and attempt to make the world believe I pay to
lose my fame? and then make me the


Yea, Sir; and you that had such a ready wit to proclaim my Lady, Whore and me
Baud, I hope to see you load a Gallows for it.


Once again, is it peace or war?


Peace? I'll have thy blood first, Dog; where's my Pearl? -- You ought to right
me, Sir, in this particular; it was to you I


Madam, I sent not for them.


No more words; I have them, I earned them, and you paid them.


You are a foul-mouth'd fellow, Sirrah.


Peace, Wench, I scorn their slander, it cannot shake my honour; 'tis too
weighty and too fixed for their calumny.


I'll be sworn for my part on it, I think it is a great honour; I am sure I had
as much as I could carry away in ten nights, and yet there was no miss on it.


You? I think so; there's no mark of my work, you see, and yet I came after
thee, and brought away loads would have sunk a Sedan-man.


By this relation she should be a woman of a great fame.


Let that consideration, with her condition, and her age, move some reverence,
at least to what she was; Madam, I am sorry I cannot serve you in this
particular.


I see all your mean baseness, pursue your scorn; Come, let's go, Wench, I
shall find some to right my fame; and though I have lost my opinion, I have
gained a knowledge how to distinguish of Love hereafter; and I shall scorn you
and all your Sex, that have not Soul enough to value a noble Friendship.


Pray, Madam, let me speak with you.


We'll have no whispering; I said it, and I'll maintain it with my sword.


Sir, there's one without would speak with you?


With me?


No, Sir, with Master Wild.


Madam, I'll wait upon you presently.


Madam, I know my Company is displeasing to you, therefore I'll take my leave;
Drawer, show me another Room?


Oh Faithful, Faithful; I am most miserably abused, and can find no way to my
Revenge.


Madam, I'll give them Rats-bane, and speedily too, ere they can tell; for that
Rascal the Captain has a Tongue else, will proclaim you, and undo your Fame
for ever.


I, I, my Fame, my Fame, Faithful; and if it were not for mine Honour, (which
I have kept unstained to this minute) I would not care.


This it is; you will still set your affection upon every young thing; I could
but tell you on it.


Who could have suspected they would have been so false in their Loves to me
that have been so faithful to them. -- Honest Friend, where is Master Wild?


The other Gentlemen carried him away with them?


Are they all gone then?


Yes, by this hand; These Gentlemen are quickly satisfied; what an ugly Whore
they have got! how she states it!


Come, let's go Wench.


Mistress, who pays the reckoning?


What says he?


He asks me, who pays the reckoning?


Who pays the reckoning? why, what have we to do with the reckoning?


Shut the door, Dick, we'll have the reckoning before you go.


Why, good-man sawce-box, you will not make my Lady pay for their reckoning,
will you?


My Lady? a pox of her Title, she'd need of something to make her pass.


What do you say, Sirrah?


I say, the Gentlemen paid well for their sport; and I know no reason why we
should lose our reckoning.


What do you take me for, my Friend?


In troth, I take you for nothing; but I would be loath to take you for that
use I think they made shift with you for.


Madam, this is that Rascally Captains plot.


Patience, Patience, oh for a bite at the slaves heart. Friend, mistake me not,
my name is Love-all, a Lady; send one along with me and you shall have your
money.


You must pardon me, Madam, I am but a Servant; if you be a Lady pray sit in an
Inner Room, and send home your Woman for the money; The sum is six pounds, and
be pleased to remember the Waiters.


Go Faithful, go fetch the money; Oh Revenge, Revenge: shall I lose my Honour,
and have no Revenge.


BY all that a longing Bride hopes for, which I am not, I am better pleased
with this Revenge then mine own plot, which takes as I could wish; I have so
anointed my high Priests with Sack, that he would have confuted Baal's Priest;
and now he does so slumber in his Ale, and calls to bed already, swears the
Sun is set.


Faith, Wench, her abusing of me made me leave her for the Reckoning.


Yes, faith, they have treated her upsey Whore lain with her, told, and then
pawned her.


Yes, yes, you are fine things; I wonder Women, can endure you; for me, I
expect you worse, and am armed for it.


Faith let's send and release her, the jest is gone far enough; as I live, I
pity her.


Pity her? hang her, and rid the Country of her, she is a thing wears out her
limbs as fast as her clothes, one that never goes to bed at all, nor sleeps
in a whole skin, but is taken to pieces like a Motion, as if she were too long;
she should be hanged for offering to be a Whore.


As I live, she is in the right; I peeped once to see what she did before she
went to bed; By this light, her Maids were dissecting her; and when they had
done, they brought some of her to bed, and the rest they either pined or hung
up, and so she lay dismembered till Morning; in which time, her Chamber was
strewed all over, like an Anatomy School.


And when she travels any where she is transported with as great a care, and
fear of spoiling, as a Jugglers Motion, when he removes from Fair to Fair.


She is a right broken Gamester, who, though she lacks wherewithal to play,
yet loves to be looking on.


He is awake, and calls for you impatiently, he would fain be in Bed, the
Company is all gone.


Are you instructed?


Let me alone, I'll warrant you for my part.


Farewell then, you are all ready; who plays Master Constable?


I, I; and Ned Jolly the sumner.


Farewell, farewell then.


It is a delicate wench.


She has excellent flesh, and a fine face; by this light, we Captain from his
reign here.


I like her shrewdly; I hate a wench that is all Whore and no Company; This is
a Comedy all day, and a Fair at night.


I hope to exalt the Parsons horn here.


And what think you? is it not a sweet sin, this lying with another mans Wife?


Is Jolly come


No, but he'll be here instantly.


Is he a bed?


Yes, yes, and he sleeps as if he had been put to bed by his Sexton, with dust
to dust, and ashes to ashes.


And we'll wake him with that shall be as terrible to him as the latter day.


Let him sleep a while that he may be fresh, else the Jest is spoiled; for it
is his sense of his disgrace must work my Ends.


I'll go home then, and get supper ready, and expect you.


Do, Our Scene lies here; Who's there, Jolly?


Yes.


Are you fitted?


Yes, I have got the Black-fryers Music; I was fain to stay till the last Act;
and who do you think I saw there?


I know not.


Guess.


Prithee, I cannot guess.


Your Aunt and Mistress Pleasant, and trusty Secret.


What man?


The Lovers only, so close in a Box!


It will be a match, and there's an End; prithee let them go to it; what is't to
Us, let's mind our business now, and think on them hereafter.


A pox upon them for a couple of Stauk-hounds; have they killed at last? Why,
this is Fools fortune; it would be long enough ere one that has wit got such a
wife.


No more of this now; have you borrowed the watchmens Coats?


Yes, and Bills, Beards, and Constables staff, and Lanthorn; and let me alone
to fit him, for the Summer; But when this is done I expect my Fee, a Tithe
Night at least; Wanton, I will lie with thee for thy Roguery; what are you
dumb, you will not refuse me, I hope?


Not, if I thought thou desired it; but I hate to have it desired
indifferently, and but so so done neither when 'tis done.


I hope you will not disgrace my work, will you?


Faith, they say thy pleasure lies in thy Tongue; and therefore, Though I do
not give thee leave to lie with me, yet I will give thee as good a thing that
will please thee as well.


Some Roguery I expected.


No Faith, I am serious; and because I will please you both, Master Wild shall
lie here, and you shall have leave to say you do, which will please you as
well.


Faith, and my part is some pleasure, else, I have loved, enjoyed, and told, is
mistook.


I, but never to love, seldom enjoy, and always tell? Faugh, it stinks, and
stains worse then Shoreditch dirt, and women hate and dread men for it; Why, I
that am a whore professed cannot see you, he digest it, though it be my Profit
and Interest. For to be a private whore in this Town starves in the nest like
young Birds when the old one's killed.


Excellent Girl, 'tis too true Jolly; your tongue has kept, many a woman
honest.


Faith, 'tis a truth, this I shall say, you may all better your pleasures by,
if you will observe it; I dare say, the fear of telling keeps more women honest
then Bridewell Hemp; And were you wise men, and true Lovers of liberty, now
were the time to bring wenching to that perfection no age could ever have
hoped; now you may sow such seed of pleasure, you may be prayed for hereafter;
Now, in this Age of zeal and Ignorance, would I have you four, in old clothes,
and demure looks, present a Petition to both Houses, and say, you are men
touched in Conscience for your share in that wicked ness which is known to
their worships by the pleasure of Adultery, and desire it may be death, and
that a Law may be passed to that purpose; How the women will pray for you, and
at their own charges rear Statu's in memory of their Benefactors; the young and
kind would then haunt your Chambers, Pray, and present you, and Court the
Sanguine youth, for the sweet sin secured by such a Law; None would lose an
Occasion, nor churlishly oppose kind Nature, nor refuse to listen to her
summons, when youth and Passion calls for those forbidden sweets; when such
security as your lives are at stake, who would fear to trust; with this Law all
Oaths and Protestations are cancelled; Letters and Bawds would grow useless
too; By instinct the Kind will find the Kind; and having one nature become of
one mind; Now we lose an Age, to observe and know a mans humour, ere we dare
trust him; But get this Law, then 'tis, like and enjoy; and whereas now, with
expense of time and Fortune, you may glean some one Mistress amongst your
neighbours wives, you shall reap women whole Armfulls as in the Common field;
there is one small Town, wise only in this Law; and I have heard them say,
that know it well, There has been but one Execution this hundred years; yet the
same party searched seven years, and could not find an honest woman in the
Town.


An Excellent Plot, let us about it; Ink and Paper, dear Wanton, we will draw
the Petition presently.


Will Master Jolly consent too? You must not then, as soon as a handsome woman
is named, smile, and stroke your Beard, tell him that is next you, you have
lain with her; such a lie is as dangerous as a truth, and 'twere but Justice
to have thee hanged for a sin thou never commitedst, for having defamed so many
women.


If all those Liars were hanged, I believe the scale would weigh down the
guilty.


One Rogue hanged, for Example, would make a thousand kind Girls: If it take it
shall be called my Law, Wanton's Law; Then we may go in Pettycoats again, for
women grew imperious and wore the Breeches, only to fright the poor cuckolds,
make the Fools digest their Horns -- Are you all ready, shall I open the door?


Yes.


I'll expect you at my house.


We'll come, we'll come.


So, knock louder.


Who's there? what would you have?


Here's his Majesties Watch, and Master Constables Worship must come in; We
have a warrant from the Lords to search for a Delinquent.


You come not here, I'll answer your warrant to morrow.


Break open the door.


I would you durst.


Lord! Dear what shall we do?


Why, sweet, I'll warrant you, art thou not my wife, my Rib, bone of my bone?
I'll suffer any thing ere one hair of thee shall be touched.


Hark, they break open the door.


They dare not; why dost thou tremble so? alas, sweet Innocence, how it shakes?


Break open the door.


I'll complain to the Bishop of this Insolence.


They come, they come, Lamb.


No matter sweet; They dare not touch thee; what would


Read our Warrant, and our business will excuse us? do you know any such person
as you find there?


Yes, Sir, but not by this name; such a woman is my wife, and no Lindabrides;
we were married to day, and I'll justify her my wife the next Court day; you
have your answer, and may be gone.


We must take no notice of such Excuses now; if she be your wife, make it
appear in Court, and she will be delivered unto you.


If she be my wife Sir? I have wedded her and Bedded her, what other Ceremonies
would you have? Be not afraid, sweet heart.


Sir, We can do no less then Execute our Warrant; we are but Servants; And,
Master Constable, I charge you in the Kings Name to do your Duty; behold the
body of the Delinquent.


Touch her that dares; I'll put my Dagger in him, fear


Help, my dearest, will you let me be hauled thus?


Villains, what will you do? Murder, Rape.


Yes, yes, 'tis likely; I look like a Ravisher.


Hold him, and wee'le do well enough with her.


What have we here, an old woman?


Let me go, slaves and Murderers.


Let him go.


Do any of you know this woman? this is not she we looked for.


No? Rascal, that mistake shall not excuse you.


It is old Goodman what do ye call him? his wife.


Hold the Candle, and let's see her face.


What have were here, Adultery? take them both, here will be new matter.


Master Constable, a little Argument will persuade you to believe I am grossly
abused; sure this does not look like a piece that a man would sin to enjoy, let
that then move your Pity, and care of my Reputation; consider my calling, and
do not bring me to a public shame for what you're sure I am not guilty of, but
by plot of some Villains.


Dear, will you disclaim me now?


Oh, Impudence!


Master Constable, do your duty; take them both away, as you will answer it.


Give him his Cassock, to cover him.


Why Gentlemen, whither will you carry me?


To the next Justice, I think it is Master Wild, he is newly come from travel,
it will be a good way, Neighbours, to express our Respects to him.


No faith, Gentlemen, even go the next way to Tybourn, and dispatch the
business without Ceremony, for yee'll utterly disgrace me; this is that damned
Captain; My wife is abroad too, I fear she is of the Plot.


Come, away with'em.


Whither will they lead us, Dear?


Oh, oh, Impudence! Gentlemen, do not lead us together I beseech you.


Come, come, lead them together, no Ceremony's; your faults are both alike.


YOu had best brag now, and use me like my Lady what'st ye call; But if you do
I care not.


Come, you're a Fool, I'll be a faithful Friend, and make good conditions for
thee before thy husband be quit.


You must do it now or never.


Hark, hark, I hear them -- What's the news?


We have brought a Couple of Delinquents before your Worship, they have
committed a very foul fault.


And we have brought the fault along too, that your Worship may see it, you
will be the better able to judge of the offenders.


Ha! What do I see? my wife in Master Justices Lap?


What has the poor fellow done?


Why Madam, he has been taken a Bed with this woman, another mans wife.


In bed with her? and do you raise him to punish him? Master Constable, if you
would afflict him, Command them to lie together again; Is not the man mad?


This is fine Roguery, I find who rules the roast.


Well, to the business; you say, he was taken in bed with another mans wife.


Yes, and't like your Worship.


Make his Mittimus to the Hole at New-gate.


Sure I have seen this Fellows face. -- Friend, have I never seen your face
before?


If I mistake not, I have seen one very like your Ladyships too, she was a
Captains cast-whore in the Town. I shall have a time to be revenged.


How now, Sirrah? are you threatening? away with him.


I'll fetch a stronger Watch, Sir, and return presently.


Do, Master Constable, and give the poor Woman something, and set her free; for
I dare say 'twas his wickedness, she looks like one that ne'er thought on such
a thing.


God bless your Worship, I am innocent; he never left making Love till I
consented.


Oh miserable! miserable!


How now, what's the news here? my honoured Friend, and Master Parson, what
makes you here at this time of night? Why I should have thought this a time to
have envied you for your fair Brides embraces, do you give these favours? are
these your Bride-laces? It's a new way.


Is it new to you?


How now Captain?


Wanton, is this your plot to endear your Husband to you?


No, 'tis thy plot, poor beaten Captain, but I shall be revenged.


Yes, faith, it was my plot, and I glory in it, to undermine my Machiavell,
which so greedily swallowed that sweet bait that had this hook.


'Tis well.


But my anger ends not here. Remember the base language you gave me, Son of a
thousand Fathers, Captain of a tame band, and one that got my living by the
long staffe-speeches; for which, and thy former Treacheries, I'll ruin thee,
Slave; I'll have no more Mercy on thee, then old women on blind puppies; I'll
bring you to your Commendations in Latin Epistles again, nor leave thee any
thing to live on, no, not Bread, but what thou earn'st by raking Gentlewomens
names in Anagrams; and Master Justice, if ever you'll oblige me, stand to me
now, that I may procure the whipping of him from the Reverend Bench.


I am undone.


I can do nothing but Justice, you must excuse me; I shall only make it appear
how fit it is to punish this kind of sin in that Coat in time, and to crush
such serpents in the shells.


Mercy, Oh Mercy!


Officers, away with him.


No Mercy?


Yes, upon Conditions there may be some Mercy.


And these they are -- let the watch stay in the the other Room. -- First, your
Wife shall have her liberty, and you yours, as she reports of you; and when you
bring her with you, you shall be welcome; then you shall not be jealous, that's
another point.


That he shall have a Cure for --


Yes, yes, I'll apply something to his Eyes shall cure him of his doubt.


Then you shall ask the Captain pardon and your Wife; to him you shall allow
half your Parsonage to maintain her; The Deeds are ready within; if you'll
sign them, and deliver your Wife to our use, she shall discharge you.


I submit, Sir, But I hope your Worship will desire no witness to the use of my
Wife; The Sumner and the Watch too; I hope your Worship will enjoin them
silence.


You shall not need to fear, I'll have a Care of your Credit;


Ha! abused?


Nay, no flinching, if you do, I betake me to Master Sumner again.


And I become severe Master Constable in a trice.


No, no, I submit, and I hope we are all Friends; I'm sure I have the hardest
part, to forgive.


And I, before all this Company, promise to forget and forgive thee, and am
content to take thee again for my dear and mortal Husband, now you are tame;
but you must see you do so no more, and give your self to be blind; when it is
not fit for you to see; and practise to be deaf; and learn to sleep in time,
and find business to call you away when Gentlemen come that would be private.


Why so, now things are as they should be; and when you will obey, you shall
command: But when you would be imperious, then I betake me to my Constables
Staff 'till you subscribe. Cedunt Armis Togae; and if it be false Latin,
Parson, you must pardon that too.


By this hand, I must have my Tythe-night with thee; thou art such a wag; say,
when? when wilt thou give me leave? ha!


Never.


Never?


No, never.


D' ye hear, I am none of them that work for Charity; either resolve to pay, or
I kick down all my Milk again.


What would you have?


Give me leave to lie with you.


No indeed.


No?


No; but rather then quarrel, as I said before, I will give you leave to say
you have lain with me.


I am of opinion she owes you nothing now, so Mistress Wanton, take your
Husband; and to remove all doubts, this night I'll be at the charge of a Wed
ding supper.


This is better then Newgate hole yet, Bridewell Hemp, brown bread and
whip-cord.


BY my troth, is was a good Play.


And I am glad I am come home, for I am en'e as weary with this walking; For
Gods sake whereabouts does the pleasure of walking lie? I swear, I have often
sought it till I was weary, and yet I could ne'er find it.


What do these Halberds at your door?


Halberds, where?


There, at your Lodging.


Friend, what would those Watch-men have?


The house is shut up for the sickness this afternoon.


The sickness?


Yes forsooth, there's a Coach-man dead full of the Tokens.


Where is the Officer?


He is gone to seek the Lady of the House, and some other Company that dined
here yesterday, to bring her in, or carry her to the Pest-house.


Ha! What shall we do, Niece?


If you please to command our Lodging.


It will be too much trouble.


Let's go to Love-all's.


Not I, by my Faith; it is scarce for our Credits to let her come to us.


Why? is she nought?


Faith, Madam, her Reputation is not good.


But what shall we do then?


Dare you adventure to oblige us?


Thank you Sir, We'll go to my Nephews at Covent-Garden; he may shift among his
acquaintance.


It was well thought on, the Piazza is hard by too.


We'll borrow your Coach thither, and we'll send it you back again strait.


We'll wait upon you, Madam.


This accident troubles me; I am heartily sorry for the poor Fellow.


I am sorry too; but pray, Aunt, let us not forget our selves in our grief; I
am not ambitious of a Red-cross upon the door.


Mistress Pleasant is in the right; for if you stay the Officers will put you
in.


We shall trouble you, Sir, for your Coach.


I Am reconciled; and will no longer be an uncharitable Church-man; I think
this sack is a cooler.


What? does it make you to see your error?


Yes, and consider my man of war; nor will I again dispute his Letters of Mart,
nor call them Passes for Pirates; I am free.


And welcome, any thing but anger is sufferable, and all is jest when you
laugh; and I will hug thee for abusing me with thy eyes in their scabbards; but
when you rail with drawn eyes, red and naked, threatening a Levites second
revenge to all that touches your Concubine, then I betake me to a
dark-lanthorn, and a Constables-staff, and by help of these Fathers whom I cite
I prove my Text, women that are kind ought to be free.


But Captain, is it not lawful for us Shepherds to reclaim them?


A mere mistake; for sin like the Sea may be turned out, but will ne'er grow
less; and though you should drain this Mistress Doll, yet the Whore will find a
place, and perhaps overflow some Maid, till then honest; and so you prove the
author of a new sin, and the defiler of a pure Temple; therefore I say, while
you live, let the Whore alone till she wears out; nor is it safe to vamp them,
as you shall find, read Ball the first and the second.


No more discourse. Strike up Fiddlers.


See, who's that knocks?


Sir, 'tis Mistress Pleasant, and the two Gentlemen that dined there to day.


My Aunt, and Mistress Pleasant.


What a pox makes them abroad at this time of night?


It may be, they have been a wenching.


Sir, they were upon alighting out of the Coach when I came up.


Quickly, Mrs. Wanton, you and your husband to bed, there's the Key; Mr.
Parson, you know the way to the old Chamber, and to it quickly, all is friends
now.


Sweet heart, we will steal away.


The Devil on them, they have spoiled our mirth.


Jack, get you and your company down the back-way into the Kitchen, and stay
there till we see what this Visit means.


Means! What should it mean? it is nothing but the mischievous Nature all
honest Women are endued with, and naturally given to spoil sport: I wonder what
Fart blew them hither to night.


Nay, have a little patience, Captain; you and Mr. Jolly must sit quietly a
while within, till we know the cause.


It is but deferring our mirth for an hour, or so. Servant. Sir, here's my
Lady.


Quickly remove those things there: Captain, step in there. --


Nephew, do you not wonder to see me here, at this time of night?


I know it is not ordinary, therefore I believe 'tis some design: what is it,
Mrs. Pleasant? Shall I make one?


As I live, Sir, pure necessity; neither mirth nor kindness hath begot this
Visit.


What, is your Coach broke?


Faith, Nephew, the truth is, the Sickness is in my house, and my Coach-man
died since Dinner.


The Sickness?


I, as I live, we have been walking since the Play; and when we came home we
found the Watch at the door, and the house shut up.


And a Constable gone in search of all those that dined there to day, with
order to furnish us lodgings in the Pest-house.


Are you not afraid to receive us?


As I live, the accident troubles me; and I am sorry such a misfortune should
beget me this favour; and I could wish my self free from the honour, if the
cause were removed too.


As I live, Mr. Wild, I must have been forced to have lain with my servant to
night, if you had not received me.


If I thought so, I would carry you out in my arms, I am so much Mr. Constant's
friend.


But are you more his friend then mine, Mr. Wild?


No, but I presume by this he has gained so much interest as he would not be
very displeasing to you.


Oh! your humble servant, Sir.


If I had had a mind to that lodging, I had ne'er come hither; for when I have
a mind to it, I'll marry without dispute; for I fear no body so much as a
husband; and when I can conquer that doubt, I'll marry at a minutes warning.


No dispute now, can you furnish us with a couple of Beds?


Yes, yes.


And have you ever a woman in the house?


My Sisters Maid is here.


Madam, if you resolve to do us this honour, you shall find clean linen, and
your Beds quickly ready.


But where will my Nephew and you, Sir, lie to night?


Oh, Madam, we have acquaintance enough in the Town.


Well, Sir, we will accept this courtesy; and when you come into Suffolk you
shall command my house.


Prithee call Bess, and bid her bring sheets to make the Bed; I'll go and fetch
in a Pallet, 'tis as good a Bed as the other, and if you will stay the
removing, we will set up a Bed-stead.


No, a Pallet, pray; but what shall we do for night clothes, Aunt?


Why, what are those you bought my Sisters?


Is not that Linen gone yet?


No faith, Madam, his man forgot it, till the Carriers were gone last week.


Will that serve?


Yes, yes, pray do us the favour to let us have it, 'tis but washing of't
again.


Nay, if it will serve, discourse no more; I'll fetch the bundle; and prithee
fetch the Combs and Looking glasses I bought the other day; for other
necessaries that want a name the wench shall furnish you with.


Nay, but where is she, Nephew?


I'll call her, if she be not gone to Bed; it is an ignorant young thing, I am
to send her to my Sisters in the Country; I have had such ado to put her in the
Fashion.


What Country is she? Prithee, Mr. Wild, let's see her.


I'll call her down.


Madam, now we see you're safe we will kiss your hands, and wait upon you to
morrow.


It must be early then, Sir; for I shall borrow my Nephews Coach, and be gone
betimes into the Country to take a little fresh Air, and prevent the search.


Pray, Madam, be pleased to command ours.


No, Sir, I humbly thank you; my Nephew's will hold our company.


Your humble servant, Mistress Pleasant.


Your servant, Madam.


Good night, Mr. Constant.


Sir, you'll excuse us, we have no body here to light you down.


Madam, I am here your servant as much as those that wear your Livery; and this
house holds no other; we can be civil, Madam, as well as extravagant.


Your humble servant, Mr. Careless.


Gentlemen, if you'll wait on my Lady to her Chamber, then I'll wait upon you
down.


You oblige us, Sir.


THe Plague?


The Plague; As I live, and all my relation is truth, every syllable; But, Mrs.
Wanton, now must you play your master-piece; be sure to blush, and appear but
simple enough, and all is well; thou wilt pass for as arrant a Chamber-maid as
any is in the Parish.


Hum! new Plots?


Let me put on a Petti-coat and a Muffler, and I'll so Chamber-maid it, and be
so diligent with the clean Smock and the Chamber-pot: now would I give all the
Shoes in my Shop to lie with 'em both.


Let me alone to fit them, I can make a scurvey Curtsy naturally; remember, I
am an Essex woman, if they ask.


Come, come quickly, take those Sweet-meats; bring the great Cake and Knife,
and Napkins, for they have not supped; and Captain, make some Lemonade, and
send it by the Boy to my Chamber; and do you hear, Jolly, you must stay till we
come, for we must lie with you to night.


We will stay, but make haste then.


And bring our Cloaks and Swords out with you.


I will, I will; but be quiet all.


Mr. Wild, I hope there is no Plot in this.


There's no jealousy, Mr. Parson; 'tis all serious upon my life.


FAith, Aunt, 'tis the first time I have had the honour to see you in my house;
and as a stranger I must salute you.


As I live, Nephew, I'm ashamed to put you to this trouble.


It is an obligation. -- Mrs. Pleasant, I know you have not supped; I pray you
be pleased to taste these Sweet-meats, they are of Salls doing; but I
understand not Sweet-meats, the wine I'll answer for; and, in a word, you are
welcome: You are Patrona, and we your slaves.


Good rest, and a pleasing dream, your humble servant wishes you.


Good night, Nephew; good night, Mr. Careless.


Good night, Mr. Careless; your humble servant, Mr. Wild.


Why I, here are men have some wit; By this good night, had we lain at my
servants, we should have found the laced Cap and Slippers that have been
entailed upon the Family these five descents, advanced upon the Cup-boards-head
instead of Plate.


They are a couple of the readiest youths too; how they run and do all things
with a thought! I love him for sending his Sister, a pretty wench.


Pray, let's go to bed; I am weary.


You will not go to bed with all those windows open; sweet heart, prithee shut
them, and bring me hither; -- Dost understand me? As I live, 'tis a great while
since I went to the Play.


It has been one of the longest days; a year of them would be an Age.


Oh, do you grow weary; you'll break your Covenant ere the year go out.


Prithee, shut the windows, and come pin up my hair.


SEE you wait diligently, and let them want nothing they call for; come shall
we go? 'tis very late.


But how does Wanton carry it?


They saluted her; and Mrs. Pleasant swore you might see the Country-simplicity
in her Face.


A pox upon her, crafty Gypsy.


Why, art not thou glad to see she can be honest when she will?


I'll show you all a Trick, for her, within these few days, or I'll miss my
aim.


Come, let's go.


I have a mind to stay till Wanton comes.


Stay a little then, for 'twill not be long ere they be a Bed.


I hear VVanton's voice.


Are they a Bed?


Yes, and have so admired you, and Mr. Careless, and abused the Lovers; well,
Gentlemen, you are the wits of the time; but if I might counsel, well they
might lye alone this night; but it should go hard if I lay not with one of them
within a month.


Were they so taken with their lodging?


All that can be said they said, you are the friendliest men, the readi'st men,
the handsom'st men that had wit; and could tell when to be civil, and when to
be wild; and Mrs. (what's her name) the Younger, asked why Mr. Wild did not go
a wooing to some rich Heir; upon her conscience, she said, you would speed.


Well, well, there's a time for all things; come let's go.


Take a light. -- Good night, Wanton.


Do ye hear, do ye hear; let me speak with you.


What's the business?


I cannot get hence this night: but your good angels hang at my heels; and if I
can prevail, you shall stay.


What to do?


What to do? why I'll be hanged if all this Company do not guess.


Prithee, what should we stay for?


For the widow, and her Niece; are they worth the watching for a night?


Yes, certainly.


Then take my counsel, and let me give it out you're married, you have new
clothes come home this morning, and there's that you spoke of I'll fetch from
the Taylors, and here's a Parson shall rather give them his living, then stay
for a License; the Fiddlers too are ready to salute 'em.


But if they refuse?


Which, upon my conscience, they will.


As you hope, else you are laughed at for missing the widow: Ned, follow my
counsel, appear at her Chamber window in thy Shirt, and salute all that passes
by; let me alone to give it out, and invite Company and provide dinner; then
when the business is known, and I have presented all your friends at Court with
Ribbands, she must consent, or her honour is lost, if you have but the grace to
swear it, and keep your own counsel.


By this hand, he has reason; and I'll undertake the widow.


It will incense them, and precipitate the business which is in a fair way now;
and if they have wit, they must hate us for such a treachery.


If they have wit they will love you; beside, if it come to that, we two will
swear we saw you married, and the Parson shall be sworn he did it: -- Priest,
will you not swear?


Yes, any thing; what is't, Captain?


If this jest could do it, yet 'tis base to gain a wife so poorly; she came
hither too for sanctuary; it would be an uncivil and an unhospitable thing, and
look as if I had not merit enough to get a wife without stealing her from her
self; then, 'tis in mine own house.


The better; nay, now I think on it, why came she hither? how do you know the
Plague is there? all was well at dinner; I'll be hanged if it be not a Plot;
the Lovers too whom you abused at dinner, are joined with them; a trick, a mere
trick of wit to abuse us; and to morrow when the Birds are flewn, they'll laugh
at you, and say, Two Country Ladies put themselves naked into the hands of
three travelled City-wits, and they durst not lay hold on them.


A pox upon these Niceties.


If they have not some design upon you hang me, why did they talk so freely
before me else?


Let's but try, we are not now to begin to make the world talk; nor is it a new
thing to them to hear we are mad fellows.


If you get them, are they worth having?


Having? yes.


If you miss them the Jest is good; Prithee, Ned, let me prevail, 'tis but a
mad trick.


If we would, how shall we get into the Chamber?


Let me alone for that; I'll put on my country simplicity, and carry in a
Chamber pot; then under Pretence of bolting the back door I'll open it, and yet
I grudge them the sport so honestly; for you wenchers make the best husbands;
after you are once married, one never see's you.


I warrant thee wench.


No faith, I have observed it, they are still the doting'st husbands, and then
retreat and become Justices of the Peace, and none so violent upon the Bench,
as they, against us poor sinners; yet I'll do it, for upon my Conscience the
young Gentlewoman will fall upon her back, and thank me.


Away, go then, and leave your fooling, and in the Morning, Ned, get in, and
plead naked with your hands in the bed.


And if they cry, put your lips in their mouths, and stop them.


Why look you, you have the Authority of the Church too.


Well, I am now resolved; go you about your part, and make the Report strong.


And do ye here? be sure you set the Cook at work, that if we miss we may have a
good Dinner, and good wine, to drink down our grief.


Miss? I warrant thee thrive.


Nay, if I knock not down the Widow, geld me, and come out to morrow complete
Uncle, and salute the Company, with, you are well-come Gentlemen, and good
morrow Nephew Ned.


Uncle Tom, good morrow, Uncle Tom.


All's done, the door is open, and they're as still as Childrens thoughts; 'tis
time you made you ready, which is, to put off your breeches, for 'tis almost
day; and take my Council, be sure to offer force enough, the less reason will
serve; Especially you, Master Wild, do not put a may'd to the pain of saying,
I.


I warrant thee, wench; let me alone.


We'll in, and undress us, and come again; for we must go in at the back door.


I'll meet you, is the Captain gone?


Yes, yes, he's gone.


Come Master Parson, let us see the Cook in Readiness, where are the Fiddlers?
what will become of our Plot? for the Coach-man; Master Sad and his friend
will stink of their jest if this thrive.


They have slept all night, on purpose, to play all day.


When the Ribbands and Points come from the Exchange, pray see the Fiddlers have
some, the Rogues will play so out of tune all day else, they will spoil the
dancing if the plot do take.


Let's see them in the Chamber first, and then I shall go with some heart about
the business; so, so, creep close and quietly; you know the way, the widow lies
in the high bed, and the Pallet is next the door.


Must we creep?


Yes, Yes, down upon your knees, always, till you get a woman, and then stand
up for the Cause; stay let me shake my smock over you for luck sake.


Why so, I warrant you thrive.


A pox take you, I'll pare your nails when I get you from this place once.


Sweet heart, sweet heart, off with your shoe.


I, with all my heart, there's an old shoe after you; would I gave all in my
shop the rest were furnished with wives too.


Parson, the Sun is rising, go send in the Fiddlers, and set the Cook on work,
let him chap soundly.


I have a tithe Pig at home, I'll even sacrifice it to the Wedding.


They will find them in good Posture, they may take Privy marks if they please;
for they said it was so hot they could endure no clothes, and my simplicity
was so diligent to lay them naked, and with such 'twists and turns fastened them
to the feet, I'll answer for it, they find not the way into them in an hour.


Why then they may pull up their Smocks, and hide their faces?


Master Jolly, there was one without would speak with you.


Who was it?


It is the Lady that talks so well.


They say indeed she has an Excellent Tongue, I would she had changed it for a
face; 'tis she that has been handsome.


Who? not the Poetess we met at Master Sadds?


Yes, the same.


Sure she's mad.


Prithee tell her I am gone to bed.


I have done as well Sir; I told her Mistress Wanton was here, at which
discreetly, being touched with the guilt of her Face, she threw out a Curse or
two and retreated.


Who is this you speak of, I will know who 'tis.


Why 'tis she that married the Genoway Merchant; they conzen'd one another.


Who? Pegg Driver, Bewgle Eyes?


The same, the same.


Why she is ugly now?


Yes, but I have known her, by this hand, as fine a wench as ever sinned in
Town or Suburbs; when I knew her first, she was the Original of all the
wayn-Scote Chambermaids, with Brooms, and barefoot Madams, you see sold at
Temple-Bar, and the Exchange.


Ah! you are a Divel; how could thou find in thy heart to abuse her so? Thou
love Antiquities too; The very memory that she had been handsome should have
pleaded something.


Was handsome signifies nothing to me.


But she's a wit, and a wench of an Excellent Discourse.


And as good company as any's in the Town.


Company? for whom? Leather-Ears, his Majesty of Newgate watch? There her story
will do well, while they louse themselves.


Well, you are curious now, but the time was, when you have skipp'd for a kiss.


Prithee, Parson, no more of wit, and was handsome, but Wanton here, that's
kind, soft, sweet and sound; These are Epithetes for a Mistress; Nor is there
any Elegancy in a woman like it; give me such a naked Sense, to study Night
and Day; I care not for her Tongue, so her face be good; A whore dres't in
verse, and set speeches, tempts me no more to that sweet sin, then the Statute
of whipping can keep me from it; This thing we talked on, which retains nothing
but the name of what she was, is not only Poetical in her discourse, but her
Tears and her Love, her health, nay her Pleasure, were all Fictions, and had
scarce any live-flesh about her till I administered.


Indeed 'tis time she sat out, and gave others leave to play; for a Reveren'd
whore is an unseemly sight; besides it makes the sin malicious, which is but
venial else.


Sure, hee'le make a case of Conscience on it; you should do well (sweet heart)
to recommend her Case to your Brethren that attend the Committee of Affection,
that they may order her to be sound and young again, for the good of the
Commonwealth.


OH, are you ready? are you ready?


Yes, and't like your worship.


And did you bid the Cook chop Lustily, and make a Noise?


Yes, Sir, he's at it.


I hear the Captain.


Have you brought Clothes and Ribbands?


Yes, yes, all is ready; did you hear them squeak yet?


No, by this light; I think, 'tis an appointment, and we have been all abused.


Give the Fiddlers their Ribbands, and carry the rest in; Mistress Wanton, you
must play my Ladies Woman to day, and Mince it to all that come, and hold up
your head finely when they kiss you, and take heed of swearing when you are
angry, and pledging whole cups when they drink to you.


I'll warrant you, for my part.


Go get you in then, and let your husband dip the Rosemary.


Is all ready?


All, all, some of the Company are below already, I have so blown it about, one
Porter is gone to the Exchange, to invite Master Wild's Merchant to his
Wedding, and, by the way to bid two or three Fruiterers to send in Fruit for
such a Wedding, another in my Ladies name to Sall's, for sweet meats; I swore
at Bradborn in his Shop my self, that I wondered he would disappoint Master
Wild for his Points, and having so long warning; He protested 'twas not his
fault, but they were ready, and he would send John with them presently; One of
the Watermen is gone to the Melon Garden, the other to Cooks at the Bear, for
some Bottles of his best Wine, and thence to Gracious-street, to the
Poulterers, and all with directions to send in Provisions for Master Wild's
Wedding; and who should I meet at Door, but Apricock Tom, and Mary, waiting to
speak with her young Master; they came to beg that they might serve the Feast;
I promised them they should, if they would cry it up and down the Town, to
bring Company; for Master Wild was resolved to keep open house.


Why then here will be witnesses enough.


But who should I meet at the corner of the Piazza, but Joseph Taylor; he tells
me, there's a new Play at the Fryers to day, and I have bespoke a Box for
Master Wild and his Bride.


And did not he wonder to hear he was married?


Yes; but I told him, 'twas a Match his Aunt made for him, when he was abroad.


And I have spread it sufficiently at Court, by sending to borrow Plate for
such a Wedding.


There's half a dozen Coach fulls of Company lighted; they call for the
Bride-Laces and Points.


Let the Fiddlers play then, and bid God give them joy, by the name of my Lady
Careless and Mistress Wild.


Where shall we play, Sir?


Come with us, wee'le show you the window.


NIece, Niece, Niece Pleasant.


Ha! I hear you, I hear you, what would you have?


Do you not hear the Fiddlers?


Yes, yes, but you have waked me from the finest dream.


A dream, what was't? some knavery.


Why, I know not, but 'twas merry, even as pleasing as some sins; well, I'll
lie no more in a mans bed, for fear I lose more then I get.


Hark, that's a new Tune.


Yes, and they play it well; This is your Jaunty Nephew; I would he had less of
the Father in him, I'd venture to dream out my dream with him; In my
conscience he's worth a dozen of my dull Servant, that's such a troublesome
visitant, without any kind of convenience.


I, I, so are all of that kind; give me your Subject Lover; Those you call
Servants are but troubles, I confess.


What is the Difference, pray, betwixt a Subject, and a Servant Lover?


Why, one I have absolute Power over, the other's at large; Your Servant Lovers
are those take Mistresses upon trial, scarce give them a Quarters warning
before they are gone.


Why, what do your Subject Lovers do? I am so sleepy.


Do? All things for nothing; then they are the diligent'st and the humblest
things a Woman can employ; Nay, I have seen of them tame, and run loose about a
house; I had one once, by this light, he would fetch and Carry, go back, seek
out, he would do any thing; I think some Falconer bred him.


By my Troth, I am of your mind.


He would come over, for all my Friends; but it was the dogged'st thing to my
enemies, he would sit upon's tail before them, and frown, like John a Napes
when the Pope is named; he heard me once praise my little Spanniel Bitch Smut
for waiting, and hang me if I stirred for seven years after, but I found him
lying at my door.


And what became of him?


Faith, when I married he forsook me; I was advised since, that if I would
ha'spit in's mouth sometimes he would have stayed.


That was cheap, But 'tis no certain way; for 'tis a general opinion, that
marriage is one of the certain'st cures for Love that one can apply to a man
that is sick of the sighings; yet if you were to live about this Town still,
such a Fool would do you a world of service; I'm sure Secret will miss him,
and would always take such a care of her ha's saved her a hundred walks for
Hoods and Masques.


Yes, and I was certain of the earliest Fruits and Flowers that the Spring
afforded.


By my troth, 'twas foolishly done to part with him; a few crumbs of your
affection would have satisfied him, poor thing.


Thou art in the right; in this Town there's no living without 'em; they do
more service in a house for nothing, then a pair of those, what d' ye call
'ems, those he waiting-women, Beasts, that Custom impose upon Ladies.


Is there none of them to be had now, think you? I'd feign get a tame one, to
carry down into the Country.


Faith, I know but one breed of them about the Town that's right, and that's at
the Court; The Lady that has them brings 'em all up by hand; she breeds some
of them from very puppies; there's another wit too in the Town that has of
them; but hers will not do so many tricks; good sullen diligent waiters those
are which she breeds, but not half so serviceable.


How does she do it? is there not a trick in it?


Only patience, but she has a heavy hand with 'em (they say) at first, and
many of them miscarry; she governs them with signs, and by the Eye, as Bank's
breeds his Horse; there are some too that arrive at writing, and those are the
right breed, for they commonly betake themselves to Poetry; and if you could
light on one of them, 'twere worth your money; for 'tis but using of him ill,
and praising his verses sometimes, and you are sure of him for ever.


But do they never grow surly, Aunt?


Not, if you keep them from raw flesh, for they are a kind of Lyon-lovers; and
if they once taste the sweet of it, they'll turn to their kind.


Lord, Aunt, there will be no going without one this Summer into the Country;
pray let's enquire for one; either a he one to entertain us, or a she one to
tell us the story of her Love; 'tis excellent to bed-ward, and makes one as
drowsy as Prayers.


Faith, Niece, this Parliament has so destroyed 'em, and the Platonic Humour,
that 'tis uncertain whether we shall get one or no; your leading Members in the
lower House have so cowed the Ladies, that they have no leisure to breed any of
late; Their whole endeavouts are spent now in feasting, and winning close
Committee-men, a rugged kind of sullen Fellows, with implacable stomachs and
hard hearts, that make the gay things court and observe them, as much as the
foolish Lovers use to do; Yet I think I know one she-Lover, but she is smitten
in years o'th wrong side of forty; I am certain she is poor too; and in this
lean Age for Courtiers, she perhaps would be glad to run this Summer in our
Park*


Dear Aunt, let us have her; has she been famous? has she good Tales, think
you, of Knights? such as have been false or true to Love, no matter which.


She cannot want cause to curse the Sex; handsome, witty, well born, and poor
in Court, cannot want the experience how false young men can be; Her Beauty has
had the highest fame; and those Eyes that weep now unpitied have had their
Envy, and a dazzling Power.


And that Tongue, I warrant you, which now grows hoarse with flattering the
great Law-breakers, once gave Law to Princes; was it not so Aunt? Lord, shall I
die without begetting one story?


Penthesilea, nor all the cloven Knights the Poets treat of, yclad in mightiest
Petticoats, did her excel for gallant deeds; and, with her Honour, still
preserved her Freedom; My Brother loved her; and I have heard him swear,
Minerva might have owned her Language; An Eye like Pallas, Juno's wrists, a
Venus for shape, and a Mind chaste as Diana, but not so rough; never uncivilly
Cruel, nor faulty kind to any; no vanity, that sees more then Lovers pay, nor
blind to a gallant Passion; Her Maxim was, he that could Love, and tell her so
handsomely, was better Company, but not a better Lover then a silent Man; Thus,
all Passions found her Civility, and she a value from all her Lovers. But
alas, Niece, this was (which is a sad word) was handsome, and was beloved, are
abhorred sounds in Women's ears.


Hark, the Fiddlers are merry still; will not Secret have the wit to find us
this morning, think you?


God give you joy, Master Careless; God give your Ladyship joy, my Lady Wild.


What did the Fellow say? God give me joy?


As I live, I think so.


God give you joy, Mistress Pleasant Wild.


This is my Nephew, I smell him in this knavery.


Why did they give me joy by the name of Mistress Wild? I shall pay dear for a
nights lodging if that be so, especially lying


Rise, rise, for shame, the year's before you.


Why, Ned Wild, why Tom, will you not rise and let's in? what, is it not enough
to steal your wedding over night, but lock your selves up in the morning too?
All your Friends stay for points here, and kisses from the Brides.


A little Patience, you'll give us leave to dress us?


Why, what's a Clock, Captain?


It's late.


Faith, so it was before we slept.


Why, Nephew, what means this rudeness? As I live, I'll fall out with you. This
is no jest.


No, as I live, Aunt. We are in earnest; but my part lies here, and there's a
Gentleman will do his best to satisfy you; Pleasant, I know you have so much
wit as to perceive this business cannot be remedied by denials; here we are, as
you see, naked, and thus have saluted hundreds at the window that past by, and
gave us joy this morning.


Joy, of what? what do you mean?


Madam, this is visible, and you may coy it, and refuse to call me Husband; But
I am resolved to call you Wise, and such


Promise your self that; see whether your fine wits can make it good; you will
not be uncivil?


Not a hair but what you give, and that was in the Contract before we undertook
it; for any Man may force a Woman's Body, but we have laid we will force your
Mind.


But that needs not, for we know by your discourse last night and this morning,
we are Men you have no aversion to; and I believe, if we had taken time and
wooed hard, this would have come a course; but we had rather win you by wit,
because you defied us.


'Tis very well, if it succeed.


And, for my part, but for the jest of winning you, and this way, not ten
joynters should have made me marry?


This is a new way of wooing.


'Tis so, Madam; but we have not laid our plot so weakly (though it were
sudden) to leave it in any bodies power but our own to hinder it.


Do you think so?


We are secure enough, if we can be true to our selves.


Yet we submit in the midst of our strength, and beg you will not wilfully
spoil a good jest by refusing us. By this hand, we are both sound, and we'll
be strangely honest, and never in ill humours, but live as merry as the Maids,
and divide the year between the Town and the Country; What say you, is't a
Match? Your bed is big enough for two, and my meat will not cost you much; I'll
promise nothing but one heart, one purse betwixt us, and a whole dozen of
boys, is't a bargain?


Not, if I can hinder it, as I live.


Faith, Mistress Pleasant, he hath spoken nothing but reason, and I'll do my
best to make it good; Come faith, teach my Aunt what to do, and let me strike
the bargain upon your Lips.


No, Sir, not to be half a Queen; if we should yield now your wit would
dominere for ever; and still in all disputes (though never so much reason on
our side) this shall be urged as an Argument of your Master wit to confute us;
I am of your Aunts mind, Sir; and if I can hinder it, it shall be no match.


Why then know, it is not in your Powers to prevent it.


Why, we are not married yet.


No, 'tis true.


By this good light then I'll be dumb for ever hereafter, lest I light upon the
words of Marriage by chance.


'Tis hard, when our own Acts cannot be in our own power, Gentlemen.


The plot is only known to four, the Minister and two that stood for Fathers,
and a simple Country Maid that waited upon you last night, which plays your
Chamber-maids part.


And what will all these do?


Why, the two friends will swear, they gave you; the Parson will swear, he
married you; and the wench will swear, she put us to bed.


Have you men to swear we are married?


And a Parson to swear he did it?


Yes.


And a wench that will swear, she put us to Bed?


Yes, By this good light, and witness of reputation.


Dare they or you look us in the face, and swear this?


Yes faith, and all but those four know no other but really it is so; and you
may deny it, but I'll make Mr. Constable put you to bed, with this proof, at
night.


Pray, let's see these witnesses.


Call in the four only.


Well, this shall be a warning to me; I say nothing, but if ever I lye from
home again.


I'll lye with you.


'Tis well; I dare say, we are the first women (if this take) that ever were
stolen against their wills.


I'll go call the Gentlemen.


I that have refused a fellow that loved me these seven years, and would have
put off his hat, and thanked me to come to bed, to be beaten with watch-mens
staves into another; For by this good light, for ought that I perceive,
there's no keeping these out at night.


And unless we consent to be their wives, to day, M. Justice will make us their
whores at night: oh, oh, what would not I give to come off! not that I mislike
them, but I hate they should get us thus.


Follow. -- Will not you two swear we were married last night?


Capt. Yes, By this light, will we.


Will not you swear you married us?


Yea, verily.


And come hither, pretty one, will not you swear you left us all a bed last
night, and pleased?


Yes forsooth; I'll swear any thing your worship shall appoint me.


But, Gentlemen, have you no shame, no conscience; will you swear false, for
sport?


By this light, I'll swear, if it be but to vex you: Remember you refused me,
[That is contrary to Covenants though with my brace of Lovers; what will they
do with their Coach-mans


And, faith, Madam, I have sworn many times false, to no purpose; and I should
take it ill, if it were mine own case, to have a friend refuse me an Oath upon
such an occasion.


And are you all of one mind?


Verily we will all swear.


Will you verily? what shall we do, Aunt?


Do you laugh? By this light, I am heartily angry.


Why, As I live, let's marry them, Aunt, and be revenged.


Marry, where's the Parson?


Here, here, M. Parson, come and do your Office.


That fellow? No, by my troth, let's be honestly joined, for lucks sake, we
know not how soon we may part.


What shall she do for a Parson? Captain, you must run and fetch one.


Yes, yes; but methinks this might serve turn; By this hand, he's a Marshal,
and a Case, by Sire and Dam; pray try him, By this light, he comes of the best
preaching kind in Essex.


Not I, As I live, that were a blessing in the Devils name.


A pox on your wedding; give me my wife and let me be gone.


Nay, nay, no choler, Parson; the Ladies do not like the colour of your Beard.


No, no, fetch another, and let them escape with that trick, then they'll jeer
your beards blew, y'faith.


By this hand, he's in the right; either this Parson, or take one another
words; to Bed now, and marry when we rise.


As I live, you come not here till you are married; I have been no body's whore
yet, and I will not begin with my husband.


Will you kiss upon the bargain, and promise before these witnesses not to
spoil our jest, but rise and go to Church.


And what will M. Constant and M. Sad say?


Why, I'll run and invite them to the wedding; and you shall see them expire in
their own Garters.


No, no, ne'er fear't, their jest is only spoiled.


Their jest, what jest?


Faith, now you shall know it, and the whole Plot: In the first place, your
Coach-man is well, whose death, we, by the help of Secret, contrived, thinking
by that trick to prevent this danger, and carry you out of Town.


But had they this Plot?


Yes faith, and see how it thrives; they'll fret like carted Bawds when they
hear this news.


Why, Aunt; would you have thought M. Sad a Plotter? well, 'tis some comfort
we have them to laugh at.


Nay faith, then, Gentlemen, give us leave to rise, and I'll take my venture,
if it be but for a revenge on them.


Gentlemen, bear witness.


Come, come away, I'll get the points; I'm glad the Coach-man's well, the
Rogue had like to have spoiled our Comedy.


MArried?


And to them?


I, married, if you prevent it not; caught with a trick, an old stale trick; I
have seen a Ballad on it.


We shall go near to prevent 'em. -- Boy, My Sword.


Whither so fast?


You guess.


If you mean the wedding, you come too late.


Why, are they married?


No, but lustily promised.


We may come time enough to be revenged though. --


Upon whom? your selves, for you are only guilty: who carried them thither last
night? who laid the Plot for the Coachman?


Why, do they know it?


Well, you'll find the Poet a Rogue, 'tis he that has betrayed you; and if
you'll take my counsel, be revenged upon him.


Nay, we were told he did not love us.


By my life, you wrong him; upon my knowledge the Poet meant you should have
them.


Why, who had the power to hinder then?


I know not where the fault lies directly; they say, the wits of the Town would
not consent to it, they claim a right in the Ladies, as Orphan-wits.


The wits! hang 'em in their strong lines.


Why I, such a clinch as that has undone you; and upon my knowledge 'twere
enough to hinder your next match.


Why, what have they to do with us?


I know not what you have done to disoblige them; but they crossed it; there was
amongst 'em too a pair of she-wits, something stricken in years; they grew in
fury at the mention of it, and concluded you both with an authority out of a
modern Author; besides 'tis said, you run naturally into the six-peny Room and
steal sayings, and a discourse more then your peny-worth of jests, every Term;
why, just now, you spit out one jest stolen from a poor Play, that has but two
more in five Acts; what conscience is there in it, knowing how dear we pay Poets
for our Plays?


'Twas, Madam, with the ill face, one of those whom you refused to salute the
other day, at Chipps house; a Chees-cake had saved all this.


Why do you not make haste about your business, but lose time with this Babbler?


Madam, will you give us leave to make use of your Coach?


You may command it, Sir; when you have done, send him to the Exchange, where
I'll dispatch a little business, and be with you immediately.


So, this fire's kindled; put it out that can. What would not I give for a
Peepers place at the meeting; I'll make haste, and it shall go hard but I'll
bear my part of the mirth too.


MAster Jolly, I find I am naturally inclined to mirth this day, and methinks
my Corns ache more then my Horns; and to a man that has read Seneca a Cuckold
ought to be no grief; especially in this Parish where I see such droves of St.
Lukes clothing; there's little Secret too, th'allay of waiting-woman, makes me
hope, she may prove metal of the Parsons standard. Find a way to rid me of
Wanton, and I'll put in to be Chaplain to this merry family; if I did not
enveigle formal Secret, you should hang me; I know the trick on it; 'tis but
praying too, and preaching of the waiting-woman, then carefully seeing her
cushion laid, with her book and leaf turned down, does it, with a few Anagrams,
Acrostics, and her name in the Register of my Bible: these charm the
soft-soul'd sinner; then sometimes to read a piece of my Sermon, and tell her,
a Saturday, where my Text shall be, spells that work more then Philtres.


If you can be serious, we will think of this at leisure. -- See how they eye
Wanton.


What? consulting Parson? let us be judges betwixt you; do ye hear, Jack, if he
offers ready money, I counsel, as a friend, take it; for, By this light, if you
refuse it, your wife will not; do ye see those gay Petti-coats?


Yes, if you mean my wives.


You know they are his, and she only wears 'em for his pleasure; and 'tis
dangerous to have a wife under another mans Petticoats; what if you should find
his breeches upon hers?


Are not you married too? take care that yours does not wear the Breeches,
another kind of danger, but as troublesome as that, or sore-eyes; and if she
get but a trick of taking as readily as she's persuaded to give, you may find a
horn at home; I have seen a Cuckold of your complexion; if he had had as much
hoof as horn, you might have hunted the beast by his slat.


How fine she is! and, By this light, a handsome wench, Mr. Jolly, I am easier
persuaded to be reconciled to your fault, then any mans; I have seen, of this
kind; her eyes have more Arguments in 'em then a thousand of those that seduce
the world; hang me if those Quivers be not full of Darts; I could kiss that
mouth, my self, is this she my Aunt quarrelled with you for?


The same, self-same. And by this hand, I was barbarous to her, for your Aunts
sake; and had I not escaped that mischief of matrimony, By this light, I had had
never seen her again; but I was resolved not to quit her, till I was sure of a
wife, for fear of what has follow'd; had I been such an Ass as to have left her
upon the Aerie hopes of a widows Oaths; what a case had I been in now? You see,
your Aunt's provided of a man. Bless him, and send him patience, 'twould have
been fine to have seen me walking, and sighing upon cold hunting, seeking my
whore again, or forced to make use of some common mercenary thing that sells
sin and diseases, crimes, penance and sad repentance together; here's
consolation and satisfaction, in Wanton, though a man lose his meal with the
widow. And, faith, be free, how do you like my Girl; rid thee of her; what
does she want now, pray, but a jointure, to satisfy any honest man? speak your
conscience; Ladies don't you think a little repentance, hereafter, will serve,
for all the small sins that good nature can act with such a sinner?


Pray, Sir, remember she's my wife; and be so civil to us both, as to forget
these things.


For that, Jack, we will understand hereafter, 'tis but a trick of youth, man, and
her jest ill make us both merry, I warrant thee.


Pray, Sir, no more of your jestes, nor your Jack; remember my Coat and
Calling. This familiarity both with my wife and my self, is not decent; your
Clergy with Christen names are scarce held good Christians.


I wonder at nothing so much as M. Jollies mirth, to day; where lies his part
of the jest? cozened or refused by all, not a fish that stays in's Net.


No, what's this? show me a fairer in all your streams; nor is this my single
joy, who am pleased to find you may be cozened; rejoice to see you may be
brought to lie with a man for a jest; let me alone to fit you with a trick too.


Faith, it must be some new trick; for thou art so beaten at the old one,
'twill neither please thee nor her; besides, I mean to teach her that my self.


I shall never be perfectly quiet in my mind, till I see some body as angry as
my self; yet I have some consolation when I think on the wise plot that killed
the Coach-man, how the Plague, Red-cross and Halberd has cut their fingers that
designed it, their anger will be perfect. Secret says they are coming, and that
the Lady Love-all has given 'em the Alarm.


And see where the parties come, -- Storms and tempests in their minds, their
looks are Daggers.


Servant, what? you're melancholy and full of wonder; I see you have met the
news.


Yes Madam, we have heard a report that will concern both your judgement and
your honour.


Alas, Sir, we're innocent; 'tis mere predestination.


All weddings, Mr. Sad, you know go by chance, like hanging.


And, I thank my Stars, I have escaped hanging; to have been his Bride had been
both.


This is not like the promise you made us yesterday.


Why truly, Servant, I scarce know what I do yet; the fright of the Plague had
so possessed my mind with fear that I could think and dream of nothing, last
night, but of a tall black man, that came and kissed me in my sleep, and slap'd
his whip in mine Ears, 'twas a saucy Ghost, (not unlike my Coach-man that's
dead) and accused you of having a hand in his murder, and vowed to haunt me
till I was married, I told my niece the dream.


Nay, the Ghost sighed, and accused Secret and Master Sad; of making him away
confess, faith, had you a hand in that bloody jest?


Fie, Servant; could you be so cruel as to join with my woman against me?


'Tis well, Ladies; why a Pox do you look at me, this was your subtle plot; a
Pox on your Clarks wit; you said the jest would beget a Comedy when 'twas
known, and so I believe 'twill.


Madam, I find you have discovered our design, whose chief end was, to prevent
this mischief which I doubt not, but you'll both live to repent your share of,
before you have done travelling to the Epsams, Burbons, and the Spawes, to cure
those travelled diseases these Knights errant have, with Curiosity, sought out
for you; 'Tis true, the are mischiefs that dwell in pleasant Countries, yet
those Roses have their thorns; and I doubt not, but these gentlemen's wit may
sting as well as please, sometime; and you may find it harder to satisfy their
travail'd Experience, then to have suffered our home-bred ignorance.


Hark, if he be not fallen into a fit of his Cozen; These names of Places he
has stolen out of her Receipt-book; amongst all whose diseases, find me any so
dangerous, troublesome or incurable, as a fool, a lean, pale, sighing, coughing
fool, that's rich and poor both, being born to an estate, without a mind or
heart capable to use it, of a nature so miserable he grudges himself meat; nay,
they say, he eats his meals twice, a fellow whose breath smells of yesterdays
dinner, and stinks as if he had eat all our Suppers over again; I would advise
you Mr. Sad to sleep with your mouth open, to air it, or get the Brewer to Ton
it; Faugh, an empty Justice, that stinks of the Lees and Casks, and belches
Littleton and Ploydens Cases; dost thou think any woman that has wit, or
honour, would kiss that Bung-hole; by this light, his head and belly look as
blew and lank as French Rabbits, or stale Poultry; Alas, Sir, my Lady would
have a husband to rejoice with, no green-tail'd Lecturer, to stand Sentry at
his beds side, while his nasty soul scores through him, sneaking out at the
back door. -- These, Sir, are diseases which neither the Spaw, or Bath, can
cure your Garters and Willow are a more certain remedy.


Well, Sir, I find our plot's betrayed, and we have patience left; 'Tis that
damned Captain has informed.


Yet 'tis one comfort, Madam, that you have missed that man of war, that Knight
of Finsbury; His Dowager, with Ale and Switches, would have bred a Ballad.


Faith, Sir, you see what a difficulty it is, in this Age, for a woman to live
honest, though she have a proper man to her husband; therefore it behoves us to
consider, who we choose.


The Lady has Reason; for being allow'd but one, who would choose such weazel's
as we see daily mary'd, that are all head and Tail, crooked, dirty, sold
Vermin, predestined for Cuckolds, painted Snails, with houses on their backs,
and horns as big as Dutch Cows; would any woman marry such? nay, can any woman
be honest, that lets such Hod-man-dods crawl over her Virgin breast, and
Belly, or suffer 'em to leave their slimy paths upon their bodies only for
Jointures? Out, 'tis Mercenary and base; The generous heart has only the Laws
of Nature and kindness in her view; and when she will oblige, Friend is all the
ties that nature seeks, who can both bear and excuse those kind crimes; And I
believe, one as poor as the despised Captain, and neglected Courtier, may make
a woman as happy in a Friendship as Master Sad, who has as many faults as we
have debts; one, whose Father had no more credit with Nature, then ours had
with Fortune; whose soul wears Rags as well as the Captains body.


Nay then, I'll laugh; for I perceive, you're angryer then we; Alas, has lost
both ventures, Wanton, and the Widow.


Both, and neither so unlucky as to be thy wife; thy face is hanged with blacks
already, we may see the Bells toll in thy Eyes; A Bride and a Wedding Shirt? a
Sexton and a winding sheet? a Scrivener to draw up Jointures? A Parson to make
thy will, man; by this light he's as Chap-fallen as if he had lain under the
Table all night.


Faith, Master Sad, he's parlously in the right; ne'er think of marrying in
this dull clime, wedlock's a trade you'll ne'er go through with; wives
draw-bills upon sight, and't will not be for your credit to protest 'em; rather
follow my counsel, and Marry la Venetiano for a night and away; a Pistol
Jointure does it; then 'tis but repenting in the morning, and leave your woman,
and the sin both, in the Bed; But if you play the fool, like your friends, and
Marry in serious earnest, you may repent it too, as they do; but wher's the
remedy?


What was't you said, Sir, do you repent?


By this hand, Widow, I don't know; but we have pursued a jest a great way.
Parson, are you sure we're married.


Yes, I warrant you, for their escaping.


Their escaping? fool, thou mistake me, there's no fear of that; but I would
fain know, if there be no way for me to get out of this Noose; No hole to hide
a mans head in from this Wedlock?


Not any, but what I presume she'll show you anon.


Hum! Now do I feel all my fears flowing in upon me; Wanton and Mistress
Pleasant both grow dangerously handsome, a Thousand Graces in each, I never
observed before, now, just now, when I must not taste, I begin to long for some
of their Plums.


Is this serious, Sir?


Yes truly, Widow, sadly serious; Is there no way to get three or four
mouthfulls of Kisses from the Parsons wife?


This is sad, Sir, upon my Wedding day, to despise me, for such a Common thing.


As sad, as I could wish; This is a jest makes me laugh. -- Common? no Madam,
that's two bitter, she's forest only, where the Royal Chase is as free as
Fair.


Were not you a Widow to day?


Yes faith, Girl, and as foolish a one as ever Coach jumbled out of joint.


Stay then till to morrow, and tell me the difference betwixt us.


I hope, thou'lt prove a She-prophet; could I live to see thee turn honest
wife, and she the Wanton Widow.


I cannot but laugh, to see how easy it is, to lose or win the opinion of the
world; a little custom heals all, or else what's the difference betwixt a
Married Widow and one of us? can any woman be pure, or worth the serious
sighing of a Generous heart, that has had above one hand laid upon her? is
there place to write above one Lovers name, with honour, in her heart; 'tis
indeed for one a Royal Palace; but if it admits of more, an Hospital, or an
Inn, at best, as well as ours; only off from the Road, and less frequented.


Shrewdly urged.


And though the sins of my Family threw me into want, and made me subject to
the treachery of that broken faith, to whose perjury I owe all my Crimes, yet
still I can distinguish betwixt that folly and this honour, which must tell
you; He or she that would be thought twice so, was never once a Lover.


Parson, thou art fitted; A whore, and Apophthegms! what sport will she make us
under a Tree, with a Salad, and sayings, in the Summer?


Come, Wanton, no fury; you see my Aunts angry.


So am I, Sir, and yet can calmly reason this truth; Married Widows, though
chaste to the Law and Custom, yet their second Hymens make that which was but
dying in the first husbands Bed, a stain in the second sheets, where all their
kindness and repeated embraces want their value, because they're sullied and
have lost their Lustre.


By this light, I'll go to School to Wanton, she has opened my Eyes, and I
begin to believe I have escaped miraculously; By this hand, wench, I was within
an inch of being married to this Danger; for what can we call these second
submissions, but a tolerated lawful Mercenaryness, which though it be a rude
and harsh expression, yet your Carriage deserves it.


Fie, Master Sad, pray leave being witty; I fear, 'tis a mortal sin, to begin
in the fifth Act of your Days upon an old subject too, abusing of Widows,
because they despise you.


Alas, Niece, let him alone, he may come in, for his share; the Parson, that
has so oft received 'em, will not refuse him Tithes, there, in Charity.


That, or Convenience, Interest, or Importunity, may, by your Example prevail;
But 'tis not fair play, Madam, to turn your Lover to the Common, as you call
it, now he's rid lean in your service; take heed, Mr. Careless, and warning
Mr. Sad; you see how fit for the Scavengers team your Lady leaves her Lovers.


Such a Lecture before I had Married would have made me have considered of this
matter. D'ost thou hear Wanton, let us forgive one another, being Married, for
that folly has made us guilty alike.


And I would fain know the difference betwixt ours, and a wedding crime, which
is worst; to let love, youth and good humour betray us to a kindness, or to be
gravely seduced by some aunt or uncle, without consideration of the disparity
of Age, Birth, or Persons, to lie down before a Jointure; Ladies, you may
flatter your selves, but the ingenuous part of the world cannot deny, but such
minds, had they been born where our faults are not only tolerated but
protected, would have listened to the same things, Interest counsels thereto.


Parson, what Boot betwixt Our Wives? either come to a Price, or draw off your
Doxy.


Propose, propose, here will be mirth anon.


Yes, yes, propose, while I break it to your Lady; Madam, you see, here's a
proper man to be had, and money to boot -- what, dumb?


No, she's only thinking; faith, Madam, try 'em both to Night, and choose
tomorrow.


Come, no more of this; Aunt, take my word for your husband, that have had more
experience of him then all these; 'tis true, he will long for these Girls, as
children do for plums; and when he has done, make a meal upon cheese; and you
must not wonder, nor quarrel at what he says in his humour, but Judge him by his
Actions; and when he is in his fit, and raves most, put him into your bed, and
fold him close in your Arms, Aunt; if he does not rise as kind and as good a
husband as he that sings Psalms best, hang me; why, you're a fool, aunt; a
widow, dislike a longing Bridegroom! I thought you had known better; do you
love a spurred horse, rather then a Duker, that neighs, and scrapes? I would
not say this, but that I know him; let him not go out of your sight, for he's
now in season, a Ripe mature husband; No delays; if you let him hang longer
upon hope his fruit will fall alone.


You are merry, Sir; But if I had known this humour.


You'd have kissed him first; but being ignorant, let me make you blush; come, a
kiss, and all's Friends. -- how now, Sir, again, again, Aunt, look to your self.


Um! By this light, sweet heart, and I thank thee; Nay widow, there's no
jesting with these things -- Nay, I am a Lyon, in my


Since all are cozened, why should I be troubled at my fortune; faith
Gentlemen, what will you two give me for a wife, betwixt you?


Faith, they 're mischiefs dear bought, though a man get 'em for nothing.


I'm almost of his mind; and if other people find no more pleasure in a
marri'd life then I, upon my wedding day, I'd pass my time in the Piazza, with
the Mountebank, and let him practise upon my Teeth, and draw'em too ere he
persuades the words of matrimony out of my mouth again. I, I, M. Constant, you
may laugh, you ha missed a wife; would I were in your case, the world should
see how cheerfully I should bear such an affliction.


Jack, I ha made my peace at home, and by seeing others ship-wrack'd will avoid
the danger, and here resolve, never to sigh again for any woman; they are weeds
grow in every hedge; and transplanting of'em thus to our Beds gives certain
trouble, seldom pleasure, never profit.


See where the enemy comes; now if you be wise, arm, and unite against him, as
a common foe; he's come from his old Lady, designing a reconciliation; the
Rogue's provident, and would fain have a Nest for his Age to rest in; Buff and
Feathers do well in the youth and heat of thirty; but in the winter of old age,
Captain at threescore, lame and lean, may lie with the Almanac out of date.


The Parson's grown witty, and prophesies upon the strength of Bride-Cake; if I
guess aright, thou'lt be hanged; for 'tis a truth, I have been endeavouring to
make it appear, her fears were mistaken in me: but I find the witch more
implacable then the Devil; the waiting-woman is harder to forgive her part,
then my Lady. Faithful will not be reconciled, the merciless Baud is all fire
and sword, no quarter; Bless me from an old waiting-womans wrath; she'll never
forgive me the disappointing her of a promise when I was drunk; her Lady and
she are coming, but in such a fury, I would not have the storm find you in the
street; therefore. I counsel you to avoid the boys, and take shelter in the
next house.


No, let's home, and with all diligence get our dinner, to defend us; and let
the Porter dispute it at the wicket, till she signs Articles of peace.


Agreed. --


See how they pair now, 'tis not threescore year will part 'em now he has
tasted a kiss or two.


Parson, I'll be your Bride-man.


'Tis well, Sir, I shall ha my time too.


I by this hand; nay, we will share fairly.


That's but reason, Wanton; and since he grows tame, use him kindly for my
sake.


Can any of you digest Sponge and Arsenick?


Arsenick? what's that?


An Italian Salad, which I'll dress for you, By Jove, ever I'll walk in my
Canonical-coat lined with horn; Death, if I suffer this, we shall have that
damned Courtier pluck on his shoes with the Parsons Musons; fine y'faith, none
but the small Levites brow to plant your shooing-horn-feed in? -- How now?


Prithee, Jack, stay, and say something to the Gentlemen, by way of Epilogue.
Thou art a piece of a scurvey Poet thy self, prithee oblige the Author, and
give us a line or two in praise of his Play.


I oblige him? hang him and all his friends, and hurt no body; yes, I'm likely
to speak for him; you see how I'ha been used to day betwixt you, I shall find a
time to be revenged, let go my cloak; I have a Province, within, of mine own to
govern, let me go.


Who, thy wife? faith stay, and give them an opportunity; thy pain will be the
sooner over: you see 'tis a thing resolved betwixt 'em, and now you're
satisfied in the matter, be wise and filent; who knows what good she may do
thee another time; I dare say, if she had as many souls in her as she had men,
she'd bring thee a cure of her self.


Let me go, or I shall be as troublesome as you are injurious, for all your
Titles, Sir.


Lend me your cloak then, to appear more decent; you'd not ha me present
Epilogue in Buff, whoreson Dunce, with a red nose.


Sir, my business is praying, not Epilogues.


With that face? By this light, 'tis a scandal to see it flaming so near the
altar; thou look as if you would cry top, in the face of the Congregation,
instead of Amen.


You're an Ass, 'tis proper there, t'has zeal and servor in it, and burns
before the Altar like the primitive Lamps.


I cry thee mercy; By this light, he'll make it sacrilege anon to steal his
nose; thou'lt entitle the Altar to that Coal; was't not kindled Ex voto? nay, I
will have your cloak.


Take it; would 'twere Nessus his shirt, for you and your Poets sake.


What, does the Rogue wish 'twere made of Nettles?


By your favour, Sir; did you see any company pass this way?


None, but the three Brides, and they are gone just before you. -- Hark, the
Music will guide you.


Is it certain then they re married?


Yes, Lady, I saw the Churches rights performed.


Why does your Ladyship lose time in talking with this fellow; don't you know
him, Madam? 'tis the rascally Captain, hid in a black cloak; I know you,
Sirrah.


She has reason; now I mark him better, I should know that false face too; see
Faithful, there are those treacherous eyes still.


Alas, you mistake me, Madam, I am Epilogue now; the Captain's within; and as a
friend I counsel you, not to incense the Gentlemen against the Poet, for he
knows all your story; and if you anger him he'll put it in a Play; but if you'll
do friendly offices, I'll undertake, instead of your Pearl you lost, to help
you to the Jewel, the Scotch Dictionary will tell you the value of it; let them
go alone, and fret not at their loss; stay, and take my counsel, it shall be
worth three revenges.


Well, what is't, Sir?


They say, you have a great power over the Parson; if you can prevail with him
to express his anger in some Satyrick Comedy (for the knave has wit, and they
say his genius lies that way,) tell him, 'tis expected he should be revenged
upon the illiterate Courtier that made this Play; if you can bring this
business about, I may find a way, as Epilogue, to be thankful, though the
Captain abused you to day. Think on it, Stephen is as handsome, when the Play is
done, as Mr. Wild was in the Scene.


There's something of reason in what he says. -- But my friend, how shall one
believe you; you that were such a Rascal to day, in Buff, is it to be hoped you
can be honest only with putting on a black cloak? well, I'll venture once
again; and if I have any power, he shall sting the malicious Rascal; and I
think he is fit for such a business. I'm sure he has the worst tongue; and a
conscience that neither honour nor truth binds; and therefore 'tis to be
believed, if he will rail in public he may be even with your Poet; I will
cloth and feed him and his Muse this seven years, but I will plague him:
Secret tells me, 'twas your Poet too that pawned me, to day, in the Tavern.


By my faith, did he; nay 'twas he that told me of your friendship with Jolly.


I wonder the Parson has been so long silent; a man of his coat and parts, to
be beaten with a pen, by one that speaks sense by rote, like Parots; one that
knows not why sense is sense, but by the sound; one that can scarce read, nay,
not his own hand; well, remember your promise.


Leave it to me, he is yours; and if our Plot take, you shall all have your
shares in the mirth; but not the profit of the Play; and the Parson, more then
his Tithe, a second day.


We will discourse of this some other time; and pray dispatch what 'tis you
have to say to this noble company, that I may be gone; for those Gentlemen will
be in such fury, if I stay; and think, because we are alone, God knows what.


'Tis no matter what they think, 'tis not them we are to study now; but these
guests, to whom pray address your self civilly, and beg that they would please
to become Fathers, and give those Brides within; what say you, Gentlemen, will
you lend your hands to join them; the Match you see is made; if you refuse,
Stephen misses the Wench, and then you cannot justly blame the Poet. For you
know, they say, that alone is enough to spoil the Play.



