THE SECOND PART OF THOMASO, OR, The Wanderer: A COMEDY. The Scene MADRID.

Written in MADRID BY THOMAS KILLIGREW.

LONDON: Printed by J. M. for Henry Herringman, and are to be sold at his Shop
at the sign of the Blew Anchor, in the lower Walk of the New-Exchange. 1663.

YOu rise late, methinks!


At Feasts men sit long, and the Rogue made me a kind one; she bound me in her
bed, where we so kissed and talked over the stories of passed love. She swore
'twas not day till the procession was passed.


'Tis a kind and a buxom Girl; but I am for her Sister who has promised me
we shall be merry at night; but what will your Angellica say when she shall
hear you lay here?


Say, as much as I do when I hear Don Pedro lay there; why, dost thou think
I'll be tied to one Wench, Ferdinando? No, I am for a herd of Whores, or one
honest woman; while I am an out-lying Deer, have at any mans Corn; impale me
and take me.


What do you resolve this morning?


Why, I must find Harrigo, I have some business with him.


And I am for that visit I told you of.


And pray, Captain, solicit your Taylor not to fail of my clothes to morrow;
you know Saint Cicilia is my Saint, and we must keep her feast to morrow; and
then, Ferdinando, you shall see I'll change my Garb, and step, when I come
forth Don Thomaso.


And Don Cornelio leap into Monsieur Con, with long Hose, and a short Coat, and
after they have been seen here, sometime away; and become an honour to the
Regiment in Portugal.


What, 'tis a bargain then I see, Coat and all?


All, for the new Buff-coat and old kindness sake, upon the condition he wears
it at Saint Cicilia's feast; and therefore haste your stitcher that I may get
my self sheathed in Don; Come, Harrigo expects us at home.

How now, the news? we were coming to you.


Have you heard nothing this morning?


No, what is't?


Nothing of news?


Nothing, what is it? some roguery I see by his eyes.


Such mirth, if you can laugh at the affliction of a friend.


Who? Edwardo, upon my life, beaten, robbed and thrown out at a Window!


Not altogether so ill; but beaten he is and robbed, turned out of doors naked,
at mid-night; he has lost six hundred crowns in gold, besides a Watch, Rings and
Seals; the Guard brought him to our house, to see who knew him; 'twas such a
sight to see him come in torn and bloody; and yet no man durst pity him, or
laugh at him; he storms yet, and will not endure a Question; he struck the
Porter for asking him who abused him.


I am sick till I see him; let's away, and study as we go home to abuse him;
the Rogue has been so wantonly bred in perpetual plenty, you shall see how
shittenly he'll look without money in his Purse, and how sneakingly he'll borrow,
and how scurvily he'll ask a courtesy.


He was never out of his depth before; you shall see him plunge and struggle
like a young swimmer to get of the puddle; 'twas well I took the rest of our
money from him last night.


He shall bite upon the Bridle, 'twill him make hear reason the sooner
hereafter; my Bills are as good as his now; he shall want nothing, but I'm
resolved I will not offer him a Real; I'll have the pleasure of acting his
part a while; not one of these black Dogs shall stir out of the Kennel before
he whistle; you know, Ferdinando, I prophesied this last night.


Prithee, let's find him ere he has time to get to bed; for the sight will be
half the jest, and I long to see him just as the Wench has dressed him for a
Comedy; where is he now?


Gone home in a chair.


EDwardo, how now! bloody, not wounded I hope.


for the blood, I'm sure 'tis none of mine; and I I have the satisfaction of
beating my Bed-fellow beyond a Jest, what ere he meant by his visit; And I had
burst my Gall when I found my self cozened, had it not been for the vent my
Rage took by discharging my Heart upon him, who must needs be as full of wonder
to find his Ears beaten with English and blows; for the Devil a word of Spanish
could I get out.


Can you not remember their Names yet?


No, that's my trouble now.


You'll be quickly out of that pain; when Cornelio comes he can inform you.


Cornelio, where is he? Let me but once know where they are, and I am content
to suffer your severest Jests till I am revenged.


He'll not be long absent, he's only gone to the Taylors for Thomaso's Spanish
Habit; there's a truck betwixt them two for Thomaso's laced suit; that's it
makes the Captain so diligent.


But was the Drab so eloquent, such a fine flattering Devil; unmerciful Whore,
to bring a Lover within an inch of her mirth, and then to beat and rob him not
only of his money, but his Gusto too! A young longing Lover, that would only
have tasted of her Milk; what a jadish Cowes trick was that to kick down the
pail?


Pish, a Mistress is nothing to him; he'll have a pair of new ones the first
Mass: Ned has nets and catches the Covey; were it you or I that fly at single
Women, whose Cupid makes not above one flight in an Age, and to find her false
to Love, 'twere sad; But for Ned, he only walks the Street, shows the man, and
the Town is his own; The German piper was never more followed then he, when he
will apply himself.


This, and more, I expected. Alas, Fred, where wilt thou find a wit that is
not mortal? All that are Active must be subject to these calamities; Yet I had
rather venture where these storms threaten, then wear out my days dully in
some Widows dock at home; When I miss my voyage I'm as happy as either of you;
one of us Gamesters may win a Fortune: But Fred, that dares not hazard, but
only spends himself in stakes, is only some Plant, some Tree; and I had as
live be a stone or Tree, as know the height of my Fortune: See who comes here;
Don Thomaso, by Tege in my Drawers still, then such a hide-bound Don.


Do you hear? Is there any privilege due to this habit for Strangers that will
wear it? Can you be admitted into an Hospital above three nights with these
clothes? Else, if you cannot have two penny loaves for a penny, to wear it, By
my troth, I would not be committed to such a Prison as that Doublet and Collar,
those shoes too, with the toes longer then the soles; I would wear the stocks
as soon, and I think sit as easy in them.


Is it far more justifiable, Fred, to ones Friends to be thus at ease against a
mans will? This Liberty of Waste-coat and Drawers in the dog-dayes; Is it not
better then to purchase thy Penance calmly to be crowded, and stuffed by a
Taylor into a Doublet and Hose, and look like a bag of Baize full of fools
flesh? 'Twas beaten into this Fresco, 'tis true; But when you find me leaping
windows voluntarily, you may laugh at me.


For your part, Ned, I'll allow you not only to dislike the Fashion, but the
Nation too. They're twigs of those Rods that jerked you so lately; and the Jest
stings still so much, that I dare say, thou wilt not endure the sight, nor
sound, of Don this month. Alas, 'tis ordinary; We see Children that have been
frighted with a Cat in the cradle hate the poor Beast for ever; And 'tis to be
hoped, you may come to hate a whore too in time; by that a Fardingale has used
you as ill as a man in a great bellied Doublet has done: But for thee, Fred,
thy dislike is as Panic as his fear who died the next day at the sight of a
past danger; So thou tremble at what's to come, and apprehend being
cozened and beaten to night: You know where you are to go; take heed, it comes
with a fear, especially with a Countrey-gentlemans fear; Your Essex man in
Madrid, their prophetic Fantasies make their Dreams Visions still.


How came you both to suffer me in the habit? I am an English-man too: How came
you to comply with my Breeches?


Had we seen your Metamorphosis, as we do his, we should have started at that
too; What Friend can see Circe's cup given to another? 'Tis an Affliction
Ulysses cannot bear, to hear his Friend grunt out of a Gotillio.


Fetch the black box with the Periwigs, and let us not lose our time, although
the Gentlemen do their censure.


Prithee make haste, for 'tis late; and the Church will be so full we shall get
no place at the Music.


Pray, will you persuade Edwardo to go.


Whither, to Church? Take him in a Church again till he be carried thither by
Torch-light, and I am deceived.


Do you hear, Captain? laugh your laugh and away; for it has been a Jest too
much handled; What will you give for my Clothes instead of Thomaso's, and be
bound to fetch 'em.


Why that's not so impossible as you believe; what will you take for my losses
last night? Be at a word now.


Why, I'll take a good Revenge and a sudden one, if you will but tell me who
has abused me.


I know the woman and the man you follow'd out of the Church yesterday; and if
you'll walk, I'll show you their Door.


Yes, and the very window you were thrown out at; he can, Ned; Con can do this
without conjuring; See Don Thomaso play such a trick, and then I'll subscribe
to Monsieur Edward.


Captain, prithee let thee and I talk seriously: Dost thou know their Names?
They are damned hard ones; I have heard some like them in a Comedy.


Her Man is called Sanco, and her Name Lucetta; is it not so?


Yes, by these Bones; Luc. Luc. Luc.


How now, what dost thou look for?


My black-lead; but now I think on it tis now in my Breeches; Prithee lend me
thine. Luc. Luc. Sanco, Sanco; the street, good Captain, the street again.


By the Jesuits.


One Question more, and I have done; Cannot your Taylor cut a pair of Christian
Breeches as well as a Catholic Doublet? I'd fain venture one suit more in
this unchristian Country. Thus would they use the Defender of the Faith were
he here.


Yes, yes, he'll fit you in both kinds.


Farewell, Noble Gentlemen; you may hear News from Dametas.


Give me the box, I'll put the Periwigs in order; Is not the suit well made?


Your bargain was better that got his other.


What a Devil have we here? These Periwigs belong to the Tyring-house; they
are all as black as the Devil is in a Comedy.


Harr. and Ferdin. How! Black?


How came this mistake?


That dull Rogue, Pogio's man; a pox upon his welch memory.


Is't possible he could mistake thus? Why then there is three Crowns cast away;
I always told you, you might cut him as often as you would of the simples, you
could never cure him; Who is that he speaks of?


Even your Brothers wise man, a Munmoth Witch; William ap Merlin ap Roger, a
tame Country-man of yours, that lives as innocently as Ale and fool can keep
them; If there were no more Charity then Profit in it, a man would keep a Cough
of the Lungs, rather then be troubled with such a fool.


There's a couple of them, a Richard and a William; They have been at the Apes
Academy these six months to breed them fine Gentlemen; and yet there's a
Cobblers dog in a Doublet, that lives in a cellar in the louvre, has out-revel'd
them both, and passes for a finer Gentleman.


These are those Periwigs my Boy bespoke for your Brother, who will be as far
to seek with my white ones as I shall be with his black.


The mistake is plain, but what's the remedy?


'Tis easy to wonder; But I would fain see all this College of wits now, to
prescribe a cure; Show all your craft now, to make a black Periwig white.


In this extremity the business may be easier reconciled, and you come forth a
complete Don; 'tis but dying your Beard and Eye-brows black, and a little mouth
glew-to your whiskers, and the business is done.


'Tis but a but, But where's this means for this But, other then walk the
streets like a Magpie; else I am not so in love with white hair but I can sleep
in a black beard.


By this hand do; and we'll say 'tis your brother come from Salamanca, till
you get a white one.


Keep but your own Counsel, and no man can betray you; let not Don Edwardo know
it till you have saluted him in Spanish; you may be resolved by him whether
your disguise be perfect, or no.


If you resolve, I'll fetch you the Water; Our old Secretary has of it; 'tis
that he uses daily to his Beard, and you see it keeps him as Black as a Raven.


Never doubt my resolution; Prithee fetch the water; silly Rogue, to put up the
Box without looking into it; My first visit shall be, to try whether the
Angellica will know me; But we must be all Secret, and serious, till the Jest
be over.


I See them follow us.


We have such a Revenge upon Edwardo; he knew nothing, neither the persons, nor
the place, till I told him; But then he flew like lightning to his Revenge.


Why, who was it? I am her Friend for ever for it.


I guessed right; 'twas Lucetta, and her two Bravo's.


Lucetta? would she be guilty of such an Action? she had a better Reputation in
the world; I wonder she is so foolish as to expose her self to the power of a
stranger that can fly the country when he has done her an affront? Besides,
she's in danger of the Justice, and the Law.


The Law? She has small friends y'faith, if he get Justice against her; I would
it had been his Friend Thomaso, so I had answered the throwing of him out at
Window, and he has good luck if he Escape, for hee'll deserve it richly; where
are they now?


I left them upon a design to visit the Calatravo's, 'tis Saint Cecilia's Eve;
Thomaso is full of Money.


I am glad to hear it, a rich Lover makes his Mistress smile; Captain,
Farewell, we'll to the Church.


AS you Love mirth, Gentlemen, be secret, till some body discover him; say
only, 'tis his Brother Don Jacomo, newly arrived from Salamanca, that we may be
all found in one Tale.


Content at the Church; we shall meet acquaintance.


We'll only pass, and so to the Angellica's, and try if she can know me, see
who comes here.


I know not, pray be serious all, and carry it gravely; See, now they open; so,
now we shall know them.


'Tis the two Sisters.


You have reason, let them pass, see what they will do.


There's Don Harrigo, and the other Englishman, your new Amoroso.


'Tis so; but who's the third? 'tis a handsome Man and a stranger, but none of
their Nation, his Men is too grave.


Some Merchant, I believe, to whom they are recommended.


That Eye has a Fellow; Why hid, Ladies? would you play the spy upon your
Friends? What is it you are Curious to discover?


That stranger, what is he?


A Servant of yours, if you please; a brother of Don Thomaso's that arrived
last night from Salamanca.


A brother of his? The Hen had several Cocks, sure; This looks as if he were
worth a Woman's kindness; 'tis a proper man, would he were less a kin to that
wild humour.


This is a man of another Temper; but we hope to abuse him out of it; Thomaso
swears he's a Maid still.


A maid! so is his brother, 'tis a proper black fellow; and I dare say 'has as
much pride as Thomaso has good nature; This looks as if he would be Courted
before a woman had the honour of his Conversation; where's my Friend? see, he
Eyes us.


Your Friend has more wit then to appear when his brother is in place, for fear
of being despised; 'Twas the first modest action I e're saw in him; This
letting him walk alone; has this as ready a tongue as the other?


Come, I'll bring you acquainted. Don Jago, Here are Ladies, Friends of mine,
desire the Honour of your acquaintance.


'Tis an honour, Sir, to me, and such as a stranger ought to be proud of:
especially such private persons as we Students, that are not only barren of
Desert, but frustrate of Occasion how to merit the most diminutive favours of
so fair a Lady.


Sir, I have had the happiness to know your brother by my sisters Friendship
with him; and though we Quarrel sometimes, that shall not hinder your well-come
to me, when your leisure will bestow a Visit upon your Servant.


Truly, Madam, he has much more to do in the world then I pretend to, that has
any business beyond receiving the honour of such conversation; And therefore
you are to Expect a sudden trouble, by the importunity of your slave being
conscious, to my self my Company may be troublesome; Else I should be more
Ambitious to have the honour to be esteemed your Creature; For yours are the
first Eyes that ever yet had power to pierce my heart; and without vanity let
me say, your beauty is the first that ever threw chains upon your Jago.


'Tis a fool, a formal Ass, he talks like a Mountebank, diminutive honour,
Glorious, Happiness, ambitious of Friendship, Chains, and Flames, and Slaves;
Sweet Lady, sure you cannot be so weak as to believe he has wit and means this
for one of our Trade, at first sight too? Pox on him, he's either an Ass, or
thinks us so; this is but a la Parakito.


Thou art so versed in Raillery and Railing, from thy Lovers tongue, Thou can
not savour any handsome serious reply; thou wilt come to talk bawdy, drink and
swear too, in time, If Huff Cap and Ale were but a little more Domestic here.


No more of this, now; we'll come and see you at home, and satisfy all your
Doubts.


Your Servant, Sir.


Here's mirth, beyond expectation.


I would drive this Jest to the bedside, e're she knew it.


To the bedside, Hall? I, behind the bed, and upon the bed, in the Bed, or
against the wall: if I do not nail this Jest to her Belly, let a Beadle scratch
me with a Dog-whip.


Fie, two Sisters?


I, Ten, if the Litter be kind and handsome, good Country Conscience; What
Advantage do I get by turning Catholic, if a Saint cannot forgive such a sin?
You think a man gets his own Children in this hot Country, as they do in
Essex; Thou art an Ass, There's not such a thing as two Sisters by Fathers and
Mothers side, on this side the Hills.


I'll leave you to pursue your Fortune, for I am resolved to have no hand in it
more then the Jest; she's too much my Friend to betray her.


I'll go and see how hee'll look, when she discovers him; for 'tis not
possible, when we are near, and Converse, but she must find him.


Well, I'm resolved to hunt the mischief till she finds her Error; there's
Revenge, as well as Love in the pleasure.


NOw I find Don Pedro Loves me, when hee'll give this Idol of the World for my
Friendship; And you shall find me, Sir, as kind as you are bountiful, and your
Arms out-vie her that sighs most for Love.


'Tis many Months since I offered you my Service, without limit; and that
which I took ill, was, you doubted my complying with such a poor Sum, which
now has opened your door, where Don Pedro was shut out.


That's a Quarrel all your Sex has against us, though most unreasonable;
Thomaso urged it yesterday; and he upbraided me with selling of our selves.
'Tis truth, and the same Answer serves you both, when either of you set a price
upon your selves; If I have a mind to you I'll pay it, and purchase you; Ours
were a fine trade, if we kept shop, and gave our Wares for Love; would it turn
to account, think you, to dress and hire this House, and venture our Bodies,
and Souls, to receive all that would enter? Try the Trade some one of you.


I urged not that, as a displeasure, that took any Root, only an unkindness,
which is blown over; though I wonder to hear you are a Lover, the Insensible
being as vulgar, as the fair Angellica.


'Tis but the wonder of a Day; A heart I have, Sir, like other Women too,
though no man had wit to find the way to win it; He is dearer to me then all
the Earth besides; and if you love me you will not hate him, you cannot embrace
me single; My breast is full of Thomaso; 'tis his, and Loves Nest.


Can I give you a greater Argument of my Love then this patience, while you
prefer my Enemy and my Rival before me, and avow it to my face?


Can you be an Enemy to my Friend, and Love me? No, Sir, he that loves me loves
and hates as I do; My Friend will protect me, and revenge my wrongs; 'Tis not
the purchase of my bed that tells me you love; that's your pleasure; Mine is to
see you smile when I smile, and embrace what I embrace; and I know there has
passed nothing between you and Thomaso but what may with honour enough be
forgotten; as if you were the first that love and anger had blinded; what is
there so ordinary as to find those Passions throw friends upon the swords of
Friends?


I confess as much; and when the heat was over my Reason did not condemn him;
'twas accidental, and his back was toward me, and we were both angry e're we
knew with whom; He has been since at my house; but I was not at home.


See, Anna, who knocks.


'Tis a stranger, I know him not; he inquires for Don Thomaso.


Call him in. Would you speak with Don Thomaso, Sir?


Yes, Lady, from a Brother of his.


A Brother of his? -- 'Tis he, I know him -- Well, and what business have you
to dispatch from that Brother of his that might not have been done in Gray as
well as Black? Good Don, let's know the reason of this Disguise; have you any
guilt, that you mourn for?


None; but since I am discovered give me leave, first, to salute this
Gentleman, and then you shall know the Cause. Sir, I know Don Pedro has too
much Honour to doubt it in his Servant, who if he were a Stranger would not
make this Apology; But having had the honour to be known to you formerly, I
venture upon the score of a Gentleman and a Soldier that once was commanded by
you; to whom 'tis known, I left neither the service, nor the Country with
blushes; which will be enough, I hope, to prevail with you to forget the
accident of yesterday, in which I am only guilty of having so late called to
mind a person whom I'll so much honour as I shall ever do Don Pedro.


Sir, you have prevented me by your disguise; else I had been earlier in the
confession of my fault; but your disguise, to day, must plead for me, as mine
begot our mistake yesterday; and Don Thomaso may be secure nothing but mistakes
can beget an unkindness from me, who have the same ready heart to serve him.


Embrace then -- so; now I am happy; and this is kinder, and far more welcome
to me then all the price you can give --


No, in earnest; a mere chance: you know, yesterday I resolved to put my self
into the habit of the place, and this morning when I was dressed and called for
my Periwigs, there was none but black ones in the Box; my man mistook when we
parted at Paris, and put up my Comrades Box for mine; and to make the chance a
jest, Harrigo died my Eye-brows and Beard, as you see; and our chief Plot was
to try if you could find it out.


And doth Don Harrigo, or my friend, think, 'tis colours or habit can hide a
Lover from a Lovers eye? No, Thomaso, neither the Hawk, nor Hound have any
sense quicker or more sagacious, then a Lover; there's too much of the heart
pierces with every look to be deceived by shadows.


Yet I have passed this jest upon one whose wit and malice is as great and
curious as your Love; her hate too as full of poison as your kindness can be of
honey; yet she has been deceived; and she that despised me when I was white
dotes upon this shadow; and takes me for my Brother, whom I hourly expect from
Salamanca; yesterday I was a fool, a better kind of Bravo only, neither wit nor
person to deserve from any serious woman; but, to day, all the graces and
excellencies of our sex scarce express her character; she invited me to dinner,
but I sent my excuse; else I could, this day, have had that offered gratis that
would not be purchased before.


And why did you refuse her? Fie, a cruel Knight deny a Lady that sighs for
you! especially when such a jest may be follow'd.


Do you ask why I refused her? is not the Angellica reason enough? thinks my
Love, I would quit my place here to sleep in any second bosom? no, I'll buy no
jests at that rate as well as I love a piece of knavery.


Who is't that is fallen into this snare?


The Saretta, a humoursome Merchant as any Trades, one that has wit and beauty
enough to answer all his bills.


I know her, 'tis a friend of yours; she'll grow lean when she hears your
Picture is down; she hoped no man would purchase your friendship at the rate
proposed.


I know she hates me for praising her Sister, who has much the better nature
and the sweeter voice; I like Paulina's humour, 'tis gay and ingenuous, you may
read a real heart in her eyes; there is woman in her aspect, her very looks are
soft and kind, yet a Girl of a sprightly Men, and graceful in every motion;
'tis pleasure to converse with such a humour; I could love her before a hundred
of her Sister; and I am resolved, this business shall not dye thus if I have
power.


I, I; hereafter we will think on it when 'twill be a cheaper jest, that's a work
will be done in an afternoon as well as in a night.


I swear you dine not here to day, as well as I love you; I'll starve the Boy,
or watch him tame, or delay love till he grow desperate, rather then lose the
sport of this jest. Let me alone to have it sung in the Cachery; the two
Foresters abused the two wits of Madrid with a Periwig; 'tis resolved, no
reply; but away to your business, and I'll teach you how to strike two Birds
with one stone; follow your design with Saretta, and oblige Don Pedro, in
giving him your day here, and I'll give Saretta mine; be but kind when you are
here, I ask no more; till night, we will expect the success.


Well, 'tis resolved; and the willinglier, because one of the Tribe has abused
my Comrade; and if I succeed, her story shall accompany Edwardo in the Prado.


Edwardo's story! what is't, any new accident?


Have you not heard how he was beaten and robbed, and turned out at mid-night
by he knows not whom?


'Twas last night near the Jesuits; I passed by when it was done; Don Mathias
was beaten too and thrown out at a Window; he's out of his Wits to now who did
it; 'twas in the Lucetta's House.


I know not Don Mathias his part; but, Edwardo, no thief taken and whipped had
more shame, or worse usage; but if she passes clearly with it I am deceived in
my man; she might have had his heart for a kiss.


Fie, 'twas base and ugly, but not strange amongst these Mulotto's; and lest
you believe all our Tribe such, see here's my Argument to buy your faith of me,
when I say I love, -- If you love Capricha with any woman in Madrid.


I shall not blush to receive any favour your kindness gives; 'tis the vain and
the miserable that make benefits heavy, and slaves the generous mind more then
want; benefits when they are done with Bon mine; 'tis a pleasure to become a
debtor to such a nature when they shower upon us. Fair and kind, farewell; and
if Love can pay my debts, I am certain I'll owe no score amongst women; and
since you will have it so, let this Spanish wit look to her self; if I do not
lay the jest upon her belly, let her lay a cudgel upon my back. Sir, I am your
servant, and hope to find some time more seasonable to tell you so. Farewell, be
kind to the kind; and 'tis but just to love where you a Lover find.


You are sad, I hate a melancholy Lover; one that must be kissed still out of
his trance, else he'll neither pipe nor dance.


No, I was only admiring what I see and hear; and wonder, why I could not
master my nature as well as you; this Thomaso loves as much as I, with his
sword he purchased you; and for your conversation neglects both the fortune and
beauty of one that is not to be despised; and for your passion, I have the same
Arguments to conclude it that I would use to prove mine own; for I see you pay
the same rate for friendship; yet you two can both tame your hearts so, that
they calmly consent to let each other give and take the fruits of Love; as if
his Tree on the Common grew, enclosed by no vows.


So he doth not marry and impale the Tree, let him give the friut to any she;
Me he will not marry, nor shall not if he would; because I love him he shall
not for my sake be guilty of any action he may blush for; nor will I stand the
curse of a chaste bed, whose robbed sheets, when holy vows have tied him, wound
as sure and fatal as lightning.


Why thus severe to your self? I warrant he may marry you, and with honour and
profit enough forget passed faults.


No, Sir; though honour be that I think not of, because the custom of the world
has placed it beyond our power; yet I can prize it in others, and despise that
man that wants it. Kindness and faith to my Lover, good nature and charity are
the height of our ambition; and 'tis one comfort, that heaven is easier
satisfied then men; who think this fault of ours a gallantry in them, a sin so
light they sing and dance under it all their days; a sin so tamed by custom
that few or none hide it, as if honour had no pretence below a mans Girdle; so
his heart be right all is gallant; chaste men ridiculous, neither believed,
esteemed or trusted by either sex, scarce held of honour if once branded with
that stain; Nay, the contrary, both sexes admires him who has the potent'st
arms, and gives the frequent'st and mortal'st wounds in Venus wars; while women
are so slav'd with custom, that virtue, parts, nor fortune can heal the wound
in us, though Nature, Love and Kindness give it; for which, but that I know we
shall have other judges of that well natured sin, and never a man of you all be
of the jury, I would eat bran ere any he that breathes in breeches should come
between my sheets.


This quarrel would soon be reconciled, could you prevail with your own sex to
a reconciliation; 'tis the women, not the men despise; they cry, Fie, and
frown, else we could digest it; for I observe your severest women that cry
whore most, are the likeliest Timber to cut a Cuckold in.


Nay, on my conscience, the dissemblers of our sex are more then the public
Whores, both for weight and number; but that will not excuse your partial
Idolatry of yours selves.


Our guilt is not so general, we like and enjoy some one; you like nor refuse
none that will buy; which truth I would not urge but for Arguments sake.


You must then confess, 'tis not virtue but nature makes you less guilty then
women; for could you act as often as we can suffer, few of you would refrain
for the sin sake; this I believe, because you all boast not only how many women
you have known, but how often too; and lest the sin should want its weight to
be currant amongst you you will give him grains of oaths, and belie the number.
What partial folly then is that governs the minds of men; and what fools are
women to submit to their Lunacy? I prize my self as high for having enjoyed a
gallant man, as you would do for having won his sword, or a gallant woman's
heart; despised because enjoyed by others! tell me, to morrow, if you find any
paths or steps upon my body where former Lovers trod, or any print of passed
kisses cleaving to their lips; if you can miss those Graces, those Roses they
gathered, and find not as fresh and full handfuls for you to reap, as if he or
they had not found their harvest.


Yet 'tis the opinion, such credit gives love more reputation then women; and
those bills the oftner drawn, and the oftner paid, make a woman a better
Merchant then a Lover.


NOt find him?


No, Madam; yet I came twice just as he went out; I have hunted him both by the
eye and question through the Town, and cannot meet him.


Were you at the Angellica's? I hear my Brother has sent a thousand crowns; I
hope he will be so busy with his new purchase he'll have no leisure to think
upon an old quarrel; else this delay may be fatal.


I was there, and saw Don Pedro at the Window, and a Brother of Don Thomaso's
come out while I was there; I knew him not till he was past.


His Brother? which, he that was at Salamanca?


The same, he came last night to Town; I saw him since with Don Harrigo; 'tis a
proper black man; and has as much of the Don as the other has of the Monsieur;
I left him here hard by, under the Portico.


'Tis strange he should be thus long in Town and neither come nor send; an
injury from him would work more upon me then all the Arguments his Enemies can
urge. -- See who


'Tis Don Harrigo.


What can his business be? Some Message from Thomaso; I'll seem as unconcerned
as he has been negligent.


This is the House, and there is the Lady.


What a dog 'tis to follow such carrion upon every dung-hill, and leave such
Manna here?


Farewell; and tell him since he resolves to be serious, I'll serve him
faithfully, and I hope successfully.


Don Harrigo, you are welcome as any man can be that from a familiar friend
have made your self a stranger; Since Don Thomaso went I have only seen you as
the seasons change; How came you to exceed in your favours? 'Tis not yet the
fall of the leaf; And I remember you did me this Honour the last Spring.


Faith, Madam, 'tis not for want of Respect or Affection that I pay my visits
so seldom here; 'Tis a time that makes all our Nation sneak and hide
themselves; There is a National guilt that beats our Hearts, we are out of
countenance as we walk the streets; The Ages crime hangs upon us; 'tis not
enough that I know my self honest, unless I could make that knowledge general;
All can say, there goes an English-man, though but few know what part he plaid.


This is a noble sense to you, but I meant not to beget your trouble; 'twas
only a kind quarrel for your long absence, which has not paid all that trust
your friend reposed in you.


And I am now to beg your pardon, not only for my self, but a servant of
yours; who dares not appear till he has made his way by this excuse.


My servant, and you mediate for him? What will your Friend say when he hears
it? But pray who can this servant be that sends before?


'Tis Don Alphonso, Madam.


You are merry; but when I send you Gloves from his Wedding, they will not
smell so sweet as those you expected from Don Thomaso; But I would gladly know
where Don Alphouso gave you this Commission.


I had it, Madam, from Don John; who told me your Brother and he had a private
meeting this morning at the Capuchins; where they resolved your Wedding should
be sudden, and by your consent, having declared you had no such intentions for
my Friend.


I will know the depth of this; 'Tis some new design to disgust Thomaso. -- Why
truly, Don Harrigo, my Brother, and my Friends, have given many Reasons fit to
be considered ere I make my self a slave to a stranger; One, that besides his
ruined Fortune, can (in the time of his pretension, after five years absence)
fall in Love with every face he sees, and fight for a whore against my Brother;
One that has had three Quarrels, three Ballads, and twenty Mistresses in the
Prado, ere he could find leisure to pay one visit to me; If I were that foolish
Lover he believes, I see how fit for pity and scorn his Heart would leave me.


Madam, I am ashamed to hear this; Nor can any ingenuous Nature deny what you
have urged; and I shall be loath to destroy your Faith of those Truths I come
to deliver, by going about to justify him, though he be my Friend; Only I
will confidently say, when you shall know how accidentally he came engaged in
all that has happened to beget the discourse of the Town, you will say, It has
been a day of Chances; at which you will laugh your share, and not condemn his
part; Especially your Ladyship being so well acquainted with his humour, which
cannot be out at a Jest; But I am confident his serious thoughts and highest
value, are confined to the happiness you have promised him in your Friendship;
Though the Condition that Fortune has now thrown him in, since his Princes
troubles, makes him not so confident to appear before you, till I had ventured
to say something in his defence; Which, if you please to retire, I shall
deliver; and I hope, with more success then his fears expect.


I should be sorry to find my self so far concerned in your Friend, as to be
very angry with any Arrives of his; No, Sir, you will find 'tis all Thomaso can
do to find me, when he shall seek Serulina; And I hope you are too noble a
Gentleman, either to wish or believe I shall seek him.


He scarce hopes to find such a Virtue in your Sex: Yet allow him as ill as
your fears, or his Enemies would present; I will prove you are as far out of
the way of being happy with Alphonso, as with my Friend with all his faults;
Nor is Alphonso chaster or confidenter then he, only duller and more niggard,
one that fears his flesh more, and loves his money better then Thomaso; which
are the hedges that keeps him in; 'tis neither Love nor Honour that binds him;
only his Craft can dissemble better to gain his own ends, the fair Serulina and
her Dowry; Besides, the Beauty of her person, and Honour of her Family, are
Blessings any man would dissemble to purchase.


Yet he can pretend a Portion, for he can make a Jointure as honourable as my
Dowry; And though he be not so fine a Gentleman as your friend, yet he may be
as good a Husband; he can keep a Wife too, he has a fortune will make her live
splendidly like her self; and discretion bids us consider those real goods, and
not dote upon flowers; and give me a Husband that can feed and cloth me as
well as hug me. What Jewels will Don Thomaso present his Wife with? those of
his eyes and heart; and hang his Arms in stead of Pearl about her neck? or in
her ears fine Verses in stead of Pendants? suppose this yet; 'tis a stout man
whose sword can defend his Wife from cold; and although Don Thomaso's wit be
better then Alphonso's, yet his bond is worth twenty Colonels.


Faith, Madam, since you are in a good humour, I'll argue


These Arguments you urged, Sir, are hazards which the virtuous mind must arm
and resolve against.


I doubt not, Madam, but you have virtue enough to digest the worst of these
their homely pleasures, which reach only to the body; but 'tis sin to consent
to slave the mind; for how will she rejoice or exercise her nobler faculties
when that comes in question; all that have ingenuity must subscribe; wherein
can the soul busy her self in the Country; but in studying of Simples, and
preparing Medecines for nasty Surgery? and perhaps, kill more by error and
mistake, then your charity can expiate; then to suffer the affliction of such
grounded ignorance, such resolute folly, such natural dullness as most
Country-families are haunted with.


Yet 'tis sweet being in the Country with all this; and when I marry it shall
be to become a Wife, not a Slave, Don Harrigo.


That's resolved as I could wish; and for the Country, 'tis no question but
'tis as sweet as Lavender or Rose-mary can make it; but I think the Orange and
Jessamine in a bottle, and the Trees all the year in your house at Madrid, as
sweet as those in the hedges.


I, but to walk and gather these flowers, is there no pleasure in that?


When? by Moon-shine? I am sure you dare not meet Signior Sol abroad, unless
you'll come home, like Rose-cakes from a Still, baked and sweating; which though
your dew be sweet (as common civility will make us allow that) yet 'tis
troublesome and a new sight to meet Ladies abroad, when the dogs cry as they
pass the streets, when to walk in your Court but two turns is evidence for
chastity, and out-does the old Law Ordeal: 'Tis enough for your Alphonso and
his Indian breeding to endure such stabs as the Sun strikes in the Dog-days;
'tis true, they say he will beat the hoof in his woollen-hose, till his feet
sweat and stink more then a hunted Bores, and are fain to be steeped at night
as long as the Beef, ere they be fresh again; this commonly out of freedom is
done in my Wives Chamber; and if he be kind, and dares trust you, perhaps he
desires you to cut his Corns and dress his Issue, signs of favour I can assure
you; and such as you must not hope, unless your woman be out of the way; and
that honour being passed, the Giant stretches himself, yawns and sighs a belch
or two, stales in your pot, farts as loud as a Musket for a jest; and then
throws himself under the Rug, and expects you in his foul sheets, and aspitting
cloth, where hangs as much of his Lungs as remains in his body; and ere you
can get into the bed he calls you with a snore or two; and are not these fine
things in a Ladies bed? who would not rejoice to meet his woollen-waste-coat
and knit-night-cap without a lining? a shirt so nasty a cleanly Ghost would
scarce appear in at the latter day; for his linen is a kin to him ere he puts
it off; thus prepared for delight you Ladies meet your Country-husbands; the
Alphonso, high shoes; and there lye and suffer them to abuse you as often as
they please to use you, which you'll too late repent; and there you may lye and
sight whole nights away, he'll snore and snore till it be day under the same
covers, and in the same bed his forefathers lived and died in, and some so
lately you may smell the very earthiness of the Corps still; and 'tis a better
savour then his arms or breath, a stink composed of vile Tobacco and dead Wine,
stuffed nose, rotten lungs, and hollow teeth, half whose number has been drawn
with dry Cheese, and tuff lean beef; yet this man you must kiss; nay, you must
kiss none but this, and muzzle through his beard to find his lips; and this you
can submit to for threescore year for a jointure; which you must purchase too;
for he sells you that and this Paradise, his bed, for the price of your portion
only; and in strict sense you give him so much to lye with him as long as he
lives; for unless he dies you have nothing but a place in his Family, and so
has his dog, who shall have a pension as well as you; for in these bargains of
Wedlock the Wife is to the portion only the handful over measure; a Chattle
that he takes to stock his Family, as other Cattle to stock his ground; nay,
perhaps he's a blade too, and then you may spin at home, while he is abroad
with Phillis in the field; by which you find, the Alphonso's are as subject to
the ills you dread, as the Thomaso's; only, as I said before their differences
is, the Alphonso's are more nasty lusts, and cheaper Whores, and the sin more
dirty there then in the City.


Sir, By this I gather a kind of necessity of being miserable; either way
affords precipices enough to make a Maid tremble ere she makes a choice.


Therefore from frail men choose the least or best ill; take such a Gentleman as
my friend, that you know has wit and honour, and a passion for you; one that
you see has lived and maintained himself in spite of cross fate; and though he
has lost his fortune, 'tis with honour enough; never burdening any with his
wants, without cheating or tricks, one stained with no base action, his name
and honour still clear and fair both with his Prince and Comrades; and when
your kindness has added a fortune to his experience, his grateful heart will be
eternally obliged to you, and so busy to serve you and justify your choice to
the world, so industrious to deserve new favours as well as pay the old, that
'twill be a joy to your soul to see. What cares Don Alphonso for you or your
opinion? sick or well, live or dye, he's prepared; the funeral cloak is brushed
and laid up for the good day; and if you dye, 'tis upon your own account, for
he is sure of your Portion; and your Jointure serves again, never the worse for
wearing; and will bait the hook for some other fool to bite at.


And none but fools are taken with such baits, nor none but mad folks suffer
such chains; I am yet free, and will be, from all such slavery.


In serious earnest, Madam, 'tis nobler far to buy a friend whom you affect,
though at price of your fortune, then to be chaffered or sold to slavery by
friends, who only think upon joining wealth to wealth; with my friend you
command as much as you must obey there; Don Thomaso has seen the world, and
gathered from every Nation what is excellent, and can comply with times and
natures, for he has been bred in Courts and Armies, those schools of the mind,
where men learn to tame their wills and persons; for Princes are to be studied
and obeyed, not disputed with; with him you'll know no cause of dispute; with
the other you must expect perpetual civil war, a sullen, rude, louring,
wilful, scowling clown, from whom if you escape blows, 'tis well; an unhew'd
rudeness, whose very kindness bruises; that when he but strokes or flatters his
dogs, they cry, This will seek and bring all that is pleasure home, either in
humour or conversation, to divert you; the one will devour this youth and
beauty that flows with such grace in every form and feature in that lovely body
and diviner face, like common food, for his dull appetite, without a thought or
value of the feast you set before him; while Don Thomaso with awe and respect
and faithful kindness from a ravished soul enjoys you. Alphonso, Don Indian! By
this light, he thinks he's trading at Gamba still, and would sell you, himself,
that Bell and Bauble for your youth and fortune; 'tis his last venture, and
you'll make a voyage if he catch you.


I am not desperate; nor find no such disease in a single life, as to drink
this poison to become such a wife; when I find my self desperately sick, and
nothing else can please, I'll send for a Priest and change the disease.


Faith, Madam, and Marriage is one disease which women are necessitated to
pass; for an old Maid is an evil without a remedy; an ill husband may be cured
by a divorce, but there's no flying the other curse; a kind husband is the best
cordial you can provide against infection of Marriage; and if you should be
sick or sad (which heaven defend) Thomaso would so divide your griefs with a
kind sense of what you suffer, so pity your pain, so feel all your griefs, that
you will find sadness vanish, and sickness it self decay, while health, perfect
health, by kindness charmed, returns; and you'll find so much more pleasure to
walk with such a friend in one of his descriptions of a Garden* then in twenty
of Dameta's Orchards; and read in his relations the Histories of persons, times
and places; And such such minds, Madam, and such men, are fit for such Brides
as the Gentle Serulina; and they only make happy Hymens; the rest but join the
sex and beast together; and such sordid coupling is base and mean, and the
herds afford as good Nuptials; this advantage Colonels (Madam) that have wit
and breeding may pretend above those who have nothing good but their Bond and
Jointure. Your servant, Lady; my hour is out, and so much shall serve for this
time.


Pray, Madam; where was father Harrigo's text? I hope he will not find it in
our family; after this counsel, it will be fool the first and the second; and
if he does, pray consider the Doctrine and use, how he cited his Saint without
a Calendar, urging his Thomaso still to prove his text, and has so confuted
Father Alphonso for Schism.


If I had been disposed to have listened to that clod in the Country, what a
character he had given him to have shook a resolution? but the truth is there
was no fear of that punishment; and this shower of reason hath but given growth
to a former aversion.


Marry Alphonso? such a wedlock would have more sins to answer, with him, then
adultery with another man; I had as live follow to the Hostel de dieu, to waste
your youth in vows there, a handmaid to Lazars and Cripples, as spend it in
such a Marriage.


There is no danger, Calis, of such a folly; and I cannot but wonder why my
Brother is so bent upon it, as to attempt the forcing of my consent; sure he
knows whose Daughter I am; and I have so much of the Father in me, as but for
modesty sake I should be very sensible of his unkindness, though I love him
with all the tenderness a Brother can expect from a Sister; but I'm resolved
not to make my self miserable to please him; and for my honour I shall always
be as much concerned in that as he, and will dye ere throw the least stain upon
our Family.


And this he knows, though Don John still sollicites him to a sudden
resolution; Diego says, he presses him to see you married, or put into a
Monastery, to avoid Don Thomaso's pretension, whose fortune he could never
brook.


A Monastery! I am like to make a good Nun; this passion is an excellent
ingredient for a Grate; no, Calis, I have a Saint of mine own to pray to; and
we will try whether our women's wit can be more ingenious, then his jealous, or my
Brothers angry fit; get me your old Coat and Veil to put over me; I have a a
design, if it take, will put all their kennel of spies to cold hunting.


I am glad to see you intend your safety; for I do believe women may do most of
their own business upon earth themselves, if they would but leave the ^inning,
and try; wit and handsome, in good clothe, will do our ^ness as well as the
Madonna.


DId she not suspect at all?


Mahomet as soon as me in her bed, I am confident; the Quean was so kind, and
the sinest armful of sweet white sin I have clasped in Madrid; I could wish I
were black indeed, for her sake, I would have given her handsomely out of the
Angellica's present, and, By this light, she refused it.


Why do you put on these clothes then?


To meet Paulina, who will be here in a minute; but I must be gone first, and
leave word I am upon the Piazza.


A pox upon her, I thought to have been so fine in these clothes to morrow.


'Tis but a little patience till the jest be over, and then they are yours;
this was a chance I could not foresee, nor neglect when kind fortune presents;
-- But all this while, Harrigo, you give me no account of our serious business;
what success had your


Come, dress you and walk, and you shall know all; I have been with her and
found her in a good humour, and I believe I left her not in an ill one; but
upon my word 'twas time, if not of the latest, for all your fooling; 'tis not
enough to value her in your heart, but to let her see it in your actions too,
unless you mean to quit the thought of it; women are not to divine a Lovers
mind; 'tis well they will answer when Love questions their heart.


I am of your mind; and this day I'll find some occasion to see her; I forgot
to tell you, Don Pedro and I are friends; I met him this morning at
Angellica's; and she made us embrace.


Trust not that friendship; for I am confident he brooks neither of your
interests, either with his Sister, or his Mistress; and where he has an
advantage you'll find it, I know Don John presses him hourly to a revenge; you
know the man and his nature, a most implacable enemy, I speak upon sure
grounds; and therefore dispatch your business with Serulina; such a jest, and
two hundred thousand crowns, will make one laugh and merry an age; those you
amuse your self with are only for the Prado, or to laugh an hour within a
Comedy; where you'll see them better done too, and exceeded by the Mountebank; I
am your friend, else I should not take the privilege to say this.


Dear Harrigo, 'tis kindly said, and I am thine for it; and we will find some
hour, to day, that may be seasonable and safe to visit her; for I confess to my
friend, my journey hither was to see what success that amour could find; (...)
whose kindness I am more concerned then any man but your (...) shall know; nor
can this mist of raillery and mirth blind a friends eyes, to whom I shall say,
'tis no more my nature then my interest, though I choose rather to put it on
then give any woman's pride the Gusto, to think, because I am poor 'twas in her
power to despise me; but to my friend I shall still be free and serious; come,
we must be gone, to avoid Paulina's visit; I am too much out of cash to accept
her Bills of Love to be paid upon sight; her Sister has had all my ready money.


When the trick is known all the load will be laid on me for keeping your
counsel; and pray tell me, am I such a dull fool as you believed for continuing
kindness for this Girl? By my life, I would not change her friendship with any
she in Madrid, if her spirit were not so furiously raging sometimes.


I love a froward Girl, a storm for variety; and 'tis Comedy to kiss them when
they scratch, and see how quickly a calm will follow their tears and anger.


COme, make haste, you see the company begins to gather; is my Master returned
yet?


No, Sir; he is gone to prepare a pair of Bathes in some private place, and has
left my Mistress with the old Lady within, she asks for you.


'Tis well, I'll attend her; salute the Gentlemen now that you may take leave
of them and Scarramucha with a good grace. Now I love you; excuse him,
Gentlemen, pray now; for his mind doth so run upon a Lady, that he forgets his
respect to me, his old Master.


There's few or no company come, let's walk a turn towards the Church. --


See, there he is, and his friend with him.


'Tis he, be sure to speak with him ere he goes off the place, and take some
opportunity to give him that Letter.


There is one of our Tribe, Hall; and a man were in stock, what commodities he
might take up of this kind, and at good rates too! -- How now? another? By this
light, I must get a switch to keep them off; now, your business, fair one?


I have some, Sir, and 'tis serious; which I would impart to you if you please
but to follow me to yon Church.


You had best retire betimes ere they pull thee in pieces; you see what 'tis to
have the reputation of a sufficient man among these Merchants; 'twill be long
enough ere they come to offer their war to me thus.


Sweet Saint, or sinner; I am now, and have lately been so busy I have no
leisure to make a new friendship; 'tis all I can do to keep credit with my old
friends; if I had but a little little corner of a heart to spare thou should
have it for kindness sake; but ask this noble Gentlemen, a friend of mine, if
there be not, at this minute, staying in my Chamber one of Venus Creditors
dunning my sheets, for a promise, and I am now going to pay a debt I owe upon
my honour; else I were your man, Courteous and kind; Another time command me.


Sir, my business is worth your serious thoughts; I have a letter for you.


Nay, if it be from a writing Lady, shee'll never find me at leisure to read
her two leaved books; Those humble Ladies that write first, their wits are best
when their Faces are at worst; 'tis fair, if the fair will answer us; and I
dread to find a Lady that dedicates her self, thus, by Epistles to a man; if it
be haste give it to one of my Friends, I'll try if I can persuade one of them
to know your business.


Let's see your face Mistress; come, show a sample of the goods you sell; would
you have us buy a Goose in the Feathers? a woman in a dream is worth a hundred
of those visions; till this shell, this vail be off, who knows what Kernel your
Nut holds?


Where shall I meet you, Harrigo, an hour hence?


Con and I must go about our business, for an hour; then I am for you; where
you'll appoint.


I'll call you at home --


What house is that he entered? follow, and give him the letter, or wait his
coming out; I'll home, and Expect you; dear Calis, make haste; tell him 'twas I
that saluted him; and if he wonder why I was in this habit, satisfy him I am
to make a private devotion to Saint Cecilia's Altar this Night.


I'll obey you; but he's so full of his wild humours still 'tis ten to one
but he makes sport with me again, before I can deliver it.


Prithee make haste, lest he pass before you speak with him; you know how much
it concerns me; if it take, We shall be too hard for my Curious ill-natur'd
Brother, and his furious friend.


Who was that? how she eyed us? See, she looks back still.


If he follows me I am undone for Ever.


She's right, I warrant her, and some one that knows you.


'Tis the Angellica by her Tallea; She told me to day she would go abroad this
afternoon; that Coat and Scarf betrays her, for those shoes and feet are not
of a piece; some knavery in design, who e're she be, I warrant her.


Let's follow her, and be certain who 'tis; See where she Sails; We may fetch
her up yet e're she doubles yon Cape; she looks back as if she were willing to
be chased, and boarded too, I warrant her Prize; If you will not chase with the
Admiral, let your servant Carlo chase with his Frigate of Cupids; I'll make her
spread all her Canvas, but I'll speak with her; 'Tis no matter for Commission;
Pirat is as good Title to these Carvels, as lawful men of War.


See, she stops, and looks back still; follow aloof, Carlo; I'll see who 'tis.


What a task it were to make this Don Chaste, or Constant? now is he as mad
upon planting this new Island, as the Angellica's continent; another thousand
Crowns I foresee in Plantation; he is taken with the prospect already; a good
Eye, and a white hand, a straight Instep, and a clean pastern, a pair of good
feet, the Rogue will follow them to a precipice; Now must I follow, and when he
has set the Partridges, draw the Curtains about them; for I warrant her lie
whilst a man may draw a sheet over her; and 'twere not ill sport, in payring
time, to hawke these manned whores, but that they are subject to be
green-tayl'd too.


What ho, down with our Banks, Excuse our Patron to the Gentlemen; he is
detained by urgent occasion.


I am lost, sure he knows me, he follows so fast; 'tis impossible to get home
before him, other place I know none, nor where to retire, but to a Church, and
there the liberty of being free with women will make him certainly discover me;
Is there no door open, no house I could shelter my self in, till he be passed?
see, he comes, something I must resolve.


There she goes again; 'tis the Angellica, I see by her step; I'll follow her,
for that look; she has some Roguery in Chase.


If I were not busy now, there were a Fortune, she looks back; I, sweet soul,
I would follow thee with all my heart, but that I have business; is't not pity
such Love-Beggars should want an Alms? if I were as able as Charitable, Not a
poor whore in Madrid should want a kindness; See, Don Pedro is leering after
her; Now Sir, you are stalking, I see the Game before you; by this light, he will
draw a whore dry foot.


'Tis a pretty wench, by the list; if the Cloth be as good, I am her Man too;
'Tis some of our Friends in disguise; she gave me the sign thrice; prithee let
me go, e're she be out of sight.


Never fear her; Shee'll stop at every Streets point; but to our business; 'tis
certain Harrigo has been with your sister, this morning, from Don Thomaso.


Prithee meet me at the Caletravoes, and we'll talk at large of it; but I must
needs see who this is.


Would any man think he had paid a thousands Crowns this Morning for a Woman's
Friendship that he dotes upon, that should see him stepping from his first
visit; thus hot in pursuit of a Fresh design, that shows a true-bred, Stanch,
stout lover, Cupids Kennel love to change.


He pursues me still; If he speaks to me, in this disguise, I am lost, nothing
less then certain death to be expected from his Fury; I know his jealousy has
contracted a hatred against me; 'tis neither my Innocence, nor Justice can
protect me; There is no disputing his rage when it is armed with power, and
privilege to destroy; which the base Custom of this Nation assumes; and
under, pretence of Honour Act all barbarous power, even to murder upon Women;
And so they can but tell a specious tale of honour, they are excused, we
condemned; See, fortune, kinder then I expected, offers a relief, here is a
door Open; I'll enter, and shut it after me; why should I dispute it? what
danger can I apprehend worse then his fury? this will at least shelter me from
his pursuit; he will not be so impudent to ask for one he knows not, however my
necessity has no choice; Love be thou propitious; and let once oppressed virtue
find thee and Fortune kind; else, who will wonder if we stray, or lose the way,
when both our guides are blind.


To this place I followed her; she is entered some of these houses, or turned
short that damned Lane; a Pox of Johanne, his prating has lost her; perhaps
she's gone up the Lane to yonder Church, I'll see; if I retrive her, she's
mine.


SO, now I am a little at peace; 'tis some consolation to my mind, the hopes
of a Revenge; would my Clothes were come home, that I might quit my Fresco; yet
this time I may waste to my advantage, by contemplating and Philosophying upon
my own misfortunes; a young handsome Whore to use me thus! a young Dissembler
must be an old Witch; if I had got my Night for my money it would never have
grieved me; how like a Boatswain I am clothed, and I have a heart now as hard
as any the Galley breeds; I grow malicious too, and am mad, to see Thomaso's
fortune; The Rogue is so successful; All Trumps turn of his Suit still; That
black Periwig (a mischance as we thought, and laughed at) has got as good Fish
as any Hook he threw into the Sea, this Voyage; Well, all I beg of Fortune is,
but to send some one of the Sex into my power; Any thing in Petticoats, that
may be at my mercy: By this light, a Cat at Tower-wharf, or a Cavalier at
Westminster, a Whore in Bridewell, or a Bear at Stake in Whitsontide, shall
find more mercy than I'll show her: How many ways have I killed that Sanco and
Lucetta over, in my mind, since last night? I'll send for a Bottle of
Consolation; what cordial comfort, I and counsel too, have I found in Sack! I
shall be mad, if I stay at home, and think upon my injuries, without it; here's
a damned Book too tells me how to avoid such accidents now when 'tis too late;
by which I find, 'tis not amiss sometimes to read as well as hawk or hunt; and
yet 'tis some comfort to find some others have been ill used before me; and
now I have nothing to do I'll pass my time with other men's injuries, and learn
all the causes I can to hate this damned Nation, and the false sex.


'Tis a handsome house, and no body in it; yes, there is one, what is he doing?
Armed in his Drawers, some Master of Defence, or else a Tumbler; what ere he be
I must speak to him -- Sir, if your study be not very importunate, pray let me
divert you.


Ha! a woman, and alone! Fortune thou art kind. -- What miserable thing art
thou?


Your charity, Sir, guesses right: a most unfortunate person; a Virgin, Sir, in
distress, that's forced to seek protection, though a stranger, from your roof;
and if you favour not, she's lost for ever.


What strange Curse can threaten thee worse than to be thrown thus into the
dangers of this place? Dost thou know, wretched thing, where thou art? Does not
thy heart bode the ill, that's hanging over thy head? Dost not observe me, and
the posture thou find me in?


Your words and posture, both, beget my wonder: But alas, Sir, I had no choice
of safety; either I must find it in this house, or fall into the hand of ^
mortal Enemy, from whose rage and power I was to expect nothing less than a
present death. But why you should threaten my misery with new fears, my
innocence is yet ignorant of the cause, my heart being guilty of no one injury
done you by this visit.


From death you are pretty safe, my anger is not mortal; but for the rest, if
any of your sex ever found a more implacable Enemy, let the Hangman shave my
throat.


Sir, as you are a Gentleman, I conjure you, consider, ere your passion
transports you. -- Why are you so barbarous to abuse a Maid, fled to you for
protection?


Yes, yes, talk: I would fain see one of your sex talk me into a faith again;
Innocent, quoth you! so was I; come, no resisting; By this light I'll bang your
bones, if either you make a noise, or struggle: What a pox are you grown so
impudent as to follow me into my house? Is the fool so visible in my forehead
that you dare attach me here? Enrage the Boar, and pursue him to his den? Am I
such a Du-pe, as to be robbed and coozen'd thrice in a day? Come, come, off
with this Hood.


You are a barbarous person; and I doubt not but Heaven will protect me from
you.


As barbarous as I can be; I'll assure you, I'll kiss, and see thee; not that I
care a rotten Orange for it; Nay, I will lie with thee too, and yet you are never
the safer from my anger; nay, I'll show one Whore how another has used me; I'll
even treat you upsie-dock, for I can kiss, and rob, and kiss, and beat a Whore
too, as well as she did me, and strip you too at noon-day, as I was at
mid-night, and turn you into the street for Flies to sting and boys to hoot;
Come along, or by this light I shall flatter you with such claps as will make
your ears ring.


Hold Sir, why do you pull me? Though you be angry, yet hear me speak; you know
I am not guilty of the injuries you have received, and 'twill be most inhumane
to revenge your self upon me; this is such a treachery, to set your doors open
of purpose to betray the wretched that fly for sanctuary to you; why this
violence? your eyes and Reason may tell you, I am not acquainted with such
barbarous usage: As you have honour, or any thing of gentle in you, consider,
ere you let your rage proceed to further injury: Do not mistake me for one of
those vile women; For by all those holy things, I vow, there is nothing
innocenter than my self; and this visit only a chance, and a sad one too;
Necessity, dire necessity, to save a life and honour, which were both at stake,
made me enter your doors.


Persuade me 'tis night, Tell me I dream, or my beard is gray; any thing shall
find faith as soon as the tears, prayers, or flattery of a Spanish woman; a
race of young dissemblers, false and bloody, in their youth, to weep my Purse
out of my Pocket, and flatter me into a beating! young Devils, to abuse a
stranger for being kind only; And I be not revenged upon all your sex, let me
pass for a tame fool -- Come, or by this Hilt I shall bang you with this
Scabbard, good Devil.


How now, what Scene's this?


Fred, thou art come in the nick. A prize y faith.


What, she's in love too? One of a great Family, that's fain to steal a visit;
some one whose passion has transported her beyond the bounds of modesty and
custom? Is't not so, fair one? or some mighty concupiscence which Petticoats
cannot tame.


No, she's one that's pursued by some near a kin, a Husband or a Brother, and
was fain to take sanctuary here at Fools Haven; and this poor innocent simple
young virgin had been murdered, but that by miracle she found the way to pick
the Lock of our Door, where she will find such a Sanctuary. Death, to me for
protection? As if fine words and tales could delude the Fool again! No, young
one, curse thy self, for the world shall not save thee, nor any thing in
Spanish Petticoats find mercy here, not a cloven Saint, no, not the Madonna,
unless she were disguised.


Now Lady fair, is this the story?


Yes Sir, and a most sad and serious truth.


She sighs; Take heed, Ned; this is in love with thy skin, she will flay thee;
if thou trust her, there are of her Tribe about the Town such excellent Thieves
they'll geld a man ere he feels them: I have heard of one that robbed a mans
mouth, while he slept, of a row of teeth; another stole Jack Smith's Eye out of
his Head at noon-day, and he never missed it till he felt the cold; Nay, she
made him buy it again; This is true, Dame, as nice as you make it.


Sir, some such ill women, void of honour and shame, there may be; but why you
should be so hasty to condemn me for one of them is most uncharitable, till you
have cause for your fears; have I asked ought of you, or injured the place more
than by putting my unfortunate foot in your house; nor that, but to have saved
a life that was pursued.


Come, come, be real and confess, for this Trick will not pass upon us: why
here? why in this house? inhabited by strangers only, that neither knew nor
practised with any of you till yesterday, and see how we are used! Behold that
wrack, a tall ship well rigged, and a good fraught when he put out of Port, and
see how a she-Pyrat of this Isle of Rogues has used him, but for sailing one
Tide in your Streights; all to be beaten and plundered, and set a shore for
Dutchmen; but if he will be ruled by me, you shall curse the story: By this
hand we'll both lie with her, one will be enough to beat her.


That I promised her before you came; Little one 'tis resolved you must pay
this score: Honour, Revenge, and Pleasure, all three condemn you to the Couch
within.


Else we shall be alone the sport of the Prado; and the blind Fiddler, who
would else have roasted none but the Englishmens names upon his Lanteer, now
the spit shall turn with a new tune; I would Thomaso were here to see us towse
this Quarry, in revenge of our affront -- Come Sweeting, cry, I, I, poor virgin
in


Do you know Don Thomaso the English Colonel?


Know him? yes: I would he were here, he would have a leg or a wing of thee,
Chicken; but 'tis as well, we'll leave him some of the Carcass till he come
home, he's not so nice-stomack'd, but he may make a Collation upon a cold Whore
and a Salad.


For his sake, I conjure you, if you be Friends, use me civilly; and I am
confident he'll take it kindlier than if you should pursue this barbarous
humour,; what is passed I can forget, because I have heard something of your
story; and if you be that Englishman that was abused, I confess I do not wonder
to find you thus enraged; 'twould make a better nature than you profess think
of their revenge; and when he comes, if you repent your delay of Justice upon
me, I am still in your power to be used as barbarously as he or you shall
decree.


She speaks sense, but 'tis out of time, and I am deaf to all but revenge; I
care not to be just or gallant; I'll be revenged on all the sex, Angels in face
and voice, but Devils in their hearts; I thought I had made a friendship with a
Saint, so young, so innocent; when the dissembling Whore would have coozen'd a
Jesuit, false and bloody as the common Stews.


Be you my Judges, my innocence dares appeal to your rage, for the worst that
that and malice can say; when you have listn'd to all that anger can prompt you
to, suppose me the worst of women, sent upon the blackest Errands, you must
confess my journey was either to prostitute my self for moan you lust; one of
these base causes is the worst your heart can think me guilty of; Now to clear
my self from those crimes, and to assure you I am fallen by chance into this
misery, take this Diamond, 'tis of no common price, I freely give it as a
Pledge of my Innocence, and a price to purchase only your delay of revenge
till Thomaso comes; and if he doth not allow of my protection, let me suffer
all your displeasure threatens; you see I am so confident of my innocence, I
refer my self to be judged by your Friend.


'Tis a Diamond. Hum, Fred, This mollified a little; 'tis strange how much more
sense this Diamond speaks than her tears or prayers.


This Ring makes her sense plain, which was hard before; and do you hear, Ned,
'twould vex us to be hanged for ravishing an honest woman, when we think we
only towse a Drab; and but a scurvy Why-not, to oversee a Gallows so.


A pox upon her, I cannot believe she is real; what if this Ring be false? They
are all dissemblers; the other talked as parlously as this, and gave me a chain
too; as false metal as her self, Gypsy


However, there is nothing lost but time in this venture.


Well, I'll once break a resolution, and delay my revenge, for an hour; come,
I'll see you safe in my Chamber till your Friend comes; but I'll make bold to
keep you Company, lest you play another Cats Trick, and leap the window.


And if I escape this storm I'll no more to Sea, blind Love in thy Idol Name, To
hazard Honour; Life and Fame.


DOn Pedro, What occasion stops you here, Sir? will you do us the favour to see
our house? 'tis the poor habitation of strangers; We boast nothing
Extraordinary; and for Furniture, so the Kitchen and the Cellar be well, if the
Bottles be good, the Bed cannot be ill.


'Tis more then you know, Don Thomaso, what furniture you have in your house;
for if I mistake not there is a moveable more then you imagine, and now I am
confident she is entered here; We followed a pretty woman, and (as near as I can
guess) to your door, before I lost sight of her; she gave the sign at every
Turning.


Upon my life 'tis the same I saw in the Piazza; If you please to go in, we'll
inform our selves better.


QUick Fred. look out, I heard some body open the Streetdoor.


'Tis Thomaso, and strangers with him, some of the same Crew we had the Quarrel
with; Don Pedro what do you call his Name? he is one of them.


Don Pedro? As you have Honour, By all that is dearest unto you, let him not
see me; I conjure you, be not Calmly barbarous; though your Rage has wronged me
yet now you are collected, be not so inhumane as to Expose me to misery, for
your sport only.


By this light, she is really Concerned, I see now, by her Paleness; poor Girl,
Come be not afflicted; by my life, he shall neither see thee nor Injure thee
here; come be confident: poor Rogue how she shakes!


Sir, I'll take your word, and if I live I'll deserve this Favour from you; And
now I consider your Friend better, it calls to mind a former injury, so freshly
acted that I cannot but wonder what Star makes me thus subject to him? and
though I take no delight in Revenge, yet I would not have him urge me too
far.


What was it she said?


I neither know nor care.


Ned, see here are friends of yours come to give you a visit; They heard you
kept your Chamber.


Sir, I am both sorry and ashamed for your injury; But since you know who did
it I shall gladly have the Honour to join in your Revenge.


Why faith, 'tis Lovers luck: but I should not have seen you so confidently as
I do, in this Garb, But that I am upon better terms with the Sex then I hoped
this morning; for here is one of the foolishest, or else unlucky'st wenches
fallen into my mercy, that ever was hid under the Curse of a Petty-coat; By
this light she found me and set upon me alone, and braved me here in my
Chamber; an Impudent tear-sheet; and if I had not been armed she would have
ravished me; she knows you both, and pretends some interest in Don Thomaso;
but, for your part, she will not see you; her cover is none of the best, but
she is fine and clean underneath.


'Tis the same.


I have taken out Letters of Mart for reprisal against her; and vowed to make a
voyage upon her, e're she go out again; yet she eats nothing but Bread and
Water till she pay it, nor shall she lie alone neither.


He had boarded her e're I came up; so she ransomed her self with this Diamond;
but she is only Repriv'd till you come, she says you'll be her Bail.


Hang her poor whore, some common Carrion; she would never haunt your house
else; 'tis some hungry Kite you see, she flies at all; your ring is likely to
be a good one, when she had rather give it then lie with you.


Ned, take my counsel; hide your Ring and deny this story as you love your
Credit; Two such affronts in one day! for the Nations sake hide them before the
Boys come to know it; robbed and beaten by one Whore, and another rather pay
then have you do her work; where is she, Fred?


In Neds Chamber, will you go and see her? I have engaged my self you must not;
But you may peep, or so.


Give me the key.


If I but see a Glimpse of her Face, I can tell whether she be a Wench of any
Garb or no.


Follow me, Sir; and when I go in I'll plant my self so, that when she
discovers her face to me you may see her.


A pox on her for a crafty Quean; she has turned her back to the door; there is
no knowing her.


'Tis no great loss if you lose the sight; she has been here this hour, yet I
was not so curious to lift up her veil; Come, Don Harrigo, We have a Bottle or
two in Fresco, let's waste the time with that; and when Thomaso comes we shall
hear all the story; if she prove prize, Harrigo shall receive his Majesties
tenths and fifteens.


No, Sir, I am not for that Game; I hate such hawking at the Bush with those
Bob-tails; Give me a long-wing'd Hawke, a high flying whore, 'tis sport to see
her stoop.


NO more excuses, Sir; I am satisfied, 'twas all full of chance; no intention
of any injury to me, this habit and the license of the place was only guilty;
and 'tis all forgot, though my part had like to have been sad; and those clouds
and fears that darkened my mind this morning, this joy, to find you the same we
parted, has quite dispersed; nor will I fear the frowns or storms that any man
can threaten, since you are satisfied; whose protection and opinion is all I
would seek or find amongst men; yet, in kindness and civility to my Brother, I
would not have him see me here; 'tis not handsome so to declare against a
Brother; and though his anger be an usurped power, it will be more modesty to
suffer such a tyranny then to war against it.


I am yet so confounded and surprised with my joys, so amazed to meet you here,
I can scarce settle my heart into a faith of what I see. The Sea works still,
though the storm be past; and my heart trembles to think what a danger you have
escaped, knowing the nature and the rage that now possesses both my friends; to
which is added the accident of your Brothers being within, my soul feels the
horror still; what strange misfortune directed your feet, in that hour of
mischief, into this danger; yet if self interest could govern me, I have cause
to rejoice; this storm having wrought through a thousand impossibilities, and
procured a blessing for which I, in vain, have laboured many years, and now
possess with fears and doubts; for I was never so vain as to believe I deserved
this honour from you, nor never had a thought so insolent as durst assure me I
should be happy; yet, 'tis truth, I always adored you above your sex, and still
gazed upon the virtuous Serulina, as that divine person from whom I was to
believe and expect all that kindness honour and justice could prompt her heart
to; and see how those vows and that faith, have not only paid but exceeded all
my hopes, and, heaven knows, surprised my very wishes; for which goodness, at
your feet thus I throw your servant, bound by gratitude with eternal vows of
faith, to adore the virtuous and fair Serulina; but we must be Edwardo, whose
late injury has made him a beast, and ready to act all inhumane things upon
your sex; which danger I must prevent.


I confess, when Edwardo was alone, I had some apprehension, because I had
formerly known him by that accident that befell in my garden, where he showed a
most untamed nature, whom neither danger, reason, nor tears could soften; but
when Ferdinando came in I then took courage; for you seldom read of two men so
wicked by chance, as to act or consent to such crimes as Murder, or Rape, where
the looker on grows as guilty as the actor.


I beseech you, Madam, let me interrupt your discourse; lest while we talk of
passed dangers, those that are upon the way and drawing near surprise us; your
Brother is without, and expects me; pray be pleased to hide your self in your
veil, and shut the door till I return, who will with all possible diligence
disperse the company within and wait upon you.


WEll, Gentlemen, I'll take my leave of you; I see Don Thomaso is pleased with
his visit; and 'twill be but an ill complement to speak in his draught; upon
the Piazza this evening, I'll meet you and hear his adventure.


Nay, faith, never part till he comes; we will have only one bottle more, and then
I'll call him; Pox on her, 'tis some crafty Whore, and hopes to flatter and
mollify him; for he's such a good natured fool she'll persuade him to any
thing.


Let them both use their best Oratory, try if they can prevent her walking in
Fresco this evening, with a most large Paper on her back full of causes why.


We will expect your prize in Spasso, I'll seek out one of your Ballads against
you come; you'll have leisure to write the second part your self; I'll warrant
you 'twill sell.


Would there were no worse in the business; but I believe I shall scarce get a
thousand crowns by my Ballad; though I'm sure I paid little less for the
subject.


What a pox can he be doing all this while with that poor Devil?


Come, let's beat up's Quarters; what if she have cut his throat, and leaped
out at the window? I imagine all mischiefs from all women; yet this is a fine
straight tree, I long to be gathering some of her fruit, I could clasp her
Bool, and clime her with a good will yet for all my anger. -- See, here he
comes. Well, Sir, how


He looks so serious as if we were to beseech him to let us take our turns;
come, the story; be quick, for we must have our hour too.


Where are the rest of the company?


Harrigo left us as soon as you. Don Pedro staid the share of two bottles; we
laughed a spell with old Ned, and parted; he'll meet us on the Piazza; I believe
'tis a good fellow enough, if his mind were quiet; but I perceive by his
discourse he is jealous you have too much interest with Angellica, which he can
scarce digest.


He drank her health, and pledged for you; he took it kindly, your leaving him
there to day; but this is from my business; what a pox have you done with our
small sinner all this while? her time of execution draws near; if you did but
see the Paper within which Fardinando has writ, and I mean to nail upon her
shoulders with some Lath-nails when I turn her out, 'twould make you laugh to
read the causes; prithee say, has she clean linen? dost thou think she is
sound? if I should go now to revenge one mischief, and get another, I should
curse my self.


Stay here, and I'll satisfy your Question.


What does he mean to be thus serious? By this light, I'll have my revenge in
spite of his heart; let him frown to the Devil.


Do you know this Lady? -- nor you, Edwardo?


I have seen that face, but where I cannot call to mind.


Nor I; yet there are dark lines in my memory that lead me to her face; 'tis
not Lucetta I am certain.


I shall remove this wonder with another; have you never heard me mention the
name of Serulina. Horrid beasts! are you not both struck with the judgement of
this vision? -- Does not your black breasts accuse you of all the villainy most
barbarous Fred. you saw her this morning in Don Harrigo's company; could you so
soon forget her and your self? I should be loath to find you guilty of any
malice; 'tis as much as your ignorance can do to plead that we are friends; for
him, he was a beast in his wine, before, as much as in his rage, now; and both
his injuries crimes to the law, not to our friendship; else I should have found
some other way to have expressed my sense of them.


Sir, we are your friends, and reason may do much; but you must not think to
threaten us into a repentance; you know us both too well; yet I confess this is
a cause you may beat us in safe enough, though my part of the injury may find
excuse from her Veil, and the place I found her in; for, to be ingenuous who
would have looked for a person of honour in those clothes and your Chamber? nor
was her veil off; but when her fears and tears were on, which was such a
disguise I am ashamed to plead.


Madam, I am not yet so ill as to defend my faults; and though I cannot be
innocent I can repent my crimes; and I have now as much shame and sorrow as
there was wine or anger in my injury; and when I can serve you, you shall see
that sorrow express it self as highly your servant, as those crimes declared me
beast and mad-man. And if the fair Serulina will still be like the great
character Don Thomaso gave us of her, here we stand an object fit for such a
goodness; whose crimes are fit for such a mercy to exercise it self upon; and
for my part* I'll never rise from your feet till you forgive me, and command me
something to expiate my faults.


Pray, Sir, rise; for I am not now to be reconciled; your friend knows my anger
fell with my fears; nor can any man wrong me by chance; and I am certain Don
Thomaso could not make so ill a choice of friends, or converse with men so
wicked as would injure me when they knew me; and my faith is as confident in my
innocence as you can be in your carriage: and you see That innocence has been,
this day, successful, and overcome all the dangers blind fortune threatened in
this accident.


Now am I such an Ass I cannot speak a word for my self: By this light, Madam,
I was never heartily ashamed before; the guilt of this action makes me dumb; I
shall never look upwards again till I have redeemed this fault.


If you will have me believe this sorrow real, I conjure you be still kind to
your friend; and to confirm you that I am reconciled, he shall tell you what we
have resolved on, in which you must both bear your parts; and when 'tis past,
if you will give me a visit at my house, I'll use you better then you have done
me for intruding into yours, though I will not promise to kiss you so often.


Nay faith, Lady, have mercy; we only pretend to that.


Why, and I hope a kiss will hurt neither of you.


Faith, they know not, for I believe they never kissed an honest woman before;
and for Fred, he is so little concerned in the sex, if he had been in Paradise
we had staid there.


Because I do not talk so much as you do.


No, but because thou dost nothing but talk; and I dare say, if thou were as
free from the sin of the Vine, as thou art from the Apple, thou might safely
return and claim the old Gardeners place yet.


Prithee, let this subject pass; and give her this Ring again. By this light, I
dare not come so near as to do it my self.


No, no; give it her your self; you could towse her even now, and use her like
a poor Whore; tear her veil, kiss and threaten to beat her without any awe or
reverence to the majesty or divinity in that face or form; alas, 'tis the same
woman still, there is not a Poniard more in those eyes then when you saw them
weep, without remorse.


Though she be the same Excellency still, yet I am not the same Beast I was;
Prithee take it, and leave fooling; 'tis not friendly to urge a folly thus, nor
pursue a friend too far.


Nay, never hang a tail, but follow like your selves; See, Madam, the later
part of Rogues Restitution: This Ring, do you know it?


Yes, but I have no pretence to it now; Nor can I claim it, unless I could pay
back the price I received for it; 'Tis sold, Sir, and at a rate I repent not.


Nay, Madam, now I am of their side; and hope you will not believe them so
little Gentlemen, as to keep any such mark of their crime to upbraid them; This
Ring will brand them worse then the Law in such a case; And I'll say that for
Ned, (and a pox take him) I know the Rogue will as soon wear the T and the F in
his hand, as this Ring on his finger; And I am so much his Friend, as to desire
you will receive it.


In earnest, I dare not, 'twill be an ill Omen to me; Should I take back in
safety what I gave with joy in Fears and Dangers, 'twere to repent my vows when
I have reaped the blessing; I am too superstitious to touch it, when I eall to
mind 'twas the price of my deliverance when both our Honours were at stake.


Do you hear this? Well, Madam, what shall be done with it? Gentlemen, you hear
what the Lady says, which of you claims it? I'll only write his name in
Hebrew and restore it.


Madam, if you have any Charity left, pray take it for him; we must fly the
Country else, to avoid his bloody Jests.


Nay, faith; If neither of you will have it, what think you, Madam, of giving
me leave to offer it to St. Cecilia's shrine to morrow, in remembrance of this
deliverance upon her Eve, from two English Gentlemen, which shall be hanged up
in wax in her Chapel, with an Ex voto; A Spanish Miracle wrought by the Saint
upon an Essex Calf with two legs, possessed with a Colliar of Croyden.


This is the Mercy we expect from such a Nature; Yet if I were better
acquainted with this Lady, I would ask her how she comes to forgive you so
easily, that are indeed the cause of the mischief? And in a Lover your crime is
greater then ours; and the neglect you have shown her a higher offence then
what we kneel for; our Insolence was a chance, and proceeded from Ignorance and
passion; for had we known her, we would have sacrificed our lives for her,
rather then have acted or suffered the least of those Crimes. But you that have
the Honour not only to be known, but esteemed by her, to be thus long in Town,
and never pay your own duty, nor inform us how we might pay ours, it makes it
our faults your guilt; You showed us all the Whores in Town, and were mad till
you had seen them your self; But, for this noble Lady, I never heard her
mentioned in Madrid; Had you paid that respect your Heart knows due to her, we
might have had, by such a visit, the Honour of being known to this Lady; which
would have given her Protection, and secured our Innocence. Do you blush? 'Tis
time; and if you had any grace, this Truth would be a Ring in your Nose, as
well as the other in ours. Good severe, small Friend, am I with you?


All blessings upon thee, for stinging him on that side; By this light, my
guilt has picked all the Guts out of my brains,


Show you this Lady? Prithee look upon her again, do you think your selves fit
conversation for her? No, Gentlemen, though I afford you my Company, yet this
is of another form; I showed you all my Whores, they were fit conversation and
acquaintance for you; Meat according to your palate, Souls and Minds of the same
size; This Virtuous Lady, what would you do with her? She'll neither drink, nor
swear; I dare say, Ned is the first that ever belch'd before her, though she
might have heard many men sigh; They are no such Dutch sour ones, as your Beer
breaks.


'Tis well, Sir; you have the staff in your hand, and you use it.


Nay, now you are too severe, and I must take their parts; But 'tis no matter,
Gentlemen, what he says now; His first Character shall stand with me; and for
what is past, I assure you, it flies and dyes with the hour it was acted in.


Your goodness, Madam, makes us blush, and ought to shame him too; But he is so
hardened, nothing can disorder him.


No more mutiny, lest I produce the Ring; This Diamond, Madam, will work upon
them like Medusa's Ass; And the Rogues are easily turned to stone; For their
Hearts are Marble already, though your goodness hath forgiven it.


NOt come home yet? Where can she be? I dare not see her neither, till I have
delivered this Letter; All things run cross to day, I would they were honestly
lost in the great bed at home; We shall never have quiet hour till the Priest
have knit a knot upon them, and thrown them into a pair of sheets. There he is;
I'll hold him with my teeth ere he scapes me.


Why I, Pout; I would not sup now, were I Fred. Nor speak these two days; I
would cry too, and not be styled with plumms; What a pox would you have done to
come off? Been grave and serious? There is nothing you could have said would
have made her so soon calm as seeing me storm; And when you have read Women
better, you'll find it easier to make them forgive ten faults committed against
'em, then forget one fault which they commit. -- How now Child, at whose suit?
what have we here, a cloven Alguazile?


Leave fooling, and read that, you know the hand; A mischief take me but I'll
burn it else; I have hunted Moon-shine in the water for you all this day, till
my feet are so in Love, they are scarce sweet or sound.


Dear Calis, what news?


You are a kind man, you a Lover! A Woman has a fine time that affects any
Soldier of you all, with your Iron Minds, and tough Buff Hearts; You have all
got the Boys wings, feathered Lovers all; The Devil clip them for Calis.


Come, no more Anger; Dear Calis, your Letter is answered; at home you will
find your Lady, to whom you must make haste, she has business for you.


Have you seen her then?


Yes, and by a chance, which she'll tell you; Here, Calis, wear this Ring, you
know whose 'twas; Your Lady will not be displeased to see it thus disposed;
there is a Story belongs to it, which you shall know hereafter; Farewell, Dear
Calis; be faithful still, and reap the Harvest of all those Afflictions thou
hast sowed.


This was my Ladies Ring, I'll home and take my share of the Jubilee; Farewell
to you and your friend; methinks, you might have kissed me after five years;
you had wont to do it when you should not, and tell me 'twas the English
fashion; but I find we both grow old; Nay, now you shall not; there's neither
Grace nor savour in a kiss when a woman begs it.


'Twas Calis, and she gave him a Letter but from whom; I can guess, though I do
not know; What woman was that he parted with at our door? 'Twas the same shoes
and scarf we dogged from the Piazza; I'll find Don Pedro, there is something in
this worth his fears and cares, if I guess aright.


Come, let us haste to Harrigo's, and resolve with him what is best to be done
in our business: This Letter should have been given in the Morning; 'tis Don
Pedro's Resolution suddenly to put her into a Monastery, till she consents to
marry Don Alphonso.


You are both fairly warned; and if you have not wit to prevent threatened
mischiefs, you will fall unpitied; Come, pray lose no time, but make use of her
kindness, before he doth of his Power, to both your prejudices.


'Tis resolved already, and with Harrigo you shall know all; We must only get
things ready for her design, 'tis she must Act; We must only be diligent to
attend her summons.


NO more, Dear Carlo, 'tis but too true; Don Pedro's discourse confirms it, and
I am miserable; 'Twas he that saved her in the sack of Pampelune, and 'tis my
punishment to love one that cannot be obliged; Yet I can bear his scorn, any
thing but marry; though I know he will never be mine, yet I cannot suffer the
thought he should be another.


If you expect Don Pedro, I'll stay; else, I must be gone and seek him; for
this is not a business to be delayed or slighted; 'Tis most certain, she has
a Passion for him; and the intelligence they hold, if not prevented, will
produce some sudden mischief.


Pray stay, I know he will not be long absent, unless this news meet and divert
him; As you love me be urgent in it; I'll tell him how much his Honour is
concerned, and how he is bound, in care and kindness to his Sister, to provide
against this danger as the greatest curse can threaten her life; You see his
Nature is unconstant, wild and rash, as common Bravoes.


I shall be faithful and diligent in my part; but who can prejudice him when
you contribute such sums against your own Interest? But for these chances he
had sneaked long since; Leave him to his Fortune, and Poverty will quickly
deject him below the saucy thought of such a Woman.


I cannot repent any kindness I have done him; My fear is rather, that Fortune
will not have it in my power to oblige him. -- See here comes the man you ask
for.


Carlo, how now? the news.


That which you have not a little apprehended: within you shall know all.


THomaso in a Periwig? 'tis not possible; Hatred and Aversion have Eyes as
curions as Love; and the Antipathy betwixt us must have discovered him.


I am amazed too, it cannot be so slight a disguise should hide him from the
Love of one, and hatred of the other; 'tis but some discourse to vex us.


'Tis a Truth great as his Villainy, as public, and as base, as injurious and
as wicked a Villain, to hunt the Bed of two Sisters; and if you suffer it, may
you be used as I am, and despised by all Men of Honour.


If it be a Truth, I'll find some way to be revenged as he has been curious in
his Injury.


If it be a Truth? Are you Saretta, so true he is a Villain; There is no
Brother arrived from Salamanca, Don John knows him, (he's a little black
fellow) who told me the whole design; only two Perriwiggs, and two suits of
clothes; which when he comes next, you may easily discover: And if you find not
that damned Thomaso under that black Periwig cut my throat, as the dog has
done my face, just as I had packed up his friends things to send them back; for
his injury, By heaven was a chance, in which I was as innocent as he; here
comes one can resolve you all.


To cure your doubts, veil your selves and walk to the Piazza, and hear whose
names, and what stories fill the crowds with laughter; while they glory in
their mischief in vindication of the affront was done to one of their Comrades;
nay, they threaten new revenge; the Angellica is of their counsel, and I hear
the design was laid at her house.


I will not brag, nor threaten; but if I have any friends, or credit in Madrid,
I'll make it a black day with some of them.


And a black mischief light on me, if I join not in any revenge at the rate of
life and fortune; and if ever Philippo will deserve from me, let him now show
himself a friend; be bold and kind in our revenge, and command me ever.


Kill him, and name the price; here's my earnest, be quick and secret.


Here, take this key, and make thy own price; for 'twas he that set Edwardo on,
and hired the Bravo's to my ruin.


And the same men shall cut his throat if you will forgive them.


Let them but revenge me upon him, and I'll not only forgive, but reward them
too.


Well, I'll undertake this business so you will be secret, and dissemble your
hatred for a day or two; perhaps to morrow being a feast may present the
occasion; your best way is not to seem to know you are injured, or known; seem
to slight 'it, and laugh too.


Death, I could tear my very flesh to think that Rascal has touched my; me
blood rises to think how kind I was to the thing I hate; I scarce remember I
ere enjoyed a man with more Gusto; sure Harrigo was in the plot, and that
hungry Captain too; I'll be revenged upon the whole tribe.


Pray retire, I'll abroad to inform my self of them all; and, perhaps, this
night find those that shall dispatch 'em.


I never hated any man before; and see the Devil should give me a passion for
him only to plague me; how I hate these eyes that betrayed me! these arms that
embraced him; these lips that praised and kissed the dog! methinks, all mankind
like my self should despise this body stained with that wretch; sure my flesh
is turned carrion since he touched it.


These are pure women's passions that neither know what nor why they love, or
hate; the accident vexes me too, but not to that height as to engage my self in
the murder of a friend; for the two Sisters, that part of the story she knows
I can unriddle; though for my interest, I'll let it pass, in the opinion of the
world; nor shall her mischief prevail if I can prevent it; 'tis the folly of
anger to threaten still, which but alarms an enemy, and gives time to arm;
their anger makes their hearts cold and cruel; and love makes mine kind and
warm, and resolved to save him from the storm.


NOt seen since I went out?


The Mountebank and the Captain have been with 'em all day.


Let them alone, they have some new design to redeem themselves; we shall have
the story time enough, I'll warrant you; but when you see Edwardo tell him he
has played the fool to cut Lucetta's face; for, believe it, she'll be revenged;
I know the humour of these people; and I could have wished you had not made
your self so merry, to day, with the Saretta's character; there were those by,
who though they laughed at what you said, yet I know they love not your humour,
and will be the first that whet you on to such an error, and afterwards both
do you a mischief and despise you for it; and, believe it, she is a wench that
wants neither friends nor malice, and as like to do you a mischief as any she
in Madrid.


I laugh at her and them; their opinion and their anger too; alas, we are none
of them that fear, we are of the number that fright others; I know the trick of
a Poniard as well as they, a dead wall, a dark night and a false light, I know
the advantages too of striking first; and wear a sword that will bite as deep
upon such occasion as any he's in Castile; and if they will play at tricks, let
them expect them. But I wonder more what 'tis these fine Gentlemen, our
Comrades, have in chase, just now when our business requires their presence,
which you know admits no delay; we are both undone if we disappoint her to
morrow; the Angellica is jealous too, I find it; and how I shall bear my self
with her to night, there is another trouble; one business more will make me
take my Bow and Arrows, and then lye down to sleep, with the Proverb. Do you
hear, Rogero, when they come, tell them I am gone with Harrigo to his Chamber.


NO words, there is the money; it must be a secret for a day or two: what must
we do when they wake?


Rub their Temples with that oil, and give them some of the Vial to drink, and
they will come to themselves again.


I hope the loving fit will be over: By this hand, I would not for all her
Estate mine should embrace me two hours more: I cracked like Wickar in her Arms
when she laughed and grew gay: did you never see a Cow pretend to be merry?
even with such ungraceful motions she expressed her self.


When will the Baths be ready? I long for the good hour, if that succeed as
well as the powder, we are made for Ever; and we'll set up thy Statue in
Essex.


Never doubt it, Sir; my life for yours it takes effect.


Let's lose no time then, but In, and vow a Pottle or two to good Luck; and the
Joy of the Jest is, all will be done e're Thomaso knows of it.


Their Guardian is a Jew; how the Rogue swelled at the Ceremonies! yet he was
as glad to be discharged of them, as we were to have them.


You will not wonder at that when you consider what a sum he reaps by the
bargain; But there was no remedy, you must not have hoped his consent but upon
such advantages; The best is, you are sure to have no noise, nor suit; All
parties are contented.


Hold Captain, there is your share; come, no Nicety; All men must live; and
when profit runs round the Mill grinds merrily.


Well Gentlemen, since you think I deserve this favour, I am not in a Condition
to refuse it; But I must desire you will get Thomaso to let our Bargain stand
for the Clothes; to morrow is Holy-day, and he wears them still.


To day only, for Evidence in our Plot; you shall have them at Night, now the
Jest is over.


Then I shall be fitted for this Campania; Clothes and money too! Well, I will
pursue my business, to get you the Baths ready; I'll provide a good Dinner,
choice wine, and the best Music in the Town.


Prithee be-speak Ten Wheel-barrows of Tripes, for Jug the Giant; I cannot but
laugh at our Fortunes; How many will envy us, and how many abuse us for these
wives! a Pox on the Captain he winked upon you; else I had got the longest
Straw; would thou had had the Giant; thine is the finest small Divel I ever
saw.


See how hard 'tis to please you; Come, what boot yet between 'em? Yet I know
as well as you the Advantage of my small sinner, and what charges yours will
bring, both in Food and Clothing; besides some new Engine, with twelve yoke of
Oxen, to draw her into the Country, or take the Air after Dinner. Do you mark?
after Dinner; which Meal would victual a Kings Ship; Think of this, and
propose.


The Rogue is confident; else I know he would not treat this bargain, his is
one of the convenient'st Wives; Of such a fine Diamond cut; her Back and Breast
are crooked, in Table and Faucet.


Where will you lodge her? there is no going above stairs; nothing but a
ground-room will bear her; Some old English Hall, for a Bed-chamber; And now I
think on it, purchase Paul's, old, Idle, and unuseful Paul's; Separate the Isles,
and there is a Partment for her; and there she may walk upright, the Gates too
are big enough for her to come in at; Then there are some of the Marble Tombs
left still, which will serve instead of Benches, to sit upon; There are stone
Cisterns too, at the Porch, will serve her to piss in; Do you remember, when
she went out of the way to Stale? I thought the Spouts had run when she opened
her Sluice.


I forgot to bid the Captain bring a Ladder; that the Taylor might take her
measure.


The Taylor! fie, fool, 'tis no Taylors work; let those that use to furnish
Churches do it; they are used to such heights; By this hand, 'twill turn a
Woman's Taylors head, to look down from her shoulder; Besides, the others, when
they have but paced her about, will guess how many pieces of Tapestry will
serve to furnish her; Think not upon Velvet, or Satin, those paper wares,
shee'll take up more then furnishes Saint Jago's Chapel; They can furnish her
with Frutages, and Festunes, for head dress; Neck-lace and Chains, Bobs and
Bracelets, they have always in readiness, as much as will furnish a Church;
Thou must get a Grate in the Bed, shee'll overlay thee else; what a time her
husband has, if he be bound to act that part! he may as soon feed Whales with
Worms.


If the Baths fail, all my refuge is, I can run away from her; Her portion is
big enough to pay the Post.


Since you will not resolve upon this change, let's find Thomaso; But not a
word of what's past; we'll only ring these Bells in his Ears; We can Dance to
our own Music now.


UPon my life, 'twas she, my Author saw her, and the confusion she was in for
fear you should know it; 'twill be a fine dishonour, when the Town shall take
notice of such a visit; Sir, she is your sister, and all her Actions will
reflect upon you; But which is most Impudent, Carlo saw him bring her to your
door, and was present when Calis gave him a Letter in the walks; Be not abused,
Sir, Two hundred thousand Crowns, and a sister of her merit, are not toys to be
lost; they'll expect a better Jointure then a Scarf and a Buff-coat, and will
be much better Ornaments in your Family, then a Colonel and his Commission;
Take my Counsel; see her in a Nunnery, and I'll make him either fly the
Country, or make him a Nest in the Church-yard.


'Tis clear, and I am satisfied; But we must be wary in what we do; They have
both too much wit and resolution to be surprised; We must dissemble our
Intention, lest this Passion betray us; and, for ought we know, the work may be
done to our hands: For I am told, the Lucetta and the two Sisters are highly
incensed, and have some design to be revenged upon him; I left the Angelica too
full of jealousy and rage: There we may Inform Our selves; and if We can blow
that Coal with her, we'll resolve what's to be done: Women, when Rage and
Jealousy possess them, are as good Counsel as Mischief can inquire of; and
what she Resolves we'll Execute; who is your Author?


The Lucetta, and she had it from Cornelio, who is himself unsatisfied with
Thomaso.


NOt a word, Ned, till to morrow, of what is past; we'll consummate to night,
and then defy the foul Fiend.


I am chained, See where they come. -- See the lost sheep; Fred has spent three
Groats in Criers to day.


'Tis well, I'm glad to see you are not flayed again; Beware of the
She-shambles, Ned: There are now snares set, I can assure you, and the whole
Piazza curse you for debauching the Mountebank, who was absent all day, and
Excused himself that he was employed by two strangers: Great wonders are
expected to morrow from his skill; 'tis thought he will make you two wise.


Well, Sir, Fool on; We may live to show the world some Essex men have some
Wit, though the Calf lie at the Door.


No more, let time speak for us; Prithee what is't a Clock? This noise in my
Pocket drowns mine ear so I cannot hear him strike.


A cheerful sound, if no hue and cry pursue it.


What? there is some secret, I perceive, which we must not partake.


As thou love me, do not ask them; They will never tell, if they but imagine
We desire it; to get a secret out of these men, you must neither listen nor
consider what they say: But slight their discourse, and them, till they hunt
and hold thee to tell all they know.


Yes, yes, Trust to that; To morrow if you behave your selves well, 'tis
Resolved you shall share the Blessing.


Did not I tell you so? now is he as sick, till he has told it, as one that
holds a Glitter too long, 'twill out, Fred. Room, Hall. let the secret come.


Not a word, only this sound to afflict you.


Yet, in midst of your mirth 'twill be fit for you to know, you have raised a
Wasps Nest that may sting you; the Lucetta has vowed a Revenge.


Her Revenge? By this day I'll have her throat Cut now; I can spare as much as
will do it by the Law, whether it be right or wrong.


Well, the Business we were sent for? pray dispatch; For we have affairs of Our
own that attend us.


Well, content; and let the Secret lie till Nature works; you must be in
disguise to morrow, and ready to serve the Lady you wot of; you must get you
fighting swords too, lest you be beaten; she expects you should pay her the
debt; I have promised her you will be as bold in her cause as you were in her
injury.


If you be serious, we will not deceive your Expectation; but why disguised?
you do not mean drunk?


Be well armed, and 'tis no matter for disguises; I'll have the Ambassadors
Coach and Footmen ready to receive us, and then we'll defy their Anger.


This is the business; and within Harrigo will inform you both of the time and
place; pray be early to morrow.


I Have no Patience till she be in a Monastery; my heart can find no peace;
Fool that I was not to try my Fortune before; Why should I believe my self the
only Woman not fit for a man of Honour to marry, when thousands have married
Women of as ill life and Fame as mine, and yet find Swords and Friends to
defend them? His Poverty too would have pleaded for me, which his pride now
will oppose, his heart being swel'd with the hopes of this Fortune; and 'twill
be in vain to attempt him till she be removed from a possibility of his hopes;
He will not see me neither, though thrice invited; That base ingratitude in the
Sex makes me hate him, to find, he that three days since fought for my door,
and would have sold himself to the Galleys but to purchase my Bed, will not now
be bought or courted to a visit.


Don Harrigo and he are at the door.


How now? turned shadow? fly when I pursue, and follow when I fly? Anna, does
your Lady use to walk in her sleep? There is no danger in questioning this
Noctambule; I have heard of them would walk upon Ridges of houses, guided by
the Fiend, without danger, unless you awake them; Therefore we must speak
softly; Stay, gentle shadow of my Love, and see how I will prove thy fears
vain, and anger light, and thus catch thee in thy flight, by falling on thee in
the Night; is't not so? Oh! there's a smile still; I thought we had been
arrived at the Court of sorrow, where Jealousy and despair, with snaky-hair,
will not let us kiss away our Care.


'Tis well, Sir; your joys are full, and fortune smiles, pursued by choice of
Beauties, oppressed with those blessings which others sacrifice for in vain;
All the Cupids that break loose, and fly from the Cages in others breasts,
perch, and build in yours; which is become their Nests; while we poor famished
Lovers are glad to feed upon such broken bread as your heart will yield; such
wretches as your despised Angellica. Yet know, fond man, Love poisoned with a
Just Anger; for perjured vows make the mortall'st hatred man can fall under;
Nor doth thy heart know what dangers the fury of a Woman, robbed of her hopes,
and couzend of her Joys, threatens even against her Love.


Her blood was as black as any Ink, for she did nought but think and think; If
I were apt to fear what I love, how this would fright a man? There are those
would scarce recover their humour again to night; and there are some that such a
short speech, next their hearts, would make as Chaste as Camphor; Prithee what
Melancholy Planet hath raised this dusty storm? Harrigo and I came to be
merry, and laugh at other Lovers, whose nests are on fire; and for ought I see,
we shall have enough to do to quench our own; This is such a Hymn you may sing
it to a Drum; I did not think you could have spoke such a Raw-head and
bloody-bones-speech; What, is your anger so high, a man cannot have credit for
a kiss, or two?


A kiss; who denies you a kiss?


Now prithee, Sot, tell me, what difference can you find betwixt these and
those of yesterday? What fond idle thoughts jealousy would put into our heads!
Why this fury on a sudden? What, Don Pedro is jealous you will use me too well,
and would have you believe I love the Saretta.


No, Sir, the Saretta cannot be my Fear; I know you scorn to marry her.


Scorn? why scorn? she's a handsome woman.


I deny not her beauty; yet I am vain enough to believe neither Beauty nor
Fortune shall have power to buy you from me; No, Sir, not the Serulina's; Do
you start? If her honour did not weigh the Scale more then they, Angellica
could be proud, and confident as she; 'tis honour, that Bubble, so prized by
men, which all Covet, though none catch the shadow.


Come, you are melancholy; and when your passion is over, you will find this
is but some plot of a jealous Rival. Serulina? That's an old story, revived
only to Alarm your heart, and lessen your kindness.


Yes, by those that invented the bringing her to his house in disguise too day;
I do not know 'twas she Don Pedro followed from the Piazza; nor how Edwardo
tows'd her; and how she refused to see her brother; Yes, Sir, I do know it; and
he knows it too, and I believe will prevent your design.


WHich was he?


That which went first, in the gray clothes with silver lace.


'Tis enough, leave the rest to us.


Their mischief is bent against his life, which is too precious, in my esteem,
to sell for a black revenge; and though she abuses the world with the opinion
of our being Sisters, I that know the secret and my interest in that opinion
will not so far wed her folly as to countenance a Lie with the price of his
blood whom I love; That Villain Cornelio, to eat his bread and betray him! --
Here 'twas he entered, I'll knock and speak with him.


Who knocks?


A Friend, that must needs speak one word with Don Thomaso, 'tis business that
concerns him.


Be gone in an evil hour; What do you haunt him in other women's houses? This is
fine Impudence; Be gone, or I shall empty an Oleo or two that was eaten three
days since upon your reverend Baudships head. My Mistress must not only pray
and pay for his company, but she must have Knights to defend her from Ladies
Lovers Errands. Where is your Squire with his shield to defend this
Chamber-pot, or his Wisp to cleanse you when I have done? See, here it comes;
by S. Jago, if you stay but a pissing-while I'll throw it.


I must find some way to tell him, he is lost else; there is is no disputing
now; this Bawd will do me some affront if I stay -- Don Harrigo you are met in
a happy hour.


Hah! Paulina, what, spying! jealous, upon my life; Why you see what frail
things men are, especially young healthy men; Not a true Lover, Child, in a
hundred, that is to say, a constant Lover, but true to love Ninety nine. What,
you hunt now? Why faith he's within, all to be-hugg'd and kissed as if thou
had him in thine own arms.


You are merry Sir, and I am pleased to see it; but when you shall know 'tis no
curious jealousy, but serious business, that brings me hither, such as
concerns the life of your Friend, I doubt not but you'll assist in his
preservation; but you must conceal me, because my Sister is engaged; if you
will walk you shall know the Design.


Since you are serious, let us retire; this comes of fooling; this Climate is
too hot to suffer these severe Jests, which will pass in our thick Air.


I Know not what she was; some impudent thing that plays the spy upon him, and
would fain have spoke with him; but I sent her away without a reply.


I would I had seen her, for my jealous Heart starts at every shadow now; I am
afraid 'twas some one from Serulina, some Letter, or some Message. See who
knocks.


'Tis Rogero with a bundle.


Bid him pass into the next Room, and if she returns call me, and be sure to
let her in; I am afraid she has some notice of Don Pedro's design, my Heart
will have perpetual Alarms till she be in a Nunnery; I fear nothing but his
Marriage; I would he were as fit for my Hate, as he is for my Love; Or would I
were as fit for his value, as I am for his desire; Then I might hope to impale
his wandering Mind as he has mine: My Heart was once as unlimited, my Breast as
untamed, and as much common as his; Yet his Eyes have enclosed it, which makes
me blaspheme Love that has destined me a slave to him that will not be my Lord.
-- See, he


Prithee give thy Master that note, and dispose of the Clothes as we resolved;
You must be certain to deliver them to night, though it be late.


I shall, Sir.


Villain, to betray us! Now I am certain, 'twas he discovered Serulina's being
at my House; The difficulty will be to follow our business to morrow, and yet
avoid their Malice, unless this design take; The slave took my money, to hire
the men to cut Lucetta's face, and for so much more, told who set him on; But
if I cry not quit to morrow, and stick a feather for his Goose, let him laugh
at the change as well as at the Robbery.


He's a Bed, and I must call my Child, he'll be froward else. What have we
here? A Letter, 'tis a woman's hand, and directed to Don Thomaso; 'Tis none of
my Mistresses, 'tis some of his other fools that complains. Some one whose
Beauty he has reaped; the Rogue pays not a sigh of Rent for all his Love; I
could afford to poison the Stallion; would he were lapped in both our sheets,
so he were laid in his Grave; What a life have I had since I saw him! There has
been a perpetual storm in our Minds; Reason, Love, and Interest, so
disordered, so shuffled together; 'twill waste a year of happy hours to place
our thoughts aright again.


Where is he, in bed?


Yes, but here's a Letter cannot sleep; I found it alone walking about the
Chamber; the paper is guilty, and full of a foul Conscience sure; Pray will you
shrive her.


A Letter, give it me. -- 'Tis from her, that cursed name of Serulina is
subscribed, and confirms all my fears; That name


What ails you? For loves sake be quiet; Wretch that I was to give her the
Letter.


'Tis resolved; Get me a pen and ink and put on your veil, while I write two
lines to Don Pedro to enclose this Letter; There's Malice for Malice; and I
shall be Revenged at last, though my fears could not obtain his Love.


'TIs late; but you must be sure to find Edwardo and Ferdinando, and give them
this paper ere they sleep; and conjure them as they love their lives to observe
my directions early to morrow. Treacherous Villain, who could have feared such
a mischief from one that breathes by our Charity? And Serulina; I must find
some way to give her notice.


MY Heart dreads some mischief; Their stay thus late makes me apprehend they
will this night attempt us; Where are the keys of the Garden?


Here, Madam.


Is my Cabinet and Jewels put up, and such money as you found in the great box?


All is done as you ordered.


Then let us sit quiet and hide the light; if they intend any force, thus
disguised and thus provided we may by the back door make our escape through the
Garden to the Ambassadors house; I have consulted both Nature and Reason, and
from neither find that right of Empire Brothers claim over Sisters; and since
he resolves to arm himself with those advantages strength and custom gives him
over our Sex, 'tis both Justice and Wisdom to provide for our safety; My
desires have neither shame nor dishonour belonging to them; Justice and
Gratitude both guide my Heart to serve him, that saved both Life and Honour.


I have a Dagger, and by my Life, the proudest He that dares lay hand upon you,
a black mischief find me if I leave it not in his Breast; They have all such a
care and kindness for your Portion; But were I you, I would build an Hospital
with it ere they should have it.


See who knocks. --


'Tis too dark.


Listen then.


Who knocks there?


A Friend, Master Porter; one that hath earnest business with Don Pedro; and a
Letter for him that concerns him to see it to night.


He is not at home; but if you leave it he shall be sure of it when he comes
in.


Are non e of his Gentlemen up?


All the House, except my self, are a bed.


Pray do you take it, and give it when he comes.


'Tis Anna, the Angellica's Nurse. Some mischief upon my Life.


Signora Anna, Caro Vecho, come in and pass an hour; I have Esquiuris and a
Biscuit; Come, we'll squeeze a Botto till he comes: Ha! you old Conjurer, how
long is't since the Devil danced last in thy bawdy circle? Come into the Lodge,
and let me brush the Cobwebs from thy corner.


You have Bell Tiempo, Master Porter; but I am now in haste, my Mistress stays
for me, and 'tis late; What a dumb House is here? Is this the Eve to such a
Feast as a young Ladies Wedding? No spits going, no Cooks chopping, no pots
seething, nor ovens heating? What, 'twill be a stolen Wedding. -- Farewell,
Master Porter.


What a pox ails her to talk thus? I hope they will not offer to marry my
young Lady without telling me of it.


'Tis clear; we are betrayed, I find by her discourse, and they are now upon
some design to prevent us.


Let's be gone before they come; 'tis better to prevent such a mischief, and
easier then to resist it.


I would fain see that Letter first; There may be some light in our business,
something may guide our Resolutions; Dear Calis, no trick to catch it?


I'll warrant you the Letter, Madam.


These flesh flies how they haunt the shambles! pox take her, she would not see
him two days since; and now aMid-wife will not be so haunted as he. -- So,
stick thou there, that I may find thee when he


So, he's earth'd in his lodge; now for my design, if I can find the window,
'tis done; See, here 'tis; now for a piece of the Chamber-maids virtue, tread
lightly; the hundred Arts that we must learn, speak softly, see quickly, hear
half sounds, read looks, keep her secrets, and betray all others; smile when
she smiles; frown, hate, and love, as she doth; lie with her, for her, either
under, or upon her; and (unless a Nunns) on my Conscience ours is the wickedst
kind of Innocent Life women can practise.


She stays long.


The Rogue stood entertaining himself with his own shadow till now: But here
'tis.


Give it me. -- What a chance is this? We had been all undone if this accident
had not happened. By this you'll find mine were no idle fears; 'tis well we are
in a readiness, for we have no time to spare; Early in the Morning we must
pursue our design.


What a false Quean is this, to take advantage and abuse his Trust! Malicious
and jealous Devil! what mischief must this have bred had it come to Don Pedro's
hands?


Yet I find by this, they are not in a readiness to execute any plot against
us; And they shall find, though I stoop to the God that bears the bow, yet I
will not hold the plough; My Heart and Mind shall become his Priest; no
stooping Hind.


COme now, this is but singing a long Psalm, better resolve and leap into her
Bed; When you are there, I must leave you; Don Thomaso has sent me the Clothes,
and I'll be as fine as any of you to morrow.


Now do I tremble to go to head, lest she should roll me betwixt her fingers, or
crack me like vermin against her bedpost: But since it must be, come Captain,
let's part like Friends; and if we do live to meet again, this danger will be
mirth; Pray Captain get witness ready against the Morning, for I'll not lie
with her another night without a grate betwixt us: This night will make my plea
good in Law, else nothing but Honour should engage me to charge her breach
again.


And mine is such a small kitt, I fear I shall make no music upon her; The
little fool sits so quiet, and pearches upon my Breast like a bird; I only
chirrip to her when I call her, and she peeps me an answer like a Chicken.


HOw merry he was when he heard the design was not made to abuse him! only a
trap to catoh the Englishman.


Yes, but I observed him; and he is angry still for all his mirth, and not
displeased when he heard her face was cut.


His fall from the window was a worse bruise to his body then Edwardo's to his
purse, and will be longer in recovering; to morrow we shall hear what her
friends will do to revenge her; I am told the two Sisters and she are upon a
design; Cornelio has confessed Thomaso set them on.


I would 'twere done, it might be some advantage to my business.


Sir, there's a Letter for you in the Window.


From whom?


That I know not, Sir; 'twas a woman brought it, some Caterpillar.


Send it in; is my Sister a bed?


A bed! 'tis almost day, Sir.


Was any body here to speak with her to night?


Not any body.


If there be any body inquires for her, give me notice; we must be early up,
ho, to morrow; and, pray, send to invite Don Alphonso to dine with us, and
resolve upon our business.


You must be sudden, you know she has a high spirit, and wants neither wit nor
resolution to deliver her self from your power, if once she imagine your
intention.


'Tis resolved, and I have already moved it to the Abbess, in case she should
refuse; but I hope better, for she knows Thomaso lies this night with
Angellica; which humour will take off the edge of a woman's kindness, what ere
they pretend, when she sees a man in the height of his wooing haunt the beds
and conversations of common Whores; what can a discreet woman hope from him
when he is surfeited upon her youth and beauty, that can now when a fancy and
imagination labours in his longing mind, throw himself into the arms of every
prostitute? but of this to morrow, 'tis late. Farewell.


YOu are early; is your Lady stirring?


Yes, Sir; she is early up, for she went not to bed; her Brothers stay, having
notice of his intention, made us expect to see the success, still resolved by
the Garden gate to make our escape hither; nor will you wonder, Sir, at our
trouble when you consider that Letter.


'Tis enough, I'll take care for all; and desire your Lady to be confident in
her resolution, and she shall find all safety here, and in us a readiness such
as our enemies dare not dispute. -- Give this key to your Lady, and observe the
door; when the Porter sees this, she may Pedro's hand she had certainly died
for it: and Thomaso is a beast not to burn Papers of such consequence: this is
Wine, and those Women are accursed that have a friendship where 'tis loved: for
though it has a thousand friendships made, all women know how many secrets it
hath betrayed.


'TIs well, thank your Master; tell him I will not fail to observe his
directions, and find him at his Chamber. -- I found her changed in my arms, she
had not craft enough Serulina, busy to prevent my mischief, her noble mind
forgot all my crimes to her; while the others, malicious and bloody, designed
nothing less then the ruin of us all. But Love and Fortune, kinder then either
my merit or hopes could promise, has blown over the storm; and now I know their
malice, if I prevent it not, I ought to fall unpitied; it vexes me she should
be guilty of so mean an action, because I thought her of a gallant temper, but
she's a common Whore; and this life of mine, that which some men may pass some
months in for humour, but no trade for men of honour; Wisdom and Conscience
bids us seek a Nest ere Age and Diseases find us; and where we spend our youth
with Faith and Love, there man ought to expect patience for the impertinency of
Age: 'tis sad to be out of doors in the Winter of our Age. A gray Wanderer is
but a bad Tragedy to himself, though an old Beggar may be a Comedy to others:
These thoughts, and the noble nature of this virtuous Maid, have made me
resolve to abjure this humour; and having bid farewell to all the follies of my
youth vow my whole thoughts to the friendship of the fair Serulina; a maid,
whose Dower and Beauty may satisfy an avaricious heart and a wandering eye; yet
those are blessings may be found in other women; but her mind is a single
virtue, and to me constant kind, her love a chaste full stream, which no
out-lets of friendship, or likings, has exhausted or lessened. The stream
always bent on one object; and my heart shall faithfully meet her, and the
Wanderer shall in this friendship prove he has in all his past flames but
practised how to love. Yet Paulina's kindness is as remarkable as the malice
and treachery of the rest; poor Paulina, for whom I have still regret; whose
kind heart has endured the test, and is of all ill women that I have known the
best.


MArried!


Yes, married.


Two days since, to the Monsters; and so privately, 'tis yet a secret to Don
Thomaso; only Cornelio and the Mountebank were of the plot, by virtue of whose
Powder they were won; their Guardian too consented, and has his share in the
Portions; and the Brides are now at Thomaso's house, where they have prepared a
public dinner.


Hell upon their luck, they are as rich as Peru; and those Vagabonds will only
remit their money home, and leave them.


'Tis but justice; the Jews their Parents cozened the poor of a Nation to give
it to these Monsters; and 'tis but equal the Jew their Guardian should revenge
their trust.


Come, we have no time left to lose in talking; our design expects us; and if
all hit right we may light other Torches then Hymens yet ere night.


Their feast will advance our business, and make them less curious to observe
or suspect our motions; Sanco the Rogue has failed us, I met him this morning
as gay and fine as the Sun, and flowers in June, going in all haste to Court;
and promises himself some fortune by my Powder: but he shall find I have malice
too, such as shall to the Guard betray the impostor, and make him in the Galley
find my Quondam Father Boat-swain, fit for such a Rogue a Foister.


At the corner of the Piazza we will expect you, where from the Carmelites we may
stand and see which way he takes; and when 'tis done 'tis but stepping in and
we are safe, or pass through the Venetian Ambassadors which is but three doors
off.


Take no care for us; be but secret and silent, and leave us to our fortune.


THe news; where are they? will they come?


Yes, Sir; they will follow immediately; but I found them and the house in such
a confusion, 'tis a Jubilee at home; there is a whole Kitchen full of Cooks at
work all over the yard, and such loads of Meat and Wine.


What cause, prithee, for all this joy, or rather madness? this is Freds
fooling, a piece of country wit, always out of season; you shall find him play
M. Justice Over-do to day in spite of counsel, I perceive the Plot; now do they
intend to surprise us with a Wedding dinner, which may, perhaps, give such an
alarm to her Brothers jealousy as will beget some more mischief, or hasten the
old; A pox upon them and their Grand Jury jests; they are as unseasonable here
as long Graces at their feast.


Your worship is mistaken, Sir, in the cause; they are both married, and have
been these two days.


Married!


Yes, Sir, to the two monsters the Captain used to speak of; I saw them both,
one sits in the yard, for the house will not hold her; she's as big as the
Saint Christopher in Nostre Dame, and the other looks like the Christo upon his
shoulders.


Did thou see them?


I saw them, Sir, and the Mountebank with'em, whose Powder got them; they'll be
here immediately, and resolve you themselves.


This is what I have always prophesied; marry two Monsters! what
chicken-hearted Rogues are these to be cowed with one misfortune!


What work this story will make in Town! By this light, there will be no living
in Madrid for and English-man; the very name will entitle us to Green Hats; see
where they come.


Save thee, sweet soul, and thy friend; what, how goes business? is this the
day thou vow'st to Hymen? 'twill be a national Wedding I see.


But is it for certain you two have done this horrible thing?


Yes, By this light, we have done it, By this fire, By this sound, By these
clothes, 'tis done and done, a bargain y'faith, wedded and bedded, which we
believe no small action; and 'twas I that encountered with the Giant.


This is the common trick of Rogues; when they have done an ill act to stand in
it; and these are grown as impudent as carted Bawds.


As Friends we ask your mercy in this case; and if you be good men you will
have mercy upon our beasts too.


But'tis a Monster, an ugly Monster.


Not so, she has Beauties, divers and sundry Beauties, which I can really
enjoy, and shall last Ages; a House and Family, fed and furnished, me thinks a
pleasing Beauty: her Hand has another grace, for the Beauty of her mark only
finds credit, and her Bills are honoured through the World; Come Thomaso, he
that has Money has all; Money speaks sense, 'Tis Beauty, 'tis Honour; and he
that has it not shall find the rest but idle nothings: What care I to keep any
Mans Opinion, or any Woman's friendship: when the old will not I'll buy new;
Money will make a Liar speak true; you see the virtue of a Wager, the new
Philosophical Argument lately found out to decide all hard Questions.


These Trappings are the Beauties of our Brides, they give no Ribbands nor
Braids of Hair; when I would wear her Favours she can fell a thousand Acres of
Wood, Excremental Beauties which their Estate can better spare, and 'twill grow
sooner again than a Lock of Hair; from those Lillies with the white Faces which
you believed had so tied up our hearts; No, Child, we have learned to choose
better; for besides these Beauties of the House and Field, you shall see
standing at the Door four Foot-men and a Velvet Coach, with six Flanders Graces
more, which wait ready to hurry us to those Pleasures that expect us; for these
Keys open all Doors.


And what becomes of all our Vows in Croyden? the bowed Two-pence and the
Garter which was given with tears because the Present spoiled the Pair; that
Garter so bekiss'd and worn till 'twas a lousy Relic? All is forgot I see;
the Cream and Sugar is digested too, and all the memory of Sack-Possets, though
eaten with the same Spoon, that dainty way of expressing a Country passion, so
to eat each others Slaver, quite abolished, all; neither that nor the Charms of
Valentine, plucked Daisies, nor Yarrow, St. Ann's Vision, nor her Fast, nor
Ground-Willow under her Lovers Head, charms now: All these Magic Rites,
believed as oft as tried, and confirmed by a ^ea with nine, when in stepped Ned
and Fred, whose Names had been the Night before nine times chosen out of the
Ashes; and what crowns all, the sacred Tomes of Ptolomy, who with In and In
sent us to Haly the first and second for that Fortune which she and you then
believed next (if not before) the Holy Writ; but all these steps of Love a
Monster has trod out with her Herculean foot.


Yes, that monster is my Wife, and at worst but my Trade; and good severe Sir,
will you not allow a man an honest Calling to get a Living by? You'll sail a
storm at Sea in a stinking ship and be lousy, starved and roasted under
several Climes for the gain of so much per cent. or flatter a faithless
Tradesman, or a less faithful Court, and wait upon Preferment till a Dropsy
swell your Legs; Why, this Monster is my Place at Court, my Ship at Sea, my
Vocation; and when Honour calls me here I charge, and Custom will reconcile
all; and the danger grows so common I shall not fear it; and for a little
patience here I purchase all my pleasure.


You or he will let the Dog that loves you kiss you, and cherish every beast
that's kind to you; Is our case worse, what, for their money live with these
tame beasts? and is it not better to suffer for a time the Worlds nine days
Wonder, than an Ages scorn, for being a perpetual Cuckold, as thousands are,
who vow to that faithless thing called Beauty? Our houses may be haunted with
Wonderers; but we are sure to find no Lovers there; for my small Bird is so
lean she's neither good in the Field nor Bed, which makes me securenone of
Cupid's Falkoners will fly at her; And for Ned's, I would fain see him that
dares attempt her Honour either by force or flattery.


And when young Ascupat shall be born wilt thou make him a Christian Giant, or
no? Sir Bevis of Croyden, by this hand Ned, if it were mine it should never be
christened; a baptised Giant sounds sneakingly; the last holy one you see shrunk
from Christophoro to S. Kit. Prithee let thine be an Ethnic Knight and run
wild in the Wild of Kent, a Pagan of the Pagans in Surry, and breed some new
Romances; only breed him a Cavalier, that he may fight with the Palmerines,
Olivers, and the Rolands of the Age, for the Legislative Lady, and I promise
thee a Patent to show him thy self; a favour, but that you are a Friend to the
Master of the Revels, you should not easily obtain, the showing your own
Monster; and 'twill be worth your care, betimes, lest some Committee be
appointed to do it; Thou art undone if thou dost not prevent it, they will so
imbezel thy Monster.


Sir, Calis is at door.


Tell her we are all ready, and will follow her immediately -- Come, we are
expected; Calis has given the sign.


And what is it we are to do, besides being laughed at? if that be all we'll
return; for there are two Pots boiling, in whose Porrage we are concerned two
hundred thousand deep.


We must be all in a readiness to attend the Design wherein Serulina is
concerned; if it thrive we shall have a home too; but that's not all, for
Harrigo tells me that Cornelio has betrayed us to Lucetta; and she knows 'twas
we that set the Bravo's to cut her face; that and the Serulina's being at my
house, Harrigo's message to her, All, all is betrayed; and we have only this
morning to prevent their mischief; which now we are warned of if we fall into
we deserve no pity.


Come, let's away; be you sure to strike first, let that be the sign; and if we
do not make some of them stand off we'll fall by them; What a pox, abuse me,
and think I dare not be angry?


The Embassadour's Coach and Servants attend us, but we must not let them
appear in the Piazza, for giving jealousy; the only thing I conjure you as
friends is, not to let your passion transport you if any accident happen, so as
to pursue your revenge rather than our Design; but keep together, and that
woman you see me take by the hand, do what lies in friends to protect her from
those that shall attempt us.


The Porter will be ready at the Gate to receive all those that retire thither.


'Tis enough, we are instructed.


'TIs late, I wonder Don Pedro comes not; Thomaso I fear suspected my being
displeased, he was so serious and so silent when we parted; Are you sure my
Letter was delivered to Don Pedro last night?


Either last night, or early this morning.


Then I hope, he is now about the Design; Come get our old veils, and hide
elose, if you see Don Pedro as we pass, speak to him that he meet me at the
Carmelites; my heart will find no peace till she be disposed of.


THere they are; Come Ladies, this Disguise is so thin we see through it.


Pray Sir, let us go; we wonder you are not in disguise too, 'tis a strange
confidence; considering your injuries, that you dare be seen; 'tis so poor and
so mean an impudence as makes us scorn to converse with such white Spaniards:
you Castilians! and suffer your swords, Sister, and Mistress, to be taken from
you by a flock of Dutch-men, a Band of Gipsies, a Troop of vagabond wandering
strangers, an old cashiered Corporal and his Squadron.


Switzers with two coloured Coats, Knaves of divers colours, black and white
Knaves, such Proteans a Lady knows not when to love or hate them; dissembling
Knaves that make women kiss them when they should beat them; froward Rogues
that scratch Ladies faces; Fie upon them, go, go, naughty men; come give me a
stroke, I'll beat them.


'Tis well Sir, and an easy thing to wound a naked woman; but though I bear
his mark, if we strike not as deep in our revenge let them despise us, as we do
you for being such tame Dons, such muzled Knights that dare only be furious
when women displease you, and yet let these wandering strangers put Bits in your
mouths, command and ride you, spur your sides till your hearts are galled, and
yet you neither kick nor stumble before them; See if we prove such Jadey slaves
as to suffer this --


Pray let's follow them; 'twill be good sport to see them tear his hair and
scratch his eyes.


I have no great expectation nor apprehension from their anger; I know their
humour too well; but believe it, the Angelicaes is a resolved hatred, and
likely to make a mischief; for he has used her so coursely that she rages
without all bounds.


I am glad to see him pay my scores there, for she uses me as ill as he uses
her, but I shall spoil his great design, and put him in worse company, and fill
his mind with lower thoughts.


Were that once past, and she in the Monastery, you would quickly see his fire
of straw burnt out.


FOllow close, I saw him cross the Piazza, we'll step into this Church, at the
corner you'll be sure to meet him.


Walk not so fast, people observe it.


There they go; and those Soldiers are they Bravo's; mark them and be ready,
left they attempt us.


Attempt us! why they are fewer than we; Prithee let's beat them first; I'll
pick his message out of his mouth with my Dagger; What a pox, it shall never be
said, Three Rogues made four of us walk muffled in Madrid.


Prithee be quiet, the Game plays it self, only keep an eye upon them.


See the Angellica and Anna; let us step into the Church till they are past.


I saw Don Pedro follow us; stay at the Corner and deliver your message.


Did you see him, Calis?


Yes, Madam, they are before; and We shall overtake them at the Church.


Be diligent, dear Calis, for all is at stake, my whole peace laid down; 'Tis
our first, and last venture, if Fortune frown.


Walk softly, Madam, 'tis he, I'll turn, and speak to him.


Who are these that stand at the Church door?


By my life Don Pedro is one of them; step off, and stand close, for I see Don
Thomaso coming.


So, now I have my Ends too, and perhaps those wits will be caught, and their
scores paid by some as malicious as themselves. Con is a fool, yes, yes; But
the fool has money and Clothes too.


Lost, undone, for ever ruined.


So may all Treacherous Villains be rewarded.


There lie, insolent, and false; now boast the Affronts you have done us.


Come away, Ladies, there is no staying here.


Bloody Villains, ha! what's here; by my life, 'tis she; I know the Ribbon,
there is the sign; Harrigo, Edwardo, Ferdinando, hold, as you love me, here's
our business.


Don Harrigo?


Calis? 'tis she, struck with the mistake of the Clothes.


Do you follow, let me alone to carry her off.


SHot?


I, Shot dead they say, and see where he lies.


Bloody Devils; see where they stand at the Church-door, and brave the Act.


So, that work is well over; Now let's see what is become of that unlucky fool;
who have we here? Don Pedro and his Company, have they a hand in it? Sir, this
is an Action both unworthy your birth, Profession, to set a Murderer to revenge
your quarrel.


Death, why do you talk with him, have they not Swords by their sides? beat
them till they draw.


Let's fight for our Lives, 'tis better then be shot like birds sitting; is
this your Spanish Gallantry? draw your sword, Sir.


Hold, what needs this fury?


Be not rash in your passion; Our innocence makes us pass by your trouble,
which we know ought to be concerned in a friends Murder, though we scorn the
guilt of so base an action; and though there were some reasons to make me
unsatisfied with your friend, yet I scorn such a Revenge; and there stand those
that will not deny the Act; 'tis true, I heard they had some design upon him;
But, by my life and honour, I could not imagine it had been bloody, only some
mirth to return his Jest; else it had been easy to have prevented this
mischief, which I should have gladly done; for by my life, I not only loved,
but valued him.


This Lazy Villain stays so long with the Surgeon too. Sir, We beg your pardon;
For finding you upon the Place, and having notice of your displeasure, it
looked as if you would have avowed the action; and I am glad with all my soul
to find Don Pedro Innocent.


Sir, I love my Sister, and shall with all honour endeavour the making of her
happy; but if there be no way to compass it without a Murder, 'tis a rate at
which I shall neither purchase hers nor mine own happiness; Nor did I ever urge
any thing injurious against Thomaso, for I always esteem d him a Gentleman, and
a Soldier; One, to whom (I confess) she owes her life and honour; an
Obligation I would gladly have paid at a cheaper price then a Sister.


See, he stirs, Help Fred.


So, now they will find their Error, and my malicious Friends repent their
Folly.


Ha! Cornelio!


Yes, Gentlemen, 'tis Cornelio.


Ha, the Captain!


What Devil put this Ass in the Lyons skin? We are all undone, and forfeit to
his scorn, and the Justice too; lost and destroyed by a mistake, and shall
perish without Revenge; who went for the Surgeon?


I am glad 'tis no worse; though this be a sad accident, yet the safety of the
other will allay the grief, and this mischief but just, for I am confident he
was guilty of the design, and has through all the day played the spy among us.


Saretta, how came this wretched fool in these Clothes?


I'll inform you; Do you see this Lady? how does her goodness upbray'd thy
malice, that could, for the Revenge of a Jest, design the murder of her
Friend? Especially knowing how false the pretence of Sister is; which though
she was content to hide, for Interest, yet 'twas folly to believe she would
with a lie, and a Murder, satisfy thy malice; fear not, Paulina; Thy good
nature shall find friends, when justice and shame has made Saretta hide her
head. And in short, Know, we heard your Bravoes had no other mark to
distinguish Thomaso by; then those Clothes which made us fit them to a person,
who, you see, is taken in his own Plot.


And, for you, Lady bright, that thought to have had me cold meat in your
Kitchen; By this light, I will have that Nose, and flay thee here at the Church
door; do not think 'tis your scratched face shall excuse you. -- And but that I
fear the


Hold, prithee, 'tis the Hangmans Office; he bleeds them twice a year with a
whip.


'Tis well nature has armed you against us; But if I had thought our Revenge
would have been thus slow, I would not have been within the danger of your
threats now.


Sir, this is no time to give you the particulars; else I am confident I could
remove all your displeasureagainst this poor girl.


What do you amuse your self at in this mistake? haste, and save your sister;
Your modest Maiden sister; I saw her fall in a swooned at the shot, while
Thomaso and another put her into the Ambassadors Coach; She, you, and I, are
all lost, if not immediately prevented.


My Sister? This Rape shall be dearly paid for; Cannot a Virgin pay her
devotions to the Church without violence? Sure there is Law and Power enough to
revenge this.


Yes faith, the Gentlewoman is gone; and that damned Soldier has all to be
married her by this time; What a fool 'tis, to neglect the Angellica for
Serulina? There's not above two hundred thousand Crowns to boot; Nay, nay, be
no angry sweet heart, nor do not frown, we'll find thee another man.


Fools cannot Anger me, especially Stripped, beaten, cozened fools; I despise
their Anger and their praise; and 'twas all my Quarrel with Thomaso, for
keeping such mouths company, such Monster-Mongers; and he was in the right in
his answer; Alas, what can one expect from Hobynoles, that are cut out of Fools
Timber? Prithee enquire out Fairs and Feasts, and join betimes with some motion
men, and go halfs in your Monsters; If your Comrade had not been another kind
of man you might have drawn like a Team, in your Trots, e're any Jade of you
all had found a Stable in my house; who now, I fear, is gone for ever.


No matter, would thy heart were burst with Envy, or with Grief; and may thy
Love turn to as great a mischief to thy self, as it has been a Curse to us.


No, no, she's wise, a shrewd crafty One, a witch of Lombardy; she Cozened?
not she; her thousand Crowns is but put to use; Thomaso, you know, is turned
Banker; Faith I would you had some more Bags to spare, here is a poor Cozened
fool would so love you for them, so sigh out all your Praises; I can flatter
too, and you know what a pleasure 'tis to be cozened in good Language.


'Twas your vanity and Madness set him up; His starved soul was tame and lean
before, till your folly cherished the Frozen Viper, who now has bit us all;
What do we stay here for? to Invite and Tempt the Justice? Let's away and
preserve Our selves; Who knows but we may yet gain a Revenge; 'twas Paulina's
falsehood betrayed us all.


I can resolve of nothing, my mind is so divided.


PRay be at Peace with your self, and all other storms will cease; Harrigo has
sent word there is no danger of Death, the shot having struck no mortal part. I
confess, This mischief had like to have spoiled all, had not my Trick been
better then theirs; For the Bravo had no other mark to know me by; with which I
paid two debts, his Treachery, and my Promise; But I must acknowledge my life
and safety to poor Paulina.


Where are your Friends? are they in safety?


From all but their Monsters.


Pray be serious, are they married?


'Tis most certain; why do you Tremble now? when by a Miracle all is safe, and
your self, the chief part of our Care, in a Place where no Injury can touch
you?


I am not troubled now; But you cannot expect to find the mind quiet as soon as
the Reason; The Alarm my fears took cannot be so soon composed; you must allow
some time to place again what the storm disordered; 'Tis but a Minute since I
found my self miserable; and this change of happy Fortune had like to have
finished with Joy the dangers which despair begun; Nor shall I find a perfect
peace till my Brother and you are friends; and here I make it my first suit to
you, that you will for my sake bear with his Passion; And as he by an
Extravagant Anger may express the value of a Sister he conceives lost; so you
will show your Esteem of me, by bearing patiently his Injury.


I were most unworthy of your Commands, if they did not bind me above all
Interest or Passion; But this is a Command so agreeable to my own wish, that I
am obliged to it by mine Inclination as well as Obedience, which shall always
speak me a faithful and an humble Servant.


Were this storm over, how happy should we be!


'Tis over; only the fear remains which thus raises these billows in your
Heart.


UNdone, undone; Fool that I was, covetous, unthankful Fool, undone, for ever
undone.


Slave, Cheat, Villain, Thief; thou shalt die no other death but boiling in
thine own broth to a damned jelly, spoon-meat for the Devil thy Master, slave.


Fred!


Ned!


O Cursed Rogue, two hundred thousand Crowns in porrage! Let's fley the Rogue
ere we boil him, he'll be the tenderer for the old Devils tooth; A Crooked
Rogue with a wry Soul too; he'll lie in the dish like a starved Hen with two
breast-bones; a carrion slave, how he looks!


This was your doings, Ned; I am bound to curse thee; he has spoiled the finest
little tidy Jewel of a wife, just a wife and no more; Fool, that I was, I must
be trying conclusions, and make a Monster of a miracle.


And I, that had all things in plenty; Fool, dull Fool, fortune and wife enough
for a Parish, to lose all in a Cullice! I have sought and skumm'd the pot, and
cannot find a bit of her; I am afraid the Devil and the Cook were agreed to rob
the pot of the whole flesh; what a mess of Eve and pudding will the Lecher
have to his Supper!


Alas Gentlemen, I am not too blame; your wine and kindness made me forget
some Rules; I shall never love Mace, nor top again; I told you then my brain
was weak, nor am I faulty; I did my part, and prepared your Baths fit for my
experiment; A nobler work had never been done, nor prouder Subject of my Art
will never be shown, had not that cursed Wine made us forget to limit the
operation and proportion in the charm, to such or such a form; you should have
named some body for similitude or shape; you should have seen what miracle our
skill would have performed; But I too late, remember your dispute, (which was
handsomest) held you so long in resolving, drinking to this, and admiring that
Beauty, till you forgot to resolve on one whose name but called on in the Charm
had stood the form or mould to have cast your wives in. And now when Wine and
delay, (your own Crimes) have undone us all, unjustly you punish the chance on
me, though your nwo Heart knows the Charm was of high force, and wrought but
too effectually.


And is there no remedy then? must mine continue in this horrid form?


Nor no retrieving my wife, is she absolutely lost in fumo? Is't possible to fix
the broth again and recover her? No Art to save so much as is useful of her?
Only so much, good Sir, as will make a wife but to stand good in Law; I desire
no more, pray will you use your Interest with his Highness the Devil, to spare
me so much of my wife; there will be enough to make him merry besides.


Alas, 'tis neither in Art nor Nature to relieve you; For I confess, the
parings, or chips, as we call them, which the Charm has hewn from the Giant,
are the Devils fees by contract; for which he is bound in exchange to furnish
so much of his own store as wanted to build your Dwarf; And your Worship knows,
how impossible 'twill be to get a pound of sweet woman's flesh out of his hungry
kitchen.


Why then, mine is more then three parts Devil.


Not so, Sir! the stock is only Devil, the graft was your own little wife
inoculated.


Now, hast thou found my wife?


Yes, Sir; We have found her at last, but we were fain to strain the broth from
her first, and then we found her lying in the Herbs; 'Tis a fine little
Gentlewoman, and she sleeps still.


And mine, Rogero, prithee how does she bear her burden?


Yours, Sir, is lusty, and walks about the house, starts, and wonders at her
self; seems angry with her own shadow, then frowns, and listens as if she were
frighted; she will not believe she is her self; yet she knows me, and wonders
why I call her by her name; she asks for you, then pinches and pricks her self
till she squeeks again, ere she would believe that load at her back and belly
belonged to her; in earnest, Sir, 'tis a sad sin to wrong them thus.


Gentlemen, is the Report true? have you murdered your wives? The Town is full
of such a mischief.


Fie, no Sir; murdered them? my wife's gone out just before you; we only
tried the foolish experiment of the Baths, which the famous man professes that
sold us the admirable powder.


What Baths?


Those of excellent virtue, which make a Dwarf a Giant, or Gyantize a Dwarf;
rendering any person bathed therein, great or little, as you desire; And we, to
express our Affections to our dear wives, willing to spare no cost, forsooth,
when their good was concerned, employed this Artist to prepare two privately;
which, by a mistake, or rather omission of some Ceremonies, the unlimited
remedies have wrought a little beyond our desires, and have boiled away so much
of my wife, as I fear the remainder will be of no use; But she is very well in
health, and the heartiest little thing, as much Soul as ever; what was a Marble
Rock before is contracted into a Diamond; if you'll please to go in; you shall
see her, she lies so fine and quiet in her cradle; but she'll grow every day
now the Spring comes on.


And mine had a mischance to be cast into an evil mould, and is come out like a
wry bullet; But we'll mend all these misfortunes, by being the best Husbands;
and you must speak a good word for us to reconcile the business, and we will
yet be more grateful to you for past kindness; Come, Ned, let's wait on our
noble Kinsman to dinner, and drink down this sorrow.


Gentlemen, this is no drinking nor jesting matter; I must desire you'll
restore the money and Jewels you have rereived; Besides an Account, before the
Justice of both my wards; where your unlawful using of witchcraft to win them,
and now to murder them, shall be presented to the Inquisition; who, I hope,
will not see a couple of lewd Heretics to murder their Wives, and rob the
true Heirs of the Estate; I'll find the Justice for you, and he shall sing
your Epithalamium.


Witchcraft and Murder? Fine points for a Member of the English Church to
answer in a Spanish Inquisition! Now do I smell the faggots and the fire, or a
rope, for fooling.


Not only lose our fortunes, but come to make a Holly-day for idle folks! For
my part, I am so angry at my luck I care not if I be hanged; 'tis all the remedy
that's left us; Pox on it, 'tis but an ill quarter of an hour; and when 'tis
past, let Fortune kiss me where I sat a Saturday; I'll even go hang my self,
and be revenged of a Croyden fool.


I and Thomaso how he'll Triumph upon this second chance! His Tongue will sting
worse then the Boatswaines pissle, if our sentence do find so much grace as the
Galley.


But first we'll spoil your Quacking, Sirrah, you dog; Help Fred, by this
flesh, you go into your own porrage; and let me alone to call upon your
proportion, as high as my wife, and four times as big, with a stomach equal;
I'll secure you from the Galleys,


Oh noble Gentlemen, have mercy upon me, let my Art plead; You know who dies
with me, the age is wounded, Nations will perish with my secrets; No mercy! no
pity! Spare me and I'll redeem all yet.


So, there's one Rogue fitted.


There are three in already, who are they?


No matter who, I have taken an order for their size; We'll have such a nest of
Giants to revenge my quarrel against the Country; I hope they'll plant again
the race of true Moors and Saracens in this damned Nation; four such Giants
will destroy them with two of the three Curses, Sword, and Famine; I am sure
Castile cannot feed them, nor fight with them without Auxiliaries; I am
resolved I'll fly this unlucky clime.


There are some Gentlemen without desire to speak with you


Prithee call them in.


More mischief yet! what fart blew them hither?


Gentlemen, I come to inquire for a Sister; I am told she knows the way to this
House, and so shall I if not restored.


Have you lost a Sister, is it a great or little Sister?


She was no Monster, Sir.


'Twas strange, considering who claims her.


This Injury will not pass thus; we shall find a way to take a serious and a
strict account from some of you.


Sir, there are none here but what are in the pot; We have no leisure to think
of you nor your losses; We have business and losses of our own; Our Wives and
two hundred thousand Crowns boiled to nothing, cozened and cheated by a damned
Mountebank; but the slave is in pickle for it.


Yes, Sir; 'tis we that are cozened the second and third time, fools in grain,
and stand fair to burnt or hanged too; Judge then whether we are in stealing
case; A pox on Bathing, I shall never love broth nor spoon-meat again; Would
any man have thought liquor would have been our Enemy?


Come, Sir; let's lose no time, you see she is not here, and haste to the
Ambassadors; you may stay short, while I can inform my self.


Where is the Guardian?


Gone, Sir, long since.


Gone? Hark, Fred; There is no dallying nor fooling in this case; therefore
let us haste, and pack up the money, and save our selves in the Ambassadors
House, before the Justice seize us; we shall never be Innocent if they know we
have that guilt about us; and let Rogero shut up all the doors, and follow us
when he has done.


MY Heart's at ease since I saw the mistake; and 'twas but Justice to let that
seditious fool fall into that mischief he designed for others; 'Twas he that
embroyl'd us all; the necessitous fool, to get a fleece from every man flock,
plaid the woolf one day, and the Shep-herd another.


I was amazed at nothing more then to hear them brag that you would join in the
Murder of one you loved.


And I wonder at your Sisters Hatred.


Sister? That's a story I shall clear some other time.


You have reason, and we ought to consider our safety; for though we are both
innocent from the blood of that fool, yet we know how busy the Justice will be
to squeeze as many into the guilt as he can, either as Accessories, or Actors
in the crime; Therefore I'll take my leave of you, and retire to the Venetian
Embassadour's; where my people will, by this, expect me with what they can save
of value in my House.


I believe I shall be safe under the English Arms, from whence (since we have
made this Friendship) you shall constantly hear from me.


Pray let me; and be so just to let him know how innocent I have been in this
design; and all my crimes were but so many loves of him.


ARe you serious?


I, by this unlucky day, undone for ever; not only lost the Birds but our
selves too; unless with these feathers we can make us wings to fly to our
safety, if you will not protect us from the Justice and their Guardian.


That Guardian is a Jew, a Rogue, I know him, and he'll undo you all; a Bath say
you, lost in a Bath!


You know what the Mountebank professed the other day; see, here are his Papers,
this is his Powder, and a sovereign one; I'd not give this Dose for the best
Diamond in Europe: now the secrets gone, do not taste it, unless you mean to
run mad for love of me; and I have vexations enough without the addition of
such a mischief. Travel, Quoth you? a month of such days as I have past will
give a man experience enough to be a Witch, if he be so unlucky as to escape
hanging.


And what wilt thou do with that Powder?


I'll travel till I find some small Princess that pleases me, and give it her;
with a dose of this I can choose my woman through the world; and 'twere not for
that satisfaction this loss would kill me.


Nay, By this hand, I'll betray him; he has a Plot upon the Angellica with it;
she's handsome and rich; and I heard him swear, even now, he thought he should
never thrive till he had married one of your seasoned Grass-widows.


By my troth, I had as live take her as a Cag'd Nymph, a mewed Maid from a
Grate in a Nunnery that acts what she can, and wishes the rest; whose
Maiden-head is a prisoner at the best: all this and more I am armed against;
and foresaw your mirth and scorn when I got her, and the joy now when you
should hear I had lost her: but I am resolved, if my Powder do not thrive, to
put half my stock in a venture, and away for the Indies, and live where these
stories were never heard of.


The Indies!


Yes, the Indies; where we are promised six black wives a piece, smooth and
comely beauties, naked truths, Eves, in the state of innocence, Girls that
will neigh and fight for my bed.


Bless the man! three couple of Moors in thy bed! they'll hunt thee to death.


Hunt their hunt, we are resolved, Sir; six plump, smooth, pregnant Girls a
piece is the bargain, with flat-noses all, for convenience of kissing, with
brave swelled lips, Cupids Cushions; so soft and sweet, the Rogues dew is sweet
in the Dog-days; their very sweat Aromatic and Balsam all; upon these we
resolve to plant a Croyden Justice, and an Essex Captain of the tame bands; and
I warrant thee the seed will thrive.


Your Fourbisher, your Magellan, your Drake and Rawley; all consent your Moors
woman has no fellow in nature; she's your black Garden-mould, the same rich
earth Adam dug in, so full of nature and strength the Sun dwells in her; and
will send forth such Clusters of Boys and Girls, such straw, and such an ear,
so full, so clean, the Cradles will not hold the Barnes: our barren cold red
and white clay knows no such harvest; all the streams the Sun sucks from the
parched earth you will find in the woman there, as full and luscious as the
Greek Vine; and 'tis true pleasure to pluck a Girl there, so full of juice
she'll fill the Press; and there women show their true virtue and their use.


Methinks Edwardo is an apt Scholar; and now you are leaving the world, given
over by Matrimony to a wedded Bed, even make your will, and entail your
Bachelors opinion on him; I would see this Testament signed, for I perceive
he's resolved to succeed you in the Wanderer; and 'twill not be an ill journey,
Sir, though I'm afraid it will be a long one if you travel till you lose the
Justice of Peace: consider upon the business till I return; I must be gone for
fear my stay may bring some misfortune to poor Paulina, who will suffer if I
provide not for her safety; and her kindness deserves all our care.


Dear Harrigo, find her, and use all possible means to bring her here.


Leave that to me; but you must not fail to give her a present for old kindness
sake, since you resolve to see her no more.


I shall not need, there is one within will do it for me, who resolved it as
soon as I told her 'twas she that saved my life: and she now is as kind to
Paulina as I have been, and loves her for loving me; she longs to see her, and
hopes to persuade her into a Monastery.


I'll be gone; but pray be you two private here till I inform my self how your
business stands with the Justice; and 'twill not be amiss to accuse the
Guardian of conspiracy, and try if you can fright him from the pursuit; I'll
ask counsel in the business.


Well, Sir; how goes your business? better I hope then ours.


I am married too, and settled, I believe, for a hundred years, or so; if I fall
not into a kettle.


Well, Sir; let the Kettle boil; and know her Brother is in pursuit of you; he
came to our house to inquire, Pox upon the sad hour, 'tis full of unbidden
guests I fear by this time; we durst not stay to eat our dinner; and if you
give us not some food and remedy for care, a bottle or two apiece to chide
sorrow, we are lost; all the foes of man arm against us.


I warrant you for meat; those days of affliction are over sure; a Wife and no
meat! 'twere sin as well as folly to beg single, and double too; no, Ned; I
always told you when ever I married I would be happy and honest. -- See who
comes here; Sweet heart,


They are most welcome, and so are all that bear that title.


What a delicate taste an honest woman's lips have above a small sinners? I
shall never relish a Whores again, I fear; I wonder what Country my good
fortune is fled to; I have neither Powder, Wife nor Whore, to build upon; was
ever Gentleman-traveller so out of Cash and Conversation as I am? would I were
at Paris, or the Hague, again; did I leave those places of pleasure and quiet
civil life to come to this where mischiefs only swarm; whose very air is
lousy, and that curse would destroy the Country but for another curse that
wars with it, that of the dust which flies so hot it would fire powder as it
passes; every sand is so many sparks in the air: yet here we walk in this
furnace without a miracle.


Nay, then I despair of thee; can one affliction make thee compare Holland to
Spain? Oh the Fish-pots and Butter of that Egypt without a River; whose Mist of
ignorance hangs upon them still, and though the English Olivers rod be over
them, yet their hearts are hardened against poor Cavaliers; I thought this heat
would have sweat out all the kindness thou suck'dst in with Roterdam Beer: but
I'm afraid 'twill stay as long as the gravel in the Kidneys; the fruits of
Hop's, Turnips, and Pickl'd-herrings which paves the back.


For all this Satire, the Flesh and Fish is such as your Madrid has not shown
us the like in her lean Shambles and starved Markets, where the Priests are
fain to conjure for Fish, by throwing Tubfuls of Tripes into the water; and
then by virtue of a Bull by Ignatius's name, command that they be fish; and
they have faith enough to eat it afterward, and swear there is bones in it too,
transubstantiated Tripes: a true Papist Catholic would distinguish what fish
he eats with bread of yesterday; for there is nothing but the Wafer baked in
the City, and 'tis well they have this trick of fishing by miracle; for that
which comes naturally to the Market, those in the Zodiac are as fresh and
sweet, and lay less in the Sun then the Salmon we eat last; it walked like a
vision before us for twenty days upon a Mule; and yet past for fresh, even at
the Catholic Kings own board. You used to eat such at Woods in the Hague?


Who will deny Holland has Fish, or who can say they have Flesh? By this light,
their Flesh is Fish, and their Fowl fly-Turf; their Birds but feathered Fish;
and their Fish finn'd Mud: all you see, smell or taste, is Fish; 'tis indeed so
many Provinces of Fish-street.


Yet I have seen you sigh and dye for one of these dishes of Milk;
Mademoiselle, what do you call her, Ned?


Skel-fish.


Pish, Mademoiselle.


Van Knowles, Van Cates.


Prithee leave fooling; Lord, Ned, you know her; 'tis the Ufrow Van --


Stoff, or Cabillio?


The Heer Van --


Forman, Skipper, Crves and Buord?


Nay, then you are resolved.


By this hand, I have named all the great Names and Families in the Country,
except the Royal Orange; which they have so squeezed with a clinch, they shall
be sure to have my curse.


Yet last year they were so fair, so white, so smooth, so proper; I have seen
you frown and sigh at the sight; the grand Mistress shall know what a Knight
she has of you.


One Swallow makes no Summer; though 'tis confessed the flesh is white, and
such as if I would eat a Girl it should be a Dutch-girle, a North Holland
child, 'tis pure Vitello, Mungany, or Capon de Lecho, as white and sweet as
either; and when 'tis weaned, the Pigs, her Foster Brothers, that sucked with
her, are as good as she; In earnest, Madam, a Rotterdams Pig, taken from my
Hostesses own breast; dost remember, Ned, when we stole the Sowesbaby out of
the Cradle where the kind Nurse had hid it? 'twas cruel Ned that killed it: the
Neighbours ran together at the cry; and as if we had killed her first born, it
put all the house in mourning, till Sack and Sugar allayed the grief.


I remember 'twas at the Saint John's head, and it proved the purest Babe of
grace; it would have tempted a Jew as it lay in the dish; old Satan of the
Disser, and a Scot his Host, in spite of Moses fell to the Roast.


'Twas where we met Ambassador Will, and Resident Tom, with M. Sheriffs
Secretary, John the Poet with the Nose; all Gondiberts dire Foes; from Poland
laden with the spoils of what do you lack, Sir; and all the Scotch Peddlers
Packs on their backs, Sir.


I am pleased to find you all in so good humour; and would bear my part were my
Brother and you friends in your heart.


The Ambassador sent a civil Message to him; and had an Answer both kind and
serious, and is now gone himself to speak with him; and I believe all will end
in Comedy, since Co^nelio's mischief is not mortal; this story of the Baths
will make fit mirth for a Wedding. -- Harrigo, haste thou found her?


Yes, she's without, but ashamed, and afraid both; to see your Lady; shall I
fetch her in?


Yes, pray Don Harrigo, I long to see her.


No, I'll do it my self; for there is nothing of shame belongs to the kindness
of yesterday; the obligations of to day bear their own date; and faults
hereafter are crimes to you; what's past is upon mine own score.


Come, no more tears; I would not have you stain my wedding day with your
griefs; 'tis ominous to weep on Hymens Altar; pray be not sad.


There is a guilt and shame, as well as sadness in these tears; and I must hope
for nothing but certain misery from your joys; your virtue may smile, you have
all the causes joy can bring you; in birth happy, in love and fortune blessed,
and in innocence, which crowns the rest. Yet heaven witness, I envy not your
youth her peace; for though I cannot be innocent my self, I am not so wicked
but I can adore both her and virtue in the breasts of others; nor do I lament a
grief that has surprised me; 'tis long since my heart discovered his; and they
are fond women, who stained with our crimes can hope to weep gallant men into
such madness as to leave the blessings the fair and virtuous Serulina brings,
to blush their lives with us.


Pray cease this grief, and know my heart has no severe thoughts; I can see
your good and oversee your error, which I know has many arguments to plead; and
if heartily repented leaves your heart as innocent as if it had never been
acted.


Custom, impious custom, is guilty of all my sins, by being the original of all
my crimes; whose depraved liberty not only tolerates, but encourages those
follies whose guilt I blush before such a virtue as the fair and innocent
Serulina; who has not only honour, but mercy too. Other women may be chaste,
but they are so rigid and so cruel to our faults; and their counsels so full of
whips and stings, it rather incenses and hardens then reclaims a heart; nor
doth their ill nature care to make a convert amongst us, so they may have the
vanity to make a Satyr upon us; but here I find the Balsam of true innocence;
which is not so proud, or vain in her own blessed condition, as sollicitous to
preserve and redeem others: and here I see the true stock of honour, which in
your generous breast has diviner forms and fruits then we can know or imagine
in our sick state; yet I dare boast never to have broke the Laws she prescribed
to our sex, faithful, kind, constant and obedient to cur Lovers, concerned only
in their good, never betraying or abandoning their trust.


I swear there are charms in her tongue, her very griefs are bewitching; what
would her mirth and kindness do? how graceful, how delightful, when her sadness
is thus lovely, thus catching; infectious grief has made me sad in spite of
this days joy.


Though this fault be folly in strict sense; yet you see we have sometimes some
reason to love these Girls; and I am confident I'll never want that excuse;
you shall always find a handsome witty cause of my sin at least.


Have you no thoughts of retiring, now? methinks, in this handsome sorrow you
should have a sense of your condition, such as might prompt you to the
abandoning this world; and listen to all those Angels that summon the heart:
hark how they call; see where virtue stands, and beckons thee to come! prithee,
dear Paulina, go, and spend some of that youth and beauty with her, try but the
difference; what a peace and calm thy mind will feel, there is no thorns nor
dangers; thy quiet mind fortune and death it self despising: Oh, that thou
could be so early wise; what Jewel would I not give to see thee become my
penitent! and once in the Magdalenes, what joy it would be to me to converse
with such beauty, and such goodness, in the glory of a repentance! your friend
too shall visit you; dear Paulina, consider what I say, and look back upon
those dangers both of rocks and seas thou daily venturest in this little
bark, how ill guided, and worse manned, thy youth must be to struggle with
those storms and tempests which the world threatens thy beauty having no
compass nor star to steer by.


The Magdalenes, Madam; though I bow to your goodness, yet I perceive your
Ladyship knows not the place: I was bred sometime amongst 'em, and from my
knowledge of their customs take leave to say it; when I retire from the world
it shall not be into a Nunnery, for I am resolved to be honest when ever I
profess it; a Nunnery will only add a dissimulation and facriledge to my fault;
and 'tis less sin and shame to yield to the flatteries of young men then the
lust and force of old women; I speak a known truth of their too common crimes;
young strange women there shall suffer more pollution and rapes then in sacked
Cities.


The Magdalenes, my heart! why, if I would breed a Thais or another Lais, or
put Ovid again to School to learn a new art of love, I would send him to study
at the grate of the Convertines, where Aretine should be made an ass, and blush
the publishing his dull postures, compared to the ingenious lust that's
practised in their cells.


My own house is far from chaste, but 'tis a Church, compared to theirs; whose
crimes have such blackness in them persons of your honour can neither imagine,
nor believe.


How can the world expect better from such multipli'd devils in a nest
assembled by want, or condemned by the Law for some horrid crime? the most
innocent enter in passion, or drove by the despair of some discontent; and
though divers causes bring them, all are forced; no one whom reason, honour, or
conscience guides, which makes them when they have recovered the anger, fear
and despair that threw them in, their minds turn to the old vomit; for their
hearts are slaves still to the same lusts, and burn with the same desires,
whose fires are increased with the thoughts of past faults, which they are so
far from repenting, as with double sin they act them over again, while the
spirit of lust plays two parts alone, the lover and the loved, till what was
fornication in their house becomes Sodomy in their Cell; two or three pill'd
sins Nunns wear, 'tis not honour, nor conscience binds; double grates can only
keep them from breaking of their vows; and were not the hangman of more terror
then the Confesser, you should see what swarms their hives would send forth.


I would you would leave this subject, and think of dinner, and take your
convert with you.


I would she were my convert, I would not only dine with her, but fast for her,
in hopes of such a blessing.


Truly, Madam; I'm resolved, at least to change the place, if not my life, to
avoid all occasions of being a further trouble to you and your fortune; for
since we are both struck with one Dart, the Angellica and my self are designed
for Italy, to seek a remedy by absence; she only begs you will forgive her
sending your Letter to Don Pedro, it being the only crime you can accuse her
of; and by this journey avoid the trouble of seeing what can only be our
afflictions.


There is nothing of anger, but much of kindness due to both: and since you
resolve upon that journey, I am confident you will find them both a kind and
civil Nation; and here is a Lover begs you will wear this Ring in memory of her
and your kindness yesterday. The Angellica shall have her thousand crowns
again, 'twas the first money I ever got by the sex; and I cannot but wonder at
their narrow minds, as well as their fortunes that can be so poorly spirited as
to design farther then the kindness of a woman. I have bought many in my time,
but never yet either asked or got more of a woman then her flesh. What you'll
do, Madam, I know not.


Where I give my faith and friendship I shall never refuse my fortune; and I
wonder as much at them who can give their persons and deny their goods, as you
do at those who prostitute themselves for money.


Madam, I shall wear this favour to my grave; for I perceive 'tis a debt I owe
your goodness; and if your husband doth not change his nature you will not
repent your kindness: for Don Thomaso had always a heart greater then his
fortune; and his presents still held proportion with his love, rather then with
his money.


I will not afflict you farther, but wish you a happy journey; and will still
hope better resolutions then you promise; for 'tis impossible good nature
should be wilfully and resolvedly wicked: 'tis true, Nature has her weakness,
and vanity or want may sometimes counsel us against our hearts; and therefore,
when ever you can resolve, here am I that will remove those difficulties; and
as long as I have any fortune you shall not have that excuse, to become as fit
for my love as the kind Paulina is for my my pity: Come, you must dine with us.


I should gladly receive the honour, Madam, if I durst avow my being here.


Come, no fears; thy innocence shall be as public as thy kindness; and as long
as I have friends, or fortune, they shall both protect thee.


DId you see my Sister?


No, Sir; she desired to be excused till the Ambassador had spoken with you.


What answer had you from him?


He confessed they were married, and was highly satisfied with the civility of
your Message; and bid me assure you all the satisfaction you could expect in
honour; and that he would immediately wait upon you himself; his Coach was
ready when I came out; and I saw him pass the Piazza now; it would not be amiss
you were in readiness to receive him.


Call Johanne, and get the people in readiness.


There is no struggling in this case, Sir; she being of years to choose; 'twas a
mischief might have been prevented; but 'tis not to be redeemed.


YOu must excuse us, we cannot stay, but we will be with you in a minute; we
expect the Ambassadors return; Don Pedro is coming with him to make a peace
between him and Thomaso; when that business is over, we will find you; in the mean
time, dear Paulina, I'll leave you Mistress of my Chamber; and Gentlemen, look
you be civil to this Lady.


Faith, Paulina, I am thinking 'tis but a folly for us to part, being of one
mind; for this is no place for the Edwardos neither; the air doth not agree
with me; especially now they have got the trick of beating and cozening me, I
shall never be safe; and home I'm resolved not to go, for I have seen the new
Catechism; and though I can lay hold of sin by as lively a resolution as any,
yet wickedness is so ill dressed, so stolen, and so oppressed; sin doth not savour
in that cold air as in this hot climate; the Cooks and Sauce are better here,
though the sin and flesh be the same; and now they have spoiled Wed-lock too;
for unless a Wench can steal a man, and run away with him, she must lye alone.


Faith, Child, having heard your resolutions we are resolved (if you and the
Angellica like our humours) to bear you company into Italy; look you Paulina,
we have not lost all; though the Birds be flown, there are some thousands of
Pistols yet, and Jewels, to a sum large enough (I warrant you) to maintain a
Soldiers life, which in honour must not be long, for fear of the Proverb: A
gray Soldier.


Is it a match? shall we remove the Scene to Italy, and swear Comrades? Fred
and I have a mind to wander with such Planets: young and kind Constellations
cannot choose but have good influence upon mirth: dare you venture your self in
our Spears! I'll undertake to prevail with the Angellica.


If she consent, I'll agree, else I cannot; for I am already obliged to her and
her company.


If it be a bargain, Ned shall give us a Supper at parting; I long to see
Italy, and taste the description the Rogue uses to make of it, such Wine, such
Women, such Music; and then his heart fires a volley of sighs to their memory;
and then a Carnival, such as would make a man curse his lot that fell on this
side the Hills, as if 'twere out of the bounds of Gods blessings: at thy
supper, Ned, he shall repeat our lesson; put him but in the humour, and 'twill
be both counsel and comfort.


My supper! no Fred, no more fuppers; I prithee do not so much as mention meat
in Madrid, there is a curse follows it; I'll not eat again upon mine own score
while I am in it; 'twould make a man swear a fast, to think upon the ill luck
has follow'd my feasts; and makes me resolve to commit that kind of fault no
more; if ever I fill a woman's belly at that end again, let them play Lucetta's
part; I find feasts and banquets are follies of a high rate, Fred: and when a
man has laid out his money that way, what return doth it yield? Fah, it stinks
to name it; and woe be to that bottle of Sack I lay my hands on first; he shall
pay for all these griefs.


And my sorrows are as ready to do you reason as any thirsty sinner in Madrid;
Come child, be merry, and learn of us to despise sorrow; we will make thy journey
short, and so laugh over these old stories.


I shall not be the saddest in the company, Sir, since I find others have their
crosses too: Fellows in misery make the burden light; 'tis the single loan
grief in jolly troops that to all is heavy still, and wounds both the seer and
the seen.


'TIs past, Sir, and forgot; the name of Brother hath wiped all other titles
from my heart but that of friend, which shall be faithfully preserved for you;
I know you have honour, and that will make you use her like your self; and
still remember how she has preferred your friendship before either her Family
or her Fortune; pray let me see her, Sir.


Prithee, Harrigo, wait upon her in, and desire the company to follow, 'tis
late; and we'll to dinner; this had been a merry day if my friends had not lost
their Brides; is there no possibility to get them delivered to the protection
of their Husbands? 'tis the State, not they are guilty to permit such
witchcraft to be practised in the City.


That will rest in the breast of the inquisidor, who must be dealt with for a
sum of money; who, else, I fear will make their portions as great a crime as
the Bathes have been. -- Sister, I wish Serulina, I conjure you not to mistake
my past severity; 'twas neither want of value or kindness for either, but a
desire to have seen you married into a Family which you know might have given
us both advantage: but since 'tis your fortune to fix upon this Gentleman, with
all my soul I wish there may be no change in your fortune, but live and dye
happy in one another Friendship; And I hope she will not be the less welcome
to you when a Brother and a servant thus presents her, the Reward of your first
Generous Action: The Portion I shall see with all diligence paid; and 'tis now
the season and Q for mirth, that I may have some share in your Joys, 'twill, I
hope, be neither unseasonable nor unreasonable to expect you should relinquish
to me Angellica, who, upon my credit, had no hand nor interest in the Murder
designed this day.


I am confident she had not; and though her kindness may want discretion, yet
she wants not good Nature; and I shall not only relinquish, but use all my
power with her to admit Don Pedro, and only him; for by Serulina's Faith I vow
to be as faithful to her Friendship now, as ever I was to my humour before.


Your desires will come too late; for I know the Angellica's Resolutions are
fixed upon a return to Venice; and I am resolved to bear her company.


Yes faith, and we are all of a Troop if we can escape the Justice; Nothing but
Witchcraft and Murder stays us; would Rogero were returned, that we might
know our doom.


Is this serious? Or does the Angellica say this to Alarm my Heart with her
departure?


Yes faith, Sir; We are all for Italy if the Hang-man do not lie in the way;
and merrily we will spend the chippings of the Monsters; here's as much left of
Sir Mammons hopes as would cure the Itch in a hot Country.


And what shall I do alone in an empty house? How say you, Carlo, shall you and
I make up the Covey? Shall we be welcome, Paulina?


I am certain, Sir, you will be most welcome to all the Company; and a year or
two well spent abroad will bury all the wild stories we leave behind; which is
the chief cause makes me resolve upon the Journey.


Sister, you were yesterday all my care, and now Don Thomaso has blown that
fear over; Faith take the house into your Protection too; for Carlo and I am
resolved to spend a year or two in Italy upon this occasion; The General once
offered me a command in Millain; if I like the people and the place, I'll take
it; if not, 'tis a Journey of Pleasure; the season is good, and the Company
better.


Sir, I am now allied to you; and there are many reasons, besides the kindness
to your person, would make me wish your stay; yet all interest laid aside, 'tis
not only my opinion, but my desire you should take this Resolution; and if you
be not as highly satisfied with the journey, the people, and the place, as any
you have yet seen, I'll forfeit the charge.


I am resolved; and now, Serulina, all cause of Jealousy being past betwixt
us, be freely and clearly kind to your Brother, who here vows to my dear Sister
all that her Heart can expect from one that loves and values her; and to give
you one Argument to believe it, look you choose me a wife against I come home.


How now, Rogero, what news?


All is well, Sir; The Justices came immediately as you went out, and have
seized all the goods they found. But those Prodigies in the Baths has made them
fly the House; Four such Giants, Sir Amadis, nor the Palmerins ever
encountered; The German guards are now in Arms to seize them, Scarramucha is
come out a Lady, as big again as Don Edwardo's; And there is a Lady come forth
Scarramucha, a Giant amongst Giants; She doth so wonder at her Beard and
Breeches, for she has Helena's old Whores Soul in a mans Body; 'twas sport to
see the wonder, and what a start she gave at the Ammunition of her own
Breeches. The Mountebank keeps his own Features, but in a horrid form; and
threatens black destruction to you all: His wife too is one of the loveliest
forms and perfect symmetry that such a Monster can present to the judging eye;
Celia in Youth and Beauty, such as when her charming Hand and Voice led Rome in
Chains; Yet she is still frighted with the power of that Charm that first
enslaved her, and would hide or fly the Anger and the Love of him who now with
frowns and severe looks threatens all; They quickly made the Inquisidors leave
the House; which gave me occasion to tell them you were Travellers, guilty
only in the trying a public experiment; Men that had not a sold to lose, poor
cashiered Cavaliers; whom their Guardian had cozened of their Portions, and
I'd undertake, for a piece of money, should quit your Interest to them; upon
which they seized the Guardian, and expect Don Harrigo to treat your Interest;
You are sure he's in the Galleys for his Life, and his Estate confiscate to the
Church; Your wives will be Prisoners during Life; for to lie with them is held
Copulation with the Devil.


The sum in hand, did not the Guardian tell of that, nor require Restitution?


Not a word; he durst not mention that for fear of confessing my accusation;
which has named him as a party that conspired with the Witch.


Ha! not only free, but hopes of more money; Prithee let Harrigo treat the
Consolation; I will not have above a hundred thousand Crowns; 'tis more then a
Soldier of our party ought to possess, unless he will eat alone; for where a
Devil shall we find two more to make up our mess?


While we feed upon this Air, I have a Mind to a real dinner; for I am a
thirsty and a hungry sinner.


Love hath his Famine too and Thirst, that drinks the Blood, while the sighing
Heart becomes his Food. But we a more propitious Deity have found; which with
smiling Fates, and full Joys, our Loves has crowned; And now, Madam, all Fears
and Tyranny of the Boy must be remembered only as the salt and seasoning of
this Joy; Whilst cheerful Hymens Nuptial Treasures invites to new and
surprising pleasures; Such, as I in all my curious search could never find;
Embraces that are as chaste as kind: And I conjure you all, where ere you go,
proclaim what I shall still adore; The Virtue of this Star, bright Serulina,
whose Friendship thus has fixed the Wanderer.



