TO you that Judges are in the public street,
Of Ballad without sense, or even feet;
To you that laugh aloud with wide mouthed grace,
To see Jack Puddings Custard thrown in's face,
To you I do address; for you I write,
From you I hope protection here to night.
Defend me, O friends, of the upper Region,
From the hard censure of this lower Legion.
I was in hope, that I should only see,
My worthy Crew of the upper Gallery.
What made you Wits so spitefully to come?
To tell you true, I'd rather had your room:
Order there was, and that most strictly gi'n
To keep out all that looked like Gentlemen;
You have even bribed the Door-keepers I doubt,
Or else I'm sure they would have kept you out:
You must, nor censure Poet, nor his Play,
For that's the work of the upper house to day.
Deal you, Sirs, with your Match, your Dryden wit,
Your Poet Laureate both to Box and Pit.
It is some conquest for to censure him*
That's filled with Wit, and Judgment to the brim*
He is for your censure, and I'm for theirs,
Pray therefore meddle with your own affairs.
Let Wits, and Poets, keep their own stations;
He writes to the Terms, and I to the long Vacations.

I Have heard your story, and much pity you; but, in truth, I am a wicked,
very wicked woman: for I never did one good deed in all my life; and I doubt
you're unlucky, that your fate directs you to me.


I find you have opportunity to do good, and will to serve me; and for reward,
if that --


Nay, you're liberal enough, you understand the world; for money creates good
and evil: and I, that never thought of doing good, will now heartily endeavour
it. Go to my quarters, for I have a great deal of roguery to act for my self,
besides the good I am to do for you.


Inquire all you can into the last thing you spoke of, for I confess that
troubles me: if she proves but honest, I'll forgive her wildness.


I'll do it, with all the craft I can.


Good morrow, good morrow Lieutenant.


Precious Rogues! what brave Honours and Titles you have arrived at in the
Wars, Rascals! Plunder-master General Flea-flint! what Prince can give thee so
great a Title? a great credit for my Colonel, Rogue. Then, here's Captain
Ferret-farm, an honourable Gentleman; for always, when we are fighting, you are
ferreting the Farms, and searching the women for Letters of intelligence, you
damned Rogue. Then, here's the Quarter-master Burndorp, a Rogue that, when we
have brave large quarters assigned, you sell half of 'em, and then truss us up
nine or ten in one house together. A pox on you, Rascal.


But why are you thus cruel, Lieutenant?


Hang you dogs; did not I know you at first to be three tattered Musketeers,
and by plundering a Mault-mill of three blind horses, you then turned
Dragooners, and so quartering in a Farm where a good team was, you changed your
blind horses for better, and then you commenced Troopers at Oxford, and when
you had plundered your selves into good clothes, you impudently called your
selves Major, and Captain, and Quarter-master, and then you ran away from your
own Troop, and I entertained you for Reformado-Ofcers? you know I know this,
and yet, you dull ungrateful rascals, you will not know why I am angry.


Why are you angry?


Why? I'll tell thee why: He wants twenty pounds, and a good gelding, Coxcomb;
he must have it too, I know him well enough.


Is that it? he shall have it, and thank him too. Pray accept of this twenty
pound, Lieutenant.


And we have a good gelding for you, Lieutenant, as ever you laid leg over.


Why so? Why will you put me to it to give you ill language? cannot you
understand me without scurvy usage?


I did not understand you, by my troth, Lieutenant.


Pray understand me hereafter. Now are you three as honest, harmless fellows!
how dost thou do? who dares say that thou wilt flea a flint? or he search for
Letters in a wenches Placket? or the Quarter-master burn a Town? I'll set 'em
by the heels that say it. Honest Robin, Tom and Dick, when shall we drink a tub
of Ale together?


When you please, worthy Lieutenant.


Get a Tub at one of your quarters, and I'll come to you. And pray understand me
thoroughly hereafter: I believe I shall be very angry within this week again;
therefore pray take care to prevent it.


It were a good deed never to plunder more.


Why, prithee?


No thriving on it for these damned Officers. To put Excise and Custom upon
Plundering! to put Toll upon fleeing a Flint! I hold my own quarters to be my
lawful Inheritance as much as any mans Land or Office, that is held by old
Custom, and Time out of mind.


Nay, I hold my quarters to be so much my own, that the Wife, the Daughter, and
Maid-servants, ought to be in my occupation.


I deny that; for the man of the house ought to have his wife himself, in case
he have a daughter to furnish you. Nay, the strictness of the Statute of
Plundering says, that in case he has but barely a Maid-servant, you ought not
to meddle with his wife, or indeed his daughter.


I am of the opinion of the Gentleman that spoke last; for I am (in my own
quarter) Lord of the Manor, and all Wefts and Strays are mine.


I'll say that for thee, a Maid cannot go a milking but thou make a Weft or a
Stray of her.


Here's the faithful fraternity, a league of Knaves that's never to be broke.
It is a joyful thing when Brethren plunder together in unity. How do ye,
Plunder-master General?


We have all arrived at excellent nick-names; to say truth, according to our
several degrees and ways of Plundering: but you, Cornet, have a name that's
proper for all Cornets to be called by; for they are all Beardless boys in our
Army: for the most part of our Horse were raised thus, The honest Country
Gentleman raises the Troop at his own charge, then he gets a Low-Country
Lieutenant to fight his Troop safely, then sends for his son from School to be
his Cornet, and he puts off his Child's coat to put on a Buff-coat; and this is
the constitution of our Army: So I salute you, Cornet Beardless. Thou art
called Ferret-farm, because thou art so terrible valiant amongst the
Country-Bumpkins, and Aspen because thou shake and tremble in a day of
Battle.


Whoo pox, this is absolute malice.


There thou art out; for this is neither malice nor anger, but down-right
truth.


You abuse him i'faith. I have seen him up to the chin in blood.


'Twas in a Saw-pit then: yet when the Armies meet (I'll say that for him) he
will draw up as confidently, as if he would take a General by the Beard; and he
will as confidently ride out of the Army before the Battle joins: and if any
man ask him whither he goes, he says he is sent for Orders, so you hear of him
no more; and the next day you find him as sure in a Saw-pit.


Pray let the Saw-pit alone, and provoke me not: good men have done the like;
therefore be not too bold with your betters.


Provoke him not; for he's a Devil at a Sword, though he tremble at a Gun.


A Gun, I confess, is as terrible to me as Thunder and Lightning, they're out
of my Element. Well, but leave this discourse, and so you do not laugh at me,
I'll tell you a story.


What is't?


Why, faith our Dol's with child, and lays it to me.


Pox on her, she was with me this morning, and I compounded with her, for five
pound.


The whore had seven of me, by this light.


An excellent cunning quean! She knows the family of the Flea-flints are ever
the moneyed men of a Troop. I'll make use of my time too: give me ten pound to
keep counsel, or I'll make you the laughing-stock of the Army.


Thou wilt not turn treacherous Rogue now sure.


'Tis no treachery. Show me a Soldier that will not take advantage.


I, of the enemy.


For ten pound any man's my enemy or friend: there's another principle for you,
and very fit for the Flea-flints to make use of.


We scorn to compound; but we will lend you so much money, if you will mortgage
the next fresh Quarters.


I'll do it.


Then there's your ten pound.


Now are you men of Inheritance, now you have a good title to every mans goods
and chattels; and for ten pound more I'll help you to a Lawyer shall plead it,
and make it good to you and your Heirs for ever.


God give you good morn, Sirs: I pray you which of you is the Captain
Commander?


Why, friend, we have never a Captain here, he lies Leiger at Oxford, to give
the King intelligence when his Troop beats or is beaten.


There you're a scandalous rascal: some Captains, I confess, have that trick;
but our Captain always fights his Troop himself: but we have a good Lieutenant
here, if that will serve your turn.


I, he's too good for us, I would the Devil had him.


What's thy business?


I'd be a Trooper.


And can thou fight?


Wilt thou try?


No, faith, friend, I believe thee. Wast' ever a Soldier?


I, a Parliament one.


What, and did thou run away?


No, I walked this pace: I scorn to run.


I believe this fellow's a Spy.


You lye; I am very honest. Now dare you fight?


No, by my troth, not with thee.


Then remember, if any body want the lye, you had it last.


This is such a fellow as I never met with. Yet why did thou leave the
Parliament?


For the same cause that I believe I shall leave you.


What's that?


Because I liked 'em not.


Who was thy Captain?


One Captain Verily Rett.


Of what Profession was he?


Of every ones Profession, I think.


What's that?


An Hypocrite.


And dost thou come out of love to the King?


No; I come to see fashions.


But why did thou leave thy Captain?


Because he is an Hypocrite, a yea and nay knave; he cannot endure to plunder,
but (in a godly manner) he will take all he can lay his hands on.


But wilt thou fight for the King out of stark love and kindness.


No; I'll fight for him as all men fight for Kings, partly for love, partly for
my own ends. I'll fight bravely for a Battle or two; then beg an old house to
make a Garrison of, grow rich, consequently a coward, and then let the Dog bite
the Bear, or the Bear the Dog, I'll make my own peace, I warrant you; and, in
short, this is my business hither.


Where are you, Sirs? the Captain has brought Orders to march, but whither I
know not; and better news than that, he has brought pay, Boys.


I hope you are not angry, Lieutenant.


I am not yet; but I shall be very suddenly, therefore provide against it: the
next fresh quarter you will have advantage enough. I hope we understand of all
hands.


'Tis sufficient, Lieutenant.


But here's the strangest fellow come to be a Trooper.


He 's welcome. Hast thou a good Horse, friend?


No, but I've a bridle, and if you'll entertain me, I shall quickly have a
horse. Are you the Captain?


I am but Lieutenant, friend.


Ho, I thought you had all been Captains, I'm sure you are all called so.


But here comes one that is so: this is a very Captain.


I tell thee that's very much. What's his name?


Captain Honour.


I? have you such a thing as Honour amongst you?


Lieutenant, get your Corporals together, and give 'em Orders to make ready for
a march; and be sure you charge 'em to see every Horse in their Squadrons shod,
otherwise we shall have 'em lye behind drinking and plundering, and then pretend
they stay to shoe their Horses: let me hear no more on it.


'Tis possible a very Captain may be honest.


But, Sir, before you do any thing, talk with this fellow: he would fain be a
Trooper.


Now, friend, would thou be a Soldier?


Yes, if I could light of a good side: a right cause, and good men to manage
it.


On my word, that's shrewdly put. Well, I'll promise thee a good cause, and some
good men: in multitudes all are not virtuous, nor valiant.


That's well said: I think I shall begin to take a liking to you. But, Captain,
I hear a man may learn to flea a flint amongst you, to drink and plunder.


Do ye hear that rascals? But where did thou hear this report of us?


In a London-pulpit: but another sort of people told me, they preached Interest
more than Gospel; so that a man knows not which side to take.


Nay, upon my word, thou art come to the right side.


I guess as much; for you talk worse than you do, and they do worse than they
talk.


This is an odd kind of fellow, and I believe a dangerous. Friend, withdraw,
while I read my Orders to my Officers.


A word in your ear first, are you wonderful honest?


Thou art a strange blunt fellow: yes, I am honest.


But are you wise too? for else the want of wit to manage your honesty, may
make you a knave. I know 'tis some men's cases.


Thou dost surprise me: sure thou hast more business than to be a Trooper.


I have so; but I must ask you another question ere you know it. Are you stanch
enough to keep a secret? Be not angry; many of your party cannot hold: for tell
you news, and you fly, like lightning, to the next man to disgorge it, and so
it goes round till it comes to the Enemy; and thus you betray your business,
and intend it not neither.


I have not heard so dangerous a man. Pray, friend, think me worthy to know
your business.


You shall. And to show you that I have business, I know what your Orders are.


Why, 'tis impossible.


Nothing impossible: you are to remove your Troop to Cilstow, there quarter
till further Orders, but not to go to bed, for you are within three miles of a
little house called Thieves-den Garrison, and you are to expect a company of
Foot to quarter with you: is this your Orders?


You amaze me! how came you by this intelligence?


It came to Thieves-den house this morning, and so to me; I am their Confidant,
and would fain be yours.


Do you not know who sent it?


No, nor they neither; there's the subtle carriage of the thing.


But pray, Sir, let me ask you who you are?


I am a plain, honest-meaning man, a neighbour to that Garrison of Thieves-den,
and one that has dived into the bottom of both your parties, and find that you
have faults, but the other great wickedness.


I do not like this fellow, he had a sling against drink.


And plundering; but twenty to one he hath paid for it.


He had a plaguy jerk at flaying of flints too.


What if you went to Oxford with me?


So I may be hanged when I come home again; for they will know it as sure. Pray
let me eat, and refresh my self, and then conclude of something.


Lieutenant, I'd speak with you.


Dol, I'll come to thee presently.


I cannot say I am with child, but with children; for here has been all
Nations, and all Languages to boot: if the several Tongues should work upwards
now, and I speak all Languages? why, I am not the first learned woman; but I
believe the first that ever came by her learning that way. If I should have for
every man that has been dealing here a child, and if the children should be
born with every one a Back and Breast on, as they were got? Bless me, what hard
labour should I have! But, for all this, I hope I do not go with above a
Squadron of children. But to my business. I mean to lay this great belly to
every man that has but touched my Apron-strings. I thank the Law, 'tis very
favourable in this point; for when I have played the whore, the Law gives me
leave to play the rogue, and lay it to whom I will.


Why how now Dol? how go matters with you, good Dol?


I desire you stand my friend, Sir, you see my condition.


Thou wilt not lay thy child to my charge, I hope.


No, Sir, I have more wit; my drift is to lay it to more than one man, or one
Squadron: Sir, I understand there's a months pay in your hands; and I am
resolved to lay this great belly to every man round the Troop; some I have
struck already, and they have very fairly compounded with me; some, I suppose,
may bustle and stand out, but if you will countenance me, then they must
compound at our rates.


But Dol, what benefit is this to me? for I profess no friendship, but follow
the general principle of mankind, Dol; which is to pick the money out of thy
pocket to put it into mine. So, Dol, in plain terms what will you give me?


Why, Lieutenant, you shall go snips.


Why, Dol, we are agreed: but after we have struck the Troop round, who dost
thou pitch upon to father it?


Why, faith, I did design to marry Monsieur Raggou, the French Cook, that rides
in your Troop.


Thou wilt never endure to live with him, 'tis such a nasty slovenly rogue.


'Tis no matter for living with him; I want a husband.


He stinks above ground: he has not had a shirt on's back time out of mind.


That makes it a fit match; for, by my troth, I do not deserve a man that's
worth a shirt.


Well, Dol, upon the aforesaid terms, you're sure of me, play your game with
all confidence.


Well, I'll to work amongst 'em presently: or if I might gain you to advance my
greater desires, which is my Cornet's Boy that waits on him; I am foolish, for
I love him strangely, desperately. A hundred pounds, in plain terms, make him
mine.


But, Dol, where is this hundred pound?


I have shark'd these four years, and made a shift to scrape four hundred
pounds together.


Still I say you're sure of me, with ready money.

Well, Dol, away; here comes Monsieur Raggou, step aside.


O let him have his money: if our Cornets Boy fail, I'll have him, or he shall
certainly keep the child.


Landlady, come, take a my Pistol and lock in your Trunk very safe.


Yes, Sir.


Take heed, for begar you will be hang if my Pistol run away.


O Lord, I'll take no charge on it.


You roundhead whore, lock it up, or me will kill you, begar.


I'll take all the care I can on it, Sir.


So, me will steal my Pistol from her trunk, and say she carry it to de Enemy,
and den me will so plundra de dam whore.

Stand; who are you for, Bumpkin?


O Lord, Sir, I am for no body.


You Dog, be you for de King, or de Parliamenta?


Why I am for -- pray, Sir, who are you for?


Tank you for dat. Begar you be very full wid cunning: you will be of my a
side, if me name my self first. Speak, you dam Dog, who be you for?


In truth it is not good manners to say who I am for: your worship ought to
speak first.


Pox take you, me be for de Parliament, you Dog.


O the Lord bless your worship, I am for the good Parliament too.


Je'rny, I am for de King, you roundhead Dog: begar me will plundra you soul
and body.


O good Sir, spare me; I am for the King.


Diable, me will plundra you for being Jack of both sides. Diantie, he have but
one filling about his soul and bodee. Get you gone, you Dog. years, and begar
me never get but one filling or one six pen, begar. Ha! Monsieur Lieutenant,
me hear very brave ting of you.


What's that?


Me hear you have some Largion for Monsieur La Soldier: pray how much will come
to Monsieur Moy?


Faith, Monsieur, some three pounds.


How, tree pone? where be de tree pone? how much be tree pone?


Why, here 'tis, Monsieur, so much as you see.


Begar, sure you mock a de moy; begar me never see so much money together in my
life. Me will lye down and tumble in my money like de Dog dat tumbla in de
carrion, it is so sweet. O brave Capitain, O brave Lieutenant, Gad a bless de
King of England, and de King of France too, when he give me tree pone.
Lieutenant, be to be mad a dangerous ting?


O, very dangerous.


Begar dere be your tree pone again, it will make a me tark a mad; me no know
vat me sall do with all dis money: begar me admire tree pone of all ting in dis
varle; it will make de great Turk de Christian, or de Christian de Turk, better
den all de argument in de varle. Pray, Lieutenant, keep dis money for me one
two tree year, till me take counsel of all my friend in France vat me sall do
wid dat.


Go to Oxford, and buy some necessaries with it; you are so nasty, no body is
able to come near you: buy some shirts, to keep you sweet and clean.


Buy some shart? Me love you very vell, Lieutenant, but you no understand: for
vat sall me have some shart?


To keep your self sweet, and from being lousy.


Who can see my shart? here be my doublet come close, my coat come over all
dat, den who de devil see my shart? For vat sall me have a shart, when no body
see my shart?


But then you want stockings, and twenty necessaries.


Me pull up my boot, who see me have a stocking? you will have a little English
tricka, and never understand: for vat will you have more ting about you, den
vat will make a show in de varle, and every body can see? Pray let me lay out
my money to please my own fancee.


With all my heart.


Den me will lay it out for my honour, and for de honour of de King, and my
Lieutenant: So adieu. Buy shart? who see my shart?


Faith, Lieutenant, I'll at him, and some of the rest presently; therefore leave
me to work: I am ashamed, I am such a fool to dote on a Boy, but no remedy:
remember, therefore, and about it.


Do you remember the hundred pound; I'll work him, fear not.


Now to my business. My Flint-flayer compounded with me very civilly, that I
did fear would have out-witted me: I am afraid of nothing but an impudent rogue
that has no shame in him, that will father the child rather than part with his
money, and so spoil my compounding with the rest of the Troop. I'll be as wise
as I can; so have among 'em.


What a pox makes she here?


How do ye, Mr. William? I'm come to tell you I am gone half my time, that you
may provide; for I am quick.


Art thou? faith, I'll be as quick as thou art, for I'll be in Nolland (if the
wind serve) to morrow.


'Slife, if they should all boggle thus, I should make a thin Troop on it.


O, Madam Dol! O dee, O dee?


You see how I do: I am near my time, I desire you to provide. You swore a
thousand oaths to me you would keep the child.


But me did but swear in French, Madam Dol, and dat will no stand good in
English Law, Madam Dol.


Come, Sir, come, I'll make you father my child, or I'll make you do worse: will
you compound?


Me scorn to compone, and scorn to fader your shild; you be a dam whore, Madam
Dol.


You are a Rascal, Mr. Monsieur, and I'll make you father the child in spite of
your French teeth.


Begar, Madam Dol, you be de great whore de Babylon; begar, me will make appear
noting can get you wid child but de May-pole in de Strana: and den me can make
appear, by good vitteness, dat me have no May-pole abouta me. So adieu, Madam
Babylon: Pox take you, me fader your dam son of a whore shild!


You fickle Frenchman, I shall be revenged on thee: I'll marry thee, but I'll be
revenged on thee.

But here comes my Cornet and his Boy, and the Lieutenant: I see he is mindful
of my business.


Cornet, I have an earnest and (by my troth) a most pleasant suit to you.


You cannot miss the grant of it. What is't?


But first, do you love money?


By my troth, I know not; for I never had a sum worth loving in my life yet.


Will fifty pound do any hurt?


But what must I do for it? betray the Troop to the enemy, or some Garrison?
for under that I cannot deserve fifty pound.


Towns are not so cheap yet: though Treason be plentiful, 'tis not grown a
Drug. But to my suit: you are to know that our Dol is desperately in love, and
with whom.


Not with me? I find I must earn this fifty pound.


No such matter: you have too great a conceit of your good face.


Indeed you lye, Lieutenant: for he can never think too well of that face.


Who is it she is in love with?


By my troth with thy Boy here: desperately in love with thy Boy.


The Devil take her for her pains. But why do I curse her, that am so
desperately in love my self?


Why, this story is very pleasant, if you knew all.


O Lord, you will not tell him what I am, I hope?


Lieutenant, I must deny your suit, for it must not be a match; for the Boy is,
in plain terms, a Girl.


The Devil take you for telling him.


Why so? my Lieutenant's very faithful.


A Girl? Let me see your face.


O you unworthy man! Good Sir, forgive me, for I am even ready to scold.


This is the pretty young daughter that belonged to your Winter Quarters, and
so came away for love?


Yes, Sir; but if your Cornet had been true, I had been past Love by this time:
I had been married.


Why, are all married people past love?


Yes, Sir, of the men's side especially: but, Sir, I am naturally very merry,
and shall be, if you will but do me the favour to think me very honest.


I shall do you a great favour, if I do, for I never thought any body so yet;
but if it please you, I'll try your honesty, and then I'll give you my opinion.


Be not rude when you try me, if you be, you were better venture on a
Maiden-Cat at midnight, for I shall scratch worse, and so mark you, not for my
humble servant, but my humble Catterwauler.


I could meet such a creature of the house top, at any hour, and scratch, and
squeak, and tumble down together, and get the prettyest Kitlings as we fall.


I am glad to see you merry, Sir; for merry people are likely honest.


Well, we will try; but, if you love mirth, consent to marry with this Dol:
there's money for us all.


Content, i'faith. 'Twill be excellent sport to marry her, for I love roguery
well enough; but, the Devil's in it, she'll know me to be a Girl.


No, no; she shall not come near you, nor touch you, till she's brought to bed;
then two to one but the Troop marches away, and leaves her behind; then I'm
sure the Country-Bumpkins will knock her of the head.


There's a Cornet in grain, i'faith.


Troth, you are very charitable. Well, since my hand's in at wearing Breeches,
I'll do all the Offices of a man: I would I had wherewithal to perform; for, by
my troth, I am weary of our own Sex.


She cries, i'faith: I like that well.


You little fool, you do not cry, I hope?


No, faith, that was but a tear by chance. You made me leave my friends (you
know) when you talked of marriage to me; but not one word on it now you have
made me your Be-de-Boy.


I know not what to say to that.


We will talk of those things when we are settled.


By my troth, you have put me in such a gog of marriage, that it will not out
of my head: and yet I scorn to ask you to marry me, and I scorn to crack a
commandment with you: was not that basely done of you to tempt me? but I shall
scold, which is a thing I hate. O base fellow! you would be going of the score
with me, for my Virginity? Faith, Sir, I'd have you know 'tis worth ready money
at any time; and faith, I'll swear, it shall never go under Matrimony.


She is honest, i'faith: I love a virtuous woman, though I am none my self;
like him that loved the sound of Greek, though he understood it not. She is
right honest, i'faith.


Marry me, and then halloo Dog for thy Silver collar; but till then, I'll gnaw
my under-sheet to the bed-cord, before you shall have your will of me. I am
sometimes mad when I think how I left my friends: sometimes I could scold, and
sometimes I could cry, and the Devil take that good face of yours, I can do
neither for it.


Come, come, you trust your person with me, and why not your virginity? How
long do you think you can hold out at this stanch rate.


Faith, Sir, I can hold out till it's fit for no body: till I'm past the use of
man, before thou shalt have it, shameless wretch.


She is certainly honest, and that's half our work done.


Come, prithee let's think of our mock-marriage with Dol, and after we will be
serious.


Why, I'm for that too; but yet I cannot choose but cry to see how false you
are, and how they talk at home of me, she's run away with a Soldier, and that
rascal will not marry her. O the Devil take you, I shall never recover that
credit again!


Come, we will cozen 'em all at last.


Nay, I believe thou'lt cozen more than me; for what woman can forbear running
away with thee, that sees those leering eyes, thou bewitching Devil, thou!


O remember you hate scolding, Biddy.


I had forgot that, indeed.


Nay, Prithee no more of this story.


Well, I will not: but truly I grow weary of your unkindness; and I am served
well enough, for scorning a man that doted on me.


A ha! I marry, that's somewhat indeed.


But I see, a Cornet with his flying Colours, and his word, Have at all, goes a
great way with a virgin: who can resist it?


Lieutenant, stay and receive Orders. But, Sir, how many companies are there in
Thieves-den Garrison?


Never a Company; for not one of 'em will be called Captain of a Company, but
Captain of a Congregation. One is called Captain Holdforth, another, Captain
Tubtext; Rogues marked at the Font for Rebellion.


Rebellion is the first point of Reformation always.


They are formed to a new stamp of villainy, the last Impression; that which put
the Devil into a cold sweat: take the wickedest and worst-reputed men you have,
and turn 'em loose to Plunder, and I defy 'em to make the Tithe of the spoil
these hypocrites have done.


You are very bitter.


Malice cannot lay 'em open: they Lecture it thrice a week, and summon the
Country to come in: they that refuse, they take their goods, and leave 'em
never a groat; and then they say, They took but their own, for the good
creature is the inheritance of the people of Gad.


It seems, every Captain is a Teacher, and his own Company is his Congregation;
so that they hang and drag Religion among themselves. No doubt most blasphemous
villains.


Well, Sir, I'll home to night; march your Troop to Lavel to morrow; stay till I
come to you: So fare you well; and I wish a blessing upon your good meaning.


Lieutenant, be careful how you march to morrow, and take heed, I hear of no
complaint. I'll to Oxford in the morning, to give an account of this fellow.


I hope you'll allow us our old harmless Drolleries.


I, most freely.


Lieutenant, half the Troop will be gone: Dol has laid her child to 'em all,
and they're for Horse and away.


What shall we do?


Endeavour to prevent it, that is all that's to be said.


Ow dee, ow dee, Monsieur Lancashire? vat make you have your arms so late at
night? is dere Alarm? be de enemy in de quarteer?


Worse than the enemy, the Devil's in the Quarter: our Dol is with child, and
would lay it to me; but I'll lay down my Arms, and go home.


Begar, me will lay down my Arms, and go home too; Hast begar, now I think, me
have no home.


Captain, Captain.


Thomas, 'tis I; the old Mutinier: tell the Captain I must speak with him.




Flesh deu blood, I will speak with him.


What's the matter? an Alarm?


I marry is there, Captain; there will be a whole Squadron upon you presently.


'Sdeath, my horse, presently.


The Enemy Dol is fallen into our Lancashire quarters, and has laid her Child to
our Squadron: so here is your Back and your Breast, Captain, and I'll go home.


Flesh, we will father no child, not we.


Begar, me will fader no shild too. Hey Monsieur Captain, here be your one
Pistol.


Captain, we have brought you some Lancashire Arms; here is ten or eleven Sowze
Kidgiors for you.


What a Devil ayls the fellows?


Begar, Capitain, me will keep no shild: your dam Madam Dol have get us all
with a shild.


Run for the quean to come to me: I shall have all my Troop forsake me. Stay,
Sirs, I'll come to you: I must as well humour 'em as be severe, or else no
Soldiers.


Vell, me do know very vell how it sall be my shild or no.


Well, Monsieur, and I have a mark to know whether it be mine or no, as well as
you.


And so we have all.


My Masters, you might have had so much manners to have held your complaints
till morning; but however I have sent for Dol, and I'll do you justice before I
stir now. How now, Raggou; what are thy sleeves stuffed withal so?


Begar, dis sleeve be my Stabla, dere be good Oata for mine Arse: and dis
sleeve be my Kitchen, dere be meat for my self. Will you eat dis morning,
Capitain?


Foh, your sleeves stink abominably.


Zoun, do you call dat a stinka? 'tis true, it have a little huggo: begar, dis
sleeve keep your Troop alive; dis sleeve is de Physician to all de Troop: When
any man be sick, me set on some hot vatera, dere let my sleeve boil one hour in
it, and dat make de comfortable Pottage in de varle. Have not me cure you all?


Yes, indeed, Captain, he has cured us twenty times.


Begar, Capitain, me have cure that dam whore Madam Dol, and yet for all dat
she lay her shild a top upon me.


O, here she is. Now (you audacious quean) what makes you Alarm these people
thus? Who got you with child? speak, and speak truth I charge you.


Why then I will speak truth, an't please you: good Captain do not fright me.


Well then. Is it his child? did he get it?


I cannot say absolutely 'tis his, Captain.


Why, is it this fellows?


I cannot say directly 'tis his neither.


Is it Monsieur Raggou's?


I cannot say (to speak truth) 'tis his in particular.


Death, (you abominable quean) say whose 'tis, or I'll slit your nose.


Why, truly, I cannot lay it to any one man; but Gad is my judge, 'tis the
Troops child, Captain.


Was ever such a slut heard of!


I desire your worship to believe me in one thing: truly Captain, and as Gad's
my comfort, I have been as true and faithful a woman to the Troop, as ever wife
was to a husband, Captain.


O, ho, are you so? me think now, Madam Dol, you are de whore de Babylon; for
one whole Troop may make a May-pole.


Why this is some honesty yet, that she is true to the Troop.


Old, Capitain, for oughta me see dis shild be your shild.


How prove you that, Sir?


Begar, she say de shild belong to de Troop, and you say de Troop belong to
you; therefore de shild is your shild, begar.


But I'll make some of you father it. There is none of you but have some private
mark to know it (to be your own) by.


Faith, Captain, if it be born with a Gauntlet and a Head-piece on, I'll own it.


Troth, Captain, if it be born with a Bridle in its hand, and Boots and Spurs
on, I'll own it.


Troth, Captain, I never touched her; I was about it once; but the jade laid
her self so like a Constable tied neck and heels together, that I went to
plunder her, and she up and beat me like a Dog.


And, by my troth, if it be born leading a horse into the world, 'tis my child,
Captain.


Old: you every one have a mark to know your shild: Madam Dol, before my
Capitain, if your shild be born wid never a shart, den it be my shild; for me
have had no shart dis forty week.


By your leave, Captain.


What want you, Aspen?


I come to free all these men, and to own the child, Captain.


How, own my child? the Rogue never touched me in his life, Captain.


Ha, Dol! Confess, confess. Will you have the truth, Captain?


I, prithee, with all my heart.


Why, then I must confess she goes with two children: one I got on the great
trunks end, and the other on a stair-case, by my life, Captain.


I never heard of stair-case children before.


But vat if de shild be born wid no shart? you sall be hang before you fader my
shild.


Captain, if I were to dye to morrow, the rogue never touched me.


I'll cudgel the rogue to death, Captain.


Hold, hold.


Let him come, Captain: me will kill him, begar.


Hold Dol. I charge you to put up, Monsieur.


Me will put up den.


Not one word more, I charge you, but all to your quarters. Be gone, Cornet,
'tis time to sound to Horse; and take heed I hear of no complaints.


Begar, me never see all dat before; diable, me be Monsieur Raggou indeed: me
will put on my coat presan, for begar if Monsieur Dung-hill-raker see me, begar
he will put me in his sack.


Pox of this French fool, what does he mean to give us all Ribbons? we do but
laugh at him.


His business is to be admired; I admire he has bought him never a shirt.


He is like the Hypocrites, that will not sing Psalms, because they've never a
Room to the street, they cannot be heard.


And so he'll have never a shirt because it cannot be seen.


Come, to horse, to horse.


Lieutenant, pray let Monsieur Raggou ride before, and make the Quarters to
night.


Pray do, Sir: for every fresh quarter we know you expect, and therefore you
must wink.


But, Sirs, I dare not own you, for my Captain is so severe, that I protest
he'll hang any man that plunders; especially you Flint-flayars, that he has
forgiven so often.


Why, Sir, we will venture that, for we have a way to come off.


Pray how? for if the Country complain (and they discover you) the world cannot
save you.


Why, Sir, you know Monsieur Raggou has a remarkable coat, with one sleeve
always full of Meat for himself, and the other full of Oats for his horse.


Well, what then?


Why, I have such a coat; and I will stuff up the sleeves, and rob like him; I
can spatter French, and have every thing so like him, that your self cannot
distinguish.


Well, and how rob the rest?


To satisfy you, in such disguises as the Devil cannot find us out in.


You'll do well to keep in those disguises still, for i'faith he'll find you at
the long run else. Well, if you will venture, do; I'll aid you in what I can.


If the Country complain, they come directly to you, Lieutenant.


Then you bid 'em describe the men, and without peradventure they fall upon the
Frenchman, with his remarkable sleeves.


But suppose he stand it out, and make it out where he was in the time of
plundering?


That's shrewd, I confess.


Come, I'll help you. If the Country-men come in, and describe him, I'll go
directly to him, and tell him, I have Orders to seize him, for my Captain is
resolved to hang him: so out of my kindness to him, I'll let him make his
escape; and I'll warrant he'll away as if the Devil drove him.


But, suppose he will not go at that neither, for he's impudent enough.


Ha! if he will not (let me see) I'll write a Letter and have it ready in my
hand, and we will pretend to search him for Letters of Intelligence, and so clap
the Letter into his pocket, and pull it out again, which shall be as if it came
from the enemy, and that (according to his promise, they hope) he will betray
the Troop.


I marry, this is something: needs must he go, that the Devil drives.


Then much more must he go that the Lieutenant drives: I warrant he goes to
some purpose.


Good; and when he is gone and fled for it --


The case is plain, he's guilty: none but he could do it.


Why, this is Plot and Intrigue, Lieutenant, bravely laid, i'faith.


Why then Esperanza Flea-flint.


What work we will make


Here comes the poor rogue and his Landlady: he little thinks of our Tragical
design against him. I'll step aside, and see what work he'll make.


Come Ladlady, bring me my Pistol, me must march.


I, Sir, I'll fetch it you: 'tis safe enough.


Begar, me have steal my Pistol, me will make her believe she will be hang,
and den she will endure plundering de betra. But (pox take her) me have search,
and she have noting to plundra.


O Lord, what shall I do, Monsieur? your Pistols gone.


Ha!


It is gone, it is stolen.


Ha! you have carry my Pistol to de enemy (you dam whore) Begar, you sall hang
tree pair of Stair higher den Haman.


Truly I know not what's become on it: I hope you have it your self.


O, you dam whore, me will plundra your house for slander a moy.


Good, Sir, I have nothing worth plundering, but a great Cheese.


Give me your Sheese, you devil you.


Here it is, Sir, and all I have in the world.


Pox take you, give me one shilling for my Sheese.


With all my heart: truly it's all the money I have.


Now give me my Sheese again, you dam whore: Vat sall me do wid dis Sheese? it
will not go into my Kitchin-sleeve. Begar, for one shilling more you sall have
the Sheese indeed.


You'll plunder it again?


Begar, it go again my conscience to take your Sheese, because it will no go in
my Kitchen sleeve.


I have not a penny to save my life.


Begar, me sell it to your Neighbour.

Vat will you give me for my Sheese.


It's my Cheese.


Begar she lye, me plunder it very fair from her.


Then I hope I may buy plundered goods as well as other people. What's your
price?


Begar, Dog-sheap: one silling.


There's your money.


Will you offer to buy my Cheese?


'Tis my Cheese.


I'll try that.


Begar, fight till de devil part you.

O Monsieur Lieutenant!


What dost with that Cheese?


My Landlady love me vera dear, and she give me dis Sheese as a token to wear
for her sake.


Raggou, you must needs go make the quarters for the Troop.


Wid all min heart. But, Lieutenant, dere be a favour for you.


But what is the meaning of this?


Begar, it be for my honer: me have lay out all my tree pone in Ribbon, and give
all de Troop my favour to wear in de Hat.


What, and is all thy three pound gone in Ribbon, and bought never a shirt?
'Tis very fine.


Begar, and so it be very fine. As me tell you before, who de devil see my
shart? all de varle see Monsieur Raggou in de Hat: every man will admire, and
ask, who gave all that favour to de Troop? den they cry, Monsieur Raggou de
French Cook: begar, dat sall be more honer for me, den ever you sall get by
your shart.


Thou art a right Frenchman. My horse there, Groom: Let's march away.


IS not this like him as can be?


'Tis like enough to delude the people with.


I'll rant and tear the ground, Boys. I will so plundra all de dam Bumpkin Dog.


That will pass: that's his word: 'tis like him.


Be you pretty modest, Sirs, and let me play the devil among 'em. I will so
terrify 'em with French-gibberish, that you shall appear no body amongst 'em.


Good: for the more active and terrible thou art, they will the more remember
thee when they come to complain, and so we shall be sure to escape.


Come away, Sirs; we must be quick, and ride hard for it.


Begar, me have maka my self like Flea-flint, and me will burn one two Town as
me go to make a de Quarter, and me will speak English, and me will call my self
Flea-flint: let me see. Come, where is this Constable? where are all these
damned dairy damned Rogues and Whores? I'll slay your very souls, you beastly
Bawds. Begar, all dat be very good English, and it be very much like Monsieur
Flea-flint, and begar, me hope he will be taken and hang for dat, for begar me
will plundra de devel if me catch him.


Come, let me see, Biddy, how finely you'll court your Mistress now.


I can court her as all men court women; you shall lend me two or three hundred
oaths, your dissembling tongue, and your false heart, and then I cannot miss
the right way of wooing her.


This comes very near scolding, Biddy.


You make me forget my self: look you now, would any honest man take a Maid so
kindly by the chin, and yet not mean to marry her?


Thou little fool, at that rate every man in the Kingdom would have ten thousand
wives: if you'll part with your Maiden-head, have at you Biddy. Come, come, you
loving worm, I know I shall have it at last.


Nay, of my conscience I believe thee; yet I have held fast hitherto.


I am glad to hear that, i'faith.


But I find I must look no more on those eyes; if I do, i'faith I shall flutter
so long about the Candle, that I shall singe my Virgin wings at last: I will
therefore now conclude I am a man, and must go court my Mistress.


Here's the Lieutenant and Dol, now behave your self like a man.


Could you show me how to behave my self like an honest man? that's out of your
way I doubt.


Still better and better. This confirms me.


Well, give me thy hand: I'm resolved to be very virtuous, and very merry, and
never think more of thee.


Well, Mrs. Dol, here's one has consented in part to marry you.


Pretty creature!


Ugly Toad.


Well, and will you be content to ride before me lovingly a days?


I, and behind thee too; ride thee all the points of the Compass, wench, fear
not.


O Lord, but is there so many ways of riding, Lieutenant?


Hast thou lived to these years, and not known that yet?


Well, but when will you marry?


Nay, by my faith, let us woo first, and then marry: because I believe there is
more pleasure in wooing than in the effects of it.


Why do you not begin and court her then?


Nay, by my faith, let her begin first.


That's not the mode for the woman to woo the man.


That is, if the man love the woman; but that's not my case: for 'tis she loves
me, not I her.


O, but in complaisance you must begin: It is not civil to put a woman to it.


Not I* faith: pray forsooth do you begin.


Indeed it shall be yours.


I protest it shall be yours: therefore begin, or I vow I'll break off the
match.


Nay, rather than so, I'll begin. Sweet, Sir, I am much, and greatly ashamed.


Were you ever so before, Mistress?


Yes, truly, I have been ashamed; but it is so long since --


That you have forgot it, I suppose. But I disturb you, forsooth.


No disturbance, sweet Sir. (I want sine words to express my love in.) I am
sorry that the Cart-wheel of Fortune should drive me into the Coach-box of your
affection.


Fortune will take it scurvily to call her wheel a Cart-wheel: besides,
Coach-box and Cart-wheel did never agree in this world yet.


I am not able to express my love as it deserves; but I have four hundred pound
in gold, if that will do it.


By my faith you express your self very well, and I will woo you heartily for
it. Madam, you have struck me with such a desperate Dart, from those fair
somewhat or other that you have about you. -- Are you sure you have the gold
you spoke of?


Yes, my dear heart, very sure.


Then if I do not love you above all women-kind, perish me, and sink me, refuse
me, rot me, and renounce me.


Hold, hold, hold: do you call this wooing?


Yes faith; I had a Sister cast away with the very same speech, therefore do
not interrupt me, for I know all mankind woos thus. And, as I was swearing,
Madam, the Devil take --


Enough, enough, enough, enough.


But, Madam, are you satisfied?


I am, to the full: and do believe you.


But, if you please, Madam, now my hand is in, to accept of a hundred or two of
oaths more.


No, no, no; by no means: I believe you without 'em, and I am yours.


I have not sworn out half my Alphabet yet.


You have done sufficiently, indeed.


Well, give me your hand then; you are the first woman certainly, that was ever
gained with so little swearing.


Thou hast wooed her, and won her most bravely.


Have I? why, then I'm thine. But hark you, Lieutenant and Cornet, we will be
married privately, and in the dark, because her face shall not turn my stomach.
Madam, I have one ill humour, I cannot abide a woman with a bare face;
therefore, if I could buy you a masque that would stick to your face, and never
come off, I believe I should love you very well.


I'll have a Masque, or what you please, my dear:
Next bout, I hope, will be my turn to jeer.

Come, let's in, and visit our new Quarters.


I beseech your worship do not quarter so many upon me: I'm but a poor man.


Alas poor man! you have over-charg'd him. Rogue, he has more money than half
the Town.


You be a dam Dog to betray your Neighbour: who would think to find de devel in
a Country-Bumpkin! Begar, me will make use of your develry.


I pray your worship take four horse from me.


You be a dam rich Dog: begar, you sall have a Squadron upon you, if you no
understand me.


How should I understand you?


You be a dam Dog: begar, me will put twenty horse upon your back till you
understand a moy. Vat will you give me, if I take all de horse from you?


Indeed I'll pray for your worship.


O ho! be dat all? do you understand noting but prayer? Divel you fool vat be
prayer to de Quarteer Master? but can you pray in French?


Alas, not I, an't please you.


Den, begar, your English prayer will no save a Frenchman; you sall have ten
Arse more fo dat.


An't please you, Monsieur, I understand you.


You sall have no Arse upon you.


And I understand you very well, Sir.


Begar, you have very mush, a great deal of understanding.


Here are more of our Neighbours that understand you, Sir.


Begar, den me understand too: get all your money togedra, and put in my pocket
your self, den me can swear begar, me never take no penny of you, a ha!


We will do it gladly, Sir, and pray for you too.


Begar, me no care for dat. But you dam Dog, that no understan a moy, sall
quarteer all de Troop; and den look to your wife, for begar Flea-flint will so
get your shild for you.


Lieutenant, we have done the work.


We have burnt seven Towns.


We have raised fourscore pound.


You're dextrous at your trade, you have made quick dispatch: but peace, we will
share anon. we will see what my quarters can afford. Where are you all? What house
here, ho?


What want you, Sir?


Art thou the woman of the house?


Yes, Sir, a poor woman.


Art thou poor? what a pox do I in such a quarter? why, Quarter-mast. Raggou,
is this the best house in the Village?


Zoun, hang 'em, they're very rich Dog; but you sall have no meat for your
self, no Oat for your Arses, but her dam husband will feast you all wid pray
for you.


Diable* you Rotterdam whore, I'll make you bring out your things: where's your
Cowes, your Calves, and your sheep?


Alas, we have none, Sir.


Hast thou any drink, good woman?


No, truly, we have none.


Nor hast thou no wine, nor strong-water, good woman?


No, indeed, we have none.


Why den, a pax take you, good woman.


No Hens, nor Turkeys, nor Swine, nor nothing?


Hang her, begar she hide every ting, when they hear me come to make a de
quarteer.


Send to the Market Town, and buy provision, and be hanged, or I'll set fire of
your house, you damned dairy damned whore.


Zoun, dis dam coward, how he domineer over de Bumpkin woman!


Alas, we have no money, Sir, not we.


What dost thou tremble and shake so for? what a pox ails thee?


What shall we do? threatening will not serve the turn.


Do but second me, and I'll make 'em bring out all they have, I warrant you: do
but talk as if we used to eat children.


'Tis enough.


Why, look you, good woman, we do believe you are poor, so we will make a shift
with our old Diet. You have children in the Town?


Why do you ask, Sir?


Only have two or three to Supper. Flea-flint, you have the best way of cooking
children.


I can powder 'em, to make you taste your liquor: I'm never without a dried
child's tongue or ham.


O bless me!


Mine's but the ordinary way, but Ferret-farm is the man: he makes you the
savouriest pie of a child's chaldron that ever was eat!


A pox, all the world cannot cook a child like Monsieur Raggou.


Begar me think so; for vat was me bred in de King of Mogul's kitchen for, tere
ve kill twenty shild of a day? Take you one shild by both his two heels, and
put his head between your two leg, den take your great a knife and slice off
all de buttack, so fashion; begar, dat make a de best Scots Collop in de
varle.


Ah! he makes the best Pottage of a child's head and purtenance! but you must
boil it with Bacon: woman, you must get Bacon.


And then it must be very young.


Yes, yes. Good woman, it must be a fine squab child, of half a year old: a man
child, dost here?


O Lord! yes, Sir.


Do you hear? get me one she-shild, a little whore-shild, and save me all de
lamb-stone and sweet-bread, and all de pig petty-toe of de shild: do you hear
you round-head whore?


I, Sir, I. O that ever I should live to see such men!


I warrant you it works; if there be provision in the Country, we shall have
it.


How the whore trembled for fear!


We shall have all the women in the Village about our ears: hide-bound whores!
it's a question whether they'll part with their meat or their children first.


This foolery will be noised about the Country, and then the odium will never
be taken off.


Why, what can they make on it? all understanding people will know it to be
mirth.


I know they will; but the envious Priests will make fine talk on it, and make a
great advantage on it too: though they know it to be nothing but mirth, they'll
preach their Parishioners into a real belief of it, on purpose to make us
odious. They'll preach against any thing: I heard a scandalous Sermon, of two
hours long, against Prince Rupert's Dog.


Come, 'tis no matter what hypocrites preach: let us see what the event will
be.


Look to your children; if ever you mean to see your children alive, hide your
children: they'll eat your children.


Woe is me! what's the matter, Neighbour?


I say, hide your children.


Ah! good Neighbour, what's the matter?


Why, run away with your children.


Why, that ever we were born! what's the matter?


They will eat your children.


O, these bloody Cavaliers! how, eat our children?


They talk of boiling your children.


O mercy on us!


And roasting your children.


O bloody villains!


And baking your children.


O Hellish Cavaliering Devils?


There's nothing to be thought of, but hiding your children.


I would mine were in my belly again.


That's not safe: they'll search there in the first place, to be sure.


I'll hide mine in the straw.


And so we shall have one of 'em lay you down a top of it, and smother one
child whilst he is getting another. I say, run away with your children.


O bloody wretches! I have heard much of their getting children; but never of
their eating children before.


Neighbour, their getting of children might be born with; but eating 'em was
never heard of.


They have got a Cook from the great Mogull, on purpose to kill children: and
they talk of roasting their haunches, and baking the chaldron, and broiling the
chine.


And making Pottage of the child's head and purtenance.


O deliver our poor children.


Do you stand whining and crying? Fetch out your Sheep, and your Calves, your
Hens, your Pigs, and your Geese, and your Bacon; for there's no other way to
save your children.


I, with all our hearts.


I'll bring two fat Sheep.


I'll bring Turkeys and Hens.


I have a brave fat Calf worth eleven Nobles, by my troth I had as lieve part
with one of my children.


O you uncharitable beast! go fetch your Calf. Run every body, and bring your
things to my house, as fast as you can drive.


Meat, or Children, to supper for a wager, Gentlemen?


Meat, for a wager, if they have it.


I, without doubt; for never was women and children so alarm'd in this world.


When they were got together, and told their children would be eaten; they set
up their throats, and made a more horrid noise than a Welch Hubbub, or an Irish
Dirge.


How now! what think you if we be put to eat Children indeed? By this light,
here's a woman with two Children.


We shall be cross-bit with these Country whores* what shall we do?


Begar, me will help you off: you sall eat no shildren.


By your leaves, your good worships: I make bold to bring you in some
provisions.


Provisions! where, where is thy provisions?


Here, an't please you: I have brought you a couple of fine fleshy Children.


Was ever such a horrid whore! what shall we do?


Truly, Gentlemen, they're as fine squab Children: shall I turn 'em up? they
have the bravest brawny buttocks!


No, no. But, woman, art thou not troubled to part with thy children?


Alas, they are none of mine, Sir; they are but Nurse-children?


Dere be a dam whore for you.


What a beast is this! Whose children are they?


A Londoners, that owes me for a years nursing. I hope they'll prove excellent
meat: They're Twins too.


A ha! but, begar, we never eat no Twin-shild; de Law forbid dat: but hark you,
have any woman with shild in de Town?


Yes, half a dozen.


Lieutenant, it be de best meat in de varle: begar, a woman with shild is
better meat den one hen with egg at Shrove-tide.


How now! what news, Landlady?


Here is a great many poor women that have brought in provisions, in hope you'll
spare their children.


We beseech your worships spare our poor children, and you shall want for
nothing our Country can afford.


Good woman, we are content to spare your children, but you must get us some
strong drink.


I, I; we will get you every thing you want.


Why, then, go all home, and be contented; for we promise you, if we eat any
children, it shall be the two Nurse-children.


Ah, -- preserve you all, Gentlemen.


Take some comfort; for if we should eat your shildren, you sall no be a loser
by dat: for look you, good woman, how many shildren we eat in a Parish, so many
shild we are bound to get before we leave it: dat is very fair.


Why, is not this better than fasting?


Well, and what harm is there in all this?


None in the world. Come, let's in, and dress our supper.


Me will go eat at my own quarteer. It be a brave ting to be in Office: begar
de Clowns worship me, as if me were dere great God Bumpkin.


LIeutenant, here's all our Country crew that we plundered yesterday.


But, our comfort is, they know us not; but cry out of a Frenchman, with two
coat-sleeves, stuffed like two Country bag-puddings.


This cunning rogue has cross-bit you all: he has been plundering as he went to
make his Quarters, and in a Buff-coat too; for here is a dozen fellows at my
Quarter, and they all describe a rogue so like thee, that I protest thou wilt
suffer for it. Nay, the rogue called himself* Flea-flint, too.


Ouns, what shall we do, Sir?


Upon my word, this is no jesting business.


'Sheart, over-reach'd thus!


You must even think of over-reaching him again. You must first think of
stopping the clamour of the Bumpkins; that's your first point of security.


But, Lieutenant, how should we do it? Faith, you must try your wits, and stick
to us.


I knew you would venture so far, 'twould come to my turn to fetch you off at
last, Rogues.


Why, Sir, my man and his both shall swear Raggou borrowed a Buff-coat of them.


Let him be gone first, and then you may swear any thing. One of you go tell
the Bumpkins, I am searching for the Rogue: the rest go with me to Raggou.


This is his quarter.


This? Knock: it seems to be the best house in the Town.


Who would you speak with?


With Monsieur Raggou.


Sir, he gave us a strict charge to let no body speak with him.


But I must, and will speak with him.


Indeed, Sir, he charged us, upon pain of his displeasure, not to disturb him.


Pain of his displeasure? what an impudent rogue's this! Show us, show us.

How now! what, in Taffeta Curtains? the impudent rogue makes me laugh. You,
rascal, Raggou; look in his Head-piece too.


Who de devel disturb me? you dam whore, you know vat me do to you last night?


Why, what was that you did to her last night?


Begar me lye with her at three motion, as de Musketeer shoot of his Gun; make
ready, present, and give fire.


O my word that's good discipline.


Begar, she sall make ready for you, if you will present and give fire.


But how came it that I had not this good Quarter?


Because me knew me should make a de Quarter but one night, and so, begar, me
make a de best use of my time, as all de whole varle do too.


But what a Rogue art thou: why dost thou lye in such a bed in thy Arms?


For two gran reason, Sir. First, because my French louse sall go great way
about before he come to de clean sheet: next, because a de dam English flea
shall not bite a my sweet French body.


Well, Maid, go down: I must speak with him.


Vat you have wid me, Lieutenant?


Faith, out of my love, I would save thee from hanging.


Hang! for vat? begar, hang me if me deserve, so you hang all dat deserve a de
hang; begar, dat is de whole Troop, Lieutenant and all.


Here you plunder in one shape, and there in another: sometimes, like
Flea-flint, in Buff; sometimes like your self: that here is all the Country
come in with such horrid complaints. Nay, they say you ravish women too.


Lieutenant, begar, me never ravish but one old woman, and she give me five
shilling for my pain.


Nay, here is worse than all that, my Captain has intelligence you're a
dangerous man, and hold correspondence with the enemy.


Me sall be hang, Lieutenant, if you think so.


Nay, 'tis so; I have orders to search you. -- Put that in his Pocket,


Ah, begar me have no long life before me be hang.


O, Sir! are you good at that? he was going to convey Letters out on's pocket.


Begar, he lye Lieutenant, me have no Lettra; begar, hang a me, if me can write
an read: de Horn-book be de Hebrew to me, begar.


Search him, search him.


Here's a Letter, Lieutenant; and an Engine, I think.


What's this?


O, you need not write and read if you have this: I'll be hanged, if this be not
the key of his character he writes to the enemy with.


Dat make a de French Pie, and make a de Garniture for de Dish, dat be all.


Let's see; the case is plain; he sent his intelligence in characters of paste.
This very thing will hang him: but let's read the Letter.


Begar, me have no Lettra: de devel send it in my pocket.


Raggou; in hope that under this poor disguise of a French Cook you will show a
rich faith --


Vat he mean by fait? begar, me have no fait.





Devel, me have no honourable, nor family neither, begar.


The case is plain, you are of some great family.


Lieutenant, me confess me come of de King of France Kitchen, of de honourable
family of de Turn-spit: Begar, me tell you true, dere be all my family, and my
honourable too.


O, Sir, 'tis a very cunning fellow; my Captain sends word he used to be
conversant with the Round-heads, and pray with them.


The Devel take a me, me never pray in my life, me swear altogedra in de King
of France Kitchen.


I love you so well, that I'd be loath to hang you, Monsieur; therefore I'm
content to let you escape: but be sure you be not taken.


Begar den hang a moy, for my Arse will no go very far.


Well, pray be gone, and say you found a friend.


Gad a bless you, Lieutenant: ven me come in France, zoun, me will so pray for
you.


And yet you say you never prayed in your life.


Begar, me tank Gad, me never have occasion to pray till just now. Adieu, adieu
-- a -- Who send me dat dam Lettra in my pocket?


Well, now we must keep the Bumpkins here till he is gone, and then give 'em
orders to search the Countries for him.


And that will whidle them as well as if you had given them their money again.


In truth, drinking is a harmless recreation, so we proceed not to drunkenness.


Pray how far-forth may we proceed in drink? for I would take no more than is
fit to be taken with a safe conscience.


Why, Captain Tub-text, if thy belly were as large as thy conscience, by that
computation, the great Tun at Heidelberg would be just thy mornings draught.


Here is old Tom Tell-troth: ha, ha, ha.


In truth, if he were not very faithful, we should never away with his
boldness.


Well said, Captain Holdforth. But to the question; how far may we proceed in
drink?


As far as the innocent recreation of knocking one another down with Cushions
come to; it is the exercise of our superior Officers.


I have observed, indeed, they do three things together: they drink, then
practise Pulpit-faces,


(To cheat the people with.


Ha, ha, ha: in truth you hit so home.)


And the third is throwing of Cushions. The practising and dissembling of holy
looks, is of great use and design.


And drinking, and throwing Cushions, a great refreshing to the body.


As for Example.


Ha, ha, ha. I have seen our Grandee throw a Cushion at the man with the great
Thumb, and say, Colonel, wilt thou be a Cobbler again?


Ha, ha, ha.


Come, here's to you, Governor, you Colonel Gold-smith, with a conscience as
dirty as a Black-smith: will you sell Thimbles again?


Ha, ha, ha.


Noble Colonel, wilt thou brew Ale again?


There is no other way to raise Rebellion, but by Religion.


Ha, ha, ha.


I never knew the use of Religion before.


The women tickle like Trouts at it: ha, ha, ha.


I believe the Country will find it so. For I hear of twenty wenches with
child.


In truth, I wonder at the witchcraft of it; for notwithstanding the people
have been bit through the chine-bone with it, yet for all that, before the old
wound is healed, they are ready to run after the Lanthorn of new lights again:
ha, ha, ha.


Well, Sirs, since you are in such an ingenious way of confessing, tell me one
thing, do not you wish your Garrison a fire, so you were at home, with all the
wealth you've got?


Thought's free; but talk no more of that: these are both treacherous Rogues, I
dare not trust 'em*


Well, you are merry, Sirs; but faith be plain, Sirs: what says my seeming
Saint that drinks by the conscience? Dost not wish thy self at home, wallowing
in thy plunder?


You might find a better name for it. Hark in your ear: we are all such
treacherous Rogues, we dare not trust one another: but we will talk in private.


But our Contribution-women will come in anon.


Ha, ha, ha: in truth, they edify as one would have 'em.


Well, now you ought to be serious, and consider the enemies approaching.


In truth a good occasion to fetch in all the Goods and Chattels of the
Country, upon pretence of securing them, and so make conditions with the enemy
to march away with them. I see we shall be rascals to the last gasp.


And so we shall have provisions for a long Siege.


I'll make your Siege short enough.


You are faithful; they are Rogues: Read that, and tell me whether you will
undertake or no.


How! very good. Is't possible! This is a greater Rogue in his own nature than
the Devils invention can make him: he would not only betray his trust, but
deliver up all the rest of the Garrison to mercy; conditionally that he may
have all their wealth, and safe convoy to his own house. I need lay no Plot,
'tis done to my hand. I love the King well; yet my own ends are mingled,
because I have a Mistress among 'em, and cannot have her but by serving the
King: and I believe most men have their reasons for their Loyalty as well as I;
so that, good King, wheresoever you see me, trust to your self. Yet I will do
something. What if I betrayed this Rogue, and his Letter, to the Governor to
secure my self? but then, if they have a mind to deliver up the Garrison,
'twill make 'em shy of me I find I have a hard task on it.


O, Tell-troth, I came to ask thee a question; and what think thou?


Troth, I know not.


To know whether thou love me truly, or no.


If you be serious, I could be angry with you, for raising such a doubt: to
show you that I love you (I do not say your Cause, but you) read there; look
you, one of your Captain Rogues gave me that Letter, and the other gave me a
whisper to the same purpose too.


Is't possible! What's to be done with these villains?


Something must be done, they'll betray you else.


I thank thy honesty, I find it so.


Shall I speak boldly? serve 'em in their own kind.


In truth, I had it in my head before to betray 'em, for the Rogues are rich.


Come, let not you and I be shy of one another, do it yet.


Art thou in earnest?


By my life; and I will put you in a way too.


Let's in, and consider how: had we best secure 'em.


No: first command their two Companies out, then draw 'em into several parties,
and then with your own Company disarm 'em, and so clap them up and their
Officers; then show 'em the reason (this Letter:) when that's done, send the
Letter to the Parliament, and write how you have secured 'em: which will so
ingratiate you with them, that you'll never be suspected for betraying on it your
self.


My worthy friend, shall I fall on my knees and worship thee?


Let's be wise, and about our business.


Where have you been, Sirs?


Why, we have been to take Flea-flint: my Captain is resolved to hang him.


For what?


For plundering, and so forth; but the Rogue has intelligence of it, and is
gone: but he is in as bad a case as Raggou; for we must send Huy and Cry after
him.


Ah, Ian povera de moy: my Arse can no carry me from de danger of de hang a de
moy; and yet me have spur two such great hole in his rib, dat you may creep
quite trow him. Me must go change mine coat, and mine hat, begar, me sall be
known by dat. Vat come here now?

What, come?


Come, who see my fine shite? my rare shite, who see my sine shite? my rare
shite.


Monsieur, where you go wid your shite?


To de Bristol Fair, Monsieur.


Dis French-man look as if he will be hang, begar, me will put a de sheat of de
hang upon him. Monsieur, Begar me have de very sine shite too, and it will come
de Bristol Fair too: it be de great vonder of de varle, it be de great fat
Dromadory; you hear of dat?


We, we: all de varle know de fat Dromadory.


Begar, you and me will join partiner in de Fair: because you be my
Country-man.


I, Monsieur, and tank you too.


We will give out in de Bill of de two famous French-man: one inventra de show
of all Trade, and de oder make a de invent of de fat Dromadory.


Monsieur, wid all my heart.


Vera good: you sall go take a de best House in de Town: dere be two piece, two
Iacoby for you; get some vera good dinner. You shall take a my coat and de hat,
and leave your show wid me, for my waggon will come wid my Dromadory presan.


I had good luck to light of this French-man.


Begar, me have betra luck to light of dis Frenchman. So, help me wid your
wast-coat: vera good. So, now make all de haste in de varle. Adieu, adieu.
Puppet in de show speak. Parla Francois Monsieur Puppey? Owieda. A ha! very
good.


Sure we shall catch this fellow at last; for we hear of him every where.


I, his two sleeves stuffed, and his French Hat edged with Ribbons will
discover him.


Diable, dere be de Constable and Mr. Huy-Cry come to catch a me. -- Who see my
shite, my rare shite, my sine shite? Begar, me sall shite my self indeed.


What a pox does he mean?


He would have you see his show.


Come, faith let us. You fellow, come, let's see your show.


How sall me do now? begar, me must show it as well as me can.


Sirrah, did not you see a French-man pass by?


Frenchman? Vat have he upon him?


Why, he has a greasy coat with the sleeves stuffed out.


A pox take him, begar he rob me just now of two piece, all me have in de
varle, dat make a me cry.


O Rogue, Rascal! alas to day! give him a Crown, Church-warden, we are at the
Parish charge.


Come, do not cry, poor fellow: let's see thy shite; there's a crown for thee.


A Gad bless you. Here be de brave shite of de varle: here be de King of Spain
play on de Bag-pipe to his Privy-Council. Dat's a very good jest. Den dere be
de King of Solomon, he give judgement upon de vise shild. Dere is de first Act.
Now put on your hat, and look upon all de Lady.

Jam more cum povera bla cum povera,
Jam, Jam, Jam, Jam Tomba net,
Jam Iang Tomb net equbla.
Now here be de Queen of Swiveland, she sit in great Majesty: her leg hang over
de chair, vera full of temptation, make your chops watra. Vera good jest. Den
dere be de whore of Babylon, she make great love to de May-pole in de Stran.
Second Act.

Jam more cum povera, c.
Dere be de King of Denmarks and Norway, learning to juggle of de Bishop of
Munsera. Dat's a vera good jest. Dere be de silent Ministra, he make a de long
preach in de Play-house. Dere is tree Act: dat is all.


I thought your Plays had always had five Acts.


They be de great Puppet have five Act; de little Puppet have but tree. Will you
go catch dis dam dog for me, and get a my money for me again, my two Iacoby?
Begar, me be undone, if you no catch dis dam dog for me.


We will away: we will have him I warrant thee.


Begar, me be very sine sheat, if it will hold out. But hold a; vat if they
catch my Coat? Begar, den they will hang a my Coat: but dam dog will confess me
have his Show den; begar, me sall be hang wid mine Coat. Begar me will put away
mine Show.

Who de Devil is dat?


A pox on it, I must be robbing alone, and without my Lieutenants advice! I must
be careful, or suffer for it. The Rogues follow me with Huy and Cry; I am not
able to go further, I must change my clothes. How now? what fellow's this?
'Sheart, would I could persuade him out of his Show, and take my Cloak for it.


Begar, would me could persuade him to take my Show, and give me de Cloak for
dat.


Come hither, honest fellow.


Devil, it is Flea-flint. Ah me be povera de moy, begar, me be half hang
already. Me will no speak French begar, den he will know me: me will belch
Dutch at him. Yaw min heer,


Come hither honest man: what's that, a Show?


Yaw min heer. Begar me will slit my mouth from one ear to de odra, to speak
good Dutch; and den, when me speak French, begar me will sew it up again:
dere's a vera good trick to save a my life.


Fellow, wilt thou sell thy Show?


Yaw min heer. Begar, dis Dutch make me vera sick. Look! begar, every time me
cry, Yaw min heer, dere come up a pickle Herring with it. Yaw, look dere it go.


Art thou a Dutchman?


Yaw verathticke.


Where hab you de neder Lands go Weston?


Diable, vat sall me say? Begar me have no more Dutch.


Hab you de neder Lands go west Lanceman?


Ick haben de Hoigh Dutch Lander go weston Lanceman.


Nay, it may be what Dutch it will, for I can speak no more.


Ick maken weel vander slapan can Helder Hought.


But wilt thou sell thy Show?


Yaw, Yaw, ick will van hundred Gilder haben.


That's ten pound; that's too much. I would I had it at any rate.


Begar, never fear, you sall have it.


Wilt thou take five pound?


Neave ick: ick maken de Show my self, and ick maken dat better as dis, and
dat's better as dat, and dat's better as all begott.


I hear 'em coming: here's ten pound for thee, and I'll give thee my Cloak to
boot and Hat.


Dere be my Show and my Cap: me tank you Lanceman. So, dis dam Rogue never do
no good in all his life before; and me hope, begar, he will be hang for dat.


Now, what shall I do with this Show; for I cannot show it? why, if any body
would see it, I must say it's locked up; the key is gone before to Bristol
Fair: that's all I have for it.


Come, Sirs, we shall have him at last.


Stay, Sirs: what fellow's this? who are you, Sir?


A poor man, Master, going with my Show to the Fair, to get a penny, and a Rogue
has robbed me of all I have, almost ten pound.


O damned Rogue! Had he not a gray Cloak and Hat.


I, (wicked villain) the same, Master.


It's the same Rogue we are looking for, we shall have him in the Fair, I
warrant you. Let's away.


This rogue thinks himself so safe now, and he'll be hanged sure enough if they
catch him.


Look you, there's the notorious Rogue with the Show: take him.


What would you have with me, Gentlemen?


Begar, me will have my Show from you.


Pox take you and your Show; a damned Rogue that had it, has rob me of ten
pound, and my Hat and Cloak.


Come, these are both Rogues: bring 'em away.


Hold, it will do us no good to have them hanged, what if we plunder them as
they use to do us.


'Tis a very good motion, do you hear, we are to ask you a question, will you
be hanged, or be plundered?


I'll be hanged before I part with my money.


Then let's hang him, we can take his money when he is dead.


Then do you hang him.


Not I, I know not how to hang him.


Troth hang him your self, if you'll have him hanged.


Dost here brother Bumpkin? I'll give thee an Angel, and hang this fellow.


It is not worth while for one, but I'll take Angels a piece to hang you all.


Hang you raskal, come there fall on boys, and plunder him.


Pray you, Gentlemen, give me some money again to bear my charges home.


There's a Crown for thee, and farewell.


Hey day! this will prove a very wonder,
That Bumpkin should a Soldier plunder.

Joiner, make haste, and set your the other Post up; and Painter, fetch your
Colours, your Pots and Pipkins, and paint this Post in the mean time: it must
be dispatch'd before the people are stirring.


My things are all ready, Sir, at the next house: we can scarce see to work
yet.


And be hanged then go get some Ale to clear your eye-sight: I'll warrant you'll
see the bottom of the Pot well enough without day-light.


Make what hast you can, I'll bring my Post as soon as you'll be ready to paint
it.


I'd laugh at that, i saith. But friend, what noise was this all night? I think
the Watch was searching for somebody.


I, I; hark, you may hear 'em searching still. Why, it seems 'tis a kind of
out-landish French-man that they look for: he has a gray Hat, and a gray Cloak;
but come, let us mind our business, and make haste.


Dat be me: they slandra a moy, me be no out-landish French-man, begar me be a
French French-man: Hark, they come: vat sall me do? Begar, me will stand for de
odra Post till de dam Bumpkin be gone; a pox take 'em, de devel could not Huy
and Cry me so close. How sall me do to be like a dat Post? Hark, they come now.


Pox of this out-landish French-fellow for me; I'm as dry as a Dog.


So we are all: let's go and knock 'em up at an Ale-house, and eat and drink a
little.


With all our hearts.

Honest Painter, can tell where we may have a little Ale?


I, sure, two or three doors off you'll find 'em up, and a good fire, where you
may tossed your noses, Boys.


Thou did not see an out-landish French-man this way?


No, I saw no French-man.


Begar, would a good rope would slip away you too.


Now to work.


He will paint a me; vat sall me do?


A pox of these roguing Prentices. Sirrah, I'll have you by the ears: a company
of Rogues, a man cannot work for you! If you serve me such another trick, I'll
break all your Windows.


De pox break all your neck.


Why, you damned Rogue, you have broke my head: 'Sheart, I'll complain to your
Master. Spoiled all my Colours too! I'll not endure it; I'll be revenged,
whatsoever it cost me.


A pox dis Rogue; he murder mine face wid his dam paint. Now de coast be clear,
me will take a de Coat of Monsieur Jack Painter and go; for begar dere be no
stay in dis Town for moy.

Hark, dere be someting: me must be de Post again. A pox on dat.


Why, how now? what a devil, another post, and none of my work? 'Sheart, do you
employ two men at once? I'll not be used thus; I'll be paid for my work, and then
let the devil set up your Posts.


So, now begar, me will take de Coat of de Jack Paintra, and de Post of de Jack
Joiner, den no man will suspect a moy. France Army, begar me vou'd fain see vat
dam English Bumpkin, Mr. Huy-Cry come fetch me from them.


Why, what a foolish fellow art thou to be so angry? I employed no Joiner but
thy self.


'Sheart, there was two carved Posts up, and I'm sure I brought the third.


Thou art mad, and so is this fool too, to complain of throwing stones at thee,
when we have never a Prentice, nor none within six doors of us.


I'm sure my Pipkin's broke, and my head too: pray look here.


Why, what's here? here's a broken Pipkin indeed, but where's the three carved
Posts?


There was two stood up when I came to the House, and I set the third down
here. Ounes, my Post and my Tools and all's gone.


I believe you are both drunk.


Heart man, I painted the Post that stood there.


Well, and heart man, I brought the the other, and you call it heart man, and
all's gone you see.


My Masters, go look after your things, and make an end of your work.


Let's go search for this fellow that stole our goods here.


O Dol, do ye hear, put her off till your friend come as before you pretended,
and say you'll marry when the Garrison is delivered up.


The Lieutenant and Cornet are very eager to have it dispatch'd, that they may
have the money I promised, and then they are resolved to laugh me to death.


Well, but you know it will be our turn to laugh at them, if all be right you
have told me.


Upon my life I have been faithful in all points, and I find I shall take pride
in doing good, since I have prospered so well in serving you.


Your reward shall answer your service. I must to the Captain, and give him an
account of all I undertook, which will meet his expectation.


Let me alone to manage my undertakings.


Here's the Captain; be you gone therefore: I would not be seen with you, till
I make him acquainted with every thing.


But pray, Sir, why are you thus severe now, to banish the Flint-fleyers?


The Kings Honour and Interest is so abused with these scandalous fellows, that
I'm resolved to cashier 'em.

Oh, friend Tell-troth! look you Lieutenant, my opinion seldom fails me.


So, you had some dispute then concerning me. Look you, Sir, it's now in my
power to do more than ever I hoped for: you have a Foot Company?


Yes; they are now (...), see they march fair, and do no wrong.


Read that: upon my life there is but three Companies, and two of 'em are
disarmed, and Prisoners, Officers and all. I laid no plot to do it, I found 'em
all ready to betray one another to get the wealth; the manner how, hereafter.
The Governor has commissioned me to make his Conditions; which must be a
Convoy, with all his wealth, to his own home. The Country bring in their plate
and goods to secure 'em from your party, and he'll make conditions with you to
march away with 'em, and so cheat the people: (precious Rogues!) besides what
they preach the women out of.


That must not be; for the King has Intelligence that they have great Treasure
there.


Does he know how they came by it?


Yes, very well; with the cheat of preaching (I mean Tub-preaching, and
Lectures.) The Lectures your wives read you, never awed you so.


But faith, Sir, give him his Conditions.


I'll storm it first.


I intend not to have you keep Conditions when you have made 'em.


That's base; I scorn that: my Honour is at stake.


What, for breaking Articles with a Rebel? Had it been a fair enemy, I grant
you. Suppose you storm it, and be beaten off? the King would give you little
thanks for the punctillio of your own private honour. Let your Lieutenant do
it: the Captain may with his Honour break the Conditions that his Lieutenant
makes.


I may approve of that; I would not have my own hand appear against me. But I
am glad to see you thus earnest for the King: sure you have some design.


By my troth I have; but so small a one, it is not worth this labour: you shall
know it, for you must assist me.


With all faithfulness.


Come then, let's sign Articles. So, march, and take possession.

(...)you are (...)


Heart man, I painted*


Me will make a me nose of wax, like de old woman, and will go to Madam Dol,
and tell her me come from Monsieur Raggou. Vera good. And if she will beg his
pardon of de Capitain, he will come and marry her, although her shild be born
wid a shart and back and breast too; for begar me find in mine conscience me had
betra marry a dam whore, dan be hang.


Now, Sir, are you satisfied in my faith?


I am so; and I have found you a worthy person: command me to any thing.


Then I'll make you merry till I go about my design. Captain Tub-text, that got
the two Sisters with child, is now in bed with them eating a Sack posset; and,
that we may both shame and fright 'em, there are Bears in the Town, and other
Shows that are going to Bristol Fair: now I'll speak to the Bearward to muzzle a
Bear, and turn him loose into the room, and I'll bring you where you shall see
the sight.


Content, for I am a great lover of sports: let not the Shows go away, for I
mean to celebrate Dol's wedding.


That's kindly done. You'll need no other sport than to see Dol rant and tear
when she finds she has married a Girl.


But the sport will be, when you and the Cornet receive your fifty pound a
piece you told me of.


Yes, faith; we shall have it sure enough.


Yes, for 'tis deposited in my hands.


Never was jade so deeply in love! but the jest is the Girl has made conditions
with Dol, to put on a Masque when she is marrying; for her face is so bad she
cannot away with it.


Give all the Troop favours; let 'em dispatch, and bring them in to the baiting
of the Sack-posset, and let the Country be summoned in.


Here is this spoonful in remembrance of our sweet Sisters precious fruit she
goes with.


My tender, and most shame-fac'd thanks be returned you.


Now here is to the Maiden-fruits of this our weeping-Sister. Wipe your tears;
if they were Cavaliering burdens you went with, your case were mournful; but
as they are my off-spring, repent not; for your Infants (be assured) will be
Babes of Grace.


What a damned Rogue is this!


Why then, it seems, we religious Lambs may play with one another, without
sinning?


Was ever such blasphemous Rogues and Whores! I tremble to hear 'em! Let in the
Bear upon 'em.


Here is to this our sweet comforting man.


I am over-joy'd to hear that religious Lambs may play, and yet not sin.


What's here, a Bear? mercy upon us!


Help, help, help, help.


Shift for your selves, sweet Sisters.


Now Bear, now Saint.


Halloo Saint, halloo Bear: I'll hold a --


Hundred pound of the Bear: thou Boy Bear.


A hundred pound of the Saint. So, now take off your Bear.


By my faith, we must stave and tail him off for ought I see, Captain. I have
been at many a Bear-bayting, but never at a Saint-bear-bayting before.


Now, Sir; is your name Tub-text?


Yea.


And do you think your two Whores are with child with two babes of grace?


Yea, foul mouth.


What an audacious Rogue is this! And dost thou really believe thy self in such
a degree of perfection, that thou can not sin, and so, need no repentance?


Yea, sure, we are past repentance.


Thou damned villain, I believe thee. Blasphemous Rogue! how many poor souls
hast thou deluded? Sirrah, it were just to make thee marry these two women, and
then hang thee for having two wives.


Sir, our wedding folks are coming, and are so merry, and so pleased; that, if
their joy continue, the Example will make us all marry.

Look you, here they are, pleased as you see.


Now stand you here till I beg your pardon of my Captain.


By your leave, Captain, I have made bold to espouse your old hand-maid Dol;
and give us leave to laugh; for faith my Lieutenant and Cornet has cheated her,
Captain, for they have matched her to a Girl: I am a very Girl, and yet I have
not wronged you, for I told you before I could not get your children.


And we laugh, to think how we have cheated you; for though you cannot get my
children, if I can get yours, we shall do well enough.


O Lord, what's that? that is not Dol's voice.


You're in the right; it is not Dol's voice, nor Dol that has married you (keep
the money, Captain) but your old love Tell-troth. Pray have your money,
Lieutenant, before you laugh me to death.


What, my old Lover Tell-troth!


Now the laugh is on our side, Gentlemen. Come, be not troubled, for I am the
same honest lover Lover that ever I was.


Nay, I'll swear thou deserve me, thou art a desperate lover to venture on a
wench that has trooped so long under such a handsome Cornet: but he's a fool
too; for if he had follow'd his blow close at one time, he had had all that I
could have given him.


I had spies upon you, and am well assured of your honesty. Ask Dol.


Yes, faith, I watched your water at every turn. Do you remember he would have
gone of the score for your Maidenhead? but you cried 'twas worth ready money at
any time; but marry me, and then halloo Dog for thy Silver Collar. You remember
this?


I, to my shame I do.


What, are you ashamed that you are honest?


No, but I'm ashamed that I lost so much time; for I'm sure thou would have
had me honest or not honest.


Come, be not troubled, I pass by all.


I love thee for thy confidence, give me thy hand, by my life I'm very honest;
but I have had as much a do to keep my self so, as ever poor wench in the world
had.


But I hope, Biddy, you and I shall not lose our acquaintance?


If my husband will have it so, I cannot help it. But I hope he has more wit
than ever to let me see you again: if you have not, husband, in good faith, at
your own peril.


I'll have wit enough; fear not.


Sir, here's the Country-Gentlemen come.


Pray let 'em come in.

Gentlemen, 'tis not unknown how publicly you have appeared against your
Prince; and how secure you thought your selves under the protection of these
Hypocrites: but to show you what rogues they are; all the wealth that you
brought hither to be secured from us, they would have made conditions to have
marched away with, and so cheated the whole Country. Look you, there's their
Articles: there's Reformation for you.


We are deceived indeed in them; to have used us thus!


You must own, Gentlemen, that all the wealth, that's here, is justly forfeited
to the King.


We grant it, worthy Captain, and our lives to boot.


Although the wealth that's here be great, and the Kings wants require it; yet,
to show that he had rather have his subjects hearts than money, he has
Commissioned me to return every man his own again.


Sir, this gracious act of the King, and your readiness to perform it, shall
turn us all faithful subjects to the extent of our lives and fortunes.


Now you deserve his mercy.


Sir, will you grant me a request? Poor Raggou has sent me word, if I can beg
his pardon of you, he'll marry me.


Dol, you have been instrumental to our friend Tell-troth; I must grant you any
thing.


Then pray, Sir, let's make a little sport with him: who do you think that old
woman is?


I know not.


'Tis Raggou himself. Pray fright him a little before you seal his pardon.


What a Devil has he done to his face?


I know not; I believe he has clapped wax upon it.


Now, good woman, what would thou have?


Me come in de crowd, in hope to see a Soldier hang: it would be great
satisfaction to de Country, truly.


Well, good woman, where dost thou dwell?


Begar me have no dwell: vat sall me say to him? I live at Bristol Towns end,
an't please your worship.


But, woman, if thou would tell me where to find a plundering French-man,
called Raggou, the Country should hang him with all my heart; for that's a
notorious rogue, and he shall be hanged if he live above ground.


Begar he serve a me vera well to hang me: vat a Devil make a me come here? dis
be my vit: a pox on mine French wit.


Woman, find out that Rascal for me, here is ten shillings in earnest, and when
thou take him, I'll make it ten pound.


But will your worship secure me that I shall have no harm if I find him?


I upon my honour, before all this Company, thou shalt have no harm.


Bear witness, gentlemen; now give me ten pound: for begar me be de man, me be
Monsieur Raggou.


How! Monsieur Raggou!


Wie mafoy, ha, ha; me have sheat a my Capitain of ten pound, and save a my
life too; dere be de French vit! Begar me honour my vit very much for dat.


Call the Marshal. Take him and hang him upon the next tree.


Hang a moy! did not you before witness engage your honour dat me sall have no
harm? Begar you will do me great deal wrong, if you hang me now.


I promised, indeed, that the old woman should have no harm; but Raggou shall
certainly be hanged.


A ha! dere be a dam English trick will hang a Frenchman. But hold, hold: if
you hang Raggou, how can you save de old woman? Dere be Law case for you! Let
me have fair play for my life.


Take the old woman's garments and lay them up safe, and then they have no harm;
then my honour is clear, and here is Raggou fairly to be hanged.


Come, come away; 'tis a plain case, you must hang for it.


Why were you such a fool as to come hither?


For love of you, you dam whore you.


Why would you betray your self for ten pound?


Dat be my cunning; de hangman sall have de ten pound because he sall no hurt a
me when he hang me. But, Capitain, begar you can no hang me in justice; for de
old woman is Raggou, and Raggou is de old woman, and de Devil can no part us:
so if you hang Raggou, you hang de old woman, and you hang your own honour too,
begar.


Well, Sir, you have pleaded so well for your self, that conditionally you will
marry Dol, I'll pardon you.


If you think it better to marry den to be hang, Capitain, me leave all to your
judgement.


Why, then marry her.


But who sall keep de shild?


The Troop shall keep it.


Why may not de Troop as vell marry her, and me will make one? dat's very fair
me tinks.


Nay, you may be hanged yet if you will.


Let a me see: here be whore, and here be halter; vera fine shoice begar! me
can no tell which to shuse; but me will even stan to mine fortune, and cross
and pile for it.


By my troth it shall be so, and take your choice; cross or pile?


Why, cross he shall be hanged, and pile he shall be married.


No, begar, it fall be cross if me be married, and pile if me be hang.


Now it's an even lay whether this Farce be a Comedy or a Tragedy.


Come, Gentlemen, whore or halter for a wager?


Whore for a wager.


Halter for a wager.


Hold, hold: vat if it be nedra cross nor pile?


If it be neither cross nor pile, thou shalt neither be married nor be hanged,
upon my Honour. Come, here is your fortune for you: i'faith, 'tis cross, thou
art to be married.


Den dere be your halter again, and me tank you.


Come, take your beloved wife, and strike a match.


Den let her take me, and de Devil in hell give her good of me.


Then you have my pardon, and all is well.


Sir, here are two of Queen Elizabeths Tilters, going to Bristol Fair, desire
to dance before you.


With all my heart: call 'em in.

You have done well: where's my man? give 'em half a piece; you have done
prettily indeed. Lieutenant, cashier the Flint-fleyers: as for these Hypocrites
I'll keep them prisoners till the King dispose of 'em, which will be but too
mercifully I'm sure.


I suppose, Governor, the Parliament will reward you with some Bishops Lands
for being so honourably pulled by the ears out of your Garrison.


Come, upbraid 'em not; I hate that. To morrow, Sirs, summon in the Country,
and every man shall have his right.


God bless the King, and all his good Soldiers.


You see, Lieutenant, how with good usage the people return to their Loyalty: I
know you are a brave fellow; but you have been to blame in the Country, and
that disserves your Prince more than your courage can recompense.


Sir, you shall never have occasion to say this again.


I believe you: and I wish that the great Timber, the Pieces of State, that lye
betwixt the King and Subjects,

I wish that they would take a hint from hence
To keep the peoples hearts close to their Prince.

PRologues, and Epilogues, should something say
In order to the excusing of a Play;
But things to the purpose, being laid aside,
We shoot at random at least six bows wide;
Speaking of this or that, of Sea or Land,
Of any Matter but the thing in hand*
If men with such faults, Poets do Commence,
I may put in with my impertinence.
And though my dull Muse cannot make y'a feast,
I'd fain be thought a Poet at the least:
I find I am one, I can prove it plain,
Both by my empty Purse, and shallow Brain:
I've other symptoms to confirm it too,
I've great, and self conceit, of all I do:
I have my little Cullies too in the Town,
Both to admire my works, and lend a Crown.
My Poets day I mortgage to some Citt,
At least six months before my Play is writ;
And on that day away your Poet runs,
Knowing full well, in shoal, come all his duns.
If these things make me not a perfect Poet,
He that has better Title let him show it.
Acted at the Dukes Theatre.

Acted at the Theatre Royal.


