HEre I am, and not ashamed who know it,
I humbly come your Forma paup'ris Poet:
Not Hector-like, that one half-year has writ,
And fights the other half to defend that wit:
Nor have I brought you here a second Play,
Like him that pretends preaching twice a day;
And when you gravely come in the afternoon,
He puts you off with repetition:
Saying, you may remember in the morn
I told you thus, and so, and where, and when;
So spins out his hour with the same again.
Though such things pass on those that Sermons hear,
It will not do with Play-judgers, I fear;
I would you had their grace, and they your wit,
Sermons would then be hard as Plays to hit;
And easy Scenes would pass upon you, when
Grace above Wit abounds in Gentlemen.
How would the Poets all rejoice to see
This age appear in the old simplicity;
To have your wives and you come ten times over,
To see the pudding eaten in Jane shore;
To cry up the bold Beauchamps of the Stage?
There was a blessed understanding age.
I would you were such but for one three days,
Till the poor Poet gather up his Baize;
Or else my less than fifth-rate wit I find
Will force me beg you'll not be just, but kind:
Yet use me as you please, my comfort is,
If by your vengeance I must needs be worried,
I'm not the first small Poet has miscarried*

THe like was never heard of, to have a sweet young Lady as she was going to be
married, to fall dumb.


If my wife had done so too, I think it had been never the worse for the
Common-wealth: but it would make any woman dumb to be designed for such a Fop
as Squire Softhead.


He is a fop of a new stamp, I would not marry a milkmaid to him.


I would he had my wife, or any that would make him a cuckold: he has turned
away twenty servants because they do not call him Squire oft enough: I shall be
sick every time I hear the word Squire, he has made it so ridiculously
loathsome.


He has been called so from his Cradle in the Country, where the title of
Squire had always great worship, till the fool crept in amongst them, of which
he is chief.


Yes Faith, for if there were an Army of Fopps (as truly I think they might be
raised here) Squire Softhead must be General; he has one faculty, he will
maintain a quarrel within three words of striking, and then he will eat cold
Custard.


Hang him; but dost thou think my young Mrs. is dumb indeed?


You saw the Doctors could not cure her, but if she do counterfeit do not blame
her, for 'twere pity upon pity that the Sqr. (a Pox Sqr. him,) should have
her; here they all come.


To have my Child struck dumb, upon her intended Wedding day, and to have the
Doctors give her over too; O my unhappy stars!


Are the stars such unhappy things, are they the cause of her dumbness? by the
heart of a horse if I thought so I'd complain of 'em.


Complain of the Stars! who would you complain too Good Sqr. Softhead?


I'd complain to the Sun and Moon, I warrant you they'd not uphold them in
their Raskally twinkling Tricks.


Alas poor Sqr. the Sun is always in haste, he never stays to hear complaints.


Why then I'll watch them when they fall, and if the proudest star of them all
light within my ground, by the heart of a horse I'll have an Action of Trespass
against them, and if the Law once take hold of 'em, I'll warrant 'em for
twinkling again in haste.


You were best get a star-trap to catch 'em in.


I warrant you a Law-trap will do as well.


Do you think your daughter had not better be dumb and dead, than marry such a
ridiculous bruit as this?


O but his estate lies so sweetly round mine, that when she understands the
blessing, she'll dote of him as I do.


Marry the Devil dote on him; why sir, he never comes into her Chamber, but he
is all of a foaming sweat, throws off his Periwig, and no one knows whether he
or that smells rankest; then he runs to the Looking-glass, rubs his head with
the dressing cloth, puts on his Periwig, then combs out the Powder upon his
Mrs. so makes a scurvy leg, and leaves her -- there's a lover with a Pox to
him. But Sqr. why do you profane the stars so?


Profane? there's a company of vagabond wandering stars that do nothing but
run up and down the sky to tell fortunes, just like our Gipsies in the high-way,
I know 'em well enough. Heart of a horse, to lose a wife for want of three
words, if she had said but to have and to hold, we had had no farther use of
her tongue as I know of.


Why so, Sqr.


Do not call me Sqr. Mrs. bare Sqr. without Softhead sounds scurvily, and 'tis
scurvily done to call me so, and as scurvily I take it, and by the heart of a
horse if you were not a woman, I'd wound you scurvily.


Truly methinks there's such a sympathy betwixt Sqr: and Softhead, that 'tis a
thousand pities to part them.


I beseech you Sqr. which is the Ancientest family, the Softheads or the
Haufheads?


The Softheads are the Ancientest family in Europe, for Adam's youngest Son got
a knock in his Cradle, and the Softheads ever since derive themselves in a
direct line from him.


How does my child? thou hast thy health I hope.


A a a a a a.


Heart of a horse, I believe she counterfeits dumbness: but I have a trick to
make her speak again if you'll give me leave.


With all my heart, Sir, what is it?


Why I'll go call her Jade and Whore, and that will provoke her to call me Rogue
and Raskal, you know.


Though it be upon such rude terms, I would be glad to hear her speak, Sir.


Come on: Why do not you speak the words of Matrimony, you Jade, that you might
be my Wife, you little Whore? Look you Sir, she has given me an answer.


I, but 'tis but with her hand, Sir.


However 'tis an answer Sir, and she may marry me with her hand as well as with
her tongue, for it seems to me to be the stronger confirmation.


Squire, if you love my child, endeavour to find all possible helps: where's my
Servants? Run and ride all ways imaginable, leave no ground unsearched, nor
means unthought of to recover her.


And good Sqr. Softhead, find out a wise man to cure her: do you know one when
you see him?


By my troth to my knowledge I never saw a wise man in my life.


Do you send a fool to find out a wise man?


If he cannot find a wise man, a wise man will find out him quickly.


Come lead my Child to her Chamber, and ride all ways and all Countries to find
out wise and able men.


Jarvis, how shall we do to know a wise man when we see him; what marks and
signs have they?


Why, their dress and their speech they have from the stool of formality, and
they have likely a bald head with a satin cap on it, a narrow band, with a
broad hat, a kain growing in their hands, with the silver head always bobbing
at their lips, and they that are thus habited are taken for wise men.


Why then I may be a wise man, if a Silver Kain will make me so; but prithee
what do these wise men do?


Bi'rlady that will pusse a wise man to tell you; for I never heard of any
thing that was wisely done in my life, therefore I think wise men do nothing.


Then I will be wise, whatsoever it cost me, for I love to do nothing above all
things in the world: but come let us go the right way to find a wise man now.


I'll warrant you go right, for we will go directly East.


Why you fool, the wise men came out of the East, and dost thou think to find
them there, when they left the place.


I, but Sir, they returned back into their own Country again.


Did they? why then the wise men of the East are not so wise as the wise men of
France, for if they get into another Country, the Devil cannot drive them home
again.


I say Dame Isabel I'll have it my way.


Have it my way? why, who are you, Sir? art thou any more than my husband,
fellow? how came thou thus audacious then to say, I'll have it my way? say
that again, and by the faith I have in my Confidant, my Gallant shall make thee
an example.


A ha, have you your Confidant and your Gallant, Wife?


Yes that I have. You know when the great ones have done with a fashion, it
comes amongst we mean Madams into th'Country at last, and I have as much
privilege due to me as any free born people in the world has, and we women will
maintain the liberties of the she subject with our lives and fortunes.


Bi'rlady Wife you rant like a free born subject indeed: but pray you, what do
you with the word free born subject.


I have it to show that I am one of the free born, and may have my Gallant with
all the perquisites belonging thereunto.


Why thou straglest as far out of the bonds of Matrimony as if you would a good
Jointure to justify thee in it: there is a thing called duty Wife; the Parson
you may remember said so when he married us.


I no more remember what the Parson said when he married us, than what he has
said ever since when he preacht.


The Jade's mad beyond recovery, a Pox of the liberty of the she subject: Wife
there are five Children by the fire side, pray you how many of 'em's mine,
Wife? I think 'tis high time to ask that question.


I must not be so much concerned with thee as to call thee husband, therefore
Mr. Drench, the first child was yours.


And whose are the rest?


The rest are mine fellow, let that suffice thee.


And but one of them mine, Wife?


No but one yours, and for this following reason, after my first child you
neglected your family duty, Mr. Drench, and when you grew negligent of me, I
grew careful of my self, and from that care came the rest of my children, Mr.
Drench.


And those four children it seems, are free born subjects* I find a Wife a
little modish, is worse than a Wife a little oldish: Wife I'll downright poison
your free born children.


O thou ungallantified Beast; would thou destroy thy own flesh and blood?


Not mine, but I will yours, Wife.


Why, are not man and wife one flesh, and then are not your children mine, and
mine yours, Mr. Drench?


Faith, I doubt this argument is the general security that mankind has to
warrant their off-springs Legitimate.


Sirrah, talk of poisoning my children and I'll have thee so gallantified.


Gallantified? prithee what's that Wife?


To be gallantified, is to be soundly cudgeled, sirrah: there is another point
of she doctrine for you.


Pray you, let me ask you a question, Madam; nay be not ashamed to be called
Madam, for as mean people as your self has the impudence to own it, therefore
Madam are you true to your Gallant?


I, by my life am I, I else deserve to lose my privileges and be a bondwoman,
I, and condemned to my own husband.


That part of me that's Gentleman forgives thee freely for that; but the rough
part, which is Farrier, must be revenged; though your gallant carry your cudgel
of love, I carry your cudgel of chastisement: I plead my privileges Wife, and
must beat you: take this and that, and that and this.


Help, murder, murder, will you kill me you villain?


Kill you? alas this is but complement, Wife, and 'tis a new fashion come into
the Country Wife, so I have it to show you that I'm one of the free born Wife.


Murder, murder, help, murder.


What's here, fie, fie, neighbour Drench, hold for shame: what, beating your
Wife?


I marry is he Sir, what's that to you? suppose I long for a beating, I have
been getting him in a good humour this two months to do it, and now you must
disturb us.


Nay if you long for a beating I'm sorry I disturbed you, I have done.


You wicked fellow do you know what ye've done? you have taken him off of the
sweetest humour: I see by his looks I shall not get another blow of him to save
my life.


The jade is mad beyond all cure.


I, for none but a mad woman would long for a beating, but farewell neighbours,
I have done.


You're an impertinent fellow to begin: Men that part rencounters are often
killed or hurt, and therefore you ought Neighbour to be soundly cudgeled.


Nay good neighbour hold, hold.


You see he has taken off his anger from me, and now you must have all the
sweet blows you raskal.


So he shall, for if I had known thou had longed for a beating, thou should
not have had a blow to've saved thy life, but you shall have it.


Hold, hold, hold; if ere I part man and Wife, if ere I put my hand betwixt the
bark and the tree again, may my fingers bear fruit, and the boys rob my
Orchard: A woman to long for a beating? what a blessing 'twere if all our Wives
would long sol.


Now I know you long for a beating Wife, lest you should miscarry I'll beat you
wonderfully.


Hold, hold, my longing is over indeed.


Is it? why then I'll to the Wood and drench a sick horse, and by that time I
return I hope you may come to your longing again, and then I shall plead the
liberty of the subject, and claw your free born sides again.


To be beaten thus! if I be not revenged, say I'm a woman without Gaul or
invention; let me think a little, they say when a woman means mischief, if she
but look upon her Apronstrings the Devil will help her presently; I'll try him:
who is here?


We may search long enough, the Devil a wise man that I can find or hear of.


I but Sir, you must know there be several sorts of wise men, and our business
is to find out a wise Physician.


Either the Proverb's false, or the Devil's very dull, for he has helped me to
no invention yet.


But all the professed Doctors which we take to be wise Physicians have given
her over you see.


I, but there may be skilful and wise men in Physic that do not profess it.


You say very true, for I was cured once of the belly ach by an old woman and a
warm Trencher, when all the Doctors in the Town had given me over.


God a mercy Devil, I have it in Faith, these Gentlemen have given me a hint
for a revenge upon my barbarous husband: Gentlemen I overheard your discourse,
and I find you are in great distress for a wise Physician.


What then, does such a Country creature as thou know any thing that's wise?


I know not what your worship means by wise.


I dare swear thou dost not, for I that am a Squire scarce know my self.


But Sir I can help you to the most excellent Physician upon earth, but then
he's a man of the most strangest humours.


'Slid no matter for his humours, so he be wise; where is he?


Why in that very Copse, blooding and drenching of a sick horse.


Why, that's a wise Farrier, not a wise Physician woman.


But he is a famous Physician of Padua, and has retired himself on purpose to
avoid Patients.


Then he is a fool and no Physician; for the wise Doctors never leave a Patient
whilst he has either breath in's body or money in's purse.


I but Sir, this is not a man that values money.


Then I say he is not a wise man. Come away Jarvis, this cannot be he we look
for.


Why you must know Sir, he exceeds the World for Physic, but then his humour
is to deny his profession and acknowledge nothing but Ignorance; then Sir, he
looks so like a Farrier, that you would swear he were one indeed; then he is
such a Clown.


The greater the Scholar, still the more Clown; and the further he is gone in
Learning, the more ignorant still in other things.


I, but is he far gone in Physic? can he make a dumb woman speak?


A dumb woman speak? I'll undertake he shall provoke a dumb divel to speak.


That's the wise man I want: pray you where is he?


Why, Sir, he is easily spoke with, but you'll find it wonderful difficult to
get him to a Patient; neither gold, complement, nor other fair usage could ever
yet work upon him, and yet there is a way to gain him.


Heart of a horse, pox to him, what way can that be?


A way that you'll think strange, but very true: he could never yet be brought
to a Patient without being rudely used and soundly cudgil'd to it.


Nay, by the heart of a horse, he shall want for no beating.


I marry, Sir, that will do it, and nothing else in the world; yet he will carry
his seeming simplicity so cunningly, that I hold a wager you come away
persuaded that he is no Physician.


I hold a wager he shall own it, I'll make him commence Doctor else with a good
cudgel, I warrant you: but is he such a rare Physician?


Truly, Sir, but two days since he brought a mad woman to her wits again, that
was suspected never to have any; nay, he has taken men's legs and arms off, and
set 'em on sound again.


That's beyond Surgeons-hall: sure he can conjure.


I'll be hanged if this fellow be not a spy of the Vertuosos, and is come
hither disguised to betray secrets in Nature.


But does he take no other fees but beating Mrs?


Of a certain nothing else, Sir.


I would some Doctors, I know, could be brought to that, I would want no
Physic, nor he should want no fees i'faith.


Gentlemen, you'll find him in the wood with a leather Apron, and a Hammer by
his side, as if he were a real Smith; and he studies as much to be a Farrier
now, as formerly a Physician; and as his drink was altogether Wine before, now
Farrier-like he studies all sorts of Ale, and drinks them soundly too: So,
farewell Gentlemen, you'll find all things true as I have said, and my Raskal, I
hope, will be cudgeled from a Farrier to a Doctor.


Why, this is such an humorous Physician, as yet I have not heard of.


Slid, we should have asked the woman one thing, it may be he delights to be
beaten with one sort of cudgel more than another.


We'll be so civil as to ask him that, if he puts us to it: But come, let us
into the wood and find him out.


Hark, I hear the trees burl in the wood: Slid, here's a man coming towards us,
I hope 'twill prove the Doctor.


By mass he has a leather Apron on, and a Hammer by his side.


'Tis he, what if we cudgel him before we speak to him?


Not for the world, Sir; that would be rude indeed. Save you, Sir.


Save me, Sir? spare your Complement till I'm dying, and then I'll thank you
for it.


By the heart of a Horse I like him for that, for what should a man be saved
for till he is dead, you know.


Sir, in short, we come (having business with you) to pay you all the respect
and reverence that's due to your worship.


Respect, reverence and worship! you're very merry, Gentlemen: pray you, Sir,
what part of me is it that you find worshipful?


O Sir, it is your virtues that we admire.


Virtue! I never heard the word in my life, no nor the use on it.


Thou speak like an honest man, for by my troth I see no sign of virtue
about thet.


Slid, you'll spoil all to be so blunt with him: Sir, we understand you are a
great Doctor.


I understand my self to be a great horse Doctor, Sir.


But pray you, Sir, be a man Doctor for my sake; by this cudgel it will be the
better for you, if you knew all.


Sir, in short, we know you to be a famous Doctor of Padua, and we wish you
would leave these abject thoughts of being a Farrier, and follow your own
worthy profession of Physic.


Now you provoke me, Sir: do you think a Farrier inferior to a Physician? he
is the son of a Mare that thinks a horse has not as many diseases as a man.


And he is the son of a whore that thinks a Squire has not as many diseases as
a Horse: and Friend, take heed how you make comparisons, for you'll have all
the Squires in the Country about your ears upon this score.


Country Squires I shall deal well enough with, and I shall justify a Horse
has more diseases than a Squire, and take the honour of Knighthood to help you.


You lye, and for the honour of Squire-hood I'll dye a virgin-Martyr.


Hold, hold, Sir, the latter end of a Squires argument is still quarrelling.


Without quarrelling then I'll prove, that Squire and Squiress have more
diseases than a Horse.


I, with the diseases of their own, that Nature never meant them, I grant you.


And first, I prove a Squiress, that is, a woman, may be dumb.


And I answer, a horse cannot speak, set that against that: and yet I'll
undertake to make a horse speak before you shall make a woman dumb, Sir.


Good Squire let us mind our business: In short, Sir, will you own your
Profession? are you a Doctor or no?


A pox of a Doctor, I am a down-right Farrier, I can give you a drench, or out
you for the staggers when you're drunk; I have no more learning than a horse:
pray open my head, and see if you can find a Physician there.


Since no means but the extremity will make you own your profession, we will
cudgel you with as much complement as we can, Sir.


A cudgel is but a course complement, I confess.


Hey, good boys i'faith, what a Devil mean you, Gentlemen?


Squire, do you strike the first blow.


No, do you Jarvis, for the first blow will bear an Action, you know, and
you're a poor fellow, he can recover nothing of thee.


What a Devil's the matter?


Fall on, fall on, will you confess you're a Doctor?


Hold, hold, hold, I will be a Physician.


Will ye own, you are one, Sir.


I am one, I am one, hold, I am a very good Physician, I feel I am.


Yes, Gentlemen; he is a rare Physician, and would confess it too, but that he
would not lose the pleasure of a cudgel, for once a week he longs for a
beating: now you and I are even, Sir.


A pox upon you, is this your design? I'll be revenged, you Jade, to the
purpose: If I should say she is my wife, and that I'm a very Black-smith,
they'd not believe me, 'twere but the way to be cudgeled again.


Nay, come, Sir, what are you falling into a relapse again?


No, no, hold, as the woman says, I am a Doctor.


I, and so famous, that you can take off broken limbs and set them on sound
again.


Well, I will own all this, rather than have my bones broken; and now I
remember you fetched me once before out of this great wood, in Plato's great
year, as my Master called it.


Pray you, Sir, how long is that since?


Why, next Strawberry-time, it will be complete six and thirty thousand years.


Ho Boy!


I, and I remember I poisoned somebody at your request.


No, Sir, I do not remember that.


But I do, Sir, by the same token you gave me a hundred pieces for a bribe tied
up in a laced Handkerchief.


I remember now as well as can be.


But I do not remember I hired him to poison any body, nor do I remember I'm
six and thirty thousand years old: A pox of your Plato's great year, and his
little year too.


Pray, Sir, remember, your Mistress will never be cured else.


Nay, rather than so, I will remember any thing.


Look you there, Sir, you see we both remember, therefore I pray you go with us
to cure a distressed Lady.


My business in Physic is killing, not curing, I assure you; for as there is
your Man-taylor and your Woman-taylor, so there is your killing Doctor, and
your curing Doctor, distinct Professions, I assure you.


But, Sir, you must own curing, as well as killing, or else we shall court you
with a cudgel again.


As we did in Plato's great year, you know Jarvis.


I do not rememher that ye beat me then.


But I remember it, by the same token you gave me my laced Handkerchief back,
when you had put the Gold in your pocket.


Now I do remember, hold, hold, Padua. Well, Gentlemen, what disease is it I
must cure?


You must help a Lady that is dumb, and has lost her speech.


How, dumb, and lost her speech too! that's a great work; if she had only lost
her speech, I could have cured her, or if she had been but dumb; but to be dumb
and speechless too, her case is very desperate, would I'd my wife and all the
neighbourhood at that lock.


But we must entreat your utmost skill, for 'tis a sad thing for a woman to be
speechless.


I, and dumb: but 'tis a sadder thing for a man to be a fool, for certainly he
is a changeling that has a dumb wife, and would have her speak again: Are you
in love with a woman's sting?


Why do you call it a sting, Sir?


Because, Sir, a woman has no tongue, they are tongues in men's mouths, but they are
called stings in women.


But, Sir, this Lady never spoke an angry word, not so much as to a servant.


But she will do, if I cure her, for I've an unlucky hand that way; yet for
her sweet dispositions sake I'll preserve her; and now I'll answer to the name
of Doctor, with as much confidence, as a Quack dressed up in all his ignorance.


Will ignorance make men confident? Slid, would I'd a little ignorance too.


I, if you had but a little 'twere very well, Sir.


Let me see how to behave my self like a Doctor now; I will first take your
Mistress by the pulse, and look up gravely at the sieling all the while; then
ask what she took last, and when she'd a stool, and there's half a Doctors
work; then I'll prescribe something that will neither do hurt nor good, so
leave her to luck, and there's the other half of the Doctor; then (to amuse the
people) I'll give her the powder of a dried Dock-leaf, with Apothecaries hard
name to it; and if that will not mend her, I'll give her a drench, for women
have sturdy stomachs, and why not as strong of constitution as Horses?


Heart of a horse, you're a delicate mad Doctor; Sirrah, wilt thou give her a
drench?


Why, a drench is a potion, and a potion is a drench; only the distinction is,
when you put it into a horn, then 'tis a drench for a horse; and when you put
it into a vial-glass, 'tis a potion for a man; nay, I'll discover all their
cheats.

Come my Squire Softhead, never fear thy wench,
She shall be cured by Learned Doctor Drench.

ANd is he so famous a Physician, say you?


Why, Sir, Aesculapius, as you call him, is a mere Mountebank to him.


I, and that fellow Galen Hippocrates, as you call him, not worthy to be his
Apothecary: he can conjure, for he'll cure a wooden leg, make it flesh and
blood, and set you up sound again.


Nay, if he like your pulse, he'll give you a lease of your life for term of
years.


I would he would give me three lives in mine, and begin them all at fifteen
again.


Is not one life sufficient to make a man a Cuckold? but you'd have three to do
it in.


Yes, because I'd make thee a Monster, that my child and I may live upon
showing thee.


You talk of wonders, I long to see him.


He is in the next room, Sir, but 'tis the maddest Doctor, and of the strangest
humours.


So he is, for by the heart of a horse we were fain to bribe him with a cudgel,
before he would own being a Doctor.


A down right Sir-reverence of a Doctor, I say get her a worthy husband, and say
I told you so.


You're a foolish woman, and talk of that you understand not.


Understand not? sure I should know what a woman wants as well as you: I say
again, a pox of your Doctor, get her a good husband, a plaster of true love
clapped to her will do her more good than Sena or Rhubarb.


Did I not provide her a good husband? was she not to marry the Squire here?


A precious morsel of him: how came you to be a Squire with a pox, with your
softhead, and your little head, and your no head at all?


Bear witness, she says I have no head at all.


Thou may take it, and throw it to the dogs for any brains there's in it.


I will not call you whore, Gentlewoman; but by the heart of a horse your
husband's a cuckold; and he is not only an English cuckold, but also an Italian
cuckold; that is to say, he is a cuckold both before and behind.


Sirrah, cudgel him, or lie in the truckle-bed all thy life.


I'll rather cudgel thee, for I believe every word he says.


For shame proffer her a husband of her own choosing, let her have Leander.


She shall never be his Hero.


If she perish in the Hellespont, at your peril.


Hellespont? how came you by that fine word?


Honestly enough.


As honestly as you came by your child, I think.


I have seen Mr. Hellespont in a Puppet-show, and Hero, and Leander too.


Talk no more of Leander, I know him not; but who ever he be, he is not to be
compared with the Squire here for wealth.


Is your Squire boobe, loobe, poop, to stand with Leander for parts and
person?


Do you know his parts?


No, but I have heard of him and his parts.


Grant me patience, for I have much ado to forbear calling you whore, forsooth.


Do if thou dare; is wealth to be named the same day with love? I scorn that
comparison, though I'm of the wrong side of the teens i'faith.


Hast thou any sense of the fopperies of love left?


Dost thou call sweet love foppery? though you're my Master, you're a beast;
go, go to bed and die, what dost thou in this world? let the Doctors give him
Physic, no body else has need on it.


You're very bold with your Master, wife.


He has been as bold with me, let that suffice you husband: I have so fresh in
my memory the sweet effects of love, that I wonder mankind should be such
beasts as to forget it.


Go give your child suck, for that's your talent, and meddle no more.


That's another sign 'tis none of my child, for why should he be so careful to
have the child suck, if it were not his own?


Look you friend, your wife has abused me, and 'tis not civil to call her whore
to her own face: but I tell thee to thy face, she is a Whore Rampant, and in
Heraldry you're a Cuckold Passant.


I, Sir, and my wants make me a Cuckold Couchant, or I'd never endure it.


Oh, here comes our delicate humoursome Doctor i'faith.


Squire, go bid them make my Daughter ready to receive the Doctor.


I do not care to go, for she has her wild Irish Chamber-maid that always calls
me Squire pogemihone, and then laughs at me.


Pray you go, Sir. You're very welcome, Sir, I have very much desired to see
you.


Hippocrates says, I pray you be covered.


Pray you, in what Chapter of Hippocrates does he bid you be covered?


In the first chapter of keeping your head warm.


A pleasant Gentleman, and I love his humour. But, Sir, concerning my Daughter
who is very sick, Sir.


I am very glad on it, Sir, and I would you and your whole Family were sick,
lame or blind, that I might have the honour to cure you.


Why, this is the strangest Doctor: he had need of good parts to bear out his
humours.


And now, Sir, I pray you what's your Daughters name?


Olinda, Sir, at your service.


Olinda? a pretty name to be cured.


Sir, I'll see if my Daughter be ready to come forth to you.


Your servant, Sir: and what woman is that, I pray you?


The Nurse of the house, Sir.


Bi'rlady, a pretty piece of household-stuff, and a fine ornament for a Couch: I
do salute you Nurse, and I would I were that happy sucklin, that shall draw
down the milk of your favour and affection, Nurse.


Her pulse beats not thereabouts, Sir: hands off, for she's my wife, Sir.


I cry you mercy, Sir, I congratulate you for having so handsome a wife, and
your wife for having so worthy a husband: Your breasts, sweet Nurse.


Pray you hold, Sir, half this courtesy would serve.


Worthy Sir, I cannot declare enough how much I'm your servant. Delicate
breasts, Nurse.


At your service.


O Devil take you, Sir, let my wives breasts alone.


Sweet Sir, I must see her breasts, it is the Doctors duty to look to the
Nurses milk.


You shall not look to her milk, I'll look to your water for that, Sir.


You will not hinder me from following my Profession; alas, I must not only
feel her breasts, but I must know whether she be with child or no.


Sir, my wife is not with child.


But she must be with child: what say thou Nurse?


If your worship think it be for my health, Sir.


Thou wilt dye in a week else.


Do you hear that?


A pox of your Mountebanking, Sir, my wife is sound and well, and shall have no
Doctor.


Sir, I know you're a man of sense, and I beseech you hear reason. A sweet
Nurse!


O dear Doctor.


A pox of your sense and reason, give me my wife, Sir.


But, Sir, I'm from home, and want a woman; I hope you'll be civil to a
stranger; if you come my way, I'll be as kind to you, Sir.


The Devil take your kindness, give me my wife.


Give me a reason for it; for look you, Sir, your wife is either with child, or
else she has a tympany. Nurse, show me your legs, they may be swelled and
dropsical, a sweet woman may be cast away here for want of a little looking to.


Let my wives legs alone, or I'll downright thrust you out of the Room.


Sir, I find you're choleric, but I'll give you a purge shall make you so
patient, that if you saw me lye with your wife, you should not have so much
gaul left, as would make an angry line in your face.


Now good husband take Physic.


God a mercy Nurse.


In troth, Sir, he is always so fretful, and so cholerically jealous.


I'll make you an example.


Such another word, and I'll put thee into a Fever, and keep thee in it a year; I
tell thee fellow, thy wife is not well, and I will give her a gentle gentile
Glister; prithee be sick Nurse.


Yes, Sir, I am sick, and, if you please, you shall give me a gentle gentile,
as you call it.


You are no more sick than I am huswife.


Sure the Doctor knows better than you or I whether I be sick or no; and I find
I am sick, and I do so long for a gentle gentile, what do ye call it.


My Master is coming, or I'd give you such a gentle gentile.


Sir, I have brought my Daughter, and I beseech your best care of her, for the
world's gone with me if she die.


Hold, Sir, people do not die so easily without the help of a Physician.


A notable Droll, and puts me in great comfort.


Is this she? a very pretty Patient, and one a man may venture on in sickness,
or in health: come on, Sir, let me feel your pulse.


I am not sick, Sir.


But your Daughter is, therefore give me your pulse; why, by your pulse, I find
your Daughter is dumb.


O dear, how he hits on it!


Hits on it? you'd be hit on it too, would you; he may thank his knowing on it
before.


But, Sir, 'tis strange that you should know my Daughters disease by my pulse.


Sympathy does it: I find you have no faith here in the Sympathetical Powder,
therefore cannot know our Sympathetical way of practice; when any man or woman
is sick in Greenland, they always send the next of kin to the Doctor, and by
that pulse the disease is known, and the Patient cured.


Pray Doctor feel whether I be dumb or no.


Let me feel your pulse husband; O I am sick, and the Doctor must physic me,
or I die.


The Devil has found a new way to make a Cuckold.


But what may be the cause think you of her dumbness?


Why, Sir, according to the sense of Aristotle.


Aristotle was a Philosopher, Sir.


I, and a Physician too, I know what I say. Heart! I had like to have been
gravel'd; I say again, according to the sense of Hippocrates.


I marry, Sir, he was a Physician indeed.


I, and a Philosopher too, therefore no matter which of their opinions I take.


By my troth I think so too.


And therefore as I said at first, according to the sense of Aristotle, women
are dumb because they cannot speak.


A sweet Doctor, I always thought so indeed.


Have you tasted of his sweetness you quean?


Not yet, but I hope I shall do, you rogue.


But, Sir, are there many reasons for dumbness in a woman?


Several, Sir: a woman may be dumb, when she has no mind to speak, and she may
speak when no body has a mind to hear her; this is Natural Philosophy now.


Why, you speak, as if it were sullenness in their Sex, and not a defect in
Nature, nor other accident.


I do so: in some Romance perhaps you may have read of a woman's being dumb; but
sure no man seriously ever heard of a woman that could not speak.


He is in the right i'faith; this is the Doctor of Doctors i'faith.


Again the Doctor? I would he were hung about thy neck.


By my troth, so would I to determine thy jealousy.


But pray you, Sir, why should you think a woman cannot be dumb?


Why, Sir, your men that has endeavoured to find out the perpetual motion, has
come near it, I confess, with their Clocks and Pendulas: but Aristotle says,
Fix a Dya^ plate to a woman's mouth, and if the perpetual motion be not there,
let them never hope to find it; and if it be there, 'tis infallible a woman
cannot be dumb.


Squire, forsooth, here is a Letter.


A good Boy; Squire, and forsooth does well together, they are very suitable; but
hold, this Letter is not big enough to have business in it, nor little enough to
be a challenge. Heart of a horse, a down-right challenge; Hercules, I'll fright
him out on's fighting, or he shall fright me.


But touching the cause of my child's disease, Sir.


Why, you must know, her dumbness may proceed from the string-holt.


The string-holt? why that's a disease one of my Horses has now in the stable.


I grant you, Sir; but we of Padua call a lameness in the tongue the
string-holt, from that very string which you call the greedy worm: (A pox on
me, I shall betray my self a Farrier:) and this dumbness proceeds from a
contraction,


Not a word, not I, Sir.


A Gentleman and not speak Arabic? why, where have you been bred?


I neither speak Arabic, Latin, nor any language, but my mother tongue.


What blessed luck is this for me? how shall I do to explain it to you then?
for Optimun purgamentum, cantaridem, venetreclum, do ye conceive me, Sir; Vinum
cum drammum, scirramoucha scrupulum; and this is just your Daughters case, Sir.


Ho boy, Doctor, he claws it away with Latin i'faith.


Still commending the Doctor? you'd have him claw you away with Latin too,
would you not, you Jade?


I faith, or with Greek either, you knave.


Sure he's a Learned man, if one could understand him; pray you, if you please,
state her case in English.


Why, this is worse than all the rest; why, you must know, Sir, that the
vapours passing from the right side where lies the heart, unto the left where
lies the liver, the lungs, which in Latin we call Armion, having communication
with the brain, which in Greek we call Nazmathon, by Intermedium of the
Venacava, which in Hebrew we call Rabshack, and in Arabic Helgoshob.


Thou beast, when wilt thou know Rabshack and Helgoshob? O most divine Doctor!


Divine? is it come to Divinity now? why then you hope to be saved by him.


I'll venture with him into Rabshack and Helgoshob, what ever befalls me.


Ragshag? Sir, I understand these tongues less than Latin.


I'm sorry for it, Sir; did you but know the sweet sound of Hebrew and Arabic,
you would never speak your mother-tongue again.


Sir, I like your discourse well, only where you say, the heart lies on the
right-side, and the liver on the left; which is contrary to all Anatomists I
ever heard of.


How shall I answer this? pox on him, he makes me sweat. Why, Sir, it is true,
that in time of health the heart lies on the left-side, and in most diseases
too: but in dumbness, the heart by some strong passion being turned, and
whirled to the right-side, till by art it be returned and whirled back to the
left, neither man nor woman can possibly speak; and that is the positive cause
of all dumbness.


O dear Doctor, I cry still.


Is it come to dear Doctor now? is he your dear, you whore?


He is not yet, but he shall be you cuckold.


Cuckold? remember this.


I do remember thou art one, and I will remember to continue thee so.


Sir, I am well satisfied; now, if you please, let us proceed to the cure of my
Daughter.


O, there's the point; why, there be several ways to cure, and twice as many
ways to kill; for we Learned Physicians with too much study, have likely a
worm in our heads, and when that worms wrigles, the mind alters; so that we
change our fashions as much in Physic, as the Court and Gentry do their
clothes: But come, get my Patient to her bed, and when she's warm, give her a
lusty dose of Sops and Wine.


How, Sops and Wine! sure that will make her drunk, Sir.


The better, Sir; for when people are drunk, they are apt to speak their minds:
I work by Natural Causes: you see by the virtue of Cakes and Wine how women
tattle at a Gossoping; no man ever knew a dumb woman at a Christening or a
Gossoping, but she talked before she went away.


The Doctors in the right, I'll be sworn, I know it by experience: O brave
Doctor.


Brave Doctor, i'faith proclaim your love with him.


By my troth so I will, with the first opportunity.


So lead her to bed, and let Nurse drink with her to countenance her.


I will indeed, Mr. Doctor, I will be sure to obey your commands.


And when you have drunk smartly, bring me word how it works Nurse.


You shall be hanged first, Doctor.


And be sure Nurse come alone still, for you know she may have something to say
to me, that is not fit for her husband to hear.


A pox on you, must my Master pimp for you too.


Pray you take your fee, Sir.


By no means; no cure, no money with me, Sir: but pray you be careful of my
Patient, and be sure to send Nurse still to me.


I must be a Cuckold, and cannot avoid it.


Sir, I shall send to you, but perhaps not Nurse.


So, my Master is jealous of her, as well as I; now 'tis plain he got my child;
how many points of the Compass am I a Cuckold?


I hope I shall make that Rogue mad for beating me.


Your servant Mr. Doctor.


Your servant Nurse.


Boy, did Squire Softhead receive my note so cheerfully?


Yes, Sir, and withal he told me, he wondered that he heard not sooner from
you, being you know he was to marry your Mistress.


Is he so brave? I shall the better digest my ruin, if I find honour in him,
yet he with all his merits can never deserve her; 'tis strange if he should
fight, for they say he is a very ass. O here he comes.


Sirrah, yonder he is, will you be sure to do as I bid you?


Yes, I warrant your worship.


Just when you see my vest off, that's your time.


I'll be sure to do it, Sir.


Save you, Sir.


Dam you, Sir; why? why the pox save me, Sir?


Because your poor servant hath an occasion to kill you, and send you to
heaven. But why Dam me, Sir?


Because your poor servant hath an occasion to kill you, and send you to hell,
Sir.


This is uncharitable language, from a dying man, as you are, Sir.


I scorn dying, I've an estate will keep me alive in spite of a Duel, Sir: I
scorn but to be very charitable. Where wilt thou be buried fellow?


Let me be killed first, I pray you.


Nay, by the heart of a horse, doubt not that, Sir; and if you'll have a
Tomb-stone over you, write your Inscription, and my Stone-cutter shall do it:
Nay, I scorn but to be charitable, Sir.


Good rich Squire make your will, for dye you must.


What a pox should I kill thee for, that has nothing to leave me for my pains?


Now you are not civil, Sir.


I scorn but to be as civil as any man.


You shall find me so too, for I'll see you buried in the flaxon your Grandam
spun her self, and left your worship for a winding sheet.


And I'll be as civil to you, Sir; for I'll see you buried in Flannil: and, Sir,
to show my self civil, if you have a mind not to fight at this weapon, I'll stay
till you choose another; nay, if you have a mind not to fight at all, for
civilities sake, I'll have no mind to fight at all neither; I scorn to be behind
hand in civility.


Now no more words, Sir, but strip and take your fortune.


Pull off Boy: and, Sir, I must have you know, that I long as much to go out of
this world honourably, as you to stay in it honourably.


This is my Q. I take it.


And to show you, I kill you, Sir, merely upon honour, and not upon malice; I
lovingly embrace you, Sir.


Embrace an Ass: leave your Fencers tricks, and take you to your sword, Sir.


Then a pox on you, Sir; and give me my trusty sword boy: how! the rogue is run
away, and with my sword too: why sirrah, raskal, come back you treacherous
rogue; come this must be your plot, Sir, to hire my boy to run away with my
sword, Sir: Why rogue, traitor to my honour, come back.


This shall not serve your turn Squire, my boy shall run and overtake him, I'll
warrant you.


I scorn to be beholding to you, or your boy, Sir; I'll run and overtake him my
self, Sir; and I charge you upon honour to stay till I come back, Sir.


This is the newest coward I have known, he has cozened me; for as I live, I
thought he would have fought, for he bore it up to the very point of danger:
Sirrah, there's a Vest (...) you, and run after him, and cudgel him, till he be
all over black and blew.


You could not have put me upon a better employment, Sir.


By your favour, Sir, I was looking out at my window, and as I thought saw a
Duel towards, so I came.


To prevent it?


No by my troth, Sir, my business is not to prevent wounds, but to cure 'em;
where is the other that fought you? Nounze you have made quick dispatch; have
you killed him and buried him already?


No, he is gone very safe, and no wound about him, but that of his honour.


Was it not Squire Softhead, Sir?


It was so, Sir; and how he has behaved himself, you shall know anon. But, Sir,
I guess you are the Doctor that undertakes the Dumb Lady.


I am so, Sir.


You're happily come, Sir; for I have earnest business with you.


Why I? the dullness of your eye shows you have, let see, let see, a very
dangerous and high flying pulse.


I am not sick, Sir.


You are loath to confess; come I see you have a clap, Sir.


By my honour, not I, Sir.


Do not let it go too far, modesty has spoiled one half of the Town-Gallants,
and too much confidence the other half; so that there's no hopes of any of you.


If you please, Sir, I shall acquaint you with my business; my name, Sir, is
Leander, perhaps you may have heard of me.


I have heard of a Naval Knight, called Sir Hero Leander; are you the man I
pray you?


You are merry, Sir, but my affair is serious; you have a dumb Lady your
Patient, to whom I am a servant and she, Sir, has an equal love for me: now
being by her father barred of all means of coming together.


You would have me do it, and so pimp for you.


Not pimp, Sir; but I would fain oblige you to befrend us.


Befriend us? a modest phrase for pimping; I begin to find that physic is but
one part of a Doctors trade, and I shall gain the Character of Chaucer's
Semstriss; for says he,

She keeps a shop for countenance;
But baudeth for her sustenance.
So I shall physic give for countenance;
But pimping's my chief maintenance.

Sir, I know you may bring me to the speech of her: I mean no pimping, Sir.


Whatever you mean, the thing is the same, Sir; for how can I help you to the
speech of her, but I must bring you together? and if I brng you together,
what's that but pimping, Sir?


But I mean in the way of honesty, Sir.


Honesty? indeed I have heard 'twill make men rich and brave; but I never heard
of honesty in the case before: Sir, the profession will not bear it: and would
you make a pimp of a Physician? O most horrible indignity!


Pray you, Sir, be pacified, and let this show you that I can be grateful.


Is there a fee belonging to that


Your servant, Sir; I must now reveal a secret to you; you must know, Sir, the
Lady fains this dumbness for love of me, and to avoid marriage with this Squire
Softhead.


I knew there was some trick in it, 'twere impossible else, either by Nature,
Art, or misfortune, a woman should be dumb* for take a woman's tongue, and pluck
it up by the roots, I'm sure in an hour another would grow in the room on it, But
come, Sir, you shall shift you, and pass for my Apothecary.


That I think an excellent way, and nothing better.


We cannot miss to cure her now, I shall get credit as I am her Physician, and
money as I your bringer together, or your pimping friend.

Thus shall I be your Advocate and Protector,
And venerably called both Baud and Doctor.

THis habit will pass me for an Apothecary, I only want some of their canting
phrases.


Why, faith you are as well qualified for an Apothecary, as I am for a
Physician; you have trusted me with your heart, and now I'll trust you with my
simplicity: I am no Doctor, but was forced to own being one; why, and how, I'll
tell you hereafter; but having served a Mountebank, that and my great share in
impudence, has made me famous.


Is it possible impudence should have such virtuous effects?


Yes, yet some men rail at impudence, and speak it vicious, when the Jest is,
they that rail most at it, make most use on it: 'tis doubtless the greatest
blessing in the world, and most men do their business by it.


But if you be so ignorant, sure impudence should not bear you out, especially
in this learned Profession.


O, Sir, it is the securest cloak for ignorance of all Arts: other Professions
are liable to miscarriages and questionable: but the Physician may kill from
the Fool to the Senator, from the Beggar to the Bloud-Royal, and never be
called in question; the dead was never so uncivil yet, as to come out of the
other world to complain of the Physician.


'Tis a sign they are civilly used where they are: But do you not study at all?


It needs not, for the great study of Physic is come to nothing now but
letting Blood; and it falls out well for me that am a down-right Farrier.


How, is your real Profession a Farrier?


Yes faith, and with the same Fleams I let Horses blood* I use my Patients to;
and the horses drench is the potion I give to men, and I cure more than I kill;
so that I am the only Doctor that has found out horse and man to be of one
constitution.


But how comes letting of blood so much in fashion?


O, Sir, 'tis Alamode Paris; if your corn does but ache against rain, what says
the Doctor? Let him blood: Nay, if you be troubled in Conscience, they'll let
you blood for that too


They let not blood for the Small-pox, I hope.


But they do; and 'tis the opinion of Padua, that 'tis as sure a way to kill,
as an old woman and Saffron is to cure.


How came you by that Velvet Coat?


O here come Patients; mark


That that no body can help me to, the worse luck, Sir; I am a Seamans wife,
Sir, that has been married this dozen years, and I have never a child, and
please you, and I would fain have a child, Sir.


And would thou have me get it?


I would fain have your worship give me something that will, Sir.


By my troth I have nothing about me at this time can do it: Why, look thou
send thy husband to Sea, that often make the wife fruitful.


A lack, Sir, I have tried all ways both by Sea and Land, and nothing will help
me.


I do prescribe thee a lusty Wine-porter, and he shall be thy gallant.


And it please your worship, I have tried your gallant, and your top-gallant,
and your top and top-gallant, and all will do no good, Sir.


By my troth, go try the main-yard too; and if that fail thee, you're a barren
woman of a certain: but come in the evening to me, after a glass of Wine I may
have something to help thee.


And it please your worship, I am a poor man.


I have never a Medicine for that disease: Prithee be gone fellow.


My wife, and it please you, lies dangerously sick.


If thou be poor, trouble thy self no further, she'll dye of a certain: but
art thou so poor thou can not come to the point?


I would entreat your worship to visit her; and here's an old angel for you.


This is but one of the points, there's two and thirty in the Compass, fellow;
however I'll come see her: she rules the roast when she has her health, does she
not?


I, but too much to my sorrow, Sir.


Thou hast a stable, hast thou not?


Yes, and it please you.


Then take the your wife, and tie her up to the Rackstaves; and be sure you
give her no hay, for I mean to blood her and drench her.


Why, Sir? that's as I serve my horse when he is sick.


But I know you're a hen-peckt fellow, and such women as do command in chief,
I physic them as I do horses, and all little enough too: but first take her
and ride her off on her legs.


That's more than I and your worship to help me can do, Sir: But I hope your
worship will come.


Yes, yes. What are you, Sir?


A Prentice, Sir, that has brought my Mrs. water, Sir.


Has your Mrs. never a Maid, but she must send her water by her Prentice? a
foolish custom, I cannot break 'em on it; let me see, but are you sure this is
your Mrs. water?


Yes, and it please your worship.


How sure are you? did you see her make it?


I did not see her make it, but, and it please you, I heard her make it.


Why, I find by thy Mrs. water friend, that thou art almost out of thy time.


Yes truly, within three months, and it please you.


I knew it; why here is twenty visible things in this water; your Master is out
of Town about a purchase, is he not?


Yes, and it please your worship.


And you are removed out of the Garret to lye in the next room to your Mrs. to
keep spirits from her, are you not?


By my troth, and so I am, and it please your worship.


The water shows it plainly; hold, ha, I find your Mrs. is apt to dream much,
and is frighted, and walks in her sleep, and comes to your chamber to be
awakened, does she not?


By my truly, she has been so troubled with these frights since my Masters
absence, that I have never had a good nights rest since he went; for she'll come
in her sleep, and throw her self upon my bed; and then I lye as still as can
be, and then she rises like a mad woman, and throws all the clothes off, and
makes such work with me, that I'm ashamed your worship should know it, then
tell her on it the next day, and she runs away and laughs at me.


I know her disease, commend me to thy Mrs; and tell her, because I'll make a
perfect cure on it, I'll come and lye in the next room to her my self, and thou
shalt go into the Garet again.


And it please your worship, my Mrs. perhaps may not like that so well, Sir.


She will like it I know; 'tis variety must recover her, go tell her I'll not
fail her.


Here comes Squire Softhead, that ran away with a trick to save his honour.


I see your boy has cudgeled him to some purpose.


Save you Doctor, a word in private, can you keep a secret?


'Tis the first point of my Profession, secrecy.


Dispatch that fellow out of the way quickly then.


He is my Apothecary, and as much to be trusted as I am: But how came your face
so?


Honourably of my side, you must know I have fought a Duel with a damned
coward, a raskal called Leander.


Now must I be abused, and dare not take notice on it: But, Sir, is it possible
Leander should be such a coward?


Do you know him, Sir?


Very well, Sir.


Is he your friend, Sir? if he be, I am sorry I said so of him, Sir; but if he
be not your friend, he is a coward, and I'll justify it, and a raskal, and I'll
maintain it; yet, Sir, if you have the least relation to him, I shall be very
ready to eat my words, rather than disoblige you.


Sir, he is neither relation nor friend of mine, neither care I a farthing for
him, Sir.


Then he's the son of a whore, and I'll tell you how he served me: just when we
were stripped, and ready to go to it, the base raskal hired my boy it seems to
run away with my sword.


That was base indeed.


I cannot believe so unworthy a thing of him.


Rather than offend any man; I'll say I hired my boy my self to run away with my
sword, I can be no civiler, Sir.


Rather than so, I will believe Leander did it, Sir.


Sir, I thank you heartily, and I will justify all that Mandevil or Coriat
writ for your sake, so you believe it your self, Sir.


But how was the Duel, if the boy ran away with your sword?


Why, I ran after him, got my sword, and came honourably to him again, and I
drive him honourably round the field; and all that while his boy got behind me
dishonourably, and cudgeled me damnably, that I am ashamed it should be known.


Nay, Sir, it shall never be known for us, but if the boy cudgeled you behind,
how came you thus black and blew before?


Why, he beat my head and shoulders so divelishly, that it came quite through
to the other side, that my face is all over Coventrey blew: therefore good
Doctor, report I am your patient and desperately wounded, and there's twenty
pound, and I'll have a Red Scarf with a great fringe about my arm, methinks that
looks valiantly; and here is a sword has been up to the hilts in blood; and if
you hear Leander be killed, not a word who did it on your lives.


Sir, to tell you true, we came just now from dressing of Leanders wounds; and
to be plain with you, if you did it, your life is in danger; for he cannot live
above two dressings more.


Therefore, if you would escape hanging, flee your Country.


Heart of a Horse, I did neither wound him, nor kill him.


No, did you not confess just now you did? besides your sword is all bloody up
to the hilts, which will hang you, if there were no other witness in the world,


Heart of a horse, I shall be hanged with a trick of my own.


I'll get money out of him; Sir, we can do less than send for a Constable and
apprehend you.


O dear Doctor, thou wilt not be such a raskal, I hope.


I'll be revenged of you for beating of me into a Doctor, when I had a mind to
conceal my parts: therefore get me a Constable.


I am disgraced, and dishonoured, if you do, and that's all you can do to take
away the reputation of a poor Squire; for I did not kill Leander.


Why, how came your sword so bloody?


If you must needs know, 'twas with killing of a sheep, Sir.


A sheep? why, are you not ashamed, as you are a Squire to own that?


There's no shame in it, Sir; for 'twas a Ram-sheep, Sir, and he assaulted me;
and in my own defence, I killed him honourably and fairly.


This excuse will not serve, for Leander is dying, and we must apprehend you.


Since you are such a raskal, I'll give you a hundred pound to conceal all that
I have said.


Tell us the whole truth of your Duel, and give me two hundred pound, as you
did for the last man you killed in Ploto's great year.


A pox of your Plato, and your two hundred pound: but since there's no remedy,
you shall have it, Sir.


And withal tell us the truth of your Duel, and we will swear to be true to you.


Why then by the heart of a horse we fought not one stroke, but my boy ran away
with my sword, as I contrived it, and I seemed to run after him to fetch it
again, and so ran quite out of the field. And this is the truth by the heart of
a horse; then Leanders boy ran after me, and cudgeled me, as you see, Coventrey
wise.


Well, Sir, go into my chamber, and send for your money, and I'll release you,
and keep your counsel faithfully.


To give a Physician two hundred pounds, and not so much as one clap cured for
it; O dishonour to true Squirehood for ever more.


Slid Pothecary, here is my wife, I'm


I understand you very well.


Save your worship.


Would you speak with any body here woman?


Pray tell his Doctorships worship, that here's his wife.


Alas poor woman, his worship has never a wife.


Who told you so? were you by when his worship was unmarried again? I must and
will make bold to speak to him. Good Doctor dog-bolt, how long have you been
worshipful?


Feel her pulse, feel her pulse Pothecary.


I'll take you over the face, if you feel any thing about me, you beastly
fellow.


Prithee be gone, woman; for I assure thee Doctor Drench has never a wife.


But there is a horse Doctor Drench a Farrier that has a wife.


I, the Farrier Drench may have a wife; but I assure thee Doctor Drench has
none, therefore be gone woman.


Are you too proud to own your wife, you ungrateful raskal? who made you a
Doctor, but my invention and a good cudgel? I'll spoil your trade of physic,
sirrah.


Now is your time Pothecary to be rid of her.


'Tis enough: But Doctor do you hear the strange news that's abroad?


O lack, what news is it, I beseech you, good Sir?


I do not speak to thee woman.


Well, what is it?


It seems there is an Edict made, and it goes very hard with poor women, I
confess,


Now good Sir, as ever you came of a woman, tell me quickly what it is.


I will not tell my tale to the woman.


Then tell me, I pray you.


Why, Sir, there is a new Edict made, that no woman upon pain of death, under
such a degree or quality, in all presume to have a gallant, or any man but her
own husband.


And all this upon pain of death? Slife, who would not be a rebel at this rate?


You say very true; and upon this hard usage, there are twenty thousand women
in arms, and have made a formal Remonstrance, wherein they declare for the
privilege of the She-subject, and will live and die for the free-born women of
England.


Ten thousand blessings upon them; where are they, I beseech you, Sir.


They are drawn up upon Hounslow-heath, and are now marching to besiege Winsor
Castle.


Though I sell all I have, and undo my children, I'll have a Regiment whatsoever
it cost me.


I saw the Cadge stand open by the Stocks, throw this purse into it, and say I
sent it; and when she is in, lock the door, and bid the boys whoot at her, and
call her baud, and then I am revenged for her beating she procured me.


I find the Doctor has a mind to gallant me, he has such a winning way with
him, he swears 'tis a thousand pities such a raskal as my husband should ever
enjoy me, and such like fine terms, that 'tis hard I swear to withstand him:
But yet ones honesty; why, I confess honesty's a fine thing to read of in a
Romance: But I do not find the practice of it so followed, as to make it a
fashion; therefore if Doctor's love hold, I shall, I shall, I cannot help it
husband, I shall.


Nurse, how happy am I to meet with thee alone? a rogue, methinks I could even
run through thee now.


I, so ye all say; but I am sure I could never see it yet.


Now good Nurse grant me my suit.


Truly Doctor so I would, if it were not for my honesty.


Thou fool, there is no such thing as honesty: the word honesty is a mere
bugbear that jealous husbands invented to keep women in awe with, as raw-head
and bloody bones frights children, that's all i'faith.


But is it possible that should be true, Doctor?


Nurse, it is so true, that I'll show thee a reverend book, called St. Aratines,
where you shall be convinced, there's no such thing as honesty.


Say you so; nay then, dear Doctor, give me physic. Here comes my husband,
what woman's that with him?


'Tis a Patient of mine that has twenty diseases besides a Neapoliton pox.


What disease is that Doctor?


'Tis a new fashioned disease came fresh with the last Packet.


Have we not old fashioned diseases enough of our own, but we must send for new
ones over?


What a villain is this Doctor? first not to own his wife, next with a trick to
trapan you into the Cadge; then make the boys throw dirt at you, and call you
baud: But why do you weep?


To think that ever I should live to be called baud; if he had called me whore,
'twould never have vexed me; but to be called baud, is to be thought an old
woman unworthy of copulation.


Troth malicious people may call you baud, but I protest I think you far worthy
to be called whore; therefore pray you wipe your eyes.


I thank you for your good opinion howsoever.


If it please you, Madam, I'll make my opinion good.


Here is a rogue to be jealous of his wife, and yet play the whore-master
himself.


Look you, there's Doctor Devil for you that will not own his wife.


And my wife with him, take no notice of them, I believe he has made me a
Cuckold of all colours, of the red, and the green, the yellow, and the blew
bed: A pox on him, faith be revenged, and make his caps too little for him.


By my gallant so I would, if it were not for my honour.


Honour? I'll not come near your honour, that's an airy thing, that lies in the
crown of your head, my request lies lower quite another way.


Look, look, how familiar Doctor dog is yonder; O for revenge.


A pox on him, I'm not able to endure this, go you in there: Are you in your
closet, Sir? if you be,


We had need be careful of our credits, Doctor; for the world is grown so base,
that if they should but see a man and a woman in bed together, they would swear
they were nought straight.


Fear nothing Nurse.


Look, look, look, I am no Cuckold to speak on.


Is it so; what a false quean is this to use me thus?


Use you thus, Sir? 'tis use me thus, with your favour; Slid, why are you
concerned? 'tis I am the Cuckold, Sir.


Slid Doctor, my Master sees us kissing, I am utterly undone.


Feign your self in a sound, and I'll seem to rub you to fetch you to life
again: Alak, help, help, who's within there, help. O, are you there, Sir? good
Sir, run for a glass of cold water, I have much ado to keep life in her.


I, with all my heart, and glad 'tis no worse.


Why the Devil must he fetch water? why could he not have sent me, I find I
shall be the staple Cuckold for all the Kingdom.


What a raskal art thou to fetch my Master?


O you counterfeit quean, you are not in a sound then.


No, you jealous rogue, but I'll counterfeit again as soon as my Master comes,
and he shall believe it too.


Here he comes, fall into your sound again quick.


Here, here, alack poor Nurse, she does use to have fits.


I, a pox on her, more than ever her mother had; Sir, give her no water, she
counterfeits, she spoke as sensibly since you went as ever she did; deny it
Doctor if you can.


What an uncharitable villain art thou to forge such a wicked lie? this rogue
is made sure.


Come you wicked knave, and help to lead her to her bed, you'll never leave your
jealousy.


Oh, oh, oh, she'll pull my ear off, Sir.


That's a sign of a strong fit, Sir, but lay her upon her bed, and she'll
recover. Slid, Sir, I was never so surprised in my life; I was consulting with
Nurse about your daughters health, and all of the sudden she fell into my arms
in a sound: But now for your daughter, Sir.


Dispatch and bring my Daughter hither with all care.


And good Sirs, bid my Apothecary come in.


What Apothecary is it, Sir? cannot you cure her without an Apothecary?


No, Sir; you speak as if you were jealous.


Not jealous, Sir, but I love to know who comes in my house.


Neither Apothecary nor Doctor shall trouble you; so fare you well, and cure
your daughter your self, Sir.


Nay sweet Doctor, leave me not in this distress.


Be not jealous then.


Be not angry then. Hey ho, Doctor, my heart misgives me that my child will be
stolen.


I'll warrant you, whilst I am in your house. He smokes us I doubt.


I thank you, Sir; is this your Apothecary?


Yes, Sir.


What the reason may be, I know not, but my heart rises at him, though I never
saw him before.


You make your life miserable with foolish phantasms: Pray, Sir, bid him
welcome.


Why you're welcome, Sir; but to tell you truly, I like you not.


If you please, I'll be gone, Sir. Do you think he has no hint of our design?


No, no: Nay, Sir, if he go, I'll go with him.


Nay, I beseech you both stay, for I doubt my child is dying. O here she comes,
good Sir, look upon her.


Apothecary, feel her pulse.


Is not that your office, Sir?


Yet again? why, he is the most learned man in Europe, and to my shame I find,
I cannot cure her without him; go, go, feel her pulse.


I fear my over joy will discover me.


Mean time I'll tell you, Sir; 'tis a great question amongst we learned of
Padua, whether men or women be hardest to cure; some are of one opinion, some
another; mean time there be potent Arguments on either side.


He is very long feeling her pulse methinks.


Pray you mind you me, Sir; first we hold, that women being naturally more cold
than men, and cold being an enemy to life, it follows their cure must needs be
more difficult and dangerous.


How many pulses has she to feel that he is thus long about it?


You do not mark me, Sir; I do not love to be slighted when I'm in argument.


I do mark you, Sir.


Then I say 'tis generally held at Padua, that women, when they take physic,
ought to have their potions much more stronger than men, because physic cannot
work so well upon cold and phlegmatic bodies, as upon hot and dry: You do not
hear me, Sir.


They are very close together methinks.


A sign he minds his business: and this was the opinion of the great Cham of
Tartar's chief Physician, that was fellow-student with me at Padua.


A pox of your great Cham, I must know why he dwells thus long upon her pulse;
have you conveyed no Letters to her, Sir?


What an uncivil question's that? Come Pothecary, let your Daughter die, and
you perish; the world shall never make me visit her again.


Dear Doctor, do not leave me in this extremity. Mr. Pothecary, will you be my
overthrow too?


I'll do no man service that affronts me thus.


Good Gentlemen bear with an old mans passion: good Mr. Apothecary go to my
child again.


No, not I, Sir, I shall but convey Letters.


Nay then you're cruel, I beseech your pardons Gentlemen.


Well Sir, we see it is your weakness, and we pass it over; go to your Daughter
whilst we consult a little: we must press to have her to your house to cure
her.


Good, and if he refuses that, I'll persuade her to counterfeit madness; I have
a design in it.


And that she may appear the more mad, let her tear all her clothes off; for a
mad woman naked has such antic temptations.


I should be loath any man should see her naked but my self, Doctor.


Well, Gentlemen, what have you concluded of?


Sir, he must feel if he can discover of what side her heart lies: I'll keep him
in discourse the mean while.


Must he feel her heart, Doctor? still it runs in my mind, this Apothecary will
do me a mischief: nay, be not angry.


Nay, I forgive you, I see an old man's twice a child, pray you walk into the
next room, I must talk in private with you.


I should sound, if I should leave my child with the Apothecary.


Let's talk here then, for look you, Sir.


I'll observe all your directions; for if he will not let me go to your house,
he shall find me mad enough, doubt not.


You see how jealous he is, therefore we have no other hopes of enjoyment left
but by this means.


I'll do my part, fear not.


Sure he feels something more than her heart all this while.


If there be occasion, we must stick at nothing.


Why, Sir, according to your opinion, I have found her heart on her right-side.


Most wonderful! pray you what may be the reason, Gentlemen?


Love is certainly the cause on it, and for her cure, this is no place of
convenience, therefore she must be removed to my house.


To thy house thou wicked fellow? I told thee at my first sight of thee, I did
not like thee.


But there is all things ready that cannot be removed hither, Sir; my Tubs, my
Baths, and my Sweating-house.


I like it not, it is a plot to steal my child, I doubt so: Nay, be not angry,
Gentlemen, I do but doubt so.


You would make a man forswear doing you any service.


I crave your pardons once more; is there no art left to make her speak?


Yes, I could make her speak presently, but I doubt it will be but wildly, Sir,
for love has shook her brain exceedingly.


Let me have the comfort to hear her speak of any fashion, good Mr. Doctor.


You shall, Sir; pray you Madam chaw that in your mouth: Sir, you shall see the
effects of it straight: before you speak, put out your tongue, and wag it two
or three times.


Let me alone, I'll do any thing to purchase thee my dear Leander.


Why does he embrace her so? I do not like it, Sir.


'Tis something in order to her cure: I think you're mad, Sir; you'll spoil all,
he is but shaking her heart right.


I'm sure he shakes mine every time he touches her.


A, a, a, a, a.


O bless my child.


Be comforted, Sir, for now it works.


A, a, a, a, a.


Is this your working? the Devil work, my child is undone.


Nay, now her tongue wags, she'll not be long ere she speak, fear not.


Who are all you, Sirs?


She speaks, she speaks, make me thankful to you for it, worthy Mr. Doctor and
Apothecary.


What art thou? whence came thou? and whither would thou?


O me, I fear my child's distracted.


I told you, Sir, he sense was a little shaken.


Pray you, is not that the Devil in black, Sir?


No, I'm but a Doctor yet Madam, I shall not take my degree of Devil this seven
years.


Yet if you please Madam, he shall commence Devil presently.


Then good Doctor Devil, for you shall lose none of your titles here, Sir, help
me to tear that beard of that old wrinkled weather-beaten tanned old face.


I am thy father, child.


I hope thou art not, I'd rather be a bastard than have thy ill nature in me.


I am thy old father, child.


I hate any thing that's old.


Wilt thou break thy old fathers heart?


Nay, that that's more precious to me than my father, which is my dear
looking-glass, I would break that, if it were old; for sure the Devil invented
old people on purpose to cross young lovers; they could never have been so
cruel else to poor Leander.


My child is undone, she weeps for Leander.


Yes, and will weep again and again for Leander: Leander, Leander, Leander, why
you do not love Leander; for which sin, good Doctor Divel take him into your
Territories, and let him fall desperately in love with a young She-devil, and
let that She-devil have a cross father, that will not let them come together,
and then he'll feel the torment his poor child endures.


Doctor, this has too much sense and satire in it to be madness.


O, Sir, 'tis madness to a high degree, and dangerous madness too.


You look like Leander, Sir, you are so young and handsome, sure you are
Leander.


Yes, Madam, I am so.


No, no, no Pothecary, do not say so I charge you what does he mean by holding
up his finger so impudently?


He makes signs to let you know he must say as she says to please her; for in
Padua we deal with mad folks like those that catch Dottrils; when they stretch
out a wing, we must stretch out an arm; if they stretch out a leg, you must do
so too: else if we should cross her, she may fall into a raging fit, and tear
us all to pieces.


O most accursed madness!


Why would you absent your self so long Leander? why lay you not your rosie
cheek to mine, and throw your arms with sweet embraces about your lover: I
doubt you're false Leander.


Madam, may the earth open as I kneel, and make me an example of falsehood, if
any unconstant thought be in me.


Why villain, Pothecary, talk no more so to her: why the Devil does he kneel?
he speaks as feelingly, as if he were concerned.


Sir, there is no other way on earth to cure her but this.


The remedy is worse than the disease; come from her Pothecary, I told thee at
first I did not like thee, I have a natural aversion against thee; confess, for
I know thou art to do me a mischief: why were you so concerned to kneel and
make such protestations.


By my life, Sir, I did it to please and to satisfy her, for she doubted I was
false, and I swore I was not: alas, Sir, we must take these courses to recover
her by saying as she says; for physic has the least hand in curing madness, I
have cured twenty mad people this way.


Well, Sir, you have a little satisfied me, and with reason too; but yet there
is something within me that hates thee heartily.


Well, Sir, when I have cured your daughter, I hope you'll have a better opinion
of me.


I may of your Art, but never of you, I doubt; for thy conscience knows thou
art to cozen me; nay, do not tell the Doctor so.


Troth Lady, you are so fine a mad woman, that 'tis a thousand pities you
should ever come to your self again; faith for a frolic take me by the ears,
and lead me round the room.


If you will have it so Doctor, but I shall make you repent it: I have him, I
have him; and now I'll tear him all to pieces.


O save the Doctor, save the Doctor.


Sweet Lady spare the Doctor, I'm your friend Leander, Madam.


I will do any thing for Leander; but you must stay and live with me then.


You see, Sir, how very calm the very name Leander has made her: troth, Sir, I
doubt you must be forced to send for Leander.


I doubt we cannot cure her without him.


She shall die mad first, and I'll die with her; this is a plot, carry my child
to her chamber; get out of my house you Villains.


You shall lay your hands under our feet before we come under your unworthy
roof again.


Let me go with Leander, Leander, Leander.


You have made a fine hand to make my Mistress thus mad; I'll weary you out of
your life for this.


You are very bold with your Master, Nurse.


There's an English Proverb says, If you lie with your Maid, she'll take a
stool and sit down by her Master.


Well, well, I say again, she shall never marry but the Squire.


She shall never marry your fool Softhead,
She shall first merchandise her Maiden-head.

NO dear cousin, I was not dumb, nor am I mad, I have trusted you with my love,
and in that my life.


Dear Cousin, doubt me not; when I am false to you, may I miscarry in my own
Amours: but pray you Couz, how came you by this lover Leander? for none of the
house knows him.


Truly Couz I never saw him but at Church.


A very good place to make love in.


Indeed, I have found it so, the first time I saw him was six Pews from me, the
next time he sate within two, and there he warmed my heart: the next after he
sate in the same Pew with me; and 'twas so ordered betwixt him and the
Pew-keeper, that none sate with us, and there we loved, and there we plighted
troth.


I find a Pew-keeper is a worthy friend to love, and for sixpence you may sit
with whom you please, and court whom you please in the Church: It was handsomely
contrived of your Lover though, to come with the Doctor as his Apothecary; but
what made him persuade you to counterfeit madness?


He has a design in it but had not time to tell me; my father has turned the
Doctor off you see, therefore Couz you must go to him.


He'll find some stratagem to see you again, fear not; if not, I'll go to him:
but come Couz, now lets laugh at the Duel, that the Squires foot-boy told us of
his Master.


I, he found if safer killing of a sheep than Leander.


No doubt on it: your father's bringing of him in to woo you again; fall to your
madness, and let me alone to dispose of the Squire; I'll have him drawn up with
an Engine, and there he shall hang in the Air in a Cardle till you're married, or
run away: Here they come, let us withdraw a little.


But how came your face thus black and blew, and thus black patched? I never
saw a Ladies face thus furnished.


They may be thus furnished when they please; but they shall never come so
honourably by their black patches as I have done.


Pray you how came you by them?


Do you take these for patches? O dull old age! these are badges, badges of
honour: look you my sword is glazed with honour too; but you shall never know
how, it has sustained me two hundred pounds already confessing.


I know it already, Sir; but Squire, I fear you did not court my Daughter
handsomely; what said you when you wooed her?


I wooed her with all the fashionable questions of the Town; I asked her if she
could come a seven, and she laughed at me; then I asked her if she would come the
caster, and I'd cover her: no man could say fairer to his Mistress I think;
then I asked her if she could drink Burgundy, and seal Bonds, pay the price of a
Chine of Beef, for a dish of French Trotters; and that's all I said to her.


I would thou had more wit, or I thy precious Acr^s. Who's there?


Sir?


Bid them bring in my Daughter, if she be awake: I hope she may take you for
Leander; for she is now out of her dumbness, and is fallen stark mad.


How, can she speak? and is she mad? Heart of a horse, I'll be mad with her for
a hundred pound: O I do so love to be mad; and will she be drunk too?


Drunk you bruit you? no.


Why, how can she be mad then? I cannot be mad till I'm drunk, for my life; but
I'll try what I can do.


But be sure you humour her, and say every thing as she says.


Let me alone, here she comes: Slid how delicately she stares.


What's that with the pye-bauld face? how came thou so distracted, thou
errand Knight?


For thy sweet sake, thou devilish damsel.


Thou art as mad as I am.


I am stark mad, for my mother was born in March: therefore let us be married.


I would not be so mad for all the world.


And when we are married, we will out-do the Great Mogul for new fashions; instead
of six Flaunders Mares, our Coach shall be drawn with six Centaurs.


Centaurs! in the name of madness what are them?


A Centaur is a horse born with a Postilian on's back.


And shall all the Foot-men ride behind the Coach?


Yes, of the backs of one another, like March Frogs in a Ditch; and there they
shall spawn young Foot-boys.


And at the Boot of your Coach must be running an Orang-wench, presenting your
Lady a sweet Lemon with a love-Letter in it.


Right, and instead of Points and gilded Nails, our Coach shall be trimmed
round with Cartridges.


And they shall be filled with Powder and Shot to defend us.


No, each Cartridge shall have a little tine Page in it, with his head peeping
out like Hictius doctius.


Bi'rlady, I think they are both mad.


What wonders would I do for my true love.


There is a verse of a Song to that purpose, I'll sing it: What would thou do
for thy true love, if she for help should call?


Why, I would fight with a great Giant, though he were never so tall.


Thou fight with a Giant? he must be in sheep-skin then.


Heart of a horse, how came she by that?


Go bid my Conjurer come.


Here, Madam.


Let me see Elisium quickly, and tell me truly what they do there.


Madam, it is so little, and so like what's done in this world, that it is not
worth your knowing; but since you command I must obey; let idle Poets speak
their fancies of Elisium, but I that have been there must speak the truth; in
short, Madam, all the women do nothing but sing, John come kiss me now; and
then the men give 'em a green Gown upon the flowery banks, and there they commit
love together.


Do they not dance in Elisium?


Yes Madam, as you shall see; every one keep their stand. Squire, stand you
here.


Must I see the Devil?


Yes.


Would I were devilish drunk then.


Why would you be drunk, Squire?


Because they say when I'm drunk the Devil would not keep me company.


You must know my Devil scorns to be commanded with canting mountebank words,
he is a Sea-faring kind of Divel, that comes when his boson whistles; stand
fast.


Save the Squire, Save the Squire.


Tell my Master all the lies you can invent of him; for I know women are good
at sudden invention.


Yes, I Could lie sufficiently to do his work; that is, I can lie my part, if
you can swear yours.


If you do not second your lying with swearing, we shall do no good on it.


Nay, by my troth if I lie, I expect you should swear to it; 'tis your revenge
as well as mine, and you shall bear your part.


Troth, I am not very good at swearing.


Then do you lie, and I'll swear; take your choice, for 'tis all one to me.


Nay, we must second one another both with swearing and lying, as occasion
serves.


That I had but some witness of this Villainy.


I'll warrant you, we will spoil his being a Doctor, i'faith.


You shall not, if I can help it.


I'll tell your Master first, he is a drunken Farrier, and no Doctor, a villain
not to own his wife.


How, is this his wife? I dare say 'tis for my sweet sake he does not own her:
poor dear Doctor!


I'll be revenged to the full.


So will I till I am full.


I'll give you my wives new Gown, and take your revenge my way.


O rogue, a Cuckold to the ninth degree.


Sure a new Gown, and a new Gallant are two sweet things, but revenge is
sweeter and dearer to me than my Children; therefore let us first go to your
Master.


But first, let us consider, and lay our story ready.


I'll to the Doctor and tell him all this: what a slave is this husband of mine?
O rogue that cannot be content to be a Cuckold, but he must be a whore-master
too; thou shalt have more than an ordinary head, for that at Amboes shall
appear but a Pricket to thee, for thou shalt be a monstrous. Cuckold, if man or
beast can make thee one.


I doubt Doctor we shall never win the old mans favour again.


Troth, I think you were never in it, for his blood rose at the very first sight
of you.


He finds by instinct the mischief I'm to do him.


Well, 'tis now come in my head to gain his opinion again.


O my dear Doctor, how!


Why thus; you shall write a Love-Letter to your Mistress, as you are Leander,
and then deliver it to the old man, as you're my Apothecary, I'll go with you
too.


What advantage will that be?


We will tell him, that Leander hearing that we gave his Mistress physic, offered
us a lusty sum to convey a Letter to her; and finding how heartily he resolves
against Leander, we thought fit to show our selves honest by delivering him the
Letter.


In troth this may clear the jealousy he had of us, and bring us in again.


If this will not, we must find some other trick; what if I continued love to
Nurse? she would be very instrumental, if we had so little wit as to trust her.


It would argue very little wit indeed; but come let us about the Letter. Slid,
here comes Nurse.


O, Mr. Doctor, I must tell you, you're a man of little conscience to make such
true love to me, as you have done, and have a wife as you have.


Truly Nurse I had thought you had had more honesty than to suffer me to make
such love to you, and have a husband as you have.


But Doctor I came to tell you, that the woman that my Cuckold makes love to,
swears she is your wife, and says you're no Doctor, but a Farrier, and a
drunkard, and a beggar, and they are just now going to my Master to tell him so;
nay, they are resolved to lie and swear all things they can invent against you.


There is no great invention in so much truth: a pox on 'em, what shall we do?
all our designs are quite spoiled.


I am undone to all eternity.


Nay, nay, 'tis I am undone, for I must turn Farrier again; Nurse I'll come to
you presently.


I'm utterly destroyed, if I get not off o'this.


I have it already, run you to Bedlam, and give two of the whippers a piece,
and bring them hither, and tell them they own my wife for a mad woman, and
carry her to Bedlam, and force her with all violence, and keep her there till
further orders.


I'll instruct them farther, as they come along.


Do so, make haste, and fly like Gun-shot. Now Nurse, this was kindly done
indeed to tell me this Nurse; but be not troubled, for she is not my wife, but
a mad woman broke out of Bedlam; and now I am resolved to marry thee Nurse, for
I see thou love me truly.


I, but Doctor, you know I've a Husband.


Hang him, I were a pitiful Doctor to suffer any body to live that I have
occasion to have dead.


If it could be done with a safe conscience.


Why, if it be safely done, it's done with a safe conscience; I see you're a
fool and knows nothing.


You Learned men know best, I leave all to you.


Thou shalt lead the sweetest live Nurse; first I will get my son and heir my
self Nurse, and then thou shalt have a brave gallant with a fine white Periwig
that cost twenty pound Nurse.


O dear Doctor, how sweetly you express your love to me.


And then your gallant shall carry you abroad, and bring you home of nights: so
well pleased, Nurse!


O my most obliging Doctor!


And then thou shalt throw that gallant off, Nurse, and have one with a brave
brown Periwig, Nurse.


Did ever man show such true love to a woman? let all husbands take example by
this dear Doctor.


And then thou shalt have one with a brave black Periwig, Nurse, so that thou
shalt have Children of all colours in the Rain-bow: but why dost thou weep,
Nurse?


I weep for joy to think what a comfortable life I shall lead with you.


And dare you be true to your young Mistress and Leander, and help to bring
them together, Nurse?


I deserve to starve for a true lover else.


But then you must be true to your Master, and tell him when they are together;
and then you oblige both parties, you know.


By my troth, and so I shall; and I'll be sure to follow your directions.


I dare swear thou would: but Nurse, I do but jest, I would not wrong the old
Gentleman for the whole earth.


Nor I for all the world.


But Nurse, go tell your Master that the woman is a mad woman of Bedlam; you
may swear you have seen her there, for 'tis very true, Nurse.


I will do it truly Doctor; but when shall our happy day of marriage be,
Doctor?


As soon as you can persuade your husband to take physic.


Let me alone for that. O dear Doctor, this fine white Periwig does so run in
my head.


And does not the brown one do so too?


Yes, by my troth, and the black one eke also.


I dare not trust this Jade for all this; yet for little things, which may be
helps to the main, I shall venture to try her in.


Mr. Doctor, I have brought you a couple of Officers for your turn, they both
understand, and are ready to serve you for your money.


But have you given them instructions?


O, Sir, we have it throghly.


You must be confident, for you'll find a damned scold of her.


O, Sir, we that can tame mad folks, can tame a scold, I warrant you.


And though the woman be not mad, we can make her mad, if you please.


Prithee how?


With these Engines: why people are not so mad when they come to Bedlam, as
they are when they are in it, I assure you.


How comes that I prithee?


Do you think that the food of bread and water, to lie naked in foul straw, and
to be whipped twice a day, will (...) make any body mad? I'll warrant you faith.


But do you give them no physic?


Something they have, but a whip is the main ingredient; for we whip' em out of
a frenzy into stark madness, and then whip'em on till they come round to their
wits again.


That plainly shows the circulation of the blood; and this may be cited a
consultation.


Well, Sir, you see they know their work, therefore about it, and there is more
money to encourage you.


You shall hear of her in Bedlam, I'll warrant you.


Now let's about our Letter with all speed.


Come on, and if all fail, we will fetch your Mistress to Bedlam; for she is
pretty well entered into madness already.


No, then people will say, If she had not been mad, she'd never been in love
with me; yet any where out of her fathers house does it.


Well, if our other designs fail, faith have at that.


Thou wretched old man, first to make thy Daughter mad, and then to keep her
in it with thy cruelty, when your own conscience knows a husband would recover
her.


But now my mind is altered; for I'm resolved, let her perish, she shall never
marry whilst I live.


At your peril be it, for I'll take my oath before a Judge that a husband would
bring her to her wits again.


I renounce and disclaim her.


A husband I tell you: Second me Nurse.


I'm resolved I'll hear of no husband.


I tell you once again a husband.


And I tell you moreover and above a husband.


And I tell you both under and over, and over and under a husband.


A husband, a husband, a husband.


I'll stop my ears, I'll hear no more of her.


But in troth Uncle, consider soberly her sad condition, she is young, and her
blood gallops in her veins, and requires the satisfaction of a Gentleman, I
prescribe her nothing but what I would take my self.


Alack she might take it if she were a dying.


Cannot the comforts of a Father recover her.


Nor of a mother neither, if her heart be set the other way.


Then let her dye mad, for I'll hear of no such thing as husband.


With all my heart, I wish she would marry thy Gardiner.


I, that she might taste of his Apricots: Nay, nay, nay, you shall hear us
out, for look you Master, a husband is such a thing.


I truly Uncle, a husband is such a thing.


What a thing is a husband?


Why, a thing a young woman cannot be without.


No, nor an old woman neither.


A husband is a thing that's good for many things.


A husband is good to father his wives children.


Pray you let him be good at getting them first.


No matter, that's a thing may be done without him; I see you are a young woman
and know nothing.


Then a husband is a thing that is a good Cloak for a woman's knavery.


I, if a husband could be brought to do the civil office of an orang-woman, to
fetch and carry, he were worth his weight in gold; I have a husband, my Master
knows, is the untowardest peevish fellow at it.


Away, away, you idle woman.


You mean down right pimping, Nurse, that's a little against the hair methinks
for a husband. Ben. Johnson says, fathers and mothers make the best bawds.


Bawds! your Johnson's an ill bred foul-mouth'd fellow to call them so; besides
he is a fool, for a husband's worth a hundred fathers and mothers for that
office; for then the wife's unstain'd, the world cannot taint her, when the
husband gives her countenance.


But will you consider your daughters madness?


I, he has turned off a worthy Doctor, and his Apothecary that would have cured
her, and now he's jealous of 'em, and will not let 'em come near her.


'Slife, I'll indite you for murder, I'll not see my Cousin cast away thus: send
for this Doctor, I say.


Here is a woman, if it please you, has something to say to you concerning the
Doctor.


I, what is it woman?


I would be loath to have your worship abused; this Doctor, if it please you,
that comes to your house is a very raskal: swear to it now.


I by my feckars-law is he.


Swear up roundly and be hanged; is feckars-law an oath to pass before a Judge?
I say this Doctor is a raskal.


Why, he may be never the worse Doctor for that.


But he is not a Doctor, if it please you.


Why, he may be never the worse raskal for that.


But as I said, he is no Doctor, but a down right Farrier.


A Farrier, bi'rlady a good foundation to raise a Doctor upon; I like him never
the worse.


Besides he is a beggar, and I am his wife, Sir.


If thou be his wife, 'tis an even lay but he's a beggar.


Besides we have had five children, and now he will not own me, Sir.


That confirms him a good Doctor still, I say,


This woman is mad, Sir.


She talks sensibly enough, and I believe her.


I am not mad, Sir, and I tell you he is but a Farrier. Swear and be hanged,
you leave me sweetly in the lurch. I say he can give your daughter a drench, and
shoe her before and behind, and that's all he knows of a Doctor.


By your leave we must make bold with your worship; we have a mad woman broke
out of Bedlam, and we understand she is come into your worships house. O are
you there you mad quean, must we have all this labour to find you with a pox?
I'll scourge you to some purpose i'faith.


What dost thou mean fellow? this is my servant.


You rogue, you villain, you raskal.


Sir, pray you pardon him, this fellow is a stranger, and come newly to his
office, since she stole out of Bedlam; this is the quean, Sir, she knows me
well enough; look, look, look, if it please your worship, how the mad whore
stares at me, now she sees me.


I mad? I in Bedlam, you rogue? 'tis that thing, that Gentlewoman thing that
looks like a mad woman.


'Slight, I'll away and secure my Cousin.


I hope they do not come for my daughter, Nurse.


Nay, nay, nay, come you quean, away with her: Why, Sir, we have had this
wretch in Bedlam this dozen years; and sometimes she is so well, that we let
her go about the house, and then she steals out, and 'tis sometimes a week
before we can find her again. Fare you well, Sir; Slid how I'll lash the whore.


This woman being mad, confirms me the Doctor is wronged.


The woman is his wife, and not mad, Sir; and the fellow is no Doctor, but a
Farrier, Sir.


The rogue is jealous of the Doctor, and that makes him say so, as he is of
your worship, when I rise a nights to rub your shins.


I say again, he is a Farrier and no Doctor.


This must be scandal, for I believe he is a learned man. How now? what do you
here, Sir? did not I forbid you my house? Are you a Farrier, Sir?


Are you a changeling, Sir?


Why changeling, fellow?


Why Farrier, fool?


He is wronged sure by his angry confidence.


Who told you I was a Farrier, Sir?


A woman that said she was your wife, and truly I believed it, till two
Officers of Bedlam fetched her away, and said she was a mad woman.


Alack, alack, was it she; why that poor creature has been in Bedlam this many
years; and she has called me husband so long, that of my conscience the poor
wretch believes it to be so indeed.


I, but Mr. Doctor, my husband swears you're a Farrier.


Who, that villain? why thou scandalous rogue, how dare thou wrong me, when
thou hast discovered such strange things to me of thy Master?


I, what has the rogue discovered, Sir?


First, he is damnable jealous of you; next he told me that you got his wives
child, and he desired us of all loves to give you some cantharides to disable
you for getting of children: ask my Apothecary else.


'Tis very true, I assure you.


Sir, they wrong me, and they lye.


But they do not swear and lie, as thou and the mad woman did: Sir, I'll swear
upon a book I over-heard them make the bargain, she was to lie, and he was to
swear to it.


Pothecary, you over-heard that too, did you not?


I did so, Sir, and I'll be deposed upon it: you put me to hard duty Doctor.


You villain out of my house.


Sir, they do me wrong, I never said so.


I know you were always a jealous raskal, and therefore must believe 'em; so
get you out you villain.


Sirrah, will you be content to be a Cuckold yet?


I'll be revenged, for I'll cut thy throat.


I'll be even with thee, for I'll give thee physic.


Pay him his wages, and let him be gone.


Give me my wife then.


No, I mean to physic her, and make her fit for a Gentleman.


I'll have my wife, if there be law.


Thou shalt have her before thy suit is ended; for by that time every body will
have done with her.


Come, sir, I'll pay you your wages, you see what comes of jealousy; could not
you be content to hear, and see, and say nothing?


But, Sir, our business is to present you with this Letter, and withal to
advise you to look strictly to your daughter; for this Leander is contriving
several stratagems to steal her, he offered us I know not what to deliver her
this Letter.


But we knowing it would break your heart, we thought our selves bound in
conscience to bring you the Letter, and withal to advise you to be careful of
your child, for to my knowledge she'll be gone else; so having fairly discharged
our selves, we take our leaves.


O do not go, you are my friends, you have proved your selves my faithful
friends; I beseech you stay and take care once more of my child.


Not for the world, Sir, we came not to that end, Sir, we came to show our
selves honest men, and that being now cleared, our credits shall come no more
in question.


I beseech you leave me not.


Why, your passion will spoil all our practice; for should it be noys'd abroad,
that a Doctor of physic carries letters betwixt party and party, 'twere enough
to undo us all.


Good Gentlemen, I have received comfort by your fidelity, take it not from me
again by your obstinacy; I once more beseech you to take the care of my child
upon you.


Alack, Sir, do not weep, we will do any thing to serve you, but our credits are
so precious to us.


Good men, I'll never distrust you more, you have showed such worth in the
discovery of this Letter, that I weep for joy to think I have found such
faithful friends.


In troth my tender Nature melts too, see, see, my poor Apothecary weeps too.


Dost thou cry too, Nurse? alack poor woman.


How can I choose but cry, to see my Master weep?


I thought you had cried to part with your husband, Nurse.


Your own conscience knows I do not love him so well: Pray you good Master wipe
your eyes.


Good Doctor and Apothecary weep no more.


We cannot hold to see your grief so great, Sir.


Ah, ah, ah, ah, ah, ah:


Let us cry in four parts, and see how 'twill go.


I have heard of singing in four parts, but never of crying in four parts
before: come, Sir, take comfort, for once more we will undertake your child.


We must first repair home, to provide things fit for her, and then without
delay we come: once more we have fastened of him.


Good Gentlemen make haste: Come hither, Nurse, this was kindly done to weep,
Nurse.


I could not choose but weep to see you weep.


In the middle of my sorrows, there is some comfort in thee yet; come kiss me,
Nurse, I hope thou hast been true to me, Nurse, and not suffered that raskal
thy husband to come near thee.


Do you think I'd be so false a wretch, as to let my husband touch me? I wish
the heavy judgement of such a sin may fall on me, if ever he so much as kissed
me, or ever shall whilst your worship lives; for sure you have been a sweet man
in your youth, that is such a comfort to a woman in your old age.


But am I such a comfort to thee indeed, Nurse? do not dissemble with me.


If I do, I wish I may never enter into the -- why am I a woman? but why do you
suspect me so?


Because I thought the Doctor had kissed you, when you were in's arms.


That you should think such a wicked thing of me, when you saw I'd a fit of the
mother.


Weep not Nurse, I am satisfied, come kiss and be friends.


Look, look of that old sinckanter, here's a fine mouldy gallant, an old grey
badger; I must play the rogue with him, though I suffer for it.


Slid your Niece sees you kiss me.


Alack, I am ashamed for ever then: good Nurse sound as you did when the Doctor
rubbed you.


Do you think I can counterfeit sounding? besides do you think you are able to
rub me as the Doctor did?


O wo is me, and wo unto us all, O this Uncle, this wicked Uncle.


Alack, what's the matter?


O cruel destiny! O fatal fortune!


Why, Niece Nibby, what's the matter?


That ever I should live to see this day.


O my dear Mrs. Nibby, what's the misfortune?


O where should I find this cursed Uncle of mine?


Here I am Nibby, what's the danger?


You are undone and ruined.


How, undone and ruined? do not delay me.


O your daughter, your daughter you wicked wretch, I am not able to say more
for grief.


Ah, oh, ah, ah.


Tell me quickly what's the matter.


Why, your daughter's grown desperate mad at your unkindness; ran to the window
that stands over the River, and there opening the great casement.


O what did she then?


Why, lifting up her hands and eyes to that good place, where you will never
come Uncle; she loudly cried, Since my father has abandoned me, 'tis time for
me to quit this life of mine.


And so threw her self into the River?


No, it seems she did not like that kind of death.


Why, what then?


Why then she ran like lightning to the Table, where your Pocket-Pistol lay.


And so shot her self with that?


No, it seems there was no powder in the pan, but bitterly sighing and weeping,
at last she ran and desperately threw her self upon her bed, and then growing
paler and paler, by degrees fell into a deadly sound.


And so dyed?


Stay, stay, you're too quick for your daughter; but with much rubbing, tumbling
and tossing her, I brought her to life again; so leaving her at deaths door, I
came to tell you the news.


Where are my servants? run, bid 'em run, I'll have a consultation of Doctors;
and run for Doctor Drench, for he shall join in council with 'em.


I'll to the Doctor and tell him this. I doubt he will not like a consultation
with Physicians.

If he stand this brush, he's made for ever;
Luck if it be thy will just now or never.

LOok you Doctor, this Gentleman is my brother; and, though he be young, a
Minister in orders; I have told him what we designed, and he is to go as my
Apprentice, and carry our feigned physic.


Very good, and can you step out of a Pulpit into an Apothecaries Shop? poison
a friend or two, and steal to your Text again without scruple of conscience?


Sir, I shall go as near the wind as a Dutch Skiper, to serve my brother, but I
hope there is no poison in the case.


No, but there is a little cheat.


Which I hope you may dispense with.


Truly I hope I may to serve my brother.


Or your Sister.


Yes sure, to serve any of my Relations.


Or a friend.


So it be a dear friend.


Or a stranger with a good living to present.


That's a good thing still.


The Doctor's merry, brother: but pray you let me help you off with your
Reverend Weeds, and appear like an Apothecary's Apprentice, or a Disciple of
Paracelsus.


Now Doctor give me leave to be merry with you, I studied physic, and should
have professed it, and an old Doctor gave me some rules for a young Doctor to
observe.


Pray you let's hear them by all means.


First, have always a grave busy face, as if you were still in great care for
some great persons health, though your meditations truly known are only
employed in casting where to eat that day: Secondly, be sure you keep the
Church strictly on Sundays; and in the middle of the Sermon, let your man fetch
you out in great haste, as if 'twere to a Patient; then have your small Agent
to hire forty Porters a day to leave impertinent notes at your house, and let
them knock as if 'twere upon life and death; these things the world takes
notice of, and you're cried up for a man of great practice, and there's your
business done.


Believe me these are good instructions.


Nay, I have more, be sure you ingratiate your self with the Bawds, pretending
to cure the poor Whores for charity, that brings good private work after it.
Strike in with Mid-wives too, that you may be in the council for by-blows, that
secures a Patient during life; and with Apothecaries, and Nurse-keepers go
snips; but above all acquire great impudence, lest you be out of countenance at
your own miscarriages.


I am so well stocked with that, that if ever impudence come to be worshipped as
a Deity, they'll set me upon a pedestal for their god.


But to our business Doctor, you know we persuaded the old man that we must say
and do all things to humour his seeming mad daughter, and by that only way she
is to be recovered.


Right, and the old man believes it too.


Therefore when we are there, you shall hold the father in discourse whilst I
whisper her; and as she and I will manage her madness, my Brother shall marry
us to the old mans face.


By my troth that would be impudently done indeed; yet the old Gentleman has
now so much confidence in us, that we may do any thing.


Therefore pack up your pretended physic, and let us cheerfully about it.


Save you Gentlemen, you are much longed for, my old Master does so talk of the
Doctor, and my young mad Mistress of the Pothecary, that you must come with all
speed; for my Mistress is so stark mad, that my Master has sent for three or
four learned Doctors; and you must make haste, and bring all your Learning with
you; for you must sit in consultation with them.


In consultation with Doctors? 'heart all is spoiled again, and worse than ever
'twas. Tell your Master plainly, Nurse, consultation with Doctors is not my way
of practice; a company of wrangling fellows, they can never agree; besides, he
under-values me to think I am not able to cure her without help: but Nurse, go
into my chamber, and turn over St. Aratines book, till I talk with my
Pothecary.


With all my heart, dear Doctor.


This is the unfortunatest cross that ever befell me.


The Divel hath conspired against you: so farewell for an unlucky wretch, I'll
put on my Apron, and profess Farrier again; and then let the Doctors and the
Divel come, I defy them.


Nay, nay, stay Doctor and let us consider.


Consider? do you think I can support an Argument with able Physicians?


Come, be not dismayed, for we will go, if there were a whole College of
Physicians; I am a Scholar, and a proficient in physic, and those questions
that you cannot answer, put them upon me, and doubt not but we will baffle them
all; therefore we must be wary, and not talk too much of Padua, for ten to one
but some of 'em has been there, and they are strict Galenists, therefore we
must be Chemists: Now you must not call my brother your Apothecary, nor me his
Apprentice, that will not sound like an out-landish Physician, therefore call
him Hurnatio your Operator, and me Stirquilutio his man.


Well boys, you have so encouraged me, that I have just now a trick come into
my head to baffle them all my self.


O brave Doctor! what is't? what is't?


You shall know, but Nurse must be in the plot.


By no means in the earth, she'll betray us all.


Fear nothing, for I've promised to poison her husband, and marry her, and
allow her half a dozen Gallants; and if that will not make her true, I have no
art to gain a woman.


That may go a great way; but


But me no buts; Nurse, Nurse.


Here my dear Doctor.


Nurse, tell your Master that I am resolved to consuit with the Doctors; but
'tis for thy sweet sake I'll swear, Nurse: therefore my dear Nurse, if thou
love mirth, and will be true to me, we will put such a trick upon these learned
Physicians, that we will laugh seven years after it.


Here's my hand and heart, dear Doctor, I'll be true to you.


I believe thee; be sure Nurse, that you be in the room; and when I bid you
fetch your Mistresses water, be sure you go out and bring me your own; and then
mark what work I'll make with your learned Doctors.


Why, this will please me above all things, most hugely, most strangely.


I, but if Nurse should cozen you, and neither bring her Mistresses water nor
her own, she would serve you finely.


I scorn to be so base, Sir, and if you think so, Sir, you may be by when 'tis
made, Sir.


Nay, be not angry Nurse, for my Apothecary, my Operator I should say, is to
give your husband physic when he is to die, and he knows I'm to marry you,
I've told him all; nay, he is as true as steel.


Is he so, Sir? I crave your pardon for my hasty speech: the Doctor reports
you're as true as steel, Sir; and I assure you I honour any Gentleman that has
either truth or steel in him* I shall inform my Master of your coming; and I
assure you, Sir, you shall command my water without fraud or guile.


Let us now consider how to answer these learned Doctors*


That cannot be, for we know not what they will fall upon.


I find I shall betray my self to be a damned Farrier; but however I'll brazen
it out.


Doctor, you must be sure you consent not to consult in private, which they
will desire, because they never agree; besides, urge that the Father, Nurse,
and we may be admitted, it will be a good excuse for your worship not to speak
Latin.


But by the way, you must furnish me with a snip or two of Latin to save my
credit.


That's easily done, but you must be sure to embroil the Doctors first with
some strange questions, to prevent their falling upon you.


Let me alone, I'll do it,

And spite of all their Scruples, Drams and Ounces,
I will confound these learned Doctor Dounces.

Gentlemen, I have made bold to send for you again, and though you could not
help my child when she was dumb, I hope you may now she is mad.


How, is she mad? and does she speak?


Yes, Sir, a famous and a learned man, of great skill, and wonderful knowledge,
gave her something, and in a short time she spake, and fell into raving fits of
madness, and has ever since continued so; and this he told me would be the
effect of what he then did.


This is strange.


Most wonderful! what was it he gave her, Sir?


Nay, that I know not, but I assure you, he said he could make her speak, and
told me her disease would turn to madness, and accordingly it has proved so;
nevertheless, Gentlemen, I desire you to join with this Learned man, and
consider how to perfect her cure.


Why, Sir, you tell us wonders of him; where did he study?


I know not, but he seems to be a great Traveller, for he talked of Tartar Cham,
and of Padua, and Greenland.


Tartar Cham and Green-land? this must be a Mountebank and a cheat.


Upon my credit you will not find him so, for he has seen all Universities, he
is but newly come over, and his name is Doctor Drench.


Drench? why that's a fitter name for a Farrier than a Physician.


Let his name be as strange as it will, he has also strange humours too, for
he'll find out men's ignorance presently.


I think we were best be gone, lest he finds out ours.


Why I, for if he be a Chemist, his opinion and ours must needs differ, and
consequently not agree in consultation.


I am, Sir, of your opinion, for I think it infradignitatem to hold
consultation with Mountebanks.


We know not yet, Sir, what the man is.


If he be a Chemist, Sir, he is eo nomine, a declared enemy to the Galenical
way, to all truth and learning, and a denyer of principles; and therefore not
to be consulted with.


Right, Sir, contra principia negantem non est disputandum; he that replies but
with submission to sic dixit Galenus, is not to be looked on as a Physician.


Pardon me Gentlemen, I have known some Chemical Physicians learned and
rational men; and although not strict adherers to the Galenical Method, proceed
with great reason, and good success, which, I take it, answers all we can say
or do.


I profess I think it as bad as murder to cure out of the methodical way. Oh
what satisfaction 'tis to have a patient dye according to all the Rules of Art.


But sure it should satisfy your conscience better to have them live by Rules.


Come life, come death, to follow Rules is your satisfaction, and Conscience is
no ingredient within the Rules of Physic, Sir.


Sir, the Doctor is come.


'Tis well, 'tis well: Gentlemen, to end this dispute here is a double fee for
each, and pray you consult with him his way, and be civil in it for my sake.


Sir, you and yours here hath prevailed over us.


I profess to serve so worthy and magnificent a person, I would consult with a
Farrier.


A Farrier? nay, for a double fee, we would consult with a Gun-smith.


Here he is, pray you salute him.


We know how to be civil, Sir.


Save you, Sir.


I thank you.


Save you, Sir.


One save you, Sir, is sufficient for all, we Learned men should hate
complement, Verba panca sapiens sapit: was that true Latin, Parson?


Brave! fear nothing: at them with some question.


I shall fall into the Farrier. Well, I find, Gentlemen, you are professed
Doctors of Physic, and are met to consult the health of a distracted Lady;
therefore to the point, and avoid your canting words, that would stick in a
wise mans throat and choke him.


But, Sir, 'tis necessary we deliver our selves in proper and learned phrases,
when we discourse either of Physic or Distempers, In Art artificialiter
loquendum; and withal, Sir, 'tis fit that we of the consultation should
withdraw.


No withdrawing, Sir, 'tis not my way, I love persons concerned should hear and
see what's done, that they may judge who are doers, and who are talkers; and if
you affect the vain-glory of learned phrases, my Operator Hurnatio, and his man
Stirquilutio shall dispute you; for with great pains I have enabled them to
argue in all tongues, because they know I hate the trouble on it my self.


Start a question quickly.


I shall only trouble you with one question or two my self: First, I ask you
whether you know the practice of before behind, behind before?


Before behind, behind before? why, that is something belongs to a horse, a
Farrier or a Blacksmith must answer that question.


I know where you'd be presently, in some sort 'tis true that you say; yet in
Italy both woman and boys have their before behind, behind before, as well as
your horses have here.


Bravely come off Doctor.


I know not well your way of practice, but the cost you put the people to in
that common disease, called the mourning of the Chine, I do abominate you for.


Mourning of the Chine? with your favour, Sir, that is the disease of a Horse,
and the phrase of a Farrier.


And, Sir, I say again, I call it the mourning of the Chine, for the word Pox
is a phrase of ill manners; and therefore I think it proper to call it the Pox
in a Horse, and civil to call it the mourning of the Chine in a man.


You'll have no need of Latin, Doctor.


Look you to that Parson: and I must tell you I shall spoil the benefit you get
by that disease; for I'll advise every man to plant a Guaicum-Tree in his
Orchard, and a Leaf of that at any time will cure infallibly, and that's one of
the secrets I will reveal to the world, to spoil the practice of Mountebanks,
clap Doctors and bill men.


But will that disease be cured with the Leaf of a Guaicum-tree?


I, Sir, as I can order it.


Pray you, Sir, how will you order it?


Why first, Sir, I will make you a mash.


How, Sir, that's a Farriers phrase again, what mean you by a mash, Sir?


Tell 'em, tell 'em Stirquilutio, and let not me be troubled to interpret.


Why, Sir, the Doctor is so much read in the Arabian Physicians, that he often
uses their terms: Masha in the Arabic is what quinta essentia is in the Latin.


Well helped Parson: you wonder at my phrases, and I at your want of Arabic.
Now, Sir, when any man is troubled with the staggers, we do not cut him and
slash him in the forehead as you do your Horses.


Staggers in a man? with your favour, Sir, you have talked all this while liker
a Farrier than a Physician; and I begin to think you are one, Sir.


How shall I get off now?


Yes, Sir, he is a Farrier, and an able Farrier too; for if you be not good
Farriers, and good Surgeons too, you deserve not the name of Doctors.


And pray you come to the point concerning our mad patient.


I, there's the best trial of our judgements, therefore Nurse, run and fetch
your young Mistresses water presently.


I, that the Gentlemen may the better judge what to apply, and I beseech you
Gentlemen agree, that I and my child may find comfort from you.


Sir, you shall be sure of all the aid our Art can show.


And likewise our endeavours, Sir.


But, Sir, amongst all signs of sickness or health, whereby the skilful
Physician is led into the knowledge of the state of the body; two above the
rest are most certain, which are the Pulse and Urin.


I, whereof the Pulse shows the state of the Heart and Arteries, and Urin the
state of the Liver and Veins.


Therefore the question is, whether of these two severally considered, does
give the most certain signification.


Urin, Urin, Urin, which makes me send for her water; still I say, Stirquilutio
give 'em reasons, and let not me be troubled.


Then I say, Montanus de excrementis says.


I say, give them reasons in their own mother tongue.


Then I say, the Urin above the Pulse, gives the most manifest, certain, and
general signification of all diseases, because with the blood it is conveyed
into all parts of the body; and from thence returns back again in the Veins, to
the Liver and Vessels of Urin, and so brings is some note of the state and
disposition of all those parts from whence it comes.


'Tis wonderful that an under-servant to a Doctor should have this learning.


I doubt whether the Master understand so much.


Say you so, Sir, I'll be even with you: Parson, I'll tell that Doctor he is not
well, and whilst I feel his Pulse, convey you this Cow-itch down his neck. Come
hither, Sir, I pray you.


Your pleasure, Sir.


You are not well, Sir.


As ever I was in my life, Sir.


Let me feel your Pulse: you accuse me of Farriers phrases, I've another
Farrier phrase for you; you are not well, you are foundered in your body, and
it will fall upon your shoulders: first, it will begin with a kind of itching,
then into Inflammations and Catarrhs; therefore look to it, be rowel'd be times.


I slight your opinion, Sir.


Well, mark the end on it, Sir.


Gentlemen, my Mistress presents her service to you, and desires you to be
civil to her water, and use it with as much modesty as you may; for I assure
you her Virginwater was never exposed to public view before.


Pray give it the stranger.


By no means, Gentlemen, I must have your opinions first. Nurse, art thou true
to me?


By my little life it's my own water, Doctor.


By my great life I'll marry thee to morrow then: but Nurse, when I wink at you,
you must own the water to be yours.


I'll do it, dear Doctor.


Here is dangerous water, it does not show the three Regents, neither is here
colour, substance, perspicuity, darkness, contents, or smell.


Therefore the Urin being obstructed, must needs fly back upon the parts, as
to the stomach in vomitings, to the belly in Dropsies.


Or to the head in Frensies, here we find plain madness. 'Slife I itch most
terribly, this fellow sure can conjure.


The Cow-itch works, he is at it already.


Come on, let me see the water; hum, ha, here is no madness, nor the least sign
on it: Come hither, Sir; is your daughter married?


No, Sir; why do you ask?


Then I say she is a baggage, she had a chid lately, and counterfeits madness
to keep the knowledge on it from you.


Gentlemen, I beseech you believe not this scandalous Doctor: Sir, I'll have you
punished for this defamation: my daughter had a child you wretch?


Come you're a weak old man. I say again, that she that made this water has had
a child lately, therefore let search be made to find it out.


You will do well to examine it, for 'tis possible it may not be her water; for
Doctors have had such tricks put on 'em ere now: this itching makes me mad.


But they can put no such tricks upon me, for my judgement cannot fail me;
therefore I say look to it, for there's a child in the case.


Call all my servants; where's my daughters women? here must be treachery, and
Nurse you must need know it.


Sir, I do know it indeed, and I crave your pardon.


What has my daughter had a child then?


No, Sir, but you know I have had one.


But the Doctor says, she that made the water has had a child.


The Doctor says very true, for 'tis my water, Sir.


I was sure I could not be deceived.


Are you sure you speak truth, Nurse?


By my little life do I, Mrs. Nibby can witness.


Nurse speaks very true, Sir.


Why did you so bold a thing as this, Nurse?


If you'll have the truth, I did it to find out which would prove the ablest
Doctor, and the stranger it seems is the Doctor of Doctors i'faith.


I believe he is, for ever since he felt my pulse, my back has played the
Divel.


Worthy, Sir, I once more heartily crave your pardon, and must acknowledge you
an able and faithful Gentleman: and Doctors I beseech your leaves to make use
of this worthy stranger, as to the cure of my child.


He must cure me too, for the vengeance has got into my back parts.


Sir, we consent, and think you have made a worthy choice. so we take our
leaves, Sir.


Nay, Gentlemen, I hope you'll stay and see our way of practice; alas we cure
madness with as much ease as, you do fevers, and merely with humoring them.


I believe every word he says.


'Tis well you're convinced. O brave Cow-itch! pray, Sir, let your child be
brought forth that we may dispatch.


Go Nurse prepare her quickly.


She is ready, Sir,


Stirquilutio, go get me a Parsons Cassock.


Why so, Sir? why so?


Because, Sir, you saw in her madness she phansied my Apothecary, my Operator
to be Leander, and was much in love with him.


She was so to my grief, but what then, Sir?


Why then, Sir, if she take him for Leander again, you shall see how finely I'll
fool her into her wits again.


Here she comes.


What is all the world got together? then I hope I shall find Leander amongst
them.


Again Leander? a pox on him, who knows him, or ever saw him?


None of your household, we have only heard well of him, and I believe she never
saw him but at Church.


Like enough, that's one of the ends people go thither for: I'll take warning how
I ever send my child to Church again.


Are you Leander, Sir?


Say I, say I, Doctor.


I am Leander, Madam, at your service, if my back would give me leave.


Thou Leander, Beast? why thou shruggest as if thou were lousy and wanted a
clean shirt: O Doctor Divel have I caught you, where's my Leander? find him, or
I'll tear thee into Air.


Here, here is your Leander, Madam.


O you Divel, would you put a false Leander upon me? find me out the right, or
I'll throw thee head-long to that dismal place prepared for Doctors.


Here, here, Madam, is your right Leander.


I, this is he indeed, now I thank you Doctor: nay, Sir. I'll take a course with
you; why Leander, would you torment me with your absence thus?


It was not my fault, heaven knows, it was your cruel father keep me from you.


Why raskal Apothecary? why say you so, you Villain?


'Tis you are mad: Gentlemen Doctors, you saw how fine and calm she began to be
upon humoring her: 'tis you that keeps her mad, I'll justify it.


Nay, I have done, I have done; but here is something here that will not be
removed.


Nay, Sir, I'll fetter you from running; Doctor, get me a Parson; does none of
these grave men belong to the Clergy?


No, Madam.


Run, run and fetch me one, they are never in the way when they should do good.


Stirquilutio, put on the Parsons Coat quickly: Madam have patience, the Parson
will be here presently.


Why so? why so Doctor? why so?


To bring your child to her self again, ask these Doctors else.


Nay, no doubt they are right, Sir, if you obstruct them not; I must have his
opinion for my disease too.


Look you, here is the Parson, Madam.


O welcome, Sir; nay, not a word out of your Book, but turn to your text of
Matrimony and marry us presently; and pray you let not that old man know we are
married.


No, no, by no means; you must not know old man your daughters to be married.


Nay, nay, nay Doctor, Doctor, no jesting with marriage.


Why are you jealous of my Operator? Alas poor wretch! why, Gentlemen, the man
has a wife and four children.


Has he, and art thou sure of that, Doctor?


Why, Sir, before these Gentlemen, if I speak false, degrade me of the dignity
of a Doctor.


I believe you, and am satisfied, and now I am as light and airy as a boy.


Who will be my father, and give me to Leander? I have a mind to this grave
Gentlemaan; do you refuse me, Sir?


No, no, no, Madam; go and give her, Sir, go: bless us all, you see what a
raging fit she had like to have fallen into.


I, but I do not like, I do not know, I do not like, I do not know what to say
to it.


The Divel's in you, have forgot the fellow's married?


I had forgot, I had forgot, in troth I should laugh to see her thus recovered;
why Gentlemen, is not this a strange way to cure madness?


It is so, Sir; but it seems they have the experience, the practical part, and
truly it seems rational.


Why, Sir, if we can but get her to sleep, in the belief that she is married to
Leander, my life for yours she wakes in the morning in her right senses.


And sure this back will put me into my wrong senses.


Ha, ha, ha, I laugh to think, poor Girl, how she'll be cozened into her wits
again.


Master, as I live, they are married in earnest; I'll be sworn, with the very same
words that I and my husband was.


Let them alone, 'tis all but jest, Nurse; why the Apothecary's married, fool,
and has four children.


'Tis true that he is married, but no four children, Sir; but we will have four
and four to that Girl.


What shall we have but eight Leander?


Fifty, fifty Sons to vie with Priam; besides Girls shall be reckoned but as
by-blows.


Fifty besides Girls? when shall a poor woman get such a husband?


Now, Sir, we both crave your blessing.


Well said Apothecary, thou acts it to the life, i'faith: Gentlemen Doctors
does he not do it well?


I shall do it better yet; Nurse make a Sack-posset, and let's to bed
presently.


No, no, no, no, Nurse, no going to bed, there you over act it Pothecary.


Sir, he is no Apothecary, but real Leander, and my lawful husband; therefore
we must of necessity go to bed, Sir.


Why Doctor, this Girl is stark mad still.


No indeed, she speaks sensibly; what would you have a young woman do but go to
bed when she's is married?


Why Doctor, thou over acts thy part too.


In troth, Sir, this is neither Apothecary, Operator, nor Hurnatio, but very
Leander; neither is this his man Stirquilutio, but his Brother, and a Minister
in orders, who has lawfully made 'em man and wife.


How Villain! did not thou say he was married and had four children, and bid
me degrade thee of the dignity of a Doctor, if it were not so.


I did so, Sir, and therefore I'll degrade my self; there goes the Doctors, and
here's honest Robin Drench the Farrier.


How a Farrier!


Did not I tell you he must be a cheat.


You have found him so, 'tis much that a Doctor wedded to Rules and Method
should be cozened by a Farrier; for you have no disease, 'twas only a little
Cow-itch put down your back.


A pex upon you, and all your cheats.


O this cursed Farrier, this cursed Villain, then you are not mad, Lady?


No, Sir, neither was I mad or dumb, but counterfeited both to cozen the Squire
and you, Sir.


And you, Sir, were Leander, when you brought me the Letter from Leander?


Yes, Sir.


And you told me that Leander would steal my daughter, and gave me good counsel
to look to her?


I did so, Sir.


'Twas good counsel if I could have taken it: that cursed Letter feigned from
Leander cozened me, that got them credit with me, spite of my jealousy: thou
art a pretty fellow, I confess, but the most impudent and audacious Villain, to
marry my Child against my will, and before my face too, Gentlemen.


Do you think I'd have been married but in my Fathers presence? not for all the
world.


'Twas love forced us to make this shift, Sir.


A pox of love, for that's the end on it: did not I tell thee all along that
thou would cozen me?


You did so, Sir, but love can take no warning.


For my revenge, I'll to bed, and fall desperately sick, make my will, and dye,
and leave thee never a groat, that thou and thy issue may starve and perish.


Fear not Leander, when this fit is over, he's to be reconciled, fear not.


Gentlemen Doctors, I hope 'tis no disparagement to you, that a poor Farrier,
by a combination with Nurse, has cured a mad woman.


^ but w^e is my reward for it?


(...) Nurse, if thou wilt accept of a Farrier instead of a Doctor, I'll love
thee still.


A pox on you for me, my heart is so set upon the white Periwig, that I shall
never be my own woman again.


Where is my Master, here is witness enough now, that he is no Doctor, but a
drunken Farrier; these are all his Neighbours, Gentlemen.


I confess I am a Farrier, they all know it too; but can my Neighbours bear
witness you're no Cuckold?


No, but here is witness that I am thy Wife, and that I am not mad.


I'll own that too, thou art my wife, and not mad; nay, more than that, I'll go
home and live with thee.


Well, I'll give you a Pension of fifty pounds a year, for the good service you
did me in your reign of Doctor.


I thank you, Sir: and Jarvis, thou shalt have thy wife again, that thou may
have a foundation for thy jealousy; for I find when thou art not jealous,
you're a dead man.


Save the Squire, save the Squire, save the poor Squire.


Is not that the Squires voice?


Yes, and 'tis high time to let him down now, open, open; come Squire, will you
quit your interest in your Mistress now to be set free?


I, with all my heart, and the Divel take her to boot; I have hung so long
in the Air, that the household Mahome's Tomb, and paid my worship with their
Piss-pots out of the Garret, I thank 'em.


I caused it to be done.


I was joined with her in commission of the member Vessels.


But Squire, since you have lost your Mistress, what think you of marrying the
wild Irish Chamber-maid.


Who, Madam Pogamihone, I'll marry my mothers Sow first.


But Squire, when shall you and I fight another Duel?


Sir, if I were a man that were given to quarrelling, as sometimes they say in
my drink I am; I'd have you know that I am able to beat, and cudgel, half a
dozen such fellows as you are, I and make you creep under the Tables and
Joyntstools, Sir; nay, I could cudgel you under a Candle-stick, Sir; that is,
if I were a man that were given to quarrelling.


I am very happy that you are a man not give to quarrelling.


So you are, Sir; but if I were given to quarrelling, here's a leg that is four
and twenty inches about, that's three inches more than any of the Kings Cables,
Sir; and I'd have you know, Sir; that I am able not only to kick you down
stairs, but kick you up stairs again, Sir; still that is, if my leg were given
to kicking, or I to quarrelling.


Well, Sir, we are all blessed, that your leg of four and twenty inches about is
not given to kicking. Nurse, let the Sack-posset be made: In the interim we will
dance, and have the song of Arthur of Bradley, where Christopher carried the
custard.


And bartle the Beef and the Mustard.


Come my Olinda, let us in and prove
The sweet Rewards, due to our vertu's Love.

I, I, to bed, you now need fear no Proctor,
But thank your Farrier cudgeled to a Doctor.

YOu that are Learned, expect honour for it;
We that are unlearned, slight and abhor it:
The Rich does look with scorn upon the Poor,
But give no Alms; the Beggar scorns you more.
Thus does the wretch your wealth disdain; nay worse,
For each proud look, the Beggar gives a curse:
But give him Alms, as I believe 'tis rare,
The Beggar gratefully returns his Prayer.
So when the Vnlearn'd, by the learned improve,
They'll give them honour for their learned Love:
But stead of that, the Vnlearn'd they indite,
And proudly ask us how we dare to write?
We humbly answer our Indictment thus,
If Poetry be Fancy, the right's in us;
For you with Authors are so deeply read,
Invention has no room in learned head;
Borrowing what you read, and Authors citing,
Is your invention, and your writing.
Now the illiterate are for fancy bent,
Having no learning, they must needs invent.
Thus Poetry is ours to inherit
As much as yours with your learned merit;
For as Quakers preach, we write, by the spirit.

