HEy Boys! -- Never did my Spirit chirp more cheerfully since I had one. Here
is work for Platonic. Never did Ladies, brave buxom Girls dispense at easier
rates with their forfeited Honours. This were an excellent age for that Roman
Carvilius to live in: who never loved any sheets worser then those his Wife lay
in. Nor his Wife any lodging worse, then where her decrepit Consort slept in.
Divorces are now as common, as scolding at Billingsgate. O Alimony, Alimony a
Darling incomparably dearer, then a seere-icy Bed possessed of the spirit of a
dull unactive Husband! A fresh flowery Spring, and a chill frosty Winter never
suit well together. He were a rare Justice in these times of Separation, who
had the Ceremonial art to join Hearts together as well as Hands: but that
Chemical Cement is above the Alchymy of his Office: or verge of his ministerial
Charge. -- Hey day! who comes here? The very professed Smock-satyr, or
Woman-hater in all Europe. One, who had he lived in that State or under that
Zone, might have compared with any Swetnam in all the Albyon Island.


But sure he has some high design in hand, he pores so fixedly upon the ground,
as on my life he has some swinging stuff for our fresh Dabrides, who have
invested themselves in the Platonic Order: and retain courage enough to make
an exchange of their old Consorts with their new Confidents and amorous
pretenders. -- Let us hear him, he mumbles so strangely, he must surely either
disburden self, or stifle his teeming Birth for want of timely delivery.


Good, as I live wondrous good: this is the way to catch the old one. Be all
things ready Siparius?


How do you mean Sir?


What a drolling bufflehead is this. -- He has been Book-holder to my Revels
for decades of years, and the Cuckoldry Drone, as if he had slept in Triphonius
cave, all his days, desires to know my meaning in the Track of his own
Calling! -- Sir, shall I question you in your own Dialect? Be your
Stage-curtains artificially drawn, and so covertly shrouded, as the squint-ey'd
Groundling may not peep in to your discovery?


Leave that care to me Sir; it is my charge.


But were our Bills posted, that our House may be with a numerous Auditory
stored; our Boxes by Ladies of quality and of the new dress croudingly
furnished; our Galleries and Ground-front answerably to their Pay completed?


Assure you self Sir, nothing is a wanting; that may give way to the Poets
improvement.


Thou say well; this is indeed the Poets third day: and must raise his
Pericranium deeply steeped in Frontineack, a fair revenue for his rich Timonick
Fancy; or he must take a long adieu of the spirit of Sack and that noble Napry
till the next Vintage. -- But Siparius.


Your will Sir.


Be sure, that you hold not your Book at too much distance: the Actors, poor
Lapwings, are but pen-feathred: and once out, out for ever. We had a time,
indeed, and it was a golden time for a pregnant Fancy; when the Actor could
embellish his Author, and return a Pean to his Pen in every accent. But our
great disaster at Canna, then which none ever more tragical to our Theatre,
made a speedy dispatch of our rarest Roscio's, closing them jointly in one
Funeral Epilogue. -- Now for you Boy, as you play the Chorus, so be mindful of
your Hint. I know you to be a Wag by nature; and you must play the Waggish
Actor.


I shall not sleep in my action Sir; if your line have so much life as to
provoke a laughter; I shall not strangle the height of your Conceit with a dull
gesture: nor weaken the weight of your Plot with too flat or unbecoming a
deportment.


Thou promise fairly; go on.


And so does Timon too, or his judgement fails him. -- Well, I will accoast
him. -- Health to our stock of Stoical wit, ingenious Timon. -- Come Sir, what
brave Dramatic Piece has your running Mercury now upon the Loom? The Title of
your new Play, Sir?


Every Post may sufficiently inform you: nay the Fame of the City cannot choose
but echo it to you: so much is expected: neither shall you discover a Mouse
peeping out of a Mountain, believe it.


No; nor a Monkey dancing his Trick-a-tee on a Rope, for want of strong Lines
from the Poets pen.


You are in the right on it, Trillo; These Pigmies of mine shall not play the
egregious Puppies in deluding an ignorant Rabble with the sad presentment of a


Your Conceit is above the scale of admiration. -- But the Subject of your
Invention, Sir, where may you lay your Scene: and what Name you bestow upon
this long expected Comedy?


My Scene, Trillo, is Horn-Alley: the Name it bears, is LADY ALIMONY. The
Subject I shall not preoccupate: Let the Pancies of my thirsty Auditory fall a
working; if ever their small expense confined to three hours space were better
recompensed; I will henceforth disclaim my Society with an happy Genius: and
bestow the remainder of my time in catching Flies with Domitian.


Excellent, Excellent. I am confident your acrimonious spirit will dis-curtain
our Changeable-taffaty Ladies to an hair.


Thou know my humour; and let me perish, if I do not pursue it. Thou hast
heard no doubt, how I never found any branch more pleasingly fruitful, nor to
my view more grateful, then when I found a Woman hanging on it: wishing
heartily that all Trees in mine Orchard bore such fruit.


If your wish had proved true, no doubt but your Orchard would have rendered you
store of Meddlers. -- But your hour, Sir, your hour.


You know, Trillo, our Theatrical time to a minute. One thing I must tell you;
and you will attest it upon our Presentment: That never was any Stage, since
the first erection of our ancient Roman Amphitheaters, with suitable Properties
more accurately furnished: with choiser Music more gracefully accommodated:
nor by Boys, though young, with more virile spirits presented.


I'm already nouz'd in your Poetical Spring: and shall henceforth wish for
your sake, that all Crop-ear'd Histriomastixes, who cannot endure a civil witty
Comedy, but by his racked exposition renders it down-right Drollery, may be
doomed to Ancyrus, and skip there amongst Satyrs, for his rough and severe
censure.


Parnassus is a debtor to thee Trillo for thy clear and serene opinion of the
Muses and their individual Darling: of which Meniey, to imprint our Addresses
all the better in your memory, our Stage presents ever the most lively and
lovely fancy: Where th'Stage breaths Lines, Sceans, Subject, Action fit,
Th'Age must admire it, or it has no Wit.



Yet I have heard Timon, that you were sometimes Stoical, and could not endure
the noise of an Enterlude, but snuff at it as the Satyr did at the first sight
of fire.


All this is most authentically true: But shall I unbosom my self ingeniously
to thee, my dear Trillo? As his hate to Woman made Eupolis eat Nettle pottage;
so became I fired in my spirit: my experience of a Shrow drove me to turn the
shrewd Comedian: and yet all our Boxes are stored with complete Doxes: nay
some, whose carriage gives life to this days action.


May the Poets day prove fair and fortunate: full Audience and honest
Door-keepers. I shall perchance rank my self amongst your Gallery-men.


We shall hold our Labours incomparably heightened by the breath of such
approved Judgements.

Sir, here is a proud peremptory pragmatical Fellow newly come into our
Tyring-room, who disturbs our preparation; vowing like a desperate Haxter, that
he has express Command to seize upon all our Properties.


The Devil he has; what furious Mercury might this be?


Nay, Sir, I know not what he may be, but sure if he be what he seems to be, he
can be no less then one of our City Hectors, but I hope your spirit will
conjure him, and make him a Clinias. -- He speaks nothing less then braving
Buff-leather Language: and has made all our Boys so feverish, as if a
Quotidian Ague had seized on them.


Sure it is one of our Trapanning Decoyes, sent forth for a Champion to defend
those Ladies engaged honour, whom our Stage is this day to present: This shall
not serve their turn. -- Call him in; we will collar him.


Hah-hah-hah! This will prove rare sport, to see how the Poets Genius will
grapple with this Bandog.


Sir!


Surly Sir, your design!


To ruin your Design, illicentiate Play-wright. Down with your Bills Sir.


Your Bill cannot do it Sir.


But my Commission shall Sir. -- Can you read Sir?


Yes Sir, and write too, else were I not fit for this employment.


With what a scurvy skrude look the Myrmidon eyes him? -- He will surely
bastinado our Comedian out of his Laureate Periwig: -- Hold him tug Poet, or
thou runs by Poetical Pinnace on a desperate shelf.


What bugbear has your terrible Bladeship brought us here? A Mandat from one of
our own society, to blanch the credit of our Comedy! You're in a wrong Box, Sir,
this will not do it.


You dare not disobey it.


Dare not! A word of high affront to a professed Parnassian: I dare exchange in
pen with you and your penurious Poetasters Pike: and if your valour or his
swell to that height or heat as it will admit no other cooler but a down-right
scuffle, let wit perish and fall a wool-gathering, if with a cheerful brow I
leave not the precious Rills of Hippocrene, and wing my course for Campus
Martius.


Slid this Mus^us is a Martiallist; and if I had not held him a feverish
white-liver'd staniel, that would never have encountered any but the seven
sisters; that Knight of the Sun, who employed me, should have done his errand
himself: well, I would I were out of his clutches: The only way then is to put
on a clear face, lest I bring a storm upon my self. -- Virtuous Sir, what
answer will your ingenuity be pleased to return by your most humble and
obsequious vassal?


Ho Sir; are you there with you Bears! How this Gargantua's spirit begins to
thaw? -- Sir, you Punto of valour --


I have indeed, puissant Sir, been in my time, rallied amongst those Blades:
but it has been my scorn of late to engage my Tuck upon unjust grounds.


Tucca, thy valour is infinitely beholden to thy discretion. -- But pray thee
resolve me, art thou made known to the purport of thine errand?


In part I am.


And partly I will tell thee, this squirt squibbe, wherewith that pragmatical
Monopolist Nasutius Neapolitanus has here employed thee to obstruct our Action,
shall be received and returned with as much scorn, as it was sent us with
spiteful impudence: -- Let him come, if he like; he may trouble himself and his
own impoverished patience: but we shall slight him on our Stage, and tax him
of frontless insolence.


You shall do well Sir.


Well or ill, Sir, we will do it. -- Pray tell me brave Spark, what Archias may
this be, who takes thus upon him to excise the Revenues of our Theatrical
Pleasure to his purse? Be his monopolizing brains of such extent, as they have
power to engross all Inventions to his Coffer: all our Stage-action to his
Exchequer?


I would be loath to praise him too much, because your transcendent self prize
him so little -- but his Travels have highly improved his expression.


We know it Don, and he knows it too, to his advantage. -- But no man knows the
issue of his Travel better then Timon. It is true, he addressed his course for
Malagasco: but for what end? to learn hard words; school himself in the Vtopian
tongue: and to close up all, he stickt not, Xerxes-like, to deface Bridges, in
the ruins whereof poor Gentleman, he irreparably suffered.


To my knowledge, he speaks no more then authentic truth: For I my self in my
own proper person got a snap by a Neapolitan Ferret at the very same time. Ever
since which hot Aetnean service; my legs have been taught to pace Iambics: and
jadishly to enterfear upon any condition.


Thus much for your dispatch; only this: -- Be it your civility, valiant Don,
to present my service to his Na^ed Savages; Monkeys, Babouns and Marmosites:
advising withal your Master of the Bear-yard; that he henceforth content his
hydroptick thoughts with his own Box-holders; and self he lose by his
out-landish Properties, be it his care to pick out some Doxes of his own, lest
those She-sharks whom he has employed upon that trading occasion, abuse his
confidence.


Your Commands, Sir, shall be observed with all punctuality.


Do so brave Don, lest I call you to account, and return your wages with a
Bastinado. -- But withal tell that Cockspur your magnificent Maecenas, that he
keep at home, and distemper not our Stage with the fury of his visits: lest he
be encountered by my little Tarriers, which will affright him more then all his
Spanish Gipsies.


Account me, invincible Sir, your most serviceable slave upon all interests. --
Well, I have secured my crazie Bulk as well from a basting as ever mortal did.
And if ever I be put on such desperate adventures again, let this weak raddish
body of mine become stuck round with cloves, and be hung up for a gammon of
Westphalia bacon to all uses and purposes.


So! you have conjured down the spirit of one furious Haxter.


And just so must all our Tavern Tarmagons be used; or they'll Trapan you, as
they did that old scarifide Fryer; whose bitter experiences furnished with
ability enough to discover their carriage and his feverish distemper.


Sir, all our Boxes are already stored and seated with the choicest and
eminentest Damasella's that all Civil can afford: Besides Sir, all our Galleries
and Groundstands are long ago furnished: The Groundlings within the yard grow
infinitely unruly.


Go to Boy; this Plebeian incivility must not precipitate the course of our
Action. -- How oft have they sounded?


They are upon the last sound; but our expectance of that great Count, whose
desires are winged for us, foreslow our entry.


These Comic Presentiments may properly resemble our Comet Apparitions; where
their first darting beget impressions of an affectionate wonder, or prophetic
astonishment. The world I must confess, is a Ball racketed above the line and
below into every hazard: but whimsies and careers challenge such influence over
the Judgement of our gallant refined Wits; as their Fancies must be humoured,
and their humours tickled, or they leave our rooms discontented. So as, the
Comedians Garden must find Lattice for all lips: or the disrelished Poet must
be untruss'd, and paid home with a swinging censure. -- This must be my fate,
for I can expect no less from these Satirical Madams; whose ticklish resentment
of their injured honour will make them kick before they be galled: but Timon is
armed Cap a Pe against all such feminine Assailants. They shall find my Sceans
more modest, then some of their actions have merited. -- And I must tell thee
one thing by the way my ingenious Trillo, that I never found more freedom in my
sprightly Genius, then in the very last night,


May your Acts live to a succeeding age,
And the Ladies Alimony enrich your Stage.

MAdams, you're welcome; though our Poet show
A severe brow, it is not meant to you.
Your Virtues like your Features, they are such,
They neither can be prized nor praised too much:
Loved and admired wheres'ever you are known,
Scorning to mix Platonic with your own:
-- Sit with a pleasing silence, and take view
Of Forms vermillion'd in another hue.
Who make free Traffic of their Nuptial Bed,
As if they had of Fancy surfeited:
Who come not here to hear our Comic Sceans,
But to complete imaginary Dreams
With realler Conceptions: if you mind them,
"Their New Loves stand before, Old Loves behind them:
And from that Prospect this Imprezza read,
"Rich Pearls show best, when they are set in lead.
Such be your blameless Beauties, which comply
With no Complexion but a Native dye,
Apt for a Spousal hug: and like rich Ore
Admit one choice Impression, and no more.
Those Faces only merit our esteem,
"Seem what they be, and be the same they seem.
For they who Beauty clothe with borrowed airs,
May well disclaim them, being none of theirs.
Here shall you see Nature adorned with skill,
And if this do not please, sure nothing will.
ROom, room for the Ladies of the New dress.


Thou stiles them rightly Tim; for they have plaid the snakes, and put off
their old slough: New Broom sweeps clean: Frosty age and youth suit not well
together. These Bonaroba's must sate their appetites with fresh Cates, or their
sharp attractive stomachs will be quickly cloyed.


True Nick; had thou known their nightly quartering as well as I have done,
thou would hold them rare Coyducks for retreving new game: and storing their
Lobbies upon all adventures.


Why, Tim, art thou one of that Covy?


Let it suffice thee, Wag, I know all their Fagaries to an hair. I have not
plaid such a Truant in my place; as to become their Pe De during all the time
of their restraint: and not to attain the Principles of a Puny-Bolt: a faithful
secret Pimp deserves his constant pay.


But in good sadness resolve me, were these dainty Dabrides ever in restraint?


As close coupt up, believe it, as any Parachito's ever were: only they
assumed to their pretended aggrievances to exclaim against their hard fortunes,
in being matched with such impotent and defective Husbands. And now they have by
long flickring and strong favourites got out of the Cage: and wrought themselves
into Alimony.


Uds so, will their dainty fingers tug in Alume work?


What an ignorant Puppy thou art? This is no Alume work, but such a calcinated
Mettle, as it will run like Quicksilver over all their Husbands Demains: and in
very short time make a quick dispatch of all his Long acre.


Trust me Tim, these be mad-mettal'd Girls: brave Branches to breed on.


What a wanton Monkey is this? -- He's but newly bred, and he can talk of
Wenches breeding! -- well, thou wilt grow a Cock of the game, if thy
pen-feathred youth mount to it: -- But silence, Wag, the She-Myrmidons are
entering the stage: and I am pricked out for the Chorus.


What humerous Tomboys be these?


The only gallant Messalinas of our age. That Love-spotted Ermine, is Madam
FRICASE, a woman of a rampant spirit; a confident pretender to Language: and
for the Latin, she makes her self as familiar with the breach of Priscians
head, as if it were her Husbands.


Who is she that looks like a mounted Scaledrake?


That spit-fire is Madam CAVEARE, one whose assiduate trading brought age upon
her before her time. But Art has taught her to supply furrowed Deformities with
Ceruss Boxes: and to repair a decayed Complexion with an Italian fucus. This
with other fomentations have so enlivened her, as they render her no less
active then if she at last Grass had but cast her Colts tooth. The next in
rank is that mincing Madam JULIPPE, who would not bear a Child for a world
(though her endeavours be pregnant enough) for fear she should dis-feature the
comeliness of her body.


Yet she's a Medler.


A mellow one, and as ready to fall in Autumn upon all occasions.


What may that gaudy gugay Lady be, that throws such scornful looks upon our
Galleries?


That's a brave Martial Millanoise: Semiramis never had a more imperious
spirit: she styles her self Madam JOCOLETTE; a jocund Girl on my word: and one
that will not engage her honour, nor barter in a light Commodity for nothing.
She was a Tyrewoman at first in the Suburbs of Millan: but falling into an ebb
of fortune, and hearing the quaint and various fancies of our Country
Damasella's; she took upon her this adventure to improve her annual pension.
Which she has by the dexterity of her wit and incomparable curiosity of art
highly enlarged, and by this unexpected means: for it happened, to give an
addition to her future happiness, that one Sir GREGORY SHAPELESS, a Mundungo's
Monopolist, a paltry-penurious-pecking pinchgut, who had smook'd himself into a
Mercenary title of Knightship, set his affection upon her soon after her
arrival here; whom thou may imagine, Nick; to be no sooner wooed then won. But
scarcely were their marriage sheets warm; till her dissembled fancy, having no
other bait but Lucre to feed it, grew cold. And the Mundungo Knight became
pitifully Crest-faln: more in love with the World then his Italian Doxy. A
divorce she sues and so happily pursues: as by the solicitancy of her private
Ingles, she became whole sharer in his trucking fortunes. Since which time, she
pastures freely upon the Common without fear of Enclosure.


Why should she not? A barren ranging Do having once leapt over her own Pale,
may encroach, though not with security, upon any others Liberty.


That next her in rank and as right as my leg in her career, is Madam MEDLER, a
cunning Civil Trader: who with much simpering secrecy, as one that would seem
sparing in discovery of her Husbands Debility; calls her Sir TRISTRAM SHORTTOOL
a good well-meaning man, and one that might content any woman under the
Aequinoctial Line, if Nature had measured him right. Whereas his sufficiency
has been elsewhere tried: which his many Branches sprung from other stocks, may
sufficiently witness; being Ciens of his own inoculating, and at his own proper
charge for breeding. As for that Lady with the inflamed face, Madam TINDER; her
desires are so strong and enlarged; as that Torrid Zone where she sometimes
planted, could not accommodate her supplies. -- And let this serve thee, Nick,
for a short Character of these Alimonial Ladies.


Those Platonic Servants of theirs are upon a strong debate with their amorous
Mistresses.


But note my precious Wag, how infinitely they seem tickeld with the Accounts
which those Ladies return them of their Court-proceedings.


You over-glad me Madam Fricace with your select discourse, closing so fairly
with our expected wishes.


No conceit
Struck more on fancy then the tale you told me;
'Tis so attractive, Madam Caveare,
It acts delight without a passive Object
And forms an Embryo in the fantasy
By Loves mysterious Spell: may Ida's Court
Ne'er see Caranto exercise his Revels
If he neglect those ceremonial rites
Which Love and Duty have obliged him to.
"May all the Orbs make Music in their Motion
And smile on our enjoyment.

Fair Iulippe,
Your choice has crowned me; Nor shall track of time
Raze out that Impreze with your free assent
Has here engraven: Palisado's zeal
Shall merit your affection, if endeavours
May mount to such a pitch, as they may cheer
My hopes in retribution: Secrecy
Or what may most suit with a Ladies honour
Shall in this breast keep constant Century.

If Salibrand fall short, may he be forced
To sue his own Divorce. -- Dear Ioculette
May your estrangement from a loathed Bed
Complete your choice with a delightful change.

Balls, Treats, Reer-Banquets, Theatrical Receipts
To solace tedious hours, shall entertain
My mellow Medler: and when Evning pleasure
Shall with in livening vigour summon more
Duly-reserved Offices; which Love
In her arrival, her desired repose.
Shall pay his loyal tribute; only due
To Crowns and Nuptial Rites: or as pure times
Make these divisions legal, to supply
Defects by abler Farmers: which defrayed
Proves man to be himself: I'll vow no more,
Only give leave to your devoted servant
Whose purest victim is a constant heart
To make this tender good: -- Before I fail
In acting your content, may youthful heat
Disclaim its interest in me: and this spirit
Active and sprightly lose his native strength,
Nay thaw it (...) to atoms, and resolve
To Opick powder, juice of Cucumber,
Or what may show most chillness in the blood.

Like brave Platonic you profess much love,
Which you ennamle with gilt promises,
But my affection's conscious of no guilt
Nor a rhetoric tincture: Some can speak,
And call the heavens to record, when their fancy
Mere Planet-struck, has fixed their influence
On various Objects: -- this deludes poor Wenches,
And makes them melt like Cerusse: -- Heavens forgive them,
I'm none of that light Leven: nor Florello,
Caranto, Palisado, Salibrand,
Nor you Morisco: moments of delight
May prompt unmannag'd youth to damned protests
And vows which they intend not: whereas, Madams,
Your choice has made you happy in your change.
This shall my dear affianced Tinder find
In her Embraces; and in those conclude
Stolen waters be the sweetest.

Excellent;
Thou shalt be styled the Platonic Pithias.

Our faith is not confirmed by Oratory.
If Man, he cannot falsify his trust
In offices of love: we leave our own
For your enjoyment; were there piety
In making Love the Anvil of your treason?
No, no; we shall not entertain a thought
That may suggest suspicion: nor retain
In our late widdow'd breasts a crime so foul
As Jealousy: let our Cornuto's harbour
That marrow-eating Fury. -- Dear Florello,
Hold my exchanged Love complete in thee.

Hold same opinion of thy Caveare,
My best Caranto.

Treasure like esteem
In thy Iulippees choice, brave Palisado.

In Ioculette, active Salibrand.


Thy spriteliest Revels may they be reserved
For thy endeared Medler, my Morisco.

So may thy hopes be crowned in thy Tinder,
My valiant Tilly: and rest thus resolved,
That th'tender tinder of my tried affection
Shall ne'er obscure its lustre, if neglect
Extinguish not that heat.

May the Frigid Zone
Sooner contract my sinews.

And Loves Grove
Become an Hermits Cell.

And our Revels
A sullen Stoic Dream.

And this exchange
A period to our joys.

And our protests
Affrighting shadows.

Or what's worst of all,
May those Contents which you expect from us
Discover our defects: and make you wish
Your Nuptial Beds untouched.

May all these fall
And crush us with their grandeur.

Be it so.
And if our levity disvalue vows,
Or what may most oblige us; may like censure
Impeach our perished honours.

-- So, the match
Is clapped already up: they need no witness.

Trust me, they couple handsomely, as if they had been married after the New
fashion.


These need no dispensation: Fancy can act it without more ado.

A mad match soon shuffled up.


But what shuffling would there be, if any of these wanton Gossips should cry
out before their time?


That cry, my dainty Wag, would be soon stifled. There be many ways, as I have
heard my old Granham say, who had been in her youth a Paracelsian Doctors
Leman, to impregnate a Birth, and by secret applications, apophthegms and
cordials, not only to facilitate but expedite their production.


And what of all this?


Why then Tim, the only safe way for these gamesom Maquerella's is, to
antidate their Conception before their separation: This has been an approved
Receipt; and upon a long consult, found so and returned authentic: Joy or
Grief produce wondrous effects in humerous Ladies.


Thou art a cunning sifting Ningle for all rogueries.


What! so soon returned; upon my life there's some amorous design on foot
either in displaying of the weakness of those Ram^-heads whom they have
deserted: or some Pasquil of light mirth, to ingratiate their late entertained
Servants.


No Drollery for love sake:
Facetious fancies are the least profane.

That's a precious strain of modesty, Nick, make much on it:
-- Let's fasten our attentions -- They are moving.

Dear Madam Fricase, present those Sceans,
Those love-attractive Sceans, your Noble self
With these long injured Ladies tendered
To your Prudential Senate.

Sure Florello
You much mistake them; can you call them Sceans
Which just complaints exhibit? true, they might,
They might have proved to us and to our honours
That lay at stake, and by spectators thought
Highly engaged, nay desperately exposed
To a Judicial sentence: a Decree
Of fatal consequence.

But pregnant wits
Stored with maturest judgement, polite tongues
Calmed an approaching storm.

Nay, made you gracious
Before those rigid Consuls.

For my part,
I never knew a good face spoil a cause
Though th'Bench were ne'er so gravely ancient:
Nor ripe in years.

Beauty's a taking bait
Which each fish nibbles at: this Appius felt,
A reverend Sage, whom furrowed brow, loose lip,
Strait line of life, a rough distempered cough,
Aged Catarrhs, a shivered shell turned earth,
where nought appeared that might partake of man
Save a weak breathing motion: yet could He
Send forth light wandering eyes: and court Virginia
With a dull admiration: so the Bard
Describes his daring-doating appetite,
Which he pursued, yet thought none durst discover:
Appius had silent tongue, but speaking eyes,
Yet who says Appius loves Virginia, lies,

Not I, I vow: let age attire it self,
And in that garish habit fool his soul
With fruitless wishes: what's all this to me?
Pigmalion may with his incessant vows
Sweetened with fancies licence seek t'enliven
Motionless marble: but such statues render
Icy content: Imagination may
Make th'Image seem a Leda: yet the Swan
Retains her feature and her nature too.
-- Let's leave these apprehensions; they suit better
With sh^dy then essentials favourites.
-- Good Madams, second our desires; let's hear
How you were dealt withal.

Our instancy
Begs so much favour.

It will cheer our spirits
In the relation of your fair Proceedings.

Where th'issue crowned your suit with that success
No Fates seemed more propitious.

We must hav't;
You know what longing means.

Come, who begins?


Stay, Gallants, wing not your too speedy course
With such Pegasian quickness, our consent
Should go along: our interests are concerned
To perfect your desires.

And we presume
Your acquiescence will accomplish it;
Our mutual loves close in that harmony,
That though the airs of Music still admit
Their closure in Divisions, our joint strings
So sweetly tuned, may run their Diapason
Without a Discord.

By which sense we gather
That we must prove your Fiddlers;

You mistake me:
We hold you instruments; your fancies strings
To actuate our motion with that fulness
Arion ne'er attained too.

We must yield
Or they will storm us.

Yet let our conditions
Bring them within our lists. -- Well, our surprise
Must make you parties in the discovery.

For Loves sake how?


As thus; we stand at Bar
To express our grievances: and you must set
Grave Censors or Examinates, to discuss
The weight of our Complaints.

Content; we'll do it.


But do it exactly, or you spoil the plot.


Slid, doubt not Ladies, we have wit enough
To frame Intergotaries, so you make answer,
And with your quickness do not puzzle us.

Advance, advance, let's mount and play the Consuls.


How will these dainty Dotrels act their parts?


Rarely no doubt; their Audience makes them confident.


Now fair Ladies, what wind has blown you hither?


The storm of our unsufferable wrongs
Call unto you for Justice.

And your Beauties
Injoins our just assistance. -- Show your griefs.

This is a Caranto-man with all my heart! must
Beauty be his Land skip on the seat of Justice?

Pray thee give them line.


Should I discover my misfortunes, Consuls,
They would enforce compassion even in strangers
Who know not my Extraction. -- My descent
Besides the Fortunes I derived from them
Who gave me Being, Breeding, with whats'ere
Might complete youth, or give embellishment
To Natures curious workmanship, was known
To shine more graceful in the eye of fame
Then to remain obscure: yet see my fate,
My sad occurring fate!

Express it Madam.


I married, Reverend Consul, and in that
Lost both my freedom, fortune and my self.
My former single sweet condition
Clothes that remembrance in a sable weed,
Resolves mine eyes to Niobees, whose teirs
Might drop to marble, and erect an urn
T'inhume my funeral spousals.

Alas poor Lady.


Pitiful Senator, if he have not drunk some
Coffie to keep him waking, he will questionless fall a-sleep,
or melt into tears before he delivers his sentence.

Whence sprung this stream of infelicity,
Resolve us Madam?

From mine hapless match;
A tender stripling, whose unmanly chin
Had ne'er known Razor, nor discovered
A youthful down: yet his minority
Was by ore-powring friends accounted fit
To match with my maturer growth: But time
Displayed their folly who enjoined me to it
And my misfortune most: light was his brain
But weaker far his strength to satisfy
Those lawful Nuptial heats, which breathed in us
An active fire. -- Now I appeal to you
Judicious Consuls;

Hold there, Madam; under favour, these brave Senators you appeal to, are more
for Execution then Judgment.


Could the patience
Of Grissel, were she living, reap content
In such enjoyments? Could she suffer youth
Quickened with blooming fancy to expire
And quench her heat with such an useless snuff?

A match unsufferable.


Opposing Nature.


Nay, what in time would quite depopulate
And make the World a Desert.

Higher wrongs
Cannot inflicted be on Woman kind.

Nor meriting an heavier censure.


Nor,
Aspersing more dishonour on that sex,
That most endeared sex, to which we owe
Our selves and fortunes: for should their choice Beauties
Suffer a pillage by desertless hands,
Forced to a loathed Bed, and made a prey
To seered age, or to unripened youth,
How soon might these imparallel'd Deities
By fixing their affections on strange faces
And their more graceful posture, which they valued
Above their churlish consorts, become strangers
To their due spousal rites: How soon engage
Their honour to th'Embraces of a Servant
Of brave deportment, sprightly eyes, neat limbs,
A virile presence, and a countenance
'Twixt Ajax and Adonis; neither fierce
Nor too effeminate: but mixed 'twixt both,
"Neither too light to scorn, nor stern to loath?
'Twas this brought Troy to ruin: for had Helen
Espoused where she had loved, poor Menelaus
Had ne'er been branched, nor Troy reduced to flames,
Nor Priam and his Hecuba the grounds
Of sad-succeeding stories.

A gallant Consul, trust me; he has got by heart the Ballad of the Destruction
of Troy to a syllable.


Honoured Colleague
You show your self both learned and eloquent.
Madam, be pleased to solace discontent
With a retired repose: we have discust
And balanced the grandeur of your wrongs
In a judicious scale: and shall apply
Proper Receipts to your aggrievances
When we have heard the rest.

Receipts of their own application, I warrant thee.


Madam Caveare,
You here appear as a Complainant too.

And none more justly: -- ne'er was woman matched
To such a stupid, sottish animal;
One that's composed of Non-sense, and so weak
In Masculine abilities, he ne'er read
The Wife of Bathes Tale, nor what thing might please
A woman best: -- my Curtain Lectures have
No influence on him. -- I must confess
He's simply honest; but what's that to me?
He apprehends not what concerns a woman:
Nor what may suit her quality in state
And fit dimension.

A most unfitting Husband.


It was my parents caution I remember,
But 'twas not my sad fate t'observe that Lesson,
Never to fix my fancy on a person
Who had no Sage in's pate: lest progeny of fools
Should make my race unhappy: this has made
My thoughts mere strangers to his weak embraces,
Nor shall I e're affect him.

Madam, no Law
Would in the Spartan State enjoin a Lady
So nobly accomplished to confine
Her fancy to such fury.

This objection
Admits no long debate.

Her rich deserts
Adorned with such choice native faculties,
And graced with art to make them more complete,
In humane reason should exempt her youth
From such a servile yoke.

In ancient times
When wisdom guarded Senats; a Decree
Confirmed by public Vote enacted was,
That none should marry till he had observed
Domestic discipline; and first to bear
With a composed garb the indignities
Of a Zantippe, if his fortune were
To cope with such a fury: and to calm
Her passion with his patience: -- now grave Colleagues
What comfort might this injured Lady drain
In these puntileo's which import her state,
From this Insensate Sot?

Exchange his Bed
And sue his Patent for the Fatuano:
And to display him to his visitants
In clearer colours; let this Motto be
Engraven on those walls deep-ach't with time:
Defective in his Head-piece here he lies,
Object of scorn to all surveying eyes.

So, poor scatter-brain, he has got his judgement already.


Praxatiles could ne'er portray him better,
Nor lodge his sconce more fitly. -- You may, Madam,
Conceive how sensibly we feel your wounds,
And with what promptness we shall expedite
your long-expected cure.

Madam Iulippe,
You come next in rank; declare your griefs,
And if our judgements hold them meriting
Our just relief, we have compassionate hearts
And powerful hands to vindicate your wrongs
To the utmost scruple.

If they weigh not heavy
Let me incur your censure. -- Patriots,
For I appeal to your judicious bosoms
Where serious Justice has a residence
Mixed with a pious pity: I shall unravel
The Clew of my misfortunes in small threads
Thin-spun as is the subtle Gothsemay.
Deep wounds, like griefs, require contracted lines,
Few words, long sighs, Accents that want express.
First give me leave one beamling to bestow
On my obscured, once glorious family.

Madam proceed, Fame made it eminent.


But now contemptive, by marrying one
Who bears the shape of man, and that is all,
A base-white-liver'd Coward: whose regard
To his lost honour stamps him with that brand,
That hateful stigma which humanity
Scorns as the basest complice.

Style it Madam.


Pusillanimity. -- That Ranter breaths not
Who with his peekt Monchato's may not brave him,
Baffle, nay baste him out of his possessions:
His fortunes he esteems not, so his person
May be secured from beating.

Matchless Coward.


Nor is this all; 'has sought t'ingage my Bed,
My Nuptial Bed and honour, nay those sheets,
Where I may safely vow, ne'er man lay in
Beside my husband.

Very like; But how many when he was not there?


No misfortune worse
Nor humour hateful to a virile spirit,
Whereof your noble family partakes
Then want of courage.

Tush, Sir, that's not all,
Her line in time might grow degenerate
And blanch the living memory of those
From whence she came.

There's none who here appears
Before you Conscript Consuls, but can give
Store of evincing instances of this:
For matching with Sir Jasper Simpleton
An hair-brain'd puppy, most of all my brood*
Run like shell headed Lapwings in careers
Just as their own supposed father did
Simple Sir Jasper, whose small doze of sense
Proportioned their discretion. -- Till a change
Impregnated me more wisely.

So did I
Suffer in my raw Puny Amadin;
Though all my fears summed up their period,
And in it crowned my wishes for one Boy,
Who while he lives, I think, will prove a Boy,
I had by my young stripling: who can trace
His fathers steps directly: all his games
Wherein his lineal youth takes sole delight
Are yert-point, nine pins, job-nut, or span count*
Or riding cock-horse, which, his Dad admires
Smiling to see such horsemanship performed:
Now I appeal to you, whose judgements are
Maturely serious, if these tomboy tricks*
Might not perplex me and enforce me too
To act what my affections prompt me do!

If one complain of the minority
Of her thin-douny Consort: and you Madam
Of his Simplicity whom you have chose,
And you Iulippe of his Cowardice,
Whom with averseness you have made your spouse;
What grounds of discontent may I conceive
Unhappy Ioculette, in my choice
My nightly torture; whose Embraces be
Worse then those snaky windings unto me
Dipped in Medusa's Charms.

Unbare your wound.


Nay, let that be the least of your fears; -- she'll do that to an hair.


Know then judicious Consuls
These arms are forced to enwreathe a shapeless mass
Of all Deformity: a Bear unlickt,
One whom Thersites that disfigured Greek
So far excelled in native Lineaments,
Proportion, Feature, and Complexion,
(All rare attractives to the eye of Love,)
As amorous Nar^issus in his prime
Surpassed the roughest Sylvan that the woods
E're nursed or harboured: yet enjoined am I
To hug this Centaur: who appears to me
A Prodigy in Nature.

'Tis a fate
Exacts compassion: and deserves redress.

Such a complete and exquisite a beauty
Accomplished in all parts --

Nay qualified
With rarity of arts to make her sex
With pious emulation to admire
Her choice perfections --

And all these obscured,
Soiled, sullied, perished by the immeriting touch
Of a misshapen Boor --

Such precious gems
Set in ignoble metals cannot choose
But much detract from the native graceful lustre
Which they retained by means of that base Ore
Imp^ls their Orient splendour. --

This is nothing
To the injury her linage may receive
From his deformity.

I must confess
That threatens much of danger: yet I read not
That Vulcans poult foot or his smutted look
Blackened with Lemnian Sea-coal, brought the issue
Be got by Venus, if he any got,
To change their amorous physiognomy --

He may thank
Mars for that active courtesy, or it had
Disfigured much his spurious progeny.

Well Madam, we compassionate your choice
In your Sir Gregory Shapeless: and shall find
A quick receipt to cure your discontent
With a new-molded and more pleasing feature
Then your sad fate enjoys. -- Repose, till we
Have run through all your griefs, and felt your pulses.

For shame sake, no further my dainty Doctors.


With th'symptoms or gradations as they stream
In your desertless Sufferings; Paroxysms,
Or what Extremes may most surprise your fancies:
In these, our serious Judgements shall supply
Such sovereign Cordials: as you shall not need
No use nor application of more help
Then what we shall prepare: let this suffice,
It rests in us to cure your maladies.
-- Excuse us Madam Medler, these debates
Have kept us from discovery of your wrongs.

Then which none more depressive: -- would you judge
The Musician good that wants his Instrument:
Or any Artizan who goes to work
Without provision of a proper tool
To manage that employment? -- Modesty
Bids me conceal the rest: my secret wants
Require an active tongue: but womanhood
Injoins me silence.

Alas I'm sensible
Of her aggrievance ere her dialect
Can give it breath or accent.

But you say,
And our experience has informed us too
In that essential truth, that we must first
Disclose our wounds, if we expect a cure:
Let your impartial judgements then give eat
To a distressed Ladies just complaint.
In my first years, as now I am not old,
My friends resolved, to supply a portion,
Which my descent though good could not afford,
To match my youth unto a man of age,
Whose Nest was richly feathered, stored of all
But native vigour, which expressed it self
As if all radical humour had been drenched
In a chill shady bed of Cucumbers
Before our Nuptial Night: oft had I begged
With sighs and tears that this unequal match
Might be diverted: but it might not be,
The fulness of his fortunes winged them
To consummate the match: this pleased them,
But me displeased, whom it concerned most.

The issue, Madam!


None, nor ever shall
With that seer suckless Kex.

Never was Lady
So rarely beautified, so highly wronged.

What flinty worldling were those friends of yours
To value Fortunes more then your content?

To prostitute your honour to a clod
Of mouldred earth?

And in an icy bed
To starve your blooming comforts?

This exceeds
All spousal suffering, which preceding times
In our Italian stories ever read
Or in their sable Annals registered.

Much of Sir Tristram Shorttool, so I think,
Men call your Husband, have I ofttimes heard
And his penurious humour: But your wrongs
Were strangers to me, till your own relation
Displayed their quality; which to allay,
Nay, quite remove, transmit the care to us
And our directions, to supply your wants,
We should be just to all, but still retain
A bosom pity to the weaker sex;
If we observed not this with tenderness,
We should not merit this Judicial Seat
Whereto --.

These Dabrides raised you.


Now Madam Tinder your aggrieves are last.


But not the least: what woman could endure
In spousal rights to have a stranger share
In her enjoyments? or remain deprived
Of her propriety by losing those
Appropriate dues which Nature has ordained
And sacred rites approved? -- You see I'm young,
And youth expects that tribute which our sex
May challenge by descent.

Her Plea is good.


Would you not reverend Consuls hold it strange,
To see a savage unconfined Bull,
When the Pasture's fruitful, and the milk-pail full,
And all delights that might content a Beast,
Range here and there: and break into those grounds
Which are less fertile, and where neither shade
Affords him umbrage, nor smooth-running Brooks
Streams to allay his thirst: nay, where the grass
Too strew for fodder, and too rank for pasture
Would generate more fatal maladies
Then a whole College of State-Empyricks
Or Countrey-Farriers had art to cure?

Such Bullocks, Madam, well deserve a baiting.


And beating too.


Yet this is my condition.
For marrying one Sir Reuben Scattergood,
A Person in appearance like enough
And well-dispos'd for ought my watchful Eyes
Could long discover^ but his Father dead
And his revenues by his Death swoln great,
His Nuptial Bed he leaves: and entertains
Such mercenary Prostitutes as fancy,
His loose-exposed Fancy, lured him to.

Injurious Ribald.


Hateful Libertine.


Had she been old, or crooked, or any way
Deformed.

Or ill-condition'd.

Or averse
When he was active.

Or run retrograde
To his just pleasures: these might have abridged
And weakened his affection: but when beauty,
Composed temper and a graceful presence
Clothed both with majesty and a sweet smile
Of such attractive quality, as the Adamant
Cannot more vertually enforce its Object
Then these impressive motives of content:
He merits not the Title of a Man,
Much less the embraces of so choice a spouse,
Who violates his faith; deceives her trust.

I am directly, Sir, of your opinion.


So I;

And I.

So all of us concur,
To make our Judgements more unanimous.

And to confirm't, may you be pleased to give
Attention to a story I shall tell,
As true as strange to manifest the Affronts
My Patience has endured, and to what height
His Luxury ascended?

Madam do,
We shall lend ready Ears to your discourse.

It chanced one day, and ofttimes so it chanced,
For doubtful thoughts have ever jealous eyes,
That my suspicion had begot a fear,
That my neglectful Husband had a kindness,
And more then usual, unto my Maid,
A proper Maid, if so she might be called:
Now to possess my self whether those grounds
Whereon I built might just inducements be
Of my late-hatched fears, I made pretence,
(What is it Jealousy will not design?)
To go from home* But this was no recede
But a retire: for in the Evening time
When those two amorous pair expected least
Such an unwelcome visit, I repaired
To a close Arbour set with Sycamours,
The Tamarisk and sweet-breath'd Eglantine,
That local Object which I fixed upon
Not of my self, but by direction,
Where I found out what I suspected long,
Such wanton dalliance as the Lemnian Smith
Never discovered more when he prepared
His artful Net t'enwreath his Eriena
Impaled in Mars his arms.

Could you contain
Your passion in such Aretine a posture?

With much reluctance I did indeed,
Curbing my temper which was much enraged
With this too mild expression: -- Fie for shame*
Minion I'll have none of this work, not I.
You may when it it is offered you, said he.

Ha, ha, ha. This was a bold-fac'd Nigler, trust me Wag.


Was't not enough for him t'enjoy his pleasure,
But he must jear you too?

As if you were
A Stale to his light dalliance?

Or a scorn to his embraces.
Was her servile beauty
Exposed to sale, dishonour of her Sex
To be compared to yours?

Whose native splendour
Without the help of Art, which makes complexion
By borrowed colours much unlike it self;
May challenge a prerogative in the rank
Of our completest Features.

It seems strange
How you could brook the affront without revenge
On that insulting Prostitute.

No doubt
She would take hold of opportunity
By the foretop, and repair her pressing wrongs
By private satisfactions, which works best
When their Revenge seems sleeping and at rest.
This Lady would not rate her worth so small
As to forego both Use and Principal.

No; reverend Favourite, you will find this Madam Spitfire of a keener mettle
then so. She's right tinder: no sooner touch then take.


Ladies, We've heard your different Complaints
Forcing our just compassion and resolves
To tender your condition and redress:
What may the purport be of your Petition
Relating to your grievances?

A freedom
From our dis-relish'd Beds.

'Tis granted you.

With Alimony to support our state
In this division.

Your suit is just,
Should we oppose it, we might wrong our selves.

Very likely; for they mean to be made whole Sharers both in their Persons and
Personal Estates: -- This is brave judicial Brocage.


Speak Fellow Colleagues, Shall I limit them
What we in Justice hold expedient
For the Alimonal Charge proportioned them,
And in what measure to supply their Wants?

Do so Florello, we shall second it.


Thus I conceive, these Ladies have resigned
Their title, property and interest,
In whole and not in part which they enjoyed
In their defective Husbands. -- Were it not just
In lieu of the whole which they have here disclaimed
That they should seize upon the Moity
Of their Revenues whom they have here deserted
As useless Instruments unto the State?

A just proportion:

We submit to it.


And so ye may well, if your Husbands will yield to it.


These be nimble shavers Nick as well as sharers: they know how to cut large
thongs out of other folks leather.


This crowns our wishes, when with joint consent
We close out votes and render you content.

Dismount, dismount, let's exercise no more
These purple seats, their stories stand too high
For our Ascent: Only let's thus much know
Whether our Parts were acted well or no.

Above expectance: singular in all,
But best in your Conclusion.

You did well
In your proportioning of our Alimony,
Moulded to the moity of their estates
Whom we have justly left: but we had less
Allotted us in more Authentic Courts.

That was not in our verge to regulate.


Nor skills it much: we have a competence
Aspiring to Exceedings; and in this
More blessed because exempted from those bonds
Which our long servitude inchain'd us to.

Of Consuls then, which title we usurped
To cheer your fancies, we shall now become
Your Servants, Confidents or Favourites,
Or how you please to style us: -- we are all
Affianced yours: firm as the solid Rock
In your reserved Councels and what may
Hold correspondence with your interests,
But soft and malleable as liquid amber
In its resolving temper when delight
Shall sport it in your bosom, and admit
A sociable dalliance.

Your free discourse
Grounded on former proofs of constancy
Has so endeared me, I am wholly yours.

Madam, we mean not you shall have it so;
You've broke the ice, and we will trace your steps;
Former experience has engaged me
To fix on my Caranto.

Palisado shall
Enjoy my love.

I for my Salibrand.


Morisco mine.


Tinder shall Tilly's be.


Pure tender Tinder of affection,
The new-blown Bloom that craves a native warmth
To cherish its young growth shall not receive
More solace from those Orient rays which shine
On its fresh-springing beauty, then your choice
Shall in my dear embraces.

I shall try you.


Thus walks the poor Gentlemen's Revenues to raise these Doxes Alimony: and thus
runs their Alimony to feed these youngsters riot.


Our joy's completed: -- Seal this joint Conveyance
With those ambrosiack signets of your lips.
"One house did hold, one house shall hold us twain,
"Once did we kiss, and we will kiss again.

How Turtle-like they couple!


Is this th'Platonick Law; all things in common?


Must all forego their wives that are not wise?


Or be divorc't because we dare not fight?


Or lose our Mates because we are not handsome?


Nay, because we are not armed so well as others be,
Forfeit our Consort and our Fortunes too?

Yes, that's the plague on it, -- lose a light-heel'd trull,
That in my judgement's nothing: but to lose all
Or Moity of that all, or any part at all
For a poor nifling toy that's worse then nothing,
'Tis this that nettleth me. -- I must confess
Tinder that light-skirt with impetuous heat
Sometimes pursued me, till that quenchless fire
Burst into flames of boundless jealousy
Which crossed mine humour: for variety
Relished my palate: -- Phoenix brains be rare
But if our dishes had no other fare
They would offend the stomach, and so sate it
As grosser meats would give a better taste:
Such was my surfeit to a Marriage-bed.
My Fortunes I prefer before her beauty,
Or what may most content the appetite.
Money will purchase wenches: but this want,
This roguish thing called want makes wanton thoughts
Look much unlike themselves: 'tis this white mettle
Enlivens spirits, knits our arteries
Firm as Alcides: He that binds himself
Apprentice to his wife merely for love,
May he, pen-feather'd widgeon, forfeit's freedom
With whatsoever is dearest to the vogue
Of his affections: she were a rare piece
That could engage me or oblige me hers
With all those Ceremonial rites which Flamins use
To Hymens honour: Beauty, still stay I,
Will breed a surfeit, be it ne'er so choice
"Nor eye-attractive: I should choose a Grave
"Before one Mistress all mine Interest have.
O my Alimony, Alimony; this is the goad that only prickels me!

Those be your Husbands, Ladies; -- how pitifully they look?


Alas, poor Cuckolds.


Ladies, we were sometimes your Husbands.


True,
You were so; but your known defects have razed
That style of Wedlock: and enfranchised us
From that tyrannic yoke. -- We'r now our own,
Nor shall our Beds by you be henceforth known.

What have I done?


Nothing, Sir Amadin;
And that's sufficient to divide us two.
Your puny years must grow in strength and sinews
To prove you man before you can partake
In my enjoyments: th'Court has so decreed,
And by resentment of that injury
Your blooming youth unripened for delight
Has done to me your hapless Virgin Bride,
Held fit to number me amongst these Ladies,
All different sufferers; and for supportance,
As every thing, you know, would gladly live,
Allots us Alimony.

So, his score's paid.


Madam, look on Sir Jasper.


Honest Simpleton
And so I will, just as the Fowler is wont
On a caught Dotrell; till your wasted brains
Rise to more growth, I from my widdow'd Bed
Will rise untouched: these breasts shall never give
Their nursing teats unto a Brood of Fools.

So, good Sir Jasper, you've your Doom in Folio.


Receive me dear Iulippe.


For what end?
Have you stolen from your Colours? -- Oh I hate
A Coward worser then a Maidenhead
Basely bestowed; -- these Paphlagonian Birds,
These Heartless Partridges shall never nestle
Under my feathers: till your spirit revive
And look like man, disclaim your interest
And injured title in Iulippe.

So;
He must first learn to fight, e're she to love.

What would Sir Gregory?


That you would love me.


No; you must cast your slough first: can you see
Ought in your self worth loving: have you ever
Since our unhappy meeting used a Glass,
And not been startled in the sad perusal
Of your frightful Physiognomy? -- Sir, hear me,
And let me beg your patience if you hear,
Ought may dis-relish you; -- when the Camel shall
Transhape himself into a nimble Wesil
Or such like active Creature: and this Bunch
Which Nemesis has on your shoulders pitched,
This Bunch of Grapes I mean, shall levelled be
And brought into proportion by a Press
Equally squeezing, till it shall retain
Adonis feature, I shall value you
And hug you for my Consort: But till then
Excuse my strangeness.

So, his Cause is heard.
He must unshape himself to gain her love.

Sir Tristram Shorttool, have you ought to do
In this pursuit of fancy?

Something Madam.


But small to purpose: Sir Tristram you have been
A man of Reading: and on Winter Nights
You told me tales, for that was all you did,
What strange adventures and what gallant acts
Redoubted Knights did for their Ladies sakes,
But what did you for Medler all the while?
Did you e're toss a Pike, or brandish Blade
For her dear sake? -- Go to, I shall conceal,
And with a modest bashful veil in-shroud
What Sense bids me discover. -- Let me Sir
Advise you as a Friend; for other styles
Relating to an Husband, I shall never
Henceforth resent them; with a free comply:
Love suits not well with your decrepit age;
Let it be your chief care to intend your health:
Use Caudels, Cordials, Julips, Pectorals,
Keep your Feet warm, bind up your nape of the neck
Close against chilling airs, that you may live
An old man long: -- but take especial care
You button on your night-cap --

After the new fashion
With his loave Ears without it.

This is all;
Only your absence.

So good night Sir Tristram.


Sweet Madam Tinder.


Keep your distance Sir;
I love not to be touched.

Are you so hot
My tender Tinder?

No Sir; look to the Clime
Where you inhabit; there's the Torrid Zone.

Yes, there goes the hair away.


Can you not love?


Not One that loves so many.


Alas pretty Peat,


Pray Sir, hold off your hand;
Truck with your low-priz'd Traders; I must tell you
Mine honour's higher rated.

Be it so;
I wish you would disclaim your Alimony,
With that indifferent touch as you do Love,
You should not need a Dispensation, Madam,
It should be granted unpetitioned.

I'm confident it would: -- nor shall the coolness
Of your affection, bring me to an ebb
Of favour with my self: Plant where you please,
I'll henceforth scorn to hug my own disease.

So, Sir Reuben's dispatcht; and like a Ranger may tappice where he likes.


But hark you Madam, what be these brave Blades
That thus accoutre you? are they your Platonic,
Hectors, or Champion-Haxters, Pimps or Paliards;
Or your choice Cabinet-Confidents?

You may
Exact account from them.

No; but I will not;
Long since I've heard a Proverb made me wise,
And armed me Cap a pe against such accounts:
"Whos'ere he be that tuggs with dirty foes,
"He must be foiled admit he win or lose.

Shall I acquaint them with your Adage, Sir?


Do if you please.


No Sir, I am too tender
Of your endangered Honour. -- Should a baffle
Engage your fame, and I the instrument
It would disgust me.

You are wondrous kind.
But pray you tell me, is this Favourite
Or Turn-key of your Council in the rank
Of generous Hectors? I would be resolved
For it concerns me.

Pray good Sir, as how?


Since 'tis my fate, I would be branched nobly
Lest mine adulterate Line degenerate
And raze the ancient splendour of mine House,
As many noble Families have done
By mixing with inferior Apple-squires,
Grooms, Pages, Ushers, which in time begot
Such middle Wits in this our middle Region,
None could distinguish them from Corydons,
Nor well discover whence they might derive
Their prime descent, unless it were by the Crest
Their Footmen wore: or what their Coach presented
In it's rear quarter. -- All your Sir Reuben begs
Aims mainly at your Honours privilege,
Which shielded I'm secure; and it is this,
"Let choice hands meddle with your Tinder-box.

Make that your least of fears. -- We'll keep our fame,
Amidst this freedom, still unblemished*

So, we have all received their final Answers.


Nor do I mean to draw up my Rejoinder.
"He who will lose his wits, or break his heart
"For such a Wench as will not take his part:
"And will not shun what he may safely fly,
"May He a Bedlam or a Beggar dye.

Farewell inconstant Ladies.


Adieu constant Actaeons.


IS it for certain that the Dukes voyage holds for Salamanca?


No doubt on it: his resolution is so firmly fixed, no motion can decline it. And
if we may credit Fame, which seldom errs in all, though it exceed in many;
never was Fleet more bravely rigged, better prepared, nor with more Military
strength furnished, nor more virile spirits accompanied, nor by more expert
Commanders at any time since the Battle of Lepanto conducted.


It was thought he would not personally have engaged himself in this adventure:
but have deputed some experienced General for perfecting this grand design: and
imposing a final period to an Action of such high consequence.


'Tis true; but those many aggrievances, aggravated with numerous Petitions
presented by our Civil Merchants, wrought such strong effects upon the sweet
compassionate nature of the good Duke; as that endeared resentment, which he
retained upon those Merchants relation, touching the infinitely surcharging
losses which they had suffered though the hostile Piracy of the Salamancans, as
he made a solemn Vow to engage himself in their quarrel: and either revenge the
injuries and indignities they had sustained, or seal his just desires with the
sacrifice of his dearest life.


Were the Merchant losses great?


In Shipping infinite: and by Accountants of approved trust, computed to many
millions: for besides Vessels of lesser burden in one Sea-voyage being driven
by contrary winds upon the Coasts of Calabria, they lost at one time ^the
Panther, Libard, Bugle, Antilope, Caracts of great and formidable sail: such as
would have made their party good against all Assailants, had they not been
dispersed and weakened by violent tempests: Besides, the unexpected Herocane,
which dashed all the endeavours of the best Pilots that all their Fleet
afforded: yet reduced to this strait and sad exigent, they found no Islander so
compassionate as to pity their deplorable Condition: but rather such as were
ready to add fresh affliction to their late suffering, by seizing on
whatsoever remained estimable in their forlorn Vessels: and exposing them
without the least remonstrance of humanity or civil hospitality to the mercy of
the winds. This it was which winged the Duke to this Expedition: choosing, as
report goes, the Revenge for his Ship of War, and that only man of War,
wherein he means to steer his course, return his errand and requite his
Quarrel.


The Duke's a Person of a gallant spirit.


I dare affirm it Sir; that the State of Civil was never with more prowess,
prudence, nor Martial Policy at any time managed; which not only his
prosperous exploits abroad, then which none more successive: but likewise his
vigilant care and, command at home may sufficiently manifest. For his late
Declaration under his Great Seal has discovered the incomparable zeal he had of
serving both Court and City: in commanding all such useless and incommodious
Weeds, as Trapanners Tarpaulins, with all our abusively entitled Hectors, that
they should by a peremptory day depart the City and Line of Communication in
relation to the Court: since which time, they have resolved for want of better
supplies to hazard the remainder of their broken Fortunes upon a desperate
adventure for Tunis.


In such glorious designs levelling at honour, they declare themselves really
Hectors.


What news Segesto?


The Duke's upon his march: and near approaching.


How quick's his Spirit to redress our wrongs!


Thus far on our address: may prosperous gales
Breath on our Sails: Sails on our just designs
In vindicating of our Countries fame
Too long impaired by suffering injuries;
Till which redressed our Honour lies at stake
And we made Aliens to our own estate.
March on then bravely that it may appear
"Our Courage can revenge as well as hear.

This gallant resolve of the Duke pursued with such alacrity can never be
sufficiently admired; and to engage his Person too in so perilous adventure --



And all this in vindication of the Merchants honour and their Interest.


Trust me, he appears bravely.


His disposition from his youth foretold What's manhood would assay -- whence
comes this noise?


Room for our Bravo's, Cadets; they march along in ranks and files. Their
pockets grow shallow, the Taverns and Ordinaries, they vow to be Infidels, so
as they have enlisted themselves Soldiers of fortune.


These be those Trapanners, whom the Duke has proscribed, or I mistake it.

Let us observe their posture.


Rouse Buckets and Tubbs. -- Hey for Tunis and Argiers.


Keep your ranks my Comrades, and fight valiantly.


What else Captain, we cheated before for nothing, and now having nothing we
mean to fight for something.


'Slid Bullies, I think the Duke has done us a pleasure.


Pray thee, how Boy?


I'll tell thee, the short and long on it: Before, if any of us had been so
valiant, as few of us were, as to borrow money on the High way, we were
sometimes forced to repay it at the Gibbet: but the world is turned upside
down; if we get it, we may keep it, and never answer for it.


Hey Boy, art thou in that Lock? -- But noble Landprisado, let us have a
Sea-Sonnet before we launch forth in our Adventure* Frigate. They say the Sirens
love singing.


Agreed Wags: but which shall we have?


That old Catch of Tunis and Argiers; good Captain, it suits best with our
voyage.


To it then my Hectors* and keep your Close as you do your march. The Sirens
will not relish you if you sing out a tune.


To Tunis and to Argiers Boys,
Great is our want, small be our joys;
Let's then some voyage take in hand
To get us means by Sea or Land.
Come follow me my Boys, come follow me,
And if thou dye, I'll dye with thee.
Hast thou a Wife? I have one too,
And Children some as well as thou,
Yet who can see his Brats to starve
So long as he has strength to serve?
Come follow me my Cubbs, come follow me,
And if thou dye, I'll dye with thee.
Methinks, my Boys, I see the store
Of precious Gems and golden Ore;
Arabian Silks and Sables pure
Would make an Haggard stoop to the lure.
Come follow me, c.
No worthless mind e're honour sought,
Let's fight as if we feared nought,
If Bullets fly about our ears
Let's laugh at death and banish fears,
Come follow me, c.
And if thou can not live so stench
But thou must needs enjoy thy Wench,
If thou my Boy such pleasure crave
A dainty Doxy thou shalt have.
Come follow me, c.
Courage my Sparks, my Knights of the Sun,
Let Civil fame what we have done,
Weed better ten times fight a Foe
Then once for all to Tyburn go.
Come follow me, c.
Come let's away, mount, march away,
This Calm portends a prosperous day,
When we return it shall be said
That by our voyage we are made.
Come follow me, c.
But if we ne'er again return,
Enclose our ashes in an urn,
And with them spice a Wassal-Cup,
And to Good Fellows drink it up.
Come follow me, c.
Which Health when it is gone about
And stoutly set their foot unto't,
No doubt they shall enrolled be
In the Book of Fame as well as we.
Come follow me spruce Sprigs, come follow me,
And if thou fall I'll fall with thee.
When this Grand Health is gone about,
Where you as sloutly stood unto't,
Doubt not, you shall recorded be
In the Book of Fame as well as we.
March after me, c.
And when this Bowl shall run so round
Your Legs can stand upon no ground,
Fear not, Brave Blades, but you shall be
Sworn Brothers made as well as we.
March after me, c.
No other Obsequies we crave,
Nor quaint Inscriptions on our Grave;
A simple Shroud's a Soldiers share,
Which if He want, he needs not care:
March after me, c.
Such vails are all we wish at last,
Which if we want, the Care is past.
This done, to think of us were just,
Who drink not, yet as dry as dust:
March after me, c.
While you act what we did before,
Discharge with Chalk the Hoastess Score,
And if the Hussy challenge more,
Charm the maundring Gossip with your ^ore.
March after me, we'll frolic be,
And if thou dye, I'll dye with thee.

I proclaim you all Edomites; Dragooners of Dagon; Ding-dongs of Dathan: -- A
generation of Vipers. --


No, Father Benhadad, your gravity is mistaken grossly, we are rather A
generation of


Go to Holy Benhadad, stand you to your Calling as we to our Arms. Thou art for
converting the Great Turk, and we for lining our Pockets with Tunis gold. Where
if we get our design, hold to thy Principles, but no farther then thou can
maintain them; and we shall create thee our Household Chaplain.

To Sea, to Sea; the Winds are prosperous.


And may we prosper with them. -- So farewell Civil and her dainty Doxes.


Ran tan; hey for Tunis and Argiers.


Such was the Dukes care to remove these Weeds,
Whose fatal growth might choke maturer Seeds.

Good Governors wise Gardeners imitate,
These cheer their Plants; those steer a planted State.

I cannot, Gentlemen, contain my self;
-- Timon thy Genius has surpassed it self;
Thy Scene is richly various: -- preaze on still,
These Galleries applaud thy Comic skill.

Come along with your horns, my Lads of metal. It was the Dukes pleasure before
his departure, that we should be appointed the Sinks and Sentinels of the City,
and that none should have ingress, egress or regress but by our especial
authority and favour. -- But harm watch, harm catch; for my part since I crept
into this office, I am woven into such a knot of good fellowship, as I can
watch no more then a Dormouse: nay, I am verily persuaded if I hold Constable
long, the Deputy of the Ward will return me one of the seven Sleepers. But let
me advise you, my Birds of the Capital, that you walk not after my Example: be
it your care to watch while I sleep. Many eyes are upon you; but my eyes grow
heavy; my days society bids me take a nap.


But one word, good Master, before you drop into your slumber: Report goes that
there be Spirits that petroul familiarly in this Century; what shall we say to
them, if they pass by?


Bid them stand.


But what if they either cannot or will not?


Let them then take themselves to their heels: and thank God you are so well
rid of them.


One word more good Constable, and then good night. -- Be these the Spirits
that allure our Children with spice and trinkets to their Skippers, and so
convey them to the Barmoudes?


In no wise Neighbours; these Spirits come from the Low Countries: and though
at the first sight very frightful, yet appearing unaim'd they become less
fearful.


Nay, if these pretty Familiars come to our Guard naked, we shall prove hard
enough for them.


Well, Neighbour Rugweed, let us not presume too far on our strength: These
Spirits be a dangerous kind of Whifflers: and like our Robin Good Fellows will
play their Legerdemain tricks, scudding here and there in a trice: and nimbly
snap you when least suspected.


From the Cinnerian depth here am I come
Leaving an ERRA PATER in my Tomb,
To take a view which of my Fellows be
The thrivingst Artists in Astronomy.
Rank one by one in Astrologick row,
And dying see whom thou did living know.
Mount gainful CRINON, for to thee we give,
As thou deserve, the sole Prerogative:
For thy divining lines have purchased more
Then all our prime Professors got before.
Iason won much at Colchos, but thy gain
Has linked thy shoulders in a Swedish Chain.
Rich Divination! But what's knowledge worth,
If People do not credit what's set forth?
This was
And hold a Prophetess as true as thou;
But not so well believed: -- take heed my Blade,
Thy late Predictions cannot retrograde,
And give thine erring Notions such a check,
As they unlink that chain which decks thy neck.
Signs sometimes change their influence we see,
I wish the like Event befall not thee.
The Golden Number and Saturnian line
Have been propitious to thee all thy time:
Thy Says held Oracles: thy Observations
For Death, War, Weather held by foreign Nations
As positive Maxims: yet one Critical point
Will throw this artful Fabric out a joint.
Dog days each year affords, if thou find none,
Thy Forune's clearer far then any One.
Let me then caution thee divining Crinon,
Lest thy own Bosom prove thy treach'rous Sinon,
Let not opinion make thy judgement err,
"The Evening Conquest crowns the Conqueror:
Hope of reward or one victorious Field
Is no firm ground for any one to build:
"May ill success cloth him with discontent,
That balances the cause by the event.
Next him ascend ERIGONUS, whose Art
Richly embellished with a loyal Heart
Will not permit thy thoughts to stoop so low
As to pretend more then thy Notions know,
Or can attain to: Thou hast taken content
With as much freedom under strait restraint.
As Pibrack in his Paradox expressed,
Inwardly cheered when outwardly distressed.
I have much mused while thou converst with us
Of the Gradations of the Celestial House,
Yet had none of thine own to shelter thee,
This was an humour that transported me,
To see a mind so large, and to discourse
As if he had got Fortunatus purse.
This caused me think that we did greatly err
In holding thee a mere Astrologer,
Though't be a sacred-secret Speculation
And highly meriting our admiration:
But rather some rare Stoic, well content
With his estate how e're the World went.
Yet when I saw thine artificial Scheme
Exactly drawn, as none of more esteem,
I wondered much how such choice Art could want,
Unless the whole world were grown ignorant.
I heard of late what I did never dream
Thy farming life had drawn thee to a Team,
Preferring the Culture of an Husbandman
Before a needful Astrologian,
Who in this thankless Age may pine and dye
Before he profit by Astronomy,
For though I must confess an Artist can
Contrive things better then another man,
Yet when the task is done, He finds his pains
Sought but to fill his belly with his brains.
Is this the guerdon due to Liberal Arts
T'admire the Head, and then to starve the Parts?
Timely prevention thou discreetly used
Before the fruits of Knowledge were abused.
"When Learning has incurred a fearful damp,
"To save our Oil, 'tis good to quench our Lamp.
Rest then on thy enjoyments, and receive
What may preserve a Life, reserve a Grave.
This with convenience may supply thy Store,
And logde thee with content; what would thou more?
While He who thirsts for gold and does receive it,
Pules like a Baby when he's forced to leave it.
For you LIBERIUS, I'd have your look
For your improvement on your Table book;
Where you shall find how you bore once a Name
Both in the rank of Fortune and of Fame,
But others rising to an higher merit
Darkened that splendour which you did inherit,
Or those mistakes which caused you err so far
As your late years have proved Canicular:
To waste more paper I would never have you,
For I'm resolved your Book will never save you,
Nor you from it receive a benefit,
Suppress then, Pray thee, thy leaf-falling Wit;
Merlins Collections will not serve thy turn,
Retire, retire, and slumber in mine Urn.
Dotage has chilled thy brain, in silence sleep,
"He's wise enough that can his Credit keep.
For you COLUMBA and rare PEREGRINE,
It is your fate, to nestle in a Clime
Of disadvantage: wisdom bids you build
Where you may dwell; and sow in such a field
Where you may reap the harvest you have sown,
"Arts unimproved are to no purpose shown.
Those only may be truly said to know
Whose Knowledge pays their Country what they owe:
And with the Be, from labour never cease
Till they have stored their Hives with sweet increase.
Which thriving industry infused by nature
In such a small Political a Creature,
Might by a Native Modul render thee
Conducts of Science in Astrology:

To brouze on Suckets in a barren soil.
For you ALATUS, mount with airy wing,
And to your scattered Nest some feathers bring:
Though popular esteem afford delight,
It cannot satisfy the appetite.
Fame is a painted meat and cannot feed,
Nor sate the Stomach when it stands in need.
This was mine own condition; -- while I lived
I to the highest pitch of Fame arrived;
All the Rialto founded with my praise,
Yet silence shrouded this within few days,
For after some few Funeral tears were shed,
My memory died, before tears went to bed.
Yea, in my life time, when my state grew low,
My fame found none she would conduct me to:
And let this caution thee:-though thou swell great
In men's conceit this will not get thee meat:
"The only means to raise friends, fame and store
"Is to make Industry thy Provider.
For ATRO-LUCUS, SERANDS they be such
I would not touch them, lest I should too much
Impeach their branded fames: one word for all,
As their disgrace is great, their knowledge small:
Let these Daemonicks practise less in Black
It will discolour all their Almanac.
But this was not my Errand: I would know
How Ladies with their Husband suit Below!
Those frolic Girls I mean, and of none else,
Who were induced by mine and Crinons Spells
To choose strange Bed-fellows: -- Pray
Dear Mephistophilus; those Wantons do.
All out of joint: they've left their Husbands bed.


By this it seems they were not rightly wed;
There was no Justice in it: for if there had,
Should they break loose, they would be judged mad.
-- But now mine hour approaches, I must pass
Down to that vault where late I lodged was.
Fix Mephistophilus this on that Gate,
That those who knew me may collect my Fate.

The ASTRONOMICAL ANATOMY in a shadowed Physiognomy; recommended to Posterity.
Dissected and presented in the Empirical Ghost of D. NICHOLAS GALLERIUS.

-- Facilis descensus Averni.
Spirits, Spirits, Spirits.


Where, where, where?


Here, there, and every where.

Now in the Porters Lodge, then in the Air. --

A foutra for such ranging Mawkins. -- I'll tell you fellow Officers, for I
have been since my weining sufficiently schooled in the Office of a Constable;
that we have no Legislative power (do you mark me) to commit any Person be he
never so notorious a Delinquent, if he fly, or as our Falconers say, mount up
into the Air; we are not bound to follow him, neither to attach nor commit him;
and why says the Law? because it is not in our power to catch him. But if he
strut in the street, you may command him to come before me the Constable, as I
am the Representave Body of the Duke; or before your selves, being the
Representave Body of your Constable: and if the Person so taken remain under
safe Custody, and he fly, if you overtake him by speed of foot, or by help of
the Belmans Mongrel, you may by the Law of Arms lay him by the Heels.


Doubt nothing, my fellow-Knights of Hornsey; the Plot is so neatly and nimbly
laid, as it cannot but hold stitch.


But be the Favourites Suits got, Sir Reuben?


They are brought to our Lodgings already. To try a Conclusion, I have most
fortunately made their Pages our Coyes by the influence of a white Powder;
which has wrought so powerfully on their tender pulse, as they have engaged
themselves ours back and edge. -- Sunt munera vinc^n s^vis.


'Tis true; but how shall we pursue this Project; that we may act to purpose,
what your Ingenuity has contrived?


Leave that to me; be it your care to follow my direction, and if I make not
these Haxters as hateful to our Hossies, as ever they were to us who were their
Husbands; set me up for a Jack-a-Lent, or a Shrove-Cock for every Boy to throw
at. The Net is spread, and if they escape the nouze, they must have more eyes
then their own to discover it.


Excellent, excellent; I long till I be at work.


It will admit no delay, Sir Amadin, I assure you. We have not over-watcht this
night to no purpose: this very morning by times we must be fitted with our
Properties: and with a scornful neglect pass by that Rendezvous, where our
gamesome Ladies expect their youthful Platonic.


Revenge to me's far sweeter then to live.


Too't, too't, for loves sake let us too't.


The Plot is laid with such industrious skill,
If this take not, I do not know what will.

HOw tedious morns these be in our expectance
Of what we tender most?

Credit me Madam,
My Marriage day from the rising Sun to Night
Seemed not so long, though it was long enough,
As the slow-running course of this Morns visit.

Desires cannot endure protractive hours,
The Poet has confirmed our thoughts in this,
Placing our Action far below our Wish:
"Sooner quenched is Loves fire
"With fruition then desire.

That Poet surely was neither Mantuan, Lucian, nor Claudian.


No Sister; nor Alcaeus, Eubaeus, nor Apuleius; but some cold-Cucumber spirited
Zonocrates, who never knew actually how to hug his Mistress.


This is the hour and place.


It is so; and no doubt but our feathered Favorites have over flown us.


What do you lack my Princely Beauties?


What your Sex cannot furnish us with; my dainty Dabrides.

Did you entertain no Gallants lately?


Not any, Madam; but Gallants are men of their words; they will stand to their
tackling upon occasion: will you be pleased Noble Ladies in their absence, to
bestow your selves in a room: or to procreate your selves, take a turn in the
Garden?


Slid does she hold us for Andalisian Studs, that can breed by the air, or
procreate of our selves?


Well, her meaning is good; we will accept her offer: and take a walk or a
cheerful repose at our pleasure: and in it let each of us for want of more real
Objects, entertain an imaginary apprehension of their absent Lover.


Anon, Anon Sir; -- quick, quick as Erebus, good Ieremy. -- Uds so, what a
clattering they make? I verily think our old Titere Tews and Bugle Blews are
come to Town, they keep such a damnable quarter.


They knock as they were mad men in the Percullis; -- quick, quick, more
Attendants in the Unicorn. -- There goes none to the Anwarp. The Lion and the
Roebuck have not one Drawer to attend them. -- Who goes into the Ladies Garden?


We shall have a brave Term, if we stir not our stumps better,


The Elyzian Groves so richly beautified,
Decked with the tufted verdure; watered
With Crystal Rills, and clothed above conceit
In native Diapry: may Emblems be
Of this delicious Platform, where each sense
May sate its quest with sweet satiety.

And th'edifying sense with melody.
Hark how that evening quire of Nightingales
Warble with shrillest notes, pricks at their breasts,
Tereus incestuous Crime; as if it had been
A fact inexpiable: wherein we doubt
What we should do if were put unto't.
This is a Garden sure of great frequent.

Lucullus nor the Roman Argentine
Had ne'er the like: nor with completer beauties
More gracefully embellished: it might be
Styled the Spring Garden for variety
Of all delights: Balls, Treats, and choice Invites
Addressed for amorous Parlance: and indeed
To make the Bargain up: -- you know my meaning,

Thou art a dangerous Beagle. -- What say you Ladies.
In this perpetual Spring-like sweet retire
To gratify her curtsy and conduct
Who tendered these respects, let's have a Frolic;
A Jovial Frolic till the Platonic come.
Whom we must chide, and with some discontent
Tax for their slowness.

The motion's wondrous good,
We all assent to it.

But in this assent
Scatter such freedom as it may appear
Our Fortunes be our own: and that no eye
Of jealousy or parsimonious thrift
Can bound our humour. -- Lets call up the

Your pleasures Madams.
What hast within Boy?


Cakes, Creams, stewed Prunes, Olivets, Tongues, Tarts, and --


What else, you Jack of all Trades! Doth your Mistress take us, you nitty napry
Rascal, for her Bordella's Blouses?

Bring us here Pistachie Nuts,
Strengthening Oringo Roots,
Quince, Peach, and preserved Apricock
With the Stones pendant to it*
With such incentive and salacious Cates,
As quicken hours, and sharpen appetite.

You shall, you shall Madam; -- On my life these be the Ladies of the New
Dress; they'll never be satisfied.


Let us imagine our selves now to be planted in the Sparagus Garden; where if
we want any thing, it is our own fault. A fair Alimony needs no pawn; it will
discharge a Tavern Bill at any time.


How is it Noble Ladies? -- Your Honours shall want no rarities that our
Store-house may afford you.


A Glass of Muscadella for me. Here Madam Fricase, to Mounsieur Flore^o.


This Curtsy Madam, must not beget in you a forgetfulness of Caranto.


So nearly he's bosomed, you need not fear it.


Nectarella for me* here princely Ioculette to your Salibrand.


Mean time remember loyal Palisado.


No Individual can be well forgot.


Medaa shall be mine. -- This Madam Tinder to your Tilly Valley.


First to your own Morisco* -- So this Health's gone round.


Now when our throats are clear, let's join together
In some choice Musical Air.

Agreed, agreed;
What shall we have?

What may enliven love,
And feather fancy with Icarian Wings.

We must be mounting then. -- Your Subject, Madam.


Le Drollere Amaranto.


Dainty Airs.
And lines to suit them: -- We shall follow you.

What shall we poor Ladies do,
Matched to Shallops without brains,
Whose Demains are in grains,
And their wits in madding veins,
Stored with Neapolitan Mains?
Give us sprightly Sprigs of Manhood,
None of these Swads nor airy Squibs,
Who would fain do but cannot.
Poor Ladies how we dwindle!
Who can spin without a Spindle?
Valor never learned to tremble,
But in Cupids dalliance nimble.
Little good does that stud with a Stallion,
Fancies Alien, weakly jointed,
Meanly manned, worse appointed,
Who would do if he knew how,
But alas he would but cannot.
Penelope though she were chaste,
Yet she bad her Spouse make haste,
Lest by his sojourning long,
She might chance to change her Song,
And do her Vlysses wrong;
What then may we who matched be
With these Haggards madly manned,
Who would gladly do but cannot?
Shall our youthful hopes decline;
Fade and perish in their Prime:
And like forced Andromeda
Estranged from Fancies Law!
Shall we Wives and Widows be,
Bound unto a Barren Tree?
Ushers come and Aple-Squires
To complete our free desires:
Platonic there be store
Fitly framed and trained to man it.
Bavin once set a fire
Will not so soon expire;
Let's never stay with such as they,
Who gladly would but cannot.
Shall we love, live and feel no heat
While our active Pulses beat?
Shall we hug none of our own,
But such as drop from the Frigid Zone?
Let's rather bid old Love adieu,
And in the Requests suit for some New
Who have the heart to man it:
Tell us not this nor tell us that,
A Kid is better then a Cat,
And though he show we know not what,
He cannot.
As I'm a Virgin, Ladies, bravely performed;
Once more Frontineack, and then a Walk.
This Wine wants Flavour, Sapor, Odour, Vigour;
Taste it, dear Madam, 'tis as pall and flat
As a seer Fly-fl^p.

Our last years Vintage, Madam, was but small.


It seems so by your measure: this would never
Quicken the Spirit, nor inflame the Blood.

They come, they come, they come.


Let's entertain them with a joint neglect.


Let us pass by them with regardless scorn.


Pox on these overacting Prostitutes,
They sate mine appetite.

Fancy so fed
Begets a Surfeit ere it gets to bed.

B're I Platonic turn or Confident,
Or an officious Servant to a Puss
Whose honour lies at stake, let me become
A scorn to my relations.

Or when I
Engage my person, like a professed Bolt,
To vindicate a Mistress, who for sale
Would set her Soul at hazard; may my Grave
Be in the Kennel: and the Scavinger
The Pen-man of my Epitaph.

Or I
Embrace a Monkey for a mass of treasure.

May never down seize on this dounless chin,
When I become an Usher to her sin.

So; let them chaw of this: -- our Scean is done,
Wee^ leave the rest to their digestion:
-- We must return those Adamits their Clothes
To make their visits in, or they are lost men;
But it were strange should they recruit again.

How is it Ladies?


Sure, wee'^ in a dream,
Whence comes this strangeness?

From the too much freedom
Of our affection: had we kept them still
At a discreeter distance, we had plaid
The wiser Falkners: and caused them stoup
Unto our Lure with eager appetite.
Fruits offered are least valued; got by stealth
Or by surprise, they are precious.

Shall we sleep
With this affront?

Our Spirits were remiss
Should we not pay them home in their own Coin.

Let Tinder lose her Name, her Family,
And Alimony which she values most.
If Tilly suffer not for this disgrace.

We vow the like: revenge may be excused,
"For Love resolves to Hate when 'tis abused.

Why; you whoorson Rogue; where's my suit?
-- As I hope for mercy, I am half persuaded, that this sliphalter has pawned
my Clothes.

Nay; as our rooms be near, our fates are all alike.
If my visit be admitted, I must present it naked.

When she sees her Salibrand so unmodiously accoutred, she will jeer him out of
his Periwig, and render him an Adamite Cap a Pe.


Never were Servants without a Dress, less suitable to Ladies of the New dress.


We shall be held for Sale-men, or Knights of the White Livery, if we encounter
them thus habited.


Nay rather for Knights of the Post; who had forfeited their broak't Suits for
want of swearing.


Nay, for Tumblers, Truckers, or Sculler-men: Plato in all his Commonweal had
never such naked followers.


Now, you hemp-strings, had you no time to nim us, but when we were upon our
visits?


Your Suits, Sir, were not without employment.
They were seam-rent, and stood in need of stitching.

Go to Rogues, you will never hang well together, till you be stitched in an
halter.


Well, we got more clear gains by this shift, then you will by your visit.


We trench too much upon these Ladies patience:
Better too late then never; let us haste
To crown their longing hopes with our attendance.
Delays in visits quicken our desires,
And in their Objects kindle secret fires.

'Tis high Meridian I wee've lost the time
Of our appointed treatment.

Let's contrive
Some neat evasion covertly disguised
To bear the face of truth.

It would do well,
Let's mould it as we go unto the Garden.

'Twere vain to call; they are long ere this dismissed.


And with incensed spirits; which to allay
Were a Receipt worth purchase.

The wound's so green
It must admit a Cure: Our confidence
Prepares us best admittance: -- go along.

How opportunely doth this season meet
To give us freedom in our intercourse!

There is a secret influence, no doubt,
Designed to second us in our desires.

Madam.


We were Mad dames indeed, should we give freedom to such injurious Favourites.


This is stormy language; I ever thought our late neglect would nettle them.


You can affront us, Sir, and with your wit
Take a deep draught of Lethe and forget.

Forget^ Slid I did ne'er affront you.


No;
Nor with a scrude contemptuous look pass by us
When we were at our Treat: and with a scorn
Not only slight us, but impeach our fame.

I call the Heavens to witness, never I.


Perfidious Wretch, this did I hear and see,
And such Records cannot deluded be.
Your Words, Sir are registered.

Pray, let's hear them.


You begun first with what your ulcerous flesh,
If I be not deceived, infected is.

Hah hah hah -- How neatly be these Widgeons caught in their own Springes!


Bravely continued, Timon, as I live
Each subtle strain deserves a Laurel sprig.
"Pox on these over-acting Prostitutes
"They sate mine appetite.

What might I say
That should dis-relish Madam Caveare?

You rant it bravely Sir; "Fancy so fed
"Begets a surfeit ere it gets to Bed.

You Palisado stand more resolute;
"E're I Platonic turn or Confident,
"Or an officious Servant to a Puss
"Whose honour lies at stake, let me become
"A scorn to my relations.

"Or when I,
(Thus I deblazon you, base Salibrand)
"Engage my Person, like a professed Bolt,
"Would set her Soul at hazard, may my Grave
"Be in the Kennel: and the Scavenger
"The Pen-man of my Epitaph.

"Or I,
(Thus you renounce your Medler, Don Morisco)
"Embrace a Monkey for a mass of treasure.

Nor would Sir Tilly be one hair behind
In scornful dereliction of our sex.
"May never down seize on his dounless Chin
"When He becomes an Usher to our sin.

The Devil's a Witch, and hast impostur'd them.


Platon. Do you believe all this?


As we do you
Stains to true love and all society.
Henceforth observe your distance as you tender
Fame, Freedom, Life: -- else we do vow Revenge
Shall dog you at the heels.

So, we are lost;
We must go cast about for some New Airy,
For these be fledged and flown.

By this prevention
I'll hate a Mistress of such rare invention.

It seems their Spleans for picking quarrels sought,
In pressing what we neither spake nor thought.

Our Duke Eugenio is safe returned
Laden with Trophies, Spoils and Victories.

Those Hectors too who launched forth for Tunis*
Have shown their valour: and enriched their Fortunes
Which languished in despair before this voyage
Above expectance: rich Rix Dollars are
Sown like Pactolus sand: their pockets crammed
With Indian Ore.

What will not prowess do
Where hope of honour, promise of reward,
Or Countries fame, th'attractiv'st lure of all,
Give spirit to men's actions?

This appears
Instanced in them to life: for by their hazard
Successfully completed, Foreign Sails
Ne'er came so richly fraughted.

It were well
The rest of our stout Myrmidons, whose Courage
Stands for the Wall, or in a Tavern quarrel,
Or an Highways surprise; to raise a stock
To feed their debauched visits, were so employed:
It would secure our Commerce.

This good Duke
Will regulate no doubt, his State-affairs
With that Composure, as no fruitless weed
Shall promise to it self long nourishment
Within the Coast of Civil. -- What means this?

The Dukes approaching in triumphant state:

Make clear the way, room for his Excellence.
Never did Civil show more like her self,
Nor beautified with a more graceful presence
Since her foundation.

WHat a Majesty
Without all servile affectation
His personating presence clothed with state
And Princely posture seems to represent!

Conquest and Affability contend
Which to his countenance may pretend most right.
His Spirit's too evenly poised to be transported
With the success of Fortune. -- Let us hear him.

Safely arrived, thanks to the Powers above,
Here are we come: our Enemies subdued,
Our wrongs redressed, our Merchants satisfied*
No foreign force to oppose us: thus has time
Crowned our addresses with triumphant palms,
And by just War begot a thankful Peace.

Long live Eugenio Sivils Governor.


Our constant care shall gratify your love.
Mean time, let these brave Soldiers sharers be
In our success: whom you and wee'r to hold
Such joint Assistants in our Victories
As their redoubted prowess merits fame,
And competent rewards to recompense
Their noble Service: For believe it friends,
Never were hazards better seconded,
Nor by their valour to a period
Sooner reduced; so prosperous was our fight
In darkening those who took away our light.
And having now composed these broils abroad,
We'r to look homeward, and redress those wrongs
Which nestle in the Bosom of our State,
So much more dangerous because Connivance
Has wrought them into Habits: These, we fear,
Pretend a Privilege, because the face
Of Greatness gives them countenance: but our Laws
Must be no Spider-webs to take small Flies,
And let the great ones escape: -- we have resolved
"Greatness shall be no subterfuge to Guilt.
This must we act with speed and closely too;
For Secrecy winged with Celerity
Be the two Wheels which manage Moral States
And Martial actions: after short repose
These we'll chastise: and by a due survey
As just Complaints shall be exhibited,
Measure our Censure to the Peccants Crime.
Nor must we spin out time: we have designed
Our very next day for Aggrievances
Of Court and City; where our absence might
Admit, perchance, more freedom to offend.
"The only way to salve a deep disease
"Is to give what may cure, not what may please.
Wherein delays prove worst: "Artists apply
"Receipts, before distempers grow too high.

Under such Guardians may we live and dye.


Sa, sa.


Ran, tan.


Tara-tantara -- thus far from the Isle of Canary. Is not this better my Boys,
then Trapanning an old D^olling Fryer for a sequestered Bond? -- Hey Boys, here
be those Indian Rats, that cant and chirp in my Pocket; as if after a long
Apprenticeship, they


O ^e pitiful Simpletons, who spend your days in throwing Cudgels at J^ck a
Lents or Shrove-Cocks.


Nay, in making Gooselings in Embers: and starting as if they were
Planet-struck at the weak report of a Pot-gun.


My wish shall be for all that Puny-pen feathered Airy of Buzardisme and
Stanielry:

"That such as They who love to stay to suck their Mammies teat,
"May live at home, but ne'er find one to give them Clothes or Meat.

Come along Wags, let's in a frolic way march to our old Friends in new Suits:
and reserve a scrude look for a three penny Ordinary.


Along, along* -- But utter not too much language, honest pockets; till a
Question be asked you.


Hey for a Fee-Farm Rent in Tunis!


Content thee, content thee Christobel --


Yes surely, that's a trim word: but when trow you, had I it? As I am an honest
woman, I have been this Goodman Fumblers wife so many years, and he never yet
gave me content. 'Tis such a dry Pilchart, he deserves nothing more then
basting.


Fie, Christobel, fie; for shame hold thy tratles: is it my fault, if thou be
barren?


Barren, you Codshead! Lies the fault there you Island Cur: nay, all the
Parish will witness for me, that I was not barren before I met with you. --
Barren Stich^l! that shall not serve thy turn. -- In plain terms Iosalin,
since Thou cannot content me one way, thou shalt another.


What would my Duck have?


What, my Drake, the Law will give me.


Law!


Yes you wizard; I have already fed a glib-tongu'd Parrot with a Coif on his
head, that will trounce you.


What have I done, my Malmsey?


Nay, your doing nothing, you Dumpling, has brought you into this pickle: The
short and the long on it is this, I will have Ale-mony.


Alemony! what means my Chicken by that?


I have been neither so long nor ill taught by my Betters, but I know the
meaning of Alemony well enough. My Landslady Ioculette, God bless her, is
matched to as handsome a frolic youngster as one can see on a Summers day: yet
she dislikes him, and has recovered a good stock of Alemony. I love to follow
the example of my betters: Set your heart at rest Iosalin, I must and will have
Alemony.


Thou shalt have any thing my Conny Cristobel, so thou wilt rest contented.


Nay Husband, you know well, that I am forced many nights to go to rest weakly
contented. But if I chance to trudge to Court; I mean to lie all open; you
shall hear I intend not to lay leafs on my wounds: The Duke, I hear, is a
merciful man; and will not suffer any of his poor Subjects to fall short of
their due.


Well, Girl, thou shalt find me ready to appear before his Grace, at any
time.


You'll have a gracious bargain on it then doubtless. -- Trust me Iosalin, you
will distemper all our Ladies at Court, if you push at the Gate with your
Ramhorns.


She's possessed, sure.


No, not yet; but I mean shortly to be possessed of my Alemony; you shall play no
more the sharking foist with me, you fumbling Fiddler you. -- I hope I have
friends at Court, that will take Course that I may have my whole due; and then
foutra for Iosalin.


Well, the thought is taken; I see one must thank God for a Shrow as well as for
a Sheep: though the Sheep have more wool on his back, and affords a more
savoury repast at the board. Hanging and Wedding go by Destiny: and I hold the
former to be the happier destiny of the twain: yet He that will practise the
art of swinging in a Halter, either to please or cross a Shrows humour, let him
hang like a Puppy without hope of pity: and dye intestate to make his Wife
heir on it: till some nimble Younker become his successor, and stumbling on his
Grave, laugh at the Cuckoldly Slave.


Summoned to appear! for what? -- What have we done!


Incensed those humerous scornful Ladies.
Thence rose the ground, I durst wager my Beaver on'c:
They ought us a spite, and their Information has don't.

This falls pat on their resolves: for those disdainful Wenches in the heat of
their Passion, vowed jointly that Revenge should kick up our heels.


Our heels are not so short, though theirs be. Should they pursue this
Information, it would dart highly on their dishonour.


Honour! what may that be in this age but an airy Title? These Bonarobas have
not lost the art of ingratiating nor deluding their Servants. There be Chimneys
enough at Court to convey their smoke. Beauty and Confidence keep strong
Sentinels in Loves Army.

They cannot want Solicitors in a place of Liberty.


Let them hold to it: Their Complaints are but squibs in the Air. Such Whifflers
are below my scorn, and beneath my spite.

Let's bravely on: I should account his fate
The worst of ills, that's foiled by Woman's hate.

Yet 'twas Alcides heavy fate, and He
Was stronger far then twenty such as we.

Conveen'd to Court! some Mask, or princely
Ball, I'll gage mine honour on it. We must be employed, sisters.

And usefully too I hope.


I see well the Court can do nothing without our City Revellers.

Trust me I am with Child till I get to it: but my desires are enlivened for a
sight of my Lord especially.


Or your special Lord Madam. We smell your meaning. As I am virtuous, he
deserves your smile or whatsoever may most indear him. I have known none at any
time court Love with a more graceful nor accurate presence. He can be both
seriously amorous: and amorously serious.


Surely, Lady Ioculette; you set him at a rate far above the Market: you value
him not as if you meant to sell.


No, nor buy neither: I have no property in such a rich pennyworth. For if I
had, I should wish --


I know what Madam.


Good now, thy conceit


Shall I freely unbosom me?


Pray thee, Madam, do Madam*


You would wish that his puny Baker^ legs had more Essex growth in them; for
else they would make ill Butchers ware.


Thou art a shrude Wench, trust me.


Well Ladies, I know a new minted Lord, that can act the Spanish Don, with a
peakt beard and a starcht look to an hair.


O Madam Tinder, I guess where you are: but he wants a little of your spirit:
He can cringe and caress better then he dare fight: A Ladies honour might
perish under such a feverish Champion.


For loves sake, let's make haste* Nothing will be done, till we come.


Good Madam Land-lady, take lame Cristobel, along with you;

She means to have about for her Alemony.


We shall not want then for handsome Attendance.


Give way, -- make present way for his Excellence and his Consuls.

As we have viewed and cleared our foreign coasts,
Wee'r now to prune those wild luxurious Sprays
Which give impede unto this spreading Vine,
Our flowery Sivel; whose succeeding Fame
Acquired by Civil Discipline exacts
Our care and yours, grave Counsellours of State.
'Tis not enough with Balms to close the skin
And leave the wound t'exulcerate within;
For He, whose care's to cure the Core without
And searches not the bottom, spoils the Root.
Let's first then look on Vices which put on
The face of virtue; and where modesty
(Merely dissembled) clothed with taking Beauty
Arms it self strongly against all Opposition:
Nay, what retains ofttimes such influence
On reverend Scarlet, as it darks the light
Of Judgement; and makes Elders fix their eyes
On rare-light Objects, which so strangely takes
As they make Judges vices Advocates:
But here's none such, I hope: Our State is free,
And so our Patriots and State-Consuls be.
Complaints inform us, and we wondered much
At th'first perusal, how a Feminine Nature
So sweetly pleasing, should be so depraved.

What means the Duke?


I relish not the discourse.


Have we not here some Ladies of the New-dress,
So newly styled and in their Honour soiled,
Who have deserted whom they ought to love?

Is this the Court-Mask, and the Ball we looked for?


Be you those Ladies?


I am one of them forsooth.


We are the same, so like your Excellence,
And now redressed.

We understand no less;
Your Alimonies signed by our Court!

They have not signed mine, if it please your Dukeship.

Truly I am a very impudent lame Woman: and my Husband a feeble weak-doing man,
your Grace must needs grant me Alemony.


See what Examples, Ladies, you have given
To simple Women! -- I shall here propose
Two tenders to your choice: either receive
(And with a Conjugal Indeerment too)
Your late deserted Husbands, or prepare
The Remainder of your days to entertain
A strict Monastic life: your Sentence's past,
Choose which you please.

I never shall endure
A closter'd life unless I had a Friar; Sir Gregory Shapeless shall be my
Platonic.

Rather then none, I'll take Sir Tristram Shorttool.


I for Sir Arthur Heartless.


I must put on my Night-gown for Sir Jasper Simpleton.


Sir Amadin Pu^y then must be my joy,
Who will be still, I think, a Puny Boy.

Well, since we are to this condition grown,
'Tis better far to use our own then none.
While I of youthful Favourites bereft
Will live with Scattergood, if ought be left.

Nay, Madam, but it were not amiss if you knew first, whether Scattergood will
live with you or no. Release your Alimony, and I'll resign my right in your
propriety: and in my widdow'd life mourn in sack -- lo infinitely.


This Iuncto must be fixed on firmer grounds,
Coolness of Fancy acts not on the Object,
Which it pretends to love: -- Join hearts to hands,
And in this second Contract reunite
What was so long divided: Love's a Cement
Admits no other Allay but it self
To work upon the aff^ections: -- be it yours,
(For virile spirits should be so demeaned,)
With pleasing candor to remit what's past,
And with mild glosses to interpret thus
In their defence still to the better sense:
"Their frailties in your Ladies wrought these failings,
"Which pious pity should commiserate
"And seal it with Indulgence: Then intend
"Your Office, Madams: which is to redeem
"Your late-abused time: which may be deemed
"Richly recovered being once redeemed.

May all our actions close with discontent,
When we oppose their humours.

Say and hold;
And this Act of Oblivion shall be signed.

This does content us highly: Powers above
Makes Lovers breach renual of their love.

And must Cristobel too pack home to her
Husband without her Alemony?

Or to thy death an aged Prioress.


Nay, but by your good favour, I'll meddle with none of your Priorities; I'll
rather go mumble a crust at home: and chuck my old Iosalin.


Nor is this all; our sentence must extend
Unto those Ladies Favorites; whose hours
Strangely debauched, made spoil of women's honours.

We hate them worse then Hell.


Good your Grace; we are reclaimed.


That's but an airy Note.
When Practical, we'll hold it Cordial.
Mean time we do adjudge you to the Quarries;
Where you shall toil till a relation give
Test of your reformation: -- Look on those
Tunis-ingagers, who were timely drawn
From their Trapanning Course: and by their hazard
Secured through valour, raised their ruined Fortunes
Above Expectance: when your work is done,
We shall find like Adventurers for your spirits
To grapple with, and rear your blanched repute.
Leave interceding, for we are resolved.
Now Conscript Consuls, whose direction gives
Life to our Laws: we cannot choose but wonder
How your impartial judgements should submit,
As if they had been biased, to grant
These Alimonies to their loose demands.
Sure such Decrees would not have relished well
Your jealous Palats, had you so been used.
"Wives to desert your Beds; impeach your Fames,
"In Public Courts discover your defects,
"Nay, to belly your weakness: and recover*
"For all these scandals, Alimonious ways
"To feed their boundless riot!

They are annulled,
Our Courts will not admit them*

'Tis well done,
For Gentlemen t'engage their State and Fame,
And Beds of Honour, were a juggling Game.
So we dismiss you: -- may the Palms of Peace
Crown Sivils State with safety and increase.
Whereto when our reluctant actions give
The least impede, may we no longer live.

YOu see our Ladies now are vanished,
And gone, perchance, unto their Husbands Bed
Convinced of guilt: where if they cannot tame
Their loose desires, but still retain the Name
Of ALIMONY LADIES; you shall hear,
They will not forfeit what they hold so dear,
Prohibited delights: and in that stain
With blushless dalliance visit you again.
Nor shall we build on these our confidence
Who give less reins to Reason then to Sense:
Yet for redemption of their Husbands Lands,
Seal our Acquittance with your graceful hands.
Naviter incumbens Cal^mo, sine merce laboro;
Merce carens, Vates nomine, verus ero.
Haec thalami Socias Alimonia fecit iniquas;
"Haud Aries uni sufficit unus Ovi. Arnold*

