AS quiet Monarchs that on peaceful Thrones
In Sports and Revels long had Reigned like Drones:
Rousing at length, reflect with Guilt and Shame,
That not One Stroke had yet been given for Fame;
Wars they proclaim, and to redeem the past,
To bold Attempts and rugged Labours haste.
Our Poet so: with like Concern reviews
The Youthful Follies of his Love-sick Muse.
To Amorous Toils, and to the Silent Grove;
To Beauty's Snares, and to deceitful Love,
He bids Far^wel: His Shield and Lance prepares,
And mounts the Stage, to bid Immortal Wars.
Vice, like some Monster, suffering none t'escape,
Has s^iz^d the Town, and varies still her Shape.
Here, like a General^ she struts in State,
While Crowds in Red and Blue her Orders wait.
There, like some pensive Statesman, walks Demure,
And smiles and hugs, to make Destruction sure.
Now under high Commodes with Looks Erect,
Bare-fac'd devours in gaudy Colours deck.
Then in a Vizard, to avoid Grimace,
Allows all Freedom but to see the Face.
In Pulpits and at Bar, she wears a Gown;
In Camps a Sword, in Palaces a Crown.
Resolved to Combat with this Motley Beast,
Our Poet comes to strike One Stroke at least.
His Glass he means, not for this Iilt or Beau,
Some Features of you all he hopes to show
On chosen Heads; nor lets the Thunder fall,
But scatters his Artillery at All.
Yet to the Fair he sain would Quarter show,
His tender Heart recoils at every Blow.
If unawares he give too smart a Stroke,
He means but to Correct, and not Provoke.

DIsguise your Inclinations as you can,
Yet every Woman's business is a Man.

Notwithstanding the Poet's Opinion, I declare for my part, I would have seen
all Mankind at the Devil, before I'd have taken so much pains for any one of
'em.


Ah Constantia! when once a Woman has got a Ma^ in her head --.


She never leaves till she has him -- well, I say no more; but faith 'tis hard
that Men should desert at this rate, and put us to such pains to bring 'em back
to their Colours.


An old Roman, as I have read, began an Oration to this purpose: If we could
break off all Communication with Women, we should be freed from many Troubles.
Now, I say, if we Women would renounce Mankind, we should avoid many Evils, and
be revenged for the past; for what could they do without us?


Not so fast neither -- Rather what could we do without them?


It might be somewhat uneasy, I confess, but they would have the worst on it.


Not so much as you may imagine, for they have a thousand other Diversions:
Nor, would Love it self ^e altogether excluded;. for in this wicked Age, a
young, spruce, handsome Fellow, is become a Rival for a fine Woman. And I'll
pawn my Breeches, and all that belongs to 'em, if in this Dress we are not as
much courted by the Men themselves, as when we appeared to be Women.


Fie, Constantia, thy Breeches have made thee strangely extravagant.


Why don't you see as we walk along, how they stop and look back -- Demme'
Jack, says one, a pretty young Fellow -- By Jove as good as a Wench -- And then
a Lady with a languishing Cast, ogles over her shoulder, and whispers her
Companion -- I vow, my Dear, a most agreeable Creature. Upon my Reputation,
such a Man is not at all my Aversion.


Of all the Conquests I have made in this habit, that which pleases me best, is
my Adventure with my Lady Dorimen. It is, you know, to her Niece Lucinda, that
my faithless Bellamour is to be married; wherefore if I can but get into her
Ladyship's Family, and have some power over her Inclinations, I hope to find an
Expedient to break off a Match, which, if concluded, undoes me.


Exceeding Wise and Politic.


My trusty Friend and Counsellor in this Intrigue, (with Reverence be it
spoken) is my own lewd old Father Sir Toby Cusiste, with whom thus disguised, I
have contracted a particular Intimacy: Whoring and Pimping have been always his
Occupation -- The kind Offices he does of that sort, make him every where a
welcome Person. He knows me not, nor indeed is it possible he should, having
left me at ten years old in the Country, at random, to the care of an old
Nurse, and never seen, nor scarce enquired after me since.


A hopeful Father truly.


How unkind soever he has been, if by his assistance I can be so introduced to
my Lady Dorimen, as to undermine B^llamour, and reclaim his Infidelity, he will
then be a Father to me indeed; and I expect him here every minute, to give me
some account of the progress he has made in it.


This Father of yours is a most necessary Man, and has likewise been
particularly useful to me upon a like occasion; for, to confess the Truth to
you freely, there is some other meaning in my wearing Breeches, besides keeping
you company.


Indeed I always suspected some secret Self-Interest in your Disguise, you put
it on so willingly: But may not a Friend be inquisitive, and ask your Secret?


Yes, and be told it. Know then, my dear Angelica, that tho in public I have
been an Enemy declared to Love, yet we have held a private Correspondence
together. And what may seem yet more Bizarre, the Man in the World whom I have
always used worst, is he whom I have loved best. I know what Dissemblers are
Men, and am resolved to enquire thoroughly into my Lover, before I discover my
Inclinations. If I find Frederick loves me sincerely, and is a Man of Honour, I
will then explain my self in his favour: But if I prove him unworthy, my
Aversion, that is now but Pretence, shall be real, and he shall never so much
as suspect that I have had the least good thought of him.


This Caution is much to be praised, and the more, because it is so very
unusual to love, and be discreet at the same time.


In pursuance therefore of this Design, I have already made a friendship with
him, passing for my own Brother Courtall, whom every one knows to resemble me
so entirely, that we have often, by changing of habits, been mistaken the one
for the other. Thus have I many opportunities to pry into his most secret
affections, to examine his humour, and sound him to the bottom: But the Jest
on it is, that he has proposed a cross Match to me, proffering me the choice of
his four Sisters, provided I will undertake to persuade Constantia to relent;
to which I have agreed, and have accordingly made formal Address to all four.


How! to all four!


Yes, and am hugely diverted; for, you must know, their Brother has strictly
instructed 'em to be wanting in no kind of encouragement: I never rise in a
morning, but I find my Toilette covered with Presents, Rings, Bracelets,
Perfumes, and a world of fine things; for which I make equal acknowledgments to
all, and protest it most impossible to know which to choose.


And are you not very malicious, to triumph in this manner over the weakness of
your own Sex? Besides, what can th^s exposing the Sisters, profit any thing
with the Brother?


O let me alone to manage it; if I fail in my Ends, I'll be bound to renounce
my Petticoats for ever, and never to find any thing more substantial in
Breeches than what you can give me: for your Plot I don't see how it can fail,
for faith I could be in love with you my self, but that I know your Credentials
are counterfeit, and 'tis a false Pass which you show.


Prithee tell me truly, what manner of a Man do I make?


A very Spark, upon Honour; and, to all outward appearances, as much a Man as
the best. Any thing that's well Periwigged, and Powdered, and Steenkirk'd, and
Embroidered, is a Man. Singing and Dancing, and Dress, is Breeding. Noise,
Familiarity and Impertinence, is Wit. Whistling to one's self -- as thus -- or
taking Snuff gravely -- as thus -- passes for Though^, and serious
Consideration: And all this put together, is a Man.


At least as much as is necessary for us two at this time -- But however one is
a little Awkward at first -- How do I walk?


Ha, an Air ^iere determinee --


And then my Legs, Constantia.


'Tis true, the Ladies love good Supporters -- They'll do, they'll do, 'Sbud
fear nothing.


Why how now Bully, what, thou swear too?


Dam your Whinings and Formalities: Confound me, Madam, I adore you; Thunder
rivet me, I must enjoy you -- How much better this sounds than -- "Durst I
presume, Madam; or might I be permitted -- ^Zoons, how many a modest Fool has
lost his Longing, for want of Damming, Sinking, and Confounding handsomely, and
like a Gentleman.


Peace, Madcap -- here comes my old bawdy Father, according to appointment.


My Ganimed -- My Hylas --


My Iupiter.


My Hercules.


My dear little Sparks of Love, let me kiss ye. You're lucky Rogues both --
Wrapped in your Mothers Smocks Begad -- There's not a Lady in Town but lies at
your mercy -- Cupid, my Lady Dorimen's your own, the least Thrust throws her
flat e'gad, just you know how -- I met her this minute, and she gave me such a
Look, such sweet Ogles, as thus do ye see, and thus; so very dying egad, it made
my heart ache to see it.


Alas! poor Lady -- If she languishes in earnest, she knows her Remedy, Sir
Toby.


And that's heartily said i'faith: Well, she for a willing Mistress, and old
Toby for a hearty Pimp, I'll say it we are the best in Christendom: But hark --
I had like to have forgot -- This 'tis to have so much Occupation at a time --
Mark -- Anthony.

Twice twenty slender Virgin Fingers twine
This curious Web, where all their Fancies shine.
Your four Mistresses beg you to accept of this Bracelet, 'tis the work of all
four, composed of their own hairs, and wrought with their own hands.


A thousand Thanks, dear Sir Toby -- all your Offices are friendly.


Hush! hush! who comes here? what, a Swarm of Beaux and Froes?

My Lord, your Lordship's -- Madam, your most obedient -- That's my little Lord
Wagfan -- That's fine Mrs. Wrigglebum.


Ha, Chevalier Ierny, dear Rogue, let me kiss thee.


Dear Toby, let me kiss thee. Thou'lt excuse me, Geddemme', that I don't stay
with thee, but the Ladies would never forgive me: Let me go this once, and I'll
make what hast^ I can to come to thee again, beged.


Let thee go? Who the Devil keeps thee. --


What Fools are those, Sir Toby?


Such Fools as are to be seen, but not to be described; adzooks, the Town
swarms with them; one is called Vaunter, and the other Sir Iohn Airy, Fops,
with great Estates; Cullies to the Women, and Bubbles to the Men. -- But who
have we here. -- Ay, 'tis she her self by Jove. -- My Lady Dorimen in propria
Persona, with her Niece Lucinda; and just behind 'em, my little Courtall, your
four Cleopatra's; stay you and meet them, while we follow my Lady Dorimen. --
Make your best Leg, -- bow, bow, and let her pass, we'll catch her the next
turn. -- Now follow, -- adzooks, I love Pimping dearly.


As Nature them, so they this Shade have wrought,
Soft as their Hand, and various as their Thought.
And did you think my Heart, Ladies, not enough your own, before that you have
sent me this pretty Chain to bind it faster.


The Ladies who sent you that Bracelet, sure meant it for a Reproach, and not
for a Favour; and it seems to say, Inconstant Man, can no one Colour please
you?


Truly, Madam, I made a more favourable Interpretation, and concluded, that the
Ladies, who have been so kind to present me their Hair, meant to deliver up
their Strength with it.


You Men interpret every thing with vanity to your selves.


Alas, Madam, take away Hope and Vanity, you kill us; they are the Cordials
that kind Nature has provided for our Comfort upon all occasions of Disgrace
and Discouragement.


If Vanity could keep you alive, the Men of this Age are so stocked, they would
be Immortal.


Really, Sister, we give our Lover too many occasions to feed his Vanity, see
how plump and ruddy it keeps him.


Let us resolve then for the future, to be seen only in frowns.


Till we make him look like a Lover in earnest.


A Lover in earnest would be a strange sight indeed.


As strange as many other things that are often discoursed of, but never seen.


Love is the pretence of all Mankind, as common in their Mouths, --


As Snush in their Noses; --


But is never to be found in their Hearts.


Besides, Men are grown such self-enamour'd things, that they neither like nor
love any thing but themselves.


And what is the whole World swayed by, but self-affection; the Courtier sides
with the great Man in hopes of Preferment; the great Man is diligent about his
Prince, because he rises by him; and there is scarce a Priest who serves God,
but for the sake of a Benefice.


Pray, are not your Lovers the same? for when a Man pretends a Passion; what is
it he intends but to content his own Desires? You seek not to give, but to
receive Pleasure, and that you call Love. -- Love of your selves, indeed.


The Friendship, Loyalty, Religion, and Love of Men serve only to cover private
Ends.


And the Virtues of Mankind are all but Vices in disguise.


Very smart and satirical; 'tis pity Ladies, but this humour of Bitterness were
encouraged; what say you to an extempore Lampoon by word of Mouth upon the
whole Mall?


With all our hearts.


Really nothing so diverting, as to rail at Folks behind their Backs.


See yonder for the Purpose, a Legion of Lords and Ladies tossing their Heads,
and jetting their Tails; -- let's follow, and be exceeding severe.


We'll not spare a Man.


Nor I a Woman.


We'll take a turn or two by our selves: my Aunt is among the Men, and won't
miss us. Did you deliver the Note I sent to Bellamour?


Yes, Madam, but I vow it went against my heart.


The truth is, he has been so arrogant of late, especially since he thought
there were no longer any Obstacles to our Marriage, that I begin to be tired of
him; and when a Woman begins to be tired of a Man whilst he is a Lover, she has
but little encouragement to take him for a Husband.


But there is this to be considered, Madam, you have your Aunt's Instructions
to love him; you have given him your self great Encouragement; the whole Town
has talked of it, and what can you expect the World will think?


Why let it think; this fear of the World destroys all the satisfactions of a
Woman's Life: Hang the World, a Woman that minds what the World thinks or says,
had better never have been in the World.


But what can be the reason of this sudden alteration?


I confess the absence of Philobel had almost made me forget him, and I began
insensibly to feel a kind of Inclination for B^llamour: If my old Lover had not
returned, I might have made my new one the happy Man; but since I hear Philabel
came last night to Town, I find my self more inclined to my first Promise than
my last, and in this have only acted like a Woman of the Age; if one Lover had
failed, I entertained another in case of necessity.


Then you are resolved to break with poor Mr. Bellamour.


Not absolutely break with him, but suspend my Resolution till I know how
Philabel continues inclined; for as I told you before, I must not lose both;
and tho the uneasiness and jealousy of Bellamour's Temper has lost him some
part of my good Will, he is yet in the Balance.


Well, I vow Madam, methinks nothing's so pleasing as to see one's Lover
jealous; sometimes in Fury, then presently at your Feet; now raging to part,
then submissive for a Reconciliation; for, what's a Woman's power, unless she
could master a Lover of all Humours?


Yes, I would master him: I would have my Lover my Slave; a thing cast to
please and obey me; like my Glove, to draw on or off as I think sitting; but
then this Lover must not be jealous; that shows too much like a Contention for
the Mastery; every Look and Action is to be enquired into, and a strict account
exacted of all that's done or said. No, give me the Lover that's free, who
never pries into my Affairs, who has his Secrets, and lets me have mine; for so
all private Reck'nings are handsomely discharged, no matter for the rest,
that's the Husband for me.


But while you suffer so much main Stock to be spent abroad, there must needs
run a great deal behind-hand to you. Lord! I should be so sorry to see you pick
up a Husband from a Side-box at a Play, or the Gallery in St. Iames's Church,
and so after the first year be forced to live in the Fleet, or the King's
Bench.


And why not, rather than marry a dull, sat Fool, with a great Estate, whose
Faculties are all choked up with Phlegm; a Lump, whose only sign of Life is
sweating; we may melt his Grease, but not extract one wholesome Drop ou^ of
him. -- No, give me a Man without a Fortune, rather than a Fortune without a
Man. I had rather beg with a brisk, lively, young Fellow, than reign with a
heavy, bloated, overgrown Blockhead.


Your Aunt, Madam.


Your Wits are never seen in public with their Wives; 'tis become a point of
Scandal, and passes for Demonstration of a Fool.


To be seen with a Wife, may be one Demonstration; to have a Wife, adzooks, is
another.


Sir Toby, you have been marri'd your self, as great an Antagonist to Marriage
as you pretend to be; and as I have heard, was so pious a Husband, that in
Honour to your Wives Memory, you spent a Thousand pounds in her Funeral.


Yes, Sweat-heart, for Joy, and would have spent five times that Sum to have
purchased so glorious a Day.


Methinks you should at least express more respect for a Condition of Life,
which this young Lady has determined so suddenly to make Choice of for her
self.


Not so fully determined, Sir, but I shall take some time to consider of it.


Sir Toby, if you please, a word with you in private.


Bellamour, whose impatience must needs be great to be possessed of so much
happiness.


I am not, I assure you, in such haste for a Husband, as to venture any part of
my own repose to satisfy Mr. Bellamour's impatience.

And do you think it such a venture, Madam?


There is no judging of Men, Mr. Bellamour, by what they appear to be, while
they Court us.


Give me leave, Madam, to add, nor of Women, while they are courted if I may
compare your former Encouragements, with your indifference to Day.


But are you sure he is such a one, as a Lady may with safety repose her Honour
in his hands?


Her Honour, ay, adzooks, or any thing else that she has.

Hark ye, young Gentleman, my Lady desires to know if you are a Gamester; she
wants a Man sometimes to pass an Evening, or so, at Piquette. -- You understand
me.


You might have answered for me; I'll never stick out at any Games my Lady
shall propose.


Look ye, Madam, he will never stick out; and adzooks, I think that's as much
as any reasonable Woman can desire.


Sir Toby, shall I venture my self a turn with you and your Friend alone:
Niece, you won't be angry to be left with Mr. Bellamour, your Servant; we shall
meet the next turn.


Yes, Women are unintelligible to the most piercing and quick-sighted: Nothing
is sincere in whatever they say or do: They are all Artifice and Disguise;
resolving and altering without Sense or Reason; nothing is constant either in
their Minds, or in their Bodies. As these are a Prey to Age and Infirmities, so
are those to every frivolous Interest and idle Temptation. Their Love is never
so firm and well-establish'd, but it is sacrificed every hour to their Folly,
or their Pride. --


Enough, enough, Mr. Bellamour, -- is ^h^se are your Opinions of our Sex, how
are you to be believed, when you s^y you love us? For how can any thing so
deformed, as you describe Women, be beloved?


There is a secret Enchantment in your Persons, that bewitches us to our own
Destruction. -- Inconstant Lucinda, after so many obliging Encouragements! Why
was this cruel Letter sent me this morning.

YOU have been too con^ident of my Consent; presume no longer on my Aunts
Authority: My H^art is yet my own, and while it con^inues so, my Person shall
never be disposed of. -- Come not near me to day.

Why am I thus abused?


Come not near me to day. -- Mark that command. Why am I disobeyed?


If any mistake has happened to cause this Alteration, or if in ought unknowing
I've transgressed, may I not be permitted to clear my Innocence?


To make your self more guilty, is that to clear your Inn^cence? I will have
you take notice, that I expect to be obeyed in every tri^le: Let my Commands
seem never so unjust or unreasonable, I say, I will be obeyed; nor will I have
my Lover dare to examine the reason of what I do, but submit patiently, and
expect with Resignation: While I am your Mistr^ss, learn to behave your self
like my Vassal; when I am your Wife, you may have your Revenge.


Well, I'll say it, of a Critic, my Lady Dorimen's the Critic of Critics.





Stealing off: Mr. Bellamour, do we drive you away?


I beg your Ladyship to excuse me, I will wait on you the next turn.


Niece, What have you been doing to Mr. Bellamour? he seemed to leave us in a
st^nge Disorder.


He looks already with the careful Face of a Married Man.


He's in one of his splenetic Fits: 'Tis an Affectation the Men have got to
disguise ill Humour, and ill Manners.


See, he's returned, and is whispering with your Maid.


Giving her some private Directions, Madam, where you may see the Pearl
Necklace, the Diamond Lockets and Pendants, and the Plate ^or your Toilet that
are to be presented upon the W^dding-day.


That if there is any thing amiss, such Alterations may be made before-hand as
are suitable to your own Fancy.


Rather bribing my Maid, to discover to him who are my Visitants, what
Correspondences I keep, and a thousand such jealous enquiries.


He a Rival! what should my Mistress do with such a Whiffler? He signi^ies no
more to a Woman, than a Fly to a Camel.


Mrs. Plackett, I repose entirely upon your Sincerity, and shall gratefully
reward all your Services.


Plackett come hither; what has Mr. Bellamour been whispering to you?


Nothing, Madam, but only to know whether my young Lady designs for the Play or
the Park, that he may accordingly order his business to be where she is to be
ogl'd.


Some such amorous Enquiry I durst have sworn^ Niece, is not our ^ime come to
be going?


When your Ladyship ple^ses.


The Park, Madam, is still full --


An invincible Necessity obliges us at this time.


That Invincible Necessity is Infinitely Disobliging.


We must not part, Madam, but at your Coachside.


Sir Toby, you are one of those happy Men who have leave to go any where with
the Ladies.


Ay Child, they'll let me go as far as their Lap-Dogs or Squirrels, the Doctor
or the Midwife. Alas! I may peep where I please: An Old Man is like a Beast
tamed, my Paw frights no Body.


LOVE is an universal Invader: Whatever Women pretend, they are all sensible
alike; the best Livers as much as the loosest Prostitutes; only with this
difference, those whom we call Virtuous and Chaste, have more Pride, or a
greater force of Dissimulation.


Really, Brother, you're a strange Man: I say 'tis impossible for a Woman to be
in Love, and I'll maintain it.


In Love! Lord, with what! with a filthy Man! Phogh.


With a stiff Beard, that fetches Blood with every Kiss.


A great pot Belly, a broad Back, and huge Legs and Arms, enough to squeeze one
to pieces.


There is another sort of Man, my good Sisters, that, perhaps, may not be so
disagreeable: I mean your smooth Beaux, who's as tender and gentle as any Lady;
always tricked and perfumed like a Lady; and were it not for his Breeches, a
very Lady.


Really I should as soon have a Passion for a Shadow.


Truly, Sisters, methinks you're too nice; I have seen very proper handsome Men
of all sorts and sizes.


Really, Sister, such a Confession does not become the mouth of one who values
her Reputation.


Men are odious Creatures I vow, and I'll live and die in the Assertion.


Young Courtall will soon make Proselytes of you all.


He! Harmless insignificant Thing.


One of you, if you love me, must love him. I have already told you how
passionately I adore his Sister, and that he has promised to put me in
possession of her, when ever one of you four will consent to be his Wife. Upon
this Article depends my Life and Happiness; if not performed, I am miserable;
but if performed, am blessed for ever.


To save a Brother's life, really much should be done; but, I vow, a Man is
strangely my Aversion.


True^ Sister; but when a B^other's Life's in Jeopardy.


To day he has promised to determine which of the four is most his inclination;
wherefore I beseech her, whom ever it is he fixes upon, to consider she has a
Brother's Life and Fortune in her hands.


If I am the Person, really I cannot agree to it, unless you confess that you
are verily persuaded that I consent out of pure Love and Kindness to you, and
not any Carnal Affection to the Man -- And I don't at all doubt but I am the
Person.


You the Person?


Sure he has more Wit than to choose the Oldest.


The Oldest? You insipid Creature --


Pray cease these untimely Dissentions.


Mr. Courtall, Sir, is at your Honour's house, and has directed me to acquaint
the young L^dies, that he will wait there till they have done walking.


Tell him they are coming --

Your Lover is waiting for you at home; I find he cannot be very disagreeable
to you, since you are so ready to quarrel for him.


For him! Really, Brother, if you think so, I will con^rn my self no more in
this Affair; my Sisters might fall out for the Man, but I vow my Disorder
proceeded from nothing but an inordinate desire to be the Instrument of your
happiness.


Pray no more words -- Go home, agree among your selves, and make me happy, by
making Courtall so.

How awkwardly we strive to conceal our Passions!

And how apparent is the Love of these Women, in spite of their affected
Aversion! It is as hard to hide True Love, as it is to dissemble Feigned.


Lucinda to be married to Bellamour! Geddemme', as I hope to be saved, sure she
wont serve me so: But hanged, all Women are Jilts, and I don't care this pinch
of Snuff who has h^r.


Nor I, Beged; for I have taken pains to make the Town believe I have had her,
and, Beged, that's all I desire with any Woman.


And, Demme, she has made me believe a thousand times that I should have her;
for by all the great Geds and the little, she never sees me, but she laughs
full in my face; and if to smile is a sign of being pleased, Beged to laugh is
at least as much again.


Well interpreted, dear Sir Iecky, Beged; for wherever I go, I observe every
body laugh, and I always used to take it for an Affront.


That's very foolish, Geddemme: Now, I never take any thing for an Affront. If
a Man calls me Son of a Whore, Beged I always take it for a mark of familiarity
and kindness. If any one kicks, or gives me a Box on the Ear, I take it all in
good part. A very good Jest, i'faith, and I laugh till I hold my sides.


You're in the right, Beged; for why the Devil should I suppose any Man would
affront a Man of my par^s? Beged, 'tis less'ning one's self, and I thank thee,
dear Iecky, from my Soul, for reforming me in this Error: But prithee tell me,
dear Aerie, did thou ever speak to Lucinda, that she has given the such hopes?


Speak to her, Geddemme', No: Was ever any thing so foolish? What signifies
speaking? If speaking would do, why none but Men of Sen^e would be happy; and
when the Devil did thou ever know a Man of Sense well received by a Woman?


That's true, by all the great Geds and the little; for I have observed all my
life, that my Gilt Coach and Six Horses, and Footmen in Lace-Liveries, have got
me more Women, than all my fine Speeches; and, Beged, I know what to say too as
well as another.


Geddemme, Paux there is more Rhetoric in a Tune on the Flute passionately
played, or a Song languishingly humoured, than in all Cicero. And tho I can
speak Sense as well as another, yet, Demme, I'm too well bred to offend the
Ladies -- But prithee, dear Vaunter, tell me how thou hast made the Town
believe thou hast had Lucinda; for, Beged, that's a pretty sort of Vanity that
I should be exceeding fond of.


Why, Beged, no otherwise than thus: At Church, I always sit in the same Pew;
at ^he Play, in the same Box; at the Musick-meeting, I contrive to be the next
Man of her, and never fail to le^d her out upon all these occasions. In the
Park, I turn as she turns; I go out, wh^n she goes out; I drive by her Coach,
then stop, and go softly, till she goes by again; then gallop, Beged, till I
overtake her once more; and so twenty times together, ogling like a Devil, till
I see where she alights, there I alight too; and, Beged, she never makes a
Visit, but I am up Stairs as soon as she. The World takes notice of these
Assiduiti^s, and being always glad of any opportunity to defame, my happiness
is every where published; my Friends give me joy of my success, which I receive
with an O Gad, why should you think so? What can a Woman see in me? This Town
is a strange place, that a man can do nothing in secret, Geddemme, I can't
imagine how this came to be found out; for, beged, I took all the care in the
World to be discreet, but these foolish Women always betray themselves -- And
so, Geddemme, half avowing, and half denying, I palm my self upon a Woman --


That would sooner spit in thy face, than let thee kiss her --


Ha! Ha! Ha! Right, Geddemme, as I hope to be saved, by all the gr^at Geds and
the little, and a very good Jest it is; and thus I got the Name of the Ladies
fine Gentleman.


But prithee, dear Vaunter, wilt not thou look like an Ass, when the world
knows another man has got thy supposed Mis^ress from thee?


Demme not at all, for I'll swear I gave my consent, and that the Fool has
nothing but my leavings; and that I was seeking some handsome occasion to get
rid of her, and, beged, you know the Town in always ready to believe any ill
that's said of a Woman: But however, Geddemme, if I could meet with this
Bellamour, I should be provoked to forbid the Banes, beged, by mincing the Dog
to Atoms.


Say thou so, Bully-Rock, beged yonder he comes -- And but that it would not
be like men of Honour for two to fall upon one, I'd stay and help thee; so,
dear Vaunter, fare thee well.


Demme, Aerie, thou wilt not leave me so -- See, there comes a spruce Prigg with
him, that thou shalt mince.


I'm heartily sorry, dear Vaunter, that I can't serve thee; but, Beged, I
engaged my person but last Night to a great Lady for all this day, an^ my
person not being my own at this time, dear Rogue, you must needs excuse me
Besides, my Lady Gobble tipped me the Wink just now to follow her.


Now I think better on it, why a Devil should I make a noise of this matter?
that would look to the world like resenting some disapp^ntment; and, Demme, I
scorn the world should think I was ever disappointed -- But I'll tell thee what
I'll do better, I'll write her a Letter by the Penny-Post, that shall give such
a Character of him as shall infallibly do his business; so, dear Aerie, let's
about it, and then come back, and rally the poor Dog to death.


Women grow troublesome when they are so fond: Your Cousin Angelica might have
spared you this trouble; I'd as live see a Ghost, as receive a remembrance from
a Cast Mistress.


You say you loved her once, and it is by that Love she now conjures you not to
give way to any other Passion which will make her desperate, and you perjured.


I should be sorry to make a Lady desperate; but if to change a Mistress is
Perjury, who is innocent?


What Reason can you give for your change?


Faith none at all: Our Inclinations are our Masters, and we wander but as our
Stars lead us; if they are false Lights, and show us out of the way, let them
answer for it. It was my fortune to see Angelica, and to love her. It was my
fortune to be absent from her, and to forget her: What is there new in all
this? I confess she has Beauty and Wit, and I wish her a great deal of
Happiness; but there is a Luck which over-rules all, the deserving are not
always the successful.


Sure Fortune will never side with Falsehood and Perjury --


O you mistake Fortune: Fortune is, as it were, an Hospital for Villainy and
Folly, where all are provided for, whom Nature has maimed and disfigured. Mark
every rude unpolished Owl you meet, he's sure to be some Minion of Fortune's;
and every nauseous ill-favour'd Hag, is not her Name a Fortune? The Children
of this World have all different Portions; some have Wit, others Beauty: But
where there is no Merit to be found, those have Fortune, which is the Cordial
Drop prescribed by Providence to comfort 'em, for the severity and unkindness
of Nature.


And so by consequence, because my Cousin Angelica has some merit, therefore
she must be unfortunate.


Besides, to confess the truth, I cannot but think two years Absence has made
as great an Alteration in her, as in me: Women are seldom behind-hand with us,
and two years was time enough for a Woman to have changed two dozen of Lovers.


And is this the best Answer she is to expect from you?


It is. Yet, if you please, you may give it some kinder turn: I would not deal
too roughly with one whom I had once loved, and whose Beauty and Virtues I
still adimre; therefore, pray, choose the gentlest terms you can to comfort her,
and advise her to forget one who cannot but confess he has been ungrateful.


And if 'tis possible, she shall hate as much as ever she loved you.


Not hate me: I would not have her hate me, only not love so much; and not
injure her self by any extravagance of Passion, nor by any over-fondness be
burdensome to me.


Ha, Bellamour! Give thee Joy, dear Rogue; give thee Joy. The Town says you're
going to be married, 'tis talked of, Geddemme, by every body at the
Chocolate-house.


By all the great Geds, and the little, is the Man possessed, to condemn himself
for all the Days and Nights of his Life to one body; to be bound never to
change her, tho she change never so much, tho she grows never so old, so
odious, so stinking, and ill-favour'd, phogh, Geddemme', to live under an
eternal Persecution?


Let me be torn by wild Horses, wracked alive, buried quick; but save me,
Heaven, save me from this Holy Inquisition, ^ll'd Marriage, beged.


Bellamour, that let the Person be never so lovely, or so much beloved, as soon
as she becomes your Wife, the Charm ends? Like enchanted Palaces that we
approach with admiration, but in the instant when we think we are entering into
Paradise, we find our selves in some dark Dungeon inhabited by Toads and
Adders.


Do not you know, Geddemme', that let a Person be never so much an Angel before
Enjoyment, she is the Devil afterwards?


Perhaps, by the continual presence of the Person, by considering her
deliberately, and examining her in all Lights, we find many things wanting to
our first Expectation. Perhaps a quiet and peaceable Enjoyment of any thing
mak^s it the less valued: Or it may be, by a frequent and customary Commerce,
the Pleasures of the Sense lose their quickness and vivacity.


Women are Riddles, Geddemme, past all expounding.


To day they are one thing.


To morrow another.


Constant to nothing.


A Compound of Whimsies, tossed to and fro by as many Humours, as the Ocean by
Winds.


Geddemme, there is no Woman's mind, but is past a Man's understanding.


There is no being certain of what is always uncertain, beged.


And in a Country full of Precipices, who but Mad-men will leap blindfold? In a
word, I can imagine no such lively Emblem of Marriage, as the Punishment for
Parricides among the Ancien^s; where the offender was sowed into a Bag with a
Monkey, a Dog, and a Serpent; these three Companions truly represent the
Character of a Wife; who is an eternal Chatterer, and full of tricks like a
Monkey; or howling and snarling like a Dog; or with a forked Tongue and
envenomed Teeth, stinging and biting like a Serpent.


But perhaps the poor Dog has a mind to a Son and Heir, and to see himself
growing up in a little Monkey-fac'd Representative; but, hark ye, my dear
Friend Bell. take this saying of the Poet's along with you, and treasure it up;
Though Solomon with a thousand Wives,
To get a wise Successor, strives;
But one, and he a Fool, survives. Geddemme.



Gentlemen, I thank you; I was once beginning to be very angry, but I find so
much reason in your Remonstrances, that I esteem my self much obliged to you.
The Counsel of Fools is not to be despised when 'tis good; and so your Servant.



Geddemme', Fools! who does the unmannerly Puppy mean?


Beged, not me; for all the World knows I am none.


I am much mistaken, Gentlemen, if he did not mean you both.


Demme, a very smart Lad. -- Dear Rogue, let me kiss thee.


Ay, dear Rogue, let me kiss thee, for thou and I must be better acquainted.
Beged, you're a Rump-Jewel for a Prince.


By your leave, Gentlemen, these Lips are reserved for better occasions.


Ah, le petit Malitieux! I never saw a Steenkirk better put on.


Sir Toby Cusiste, my most Illustrious Patron, great Master of the Mysteries of
Pimperlimpimp, Geddemme', your humble Servant.


My dear Brother Knight Baronet, your humble Servant, beged.


Adzookers, when I have such Servants, they shall never be seen without broken
heads.


A very good Jest; by the great Gods and the little. -- Let me kiss thee.


Stand o^f you Cur, -- thy Breath smells farther than a Brick-kiln.


Demme', you're so plagu^ witty. -- But, what Fool dost think I have been
rallying to Death?


I see no Fool, adzooks, here, but Vaunter.


No, Demme, a greater Fool than Vaunter.


Thy self.


Thou'^t make me angry one time or other with these true Jests, Geddemme.


Geddemme thou li'st, thou can not be angry.


Nay, prithee don't be so damnable witty: Pox, I hate these Jests that make
one's Sides ache without Laughing.


Spare him, good Sir Toby, for this time, he has been lately very useful.


By your leave, Geddemme, I'll tell my own Merits. You must know then,
Bellamour has been here; poor Fellow, how we rallied him; never was Dog with a
Bottle at his Tail so persecuted: For as you know, and as all the Town knows,
for if 'twere a Secret no body should know, and how it came not to be a Secret,
Geddemme if I know; for upon these occasions I am always Mum; -- but Women,
beged, are strange indiscreet Things, and a Man can't be always stopping their
Mouths, Geddemme. --


Dear Rogue, now I adore him, he speaks like an Angel, beged.


As I was saying then, to omit all farther Tropes and Figures, Circumstance of
Elocution, and Flower of Circumlocution. -- Bellamour is going to be married to
Lucinda. -- Now this Lucinda, beged, Vaunter and I have had twenty times. --


Ay, beged, a thousand, whenever we thought fit, by the great Geds and the
little.


Why, you Brace of Toads, whose Breath is poison. --


Ye Vermin, that live by gnawing upon the Reputation of Ladies. --

Demme, no more of these Jests, or we'll keep you Company no longer.


Rascals, -- Vipers. --

How unhappy are Women, whose Fame depends on the Breath of such Fools!


Rather unhappy, adzooks, for trusting their Fame with such Fools. And now,
Noble Colonel, give me leave to present you to this young Friend of mine; -- a
pretty Fellow, as you see, and worth a better acquaintance. This my little
Spark of Love, is Colonel Philabel, a brave metled Fellow, newly arrived from
Flanders, where he has been most Heroickly, adzooks, learning to ride -- the
Flying-horse in a Dutch Troop.


I shall be glad of your Acquaintance, Sir, and desire to be looked upon as
your Friend.


Pox of Speeches, -- Kiss you Rogues, -- Kissing makes the best Friends; -- one
Kiss is worth half a dozen Speeches; Pox of Speeches, -- would 'twere a Girl,
old Phil. gad I'd hold the Door, tho 'twere my own Daughter.


Well said old Iniquity. -- Thou hast nicked it, if thou knew all.


Now Gentlemen, that I may not be absolutely a Stranger to this Town, instruct
me how this Side of the World is altered since I left it; What are the
Diversions in Vogue? How do the Men behave themselves? And how are the Ladies
to be governed?


Why, faith, the Men are as abominable Rogues as ever, always Drunk, and always
Poxed, begad; nothing is heard of but Tavern-brawls and Midnight Rapes and
Murders; nothing to be met but Sharpers and Cullies, Pickpockets and
Politicians, Cutpurses and Lawyers; Parsons that point out Roads they ne'er go;
Physicians that prescribe what they never take; Courtiers that promise what
they never perform; Colonels that tell of Battles they never saw; Beauxs that
lye with Women they never could come near; Pocky Lords, Bloated Commoners, and
Pale-fac'd Catamites.


Most illustriously summed up; -- but the Women, Sir Toby, the Women.


Why, of them too, there are of all sorts, good and bad. -- Good, did I say,
very few good, but very Devout, and great frequenters of St. Iames's Church;
whoever goes that Road, can't fail of Heaven, at least of Heavenly Joys.


None are so Devout, I hope, as to renounce the Pleasures and Conversations of
the World.


No, never trouble your self, the Saints themselves have failings; human Flesh
is frail. So you lift up one hand to Heaven, you may lift up the Petticoat with
the other: Let their Heads be never so full of Devotion, the Devil is sure to be
in their Tails.


But which are the ways most in practice and observed to be most prevailing
over their frailty.


Why Money, adzooks, nothing like Money; be free of your Purse, and your
Presents, your Settlements, and your Jointures, and you may be as free as you
please, with whom you please: All, all are Danaes, by this Light; and the
Golden Ravisher is never denied entrance.


This indeed is a great encroachment upon Love: In matters of Love, Love only
should prevail.


Thus we have been so long ill used by the Sex: There are so many Examples of
Estates Mortgaged, and honest Fellows undone by their Treachery and
Expensiveness, that we begin to leave 'em off, and resolve to stick to one
another. For my own part, I am resovl'd not to care one farthing for the Sex
more, not I, ^gad, Bacchus shall have all my Gold.


And Venus shall never starve while I can furnish her; you old Fellows always
rail at Pleasures you are past. Nothing relishes when the Appetite is gone. For
my part, I have quite another Idea of the Sex; at least, I will delay censuring
till I have examined into Lucinda's Truth: If Lucinda has been false, I will
then turn Railer like you, and conclude the worst of 'em all.


See here, an Informer for your purpose; -- Mrs. Placket can give you the best
Intelligence of that.


Mrs. Placket, I am overjoyed to see you.


Mr. Philabel, you are welcome from the Wars. My young Lady is distracted to
see you; -- she has been in such frights for you, poor thing, -- but was
overjoyed to hear how well you carried your self in the last Battle. --


How well his Horse carried him, adzooks, thou mean.


This Note will better inform you.


Be not surprised at any Discourse you may hear of me in the Town: I am the
same you left me, and shall be pleased to find no Alteration in you. If you
think it worth your while, you may see me this Afternoon at my Aunts.


Lucinda returning to an old Lover; -- that's good news. -- Now for some trick
to secure the Aunt against Bellamour; -- but that one shove more, and Fortune I
adore thee.


If this Kindness is sincere, why was Bellamour so well received in my absence?


Why don't you know that the best received are seldom the most welcome, and
that the Civilities a Woman shows in public to one Man, are only to cover
private Familiarities with another?


And my Lady Dorimen, we may have leave to wait upon her too?


Yes; this is her Day.


Her Day! for what?


Why to receive Visits: All your great Ladies keep their days for Visitants.


And so by laying apart one Day for public Ceremony, all the rest of the Week
is secured for private Intrigue.


The Men and Women all visit the same day?


They have different Methods; my Lady has days apart. This is her day for the
Men.


Very fine. And so we visit as we go into the Baguio, where the Men and Women
have their particular days of admittance.


And ^ind hotter Work in some of their Ruels, adzooks, than in any Baguio in
Town. -- What think you Mrs. Placket of my young Friend here? he's most
desperately in Love with my Lady Dorimen.


That's desperate indeed: Alas, such little Gentlemen may pass upon
unexperienced Persons; but Widows have Beef-stomacks, such a Chick is not half
a mouthful. -- The Frenchman man is now dressing my Lady's Head; he has been
yet but two hours about it, in two more you may make your Visit; till when,
Gentlemen, your Servant, I will be sure to make all your Complements.


Fare ye well good Mrs. Placket.


I'll go before, taste some Wine, and bespeak a relishing Bit.


Thus Heroe-like, we from the Wars remove,
To crown our Toils, and still that Crown is Love.

ONE, two, tree Story more, begar, and dat be ver vell.


Not quite so high, Monsieur, I shall not be able to get into my Chair, nor my
Coach; nor come in, or go out at doors, without leaving some of my Head behind
me.


Dat be no my fault begar: me no make de shaire, nor de coche, nor de door: me
dress de Head, and me mos show all mine arts. Parbleu, let de dam Bricklaer
English make de house fit for de Ladies head: me no make de Head for de house.


My Head's in your hands, do with it as you please.


Me do defy de valet de Chambre of de vole Christen World, to ajuste de
Commode, tie de Fontange, handle de Petticoat, or put on de Smo^k begar --


You think your self in your own Country, the English Ladies don't give so
great Privi^s.


Ha! Ha! Dat be ver good Jest -- Parbleu, now we be come to de Englis Head, Ve
shall soon come to de -- Ay, begar, dat Ve shall.


Sir Toby, Madam is coming up: All your Visitants will be here before your
Frenchman will have done.


Patience, Patience. Me bot ajoute de Jardiniere, and de Sortis, and put on de
Assassinat, and me make done.


Pray dispatch.


'Tis make don: And now, begar, der be no Lady in France nor England more
Propre -- Parbleu, your Ladyship be de ver beautiful Lady; de Engliss Lady be
ver handsome, begar.


Your Ten Guinea's are upon the Table.


Ah! Madam -- Votre tres humble Valeet -- De honour of serving de Engliss Lady,
be more dan de profit -- [ Aside.] Now, begar, me will go into Hollande, and
make de Farce of de Engliss^ Lady vid deir great Top. Knot; me have got deir
money, and now me will laugh at them vid all mine 'earts. Ha! Ha! Ha!


Pray be pleased, Madam, to order us to be paid before Sir Toby comes up.


We had rather lose our money, than be exposed to his foul-mouth'd Raillery.


The adorning thee with so much Art,
Is but a barbarous Skill:
'Tis like the poys'ning of a Dart,
Too ap't before to kill.
What! adzooks, always these Peddlers at your Toilette.


Peddlers! adzooks, no more than your Worship's a Pimp, if you go to that.


The Orange Women swear they'll pull you to pieces, since a Note in a Tea-Pot
is found more secure, than at the bottom of a Basket of Fruit.


That's your Worship's quarrel to us: you'd have no body seduced but by your
self -- Pray, Madam, bid Mrs. Plackett pay us.


Give them their money -- But hark' ye, Mrs. Iannoway, for the future, be sure
you bring me right Indian, I abominate your Dutch Trumpery.


God bless your Honour, we will Madam.


Bring Sir Toby a Chair -- and wait within call.


Your Piquette Friend will be here instantly, Madam, according to your
direction: He is already so charmed with your Ladyship, that if you are not
merciful in time, his heart will break, quite break; poor thing, he is just at
the point of death.


'Tis much for a Lady's Honour to have a Lover die.


True, Madam; but then let those die you don't care for: Tho it may be for your
Glory to triumph over some, yet for your Pleasure you should be kind to others
-- And this is the prettiest loving little Rogue -- Adzooks 'twere a thousand
Pities to let him come to any harm.


But suppose he should be one of those modest Fools, (for he is very young, Sir
Toby) who tho they are never so much in Love, yet have not the courage to speak
out their minds.


Why suppose he should, why then you must take some opportunity to squeeze him
by the hand; or by some sly Insinuation with your eyes, inform him that he need
fear nothing. Or what if you should speak first is any thing more common?
Besides, when Women through Decency, as they call it, are silent; and Men
through fear, how the Devil shall they ever come together? If you observe your
Spark to be bold and undertaking, then indeed you may seem shy; but if he is
timorous, and under any awe, you must do something to give him Courage, or you
spoil all. Come, come, adzooks, the Women of this Age are not to be taught
these Lessons.


Fie! I blush for the Follies of my Sex.


Blushing does infinitely become your Ladyship -- Then there is the Secret of
Secrets, the Never-failing Elixir of Love --


Hold, hold, Sir Toby -- may it become my Modesty to hear it?


Adzooks, I don't know what your Modesty may be; but if 'tis so troublesome, I
can hold my Tongue.


No, no, speak; you're too well bred, to say any thing you should not.


Then this mighty Secret is Keeping. The Men naturally love receiving better
than paying; and since some great Ladies of late have used them to it, it ^s
with great difficulty that they part with their very Halfcrown, or give the
poor Chambermaid her Fee.


A Woman, and Keep! O hideous!


Ay, igad, or resolve to lie alone. Why yonder's my Lady Homely, 'tis hard to
remember when she was young, and yet her doors are always blocked up with
Coaches and Chairs; whilst in the mean time my Lady Lovely scarce receives a
Visit from morning to night, and yet is the most beautiful Woman in Town.


And what say you is the Reason of this?


The Reason is plain: The first gives to her Gallants, what the other reserves
for a Portion for a Daughter, or bestows in charitable Uses to the Poor.
Besides, it has been always the fashion for great Ladies when they are a little
turned of their Prime; and your Ladyship is too considerable to be out at any
thing that's a fashion.


'Tis true, a Woman of Quality should be in all the Fashions: But pray inform
me, how is this Keeping? Do Men of Quality take Money? Or is it by Presents of
Jewels, and such things?


Nothing like ready Money, adzooks. A thousand Guinea's in ready Cash, tickles
a young Fellow beyond a Jewel of twice the value: Not but that a Jewel now and
then by the by, is a pretty Provocative; but however a settled Quarteridge is
necessary.


I protest you are a very Learned Person.


Besides the standing Pension, there must be an allowance too for
Extraordinaries: for Example; ^or Balls at Court, and public appearances of
that kind. At such times, I say, the Courtiers will give themselves to the
Devil for a little money, especially in hard times, when Salaries are ill paid.


Sir Toby you have convinced me; but yet there remains a main Point to be
considered, which is, how to impose upon the Town. This Town is a prying
malicious place; as long as the Town does not talk, our Honour is safe; and as
long as our Honour is safe, there's no harm done: for 'tis a received Maxim
among us Ladies, That 'tis the Talk, and not the Intrigue, that's the Crime.


The way to keep the Town Civil, is to be openly Scandalous and Lewd. We never
talk out of Aversion to the Guilty, but Spite to the Innocent; and care not to
expose those who do Ill, but defame those who do Well. Believe me, the only way
to gain an ill Reputation, is to live Chaste; the Town abhors Modesty and
Virtue, but Impudence and Vice are its inseparable Companions: Be as wicked as
you please, th^ Town will never expose a Friend.


There's below a young Gentleman desires to speak with Sir Toby.


I come instantly --

'Tis our Spark, Madam -- I'll go down to him, and keep him in discourse 'till
you are quite ready.


Sir Toby your Servant, I'll endeavour to profit by your wise Lecture.


Plackett, give me one of my last new Fans -- No -- another; one that has the
right Flirt, and rides with an Air. Ay, this without Nudities.


The Gentleman will be Impatient.


I go: Is every thing as it should be?


Most exact, Madam.


And d'e hear?


Who? Sir Iohn Aerie, and Mr. Vaunter, I think you called 'em; I will not fail,
Madam.


This young Thing will want Helps.


And Fools have an old Saying of their side, which makes 'em so welcome.


Joy salutes me when I see
My blessed Eyes on Amoret;
But with Wonder I am struck,
When I on the Others look.
And how is it possible to choose one, when all are engaging alike? If at any
time I seem inclined to the Prudence and nice Honour of Diana, the Gaiety and
lively Humour of Melissa comes in view, and with-holds me. And when Melissa
gets ground, strait Dorinda interposes with her admirable Shape and Mien: And
so on to the charming Miranda, who, with a Song, can turn my fleeting heart
which way she pleases.


Sure Cupid shot you with a Blunderbuss, four such dreadful Wounds could never
be made with a Dart.


Phoo, 'tis the usual Ceremony of all Men, to carry themselves equal to the
whole Company; if he had us single, we should soon know his mind.


Really my Sister has observed with great Prudence: It is likely the Gentleman
would be particular, if we were single: Pray Sisters retire, and leave us
alone.


Fie, Sister, sure your nice Honour would not permit you to be left alone with a
Man.


I was the first who proposed the Expedient, and will be the first to have the
benefit of it.


Really you are very confident; sure there is some Respect due to your eldest
Sister.


You might have spared the remembrance of your age for your own sake.


Pray, Ladies, let not this Debate go any further, I have found out an
Expedient to close all. Come in with me, and I will seal up four Notes, giving
one to each of you, three being Blanks, and the fourth my Determination; which
you shall deliver, as soon as I am gone from you, to your Brother, who shall
tell you my mind, sparing me the consusion.


No, No; since I have once said it, Mr. Courtall, really I will be left alone
with you.


Pray, Madam, consent to what I have proposed.

You are certain to be my Choice.


I say again --


Dear Melissa be contented.

They shall all have Blanks but you.


For my part I consent to leave you together: Eldership may be a Plea for
Respect, but 'tis a very bad one for Love.


Peace, good Dorinda, and agree to my Method.

The Benefit Ticket shall be yours.


I am clearly for his Opinion in writing, 'tis much the surest way, and not to
be retracted.


Most charming Miranda a thousand Acknowledgments.

You only are the Venus among these Goddesses, the Prize of Beauty shall be
yours.

Now Ladies let's in, and proceed to Election; sure no Lover since Paris was
ever so put to it in his Choice.

How hardly does this Tyrant Custom bind?
Forced to choose One, to All alike inclined.

Thirsis. DELIA, how long must I despair,
And tax you with Disdain?
Still to my tender Love severe,
Relentless to my Pain.
Delia. When Men of equal Merit love us,
And do with equal Ardor sue:
Thirsis you know but one must move us,
Can I be yours and Strephon's too?
My ravished Eyes view both with Pleasure,
Impartial to your high desert;
To both alike Est^em I measure,
To one alone can give my Heart.
Thirsis. Mysterious Guide of Inclination,
Tell me Tyrant, why am I
With equal Merit, equal Passion,
Thus the Victim chosen to dye?
Why am I
The Victim chosen to dye?
Delia. On Fate alone depends Success,
And Fancy Reason over-rules;
Or why should Virtue ever miss
Reward, so often given ^o Fools.
'Tis not the Handsome, nor the Witty^
But who alone is born to please:
Love does predestinate our pity;
We choose but whom he first decrees.
The Words, Ladies, are my own; pray, your Opinion.


You are a Wit then.


O! we are all Wits. Pray, Madam, by what celebrated Wits are you visited? for
there is no way to establish a Reputation like being a Patron to Men of Parts.


I love Men of Parts mightily: A Man without Parts is a strange Monster. I have
some that are pretty constant Visitants; for Example, the Translator's of
Plutarch's Lives, Iuvenal's Satyr. --


Foh, a Lady, and converse with Greek and Latin Wits. No, give me your Wits of
the Town, who are above Learning; your Wits of Quality that can scarce Write or
Read; your Lampoon-wits.


Bold Rogues, that spare nothing that's sacred, not even the Majesty of Kings;
that can make Black, White; and White, Black. Take away the Reputation of the
chastest Woman, and give it to the lewdest Prostitute. Call the Man of Sense, a
Fool. And the Man of Honour, a Coward. Make Religion, Apostasy. And sanctify
Rebellion and Parricide. Whose only Topicks are Scandal, Sedition, and
Blasphemy. And all they contend for, but who shall be the greatest Rascal, and
tell the most plausible Lye behind a Man's back.


However, I know some certain Ladies, who think themselves neglected, to be
left out of a Lampoon; and are proud to have their Names published, and to be
known, and enquired after by the whole Town.


Pray, Madam, did you never write?


Who, I, Sir! 'tis not a Talent for a Woman.


And why not for a Woman, Madam? An Evenings Exercise at Crambo, to get the
knack of Rhyming, is all that's necessary; 'tis no matter for Sense, who cares
for Sense?


Besides there are no pains required, as is plain, for when we take all the
pains in the World, 'tis just the same thing, we write never the better.


Mr. Philabel you used to have good Intelligence; what new Diversions are
preparing for the Town?


The newest thing that I know of^ is a Dictionary that's preparing for the
Press, at the desire of a certain great Lady, to suit our Language to the
Modesty of the fair Sex, and to castrate the immodest Syllables in such Words
as begin and end obscenely.


Fie, Philabel, was ever such an extravagance.


I vow, a very decent design; I have been strangely put out of countenance my
self at the beginning and conclusions of some certain words.


There is likewise a Cabal of Ladies, who meet daily for the Reformation of
good Manners. Another great Grievance is the Nudities upon Fans worse than the
Postures of a Venetian-Snuff-box.


I know a Lady, that shall be nameless, whose Fans are always painted with
filthy naked Boys, and yet for the World, she would not be persuaded to be seen
in Chelsea-Reach upon a Summers Evening^


Likewise, Madam, a Poet is to lose his Maidenhead to day upon the Stage. --


Lord! Mr. Philabel, what do you mean?


Nothing, Madam, but that there is a new Play to be acted. A young Fellow has
been drawn in to play the Fool without any necessity for it.


How comes your Ladyship not to be there? You would see rare sport; there is a
Party already engaged to cry it down.


How! engaged to cry down a Play before they knew whether it's good or bad.


O, no matter for that. I'll tell you their Method; they spread themselves in
Parties all over the House; some in the Pit, some in the Boxes, others in the
Galleries, but principally on the Stage; they Cough, Sneeze, talk Loud, and
break silly Jests; sometimes Laughing, sometimes Singing, sometimes Whistling,
till the House is in an Uproar; some Laugh and Clap; some Hiss and are Angry;
Swords are drawn, the Actors interrupted, the Scene broken off, and so the
Play's sent to the Devil.


A very compendious Method.


A new Play never wants Enemies. First, All your discontented Poets who have
been ill-us'd themselves, are glad of a new Companion; then your Critics that
had not the Reading of the piece before 'twas given to the H^e, are sure to
Censure severely, to be revenged for their neglected Judgments. And l^stly, All
your dressed Beaux, who revenge upon the Innocent Play the injuries they receive
from the Crowd, as the ruffling their Crevats, disordering their Perukes, and
the Sweat that gets the ascendant of their Essence and Polville.


A very rational Account. I confess, I have often wondered at the ill Success
of some Plays.


Now I think on it, Madam, I have waiting below some Dancers, that I brought
hither for your Ladyship's Entertainment; they shall show you a Dance that a
Friend of mine has composed for his Mistress.


How, Sir, composed for a Mistress! I have heard of Songs composed for a
Mistress; but a Dance is extremely new.


'Tis fit, Madam, that some new ways should be invented to engage the Ladies;
'tis dull to tread always in the same path. And nothing is found so prevailing
as these mute Accomplishments. Writing, and saying fine things, have given
place to the Caper, the Flute, and the Voice.


Some Fool, who had no other way of prevailing, was certainly the first that
introduced those effeminate Accomplishments.


Right, Madam, and 'twas as necessary, as for those who have ill Smells, to
keep up the fashion of perfumes. --


Or, as for Ladies with Pimples to enoourage Patching.


Pray let us see the Dance.


Hey! Enter Dance.


Where are these Balladins?


And will not this carry the Lady, do ye think?


Very Passionate indeed. There are some certain motions in Dancing, extremely
Pathetic and Expressive.


You see Madam, I am come again; I am a Man of my word.


You are always so -- Mr. Bellamour, your Servant. Would you had both come
sooner, to have seen the Dance.


Let not that trouble you, Madam; they are my Friends and at my Devotion, and
shall renew the Entertainment, since it proves agreeable to you. Ladies and
Gentlemen, the the other cast of your Office if you please.


So well Corinna likes the Joy,
She Vows, she'll never more be Coy.
She Drinks Et^rnal Draughts of Pleasure,
Eternal Draughts do not suffice;
Ah! Give me, give me more, she Cries,
'Tis all too little Measure.
Be wise ye Fair, let Scruples die,
For who but Fools would Pleasure ^ly,
Like Corinna, when you've tasted,
You'll repent that ever you fasted.
Very fine, extremely fine -- Mr. Bellamour and I Madam, met at the Door,
having both the same Design of waiting on your Ladyship. Sir Toby says he, be
pleased to go before, I wait on you: Mr. Bellamour, says I, after you is
Manners. Pray, Sir, says h^, give me leave; by no means, Sir, said I again: And
then said he, and then said I, till at last, begad, we both came in together,
and Adzookers, I have almost squeezed off the bottom of my Belly -- Pox of
Compl^ments and strait Doors.




I wonder, Sir Toby, you should be so Ceremonious, with one to whom you ought
to be a sworn Enemy. I cannot with Patience suffer my Friend to be wronged, and
therefore think my self obliged to acquaint you, that this Gentleman has
injured you.





No, no, all shall out, unless you engage before all this Company, to make
Reparation for the future.


Hey Day! Why he never did me any injury. Adzooks, my little Gammea's in the
Clouds.


I'll tell you then in short --





Nay, no threats nor no Whispering. This Gentleman, Sir Toby, some time since,
made pretensions to your Daughter, as now Madam, he does to your Niece; but not
Pretensions that were dishonourable, but confirmed by Vows and Oaths, till she
yielded, at last, to be privately Contracted.


How! Contracted!


Base Man.


Pray harken not to what he says; this is the strangest ^xtravagance.


No, no, pray let's hear all.





No Bribes, no Bribes.


This must be true, he is so Concerned.


As I hope to be saved, Madam --


No Swearing, dear Sir, it will Offend the Ladies.


Damn Swearing, Sir --


No quarrelling here, I beseech you, Gentlemen.


I remember indeed, a Lady whom I used to Visit in the Country; and I confess,
Sir, your Daughter I think she was.


O was she so, Sir; a Damned Villainous Whoring Rogue, this.


Some words of Gallantry perhaps might escape me or a little Love in Jest, to
pass the time: Or suppose it in Earnest; sure we may have leave to change once
in our Lives; Saints are allow'd it in Religion, when they are Convinced of a
better.


But you shall not be allow'd it, Sir, pray don't mistake me, tho I am an old
lewd Dog, yet I have some Notions Adzooks, that are not amiss^ How many Drunken
Blaspheming Rascals venture their Lives every Day for Religion, and yet know
nothing of any Religion. And so Sir, in short, tho I may be a dishonour my self
to my Family, Adzooks, I'll die to maintain the Honour of it.


I made no Promises, but what were meant in Jest: Vows and Oaths in Love, are
like Counters at Play, we set up with 'em, but never mind them when the Games
over.


I am glad I know the value of yours, a very decent Declaration


If Contracts might be made and broken, as Men change their Affections, Poor
Women are like to be happy. Barbarous Ungrateful Creature, let me never see
your Face again in my House -- Oh! I can't endure him.


Victoria, Victoria -- the Day's my own, and the Enemy is beaten from his hold.


Such Perjury is never to be Pardoned.


All things are Faults to those, who seek to find 'em^ 'Tis you are Perjured,
and not I, after having sworn to you; had I engaged in a new Passion, then I
had been false. Now if I am false, 'tis for your sake; 'tis you that made me
so, whatever I have been to others, to you my Faith has been inviolable.


Who can be false to one, 'tis violently to be suspected will be so to another,
whenever his Pleasure or his Interest ^umpts him.


Confess the truth, and lay aside disguise; impute not to me your Crimes; this
Airy, Smooth, Conceited Coxcomb, this Woman's Fool here, has worked into your
Heart, and shov'd me out; this lucky Robber, in some wanton moment name, and
rifled all the Treasure, whilst I, a poor precarious B^ggar; never could get
the least unvalued Trifle. Gods! ^ods! what Appetites have Women, and who can
fix 'em? Now for Men of Sense, and now for Coxcombs; and every ^hing is refused
or goes down, just as the Minute is, that wo ^ay hold of.

( Omnes.) Ha, ha, ha.


What could you see in this puny Effeminate thing, to ^harm you? He can Sing
and Dance, Play on the Flute, and ^iddle, there's Woman's Vanity again: She
never sees a soft A^ected Ass, but she is pleased with the reflection of her
own ^ollies, and admires her self in every Fop, that like a Glass shows her the
Image of her own Mind.


You are Rude, Sir.


Rude, Sir ^


Ay, Rude Sir, that's English.


You are an Ass, Sir: Or is it your Soldier here, that Charms you? your
Colonel! O how that sounds to please a Ladies Ear! Is it his Red Coat, or his
Hoboyes tha^ take you most? what Wounds has he to show you? what Deeds in
Battle to describe? what Dangers? he has seen a Siege through a Prospective Glass
--


I can endure this odious Railer no longer; his Noise i^ got up into my Head --
let us go in and leave this Wrangler to Rave by himself.


We wait on your Ladyship.





Whenever you please, Sir.





What place you please, Sir.





Mr. Bellamour, can't you compose your self enough ^ go in and Play a Pool with
us.


I will wish you some Luck, Madam. May you be always Flattered, and always
Loose; may you never think you have a sure Game, but be disappointed by a
better.


A little Hellebore would do the Gentleman no harm.


Straw, Straw, and a Dungeon; Adzooks the Man's stark Mad.


Mankind from Adam, have been Women's Fools;
Women from Eve, have been the Devil's Tools:
Heaven might have spared one Torment when we fell,
Not left us Woman, or not threatened Hell

REad mine, they are all Blanks but m^e^


I say, her's is a Blank. Read mine.

They are all Blanks but mine.


What? are you all mad! give me your Notes in Peace and I'll read 'em, else I
am gone.


Well then, here take 'em.


So: Let none interrupt me; but whose s^ver the lot is, let the rest be
contented and Silent. Melissa is beauty -- full --


I told you so, I know 'twas I, you need read no farther.


Good Sister, forbear.

Dorinda is good humour --


That's I.


Patience.

Miranda is Charming to admiration. But it is Diana that is adorable, and has
my Heart.

Let none reply Diana's is the lot.


Diana's is a Cheat, a Counterfeit; he vowed to me he could not endure her.


We are to stand to what he has written. You may ^ake back your notes, we need
read no more.


I say, my Sister Dy's, is all Forgery.


I say you are a confident Creature.

Sisters, this is misbecoming all modesty. Melissa, be satisfied! there are
more Men besides Courtall.


Dear Brother, open the rest of our Notes for our common satisfaction; Courtall
told me, all should be Blanks but mine.


So he told me.


Any thing for peace. This Melissa I think is your^.

Diana is discreet -- Dorinda, c Miranda, c. ( as before,) but Melissa only has
my heart.

How Diana! is it true then, tha^ yours was forged? Melissa, be happy, the lot
is yours.


I say, 'tis she has forged, and not I. Let me tear her Eyes out for this
trick.


No more, I entreat you -- I suspect a trick; I'll read the rest. Dorinda and
Miranda: this is all a trick.


Courtall. Let us be no more seen in this business.





'Tis plain, Courtall has abused us all, but be you advised, and I'll be
revenged? I love his Sister, but not above the Honour of my Family. I'll
instantly find him out, and teach the young Impostor, what it is to play with
the Reputation of Ladies, or fool with a man of Honour. Be a^ peace among your
selves, and all shall be well.


Victoria, Victoria, turned out of doors, quite discarded; ha, ha, ha. To have
seen how he stormed and Hectored, ^would have made thee die with Laughing, ha,
ha, ha.


'Twas most Heroically performed indeed.


He swore I must give him satisfaction, and by Heaven I am ready, when ever he
dares demand it.


How! ready to fight with him! what, fight with a man?


Yes, Conquer him too; lay him grovelling at my Feet, Panting, and not able to
stir a Limb.


The Truth is, that may be done, but how will you lay your Widow Panting?


That indeed, is now my hardest task. And pray^ how will you come of with your
Virgins.


That's to be thought of too. I'll go consider on it. You are bound for other
Adventures, and so good night.





A Lover can no more go to bed, without easing his heart in sighs under his
Mistress's Window, then without comforting it afterwards with a Bottle.


Behold, Lover, to your sighs I have brought a Song, 't shall pass for thy
Serenade, to my Lady Dorimen, Hey Myrmi^ons strike up.


W^ Phill^ is Drinking, Love and Wine in Alliance
^ unit^d, bid resistless Defiance,
By the touch of her L^ps, th^ Wi^e sparkles higher,
And her Eyes from her drinking, redouble their fire.
Her Cheeks glow the brighter, recruiting their colour,
As Flowers by sprinkling, revive with fresh odour:
His dart dipped in Wine, Love wounds beyond curing,
A^d the Liquor like Oil, makes the Flame more enduring.
By Cordials of Wine, Love is kept from expiring,
And our Mirth is enlivened, by Love and Desiring:
Relieving each other, the Pleasure is lasting,
And we never are cloyed, yet are ever a tasting.
Then Phillis, begin; let our Raptures abound,
And a Kiss, and a Glass be still going round:
Our Joys are Immortal, while thus we remove,
From Love to the Bottle, from the Bottle to Love.
Sir Toby, you Kiss in another wrong: all my kisse^ are bespoke for to Night.
See what a dreadful challenge my Lady Dorimen put into my hand at parting.


Ten is the lucky hour Sir Toby: if you have any thing to Command, speak, I
must give the Signal


O, are you come; follow me, and be sure you make no noise.


I know how to behave my self upon these occasions.


'Tis not the first time you have practised.


Nor you neither, good Mrs. Placket; you both know your Trades.


Are you there, then we shall never have done. Come, come your ways.


These young Smock-fac'd fellows, Sir Toby, carry all before 'em. Brave
Warriors and Men of Sense, Besiege ten years in vain, the Beast prevails in a
night.


The truth is, Women have depraved Appetites; but here's my comfort still --
Seraglio.


Not such a Seraglio indeed.


But why loiter we here? yonder's a Tavern. what say thou, Lad, to a quart
of Canary before we sleep Hey! Cats Guts strike up. Ienny, Gipsy, Iudith -- ye
Jezebels follow me all.

Our Joys are Immortal, c.


I blush exceedingly, to see my self alone with a Man; for tho your coming is
upon an innocent account, yet there is room for a Scandalous interpretation:
but I hope you are too civil a Gentleman to take the Advantage of being alone
with a Lady in her Bed-chamber.


Let my Transports express --


O fie, methinks you're very forward: who could have imagined it from one so
young.


Pardon me, Madam, if too much eagerness to express the sense of your favours
--


Frighten me so no more. And on that condition I give you leave to sit down by
me.


Ah, Madam -- you squeeze my hand too hard.


You are so tender.


You are so killing, the least touch goes to the Soul. What a Complexion! What
Eyes!


Don't you look so upon me; I never looked so ill in my life. I hate you should
look upon me so -- I am quite out of order to night.


You never were so Charming.


You are the strangest Man.


Pray, Madam, give me leave to see --


See! Pray what would you see?


Your Neck, Madam, that I may vindicate you from the Aspersions of the World,
that says it is not of the same Complexion with your face.


The World is a Malicious ill-natur'd impertinent World.


And you the most invincible temptation in it. Am I Flesh and Blood -- am I a
Man Madam --


I vow, Sir, I can't tell. But I hope you mean to be Civil.

And why this niceness to a Pleasure shown,
Where Nature Sums up all its Joys in one.
But since you will have it so, I must submit. I may perhaps, have been too far
transported, but I hope your Ladiship's goodness, will excuse the violence of a
Passion that was not to be with-held.


I must needs say, any one in your place would have offered as much, and
perhaps more: for who could have imagined, that such an Assignation was
contrived for nothing but a little discourse? besides, 'tis natural enough to
suspec^ that all this great care that I have taken to forbid, was meant only to
mind you of what else you might be too backward to undertake: and I know it to
be a Maxim among Men, that Women are angry to be always obeyed, and that our
first refusals are necessary to decency, and proceed only from a little
Customary formality, and not from any real dis -- like. But you, I perceive,
are none of those --


Who I? Heavens forbid --


The Men, I say, of this age, for the most part, are bold and undertaking, in
the Tete a Tete, as they call it, and when the Chambermaid's sent away, and a
Bed in the Room, they think they may venture on any thing.


Excuse me, Madam, you shall find me none of those impudent intruders, of whom
you complain. I must needs condemn the forwardness of those men, who are still
encroaching upon the modesty of the Ladies: and would not for the World offend
against the respect that is due to you.


I only say 'tis the way of most Men. But I am convinced you are none of those.


Heavens forbid, Madam, that I should be any thing that were displeasing to
your Ladyship.


I do to be understood? I have thought of a way --

Oh I feel a sudden swimming in my Eyes, and trembling in my Limbs, it comes
all over me, Help, help, help, Oh, oh.


I'll run and call for help.


Call no body, you may do it your self; Oh, oh! you may do it your self.





Oh, oh.


Let me go, Madam, and call your Maid, for some cold Water to sprinkle in your
Face.


No, do you sprinkle me, do you sprinkle me.


So I would with all my Heart, but I have nothing to ^b^ withal -- Placket,
Mrs. Placket, help, your Lady's in a Fit.


Ungrateful Man! Such insolence is unpardonable, ^lesh and Blood can never
forgive it.


Wicked Man! what have you been doing to my Lady?


I have been doing nothing to my Lady, she has been in a Fit.


Poor Lady; how out of Breath, she is -- I say, what have you Committed?


I say, I have Omitted -- and that's it.


Lucinda? I will see her -- I will not be denied --


As I live, Bellamour's Voice -- O save me, if he finds me here, I am
Sacrificed -- Pity Madam, my Youth, and forgive my Ignorance -- all shall be
mended.


I pity you indeed. Run Pl^cket, and stop Mr. Bellamour -- carry him up the
back-way to my Niece, and let her be s^re ^o see him, that the Pass^ (...) ^ar
--


Preserve me to Night from the Fury of this inoen^s^ Man: To morrow we may
repair the time that has been lost.


Which we might not have lost neither -- but we hav^ been both to blame.


To Morrow all shall be mended.


Sh^ll it indeed?


Upon Condition, that this Bellamour comes here no more; I thought you had
forbid him your House.


All Men you see don't mind us when we forbid. I promise you after this Night
he shall never more be admitted; my Niece shall sooner couple with a Vulture or
a Bear. This interruption is new Guilt.


That is all I ask.


Remember then to Morrow.


By this Kiss.


Placket, are the other Gentlemen here?


They were here, Madam: And I thought I had locked 'em up safe, but when I went
to lo^k just now, I found the Lo^k of the Closet Door broke, and they were
gone.


Cursed Disappointments.


The Chaplain, Madam, is not yet gone to Bed.


Tell him I must have Prayers presently, and bring him into my Closet; and do ye
hear, lay the Books on the Table.


That is, the Cups and the Bottle of Orange flower Brandy.


Now the Angry Fit is over, you are come to b^g Pardon; this is the Trick of
you Men: You Quarrel on purpose to try, whether our Fondness is great enough,
to excuse the Insolences of your Passion, and then think to Lord it as ^ou
pleas^.


You mistake, Madam; I come not to beg Pardon, but to take my leave: Yes,
ungrateful Woman, but one last look, and then we part, never to behold each
other more; let cringing Fools and base born Slaves, continue their
Officiousness to those who neglect 'em: A brave Man scorns it.


You have free Liberty to depart, and will leave no aching Hearts behind you.


'Tis false, I know my Resolution vexes you, how'ere you'd strive to Conceal
it. There is never a Dissembling ill-natur'd Woman of you all, but is vexed at
the loss of a Lover, tho 'tis one she hates; all are necessary for your Vanity,
and your Pride, though but some are picked for your Pleasures. But by Heaven, I
scorn the Office, nor will be tied like a Slave to the Chariot, while others
ride in it in Triumph.


Speak softly.


Would I could speak louder yet, ^hat Heaven and Earth might witness to your
Perjury. Yes, Lucinda, when I am again your Fool, may all the Town Laugh at me,
as well as you: May I be Hooted and Pointed at for a Mo^ster, and which would
be the greatest, greatest Plague, may you Marry me, and bring forth a Bastard
the next Day.


In return to your obliging Oath, hear mine. If ever I Pardon your Ill-manner'd
Outrageous Carriage to Day, may I be the most Wretched, and most Infamous of
Women; may all the Villainous Slanders of thy Tongue be believed of me; and for
my Eternal Perdition, may my Ill Fate condemn me to such a Brute, as thee ^or
my Husband.


Agr^ed: And therefore that I may preserve nothing which might give me the
least feint remembrance of you -- here, take back your Picture -- this
representation in little of so Faithless an Original --

How beautiful it looks! Ah! Lucinda, Lucinda, were but thy Soul Celestial as
its Frame -- but that is false, a Course Deceitful daubing, no real, but a
^ainted Joy, like this.


Ha, ha, ha.


Then here is another Encouragement -- the only one indeed, that I have under
your Hand -- here 'tis --

You swear you love me, Ah Bellamour! If I have not as yet an equal Passion for
you, believe me, I am pleased with yours.

These were Deceits that merit this





And now no more but this; O Lucinda! False, Ungrateful Lucinda, ^rewel for
ever!


A very fair Riddance -- why do you come back?


But one word more Lucinda! Ah Lucinda! Call bu^ to mind your former Vows, then
see if your Heart can hold up to its point, and still be sixth, tho knowing how
't has wronged me.


What froward Fools are Men? Still they perplex us with ungrounded Jealousies,
and affront us with vile Aspersions; yet know us at the same time, to be their
Judges, and that by our Sentence 'tis, they Live or Die. No, Bellamour after
your Rude Behaviour to Day, never must you more expect the least appearance of
Kindness from me; there is no trusting for a Husband, a Man who makes so unruly
a Lover.


You wrong me, Madam, by all that's good, you do.


No more, Mr. Bellamour, I'll hear no more upon this Subject. Return to your
first Allegiance, you have wronged an Innocent Lady; think not that I'll be any
longer accessory to your Perjury.








Beged Madam, 'tis very unconscionable to send for Gentlemen, and then make 'em
wait Three Hours in the Dark.


Insolent Fellow, who sent for you! And how got you in?


Insolent Fellow? Demm'e, methinks she begins to be very familiar already.


You sent for them, they tell you; and I beg Pardon for having so long detained
you from the Company you expected. Vile Woman, my resentment is now turned to
Pity, and I blush at this Infamous Confirmation of your Wickedness.


I rather believe 'em Companions of your own, brought hither on purpose to put
some new affront upon me.


No, Demm'e Madam, if any thing should have brought us but your own Commands.


Nothing beged Madam, but your Commands, and our own Inclinations.


My Commands! Impudent Rascal -- Mr. Bellamour, this is a part below the
Character of a Man of Honour; neither am I so destitute of Friends, but you may
be called to a severe Account for it.


I doubt not but you have Bully's at Command as well as Fools; cunning Devil!
This Disguise is too affected: Thus Women always turn Accusers, when they want
an Excuse.


Hark Vaunter, Gedemme, we should not have owned before Bellamour, that we were
sent for.


True beged -- but I'll set all right. The Truth is, Madam Bellamour did bid us
meet him here.


I bid you come --


Ay, Geddem me!


Yes, Beged.


Rascals, your Tongues shall be Cut out for so damned a Lye.


O Law, O Law; no, you did not bid us.


No, no, you did not bid us.


Who sent for you?


O Law, no body, no body, sent for us.


We came -- beged we don't know how.


Speak the Truth, as you value your Lives.


Speak the Truth, or it shall be Rack't out of you.


What would you have a Man say? If we speak the Truth, we offend the Lady; if
we Lye, Gedemm'e you'll mince us, and what the Devil shall one do?


If he speaks the Truth, he tells you 'twill o^fend you^ Devils! Devils! What
are Women? You can tell best, they are so like you.


O Aerie, this is the Dam'st Bawdy House that ever I came in, in my Life.


Who's within there -- call up the Servants -- I will make Examples of these
Fellows, or know the Tru^h.


Give not your self unnecessary trouble; when I am gone, all will be well,
their Confession will but add to your Guilt. Confounded Woman! Angelica, my
broken Vows to thee are well Revenged. Farewell false L^cinda, I am a shamed of
my past w^akness, for one so Wicked.


Bellamour, you shall not go till I am justified of this Inhuman Imputation,
that you would fi^ upon me --


Nay, Madam, you must not hold me -- I leave you to your Fools, and will be one
no more.


Is he gone? Madam are you sure he's gone?


'Tis well for him he is -- Demm'e, had he stayed a minute longer, I'd have
mine'd him.


Dear M^dam, why this Passion now? 'tis true, 'twould have vexed any one to lose
so much time through a Fellows Impertinence: but beged you may be as free now as
you please, here's no body here, but Dear Jack Aerie, and he and fare all one.


'Tis true, Madam, here's no body here, but Dear Vaunter, and ^e and I are one
Soul in two Bodies.


Apes and Monkeys.


Be pleased Madam, to dispatch us, for I have promised to play at Ramp to
Night, with some Ladies, and I would not beged disappoint the Ladies for the
World


Whose within there -- whose within?


Lord, Madam, what's the matter?


How got these Fellows into the House?


Lord, Madam, how should I know.


Let the Doors be better looked to another time; and let the Footmen tie these
Fools Neck and Heels, till they discover upon what Errant they came hither.


O Law, O Law, rather let your Footmen show us the way down Stairs, and if you
ever ketch me in your House again, may I be damned.


Ay, if ever you ketch me in your House again, General demm'e.


I say, let them be tied Neck and Heels -- carry 'em away.


O Dear Vaunter! What will become of us.


What cursed unmerciful Croccadels are these Women.


Take the Candles, and light to my Dressing-room. I have this Comfort under
Bellamour's Jealousy of these Fools whom I hate, that Philabell whom I Love,
will be less suspected.

For tho the slighted Rivals be Revealed,
The Man we Love, should be with Care Concealed.
Vn-nam'd, unknown, he lies securely Blessed,
Safe in our Arms, and Peaceably Possessed.

AFter what past between us Yesterday, you need not be surprised to know that I
am resolved to Cut your Throat, in order to which, I require you to appoint
your Place and Time



I am impatient to try if you can be as brisk in the Field before an ^nemy, as
in a Ruel before the Ladies, Bellamour.




And how you will bring your self off, I can't imagine, for my own part; as a
Poet in a Play, when he has puzzled himself with a Plot, has recourse to
supernatural Aids, and fetches down Mercury or Iupiter from Heaven, to set him
right, so have I been forced to Conjure up my Brother here, who by the help of
the resemblance that is betwixt us, I hope may be able to satisfy my
Mistresses, and protect me from the Fury of their Relations.


By the Description Sister, you will stand more in need of a Real Iupiter to
satisfy Four such dreadful Termagants; one Man, nor one Dozen of Men will
scarce be sufficient.


Observe my Instructions, and fear nothing.


A pretty Occupation indeed, to take up the Women you run down, and Fight the
Men you provoke.


And does not the one make amends for the other?


That's according as I like your Ladies; he that is backward to Fight for a
Woman, is a most un-natural Coward: Hunger and Love make every body Valiant.


Now each to their several Project -- Yes, Bellamour, I will meet thee -- hark
my Lady D^rim^n's Door opens let us go, that no accident may hinder us.

O Love, be thou my Second, Fight for me,
Who have endured so many Wounds for thee:
When with his Weapon, pointed at my Heart,
The Traitor stands, l^t loose thy ^lying Dart,
Reduce the R^bel, and Avenge my smart.
Whom Love befriends, is certain of Success,
Love made a Woman's Fool of Hercules.

Alas he's so very Young.


Is that a Fault, Madam?


Youth is necessary, but it has its inconveniences too; young Men make great
over-sights.


What have been those over-sights, that put your Lady ship so out of Humour.


The Remembrance is insupportable.


Be pleased, Madam to inform me, and I'll take care to instruct him better the
next time, and give him a short L^sson or two in the Closet, before I bring him
in to your Ladyship.


Peace, I'll explain this matter another time.

Niece, I have been waiting for you this Hour.


I but just heard the Coach was re^dy, Madam.




Call the Footmen and bid the Coach come up to t^e Do^r.


By your leave Gentlemen, I must expostulate this matter a little farther. One
of you has injured me, but the Devil take me if I can tell which 'tis.


If you don't know your own Enemies, I don't know how we should.


Courtall.


No, Sir.





Not I, Sir, I vow to Gad, but if you have a Sister Sir, that has any urgent
occasions --


You need not press us, we are Gentlemen --


And will be Volunteers in a Ladies Service.


Damme, this Trick won't pass -- what are you? Men or Devils.


Not Men, Sir, I assure you --


Then I will so Conjure your Devilships.


Whatsoever we are, we are two to one Sir.


One after another Gentlemen is fair.


Your Pardon, Sir, if you attack us, we must defend our selves.








What, leave my Friend in danger? Fie, I'll bring of all yet.







Well, Gentlemen, now we shall try your mettle upon the square.


Ha, ha, ha, why Frederick -- ha, ha, ha, what! Draw upon a Woman -- upon your
Mistress too -- for shame -- you a Man, ha ha.


Hey Day! Upon a Woman! Upon my Mistress! what the Devil is all this!


Love they say is blind, have Lovers too no Eyes? Is it possible, that you
cannot discover Constantia through any Disguise?


Constantia!


Yes, dull Lover; where is now the Sympathy and the instinct, by which you Men
are always so ready to find us out? one of us is Constantia.





Mr. Bellamour, I am ashamed of the trouble I have given you --


There needs no Apology --


I have heard indeed of so wonderful a resemblance between Constantia and a
Twin Brother, that by exchanging of Habits, they have often imposed upon their
very Parents.


Lay aside your Choler, and we will both go Home with you: Unriddle us, and
take us among you.


With all my Heart, and if I don't find a Sense for that, may all my Senses
^orsake me.


Come along then Oedipus. Riddle me Riddle me re, who ^inds my Riddle shall
have me.


O Vaunter, Vaunter! What a miserable Life is a Whoremasters?


O Repentance! why art thou never to be found but at the Gallows?


Past Experience, might have reclaimed us from the Folly of running after
Adventures, but Human Nature is frail, and never takes warning.


How often alas! have I lain Sweating in a Chest, for fear of a jealous
Husband, that came Home before he was expected: Or stood shrinking behind the
Hanging which he has probed with his Naked Sword, and sometimes Run me through
a Leg or an Arm, without daring to cry out.


How often have I leapt out at Window, with the Bullets of a Blunderbush
whizing round my Ears.


How often have I been beaten with my own Ladder of Ropes.


O the Knocks and Bruises that I have endured.


O the Claps and the Poxes that are not Cured to this Day.


And now to be tied Neck and Heels in order to be Robbed and stripped.


To have our Throats Cut, and to be buried in a House of Office.


Or at best to enter into Bonds forasmuch as we are worth.


O Aerie, and when our Estates are gone, what will be left us?


Not a Man will keep us Company, for fear we should borrow Money of him.


Not a Woman will suffer us, for they think all filthy Fellows that have not
Estates.


O Vaunter, Vaunter! What a miserable Life is a Whore Masters.


Well, Gentlemen, how do you do? have you Prayed.


Yes, yes, we have prayed --


And Repented.


And repented, heartily repented --


And you will never more brag of Favours that you never received? Nor swear
when the L^dy makes her Foot-men Cudgel you, that her Husband caught you a Bed
with her, and that you were beaten by his order, and not hers, and that she
sent you a present the next Morning to make you amends.


O never, never.


Nor write Love-Letters to your selves, with this Countess, and that Dutchess's
name, and drop 'em in Chocolate-houses.


Never, never.


Nor when the draggle tail Mask, sends for you out from Chauvisses, swear that
'ti^ a great Lady that shall be nameless, that has stolen from her Lord, to
spend the only half hour of her liberty with you, when all her business is to
borrow a shilling to pay for her Coach, or to get a glass of Rosa solis, to
drive out the Wind that blows a storm in her guts, for want of having found a
Fool to give her a dinner.


Never, as I hope to be saved, General demme.


O, dear Aerie don't swear in this time of tribulation, think of your Soul, dear
Aerie, for God knows, we may'nt have long to live in this wicked World.


Nor hire Black -- guard, and Link -- boys to be dressed like Pages, to deliver
you notes in Public Places.


Never, never, Gadzoony -- Vaunter, I hope that was no swearing.


Nor give money to the Box-keepers at the Play-house, to come in almost in
every Act, to whisper you that such a Lady, and such a Lady, in such a Box, and
such a Box, desire you impatiently to come to them, when no body cares for your
company.


Never indeed, never.


Lastly. Nor ever refuse your Money to honest folks, that know how ^o make
better use of it.


Never, never, Deliver us and take all we have.


Then each of you, give me a Bond for a Thousand pound, and be at liberty.


We will, we will.


There remains yet another Article: which of you two is the Knight?


I am a Knight, General demme, a Knight Barone^; and my Name's Sr. Ienn -- Vaunter,
we may swear again, now we are out of danger.


Yes, beged. The Devil was sick, the Devil a monk, would be.


The Devil was well, the Devil a Monk, was he, General demme!


Your Father was a Pimp, and was Knighted for his Services. I know your
Pedigree, why then -- Sr. Ienn -- to be short, my Fortune has been told me,
that I should be a Lady -- You must Marry me.


Tie me Neck and Heels again, tie me Neck and Heels. Gad zoons what marry a
Chamber-maid.


A Chamber-maid, saucy Fellow: I have known a Lord marry a Sempstress.


O, Aerie, dear Aerie, this comes of swearing so soo^. A heavy judgment for thy
Sins, well, I will never swear nor be wicked, but when I am sure I'm so safe,
that no harm can come on it.


Well, Sir Knight, you may be worse offered. And I don't know but the
punishment might be more to my self than you. Wherefore, on condition that you
add another Thousand pound to your Bond, you shall go free.


With all my heart, dear Soul; General demme and a very good bargain.


Come in then, and Sign and Seal; but if ever you say one word of these Bonds,
most certainly your Throat^ shall be cut.


Not one word, General demme, beged.


You are likewise to declare before company, that you came hither by mistake.
That you took this House for another, and that no body here sent for you.


But, tell us truly: were not we sent for? Did no^ you meet us at the door?
Lead us up stairs? Lock us into a Closet? and divert your self you know how,
most uncon^ionably with us for near two hours --


Impudent fellow, did I ever see your Faces before -- I'll call the Footmen,
you shall be tied Neck and Heels again you shall.


Why then 'twas the oddest Dream that ever I had in my life; and I believe we
came hither in our sleep.


Why so you did. I never knew such a couple of lying Fellows.





'Twas all a Dream, that's certain: and so we'll swear any thing that's put in
our mouths.


Come in then, and perform covenants; 'tis a Charitable Office I am doing:
Fools must be bitten to be made wise.


Would we were well off this business, and I'll swear I have lain with all the
Family round, General demme.


And so will I beged.


Sir, I must entreat you to take some other Walk. This Place I have chosen for
an Adventure of my own.


H^d you not prevented me, Madam, I must have made you the s^me request. This
very Place, is to determine of my Good or Bad fortune for ever.


I wish I could oblige you. But the Repose or Disquiet of my whole life is
absolutely concerned.


My Honour is engaged.


And so is mine.


Your pleasure it may be. A Vizard and talk of Honour; Why is that sign set
out, but to invite Passengers in? A Mask to a Woman, is like a House with a
bush, the Ensign of Public Reception.


To be short, Sir, I expect to be obeyed, and have a Rendezvous here, that
admits of no Spectators.


To be short, Madam, I am to sight a Duel on this very spot: If you are not
afraid to see Swords drawn, and Throats cut, you may stay -- I shall begin to
make ready.


Sure, Sir, you don't use to strip before Ladies.


Yes, stark naked, if I thought 'twould frighten you.


Why do, strip, I have seen many a curiosity, but never saw a naked Man in my
Life.





You are considering I see, I hope 'tis to comply and be reasonable.


I perceive, Madam, you are resolved to be obeyed, and it is but just indeed,
th^t the Men give way to the Ladies: but then in recompense for the Sacrifice,
I make you of my Honour, you must please to unmask, and let me know for whose
sake I do my self this violence.


I vow Mr. Bellamour, my misfortune is very great, since you ask nothing but
what I am under an obligation^ not to grant.


It seems you know me too; this heightens my curiosity, and I am now confirmed,
not to leave the place upon any other condition.


If I thought I could revenge my Sex's Quarrel, to you, by the sight, for an
injury you have done a Friend of mine, I would then show you my Face. Methinks
you should walk the streets in Armour: I wonder you are not a^aid ^o be torn to
pieces after so known a Treachery to Ang^lica.


That Treachery has been sufficiently revenged already^ by ano^her Treachery --



May Traitors never meet, but with Traitors: Who^v^ ^a^s, may they be always
Betrayed


(...) you think the Vengeance not yet perfect, complete it by showing me your
Face: It is certain your Eyes cannot be employed in vain: You have too many
Charms to be hid by a Mask; and those that do discover themselves, in spite of
the care you take to conceal 'em, have in a moment, begun what you wish. Behold
-- I am ready for Execution, unmask and give the blow.


Why then prepare for your Doom. And may you be a true Prophet, I beseech.
Heaven. Are you prepared!


Yes, Madam, and prepared to see somewhat that's very surprising.


Surprising indeed.


Angelica!


Yes, perjured Bellamour, it is Angelica, the Credulous Angelica; whom you so
basely, and so ungratefully have betrayed: And who in a disguise, unworthy her
Quality, or the modesty of her Sex, has been a Witness to all your Perjuries.
'Tis that Angelica whose heart ye came hither to pierce. Behold that heart, and
with a Resolution worthy the rest of your Treacheries, Pierce, Perfidious Man,
Pierce it boldly: see 'tis unguarded for the blow. Alas! but a little longer,
and it had broke with the weight of the injuries that oppressed it. Why stand you
mute? Where is your Courage ^led? Why is not your Sword employed, that you have
held twice to my Breast, with a Rage so generous? Behold, here is the Enemy you
expected.


O, raise not my Confusion with Reproaches, so tender and so just: Alas^ if you
could look into my Breast, you would fin^ your self, if it be possible, enough
revenged by ^he shame and remorse that over-whelms me. disdainfully away;
Angelica, Angelica, thus will I haunt you ever: thus following on my Knees for
mercy: What has my folly lost! I have consumed a vast Estate, and sums immense,
in search of Toys unprofitable and airy Treasures: I have forfeited a promised
Heaven, to reach at fruit, scarce worth the plucking. You Weep -- Are they for
me; those Tears? Then Weep again, give pity a full entrance: Where there is
Pity, sure there will be Mercy.


Rise, Bellamour. As I have Reason, so have I now opportunity of being cruel.
But one who has already been guilty of so many weaknesses on your account, may
be easily persuaded to another. Yes, Bellamour, I will forgive, but must be
cautious ever how I trust you any more: we should take care how we confide a
second time, having been once betrayed!


Then let me Kneel again, and Swear --


No more -- I forgive all faults that are past -- But if there are any more to
come -- Alas! I should forgive them too.


False are the tales so often told of Women's Perjuries: the Spite and Malice
of detracting Men; base, base Aspersions all and false; or were they true such
goodness might atone for all.


So close! What billing in open street at noon-day? Adzooks, there's an
impudent Whore-master.


What proofs would you have more of his inconstancy?


They were much to blame, Mr. Bellamore; Who gave me notice of your
infidelities -- What at the Feet of a new Mistress?


My Mistress and my Guardian Angel, when you know who she is; I doubt not but
we shall all be Friends.


Indeed you have made a good choice; she's very Handsome. But sure I have seen
something very resembling that face before.


As I live, Madam, your little Spark in Petticoats:


It cannot be.


What strange Metamorphosis?


My little Son of Love become a Daughter.


A Daughter indeed, and now the Mystery's all out; I am my self that injured
Angelica, of whom I told you. I had no other way to do my self right, but by
this manner of proceeding. Wherefore, Sir, I hope you will excuse me, and not
deny me your Blessing.


Adzooks no more I won't; thou hast it Child; why ^his was such a hocus pocus,
to make thy old Daddy at his years, and experience, not to know a Man from a
Woman. To Pose him in his Ru^iments, in the M^s^ulin and Feminin Gender.
Adzo^ks I'll Double and Treble ^hy Portion for thy Wit.


For my part, Madam, I ever found an invincible inclination to Love you. P^ay
give me leave to embrace you.


N^ y^u^ Breeches are off, I may desire a share in your F^i^ndship, I ^ope,
without making any one Jealous.


That reproach is a remembrance to me, that I am to beg Pard^n of all ^his
Company, whom I desire to forget what has past, and to look on me, no longer as
an Enemy


I suppose now we are all satisfied! Mr. Bellamour, is as much ^o be valued as
a Friend, as to be feared as an Enemy.


Before I sign to this general Reconciliation, I must have a Public clearing
of some passages last night. Placket, go fe^ch your Prisoners.


It needs not, Madam; my Passion made me too Credulous. Those Fools I know, go
every where uninvited, and their forwardness never waits for Encouragement.

Remember your Lesson, as you hope to save your Ears and your Noses.


I'll warrant you; if we have not Memory, we have nothing.


Well Gentlemen, h^ve you called to mind what brought you hither last Night.


Yes, Madam, and we beg Ten Thousand Pardons for our Mistake. But having
received Intelligence, Geddemm'e from a very beautiful Lady that lives next
Door --


Next Door, Sir, I have a Relation lives there, a very Virtuous Lady, have a
care what you say.


O Law! What shall I say now; I don't mean Sir, Geddemm'e the next Door, where
your Vir^uous Kinswoman lives, but the other next Door, where you have no
Relations; there are two next Doors.


Well brought of Dear A^ry, beg^d; hou'rt an Angel Geddem me!


A Chandler's Shop; ^h^re is not a Woman in the House under Fourscore.


No matter for that, you shall not think to pump me so. But as I was saying, upon
a small Item of the Ladies Affection, my Dear Vaunter and I intended a Civil
Visit; but the nearness of the Houses, and the Dusk of the Evening, occasioned
the unhappy Mistake, that has made us fall under your Ladyships Displeasure.
And this now is the Truth, Geddemme, as I hope to be saved.


Ay, beged, this is the Truth, the whole Truth, and nothing but the Truth.


This is all we had a mind to know; Gentlemen, you are Prisoners no longer.


'Tis sufficient we are all cleared.


There needed not this strict Examination, my own Reason had convinced me
before.


Bellamour; Geddemm'e Bellamour, ^hou hast no Reason, for as I hope to be
saved, there has nothing past between us, but a few Smiles or so -- Geddemme if
I ever meant to make any thing on it.


I believe you, Sir.

You have acquitted these Prisoners, Madam, when is my Sentence to come, and
how long must I languish for your Mercy.


Silence gives consent; and that pretty sly gloat with the Eyes; Oons, if Women
had no Eyes, we should never know when to believe 'em.


It were no matter, if all Mankind were blind, they are such Malicious
observers; your wicked Consequences scarce allow poor Women the use of their
Eyes; and we hardly dare open them for fear of some forced ill-natur'd
Interpretation.


Your Pardon, Madam; I meant not to offend.


All this looks exceedingly like Coupling, beged, what are you all going to
play the Fool and Marry?


If the Ladies please, Sir, 'tis a venture, we are all willing to run.


Call it not a venture; our Inclinations have been so tried and proved, that
there seems to be no hazard.


I hope so too Adzooks; but 'tis still a venture, for 'tis well known, that
Women are strange changeable things.


That which is often thought Change in us, is for the most part Provocation, to
be revenged. Men are gene^a^ly the Aggressors, and Women must have a great
stock of Patience and Virtue, to resist the Provocations that are Daily given
'em by their Husbands.


If you examine strictly into the miscarriages of most Wives, you will find 'em
grounded upon the neglect of their Husbands, and the Ill Usage they receive,
more than their own Inclinations to Evil.


Resentment has made more Cuckolds than Inconstancy: Women are naturally Fond
and Faithful; but they are Revengeful, and of all Provocations, Neglect is the
greatest.


It is not therefore to us, but to themselves, that they owe their Misfortunes.
When we are injured, we are no longer our selves; Disdain and Resentment
Oppress our Virtue, and in that moment, a slight Temptation shall prevail with
those who had before resisted the strongest.


Not but there are many whom nothing can entice or Provoke from their Duty.


The most Prepostterous Abuse in Marriage is, when upon Agreement of Friends,
two that know nothing of one -- another minds, are to lye together at first
sight; this, as to the World, is coming together Honourably: A Woman that is
sold for all her Life long, is a Wife; and she that is sold but for a Quarter
of an Hour, is a Whore.


The Misfortunes in Marriage have other Causes besides; proceeding not only
from the Avarice of Parents, who force their Children for Interest or some
private Consideration, to marry, tho never so Av^rse themselves: But from our
own Ambition, preferring an Alliance or a Portion without Examining the Person;
or from a rash Fancy taken at ^irst Sight, and pursued without consulting our
Judgment.


But when Love is kept within the bounds of Prudence and Discretion, arising
from Esteem, repaid with Tenderness, maintained by Innocence and Fidelity; 'tis
then a Divine Ecstasy; the Fountain and Author of Peace, Tranquillity and
Unutterable Joy.


But why Adzooks is not this Divine Ecstasy to be found without marrying.


No, for what offends the Conscience, destroys the Tranquillity; and nothing
that must be repented of, can be called Happy or Wise.


They who are Rich by indirect means, or Great by Evil Practices, or enjoy
forbidden Loves, are all miserable at ^he bottom.


Innocence is the foundation of true Joy, and without it all Possessions are
imperfect.


Marriage is therefore necessary to perfect the Felicities of Love; and I
appeal to their Consciences, Men and Women, who follow unlawful Pleasures, if
they have not at some times, uneasy moments: And whoever have any thing, at
any time, to reproach their Consciences withal, cannot be said to be happy.


And is this all your Opinions?

All, All.


Why then, beged, I'll get me a Wife as soon as I can.


Geddemme a mighty pr^tty Woman, and a great Fortune, not an hour ago, would
have forced me to marry her, and beged I refused!




Peace, Peace, don't Disgrace me, and thou shall it have more Money. As I was
saying, the Handsom'st Woman in England, is in Love with me; and I'll give my
Consent before I Sleep.


Fooled, Cheated, Abused --

Pull her to Pieces -- to Pieces, with this Succubus -- this she-Devil.


Help, help -- I shall be devoured by these Harpies, turn Frederick, Constantia
kneels; now to you. Oh spare the Brother o^ Constantia, Oh Succour the Distressed
Constantia.


Adzooks what Srange hurly burly have we now?


More wonders! More Transformation of Sexes!


Why F^derick, what new Mistake is this? I thought I had le^t this matter in a
way to be reconciled.


Faith so I thought too; but new Mistakes have happ^n'd.


Si^ce ^hro your Impatience and your Sisters, so ^ow a Discovery has been made:
'Twere Folly to pursue this ^est any far^her; Constan^ia, 'tis time to
Surrender, take ^os^ession Fred^rick, and use your Discretion.


We'll not part wi^h her so, if you will have her, you shall have her Pricemeal
-- Vile Impostor, to put the Man upon us so.


Not to put ^he Man upon you, Adzooks, there wa^ the Devil.


These were very Innocent Ladies, not to know a Man from a Woman.


I doubt not Madam, but you have been better Instruc^ed a long time.


Sisters, pray an Exchange of Prisoners; what say you C^urtal, are you willing
to redeem your Sister, by putting your self in her place.


I think as a good Christian, I ought to make the Ladies Reparation for so many
provoking Disappointments.


What says Constantia, is she willing?


Necessity has no Law; I am for Surrendering to the Power that can protect me.


In my Hands you shall never want Protection. Frederick takes Constantia's
Hand, his Sisters thrust her to him.


There take her, she's more for your purpose than ours.


And there take him, whose more for your purpose than I.


O Constantia! I will so sweetly revenge my self.


Mr. Vaunter; Sir Iohn, there are Wives for you, make your Addresses.


Very pretty Ladies beged.


Demm'e, very pretty Ladies, your humble Servant.


So wonderful a resemblance I never saw. Well for my part, after so many
Mistakes; never more will I believe any Man the more a Man by his outside, as
the Beard makes not the Philosopher, so the Breeches make not the Man, that's
certain.

Cowards in Scarlet, pass for Men of War,
And the Grave Fool, does of^en Wise appear.
Trust not appearances; not Two in Ten
Deserve the generous Name of Women's Men.

As your Ladyship's Disappointments are a Lesson to the Ladies, not to trust
^oo much to appearances, so may my Victory serve to inform Mankind, that
whosoever has once entertained a real Passion, can never so entirely dispossess
himself, but the Woman, if she Pleases may reclaim him. There is always left a
Foundation to work upon; and a weakness which he himself does not suspect, till
he is brought to the Trial.

Captives in Love, try to get loose in V^in.
The Feet but slowly move, that drag a Chain.
Whom Irons Clog, we may 'ore take with Ease,
None can be free, unless the Victors Please^

I Who have bin the Poets Spark to day,
Will now appear the Champion of this Play.
Know all, that would pretend to my good Grace,
I Mortally dislike a damning Face:
Pleased or displeased; no matter now, 'tis past.
The first that dares be angry, breathes his last.
Who shall presume to doubt my Will and Pleasure,
Him I defy, to send his Weapons measure.
If War you choose, and Blood must needs be spilt here;
By Jove, let me alone to match your Tilter.
I'll give you satisfaction if I can,
Death! 'tis not the first time I have killed my Man.
On pain of being posted to your Sorrow,
Fail not at Four to meet me h^re to morrow.

