IT is the Fate of Strangers to the Town,
To have the Play and Prologue too their own:
Whilst Writers here for one another sweat,
Clubbing like Carr-men when a Brother's set.
Nay, dull insipid Farce you will commend
For sake of Prologue-writing gifted Friend;
Some gentle follower of the Wits, who thinks
He sucks in Poetry when-e're he drinks.
Since these have left no Formal So or Thus,
I'll bluntly tell you what you'll have from us.
Know then our Poet ventures more by far
Then all the blustering Hero's of the War.
For he without a Second does engage
Throngs of a fulsome bawdy scribing Age;
And dares in the midst of cry'd-up Satyr vent
What you'll acknowledge nicely innocent.
'Tis bold and new, and amongst the r^ffling Toys,
Whose Wit is beastly Impudence and Noise,
He knows he's damned; but would be so on choice.
Ladies, for you he writ, much grieved to see
Your best of Pleasures, harmless Comedy,
Made Bawd to such mean dirty Ribaldry
As scarce is known to the Offall of the Gallery.
Should he miscarry, 'tis in such a Cause
Will challenge Pardon, if not gain Applause.
Be kind, he's young, and on your hands may mend.
'Tis something so to write as not t'offend.

SHe is your Sister, Antonio.


That's it that makes my Hell: were she as far from my Blood, as now my Love,
she might, if possible, out-sin her Sex, and never injure me. But to call me
Brother, and be pointed at for Whore, Carlos; were the Lives of all our Family
twisted up in hers, nay, should all Posterity perish with her, she dies.


This Passion puts thee beyond all Counsel: prithee be thy self, and let me
hear the Circumstances of your Story. I am too much a Spaniard, not to prompt
you to Revenge; but would first know why, and how.


Believe me, thou art blessed, Carlos, who hast none of this frail Tribe so near
thy Blood, to rack thy Thoughts. The very Being of the Sex is infectious, and
from the mom^nt of their Birth corrupts their Blood, and leaves them all a
Stain.


This is Raving past hopes of Cure.


Would you have me tame, when all my Care and future^ Hopes are at once
blasted? Had I not Fondness for her beyond that of Mothers? F^ol that I was, to
trust my Happiness on the treacherous prop^ of a Woman's Faith!


This may still be Jealousy, and founded on the hate of some ^ly Informer.


Would my Life could buy the least show for Doubt. No, see, see Carlos, her own
Hand witnesses against her self; the only thing wherein a Woman ought to be
believed.


-- Vitelli, a Gentleman of Cordova, as he pretended, with promise of Marriage^
had possession of my Bed^ and, as I am informed, is fled towards Castile. My
Retreat is to a Monastery, where, you shall know when my Injuries are revenged
--


Dost thou not find her more impudent then practised Bawds? Had he still staid
to feed her Lus^ful flame, I had been ignorant.

Yes, you shall be revenged on your Vitelli; and with the same Dagger, though
thou were professing at the Altar, I'd send thee to keep company with the
Devils like thy self.

Carlos, thou must not trust thy very Thoughts with this Secret. Is there not
something in my Looks may tell the world my Sister's Whore? Hah --


This is Madness beyond Bedlam; be calm, and I'll further your Design. -- But
--


Each Minute's now an Age; but once revenged, thou shalt see me calm as
sleeping Children. I was not wont to be thus.


Nor must you be, Antonio; this Passion is a certain Hinderance to your
purpose. How can I assist you, when you will not give your self time to tell
your Story?


True, Carlos, and thou hast named the only thing could teach me Patience to
relate my Shame. Know then, that very night I had concluded the advantageous
Match for this false Woman, with Don Alonso Fonseca, the great Heir, returning
late home, brisk with wine, and over-joy'd at the Success, I entered at the
Garden-door, which I found open, and all the House silent as Death. Fear of my
greatest Treasure winged me to her Chamber: where, to my perpetual Torment, I
found that Letter. Oh Carlos! can thou guess the Sighs of Merchants in a
Storm, or utmost Pangs of Parents over their dying Hopes? such was my Treasure,
such my Loss and Grief.


The Surprise must needs be great, and the unlucky Circumstances add much to
the Affliction. But what Account could your Servants give?


All I could learn was, that she (who you know always governed) commanded them
to bed, and that her Maid should wait my coming home; by which means, unknown
to any, th^y escaped.


Know you the place of her Retir^ment she speaks of?


No, I le^t her Shame to b^ her Punish^ent, till I could wreak my Vengeance on
Vitelli, who I judge would choose Madrid, (for of Cordova he is not,) both for
the Solemnity, and likeliest place to lie concealed.


Do you know him?


No, Carlos, but such an Action must leave some mark upon the base Offender;
and something tells me, my heightened Rage will point me to the cursed Ruiner of
my Honour. -- Methinks I must look him dead.


Our Friendship needs not be confirmed by Talking; Antonio knows how much
Carlos would do to serve him. Nor will I spend a Minute otherwise then in his
Search. Unload thy self, and let me bear half the weight. Thou hast too much
Love, and too much sense of Honour.


Carlos, thou knew my Father well: methinks I see him just now breathing out
his last, and with his cold trembling hand delivering up Elvira to my Care.
Take her, said he, Antonio, the Treasure of my life, the Darling of thy lost
Mother: and as thou hope to meet us both in Heaven, swear never to marry till
thou hast settled her. I swore; and when I would have added more, he only
answered with a Smile, and seemed to die o'rejoy'd.

Blessed man! how unsuccessful was thy Care!
And 'twas to perjure me thou made me swear.
We Interest and Honour urge in vain,
Where Lust and Passion absolute do reign.

ARe we alone, Clara? each step I take I feel a Dagger at my heart. Wretched
Woman, how am I fallen! Oh the blessed time, when innocently we spent our days in
pitying the rest of our frail Sex! Am^ I not a Monster branded for my Infamy?
Slave that I was to perjured false Vitelli!


For Heaven's sake, Madam, don't weary me with Complaints. I swear the
long-ear'd Devil I rid has laid me up this month. I fancied my self ^lying,
when I whipped and spu^r'd. They may laugh at Scholars, Tailors and Seamen; but
if a Chamber-maid in Breeches don't rid^ with the wor^ of 'em, I'll sell my
Maidenhead for four Grapes, and they are cheap in this Country.


Thou art still all Mirth: but sooner shall the Sun rest, then I live and not
seek the false Vitelli. Base, cruel man, to leave his poor Elvira so! Oh! I
could curse him, would my Heart give leave; but that belies my Tongue.


Well, Madam, you know Clara is no Flincher; but I'd sooner undertake to know a
Be amongst a Swarm, then find out a Man in this Crowd whose Name you're as
uncertain of, as you are certain of his Dishonesty. This Will-of-the-wisp of
Love wants Wit as well as Eyes.


I've often heard him say, (and sure all he said could not be false,) that his
Attendance upon the Counc^l of State would be necessary towards the recovery of
an Inheritance; so that I conclude him here: and were he amongst millions, I
have too much reason not to know him.


The truth is, you have been pretty intimately acquainted.


It will be impossible for him to make me more wretched. But amidst this
Concourse, thus disguised, it will not be easy for to meet, much less to know
us. Let what will come, I am too miserable to fear a Danger, and only wander
to find variety of Torments.


Nay, good Madam, no more Whining. 'Slid, did I knight you for this? or will a
few drivelling Tears find your Lover, and escape your Brother's Fury? Think how
ill S^iveling becomes a pair of Breeches. Could I ever mistrust that You, that
had the courage to leave your House and Country to turn Knight-^rrant, nay
more, plainly tell your Brother by your Letter, you had yielded up your Fort to
a strange Cavalier, should come to talk of Danger and Wretched; things fit for
Boys thoughts and Women's fears, not for Knights of Malta?


Thy Innocence maintains thy Mirth: but what can wronged Elvira do, weighed
down by a vast load of Shame, that sinks my very Soul?


There's your little imp^tinent Nicety, to call that Shame, Women spend their
lives to purchase. Why, there's not one in hundreds that you meet, that seem
devout and melancholic, but are contriving to throw away that Toy you wot of:
and 'tis the first Lesson their Mothers teach them, to lose it handsomely.


But that I know this designed to divert my Cares, thou were past hope of
Pardon.


Heaven knows how dear I pay for all this Mirth.

Faith, methinks this Cross becomes you. Was't gained by some strange
Achievement against the Musselmen? or is it for fear the Women should run mad
of such Sweetness, that you put this Cross over your Plague-door? Truth is,
the^e may be danger of Swelling for those come near it.


I shall lose all Patience, and wish you miserable as my self, if you persist
in this Idleness.


That's pleasant^ you'd persuade me you're Woman too^ ^ome, Sir, 'tis not that
Cross shall bear you harmless. I know a Vow may be broke to save a Maid's
longing. Oh my heart! whither do I ramble?


All thy Counterfeit cannot ^aise me to a Smile. Alas^ it is already broke. But
that fond Fool dares trust a man, though heightened with such Vows as would make
the most perjured tremble, is deservedly lost. Credulous, rash, doting,
sottish Woman! did thou not know him Man? how could thou think him then to
be believed?


Base that he was, to affront a person of your Honour, one that wears a Sword,
and knows what's what. Did he refuse me, to meet me in the said Field provided
at all points, I'd post him Coward, and hire Slaves to kick him.


Ah Clara! had thou but seen his pale and ghastly Looks, but heard his Sighs
and Vows. Then would he kneel, and weep, and press my Hand; then ^ise, and
swear again with such dreadful Imprecations, nothing that was Woman could
resist. I'm sure I did not; false to my self and too-too-loving Brother. Would
I had ne'er b^n Woman: nor would I yet be Man, for I should be still far worse,
and still more false. Yet would I were any thing but what I am.


I'm like to have a blessed time on it; and all this for the loss of a Ma^denhead.
Faith it scares me so, if there be ever a Receipt in Spain to keep one, 't
shall be the first thing I'll purchase: but I'm afraid 'tis very dear, and hard
to come by.

Oh here's my Landlord: never man came in better time.


You re welcome, Gentlemen; I hope your Lodgings please you.


Very well, Landlord, we are quickly pleased, so they be private. But I fear
you'll be crowded against this great Solemnity.


Nothing can disturb you, the House is large, and this the most ret^r'd part.


What other Strangers have you?


Yet only one Gentleman and your selves.


Do you know from whence he came?


No, I assure you.


Prithee, Landlord, see our Dinner be made ready, and our Wine good and w^ll
cooled: as hot as the weather is, I must have one H^al^h to the Royal Pair.


Sir, a Gentleman just now alighted calls for you.


I'm coming. Your Dinner shall be ready with all expedition.


In the mean time we'll take a turn in the Yard, and see this Newcomer.


I'm glad you have so much Woman in your Passion, as to be able to dissemble
before Strangers.

Come, Sir, be brisk and gay, strut like a young Knight new dubbed. So, that
becomes you, and is tempting.

Though the Men false and cruel you may find,
You yet may conquer all the Woman-kind.

WIll you please to see your Chamber?


Not yet; I'll stay here a while for my Servants that are coming.


Are they much behind?


I guess, not; for coming early this morning from Iyescas, my man left my
Portmantue behind him, and brought in stead of it a Stranger's that supped with
me. But before we had got a league from thence, we found the Error, and I sent
them both back to change it. I hope they may speed, for the Gentleman was not
stirring when we set out.


Is he coming this way, Sir?


No, he came from hence.




'Tis like these are those you expect.


Never tell me, he must ride upon some Devil bridled and saddled.


Would he would take him into his possession then; he has brought us into a
fine condition.


'St, there's my Master. Well, Tonto, that hanging Look of ^hine always
foretold ill.


Have you brought back the right?


No, Sir, one much lighter in it^ stead.


Curse on you both, Slaves! I am utterly ruined, without hopes lost^ Why did
you not pursue him? Dogs!


Whither, Sir?


To Valentia, Rascals.


Why, Sir, he was no more going to Valentia then you back to the Indies; but,
as a Shepherd told us, took the upper way hither. Some Robber, Sir, on a Jennet
got by the Wind: had he strid any thing else, we must have reached the Town
before him.


Careless Slaves! your Lives shall be some little Recompense.


Hold, Sir, this were a Punishment too great, and most unworthy of your Sword.


'Twas not our fault: your coming out so early occasioned the Mistake.


Dog! but mutter towards an Excuse, and I'll silence thee for ever.


Pray, Sir, give me leave to advise: 'tis not your Passion will recover what is
lost; rather think which way you may retrieve it.


If he be once housed in Town, 'twill be as difficult to find him, as an Honest
woman in an Embassadour's Liberties. Your only way will be, to send to watch
his coming: 'tis likely he's yet upon the Road.


Thanks, Gentlemen -- Tonto and you go several ways; and if you hope for
Pardon, bring some tidings of him.


Here, Landlord, take care of this.


Your Loss must certainly be great, that makes you thus concerned.


There was in it to the value of twelve thousand Ducats in Gold and Jewels.


A Loss sufficient to undo a Banquer.


This is a course Welcome to Madrid.


We cannot blame your Passion, caused by such a Misfortune.


The Wealth is much below my care, could I but recover some Papers, which I
would redeem with twice the sum.


They needs must be of great import, to merit such a Ransom, and of too near
concern to admit a Stranger's inquiry.


No, Sir, that Cross you wear declares your obligation of succouring the
Distressed: and if you will so much relieve my Sorrow, as to hear my Story, I
would beg your Company in my Chamber.


I willingly shall wait you, Sir, and beg you will not scruple to admit my
Friend.


No, Sir; two such Counsellours may in some measure ease my Grief, and prove
necessary to one so much a Stranger in this Court and Kingdom. -- Landlord,
show a Room.


Don Luis desires to speak with you.


Take this, and show the best Chamber.


How fares my honest Friend Senior Dormilon?


Ever ready to serve the noble Don Luis.


Have you any news yet of my Nephew Peralta?


None, Sir: for though I cannot pretend to know him by his Face; I should soon
guess him by his Discourse, were he amongst my Strangers.


He has orders to trust hims^lf to your care. I my self should ^carce be able
to challenge him by his Looks, it being thirteen years since he le^t Madrid for
Flanders.


His killing the Ensign was unlucky; especially in this nick of time, whilst it
deprives him of so fair an Estate as his Brother has left him.


I'll venture mine to procure his Pardon, and make a Composition with the
Widow; which I do not much doubt of, if he escapes those that watch his coming
into the Town.


Her knowing of his coming is strange.


'Tis certain, and that she has so far prevailed with the Corrigidor, that he
has commanded all his Alguazills to apprehend him, if possible, at his arrival.
Which is the reason I wrote him word to Valentia, where he has lain concealed,
to come to your House first; mine being continually beset ever since he left
Flanders.


As soon as he comes, you shall have notice; and here he shall be safe as in S.
Isidor's Church.


Senior, I thank you. I am now going to meet the Widow at the Palace about the
Reconcilement, judging much easier to buy her off before he is in Custody.


Fortune attend you, Sir. Money is a prevailing Advocate.


When that once fails, we must submit to Fate.


BOy, leave us.

Sir, I am d^scended of the ancient Family of the Vitelli from whence I took my
name. My Father, of no mean Fortune, has long since contracted a strict
Friendship with one Don Gomez Aranda; and here in Madrid lived with greatest
expressions of mutual Love. At last forced to part, Don Gomez set up his
Residence in this Court; and my Father past the Seas to Mexico, where he has
ever since been: and I in that great City of the New World first saw Light.


Was you never, Sir, in Spain till now?


Never: And the Occasion of my coming is to consummate a Match (formerly agreed
on by our Fathers, that this way they might seal and propagate their
Friendship) between the only Daughter of Don Gomez and my self. The Painter
makes me believe her fair and charming, and I arrived with all the Expectation
of a longing Bridegroom; but after a long Voyage find my self wrecked on Shore.


Your Loss can be no hindrance to this Affair.


Yes, much; my Letters are all gone I brought her Father from my own; and I
have no reason he should believe me on my ba^e Word, without farther Evidence
to confirm him.


Does he expect you, Sir?


That he hath done these six months.


He cannot doubt the truth of your Relation; or at least will so long suspend,
till you can send to Cadiz, where I suppose you landed, and give him farther
Testimony of being what you say you are.


Your Counsel cannot be disputed; I'll immediately go seek him out.


I should think it well advised to open this Portmantue; 'tis possible it may
discover who has put the Change upon you.


If any thing can be thought true a Villain says, he's called Vitelli. 'Twas
^ur being of the same Name that began this un^ortunate Acquaintance. But this I
hope will evidence the contrary. 'Twould add to my Affliction, to have a
Rascal justly claim the Name of my Family.


Would to Heaven I'd been a Stranger to that fatal Name, that like a Plague
infects the air 'tis mentioned in.


Heavens! what's here? a Broker's Shop?


There can be nothing worth the search amongst such Rags.


See, Sir, here are Papers, and a Lady's Picture.


A Moor to my Goddess; throw the Trif^e by.


Do you know this, Madam?


Oh my Heart! the very same I gave the false Vitelli.


Never whine, but remember you a^e a Woman, and to dissemble, or all is ruined.
We must be nigh a Discovery.


The Trial is too great.


You seem concerned; does that Picture cause it?


I was saying, Sir, there is something in this Look that seems strangely
unfortunate.


And I, that the Eyes had such a yielding Easiness, as might be betrayed by
false Vows: and that here me thought the Painter had expressed such a languishing
Cast as spoke the height of Love.


Faith, Sir, I am not curious; but may pronounce the Lady miserable enough has
fallen into the hands of this Ruiner of my Fortunes.


Did the Beauty you adore much exceed this?


As this an Indian; her very Figure was enough to make all men love, and its
Loss to make all men die.


This is not so despicable a Face, that a Lover ought to be ashamed of
Constancy. Sure I am, as bad a one has oft been sighed for.


By some fond Fools that never knew a Beauty; but this is all Cloud to my
Brightness.


This will come to a Quarrel if not prevented. The disparaging a Woman's Beauty
turns the tamest of the Sex to a Scold.

Pray, Sir, what Papers are those? this seems much from your Design.


True, but entered on the discourse of one I love, I lose my self and Business.
They are Letters. This to the most excellent Duke of Ossuna; this to the Regent
of the Council of Aragon; this to the Marquis of Velada.


By these he should be a man of Fortune and Repute, and not a Robber.


The best way is to open one, 'tis probable you will find his Name and Quality.


My Lord, The Bearer of this is Don Manuel Peralta, Captain-Lieutenant of my
Regiment, who for killing an Ensign on the Guard (though highly provoked) is
compelled to leave this Place, to prevent the Governour's Severity; and flies
to your Lordship's Protection, by whose favour I doubt not he will obtain a
Pardon, which I earnes^ly desire; as that of your Lordship for this Trouble
given you by,

My Lord, Your Lordship's most humble Servant and Kinsman,the Earl of
Pontilliana.

This has made all plain: the only means is, to have present recourse to the
Marquis, declare your Loss, and beg his Assistance in the Recovery.


'Twould require Haste, lest he prevent you with some new Cheat.


I fly, and something like Hope gives me a good Omen.


We shall wait your Return with impatience.

Sure I am, my Happiness depends upon your Success.


What do you think of Vitelli now, Madam? Peralta I should say. You see he
steals other things besides Maidenheads.


But nothing of such Value, or so much past recovery.


Faith, Madam, were that all, 'twer^ nothing. For my part, I think the
Principal well sunk, so one can secure the Use: troth is, to lose that too, is
something no Woman can well bear.


Nothing but thy known Fidelity could secure thee from my Anger.


What? I warrant you'd be grave, and thinking again; Oh the fine Gentleman upon
his Jennet! how gracefully he bowed! the tempting Serenades, passionate
Letters, Complements beyond resistance; and when possessed, all over Pleasure!
and then he kissed, and vowed, and left me full of Hopes, that equalled all but
present Joys.


But disappointed, makes all Pl^gues and Death a Blessing. And 'tis from these
Thoughts the wretched Elvira falls to be a Lump of black Despair.


By my faith, this is pleasant: neither well f^ll nor fasting. All the way we
came; Oh Clara, were it possible, nay did I b^t think it so, e're to see him,
thou should find me cheerful as in my Innocence: Now 'tis more then probable
we shall see him; The Trial is too great, and I'm a Lump of black Despair.
Believe me, Madam, 'tis unnatural for a Woman to fear in extremi^y.

Though Men with Counsel and with grave Debate,
May better War, and judge Intrigues of State;
In Exigences We the Rule have got.
No Woman e're could want Excuse or Plot.

THis Master of mine is as unaccountable as a breaking Merchant. To steal from
Valentia through ways scarce known to a Foot-pad; alight at the Town's end just
a noon, when the Heat makes the Streets empt^est, to avoid being snapped by the
Officers; and yet at the sight of the first Vail, forget all Dangers, and think
himself as secure as a Confessor in a Church.


Now I am confirmed 'tis he. For Heaven's sake, Madam, to your Chamber; 'tis
downright Madne^s to make a double Venture.


Certainly when the Devil wou^d show his Master-piece, he puts on a Petticoat;
and when he is not at l^su^e, a Woman may save him the labour, and supply his
place.




Troth, Sir, he that can be sad with good Clothes on his back, Money in his
purse, and his Mistress Smiles, may he be condemned to the Galleys till he
laugh.


To curse him home, may he meet with such a Master as I have; and if he never
laugh till he give him cause, I'm sure he must die a Slave.


Is yours such a Turk?


Oh! the Great Turk, Sir; and has by much a larger Seraglio: for all the use he
makes of the whole World is to keep his Wenches ^n't.


Pray how do you call your Hercules?


Since you will have it so, Hercules Vitelli.


With what confidence the Rogue lies!

By his Name he should be of a great Family.


I am not Herald enough to know the greatness of his Ancestors, but to my
knowledge his Issue is large; about as numerous as the I^ws, and of my
conscience as much dispersed.


I have an Acquaintance here, a Knight of Malta, that would make a rare
Companion for him.


A Knight of Malta? if he loves his Life, let him avoid him, for he has vowed
Destruction to all Pretenders to Chastity. You'll scarce believe it, but the
sight of a Nun through a Grate, though he thinks her chaste upon force, puts him
into an Agony.


You are much deceived, Sir, a Knight's Vow is but what forbids the chaste use
of Marriage, and leaves him at liberty to all the world besides.


Nay, if he has a new way of interpreting his Oath, it may be ^hey may fadge.


Methinks --


No more, I beseech you, Sir, I expect him each minute; and ^f I have not
provided a Room before his coming, shall pay for this Prating.


I lodge in this House, and when you are at leisure shall be glad of more of
your company.


Adieu, Senior.


Poor Elvira, a Town-bull would have proved as constant a Lover.


A Chamber, Boy.


Will you please to walk this way? I'll carry your Portmantue, Sir.


No, Sirrah, I had a wise Father, that taught me to trust my self: by the
Weight there may be the Indies in it.


I Do confess, Madam, I have been Cock of the brisk Fools, that set up for Wits
with railing against Love. But I now recant; and my Pain has been so exquisite,
since I had the honour to see you, that it may equal years of Sighs and Verses.


I should not sooner know a practised Beggar by his Cant, then I do you for a
formal repeating Woer; one that takes notes from Plays, practises with his
Glass, and concludes the next Woman he meets will be fond of studied Nonsense.


'Tis barbarous to murder him with Wit, who has already yielded to your
Beauty; the Power of which you know too great to suffer a Dissembler.


Sure you think me Daughter to the Knight of the Sun; or my Beauty could never
warm through this Cloud.


It does not extinguish the Fire, Madam, to hide the Flame that kindled it,
that still burns and consumes.


That's in the road again: could we but persuade you Gallants to forswear Fire,
Sun, Flame and Fate, you would court with as much Silence as the Turk's
Attendants wait.


You shall bind me to any thing, so you will reward my Diligence, and
understand by Signs. --

Let these then speak for me. --


A pretty Puppet-show, which when I am best at leisure, it may be I may throw
away some few Rials to see again. Now I'm in haste.


Nay, 'saith, though your light F^igat hath gained the Port, I'll make bold to
seize the Tender, till I know of what Country you are.


You'll find a smart Resistance.


Now you're mine; but some kind Answers to half a dozen Questions frees you.


Sure you think your self in the Suburbs, or Ambassadors Liberties, to take
this freedom. I'd have you to know my Place is what's honest and honourable.


And shall be so still for me, dear little Fury! But can thou do any thing
more honourable then to promote an honest Love? Is it not pity a Gentleman
should be ruined for want of two Words? a Charity your Sex is seldom sparing
in.


I so perfectly hate you, I would lose that pleasure of Talking, did I not
know, (if you are truly in Love, which Heaven grant!) what I have to say will
rid the world of you. Learn and despair then. This Lady is just now to be
married. Who she is, you shall ne'er be told, that you may die for an unknown
Mistress, and make the better subject for a Ballad.


Truth is, this Anger does become thee; but for variety, and to show the rest
of your good Qualities, put on a relenting Look, and discover. -- Thou art out
of thy Calling to pretend to Secrecy. -- By this thou shalt be kind. --


You show so noble a Constancy, that if I were to die, I can't forbear now. Oh,
my Lady were a happy woman, could she hope for such a Lover. I vow, Sir, I did
but try you; and I'll assure you, in my eye you are the properest, most
accomplished Gentleman.


Now thou flatter; I can ne'er reward such Kindness -- Prithee on.


In short, Sir, for I shall be mist,

Her Name is Donna Violante, sole Daughter to Don Gomez Aranda, who lives in
this House. What will make your Pretences fruitless is, her Quality, and that
she is already contracted to a Gentleman she never saw, and whom she every
moment expects from India.


'Tis ill, but not desperate, if you promise your Assistance.


As far as I can serve you without endangering her Honour, and my own Honesty,
which I'll assure you, Sir, I stand upon, you have made me yours.


This is one of the true Breed: some few that prove otherwise are of another
Species. You may as well call a Wolf a Lamb, as her Woman that waits, and can
keep a Secret, or resist a Bribe. -- Well, the Devil does owe me a Spite, and
has taken an opportunity of paying it. Certain it is, this Woman must be had;
but how, I fear's a Qu^stion will ne'^ be answered.


I Have a true Mule's life, Burden and Provender. He was certainly bewitched
that first debased himself to Serve: but the downright Devil was in him that
chose a Wencher for his Master. The wandering Jew is a staid House-keeper to
him: 'tis odds but the next Petticoat he meets carries him for Turky^ and there
he may take a fresh one for the Indies. I have often wondered at two things;
one, what this Master of mine is made of: to my knowledge he has given away and
lost more Hearts then our Kings have sent to people the New World; and yet of
my conscience he has such a stock left, that were they well marshalled, they
might fight the French King this next Campaign. The other is, what could possess
me to be Shadow to this termagant Turk, whose only Religion is to conquer
Women. Why should not Don F^bi^ sound as well as Don Peralta? I'm sure
Historians impose upon us, or else the Family of the Fabii have been famous.
And shall be again, good Don Fabio. -- Don Fabio. I have the advantage in the
sound of my Roman Fore-fathers. Beso 'oste las manos. -- muy criado de su
merced. Excellent! now will I walk in as much state as a Grandee, and with the
Wisdom of a Privy-councellour: and when Affairs of State prove too heavy for
me, my Boy and Musician shall divert me with a Song. But in the mean time, till
my Retinue is settled, I will vouchsafe to be Boy and Musician to my self.

Hang slavish Fear:
The names of Man and Master is a Chea^
'Tis Dog-like to be rated here and there.
I will resolve, and shall be Great.
I set my self at Liberty:
We're all by nature Free.
'Tis only Law that makes us Slaves;
Law first obeyed by Fools, and made by Knaves.
He that will be a Don,
Follow me, he is one.
He that will not his Freedom restore,
Was got by a Jew, and nursed by a Moor.
Humh! what a nick of time does this Master of mine choose! Now do I see the Don
running from before my Name, and leave poor Fabio to shift for himself; and
feel all my Privy-councellourship trill down to my very Heels. But Fate still
takes pleasure to ba^le vast Designs. Thus when the Wheel of Fortune turns,
Oh Spain, thy great Escurial burns.



What Company's in the House?


None of note that I hear of, but a Knight of Malta.


Where's my Landlord, Senior Dormilon?


Abroad, otherwise I had acquainted him with your being here.


'Tis lucky that you mist him, for I must yet be concealed; therefore on your
life dissemble my true Name.


So, the Devil and my Master have been juggling on some new Design.


The great Hazard that I run is, lest my Portmantue should betray me. Where is
that was left in its stead? That may discover who made the Exchange, and
contribute to its recovery.


Here, Sir, may the Worth answer its Weight, and I can't be less then Don for
the lucky Mistake.


Open and search it. What's there?


Why, Gold and Jewels, Sir, without count. The Gentleman has paid dear for an
old Suit and dern'd Linen, and some few Bills that should have been
discharged. Here are Letters too --


How's this? To Don Gomez de Aranda? the Father of my adored Violante; and this
no doubt the Indian they expect.


A Lady's Picture, Sir.


The same: By Heaven her Picture too! Hah! Why am not I then the true Vitelli?
for that's the Name. I well remember began our Acquaintance; and that he told
me the hopes of a fair Wife brought him to Spain. He that loves can't want
Impudence, and these Evidences must stand the nicest Search. 'Tis resolved. --
Put all up again, and make it fast.


I think you resolve well^ this Country's hot^ and Company troublesome.
Besides, you're used to Flanders. The Mules shall be ready, Sir; Gold's no
Burden.


What's that you mutter, Rascal?


A Journey, Sir, would be necessary, and healthfull^ this Crowd may breed the
Plague. To be plain, let me beg of you to fly with this Treasure. In a short
time you ^ay purchase your Pardon in spite of this dissembling Widow, and
never trouble your Fri^nds to petition for it; and in the mean while, by the
strength of this live as Great as the Governor.


No, Villain, I have Business of gr^ater consequence in hand; and when that's
done, will return it to the Owner. Mean-spirited Rascal, to guess I would
enrich my self by such base means!


Will you but wink till I run, Sir? I have ventured Hanging in your Service
e're this for six ^ivers a day, with the Appurtenances of Poor-Jack and Biscuit.


No more, Slave; make it up, I say.


And the Picture too? --


That I shall have occasion for.


Here's one Doblon, Sir, I am strang^ly smitten with. May not I have that for
Contemplation?


Not a Rial, Dog; take it up and follow me. And know from this time forward I
am Vitelli, lately arrived from Mexico, and that you are now come with me from
Cadiz. And upon these hints improve thy faculty of Lying.


Yes, I am an Indian, and am forced to value Gold at as little rate as those
Fools. A pox of Honour and Hon^sty, 'tis as impertinent to a man and
troublesome as a Maidenhead at fifteen, and as necessary to be parted with at
the first good occasion.


HOw could I do less, when I had taken the retaining Fee? Besides, Madam, he
spoke with such a prevailing Earnestness, that I, that never had an aversion to
a proper Gentleman, could not help it.


A proper Gentleman! one of the forward pretending Fops, that have half a dozen
fine things to say, and when they are done, prove as dull as an outworn Poet.


This Railing with us Women is as certain a sign of Love, as Huffing with the
Men, of Cowardice. -- But it shall go hard or I'll find it.


Dresses well? so does a Tailour's Prentice: and what you call Freedom is only
Impudence picked up by keeping Ill company; such sort of Wit as a man of sense
takes more care to avoid, then such Triflers do to con it.


This confirms me. --

You'll allow his Person manly and agreeable?


I confess I have seen some few in a Crowd less desirable: but put him
altogether, he's one of the last men I ^hould choose.


You may be persuaded to see him again for all this Aversion.


Yes, if you can assure me I may do him a Mischief by ir. -- I wish I had
never seen him --


Since you are so nice, I hope your Mexi^an will prove one made of Wax, without
a Fault or Blemish.


You're always disturbing me with things I hate. I tell you, I will have
nothing to do with Mankind either of the Old or New world. But of all things
never name this Stranger more.


I hope I may rally a little on him, for that I designed at first, only I
feared it might offend you. I'll try you this way. --

By my troth, Madam, I wished you with me, for certainly never any thing was so
worth laughing at. Besides what he said to you, he has not Language enough to
ask what's a clock, or commend a S^it of Linen. 'Tis as raw a Fool as ever
came out of a Nursery.


Thou art always in extremes; I could not perceive so much Simpleness: I should
have guessed he had been a little at least conversant with the World.


Right. -- No, believe me, Madam, he sn^akt like a Boy before ^ Mother-in-law;
and I am apt ^o think we are the first Women he ever adventur^d to speak to,
and he threw me this Purse merely for fear I should have jear^d him. I was
about teaching him to hold up his Head, and make a Leg^ but the^ he ran fort.


This is impossible; all he said to me was consistent and courtly, his Address
gentile, and Shape becoming. But you a^e still finding fault with what you have
not wit to understand.


Am I so, Madam? and I am now your Aversion, for abusing this Stranger. Could
you in agi^e your Cunning laid so deep, that one of your own Sex could not see
through it? All the harm I wish is your Ind^an may prove half so taking. But I
have done, and here come^ one will plague you enough on that ^ubj^ct.


I warrant you Girls have been tal^ing of a Husband, and I can't blame you. I
made my Wife confess she thought of nothing e^e. -- That Look won't do, Will.
-- I know it longs, and so forth. Come, come, your Mother tells me you're a
Woman, and so forth. -- That's enough, Will, --


We had Discourse that was much more se^ious, Sir.


Nay, by my troth, Will. thou art fit to be married now thou can dissemble so
well. -- But dost thou know, Girl, he's coming? -- hah -- does it not move,
affect, and so forth? -- A word to the wise, Will. --


Sir, I know nothing but my Duty.


That's right, take the India's then. Oh, if he be like his Father -- Will. --
I'll say no more. But for a sparkling Eye and Wit, we were the same, and
carried it; knew all the Poets and Players, and writ Prologues; nay, I had once
the credit to be named for a Lampoon. Time is, time was, Will.

Here 'tis, Will. -- Vitelli in a twelvemonth.


I hope, Sir, it will be no breach of Duty to ask some time to consider.


Consider? -- why, thy Mother and I were smitten, bargained, and so forth,
before you could pluck up a Veil.


I must not be accounted disobedient; but yet --


Nay, that Toy of Modesty becomes thee, c. but I'm your Father, Will. and though
merry, know what's what, Will. -- I give you leave to make up your mouth, c. --
But when he comes, expect a Courtesy, and, I thank you, Sir.


What a cursed thing is this not to have my Q --


Has he no name, and so forth?


I never saw him, Sir.


Retire, Daughter. -- If it be the man you wot of, go in and twitter, you shall
be called.


Whatever this Stranger means, I wish he had all my Bribe to be fairly rid of
him.


Your right leg foremost, Sir.


Sir, when I tell you I am Don Pedro Vitelli, and come from India, I hope I may
beg a Welcome; this I know, my Father g^e me some assurance of it.


Don Pedro Vitelli must challenge Welcome as long as I am Don Gomez, c. And how
does the good Gonzalo, my old Friend, your Father? Thou make me weep for joy.
Just such was he, when we began our first Acquaintance. -- I should have known
thee in the Street, thou art so like, the very shape and face, c.


I was always thought like him, Sir.


Yes, as a Bear's an Elephant. The Old man's as fond of the Cheat as my Master
of the Wench.


This Letter I was commanded to deliver from my Father, with Thanks for the
great Honour you designed his Son.


Honest man! -- Yes, yes, this is the old Hand and Style to a very tittle.

You are doubly welcome --. Let me embrace you: my Joys are so complete, I
scarcely can contain my self.


Not so hard; he's weak in the back since the last Cure.


He tells me he had once thought to come with these Gallions; but then I had
been too happy.


Yes, Sir, he did, but some unexpected Business has deferred his purpose till
their next return. In the mean time, Sir, he has sent me as a Pledge and Token
of his ancient Friendship.


And trust me, a welcome one. Nay, my Daughter shall tell you so too -- Flora.
-- By Saint Isidor I was so overjoyed to see you, I had forgot to give her
notice of your Arrival.

Tell Will. the happy Minute's coming, bid her put on her best Looks, and so
forth.


Sir, I beg you would let this be disposed of in your Closet, about twelve
thousand Ducats in Gold and Jewels, what I could bring conveniently from Cadiz;
the rest will be sent.


I'll be your faithful Steward. Flora, show the way where it may be laid, and
hasten your Mistress.





I never refused a Challenge from a Woman.


Fie, fie, this Girl makes me out of patience. --

Oh here she comes. -- Come hith^, Will. this is he; Look and like, Will. 'tis
thy Father's Choice, and a wise one, though I say it. -- I know you young
people have some fine things to say to one another, c. therefore I'll leave
you, and talk a while with your Man about the Affairs of the New World and the
like.


He will be able to say something, though you can expect no perfect account
from one of his Breeding: -- at leisu^e I shall satisfy you, Sir.

Now, Madam, I hope you will allow me more Freedom then when you cruelly
shunned my Addresses; and one that leaves the world he was born in, merely to
serve you, may justly expect some kind of Welcome.


This Encounter is more strange then the former: and I can scarce imagine, the
man that took so long a Journey for a particular Mistress, would make so
zealous a Court to the first he meets. The Lady in the Veil has the promise of
that Heart to my knowledge.


And to mine too, Madam, or else this deceives me --


And yet you bribed my Maid to learn my Name.


True, only to take an opportunity of giving something to one I knew I must be
beholden to.


Your Trial of me was not too kind, Sir.


I confess, Madam, there's something extravagant in what's past: but I hope
Curiosity and your Goodness will excuse it -- Nor was it fit I owned my self,
till I could produce such Letters and Treasure as might secure me from being
thought an Impostour for the future. --


Yes, Sir, my old Master studies night and day: he is just now writing a Book,
and intends to dedicate it to you.


Then he has outstripped me; I could never arrive farther then a Madrigal, c. --
And how is Mexico to Madrid?


Catch me at Descriptions, and I'll hang for it.

What's more wonderful then any thing in the Old or New World, he is a great
Poet, and yet vastly rich.


What kind of Court does the Vice-roy keep? is the Palace magnificent?


Faith, Sir, I think I may venture to tell you, 'tis whispered my old Master
knows no end of his Wealth.


Are the Streets large and fair? what garb do the Indians keep? c.


My young Master, Sir, may be worth -- let me see -- a million of Ducats; and
when his Father dies --


This Fellow's mind is all on Money: a shallow Rascal. -- But these Answers are
to my purpose: for if he be Rich, c. let the Woman run the rest of the Hazard,
and the New World be as 'twill.


I am sure I have kept to windward of the Law, let my Master look to the
upshot.


This I like, this looks as Man and Wife; and may ye be as happy, c. as Gonz^lo
and I can wish you.


Sir, there can be nothing less then Happiness accompany the Poss^ssour of so
much Goodness. And if she think me worthy of her, I must go into a Third World,
to learn something new to wish to make me more blessed.


See you there, Will. that's a Flight: many one of them, and such like, have I
had in my Youth. Old Gonz^lo still! -- Well, Son, your Father and I were Wags,
c. in our young days.


Each thing you say reminds me so much of him, that were not I thus doubly
blessed, I should think of Mexico.


Well, Will. for a Man and Wealth thou art fitted; and she that looks for more
must die, c. This World I'm sure affords nothing -- Come, Son, we'll go in,
you're weary, and I long to discourse you: for this Man of yours is none of
the great Intelligencers.


'Tis ten to one but we shall play the old Romantic trick, and while the
Knight and Lady are at work, the Squire and Damsel imitate.


I shall like you well enough, if you have another Romantic trick too, of
drowning or hanging your self, if you see me displeased. For the truth is, you
have a Face I would fain be rid of.


Not so willingly as I would free my self of this House. -- What a-Devil can
come of a thing built upon a Quicksand? This they may call Love and Adventures:
but he that can foresee a good End of them need never despair at the Gallows.
But so it is -- When for a Wench our Voyage is designed,
We boldly sail against both Tide and Wind.



ON my life, Sir, 'tis he; the very Vitelli whose Portmantue we have -- I see
him with Don Gomez.


Cursed Fortune! in the very minute? two Hours had possessed me of her.


What do you think of a fair and honourable Retreat? -- This is the way out. --



Dog! I'll think of nothing but Victory; and will be, and am Vitelli, Son to
Gonzalo. Think me any thing else, and I ll cut thy throat.


You may be what you please: but I hope you'll allow me still to be Fabio, and
to think my self in great Danger. I know it nothing concerns you.


Coward! no Flinching; but follow my Example, and lie like thy self, we will
still carry it. In the mean while let's retire, and contrive to meet the worst.


There needs no great Contrivance, it will meet us. -- For my part, I'll lurk
hereabouts for Intelligence.


But, prithee Friend, have I so silly a Face, and so forth, that you could pick
no body else out so fit to put a Cheat on? Good faith you're deceived in old
Gomez, he understands Trap, c.


I cannot yet understand why you mistrust me; I'm sure I expected ^uch another
Welcome from one I looked upon as Father.


I'll say that for thee, you're a pleasant Fellow, and hast as lucky a
Count^nance to conceal a Cheat as one would wish to purchase. But this is a
little too gross -- and how came we to be so nigh of kin?


The Respect I bear you keeps me from taking any thing ill; nor can you by the
worst of words force me into a Passion with the Father of Vi^lante, whom
Gon^alo made m^ believe I should at my arrival from the Indies call Wi^e.


And so you shall, if you can lay any just Claim. But you ^ay with the same
Considence pret^nd to the Kingdom o^ Spain, c. and with much the same Success,
believe me -- Violante? -- ha, ha, ha. --


That you are Don Gomez you your self assure me, nor am I less Don Vitelli.
That Violante is your Daughter you own, and Gonz^lo your Friend, for whose Son
you have designed her. Why then does all I say seem Riddle? Is it the custom of
Spain to mock those they style Friends? if so, the Indians are much less
barbarou^.


The Devil take me, and so forth, if this Fellow have not a pretty wheedling
confident way with him. I'll confound him a little. --

Well, Sir, since you will be Vitelli, I know you have often heard your Father
speak of me, and how we spent our time when young.


No day, Sir, but your Friendship is his subject; and this he bids me imitate.
Tells how you vied in Arms and Arts; often wishes (though blessed with Wealth) he
had never left Spain, but still enjoyed your Company.


V^ry fine. -- I'm much beholden to him, c. Did he never enter into particulars
of our A^fairs?


Yes, I've heard him say, when Fellow-students, you had one Purse; that the
same Books, the same Company pleased you: and that your Fancies kept so even
pace, that you often joined upon the same Subject without the difference of the
Style perceived.


I wish this Fellow's Shoes were off, that I might see whether he has cloven
Feet or no. How could he possibly know this else? Of what Age, what Stature and
Complexion is he?


In all agreeable to you, and what he says so like your way of Speech, that
sure I must call you Father. One think remarkable and private too is a S^ar on
his right Side, by a Wound received in a Duel wherein he was your Second: and
you, Sir, as he told me, was then run through the Thigh, being on the same day
you should have married.


This Truth startles me.

Do you know to whom?


Yes, Sir, Donna Beatriz Cruz^d^, whom you first saw at Saint Isidor's Church,
and that a month after your Marriage was consummate.


'Tis a clear case, I am not Gome^, nor this my House, nor he within Vitelli;
no, no, all's a downright Mistake. -- Friend, dost thou know whether there be
two Gonz^lo's, and two Vitelli's, that love and know by Sympathy? or art not
thou som^thing of a Spirit, and so forth? ha?


The Gentleman's distracted.

Sir, this I know, that I am the man I pretend to b^, and grieve to ^ind you
thus.


Where you pick up these Truths, is b^yond my power to guess^ but. I can
demonstrate you f^lse and coun^it. Fo^ if true, where the Jewels, and so forth,
you wrote you would bring with you? show my Daughter's Picture I sent, your
Father's Letters, and all that.


That's my Misfortune; this very morning I was robbed of all: but if you will
have patience to wait --


This I knew would tickle you. Let old Gomez alone to find out a Cheat, and so
forth. Stole from you? yes by the right Owner, who brought them to me.


To convince you, I know to a Rial what's in the Portmantue, each particular
Jewel and Paper.


This is some Confidence of another World, and almost distracts me. -- Within,
call Don Vitelli.


Use not my Name to such a Villain; for so I dare pronounce and justify him.


Ne'er fear, I have over-heard all, and can help you in a stress. --

Don Fernando, Sir.


This is argument of great Kindness, to make such haste from Cadiz to be at the
Wedding of your Friend. Welcome, dear Fernando; for so I dare bid you to the
House of him has given me leave to call him Father.


New Riddles still!


Steeled Impudence! -- how can thou with confidence pronounce so damned a
Forgery?


We got well hither with our Treasure, to which I believe your good Wishes
contributed.


Slave, the Place secures thee. --


You're acquainted then, and so forth. --


The only Friend I had in Mexico; we were Neighbours, School-fellows, and in
the same Ship arrived at Spain: nor can any one give you a more perfect account
of my Father or his Affairs; for I know nothing I have concealed from him.


He has hardly used you like a Friend, without Cheat, Villain, c. are signs of
Love amongst you. -- Nay, with Confidence he endeavoured to face me out he was
the true Vitelli.


And with the same honest Assurance stand here to make it good.


This is like thee, always driving on some piece of Extravagance. -- But trust
me, Fernando, this is so unseasonable, as to break our Friendship, if persisted
in.


I scorn thee, am, and always was a Stranger to thy Friendship; and here
pronounce th^e Cheat, Thief, Murderer. Beware, Old man, you warm a Snake will
leave a fatal Sting.


Could I believe you were in earnest, I should be ang^y, Sir; but for this once
forgive.


I demand nothing but Justice, and by Heaven will have it.


What can he design by all this?


Why, Sir, you have had experience enough to know the World's wicked, and Love
powerful.


Yes it is, always was, and always will be, c.


I have had long a Jealousy that he was not right. For when my Master produced
his Jewels, and showed his Treasure, he would so eye and sigh; and at the
Picture cast such wanton amorous Glances, that I fear that's the true ground of
his haste from Cadiz, thinking to prevent us. Then I minded he caught at each
Story that might seem very particular; as one my Master was the other day
telling of a D^el, and a Wound you received in the Thigh. Nay, he was so
inquisitive, that he would count the Money and Jewels.


I have no Doubt left; there 'tis I warrant. This Devil of Love invents more
Tricks then a Jew ready to starve.


Then, Sir, he has a plaguy wheedling Tongue, and such a set Look, that he was
made to deceive.


So he has, and by my troth had deceived me, if he had come first. But bless my
Stars, c. that shall suddenly be prevented.


If nothing will do, from henceforth you are my Enemy, and as such I shall next
meet you.


Dare but quit this House, and no other Sanctuary shall protect thee.


Desperate Villain, be gone, c. or else an Alguazil shall provide you a
Lodging.


Was ever Age thus blinded? Stay but my returns from Cadiz before you conclude.


No, this very night shall consummate the Match with the Noble Vitelli.


No, Don Gomez, you throw her away upon a base Deluder; who is indeed a
Soldier of Flanders, fled hither to gain a Pardon for Murder.


This sounds like Forgery. You have no choice, but quit the House, or to
Prison.


See how wild his Story is, and how quick Passion makes his Invention. Be gone,
or this shall force it.


I'll go, because my being confined will render me absolutely incapable of
Remedy. -- But I shall expect you have so much Honour left as to meet me in the
Prado.


I will, and with my Sword chastise this Ins^l^nce. An hour hence let it be.


Agreed. But I shall scarce fight such a R^gue, till I have secured my
Mistress.


Well, Son, this Adventure is so extraordinary, that w^re your Father and I as
when time was, the Players should not have wanted a Comedy, nor an Audience, c.
though I say it. -- What, melancholic? --


You must give me leave to reflect a little on the Loss of one I thought my
Friend, nay doted on, and would have yielded all things up to satisfy his very
Curiosity, but Violante. --


Come, an ^ll thing's better lost then found: the World grows worse and worse,
c.

You have reason to b^ satisfied, you have so timely found his Falsehood.


Let me beg you would urge that; for no man loves with such Truth, nor no man
grieves with such Sincerity.


For shame, Son, I shall think you repent your Voyage. Let's in, and my
Daughter will make amends with true Affection.


The name of such a Remedy makes me forget my Disease; and she is now my only
Friend, as well as Mistress.


Bating some odd hundreds, and so forth.




The very name of Love from one I hate adds wings to me.


Not so fierce, good Damsel; though I have no Portmantue of Jewels, I have
some Treasure about me I brought from the Indies, you'll like much better.


I warrant some petty Shells and Baubles, things I scorn as much as I do you.
My Mistress were miserably provided, were the Master and Valet alike.


Come, ^ine Sentences are not for people of our quality. To have and to hold's
the word; and the licking of the Posset-bason when they have done will save
charges, and yet look Princely.


No, Valet, next to you I hate nothing more then what has been palled.


Except a Petticoat, and that of sixteen removes; yet must be thought to look
new, like the Chambermaid after being paum'd by the whole Family.


Still fresher then a Suit that after three generations in the Indies must be
new turned for the Wedding.


Come, faith never deny it, if thou hast pawned thy Utensils for Lees of wine
and Chippings, or art contracted for Gizzards, and the fifth quarter of a Hen
called the Guts, I desist: otherwise, which is the top of your Hopes, I offer
you Flesh unblown, Fabio the sound and trus^y.


To convince you of my Aversion, I had rather live a wrinkled Maid of sixty,
and then be burnt for a Witch, then have any thing to do with thee.


This looks so like the Courtship of our Form, that it is no less then an
evident token of Love -- which thus I seal. --


And thus I deliver. --


I Am now resolved; therefore without disputing about what I commanded you. --


I have told you all in short; and he that is more miserable must meet
something yet unknown. To be outfac'd, rejected for a Villain, tied up by
Nicety and Respect from Revenge, without a prospect of retrieving my Right, is
what the most patient must want temper to bear.


Wherein I can serve you, you may with assurance command, and I am apt at
present not to think my self altogether incapable.


I da^e promise my self any thing from so noble a Succour. -- Bless me
therefore with something like Hope.


The means how, I beg you will not inquire into; but I have some reason to be
confident of a Design will defer the Marriage till you can hear from Cadiz:
whither I advise you would immediately send post.


This would secure my Happiness, and a little time gained certainly discover
the Cheat.


To prevent all Danger, if he comes out according to appointment to fight you,
prepare Alguazills to seize him for the Robbery. It cannot be dishonourable
thus to treat so base a man, and vindicate your self. Before he can procure his
Liberty, your Post will be return^d, and all be cleared. This requires
dispatch, therefore haste; within half an hour I'll meet you.


I have just reason to suspect him too false to keep his word; my greate^
confid^nce is your Conduct.


What this will come to, is as impossible to guess, as that it could ever come
to this. But I'll in, and hasten Clara. -- Once on the Ground, I can no lower
fall:
And venture nothing, though I venture all.



SInce you have reason to despair of finding one in a Crowd, whose person you
have no knowledge of, make this Tumult a Diversion; at least defer these
melancholic Thoughts. Thou art now something more extravagant then Love could
make thee. Nay, would I curse a man, I'd wish him as nice a sense of Honour as
Antonio.


I know my self to blame: but all I see of this great Preparation has so much
unaccountable, tawdry Gallantry in it, is so far from what I think, that to me
Sickness would prove greater Pleasure then that the rest of men seem fond of.
Carlos, I am not what I was; all my Ambition, Dotage of youth and Beauty, make
but one entire thought of Hatred and Revenge: and could I satisfy this
Passion, I should die with more delight then assured Mar^yrs suffer.


In earnest, Antonio --


Ha! that Face I have seen. --


Now cannot I move a step; my masculine Spirit with my Habit leaves me. I have
nothing but my Woman's Cunning to trust to.


'Tis she, Carlos; the very Clara, Pimp and Confident to Elvira. -- Baud! --


You cannot think your self in Spain, or that you talk to one of Quality, to
treat me thus. Nor could any thing but your M^stake of the person persuade me
to forgive this Insolence.


Impudent Strumpet! would I had ne'er had cause to know thee. Unveil, or I'll
tear it and thee to pieces.


Stranger, you'll repent this horrid Rudeness. Know, people of my Rank cannot
want Revengers of their Honour.


What do you mean, Antonio? 'tis dangerous to force a Veil in Court: you may
mistake.


I tell thee she's my Sister's foul Associate, and Seller of her Honour. --
Discover, or by my Father's soul --


Hold, Sir; 'tis I. --


Base Devil! thou should not live, were it not to tell me where Elvira is.


Be moderate, Antonio, your Threats will fright her from the Truth.


That, Sir, Heaven be my witness, I am as ignorant of as those that ne'er saw
light.


Confess, or each minute shall invent new Punishment to rack it from thee. Thus
with little Tortures I'll begin -- and let out some of thy loose Blood.


This is a Transport unworthy of thee.


Should I trust a Rock I have already split on? Confess, or by --


Be not so cruel, and I'll tell you all.


Give her time to think, Antonio; this Encounter may prove most lucky.


But this time, dear Invention! and let me die a Fool. --


About it then, and I will be patient.


That fatal night we left your House, I waited on her to the Convent of
Molbietro, where your Aunt is Abbess; who entertained her with no small Grief,
when informed of the Accident that drove her to that Sanctuary; whence she
dispatcht me to this place in search of he^ f^se Vitelli.


Of Hell, then which this Lie is falser.


To me this Story seems probable.


So Heaven and you afford me Mercy as 'tis true.


When came you hither?


Not three hours since I alighted in this Inn, where I found --


Whom?


Vitelli.


Vitelli here? Oh let me fly to my Revenge! On, good Clara. I can almost
forgive thee.


As I came out, he left his Chamber in search of a Servant he is sending out of
Town, and cannot be far off.


If this prove true --


Why should you suspect me false, when 'tis my Lady's interest you should find
him? But to leave no Scruple, I'll conduct you to his Chamber, and produce
unquestionable Testimonies. This you must remember, it is no longer Vitelli you
pursue.


More tricks yet? who then?


What I shall discover will convince you. 'Tis Peralta, a Captain fled from
Flanders for a Murder, and took Valenti^ in his way. All this I learnt from
Papers of his left in his Chamber, which I thought I was bound to search, when
I knew they belonged to him; that I might give a good account to her that sent
me.


This news is beyond our expectation or hope.


'Tis what I'll improve to his certain Ruin.


First by fair means (which you have often promised me, if he was a Gentleman)
you must retrieve her Credit, by offering him to marry her.


Indian, you must pardon me, since to secure my Mistress, her Lover and my
self, I expose you to the first shock of Antonio's Rage: and good faith,
Charity begins at home.


Come along, and direct us to this Chamber of Discovery.


This way, Sir. -- Can I but get clear of you, and give my Lady timely notice,
-- discover what you can.


I must preserve Peralta, if possible, for the fair Elvira's Safety: For that
depends on his, and if He dies,
She too must fall nice Honour's Sacrifice.



THe Horses are ready, Sir.


Take this then,


This looks like truth.


For more certainty see where he stands.


Is that my Enemy?


That's Vitelli, or Peralta, which you please, or both. -- I hope this Shift
may free me, and I'll still about the dispatch of my Message.


Your Name's Peralta, Sir?


I neither own the Name nor Temper of that cursed Villain. What I really am I
dare speak, which is, Don Vitelli.


You're a Villain under both Names, and as such I'll use you.


I can scarce think my self born of a Spaniard, to meet such Rudeness as my
nature perfectly abhors.


Damn your Sentences -- and know your Forgeries and you are discovered.


To none that dare name my Actions so, and know me.


Yes, Villain, Elvira's Wrongs and mine shall proclaim them And if thou hast so
much Valour to defend thy self against the Brother, as Cunning to betray a
wretched Woman, draw, and know 'tis Antonio heightened with a just Revenge that
bids thee.


This world is all Madness and Mistake. -- Could I but think you were not
deceived in the Person, and had not too good reason to know the true Peralta
deserves all this, I should not thus tamely dispute the Wrong.


What, Coward too? and think to conquer me as my lost Sister by Words? -- Draw,
or by Heaven I'll do the act of Justice, and rid the world of a perjured
Slave. --


Provoked thus, I must be more, or much less then Man to suffer.


What will this come to? -- Those Officers at the gate shall determine the
Quarrel.


Friendship's a Name, Carlos, when it stands in competition with Honour and
Revenge. -- What, must Antonio live and see (good Heavens!) the Ravisher of his
Sister safe? -- By all --


What I urge is your Promise, and her Honour. And if he will make up this
Breach by Marriage, you create a new Enemy to refuse so just Terms.


Little Hecks! do you think with a seeming Quarrel to force me to the keeping
of a Whore, and take off your stale Goods? No, show your selves for Cheats, and
both assault me; whilst the innocent Vitelli dares thus undauntedly oppose you.


That's he, -- seize him. And at your own peril be his escape. -- I have too
much kindness for Vitelli, to let him perish for Peralta: a little Confinement
will break no squares.


Seized by us the Devil can't escape.


More Accomplices? Thieves! Murth^rers! lose me, or --


No, Sir, Murderer falls upon your own head, and 'tis the Ensign's blood you
shed in Flanders that calls for Vengeance.


Let him at liberty, and I'll revenge it bravely, and save the dull Ceremonies
of Law.


You owe us Thanks that you are not confined; this Quarrel deserves it.


If you consult your own Safeties, away.


Come, Antonio, you must know the Town too well, not to understand a Retreat
necessary in this case.


What can you mean, Gentlemen? I ne'er saw Flanders nor Spain till this last
Flota from the Indies^


This won't do, Sir, we are told of Writings in your Chamber will convince you,
whither we intend to carry you, and thence to Prison.


Cursed Peralta! now thou hast secured thy Designs. Gentlemen, I hope I may beg
leave to speak with a Knight of Malta in the house before my Confinement.


No, Sir, we must and will prevent a Rescue: only take your Papers with us,
and then secure you.


What means this Disturbance in my House?


Only the Seizure of one Peralta for a Murder.


Peralta? this will be sad news to Don Luis. --


The Crime admits of none; along, Sir.


The Widow has been too cunning for us; and that Don Luis must speedily
understand.


CLara escaped, and Peralta secured from my Sword? something must and shall be
done. Nor is it fit the Law punish a single Murder, whilst mine and my
Sister's Honours remain unrevenged. I'll arm him my self, and in his own
Chamber fairly kill him.


Yes, and suffer in his stead, while milder means may dompass your Designs. And
if Antonio dare trust me --


Trust thee, Carlos? yes, with Life, with Honour, All, I freely do. I find I am
not fit to guide my self. Henceforth thy settled Judgement gives me Laws; but
still remember my Sister's Wrongs, and where Peralta is. -- Oh that Name!


Pray, no more, your hasty Rage has already proved Clara's loss, whose recovery
will be necessary to our Affairs. She cannot yet be far; therefore let us round
this Street: half an hour hence I'll visit the Prisoner, and doubt not to get
more by Fair words and Promises, then your Sword could extort.


Should he accept your Offer, the cause of his Imprisonment brings his certain
Ruin with my Infamy.


There's no danger on that side: a sum of Money prevents the Prosecution, and
gains his Liberty. For 'tis as great a Miracle for a Rich man to be hanged, as
a Poor man to escape.


I Am much too miserable e're to hope to make thee amends.


You make your self so with fine Speeches. Let me learn you what Dangers
Resolution and Cunning may avoid. Think now of nothing but a ^it Story to
wheadle old Gomez, who will instantly be here.


Had I but thy Courage, I could not fail^ but as I am, something thrills
through my Blood, and makes me tremble. How can I think to impose upon him with
a false Story, who so steadily repulsed Vitelli's true one?


And so easily believed Peralta's, that was as false as yours. I tell you,
Madam, he has a believing Countena^ce^ and looks like one of our politic
News-mongers, who are sure to entertain a Story for being strange, and of
themselves find out Reasons to make it probable, then conclude it true.


How did he receive my Message?


Like a Gentlema^; and when he read a Lady's Honour was concerned, told me, he
would defer the greatest Business of his Life, which was the Marriage of his
Daughter, till he had waited on you.


This was courtly.


There's no doubt of him; had I that Face and Clothes, I'd undertake to cully
half the Dons in Madrid with a Li^ ten times more unlikely. -- There tis: That
Cast, and a little Assurance, is infallible.


This Mirth would conquer any body's Misery but mine.


One thing I foresee, that the Seizing of Vitelli must something alter your
Design. -- St.

This must be the Don.


Is this your Lady?


Yes, Sir. -- Don Gomez Madam.


Your Looks, and the Character the world gives you, speak you so much a
Gentleman, that I shall need the less Excuse for this Rudeness.


Ha! what a Prize was this for one of twenty, a^d so forth? -- Madam, the world
at the worst must say, Don Gomez always loved his Friend, and took pleasure in
serving Strangers. And he that deserv^s this Character must be proud of the
Commands of so fair a Lady. -- By my faith she is, she makes my old teeth
chatter, and so forth. --


Sir, what I have to say is strange and startling, yet so fit for me to speak,
and you to hear, that this Trouble is but necessary.


The very stile I love too -- Pray, on, Madam.


The Old man listens as earnestly as a Bird in a Cage to a whistling Cobbler.


I can scarce believe one of your Experience and Wisdom would throw away an
only Daughter, fair and virtuous, on a Perjured man.


Heaven forbid! I'd rather bury her in a Nunnery, and so forth: and let the
Family of the Gomez^s perish.


Yet such is the false Vitelli, whom you design your Son-in-law.


You startle me indeed; Vitelli my Son-in-law, false and perjured?


Yes, Sir, if breach of strictest Oaths and solemnst Contract deserve such
terms. Too sure I found him so.


Then I am lost. Pray, good Madam, methinks I should, yet Heaven knows how
unwillingly I believe you.


In short, for 'tis grievous to tell a Truth to the Disadvantage of one I can
never hate; you see here the miserable Mariana, whom treacherous Tears, and
such Oaths as the most j^alous could not but trust, betrayed to Love. 'Tis too
plain, all men must be false, when after such Vows Vitelli can prove so to me
-- wretched Woman!


Trust me, Madam, I can weep, and so forth, at your Misfortunes -- But hope you
mistake the Person that is their cause. For this Vitelli I have entertained,
has not been long enough in Spain to make a Contract, scarce see a Lady.


No, Sir, 'twas Mexico first gave me life (nor can my Fortune or Relation shame
Vitelli,) and there my Heart was stole with fair bewitching words, and such
tempting shows of real Love as might dispel a settled Hatred. -- Yet can you
think it, Sir, this kind protesting man, this Vitelli could prove false? false,
oh my Heart! to Mariana that so loved him?


Brave Woman, she almost makes me believe her.


You will not think it rude, if I take leave in a Business of such weight, to
clear some Doubts. c. before I give full credit.


So far from that, you will oblige me by your Questions, the nicest of which I
know I can satisfy you greatest Curiosity in. For, alas! Sir, that and its
Circumstances take up all my Care and Thoughts.


I ask then, did his Father know any thing of his Love? and by what means did
you arrive?


No, that he still kept concealed, for Reasons I could never guest. Till
finding my self forlorn and left, that very morning we had appointed for our
Marriage, by diligent search I understood he was gone for Spain, to Marry your
Daughter. -- Armed then with Love, which emboldens the most fearful,
disguiz'd, I pursued him in another Ship, and a day after him landed at Cadiz;
whence I am now come to beg Relief in such a Cause as must concern every man's
Honour that pretends to be generous, much more Don Gomez, and the Father of
Violante.


Base Vitelli, thou can not be Son of good Gonzalo, nor e're shalt call me
Father. -- What a Escape was here, and so forth! --


That he is the Vitelli that I challenge, this will witness; given with such
moving Passion and such Charms as has ruined the poor Mariana.


This I know all true, and this the very same I once thought to call mine. --
But if --


What I beg is, you would endeavour to restore an unkind Husband to the most
unfortunate of Women. For, false as he is, I can forgive, whom I find I must
ever love


If there be Laws, Justice, c. in Madrid, I here engage to see you righted: nor
is it more then the great Obligation this Discovery lays upon me may justly
challenge.


I would, if possible, avoid Severity, for I must suffer when he is punished.
Let him but he persuaded to come hither, and I have some hopes he will not
refuse to own me.


That, Madam, shall speedily be done, and my Daughter brought to wait upon you
to my house. For this public p^ace is not fit for your Quality.


Heaven must reward such Goodness, Sir.


This is right, and the Old Trout rarely tickled. Nor was there any other means
of getting Peralta from his house, before the designed Marriage was consummate
-- I'd give half my Maidenhead, to her how the Don will tease him, and so
forth.


Something w^ still want to make our Plot successful, the Release of the true
Vitelli from Prison; which must infallibly ^uine Peralta's Pretences; and to
give my Brother timely notice, that thus awed I may secure him.


I'll undertake both, and in my old Disguise to the Prison, where 'tis odds but
we find some Expedient. As for your Brother, his Lodgings are so near, he may
be soon sent for. But how convenient that will be, knowing his hot Temper, must
be consider^d of.


This I resolve, I'll be Peralta's Wife,
Or to my Brother's Rage expose his Life.

NEver had Mischief such Success: for certain you were wrap^ in your Mother's
Smock, and that a fine one too. The Old man is so confirmed, he wreaths himself
into the Toil, as if he resolved never to get out.


What may come of it hereafter I can't guess, but I am sure to enjoy the Woman,
and that will recompense twenty such Hazards. All that seems unlucky is Don
Gomez hasty Business, which defers a while our Marriage. But I resolve not to
stir to answer Vitelli, till Violante's mine past recovery: for though I have
no aversion to Fighting, I love a fair Lady much better.


By my troth, the ugli^st would carry my Affections from that; and certainly
man was made to increase the world, not to destroy it. But under favour, Sir, I
hope you won^t be so unfashionable to duel for your own Wife.


No, Sot, I duel to kill Vitelli, whose mouth once stopped, who lives in this
world to contradict me? And within a year, which is the soonest I can be
discovered, I question not but with a Trick I have so to please the Lady, that
all will be reconciled.


This was a Master piece beyond my dull reach; and now I dare pronounce you
happy, for 'tis a sweet one.


'Twas pleasant to see, when the Old man would be offering at Questions, how
the present of a Jewel diverted him; and the story of a large Stone (which for
all I know may be an Indian Pebble,) that I told him was one of the famed
Jewels of the great Montezuma, sealed up his inquisitive Humour, and delivered
him mine.


Yes, Sir, I observed then he hugged, and called you dear Vitelli, Picture of
Gonzalo, and only one he would call Son. I'll swear I have seen a whole Comedy
his had less Sport in it.


Is the Priest ready?


Yes, yes, and has nothing to do this half hour, but contrive a tolerable Leg
not to be laughed at.


It must do, without some Devil-Intelligencer owes me a spite: if so, this is
his time to nick it.


Doe^ the Devil has not Cunning enough, were you his Enemy, to prevent it. I
went into the Kitchen, and the Cooks are as busy as a new Politician employed
on guess: follow'd Flora up stairs, and found an experienced Matron making the
Bed to the best advantage.


Here comes my Father and my Life. Now I venture to call you so, since my Joys
are certain.


Never in worse time. Know, Sir, he that is once perjured, and so forth, must
be trusted by Fools, not old Gomez; mark that.


Here's a Shower in the midst of Sunshine.


Come, you study for some paltry Excuse^ but be assured I have found you base
and treacherous.


Would I had a Musket on my shoulders in Flanders.


You'll give one so perfectly innocent leave to be amazed at so great a Turn.


Must Gomez be picked out of all men to be abused? or is this Maid an object ^it
for so base a Design? No, Sir, I shall provide you a Wife more suitable, and
take care to secure you from the Danger you were running headlong into, and so
forth.


I can dread no Danger but your Displeasure, and the Loss of her I so in^irely
love.


You give a great proof of it, whilst you thus contrive h^r Ruin.


I have done nothing but what a violent Passion forced me to, nor is my Quality
so mean.


I know your Quality, and so forth, and grieve a Gentleman so nobly born shoul^
with such Baseness shame his Family.


Heaven grant he don't shame that, and the Family of the Fabii at the Gallows.


I shall forgive the Injury, if you return that Passion you speak of, to her
you have quitted to impose on me. -- Assure yours^lf henceforth you are more
then a Stranger to Violante.


Elvira's Wrongs discovered too? cursed Portmantue! this is past hopes.


Your G^ilt may well silence you.


The unthought-of Charge well may, with the greatest w^nder.


That will soon cease, when you shall see the fair and virtuous Mariana, whom
you called Wife in Mexico; and has thence pursued you hither.


'Sdeath, I had laid Snares for my own catching.


Bear up, Sir, the wind veers fair again: this must be a gross Mistake, and at
worst give us leave to run for it.


The mention of her Name may well disorder you, and so forth. If it be Remorse
for deserting her, it may make some small Amends. Poor Heart! she must forgive,
though she has but little cause to love. And were she my Daughter, and so
forth. --


I can scarce think I want a Pardon, when I am a Stranger to my Crime. And all
Womankind may as justly lay the same Claim as Mariana, whose very Name I ne'er
was yet acquainted with.


That you are Vitelli, Son to Gonzalo, and so forth, I am fully satisfied, nor
am I less, that she speaks truth, from whose own mouth I heard it.


Is not her Discourse wild, and she justly to be suspected to be beside her
self? Pray, Sir, consider how unlike this is the Son of that Gonz^lo you call
Friend.


I have waited on my Master ever since he could think towards Man; and let me
beg your Pardon, Sir, have ticed him to Women, for fear he had no sense that
way: but when he saw this Lady's Picture, he was convinced, for the very first
week he would gaze and kiss; so that I left off Persuasions. -- But ne^r as yet
heard of any Mariana -- or any other, was she ne'er so beauteous, in Mexico,
that could divert his Thoughts. -- This, Sir, I offer my self to swear.


Though this Witness may be of proof, yet so much do I trust ^y Innocence, that
all I beg is, you would let me see this Lady. If she can so much as name me
with Assurance hers, which is the greatest Cu^se, here I relinquish all my
Pretences to what I dote on.


This I like, though I have little reason to believe you willingly undertake.
Come, Daughter, put on your Veil; we'll go to Dormilon's, the Inn you say you
lighted at, and there expect you. -- Yet his Treas^e secures him from running.


I wait you Sir, -- and thank my Fortune, this suspicion has l^ss'ned my
growing Love.


Adieu, dear Mis^riss, till the next Meeting shall approve me constant.

Fabio? within these few minutes, I would have quitted my Pretences for the
very hopes of Liberty.


By my troth, Sir, for once take a Fool's advice; and now you may have it,
never pretend more. For though this is some forsaken Virgin follows the true
Vitelli; yet true Stories laid together will grow too strong for Lies ne'er so
well wrought.


Thou art always Coward in the very nick of Victory. Is it not much easier to
persuade him she is some common Jilt, hired by Vitelli to disappoint our
Marriage, then to outface the true Vitelli?


All I say is, Sir, with your Assurance I should have made an excellent
Servant. Now I know my self modest, and so not capable. --

Well, 'tis hard when a Master takes ones calling from him, and incroaches on
the very Secret of Lying that maintains him.


He's doubly cursed is foundered near the Shore:
Fortune the Rudder guide, I'll pull the Oar.

BElieve me, Sir, so much a Friend to Honour and Justice, especially in a
Lady's Quarrel, that nothing but Confinement could secure you from Revenge.


Believe me, Sir, to understand so much of Honour and Justice, that nothing but
my Restraint should bear these Injuries: and be assured I am as far from
knowing the Lady you speak of, as what you are; I will not say Trapans, for
that may look like Railing and Cowardice thus disarmed. -- But --


'Tis a Phrase belongs so properly to none as such deny their Names. And were I
Peralta, no Hazard should so unman me to disown it.


I have scarce Patience under such Su^ferance to deny that once again. -- Hell
take the true Owner; and were I again amongst the barbarous Indians, I would
spend my Life in railing at what you think Civil.


All this and more might pass, did I not know it counterfeit^ and what I urge,
to the Advantage of one of more Fortune then you can pretend to. You too well
know Elvira.


Is a Strumpet to be imposed on Fools; nor am I so dull, tha^ the fear of a
false Imprisonment should marry me to a Whore.


One more such word, and by Heaven the Laws of Honour cannot secure thee.
Strumpet and Whore, to one I name otherwise, though so, were Death.


I as little fear your Threats, as understand your Niceties of Honour: but this
I dare boldly urge, she that will court an Acquaintance can be little better.
-- But should I allow her Virtuous, what is she to me? or why must I needs be
sixth upon by the Name of one I hav^ such just cause to hate? Or why should you
mistrust a Story that must seem probable at least to the most prejudiced?


This seems an honest Confidence, and the Maid might be a Dissembler.


Once more I tell you I am Vitelli, a Stranger to Spain^ that I was robbed by
this Peralta, both of my Treasure and Mistress, and have nothing in exchange
but those Papers and old Clothes, on which you ground this Mistake. And were I
at liberty, my Sword should make the Villain confess this Truth.


These strong Denials make me begin to doubt; and should you prove what you say
you are, I have reason to beg your Pardon, though my just Concern for the Lady
and her Brother will very much excuse this Earnestness.


Which is the Prisoner?


My being disarmed may soon resolve you.


This frees you. Don Luis, whom you have so long converst with by Letters.


Gentlemen, if you have designed to ruin me, do it some more manly way. 'Tis
too cruel thus to prolong my Torment. Old Gentleman, your Age secures you from
Abuse.


Hah! what's this? Ruin, Torment, Abuse? what can Peralta mean thus to return
so great a kindness as his Liberty? especially to one he knows loves him, and
on that account with greatest difficulty and charge has purchased it?


I know no Pardon I want, nor does that Dog that owns the name of Peralta
deserve it.


Be not so severe against your self: other Young men have been guilty of as
great Faults; besides, you killed him fairly.


Leave, or I'll study some greater Curse then Madness ever could invent, and
make it my only Prayer it may fall upon you.


You are much altered since you writ last from Valencia. -- Pray, Sir, can you
guess the cause of this Distraction? it makes me weep.


Faith, Sir, I am much a Stranger; unless it be his fear of Revenge for the
Wrongs he has done a Lady persuades him to conceal himself, I am wholly
ignorant. I found him much in the same Humour, and began to give credit to him
till your coming.


Dearest Peralta, be thy self; if my Life or Fortune, which is no small one,
can serve you, thou art safe. By thy Father's Soul I beg, who left thee to my
Care.


This must be he. -- Come, Sir, you know I proposed most honourable means of
Reconcilement to Antonio; and if you marry Elvira, whose Beauty and Fortune are
too considerable for the proudest to despise --


Hell take you both: or may you live to meet Miseries like mine^ Do you not
think Confinement plague enough, but must I be thus racked with Lies and
Nonsense?


Oh, Sir! had you known him when young, for since I have not s^en him, this
would afflict you.


Oh, I have still one Friend left: welcome, Sir, for ne'er was Wretch so timely
succour'd. Alas, I have suffered past the Cruelty of Turks betwixt these two
Tormentours.


That's Antonio's Companion, or I mistake; but this Disguise protects me. -- I
wish it were in my power to ease you, or in my Friend's, the Knight of Malta,
at whose desire I now wait on you.


They swear me down that I'm Peralta. The man, you well know, deserves my
utmost Hatred, and by Heaven shall feel it. -- Tell me Stories of one Elvira I
have wronged, of Murder I have committed: nay, the old Gentleman fawns and
cries, and calls me dear Peralta, and offers me my Pardon and my Liberty mee^ly
to abuse me. Is not this Sufferance beyond Patience, when I know all false and
counterfeit?


This is an Opportunity not to be lost. --

Truth is, you act it brav^ly; but the Danger's past, and you may safely own
your self.

Peralta, nothing else can gain your Liberty, and this to my knowledge secures
your Mistress.

Gentlemen, you may think what you have heard strange, but the necessity of his
Affairs I dare assure you made it requisite.


Prodigious! what may not a man do with this Impudence? But his Liberty will
be good news for Antonio, whom he must prepare to answer.


Pray, Sir, let me undertake the Business, who thoroughly understand the Affair;
and will engage, if you bring Antonio to Dormilon's, either fully to make up
the Breach, or that Peralta with his Sword shall give him Satisfaction.


That's all I wish; I'll i^mediately go find him. -- We shall expect you, Sir.


Where?


At the Inn whither you are going.


I will not fail.


I can forgive him any thing I so truly love, and am confident some weighty
Reasons urge you to this Denial of your Name.


That you'll be assured of when you know each Circumstance, but now 'twill be
too tedious; besides, his Business yonder requires dispatch.


Along then, I have already discharged your Fees.


I wholly commit my self to your Management.


Which with this unexpected Success cannot possibly miscar^y.


'TIs no more then what I promised, Madam, and was bound to perform.


This is too much Honour, Madam, and I am so perfectly a Stranger, that I must
despair of a Requital.


Your Acquaintance would doubly recompense, could this be thought an
Obligation.


Come, Sir, now I hope you will prove your self a Gentleman, honest, and so
forth.


I never was charged for otherwise by any one that understood me, and question
not but to unravel this Mistake.


Here's your Vitelli, Madam, and I am thus far discharged of my Engagement.


Elvira? this is a Rock must split me.


'Tis not in the power of Impudence to save us.


Have I once more met thee, cruel, false man? it shall be hard to fly me.


How strangely fond she is!


It may be the Custom in Mexico.


Madam, if my being like the man you are so well acquainted with disturbs you,
I had best remove the Object; 'tis unseemly to use a Stranger thus.


No, Vitelli, for by that Name thou won'st me; thou too well know the
wronged Elvira, and those many Oaths that seal^d thy treacherous Love, e're to
disown me. Can thou forget Valentia? those Tears that made me thine? Is this
the Recompense of too great Tokens of the ^ondest Dotage?


What can all this mean?


Heaven knows, I am perfectly ignorant, nor to this time e'r^ beheld her face.
Had I, Sir, could you think me so cruel to despis^ such Beauty?


Can thou forget, when languishing at my feet you lay, and dying vowed,
thence ne'er to stir till I had granted your Request? won then, I easy Fool
believed, and p^rished.


There must be truth in this, no Woman e're could counterfeit to such height.


Truth? all's an evident Ch^at. You see she talks no more of Mexico and
Mariana, but of Valentia and Elvira, names I'm a perfect Stranger to.


Lady, this sudden change of your Story is enough to give me ground of
Suspicion, and so forth.


What can you believe, Madam?


Nothing, but I naturally pity the poor Woman.


Consider, Sir, I had no other means but this Pretence to get him from your
House, and save your Daughter from Ruin. I freely confess I am not Mariana,
nor a Mexican: nor is he Vitelli, or an Indian; but Peralta, a Captain of
Flanders, who in his Journey hither stopped at Valentia, merely to destroy the
wretched Elvira.


This is something of the Story the pretended Vitelli told, and so forth, is it
not?


Now you have hit it, the same; and she without question one of Fernando's
Dependants, hired by this Counterfeit to defraud me of my Mistr^ss. Does not
this sound probable?


Most likely; nay, I knew I should smell it, were it to be found above ground.
Let old Gomez alone for Discoveries, c.


I hope, Sir, no unlucky Accident can now disturb my Joys, but you will once
more tell me I shall be blessed.


Yes, yes, we'll about it presently. Come, Will. a little Opposition makes the
Victory more welcome. It will be no Rudeness to leave you alone, Madam; I
suppose you'll quickly ^ind your Companion.


No question, Sir, she has plenty.


Base man! re^lect upon my Honour too? Stay, Sir, for H^aven's sake stay.
Here's one can witness all I say is truth, that has been the constant Messenger
of our Loves. Speak, dear Fabio; thou were once all Honesty: I'll treble all
thy past Rewards.


You need not bribe me to speak Truth.


This is Trifling, and so forth; but let's hear him.


I know you expect nothing but Truth from me.


Dog! will he betray me yet?


Nothing else, dear Fabio; this may at last be some Remedy. -- Tedious Clara.
--


Why then, Sir, upon the word of an Honest man, I never before so much as heard
of Valentia or Elvira; and to my certain assurance, my Master knows nothing
either of them or Flanders. This is what I can declare in short.


Slave! were I but a minute Man, thou should not outlive this Lie.


You find, Sir, how she studies Delays, though it be to create Witnesses
against her self. The Rogue lies with more con^idence then the boldest of
others can speak truth.


Since I am thus basely used, tremble at Antonio's Rage, who shall bravely
revenge my Wrongs, and teach you what it is to scorn a Woman's Love.


This must be some Player that has been used to act a Passion, she does it with
such Art.


By my troth, her way of Speech and Action pleases me much. And were not our
Business earnest, and so forth, I would stay to hear her.


As for you, Madam, whose Ruin I foresee equal with my own, let this Sea-mark
warn you, and learn of her that teaches by Experience, not to trust those
Angel-like bewitching Lips which with such power move, they might entice a Nun
professing at the Altar; yet are full as false and treacherous as you think me.


'Tis Custom rules me, and a Father's Will, not my own Choice. Were it in my
power, he should be still yours, if he was ever so.


No, no, I know you must love, and fondly dote; I'm sure the wretched Elvira
did. Alas! his Words are Charms, and each Action carries such Persuasive
Eloquence, that were he not fal^e --


W^ll, Madam, I am confident the Lady's wronged.


So far it works on me, as could I, to defer the Match a while, --


Blessed Tongue! but are you so much more then Woman, to withstand his
well-weigh'd, insinuating Vows? cannot Protestations made by subtlest art and
dying Postures move? for he used such to me, and such must conquer. But I am
troublesome, and you will cur^e me for speaking ill of one I should still hate
her that railed on.


So much your Passion moves me, that, propose a way, and, if possible, I will
serve you.


'Tis Impudence to beg so great a Treasure. It may be he'll prove true to you,
and 'twas Elvira only that was born to be thus miserable.

Clara, still more wretched! with a ^ixt Confidence he denies me, and
obstinately says he is the Indian Vitelli. Is there the least show of Help?
speak, dear, dearest Clara.


You make me mad to be thus passionate, when there is almost certainty of
Relief.




Yes, Sir, you see here the unfortunate Elvira, who in the Disgui^e of a Knight
of Malta follow'd yon false, barbarous man. --

My Misery makes me past all shame.


This doubles my Hatred.


No Whining, but have confidence of a Remedy. A little Patience and your
Brother's coming must clear this Deceit. I'll go try to wheadle that Rascal
Fabio.


None is more then my self a Servant to the good Don Luis Pacheco.


I must always be happy to see Don Gomez.


That should be my Uncle by his Name; if he knows me, I'm compelled to yield.


Indian since I last saw you?

Friend, I have some serious Affairs, which are not to be disturbed by
impertinent Questions.


Good, grave Sir, give me leave. -- There was a Rascal Fabio I have seen, that
strangely resembled you, who pret^nded a smattering after a Damsel hight Clara;
have you met with such a one in your Travels?


Pert Sir, I am at present mela^cholick, and will know no body.


Since you are so surly, it shall go hard but I bring you acquainted w^th the
Gallows.


Your Nephew that -- Fernando, was bred up with him at Mexico. Was't not so?


Right, Sir, and till this just Breach between us --

Pox on it, I have spun my thread too fine.


Assure your self, my Nephew is an absolute Stranger to the Indies. Till
thirteen I bred him here in Madrid, and since he has spent his time in
Flanders; where unfortunately killing an Ensign, he was forced to sue out his
Pardon, and not an hour since was releast.


Believe, Sir, though I was glad to accept my Liberty on any terms, I ne'er yet
saw Flanders, nor was e're in Spain till my landing at Cadiz. There stands your
Nephew, if you think fit to own one so base; who is the Robber of my Treasure,
the actual Ruiner of this Lady's Honour, and great Designer on her I have a
just Pretence to, might my Story gain credit.




Good faith, had not I a stayed Judgement, and so forth, this would half
distract me.


'Tis all Riddle to me, but I guess at a way shall unfold it.


Remember your Promise, and keep your Temper: this I justly challenge from you,
and exp^ct.


I am nothing but what you will have me.


Thus low I do implore a Brother's Pardon, but my Fault has found already too
severe Punishment.


I hope, Sir, you will forgive the exact Duty I owed a Mistress I so dearly
loved. -- 'Tis Clara begs it, Sir.


You have made me too much a Stranger to your Affairs to think me concerned.
But the Love I always paid Elvira scarce deserved so great Neglect.






Still the same Error? would you have me marry one I am a Stranger to, and as
Woman never till this minute saw? But know, I am so far from thinking wrong,
that this shall ne'er be drawn sooner then to serve her.


By Heaven, these petty Shifts --


Antonio. -- Peralta, you at our last Meeting owned; when this which now proves
Clara engaged you should make a Reconcilement. What means then this new
Pretence?


By that I purchased Liberty, and now persist in my first Truth.


Believe me, Sir, there stands the false cruel man, the treacherous Peralta.


That's the base Wretch, for so I dare call him; and with This will revenge my
Lady's Wrongs.




So much they persuade me, that I'll ^'n home. -- Come, Will. this Design's at
an end, for I'll never marry thee at Uncertainties, and so forth. -- Here's two
Vitelli's, two Peralta's, Fernando's, Elvira's, Mariana's, the Devil and all;
and yet neither Vitelli, nor Peralta, c.


This Delay is all I entreat to gain my Mistress, and a few days hence my
Messenger's return from Cadiz will assure you I am Vitelli.


I'll kill them both, and that makes sure of my Enemy. --


Then I'll try my last means; and 'tis what I solemnly swear, from this minute
never to call him Nephew, nor possess him of a Rial of my Estate, that does not
immediately own me.




Nay more, this Lady's Story touches me so near, that if she be a Gentlewoman,
he forfeits my Love in refusing to right her.


He that questions that must be ignorant she is my Sister.


I have no reason to expect Forgiveness, who have been the general Abuser of
the whole Company. But if Love can cover Faults, I have great Pretences. First
then, to preserve, here Peralta entreats.


Truth is, Nephew, this was a little too high driven; but if you can reconcile
your self with the rest, I must forgive one I love. And now I more earnestly
view you, I dare conclude you the Son of my Brother.


Well, I will never trust Age and Experience more, c.






Antonio, and you break your vowed Engagement.

I yield to any thing is just, and if you behave your self worthily, shall make
no small increase to your Fortune.




I must think any thing you'll have me.


To take off all ^cruple, I openly confess the Portmantue I brought you was
mine by mistake, and upon that I grounded all my Pretence. But I shall
sufficiently make Amends, by yielding up that, and this a much greater
Treasure.


Had I designed a Quarrel, the Interest you have in this Lady would make us
Friends. -- And thus emboldened I dare call you Father, and my self this Fair
one's Servant.


'Tis strange that I should not know thee, for by my troth thou hast Gonzalo's
Cast, and so forth: and I will think of no Unkindness, since I am thus assured.


My Journey to Madrid was well designed, and I can once more call my self
Antonio.


You shall all to my House, c. for I love Weddings, and resolve to laugh at
this Adventure.


Nay, Mistress Clara, I was not altogether so false as you think; for Fabio the
Indian courted her, but Fabio the Spaniard was always constant.


No more, my Don of the Netherlands, Clara will not pretend to hold so slippery
an Eel, and she that will may take you for better for worse in best Capacities.


You have your liberty, they that quarrel for you must strangely love Fighting.


Why then all's agreed, and this little Noise may make a lasting Friendship.


I have overheard so much as to know you merry. -- What do you think of calling
the Getano's in, who are just going by to Saint Hieronimo's?


By all means call them in, c. I will have one merry day after all, let the
rest look to themselves.


Very well, very well. But this loses time: let's to the Church^ and so forth.
For fear new Scruples should arise,
I'd rather be Resolved then Wise.



IF any of you have a mind to ^ight,
Let him affront our pretty Female-knight.
For though her rambling Errantry is done;
Since she's in danger of your damning Frown,
Here as her Squire a Challenge I proclaim:
Declare your Weapon, Time, and Place, and Name.
When you shall own with shame, upon your knees,
You fail much oftner then our Sex, to please.
Perhaps her Servant by the Ladies may
Be censured, that he basely ran away:
But few, when they'd attained so much, would stay.
Yet now the Power's by Marriage in her hand,
Who may at leisure due Revenge command.
For if he goes this year to the Campaign,
A Friend may in his stead at home remain.
Gallants, I needs must pray for some of you,
Who with such heat to the Low-Countries go,
That when you come again, if e're you do,
You may be welcomed with the loss of some rich Friend,
Who's made you Heir to all he left behind.
And be assured we'll prove exceeding kind
To those who come with Scars of Honour home,
If to inherit good Estates they come.
Faith then, to us be favourable now,
That we hereafter may be so to you.
For those who mean to stay within the Nation,
Let all new Plays now have their Approbation,
Considering shortly comes a long Vacation:
Against when, we shall no more reserve new Play,
Then Vintner stock of French-wine till May-day.
THE Heroin Musketeer, or the Female Warrior; in Two Parts: Containing many
true and delightful Adventures of a French Lady, in the late Campagnes of
1676. and 1677. The Third and Fourth Parts, concluding the Work, are in the
Press.

Sir Patient Fancy, a Comedy, Acted at the Duke's Theatre, and written by the
Author of the Rover.

Friendship in Fashion, a Comedy; written by Tho. Otway: Acted at the Duke's
Theatre.

Mr. Rimer's Examination of the Plays of Rollo, Duke of Normandy, the King and
no King, and the Maids Tragedy; in a Letter to Fleetwood Sheppard, Esq.

The Art of Making Love, or a Guide for Ladies and Gentlemen in the affairs of
Love. Price 1 s.

Pleas of the Crown. Written by Sir Matthew Hales, late Chief Justice of the
Court of King's-Bench.

An Historical Discourse of Parliaments in their Original before the Conquest,
and continuance since: together with the Original, growth, and continuance of
these Courts following, ( viz.) The High Court of Chancery, King's-Bench,
Common Pleas, Exchequer, Duchy, and other inferior Courts. Price 1 s.

Brutus of Alba, or, the Enchanted Lovers, a Tragedy, written by N. Tate: Acted
at the Duke's Theatre.


