THis day we show you the most Bloody rage
That ever did Religious Fiends engage,
A Reconcilement, with a Wedding-Feast,
While Murder was the Treat for every Guest,
Which well may prove to Ages yet to come,
The Faith of France, the Charity of Rome,
France by the most detestable Perjury,
Enslaved its Subjects who by Laws were free.
No Sacrament can this Great Hero bind,
Oaths are weak Shackles for his mighty Mind,
And worse than Heathens does he persecute.
His Priests want Sense and Learning to dispute;
But weak Divines by strong Dragoons confute:
And who-e're doubts of any Priestly Maggot,
The Heretic Dog must be convinced by Faggot.
With Rome's Religion and French Government,
What Slave so abject as to be content?
Now, idle Malecontent, what is't you'd have?
Would you be an Idolater or Slave?
What do you murmur for, because you're free,
And this blessed Isle enjoys its Liberty?
Cross but the Narrow Seas, and you will find
Slavery and Superstition to your mind.
Take with you all your Friends that grumble too,
The Land will happily be rid of You;
Then all as one with our Great Prince combined,
And his Allies by Sacred Union joined:
Will such false Bloody Tyrants oppose,
Till none shall dare to own the Name of Foes?
SCENE PARIS.


JUST from your Arms, by this great Guardian raised,
Called to the Council of a wary King,
On whom depends the Fortune of Lorraine,
O, Marguerite, yet to drag at this,
After such full possession thus to languish:
If this be not to love thee, say what is!
Cease then the rolling Torrent of thy Tears,
Which when I strive to climb the Hill of Honour,
Washes my hold away, and drives me down
Beneath Man's Scorn, into the vale of Ruin.

Hear, hear him, O you Powers, because I love him
Above my Life, beyond all joys on Earth,
He says I am his Ruin; to my Face,
With a Court Metaphor, he Vows he loathes me.
For all Men hate their Ruin; nay, 'tis true,
I find your Falsehood; 'tis the trick of great ones,
Like Beasts of Strength, to prey upon the Weakest.

I swear --

O, do not, dear, Ambitious Guise;
For Perjury so necessary seems
To great Men's Oaths, thou must of course be damned:
Yet as I am, thus plunged in this dishonour,
Like a fallen Angel rolled through all my Hells,
I cannot hate thee, Guise, but sighing far,
Far from the shining Clime where I was born,
I beg those cruel Fates that hurled me down
To pity thee, and keep thee from my ruin:
For I'm so cursed, that I do not wish my Foe,
Much less the Man I love above the World.

As I love thee, and O be Witnesses
My Brain and Soul, there's not an Artery
That runs through all the Body of thy Guise,
But beats where e're it pass Marguerite;
Yet this is nothing: haste away, my Lord;
Go tell the King and Council I am sick;
For I'll to Bed again, or on a Couch
Sit gazing in her beauteous Eyes all day,
And let the business of a grave World pass.

No more, my Lord; you shall, you shall to Council:
I see 'tis necessary; but I find
My Soul presages Mischief, if not Murder;
For if you should prove false, Crowns, Kingdoms, Empires,
Worlds should not save poor Marguerite from the Grave.
Ah, Guise, ah venerable Lorrain, view me,
Behold me on the Earth, I swear I love
As never Woman loved; I'm all a Brand,
With, or without you, I am ne'er at rest:
Farewell; this Fever of my furious passion
Burns me to Madness, yet I say, farewell.

Farewell. Yet why farewell, when e're the Evening
I shall again rush to eternal Sweets,
This bosom of the Spring!

What, no endearments at so sad a parting!
Alas, perhaps I ne'er shall see you more.
You bowed, you kissed, but did not press my hand;
You should, like me, have staggered when you left me,
And eat your Marguerite with your hungry Eyes;
But you are cold and palled, a lukewarm Lover,
Must to the business of the cursed State,
Which will not let you think of dying Marguerite,
Who to her last gasp will remember you.
But see, I rave again, my Fits return:
Yet pity me, for oh, I burn, I burn.

I think I never heard so fierce a Passion:
She's all Convulsion, and she gazes on you,
As you would do on him that killed your Father.
What have you done, my Lord, to make her thus?

Causes are endless for a Woman's loving.
Perhaps she has seen me break a Lance on Horse-back,
Or, as my Custom is, all over Armed,
Plunge in the Seine or Loire; and where 'tis swiftest
Plow too my point against the headlong Stream.
Tis certain, were my Soul of that soft make
Which some believe, she has Charms, my Heavenly Uncle,
Beyond the Art and Wit of Cleopatra:
Such was not she stretched in her Golden Barge,
As Marguerite was last Night in Bed,
Who, as she mourned at my unkind delay,
Hung all the Chambers round with Black; her Bed,
Her Coverings, nay, her Sarsenet Sheets were Black --

Fie, fie, my Lord.

And for the Weathers heat
Were rolled beneath the beauties of her Breasts,
Which with a White, more pure than newly fallen Snow,
Would sure have tempted Hermits from their Orgies,
To nod and smile a little at the wonder.

Come, come, my Lord, you anger me indeed,
Not for the Sin, that's as the Conscience makes it;
I had rather you should Whore a thousand Women,
Than love but one, tho in a lawful way:
Show me through all Memorials of Great Men,
Except the Partner of the Roman Empire,
Drooping Antonius, and the famed Decemvir,
One that e're bowed before this little Idol!

First know your Man, before your Application:
I love, 'tis true; but most for my Ambition;
Therefore I thought to marry Marguerite;
But, oh, that Cassiopeia in the Chair,
The Regent Mother, and that Dog Anjou;
Cross Constellations blast my Plots e're born:
The King too frowns upon me; for last night,
Hearing a Ball was promised by the Queen,
I came to help the Show; when at the Door
The King, who stood himself the Sentry, stopped me,
And asked me what I came for? I replied,
To serve his Majesty: He, sharp and short,
Retorted thus; He did not need my Service.

'Tis plain, you must resolve, my Lord, to quit her;
For I am charged to tell you, she's designed
To be the Wife of Henry OF Navarre.
'Tis the main Beam in all that Mighty Engine
Which now begins to move so dreadfully
Against the Heads of the Rebellious Faction.

I have it, and methinks it looks like D'Alva,
I see the very motion of his Beard,
His opening Nostrils, and his dropping Lids;
I hear him Croak too, to the King and Queen,
In Biscays Bay, at Bayonne,
Fish for the Great fish; take no care for Frogs:
Cut off the Poppy-heads: lay the Winds fast,
And straight the Waves (the People) will be still.

Then you will leave her!

Hurl her to the Sea!
The Air, the Earth, or Elemental fire,
So I may see Chastilion in the Net.
Oh that Whale-Admiral: might I but view him,
After his thousand Fetches, Plots, and Plunges,
Struck on those Scouring Shallows which await him,
Furies and Hell, and I, stand by to gall him;
Were Marguerite all one World of Pleasure,
I'd sell her, and my Soul, for such Revenge.

Speak lower.

What, upon my Father's Death!
O glorious Guise, be calm upon thy Murder!
No; I will hollow my Revenge so loud,
That his great Ghost shall hear me up to Heaven.
In height of Honours, oh, to fall so basely,
When Orleance was blocked up, and Conquest Crowned thee,
By damned Poltrot so villainously slain,
Poltrot, by Beza, and this cursed Admiral,
Set on with hopes of Infinite Rewards
Here and hereafter, so to blast thy Glory!
O, I could pull my bursting Eye-balls forth,
But that they may one day prove Basilisks
To that detested Head of all these Brolls,
Then Tortures, Racks and Death shall close thy wound,
Kill him in Riots, Pride, and Lust of Pleasures,
That I may add Damnation to the rest,
And foil his Soul and Body both together.

Behold your Brother, and the Duke Delbeuf
Mercour too comes; this outrage will undo us.

No, not at all; for 'tis in general terms.
O my good Lords, what if the Admiral
Stood here before you; should he scope our Justice?
I see by each man's laying of his hand.
Upon his Sword, you vow the like Revenge:
For me, I wish that both mine may rot off. --

No more; away, my Lords: the King calls for you.

I go. That Vermin may devour my limbs,
That I may die like the late puling King
Under the Barber's hands, Imposthumes choke me,
If while alive I cease to chew his ruin,
To hang him in Effigy, nay to tread,
Drag, stamp, and grind him, after he is dead.

O my Anjou, the Wheels of this New Ruin
Go wrong, for want of one that knows to drive;
He sits too light upon the whirling Throne,
And totters, with the dismal prospect, down:
Young Charles, a smart suspicious doubtful Boy,
But, Charles, you must be ruled in this dark Road,
Or with the Lightning of my Fatal Power,
Which never cracks nor claps, I'll melt thee down,
For ever lost amongst the Mass of Things,
That thou, the Darling of my doting Soul,
The Price of my Eternal thought, may mount
Like Nero, though at Agrippina's Ruin.
But see the King with the new Count of Rhetz
Let us withdraw; it may be worth our hearing.

Alberto Gondi.

Sir!

I think thou love me.

More than my life.

That's much; yet I believe thee.
My Mother has the Judgment of the World,
And all things move by that; but my Alberto,
She has cruel Wit, and, let me tell thee,
Thus to destroy the Soldiers of the Kingdom;
Famous as ever fought for Rome or Greece,
Under a shadow of a thousand Oaths;
'Tis Barbarous, Alberto, is it not?
And seems to me unworthy of a King.

The Provocation, Sir.

I know it well.
But it thoud'st have my heart within thy hand,
I swear, Conspiracies of that foul Nature
For ever blot the Memory of Kings.
What Honours, Interest, with the World to buy him,
Shall make a brave Man smile and do a Murder?
Therefore I hate the Treachery of Brutus,
I mean the latter so cried up in Story:
Whom none but Cowards and White-Liver'd-Knaves
Would dare commend, lagging behind his Fellows,
His Dagger in his -- Stabbed his Father.
This is a Blot, the Ciceronian Stile
Could ne'er wipe off, though the Man
(Mistaken in his Love, for Brutus scorned him)
Makes bold to call those Traitors Men Divine.

Tully was Wise, but wanted Constancy.

He did, Alberto. Hark, but one thing more,
For much I love thee, and would fain unburden
My Soul of half her Cares on such a Man,
So good.

My ever Dear and Honoured Master.

No more of that. I'll tell thee then: last night,
As I lay tossing in a Feverish Dream,
I called for Drink; when straight my Mother brought it;
But as she reached it to my trembling Lips,
Methought her Eyes rolled ghastly upon me,
A Palsy shook her hand; yet I resolved,
Took off the Draught, when straight a fainting seized me,
My Eyes wept Blood, my Ears, my Nose and Mouth
Poured forth whole Streams, and all my Sweat was Blood,
My Hair and Nails dropped off as Autumn Leaves,
When Tempests rise, fall from the withered Trees:
But, oh, the Fancy seems so much unnatural,
I'll think no more on it; yet I thought to tell thee,
Because she is a Woman whom no Art
Nor Wisdom of the World can ever fathom:

O my Gracious Lord,
Judge not the Queen by Dreams, and vain Chimaera's;
Remember, Sir, how often in your Nonage
She managed with her Wit the weight of Empire,
Contending with the Effects of blind Religion,
The Contumacy of Rebellious Subjects,
The deep dissimulation of the Court,
The want of Treasure, bassling with her Prudence
The utmost strength Ambition raised to gain her.

O Count of Rhetz, thou lead me through the Garden
Of every Grace, but dare not point her Weeds:
Is she not of a most deceitful Soul;
Perfidious even to violating Vows?
Is she not greedy too of Human Blood?
A Wit wasteful in destroying Lives,
That she will turn a City to a Wild?

Good Morrow, Sir! 'Tis just the time you ordered,
I think the second Watch; and we are met
To wait on your Decrees.

O Mother, Mother,
You have embarked me in a Sea of Blood;
And sure so damnable an Enterprise
Was never formed by Man.

If, Sir, you fear it,
Why give it over, and let the Admiral Reign,
Call in the Hugonots, and drive your Friends,
Banish your Blood, and the Established Peers,
Forget the long Succession of your Fathers,
The Throne of Kings, forget the Laws, Religion,
Cut off the Noble Spirits from your Council;
And from the Dregs of this Heretical Faction
Compose a Bastard Cabinet-Election,
Let Knaves in Shops prescribe you how to Sway,
They read your Acts, with hardened thumbs
'Em out, or with their stinking Breath
Proclaim aloud they like not this or that;
Then in a drove come lowing to the Louvre,
And say, they'll have it mended, that they will,
Or you shall be no King.

'Tis true the People
Ne'er know a Mean when once they get the Power.

Did you not late dispatch by Lodowick
Thus to the Admiral, with Vows of Honour,
That young Navarre should straight Espouse your Sister,
So to root up all Seeds of least Suspicion;
And that those Nuptials should be solemnised
At Paris, to be bound with deepest Oaths?

Yet, Madam, I must fear; for, should it fail,
We should be less than our worst Foes could wish us.
The Poltroon Court, the Scorn, the laughing Stock
Of all the Christian and the Barbarous World.

No, Sir, you cannot fear the sure Design,
But you're in fear of those that are about you:
You fear even Me; but I have lived too long,
Since my own Bowels, nay, my very Heart-Strings,
(For so I always loved and prized my Children)
Dare not confide in her that gave 'em Being.

Stay, Madam, stay, come back, forgive my fears,
Forgive my sifting Soul her narrow Searches,
Where all our Thoughts should creep like deepest Streams;
For know, I hate the Haughty Admiral,
And all his cursed Accomplices to Death.

What brings the Cardinal of Lorrain from Rome?

That the new Pope is fully satisfied;
I sent the Legate too that Diamond Ring,
With this close Motto writ within the Gold:
By this, my solid Zeal I own;
And Blood can never melt it down.

A murd'ring Sentence for the Hugonots.

And which so cleared the matter, that the Pope
Ordered a Dispensation for the Marriage.

Behold the Duke of Guise, and Cardinal:
'Twere sit you send his Eminence to Rochel,
T'acquaint the Admiral of a War with Spain,
And that the Plot we formed for the Low-Countries
Against the Catholic King, should straight be acted.

O Mother, oh, what's this that rends my heart,
That rides my Nights, and clouds my Days with horror?
Is it not Conscience? which sometimes appears
Like a She Wolf, in Iane of Albert's Shape,
And drags me on the Floor; now in the form
Of that old Lyon Admiral, it comes,
And grins, and roars, just gaping to devour me.

Why, let him: when his Throat is cut we'll trust him;
Clear up this furrowed Brow. Believe me, Sir,
You'll see him shortly where you need not fear him;
For, should he stay behind the Queen and Princess,
Doubting the Marriage, filled with boding fears,
The War with Spain will so be witch his Glory,
And lull his proud Ambition, that should Fate,
Which awes him now, leap up more terrible,
He'll follow with a speed shall make him foremost,
And scorn a Grave.

O, tis a dreadful Image;
Yet when his brains are pash'd I shall be still,
The Morning rises, yet I cannot rest;
Like those eternal Lamps that wink above;
Methinks, O Mother, I could watch for ever.
Once more let me conjure you, all be hushed,
Be secret on this horrid Consultation,
As Urns and Monuments, that never blab.

Therefore let's lye like Furies on the watch,
As if it were an ambush for the World.

With Claws locked in, like Lions, couch to tear 'em,
Our Mother, thou so fierce upon the slaughter,
Direct thy Brood; we will not stir nor breath:
But when thou give the Word, then start away,
Rush from the Shade, and make 'em all our prey.

YOur Reasons are to all appearance fair;
Like Eden's Fruit, the Tempter hangs 'em forth,
But there's a canker-Queen within the Core,
That eats Colignie's firmest hopes away:
Like Paradise, she paves my spacious walk;
But oh, Cavagnes and Langoiran, look,
Do you not find her lurking in the Flowers?
With soft indented glides behold she comes;
I see the forked Tongue betwixt her Teeth,
Hissing us from the Stage of Life and Honour:
O, she's a Serpent equal to the first,
And has the will to damn another World;
Therefore I'm positive, till I'm convinced
The King foregoes her Counsel, I'll not stir:
I'll not to Court.

Thus far I can make good,
She is believed, through all the Courts of Europe,
A most transcendent Wit, and absolute Woman.

That is an absolute Murderer and Dissembler;
Who that proceeds on such black principles,
That thinks there is no God above Ambition,
But may accomplish all that he intends:
Where's then the Art, the Reach, the Policy
Of this transcendent and most absolute Woman!
Is it not easy to Assassinate,
To Lie, and Swear you love the Man you hate,
Train him into the dark, and murder him?
I urge again, unless the King resolve
To rule alone, I will not come to Court.

Cavagnes is a Master in Court Secrets;
For me, I ruined the business of the War.

Persuade me while the Queen is at his Ear,
That if he were made up of Worlds of Mercy,
He ever would forgive me! pray look back
Into the former times, and see who sowed
Those glowing grains which shot up to a War,
Who blew the coals of Calvin's kindled Doctrine,
And earth'd the little Sect at Hugo's Gate;
Was it not I that formed 'em to a Body?

Stick to your self, Sir; follow your own methods.

Who therefore, while the pangs of Rage were on her,
Proclaimed me in all Languages a Traitor,
Dragged my Effigies through the streets of Paris,
Hung up my Statue on the common Gallows,
Set, by Court Officers, my Goods to sale,
My Houses razed, or burnt 'em to the ground.

I must confess that start of open vengeance,
Not common to the Nature of the Queen.

And why all this, not for a private grudge?
I judged 'twas time to view the ghastly slaws
Of that Religion that would rend the World;
That sticks not at the slaughter of whole States,
Blowing up Senates, nor at murdering Kings:
Driven with this thought, I pushed the War yet farther;
And, though we lost the Fight at Moncontour,
Yet speak, Cavagnes, did I fail in ought?

I was not there.

Then give me leave to say,
I sought my self the Protestant Cause alone,
When in the head of our remaining Horse,
I met the Elder Rhinegrave hand to hand,
Shot him in the Face, and left him on the ground;
Then seeing all our Army quite defeated,
My Jaw-bone shattered, and my Voice quite spent,
I fled, with hopes to rise more terrible;
As it succeeded, to the astonishment
Of all the Christian World.

My Lord the Cardinal of Lorrain's arrived,
To swear and sign the Articles of Peace;
The Queen at present holds him in discourse;
Mean time Commends this Paper to your view
Sent to her Majesty from the King of France.
MAdam, as you demanded, you have power over all the County suddenly of
Armagnac; Tell the great Admiral I seek his Friendship. Ask of Lorrain the
rest, who knows my heart.

Perhaps, my Friends, it may be thus indeed,
That, quite tired out with infinite Distractions,
He may at last resolve to Rule alone,
Come from his Page-ship, and put off the Mother;
Not lose his Youth, the pleasure of his Bloom
Among grey Senators, and withering Councils:
If it were so; but hold, there's something here
Forbids that thought; it rises like a Vapor,
A strange misgiving, such as Women swoon at,
And Men themselves may fear. But see, the Queen.

I come, Sir, to forestall the Cardinal,
Who from the King offers these terms of Peace:
He adds to what Count Lodowick brought before,
His Mothers Policy shall sway no longer;
That He'll submit his Genius to your conduct,
Confirms your being Captain General
In that most glorius Enterprise on Spain,
Allows you fifty for your Person's Guard;
Therefore, for sealing this Eternal Bond,
And for the former weighty Consultations,
He begs you instantly to come to Court.

What has your Majesty resolved to do?

To go with both the Princes straight to Paris,
And see the Nuptials of my young Navarre.
I know not what your Lordship does intend;
But I have sent already to the King
My Answer by Byron, and will attend him.

Then 'tis too late to think of going back;
You have lanch'd me now indeed, and I must plunge
In this Abiss, though it be deep as Hell.
No, Madam, spite of all the Augurs here,
Since you are thus resolved, I'll go to the foremost.
'Twas for your sake, and in the Prince's cause,
For Liberty of Conscience and Religion,
That I thus long did propagate the War;
And shall I now not follow where you lead me?

Why should you, if it goes against your mind?

Peace, peace, Langoiran; since the Main's produced,
I mean, the Resolution of the Queen,
My Fate cries out, we must, we must away:
Therefore, my Friend, go gather my Dependants,
Bid 'em prepare for Paris. Tell my Wife,
My dearest Martia, we must bid farewell;
Tell her, I'm forced to swim against the Stream;
Say, that her Cato's bound for Vtica,
From whence perhaps he never shall return.

Conquest, prosperity, and smooth success
Be ever strewn before our General's feet.
Thus, Sir, the King salutes you, with Commission
To turn the Torrent of your Arms on Spain.

My Lord, I glory in the great Employ.
I hear beside, the King will rule alone;
For, Sir, what e're the Wit of Women be,
From War and Councils let 'em be removed,
I say again, with my old bluntness, Sir,
To have a Female finger in the State,
Is blasting to the Prince's Memory.
Let him but be sincere, and leave the Mother,
Old as I am, I will put on my Arms,
And with this hand, not withered yet in War,
Bear to the Escurial his Imperial Standard.

My Lord, for the sincerity of the King,
That he intends his Dear and Great Chastillon,
The very words that did express his love,
All Honours, Titles, Greatness, all Advancement,
Nay, to the curbing of his Mother's Will,
For the performance of each Article,
Without a pious catch, or trick of State;
Without the smallest Mental Reservation,
Equivocation, or the least Reserve;
In the King's Name, as I am Priest professed,
As I am sent from Heaven, to teach Salvation,
I pawn the truth of my immortal Soul.

He then, to whom our hearts are free and open,
Be judge betwixt his Majesty and me.

O Sir, O Madam, oh, you make me weep,
Viewing by this the frailty of the World;
For if the Mind of Man be so suspicious
On such clear Demonstration of Affection,
How can you e're believe the Love Divine?

My Lord, you may return with our obedience,
And tell the King, the Admiral, the Princes,
My self, and all his humble faithful Subjects,
Will haste to throw our Bodies at his feet.

My Lord, farewell; I must not doubt your Oaths,
But with implicit Faith believe the King,
At whose Tribunal I must shortly kneel,
For Pardon and Forgiveness.

Hark, my Cavagnes, write to count Lodowic,
The Seirs de Genlis, and La-Nove, to haste,
And suddenly to make surprise of Mons.

My Lord --

Nay, write I say; I'll have it done,
On my Parisian entrance. I'm resolved
To see into the heart of this young Charles,
And force him thus upon a War with Spain;
For though this Cardinal Swear, and damn his Soul
As deep as Heaven's high, yet if his bowels
Be like the rest of that Blood-colour'd Robe,
And laughs at Ghosts, where's then the Admiral?
Caught by this perjured juggling man of God!
What, for the Cabinet Murderers to play with,
To toss Chastillon's Fate from one to the other,
And grin my Life and Honour from the World?
But now for Paris. Call Colombier,
The Count la Rochfoucalt, Marquis de Renel,
Piles, Pluviah, Pardillan, and Lavardine,
Bandine, and all my Gallants of the War:
For Paris bid 'em haste.

Stay, stay, My Lord;
I charge you stay, for Martia does Arrest you.
And says, you shall not go to Vtica:
Martia resolves to hinder this Self-Murder.

Self-Murder, Martia!

Yes; you turn the Sword
Upon your self, which Charles and that false Queen
Brandish against you, going thus to Court
Against your will; for so you sent me word.
Is not this running it in your own Bowels?
Is it not, Cato? but you shall not leave me:
You're now Betrothed; and in this sad Condition,
Thus fraught with your clear Image, like a Bark
Too Richly laden, with an over Ballast,
Leave me not Gaspar, to a stood of Tears,
A Sea of Passion, and a Storm of Sorrow.

Beg me not, Martia; 'tis impossible
To stay me now, my Honour is engaged,
My Word is past.

Yet stay, Sir, stay so long
So long at least, as may preserve your Likeness;
For if I yield you now to those Court-Murderers,
My boding Fears will blast it e're 'tis Born;
For sure as Caesar's Butchery was performed
At Rome, your Murder is contrived at Paris:
Calphurnia's bloody Dream, and Scent of Slaughter,
Are nothing, Sir, to my Prophetic Spirit;
Which not by Visions, Phantoms of the Night,
But by day Arguments, and certain Reason,
Will give such Evidence for your undoing,
As you, your self being Judge, shall say are true.

O, Antramont, away; why dost thou thus
Unman me with thy Tears? Though certain Death,
With all the Dagger'd Council stood to wait me,
Even in my view, I swear I would among 'em.

Then you are caught indeed; they hate you, Sir:
Your Wife, with this poor Innocent unborn,
With all your other Orphans, are undone:
The Glory of the Earth is laid along.
I see the Vine that spreads his Arms to Heaven,
With all his Clusters rotting on the ground,
Blasted with Lightning from a clouded Council,
By her that is the Iuno of your Fate,
That Murd'ring Sorceress, that dry Hag of Florence,
That Midnight Hecate of ten thousand forms,
That varies with all Shapes, that tries all Spirits,
Selling her Soul to each, and all together,
To make your Fate inevitable sure.

Give me your hand, and take this farewell Kiss:
If thou would have me think thou love old Gaspar,
Reply no more, but leave me, and be dumb.

I'm all Obedience; let me speak but once,
And whisper't in your Ear: By all my hopes
Of Earth and Heaven, you shall not dye alone;
I'll gather all the Branches of your Body,
The little Arms, the Sprouts of him that was:
Yes, with that precious Fardel, bound together
By Cords of Hair, Cemented with my Tears,
And wreathed about till Death with my Embraces,
I'll follow you to Court: I will, my Lord;
And since you'll have it so, we'll burn together

O, my brave Friends? my dear la Rochfaucalt,
Your hand; and yours, my rough Colombiere;
My Gallant Piles; and thine, my plain Langoiran:
But say, how stand you to this Expedition,
This new Exploit, this dangerous Court Adventure?

My Lord, I'll answer for 'em; there's not one
But has resolved to follow; though they had rather
Run the most violent Shock of Glorious War,
Than stand one Complemental Death at Court.

Then our Opinions jump. But to the purpose;
Since 'tis resolved that we must go to Paris,
Because you're Strangers to the King and Queen,
I would instruct you in the Royal Tempers,
Draw the Queen Mother's Face in Minature,
For there the watch and ward of all our Caution
Must lye, if possible to wave the Ruin.

Fore-warn'd, fore-arm'd; fear not, we shall remember.

Imagine then the King, like Adam laid
Among the Sweets of Paradise to rest,
While to his listening Soul this Second Eve,
Full of the Devil, and designed to damn us,
Thus breathes her Counsels fatal to the World:
What ever Paths you trod before your Reign,
'Tis Blood and Terror must your Throne maintain:
Scorn then thy Slaves; nor to thy Vassals bow;
Fix the Gold Circle to thy bended Brow,
By Murders, Massacres; no matter how.
For Conscience, and Heavens Fear, Religion's Rules,
They're all State-Bells, to toll in pious Fools.

IS Guise then false! or do you try me, Madam,
And search my Heart, to know how much I love him?
If it be so, I will resolve you quickly;
I'll swear to you by Heaven, by all things Sacred,
By all that's great and lovely upon Earth,
By him, by Guise, by all the blessed Moments
Of that dear Life, which single I prefer
To Millions of my own, I love him more
Than you love Glory, Vengeance, and Ambition.

Then thou art lost, a Wretch, an out-cast Fool,
Not worthy of my Care, nor worth my seeking;
For, by my best Desires, I know he scorns thee,
And to my certain Knowledge, is betrothed
To Catharine Cleve, the Prince of Porcien's Widow.

'Tis false; he's not, he shall not, nor he cannot:
You hate me, Madam, and you forge this Matter,
To make me dye, to kill your Marguerite;
For, if you did respect me as your Blood,
Why should you tear my Heart in thousand pieces?
Why should you make me rave with Jealousy?
For, oh, I love beyond all former Passion:
Dye for him! that's too little; I could burn
Piece Meal away, or bleed to Death by drops,
Be stead alive, then broke upon the Wheel,
Yet with a Smile endure it all for Guise:
And when let loose from Torments, all one wound,
Run with my mangled Arms, and crush him dead.

Farewell; you're mad indeed: I'll find the King,
And send him to convince you of the Truth.

The Truth! O Heaven! nay, stay, and I'll believe you.
But is he false? is't possible in Nature?
Is Guise then, like his Kindred Savages,
True Man, an Upright, Bold, and Hearty Villain?

I tell thee, as I love thy Life and Honour,
Though much I fear, the latter is past hope,
Their Marriage will be solemnised to morrow;
The Cardinal of Lorrain must join their hands.

What, he that keeps the Tie, the sacred Contract,
I'll warrant too he'll be a Witness for him.
Why then, for ever throw off Modesty,
If thus Religion cheats us: let us haste,
With Messalina, to the common Stews,
Where Bawds are honester than Roman Church-men.

Think no more on it, but with a generous Fury
Resolve to cast him from your Soul for ever.
Prepare your self for what the King commands,
Without delay, to wed the young Navarre.

To wed my Tomb, to dwell in dust below,
Where we shall see no more deceitful Men,
Hear no more flattery, nor no damning Vows;
Where I shall never start from my cold Bed,
Nor walk with folded Arms about the Room,
With Eyes, like Rivers, ever running down;
While with my over-watching, I mistake
The rustling Wind, and every little noise
For Guise's coming; which not finding true,
I weep again, till all my face is drowned,
And groan, as if there were no end of sorrow.

Then I must find some other Instruments,
That have the power to rule you: So farewell.

Stay, Madam, stay. She's gone, and leaves me here,
To do a mischief on my Life. False Guise!
Pefsideous Guise! but I will find thee out,
And wreck the Miseries of my Soul upon thee;
Nay, I'll alarm that Priest that makes thee wicked:
Priests, that like Devils, laugh at humane pains,
And Souls ne'er reckon, so they count their gains.

But are you sure he'll come?

Most certain, Sir.

Why then, I will not eat till I behold him.
O, I could pine my self into a Ghost,
So I at last might thrust my hungry Sword
In the cursed Carcass of this Admiral,
And glut my greedy Vengeance with his Heart.

The Queen too of Navarre, the Heretic Princess,
Gentlemen and Commanders, Knights, Barons, Counts,
With all the Combination of the Rebels,
Come to the Wedding of the young Bearnois.

Why, what an Oglio will the Devil have?
A Feast for Hell, to cram it to the mouth,
A Massacre to Souls: methinks I see
The glutton Death gorged with devouring Lives,
And stretching over the City his swoln bulk,
As he would vomit up the Dead.

My Lord,
How brooks your Heart the Marriage of Navarre?

Why, faith, Sir, as we must necessity:
The King resolves it; urging to my face,
The Man that dared to contradict his pleasure
Should make that opposition with his ruin:
On this I turned my Court to Porcien's Widow.
But O, Lorrain, Love mourned at the mistake,
As conscious of the cruel change he made.
Take then the prospect of a Summers Morn,
The gaudy Heaven all streaked with dappled Fires,
And sleck'd with Blushes like a rising Bride,
With sweets so poured from such a lavish Spring,
That it must, beggar all the years to come:
From this bright view, from Marguerite's form,
Now turn thy Eye upon the yellow Autumn,
On Porcien's Wife, the Widow of the Seasons.

You speak, methinks, as if you loved the Princess.

How e're I bragged before, I do confess it;
Spite of my Glory, spite of my Ambition,
And all the vowed resolves of my Revenge,
Had she not poorly yielded to the Marriage,
I would have turned my Widow to the Common:
But I am satisfied; 'tis now the talk
Of the whole Court, how she in secret likes it;
Hears too, no doubt, of my design on Cleve,
Yet (Curses on that changeable Staff her Soul)
Regards it not. But see, she comes: a Tempest
Ruffles her Face! the Mother taught this cunning;
And she has caught the Plague of that Dissembler
So right, methinks I see the tokens on her.

Look in my Face.

I do.

Nay, in my Eyes.

I view 'em as I would the setting Sun,
Were I to dye at Midnight.

Come, you dare not.

What, dare not dye?

Thou dare not one, nor the other:
At least thou should not, for thou art so wicked,
So gone in Sin, Damnation must attend thee.

Why, then the Devil is sure of one great Man.

Of one! of all; at Court he's no Retailer,
But deals in Gross, and takes you by the Lump.
In Country-Fields he's forced to sit all day,
With patience, angling down the guiltless Stream,
Yet rarely catches one for all his labour;
But when he comes to Court, the Sea of Pleasures,
He throws his Drag-Net in from side to side,
Where none of all the Fry escape Perdition:
There may you see Whales plunging in the Meash,
Disgorging streams, like Drunkards on the ground;
The Sword-Fish, like the Soldier, fast in hold;
The floundring Priests, like Sharks, that gape for prey;
Fat Porcpise Bawds, the Mermaids too of Honour,
The Minim Pages, all the twinkling Host
So filled, the Snare of Hell must crack to hold you.

No, there's another Cause for this fine Satyr,
Too well digested for a sudden thought,
An Argument at home, there in your heart,
Though you have learnt discretion thus to turn it.

O Heavens! what means he?

Do ye seem amazed?
I say again, however you upbraid me,
You bear the Guilt, who bring the Accusation:
Yes, Marguerite, thou hast plaid me foul.
Nay, do not start, nor gaze, nor make false steps:
Come, Princess, these are tricks too stale for Guise,
Show 'em your little Creatures; bid your Mother
Fetch something quainter from the Schools of Florence,
Where she has learnt the Art of Honest-dealing.

O, all ye Powers of Heaven, of Earth, and Hell,
Where would he, whither, and when will he end?

Madam, I've done already; but left you should
Forget coherence, through your world of Passion,
I tell you, you are false; your Vows, your Tears,
Your Languishings, your very height of Pleasures,
Your grasping Joys are false; for even then
When you cry out, There can be nothing farther,
By all your perjuries, you wish 'em more.

Furies and Devils! shall he bear it thus!
What with his Lip! his Eye! his every Scorn,
Walk thus before me, and defy me thus!
Ah Guise! disloyal, faithless, perjured wretch!
Thou art more damned, than any Fiend in Hell.
Imposture!

Woman.

Traitor.

Woman.

Villain.

Woman still.

Hark Guise, hear Monster, hear and mark me:
While to thy Conscious Soul I sound the Name
Of Porcien.

Of Navarre.

Porcien I swear.

Navarre, Navarre.

Thou lie, thou lie: Porcien, the Widow -- Porcien.
O, I could cut my face! what, for a Widow!
Leave me for Porcien! O thou dull, dull Guise!
Wilt thou sit down to the refuse of Meals!
A Widow! what, the Monument of Man;
The Tomb Grave-Vault, the very Damp of Nature!
For this, I hate thee more than e're I loved thee;
And from my presence banish thee for ever.

No; I will banish this detested Guise
My self; you shall not buy him to your presence:
For, know, I hate more perfectly than you;
Yours is a gust, a puff of Woman's Fury;
But mine a manly, constant, settled hate,
Which, ever since you made your better choice,
Of young Navarre, took root within my heart.

'Tis false, 'tis false, a Treason fetched from Hell,
But where! speak out; where was this Lye invented?

Thus then in short, and so farewell for ever:
The King and Queen, with all particulars
Avowed it to me; and in general
The Court. You may perceive the Choice,
I made of Cleve, was more to be revenged
Than want of Constancy: but yours was weighed;
Navarre has youth, and may be King of France,
Tickling Variety for Love and Glory,
For the false appetite of Luxurious Woman,
Woman, damned Woman; but I waste breath to name her.
My Lord Lorrain, I charge you by your Friendship
Give me the Contract.

Hold, my Lord. -- For what?

That I may tear it to as many pieces
As she has done her Vows. What, faith in Women!
The very fragments of the whole Creation,
Whose severed Souls, like many parted Mirrors,
Reflect the face of all Mankind at once,
Who with their weeping Smiles, and laughing Tears,
Were they allow'd a Heaven, as sure they are not,
Would tempt the Angels to a second Fall.
But I grow wild; give me the Contract, Sir:
Nay, Madam, off; I swear you must unhand me.

I will not. O my heart! Ah Guise, Guise, Guise!
You have got the Conquest, and you shall maintain it,
Though at the expense of Marguerite's death.
'Tis true, my Mother mentioned such a Marriage;
But If I did not loath it, scorn, detest it,
O, if this be not true as thou art false,
(Forgive me, for I meant to say unkind)
Banish poor Marguerite from those Eyes
That feed her life, let me no more approach you;
But take, O take this Poniard from my hand,
And stick it in my heart, that heart that loves you,
That when 'tis injured dares not stand before you,
But owns you for the Tyrant of my days.

No, Marguerite, no;
You've found the way to temper me indeed,
Nay, turn it upon me, who am a Traitor,
Because I dared to counterfeit a Falsehood
Against such perfect Love, to seem t'affect
The hated Porcien.

Did you then dissemble?
Did you not love her in your Heart, indeed?

I swear by Heaven.

O let me then embrace you.
Yet closer. O that I could get within you!

My Life!

My Soul!

My Heart!

My Lord, the Duke of Anjou moves this way.

Farewell. And till I hear that thou art Married,
The Heart of Guise is riveted to thine:
Which all the Hammers in thy Mother's Brain
Shall never loose.

They may compel my Body;
But till I hear thee say thy self, You're false,
Death shall not force my Soul to wed Navarre.

I'll stand the shock of this Imperious Duke,
This Anjou, that has got a Name in War,
I know not how, because his Horse was shot
At Moncontour: you see by what ensued,
Nature designed him for a Reveller.

O. Ligneroles, thou Partner of my Soul,
Be secret; for if once the King should know
What I have told thee through excess of Love,
The World could not redeem thee from the Grave.
Ha! Guise! But soft, my Soul. My Lord Lorrain,
'Tis said, the Admiral, and Huguenot Princes
Are scarce a League from Paris.

Yes, My Lord,
I hear so too: the Duke of Guise was going.

I hope he will not move for fear of me.

You're right, my Lord; nor will not stay for love.

What, not a Woman's Love! Love of a Princess?

No, nor a Boy's; your Sister may do much.

Haste Ligneroles, go bear the King this Packet.
My Lord of Guise, 'tis not impossible
But Anjou one day may be King of France;
Mark me, if then I find Valois dishonoured,
I will not leave a Guise to gape at power.

'Tis so: by all the Mysteries of Empire,
By the Eternal Fates, his Mother's Poison
Boils in the Brains of the young drooping King,
And speeds him to make way for cursed Anjou.
Charles his Religion, which she wonders at,
And scarce believes him hers; laughs at his pity,
Calls his Remorse the Colic of the Mind;
His starts, and fears, the gripes and checks of Conscience.
But see, the King? mark, mark, my dear Lorrain,
Mark how she tempers him betwixt her hands:
He has it in his Veins, the lingering draught
That moulders him away. Let's tell him of it:
By my Ambition, and my vowed Revenge,
I'll do it.

Away; you shall not: are you mad?
Where is your temper? Walk a little off,
And lay these Fumes.

Lead then the blind away;
Yet, if I meet him in the dark, I'll crush him.

Was ever such an Insolence? Read there.
My Brother has Intelligence from Rochel
The Admiral has ordered his Adherents
To seize on Mons, as he arrives at Paris,
So to assure the kindling of a War.
O, Mother, now I feel thy flames inspire me;
Yes, by the injured Majesty of Kings,
I'll fetch this soaring Rebel from his height:
Traitor, Imperious, Saucy, Arrogant Slave!

Why should your Majesty thus shock your Peace
With needless Fury, since the time draws on
When He, and all those Rebel Hugonots,
Shall never grieve you more?

Your meaning, Sir.

When, as your Royal Justice has decreed,
They shall be Massacred.

A vain Surmise.
Go, Sir, and bid the Count of Rhets attend me.

Well, Sir, what think you now?

Death, and Destruction,
We're all undone; the Secret of the World,
Th'eternal Care of my contriving Soul,
Which has so many Moons, with constant watching,
Reduced me to this state, is blabbed by you,
Divulged, and made the Prattle of a Boy.

No, no, my Lord; I am not to be taught
By you, to keep a Secret: Look at home,
Collect, if in your late tempestuous Passion
You did not give suspicion of the truth.

Suspicion! no, 'tis more; we are betrayed:
He told me to my face he knew the matter,
How that the Admiral, and the Hugonots
Should straight be Massacred. O, I could rave!
Our hearts are Rebels to our Bosom-Councils.
But see, perhaps this Villain gave it Air.
Ah, Traitor! Ah perfidious false Alberto!
Have I not raised thee from the dregs of baseness,
And lodged thee in the bosom of thy Master?
Nay, rise, and speak: where did thou get the daring
T'unravel the close web of my sworn Councils,
And trust 'em to the giddy Ligneroles?
Confess; nay, hide not what thou hast revealed,
Or Racks, Blood, Blood and Fire, and lasting Torments
Shall force thee, speak.

Then let the Rack be brought:
Methinks I long to give a noble proof
How much I can endure in such a Cause.

I know not what to say, whom to accuse,
Or where to turn my self. Call hither Guise,
And Cardinal of Lorrain. But see, my Brother.
It must be so: 'tis he, 'tis he, false man!
I had forgot! this Boy's his only Minion,
The very turn-key of his Cabinet-thoughts.
But speak, Anjou; how did thou dare to trust
So strong a Secret, such important Counsels,
That from the Book of Fate must wipe for ever
A hundred thousand Lives, or quash the Throne?
O, I'm not able to contain the Transport!
Why did thou trust a business of such weight
To Ligneroles?

'Tis true, my Lord, I did;
But I'll engage my life he'll ne'er divulge it.

No, Sir; I pass my word he never shall.

My Lord, I beg --

Speak not, stir not hence.
My Lord of Guise, I must engage your Service.

Think no more of him, lest the violent King,
Whom yet I never saw so strangely moved,
Should turn his rage on you.

My Lord, 'tis done.
Two of my Train there are that bear him grudge.

When he's dispatch'd, let your Friends go to Prison,
To put a little varnish on his blood;
Then you, or some that have the seeming Power,
Beg for their Pardon, and it shall be signed.

My Lord, the Admiral's arrived.

O, Madam,
Give me your hand, and yours and yours
To prop me;
Now we must show a Master-piece indeed,
To meet the Man whom we would make an end of,
Even at that time when mortal Wars within,
When the blood boils and flushes to be at him,
Yet then to show the signs of heartiest Love,
To cringe, to fawn, to smile, to weep, and swear,
Are Masks for women, not for men to wear.

Cavagnes, would thou think it possible,
I scarce have breath to tell thee I'm not well?

Why should you fear?

Because it goes against me.
Upon the way, my sad presaging heart
At the first view of Paris sunk within me,
I stopped, and start, and answered without thought,
Like one that breaks his sleep with his own brawl,
As if my Genius shocked me with a question,
And asked me, whither I was bound for Death?
But it must be, Cavagnes: nay, what's more
Than Death it self, confess my self a Traitor,
Even in the Theatre of all the Kingdom
Do Penance for the glorious Wars I made,
In view of those that have so bravely backed me.

Madam, you're welcome; this the Prince your Son
Most welcome; this the Prince of Conde, welcome;
Welcome to Paris, welcome to the Court:
The heart of Charles bids welcome to you all.
VVho's that upon the Earth! the great Chastillon,
The glorious Admiral, the famed Coligni,
The scourge of Kingdoms! O, my Father, rise;
Or, by the Majesty of Age, the Reverence
Due to these hairs, the King himself shall kneel.

O Sir, is't possible! can this be real!
Can you forgive this Out-law; this Offender;
Who has so often turned your Subjects Arms
Against their Lawful Sovereign; made whole wilds
Of populous Towns, and braved the Lions fury!
Now you have drawn me quite unarmed to Court,
Can you so far be Master of your temper
As not to hew me in a thousand pieces?

Can you, who had the power to make me tremble,
Can you, my awful Subject, be so good
To kneel before my feet, and ask my Pardon,
And shall I be so barbarous to refuse it!
No, mighty VVarrior, in the heat of Broils,
When thou so terribly becam'st the Field
Had thou thus sought me, by those Saints we worship,
I had received thee with a breast of Mercy.

Forgive me, Sir; my heart so rises in me,
I cannot speak.

Let then the World be witness,
All that is Honest, Sacred, Good, and Just,
Be witnesses the powers of Heaven and Earth,
With this embrace I pardon thee thy Er
I bid thee welcome, as my better Angel,
Thou shalt direct in all my bosom Councils;
My Genius; O! and while I hold thee thus,
Methinks I press my Father in my Arms.

O! Sir, what have you done you've burst the heart
Of your old Gasper, with this Flood of Goodness:
And see, it gushes from my Aged Eyes.

No more.

I must, I must make way, my Lord,
For this dear Load that makes me fore within:
But haste, employ my Arm; Let Fortune raise
Some Fo that's worthy of Chastillon's Sword:
Nay, I shall quarrel with the Fates themselves
Unless they rouse me up some brave occasion,
To signalize my Loyalty, my Conduct
And constant Zeal for your Immortal Glory.

Your Friendship to the Queen, who courts it too,
Will more oblige me than your VVars abroad.

For all past Faults thus low I ask her Pardon.

Rise, rise, my Lord: let us forgive each other.
May I, when dying, miss the Throne of Mercy,
If, when I saw the King and you embrace,
My wounded heart did not weep blood for joy.

Come, come, my Lord, since you're so fierce to Serve me,
I'll find your Sword Employment. Rest a while,
And then for Flanders, where the Duke of Alva
Will hold you to it.

I long, my Lord, to try him:
He who so curses the Reformed Religion.
I wish that, with some thousands I could raise
Of those poor Protestants whom he disdains,
I could but face him on the dusty Plain,
Though to his Aid he called his Catholic Master,
With thousand Arms held up to thousand Saints;
Even with this handful of my old Commanders
Heading the well trussed Body of our Men,
We'd on, to make the Mytred Armies yield,
And drive the trembling Crosiers from the Field.

AH Traitor Guise! but I will have thy life --

Let go your hand; or by the Majesty
That Governs here, I'll send you to your Boy.

Tear 'em asunder.

I'll have Satisfaction.

Remove the Body. You my Lord of Guise,
Say how this murder happened.

Thus, my Lord.
Charles Count of Mansfeild, and the Count of Guerchy,
When with this Mornings hunt, the Hills, and Groves,
The Skies and Fountains seemed one mutual cry,
Riding in company, with this bold Spirit,
On siery Coursers, chanced to discompose him:
He frowned, they laughed, and so the beaten road
Of Quarrels, hot words rose, then Blows and Thrusts,
The Youth betwixt 'em fell, I know not how;
And there's an end of him.

Traitor, thou lie: thou know the cause.

No, Sir, it was my Order.
Now, as you have respect to your own Safety,
No more of this. Had you not blushed in Blood,
In the Heart-blood of him you dearest loved;
By my dead Father's Soul, by my Revenge,
You should your self have mourned so gross a failing.

Sir, he repents.

He does but what he ought.
Now to the Business.
Since then the Cloud that holds our horrid Vengeance
Comes nearer racking over the Hugonots heads;
Let's help the fall, and stir not from this place
Till we have fixed the Plat-form of their Ruin:
First, for the Queen, Iane Albert of Navarre,
Because a Woman, and of Royal Blood,
My Mother judged that she should dye by Poison.

Dispatch'd with Sweets. Pass to the rest; she's dead.

Yet not without suspicion of the Princes,
Who therefore, by my Order, were desired
To see her Body opened; which was done
Before the chief of all the Hugonots;
Only her Head was spared, as I appointed,
Out of a seeming Reverence; but indeed,
Left that the Poison, though it passed unseen,
Like a close Murderer, through the Lanes of Life,
Might yet at last be taken where it lodged.
With this, in part, I satisfied their Murmurs.

Therefore you must confer more favours still
Upon the Admiral, lull him with Honours;
Strike him but in the throat of his Ambition,
You have him sure: yet let him play a while,
And roll at random down the stream of Glory.
My Lord of Guise you have not yet conversed him;
Therefore, while this suspicion on the death
Of the late Queen flies warm about his ears,
Visit him, as commanded by the King;
But so as if enforced: and by degrees,
Proceed to half a Quarrel, that the King,
Being made the Judge, as coming there by chance,
May give it quite against you in appearance,
And force you to submit your self for Pardon.

It shall be so: And fear not, I'll provoke him;
'Twill ease my Heart a little, with keen words,
To right my Father's wrongs, and shed the Venom
That swells me all within.

On this proceed
To the intended Marriage of Navarre;
Which once performed, as if that were the Lightning
To the sure Peal of Horror that must follow,
Begin our Vengeance with the Admiral's Death.

First, Sir, it would be known how Guise approves
The Marriage of Navarre with Marguerite.

I know the Duke approves what I resolve;
And on so great a push, would forfeit both
A Ligneroles and Marguerite too.

Come, come, it's monstrous but to make a Scruple,
To stand on Pets, Intrigues, and foolish Passions,
When such a Fate is now upon the Bolt,
As ne'er perhaps yet Thundered with Success,
Since first the World began.

My Lord, I yield;
And take Prince Porcien's Widow for my Wife.

I sent the Count of Rhets to bring her hither.
My Lord Lorrain, pray let me view the Contract.
This, by the hand of Guise, must first be torn,
And then presented her.

Excuse me, Sir.

If Prayers or threats can bend her, Sir, you shall not;
But, if those fail, my Lord, without more words,
I charge you for your Honour, and my own,
To act as I command: or, by my blood,
Nor you, nor I shall ever see her more.

That's a home thrust indeed: Sir, I obey,
And wait your farther order.

My Lord Lorrain,
Attend the Duke while I examine Marguerite,
Wait till I stamp, and when thy trouble's over
Make to the Admiral; and I will follow.
How, Marguerite, weeping? all in tears!
Sure then the Count of Rhets mistook the Message.
I sent to give thee Joy, to tell my Sister
She must be married.

And I come, my Lord,
To show my heart before your Majesty,
To beg your favour, mercy, and your pardon;
For O, my Lord, I cannot, if I would,
Be married to Navarre.

You cannot? Rise,
And tell me why: I'll hear you out with patience.

Ah, Sir, how shall I speak your Sister's Frailty?
How shall I, but thus drowned with tears and blushes,
Confess the fault of Duty? I am married,
Betrothed, my Lord.

To whom?

Alas, you're angry;
But I must own the truth, though on your brow
A thousand deaths sat menacing my Soul:
Yes, Sir, I'm married to the Duke of Guise.

Not married, Marguerite; but contracted:
And so far I'll forgive thy heedless Youth;
But on condition that, without more noise,
Thou raze the haughty Guise from thy remembrance;
Or, by the violation of our Name,
I will not spare to drain thy tainted blood,
Till I have mounted thee by death a Victim
To the great memory of the wronged Valois.

Call then, my Lord, call forth your fierce Tormentors,
Propose to Marguerite flames and wounds,
And all the cruel Arts of thoughtful Fury,
See your poor Sister's Spirit parched away
By lingering fires, to make my death more dreadful;
Yet, Sir, with my last breath I must avow
My Love to Guise, and hatred to Navarre.

No; I have thought on it better; I'll proclaim thee,
A Prostitute; thou shalt no more be Royal:
Poor, and abandoned, with thy shame upon thee,
I'll turn thee forth a Beggar to the World.

Do, do, my Lord, rather than wed Navarre,
And make it death for any to relieve me,
Set the mad multitude like Dogs upon me,
To tear, to worry me like common flesh,
To drag me to a Ditch, and leave me gasping;
Yet with my last sighs I will groan to Heaven,
'Tis easier this, than to be false to Guise.

But, Marguerite, was there ever Love
Without brave Revenge on Provocation?
Yet, Wretch, thou love without being loved again:
Since in my presence Guise now past his word
To leave thee, and to wed the Widow Porcien.

No, no, my Lord; that Art was used before;
Yet, Sir, you make me tremble; for methinks
There's something more resolved, more stern in you,
Than in my Mother: yet my heart's confirmed
Not to believe even you; O therefore cease,
Or rather execute your former rage,
And give me up to those Tormentors hands
That wait your Call.

But if I bring the Duke
Before thy face, that Contract in his hand,
Which past betwixt you, and he tears it here
Openly, in the presence of us all;
Wilt thou then quit him, with resolved revenge,
And wed Navarre?

Why should you ask me, Sir?
Prove me but half as much, but half that falsehood,
That Impudence, that Treason to the Throne
Of our crowned Loves, and I will wed a Slave:
There's not a thing so loathed upon the Earth,
But you shall bind me to it for my life,
To Age, Deformity, to all that's hateful,
Blasting, and deadly. -- Ha! what's this he tears?
The Contract? O, it is the cursed Contract!
Then I'll tear too. Death, Furies, Hell, and Devils!
But call him, Sir, call back the perjured Traitor;
Let your Guards hold him; you shall see, my Lord,
How well I hate him: Give me but a Dagger,
And I will gore his heart with thousand wounds;
Nay, if 'twere possible, I'd stab his Soul,
Fill it so full, brimful of Woman's Gall,
That, though he were an Angel, it should damn him;
But he's a Devil, Devil, Devil, Devil.

Give me your hand; you shall along with me
To a young King, that will be proud to serve you.

O, Sir, I know not what to say, or do,
But fling this load of misery at your feet:
You have my promise; but with all my blood
I would retrieve it; for since Guise is false,
Whom I believed the worthiest of the World,
Since he has proved himself so damned a Villain,
O, give me leave, Sir, give me leave to shun,
To hate, to loath, to curse all Humane Kind.

I'll have no more delay; I claim your Promise:
Come then; or, by my Crown, I'll have thee dragged:
What hoa? without there.

Mother, pity me.
Have patience, Sir, a little time, my Lord,
To vent these bursting sighs, and I will go;
Let me but dry my Eyes, and I will go:
This remnant of a wretched Royal woman,
This stain to all your Blood, O cruel Heaven!
This cursed, forlorn, unhappy Bride shall go
Thus to the Altar where my Fate's decreed;
But like a Victim that is doom to bleed.

Poisoned; the Royal dead Navarre was poisoned?
'Tis the first Thunder-clap of that vast Storm
That seems already breaking over your head:
Why are you senseless then, and deaf to warning;
When, wherefoe're you cast your Eyes, the storm
Looks blacker yet? Why stays the Duke of Guise?
Why does he summon all his Blood to Court,
With Barons, Knights, that hold the Catholic Party,
With Foreign Gentry living on his Pensions,
And therefore ready upon all occasion,
With hazard of their lives to act his pleasure.

Peace, Antramont.

Alas, my Lord, I cannot.
Why should the Visdam Chartres, Count Mongomery,
Resolve to lodge themselves beyond the Sein,
Unless their minds presage some dreadful mischief!
'Tis coming; O, with deeper Policies
The King and Queen delude your easy Soul
With fatal Praises, and undoing Honours:
O, they have caught you! my Prophetic Soul
Sees the red Tempest thunder down in blood,
In blood of you, of me, of all about you.

O, Antramont, you foil me now indeed;
Yet I shall answer, if your Passion please:
First, for the Queen, I saw her Body opened,
The parts whereof were sound, untouched by Poison,
And by our own Physicians 'twas concluded
She died a natural Death. Then for the Guises,
Some little satisfaction must be given,
As to permit their Presence at the Marriage;
But, for the management of State-affairs,
Or Favour from the King, they're lost for ever:
Nor shall it keep my dauntless Powers awake,
Though Chartres and Mongomery will not come.
But, to forbear the Subject, leave me here
With my Cavagnes.

I am commanded, Sir;
Yet, for the safety of your innocent Babes,
Beware, my Lord, be cautious, O prevent.

Fear not; Farewell; be gone; I will beware,
Why should I fear, Cavagnes, when the King
Inclines his heart to the Reformed Religion;
When the whole management of Home-affairs,
With all Confederacies made abroad,
Are left to me, as Judge and Arbitrator,
The Genius and the Oracle of France?
But, if the Will of Heaven has set it down,
That all this trust is deep dissimulation,
That there's no Faith nor Credit to be given
To the inviolable Royal Word;
O, my Cavagnes, if 'tis possible,
If this be so, I yield, I yield to die:
I am contented for the Protestant Faith
Here to be hewn into a thousand pieces,
And made the Martyr of so good a Cause.

My Lord, I take my leave; and am resolved
To leave the Court.

Cavagnes, prithee speak,
It is not worth our smile: But why, Langoiran,
Why dost thou leave the Maker of thy Fortune?
Is it not worth the hazard?

No, my Lord.
I'm sorry, Sir, to see you made so much of:
And so Farewell. For my part, I'm content
To save my self with Fools; rather than perish
With those that are too wise.

My Lord the Duke of Guise.

The King, my Lord, commanded me to wait you,
And bid you welcome to the Court.

The King
Still loads me with new Honours; but none greater
Than this, the last.

There is one greater yet,
Your high Commission for the War with Spain:
I, and my Family, are charged to serve you;
And 'twill be glorious work.

If you are there,
There must be Action.

O, your pardon, Sir;
I'm but a Stripling in the Trade of War:
But you, whose life is one continued Battle,
What will not your Triumphant Arms accomplish?
Who, as your self confessed, or Fame is false,
Have quite out-gone the memory of the Ancients,
Of Alexander, and of Iulius Caesar,
For they in all their Actions had success;
But you, in spite of your malicious Fortune,
After the loss of four most signal Battles,
Still rose more fierce and dreadful to your Foes:
And last, when all men thought you had no way
To save your life, but wander through the World;
You forced the King to grant your own Conditions,
More proper for a Conqueror than one
That was overcome.

No more of that, my Lord.

But, Sir, since I must make a little one
In this great Business, let me understand
What 'tis you mean; and why you put the King
Upon so dangerous an Expedition.

Know, I intend the Greatness of the King,
The Greatness of all France, whom it imports
To make their Arms their Aim and Occupation:
Since then the Genius of the Kingdom's roused,
I'll turn the Fever of those Civil Broils
To wholesome Exercise, to war with Strangers.

Stored Arsenals, and Armories, and Fields of Horse,
Ordnance, Ammunition, and the Nerve of War,
Sound Infantry; not harassed and diseased,
To meet a Veteran Army, should be thought of;
Nor ought you to rely on Protestants,
Those Mercenaries that must come: for he
Who, thus resolved, depends on such, shall spread
His Feathers now; but mew 'em all to morrow.

I find; my Lord, the Argument grows warm.
Therefore thus much, and I have done. The King
Intends to send an Army into Flanders,
A powerful one, and under my Command:
First then, although the Wars of later Ages
Are, in respect of former, made in the dark,
Chastillon will not steal a Victory.

The Phrase of Alexander at Arbela!

No place of Honour, Office, or Command
Through the whole Series of this glorious War,
For Profit, Favour, or for Interest,
Not of the greatest shall be bought or sold:
Whereas too, for the encouragement of Fighters,
There are degrees promiscuously conferred
On Soldiers, and no Soldiers, this man Knighted,
Because he charged a Troop before his dinner,
And sculk'd behind a hedge in the afternoon;
I will have strict Examination made
Betwixt the meritorious and the base;
And, since I am entrusted as I wish,
I'll spoil the Traffic of this Brandy Court,
And vie Rewards for Merit with old Rome.

You will, my good Lord Admiral?

Sir I will.
Upon the very Spot of Victory
For Gallant Men --
Erect their Tropies, Funeral Laudatives,
And Monuments for those that died in War,
Crowns of distinction, Garland Personal,
All but the Stile of Emperor, which the King
Of the whole Universe did after borrow;
That for my Master: and perhaps for me
The Triumph of their Generals on return.

You have mouthed it bravely; and there is no doubt
Your deeds would answer well such haughty words:
Yet, let me tell you, Sir, there was a man
(Curse on the hand that sped him) that would better,
Better than you, or all the bragging Generals,
That when he shone in Arms and sun'd the Field,
That better would become the great Battallion,
Moved, spoke, and fought, and was himself a War.

The Noble Guise, your Father, Sir, you mean;
But yet, my Lord --

No yet, my Lord; no yet:
By Arms, I bar you that;
For never was his like, nor shall again,
Till murdered by Poltrot; cursed, damned Poltrot,
Whose Soul now gluts the Maw of Lucifer.

Speak with more Charity.

Ha! Charity!
Damnation on the Soul that harbours it.
Were I in Heaven, and saw him scorched in Flames,
I would not spit my Indignation down,
Lest I should cool his Tongue. For Beza too,
That set him on, with the Rewards of Heaven,
To act so black, so deep, so damned a Murder.
O why will Charles thus sheath the Sword of Justice
Till he has rooted up this Sect of Villains,
And collared to the Stake that canting Slave
That preached my God-like Father from the World?

Come, come, my Lord, hear with a little patience,
And you shall find 'tis not the Protestant way
To stab, and beat the Brains out in the dark:
Look home, my Lord, go to the Vatican;
See, if in all those Politic Discourses,
There be not one Red-letter'd Page for killing.

Ha, Admiral! then dur'st thou justify
The Villain, whom my Vengeance marks for death?

My Lord, I will not justify a Villain
More than your self: But if you thus proceed,
If that a great Man's breath can puff away
On every Pet the Lives of Free-born People;
What need that awful General Convocation,
The Assembly of the States? nay, let me urge,
If thus you threat the Venerable Beza,
What may the rest expect?

What if I could,
They should be certain of; whole Piles of Fire.

'Tis very well, my Lord, I know your mind
Which, without fear or flatt'ry to your Person,
I'll tell the King; and then, with his Permission,
Proclaim it for a Warning to our People.

Come, you're a Murd'rer, your self.

Away.

You were Complotter with that Villain Beza,
The black Abetter of my Father's Murder.

This would sound well, my Lord, in Front-Battle,
But here upon a Visit from the King
It looks not like the Guise.

My Father's Murder? bid me not stand on points
When that's remembered!
But track me to the Forest with thy Sword,
Thus Man to Man, barked with all thy People,
Follow me, or I will proclaim thee Traitor, Coward.

O King, King, King! still let me sound thy Name,
Lest this Fool-hardy-Boy, this knotty Trifler,
This Spawn of Words, this Urchin of the War,
Should raise my Anger past the pulling down.
But see He's here, I scorn to ruin thee:
Therefore go tell him, tell him thy own Story.

What now, my Lord of Guise? Is this your Visit?
I charge you on your life, without reserve,
Tell me the truth; how happened this disorder?
Those rusted hands, red looks, and port of Fury?

I told him, Sir, since you resolve to have it,
He was the Murderer of my Noble Father;
Therefore a Traitor, Villain, and a Coward.

Is't possible?

No matter, Sir, no matter;
The Old Man roused, and shook himself, my Lord;
A few hot words; no more, upon my life:
So, if your Majesty will do me Honour,
I do beseech you, let the business dye.

Guise, go, submit your self, and ask his pardon.

My Lord, I cannot speak.

Where are our Guards?

Hold there. Come, Sir, I will interpret for you.
My Lord, this close embrace makes up the breach:
We will be sorry, Sir, for one another.

You have out-done me, Sir; but you'll excuse me,
'Twas a great Rack that screwed me to this Folly.

More than enough, we're riveted the faster.

My Lord of Guise.

My good Lord Admiral,
Now use your Power, and quite oblige the Court:
Villandry has provoked the King at Play,
In such a nature, that he's doomed to die;
My Son refused my Intercession for him;
Therefore, when he has done his Check to Guise,
For your affront; pray, my good Lord, entreat him.

The Marriage stays within; which past, resolve
His Execution sudden as you can.

Marvile.

My Lord?

I by the King's Commission, have Command
To take the Admiral's life.

I'll shoot him.

Right:
As he returns from Court.

From some Out-Lodging
I'll watch him till I execute your Order.

I am a Suitor to your Majesty
For poor Villandry's life.

Haste, bring him forth.
I think, my Lord, if you should ask my heart,
My yielding breast would open to your hand.
But, Father, let's away; the Cardinal
Stays for Navarre.

We'll wait your Majesty.
O, my Cavagnes, where's Langorian now?
Where's Antramont? but haste, and tell her all;
Tell her th'extravagant kindness of the King,
Tell her, but stay; why such repeated Oaths?
That's to be thought on; Hollow was his aspect,
Graves in his smiles; Death in his bloodless hands.
O, Antramont! I'll haste to meet thy Eyes:
The Face of Beauty on these rising horrors,
Looks like the Midnight-Moon upon a Murder:
It drives the Shades that thicken from the State,
And gilds the dark design that's ripe for Fate.

FRom Amber shrouds I see the morning rise
Her Rosy hand begins to paint the Skies;
And now the City Emets leave their Hive,
And rousing Hinds to cheerful labour drive;
High Cliffs, and Rocks are pleasing objects now,
And Nature smiles upon the Mountains brow;
The Joyful Birds falute the Sun's approach;
The Sun too laughs, and mounts his gaudy Coach,
While from his Car the dropping Gems distil,
And all the Earth, and all the Heaven does smile:
But Charles, still wrapped in Shades, like Night appears,
His sighs the Vapors, and the Dews his Tears.
Yet, O Just Power, with pity, O behold
The wretch, whose fault is in your Book enrolled:
Behold these streams, with which his Soul aspires
To slake your wrath, and quench your angry fires.
Thy Genius, lo, from his sweet Bed of rest,
Adorned with Jassamin, and with Roses dressed,
The Power Divine has raised to stop thy Fate;
A true Repentance never comes too late:
So soon as born, she made her self a Shroud,
The weeping Mantle of a Fleecy Cloud,
And swift as thought, her Airy Journey took,
Her hand Heavens Azure Gate with trembling struck;
The Stars did with amazement on her look;
She told thy Story in so sad a Tone,
The Angels start from Bliss, and gave a groan.
But Charles beware, oh dally not with Heaven,
For after this no Pardon shall be given.

The King upon the Earth? O rise, my Lord.

He has of late been troubled with such Faintings;
And see he bleeds at Mouth.

Stand from me all.
O, Mother, Mother! Whither will you lead me?
Through what a Vault of Monuments, and Sculls,
And dead Men's Bones? And you, my Lord Lorrain,
Must I still journey through this Vale of Death,
And never reach the Paradise you promised?
I must not let the Massacre go forward:
I'm warned from Heaven, I swear I think from
Heaven.

Some Scar-crow of a Dream? So far from Sin,
Or ought that's damnable, is our Design;
That my Lord Cardinal will tell you, Sir,
'Tis meritorious: and when e're we strike,
The Church shall bless it, as a blow from Heaven.

Therefore, my Lord, I wish you to suspect
Whatever thwarts you in your holy purpose;
However veiled, though in an Angel's form,
Conclude it the suggestion of the Devil.

So; now, I hope, these Qualms are at an end,
And we may close pursue the main intention.
Supposed the Admiral killed: on this, the Hugonots
Fall on the House of Guise; the City rises
And cuts 'em all to pieces: now imagine
Which I am apt to think the Heretics
Are more discreet, and only sue for Justice,
Without a Tumult; shall the business stand?

No. If we find they do not run to Uproar,
(Our only hope to colour over their ruin)
Proceed to instant Slaughter; or they'll find
Some means for flight, and kindle up the War
More dreadfully than ever.

Is't determined
That, with the rest, the Princes too shall bleed,

My Judgment is most positive in this:
Let not one Soul of all be left alive;
For 'tis ridiculous, in such Extremes,
In the midst of Slaughter, Ruin, Blood, and Death,
To think of ever being praised for Mercy.
Nor can a mean be used; the Duke of Guise
Meddles not in it, if a man escape:
And says, in such a desperate Purge of Humours,
If any Relic of the great Distemper
Be left behind, it runs to a Relapse.
More dangerous than before.

As I remember,
Madam, it has been oft your Oracle,
In this late Civil Wars, to avoid a Battle,
That limbs, though ne'er so foul, should not be lopped
Without the utmost, last Necessity;
Because the Body feels too great defect,
Sharp Pains, and almost irrecoverable Weakness:
And will you now cut the great Arteries,
The Princes of the Blood? Most horrid thought!

Compose your self; Navarre and Conde live.
Come, come, you must put off this Melancholy;
'Twill breed Suspicion, Sir, let me entreat you
To go upon the Instant straight to Tennis,
While Morvele does his business.

O my heart!
If you would have me fixed, you must not leave me,
You must talk out to my distracted Soul,
Left Conscience drown the Voice of Policy.

This 'tis to have a Conscience? -- Here comes one
Seared as my self, of my own Family.
Is he dispatch'd!

Not yet; but Morvele waits him,
His Fusee cocked, and planted at the Window:
All, all is fitted.

What, your Marguerite,
Said she was sick, and would not bed the Prince
Last night?

I know not that; but here I stay
To take her as she passes to the Gardens.
How fares the King?

A little bound in Conscience:
He pukes at Dreams; and as I hear of late,
Spits Blood.

A Fit, a fit, my Lord, of the Mother:
I told you so. But see: the furious Princess?
Away: I'll clap my Prow upon the Storm;
And, if a Wrack must follow, let it come.

Ha! Villain? Traitor? Devil? Hence, be gone;
Or I must get into my Grave to hide me:
I've sworn, I've sworn to fly thee like a Fury,
And I am Damned if e're I see thee more.

I will obey you. And indeed the Fates
Of these sad Souls that must to day be doled
Require my haste: I beg you but to hear me:
Grant me but this, By Hell, and Hell's worst Horrors,
And all the Murders of this bloody day;
You ne'er shall see me more.

What can thou say?
For see, I know not how, thou'st charmed my rage.

Know then, the lives of every Huguenot
This moment now are sentenced to the Grave:
A Massacre of all.

A Massacre!

Madam, I've done. But hark! a Gun went off!
My leaping heart cries out, It is the Admiral.
The Marriage of Navarre was for this end
Designed, to bring the Princes to the Court:
And, on so great an Enterprise, the King
Compelled me to the tearing of the Contract,
Or threatened the destruction of my House,
And which was worse, your death before my eyes.
What, hoa! Morvele! He passed the Anti-chamber.
Permit me to consult him. Ha! speak out;
Say, is the Admiral --

Not dead, my Lord.
I think I saw some of his Fingers fly,
And part of his left Arm: I'm sure I hit him.

Here, take this Key; fly to my Closet, haste;
Thou art pursued: Farewell.

I'm gone, my Lord.

'Twas in this manner just, my noble Father
Was palted from the Fame of all the World
By such another Villain: and my Soul
Leaps with Revenge, that this proud Admiral
Should, like an Eagle, in his utmost slight
Be topled from the Clouds of all his Glory.
Madam, farewell: I hope you will excuse
What I, enforced, did act: I love you still;
And, on this sad affair, in which perhaps
Your Guise may perish, It would warm my heart
To hear you do not hate me.

Death and Horror!
Infamy, Vengeance, Murder, Massacre!

Now by the life and heart of our design
'Tis well dissembled; stood thy Lord in view,
I thus would charge thee; bear thee in my arms,
From the proud hurry of a clashing World:
To Mahomet's Paradise, to Beds of Pleasure.
Where we shall spin the silken Joys for ever,
Without a break: lengthening the twinkling moment
To an Eternity of deathless Pleasure.

Touch me not for thy life, thou Traitor! Murderer!
Ravisher! Oh thou titled Villainy!
In Purple dipped to give a gloss to mischief!
Follow the bloody bark of thy Ambition,
And never see me more --

It cannot be,
Unless you chain me, drag me in Sunless Caves:
You are my Earthly goodness, all my hope
Of Comfort here: nor wish I more hereafter.

Hold, hold, Profaner, thou hast dishonoured me,
But this is little to the Crimes that follow,
Thou hast betrayed me, after all my Vows,
To marry one I hate; for thy Ambition
Make me the Cause of this most horrid Vengeance.
At which the Earth shall sicken, Saints be sad,
And none but Furies like your self --

Did not your Mother form the whole design?

Whoever formed or helped in such contriving,
Hell and Damnation waste 'em; but for thee,
Seared as thou art, with Cruelty, Revenge,
I pity thee, O Guise! because I loved thee,
And beg thee view those Fiends that gape to seize thee:
Allow at least a possibility;
An unknown Country, after you are dead,
As well as there was one e're you were born.

Admit me then once more to share your Breast,
To taste those Secrets from those lovely Lips,
And I in time may be a Proselyte.

Here look your last! for from the time I leave you
Ne'er hope to see lost Marguerite more.

I am a Rebel, and have sworn to see you:
By all our former Dearness, and I will
By Heaven: I will, in spite of your resolve,
I'll gaze upon you till these Crystals run.

You have broke my heart a thousand several ways,
And now against my will this parting melts me.

Speak not of parting: by those Eyes I beg,
Nor melting hearts: The blood runs down from mine.

For all the wrongs you have done me, my Dishonour
For all your delays, your slights, your thousand Oaths,
Your most considerate Pride in falling out,
That I might court you to be Friends again.

Stop yet: and Oh eternal Love shall crowu thee.

For all my Midnight groans.

Hold, Marguerite.

My Tears, my Watchings,
The bleeding tokens of the fondest Love.

Take this, and strike it to my heart;
But speak your griefs no more.

By all I've said,
I beg you, Sir, to spare my Husband's life.

What, Marguerite? ha! Navarre again?
This was too much.

Save him, if possible,
And so farewell, thou Ruin of my Glory:
Farewell, thou strong Seducer of my Youth;
Yet I will Eye thee hungerly at last:
Nay, take this sigh too that thus splits my heart,
My Husband's life. In all that I implore,
To save Navarre, and never see me more.

She's gone, for ever gone: why, let her go.
Henceforth pronounce all Woman-kind thy Foe;
Or if thy feeble Soul to Love return,
Do not, like Anthony, for life time burn:
But as a Lion, eager of his prey,
Compelled by thirst, turns from his purposed way;
And in some silver Fountain slacks his rage,
Then runs more fiercely on his Foes t'ingage;
So having quenched thy fires with Beauties Charms,
Forget the Pleasures, and rush to Arms.

Command that all the City-Gates be shut,
Except but two, for bringing in Provisions;
And these my Lord of Rhetz, see strictly Guarded,
Left that the Murderer escape.

You bear it bravely!
Now to the wounded Admiral: be there
As you are now, seem soft and pitiful,
Fond him with tears, cry out with your impatience
To be revenged upon the Murderer.

You that are made of Artifice instruct me.

A finger and an arm? what all this noise
About the shattering of a Limb? Away.
And in a Cause so great, so glorious too?
Nay, let 'em burn the other to the shoulder,
Or let that Badger Queen grind every Bone
Betwixt her teeth, and grin to hear 'em crack.

Let's instantly resolve to bear him forth.

No: with this mangled flesh held to Heaven,
This horrid mash of Blood, and Bone, and Marrow,
Upon my knees I beg the Power Divine
T'establish thus the Protestant Religion,
To plant it in the Blood of lost Coligni,
If that, Alas, may satisfy their Fury.

Take heart, Sir; hope one day for full Revenge.

'Tis well, my Lord! 'tis well, my Cato! well!
You called this Paris Vtica at first:
The Stars of Great men have a cast Divine,
And when they mould with second thought, the Spirit,
The Air, the Life, the Golden Vapour's gone.
Langoiran! O Langoiran!

Fate, my Martia;
There is a Providence that over-rules:
Therefore submit; haste, for thy life, away;
I beg thee fly, my Martia, to Geneva:
My little ones shall, with Teligny, follow.

What, Sir, is't possible!
Is a planck in this great Vessel rived?
Is't necessary that a Wreck should follow?

O, Antramont, there is no going forth;
If the King be not in the Assassination,
Fear not; I shall have Justice: If he be,
Farewell for ever, I'll ne'er see thee more.

You shall, you shall: why burst you not away?
There are at least ten thousand, your Adherents,
Will clear your passage to Chastillon:
Why do you drag then, when your Fate cries on?

Once more I say, my Fate is in the King;
Therefore away: If things go right, you come
To me again; if not, there's one preserved
T'embalm my Bowels. O my Antramont,
I mean my Babes, that thus have force to thaw me.
That Power, whose most unsearchable Decree
Thus dooms our parting, give thee strength to bear it;
To bear my Death; perhaps thou'lt hear it shortly:
Yet thou shalt hear nothing unworthy me,
Nothing that's faint and flagging at the Goal,
But my last Gasp like my first start of Glory.

What, leave thee, Gaspar, e're I kiss thy wound?
O, let we touch the Battery of his Arm!
Forgive me; thus far I will be a Roman:
There's Virtue here, in this most Sacred Relic,
I swear I think there is, to save a Soul.

Be gone, I say; I cannot bear thy Kindness:
Force her away, and bear her to St. Germain.

I go. For thee, this Prayer I leave behind me:
When-e're thou dy'st, the Arms of Angels wast thee
To those smooth Joys that have no gritty moments.
For her that brought thee to this barbarous end,
The Whips of Conscience drive her to Despair;
Conscience! She has none: why then the stings of Pleasure,
Sores and Diseases, Disappointments plague her;
May all her Life be one continued Torment,
And that more Racking than a Mother's labour:
In meeting Death, may her least trouble be
As great, as now my parting is with thee.

My Lord, his Majesty, the Queen, his Mother,
Approach, to mourn your Chance, and give you Justice.

My Lord, I come to pour the Balm of Tears
Into your Wound; I come to threaten death
To that bold Villain who durst act this outrage:
And by my Soul I swear, my Father shall
Have such Revenge, as if a King were killed.

I thank your Majesty, and humbly crave
Your leave, Sir, to retire home to Chastillon;
Where, from these tumultuous Parisians,
I may, my Lord, recover this Misfortune.

What, take a Journey, Sir, in this condition?
Your Death must follow: but, alas, I fear,
I fear the truth, with tears I must avow it,
My Lord, you dare not trust the King and Me.

O, do not tax me with the least Suspicion:
I must believe the Royal Majesty;
But all my fear is for my dear Companions,
And these loved Princes, whom the Heavens defend.

Therefore my Brother Straight shall draw the Guards
Within the City, while for present Safety
I order Monsieur Cosen's Company
To keep your Quarters from all fear of Tumult.
O, Father, Father, do not wound my Soul
By a distrust unworthy of us both.

Ah, my Lord Admiral, can you imagine
That we are past all fear, or hope of Mercy,
That there's no Conscience, no regard of Vows,
No Grace, no Reverence, fear of Heaven, nor Hell,
Nor common Care of Fame, even in this World?

To Bed, to Bed; let me entreat you rest.

Nay, you shall go, my Lord, supported thus
Betwixt your Bosom-Friends: believe me, Sir,
This is not seign'd; there are not two alive
That love you more, than those that now sustain you.

Is't possible? Why, if it were dissembled,
The very Counterfeit of such a Friendship
Were worth a dying for. Alas, my Lord?
O, Madam! Why, why must this trouble be?
But lead me, lead your poor old Admiral,
Blind with his Tears, and faint with his Blood:
If I do well again; I'll thank you, Sir,
I'll thank you in the Field; O, grant it, Heaven,
That I may end where no Assassins are,
And fall a Victim in the Glorious War.

Look you, my Lords, this is, this is the Royal Order;
The Dukes of Nevers and Monpensier
Must wait to guard the Person of the King,
With all the Royal Regiment in Arms:
Haste, for the day begins to wear apace.

El. We obey.

President Charton, Provost de Marchand,
The Head of the Parisians.

Here, my Lord.

Provide two thousand men completely armed,
Let each particular man, on his left arm
Wear a Shirt-sleeve, and a white Cross in's Hat,
That, upon notice given, all may be ready
To execute his Majesty's Commands:
The Eschevins of every several Ward
See in just order and precisely set,
That upon ringing the Palace-bell,
Lights may be put directly on the instant
In every Window all throughout the Town.

It shall be done.

My Lord Grand Prior,
With what Commanders we can rise, be ready
To take the Admiral's life. But see the Queen?

Come, come, my Lords, let's lose no longer time;
The Hugonots proceed not to a Tumult,
But only vent their Fury in high words:
Therefore away. My Lord of Guise, your Father,
Looks from the Clouds, and cries, Revenge, Revenge.
I think 'twere better too, while you kill the Admiral,
The King's Grand Provost should pursue his Wife.

The old gray Sire, the Dam, and little Babes,
I'll take 'em all together in the Nest,
And pash 'em till they Sprawl. You and the Cardinal
Haste to the Louvre; when the Gates are shut,
Call the Chief Hugonots down, and cut their Throats.
My Lord, the Duke of Anjou, to your Care
The King commits the City: So Farewell;
There wants no more but ringing of the Bell.

The Palace Bell rings out, loud Cries of Murder,
Guns fired, and groans of dying men below;
The King has given his Warrant for my last;
His Vows, his Oaths, and Altar-Obligations
Are lost: the Wax of all those Sacred Bonds
Runs at the Queens Revenge, the Fire that melts 'em.
They are no more: the Admiral's no more.

My Lord, God calls us; Death is in the Court:
Fate, in the shape of Guise, all over Blood.
I saw your Son in Law Teligny dye;
Roura, the Son of Baron des Atrets,
With Colonel Montaumar, Gallant Guerchy,
Wrapping his Cloak about his Arm, fought on
Till he was all one wound, and so Expired:
But hark, they come!

Why, let 'em, let 'em come;
We shall e're long, my Friend, be worth their Envy:
To dye thus for Religion, O, Cavagnes,
It puts the Soul in everlasting Tune,
And sounds already in the Ears of Angels!
And, O, what cause had ever such Foundation!
I tell thee that the Root shall reach the Center,
Spread to the Poles, and with her top touch Heaven.
But see, they come: stand fixed, and look on Death
With such Contempt, so Masterly an Eye,
As if he were thy Slave.

See where he stands! ha, Slaves, what makes you pause.

Kill him your self, for my part I'll not touch him.

Nor I: for my part I am sorry for what is done already.

Cowards indeed! thus to be terrified
Even with the shadow of the Admiral.

It goes against me; yet I must obey:
Sheath all your Daggers in the Traytor's Breast.

Young Man, thou ought to reverence these gray hairs;
But I command thee, do as thou art ordered,
Thou'lt cut but little from the Line of Life.

Dye then, dye both: now for his Wife and Children.

Heard thou, Cavagnes? said they not my Children.

I know not what you say; the stroke of Death
Has stunned my sense of Hearing.

Yet let's crawl
With all our Wounds into each others Arms,
And hand in hand go Martyred thus to Heaven.

I am gone, farewell.

Why dost thou shudder thus,
And gasp upon my Bosom? 'Twas his last;
My Soul so likes her house, she's loath to part;
But, O what Builder can repair the ruins?
The Lights are choked, the Windows are damned up,
The main Beams crack, and the Foundation sinks;
Besides, the Lordly Owner warns me forth:
I come, great Master of the World and me,
And, O revenge, revenge thy Peoples blood.
A hundred thousand Souls for Justice call;
Let not the guiltless without Vengeance fall.

So fling him down, down with him to the Court,
Expose his Carcass to the Peoples mercy,
Drag him away, and hurl him from the Window:
See all his Bastards strangled on the spot;
There's Orders for it. The Hostel de Chastillon
Be razed for ever: his Posterity
Be made incapable of bearing Office,
Or being Noble; burn his Statue, haste:
There's a Commission granted for the deed;
Nay, kill, as if 'twere Sport to see 'em bleed.

Here Colonel bring forth your Prisoners,
And let me see these Leaders of the Faction.
Give the Word Colonel.

Fire on 'em all.

I saw the Master Villain dragged along
To Execution, by the Common People,
Who from the Shoulders tore the mangled Head,
Cut off his Hands, and at Mountfaucon hung him,
Half burning, by one Leg upon the Gallows.

O horror! horror! O thou cruel Guise!
O Mother! Brother! and thou Murd'ring Priest!
Dost thou not blush to fail in Seas of ruin,
To hang the Flag of a Damned Pirate forth,
Yet call thy bloody Bark the Christian Church?
Or, tell me, Can thou lay the Furies here,
Pale Hugonots that haunt me up and down
Through Chambers, into Closets, Beds, and Couches?
Or dare thou shield me, when the Admiral's Ghost
Claps to my Heart the Dagger of my Word?

Why are you thus?

The Angel's words are true,
And Charles is near his end. O Mother! Mother!
Hear my last words, and take my dying Counsel,
Stop the vast Murder that you have begun;
For know, all Churches by Decree and Doctrine,
Kings by their Sword and Balance of their Justice,
All Learning, Christian, Moral, and Profane,
Shall by the virtue of their Mercury Rod
For ever damn to Hell those cursed Designs
That with Religion's Face to ruin tend,
And go by Heaven to reach the blackest end*

HOW Wise are they, that can with patienc ebear,
And just Reflections moderately hear,
Vnmov'd by Passion, as unsway'd by Fear.
To them we Dedicate this Play to night,
That having long been Banished from the Light,
Hushed and Imprisoned close, as in the Tower,
Half pressed to Death by a Dispensing Power;
To take a lawful Trial for each Fact,
Is just come out by the Habeas Corpus Act.
Rome's Friends, no doubt, supposed there might be shown
Just such an Entertainment of their own,
The Plot, the Protestants, the Stage, the Town.
But no such fear our Hugonots alarmed,
True English Hearts are always better armed.
For if the Valiant in a little Town,
Battered and Starving, their brave Cause durst own;
If Peasants scorning Death, can Guard our Walls,
And the mild Priesthood turn to Generals,
Britains stand firm, and in short time you'll see,
Your own, and Neighbouring Realms serene and free,
Cleared from the choking Fogs of Popery.
No Massacres, nor Revolutions fear,
Affairs are strangely altered since last year,
Infallibility himself does run,
The Garden's weeded, and the Moles are gone.
Not Gold to Lawyers, to the Ambitious Power,
Not lusty Switzer to a lustful Whore,
To Gamesters luck, to Beauty length of days,
Nor to a wrinkled withered Widow praise,
Can give such Joy, as to behold once more,
An English Army on the Gallic Shore.
That this will be, the Poets Prophecy,
The Poets all were Prophets formerly,
T'inspire 'em then, give ours, to night his due,
His Tale is somewhat bloody, but 'tis true.
A Tragic Truth shown to an Honest end,
And can the Good or Wise of neither Sect offend.
Fancy and Stile, far as the rest excel,
In our Deliv'rance-Year, let no Tongue tell,
Poets the only cursed on whom no Manna fell.
Plead that they may be Caesar's Influence breathe,
And mix a Laurel with his Oaken Wreath.
Then shall his Glory Flourish to the height,
Then every Pen shall Panegyric write.
This, this was He, who blessed by Sacred Power,
To England its Religion did restore,
So firm, that Rome could never hurt it more.
WIT long oppressed, and filled at last with Rage,
Thus in a sullen mood rebukes the Age.
What loads of Fame do modern Hero's bear,
For an inglorious, long, and lazy War?
Who for some Skirmish, or a safe Retreat,
(Not to be dragged to Battle) are called Great.
But ob, what do ambitious States-men gain,
Who into private Chests whole Nations drain?
What sums of Gold they hoard, is daily known,
To all Men's cost, and sometimes to their own.
Your Lawyer too, that like an O Yes bauls,
That drowns the Market-Higler in the Stalls,
That seems begot, conceived, and born in brawls;
Yet thrives: He and his Crowd get what they please,
Swarming all Term-time through the Strand like Bees,
They buzz at Westminster, and lye for Fees.
The Godly too their ways of getting have;
But none so much as your Phanatick Knave:
Wisely the wealthiest Livings they refuse,
Who by the fattest Bishoprics would lose;
Who with short Hair, large Ears, and small blue Band,
True Rogues, their own, not God's Elect, command.
Let Pigs then be profane; but Broth's allow'd,
Possets and Christian Caudles may be good,
Meet helps to re-inforce a Brother's Blood:
Therefore each Female Saint be does advise,
With groans, and hums, and ha's, and gogling Eyes,
To rub him down, and make the Spirit rise.
While with his Zeal transported from the Ground
He mounts, and sanctifies the Sisters round.
On Poets only no kind Star ever smiled;
Cursed Fate has damned 'em every Mothers Child:
Therefore he warns his Brothers of the Stage,
To write no more to an ungrateful Age.
Think what penurious Masters you have served;
Tasso ran mad, and noble Spencer starved:
Turn then, who ere thou art that can write well,
Thy Ink to Gaul, and in Lampoons excel.
Forswear all honestly, traduce the Great,
Grow impudent, and rail against the State;
Rursting with spleen, abroad thy Pasquils send,
And choose some Libel-spreader for thy friend
The Wit and Want of Timon point thy Mind,
And for thy Satyr-subject choose Mankind.
THrice happy they that never writ before;
How pleased and bold they quit the safer shore:
Like some new Captain of the City Bands,
That with big looks in Finsbury Commands,
Swelled with huge Ale, he cries, Beat, beat a Drum,
Pox of the French King, uds-bud let him come:
Give me ten thousand red Coats, and alloo,
We'll firk his Crequi and his Conde too,
Thus the young Scribblers, Mankinds sense disdain;
For ignorance is sure to make 'em vain,
But far from Vanity, or dangerous Pride,
Our cautious Poet courts you to his side:
For why should you be scorned, to whom are due,
All the good Days that ever Authors knew.
If ever gay, 'tis you that make 'em fine;
The Pit and Boxes make the Poet dine,
And he scarce drinks but of the Critics Wine.
Old Writers should not for vain-glory strive,
But, like old Mistresses, think how to thrive,
Be fond of every thing their Keepers say,
At least till they can live without a Play.
Like one that knows the Trade, and has been bit,
She dotes and fawns upon her wealthy Cit,
And swears she loves him merely for his Wit.
Another, more untaught than a Walloon,
Antic and ugly, like an old Baboon,
She swears is an accomplished Beau-garson,
Turns with all winds, and sails with all desires;
All Hearts in City, Town, and Court, she fires,
Young callow Lords, lean Knights, and driv'ling Squires.
She in resistless flattery finds her ends,
Gives thanks for Fools, and makes ye all her Friends;
So should wise Poets sooth an awkward Age,
For they are Prostitutes upon the Stage:
To stand on points were foolish and ill-bred,
As for a Lady to be nice in Bed:
Your Wills alone must their performance measure,
And you may turn 'em every way for Pleasure.

