THE BASHFUL LOVER.

A TRAGI-COMEDY.

As it hath been often Acted at the Private-House in Black-Friers, by His late
MAJESTIES Servants, with great Applause.

WRITTEN By PHILIP MASSENGER, Gent.

LONDON, Printed for Humphrey Moseley, and are to be sold at his Shop at the
Sign of the Prince's Arms in St. Paul's Church-yard. 1655.

This from our Author, far from all offence,
To abler writers, or the Audience
Met here to judge his Poem. He by me
Presents his service, with such modesty
As well becomes his weakness. 'Tis no crime
He hopes as we do in this curious time,
To be a little diffident, when we are
To please so many with one Bill of Fare.
Let others, building on their merit, say
You're in the wrong, if you move not that way
Which they prescribe you, as you were bound to learn
Their maxims, but incapable to discern
'Twixt truth and falsehood Ours had rather be
Censured by some, for too much obsequy,
Then taxed of self-opinion: If he hear
That his endeavours thrived, and did appear
Worthy your view though made so by your grace,
With some desert) he in another place
Will thankfully report, one Leaf of Bays
Truly conferred upon this work, will raise
More pleasure in him, you the givers free,
Then Garland ravished from the Virgin-Tree.

I Dare not cross you sir, but I would gladly
(Provided you allow it) render you
My personal attendance.

You shall better
Discharge the duty of an honest servant,
In following my instructions which you have
Received already, then in questioning
What my intents are, or upon what motives
My stay's resolved in Mantua: Believe me,
That servant overdoes, that's too officious;
And in presuming to direct your master,
You argue him of weakness, and your self
Of arrogance and impertinence.

I have done sir; but what my ends are

Honest ones, I know it:
I have my bills of exchange, and all provisions
Entrusted to you; you have shown your self
Just and discreet, what would you more? and yet
To satisfy in some part your curious care,
Hear this, and leave me: I desire to be
Obscured; and as I have demeaned my self
These six months past in Mantua, I'll continue
Unnoted and unknown, and at the best
Appear no more then a Gentleman, and a stranger,
That travails for his pleasure:

With your pardon,
This hardly will hold weight, though I should swear it,
With your noble friends and brother.

You may tell'em,
Since you will be my Tutor, there's a rumour
(Almost cried up into a certainty)
Of wars with Florence, and that I am determined
To see the service: Whatere I went forth,
(Heaven prospering my intents) I would come home
A Soldier, and a good one.

Should you get
A Captains place, nay Colonels, 'twould add little
To what you are; few of your rank will follow
That dangerous profession

'Tis the noblest, and Monarchs honoured in it:
But no more on my displeasure.

Saints and Angels guard you.

A war indeed is threatened, nay expected
From Florence; but it is against me already
Proclaimed in Mantua: I find it here,
No foreign, but intestine war: I have
Defied my self, in giving up my reason
A slave to passion, and am led captive
Before the battel's fought; I fainted when
I only saw mine enemy, and yielded
Before that I was charged: And though defeated,
I dare not sue for mercy; like Ixion
I look on Juno, feel my heart turn cinders
With an invisible fire: And yet should she
Daign to appear clothed in a various cloud,
The majesty of the substance is so facred,
I durst not clasp the shadow: I behold her
With adoration, feast my eye, while all
My other senses starve; and oft frequenting
The place which she makes happy with her presence,
I never yet had power with tongue or pen
To move her to compassion, or make known
What 'tis I languish for; yet I must gaze still,
Though it increase my flame: however I
Much more then fear I am observed and censured
For bold intrusion.


Know you, boy, that Gentleman?

Who, Monsieur Melancholy? hath not your
Honour Marked him before?

I have seen him often wait
About the Princess lodgings, but ne'er ghess'd
What his designs were.

No? what a sigh he breathed now!
Many such will blow up the roof; on my small credit
There's gunpowder in 'em.

How Crack! gunpowder?
He's flesh and blood, and devils only carry
Such roaring stuff about 'em: you cannot prove
He is or Spirit or Conjurer.

That I grant; but he's a Lover, and that's as bad; their sighs
Are like petards, and blow all up:

A Lover! I have been in love my self, but never found yet
That it could work such strange effects.

True, Madam,
In women it cannot; for when they miss th'enjoying
Of their full wishes, all their sighs and heigh-hoes
At the worst breed timpanies, and these are cured too
With a kiss or two of their Saint, when he appears
Between a pair of sheets: but with us men
The case is otherwise.

You will be breech'd, boy,
For your physical maxims: But how are you assured
He is a Lover?

Who, I? I know with whom too,
But that is to be whispered.

How? the Princess! th'unparallel'd Matilda!
Some proof of it; I'll pay for my intelligence.

Let me kiss
Your Honours hand; 'twas ever fair, but now
Beyond comparison.

I guess the reason;
A giving hand is still fair to the receiver.

Your Ladiship's in the right: but to the purpose,
He is my Client, and pays his fees as duly
As ever Usurer did in a bad cause
To his man of law; and yet I get, and take 'em
Both easily and honestly: All the service
I do him, is to give him notice when
And where the Princess will appear; and that
I hope's no treason: If you miss him when
She goes to the Vesper or the Matins, hang me;
Or when she takes the air, be sure to find him
Near her coach; at her going forth, or coming back:
But if she walk, he's ravished; I have seen him smell out
Her footing like a Lime-hound, and knows it
From all the rest of her train.

Yet I ne'er saw him present her a petition,

Nore'r shall: He only sees her, sighs, and sacrifices
A tear or two; then vanishes.

'Tis most strange:
What a sad aspect he wears! but I'll make use of't.
The Princess is much troubled with the threats
That come from Florence; I will bring her to him,
The novelty may afford her sport, and help
To purge deep melancholy. Boy, can you stay
Your Client here for the third part of an hour?
I have some ends in it.

Stay him, Madam; fear not:
The present receipt of a round sum of crowns,
And that will draw most Gallants from their prayers,
Cannot drag him from me.

See you do.

Ne'er doubt me,
I'll put him out of his dream. Good morrow Signior.

My little friend, good morrow: Hath the Princess
Slept well to night?

I hear not from her women
One murmur to the contrary.

Heaven be praised for it:
Does she go to Church this morning?

Troth I know not; I keep no key of her devotion, Signior.

Goes she abroad? pray tell me.

'Tis thought rather
She is resolved to keep her chamber.

Ay me!

Why do you sigh? If that you have a business
To be dispatch'd in Court, show ready money,
You shall find those that will prefer it for you.

Business! can any man have business, but
To see her, then admire her, and pray for her,
She being composed of goodness? For my self,
I find it a degree of happiness
But to be near her; and I think I pay
A strict religious vow, when I behold her,
And that's all my ambition.

I believe you:
Yet she being absent, you may spend some hours
With profit and delight too. After dinner
The Duke gives audience to a rough Ambassador,
Whom yet I never saw, nor heard his title,
Employed from Florence: I'll help you to a place
Where you shall see and hear all.

Tis not worth my observation.

What think you of
An excellent Comedy to be presented
For his entertainment? He that penned it, is
The Poet of the time; and all the Ladies
(I mean the amorous and learned ones)
Except the Princess, will be there to grace it.

What's that to me? without her all is nothing,
The light that shines in Court, Cimerian darkness:
I will to bed again, and there contemplate
On her perfections.

Stay sir! see the Princess,
Beyond our hopes.

Take that, as Moors salute
The rising Sun with joyful superstition:
I could fall down and worship. O my heart!
Like Phoebe breaking through an envious cloud,
Or something which no simile can express,
She shows to me; a reverend fear, but blended
With wonder and amazement, does possess me;
Now glut thy self, my famished eye.

That's he, an't please your Excellence.

Observe his posture,
But with a quarter-look.

Your eye fixed on him, will breed astonishment.

A comely Gentleman! I would not question your relation, Lady,
Yet faintly can believe it: How he eyes me!
Will he not speak?

Your Excellence hath deprived him
Of speech and motion.

'Tis most strange.

These fits are usual with him.

Is it not, Ascanio,
A personated folly? or he a statue?
If it be, it is a master-piece; for man
I cannot think him.

For your sport vouchsafe him a little conference.

In compassion rather:
For should he love me as you say (though hopeless)
It should not be returned with scorn; that were
An inhumanity, which my birth nor honour
Could privilege, were they greater. Now I perceive
He has life and motion in him; to whom, Lady,
Pays he that duty?

Sans doubt to your self.

And whither goes he now?

To his private lodging,
But to what end I know not; this is all
I ever noted in him.

Call him back: In pity I stand bound to counsel him,
Howe'r I am denied, though I were willing
To ease his sufferings.

Signior, the Princess commands you to attend her.

How? the Princess! am I betrayed?

What a lump of flesh is this?
You are betrayed, sir, to a better fortune
Then you durst ever hope for: What a Tantalus
Do you make your self? the flying fruit stays for you,
And the water that you longed for, rising up
Above your lip, do you refuse to taste it?
Move faster, sluggish Camel, or I will thrust
This goad in your breech: Had I such a promising beard,
I should need the reins, not spurs.

You may come nearer;
Why do you shake, sir? If I flatter not
My self, there's no deformity about me,
Nor any part so monstrous to beget
An ague in you.

It proceeds not, Madam, from guilt, but reverence.

I believe you sir; have you a suit to me?

Your Excellence is wondrous fair.

I thank your good opinion.

And I beseech you that I may have licence To kneel to you.

A suit I cannot cross.

I humbly thank your Excellence.

But what,
As you are prostrate on your knee before me,
Is your petition?

I have none, great Princess,

Do you kneel for nothing?

Yes, I have a suit;
But such a one, as if denied, will kill me.

Take comfort; it must be of some strange nature,
Unfitting you to ask, or me to grant,
If I refuse it.

It is, Madam, --

Out with it.

That I may not offend you, this is all,
When I presume to look on you.

A flat Eunuch! to look on her? I should desire my self.
To move a little further.

Only that?

And I beseech you, Madam, to believe
I never did yet with a wanton eye
Or cherish one lascivious wish beyond it.

You'll never make good Courtier, or be
In grace with Ladies.

Or us Waiting-Women, if that be your
Nil ultra.

He's no Gentleman, on my virginity it is apparent:
My Tailor has more boldness, nay my shoo-maker
Will fumble a little further, he could not have
The length of my foot else.

Only to look on me? ends your ambition there?

It does, great Lady,
And that confined too, and at fitting distance:
The Fly that plays too near the flame, burns in it.
As I behold the sun, the stars, the Temples,
I look upon you, and wish'twere no sin,
Should I adore you.

Come, there's something more in it;
And since that you will make a Goddess of me,
As such a one, I'll tell you, I desire not
The meanest Altar raised up to mine honour
To be pulled down; I can accept from you
(Be your condition ne'er so far beneath me)
One grain of incense with devotion offered,
Beyond all perfumes or Sabean spices
By one that proudly thinks he merits in it:
I know you love me.

Next to heaven, Madam,
And with as pure a zeal. That we behold
With th'eyes of contemplation, but can
Arrive no nearer to it in this life;
But when that is divorced, my soul shall serve yours,
And witness my affection.

Pray you rise, but wait my further pleasure.

I'll present you,
And give you proof I am your friend, a true one;
And in my pleading for you, teach the age
That calls erroniously Friendship but a name,
It is a substance. Madam, I am bold
To trench so far upon your privacy,
As to desire my friend (Let not that wrong him,
For he's a worthy one) may have the honour
To kiss your hand.

His own worth challenges a greater favour.

Your acknowledgment
Confirms it, Madam: If you look on him
As he's built up a man, without addition
Of fortunes liberal favours, wealth or titles,
He doth deserve no usual entertainment.
But as he is a Prince, and for your service
Hath left fair Parma (that acknowledges
No other Lord) and uncompelled exposes
His person to the dangers of war,
Ready to break in storms upon our heads;
In noble thankfulness you may vouchsafe him
Nearer respect, and such grace as may nourish,
Not kill his amorous hopes.

Cozen, you know I am not the disposer of my self,
The Duke my father challenges that power:
Yet thus much I dare promise; Prince Uberti
Shall find the seed of service that he sows
Falls not on barren ground.

For this high favour
I am your creature, and profess I owe you
Whatever I call mine.

This great Lord is
A Suitor to the Princess.

True, he is so:

Fame gives him out too for a brave Commander

And in it does him but deserved right;
The Duke hath made him General of his horse
On that assurance.

And the Lord Farneze pleads for him, as it seems.

'Tis too apparent:
And this considered, give me leave to ask
What hope have you sir?

I may still look on her,
Howe'r he wear the garland.

A thin diet, and will not feed you fat, sir.

I rejoice, rare Princess, that you are not to be won
By Carpet-courtship, but the sword: with this
Steel-pen I'll write on Florence helm, how much
I can, and dare do for you.

'Tis not questioned,
Some private business of mine own disposed of,
I'll meet you in the presence.

Ever your servant.

Now sir to you: You have observed, I doubt not,
(For Lovers are sharp. sighted) to what purpose
This Prince sollicites me; and yet I am not
So taken with his worth, but that I can
Vouchsafe you further parle. The first command
That I'll impose upon you, is to hear
And follow my good council: I am not
Offended that you love me: persist in it,
But love me virtuously, such love may spur you
To noble undertakings, which achieved,
Will raise you into name, preferment, honour:
For all which, though you ne'er enjoy my person,
(For that's impossible) you are indebted
To your high aims; visit me when you please,
I do allow it, nor will blush to own you,
(So you confine your self to what you promise)
As my virtuous servant.

Farewell sir, you have
An unexpected Cordial.

May it work well.

Your love, yes, so she said, may spur you to
Brave undertakings: Adding this, You may
Visit me when you please. Is this allowed me,
And any act within the power of man
Impossible to be effected? no,
I will break through all oppositions that
May stop me in my full carrier to honour;
And borrowing strength to do, from her high favour,
Add something to Alcides greatest labour.


This is your place, and were it in our power,
You should have greater honour, Prince of Parma:
The rest know theirs; let some attend with care
On the Ambassador, and let my Daughter
Be present at his audience. Reach a chair,
We'll do all fit respects; and pray you put on
Your milder looks; you are in a place where frowns
Are no prevailing agents.


I have seen
More then a wolf, a Gorgon:

What's the matter?

A Page of mine is fallen into a swoon,
Look to him carefully.

Now when you please, the cause that brought you hither?

The protraction
Of my dispatch forgotten, from Lorenzo
The Tuscan Duke, thus much to you Gonzaga
The Duke of Mantua: By me his nephew
He does salute you fairly, and entreats
(A word not suitable to his power and greatness)
You would consent to tender that, which he
Unwillingly must force, if contradicted.
Ambition, in a private man a vice,
Is in a Prince the virtue.

To the purpose; these ambages are impertinent.

He demands
The fair Matilda (for I dare not take
From her perfections) in a noble way;
And in creating her the comfort of
His royal bed, to raise her to a height
Her flattering hopes could not aspire, where she
With wonder shall be gazed upon, and live
The envy of her sex.

Suppose this granted.

Or if denied, what follows?

Present war, with all extremities the Conqueror can
Inflict upon the vanquished.

Grant me licence
To answer this defiance: What intelligence
Holds your proud Master with the will of Heaven,
That ere th'uncertain Dye of War be thrown,
He dares assure himself the victory?
Are his unjust invading Arms of fire?
Or those we put on in defence of right,
Like chaff to be consumed in the encounter?
I look on your dimensions, and find not
Mine own of lesser size; the blood that fills
My veins, as hot as yours; my sword as sharp,
My nerves of equal strength, my heart as good,
And confident we have the better cause,
Why should we fear the trial?

You presume you are superior in numbers; we
Lay hold upon the surest anchor, virtue;
Which when the tempest of the war roars loudest,
Must prove a strong protection.

Two main reasons (seconding those you have already heard)
Gives us encouragement: The duty that
I owe my mother Country, and the love
Descending to my daughter. For the first,
Should I betray her liberty, I deserved
To have my name with infamy razed from
The catalogue of good Princes: And I should
Unnaturally forget I am a father,
If like a Tartar, or for fear or profit,
I should consign her as a bondwoman
To be disposed of at another pleasure,
Her own consent or favour never sued for,
And mine by force exacted. No, Alonzo,
She is my only child, my heir; and if
A fathers eyes deceive me not, the hand
Of prodigal nature hath given so much to her,
As in the former ages Kings would rise up
In her defence, and makes her cause their quarrel:
Nor can she, if that any spark remain
To kindle a desire to be possessed
Of such a beauty, in our time want swords
To guard it safe from violence.

I must speak, or I shall burst; now to be silent, were
A kind of blasphemy. If such purity,
Such innocence, an abstract of perfection,
The soul of beauty, virtue, in a word,
A Temple of things sacred, should groan under
The burden of opprestion, we might
Accuse the Saints, and tax the Powers above us
Of negligence or injustice. Pardon, sir,
A strangers boldness, and in your mercy call it
True zeal, not rudeness: In a cause like this,
The Husbandman would change his ploughing-irons
To weapons of defence, and leave the earth
Untill'd, although a general dearth should follow:
The Student would forswear his book; the Lawyer
Put off his thriving gown, and without pay
Conclude this case is to be fought, not pleaded:
The women will turn Amazons, as their sex
In her were wronged; and boys write down their names
In the muster-book for soldiers.

Take my hand;
Whatev'r you are, I thank you: how are you called?

Hortensio, a Millanoise.

I wish Mantua had many such. My Lord
Ambassador,
Some privacy if you please: Manfroy, you may
Partake it, and advise us.

Do you know, friend,
What this man is, or of what country?

Neither.

I'll question him my self; what are you sir?

A Gentleman.

But if there be gradation
In Gentry, as the Heralds say, you have
Been overbold in the presence of your betters.

My betters, sir?

Your betters! as I take it, you are no Prince.

'Tis fortunes gift you were born one:
I have not heard that glorious title crowns you
As a reward of virtue; it may be
The first of your house deserved it, yet his merits
You can but faintly call your own.

Well answered.

You come up to me.

I would not turn my back
If you were the Duke of Florence, though you charged me
In the head of our troops.

Tell me in gentler language,
(Your passionate speech induces me to think so)
Do you love the Princess?

Were you mine enemy,
Your foot upon my breast, sword at my throat,
Even then I would profess it. The ascent
To th'height of honour, is by arts or arms:
And if such an unequalled prize might fall
On him that did deserve best in defence
Of this rare Princess, in the day of battle
I should lead you a way would make your Greatness
Sweat drops of blood to follow.

Can your Excellence
Hear this without rebuke from one unknown?
Is he a Rival for a Prince?

My Lord, you take that liberty I never gave you:
In justice you should give encouragement
To him or any man that freely offers
His life to do me service, not deter him;
I give no suffrage to it: Grant he loves me,
As he professes, how are you wronged in it?
Would you have all men hate me but your self?
No more of this I pray you: If this Gentleman
Fight for my freedom, in a fit proportion
To his desert and quality, I can
And will reward him, yet give you no cause
Of jealousy or envy.

Heavenly Lady!

No peace, but on such poor and base conditions?
We will not buy it at that rate: Return
This answer to your Master: Though we wished
To hold fair quarter with him, on such terms
As honour would give way to, we are not
So thunder-struck with the loud voice of war,
As to acknowledge him our Lord before
His sword hath made us Vassals: we long since
Have had intelligence of the unjust gripe
He purposed to lay on us; neither are we
So unprovided as you think, my Lord,
He shall not need to seek us, we will meet him
And prove the fortune of a day, perhaps
Sooner then he expects.

And find repentance when 'tis too late.
Farewell.

No, my Matilda,
We must not part so: Beasts and birds of prey
To their last gasp defend their brood; and Florence
Over thy fathers breast shall march up to thee,
Before he force affection: The arms
That thou must put on for us and thy self,
Are prayers and pure devotion, which will
Be heard, Matilda. Mansroy, to your trust
We do give up the City, and my daughter;
On both keep a strong guard: No tears, they are ominous.
O my Octavio, my tried Octavio
In all my dangers! now I want thy service,
In passion recompensed with banishment.
Error of Princes, who hate virtue when
She's present with us, and in vain admire her
When she is absent! 'Tis too late to think on it:
The wished for time is come, Princely Uberti,
To show your valour; Friends being to do, not talk.
All rhetoric is fruitless, only this,
Fate cannot rob you of deserved applause,
Whether you win or lose in such a cause.


NO matter for the Ring I asked you for:
The Boy not to be found?
Nor heard of, Madam:

He hath been sought and searched for, house by house,
Nay, every nook of the City, but to no purpose.

And how he should escape hence, the Lord Manfroy
Being so vigilant ore the guards, appears
A thing impossible.

I never saw him
Since he swouned in the presence, when my Father
Gave audience to the Ambassador: but I feel
A sad miss of him; on any slight occasion
He would find out such pretty arguments
To make me sport, and with such witty sweetness
Deliver his opinion, that I must
Ingeniously confess his harmless mirth,
When I was most oppressed with care, wrought more
In the removing of it, then music on me.

An't please your Excellence, I have observed him
Waggishly witty; yet sometimes on the sudden
He would be very pensive, and then talk
So feelingly of love, as if he had
Tasted the bitter sweets of't.

He would tell too a pretty tale of a sister that had been
Deceived by her Sweetheart; and then weeping swear
He wondered how men could be false

And that when he was a Knight, he would be the Ladies Champion,
And travel ore the world to kill such Lovers
As durst play false with their Mistresses:

I am sure I want his company
There are Letters, Madam,
In post come from the Duke; but I am charged
By the careful bringer, not to open them
But in your presence.

Heaven preserve my Father!
Good news, an't be thy will!

Patience must arm you against what's ill.

I'll hear 'em in my Cabinet:

Why have you left the safety of the City
And service of the Princess, to partake
The dangers of the Camp? and at a time too
When the Armies are in view, and every minute
The dreadful charge expected.

You appear so far beyond your self, as you are now
Armed like a soldier, (though I grant your presence
Was ever gracious) that I grow enamoured
Of the profession, in the horror of it
There is a kind of majesty.

But too heavy to sit on thy soft shoulders, Youth; retire
To the Dukes tent that's guarded.

Sir, I come
To serve you: Knights adventurers are allow'd
Their Pages; and I bring a will that shall
Supply my want of power.

To serve me, boy! I wish (believe it) that 'twere in my nerves
To do thee any service; and thou shalt
If I survive the fortune of this day,
Be satisfied I am serious.

I am not
To be put off so, sir: since you do neglect
My offered duty, I must use the power
I bring along with me, that may command you:
You have seen this Ring.

Made rich by being worn upon the Princess finger.

'Tis a favour
To you, by me sent from her: view it better;
But why coy to receive it?

I am unworthy
Of such a blessing, I have done nothing yet
That may deserve it; no Commanders blood
Of th'adverse party hath yet died my sword
Drawn out in her defence. I must not take it.
This were a triumph for me when I had
Made Florence Duke my prisoner, and compelled him
To kneel for mercy at her feet.

'Twas sent, sir,
To put you in mind whose cause it is you fight for;
And as I am her creature, to revenge
A wrong to me done.

By what man?

Alonzo.

Th'Ambassador?

The same:

Let it suffice, I know him by his armour and his horse;
And if we meet -- I am cut off, the Alarm
Commands me hence: sweet Youth, fall off.

I must not; you are too noble to receive a wound
Upon your back; and following close behind you,
I am secure, though I could wish my bosom
Were your defence.

Thy kindness will undo thee.


We'll charge the main Battalia, fall you
Upon the Van, preserve your Troops entire
To force the Rear: he dies that breaks his ranks,
Till all be ours and sure.

'Tis so proclaimed.

'Tis he, Ascanio: Stand!

I never shunned
A single opposition; but tell me
Why in the battle, of all men, thou hast
Made choice of me?

Look on this Youth; his cause
Sits on my sword

I know him not.

I'll help your memory.

What have I done? I am doubtful
To whom to wish the victory; for still
My resolution wavering, I so love
The enemy that wronged me, that I cannot
Without repentance wish success to him
That seeks to do me right. -- Alas he's fallen.
Alonzo falls.
As you are gentle, hold sir! or if I want
Power to persuade so far, I conjure you
By her loved name I am sent from.

'Tis a charm
Too strong to be resisted: He is yours.
Yet why should you make suit to save that life
Which you so late desired should be cut off
For injuries received, begets my wonder.

Alas, we foolish spleenful boys would have
We know not what: I have some private reasons,
But now not to be told.

Shall I take him prisoner?

By no means, sir; I will not save his life
To rob him of his honour: when you give,
Give not by halves: One short word, and I follow.
My Lord Alonzo, if you have received
A benefit, and would know to whom you owe it,
Remember what your entertainment was
At old Octavio's house, one you called friend,
And how you did return it.

I remember I did not well; but it is now no time
To think upon it; my wounded honour calls
For reparation, I must quench my fury
For this disgrace in blood, and some shall smart for it.

O Prince Vberti, valour cannot save us;
The body of our Army's pierced and broken,
The wings are routed, and our scattered Troops
Not to be rallied up.

'Tis yet some comfort,
The enemy must say we were not wanting
In courage or direction; and we may
Accuse the powers above us partial, when
A good cause, well defended too, must suffer
For want of fortune.

All is lost; the Duke
Too far engaged, I fear, to be brought off:
Three times I did attempt his rescue, but
With odds was beaten back: Only the stranger
(I speak it to my shame) still follow'd him,
Cutting his way; but 'tis beyond my hopes
That either should return.

That noble stranger,
Whom I in my proud vanity of greatness
As one unknown contemned, when I was thrown
Out of my saddle by the great Dukes lance,
Horsed me again in spite of all that made
Resistance; and then whispered in mine ear,
Fight bravely Prince Uberti, there's no way else
To the fair Matilda's favour.

'Twas done nobly.

In you, my bosom friend; I had called it noble:
But such a courtesy from a Rival, merits
The highest attribute.

Stand on your guard, we are pursued.

Preserved! wonder on wonder.

The Duke in safety?

Pay your thanks, Farneze,
To this brave man, if I may call him so,
Whose acts were more then humane: if thou art
My better Angel, from my infancy
Designed to guard me, like thy self appear,
For sure thou art more then mortal.

No, great sir,
A weak and sinful man, though I have done you
Some prosperous service, that hath found your favour,
I am lost to my self; but lose not you
The offered opportunity to delude
The hot pursuing enemy: these woods
Nor the dark vail of night cannot conceal you,
If you dwell long here: You may rise again,
But I am fallen for ever.

Rather borne up
To the supreme sphere of honour.

I confess my life your gift.

My liberty: You have snatched
The wreath of conquest from the Victors head,
And do alone in scorn of Lorenzo's fortune
Though we are slav'd, by true heroic valour
Deserve a triumph.

From whence then proceeds this poor dejection?

In one suit I'll tell you,
Which I beseech you grant: -- I loved your daughter,
But how? as beggars in their wounded fancy
Hope to be Monarchs:
I long languished for her,
But did receive no Cordial, but what
Despair my rough Physician prescribed me.
At length her goodness and compassion found it.
And whereas I expected, and with reason,
The distance and disparity considered
Between her birth and mine, she would contemn me,
The Princess gave me comfort.

In what measure?

She did admit me for her Knight and servant,
And spurred me to do something in this battle
Fought for her liberty, that might not blemish
So fair a favour.

This you hrve performed to th'height of admiration.

I subscribe to it, that am your Rival.

You are charitable:
But how short of my hopes, nay the assurance
Of those achievements which my love and youth
Already held accomplisn'd, this days fortune
Must sadly answer. What I did, she gave me
The strength to do; her piety preserved
Her Father; and her gratitude for the dangers
You threw your self into for her defence,
Protected you by me her instrument:
But when I came to strike in mine own cause,
And to do something so remarkable,
That should at my return command her thanks
And gracious entertainment, then alas
I fainted like a coward; I made a vow too
(And it is registered) ne'er to presume
To come into her presence, if I brought not
Her fears and dangers bound in fetters to her,
Which now's impossible. -- Hark, the enemy
Makes his approaches: save your selves, this only
Deliver to her Sweetness; I have done
My poor endeavours, and pray her not repent
Her goodness to me: May you live to serve her,
This loss recovered, with a happier fate,
And make use of this sword: Arms I abjure,
And conversation of men; I'll seek out
Some unfrequented cave, and die Loves martyr.

Follow him.

'Tis in vain; his nimble feet
Have born him from my sight.

I suffer for him:

We share in it, but must not sir forget
Your means of safety.

In the war I have served you,
And to the death will follow you.

'Tis not fit,
We must divide our selves.
My daughter, if I retain yet
A Sovereigns power ore thee, or friends with you,
Do, and dispute not; by my example change
Your habits: As I thus put off my purple,
Ambition dies; this garment of a shepherd
Left here by chance will serve; in lieu of it
I leave this to the owner. Raise new forces,
And meet me at S. Leo's Fort; my daughter,
As I commanded Manfroy, there will meet us.
The City cannot hold out, we must part,
Farewell, thy hand --

You still shall have my heart.

The day is ours, though it cost dear; yet 'tis not
Enough to get a victory, if we lose
The true use of it. We have hitherto
Held back your forward swords, and in our fear
Of ambushes, deferred the wished reward
Due to your bloody toil: But now give freedom,
Nay, licence to your fury and revenge;
Now glut your selves with prey, let not the night
Nor these thick woods give sanctuary to
The fear-struck Hares our Enemies: fire these trees,
And force the wretches to forsake their holes,
And offer their scorched bodies to your swords,
Or burn'em as a sacrifice to your angers.
Who brings Gonzaga's head, or takes him prisoner,
(Which I incline to rather) that he may
Be sensible of those tortures, which I vow
T'inflict upon him, for denial of
His daughter to our bed) shall have a Blank
With our hand and signet made authentical,
In which he may write down himself, what wealth
Or honours he desires

The great Dukes will shall be obeyed

Put it in execution.

Begirt the wood, and fire it.

Follow, follow.
Uberti, Prince Uberti! O my friend
Dearer then life! I have lost thee. Cruel fortune,
Unsatisfied with our sufferings! We no sooner
Were parted from the Duke, and even then ready
To make a mutual farewell, when a troop
Of the enemies horse fell on us: we were forced
To take the woods again, but in our flight
Their hot pursuit divided us: we had been happy
If we had died together; to survive him
To me is worse then death, and therefore should not
Embrace the means of my escape, though offered.
When nature gave us life, she gave a burden,
But at our pleasure not to be cast off,
Though weary of it; and my reason prompts me,
This habit of a Florentine which I took
From a dying soldier, may keep me unknown
Till opportunity mark me out a way
For flight, and with security.
Was there ever such a night of horror?

My friends voice! I now
In part forgive thee, fortune.

The wood flames,
The bloody sword devours all that it meets,
And death in several shapes rides here in triumph.
I am like a Stag closed in a toil; my life
As soon as found, the cruel Huntsmans prey:
Why fliest thou then what is inevitable?
Better to fall with manly wounds before
Thy cruel Enemy, then survive thine honour:
And yet to charge him, and die unrevenged,
Mere desperation.

Heroic spirit!

Mine own life I contemn, and would not save it
But for the future service of the Duke
And safety of his daughter; having means,
If I escape, to raise a second Army,
And what is nearest to me, to enjoy
My friend Farneze.

I am still his care:

What shall I do? If I call loud, the foe
That hath begirt the wood, will hear the sound.
Shall I return by the same path? I cannot,
The darkness of the night conceals it from me:
Something I must resolve.

Let friendship rouse
Thy sleeping soul, Farneze: wilt thou suffer
Thy friend, a Prince, nay one that may set free
Thy captived Country, perish, when 'tis in
Thy power with this disguise to save his life?
Thou hast lived too long, therefore resolve to die;
Thou hast seen thy Country ruined, and thy Master
Compelled to shameful flight, the fields and woods
Straw'd ore with carcasses of thy fellow-soldiers:
The miseries thou art fallen in, and before
Thy eyes the horror of this place, and thousand
Calamities to come; and after all these
Can any hope remain? shake off delays,
Dost thou doubt yet? To save a Citizen,
The conquering Roman in a General
Esteemed the highest honour; can it be then
Inglorious to preserve a Prince? thy friend?
Uberti, Prince Uberti, use this means
Of thy escape; concealed in this thou may
Pass through the enemies guards: the time denies
Longer discourse; thou hast a noble end,
Live therefore mindful of thy dyng friend:

Farneze, stay thy hasty steps: Farneze!
Thy friend Uberti calls thee: 'tis in vain,
He's gone to death an Innocent, and makes life
The benefit he confers on me, my guilt.
Thou art too covetous of another safety,
Too prodigal, and careless of thine own:
'Tis a deceit in friendship to enjoin me
To put this garment on, and live, that he
May have alone the honour to die nobly.
O cruel piety, in our equal danger
To rob thy self of that thou give thy friend!
It must not be, I will restore his gift
And die before him. How? where shall I find him?
Thou art overcome in friendship; yield Uberti
To the extremity of the time, and live:
A heavy ransom, but it must be paid.
I will put on this habit: pitying Heaven
As it loves goodness, may protect my friend,
And give me means to satisfy the debt
I stand engaged for; if not, pale despair
I dare thy worst, thou can but bid me die,
And so much I'll force from an enemy.

I know him, he's a man of ransom.

True, but if he live 'tis to be paid to me:

I forced him to the woods.

But my art found him,
Nor will I brook a partner in the prey
My fortune gave me.

Render him, or expect the point of this.

Were it lightning, I would meet it
Rather then be outbrav'd.

I thus decide the difference.

My sword shall plead my title.

Ha! where learned you this discipline? my
Commanders
Opposed against one another? what blind fury
Brings forth this brawl? Alonzo and Pisano
At bloody difference! hold, or I tilt
At both as enemies. Now speak, how grew
This strange division?

Against all right;
By force Alonzo strives to reap the harvest
Sown by my labour.

Sir, this is my prisoner,
The purchase of my sword, which proud Pisano
That hath no interest in him, would take from me.

Did not the presence of the Duke forbid me,
I would say --

What?

Tis false.

Before my face!
Keep 'em asunder. And was this the cause
Of such a mortal quarrel? this the base
To raise your fury on? the ties of blood,
Of fellowship in arms, respect, obedience
To me your Prince and General, no more
Prevailing on you? this a price for which
You would betray our victory, or wound
Your reputation with mutinies?
Forgetful of your selves, allegiance, honour?
This is a course to throw us headlong down
From that proud height of empire, upon which
We were securely seared: shall division
Oreturn what concord built? If you desire
To bath your swords in blood, the enemy
Still flies before you: Would you have spoil? the Country
Lies open to you. O unheard of madness!
What greater mischief could Gonzaga wish us,
Then you pluck on our heads? no, my brave Leaders,
Let unity dwell in our tents, and discord
Be banished to our enemies

Take the prisoner, I do give up my title.

I desire your friendship, and will buy it:
He is yours.

No man's a faithful Judge in his own cause;
Let the Duke determine of him, we are friends sir.

Show it in emulation to oretake
The flying foe; this cursed wretch disposed of,
With our whole strength we'll follow.

Death at length
Will set a period to calamity.
I see it in this Tyrants frowns haste to me.

Thou machine of this mischief, look to feel
Whatever the wrath of an incensed Prince
Can pour upon thee: With thy blood I'll quench
(But drawn forth slowly) the invisible flames
Of discord, -- by thy charms first fetched from Hell,
Then forced into the breasts of my Commanders.
-- Bring forth the tortures.

Hear, victorious Duke,
The story of my miserable fortune,
Of which this Villain (by your sacred tongue
Condemned to die) was the immediate cause:
And if my humble suit have justice in it,
Vouchsafe to grant it.

Soldier be brief; our anger can brook no long delay.

I am the last
Of three sons, by one father got, and trained up
With his best care for service in your wars:
My father dyed under his fatal hand,
And two of my poor brothers. Now I hear
Or fancy wounded by my grief, deludes me,
Their pale and mangled ghosts, crying for vengeance
On perjury and murder.
Thus the case stood. --
My father (on whose face he he durst not look
In equal mart) by his fraud circumvented,
Became his Captive: we his sons lamenting
Our old sires hard condition, freely offered
Our utmost for his ransom. That refused,
The subtle Tyrant for his cruel ends,
(Conceiving that our piety might ensnare us)
Proposed my Fathers head to be redeemed,
If two of us would yield our selves his slaves.
We upon any terms resolved to save him,
Though with the loss of life which he gave to us;
With an undaunted constancy drew lots
(For each of us contented to be one)
Who should preserve our Father: I was exempted,
But to my more affliction; my brothers
Delivered up; the perjured Homicide
Laughing in scorn, and by his hoary locks
Pulling my wretched Father on his knees,
Said thus, Receive the Father you have ransomed;
And instantly struck off his head.

Most barbarous!

I never saw this man.

One murmur more,
I'll have thy tongue pulled out. Proceed.

Conceive, sir,
How thunder-struck we stood, being made spectators
Of such an unexpected tragedy:
Yet this was a beginning, not an end
To his intended cruelty; for pursuing
Such a revenge, as no Hircanian tigress
Robbed of her whelps durst aim at, in a moment
Treading upon my Fathers trunk, he cut off
My pious Brothers heads, and threw'em at me.
Oh what a spectacle was this! what mountain
Of sorrow overwhelmed me! My poor heartstrings
As tenter'd by his tyranny, cracked; my knees
Beating against one another, groans and tears
Blended together followed; not one passion
Calamity ever yet expressed, forgotten.
Now mighty sir, (bathing your feet with tears)
Your suppliants suit is, that he may have leave
With any cruelty revenge can fancy,
To sacrifice this Monster, to appease
My Fathers ghost and Brothers.

Thou hast obtained it; choose any torture; let the memory
Of what thy Father and thy Brothers suffered
Make thee ingenious in it, such a one
As Phalaris would wish to be called his.
Martino, guarded with your soldiers, see
The execution done; but bring his head
On forfeiture of your own, to us: Our presence
Long since was elsewhere looked for.

Soldier to work; take any way thou wills for thy revenge,
Provided that he die: his body's thine,
But I must have his head.

I have already
Concluded of the manner: O just heaven,
The instrument I wished for offered me!

Why art thou rapped thus?

In this soldiers hand
I see the murderers own sword, I know it,
Yes, this is it by which my Father and
My brothers were beheaded: Noble Captain
Command it to my hand. Stand forth and tremble;
This weapon of late drunk with innocent blood
Shall now carouse thine own. Pray, if thou can;
For though the world shall not redeem thy body,
I would not kill thy soul.

Can thou believe
There is a heaven, or hell, or soul? thou hast none.
In death to rob me of my fame, my honour,
With such a forged lye? tell me thou hangman,
Where did I ever see thy face? or when
Murdered thy sire or brothers? look on me
And make it good: thou dare not.

Yes I will
In one short whisper, and that told thou art dead.
I am Uberti; take thy sword, fight bravely,
We'll live or die together.

We are betrayed.

And have I leave once more, brave Prince, to ease
My head on thy true bosom?

I glory more
To be thy friend, then in the name of Prince
Or any higher title.

My preserver!

The life you gave to me, I but return;
And pardon, dearest friend, the bitter language
Necessity made me use.

O sir, I am
Outdone in all; but comforted, that none
But you can wear the laurel,

Here's no place
Or time to argue this; let us fly hence.

I follow.

A thousand Furies keep you company!
I was at the gate of -- but now I feel
My wounds not mortal; I was but astonished,
And coming to my self, I find I am
Reserved for the gallows: there's no looking on
Th'enraged Duke, excuses will not serve,
I must do something that may get my pardon:
If not, I know the worst, a halter ends all.


'TIs true, by proof I find it, humane reason
Views with such dim eyes what is good or ill,
That if the great Disposer of our being
Should offer to our choice all worldly blessings,
We knew not what to take. --
When I was young,
Ambition of Court-preferment fired me;
And as there were no happiness beyond it,
I laboured for it and got it; no man stood
In greater favour with his Prince, I had
Honours and offices, wealth flowed in to me,
And for my service both in peace and war
The general voice gave out I did deserve 'em.
But oh vain confidence in subordinate greatness!
When I was most secure, it was not in
The power of fortune to remove me from
The flat I firmly stood on: in a moment
My virtues were made crimes, and popular favour
(To new-rais'd men still fatal) bred suspicion
That I was dangerous: which no sooner entered
Gonzago's breast, but straight my ruin follow'd:
My offices were took from me, my state seized on;
And had I not prevented it by flight,
The jealousy of the Duke had been removed
With the forfeiture of my head.


Ha! is not poverty safe?
I thought proud war that aimed at kingdoms ruins,
The sack of palaces and cities, scorned
To look on a poor cottage.

What would you have?
The devil sleeps in my pocket, I have no cross
To drive him from it. Be you or thief, or soldier,
Or such a beggar as will not be denied,
My scrip, my tar-box, hook and coat will prove
But a thin purchase; if you turn my inside
Outwards, you'll find it true.
Searches his scrip.

Not any food?

Alas sir,
I am no glutton, but an under-shepherd,
The very picture of famine; judge by my cheeks else:
I have my pittance by ounces, and starve my self;
When I pay a pensioner, I have an ancient mouse,
A crum a meal.

No drop left?
Drunkard, hast thou swilled up all?

How? Drunkard, sir! I am a poor man, you mistake me sir:
Drunkard's a title for the rich, my betters;
A calling in repute, some sell their lands for it,
And roar wines better then money. Our poor beveridg
Of buttermilk or whey allaid with water,
Ne'er raise our thoughts so high. Drunk! I had never
The credit to be so yet.

Ascanio, look up dear youth: Ascanio, did thy sweetness
Command the greedy enemy to forbear
To prey upon it? and I thank my fortune
For suffering me to live, that in some part
I might return thy courtesies: And now
To heighten my afflictions, must I be
Enforced, no pitying Angel near to help us,
Heaven deaf to my complaints too, to behold thee
Die in my arms for hunger? no means left
To lengthen life a little? I will open
A vein, and pour my blood, not yet corrupted
With any sinful act, but pure as he is,
Into his famished mouth.

Young man forbear
Thy savage pity; I have better means
To call back flying life.

You may believe him,
They apply themselves to Ascanio.
It is his sucking-bottle, and confirms
An old man's twice a child; his nurses milk
Was ne'er so chargeable: should you put in too
For soap and candles, though he sell his flock for it,
The baby must have this dug: he swears 'tis ill
For my complexion, but wondrous comfortable
For an old man that would never die

Hope well sir,
A temperate heat begins to thaw his numness,
The blood too by degrees takes fresh possession
On his pale cheeks, his pulse beats high; stand off,
Give him more air, he stirs:

And have I got thee, thou bottle of immortality?

Where am I?
What cruel hand hath forced back wretched life?
Is rest in death denied me?

O sweet liquor!
Were here enough to make me drunk, I might
Write my self Gentleman, and never buy
A coat of the Heralds.

How now slave?

I was fainting,
A clownlike qualm seized on me, but I am
Recovered, thanks to your bottle, and begin
To feel new stirrings, gallant thoughts; one draught more
Will make me a perfect Signior:

A tough cudgel
Will take this gentle itch off: Home to my cottage,
See all things handsome.

Good sir, let me have
The bottle along to smell to: O rare perfume!

Speak once more, dear Ascanio! How he eyes you,
Then turns away his face! Look up sweet youth,
The object cannot hurt you; this good man
Next heaven is your preserver.

Would I had perished
Without relief, rather then live to break
His good old heart with sorrow. O my shame!
My shame, my never dying shame!

I have been
Acquainted with this voice, and know the face too:
'Tis she, 'tis too apparent; O my daugbter!
I mourned long for thy loss; but thus to find thee,
Is more to be lamented.

How? your daughter!

My only child: I murmured against heaven
Because I had no more; but now I find
This one too many. Is Alonzo glutted
With thy embraces?

At his name a shower
Of tears falls from her eyes: she faints again.
Grave sir, overrule your passion, and defer
The story of your fortune: On my life
She is a worthy one, her innocence
Might be abused, but mischiefs self wants power
To make her guilty. Show your self a Father
In her recovery; then as a Judge,
When she hath strength to speak in her own cause,
You may determine of her.

I much thank you
For your wise counsel: you direct me sir
As one indebted more to years, and I
As a pupil will obey you. Not far hence
I have a homely dwelling; if you please there
To make some short repose, your entertainment
Though course, shall relish of a gratitude,
And that's all I can pay you. Look up Girl,
Thou art in thy Fathers arms.

She's weak and faint still:
O spare your age! I am young and strong, and this way
To serve her is a pleasure, not a burden:
Pray you lead the way.

The Saints reward your goodness.


No hope of safety left?

We are descried.

I thought, that covered in this poor disguise
I might have passed unknown:

A diamond, though set in horn, is still a diamond,
And sparkles as in purest gold. We are follow'd:
Out of the troops that scoured the plains, I saw
Two gallant horsemen break forth, (who by their
Brave furniture and habiliments for the war
Seemed to command the rest) spurring hard towards us;
See with what winged speed they climb the hill
Like Falcons on the stretch to seize the prey;
Now they dismount, and on their hands and knees
Overcome the deep ascent that guards us from him.
Your beauty hath betrayed you; for it can
No more be night when bright Apollo shines
In our Meridian, then that be concealed.

It is my curse, not blessing; fatal to
My Country, Father, and my self: why did you
Forsake the City?

'Twas the Dukes command,
No time to argue that; we must descend:
If undiscovered your soft feet (unused
To such rough travail) can but carry you
Half a league hence, I know a cave which will.
Yield us protection.

I wish I could lend you
Part of my speed; for me, I can outstrip
Daphne or Atalanta.

Some good Angel
Defend us, and strike blind our hot pursuers.

She cannot be far off; how gloriously
She showed to us in the valley!

In my thought
Like to a blazing Comet:

Brighter far:
Her beams of beauty made the hill all fire;
From whence removed, 'tis covered with thick clouds.
But we lose time; I'll take that way.

I this.
'Tis a degree of comfort in my sorrow.
I have done one good work in reconciling
Maria, long hid in Ascanio's habit,
To grieved Octavio: what a sympathy
I found in their affections! she with tears
Making a free confession of her weakness
In yielding up her honour to Alonzo,
Upon his vows to marry her: Octavio
Prepared to credit her excuses, nay
T'extenuate her guilt; she the Delinquent,
And Judge, as 'twere, agreeing. But to me
The most forlorn of men, no beam of comfort
Daigns to appear; nor can I in my fancy
Fashion a means to get it: To my Country
I am lost for ever, and 'twere impudence
To think of a return; yet this I could
Endure with patience: But to be divorced
From all my joy on earth, the happiness
To look upon the excellence of nature,
That is perfection in herself, and needs not
Addition or epithet, Rare Matilda,
Would make a Saint blaspheme. Here Galeazo
In this obscure abode 'tis fit thou should
Consume thy youth, and grow old in lamenting
Thy star crossed fortune, in this shepherds habit;
This hook thy best defenc, since thou could use
(When thou did fight in such a Princess cause)
Thy sword no better.

Are you men, or monsters?
Whither will you drag me? can the open ear
Of heaven be deaf, when an unspotted Maid
Cries out for succour!

'Tis in vain; cast lots who shall enjoy her first.

Flames rage within me,
And such a spring of Nectar near to quench 'em!
My appetite shall be cloyed first: here I stand
Thy friend, or enemy; let me have precedence,
I write a friends name in my heart; deny it,
As an enemy I defy thee.

Friend or foe
In this alike I value, I disdain
To yield priority; draw thy sword.

To sheath it in thy ambitious heart.

O curb this fury,
And hear a wretched Maid first speak!

I am marble:

Where shall I seek out words, or how restrain
My Enemies rage, or Lovers? oh the latter
Is far more odious: did not your lust
Provoke you, for that is its proper name,
My chastity were safe;
And yet I tremble more
To think what dire effects lust may bring forth,
Then what as enemies you can inflict,
And less I fear it. Be friends to your selves,
And enemies to me: Better I fall
A sacrifice to your atonement, then
Or one, or both should perish. I am the cause
Of your division; remove it, Lords,
And concord will spring up: poison this face
That hath bewitched you; this grove cannot want
Aspicks or Toads, creatures though justly called
For their deformity the scorn of nature,
More happy then my self with this false beauty
(The seed and fruit of mischief) you admire so.
I thus embrace your knees, and yours a suppliant,
If Tigers did not nurse you, or you suck
The milk of a fierce Lioness, show compassion
Unto your selves in being reconciled,
And pity to poor me, my honour safe,
In taking loathed life from me.

What shall we do?
Or end our difference in killing her,
Or fight it out?

To the last gasp. I feel
The moist tears on my cheeks, and blush to find
A Virgins plaints can move so.

To prevent
Her flight while we contend, let's bind her fast
To this Cipress-tree.

Agreed.

It does presage my funeral rites.

I shall turn Atheist,
If heaven see and suffer this: why did I
Abandon my good sword? with unarmed hands
I cannot rescue her. Some Angel pluck me
From the apostasy I am falling to,
And by a miracle lend me a weapon
To underprop falling honour.

She is fast, resume your arms.

Honour, revenge, the Maid too
Lie at the stake.

Which thus I draw --

All's mine,
But bought with some blood of mine own: Pisano,
Thou were a noble Enemy; wear that laurel
In death to comfort thee; for the reward,
'Tis mine now without Rival.

Thou art deceived;
Men will grow up like to the Dragons teeth
From Cadmus helm sown in the field of Mars,
To guard pure Chastity from lust and rape.
Libidinous monster, Satire, Fawn, or what
Does better speak thee slave to appetite
And sensual baseness; if thy profane hand
But touch this virgin-temple, thou art dead.

I see the aid of Heaven, though slow, is sure.

A rustic swain dare to retard my pleasure?

No swain, Alonzo, but her knight and servant
To whom the world should owe and pay obedience;
One that thou hast encountered, and shrunk under
His arm, that spared thy life in the late battle
At th'intercession of the Princess page; look on me better.

'Tis my virtuous Lover,
Under his guard 'twere sin to doubt my safety.

I know thee, and with courage will redeem
What fortune then took from me.

Rather keep
Thy Compeer company in death -- lie by him
A prey for Crows and Vultures; these fair arms
Unfit for bonds, should have been chains to make
A Bridegroom happy, though a Prince, and proud
Of such captivity: whatsoe'r you are,
I glory in the service I have done you;
But I entreat you pay your vows and prayers
For preservation of your life and honour,
To the most virtuous Princess, chaste Matilda:
I am her creature, and what good I do
You truly may call hers; what's ill, mine own.

You never did do ill, my virtuous servant,
Nor is it in the power of poor Matilda
To cancel such an obligation as
With humble willingness she must subscribe to.

The Prencess? ha!

Give me a fitter name,
Your manumissed Bondwoman, but even now
In the possession of lust, from which
Your more then brave heroic valor bought me;
And can I then for freedom unexpected
But kneel to you my Patron?

Kneel to me!
For heavens sake rise; I kiss the ground you tread on,
My eyes fixed on the earth; for I confess
I am a thing not worthy to look on you,
Till you have signed my pardon.

Do you interpret
The much good you have done me, an offence?

The not performing your injunctions to me,
Is more then capital: Your allowance of
My love and service to you, with admission
To each place you made paradise with your presence,
Should have enabled me to bring home Conquest.
Then, as a sacrifice to offer it
At the altar of your favour, had my love
Answered your bounty or my hopes, an Army
Had been as dust before me; whereas I
Like a coward turned my back, and durst not stand
The sury of the Enemy.

Had you done nothing
In the battle, this last act deserves more
Then I, the Duke my father joining with me,
Can ever recompense. But take your pleasure,
Suppose you have offended in not grasping
Your boundless hopes; I thus seal on your lips
A full remission.

Let mine touch your foot, your hand's too high a favour.

Will you force me to ravish a kiss from you?

I am entranced.

So much Desert, and Bashfulness, should not march
In the same file: Take comfort, when you have brought me
To some place of security, you shall find
You have a seat here, a heart that hath
Already studied, and vowed to be thankful.

Heaven make me so! oh I am overwhelmed
With an excess of joy! Be not too prodigal,
Divinest Lady, of your grace and bounties
At once, if you are pleased I shall enjoy 'em,
Not taste 'em and expire.

I'll be more sparing:


What noise of clashing swords, like armour fashioned
Upon an anvil, pierced mine ears? the echo
Redoubling the loud sound through all the valleys,
This way the wind assures me that it came.

Then with your pardon I'll take this.

Why sir?

Because, sir, I will trust my heels before
All winds that blow in the sky: We are wiser far
Then our Grandsires were, and in this I'll prove it;
They said, Haste to the beginning of a Feast,
(There I am with 'em) but to the end of a Fray,
That is apocryphal, 'tis more canonical
Not to come there at all; after a strom
There are still some drops behind.

Pure fear hath made the Fool a Philosopher.

See Maria, see!
I did not err; here lie two brave men weltering
In their own gore.

A pitiful object.

I am in a swoon to look on it.

They are stiff already.

But are you sure they are dead?

Too sure, I fear.

But are they stark dead?

Leave prating.

Then I am valiant, and dare come nearer to 'em,
This fellow without a sword shall be my Patient.

Whate'r they are, humanity commands us
To do our best endeavour: Run Maria
To the neighbour Spring for water; you will find there
A wooden dish, the beggars plate, to bring it.
Why dost not, dull drone, bend his body, and feel
If any life remain?

By your leave he shall die first, and then
I'll be his Surgeon.

Tear open his doublet,
And prove if his wounds be mortal,

Fear not me sir;
Here's large wound, how it is swoln and impostum'd!
This must be cunningly drawn out; should it break,
'Twould strangle him: what a deal of foul matter's here!
This hath been long a gathering: Here's a gash too
On the reme of his belly, it may have matter in it.
He was a choleric man sure: what comes from him
Is yellow as gold: How troubled with the Stone too!
I'll cut you for this.

Oh, oh!

He roars before I touch him.

Robbed of my life?

No sir, nor of your money
Nor jewel, I keep 'em for you; if I had been
A perfect Mountebank, he had not lived
To call for his fees again.

Give me leave, there's hope of his recovery.

I had rather bury him quick
Then part with my purchase; let his ghost walk, I care not.

Well done Maria, lend thy helping hand;
He hath a deep wound in his head, wash off
The clotted blood: He comes to himself.

My lust!
The fruit that grows upon the tree of lust!
With horror now I taste it.

Do you not know him?

Too soon, Alonzo! oh me! though disloyal,
Still dear to thy Maria.

So they know not
My Patient, all's cock-sure: I do not like
The Romanish restitution.

Rise and leave him, applaud heavens justice.

'Twill become me better
T'implore its saving mercy.

Hast thou no gall? no feeling of thy wrongs?

Turtles have none; nor can there be such poison in her breast
That truly loves, and lawfully.

True, if that love
Be placed on a worthy subject. What he is,
In thy disgrace is published; Heaven hath marked him
For punishment, and 'twere rebellious madness
In thee t'attempt to alter it: Revenge,
A sovereign balm for injuries, is more proper
To thy robbed honour. Join with me, and thou
Shalt be thy self the Goddess of revenge,
This wretch the vassal of thy wrath: I'll make him
While yet he lives, partake those torments which
For perjured Lovers are prepared in hell,
Before his cursed ghost enter it. This oil
Extracted and sublimed from all the simples
The earth when swoln with venom ever brought forth,
Poured in his wounds, shall force such anguish as
The Furies whips but imitate; and when
Extremity of pain shall hasten death,
Here is another that shall keep in life,
And make him feel a perpetuity of lingering tortures.

Knock'em both on the head, I say,
And it be but for their skins; they are embroidered,
And will sell well in the market:

Ill-look'd Devil,
Tie up thy bloody tongue. O sir! I was slow
In beating down those propositions which
You urge for my revenge; my reasons being
So many, and so forcible, that make
Against yours, that until I had collected
My scattered powers, I wavered in my choice
Which I should first deliver. Fate hath brought
My Enemy (I can faintly call him so)
Prostrate before my feet: shall I abuse
The bounty of my fate, by trampling on him?
He alone ruined me, nor can any hand
But his rebuild my late demolished honour.
If you deny me means of reparation
To satisfy your spleen, you are more cruel
Then ever yet Alonzo was; you stamp
The name of Strumpet on my forehead, which
Heavens mercy would take off; you fan the fire
Even ready to go out; forgetting that
'Tis truly noble, having power to punish,
Nay King-like to forbear it. I would purchase
My husband by such benefits, as should make him
Confess himfelf my equal, and disclaim superiority.

My blessing on thee!
What I urged, was a trial; and my grant
To thy desires shall now appear, if art
Or long experience can do him service,
Nor shall my charity to this be wanting,
Howe'r unknown: Help me Maria; You sir,
Do your best to raise him. -- So.

He's wondrous heavy;
But the Porter's paid, there's the comfort.

'Tis but a trance, and 'twill forsake both.

If he live, I fear not
He will redeem all, and in thankfulness
Confirm he owes you for a second life,
And pays the debt in making me his wife.


MAntua is ours; place a strong garrison in it
To keep it so; and as a due reward
To your brave service, be our Governor in it.

I humbly thank your Excellence.

Gonzaga is yet out of our gripe; but his strong Fort
St. Leo, which he holds impregnable
By the aids of art, as nature, shall not long
Retard our absolute conquest. The escape
Of fair Matilda, my supposed Mistress,
(For whole desired possession 'twas given out
I made this war) I value not; alas
Cupid's too feeble-ey'd to hit my heart,
Or could he see, his arrows are too blunt
To pierce it; his imagined torch is quenched
With a more glorious fire of my ambition
T'enlarge my Empire: soft and silken amours,
With Carpet-Courtship, which weak Princes stile
The happy issue of a flourishing peace,
My toughness scorns: Were there an abstract made
Of all the eminent and canonised Beauties
By truth recorded, or by Poets feigned,
I could unmoved behold it, as a Picture
Commend the workmanship, and think no more on it;
I have more noble ends. Have you not heard yet
Of Alonzo, or Pisano?

My Lord, of neither.

Two turbulent spirits unfit for discipline,
Much less command in war; if they were lost,
I shall not pine with mourning.

Bring 'em forward;
This will make my peace, though I had killed his father,
Besides the reward that follows.

Ha! Martino?
Where is Farneze's head? dost thou stare? and where
The soldier that desired the torture of him?

An't please your Excellence --

It doth not please us; are our commands obeyed?

Farneze's head, sir,
Is a thing not worth your thought, the soldiers less sir:
I have brought your Highness such a head, a head
So well set on too, a fine head.

Take that
For thy impertinence: what head, ye Rascal?

My Lord, if they that bring such presents to you
Are thus rewarded, there are few will strive
To be near your Graces pleasures: but I know
You will repent your choler. Here's the head,
And now I draw the curtain, it hath a face too,
And such a face.

Ha!

View her all over, my Lord;
My company on it, she's sound of wind and limb,
And will do her labour tightly, a Bona Roba:
And for her face, as I said, there are five hundred
City-dub'd Madams in the Dukedom, that would part with
Their Jointures to have such another: Hold up your head, Maid.

Of what age is the day?

Sir, since Sun-rising about two hours:

Thou lie: the Sun of Beauty
In modest blushes on her cheeks, but now
Appeared to me, and in her tears breaks forth
As through a shower in April, every drop
An orient pearl, which as it falls, congealed,
Were Ear-rings for the Catholic King,
Worn on his birth-day.

Here's a sudden change.

Incensed Cupid, whom even now I scorned,
Hath took his stand, and by reflection shines
(As if he had two bodies, or indeed
A brother-twin, whom sight cannot distinguish)
In her fair eyes; see how they head their arrows
With her bright beams, now frown, as if my heart
Rebellious to their edicts, were unworthy,
Should I rip up my bosom, to receive
A wound from such divine artillery.

I am made for ever:

We are lost, dear servant.

Vertue's but a word; Fortune rules all.

We are her Tennis-balls.

Allow her fair, her symetrie and features
So well proportioned, as the heavenly object
With admiration would strike Ovid dumb,
Nay force him to forget his faculty
In verse, and celebrate her praise in prose:
What's this to me? I that have passed my youth
Unscorch'd with wanton fires, my sole delight
In glittering arms, my conquering sword my mistress;
Neighing of barbed horfe, the cries and groans
Of vanquished foes suing for life, my music:
And shall I in the Autumn of my age,
Now when I wear the livery of time
Upon my head and beard, suffer my self
To be transformed, and like a puling Lover
With arms thus folded up, echo Ay me's!
And write my self a Bondsman to my Vassal?
It must not, nay it shall not be: Remove
The object, and the effect dies. Nearer, Martino:

I shall have a Regiment, Colonel Martino,
I cannot go less.

What thing is this thou hast brought me?

What thing? Heaven bless me, are you a Florentine?
Nay, the Great Duke of Florentines, and having had her
So long in your power, do you now ask what she is?
Take her aside and learn; I have brought you that
I look to be dearly paid for.

I am a Soldier; and use of women will, Martino, rob
My nerves of strength.

All armour, and no smock?
Abominable! A little of the one with the other
Is excellent: I ne'er knew General yet,
Nor Prince that did deserve to be a Worthy,
But he desired to have his sweat washed off
By a juicie Bedfellow.

But say she be unwilling to do that office?

Wrestle with her, I will wager
Ten to one on your Graces side.

Slave, hast thou brought me
Temptation in a Beauty not to be
With prayers resisted; and in place of council
To master my affections, and to guard
My honour now besieged by lust, with the arms
Of sober temperance, mark me out a way
To be a ravisher? Would thou had shown me
Some monster, though in a more ugly form
Then Nile or Africa ever bred. The Basilisk
(Whose envious eye yet never brook'd a neighbour)
Kills but the body; Her more potent eye
Buries alive mine honour: shall I yield thus?
And all brave thoughts of victory and triumphs,
The spoils of Nations, the loud applauses
Of happy subjects made so by my conquests;
And what's the crown of all, a glorious name
Insculp'd on Pyramids to posterity,
Be drenched in Lethe, and no object take me
But a weak Woman, rich in colours only,
Too delicate a touch, and some rare features
Which age or sudden sickness will take from her,
And where's then the reward of all my service?
Love-soothing passions, nay idolatry
I must pay to her. Hence, and with thee take
This second, but more dangerous Pandora,
Whose fatal box, if opened, will pour on me
All mischiefs that mankind is subject to.
To the deserts with this Circe, this Calipso,
This fair Enchantress; let her spells and charms
Work upon beasts and thee, then whom wise nature
Ne'er made a viler creature.

Happy exile!

Some spark of hope remains yet.

Come, you are mine now;
I will remove her where your Highness shall not
Or see or hear more of her: what a sum
Will she yield for the Turks Serraglio?

Stay, I feel
A sudden alteration.

Here are fine whimsies.

Why should I part with her? can any foulness
Inhabit such a clean and gorgeous palace?
The fish, the fowl, the beasts may safer leave
The elements they were nourished in, and live,
Then I endure her absence; yet her presence
Is a torment to me: Why do I call it so?
My sire enjoyed a woman, I had not been else;
He was a complete Prince, and shall I blush
To follow his example? Oh but my choice,
Though she gave suffrage to it, is beneath me:
But even now in my proud thoughts I scorned
A Princess, fair Matilda; and is't decreed
For punishment, I straight must dote on one
What, or from whence I know not? Grant she be
Obscure, without a Coat or family,
Those I can give; and yet if she were noble,
My fondness were more pardonable. Martino,
Dost thou know thy prisoner?

Do I know my self?
I kept that for the Lenvoy; 'tis the daughter
Of your enemy, Duke Gonzaga.

Fair Matilda! I now call to my memory her picture,
And find this is the substance; but her Painter
Did her much wrong, I see it:

I am sure
I tugged hard for her, here are wounds can witness,
Before I could call her mine.

No matter how:
Make thine own ransom, I will pay it for her.

I knew it would come at last.

We are lost again.

Variety of afflictions!

That his knee that never yet bowed to mortality,
Kisses the earth, happy to bear your weight,
I know begets your wonder. Hear the reason,
And cast it off, Your beauty does command it:
Till now I never saw you; same hath been
Too sparing in report of your perfections,
Which now with admiration I gaze on.
Be not afraid, fair Virgin; had you been
Employed to mediate your Fathers cause,
My drum had been unbraced, my trumpet hung up,
Nor had the terror of the war ere frighted
His peaceful confines; your demands had been
As soon as spoke, agreed to. But you'll answer,
And may with reason; Words make no satisfaction
For what's in fact committed. Yet take comfort,
Something my pious love commands me do,
Which may call down your pardon.

This expression
Of reverence to your person, better suits
Takes him up, and kneels.
With my low fortune. That you daign to love me,
My weakness would persuade me to believe
(Though conscious of mine own unworthiness)
You being as the liberal eye of heaven
Which may shine where it pleases: Let your beams
Of favour warm and comfort me, not consume me;
For should your love grow to excess, I dare not
Deliver what I fear.

Dry your fair eyes;
I apprehend your doubts, and could be angry
If humble love could warrant it, you should
Nourish such base thoughts of me: Heaven bear witness,
And if I break my vow, dart thunder at me,
You are and shall be in my tent as free
From fear of violence, as a cloistered Nun
Kneeling before the Altar. What I purpose
Is yet an Embrion; but grown into form,
I'll give you power to be the sweet disposer
Of blessings unexpected; that your Father,
Your Country, people, children yet unborn too,
In holy hymns on Festivals shall sing
The triumph of your beauty. On your hand
Once more I swear it: O imperious Love!
Look down, and as I truly do repent,
Prosper the good ends of thy Penitent.

You must not be too sudden, my Maria,
In being known: I am in this Friars habit
As yet concealed; though his recovery
Be almost certain, I must work him to
Repentance by degrees. When I would have you
Appear in your true shape of sorrow to
Move his compassion, I will stamp thus, then
You know to act your part.

I shall be careful.

If I can cure the ulcers of his mind,
As I despair not of his bodies wounds,
Felicity crowns my labour. Gothrio!

Here sir.

Desire my Patients to leave their chamber,
And take fresh air here: how have they slept?

Very well sir,
I would we were so rid of 'em.

Why?

I fear one hath the art of memory, and will
Remember his gold and jewels: could you not minister
A potion of forgetfulness? what would Gallants
That are in debt, give me for such a receipt
To pour in their Creditors drink?

You shall restore all,
Believ't you shall: will you please to walk?

Will you please to put off
Your holy habit, and spiced conscience? One
I think infects the other.

I have observed
Compunction in Alonzo: he speaks little,
But full of retired thoughts: The other is
Jocund and merry, no doubt, because he hath
The less account to make here.

Reverend sir,
I come to wait your pleasure; but my friend
(Your creature I should say, being so my self)
Willing to take farther repose, entreats
Your patience a few minutes.

At his pleasure; pray you sit down, you are faint still.

Growing to strength,
I thank your goodness: but my mind is troubled,
Very much troubled, sir; and I desire,
Your pious habit giving me assurance (please
Of your skill and power that way, that you would)
To be my my Minds physician.

Sir, to that
My order binds me, if you please to unload
The burden of your conscience, I will minister
Such heavenly cordials as I can, and set you
In a path that leads to comfort.

I will open
My bosoms secrets to you; that I am
A man of blood, being brought up in the wars,
And cruel executions, my profession
Admits not to be questioned: but in that
Being a subject, and bound to obey
Whate'r my Prince commanded, I have left
Some shadow of excuse: with other crimes
As pride, lust, gluttony, it must be told
I am besmeared all over.

On repentance mercy will wash it off.

O sir, I grant
These sins are deadly ones; yet their frequency
With wicked men, make them less dreadful to us.
But I am conscious of one crime, with which
All ills I have committed from my youth
Put in the scale weigh nothing: such a crime,
So odious to heaven and man, and to
My seared up conscience so full of horror,
As penance cannot expiate.

Despair not,
'Tis impious in man to prescribe limits
To the divine compassion; out with it.

Hear then, good man; and when that I have given you
The character of it, and confessed my self
The wretch that acted it, you must repent
The charity you have extended towards me.
Not long before these wars began, I had
Acquaintance ('tis not fit I stile it Friendship,
That being a virtue, and not to be blended
With vicious breach of faith) with the Lord Octavio,
The Minion of his Prince and Court, set off
With all the pomp and circumstance of greatness:
To this then happy man I offered service,
And with infinuation wrought my self
Into his knowledge, grew familiar with him,
Ever a welcome guest. This noble Gentleman
Was blessed with one fair daughter, (so he thought
And boldly might believe so, for she was
In all things excellent without a Rival)
Till I (her Fathers mass of wealth before
My greedy eyes, but hoodwinked to mine honour)
With far more subtle arts then perjured Paris
Ere practised on poor credulous Oenone,
Besieged her Virgin-fort, in a word took it,
No vows or imprecation forgotten
With speed to marry her.

Perhaps she gave you just cause to break those vows.

She cause! alas
Her innocence knew no guilt, but too much favour
To me unworthy of it: 'twas my baseness,
My foul ingratitude, what shall I say more?
The good Octavio no sooner fell
In the displeasure of his Prince, his state
Confiscated, and he forced to leave the Court,
And she exposed to want; but all my oaths
And protestation of service to her,
Like seeming flames raised by enchantment, vanished;
This, this sits heavy here.

He speaks as if
He were acquainted with my plot: You have reason
To feel compunction, for 'twas most inhumane
So to betray a Maid.

Most barbarous.

But does your sorrow for the fact beget
An aptness in you to make satisfaction
For the wrong you did her?

Gracious heaven! an aptness!
It is my only study; since I tasted
Of your compassion, these eyes ne'er were closed,
But fearful dreams cut off my little sleep,
And being awake in my imagination,
Her apparition haunted me.

'Twas mere fancy:

'Twas more, grave sir, nay 'tis,
Now it appears.

Where?

Do you not see there the gliding shadow
Of a fair Virgin? that is she, and wears
The very garments that adorned her when
She yielded to my Crocodile tears: A cloud
Of fears and diffidence then so chased away
Her purer white and red, as it foretold
That I should be disloyal. Blessed shadow!
For 'twere a sin, far, far exceeding all
I have committed, to hope only that
Thou art a substance: look on my true sorrow,
Nay, souls contrition; hear again those vows
My perjury cancelled, stamped in brass, and never
To be worn out.

I can endure no more;
Action, not oaths must make me reparation:
I am Maria.

Can this be?

It is, and I Octavio.

Wonder on wonder!
How shall I look on you? or with what forehead
Desire your pardon?

You truly shall deserve it
In being constant:

If you fall not off,
But look on her in poverty with those eyes
As when she was my heir in expectation
You thought her beautiful.

She's in herself both Indies to me.

Stay, she shall not come
A beggar to you, my sweet young Mistress! no,
She shall not want a dower: here's white and red
Will ask a jointure; but how you should make her
Being a Captain, would beget some doubt,
If you should deal with a Lawyer.

I have seen this purse:

How the worl'ds given, I dare not say to lying,
Because you are a Soldier; you may say as well
This gold is marked too: you being to receive it,
Should ne'er ask how I got it. I'll run for a Priest
To dispatch the matter; you shall not want a Ring,
I have one for the purpose. Now sir, I think I am honest.

This Ring was Pisano's.

I'll dissolve this riddle at better leisure:
The wound given to my daughter, which in your honour
You are bound to cure, exacts our present care.

I am all yours sir.

Thou hast told too much to give assurance that
Her honour was too far engaged to be
By humane help redeemed: If thou had given
Thy sad narration this full period,
She's dead; I had been happy.

Sir, these tears
Do well become a father; and my eyes
Would keep you company as a forlorn Lover,
But that the burning fire of my revenge
Dries up those drops of sorrow. We once more,
Our broken forces rallied up, and with
Full numbers strengthened, stand prepared to endure
A second trial; nor let it dismay us
That we are once again to affront the fury
Of a victorious Army; their abuse
Of Conquest hath disarmed themselves, and called down
The powers above to aid us. I have read
Some piece of story, yet ne'er found but that
The General that gave way to cruelty,
The profanation of things sacred, rapes
Of virgins, butchery of infants, and
The massacre in cold blood of reverend age,
Against the discipline and law of Arms,
Did feel the hand of heaven lie heavy on him,
When most secure: We have had a late example,
And let us not despair but that in Lorenzo
It will be seconded.

You argue well,
And 'twere a sin in me to contradict you:
Yet we must not neglect the means that's lent us
To be the Ministers of Justice.

No, sir: One day given to refresh our wearied Troops
Tired with a tedious march, we'll be no longer
Cooped up, but charge the Enemy in his trenches,
And force him to a battle:

Ha! how's this?
In such a general time of mourning, shouts
And acclamations of joy?
Long live the Princess! long live Matilda! Within they cry

Matilda! the Princess name,
Matilda, oft re-eccho'd.

What speaks thy haste?

More joy and happiness
Then weak words can deliver, or strong faith
Almost give credit to: The Princess lives,
I saw her, kissed her hand.

By whom delivered?

That is not to be stalled by my report,
This only must be told: As I rode forth
With some choice troops to make discovery
Where the Enemy lay, and how intrench'd; a Leader
Of th'adverse party, but unarmed, and in
His hand an Olive-branch, encountered me;
He showed the great Dukes seal that gave him power
To parley with me: his desires were, that
Assurance for his safety might be granted
To his royal Master, who came as a friend
(And not as an enemy) to offer to you
Conditions of peace. I yielded to it.
This being returned, the Dukes Pretorum opened;
When suddenly in a triumphant Chariot
Drawn by such soldiers of his own as were
For insolence after victory condemned
Unto this slavish office, the fair Princess
Appeared, a wreath of Laurel on her head,
Her robes majestic, their richness far
Above all value, as the present age
Contended that a woman's pomp should dim
The glittering triumphs of the Roman Caesars.
I am cut off; no Canons throat now thunders,
Nor Fife nor Drum beat up a charge; choice Musique
Ushers the parent of security, long absent Peace.

I know not what to think on it.

May it poise the expectation!

Thus to meet you
Great Duke of Tuscany, throws amazement on me:
But to behold my daughter, long since mourned for,
And lost even to my hopes, thus honoured by you,
With an excess of comfort overwhelms me:
And yet I cannot truly call my self
Happy in this solemnity, till your Highness
Vouchsafe to make me understand the motives
That in this peaceful way hath brought you to us.

I must crave licence first; for know, Gonzaga,
I am subject to another will, and can
Nor speak nor do without permission from her:
My curled forehead, of late terrible
To those that did acknowledge me their Lord,
Is now as smooth as rivers when no wind stirs:
My frowns or smiles, that killed or saved, have lost
Their potent awe, and sweetness: I am transformed
(But do not scorn the Metamorphosis)
From that fierce thing men held me; I am captived,
And by the unresistable force of beauty
Led hither as a prisoner. Is't your pleasure that
I shall deliver those injunctions which
Your absolute command imposed upon me,
Or daign your self to speak 'em?

Sir, I am
Your property, you may use me as you please;
But what is in your power and breast to do,
No Orator can dilate so well.

I obey you. That I came hither as an enemy
With hostile arms, to the utter ruin of
Your Country, what I have done, makes apparent:
That fortune seconded my will, the late
Defeature will make good: That I resolved
To force the sceptre from your hand, and make
Your Dukedom tributary, my surprise
Of Mantua your Metropolis can well witness:
And that I cannot fear the change of fate,
My Army fleshed in blood, spoil, glory, conquest
Stand ready to maintain: Yet I must tell you
By whom I am subdued, and what's the ransom
I am commanded to lay down.

My Lord, you humble your self too much, 'tis fitter
You should propose, and we consent.

Forbear,
The articles are here subscribed and signed
By my obedient hand: All prisoners
Without a ransom set at liberty,
Mantua to be delivered up; the Rampires
Ruined in the assault, to be repaired;
The loss the husbandman received, his crop
Burnt up by wanton licence of the soldier
To be made good; with whatsoever else
You could impose on me, if you had been
The Conqueror, I your Captive.

Such a change wants an example: I must owe this favour
To the clemency of the old Heroic valour,
That spared when it had power to kill; a virtue
Buried long since, but raised out of the grave
By you to grace this latter age.

Mistake not
The cause that did produce this good effect,
If as such you receive it: 'twas her beauty
Wrought first on my rough nature; but the vertnes
Of her fair soul, dilated in her converse,
That did confirm it.

Mighty sir, no more:
You honour her too much, that is not worthy
To be four servant.

I have done, and now
Would gladly understand that you allow of
The art cles propounded.

Do not wrong
Your benefits with such a doubt; they are
So great and high, and with such reverence
To be received, that if I should profess
I hold my Dukedom from you as your vassal,
Or offered up my daughter as you please
To be disposed of, in the point of honour
And a becoming gratitude, 'twould not cancel
The bond I stand engaged for: but accept
Of that which I can pay, my all is yours sir,
Nor is there any here (though I must grant
Some have deserved much from me) for so far
I dare presume, but will surrender up
Their interest to that your Highness shall
Daign to pretend a title.

I subscribe not to this condition

The services
This Prince hath done your Grace in your most danger,
Are not to be so slighted.

'Tis far from me
To urge my merits, yet I must maintain
Howe'r my power is less, my love is more;
Nor will the gracious Princess scorn to acknowledge
I have been her humble servant.

Smooth your brows,
I'll not encroach upon your right, for that were
Once more to force affection (a crime
With which should I the second time be tainted,
I did deserve no favour) neither will I
Make use of what is offered by the Duke,
Howe'r I thank his goodness: I'll lay by
My power; and though I should not brook a Rival,
(What we are, well considered) I'll descend
To be a third Competitor; he that can
With love and service best deserve the garland,
With your consent let him wear it; I despair not
The trial of my fortune.

Bravely offered, and like your self, great Prince.

I must profess
I am so taken with it, that I know not
Which way to express my service.

Did I not build
Upon the Princess grace, I could sit down,
And hold it no dishonour.

How I feel
My soul divided! all have deserved so well,
I know not where to fix my choice.

You have
Time to consider: will you please to take
Possession of the Fort? then having tasted
The fruits of peace, you may at leisure prove
Whose plea will ptosper in the Court of Love.


YOu need not doubt sir, were not peace proclaimed
And celebrated with a general joy,
The high displeasure of the Mantuan Duke,
Raised on just grounds, not jealous suppositions.
The saving of our lives (which next to heaven
To you alone is proper) would force mercy
For an offence though capital.

When the Conqueror
Uses Entreaties, they are armed Commands
The vanquished must not check at.

My piety pay the forfeit,
If danger come but near you. I have heard
My gracious Mistress often mention you,
(When I served her as a Page) and feelingly
Relate how much the Duke her sire repented
His hasty doom of banishment, in his rage
Pronounced against you.

In a private difference,
I grant that Innocence is a wall of brass,
And scorns the hottest battery: but when
The cause depends between the Prince and Subject,
'Tis an unequal competition; Justice
Must lay her balance by, and use her sword
For his ends that protects it. I was banished,
And till revoked from exile, to tread on
My Sovereigns territories with forbidden feet,
The severe letter of the Law calls death,
Which I am subject to in coming so near
His Court and person. But my only Child
Being provided for, her honour salved too,
I thank your noble change, I shall endure
Whate'r can fall with patience.

You have used that medicine too long; prepare your self
For honour in your age, and rest secure of't.

Of what is your wisdom musing?

I am gazing on
This gorgeous House, our Cote's a dishclout to it;
It has no sign, what do you call it?

The Court; I have lived in it a Page.

Page! very pretty:
May I not be a Page? I am old enough,
Well timbered too, and I have a beard to carry it:
Pray you let me be your Page, I can swear already
Upon your pantable.

What?

That I'll be true unto your smock.

How, Rascal?

Hence, and pimp
To your Rams and News; such foul pollution is
To be whipped from Court: I have now no more use of you,
Return to your trough.

Must I feed on husks, before I have plaid the prodigal?

No, I'll reward
Your service; live in your own element
Like an honest man; all that is mine in the cottage
I freely give you.

Your Bottles too, that I carry for your own tooth?

Full as they are.

And gold, that will replenish 'em.

I am made for ever, this was done in the nick.

Why in the nick?

O sir, 'twas well for me that you did reward my service
Before you entered the Court; for 'tis reported
There is a drink of Forgetfulness, which once tasted,
Few masters think of their servants, who grown old,
Are turned off like lame hounds and hunting-horses,
To starve on the Commons.

Bitter Knave! there's craft in the clouted shoo. Captain!


I am glad to kiss
Your valiant hand, and yours: but pray you take notice
My title's changed, I am a Colonel.

A Colonel! where's your Regiment?

Not raised yet;
All the old ones are cashiered, and we are now
To have a new Militia. All is peace here,
Yet I hold my title still, as many do
That never saw an Enemy.

You are pleasant,
And it becomes you. Is the Duke stirring?

Long since,
Four hours at least, but yet not ready.

How?

Even so; you make a wonder of't, but leave it:
Alas, he is not now (sir) in the Camp,
To be up and armed upon the least alarm;
There's something else to be thought on.
Here he comes, with his Officers, new rigged.


A looking-glass!
Upon my head he saw not his own face
These seven years past, but by reflection
From a bright armour.

Be silent, and observe.

So, have you done yet?
Is your building perfect?

If your Highness please, here is a water.

To what use? my Barber
Hath washed my face already.

But this water
Hath a strange virtue in it, beyond his art;
It is a sacred Relic, part of that
Most powerful Juice, which with Medea made
Old AEson young.

A fable; but suppose
I should give credit to it, will it work
The same effect on me?

I'll undertake
This will restore the honoured hair that grows
Upon your Highness head and chin, a little
Inclining unto gray.

Inclining! Doctor:

Pardon me, mighty sir, I went too far,
Not gray at all; I dare not flatter you,
'Tis something changed, but this applied will help it
To the first amber-colour, every hair
As fresh as when, your manhood in the prime,
Your Grace arrived at thirty.

Very well.

Then here's a precious oil (to which the maker
Hath not yet given a name) will soon fill up
These dimples in your face and front. I grant
They are terrible to your enemies, and set off
Your frowns with majesty: but you may please
To know (as sure you do) a smooth aspect,
Softness and sweetness, in the Court of Love,
Though dumb, are the prevailing Orators.

Will he new create me?

If you daign to taste too
Of this Confection.

I am in health, and need no physic.

Physic sir! an Empress
(If that an Empress lungs, sir, may be tainted
With putrefaction) would taste of it
That night on which she were to print a kiss
Upon the lips of her long absent Lord,
Returning home with conquest.

It is predominant
Over a stinking breath, is it not Doctor?

Clothe the infirmity with sweeter language,
'Tis a preservative that way.

You are then admitted to the Cabinets of great Ladies,
And have the government of the borrowed beauties,
Of such as write near forty?

True, my good Lord, and my attempts have prospered.

Did you never minister to the Princess?

Sir, not yet;
She's in the April of her youth, and needs not
The aids of art, my gracious Lord: but in
The Autumn of her age I may be useful,
And sworn her Highness Doctor, and your Grace partake
Of the delight.

Slave! Witch! Impostor!
Mountebank! Cheater! Traitor to great Nature,
In thy presumption to repair what she
In her immutable decrees designed
For some few years to grow up, and then wither
Or is't not crime enough thus to betray
The secrets of the weaker sex, thy patients,
But thou must make the honour of this age
And envy of the time to come, Matilda,
(Whose sacred name I bow to) guilty of
A future sin in thy ill-boding thoughts,
Which for a perpetuity of youth
And pleasure she disdains to act, such is
Her purity and innocencce?
His foot on the Doctors breast.

Long since I looked for this Lenvoy.

Would I were well off!
He's dangerous in these humours.

Stand concealed.

O sir, have mercy! in my thought I never
Offended you.

Me? most of all, thou monster:
What a Mock-man property in thy intent
Would thou have made me? a mere Pathick to
Thy devilish art, had I given suffrage to it.
Are my gray hairs, the ornament of age,
And held a blessing by the wiseft men,
And for such warranted by holy Writ,
To be concealed, as if they were my shame?
Or plaster up these furrows in my face,
As if I were a painted Bawd or Whore?
By such base means if that I could ascend
To the height of all my hopes, their full fruition
Would not wipe off the scandal. No, thou wretch,
Thy cozening Water and adulterate Oil
I thus pour in thine eyes, and tread to dust
Thy loth'd Confection, with thy trumperies:
Vanish for ever.

You have your fee, as I take it,
Dear Domine Doctor! I'll be no sharer with you.

I'll court her like my self; these rich adornments
And Jewels, worn by me an absolute Prince,
My Order too, of which I am the Sovereign,
Can meet no ill construction: yet 'tis far
From my imagination to believe
She can be taken with sublimed clay,
The Silk-worms spoils, or rich Embroderies;
Nor must I borrow helps from power or greatness,
But as a loyal Lover plead my cause,
If I can feelingly express my ardor,
And make her sensible of the much I suffer
In hopes and fears, and she vouchsafe to take
Compassion on me, -- Ha! compassion?
The word sticks in my throat: what's here that tells me
I do descend too low? rebellious spirit,
I conjure thee to leave me: there is now
No contradiction or declining left,
I must and will go on.

The tempest's laid; you may present your selves:

My gracious Lord!

Your humble Vassal.

Ha! both living?

Sir, we owe our lives to this good Lord, and make it
Our humble suit --

Plead for your selves: we stand
Yet unresolved whether your knees or prayers
Can save the forfeiture of your own heads:
Though we have put our armour off, your pardon
For leaving the Camp without our licence
Is not yet signed. At some more fit time wait us.

How's this?

'Tis well it is no worse; I met with
A rougher entertainment, yet I had
Good cards to show: He's parcel mad, you'll find him
Every hour in a several mood, this foolish Love
Is such a shuttlecock; but all will be well
When a better fit comes on him, never doubt it:


How do you find her?

Thankful for my service,
And yet she gives me little hope; my Rival
Is too great for me.

The great Duke you mean.

Who else? the Millanois (although he be
A complete Gentleman) I am sure despairs more then my self.

A high estate, with women,
Takes place of all desert.

I must stand my fortune.


The Duke of Florence! sir.

Your Highness presence
Answers my wish. Your private ear: -- I have used
My best persuasion with a Fathers power
To work my daughter to your ends; yet she
Like a small Bark on a tempestuous sea
Tossed here and there by opposite winds, resolves not
At which port to put in, this Prince's merits,
Your grace and favour; nor is she unmindful
Of the brave acts (under your pardon sir
I needs must call them so) Hortensio
Hath done to gain her good opinion of him:
All these together tumbling in her fancy,
Do much distract her; I have spies upon her,
And am assured this instant hour she gives
Hortensio private audience; I will bring you
Where we will see and hear all.

You oblige me.

I do not like this whispering.

Fear no foul play.


The Princess, sir, long since expected you;
And would I beg a thanks, I could tell you that
I have often moved her for you.

I am your servant.


She's come; there are others I must place to hear
The conference.

Is't your Excellencies pleasure that we attend you?

No, wait me in the gallery.

Would each of us, Wench, had a Sweetheart too!
To pass away the time:

There I join with you.

I fear this is the last time we shall meet.

Heaven forbid!


O my Hortensio!
In me behold the misery of Greatness,
And that which you call Beauty: had I been
Of a more low condition, I might
Have called my will and faculties mine own,
Not seeing that which was to be beloved
With others eyes: But now, ay me, most wretched
And miserable Princess! in my fortune
To be too much engaged for service done me,
It being impossible to make satisfaction
To my so many Creditors, (all deserving)
I can keep touch with none.

A sad Exordiam.

You loved me long, and without hope, (alas,
I die to think on it!) Parma's Prince invited
With a too partial report of what
I was, and might be to him, left his Country
To fight in my defence. Your brave achievements
In the war, and what you did for me, unspoken,
(Because I would not force the sweetness of
Your modesty to a blush) are written here.
And that there might be nothing wanting to
Sum up my numerous engagements (never
In my hopes to be cancelled) the great Duke
Our mortal enemy, when my Fathers Country
Lay open to his fury, and the spoil
Of the victorious Army, and I brought
Into his power, hath shown himself so
Noble, so full of honour, temperance,
And all virtues that can set off a Prince,
That though I cannot render him that respect
I would, I am bound in thankfulness to admire him.

'Tis acknowledged, and on your part to be returned.

How can I,
Without the brand of foul ingratitude
To you, and Prince Uberti?

Hear me, Madam,
And what your servant shall with zeal deliver,
As a Dedalean clew may guide you out of
This labyrinth of distraction. He that loves
His Mistress truly, should prefer her honour
And peace of mind, above the glutting of
His ravenous appetite: He should affect from her,
But with a fit restraint, and not take her
To give himself: He should make it the height
Of his ambition, if it lie in
His stretched out nerves to effect it, though she fly in
An eminent place, to add strength to her wings,
And mount her higher, though he fall himself
Into the bottomless Abyss; or else
The services he offers are not real,
But counterfeit.

What can Hortensio infer from this?

That I stand bound in duty
(Though in the act I take my last farewell
Of comfort in this life) to sit down willingly,
And move my suit no further. I confess,
While you were in danger, and Heavens mercy made me
Its instrument to preserve you, (which your goodness
Prized far above the merit) I was bold
To feed my starved affection with false hopes
I might be worthy of you: For know, Madam,
How mean soever I appeared in Mantua,
I had in expectation a fortune,
Though not possessed of't, that encouraged me
With confidence to prefer my suit, and not
To fear the Prince Uberti as my Rival.

I ever thought him more then what he seemed.

Pray you forbear.

But when the Duke of Florence
Put in his plea, in my consideration
Weighing well what he is, as you must grant him,
A Mars of men in Arms; and those put off,
The great example for a Kingly Courtier
To imitate: Annex to these his wealth,
Of such a large extent, as other Monarchs
Call him the King of Coin; and what's above all.
His lawful love, with all the happiness
This life can fancy, from him flowing to you;
The true affection which I have ever borne you,
Does not alone command me to desist,
But as a faithful Councellor to advise you
To meet and welcome that felicity
Which hastes to crown your virtues.

We must break off this parley.
Something I have to say.

In tears I thank
Your care of my advancement; but I dare not
Follow your council: Shall such piety
Pass unrewarded? such a pure affection,
For any ends of mine, be undervalued?
Avert it Heaven! I will be thy Matilda,
Or cease to be; No other heat but what
Glows from thy purest flames, shall warm this bosom;
Nor Florence, nor all Monarchs of the earth
Shall keep thee from me.


I fear, gracious Lady,
Our conference hath been oreheard.

The better:
Your part is acted; give me leave at distance
To zany it, sir, on my knees thus prostrate
Before your feet.

This must not be, I shall
Both wrong my self and you in suffering it.

I will grow here, and weeping thus turn marble,
Unless you hear and grant the first petition
A virgin, and a Princess ever tendered:
Nor doth the suit concern poor me alone,
It hath a strong reference to you
And to your honour; and if you deny it,
Both ways you suffer. Remember, sir, you were not
Born only for your self; Heavens liberal hand
Designed you to command a potent Nation,
Gave you heroic valour, which you have
Abused in making unjust war upon
A neighbour Prince, a Christian; while the Turk,
Whose scourge and terror you should be, securely
Wastes the Italian Confines: 'tis in you
To force him to pull in his horned Crescents,
And 'tis expected from you.

I have been in a dream, and now begin to wake.

And will you forbear to reap the harvest of such glories,
Now ripe and at full growth, for the embraces
Of a flight woman? or exchange your triumphs
For chamber-pleasures? melt your able nerves
(That should with your victorious sword make way
Through the Armies of your Enemies) in loose
And wanton dalliance? Be your self, great sir,
The thunderbolt of war, and scorn to sever
Two hearts long since united: your example
May teach the Prince Uberti to subscribe
To that which you allow of.

The same tongue
That charmed my sword out of my hand, and threw
A frozen numness on my active spirit,
Hath dis-enchanted me. Rise, fairest Princess!
And that it may appear I do receive
Your council as inspired from heaven, I will
Obey and follow it: I am your debtor,
And must confess you have lent my weakened reason
New strengths once more to hold a full command
Over my passions. Here to the world
I freely do profess that I disclaim
All interest in you, and give up my title
Such as it is, to you sir: and as far
As I have power, thus join your hands.

To yours I add my full consent.

I am lost, Farneze.

Nearer to the port then you suppose:
In me our laws speak, and forbid this contract.

Ay me! new stops!

Shall we be ever crossed thus?

There is an Act upon record, confirmed
By your wise predecessors, that no Heir
Of Mantua (as questionless the Princess
Is the undoubted one) must be joined in marriage,
But where the match may strengthen the estate
And safety of the Dukedom. Now this Gentleman,
However I must stile him honourable,
And of a high desert, having no power
To make this good in his alliance, stands
Excluded by our laws: whereas this Prince
Of equal merit, brings to Mantua
The power and Principality of Parma:
And therefore since the great Duke hath let fall
His plea, there lives no Prince that justlier can
Challenge the Princess favour.

Is this true, sir?

I cannot contradict it.


There's an Ambassador
From Milain, that desires a present audience;
His business is of highest consequence,
As he affirms: I know him for a man
Of the best rank and quality.

From Milain?

Admit him. -- How? so low!

I am sorry, sir, to be the bringer of this heavy news:
But since it must be known --

Peace rest with him,
I shall find fitter time to mourn his loss.
My faithful servant too, Julio!

I am orejoy'd to see your Highness safe.

Pray you peruse this,
And there you'll find that the objection
The Lord Farneze made, is fully answered.

The great John Galeas dead?

And this his brother, the absolute Lord of Milain.

I am revived.

There's no contending against destiny,
I wish both happiness.


Married, Alonzo? I will salute your Lady, she's a fair one,
And seal your pardon on her lips.

Octavio, welcome even to my heart! Rise, I should kneel
To thee for mercy.

The poor remainder of
My age shall truly serve you.

You resemble a Page I had, Ascanio.

I am your Highness servant still.

All stand amazed
At this unlooked for meeting: But defer
Your several stories. Fortune here hath shown
Her various power; but Virtue in the end
Is crowned with laurel: Love hath done his parts too;
And mutual friendship after bloody jars,
Will cure the wounds received in our wars.

PRay you Gentlemen keep your seats; something I would
Deliver to gain favour, if I could,
To us, and the still doubtful Author. He,
When I desired an Epilogue, answered me,
'Twas to no purpose: He must stand his fate,
Since all entreaties now would come too late;
You being long since resolved what you would say
Of him, or us, as ye rise, or of the Play.
A strange old Fellow! yet this sullen mood
Would quickly leave him, might it be understood
You part not hence displeased. I am designed
To give him certain notice: If you find
Things worth your liking, show it. Hope and Fear,
Though different passions, have the self-same ear.

