HOw ere th'intents and appetites of men
Are different as their faces, how and when
T'employ their actions, yet all without strife
Meet in this point, Any thing for a Quiet Life.
Nor is there one I think that's hither come
For his delight, but would find Peace at home
On any terms. The Lawyer does not cease
To talk himself into a sweat with pain,
And so his Fees buy Quiet, 'tis his gain:
The poor man does endure the scorching Sun,
And feels no weariness his day-labor done,
So his Wife entertain him with a smile,
And thank his travail, though she slept the while:
This being in men of all conditions true,
Does give our Play a Name; and if to you
It yield Content, and usual Delight,
For our parts we shall sleep secure to night.

AWay, I am ashamed of your proceedings, and seriously you have in this one act
overthrown the reputation the world held of your wisdom.


Why Sir?


Can you not see your error? that having buried so good a wife not a month
since; one that, to speak the truth, had all those excellencies which our books
have only feigned to make a complete Wife, most exactly in her in practice,
and to marry a Girl of fifteen; one bred up in the Court, that by all consonancy
of reason, is like to cross your estate: why, one new Gown of hers when 'tis
paid for, will eat you out the keeping of a bountiful Christmas. I am ashamed
of you, for you shall make too dear a proof of it, I fear; that in the election
of a Wife, as in a project of War, to err but once, is to be undone for ever.


Good my Lord, I do beseech you let your better judgement go along with your
reprehension.


So it does, and can find nought to extenuate your fault, but your dotage: you
are a man well sunk in years, and to graft such a young blossom into your
Stock, is the next way to make every carnal eye bespeak your injury. Troth I
pity her too, she was not made to wither and go out by painted fires, that
yields her no more heat, then to be lodged in some bleak Banquetting-house in the
dead of Winter, and what follows then? your shame, and the ruin of your
children, and there's the end of a rash bargain.


With your pardon, that she is young is true; but that Discretion ha's gone
beyond her years* and overtane those of maturer age, does more improve her
goodness. I confess she was bred at Court, but so retiredly, that (as still the
best in some place is to be learnt there) so her life did rectify it self more
by the Court Chapel, then by the Office of the Revels: best of all virtues are
to be found at Court, and where you meet with writings contrary to this known
truth, they are framed by men that never were so happy to be planted there to
know it: for the difference between her youth and mine, if you will read a
Matrons sober staidness in her eye, and all the other grave demeanour fitting
the Governess of a House, you'll then confess there's no disparity between us.


Come, come, you read Water Chamlet, you are welcome.


I thank your Lordship.


And what news stirring in Cheapside?


Nothing new there my Lord, but the Standard.


Oh that's a Monument your wives take great delight in; I do hear you are grown
a mighty Purchaser, I hope shortly to find you a continual resident upon the
North Isle of the Exchange.


Where? with the Scotch-men?


No Sir, with the Aldermen.


Believe it, I am a poor Commoner.


Come, you are warm, and blessed with a fair Wife.


There's it, her going brave, has the only virtue to improve my credit in the
Subsidy-book.


But I pray, how thrives your New Plantation of Silkworms, those I saw last
Summer at your garden?


They are removed sir.


Whether?


This winter my wife has removed them home to a fair Chamber, where divers
Courtiers use to come and see them, and my wife carries them up; I think
shortly, what with the store of Visitants, they'll prove as chargeable to me as
the morrow after Simon and Jude, only excepting the taking down and setting up
again of my Glass-windows.


That a man of your estate should be so gripple-minded, and repining at his
wives bounty!


There are no such ridiculous things in the world, as those love money better
then themselves; for though they have understanding to know riches, and a mind
to seek them, and a wit to find them, and policy to keep them, and long life
to possess them; yet commonly they have withal such a false sight, such
bleard-eyes, all their wealth when it lies before them, does seem poverty, and
such a one are you.


Good sir Francis, you have had sore eyes too, you have been a Gamester, but
you have given it over, and to redeem the vice belonged to it, now you entertain
certain farcels of silenced Ministers, which I think will equally undo you* yet
should these waste you but lenatively, your devising new Water-mill for
recovery of drowned Land, and certain dreams you have in Alchemy to find the
Philosophers-Stone, will certainly draw you to'th bottom: I speak freely sir,
and would not have you angry, for I love you.


I am deeply in your Books for furnishing my late VVedding; have you brought a
Note of the particulars?


No sir, at more leisure.


What comes the sum to?


For Tissue, Cloth of Gold, Velvets and Silks, about fifteen hundred pounds.


Your money is ready.


Sir, I thank you.


And how does my two young children, whom I have put to board with you?


Have you put forth two of your children already?


Twas my wives discretion to have it so.


Come, tis the first principle in a Mother-in-law's Chop-Logick, to divide the
Family, to remove from forth your sight the Object, that her cunning knows
would dull her insinuation: had you been a kind father, it would have been
your practice every day to have preacht to these two young ones carefully, your
late Wives Funeral Sermon. L'as poor souls, are they turned so soon a grazing?


My Lord, they are placed where they shall be respected as mine own.


I make no question of it, good Mr. Chamlet. See here your eldest son, Frank
Cressingham!


You have displeased and grieved your Mother in Law, and till you have made
submission and procured her pardon, I'll not know you for my son.


I have wrought her no offence sir, the difference grew about certain Jewels
which my Mother (by your consent) lying upon her Death-bed, bequeathed to her
three Children; these I demanded, and being denied these, thought this sin of
hers to violate so gentle a Request of her Predecessor, was an ill foregoing of
a Mother in Laws harsh nature.


Sir, understand my will moved in her denial: You have Jewels to pawn, or sell
them! Sirrah, I will have you as obedient to this woman as to my self, till
then you are none of mine.


Oh Mr. George, be ruled, do any thing for a quiet Life, your Fathers peace of
Life moves in it too. I have a Wife, when she is in the Sullens, like a Cooks
dog that you see turn a wheel, she will be sure to go and hide her self out of
the way Dinner and Supper: and in these Fits Bowe-bell is a still Organ to her,
when we were married first, I well remember, her railing did appear but a
vision, till certain scratches on my hand and face, assured me it was
substantial. She's a creature uses to way lay my faults, and more desires to
find them out, then to have them amended: She has a Book, which I may truly
nominate her Blackbook, for she remembers in it in short Items all my
misdemeanours: As, Item such a day I was got foxed with foolish Metheglin, in
the company of certain Welsh Chapmen. Item, such a day being at the
Artillery-Garden, one of my neighbours in courtesy to salute me with his
Musket, set a fire my Fustian and Apes Breeches. Such a day I lost fifty pound
in hugger mugger, at Dice at the Quest-house. Item I lent money to a
Sea-Captain, on his bare Confound-him he would pay me again the next morning,
and such like; for which she railed upon me when I should sleep, and that's,
you know, intolerable; for indeed 'twill tame an Elephant.


Tis a shrewd vexation, but your discretion sir, does bear it out with a
months sufferance.


Yes, and I would wish you to follow mine example.


Here's small comfort George from your Father. Here's a Lord whom I have long
depended upon for employment, I will see if my suit will thrive better. Please
your Lordship, you know I am a younger brother, and my Fate throwing me upon
the late ill-starr'd Voyage to Guiana; failing of our golden hopes, I and my
Ship addressed our selves to serve the Duke of Florence.


Yes, I understood so.


Who gave me both Encouragement and Means, to do him some small service against
the Turk; being settled there both in his Pay and Trust, your Lordship minding
to rigg forth a Ship to trade for the East-Indies, sent for me, and what your
promise was, if I would leave so great a fortune to become your servant, your
Letters yet can witness.


Yes, what follows?


That for ought I perceive, your former purpose is quite forgotten; I have
stayed here two months, and find your intended Voyage but a Dream, and the
Ship you talk of as imaginary, as that the Astronomers point at in the clouds.
I have spent two thousand Ducats since my arrival; men that have command, my
Lord, at Sea, cannot live a shore without money.


Know sir, a late Purchase which cost me a great sum, has diverted me from my
former purpose, besides Suits in Law do every Term so trouble me by Land, I
have forgot going by Water. If you please to rank your self among my followers,
you shall be welcome, and I'll make your means better than any Gentleman's I
keep.


Some twenty Mark a year! will that maintain Scarlet and Gold-lace, play at th*
Ordinary, and Beavers at the Tavern?


I had thought to prefer you to have been Captain of a Ship that's bound for
the Red-sea.


What hinders it?


Why certainly the Merchants are possessed you have been a Pirate.


Say I were one still, if I were past the Line once, why methinks I should do
them better service.


Pray forbear: here's a Gentleman whose business must engross me wholly.


What's he, dost thou know him?


A pox upon him, a very knave and rascal, that goes a hunting with the penal
Statutes; and good for nought but to persuade their Lords to rack their Rents,
and give over House-keeping; such Caterpillars may hang at their Lords ears,
when better men are neglected.


What's his name?


Knaves-bee.


Knaves-bee!


One that deals in a tenth share about Projections: he and his partners when
they have got a Suit once past the Seal, will so wrangle about partition, and
sometimes they fall to'th ears about it, like your Fencers, that cudgel one
another by Patent; you shall see him so terribly bedasht in a Michaelmas Term
coming from Westminster, that you would swear he were lighted from a
Horse-race: Hang him, hang him, he's a scurvey Informer, has more couzenage in
him, then is in five travelling Lotteries. To feed a Kite with the carrion of
this Knave when he's dead, and reclaim her, oh she would prove an excellent
Hawk for tallon: has a fair Creature to his Wife too, and a witty rogue it is,
and some men think this knave will wink at small faults; but honest George,
what shall become of us now?


Faith I am resolved to set up my rest for the Low-Countreys.


To serve there?


Yes certain.


There's thin commons, besides they have added one day more to'th Week then was
in the Creation; Art thou valiant? Art thou valiant, George?


I may be, and I be put too't.


O never fear that, thou can not live two hours after thy Landing without a
quarrel. Thou must resolve to fight, or like a Sumner, thou'lt be bastanado'd
at every Towns end. You shall have Gallants there as ragged as the Fall o'th
Leaf, that live in Holland, where the finest Linnen's made, and yet wear ne'er
a Shirt: These will not only quarrel with a new-commer when they are drunk,
but they will quarrel with any man has means to be drunk before them: Follow my
council, George, thou shalt not go over, we'll live here in the City.


But how?


How? why, as other Gallants do that feed high, and play copiously, yet brag
they have but nine pound a year to live on: these have wit to turn rich Fools
and Gulls into Quarter-days, that bring them in certain payment. I have a
Project reflects upon y'on Mercer, Mr. Chamlet, shall put us into money.


What is't?


Nay, I will not stale it afore-hand, 'tis a new one: Nor cheating amongst
Gallants may seem strange, Why a reaching Wit goes currant on th'Exchange.


O my Lord, I remember you and I were Students together at Cambridge; but
believe me you went far beyond me.


When I studied there, I had so fantastical a brain, that like a Phelphare,
frighted in winter by a Birding-piece, I could setle no where; here and there a
little of every several Art, and away.


Now my wit, though it were more dull, yet I went slowly on, and as divers
others, when I could not prove an excellent Scholar by a plodding patience, I
attained to be a Petty Lawyer; and I thank my dullness for it, you may stamp in
Lead any figure, but in Oil or Quick-silver nothing can be imprinted, for they
keep no certain station.


O, you tax me well of irresolution; but say worthy friend, how thrives my
weighty Suit which I have trusted to your friendly bosom? is there any hope to
make me happy?


Tis yet questionable, for I have not broke the ice to her; an hour hence come
to my house, and if it lye in man, be sure, as the Law Phrase says, I will
create you Lord Paramount of your wishes.


O my best friend, and one that takes the hardest course in the world, to make
himself so. Sir, now I'll take my leave.


Nay good my Lord, my Wife is coming down.


Pray pardon me, I have business so importunes me o'th sudden, I cannot stay;
deliver mine excuse, and in your ear this. Let not a fair woman make you forget
your children.


What? are you taking leave too?


Yes, good Madam.


The rich Stuff which my Husband bought of you, the works of them are too
common: I have got a Dutch Painter to draw Patterns, which I'll have sent to
your Factors; as in Italy, at Florence and Ragusa, where these Stuffs are
woven, to have pieces made for mine own wearing of a new invention.


You may Lady, but 'twill be somewhat chargeable.


Chargeable! what of that? if I live another year, I'll have my Agents shall lye
for me at Paris, and at Venice, and at Validolet in Spain, for intelligence of
all new Fashions.


Do Sweetest, thou deserve to be exquisite in all things.


The two Children to which you are Mother in Law, would be repaired too, 'tis
time they had new clothing.


I pray fir, do not trouble me with them; they have a Father indulgent and
careful of them.


I am sorry you made the motion to her.


I have done: He has run himself
Into a pretty dotage, Madam, with your leave;
He's tied to a new Law, and a new Wife,
Yet to my old Proverb, Any thing for a quiet Life.

Good friend, I have a suit to you.


Dearest Self* you most powerfully sway me.


That you would give over this fruitless, if I may not say this idle, Study of
Alchemy; why half your house looks like a Glass-house.


And the smoke you make is a worse enemy to good House-keeping, then Tobacco.


Should one of your glasses break, it might bring you to a Dead Palsy.


My Lord, your Quicksilver has made all your more solid gold and silver fly in
fume.


I'll be ruled by you in any thing.


Go Saunder, break all the Glasses.


I fly to it.


Why noble friend, would you find the true Philosophers-stone indeed, my good
Housewifery should do it. You understand I was bred up with a great Courtly Lady,
do not think all women mind gay clothes and riot, there are some Widows living
have improved both their own fortunes and their childrens: would you take my
counsel, I'd advise you to sell your Land.


My Land!


Yes, and the Manor House up n't, tis rotten: Oh the new fashioned Buildings
brought from the Hague! 'tis stately. I have intelligence of a Purchase, and
the Title sound, will for half the money you may sell yours for, bring you in
more Rent then yours now yields you.


If it be so good a pennyworth, I need not sell my Land to purchase it, I'll
procure money to do it.


Where sir?


Why, I'll take it up at Interest.


Never did any man thrive that purchased with use-mony.


How come you to know these thrifty Principles?


How? Why my Father was a Lawyer, and died in the Commission, and may not I by
a natural instinct, have a reaching that way: there are on mine own knowledge
some Divines daughters infinitely affected with reading Controversies, and that
some think has been a means to bring so many Suits into the Spiritual Court.
Pray be advised, sell your Land, and purchase more: I knew a Peddler by being
Merchant this way, is become Lord of many Manors: we should look to lengthen
our Estates may both go out together, and one Tomb quit our Executors the rites
of two.


Oh you are so wise, and so good in every thing, I move by your direction.


She has caught him!


HAve you drunk the Eggs and Muskadine I sent you?


No, they are too fulsome.


Away, you're a fool, how shall I begin to break the matter to her? I do long,
wife.


Long, sir!


Long infinitely. Sit down, there is a penitential motion in me, which if thou
wilt but second, I shall be one of the happiest men in Europe.


What might that be?


I had last night one of the strangest Dreams; me thought I was thy Confessor,
thou mine, and we revealed between us privately how often we had wronged each
others Bed since we were married.


Came you drunk to bed? there was a Dream with a witness.


No, no witness; I dreamt no body heard it but we two. This Dream wife, do I
long to put in act, let us confess each other, and I vow what ever thou hast
done with that sweet corps in the way of natural frailty, I protest most freely
I will pardon.


Go sleep again; was there ever such a motion?


Nay sweet woman, and thou wilt not have me run mad with my desire, be
persuaded to it.


Well, be it your pleasure.


But to answer truly.


O most sincerely.


Begin then; examine me first.


Why, I know not what to ask you.


Let me see, your father was a Captain; Demand of me how many dead Pays I am to
answer for in the Muster-book of Wedlock, by the martial fault of borrowing
from my neighbours?


Troth I can ask no such foolish questions


Why then open Concession I hope dear wife, will merit freer pardon: I sinned
twice with my Laundress, and last Circuit there was at Banbury a
She-chamberlain that had a spice of purity, but at last I prevailed over her.


O, you are an ungracious husband.


I have made a vow never to ride abroad but in thy company; Oh a little drink
makes me clamber like a Monkey: now sweet wife, you have been an out-lyer too,
which is best feed in the Forest, or in the Purlewes?


A foolish mind of you in this.


Nay sweet Love, confess freely, I have given you the example.


Why you know I went last year to Sturbidge-Fair.


Yes.


And being in Cambridge, a handsome Scholar, one of Emanuel College, fell in
love with me.


O you sweet-breath'd Monkey.


Go hang, you are so boisterous.


But did this Scholar show thee his Chamber?


Yes.


And did thou like him?


Like him! oh he had the most enticingst straw-colour'd Beard, a woman with
black eyes would have loved him like Jeat: he was the finest man with a formal
wit; and he had a fine dog that sure was whelpt in the College, for he
understood Latin.


Pue wawe, this is nothing, till I know what he did in's Chamber.


He burnt Wormwood in it, to kill the Fleas in the Rushes.


But what did he to thee there?


Some five and twenty years hence I may chance tell you. Fie upon you, what
tricks? what crotchets are these? have you placed any body behind the Arras to
hear my Confession? I heard one in England got a Divorce from his wife by such a
trick; were I disposed now, I would make you as mad. You shall see me play the
Changeling.


No, no wife, you shall see me play the Changeling: had thou confessed, this
other Suit I'll now prefer to thee, would have been dispatcht in a trice.


And what's that sir?


Thou wilt wonder at it four and twenty years longer then nine days.


I would very fain hear it.


There is a Lord o'th Court, upon my credit a most dear, honourable Friend of
mine, that mustlye with thee. Do you laugh? 'tis not come to that, you'll laugh
when you know who 'tis.


Are you stark mad?


On my Religion I have past my word for it, 'tis the Lord Beaufort, thou art
made happy for ever, the generous and bountiful Lord Beaufort: you being both
so excellent, 'twere pity if such rare Pieces should not be conferred, and
sampled together.


Do you mean seriously?


As I hope for preferment.


And can you loose me thus?


Loose you! I shall love you the better: why, what's the viewing any Wardrobe,
or Jewel-house, without a companion to confer their likings? yet now I view
thee well, methinks thou art a rare Monopoly, and great pity one man should
enjoy thee.


This is pretty.


Let's divorce our selves so long, or think I am gone to'th' Indies, or lye
with him when I am asleep, for some Familists of Amsterdam will tell you may be
done with a safe conscience: Come you wanton, what hurt can this do to you? I
protest nothing so much as to keep company with an old woman has sore eyes: no
more wrong then I do my Beaver when I try it thus. Look, this is all; smooth,
and keeps fashion still.


You are one of the basest fellows.


I looked for chiding, I do make this a kind of fortitude the Romans never
dreamt of, and 'twere known, I should be spoke and writ of when I am rotten,
for 'tis beyond example.


But I pray resolve me: suppose this done, could you ever love me after?


I protest I never thought so well of thee, till I knew he took a fancy to
thee; like one that has variety of choice meat before him, yet has no stomach
to 't until he hear another praise: Hark, my Lord is coming.


Possible.


And my preferment comes along with him; be wise, mind your good, and to
confute all reason in the world which thou can urge against it when 'tis
done, we will be married again wife, which some say is the only Supersedes
about Limehouse, to remove Cuckoldry.


Come, are you ready to attend me to the Court?


Yes my Lord.


Is this fair one, your wife?


At your Lordships service; I will look up some Writings, and return presently.


To see and the base fellow do not leave's alone too!


Tis an excellent habit this, where were you born, Sweet?


I am a Suffolk woman, my Lord.


Believe it, every Country you breath on, is the sweeter for you: Let me see
your hand. The Case is loath to part with the Jewel: Fairest one, I have skill
in Palmestry.


Good my Lord, what do you find there?


In good earnest I do find written here, all my good fortune lies in your
hand.


You'll keep a very bad House then, you may see by the smallness of the Table.


Who is your Sweet-heart?


Sweet-heart!


Yes, come, I must sift you to know it.


I am a Sieve too course for your Lordships Manchet.


Nay, pray you tell me, for I see your husband is an unhandsome fellow.


Oh my Lord, I took him by weight, not fashion: Goldsmiths Wives taught me that
way of bargain, and some Ladies swerve not to follow the example.


But will you not tell me who is your private friend?


Yes, and you'll tell me who is yours.


Shall I show you her?


Yes, when will you?


Instantly, look you there you may see her.


I'll break the glass, 'tis now worth nothing.


Why?


You have made it a flattering one.


I have a Summer-house for you; a fine place to flatter solitariness: will you
come and lye there?


No my Lord.


Your husband has promised me: will you not?


I must wink I tell you, or say nothing.


So, I'll kiss you and wink too,

Midnight is Cupids Holiday.


By this time 'tis concluded: Will you go my Lord?


I leave with you my best wishes till I see you.


This now (if I may borrow our Lawyers phrase) is my Wives Imparlance, at her
next appearance she must answer your Declaration.


You follow it well, sir.


Did I not know my Husband of so base contemptible nature, I should think
'twere but a trick to try me; but it seems they are both in wicked earnest; and
methinks upon the sudden I have a great mind to loath this scurvy unhandsome
way my Lord has taken to compass me: why 'tis for all the world as if he should
come to steal some Apricots my Husband kept for's own Tooth, and climb up upon
his head and shoulders. I'll go to him, he will put me into brave Clothes, and
rich Jewels; 'twere a very ill part in me not to go, his Mercer and his
Goldsmith else might curse me; and what I'll do there, a my troth yet I know
not; Women though puzzled with these subtle deeds, May, as in the Spring, pick
Physic out of weeds.


What is't you lack, you lack, you lack?
Stuffs for the Belly, or the Back?
Silk-Grograns, Satins, Velvet fine,
The Rosie-colour'd Carnadine;
Your Nutmeg hue, or Gingerline,
Cloth of Tissue, or Tobine,
That like beaten Gold will shine
In your Amorous Ladies eyne,
Whilst you their softer Silks do twine:
What is't you lack, you lack, you lack?

I do lack Content Sir, Content I lack: have you or your worshipful Master
here, any Content to sell?


If Content be a Stuff to be sold by the Yard, you may have content at home,
and never go abroad for it.


Do, cut me three yards, I'll pay for 'em.


There's all we have in the Shop; we must know what you'll give for 'em first.


Why Rachel, sweet Rachel, my bosom Rachel, how did thou get forth? thou were
here sweet Rac. within this hour, even in my very heart.


Away, or stay still, I'll away from thee, one Bed shall never hold us both
again, nor one roof cover us: did thou bring home


What is't you lack, you lack, you lack?


Peace Bandog, Bandog, give me leave to speak, or I'll


Shall I not follow my Trade? I'm bound to it, and my Master bound to bring me
up in it.


Peace, good George, give her anger leave, thy Mistress will be quiet
presently.


Quiet! I defy thee and quiet too: Quiet thy Bastards thou hast brought home.


What is't you lack, you lack? c.


Death, give me an Ell, has one bawling Cur raised up another? two dogs upon
me, and the old Bear-ward will not succour me, I'll stave 'em off my self: give
me an Ell, I say.


Give her not an Inch, Master, she'll take two Ells if you do.


Peace George and Ralph, no more words I charge you; and Rachel, sweet Wife, be
more temperate, I know your tongue speaks not by the rule and guidance of your
heart, when you proclaim the pretty children of my virtuous and noble
Kinswoman, whom in life you knew above my praises reach, to be my bastards;
this is not well, although your Anger did it, pray chide your Anger for it.


Sir, sir, your gloss of Kinswoman cannot serve turn, 'tis stale, and smells
too rank, though your shop wares you vent with your deceiving lights, yet your
Chamber Stuff shall not pass so with me; I say, and I will prove.


What is't you lack?


Why George, I say.


Lecher I say, I'll be divorc't from thee, I'll prove 'em thy bastards, and
thou insufficient.


What said my angry Cousin to you sir? that we were bastards?


I hope she meant not us.


No, no, my pretty Cousins, she meant George and Ralph; rage will speak any
thing, but they are ne'er the worse.


Yes indeed forsooth she spoke to us, but chiefly to Ralph, because she knows
he has but one stone.


No more of that if you love me, George, this is not the way to keep a quiet
house.


Truly Sir, I would not for more treasure then ever I saw yet, be in your house
a cause of discord.


And do you think I would, Sister?


No indeed, Ned.


Why did you not speak for me with you then, and said we could not have done
so?


No more sweet Cousins now: Speak George, Customers approach.


Is the Barber prepared?


With ignorance enough to go through with it, so near I am to him, we must call
Cousins, would thou were as sure to hit the Taylor.


If I do not steal away handsomely, let me never play the Taylor again.


What is't you lack? c.


Good Satins sir.


The best in Europe, sir; here's a piece worth a Piece every yard of him, the
King of Naples wears no better Silk; mark his gloss, he dazzles the eye to look
upon him.


Is he not gummed?


Gummed! he has neither mouth nor tooth, how can he be gummed?


Very pretty.


An especial good piece of Silk, the Worm never spun a finer thread, believe
it, sir.


Gascoyn, you have some skill in it.


Your Taylor, sir?


Yes sir.


A good piece, sir; but let's see more choice.


Taylor, drive thorough, you know your bribes.


Mum: he bestows forty pounds, if I say the word.


Strike through, there's poundage for you then.


I marry! I like this better, what say thou, Gascoyn?


A good piece indeed, sir.


The Great Turk has worse Satin at's elbow, then this sir.


The price?


Look on the mark, George.


O. Souse and P, by my facks, sir.


The best sort then, sixteen a yard, nothing to be bated.


Fie sir, fifteen's too high, yet so, for how many yards will serve for my
Suit, sirrah?


Nine yards, you can have no less, Sir Andrew.


But I can sir, if you please to steal less; I had but eight in my last Suit.


You pinch us too near in faith, Sir Andrew.


Yet can you pinch out a false pair of Sleeves to a Freezado Doublet.


No sir, some Purses and Pin-pillows perhaps: A Taylor pays for his kissing
that ways.


Well sir, eight yards, eight fifteens I give, and cut it.


I cannot truly, sir.


My Master must be no Subsidy-man sir, if he take such fifteens.


I am at highest sir, if you can take money.


Well sir, I'll give you the buying once, I hope to gain it in your custom:
want you nothing else, sir?


Not at this time, sir.


Indeed but you do, Sir Andrew, I must needs deliver my Ladies Message to you,
she enjoined me by Oath to do it, she commanded me to move you for a New Gown.


Sirrah, I'll break your head, if you motion it again.


I must endanger my self for my Lady, sir: you know she's to go to my Lady
Trenchmores Wedding, and to be seen there without a New Gown, she'll have ne'er
an eye to be seen there, for her fingers in 'em: Nay by my fack, sir, I do not
think she'll go, and then the cause known, what a discredit 't will be to you!


Not a word more, Goodman Snip-snapper for your ears: What comes this to, sir?


Six pound, sir.


There's your money: will you take this, and be gone, and about your business
presently?


Troth Sir, I'll see some Stuffs for my Lady first, I'll tell her at least I did
my good will; a fair piece of Cloth of Silver, pray you now.


Or Cloth of Gold if you please sir, as rich as ever the Sophy wore.


You are the arrantest villain of a Taylor, that ever sat cross-leg'd: what do
you think a Gown of this Stuff will come to?


Why say it be forty pound sir: what's that to you? three thousand a year I
hope will maintain it.


It will sir, very good, you were best be my Overseer: say I be not furnished
with money, how then?


A very fine excuse in you, which place of ten now will you send me for a
hundred pound, to bring it presently?


Sir, sir, your Taylor persuades you well, 'tis for your credit, and the great
content of your Lady.


Tis for your content sir, and my charges: Never think Goodman False-stitch to
come to the Mercers with me again; pray will you see if my Cousin Sweetball the
Barber (he's nearest hand) be furnished, and bring me word instantly.


I fly, sir.


You may fly sir, you have clipped some bodies wings for it to piece out your
own; An arrant thief you are.


Indeed he speaks honestly and justly, sir.


You expect some gain sir, there's your cause of love.


Surely I do a little, sir.


And what might be the price of this?


This is thirty a yard; but if you'll go to forty, here's a Non pareile.


So, there's a matter of forty pound for a Gown Cloth.


Thereabouts, sir; why sir, there are far short of your means that wear the
like.


Do you know my means, sir?


By over-hearing your Taylor, sir, three thousand a year: but if you'd have a
Petticoat for your Lady, here's a stuff.


Are you another Taylor, Sirrah? here's a knave, what are you?


You are such another Gentleman; but for the Stuff Sir, 'tis L. SS. and K; for
the turn stripped a purpose, a yard and a quarter broad too, which is the just
depth of a woman's Petticoat.


And why stripped for a Petticoat?


Because if they abuse their Petticoats, there are abuses stripped, then 'tis
taking them up, and they may be stripped and whipped too.


Very ingenious.


Then it is likewise stripped standing, between which is discovered the open
part, which is now called the Placket.


Why, was it ever called otherwise?


Yes: while the word remained pure in his original, the Latin tongue, who have
no Ks, it was called the Placet, a Placendo, A thing, or place, to please.


Better and worse still: Now sir, you come in haste, what says my Cousin?


Protest sir, he's half angry, that either you should think him unfurnish, or
not furnished for your use, there's a hundred pound ready for you; he desires
you to pardon his coming, his folks are busy, and his wife trimming a
Gentleman, but at your first approach the money wants but telling.


He would not trust you with it: I con him thanks, for that he knows what Trade
you are of: well sir, pray cut him patterns, he may in the mean time know my
Ladies liking, let your man take the Pieces whole, with the lowest prices, and
walk with me to my Cousins.


With all my heart, sir: Ralph, your Cloak, and go with the Gentleman, look you
give good measure.


Look you carry a good yard with you.


The best in the shop sir, yet we have none bad: you'll have the Stuff for the
Petticoat too?


No sir, the Gown only.


By all means sir: Not the Petticoat? that were Holy-day upon Working-day
in faith.


You are so forward for a knave, sir.


'Tis for your credit and my Ladies both, I do it sir.


Your man is trusty sir?


O sir, we keep none but those we dare trust sir. Ralph, have a care of light
gold.


I warrant you sir, I'll take none.


Come sirrah: Fare you well sir.


Pray know my shop another time, sir.


That I shall sir, from all the shops in the Town; 'tis the Lamb in
Lomberd-street.


A good mornings work, sir; if this Custom would but last long, you might shut
up your shop and live privately.


O George. But here's a grief that takes away all the gains and joy of all my
thrift.


What's that, sir?


Thy Mistress, George: her frowardness sours all my comfort.


Alas sir, they are but Squibs and Crackers, they'll soon die; you know her
flashes of old.


But they fly so near me, that they burn me; George they are as ill as
Muskets charged with Bullets.


She has discharged her self now sir, you need not fear her.


No man can love without his affliction, George.


As you cannot without my Mistress.


Right, right, there's harmony in Discords: this Lamp of Love while any Oil is
left, can never be extinct, it may (like a snuff) wink and seem to die, but up
he will again and show his head; I cannot be quiet George, without my wife at
home.


And when she's at home, you're never quiet I'm sure, a fine life you have
on it: well sir, I'll do my best to find her, and bring her back if I can.


Do honest George, at Knaves-bee's house, that Varlots, there's her haunt and
harbour, who enforces a Kinsman on her, and calls him Cousin:

Restore her George, to ease this heart that's vexed,

The best new Suit that e're thou wore'st is next.


I thank you afore-hand sir.


Were it of greater moment then you speak of (noble Sir) I hope you think me
sufficient, and it shall be effectually performed.


I could wish your wife did not know it, Cousin. Women's tongues are not always
tuneable, I may many ways requite it.


Believe me, she shall not sir, which will be the hardest thing of all.


Pray you dispatch him then.


With the celerity a man tells Gold to him.


He hits a good comparison! give my Waste-good your Stuffs, and go with my
Cousin sir, he'll presently dispatch you.


Yes Sir.


Come with me youth, I am ready for you in my more private chamber.


Sirrah go you show your Lady the Stuffs, and let her choose her colour, away,
you know whether: Boy, prithee lend me a Brush in the mean time: Do you tarry all
day now.


That I will sir, and all night too, e're I come again.


Here's a Brush sir.


A good child.


What Toby.


Anon sir.


Why when, goodman Picklock?


I must attend my Master, sir: I come.


Do pretty Lad: so, take water at Cole-harbor, An easy Mercer, and an innocent
Barber.


So friend, I'll now dispatch you presently: Boy, reach me my Dis-membring
Instrument, and let my Cauterize be ready; and hark you Snipsnap.


I Sir.


See if my Luxinium, my Fomentation be provided first, and get my Rollers,
Bolsters, and Pleggets armed.


Nay good sir dispatch my business first; I should not stay from my shop.


You must have a little patience sir, when you are a Patient; if Prepusium be
not too much perished, you shall loose but little by it, believe my Art for
that.


What's that sir?


Marry if there be exulceration between Prepusium and Glannce, by my faith the
whole Penis may be endangered as far as Os pubes.


What's this you talk on, sir?


If they be gangren'd once, Testiculi, Vesica, and all may run to
mortification.


What a pox does this Barber talk on?


O fie youth, Pox is no word of Art, Morbus Gallicus, or Neopolitanus had bin
well: Come friend, you must not be nice; open your griefs freely to me.


Why sir, I open my grief to you, I want my money.


Take you no care for that, your worthy Cousin has given me part in hand, and
the rest I know he will upon your recovery, and I dare take his word.


's Death, where's my Ware?


Ware! that was well, the word is cleanly, though not artful; your Ware it is
that I must see.


My Tobine, and Cloth of Tissue?


You will neither have Tissue nor Issue, if you linger in your malady: better a
Member cut off, then endanger the whole Microcosm.


Barber, you are not mad?


I do begin to fear you are subject to Subeth, unkindly sleeps, which have bred
opilations in your brain; take heed, the Simptoma will follow, and this may
come to Frenzy: begin with the first cause, which is the pain of your Member.


Do you see my Yard, Barber?


Now you come to the purpose, 'tis that I must see indeed.


You shall feel it sir: Death, give me my fifty pounds, or my Ware again, or
I'll measure out your Anatomy by the yard.


Boy, my Cauterizing-Iron red hot.


'Tis here, sir.


If you go further, I take my Dis-membring Knife.


Where's the Knight your Cousin? the Thief, and the Taylor with my Cloth of
Gold and Tissue?


The Gentleman that sent away his man with the Stuffs, is gone a pretty while
since, he has carried away our new Brush.


O that Brush hurts my hearts side: Cheated! cheated! he told me that your
Virga had a Burning-feaver.


Pox on your Virga, Barber.


And that you would be bashful, and ashamed to show your head.


I shall so hereafter, but here it is, you see yet my head, my hair, and my
wit, and here are my heels that I must show to my Master, if the Cheaters be
not found; and Barber, provide thee Plasters, I will break thy head with every
Basin under the Pole.


Cool the Luxinium, and quench the Cauterizer,
I am partly out of my wits, and partly mad:
My Razor's at my heart: these storms will make
My Sweet-balls stink, my harmless Basins shake.

YOu're welcome Mistress (as I may speak it) but my Lord will give it a sweeter
Emphasis: I'll give him knowledge of you.


Good sir stay, methinks it sounds sweetest upon your tongue, I'll wish you to
go no further for my welcome.


Mine! it seems you never heard good Music, that commend a Bag-pipe: hear his
harmony.


Nay good now, let me borrow of your patience, I'll pay you again before I rise
to morrow, if it please you.


What would you forsooth?


Your company sir.


My attendance you should have Mistress, but that my Lord expects it, and 'tis
his due.


And must be paid upon the hour! that's too strict, any time of the day will
serve.


Alas 'tis due every minute, and paid, 'tis due again, or else I forfeit my
recognizance, the Cloth I wear of his.


Come, come, pay it double at another time, and 'twil be quitted, I have a
little use of you.


Of me, forsooth, small use can be made of me: if you have suit to my Lord,
none can speak-better for you then you may your self.


Oh, but I am bashful.


So am I in troth, Mistress.


Now I remember me, I have a toy to deliver your Lord that's yet unfinisht, and
you may further me, pray you your hands, while I unwind this Skain of Gold
from you, 'twill not detain you long.


You wind me into your service prettily; with all the haste you can, I beseech
you.


If it tangle not, I shall soon have done.


No, it shall not tangle if I can help it, forsooth.


If it do I can help it, fear not, this thing of long length you shall see I
can bring you to a bottom.


I think so too, if it be not bottomless, this length will reach it


It becomes you finely, but I forewarn you, and remember it your enemy gain not
this advantage of you, you are his prisoner then; for look you, you are mine
now, my captive manacled, I have your hands in bondage.


'Tis a good Lesson, Mistress, and I am perfect in it, another time I'll take
out this, and learn another, pray you release me now.


I could kiss you now spite of your teeth, if it please me.


But you could not, for I could bite you with the spite of my teeth, if it
pleases me.


Well, I'll not tempt you so far, I show it but for rudiment.


When I go a wooing, I'll think on it again.


In such an hour I learnt it, say I should (in recompense of your hands
courtesy) make you a fine Wristfavor of this Gold, with all the letters of
your Name embossed on a soft Tress of Hair, which I shall cut from mine own
Fillet, whose ends should meet and close in a fast True-love-knot, would you
wear it for my sake, sir?


I think not, truly Mistress, my Wrists have enough of this Gold already, would
they were rid on it yet: pray yuo have done, in troth I'm weary.


And what a virtue is here expressed in you, which had lain hid but for this
trial; weary of Gold, sir! Oh that the close Engrossers of this Treasure could
be so free to put it off of hand, what a new mended world would here be! It
shows a generous condition in you, in sooth I think I shall love you dearly
for it.


But if they were in prison, as I am, they would be glad to buy their freedom
with it.


Surely no, there are that rather then release this dear companion, do lye in
prison with it, yes, and will die in prison too.


'Twere pity but the hangman did enfranchise both.


Selenger, where are you?


Even here, my Lord. Mistress, pray you my liberty, you hinder my duty to my
Lord.


Nay sir, one courtesy shall serve us both at this time; you're busy I
perceive, when your leisure next serves you I would employ you.


You must pardon me, my Lord, you see I am entangled here: Mistress I protest
I'll break prison, if you free me not, take you no notice?


Oh cry your Honour mercy, you are now at liberty, sir.


And I'm glad on it, I'll ne'er give both my hands at once again to a woman's
command, I'll put one finger in a hole rather.


Leave us.


Free leave have you, my Lord, so I think you may have: filthy Beauty, what a
white witch thou art!


Lady, you're welcome.


I did believe it from your Page, my Lord. Beau. Your husband sent you to me.


He did my Lord, with duty and commends unto your Honour, beseeching you to use
me very kindly, by the same token your Lordship gave him grant of a New Lease
of Threescore pounds a year, which he and his should forty years enjoy.


The token's true, and for your sake Lady, 'tis likely to be bettered, not
alone the Lease, but the Fee-simple may be his and yours.


I have a suit unto your Lordship too, only my self concerns.


'T will be granted sure, though it out-value thy husbands.


Nay, 'tis small charge, only your good will, and good word, my Lord.


The first is thine confirmed, the second then cannot stay long behind.


I love your Page, sir.


Love him! for what?


Oh, the great wisdoms that our Grandsires had! do you ask me reason for it? I
love him, because I like him, sir.


My Page!


In mine eye, he's a most delicate youth, but in my heart a thing that it
would bleed for.


Either your eye is blinded, or your remembrance broken: call to mind
wherefore you came hither, Lady.


I do my Lord, for love, and I am in profoundly.


You trifle sure, do you long for unripe fruit? 'twill breed diseases in you.


Nothing but worms in my belly, and there's a Seed to expel them; in mellow
falling fruit I find no relish.


'Tis true, the youngest Vines yields the most Clusters, but the old ever the
sweetest Grapes.


I can taste of both sir; but with the old I am the soonest cloid: the green
keep still an edge on appetite.


Sure you are a common creature.


Did you doubt it, wherefore came I hither else? Did you think that honesty
only had bin immured for you, and I should bring it as an Offertorie unto your
shrine of Lust? As it was, my Lord, 'twas meant to you, had not the slippery
Wheel of Fancy turned when I beheld your Page; nay had I seen another before
him in mine eyes better grace, he had bin fore-stal'd; but as it is, (all my
strength cannot help) beseech you your good will, and good word, my Lord, you
may command him, sir; if not affection, yet his body, and I desire but that,
do it, and I'll command my self your prostitute.


You're a base strumpet, I succeed my Page!


Oh that's no wonder, my Lord, the servant oft tastes to his Master of the
daintiest Dish he brings to him; beseech you, my Lord.


You're a bold Mischief, and to make me your Spokes-man; your procurer to my
Servant.


Do you shrink at that? why, you have done worse without the sense of ill, with
a full free conscience of a Libertine: Judge your own sin, was it not worse
with a damned Broking-fee to a corrupt Husband, state him a Pander to his own
wife, by virtue of a Lease made to him and your Bastard issue, could you get
'em: what a degree of baseness call you this? 'Tis a poor Sheep-steal provoked
by want, compared unto a Capital Traitor; the Master to his servant may be
recompenc't, but the husband to his wife never.


Your husband shall smart for this.


Hang him, do, you have brought him to deserve it, bring him to the punishment,
there I'll join with you: I loath him to the Gallows, hang your Page too, one
Mourning-Gown shall serve for both of them: This trick hath kept mine honesty
secure, best Soldiers use policy, the Lions skin Becomes not the body when 'tis
too great, But then the Foxes may sit close, and neat.


Now Flesh-hook, use thy talon, set upon his right shoulder; thy Sergeant
Counter-buff at the left, grasp in his Jugulars, and then let me alone to
tickle his Diaphragma.


You are sure he has no protection, sir?


A protection to cheat and cozen! there was never any granted to that purpose.


I grant you that too, sir, but that use has hin made of 'em.


Marry has there sir, how could else so many broken Bankrupts play up and down
by their Creditors noses, and we dare not touch 'em?


That's another Case, Counter buff, there's privilege to cozen; but here
cozenage went before, and there's no privilege for that; to him boldly, I will
spend all the Sizzars in my shop, but I'll have him snapped.


Well sir, if he come within the length of large Mace once, we'll teach him to
cozen.


Marry hang him, teach him no more cozenage, he's too perfect in it already; go
gingerly about it, lay your Mace on gingerly, and spice him soundly.


He's at the Tavern, you say?


At the Man in the Moon, above stairs, so soon as he comes down, and the Bush
left at his back, Ralph is the dog behind him: he watches to give us notice,
be ready then my dear Blood-hounds, you shall deliver him to Newgate, from
thence to the Hang-man; his body I will beg of the Sheriffs, for at the next
Lecture I am likely to be the Master of my Anatomy, then will I vex every vein
about him, I will find where his Disease of Cozenage lay, whether in the
Vertebrae, or in Oscox*Index, but I guess I shall find it descend from Humore,
through the Thoric, and lye just at his fingers ends.


Be in readiness, for he's coming this way, alone too; stand to it like
Gentleman and Yeoman, so soon as he is in sight, I'll go fetch my Master.


I have had a Conquassition in my Cerebrum ever since the disaster, and now it
takes me again, if it turn to a Megrum, I shall hardly abide the sight of him.


My Action of Defamation shall be clapped on him too, I will make him appear to it
in the shape of a white Sheet all embroidered over with Peccavi's: look about,
I'll go fetch my Master.


I Arrest you, sir.


Ha qui va la, que penses vous fair Messieurs, me voles vous derober, ie nay
point d'argent: Je suis un pouure Gentilhomme Francois.


Whoop! pray you sir speak English you did when you bought Cloth of Gold at six
Nihils a yard, when Ralphs Preputium was exulcerated.


Que voules vous, me voules vous tuer; Le Francois no sont point enemis: voila
ma bource, que voles vous d'avantage.


Is not your name Franklin, sir?


Je na'y point de Joiaux que cestui ci; et cest a Monsieur L'ambasadeur, il
m'en voie a ces afaires et vous enpaiches mon service.


Sir, we are mistaken for ought I perceive.


So, so, you have caught him, that's well: how do you sir?


Vous sembles estre un homme courtois, Je vous pry entendes mes affairs: il y
a ici deux ou erois Quenailles qui m'ont asseige un pouure estranger, qui no
leur ay fait null mal, ny donner mauuaisse parrolle, ny tirer mon espet; l'un me
prend par vne espaule, et me frape deux Liure peisant; L'autre me tire par le
bras, il par le ie no scay quoy: Je leur ay donne ma bource, et si no me
veuleut point Laiser aller; que feray ie Monsieur?


This is a French-man it seems, sirs.


We can find no other in him, sir, and what that is we know not.


He's very like the man we seek for, else my lights go false.


In your shop they may sir, but here they go true: this is he.


The very same sir, as sure as I am Ralph, this is the Rascal.


Sir, unless you will absolutely challenge him the man, we dare not proceed
further.


I fear we are too far already.


I know not what to say to it.


Bon jour, bon jour, Gentilhommes.


How now! more News from France?


Ceste femme ici est de mon pais, Madame ie vous pry Leur dire mon pais, il
mont retarge Je no scay pour quoy.


Estes vous de France Monsieur?


Madame vay est, que ie les ay trompes, et suis areste, et n'ay null moien de
chapter quan chansant mon Language* aides moy en cest affair: Je vous cognois
bien, ou vous tenes un Bordeau; vous et les vostre en seres de mieulx.


Laises fair a moy; Este vous de Lion dites vous.


De Lion, ma chere Damme.


Ma Cozin! Je suis bien aise de vous voire en bonne disposition?


Man Cozin!


This is a French-man sure.


If he be, 'tis the likest an English-man that ever I saw, all his dimensions,
proportions! had I but the dissecting of his heart, in capsula cordis, could I
find it now; for a French-mans heart is more quassitive and subject to tremor,
then an English-mans.


Stay, we'll further enquire of this Gentlewoman. Mistress, if you have so much
English to help us with (as I think you have, for I have long seen you about
London) pray tell us, and truly tell us, Is this Gentleman a natural
French-man, or no?


Ey begar, de French-man, borne a Lyon, my Cozin.


Your Cousin? if he be not your Cousin, he's my Cousin, sure.


Ey konoshe his Pere, what you call his Fadre? he sell Poisons.


Sell poisons, his father was a Potycarry then.


No, no, Poisons, what you call, Fish, fish?


Oh, he was a Fishmonger.


Ouy, ouy.


Well, well, we are mistaken I see, pray you so tell him, and request him not
to be offended; an honest man may look like a knave, and be ne'er the worse
for it, the error was in our eyes, and now we find it in his tongue.


Je saieray encore vne fois Monsieur Cozin, pour vostre sauuete, ales vous en;
vostre Liberte est sufisant: Je gaineray le rest pour mon devoir, et vous
aures vostre part a mon Escole: J'ay vne filly qui parle un peu Francois, elle
conversera avec vous a la Fleur de Lice en Turnbull-street: Mon Cozin aies soin
de vous mesme, et trompes ces Ignorans.


Cozin pour L'amour de vous, et principallement pour moy, ie suis content de
m'en aller, Je trouueray vostre Escole, et si voz Escoliers me sont agreeable,
ie tireray a L'espe' seule, et si d'auenture ie le romp, Je paiera diz souls
et pour ce vieulx Foll, thee ce deux Quenailles, ce Poullens Snip snap, et
L'autre bonnet rond, Je les voiray pendre premier que ie les voie.


So, so, she has got him off; but I perceive much anger in his countenance
still: and what says he, Madam?


Moosh, moosh anger, but ey conosh here Lodging, shall cool him very well,
Dere is a Kinse-womans can moosh allay here heat and here spleen, she shall
do for my saka, and he no trobla you.


Look, there is earnest, but thy reward's behind: Come to my shop, the Holy
Lamb in Lombard-street, thou hast one friend more then e're thou had.


Tanck u Monsieur, shall visit u: ey make all pacisie: a vostre service
treshumbement, tree, four, five fool of u.


What's to be done now?


To pay us for our pains sir, and better reward us, that we may be provided
against further danger that may come upon's for false imprisonment.


All goes false I think: what do you neighbor Sweetball?


I must Phlebotomize sir, but my Almanac says the Sign is in Taurus; I dare
not cut my own throat, but if I find any president that ever Barber hanged
himself, I'll be the second example.


This was your ill Luxinium, Barber, to cause all to be cheated.


What say you to us, sir?


Good friends, come to me at a calmer hour, my sorrows lye in heaps upon me
now; what you have, keep, if further trouble follow I'll take it on me; I would
be pressed to death.


Well sir, for this time we will leave you.


I will go with you, Officers, I will walk with you in the open street though
it be a scandal to me; for now I have no care of my credit, a Cacokenny is run
all over me.


What shall we do now, Ralph?


Faith I know not, sir: here comes George, it may be he can tell you.


And there I look for more disaster still, yet George appears in a smiling
countenance. Ralph, home to the shop, leave George and I together.


I am gone, sir.


Now George, what better News Eastward? all goes ill to'ther way.


I bring you the best news that ever came about your ears in your life, sir.


Thou putst me in good comfort, George.


My Mistress, your wife, will never trouble you more.


Ha? never trouble me more: of this, George, may be made a sad construction,
that phrase we sometimes use when death makes the separation, I hope it is not
so with her, George?


No sir, but she vows she 'l never come home again to you, so you shall live
quietly, and this I took to be very good news, sir.


The worst that could be this, candid poison; I love her, George, and I am
bound to do so, the tongues bitterness must not separate the united souls:
'twere base and cowardly for all to yield to the small Tongues assault: the
whole building must not be taken down, for the repairing of a broken window.


I but this is a Principal, sir: the truth is, she will be divorc't, she says,
and is laboring with her Cousin Knave (what do you call him?) I have forgotten
the latter end of his name.


Knaves-bee, George.


I Knave, or Knaves-bee, one I took it to be.


Why neither rage, nor envy, can make a cause, George.


Yes sir, not only at your person, but she shoots at your shop too, she says
you vent Ware that is not warrantable, brayded Ware, and that you give not
London measure: women you know look for more then a bare yard: and then you
keep children in the name of your own, which she suspects came not in at the
right door


She may as well suspect immaculate Truth to be cursed Falsehood.


I but if she will, she will, she's a woman sir.


'Tis most true, George: well, that shall be redressed, my Cousin Cressingham
must yield me pardon, the children shall home again, and thou shalt conduct 'em,
George.


That done, I'll be bold to venture once more for her recovery, since you cannot
live at liberty; but because you are a rich Citizen, you will have your Chain
about your neck; I think I have a device will bring you together bi'th years
again, and then look to 'em as well as you can.


Oh George, amongst all my heavy Troubles, this is the groaning weight; but
restore my Wife.


Although you ne'er lead hour of quiet life.


I will endeavor't George, I'll lend her Will A power and rule to keep all
husht and still; Eat we all Sweet-meats we are soonest rotten.


A Sentence! pity 't should have bin forgotten. Exeunt.


WHere's Mr. Steward?


Within: what are you, sir?


A Surveyor, sir.


And an Almanac-maker, I take it: Can you tell me what foul weather is toward?


Marry the foulest weather is, that your Land is flying away.


A most terrible prognostication! All the resort, all the business to my house
is to my Lady and Mr. Steward; whilst Sir Francis stands for a Cipher: I have
made away my self and my power, as if I had done it by Deed of Gift: here comes
the Comptroller of the Game.


What, are you yet resolved to translate this unnecessary Land into ready
money?


Translate it?


The Conveyances are drawn, and the money ready: my Lady sent me to you, to
know directly if you meant to go through in the Sale; if not, she resolves of
another course.


Thou speak this cheerfully methinks, whereas faithful servants were wont to
mourn when they beheld the Lord that fed and cherished them, is by cursed
enchantment removed into another blood. Cressingham of Cressingham has
continued many years, and must the Name sink now?


All this is nothing to my Ladies resolution, it must be done, or she'll not
stay in England: she would know whether your son be sent for, that must
likewise set his hand t'oth' Sale; for otherwise the Lawyers say there cannot
be a sure Conveyance made to the Buyer.


Yes, I have sent for him: but I pray thee think what a hard task 't will be
for a Father to persuade his son and heir to make away his inheritance.


Nay for that, use your own Logic: I have heard you talk at the Sessions
terribly against Deer-stealers, and that kept you from being put out of the
Commission.


I do live to see two miseries, one to be commanded by my Wife, the other to be
censured by my slave.


That which I have wanted long, and has bin cause of my irregular courses, I
beseech you let raise me from the ground


Rise George, there's a hundred pounds for you, and my Blessing, with these,
your mothers favour: but I here your studies are become too licentious of late.


He has heard of my cozenage.


What's that you are writing?


Sir, not any thing.


Come, I hear there's something coming forth of yours, will be your undoing.


Of mine?


Yes of your writing; somewhat you should write, will be dangerous to you. I
have a suit to you.


Sir, my obedience makes you commander in all things.


I pray suppose I had committed some fault, for which my Life and sole Estate
were forfeit to the Law, and that some great Man near the King should labour to
get my pardon, on condition he might enjoy my Lordship, could you prize your
Fathers Life above the grievous loss of your inheritance?


Yes, and my own Life at stake too.


You promise fair, I come now to make trial of it: You know I have married one
whom I hold so dear, that my whole life is nothing but a mere estate depending
upon her will, and her affections to me: she deserves so well, I cannot longer
merit then durante been placita, 'tis her pleasure, and (her wisdom moves in it
too) of which I'll give you ample satisfaction hereafter, that I sell the Land
my Father left me: You change colour! I have promised her to do it, and should I
fail, I must expect the remainder of my life as full of trouble and vexation,
as the Suit for a Divorce; it lies in you by setting of your hand unto the
Sale, to add length to his life that gave you yours.


Sir, I do now ingeniously perceive why you said lately, somewhat I should
write would be my undoing, meaning (as I take it) setting my hand to this
Assurance: Oh good Sir, shall I pass away my Birth-right? Oh remember there is
a malediction denounced against it in Holy Writ: will you for her pleasure, the
Inheritance of Desolation leave to your posterity? think how compassionate the
creatures of the field that only live on the wild benefits of Nature, are
unto their young ones; think likewise you may have more children by this woman,
and by this act you undo them too: 'tis a strange president this, to see an
obedient son laboring good counsel to the father! But know Sir, that the
spirits of my Great-Grandfather and your Father moves at this present in me,
and what they bequeathed you, on your Death-bed they charge you not to give
away in the dalliance of a woman's bed: Good Sir, let it not be thought
presumption in me, that I have continued my speech unto this length, the cause
sir, is urgent, and believe it you shall find her Beauty as malevolent unto
you, as a red morning that doth still foretell a foul day to follow: Oh Sir,
keep your Land, keep that to keep your Name immortal, and you shall see All
that her Malice and proud Will procures,

Shall show her ugly heart, but hurt not yours.


Oh I am distracted, and my very soul sends blushes into my cheeks.


See here an Object to beget more compassion.


O Sir Francis, we have a most lamentable house at home, nothing to be heard
in it but Separation and Divorces, and such a noise of the Spiritual Court, as
if it were a Tenement upon London-Bridge, and built upon the Arches.


What's the matter?


All about Boarding your children, my Mistress is departed. Cress. Dead?


In a sort she is, and laid out too, for she is run away from my Master.


Whither?


Seven miles off, into Essex, she vowed never to leave Barking while she lived,
till these were brought home again.


Oh they shall not offend her. I am sorry for it.


I am glad we are come home sir, for we lived in the unquietest house!


The angry woman me thought grutcht us our victuals: our new Mother is a good
Soul, and loves us, and does not frown so like a Vixen as she does.


I am at home now, and in heaven me thinks: what a comfort 'tis to be under
your wing!


Indeed my mother was wont to call me your Nestlecock, and I love you as well
as she did.


You are my pretty souls.


Does not the prattle of these move you?


Look you Sir, here's the Conveyance and my Ladies Solicitor, pray resolve what
to do, my Lady is coming down. How now George, how does thy Mistress that sits
in a Wainscot Gown, like a Citizens Lure to draw in Customers? oh she's a
pretty Moustrap!


She's ill baited though to take a Welch-man, she cannot away with Cheese.


And what must I do now?


Acknowledge a Fine and Recovery of the Land, then for possession the course is
common.


Carry back the Writings sir, my mind is changed.


Changed! do not you mean to seal?


No Sir, the Tide's turned.


You must temper him like wax, or he'll not seal.


Are you come back again? How now, have you done?


How do you, Lady Mother?


You are good children; bid my woman give them some Sweet-meats.


Indeed I thank you: Is not this a kind Mother?


Poor fools, you know not how dear you shall pay for this Sugar.


What, have not you dispatcht?


No Sweetest, I am dissuaded by my son from the Sale o'th Land.


Dissuaded by your son!


I cannot get his hand to it.


Where's our Steward? cause presently that all my Beds and Hangings be taken
down; provide Carts, pack them up, I'll to my House in the Country, have I
studied the way to your preferment and your childrens, and do you cool in the
upshot?


With your pardon, I cannot understand this course a way to any preferment,
rather a direct path to our ruin.


Oh sir, you are young sighted: show them the project of the Land I mean to buy
in Ireland, that shall out-value yours three thousand in a year.


Look you sir, here is Clangibbon, a fruitful country, and well wooded.


What's this, Marsh ground?


No, these are Bogs, but a little Cost will drain them. This upper part ( Map*
that runs by the black water, is the Cossacks Land, a spacious country, and
yields excellent profit by the Salmon, and fishing for Herring: here runs the
Kernes-dale, admirable feed for cattle, and here about is St. Patrick's
Purgatory.


Purgatory! shall we purchase that too?


Come, come, will you dispatch the other business, we may go through with this?


My son's unwilling.


Upon my soul sir, I'll never bed with you till you have sealed.


Thou hear her: on thy blessing follow me to'th' Court, and seal.


Sir, were it my death, were it to'th' loss of my estate, I vow to obey you in
all things; yet with it remember there are two young ones living that may curse
you: I pray dispose part of the money, on their generous Educations.


Fear no you sir: The Caroche there, when you have dispatcht, you shall find
me at the Scriveners where I shall receive the money.


She'll devour that mass too.


How likest thou my power over him?


Excellent.


This is the height of a great Ladies sway,

When her night service makes her rule in the day.


Not yet Sib? my Lord keeps thee so long, you are welcome I see then, and pays
sweetly too: a good wench Sib you are, to obey thy husband. She's come: a
hundred mark a year, how fine and easy it comes into mine arms now! Welcome
home, what says my Lord, Sib?


My Lord says you are a Cuckold.


Ha, ha, ha, ha, I thank him for that Bob in faith, I'll afford it him again at
the same price a month hence, and let the commodity grow as scarce as it will.
Cuckold says his Lordship! ha, ha, I shall burst my sides with laughing that's
the worst, name not a hundred year, for then I burst. It smarts not so much as
a fillip on the forehead by five parts: what has his dalliance taken from thy
lips? 'tis as sweet as ere 'twas, let me try else: buss me Sugar-candy.


Forbear, you presume to a Lords pleasure!


How's that! not I Sib?


Never touch me more, I'll keep the noble Stamp upon my lip, no under baseness
shall deface it now; you taught me the way, now I am in, I'll keep it, I have
kissed Ambition, and I love it, I loath the memory of every touch my lip hath
tasted from thee.


Nay but sweet Sib, you do forget your self.


I will forget all that I ever was, and nourish new sirrah, I am a Lady.


Lord bless us Madam.


I have enjoyed a Lord, that's real possession, and daily shall, the which all
Ladies have not with their Lords.


But with your patience Madam, who was it that preferred you to this Ladyship?


'Tis all I am beholding to thee for, you have brought me out of ignorance into
light, simple as I was, I thought thee a man till I found the difference by a
man: thou art a beast, a horned beast, an Ox.


Are these Ladies terms?


For thy Pandors Fee it shall be laid under the Candlestick, look for it, I'll
leave it for thee.


A little lower, good your Ladyship, my Cousin Chamlet is in the house, let
these things go no further.


'Tis for mine own credit if I forbear, not thine, thou bugle-browd beast thou.


Bidden, bidden, bidden, bidden; so, all these are past: but here's as large a
walk to come, if I do not get it up at the feast, I shall be leaner for bidding
the Guests I'm sure.


How now! who's this?


Doctor Glister, et; what word's this? fuxor, oh Uxor, the Doctor and his wife:
Mr. Body et uxor of Bow-lane, Mr. Knaves-bee et uxor.


Ha, we are in, what soever the matter is.


Here's forty couple more in this quarter; but there the Provision bringing in,
that puzzels me most: One Ox, that will hardly serve for Beef too; five
Muttons, ten Lambs, poor innocents, they'll be devoured too; three gross of
Capons.


Mercy upon us! what a Slaughter-house is here!


Two bushels of small Birds, Plovers, Snipes, Woodcocks, Partridge, Larks; then
for Bak'd-meats.


George, George, what Feast is this? 'tis not for St. George's day?


Cry you mercy sir, you and your wife are in my Roll: my Master invites you his
Guests to morrow dinner.


Dinner say thou? he means to feast a month sure.


Nay sir, you make up but a hundred couple.


Why, what Ship has brought an India home to him, that he's so bountiful? or
what friend dead (unknown to us) has so much left to him of arrable Land, that
he means to turn to pasture thus?


Nay, 'tis a vessel sir, a good estate comes all in one bottom to him, and 'tis
a question whether ever he find the bottom or no; a thousand a year, that's
the uppermost.


A thousand a year!


To go no further about the Bush sir, now the Bird is caught; my Master is to
morrow to be married, and amongst the rest invites you a Guest, at his
Wedding-Dinner the second.


Married!


There is no other remedy for flesh and blood, that will have leave to play
whether we will or no, or wander into forbidden pastures.


Married! why he is married, man; his wife is in my house now, thy Mistress is
alive, George.


She that was, it may be sir, but dead to him, she plaid a little too rough
with him, and he has discarded her, he's divorced sir.


He divorced! then is her labour saved; for she was laboring a Divorce from him.


They are well parted then sir.


But wilt thou not speak with her? 'ifaith invite her to 't.


'Tis not in my Commission, I dare not, fare you well sir, I have much business
in hand, and the time is short.


Nay but George, I prithee stay, may I report this to her for a certain truth?


Wherefore am I employed in this Invitation sir?


Prithee what is she, his second Choice?


Truly a goodly presence, likely to bear great children, and great store, she
never saw five and thirty Summers together in her life by her appearance, and
comes in her French-hood, by my fecks a great Match 'tis like to be; I am sorry
for my old Mistress but cannot help it: pray you excuse me now sir, for all the
business goes through my hands, none employed but my self.


Why here is news that no man will believe, but he that sees.


This, and your Cuckoldry, will be digestion throughout the City dinners and
suppers, for a month together, there will need no Cheese.


No more of that Sib: I'll call my Cousin Chamlet, and make her partaker of this
sport; she's come already. Cousin, take it at once, you're a free woman, your
late husband's to be married to morrow.


Married! to whom?


To a French-hood birlakins, as I understand, great cheer prepared, and great
Guests invited, so far I know.


What a cursed wretch was I to pare my Nails to day, a Friday too; I looked for
some mischief.


Why, I did think this had accorded with your best liking, you sought for him
what he has songht for you, a Separation, and by Divorce too.


I'll Divorce 'em? Is he to be married to a French-hood? I'll dress it the
English fashion; ne'er a Coach to be had with six horses to strike fire in the
streets as we go?


Will you go home then?


Good Cousin, help me to whet one of my knives, while I sharp the the other, give
me a sour apple to set my teeth an edge, I would give five pound for the paring
of my nails again: have you ere a Bird-spit in the house, I'll dress one dish to
the wedding.


This violence hurts your self the most.


I care not who I hurt; oh my heart, how it beats a both sides; will you run
with me for a wager into Lombard-street now?


I'll walk with you Cousin a sufficient pace; Sib. shall come softly after,
I'll bring you thorough Bearbinder-lane.


Bearbinder-lane cannot hold me, I'll the nearest way over St. Mildreds Church,
if I meet any French-hoods by the way, I'll make black patches enough for the
rheum.


So 'tis to my wish, Master Knavesbee,
Help to make peace abroad, here you'll find wars,
I'll have a divorce too, with locks and bars.

Madam, but stay here a little, my Master comes instantly, I heard him say he
did ow you a good turn, and now's the time to take it, I'll warrant you a sound
reward e're you go.


Ey Tank u de bon cour Monsieur.


Look he's here already, now would a skilful Navigator take in his Sails, for
sure there is a storm towards.


Oh Madam I perceive in your countenance (I am beholding to you) All is peace?
Mar. All quiet, goor frendsheep, ey mooch a do, ey strive wid him: give goor
worda for you; no more speak a de matra, all es undonne u no more trobla.


Look, there's the price of a fair pair of Gloves, and wear 'em for my sake.


Oh, oh, oh, my hearts broke out of my ribs.


Nay a little patience.


Ey tank u artely, shall no bestow en gloves, shall put moosh more to does, an
bestow your shop; Regard does stofa my pettycote u no soosh anodre; shall
deal wid u for moosh; take in your hand.


I see it Mistress, 'tis good stuff indeed, 'tis a Silk rash, I can pattern it.


Shall he take up her coats before my face? Oh beastly creature; French-hood,
Frenchhood, I will make your hair grow thorough.


My wife returned! oh welcome home, sweet Rachel.


I forbid the Banes, Lecher and strumpet, thou shalt bear children without
noses.


O pardonne moy, by my trat ey mean u no hurta: wat u meant by does?


I will have thine eyes out, and thy Bastards shall be as blind as Puppies.


Sweet Rachel, good Cousin help to pacify.


I forbid the Banes, Adulterer.


What means she by that sir?


Good Cousin forbid your rage a while, unless you hear, by what sense will you
receive satisfaction?


By my hands and my teeth sir, give me leave, will you bind me whiles mine
enemy kills me?


Here all are your friends sweet wife.


Will it have two wives? Do and by hanged Fornicator, I forbid the Banes; give me
the French-hood, I'll tread it under feet in a pair of Pantophles.


Begar shall save hood head and all; shall come no more heer, ey warran u.


Sir, the truth is, Report spoke it for truth, you were to morrow to be
married.


I forbid the Banes.


Mercy deliver me, if my grave embrace me in the bed of death, I would to
Church with willing ceremony; but for my wedlock-fellow, here she is the first
and last that ere my thoughts looked on.


Why law you Cousin, this was nought but error or an assault of mischief.


Whose report was it?


Your man Georges, who invited me to the wedding.


George? And was he sober? Good sir call him.


It needs not sir, I am here already.


Did you report this George?


Yes sir I did.


And wherefore did you so?


For a new suit that you promised me sir, if I could bring home my Mistress, and
I think she's come with a mischief.


Give me that villains ears.


I would give ear, if I could hear you talk wisely.


Let me cut off his ears.


I shall hear worse of you hereafter then, limb for limb, one of my ears, for
one of your tongues, and I'll lay out for my Master.


'Twas knavery with a good purpose in it, sweet Rachel, this was even Georges
meaning, a second marriage 'twixt thy self and me, and now I woo the to it, a
quiet night will make the Sun like a fresh Bridegroom rise, and kiss the chaste
echeek of the rosy morn which we will imitate, and like him creat Fresh buds of
love, fresh spreading arms, fresh fruit, Fresh wedding robes, and Georges fresh
new suit.


This is fine stuff, have you much on it to sell?


A remnant of a yard.


Come, come, all's well, sir, you must sup, instead of to morrows dinner.


I follow you; no: 'tis another way,
My Lords reward calls me to better cheer
Many good meals a hundred marks a year;
my wives transformed a Lady, tush, she'll come to her shape again,
my Lord rides the circuit,
If I rid along with him, what need I grutch
I can as easy sit, and speed as much.

SIr, your sons death which has apparrel'd you in this darker wearing, is a
loss wherein I have ample share; he was my friend.


He was my nearest and dearest enemy, and the perpetual fear of a worse end had
he continued his former dissolute course, makes me weigh his death the lighter.


Yet sir, with your pardon, if you value him every way as he deserved, it will
appear your scanting of his means, and the Lord Beauforts most un-lordly breach
of promise to him, made him fall upon some courses, to which his nature and
mine own, (made desperate likewise by the cruelty of a Mother in Law) would
else have bin as strange, as insolent greatness is to distressed virtue.


Yes, I have heard of that too; your defeat made upon a Mercer, I style't
modestly, the Law intends it plain cozenage.


'Twas no less, but my penitence and restitution, may come fairly off from it;
it was no Impeachment to the Glory won at Agencourts great Battle, that the
Achiever of it in his youth had bin a Purse-taker, this with all reverence
to'th great Example. Now to my business, wherein you have made such noble trial
of your worth, that in a world so dull as this, where faith is almost grown to
be a miracle, I have found a friend so worthy as your self, to purchase all the
Land my Father sold at the persuasion of a riotous woman, and charitable to
reserve it for his use, and the good of his three children; this I say, is such
a deed shall style you our Preserver, and ow the memory of your worth, and pay
it to all posterity.


Sir, what I have done, looks to the end of the good deed it self, no other way
in the world.


But would you please out of a friendly reprehension, to make him sensible of
the weighty wrong he has done his children, yet I would not have it too bitter,
for he undergoes already such torment in a woman's naughty pride, too harsh
reproof would kill him.


Leave you that to my discretion: I have made my self my sons Executor, and am
come up on purpose to collect his Creditors, and where I find his pennyworth
conscionable, I'll make them in part satisfaction:

Oh this fellow was born near me, and his trading here in the City may bring me
to the knowledge of the men my son ought money to.


Your Worship's welcome to London, and I pray how does all our good friends
in the Country?


They are well, George: how thou art shot up since I saw thee? what, I think
thou art almost out of thy Time?


I am out of my wits sir, I have lived in a kind of Bedlam these four years,
how can I be mine own man then?


Why, what's the matter?


I may turn Soap-boyler, I have a loose body: I am turned away from my Master.


How! turned away! Indenture.


I am gone sir, not in drink, and yet you may behold my Indentures: Oh the
wicked wit of woman, for the good turn I did bringing her home, she ne'er left
sucking my Masters breath, like a Cat, kissing him I mean, till I was turned
away!


I have heard she's a terrible woman.


Yes, and the miserablest! her sparing in House-keeping has cost him somewhat,
the Dagger-pyes can testify: she has stood in's light most miserably, like
your Fasting-days before Red letters in the Almanac: saying, the pinching of
our bellies would be a mean to make him wear Scarlet the sooner. She had once
persuaded him to have bought Spectacles for all his servants, that they might
have worn 'em dinner and supper.


To what purpose?


Marry, to have made our Victuals seem bigger than 't was: she shows from
whence she came, that my Winde-collick can witness.


Why, whence came she?


Marry from a Courtier, and an Officer too, that was up and down I know not how
often.


Had he any great place?


Yes, and a very high one, but he got little by it; he was one that blew the
Organ in the Court Chapel, our Puritans, especially your Puritans in Scotland,
could ne'er away with him.


Is she one of the Sect?


Faith I think not, for I am certain, she denies her husband the supremacy.


Well George, your difference may be reconciled. I am now to use your help in a
business that concerns me: here's a Note of men's names here in the City, unto
whom my son ought money, but I do not know their dwelling?


Let me see sir: fifty pound taken up at use of Mr. Water Thin the Brewer.


What's he?


An obstinate fellow, and one that denied payment of the groats, till he lay
by the heels for it; I know him: Item, fourscore pair of provant Breeches'ath'
new fashion, to Pinch buttock a Hosier in Burchen-lane, so much.


What the devil did he with so many pair of breeches?


Supply a Captain sir, a friend of his went over to the Palatinate.


Item, to my Tailor Mr. Wetherwise, by St. Clements-church.


Who should that be? it may be 'tis the new Prophet, the Astrological Tailor.


No, no, no sir, we have nothing to do with him.


Well, I'll read no further, leave the note to my discretion, do not fear but
I'll enquire them all.


Why, I thank thee.


Sir, rest assured I shall in all your business be faithful to you, and at
better leisure find time to imprint deeply in your father, the wrong he has
done you,


You are worthy in all things?

Is my father stirring?


Yes, sir, my Lady wonders you are thus chargeable to your father, and will not
direct your self unto some gainful study, may quit him of your dependence.


What study?


Why the Law, that Law that takes up most 'ath' wits in the kingdom, not for most
good, but most gain, or Divinity; I have heard you talk well, and I do not
think but you'd prove a singular fine Church-man.


I should prove a plural better, if I could attain to fine benifices.


My Lady now she has money, is studying to do good works, she talked last night
what a goodly act it was, of a Countess ( Northampton-shire breed belike, or
thereabouts) that to make Coventry a Corporation, rode through the City naked,
and by day light.


I do not think, but you have Ladies living would discover as much in private,
to advance but some member of a Corporation.


Well sir, your wit is still goaring at my Ladies projects: here's your father.


Thou come to chide me, hearing how like a ward I am handled, since the sale
of my Land.


No sir, but to turn your eyes into your own bosom.


Why, I am become my wives pensioner; am confined to a hundred mark a year,
t'one suit, and one man to attend me.


And is not that enough for a private Gentleman?


Peace sirrah, there is nothing but knave speaks in thee, and my two poor
children must be put forth to prentice.


Ha! to prentice: sir, I do not come to grieve you, but to show how wretched
your estate was that you could not come to see order, until foul disorder
pointed the way to it, so inconsiderate, yet so fruitful still is dotage to beget
its own destruction.


Surely I am nothing, and desire to be so, pray thee fellow entreat her only
to be quiet, I have given her all my estate on that condition.


Yes sir, her Coffers are well lined believe me.


And yet she is not contented; we observe the Moon is ne'er so pleasant, and so
clear as when she is at the full.


You did not use my mother with this observance, you are like the Frogs, who
weary of their quiet King, consented to the election of the Stork, who in the
end devoured them.


You may see how apt man is to forfeit all his judgement upon the instant of
his fall.


Look up sir.


O my hearts broke; weighty are injuries that come from an enemy, but those are
deadly that come from a friend, for


What a terrible eye she darts on us.


Oh most natural, for lightning to go before the thunder.


What? Are you in council? are ye levying faction against us.


Good friend.


Sir, sir, pray come hither, there is winter in your looks, a latter winter, do
you complain to your kindred? I'll make you fear extremely, to show you have
any cause to fear: Are the bonds sealed for the six thousand pounds I put forth
to use?


Yes Madam.


The bonds were made in my uncles name.


Yes.


'Tis well.


'Tis strange though.


Nothing strange, you'll think the allowance I have put you to as strange, but
your judgement cannot reach the aim I have in it: you were pricked last year to
be High Sheriff, and what it would have cost you I understand now, all this
charge and the other by the sale of your Land, and the money at my dispose, and
your pension so small, will settle you in quiet, make you Master of a retired
life, and our great ones may think you a politic man, and that you are aiming
at some strange business, having made all over.


I must leave you, man is never truly awake till he be dead.


What a dream have you made of my father?


Let him be so, and keep the proper place of dreams; his bed, until I raise
him.


Raise! him not unlikely, 'tis you have ruined him.


You do not come to quarrel?


No certain, but to persuade you to a thing, that in the virtue of it, nobly
carries its own commendation, and you shall gain much honour by it, which is the
recompense of all virtuous actions, to use my father kindly.


Why? does he complain to you sir?


Complain: why should a King complain for any thing, but for his sins to
heaven, the prerogative of husband is like to his, over his wife.


I am full of business sir, and will not mind you.


I must not leave you thus; I tell you mother 'tis dangerous to a woman, when
her mind raises her to such height, it makes her only capable of her own
merit; nothing of duty! oh, 'twas a strange unfortunate o're-prising your
beauty, brought him, (otherwise discreet) into the fatal neglect of his poor
children: what will you give us of the late sum you received?


Not a penny; away, you are troublesome and saucy.


You are too cruel: denials even from Princes who may do what they list, should
be supplied with a gracious verbal usage, that though they do not cure the
sore, they may abate the sense of't; the wealth you seem to command over, is
his, and he I hope will dispose of't to our use.


When he can command my will?


Have you made him so miserable, that he must take a Law from his wife?


Have you not had some Lawyers forced to groan under the burden?


Oh! but the greater the women, the more visible are their vices.


So sir, you have been so bold; by all can bind an oath, and I'll not break
it, I will not be the woman to you hereafter you expected.


Be not; be not your self, be not my fathers wife, be not my Lady Cressingham,
and then I'll thus speak to you, but you must not answer in your own person.


A fine Puppet play!


Good Madam, please you pity the distress of a poor Gentleman, that is undone
by a cruel Mother in Law, you do not know her, nor does she deserve the
knowledge of any good one, for she does not know her self, you would sigh for
her that ere she took you sex, if you but heard her qualities.


This is a fine Crotchet.


Envy and Pride, flow in her painted breasts, she gives no other suck; all her
attendants do not belong to her husband, his money is hers, marry his debts are
his own, she bears such sway, she will not suffer his Religion be his own, but
what she please to turn it to.


And all this while, I am the woman you libel against.


I remember e're the Land was sold, you talked of going to Ireland, but should
you touch there, you would die presently.


Why Man?


The country brookes no poison: go, You'll find how difficult a thing it is, to
make a settled or assured Estate of things ill gotten: when my father's dead,
the curse of Lust and Riot follow you, marry some young gallant that may rifle
you; yet add one blessing to your needy age, that you may die full of
repentance.


Ha, Ha, Ha.


Oh! she's lost to any kind of goodness.


Sirrah, be gone, you're base.


Base, my good Lord? 'tis a ground part in Music, trebles, means, all his but
sidling, your Honour bore a part as my wife says, my Lord.


Your wives a Strumpet.


Ah ha, is she so? I am glad to hear it, open confession, open payment, the
wagers mine then, a hundred a year my Lord, I said so before, and staked my
head against it, thus after darksome night, the day is come, my Lord.


Hence, hide thy branded head, let no day see thee, nor thou any but thy
execution day.


That's the day after washing day, once a week, I see it at home my Lord.


Go home and see thy prostituted wife (for sure 'tis so) now folded in a Boys
adultery, my Page; on whom the hot-rain'd harlot dotes, this night he hath been
her attendant, my house he's fled from, and must no more return, go, and make
haste sir, lest your reward be lost for want of looking to.


My reward lost; is there nothing due for what is past, my Lord?


Yes Pander, Wittoll, Macrio, basest of knaves, thou Boulster-bawd to thine own
infamy! go, I have no more about me at this time, when I am better stored thou
shalt have more where e're I meet thee.


Pander, Wittoll, Macrio, base knave, bolster bawd; here is but five mark
toward a hundred a year: this is poor payment, if Lords may be trusted no
better then thus! I will go home and cut my Wives Nose off, I will turn over a
new Leaf, and hang up the Page; lastly I will put on a large pair of Wetleather
Boots and drown my self, I will sink at Queen-hive, and rise again at
Charing-cross contrary to the Statute in Edwardo primo.


Good health to your Lordship.


Mr. Franklin, I heard of your arrival, and the cause of this your sad
appearance.


And 'tis no more then as your Honour says, indeed appearance, it has more form
then feeling sorrow Sir, I must confess, there's none of these Gentlemen
(though Aliens in blood) but have as large cause of grief as I.


No, by your favour sir, we are well satisfied; there was in his life a greater
hope, but less assurance.


Sir, I wish all my debts of no better promise to pay me thus, fifty in the
hundred comes fairly homewards.


Considering hard Bargains and dead Commodities, sir.


Thou say true, friend, and from a dead Debtor too.


And so you have compounded and agreed all your sons riotous Debts?


There's behind but one cause of worse condition, that done, he may sleep
quietly.


Yes sure my Lord, this Gentleman is come a wonder to us all, that so fairly
with half a loss could satisfy those debts were dead, even with his son, and
from whom we could have nothing claimed.


I showed my reason; I would have a good name live after him, because he bore
my Name.


May his tongue perish first (and that will spoil his trade) that first gives
him a syllable of ill.


Why this is friendly.


My Lord!


Mr. Chamlet! very welcome.


Mr. Franklin, I take it, these Gentlemen I know well: good Mr. Pennystone, Mr.
Phillip, Mr. Cheyney! I am glad I shall take my leave of so many of my good
friends at once; your hand first, my Lord, fare you well sir, nay I must have
all your hands to my Pass.


Will you have mine too sir?


Yes, thy two hands George, and I think two honest hands of a Trades-man,
George, as any between Cornhil and Lombard-street.


Take heed what you say sir, there's Birchen-lane between 'em.


But what's the cause of this, Mr. Chamlet?


I have the cause in handling, now my Lord; George, honest George is the cause,
yet no cause of Georges, George is turned away one way, and I must go another.


And whither is your way sir?


Even to seek out a Quiet Life, my Lord: I do hear of a fine peaceable Island.


Why 'tis the same you live in.


No, 'tis so famed, but we th'inhabitants find it not so; the place I speak of
has bin kept with thunder, with frightful lightnings, amazing Noises, but now
(th'inchantment broke) 'tis the Land of Peace, where Hogs and Tobacco yield
fair increase.


This is a little wild methinks.


Gentlemen, fare you well, I am for the Bermudas.


Nay, good sir stay, and is that your only cause, the loss of George?


The loss of George, my Lord! make you that no cause? why but examine, would it
not break the stout heart of a Nobleman to loose his George, much more the
tender bosom of a Citizen.


Fie, fie, I'm sorry your gravity should run back to lightness thus: you go to
the Bermothes!


Better to Ireland Sir.


The Land of Ire, that's too near home, my wife will be heard from Hellbree to
Divellin.


Sir, I must of necessity a while detain you: I must acquaint you with a
benefit that's coming towards you. You were cheated of some goods of late,
come, I'm a Cunning-man, and will help you to the most part again, or some
reasonable satisfaction.


That's another cause of my unquiet Life, sir; can you do that, I may chance
stay another Tide or two: My wife! (I must speak more private with you) by
forty foot pain of death, I dare not reach her: No words of me sweet Gentlemen.


I had need hide too.


Oh, my Lord, I have scarce tongue enough yet to tell you; my husband, my
husband's gone from me, your warrant good my Lord, I never had such need of
your warrant; my husband's gone from me.


Going he is, 'tis true; has taken his leave of me, and all these Gentlemen, and
'tis your sharp tongue that whips him forwards.


A warrant, good my Lord.


You turn away his servants, such on whom his estate depends he says, who know
his books, his debts, his customers; the form and order of all his affairs you
make orderless, chiefly his George you have banished from him.


My Lord, I will call George again.


Call George again.


Why hark you, how high voiced you are, that raise an Echo from my Selleridge
which we with modest loudness cannot.


My Lord, do you think I speak too loud?


Too loud.


Why hark, your own tongue answers you, and reverberates your words into your
teeth.


I will speak lower all the days of my life: I never found the fault in my self
till now, your warrant good my Lord, to stay my husband.


Well, well, it shall o'retake him, ere he pass Gravesend, provided that he
meet his quietness at home, else he's gone again.


And withal to call George again.


I will call George again.


Call George again.


See, you are raised again, the Echo tells you.


I did forget my self indeed, my Lord: this is my last fault, I will go make a
silent enquiry after George, I will whisper half a score Porters in the ear,
that shall run softly up and down the City to seek him. Bewy ye my Lord, buoy
all Gentlemen. Exit


George, your way lies before you now, cross the street, and come into her
eyes, your Masters Journey will be staid.


I'll warrant you bring it to better subjection yet.


These are fine flashes: how now Mr. Chamlet?


I had one ear lent to you-ward, my Lord, and this o'th to'ther side, both
sounded sweetly: I have whole recovered my late losses sir, th'one half paid,
the to'ther is forgiven.


Then your Journey is staid?


Alas my Lord, that was a trick of age, for I had left never a trick of youth
like it, to succour me.


How now? what new Object's here!


The next man we meet shall judge us.


Content, though he be but a Common-Council-man.


The one's a knave, I could know him at twelve score distance.


And to'ther 's a Barber-Surgeon, my Lord.


I'll go no further, here is the honourable Lord, that I know will grant my
request; My Lord --


Peace, I will make it plain to his Lordship: My Lord, a Covenant by Jus
Jurandum is between us, he is to suffocate my Respiration by his Capistrum, and
I to make incission so far as mortification by his Jugulars.


This is not altogether so plain neither, sir.


I can speak no plainer my Lord, unless I wrong mine art.


I can my Lord, I know some part of the Law, I am to take him in this place
where I find him, and lead him from hence to the place of Execution, and there
to hang him till he dies; he in equal courtesy is to cut my throat with his
Razor, and there's an end of both on's.


There is the end my Lord, but we want the beginning: I stand upon it to be
strangled first, before I touch either his Gula or Ceruix.


I am against it, for how shall I be sure to have my Throat cut after he's
hanged.


Is this a Condition betwixt you?


A firm Covenant, signed and sealed by oath and handfast, and wants nothing but
Agreement.


A little pause: what might be the cause on either part?


My passions are grown to putrefaction, and my griefs are gangren'd; Mr.
Chamlet has scarified me all over, besides the loss of my new Brush.


I am kept out of mine own Castle, my Wife keeps the Hold against me: your Page
my Lord, is her Champion; I summoned a Parle at the window, was answered with
Defiance: they confess they have lain together, but what they have done else I
know not.


Thou can have no wrong that deserves pity, thou art thy self so bad.


I thank your Honour for that, let me have my throat cut then.


Sir, I can give you a better remedy then his Capistrum; your ear a little.


I come with a bold innocence to answer the best and worst that can accuse me
here.


Your husband.


He's the worst, I dare his worst.


Your Page, your Page.


We lay together in bed, it is confessed; you, and your ends of Law makes worser
of it, I did it for reward.


I'll hear no more of this, come Gentlemen will you walk?


My Lord, a little stay; you'll see a sight that neighbor amity will be much
pleased with, 'tis come already, my Father sir.


There must be cause certain for this good change: Sir, you are bravely met,
this is at the best I ever saw you.


My Lord, I am amazement to my self; I slept in poverty, and am awake into this
wonder; how I can thus brave, my dreams did not so much as tell me of; I am of
my kind sons new making up, it exceeds the pension much, that yesternight
allow'd me, and my pockets centupled, but I am my sons child, sir, he knows of
me more then I do my self.


Sir, you yet have but earnest of your happiness, a Pinnace fore-riding a goodly
vessel, by this near Anchor-bulkt like a Castle, and with Jewels fraught, (Joys
above Jewels sir,) from deck to keel, make way for the receipt, empty your
bosom of all griefs and troubles, leave not a sigh to beat her back again, she
is so stored ye'ad need have room enough, to take her lading.


If one Commodity be wanting now, all this is nothing.


Tush, that must out too, there must be no remembrance, not the thought that
ever youth in woman did abuse you, that e're your children had a stepmother,
that you sold Lands to please your punishment, that you were circumscribed and
taken in, abridged the large extendure of your grounds, and put into the
pinfold that belonged to it, that your son did cheat for want of maintenance;
that he did beg, you shall remember only, for I have begged off all these
troubles from you.


This was a good weeks labour.


Not an hours my Lord, but 'twas a happy one; see sir, a new day shines on you.


Oh sir, your son has robbed me.


Ha! that way I instructed?


Nay, hear her sir.


Of my good purpose sir, he hath forced out of me, what lay concealed, ripened
my pity with his dews of duty, forgive me sir, and but keep the number of every
grief that I have pained you with, I'll ten-fold pay with fresh obedience.


Oh, that my wife were here to learn this lesson.


Your state is not abated, what was yours, is still your own, and take the
cause withal of my harsh seeming usage; it was to reclaim faults in your self,
the swift consumption of many large revenues, Gaiming, that of not much less
speed, burning up house and land, not casual but cunning fire, which though it
keeps the Chymney, and outward shows like Hospitality, is only devourer on it,
Consuming Chemistry; there I have made you a flat banquet-out; all your
Stillatories and laboring Minerals are demolished, that part of Hell in your
house is extinct, put out your desire with them, and then these feet shall
level with my hands, until you raise my stooped humility to higher grace, to
warm these lips with love, and duty do to every silver hair, each one shall be a
Senator to my obedience.


All this I know before, who ever of you that had but one ill thought of this
good woman, you owe a knee to her, and she is merciful if she forgive you.


That shall be private penance sir, we will all joy in public with you.


On the conditions I tell you, not else.


Sweet George, dear George, any conditions.


My wife!


Peace, George is bringing her to conditions.


Good ones, good George.


You shall never talk your voice above the key, sol, sol, sol.


Sol, sol, sol, I George.


Say welcome home honest George, in that pitch.


Welcome home honest George.


Why this is well now.


That's well indeed, George.


Rogue, nor Rascal must never come out of your mouth.


They shall never come in, honest George.


Nor I will not have you call my Master plain husband, that's too course, but
as your Gentlewomen in the Country use, and your persons wives in the Town,
'tis comely, and shall be customed in the City, call him Master Chamlet at every
word.


At every word, honest George.


Look you, there he is, salute him then.


Welcome home, good Mr. Chamlet.


Thanks, and a thousand sweet Wife; I may say honest George.


Yes sir, or Bird, or Chuck, or Hearts ease, or plain Rachel, but call her Rac
no more, so long as she is quiet.


God-a-mercy, shall it have thy new suit a Sunday George.


George shall have two new suits, Mr. Chamlet.


God-a-mercy, in faith Chuck.


Mr. Chamlet, you and I are friends, all even betwixt us?


I do acquit thee, neighbor Sweetbal.


I will not be hanged then, Knares-bee do thy worst; nor I will not cut thy
throat.


I must do it my self.


If thou come to my shop, and usurp my chair of maintenance, I will go as
near as I can, but I will not do it.


No, 'tis I must cut Knaves-bees throat, for slandering a modest Gentlewoman,
and my wife in shape of your Page, my Lord, in her own I durst not place her so
near your Lordship.


No more of that sir, if your ends have acquired their own events, crown 'em
with your own Joy.


Down a your knees Knaves-bee, to your wife, she's too honest for you.


Down, down, before you are hanged, it will be to late afterwards, and long thou
can not escape it.


You'll play the Pander no more, will you?


Oh, that's an inch into my throat.


And let out your wife for her?


Oh sweet wife, go no deeper.


Dare any be bail for your better behavior?


Yes, yes I dare, he will mend one day.


And be worse the next.


Hang me the third then, dear merciful wife,
I will do Any thing for a quiet Life.

All then is reconciled?


Only my brush is lost, my dear new brush.


I will help you to satisfaction for that too sir.


Oh, Sperma Caete, I feel it heal already.


Gentlemen, I have fully satisfied my dead sons debts?


All pleased, all paid sir.


Then once more here I bring him back to life, from my servant to my son, nay,
wonder not; I have not dealt by fallacy with any, my son was dead, who e're out
lives his virtues is a dead man, for when you hear of spirits that walk in real
bodies, to the amaze and cold astonishment of such as meet 'em, and all would
shun; those are men of vices, who nothing have but what is visible, and so by
consequence they have no souls, but if the soul return but if the Soul return
he lives again,

Created newly; such my Son appears
By my blessing rooted, growing by his tears.

You have beguiled us honestly sir.


And you shall have your brush again.


My basins shall all ring for joy


Why this deserves a Triumph, and my cost shall begin a feast to it, to which I
do invite you all; such happy reconcilements must not be past without a health
of joy,

Discorded friends atoned, men and their wives
This hope proclaims your after quiet Lives.

I Am sent to enquire your Censure, and to know
How you stand affected? whither we do owe
Our service to your Favours, or must strike
Our Sails (though full of hope) to your dislike:
How e're be pleased to think we purposed well,
And from my fellows thus much I must tell,
Instruct us but in what we went astray,
And to redeem it, we'll take any way.

