WHo have we here, sine Sparks, faith Sirs I fear
You'll not be pleased with our Vacation Cheer;
Why, what a Devil make you now in Town
In the Mall, the Park, and Play-house Clothes were shown,
Down, down to the Country, there show the Gay Baboon;
Cloris, and Celia do expect ye there,
To the honest Tradesmen leave this time of the year,
Who, (while their Wives (good men) are gone to meet
Some of you Sirs t'th' Country here can sit
Wondrously pleased with our Vacation Treat.
But since against the Rules of Gallantry
Ye keep in Town, faith take your Chance for me;
Huff, Damn and Swear, if you think good -- but then
Expect a brush fro'th' Trading Gentlemen,
For' tis their time to approve or to Condemn:
You'll say, 'tis hard, you cannot be allow'd
To Judge, and censure with the Common Crowd;
Nay to be bared from damning, swearing too,
When, here, you've hardly little else to do,
Since Vizards are grown scarce: -- might I advise,
If you will come, let 't be in some disguise,
With Coat, Short wig, and Colbertein Cravat,
With greasy Gloves, and the broad flapping hat,
Then freely ye may give the Play its Fate;
But if you boldly will Usurp their Right,
And huffing damn the Play out of mere spite,
Because it affords not you deboacht delight,
You justly may expect that They will swear
Vacation Pocket 'tis, that keeps you here;
And Play at Half a Crown does now prove Dear.

I Am at my Wits ends, Sam.


Faith Sir, like a kind Friend, I'm following you as fast as I can.


My Wife will be forced from me, my pleasure, my delight.


How shall we help it, Sir, dull, dull dog as I am, my invention was never so
gravelled since I first set out upon it.


But this is not all my misery -- for I am branded with the breach of
Friendship: for Sanders does suspect that I make Love to his Mistress the
Widows Niece Eugenia; when Heaven knows, 'tis my Father that works against the
peace of both our spirits, and courts her for me.


Let him go on, Sir, She'll hardly yield to an Old Man's Courtships, especially
when she finds you appear not in it -- but Sir, here's Mr. Sanders with looks
as melancholy and angry as a Looseing Bulley of Marribone.


My treacherous Rival there! draw Sir --


What means my Friend? --


Not a word, but defend thy life.


I'll dye before I'll draw against the man that I love; what reason? --


Thy Perjuries have blotted out the name of Friend, and out of Cowardice you
endeavour to excuse an act, not Heaven it self can pardon, much less I, -- but
thus I will repay thy falsehood.


Hold, hold, Sir, -- here's like to be fine work -- Pray hear him first before
you kill him, Sir, -- upon my life, your anger is in an Error all this while;
for 'tis my young Masters Injury and not yours, you would kill him for -- Come
Sir, I must have ye friends, a pox on weapons -- Mr. Sanders your hand, Sir, --
Now yours, Sir, -- So, so -- Now all's right again: This is a new way of
reconciling Friends, which I learnt the other day among the Town Blades --


You are a mad Slave.


Now Sam, tell him the Secret, which none knows but your self and I, and he
will confess he has wronged the patience of his Friend.


Be patient then and attend -- You must know, Sir, That about Seven Years since
my Lady, his Mother, went over to Flanders, to coop the Young Chick his Sister
in a Nunnery, she then being about Nine Years old; but on the Road to Antwerp,
they met Thieves, were robbed, stripped, and parted; for the Kites conveyed the
Young One-away, and left the Old one to cackle over her loss.


Strange accident!


From which time they were not heard off, till about Three Months since, News
came of all had past, in a Letter from the Mother, who was then but in an ill
condition at Colone; for thither she had wandered to find out her Daughter, but
despairing of that, she sent over for Money to bring her home with -- My Old
Master no sooner heard of the Sum, but told it out, gave it him, and sent us
over; but we unfortunately calling at Antwerp by the way, a little Gypsy at an
Inn, had so looked her self into his heart, that the Mother was forgot, and he
doted so, that he brought her over, and this day married her; but pretends it
is his Sister; for which she now passes with the Old Man.


But how came you off concerning her Mother?


With a Tale of my own devising, That about 3 Years since she dyed at a little
Village within Two Leagues of Antwerp.


Let me admire thee -- and withal confess my groundless Jealousy.


Which thus I pardon -- and renew our former friendship --


But here's the Devil on it, my Old Master concluding her his Daughter, has
found out a Match for her, an Old Rank Fox, one Gazer.


What he that woes by the Almanac? observes the Full and Change of the Moon, and
makes it his business to conform all his actions and designs to the Influence
of the Planets?


The very same, he will not shave his Beard, clip his Nails, nor cut a Corn
before he has consulted Erra Pater, whether it be a lucky day or no.


Even he, because the Fool demands no portion -- but if my skill fail not, I
shall give him the Go-by.


As how, good Sam?


Honest Rogue say how.


Thus -- when the Fool's cashiered, as that he shall be, I'll tell my Old
Master, that you admire his Daughter, and your Love's so great, that provided
you might have her, you'd take her without a farthing -- it's no sooner heard,
but the bait is swallowed, you are admitted, and the Match concluded.


But how will you shift off the Marriage?


I have a Trick for that too -- and each shall have his own -- and both being
lodged in one house, as 'tis his pride to have his Childrens Children got
successively, on his fore-fathers Beds -- in the Day time to please the Old
Man, ye may dally and print a kiss on the wrong Lip, and no harm in it; for
Brothers and Sisters may do it: But for the Night, let each know his own
business, and there I'll leave you.


Honest Rogue, how I applaud thy Wit.


See, my Father's coming -- let us retire --


About it straight, my Master's time is precious -- and let me alone with my
Old Master --


How now Sirrah, does the Love-business go well between the Young Ones?


Between your Son, and Mris. Eugenia the Line is Even, Sir --


And shall I be a Grandsire then?


Oh questionless, Sir -- but Sir methinks there's no proportion between that
Equinoctial and my Young Mistress Clarina.


You mean Gazer: why the better Man; the better.


How Sir, are you glad there's no proportion in it?


Yes marry am I Sir; for I would have you to know, I hate all words that end in
portion -- for I'll give her nothing.


Say you should not, Sir, as I'll ne'er urge your Worship against your Nature
-- is there no Gentleman (think you) of Worth and Credit, that will not open
his Bed to warm a plump, handsome, charming naked Lady? believe me, Sir, there
are Thousands in this Town would be glad of such Service; nay, and would give
Money rather then not be so employed.


Say you so? then they shall give me money for my Girl, or they shall go
without her.


Yes, they do give, keep, and treat, but not marry Sir, which I suppose you are
for.


For quoth I? my Daughter shall not be a Whore, no not to get money, which is the
best plea the Jades of the Town have for their lewdness, and in troth I love
wealth so, that in my conscience had I bin a Maid, I had turned Strumpet mearly
for money sake.


A Smiting one 'yfaith -- but Sir methinks there's a great inequality in years
-- Mr. Gazer is too old in conscience for my young Mistress.


You lye Sirrah -- he is but fifty five years of discretion, and will make a
Staid Husband.


As tame as a Drone that has lost his sting -- but Sir, under correction, I
fear he is past getting of Children, which young Women love extremely, and I
should be loath my young Mistress should lye fallow before she has yielded
fruit.


Sarrah do not provoke me to wrath -- not he get Children, when 'tis well known
that a tough old Fox of Threescore and Nine got a Girl of ten with Child -- but
however should he prove impotent, it would be the better I say still.


Would you not be a Grandfather by your Daughter, Sir?


No Sir -- my Son will make me that, and should my Daughter too, 'twould undo
me, double charges Sam. double charges.


Then I know a young Gentleman, between you and I Sir, as impotent as an
Eunuch, that has all the passions of Love, but incapable of Action; besides he
has a great Estate.


How say you? a rich Eunuch? what a blessings that! and is he in Love with my
Girl! blessing on blessing -- name him, honest Varlet, who is it?


Mr. Sanders, Sir.


How, Mr. Sanders? -- why Sirrah, had not he last Session a Bastard laid to his
Charge, for which he was fined twenty Pounds.


True Sir, but 'twas his Footmans Bastard, which he only Fathered, for his
credit; the case of many Blades now a days to keep up reputation.


But he 'l have a portion too.


To my knowledge not, Sir; alas he has a vast Estate already, which he intends
to settle on your Daughter, and then Sir when he dyes 'twill all come to your
Family.


Art sure of that?


He told me so himself Sir, and said likewise, he would leave all to your
Discretion.


Nay then it's my own, and the Devil a penny he gets of me.


Sir shall I fetch him, ere it be too late; for he's so raving Mad, that
shortly he will either be in Bedlam, or break his neck off some Steeple.


Now bless the young mans gristles, I should be loath to loose such an Estate,
and see a begging Courtier go away with what might have been mine -- therefore
prithee find him out that I may pronounce words of consolation to him -- before
he be past all recovery; for I would not loose the blessing of an Eunuch
Husband for my Daughter, for the World --


But Sir you'll send the Gull, the weathercock going First?


Presently, instantly, my Daughter shall not be his Ephemeris, since I can
Prognosticate a happier Fortune for my Girl; prithee Sam, about it man, and
bring Mr. Sanders to me --


But Sir, take no notice for the World, that he is an Eunuch.


Not a word, begone, begone man --


Let me see, let me see, what comfort gives my Almanac to day --

Luck I beseech thee, good days evil days, June, July, August, speak a word
for me now, the Girl's my own; let me see the Eighth day between Hawk and
Buzzard, (I remember I was drunk then) the Ninth day on a slippery pin, the
Tenth day the Markets marred, the Eleventh day against the hare -- against the
hare! a pox on the hare, would it had bin left out, had it been against any
thing but the hare, I had not valued it -- however I'll try the fortune of a
good face, tho my Almanac leaves me in the Sudds.


Mr. Sanders and an Eunuch too! -- well, 'tis a prodigious Match! nay I thought
I should have good luck to day, because I rise with my butt end foremost this
morning as they say.


Oh here's my Father-in-Law that must be, Sir Oliver your most dutiful
Son-in-law and Servant.


An Eunuch! by Gogmagog he's happier then all the Whoring Gallants of the Town.


How? an Eunuch! I scorn your words, Sir, 'tis well known I have three chopping
Bastards at Nurse -- but, Sir Oliver -- Sir Oliver Santloe --


Oh, Mr. Moon-Calf, are you there? prithee depart, for I am very busy at
present --


When shall I wait on you then, Sir? --


Why, let me see, about a quarter of a year hence --


A quarter of a year hence? what shall I come in September or October?


No Sir, nor in November neither, good my Friend --


You are not mad, Knight? you will not let your Daughter hang past August, will
you? if Sir you do, she'll soon drop under the Tree, for she's no winter fruit
I'll assure you --


By Gog and Magog 'tis no matter for that, my daughter is not fruit for your
tooth -- therefore be not impertinent, but march off --


Your Promise is past --


A fart for Promises -- I tell you you're troublesome -- what think you I'll
marry my daughter to a Planter of the Skies, pray what Settlement will you
make, of the 12 Planets, and once a year they march out of your Lordship; I'll
not bestow my daughter on one who can make no Jointure, but of Castles in the
Air --


But I have an Estate --


For ought I know 'tis one by Conjuration, and the Charm may be out if you dye,
and when my Girl thinks she's on substantial Land, may find her self in the
midst of an Irish Bog -- in short, Sir -- you shall have none of my daughter
--


Then may the Devil choke ye with Money, and may a Fiddler run away with your
daughter, not have your daughter? a Pox on your daughter. Adieu, Sir; now for
my Widow, I'll never leave an open hearted Widow for a narrow eyed Maid again:
go out of the Road-way like an Ass to leap over Hedge and Ditch -- I'll fall
into the beaten Road again, and invite the Widow home to a Banquet and make
amends for my neglect of not waiting on her yesterday --


My Almanac told me true, how I should fare:
Let no man think to speed against the Hair.
So, he's gone, may all the Stars by whatsoever Titles they are dignified and
distinguisht look a skew upon all his Enterprises --

Oh luckey Rogue, ha'ye brought Mr. Sanders -- he looks so sad, he grieves my
very Soul, poor Fool --


Sir, there's the old Gudgeon, now catch him neatly and your business is done.


Oh, Mr. Sanders, what you are in love it seems; One might guess by your
hanging look you are possessed with that troublesome spirit --


I am so, Sir --


For my daughter --


True, Sir --


And you'd kill your self for her --


My Life will be a burden if I have her not --


In good time, Sir -- but then you expect no Portion?


Something by which you do acknowledge her your daughter, Sir --


Acknowledge her your daughter! what a wheedling Phrase was that to get Money
-- but 'twont do -- in a word, Sir, if you like, love, and will marry my Girl
without a Portion so, if not -- Lord have mercy upon you, and so go hang your
self.


How dexterously he wheedles himself into the noose.


But, Sir, if you'll bestow no Portion, you'll give her Clothes and
Wedding-dinner --


Yes that I will, Sir, and more; you shall board in my House gratis for three
Years, if that will do: look out no further, for I'll reprieve you from your
grinning destiny --


Then thus I joyfully return my acknowledgments for your kind compliance, and
admire your judgment and discretion, for a Woman's Virtue is the richest Dower
she can possess --


Now I love thee for thy wisdom, rise, rise, and a Blessing on you both --


How now Son, whither so fast --

To visit my Mistress, Mr. Sunset's daughter, Sir --


A good Boy -- ply it hard both of ye; these young Sluts are as skittish as
unbackt Colts -- Do ye hear, agree't so soon as possible, and one day, one
dinner shall serve for both.

How soon my Joys for my Girls good Fortune have drowned the Sorrow for my
Wife's Loss -- well 'twas a good Soul -- but why should I grieve, since I enjoy
her Picture in my daughter --

How now, the News with you, Sirrah --


A Dutch Merchant, Sir, desires to speak with you --


With me? what should his business be trow -- I have a Cousin in Holland,
perhaps some News from him, the old business, some Firkins of Butter with
Counterfeit Farthings, but tho the gain may be great, yet by Gog Magog I'll be
no Trayter I, so I'll roundly tell him --


Well I must be revenged on this impertinent Lecher, he will not be repulsed,
yet in spite of poverty and all its cursed attendance of Calamities, I'll keep
my Virtue still, and my precious Sir, the Goat, will appear under the Ass's
skin --


Thus far I am prosperous, Love, if it be thy will make her comply: Poverty!
thou blessed Bawd of Love, confute her sullen Virtue, make her yield, and then
I'm happy --

Now, Madam, what answer shall I give to the Worshipful Knight that sent me?


I'll comply seemingly till I have an opportunity to be revenged for his
unlawful Solicitations.

Friend, you may tell Sir Gregory, That the small Favour which in his Letter he
requests was no sooner read but granted --


Oh divine Beauty! let me embrace my Treasure --


Sir Gregory Lovemuch in the Habit of a Porter, it amazes me.


Oh Madam, Love, Love has a thousand ways to discover it self and its Deity --
and this was mine -- speak, Madam, and with the harmonious sound make me all
rapture, new create me Young, say, shall I enjoy that mighty Blessing I have so
long toiled and laboured for?


I will consider further of it, Sir --


Oh dally not with time, my fair, let us now improve this blessed time of your
Husband's absence -- I met him at the Temple, I suppose -- gone to his Lawyer's
Chamber --


Very right Sir --


Shall we, shall we withdraw then to your Chamber? -- fair one?


And wrong my Husband, and the Widow whom you are about to Marry? 'twoud be
unkindly done of me --


I marry her Wealth, not Person -- when I've the Blessing of her Estate, it
shall be at your Command, I marry her only to supply my Purse.


I must confess 'twill be a home revenge upon her, for she now enjoys my
Estate, which her Husband by Knavish practises, cozened my Father of just
before he dyed --


That's my design to force her make a restitution of your Estate; for all, all
she has you shall be sole Commandress of --


Your Promises are great --


The performance too shall be so, her golden showers shall fall into your lap,
and one kiss shall ransom inestimable Jewels from their imprisonment of her
Cabinet; come, come, my sweet, let me partake of the boundless bliss of Love.


Let me a while consider Sir --


Time enough to consider when we have tasted of Love's pleasing banquet, and
this minute lost may be ominous for the future. --


I ask but one days time, Sir Gregory then, let the rest be yours.


Happy, happy I, 'tis granted Madam; one kiss, my Dear, and then I'm gone --

Oh how divinely does she kiss!

So great a gift must be thus rewarded --


Within Wife, Sweet heart, where are you?


Oh Heavens, Sir Gregory, my Husband! should he find you here? --


Fear nothing, Madam, the Devil can't know me in this disguise.


He's come as I could wish -- Sir Gregory, let me prevail with you to step into
my Closet; for should he come and see you here, I am so young a Sinner, my
guilt would quickly betray me.


Do with me what you please -- I wish I were well off. --


Now, my Dear, what comfort does the Law afford, shall werecover our lost
Estate, or are we doomed to eternal Poverty?


'Tis past retrieve, Sweet heart, -- the Fox was too subtle for us; but I am
resolved to attempt something shall either end my life, or redeem our Estate --



'Tis not thereabout yet, Husband, despair not, for I have thought upon a way
which I am resolved to prosecute, and if it take effect, say once a Woman's
undertaking may prosper -- and we may be said to share in wit, as well as in
your sorrows; but till that opportunity happens, I have a rare old Fool in
Limbo, a precious vigorous Lover, of Threescore and odd, who thinks our low
fortunes may make me stoop to his unlawful desires -- 'tis Sir Gregory Lovemuch
-- see here what a precious bate his Traps are furnished with to catch
distressed Virtue. --


'Tis a rich Ring -- but where have you bestowed that lump of Lechery and
Impotence? --


In my Closet, -- he's disguised like a Porter, do what you please with him --


Hell and the Devil, out Cats, out.


What's the matter with him --


See if you please --


Gad take me, Madam, -- Is your Husband gone? -- a confounded Spawn of the
Devil has almost frighted me out of my wits; I wonder what makes people fond of
Cats, when their young they are absolute Succubusses, and Witches when old --
your Tabby Satan, a Pox on her, has made me impotent with her looks, and I am
at present perfectly bewitched -- but I shall return to morrow, sweet, with new
joys and vigour, when these Charms are ended.


Provided my Cat be not in the way --


True, Madam, -- therefore pray let me prevail that Puss and Husband may be
decently removed, for the sight of either will make my Ague fit return. --


Ha! her Husband, then world farewell, for now I shall be killed.


How no Sir, what are you?


A poor fellow, an't please you. --


Stay friend, I must speak with you before you go. -- Sweet heart -- Ha, a
Letter, from whence came this? --


Now welcome Death -- he'll discover all --


Nay, prithee Husband restore my Letter again, 'tis from our Cousin in the City
-- would have me --


How in a man's hand? --


A Plague on it, that I could not counterfeit a Woman's hand --


One of her Apprentices writ it for her --


Do not tell me Stories -- I partly know the hand; therefore will read it. --


But there are some secrets in it which she conjures me not to let any one see
--


Yet her Apprentice might write 'em -- Now I am resolved to read it. --


Now I am past all hopes, I shall be killed for being my own Pimp -- Pox on
him, he's poor, consequently desperate, and undoubtedly he'll cut my Throat,
that he may be hanged, and be out of his misery.


You see, Sir Gregory, what a misfortune your stay has brought upon us. --


Ay too late, I see Madam -- were I well off of this business, the Devil should
have Married Wives for me; the very thoughts of their Husbands coming up, does
in the midst of Enjoyment pall the appetite so, that half the pleasure's lost.


A secret indeed, which you of all the world should have kept from me -- Is
this the fruits of your pretended sanctity? are all your admonitions of
Patience come to this? must I be made the monster to maintain your lust,
ungrateful, false Woman? -- this now confirms what I too much have heard
abroad, concerng you and Sir Gregory that Goat, but I shall spoil the Amore. --


How now Rogue, whether so slyly -- this too's the Bawd to that Sir Fisty --
but I'll reward you e're you go. --


Upon my knees, I beg --


Rise, not a word, out of my sight, go -- for fear my passion make me rashly
act what I may too late repent of -- prepare for the Country to go to your
Relations again -- for here, I Vow never to live longer with you, -- out of my
sight -- go --


Then she's my own, I'll meet her at the Coach when she is to go, take new
Lodgings, and give her a false name, and the dear delights of the Town will
easily prevail with her to stay and embrace my offer; besides, 'tis the Common
practice of divorc't Wives to have Gallants under their Husbands Noses -- ha
she's gone, I like not his staying. --


Now Sir, for your reward, thus I make


Hold, Sir hold, oh hold, what means your Worship --


To pay you for your pains. --


I was paid before I came Sir; there's Porter paid, writ on the Letter, Sir --


Now, Sirrah, take this and deliver it to that Dog of a Knight, or I'll cut
your Throat --


Lord Sir, do you question it Sir? I am an honourer of your Worships --


Tell him if he meets me not, he must expect to be posted for a Coward --


Gad for give me a Challenge? very fine, what have I got, to day a dry basting,
and to morrow must be run through the Lungs --


Rogue do you grumble -- take that to remember you to save your Wind-pipe --


Nouns, I'll do it, I'll do it Sir.


Is he gone?


Yes, with a good basting, and a Challenge, which I'll undertake will keep him
waking beyond the Cure of Opium for this Night --


Oh Sister, cursed Luck -- the Dice and Devil prove my Enemies, my last, last
dear stake of ten Guinnies are flown -- and now I begin to reflect on our last
discourse about the Widow, is your design perfect --


It is -- take no care, for I am resolved to set all right, -- and Brother,
what I can spare, take and try once more, what kindness Fortune will show --


Thanks kind Girl -- but still my mind runs on this damned Widow, no revenge,
prithee consider Girl, --


Leave that to my Care -- for you are not like to know any thing, till I see I
shall succeed --


Well, honest Soul, I leave it to thy management; but let each other exchange
Prayers for our designs.


Now for my design, you'll be assisting.


I will --


We will about it then straight --


Wit now perform, what Justice could not do;
All ways are just, when we our Rights pursue.
Welcome, welcome Widow, to a Batchelor's house here, a single man I, but for two
or three Maids that I keep.


Are you double with them sometimes then, Sir, --


An exceeding good mourning Wit, by Capricorn --


I protest Widow you're a most intolerable profound witty Lady -- and so I kiss
your paws --


Well said, Mr. Noddy.


I am obliged to you for your Complement, Sir, --


A curse on Hadland, I shall not forget him in hast,


Sir Gregory! You honour me -- see our Mistress, keep her Company, whilst I
step aside and look after affairs --


Your Servant Brother Rival -- You see Widow, what power your beauty has to
make Rivals Friends and embrace -- as thus -- Mr. Noddy, your Servant.


Your Slaves slave, to the third and fourth Generation, Sir Gregory.


Sir Gregory you were remiss in your duty to day --


Your pardon, your pardon Widow -- but when, when will the blessed day arrive
that I shall take possession of my treasure in thee, Widow?


In a day or two I shall make my Choice Sir Gregory, and then? --


And then to bed Widow, ha Lady bright! -- this Noddy's a very Ass, Gazer a
Gull. --


A couple of Fops -- but Sir Gregory!


I understand you, a kiss for the Conceit sake, Widow.


A murrion on him, how my mouth waters -- what a cursed thing is modesty.


If conceit will strike the stroke, have at the Widows Plumb-tree, I'll put 'em
all down for a Banquet, Widow, and Gentlemen, my Friends and Servants, I make
you wait long here for a Batchelor's pitance --


Oh Sir, you are pleased to be modest --


No by my troth Widow, you shall find me otherwise.


How's this? the Twelve Months for our Plates, and the Twelve Signs for our
Treat,


These are the signs of my Love Widow --


I am sorry you should be at such Charges, Sir, to feast us a whole Month
together --


Widow you are welcome a month, a year, for ever to me --


What are those brought in the Banquet?


My Tenants they stand for Fasting days.


Or the weeks in Lent.


You're in the right, Sir Gregory, sweet Widow take your place here at Aries,
that's the head sign; a Widow is the head till she is married --


But married, what is she then? --


The middle, the middle Widow -- Sir Gregory Lovemuch, pray sit here at Taurus,
they say y' are a good Town-Bull.


Spare your Friends, Sir --


Mr. Noddy don't fall back so -- here's Gemini for you Sir; for you had two
chopping Boys by your last Wife --


No harm in that, Sir, the Widow may like me the better --


But, Sir, methinks your Signs are not perfect, your Tenants would do well to
help fill the Table --


By the Mass it's true, Widow -- Tenants for once sit down with your Harts on;
but spare the Meat I charge you, as you hope for new Leases, I must make my
Signs draw out a month yet, with a bit every morning at breakfast, and at Full
Moon with a whole one; that's restorative, sit round, sit round, and do not
speak good Tenants, You may be bold enough, so you eat but little: How like you
this, Widow? --


It shows well, Sir --


By my troth, Widow, I'm sick that day my Table's empty; I wish some Guest or
other to fill that gapp there --


Indeed the Feet for want of covering may catch cold, and then the head will
quickly feel it --


Why then you may draw up your Legs and lye rounder together.


In troth, Madam, my Neighbour's a Notable Wagg --


His Wit increases with his eating.


Gentlemen, your Servants.


Another Suitor? then Pisces will be covered.


Madam, youl'e pardon my Intrusion; I heard your mirth, and thought a sober
Gentleman might be admitted to partake --


There needs no excuse, Sir, and with that Gentleman's leave I entreat you to
sit and do as we do.


Young Gentleman pray sit, You're heartily welcome by Ceres.


Pray make room for the Gentleman --


Sit still Tenants, I'll call in all your Old Leases, and wrack you else.


Sirrah, Take my Hat and Sword --


Then Sir, you mean he shall sit as he comes?


I, and he were a Lord he shall not sit above my Tenants, I'll not have two
Lords to 'em; so I may look for my Rent in another man's breeches.


Gentlemen sit still, I'll disturb no body, but here take my fortune --


If you love Fish, pray fall too, Sir; had you come sooner, you might happened
among some of the Flesh signs, but now they are all taken up; Virgo had bin a
good Dish for you, had not one of my Tenants bin somewhat too busy with her.


I'm extremely pleased with my Fortune here, Sir, 'tis the conceited'st Banquet
I ever met with --


What say you to a bit of Taurus?


The Bull's too rank for me --


How Sir?


Too rank, Sir? does it offend you?


Forbear, or I shall strike you as dumb as your watery Kindred --


With your heels or horns?


Perhaps with both --


It must be when I am asleep then.


It's a brave Girl, and nobly managed.


Hold Gentlemen, for the sake of Mankind let not the Planets fall out; for if
they destroy one another, what a world of abortive births, we shall have --
Sirrah, run and fetch my Sun Cup, his Beams shall disperse these clouds of
Contention.


Sir, I make it my request to you, to sit --


Madam, you are obeyed --


Each look I take increases my desires, such charms I never saw before; and
should he not be a Servant, my hopes will be all defeated.


How is't Widow? Gentlemen cheer up, fair weather in all Quarters; the Sun will
rise anon, I've sent for him -- Oh here he comes -- Sing sirrah, sing the Song
I gave you.


COme fill to the brim, for the Sun does go round,
And visits the World in a day;
Our glass is our Sun,
Through our World he does run,
And each little drop is a Ray.
As the Sun with his Rays does ripen the Earth,
And guild all the World with his Light;
So powerful Wine
Our Wits does refine,
And ripens our Joys to delight.
Now fill it to the Widow --


What's here a Sun?


It does betoken, Madam, a cheerful day to some body.


Gentlemen, my Service to ye all; for ye know the Sun must go through the
Twelve Signs --


Most witty Widow, you jump with my Conceit; there's not a hair between us.


Give it Sir Gregory.


I am the next through whom the Golden flame must shine, the poor Feet there
must wait and cool a while.


My time will come, Sir --


So round it goes -- Fill it him again, Sirrah --


Fill't me? why I drank last, Sir.


I know you did, but Gemini must drink twice, unless you mean that one of 'em
should be choak't.


Well Mr. Gazer, you're a merry Man --


Fly from my heart all variable thoughts; she that's enticed by every pleasing
object, shall find small Pleasure, and as little Rest -- Sir Gregory Lovemuch
--


With your pardon, Madam, is this Sir Gregory, Lovemuch?


I am, Sir, I dare own my name --


There's a rank Villain bears that name; are you of that Family, Sir?


How, Sir?


Nay Sir, by Heaven stit still -- leave roaring, I intend anon to bait you --


Yet again? if you love me Gentlemen, let's have no roaring here -- If I had
thought of this, I'd have sent my Bull to the Bear-Garden.


Sirrah, commend my Love and Service to the Widow, desire her Ladyship to taste
that Morsel --


This is the Bit I watched for all this while.


And wherein has this name of mine offended, that you are so liberal of your
infamous Titles? I am a stranger to thee, but it must be known Sir, e're we two
part --


And good reason Sir -- I don't intend to end so calmly with you; for my
precious Sir, I design to cut your Throat.


Oh strike me dead! what's here -- this should be your hand, Sir Gregory.


Undoubtedly, 'tis one of the Letters I sent to you, Widow.


Much good may do ye Gentlemen --


Niggers, noggers, what ails the Widow --


The Widow paints White, some Aqua Coelestis there, quickly --


Oh Treachery unmatch't, unheard of Villainy!


How do you, Madam? --


O impudence! does my Disease ask how I do? can it torment my heart, and look
with a fresh colour in my face?


What means the Widow?


What qualm is this, Madam? I hope my Ram does not stick in your stomach.


No, but an Old Lecherous Goat, a false Villain does -- He that would know a
Villain when he meets him, let him look here; Here is a Glass will reflect his
perfect Character -- Oh thou preserver of my state, pray tell me, Sir,


Please you to retire, Madam, I shall unfold this Riddle --


Thou Basilisk to Virtue out of my sight, and ne'er come near me more --
Gentlemen pray come in and partake of a Story which may prove beneficial to you
--


We follow, Madam --


Niggars, Sir, why don't you budge? -- s'heart thrust him out.


Out of my doors thou treacherous Fox --


All Curses scatter you --


Do you thunder? if you had staid I'd have made bold to have ripped out some of
my Bull out of your belly again --


Now for the Widow, since the Knight's removed, I am resolved to get drunk,
infuse confidence, be very rude, and then they say a Widow will yield.


Come, Brother Rival, let us to the Widow, and learn of her what Treachery this
is --


Thus far my Wives designs are successful; now to my Charge, I must find out
her Brother, and bring him hither to my Wife; what she intends I know not.


My designs work rarely! well, if I go on and prosper, my Statute, when I dye,
shall be set up in Brass with an Inscription, Here lies the Machiavel of Love
Intreigues -- The two Young Blades are close at it on a wrong scent, whilst the
Old Men are ready to dissolve with joy.


Oh come, come, are you there, Sir? --


Life! what's the matter now?


There's a new Reckoning come in since I saw you last.


Pox on it, I thought all had bin paid, I hate after-reckonings.


Pray come near Sir, let's be acquainted with you --


You honour me too much, Sir. --


Sirrah, You're impudence is great, nay you have bin bold enough too with my
purse abroad, if I am rightly informed; by Gogmagog if it be true, I'll have
thee hanged, drawn and quartered.


Who, I bold with your purse, Sir?


Yes you Sirrah -- did not you bring me word about Ten Weeks since, my Wife was
dead?


Yes, true Sir, very true Sir.


Pray stay, Sawce-box, and hear me out; and did not you likewise say, That with
the Money I sent to defray my Wives Charges, she being, as you did aver, dead,
you brought home my Daughter, whom by accident you met with at Antwerp?


Right as can be, Sir, I never found your Worship in a false Tale yet.


I thank you for your good word, Sir; but I'm like to find your Worship in two
at once.


I should be sorry to hear that, Sir. --


I believe you Sir -- within this month my Wife was alive (which a Dutch
Merchant, Father to this Boy who was just now with me, will justify), so
there's six Weeks of your Ten abated.


Strange! how men are grown to lying; that it is false, I'll justify it with
my life, Sir: I'm sure, poor Lady, I dropped a Tear over her Grave; so did my
Young Master too -- if this Merchant were here, I'd tell him to his face that
he wears a double Tongue; that is, Dutch and English -- will the Boy say it,
Sir? --


Yes that he would, could you understand him; for he speaks nothing but Dutch.


All the better, I'll gabble something to him -- Hoist kaloiste kalooskin se
vou, Dar Zun alla gaskin?


Ick wet neat watt bay zackt, Ick vnverston ewe neat.


I thought as much --


What says the Boy?


He says his Father is troubled with an imperfection at one time of the Moon
--


Does the Boy say so?


I knew there was something in it -- your Wife alive! will you believe all
Tales, Sir?


But Sir he told me he saw this Wench you brought home, at Antwerp in an Inn:
he tells me I am plainly cousened, and that she's not my Daughter.


All's discovered -- how Sir, not your Daughter? I must to it again.


Quisquivikin Sadlamara alla pisskickin sows clows, hoff tofte le cumbershaw,
bouns buss boxseeno.

Ick an sawth no int hein clappon de heeke, I dinke vte zein zennon.


Oh ho! zein zennon! I thought I should find it out at hast; The Boy says they
never came near Antwerp, but a quite contrary way, round about by -- Parnia.


What means he by Zein Zennon, Sam?


That is, he saw no such Wench in an Inn; 'tis well I came so opportunely to
get it out of the Boy before his Father comes: pray be wary Sir, the World is
subtle, come and pretend a charitable business, merely to work out a piece of
money on you.


Mass art advised of that?


The Age is cunning, Sir; besides, a Dutchman will live upon any ground, and
work Butter out of a Thistle.


Troth thou says true in that; they're the best thrivers in Turnips, Cabidges,
and Hartichokes, our English are not like 'em.


Oh fie Sir, when the Treat that a States-man of Holland gives, would either
choke or starve an English man, dried Stock-fish, pickled Herring, or the like,
Sir. --


Sam. ask him from whence they came when they came hither.


That I will, Sir -- Culluaron lagooso, lageen, lagan, rufft, punkatee.


Nime aweigh de cack.


What, what? I cannot blame him then.


What says he to thee?


The poor Boy blushes for him, he tells me his Father came from making merry
with certain of his Countrymen, and he's a little steeped in English Beer;
there's no heed to be taken of his Tongue now.


Why this is strange, how came thou by all this? the Devil take me if I heard
him speak above three words to you.


Oh Sir, the Dutch is a very wide Language, you shall have Ten English words go
to the Explaining of one Dutch -- As for example, Gulldergoose -- there's a
word for you, Master.


Why what is that same -- Gull -- Gull -- Gulldergoose, ha?


The English is -- How do you and all your Generation?


Why 'tis impossible, 'tis impossible, man --


Thus I prove it by the Explanation, Sir, -- Gull -- how do you? der, and;
Goose, -- your Generation.


Methinks the Language is a little sawcey -- Goose, my generation -- quoth a?
but sirrah, how came you to understand Dutch so well?


By going to fetch home my Young Mistress, Sir, we had in our Company a Young
Frokin, who taught us it in a trice, Sir. --


What in a months time?


I'll undertake, Sir, in a Fortnights time you shall speak as good Dutch as any
Native of Holland, if you would learn, Sir -- I shall be tripped anon -- pox on it
would I were fairly off --


I'll go seek out your Son, Sir; You shall hear what Thunder he will bring with
him --

Do so, for I le have ye all face to face --


Cuds me what Else, Sir, -- If you take me so near the Net again, I le give you
leave to wring my Neck off -- I am come off fairly: We are undone in Dutch, all
our Three months Rognery is come over in a Butter-Firkin.


By Gogmagog an intricate business this; I am so lost between two Tales, I know
not which to trust, -- The Boy is the likeliest to tell truth; for he is not
yet old enough to understand iniquity -- but then why should the Father tell me
a lie, he gets nothing, certainly expects nothing; but by my troth if he does
expect, he gets nothing of me, and so much good may it do him -- but however,
I'll in and examine the business further --


I Have sent in to the Widow --


Thou plyest thy business close -- the Coast is clear yet -- that was a good
surprise you put upon Sir Gregory --


I found him the sensiblest Fool of the three to whom the Widow was inclined;
therefore ought to be removed -- be sure, Husband, to stand Sentinel, and let
me have warning when they come, and I'll rout 'em all --


I'm gone my Witty Sweet --


My Lady, Sir, begs your pardon for making you wait, and she will be with you
so soon as she has dispatcht some of her Tenants come from Kent.


Thank you Sir, 'tis fit I should attend her leisure.

Those were my Tenants once, but what relief now; yet e're we part, Widow, I
shall have full revenge -- Your heart is mine already, and when the whole
Cargoe's in my power, I'll hoist my sails, and with my streams playing in the
Air, make to the blessed Harbour of repose --


Wife, the pair of Fools are come just now lighted out of the Coach, --


Now to your duty -- for I shall deal a little roughly with you, but you must
not take it ill; for my obedience is in my Petticoat Pocket, and not about me
at present.


Use me as you please --


I hear 'em coming -- help me a little -- Now step back and be very ceremonious
-- Where be those Fellows, who looks out there? Is there ne'er a Rascal


This is most insupportable! what beating your Man! hold Sir, what mean you? --



I beg your pardon -- Gentlemen your Servant -- Sirrah call your Mistress,
tell her I wonder she stays so long? Gentlemen you must pardon Women's
frailties, their decking and trimming themselves, make 'em often commit such
rudeness.


How's this? nay then we are choosed -- and I have spent both time and money to
a fair end --


What a new Lord in the Widows house? -- would I were fairly off; for I'll lay
my life he has struck the Widow in a fair Planet -- let me see, let me see --
Venus in Cauda? then 'tis too true, for that's a damned Lecherous ^lanet.


Sir, Your Servant --


By my faith you shall not stir till you have seen Isbel, make haste and desire
your Mistress to come down --


She desires to be excused, Sir, the Milliner has brought Gloves to show her --



How plain Isbel? Then I know how the world goes, ay, ay, too true, he has
Isbell d her -- a Pox on these Widows, there's no trust in 'em --


They are galled -- the Rogues begin to sneak --


Come, let us steal off, and take no notice of him, for he'll jear us to death
should we stay -- Love is not by desert, but such fluttering half-witted
Hectoring Blades are the only taking men with you buxom Widows -- come away.


What, Gentlemen are you for the Wine-Cellar? -- Sirrah conduct 'em down, by
that time you have drank your Mornings draught Isbel will be ready --


Spare your Wine Sir, I beseech you -- for since the Widow is disposed of -- we
have no business here.


I'll see the Wine in a Drunkard's shoe first, and drink't after he has brewed
it -- Hang her, let her go, she's fitted in faith; a proud domineering young
Coxcomb -- he'll quickly rattle her bones, and go to Dice with her Money, or at
least pick up some common Orange-wench, set up her Coach, gay Clothes, teach
her to confront his Wife, and laugh Modesty out of Countenance, or I have no
skill in Astrology; if he is so saucy now to call her plain Isbel, she'll be
Bitch and Whore before a Month comes about --


They have given you the slip --


Hang 'em -- there are three rubs past -- and now for the Widow. Thus like a
younger Brother I'll begin my fortune, put on impudence, talk wantonly, -- and
ruffle her lustily.


But if she should yield, what then --


Well considered, to prevent that, you must step in most officiously, and
interrupt us -- but she's coming --


Adieu witty Wife, and I le be sure to stand Sentinel.


My life, my Dear!


I fear I have tired your patience with my long stay Sir --


Who would not be devout, and out-wait patience, when such a Heaven is the
reward -- but Widow, you're indebted to me --


As how, I pray --


I love you Widow; nay, laugh not, for I expect return, or look to your self,
for I'm resolved to sue thee in Cupid's Court, and there I know what decree
will pass --


But if I would compound, pray Sir, what will satisfy?


The endless enjoying thy sweet self, Widow, nothing less --


So by compounding a small Debt I may run into a greater --


Your credit will be the better, there's many a young Blade would give you half
the purchase to trust you, -- nay, and pay use for it.


Some of those roaring Bawdy talking young fellows would be idle, were it for
such interest.


Then 'tis a match -- Come Widow, short service, a kiss and to bed, for I am
desperately hungry in faith --


You're in great haste, Sir --


Troth Widow, I have an excellent stomach -- and to provoke thine; know, that
my kisses are Virgins, embraces perfect, strength solid, love constant, but to
come to the point, all ecstasy, rapture!


Since you value your self on your honesty, I'll put you to it Sir, -- Will you
swear you never knew Woman --


By all that's good, and by thy sweet self I swear, that never as Man I ever
yet knew Woman -- but if we do not agree, faith Madam, I expect you keep it
secret, for it may spoil my future being; for a sober man is more ridiculous in
this Age, then he was prized in the last --


How his mean and wit surprise me -- Well, I find I shall love him; for I am
very apt to believe what he says --


Are you considering whether you may believe me or not, Madam -- then take
altogether -- for I add further, that you are the first Widow, Maid, or Wife I
ever made love to --


There's ne'er a Jury of young Women in Town that were to view you, but would be
inclined to find you guilty -- therefore, Sir, I am apt to believe there is
some secret reason, and not Devotion keeps you from it --


None by Heaven -- I kept it in reserve for thee --


For Me, Sir? --


Where can I bestow it better --


What means this insolence and rudeness, Sir?


Fie, Widow, fie, 'tis pleasing violence, that begets delight.


I'll call my Servants, Sir, --


Do, and I le use thee ten times worse even before witness, and then thou art
my own Widow -- Come, come, dear, sweet, inticeing Widow, we must withdraw --
we must in faith, now, now, or never Widow.


Does your Worship call?


Pox on you Dog, are you peeping?

Thanks good Tom, thou came in the critical Minute


But Sir, let us breath a while, what Encouragement have I given you to make
you thus confident and forward, Sir? --


Love, powerful resistless Love -- you see what Mad-men you Women make us --
Come, Madam, few words, kind consent and no Ceremonies are most pleasing --


Well, I cannot withstand, for I begin to grow as impatient as he is, within
there who waits? --

If Mr. Gazer and Noddy are below, bring 'em up. --


I've lost my Widow, I fear, there are but two ways that I know, which leads to
a Widows bed; they are, Wealth and Impudence -- Now if I have took the wrong,
how I shall curse my self; here they are, now love if it be thy will.


Gentlemen, you're welcome, I am now fully resolved to choose one of ye here, let
me see -- but first, Mr. Gazer, you are a judicious Astrological Person, do the
Stars smile to day? if not, I will defer my choice.


Let me see -- Oh the best time in the world, Madam; for just now Mars being
Lord of the Ascendant, is entering into the house of Venus -- about three
Minutes three quarters after Eleven this morning --


That's well -- and Mr. Noddy, your judgment of that person walking there, what
think you of him.


What I think? -- Why I think he's well made, has a aerie mean, I believe he
has a pretty Judgment, for his Trimings and Clothes are not very contemptible
-- but I believe he's a Whore-master, for he has notable waggish Eyes.


Then bear all witness, this is the Man whom I have chose to be my Husband --
and ye will infinitely oblige me if you come to my Wedding, and so your
Servants.


The Devil go with you --


I ne'er suspected my Almanac till now.


Now Gentlemen, I can give you a true invitation and welcome, before 'twas but a
flourish; but you see Fortune will be the bold Adventurers friend --


That I should over-look this damned Eclipse of the Moon, which was this
morning, tho not visible to us; but I wish it may have power here, and by a
forked Influence, make him beat her, she Cuckold him, he turn her out of Doors,
and with her Estate maintain a Whore --


Amen say I, -- Sir, your Servant, your Servant.


A fair riddance of a brace of Fools.


But see your Brother's come --


I intend to set his wit to work.


Sir, this is my Master. --


You see, Sir, I have obeyed your Summons sent me by your man, and now I would
know your pleasure?


Thus receive your welcome, Sir, -- and now I have a request to you.


Name it, Sir, if it consists with honour, and within my power you may conclude
it granted Sir --

'Tis for your Sisters sake I make it.


You have named the dearest friend I have, and I can deny nothing is desired in
her Name.


'Tis this, that you would honour my Wedding, which is to be to Morrow, with
some small entertainments of your wit -- and you are void of all Excuses; for I
have been an ear witness of your Sisters frequent commendations of your parts.


You oblige me with the Injunction; Is it with the Lady of this house you
Marry, Sir? --


The same --


Then I must recall my promise Sir --


Your reason, --


Her last Husband was an extorting Villain, and has undone our Family, and now
enjoys what is mine and my Sisters due.


But Sir, for her sake, comply for once -- She shall not know who you are, but
shall be obliging to you -- and your Sister too to my knowledge will give you
thanks.


You have prevailed, Sir --


Pray Sir, be pleased to walk in, that, I may recommend you to my Wife that
must be --


I wait on you, Sir, -- Now if I should in my Sisters absence strike up the
Widow -- Gad I'll try -- and this will be a good opportunity to attempt it.


Madam, I pity your misfortune, and if there be any thing wherein I can serve
you, you may command it.


You are all obliging, Sir, -- My Husband is now below, trying what he can do
with his Mother, who is unexpectedly arrived, after being reported to have been
dead two years --


That was a contrivance of my Friend Santloe's, occasioned by your Beauty,
which had such an Influence over him, that he ventured a Fathers Anger to
oblige his Passion --


Oh friend, Fortune begins once more to smile upon my Actions, and has favoured
me in this last Enterprise beyond my wish --


As how -- Prithee inform us, that we may partake your joys --


Honest Sam. --


Who helps a lame Dog over the Stile as well as the best.


Put me upon persuading my Mother to make my Father believe, that my dear Wife
here is my Sister; but the reason she knows not --


And my Mistress, like a kind overjoyed Mother to see her white Boy, most
readily consented, -- so that, Madam, if you at last should not be well gifted
by Nature, as the rest of Females are, with Dissimulation, all our designs are
spoiled, and you must trudg to Antwerp again; for as sure as death, my old
Master will turn ye both out of Doors. --


'Tis an hard task for me, however I'll endeavour, what is't I would not
undergo, or suffer, for my dear Husband's sake --


They are coming -- Now Sweet heart carry thy self -- bravely now -- and let
fortune do her worst -- for we are for ever happy.


I'll withdraw --


And have I thee in my Arms again? Look see, I weep for Joy -- had I my Daughter
too; but the Dutch Merchant told me the thing I have of their bringing over was
a Servant in Antwerp, and not my Child --


They cannot deceive me, Sir, let me see her, and I shall soon discover their
cheat, if it be one -- Now heart hold, and let my tongue for once belie thee --



Take courage Love --


Lass how I tremble! --


See there, Sweet heart, what a piece of flesh they have brought me, that is
the creature would be my supposed Daughter; but by Gogmagog, if she is a Cheat,
I'll have her stripped and whipped through every Parish, and cross the Seas till
she arrives to her old Kitchen at Antwerp again.


Bless her Eternal Powers! my life, my comfort, and my nine years grief; but
now my joys, thrice welcome to thy Mothers arms, 'tis she, my Daughter --
receive your Child, and thank Heaven for her wonderful restoration --


What, what's this?


Kind Mother -- I shall love Dissimulation for thy sake, who would not, that
heard thee swear, conclude this not Counterfeit. --


My Daughter! it cannot be -- no, no, I shall ne'er believe it --


Down on your knees --


Rise into my bosom, and receive a Mothers blessing.


Soft Wife, soft, have a care how you place your blessing; for the Dutch
Merchant who came over with you, affirmed, he saw her a Servant at an Inn in
Antwerp --


She was so, Sir, -- I often saw her there; but seeing she had acquired to an
honest way of living, I would not disturb her rest by discovering her
misfortunes -- forgive me truth, if I abuse thee with a false story, since 'tis
to preserve mutual love betwixt an injured Father, and beloved Son.


Daughter Clarina! Let me kiss thee wench -- This unexpected joy has forced
tears, and my heart's so full with this surprise, I know not what to say -- My
joys are now complete, and this days happiness has countervailed all my past
years of sorrow for my long lost dearest Wife, and Daughter --

Mr. Sanders here, by Gogmagog, the Girl is yours.


I'm proud of this mighty present, Sir, and thus I hug it as Misers do their
Gold.


I hope, Sir, I may be once more credited.


Honest, honest Son, I have wronged thy faith; but thou wilt pardon me, I hope;
old men are apt to suspect Youth for Wags, that was the reason.


Now I may securely venture my head out of my Covert.


Where's Sam: that honest merry fellow? I must have his pardon too.


Look you Sir, I am very merciful, good natured, and prone to forgive; and to
show that I have no malice in my heart, if you have another Wife or Daughter to
find, and Money to spend, I shall be very ready to serve you, Sir --


Come hither, Sirrah, let me hug thee, and take my Curse from your Knave's
Shoulders.


For Heavens sake do, Sir, I feel it on my blade here, your Curse is at least
ten Stone weight, and a pound over, Sir.


I'll do thee right Boy, I ne'er knew thee but speak honest English, marry in
Dutch, I found thee a knave lately.


That was only to hold you in play, Sir, till further proofs came over.


By Gogmagog, I love a harmless wit with my life -- Well, 'tis my Girl,
methinks her Eyes, Nose and Mouth strangely resemble her Mothers there -- ay,
ay, 'tis she, and there's an end; however I'll try further -- Wife, Wife,
prithee now kiss me, do I say --

Clarina, be obedient, and come and buss your Father -- Very good, 'tis so, now
I'll swear 'tis she; for they have both the same way of kissing too; now Wife,
since I find that my Daughter is my Daughter, I'll prosecute my first
intention, and this Gentleman shall have her for his Wife.


I am proud of the honour, Sir, --


Observe Wife, observe, he is one that handles his Tongue as well as most men,
a very Genteil Person, and as pretty a Spark as e're made love, or kept Miss, I
le say that for him -- I'll be sworn by his looks no one would take him for an
Eunuch --


My design succeeds as I could wish --


Nay, I have not forgot my Son too, for I have found a Wife for him, it is the
Widow Landwels Niece, the Daughter of old Morley lately dead, her own fortune,
it's true, is none of the greatest; but her Aunt questionless will give her a
swingeing Blessing when she dies; it is the same Maid Eugenia, that was Nursed
with our Clarina; well, it is a pretty creature by Gogmagog, she's a Nosegay of
Beauty and sweet Conditions, how say you to it -- Boy -- ha? --


The Blessing will be greater than I could ever have expected, Sir, --


What fortune was this! that I should come so opportunely to see my happiness
completed in the Marriage of my two Children.


Well thought on Wife, I had almost forgot, we are invited to the Widows
Wedding, with a bold brisk young Spark that has clapped her on board in faith -- Do
you and your Daughter put on your Hoods and Scarfs, and we will expect you below
in the Parlour; come, Mr. Sanders, come along with me --


Oh Mother, I am so transported with those new Joys, you kindly have created, I
know not which way to begin to pay my Duty.


But Son, the more I look on her, the more thy Sister runs in my mind.


Perhaps she's like her, that will carry on the Cheat the better, Madam.


I must examine her -- of what Country and Parentage are you?


Of England, Madam, -- and many are the afflictions I have undergone -- so that
my Parentage I have forgot --


If it will not renew your sorrows, give us a small relation of what has past.


So much as my memory will give me leave -- for I was not above seven years old
when my Mother carried me beyond Sea, which was about ten years since, with a
design to put me into a Nunnery; but by the way to Antwerp, we met with
Robbers, who stripped us, conveyed me from my Mother into a Wood; but they having
committed several Outrages, were pursued by Soldiers, so they left me, and I
wandering about, came at last to Antwerp, and was received by the Mistress of an
Inn, where I continued a Servant till this Gentleman persuaded me to come to
England.


Oh my blessed fortune! my dearest Child, thrice welcome to my Arms --


S'life if this should prove his Sister now --


Look you Mother, my Father's gone -- now you may be plain --


I am sorry he is -- but l'le hast to him to confirm what before I only for
your sake averred, but did not then know the truth.


But I hope you are not in earnest Mother, that it is my Sister.


Witness Heaven it is your Sister --


Hold, hold, good Mother -- Kill not your Son -- Why I am in love with her
Mother, and have made her my Wife.


But now your love must end as to Marriage, and with a Brothers Eyes you must
look upon her -- Come Daughter, let us go down to your Father, who shall
redouble his joys when he shall know the Truth --


Heavens! I love him so, I could wish my self any thing but his Sister --
farewell for ever Love, since thus I am deceived in my first desires.


My Sister, that Northern blast has nipped my blooming joys -- must all my
Courtship, Expense and Constancy, ay, Constancy, Sam. be jilted by the
resurrection of a long lost Sister.


A Pox on her, say I, she was ever a cross Brat when she was young, and now she
has lived in spite to cross your love.


It cannot be my Sister -- for I find no alteration in me, I am in good temper,
and my mind's not shook at that dreadful name of Sister -- therefore I am
certain there is some damned riddle in it, which we cannot at present expound.


To make us wise enough, Sir, let us to the Widows Wedding, drink briskly, and
then with nodding gravity unsold this mystery if it be one.


Agreed --


Tho Love was cruel, Fortune has bin kind,
Since I, a Sister in a Mistress, find.
COme Gentlemen, since you are pleased to honour me with acting my little Essay
of fancy, please you to retire and dress, for they are ready to enter.


Worthy Sir, we follow you --


I shall attend you within.


By Mercury, a neat contrivance, Sir Gregory I applaud your wit.


Tis a profound device, an extravagant fancy, and an insupportable design; and
Sir Gregory, I am in an intolerable Consternation of your Penicranium --


This will be a brave opportunity to affront her for deceiving us -- are all
perfect in their parts, Rail and spare not, for that is all that we are like to
have for our Expenses on the Jilting Widow.


I am ready in mine --


And mine is in Capite.


Let us in to dress then -- Widow, look too't, we'll all your scorns repay.


Your Sun of Joys shall be Eclipsed to day.


Your Market shall be marred too, as they say --


But prithee tell me, art thou in earnest, my Sister?


So our ill fate will have it, but so much I love, that I could wish I were
not.


Pox on Kindred -- like noble Savage, I would range and choose my Mistress
where I pleased -- now must sacred Love be curbed, and pleasures lost, and all
long of dull fantastic Law.


We must submit, for Reason tells us it would be a Sin, should we pursue our
Love --


Friend, I can but pity thy misfortunes in losing of a Mistress, but must
congratulate your Joys in finding of a Sister. Now, fair Eugenia, shall I at
last receive the fair reward for all my Constancy? speak kindly, and return my
love with yours -- and then I'm happy --


Faith Madam, yield -- do not cast away a handsome proper man, for so small a
toy; my Sister here has bin more kind to me, than hitherto you have proved to
him --


My Aunts to rule my fate, and I must choose a Husband with her liking, I'll
make it known to her, and if she approves of it, Heaven knows, I can enjoy no
greater happiness -- for without blushing, I confess, I love --


Oh my kind Saint!


Sanders, to your Post, see where they come -- But dost hear, prithee do not
make love to her, for by Heaven, tho she's my Sister, I shall grow wondrous
Jealous, and consequently quarrelsome.


Come my long wished for Lady, your happy return is a second feast to me.


Ye'are all most freely welcome --


We thank you, Sir --


But is my Brother, do you say, so much in love with my Widow?


I overheard him but now complaining on his destiny that should make him so
desperately in love with your Enemy, that I thought he would have rebelled
against himself, there's such a mighty feud between the two old Enemies in his
Breast, Love and Honour.


Lass poor man -- I wish he had my place to day, he is abler than I to perform
the duty that belongs to a young Widow.


Come Gentlemen, pray sit -- that worthy friend of yours, Madam, is pleased to
entertain us for a while, and now I suppose they are ready to enter --


Madam, here you may before-hand read the Argument of what I do design -- Now
Love, prove but so kind to inspire her with an equal slame, make her a true
Widow, and my young Spark I shall soon grast on your Stock --


Ha, what's here? a Letter enclosed, this must be concealed till a fitter time
to be read --


Good, she has conveyed the Letter as I could wish, now half my toil is over
-- Madam, they are Entering --


The flame of Zeal --

-- The wicked fire of Lust
Does now spread heat through Water, Air, and Dust.

Ha! He's out at the beginning -- The wheel of Time

The Devil set fire on the Distaff --

What a Devil means all this? --

I, that was wont in elder time to pass
For a bright Angel, now am made an Ass,
And so corrupted with the upstart fires
Of hated Avarice and hot desires,
Which in unlawful sheets were kindled first
By forward Girls, false Wives, and Widows lust.
That I, even Fire, who purest Gold did try,
From these base heats, my self can't purify;
I once was reverenc't, Charity did thaw,
And did keep up the Hospitable Law,
But stead of me, a Bastard heat now burns,
And to supply my Landlord's lust, it turns.
Now Matron Widow's Lechery so great
They ne'er consult their years, but lustful heat
And wed young Fops that may perform the feat.

Heart! Who should this be? -- Some Rogue -- but I'll let'em take their swing
-- and afterwards will be fully Revenged.


Upon my word, Monsieur Fire is a notable hot Satirical Blade --


What should my Brother mean to rail so --


After this hear, you Ladies fat and fair,
Open your Casements wide, and take in Air;
But not that Air, false Women make up Oaths with,
No, nor that Air Gallants perfume their Clothes with;
I am that Air that keeps about the Clouds,
None of my Kindred were smelt out in Crowds;
Yet some there are that are my Chief Polluters,
Widows that falsify their faiths to Suitors,
And will give fair words, when the Sign's in Cancer,
But at the next remove a scurvy Answer;
Come to the poor men's Houses, Eat their Banquet
With smock-fac't Boy, at Night be tossed in Blanket.
He that believes a Widows word shall fail,
When Venus Gown-skirt sweeps the Dragon's Tail;
Fair weather the first day she makes to any,
The second Cloudy, and the third day Rainy;
The fourth day a great Storm, Lightning and Thunder,
A Bolt strikes the Suitor, a Boy keeps her under.

'Tis so, some Rascal's crept in on purpose to disgrace me; but I'm resolved
they shall share in my disgrace --


By Gog Magog, a notable sharp Air this, Madam --


He has perfumed the Room well --


A man may smell her meaning two Rooms off, tho his Nose wanted reparations --


Prithee step out, and know what his meaning is, is this the Entertainment I
promised to my self? --


His love sure has made him mad -- but I'll go know the Cause --


Now Gentiles all, since fire has made ye hot,
Come bath in me, for I'm a Water-pot:
Water's my Name, I come your Pipes to fill
Without the Charge of Water-house, or Mill --
But first, I will a Widows Cheeks besprinkle,
Which glow with heat, her lecherous Eyes do twinkle.
And I'll endeavour too, to lay the dust
Of Widows hot desires, and boundless lust,
Then will display her shame -- From such as she
I first took weakness and inconstancy;
I sometimes swell above my banks, and speed,
Widows are oft with Child before they Wed.
Where I'm least seen, there my most danger lies;
So in those Parts hid most from humane Eyes:
He heart, her love, or what may be more close.
I know no Mercy, she thinks that no loss
In her poor Gallants, Pirates thrive in me,
I help to Cast away, and so does she --

Curse on his Wit -- I am all confusion --

Earth stands for a full point, me ye should hire
To stop the gaps of Water, Air, and Fire
Your Husband loved me, he locked me in his Chest,
I was the only Idol of his Breast.
Now he is dead --
He shall have Gold, enough to glut his Soul,
And as for Earth, I'll stop his Cranes throat full.
With ease a Miser's appetite we please,
But Lust in Widows, is a damned Disease.
And proves the most insatiate avarice.

And now to vex you, Widow, to your face,
See, once four warning Elements, embrace.

Help, help, help; Murder -- Murder --


Widow, for Heavens sake, intercede for us to the Devils --


Oh law, what will my Mother and Sister say, when they hear I am carried away
by the Devil --


Who are ye, discover your selves then?


By Charles's Wain, don't you know me?


Why look you, do ye see, it is I, it is I --


My old Suitors, we are all obliged to you, my Masters, you have taken great
pains to make your selves Ridiculous -- -- ha, -- ha, -- Pray Sir release 'em
for my sake --


You may Command, Madam, let 'em down there --


Thanks good Widow.


When faith since we were to lose you, Madam, we thought losers might have leave
to speak, and therefore by offering our Service to this Gentleman, we got this
opportunity to speak a little of our minds to you --


And I think we have pretty freely, and at our own Costs too; for I owe Money
for some of the Painting -- but the Planets are sufficient to pay the Painter
--


If ever I court Widow again for your sake, may I be made a Pissing-post of;
well, I find Widows are confounded insupportable witty Devils.


We are all obliged to you, Sir, for this discovery.


My shame, Madam, urged me to contrive some way to discover the Authors of my
disgrace -- But, Madam, to divert you I have brought a Servant of mine to
entertain you with a Dance --


I am indebted to you for this favour, Sir -- Please Gentlemen to walk in and
partake of a small Collation, and then, my Dear, we will retire to surfeit on
Loves sweets --


We follow you, Sir --


Curse on ill luck! What a Devil should be become of this Sister of mine, had
she not promised to get the Widow for me, I had not slipped the opportunity which
now is irrecoverably lost, she's Married! now the Pox or Impotence be his
Curse, for I cannot with patience see my self thus chous't -- ha -- here comes
my brisk Bridegroom -- good, I have thought on an excellent way, if possible,
to retrieve her -- I'll wheadle him to drink, make him damnably drunk, so
consequently impotent, and a Widow disappointed, turns Devil, will sue a
divorce, and then she's mine. --


Oh Sir, most opportunely met -- are you alone? --


Yes, Sir, -- Your Pleasure --


I am come to -- cut your Throat.


How Sir! -- cut my Throat, you'll give me a reason, Sir, for it, I hope --


I saw what amorous glances past between my Wife and you at Dinner, and since
too I have discovered that which has raised such a Storm within me, that
nothing but thy death can restore my former calmness --


Jealous by this light -- I hope he has not met with my Letter I conveyed to
the Widow --


I am all rage with jealousy, your Letter, Sir -- see there the reason,
Villain, and then judge if I can pardon such an injury -- Therefore prepare to
yield up either Life, or Love --


Nay, Sir, since you have discovered my passion, then know I do, must, and will
love your Widow, nay, dote upon the sight of her, and yet no harm to you, since
you possess the wealth, you cannot barr a longing stander by, to wish and sigh,
since you know 'tis in vain; therefore I will persist -- ah 'tis a charming
Creature!


Hell and Furies! shall I stand tamely still, and hear a fellow boldly to my
face proclaim my Infamy!


A fellow, Sir* Provoke me not, I say provoke me not; if you do, by Heaven, if
possible, I'll cuckol'd thee before thy face --


This is beyond all patience, base Villain draw --


Pish Sir, your little Bodkin frights not me, see I have one can match it --
Yet I believe thee Valiant, or such a little whipper-ginnie durst not have been
so desperate to have ventured on a longing Widow --


How, Sir, have at thy heart! --


Good Child, thou art too forward, -- reserve thy vigour for another place, it
will be little enough, I'll engage -- for young, Sir, there can be no
comparison between you and I, in love affairs --


How mean you Sir?


You may perhaps be well enough for the Theory, to cringe, and whine, and
wheadle your self into a Virgins heart; but a Widows wise discerning Eye must
of necessity read here the only man that's fittest for the Practick part --


Heavens! Do but hereafter look upon her with one pleasing glance, and I'll
damn thy Soul.


A Bully in Swadling-clouts by this light, 'tis the youngest Hector I ever met
with in my life -- a gad, little Squire, were she the great Turk's favourite,
I'd look and gaze although I knew my death should follow, and let me tell thee,
had somebody been true to their promise, your fortune had been mine --
therefore, little one, you may thank my cross Stars for your good success. A
Pox on an absent Sister --


How Sir, obliged to you? Oh insupportable! thou base detracter of my honour,
who not only would supplant my love, but blast my reputation, and make me
undeserving of a Ladies favour.


If you come to that point, Sir, what can you boast of, should be so
attractive? I must confess thou appear a hopeful Stripling, and I question
not you have the pretty impertinents of one of your Age, as Dancing, Singing,
affected Gestures, be peirtly witty, making bold with every new Play comes out,
and extravagantly tawdrey in every new fashion.


Death and the Devil!


These accomplishments, I must confess, may be very surprising to a poor young
thing of a Boarding-School, who never had love made to her but by her
Dancing-Master, or some such follow.


This is beyond all sufferance --


This won't do -- and now, little one, I le discharge my Conscience, between
you and I, I do verily believe, the Widow that was, and your Wife that is,
Married you only for a Drudge or Steward of her Estate, while she spends it on
pleasures, with such vigorous Blades as my self, and who knows it may be my
turn; which if it be, faith I'll be very reasonable, and Cuckold thee as seldom
as possibly I can --


I'll hear no more; but thus will make a passage to thy Soul, for I swear thy
Ruin, Death, Damnation --


Say you so, then 'tis time to look about -- and since you provide me, little
one, know this, that if I kill thee, I swear to marry the Widow the next day --



Thus I prevent thy boasting -- dull, dull, Brother, not know your own flesh
and blood. H. discovers her self.


My Sister* I'm all amazement*


Now Sir, what think you of my design?


Design quotha! 'twas well you discovered your self, or I had spoiled all; --
but I'm a Dog if I understand what you mean? -- you are Married --


I am to the Widow, I knew not how to cheat the Parson; but I question not, but
to deceive the Widow e're I sleep --


As how, as how? -- I long to hear --


See, my Husband comes with some intelligence --.


Is that my Brother Hadland? --


Sir, My Lady is retired to her Chamber --


Leave off your distance now, sweet heart; for I have told my Brother all.


Kind-Brother I obliging Sister! --


But Brother, do you like my Widow in earnest?


Like her! Heavn's! I love her infinitely! were she not Mistress of a farthing,
agad, I believe I should have Married her, there's such an aerie sweetness in
her face --


Say you so, then along with me, I have one design more, and if that take, we
are once more happy --


Lead on whilst I follow, and admire thy wit.


T Thus far I am prosperous, Widow, I have not done with you yet; I have
wheadled all her Keys out of her Custody, and in her Closet I found the Writing
of my Estate, thou dear, dear Parchment, how I am over-joy'd to hug thee in my
Arms once more -- the Widow comes --


My life, my Soul, my only joys on Earth, haste, haste to Bed, that I may be
completely blessed with an Heaven of Pleasures and delight.

Oh let me embrace the mighty Treasure I have this day gained! --


Delay not the Consummation of our bliss, to bed, to bed, my dear, and there
we will surfeit with delights unspeakable.


I go, but prithee stay not long behind --


I'll but to my apartment, and undress, then fly to rifle all thy Charms --
now, Widow, thou art safe --


Kind Rogue, I am -- I cannot avoid laughing to think how surprised the Widow
will be, well Girl, I'll endeavour to behave my self so, that she shall have no
reason to complain, nor you to repent the trick you have put upon her.


Do that, and I am well pleased, I believe I am the first Bridegroom that ever
procured for his Bride the first Night.


The obliging'st in the world, and the kindest Sister too.


Away then -- be brisk, and disgrace me not.


Dear, honest, kind, obliging, witty Rogue, adieu -- now for the Widow.


Widow, you're caught at last --
Thy Husband's subtleties shall be repaid,
Thus Women are by Women best betrayed.

Well done, my friends, put it briskly about -- now the Bride and Bridegroom
are preparing for bed, let us Drink their healths -- Sam. give me a Glass --
Son Sanders, top and bottom to you --


I'll do you reason, Sir -- Mr. Santloe, the Bride and Bridegrooms healths.


Mr. Gazer --


I'll Pledge you, Sir, tho by Aries the Sign is in the Head with me already, Mr.
Noddy have at you --


Ay, ay, let it come, hang Sorrow, it must be drowned, I find --


Nay, nay, Sir, I'll not bate you an ace of top and bottom, off with it, off
with it for shame, I say again, top and bottom is my word --


Lay aside Indignation, Sir, I'll do it, tho I dye for it, but yfeck I have so
topped and bottomed it already, I can hardly breath --


Hye, that's he, that's he -- What, Son Peter, no frolic, no frolic, Sirrah
Boy, be merry, or I'll dis-inherit thee -- Ah, when I was of your Age, and at
the Temple, I was the Cock of all the Jovial Blades in Town -- I was always the
Captain of a Temple-Rebellion, broke Benchers heads with the Temple pots most
dexterously, lye with my Laundress, got her with Bastard, and made her lay it
at a Benchen's door, by Gogmagog --


So, so, all will out -- now shall I have pious instructions to follow the
Example of a sober Father --


I have beat Watches, have had my head broke, and been in the Counter so often,
that it cost your Grandfather above a Hundred pounds one year to cure my broken
head, and to ransom me from Limbo -- and yet you see, Sirrah, I am a sober
discreet man now --


Wondrous discreet thus to display your weakness --


Son Sanders, what ne'er a Song in Budget -- by Gogmagog, this whoring Age has
spoiled all good harmless mirth and Company -- All the young fellows now a days
single out their Does, and retire as if it were nothing but rutting time with
'em -- but in my Days we should not have sat half so long without a Catch or
two, and top and bottom going briskly about in faith --


Prithee let's have the Song, you made the last drinking bout, and one glass
more will lay your Father to rest --


I have a Song, Sir, which if you please well sing -- but all must join in the
Chorus. --


Yes marry shall they, Sir -- and so will I -- but first let every one take top
and bottom in his hand --


COme troul it away,
We'll drink up the day,
Let none from his standing retire,
We will Laugh, Drink, and Sing,
And Bacchus's Spring
We will drain, and our prowess admire.
Cho. We will Laugh, c.
Old Age we despise
Whilst Wine we can prize,
And briskly can take off our Glasses;
Wine, life does repair,
And banishes Care,
But Temp'rance would make us all Asses.
Cho. Wine, life, c.
Let the Politic fool
Live dully by Rule,
While our Wits we refine in our Liquor,
My Soul's in that Wine
Which puts the Divine
To a Nonplus, and turns up the Viccar.
Cho. My Soul's, c.
Well done in faith my Lads -- and now off with top and bottom -- Peter I'll give
thee an Hundred pounds a year more for this Boy --


Say, and hold Sir, that you have often done in your Glasses; but has forbid
the banes when sober --


Oh the sweet days of Youth -- I have roared it in my time in faith -- and so
topped and bottomed it, that by Gogmagog we have all bin top heavy before we have
parted -- Now Son Peter, ne'er a Jig or Horn-pipe about you? how has my Money
bin spent at Dancing-School, I pray? --


He would make me as ridiculous as himself -- Sarabands, Minuets Entries, and
the like --


Pox on your hard named Dances and Wine too, they never prove good, nor wholesome
-- but Sirrah, to convince you, nothing can be finer than a Lancashire
Horn-pipe -- Fiddlers strike up --


I Vow, Sir, 'tis in supportably admirable --


Before I left the Temple, I was the only Reveller as old as I was; I could
have footed the Measures, and Danced Horn-pipes with e're a young fellow of 'em
all. Sam, Give me top and bottom -- Mr. Noddy, my Service to you --


Yfeck I'll pledge you --


Is not John Sanders dead?
And is not his Wife a Whore?
For she will go drunk to bed,
And yet she'll have one Pot more?
Our Cat is to be hanged,
And all to be tumbled in the mire,
For scratching my Wives Huquissin,
As she sat by the Fire. --
Ah, when I was young, I had a thousand such frolics as these, off with your
Liquor man, off with it, I say.

Top and bottom, as you say, Sir Oliver, yfecks --


So ho, my Boys, who says I am old, see there my conquest over Youth -- this
Whoring weakens 'em so, they are not able to take of a chirping Cup or two now
adays --


Now Sam, thy frolic?


What grinding of Knives Sir? have at it then -- Knives to Grind, Knives to
Grind --


How now Sam, what art thou frollicking too --


A Well-willer to mirth Sir, and now you shall see me grind Knives as
dexterously with a Chair, as the Fellows in the Street with a Grind-stone --


Well done my Lad -- Here's something to encourage thee --


What's here, a Newgate Groat, by this Light he's short lived, he is so
confounded liberal -- ah Sir, this is nothing; I can tumble with any
Bartholomew Fellow, Run up a Wall like a Cat; but I can act a Breast of Mutton
so naturally, that our Cook-Maid the other night had like to have spitted me
for one, I did it so to the life --


Hold, hold, hold, Murder, Murder --


Out you old Lecher, invade my Honour?


Laugh.


Wats the matter, Sir Gregory?


I only desired a kindness or so, being set agog with the Widows Marriage, and
the Baggage had not only the incivility to deny me; but has most unmercifully
chastised me too.


By Gogmagog well enough served, for leaving top and bottom -- and old Lechery
will be catteryauling, tho they are sure to come by the worst.


For Heavens sake, Gentlemen, come to the Bride-Chamber, some accident or other
has happened; for the Bride cries out, and seems by her Speech to be in some
strange confusion.


It's nothing but her being coy, and in faith the young Bridegroom seems a man of
Mettle, and will put her to it, I'll warrant.


What should this mean?


Let us go see, I fear my young Blade's too brisk for her -- gently, gently
good Youngster, be not so boisterous --


Heaven protect me! Villain unhand me --


I say, Widow come to Bed, or I shall grow very angry; for I'm impatient, and
will not be delayed any longer.


Guard me, ye Powers above! Protect my honour, or I'm lost for ever should my
Husband come --


Whose fault will that be; therefore be speedy, let me antedate my young
Squire, and I'll be gone -- Nay, no struggling, but yield quietly -- I need not
a resistance, for I am all on flame already -- not yet? agad persist in
stubbornness, and I'll publish it in all places that I have lain with thee, no
matter whether it be truth or no -- and then Lady bright, that trifling title
Honour, must be surrendered; but be kind, and I shall be all silence and
obedience --


I'll rather dye, than yield --


Say you so? Then I find I must try strength.


Ha! my Husband! --


What coming for me Widow? This was kindly done -- let us to Bed, for now I am
ready to perform the Rites of Love.


What shall I do? undone, for ever wretched --


What means this strange Confusion!


Alas, Sir, I'm not well -- I was just going to call up my Maid, for some
Cordial -- Tis but too true, for my Spirits fail me.


Such vain excuses belong to Virgin Modesty, but Widows should know better --
then, lay aside this veil, and meet my love with equal flames, that both may be
transported into Ecstasies --


For ever I am ruined --


Sure you're the first Widow ever feared the embraces of a second Husband --
Come, come tremble not -- but to Bed.


Ha! Noble here -- Hell and the Devil!

Base perfidious Woman, now I see the cause of your disorders, was your Lust so
hot you could not stay till the first Night was past?

Good Sir, hear me --


May thou be for ever dumb, or I deaf, rather than lend an Ear to thy
bewitching tongue -- Now Sir, how durst you attempt the dishonouring of my Bed?
Do you laugh? I shall spoil your mirth --


Who can forbear at such an Idle question -- rather Sir, how durst you Marry,
and fondly think to preserve such a tempting Creature entirely for your self,
-- Sir, where I love, I dare do any thing to enjoy; and a Pox on your officious
hast and jealousy, had you but stayed two minutes longer, your business had
been done, and you ne'er the wiser --


Confusion! This to my face?


Yes, faith Sir, 'twas most uncivilly done, and very unlike a Husband to
intrude; but I pardon you for once, for I hope in time you will understand
better --


Base Villain! Did I for this cast a friends Arms about thee? gave thee the
welcome of a man of Honour? and is this your return of gratitude? Hence, begone,
and take that Volume of corrupted Beauty; for henceforth shesh I be to me like
the Book of Fate, for ever clasped.


Wretched Woman, was this the promised blessing of an indulgent Husband! Speak
Sir, and clear my Honour, how you got here; for Heaven be my Witness, I was as
great a stranger to his being here, as you.


In vain are idle words, out of my doors, for ever I discard you from my house
--


I find too late your drift, my Wealth (Curse on it) was the Original of your
design, take it to save my Honour; and what is't I would not give to be rid of
so base a fellow.


I thank you for my own, sweet Lady -- but I scorn to be out done in courtesy
-- therefore in return, make you this present -- provided you'll confirm you
Estate on me --


I will -- what laugh you at my misery --


Faith Widow, you are caught; for know, I am already Married to another --


How Married to another! I am all astonishment: Villain, how durst you attempt
so desperate an act; an act by which your life is forfeited? and question not,
but I'll have full revenge for this affront you've offered me.


Rail on, 'tis Music in my Ears, but faith you are not like to stir till we
are friends --


What's your design? who are you --


Come, come, no more questions, my design was only to provide a Husband for
thee -- how say you to my Friend here, methinks he would make an able Husband
for a Widow.


So ho, Mr. Bridegroom open the Door, and let Sack-posset enter --


How say you, Widow, is it a match -- or they all enter, and I'll forswear all
I have said, and make you infamous to the world --


And faith so will I, Widow -- if you consent not.


Hold, hold Gentlemen -- What shall I do? my Honour this way will be lost --
Leave me to my own choice, you know not what then I may do --


All one for that, Widow, so it must be --


Or Egad they come -- see I am ready to unlock, is it a Bargain?


Take half my Estate, my House, Goods, any thing, rather than force me to so
rash an Act --


How rash! to Marry an able fellow! this is an affront, I cannot put up;
therefore thus I revenge my self --


Hold, hold Sir, let me consider but one Minute --


I'll give thee a looking and a thinking time, that is but fair; for I am
certain the more you view me and consider, the more you'll like me --


On my Conscience they are reconciled, done their business, and fairly turned
to sleep. --


Now, Madam, what is it you resolve?


Not to consent --


Egad they come then --


Hold, what are you? --


No questions, for Conscience sake --


I yield, I yield --


Swear then --


By all that's good, I will be yours --


Seal it --


Gentlemen, pray enter --


What's here, two Bridegrooms? I'll warrant her crying out, was, for want of
the Second --


Gentlemen, bear witness, I here discharge the Widow, from her Marriage with
me. --


How, parting before ye have bedded? what's the meaning of this?


Some private Reasons, Sir Oliver, which more at leisure you shall know --


Before these Gentlemen, I take him for my Husband.


The Devil give you Joy then --


See here the transformation -- and Widow in a young huffing Bully, see your
Friend and Servant Eliz. Hadland --


And Thomas Hadland, her Serving-man and Husband.


Am I out-witted by my Enemy then!


What a notable frollicking Woman is this! Is she the Bridegroom, and my
worshipful Serving-man, are you there?


A poor wronged Gentleman, Sir, willing to serve for his own --


Pox on her, was it she disgraced me at the Treat, I'll steal off before they
take notice of me --


By Capricorn, and so will I --


Look you, Madam, do ye see, I have spent at least Forty Pounds in Clothes,
Coaches, Journeys and so forth, in Courting of you, and since you have choosed
me of your self, I expect satisfaction -- which I will have if there be Law --


Take your course, Sir --


So I will, by Jehosaphat --


Now Madam, no more your Enemy, but Sister; for I must call this Gentleman
Brother.


Then my fortune's better than I could have expected, since I am assured he is
a Gentleman in all respects -- and thus all animosities shall cease. --


Why, now the Bells they go trim, they go trim -- Wife, with this Ladies leave,
we will make no more hours on it; for this is as fine a contracting time, we could
have wished for, and the Parson to morrow shall finish this Nights work, come to
the Book, to the Book young men --


'Slid Sam, what's to be done now.


Your Friend and Servant knows no more than the post, Sir --


How say you, Madam, is it a match between your Niece and my Son? do it, and I
am resolved Mr. Sanders shall be my Son in Law --


I freely consent, Sir --


Mrs. Eugenia, your hand --


But not my heart, for that is Mr. Sanders's --


But with your leave, Sir Oliver, I'll join 'em --


With all my heart, Madam.


Mr. Sanders, take this Lady.


Oh, Madam, blessed be your goodness for this inestimable treasure.


Cuds boddykins, what means she?


Here Mr. Santloe, in a Sister find a wise --


Sure the Widow has dealt with the Devil, or else hath heard of our mutual
love, and thus sooths our passions --


By Gogmagog, the Widow's mad -- my Son Marry his own Sister! what Riddle is
this?


One of Seventeen years standing, Sir -- You remember my Sister Morly Nursed
your Daughter, who at that time had a Daughter too --


What of all this --


My Sisters fortunes decaying, she gave you her Eugenia, and kept your Clarina
with her self -- afterwards fortune smiling on her Husband's industry, she on
her Death-bed did reveal this secret, and wished me when occasion served to make
it known --


Hyeday the Town's our own again --


Oh, Madam, this is beyond all president, not to be equalled -- and now Sir, I
may with confidence own I was this day Married to my supposed Sister.


By Gogmagog, you were a desperate Boy; how could you tell but that it was your
Sister in earnest?


Nature was not so dull to let me languish for a Sister; for notwithstanding
what my Mother said, yet love retained its native heat, and bad me still love
on -- Oh my blessed Soul --


Daughter come into thy Father's arms, see, excess of Joy will make affection
melt.


What tears have I bestowed on a lost Daughter, yet left her behind me.


This is beyond all thought surprising -- and now, Girl, since your wit has
been the kind directer of my Fortunes, with my Widows leave here, freely
command whatever's in my power --


I shall comply with you in everything.


I thank you for your obliging offer, and I shall desire nothing more, but the
confirmation of that Portion which your rigorous Husband had deceived my Father
of, before he dyed --


Your generosity is so great I can deny you nothing -- consult with your
Lawyer, and I shall willingly subscribe to any thing you shall desire --


We are obliged to you --


Cudsboddy kins, this was a notable waggish trick, and by Gogmagog, much like a
second Wedding, and I give you joy with all my heart.


Madam, fear nothing; tho I have appeared a wild Debauchee; yet you shall find
an Indulgent Husband -- and now, Gentlemen, let us in and congratulate each
others good success and fortunes.


Thus in the Storms of Fortune you may find,
Where Justice is deficient, Wit proves kind.
KNowing too well, Gallants, your natural spite,
We bar your censuring privilege to Night;
For your Diversion, this was ne'er designed,
How can our Author then, expect you kind?
Your malice is so great to One unknown
That like the Play, or not, you cry him down,
Who is not one of the huffing Wits of the Town:
Nay, your ill natures bare so great a sway,
Often ye Damn, before you've seen the Play;
Such Bully-Wits, like Butchers should not sit,
Nor be impannell^d at the Bar of Wit;
There's such a Native Cruelty in them,
Without a Consultation they condemn.
Then to Vacation-Customers we sue,
We have our ends to Night, if we've pleased you;
Kind Sirs, let not the Critics of the Town
Awe ye -- But let your Judgments be your Own,
Consider well --
Here is no Satire on a Married life,
Nor damn^d Lampoon upon the City-Wife;
No Cheats discovered of the Man of Trade,
Nor who Gallants your Wives are here displayed,
Nor your own secret Pleasures too betrayed:
Then Judge the Play, unbiased may ye be,
And from the snarling Critics set us free.

