GAllants you're so unconstant grown of late,
That Plays and Mistresses have the same fate;
For both with you grow quickly out of date.
Each with variety so taken is,
You'll see but once or the same Play or Miss.
Go on, we will not your liberty retrench,
Like this for change* as you would do a wench:
But know, when the translating vein is past,
That you must not expect new Plays so fast.
Then Wit and sense will come into request,
And something more than a vain Fop well dressed.
The Taylor now in Plays makes the best jest.
And 'twill be time to check this full career
Of Plays, and Act but two or three a year.
With plenty you are cloyed, but when grown scarce
You will esteem 'em more; and then a Farce
Will entertain you for a Month at least;
Not what is good, but scarce does make a feast.
Then shall the Knight that had a knock in's Cradle,
Such as Sir Martin, or Sir Arthu^ Addle,
Be flocked unto, as the great Heroes now
In Plays of Rhyme and Noise with wondrous show.
Then shall the House (to see these Hectors kill and slay,
That bravely fight out the whole plot of the Play,)
Be for at least six months full every day.
If beauty grows so scarce, your Misses too
Will find that you'll to them more constant grow.
Now the enjoyed you slight; if you're inclined
To visit them, it is not to be kind.
You play the critics, you find fault and jeer,
And against your Miss are wittily severe;
As fain you'd be on Plays when you come here.
You like prejudicated Judges sit;
There Beauties faults you find, here those of Wit.
Against both I've heard Women and Poets say,
No Critic is like him that every day
Sees a fresh Girl, and each Week a new Play.

SO, so, Gentlemen, I see you are at it, come let's have a sight of your little
Droll.


How, Sir, our Droll?


Eh, your what do you call it, your Prologue of Song and Dance.


Ah, ah, ah.


Our Dialogue you mean, well 'tis ready.


I have made you stay a little too long, but as I am a Gentleman, and as I hope
to be a Knight, (mark that, for so I mean to be once in my life) my Taylor was
in fault.


We wait your leisure with a great deal of willingness.


He brought home this Indian Gown, Cap and Slippers, -- how do you like 'em?


Extremely well.


You appear very graceful.


So, so, Jack -- Boy.


Here, Sir; what would you please to have?


Nothing, I called to see if you be diligent in your attendance: how do you
like my livery?


Very fine and noble.


Jack?


Who do he speak to?


To you.


Begar den let him call me be me name, me be no shauck.


Jack, come hither Jack.


Shauck, me be no shauck, call your Englishman shauck, me be called Maitre
Iaques.


Master Jack come hither.


Ho, ho, dat be ver well, here be your tres humble, and tres obeisant valet.


Hold back my Gown, and you Sarrah hold back the other side, -- so, see
Gentlemen, here is a little loose morning garb, does it please you?


Wonderfully.


Neat and Gentile.


Stay, pull it off, that they may view me round -- How do you like me from top
to toe?


Your habit is worthy admiration.


Gallant from head to foot.


My Suit will come home by and by, that will be fine indeed.


The ceremony requires it.


Ha, you mean my Daughter's wedding, but know there is more in the wind than
so: this day I am to begin to court a Mistress, a Knights Daughter, I'll assure
you.


And all our preparations are for her entertainment.


And to render my self more acceptable, I have required your helps to make me
an accomplished Gentleman; if singing and dancing won't win her, the Devil's in
her. -- Well, I'll see your Dance rehearsed; but first let me hear the Song.


I sigh all the night, and I languish all day,
And much to be pitied I am:
Ever since your bright eyes, my heart did surprise
I could not extinguish the flame:
But you, since you've known my heart was your own,
Though before you was kind, now scornful are grown:
If so cruel you prove
To the man that does love;
Ah Phyllis! Ah! Phyllis, what fate
Have you in reserve for the wretch that you hate?
Very well.


But me thinks this Song is a little too doleful, and enough to put a woman
into the dumps, if she have any kindness for me.


'Tis a delicate Air, and the words are not amiss.


I learnt a very pretty one the other day of a friend; stay, how begins it?


Nay, I know not:


There is something of Mutton in it.


Mutton?


Yes, -- oh, no, no, no, 'twas Lamb -- ah -- I have it.

My Mistress is as kind as fair,
My Mistress is as kind as fair,
And as gentle as Lambs are;
And yet alas, alas, ah lass,
Sometimes to me
She'll as cruel be,
As in the woodfierce Wolves and Tigers are.
Is it not very sprightly?


As can be.


And you humour it well.


Well, now for my dancing, and because the Morning is far spent, I will only
practise over the Minuets: Ah, of all Dances that pleases me most.


Come, Sir, begin; your hat, Sir, so now your honour: La, la, fa, la, la, fa,
la, la, (bis) c. so, so.


Euh!


very well.


I hope to get credit by him.


Money you mean: Well Mr. Iordan, it is not enough to proceed thus alone, but
you would do well once a week to have a Music Club at your house, and play and
sing in consort, it will much benefit you.


And so I will, now you put me in mind on it.


And once a fortnight a Ball, you will have the whole Court with you, and all
the fine Ladies of the Town.


'Twill make you known at Court.


And familiar with Noblemen: a Gentleman is known by what company he keeps.


You advise well, sweet-hearts; but are you perfect at your Dialogue and Dance?


We intend you shall see it performed.


No, 'tis too late now: look they be perfect against dinner, and I am
satisfied.


I'll warrant the Dancers.


And I'll engage for the Music.


Well, your servant; stay, show me with what reverence I ought to accost my
Mistress, 'twill be the next thing I shall have need off.


To do it with respect, you must first draw your leg behind you and bow, then
march up towards her with three Congees forward, and at the last you bow so low
as to kiss her hand; try it once over: -- Very well; your servant.


Your servant. -- Come now to my french lesson.


Vell, Sir, have you got te Catalogue of te French words me give you in your
memoir.


Yes, and I find I can bring 'em all in, in discourse with my Mistress; tho I
can't talk French to her, 'twill be next to it, she'll think I can.


'Tis be me invention, and judge Maitre Iorden, if it be no ver rational,
before me teash you te rules, you be inure to our langage, by making it as it
vere your own.


Nay, I think to make it our own is a very ready way to learn it.


And 'tis course will ver much refine te English Landguage: If you observe all
travellers give te ver many littil graces to their discourse vith te tange of
te French, you shall no hear speak, one sentence vithout Bon mean, jaunte
devoir, efsort, c.


I have observed it. But to our Lesson, I am in haste.


Now proceed we to teash you te right pronunciation of te Vowels, because of
Letters tey be te sheif, and no word is or can be vithout one or more of tem.


Vowels, why are there any vowels in our Alphabet?


Yes, Sir, te number be fife, and te same vith yours, these be they, A, E, I,
O, U. A be pronounce like a, u, au; As for Example in some English words, all,
fall, and no as in ale, stale.


A, au.


Right, A opening strongly your moush, and drawing your jaws vide asunder.


Au, right.


E, is pronunce by heaving te nether jaw to te upper, A, E.


E, A, E, E, directly.


I be pronounce not as your English man do Latin, Qui mihi, but more like to te
second vowel E; and is form by drawing your jaws yet more near den before, and
drawing the two corners of your moush to te ears, A, E, I.


A, E, I, I, I; Dad, 'tis true, may Learning flourish.


O is form by opening te jaws, closing te lips at the two corner, and opening
tem in te middile, O.


Let me see that again.


O, O,


Right, O, O, O, nothing more true, A, E, I, O, O, I, O; ah, 'tis admirable.


Te opening of te moush is a little round representing one O.


What a fine thing is knowledge!


U be form by approashing te teet vithout quite joining them; trusting your
lips at full length from your face, approashing also one te oder vithout
closing, and tis vowel requires te strongest and te freest expiration of your
breat of any Letter vhatsoere.


U, U.


Not as you pronounce it, like You, more like Eu, u, vith a long breating out
of our breat.


Like Eu, u.


Right, u, as if you made a moush to mock somebody. To morrow, Sir, we will
proceed to te Dipthongs which be eleven, and te next day ve'l manage te
consonants.


Consonants?


Tey are te oter Letters.


I shall make a shift to learn 'em all at once, I am pretty apt because I bend
my mind to it.


Noting is hard to a villing mind.


But how many did you say the five vowels were?


You named te number, fife, Sir, fife.


Right, the five vowels are five, I'll note that down in my Table-book: numbers
are the worst things can be trusted to my memory. A Lady at Court yesterday
morning asked me how many the ten Commandments were, and I protest I had
forgot: I have noted this next to that.


Tings ve no oft think off soon run out of te brain.


Well, what is a good expression to break ones mind to a Lady, and to let her
know I love her?


Be you in love den Maitre?


Yes.


Vith whom?


Truly I have never yet seen her, but I shall anon.


Vell, Sir, vou'd you have te expression in Prose or in te Verse?


Not in Verse.


In prose den?


No, nor in Prose: I would have it neither in Prose nor Verse.


Jerne, it must be in one or te oder.


Why so, if I won't have it so?


Because, Sir, all expression be in te one or te oter.


What have we nothing but Prose and Verse? what a mad language is ours? I'll
learn French so much the sooner for it.


Dat be te same in all languages, dat vich is no Prose is Verse, and dat vich
is no Verse is Prose.


What is it we talk now?


Prose.


Well, if I say to my Mistress, Fair Lady, the lustre of your fair eyes do
wound my heart.


Dat be te Prose: you may add, and their bright flame has burnt it to a Cinder.


Well, I'll study a speech, I warrant you.


The Tailor, Sir, has sent your suit home again.


Ah, the shoulder-knot stands right now: go fetch my Sword and Belt, my Hat and
Periwig, that I may dress me presently.


Sir, Here's a servant sent to you from the next house, to inform you that
there are some persons sick, and to desire they may not be disturbed with your
Music.


The Music has been gone a good while.


The Neighbours say 'tis fitter for you to exercise your Music, Dancing and
Fencing in the Schools.


A company of fools, they'll teach a Gentleman what to do, will they?


Your gentility is troublesome to the whole Neighbourhood: they have often
complained of the disturbance you make with Music, Dancing and Fencing.


Pish, a man shall not learn good breeding for them I warrant you, 'tis a sign
they want it, they are so rude to talk so: What's a Gentleman but his liberty?


Every body much wonders what you mean by learning to dance at these years.


It's a greater wonder they are not so wise as to know, 'tis never too late to
learn.


And to speak French.


It is altogether spoke at Court.


The Court, Sir, is no fit place for you, nor you no fit man for it.


I not fit for the Court! I was born a Courtier, only I was spoiled in the
bringing up.


My Grand-father, Sir, brought you up in his own way.


Your Grand-father! alas poor old silly Citt, I cannot but laugh to think what
an Aufe he was to imagine that I would stand sneaking in my Shop all my life
with my Cap in my hand, crying, What do you lack, Gentlemen, choice of good
Silks: I'd have you to know Lucia, I have no such Mechanic Spirit in me. Now
he is dead, I defy Pater-Noster-Row, and all within my Lord Mayor's
jurisdiction.


My Grand-father, Sir, was held a wise man.


A wise man, and an Alderman, ha, ha, ha. A rich man you mean.


No, Sir, I mean a wise man.


Alas, Luce, you are a fool, you know not what you say.


Very well.


Very well! ha, ha, ha, why, what is it you say?


That the Court --


I speak not now of the Court, I ask, if you know, what it is you say?


And I tell you, Sir, I say that the Court --


Pish, the Girl's a fool; I say again I talk not now of the Court, but ask you
if you know what this is you speak to me and I to you?


What is it? 'tis English.


True, but what else?


Nothing else, 'tis every word English.


Was there ever such a dunce? what are these words?


What are these words?


Yes: What?


Letters make Syllables, syllables words, words sentences, and sentences a
discourse.


And is this all you know?


Yes.


God help your head, what a fine fellow should I be, were I as ignorant as your
self.


Where lies my ignorance? what was it I said, say you?


'Twas Prose you fool.


Prose!


Yes Prose, all that is prose is not verse, and all that is not verse is not
prose: La you there now: Do you know what it is you do, when you say U?


I say U.


Pish -- but what do you do then? Come, say U.


Well Sir, U.


Well; what did you do then?


I did as you bid me.


Invincible stupidity, you opened your mouth, thrust your lips out at length
forward, let your under jaw fall almost to meet the upper, and strongly sent
out your breath -- U -- see there -- U -- as it were make a mouth at one -- U
-- I could puzle you too, with asking you how many the five vowels are, and
tell you as much of every one of them -- this 'tis to be a Vertoso. -- Hah --
this fencing-master comes not yet -- Boy, run to the door, and when you see him
coming, bring me word.


These exercises of fencing and dancing in my opinion were fitter for my
brother, he is not above twenty years old.


Your Brother -- puh -- he can ne'er be a Gentleman. I was born a Citizen my
self, and his Mother was a Citizen born, he was not allied to gentility on
either side, forty or fifty pounds a year will maintain him in his native
quality -- but for you daughter, because you are a gentlewoman by your Mothers
side, I have provided better; you shall be married to the Suffolk Knight that
will be here anon; the Articles of Marriage are agreed upon by your Uncle who
is his townsman. The writings are already drawn and sent up with the settlement
of your Jointure, and provision for younger Children; if he comes time enough
you shall be married to day.


To day?


Yes, to day, for I long to have a Gentleman, and a Knight for my Son-in-Law.


I have no ambition to be a Lady.


I have.


Marry him your self then.


If you anger me, I'll make you a Duchess, a Countess at least.


Truly I have no mind.


Truly I have a mind.


I would not marry yet.


Yet you shall marry.


Not Sir Simon.


Yes Sir Simon.


He is a fool, Father.


Therefore you are a worse fool if you refuse him.


If I marry I'll have none but Master Cleverwit.


But Master Cleverwit will have none of you.


Will you stand to that? shall I have him if he'll have me?


Yes, if you'll marry Sir Simon, if he refuses you.


Agreed.


Oh! here he comes to our purpose. Master Cleverwit, do you love my Daughter?


I did once Sir.


Would you have her still?


You discharged me, and I would not do her that wrong, (since you have provided
a Knight, and a richer man for her Husband) to be her hindrance.


La you there; I told you so.


False man!


Besides, Sir, you know I told you I have engaged my self elsewhere.


Oh heavens! am I then forsaken?


Yes indeed, Sir Simon will down with you anon as much a fool as he is.


Besides, I have so entire a friendship for you, that did I love her still as
once I did, I would refuse her though you would double her portion, and say take
her, if you did not judge it convenient.


I know you are a worthy person, and my good friend; and truly Sir, had you not
told me your Father was not a Gentleman, but a Citizen, you should have had her
before any man.


I thank you Sir.


Now Master Cleverwit pray be you Judge; ought not my Daughter to marry Sir
Simon?


Without doubt: he is a Knight?


Yes Sir.


He is a fool too?


A little shallow my Brother writes me word, but that is a blot in many a
Knights Escutcheon.


So much the better for her.


Aye Sir, as how?


She that wedds a Fool, marries her self to his Estate -- she'll have all, do
all, dispose of all, and rule the roast as long as she lives.


Sir, there is one without would speak with you.


I will be with you again presently; in the mean time pray take some pains with
the baggage; you have powerful reasons, and can persuade.


I'll labour to serve you -- but my self first --


Perfidious man! is it thus you use a Maid that loved you? was it not crime
enough to be unconstant to deprive me of your self, but to condemn me with your
own mouth to marry one I ne'er can love?


Ah I, Lucia!


Nothing but this proof of your hatred can dispossess my heart of Love. But I
will dye rather than let it return though you'd be constant.


Now is the time to tell you --


No, to make the wound mortal, I will hear no cause of your infidelity, nor can
you have a just pretence: farewell, farewell.


Lucia stay.


Why do you hold me?


Hear me, speak, or if you needs will go, go undeceived.


Speak then what you would say in as few words as you can.


My inconstancy, dearest Lucia, was but feigned, and a disguise to carry on a
plot laid to divert your expected Lover, and preserve you mine.


You maintained your Rivals cause, and soothed my father in his injustice.


I have, ere since I heard the news of your new Lover, prepared him for this
revolt: long since I declared to him I was engaged to another, and showed this
compliance, that he might not suspect fire hid under the ashes.


If this be true, make use of these few minutes to inform me what inventions
you have framed to divert this unlucky marriage?


Be not inquisitive to know what tricks we mean to play; you shall as in
Comedies have the divertisement of the surprise; let it suffice to tell you,
Trickmore is the main engine. I sent him last night to stay at the Inn where
the Coach lies, to take a strict view of him and his Retinue, and to make as
great a discovery of our Knight Errant as he can, that we may the better know
how to manage him.


My Father returns. --


A Daughters reputation is safe no longer than her obedience continues, and a
Daughter ought not to regard whether her Husband be handsome or wise, when a
Parent commands: Riches, and Gentility are above Youth and Beauty* they fade in
the marriage-bed, the other accompany you to the grave, and descend to
posterity.


Oh Sir, you are a good man, you speak admirable things.


Sir, I have almost prevailed, and she will be brought with a little more
counsel to obey you.


How happy is our Family in such a friend, how pleased I am you give me hopes I
shall see my Daughter a Lady to night and that I shall have a Knight for my
Son-in-Law.


But can it be to night?


Yes, Sir Simon arrived late last night, and sent me word just now, that he
will be here within this hour, or a little more, but I'll immediately take Coach
and go to him, for I am impatient to see my Son-in-Law.


Sir Simon arrived, and no news from Trickmore yet?


Sir, here is one come from your Fencing-master to speak with you.


Sir, are you Master Iorden?


Yes Sir, I am Master Iorden.


Your Fencing-master is sick, very sick, and cannot come to day, but has sent
me in's place to give you Lesson.


Well, now I don't know whether 'tis best to go or stay.


Oh stay Sir by all means, now the man is come.


Sir, if you please to stay, you shall learn more in one half quarter of an
hour, than e're you yet learnt in your whole life.


There's encouragement.


I'll show you a trick to undo all you fence with.


Say you so, come then -- Boy take my gown.


Sir, we will take a walk in the Garden; with a little more pains, I shall perfect
her obedience.


Your servant Sir, -- Lucie, you'll remember to go to Mistress Manira at the time
appointed, and wait on her hither.


Yes Sir.


And when you go, present her with this ring as a token of my love.


Come Sir, your reverence -- Your body straight, let your body lay a little
more stress on your left thigh, your legs not so straddling, your feet in a
direct line, your wrist joint opposite to your hip, the point of your Sword
over against your shoulder, your arm not so much extended, your left hand in
level with your eye, your left shoulder more turned, your head upright, your
eye fixed, -- Advance. Your body steady; one, two, as you were, redouble, your
foot fixed, a leap back -- When you make a thrust you must let your sword move
before your body: One, two; come Sir, take me in tierce, home, home, advance,
your body steady, advance, thrust: one, two, as you were, redouble, a leap
back, to your guard Sir, to your guard.


Euh, euh -- well now for the trick --


Sir, it is too rare to show to every one, if you please let the Boy depart the
room, your man may stay, but he must swear secrecy.


Do you hear? --


Begar me be no Englishman, to tell all dat me see or know.


Here, take you my Foil -- come, suppose I was to fight against you two, I
would kill you both.


Both!


Both.


Oh dat be te brag -- Alloon -- mort bleu.


To your postures -- now --


Begar and so me think, we two foils against your sword -- no -- no -- pardonne
moy --


Well, now -- 'tis in the scabbard.


Kill me now and you can.


To your postures then -- so -- look to your hits.


Come --


Ah, ah, what art -- avaunt a Ghost -- there --


Euh --


Euh --


Now had you bin both killed or no? -- there's a trick for you.


I, but I warrant you I would not be killed so a second time.


Come to your postures again, each fix his eye on the point of his sword; now
suppose your enemy was before you, you a first, and he your second.


Nay, we will look to our selves, now we know your tricks.


Suppose I was placed by your enemies in a hedge behind to make a noise, that
might cause you to look back.


No, no, we no look back.


I wager a crown with you Master Iorden, you look back, though you are
forewarned.


Done.


Done with me too.


Done: well, prepare -- so, ho, ho, ho, not yet -- lo, ho -- lo, ho -- not yet
-- well, I shall have you anon.


Your Daughter Master Iorden --


Aye, aye, I hear you Sir.


Is so well convinced.


No, no, this wont do.


Yes Sir, she'll do any thing, I have so convinced her of Sir Simon's good
qualities, and your fatherly care, --


Well Sir, I care not, I care not.


That she is now extremely rejoiced, and will be glad to see him come.


O this trick wo'nt do.


No, no, we no lose te crown, I'll lay one more.


There's some trick in it, they not so much as stir. What mean you, are ye both
betwitcht?


Oh, is he so cunning, to set you on to make us look back.


He! what he? here is neither he nor she besides my self, and you two.


Ha, no body!


Yes, here comes Mistress Lucia*


Oh ho Maitre Iordan you look back, you lose your money -- ha, no body here?


Who do you look for?


The Fencing-Master.


He is not here --


Gone!


I saw him go out in great hast.


Sir Simon will be here before you are dressed.


Give me my clothes and dress me.


Clothes! here be no clothes; oh dam English trick, te Rogue steal all your
clothes.


Ha! my Suit gone? --


Gone, Mounsieur, gone --


Did he take 'em? --


Me say* nothing, me swear no to tell te secret.


Sir, I am undone.


He told you indeed, he'd teach you a trick to undo all you fenced with.


Ha, ha, dere be te jest of te trick!


I had not cared a straw had but my Mistress seen't before it went.


Well Sir, let not this put you out of humour.


No Sir, I am more a Gentleman.


I'll after the thief, and see if I can recover your Suit.


If it is gone, farewell it, I have learnt a good trick by the bargain, I'll even
put on some of my other Suits, and stay till my Son-in-Law comes. Master Jack
get the Suit ready I wore yesterday.


You see Sir what comes of your Fencing.


My fencing I see sticks in your stomach: but I'll convince you presently. Take
this Foil: now for demonstration;

When you make a thrust in Quart, it is but to do so, when in Tierce, so: see
there a sure way never to be killed; and is not this something think you, to
know what a man has to trust to when he goes to fight his enemy? Come make a
thrust now, that you may see the manner on it.

Euh, euh, euh -- houh -- hold, what's the Devil in the Wench?


Did not you bid me thrust? now Sir what think you of your skill?


Yes, but you made a thrust in tierce, when you should have made a thrust in
quart, and was so hasty, you'd not give a man time to purrey.


You see what your fencing signifies.


Go get you to Mrs. Marina's -- I see what my pains signify in endeavouring to
make you wiser. It has been well observed,

To conquer Armies is not so hard to man,
As to overcome the ignorance in Woman.

HOw these visions of gallantry, and capritives of gentility still dance in my
fathers fancy!


His madness will undo us; me he'll marry to one I never shall love; you he will
disinherit, and marry again to get a Son that shall be a gentleman to succeed
him in what will be your right.


I lament not so much he should marry, as that Marina should be his wife; nor
that he should deprive me of his estate, as of her.


Do you then love Marina?


I do, and ever shall. She did admit my addresses till my Father's pretensions
interrupted the course of my love; her father, poor Knight, is old and
decrepit, has but a very slender fortune, and is glad of this occasion to
dispose of his daughter to a man of estate.


Does Marina approve of my Fathers suit?


She is yet scarce well acquainted with it; but when she shall, I fear her
obedience may dispose her will, for her father will be very urgent, being he
can give her but little while he lives.


I pity your condition: without her you'll be unhappy, and with her you'll be
miserable, unless my father would settle some part of his estate on you.


Two thousand pounds a year his folly throws away, and yet his hand is shut to
me.


Yet I observe you have always plenty of money.


I have a revenue coming in you know not of: I keep a Journey-man at work
continually. The profits of the last half year came to five hundred pounds,
which by gaming at the Groom-porters I have doubled.


How found you out the secret?


Necessity is the Mother of Invention. Love made me sensible of my wants, and
wants which whet men wits to do ill, taught me the means.


Is it then an unlawful course?


Strangers when they hear of it may blame me, but all that know my condition,
and my fathers humour, will excuse my dealing. But here comes your Lover.


Madam, you have seen the first part of our intrigue: this is that Fencer who
gave your father so home a thrust this Morning.


What, Mr. Trickmore!


Yes, Madam, out of pity I have sent him his Suit again, for now the hour of
Sir Simons absence being exspired, Mr. Iorden will expect to see him at his own
house, and you shall see another trial of Skill by way of prevention.


Where did you leave him?


At the Inn in bed. I had notice this morning he was sending to advertise your
father of his arrival; I dogged the Messenger to know the result of his message,
resolving to act as occasion required. At the door I overtook his
FencingMaster: And he being my old acquaintance, I made known to him my design,
and obtained his consent to go in's place, and pass for his Usher: And this I
did to prevent his journey to Sir Simon.


But should Sir Simon get abroad before you return to the Inn.


There is one at his heels will do his work: My fellow Mounteback alias Doctor
Cureal.


Pray what manner of man is this Knight for a Lover?


For his Figure it is beyond expression, ridicule enough.


What brains has he?


No more than our purpose requires. I'll tell you in what a pleasant posture I
found him when I got to the Inn, last night. A servant chanced to leave open
the door of the Room where he was at supper; looking in, I saw him sit at table
with his Hostess, who was a notable fat burley Dame; he not being well after
his journey, bespoak a Sack-posset, and invited her to the eating of it.


So, but as to his posture,


Twas thus. One leg with a slipper at the end of it (and that no very cleanly
one) was laid upon one corner of the Table, the other in her lap, his left arm
about her neck, embracing: in this manner he sat for some time, telling her the
occasion of his coming to Town; that it was love* that his Mistress was such a
one (naming you, Madam). His hostess to gratify the relation he had made her,
drank your health to him in the posset, he went to pledge it, but was taken in
the middle of his draught with a coughing and sneezing, which broke out with
such a violence, that all he had drank flew out at his nose and mouth into his
Land-ladies face; she making a start from her chair threw him backward, he
keeps his hold, draws her after him; down comes she, the posset between 'em,
and her coats over 'em. A terrible outcry there was, and I ran in amongst the
rest to help: when with much ado we had found the way to take her off the right
end upward, there we saw Sir Simon lying half drowned in posset, and half
smothered with Petty coats.


A very pleasant Relation.


At last we got him up, but you would have laughed to have seen how like Rogue
and Whore they looked, that had stood in the Pillory and been pelted with all the
rotten eggs in the Parish.


Alas poor Lover.


You must think the bed was the next place after this. But yonder comes my
setter, our game is not far off.


So ho, put your selves into a posture to receive the enemy, he's marching
towards us.


Where have you left him?


Coming along that street with a clutter of people about him, as if he was some
monster newly come from the Deserts of Arabia.


Is he so remarkable to be taken notice off?


You'll see anon with what an air Nature has designed him.


See, yonder he comes.


Goodness, how he is hung together!


These that haunt him, are some unlucky Prentices, whom I advised of his coming
this way, on purpose that their rudeness should give me an occasion to do him
some piece of service which might endear me to him.


Madam, I must not yet be seen by him, let us retire, and I'll give you
instructions how to demean your self to your father, if in spite of all our
endeavours he should come to the sight of him.


Very pretty, as I live; what's the matter? what would you have? in my
conscience the Devil's in the Town, and has possessed all the people: Why, what
a Devil ails ye all? cannot a man go along the streets without a Regiment of
fools at his heels? What do you laugh at now? ye had more need go look after
your wives at home, lest they make ye Monsters to be stared at; I believe I
shall laugh at some of you before I leave the Town; and hau, hau, hau, too, the
devil take me if I do not give the next I see laugh a douce of the chops.


How now, what's the matter here gentlemen? what mean ye? who have ye got here?
have ye nothing else to do but run staring and gaping after a gentleman, as if
ye were all out of your wits?


Here is a man has some reason in him.


What is your business? what do ye snear at?


Aye, aye; at what, at what?


Do ye see any thing about him that is ridiculous?


Aye, have I?


Is he not like other people?


Aye, have I horns upon my head as some of you? or am I cloven footed?


Go, go home, and learn better breeding.


That's good counsel, and take it y'ad best.


The Gentleman is a Knight.


Aye.


The heir of an honourable Family:


Aye.


His Ancesters deserved well of his Country.


Aye.


And he no less.


Aye.


His behaviour challenges respect.


Aye.


He is one of singular, parts.


Aye.


He has been a Traveller.


Aye, marry have I.


He honours the Town with his presence.


An understanding fellow this, I believe he's well bred.


He is not a person to be affronted and laughed at.


No, they are mistaken in their man if they think so.


If ye go not about your business, I will handle some of ye without mittens:
go, be gone.


Sir, I am most hugeously obliged to you.


I am troubled, Sir, to see such a person as you treated so rudely, and I ask
your pardon for the whole Town.


Your servant, Sir.


Sir, I had the honour to lodge in the same Inn with you last night, when I
understood by your servant who you was, I had a great presumption to do you
some piece of service --


What does this fellow expect now? Money?


And it was my good fortune to pass by the door of your Room where you was at
supper, just as the out-cry was, and these hands had the honour to disengage
you from being smothered by the gentlewoman of the house, when you was
overthrown by that unlucky accident, and your Hostess whelmed over you.


Was you there then?


I was, Sir.


I was so blinded with Sack-posset I could not see my deliverers.


I am glad I am again so happy to do you another piece of service.


I must give him something. Sir, pray let me requite your services with a piece
of gold.


By no means, Sir, I am not covetous of any thing but to do you service; pray
put it up again. I have conceived a great inclination to serve you, and the
honour shall be the only reward.


An honest fellow this. Well Sir, I remain behindhand with you in courtesies.


Pray let me kiss your hand.


In my life I never met with such a civil fellow.


Your physiognomy takes me extremely.


Ah, ha.


I see much gallantry in it.


Ah, ha.


Something very taking.


Ah, ha.


Manly and brave.


Ah ha.


Frank and generous.


Ah, ha.


I swear to you I am wholly engaged to serve you.


I find it.


If I had the honour to be known to you, you'd say I was a man very sincere.


I doubt not.


An utter enemy to knavery.


I believe it.


And one that is not capable to disguise his thoughts.


Plain dealing is a Jewel.


And I use it; yet in spite of the fag end of the Proverb am no beggar.


Ha! who is this I see? Sir Simon Softhead! I am ravished to see you; Oh what a
joy I feel at sight of you! What it seems you scarce know me.


Sir Simon is your servant, Sir.


Out of sight out of mind I see: but is't possible six or seven years should
blot me out of your memory? It's strange that in so short a time you should
forget one that professes himself the greatest friend and servant to the family
of the Softheads of any man breathing.


Oh pray pardon me there -- Faith I know him not.


There is scarce one of that Family that I do not know as well as I know you,
when I lived at Berry, there was no doing without me, I was always amongst 'em,
I had the honour to see you there almost every day.


You shall excuse me, Sir, 'twas I received the honour -- I never saw his face
before.


You cannot call me to mind yet.


Pray excuse me for that. -- I know not who it is, not I.


Don't you remember we went often together to drink?


O Yes. -- But let me be hanged if I remember any thing like it.


How do you call the little witty Knave that used to make us so welcome at his
house?


Oh, little Iohn.


Right, we went often thither to be merry: but what is become of his pretty
daughter?


He had never a daughter.


He never a daughter! What not a witty little baggage you used to run after to
kiss from one room to another?


Oh, I know where abouts you are now, you mean, I warrant you, little Peggy.


Aye, Peggy, by the same token was her name.


She was George Goodale's Daughter at the Rose. Why, she's married.


Is She? Pray how do you call the place at Berry, where they used to walk?


Oh, the Green.


Directly, 'twas there I passed so many hours of delight in your good company:
You do not remember this?


I not remember't? Not in the least: if I do, I wish the Devil fetch me.


There are a hundred of these things a man forgets.


Let us embrace then, and renew our ancient amity.


See now there is a man that loves you cordially.


Pray tell me some news of your family, Sir Simon: how does that Gentleman --
your -- he that is such an honest good man?


My Brother-in-Law, the Justice of Peace?


The same, the same.


Why, he is very well.


I am very glad, I assure you; and he that's of so good an humour, the
Gentleman, -- your --


What my cousin Small-brain?


Aye, Mr. Small-brain, -- that I should forget his name! to see how quickly
things run out of a man's head. But pray how does he do?


He keeps his old humour, always merry and jocund.


Troth you tell me good news. And pray Sir Simon how does your Uncle, the --


My Uncle? I have no Uncle.


No? but you had at that time perhaps.


No, only an Aunt.


Oh, 'tis her I mean: The Lady your Aunt, pray how does she?


She has been dead these six years.


Indeed, I heard so, now I think on it, presently after I left the Country:
Well, rest her soul, she was as good a Gentlewoman as lived.


We had also a Nephew that dyed of the small Pox.


Oh what pity it was, he was a hopeful young man.


Did you know him?


Know him? he was a comely proper young Youth.


Not very proper.


Yes, for his age.


Oh yes, for his age.


If he was your Nephew, that I mean, he was the Son of your Sister and Brother.


Right, he was so.


'Twas the same.


He knows all my Relations.


He knows you better than you are aware of.


I hope I shall oblige you to make my house your home while you stay in Town.


I am obliged to be at my Father-in-Laws.


Are you married then, Sir Simon?


No, but all's agreed on.


But however you shall dine with me to day.


I have sent* Mr. Iorden word I was coming, and he'll expect me I know at
dinner.


Mr. Iorden then is your Father-in-Law: Well, well, that shall not hinder my
design, he is my Neighbour and intimate friend, we are as it were brothers*


Indeed!


You shall stay, and I'll send for him to dinner too.


'Twill be a trouble, and --


No excuse Sir Simon, for by my soul you shall; I have sworn it.


Since he so importunes you, accept it; he has sworn it, and 'twill not be
courteous to refuse him now.


Where are your Servants, and Portmanteau?


Truly my coming was in great haste*, and for expedition, I left all but one
man behind, and he is at the Inn where the Coach lies.


Sir Simon, I will, if you please, wait on you to the Inn where your man stays,
and then help you to find this Gentleman's house. Pray where abouts is it, Sir?


This is the house.


We will be with you in a trice.


I will in, and give orders for your reception; you shall find me here at your
return.


I'll not fail to trouble you.


I'll wait your coming with impatience.


He has the carriage of a fine Gentleman.


Ah, ha, he, a good jest, a good jest i*faith.


What occcasions your mirth?


Ha, ha, he, why I don't know that I ever saw any such man before in my life.


No?


No, as I live, not I.


Come, Sir, no matter, he knows you.


So, he has trussed his Quarrey: how do you like Sir Simon for a woman's man?


Sure there is no woman in the world so necessitated to venture on him.


O many.


Not she that wears a stiff Busk to keep down a great belly, and is to pass for
a Maid still; or she that is forced to come to a Play in a Vizard-Mask to pick
up a gallant to give her a Supper.


Ha, ha, ha.


Nay, not she that has lived to be a stale Maid, and is convinced by her own
imperfections that she shall never know any pleasure, but what her own art and
industry can create, but would think her self cast away on him.


O, Sir, a Country Knight will down with many Court and City Ladies, 'tis a
great convenience to have a husband that is blind in his reason, and is not
clear enough sighted in's understanding to see the shadow his horns cast.


Here is the Court Doctor come, I believe for some more of your money.


Speak of him with respect, he is a person of great importance, he talks to the
King and Nobles at Court as familiarly as I to you.


Yes, he wants neither confidence nor impudence.


He does me the honour to come often to me; is't not an honour* think you, to
be visited by one of the Kings Physicians, and a Favourite too as he is?


He is the best paid for his visits to you of any Doctor in Town, let him visit
Lord, Duke, or King.


He does me the honour to let me lend him a sum of money now and then: Can I do
less than lend it to a man that is in favour at Court, and calls me his friend?


What courtesies does he do you?


More than you are aware of.


Yes, he does you the favour to borrow money of you rather than of any body
else.


Aye, and more than so, he had rather borrow ten times of me than once of any
other man living; and does it so Courtly and Gentleman like.


And pays it so frankly, and with so good a grace.


When I please he will.


What security does he give you?


His word* as he is a Gentleman.


You'll have it again without doubt, that is security enough.


He shall command what he will.


No doubt.


Tell your Lady I'll wait on her immediately.

My dear friend Mr. Iorden how do you, Sir?


Well, to do you service.


You're very modish and fine in this habit, you exceed all the young Gallants at
Court.


Hay, hay.


Turn you -- Gallant all over.


Pretty well: even as the Taylor pleased.


I know not what is the matter Mr. Iorden, I am never so well as when I am with
you, you are the man of all the world I most esteem and love, I was speaking of
you this morning to the King as I stood by his bed-side.


To the King! You did me a great honour I vow.


What mean you, Sir? pray put on --


I know my respect to you.


Fie Mr. Iorden, no ceremony among friends.


Nay, Mr. Doctor.


You must, Sir, by all means: you are my friend.


I am your servant, Sir.


I protest I will not, till you are covered.


I had rather be uncivil than troublesome.


Well, Sir, as I was saying, I spoke of you to the King* and he has given order
the Patent be made, and commands me to bring you to him, and he'll confer on you
the honour of Knighthood; he showed much joy and willingness when I told him,
and was much pleased when I mentioned you to him.


I am extremely beholden to him.


Name what day I shall wait on you to kiss his Majesties hand, and I'll advise
you if he will be at leisure.


Your servant, Sir; as soon as you please: to day I cannot, but to morrow --


To morrow I cannot neither* Well* let it alone a day or two till the Patent is
ready for the Seal.


I would have it so soon as I could.


I might get it done to day peradventure, if I had the money ready to give in
fees, and something a little extraordinary, and so forth as you know.


What will do?


Let me have two hundred pounds, and for what is over I'll be accountable.


I have that sum here in gold.


It may be, less may do.


Well, Sir, pray take purse and all.


So, leave it to my management, this will hasten the dispatch. But now Mr.
Iorden, Sir Ionathan Iorden that shortly will be: As to my affairs, you know I
stand indebted to you.


A few dribbling sums, Sir.


And you lent 'em me very frankly, and with a great deal of generosity, and
much like a Gentleman.


You're pleased to say so, Mr. Doctor.


But I know how to receive kindnesses, and to make returns according to the
merits of the person that obliges me.


No man better.


Therefore pray let's see how our accounts stand.


They are down here in my Table-book.


I am a man that love to acquit my self of all obligations as soon --


See the Memorandum.


You have set it all down?


All.


Pray read.


Lent the second time I saw you one hundred Guineas.


Right.


Another time fifty.


Yes.


Lent for a certain occasion which you did not tell me, one hundred and fifty.


Did I not? that I should conceal any thing from my friend.


No matter, Mr. Doctor.


It looks like mistrust which is a wrong to friendship.


O Lord, Mr. Doctor.


I am so ashamed, for I dare trust my soul with you. I borrowed it, Mr. Iorden,
to lend a person of Quality, whom I employed to introduce me to the King, and
recommend me to his particular favour, that I might be able to do you service
in your affairs.


O was it so, then that debt is as it were paid, I'll cross it out.


By no means, Mr. Iorden, you shall have it* or I vow --


Well, Sir, as you please.


I vow, I would never have borrowed any of you again as long as I had lived.
But proceed.


Another time, one hundred.


O that was to send into France to my wife to bring her over; but the Queen
would not part with her then, and since she is fallen sick.


Alas.


But pretty well recovered.


These four sums make up four hundred Guineas.


Just as can be.


A very good account; put down two hundred Guineas more, which I will borrow
of you now, and then it will be just six hundred; that is, if it will be no
inconvenience to you.


Euh, not in the least.


It is to make up a sum of two thousand pounds which I am about to lay out in
houses I have bought: but if it will incommode you, I can have it elsewhere.


O by no means.


You need but tell me if it will be any trouble.


Lord, Sir, that you will think so!


I know some will be glad of the occasion to serve me; but these are favours
only to be asked of special friends: And I thought you being my most esteemed
friend, would take it ill if you should come to hear of it, that I did not ask
you first.


It is a great honour, and you much oblige me in so freely giving me occasion
to serve you. I'll go fetch it instantly.


Is he gone for the money?


You'll be two hundred pieces richer if he live but to come out again.


Did you find him easy?


As a single-soaled-Shooe, he did not want much drawing on, the hopes of
Knighthood make him as loving.


You baited your hook well.


We will still keep him in play, that we may have the other pluck at his
purse-strings.


I wish you could as successfully wheadle him out of Marina for me.


If your Mistress had but half so good an opinion of you as he has of me.


She has often admitted my courtship, and by that I guess she does not wish me
ill. But could you not invent a way to break off my Fathers correspondence with
the old Knight her Father, and especially prevent his treating her to day? his
courtship is now but beginning to her*


By no means* to put him by, were to make you lose many opportunities of seeing
and discoursing with her: Conceal your love, and you'll find, not to discourage
his hopes will be to your advantage; Love, in time, will teach her to
transgress that blind obedience which keeps her in subjection.


I hear him returning, I'll march off.


When we have got the money, we will consult of your Love.


Look you Mr. Doctor, there are three hundred Guineas.


Three hundred?


True, you asked but for two, but I count the two no courtesy; the other
hundred you shall give me leave to lend you without being asked, that I may be
satisfied, I have done something may express my kindness to you.


Well, Mr. Iorden, you are the most a Gentleman for your time I ever saw in my
life; this is the most heroical Act! Indeed I did not think it possible to have
found out a way to oblige a friend at such a high rate.


O, Sir, I am behind hand with you as to that.


I am so ashamed, I know not how to imitate your generosity, and I have such a
zeal to do you some piece of service. When will you and your daughter Mrs.
Lucia come to a Ball at Court, and I'll carry you in, and place you among
persons of Quality?


The next time there is one, we will both come.


There will be one very suddenly.


Sir, Mrs. Lucia bid me acquaint you she is returned.


Has she brought Mrs. Marina?


There is a Lady with her, Sir.


Tell her I am coming; bid her have her into the dining Room, and let all
things be in readiness.


Sir, I will take my leave.


You shall walk in and take part of a Collation.


I am sent for to a Lady of great Quality, who writes me word, I must not fall
to visit her.


But Mrs. Marina is come, you must needs go in and see my Mistress first.


I have so natural a kindness for you, I can refuse you nothing.


You oblige me.


Madam, regard my Brothers youth, and sorrow, it is for you he sighs, and
languishes; and tho* you cannot cure, yet ease his pain.


Were I permitted, dearest Lucia, to pursue my own inclinations, he should not
unregarded grieve; but I am not at my one dispose: imagine your self in my
condition, and tell me how you would act on this occasion.


Alas! I am subject to the same misfortune, and therefore already qualified to
be your Counsellor, and be assured I give no advice but what I take my self.


Do you then encourage your Lover?


To the utmost of my power.


It will be too difficult for me on the sudden, for I have not yet passed my
first blushes, though I received from him proofs of his love, I gave him not any
acknowledgements of mine.


Nor would I now put you to the trouble of inventing such nice and wary words
as Virgins use, when first they give encouragements to their Lover: let me
interpret it from your actions, receive this trifle.


Start not, Madam, he but presents you with a Ring of a small value, if you
will not receive it from his hands, take it from mine: but wear it for his
sake.


And with it take my heart.


If I do more than I ought, yours, Madam, be the blame.


But fair Marina, if your Father will not give consent I marry you --


I will declare to him my real inclinations.


But if he prove averse, and unalterable?


I'll threaten to fly beyond Sea to a Nunnery, and for ever to exclude my self
from the world.


But if in spite of all, he will force you to a Marriage?


What would you have me say?


That, which I fain would hear you say.


What?


That which one would say, who loves well.


What is that?


That nothing should compel you, and that against all endeavours of your Father
to the contrary you would promise to be mine.


Content your self with what I have already said and done, and attempt not to
know the future resolutions of my heart, nor trouble your self with
apprehensions of extremities which may never happen, or if they do, suffer me
to govern my self at all times according to the present state of affairs.


Madam, a little further I pray.


Sir, I?


One step back, and please you.


How Sir? a little retreit to make room for the third.


Mr. Iorden, Madam, understands behaviour, and with what respect to approach a
Lady.


Mademoiselle, I beg pardon for my son.


For what, Sir?


I saw him give you a buss les mains.


I confess 'twas a civility too humble.


I beg your pardon, he's not a Gentleman.


In all things.


Excuse moy; his Mother was but a Citizen.


He's well behaved.


His deport is but so, so, his guard is pretty jauntee, and his garniture not
much amiss, but he wants a bon mean; and, Madam, I will make it my devoir to
retrieve what has been amiss.


Nothing passed, but what was extreme well.


I am ravished to hear you say so.


Sir, the Lady will be weary with standing.


Pray repose you at the Table, here's a small Collation to divert you. Mr.
Doctor, will you please to sit? Madam, you see how poorly I regaul you,

I ought to make an harangue to excuse it, but I hope you'll pardon my
unpreparedness.


Your treat is noble.


Madam, pray choose where most you like.


Boy, bid the Music give us a touch of their Harmony. Is here any thing,
Madam, appears agreeable to you.


Every thing, Sir?


Fall too then: Sa, sa.


I do, Sir.


Without sans complement.


I use not any.


Pray taste that Ragoust. Ah, what a pretty bells mains has this Lady, Mr.
Doctor.


Admirable white, and well shaped.


Fill me a glass of wine: so the same to this Lady, and to every one round.


Come Phyllis thy singer to begin the go round:
How the glass in thy hand with charms does abound!
You and the wine to each other lend arms,
And I find that my love
Does for either improve,
For that does redouble as you double your charms.
'Twixt him, you and me, 'twixt him, you and me,
To love let us vow, and vow constancy.
Your lips to the wine do give a new relish,
And that when you drink your mouth does embellish;
Whilst this I behold, my desires get strength,
Both with that and with you
More enamoured I grow.
With love and with wine, I am tipsy at length.
'Twixt him, you and me, 'twixt him, you and me,
To love let us vow, and vow constancy.
Hai, allons: The Hat, chappeaux bas: this Ladies health to you, Mr. Doctor.


Look you, Sir: I do you reason.


So, 'tis gone round; 'tis with you, Lady.


Sir, my service to you.


How do you approve of the frolic, Mr. Doctor?


Very pretty, and apt to the purpose; Love and Wine, Mr. Iorden, should go hand
in hand.


Ah, Mr. Doctor, if Mrs. Marina would be as favourable to pledge in one as the
other.


She is so charming, she can do nothing but oblige, Mr. Iorden, pray give me
leave to begin a health.


With all my heart: Fill round.


And let's have the other Song to encourage us.


Let's drink, dear friends, let's drink,
The time flies fast away,
And we no leisure have to think,
Then let's make use on it whilst we may.
When the black Lake we have passed,
Adieu to Wine, to Love and Pleasure;
To drink, to drink, let us make haste;
To drink we always sha'nt have leisure.
Let's love, let's drink whilst we have breath;
Nor love, nor drink is after death.
Disputing leave to Sotts
That are more grave than wise:
What's life's true bliss our learning lies
In the bottom of the pots.
Great riches, knowledge, and great fame,
Ease not the troubled mind of care;
But rather more increase the same;
But we by drinking eur'd are.
'Tis only wine can do the feat:
Wine makes our happiness complete.
Drink, drink, drink off your wine, turn, turn, turn up your glass,
Turn it up, turn it up; till we cry, let it pass, let it pass.

Very fine i'faith: Now, Mr. Iorden, to this Lady's best inclinations, and
long may they live in favour of whom this Lady wears this fine Ring.


Courage: so, and long may he live.


Not a word more of the Ring, you'll make a discovery.


Mum.


Long may he live, Madam.


How, Madam, do you approve their singing?


It was not amiss, Sir.


In my opinion 'tis admirable.


It was indeed most ravishing.


Ah, Madam, could we but as easy ravish your heart.


Sir, my service to you.


Sarrah, give me that Glass as it is.


Observe, Madam; Mr. Iorden drinks just where your lip has been, and all this
while eats nothing but what your fingers have touched. Oh the little Arts of
Lovers.


Sir, I am ignorant of your meaning.


I'll take the other glass, and then Mr. Doctor --


What, Sir?


I'll tell her my mind more plainly.


But have a care what you do, you must not blurt all out at once, Maids are
shy.


But I intend to show my self a man of courage, and boldly to declare my Amour.


Aye, Sir, that is City-courtship; but now you are to make love Ala mode, to
act like a Gentleman, Ala negligence, with a certain kind of gallantry that
obliges more than words: Entertainments, Songs, Dances and Music are
preparatives.


Must I not speak to her?


Your treat this time speaks enough; this lays an obligation; obligations beget
respect, respect begets love, love begets marrying, and marrying begets
children.


Well, Sir, I have a damnable itching to tell her my mind; but since
obligations beget so to the end of the Chapter, I'll let her know how much she
is beholden to me. That Ring Madam --


Sir?


I shall be disgraced.


My Father says, becomes your hand.


Cost a good sum of money.


Pray, Sir, how much do you think it cost?


It cost fifty pounds.


I believe it might.


My Father, Madam, has skill in Jewels.


'Tis well worth your wearing.


I am not much affected with Jewels, but I have a particular reason to wear
this.


You shall see how prettily I'll wheadle her to tell me she loves me.] Why,
Madam? because it was given you?


Yes Sir, for the sake of the Giver.


Ha, ha, Madam, this small present deserves not so great an honour.


Excuse me, Sir.


You set too great a value on it.


I rate it according to the merit of the person that presented it.


Lo you there.] That person is very much your humble servant, and wishes it was
much better for your sake.


I think, Sir, he does not wish me ill.


Look you again.] When you know him better you will say so; he loves you
extremely.


'Tis likely he may, but men know how to dissemble.


But he, Madam, the least of any one in the world.


I am glad you confirm me in my good opinion; but I wonder to hear this from
you.


The Lady wonders to hear you commend your self so.


I beg your pardon, Madam, if my over-forwardness offends you.


On the contrary it pleases me extremely to hear you speak well of him.


It is my near concern gives me the occasion; but truly I never knew any of the
Iordens not Gentlemen in the point of Love, though I speak it that should not.


Truly, Sir, I did not think you had known so many as I perceive you do.


Now Sister all comes out.


If I did not, Madam, who should?


Since our Love is no longer a secret as I thought it had been, and you
approv't, I hope by your means my Father may be inclined.


O, I had got his consent before: and this design of my daughters bringing you
hither was a plot laid to gain a good opportunity to court you.


Alas, Sir, I was so well inclined before, I could not long forbear the
acknowledgement, though I cannot but blush to own I am so soon o'er-come.


Is not this a rare wheedle Mr. Doctor?] How glad am I to hear this, for in
truth I think courtship the most troublesome thing in the world.


Yet, Sir, you must use it with my Father.


Let me alone to deal with him, we will send for a Parson, and the marriage shall
be concluded to night.


Alas, I know my Father will obstruct our proceedings.


Madam, take my word for it.


Well, Sir, if he can be won to consent to it.


Lord! you are so hard of belief.


Nay, Sir, he guessed once at our love, and did not then seem displeased; but I
believe he has since designed me for some other; for of late he has strictly
charged me to the contrary; he told me himself he had provided one would be a
sitter match for me.


Well, Madam, to clear all doubts, I'll even wait on you home, and you shall
soon hear what he says. Mr. Jack, give me my Sword and belt.


Madam, pray let me set this curl right for you.


I beg your pardon.


A little this way. Ah, Madam, you are unhappily run into a mistake: my Father
knows not of my brothers love for you, and himself is the man your Father has
found out to be your husband.


I am amazed.


What good luck have I to dispatch so great an affair in so short a time: I was
wooing my first wife at least a year; But to see how obliging a Gentlewoman is
over a Citizen.


You must resolve to stand to the brunt of 't, but conceal my Brothers being
your Lover.


I'll indeavour't, and frame some excuse for what I said.


Any thing.


Come, Madam. How your hand trembles?


My heart misgives me.


Allons courage, your Father will consent, I warrant you. Lucy, stay you at
home to receive Sir Simon: I much wonder he comes not yet; but when he does
send me word.


Yes, Sir.


Let the Music stay till night; and bid them practise their Dialogue; we
cannot stay to have it now, but it will serve rarely well at supper, and will
be as good for a wedding as an Epithilamium. Mr. Doctor, your servant, Sir.


Sir, I'll wait on you out, for I must be going too. Madam, I am going to meet
your Lover. Mr. Iorden take heart, things may yet go well.


And I how unhappy!


All may go well yet, ever hope the best.


I cannot hope my love should not be discovered.


Brother, think on Marinas Love, you'll find
Sufficent ground for hope whilst she proves kind.

BEsure you look well to him; keep all the doors shut and locked.


When he is once in Lobs-pound, he shall not easily escape.


Here he comes. -- Sir Simon, you are welcome.


You see I make bold.


You honour my house. But where is the Gentleman that was to show you the way?


He left me but just now, he showed me the house, and begged leave for an hour.


I should have been glad he had been here to bear you company till my return:
I'll step cross the street and fetch Mr. Iorden to you. But see here a person
into whose hands I commend you, he will treat you with all courtesy possible.


My profession obliges me, and 'tis enough you command my care.


This is the Steward of's house: He must be a person of quality.


Yes, I assure you, I'll treat Sir Simon according to the method and rules of
Art.


Oh pray make no ceremony, I beseech you, treat me as a friend, let me be no
trouble.


Such an employ is not my trouble but delight.


Here, Sir, is ten pounds advance of what I promised you.


I beseech you, Sir, I understand not wherefore you should put your self to
charge for me: Pray, Sir, let him not buy any thing extraordinary, but let me
partake of the usual entertainment of your Family.


Pray, Sir, give me leave: it is not for what you imagine.


Not for provision, Sir; a spare diet is wholesome; much meat sends up fumes
from the stomach to the head, and that is very hurtful for the brain,
especially to one that is a little disordered.


He talks learnedly. But I befeech you, Sir, let me fare like a friend, and not
a stranger.


'Tis that I intend: I pray, Sir, excuse the incivility I commit in leaving
you.


Oh, Sir, you leave me in good company.


It is a great honour to me, Sir, to be chosen one to do you service.


I am your servant.


See there an able man, my great friend, with whom I will consult the manner
how to treat you.


Once more I request you to make no such ceremony, I am a man content with
ordinary usage.


Come, set chairs here. Sir, please you take that place.


Ha, what's the meaning of this? I am fast.


An Italian device, we meant to surprise you with a rarity.


I cannot get up.


We can soon set you at liberty, it may be you don't sit easy.


Oh, very well, I thank you: I should be loath, were it not among friends, to be
so engaged.


Come friend, pray draw your chair nearer. Now to our business. Give me your
hand, Sir.


Your hand, Sir, I beseech you.


Oh, your servant, Gentlemen, your servant.


Oh, Sir, I beseech you hold still a little.


What means this?


Have you a good stomach? do you eat well, Sir?


Ay, and drink well too.


So much the worse, this great appetition of cold and humidity is an indication
of the heat and dryness within. Do you sleep sound*


Yes, when I have eat a good Supper.


Do you dream, Sir?


Sometimes.


Of what nature are your dreams?


Why, of the nature of dreams. A Devil, what kind of entertainment is this?


How do you go to stool, Sir?


As others do. A plague on it, I know not what they mean by these Questions:
pray let me be so bold to call for a glass of wine.


Have patience, Sir: I doubt whether it be good for you; we will begin and
discourse of the thing it self, and that you may the better understand we will
dispute in English, and resolve upon your food, what meats and drinks are
properest for you, and will do you the least harm.


What needs so much discourse about my eating and drinking?


Patience, Sir, you must be patient.


What a devil would they be at?


I say with your permission, Sir, that our patient here present is very much
assaulted, affected, afflicted, possessed, and overcome with this sort of
folly, which is very well called Hypochondriac melancholy.


These are Doctors, now shall I have a lecture read over me.


I beseech you, Sir, sit still.


This Hypochondriac Melancholy proceeds from the depraved constitution of some
part of the nether belly, and inferior region: but particularly from the
spleen. To be assured that this is his disease, you need but observe this great
dullness which you see, this heaviness accompanied with fear and diffidence,
signs, pathognomiques and individuals of this disease so well observed by the
divine Hippocrates; this Physiognomy, these eyes, red, heavy and dull; this
grisly beard, and grumness; this swarthy, tawny complexion; this constitution
of body, lean, spare and haggord, rough, black and hairy; all which signs
denote him to be very much overcome with this disease proceeding from the
depravedness of the Hypochondria.


Sir, you must sit still.


Now I mean to touch the Therapeia, and remedies which ought to be prescribed
to effect a perfect cure. First, then to remedy this Plethora, and this
Cacochymia, or general depravation of humours throughout all the body; my
advice is for Phlebotomy; that he bleed freely; that is to say, plentifully;
first of the Basilic, then of the Cephalic vein; and if the disease prove
obstinate and refractory, that a vein be opened in his forehead, and that the
orifice be very large, that the thick corrupted blood may have passage; and at
the same time that he purge, deopitulate and evacuate by proper and convenient
purgations; that is to say, by Cholagogues, Melanogogues, c. But before all
these, I find it meet to exhilarate his spirits with harmony resulting from
Music instrumental and vocal, with which it will not be amiss to join some
Dancers; to the end that their motions, postures, and agility of bodies, may
excite, stir up, and quicken his spirits stupefied with idleness, which
occasions the thickness of his blood, from whence proceeds the Malady: these
are the Remedies I prescribe, which may be much advantaged by some others of
yours much better and more efficacious, having by your daily practice gained
great experience, judgement and knowledge in our Art. Dixi.


Amen.


Nay, now, Sir, you must have a little longer patience to hear my Brother
Doctor.


There remains nothing for me to say to the Gentleman, but that he was a lucky
man to fall into your hands, and that he is even too happy in being a fool, in
that he shall experiment the efficacy and admirable virtues of these Remedies
you have propounded with so much judgement: I approve of all, Manibus pedibus
descendo in tuam sententiam: All that I say is, let the number of his bleedings
and purgations be odd, Numero Deus impare gaudet: To drink often clarified
Whey, to bathe often, to have a strait band made with salt in it to bind upon
his forehead, for salt is the emblem of wisdom; and to new whiten the walls of
his chamber, to dissipate the darkness of his spirits, Album est disgregativum
visus: A gentle glister to serve for the introduction to these judicious
Remedies, with which he is to be cured, and he ought to receive consolation.
Heaven grant that these Remedies you mentioned may according to our intention
work their effects upon your patient.


Gentlemen, I have listened to ye all this while, and I have no more patience
left. What, do you sport with me?


Oh, Sir, we don't sport with you.


What means all this? what would you with your mountebanck canting?


Good, see a Diagnostick which we wanted for the confirmation of his disease,
and this may well turn to madness.


A pox on it, who am I left here with?


Another Diagnostick, his frequent spitting.


Let me out here, let me be gone.


Yet another, his unquietness, and desire to change, and shift places.


What's the matter? what a devil ayl ye? what would you do with me?


Cure you, according to order given.


Cure me?


Yes.


What a devil, I am not sick.


A very ill sign, when a sick man perceives not his own disease.


I tell you I am very well.


Oh, we know better than you how you do; we can see into your constitution.


I tell you I was never better since I was born.


Worse and worse, he has been a fool from his Cradle.


Let him be ruled by us, we will cure him, I'll warrant you.


I'll be ruled by none of ye, ye are a couple of knaves.


We are your Physicians, Sir.


Worse and worse, ye are the greater knaves for that. Physicians! what have I
to do with Physicians? a fart for you, and your Physic too: a Caudle,
Ale-berry, or a good Posset is worth all your damned drugs.


A hone, a hone, the man is a greater fool than we thought him.


My Father and Mother never took Physic in their lives, and they are both dead
without the help of Physicians.


I wonder no longer then, that they had a son no wiser; come, let us proceed to
the cure, and by the sweet exhilarating of harmony, sweeten, allay, and abate
the acrimony of the spirits, which I see ready to inflame him. O here comes my
Operators.


What in the Devils name is all this? are all the people in this Town mad? I
never saw the like in my days, what should it mean?


What ail thee thou musing man?


What art thou melancholy?


Come let's cure him if we can.


Sadness is the greatest folly.


Let's cure this wight.


He's a gallant Knight.


'Tis great pit-ty,


That he should die


Of folly,
Or of melancholy.

We to cure thy sadness come.


Mirth with us we bring along.


Throats let's clear with crying hum.


Then treat this gallant with a Song.


With Song we will advance,


With Music and dance;


With these we will clear him.


Then give him glisters half a dozen.


To purge away melancholy and clear him.


Then rinse his body with Canary and Sherrey.


If this will not make him merry,


'Tis we


That be


More fools than he,


And our art will us cousin.


And our art will us cousin.


Let him that's melancholy,
Each morning when he gets up
Take of Sack a good cup:
Sing a catch, and again sup:
Sip and sing, sing and sip again and again,
Till he find the Canary doth work in his brain.
Then to dinner go, and after
Let him sit and hatch a laughter:
Sing the other catch, take the other cup,
Till each hath drunk his bottle up.
Thus laugh, thus quaff, thus quaff, thus laugh again again,
Till he find the Canary doth work in his brain.
At supper let him eat
But light and little meat;
Yet trowl the cup roundly away;
But avoid foggy Ale,
And Beer new or stale:
For Wine is the liquor,
Makes the wits to grow quicker,
And each over his glass to tell a merry tale.
This melancholy evil
Is a sort of a Devil,
Which wine and not holy water will drive away:
Nothing is so sure,
And perfect a cure,
As wine, as mirth, and good company:
And if ought doth lack
'Tis a pipe of Tobac -- coco -- coco -- coco --
Which taken may be
When to bed he doth go, gogo, gogo, gogo,
Come let's have him up to his Chamber, and there give him the remedies
perforce, which he refuses to take here.


Help to let him out of his stool of repentance.


Stay, let me take out my handkerchief to blow my nose. The Devil take ye all
for Rogues.


He is gone, gone beyond recovery, all my designs are ruined.


A pox o'that Pistol.


A pox on you for leaving the Key in the door.


Who'd have thought --


That you should have plaid the Mountebank so long, and have no more brains in
your scull.


I have a device to recover all.


He'll find out Mr. Iorden, and then --


I'll to him first, and doubt not but I'll forestall his reception for a while:
And here comes Mr. Iorden as I could wish.


Hold him in discourse till I come and second you in a new design.


There was juggling in the case, Lucia, for I find it was your brother
presented the Ring to her, he was the man for whose sake she wore it, therefore
tell me true how he came by it?


It may be she lost it, or laid it down somewhere, and he took it up.


No, Sir.


How was it then? let me know.


My Brother, Sir, desired that he might present it, and I, ignorant of his
pretensions to Marina, gave it him.


But that thou art to be a Lady to night I would beat thee for it.


Alas, Sir, I thought no harm, and judged it more fit for him to give it, than
for me.


Let me heat a reason for that, and I'll forgive thee both this and the next
fault.


I imagined, Sir, Mrs. Marina would think my brother would be displeased at the
match, as most sons are when their Fathers marry again, it being against their
interest to have a new brood in the Family, and might from thence have some
scruple to match with you, having children so well grown: therefore I gave him
the Ring to present, that it might appear by this Act, my Brother did well
approve of having her for a Mother-in-Law.


This is very rational.


Well, get you in again; and tell your Brother he has no way to come off with
me, but utterly to renounce her, and resign her to me.


Yes, Sir, I hope he will.


I thought Sir Simon would have visited your house with Lovers speed.


Something is the matter he comes not yet, and I am going to see what it is
detains him.


Mr. Iorden, have you seen Sir Simon?


No, is he come?


Come! yes, Sir, and gone.


Gone!


He has not been at my house.


He has shown me a light pair of heels.


Is he come for certain to this end of the Town?


And gone for certain?


Both for certain; and if he comes to you, let him not conclude the marriage
with your daughter till he be duly prepared for it, and reduced to an estate of
begetting children, well conditioned both in body and mind.


I understand you not.


Nor do I know what he means.


Your Son-in-Law that is to be, was this morning put into my hands by a near
relation of his that endeavours his good, to be my patient, and I must tell my
friend, I do not think fit he should marry your daughter till he hath taken the
remedies I am to prepare for his disease.


Has he any disease?


A most notorious one, and hard to be cured, 'tis gotten into his brain.


What is his disease?


Folly.


Ha, ha, he, that's one Reason why I make him my Son-in-Law; for what better
husband can I provide for my daughter, than one that has much honour, a great
estate, and but little wit.


How, Sir?


I'll assure you, Mr. Doctor, you may spare your drugs and labour too, for his
disease is as hereditary to his Family, as his estate, and you may sooner cure
him of that than of the other.


But he has another disease I have not told you off.


Another?


One that debilitates his body as much as this his mind.


What is that?


Doctors are bound to secrecy.


You may tell Mr. Iorden:


For his Daughters sake, and because he is my friend, I will. But you must both
promise to keep it secret.


Doubt not, that Gentleman is my great friend.


Pray out with it.


I'll trust ye for once.


You may.


You know, Mr. Iorden, Sir Simon has been in France.


I have heard so.


There he fell extremely in love with a Lady. He gave her his Gold, and she as
a token of her kindness gave him the Pox.


The Pox!


The Pox said you?


No such great wonder, for most young English Gallants that go thither have the
like misfortune.


The Pox his disease!


It is indeed the fate of most young Travellers.


Like most of 'em too he fell into the hands of an unskilful Surgeon, who
made no perfect cure; and should he marry as he is, he either would have no
children; or if he has, they will be peuling, whining, sickly things, scabbed as
young Cuckows, and look like Chickens that have got the pipp.


We see the example of it daily.


But that he is both Knight, and Baronet, he should not have my Daughter.


I doubt not, but by the course I intend for him, within forty days to put his
body in a good condition for procreation.


Well then, I'll have him enquired out, he shall marry my daughter presently,
lest she should hear on it* and be averse to the Marriage: And then Mr. Doctor
and friend, I will deliver him again into your hands.


How! let him marry your daughter before he is eured?


Yes, Il make sure of him first; for he may dye under your hands, and then she
misses the title of Lady, and the honour of having been wife to a Knight
Baronet; besides, he makes her a very great jointure.


How his folly frustrates our designs!


Now is the time I must show my self a man of intrigue* or for ever lose the
reputation I have gotten.

Gentlemen, can any of you inform me which is Doctor Cureal's house?


That is his house, and this Gentleman is the Doctor.


Yes, Sir, I am Doctor Cureal.


I have a little private business, and beg these Gentlemen's leave to speak with
you.


Mr. Iorden, you have not yet told me how you like your Mistress?


Oh, Sir, 'tis the prettiest charmingest Rogue --


Her eyes are but little.


Oh, but Mr. Cleverwit, so sparkling, so black and so piercing, they strike a
man to the heart at first sight.


She has a wide mouth.


She has so, but so many graces about it, such pretty dimples at each corner
when she smiles, and such a pair of smacking lips too.


Her stature is but low.


But yet she's well shaped: Oh, 'tis a pretty snug Rogue, she'll lye as round --



She speaks very little.


Oh, a prattling woman is worse than a Flock of Geese.


And some conclude, a woman that wants tongue wants wit.


And she that has too much, wants Grace.


Well, Sir, I see plain, by your excusing her, that you love her, and will have
her from your son.


If her Father order her, as I'll order my son, we shall meet in a pair of
sheets.


Well, Sir, I'll acquaint my friends here with the business; and if you'll engage
your word before them I'll do it.


Business of this nature should not be communicated.


They are my special friends.


Well, Sir, if you think good to trust 'em.


Mr. Iorden, whatever you hear, say nothing, till you have made a full
discovery; here is villainy plotting against you.


Ha, knavery, knavery.


Ye must know friends, one Sir Simon Softhead is my Patient, whom I have to
cure of a certain distemper, which will require some considerable time. Well,
go you on, Sir.


The said Sir Simon is come to Town to marry the Daughter of one Mr. Iorden, a
rich man.


So.


Now this Sir Simon owing much money to me, and five other Merchants of
Norwich, we have all his land in mortage; but we being all his Fathers Friends,
and having a respect for the Son, are willing to do him all the good we can;
and therefore do underhand manage the business so, combining with the said Sir
Simon, that the Mortgages and Engagements shall not appear to damage his
Marriage.


Well, Sir.


Now comes the design.


So that Sir Simon may, besides the portion he is to have with his wife, take
up of his Father-in-Law (who we hear is a mony'd man) as much money as will pay
all his debts, and engage to him his land before engaged to us.


O dainty Rascals!


And then shall your Mortgage start up and take it from him.


So shall the Son cheat the Father-in-Law, and the Father have no remedy for
it.


Yes, Sir, and this may easily be done, for Mr. Iorden is but a half-witted
fellow.


Oh, is he so, Rascal?


The said Land passes already currant for the jointure, though managed by his
Brother in the Country, who is not much wiser than himself.


Very good.


Now, Gentlemen, this Sir Simon being also a man of a thick scull, and not so
sensible of his own good, as he ought to be; I, and the other five Merchants do
desire of Mr. Doctor, to persuade Sir Simon to strike up the Match, and be
married before he enter into his course of Physic, that the design so well
laid may not take wind, and miscarry by his folly and want of discretion.


And for this piece of service, your self and those other five Merchants do
reward me with an hundred pounds, to be demanded the day after the marriage.


I do here before these Gentlemen promise and engage my self for the true and
just payment of it, and will moreover treat these Gentlemen with a Dinner of
five pound.


How are you called?


My name is William Webster, Merchant of Stuffs in Norwich.


Then, I say, William Webster of Norwich, and the rest of his Merchant
Combiners are knaves, ha, ha, he, bear witness Gentlemen -- ha, ha, he, --


Gentlemen, you'll not discover, I hope.


No, no friend, you have made discovery enough.


Pray tell Sir* Simon, my Daughter shall not be a beggar to be a Lady; there
are more Knights Baronets in the World.


Mr. Doctor, is this Mr. Iorden?


The very man, now, I think on it.


Oh dire mischance!


Come, Sir, pay your hundred pound, Mr. Doctor has done your business for you
-- ha, ha, he.


Well, Sir Simon is an undone man, and so I'll go tell him.


And when you find him, tell him too he may even go like a fool as he came --
ha, ha, he..


This after-game was well plaid.


A half-witted fellow! ha, ha, he.


How blank will Sir Simon and the rest look when they hear this news.


I fear he is more knave than fool.


Mr. Iorden, I am glad I have served you in so important an affair; I must
leave my friend to visit a Lady of great Quality that has sent for me.


And I am heartily sorry, I cannot stay till Sir Simon comes, to see the upshot
of the business, for come he will if he misses this fellow.


Your servant, Mr. Iorden.


Your servant, Sir.


Your servant, Mr. Doctor: Your servant, Mr. Cleverwit.


Oh, Sir, are you here? I have found out all your intrigue with Mrs. Marina,
you are the man in her books, are you?


Only in that one thing I am happy.


But you must think no more of her.


Not think of her!


No, Sir.


It is impossible.


You must resign you interest.


To no man living.


To me.


Not, while I have life.


She is to be my wife.


Not with my consent.


I have her Fathers good liking.


And I have the Daughters.


She must submit to her Father's will, and you to mine.


Love is subject to no Laws but its own; when that is in dispute, all respect
to power and authority is laid aside.


I shall make you know me.


He that loves well, dares all threats desie.


You will then be meddling in my concerns.


No, Sir, 'tis you meddle with mine, I loved her first.


And you shall quit her first.


Quit her? -- never --


I'll force you, saucy Jack.


You cannot.


I'll try that.


Oh Maitre, Maitre Iorden, vat do you mean?


I laugh at your anger.


You shall cry at my anger.


O maitre, maitre Iorden?


Let me come to him.


O fee, fee, fader beat te great son, vat, vat be te difference? make me te
judge, me pass me parol to make te reconcilement.


You shall hear Mr. Jack.


But stand you two at more great distance: So now me am to be te judge: so,
hum, hum, speak te fader now: Be no dat ver just to bid te fader speak before
te son.


I love Mrs. Marina, and have intentions to marry her, and my son here in
spite of my teeth says he will love her.


Spit in your teet, no good fashione: he be to blame ver much.


Is't not an insolence in a son to contend with his father?


A ver great injure.


Ought he not to forbear his pretensions to show me respect?


You have te grand reason: let me go speak to him, and stand you dere.


Well, since he hath made you judge, I am content to refer the matter to you.


You do me te ver great honour.


I was first in league with Mrs. Marina, she makes kind returns to my
affection; and with tenderness receives the offers of my love; and my father
comes to disturb our peace with his pretensions.


A ver great injure.


Is it not very unreasonable to desire she should love him against her
inclination, ought he not rather to quit his design?


You have te reason, let me now speak to your fader. Have you no more to say,
but dat you love te Gentlewoman?


Yes, I have her Father's consent, and he is utterly against my sons marrying
his daughter.


Ver good.


Ought she not to be obedient to her father?


Oh vithout doubt. Let me speak to your son. Your fader do say he has te
consent of her fader.


But I have the consent of the Daughter.


Auh dat be 'gen te ver good reazon.


Is it not a great injustice in him to cause her father to force her to marry
one she does not love?


Oh vithout doubt, dat be ver injuste. Now let me have te consideration how te
do justice, to cause be ver difficult.

Auh, you love te Gentlewoman?


Yes.


And she do you love?


Yes.


And she will mar you?


Yes.


O vat remedy? vel, stay you dere --

Vell, Sir, your Zon be no so obstinate as you do think, he do submit to you,
and say vat he did tell you, was in his great indignation, and dat he will give
you te Maitress, provide dat you will treat him ver vell for te future; and let
him have some little part of your Estate, dat he may live like te Zon of
Monsieur Iordane, and mar some Gentlewoman dat be young, handsome, and rish.


Well, tell him he may have any thing hereafter, and except Marina, he is at
liberty to choose whom he will


O, let me manage te affair --

Your fader have te more discretion den you imagine, he say dat te fashione of
your discourse, and your action put him in te grand colore, and dat he will
give te consent to vat you desire, provide dat you give te promise for te
future to be te ver good Zon, and render to his person te respect and
submission tat one Zon ow to te fader.


You may assure him, that granting Marina, he obliges me for ever to submit my
self entirely to him, and henceforward his will shall be a law to all my
actions.


Oh so tis affair be dispatch.


As I could wish.


Te league be conclude:

He be content vith vat you do promise.


Oh my kind Stars be thanked.


Now, ye may make discourse togeader again; ye se how soon te man of discretion
make te accommodation.


I am much obliged to you.


Not at all for vat me do, me be your humble serviteur.


You have done well Master Iaques: there is a reward for you.


Me kiss your hand Maitre Iordane.


I am now Trickmore again, and ready to receive Sir Simon if he come this way:
I will proceed to sow such jealousies between the Father and the Son-in-Law,
that shall make 'em both draw contrary ways. Yonder he comes, be gone.


Of folly or of melancholy,
Of folly or of melancholy. -- coco -- coco -- coco.

What mean you by this Sir Simon?


All I see seems Glisters to me.


How!


You know not what has happened since I parted from you.


No, what is't?


I thought I should have been treated according to my Quality.


And well. --


And I was left by that Gentleman in the hands of two fellows clothed in
black, Physicians I suppose they were, who set me in a trap-chair, felt my
pulse, shook their noddles, cried ah! is't so? he's a fool, he's a fool: then
did these two buffle-headed talkative fellows in broad-brim'd hats speak
nonsense for an hour, till my patience was wearied; then entered such a consort
of Music, as if they had plaid a flourish for the entry of Devils; but were
followed by half a dozen Antics singing, and dancing with Syringes and
Glisters in their hands, that they made me almost out of my wits; when with
much ado by the help of a Pocket Pistol, I got from 'em, they all discharged at
me: see, am I not all beglisterfied?


Indeed you have an odd smell about you.


Oh my imagination is filled with 'em, every thing I see methinks is a Glister.


How deceitful is the out-side! I thought that Gentleman the sincerest of your
friends.


A very Rascal.


This is one of my wonderments, is't possible there should be such knavery in
the world?


I think that is the house.


According to my promise I came, thinking to have found you there, but I have
knocked this half hour, and the Devil of any body can I make answer, the doors
and windows are all shut close, as if no body was in the house.


The Rogues thought it time to be gone. Ever since I made my escape, I have
been enquiring to find out Mr. Iorden; I am told he lives in this street, and I
am glad I have met with you, that you may help me to find his house.


So, so, I smell you out, Sir Simon.


Smell me? aye so may any body: a pox on these Rogues and their Glisters.


I mean I know your design of enquiring out Mr. Iorden, you have a months mind
to his Daughter, I warrant.


Yes, I come to Town on design to marry her.


To marry her?


Yes.


Indeed to marrry her?


Aye, for what else do you think?


Nay, then 'tis another matter, and I crave your pardon.


What mean you by this?


Nothing, Sir.


Pray tell.


Nothing, not I, I spoke a little too hastily.


Pray let me know what was in your mind.


It is not at all convenient.


Nay, pray out with it.


By no means, indeed you must excuse me.


Then I see you are not the man I took you for, I thought you had been my
friend.


No man more.


You ought not then to conceal any thing from me.


It is a matter in which is concerned the interest of a Neighbour.


To oblige you to open your heart, take this Ring and wear it for my sake.


Let me think a little whether I may do it in conscience. 'Tis a man who seeks
his own good, who endeavours to provide for his Daughter, as advantageously as
he can. I ought to injure no man. These things are known truths: And then I go
about to discover to a man that is ignorant of them. 'Tis forbidden to speak
ill of our Neighbour.


Not to interrupt you, there's Gold, by my soul you shall keep it: Now pray go
on.


But on the other side, here is a stranger he would surprise, and one who comes
with a good intent to marry his Daughter, whom he knows not, nor ever saw; a
Gentleman free and courteous, for whom I have a kindness, who does me the honour
to esteem me his friend; reposes confidence in me, who gives me a Ring to wear
for his sake, and Gold. Well, I find I can tell you all without scruple of
conscience. But I'll take care to tell you as blamelesly as I can, and to spare
the person as much as may be. To tell you then, this daughter of his lives
dishonestly would be too harsh; I'll find some milder term to express my
meaning; to say she's gallanted is not enough, but I think it will suit well
with my meaning, to say she is a naughty pack; and may serve to let you know
truly what she is.


Oh, oh, they take me then for a Coaks.


It may be she is not so bad as the talk goes, and since there are some young
women that expose themselves to censure by taking too much liberty, not
thinking their honour and reputation depends --


I thank you, Sir, I will not be in the Turkish fashion, and go with a crescent
above my brows, I love to walk without being pointed at.


Well, Sir, but you are resolved to give 'em a visit.


On purpose to let 'em see how they are deceived.


Well, Sir, I'll wait on you to the door, have a care, she's very handsome, and
beauty is a sort of witchcraft.


Let me alone, I warrant you.


At your return you shall find me here about.


BE pleased to walk in there, Sir, my Master will come presently.


Where, where is the Gentleman would speak with: me?


Your servant, Sir, are you Mr. Iorden?


So am I called, Sir.


And I am Sir Simon Softhead.


In good time.


Do you think, Mr. Iorden, we Suffolk men are fools?


And do you think, Sir Knight, that we Londoners are gulls?


Do you imagine that such a man as I am, is so put to it for a wife?


And do you believe that such a woman as my Daughter is so in want of a
Husband?


I am informed Father, Sir Simon is come: this is he without doubt, my heart
tells me so; what a comely person! how well shaped! what a bone men, and
gentile carriage he has! Oh how content I am you have made choice of such a man
to be my husband.


Soft and fair, daughter.


How coming she is.


I would fain know, Sir Simon, what wind brings you hither?


Indeed Father I am so pleased with Sir Simon, he's one of the comeliest and
most courtly persons!


She's on fire already: Ha 'tis a pretty little loving fool.


You know what interest you have here, Sir Simon, you need not make your self
so much a stranger.


Daughter stand off, keep from him I bid you.


What a liquorish baggage 'tis, she'd have me salute her.


I would fain know for what reason, and please you, you --


Ah my dear, Sir Simon.


Again! the wench is mad.


Will you not permit me to express a kindness to the man you have determined to
be my husband?


No, get you up into your chamber.


Let me but stay and look at him.


Ah pure wheedle.


Get you in, I say.


I'd stay here, if you please.


A cunning slut, how she gleggs at me.


Get you in once more, or --


Well, I go then.


Are you not gone yet?


When is it, Sir, we are to be married?


Never: let that serve your turn.


How her chops water at me!


But you have promised I should be his Wife.


If I promised you, I unpromise you.


She's agog for me: She sings loath to depart.


But if we will, who can hinder it?


Why I'll hinder it, and take notice I forbid the bains. My Daughter's
bewitched, I think.


Well, our good Father-in-Law that was to have been, don't trouble your self, I
have no such maw to your Daughter. This won't do: ha, ha, he, who put it into
your head that Sir Simon Softhead was a man to buy a pig in a poke, and wants
wit enough to inform himself how squares go, and one that would so soon be
drawn into the noose of matrimony without being well assured it would be safe
for his reputation, ha, ha, he, he's no such fool as you take him for, I'll
assure you.


I know not what you mean by this; but how came you to have such a conceit in
your head, that Mr. Iorden had no more brains in's scull, and considered his
daughters good no more, than to marry her to a man who has you know what, and
was put you know where, and to you know who, to be cured against you know when?


Come, come, Sir, I know what you mean, but that's a lye, I am as sound and as
well as you, or any man living.


Well, well, somebody that knows somebody, told somebody, though that somebody
must tell nobody.


That somebody is a lying Rogue; I am a Gentleman every half inch of me, and
I'll make it appear with sword in hand, I'll justify my reputation, here, or on
any ground in England.


Well, Sir, I have a sword too in my house, am a Gentleman, and may in time too
be a Knight; and will tell you here, or on any ground in England, that, what I
know, I know; nor am I to be cozened with Land mortgaged already to Norwich
Merchants to pay debts, not I, Sir.


What mortgage, what land, what debts, what Norwich Merchants, ha, ha, he.


Come, come, dissembling won't do, all's out, I am not to be choosed out of my
money, nor wheedled to pay Creditors, no, Sir.


What Creditors, ha Sir? do you know, Sir?


Who's this with a drawn Sword against my Father, and he unarmed? Come, Sir,
make me your adversary.


Your are his Hector, are you?


I am his son, Sir.


That is more than I will be, I assure you.


And will vindicate his cause with the last drop of my blood.


Oh, Sir, your servant; fare you well Bully* Ruffian.


I'll be so civil to wait on you to the door.


Oh, Mr. Iorden, Mr. Iorden!


What, Mr. Doctor, what's the matter?


Such news, such joyful news!


What, what is it?


I made such haste hither, I scarce have breath left to tell it you.


Oh dear Mr. Doctor!


The Lady I went to, when I parted from you, entreats the favour of me to
recommend some Lodgings to her: now it presently came into my mind, that you
have a house spacious and well furnished, fit to receive a Lady of great
Quality.


What, I let Lodgings?


O no, dear friend, you mistake me: whereupon, that you might have an occasion
to court and be acquainted with this Lady, said I to her, I have a friend, a
very good friend, called Mr. Iorden, at which word she started, who will do me
the honour to give you, or any friend of mine an apartment in his house, and
there, Madam, you will be treated very honourably, and received with much
respect and gallantry.


I am obliged to you. But what I pray was the reason she started when she heard
my name?


At that time, Madam (said I) you seem surprised: and then she blushed, and her
colour went and came, and came and went. Then I proceeded: Madam does the name
offend you? I must confess (said she) I know some reason to wish I had never
heard the name, nor seen the man; yet have I not so much power not to see him
again, and it was my desire the Lodging you were to provide me should be near
that persons house; but pray make no more words on it, said she; then blushed
again, and turned away and sighed.


What meant all this?


Nay, Sir, it is no riddle: what think you?


I vow to you I cannot guess unless it be love.


You'll never be counted a Conjurer for telling this, though it is a most
undoubted truth.


Well, Sir; and will she come?


Come, Sir? she can't help it, there is no resisting the influence of our
stars. Lord! Mr. Iorden, that you should have such prodigious luck.


Is she very rich?


Rich? what is she think you?


A Lady.


A Lady?


A Countess.


More.


A Marquess.


A Marchioness you meam, more, Sir, more.


A Duchess.


More than all that.


More than a Duchess? what is she then?


A Princess, Sir.


A Princess, Mr. Doctor?


Mum, Mr. Iorden: ha, is nobody near? let me see: have we no listners. Aye, Mr.
Iorden, a Princess, I say to you she is a Princess.


I'll lay my life now at last the jest of it is that her name is Princess.


No, Sir, she is a Princess by birth, her Quality is Princess.


Indeed!


I knew her in hanging-sleeves, I was Physician to her Father while I was in
Germany.


She is then Daughter to one of the Princes in Germany.


Right, she is a German Princess; I taught her English when I was there, and
she has since marvellously improved her self in our Language.


I am glad she understands English.


Admirably well.


Will she come to night?


Immediately; her Coach was at her door when I came. But be sure you give her
no ground to apprehend you know her Quality, for she is here incognito, and
will not be known till all her train and attendants come over, which will be
very suddenly; therefore what you do, you must do quickly, for then she'll be
for Court.


I'll make good use of the opportunity.


Besides should you not declare your love till after you know her Quality, she
may think it is but ambition, and that you are more enamoured of her quality
than person.


I'll assure you, most dear friend, and divine Doctor, I will lose no time.


Well, Sir, but pray let me not lose the title of Doctor of Physic for that of
Divinty.


Oh, Maitre Iorden, here be te ver fine Lady in te great glass Carriage, enquire
for Dr. Cureal.


'Tis she: Prepare, Sir.


I dare be bold, now you Mr. Doctor have felt her pulse for me.


Be not too ceremonious, but*behave yourself as if she was but what she seems,
a Gentlewoman.


Madam, this is Mr. Iorden, Master of the house, and my worthy friend.


Oh, I had like to have forgot. Madam, a little nearer, I pray.


Sir?


One step nearer, and please you: So, you are welcome, Madam, as I may say. Oh
she kisses like a Queen!


I presume upon Mr. Doctore* score of friendship to give you the trouble of
being your guest some few days.


Madam, it is to me a great glory to see my self so fortunate, as to be so
happy to have the good luck, that you should have the bounty to do me such a
grace, as to afford me the honour, to honour me with the favour of your good
company. And that --


Mr. Iorden, you have done well, this Lady loves not much ceremony, she knows
you are a man of wit and parts*

'Tis as good a ridiculous Cit as ever was seen.


He is a very farce, nothing but ridicule.


Believe me, Madam, this Gentleman is one of the best friends.


You do me too great an honour.


As gallant a man as lives.


I have no small esteem for him.


I have not yet done any thing, Madam, to merit this Grace, but if your
Ladyship please to command me any service, your Grace shall find I have such an
inclination* to serve your* Highness, that it should be impossible for any man,
were you a Princess ten times over.


Hold.


What means Mr. Iorden?


Have a care what you say.


I vow, Madam, I forgot, and I beg your Princely pardon.


I understand not Mr. Iordens discourse.


You will spoil all.


Ha: O Lord, Madam, if I have offended you, I cry your Highness mercy.


Again, fie, fie, Mr. Iorden.


I vow it was out before I was aware.


Mr. Iorden is too great a Courtier.


I hope, Madam, you'll not be offended, it is a custom he has got to give the
title of Princess and Queen to all Ladies that are extraordinary sair and
beautiful, because like Princesses and Queens they rule, command, and are
adored.


Had I not been interrupted, you are so very beautiful, I should have run on
till I had called you Emperor and great Turk.


How, Mr. Iorden? Empress and Sultaness you mean.


Pauh, a man in love minds not what, -- I should have called you Cherubin and
Arch-angel, ere I had done.


Are you then in love, Mr. Iorden?


There I am caught again. Who I? no, Madam, not I.


What do you mean to deny it now?


I am not well.


Do you see what you have done?


Yes, yes, Madam, I am in love, I am in love.


Indeed? ah me.


She swoons, run for some spirits.


Help, help.


Stay, she revives.


I am in love, Madam, I assure you.


Ah.


Help, help.


What out-cry is this?


Oh Daughter, help, the Lady swoons.


O my dear Prin --, my dear Mistress.


Dear Prin -- O have I caught you tripping too.


Hy ho.


how do you, Madam?


Pretty well, Mr. Doctor, I thank you.


Madam, here is my Daughter come to wait on you.


Her company perfects my recovery.

How wondrous pretty she is, she's so like you, Mr. Iorden, I must needs salute
her once more.


Observe that; like you, and kisses her again.


Madam, you are all obliging, and I merit nothing of this favour.


Madam, here is the Cabinet you committed to my care.


Mr. Iorden, in this trunk is all my present concern, will you pardon me, if I
request the trouble of you to see it safe locked up.


I'll take care of it my self, and put it into my Iron chest, where I keep my
own little treasure.


You shall see what it contains; look you, Sir, here is a small parcel of gold,
some six thousand pounds, with some trifling Jewels, to the value of about two
thousand pounds more, not worth your seeing.


Mr. Iorden will see 'em carefully disposed of.


They shall be forth-coming when you please.


I have twelve thousand pound more to receive of the Banquers next week, for
some friends of mine, alas I am not worth near so much.


That is because I should not think her a person of great Quality, I understand
her wheedle.


Mr. Doctor, I find my self very drowsy.


Your spirits, Madam, are faint, and weak; retire a while to your Chamber, one
half hours repose will much refresh and enliven you.


Woman, where are you?


Madam, my Daughter shall wait on you too.


It were a disease to part with her, nothing I'll assure you can delight me more
than her company.


You are pleased to esteem it.


Page, wait on Mr. Iorden with my Cabinet.


Mr. Doctor, I'll wait on you immediately.


'Tis well you give me timely notice of the deceit. I wondered indeed at my
Fathers sudden change.


Te reconcilement was good for te present, you give me your pardon.


You did very well.


Your servant.


All things succeed wonderfully.


The grand Masque is ready, the Play-house has furnished us rarely with habits;
the Masquerade seems a little burlesque, but 'twill pass upon him, it hits his
humour so right.


What with his love for Marina, and his ambition for our German Princess, his
brain is so unsettled, he cannot frame a judgement so much as whether a thing be
possible, or not; much less discern 'twixt probabilities, and improbabilities.


Sir, I have had remorse of conscience for contending with you for Marina, but
to make a perfect amends, and to gain your pardon entirely, I have used all my
endeavours to persuade her to love you: and, Sir, I have so prevailed that she
has promised her Father, she will be your Wife, if you demand it of her to
night.


Ha, to night? I am bustle.


I am sorry for it, for her father has given her leave to make a vow never to
be your wife unless you consummate the marriage this very night.


Doctor, what do you advise me to?


To think of the Princess.


But does she love me think you?


She swooned when you said you did not love.


Yes, and when I said I did, too.


She was then possessed with jealousy, that you loved some other Lady: you
may, Mr. Iorden, let a Princess dye for you; but it will not be done like a
Gentleman.


No, won't it be like a Gentleman? Well, Son, let 'em know if they are in such
haste, they may do as they please.


Will you not go to her, Sir?


I have other fish to catch. You may tell Mrs. Marina, they that will not when
they may, and so forth.


After this night you will have no hopes.


There, or in another place. What, marriage is a matter of moment, and I will
first consult with my pillow.


I am sorry you are so much disgusted.


It may be, anon I may send my man to 'em, and it may be not.


I have business that way, if you please I'll serve you in that occasion, and
tell 'em your mind.


Pray do.


Your servant.


There be Maitre Iorden.


Sir, I have not the honour to be known to you.


Nor I the like to you, Sir.


I remember I have seen you at my Fathers, when we were Children, your Father
used to bring you sometimes to our house; you was the prettiest sweet babe, the
women did love to get you upon their knees, and kiss you.


Kiss me!


Your father and mine were great Cronies.


Indeed!


I am sorry to hear he is dead, he was a very honest Gentleman.


How say you, Sir?


I say he was a very honest Gentleman.


What, my Father?


Yes, as lived.


And you knew him very well?


I did, Sir.


And you knew him to be a Gentleman?


Yes.


Then I know not how the World goes.


Why, Sir?


All the World knew him to be but a Shop-keeper.


He a Shop-keeper?


Yes, a Mercer, was he not?


He a Mercer? what because he was very obliging, and officious, and because he
had great skill in silks, went up and down and bought 'em, and had 'em sent
home to his house, and gave 'em to his friends and acquaintance for their
money; therefore he was a Shop-keeper, was he?


I always thought him a Shop-keeper: but I am glad to understand from you that
my Father was a Gentleman.


He was, and I'll maintain it.


I am obliged to you for it.


Since I saw him (good Gentleman) which is now about twenty years, I have
travelled almost over all the World.


Over all the World?


Yes, Sir, over all the World.


'Tis a great way thither.


It is but four days since I have been in Town after my long travels, and to
morrow or next day I am to depart again.


Your own Country after so long an absence, should methinks be too dear to you
to part again so soon.


A mans Country is where he can make his fortune, I am lately got into a great
employ.


What, I pray?


I am the now great Turks English Interpreter, and have been so this fortnight.


Are you come so far as from Turkey in a fortnight?


Oh, Sir, the great Turk is here.


What, in England?


Aye, Sir, he is here.


Here? what in London?


Aye, Sir, and in this house.


The great Turk in my house?


Yes, and a great train with him.


In my house? in this house?


In this very house; he is come to visit a Lady that is newly come hither, and
to take his leave of her.


How came he to know her, and that she was here?


He grew acquainted with her in Germany; and at her old lodgings they informed
us of her remove, which I was glad to hear; for by this means I have an
opportunity to pay my respects to you, Sir, whom I honour for your fathers
sake.


But pray, Sir, how came the great Turk to be in Christendom?


Do not you remember you had the news some while since that the great Turks
brother was taken by a Squadron of the French-fleet, as he was sailing to
Mecha, to pay his devotions at Mahomet's Shrine?


I heard that indeed.


The King of France generously restored him to liberty, and he since that time
has travelled over most part of Christendom, and is now come to England; but
since his arrival at London, which is now but two days, news is come that his
Brother who was the Sultan, is dead, and he is to succeed him in his Empire,
which occasions his sudden departure, for to morrow, or next day, he is to set
sail for Turkey, attended with a Squadron of the Kings Frigates, which his
Majesty sends to be his Convoy.


Ehhim, acha halif ulabalechi.


Alman bochin. Mr. Iorden, I am commanded to go about some affairs, but I'll
wait on you again before my great Lord the Sultan turns his posteriors to the
front of your Palace.


Your servant, Mr. Interpreter. Mr. Jack, where is this great Turk?


Above vid te Lade.


Who showed him up?


Her Shentilewoman.


Ha! he smells her out to be a Princess, he is my Rival: go fetch me my long
Sword and Pumps.


Ha, vat do you mean?


Never a great Turk in Christendom shall rob me of my Princess.


Ho Princess! my Maitre be troubled in te esprete.


He is my Rival, and I'll fight him.


You fight te great Turk?


I'll challenge him, and kill him by the trick I learnt to day.


Oh he have te grand train vit te Cemiter dat will sa, sa, sa, cut off te head,
and te arm at one blow.


Well then, I will play the Politician: the Dialogue we omitted at dinner, in
hopes this would have proved mine or my Daughters wedding-night, shall be
performed by way of Cerenade, and I will plant my self below over against the
Balcony; and if I epsy his Turkship making any courtship to her, I will put my
self into a posture of terror, and look so grum upon the matter, that he shall
think me a Devil or a Rival.


Does Sir Simon then believe he has killed me?


I put him into a fear that he has done you some mischief so soon as I
disengaged him from you at the door; for I got his sword out of his hand, and
cut my finger with it, and bloodied the point, which much surprised him; then I
hurried him away in great haste to that house, where I caused some persons to
come and report the news of your death, which has put him into such fear, that
he is resolved to leave the Town in disguise to avoid being apprehended.


By that means we shall get quit of him.


The posture our affairs are in at present, do not much seem to require his
absence, therefore I have contrived a defeat, and will keep him yet in play. I
have set another Spring, which if it catch the Woodcock, 'twill hold him fast.
Look here comes forth our Knight in Petty-coats: mussle your self up in your
Cloak, and be gon.


A stately dame on my word.


Come, Sir, I am in a bodily fear for you, but I think you cannot be known in
this disguise, I would not for the World see you hanged.


Nor I for the world you should see so sad a sight: but I don't flee so much
for the fear of death, as that it would be a dishonourable thing to be hanged;
it would be a blur to our Family, and much below the dignity of Knighthood;
were I of a mean descent, or a poor Devil, it were another matter.


Right, hanging then would not be so much, it were more suitable to ones
condition. Come, Sir, I'll lead you off, think to demean your self like a woman
of Quality, and carry your self with some state.


Shaw waugh: let me alone for that, I know how to carry my self like a Lady of
honour. I warrant you; but have I not a little too much beard?


Some women have as much: but put your Mask on, that will hide it.


I have never a Mask.


I laid a Vizard Mask with the rest of your things, I'll step in and fetch it:
Do you practise a good carriage in the mean time.


A pox on this Sir Simon Softhead, that he should get away already.


O that we could find him, that we might get the twenty pounds, Mr. Iorden
offers them that can bring him before a Justice.


Ha, these are hounds upon the scent for me.


I am as weary as a dog with running about, but hanged he's gone, we got crowns
a piece to encourage us to begin the search, even let us go and be merry now.


I would ye were gone, that I might be a little merry too.


I'faith Comrade, we will have a Wench if we can get one, I'll try if I can pick up
that Gentlewoman, she looks like a good brazon'd faced Quean.


How shall I behave my self now? these fellows understand no breeding.


What, Mistress, are you here all alone?


No, now you are here I am not alone.


Mistress, if you please.


Keep your hands off, they don't please.


Here is excellent liquor hard by, pray let us wait on you to take a pot.


I am not such a one as you take me for.


Faith she's a good bonny Lass: Pray give me your hand, Lady.


Over your ears, and you will ye saucy Rascals, I am a person of Quality.


Oh we know how to be civil.


Oh Rogue, what a breast is there, I warrant you?


Ye are the rudest insolent fellows I ever saw in my life.


Aye he's a rude Rogue, go with me Mistress.


Go with you Comrade?


Let go my hand.


Aye, let go her hand; come, Madam, you and I.


Let me go both of you: is this usage to be offered to a person of Quality? let
go my hands, or I'll spit in your faces.


Come, Madam, come this way.


No this way; I know where there is the best drink


You lye, I know best: this way, Madam.


No, come this way.


You uncivil, unmannerly fellows, how ye haul and pull me, I'll kick your arses
for you soundly.


O Lord, Madam. O, O.


Nay, nay, nay, good Madam.


Ha! what is here to do? I charge you in the Kings name to keep the peace.


You unmannerly Rogues pick me up? I'll make ye know I am a man -- a woman of
Quality.


I'll have 'em before a Justice, if you please, Madam.


I pray do Mr. Constable, they have pulled me almost limb from limb, the Rogues
would have ravished me.


O good, Mr. Constable, we were but in quest of the Knight that killed the
Gentleman, we thought this might be he in disguise, and went to search.


O what a mischievous lye has the Rogue told for an excuse.


Go, be gone about your business.


I thank you, Mr. Constable, I know not how to make you an amends for my
deliverance.


'Twill be an amends sufficient, if you prove to be the person they took you
for, 'twill be twenty pound in my way.


Oh, I find by the constitution of my body here will be foul work.


By all circumstances you must be Sir Simon, you have a masculine spirit, I saw
you boxing, and kicking a little too heroically for a Woman.


Oh I can hold no longer.


And a word slipped from you unawares even now, I heard you say, as I am a man of
Quality: Let me observe you well; faugh, I smell you out; oh there are the
stumps of a beard and all.


I am undone: Good Mr. Constable, I am not he you look for.


Well, well, come before Mr. Iorden, we shall soon know who you are.


Nay, good Mr. Constable.


Heavens! Sir Simon, what's here to do?


O, lo you there, you are Sir Simon.


Oh discovered: undone.


Yes, yes, come; come a-long.


Nay Mr. Constable, you and I have been old friends, pray, for my sake let him
go, and say you saw him not.


Never talk on it.


You were won't to esteem my friendship; come, pray let us adjust the business;
Sir Simon, pull out your gold.


Oh cursed London!


Pray Mr. Trickmore, think not of any such thing, I dare not do it, I protest.


Hold, hold your hand, there's gold, there are twenty Guineas, Mr. Constable.


The reward is so much to take him.


And there it is, not to take; him a thing sooner done by half.


Aye, Sir, but the breach of my duty, it is my office.


Come, there are twenty more.


Not for a thousand, I protest.


Not for a thousand? then it is a thousand pound to a penny, but I shall be
hanged.


Sir Simon, how much was in the purse?


A hundred Guineas.


Shall I give him all if he'll take 'em?


All, all: I would not be hanged for a hundred thousand.


Here, Mr. Constable, take all in the purse: a hundred I assure you.


Well, Sir, I would not take it, but that I have a device in my head may secure
me: look you, Sir, I have hold of Sir Simon: do you now pull him away by force:
so, now if his escape be found out, you will be called in question for it.


Well, I'll venture more than that to serve Sir Simon.


Now he can do it with security, he might afford to give me half my money back
again.


Have a care of marring the matter. But pray tell me Mr. Constable is young Mr.
Iorden dead?


I have some reason to think he is not at all hurt, but that this is a design
of theirs to bring Sir Simon into trouble* and that the son conceals himself in
his Fathers house to this purpose: But for fear it should be otherwise, get you
gone so soon as you can, to prevent danger.


Aye, let's be on the safer side. A^ my shirt sticks to me like a Cerecloath.


Away, I hear a noise, more are coming this way, I'll go and delay 'em till you
get clear.


Well, excepting your self, this is the only man of honesty I have met with
here in Town, but I perceive it is scarce with him, he sells it so dear.


Virtue, Sir Simon must be encouraged; come, Sir, while you go in and dress
you, I'll pretend business to Mr. Iorden's house, and find out whether his son
hath received any hurt or not; and bring you word.


Music, plant your selves under that Window, away with it smartly and briskly:
so, this has alarmed 'em to the Balcony. Now you to your Dialogue, and I to my
posture.


A heart in loves Empire, though jocund, and blithe
From cares, and from fears can never he free:
'Tis said that with pleasure we languish and sigh;
But for all can be urged, there's nothing can be
So pleasant, so pleasant as our liberty.

None are more happy, nor none are more blessed
Than whom Love doth inspire, with a gentle, soft fire;
When both of them sigh, and neither can rest,
How pleasant their pantings, how sweet their desire!
Love is a blessing, though counted a Pain;
For take away Love, no pleasures remain.

To submit to Loves Law, ah sweet it would be,
If in Love we (...) any fidelity see:
But O Rigour extreme! O fate too unkind!
A Shepherdess faithful, no man can find:
And this faithless Sex so unworthy doth prove,
They ought not to live, or ought not to love.

Ah passion most sweet!


Ah blessed liberty!


Sex full of deceit!


How dear unto me!


How my heart you do ease!


And how mine you displease!


Ah quit thou for love this hatred so great*


A Shepherdess you,
May find that is true.

But alas! where can she be met?


Our credits to save, my heart*
I do offer --

-- O subtle Art!


But Shepherdess may I believe,
That it wonnot it wonnot deceive?

By experience let us try,
Who can love best you or I.

To them that constancy want,
May the Gods no*er their wishes grant.

Let's permit the soft fire,
To inflame our desire.
Ah! how pleasant, how pleasant is love,
When two hearts faithful do prove!

He treats his new Mistress with a great deal of gallantry.


Now dearest Marina, let us ascend to your Father, he is by this time from his
Window convine'd of the slight is put on you; hang about his neck, use all your
little arts and pretty blandishments to gain his consent: you have powerful
charms in your persuasions, such as will mollify the most rigid natures.


He does not at all dislike your person.


And I will induce him to consider the hopes I have of an estate,
notwithstanding my fathers extravagant humour, I'll show him what I have in
present, and what more I hope from the event of this night.


I am called.


Come it is your Fathers voice.


Sir, Mr. Iorden, Mr. Iorden, I have most advantageous news for you: My Lord
and Master the Grand Seignior is mightily in love with your Daughter.


Ha, with my Daughter!


Yes.


With my Daughter, said you?


He has a mind to be your Son in-Law.


The great Turk be my Son-in-Law?


Yes, Sir, he called me to him just now, and speaking in his own Language,
said, Acciam croc soler ouch alla Moustaphi gidelum amanahem vorahini oussere
carbulath, (That is to say) This is that fair person I yesterday saw pass along
the street: This is she I languished for, and knew not where to find.


The Great Turk say this of my Lucie!


I told him she was wondrous beautiful: Then, said he, Marababa sahem, Ah how
much in love am I!


Marababa sahem, mean, ah how much in love am I!


Yes.


I am beholden to you for telling me, for I could never have thought that
Marababa sahem, should signify, Ah how much in love am I! Ah this Turkish is a
most admirable Language.


Much better than one could imagine; do you know what means cacaracamouchen?


Cacaracamouchen? no.


That is to say, my pretty Pigsny.


Cacaracamouchen, signify my pretty Pigsny?


Yes.


It is a most excellent Language: cacaracamouchen, my pretty Pigsny: ah that a
Turk should say so!


In fine, to tell you my whole embassey, he is coming down to demand your
Daughter in marriage, and to make you worthy to be his Father-in-Law, he will
make you a Mamamouchi, which is the greatest honour and dignity among the
Turks.


A Mamamouchi?


Yes, a Mamamouchi; that is to say, a Paladin, and a Paladin is a sort of the
most ancient. In fine, a Paladin is a Paladin, and a Paladin and a Mamamouchi
are all one and the same thing: nothing is more noble in the world, and you may
walk cheek by Jowl with the greatest Seigniors upon Earth.


The Grand Seignior honours me very much, and I beseech you conduct me to him,
to kiss his hand and give him thanks.


Oh, Sir, he is coming down to you.


He come down to me?


Yes, and will instal you in the dignity; it is his custom where ever he goes
to visit, to present the Master of the house with a Turkish habit, and you will
instantly have one brought to you to put on.


That will be noble.


He will consummate the marriage to night.


That will be quick dispatch.


His love cannot brook delay, within a day he departs hence, he will take you
and your Daughter a* long with him to Turkey, if you'll go.


But all that I fear, is my Daughter should be averse to the marriage; she is a
little untoward sometimes in cases of this nature.


O, but to be the Grand Seigniors wife, she to be the Sultaness, and you a
Mamamouchi! O she cannot refuse this. See, Sir, there comes the greatest man
that walks upon the earth.


Ambousahim, oqui boraf, Iordina, sala ma lecqui.


That is to say, Mr. Iorden, may your heart be all the year round like a Rose
Tree, full of buds. This is the manner of speaking obligingly in that Country.


I am his highness the great Turks most humble servant.


Carigar, cambito oustin moraf.


Oustin yoc catamalequi basum, base alla moran.


He wishes Heaven may give you the strength of Lyons, and the prudence of
Serpents.


His High and mighty Highness the great Turk does me too great an honour, and I
wish him all the happiness in the World.


Ossa binamen sadoc babally oracaf ouram.


Bell men.


He says, these shall wait on you to cloth you in that habit, in order to the
ceremony of making you a Mamamouchi, and for the celebrating the Rites of your
Daughters Marriage.


All that in two words?


O, Sir, the Turkish Language is very significant, much may be said in few
words. But to be a Mamamouchi, you must be a Mohammedan.


I do not much scruple to change my religion, for any will serve my turn; but
methinks it is not a Gentlemanlike quality to change, though a man be sure of a
better.


But to be a Mamamouchi you must be a Mohammedan.


Then long live Mahomet.
Who stops when honour calls is but a Lourdane,
Honour need but to beckon Master Iorden.

Seti sabir
Ti respondir
Se non Sabir
Tazir, Tazir
Mi star Mufti
Tiqui star ti
Non Intendir
Tazir, Tazir.

He bids you hold your peace.


Now the Mufti will demand what Religion you are of.


Anabaptista, Anabaptista.


No, no, no.


Brunista, Brunista.


No, no, no.


Calvanista, Calvanista.


No, no, no.


Papista, Papista.


No, no, no.


Mohometana, Mahometana.


Hivalla, Hivalla, Hivalla.

Chou, Chou, Chou.


Mahametta, Mahametta, Mahametta.


Mahametta, c.


Mahametta per Giourdina
Mi pregar, sera e Mattina
Voler far un Paladina
De Giourdina, de Giourdina
Dar Turbanta e dar scarcinae
Con Galera e Brigantina
Per defender Palastina
Mahometta, c.

Star Bon Turca Giourdina.


He tells you, you are now made a Turk.


Hivalla, Hivalla, Hivalla.


Hivalla, Hivalla, c.


Chou, chou, chou.

Hula baba la chou, ba la haba la da.


ala baba, c.


Hula ba, c.


Chou, chou, chou.


Now you must answer for your self.


Ti non star Furba.


He asks you if you are a Knave?


No, no, no.


Ti non star Furfanta.


He asks if you are a Paltroon.


No, no, no.


Donar Turbanta, Donar Turbanta.


Donar Turbanta, c.


Ti star Nobile e non star fabbola
Pigilar Schiabbola.

He tells you, you are ennobled, and bids you take the Cemiter.


Tistar Nobile, c.


Dara Dara
Bastonnara Bastonnara.

Dara Dara.


Non tener Honta.
Questa star ultima affront.

Non tener, c.


Mamamouchi, Paladin, Paladin.


The Sultan saluted you as he went off by the Title of Mamamouchi and Paladin.


O there is a great grace in the sound of Mamamouchi.


The next thing you are to do, may it so please the illustrious Mamamouchi, is
to give your Daughter in Marriage to the Sultan, and to set your hand and seal
to those writings are drawing within to convey your Land away.


But why must not a Mamamouchi have Land?


A Mamamouchi is the greatest honour a subject can be raised to, and to have
Lands is not consistent with so great a Dignity, because it implies a kind of
slavery and servitude.


Humh.


Another reason is, they are men in great Power; and if they might be
Possessors of Land, they might in time purchase whole Countries, and raise
Armies of their Tenants, and become Rebels.


Humh.


And for this cause no subject of the mighty Sultans is permitted to have any
inheritance of Land. You my great Master and Illustrious Mamamouchi, will have
yearly coming in no less than fourscore or a hundred thousand pound a year.


Well, my Daughter will be provided for by her Marriage, I am going a
Mamamouchi into Turkey: My Son shall have my Land, and stay in England to
continue the name, that after ages may know, from whence came Ionathan Iorden
the great Mamamouchi.


I'll leave you to the congratulation of your friends, that will be flocking to
you to salute you by your new title.


Jack, approach:

It is now below me to give you the title of Master, I must now call thee Jack;
for thou see I am created a Mamamouchi.


A Mam -- hi, hi, hi?


How now?


Vat be you, Sir, a Mama -- hi, hi, hi?


I am a Mamamouchi.


A Mamamou -- hi, hi, hi?


How dares thee knave laugh before a Mamamouchi?


A Mamamouchi -- hi, hi, hi?


What does the slave mean?


Maitre Iorden be a Mamamouchi -- hi, hi, hi?


Grand insolence!


O me demand pardon of te great Mamamouchi -- hi, hi, hi.


I will not endure this.


Me be trouble very mush, but me can no hold to see, hi, hi, hi.


Slave, to see what?


To see, hi, hi hi.


Hold, or Il run my fist down your throat.


Me demand pardon on me two knee, hi, hi, hi, you are so pleasant, hi, hi, hi,
tat me never see te like, hi, hi, hi.


Thou French Rascal!


You be so comical, tat -- hi, hi, hi.


Insufferable, intolerable, insupportable.


Excuse me but a little, hi, hi, hi,


Take warning, or by Mahomet, and the great Turk, thy chastisement shall be
most bloody.


O, me have done, hi, hi, hi.


Hear then.


Hi, hi, hi.


You Jack shall go with me into Turkey, and be my French Interpreter.


Ouy Monsieur, hi, hi, hi.


Are you sneering again?


Hi, hi, hi, here, Sir, beat a me, box me, buffet me, kick me, give me to
bastonado; but no, hi, hi, hi, hinder me laugh, hi, hi, hi.


Then by the Turban of a Mamamouchi my revenge shall cut the off.


Hi, hi, hi. O, murder, murder.


Murder, murder.


What out-cry is this?


O my Master is huzzahing the Munfu.


Hold, Sir, what do you mean to kill him?


I have sworn by Mahomet, and cannot in honour come off without his head.


O pray make te agreement, me only laughed out my laugh, hi, hi, hi.


Laugh at a Mamomouchi?


Did not duty restrain me, I could not forbear; this strange garb and
alteration will raise laughter where ever you go.


No, I am going where a Mamamouchi is adored.


What mean you, Sir, by Mamamouchi?


I mean Paladin a certain kind, of Paladin, and Mamamouchi are all one.


A certain kind of wild beast, is it not?


I tell you, I am a Mamamouchi, it is a certain kind of honour amongst the
Turks: In fine, had you come a little sooner, you might have seen the ceremony.


What Ceremony?


Mahometa par Iordina.


What means this?


Iordina, that is to say Iorden.


Well, Sir.


Volar far un Paladina de Iordina.


How's that?


Dar turbanta con gulera.


What signifies this?


Per defender Palestina.


What mean you by all this?


Dara, dara bastonnara.


Strange kind of gibberish this!


Non tener honta questa star l'ultima affronta.


I beseech you, Sir, let me but know what all this signifies.


Thou la baba la chou, ba la ba ba la da.


Certainly, Sir, you are going distracted.


Peace, insolent, learn to behave your self with more respect to a Mamamouchi.


Well, Sir, I come not to offend you, but to acquaint you, that fair Marina's
Father is so incensed against her for provoking you to quit your intentions,
that he has turned her out of doors, and vowed in his anger never to see her
face, till she has reconciled you to her, and is become your Wife.


My Wife! the case is altered now, I am a Mamamouchi.


Sir, I was in part the occasion of her misfortune, therefore give me leave to
entreat you to be kind to her.


No, she has not state nor grandeur enough in her person to be a Mamamoucha,
Paladina. Here comes my Princess, ha with what a swoop and haughty mean she
marches forward! Go you in and peruse the writings are drawing, and you will
see what you get by my being a Mamamouchi.


I come to pay the first tribute of homage to your new dignity, and to wish you
much joy of the Election of your Daughter to the Grandeur of Sultanness.


Madam, I wish you the strength of Serpents, and the prudence of Lyons.


I am proud of the honour I have to be the first that comes to salute you by
the title of Great and Illustrious.


Madam, I wish that you may be all the year round like a Rose-tree full of
buds, that I may have the gathering them, that with the breath of Mamamouchi
they may be full blown, that they may ever flourish in the Sun-shine of
Paladines prosperity, and that --


That would be an honour, Sir, too great.


Say, will they kindly admit the influence of my love?


Ah, can the heart of a Mamamouchi descend from the high mountain top of honour
to perch upon a Rosetree that grows in the valley?


Marababa sahem, that is by way of being my own interpreter: Ah how in love am
I!


With me?


With thee Cacaracamouchen my pretty pigsny.


But do you love me?


Thee, and only thee, by Mahomet.


After this assurance, I no longer will conceal the secret of my Quality; then
Prince Mamamouchi, I am not below your love: here, Sir, take my hand, and know
that by birth I am --


Little thinks she I know already -- what.


Prevented.


In what an unluky minute comes she here?


Ah, Mr. Iorden, is it thus you treat a harmless maid! can you be so cruel
after all your vows of love and proffered kindness to forsake me? Ah, did the
message of my love merit no better a return than scorn?


How! what do I hear!


Puh, Madam, mind not her idle story.


Is it possible you should be faithless and unconstant?


I unconstant? no, no, it is not in my nature.


Do you then love her still? ah me!


I love her? that's a good one: look you, Madam, does she seem fit to be a
Mamamoucha or a Paladina; no, no, 'tis you I love.


'Twas me you did love.


Prithee hold thy prating.


You have forsaken and undone me.


I think the wench is mad; look you, to put you out of your pain, see here I
bestow my hand and heart.


Would you deceive me too?


I vow --


Hold dissembler, let me vow first.


Hear me.


I vow not to hear, nor see you this --


Hold, ah hold, hold.


This half-hour -- nor love you if I can help it.


Ah hapless Maid, what has fate in reserve for thee but death, that art
abandoned by a Father, and by a Lover forsaken? Unkind and cruel man farewell,
you soon shall hear that I am dead, laid in the cold grave, covered over with
earth, and then forgotten as now forsaken.


What means my friend by this sad posture?


I vow to you,

Mr. Doctor, I cannot help it; I cannot but grieve; I was always good natured;
I ought to pity her; for the truth on it is I, I, I, have wronged her poor
thing!


Truly my heart melts too, and I have brine in my eyes, I cannot but mourn to
see a Mamamouchi weep. But the very sound of that word comforts and rejoices
me.


And so it does me.


I heard the news within, and came in haste to wish long life, continual
health, and all hearts ease to my friend the Illustrious Paladin. Come, Sir,
think no more of her, it was her own fault.


And so it was; but, Mr. Doctor, she came in the most unlucky minute.


As how?


Just as my Princess was about to give me her hand in earnest of her heart, she
bolts in, and interrupts us with her whining.


Strange accident!


Had she staid but one minute longer, we had struck up the bargain.


Indeed!


And she was just upon discovery to me who she was.


All will out, Love can keep no secrets.


She grew jealous presently, and banished me her presence.


But for half an hour, if she can be without your company so long.


She had no sooner heard love named, but she flew off.


You'll have her come about again, like a bird that is scared, which takes a
flight round, and lights just in the same place.


I long till the half hour is out, that I may be at her again.


In the mean time introduce me to the Sultan as a friend of yours, that I may
give him my respects as your Son-in-Law.


Come I'll recommend you to him as my special good friend.


Your clothes stole? which way?


I left 'em on the chair under the window: when I went in I found the window
open.


Being a ground room it was an easy matter. Well, but I bring you good news
after all; Mr. Iorden is no more hurt than you or I.


Nay then I care not.


I saw him go in and out at his Fathers house two or three times.


Did you?


Come, now I'll carry you to your lodging, I have a friend lives at the end of
this street, will make you very welcome for my sake.


I thank you, Sir; I am so infinitely beholden to you.


Here they are.


I'll keep on my Mask, that Sir Simon may not know me.


Ah Gentlemen, Gentlemen!


Ha!


Ah, if ye are noble Gentlemen, give protection to a distressed Virgin.


Sir Simon, it is the height of gallantry, and the glory of Knighthood to
succour beauty in distress. Madam, be your cause what it will, here are those
will stand your champions.


This adventure makes me think I am a Knight errant.


Declare fair Damsel what your disasters are, that by the knowledge of them, we
may judge how capable we are to serve you.


My Father dying while I was an infant, delivered me to the care of
his-brother, and in his last Will commanded me to respect my uncle, as I would
have done him, had he lived; and there left me ten thousand pound in money, and
six hundred pounds a year in Land. But the moyty to be forfeited, if I married
without this Uncles consent; but he covetous wretch, is now grown so inhumanely
cruel, that he would sell me to one I never can love, for half my portion, and
force me to be his wife: This five thousand pound here in gold


Ha, gold, see, Sir Simon.


Gold indeed!


Was the price my Uncle sold me for, and this is the night I should have been
forced to marry against my will: but whilst my Uncle and intended husband were
consulting about my Jointure, my Damsel and I found an opportunity, encouraged
by this Gold and these Jewels to make an escape.


A pretty adventure.


Aye, Sir Simon, 'twere pretty indeed, if the story would run on in adventures,
till at last it ended as Romances do with a Marriage.


And I the man.


Oh, 'twould be a solecism in a Romance to make the Lady distressed marry any
other than the Knight had rescued her.


Five thousand pounds in hand, and all these Jewels.


Besides you'll recover the rest. Lady, this Knight vows he will protect you not
only this night, but as long as the fates permit him to draw vital breath.


The deceased daughter of old Goodhope thanks you.


Goodhope! are you indeed his Daughter?


The same.


I knew him well, and was one of the witnesses to the Will you speak of. Could
you but get this Girl, Sir Simon, you would not lose your labour of coming to
Town. But, Madam, who was the man your Uncle would compel you to marry?


One Mr. Iorden:


Iorden! 'twould be a rare revenge if you could get Iordens Mistress from him.


But rather than be his wife, I have vowed to marry the first Gentleman that
asks me the question.


If I can serve you, sweet Virgin, think of no other.


Madam, I hear a noise. It may be somebody coming in quest of you.


O courteous Knight conduct me to some place where I may find a refuge.


My Arms shall be your sanctuary.


Sir Simon, we will stay now at this house, here lodges a young Oxford Parson of
my acquaintance, and if the Lady please to let him pronounce the spell of
Matrimony, she will no longer be in danger of them that pursue her.


Yonder is somebody coming.


Away, Sir, with sword in hand like a valiant Hero, and stout Champion, lead
off the Virgin in defiance of danger.


Which thus I do.


I as your Squire, will follow with the Damsel, and guard the Gold.


There: now you are Master of my whole estate, all is your own.


This is a sad bounty, Sir, which gives me your Estate, and deprives me of your
self: but must I never see you more?


No.


May I not once in ten years make a voyage to see you, Sir, at Constantinople?


I thought what you'd be at, but to confine you in England, I have settled my
Estate upon you conditionally, and you forfeit it to Mr. Doctor here, if ever
you travel out of the three Kingdoms.


I should have been glad to have seen you in your grandeur in Turkey, and to
have had the honour of being owned by a Mamamouchi for his Son, but since you
will not have it so --


Look you friend, now you shall see my Sultan Sonin-Law, I know the first word
will be to ask for my Daughter, therefore, Son, go see if she is dressed, and
bid her come away.


I am, may it please you mighty Sultan, an intimate friend of your noble
Father-in-Law here, the new created Mamamouchi: I come to pay you my most
profound respects and services, and to do reverence to the hem of your Vest.


Where is this Interpreter now to tell him who you are, and what it is you say?
Ah you shall hear how obligingly he will answer you, where a-duce is this man
gone?

Strouf, strif, strof, straf; this is a Doc-tore, a Doc-tore, a grand man with
the King, a Mamamouchi English: Euh, I cannot make him understand me better.


Cacaracamouchen.


Aye, your Cacaracamouchen is dressing, dressing, I knew he would be asking for
my Daughter.


Marababasahem.


Aye, and she is Marababasahem.


What's that?


He tells me, he is deeply in love.


Teives, teives, teives, begar.


Hark, they cry Thieves.


Euh.


Villain, had thou a mind to be the death of a Mamamouchi?


O me beg te pardon. But me come to tell you of Teives, Rogues, you be rob, rob
of your gold, rob of your money.


Robbed?


Me had te occasion to go into your Shambre, and me find your shest, your iron
shest open, noting witin, all gone, gone.


No Cabinet? no gold.


No, no Cabinet, no Gold, no Money, noting at all, all gone, all gone.


Find out the Thief, or you are he.


Teif, teif, jerne Frenchman and Teif, begar find out te Teif your self, ho,
ho.


Ah good Jack, good Mr. Jack, find out the Thief has stole the Cabinet, the
Jewels, my Princess Jewels.


O ho den Maitre Iacques be no Teif.


No, run, run, cry stop Thief, stop Thief.


Cassa molou.


Oh robbed, robbed, robbed of my Princess Jewels: Thieves, Thieves, Thieves.


Oh, Sir, undone, undone.


Aye, undone, undone, the Cabinet, the Jewels.


My Sister, Sir.


No, no, she has 'em not.


Is stole, is gone.


Aye, aye, they are stole, and gone, quite gone.


Aye, Sir, my Sister is stole, my Sister is gone.


Your Sister gone too!


Aye, Sir, gone away, run away, stole away.


O unfortunate Mamamouchi! lose my gold, lose my daughter; and now the Jewels
are lost, I shall lose my Princess too. Oh undone, undone.


Alas, alas!


She left this note on her Table to let you know she could not like the great
Turk so well as another, you once approved of for her husband, and to avoid the
marriage, is fled away into the arms of one will this night make her his Wife.


Oh, undone, undone, undone.


Have patience, Sir.


Now shall not I be carried into Turkey, but remain a sneaking Mamamouchi here
in England.


What is your daughter gone?


Aye, Sir, the baggage just as she was to have been the she great Turk, is run
away.


She is but at the next house, I saw her led in by a a man muffled in a Cloak.


I'll follow, and prevent the dishonour of our Family.


Bring the baggage home.


A fortunate discovery.


Pray tell his greatness, that this Gentleman is my special friend, and a
person of much worth, and one that is ambitious of his smiles. Now you shall
hear how he'll answer you.


Alabala crociam, aceiboram alabamen.


Cutalequi tubal ourin soter amalouchen.


Lo you there.


He says, may the rain of prosperity always besprinkle the Garden of your
Family.


There's for you.


Fine, indeed.


Nay, I must deliver you into the hands of my Father: There, Sir, and now I'll
send the Thief after her to you. Come Iaques.


Ah graceless Girl!


Why, Madam, do you so ill requite a Father that is so provident for your good,
and seeks to dispose of you with so much advantage: see what a glorious husband
here stands ready for you.


I pursued but mine own inclinations, he once approved of Sir Simon for his
Son-in-Law.


Ha! was he the man? he's a pockey beggarly Knight. Come give me your hand, I
will dispose of you to more advantage, the grand Seignior does me the honour to
demand you in marriage. Come, come near: immortal glory crown your nuptials.


Ah, Sir.


Go too, give him your hand:


Marry a Turk?


Yes, the great Turk.


Not I.


I'll see it done.


No, Sir, you have no power to force me to take any man but Sir Simon for my
Husband.


Do it, or the breath of a Mamamouchi shall blast thee; do it, or may never the
Rain of prosperity besprinkle thy Grass-plat.


Be obedient to your Father.


In any thing but this.


In this, or I'll send you beyond Sea to a Nunnery.


Use no violence.


Rather let me dye than prove false to Sir Simon.


Take her hence, and let her be locked up all night in the Cellar, I'll pack her
beyond Sea tomorrow.


Ah, Sir, I'll do any thing rather than go to a Nunnery, that were to be buried
alive.


So then, down on your marrow-bones, ask him forgiveness for running away. Sir,
I beseech you to tell him.


Not that she fled away from his love: I'll tell him* she prostrates her self
before him to know if he thinks her worthy to be his Sultana.


Pray do.


Bolac allim oustin malaf afti.


Boloma tafti.


She shall be the Glove to his right hand.


Ah, ha.


Elcan allhoim.


The Rose-bud in his Nose-gay.


Ha, ha.


Malta haraban.


The plum in his broth.


Pretty.


Croustan meli.


The crust to his bread: (which the Turks love wonderfully.)


Tart of anachi.


A Jewel to wear at his heart.


Brave!


I, is it not?


Straca tafti.


The Joy of his soul.


Hulalli, hulalli.


Hulalli, hulalli, hulalli.


His bed-fellow, his bed-fellow, his bed-fellow. Madam; you must veil your face
with that handkerchief, and suffer your self to be led by these Dervish to the
Mufti who are prepared for the Ceremonies of the Marriage.


Is it not a pretty Language?


Full of very obliging Phrases.


All^nz Teif, come along and be hanged.


What a Devil do ye haul me, as if I had stole the money.


Stole it? pray how came your worship by it else?


I came honourably by it*


And you shall as honourably be hanged for it.


Be hanged for receiving money?


The Receiver is as bad as the Thief. Bear witness that will hang him.


I received it as my wives portion.


A cunning piece of policy, rob you of Gold and Jewels, run away with your
Daughter, and being taken, say he received it as her Portion.


That excuse will not do, he stole both it, and my Daughter too.


Daughter! what daughter did I steal?


Nay, she's not far off.


Aye, let me hear her say it.


It's no matter whether she says it or no, she was found in the house where you
was.


What's that to me, she might follow me for ought I know.


That's a cunning excuse, follow you?


She's not so modest a woman, but that she might -- Ask him there else.


My Daughter not modest?


As any woman in Town for any thing that I can say.


He'll not be known he told me. Well, if he won't say it, I know others that
will; and if all be true is said, I am not the first man she has followed.


'Tis ungenerous, Sir Simon, now you cannot have the Lady to defame her.


That is malice: if she followed you, did that Cabinet with the gold and Jewels
follow you too?


But she that had 'em did.


Cunning knave, he thinks to escape by laying the Theft on my Daughter still.


What do you tell me of your Daughter still? ask that man if it did not follow
me, now you go to that.


Ask me?


Did not a Lady come running after us?


After who?


You and I.


When?


A little while ago.


Where?


In the street.


Not as I know.


Why? was not you and I together when a Lady came and begged our protection?


You amaze me! what Lady was it?


She that told us the story of her Uncle that would have sold her, and how she
escaped.


What means he?


Lo you there.


I never saw you in my life till just now.


Hye-day, hye-day.


Sure he is dreaming of Romances.


Or else he is mad.


He is indeed much troubled with melancholy fancies, and melancholy is a sort
of madness, that will be his best plea before a Judge.


I thank you Mr. Quack, you'll be sure to speak for your Patient, you played
fine Pranks with me to day.


Come, Sir Knight, speak to the purpose: what is this to the Gentlewoman that
followed you with the Cabinet?


And what is the Gentlewoman to you?


Yes, she is something to me.


What? because you bought her of her Uncle for half her portion?


What means he now?


And this night he was to force her to marry you?


He grows mad, stark mad.


You will be so ^on, when you know she is the Lady I have married, and that it
was she gave me this Cabinet.


Can you guess what he would be at?


Not in the least, I know nothing of any Marriage, Uncle, or any thing like it.


Pray where is this Lady wife you talk of?


She was too cunning for you, she slipped out at the back door, but if you find
her, you'll be never the better, I assure you, ha, ha, he. We are married, she
is my wife now, and so pray set your hearts at rest.


This is all but fiction; but we have proof enough to hang him.


Here she comes that will clear all.


My dear Princess!


See she's displeased with you.


There is much of Majesty in her frowns*


Ungrateful man, false and unconstant!


Ah Sovereign Lady of my soul!


Unworthy me, and my love.


On his knees, behold your Mamamouchi falls.


My dear Knight, my dear Sir Simon, have I found you?


Hau.


My bosom shall be your sanctuary, and my arms magic Circles to keep thee here
for ever; love shall be the sweet enchantment of our souls.


My Princess is grown very loving, sure she mistakes her man.


My dear bride, my dear wife, I've been at such a loss for want of thy
presence.


How is that? his Wife!


It may be this is the Lady he has married.


That is my Princess: away with him, if he has married her I'll hang him,
because it is the speediest and surest Divorce can be had.


No, malicious man: this Cabinet is mine. I took it out of your custody, as
unworthy to keep any thing that belonged to a Princess: The Key your servant
gave me when you cast your skin.


A Princess!


You see your fortune.


Am I then deprived of my love, a Princess, and revenge at once? Here comes
Marina, I'll be content with my leavings, and marry her presently.

You come opportunely, Mrs. Marina, for in spite of that Princess there, I
will make thee a Mamamoucha.


What is that, Sir?


Thou shalt be my Wife.


I am your Daughter, Sir.


I thought my self concerned to repair the injuries you had done her. I wanted
nothing before to gain her fathers consent, but an estate, and your bounty
supplied me with that.


Deprived of Marina too!


Our business now was to ask you blessing.


A blessing without an estate is but a name, and you had that beforehand: Well,
my comfort is I am a Mamamouchi.


Sir, the Marriage is concluded, the Sultan is your Son-in-Law.


They were very eager, married before I come.


They come now to ask your blessing, which the Turks do by bowing.


Princess, pine at my glory: behold me Father to the Grand Seignior, and the
Worlds greatest Emperor bows to me. Love and conquest crown your lives.


Your Son-in-Law but no Sultan, thanks you.


How! Mr. Cleverwit?


The same, Sir, I am no Turk great or little.


Am I no Mamamouchi then?


Ha, ha, he.


Friend, Mr. Doctor, what shall I say? must I be content with a pitiful
Knighthood at last?


You'll find your self defeated there too: for, him you take for a favourite at
Court, and a Doctor, is neither favourite nor Doctor; but one instructed and
employed by me to work upon your Capricio of setting up for a Gentleman,
thereby to supply my own necessities, and by the event to bring you to see the
vanity of your extravagancy.


This is certain truth, Sir.


No Doctor?


No, Sir.


Avoid Satan, thou art then the Devil.


No, Sir, he is onward in his way, he is a Mountebanck, and may in time take
his degree, as most of them do.


I have an excellent cure for your corns, powders for the teeth, ointments for
the itch, plasters for boils, and so forth.


Save you Mr. Doctor: save you Illustrious Mamamouchi, ha, ha, he.


Well, I am vexed at nothing so much, as his getting my Princess; and could I
be revenged of him for that, and his insolent insulting --


Well, Sir, now come I in with my discovery; and to gain your pardon for taking
on me to be a Fencer to prevent your going to Sir Simon: and also my pretending
to be a Norwich Merchant to forestall Sir Simons address to Mrs. Lucia, I will
change the Scene of Sir Simons mirth, and let him know, that his Princess will
not disdain to call me brother, and is by occupation a Sempstress.


Another turn yet?


I give you joy, Sir, ha, ha, ha, joy of your Princess, ha, ha, ha; hula baba
la chou.


Where is the Cabinet, the gold and Jewels?


Lass, Sir, they are none of mine.


The Jewels, and part of the gold I seize on as mine.


And the rest is mine, only lent to carry on the design of her personating a
Princess.


No portion then?


My Dowry is my brain.


Wit without money has long been the inheritance of our Family, and yours, Sir
Simon, is a Family that has money without wit; 'tis a proper Marriage for you,
and both our houses will be much the better for it hereafter.


Lord! Sir Simon, what luck had you to get my Princess from me, ha, ha, he,
you'll have God knows what with her, ha, ha, he; you'll never be able to count
her portion, ha, ha, he.


This Town produces nothing but wonders.


And one was, that I should be fond of you, Sir Simon.


Bear it with fortitude, Sir Simon, such misfortunes sometimes befall Knights
errants.


I ride the hind horse, I married but your Ladies Damsel; this is the hand-maid
that carried the luggage.


I am sorry for nothing so much as the loss of that, for it spoils half the
conceit of a good subject for a Romance.


But the turn of it makes it fitter for a Comedy in these days, and that is
much better, for the Knight and the Damsel still shake hands at the end of the
intrigue.


Save you, Sir Knight errant, much joy to you and the Lady of your adventures,
ha, ha, he.


Laugh on, Sir, 'tis your turn now. Well, Lady Wife, and Brother-in-Law I
embrace you both: I'll down to morrow into Suffolk where you shall be welcome:
there people have either more honesty, or less wit: we have no cheating there,
but with Lords and Jockeys at Horse-races, and Ladies at Cards.


And you, Sir Simon, have got one will match the best, if she holds on as she
begins, ha, ha, he; Sir, I doubt not but she'll improve upon your hand, ha, ha,
he.


I am glad, Sir, you lay things no more to heart, if you please to make up the
money, Mr. Cleverwit has of mine in the Cabinet, a convenient Portion for my
Sister, I'll restore to you one half of your estate.


Well though now I affect not much to play the Gentleman, yet in this last act to
cross Fortune, I will show my self a Gentleman: Mr. Cleverwit I'll do it.


I thank you Sir:

To reclaim some men from their extravaganees,
We must appear indulgent to their humours,
And push them forward to undertakings
Yet more indiscreet, that raised high in hopes
They may from the unexpected events
Be convinced of their follies.
For fools are obstinate to good advice;
Experience, and not percept makes them wise.

OUr Author thinks 'tis not in vain to sue
For pardon here, for he is one of you;
And hopes he has some little interest here;
But yet his hope is not quite void of fear:
For by the grave it may objected be,
Who can at once mind Law and Poetry?
But this he bid me say in his excuse,
A fortnights sickness did this Play produce*
His sickness was the Bawd unto his Muse.
If after that he spent some idle time
In courting her, he hopes 'twas no great crime.
Fortune has punished him; for like a Whore
She lays the Brat even at his Chamber door;
The commonest Wench in the town could do no more.
The Father ow^s the child, which none of you
His fellow Students ever yet would do.
Though in hand-baskets the poor fools did lie,
And at your stare-case feet for succour cry:
For them --
He does his yearly contribution pay;
Therefore be kind to his but this one day:
For its relief you need not draw your purse,
Give it goodwords, and this shall back to Nurse.

