WHo dares be witty now, and with just rage
Disturb the vice, and follies of the Age?
With Knaves and Fools, Satyr's a dangerous fault,
They will not let you rub their sores with salt.
Else Rose-streets Ambuscade shall break your head,
And life in Verse, shall lay the Poet dead.
Since therefore such unequal Judges sit,
Who for suspicion punish men of Wit,
'Twill be self-preservation to be dull,
It cracks the credit but preserves the skull.
Henceforth live long and undisturbed lives,
Your Countrey-Worships, and your tawdry Wives,
The flaunting Punk and Ladies eldest Son,
All such who are by mutual crimes undone;
Like Lakes look green and flourish to the Eye,
But yet for want of stirring putrefy.
For I am told that Fop, and eke the Clown,
Jointly subscribe Petitions in each Town,
And swear all Satyr with bold truth shall down.
Why, cry they, What has wit to do with me?
With this Mans folly, or his knavery,
It is not fit we lose our property.
We'll pound the Poet up in small extent,
Far from his arbitrary Government.
Birth-right is birth-right, and he shall not rail,
We are undone, if common sense prevail.
Meum and tuum now shall be the rule,
The Magna Charta for the Knave and Fool.
Therefore the Poet that designs this Treat,
Ventures to serve up light and innocent meat.
And since high seasoned sauce don't well agree,
Excuse a strangers plainer Cookery.
For to extremes you do the Poet drive,
And make him leave his best prerogative.
So the poor Beaver lest he prove a prey,
Bites off his dearest part, and throws away.

BLess me, Circumstantio, how goes the day?


Dear Sir, two hours precisely are rolled off since the Meridian, and Sir by
the way I have often thought the Sun a proper emblem of all us, though we be
never so glorious for birth or parts, like him alas how soon we set! 'tis pity
noble Sir that men of parts --


-- Again Fool brushing up your threadbare phrases* your nasty ends of Gold and
Silver, your tawdry intellectual Wardrobe, you had best tell me what's a Clock
without your foolish sentences and morals -- Thou everlasting Coxcomb, are not
words to express thoughts by, and the plainest expression of our meanings best?


Oh Heaven Sir you amaze me! plain speaking!

Sure words were meant for ornaments of thoughts, and I'd not for the Universe
be without those tropes, and flowers that my discourse adorn.


Most excellent Rogue! flowers? no your weeds rise thick, and I will root out
them or thee, thou gross nauseous Fool: laughter which first thou took as an
applause, since it hath been the cause of thy disease, shall be thy cure, and
thou shalt be a scorn to all the Family.


The envy, not the scorn, no men of parts can laugh at me


In short Sirrah, tell me plainly what's a clock, or I will cudgel you most
excessively.


Sir, the Sun has from its Zenith these two hours declined.


Incorrigible wordy Rogue! -- Come Sirrah, I'll stop those Rhetoric vapours --
Ho there within Pietro, is the Pillory I bespoke for this Fool made?


It is Sir.


Let it be brought in.


It shall Sir.


Now Sir you shall find the ill success of translating the florid Coxcomb. Is
there but one sort of Fool more nauseous than other to me, (I mean your Orator)
and must you copy him?


Sir be concise and clear, I hope you mean not me.


In short, most eloquent puppy, you must stand in the Pillory, exposed to jeers
and taunts of all the house, until two hours precisely are rolled off. --
Sirrah, I told you the next trope was Capital, no metaphors but in turned suits
Fool.


Oh utinam nescirem literas -- the Pillory for Rhetoric and good parts!


There is no remedy, I have often threatened you before.


Oh cruel master whose heart is hard as Rocks of Adamant!


Within there, bring in the Pillory, I'll try if punishment will reform thee.


I'll dye a martyr Sir to tropes and figures, Oh Nick -- Nick Machiavel thou


I'll try that, put him in.


Come, come on.


Be not so temerarious, Friends.


Put him in, he's at his tropes still.


Must I abandon eloquence? -- Certes thou wast not born of Humane race, but
sprung from some wild Numidian Father, and got on some rough Caledonian Mother,
from Ganges West, to Gades East, there is not one so savage. Hold, Hold, I say
--


Welcome my dear Marcello thou art come in good time to see my Farce.


What Engine's this?


'Tis a Collar for my Orator, you have often known him plague me with his
tropes; this Rascal served me all the while I studied at Padua, where (instead
of Learning) the Coxcomb got a little false Rhetoric and Pedantry, he affects
to talk like a Scholar, and never since would bring a message or tell what's a
clock without a trope.


'Tis pity you should affro^ one of such parts, release him now, I'll be his
surety.


He's incorrigible.


Sir, when for this noble intercession I shall cease to offer the oblation of
my thanks upon the Altar of my heart, may I become the scum and scorn of
vagabonds.


You see his amendment. Nuarcha, I am your humble servant, let me kiss thee.


Thank you dear Sir.


What news from my Mistress the Widow Paulina?


This night she ends her year of Widowhood, and now will see and speak with man
again, she has removed my old Masters statue out of her Bed-chamber, and old
Seignior Paulo has leave this night to speak with her, but sure she is designed
for one more young, of whom she thinks and talks, sleeping and waking.


Much thanks for thy goods news, faith I must kiss thee again, though much
against my conscience and my appetite.


How sovereign a Cordial is Mankind!


Sir I beseech you to entreat for a remission of my ignominious censure.


Pray release your Orator on his submission.


I do upon condition he will abandon tropes and figures, and speak sense to his
fellow servants.


My affairs call me home, I had almost forgotten, Mrs. Lucinda, Seignior
Paulo's daughter, whom you know her Father has placed with my Lady, has a
desire to speak with you in the Garden about the prevention of her Fathers
marriage with my Lady, which would much prejudice her affairs, I will make way
for you to see her.


You will most infinitely oblige me, assure her I will not fail to do her all
the service of my life, and should think my self happy to venture it for her.
One kiss more, dear sweet Mrs. Nuarcha.


A most absolute complete fine Gentleman, a civil proper young man is a most
sweet Creature! Sir your most obedient servant.


Your servant.


You are a most vigorous man to be able to kiss this Succubus.


This salacious old Chamber-maid is better bribed this way than any other.


You have a lusty mind to the Widow I see, that you can travel through so soul
a way to her.


O Marcello, 'tis not the Widow which I aim at. Lucinda's Mine of beauty far
exceeds the Widows wealth, so excellent, so sweet, so rare a Creature, I but
pretended passion to the Widow to get access to beautiful Lucinda, and now
congratulate my happiness, she has contrived an interview her self. But why do
I tell thee of this? thou art an Heretic, an Infidel to love.


Oh thou mistake me, dear Antonio, I am a Convert, I have the Image of a fair
one stamped upon my heart, that ne'er can be effaced.


This is news indeed, may I know who this fair one is?


That adds to my confusion, she is unknown; yesterday morning going to my
devotions, this Lady being near me dropped her Handkerchief, I stooped and gave it
her, she hastily put up her Veil, and with so sweet an air thanked me for my
service, and showed me such a face, that nature in all her plenteous store can
never show an equal.


The showing of her face in Florence, is an encouragement against despair.


I should have thought so, had not I found when she perceived I watched her she
shunned my search, and spite of all my diligence avoided me in the crowd at
Church, so that the showing o^ her matchless face appears an accident from her
surprise, and no designed favour.


It cannot be, you construe it amiss, fear not she'll give you opportunity
again to see her. But as you are my Friend I have a thing of near concernment
to relate to you, a thing that grievs me much, I find the Duke's command has
not yet power to tame Lorenzo's spirit, he seems yet more enraged than ever.


I know it since the Duke checked him so severely, and vowed to punish his
disobedience if he contracted not a friendship with me; he thinks that I by a
complaint caused his disgrace, and is more bent upon revenge for that.


It is a custom too frequent, and too brutal here, for Parents to entail their
Quarrels with their Estates.


It is so, and therefore I'd avoid them. Our Fathers ambitious of preferment
could not admit superior or equal, they lived like the two famed Theban
Brothers always in war, the fierce Lorenzo when but young was sworn to oppose
the Growth and Fortune of our house, hatred was left by Will and Testament. I
have used all healing ways, affecting the friendship of a person that but for
this, would be most worthy of it, but 'tis all in vain.


A Messenger from Padua, who by his haste may well be called a Mercury, well
figured by his wings on Head and Feet, is much sollicitous to impart his grand
affair unto your proper ears.


Again at tropes, thou odious Rogue?


Antonio Fare thee well, I will to Vespers, and see if I can find my unknown
Mistress out.


Farewell Marcello, I see this Love will make thee very devout. Where is this
Messenger?


Madam, do not thus blast your beauty with your sighs
And drown it with fond tears, forget the cause
Of this dire mischief.

As soon a wretch with dislocated limbs
Might put the rack out of his memory
That caused his torments. How just is heaven
To punish thus the Brothers unjust ra^e
With hopeless love upon the Sister! Fierce Lorenzo
Still more and more pursues the good Marcello
Hurried by my ^athers hot spirit, and
His own mistakes and Jealousies, whilst I
Dote on Marcello's generous nature, which
Would pass by all his cr^ing injuries,
And heal the wounds which weaken both our Families.
At first I but admired his lovely form,
His virtue now completes the victory.

Why do you call yours hopeless love? Marcello
Though yet he knows you not, has seen and loves you,
By yesterdays good signs you saw it, which
I'm too skilful not to understand.

Ah Leonora, should my Brother know
He once hath seen my face, although by chance,
He'd tear my heart out, but did he know
I loved him! Oh fatal eyes that ere beheld
This lovely enemy.

Yet were you married to Marcello, his courage
Might defend you from your Brother and perhaps that marriage
Would close the breach between the Families.

'Twould pull down ruin on us both.
I see thou know not his ungoverned ^age.

Too well I know and fear it, he is talking yonder
In the Piazza, should I suffer you to loiter thus
In the way to Church, I should soon feel his rage I fear.
Let's hasten to Vespers, devotion and good music
May perhaps soften your care.

No Leonora, no divinity can justle out Marcello
From my thoughts.

Come Charge, let's hasten to the Church,
The Saint of this day whatever good he
Does, brings us good Music. All the Masters
In Florence assist at the Ceremony.

Yet all will cause but little harmony
In me, there's nought but discord in my thoughts.
Oh fatal love! yonder is my Lorenzo,
Heaven! my Lorenzo, foolish tongue he ne'er
Alas can be so, though he long has warmed
My tender heart, and yet he never saw me.

What are you musing on? let's haste to Church.

He'll hate the Sister of his enemy,
His rage does burn so fiercely in his breast
'Twill cause eternal separation
'Twixt him and any of our Race; fool that
I am, that I should like that fierceness
In him too, and think it does become him.

What do you mutter to your self? go on.

I find my love too hard for me, when we are
Bewitched to love a man, we like
Each fault, and folly in him too.
Bless me! my Brother and he come
Towards one another! stand by, I'll
Wait the sad event, I shall be known
By thee, else my black habit makes me
Undistinguish'd, and I would try to hinder it.

I'll not appear.

Retire, I'll venture on an odd experiment.

What's here my Brother and Marcello!
Oh fatal meeting. Retire Leonora and let
Mealone --

Who's here, my hated Foe? now for his
Blood, what power has hitherto defended
Him from this Arm and Justice?

So I shall have an honourable occasion
Of showing my prowess.

I will avoid him as much as honour
Will permit me.

What dost thou shun me, Coward?

I am less a Coward than thou a Brute,
I fear thee not thou know it,
But I'd obey the Duke.

That name calls all my strength into my arm
And quickens my revenge, you have abused me.

'Tis false.

At thy life.

Thou ne'er shalt reach it.

Sir I will wait upon you.

Your servant Sir.

Oh hold your hand, spill not Lorenzo's
blood,

My life, my soul, my Genius, my good Angel
In appearance, but my destroyer now.
Am I a Rival to my enemy?

Is your protection there?

'Tis in my hand.

O Sir, If ever prayers could move your fierce
And stubborn nature, hear 'em now,
Pull not Marcello's blood upon thy head.
He's Generous and would forget your injuries.

He dare not then remember 'em, prithee
Woman let me go. -- Come from thy guard
And fight.

Hold, hold, the rashness of this act will ruin you.
Beho^d my tears, deny 'em if you can.

Ha! who art thou?
By heaven the brightest thing that e're was seen,
What is't shrinks up my nerves, and calls
Back my revenge?

I on my knees beseech you will desist
From your rash action, can you deny me?

By all the Saints in heaven I cannot.
Death what's this that softens me to
Woman? By heaven and earth she is
The sweetest Creature that earth e're was,
Or heaven e're made.

Who is't that on her knees can beg for my
Marcello? have I Rivals too besides the
Enmity of our Family to undo me?

Ah Madam had the care you have expressed
Been aimed at me, I had been blessed enough.

I had a care of you, but he must be my care.

Marcello go and live, this Lady bids thee
Live. Thank her.

I thank none but heaven for my life,
It is unmanly to be thus vain-glorious.

Good Sir walk this way, I have something
More to say to you.

Who are you Madam that have hindered
This present quarrel between my mortal Foe
And me, but let me tell you, y'have (...)
My private peace, and raised a war more
Dangerous within me than any thing I
Could have met from him.

I dare not tell my name, I meant no
Harm to you, but if you love your self,
Or if your nature has imbibed
But the least softness from your Mothers milk,
Pursue not farther good Marcello's life.

Good Marcello! Hell and Furies! she loves him.
First let me know who gives me this command.

First Sir, deserve it by your temper,
And be assured I will not be ungrateful*
Farewell.

Tempests and whirlwinds! whither am I rapt!
She is gone, she has lest me quite unmanned,
At once I am stung with love and jealousy,
And I have let my Rival escape my fury.
Sirrah, dog that Lady, and on your life
Enquire out who she is.
Thou art not my Foe alone but happy Rival.
Instead of cooling shor has inflamed our strife:
I'll first defeat thy love, then take thy life.

In troth 'tis well leapt, Paulo, who can say you're old, let me see any young
man leap with more agility -- hah well done Paulo, come thy joints are pliant,
thy back lusty, and thou fit for an able Bridegroom, -- hah well done again
honest Paulo. What? grey hairs are no marks of old age, but of many years, of
chaste and sober youth, and of no idle expense of life, of no years cut off by
a Surgeon, nor washed away in a Tavern. Widow I commend thee in thy first
choice, and hope thou wilt resemble it in a second -- Have at thee Widow, have
at thee. -- Now well jumped Paulo. But now I must fatherly infuse Chastity into
my Daughter, and teach her rules too hard for me, Declaim against the lewdness
of the World, and advise her to choose the virtue of a Nunnery, for ^he being
(...) settled, my Widow can assault me with no very strong objection. Lucinda
come hither.


I come Sir.


What have you been doing Lucinda?


Sir I have been observing the Pictures in the long Gallery.


Which of them Child?


I observed Europa and Iupiter, and the Picture of Calisto surprised by the
same amorous God.


And we observed how he put a trick upon Danae, for all the Guards of her
severe Father.


Out upon it, mere bawdry, dost thou know my Child the moral of it? it declares
a hot Gallant, and a vile Governess debauch't with money to ruin her charge:
Out upon you naughty Girl! to indulge your Carnality with provocation; why did
you not look upon the good Saint Mary Magdalen, you know she bemoaned all her
love-vanities, you should have viewed St. Katharine of Alexandria. Did not I
bid you speak to your Lady to take down these Pictures, and that of Mars and
Venus in a net?


O Devilish dissembling old Fe^w!


I will be a kind Father in keeping thee spotless from this world, I am now
old, and can best tell you the small improvement virtue makes in Worldly
conversation; come, have you considered well my Child our late Discourse about
a Nunnery? Oh the sweet life! O the blessedness of such retirement! O divine
pleasure of a Nunnery!


This old Goat thinks to deceive me. What sure do you propose most unnatural
rules to be observed by her in the fresh spring of her life, which you cannot
submit to in the frozen December of your age?


Peace vain naughty carnal Woman. Speak Child, does silence give consent?
perhaps thou may through piety be Canonised: O what joy! and what honour to
us all! to have posterity after thy death pay devotion to St. Lucinda.


Pray Sir, may not Wives be Saints? if you please I will turn Nun when I am a
Widow.


I well said Madam; Pray have you the heart to put a young Woman of this neat
shape, this complexion, these bright eyes, this sweet breath, these clean teeth
--


Woman, hold thy tongue.


I will not, what into a Nunnery! what flesh and blood dares be her Confessor?
there's ne'er a shaved pate of them all but has more mind to her than a month's
fasting.


O Lord! she will make me deaf with talking.


Had she been crooked, had she wanted an eye, one leg shorter, one hand
reversed, or uncurable fits, or by any distemper improper for copying out her
own sweet-fac'd Picture: then she had been fit for a Nunnery, then most fit for
your Matins and Vespers.


Well, have you done?


No Sir, I have not done, Is this flesh and blood for a Nunnery? no, she shall
be a Matrimonial Saint, her shrine shall be a Down-bed and a Quilt, and her
Chapel a well furnished Chamber, the Pilgrim that shall kneel to her and kiss
her, shall be a young handsome man, and you need expect no Miracle, but to see
her Nuns work run up and down, and call you Grand Pappa.


I tell thee Woman, I shall chastise thee if thou hold not thy tongue. Thou
hast been false, thou hast corrupted my daughter, thou hast confederated with
Carnality: Get thee out of my sight, I will forthwith speak to my Lady Abbess
about it, and she shall be admitted to morrow.


Sir, if you please, since a Daughter cannot with a Father dispute this great
affair, which like marriage is for better for worse, let your Friend and mine
reason it calmly, whether your only Daughter should turn Nun; If their reasons
convince me, I obey.


Well, for once I consent, who shall they be?


Sir, any young Gentleman of Florence shall judge for me, and for you my
designed Mother-in-Law Paulina.


Begone you saucy Baggage: What, concern your self in your Fathers Business?
what, you can prate, can you disobedience?


No Sir, I am all duty; you told me, you loved me, because I did resemble my
Mother: I would fain increase your love, and be like my Mother in every thing.


Begone I say, my will is fixed.


Pray Sir, I ever loved my Father, and since the world is so perilous, let us
both leave it: You often commanded me to follow my Parents Example.


Hence Impudence. And get thee out of my presence, Thou pestilence of the
Family: Paulo -- hah vigorous Paulo, hah lusty Paulo -- Hah brave Paulo.


WEll sirrah, what makes you stay so long, when I bid you return a speedy
answer from Lucinda?


Pray Sir, let me excuse my stay, secundum quid, by the History of some
extraordinary contingences which interfered, though indeed I am of the Stoics
opinion, that nothing is contingent, but only seems so quoad nos.


Sirrah to the purpose Rogue, Rascal.


Sir, why do you wrong your self, and debase your nature by this vile employ,
which instead of making you red with anger, should make you blush for shame?


You tormenting Villain speak now, or else I am resolved to damn you to the
Pillory.


Alas Sir, the Pillory! by this passion you extinguish every thing that is
Socratick, or indeed Philosophical; you become my servant, I can make you kick
me when I please, alas poor Gentleman! did he but see how passion alters his
countenance, and defaces the pleasure of his Mistress!


Within there-bring in the Pillory; now sirrah you shall not escape: bid your
fellows come in with the Pillory and Garland.


Sir, pray ponder the thing, and that you may not by designing me, expose your
self to domestic ignominy, I will endeavour to give verbal satisfaction.


Look invincible fool, here is the best Scheme for your Rhetoric, this must be
your Climax, and this the ornament for your florid head, come put his Collar
on, lest in his madness he bites some of you, and so infect you.


Fellow-servants entreat your Master to consult his reputation, and not pursue
a thing so mal a propos.


Insufferable slay, as impudent, as invincible.


Sir, what ^rrour, what fault, what transgression? where is the least
Circumlocution? though habits are very tough.


In with him. I leave him to you, let him not sleep, for that's bad in Physic,
I allow you all battering instruments; sirrah, your faults are many, I hope
they will reckon them up in my absence.


Torrens dicendi copia multis, sua mortifera est facundia.


What at it again? I hope this punishment will prove a cleansing vomit for your
tough bits of eloquence.


I will suppress my anger, though it swells my heart, and hear what the dull
Rout will say, and thus by taciturnity deceive them. Philosophy I thank thee!


Lord what makes Circumstantio in this strange disabilie as he used to call it!
he swells like some Don in his ruff, sure the rogue has got a cold and cannot
stir his neck.


No, no, the Laundress has put too much starch in his Cravat: that light pate of
his peeps like a Cork out of a bottle.


Well learned Domine! I knew you would at last be yoked for your frequent
breaking of hedges, most high and mighty, you were always despising your
fellow-servants, calling the Cook greasy, Butler frothy, the Coachman stable
man.


I am afraid our sport will be prevented by the coming of this old Maid, now
must we kiss her, and talk of her husband, to keep her in some tolerable
humour. Come Gentlemen show your breeding.


Blessings on you all, kind hearts, I have not received so much comfort these
two months: pray where is Antonio? for I came to speak with him: ah! but what
do I see the accomplished Circumstantio in the Pillory?


Ah how dark and erroneous are the sentiments of the unphilosophick, which
proceed from want of definition and distinction, they suppose this Pillory to
be malum verum, which we that have been better taught know to be but malum
apparens, no wise man can suffer ill; for how insignificant is malum poenae,
when the essence of a man is free from malum culpae! Oh what consolation do I
find in Metaphysics! I will assure you Auditors, neither candid, nor gentle,
that I value not this Pillory nor its Pilloreity.


Well, I never heard him speak so finely before.


Mrs. Nuarcha, my Master is coming.


Then I will compose my self. Sir, Mrs. Lucinda so desirous of your company
Circumstantio's liberty. Indeed Sir you do not use him according to his
deserts.


Indeed Mrs. Nuarcha you are in the right, but for your sake and this excellent
news, I will not at this time be ungrateful in denying you any thing, well let
him come out; Circumstantio you're bound to pay your respects to this Lady, and
by right, if she thinks fitting, to marry her that brings you the reprieve, but
as the Prologue of Matrimony, kiss her.


I kiss her not qua Nuarcha, but quatenu^ my deliveress.


Your words and lips shall always be acceptable.


I must now return, shall I tell Lucinda that you will not fail, for she
expects me with impatience.


Tell her I will watch each minute, and the hour will seem a year till I wait
on her.


Madam, Marcello just meets us.


-- If he
Knows me I am ruined, is there no way
To escape him? though I would willingly
With his leave fly into his arms.

-- Come, come
Prepare your discretion to receive him.
And put him off with hopes of seeing him,

Madam, though in obedience to your command
I durst not enter the Church after you,
So nice you are of discovering your self,
Yet now be not offended if I strive
To know the name of my kind Protectress.

Sir, pray retire, for sure the fierce Lorenzo
Hovers hereabouts to meet you, and then
I his fury returns, as sure it will,
Perhaps the kind Lady that bowed his heart
And arm, may not be at hand to help you.

Like Heaven you gave us unexpected help,
And speak your mind like it in Oracles,
Dark and mysterious. I know no Lady
Neither you nor her, and owe no safety
To any but your self. Strange interview!
Big with contraries, which saves, and yet destroys.
To hinder my chance of death thrown
From my enemy, yet as the same Friend
To murder me by kindness to my foe!

Let it satisfy in this place in words
To promise you, that I am as ready
As the other Lady to render my
Assistance to the worthy Marcello.

It seems you know me Madam.

-- Not so well
As the Lady who ventured the blind rage
Of Lorenzo, by exposing her life
To save yours, you have small reason to blame
My hard heart, when you find such softness there.

Madam, 'tis the greatest severity
To rally with a Wretch upon the rack.

Come, you must be kept there till you confess.

Confess! what Madam?

-- The name of her that
Did you such service, and then you may more
Justly expect mine, for my part I can
Allow you but one Mistress at a time.

Madam, if you design me by cruelty
For death, let me not mistake some kindness
In your words to keep me longer in pain.
Oh speak my fate, for doubt is worse than death.
You'll prove unkind if you pronounce my death,
Yet more kind by speaking to finish life and pain.

Sure despair is the worst vice of the Brave.
Well, to be short, I will make
This agreement with you, pursue no more
Questions nor any further inquiry
At this time, and I promise suddenly
To grant the satisfaction you desire.
And may Heaven grant that knowledge don't increase
Those torments which we both conceive in ignorance.

Well, I submit, 'tis more generous to say, I obey my
Mistress, than necessity, and 'tis better far to stand still, than
march after love, when it moves like a wandering fire.
Lest the poor Traveller goes more astray
In a blind Moonless light, and unknown way.

Sure my Servant is lost, as well as his poor Master. Oh how I rack my mind to
know who this fair Creature is! perhaps to my greater torment, for some small
hope hovers about me in my ignorance, which will take wing and upon information
leave me


Pray Sir, shall I tell you, or shall I not tell you?


If your relation be good, stay not a moment, but if fatal, let it remain in
everlasting silence -- yet I must hear, come who is she?


Nay Sir, be not so passionate, for I can neither kill you, nor save you.


Slave be quick, who is she?


Pray Sir be satisfied, heaven and St. Peter knows for me.


Wretch, dost thou not know? why dost thou keep me thus in pain? speak or for
ever hold thy tongue, who is she?


Sir, in short I dogged her, but she was too nimble for me, she was mingled
with so many in the Church, that I could not distinguish her.


Villain thou lie. I will kill thee, and write fool in thy blood, what, not
distinguish her? villain thou lie, 'tis impossible, a bright circle always
crowns her face, her vail was all illustrated, as clouds gilded by the Suns
darted beams, her breath would discover her at distance, as spices in blossom
betray Arabia to approaching Travellers. Roses grow for ever where she treads,
and nature paints her footsteps: not know her, not distinguish her! Impudent
sot; recollect, and tell me you know her.


Hey-day: here's brave alteration in my Master: truly Sir, to speak the truth,
I have a great cold, and so perhaps could not smell her, and then my eyes are
very weak, and cannot look against so much light; as for Roses I saw none.
Ladies servants, and their servants servants look not with the same eyes.
Perhaps 'tis always Summer, and hot weather when you see her, but it was
Winter by that time I drew near to her.


Yes, by your stay it seemed so; march before, and lead me to her; or --


Lord Sir, what do you mean? have a little patience, and she may come by this
way again. Vespers were almost done when I came to you: (...) -- see your enemy
Marcello is just going into his house.


I would it were his grave, but I will shortly send him or my self thither.


Sir pray look that way -- I think I spy the same Lady coming, yes 'tis she,
now I see the light about her face, yes I smell the roses, and see them blush,
and peep under her Petticoat.


'Tis she -- I know my murdress is at hand by inward bleeding. My heart beats
vehemently, and my blood presses with haste through lifes flood-gates: love
which animates all creatures, abates my courage, when I have most need of it. I
cannot speak to her, and yet I must.


Lorenzo is here, alas I tremble
To meet the Man I love. I know he stares
To learn who I should be, and where I live.
'Tis only ignorance can make him kind,
For knowledge would extinguish his devotion.
He comes this way, be sure you discover
Nothing of me to his servant.

Madam
Grant me the favour of some few minutes,
To tell you that you have killed me, and saved
My enemy; pray pardon the roughness
Of my unpractised love, born in a storm
And yet wrapped up in its clouds and darkness.
Oh tell me I beseech you who you are,
That were so kind to my foe Marcello.

Sir, I should venture more to save the life
Of good Marcello; and since time and place
Hinder me from offering long prayers
To you, let me beg one boon on my knees
If you can love

Madam, I beg of you
Not to abuse you supplicant; O Death!
She names the villainous Marcello with affection,
And calls him good, but in death I should be
Charitable, pray name your boon that I
May grant it.

May good heaven bless Lorenzo
For this mercy; be kind to Marcello
And then --

Cursed expression! each syllable
Proves a poynard, and stabs me to the heart.
Marcello is my rival; Dear Madam
Pronounce those words again to make me happy,
If there be happiness for me in death.

Come Charge, let us go.


Hold, hold, you have not proved your self a woman yet, and discovered who your
Lady is.


But you have declared your self a Serving-man by that question, What are you?
your masters forlorn hope? ^ent out to skirmish with the enemy, and then
retreat to the main body.


I never heard the Sutlers wife, or the Laundress call her self part of the
Army before.


Saucebox, I believe your empty belly, and foul Linen put these words into
your mouth; come Charge let's go and not expose our selves thus in the street.


I go with great regret, but must retire,
Farewell Lorenzo, and be kind to me.

By heavens I am astonished and scarce know
Where, and who I am! O stay a little
And hear my last petition, pray tell me
Who you are, so cruel to Lorenzo
And so kind to your Marcello; Whom now
I must for ever hate, for what can move
A man so much, as his lost fame and love?

O speak not such ill omens, for kind heaven
Will bring us safe out of our labyrinth.
I go Lorenzo, but will soon find time
To see you, and make my self more happy,
If now you'll promise me to retire
Without observing me.

Well, I promise
Since it pleases you, to torment my self:
And be tormented by my ignorance.

'Tis best, for knowledge would my hopes destroy,
His hatred is so inveterate against any of
Our house: farewell Sir

Farewell my Visionary Mistress; for I neither know who, no^ whence thou art;
like Ixion, I did fancy a Goddess, but embraced a cloud. Sirrah what were they
we discoursed with just now?


Two Women, without doubt Sir.


'Tis false, impudence, are your sure you talked with any woman?


I am sure mine was a true Woman, by her way of speaking.


'Tis strange that I should thus forget my self, to lay open my follies before
my servant: hurried with new passions of love, and jealousy. Marcello is my
Rival and my Foe. My Rival -- 'tis enough -- it is decreed. I will forthwith to
his house, and kill him: no place shall save him, not the Court, nor Duke; nor
Household gods; no bright apparition shall rescue him from death the second
time.


Brother, are you resolved to go to night?

Yes Dear Sister, my horses are ready.

When shall I see you again?

To Morrow.

I am sorry you go; pray have a care
Of your self. Lorenzo you know is much
Enraged, and seeks after you

-- Fear nothing
Sister, Lorenzo is honourable.
His greatest fury can suggest nothing
That is unworthy of a Nobleman.
To day I met him, and I will tell you
At more leisure what wondrous providence
Diverted his rage, and divided us.

My Brother little thinks, I know the thing
So well, which he pretends to hide. -- But yet
Brother, last nights dream disturbs me. Methoughts
A young Gentleman of that house killed you,
And I in just revenge stabbed Lorenzo.
Ye both ^ay dead upon the ground, and then
Rose up, and like the dearest Friends embraced.
But that must signify the other world.

Dreams are but the Echo's of the thoughts
Possess your mind by day. -- a lively mark
Of your great concern for me, for which I thank
My loving Sister.

Sir, Lorenzo whom I never saw here before, with angry looks and hasty words,
bids me tell you that he must speak with you.


Oh my Brother!


'Tis fortunate Sister to have him here, I hope he comes prepared to hear me
speak: retire Sister, whilst I introduce him.


I will withdraw, but overhear you both.


Lorenzo most welcome, you oblige me
And my house for ever, by this favour.

Marcello you mistake, I hate both you,
And your loathed house. I desire no welcome,
But come hither like thy evil Genius
To terrify thee, and bid thee meet me
In such a place, where chance shall not part us.

I cannot fear it in Lorenzo's shape,
Who rather should command my love, than fear,
If he could bridle passion, and (...)
His better reason, and the Dukes command.

Oh thou Rock under smooth waters! thou shalt
Never deceive me, thou base enemy,
Best able to kill at distance, and to
Murder me by whispers.

You wrong me much,
I hate the wretch as much as you, who can
Deserve this character. I would in my
Own house be calm, and make my plea
To these false objections.

-- as true, as thou art false.
Now I find in thee a vice, I ever
Thought thee free from, I mean base cowardice,
Which springs from guilt; thou understand my rage,
And its just cause, yet would by oily smoothness
Loosen my hold, if thou hast any heat,
I will raise it by the remembrance
Of thy Mistress, who saved thee from my revenge
Today, 'tis her I'll have too, yet that
Shall never buy my friendship.

'Tis enough,
You have broke for me all ties of honour,
And good manners. Lorenzo, be gone,
My house is your best defence, pray leave it,
Your last words will force me to imitate
Your rudeness.

I will not go without you,
I came to fetch you out, and punish you.

It is in vain by calmness to flatter
His proud insolency any longer.
I have been tame too long, and that my wronged
Love and honour may have their quick revenge
Upon thee, beyond the reach of casual
Assistance to save thee, name some secret place
Where we may meet, if thou dare come,
Early to morrow morning.

Marcello
For this kindness, if I find it real,
I must thank thee: in nothing else thou can
Oblige Lorenzo -- well -- by Sun-rising
Tomorrow, let us meet at the great Oak
In the Neighbouring Forest, till then -- Farewell.

Let not my passion spoil civility,
I will see you safe out of my own doors.

Forbear your cere^nies, I hate them
From you, like him that uses them, it seems
As recantation of your former words.

You might accept them now, for I will show you none to morrow. I dare not tell
my Sister what has passed betwixt us. Camilla I am glad that all things will be
soon composed between Lorenzo, and my self; for he came very kindly to propose
a conference to morrow, where we shall upon the debate grow more calm, I hope
for ever; and that my proposed affair may not hinder me, I must take my leave,
and be gone. Dear Sister Farewell, and wish me good success.


May all that is good preserve my dear Brother. He's gone, and now my eyes
shall freely speak the rest. He thinks he has deceived me, and that I did not
over-^ear their f^tal assignation, I will retire to my Chamber, and consider
how to save them both.


Lucinda, your father is so brisk and vigorous of late, that he seems to have
dropped Twenty years of his life.


Yes Madam, he has been fortifying himself these three months to my knowledge,
that he might appear brisk upon this day of admission.


Prithee pay more respect to the old Gentleman before your Mother-in-law, he
always appeared cheerful though not to this degree.


Well Madam, if you have a mind to be my Mother-in-Law, 'tis you will have the
worst of it, not I.


Why so merry Cousin?


Because after a very little time my Father must return to rheum and
spitting-sheet, and then how will you away with it? I love an old man well
enough for a Father, but not for a husband.


Pray Cousin let us reason it, such an old man as your Father, or my late
husband, would make you an excellent match, come think of it Lucinda, it might
prove most proper, his gravity to allay your levity, his cold your heat, as we
correct Wine with Water.


Out upon it! I would not have an old man, though he made me a jointure of the
Indies, though he built me a house of Silver, and turned a rich stream of
golden Tagus to wash my garden walls, though he could afford me Cleopatra's
draughts every morning, I should find out another Antony.


O brave Girl, had you rather venture a young mans frolics?


Yes, rather than to lye by an old man, 'tis lying with a Coffin, and I am sure
you had rather lye by a certain young man than my f^ther.


Why do you think so Cousin? an old man is a very wise bosom friend, whom long
use of life has polished, from whom you may learn the wisest rules to methodize
your self.


Very good, you advise me to marry an old man, that is to say an history
incarnate, true Annals writ upon a Skeleton; and what then, go to bed with this
rotten Chronicle? no he shall lye covered with Cobwebs first. I don't intend to
embalm matrimonial mummy, to spoil the Apothecary's trade, and fill my Closet
with gally-pots.


Madam, Seignior Paulo desires to speak with you.


Well, I will go wait upon my Cousin, 'tis to give my approbation to the design
of his music he presents us with to night at Supper. Cousin farewell, and
think more charitably of an Old husband.


Antonio is just come to the back door, and I have got my Mistress luckily
away.


Pray bring him into this walk pray make haste, and I will give you the best
gown I have.


I go, I go to serve you both.


I know there is no danger of the Widows marrying my Father, though she carries
it so demurely; she has a greater longing after my dear Antonio, and my love is
not without some hope; for though he seems to court the Widow, yet his looks
and words may be as well interpreted to me, I wish my supposition proves true.


Madam, this happiness you confer upon me is more than any past or future
service can repay: pray Madam let me know the honour of your commands, that I
may express some thanks by readiness to obey them.


Sir you shall know them presently, they concern both you and my self: good
Nuarcha, oblige me in observing my Cousin and Father's motion, that I may not
be surprised talking with Antonio.


Well, dear heart, I will, I go most willingly, for a hundred to one but they
will talk about my Mistresses affection to Anton^o, which amorous discourse
will so heat my desires, that they will exceed moderation: well goodly Couple
^arewell, I dare trust you both.


Ah Lucinda, give me leave to speak, and whilst there is time to undeceive
you, by all that is good you should believe: you are the design of my true
love, and the Widow but the Shadow of the Picture to cheat the eyes of the
beholder.


Antonio, you mistake, I am not she you mean, I am Lucinda and not the Widow,
'tis she has ever had the appearance of your love by words and actions, which
bid her judge it real. But I wi^h with all my heart he means what he sp^aks.


Let this propitious hour be for ever blessed, in affording me time to express my
heart.


Well, well, you are a merry man to whet your discourse on me, against my
Cousins coming.


Madam, do you think I want eyes and ears to distinguish the beauty, and wit of
Lucinda?


But to be serious, the only way to procure your Widow, is by keeping off my
Father; who to speak dutifully of him seems in the Autumn of his life to
pretend a second Spring: I will assure you your Rival is very brisk with her;
therefore pray Court your Widow to the purpose, and give her greater assurance
of you, that my Father may be diverted from clapping me into a Nunnery; and
that is the end of my giving you this trouble. Would to God I could tell him
plainly that I love him.


Oh Lucinda, be not so cruel as to condemn me to new pains: for this falsehood
of pretended love is as great a torment to me, as a mistake in you; rather
command me to own my love before your Father, and the Widow.


No, pray Court on, upon discovery Lucinda must forthwith march into a Nunnery,
I believe you will hardly free her from it without her Portion.


Dearest Lucinda do not think so basely of your Lover, that the spirit of his
love so much delights in dross and earth. I love not Lucinda as the Heiress of
her Father; but for the inestimable dowry of her Virtue and Beauty: I have
enough left me by my Ancestors, and fortune would be prodigal, to grant me
Lucinda to command me and it.


These words will make be believe former passages, that he is real, I must
confess.


What is that Lucinda?


Why it must out -- if it were not for -- my Antonio.


Oh pronounce those blessed words again, lest it passes for a dream of
happiness.


Nay, I am glad 'tis out, but if it had not been for fear of Nunnery and
Hair-cloth, I had held out longer: yet you must Court the Widow, as you used to
do, the next time you see her.


For heaven sake do not relapse, I am weary of the cheat: I must acknowledge
the truth, this unkindness suggests as if you did not love me; for Lovers like
the Deity hate to have their dues offered to an Idol.


But as you love me, continue it for a while, I warrant you for some handsome
Plot to discover all in a little time.


Madam, your Father and my Lady are coming, pray set your self in order.


How now! what do I see? is not that a young man, and that my daughter?


Yes Sir, and a handsome young man too, he happened to come by when the Garden
door was open, and being delighted with the beauty of the place, I invited him
in, as one not unknown to my Lady.


Good Sir be disturbed at nothing, he is a Gentleman of my acquaintance, I am
glad that any thing here has obliged his stay: and that my Cousin was here so
luckily to entertain him.


Madam, I need not fear to come off in the old Gentleman's opinion, having so
good an Advocate.


Umph, Advocate, and old Gentleman! no more old Gentleman than your self, for
years do not bring age, but debauchery of youths and such Jacks as you are.
Come Sauce-box, can you jump as I can? come, the old Gentleman, as you call
him, shall try your activity.


How zealously this old Gentleman, like some sort of lovers, acts one thing and
is another, declaiming against youth, yet mi^king its gaye^y!


Young fellow there -- leave off your prating, and try if your back can bear
jumping as mine does: prithee sweet Widow don't mind his prating, but observe
this trial of skill.


Pray Madam, speak to my Father to have a care of straining.


How is that, you Saucy baggage? abuse your Fathers back to his face, that was
one cause of bringing you into the world? get you gone you undutiful slut, to
abuse the spring of your being.


Madam, what must your influence and virtue be, which can thus change nature,
and metamorphise old age into brisk youth?


But the victory is greater which conquers the stronger, and set^les wandering
youth within the sober bounds of constancy.


Come troublesome Companion, if you will have all prating and no jumping, pray
leave this Lady and prattle with that young Flirt there. I'll warrant her I
shall punish her within few days for impiously throwing dirt upon my back.


Madam, since at this time this old Gentleman will be your only Guardian,
pardon me if I am forced to play the hypocrite.


Well Rag-manners forbear your flouting, or you shall take what follows. And be
satisfied that this Lady is otherwise disposed of.


Lucinda, it certainly foretells good luck that I have so easily obtained your
Fathers consent to Court you.


But what would become of us if either of them imagined the plot betwixt us?


Faith, I will directly discover it.


Yes, yes, throw me into a Nunnery* and then see how you can get me out: pray
at this time break up company, lest it seems too much familiarity at first
sight, I will contrive to see you again before midnight.


Well, I will obey you in all things -- Madam I must beg you^ pardon for my
rude intrusion, and yours Ancient Sir, if I have given you any occasion of
trouble.


Well Sir, we thank you as much for your room as your company -- Ancient say
you? -- Widow pray give him his farewell.


Antonio, I am sorry my circumstances will not permit me to discover how much I
value you: but be assured that you shall be always welcome to any place, which
calls me Mistress.


Madam, your most obedient Servant, I wish I might in this place plainly
express the truth of my affection. With your Fathers good leave Lucinda let me
be esteemed your most faithful Servant.


Paulo, what think you of him, is he not a most accomplished Gentleman?


No, no, -- very indiffe^ent, -- a mere flash, come put him out of your head.
Let's go in, the air grows cold.


MY Master has I must confess above my merits honoured me with a Commission to
wait upon you and kiss your noble hands, the which Province I embrace with an
eminent Exaltation of joy, since you are a person of such illustrious honour
that Florence scarce contains your equal, I am sure not your Superior, which
is no small symptom of my Masters piercing wit and more distinguishing
Judgement, that have made so Excellent a choice.


You'll never leave your Rhetoric.


The subject needs it not, your vast merits afford so ample a Field of
Discourse, that with Excessive pleasure I could wander in those delightful
paths, but at the present I am too strictly bound by my Masters too hasty
expectation of my too quick Return.


Prithee to the point if you be in haste, for I am so.


I shall be brief, for brevity, though I must confess it does too often
obstruct the ravishing torrents of an eloquent* and charming tongue, yet in
quick dispatch of business I hold it ne^essary, and therefore I shall proceed.


I must be gon else, what would Antonio have?


You being a person strictly allied to him by firm necessitude, and boun^ to
him by the indissoluble knot of an inviolable Friendship, and being a person to
whom he is mu^is nomini^us obstrictus.


What would he have with me?


He being also a person embarrassed with an amorous Intrigue, well may I say
embarrassed for res est (...) plena ^imoris amor, as the Poet sings sweetly,
But Antonio being a person --


-- That would speak with me, when and where?


I shall inform you, he being a person who not only having great proclivity to
that amorous passion, but being driven by the violence of her beauty whose
Image he wears upon his heart, she being a person --


-- Ounds is she a person too, nay then Farewell.


Hold good Sir, and hear the end.


S'death you will never come to an end.


She being a person --


-- I will not stay if she be a person.


I am astonished Sir at your impatience, would you have me speak vulgarly and
abruptly, and in haste like a Nursekeeper that is sent for Aqua-vitae?


I am going out of Town, I shall return and wait upon your Master to morrow.


Hear me first, I shall be concise, for I am a person --


-- You a person? nay then farewell* a pox on your person.


I am much mistaken Sir, if your unknown Mistress be not coming this way -- and
if it be she, I saw her come out of Lorenzo's house: She's here.


What do I hear? Madam I know your person.
And yet I know not what to call you,
Unless it be Lorenzo's Mistress.

Jealousy is sometimes a sign of great love,
But always of little wit.

I see then you will own it.
Has my so violent passion deserved your scorn?

Jealous and angry too! nay then I'm sure
You are fast enough in the toil.

Lorenzo has employed you then
To set your beauteous snares to draw me in.
Then prey on me. This is most exquisite revenge

You are confident I am Lorenzo's Mistress,
Because the Lady who spoke to him to day*
Is yours.

On my honour I know her not,
But I am sure, you came but now
Out of Lorenzo's house.

Shall I not accomplish my Embassy to you?

Pox on thee, begone Impertinent. -- Albricio know the
Tools Message if you can find it out.

What luck is this he should discover it --
I visited his Sister who was bred in the
Same Nunnery with me, and whom I love
Equally with my self.

If this be all, I may be happy yet.

Lorenzo is the man on earth I would not have,
I hate his stubborn and inveterate humour,
If he were sole Monarch of the Universe
I would not marry him, but if my too forward
Care of you will make you jealous, you
Shall have less of it hereafter.

O say not so, I had rather my good Angel
Should neglect me, and hover about my
Enemy.

Were there no other man in Florence, he
Should never have my love.
A Bark that's tossed by Tempests on a Rock
Were safer than a woman cast on him.

Dear beauteous vision, for yet I know not
What to call you, I am convinced
You would refuse his love, and were I sure
You would accept of mine.

You are not sure I am worthy of it.

Thou art worthy of the love of Princes.
The greatest Hero that the earth e're bare
In thee might meet the end of all ambition.

Suppose I were one of Lorenzo's Kindred.

Were thou his Sister, I would headlong fly
Into thy Arms, though he were at my back
Ready to give me the malicious blow
He long has wished me.

How I admire and love his generous nature!

By this plain declaration I deserve
Thou should reveal thy self, and make me happy.
For whosoe're thou art, by Heaven I swear
My life and love to thee shall end together.
I am sure you're good, for nature would not slubber so
To place an evil mind in such a body.

Your Generosity has so obliged me
That the next meeting which I will contrive
As soon as may be, you shall know my name:
Let it suffice at present to inform you
My virtue is unquestioned, and my birth
And fortune too may claim the good Marc^llo.

Life of my soul, here let me seal my vows.

The Naturalists observe --

-- What have I to do with your Naturals, what would your Master have with
mine?


I am confounded, that I should draw my breath in so unlearned an Age!


Where is your Master?


I cannot say affirmatively what place does circumscribe him, I suppose you
hold with Aristotle, that locus est superficies.


Pox on Aristotle, where's your Master?


Paulina's Mansion did contain him locally, for Corpus must always be in loco,
that's certain, but at this present point of time I can only say indefinitely
he is not at home.


Farewell, a pox of this stuff. Sir, I cannot understand one Sentence that he
says.


I see Lorenzo coming up that street.
Now if you would have me believe one word
You speak: avoid him quickly.

I am all obedience, Joy of my life farewell.

Will you not lend your ears for one small moment?

Damn you impertinent Rascal.

The world is envious of my parts I see,
There's no man truly honoured while he lives.
I will write something, Quod nec Iovis ira nec ignis,
And then I'll dye and purchase true renown.

Dissuade me not, I am resolved to venture
Through all the dangers Cowards can imagine.

Consult your honour and my safety Madam
As gentle as Marcello is, he would revenge
Your love adventures upon me.

Fear not.
I will protect thee and defend his life,
Or perish with him, 'tis no time to (...)
With his or with my loved Lorenzo's safety.
I'll save my honour too, or lose my life.
Go to Lorenzo's house, and let him know
I am here to speak with him.

Consider Madam.

I prithee lay thy tedious wisdom by,
We must have desperate remedies for this ill.
If you would preserve my life, I do conjure thee
To do as I appoint thee.

Here he comes.
Put a strict guard upon your honour now
And let not love find out its weaknesses.

My honour's safe, he sees me not.

Revenge,
Thou art my Deity, to thee I pay
My vows and off rings, Oh cursed Marcello
To morrows Sun shall see thy treacherous heart
Throbbing within this hand. Oh Heavens who's this?
My Genius come to stop the lawful rage
Of this avenging Arm? It is her shape
The motion too of her Celestial body.

I know her by her Governess my Mistress.

Fair unknown Saint of all my vows, to thee
The dear protectress of my life and fortune
I humbly kneel, and from thy powerful doom
Expect my life or death. If thou'lt be kind,
I will look down upon and pity Kings,
If not, the miserablest slave may pity me.

Fair unknown Saint of all my vows, to thee
I humbly kneel Protectress of my fate,
Pu^ up this Cloud and shine upon thy servant.

Whose Fool art thou?

I am Lorenzo's, pray whose Fool art thou?
It is a secret I would gladly know.

I shall never be thy Fool, that is, thy wife.

Break, break distracted heart, there is no cure.

Sir, you ask pity of me who needs it more.

Pray mock me not, such beauty stand in need
Of pity? 'tis impossible, you may
Give law to all that see you, and those wretches
That once could disobey you ought to be
Cast out from all humane Society,
And left to the company of Bears and Wolves.

Oh were these words the dictates of your heart,
I should be happy.

By all the joys of Heaven
They are, I swear on your fair hand, except
You intercede for vile Marcello's life,
There's no command of yours I'd not obey,
I'd singly stand a breach, leap into fire
Or mount a billow when the foaming Sea
Is most enraged with tempests: I for you
Would scorn all danger, but the loss of honour
I cannot bear.

Nor could I e're esteem
One that would hazard that; but to be just
And honourable, you should end this feud.
'Tis the most brutal custom of our Country
For Families to fight they know not why:
Beasts are more civil, for they never quarrel
But for necessity of nature: Good Marcello
Is willing to contract a Friendship with you,
And would on that condition give his Sister
Who's young, and they who have seen her say she's fair,
And all conclude her rich and virtuous,
This Sister he would give in marriage to you.

How! marry one o^ his accursed Race?
I'd sooner take one sick of the Plague and keep
My Nuptials in a Pest-house. There's no yoke
Which the most savage Tyrant could impose
I would not sooner bow my servile neck to.

Ah what hope
Poor lost Camilla now remains for thee!

But for the life of base Marcello Madam
You are the most improper Orator,
Can a scorned Lover hear his cruel Mistress
Pleading for his successful, hated Rival,
And not be more enraged against him for it?

He never yet by words or signs made love
To me upon my honour. -- Heaven I fear
I shall reveal too much.

It is too plain you love him. Oh Devil
With what patience can I reflect on that
And let him live an hour?

He has my esteem because I think him generous,
And he's beside a Friend to our Family,
My love he ne'er shall have: But 'tis as plain
You have a Mistress who staid his arm from you.

No Lady e're could touch my heart but you,
May Thunder strike me dead if e're I loved
Before I saw your all commanding beauty,
Which I am resolved to perish, or deserve,
If all the service of my life can do it.

If you desire to make me credit you,
Meet not Marcello in the wood to morrow.

Hah, has his fear made him betray the place.
And time of Assignation, where I was
To enjoy my enemy? What riddle's this?
Can you be so concerned, and yet not love him?

It is your safety Sir which I consult,
Make me not blush to tell the cause of this.

If this be true, as I will ne'er distrust
The words so fair a mouth as yours shall utter,
Say but the cause is love, and tell me who
You are. -- let my lips dwell upon this hand for ever.

My birth and fortune equal yours,
My honour's yet unblemished in a ^ught.
If I can love a man on earth 'tis you.

Madam, this is too much, we must be gone.

Peace Screech-Owle, or by Heaven I'll strike thee dead
With Curses. Oh let me hear those Sacred words
Once more, that I may think I dream not.

I have said too much to one who loves so little.

Little! -- the virtuous love not heaven so much.
They know as little of it too, as I
Of you my Heaven.

Thou art as impertinent and as inquisitive with me as thy hot-headed Master is
with my Mistress.


Perhaps you may be as handsome, and I may have as much reason. Oh let thy
splendid face break out upon me sweet, and I will be as full of raptures as my
Master.


You'll soon be satisfied, as for example.


Benedicite, I am satisfied thou hast punished me enough. By heaven a Succubus:
Thou Scare-crow to preserve that goodly fruit.


Saucy fellow, I hope my face deserves better than yours.


If e're I trouble thee with love again, may thou confound me, and consent.


Grant me but this request, and on my honour
Next interview which shall be sudden, you
Shall know my name.

How is my nature lost, how soft I'm grown!
By heaven I cannot disappoint my enemy,
And yet by all the sacred powers above
I never can deny thee ought. -- But yet my honour.

False Braves alone are jealous of their honour,
The true are still assured they cannot lose it.
Or grant me this, or I'll conclude you love
So little, 'twill not be worth my seeing you again,
And I will ne'er attempt it.

Say not so.
My life, my honour, all I have is yours,
You shall dispose of all, and I'll obey you.
I will not meet him, though I had much rather
See him in opposition with his Sword
Than have the fairest Lady but your self
Within my arms in dalliance.

Strange passion of revenge! and I'll not trust it.
I have another way yet to prevent their meeting.
Since you are pleased to promise you'll not meet,
I take my leave for a short space of time.

Why should we ever part?

It must be now.

First let me kiss thy hand, once more, again, again,
Why should I ever leave it?

Farewell my good Lorenzo, I was saying Dear Lorenzo.
Hold, if you dog me, I'll never see you more.

Farewell Todpool, Toad, Monkey.

Farewell Hag, Night-mare, Scarecrow, Mawkin, c.

Heaven, with what pangs she leaves my soul!
That in its last flight will not leave my body
In half so bad.
Methinks she tears my heart-strings, as she goes,
I feel her pulling at'em. But what, have
I promised not to meet my enemy;
To lose my honour and revenge for one
I know not? I was not my self, my madness
Made it. Perhaps she may be one
That's prostituted to the vile Marcello.
By heaven I lye, it cannot be, she is
Divine, the Saints we pray to are not half
So beautiful, or holy.

Are you Lorenzo?


I am.


Marcello sends you this, I lye, but 'tis no matter, I am well paid for lying,
and I believe 'tis for pimping too.





What answer Sir?

There needs none, there's something for you.
Luc^y above my wishes,
I only promised not to meet to morrow,
I am free, and I will haste to my revenge.
Sister whither are you going?

No farther, I came to meet you at your coming in.

Iulia I have news for you.

What's that dear Brother?

I have appointed time and place to meet
My mortal enemy Marcello, and suddenly
All our vexatious Quarrels will be ended.
I know the bravery of thy spirit makes thee
Hate that cursed race, and ^
With me.

Heaven send a good end.

Do not distrust my courage or my fortune.

When and where, is this meeting to be?
Oh my Marcello!

Hah, she sighs, I must not trust her tenderness,
Inquire no more, 'twill not be long.

I see a paper in his pocket, perhaps it contains
The appointment: forgive my theft.
When e're you meet may heaven preserve my
Dearest brother.

Thanks my Iulia, let's in.

To night in the neighbo^ring wood by the great Oak. Heaven, how shall I find
this out. -- Hold, I shall be observed.


Think Mada^ if Paulina discovers my deceit, how we shall be defeated, what
e're my tongue may utter, my eyes will tell her plainly whom I love.


We women are vain enough to interpret all to our advantage, as perhaps I do
when I believe you.


To put you out of doubt, this night I will contrive your escape, and to morrow
a Priest and you may make me happy, I have sent to my Friend Marcello to be in
readiness, in hope that I might persuade you to this reasonable proposal.


Is it reasonable then to run away with a Gentleman at the second Interview?


Rather than to be ^lapt into a Nunnery before the third Interview.


'Tis fit we should try men's tempers first, and what they can bear, be coy, and
use them scurvily beforehand, for they are sure to use us so afterwards.


Our Italian Marriages are made for interest, but mine with you would be for
love, and to assure you of it, I could wish you were a Beggar.


I am like to be little better, if I marry without my Fathers consent, and
he'll not give it because his paying a good portion to me may be an objection
of the Widow against his Marriage.


Ah Madam, I would have you come all love and no money into my Arms. Our
Italian Ladies in love matters use to be so wise to consider that opportunities
are but few, think of a perpetual prison, Hair-smocks, Midnight Prayers, lying
on Matts alone, Green Sickness, and continual Chalk-eating.


These are terrible things, and you being less terrible, I cast my self upon
you.


My dear incomparable Lucinda!


None of your raptures, those are always short-lived affections, that show
themselves that way.


My love is as immortal as my soul.


As soon as I had received the honour of your Command, I did forthwith repair
with all the haste that was decent for a Florentine of that Gravity and
Education that I pretend to, to the house of Don Marcello, which I soon found
at that time did not circumscr^be its Master: the noble Pater Familias being
lately sallied forth upon some important affair, which at that particle of time
urged his absence from his own Mansion --


Thou eternal Rogue, the presence of my Mistress saves thy life.


But to proceed, departing from this Mansion almost in despair


Rogue --


Of any opportunity that might present itself of my encountering with the noble
Gentleman to whom my Embassy was then addressed --


Villain --


I applied my self to a more gentle and deliberate motion, uncertain where I
should guide my wandering steps to the attaining of my wished for end.


Most eloquent impertinence!


And though I must confess with anxiety enough duly weighing the emergency of
your occasions, yet I could not retain my self from reflecting with pity on the
erring and illiterate vulgar: who wanting the unspeakable benefit of education
and literature were little better than so many two-legged beasts wandering up
and down within the several walks of this fair Urbane Forest.


Dog, Rogue; incorrigible Rascal, there's a reward for your Damned Rhetoric.


Alas Sir, these unseemly blows do you more harm than me, in as much as they
betray your want of Philosophy.


Again Villain.


Are these the Guerdons due to eloquence, which might most justly claim its
wreaths of Laurel?


Of Laurel! wreaths of Indian Cane, which thus Sir I confer upon you.


Hold Sir, he is distracted, this is not the way to cure him, let him be bled
and dieted.


Is she barbarous too?


Madam, I ask your pardon for the rudeness his impertinence provokes me to; but
sirrah tell me what Marcello said to you or by Heaven I'll kill you.


I had indeed at last post various casus, post tor dis^rimin^ reru^, a vision of
Marcello, but he whether possessed with more important thoughts, or rather
diverted by an encounter with a Nymph, who is a person --


Well Dog, I shall not know, be gone and see my face no more.


Sir, I beg pardon for intruding thus upon you, but my Master not being able to
find out your mans meaning has sent me to know what service you would command
him.


Desire him if possible to put off his Journey into the Country to night: for
I have a business of the greatest consequence in the world to me, which will
require his assistance.


I will tell him instantly.


What a vulgar and illiterate Fellow's this!


Now Madam, with the assistance of Marcello we safely shall escape, but do you
hear Rogue, see me no more as Master.


You are always cruel to my Circumstantio, who is a man of such excellent
parts you are not worthy of him: I'll not be kind to you if you use him thus:
in the mean time my Lady desires your company to atone for that of Signior
Paulo's.


I have such a design which I will tell you of, as I'll secure you shall break
the marriage, I'll go first, do you follow.


I will Madam.


I will take every occasion by the forelock, whereby I may express my grateful
resentments and my services within the narrow Sphere of my Activity.


I must confess I love men of activity, but at the present I will conduct you
where we may in a Corner hear. Paulo's Music, and confer about our mutual
affections.


You are indeed the gayest young Gentleman of your age that I have met with.


Age, pox of age, your young washy fellows are all Jades, I am tough and will
hold out the matrimonial ^ourney: young Rogues like tender plants wither
presently, but I like a Bay tree am green and flourish all the Winter. Here's a
^ody of Iron.


And a face of brass.


Faith Widow I shall be brisk with thee, I wish thou may be able to sustain
my vigour. Hem, hem, here are lungs for thee, Hah Widow, I am in the flower of
my age, come faith let's be merry -- fa, la, la, la.

Ah how I love thee my Widow,
Ah how I love thee my dear!
Of Rivals I soon would be rid ho
If thou would but gracious appear.
Ah how I love, c.
I ^ade this my self, faith I did.


Very good, is there no more?


Ah how I love my Paulina
Ah far beyond each living thing.
Honest Paulo would make her his Queen a
If Paulo were once but ^ King.
Ah how I love, c.
Hum, ^h, what say you?


O, excellent.


Hah! What a Devil does this young Rogue here?


I am bold again to come and kiss your hands, Lovers like Ghosts, will always
haunt the place where their Treasure is.


In the time I would not speak to any man, you did seek occasions to express a
generous Passion. I was not then, nor am I now insensible of your Flame.


Hah, Flame! Who's that has a flame for my Widow? I'll burn him in his own
Flame, and make a Martyr of him. Da -- God, Young Fellow, I'll make thee smoke.


Though, he being here, 'tis no time for Discourse, Yet, I assure you, you
shall not find me ungrateful.


Do you know I pretend to this Lady? and that 'tis dangerous to be a Rival to
Paulo del Campo.


No indeed neither. Alas, old Gentleman, by those white Hairs I see you have
one foot in the Grave, and should not think of a young Lady.


Sir, I would have you know I was white at two and twenty; What can you do?
What are you good for? Hem, hem; there's Lungs boy; I'll spit with you for
Twenty pound: what can you do? can you vault or dance, Fa, la, la, la? I can.


Fie, Sir, 'tis unbecoming your Gravity to dance, you are Old, and being Wise
should be reserved, lest you should be found to be otherwise.


Old! Thou art a decrepit young Fellow; Widow, have a care of young Sparks; all
the Youth of this last Generation are but half-Gotten, born with the Rickets,
knocked in the Cradle, starved at Nurse, basely Educated, neither with Sense,
Learning, or Manners, and grow up at last to be feeble, foolish, positive,
confident, idle, debauched Fellows, full of Mercury, and empty of Brains, and
of no Use in the Dukedom.


Have a care of an old man, with whom you will have the Name of a Wife, but the
Office of a Nurse.


Wilt thou not change a young, hot-headed, crazy Wencher, for a sound, solid,
sober Husband?


One that will keep home, and Sup at home, and after Bed well-warm'd, and
wrought-Cap aired, his Posset-drink turned off, enters his Bed, coughs thrice,
and goes to sleep.


Well Jade to a Nunnery to morrow. Had not a man better be sober and civil, and
go on a Carriers pace, than make a Post-horse of a Wife?


What can those Embers, those Ashes of Love be good for?


A prudent, stayed man in years, makes a good Husband.


Witness my old Friend Ferdinand, your late Husband.


He was of middle Age; but is it fit for this young Lady to nurse up Children
with long Beards, and Infants of three Feet, to have a Deaths-head by her
instead of a Husband every night?


Dost thou hear, can thou fight, Sa, sa, sa?


Hold, that I forbid.


Heaven deliver me from an old man to my Husband, 'twould grieve me to hear him
groan all night for the Gravel, or for the Gout, wrapped in Flannel for his
Rheums and Aches, and in the morning to see my Maid sweep away six ounces of my
Husbands Lungs with a Besom.


I shall provide you Iron bars instead of a Wedding Ring, Huswife.


Nay, not that my Father is such a one, but an old Husband is good for nothing
but for a Wife to foretell change of Weather by.


Will you wrestle a Fall with me, Boy, Scoundrel?


A Humane weather-glass, a Flesh Barometer, what, take a Husband for an
Almanac, the common mark for all Influences; now Taurus hurts his neck, and
Pisces makes his feet catch cold.


Young Fellow, Hast thou paid thy Surgeon? I warrant thou art so full of
Quick-silver, that all the Gold in the Room is discoloured with the Atoms that
fly from thee. Mind him not, Widow, he's a young, silly, flashy Fellow: be
wise, Widow.


I warrant you, I'll do what's best for my self.


Nay then, I am thine own, thy hand Widow.
Young Fellow, despair and hang thy self. -- Hark,
Now my Musick's ready, Widow, pray mind my
Music, 'Tis very good Music, in troth.

Let Fools consume themselves with fruitless care,

And with fond hopes search after empty things,
But Beggars with their Love are happier far,
Than are, without it, the most mighty Kings.

Let all the World beside go pine,
And sigh, and weep, and groan,

To dismal Griefs their Breasts resign,
And with sad, sad Accents moan.

Lovers shall laugh while they shall whine.

Fools for it's self will Treasure prize,
Some dazzling Greatness blinds.

Beauty alone can charm our Eyes,
And Love delight our Minds.

Beauty alone can c.
What is the Use of Wealth or Power
By which they men subdue,
If not in order to gain more
To vanquish Women too.
If not c.
Beauty's the Sum of all Delight,
Without Love Life were vain.
The ambitious Toil, the valiant Fight,
For these, for these Kings Reign.
The Ambitious c.
They who on these fix their Desires
Go right in Natures way,
All others are but wandering Fires
That lead Mankind astray.
All others c.

Tis very fine, now let's to Supper.


Prithee send away that Puppy with a Flea in his Ear.


By no Means, he is a civil Person, Antonio, your Company too.


Civil person? a Puppy, a Flash, a Vapour, a Butterfly. Well I'll rout him.


THERE's Nectar and Ambrosia on thy Lips, enough for Men and Gods to surfeit
on.


Good lack a day! but since our Hearts are now made one, what rests but that a
Priest to morrow may make us one flesh too.


That would be Joy beyond my Oratory to express, but my Affairs being yet
tempestuous, let me take Harbour in old Paulo's Service, and then we will
consummate. Antonio with whom I lived to advise and cultivate him with some
politer Arts, being too obdurate to receive Impressions, I have discarded
utterly, I did even now insinuate this to Signior Paulo.


Let me alone, I'll do your Business with old Paulo.


The Churches Seal shall then confirm our mutual Loves, but I will perish e're
I will throw all my good Parts away on her.


While Paulo is in Discourse with his Daughter, we have some time that's free
from Interruption.


My Affections I have at large expressed already, and since the Beauteous
Creature understands me fully, I hope she will not cast away a faithful Lover.


I for my part shall never Delight in Cruelty.


Prithee my dear Widow, send this impert^nent young Fellow away, I wonder how
thou can suffer him.


Give me leave to retire a Moment, and I will give him such an Answer, as shall
make him press me further in this matter.


Do so my Dear, and let him go home and hang himself.


Sir this Gentleman who is a great Scholard, and has the most eloquent Tongue,
a Tongue tipped with Silver, has a mind to serve you.


I understand as much from himself, and in Troth I take him to be a very pretty
Fellow.


I sucked my Education and my Literature much from Imitation, and much from
Pad^a, bred with the ignorant Antonio, who never knew enough to value me; I did
--


In truth a very pretty Fellow, hast thou a Certificate from thy Master?


Behold here it is in prom^in.


These are to certify you, that Circumstantio Eloquence.


Oh foolish young Fellow! what does he hate Eloquence? I honour it, and do
receive thee as a Jewel, but can thou write as well as thou can speak?


My Stile in writing is much more neat, terse, and polite, than indeliberate
speaking can be, which you soon will find, if you please to fix on this
occasional Reflection which Meltetique Paper contains some small Diversion of
my Thoughts.


Good Faith he speaks gallantly.


Beyond mortal men!

Upon a Magpie sucking of an Hen's Egg, rare I faith, I love these pretty things
of Wit.

After the too enticing Charms of a soft and downy Repose, walking abroad one
Morning with the beauteous and excellent Clarinda, most noble Theophilus, just
as blushing Aurora had left the Bosom of the Deep, and the Sun had with infant
Beams begun to smile upon, and dally with the various Beauties of the Spring,
and had gu^lded and adorned the verdant Meads it chanced that our wandering and
indeterminate Steps conducted us into one soe^eld and bespangled with Flowers,
so beauteous and so fragrant, that we were in Doubt, whether our Sight or
^melling was ^ with Excess of Pleasure: and all the while the little innocent
Choristers of the Spring, chanted forth their pretty and melodious Caro^ls to
welcome in Clarinda and the Morning, when lo! on a sudden divinely thus the
Nymph broke Silence. Behold most noble Cunophilus, a Beauty in these Meads,
which Flora her self would blush at and be proud of, behold how Natures pretty
Wildness does exceed all the feeble Endeavours of emulous Art, when her Speech
was on the sudden interrupted by the clamorous Importunity of a pretty
chattering Animal, which by it's Colour did seem to be of the Dominican Order
among the Fowl, and was in Brief a Magpie. At first we considered whether Joy or
Anger or what Passion it might be, had surprised the chequered Fowl, and caused
its sudden Ecstasy, when lo! hard by we spied that garrulous and domestic
Bird, vulgarly called a Hen, which soon became more loud and sonorous than the
other. The Cause of which we soon perceived to be a sudden Joy it had conceived
for it's safe and happy Delivery of an oviparous Production, which no sooner
had the unopining Bird deserted; but its false and chattering Neighbour leaped
hastily on the forsaken Birth. And after making a little Fracture on the too
brittle Defence, (I mean the Shell) the gready immoral and voracious Fowl did
in a Moment absorb all the precious Liquor it contained.


Come my dear sweet Widow, have you given that foolish Fellow his Answer?


He knows what he must trust to.


Now go about your Business, the size of the Statue fits you exactly.


As it were made for me, I can conceal my self within its Hollowness.


You will turn them to Statues e're you have done.


Madam I humbly kiss your Hands, Old Gentleman your Servant.


Farewell young Coxcomb.


'Tis time now to retire, 'tis my Cozens Bed-time.


Let me but see my old-Friend's Statue first.


I'll draw the Curtain, are you ready A^tonio,


Bless me what is the Matter? The Candles burn blew, Oh Heaven I am afraid of
Spirits!


They do burn blew, what's the matter?


The Tapers shine with a sulphurious Flame, and shed a sickly and unusual
Light.


Heaven what will become of us!


I will turn the Statue, Circumstantio stand by me, art a Scholar, the Statue
stirs.


I am possessed with panick Fear.





Ah my dear Circumstantio.


Heaven defend us, what Prodigy is this.


O Lord forgive me my Sins, good Widow pray for me, have you some Holy water
to cool the Spirits Courage?


Rather ask hot water to increase your own.


Alas! we are helpless Women, you are a Man, a good old man, if you were a
young man laden with Sins, you might with Reason fear: Pray speak to it.


Paulo, Paulo, Paulo.


Speak reverend Spirit, speak whence come thou, whence art thou, and what
disturbs thy Quiet?


My Soul commanded for old Paulo's Good,
Against his Sins informs this carved Wood,
I for some years enjoyed that Woman's Bed,
And bound the lovely Living to the Dead;
For which I was to Purgatory sent,
To expiate my Crime (...) ^unishment.
But if you long for better or for worse,
You should have made a Matrimonial Nurse
Of some old Widow, who in Country Town,
From Salves and Waters has obtained Renown.
She best might fit your Cap, and spitting Sheet,
And ply the Panting Pigeons to your Feet.
She could with Skill your strengthening Plaster spread,
And by back door relieve your aching head.
Yet Heaven is better pleased if you should live
A Widower, and your Lucinda give
Into some young mans Arms, for that would be
In Virtue best for her, and l^st for thee.

Oh! I am wounded to the Heart with fear. Oh! I dissolve, I dye. Has it done
speaking?


Yes sure Sir.


I thought my old Friend and School-fellow Ferdinand would not have served me
so: What, dissuade me from taking a short Lease of his own House? but what must
be, must be.


Nay, many times it made mouths, and grinned at me, as my old Master used to do
in his Fits of the Cholick, yet I never ventured to speak of it till now.


Well, Paulina, there is a man baulk't, I had a zealous Passion for you, and,
with the Statues leave, no old man could deserve more than my self; but since a
Plenipotentiary comes to forbid the Banes, I must submit. In troth it breaks my
heart, it is a hard trial to my Flesh and Blood, I cannot forbear weeping; the
fire within makes my Heart boil over. Widow, in troth, I designed you for my
comfort, my Bosom Friend, in troth I love you, but what Heaven pleases: In
troth I did love you, and hanged you on my Heart-strings, but no more of that:
farewell, sweet Marriage, it mu^e henceforth one in a Bed, be the Weather never
so cold.


Alas, I pity this poor old Gentleman.


Well, Widow, my Heart glows still, I have not yet conquered my self, in troth
I loved you, but must love no more.


O yes, you must not deny your Charity, your Friendship and good Wishes upon
occasion, as heretofore.


Oh, Widow, remember Paulo, this has been a sad surprise to my poor loving
Soul, I shall never forget it, but farewell, I am not well, Widow, I must now
take my leave, perchance I may see you no more, this kiss shows that in troth I
loved you.


Good night to you, Sir, I hope a good sleep and the sure knowledge of the Care
Heaven has for you, may settle this disturbance, but I shall not suddenly
recover it.


Madam, It were better to let him compose himself a little in my Chamber before
he goes, Pray Sir do.


I think nothing better; or if he pleases to stay all night. (I am almost dead
with fear) Lucinda, thou shalt lye with me, and thy Father shall lye in thy
Chamber.


With all my heart, sw^et Widow, and Circumstantio, thou shalt lye with me.
Widow, in troth I loved you, in troth I did, sweet Widow.


Let's to our Chambers from this frightful place.


This is the tree, and this the appointed place
Where my dear Brother is to meet Lorenzo.
Both I would save, or dye for both; oh Love,
How much thy Torments overcome thy Sweets!
And yet nothing can be so terrible
Or full of Danger which thy Proselytes
Will not for thee encounter: I am transformed
From Woman to a man, a fearful Maid
Grows bold, and dares by the Moons sickly light
To expose her self alone. Here comes
One this way, sure it is he, my Sex returns,
And I am fearful. How this will end, Heaven knows.

This is the time when Death and my Revenge
Shall have their Sacrifice. Were it my Fate,
As I believe it cannot be, to fall
Under Marcello's Sword, I'd bleed contentedly,
Doing my best to vindicate my Fame,
And Death is better far than withering Honour.
The oppressed Indian did not more abhor
The place where Spaniards were, than I this Earth
Where vile Marcello triumphs. Who art thou?
I did expect to meet another man.
Does cowardly Marcello send you to beg his Life?

He scorns the thought of it: he'll be just to his word.
'Twas I that wrote the Note to change the time,
Being one of his House, I came to speak with thee.

Being one of his House, I am come luckily.
To kill thee.
I came with as much joy to meet my Enemy
As Bridegrooms go to bed. Rash youth,
This great Disparity will make me blush.
Nature has not made thee for fight, but rather
Has shaped thee for my Ladies Page; but yet since
His base Blood runs in thy Veins, I'll let it out.

First, let us parley and perhaps you'll find
Not so much cause as you imagine.

Death! Parley with my Sword in my hand,
And with one of Marcello's cursed Race.
Draw. --

I will not draw, till you have heard me speak.

I'll make thee draw. Take that young Fool,
For daring to provoke me thus with trifling,
And when thou fight I'll give thee more
For being of that hated Family.

No. Thou hast done enough to one who was before so deeply wounded. Heaven
preserve Lorenzo.


What do I hear? the Youth did bless me sure
Just as he fainted, the small Wound torments me,
And Gratitude returns it on my self.
I'll chafe his Temples to recover him,
Nothing but Fear has made this Agony.
Oh Heaven and Earth, forgive me! 'tis a Woman.
Hah! my unknown Mistress! wretched, damned Lorenzo,
Thou art cursed to all Eternity.
Earth swallow me, and let me be forgot.
She's gone, she's gone: Was ever Mortal yet
So cursed as I? feel a Hell within me,
And all the Furies are raging there; O Speak,
My Saint, my Goddess, speak, look up, Is there
No help of Mercy?

Lorenzo censure not my Modesty,
'Twas Love to you; and care of good Marcello
That brought me hither, this Wound was kindly given,
There is no other Cure for those my Breast
Received from you before: for I could never
Have enjoyed Lorenzo.

What Riddle's this?
She faints again, Oh dearest Creature stay,
One Moment stay, the pen^tent (...)
Will wait upon there.

Oh! no but if you can
Forgive and love one of Marcello's House,
Let me conjure you by my dying Words,
To love Marcello for my Sake.

She's gone again, Oh Guardian Angel stay,
And hasten not away your lovely Charge
In Flesh as much Angelic as thy self.
Is there no Hopes, weep Oh ye Heavens, and give
Water to sprinckle on her Face, weep thou
Wretched Lorenzo, but thy Tears are hot
Like thy accursed Rage. There is hard by
A Sovereign Fountain famous for it's Cures,
I'll run and fetch some of it's Water.

This sure is the fatal place of Assignation,
Where the two furious Combatants will meet,
Where I like the renowned Sabin Woman,
With Cries, disheveled Hair, and Floods of Tears
Will strive to close their mortal Enmity.
Hard by there dwells an honest Country-man
Whom I have gained to give me safe Retreat,
And rest for some few Hours, if Sleep can bind
The Sense where so much weighty Care doth dwell.
Oh blessed Inhabitants of Cottages!
Oh that I had been born some rural Girl,
To have fed my Fathers Flocks with cheerful Thoughts
As impolluted as the Crystal Streams!
There if some Flame had warmed my tender Heart
With good Assurance I might own my Pain.

Oh! Oh! Oh!

Speak, what art thou? For I can ask no more.

Help who ere thou art, alas I am robbed,
And wounded in this Wood.

How robbed? Heaven how I quake!

Yes worthy Sir, in Charity
Convey me hence or else I faint again.

How my Limbs tremble, I scarce have Strength
Enough to help you. Hard by my Chariot stands,
I will convey you to a safe Retreat.

Thanks noble Sir.
Savage Lorenzo could thou wound me, and
Then leave me, I'll never see the more.

Come lean on me.

With too much Hast I missed my Way, and stayed
Too long, so much has my Misfortune
Confounded all my Faculties, Oh my Saint
Go not without me, hah, what is she gone?
I left her here: she's dead, and Angels have
Conveyed away her sacred Corps, too good
For Worms to feed on, or has Heaven suffered
This lovely Creature to recover Life
Without my Help, who did commit this Crime?
Oh cursed Wretch damned beyond Repentance!
Art thou awake, doest thou behold these Trees?
Or dost thou see the bright Moons silver Beams?
Oh hide thy Face, for thou should be eclipsed
In Horror of this Sin.
If Fables feign man for ill Nature
Derived from fiery Flints and stubborn Rocks,
From what hard Metaphor shall fancy draw
Parents fit for Lorenzo: what Floods, what Seas
Can cleanse these bloody hands: if she be
On Earth I'll find her out, if in the other
World I'll follow her, but Ah! alas, I ne'er shall see
That happy Place: this Sin will weigh me down.

This is the place Albricio, where my Friend Anto^io appointed us to be.


I wonder Sir he is not yet come.


The time seems fit for our Adventure, the Moon is civil, and is just gone
down. Who is there?


Your Friend Antonio.


Well my dear Friend, let's on, and good Luck to our Enterprise.


I am ashamed of engaging my best Friend in any thing of this Hazard, but I had
none whom so entirely I could trust as you.


You honour me with your Confidence, but injure me, if you think I can value
Danger, where my Friend is concerned: he that will not embrace the Perils
Friendship draws upon it, ought never to enjoy the Pleasures it brings with it.


I know you are a generous Friend, and


Fear not, 'tis a noble Cause.


Servants stand under the House, while Lucinda's, this is a Quality I never
knew: now for my Sign.


I hear the Sign, lie by my Lute.


Lucinda where art thou? Foolish Girl,
Go to Bed -- ha, there is some Body in the House,
Nuarcha rise -- ring the Bell, Thieves, Thieves.

I have set my Cabinet of Jewels here in the Hall, I'll take that and away.


Lucinda, where's Lucinda?


Oh ill Fortune! the house is alarmed, they are coming towards us, the Attempt
without doing the thing would undo me.


Let's away, we are strong enough to defend the Attempt and Action too.


No, they will raise the Town, when they miss me, my Father is in the House
too, stand you here let your Friend secure the Door. Mind what I do, and be
ready for your Cue. They come.


Thieves, Thieves, search every Hole.


Oh Madam have a Care whither you go; I was singing and playing upon my Lute, I
broke a String and came down for my string-Box which I had left in a lower
Room, and there I met the Ghost of your former Husband, Seignior Ferdinand, I
cried out, sounded with the Fright, and your Coming has revived me: For
Heavens sake to your Chamber, Madam give me the Candle, Oh it burns blew again.


Paulo, Paulo, Paulo,


Ah Heaven bless us.


Now dear Antonio your hand,
Oh Misfortune, another Light.

What may these Disorders portend!


Where are these Thieves, Rogues, I'll cut them off in the middle.


Paulo, Paulo, Paulo.


Ah, Ah, Benedicite.


Paulo, Paulo, Paulo.


Lights there, Lights.


Thou must thy amorous Passion quite forgo;
Or suffer dire avenging Flames below.

Oh, Oh, ever honoured Ghost, I have done with my Love, I do not care for thy
Widow now, I can't abide her, a Pox on her for me, I hate her mortally, I
prithee let me rest, the Devil take her for me.


Now all to bed, quiet repose to ta^e,
No more shall you b'affrighted for my sake.

Now Antonio slip away.


A thousand blessings on thy Wit and Beauty.


Go on boldly, I'll make good the Rear carry her to my house, my Sister shall
wait on her


How much I am indebted, worthy Sir,
To you, in this my great extremity!
My Heart with thanks conceives, and bears me witness
That I shall always pay my gratitude.
Could I but know the kind Author of these
Favours, and hope to be esteemed his Friend.

Sir, I shall endeavour to promote our
Lucky Friendship and mutual knowledge,
After you have reposed some time.

Oh Sir!
It is in vain for me to wish for rest
This night, or indeed for ever: but I hope
Providence in mercy designs few days
For one whom it decreed unfortunate;
The morning Sun will tell me whether Life
Be worth my Care.

Alas, I pity you
For I feel grief to make me sensible.
I would resemblance might allay our pain;
For I as little value Life as you.
My Fortune likewise in this World depends
Upon good Omens, when the Sun shall rise.

Your Virtue cannot fail of good success
To crown the goodness you have showed to me,
But I shall beg of Heaven to keep you free
From my dire Circumstance, howsoe're
My Lot falls out, may yours (resembling you)
Be kind and fair.

Still I deplore you more,
Our Fates appear so parallel, yet here
I vow, for your so^' ^houghts and tender wishes,
A Friendship firm as Destiny, since you
Please to ask it, with fervent zeal to serve
A Friend, which cannot wrong that Sacred name.

Dear Sir, You make me long for Life, and love
My grief, because in that alone I must
Pretend to equal you, blessed be this Grove
Where first we meet, blessed be this silent Night
Where we two Friends contracted Friendship first.
These few happy Minutes shall be an Age
To me, and when cold Death (perhaps to Night)
Shall shut my Eyes, I may with Reason say,
This close of Life, has fully recompensed
It's sad Beginning, and in Confidence
Of our true Friendship, I will tell my Friend
The great Secret of my Soul, who I am,
And why I hither came.

You will excel.
As you deserve, and teach me what I ought
To do, begin my Friend, and whilst you make
Your sad Relation, I will sigh for you,
And you shall do the same for me.

Dear Friend
You may remember when you saw me first
I told you that I was robbed and wounded
And so I was: but 'twas by Love. My Heart
Was stolen and wounded, by such a Thief
Whose Charms are irresistible, let not
My following Words stagger our Friendship,
I am a Woman.

Still may your Words add
Fresh Delight, and so am I; no less robbed
And wounded than your self: but what
Occasion drew my Friend this way to Night?

I cannot speak for Joy, I came to save
The Life of one I prize above the World,
And he loves me as much, you may know him
When I call him Marcello.

Oh my Death!
What do I hear? Iulia thou art lost
^r ever!

What says my Friend?

Only remembering what sad Accidents
Lovers undergo.

'Tis most true. This Marcello
Has promised to morrow morning to fight
His deadly Enemy, called Lorenzo,
And in that fatal place where you found me;
To quench their Hate in Blood, my Death would be
A pleasure to save their Lives, to morrow
I am resolved to meet them there, Dear Friend,
Will you be there and help me?

'Tis too true,
My new Friend is turned my Rival, and such
A Rival, whose great merits, my small worth
Dares not pretend to balance. Now I am
Truly wretched, bound in my Soul to love
My Death, and bless my Executioner.

Friend, you do not mind me, you seem disturbed,
Are you not well?

Never so ill before.

Forbid it, gentle Heaven, where lies your grief?

A murdering pain at your last words surprised
My Vitals: 'tis impossible for me
To last out long. Now pointed Tortures shoot
Through every part, oh! give me some relief,
For you are she must help me.

Oh, teach me
But the means, and I will dye to serve you.

I only beg of you to give your Friend
Some Physic, the best for my Distemper,
I have it here about me.

Blessed Fortune!
Come give it me, by all that's good I will
Most faithfully apply it.

Here, kill me
This is my Cure, remember your promise,
Start not, it must be so,
If you love your self or me: By my Death
You shall remove your Rival, and confirm
Your Monarchy in Love. Oh! that I had
Never seen your Face, or else had never
Heard your Story. My Fever makes me mad,
Pray let me blood.

Perdition seize me first --
Oh, my pernicious Fate! put up your Sword.
Can you not love me still?

Yes, after Death.

And not in Life. Why do you talk of Death?
There is no danger in your Love, 'tis I
Am lost: Yet I could still love you.

Farewell.
You break your Oath, and are no more my Friend;
You love to keep me on the Rack: be gone --
And give me not new Torments by your stay.
When the Day dawns, expect me at the Tree
Where both must die, because you killed not me.

Hurried with rage, she will not hear me speak,
Oh, that my hated Life might sooner end,
To ease my pains, and cure my pensive Friend.
For what good Omens can attend my love,
Since Friendship does so unsuccessful prove?

I Lately saw my Friend Antonio
Made happy in the Marriage of his
Dear Lucinda, which by comparison
Discovers what a Wretch I am: condemned
To pains and fatal Errors; till Death shall free
Me, or my Enemy. And in this Wood
I must expect him and the Sun together.
These Summer days are good Types of Man's Life,
For the most part through Heat insufferable,
T^ Morning and the Evening best for Use
And Pleasure, but yet how short! whilst Manhood
Like Mid-day-hours, too much ferments our blood,
And gives long Fevers from our eager Passions.

O stay, O stay!

Who is this that invokes
My pity? a most lovely Youth! sleeping
And yet disturbed; sure he is full of Grief:
For in his ugly Dream he sighs and weeps

O, Why has sleep
Forsook me! Why could it not last for ever?
Sleep had compassion on me, and by Dreams
Deluded all my Sorrows. My fair Rival
Just now was very kind, she smiled and seemed
To give me Joy, I sighed and cried, because
She fled before she told me how.

By Heaven the Voice of my fair unknown Mistress,
It hath performed Lorenzo's will, and pierced
My heart: each syllable did stab
And burn me in the passage.

'Tis now the break of Day, a fatal Morning!
But I will sing my Troubles to these Woods.
'Tis too severe, ye Powers, that Love,
The Noblest Object of the Mind,
Should now so fatal be,
That the sole pleasure of Mankind,
And the chief Joy of those above,
Should be a Curse to me.
Why should the spiteful Stars contrive
That in such Torments I should live?
That I should love the Man that must hate me,
And still pursue impossibility.
Ah, fatal Love! like other fire,
Thy Heat to Objects does impart
Most different Effects,
Whilst thou dost melt thy soft desire,
Thou harden'st my Marcello's heart,
Till he my Love neglects.
Thy Godhead I with Faith have served,
And have not this from thee deserved
Yet, though to me his heart no love can give,
He still might let me in Lorenzo live.

Sure my Mistress then is Sister to Lorenzo.

Alas! who is there? who are you?

Madam, it is your Creature.

Who are you? you frighted me.

O hear
With Patience, and forgive my crime, I am
Marcello, your Foe Marcello, guilty
Of Death, yet begging Life.

'Tis he, blessed Heavens!
It proved a happy fright -- Rise Marcello,
And let Lorenzo's Sister kneel to you:
Can you forgive my Brother's daring rage?
And hide some Crimes for head-strong Nature's sake,
Some, for a wretched Sister, some for one
That loves you; Pardon this bold confession
From her that became bold to save you both.

Oh Balsom to my wounds! by Providence
That brought me hither, my Love, my Dear, my Soul.
'Tis you have saved my Life and Fortunes, You
Can bring eternal Quiet to my Mind.
By Heaven I value Life only for you,
And love you far above it.
Consider Sir before you speak, I am
Lorenzo's Sister.

And I'll be for ever
Lorenzo's Friend, I can no more fight with him
Than with my Father, were he now alive.
^'ll meet him unarmed and catch him with Arms
Of Friendship, sure he cannot hurt the breast
Which you blessed Image guards.

The time draws near
Which proves my Happiness, and your Virtue.
^arcello how can your appear so cruel
With false Hope to deceive a harmless Maid?
You'll find a much more potent Guard to save you,
My charming Rival, she expects you there,
She will preserve you safe from Injury.

Oh! Madam be not cruel in mistrusting me,

Nothing in Nature is so wild, but grows
Gentle before her, and lays down it's Fierceness
At her feet, nay she makes me love her, who
Have most Cause to hate her, and when I had
Her in my Power, I had no Power to hurt her.

This is wondrous strange! by all my present
And my future Hopes, I understand you not.
My Breast now feels its Virgin-Flames, which ne'er
Can be extinguished.

Time gives us leave to talk no more, but bids me
To the fatal place, where I soon shall meet
You, but I charge you if you love me now,
Do not pursue me too close.

When you command I will obey even Ruin.
Now by my strange Captivity I prove
My former Sins against the Power of Love:
In sharpest Tortures without Hopes to gain
Through so much Doubt, an end of so much Pain.

Now Widow 'tis clear, what is become of my most undutiful Baggage, and yours
too, if Heaven and the Statue had so pleased. It seems your Skip-Jack Antonio
was about the House, for he was seen by your Coachman as he thinks, to go out
of the Door in her Company.


'Tis very strange, and it vexes me no less than it does you, what should be
the meaning of it? But if Antonio is concerned in it, without Doubt
Circumstantio and the Officers may discover them.


The Meaning of it is plain now upon second Thoughts, but if your civil Antonio
be concerned in it, cannot you guess that no young Wench runs out at Midnight
with a young Fellow, but she has a mind to eat Flesh with the Fryers Leave? I
pray God it proves no worse. I ever told you Widow, that these young Fellows
were never without their Rogues Tricks.


He has raised a strong Jealousy in my Head, which I never thought of before.


Well Mistress Nuarcha what News of my Daughter? have the Officers and
Circumstantio discovered where she may be?


Sir, Circumstantio is just returned to give us an Account, Having been all
night about it.


Well good Circumstantio let me beg of thee to be as brief as thou can, what
is become of my confounded Daughter?


Ah Sir exerce Patientiam, for my Relation do^ require it above Mode and
Figure.


I know it will, but prithee at this time be very plain.


What Sir, shall it be said that Circumstantio speaks without Embroidery.


Ah! Good Circumstantio oblige me so far, as to tell me if you have found her,
and in whose company.


Well, Madam, If I must do violence to my self and Rhetoric, and take a
sorrowful farewell for some time of my familiar Tropes, it shall be the less
injurious to my Reputation, since 'tis in obedience to the Commands of so
hyperbolick a Lady, to whom my depositions bear a particular respect.


I charge you to tell forthwith what you can say of my Daughter, where she is,
and what is become of the Off-Officers, upon the penalty of a Quarters Wages;
dost hear Fellow? though I love Eloquence very well, yet now 'tis very
unnecessary in these Circumstances.


Ah, gentle Sir! May Heaven forgive the rashness of your Expression: what, can
Eloquence be unnecessary? but to imitate some well-designing Poet, I shall
begin in the middle of my Story, and declare the former part in some succeeding
Narrative.


Pox on you, you will distract me, what is become of my Daughter?


Gentle Madam and ungentle Sir, to come to the so much desired Proposition.
Your Daughter I declare categorically is no more Lucinda, she is changed, she
is altered, she is metamorphosied.


How! What dost thou mean thou man of Ambiguity? How changed?


Yes reverend Sir, she is changed, there is a Transmutation, or rather a
Transcorporation.


Into what, good Circumstantio?


Yes, yes, do you think this Ghost came for nothing?


But prithee, young Fellow, explain thy self.


What Mortal, endued with natural prescience could have had prospect of this
most affecting alteration in the beginning, or a part ante as the School-men
sweetly phrase it. O most occult Antonio, I must confess I never did rightly
conceive thy Antoneity.


He names Antonio and makes me almost mad with Fear.


Prithee Fellow do not distract me, at your Peril.


Good honey Circumstantio, discover your meaning for Love's sake.


Forbear your Arms of Concupiscence, Pace vestra dixisse liceat, there is a
Change, Lucinda is changed, Antonio is changed. Proh Deum atque hominum fidem!


Dost thou hear Fellow, God I will not suffer thee longer.


Ah prithee dear Bird save thy Nuarcha's Longing.


Why then Quaeso animos Advertite, they are neither He nor She, but both from
henceforth, by the Application of a Fryer, Antonio and Lucinda are fastened
together about the Middle, and here they are.


Sir in all Duty I desire your Blessing.


And I beg your Blessing on us both.


O most false of Mankind!


What do you mean you impudent Runagate, what Change is this?


Sir it is for better for worse. This Gentleman is my Husband, I am glad with
all my Heart that he has rescued me from a Nunnery, which terrified me as much
as the Ghost did you.


Out upon thee, thou incontinent profane Baggage, what think of Marriage in
that very Moment, when the dead declaimed against it?


Yes Sir they dissuaded you, but I thank them I found good Friends in
Purgatory, and took the first Opportunity to obey their Counsel.


How dare thou look me in the Face, thou base perfidious man?


Madam, I blush, I must confess after my Falsehood to behold your Face, but my
violent Love to Lucinda (since by no other Means I could approach her) forced
me to it.


Was I a fit Property? must I be thus abused?


You might have perceived the Love I seemed to make to you was all the while
addressed to her: pardon the Extravagance of my Love, for next to my Lucinda,
there's not one on Earth I have more Honour for, and if all the Service of my
Life can but atone my Crime with you, I then shall dye contented.


Think not false Wretch I'll honour thee so much as to be angry, I cast thee
from my Heart and Memory, and spoil thy Triumph, O thou base Companion of my
Solitude, and Partner of my Secrets false Lucinda.


Widow I thank thee for being so angry in my Concern, it shows thou love me,
Pox on the Ghost I say, what gone on a sudden -- come hither you young Fellow,
that will be my Son whither I will or no? How durst you marry my Daughter -- ha
-- well sauce Box since you have her, and I can't take her from you, here take
her, -- but do you mark me, As her Mother gave her me -- naked -- without a
penny of Portion, since your Stomach is so good, you shall eat your Meat for me
without any Sauce, in troth --


Sir, I am contented.


I hope Sir, you will give me a Wedding Dinner.


Yes, perhaps I may give you a Wedding Dinner, since you have rid me of so much
trouble in finding another Keeper. Ah! what a happy man had I been if the Ghost
of old impertinent Ferdinand had not been giving Advice to night, freed of my
skittish Daughter, and in an hopeful way for my Widow, but the Will of Heaven
be done.


A right Godly old Gentleman!


Well, I will pluck up my old courage, and give consolation to the disturbed
Widow.


Madam, Heaven bless this happy change to you; indeed you have surprised us
very much.


I thank you, good Nuarcha. I hope your change will come suddenly.


When the accomplished Circumstantio pleases.


Sir, Injuriarum remedium est oblivio. May Hymen and Venus look propitiously
upon you, and confer upon you Infinity --


Thanks, good Circumstantio, no more Speeches to night, I beseech you. Come,
dear Lady and Mistress, your hand.


Here, dear Lord and Master, with my Heart to boot.


How my Heart beats, and calls up my Passions,
My Hope, my Fear, my Love, my Jealousy.

You are here before me --

I am here to serve you, and to assure you
I am that Friend I once pretended, and
Am here to give you to the hand of him
I love, and beg one favour for so rich
^.

Ah, my charming Sophister!
You know your Beauties strength, and so would put
The Prize upon too unequal Combat.
I in this Cause can fight, and boldly dye.
Injurious Rival, draw thy Sword, and free
Me or thy self from Jealousy and pain.

A^, ^adam, why do you unsheathe your Sword,
When Life (...) ^eath depend upon your Eyes?

O (...) Marcello, there you mean these words;
On those Eyes Life and Death depend -- oh, turn
A way, and look not on her, for that face
Will make you fals^, if you be not already!

Sure I should know that Face -- Camilla,

Even she,
Who changed her Habit to preserve Marcello.

Camilla, How I love thee for this Action!


Marcello, Can you so soon
Deride your Vows and me?

Mistake m^ not.
My happiness, when you know her to be
My virtuous Sister, you will love with me.

Ten thousand Blessings on that name, it gives
Me Heaven on Earth. O pardon me, my Friend!
O pardon fierce Lorenzo's unknown Sister,
And place her in the state from whence she fell.

O Joys which Angels fell! O blessed Brother!
By such an unexpounded Miracle,
I could hold my dearest Friend for ever
In my Arm^, ^ (with Reason)
Would not chide.

I will thus embrace you both,
And with these two impenetrable Shields
Will meet Lore^zo.

Such unexpected Joy must hurt
Like Grief.

The Sun ne'er shined on such a Wret^h as me,
My Mistress wounded, nay, for ought I know
Killed by this hand, and the sweet Body lost.
My Strength decays, and Life feels Winter in
My chilly Veins: a Child would now disarm me.
How d^ I meet Marcello at this time?
How does his Genius baffle mine?
Weary of Life and sick of my few Minutes?
I needs must bow beneath his just Revenge.

See Lorenzo approaches, but he does seem
To have more of Sorrow than of Anger in him.

What do my wretched Eyes behold?
My Mistress in Marcello's Arms?
Giving my Foe by Looks, and hand her Heart.
O stabbing Object! placed there to complete
My Sorrows. Now it is time to dye, but not
Without Marcello's Company. That Sigh
Boils up my Blood within me, and swells my Rage
Like a swift Torrent beyond Banks and Bounds,
I will speak and turn him to an Eunuch.
Marcello view this Sword, whose Sight may chill
Thy hot Desire, what can thou think of Love
In Death, how dar's^ thou touch that Beauty
Which only I must worship?
Draw short lived Wretch and try thy feeble Right.

O Dear Lorenzo pacify your Wrath
Towards Marcello for his Sister Sake,
Who loves you and came here to tell you so,
Camilla will not rise nor let you go,
Unless you promise Peace.

Of dear Brother,
Imitate my tender Mothers Mildness
And be not altogether the Picture
Of my furious Father: For Iulia's Sake
Whom you have often said you dearly loved,
Proffer and take Marcell^s Amity,
For he loves me, and I love him as much.

Speak gently, and do not kill your Lover,

O calm your Breast, and then you'll give us Comfort.

I am amazed at this surprising Sight!
And this strange Riddle of Happiness! it is
My lovely Mistress, with my much loved Sister,
But how these Impossibilities should meet
My mind cannot unfold! O Providence!
How dark are all thy ways? And yet how kind?
Doubling all Favours by their great Surprise.
O! rise good Angels both, and pardon this
Forgetfulness. Such Wonder takes away
My Sense, alas forbear your Fears, the Storm
Within my Breast is now laid on a sudden,
My Soul is altered, or a new one given,
O let me go, ye Glories of your Sex
Who have atoned the Sins, all Women kind
As ever yet committed. Forgive my Faults
Marcello, for my beloved Sisters sake,
I embrace you with the same Zeal as Friends
Meet after Storms and Battles, O Marcello
Wipe away past Records, and take your Friend
Regenerated.

Brother Lorenzo
Let me plead in your words: Remember not
Marcello as he was, but as he is.
And when you think of him, at the same time
Think of his happy Sister good Camilla.

Yes happy indeed in such kind Brothers,
This place though we must leave it now, deserves
It's Consecration, and should be yearly
Visited. But now how shall we get home,
For the bright day recalls my Sex to mind?

I brought a Coach last Night with me to serve
One of you, who for his Wounds might use it.

Still you deserve more thanks, it may bring
Us to my Cousin Paulina's where both may change
Their Habits.

Well mentioned, and as we go
Explain our Stories, and their strange Success.

Beauteous Camilla, can thou pardon one
So barbarous, so inhumane as I was?
To wound my Mistress, Oh, this cursed Arm!
But, had I known my Saint, I sooner would
Have torn my Heart out. On my knees I beg
Your Mercy, the Damned have not suffered worse pains
Than all this night have wracked my tortured Breast.

Rise, dear Lorenzo, it was but a scratch by a mistake,
I know it.

I went to fetch some Water from your Fountain,
And I had lost you: then my Pangs --

No more, this happy Agreement has healed all,
And every one had a worse wound than this.

In Nature as in Form thou art an Angel.
All Griefs and Enmities far hence remove,
And let us consecrate the rest of Life to Love.

My dear and constant Circumstantio, I am glad I have met you.


Why? what Novel, or Business of importance do you bring?


The greatest of my Life; I have been seeking of you all over the House, being
stirred up by the good and happy Example of Lucinda, and your late Master
Antonio, to confirm my happiness, and I shall endeavour to make it yours by the
mouth of a Priest, this sweet inviting Morning.


'Tis a very ill juncture for so weighty an Affair. Abi -- suspend te.


Well, Delight of my Eyes, I admire you, though I understand you not; but
dearest Dear, what do you mean by this?


Mrs. Nuarc^a, you are a Person upon whom I design to bestow --


A thousand Blessings on my most lovely Love --


Forbear, I say, and cool this amorous Flame. To be short, and to affect
Laconic brevi^y, Mrs. Nuarcha, as I was saying, you a Person that I am
forbidden to marry.


Oh! where shall a poor Maid find Fidelity, if Circumstantio prove unfaithful?


Hear me, I say, and with pri^ked up Ear attend to my Ratiocination.


I will hear nothing but Marriage. O unfortunate Maid, to place confidence in
man!


Cease your objurgatory Language. For, Heac commemoratio, quasi exprobratio
est; I have a great Respect for you; but for several reasons am much deterred
from Marriage. Ask the performance of any Command rather than this Entreaty of
necessitous Conjunction Copulative.


I will ask nothing but Marriage --

Put a Bridle I say upon your immoderate desire.
Here comes your Lady with other Company.

Well, Widow, I am glad to hear your Noble Resolution, not to concern your
self with Mankind, and I rest pretty well satisfied, that since I could not
have you, that no Body else shall. Widow, I believe it is for my sake -- Ha,
-- Widow! yet we might comfort one another by the by, the Ghost did not forbid
that.


It's a very hard thing to find your Constancy without your Years, I believe
Sir; and therefore I bid Marriage farewell.


Yes, yes, and so will I take my leave of Marriage, 'tis time for me, in ^roth
W^ddow: but I shall always take delight to visit you now and then, Widow, and
take a caper or two in your Parlour -- Ha, Widow, -- that, I presume, my old
Friend Ferdinand will admit of.


You take a prudent course, Sir, I shall follow your Example, be Mistress of my
self; free from the Treachery of any Governor.


Widow, in troth I rejoice at this bravery of Spirit, and in token of it I
jump for joy.


Antonio, Your Widow bears her loss of you with great indifference.


You see, Lucinda, how small your prize is.


I value it the more because I shall possess you absolutely without fear of a
Rival.


Well, This new Son of mine, Antonio, puts me in mind of my self, when I was at
his Years, I had my tricks then as well as the best of them. I was once in the
mind to have stolen that Baggages Mother just so from her Father's House, when
he made a dispute with me about Articles. Since the Widows Resolution has thus
pleased me, my good nature returns; I will forgive him. Come hither, Antonio.
--


Sir, Your pleasure.


Sirrah, you are a Wag, a very Wag, I believe, but I forgive you. Come hither,
Hussy, -- you are a Wag too, so there's Wag for Wag -- Get you together in Gods
Name; and remember, Antonio, when thou make me a Grand-father, I will settle
a good Estate upon the little Raseal.


S^, I will deserve your Favours by my Industry.


Well, you are a Wag in truth.


Oh, Madam, I bring you the strangest News, be^yond belief. Your Co^en
Marcello, and Lorenzo, with two other young Gentlemen, are coming up.


How^


'Tis impossible!


I hope Cousin Paulina, that you will easily excuse me for this early Trouble,
when I have told you it's Occasion, and the solid Happiness that is befallen me
and my Family; These two in men's Clothes, are the perpetual Ornaments of your
Sex, this is Iulia my adored Mistress, Sister to my beloved Friend Lorenzo;
this is my Sister Camilla most happy in her Lorenzo's Love.


This Surprise is as welcome as 'tis wonderful, and does no less astonish us
than the strong Accidents that have happened to us on our side last night; but
in Civility I should refer my asking Questions to our better Leisure, and at
present wish nothing but continual Joy to my Cousins.


Oh! Cousin I am this Morning the happiest Woman in the World, who was last
Night the most unfortunate.


And give me Leave to be your Sister even in both Extremities of good and bad
Fortune.


May Heaven continue every day like this.


Marcello you amaze your glad Friend with the Strangeness of your Story, who
most rejoices that Heaven rewarded you so soon with Love, for assisting him in
his.


I succeeded the better in being any way serviceable to you and your Lucinda,
pray know the worthy Lorenzo.


Lorenzo shall always command my Life, since he calls Marcello Brother.


After the name of Lorenzo's Brother, I cannot find any more pleasing than that
of Friend to Antonio.


The Learned observe that the mind of man in great Passions of Joy and Grief
cannot curiously attend the El^quence of Speaking. Ergo, I will defer my
complemental Entertainment, till I have woven my Thoughts into an Epithalamium.


In Troth this Sight is almost as strange as our Apparition to night, and
silences me almost as much. The Devil take the Ghost for me, that all should
speed in the Flesh but I and the Widow. Well, what must be, must be. Yet I am
heartily pleased for two Reasons, first, to see these old Quarrels between two
good Families so handsomely ended. And then that my Son in Law carries himself
so prettily amongst 'em. In Troth I find he is a pretty Fellow, and in Troth
you are all pretty Fellows, and may you all live to be as lusty as I am, at my
years -- Hem -- There's your Lungs in Troth.


Antonio you have a merry Father in Law, but Cousin Paulina, let me beg you to
assist our Mistresses in changing of their Habits as soon as you can, and let
me beg the same Favour of Lucinda.


Marcello has laid such an Obligation upon me, that I can never deny him any
thing.


I would most willingly see dear Camilla in a Woman's Dress, for in this she
still seems to upbraid my last Nights Inhumanity.


Well Gentleman you shall be forthwith obliged whilst my Cousin's in Recompense
shall relate us their Stories.


Thanks good Paulina, and in the mean time Antonio and we will explain to one
another what has happened.

For in such Happiness 'tis new Delight,
To tell the Joys of this successful Night.

OH! How severe is our poor Poets Fate!
Who in this barren Trade begins so late.
True Wit's no longer currant, 'tis cried down,
And all your half-wits into knavery grown.
Those who once loved the Stage, are now in years,
And leave good Poets for dull Pamphleteers;
Nay, for the worst of Rascals, Libellers.
In none of these will the young Sparks delight,
They never read, and scorn all those that write.
They only come the Boxes to survey,
Laugh, roar, and bawl, but never hear the Play.
In Monkey's tricks they pass the time away,
At least, the Poet hopes, th've done to day.
The Graver sort, he's sure, have so much Sense,
That they'll ne'er damn him for his first Offence.
He may take warning, and fling off this Itch,
That does poor Poets Hearts so much bewitch,
And, in a duller way, drudge and grow rich.
Ye have no hardened Malefactor here;
He ne'er before did at this Bar appear.
If he should suffer, the first time he's in,
'Twere hard, as for a Girl, fresh, at six^een,
To meet, at the first Venture, the mishap
To lose her Maidenhead, and get a Clap.

