I've been to invite our Friends at Epsom hither,
But fear we must expect but* few this weather.
Here for a triple scarcity we pine,
Of Wits, of Beaux, and what's yet worse, of Coin.
Lord! what a Crowd I met upon the Road!
Tried Virgins, going to lay down their Load,
Squires, Bullies, Rakes, and Fops, in jolting Coaches stowed.
Sharpers like Captains; Lawyers Clerks, like Beaux,
And freckled Country-Wives, in new old fashioned Cloths.
New Married Fools, with hollow* Eye and Cheek,
Going to see their Uncle for a Week,
And battered Sinners that have sprung a Leak.
Kind Cuckolds, to see Spouse's Brat at Nurse,
And College Quacks, to purge the Body and the Purse.
Fat Priests, who Coach it while lean Curates drudge,
And their Parishioners on Foot must trudge.
Setters, and Brothers of the Oak and Dice,
And Masks new plastered, Cullies to entice.
Cits, who s^opt Payment, to take Country-houses;
Some, slyty riding with each others Spouses:
For, Sparks so scarce this time of Action grow,
Cits must even Cuckold one another now.
Even Prentices, on Hacknies themselves priding,
Now Whip and Spur to run out Cash are riding:
Then fairly run-away for fear of Chiding.
I fancy, none but those will stay in Town
Who, like us here, want Money to go down.
Let's see! shall we have Charges at this Play?
Faith that's more than some had at their Third-day.
We must Prorogue the House, should this not take,
In Pity then pray spare it for our sake.
A young Play-writer, when we act his first,
Without Damnation here enough is Cursed.
Oh! he has then a most Poetic Face,
And looks* stay, let me see -- just like an Ass;
Nay, what you'll scarce believe, a Poet prays.
Then the next minute, with a frightful mean*
Vds bloody Bones he cries, they spoil this Scene.
If you seem dull, like him, he's mighty sick,
Cut off a Line, you cut him to the quick.
At the least hiss you'd swear his Soul were fled,
But a round Clap can raise him from the Dead:
He's Cock-a-hoop, and scarce can talk to you,
E'gad he cries, I knew the Play would do.
But if another hiss his Ears but reaches,
Down sinks at once his heart into his Breeches.
Yet scorns our Writer threatening Foes to fear;
The generous Britons will a Stranger spare:
Thus low the Frenchman bows -- then learns of you to dare.
His Satire bites but like a Lovers kiss,
And none of you, he's sure, can tak't a miss.

SLaves to London, I'll deceive you.

E'gad I've as good a voice as most Composers! Prithee sing it me once more,
that I may have it right.


Slaves to London, I'll deceive you;
For the Country now I leave you.
Who can bear, and not b^mad
Win^ so dear, and yet so bad?
Such a noise, an Air so smoky,
That to stun ye, This to choke ye,
Men so selfish false and rude,
Nymphs so young, and yet so lewd?
If we play, we're sure of losing;
If we love, our Doom we're choosing.
At the Playhouse tedious sport,
Cant in City, Cringe at Court,
Dirt in streets, and dirty Bullies,
Jolting Coaches, Whores and Cullies,
Knaves and Coxcombs every where.
Who that's wise would tarry here?
Quiet harmless Country Pleasure*
Shall at home engross my Leisure.
Farewell, London, I'll repair
To my native Country Air:
I leave all thy Plagues* behind me --
But at home my wife will find me?
O^yee Gods! 'Tis ten times worse!
London is a milder Curse.

Mad Sam Gaymood!


Covent-Garden Railmore come to ease his Spleen in Hertfor^shire!


What, my thoughtless merry talking old acquaintance, come to eke out a scanty
Income with elemosinary Maintenance at an Elder Brothers!


Even so, by Mercury; and I think 'twas high-time to go after my Credit, when
my Credit was gone after my last Quarter. Faith I wisely tick'd for the Coach
down, resolved the Padders should get no more by Sam, than they would by a cast
P^et, when he steals into the Country after his Damnation in Town.


Sure thou might have borrowed of thy acquaintance?


Of any body sooner I fancy. Why, thou know my Conversation is amongst the
Wits, and they commonly have too little Money or too much Wit to lend a Brother
any thing. Toast me, if I durst so much as ask my man to do it, for fear the
Rogue who has formerly carried a Wit's Cloak should ask me Security for his
Wages.


Faith I'm come to be your neighbour much for the same Cause; I mean, to
recruit, and Dun Tenants, that I may be Dunned less my self; for I am not like
most of our fine Sparks, that are ashamed of Dunning, but not at all of being
Dunned.


Prithee, old Wormwood, when did you leave the Town?


Two days ago, and hearing this morning, my Lord Lovewel would be here to day,
I came to see him; but I found him so deep engaged with your eldest Niece,
that, after a moments converse, I even left him.


To come to me: ay, he courts her with my Brothers encouragement, but she's so
reserved, and he so observant that I dare* lay my* modesty to *thy good* Nature
(which is no very great Wager*) that you cared as little for their Company as
they for yours.


Or any body for thine, when there's any other to be got.


That's like thee! mere Spleen and Envy, Jack, because my Tinsel out-shines thy
Lead. Why, there's your Idol* Tom Airy, who's come to pass the Summer near us,
and is now yonder with my Cousins; he's a pretty smart Fellow, we own it; but,
if you'll be judged by our Country Sparks, he shines no more when I am by than
some slovenly Wit by your glittering Queens of the Stage.


Why, the little Wit he has is his own, Sam; but thine is as false as their
Jewels, and as borrowed as what they speak on the Stage.


Like thee again! 'Tis well thou know I ne'er take any thing ill from my
Friend -- Oh here comes my Brother!


Mr. Rail^! I longed to have you at my House: Come* let's go take another*
Glass or two of Hock before Dinner!


No more till then, Sir Thomas.


Why, my neighbour Sir Topewel Clown^sh and Squire Ilbred who'll be here after
Dinner would have made you T^psy before they'd have granted you in Truce.


Ay, they are sonder here of knocking down a Friend, than some of our
Bea^-Compainers of knocking down an Enemy.


A very honourable way of sighting in time of War.


Ay, or in time of Peace either. First, they ply you by Break of Day with a
Bumper of Cherry-Brandy to heal you; next two Bumpers of Stingo to to warm you;
then as much Mead or Cider* to cool you: Stale-Beer and Sugar for Breakfast; a
Flood of bad Port for Dinner; an Ocean of worse Punch, for Supper; and a dose
of raw Brandy to settle you: Much smoking, and more drinking; little Eating,
and less talking; unless I'm there, e'gad, scarce any thing comes out of their
mouths but Smoke.


But pray what News at London? I should want such a friend as you to send down
the News; for your News-mongers are such Liars!


Why, truly, in the land of the Wise, they say little; and write less: News is
as partially spread as Religions; so, I'm as careless about it as the credulous
Crowd, or you Country Gentlemen are inquisit^v^.


Yet you may tell one how things go in the City? I hate it as a smoky Kitchen,
but yet good thing^ come out of it sometimes, tho 'tis bad living in 't.


Why, the the City stands where it did; and that's a wonder to the Godly! But
the Sub^rbs are like to overtake you in Hertfordshire: As for the Citizens they
follow their own way, I think.


As how, Pray?


Why, they cheat, to build Alms-houses; break, to get Estates; rail at
Courtiers, yet trust 'em, load Ships, for the Privateers; take Prentices, to
learn 'em nothing: Get Money by venturing to lose that of other Folks; take
Wives for other Folks, and have Children that are other Folks's. They wear
Swords, but n^r draw 'em: The Court-end of the Town Extravaganue is getting
into the City, and the City Trade^ to ^he Court-end of the Town: They play at
the Game of Stock jobbing at the old Exchange, and play away their Money, and
their health near the New; Pray for Wealth, but damn themselves to get it;
spend little, to leave much; turn Insurers when they've nothing to lose; and
Gentlemen when there's nothing to get; lower the price of Goods to make it
rise; have store of Bank-Bills, and the Banks, store of empty Chests.


Pray tell us something of the Court? you've been a Courtier, and they say, the
best way to have a good malicious account of it, is to ask one that has been
turned out.


Why, there they are plagued with impertinent Suitors, but plague 'em worse
with disappointments. Lords sell-off, and Stewards Purchase; just as Officers
set up their Coaches, and you Country Gentlemen lay 'em down: Preferments are
plenty, but Money scarce: Acquaintances elbow one another out without
Conscience, smile without joy, embrace without Friendship, flatter without
Moderation, promise without Reflection, and break their Words without
Consequence. Beggars grow Courtiers, and Courtiers Beggars.


Why, that's no news man; begging was the Courtiers Trade from the Beginning.


But how do thy drink at London now; for there are modes for drinking as well
as for other things?


Oh I'll tell you that better than he; first, your Politicians drink Coffee;
Wits, Beaux and Women, warm Tea, and some of 'em. cold: We Rakes, drink Red,
and then Small-beer; Bawds, Snapdragons; Whores what they can get, but Mead and
Rhenish and Sugar to choose; Stewards the best Champain, and their Masters the
worst, Merchants smuggl'd Claret; Wenchers Chocolate, and sometimes Dyetdrink.


And what do Black-Coats drink?


Oh any thing, any thing.


I see our two Lovers moving this way, I would avoid 'em, and find out Airy,
and the other Ladies.


My Cousin Single, with her Sister Kitty, and my Daughter Christina are that
way with him.


It's a wonder my Lady Single would steal any time from her Books she loves so
much, to walk with any of our Sex, she loves so little.


Why, truly there's so little good Society, that Books are often the best
Company. It seems the falsness of our Sex has frighted her into an aversion to
Marriage as much as the Infidelity of Women has deterred me from that fatal
Noose; but it grieves me to hear, she impairs her health and good humour by too
much reading. I'll strive to persuade her at least not to hate us all, that she
may converse with some, and so help me to rail at the rest of mankind.


Ah Francelia! should your modesty make you doubt your Power of reconciling
Libertines to Truth, sure you've too much Charity, not to believe, but some of
these may become Converts to constant Love at last.


At last indeed, and very few I doubt. Some who roved in their youth may do at
and become constant, but 'tis as most sinners repent, when they grow old, my
Lord.


Oh! believe me one of those Few that could repent betimes; I sought in others
what I've found in you, and have only known their Falseness to prize your worth
the more.


I must confess I wish I could believe you, tho yet I think you mean not to
deceive me: But in Love's disease* as in others, sometimes Libertines seem
converted, and make vows, which they then intend to ^ep* but commonly forfeit
as soon as they are eased.


Even Gratitude alone can secure you a heart, but you have Charms to ^ix a
Rover, tho he should want that Virtue.


Alas! my Lord, Love is a sickle Passion, but Beauty is a transitory Charm, and
Gratitude a weak chargeable Virtue, which Men shake off, or wilfulfully forget.
No, since we must think of throwing away many Favours before we can expect to
place one well, I dare not run the venture.


I swear by all --


Oh do not swear, my Lord; a Lover's Oaths like Confessions on the Rack, are
still recanted, when the Pang is over. If you'll accept my friendship, 'tis
your own* But name not Love, I tremble at the word.


Why, Friendship is Love refined! Ah! Madam --


Come, we'll walk on, my Lord: I dare not grant you more; and if you prize that
Friendship, ask no more: Oh name not Love, I tremble at the word.


Yonder they're walking!


And will be these four hours if you'll let 'em: He, only to say, I'll love
eternally; and she, I'll never love -- Both true alike.


I wonder Lovers are never ti^'d of each others company.


No wonder at all, Cousin; they always speak of themselves.


As you love to read all day, many love to hunt all day, my Lady Single; now
Love they say is a kind of Chase.


A Wild*goose Chase.


And the Woman the Goose, when 'tis caught the Game is ended. Ay, 'tis well to
keep you men at a distance; Forms in Love, like Mysteries in Religion, make
Reason truckle, but advance your Zeal.


Asses, they say, run the faster under a Load. For my part, I am like the
Fireship that scorns to burn, till sure to kindle Flames in something worth
burning for.


So that like most of ours you're in no great danger of burning; for the Enemy
is not more afraid of *em than Women are afraid of Wits, or ^ond of Beaux.


Beaux! Why, we hear nothing so much railed at now as those tame Animals! Pray,
what do you properly call a Beau, Mr. Airy?


A Beau is --


Stay, let me tell that -- Why, a Beau is a kind of a two-legged thing, that
talks, and walks, and dances, and sings, and dresses, and looks like something
between a Man and a Woman, that seldom keeps a secret better than the latter,
and strives to outdo 'em in taking care of the outside, conscious there's
little within. It rises to go to Bed, is two hours at the Toilette a dressing,
dispatching of Duns, and spoiling gilt paper to dispatch it as Billets Doux,
sometimes to its sweet self, and all day making Love to its dear Carcass and
sweeter Cloths.


Ay, but there are o^her sorts of Beaux?


Oh, yes; now Beau is every thing: there's your Town, Court, Camp, Sea, Church,
and Country Beau. Sometimes Beau is Mr. Smerk with his diminutive Band and
powdered Bob: sometimes Dash a Lawyers Clerk, that pomatum's his Face, washes
it with Milk and Water, and is two hours turning up his hair at night, that it
may sit in Curls the next morning. There are dirty Beaux, and Beau Footmen too,
and old Beaux in abundance! Nay, now a Man's a Beau if he has but a clean
Handkerchief.


Methinks 'tis time the Name were abdicated.


The Name may be laid down, but the thing will continue, as long as Women's
Inclinations continue the same.


Nay, if you begin with us, I must put in for the honour of our Sex.


Which is just like the honour of ours, and that's so little I'm ashamed to
tell you.


Come, those Wits ought to be fooled who make their Addresses to Fools; how
fine 'tis to see one of you follow some foolish Celia like her Shadow, and go
even to St. James's or St. Ann's, for a single look cross a Pew; pelt her with
Billets Doux commonly stolen, Nonsensical, or Romantic, write dull Madrigals on
her, and get 'em sung to duller Tunes at your weekly interviews in
Yorkbuildings; and lose his rest for her, while Miss Celia all the while either
sleeps or laughs at him.


Ten to one but he has his turn to laugh at her: Look you, Madam, one half of
the world first banters the other, then one half of the world lies with the
other, and at last one half of the world laughs at the other.


Therefore I would not have our Sex trust the other.


Not so fast Cousin; I believe of you and Mr. Railmore as I do of both Sexes.


What's that, dear Christina?


Why, the one is in the wrong, and the other is not in the right.


Ay, Madam, were the world such as they would both be thought, a married pair
would be as great a rarity as --


A self-denying Priest, or a couple that never repented after the Honey Moon.


Have a care, Sir; all people marry at one time or other.


Ay, Sir, and repent it at one time or other; look you, when two marry, both
part with their Freedom to each other, yet neither of them gets it.


There I agree with you: For my part a Husband's Inconstancy and Ingratitude
are no less my aversion than a Wife's lazy subject way of living. I could not
waste half my time at my Glass, and the rest on Children, Nurses, and mean
household affairs; and on a Drunkard, a Gamester, a Debauchee, a jealous
Coxcomb, or an ill-natured Blockhead, who would look on me only as a means to
mend his Fortune, or an Obstacle to his Pleasures.


Nor would I become a property for the sake of a little Dross or fancied
Charms, which like a Will in the Wisp vanish when they've deluded us into a Pit
whence there's no getting out; then the seeming Angel proves a real Devil,
neglects her self for her Fool, and adorns her self only for others.


Oh, say no more; were not you Men to be caught by mere outside as well as we,
we should seldom take such care about it, and were you not so blind when
caught, we would not be so careless before you afterwards. But let's talk of
something else. What if we should sit down yonder.


With all my heart.


This is young Frankly's little Mistress: I've a mind to try how she bears my
Friend's absence -- Stay dear pretty creature, I must call you to an accoun^


O Lord, Sir! for what?


Why? for making me love you whether I will or no; such an Air, such Eyes, such
blooming Beauty, will make more Men run mad than Poetry, Plotting, or
Phanaticism.


Nay, as I hope to be saved, Sir, I can't help it. Would you have my Eyes put
out?


Thy Eyes! why, Child, I had rather the Sun were put out. Oh I would still gaze
on those dear damned bewitching Eyes, and hear that sweet pretty prattling
Tongue.


O Law! the Man's mad indeed! -- Yet methinks I like this kind of Madness
mightily.


Why, don't I tell you you'^l make the whole Nation a Bedlam, if 't^s not one
already -- Nay, you must not go yet.


Why, Sir, you own you are mad, and I should be mad too should I stay with you
-- Let me go.


Oh mine's a Madness that will hurt none but my self, dear Creature; come, you
must stay, you can never have an opportunity to appear fully beautiful but
alone with a Man that loves you.


If you love me, why don't you let me go? Yet methinks I could stay to grow
handsomer.


I won't let you go, because I love you. Why, you are grown infinitely more
charming in an instant.


Ah! why must we dissemble. Methinks 'tis a pretty innocent thing to be talked
so to!

Well* Sir, tho they tell me I'm too young to be courted, I'm old enough to
know I'm flattered.


Were you before your Glass you'd find it truth: but a Kiss or two will make
you incomparable. Dear lovely Sweetness.


Oh; no, no, no, no; no kissing at all.


Bless me! he's kissing the Girl, and she refuses it as faintly as if she
desired he should do more! Kitty, is this what I taught you? 'S death, Sir, you
ought to pay dear for this presumption.


Why, Sister, the Gentleman is a very civil Gentleman; he only tried to make me
handsomer.


I think he has done it indeed; he has put a colour in your face. O my word you
shall go into a Nunnery speedily.


Ay, Madam, so she should; for she'll be the Torment of both Sexes if she is
not locked up.


Why, Mr. Airy, I did not think you would have taken so much pains with a Girl,
while so many Women would have thanked you for the Office?


Truly, Madam, Girls have often more Wit than Women, they seldom refuse what
they like. And then while you have Mr. Railmore with you, who is a Master in
that Profession, why should you grudge your Sister those innocent Improvements
which you deny your self.


He a Master in that Art! he's too surly to have any Scholars.


And your Ladyship too scornful to be taught. But I suppose 'tis because your
Charms admit of no increase, Madam.


Oh, your Servant, Sir; no more of this, I pray; I would have my Sister, like
me, shun such dangerous Instructions.

Love is a Foe by Flight alone subdued;
So Daphne gained the Laurel when pursued:
The God was fired, and owned and urged his Flame;
The Virgin blushed, and fled, and overcame.

HEre, take away! Nay, Girls, what need you rise? I've a Dance and some Music
for the Company.


How is't, old Boy? how fares it with thy body? hale and lusty, full of juice,
full of gravy, hah?


Sir Topewel Clownish! Adad stand off* or I'll beat thee* a Peasecods on thy
Shoulder of Mutton Fist; why did not you come to dine with me, old Suckface? I
have the rarest Hock now! Many a German Prince gets drunk with worse; and as
for Red stuff, here's* that would make a divided County vote one and all, by
old England! here's to you, old Sot!


Thank you Brother: Look you, Mum^s the word. I'll tell you what 'tis in the
twinkling of a Bumper. Here, John, John, do you fill me yonder Beer Glass, only
for a Taste, John.


Squire Illbred, I'm glad to see you; you're welcome!


The like to you, Sir Thomas! Odsme, I shall ne'er be able to break my mind to
my Mistress: my Heart beats like any Mill-clapper; 'tis even sinking into my
Breeches, e' saith.


Cousin, don't hang on Arse: Odsooks, show your head, Man, and go buss the
Women, if thou ^ou'dst.

But hold, here's to thee: Do nothing rashly, as the saying is, soft and fair,
as Lawyers go to heaven, drink first.


Mistress Frances, your Health: Sir Thomas here's towards you.


Sir Topewel, thou right worshipful Bumpkin, thou glorious Phiz painter, thou
walking Cellar of March Beer, and Terror of Sippers and Flinchers, egad I'm as
glad to see thee sober in this House, as thou art to see a stranger drunk at
thine.


Thank you, Squire Prate-apace.


Egad, old Tough-hide, I'm come to have to other bout with you.


Why, I've only made some, stay, let me see, ay, ay -- No, ay, some ninety nine
as drunk as Cuckolds (I mean as Londoners) since I knocked thee down, and
you're come just time enough to make up the hundred.


I've a couple of Seconds here, you old Toast, they'll stand by me.


Ay, and full by thee too, before I've done with 'em. I don't know 'em: I never
know a man till I've drunk with him -- Odsooks I had even forgot bussing.
Cozen, follow; methinks I'm a dancing the New Vagaries.


Fie, Sir Topewel, since you Men kiss one another like Children, to kiss Women
grows out of fashion at London.


Then it's a sign 'tis in fashion in the Country. Odsooks, I had rather kiss a
Hog's Snout than slabber a bristly fellow who makes a Hen's Breech at you with
his Chaps. I'll warrant, that's outlandish.


The Booby kisses like a Nurse; here's a Smack as loud as that of a Carriers
Whip


A Dewse take you and your Dutch Buss! Were you to kiss thus at London, 'twould
cost some Women half their outward face.


Foh! you stink of Wine.


Odsooks, you young Sucker, you proud Titbit of Flesh for your Children, does
Wine stink? give me my Buss again. Bir, bir, bir.


I'll owe it you, I'll owe it you.


I've a coming stomach to Kisses, e' faith! By y'r leave, Miss.


By yours, Master!


Thank you; but what's that for, tho?


Why, that's for you: My Lips are bespoke, but my hand's at your service; do you
want another?


No, you young Light-skirts, I have too much by one -- Go, munch Oatmeal!
What's the Girl afraid of? a Horse Buss? Why, the Parson's Daughters, nay the
Justice's Wife, let me smack 'em again and again, and welcome; and there's our
Susa^ saith, I've a breath like a Cow's 'tis so sweet -- Well, if the Mistress
won't the Maid shall* e'faith.


He's in the right on it; when we can't get into the Town we must even take up
in the Suburbs.


Now you shall hear a Song set by my Daughter's Music-master.


FRom Aberdeen to Edenbrough
I trudged it with my Bearn,
And thence to London Town did go,
News of my Love to learn.
And now the bonny Lad is come
To Royal Willy here,
So I'se even gang contented home*
Sin I have got my dear, c.
Pray, how does your Lordship like the composing?


I like it extremely, Madam.


Oh! is that a Lord!


Like it! Why, there's not a word of drinking in it. Odsooks one merry Drinking
Catch is worth a hundred on it; as, Oh the little House that lies under the
Hill! Thrilo, lilo, lilo, lilo, liloh!


Well, here's something will fit you to a Hair.


Should I not lead a happy Life*
Were but my Bottle like my Wife!
My Bottle empties when I swill,
But my Wife swells up when we bill.
Would (when I drink) my Bottle fill,
And (when I kiss) my Wife not swell,
All would be well:
I would so bill,
So fill, so swill,
That daily gaily I would spend my Life,
Sucking, filling,
Hugging, billing,
My merry Bottle and my Wife.

STill at your Pot,
You drunken Sot?
You till I come
Will ne'er go home;
And when you're there,
You curse and swear;
Then prove a Bed
A lump of Lead.

D' you think, you Scold,
I'll be controlled?
No more be said:
Or at your Head,
As I'm a Sot,
Souse flies the Pot!
But first, I think,
I'll save the Drink.

Hold, leave a sup,
Don't drink all up.

Here, taste and know
Why I'll not go.

How sweet! oh how it cheers my heart!
O dear! methinks I suck my Mother.
Here's t'you, my Love! have to other Quart,
And then --

-- What then?


-- And then another.

Come, now we're Friends, and all is right.

Drink, drink all day:

-- -- -- But love at night.

Drink, drink all day, but love at night.



Now this is something like a Tanzy: here Friends, there's a couple of
Shillings for you to drink.


Sir Topewel, you affront 'em, and us too; they never sing under a couple of
Guineas.


Well then, if they'll come to Clownish-hall they shall be drunk for a month
together -- Here, John, do thou take up the Shillings, and then fill me to
other Brimmer, you old Cuckold!


Why, this is treating indeed; let the Ladies but be kind, and there will be
Chere Entiere.


Pshau, my little H^tspur, the whole kind will be kind, if we are not too kind.
They are like Fruits, Man; if they're dear even thank your impatience, you
might have enough else for little or nothing in due season; there's plenty and
they won't keep; when the Pears are ripe, do


Why, I only say, that's old; thou steal Trash out of Books, as impudently
as Boys do out of Orchards; nay, the worst on it is, that like other Thieves
thou spoil'st what thou steal, lest thy Roguery be found out.


Pshau, pshau, a mere Poetic License, by Mercury. The God of Wit is the God of
Thieves too. Why, Man, every body steals: the Country Levite steals Sermons,
nay the very Invectives he uses against stealing: the younger Brother with his
pious Dad's abetting steals a Fortune, the Hypocrite steals a good Name, the
common Soldier steals Hens and Geese, the Commander Towns and Countries, and
both, like the cozening Citt, call that Getting. The busy ignorant steals a
Preferment, and the sly Cuckold-maker steals your Wife.


And thou thy Speeches.


I deny the major: I pay for the Books out of which I take 'em, ha, ha, ha!


We'll take a Walk in your Gardens, Sir Thomas.


What are they all a going? A Pox of these peticoated Implements; they spoil
Company worse than Business, Politics, or Religion. Well, I'll be with you; but
first let's smoke a Pipe.


These seem clever fellows, Squire? hark you, can they drink?


Just as you talk, Knight.


How's that?


Why, so, so; you only talk to promote drinking, and they only drink to promote
talking -- Where are they now? They could not say that's stolen! Mercury.


What say thou, hah?


Nothing, nothing, I was only thinking of some of you Country Squires.


Odsooks one Country Fellow of Threescore is worth threescore of your
spindle-shankt washy finical Town-whipsters, with scarce a Penny in their
Pockets, or any Pith in their Backs, but the Devil and all of Maggots in their
Noddles, and of C^ent-garden Gout in their Bones.


Can they --


Brother, not ^ord against the Country. You Town Changelings ar^ ^ froward
Children; you're always biting your Nurse: Can you live without the Country?


Well said, e' faith. Now look you, Neighbor, here's no body too much: You see
my Cousin Illbred* Is he not a elever sort of a body, for an elder Brother?
Here's a Man now! I'll warrant him as sound Wind and Limb as any he of his
inches: Odsheart, he'll wear well and live long!


Not live, but last long* e' gad, one would swear he were commending his Horse
to pack it off to some Fool at a Fair.


He hunts, hawks, or whistles, about his ground three hours in a morning, feeds
like a Plough-jobber, and drinks like a Tinker: As silly as he stands he made
14 Lawyers drunk last Assizes.


You've a rare Pupil of him.


In short you have him as true bred a Countryman as my Worship, and wanting
nothing but a Wife, by the Pleasure of Drinking: nor shall he want that long,
if my Neighbor here is willing to be rid of his eldest Daughter; for that's
what we come about.


My Daughter Francelia! There are more words than one to a Bargain, Sir
Topewel, my Friend.


An you be not willing to get rid of that Cattle, you're the only Man of your
mind in seven Counties. Why, they are mere Rubbish, Father Dry-boots, we must
pay those that take 'em away.


Ay, marry, but every Man shall not be the Scavenger. What, I must bestow my Jewel
upon a Fool, an Idiot, a Booby, a senseless Clown?


Odsbobs, I shall have her, I'll lay five pounds to a Nut Cracker he means me,
for every body calls me so.

Thank you, Father-in-law that's to be.


Adad, Sir, you had best keep your Thanks till you have her.


Hark you, Neighbor, Mum's the word. I guess where the Shoo wrings; you grudge
to untie your Pursestrings to him, you old Micher; now we want none of your
Muck.


Humh! I may save a Portion!


Did I not tell you, you old Hunks, that my Cousin wants nothing but a Wife?
See how he sniggers at it! how arch the young Whoreson looks! Whee, Man! he's
not the Fool you may take him for.


No more I an't: I'm none of your raking, scraping, sneaking Fools, although I
may'nt say so much where I an't acquainted.


Can he be a Fool with three thousand a year, besides eighteen hundred more
which shall be his -- When they can no longer be mine.


He's a Wit, he's a Wit; I'll bring 18 Dedicating Poets will draw their Pens to
vouch it to the last drop of their Ink, by Mercury: But if that won't do, how
d' you think I'll make him a Wit?


What you'll beggar him, or you'll --


No, stay, I'll tell you my self. First, he shall read half a score Plays, that
is, if he can read: then I'll teach him to make Rebus's, Quibbles,
Semiquibbles, Quarterquibbles, Conundrums, Carwitchets, Longinquopetits,
Clinches, Puns --


Heigh day! what's all this?


Do you know what's Cross Purposes, or Questions and Commands.


Yes.


Why Puns, Carwitchets, coetera, are not at all like that -- But they are all
the wit in fashion, and as easily learned as Fornication; your very Country
Parsons are as capable of it as any Men.


I'm sure that must needs be easy then: Susan, Sister's Chambermaid, might
teach one that in a quarter of an hour.


Then he shall go to every new Play* and when he hears a good sharp Kiss, he
shall lug out of his Pocket the Terror of Scribblers, that is, a Musical
Instrument called a Catcall.


A Catcall!


Ay, a Catcall egad; with a touch of this* I'll blow you a poor Devil off the
Stage in a trice, after he has been a whole year drudging on a Farce.


Ods my heart, I fancy I could do this my self.


Look you, he's half a Critic already.


Ay, ay, all in good time: but to the point. What say you Sir Thomas?


I must confess you bid fair, but I have given my Lord Lovewell leave to court
her; and then, who knows whether she may fancy the Squire?


I'm sure she'll soon like him, he's so good natured a Lad* he has a Lord's
Estate, and prithee what's a Title? why, you can no more know some young Lords
now from Citizens Heirs, than most of us from Graziers; then they're somewhat
apt to outrun the Constable they say.


But my Lord's none of those, and loves her well.


Ay, now perhaps: but hark you me, when did you hear of a Lord that loved his
Wife six weeks together? Here, John; where's John? Come Sweet-heart


Well, you have my leave, Mr. Illbred* and I'll do what I can to prevail with
my Daughter. I fancy you had best send her a Letter, and come an hour or two
after.


So he shall; we're a going to Mother H^mp's, he shall write it there, and send
it anon --. Here, Hussy, fill as you love me; fill as 'twere for thy self, and
no body by: Odsooks, fill it full! What's the Brim made for else?

Well, Sir Thomas, God be with you.


God by t'you, Sir Thomas! My Love to your Daughter! I long mightily to he in
with her. Thank you for your good Company.


I'll see you out, and then I'll go look for her?


And I for Railmore, to tell him what hopeful Bargain's a* driving to put my
Lord's N^ out of jo^*nt* then heigh for a juicy Country Lass! I'm for easy work
^ga^; and I ^ancy she that waited now might do; she's somewhat raw that's the
truth on it: but we're in the Country, where a kind Wench is as scarce as a
^ound one in Coventgarden: she may mend there like others ^or^ly of no higher
rank.

Some, not ^ar off, as ill became their Cl^ths,

Who now set up for Settlement and B^a^x.


OH! here's the Game! what a buxom Bona Roba she'll make! Well, I may safely
venture I hope; yet I have heard of a Town Spark who made a Token of his
Kindness go round a whole Country Parish. My young Master peppered the
Dairy-maid, the Dairymaid peppered the Groom, the Groom peppered the
Chamber-maid, the Chamber-maid peppered his Worship, his Worship peppered my
Lady, my Lady peppered the Parson, and the Parson's Wife peppered my young
Master again! And what a circulation of blood was there! Spanish Wool could
make Women red now a days! what's thy Name, my Dear?


Frances Pinngown, Sir.


How long hast thou lived here, Child?


But two days, Sir: I came upon liking, and am to go to morrow. I found they
were turning me away, so I was resolved I would not stay.


Gad those that don't like thee must be more difficult than I.


There's a deal of Linen to be washed, and I an't si^ for that work.


Hark you, come and live with me, do; I've work you're sit for; then there
will be but little washing, for I wear a ^hirt a fortnight.


Maids must not live with single Gentlemen, Sir.


Pshau, pshau, that's a mistake, Child. Come, if thou can but make a Bed
I'll teach thee to unmake it: A days thou shalt be my Maid, but my Mistress a
nights, according to the laudable Custom of City VVidowers and Bachelors.


Oh! sye, Sir!


Come and live with me, I say, thou'lt live like a little Queen.


No indeed, Sir, I dare not; I have learnt to know better things: then who'd be
so foolish do you think, as to hearken to one whom his elder Brother talks of
marrying out of hand?


Why, Child, he may talk on it, but I mind him as little as most Daughters do
their Mothers: but suppose I should marry 'twill be the better for thee; for
I'll no sooner have fingered my VVise's Portion, but I furnish thee stately
Lodgings in some creditable House, at least a Churchwarden's or a Head
Constable's; keep thee a Footman and a gilt Chariot, and make thee outshine a
Lord's public Mistress, or a Bankers private Friend.


Let me go Sir -- You must not -- let me alone* I can't do as you'd have me --
Pish! You shall never make a Harlot of me. Oh fie, Sir! some body sees you.


What need you care? you are not to stay.


Not with you if I would prosper.


Fool! what way have Chambermaids to prosper but that?


Come* Girls, now I have thee aside, let me ask thee a question; what think
thou of a Husband, hah?


As most VVome do, Sir.


Which is as good as to say thou always think of it, hah?


I mean, Sir, I think 'tis dangerous venturing on one


Ay, and more dangerous being without one. Why* 'tis as bad as having arable
Land lye ^allow -- In short I have agreed to marry thee speedily.


Sir, there needs no haste; I'm not weary of my condition.


But thy Father's weary of seeing thee so long courted tho; besides I fancy a
Husband is a kind of a pretty play thing for a Child of thy size, heh!


My Lord has spoke to him I find.

You are resolved, Sir, to put me to the Blush.


So, she smiles, I think. Adad, these women can as little hide their Joy before
Marriage, as we our Sorrow afterwards -- Well, silence gives consent. It must
and shall be so.


I must like what you like, Sir; and would even sacrifice my inclinations to
your pleasure.


You're my good Girl! Well, I have settled matters to my mind, and thou shalt
be a Bride to morrow.


'Tis very sudden, Sir, but you're absolute.


Look you, you'll have a Letter from him just now; and he'll come and pay you a
Visit an hour after. 'Tis Squire Illbred: Oh he'll make a rare Husband!


Illbred! my mistake has undone me.


Prithee what makes thee look so oddly of a sudden?


I am thinking, Sir, that Marriage brings many cares.


Prithee, what cares can Wives have, while their Husbands live, unless it be
how to cuckold them? C^e leave this dissembling.


But indeed, Sir, I do not dissemble.


Humh! Now I understand you: You don't mislike Marriage, Mistress, but the Man
you should marry.


I must confess, I fear I should live unhappy with such a Man: I'm afraid he is
a Fool.


What then? will he make ever the worse Husband?


A mere Clown!


Prithee, who but Clowns love their Wives now a days? -- Look you, don't
provoke me: you know my hu^our that's enough: as for my Lord, as he came, so
let him go; he wants Money, now the Squire wants none. Come along, come along.


What pity 'tis I wa'n't bred a Sc^olard! I fancies I'd have made as good a Man
as our Parson* I had not forgot one word of my Message: I'll say it now as if
Meester's Sweet-heart was by* Illbred remembers his kind Love to you, and has
sent you a Letter.


Od^nig^* here's my Jade Doll that I loved so once, till she took out John the
Thresher to dance! I'd as leive have met a mad Cow in a narrow Lane.


What d' you want hah?


I don't want you, goody Trollop, I want to come at you^ betters.


Marry, come up, Looby! I'll know why you come creeping like a Dog under a door
for all your haste? You come at my betters? I think you're before your betters
now.


Come, help me to thy Dame's Speech and thee w^d*st; then go thy ways to John
the Thresher, like a so^y hollow hearted dirty Slut as thee art.


I care n't an he were hanged, and you too.


What does this fellow want?


An't please you, forsooth; an't please you, my Meester -- I don't know what I
say or do; I've quite and clean forgot my Errand -- I have a Letter forsooth I
forgot my self, or Meester forgot his self -- I'm come away without it -- No,
stay, I took it of the Parson. I'll look again. Marry* I lost it -- No, marry,
but I have not -- Ay, marry, I have -- No marry but I have not -- Here 'tis; Thomas's
handsomest Daughter, forsooth.


We seldom think others handsomer than our selves -- Let see -- 'Tis for my
Sister; but dear Curiosity, Woman's favourite Vice, cannot be withstood -- I'll
open it -- heigh day! what stuffs this? o'th my word the Parson's unlawful
Issue tho the Booby Squire fathers it.


An you'll send an answer by me, forsooth* I'll deliver it safe to Meester (I
can deliver a Message passing well, you see) Else he bade me tell you, he'll
come for*t anon, he's somewhat busy at present.


Where is he?


Why, if you must know, ^orsooth, I left him hard at it, smoking hi^ Pipe
yonder at Mother Humps.


Nay* then he's busy indeed; stay, I'll bring you an answer presently.


Well, and what business had you to stand and state in a body's face, and put a
body out? I ^e're was half so shamed in my born days, not I.


What did you cast a Sheep's Eye at me for?


Because I was a Fool I think. Of my Conscience you're nothing in the varsal
world but mischief: But if e're I set Eyes on thee again while I have breath to
draw, may the Crows come and peck 'em out!


And so say I: Goodb'y t'ye.


What dost look at me so for?


What do you look on me for?


What dost thou cry for? Oh* 'tis a peerless Jade!


Oh that I should live to be used thus!


Why did you serve me so then with that sneaking Whelp John the Thresher, who's
no more to compare d' you see (though I say it, that should not say it) than a
Hog's to a Bullock* -- You know I would have broken Silver with you once, but
that the plaguy Collectors had not left one broad Shilling in the County.


I only took him out to try thee, Humphrey.


I'll be hanged then, and my Horse too.


Nay, prithee don't pout, Humphrey; don't spoil that sweet face of thine: if I
e're do so again, may In be churning and churning all days of my Life, and
Butter ne'er come.


Ay, marry, hang you; I'll trust you no further than I can hurl you.


Don't be dumpish, Humphrey, I'll dance with you now; we've Minstrels hard by.


Not I, even dance with somebody else, and thou would.


Well then I will, Humphrey; any thing to please poor Humphrey Doddipole.


Oh that John the Thresher sticks plaguily in my ^izzard still.


Oh brave Doll. Hoydon! That wag of the Butto^k has won my heart.


Be quiet!


I find every body has his own little private business in this world!


I will, forsooth: This is a lucky day. Ods me, I warrant this good News will
renew Father's Lease for nothing.


Mr. Railmore, just now this thing* in the shape of a Letter, was sent by my
Lord's new Rival, the Squire you saw here. I was taken for my Sister, and as
the hates him, and I have a respect for your Friend, I sent a short drolling
answer, in her Name, as kind as a Billet Doux writ by a Town Beau to himself.


I hope he'll make it as public, be as little believed and worse used: Look
you, Madam, you do well; 'tis your interest to disappoint the Squire; for,
after all, were my Lord dismissed, I guess you must stay for a Husband as long as
she'll be te^z'd with such Fools. Be generous then as all the world is, and be
thanked for obliging your self; but you must do more.


What's to be done?


Write two or three Lines as from your Sister to my Lord, as it were to assure
him, that tho she weds the Squire she'll favour his Lordship ne'er the less.
I'll take c^e the Uncle and the Nephew shall see it instantly. I've already set
some other Engines at work?


But what if my Sister hears of this? I'm sure she'll not only disown it
utterly; but will hardly forgive my Lord.


He must know nothing of it himself, till it has taken* Effect* then we'll
easily reconcile 'em, if she hears on it, and, like other Women, seems angry for
being pleased.

None can a Good, th^ got by Tricks, disdain,
When others reap the Blame, and she the Gain.

I had not had an Opporunity to ask you, Why you're so Melancholy, Madam? I love
you better than any Body, so nothing could please me more than to see you
cheerful.


Thank you, good Fanny, but you can't make me so.


You may be mistaken, Madam; come, do but discover the Cause of your Sadness to
me, and if I don't serve you effectually, may I never deserve a Lady's good
Opinion!


What would you have me say? I protest I don't know why I'm so*


Oh! that's a Jest; but we Maids are so bashful! Come, I fancy, your Secret
will out the more kindly, if I ask you a few Questions. Are you not in Love?
Nay, I my self would be one of the first to laugh at you* if you did not know
what 'tis to love.


Well* don't laugh at me, good Fanny, I know what 'tis well enough, but my
Sister must not know of it for the World.


Good! I like you now* Plain dealing becomes us Maids, when we're among our
selves no less than Dissimulation before Men: Come then, be free, and believe
I'll keep your Secret as well as your Lover himself.


But why don't you ask me Questions then, F^ny, that I may answer you?


That's well said! you love some young Gentleman, do you not?


When I was at London, there used to come with my Cousin Will Gaymood a pretty
fine dressed* Gentleman, who came from the College; his Name's Mr. Frankly.


And do you love him very well?


I loved him mightily then* but I did not tell him so; for, they say, We must
not tell Men our Mind till they find it out; yet I fancy he guest it; for, he
promised me he would come, or let me hear from him: But he has not done it. Now
as my Sister threatens me with a Nunnery --


Pray go on, I'm impatient, to know the rest.


I am ashamed; I had rather you would ask* me Questions* Fanny.


I fear you've got a new Lover in his Absence.


I vow, I could not help it, Fanny* But* I'm mightily concerned, and don't know
what to do; for he is to come to me by and by, and I am afraid my Sister should
see him with me. Now, if thou woudst help me a little, good Fanny.


I had rather serve the other; but what's this new one's Name?


Major Buff; I like him but so so; but he teez'd me, and would not let me alone
till I had promised to meet him; and any thing is better than a* Nunnery, you
know. Yet I would not have talked to him had Mr. Frankly come to me.


The Absent are always in the Wrong, I find.


But, Fanny, there's Doctor Kill-^lown too* whom I promised to meet* and I'm
mightily afraid they'll come at the same Time.


Another Appointment! a forward Child, truly! But why did* you appoint him at
the same Time?


What shall I say to you? I did not think on it: I'm so concerned for Mr.
Frankly's not coming, and so afraid of the Nunnery, that I don't know what I
do* But as I grow older I hope I shall manage things better* and have more Wit*


More Wit* why you're a Prodigy already! But, what if Mr. Frankly should come
at last? For, I am sure he'll come, since he promised* I know him.


Oh! let me kiss thee again and again for that dear, dear Fanny


He's well enough* I think* But* would you marry him if he could get you out in
Page's Clothes, and had a Parson ready?


Heh! truly, I know nothing to the contrary, Fanny. Yet there's another pretty
fine Gentleman --


Another yet!


That's all indeed* Fanny* One Mr. Airy: I'm sure you would like him, Fanny:
But yet dear Mr. Frankly was my first Love, and if I were but as sure he would
come --


As you are sure of a Kiss.


You have lost her, and I my little Chamber-Utensil: Well* no matter for that*
I've had her already* B^, tho she seems so skittish now* I gad, true Mo^es^y is
as great a Stranger to these Chambermaids* as to a Midwife* a Hedge-Poet, or a
Side-Box Mask, by Mercury.


Well, let's go find out Railmore: You say you'll serve my Lord, Sam, and help
us to defeat the Squire his new Rival.


Fear not, I'll do it, tho 'twere but to fret my covetous old Brother, be
revenged of the Uncle, and laugh at the Nephew: I long to do some good generous
Action worthy being Chronicled. This shall be the first, Egad; and if the Fool
should marry my Niece, to make it more meritorious, I'd drink him dead in Three
Months. What a Pox* do you think I've no Conscience? I shall save nothing by
old Thomas's saving a Portion, and Nephew for Nephew, I'd rather have a witty
Lord than a foolish Squire, by Mercury.


A Pox of all such Men of Clay and no Sense! They are the Terror of those who
want only to be married to raise Portions and pay Debts. Women should be
ob^ig'd not to use such rich Fools better than if they had Merit and nothing
else: But then

How many Heirs would sue, while none would grant!
How many Nymphs would their best Bubbles want!

HOw now, Mad Cap, whither so fast?


Not to look for you, my Wi^e Uncle, you may be sure. I'm looking for my Lady
Single: Do you know which way she went?


Look you, you know the Passage that leads to the Stairs that are on the
Right-Hand, near the Back Yard, as you go up to the Gallery, don't you?


Ay, ay, What then?


Why, she did not go that way -- that's all


Dear Uncle, will you never leave this Folly?


Ay, ay, Child, when it leaves me, and thou thy self art wiser: Come, like to
like; stay with us, and be Company; hang thinking! Too much Reflection is the
Folly of the Learned.


Ay, and too little Reflection the Folly of the Ignorant.


Ignorant! Why, I don't trouble my self with what's past or what's to come. I
enjoy the present* and let the World rub, and who wiser than Sam?


You do well to praise your self, Sir.


Ay, seeing no Body will do it for me, Madam* Pshau, 'tis the Fashion now: Show
me the Man that never talked ill of others, nor well of himself, and I'll be
bound to show thee a Plain-dealing Courtier, a Peace-making Lawyer, a silent
Woman* an honest Taylor* a witty Alderman, a --


A what?


Nay* Faith, I can't tell what: Help me out if you can*


Why, you are never out nor in* Man: Neither will you give me leave to put in a
Word, or be happy in exchanging a Speech or two with this Lady.


Nay, now I think on it, thou hast not had thy share of Talk, this one Time:
Well, make thy self amends, if thou can: Come, let me see you box about a
little amorous Non-sense; for 'tis what you would be at*


Can a Man talk of any thing but Love* when there's so strong an Incentive to
it before him?


Why, Uncle, would you have me be a Courting-Stock?


You need not, Madam, if you're willing to be in earnest.


That would not be fair, Mr. Airy, for I fancy Love it self is a Jest.


Then give me Leave to pass that Jest upon you; there can be no harm in a
little Jesting.


I'm not much inclined to find Fault with a Jest, provided it be not carried
too far.


What think you of Platoni^ Love?


That's a Jest indeed, but 'tis a dull one.


Shall I court you like an eldest Son, sold by his Father to redeem a Mortgage?


That Courtship is indeed much in fashion, but there's no Jest in it.


Shall I court you then like some first-rate Spark, between a Rake and a Beau;
a pleasant modern Medley, like Punch; for there's the strong and the insipid,
with the sweet and the sharp?


That will go down better than the rest, but 'tis a dangerous Mixture, and not
fit for common use: However, I'll venture on a Taste to try your Skill.


By the Blessing of Freedom, I'll stay on the Stage, and will see that Scene
for nothing.


I bar that, Sir, No Person to stand on the Stage.


The Play-Bill says so, but we'll suppose 'tis the Poet's Day; besides* we
Beaux will show our selves to the Audience, in spite of the Bill and the
Audience.


Ay, tho some of you are as dirty* Beaux as your self.


Egad, I'll clap that Jest,


Well, Madam, suppose me one of those Sparks just coming to see you, and your
self one of those airy Women of Honour they court en passant.


Solyman, Le Begue's with Three or Four Rakes of Honour, balked poor my Lady
Love-all, who stayed for me to hand her out of the King's Box, and Two Masks,
who waited for me by the Chocolate-house; I'm sure they're Quality; and at last
I've been forced to drive hither. Confound me, if I did not break the
Coachman's Head for his Fare, because the Rascal did not keep a Lover's Pace.


Oh your Servant Airy; I easily believe you've been Side-Glassing in the Park,
Side-boxing at the Play-House, Acting in the Pit, nay on the Stage too, but no
more for me, I dare swear, than for any Human Thing in Petticoats. Some little
forgetful Mask has disappointed the no less forgetful Mr. Airy, and I may thank
her for this Visit.


No, demme, Madam, I begin to leave off Masks; they are grown doubly dangerous
of late.


A Couch! Bless me! A Couch! What for?


Is that a Question to be asked a Gentleman? why, for many Uses, my Dear* tho
'twere but to loll on.


Spoken en Gallant Homme, as I'm a Christian; respectful and civil to
amazement! Hark you, Spark* are you still as mad as you used to be?


I was just going to ask you the same Question. But hark you, have not I forgot to
tell you how damnably I love you?


Love me! Bless me! how abruptly you expose a Declaration of Love! This is the
first happy Moment I ever heard of it, as I'm a Christian.


Yet I'm confoundedly in Love with you to Day. But we young Fellows are all so
full of Mercury, and one Thought drives out another --


Just as one Mistress drives out another.


No, I'm a Dog if I don't think I shall love you, even after* I am dead.
There's something in you so jaunty, so j^-n^-s^ay-quoyish! Tho methinks you look
worse to Day than ever I saw you look in my Life! Why don't you lay on a little
more Red? Stay, is that your Hair or a Tour?


O good Mr. Whatd'you call, for Gad-sake don't look upon me to Day; I'm not a
Creature: I should have kept my Bed, as Sir Finical Self-love does, to rest my
Features: I've been so sick these Two Nights, that instead of causing a Love
without Remedy, I'm a mere Remedy for Love.


's Blood, Madam, what what do you mean to speak thus of the finest Woman* in
England, and my Mistress too? I'm only afraid you're fallen in love with some
starched Fop, in Love with no Body but himself. Well, Woe be to him when I know
him! I'll do his Business: Demme, I hate a Fop.


What, are you jealous?


Oh, like a Devil, 'tis the best Quality I have.


'Tis true, a Dose of Jealousy rouses up your sleepy Passion, just for the*
World, as a Pinch of Snuff revives the Senses: But the Remedy loses its effect
when often used.


Gad you're witty* Never let her be your Wife. Sevil! I begin to leave it off;
I take but Twice or Thrice this little Box full every Day -- Look on the
Inside, 'tis prettily painted.


O hideous! I look on your filthy obscene Box! I would not touch it for the
World.


Look you, 'tis to show you I love to be free and sans facon. When shall you
and I dine at Pontac's or the Rummer?


Ruder than Rudeness it self! what, talk of Taverns to a Woman of Condition,
Monster!


Pshau* I go there every Day, with Twenty that are as Nice as your Ladyship.
Let's see that Indian Fan, I fancy it turns two ways, and has as pretty Figures
on the Inside as my Box.


You shall no more see it than I would your Box: Fans are as useful to us for
Action, and when we've nothing to say, as your Boxes are to you. Fie,
Gallanting of Fans is as much out of Fashion as Gallantry.


But not tearing of 'em, to get you to some Indian House, on pretence to give
you better. Throl lollolol!


What, I suppose you've a Mind I should ask you to Sing?


Why the Devil don't you then? Gad, I fancy you are as fond of being asked as
I. Why, you sing almost as well as I do. Come, let's sing the last Dialogue our
Master set.


Hark you, Madam, can't I move you?
why the Devil do you run?
Had not I told you twice I love you?
come then, kiss me, or I'm gone.

Foh! I hate a Rakish Lover,
Do not discompose my Dress:
Good familiar Spark, give over!
how on Quality you press!

From the Countess to the Cit,
every Beauty for me dies:
Demme, why should I submit
to do at on this Woman's Eyes!

Fifty Beaux expire for me,
ogling, sighing all the Day;
Yet not one dares be so free,
tho they let me win at Play.

Sure we Rakes can better move you;
see this Shape and Leg, my Dear!
In one Minute more I'll love you
than those Fops can in a Year.

But your Love will soon be over.

Then you'll get a fresher Lover.
Come, to Bed! I long t'embrace.

Leave my Hand!

-- Then lend your Face!
First the Hand, and then the Face,
Then the Breast,
And then the rest,
Then the Breast, and then --

-- The Face.

's Death, I've a good mind to beat you;
No; to vex you more, I'llgo.
Thus I puff you -- I'll go say,
I refused your Love to Day.

Then I'll say how I did treat you.

None will believe you could do so.

All will believe I used you so.



Pretty well, pretty well, all but that damned Slap on the Face -- Well, I
shall run mad for you in Two Days, that's certain.


Poor Mr. Airy! what, gone so far of a sudden?


'Tis the Fashion now: What, would you have me court like a formal Cit, or
freeze you with dull whining Stuff, and die in Simile like a mere Beau? We
brisk Fellows push on in Love as in War, egad. Towns must quickly yield or be
insulted with Bombs, that ruin them as Slander does Reputation, Demme.


O fie! the intolerable Presumption of Fellows! Had not you better make the
Campaign in Flanders than in Pelmel and at the Wells and Bath?


Pox, I played away my Equipage-Mony at Piquet, and that damned Bassette -- But
tell me, dear Creature, how long must I still sigh in vain for you?


Exceeding Pretty, as I'm a Christian! Why, you have not begun yet, that I know
of.


What a Pox, do you reckon this Visit nothing?


When you can be constant, perhaps I may think you deserve Encouragement.


's Death, at that rate I might wait long enough, Child! I find I must storm
the Out-works, in order to a General Assault -- Thus then I invest the Town, my
fair Enemy.


Nay then 'tis Time to call for Relief -- Who's there? Uncle! What were you
asleep?


You may swear it, or how* could I have been so long without talking? Pox, this
Wine is got into my Head! Well, what's the Matter?


When a Woman begins to cry out, you may believe the Jest is over.


Why, 'twas but just going to begin.


I find we've jested too long, I must leave you.


I fear I have, for I must follow you in earnest.


Jest or Earnest, 'tis all one to Sam: If he's caught let him take it for his
Pains: They say there's no fooling with the Devil, but I fancy that Saying will
hardly hold good of Women, Egad.

Bewitching Woman's a resistless Evil,
The Devil fools us, but she'd fool the Devil.

Nay, since you've got your Load elsewhere, and won't stay, prithee tell us
here, in good sober Sense?


Then, in no sober Sense, if this Nephew of thine has her, he'll be a Cuckold;
it would be a Shame if he were not, he has the best Qualifications for it, and
wants that to be in the Fashion.


Heighday! I'll warrant you then, your Londoners have brought up that Fashion,
these dead Times, for want of Trade; a Cuckold!


Ay, or a Husband, that's all one, I think: Look you, you Put, I'll stand to
what I say.


Ods me, 'tis from Francelia! 'Tis the same Hand as mine: Let see -- Francelia
is condemned to marry a Fool -- (that's me) you may help her to revenge on him
the Wrong that's done you -- In spite of all slavish Bonds, she vows to be my
Lord Lovewel's while she is Francelia -- Ods bob^! who'd have thought it?


May the Curse of small Beer, in an Evening light on me, if I don't go and
rattle her to some Tune anon!


Hang her, Man! ne'er go to her, 'twill spite her more: Besides, my Lord is a
bloody-minded Devil, he makes no more of killing a Man than a Doctor of Physic
does.


Odsooks, 'tis all a Case, I'll go -- but I'll consider on it first.


Odsbobs, Sirs, why do you leave us so? you're Three Bumpers behind-hand.
There's Justice Dolt swears at you like any Carrier in a Slough. Come, Master
of mine, come in; don't stand here holding of a Parley.


Not I; I am not such a Sot; I have enough: I'd as soon go to a County-Feast,
or a Punning Club at London.


Why, there are not so many Fools here as at London, Friend of mine!


There are fewer Fools here indeed, because there are fewer People.


Odsbobs, that Shall not serve turn, you shall drink with us for all that.


I'd sooner go back to London among the Rabble for, there tolerable Wine at
least is had, in good Rooms, if not in good Company; but here your Room is
wretched, your Liquor bad, and your Company abominable; and so farewell, Brother
Sots.


Well, go thy ways, Nutmeggrater! what pity 'tis, Major Buff, that such a tart
witty Knave can't drink!


I tell you your Fortune, you pretty Man; you live well, you be good Fortune.


What Vermin ha'we here? Gipsies! nay then mind your Pockets.


An angry one, an angry one!


Gad, Uncle, they shall tell me my Fortune, for all that, but I'll mind 'em.


Ay, presently; cross you my Hand with one piece of Silver, I tell you all
then.


Here 'tis, old Egypt!


Let me see your Head! Oh the good strong Head, fit for the Country Justice!


What! tell a Man's Fortune by his Head?


Yes, we tell the Lawyer the Fortune by both the Hands, the pretty Woman by the
Eye, the Lover by the long Nose, the Drunkard by the Copper-Nose, the
Dancing-Master by the Foot, the Taylor by the Calves of the Leg, the Alderman
by the Forehead, and you by the whole Head together.


Why, what dost thou take me for then?


Let see! You no be the Gentleman.


How! no Gentleman?


No, but you be the Squire.


Oh ho! well, I'll try your Skill e'Faith. Come, when wan't I well last, hah?


You have not been well lately.


Now you're a greater Liar than Patridge's Almanac.


No, I be not, I see by your Hand that 'twas -- the Itch.


The Itch! Thou lie like the Devil's Tooth-Drawer.


I mean the Itch of Love. You be troubled with it yet. You love the very fine
Woman, but you be jealous of her, and will not have her for fear --


Hum! if thou can but tell me how old I am, I'll believe thou know whether
she would be honest or no.


Let me see your Mouth! How old was you when your Father Died?


Sixteen.


Don't stir! and 'tis now since he died.


Five Years.


Look you, I find that if you marry this Woman that you design to court to Day,
you be one very great Cuckold by some great Person; but if you not go to her,
and take no notice at all, you soon will have another more to your Mind, with
great deal Money; but this is not to bring you one Cross: And for a Proof of
this, I will tell you your Age as you ask me -- You be -- you be -- just One
and twenty, as I find by your Mouth.


stops Plot, Ilbred and Major Buff run after the


The Gipsies steal off, having first picked Ilbred' s Pockets and Sir Topewel'
s.


Odsooks, the Gipsies have picked my Pocket -- stop 'em, I have one fast -- Ah
Rogues! You tell Fortunes, but could not tell your own. You shall be trust up
next Assizes, hanged in Chains, and shown for a right Egyptian Mummy.


Good Sir, hear me! As I'm an honest Man, 'twas not I picked your Pocket;
besides, I'm no Gypsy, an't please you. Oh! Good your Worship, let me go; I'll
discover a Plot to you.


A Plot! no more Plots, we've had too many already.


'Tis a Plot against Squire Ilbred to fool him out of his Mistress.


Fool me! The best Lord in the Land make a Fool of me, I won't marry.


The Devil helps th^se same Gypsies, they were too nimble for us.


Nay, now I smell a Rat; well, speak Truth and thou shalt go free.


I am my Lord Lovewel's Man, Sir, set on by Mr. Railmore, who even now,
pretending to be drunk, got you out, and kept you a talking till he saw us, to
give me an Opportunity to make the Squire believe he'll be a Cuckold if he
marries Mrs. Francelia: He was to show you a Letter; that's a sham-one, upon my
Honour* as well as that the Squire received.


Why, this was no Sham-Plot tho; this was a Plot indeed: Well, I set thee free
for this Discovery; but can thou not tell me more?


I shall be turned away, Sir.


Come, fear not; we'll provide for thee.


Well, you are such good natured Gentlemen that it goes against my Heart to see
you deceived. I will tell you, whatever comes on it.


I'll reward thee to thy own Content; believe me, I am no Courtier.


You must know, my Lord is to marry Mrs. Francelia very privately to Night; not
that she hates the Squire, but because my Lord is a Lord, I think: I know no
other Reason; for I know some Women that have staid Twelve Years for a Lord,
and now would be glad to take up with a Squire, or any thing. Now I fancy* I
could put your Worship in a way to put his Nose out of Joint, but --


Come, but me no Buts! serve him, and I'll do thy Business; thy Lord himself
shall not live better than thou shalt. Cousin, give him some of the Broad Pieces
thou hast for a Taste.


Odsme! they're all Gipsied away: My Pocket has been gutted already. Well, till
anon, take this Ring, and that Tobacco Box.


Pray excuse me, Sir; I hate to take any thing for doing good -- won't this
look like a Bribe? -- These real Gipsies, whom I got to come with me* could not
forbear stealing -- Your Worship's most humble Servant -- Well, I believe I
might easily convey you, when 'tis dark, into the Room by the Hall, where my
Lord intends to be married to your Mistress, unknown to any Body but my self
and the Chaplain; there won't be so much as a Light, and they are to whisper
all the while, for fear Sir Thomas should come and spoil all.


O rare! We'll come, we'll come.


'Twill be dark about an Hour hence, Sir, I'll wait for you near the Hall, but
then you must be very private: Your Worship's most humble Servant.


Now, Lads, let's go Drink!


Here they are!


A Word with you, Sir.


Make haste then, for we're a dry.


I hear, you raise your Pretences to a Lady, whom I Court with her Father's
Consent.


Ay, and he shall Wed her, and Bed her with my Consent, and her Father's
Consent. Do you come to be Invited to the Wedding?


No, we come to forbid the Ba^es, Sir, and to desire you to desist.


But what if I wont, Sir?


Then I must try to make you.


So, here's like to be otherguess fighting than we have on our Muster-Days:
I'll go get a Reinforcement, and then boldly march up -- in the Rear of it.


You wear a Sword, Sir!


Nay, 'tis but a Hanger neither. Look you, I a'n't for Single Rapier; we scorn
your little Spit-frog Play: That's a French Trick: But for Wrestling, Cudgels,
or good downright Backsword slashing, may haps I won't turn my Back to the best
Master of the Science in the County.


Why, that's only fit for Butchers and Hedge-Fencers, to fight sham Prizes
before a Bear-Garden Rabble.


I'll Drink with you for her then, and Uncle will be my Second.


Sir, if you would show yourself a Gentleman, get a Sword and --


My Bay Gelding shall run* with the best Horse in your Stable for her, three
Heats, Weight him and Inch him -- Methinks I should not want Courage, I drink
Stout and Cherry-Brandy ^'ry Day.


Odssooks, say no more, Cousin, Lug out, we'll make their hollow Blades fly in
shatters about their Coxcombs.


Say you so, Sir? Then have at yours.


Odsnigs, Thrash 'em thick and threefold; have among you blind Harpers, fall
Back fall Edge.


Hold, hold, Gentlemen, Pax* est bona res, says a Learned Father; Peace is a
good Thing: Knock 'em down, Humphrey, Peace is a good Thing: Knock 'em down,
Humphrey.


Come, my Lord, we've got the Day, as most Generals do, by Chance* You'll
scarce be made one, though we should win the other Battle; so, let's away to think
of other means to defeat your Rival effectually; for, after all, he's but the
more dangerous for being a Blockhead.


Oh, why do we complain we live too little! When even the Wise want something
more than Wisdom to fill up the long useless Blanks of Life! Tired by our
selves, with others soon uneasy, a while with Books we trifle Time away; but
even that solitary Pleasure grows insipid, and often wakes the Cares it should
beguile; whereas, he that knows nothing, doubts of nothing! So, Cowley, thou
say right, and Life is an incurable Disease.


Pardon me, Madam, if I am so selfish as to break in upon your Meditations!
Hearing that my Lord and Mr. Airy were gone to the Club, I was walking this way
till they* come back; for I guess they'll hardly be able to stay there longer
than I did: Well, I should be sicker yet of the Country than of London, were
there no better Society there.


You'll find that scarce enough, I doubt, Mr. Railmore.


Yes, Madam, yet some few Men and Women of Sense, I hope will make me amends.


Women here! Why, Romances, Chaplains and Simplicity, or rather Rusticity,
spoil more of 'em for Conversation, than Affectation does at London.


Nay, as for Simplicity, Madam, 'tis a Stranger to this Family at least; if
'tis not one in so fair a Lady as your self to be an Enemy to Man.


Not while Man is such an Enemy to Woman.


'Tis pity you're so prejudiced against us all; for some one might have Loved
you on the Square, and thus have prevented that Rough, Scornful, Melancholic
Air that frightens away the Love your Face and Sense attract.


What, do you believe Love makes us more agreeable* Mr. Railmore?


Certainly, Madam, it wears away gently all our Native Roughness, gives a
pleasing Turn to our Expressions, a taking Air to our Person, and winning
Graces to all our Actions; nay, I'll maintain it makes a Woman more Beautiful.


More Beautiful! Nay, now I doubt you are more a Dissember than I thought you.


Why, Madam, as I speak to a Woman of Sense, I can prove my Assertion: Pray is
not the Face the Mirror of the Mind?


Without doubt it should be so.


Does not then a Mind given over to cold Indifference communicate a certain
Lethargy to the Face, that makes every Feature lifeless and unactive, and
spreads a chilling unlovely Air over the whole Person?


This is somewhat likely, I think.


Now on the contrary, a single Spark of Love happily kindled in a youthful
Heart, makes the Imagination quicker, the Wit more free, the Conversation more
lively, the Eyes more sparkling, and diffuses over the Face that sprightly
moving Je-ne-scay-quoy, whose Charms 'tis impossible to resist.


Since I was Born, I never was so strangely tempted to make a Trial of this. --
Railmore, I should look more tolerably if I showed less Averson to your Sex?


Give me leave to convince you now of what I said; but first be pleased to let
your Woman give us a Song that may divert you from more serious Thoughts: Your
Dress too should be artfully loose, and carelessly Genteel; for Love neglects
us, when we neglect our selves.


Well, for once I'll humour you in your Frolic: Sing us a Song!


'Sdeath, what I am doing? I like this Woman strangely, but then I --


MOrtals, learn your Lives to measure,
Not by length of Time, but Pleasure.
Now the Hours invite comply;
While you idly pause, they fly:
Blessed, while a brisk pace they keep,
But in Torment when they creep.
Mortals, learn your Lives to measure,
Not by length of Time, but Pleasure.
Soon your Spring must have a Fall:
Losing Youth, is losing all.
Then you'll ask, but none will give,
And may linger, yet not Live.
Mortals, learn your Lives to measure,
Not by length of Time, but Pleasure.
Well, Master, am I now as I should be?


You only want seven or eight Patches: They are to Women what Shades are to
Pictures, or Stars over the Face of Night; a Beauty's no more complete without
'em, than a Beau is without Powder.


Fie, they should be as scandalous now as Velvet-Scarfs, or Velvet-Faces those
greater Patches: Sempstresses, Barkeepers, Chambermaids and City Beaux, wear
'em.


There's no harm in a few for all that; but I would not have you like my old
Lady Tawdry, whose fat Face looks just like a Gammon of Bacon stuck over* with
Cloves, with more Patches on than she's Years old, over her double Mask of
Hypocrisy and Paint.


Well, how do you like me now?


Why, you'll soon bid fair for a Place among the First Rates; chiefly now there
are so few! Well, be pleased to sit, and do but remember to Hear me, Believe
me, and Answer me sincerely. I intend to speak to you, as 'tis supposed a
Person would do, whose Wealth and Merit might embolden him to make his
Addresses to your Ladyship.


I set little Value upon Wealth, true Merit affects me much more; so Mr.
Railmore, pray speak as of your self, and do not personate another.


Since you are so kind, Madam, as to prevent my hopes, and give me leave to
profess the Love I have for you, I'll wave all those Hyperboles, so commonly
lavished in Declarations of Love, and all the Hell of Pain which whining Fools,
and designing Knaves pretend to feel, and really deserve.


All exploded thread-bare Cant, to be cast off, like dull Romances, and only
used by Pedants and Abigails.


I'll neither meanly Cringe nor saucily Presume; neither magnify your Worth by
Flattery, nor debase my own by affected Dispraise, or Self-Commendation: No,
Madam, the only Eloquence, I ought to use to persuade a Woman of your* Sense,
is my sincerity in doing Justice to your Merit: Thus I only urge the Esteem I
have for you, to claim your Ladyship's.


'Tis the surest way to gain it.


And if I ever obtain that Blessing, you'll never find the least Unevenness in
my Temper, the least Contradiction in my Sentiments, or Decay in my Affections.


Were this possible, Sir, I must own it would be as singular, as sweet.


Can you wrong me so much as to doubt it, Madam?


We easily doubt of what we wish.


Think more favourably of a Man whom you have always found to speak his
Thoughts, and who being tired with long Wandering, a^d ripe for a Retreat, would
fix a grateful Heart, and be for ever True.


Sure you forget you are a Man, Mr. Railmore! What, could you Love a Wife, none
but a Wife, and that for ever too?


Yes, Madam, could that* Wife resemble you so much as to be thought your self:
But that's above my hopes: Yet our equal Aversion hitherto to Marriage, to
Fools* Flattery, and the Hurry of the World, shows two Humours so suited to
each other, that they would seem but one, if both were joined: And as each of
us at once would Conquer, and be Conquered, such an Union of two
Marriage-Haters could be but Honourable and Sweet to both. We'd pity wretched
Couples, linked by the poor Sympathy of Interest, or Frenzy; while you and I,
clasped in each other's Arms, would think we two engrossed all the Delights
they forfeit, and Life and Love can give -- Oh do not turn that Lovely Face
aside; or I shall think you're made of Ice indeed, and hate my self for being
not like you.


By Heaven! He has kept his Word: I Blush to think on it, yet almost wish he
might be in Earnest. -- Railmore, you act your Part so well, that Truth it self
could scarce have moved me more.


By Heaven, Madam, 'tis real all; and to prove it with a Witness, I'll send for
some living Form of Sanctity to confirm it.


What, are you then come to the End of Love already?


No, no, dear Madam, I would only come to the Seal of it. Consider if our Sexes
Passion ends before yours; 'tis chiefly through your Coldness at first, and
your Fondness at last. We set out too soon, or you too late; and you either
Starve Love, or overload it so, that the poor Thing seldom holds out to its
Journey's end: But you and I setting out together, our Loves shall keep pace
with each other, and their Race, and that of Life be the same.


But will not the whole World laugh at us?


The Thought on it moves me a little, I must confess: But what's the World, the
Vile Mad World to us? Besides we may be a while as private as you please, and
Laugh at those who vainly hope to Laugh at one of us.


Well, I must needs own you're an excellent Master, since you have in so little
a Time made me look less disagreeably, and almost persuaded me, a Man may be
worthy of being Loved. Could I believe you such -- --


Oh! I am wild to convince you of it more feelingly. Let me seize that fair
Hand, and bribe it with fond Kisses, to be a Pledge to mine of a Return. Ah!
let me, let me in this sweet, this wise Extravagance of Passion, kindly force
you to come and make it lawful now.

Too long in vain against your Heaven you strove:
The only Care that should a Woman move
Is to be fair, to be beloved, and love.

WELL, you have made me put on Page's Clothes, but I can't put on Page's
Assurance. I tremble, and have not power to go.


What! afraid to go and be married to the man you say you love?


No, rather afraid my Sister should hinder it.


There's a grave Gentleman in black hard by, who'll soon put that out of her
Power, and then you may easily get out in this Disguise.


Nay, I was forced to tell her a fair Story to get from her: she believed me
presently, for, I thank Heaven, she never could catch me in a Lye, and yet I
tell I don't know how many every day: But what will she say when she finds I
have deceived her?


Psha, whom do we not deceive to be married? Think of the Nunnery.


Well, let's go, I fancy I was not made to be a Nun.


I tell you I have taken care my Daughter shall entertain him as she ought: I
have enjoined her to think no more of my Lord Lovewel. But see! here she comes.


Daughter, you know what I said to you: Make much of Squire Illbred for my
sake, more for his, and more still for your own. Come, Sir Topewell.


Go go, get you gone, I must stay a little to hearten him up.


Will you be pleased to sit, Sir?


Thank you, Madam, I am well as I am: I love to be in a standing Posture.


What, won't you sit by your Mistress, man?


Now I think on it, I don't much care if I do; nay, and lye by her too.


Mark that! heighboy!


We've had a fine day to day.


But an odd one, Sir, in my Opinion.


Speak to her, good Lad!


Why, the Roads are as dry as these Boards.


Ay, and the dryer they are, the dryer they make us: Would I had a Bumper or
two of that *Hock!


Pray, Madam, what News do ye hear?


Truly, Sir, none that's good: A Friend of mine is importuned to marry a man
she does not love.


Is that such ill News? Why, 'tis as common in Marriage to hate at first, and
then love, as 'tis to love at first and then hate. Cousin, to her! Odsooks
you're at least a quart too low. When first I went a wooing, I made my self
half drunk, and then I spoke up as boldly as a Member that either scorns or
wants a Pension.


Well, when once we're got acquainted, I'll mend my Hand. -- Pray, Madam, how
old may you be?


You should never ask a Woman her Age, Mr. Ilbred, lest she answer you false,
or disoblige herself.


Cry mercy, I meant no more harm than a man that cheapens a Horse or a Mare
does, when he asks how old 'tis: I asked, because I fancy you and I are much of
an age, and thus may the better be yoked together.


'Tis not likeness of Age, but of Inclination, that makes the Yoke easy, Sir.


I've nothing to say as to that; but if Somebody loves Somebody, as well as
Somebody loves Somebody, I know what I know.


What's that, Sir?


Why then Somebody will have Somebody, or Nobody, inspight of Every body.


'Tis well if any body can understand you.


Look you, that is, if you love him as well as he loves you, 'tis a March; though
this same Lord we saw here thought to have huffed him out of you, and forged a
Letter as from you, to make us believe you'll Cuckold my Cousin, yet he dares
venture on you, nay, and take you, though you had not a Smock to your Back.


My Lord, contrive a Letter as from me.


Ay, that he did; his surly Companion showed it us. Well, what say you?
Nothing? Well! I find there's one Woman in the World has not too much Tongue.
Cousin, say as I tutored you.


Look you, Madam, I an't used to make Love, and may not talk so much like a
Courtier (never the worse man for that) I am downright Dunstable, I've for
these many Months hoarded up -- --


A Barnful of good hearty Country Love for you.


Uncle, hold you your prating Tongue, will you; or rather get you gone; John
the Butler, your old Pot-Companion wants you: I'm in now, man.


Then push it home, Boy. God b'w'ye.


I fancy I can talk better now the old Sot my Uncle has left us. Faith and
troth, I loved you this great while, and if you'll be ruled by a Fool, even
have me, I dare say you'll be Mother of many Children* What say you? Come, as
the new Song has it, Here's my Heart, and here's my Hand too; all that's mine
shall be thine, Body and Goods at thy Command too. Roger a Coverly, a Jig, any
thing, play your May-day Tune, Tom Crowder.


Now go about your business, and leave me to manage mine: O sweet Mistress
Frances, I long to be at another sort of Dancing with you; faith and troth I've
loved you this great while.


I'm afraid the Clown will prove as impudent at last as he was shamefaced.


Odsbobs, is it a News to you? Why, I've been at Church, and what business
could I have there but to see you, think you? I've hunted by you*all* along to
the same intent, and used to hollow in a Morning, to wake you, that you might
know on it, thus, So-ho!


The noise was the only Instance of your Love that ever disturbed me to this
day; but I'll beg another: 'Tis my first Request, so I hope you'll not deny it.


Nay, to be sure I must do as you'd have me, that you may do as I'd have you.


Then, Sir, that first Request is, That you would be so kind as to leave me,
and think no more of me.


Look you, Madam, I was told you'd be as shy as a high-metal'd Filly when she's
to be backed first; but troth, you may kick and wince, and stand up an end, but
I won't be thrown off the Saddle, I won't budge a Foot as long as my Name's
Ilbred.


Now I think better on*t I must humour you. A good Evening to you; but I'll be
with you sooner than you think.


Sir, Sir!


I'll be with you anon; I must go look after my Horses.


You have a mighty Ascendant over this Gentleman, my Lord; he leaves the Room
as soon as he sees you.


You have a greater over me, Madam; nothing* could make me leave you.


But my Father, who ought to have the greatest Ascendant over me, commands me
to leave you to entertain him.


But my Rival is kinder than your Father, and leaves me to entertain you. Ah,
Madam! while you stint me to bare Friendship, must he engross the Treasure of
your Love, which he wants Sense to value as he ought?


The less Sense a Man has* the more he prizes Things whose worth is only
imaginary. And after all, my Lord, he gives me no small Proof of his Esteem, in
offering to ease my Father of the Charge of my Person, without a Portion to
support that Charge. He uses no ill means to obtain me; he did not cause a
false immodest Letter, written as by me to himself, to be shown his Rival, to
deter him from pursuing his Intentions.


I do not know that he did so.


I say he did not, but I know who did.


Tell me who did, that I may punish him.


He needs no other Punishment but Neglect. Farewell.


Going! What can this mean? Stay, Madam, explain your Riddle.


You, who did all this, need no Explanation.


I! by all that's true, I know nothing of this, and blush to think you can
suspect me of it.


There's more than Suspicion, I'm assured of it.


Hold, Madam, do not persist in thinking me so base as to deny the Truth, or I
shall cease to think you what I thought you, and strive to grow indifferent.
But tell me, who laid that mean Contrivance to my charge?


You would show your Resentment of the Discovery, but I need not tell you.


Nay then, I am convinced this is a mere Pretence for leaving me. 'Tis kind
however to lessen my Sorrow for so ^n^ble a Separation by ill usage. Well,
Madam, I am yet too much disordered to have power to expostulate postulate with
you: Farewell. Be as happy as you make wretched; I've nothing now to court but
an honourable Death.


Stay, my Lord, let's reason a little more calmly of this business.


Ah! give me more, give me more, c. Heyday! Gravity has doubled her Guards here
to day! O'my word they both look as sullen as a new-married Couple, that find
they've cheated one-another.


Perhaps they find they've done so without marrying.


What, still sighing, my Lord?


Still sighing, because still unhappy.


And still unhappy, because still in Love.


Gad, if I were in your place, I'd no longer be in Love, that I might no longer
be unhappy.


Those that are in Love, and blame others for loving, are like those who are in
Health, that blame others for being Sick.


Well, well, have a little Patience, we have been plotting that you may be
quickly cured.


How! perhaps then you may know something of a Sham Letter! say, do you? Nay,
quickly tell me, I'm all Impatience.


Why, perhaps we do, perhaps we don't; I won't tell you.


But the Lady accuses me of showing.


Psha, Psha, showing is necessary sometimes; the Lady is a Fool, My Lord: keep
your Breath for her; go, get you gone together, be addressing and redressing,
pressing and caressing, trying and denying, flying and lying, cooing and
showing; but first be you going, that we may be doing.


But my Innocence --


Shall appear as white as Curds and Cream in nine and twenty minutes. The Grove
is a pretty place for cooing Lovers; would you had the Wit to make use on it so
long.


But -- -- --


Lord, will you ne'er have done? I hate a man that makes so many words.


Well, Plot, are all things ready?


Yes Sir, but I fear your Tom will scarce be taken for Mrs. Francelia, though the
Squire's as dull and credulous as a London Mob: If you could but get one of the
Maids to pass for her in the dark, my Comrade can marry 'em by Rote, as well as
the best Hedge-Parson between Marybone and Dukes-Place: The Rogue has such a
mind to be married, that none can have the Form by Heart better than he; no,
not a Maid of eight and twenty, nor a Widow of three Husbands.


What shall we do? Ilbred and his Uncle will be here presently, I suppose.


Catso! we wanted some body to fit a Squire, and who should come in the nick
but a Chambermaid! Leave me to manage her: Away. Plot, listen you Dog, and come
in when you judge 'tis time.


Ay, Sir, we Waitingmen need not be bid to listen, we do it as naturally as
Drawers, Landladies, Chambermaids, or Informers.


How now, my skittish piece of Chamber-stuff, have I caught you at last?


Pray Sir, let me alone.


To Morrow Morning.


I vow and protest Sir, I'll call.


Let it be so softly then, that no body may hear thee.


Let me go Sir, what will you get by keeping me here?


Not a Maiden-head, I dare swear.


Come, fear not, I'll be very kind; I swear I love thee.


So do I, as a Politician loves an Informer, for our own Ends.


I assure you Sir. I'm none of those; Pshau, let me go; are there not Citizens
Wives, Masks, and other naughty Women enough?


Toast me, if they be not as scarce of late, as honest Attorneys. What for Sea
Captains, Land Officers, and City Beaus, there's scarce a Wench to be had for
Love or Money.


That's a Lye, as too many can justify.


Have a care, thou'^t have the Green-sickness; gad, I love mightily to prevent
it, Child, but the Devil shall cure it for me. But I have another Proposal to
make to thee.


Pray Sir, don't keep me here; I assure you I am honest.


What will this World come to! O the Impudence of a Chamber-maid that would
scandalize her Calling!


Hark you, Prithee what woudst thou be honest for? hah! Don't hundreds of
battered Town Wenches get rich Husbands at last? Don't notorious Rascals jump
into good Places, and detected Knaves keep their old ones, or get better? Don't
we see cheating Collectors, squinting Bribe-mongers, embezling Pursers,
long-winded Pay-masters, saggoting Officers, Brokers and Retailers of Offices
and Benefices, Pimps, Stallions, Catamites, and the Devil and all of Rogues
look big, ride in Coaches, respected and waited on by the Crowd of honest
scoundrel Fools, that trudge it on the hoof? honest! ha, ha, hah!


Well, when you can make me live like one of these fine Folks, perhaps I may
talk to you.


So, I knew it would come to that: Upon my honour, we poor Rogues cannot afford
to be honest.


Look you Child, I'll put you immediately in a way to do it. Thou shalt marry
Squire Ilbred, whom thou saw here to day, a Man of 3000 l. a Year; Nay, and
a Fool to boot. That is, provided thou'^t let me confirm him my Fool, as soon
as Marriage has made him thine.


Sure Sir, you jest, 'tis impossible.


To deny me, you mean. Look you, he loves my Niece Francelia; and we have
contrived it so, that he believes she's to marry my Lord this Evening in the
dark, for fear of my Brother. The Squire is to come in my Lord's stead and wed
her. Now you shall be introduced in her Place by my Lord's Man, who manages the
Intrigue, and so she'll be secured to my Friend, and the Squire to you.


Oh! but Sir. --


Oh! but 3000 l. a year! say no more, it must be so; or -- Oh! here comes the
Man shall direct you


Well, I can't avoid complying, as things stand; the Consequence cannot be bad,
what ever comes on it


Plot, Here's Fanny shall act my Niece, and Wed Squire Ilbred; be sure the
Parson and you whisper all the while. As soon as you have done, we'll all come
in and be Witnesses But hark you, Sir Pandarus; if you offer to be familiar,
take notice, I'll make a Capon of a Craven.


O-law, Sir! upon my honour, I'm not so ill-bred as to offer to be served before
my Betters: I'll immediately leave her with the Parson.


Hah, ha, hah! I can but laugh to think how I shall fool both Parties with one
Plot, just as all other Matchmakers do. The Chamber-maid shall fool the Squire,
but I'll fool the Chamber-maid. The Jade was honest just as others are, till a
good Bribe came in the way.


What, alone, Squire?


Not till you came, Knight; I was a thinking.


That's a wonder! prithee, thinking of what?


Why, only of bribing a Woman to cuckold the Fool her Husband on her Wedding
Night; for I find nothing but a Bribe will do it. A Love Suite now is like a Law
Suite, he that courts without Fees, starves his Cause, and sues in forma
pauperis.


Did not you tell me once you ne'er gave a Wench any thing?


True, there's the business, I would bribe her at another Man's cost; for I
love as little to f^e Wenches, as to bribe Lawyers; dam me, I hate to encourage
Vice.


Well, Sam, will it speak a good word to thy Niece for honest Bob.


Between you and I, honest Bob, 'twill be needless; I fancy my Lord Lovewel
will have her before to Morrow Noon, if he has her not by this time, and so I
leave you.


I find this same Gypsie-fellow told us true, Cousin. she's to be married in
hugger-mugger. I wish he'd come and make good his promise.


Ods bobs, though she frumpt me, I fancy she's only strange at first, like other
Cattle; but she has a strange way with her, let her say what she will, I cannot
but like her. Well, I'd be content to leave off riding hard, and drinking hard,
a whole Week, so I might but get her in a Corner, or on a Hay-cock, and no
body* by.


Oh! Sir, are you come? you're too late*


Ods lidikins, don't tell us so Man: Why, 'tis not half an hour since I left
her. O law! O law! I could weep like any Calf now.


If 'tis done, 'tis done; come away, and drown Sorrow; thou shalt go home as
drunk as if thou came from an Election.


Hold, hold Sir, I did but Jest with you; but a Moment later had been too --
Well, Mrs* Francelia waits for me to take her aside, and my Lord is with her
Father, discoursing about you and her. Come* now's your time, make no noise.


Come along, I'm as still as a Mouse.


Here my Uncle desired us to stay for him; but I can't guess his Design.


Design! Why, he has as seldom any, as our Modern Play-Writers, unless it be to
make us talk as he does himself.


To no purpose.


But '^will not be my Fault, if we do not talk to the purpose* Madam. Love,
Love, Madam! Nothing's to the purpose but that.


Nay, no Love in earnest; good Mr. Airy; don't I know you're a mere
Weather-cock?


Yes, Madam, I may be like the Weather-cock; for I never change till that which
moves me changes; and all my Motions wait upon your Breath. But here* most
Women are like our Weather, scorch us and chill us the same day: And others
make Love so tedious a Plague --


As if there were not Plagues enough in Life, without making one of Loving; but
some of you make as much haste to get out of Love, as they do to get in Debt.


I am not for running so fast; for as one said, going to his Wives Funeral;
What need we make a Toil of a Pleasure?


Come, come, most of you serve your Mistresses as all People do their Guests:
At first the Entertainment is warm and costly, but soon grows as cold as dull
indifference or jaded Matrimony can make it.


But I am for a ^ove easy and agreeable, like your humour, and that must be
lasting. Such a Love, Madam --


Is as indifferent a Love as one can wish, and in Truth, no Love at all*


No, Madam, 'tis a pretty, sociable Passion, like modern Friendship. It cheers
a loving couple when together; yet is no pain to 'em when asunder. 'Tis like
Fire in a Flint, it lies till 'tis urged, but then it never fails to sparkle.


Never Court One of our reserved Beauties, Mr. Airy, she would expect a
stricter Duty from her Lover.


Yes, First he must be a Slave to Dress as much as she is to her Complexion,
and never see her unless he's as Spruce as a Dancing* Master at his breaking
up, or a politic Beau on a Birth-day at Court.


Ay, for I heard of a Beau that lost a Lady for offering to approach her in a
Coat with Pocket-holes an Inch too high, and Button-holes but Three Inches
wide.


Now you shall have sport.


To promise Sport, is the way to spoil it.


What's he going to do?


Hold, hold, Sir, you must not Marry her.


No more he must not; he has Married her already.


Yes, Faith Unkle-in-Law that is now; you come a Day after the Fair; Here's my
lawful wedded Wife, and your --


Brothers Maid, Brother-Sterling that shall be.


Ha, ha, ha! You're merry disposed Uncle: Why, don't you know your own Niece?


Yes, better then you know your own Bride, it seems: Look on her in the light.


Hah! What art thou?


Even what you said just now, my Dear, your lawful wedded Wife.


The Devil's rather. Ods bobs, do you take me for a Changeling? I was Married to
Mrs. Frances.


Nay, thy Wife's Name's Frances; She's the Changeling: But my Cousin Francelia
has not been in the Room this Evening.


I'm in Amaze! Or, I Dream, or, I am Mad, or else I'm Drunk.


You have had my hand ever since the Good Man joined us, and Here's the Ring.


Nay, then I'll hang my self, O-law! O-law!


Oh fie, what a filthy Death you've chosen? Remember you're a Gentleman.


What, cheated! There's Conjuring in it. Hah! is't so, thou young Witch?


Come Knight, speak more kindly to your Niece; he has Married her you know,
you're a Witness to it your self.


What's the matter, Gentlemen?


Why, Mr. Ilbred has committed Matrimony with One of the Maids, and would
persuade us 'twas my Niece Francelia* that's all.


This shall not pass so, do you see.


No, 'tis past already, do you see: How will you help your selves? The Gudgeon
that's caught in the hook may flounce, and flounder, but that wont do. He hugs
it, and tugs it as a Man does his Wife.


Hark you, Sir Topewel, and you Mr. Ilbred, I'll show you I'm not so much your
Enemy as you Imagine: I fancy, I have One way to bring you off.


How? ah, would you could*


If you'll bind your self in a Bond of Twenty Thousand Pounds, never to pretend
to Mrs. Fran^elia, I'll try what I can do for you.


Ay, with all my Spirit, and thank you too.


Here's a Bond ready drawn; look on it, 'tis but Signing and Sealing.


Ay, ay, he shall Sign it and Seal it, and with more joy than any ever Signed a
Contract of Marriage; here Cousin, Sign, Sign and Seal; but lets see if 'tis right
first? heigh ho! how soon care comes upon a Man that's Married! he's no sooner
noosed but he'd give his Ears to get off. Here 'tis Signed and Sealed.


Take off the Seal; you deliver this as your Act and Deed, for the use of the
Party therein mentioned.


I do. Well, now, dear Friend of ours, prithee tell us quickly, how shall I get
off? Pray put a Body out of pain!


Look you, before this Company, I declare you free to Marry any One that will
have you, except Mrs Francelia: For, as we got this Maid to Personate her, we
got also One of my Lord's Men to Personate the Chaplain.


O-law! o-law! Is that all you had to say? You're good to help a lame Dog over
a Stile.


Where is he? This is not the Man.


That's the Man that married me.


Ods death, this is none of Dick; this is Parson Humdrum.


Plot, Rogue, Dog, how is this? Why sure you did not let the Gentleman Marry a
Serving* Wench in earnest?


As I'm an honest Person, Sir, I could not help it. I had got my Comrade ready
according to your directions, and told the Squire and his Uncle so, but they
would needs have a Parson of their own, whom they had brought: I did all in*
the World to persuade 'em not to have him (they know it) but they were
positive, and for fear of spoiling my Masters Match, I durst not hinder 'em.


Rogue, Villain, Dog, let me come at him.


Nay, then, your humble Servant, though I know what I know 'tis time to scamper.


What's the matter Sir Topewel? Mr. Ilbred what ails you?


Why, nothing, he would have taken a Wife with nothing, and he has One with
nothing; so there's nothing lost: Though he has mistaken your Maid for your
Daughter; sure the Maid will be kept Cheaper than the Mistress.


Not when the Maid comes to be the Mistress.


True; an Usurer's rakish Son, after his Dad's Damnation, or a half starved
Seaman after his Pay-Day, is not more Expensive,


Well if he has Married her, let him make much of his blind Bargain.


What, and is Meester sped already! Wish your Worship Joy! Here's Doll Hoydon
and I are Friends again, an't please you, and want but your Worship's Consent
to be Married too.


Here's the Consent I give you, with a Horse-pox.


^iey day,! What time of the Moon is't? What Wasp, or Nettle has stung him?


Why, thy Master ha^ married thy Mistresses Fellow-Servant through a mistake, and
he is mad at it.


What, yonder* Minx! Odsnigs, I know what I know; now could I help him at a
dead lift, but I have a good mind not to do it, for the sake of this same kick
of the breech he gave me.


How! can thou help thy Master off of this ugly Job, Humphrey?


Mayhap I can, mayhap I won't; what then? You'd give me such another Kick as
you did even now, would you?


Prithee, good Humphrey, don't take it in dudgeon; I'd have done as much to mine
own mother. Why man, I'm mad. Here, hit me Two Kicks for my One; pray do, pray
do; do but bring me off, and kick me till thou'st lost me, an'thee would.


Well, now you cry pectcavi* I'll tell you: I and Do^ was looking for Sir
Thomas's Chaplain, to tell him we should want him to give us a Cast of his
Office; when who should we see* as Luck would have it, but this same Lass there
in the high Topping, and a tidy Skip, a little tiny go-by-ground, not passin
thus high. (I'm sure* she's no higher than a Horse-block) with the Chaplain
mumbling over them out of his book; so we listened, and found he was making 'em
as fast as a Parson can make Two Folks.


Pshau, pshau, sure this cannot be.


Why, you'd as good tell me a Bailiff's no Knave* I know her Face main well;
Do you think I'm like your London-Folks? tell Lies? I'll take the Bibled Oath
on it, an^ so shall Doll; won't you Doll?


Ay, as I'm an honest body, that I will


Ah boys!


Ah boys! Cousin, dance, dance, I say: This brings thee off, boy; and as for
you, Mistress Chose, we'll have you hanged for marrying Two Husbands.


How! is this true, Sweetheart?


Why, what, shall -- as I hope to be saved -- no -- for fear -- I can't tell --



You can't tell what to say; I find 'tis true.


Look you, an't please your Worship* here's the Young Smock-fac'd Hobberdehoy
she had picked out for a Cloak: I spied him now peeping in here* See, he's
hardly big enough to go a nutting. I wonder how the man could have the
conscience to marry'em. But some of 'em don't value a straw whom they cause to
rue, so they're grees'd in the fist* Tho I fancies too, they Two had been at
other sport than Push pin* else he durst not have don't*


A beardless boy! Fie, a Husband without a Beard is as unseemly as a Wife with
VVhiskers.


He's very Young indeed; but stay -- sure* I should know that Face* It must be
my Cousin Kitty! Cousin Kitty!


Mistress Kitty!


What, one Female Marry another! Do you make a Jest of Marriage?


Pray, don't you be Mistress Kitty! Pray don't, pray don't.


O Law! all's spoilt again; undone, undone!


What do I hear, Mr. Illand. Is it possible you've Married my Maid for spite?


Only a little by chance* I thought to have made sure of you: They have
tantalised me twice with the hopes of being my own man again; but that, I fear,
I never shall while I live: Yet perhaps you being her Mistress may persuade
her.


Truly, Sir, she's no more my Servant, since you are her Lord and Master; but
tho you should never have been mine, I'm sorry for you: Even take her with you
when you will.


What, is she whispering already with another man?


Nay* 'be not jealous, Mr. Illbred; our whispering cannot be so fatal to you,
as that you had with her, and Doctor Humdrum.


Nay, then 'tis time to be gone! To be thus insnar'd, and then fooled over and
over again with sham promises of getting free is too much for Flesh and Blood
to bear. 'Owns! ^'ll be revenged, if I live; come, come away.


Hold* you must take care of your Bride, Mr. Bridegroom, for all your huffing.


Nay then if the Bridegroom must take care of the Bride; you and Mr. Illbred
must give me leave to take care of this pretty little Partner of mine.


Take care of h^ and be hanged; the Devil a bit we'll take care of either.


Well, well, good angry red Nosed Gentleman, we'll take care of one another.


What, affront my Nose; you little Snipper Snapper? Odsooks, it cost more a
Painting than all the Saffron Faces in a Play-house.


How Sister Kitty, are you mad?


No madder than your Ladyship.


She's only Married* Madam, and to a person that will strive to show himself
not altogether unworthy that happiness.


How! married in earnest?


Uncle, mind, mind a little!


Dear Madam, be pacified; the Chambermaid is Mr. Frankly, no more a Woman than
my self; but a very worthy young Gentleman, whose Wealth and merit entitle him
to a young Lady that has both: He discovered himself to me now, and told me he
was forced to use this Disguise to secure pretty Mrs. Kitty to himself.


What the Chambermaid prove a man at last!


Huzzah!


Huzzah, Cousin, you're unmarried now: Odsooks let's go and be bloody Drunk for
Joy.


Odsbobs I'm more glad now I've missed the wrong, than if I had got the right.


I was informed your Ladyship would not suffer your Sister to entertain the
least thoughts of a Husband; I got admittance here as a Maid-Servant two days
ago; and as you threatened her with a Nunnery, she consented the more easily to
be joined to me in more suitable Bonds.


You mean Spirited wanton Girl! Did you then regard my Admonitions no better?
'Tis true, I threatened you with a Nunnery, but 'twas but to deter you from
marriage, the more fatal Prison of the two. See me no more.


Jeeringly. Come, Madam, we guess your Aversion to Marriage is somewhat abated,
pray let your Anger be so too. Mr. Railmore, you'll intercede.


How!


In short, we know that the same Spiritual Executioner that dispatch'd us had
done as much for you two just half an hour before: So now 'tis about an hour
too late for your Ladyship to use that style.


What, my Lady Single married!


Railmore married!


The two marriage haters married!


Nay, then miracles are not ceased!


Why a miracle? I never heard any one rail at the Courtier's Slavish Life, but
what would at one time or other Sacrifice his Liberty to it.


The two extremes Love and Hate touch one another, like Laughing and Weeping.


You are all Ephesian Matrons one way or other.


What a Pox, are you capping of Sentences? Wish you Joy -- of a thousand Pounds
a year, Jack; for as for a Wife I know better Things than to wish a Friend Joy
of that.


Wish you Joy of your Chambermaid here! Did not you say you had had her
already, Sam? hah?


Pshau, Pshau, so I would have had her, man; had she been a Chambermaid.


Cousin, shall I laugh at you two a little, for railing at matrimony?


Pray spare 'em, Madam, they have done well* Their Inclinations agreed before,
and consequently will now* tho a much better way. But now, Madam, Thomas will
no longer be an obstacle to this; I had his Leave to urge my suit to you.


Ay, But I'm loath to part with so much money at a Time that there's so little.


While Sir Thomas seemed disposed to part with his money, as well as with his
Daughter, it would have been imprudence to have bated him the first. But we'll
not differ about it: So, Madam, if you will but at last add your consent to
your Father's, I'll ask no other Treasure but your Person, which is indeed too
valuable to need any addition to recommend it.


This so generous Offer, my Lord, convinces me of the reality of your Esteem;
but to make the best Return I can, I solemnly declare, That if my Father will
not be pleas*d to part with what he promised should be one Consideration of his
parting with me to you, I will never consent to marry while I live.


How! Adad, tho I love money, I love Generosity too* Here, my Lord, take her,
she*s yours; the money I promised shall be yours too. I must confess, I was
tamper*d with, and tempted; but there are few here would not have been tempted
to break their word for Ten Thousand Pounds.


I humbly thank you, Sir.


Wish you Joy* Squire.


Thankyou; but Joy of what?


Why, of being not married; o^ rather, of being married, yet no Husband: I'm
sure many would be glad to be greeted thus.


I'm so little afraid of being one of those, Madam, that if I can be so happy
as to prevail with you to approve of my Love, as well as I hope your Father
will of my Circumstances, I shall have nothing more to wish but to be yours for
ever.


What, are you making Love in Jest again? To be serious is a Jest. First, let
us be sure you can continue some time in a mind: Mistresses, they say, are
valued by most of you like Plays, only for being New; You hardly come to see
'em after the Third Day, and it must be an extraordinary one, or an
extraordinary Favour, if you come to the House Three Days after, tho your
Company's wanted there never so much.


Oh* I shall still discover New Beauties, Madam, and love you more and more.


Pox, you grow too serious on a sudden, man; had you not better make Love in
Jest still? The very Boy and Girl in the House will teach you to keep to that.
Oh, here they are. -- Come Sing the Dialogue my pretty Rogues!


PRetty Miss* let's talk together,
I play truant to come hither,
To go with you up and down,
I'd leave all the Boys in Town.

My dear Jemmy, how do you do?
I'd leave all the Girls for you,
Nay, my finest Baby too.

Come, let's play at Man and Wife*

Fie, you know that's full of strife.

No, we'll kiss and hug each other,
Like my Father and your Mother.

Ay, that's better, come, begin,
When you're out, I'll put you in.

Pray, be not so shy, my D^ary.

Keep your distance, or I'll tear you!

Are thy Bubbies coming, Child?
Let me see!

-- -- Oh, Pray.

-- Be mild.
None can see us, do not fear.
Now a little more, good Betty.

Fie, you make me blush I swear;
Yet methinks 'tis very pretty.

Well* we'll Marry e're 'tis long.

You're too little.

-- -- You're too young.

Oh! I cannot, will not tarry.
Quickly, quickly let us Marry,
For I cannot tarry long.



Very well* but I find they are seduced as well as the rest, by the evil Spirit
of Matrimony.


What, can't our Example make a Convert of you?


No, saith; I should be afraid of the Matrimonial Curse, ^ ^ without stomach,
walk about without ^ase, sing without ^i^th, go to bed without desire, enjoy
without pleasure, lie without Rest, be Cuckolded without mercy, ^ught at
without pity, and plagued without end.


What, will you never have better Thoughts of our Sex?


Ay, when you all cease to go to Prayers without Devotion, to fawn without
Love, to weep without sorrow, to be chaste without Virtue, and to get Children
without your Husbands.


Mr. Frankly, now your Friends may know you; you're your self again.


Dear Airy, help me to obtain Sir Thomas*s, and my Lady Single's Pardon for
using a Stratagem that may seem somewhat inhospitable to those who never felt
the violence of Love. As for Mr. Illbred, he must not only forgive me, but
honest Plot also, to whom I had made my self known before I was to wed the
Squire; so that there was no danger on either side.


The short and the long of the Stor^ ^ that between Jest and Earnest I'm fairly
choosed of my Mistress among you, e faith.


Come, come, we'll get thee another* Cousin.


Get thee another, Cousin! Odsbobs, 'tis all along of you* Gnaw, gnaw, you Old
Fool: Before George, I've as good a mind as e're I had in my life, to have
Susan, Sisters Chambermaid, for spite.


O fie, Sir, no Chambermaid in earnest* I beseech you; come, be thankful; those
who take our Mistresses from us, improve our Parts; first we love as Learners,
but afterwards like Masters.


Hark you, Sir Topewell, let me give you some Counsel which several men in your
station should follow; Allow some needy man of Sense a Genteel maintenance to
give your Young Squire good Education by degrees. Let him read good books
moderately, but chiefly the great book of the world, not to be found with
Pedants. It costs so little more to breed a man like a Gentleman, than it does
to breed others like Clowns, that I wonder there are so many of the latter with
good Paternal Estates.

Good Education must our Youth improve,
And fit a man for Business and for Love.
Wealth may be lost, but never what we gain
By reading Books, and most by reading Men.
Thus we grow wise, and raise and use our store;
While Fops and Squires, amidst their Wealth, are poor.


