WIth the sad prospect of a Long Vacation,
The Fear of War, and Danger of the Nation;
Hard we have toiled this Winter for new Plays,
That we might live in these Tumultuous Days.
Sad Days for us, when War's loud Trumpets sound,
Nothing but Beaux and Parsons will be found:
Look to it, you Men of Battle, of Renown,
They'll claw your Ladies off, when you are gone:
Servants for ^ity. Your Beaux's of Sense:
Will's Coffee-House is the Office of Intelligence;
And for the Masks who hunt the smaller Fry,
Their Chocolet-House will their wants supply:
Our Play presents you with all sorts of Men,
From keeping Courtier, to the horned Citizen,
Whose handsome Wife brings in the constant Gain.
At Greenwich lies the Scene, where many a Lass
Has bin Green-Gown'd upon the tender Gross.
If Flamstead's Stars would make a true Report,
Our City Breed's much mended by the Court:
What Wagers about Mons were-lately laid?
Had all that Money to the King been paid,
It might have saved the Tax of each Man's head.
I heard a Shop-keeper not long since swear,
If England's old Militia had been there,
We had spoiled the Monsieur's Projects for this Year.
Since they depend so on their own Commanders,
Why weren't the Royal Regiment sent for Flanders?
With English hearts of Oak, and Horns well steeled,
To Butt the Puny Monsieur from the Field.
But those who threaten him so much, I fear,
Were they encampt where any Foe was near,
Would wish themselves behind their Counters here.
WEll, Sirs, is't Peace or War, that you declare?
I am ready armed, so is my Second here.
If you're displeased with what you've seen to Night;
Behind Southampton House we'll do you right,
Who is't dares draw against me and Mrs. Knight?
Be kind, Gallants, if you can mercy show,
Press not the Plant which of it self does how.
Ladies, your Goodness is our best support,
The Men must like the Play, if you are for it.
And sure the Vizards will not cry it down,
Since our Intrigues resemble still their own,
Here all your Coquette tricks to the life are shown.
Will you take us to answer your desires?
We look like two kind keeping Country Squires.
You'll say we are Chits, too slight and little made,
You'll scarce find larger in this Age, I Gad.
For such a Pigmy-Race are now ^me up;
They're but half sprouted, like a second Crop.
The Fathers Sins are in their Offspring shown,
And each now Puny Chit's an elder Son.
Nature disowns the slender half-got Race,
Every Lath-Carcass, with his small Pigs-face,
By Art endeavours Nature to out-do,
And since he can't pass for a Man,'s a Beaux.
If such as these your favour, Ladies, find,
To Knight and me, as Pages, pray be kind.
ARE all my things carried to the Water-side, Sirrah?


Yes, Madam, and the Gally with an Awning, is ready to carry your Ladyship to
Greenwich.


A Gally! why a Gally, Wife?


Because you won't allow me a Coach, Husband.


And because I won't allow you a Coach with two Horses, you'll have a Boat with
four Men?


Yes, a Barge with twelve, if I had my Will: Must I jolt about in a Hackney, or
trapes a Foot like my Inferior Neighbours? Since you'll make no distinction of
me at Land, I'll make some my self by Water.


I don't know what you would have; you go where you please, and come when you
please; live how you please, and do what you please; have Money as you please,
and yet I can never please you!


Therefore I'll have those that can.


Yes, I suppose you have.


'Tis fit I should; did you not promise me when I married you, I should keep my
Coach, and live like what I was?


A Beggar.


Did I marry you when I could have had --


No body else!


The best of Quality; but that I credited your Protestations: Did you not
swear, I should out-shine the best of all the City, and yet deny me a sneaking
100 l. a Year for a Coach, which almost every Tradesman keeps his Wife for a
Twelve-month, tho he break at the Years end for it?


They deserve it, when their Vanity exceeds their Ability: You took an Oath
too, Wife, to Love, Honour, and Obey me; but you have taken your own Measures
for all that; you have a Spirit that the Devil cannot Conquer, and a Desire
that I cannot satisfy: You make me Ridiculous where ever you come, and seem as
if you were ashamed of me.


Since you will not use those Methods to gain my Love which you know will do it,
I look upon you only as my Convenience.


Yes, I have been a Convenience to your whole Family: Five hundred pounds your
Brother had to buy him a Company, which was broke in two Months; then he set my
Prentice at Dice, cheated him of Two hundred pound, which he robbed me of: And
three hundred pound your Father had to purchase a Place at Court, to keep him
from his Creditors, which he lost one night at the Groom-Porters, and durst
never peep out of Whitehall since. Indeed you are a Gentlewoman, and have
behaved your self like one: In less than a fortnight after I married you, you
ran away with a Captain of the Guards, and I was forced to take you out of his
Lodgings with a Messenger; and you have played me abundance of pretty tricks
since, which my Love and Folly has forgiven: So I have been your Father's
Bubble, and your Brother's Cully; the Mark of the City, the Shame of my own
Family, and your Cuckold and Convenience.


Let me but have a Coach, and I'll live as you'll have me.


Don't think of a Coach, and you will live as I'll have you.


Why, Ingredient, the Pothecary keeps his Wife a Coach, and is not worth half
so much as you are; besides you have find for Alderman.


Ay, and if I had not find for Fool, in giving your Relations a thousand
pound, you might have had a Coach.


Why, I did not advise you to it.


Yet would never let me rest till I did it.


Why, let me have a Coach, and I'll save it in other things; I'll catch Cold
else every Winter, and it shall cost you as much in Slops; for my Clothes are
so good, and my Shoes are so fine, I cannot walk a Foot.


Oh Citizens! Citizens! how are the times altered, since your Wives wore
High-crown'd Hats, Farendin Gowns, Red-Cloth Petticoats, Spanish-Leather Shoes,
and trudged about in Pattons: Now your Feet must be furnished with a Guiney a
pair; your Milliners Ware from the New-Exchange, the Old can't please you; your
Silks bought in Covent-Garden, Pater-noster Row has no Choice. We are a pretty
Corporation! that are the Metropolis of the Kingdom, furnish the whole Nation,
yet cannot please our selves! like Vintners that love to be Drunk in others
Men's Taverns! well may we decay, when our Wives, like French Mistresses, send
our Money abroad.


If the times are altered with the Wives, so they are with the Husbands, since
they wore slash Doublets, short Cloaks, and open-knee'd Breeches, with their
own thin lank Hair, that looked like the Fringe of a Blanket, or the strings of
a Bunch of Leeks; you can now wear the best Fashion and richest Clothes, Swords
upon occasion; come Drunk to a Play-House; pick up Whores at the
Chocolate-House: Be bubbled by Sharpers at Ordinaries: Carry a good Face at
Change, though within a day of Breaking; take up 3 or 4000 l. under pretence of
unexpected Bills; whip over to the Kings Bench; Bilk your Creditors, and die
with the Curse of Orphans and Widows on ye.


I pity them that do so. But Women commonly bring 'em to it.


But not their Wives.


Their Wives or their Whores, they are Women still: Why, how extravagant that
Head looks now, what a Monument of Topnots is there? On my Conscience, if the
French had landed, the Heads of the Women might have served for Beacons all
over the Nation.


Well, well, shall I have a Coach?


Not this Year.


Shall I have one the next?


I can't tell.


Nor yes won't give me a positive answer?


We will think on it.


We will think on it, Bungler. I long for a Coach, and I will have a Coach; and you
may spare it out of Clarret, you So^; since you can get no Children to Inherit
what you have, I'll spend it; and thou shalt never live an easy hour till I
have a Coach; and so think on it, thou Associate of Drunkards, eternal Tobacco
Funker; must I be contented with a Beast that stinks perpetually, sits up till
two or three of the Clock in the Morning, and knows nothing but his Bottle some
times a Week together? The World shall know what a Bedfellow thou art, that
snores all night, and art sick in the morning; thou Dehilitated Booby, thou
sapless trunk.


What will become of me? Beat her I can't, hate her I can't, turn her away I
dare not. If I could complain of her, I must not, for my own Reputation suffers
in it; besides, she has such a bloody crew of Relations, that would murder me,
if I should do any of these things; A Pox of all Fools that marry poor
Gentlewomen, for you wed their whole Family, and entail a Plague upon your
Posterity. Well I'll go up to Sir Tho. Reveller, invite him to Dinner, with two
or three more, and drink her out of my head. The Daughter of a Knight; with a
pox! the Honourable Sir Francis Haughty, Brother to the Viscount Blusteror,
Baron of Rocky Hills in Scotland! Well, take warning all by me.

I Robert Raison Grocer,
To have and to hold, and so, Sir,
Took the Daughter of a Knight from Covent Garden,
I Worth 10000 l. she not one Farthing.

Bring my things out of the Boat, and call me a Coach.


Yes, Master.


I think I have heard that voice, I'm sure I have seen that face.


George Reveller!


My Lord Worthy! Welcome ashore: how long has this happy Island been blessed with
your approach?


Prithee, sweet Orator, lay aside thy Rhetoric, and Preserve if for Friends of
lesser date; I am glad to see thee, and take my Joy heartily.


Nothing more acceptable by the pleasure of friendship. But, my Lord, being so
long abroad in the Courts of celebrated Breeding, I was afraid a hearty English
Salute might have been too gross for the tender Constitution of Italian
Ceremony.


Why faith, George, there are follies all over the World; but by my long
absence, and observation, I have studied to despise 'em; I can be Courteous,
without Formality; Cleanly, without Vanity; Friendly, without Flattery; free
from Prodigality, yet Generous in what is necessary; Honest, without
Partiality; and can be merry with a Friend, without talking Bawdy or Divinity.


Faith, my Lord, I can't match you; if you expect such Virtues here, you must
even keep company by your self: Why you'll be envied by the Wise, and scorned by
the Fools: for a true English man abhors what he cannot reach, and neglects
what he can.


Well, George, if thou art as free from these sins, as thou were when I left
thee, I shall complete my Travels in thy so wished for Conversation, and repent
that my curiosity abroad kept me so long from home.


Nay, my Lord, I was heartily grieved my Fortune would not admit of my
accompanying your Lordship abroad, but I have been faithful in my
Correspondence to your four years Travels, and my Letters never mist of any
passages here that were worth your acceptance.


Dear George I thank thee for 'em; and but that I thought I should sooner reach
thee than a Letter, I had given thee notice of my arrival; for I came in the
Packet Boat from Callis to Dover, where I took Post to Greenwich, shifted my
self, and so came hither; and had I not met with you, was going to seek you.


I am glad this accident prevented that trouble, I was just going to Greenwich;
but if you please, we'll go back to the Change, pick up an honest fellow or
two, and dine at the Rummer in Queenstrees; which, though the dearest, is indeed
the best accommodated house we can boast of.


What, are all the famous Houses about Covent-Garden and Charing-Cross
abolished?


Faith, my Lord, they are mightily degenerated, since Strephon the wise, the
witty, and the gay, and the Prince of all Company, as well as all hearts,
forsook us: Those that are left of that glorious Society, are retired from the
world, and mourn the remembrance of their lost Companions, that Wit and good
fellows are as hard to be found, as Conscience in a Jury, or Honesty in a
Guardian.


Well, since those Golden Days cannot be called again, we must make the best of
our present Insufficiency, and be as happy as we can, though not to such
perfection. For to tell thee truth, George, we have a very indifferent
Character abroad; and the respect to an English man is lessened extremely; our
understanding is become a jest, by our not knowing what we would have; and the
next Age must play the Fool within its own bounds, for as the Gent. Usher says
in the Rehearsal, for Politicians no body else will take us.


'Tis a sad truth, my Lord, for our distractions, which we might heal, we
strive to enlarge; and our misfortunes abroad are occasioned by our sollys at
home: Our Nobility love their Ease and Pleasure, the Gentry are Careless and
stubborn, the Commonalty grumbling and Positive, the Clergy Ambitious and
froward, and the Mobile mad for an Insurrection.


So much for Politics; but setting State Affairs aside, how does the old
Gentleman your Father?


Why 'tis a tuff Thief, my Lord, he'll bend double before he'll break, and
prefers living with his Equals below, before going to his Betters above: ^lfes
me, as most Parents do their Children, who are at vast charge to give 'em the
Education of Gentlemen, and, when they're fit for the society of such, starve
'em.


Is he in Town?


Ay, my Lord, and ten to one but we meet him at Change; he's a jolly Spark, and
loves his Whore and his Bottle, as well as the Lewdest of Eighteen.


Are our Youth so perfect at 18, George?


Ay, my Lord, as our Grandfathers were at 50: Youth now keeps Company with Age,
and Men with Boys; Vice is so much Improved within these ten years, and madness
so Pregnant, that within five more our Lads at 12 will begin to Whore and bear
Drink, as Portuguese Women do Children, and be past it at five and twenty;
they're Downright fots at 30, Drivel on till 40, when being fit for nothing but
Hospitals, they expire in a Flux, and you read in the Bill of Mortality, they
dyed of a Fever.


Well, prithee let's be gone, for I long to see some of these whose Characters
thou hast given.


As we go, my Lord, we'll call at the old Gentleman's Lodgings, Probably he's
at home; I must inform you, as you go, of his humour, that you may the better
know how to manage him: Next have a care you buy not the sight of these Sparks
too dear, for they'll fasten on you with the least Encouragement you give 'em,
and they'll worry you with more Questions, than an old Scholar would his Son,
when he comes home from School at Christmas.


O fear not, I Love Fools as I do a Landscape, they're always best at distance.
Tom bring the things.


Sir, the Steward has brought his Accounts, according to your Worships Order.


Bring him in; I look frouzy this morning, ad I must leave off this Drinking,
it will kill me else; For the heat of my Body's so violent, it will set the
Clarret within me a Boiling, and make a hash of my Bowels for Satan; Yet, I
look pretty well of my Age too; What a pox I'm but eight and forty, and have
Lungs as shrill as an Eunuch, fo, la, la, la; ah that Eye, Sir Thomas, that
Leer of the left Eye has broke many a heart, you old Rogue; George's Eye, Son
George has the same Eye to a T, all 'tis a wicked Dog at a Wench, but a cursed
Rogue keeps all his Whores to himself, he won't let his none Dad come in for a
snack; I'm forced to lay on my own Maids, and then the Coach-men get 'em with
Child, and the Whores put 'em upon me; ad I must take up, I must take up my
Life, and take down my flesh; I have had 20 Coach-men within this 10 year, and
every one of them has left me the Illegitimate substance of his Brawny Ability.


Is this a sincere Account of the last 3 months?


'Tis both sincere and Just.


It may be so, but 'tis very Extravagant; three hogsheads of strong Beer Drank
out in one Day by Harvest People.


Yes, and please you.


Yes, and vex me; it went thorough 'em as fast as they Drank it, they could
never hold so much.


Yes, and make nothing on it.


So methinks. Stolen one night 5 Pigs, 7 Turkeys, 9 Geese, 11 Ducks, 13 Hens,
and 15 Dozen of Pigeons, by the new-rais'd Dragoons; what will they do when
they come to be old Soldiers* But they're always in an Enemies Country, though
Quartered on their own Fathers. Spent likewise 40 s. at several times with the
Overseers, about agreeing for giving Security for 4 Maids with Child.

Maids with Child!


Servants, and like you.


Yes, they have served me finely! which were left so by the aforesaid
Soldiers; so what they rob us of in poultry, they give us in Bastards, a
pretty Exchange. Spent at fair Sarah the Dairy-Maids crying-out, who in her
Labour laid the Child to your Worship; why, you Son of a Whore, laid it to me!
I have not known her this 12 Months.


Sir, she Swore --


Sir she's a Bitch if she swore any such thing, and I can satisfy a Jury of
Midwives I have keen past it this 10 years; a young Dragooner, I'll be hanged
else; Owns what an Age we live in, that the Civil Powers must keep Whores for
the Military, and maintain the Children at their own Charge! I had a Sister but
12 year ago, that run away with a Welsh Ensign, who made a Beggar of her in 2
years, Poxt her the third, was Hanged the 4 th for a Highway Man, and she Burnt
in Wales for a Clipper.


'Tis a crying shame, Sir, that ones own Kindred can't be safe for them.


It is so, wherefore I will Petition, that the Army may have a certain
allowance of Strumpets, which shall be maintained by the Country Gentlemen,
that we may keep our Families and Relations for our own use.


Good Morrow, Sir Thomas the Worshipful, how is it, Sir?


Mr. Sasaphras the Drugster! faith warm with last Nights Topping, my Head Aches,
and my Hand Shakes, this Morning.


Ah, Sir Thomas, that will be at our years, if we drank water; but indeed, we
roared mightily, were very Merry, and Bumper'd it about cheerfully; ad my
Neighbour Raison the Grocer was pure and Wicked after you left us.


Ay!


Ay, fackings.


Why, Prithee? What did you? for I went home at 9 of the Clock.


Why, we were Delitions and Lewd, and had a mind to play some of your Covent
Garden Tricks, and Court-Diversions; and Mr. Billet the Wood-Monger goes Home
very Drunk, and like a true Gentleman, kicked his Wife, and went to Bed to his
Maid.


A very goodnight, I saith, Steward, depart, this Wickedness is too Gentile for
your Capacity.


Yes, Sir, and would become me as ill as your Companions: These Citizens would
feign do something like Courtiers; but I find they affect their Vices, as they
do their Fashions, never till the Gentry are both weary and ashamed of 'em.


Sir Thomas, good day; Neighbour Sasaphras the same; well how is it Gentlemen?
Pure, Bonny, Blithe, Brisk, Gay, Jolly, Whimsical, what say you? seasoned with
last nights Wetting, for to days soaking? does not the Spirit of Claret shine
in your Souls, and illuminate your Faculties, inspiring your Understandings fit
for fresh Wantonness, ha?


Well said, Landlord Raison, the Honour of the Grocers I faith!


And Master of the Company, you forgot that, Sir Thomas.


How now, Sasaphras the Drugster, old Ingredient for Claps, Infusion for
Potions, and Author of wry faces.


Free from the Noose of Matrimony, Old Spicer of Plumb Porridge, Quest Ale, and
Funeral Dead Claret?


To him, Sugar-Loaf.


Well said, Bachelor, old Bawdy Solitude, and Single Fornication.


Why, you're as brisk. --


Why? my Wife's gone into the Country, I'm Lord of all, and Master of my self.


Till she returns, Neighbour Raison.


Right, Neighbour chip Roots.


I gad, if she were mine, I should be loath to trust her in such public places,
as thou dost; as Epsome, Islington Wells, and Greenwich Park. Ad if I were a
young Fellow, my Mouth would so water at her.


Like enough. I warrant you, there are Fellows water at her, and it may be she
thirsts after them; may be she's Honest, or may be I'm a Cuckold; all Married
Men must stand to their Wives Mercy; and if I should be one, I have so much
Sense, as not to make a noise about what I cannot help, and had rather be a
private Plague to my self, than a Public Jest to the World.


Advice to Cuckolds, Seneca the 2 d.


Pshu, Pox, if we Marry Gentlewomen, they'll play us Gentlewomens Tricks; we
Citizens marry them for Love, and they take us for Interest: I wonder at the
Impudence of any Tradesman, to think to keep a Gentlewoman to himself.

Ye Citizens of London,
That will have Gallant Wives,
Ye never would be undone,
If you'd Marry Dames in Quoives.
But Gentlewomens Tales
Have got the Itch of Loving,
And when the Fancy once Prevails,
Their Buttocks will be Moving.

Ah Boys, ifackins, he's in a rare Cue to day, his Wife's absence has new
Souled him.


We will not baulk this good Humour, where shall we Dine?


Faith, with me, Sir Thomas, this is my Birth day, and I'll Drink
To the Memory of he that got me, she that bore me,
And Heaven grant Wife thou dy'st before me.

Sir, There's my Lord Worthy newly come from Travel, and my young Master below.


Entreat my Lord to Approach, but bid your young Master wait below, till I send
for him.


Why, what a crooked tempered Knight's this, he will do nothing his Son would
have him, nor suffer him to follow his own desires.


Sir Thomas Reveller, may a Man be admitted to your Embraces after six years
absence?


Heartily Glad to see you on my Soul, my Lord. Pray be pleased to know, my
Landlord Raison, and his Neighbour, Mr. Sasaphras a Drugster, ingenious Men
both, particular Members of the Common Council, and in all private Affairs
consulted for the good of the Public.


Seeing 'em in your Company, is a sufficient Testimony of their good Parts.


Sir Thomas is pleased to be Witty, my Lord; but we have some Power in this
City, and should be Proud if your Lordship had occasion to use it.


We are plain Men, my Lord, but have good Credit, and can make our Friends
welcome; we can Drink without being Exceptious, be Merry without State-Affairs,
hate parting when we are good Company, abhor knowing how the time goes,
therefore no body carries a Watch amongst us.


Pray, my Lord, how long have you been in London?


Faith, Sir Thomas, not an hour, and if my Good Fortune had not thrown me on
your Son, must have been a Wanderer much longer; but he has the strangest
fancy, he told me he'd bring me to his Father, and I could not get him up
stairs by any Persuasion.


I sent to him to stay below.


No, Sir Thomas, before I saw your Servant he swore he would not come up.


Swore it, I'll make him break his Oath, or break his Neck; Jack, go and bid
George come up.


I suppose he has told your Lordship his Father's Humour, he's forced to act by
contraries with him; I swear it's pity, he's a fine Gentleman, and I love him
extremely.


I never knew a Cuckold in my Life, but was fond of the Rogue that made him
one.


Why truly, Sir, I think Nature has been juster to him, than his Fortune, which
I am sorry is not equal to his Merit; and all the Virtues I could wish my self,
or in a Friend, I find in him.


Sir, your Son's gone.


How, Gone!


He's but gone to Guildhall, he said he'd walk there till I came.


Fetch him, Sirrah.


'Tis true indeed, my Lord, and I am sorry his Father won't let him live like a
Gentleman.


What, you'd have him Master of my Purse, as your Wife is of yours! as long as
the world knows he is a Gentleman, what's matter for his living like one; 'Gad,
I know abundance about this Town that live like Gentlemen, and are ashamed to
own their Parents.


So far I must side with Sir Thomas, he allows his Son to live on the sharp,
and that's like most of the Gentlemen of this Age.


Come, come, 'tis best pinching 'em in their Youth, they'll the better know how
to prize Money in their Age.


Faith, Sir Thomas, that Precept seldom takes effect; for a Son is apt to run
into Extravagancies the latter part of his Life, to make amends for the ill
usage of the first; and when Pleasure's in view, Consideration's a Foe.


Understandingly spoken, my Lord; this Travelling is an ingenious thing, 'tis
pity, that there are not half a dozen Members of the Common Council, sent
yearly abroad to learn Politics, at the Expense of the Nation.


What, how to Cheat more than you do. Pox, Tradesmen's Politics consist in
Lying only, and ye need not go out of your Parishes to learn that.


But pray, Sir Thomas, how long have you forsook the Court, and Embraced the
Order of Citt?


Why, ever since Knavery took Place of Honesty.


And that's a long time, Sir Thomas.


I speak in my days, Pimp.


There's a Bob for Bachelors, for they're all so.


There's nothing but Whoring, and -- for Whoring, I think we are pretty even
with 'em here; but there's Gaming and Perjury, Murder and Blasphemy, Divinity
and Hypocrisy, running in Peoples Debts, and borrowing of Money: I'll say that
for the Honour of the City, I have lived here this 3 years, and have not been
struck for a Guiney by any younger Brother among 'em.


He that won't provide for his own Son, will scarce lend to an Acquaintance.


Peace, Bedlam.


Pray let him, my Lord, he's an admirable Satylist.


'Tis to speak ill of every Man; yet be courteous to all Men; borrow of most
Men, and pay no Man; always at home to their Whores, and ever abroad to their
Creditors; to Cheat their Brothers, Debauch their Sisters; to be Drunk Nightly,
Arrested Weekly, Beaten Monthly, Poxt Quarterly, Live Cursedly, Dye Wretchedly,
and so be Damned to all Eternity.


Here's the Spleen of the City, my Lord; we can be as sharp upon them as they
upon us, sometimes.


Pleasantly described, in faith, Sir Thomas.


But see your Son.

What was the Reason you did not wait on my Lord up stairs, Sir?


You sent me word it was your Pleasure I should stay below.


And therefore you went away, Jackanapes.


I thought it not for your Honour, I should keep Company with Footmen.


Nay, Sir Thomas, You must not look upon him now as your Son, but a Friend of
mine, and pray be Civil to him for my sake.


Sir, for my Lord's sake, you're very welcome.


Nay, Good Sir.


Why, Tom Totty, will neither Austerity nor Civility please you?


Good my Lord take him off, here will be a Quarrel else.


Well, Sir Thomas, I'm resolved we'll Dine together, since I did not pay my Foy
when I left the Town, I'll pay my Welcome to it.


If your Lordship pleases, let me give you your Welcome; Sir Thomas has
Promised to Dine with me, 'tis my Birth Day, and if you'll grace it with your
Presence, I'll give you a Cleanly and Hearty Entertainment; we'll have Wine in
abundance, speak but one at once; Wit as it happens, and no Wives.


Truly, Sir, the Invitation is indeed alluring.


Come, my Lord, be good Natured for once, and let my Landlord have the
Maidenhead of your Arrival.


I think, my Lord, we can't do better.


Who spoke to you, Jack Sauce, you may Dine elsewhere.


Nay, Sir Thomas, you forget he's my Friend.


Nay, Sir, I ask your Pardon; for I'm engaged, now I think on it, at Pontacks,
though not with such good Company.


Indeed, Sir, and now I think on it, you shall not be engaged at Pontacks.


Indeed, Sir, but I am.


I will break your Head, if you say that again.


Why, Sir, my Word is past.


Therefore you shall not go.


Would you have me break my Word, Sir?


Break your Word, Sir, 'twon't go for a Groat, Sir.


That's your fault, Sir Thomas.


Drugster.


What, not to dine with a Friend, Sir!


No, Sir, not to say your Prayers, if I think fit.


Let him alone, my Lord, there's no other way of working him.


I know it.


Did you never pray for my Death, Sirrah? answer me sincerely. Did you never
wish me at the Devil?


I have wished him out of you often, Sir.


Out of me! Why, you Dog, do I incorporate with the Devil?


This is too far* Come, come, Mr. George, you shall dine with me.


Indeed Mr. Raison, I shall lose a Guiney if I do. For I left one as a Forfeit,
if I made not my appearance.


Come, come, George; stay George, thou shalt not want for a Guiney.


Sir.


I say thou can not want for a Guiney; my Landlord Raison, or Mr. Sasaphras,
will lend thee a Guiney.


What, and the Father present!


No, thank you for that.


I cannot stay without the Guiney.


Why get you gone and be hanged, you mercenary -- George.


Sir.


Won't you dine with your Cuckold, you fair-fac'd Dog?


My Cuckold!


Ay, ay, you leering Rogue, my Landlord; ah you're a sly Toad, George.


I know nothing on it, Sir.


Why did you never lie with his Wife, Smock-face?


Not I, Sir.


As you hope to be saved.


Nay, Sir.


I'll knock you down, you cursed Dog, if you stand in a lie to me.


Nay fie, Sir Thomas.


A hardened Rascal; why whither are you going, Sirrah?


Out of your presence, Sir, that I may not disturb the Company.


Stay, Sirrah. I cannot let him go, because he has a mind to it. And must you
lose a Guiney if you stay, Sir?


Ay, Sir, besides the Conversation of some pretty Women.


Pretty Women Sirrah! My Lord, we'll all go and dine with George.


Come Sir Thomas give him the Guiney, I had rather give it him my self, than be
without his company.


Why then give it him, if thou lik'st it so well.


Not before you, Sir Thomas.


I'll go out of the Room.


Ah, hold there.


I have no Gold about me; -- my Lord will you lend George a Guiney?


Ay, Sir, twenty, if you say the word.


No, no, but one, my Lord; nay, give it George; but one, my Lord; twenty I must
pay him, one he may forget, or be ashamed to ask for it.


Come all's well, and we'll be rare and merry.


George be cheery, I will lay by the authority of a Father, and dedicate this
day to Familiarity and good Fellowship.


Give me your hand on it.


There 'tis, and if I talk like a Parent, break my Head.


There's mine, Sir, I'll do it.


Come, my Lord, lead the way.


Pray do, my Lord, and we four will sing a Whim ex tempore. Eat an Oyster
before Dinner, and take a whet.


Away with it.


The Son's reconciled, and the Father is free;

The Husband's at home, and the Wife is abroad;

We'll empty the Cellar, and drink it quite dry;

But every man here shall have his full load.

Confusion to him that's not true to his Friend,

And hang the dull Rogue that shrinks from his Wine,

May all hard hearted Parents and Usurers mend,

And may Sons at their Fathers never repine.

May all these good Wishes increase with our Riches,
But a Pox take all Wives that e're wore the Breeches.

May all, c.

WEll, this Young Reveller's not coming to Dinner vexes me.


Ay, and had not Mrs. Raison come down this Morning, you would have been much
more uneasy.


Why truly I should have thought 'em together, that's the wicked truth on it;
but hang him, he has more Mistresses to diverthimself with: These young Fellows
that run at all, value no body any longer than they're with 'em. Well, Virtuous
Women, when once they're in love, should never let the man stir out of their
sight, till they've made him sure; for we set the Devil a dancing in 'em; and
because we won't comply without Matrimony, they meet while their eager some
kind she that has less Grace, which reaps the fruit of our Labour.


Fie, how you talk!


Fie, how I talk! why you think the same, and so does the whole Sex.


Have you no Regard to Virtue?


Yes, as long as Virtue has any Regard to me. Prithee let us not affect that
nicety when we're alone, which we assume in Public: I confess I would not go
beyond the Rules of Honour, and yet I cannot help envying those that do, when I
think they enjoy my Lover.


Florella, a lewd satisfaction is but of a short date; And however Gay or
Splendid a Miss may appear for the time she Triumphs, she falls at last as
unpityed, as unhappy; for the thoughts in each Man, that every fool who has
money is as acceptable as himself, makes the Woman as cheap as the Pleasure.


Why, do you believe that none of the Women about the Town were ever true to
one man?


No more than I believe one man is enough for the Women about Town. The vanity
that first betrayed 'em, always pursues 'em. Pride makes more Whores than Love.
Love ne'er made Whores; Convenience and Lust: Love's pure and chaste, the Beauty
of the mind, if so allow'd; the Beauty of the mind can ne'er abuse the Glory of
the Soul: They that can fit contented with their being, will never use base
methods to advance it: And I cannot help thinking that she who will be
Debauched to mend her condition, will afterwards lye with any man that can
better it.


Here's a Letter from Mr. Reveller, to Madam Florella.


So, the Rascal has sent an excuse, that's better than nothing.

(Reads) Dear Madcap (somewhat familiar for a Lover of a Fortnights standing) I
was robbed of thy Company by the Arrival of a Friend, my Lord Worthy, who this
Morning came to London, being returned from his Travels, and waiting on him to
my Father, was kept by the old Fellow at Dinner; pray pardon the misfortune,
since 'twas not my own seeking: I will wait on you this Evening in the Park,
and bid your Sister look about her, for I will bring my Lord, who is as mad to
see her, as she will be to have him, when she knows him. So in hopes to Cherish
you in Sickness and in Health, I remain your Obedient, George Reveller.

And thou shalt obey some time, George, for I know I must hereafter altogether.
Do you hear, Sister, how you're threatened?


Oh, forewarned forearm'd; however, if he be so accomplished as your Lover has
spoke him, as frozen a Virgin as I am, I may be melted: but when that time
comes, Florella, I'm resolved, if possible, we'll be Married the same Day, and
Bedded the same Night, that the Ignorance of one may not put the Experience of
the other to the Blush.


Your Servant, Ladies, what taking the Air to digest the Fumes of your Dinner?


Any thing, Madam, to avoid sleeping, which I am mightily given to after meals?


'Tis very unwholesome, indeed: But your Mother expects you, for there are
several Ladies come to visit her, and she wants your good Company to help her
to entertain 'em.


We'll wait on her, Madam; come, Sister.


Stay, I'll vex her a little first. Will not young Mr. Reveller be here to Day,
Madam? he promised to come and play at Cards again.


Why, do you like his Company so well, Madam?


No, Madam; but I find he does mine; you were the first that introduced him
into the Family, and I was civil to him for your sake, which I find he
misinterprets, and has sent me a Love Letter.


A Love Letter! what was in it? pray let's see it.


'Twas not worth your Reading, or my Remembering, and I exposed it to the flames
the minute I perused it. And though his Father makes Love to my Mother, I have
more value for my self, than to admit the Addresses of one who is a Beggar; and
so pray tell him.


I shall; and severely, Madam.


She's roused. Will you not walk, Madam?


I'll but gather a few Violets, and follow you.


Fie, why would you fret the poor Woman so? You might spare her the use of him,
'till you purchase him your self.


Hang 'em for Cutt-Loaves, as they call 'em; if it were not for the Convenience
of such, young Fellows would marry faster.


Oh false base Villain! have I maintained him, kept him even from starving, fed
still his Pride to keep his Figure up, slighted the Addresses of great Men for
him, neglected every duty of a Wise, and Sacrafic'd my name, my Peace, and all
the ornaments of Reputation? With him I ran away, e're scarcely warm within my
Husbands Arms: oh 'twas too short a Siege, he won too easily the Fort, which
had to others seemed Impregnable; without an Oath I rendered him my Heart, and
in the Zeal of Love forgot conditions; I had intentions to forget the Monster,
return to the Obedience which I swore; for what I use so ill deserves it not;
nay, I had resolved it, had framed my self by mild Degrees to leave him. I
would have been his Friend though still in want, and could with ease I thought
have parted with him.

But that which was indifferent before,
His Loving her now, makes me Covet more.

Oh tell me not of Honour, what I ought
Of Obligation's Gratitude to Worthy:
'Tis true, he is the Man who first seduced me,
And thou art she who first betrayed me to him:
I then was Poor, was ignorant of Sin;
So Innocent, that had I loved as now,
I could not for the Soul of me have told
What 'twas I longed for more than talk and kisses.

Well, well, Experience has cured those Errors,
And I suppose you can tell what you long for now.
You know this young Reveller is your Lord's Friend,
Who was so fearful of the World's admiring you,
He would not trust him with the Knowledge of you:
What can you hope for? If his Friend has Honour,
He cannot condescend to wrong his Love.

He knows me not, nor nothing of my Being.

You will be known in time, and then consider
What the Event will be of such a Breach.
My Lord can ne'er forgive so foul a Crime,
And in the heat of Vengeance both may fall;
You then will wish you had kept the worst of 'em.

Impertinent, thou prattlest for thy Interest,
And see no further than my ill-got Pension:
When Vice grows Ancient, it grows Mercenary.

Well, well, I was believed in the days of your Stepmother, when you sat with
your Needle in your hand from morning till night, with a short Meal a day,
whilst all her own Children took place of you. I then was appealed to, and my
Advice was acceptable.


It was my Poverty that gave the Credit.
Temptation in Affliction seldom fails.
Freedom was first proposed, and first inclined to;
Then Wealth, which made that Freedom relish better.
My Vanity was eager of the Bait*
And thou with Art did play it to my liking.
Fools, when they find their Masters Weaknesses,
Are Eloquent in flattering their Errors:
The Wife that would correct them are thought Fools.
I loved the Purchase, but I cursed the Price:
My Pride, not Inclination did undo me.

But now your Inclination will, I find:
What is it you propose in following Reveller?
The Man must live on you, you can't on him;
Nor will your Stock maintain your Follies long;
Can't you take one without forsaking the other?
Keep both, and I'll side with you.
Let Reveller his absent Hours supply,
But let the others Gold still make you easy.

Thou art a worthy wicked Counsellor:
Sin when it shows good nature is excusable;
My Treachery must thrive by Treachery:
I know the Act I am about is base,
But that serves little, when I cannot help it.
Morality, thou art unprofitable;
When once our Souls are prejudiced to Reason,
Affection helps the most decrepit sense,
And reconciles Impossibilities.

Do you stand to my Proposal?

Oh, any thing to feed my Hopes;
These four Years to the World I've lived a Nun,
Conversed with nought but Books, and thy dull self,
And use at last made Solitude most easy;
But oh, that fatal Morning be accursed,
When Curiosity debauched my Quiet.
'Twas Yesterday, would some Disease had stopped me,
Fond of a sight, I forced thee to the Wells,
And Criticised upon a crowd of Fools;
Each Fop Buz'd, in a Road of talk, his Folly,
And being Masked, I was obliged to hear 'em:
I laughed at the insipid Chatterers,
And was diverted with variety.

Till Reveller approached?

'Tis true.
I love my Weakness, though I blush to own it:
That Reveller! why was he made so Lovely?
Not but I could have stood the Charms of Person,
Had he not backed his Beauty with his Tongue.
I was a stranger too to Conversation;
But Reading, which informed me, that the rest
Were Fustian Souls, uneducated Blockheads,
Proved Reveller had Art with wondrous Sense;
His words fell easy, soft, not starched with Method,
Nor was his Language cramped with unknown Terms;
His Arguments gently conquered mine,
And when he found me silent, urged 'em strongest.

Why would you go? I persuaded you against it.

Thou did,
But 'twas an evil Itch that would not hear thee.

'Tis strange! you have the sense of the ill, yet cannot shun it;
Judge equally the Benefit and Loss,
Take in the cooling draught of Temperance,
And weigh impartially, e're 'tis too late.
You that can argue thus the right and wrong,
If you'd endeavour, sure might make good choice!

Oh, thou mistake, the weighing it confounds us.
It is in Love, as 'tis with Factious Writers,
Who state and answer every thing themselves;
That side seems fairest which they most affect.

Well, well, since it cannot be hope, you must have the Man, and there's an end
on it.


I must, I will, by Heaven I have him now,
I feel the Panter throbbing at my Heart,

Still let's be merry and wise, as the saying is:
What will you do about my Lord Worthy?
He has sent you a Letter here, but you won't see it; he says he will be down
to night.

Give it me -- Dear, dear Dorinda, (Dear and dull, but come, let's on) this
morning I came from Dover to Greenwich, where my Treasure was, but unknown to
me; in the pursuit on it I have lost such precious hours, as nothing but thy
self can make amends for: They told me, where I use to direct my Letters for
you, how you were disposed of, and had not Y. Reveller hindered me, I had been
with you as soon as this: But at night expect a longing Lover, to whom Dorinda
is the dearest Object.


Well, and who could write prettier; or indeed, who is prettier? I don't think
you have mended your choice; he's Young and Handsome, Rich and Noble; the other
has nothing but his Wits to live on.


To night! why Reveller meets me to night! nor will I miss the appointment, for
ten Lords.


Why, you don't mind what I say to you?


Disturb me not -- what's to be done?


Why, what are you thinking of?


How to avoid this Worthy.


Mercy on me now, Heaven forbid!


Do you forbid his coming, or I go.


Go, whither?


Any whither, Madness ne'er wants a place.


What will become of us? -- Consider.


Perish Consider! I have cursed all thoughts but those which favour Love and
Reveller


Well then, he shall be put off. I'll tell him, that you went to London to see
for some Letters, just before his came, which is probable enough, and so missed
each other; and that you being fearful of the Water would scarce venture to
come home to night; but says I, when she hears of your coming, her Love will do
any thing: Then after you have discoursed with Reveller, you may come in as
from London, which will the more and more endear him to you.


Do as thou wilt, and tell me on it hereafter.


Sure you might hear what's for your own good, one would think.


Talk but of Reveller, and I'll listen calmly;
My Soul shall dwell on the enticing Tale,
And I'll be stupidly in love with Silence;
No Passion ever, ever equalled mine:
But oh, my Reveller! be thou as kind,
What harmony will be in both our Souls!
Whilst trembling sighs bedew the willing Lips,
And every squeeze still closer than the former.
Oh Ecstasy!
But hold, keep down my Joy, it were a Crime
That I should lose my self before my time.

This coming by Water has refreshed us mightily. 'Sdeath, the old Fellows drank
like Germans.


Or like Women with Child, it had no Operation with 'em: I was pretty far gone
when we took Boat, but the Air has somewhat settled me.


How did you like the Entertainment, my Lord?


Much better than I thought I should; they are the honestest Plebeians I ever
met with; and as thy Father says, George, I wonder thou can have the heart to
Cuckold so honest a ^riend to the Bottle, as Raison.


Faith, my Lord, I'll be ingenuous with you; 'tis an Intrigue of a pretty long
standing, and though it be somewhat scandalous to receive more Favours from Women
than one, my necessity has obliged me to comply; for ever since your Travels
she has been my Father.


Thy old man has used thee scurvily; truly, but this Amour with Florella, as
thou talk of it, if it succeeds, will put it out of his power to wrong thee.


I have fair hopes on it, she's worth 15000 l. and her Sister as much. They are
the Co-heiress's of Sir Tho. Hazard, a famous Merchant, that died about two
Years ago. Their Mother-in-law, my Lady Hazard, did order it so, as to be their
Guardian, but the Money's their own upon the day of Age or Marriage; nor is
there any scurvy Proviso of the Mother's liking, and so forth; and if I can but
secure the Inclination, the Money comes of course.


How came you acquainted?


Why, you must know, my old man has made Love to the Mother this six Months;
she has 1200 l. a Year for her life, which her Husband gave her, not as a
Jointure, but generously, when he died; which with my Father's two thousand
pound per annum, will put 'em into a condition of living without being obliged
to Relations. But indeed Mrs. Raison was the person who first presented me to
the Family, for she Boards in the same House with 'em.


And thou hast well rewarded her. I wonder at the Humour of Women, that can't
have a handsome young Fellow, without the vanity of showing him; had she never
brought you into better company, then her own Discretion had kept, what her
Folly has lost.


I think both Sexes are equally to blame in that point; and especially Husbands
that carry their handsome Wives to all the public places about Town, as if men
married for the approbation of the World, and not their own liking: Now, when
I drink, I make use of my own Pallet; when I buy any thing, my own Opinion's my
guide; and not the persuasions of the Seller.


But, George, you'd take it till to put on a new Suit, and have the Town damn
your fancy. Every man loves to hear his choice commended; and a rarity in any
kind will be shown by the owner, out of the pride of his particular possessing
it.


Why truly there is something in that, my Lord. But I had rather keep my Money
in my Pocket, than by exposing my Stock, give Sharpers opportunity of borrowing
it.


But see, George, Petticoats!


The right, I hope; I know you, Madam, by that vicious turn of your head, and
side leer.


Indeed, Sir!


Yes, indeed, Sir -- my Lord -- Madam, you know what I writ in my Letter: Pray
unmask Ladies, that my Lord may be satisfied I spoke truth; for I have given ye
Beautiful Characters.


I think an honest face need not blush, though somewhat homely. Come, Sister, let
'em see the worst of us, lest my Lord should think us uglier than we are. I
think our faces are clean.


Little Charmer!


If my Friend, Madam, bought his Curiosity as dearly as I shall purchase mine,
he's in a languishing condition, I assure you.


Soft and fair, my Lord; you are an Artist I find; that can love, as Fiddlers
play, at first sight.


Love, as it's unaccountable, is irresistible.
There must be a beginning, why not now?
A Laziness in liking is insipid.
Nor would you prize the lightning of your Eyes,
If it were slow in giving us the Wound.
That Flint is best, that fires at first stroke.
Such fierce born Sparks, if they not take effect,
Proves that which should receive 'em is in fault,
And makes the Striker peevish.

The Fire that kindles quickest, burns too fast;
What boils too fierce ne'er strengthens, but decays;
The simmering, though slow, is still the stronger.

No method, sure, can be allow'd in Love.
Prudence and passion never were allied.
The Flame which Reason rules has Interest in it:
What's raised by Art, is still maintained by cunning:
The naked looseness of the Soul is best;
And that which shows most madness, owns most love.

I find you are experienced in it, my Lord,
And are a Bowler in the Green of Love;
Can lie in the Way, or hit the Heart at pleasure.
I am a Stranger to my Bias yet,
Nor is it fit my weakness should be challenged
By one who knows the Ground, and all its rubs.

The Game which I propose I'm sure to lose at;
The most unknowing of your Sex in that,
Will quickly learn, and baffle the Instructor.

My Lord you go too far, I'll hear no more.


So, his Wit has made him too familiar; and she has done with him: What can you
say now that's pleasant and modest? I know 'tis a Restraint upon your Capacity
to talk civilly and well: But if you don't, I shall follow my Sister.


As you say, Madam, Lewdness is most easy, especially to those who abhor
Virtuous Company; but I, who am naturally addicted to goodness, can bear a
Subject as Pious as the Priests of our times.


So, your Vice will peep in spite of your Tiffany Virtue: But, d'hear, talk to
me of nothing but Love; and manage it so that I may believe you; nay, honest
Love too, mark that, Sir!


That latter obligation is somewhat heavy: Prithee let's talk of other Love,
though we shall act none; the thoughts of a Miss has oftentimes relished a Wife.


Indeed, Sir! is your Stomach so queasy? methinks you might swallow the
bitter-Pill of Matrimony, when so sweet a bit as 15000 l. is to follow.


Faith, Child, I bear a Conscience, and had rather serve thee for nothing, than
take so unreasonable a price for my Labour.


Truth is, I don't know whether you'll deserve it; and I think I had better
keep my money, than run the hazard of so uncertain a purchase.


Pox on it, thou hast too much Wit for a Wife; besides, I suppose you have such
a Villainous Constitution, as to expect me all to your self.


I leave that to your own discretion; but if you should play me foul, may you
only think at the same time I am serving you the same fauce; and go on as well
as you can.


As you say, when a man can't trust his Servants at home, he can take but
little pleasure abroad: I find I shall be undone, in spite of my aversion to
Wedlock. Well, my Lord, will your Fort accept of Proposals, or is it stubborn
against Articles?


Faith, George, somewhat Peremptory, and much upon Resistance.


Why, my Lord, I thought you Travellers had the Knack of taking Hearts.


I had of keeping one, 'till I saw your Sister, Madam.


I desire Consideration, my Lord, the surrender's of consequence, it being the
inlet to my Eternal Peace or Disquiet.


Ay, ay, give her time, my Lord, as much as she will; the more you offer, the
less she'll accept; so much I know of my Sex.


Thank you, Sister; but men are not so scarce, that we need run mad for 'em.


But you may, if the War continues, for ought I know; you'll wish you had taken
a whole Man hereafter; if the Prophecy comes to pass, you'll be very
indifferently fed, when one Man is a mess for 7 of you.


Methinks you young Gentlemen, Mr. Reveller, should go and serve your Country;
'tis a shame to make Love, when there's Honour in view.


Thank you, Madam; but if you could persuade my Father to go in my Room, you
would much more oblige me.


He's old.


The fitter to be knocked on the head. Young Fellows get the King Soldiers.
Drones that have lost their Stings are useless.


I find these Ladies would be Courted like those in Romances, we must kill
Monsters for 'em.


Thank Heaven, we are not so hard put to it, as the Romans were with the
Sabines; we need not fight for Women in this Age.


Not if all be so free as the Lady in the Mask was yesterday Morning at the
Wells, Mr. Reveller.


Jealousie's a Sign of Love, Child, I am glad to see it. Why Faith 'twas a
likely Soul, and a Woman of Sense; for she railed at Matrimony damnably.


Well, George, I as much envy thy Happiness, as I mistrust my own; my Lady has
no pity.


As much as you care for, my Lord, or becomes me: You have Rallied enough now,
I suppose, which was the utmost end of your Conversation. Do I colour, Sister?


A little guilty about the Eyes.


Come, Ladies, will you honour us so far as to play at Cards with you this
Evening? my old Fellow's with your Mother, and we'll pretend a visit to her; I
have often talked to my Lady of my Lord, and she'll be Proud of a Noble-man for
her Son-in-Law, though you are so indifferent to him for a Husband.


Ads my Life, here's your Father, my Lady, Raison, and abundance more with
Music!


Come, my Lady, 'tis pity such an Evening should be lost within doors.


Look, yonder are my Daughters, Sir Thomas, with your Son and another
Gentleman!


Ad so, my Lord Worthy! the Flower of Europe, Madam: ad if he takes a liking
to your Daughter, we shall have a Glorious Son-in-Law -- George -- my Lord,
your Lordships humble Servant; pray be pleased to know my Lady Hazard, the
Mother of these Girls, and, in all likelihood, of Election to be the Partaker
of my Flesh and Blood.


You much honour me, Sir Thomas, and I wish my interest there were equal to
yours here.


If he goes on as he begins, he may get the start of 'em.


Your Lordship has so noble a Character, that were I a stranger to your
Quality, the fame of your Virtues would recommend you alone; nor would I
willingly call her Friend, or Relation, that could refuse such goodness.


I humbly thank your Ladyship.


Very well; Faith, very well said of both sides; and so much for Complements.
Come Neighbour Sasaphras, Landlord Raison, bear up Sirs; what a Pox, Dosed,
stupefied, hum drum! Wine used to have another Operation.


Pox on it, I'm sorry we left off Drinking. Prithee let's to it again: I don't
care for Women's Company.


Why, was it not thy own Proposal, to come down to Greenwich, to Sup with thy
Spouse, and be merry with this good Company?


Truth is, I was but half Drunk when I had a mind to my Spouse, I find since
the last Bottle I am incapable.


I am sorry your Husband's in such a condition, Madam.


I am more sorry you're in such Company, Sir. I have not only a Beast for a
Husband, but a Villain for a Lover.


Madam!


Rascal.


Your Servant.


What, are you angry, Mrs. Raison?


A little troubled he should make my Husband such a Sot, Madam.


Such things will be: you may repair the Lady's loss, Mr. Reveller.


I wish I might, Madam; for I was always inclined to help the afflicted.


Come, what do we do here, Sir Thomas? a Pox of these Petticots, they spoil
more Company than e're they Created; let's have some Wine, and cold Chickens,
go upon Flamstead's Leads, and huzza to the Neighbouring Counties.


Ay, ay, let's huzza, let's huzza.


Nay faith, Mr. Raison, since you have Fiddles we'll have a Dance, and what you
will.


Why, you impudent Rascal, how come you to speak of a Dance before I thought
on it?


You forget, Sir Thomas, what we shook hands about.


Gads so, I beg thy Pardon, George; come then, let's have a Dance.


Hang Dancing, Sir Thomas, 'twill put us all into a Sweat, and make the Air
unpleasant.


I think we had better Dance at home, for we shall have the whole Town here
gaping at us.


Agreed, then we'll first to Supper, and then for a Rubbers at scampring. My
Lord, we must desire your good Company.


By all means.


'Tis a Blessing I have Prayed for.


Lead on then; George, handle your Mother-in-Law, and I'll take Water-wag-Tail,
my Lord here's yours, Sas take Mrs. Raison, and let the Husband bring up the
Rear.


He had better lead the way, that he may not fall upon us.


I think I ought to go first, as being the only Married Person among you:
Besides, as I'm a Cuckold, I'm a single Man in this Company. Fiddlers, Play
Buffcoat, la, la, la.


Well said, Mr. Raison -- Madam, bear up, your Husband's good Company.


What means this Devil?


Come, away with it, la, la, la.


HAs not the Clock struck Eleven yet?


No, but 'tis very near it; I'll in, and wait my Lord's coming.


Do.
Oh! Reveller! you're slow, or I'm in haste,
Love should be still before hand with the time,
For 'tis a Thief that often Robs our Joys.
How tedious are the Moments of my Longing!
Whilst Worthy, at a years end, comes too fast.
Yet such a Slave I am to my Impatience,
That for one early Minute with my Love,
I'd meet an hour sooner what I hate.

'Tis a fine Moon Shiny Night, much ado I have stole from my Company, and much
ado I have to manage my Footing, 3 Bumpers more had rendered me incapable of
Crawling; now for this Mistress, it is the prettiest wittiest thing I ever met
with; shine out thou Pale-Fac'd Bawd to Midnight Wooers; Blush if thou can,
to make thy Flame more cheerful, for I will do a deed, if she will let me,
shall make thy Cheeks glow, little Luna, and wish instead, of Lighting the
World, thou were it in her Condition of Peopling it; oh! th^re's Man's Meat
already; has thy Blood, child, any simpathetical motion towards mine? if you
expect a Lover, tell me? if not, leave the place for one that does? There's a
convenient Pond at the lower end, if you're in a Despairing Condition.


'Twere hard to be droun'd so near a good Harbour, would not that Flesh and
Blood, you talk of, fling out a Rope to save me?


O, 'tis the Devil, I know the Instrument by the sound; well, Madam, I know not
whether you'll esteem it a Favour; but I have left Wit and Wine, Women and
Wealth, to show how much I am your Humble Servant.


'Tis as my Mistress Raison suspected, and I'll acquaint her instantly.


Well, Sir, and I have neglected my Repose, ventured catching Cold, and run the
hazard of a Parents fury; to bid you welcome.


So far we are upon the square; but how must I accost you? shall we chat easy
and naturally, without the Cant of Romance, and Ridiculous Whining, or must I
open my Heroical Budget, for extravagant Raptures?


Keep it shut, I beseech you, Sir; for as I desire no Lies, I expect no
flights; let our Expressions be Cordial, whether they prove effectual or no;
what a Condition the Knave's in! now Cunning help me.


Why then, as I hope to be Saved, and that's a Presumption --


Hold, Sir, I must give you some Cautions; in the first place, I am a Maid,
therefore talk Decently; in the next place, I am Honourable, therefore talk
Respectfully; and thirdly, I am and will be Honest, therefore talk Virtuously.


Oh Lord! what Company hast thou betrayed me into? Virtuously and Honest! the
very words have made me Sober; if I were Dying of a Hycop, the surprise of a
Thumb Ring would destroy it.


I'll try you, Sir.
For if I yield, I lose him after it,
It is the Pride of Man, with Oaths to win us,
And then with scorn he boasts his Treacherous Conquest.
Why should I for the Joys of one poor Night,
Create the Plague of Doting ever after?
All Men despise what's given too willingly.

Child, I find we shall do no great matters,
I wish Thee and thy Honesty a good Nights Rest,
Such a Cold Couple can get nothing but Agues sure.

Stay, Sir. I cannot part with him.
Goddess of Wisdom and of Beauty help me,
Pour all the Guiles and Graces of my Sex
Into my Face and Soul, but for an hour.
Diana, from thy Freezing Isicles
Of uninstructed harmless Chastity,
Send to his wanton Blood one drop to cool it,
That I may catch him in the Bonds of Honour,
And never more expose my self to lewdness.
Then will you go, Sir!

Why, what a charming look the Baggage gave me! Not if you talk within compass;
I am pretty good natured, and can pass by what's said, upon condition, you
don't Relapse; for look you, Child, Honour is as great a check to Love, as fear
of being discovered is when we're acting it.


But how can you esteem what comes so cheap?
When there's no tie, where's the security?
You have a treacherous notion in your minds,
Which, on the least occasion, you improve;
Believing, if we are seduced by one,
By the same Rule we may be kind to all:
But Marriage binds us by a sacred Oath,
And Reputation checks all Lawless Thoughts.

Look you, Madam, my Mother made me swear, upon her Death Bed, I never should
be bound for any body.


Though I know the Rogue lies, yet he pleases me:


If I thought 'twould any ways add to the making her a Whore, I'd confess my
self the Son of one. Why, Child, I think there was some such hugger mugger
business, but that was to preserve an Estate from going out of the Family;
'twas a kind of an incestuous match, for they were Sisters Children; but
Interest, Interest; now mine's a Love free from all such design: Our Fancies
shall not be palled with cares of Wealth, of Cuckoldom, or chargeable Posterity.


But nothing can be constant out of Wedlock.


No, nor in it neither, scarce, to my Knowledge. Wedlock may cover a sin, but
'twill never prevent one; and we have such an itch to be gadding when we're
confined: Had our first Parents never been forbid, they had never been Curious.
What makes men love eating abroad, when they may have it so much better and
cheaper at home, only because it is home.


Suppose you should gain Credit,
Would you for ever love, and never leave me?
Would you not covet still Variety,
And seek out some fresh Mistress to deceive?

Not I, by Heavens;
Thou hast Charms sufficient to secure a Heart,
Thy Wit's unimitable, thy Beauty matchless:
Nature was in thy Composition lavish.
Would Jove create a Mistress for himself,
He'd choose thy Mould to Cast her in.

Blessed Moment, he grows sober.

Think what a glorious pride will swell my Soul,
When I possess what none beside can purchase:
Thy Generosity will oblige my Faith,
And I must shame my self in wronging thee.
What Fool would run the hazard of a change,
When he's secured of certain happiness?

Now Woman -- Oh, you flatter!
This heat of Love comes from the zeal of Lust:
No Passion can be lasting that's so eager,
And when you've pleased your self, and ruined me,
You will forget as fast as you invented.

Desire can ne'er forget what it must feed on;
Like Jealous Piety, I'll have the Figure
Drawn of the Saint I worship, to prevent it,
And to thy Shrine such hearty Offerings pay,
As no methodical dull Wife can merit.

Then I've another Game to play.
Heat, heat his Blood, instead of cooling it,
That I may work his eager hopes to Love,
Then act a Virtue which shall tie him faster.

Our Joys shall be irregular, but often:
Despising a Domestic Decency;
And when we faint with Emulating Fondness,
As two hot Combatants wearied, not beaten,
Whose violence has dried and choked their Lungs,
Creep to some Spring to re-instate their Spirits,
I from thy Lips will take such Verdure in,
As shall relieve my droopy drowthy Soul,
And make me fiercer for the next Engagement.

By Heaven, if he persists I am undone,
His charming Tongue will blast my Stratagem;
And will ye swear? but what avails men's Oaths!
Forgot when the occasion's passed which urged 'em.

What should I swear!

Swear that you'll never marry whilst I live,
For that's the Rock our yielding Sex still splits on.
You to the Generous Mistress curse the snare,
But when you're tired, make use on it to avoid her.

May Poverty and Jealousy attend me
The minute I prove false:
Come let's retire, and wind our selves in Bliss,
Tangle our Souls in Ecstasies unknown,
And drop into Confusion by consent.
By Heaven, I'm sir'd, her every touch distracts me,
So over eager am I to possess her:
I fear the fierceness will destroy the Power.

And will you ever love me?

Can I love Heaven, Prosperity, or Content?
Oh do not drill me thus! but take me to thee,
Smother me in thy Arms with kind Convulsions,
And hug me to the utmost verge of Bliss.

Stand off, Base Villain! thou Beastly part of man!
Thou glowing Satyr! got by some rank Devil.
Go to the Stews, vile thing! and make thy Choice;
Take Pleasure and Diseases both at once,
And scatter 'em through all the Strumpet-Tribe:
I loath thee for this wicked Supposition:
And all the noble Notions in my Soul,
Which crowded with a fondness to prefer thee,
I here dismiss, and in their Room admit
As base thoughts of thee, as thy intended Practice!

Stay, Madam; what an Apoplexy's here in the midst of Health You can but try me
sure, and think this way to work me to a higher value for you.


Touch me not, Monster!
If thou dost, I'll call for help; I feared thy Treachery, and have it near me.
Because I tried thee with a seeming kindness,
Could thou believe so poor of me, to yield
On a first Conference? had I really doted,
So much I hate thy low esteem of me,
That you're as much my scorn, as once my liking.

Yet stay, Madam! by Heaven, I cannot leave her!
There's something from her which has touched me nearly:
Stay, Madam!
And since I have committed such a Crime,
Let me gain Pardon, though I lose your Favour:
For mild discretion tells me I'm to blame,
And all those Charms, which when my Blood was warm
Enticed me to a lewd imagination,
Now strike a Reverence upon my Soul:
'Twas cursed Wine! that Spirit of Assurance,
And Introducer of all Lawless thoughts,
That bred the mischief. I now am temperate,
Shame has destroyed the Vice, and I am honest.

Oh happy management!
How can I trust what has so lately wronged me?
If I forgive you, and you again relapse,
I am alone in fault.

By Heaven I am as calm as a Platonic:
Thy Glorious Virtue has increased that Flame,
Which after its lascivious heat had ended.
Propose a Remedy to heal this Breach,
And like expiring Mortals, fond of life,
I'll take in any thing that gives me hopes.

No more, I'm called; keep steady in this Faith,
And you shall hear soon from me.

Will you not tell me when; that being full of the expecting Bliss, I may some
comfort purchase, with the knowledge that every tedious hour that falls away, I
have an Enemy the less?


To morrow at the Wells: but be gone.


I cannot leave you.


Nay offer not to watch me, but convince me of your love, by your obedience,
and you shall know to morrow what I am.


Thou dearest, thou first I ever truly loved, adieu.


Thanks to my prosperous Art, I think I have thee.
Now to my Interest; how dull is all
That's coming, how dear was all that's past!
Yet I must seem to covet what I'd shun;
Oh what a curse 'tis, when for filthy Gain
We affect a Pleasure in a real Pain.

What the Devil ails me! or does the Devil govern me! my Blood's quite altered,
and those loose desires, which never liked but for Convenience, are changed to
real Passion; my wanton Drunkenness turned to a sober Admiration, and I begin
to fear I'm growing a downright dull, insipid, constant Lover! oh for some kind
she to allay this mighty Fever, that I may snub this damned honest Inclination,
before it gets the better of me.


Satan, I thank thee, here's a Petticoat I'm sure! I find wickedness will not
be kicked out this night, and my Constitution returns to its rambling Custom.
Madam!

Sir.


What cruel accident can be the occasion of this solitary travelling so late?


Why, Sir, I am come to look after a lost Lover, who parting from me in a
sullen humour, I fear has hanged himself.


No, no, Child, never trouble thy Head about that, those Roman Gallantries are
expired; but if thou would be thoroughly revenged on him for leaving thee,
take up with me: I bear a tender Conscience to all distressed Damsels, and keep
a particular Fund for Acts of Charity.


Should all the distressed Damsels come to you for Relief, I believe you'd shut
up your Exchequer quickly.


Look you, Madam, I am not the first Banker that has broke, when his Bills have
come too thick upon him.


Say you so, Sir.


Mrs. Raison!


To your amazement, ungrateful, perjured Villain.


Oh, I find what this will come to, and thanks to my unknown Mistress, am
pretty well provided for a Reconcilement: What means this Fury, Madam?


Devil, can thou ask that Question! The Lady you have had so long should know
the meaning, could I find her out.


Now for a good Face to a bad Cause: I suppose, if you'd examine into it, you
might easily find her out.


What says the Beast?


I do confess I am somewhat Brutify'd, but I have so much humanity left, to
remember I tipped you the Wink when I left you, and you Leered, as much as to
say, I'll follow you.


Was ever such impudence!


Was ever such forgetfulness! why; what the Devil, because I am Drunk, do you,
think I've lost my Senses? Did you not come presently after me, Masked? and
have you not been bantering me this hour, with a pretence I did not know you,
though I called you by your name; and hinted some Particulars of our Familiarity?
and did you not turn short from me at the upper end of the Walk, and run from
me, and now here I have met you again?


This is beyond all Patience!


I'm sure I have shown a great deal, in bearing what I speak of, and but I was
thorughly convin'd it was you, and only a trick to try me, I would no more have
sauntered after you, than an old Courtier would have follow'd a Statesman out
of favour.


Distraction! Did you not address to me as a fresh Woman?


Ay, that was when you used me like a fresh Man; trick for trick, Child, that's
all: and since you have had your humour, come along and let me have mine.


And do you think I'll be satisfied thus?


No, no, I'll satisfy you better.


This won't do, Devil, I am so convinced of your Baseness, that --


^h, pox, too much is too much: Prithee don't drive the Jest so far neither; I
can bear, you know by what's passed, but I gad the Worm will turn at last.


'Tis a folly to talk to him in this condition, I'll take the Morning to School
him in; perhaps it might be some midnight Jilt watching for Prey, like a
Polecat in a Warren, and my approach might frighten her away.


Come, come, Child.


Whither, what do you mean?


How silly that is; where's your Husband?


Why, your Father and he, with the Drugster, are all gone a Rambling into the
Town: I expect none of my Wedlock Monster this night.


That's as much as to say I must take care of her. Well, we'll to my Lodging,
you may get in early enough unseen the back way, as you use to do.


My Maid will take off that; but I shall catch my Death here, standing so long
in the Dew.


We'll go, My Dear. Claret I worship thee!
At last the injured Termagant's grown Civil,
A Drunken Impudence can out-face the Devil.

There's nothing like a Brimmer,
To make the Heart full glad;
It cheers the Soul,
Inspires all,
The Drunk are never sad.
Sir Thomas, let's out-roar Thunder, be Lewder than Atheists, out-Swear a
Gamester at the loss of his last Stake, out-drink a Cook in the Dog-days, be
Saucyer than kept Whores to their Cullys, and Prouder than Constables at
midnight.


Let's be as conceited as City Wits, vainer than City Wives, fonder than City
Husbands, and as great strangrs to our old Acquaintance, wherever we meet 'em,
as a new made Sherriff to his next Neighbour


Let's be frollicksome as Counsellors Clerks; and as Awkward as their Masters;
make as much of our Whores as Presbyters in private, value discretion no more
than our young Nobility. Let's commit Murder, that we may be company for
Gentlemen, and stalk as stately as a Foot Captain, when he marches through the
City at the head of his Mirmidons, to relieve at the Tower.


Till by affecting what we are not capable of, we become as Ridiculous as a
dancing Judge.


Well said, Sir Thomas, but where's this Son of yours?


Hang him, Rogue, he's stole home to some Whore I warrant him.


A Pox take all Whores, say I.


Thou hast reason, poor Cuckold. 'Tis a Heavenly Moonshiny night. Some Wine,
Rogues.


Stand.


And that's as much as we can.


Who are ye?


Drunkards, rich Fellows, and not over wise.


Oh, Sir Thomas, and Mr. Raison, good Morrow to you Gentlemen; you're upon the
frolic, I see. Rest ye merry, Gentlemen; pray do no mischief, and be as Jovial
as you please.


Nay, drink the King's health, Mr. Constable.


If ye please, Gentlemen; come, Sirs, Heaven bless him.


May not we pledge ye, Masters?


No, Vermin, no; there's Money to swill malt with, Claret's as much out of your
Element, as good Manners beyond your Understanding.


Bless ye, Masters.


This Constable has more Sense, than ever I met with in any of his Tribe; some
Rogues now would have provoked a Quarrel, only for the Convenience of their
Watchmens stealing Hats and Periwigs, and so forth.


The Watch of Covent-Garden would no more have missed such an opportunity,
than a Thief would slipping into a House, when the Door's open.


There is one of those VVatchmen they say is a terrible Fellow, pray who is he?


Why, he's a Midnight Rakehel driver, that has Cracked more Skulls, than ever
Pavier thump'd Flints; there's not a scourer of any Reputation, whose facetious
Noddle has not had the Honour of being Dubbed with his Quarter Staff; he was
never in the right, and yet always gets the better; he will sit you up three
hours after his time to Watch for Prey, and use you the worse for not coming
sooner; and being an il-llook'd Fellow, he has a Pension from the
Church-Wardens, for being Bullbeggar to all the froward Children in the Parish.


A most notable Description: but your Son, Sir Thomas?


Ay, your Son.


Let's go and disturb the dog, and drown him in pint Glasses.


Agreed, agreed. Play Cats-guts and Rossen.


Well, Mr. Reveller, you're a wicked man; and were it not more out of a
Motherly Affection, that you might come to no harm in your Drink, than any
inclination or desire I have to your person, I swear I would not have come with
you.


This will be the Cant when she rises in the morning; she never was with me in
her life, but she told me 'twas to keep me from ill Women.


But I hope you are somewhat come to your self now?


I shall be, Child, when my Vapours are expelled, the night's much wasted;
come, we lose time.


Heavens, what noise is that? 'Tis your Father's Voice, and my Monsters!


Sir, your Father's just coming up, with Mr. Raison and several others.


Go, get you in, lock the Door, and go to Bed, I'll send 'em away, I warrant
you.


Don't drink no more, dear George, you'll be senseless if you do.


Don't fear it.


A Pox of the Rogue that sneaks from his Wine,
And runs to a Daggle-tayl'd Whore;
May Nature be drowsy, and bawlk his design,
Or may he ne'er drink any more.
How now, Rogue, how now Sculker, what leave your old Dad for a Whore? I never
served your Grandfather so, Sirrah.


Indeed, Sir, you were too hard for me. If I had drank any more, I should have
forgot the duty of a Son, and have used you saucily.


Why, that's like most of the Sons of this Age, when we're old, they're the
only young Fellows will keep company with us, and it's against their Wills too,
only the respect of what we'll leave 'em obliges a little, so we're forced to
wink at their wickedness to keep our own in Countenance.


Ay, Sir Thomas, the greatest Seducers of Children now a days are the Parents;
the Fathers for the Sons, and the Mothers for the Daughters.


And who are the greatest Seducers of Wives? old Race of Ginger.


Bachelors, Sir Thomas, illustrious and free Bachelors.


Not of thy Age, Drugster; you're as dry as the Ingredients of thy Trade, and
hast no more Moisture in thee than a Potato.


Well, had I any Children, they should never go to a Play-house, nor to Church.


Why so?


Because they go to learn Wickedness at the one, and Hypocrisy, how to
dissemble it, at the other.


Ay, but you may learn good at both, if you'll make a right Construction.


Yes, you may be sober in a Tavern, if they'll bring you no Wine; but where
there's Object, there's Temptation, and where there's Temptation, there's
Desire, and where there's Desire, there's Uneasiness, and where there's
Uneasiness, there's Impatience to be cured, and when there's Impatience to be
cured, Adultery or Fornication's the only Remedy; so the Devil in the end's
your Physician.


Well said, Sas. and since the Clergy on all sides are so fickle, I think that
Layety wisest, that believes none of 'em; and now we are talking of Church
Affairs, where's your Whore, you Dog?


Whore, Sir!


Ay, Sirrah, I'm sure you would not have run away, if there had not been a
Whore in the case -- therefore I'm resolved I will see her, and if I like her,
I'll be better acquainted with her.


Why, Sir Thomas, suppose your Son had a Woman with him, would you have so
little Grace as to commit Incest?


Incest! that's a jest! for most of the younger Brothers about Town, are kept
by their Fathers Whores, and I say I will see her.


Nay, pray Sir, you'll disturb --


Ay, therefore I'll do it.


But, Sir, he is not well.


He, what he, Sirrah?


Why Sir, my Lord Worthy's Chaplain: who being in want of a Lodging for this
night, is within, in my Bed: He's a grave sober man, Sir, and you'll fright him
out of his Wits.


How, a sober Fellow and a Nobleman's Chaplain, he's at Boardwages then; for
where they command the Cellar, the Butler's never idle, and I will see this
Miracle.


Nay, pray Sir. Mr. Raison and Mr. Sasaphras, I conjure you, by the Worth and
Honour of Citizens, stand by me, and keep my Father out, or I am ruined for
ever.


Yes, George, you shall find we Citizens have Honour and Worth: Come, Sir
Thomas, here's a Bumper to you.


Agreed. Sir Thomas, your Inclinations.


They're in his Bed-Chamber, here's her Health. Drink you Dog, that we may be
upon the square with her.


You shall not go in.


Gad but I will.


Faith but you shall not.


By the Hectors of Covent Garden.


By the Members of Grocers Hall.


Why, is not the Whore as free for me as for him?


Sir, I have given him the Word of a Citizen to stand by him, and my ^uncto
will not allow me to violate the Honour of my Corporation.


Why, you Cuckoldy Dog, it may be your own Wife for ought you know.


I care not if it were my Mother, and he were getting an Heir to disinherit me,
he shall not be interrupted; and though I am as it were dead Drunk, yet I will
stand by him, I say I will stand by him.


So suddenly fell the Walls of Jerico, and Joshua plundered the Town.


Mr. Sasaphras.


Hold there, Sir Thomas, I stand in the Gap, and like the Bassa of Buda will
dye in defending the place.


Why, what a Pox have we got a Hydra? No sooner one Head down, but another
sprouts up? Why, dare you fight?


Dare! 'ounds draw, come, for the Pass, yours or mine.


And hast thou really Courage?


Have you a Heart, Sir, try if I can hit it; come on, Sir, come on.


Nay, if you're so hot upon fighting, you're no Citizen I'm sure; and
considering how Captains and Laced Coats have been admired by Shopkeepers
Wives, thou may be the hasty Off-spring of an Afternoon's Recreation in
Moorfields.


Come, Come, will you Tilt for this Lady?


No, I shall not do like the Fools now a days; Tilt for a Whore I don't know; Come
Sirrah, since I must not see her, Raison's Wife --


I care not, I'll stand by him.


What Liquor have you? have you any Cherry, Sir? Cherry, the Comfort of
midnight.


Yes, Sir.


Fetch it then; three Beer Glasses of Cherry, Sirrah.


Ay, now you say something.


He had as good let me see her, for I'll debilitate him so with Brandy, he
shall be useless to her.


Agreed.


So, now George, fall to your Lady, and if the Brandy does its part, I think
thou wilt falter in thine.


Take care of the good Man, George, for the good Woman's sake.


I warrant you; ten thousand thanks.


Sirrah, remember this when I have a Wench. Strike up; A Pox of the Rogue that
runs, c.


Now to the Female; if fear has not killed her. Sirrah, draw Raison into your
Room, and take care he peeps not out in the morning, till all's safe.

Each Whoremaster his Cuckold thus o're-powers,
We make 'em Drunk, and then their Wives are ours.

MY dear Dorinda Darling of my senses, how sweet is Love after so long an
absence; my hours have been as troublesome without thee as they have been
delighted in being with thee; nor will I ever travail more for Knowledge; my
utmost Study Centred still in thee; I have wandered like a Child without my
Guide, follow'd the Notion of improving Arts, when I had left my Natural Genius
here.


My Lord, you know you are welcome to these arms, but if the separation was so
tedious to you who've had such vast variety of Countries and of Courts, of all
that's worthy the pursuit of Fancy, think how uneasy has been my solitude: no
object, Entertainment or acquaintance, nothing diverting to deceive the time,
my prospect limited, my measures fixed, nothing but Lectures from a peevish
Aunt; nay had I not been blessed with constant Letters, which satisfied me that
my Lord was safe, I must have sunk beneath the sad restraint.


I'll study how to recompense thy patience; the generous compliance thou hast
shown in thy submission to my Jealous Love, (the dread of loosing thee
inflicted it) but I'm united now for ever here, nor will I e're torment thee
more with absence; great Natures utmost Curiosity can never match Dorinda's
full perfections.


Oh tedious Raptures and Insipid Eloquence, London.


My Love.


I say if you do go to London do not stay long, may I expect you back at
Dinner?


I have Accounts to settle, Bills to receive, things to look after that belong
to thee, some Presents.


Presents, alas! you're all I covet.


No, my Delight, I have brought over some toys, some Silks, and Points; still
what I saw that might adorn my Love, I picked up by degrees in Travelling, to
let you know you never was from hence.


But be sure you come at Night.


Will the Night come think thou I could stay from thee, but I'll not leave
thee yet.


Nay, then you'll be so late you'll not come home; the earlier you are there, the
sooner you'll be here.


And won't you take it ill I leave you?


Unkind suspicion, can I pretend to love and be displeased at ought is for my
Lords convenience.


Blessings upon thee, adieu then for a while.


Be sure you think upon me.


My Soul is useless when not employed on thee my Life.


My hearts Devotion.


I cannot stir whilst I behold thee.


You shall not stay to Prejudice your Business.


At Night my Love betimes.


Forgot not.


I warrant you.


He's gone and all this day is mine: within there, Aunt.


What's my Lord gone?


To London, put on your hood and scarf, and get me mine, 'tis a fine (...)
I'll to the Wells.


And will you still pursue this Reveller, you will Repent.


Peace, manage for thy own ends I'm resolved, if you'll stay at home you may;
who waits? get the Chariot ready.


Well, Heaven direct all for the best.


Thus the Gallant is by the Mistress Ruled,
Whilst by some other Lover she is Fooled.

What will this come to? here is nothing but Destruction to be looked for; In
Fine, I'll even tell the Gentleman downright who and what she is, better he
should have her any way then marry her, for the Treason must out, and then
she's undone, he can never forgive her, nay what's worse I shall be turned a
starving, I can't work, and we Ancient Gentlewomen that live upon the Sins of
our Relations are very ill qualified to get a penny in the fear of Grace. Well,
take warning by me good Dames, for it is not only an ill thing in being
accessory to the Debauching your Kindred; but it is a provoking thing to see
Young Girls partake of what we cannot.


Well, I am satisfied, my Roving-Rascall Reveller and Mrs. Raison have been
together this Night, I watched her stealing in this morning at five a Clock,
and I do not know of any other Lover she has here about.


I suppose my Lord and he have not separated whatever adventure they've had,
well I wish I had not seen him.


Why so? You must have somebody, and why not him; he's a pretty Gentleman, and
besides a Lord, and that you know goes a great way with a Merchants Daughter;
most of our young Nobility by the Extravagance of their Fathers are left very
inconsiderable in their Fortunes; so their quality being necessitated for
money, and our Citizens Ambitious of Honour, many a Title has been kept up by
the Pride of a Tradesman, who never values what he gives for a Nobleman to his
Son in Law.


'Tis true, and interest is so absolute, and Poverty so pressing, that a Taylor
who can but get a Considerable Estate, need not despair of seeing his Daughter
dye a Countess.


Well Sir Thomas has told us what passed between him and his Son last Night,
our shifting of clothes may conceal us, and I am resolved to tease him, and all
the fools that talk to me this Morning, as far as the Spleen of a Jealous
Mistress can reach.


Agreed, we shall have variety of game presently, the Coxcombs thicken already.


Bounce, come along, ha! A brace of Tit^ Lasses yonder let's make up to 'em --
how do you Ladies, why this Melancholy Velvet upon such fair Complexions, has
the Chillness of the Waters made the Roses on your cheeks to fade, or has their
Influence rudely pressed upon the tip of your Noses and made 'em bleak and
sharp?


How ever sharp they have made our Noses they have had no effects upon your
understanding, for your Language is as Ridiculous as your Person.


Prithee Sir William let's seek some other game, these have better tongues then
our usual acquaintance.


No gad, my stock of Raillery's not out yet.


I believe you may put it all into a sentence, and not be out of Breath with
the Delivery.


Why gad, I love to talk with Vizards mightily, for we have the Privilege of
Railing as much as we please.


Without running the danger of being beaten for it.


Why, pull off your Masque and I'll be Civil.


If I were sure the sight of my face would frighten you away I would.


Why, you don't know but it may, I have known many a pleasant Tongue belong to
a Damnable ugly Face.


I see a very indifferent Face that belongs to a Foolish Tongue.


So we have the pleasure of being convinced and leaving your Worship in doubt.


Damn me, I believe you're ancient, your Features are expired and your Face is
in Mourning for 'em.


Well said Knight, my dear Sir William Thoughtless, Ounds, if she answers that,
I'll allow her a Wit.


Or you'd be allow'd no spunger, is he your Probatum est, bound to flatter a
Fool or dine with the Servants.


Answer me to what I reparteed upon your Masque, and gad take me I'll kiss you.


No, I wear it on purpose to keep flies from my Face.


Flies Madam; why I am a Knight.


The best excuse in the World for a Blockhead; tell but your Title before-hand
Sir Knight, and no body will be surprised with your Conversation.


I must go now Bounce, my Wit's quite gone, I have but one thing more to say.


Ease your self, and let's depart.


Gad, I believe for all your fine Clothes you're but Servant-Maids in your
Ladies Apparel.


That's the Constant Cant of the Chitts at the Chocolet-House, where, as they
receive Favours from nothing but Chamber-maids and Trulls, they abuse all that
are above 'em, how long have you haunted that Nursery of Fools?


Ever since it was the Rendezvous for Whores -- that was a smart one, faith; and
if I have not seen there, I'm sure I shall child, come Bounce.


Buy Bulkers.


Buy Bully.


'Sdeath if your Lover were here, he should find --


None of you I'm sure -- but yonder he comes.


Let him follow me if he dare.


He can't spare so much time Sir, I believe, but if you'll stay a minute.


I, Damme I'll wait for no man.


Look you Sister yonder comes our Sparks, my Lover looks a little heavy for
want of sleep; Prithee let's slip into the Crowd and observe what female Flag
they'll first strike to.


Faith George, this was a narrow escape, had the Old fellow satisfied his
Curiosity you had been in a scurvy Condition.


Thanks to the kind husband and Drugster, my Credit is yet safe, but see here
comes the old Gentleman with my two Champions.


Well, I Protest Sr. Thomas there's no Living with you at this Rate,
adsheartlikins, two more such nights would kill me out-right, my Constitution
will never bear it.


Then I'd never bear such a Constitution.
When I can Drink no more I hope to dye,
For without Drink Lifes a Dull Property.

Sr. Thomas, good morrow.


Ah my Lord Worthy, gad take me you're a Flincher, though -- you served us
somewhat basely last night, faith I am sorry to see a young Nobleman that has
no Dependence on the Government, sip like a Minister of State that has his
Fortunes to make out on it.


Really Sr Thomas you must excuse me, I was so weary Riding Post, that I could
not help it but I'll make amends speedily.


But here's a Dog that left us too, Sir, Sir, somebody stayed out till 6.
this morning; pray my L. where did your Chaplain lye last night.


Chaplain, Sr. Thomas, I have none.


Ha! George good boy George, oh Pretty George.

At Westminster a sight was Known,
The Like was never heard,
A Judge that never wore a Gown,
And a Bishop without a Beard.
Oh Rare George -- why Sir, you Cursed Villain, what do you think will become
of your Soul, Sir, to stand in such a Lye to your own Father, and lay your
Sins upon the Church you Dog, as if they had not enough to answer for of their
own.


Pray my Lord take him off.


Well Sr. Thomas to night I give a Ball or a sort of a Masquerade at my Lady
Hazards, and will fetch up lost time: I must only go up to London on some
urgent business, and will be with you in the Evening without fail; Gentlemen
till then your Servant.


We will prepare for you, my Lord.


Why what an abundance of Whores-flesh is here; Landlord and Drugster let's
have a Brush with 'em, I am hot-headed and can talk smartly.


I feel the Spirit of Scandal a little provoking in me too.


Let us Join, and Combine -- We will make 'em Repine, as Satyr so fine, -- Our Wit
shall out-shine -- their Faces Divine -- and we will sing the Praise the Praise of
good Wine.


That's Reveller and his Father; what women are they? they are making up, I think
my Lady Hazards Daughters, Let us observe.


Ladies.


Jackanapes, after me's manners Sir, why what will you Engross the Women both
at home and abroad?


Nay Sir here's more game, there's no occasion for Confinement in this place.


Rogue, I will make you stay here, and if you speak with any Woman till I have
done with her, I'll break your head.


Is this Gentleman your Tutor Sir, that he bears so strict a hand over you?


He is my Father Madam, as to the begetting me; but an utter Stranger as to the
maintenance of me.


He was my Son Madam, when he was in his virtuous Teens, but since the Devil
has stamped him one and Twenty, alas a day he has out-Sin'd me like an Elder
Brother.


I may out-sin you like an Elder Brother, but as to Estate I'm sure I'm the
younger.


What, is the Gentleman of Age, and worth nothing Sir?


There's a Thousand such Gentlemen about this Town Madam; why what Sir would
you have my estate before I'm Dead? -- when I'm dead he shall have all Madam, I
can't live much above 40. years longer.


And then he'll be as much past the Pleasure of enjoying it as you are now that
have it.


I past the Pleasure, adsheartlikins, if you dare venture, you shall find I
can play on Taber and Fife still, Madam.


Old Instruments are a long time a tuning, Madam.


Do you speak for your self or the Gentleman Sir?


Prithee stand by, married man, what says your Ladyship to me Madam?


You Sir, why who are you?


Who am I, Madam, a Reverend Alderman of the City of London.


What, one that lends money upon Acts of Parliament, manages Juries in your
Ward, and snacks with the Sheriff, give Courtiers Credit in hopes of Getting
Employments, Bribe Common-councill-men, Cheat Orphans, and sponge Dinners all
the year round at my Lord-Mayors Table.


Well whistled black-bird, a notable Baggage, and a Whore by her wit; Child if
thou likest me, I will disinherit my Son Settle all upon thee.


Faith Sr. Thomas that would be a sure way to settle all upon your Son, for I
like him so well I should give him every groat.


Pox on me for a Fool to make Love, and this young Dog present: Get you gone
you Rogue, do'nt Dangle after me thus you booby, are you not able to walk alone
and be hanged, get you gone and be hanged.


Observe him Sister with that Woman whom I will have Dogged, 'tis the same he
talked with yesterday. But Sr. Thomas I hear you are to be married to my Lady
Hazard, and methinks this is not a very good sign of living Virtuously.


Ay Madam, I may marry her, but may love none but you.


But Sr. Thomas, pray let us observe your Son.


Hang him Rogue, an Inconstant Dog, a faithless Villain.


So those are Florella and Violante, but who is that my false Villain's so hot
upon?


Prithee Let us make up to yonder Woman, I find these are too hard for us.


Thou may if thou wilt, but I gad I'll speak no more to the Sex.


Pray if a man may be so hold what come you here for?


Not to talk with Fools.


Prithee Raison let's give over making love; adsheart, a Citizen making love is
as ridiculous as a Parson making Legs, I'll go to the Coffee-Room, Smoke a
Pipe, and Drink a glass of Mum.


Agreed, where like true tradesmen we will seem Politic, although we know nothing.


This is a happiness I could not expect.


I'm sure you don't deserve it, I find all Women are welcome to you.


Only to pass away the time with Madam, men may Divert themselves with several
Women, but only one can make 'em truly happy.


And how many of those ones have you said this to?


As I never was really in Love till now, I never had occasion for the
Expression before.


Do you not know those Women you talked to?


No.


Your Love is blind indeed when only a strange Petticoat can cheat you of your
Mistress.


Upon honour I know 'em not.


They are my Lady Hazards Daughters.


Indeed.


Nay this is over-acted.


By Heaven and Earth I know 'em not.


The Youngest I hear is the Ruler of your affections.


I must confess, Madam, till I saw you I had a hankering that way, she has a
very considerable Fortune, which in my Circumstances was very Prevailing.


Besides their Father was Lord-Mayor of London, their Mother I hear was a
Court-Laundress, being given to blab betrayed the Intrigue of a great Man to
his Wife, and was Cashiered, but having Purchased an Interest for former
Service, got Hazard Knighted, and married him.


You are better acquainted with the Family then I am.


But 15000 l. makes amends for all faults in Parentage, and the Children are as
acceptable as the best born.


Faith Madam, so fa^ I must justify 'em, that they Deserve better Families, for
their Accomplishments will give 'em Titles without their Fortunes to Noble
blood, nor would the most honourable blush to own 'em.


You speak like a man of honour Sir, but we are observed, you must dine with me
to day.


Blessings upon you.


Be in the Park at one of the clock, I'll send to you.


Must you go soon?


Immediately; they are making up to us; I suppose I have raised the Ladies
Jealousy, and she has a mind to have a fling at me.


Why how now Mr. Reveller you're the favourite of our whole Sex, I find the
Lady's Inclining.


'Tis but your Leavings Madam, she must have charms indeed that can pretend to
raise the seige you've laid.


The Fort is of no great Consequence nor Worth much trouble, when it is willing
to yield to such things.


That's Florella I'm sure, I know it by that despicable speech; -- I'll fret
her more, I love as much as the, am equally malicious, and will try the Wit
she's famed for.


Faith Ladies I'm not stubborn, the fairest in Conditions I give up to, and she
who thinks best of me now may have me.


The Ladies silence tells you she's indifferent; if you stand good to what we
have agreed on we will Seal Articles when next we meet; and if this Ladies face has
no more charms then her tongue, I dare trust you alone with her, without one
Jealous pang.


Pray take your spark with you Madam, for if you should relapse, 'twill save
you the trouble of coming back again and being Laughed at.


I have so much good nature Madam, that I had rather make you laugh by coming
for him again, then weep by taking him from you now.


Mr. Reveller take the Lady home with you for shame, and put on clean linen
both; 'tis mightily fullyed with last nights Rambling.


'Tis Whiter now then ever your Mother washed, and finer then ever her Children
wore when the Father was Lord-Mayor and made 'em ride in his Pageants to save
charges.


Devil, does she know us?


A Tight Baggage by the Sons of Apollo: now Madam I hape I may go down with you.


I'll ask my mother Sr. Thomas;


And I'll tell Florella how constant you are.


Oh your Servant, do you think I did not know you.


Here's fine work.


O yes, and so did your Father:


Now Impudence, I gad, and so I did Kirlins, and rallied accordingly, did not I
George, Lye Lustily you Dog, and I'll be familiar with you for a fortnight.


Why Sr. Thomas told me of you Ladies, saw when you came out, and we set you
accordingly.


This will not do sweet Mr. Sly, therefore follow your Damsel and trouble me
no more.


Is this the Lady that was with you last night when Mr. Raison stood Sentinel
to Secure the pass from your Father?


Good man, we saw the Wife come in this morning, and he following an hour
after, and begging pardon for his slaying out so Wickedly, but said it was to
preserve a Lady from the sight of Sr. Thomas who would have forced her from his
Son.


Well said Waggtails.


Well Madam, then you see there are those that will be less shy of their
Persons and not so severe with their tongues.


And the fittest for your Purpose.


Well Madam, if I have but Patience, I find here's encouragement for Chapmen
of my nature: When you Celebrated Beauties are gone, I may have hopes among
some of the ordinary sort.


Yes you may make Love as the poor go to market; when the Choice is bought up,
you'll have the better Pennyworth in the fragments.


Sir, Sir, she's too hard for you, give over while you're well, for she'll
make as great an Ass of thee at Board, as she would of me in bed.


In Language and in Love the females are allways too hard for us, they will
have the last blow, but I'll leave you to take up the Cudgels.


No, hold there Sir, if they make so little of you, they'll make nothing of me
presently.


Well said Sr. Thomas, don't let him go.


Madam I have an appointment


Therefore you shall not go you dog.


Sr. there is an old saying, never spoil sport, and so forth.


I know it Rogue, I know it; but I am like Rivals; when one is despised, let
him do all he can to hinder the other.


Adsme Sr. Thomas, yonder's some London Sparks come down this morning, some
City things and Covent-Garden Beaux, pray let's rally a little with 'em.


Ay but let Sr. Thomas and his Son be within call, for they say your Beaux when
they cannot talk with a woman are apt to Beat 'em.


Not when they've a man with 'em; indeed when they are alone they are like
Hackney-Coachmen, if they wont come to their terms they'll unrig 'em.


How do you Miss? do you come to take the Waters in hopes of being fruitful, or
to destroy some Unlawful Conception?


Neither, I came to satisfy my sight with Sr. Thomas-Reveller.


With me Child, I gad I'm a Noun-Substantive, and am to be seen, felt, heard
or understood; prithee Child let's walk off a little, and be better informed of
each Other.


Madam, will you please to eat some Sweet-meats, they'll expel the Wind and
take off the coldness of the Waters.


I thank you Sir, but I never drink any.


The better hopes for a Lover, if your Spirits are not chilled; Madam I should
be happy to be warm in such Comfortable Inclinations as your Ladyship is able
to bless me with.


Indeed Sir, my inclinations are as Comfortless as the Waters you speak of, for
I'm troubled with a fit of the Spleen, and desire to be in private.


I should be accessory to your disquiet to encourage your melancholy by
leaving you, and there --


You will be accessory to your being ill-used if you encourage your
Impertinence.


Ah Madam, we Lovers and Pilgrims in the Devotion of the fair Sex, must bear
much More, the feircer you are at first in your Indignation, the fonder you are
at last of an Assignation.


Rot her, let her depart, she'll follow us anon.


For what, your charity, Let me alone till that time comes, and you'll oblige
me.


Madam, Madam, this will not pass upon me.


No Sir, nor you upon me, I told you my mind before.


P'shaw, Pox, I know thee well enough; come, come, unmasque, let's be familiar
as we have been.


What do you take me for one of the Orange Wenches at the Play-house, that
fasten upon every fool they meet with.


And disturb the rest of the Audience with their nauseous Impudent behaviour.


I protest I think the Ladies are somewhat in the right of that, those Creatures
are very Ignominious, and I see 'em encouraged by great persons, I think it a
Scandalous object to see Quality condescend to be familiar with the Spawn of a
Gostermonger.


Do you use the Play-house much, Sir?


Out of Gratitude to the Ladies, Madam, who are Pleased to bestow many favours
on me by the Way of Ogle, Fan, the Language of the fingers, I am mightily
Envied by the men, and have Observed that whenever there is any Jest in a Play
Relating to a neat cleanly slender well-shap'd man, the whole Audience have
turned upon me, and maliciously ridiculed the Perfections they could not not
attain to.


Pox of this Puppy Madam.


Nay pray, Sister, let's humour this fool and seem fond of him.


Ay Sir there are abundance of those Envious fellows who are in their hearts as
much Beaux as the most eminent, and only rail at others because they are not
Liked themselves.


There are so Madam, but 'tis a harder thing to be a Beaux then they Imagine.


Pray Sir, what are the Ingredients I beseech you which accomplish so fine a
Person?


Oh your Servant Dear Madam: why in the first place, he must have a very white
hand; if it be not so by nature, he must make it so by Art, and he must be
constantly taking Snuff or picking his teeth.


Before or after Dinner Sir.


No matter which, it is not that there is occasion for picking his teeth, but
it gives an opportunity of showing the beauty of the skin; he must avoid all
Wine for fear of Pimples; he ought to have a mighty sweet breath; but that very
few Beaux have, they ruin 'em all with Cashaw; he must keep in upon Windy
days, never miss Covent-Garden prayer, and if he receives visits in Bed he must
lye in his Perewig.


And pray Sir --


Gad take me Madam, I knew a Beaux once that fluxed for a Complexion.


But how do you pass away the time?


Why Madam, it never lies heavy on our hands, we have hourly so many billet
Deux from Ladies, that we are almost worked off our Legs; you never saw a Beaux
with a full Leg. But really now and then the Knavish Wits at Wills Coffee-house
will direct Letters for us as from Women, appoint a meeting too, and make us
sit sometimes in a Hackney-coach six or seven hours in the Cold, and the Devil
of any Soul comes near us.


Pshaw, pox o'these Beaux they are damned poor Rogues, the little stock they have
goes all to Perewig-makers and Washer-women, come Child lets to the Ship, where
wo'l have a rich Dinner, Fiddles, mirth in abundance.


Sir I thank you, but I like this Company much better.


Why, they have not wherewithal to make thee Drink child, they're as
penuyless as a Jew on his Sabbath; come along Lasses, I'll provide ye --


No rudeness Sir.


Pray Sir desist.


Damn me, not I.


What Insolence is this?


Be civil, or I shall unrig.


Nay, nay, come along.


Fools.


Gilt, this shall not do.


If you dare go out Sir.


I shall wish this Lady.


Mr. Reveller.


Nay Gentlemen, be not boisterous to so tender a Sex, but let 'em go.


Ounds what do you mean?


I'll tell you Rascals, come Beaux, fools


S'death shall I draw Bounce?


Do, 'tis but retiring, I warrant he shall not hurt us.


Sr. this affront.


Asses.


You're a Son of a Whore.


What's here 4. upon one, Courage George, Rascals.


For the honour of the 12 Companies.


S'death, the Rogues heels are as nimble as their tongues.


Beaux do you call 'em, I have bounced one of 'em, I have made his head ring, I
warrant him, I wonder at the Impudence of these fellows that would Engross all
the women to themselves, and dare not look a man in the face.


We should have fine work this Summer if our Fleet were manned with such.


P'shaw, pox, these are bastard Beaux, Councellors Clerks kept by their
Mistresses, and palmed upon us at Epsome, and these places for Gentlemen; I
know abundance of very honest hearty fellows they call Beaux, who setting by
their blind side of being a little over-neat will be Drunk with their friends,
fight for their friends, pimp for their friends, and do what friends ought to
do; But these are Scoundrells, awkward things of your Chocolet-house that depend
upon Ordinarys, and go to Twelve with a Charitable man at the Groom-Porters,
Beaux to day and beggars to morrow, for whose coming into the World no man e're
rejoiced, or for whose going out any will ever Greive.


I have seen these spruce Tits look as Scornfully and (...) ^ur upon a plain
dressed Country-Gentleman as a Grumbletonian upon a (...) man that has taken
the Oaths -- but neighbour Raison what made you keep ^o behind me all the
fray, and push me forward?


Why in case you had been run thorough, I had been ready to have carried you
off in my arms.


A pox of your Civility, but 'tis much better as 'tis.


But come let's after these baggages to dinner, where if occasion be, you must
vouch for me.


In what?


Why that I knew Florella and Violante for all their Masques.


Why, were those they you talked to?


Ay, I gad, stand by me or the mother will give me over else, can you swear
heartily?


Are we not tradesmen, what a question's that to a Shop-keeper?


I am Punctual to my time, 'tis just one by the Sun-dyall, if this Lady should
convince me, she is honest, and has a fortune, I might be fool enough to Love
her in good earnest; and that would be a Rascally trick to Florella; she has
Youth, Wit, Beauty and money; this has Youth, more wit, and Beauty, and may
have more money: I but Florella was my first Mistress; well, but this is my
first Love, I only like the other as yet, Pox on it I'll not trouble my self
with the Puncto of the matter, Let the Stars take their Course and fortune use
her Pleasure.


Mr. Reveller.


Here my little Peter of Paradise may I enter?


follow me.


Till I'm weary on so good an errand.


Now to my Lover, this Intrigue 'twixt him and Florella I would feign break
off, I have considered and weighed every thing, and upon second thoughts
Promise my self more security and satisfaction in Reveller as a Lover then a
husband, for howsoever fond he may seem, nay, even to marriage, when I am known
as I must be, nothing but Destruction can be my reward; however I'll so order
it that he shall think the Conquest worth his Labour, and fancy he's the Only
victor here.


Are you not much Surprised Sir at my boldness? will not my freedom make me
less esteemed? men ought to Woo.

They do so always when they are encouraged, but where they are approved and
know it not, they cannot justly sure be thought the worse of: Errors of
Ignorance are most excusable, fools often fancy all that sees 'em Loves, but
Prudent men their Imperfections know and give no way to such self-flattery.


But men too often when they think they are Liked affect a negligence of what
esteems 'em: You're naturally vain without occasion, but on the least advantage
most Intolerable; many pretend to favours ne'er received, others regardless
seem when we strike first: So fickle and so foolish are your Sex, 'tis more for
Vanity then Love you Court, nothing so Wretched till we give you credit, nor
nothing more uneasy till you've told it.


Such follys are, but such ne'er entered here; I of a Contrary temper am:
Enjoyment is the least of my affection, Though 'tis the Crown of all alone, 'tis
worthless: were Heaven as easy gained as it is wished for, the blessing scarce
would tempt us from this world, Improving Fancy, constant Conversation,
frequent Addresses fed with Courteous hope makes me uneasy till I am possessed,
but when possessed, then my Impatience comes, then I am eager to increase my
Joys, and still the last breeds appetite for more.


How charmingly he talks: Well, you have cunningly excused your self: Bring
Dinner in; come Sir, sit down there opposite, that with full pleasure we may
view each other.


My Eye will have the greatest Banquet, Madam.


Your Ear too shall be entertained.

Come Sir, you seem uneasy.


Blast not my Entertainment with that thought Madam, my senses are all charmed
with such perfection, they are Crowding which shall be first Gratified.


Some Wine; come Sir, health to that sense which is your Favourite.


This distance starves it Madam.


Sir, with my Nieces leave I'll change places with you, give me


Nay, fill it Madam, 'tis the Ladies health.


Here is enough, Sir.


I beseech you.


Nay, Pray Sir.


Your pardon Madam, please your self.


Well that kind word has wrought upon me I hate to be Imposed on, come then
since it is left to me, a little more, -- up with it now; we Women can never
have too much of a good thing, come Niece, your health.


Up with it full as my Love, come Madam, to your wishes satisfaction.


And to a good understanding betwixt yours and mine.


Cunning and sweetly hinted; pluck up a spirit you Dog, take tother Bumper and
be fancy.


Sing the Scotch Song I love so.


Heaven grant she may have Faith to believe, and Charity to Relieve, or I'm a
dead man; for I like her to madness; this retiring carrys somewhat of the face
of a Bed-chamber in it, she has a Rare sleepy Eye which they say seldom fails;
if She have any Comfortable Waters I'll drink her into Compliance.


Your hand Sir.


My heart's in your own Madam.


I fear my Ruin.
But oh with such a bait I am Drawn in,
It may excuse though not forgive the Sin.

Now all's well and my fears are over, and sure none can blame my Discretion in
this Point; 'tis true'tis not altogether so honest as I could wish it, but the
Prudent part of it is good, and I am secured from the thoughts of being undone,
which of necessity I must have been any other way, and she had better have two
gallants then none.

Pardon me s^ilty, (...) upon the Score
Of self-security I increase her store,
'Tis to Preserve (...) whom she had before.

Thou art a mad Girl to transform thy self thus from one Sex to another.


Well, were I a man I should be a very wicked fellow, there's such an Air and
freedom belongs to Breeches, to what our Dull and dragging Petticoats allow of,
that adsheartlikins I fancy my self of the Masculine Gender, and am for
ravishing the first woman I meet; Prithee let me try upon thee, 'tis the
fashion now to begin with Relations.


Well said mad-cap, thou make a very pretty Rakehell, and I could almost wish
thee Capable of being a husband that I might have the honour of taking down
your presumptuous Spirit.


Thus accounted will I court Mrs* Raison, and try if the Lady be constant to my
Inconstant Rogue, or whether she's for making the most of her time: I fancy
she's a right bred City-dame, fond of every young fellow that can tender her
ready money upon her Counter.


If you can but manage the mans part well ne'er fear it.


All but part of the man I am pretty well provided for; I can huff, and be
Saucy, be troublesome in Rumbling their Clothes, and talk a great while seem to
be familiar and force whispers, Drop out an affected Oath and take Snuff, Stare
till my eyes are as stiff as my Crevat-string, Laugh only at my own Jests, and
be only the Jest of the Company, and these are the greatest Materials of the
fools that make Love now adays; then I will Ogle, Tip, and Leer with either
Court or City-Fop from the Jews Synagogue to St. Arms Church in So-ho, or St.
James in German-Street. Well I'm sure to be diverted, but our Company
Increases.


Now for the Ladies, 'tis Youth and Beauty, not Sense and Breeding Conquers now
adays; I think I'm a pretty man whate'ro I am for a woman: and this beardless
boy may have as good success with the fair Sex, as if I had been a Page in a
particular Family, and Destined from my Childhood for a comfort to my Ladies old
age: I must find out Florella whom I will Court with such an eagerness, that
if she seems inclining, I'll make young Reveller curse her from his heart, and
think her easy to each Fops addresses.


I wonder which is my Wife among all these Sr. Thomas.


I don't know which is thy Wife, but I believe any of 'em may be thy Whore upon
a good Occasion; I never saw such confusion of Babell.


My Lamb is among 'em that's certain, but I know no more how to distinguish her
then a Shepherd a stray sheep that's mixed with another flock.


This is a heavenly Life Sr. Thomas we lead, sitting up all night, and being
sick all day, Disturbing all Men, and abusing all Women; Loving all mischief,
and Hating all good; affecting of Lewdness, when you know you're incapable, this
will bring you to the Devil in time old Knight.


Ay, and thee, and I, if we do not reform Sas, I'm afraid shall Sweat in those
Everlasting Hummums with him.


No pox, thou hast a Proverb on thy side; thy Spouse will save thy Soul in
spite of thy teeth.


All in good time, your worship's coming into the noose, my Lady Hazard may
give me an Opportunity of returning your Jest, for they say Merchants Widows
are as good at it as Tradesmen's Wives.


I faith Sir Thomas you are too blame I think, considering your age, and what a
brisk Son you have, to think of Matrimony, you'll not only Rob her of her
Jointure, but cheat her expectations.


Good lack do ye hear the Bachelor, prithee old Cracker of other men's pipkins
trouble thy head with thy own abilitys, and distrust not mine: Gad sookers I am
a Boy to thee yet, thou shavings of Harts-horn and Ivory.


Caelia was Coy and hard to Win,
With Artful Cunning played the Virgins Part,
But when she once had tried the Sin,
She hugged the Charming Tingling dart,
Cried nearer Dearest to my heart,
You're Lord of all within.
Oh what a Luscious Feast of Love I've had, the unexpected Conquest raised the
Joy; full of desire and trembling with my doubts I lay half-satisfy'd, then
half destroyed, she cried, oh do not, do not ruin me; Weakly she struggled
till she seemed quite tired, then fainting sighed; do force me Villain, do: I
took the yielding moment in its Prime, and sent my expiring Soul to seek for
hers.


So, there's Reveller, but I can't find out this Mrs. Raison, I'm sure she is
among 'em; I have a Trick to play her, and would no more be disappointed in my
Mischief, than she would in her man.


What can become of this Florella! there's my Villain whom I will plague with
Jealousy, if possible, as much as he has tortured me.


Dear George, your late she Company has mourned for you.


Oh! Friend, such an Adventure, such Joy, such Delight, such unspeakable
Pleasure, incomprehensible Transport; Imagination cannot reach it, Fancy draw
it, Nature match it, the World value it, Art improve it.


What the Devil, art thou mad?


Mad, aye; and so would you, had you been where I have; seen what I have; felt,
heard and understood, what I have; thou had been in the uppermost Region by
this time.


Dear George, What is it?


I'll tell you when my Soul's cool enough for my Tongue to relate it; at
present, Reflection's so vast in my thoughts, it stifles my Speech, being above
its expression.


Some fair Lady, I suppose Sir.


You may suppose Sir, but ask no questions as you value your Nose, Sir.


Did the Lady you Dinned with, entertain you kindly, Sir?


Look you Sweet-heart, I gave thee a caution about Questions; such familiarity
at first sight, is not agreeable to my Constitution, therefore keep thy Tongue
within compass, left my Feet go beyond measure.


I won't provoke the Rogue, lest he should be as good as his word, and force me
to discover my self: Where the Devil is this dried Fig of his?


Sirrah, Sirrah, Where have you been till this time?


About some urgent Business of my own, Sir.


Of the Devil's you Dog, the Flesh and the Spirit: Ounds, Sirrah, What is the
meaning I can't Whore and Drink with you?


There is a natural Infirmity, Sir, allied to 59. which in cases of this
Matter, do bear a debilitated Influence over the frigiditated Circumstances of
halting Inclination, which being preingaged to a foregoing want of Power,
renders the Faculties incapable of exerting those necessary Ingredients which
commonly are required in the Eager Occurrences of Predominant Desire. --


Why, you Rhodomontading, Canting, Bantering, Sputtering --


Hold, hold, Sir Thomas.


Why, the Rogue's a Bantering of me, spitting out his superfluous Bombast, and
ridiculing my Understanding, as if his Father was liable to his nonsensical
Raillery: Get out of the House, Sirrah.


Nay, hold, Sir Thomas, not so.


I have lived to a fine age, a fine time I mean indeed -- Sirrah, get you out.


Nay, Sir Thomas, let me intercede.


Why, 'tis a shame, Madam, what an impudent Son in Law will he be to your
Ladyship, when 'tis such an insolent Rascal to his own Father.


I warrant you, Sir.


Hark, you Sir, lay by your mustiness, or my Lady shall know how brisk your
Worship was at the Wells to all the Masques you met with.


Dog Rogue, shall she so -- well; I won't disturb the Company now, but another
time.


Come, come, a Dance.


Aye, a Dance, a Dance.


Gad so, it's break o'day: Come on then, strike up now Rogue, I'll frigididate
you.


My Fears are true, and he is false as Hell.


What could you expect less from such a wild Fellow?


Peace, Mischief! inconstant Villain, altered in an hour --
Are all those Charms which extasy'd his Senses,
Those melting Joys, his Life could scarce dispense with;
When all his Spirits with excess of bliss,
Lay gasping as in Fits struggling for vent,
As if his Soul had sickened with the pleasure,
And nature could not bear the vast delight.

Come, will you go home, now you're satisfied?

There's Worthy, and Violante, whom he spoke of,
That is Florella, whom he's coupled with;
I'll stay and watch a little, though I burst.

Oh! here's more company; Ladies, will you Dance?

Not yet, Sir, if you please.

Your time's your own.

Why, there's another Villain, whom though I love not, I hate to think another
should get from me.


Hold, Sir Thomas, I swear you'll kill us all; there is no Dancing with you.


Aye, Madam, here's a true English-heart for you, uncorrupted with the gross
Luxuries of the Age, a plain well-bred North-Country Tit, that shall tire Forty
of these Barbary Colts, and break their Backs Gad take me.


Sure that must be Florella, I'll try her.


Certainly that must be the Woman, Reveller talked to at the Wells, 'tis just
her Shape and Air; I'll bear up to her and try her Inclinations.


Well, my Lord, I'll take into consideration what you say, and if your
Inclinations be as Honourable as your Language --


Else, curse me from the Blessing I desire.


This must be Florella: Come, Why so froward little Mad-cap? Do you think it
possible to disguise your self from so zealous a Lover?


I don't know who he takes me for, but I'll humour his supposition for sport
sake.


Confusion, how fond he is!



Madam, What makes your Ladyship keep so far from the Company, will you not
make one at the Collation?


Sir, I had the Honour to speak first to this Lady, and desire you would make
your Addresses elsewhere.


Fools!


Sir, I hope my Civility, though not so early as yours, is no Affront to the
fairLady, and till she tells me, I'm troublesome, I shall follow my own will.


Oh! how the Poppets toy Distraction,
Nay, Gentlemen, I never admit Suitors;
I don't know --

I think I can't be discovered; Madam, to show how much I esteem your Favour,
I'll conceal nothing from you.


A pretty Youth, Madam, I scorn to be out-done.


I discovered first, Sir, and now, Sir, I am as much before-hand with you in
point of good Breeding, as you were with me in your Approaches.


By the pleasures, I have passed a couple of sweet Youths: Can't you divert
your self with these.


I hate 'em both.


Well, would I had the worst of 'em.


Madam, I'll tell you --


I'll acquaint your Ladyship --


By Hell, I cannot bear it.


Hey day!


Villain and Traitor.


Is the Frolic to go round, Madam?


If you've Honour, protect me.


This is lucky, 'tis she I'm sure.


This is some Rival; Madam, my Service.


Both, Gentlemen.


Madam, Can I serve you?


Perdition seize your Generation.


And the Devil take your Inclination.
Why, what's the meaning of this George?

Indeed I know not, Sir, some Frolic upon a Wager I suppose.


George, I'd speak with you -- my Blood is chilled o'th sudden; sure, that
could not be Dorinda.


I'll wait on you.


Come Ladies, faith we'll have no bed-time; yet let's into the next Room,
there's a fresh Entertainment.


NOW, as you're Men of Honour, I entreat you'd leave me to my self.


Ay, pray Sir, depart; the Lady would be in private.


That's what I would be with the Lady, Sir. Come Madam, we're a couple of
likely young Fellows, take your choice, and he you approve of, the other shall
give way to.


Nay, Gentlemen, 'tis late.


Early by this hand, Madam, the Sun's just breaking; come, take one of us into
your Livery, and see how heartily we'll earn our Wages.


I have no business for you.


If she knew me rightly, she'd swear it.


Sir, methinks you might perceive by the Ladies uneasiness, she would willingly
have you gone.


And methinks Sir, you might perceive by my uneasiness, I'd have you gone.


Not till the Lady pronounces Sir.


Not Sir.


Not dam me, do you think I'll be brow beaten.


Ha! by Heavens, Mrs. Raison, that awkward huff and stamp betrayed it; I might
have looked long enough for her in Petticoats; ah! I'll swagger lustily, now I
know my man -- Look you, Sir, either desist, or I'll make you the first dead
Carcass this day's Sun shall breed Maggots in.


Bear up Raison, and be not daunted, he's too well dressed to love fighting,
and too much like a Courtier to have any Courage, Sir. --


Well, Sir. --


Nay, no quarrelling Gentlemen, to end the Dispute since it must be so, let me
go in here to my Lodgings, and I'll send for the Man I like best in half an
hour.


Upon Honour.


My Hand on it.


And me Madam.


There Sir, each of you has a Hand, but he that has my Heart shall be resolved
immediately.


We depend on it.


As I hope to be satisfied in the Embraces of my choice. --


Swear by something else, your expectations may halt else.


Oh, Reveller! thou Hell and Heaven, thou Plague and Pleasure, come rid me of
these Coxcombs.


Now will I bully this she Spark, and revenge my self on her, for Revellers
kindness to her: Oh! for the impudence of a true bred Page, and the management
of an old Soldier. Sir, being Jealous of my Destiny concerning this Lady, and
being likewise so struck with her Eyes and Conversation, that my heart cannot
bear the loss of her, should she unluckily pitch upon you; I am resolved to
try, who most deserves her by the Merit of his Sword, and not her Choice:
therefore Draw, Sir.


Ads-life, What will become of me now? -- Draw Sir!


Draw Sir, ay draw Sir; dam me, do you think to brow beat me?


'Tis a pretty Fellow, and I could put him to a better Employment than running
me quite through. Sir, I don't think it worth fighting for, till we know her
Inclinations, if they claim you, there's no occasion for it, and if it be me --



That if's impossible; for he that dare but think so damned a lye, and so forth
--


I never saw such a little fury; I must tame him in my own Sex, for I find this
will never do.


Draw, Sir.


Pray, Sir.


Rot you.


How, Sir.


Burn you.


Dear Sir.


Sink you.


Stay, Sir.


Dam you.


Hold Sir, I must discover my self.


Roast, fry and frigacy, chop, slice and mince your Soul into Atoms.


Hold Sir, I am a Woman.


This shall not save you.


My name's Raison, my Husband keeps a Grocers Shop at the Stocks-Market, and
here he comes to justify it.


Rise Madam.


I could not find out my Wife, but there was a Woman ordered me to come into
the Park, and said, she'd follow me.


I am resolved to thrash him a little, for I'm sure he's a Coward: Sir, Do you
know this Lady?


Lady, Sir; what a Lady in Breeches!


Aye Sir, she says, she is your Wife; this Lady in Breeches.


Nay, 'tis no great wonder, for she always wore 'em since I had her.


Oh! dear Raison, I disguised my self thus for the Masquerade; and making love
to a Lady out of waggery, this Gentleman has drawn upon me.


Aye Sir, and I don't know but by her impertinence, I've lost the Lady for
ever; therefore I will have satisfaction.


Why, Sir; my VVife's excellent at giving every body satisfaction but me.


No quibbling, Sir; but take her Sword and do me Justice.


I Sir, why, I'm no fighting man, Sir.


No fighting man, Sir.


No Sir, I can pay those that fight, and that's as much as was ever required
from a Citizen.


Not fight, and an Officer in the Royal Regiment!


Why, that's only Ornament* Sir, it was never designed for use; but if we
would fight, we have taken an Oath, not to strike a blow out of our own Walls.


If you won't fight, Sir; I must have the satisfaction of kicking you, thus
Sir, thus Sir.


It may be a satisfaction to you, Sir, but little or none to your humble
Servant.


Nay, Sir, if you have any value for a Woman, let me entreat for him.


Well, Madam, to show I am a Man of Honour, for your sake, I will forbear him.


Aye, but she let him kick me first.


And now Mrs. Florella has had her Frolic as well as your Ladyship.


Florella, I had some suspicions of that effeminate Face indeed; Confusion, how
shall I be laughed at!


I thank you Madam, for the Maiden-head your Bullyship.


Come, Mr. Raison, you're never the worse Man, and I'll make you ample
Satisfaction, for I ll Marry Mr. Reveller, and then you may keep your Spouse to
your self.


Well, I am the first Man that ever was kicked by a Woman, that was not his
Wife sure.


Here comes Reveller and my Lord Worthy, I'll have a Frolic with him too,
you'll stand by me Mr. Raison.


Not if he kicks like your Ladyship.


And your first Acquaintance with this Woman, was at the Wells?


The very morning before you came to Town.


Hell, and Confusion; Oh! damned Jilt: methinks your Conquest was very easy,
considering the Character you give of her Beauty and Conversation, that in
three Days, you should bring her to compliance.


They are discoursing about a Mistress, I think Mr. Raison, pray stand aside a
little and observe.


Faith, what she saw in me, I cannot tell; our Familiarity was somewhat hasty I
confess; not but I could have stayed a twelve Month, so I had been sure at the
end, of those Joys she gave last Night.


Damnation on the Artful Whore. Now I reflect, methought to me her Love was all
affected, and her Embraces which she seemed with bashfulness to give, proceeded
from uneasiness; by Heaven -- Do you not know her?


The Name she told me, was Dorinda: I do believe she is of some Fashion, and
Debauched by some Noble Man or other, and kept here for security of not being
known.


Legion of Devils burst her cankered Heart-strings.


She hurried me away about Nine a Clock out of her back Door: I suppose the
Spark was come, for one of her Scouts came and whispered her, it was a hearty
well wisher to St. Valentines Day, for she coupled us as lovingly and as
securely, as if she had been to have had me her self; I think she called her
Aunt: It was the wholsomest looked Dame --


O true bred, plump faced Baud; then Florella is quite laid aside?


No, my Lord, That I design for my constant Habitation; this is only a Lodging
by the by, to divert my self with whenever I'm uneasy at home.


And you're going now to her?


If I can gain admittance.


I'll have a brush with you first Reveller; you're a Son of a Whore.


Oh fie, draw upon a Woman!


What, my little Mad-cap in Breeches!


Hearing your Father resolved not to give you a Groat, and in despair you had
got a Commission to go to the Wars, Mrs. Raison and I, come to offer our selves
as Volunteers.


Mrs. Raison, a couple of amiable Supporters faith, Alcibiades never regaled
himself with two Titer Lasses -- My Lord, will you take 'em aside a little,
till I step in to this Dorinda; for I am very impatient to know the meaning of
that Box of the Ear.


A friendly Request truly -- but I shall alter your Joys speedily: Ladies, pray
walk this way a little?


Mr. Reveller, won't you? --


I'll but correct my Watch by the Sun-Dial, and --


Let him alone, Madam.


So, he's gone to his Mistress, I'm sure.


What, the Lady that gave him the Box of the Ear?


Gad I believe the whole Sex are turned Kickers and Cuffers.


The same, Madam; and if you'll promise me to use your Interest to your Sister,
to pardon me in some things I have erred in; I'll not only restore you Mr.
Reveller wholly to your self, but entertain you with an unexpected piece of
Diversion.


I do not know what you mean; but in any thing that's Honourable, your Lordship
may command me.


I ask no more, Madam.


Hey-day! here's Sir Thomas and my Lady, with Fiddles; 'tis a mad old Knight*
my Mother will never recover the Fatigue of this Nights disorder.


For Heavens sake, Sir Thomas, give over your Frolic; I am so sick and
untoward, pray let me and my Children go to rest.


Not till Night saith, Madam, and then not much Rest neither; for I am resolved
we'll Dance to a Priest, and be made Flesh and Blood out of hand.


How, Sir Thomas?


Even so, my Lady; it must be done, and no time so sitting as now we are in a
good humour, therefore let's nick it; Widows when they are heated must be kept
stirring.


Oh fie, Sir Thomas! It requires consideration.


Consideration in Matrimony! Nay then, I'll be hanged, if any man ever weighed
the State of Marriage seriously, and entered into it afterwards; I'll be bound
to answer for my Father's sins.


I wonder then, Sir Thomas, you that have proved it once, will venture upon it
again.


Why, How now, you little Smock-fac'd Dog, a pretty Boy faith; Sirrah, Sirrah,
if you were in Italy --


Nay, nay; but answer me as I'm in England.


Why, because I'm sure I can't have a worse Wife than I had before; and I
would try if there be any better.


Then I find you Marry more for the Experiment, than for any Comfort the Lady's
to have of you.


Therefore if I might advise my Mother.


Thy Mother! --


Florella, and my Wife, Sir Thomas, not being loose enough in their own Habits,
have chose one to be lewd in with less Scandal.


Good Sugar-Loaf, none of your Censures; you know the length of my Foot.


Yes, and the breadth, I thank you.


Ah, my little Squirril turned hector!


Florella, I wonder at your Frailty, to commit such an Absurdity in Discretion,
by giving your self up to --


Nothing but a harmless Frolic, Madam; I beseech your Ladyship not to construe
it worse than it is.


Well, my Lord, you have behaved your self so like a Man of Honour in this
discovery of your Mistress, that it shall no way turn to your prejudice in my
esteem.


Heaven make me capable of deserving so much Goodness.


But where's George, what's become of that Rogue?


Sir Thomas, I have a favour to beg of you and this good Company; pray ask no
Questions, but follow me into this House; I have a Key here commands it.


What should this mean?


Faith, I know not; but let's follow him.


Now Vulcan and Venus will be caught in a Net.


Some Comfort, I shall know who this Rival is; come Husband.


Ay, Wife, where you please.


Can nothing appease you?


Ungrateful Villain! Was the Prize so poor, it could not merit one Night's
Constancy.
Oh! Curse upon my Folly which betrayed me,
Which gave such hasty Credit to thy Oaths*
My Generosity overcame Discretion,
And I'm despised for being kind too soon.

Conscience, give way a little, Madam; by Heavens, I went strait home; nay, was
in Bed when my Father came and pulled me out, and forced me to go with him.


By Hell, 'tis false, you went strait thither, I had you dogged.


So, that won't do then -- Why, then in short, I should have been pulled out of
my Bed if I had not gone, and 'twas better as 'twas.


Why, Did you not swear to me, you would not see Florella last Night?


The Devil take me, if I know I did, I fanci'd several for her, but as I hope
to be reconciled to you, I did not to my knowledge see her; and to make you
amends, I won't see her this Week.


You'd sooner hang your self.


Nay, if you won't believe --


I have believed too much, and you have promised more than you can keep.


By the dear Joys possessed, I will be faithful.


And will you not marry Florella?


Buy Trouble so dear, when I can have Pleasure so cheap.


And you will never?


Impossible I should keep me here ever with thee thus, and scorn thy Sex
besides.


Oh, take me all then* thus let us grow and never separate.


within. By Heaven, a shreik destroys thee down.


Destruction, thou art come!


My Lord!


Put up George; here's my Aim.


Honour forbid that, and a Man so near; holds him.


I thank thee, my Passion was too violent: What can thou say, persidious
hellish Jilt?


I am struck o'th sudden, and have nought to help me; where art thou cunning,
thou Devil at a pinch, can thou be backward when a Woman wants thee?


The meaning of all this?


I'll tell thee George: Oh! had I trusted thee before, thou had not wronged
me.


Or had I cautioned him, thou had not know it: Curse on my Folly --


This Lady that has been thy Whore, was once my Mistress; this Reverend Matron
sold her to me; her Father was an ancient Servant in our Family, and dying,
left her with this Widowed Aunt, whose cursed Avarice, betrayed her to me. In
short, I had her for 500 l. for I did love her (to my shame I own it) above the
World: 'Tis six Years since, in which time her Ladyship has somewhat weakened my
Estate; for as I had no Wish above her Love, I had no Power above her Wish; all
she commanded, and she has well repaid me: thy Ignorance, and my Breach of
Friendship in not trusting thee, makes thee unblameable; but she sure's doubly
damned, to wrong me with the only Man she knew my Friend.


By Heavens it staggers me, and I could wish --


It is too late, forget her as I shall, and we shall be much happier. What
say thou Bawd, is't true what I have said?


Ay, let her speak; I'll stand to what she says.


Say, It (...) true.


Yes.


Convulsions ^o^ thee.


But as I hope to dye ou^ of ^ house, 'twas all against my will; but she
threatened to run away and leave (...) to beg, if I did not comply; and being
old and incapable of gettling bread in my (...) employment, I thought it better
to wink at her Fornication, than (...) through her Indignation.


Madam, this has a Face --


So has an Ass, Confusion on ye all.


Nay, not so fast good Madam, we'll part with Witness, though we met with none.
Sir Thomas, Will you enter?


Must I then be derided; poor Insulter!


No, let her go my Lord.


Nay, George, dispute it not; by Her ^ some revenge.


Why, what are we to do here, is there any Conveyance we must be Witnesses
to?


Yes, here has been a Conveyance, only a damned mistake in the drawing it up.


Ladies, Sir Thomas and Gentlemen; I desired your good Company to see me take
leave of an old Acquaintance, being resolved to live a sober, discreet Life,
and bend my whole thoughts towards this kind Lady, I have bid adieu to the only
Mistress I had, whom by the way, Sir Thomas, your Son has rid me of.


How, my Son!


I'll tell you more hereafter, Madam, you may retire, I have ended my Triumph.


That's she that has undone me, I could have worked him yet, for all this
mischief; but there's a Fortune and a Face, too powerful.


Is this the Lady that was so very severe upon our Parents? I suppose you'll
wash all at home now, Madam?


May Jealousy unquenchable possess thee; may Impotence in him still cross thy
wishes; and may you love still in despite of both: for thee I have some
pleasure in my Ruin; thou did intend, I find, for her to leave me; and I have
been before-hand with thee, in him. And since we both designed to cheat each
other, it is my Pride, though with the loss I'm cursed.


I had my man, and was in falsehood first; A notable Baggage by the Pleasures of
VVhoring -- but what a pox, I'm still in the dark here --


You shall know all anon, Sir; now Madam, for our design with the old
Gentleman: if I seem to be fond of it, I certainly lose it; my Lord assist her.


Faith Widow, we will to Church, and there's an end on it.


Of Love! indeed it may probably enter the Church, but seldom comes out: Madam,
I have a Request to your Ladyship, your showing a very good Example with Sir
Thomas, and really, I have a mind to follow it with his Son, but he's so very
perverse towards Matrimony, that without some Assistance of the good Company,
my single Interest will never prevail:


What do I hear?


Why truly, Florella, I have no averse Exceptions to the Gentleman, if his
Father be willing.


Willing, ay Madam, with all my heart; 15000 l. you Dog, and you not worth a
Groat.


I thank you Sir, but I value my Freedom above all Fortune.


You Dog, you have been free ever since you were born, and I'll make you Draw
now with your Father.


Ay, ay, 'tis time to leave off rambling, George, so much Beauty and 15000 l.


My Lord, had I wherewithal to seatle a Jointure upon the Lady equal to her
Portion, something might be said; but I have so much regard to my own Honour, to
take a Wife who shall twit me hereafter with what she brought me.


Twit you, Jackanapes, what need you value her Twitting, when the Money is in
your own hands. When Wives twit, Husbands may whore with a safe Conscience,
Hang-Dog.


No, but Sir Thomas shall take the 15000 l. and settle 2000 l. a year on you,
and make a Jointure equal.


Psaw, never trouble your Head, my Lord, I warrant you I'll be a loving Father
to 'em.


As a Jew to his Child that had married a Christian; Sir, if you would give me
50000 l. I would not marry.


Oh! He has some Honour left I find.


You would not marry, Rogue.


No, Sir.


Come, pray Mr. Reveller be persuaded.


What have you to do to persuade him to marry?


Because I'd willingly have him have a Wife of his own to make use of, that he
may not borrow of his Neighbours.


And you won't marry?


No: pray Sir don't trouble me.


You Dog, you shall marry, and I'll stand to what my Lord proposed -- but I'll
make you marry. I'll have the Writings drawn presently, and if you refuse,
I'll go to Church in a Pet, marry in a Passion, get a Son in a Fury, and
disinherit you, you Dog.


Well Sir, to avoid the Curse of Disobedience, I will submit; nothing but my
seeming averse could have wrought this.


I thank you good People, tho I fear I shall repent it.


And will you be such a Villain?


Faith Madam I have been a great Charge to you, and am very happy I can --


No whispering now the Man's sold, you have had your pennyworths I'm sure.


Come Wife, you had as good live honest, since you find you can't help it.


Why, let him go; here Husband, take what you never had till now, my Heart;
your Generosity and good Temper, how ever I have abused it, I'll strive to
deserve it.


Why better late than never Kate.


And Madam may (...)


My Lord, you may, my Sister and I shall take some time first, when my Laday's
fixed with her Consent --


His Lordship has it; but (...) where's Mr. Sasaph?


Dismal drunk ^ him upon it at P^ this Morning. ^o^ Widow, I find ^ the only P^
this day then, and be not frighted.

It dreadful seems to those who wed at first,
But we who've tried i^ once ^ the worst.

And may all ^ know
Their Sons by me* may ^ what to do.


