SEttle thy Study, Faustus, and begin
To sound the Depth of that thou wilt profess;
These Metaphysics of Magicians,
And Negromantick Books, are heavenly
Lines, Circles, Letters, Characters,
Ay, these are those that Faustus most desires;
A sound Magician is a Demi-God:
Here tire my Brains to get a Deity.

O Faustus I lay that damned Book aside;
And gaze not on it, lest it tempt thy heart to blasphemy.

Go forward, Faustus, in that famous Art
Wherein all Natures Treasure is contained:
Be thou on Earth as Jove is in the Sky,
Lord and Commander of these Elements.

How am I glutted with conceit of this?
Shall I make Spirits fetch me what I please?
I'll have 'em fly to India for Gold,
Ransack the Ocean for Orient Pearl.
I'll have 'em Wall all Germany with Brass;
I'll levy Soldiers with the Coin they bring,
And chase the Prince of Parma from our Land.
'Tis now the Dead high Noon of Night,
And Lucifer his Spirits freedom gives;
I'll try if in this Cricle I can Rai^e
A Daemon to inform me what I long for.

Faustus, I a^tend thy Will.


Where are thou?


Here.





What Noise is that? Hast thou any Companions with thee?


No.


It comes this way?


Oh, oh, O --


What ail'st thou?


Of of of


Speak, Fellow, what's the Matter?


O Poor Scaramouche l'


Speak, I conjure thee; or Achero^tis Dii Demogorgon. --


O I beseech you Conjure no more, for I am frighted into a Diabetes already.


Frighted at what?


I have seen, Oh, oh --


What?


Tho Devil.


Art sure it was the Devil?


The Devil, or the Devil's Companion: He had a Head like a Bulls, with Horns
on; and two Eyes that glowed like the Balls of a dark Lantern: His Hair stood a
Tiptoe, like your new-fashion'd Top-kno^s; with a Mouth as large as a King's
Beef Eater: His Nails was as sharp as a Welshman's in Passion; and he looked as
frightful as a Sergeant to an Al^tian.


But why art thou a^raid of the Devil?


Why I never said my Prayers in all my Life, but once; and that was when my
damned Wife was sick, that she might dye: My Ears are as deaf to good Council,
as French Dragoons are to Mercy. And my Conscience wants as much sweeping as a
Cook's Chimney. And I have as many Sins to answer for as a Church-warden, or an
Overseer of the Poor.


Why, the Devil loves Sinners at his Heart.


Does he so?


He hates none, but the Virtuous, and the Godly. Such as Fast, and go to
Church, and give Alms-deeds.


I never saw a Church in my Life, thank God, (I mean the Devil;) and for
Fasting, it was always my Abomination; and for Alms, I never gave any Thing in
my Life, but the Itch once to a Pawn-broker. Therefore I hope he may Love me.


And he shall Love thee; I'll bring the^ acquainted with him.


Acquainted with the Devil?


Ay; Tant^ m^tropon^is Acherontis.


Oh, oh, oh.


Fear nothing Mephostopholis, be visible.

I charge thee to be gon, and change thy Shape; thou art too ugly to attend on
me. I find there's Virtue in my Charm; Come, rise up, Fool, the Devil's gon.


The Devil go with him.


Fear nothing, I command the Devil. If thou wilt leave thy Chimny-sweeping
Trade, and live with me, thou shalt have Meat and Drink in Plenty; and 40
Crowns a Year shall be thy Wages; I'll make* thee Learned in the black Art.


I am a Student in that already* But let me consider, Good Meat and Drink, and
40 Crowns a Year. Then I'll change my black Art for yours.


There's Earnest, thou art now my Servant; dispose of thy Brooms and Poles,
they'll be useless to thee here; take this Key, go into my Study* and clean*
take all the Books you find scattered about, and range 'em orderly upon the
Shelves.


Happy Scaramouche, now may thou Swear, Lye, Steal, Drink and Whore; for thy
Master is the Devil's Master, and thou in time may master 'em both.


Now, Faustus, what would thou have with me?

I charge thee wait upon me whilst I live,
And do what-ever Faustus shall command.

Ay Faustus, so I will, if thou wilt purchase me of Lucifer.

What says Lucifer, thy Lord?

That I shall wait on Faustus whilst he Lives,
So thou wilt buy my Service with thy Blood.

Already Faustus has hazarded that for thee.

Ay, but thou must bequeath it solemnly,
And write a Deed of Gift with it;
For that Security craves Lucifer.
If thou deny it, I must back to Hell.

But Faustus, if I shall have thy Soul,
I'll be thy Slave, and worship thy Commands,
And give thee more than thou hast Will of.

If he will spare me Four and twenty Years,
Letting me Live in all Voluptuousness,
To have thee ever to attend on me,
To give me whatsoever I shall ask,
And tell me whatsoever I demand;
On these Conditions I resign it to him.

Then, Faustus, stab thy Arm courageously,
And bind thy Soul, that at some certain Day
Great Lucifer may claim it as his own;
And then be thou as Great as Lucifer.

Lo, Mephostopholis, for Love of thee, Faustus has cut
His Arm, and with his proper Blood
Assures his Soul to be great Lucifers.

But, Faustus, write it in manner of a Deed, and Gift.

Ay, so I do; but, Mephostopholis, my Blood congeals, and I can write no more.


I'll fetch thee Fire to dissolve it straight.

What might the staying of my Blood portend,
It is unwilling I should write this Bill.

Yet, Faustus, think upon thy precious Soul.

No, Faustus, think of Honour, and of Wealth.

Of Wealth. Why all the Indies, Ganges, shall be mine.


No, Faustus, everlasting Tortures shall be thine.

No, Faustus, everlasting Glory shall be thine.
The World shall raise a Statue of thy Name,
And on it write, This, this is he that could command^ the World.


Command the World; Ay, Faustus, think on that.
Why streams not then my Blood that I may write?
Faustus gives to thee his Soul; Oh! there it stops. Why should thou not? Is
not thy Soul thy own?


See, Faustus, here is Fire, set it on.

So now the Blood begins to clear again.

What is't I would not do to obtain his Soul?

Consummatum ect; the Bill is ended.
But what is this Inscription on my Arm?
Homo fuge: Whether shall I fly?
My Senses are deceived, here's nothing writ;
O yes, I see it plain, even here is writ.
Homo fuge: yet shall not Faustus sly
I'll call up something to delight his Mind.

What means this then?

'Tis to delight thy Mind, and let thee see
What Magic can perform.

And may I raise such Spirits when I please.

Ay, Faustus, and do greater Things than these.

Then, Mephostopholis, receive this Deed of Gi^t;
But yet Conditionally, that thou perform all
Covenants and Articles herein subscribed.

I swear by Hell, and Lucifer, to effect all Promises between us both.

Then take it.

Do you deliver it as your Deed, and Gi^t?

Ay, and the Devil do you good on it.

So, now, Faustus, ask what thou wilt.

Then let me have a Wife.

What sight is this?

Now, Faustus, wilt thou have a Wife?

Here's a hot Whore indeed, I'll have no Wife.

Marriage is but a Ceremonial Toy;
I'll cull thee out the fairest Curtezans,
And bring 'em every Morning to thy Bed:
She whom thy Eye shall like, thy Heart shall have.

Then, Mephostopholis, let me behold the Famous
Hellen, who was the Occasion of great Troys Destruction.

Faustus, thou shalt.

O Mephostopholis! what would I give to gain a Kiss from off those lovely Lips.


Faustus, thou may.


My Soul is fled; come Hellen, come, give me my Soul again; she's gon.


Women are shy you know at the first Sight; but come, Faustus, command me
somewhat else.


Then tell me, is Hell so terrible as Church-men write it.


No, Faustus, 'tis Glorious as the upper World; but that we have Night and Day,
as you have here: Above there's no Night.


Why sighs my Mephostopholis, I think Hell's a mere Fable.


Ay, think so still.


Tell me who made the World?


I will not.


Sweet Mephos^.


Move me no further.


Villain, have I not bound thee to tell me any Thing.


That's not against our Kingdom, this is: Thou are Lost; think thou of Hell.


Think, Faustus, upon him that made the World.


Remember this.


Ay, go accursed Spirit to ugly Hell,
'Tis thou hast damned distressed Faustus Soul:
I will Repent: Ha!
This Bible's fast, but here's another:
Is't not too late?

Too late.


Never too late, if Faustus will repent.


Faustus, behold, behold thy Deed; if thou r^pent Devils will tear thee in
Pieces.


Repent, and they shall never raze thy Skin.


This must be Mr. Doctor's House; I'll make ^old to knock: My Heart fails me
already.

I begin to tremble at the Thoughts of seeing the Devil.

Here's a great Resort of Devils, the very Doors smell of Brimstone: I'll even
back -- No: I'll be a Man of Resolution: But if Mr. Doctor should send a
Familiar to open the Door, in what Language should I speak to the Devil?


This is some malicious Spirit, that will not let me alone at my Study; but
I'll go in, and conn my Book.


I believe Mr. Doctor is very Busy; but I'll rap this time with Authority.


I have left the Door open to save the Devil the labour of Knocking, if he has
a mind to come in: For I am resolved not to stir from my Book; I found it in
the Doctor's Clo^et, and know it must contain something of the Black Art.


Oh here's Mr. Doctor himself; he's reading some co^juring Book. I'd fain
jecit.


This must be a conjuring Book by the hard Words. AB, EB, IB, OB, VB* BA, BY,
BV, BI.


It's Child's Primer.


The Devil, the Devil; be gon, avoid Satan.


O the Devil! Now will I lye as if I were Dead, and let the Devil go hunt for
my Soul.


I have learned to raise the Devil, but how the Devil shall I do to lay him.
Ha! what's here, a dead Body? The Devil assumed this Body, and when I began to
mu^ter my Prayers, he was in such haste he left his Carcass behind him. Ha! it
stirs; no, 'twas but my Fancy.

All's dead but's Head.
The Devil, the Devil! Be gon; what art thou?

A poor unfortunate Devil.


The Devil; Avaunt then Hogon mogon strogon.


O good Mr. Doctor, conjure up no more Devils and I'll be gon, or any thing. --
I came only to ask your Black Artship a Question.


No, this is not the Devil. Who are thou? Whence come thou? What's thy
Business, Quick, or Hogon strogon?


Hold, hold, hold, I am poor Harlequin: By the Learned I am called Z^ne, by the
Vulgar Jack Pudding, I was late Fool to a Mountebank* and last Night, in the
mistaking the Pipkin, I eat up a Pot of Bolus instead of Hasty P^dding; and
devoured Three Yards of Diaculum Plaster instead of Pancake, for which my
Master has turned me out of Doors instead of Wages: Therefore, to be revenged,
I come to hire a Devil or two of you, Mr. Doctor, of a strong Constitution,
that may swallow up his Turpentine Pills as fast as he make 'em, that he may
never cure poor Whore more of a Clap; and then he'll be undone, for they are
his chief Patients.


What Practice has he?


Why his Business is to patch up rotten Whores against the Term for Cou^try
Lawyers, and Attorneys Clerks; and against Christmas, E^ster and Wh^sum
Holidays, for City Apprentices; and if his Pills be destroyed, 'twill ruin him
in one Term.


Come in; and for a Crown a We^k I'll let thee out a Devil, as they do Horses
at Livery, shall swallow him a Peck of Pills a day, though every one were as
big as a Pumpkin; and make nothing of a Bolus for a Breakfast.


O brave Mr. Doctor! O dainty Mr. Devil!


S^igniora.


FAustus, Repent; yet Heaven will pity thee.


Thou art a Spirit, Heaven cannot pity thee.


Who buzzes in my Ear, I am a Spirit; ^e I a Devil yet Heaven can pity me: Yea,
Heaven will pity me, if I repent.


Ay, but Faustus never shall repent.


Ay, Sweet Faustus think of Heaven, and heavenly Things.


My Heart is hard'ned, I cannot repent.
Scarce can I name Salvation, Faith, or Heaven,
But I am pinched, and pricked, in thousand Places.
O help distressed Faustus!
Lucifer, Beelzebub, and Mephostopholis rises.

Non^ can afford thee help; for only I have Interest in thee, Faustus.


Oh! What art thou, that looks so terrible?


I am Lucifer, and this is my Companion Prince in Hell.


We are come to tell thee thou dost injure us.


Thou call on Heaven contrary to thy Promi^e.


Thou should not think on Heaven.


Nor will I henceforth pardon him for this,
And Faustus Vows never to look to Heaven.

So shalt thou show thy self a faithful Servant,
And we will highly gratify thee for it.

Those Words delight my Soul.


Faustus, we are come in Person to show thee Pastime; sit down, and thou shalt
behold the Seven Deadly Sins in their own proper Shapes and Likeness.


That Sight will be as pleasant to my Eye, as Paradise to Adam the first Day of
his Creation.


Talk not of Paradise, but mind the Show. Go, Mephostopholis, and fetch 'em in;
and, Faustus, question 'em their Names.


What art thou?


I am Pride; I was begot by Disdain and Affectation, I always took the Wall of
my Betters; had ever the first Cut, or else would not eat: I scorned all
Advice, never thought any one handsome but my self; had the best Pue in the
Church, though a Tradesman's Wife; and at last dyed of the Spleen, for want of
a Coach and Six Horses. Why is not thy Room perfumed, and spread with Cloth of
Tissue? What must you sit, and I stand? Rise up Brute.


Go, thou art a proud Slut indeed.
N^w what art thou the Second.

I am Covetousness; I was begot by a close Fist, and a griping Heart, in a
Us^rer's Chest. I never eat, to save Charges: This Coat has covered me for
Fourscore Winters: This Beard had seen as many more. I never slept in my Life,
but always watched my Gold.


What wort thou on Earth?


I was first an Exciseman, and cheated the King and Country; then I was a
Baker, and from every Neighbor's ^oaf I stole Two Pound, and swore 'twas shrunk
in the Oven. I was a Vintner, and by bribing of Quest men had leave to ^ell in
Pint Bottles for Quarts: At last I was a Horse courser, made Smith^ield too hot
to hold me, and rid Post to the Devil? Give me some Gold, Father?


What art thou the Third?


I am Envy; begot by a Chimny-sweeper upon an Oyster-wench. I cannot read, and
wish all Books burnt. I always cursed the Government that I was not preferred;
and ^as a Male-content in Three Kings Reigns. I am Lean with seeing others Eat;
and I wish the Devil would make a Sponge of thy Heart, to wipe out the Score of
my Sins.


Out Envious Wretch. What art thou the Fourth?


I am Wrath; I had neither Father nor Mother, but leaped out of a Lion's Mouth
when I was scarce an Hour old. I always abhorred the Art of Patience, and cursed
all Fisher-men. I beat my Wife for my Pleasure; cursed Heaven in my Passion,
because it gave me no Fortune, and was hanged for a Rape on a Scotch Peddler.


What art thou the Fifth?


I am Gluttony; begot by a Plow-man on a Washerwoman, who devoured a Chedder
Cheese in two Hours. I am of a Royal Pedigree: My Grand-father was a Sur-loin
of Beef, and my Mother a Gammon of Bacon: My Sisters were Sows, which supplied
me with Pork: My Brothers were Calves, which afforded me Veal: My God-fathers
were Peter Pickled-Herring, and Michael Milk-Porredg: My God-mothers were Susan
Salt-butter, and Margery Sous'd-Hog'sFace. Now, Faustus, thou hast heard my
Pedigree, wilt thou invite me to Supper?


Not I.


Then the Devil choke thee.


What art thou the Sixth?


Hey ho! I am Sloth; I was begotten at Church by a sleepy Judge on a
Costermonger's Wife, in the middle of a long Sermon. I am as Lazy as a
Fishmonger in the Dogdays, or a Parson in Lent: I would not speak another Word
for a King's Ransom.


And what are you, Mr. Minks, the Seventh and last?


I am one that love an Inch of Raw Mutton better than an Ell of Fried
Stock-fish, and the first Letter of my Name begins with Lechery.


This Sight delights my Soul.

Faustus, in Hell are all manner of Delights.

O might I see Hell once, and return safe.

Faustus, thou shalt; give me thy hand.
Hence let's descend, and we will Faustus show
The mighty Pleasures in the World below.

So, now am I in my Pontificalibus: Now can I show my Black Art; for I have
found that heavenly Book which Faustus used to raise the Dead in: Come, stand
within this Circle.


'Tis time to Conjure, for I am almost famished. We have fasted like Priests
for a Miracle.


I'll make thee amends presently; I'll conjure up a Spirit, ask what thou wilt
thou shalt have it.


Let me alone for asking.


Be very earnest with him, and entreat mightily.


I'll entreat Earnestly.


Silence. Sint mihi Dii Acherontis propitii Nobis Diccatus, Mephostopholis, c.


How am I tortured by these Villains Charms?
From Constantinople have they brought me now,
Only for Measure of these idle Slaves? What
Would you with Mephostopholis?

Weed know how Dr. Faustus does.

Well.

When comes he home?

Within Two Days.

What was he doing when you left him?

He was at Supper, eating good Cheer.

Good Mr. Devil, tell him we are almost starved* and desire him to send us some
of his good Cheer.


Is that all?


Some Wine too?


What else.


What else: Why if Fornication been it against your Commandments, we would have
some live Flesh; a handsome Wench.


Only for a third Person, and please your Damnat^on.


You shall have your Desires.


We desire your Mephostopholiship too, not to let us stay the Roasting and
Boiling of any thing: For we are as Eager as the Wine in Smith^ield, and want
no whetting.


You shall.
Now if your mighty Darkness would please to Retire.

Farewell.


Now how do you like my Art?


O rare Art! O divine Mr. Doctor Scaramouche! If the Devil be as good as his
Word, I'll owe him a good Turn as long as I live: But I wish our third Person
would come.

^a! What's here?


I am sent by Pluto to bear you Company.


Is this his third Person? Or is it Three Generations in One? Come you from
Guild-hall, Sir?


No, Mortal, from the Stygian Lake. I am the Giant which St. George destroyed;
and in the Earth have been decaying ever since, but now am come to Eat with
you.


To pick up your Cr^ms, Sir: You're heartily Welcome.


I have lain now within the Stygian Lake 2000 Years.

Your Honour is not much shrunk in the Wetting.

But we loose Time, and Dinner cools.

Where is it?

In the next Room.

Will it please your Lustiness to lead the Way?

Will it please you then to make way for him?

I can divide my self to serve my Friends?
Breeches be you my Page, and follow me.

O heavenly Apparition!

Come, let's sit down.

Ha! What's here, a Woman?

O happy Change! Madam, with your good Leave.

Never too late in good Breeding.
Wench! And us Luscious as Pig-sauc^.

Heaven be praised for all.

Your unseasonable Thankfulness has robbed us of our Strumpet.


No matter, no matter; we shall meet her in the Cloisters after the Fair. Come
let's fall too.

Ha!


The Table runs away from us.


We'll bestow the Pains to follow it again; this I see is a running Banquet.


I have found the Secret: We must not say Grace at the Devil's Feast.


Come then let's fall too, San's Ceremony; Will you be Carver?


Every one for himself, I say.


Ay, every one for himself, and God for us all.


A Plague o'your Proverb; it has a Word in it must not be named.


Ah, Mr. Doctor, do but entreat Mr. Mephostopholis to let the Table down to us,
or send us tothat, and I'll he his Servant as long as I live.


Oh, oh, oh.

Now have a care of another Proverb:
We go without our Supper.

Nay, now I know the Devil's Humour, I'll hit him to a Hair: Pray, Mr. Doctor,
cut up that Pasty.


I can't get my Knife into it, 'tis over-bak'd.


Ay, 'tis often so: God sends Meat, and the Devil sends Cooks.


Thou Varlet, dost thou see what thy Proverb has done?


Now could I curse my Grand-mother, for she taught 'em me: Well, if sweet
Mephostopholis will be so kind as but to let us and the Table come together
again, I'll promise never to say Grace, or speak Proverb more, as long as I
live.


Your Prayers are heard, now be careful; for if I lose my Supper by thy
Negligence I'll cut thy Throat.


Do, and eat me when you have do^e. I am damnably hungry; I'll cut open this
Pasty, while you open that Pot of wild Fowl.


Here's the Nest but the Birds are flown: Here's Wine though, and now I'll
conjure for a Supper. I have a Salad within of my own Garhering in the Fields
to Day.


Fetch it in; Bread, Wine, and a Salad, may serve for a Collation.


Come, no Ceremony among Friends. Bon. fro.

Salad mal adjuste; here's neither Fat nor Lean.

O Mr. Doctor, neither Fat nor Lean in a Salad.

Neither Oil, nor Vinegar.

Oh! I'll fetch you that presently.

O thy Salad is nothing but Thistles and Netles; and thy Oil stinks worse than
Arse^etito.


Bread and Wine be our Fare. Ha! the Bread's alive.


Or the Devil's in it. Hey! again.

My Belly's as empty as a Beggar's Purse.

And mine as full of Wind as a Trumpeter's Cheeks.
But since we can't Eat, let's Drink: Come, here's Dr. Faustus's Health.


Ay, come; God bless Dr. Faustus.

What all gone: Here's a Banquet stole away like a City Feast.


Ha! here's Music to delight us.

Ha! the Devil. We are locked in.

As fast as a Counter Rat.

Of o, of --.

HOW have I been delighted by thy Art; and in Twelve Years have seen the utmost
Limits of the spacious World; seasted my self with all Varieties; pleasured my
Fancy with my Magic Art, and lived sole Lord over every Thing I wished for.


Ay, Faustus, is it not a splendid Life?


It is my Spirit; but prithee now retire, while I repose my self within this
Shade, and when I wake attend on me again.


Faust, I will.


What art thou, Faustus, but a Man condemned. Thy Lease of Years expire apace;
and, Faustus, then thou must be Lucifers: Here rest my Soul, and in my Sleep my
future State be buried.


Faustus, sweet Faustus, yet remember Heaven.
Oh! think upon the everlasting Pain thou must endure,
For all thy short Space of Pleasure.

Illusions, Fancies, Faustus; think of Eart^.
The Kings thou shalt command: The Pleasutes Rule.
Be, Fa^stus, not a whining, pious Fool.

Oh! what a couz'ning Doctor was this: I riding my Horse into the Water,
thinking some hidden mystery had been in 'em, found my self on a Bundle of
Straw, and was dragged by Something in the Water, like a Bailiff through a
Horse-pond. Ha! he's a Sleep: So ho, Mr. Doctor, so ho. Why Doctor, you
couz'ning, wheedling, hypocritical, cheating, cho^sing, Son of a Whore; awake,
rise, and give me my Money again, for your Horse is turned into a Bottle of Hay.
Why Sirrah, Doctor; 's^oot I think he's dead. Why Doctor Scab; you mangy Dog.


O help! the Villain has undone me; Murder.


Murder, or not Murder, now he has but one Leg I'll out-run him.


Stop, stop him; ha, ha, ha, Faustus has his Leg again, and the Horse-courser a
Bundle of Have for his Forty Dollars. Come, Mephostopholis, let's now attend the
Emperor.


Here's to thee; and now I'll tell thee what I came hither for: You have heard
of a Conjurer they call Doctor Faustus.


Heard of him, a Plague take him, I have Cause to know him; has he played any
Pranks* with you?


I'll tell thee, as I was going to the Market a while ago, with a Load of Hay,
he met me, and asked me, What he should give me for as much Hay as his Horse
would Eat: Now, Sir, I thinking that a little would serve his Turn, bad him
take as much as he would for Three Farthings.


So.


So he presently gave me Money, and fell to Eating: And as I'm a cursen Man, he
never left Yeating and Yeating, 'till he had eaten up my whole Load of Hay.


Now you shall hear how he served me: I went to him Yesterday to buy a Horse of
him, which I did; and he bad me be sure not to ride him into the Water.


Good.


Ad's Wounds 'twas Bad, as you shall hear: For I thinking the Horse had some
rare Quality, that he would not have me know, what do me I but rides him in the
Water; and when I came just in the midst of the River, I found my self a
Straddle on a Bottle of Hay.


O rare Doctor!


But you shall hear how I served him bravely for it; for finding him a Sleep
just now in a By-Field, I whoop'd and hollowed in his Ears, but could not wake
him; so I took hold of his Leg, and never left pulling till I had pulled it
quite off.


And has the Doctor but one Leg then? That's Rare. But come, this is his House,
let's in and see for our Money; look you, we'll pay as we come back.


Done, done; and when we have got our Money let's laugh at his one Leg: Ha, ha,
ha.


What have the Rogues le^t my Pots, and run away, without paying their
Reck'ning? I'll after 'em, cheating Villains, Rogues, Cut-purses; rob a poor
Woman, cheat the Spittle, and rob the King of his Excise; a parcel of Rustic,
Clownish, Pedantical, High-shoo'd, Plow-jobbing, Cart-driving, Pinch-back'd,
Paralytick, Fumbling, Grumbling, Bellowing, Yellowing, Peas-picking, Stinking,
Mangy, Runagate, Ill-begotten, Ill-contriv'd, Wry-mouth'd, Spatrifying,
Dung^ill-raking, Costive, Snorting, Sweaty, Farting, Whaw^rover Dogs.


My Time draws near, and 20 Years are past: I have but Four poor Twelve Months
for my Life, and then I am damned for ever.


O gentle Faustus, leave this damned Art; this Magic, that will charm thy Soul
to Hell, and quite bereave thee of Salvation: Though thou hast now offended
like a Man, do not, oh! do not persist in it like a Devil. It may be this my
Exhortation seems harsh, and all unpleasant; let it not, for, gentle Son, I
speak in tender Love and Pity of thy future Misery; and so have hope that this
my kind Rebuke, checking thy Body, may preserve thy Soul.


Where art thou, Faustus? Wretch, what hast thou done? O Friend, I feel thy
Words to comfort my distressed Soul; retire, and let me ponder on my Sins.


Faustus, I leave thee, but with grief of Heart,
Fearing thy Enemy will near depart.

Thou Traitor, I arrest thee for Disobedience to thy Sovereign Lord; revolt, or
I'll in piece-meal tear thy Flesh.


I do repent I ever offended him; torment, sweet Friend, that old Man that
durst dissuade me from thy Lucifer.


His Faith is great, I cannot touch his Soul; but What I can afflict his Body
with I will.


We are come to drink a Health to your wooden Leg.


My wooden Leg; what dost thou mean, Friend?


Ha, ^a! he has forgot his Leg.


P^ha, 'tis not a Leg he stands upon. Pray, let me ask you one Question; Are
both your Legs Bed-fellows?


Why dost thou ask?


Because I believe you have a good Companion of one.


Why, don't you remember I pulled off one o'your Legs when you were a Sleep?


But I have it again now I am awake.


Ad's Wounds, had the Doctor three Legs! --. You, Sir, don't you remember you
gave a Penny for as much Hay as your Horse would eat, and then eat up my whole
Load.


Look you, Mr. Doctor, you must not carry it off so; I come to have the Money
again I gave for the Ho-o-o-


And I come to be paid for my Load of Ha-a-a.


O Mr. Doctor! do you harbour Rogues that bilk poor ^olks, and wont pay their
Reck'nings? Who must pay me for my A-a-a-a


Mr. Doctor, I can't be quiet for your Devil Mr. Me-o-o --


Wonder of Men, thrice Learned Faustus, Renowned Magician, welcome to our
Court; and as thou late did promise us, I would behold the Famous Alexander
fighting with his great Rival Dari^s, in their true Shapes, and State
Majestic.


Your Majesty shall see 'em presently.


It thou bring Alexander, or Dari^s here, I'll be content to be Act^on, and
turn my self to a Stag.


And I'll play Diana, and send you the Horns presently.


Away, be gon; see, my Gracious Lord, what Beast is that that thru^ts his Head
out of yo^' Window.


O wondrous Sight! see tow Horns on young Benoolio's Head; call him, Lords.


What, ho! Benoolio.

A Plague upon you, set me Sleep.

Look up, Benoolio, 'tis the Emperor calls.

The Emperor; O my Head.

And thy Horns hold, 'tis no matter for thy Head.

Doctor, this is your Villainy.

O say not so, Sir; the Doctor has no Skill, if he bring Alexander or Dari^s
here you'll be Act^on, and turn to a Stag: Therefore, if it please your
Majesty, I'll bring a Kennel of Hounds to hunt him. Ho! Helmot, Argi^on,
As^erot.


Hold, he'll raise a Kennel of Devils. Good, my Lord, entreat.


Prithee remove his Horns, he has don^ Penance enough.


Away; and remember hereafter you speak well of Scholars.


If Scholars be such Cuckolds to put Horns upon honest Men's Heads, I'll never
trust Smooth-face and Small-band more: But if I been it revenged, may I be
turned to a Gaping Oyster, and drink nothing but Salt-water.


Come, Faustus, in recompense of this high Desert, Thou shalt command the State
of Germany, and live beloved of mighty Carol^s.


Nay, sweet Benoolio, let us sway thy Thoughts from* this Attempt against the
Conjurer.


My Head is lighter, than it was by the Horns:
And yet my Heart's more ponderous than my Head,
And pants, until I see the Conjurer dead.

Consider.

Away dissuade me not he comes:
Now Sword ^trike home*
For Horns he gave, I'll have his Head anon.

Oh, (...)

^
^

First, on this Scull, in qu^ttance of my Wrongs, I'll na^l huge ^orked Horns
within the Window where he yoked me first, that all the World may see my just
Revenge; and thus having settled his Head --


What shall the Body do, Gentlemen.

The Devil's alive again?

Give the Devil his Head again.

Nay, keep it; Faustus will have Heads and Hands:
I call your Hearts to recompense this Deed.
Ho; Asteroth, Belin^oth, Mephostopholis.
Go Horse these Traitors on your fiery Backs.
Drag 'em through Dir^ and Mud, through Thorns and Briers.

Pity us, gentle Faustus, save our Lives.

Away.

He must needs go whom the Devil drives.

I find this Scaramouche is a Villain; he has left the Doctor, and is come to
be Steward to a rich Widow, whose Husband dyed Yesterday, and here he is
coming to give the Poor their Doles, of which I'll have my Share.


Come hither, poor Devils; stand in Order, and be Damned. I come to distribute
what your deceased good Master hath bequeathed.


God bless you, Mr. Steward.


Let me tell you, Gentlemen, he was as good a Man as ever piss't, or cried
Stand on the High-way.

He spent a good Estate, 'tis true; but he was no Body's ^oe but his own. I
never left him while he was worth a Groat, this. Easter: The Meat that was
stale, and his Drink that was sour, was always yours.


So, setting the Here's Head against the ^oose Giblets, he was a good
Hospitable Man; and much good may do you with what you had.


I have had nothing.


Nor I^


Nor I.


Nor. I.


Nothing.


Nothing, nothing.


Nothing, nothing; you lying Rogues, then there's something for you.


So now I am Victual'd, I may hold our Siege against Hunger.

Ha! they are hunting a after me, and will kill me. Let me see, I will take
this Gi^bet for my Preserver, and with this long Cloak make as if I were
hanged. Now when they find a Man hanged, not knowing me in this Disguise,
they'll look no farther after me, but think the Thie^s hanged. -- I hear '^m
coming.


Ha! what's here, a Man hanged? But what Paper is this is his Hand?

I have cheated the Poor of their Money, and took the Bread out of their Mouths,
for which I was much troubled in Conscience, fell into Despair, and, as you
see, hanged my self.

O the Devil! Murder, murder!


O Neighbours, here hangs the Rogue.


Help me down?


No, you are very well as you are.


Don't you know me?


Ay, for a Rogue; even finish your Work, and save the Hang-man a Labour. Yet,
now I think on it, self-murder is a crying Sin, and may damn his Soul. Come,
Neighbours, we'll take him down, and have him hanged according to Law.


Stop Thief, stop Thief.


Thus from the infernal Dis do we ase^nd, bringing with us the Deed; the Time
is come which makes it forfeit.


Yet, Faustus, call on Heaven.


O^! 'tis too late; behold, they lock my Hands.


Who, Faustus?


Luci^er and Mephos^opholis; I gave 'em my Soul for Four and twenty Years.


Heaven ^orbid.


Ay, Heaven forbad it indeed, but Faustus has done it; for the vain Pleasure of
Four and twenty Years* Faustus has lost eternal Joy and Felicity: I writ 'em a
Bill with my own Blood, the Date is expired; this is the Time, and they are
come to ^etch me.


Why would not Faustus tell me of that before?


I oft in^ended it, but the Devil threatened to tear me in Pieces. O Friend,
retire and save your self.


I'll into the next Room, and their pray for thee.


Ay, pray for me; and what Noise soever you hear stir not, for nothing can
rescue me.


Pray thou, and I'll pray. Adie^.


If I live till Morning I'll visit you; if not, (...) is go^ to Hell.


Ay, Faustus, now thou hast no hopes on Heaven.


O thou bewitching Fi^nd; 'twas thou, and thy Temptations, hath robbed me of
eternal Happiness.


I do confess it, Faustus, and rejoice.
What weep thou, 'tis too late; hark to thy knell:
Fools that will Laugh on Earth, must Weep in Hell.

O Faustus, if thou had given Ear to me,
Innumerable Joys had followed thee:
But thou did love the World.

Gave Ear to me, and now must taste Hell's Pains perpetual.


Had thou a^ected sweet Divinity,
Hell, nor the Devil, had no Power on thee.
Had thou kept on that way, Faustus, behold in what resplended
Glory thou had sat; that hast thou Lost.
And now, poor Soul, must thy good Angel leave:
The Jaws of H^ll are ready to receive thee.

Now, Faustus, let thy Eyes with Horror stare
Into that Vast perpetual torturing House.

O I have seen enough to torture me.

Nay thou must feel 'em, 'taste the Smart of all.
He that loves Pleasure must for Pleasure ^all:
And so I leave thee, Faustus, till anon.
Thou'lt ^umble into Confusion.

Now, Faustus, hast thou but one bear Hour to Live,
And then thou must be Damned perpetually:
Stand still you ever-moving Spheres of Heaven,
That Time may cease, and Mid-night never come.
Or le^ this Hour be but a Year, a Mon^h, a Week, a natural Day; that Faustus
may repent, and save his Soul. Mountains and Hills come, come, and ^all on me,
and hi^e me from the heavy Wrath of Heaven. Gape E^rth; Oh no, it will not
harbour me.

Oh! half the Hour is past; 'twill all be past a^o^. Oh! if my Soul must suffer
for my Sin, impose some end to my incessant Pain. Let Faustus live in Hell a
Thousand Years, an Hundred thousand, and at last be saved. Lu^ifer; O
Mephostopholis.


Come, Friend, let's visit Faustus: For such a dreadful Night was never seen.


O help us, Heaven; see here are Faustus's Limbs,
All torn asunder by the Hand of Hell.

May this a fair Example be to all,
To avoid such Ways which brought poor Faustus's Fall.
And whatsoever Pleasure does invite,
Sell not your Souls to purchase vain Delight.


