TO please you with new Whims our Poet strives;
For most Things please when new, even your own Wives.
But Wi^es, he fears, are surer to delight
Than Plays. Play^ scarce can do it one single Night.
Yet still h'has found you kind; but, for his part,
Swears, 'Twas your goodness more than his desert.
Chiefly at others Cost he treats to Day;
For every Act you'll have a diff^rent Play:
Each kind distinct: Then let no Critic grumble;
Some taking Plays are a worse sort of jumble.
The first's a Past^ral, which to a friend is due;
But that's for none but th^ innocent and true,
And I much fear, Gallants, 'tis not for you.
A Comic Dish before you then he'll set,
And much in Season; that's a Beau in debt:
Poor, as a Poet, in all Things but's Cloths;
For Poets are at best but dirty Beaux,
And what, long after a third day, God knows.
His Third's a Masque. The fourth he chiefly drew
From a late Tragic Drama seen by few;
Yet hopes 'twill please no less than if 'twere new.
The fifth's a Farce, where some odd tricks are joined,
Vs^d by the Italians; to which pray be kind:
Nor hope in Farce true Wit or Sense to find.
Sure your Devotion several Plays will bear,
As in one day, some several Sermons hear.
These are not long; but be not sorry for it,
All things are not the worse for being short.
Our Author studies, Sirs, to make you easy;
Some things, the less they are, the better please ye.
Light Cloths, and lighter Food are best this weather,
Next Winter for more solid sare come hither.
Plays, Whores and Masks, go rarely off together.
When Volunteers return, who, like Commanders,
Went to buy Mechlen-Lace, and drink Champaign in Flanders.
Then they all bravely march to Winter Quarters,
To be bombarded by the Vizard-Mortars.
The Tars, who played at Bow-peep with the French,
Come to spend all upon some battered wench;
And Beaux, of honour fond, when Dangers cease,
To buy Commissions, hearing of a Peace.
Raw Squires come to be modish, see a Play,
Be rigged, be rookt, be clapped, then sneak away;
And Petti-foggers come to spend their Guineas,
Then Plantiffs and Defendants all trot home like Ninnies.
Projectors come to offer means and ways,
And a huge Mob to offer us damned new Plays.
Kept back by many such, and some few better,
Our Author, till his turn, must be your Debtor,
For, by the by, we did these Acts prepare,
To make good his deficiencies of fonds last year.
Since he may make amends, pray let 'em pass!
Restore the Credit of the Bank of Bays!
He'll ne'er thus trespass, till, by wondrous Chance,
This is revived, and we have Conquer^d France.

Satyr, Shepherds and Shepherdesses.

I Shall be known.


You need not fear;
Your habit will secure you here.
On me you safely may depend,
You know I ever was your friend.
In this Disguise, if People knew
You were not lost, who'd think of you?
Among the Trees we'll stay unseen,
And hear what passes on the Green:
The Swains will quickly leave their Sheep,
To play beneath the Shades, or sleep;
Then Thyrsis comes, and you may hear
What ground you have for what you fear.

Delicious shades! Ye oft have seen
How blessed I formerly have been,
When I have met my Thyrsis here,
And heard him sigh, and heard him swear:
But oh! he falsely sighed and swore,
That then he loved Dorinda more
Than Doves their Mates, than News their Lambs,
Than tender Kids their fawning Dams;
Than Streams the Banks they glide along,
Or joyful Birds their vernal Song:
But Streams still kiss their Banks: The Spring
Still tempts the joyful Birds to sing:
Kids never their fawning Dams forget,
Nor News their Lambs, nor Doves their Mates:
Yet he is changed, and thinks no more
Of me, or what he falsely swore.

He changed not till he thought you dead.


And hardly wept to lose a Maid
Whom once he loved, he swore at least,
And I believed he loved me best.
But who that hears my wrongs, will now
Believe a Shepherd for his Vow?
Ye Maids! that shall within this Grove
Be tempted with the voice of Love,
Refuse to hear, the Charmers shun,
For if you trust 'em, you're undone.

If Thyrsis loves, he loves in vain,
Your Sister likes another Swain.

Tho Cleomira should refuse
His suit, will that his Fault excuse?

Never think hi^ faulty, till you know
How far the Youth has broke his Vow.
Had you been dead, his hopes were gone,
And he had then been free.

So soon?
Montano, you of old have seen
The Shepherds oft forsake the Green,
For years to mourn in Cypress Groves,
For such Misfortunes in their Loves.
To bath with Tears their Virgin's Graves,
Sigh to the Winds, and weep in Caves:
To Rocks, to Trees, of Fate complain,
And not pretend to love again.
While Thyrsis never forsook his Sheep,
And scarce could condescend to weep:
Nor sighed in Caves; nor to the Wind,
Nor told the Waves they were unkind;
But once or twice for Custom sighed,
And chose my Sister for his Bride.

You only was beloved in her:
He saw, and liked your Picture there.
You must confess his Love was due
To her, for what she has like you.
You^re sick, Dorinda; cease your fears.

See -- He that makes me sick appears.


No, by these Symptoms I can tell
He comes that is to make you well.

I should not fancy this Retreat,
This silence, nor this Shade so sweet,
Did not my Thoughts when I am here,
Run all on her I love so dear.
That I would part with all I have;
For some small Hut or little Cave,
Within the Covert of this Grove,
To spend my Life with her I love.
But she prefers another Swain,
And I'm condemned to love in vain.
When e're we pipe, his Tunes are best,
When e're we dance, 'tis I'm the jest.
She likes his step, she likes his mean,
And he's the Master of the Green.
The fairest Garlands she can weave,
She thinks not fine enough to give
To him; but what's on me bestowed
Is all too fine, and all too good.
Her Ribbands, and her Crook are his:
Nay, once by chance, I saw 'em kiss.
And yet, alas! I can't forbear
To love, and serve, and think of her.
Will she then ne'er on me bestow
Part of those Joys she lets him know?




What make you here insulting Swain?
Go mind your business on the Plain:
Go feed your Lambs, and watch your Sheep,
'Tis true, thou hast but few to keep:
But out of few to lose but one,
The loss is great, and you're undone.

And yet, proud youth, tho thou hast more,
Who envies thee thy Father's store?
Where-e're thou drive thy Flocks to graze,
The Nymphs and Shepherds leave the place.
They hate thy Pipe, and dread thy voice,
Our Lambs are frighted at the noise.
Thy Songs and Dances are at best
The Goatherd's scorn, and Ploughman's jest.
Thy Songs are bad, thy steps are rude;
But we confess thy Flocks are good.
Go watch 'em then, for great^s thy charge,
Thy Herds are vast, thy Pastures large;
Thy Men may sleep, thy Boys may play,
Thy Flocks may rove, thy Herds may stray;
And when thy Flocks and Herds are gone,
Poor Thyrsis thou art quite undone.

No more of such disputes as these,
But go, and let me sleep in peace.

You came not here to sleep to day,
I know your Business, and will stay.

There's Room enough within the Grove:
Go in, and leave me --

With my Love?
My Cleomira? No, I'll stay,
And make her hear what both can say.

Thy Cleomira? You're a fool
To fancy she can be so dull
As once to think of leaving me,
And all that I possess, for thee

What reason coud'st thou ever find
To hope the Shepherdess designed
Her self for thee? When e're we play,
From thee she turns her head away:
When e're we dance she chooses me
To take her hand, and frowns on thee.

She frowns perhaps to let me know,
She's vexed at what she's forced to do;
And if she turns her head aside,
'Tis more her Modesty than Pride.
Maids use those worst whom they like best,
And where they love they show it least.

Stay, my Cleomira!


Stay!


Hold! You fright the Nymph away.


Hold! You fright her: Prithee see
How she looks and turns --

To me.
Tell me why you are afraid?
Who could hurt so fair a Maid?
Is your Spaniel run away?
Has the Woolf broke in to day?

No, but I have been pursued
By two Monsters of the Wood.

Cease your trouble; never fear;
You are safe, while I am here.

Cease your fear, you need not fly,
You are safe, while I am by.

Should I trust my self to you,
What coud'st thou pretend to do?

I could fight,


And so could I.


I could bleed.


And I could dye:


I can --


What you've done before;
Talk of Marriage to a score;
And when all thy Reasons fail,
Think thy Riches will prevail.
I can --

Boast of much desert
In bestowing of a heart,
Tho the present must be small
When with that you give your all.

I have nothing else to plead.


Nothing else should here succeed.
Riches take at Court and Town,
Where there's nothing better known;
Love and Constancy must reign
In the limits of our Plain.
We that know what 'tis to live
On what Nature has to give;
On an Herb, or on a Plant;
How can we Provision want?
Every Wood and every Field
Stores of rich Provision yield;
He, and only he is poor,
Who is ever craving more.
He who thinks his Wealth above
Truth and Constancy in Love.
Let him not infect our Swains,
Let us drive him from the Plains:
Let the Maid, who e're he woos,
All that he requests refuse --
Let me go, I see the Sun
Declines apace; I must be gone,

As yet 'tis high, and you may stay:
The youth will make himself away.

You need not fear when Thyrsis grieves;
Dorinda's dead, yet Thyrsis lives --
Nay, let me go; the time is come
That I shall be expected home.
I loitered once, and lost a Kid,
And if I stay I shall be chid.

Must I go too?


No, then they'll say
That we've agreed to Wed to day.
They won't believe the Satyrs drew
Me here, but I came here for you,
No, Damon, stay; the dangers gone,
And I may venture home alone.

While I will to my charge repair,
And see that nothing's wanting there.
You, Thyrsis, too should not forget,
Your Herds are large; your Flocks are great.
You see, 'tis now too late to sleep,
And you'll be wanted with your Sheep.
The Shade's too cool, the Maid is gone;
What then should you do here alone?

Hence with hope, and hence with care!
There's some comfort in despair.
Now I know the worst is past,
Something good may come at last:
Let me like a man endure
All my Pain, and hope no Cure.
Hope will but increase my grief,
When 'tis so much past relief;
Hence with hope, and hence with Care,
There's some comfort in despair.
Oh, how much we do boast in vain
Of the quiets of the Plain!
How we idly talk of ease!
Love, alas! disturbs our Peace:
And where e're the Tyrant dwells,
Be it in Palaces or Cells,
Peace and soft Content remove;
War and Tumult wait on Love.
Once, and I call it oft to mind,
I loved a Maid, and she was kind.
Oh! How could I once forget
How soft was every Word, how sweet
Was every Look! For me she chose
To leave her Lambs, to leave her News,
To hear me pipe beneath a Tree,
And all her Business was with me.
Hah! What friendly Notes are these,
That charm and sooth my mind to peace,
Some happy Swain within the Grove
Has met, and entertains his Love.
Music gives pleasure to the Blessed,
And to the Miserable, Rest.

Hold Villain -- go in, Montano;
Nor stay to see a Virgin^s weakness;
But save my blushes: Stay within,
And, when you see your time, appear.
He wakes, and as he lifts his Eyes,
They bring those glances to my view
Which charmed me once, and if I gaze
I love and then am lost again.

Who talks of love, and being lost?
In words and with a voice so sweet,
That tho it wakes me from a dream
Where I began to taste of joy,
And feel Dorinda in my Arms,
Yet I am pleased.

Perhaps to be relieved
From Dreams which troubled your repose,
And set a Maid before your Eyes,
Whom you were willing to forget.

Thy voice, fair youth, thy looks, prevent
My anger; but whoever thou art
'Tis fare unkind to think me false,
Before thou know my guilt.

I know
You have been guilty, if 'tis guilt to love
Another while the Virgin lives
To whom you have engaged your heart,
To whom you vowed you would be true,
Till death should part ye -- Did you not?
Yet, ere death parted ye, you changed,
And if to break a vow be guilt,
I know --

Nothing; for she I loved is dead,
They told thee false who said I changed
Till death, despair, and one so like
The Nymph I loved, so dear to her,
So kind to every one but me,
That not to love her had been worse
Than not to scorn her when her pride,
Disdained my Sighs; till these prevaild
The lost Dorinda had my heart.

But if the lost Dorinda lives
Could you pretend to innocence,
Or say you had not broke your Vow?

But if the lost Dorinda lives!
Why that? Whence thou? and what thy Name?
Excuse me, lovely youth, from words,
And let me gaze upon thy Charms!
Oh! Every look revives my soul!
I see (or else I'm yet asleep)
The Graces that I loved in her.
But if the lost Dorinda lives!
That word, that last bewitching sound
Strikes to my heart, and to my mind.
Restores so many former joys,
That if thou art not her her self,
Thou art so like her, I forget
My Woes, and all that I have lost
To see thy Eyes, and hear thy voice.

Oh! Thyrsis.


'Tis she! Dorinda! let me hold
Thee fast, and if I dream! Oh Heaven
Let me dream still, and never wake.

Dorinda.


Dorinda lives!


And Thyrsis loves!
My fears are gone, and joys succeeds.

You Thyrsis are obliged to me
For what you hear, and what you see.

Oh how, Montano? Let me know,


Be calm, and I will tell you how.
As I this morning watched my Sheep,
While you perhaps was fast asleep,
A youth came to me from the shore,
Whose Face, methought, I'd seen before;
But when he asked me, if I knew
Such Swains, and blushed in naming you,
I kissed him oft, and wept for joy,
To see Dorinda in the Boy.
She told me, when we thought her lost,
She safely reached the Delphian Coast.
How she came back, and why she came
In that disguise, and hid her name:
Your Marriage was resolved she heard,
And had she found it as she feared,
She vowed, alas! in that disguise,
To make her life your sacrifice.

Peace, good Montano, say no more,
For now that all our griefs are over,
Bring no sad Prospects to our view,
Since I am safe, and she is true.

Thyrsis here so late as this,
Sure there's something chanced amiss.
'Tis past our sleeping time, 'tis cold,
The Flocks are driving to the Fold.
The Goats are milked, and we are come,

To sing Dorinda's welcome home.


My Sister here disguised!


The same.


Oh say, when, how, and whence you came?


I brought her here, but when and how
I'll tell you, as we go.

But e're we part,
Let each in Songs express his heart;
Let's dance and sing while we have light,
And talk and kiss away the night.
You Damon, with your Pipe attend,
My Rival once, but now my friend,
The gayest Tune's Dorinda's due,
The gayest Tune must come from you.
To you those honours I resign,
Dorinda only shall be mine.

Her Welcome, Thyrsis, let us sing,
In Notes as sweet as for the Spring.
As when the Trees begin to bloom,
The Leaves to spread, the Buds to come;
When Vi'lets first the Fields adorn,
And warbling Birds salute the morn;
Feasts, Songs and Dances sill the Plain,
For joy that Summer comes again;
Such let Dorinda's welcome be,
And all rejoice like him and me.

HEr Eyes are like the morning bright,
Her Cheeks like Roses fair,
Her Breasts like Watered Lillies White,
Like Silk her flowing Hair.
Her Breath's as sweet as Odors blown
By Zephirs over the Vales;
Her Skin's as fine as soft as Down,
Her Voice like Nightingales.
Where e're she breathes, where-e're she sings,
How happy are the Groves,
How blessed, how much more blessed than Kings,
The Shepherd that she loves.
With gentle steps let's beat the ground,
In gladsom Couples joined,
For joy that your Dorinda's found,
And Cleomira kind. A Dance of Clowns and Shepherds.
Thus merrily we'll homeward move,
While Hill and Vale, and Plain and Grove,
Ring with the sound of joyful Love.

Bailiffs, Taylor, Cooks men, c.

HEy! Speedwell! Where the Devil's this Blockhead?


At your heels, Sir, light enough in Belly and Purse not to lag far behind.
Well, at last your Creditors have their turn; you've made them walk, and now
they make you run.


The worst is, I have been balked where ever I went, and can't raise a penny.


Alas, Sir, my heart aches for you; I'm sure my Legs do with following you; with
much fear, but no money, a heavy heart, and a light pair of heels, you ve made
as many doubles to day as any hunted Hare; the truth is, you've escaped a whole
Kennel of Hounds.


Ay, a damned Pack of Dogs had me in the Wind.


'Tis well I had, you in the Wind too, for I should certainly have been
poisoned in some of those damned Alleys we went through. Well, I'm bound to pray
for Persumers the longest day I live: Therefore, sweet Sir, if you have any
kindness for your poor Servant, Pay honest Signor Pulvilio the first.


We have gone through some unpleasant By-ways, I confess.


Some did you say? Why, no Skulking Scribbler, or Tally-man goes through more in a
week, I think. Then, in the streets, if you but spied some one of your many
Duns, you turned short, run like the Devil, or stepped into some house, to ask
fo^ some body, who, to your knowledge, was not there: Presently after pushed
forward; then, to avoid another, you started, wheeled about, or made a show of
looking on a Wall; now whisked through an Inn, next through some blind passage, till,
like a Ship still tacking about, you at last just got -- to the place from
whence you came.


The best Masters of Ships sometimes can do no more.


You're like a Master of a Ship indeed, for your Rigging and whole Cargo belong
to other men.


To the Devil and your Dogship.


I beg the Devil's Pardon, and yours, Sir, I had forgot my self.


Yes, you saucy insulting Rascal, and always do.


I know it, Sir; had I not, I had left you long ago, when you first saluted me
thus for advising you to keep in compass, as my old Master ordered me. Well, I
des^ve it all, wicked Rogue as I am, for breaking the many Oaths I've made to
quit your service -- But I am too generous to leave a Gentleman in distress;
and therefore I'll stay till I see you clear, if possible; for, as for the
Salary you owe me, I scarce look for it.


You need not; you are Knave enough to have cheated me of more.


But I was Fool enough to let you cheat me again the lawful way of Loan Well, I
give that over too; only remember, Sir, a Man may cause his own Dog to bite
him; and when I leave you, all your Creditors, especially Monsieur Le Diablo,
will have more power over you than ever.


Say thou so? Well then, for thy good Nature I will reward thee.


Ha, ha, hah! Wh^t makes your hand there? To my knowledge you ha'nt one Cross
left. Your breeches are now in the fashion, a damned deal of Pocket, but no
Lining^ You ^ould have taken a Coach else, but that you feared being served as
you (...) was, keep it all day for want of Money to discharge it, and be
obliged to bilk it at night. Your Watch too is gone, and your fine Snuff-Box.
The Painted one I have secured [


There, Sir! you love Snuff I perceive.


Ay, but not so much at once tho. So! Farewell Orangerie and Bergamotte. Item
half a Crown for that; which puts me in mind of about seven pound due for
Snuff, Cards, and Chocolate: And the Fruit-womans Bill too of four pounds odd
money, as conscionable as a Pothecary's. I don't think there's a Chair-man or
Coach man you don't owe Money to. I dare say you're already in debt to the
She-Farmers of the Side-Boxes in the Play-house.


Well, Rascal! What then? half the fine fellows in Town do as much -- I shall
be able to pay my Debts shortly.


E God, that won't be like half the fine Fellows in Town then -- But I fear,
the Money you expect will go like the rest, 'that is (like, half the fine
Fellows in Town too) you'll scorn to pay a farthing of your Debts with it, but
will wisely choose to play it away. -- Well, may I never see money again, if I
believe a Coach and Six could have drawn you off last night, till you had lost
those fifty Guineas, and made your self a clear Gentleman.


'Tis true; and it plagues me; for I have invited Theodosia to sup with me here
at my Lodgings to night.


So! The Devil owed you a shame, and he means to pay you. How do you think to
treat 'em? -- Ha! Let me see! There's a new Beau-Peruke! Pray, Sir, how much
does that cost upon Rep?


Only 35 Guineas, Sir.


Zoons! That's more than head and all is worth. I'm afraid I shall see you in
Jail for Periwigs and Powder! -- C'me, pull it off, Sir; pull it off, and put
on that you tick'd fo^ before this, and then?


What then?


What then! Why then, I'll pawn this and treat your Mistress.


Prithee take my head too.


A Beau's head! Nay then no Broker will take it in -- Well, I find a good Wig
is the very last Moveable^ Beau will part with.


But without fooling, what's to be done now?


Nothing without fooling: Unless we can fool that testy Cook Le Soup, your
Guests must chew the Cod, and all of us go supperless to Bed.


You know I shall have a Bill from my Father within these ten days, and then
I'll pay him; so tell him.


So you told him these ten months -- alas, Sir, you modish people have no
Almanacs, that makes you forget your selves, and play at Cards of Sundays --
But here comes Mr. Freeman: Be sure you strike him, he's your friend; and to
make him more so, humour him, fawn on him, commend him: Flattery is a sort of
bad Money, for which even the wisest often part part with good.


I came to look you.


My dear, dear Freeman! I'm heartily glad to see you. This is a kindness beyond
my hopes. What can I serve you in? Speak, you know I'm always ready to serve my
Friend, I'm open and free, and you may command me.


I thank you: Let affectation dwell at Court; I'm without somality, your
friend.


'Twere a Crime to doubt it: But, Complements aside, pray let me know what
brought you hither?


With all my heart.


I must know too.


You must know, I come to pass away this ^ening with you.


So!


How unhappy am I, that you can't! You must pardon me, my dear Friend; for I
expect Company tonight.


Yes, Theodosia: She told me so her self; and entreated me to bring Clara to
sup with you too; of which I thought fit to give you notice, that you might not
be surprised.


More Guests! But 'twill be at his cost; or e'gad they're like to be worse
surprised.


Well, what say you to this matter.


Have a good heart, Sir.


You may be sure, you'll be all as welcome as I can make you.


E'gad the welcome he'll find, he's like to bring along with him


Then I'm resolved to be merry to night, and drown in Champaign a damned
melancholic humour that hangs upon me.


Champaign and no Money, I don't like this beginning.


Can you have occasion to be melancholic, you who are the envy of the Men, and
the Darling of the Women?


What a pox, hast thou lately been reading the Academy of Complements? If I did
not know thou hast money, I should think thou hast a mind to borrow some of
me.


Ten pound to a Supper he lends us none.


Whence proceeds then your being out of humour?


From that which makes every body so, I've parted with all my money the old
way.


Oh! Now for a Cordial! 'Tis well, if he don't ask us to lend.


I'm heartily sorry for your loss.


So am I too, as I with for a Supper to night.


The loss is not much; 'tis the manner of it vexes me most, for I lost all
running, without so much us turning a stake.


Sir, Sir, lend Mr Freeman 10 or 20 Guineas.


By no means, I shall have money to morrow.


Nay, Sir, you know my Master's always ready to serve his Friend, he's open and
free, and you may command him.


I know it -- But a pox of Fortune I say, she deals us good or bad luck as she
does Stations, or we Cards; Knaves, and Kings shuffled up together. I'm afraid
there were Sharpers in the Company.


That's not unlikely; they get now into the best: for there are some of all
Ranks. For this, I my self have now forsworn play; tho that's the way to find
the days tedious, and lose one'-interest with half the Beau monde? But I find
that playing on the square is like dealing on the square, the ready way to be
undone. Yet do not curse Fortune, my friend; you should rather pray to her, she
has been, and may be kinder to you.


No, if she's a female, as her sickleness proves her, by a spirit of
contradiction, she'll be sure to be kindness to those that respect her least.
Well, adieu till night! We'll come betimes.


Ay, sooner than welcome, I dare say.


Your Servant.


Faith, Sir, I'm afraid he smoked you.


I hope not. Yet friends when we're in prosperity cleave to us, as Quick-silver
does to Gold; but forsake us alike in the fiery Trial.


Ay, Sir; those are your Town friends: They're like your Town Wines and Town
Wenches, e'gad you may try ten before you light on one that's right or sound.


Well, will you bethink your self how to bring me off from this handsomely?


I! I can't tell what to do in it.


What, then will you see me disgraced, and give Theodosia occasion to frown on
me for a month together? Prithee try to get us something to eat.


'Tis vain, Sir; your Creditors are now no fools-Come along with me, and see if
I lye; which if I do, may I be bound to pay your debts, and that I would not do
for half an East India Bribe.


But how shall I get off?


Even do as Ladies do when they're in love with their Doctor, seign your self
sick and take your bed.


Then they'll come to see what my Di stemperis, and finding I have no Fever,
presently call for Supper.


Send for some eminent Physician, he'll order you some damned Drench and make
you sick enough.


You know I dread Physic as I do Poison.


Or a Bailiff - Ay, I had forgot that; there's scarce a Town Spark, but is as
much set against Pills and Bolus, I think, as against Marriage and Repentance;
and that makes 'em delay those three bitter Remedies to the last. Well then,
suppose I pretended you were gone to fight a Duel.


How! shall a Gentleman pretend a Duel?


Why, 'tis as common now to pretend 'em as assignations; tho 'twere but to
excuse the wounds get in a pleasanter sort of encounter.


But this false report would frighten Theodosia into real sickness.


Very good! Go on, I perceive you intend to be a man of your word.


No, prithee tell me what I must do?


S'death, Sir, I'd as soon undertake to get you off, when flaster'd, from a
gaming Club, or chatting Mask in the Play-house.


Well, I will be wholly guided by thee.


Leave me then; I have a whim in my head may chance to set you free.


Prithee let me know it?


Ay, as we do a Prophecy, when it has taken effect.


Why will you hide it from me?


That it may be hid from other people -- What, tell a Beau a secret? a
Chambermaid would not do it.


But it may be some pitiful mean thing.


A mean thing, and I contrive it!


Let's consult about it together.


No consultations, Sir: Two will keep Council if one be away.


I must submit then to your Will and Pleasure.


You should have considered before you had made the Invitation. 'Sbud, leave me
to my self.


Methinks --


Leave me, I say; You disturb me worse than a talking Better does a busy
Gamester.


Well, I must endure any thing as matters go now.


So! Now I command. This 'tis to serve an unthinking Master. I was kept to wait
on his idleness at the College, and must attend his extravagance in Town; till
with a little more experience, I may set up for my self, get as much by
rooking, as he has lost by fair play, and then look as big on him, as others
formerly of my function do now on their Betters. But in the mean time my brains
must work for his. Stay! I have it! I'll whip over to Theodosia's and put it in
practice.


Oh! Is it you? What's your business?


I'd speak with your Lady.


Is your Business pressing.


Faith, not at all: I come to know when we may expect her, that Supper may be
ready at her coming; for, you must know, Child, my Master makes no common
entertainment to night.


I'm glad on it; I love feasting dearly.


Ay, your mouth waters at the very thoughts on it, like a Chaplain's preaching
grace over a good Dinner.


But are you in earnest?


As you were when you lost your Maiden head.


This pleases me; I love your costly great Treats.


I understand you; you are always for great things. Come, confess, don't you
love me a great deal;


Hang Love; let's talk of the Supper.


The best Love indeed is commonly after that. Well, ours will be an
extraordinary Treat, let me tell you.


And let me tell you, I'll keep an extraordinary Stomach for it. Take care to
pinch three or four Bottles of the choicest Wines, and secure some of the best
Dishes for us; then if I don't love you, say I've nothing of a Lady's woman
about me.


I commend thee. Girl, thy love is in thy Belly: where else indeed should it
be?


Peace, I hear my Lady coming.


How now, Sir! What brings you hither?


My Master desires to know, Madam, at what hour you will please to honour him
with your Company to night?


As soon as 'tis convenient: Too soon for him, tell him.


A Witch of my Conscience, if I don't prevent it.


But what?


I should acquaint your Ladyship with something if I durst.


If you durst! Why, is it of such dangerous consequence? If it be, 'tis fit I
should know.


True, Madam; but the danger is chiefly to me: If my Master should once come to
know what I would fain tell you, murder would ensue.


Trust me, he shall not know it, as I have honour!


Ah! Madam; but 'tis very dangerous.


What ails the fool? What's dangerous? To trust a Lady of Quality?


Yes, on her woman's secrecy.


No, I'll engage for her. Prithee let's know it.


Why then, Madam, (but not a word!) Some rascally Neighbours having seen you
twice or thrice coming from my Master's Lodgings, have been pleased to bestow
some uncivil reflections on your Ladyship, for which I have likewise been
pleased to bestow some blows on their Coxcombs.


What a tale of a Roasted Horse the Rascal tell us! What made you put my Lady
in the head of this.


I only would caution her, that if she should receive some small affront as the
past to or from us, she would take no notice of it, but to me; for my Master is
certainly the most desperate man on such occasions, that ever escaped the Law
to his years.


No, no, to prevent the worst, I'll not go at all.


So! Now Master, thank my wit.


Well then, Madam, since you won't go to Mr. Needmore's, let the Supper be
brought hither, 'twill do as well.


With all my heart! Let 'em bring it.


O Lord! There this damned greedy Jade has over-reach'd me.


Stay I'll have no Supper brought. Do you hear! Let 'em bring none: twill be too
much trouble on both sides.


Trouble! Why, nothing more easy, Madam.


Hold your prating. I say I will not go.


But how will you excuse your self?


I'll pretend I've the head-ach.


That will seem too sudden to be thought real.


Why so? It often comes suddenly; and I think 'tis the best pretence you can
use. I'll go and back it.


But take care --


O! for that never trouble your self: Be you but secret, Madam.


I will.


So! now my Master comes off with flying Colours.


VVou'd thy Neck were broke! Thou shamming Rascal -- I fancy this is one of his
projects to hinder us of a good Supper.


Ay, but I fancy 'tis by his Masters encouragement, Freeman and Cle^ are to sup
there to night: Now it comes into my head, that Needmore thinks he can't so
freely entertain Clara, if I am with 'em.


Do you doubt his love then, Madam!


I don't know; Men are inconstant, and Clara's handsome -- Well, I'm resolved
I'll spoil their sport to night, for thither I will go.


Sir, I'm sent again.


^, can't come yet.


Once more, if you'll take my Counsel, walk off and leave 'em.


I dare not.


Nay then take your own measures. But look you, Sir, here's Le Scupe.


Try, if you can work him to any thing of good nature: for my part I found him
more fawcy than a Bailiff.


Sir, your humble Servant! I hope your honour has got some money for me now.


O my worthy friend, Mr Le Soup! Ay, ay, Monsieur, within this Fortnight I'll
pay thee every penny.


Ay, Sir, but in the mean time --


Why, in the mean time I shall only desire you to let me have a pretty genteel
Entertainment f^ some Friends that I've here to night.


I have entertained too many of your friends already, Sir, to my cost. Zoons! I
have been as patient as a Grocers hall Creditor -- But I find, that between
promising and performing, a mans Walls may be as naked as the roof, and his
Back as bare as the naked truth.


But now my Word shall be as good as my Bond.


I believe you. I would not take either of 'em for a sorry English black
Pudding.


Needmore, a word with you.


I'm coming -- dear Le Soup, let me entreat this one kindness of you: I'll
give you a Note under my hand.


What, never to pay me?


They're out of all patience within.


He's speaking to the Cook, Sir.


Never put your self to unnecessary Charges! One Dish will be enough.


Well, you shall have no more.


No more than you have now, I dare engage.


Dear Le Soup, let me prevail with thee. I shall have a Bill from my Father's
for 500 l. within this Fortnight, and then I'll pay thee upon my honour.


You've pawned that so long ago, like many more, I dare say, you do'nt think it
worth redeeming! Look you, Sir, there never was less money, nor more need of
it; your words without that are like treating a man with a Fiddle when he wants
a Dinner. Upon the word of a Cook, I will send some friends of mine to you
presently; and so, Serviteur.


Ah diable je r'nie -- Will you go, Sir? And I'll provide for their
Entertainment. You know my Lord Title, what if he should protect you.


Who?


Why, he who with 200 a year, has 300 protected servants?


I scorn it --


Hah! What Strapper's this? She looks as much like a Bawd as a Catch-pole looks
like a Rogue.


Pray, Sir, how may I speak to Squire Needmore?


He's a little engaged at present, Madam; but if you please, I'll deliver any
message to him.


I must do it my self, Sir; for so I promised the Lady.


Is your business from a Lady then?


Yes, Sir.





Are you the Gentleman, Sir?


My Name's Needmore, Madam.


Then, Sir, pray give me leave to Arrest you, at the Suit of Mr Extortion the
Scrivener.


'Sdeath, he'll be buried alive! I must prevent it.


Is not he ashamed to take me up for the Principal? Why, I have not been able to
pay the use. None but a Knave would Arrest a man these times.


These times! why they are the best times in the World, for us. But, look you,
Sir, since you say there's nothing to be got of you, and you plead poverty, in
Charity, as I'm an Officer, I would avoid troubling you. Come, I'll have but 5
Guineas Civility Money, and then you shall choose whether you'll run away from
me, or I from you.


Who am I? Guess, Mistress Jenny.


I don't know. Let me go.


I'll wash your Eyes, Madam; 'twill clear your Eye-sight.


'Sdeath I've lost my Prisoner.


Prisoner! Cry mercy! I'm mistaken, I took you for an honest Friend.


Zoons! Where were your Eyes? I'm a Bailiff! Oh! He has put out my Eyes. Stop
him! Help! Murder! Setter, Sweet'n'em, Spunger, Dogbolt, where are you? Help,
help.


The Rogue has groped out his way -- Now, Sir, run in, shut the door after you,
and show your self, while here I study to bring you off: Don't seem concerned;
Do as Whores, Plotters, and Tradesmen do, within a day of running away, put a
good face upon the matter.


I must.


Now must I shut the door, and cudgel my Brains again -- Hah! There's Le
Soupe's Man! I'll cudgel the Rascal first, but [


Where's your Master.


There's yours, you Setting Dog: There's payment: There's Rake's Money: There's
new fashioned Coin for you.


Oh hold! Hold! Hear me! My Master's sending half a dozen Dishes hither, Mar.


How! Art thou in earnest?


As you were with me now. He was out of humour; but he has bethought himself,
sent me to lay the Cloth, and beg your Master's pardon.


Then I beg thine. Come, let's do it quickly, dear Sauce -- But what made him
thus out of humour?


Why, many things; a Steward put him off till next year for denying him treble
Poundage of a Bill of 5 years standing. Then some Officers pawned two Masks for
a seven pound reckoning, and all their Clothes won't yield forty Shillings.


Poor Devils. They work hard for 'em, and ten to one but they were borrowed
too.


Then, Sir John Rattle bespoke a fine Dinner, and never came. Six topping
Sparks had the Guinea ordinary, then bid us set it down, and broke a Waiters
head for muttering at it; and 4 tearing Beaus took the best room, called up all
the house, asked for all varieties in Season, had a deal of attendance, and at
last dined on Small-ale, and a Cutlet.


And upon tick. Well, now the Cloth is laid, prithee go and hasten your men


I will


Stay, let me look out sharp; I fear my She-Bayliff's Crew -- Hah! Are you
thereabouts -- I'll shut this door, and call my Master -- Oh! Here he is --


Ah! Dear Speedwel, thou hast got us something, I find.


I have not time to talk of that yet. Off with your Upper Geer.


How!


Nay, 'tis no matter for drawing it, I must have that too.


What's the meaning of this?


There are more Rogues below, and I know best how to use the Sword. Come,
uncase, uncase.


But what will your Honour do with Theodosia and the rest of 'em?


I'll set 'em going presently. [


An't please your honour, we bring this from Mr. Le Soupe's.


Lay it down.


Ay, to take you up -- [


Against me? Demme, at whose Suit?


Mr. Le Soup, and Mr. Cabbage your Taylor.


Cabbage! I don't know the Thief, confound me!


That may be, some of you are so long in your Taylor's Books, they are commonly
forgot before they're paid: You shift 'em as often as you do new Suits, and
Lodgings -- Come along.


Prithee, Fellow, let's talk first.


I'll talk with you when you're out of Debt. Demme, would you have us Gentlemen
Officers wait as long as your Taylors Bills? Come away, or let's see some
Money, and we'll be civil. For a Guinea an have we'll keep you till you've sent
for Bail.


Damned Scoundrels! Was ever a man of Quality used thus.


Ay, and worse, what's quality to us? -- Run to the Office Manhound, search if
there be more Writs out, inform his Creditors; we'll be well paid for it.


Demme, I don't owe any man Two pence: Whom do you take me for?


You are Squire Needmore; we know you well enough.


Ha, ha, ha! You silly Dogs you! You know me as little as you do Breeding.
Demme, I shall catch you by the five pound Act.


O, Master Cabbage, you're come in good time: We've taken this Gentleman, who
denies that he's called Squire Needmore.


No more he is not. Beg his pardon, and let him go: But methinks I've seen his
face before now.


Noble Sir, we beg your Honour's Pardon.


Go, you Dags, Needmore is far enough by this time, your Game is out of your
reach.


We shall catch it at last: Our Game is better than the Beasts you hunt, yet we
don't so often miss on it.


Come, Sir, the Coast is clear.


That's well, my diligent Mercury. But oh! Theodosia, and the Supper.


The first shall go hence presently, and the last I'm sure will not come hither
to night -- But, get you in again, Sir, and dress; and, by that time you've
done, come to 'em. But first give me notice with a hemh, that you are coming:
For just then I will pronunce the Charm that shall set 'em all a flying.


Dear Conjurer, be sure it be a powerful one.


Where the Devil's this Needmore all this while?


Playing the extravagant in providing us a Feast, I warrant you.


Methinks this long absence of his looks like rudeness: he might have sent his
Directions for the Supper by his man.


That man of his is a sneaking Devil, and the very Emblem of Hunger, he would
purposely have forgot half his orders, to have starvd us: But now we shall have
an extraordinary Supper.


Oh here he is! Where's your Master?


Madam, I'm afraid he'll be here before I've made a discovery to you that
concerns your health, your Beauty, and perhaps your Life.


What mean you by this discourse?


Mean Madam? Why he means to play your Ladyship some Trick.


I hope not; tell us quickly, good Speedwell.


To show you then Ladies that I value your Lives more than my own, I shall tell
you, though my Master looked Death with every Frown --


Our Landlady's Daughter lies sick of the Small-Pox-over-head.


Good Heaven defend us!


How's that, you Dog?


'Tis false, is't not?


Would I could say it were! But what should cause this Villain to discover this
to these Ladies? I knew on it but an hour ago; and wished 'em in some other
House, (knowing they dread the Small-Pox) but durst not let 'em know why, lest
the Fear of that fatal Disease should make this Lady deprive me a while of the
Blessing I enjoy in seeing her.


Oh barbarous Man! Thy Servant has more Honour than thou. -- I'll not stay here
a Moment. Is this the Care you ought to have of our Healths?


But Madam --


Not a Syllable; I shall be afraid to hear or see you this Fortnight. Be sure
keep out of my Sight till then. Come Brother, your Hand.


Well Madam, I'll not stay a Minute in Town, while I may not see what I value
most in it. I'll into the Country, and there stay my time for Product: Too much
punished by so cruel an Absence.


Ah, Mr. Needmore, have a care how you expose young Ladies again to such
Hazards. Mr. Freeman, you must continue my Convoy -- I'll swear I'm very
hungry.


So am I too! Well, 'tis always so: I never fared worse than when I wished for
my Supper.


Remember Child, Abstinence is wholesome. We English, they say, dig our Graves
with our Teeth.


Peace, you meagre Chaps, I have a Saying for yours. A hungry Belly has no
Ears.


And good reason why; because Words won't fill it.- But see they're gone.


Would they'd staid. I a'n't afraid of the Small-Pox.


No nor of the great ones. -- Well Sir, they're fled, and 'tis fit we should.
Hunger is doing the Somerset in my Guts. E gad my Belly is as empty as my
Pockets -- Come, I'll have you to a Place, where, as well as at many others,
they'll take the Rascally Servant's Word, though not the honourable Master's.


Well, this has made me so sensible of my former ill Conduct, that from this
Moment I'll reform, pay my Debts, and regulate my Expenses by my Income.


Ay, do Sir, and then I shall be paid. -- Cut your Coat according to your
Cloth. Remember, Fools make Feasts, and wise Men eat 'em: My Son, keep Money in
thy Pocket. (I am damnably full of old Saws!)

Well, mind one more, to free you from Disaster,
And let your Purse for ever be your Master!

welcome to the Lydian Court,
Great Alcides, still victorious,
Still more glorious,
Earth's Defence, and Heav'n's Support!
Welcome to the Lydian Court.

"By thee the worst of Monsters fell:
"By thee was curbed the Power of Hell:
"By thee on Earth Astraea rules again:
"The Toil and Glory thine, the thankful World's the Gain.

Hence Slaves, still crowding to caress,
Not Manly Virtue, but Success.
"Why must I be stared at by you,
"As if I were a Monster too?
Why gazes on me every Eye,
When a more conquering Object's by?
Why sing my Triumph, when a single She,
A single Look has vanquished me?

Bright Omphale, in Pity stay,
Oh let me gaze, and gaze Eternity away.

"Why should I be gazed on by you,
"As if I were a Monster too?

"Why should I be thus shunned by you,
"As if I were a Monster too?

We Soldiers are blunt, and awkwardly woo;
But though we can't talk, you'll find we can do.
A thousand hard Labours I've conquered with Ease;
But think it much harder one Woman to please.
Yet here I stand ready, to try, when you will,
If one Woman's Wishes a Man may fulfil.

All you Men, when Love is new,
Promise much, but little do.
You in Search of Blessings run,
Which alas you quickly shun.
Should we cheap our Favours make,
You'd but conquer to forsake.
Lest our Slaves our Tyrants grow,
Little Freedom we bestow.

To try me and exert your Sway,
Speak, and, by Jove, I will obey!

Then learn to spin; 'tis all I ask.


For Hercules a very pretty Task!
'Tis odd, 'tis odd, 'tis wondrous odd!
Malicious Love, resistless God!
But I have sworn, and then I burn,
And now my Club must Distaff turn.
I know by this I'm turning Fool,
And so we're all, while Women rule.

"Come grieve no more for turning Fool
"Than did your Sire for turning Bull.
"Love grows fiercer by Denials,
"Love, like Gold's refined by Trials.
"Doubts and Fears new Heat inspire.
"Melting Tears enrage the Fire;
"Sighs, like Wind, still blow it higher.
"Cruelty awake must keep
"Love, which Kindness lulls asleep.
"Off with your rough Attire of War;
"You must for softer Arts prepare.

Well then if I must learn to spin,
And be a Coxcomb, let's begin.
Thus -- you must whirl about your Wheel;
Thus -- wet, and twist, and fill the Reel.

"Come, spin out your Clue.


"S'Death, all is entangled! plague on it; it won't do.

"Come, spin out your Clue.

"Hold Women, hold; I never knew
"A Man could be a Match for two.
Oh, you treacherous Knave!
Oh you Villain, you Slave!
What, do I surprise you,
Your Wenches and you? e'Faith, I'll disguise you.
Let me reach 'em!
I'll teach 'em
To make themselves common,
And wrong me, not dreading the Rage of a Woman.
What, take you their Part?
I could tear thy false Heart.
"At home you still grumble,
"And though mighty abroad, there your Courage is humble;
"Still dull with your Spouse, and still gay with another,
"You make every Whore but your poor Wife a Mother.
Oh you treacherous Knave!
Oh you Villain! you Slave!
Heh! ho! pray, Sir, pray now come!
With my Mother pray go home.

All Night she makes her Moan,
She cannot lie alone.
As in her Arms I lay,
The Night you went away,
She sighed, and, with a Tear,
Cried, oh would it were my Dear.

She over her Pillow weeps,
And hugs it as she sleeps;
Then, waking, with a Tear,
Cries, Would it were my Dear,

Heh! ho! pray Sir, pray now come;
With my Mother pray go home.

Behold the Blessings of a married Life,
In bawling Children, and a scolding Wife!
"Poor Husbands the Noise of their Vexons must fly;
"If Juno but scold, even Jove leaves the Sky.
Like Furies they bellow, and rave, if we stray,
Yet still by their Clamours they drive us away:
"With Dragons and Devils I'd venture a Strife,
"But I dare not encounter that greater, my Wife.
Stay cruel Man; and e're you fly me,
E're I my latest Farewell take,
Oh do not one poor Wish deny me!
Wear this more proper Garment for my sake!

Well, since you're milder, I comply.

Your Vest is on, Thanks, Wife! and so god b'w'ye
At Night Arrears I'll satisfy.
'Tis warm, -- 'tis hot, -- 'tis wondrous hot --
I'm scorched -- I fry -- I burn -- Oh strip me -- Give me Air --
The stubborn Vest obeys me not:
I cannot bear it --
Let me tear it,
Though with my Flesh, my Heart and Soul I tear.
In vain I strive; the Bosom-Traytor cleaves the more,
And spreads a more than Hell through every sucking Pore.
And now the flaming Poison gains
My Nerves, my Veins,
My Lungs, my Heart, my Brains --
Help! Water! Rivers! pour a Flood!
A Deluge scarce will quench the Fire that drinks my Blood.
Ah me! Ah, poor Alcides! wretched Man!
I sink, I faint, I die with Pain.
Now with ten thousand Stings I suffer Life again.
"Run, haste, bid Neptune bring the Sea
"To save the World and me.
Wake sleeping Jove; 'Tis I that call.
Collect the Clouds, and squeeze 'em into Showers;
Or quench the Flame which thy Son's Heart devours
With thy less dreadful Thunder's fall.
"Rouse, idle Tenants of the Sky!
"Must I implore, and you deny?
Rouse; or on my own Fires I'll fly;
I'll dash to Air your Beings with a Stroke,
And, siring Ocean, Earth and Sky,
Entomb the World in everlasting Smoke.
See! Trembling Heaven assists for fear.
Behold a Fire! I'll cool me the e --
Flames quench my Flames -- Hark! From the Heavenly Hall
I hear the beck'ning Thund'rer call --
I hear the Music of the Skies --
I come, I mount, my Spirit flies,
While my maternal Earthy Being dies. --

Rejoice; Alcides lives on high:
Thus Heroes claim their Kindred Sky.
Through Fiery Trials thus the Soul must fly.
He ever lives who does not fear to dye.

LUst of Revenge! Mad Child of slighted Love!
Thou drive me, like thy Parent, to this House;
But not with Hopes so sweet. Yet I must on.
Elvira, loved by me, has cast me from her,
With insolent Reproof,
And all the Spite of a damned virtuous Wife.
She may complain of me to her Grammont. I must prevent her.
For fav'ring me, her Woman must to morrow
Be turned away: But we've this Night to plot.
The Creature's as revengeful too as I.
So when my cred'lous Kinsman Grammont comes
To his fond Wife to Night, with this false Letter
She shall so raise the Jealousy I've kindled,
That Mischief will be great, and I revenged.

Well, Sir, the Letter.

There -- 'Twas writ to me,
To come to her, before she knew I loved her:
But I've torn out my Name, and part of it:
Tear the rest with your Teeth when Grammont meets you.
Thus if he looks on it here and there a Word,
Backed with your feigned Surprise will make him think
'Twas sent to Montigny, as you must tell him.

Enough; go in; leave me to watch his coming.

Succeed; Dampierre has Gold waits to reward thee.

Business, unlucky Business, long has kept me
From my Elvira. Though all late as 'tis,
Methinks some dark ill-boding Fancy seems
To tell me, 'tis too early yet, to seek
Those Joys I ever found in her dear Arms.
A strange unusual Damp has seized my Soul;
And I, who use with cager Joy to fly
To my Elvira, have now scarce the Strength,
Or Will, indeed, to move one step that way.
Oh Dampierre! Dampierre! what was thy Design!
Since I left thee, my working Thoughts have been
In a perpetual hurry: Thou, alas!
Hast poisoned all my dearest Joys,
And in my troubled Mind laid the Foundation
Of eternal Doubts! Perplexing, gnawing, killing Doubts!
And yet, I know thee, Dampierre, base, of a poor, mean,
Low Spirit too, and so capable of any Mischief.
Why then should thou gain Credit with Grammont?
No, from my Memory henceforth I chase
Thee, and each Thought of thy base Treachery.
Grammont's too happy in a virtuous Wife
And generous Friend -- But, hark! What Noise is that?
Oh! 'tis the Door opens. Hah! Who art thou that steal away
So guiltily! Nay, I must see -- Lysette! Whither away
At this unseasonable Time of Night?
And what Paper's that thou mumblest so?

Alas! I am undone! Pardon me, Sir! O pardon me, I beseech ye.

Would have me pard'n thee ever I know thy Fault?
Confess, and then perhaps thou may deserve it.

O never, never! All that I desire
Is, that you would be so just as to believe
Me only guilty; for on my Life my Lady's innocent.

Hah! Thy Lady! Speak what of her?

Why, she, I do declare to all the World,
Is innocent, by all that's Good she is!
Nay, were I to die next minute,
My Tongue should end my Story with that Truth.

I ask not of her Innocence; but tell me,
And tell me truly, as thou hop'st for any Mercy from me,
Whither we'rt thou stealing with that Letter, and what were the Contents of
it?

For Heavens sake, and for your own, Sir, press me no further.
Here on my Knees I beg you would not.

Hah! dost thou dally with me?
Come, speak quickly, or, by Heaven thou dy'st.

Do with me what you please; but force me not,
I do beseech you, to a Confession, that --

What? Speak, I say; tell me what was that Paper?
To whom directed, and from whom?

Alas, I die for fear.


If thou continu'st obstinate,
Not all the World shall save thee from my Fury.

It was --


What was it? Speak, I say.


It was a Letter.


From whom?


It was a Letter from my Lady --


Well said; to whom?


To -- Yet Sir, excuse me, I conjure you.


Ah! more trifling! Out with it boldly, or --


'Twas to Montigny, Sir; your best and dearest Friend Montigny.


To Montigny! was it to Montigny, that Elvira sent thee
With that Letter, at this unseasonable Hour?

It was: But why should that so much disturb you?
A petty Quarrel parted 'em in the Evening,
When, though Montigny humbly sued for Pardon,
She would not grant it, till at last, good Lady,
Repenting her Severity, she could not rest,
Till she had given him an Assurance under
Her Hand, that what he then so earnestly
Desired, was now as freely granted; and --

Peace, Screech owl! Peace, thou rank Messenger of Lust!
By Heaven I know not why I do not kill thee.
Hence from my Sight! away!
But which Way now, wretched Grammont, wilt thou
Direct thy wandering Steps? Where ever thou go
Destruction, Horror, and Amazement will attend thee.
thy faithful Ears, deaf to all other Tales,
Will turn each Sound into this one sad Story,
Elvira's false, Montigny's false; and now
Grammont's become the Scorn of all the World.
Oh, 'tis too much for Mortal Man to bear.
By Heaven I'll make my sad and just Revenge
As signally notorious as my Wrongs.
But hush. Be still y'unruly Passions of
My Mind; and think Grammont, that to revenge
Is but the way to publish thy Disgrace.
Patience then, oh Patience! grant me, just Heaven, more Patience;
Or take from me that li^le I am yet Master of;
And in Return, bless me with Madness, eternal Madness;
Madness without one Minute's Interval of Sense.
Grief, Rage, Despair, possess my tortured Mind.
Make me but mad, ye Gods, and you'll be kind.

So, all goes well. I watched, and heard, and joyed.


Yes, yes, all yet goes wondrous well indeed;
But what the End will be, for my part I can't guess.

No matter: Let there be no End at all,
But that which puts an End to all things; Death.
Oh, may Confusion, Rage, Despair,
And everlasting Jealousy attend 'em to their Graves.

Amen, say I; But yet suppose they should at last came
to a right Understanding; what would become of me, I pray?
Were it not better, think you, to decamp
In time, and leave 'em to themselves?

By no means; that would make 'em presently
Smell out thy Roguery and their own Error.
Rather be more diligent, and more assiduous
In your Attendance now than ever.
Consult their Looks: For till you find the Weather
Clearing there, you need not fear a Storm.
And then at last it will be time enough to fly.
In the mean time, here, Thou hast been
Industrious, and dost deserve Encouragement.

A paltry Pair of Gloves, I'll warrant you. Foh! I'll have none of 'em.


Away; Thou art a Fool; and know not what
Thou hast refused. They are, I tell thee,
Gloves of the richest Scent; Besides, each Finger
Is lined with Gold: Here wear 'em for my sake.

Well, for once I care not if I do; the cordial Gold
Perhaps may keep my Spirits up, and give me
Strength to bear the Brunt of all. Adieu, Sir.

She shall not sell me as she sold her Mistress.
Those Gloves, how rich soe'er their Scent may seem,
Yet once well heated in the Hand, will cast
A strong and deadly Smell most fatal to the Brain;
A Poison sudden in its Operation.
So thou, poor Fool Lysette hast thy Reward.
Thus Caution dooms some dangerous Tool of State,
Left Petty Villains should betray the Great.

Oh Grammont! Nay, turn not, turn not, cruel Man, away;
But look upon thy poor disconsolate
Elvira, almost drowned in Tears: Oh speak!
Oh speak at last, and let her know wherein
She has been faulty or unfortunate
Enough to merit this hard Usage from her much loved Grammont.

Art thou Elvira?


Why dost thou ask that unkind Question?


Because Elvira ever loved Grammont;
And so could never be a Trouble to him.
But thou alas! art most importunate.
Prithee be gone, thou art not Elvira,
Not the same Elvira; that I'm sure of.

Yes, I am the very same I ever was;
The very same Elvira still, on whom
With dearest Transports thou did once bestow
Ten thousand Vows of everlasting Love.

Forbear, forbear, Elvira, and re-call
Not to my Memory those happy Days,
In which I dearly loved, and thou we'rt kind.

If in Elvira's Love thou once we'rt blessed,
Why art thou not so still?

Oh Elvira! All things are strangely altered since that time.
Love once was pure; and Friendship sacred held;
Yet now the one is little else but Lust,
The other all Design. Virtue is fled,
And Vice reigns now triumphant in each Sex.
We are all wondrous weak, alas, and frail. -- Oh --!

Alas, what means that sad and dismal Groan,
By Grief extorted from thy Manly Breast?
Thou can not sure be so unjust, as to
Suspect my Love? Yet if thou art,
Speak, I conjure thee; but speak plainly then,
And not in unintelligible Groans.
Speak, cruel Man, oh speak, do I not love thee?
Am I false? Oh may Elvira live no longer
Than with a Passion innocent and pure
She loves her dear Grammont.

What pity 'tis our Hearts are not exposed
To open View, as are our Faces, that
So, even our most private Thoughts might all
Appear naked and bare, as at their first
Conception, e're dressed up in ornamental
Words of a much different Import!

Ah, cou'd'st thou but see into my Heart,
Thou there would soon perceive thy Error
And my Innocence. But since my dear Grammont
That cannot be, believe my Words, believe
These Tears, believe my Actions. Oh see
I am here ready to receive thee still,
Rude and unkind, ungrateful and inhumane
As thou art. Come then, come to these Arms,
Never yet stretched out to thee in vain.
Wilt thou not come? Not yet? Thou can not sure
Deny me now, when all I beg of thee,
Is, that once more thou would be happy.

Why shou'd'st thou desire Impossibilities?
Alas, I never can be happy more.

Then must I be for ever miserable.
Cruel Man, show yet some small Remainder of Humanity.
Be not so rash: Either accuse, or else acquit me;
But pass not Sentence on me here I'm heard.

No; Fear not too hasty or too hard
A Sentence from my Mouth. False as thou art,
I cannot hate where once I loved so well.
Live then Elvira, live long; but live
A Stranger to Grammont; and that thou may
Live happily, wipe from thy Memory
The dearest Passages of some few past Years;
And see thou quite forget there ever was such
A Wretch in the World as I am.

Hold! oh hold!
It is too much. Alas, insult not poorly
Over my Weakness, nor play the wanton with my Grief.
Why dost thou bid me live if it must be
Without Grammont? Why dost thou wish me happy,
When all my happiness, thou know depends upon thy Love?
Yet that, thou say, is forfeited, is lost to me for ever.
Oh! my Grammont, it is enough thou art unkind;
Be not unjust to thy Elvira. For Pity's sake grant something.
To the dear Memory of our mutual Love.
And if thou know me false, tell me wherein,
When, or with whom I have offended.

What Satisfaction would it be to thee,
Elvira, should I tell thee all? Since all
Alas! can be no more than what thou know,
As well at least, if not much better than
My self; In short I am convinced thou can not
Clear thy self; and if so, consider, that
A weak Defence is worse than none at all.
Tempt me not then to speak, since 'twill but add
To thy Confusion, and my Shame: But I would willingly
Spare both as much as may be with my Honour.

Confusion, Shame, Contempt, and everlasting Infamy
For ever be my Lot, if ever I wronged
Thy Love so much as in one guilty Thought.
Oh my Grammont, my dear, my loved Grammont,
See thy Elvira on her tender Knees,
From whence she never will rise, till she has learnt
The strange and fatal Cause of her Disgrace.

Away; this thy affected Obstinacy
Would make me hate thee, were it possible,
Elvira! Is it not enough that thou
Hast wronged my Honour, but that I my self
Must here repeat the shameful Tale,
Only to gratify thy wanton Curiosity?
Perhaps indeed I know not half thy brave
Exploits; so my imperfect Tale may yield thee
Some Diversion. But have a care; The Cuckold yet
Bears his Misfortune patiently enough.
Make him not then thy sport: For, if thou dost,
By Heaven! -- Away, away, Elvira.
I would not be provoked; away, I say,
While yet I'm Master of my growing Passion.

Do what thou wilt, be rude, be cruel,
Be inhumane as thou hast been to the Poor
Elvira; Yet while she has any Strength,
She never will let go this Hold, unless
Thou first communicate the fatal Secret.

Away, away, thou'lt force me to be rude.
Be not so strangely obstinate, alas!
I would be civil, though I can't be kind.

Barbarous Man! Yet speak, what have I done?


Will nothing then content thee? Then thus
I throw thee off, and force my Way.

And thus
I cling to thee close as the tender Ivy
To the sturdy Elm. Do, do, merciless
Grammont, do, pull, hale, tear, drag, nay kill me,
Yet I'll not willingly let go. But oh!
His cruel Strength prevails.

Farewell thou most importunate of Women.


Stay, stay, my lost Grammont; give me but one
Poor Minute more, and all is done. Fear not;
I will no longer urge my Innocence.
It is enough that thou believe me false.
Oh, for thy own Repose, may thou for ever
Think me so!
Farewell, my dear unkind Grammont, farewell:
And when I'm dead, think what the poor Elvira
Would have done to have kept thy Love, who on
Her own tender Breast dares thus revenge the fatal Loss.

Hold! hold, Elvira, hold!
By Heaven 'twas boldly done, and nothing could
Have given so sure a Blow, but Innocence
It self. Yes, my Elvira, every Drop
Of that dear Blood loudly proclaims to all
The World thy Innocence, and my sad Guilt,
Oh! Ye juster Powr's above, to what strange Fate
Am I at last reserved! See, at thy Feet,
My dear Elvira, the wretched'st Thing alive:
A Thing unworthy of the Name of Man:
A Penitent who dares not hope for Pardon
Either from Heaven or Thee; though both, alas!
Are infinitely good and merciful.

Never did so much Joy as here we bring spring from sad so a Cause.
Oh, Heaven! Are all my dearest Hopes thus dashed?
Oh Brother, who has done this bloody Deed?

'Twas I; 'twas I my self, my Dear; weep not
For me; but rather go and comfort, if thou can, the poor Grammont.

Oh Grammont!
Unfortunate Grammont, most grossly hast
Thou been imposed on by that Monster Dampierre.
Know then, that Letter thought directed
By Elvira to Montigny, and sent
At that suspicious time of Night,
Was but a Trick, a mere Device, the whole
Only a Scene contrived by Dampierre, acted by Lysette.
This Truth from her own Mouth we just now learnt,
And she confirmed it with her latest Breath:
For she is dead, poisoned by Dampierre.
Oh that we had known this some Minutes sooner!

Gods! What has this miserable Caitiff done
To draw down all your Anger on his Head?
What horrid Crimes before had stained his Soul,
That you should thus all at one fatal Blow
Oppress the Wretch with your severest Judgements?
Oh that some Mountain now would fall on me,
And in its dreadful Ruins crush my Head.
But hark! Methinks the Gods grow loud, Hark! how
Their awful Thunder grumbles in the Sky.
See how the fiery Balls fly whizzing by,
Dealing Amazement and Destruction all around!
Ha, ha, ha, ha!
See you old Miser laden with swelling Bags
Of ill-got Gold, with how much awkward Haste
He limpsaway to Shelter: See how he ducks,
And dives, and dodges with the Gods, and all
Only in hopes t'avoid, for some few Days
Perhaps, the just Reward of his accursed Extortion.
The hot Adult'rer now, all chill and impotent
With Fear, leaps from the polluted Bed,
And crams himself into a Cranny.
Those Mighty Men of Blood, who make a Trade
Of Murder, now forget their wonted Fierceness;
Out-nois'd they shrink aside, and shake for fear
Of the louder Threatenings of the angry Gods!
While I, I only, though the wicked'st Wretch of all,
With an erected Countenance, stand to it,
Courting those Dangers others seek t'avoid.
And yet there's not one Dart, one Bolt for me;
Though I, Heaven knows, deserve 'em all. Oh!

Let not the Knowledge of my Innocence,
My dear Grammont, add to thy Grief:
Rather believe me guilty still. Alas!
Thy generous easy Nature was abused,
Imposed on, by a Kinsman's wicked Arts.
Thou still art innocent, and so am I,
Who freely can forgive thy greatest Faults.
Come then, Grammont, come to thy Elvira;
And with a Kiss, a cold and dying Kiss,
I'll seal thy Pardon.

My dear Elvira, this thy prodigious
Goodness does but increase my Misery.
Yet I will come, yes, my Elvira!
With a down dejected Countenance,
Not daring to look up, but creeping thus,
And crawling on the Earth, I do approach
Thy Feet: Here spurn the vile Thing, tread, trample
The miserable Insect into nothing.

Oh! my Grammont! yield not too much to Grief;
It is a fatal, though a slow Disease.

I thank thee, dear Elvira, for that Hint:
Now thou art kind, and give me good Advice.
Whoever would endure an Age of Pain,
When one such Blow as this, might give him present ease?

Hold! oh hold, Grammont! Oh Heavens! what has he done!


Too much, alas! though 'tis no more than what
I apprehended from his just Despair.

I've heard loud Cries: I hope Grammont has killed her. --
So! Murder has been busy. I'll draw near,
And with dissembled Pity mock their Woe.
O dismal Sight! Oh horror! Poor Elvira!
Wretched Grammont! Cursed be the fatal Cause
Of this most sad Mischance!

Then, Villain, die!


Oh! Death and Hell! I'm killed.


The Murth'rer of our Joys has his Reward:
'Twas needful Mischief: We may kill a Monster,
Tho he resists not.

How am I a Monster?


Think on Lysette! She's dead,
But first discovered all.

Cursed be her Tongue, and thine; cursed my Italian,
For his unprofitable lingering Poison;
And yet more cursed my self for trusting either.
I'm fitted -- Oh, Revenge! too fierce Revenge!
Thy Sweets, like Love's, soon, when enjoyed, grow bitter:
Like Guns o'er-charg'd, thou hurt'st the Hand that fired thee.
I'm dying -- Oh! I would, but can't repent.
Hah! there's a dreadful Gulf! -- I'm on the brink --
Oh! now I'm falling, and for ever sink.

Where, where art thou, my Grammont?
A rising Mist has on a sudden snatched
Thee from my sight. Alas! I faint; I die.

She's gone; and all my Comfort is, that I
Shall quickly follow. Yes, this fight wounds
Deeper than the sharpest Dagger, I come,
I come, Elvira; my aspiring Soul
Begins to mount; not to o'er-take, but at
An awful distance to attend and wait
On thine above, in those blessed Regions of eternal Peace.

Alas, he's gone! Oh! I've scarce Power to speak it.
If Grief will let me live, I will attend
Them to the Earth, and give 'em both one Grave:
And as with Tears their Story I relate,
Teach happy Lovers to avoid their Fate:
Nor rashly to despair, nor Slanderers trust,
Since Heaven at last never fails to right the Just.

DEar Isabella, forgive my Love the Trick it makes me put upon your cruel
Uncle. You know, this House, and the Land about it, should have been mine, but
that he cheated my Father of it; and unless we can fright him out of the Deeds,
by making him believe the House is haunted, I must despair of being able to
maintain you, as I would the only Person that can make me happy.


I can forgive you any Thing but staying here now, my Cinthio: My Uncle is just
coming to Bed; he's but speaking to his Tenant.


That Tenant is my Friend, and keeps him in Talk on purpose: Knowing that your
Uncle was to come this Evening from Naples, to take Possession of this Estate,
we have contrived Traps and other Matters to carry on my Design; and if it
succeeds, Colombina and Mezzetin shall be so well rewarded.


Yes, with a damned Cudgel, if our Master Signor Pantaloon catches you with us
here.


Fear nothing: Pasquarel, my nimble Spaniard, watches, and will give you timely
Notice.


You and he may be deceived in that, as well as in your Design of making him
pass for a Spirit: I fear he can't speak our Language well enough for that;
though I own he speaks it like a Devil.


Sir, he's coming.


Away.


We're undone, that Door is double locked.


There's no way but one to bring you off; bolt the Door to keep him out.
Colombina, off with that black upper Petticoat. You, Sir, must unbutton your
Coat: 'Tis well 'tis black: Let me put it over your Head backwards, thus,
inside-outwards. Now your Arms through the Side-slits. Now on with the
Petticoat. Thus you'll look like a Friar. Look grave. Leave the rest to me.


What will become of me?


An Eunuch if he sees thee.


He shall not, if these Petticoats will hide me.


Hold, hold, I'll let no Body come there.


That's a Lie. I must even get under that Table. Pantaloon without Knocks and
Calls, Open the Door!


Oh! Sir, we dare not.


Who has shut it?


The Spirit.


The Spirit's the Wind, you Ass.


Now you may open.





Nothing but a reverend Father, Sir. Your Niece is afraid of the Spirits,
which, they say, haunt the House; so she would not go to Bed without
Confession.


She's a credulous Fool. But no matter; 'tis well there are such, and
unbelieving Knaves to keep 'em so. Italian. Reprove her, Father; I leave her
wholly to be guided by you.


Since my Uncle is come into this Room, let your Reverence be pleased to walk
into the next.


Your Reverence's humble Servant.


Sir, here's a new Ruff was left for you: Pray try whether it fits, that it may
be altered, if it does not: For you'll want it to morrow.


Do so. [


Ay, now it's about your Neck.


Bless me! But I'll try to pull it down.


So! 'tis off. Let the Devil put it on for me. [


I fear Isabella dropped it.


Let's see the Light! I'll put on my Spectacles, and read it.


He must not. I'll make my Words good, and set it on Fire.


This Candle gives a pretty good Light. [


I told you so, Sir: Some unlucky Devil dropped it.


There was something of Fires and Flames in it.


No wonder then if it burned so. Oh! I dare not stay here.


I don't know what to think of all this! But come what will, I'll not abate a
Penny of the Rent. I'll even go too, and try whether the Father-Confessor can
set Things to right. -- Stay; is not that the Devil at my Heels? [ Mezzetin!
Colombina!


What's the Matter, Sir?


Did not you see it?


What, Sir?


The Devil, the Spirit.


I saw nothing.


Oh! I am crippl'd. Where's the Father-Confessor?


He's gone, Sir.


What shall I do? I dare not lie alone. Colombina, prithee lie with me to
Night.


Fie, Sir; such a wicked Thing would raise the Devil certainly.


But this is no such dangerous Devil neither: I dare say, he'll do thee no
Harm.


No; nor no Good neither, I dare say. Get your Man Mezzetin to lie with you.


No, he's a Cow-hearted Rascal.


There's Nicholas, your Farmer's Man! He's a stout Fellow.


Cra' mercy; and God speed the Plough! I thought I had heard an Outcry.


So thou did. The Spirit has broke my Bones.


Oh! is that all? Mary 'tis well he had not broke your Neck.


He cannot, Nicholas: The Devil has no Power but on those that have sold
themselves to him: Now I have not sold my self to the Devil.


Troth, I don't know. You old Pinch-pennies are like your Wenches, and your
Court-Folks, they say; you'd sell any thing for Money.


Well, wilt thou lie with me, honest Nick?


An't please you, I'm no proud Man; I had rather lie with you' Wench.


What are you afraid of Spirits too?


Not I; but many a one has been trust up for being in bad Company. What if old
Nick should mistake in the Dark, and carry young Nick away in stead of his
Worship.


Thou need not fear: Did thou ever give thy self to the Devil?


What need I? I'm no marry Man.


Then you're safe enough: The Devil has no Power over thee.


Why are you then so ascard?


I! I a'n't afraid. But 'tis good to have Company.


Why, I've heard our Curate say, An Usurer's never alone; Gold and the Devil
(God bless us) are always in his Company.


Come, you must lie with me; for I will not lie by my self.


Stay; I'm thinking of a rare Bedfellow for you.


Say thou so? Prithee who is it?


Why, our Master's Wife. I dare say she'll deny no Man. Then she must needs be
a plaguy good Body; for he has bid the Devil take her these Ten Years, yet the
Devil don't care to middle with her.


Come, lie with me; thou dost not know what I'll do for thee.


No, nor never shall, I'll warrant. But if I must come, let's even pig together
quickly of God's Name; for I'm even as sleepy as our Neighbour's Dog, that
leaned his Head on the Wall to bark.


Draw the Window-Curtains, and we'll to Bed.


A Match, quoth Joane, when she lay with her Master.


Here I must fix this Ladder, to get into our old Hunks's Apartment, that
Cynthio's Devils may get in to fright him.


Hah! what's that? Some English Mastiff? No, they have not such long Tails. Oh!
'tis the Devil himself.


Mezzetin! Mezzetin! So I have frighted one Fool away! I find I shall pass
unsuspected in this Monkey's Dress and Face (though I've seen some here pretty
much like it) but he must be subtiler than a Monkey that will work an Usurer to
refund. This way I must get in: But first I'll try whether I have my Monkey's
Tricks perfect. [


Is all fast? [


Of a Miser. [


Oh! deliver me from the Devil and his Ape's Tricks! Nicholas! The Clown snores
so loud, I wonder the Noise of his own snoring don't wake him, Why Nicholas!


Can't you let a Body sleep, you old fat Sow?


He dreams! Why Nicholas, I've seen the Devil in the Shape of an old Woman,
just like an over-grown Monkey.


What, do you say, you're as apish as an old Monkey? I know it, Dame: I can say
no more to you now. You've had enough for one Night, I think.


Why, you dreaming Sot; I'll awake you.


What's that for? Can't you let me make an end of my Dream?


I've seen the Devil.


Why, then, bid him good Night for me.


He's a coming.


Let him, of God's Name. I've the Key of the Door in my Pocket.


But he'll get in through the Key-hole.


What do I care? I had not sold my self to the Devil.


How long must you be awaking, you Dolt?


Ay, ay, Forsooth.


The Looby sleeps as he stands.


Ay, and stands as he sleeps. -- To Morrow, Dame, upon a Hay-Cock.


Go to Bed, you Lump.


Ay, and thank you too; I'll go sleep out my Sleep, and make an end of my
Dream.


I'll go to Bed too; but I'll not venture to strip. I'll lay by me my Dagger,
my Pistol, and my Holy-water Pot. [


Bless me, my Candle's out! I must crawl to the Chimney for a Fire-brand.


Hah! I'll secure these dangerous Tools: Exchange is no Robbery. [


So, I've got one; I'll blow to light the Candle.


I'll spare you that Labour.


Mercy of me! What's that? [


Thus shalt thou be plagued while alive; and then thou shalt burn for ever,
unless thou restore the Deeds to Cynthio.

Oh good, Mr. Devil, I'll do it, if I live -- till Doomsday.


Then I'll haunt thee no more.


Nicholas!


Hush! I'm asleep.


Nicholas.


Odsooks, don't I tell you, I'm asleep? What's the matter now?


Oh the Devil has been here! Is he gone?


Nay, look your self: I don't care to look after the Devil.


He's gone.


Well, this same Devil is a main honest Man; thus he always comes, they say, to
make Folks honest, and destroy his own Religion.


Why, thou Fool, dost thou think I'll give up an Estate of Two thousand Ducats
a Year, for a little Imp's Tricks? No, Nicholas; he can't do me so much harm,
as this Land will do me good. I dare him, I defy him. Oh law! Is not that he?
No. I scorn to fear him -- [


Give me up my Deeds.


Ah, sure, that's old Cynthio's Ghost. I must guard my self from that Enemy of
mine, with this good Dagger. [ Bolonia-Saucidge! However, I'll venture to keep
that for my Breakfast! But I think I feel my Pistol, I'll keep him off with
that. [


Oh say your Prayers, Sir; say your Prayers.


So I would; but it is so long since I said 'em, that I've quite forgot 'em.
Say yours.


I can't; I have trusted to our Curate, who lost to me ten Years-prayers at
All-Fours. Oh, I've been a great Sinner; but Yesternight I thresh'd little
black Mary in the Stable, while her poor Husband was threshing in the Barn.


Oh!


If thou restore not the Land to Cynthio, to Morrow, thou shalt be like me.


Oh I will, I will, Mr. Ghost, and fourfold what I've cheated others of.


Hold, Master! Wowns! don't promise so much; you'll be undone.


Tush, Fool; now the Danger's over, I'll not give up the worth of a Notched
Hoop-stick, or a cast Poet's day. No, not a single Piece --


For I'll give up a great many. Oh! save me!


Oh! this is the ugliest Thing we've had yet. He's coming! Oh, if he should
kill me, I ne'er shall be my own Man again. Oh let me alone, Mr. Devil; as I
hope to be shaved, I'll be bound to pray for your Worship all Days of my Life.
Confession! Absolution! Oh good Devil, give me but three or fourscore Years to
Repent, and take any Body else: There are a great many Whores and Whoremongers,
hereabouts.


Give up the Deeds to Cynthio; or prepare to meet me to Morrow at this Time,
for I'll Fight with thee for them.


Oh, he's gone: I was sadly afraid he would have left his Glove.


Why, will you Fight him?


No, I'm old; then he's no Gentleman! Do thou meet him, I'll reward thee to
Heart's Content.


Not I; I a'n't of his Match. Do you! I fancy an old Usurer's a Match for the
Devil.


Oh, Sir! We dare not go to Bed: There have been strange Doings since we left
you: Rattlings of Chains; Flashes of Light: Some Imps, or sucking Devils
overturned all the Pewter, Bottles, Glasses, Pans and Kettles; laughed aloud,
and throwed each of us a piece of Money, went away, and broke -- Nothing.


Make me thankful. Let's see the Piece. Sirrah, you shall keep nothing of
theirs.


They hit me half a dozen Slaps of the Face too, thus and thus: Make you
thankful, Sir.


How, you Rogue?


Sir, you'll have me keep nothing; and then this is to show you how they did.
But, Sir; there's a Spanish Capitan, who has been seeking Mischief and the
Devil in Savoy, Catalonia and Flanders, very unluckily these Eight Years, and
comes here to find him: Here he comes.


Senor, I am the renowned Don Mezzamorto de los Rodomontados: Glory's my Chase;
Fighting my Business; and Killing, my Diversion. Travelling in the Dark (for I
defy Danger) I lost my Men, and my way. I have been seeking the Devil both in
the Old World and the New, resolved to find him in This, or in the Next -- I am
for Rome; for that, they say, is the likeliest Place to find him; but, hearing
you have him in this House, I honour it with my Presence; to let that Devil
know, he's a Son of a Whore, to make me seek him thus long: I, who send him
such Crowds of Souls; the whole College of Physicians scarce send him more.


Nay, he's an uncivil Person, that's the Truth on it.


Tell that Devil, I'm more a Devil than he.


Oh, Sir, you're most heartily welcome. Would you had been here a little
sooner; you might have told him so your self. But by to Morrow you'll have your
Wish; nay, perhaps to Night.


I'll stay, and Face him; and with this Sword, with which I killed Catinat --


Why Catinat is alive still, Sir.


Blood and Death! not the Catinat I killed.


Very true, Sir: I beg your Excellence's Pardon. -- A bloody Fellow. Mezzetin,
some Fruit, some Liquors and Sweat-meats, to refresh the Capitan; quick.


Hold! If I stay, I must have a Thing that's pretty hard to be got, to stay
with me.


What's that, Sir?


A Virgin! Such a one she must be, that the Devil may have no Power over her.


Dost hear, Colombina?


Not I; but what should I stand here for?


The Capitan wants a Virgin.


Why, he does not want me.


Art thou a Virgin?


I -- I -- am -- not -- to resolve you.


Death and Blood! Draw, some Body; for I will have Satisfaction.


Indeed, Sir, I don't know, I am hard to be awaked sometimes; I don't know what
may be done, when I sleep. Let me go.


Well, be or be not; I'll act like all Husbands: At a venture, I'll secure
thee.


I must watch this Spaniard: I fear, this is rather a Plot to trick me out of
my Mistress, than my old Master out of the Deeds. Here's a Table with Fruit;
I'll place my Head in it through this Hole, so as to observe him. She may well
think him half mad; and I'll palt him unseen, and put something in his Drink,
shall make her think him quite so. But hush! they're coming.


Be pleased to sit, Sir.


Do you sit too. I hope she does not know me in this Garb.


In Obedience, I will. Be pleased to taste of this, Sir.


By my Sword, dear Creature, there's nothing here I would taste of but you.


Sure, Sir, you would not eat me?


Yes, with Kisses.


Are you so sharp set? I'll spoil your Stomach! There's a Rogue! He's for
taking my Copy-hold over my Head.


Come, we're in Italy, where Opportunities are as welcome as they're scarce.


Oh! Sir; but what if the Devil should come this moment?


Why, then I'd make that Devil hold the Candle to me, hold his Life of me, hold
the Door for me; and hold himself contented. I'd make him tremble, like --


Who, who, who, whoop!


Hah! what's that?


Nothing but a silly Owl. What, does that make you tremble?


What I? In scorn to tremble. I must confess, it made me shake. But 'twas as
the I you does; nothing but the Rousing up of my Courage; and now 'tis up, have
at you.


Nicholas! Mezzetin! [ softly.] I vow, Sir, I'll call louder! Nicholas!


Pox, that last was too loud: Now a well-bred Woman would have cried out so
softly, that no Body would have heard her.


What's the matter there?


Oh! nothing: I was only afraid of the Devil. Yet stay, or I'll go too.


I will, and thank you too.


Why, do you fear? Does not this Sword secure you? Argos, my Courage and
Conduct got the Day. There lay the Christians -- There the Turks. These
Sugar-plumbs the one; and these the other. Thus did I charge their Right; pow,
pow, pow! There's a Colonel killed, with three Captains. Thus, they're taken
off, and the Ranks closed. Then their Left comes on, pow, pow! There lie two
Men slain; I take 'em off! Then thus I charge their main Body, pow, pow, pow,
pow; and I rout and take 'em all Prisoners.


Ay, but thus pow, pow, pow, you eat all. This is new-fashion'd Justice; some
all, some none.


No, Fellow, though thou art Clay. I'll fairly give thee half. There's one for
Me, one for Thee, and one for Me. One for Me, One for Thee, and one for Me. One
for Me, one for Thee, and one for me.


Why, you take Two for my One* is this your fair half?


Ay, was ever the King's Moiety otherwise paid in? Come, now let's drink a
Glass.


There I watched you.


Confusion to all Cowards.


Hold, Master, don't curse your best Friends.


Ay, were it not for Cowards, how would half of you Men pass for Valiant?


Just as, were it not for Fools, half of you Women would pass for honest.


[ Bear me, Bucephalus, among the Billows! Oh! 'tis a noble Beast. What's that?
I'll alight and catch it. A Maidenhead! Whip, 'tis gone! 'Twas nothing. Thus it
went. Hey! Presto pass. [ As if the old World modestly withdrew, and here in
private had brought forth a new.


He's stark staring Mad; he raves and heaves and winds himself, like any Wench
in Fits. Sure the Devil's got into his Wemb. He's a playing's
Christmas-Gambols! Let's scamper and tell our Master.


Would I were well off now.


Hah! I burn! Where am I? What Place is this? A Conventicle? How crowded 'tis
with Whoremasters! Hah! Sure 'tis Hell. I know it by their Grinning. How!
Vanity here! Vanity there! Vanity every where! What's that lean Thing? Poor
Matrimony! See, see! Repentance treads on his Heels, and Cuckoldom rubs his
Forehead. Hah! hah! hah! Who's that with a Face of the Colour of a
Stock-jobbers Conscience? Hypocrisy! No, she's at Church. I know her now; 'tis
Proserpine. I'll have her, and make the Devil a Cuckold. Stay, I'll treat her
first with Fruit. [ Tantalus's Feast. Now by the Gods, by Pasquarel I swear,
I'll be revenged and put out all Hells Fires, Till Fiends meet Fiends, and
justle in the Dark.


What's the matter? Is any Body robbing me here?


Oh, Sir, the Devil (God bless us) is certainly got into that same huffy
Fellow, and he's driving him for ought I know into the next Pond, like any mad
Swine.


I'm glad on it; then I hope we're rid of him.


Ay, Sir, I warrant you he's far enough by this Time. But there's a Neighbour
of ours without says, he has a Bargain for your Worship.


What, at this time of Night? Bid him come in though.


He won't be seen, Sir; but here's a parcel of Silver-Plate he wished me to
bring you.


Leave it, and tell him, I thank him.


Not so fast, Robin; I bring it to be sold, Man. Why, there's enough of it to
buy a score of Lordships, and debauch a whole County.


Sold! But where's there Money to buy it?


Thus it is now with these Mony-mongers! They'll all tell you there's no Money,
yet they're always laying out.


Hark you; your Ear: Was it stolen? For then I must give accordingly.


No mary wa'nt it: 'Twas my Neighbour's old Master's, such another old Thief as
your Worship: He damned himself to get, and his Heir wants to sell it to buy
Earthen Ware, I think.


Oh! if 'tis a young Heirs, he'll afford as good a Pennyworth, as if 'twere
stolen. A prudent Age! Men part with their solid Metal, to purchase brittle
Earth! What do you ask for it?


Cheap enough! Threescore and two Pence an Ounce.


Is that cheap?


Ay, mary, is it: Some would give Threescore and ten, yet can't get enough
on it.


Ay, but we Men of Money know better Things: Come, I'll give you Fifty Crowns
for it, all at a Lump.


Why, I could have more at the Mint.


Ay, but when, my Friend?


When? Why not to Night, 'tis somewhat of the latest; but after to Morrow. Good
by t'yee.


Come back, I'll give you Thirty Pistols for it.


No, I'll take no less than Forty.


Come then, I'll advance -- Six-pence.


Keep your single Sic to buy a Halter. I'll take no less than Fourscore
Crowns.


Well, come back, and take 'em. This Fellow's a Fool, and takes much less in
Silver, than I bid him in Gold.


Ay, but where's my Pair of Gloves? Don't I know there's no good Job got
now-a-days, but the Procurer gets a Spell?


Ay, a Peasecods on it! That sometimes amounts to half on both sides.


What will you give me?


Thanks -- And that's more than some will give for a good Turn.


Farewell and be Hanged, that's twice Go'd buy.


Come, there's a Crown for thee.


A Crown! I'll have Forty in one Word; or you shall not have it.


Forty!


Ay, now I bargain for my self, Man.


Hang it! Come, take 'em, here's the whole Sum.


And there's the whole Plate.


What lumping Bargain's we get, now Mony's scarce! Let's see mine again! That's
half the Pleasure of an Usurer. Sure 'tis worth above six hundred Crowns. [


Hold, Mortal! Behold Mammon, that dread Power that makes Men great, the God
thou serve and worship'st. I'll now make up thy Loss ten thousand Fold. Some
Fiends, set on by Cynthio, have this Night disturbed and threatened thee, but
fear 'em not. I'm their Superior, and will make them serve thee: For, what
withstands Almighty Mammon's Power? I'll force 'em now to fill this Chest with
Gold. But they're of dismal Shapes, and their Sight hurtful; then turn thy
Back, and as thou love thy Life, or dearer Wealth, till they've performed my
Will, cast not an Eye this way. When thrice you're called, then, turn, see,
wonder, and still serve Great Mammon.


Dread Mammon, I obey; and if I turn before, may I then lose whatever I have
here.


Spirits of Earth and Fire, appear
Swift as Thought, Great Mammon's here.
Take this Chest, and all that's in it,
And here return it in a Minute,
As full of Gold,
As it can hold.

Shall we, for want of Time to make it,
At the Bank of Venice take it?

No, you must not, lest you break it.

Shall we to that of London run?

No; much of its Gold is gone.

To Amsterdam we'll fly with Speed.

Ay, There you'll find enough indeed,
But kept so close you scarce would speed.
Fly to Cales; there, like silly Elves,
They get it, but keep none themselves.

Swifter than Sight we fly through Air;
And in a moment will be there.

Well, I'm made for ever. My Lord Mammon is like all the World, and is kindest
to those that keep Money by them; and I'll keep mine so, that 'tis not not Forty
in the Hundred Discount shall decoy me to part with it. I've a great Mind to
turn, and make my Court to the Spirits, that they may bring me more hereafter.
But I must not. Would they were come! Methinks they out-stay their Time. --
What if this damned Fiend that haunts me, has changed Shapes to plague me more?
What need they have taken the Chest? There my Deeds are, and ten thousand
Ducats! Oh! I'm in a cold Sweat -- Shall I look back? What shall I do?


Oh! here's the old Craven dares not go to Roost without me. He sleeps
standing. I'll call him -- Master! Signor Pantaloon!


Oh! I beg Great Mammon's Pardon! They are come.


Why, Signor Pantaloon!


Hah! I've been called twice.


Hey, Signor Pantaloon!


Now do I turn to look on my Gold, and thank Great Mammon. [


Nay, why do you kneel to me for? I a'n't your God-father.


Where's my Chest, my Money, my Deeds?


Nay, the Devil and you know best.


Undone! Ruined! Let me curse my self into the Ground, for I had not enough left
to bury me! Run, Cry, Ride, charge a Constable with them.


With whom? With the Devil?


Run to a Conjurer. Cast a Figure! I'll have it again, though he has me for it.
Stay, I'll be revenged on my self. Get me some Poison.


How much, Sir? We buy it of 'Pothecaries at Half a Crown a Glass; but you may
have it at the Vintners at Eighteen Pence a Bottle.


No, not so dear! All my Mony's gone! Two penny-worth of Ratsbane will do --
Stay, I'll save the Money. There's a Rope yonder, I'll even hang my self. Oh my
Chest! My dear Chest! I'll not survive thy Loss. Thou art gone to the Devil! Oh
my Chest! my dear Chest! I'll follow thee.


Wowns! He's hanging himself. 'Tis like to be a blessed Time, though, when
Usurers hang themselves! But what a Pity 'tis! I came to tell him how he might
have licked himself whole, by lending a well-landed Heir a Sum of Money.


Is he of Age?


Mercy of me! I fancy, the hopes of chousing a young Squire, would raise an
Usurer from the Dead. You're welcome from Hell, Sir! Of Age, say you? Mary,
many of his Age have spent two or three times more than they're worth -- Stay,
and he lives to see the First of April come Twelve-months, he'll be -- just Two
and twenty. Blessed be the Day when it comes.


Oh he's a Minor. Nothing to be done! And more cause of hanging my self.


But, Sir!


Lard! Can't you let a Man hang himself in Peace.


Wowns! I must go get a good Knife, or his Soul will burst out at the Bunghole.



Signor Pantaloon hanged. I'll cut him down.


Lard, Sir, could not you let him alone? He'll have an Action against you for
spoiling his Rope.


He's not dead! His Pulse beats! He's but in a Swoon.


Let's keep the Room dark, and when he wakes make him believe he's in Hell:
This may do you and him some good.


So it may -- But what have you done with my Spaniard?


Sir, he's come to his Senses: The Dose which I poured into his Glass never
works above a quarter of an Hour.


Then he may be further useful. Bring our Spirits hither, while I order Things
to bring him before us, who'll represent Lucifer's Court of Justice. Oh they're
here.


Apply this Essence to his Nostrils; and when he revives, tell him he's in
Hell.


Where am I?


In Hell, wretched Soul!


Hah! Defend me! What are you?


We are the Sheriff's Officers of Hell: You must come to be tried and
sentenced.


Oh ho! But am I then dead?


Yes, and damned: Were you not an Usurer?


No indeed; I only lent Money to Friends, on Land, or other good Security, at
Twenty in the Hundred -- And that's but a National Rate you know. Oh ho! I
should have thought I had been alive, but that I remember I hanged my self;
methinks I am no more dead than e're I was in my Life.


Bring the Criminals to the Bar to receive Sentence. Make haste, I'm hungry,
and consequently as out of Humour as my Brother-Judges above, at a tedious
Quarter-Sessions.


Bear back there! Make way for the Quack Doctor.


Transportation, my Lord! I've sent more People to Hell last Year, than did a
whole Army in Flanders.


That was but against your Will. Hearken to your Sentence. I'm in haste, and
wave Method. You shall swallow every Day a Peck of your own Pills! Twelve
Vomits, Sixteen Purges, Fourteen Bolus's, and Six and thirty Clysters of Aqua
Fortis.


Make way for the Vintner.


My Lord, I've killed my self in your Service; and have sent you more People
than the modern Broachers of Heresies in Physic and Divinity; and that's whole
Legions, my Lord.


Against your Will too. You shall set up a Hedge-Tavern for Bullies and
Night-walkers; never Ride nor Tipple abroad, sell in sealed Measures at the
Statute-price, be boiled in slumm'd Claret, and drink your own Wines over
again.


Room for an old Maid.


My Lord, I'm not fit for Hell.


How? And an old Maid?


There must be gnashing of Teeth: Now I have none, my Lord: Then there must be
Weeping; and I wept so much, first, for having refused, and then for being
refused, that I'm as dry as Tinder, my Lord.


Her Crimes are too enormous for Hell to punish -- Let her be -- Stay, what
shall she be? -- Still an old Maid.


My Lord, let me have the Benefit of the Clergy.


'Tis too late. Take her away; cut her into Matches, and lay her up in Pluto's
Tinder-box.


I'm quick with Child, my Lord. I plead my Belly.


Away with her; I'll hear no more.


May it please your Lordship, here's a Criminal to be tried.


Dam him! I'm in hasle. Let him be hanged on Tantalus's s'ree.


My Lord, I've been hanged already.


What art thou?


An Usurer, as they'll have it, an't please your Diabolity.


Hell's full of them. This makes People want Money so damnably above. What were
thou damned for?


For nothing, my Lord: Only for thinking too well of the World. I cheated, as
every Body does; I was cheated again, and so suspended my self.


Hearken to your Sentence. You shall for ever lend Money, without Secucurity or
Interest, to Prodigals, Projectors, and Poets; receive as many Lashes as you've
got Pence by Extortion, be singed with your best Bonds, and the Lord of Hell
roast your Sole.


Mercy, My good Lord-Devil! I have neither Bonds, nor Money. Mercy! Mercy!


How! No Bonds! No Money! Produce the Chest.


Here 'tis produced in Court.


My Lord, I've no right in 'em. These are only some Deeds that belong to a
Gentleman, whose Father I wronged; his Name's Cynthio: Let him have 'em. And
the Ten thousand Ducats are my Niece Isabella's: I was her Guardian, and
cheated her of 'em. Let 'em take 'em among 'em, and Marry when they will, and
do you have Mercy my Lord-Judge. Transportation! Mercy!


Mercy, upon an empty Stomach? Yet what shall we do with this wicked Fellow?
He'll but spoil these worthy Gentlemen here.


Let him set his Hand to this Paper to make good what he says, and send him to
his World again, without Money. He'll be miserable enough thus. There's no Room
for him here; no not among the Proctors, Taylors, Overseers of the Poor, nor
the Pawn-brokers.


Stay, is it stamped Paper? Yes! Hah would it wer'nt.


And I adjourn the Court -- These Gentlemen may go Sup where they can: As for
you, Signor Pantaloon, you shall be our Guest.


Bless me! Are you all in Hell? Or am I out of it? Oh I have been cheated,
gulled, made an Ass, and what's worse, a Beggar!


Hah, hah, hah!


Come, Sir, you've enough left: You've parted with nothing but what was not
yours; and 'tis to your Niece, and to me, to whom you owe more; since you owe
me your Life; for, had I not cut the Rope, you had been dead, and damned as you
thought your self just now. Thank Providence, and learn to make a better use of
what you enjoy.


Well, the Advice is good. Heaven forgive me, and bless you together! Since you
have saved a Life that stood between an Estate and your Mistress, you show you
deserve it, and you shall have all, when I die: For now I'll right those I've
wronged, and, though late, begin to lead a new Life.


Look you, Master of mine, so would I too. I borrowed some Plate of our
Neighbour, Sir John's Steward, and sold it you; then changed it and the Cloth,
thinking you'd fancy the Devil had don't in this Hurly-burly: Since that they
brought me into this Plot here, for I knew nothing on it before; but take your
Muck again, 'tis Usurer's Money, the Widow's and Fatherless's Blood, and the
poor Man's Curse; 'twoud not thrive with me.


No, to show I'm no more such, keep it; I give it thee freely, honest Fellow.


Well, now I dare keep it. There's a Wonder come to pass! A Pinchpenny grown
Free-hearted. Covetousness routed out. Well,

To cure all Misers of that cursed Evil,
I fancy there's no Doctor like the Devil.

KIngs send Ambassadors; so Poets do.
I from the French, to the Confederates, You,
Am sent Plenipotentiary; for Peace to sue.
To treat with me, pray think it no Disgrace!
You may read my Credentials in my Face.
Besides, I'm told, the silliest Women are,
Able to deal with the best of you here:
You're fierce at first, but tamely end the War.
The Power that sent me offers to restore
All he took since he treated here before,
Or else Equivalents. What would y' have more?
Not want at Home from others made him take:
He only took for sweet Convenience-sake.
Agree! Faith, once I thought, as he does use you,
This talk of Peace was only to amuse you.
But now he finds his Treasury grows low;
Though yours he fancies now is but so so.
Thus, tired like you, he's willing War should cease,
Because he hopes he may get more by a Peace.
All you he'll spare, whom pointed Satire hits,
From those who crowed us here, to yonder peeping Wits;
Even Critics, Masks, and Beaux; nay Cuckolds, Squires and Cits.
He'll let the Critic for good-natur'd pass;
The Mask for fair and modest, while she hides her Face.
The Fair, who scarce dares ogle at Hide-Park,
Shall safely meet in the other, when 'tis dark,
And keep Time with the Music and her Spark.
The Wits for Beaux shall pass; for Wits, the Beaux,
And if they please, wear Periwigs to their Toes,
And Shoulder of Mutton-Flaps in Gaudy double Rows.
The Squire shall be well bred, old Matron pretty,
And Cuckold's-point no Scandal to the City.
Why, thus you'll all be safe! Then kindly bless
This my first Embassy, with fair Success.
Ladies, let your Mediation end the War!
He never trespassed yet against the Fair.
And, Sirs, till we your Hearts to a Peace induce,
Pray let me have your Hands, and grant at least a Truce,
We'll ratify't on Thursday at this Place:
But then be sure you be not in Needmore's Case.

