NEW Plays have been so frequent, all this Season;
We must believe You're tired, and you have Reason:
Some, like Rich Timons Feasts, have pleased your pallates,
Others have proved, damned Apemantus Sallates,
What e're has happened, or how e're disgract,
We hope this night to put Your Mouths in taste:
The Season of the Year our Rival grows,
The Country, and the Park, are constant Foes,
Which to our thoughts, like Blazing Stars appear,
Foretelling our worst Fate, an Empty Theatre,
Empty not only of our Noble Friends,
Whom Love of Wit, or Beauty, hither sends,
But even our Gests of the Gallery will leave Us:
The Emperor of the Moon, will now deceave Us.
Nay, which is stranger yet (We have not forgot.)
The very Masques, will tell you they're too hot:
The Poets now Spurring their jaded Brains,
Write not for Summer Laurels, but Winter gains;
Winter is their Campaign, as well as Ours:
Give us the Profit, be the Pleasure yours.
While thus We sigh, while thus your Absense mourn,
Double our joys with Hastening your Return:
Since we must soon, We'll strive to Leave you easy:
Wee'r in no other Plot, but how to Please you.

WHat shall I say to him?

He must come in.
The Officious Fool brings me news from the Ephori,
To which Honour I got him this year Elected.
He is my Creature, such tools must be had.
He has just sense to find he is of Use,
And therefore knows he may be troublesome:
I must have patience.

I beg your Graces pardon for disturbing your retirement.


Oh you are ever welcome dear Polaemon.


But my Lord I was with Child till I had given you an account of what has past
in our Senate just now, we have had huge doings, you know who my Lord, I need
not tell you my Lord, his name begins with a C. he gets me up and with his
wonted gravity, with a pox to him, makes a most tearing Speech against the
Persianites, no better titles he gave us than Traitors to our Liberty, our
Country and our Laws; Laws quoth'a, I thought he'd ne'er have done with his
Laws; he throated you out Laws, Laws Laws for an hour together, I stood up my
Lord, and what do me I, my Lord, but -- but wished the Devil had him, and his
Laws, I never had so much of the Laws in my Head in all my life; my head does
so sing of his Laws, that I don't know what to do my Lord, I am quite and clean
deaf with 'em.


Well Polaemon and what then?


My Lord?


How did our Friends take it?


A -- Plague of his Laws, I can't hear a word my Lord.


Eternal blockhead how shall I endure him?


Why truly my Lord you'll find it a hard matter, he is never to be gained over
to us my Lord, he is a bitter Enemy to Persia and to your Lordship.


No matter, I fear him not Polaemon.


The Laws, did your Lordship say any thing of the Laws?


I say I fear him not.


Oh ho you fear him not, no hang him, fear him but then my Lord don't think we
had nothing to say to this grim Gentleman, we told him he was of the Sect of
Lycurgus, and would set up a Democracy amongst us, an Athenian in his heart,
and then railed at Democracy, and said 'twas a nasty slovenly Government, and
not fit for a Gentleman, and then the most Tyranical Government of all, he had
need talk against Tyranny indeed -- pray what did your Lordship say?


Nothing Polaemon nothing.


Ay my Lord, as you say, their we were even with his Laws; but then he began to
reflect upon you with a side wind methought; by Iuno's bedstaff I grew into
choler then and said, and said, and said -- my Lord --


Ay you did so, my Lord Polaemon I thank you kindly, you have spent your self
with Zeal, I advize you to go home, and refresh your self my dear Friend, --
and be Crucified.


And so I will, my Lord, for indeed I am in a very bad way -- but my Lord I did
what I


Nay, nay, you are not well: I must take care of you: you shall go home.


Impertinence, and busy Knaves increase the weight
Of all those deeper cares, which load exalted State.
But there's a rising Pleasure still in being great.
Argilius, thou art always my retreat
From Crowds, and Fools. I would retire awhile:
Thy Friendship be my guarde. Some minutes hence.
I must confer with thee.

I will attend --

Where's the Regent? The Lord Pausanias?

my Lord, he has commanded
None shall have admittance farther.

Prithee, fond Youth, I must, and will go in.

my Lord, you have forgot Thermopylae:
You may have heard Spartans can keep a pass.

What do you mean.

To act Leomidas,
To learn from him the lesson of my duty,
To Stand against a Persian Army, and
In such a cause, Dye in my Post like him.

Noble Argilius I commend thy truth:
More then a thousand Trials I have known.

Then this might have been spared.

Come, we are Friends.
Here is a pledge, you shall accept this trifle,
A kind forerunner of suceeding Love.

My Lord, I serve the Regent out of Love,
And am a Spartan, Sir, of Noble Blood,
We Spartans ne'er take gifts from Foreigners:
If there be found such honest Men, that do:
At least I know my duty to my Country.

Well then I must find out some other way,
To prove my just Esteem --
My interest with the Regent shall be used,
To raise his kindness equal to your merit.

My Lord, the Regent now comes forth himself.

My Lord Ambassador,
You have been here some time.

I did not think it long.
I was delighted with the company
Of sweet Argilius: his Spartan honesty,
And wondrous faithful love he bears to you,
Trust me, deserve the friendship you have for him.

His Spartan honesty! I like it not;
Pretended Liberty, and sawey Pride:
There's nothing good that's Spartan --
But kind advice, like gently falling showers,
Will wash a stain out of the hardest marble:
I hope it will, Argilius. By the bright Sun
I love thee, as I ought, and can no more,
Thou One Example of a faithful Friend!

Emportant business, and my zeal to serve you
Brought me thus early --

Retire Argilius, We must be private.
Keep off the buzzing crowd of fawning Rascals;
Those teasing Candidates for Places, and Preferment,
Filling the restless Courts of great Ones,
With lies, and feathers, falsehood and perfume.

Would to the Gods I could prevent your ruin,
As sure, as that Ambassador designs it.

So, now no more Ambassador, but Friend.
Dear Artabazus, tell me, hast thou ought
Receav'd from Persia?

Long live my Master, the great King, and you
The backward fruit, which you despaired to taste,
Behold this moment to perfection brought,
And here's the Sun, that ripens it.

I know well the policy of Xerxes,
Deep, Universal, hid in time to come,
With such dexterity performed, that all
The lazy Counsels of the World are stunned,
Nor can they fend the blow.

His Letter will inform you.

As for all thy kindness, and sufferings on my account the benefit is laid up
in our house, indelibly registered for ever; my Daughter also is thine, as thou
desire; let neither night nor day, make thee remiss in what thou hast
promised Me; neither be thou hindered by the expense of Gold, or Silver; I have
a hundred thousand Men lye ready at Rhodes, who wait thy orders to Set sail for
Greece: with Artabazus do boldly Mine, and thine own business, as shall be most
fit for the dignity of Us both. What think you now my Lord?

As One, whom Nature made imperfect,
Whose Mother gave him blind into the World,
Hearing of day, or light, or the bright Sun,
Cannot conceive, but thinks 'tis mockery;
Or that he is in Natures Work house still,
Conversing with unfinisht beings, like himself:
His faculties, like false Lotteries, most Blanks:
Few his Ideas, dark, and unstamped the rest:
They tell him it indeed, but all his Sense
Just gives him power to feel himself a Man:
If in a moment, the dark curtain drawn,
Darkness is couched, and light springs all around,
Like him, I stand aghast, like him admire:
Husht with enlightened joy my other senses lye,
And I forget to speak.

Blessed be the glorious Ruler of the day,
Blessed the great Xerxes, and my Lord Pausanias
O! be not silent, Sir but give your pleased
Resentment way.

Gods! the Stupendous, goodness of the King!
Kind, as he's great! he calls his interest, Mine.
And with a hundred thousand Swords, offers
To make it good. All my misfortunes, all
My former sufferings are now pleasures to me,
Since they have given me favour with the King.
O! that I could deserve such condescension!
Ay, there's the point, good Artabazus, how
O! tell me, how?

Sir, you deserve it all, you are his Friend.

O! now you flatter me.

My dearest Lord, you know your Artabazus
Better. He bids me tell you, Sir he has enough
In having you his Friend, and hopes his actions
Will well persuade the generous Pausanias
Still to continue so.

He asks my Friendship, desires to make me Great
In both my growing happiness is sure:
But to be known his Friend, is to be great.
He asks my friendship, he should have asked my life:
All that I am, or have, is his. He, he desires
To make me great, Xerxes, that God on Earth!
I shoud desire it, he can make me so.
Tell him I'm Guardian to an Infant King,
An Infant too he'll find himself in power
When I no more am Regent, a Servant to
The Ephori, a King in nought but name,
I would be Lord of the Inheritance,
A King to all the purposes of Power,
A King indeed, to every thing, but Xerxes.
And unless I can make him absolute
Supreme of Greece, I wonnot be at all.

Spoke like your self my Lord.

But yet, I know not what, methinks I fear
The crafty Ephori again may find us out,
And prove too Powerful.

Pausanias fear! the trembling Ephori will scarce
Have time to fear, if you will push: in such
A readiness things are; so near the Goal,
You cannot miss the way, or loose the Prize.
Dispatch your orders then, and call the Persians in.
They'll bring such tools with 'em, will quickly free
The imprisoned Crown, cleanse every Jewel there,
And bnrnish the dim Gold, made cheap, and soild
With sawey handling of the Populace.
Not the lest rust, lest speak of liberty
Shall escape the file, till bright, and glittering
The Royal Circles set upon your worthy Head.

O you transport Me!

Millions of dazzling streams from every side
Shall shoot, making the slavish Ephori first behold
The King despotic darted in their eyes.

O! what a pleasure such a day would bring,
To humble Sparta with an enraged King?

But two Sweet words shall then make all the Law,
-- I will -- those charming, Royal words -- I will.
With resty Laws, volumnious Statutes, Rights,
Charters, and privileges (dusty heaps
Of those worm eaten Monuments of power)
Vast bonfires shall be built --

Like Becons blaze,
To show the coming wrath of Majesty:
These are fit victims to the Sovereignty.
Xerxes shall see my Triumph, and shall be
The Lord of humbled Greece, and Lord of Me.
O you immortal Powers!

Riches, and Force will make you great abroad,
As you'll be Idolised, and Feared at home.
You'll be as Jove himself, who reigns above,
Absolute Lord, and not to be controlled.
Dispatch your orders then, and bring the Persians in.

I will be sudden -- stay -- I had forgot --
A hundred Thousand let me pause on them.
The Spartan Army being sent abroad
To War with the Athenians,
The Friends my Interest can raise at home,
With the assistance of the Helots (whom
Upon their promised Freedom I have gained)
Are strength enough to execute the Deed.

It works, it cannot fail.

To morrow is the day appointed, for
The general insurrection: then what need
Of Persians? they may hinder my more deep designs.
Dear Artebazus, I will to Pandora,
'Tis very fit she know this mighty news,
She'll bear a joyful part.

But now, my Lord, the wind sits fair from Rhodes.
Consider, Sir, what mischief may produce
Delay in this conjuncture --
Greece waits to call you King of Sparta too:
Can you be great too soon?
Then Sir make hast, and bring the Persians in.

She, who has born a share in all my labours,
She, who inspired Me first with love, and zeal
For the great Xerxes Royal interest*
Pandora, who has left Luxurious Persia,
Contented with hard Spartan entertainment,
Advised in our most secret Councils,
Must have a share too in our hopes and joy.
To her I must this welcome news impart:
No time is lost, where gratitude is paid.
You meet me there

What does he mean? 'tis the first time I've failed.
I have not studied thee so long, Pausanias,
To be taught cunning by thee at last.
My tool thou hast been, and my tool shalt be.
So the good labouring Hound, with eager chase,
Pursues the Game, his sporting Master eats:
Encouraged, Praised, his youth, and strength he wastes,
Till growing old, and having done his most,
The useless cur is hanged --
His Mistress is a Persian, and our Pensioner,
And which is well, last night she had a Jewel
From me, worth a Province: Cunning she is,
And knows our drift; and now the last stake
Is playing, may prevent Us; first, because
She loves Pausanias; then, which I think
May be the stronger with her, she well knows
She parts with her dear profit, if she looses him --
That must be answered, and made up to her.
Rich Petticoats, Rich Jewels, Furniture,
And Equipage, don't always come from visible Estates.
I must exert my utmost cunning with her,
Before his business gives him time to see her,
For on this turn depends our whole design.
If I succeed, I have served my Master well.
The Spartan Army by this time may be
Well beaten by the Athenians; be it so.
Such numbers Landing will be quickly known --
But then We know the Spartan temper too,
Lazy in Preparation, and, they think,
To brave to need to be upon their guard.
Their Troops at home, raw, and undisciplined,
Ours seasoned, and long practised in their trade.
Hast, Artabazus, hast, the means prepare,
And bring 'em in, to make new Conquests here.

Now to Pandora -- I'll stop the Persian Army.
What need of strangers, when our Friends can do it?
Pleased with my promises, 'tis true, I've had
Some of their Persian Gold, employed it too
To serve my own, and not their Interest.
Vain Xerxes! think thou I'm to toil for thee?
And only Conquer for a Spartan Crown?
No, though ruin I design, and rather than fail,
I would call in, and even assist thy arms,
Yet first I'll try to get the spoil my self.
Greece I design shall fall, and Crown
With Sovereign Rule my pains alone.
When General of the Greecian force, I drove
Almost three hundred thousand Persians,
Mardonius slain, from famed Platea's fields.
Then I sought glory with my Countries good.
Now with it's undoing, still I seek for glory.
Honour, that cheats the World, is but a Name:
'Tis waste, and ruin lead the way to Fame.

I Left Pausanias in Pandora's lodgings,
Where Love alone now does not entertain 'em:
Something of mighty consequence, and Ill,
I fear, is hatching. The Minister of Mischief,
Artabazus, is very busy Besides Commanded
By the Regent to withdraw, as I went out,
I heard Pandora say, the Persians, my Lord,
Are trusty Friends, and I a Persian, first
Salute you King -- a King!
Is not the Young Plistarchus living?
Does not each man enjoy his property?
Security and Peace reigns throughout Sparta,
Justice and Mercy flowing, from the throne,
And like the Sun, give comfort every where;
What revolution can bring better days?
Pausanias, 'tis Ambition leads thee on:
When thou art blindly fallen into the snare;
Too late thou'lt find thy flattering hopes deceive thee.
I'll to the Princess Anchilthea,
Acquant her with my fears, --
A Mothers Council with a Mothers love,
May all the Gods assist, and change his Mind.

My dear Argilius good Morrow, I know When you get into this Piazza, you are in
a Melancholy way.


You know my Temper Lysander and I wonder at your goodness that you can bear
with me, you that are all Spirit and Fire, and never knew one minutes care,
would I could say as much.


Why what in the Name of Pluto would ye have? You are the Regents favourite,
you swim in the Stream of Prosperity and all the World courts you, Men and
Women, and may if you will enjoy the Charmingest Creature Umph Pandora -- Umph.


Not a word of that Lysander their's none but you must know it, besides I have
told you my Resolution.


Ay to be inexorable out of a point of Friendship and Gratitude to the Regent;
'tis all Spleen, damned spleen, where's Friendship or Gratitude when a fine
Woman comes a cross one? there's nothing thought of but how to get her; and if
you think otherwise you are ungrateful to your self. To quit Friendship in such
a Case, were no more than to rifle the Temple and Debauch a pretty Priestress;
and that I've done before now.


Nay thou art rake-hel enough that's the truth on it, but since you say I have
the Spleen so much, pray give me a remedy.


I could prescribe many, but here's one just now falls in my way, you know my
Old cross Father like all other Old fellows, when they cant enjoy no more
themselves, grow malicious, and hinder us as much as they can, out of a
pretence of making us virtuous and sober, forsooth, and if they can find no
other way to Plague us, then they clinch us with a Wife, and that Faith is most
commonly plague enough, for I'd fain know any thing so sneaking and foolish a
sight, as a young Fellow that has bin Married but half a year?


What! then I find that's like to be your case you set it off so feelingly.


No, 'tis not like to be my Case I promise you; by Jove I am a Spartan, and
love Liberty, he that's indifferently easy, is a Fool to through Dice, whether he
shall be so any longer, or no; 'tis perfect nonsense; I wonder any body can
have the face to propose Matrimony to a man, unless 'twere to save him from
going to Goal for Debt?


If all men were of your mind how should we have the World continue?


Oh -- there are people enough in the World, that are fit for nothing else;
Fools that will Marry whither ye will or no; all your self admirers too, and
your whining Adorers, I would have Marry; I would have all Ugly people to
Marry, and get out of sight, that the handsome ones may enjoy the World, and
one another, my Dear.


Well -- but a great deal of Money with a Wife, will prove a Comfort to a Man,
let the worst happen that you can imagine.


'Tis true Money is a sure stake, and I think there's a great deal of reason we
should have it, for since the Matrimonial Sea is so Dangerous we ought to
insist upon great Insurance, before we Launch into the deep* our Ancestors were
Fools, and did'nt know their own worth, Women must have Us, and will have Us,
and can't live without Us, no more than they can without sleep, and some of em
loose a good deal every night about it, would I were with em, I'd so rock
'em: then forsooth to keep up the show of Modesty, for they must not be seen in
it for the World, they get a third Party, a go between, a Matrimonial Bawd,
(there's abundance of 'em) and they bring you by chance together; the Innocent
Virgin knows nothing of the matter, not she* nor is'nt Tricked, and dressed out,
not she; nor dos'nt Simper, not she; then afterwards you are told a damned
company of lies about her Fortune, or her good Qualities, and they believe the
thing might be brought about, and a thousand little tricks, you know 'em.


Why dost thou think all this? They must know Chastity and Modesty are the
Virtues most admired by us Men.


Ay the scarcest Commodities are ever the most valued: you can't know some
things 'till you use them, we are Devilishly imposed upon sometimes in
Merchandises that are set to Sale; what do you think they Dress themselves out
for, with so much Pains and Art? what do you think they take such Care to show
themselves afterwards for, if not for Sale? and if we past by without
Cheap'ning 'em, they'd cry out what do ye Lack Sir.


Fie, fie, mere railing.


What do they Plague me with Matrimony then for? when one's weary of every
thing else (as one shall be) then 'tis the time to Marry, ay and to make the
best Husband too; to be contented with riding out a mile or two, to take the
air, to keep a pack of maingey, stinking Beagles; to visit my Neighbours in
their turns, and to lye with one and the same Woman every night soberly, and
gingerly, there's the Husband for ye.


Ha ha ha thou art a rare Philosopher, but what's the remedy for the Spleen, if
this be not one?


This matrimony has put it out of my head, I was going to tell you my Father
will have me marry the rich Widow the Lady Demetria's Daughter, that charming
Pearl Miss Mawkine.


Oh -- I know 'em, Hercules! what a Creature has he found out for you?


An odious thing indeed. I must go and Visit her. Come you shall go along with
me.


I can't now, I have business of consequence, but I'll meet you in the Evening,
at Minerva's Temple, and then I may have leisure to laugh with you.


The Old Lady sets out I assure you, for something, or another, look to yoor
self Argilius.


Well, I dare venture her. Minerva's Temple.


I wonnot fail to meet you.


Leave me not thus --
Let me not live to see you run such hazards,
By all the tenderness of truest Love,
I do conjure you, by all the Virgin joys I gave you,
When at Byzantium's famous Seige, your Captive,
When midst the sound of War, and heat of Glory
Love too displayed his ensigns, with sighs and Vows,
And winning looks, you tuned me to your Love,
Byzantium and Pandora both were yours,
Happy and pleased, my Chains I bore, through 'all
Rough seasons, and more rugged Fortunes (unknown
Till then) I follow'd you; Love and Pausanias,
Were all to me, and still are so, but Oh
Too much I fear Pausanias his has lost,
And poor Pandora's Love, alone remains:

Why will you add this torment to my Soul?
Or why affect me with Presaging Tears?
Pandora! 'twill be time enough to weep,
When I miscarry. --

Then 'twill be too late.
Think what you are, and what you have to Aloof,
Your well got Fame which sounds throughout the World,
If it must go, let it be like your self,
With vast Designs, and those too well concerted;
Then more then giddy chance is on your side;
Trust not Pausanias, trust not Feeble aid;
The awkward Helots, timorous and Enslaved
And all the Party that you can propose,
Are but the dross, and refuse of the Land;
The best are gon to the Athenian War,
Shall great Pausanias thus poorly trust his sate,
No, let a Warlike host of Persians
Give credit to your arms, and make the Conquest sure:

Credit and Conquest, follow my Command:
Brave Leaders make brave Men; those that with such
Disdain you treat, would make you Gaudy Persians
Feel, once again the Force of hardy Greece,
Of that no more, Pandora, you're to blame,
Press me no farther. --

My Lord, you seem to be displeased, with Me:
If I have said what Mis-became me
If Passion too much Innocent freedom showed --
Believe that Passion only was my fear,
My fear for you and that you should forgive.

Stifle that fear, for fear that brings no help,
May bring much harm; trust me Pandora, trust
My grown experience,
I've weighed it well --
Money and Men don't grow like Mettles, whether
We will or no, if we can save 'em both
And gain our Ends Xerxes and all wise Men,
Will praise my Conduct, and esteem my Service;
Therefore the Persians wait, 'till farther orders.

And therefore would I'd ne'er been born
'Twere better, better I had never known,
Ne'er felt the joys of great Pausanias love,
If I should say the Gods themselves, ne'er tasted
Diviner bliss: I think I should not boast,
A noble Flame you've kindled in my Soul,
Fed, with your breath, your looks, your every Grace,
Heroic actions, and your feasts of love,
Unenvi'd, and unrelish'd be the World,
While I, Oh happiness! enjoying you,
Have more than comes to any mortals share
I cannot bear it, cannot see you lost,
My artless fondness, and my murd'ring feats,
Are troublesome, I find you think 'em so
Yet give me, may be a last leave to beg.

'Tis sixth, and now once more I take my leave:
Business of several kinds must be dispatch'd

Stay Sir, yet stay, 'till I have finished mine,
'Twill not be long a doing, and then I'll never
Disturb you more, I see you are resolved,
(With utmost grief, and all the pangs of parting
Souls I find it) to seek your Ruin, let me
Once more Embrace the greatest Man on Earth --
What will the World loose? What shall I loose rather?
Who live not but in you --
Like flowers spreading to the rising Sun.
Beauteous, and gay, while they are warmed by him,
But when he's gone and the Cold Evening comes,
Closed up their withered sweets Decay, and Die --

Ha! She's gone, what hoa there, the woman has
Overcome her Spirits, what hoa who waits? --
Be sure you take all necessary care --
I'm loath to leave her thus, but I'll avoid
The second grief of parting, and please her more
Returning with Success --

Away, stand off, he's gon, and all my arts,
The Woman, and the Mistress too have failed, --
However I have done my part for Xerxes.
And Artabazus when he knows it must
Approve my management; I love Pausanias, or I loved him once
And I would save him, save the lovely Youth
Argilius, who I know will fall with him --
May be he suspects the Persians, and he
Has reason, but this present Enterprise
Is Madness, Fury, throwing all away.
Rather than have him lost, I will call in
The Persians -- Pythia, you find out my Lord
Ambassador -- but stay -- you may retire --
The Persians here, my reign is at an end.
Pausanias runs too fast, and hurrys Me
And my design upon Argilius
I'll seize this Night: once more attempt his Love
Before to Morrows bloody Enterprise:
For after that I must despair to see him.
If I'm unlucky --
Let him unpitied fall, and his loathed Life resign,
If I succeed --
I with delight shall think he once at least was Mine.

SWeeter than Roses, or cool Evening's breeze,
On a warm Flowery Shore,
Was the dear Kiss, first trembling made me freeze,
Then shot like Fire all over;
What Magic has Victorious love!
For all I touch, or see,
Since that dear kiss, I hourly prove,
All, all is Love to me.
My Dearest

My Fairest

I Languish for thee.

Thy Kindness has won me

Thy Charms have undone me

I ne'er shall be Free.

I faint with the Pleasure I fain would repeat,

Ah why are Love's Raptures so short and so sweet?

Thus pressing and kissing, fresh Joys we will pursue,
And ever be happy, and ever be true.

But alas! should you Change

Ah tell me not so,

No never my Dearest

No never my Fairest

No never no no.

BEhold me Madam, waiting your Commands.

Must I Command you then to have you here?
Must I still send for you, Argilius?
Where is that welcome Warmth, fruitful of Love,
To bless my barren, wintered, dying hopes?
Why am I slighted thus I should complain,
But would not willingly complain of You.
Would I had been more Fair, You less reserved:
What can I do to gain, and keep your Heart?
Tell me, Argilius, and it shall be done.
Tell me my faults, for I can hear even them
From those dear Lips, they shall be mended all:
My Love can Conquer every thing but You:
Cruel Argilius! yet I wonnot think,
You will be Cruel, for my being kind.

Your dazzling Beauty, and your wondrous Charms
Are fit for Jove, no Goddess half so Fair.
No need of Arguments where proofs are plain:
Witness, the many many Slaves you've made,
Witness, the greatest Man Pausanias;
A Conqueror still you Triumph 'ore his heart,
You he Adores, and with the strictest Love,
You mix your happy Souls --
As you deserve so you enjoy the best
Of Men; how Madam, can you think of me?
My faithfulness to him has born the trial,
And thank the Gods, he ever found me true;
Ah Madam! why then all these pains, to make
A Villain of a Friend? --

No I would make you mine Argilius,

In me 'twere Sacrilegious rage Indeed,
To violate the Temple of his Love.

The Temple's meanly served, that has but one
Poor votary; when a full Chorus shakes the roof
Then then's the best Devotion.

The Priest alone, has right to Sacrifice,
I with the distant crowd shall humbly Bow.

Give me no Ceremony, but the Heart.
Oh cruel Youth! averse to Love, and Me:
Too fond of what was never meant for thee:
For thou, were surely made for Gentler Wars
Change thy fierce mind, and think on softer Love,
Arms are to rugged for thy Pliant Limbs,
For close embraces, let 'em be Exchanged;
Instead of Noise, and the shrill Trumpets sound,
Let tender Murmuring sighs, divert thy ear;
No fear of Death, but smiles and dying Eyes,
No smarting Wounds but those of bleeding, Love.
Which with delight are cured. --

Ah Madam hold, you know not what you do.

I'd have thee hasten to be Happy now.
Neglect no longer the advice of Love,
But escape the pain, which I have born so long,
For love of thee, what Torments have I felt?
What torments do I feel? laden with cares,
Torn with my Hopes, and Fears, sleep from my Eyes
Is fled, while I restless* despairing pine
My life away; give me one tender look,
One moments love, and I'll forgive you all.

O! Help me all ye Powers or I am gone, --
A strange forgetfulness comes over my Soul,
And I can think of nothing else but her.
I know not how, I'm hurried on so fast,
Deaf to my reason, Duty pleads in vain.

Why muses, thus my Life, so thoughtful, why?
You sha'not think, 'tis Love, Argilius, Love,
With all the charms of a fair eager Lover,
Invites you to be kind, my panting Breasts
Blown up by Love, like Neptunes waves foretell.
A storm of swelling Joy, plunge boldly in,
Within these Arms you can no danger fear,
No Rock, but Scorn, no Shipwreck but Despair.

Friendship and Love, distract my tortured mind,
Such kindling Charms, such Tenderness, such Love,
With thousand Graces, Favours undeserved,
Set me on fire, and captivate my Soul.
But then methinks I hear Pausanias, betrayed by me,
Cry out, there there he goes,
Th'ungrateful Villain, whom I thought my Friend,
Argilius, only he could so have done.
Shall I consent to wrong this Godlike Man?

Is't come to this, this hateful Parley then?
I know your thoughts, hence from my sight be gon;
Thou honest Fool, unfit for me; thou had
But few hours happiness to taste, and those
Thou hast lost, to morrow thour't no more, then perish
With the Helots and Pausanias; --
No, I'll be revenged on him, the cause of this,
And thee; so honourably you shall not fall;
I'll to the Ephori, discover all,
And leave you to the Executioner:

Hold Madam hold, -- a woman's hate is fatal,
I find he is engaged in new designs;
On me alone let your --
Resentment fall, O! let me expiate
Great Pausanias Crimes: Here Madam at your Feet
Behold your slave let the dire sentence Death,
Nay worse than death, your, your displeasure, light
On me alone, tell me but how I may
His pardon win, his safety but procure,
I'll merit it, with all that I can think,
Or do, for you.

I take you at your word, You've saved his Life:
And that's an action worthy of a Friend.

Then I am blessed, and now am wholly yours
My Life, my Soul, which way will you dispose --

Madam the Persian Ambassador.

Conduct him up -- would he were in Persia:
This comes of loosing time.

He must not see me here, I'll soon return
And then --

And then deceive me if thou can.
My Lord you're come very opportunely, I longed
To see you, though I wish, I could
Tell better news, I follow'd your Commands,
Tried all you're Arts, and some too of my own,
To change Pausanias mind, but all in vain.
There's a Fatality that urges him,
To ruin, and stops all our good designs.

It must be so: just now I left him where
He told me all; and is in care to know,
How Fair Pandora does; as soon as e're
He told me you were ill, struck with the news,
I hither flew, to satisfy my fears,
And thank the Gods, gaurdians of our Persia,
I find you, Madam, well; you are the light
That guides us in our travels, withdraw your self.
And helpless we are lost. --

I feigned to swoon, at last and so he left me:
I heard him say, he quickly would return
With Victory, but 'tis impossible, he's lost,
And with him all the hopes of Persia --

When so much Beauty fails, we must expect
The worst; I found him angry, much disturbed,
I doubt our common enemy his Mother the Princess
Anchilthea, undermines us.

The Spartan Ladies, are all Politicians,
All Patronesses of the public weal,
Story is full of 'em, and there she hopes a name;
There let her live, so we were rid of her.

We both with equal Zeal our Country serve;
Though I with half the pains, attain my ends,
While bright Pandora, her assistance lends.

My Lord, my Lord, I have no such Vanity,
I shall be happy if by my poor means,
I answer your designs, and serve the mighty King.

Xerxes the great, receives your kindness right,
Resolves to honour you, above all Women,
Informed by me, of all your beauteons Charms,
Loves you unseen, desires your Character,
And when Triumphant he arrives in Greece,
Pleased with the Charge, and Proud of such a Mistress,
I'll soon conduct you to his kind Embrace.

Dissembling Knave --
My Lord I hear the Regent
Is to have Xerxes Daughter, I shall be pleased
To see him grow so great, and soon retire
Contented from the World, praying for Xerxes,
And his great Sons good Fortune --

I may impart with safety what I know;
These are pretended Nuptials Madam; these
Are ways of State to gain a present point,
You can't believe 'em real --

No more than the other --
My Lord I dive not into turns of State,
I'm only happy to be useful here.
What shall we do, to get the Persians in?
This rising will be vainly desperate.
It will awake the sleeping Ephori,
Put 'em upon their Guard, and so prevent
Our hopes; besides Pausanias meets his Death.
And dear Argilius will be lost with him,
I have no Patience, oh find out some remedy.
Use all your cunning, stop this mad design,
I have done all I can. --

To change Pausanias is impossible,
And I have tried a second time in vain --
-- You have inspired me Madam,
And to your influence I owe the thought,
By the bright Sun I have it --
I'll send a Letter to the Ephori, unsigned,
Therein at large I will inform of all,
And that to morrow is the day set down. --

You won't discover Pausanias? --

No, Madam, no, not the least glance at him.
No naming Names. I'll word it cunningly.

Well, it must do.

It will have this effect:
'Twill make 'em all intent upon this Plot.
So while they're busy, bustling here at home,
Our Men may land securely.

Excellent! our time's but short.

I'll instantly about it.

Sparta! thou noblest seat of Liberty!
Still may thou be preserved and greater still,
Freed from self Interest, and base corruption,
From traitorous designs of trusted Friends,
And slavish Principles, yet more dangerous.
Ba thou the Ballence still of Greece and spread
Thy easy Conquests through the Persian sway:
Thus it was once, thus, thus it used to be,
When with united Hearts, and hands we fought,
And smiling Fortune purpled the Victors way:
But now, alas! distracted heats, and jarring,
Factions, strive hard for thy undoing:
Now who bids most for Liberty, or Country,
Takes the unhappy Purchase. See he comes --
Argilius has raised my Jealousy --
I'll try Pausanias, if I find him bent
On ill Designs, my self would see him Perish.

The best deserver will be sure of that.
Now separate, and so my Friends farewell.

Well met my Son; when saw you the Young King*
My Nephew, good Plistarchus? he is well?

Very well in health Madam,
And still much like his Father.

I hope he'll prove much like him in his Virtues,
You are his Guardian, Son, and should inform him
Of his Fathers Actions, worthy his Imitation,
Tell him the Great Leonidas with Heroic
Fortitude, redeemed poor Greece from Persian Slavery,
When with but only three, three Hundred men, --
He stopped their torrent at Thermopylae,
Which threatened utter Desolation; tell him
His Father then lost his life, but mounted
To the Gods, a glorious Victim for his Country,
Tell him he refused the Sovereignty of Greece,
Offered by Xerxes, and chose a Noble
Death, rather than an ignominious Rule,
Tell him what all good Kings should know.

There want not these to make a Spartan King,
His Lesson's written in the Laws, he need
But learn to Read, and then he's taught to Govern.

Methinks there's more required Pausanias,
The Virtues of the Ancients should be shown,
The liberality of Agamemnon, Old Nestors Eloquence,
Vlissess Arts, and the brave Daring of Achilless too.
A King should learn to fill his People's hands,
Study to rob 'em only of their hearts,
That would become a King: and then so wise,
That he should be a Council to himself.
So Bold and Daring, that while others pause
Upon the Danger he should break through it,
And leave them to finish the easy part;
On Justice and Clemency I could much more enlarge,
But this methinks is somewhat more than Spelling.

The Kings of Sparta have all this inspired,
The race of Hercules are Born with these
Endowments, though there are some who are not Kings,
Whom Chance thought fit to send into the World
Out of the reigning Constellation --
Yet have more shining qualities --

That there are Souls worthy of Sceptred sway,
I doubt not, I wish all Kings were such, if not,
They are to be the more despised, you once
My Son, were one of those great Souls, Oh pleasure
To my thoughts!
With joy unspeakable I heard the News,
And blessed the Gods Sparta and Greece were saved,
Saved by Pausanias my beloved Son,
Then, with what thirst of Glory and revenge
You drove the Invaders hence, -- then was a time!
Now Persian habits, and Rich Persian Wines
Mistresses Persian, nay and Persian Gold
Would bring 'em in again. My Son, my Son,
Your dress, your Manners, Customs, and what most
I fear, your Inclinations to are theirs,
A Persian Strumpet, and a Persian Spy,
Are dearer to you than the Love of Sparta;
Take heed Pausanias, keep your self from Plots,
Loose not the Fame you've Got, by base designs,
You know you are suspected to the State,
But former merits Spoke in your behalf,
Throw off these Persian Novelties, and rise again
A bright Conductor of the Common-Wealth,
For know, that were they more, your Plots are vain,
For Sparta like the Rain-bow, will shine most,
When girt with thickest Clouds. --

Madam the Charge is weighty, that you lay,
And I must try to bear it. --

Very brave! how it becomes
Your Pride! Ay, ay, go on,
Thou silly Tool for others Interests,
Go on Ambitious, Insolent, and Proud,
Disgrace to Sparta, and thy Royal Stemm,
If against my hopes and cares, thou prov'st a Villain,
I with these Arms which nur'st thee up for good,
Will be the first, shall dye 'em with thy Blood.

Please to retire Madam I doubt you are not well.

You sha'not escape me so, for I will do
My part, O! Witness all ye Gods, and the great Manes
Of our Ancestors, if I would ought, but what
Is great and Glorious, --
Think on the Torments of a Mothers Soul,
Who strives to save her only darling Child,
Often forewarned to keep within his bounds,
The Giddy headed minds it not, Entic't
By other, and his own desire to range,
Ventures to far, till mist, his Mother calls,
And runs and cries in vain, Helpless and Breathless.
Now she see's, the hopeful boy is by a
Tiger slain, this, this, is my case now. I know
Thy wild designs, and would prevent thy fall.

Madam I must admire you for your Virtue
Though you* Condemn me, on your bare Suspicion,
Have I not given proof of my Love to Sparta?
Witness what you have said. --
Why then am I accused, by restless humours,
And causeless Jealousies? if I design
It shall be how to make my self and her --
Much greater than we are. --

Son, I have more than fancy for my fears,
I know your meaning, you aim full at Power,
At Power despotic, you would be a Tyrant,
And like a Monster waste this Fruitful Land,
Then Starve your self, forsaken and abhord.
As in a Moment after the Last sigh,
The Body motionless, colour the Face,
Heat flies the stiffining Veins,
The glorious tissue soon unweaves it self,
And all the Elements which were before
Subjected to the Offices of Life
Now snatch their several parts, fighting on ruins,
'Till there's nothing left; so Tyranny
The sure disease of States, when e're it seizes 'em proves mortal,
The People languish, and their freedom dies.

Sentence is past, and Pleading is in vain,
And now no matter Innocent or not.
Yet e're to morrows Sun reddens the Western Sky
You'll find me clear my self --

-- Else may the Traitor Die.

YOU have a very fine Garden here Madam, and very well understood, as every
thing else is about you.


Oh good Sir I have no fancy at all indeed, if we are but clean, 'tis the most
we can pretend to; however this little out-let is a convenience in the City, I
walk here every morning before dinner, for a little fresh air.


'Tis very agreeable Madam and it gives Health and Appetite.


Oh dear Sir I never want Appetite, I wish Maukine had as much poor Child, she
is so over-run with the green-sickness, I don't know what to do with her, I
make her get up every morning early, when I do, and stir about, we were up this
morning by nine a clock I protest, and were dressed in two hours time, as you may
guess by the hanging of our Clothes.


Nothing can be more exact Madam, I'm in amaze it could be done in so short a
time, pray Madam don't hurry your self so, let me alone to cure my pretty Jewel
here.


Truly Lysander I am a little out of order with it that's the truth on it, but I
don't care how I look so I do my poor Girl good; but could you cure her think
you, umph -- I don't know but you might, if you made her stir Soundly, a
warming Exercise is the only way -- but she's fit indeed for a Husband, that
plays with Babies, have you brought that along with you too? I have told you a
hundred times I'd burn it -- give me't I say.


O Save me, Save me, I will play with it that I will so.


How dare you say such words, Baggage, ha?


I won't then, I won't Oh Dear Mother -- I will play with it then.


Indeed Gentlewoman I shall order you I shall.


O Mother -- you've hurt my Issue, oh Gods! oh Gods! oh Gods!


Hold your Tongue you nasty Slut, but I'll throw this away for you.


O dear Madam don't be angry with pretty Miss, poor creature how she Sobs!


Pray Madam, she'll do so no more, I dare promise for her, she was only
practising how to dandle a living Baby of her own.


Oh Sir I'm so troubled with her sometimes, I don't know what in the world to
do; yet the Girl has a great deal of good nature in her, and I hope will come
off from these Childish things.


Ay Madam a good Husband will make her a Woman.


Some Husbands will go a great way that's the truth on it, I had a good one
once, that would have made a Woman of any thing, I am sure I was very Young and
Foolish then, but he made a Women of me presently, while you could say what's
this; but I grow old now and must leave that to my Daughter.


No body would take her for your Daughter Madam, you must call her Sister
indeed, so youthful and blooming as you are.


Oh dear Sir it can't be indeed, O good, I don't know truly -- I vow I can't be
so vain to think it. -- but do you speak seriously now?


Madam I'll leave the World to Judge;


No no, I can't believe it, though I was young and beautiful once, your Uncle (
Lysander) and I were very well together, he was a fine man as I may say, for he
always kept great Equipage about him, how I loved play in those days, there
would be such Squabling, such a pother sometimes, and though we were out for a
little time, yet we were quickly in again, I was never weary of playing -- it
makes me laugh ha ha ha, and now to have such a fine young Spark as this say
such things to me -- does really as it were -- I don't know how methinks -- but
it obliges me to you strangely -- I'll Swear I'm out of Countenance. O Iuno!
what has she put in her Mouth Venus a green Apple -- Oh this intolerable girl,
this 'tis is her Bane, I am quite weary of my Life with her -- 'tis to no
purpose, all this Charge and Care I have been at to give her Physic and
Openings, the Mischievous Creature gets her self Stopped again, do what I can.


Why Mother 'twas only a little Apple my Cousin Memnon gave me, when we were at
play together on the Bed in the Damsen Coulor'd Chamber.


Ay thou art a Tom-rigs, fie at this Age? it makes me quit wild, Hussy have you
got nothing else in your Pockets?


No Mother indeed, and indeed now.


I won't believe you, I will see, therefore stand still -- look here a great
peace of Chalk -- a Scrap of Parchmin -- a great peace of Alum, -- an Apple
Scoop, and a raw Turnip -- are not you a lying Girl? speak -- a peace of
Plaister-lime and hair, mere Poison -- are not you a Vexatious Child? speak --
why do you Plague me thus? speak I say.


I won't.


Come let see what's in the other Pocket -- full of Oatmeal -- why wou'd'nt this
make any Flesh Mad? but I'll --


Hold Madam hold, let me entreat you.


Oh Sir I am the unfortunat'st Woman in Greece, she breaks her poor Mothers
heart that she does, for me this is the daily Life I have with her or worse, I
have tried all the fair means in the World, but it signifies nothing, a great
Hoyden as she is, you shall have a Husband indeed, you shall, Ah if Lysander
were not your true Lover, and blind to all your faults you might stay long
enough, e're any other would be troubled with you, Oh I'm past Patience.


Maw, waw here's a rout indeed -- but I'll be revenged on you for this and that
soon too.


'Tis all nothing Madam, these little things are incident to Youth, she'll make
never the worse Wife, this is all Innocent, you may thank the Gods she's
Virtuous Madam, and that's the Charm that wins my Heart.


Oh Sir you are a good discreet Young man, as you say, 'tis a great Comfort to
me to think she's Virtuous, all the Mischief she does is to her self poor
Child, but when you have her, she'll be Weaned from every thing of this kind,
and I hope I shall have Comfort in her and hers.


No doubt on it Madam, she must be good that comes from you, she must have
Beauty, Sense and Virtue if she's your Ladyships Daughter.


Oh sweet Sir you oblige me Eternally to you, and when you and I are better
Acquainted, I hope you will speak your Mind freely to me, I love Flat and Plain
doings Sir, I am for downright dealing.


Your Ladyship says very true, and I'll promise you, you could not meet with a
more upright Man than my Friend here, I'll Answer for him.


Lysander has done me great honour Madam in making me known to your Ladyship,
and I shall use all the means Possible to requite him so great a Kindness, and
endeavour always to show my self deserving of the favours I receive.


Well I vow I can't choose but look upon you -- I Dream't last Night of just
such a Face and Person, -- well really ones Fancy works very oddly when ones a
sleep sometimes -- Oh Iuno! Oh the Gods! she has run a Pin into me Jove knows
how far -- where is she --


for Heavens sake Madam be pacifi'd.


Pray Sir meddle with that which belongs to you, you are no Master here. Gods!
how it Smarts?


Why so outrageous Madam?


You're a Saucy Coxcomb Sir, what do you mean? do you know who I am?


Yes Madam you have not concealed your self at all, I hope you don't think I or my
Friend here, have any design upon you.


Why this is intolerable, to be Affronted thus at my own house, my Daughter!
my Scullion's too good for you.


She may be the better Choice for ought I know.


Had your Father the wealth of Persia, he nor you should ever come within my
doors, you have your answer Sir.


I am Proud you employ me Madam, my Father shall have your Message.


The sooner the better Sir, there's your way. I shall have a reckoning with you
Mistress.


O the sweet Conversation we have had Poor Miss has brought us both off, but
She'll pay for it, come let's be gone.


Nothing ever happened better, you have had the diversion I promised you, and I
have my Liberty secured, much sooner, then I expected. I'll tell my Father how
she despised him, I know his temper, 'twill put a certain end to this business,
and then the world's my own again.

Thanks to the Gods our Matrimony's done,

Which ne'er begins too late, nor ends too soon.


Hear you the news my Lord Ambassador?

What news?

Honest Argilius brings me word,
The Business of the Helots is discovered!

O the good Gods discovered!

Eternal Death pursue the Villains fears,
Rot, rot the hand, that writ the coward Scrowl;
Would I could know the Secretary -- but
I have the means to spoil their blabbing still.
It shall be told, but not so soon as done.
And when the first Discoverer brings the news,
It shall be Conquest and Proud Sparta's Fall.
Thus to be Baffled by dull blockheads, thus!
Puzling about, at last they've hit it off,
And follow with full cry: I'll lay a trail
Of Persian Game, shall draw 'em to the Toils.

Come my good Lord be pacified: it is
But shifting Sail, and still the wind sits fair:
We are not destitute, remember Rhodes.

Rage, and Revenge, like fierce imprisoned Winds,
Hurry my Sense, and shake me, like an Earthquake:
But there will come a time to give 'em vent.

My Lord, I do beseech you Calm your mind,
And on fresh Methods let it be employed.
So Great your Power, so many are Your Friends,
The Ephori dare not say that you are guilty.

He says I was not mentioned in the Paper.
Let 'em suspect me, while they have no proof.
I trust my Treasons only with a few.
Let hot Brained Fools set up their noisy Clubs,
Cabal with Male-contents, and whisper Secrets,
The very Forum will be sure to know:
Nothing so vain, so Buoyed with hopes as they,
Dirty and weary Hobbling up and down,
To Spread reports which no Body believes;
Mighty designs they Hatch in Speculation,
Not Possible in practise, they wish well
To Treason, and will dip themselves as far,
As any One will trust 'em, but all the
Credit they can do their Cause,
Is when the silly Block-heads Suffer fort.

Your very right my Lord,
They're only Engines, the Spring is hid
Which gives the Motion, and when
They're once worn out, are thrown aside
My Lord our building needs no Scaffolds now,
One word from you will Raise and Finish it;
Think of your Friends, at Rhodes,
The eager Troops lye Languishing
For Summons, when will Pausanias, when the
Regent send? why so much time before we
Call him General? why dos'nt Xerxes send us
Into India; to push our Conquests there, why keep
Us here in Tedious Expectation? himself
Is with 'em raising still their Hopes,
His Confines open to Incursions lie,
Yet he Expects, and Venturs all for you.

No farther need of Rhetoric Artabazus,
Now they shall come, my Friend, my last advise
I will dispatch to Xerxes Instantly.

But I am Cautious in the Messenger
In these suspected times we ought to choose
Most warily, it will be difficult --
Besides our all depends upon these Letters --
Since we must trust the Secret to one more,
He must be one of tried Fidelity --

Such Men we find are scarce --

Yet there is One, Faithful Argilius.

Argilius.
You know he is a Spartan in his Heart.

That is one Reason why I wish him there.
A Spartan! that's an Enemy to you.

O! he's my Friend.

Why let him show it then:
This way he carrys on your Interest;
And that I'm sure's the business of a Friend.
He must know nothing of the deep contents,
Only convey the Letters to my master.

You know the Messengers have ne'er returned,
By our Agreement suffering present Death.

Then he will fall with Honour serving you.

He saved my Life at famed Bizantium's Siege --

And you would there have done as much for him.

Since that you know how great has been his Love:
And many are the Proofs, this very Hour,
Is Witness of his Faith -- What such a Friend!

There is no Friendship, in Affairs of State.

I grant it -- but we'll think upon another.

There's not another: You are sure of him.

Then I'll Subscribe his life shall be untouched.

You may and give him time to ruin Us.
Consider Sir when he shall come to Rhodes
And see the Mighty preparations there
His zeal for Sparta, then preferred to You,
(Before the numerous Fleet can yet arrive)
May make him send advice, discover all.

Advice! Discovery! let the Names be lost:
They signify a Villain every way.

Then you will thank his Friendship.

He shall Dye.
Friendship implys an Equal in the Throne;
A Subject-Passion: But Ambition
Fills all the Soul, and Godlike reigns alone

Now I shall prove the Ambassador a Villain,
I saw the letter which disclosed the Plot
Of the Helots to the Ephori, and know the hand
To be one of his Secretaries; I'm glad
The Design's prevented, but I fear 'twill
Bring on a worse; if Pausanias will hear me
He must resent the Fact. --
Then for Pandora here, I'll Feign to love her still
Appoint my Lodgings as the meeting place
Then bring Pausanias to find her Falsehood;
Help me ye Powers, who Watch for Sparta's good,
That I may save him from their Cursed wiles
Restore him to his Country's Interest.
With all the Eagerness of panting Hearts,
I come, to bless my Eyes, my every sense.
Ages methinks are past, and Wracks Iv'e felt,
Since the Ambassador did send me hence

Love has a Thousand Thousand joys in store
And Coveting is still possessing more,
A Thousand Raptures he is pleased to give,
And show by Dying what it is to Live.

Pardon me Madam pardon what is past,
Pardon an unexperienc't Youth, and Love,
I'll soon recover what I dully Lost,
Thus Pleased, thus Charmed, the Rival of the Gods
I'm more than Mortal something more than Man
While thus I hold my Goddess in my Arms.

She's yours Argilius, all, she all is yours,
Preserve your Conquest still with kindness thus
With Freedom I have often owned my Love,
Too Powerful to strive against, or Hide,
And 'tis my greatest Pleasure that you know
What to the World were shame.

This, this I know, the Hours
Shall wait to see our Joys, the Nights
Shall linger with delight, as loath to rob us
Of even a Minutes Pleasure; a week with us
Shall be a Year, an Age, to other Lovers.

Let us retire, least we be over heard.

When shall I then be Happy?
Let but that be fixed Before I go.

Must you then go First?

The Regent has Commanded my Attendance,
This Minute he expects me, tell me where, and when.

You must not fail with him, my Lodgings
Are not safe, I'll come to yours.

At Eight my Life I will not fail to meet you,
The doors shall be unlocked.

Agreed, then we will talk again, of Love.

We'll do, as Love and you inspire, I know
Not how to leave you, what a tedious hour 'twill be,
Would it were come.

Time now appears our greatest Enemy,
We wish him gon; anon he'll be our Friend,
And we shall wish his stay, 'tis but an hour,
Yet we may take a pledge for meeting.

This, and this, and this --

Nay now you're lavish --

The store can never never wast, while you
Still feed desire. Now we will know no bounds,
No regulation in our Pleasures now.

Curse on the cause that calls you thus away,
Methinks the Regent might not want you, stay:
Prudence is a Fool, in Love; yet Jealosies a Foe
That may pursue us, therefore quickly go,
Absence like sullen night, darkens the joyful day,

Return, like rising beams, will chase those fogs away.

HEre's the reward of all my Faithful Service,
Cruel Pausanias, how shall I forbear,
To load thee with Deserved reproaches?
Yet still I love thee, and will show it too,
A hard necessity promotes my Death,
Were I a Villain, this way I should not dye.
Ambition causing Us t'expose our Friends,
Makes me a Victim to unlawful Ends.
Why should he shun me? why withdraw alone?
I will observe him farther --

These Letters full of Impious guilt,
I am to bear to Xerxes, th'imployment has
Ever been fatal to the Messengers,
And must be so to me. Sure I might hope,
In things of small import, to have bin spared;
Then these contain great, universal Ill,
Where the best Friend, must give the first Example.

Letters! and Xerxes!

O Sparta! I with Joy could loose my Life
To save thee; but horrid destiny, brings with my death
Thy fall; yet I could save 'em both, and with
A just Revenge, defeat the black design, --
These, these would do it, thy Life Pausanias
Is Safe no longer, then I keep these Concealed,
Pausanias Life! no, that is still so dear
I could even wish his Villainies success.
What is the World to me when I am gon?
I Live for him: The Gods must look to Sparta,
Then vanish all ye anxious cares, I'll go,
My part I justly in obeying show.
What makes me thus! unusual tremblings seize me!
And now methinks my Mothers bleeding Ghost
Stands in the passage, and forbids my way,
Calling me Traitor -- so, she's, gone again --
How can this be? am I a Traitor then?
All, all are so, Villains, and Traitors all,
Who wound their Country's Peace, and drink her Blood,
Who is the common Mother of us all!
Villains, and Traitors all, who see the Sword
At their dear Country's throat, and not disarm,
And Stab its Rage through the Oppressors Heart.

Now is my time --

What Torments must, they feel in the next World
Who help the Cursed deed? Must I be One?
Cursed here through a Posterity Enslaved,
By my means? And doubly damned in Hell?
Oh ye Just Gods assist! --

The Gods by me are ready --

Oh Heavens! Madam let me entreat, give back
What you have taken, they're Letters to the Mistress
Of my Heart, derected in unusual Names,
Indicted with unusual Terms,
Which were Concerted, to deceive the Jealous.

No good Argilius no, I've heard your Plaint,
And know what I have got, ungrateful Son,
Traitor to every thing, now he is so to you,
Could not such Virtue breed remorse in him?
Unhappy Youth, thy Fortune I deplore,
I know so great's thy Love, thy Care is more,
Yet be advised, you my protection have,
I'll keep you safe, while base Pausanias,
Finds his deserved Fate.

O! rather let the Sentence fall on Me.
I own the Letters, all the Practices
Of their Contents: You found 'em in my hands,
I own 'em all. Pausanias is abused,
And I the guilty Villain fit to Fall.

Charge not your self unjustly.

What shall I do? what will he think of Me!
I'll go to him, tell him I have Betrayed him,
Urge him with all my Power to take my Life!
But I'm Unworthy of a Death from Him.
O! spare Pausanias: spare my Honoured Lord:
The Seat of Mercy is a Mothers Breast.
You cannot, Oh, you must not see him fall,
Your only Son, the Glory of your Blood,
Think on his Actions past: He's still the same.
The Ambassador alone is here concerned
And I will prove it, give me but the time.

Miraculous Friendship! I would calm his mind
And manage these with the best Arts I can:
I'll send him to Neptunes Temple,
There he is safe, Pausanias there will meet him,
The Ephori shall over-hear 'em then:
That will be proof, I hope if these are not.
You charge the Ambassador, I shall be glad if
You can make it good.
In the mean time, that He may think you gon,
Retire to Neptunes Temple, there take Sanctuary,
To save you from his malice when he hears
Himself accused, for he is Treach'rous,
And by your Death, may smother Evidence,
And then he leaves my Son to Answer All.

Madam I go, and If I do not prove
What I have said; Expose me to his Rage.
Yet I may save my Friend.

Blessed be the immortal Powers that sent me hither,
Now I have proof which I so long have feared.
Let me see, both to Xerxes -- This is my Son's,
This hand unknown -- My curiosity
Shall be the excuse, I'll open this --
Oh 'tis Signed Artabazus. Most mighty most Illustrious, and above all Princes
Great and happy Xerxes, your Slave has with unwearied pains and diligence,
pursued the matters given him in trust, and has at last prevailed upon
Pausanias to send for thy invincible Army, as soon as he shall have don what is
expected from him, he shall suffer the same fate this Messenger must, that
Xerxes may rise the sole Soverain of Greece, to whom all Nations be Subjected;
Artabazus.
Brave Villain! And thou Fool Pausanias,
Alas! why have I lived to see thy ruin?
My peaceful Ashes undisturbed had lain,
And in the Grave I had not cursed thy Birth;
Some other then might have performed this task,
Which tears a Mothers Soul.
Now I find out why this Solemnity,
Neptune must be implored with Sacrifice
To bring the Persian Fleet, and Army safe;
Can then Religion serve such Impious ends!
Nature be gon, here I disclaim my Blood,
Incorrigible to a Mothers council,
Often forgiven, still Engaged in Ill,
A spreading Gangrene to his Royal Stem,
And must be fevered to redeem the whole;
I will assert the Glory of his Ancestors,
Which he thus seeks to tarnish.
Alas, in vain such black Designs are laid,
Thousands of Noble Souls defend our Sparta,
Unconquered Hearts, disdaining Slavish Rule,
And the attempt is ever fatal: O ye Immortal Gods!
Laugh not at humane Misery, but renew our Hopes,
Let us convince the World you made us free,
And yet uncancel'd stands that first Decree.

PRepare, prepare, a Solemn Sacrifice prepare,
Prepare we to appease,
The powerful God of the Seas.

Hear, Mighty Neptune hear.

Let the Billows cease to roar,
Smooth and silent be the shore,
Save, and conduct our hopes, while we adore.

Hear, mighty Neptune hear.
From Crystal Throne adorned with Pearl, receive
Our humble Vows, and thy Protection give.

While blustering Winds do thee obey,
No Storms can e're enrage the Sea,
For gentle lucky gales we Pray.

Hear, mighty Neptune hear,
From Crystal Throne adorned with Pearl, receive
Our humble Vows and thy Protection give.

Glory attend each filling Sail,
May Sailors Courage never fail,
Let the merry Victors go*
Destroy the treacherous Foe.
Increase our Trafick, and our gain,
On equal Terms, we never fear,
We will be Masters every where,
And Triumph ore the Main.

Increase our Trafick, c.

Ha -- withdraw a while.

You must not wonder Sir to see me here,
Believe me true, I never will betray you,
I hope this Accident will give me opportunity,
To serve you more than ever --

I doubt you are too busy grown Argilius,
I thought you would have bin by me Directed,
But you turn Politician.

May the Great Deity within these Walls adored.
Pursue me with his utmost Wrath, if I
Have failed, or did Design to fail your Orders,
Unlucky Chance brought Anchilthea to me.

What? then my Mother has prevailed with you,
Take heed Argilius.

Going from you with full Intent to hast
On Shipboard, she came into your Antechamber
Unseen, and snatched the Letters from my Hands.

'Tis Mighty well, go on;

I Feigned, beseech't her to restore 'em,
But in Vain, she Threatened all that's Dear to me,
Your Life, I proffered mine* Happy if she
Had taken my Life then I conjured her, by
A Mothers name by Pity, still unmoved:
'Till at the last I said the Ambassador
Was guilty, and that I'd prove he only was
Concerned; let me, my Lord, charge him alone,
And then you will be free, he and Pandora,
Design your ruin, that too I can make clear,
Let me my Lord, O let me prove 'em false;
By the advice of Anchilthea, I here
Took Sanctuary, that I might clear my points
With safety. She consented to this manner.

This Indefatigable Mother is
In every Place -- I shall out-wit her yet --
Without more proof, then this, I cannot fall
Some of the Ephori I know my Friends --
If they were all my Enemies Declared,
I fear 'em not; proceeding, as they must,
In Lazy methods, and unactive Forms --
One of my Rank, and Interest cannot Want
The means to baffle Justice, and delay --
At last I have recourse to Bribery:
And I have past a Senseless Life at Court,
If I should ask whose hands are to be filled:
I know my Men, they won not fail their Fee:
This way I would not have thee Take,
Thou ever kind and ever Dear Argilius.
I have no time to Write, I can trust Thee,
Proceed with hast to Rhodes, there you'll find Xerxes,
Greet him from Me, and tell him all is Ready:
I with impatience shall attend his Forces
Be speedy, and be all my Fortune thine.

I never yet desputed your Commands,
I go, though I could wish you had not sent me.
Yet give me leave once to embrace your Knees,
I know my Fate, and from your mouth 'tis easy,
Farewell farewell may you be happy long:
And all your Friends be Faithful found, like Me.

Where are our Guards?

Ha! This from thee dissembling Traitor -- go,
Take thy Reward then.

O horrid Fact!

I come to Acquaint your Lordships the Princess
Anchilthea has been Saved by Miracle.
Coming to the Temple through the Crowded streets,
The Persian Woman, Pandora she is called,
Did like a Fury rush upon her?
And she as Bravely did Defend her self,
Wresting the Dagger from the Traitoress hands,
And plunged it in the Conquered Strumpets Heart.

She has met a nobler Fate than she deserved.
She should have died with Puplick infamy.

Now hope we better days, and for the Persian,
We will employ our utmost force against him.
The Ambassador shall bear the News,
He must depart to Night.

We Spartans will preserve Our Freedom still,
And drive their big swoln Navy from our Coasts,
They shall once more find Us their Conquerors.

Pausanias cannot far escape
Already by our order the Guards are doubled
At the City Gates.

What! is the Traitor gone! And you my Lords,
Are Satisfied? Have you not Proof enough?
For shame Rouse up your Souls: Or are you Bribed
With Persian Gold? The Persians will be kind,
Kind Masters when they come: you will deserve their thanks.

Madam you Charge us too Severely here.

My Lords the Regent's fled to the Temple of Minerva.

Dam up the Temple Gates, there he shall starve:
We must not violate the Holy Altar,
To dragg him thence: but we may shut the doors.

Pausanias as he is of Royal Blood,
We with all Tenderness regard: but now,
His Treason's plain, thanks to the Gods, and You,
Protectress of our Country, his Punishment
Is just, and he shall have it.

Good Heavens! Argilius dead!

Pausanias killed him, as soon as we appeared.

The Temple violated! Murderer of his Friend!
Had he met Me, thus he had served his Mother.
Ah! pitied Youth! Pattern of virtuous Faith!
Thou had been sase, had I not sent thee here.
I did it for the best -- yet the last rights,
Thy Funeral Obsequies I will perform,
My Son forgot, and only Mourn for thee.
Inhumane, Barbarous Pausanias!
But acts like these, are Trifles to such Traitors.
The fearful Sinner, trembling at the first
New fault, believes himself for ever cursed:
Finding no Punishment, he ventures in,
Till by degrees he's quite immerg'd in Sin:
His Pleasure now, which had his Horror bin.
Thus, when with hardened guilt, good Principles are gone,
Millions of blackest Crimes urge one another on.


