What Lady Contemplation, musing by your self alone?


Lady Visitant, I would you had been ten miles off, rather than to have broken
my Contemplation.


Why, are you so godly, to be so serious at your Devotion?


No faith, they were Contemplations that pleased me better than Devotion could
have done; for those that contemplate of Heaven, must have death in their mind.


O no, for there is no Death in Heaven to disturb the joys thereof.


But we must dye before we come to receive those joys; and the terrifying
thoughts of Death, take away the pleasing thoughts of Heaven.


Prithee let me know those pleasing thoughts.


I did imagine my self such a Beauty, as Nature never made the like, both for
Person, Favour, and Colour, and a Wit answerable to my Beauty, and my Breeding
and Behaviour answerable to both, my Wisdom excelling all: And if I were not
thus as I say, yet that every one should think I were so; for opinion creates
more, and perfecter Beauties, than Nature doth. And then that a great powerful
Monarch, such a one as Alexander, or Caesar, fell desperately in love with me,
seeing but my Picture, which was sent all about the world; yet my Picture (I
did imagine) was to my disadvantage, not flattering me any ways; yet this
Prince to be enamoured with this shadow for the substance sake: Then Love
persuaded him to send me his Picture, which represented him to the life, being
extremely handsome, yet had a manly and wise countenance. This Picture being
brought by Ambassadors, which Ambassadors when they came, treated with me
about marriage with this sole Emperor, all other Kings and Princes being but
Tributaries; receiving these Ambassadors with great civility and respect, yet
behaving my self with a reserved and Majestic behaviour, which the
Ambassadors observing, said, I was the only Lady that was fit to be the only
Emperors wife, both for my Beauty, Carriage, and Wit: When after a modest
Fear, and seeming Humility, I had reasoned against the marriage, at last by
their persuasion I consented; then was there Post after Post, and Messenger
after Messenger, sent with letters from the Emperor to me, and from me to the
Emperor; he admiring my letters, for the elegancy of the stile, and eloquency
of the wit, and admiring my Picture for the beauty; one while reading my
letters, and another while viewing my Picture, made him impatient for my
Company, which made him send to his Ambassadors, that with all speed they
should bring me away, sending to all the Princes whose Kingdoms I was to pass
thorough, that they should guard me with Armies, but not retard me with Olimpias,
or the like, but to convey me safe and speedily: Whereupon I took my Journey
(most of the Kingdom where I was born petitioning to wait on me); but by
reason I could not take them all, unless I should depopulate the Kingdom, I
would carry none, lest I should displease those that were to be left behind;
but as I went out of the City where I dwelt, all the streets were strewed with
dead Lovers, which had lived only on hopes, so long as I lived amongst them:
But when they knew for certain I was to depart, their hopes vanished, and they
dyed with despair. The Ambassadors seeing such a Mortality, caused the Army
that was my guard to march apace, and my Coaches to trundle away, thinking it
was the Plague; but at last, after my Beauty had killed millions in the
Kingdoms I passed thorough, I arrived at that part of the world where the
Emperor was, who was a joyed man to hear of my coming, and had made great
preparations against my arrival; but some few days before my arrival, he sent
a Chariot which was made of the thinnest plated gold, because it should be
light in the Carriage, but the body of the Chariot was enamelled and set with
precious stones, the Horses trappings were only great Chains of pearls, but the
horses reigns were Chains of gold, that might be strong enough to check their
hot Spirits, and swift speed; as for my self, I was only clothed in white
Satin, and a Crown of Diamonds on my head, like a Bride, for I was to be
married as soon as I met the Emperor; but as I past along, all the Highwayes
were beset with Crowds of people, which thronged to see me, and when they saw
me, they cried out I was an Angel sent from the Gods; but your coming spoiled
the Triumph, and brake the Marriage.


No. no it is retarded for a time, the next musing Contemplation the marriage
Nuptial will be.


If you had not come and hindered me, I should have gover'nd all the world
before I had left off Contemplating.


But if you make such hast to be at the Government of the whole world, you
would want a Theme for your thoughts to work upon, for you can aim at no more
than all the world.


O yes, rather than fail I would make new worlds, but this will last me a long
time in showing you what wise Laws I make, what upright Justice I give,
ordering so, as the whole world should be as one united Family; and when I had
showed my wisdom in Peace, then my thoughts should have raised Wars, wherein
I would have showed my valour and conduct.


Prithee be not so imprudent to cast away precious time, and to bury thy life
in fantasms.


Why prithee, they manage time best, that please life most; For it were better
not to be, than to be displeased; for there is none that truly lives, but those
that live in pleasure, the greatest pleasure is in the imagination not in
fruition; for it is more pleasure for any person to imagine themselves Emperor
of the whole world, than to be so; for in imagination they reign Rule, without
the troublesome and weighty cares belonging thereto; neither have they those
fears of being betrayed or usurped as real Emperors have; Besides, the whole
general Race of Man-kind, may this way be the particular Emperor of the whole
World, if they will; but those that desire to be Emperors any other ways,
have but sick judgements, for the mind is all, for is that be pleased, man is
happy.


Well, well, I had rather have the Material world, than you Airy Fictions. --
But confess really to me, if you should not think your self accursed if you were
to have no other Lovers, but what your Fancy creates.


No truly, for I finding none so exact as my Fancy creates, makes all men
appear worse than they are: For imagination doth like Painters, which takes all
the gracefullest lines, and exactest Features from two or three good faces, and
draws them into one: this is the reason that there may be handsomer Pictures
drawn, than any Creature born; because, Nature distributes and divides her
Favours, as to the generality, when Painter contract them into particulars; for
there was never any, unless born as a wonder, that hath no exceptions;
besides, my Lovers which my Fancy creates, never make me jealous, nor never
disturb me; come to me, and go from me; speak or are silent as I will have
them, and they are behaved, qualified, and adorned to my humour, also of what
Birth, Age, Complexion, or Stature I like best; thus their persons and souls
are created in my brain, live in my Contemplation, and are dead and buried in
my forgetfulness, but have a Resurrection in my remembrance,


Prithee do not lose the pleasure of the World, for the sake of dull
Contemplation.


Why, the greatest pleasures that can be in Fruition, I take in Imagination:
for whatsoever the sense enjoys from outward objects, they may enjoy in inward
thoughts. For the mind takes as much pleasure in creating of Fancies, as Nature
to create and dissolve, and create Creatures anew: For Fancy is the Minds
creature, imaginations are as several worlds, wherein those Creatures are bred
and born, live and dye; thus the mind is like infinite Nature.


Prithee leave thy infinite folly.


It is my infinite delight.


Madam, why do you weep, and grieve your self almost to death?


Have I not reason? my Father being killed, and I left friendless all alone,
my Mother dying as soon as I was born.


There is no reason you should grieve for your Father, since he dyed in the
defence of his King and Country.


Tis true, and I glory in his valiant loyal Actions, yet I cannot choose but
mourn for the loss of his life, and weep upon his death.


Methinks the greatest cause you have to weep, is, for the loss of your Estate,
which the Enemy hath seized on, and you left only to live on Charity.


I cannot mourn for any thing that is in Fortunes power to take away.


Why? Fortune hath power on all things in the World.


O no, she hath power on nothing but base dross, and outward forms, things
moveable; but she hath neither power on honest hearts, nor noble Souls; for
'tis the Gods infuse grace, and virtue; nor hath she power or Reason, or
Understanding, for Nature creates, and disposes those; nor doth she govern
Wisdom, for Wisdom governs her; nor hath she power on Life and Death, they
are decreed by Heaven.


And will you weep at Heavens decree?


The Heavens decrees hinder not humanity, nor natural affection.


Well, ever since your Mother dyed, I have governed your Fathers House, and
pleased him well; but since he is killed, and that there is nothing for me to
govern, I will take my leave of you and seek another place; and I hope fortune
will favour me so as to direct me to some Widower, or old Bachelor, which
desires a comely huswifly woman to order their private affairs.


I wish you all happiness, and if I were in a condition, I would make you a
present.


Sir, My Lord is so busy since his Fathers Death, with Stewards, Attorneys, and
such like, about ordering his Estate, as I am loath to disturb him; but as soon
as he hath done speaking to them, I will wait upon you to my Lord.


Sir, I shall wait my Lords leisure.


Sir, what pretty young Lady is that which passes by?


She is a great Heiress, and was Ward to my old Lord, and he upon his Death-bed
charged his Son my young Lord to marry her.


Surely small persuasions might serve turn; for her Virtue is Rhetoric enough
to persuade, nay to force affection.


Yet my Lord is discontented, he would rather choose for himself, than that his
Father should have chosen for him; for it is the Nature of Mankind to reject
that which is offered, though never so good; and to prize that they cannot get,
although not worth the having.


Of what Quality, of Birth, and Nature, and disposition is she of?


She is Honourably Born, and seems to be of a sweet disposition; but of a
Melancholy Nature.


Sir, my Lord desires the Gentleman would be pleased to walk in.


Lady, what makes you so silently sad?


Pardon me Sir, I am not sad at this time, for my thoughts are merry, and my
spirits lively.


There is no appearance of mirth in you, for mirth hath always a dancing heel,
a singing voice, a talking tongue, and a laughing face.


I have such merry Companions sometimes; but I seldom dance, sing, talk, or
laugh my self.


Where are those Companions? I desire to be acquainted with them, and keep them
Company.


You cannot keep them Company, for the place they inhabit in, is too little for
your Corporal body to enter; besides, they are so curious, choice, and nice
Creatures, as they will vanish at the very sight of you.


Why Lady, I am none of the biggest sized Men, nor am I of a terrible aspect; I
have seen very fine and delicate Creatures.


But you never saw any of these Creatures.


Pray where do they dwell, and what are their Names? I long to visit them.


They dwell in my head, and their Surnames are called thoughts; but how you
will visit them I cannot tell, but they may visit you.


Faith Lady, your relation hath made me despair of an interview, but not a
friendly entertainment, if you please to think well of me.


Thoughts are free, and for the most part they censure according to fancy.


Then fancy me such a one, as you could like best, and love most.


That I cannot do, for I love those best which I create my self, and Nature
hath taught me to prize whatsoever is my own most, although of smaller value,
than what's another, although of greater worth.


Then make me yours, by creating me anew.


That is past my skill; but if you will leave me alone, I will think of you
when you are gone; for I had rather of the two entertain you in my thoughts,
than keep you Company in discourse; for I am better pleased with a solitary
silence, or a silent solitariness, than with a talking conversation, or an
entertaining talking, for words for the most part are rather useless spent,
than profitably spoke, and time is lost in listening to them, for few tongues
make Music, wanting the Cords of Sense, or sound of Reason, or singers of
Fancy, to play thereon.


But you will injure your wit, to bury your wit in solitary silence.


Wit lives not on the tongue, as language doth, but in the brain, which power
hath, as Nature, to create.


But those are aerie not material Creatures.


'Tis true, but what they want in substance, they have in variety; for the
brain can create Millions of several Worlds filled full of several Creatures,
and though they last not long, yet are they quickly made, they need not length
of time to give them form and shape.


But there is required Speech to express them, or they are made in vain, if not
divulged.


Speech is an enemy to Fancy; for they that talk much, cannot have time to
think much; and Fancies are produced from thoughts, as thoughts are from the
mind, and the mind which doth create the thoughts, and the thoughts the
fancies, is as a Deity; for it entertains it self with it self, and only takes
pleasure in its own works, although none other should partake, or know thereof;
but I shall talk a World out of my head, wherefore farewell.


Now your Estate is seized on, you have not means to keep a Servant, as to pay
them for their service.


No truly Nan, but that which grieves me most, is, that I have not wherewithal
to reward thee for thy past service.


I have served you these seven years, and have had nothing but my bare wages,
unless it were some of the worst of your cast Clothes; for Mrs. Governess took
order I should have none of the best; but I hope you will pay me my half years
wages that is due to me.


Truly Nan I am not able, for not only my Estate, but all the Money, Jewels,
Plate, and other goods you know was seized on, all that my Father left, or had
a right to, unless it were my single self; and if you will take my service for
half a year for payment, I will be very honest, dutiful, and diligent.


No by my troth, for you have been bred with so much attendance, curiosity, and
plenty, as you will rather prove a charge than a payment; but if you can get
means by your youth, and beauty, I shall come and claim what is owing me.


When I am able you shall not need to challenge it; for I will pay you before
you ask.


Why weepst thou old Humanity?


For the ruin of your noble family. I came a boy to your Grandmother the great
and rich Lady Natures service, she being then newly married to your Grandfather
the Lord Propriety; from whence sprung your Father the Lord Morality; your
Grandfather, and Grandmother dying, I served your Father, who soon after
married your Mother the Lady Piety, they living, whilst she lived, with Peace
and Tranquillity; but she dying, left you only to your Father, as a pledge of
their loves; and indeed, you are so like them both, as all must confess they
were your Parents, although they knew not your Birth; and yet none can tell
which you resembled most: thus have I lived to see your Grandfather, and
Grandmother, and Father, and Mother dead, and Peace, and Tranquillity fled; and
you sweet Virtue left dessolate and forlorn, both of friends and fortune; but
sweet Lady comfort your self, for I have a little fortune, which I got honestly
in your Fathers service; and as long as that lasts you shall not want.


I thank you, but you are old Humanity, and ready to go upon Crutches, and age
and infirmities are shiftless; wherefore keep it for thy own use.


Why, so is unexperienced youth, both shiftless, and strengthless.


Tis true, yet youth hath an increasing advantage; for time carries youth up,
but time pulls Age down; wherefore I will not take that from thee, that will
cause thee to be the poorer, or hazard you to want; I shall only desire your
advise, what I shall do, and what course I shall follow.


Alas sweet Lady, necessity will drive you into many extremities.


I shall have fortitude to arm me; but what Counsel will you give me?


The best way for you will be to get into some great Ladies service, and in
such a place or office as to attend upon her Person, there you may live with
honour and respect.


I had rather shrow'd my honest Poverty in a thatched house, than live in a
Palace to be pointed at for my misfortunes; for in this Age, misfortunes are
accounted crimes, and poverty is condemned as a thief, and hanged in the Chains
of scorn; wherefore if I could get a service in an honest poor Farmers house, I
might live happy, as being most obscure from the World, and the Worlds Vices;
for vice increases more in Palaces than in Cottages; for in Palaces Pride
Plows, Faction Sows, Riot Reaps, Extortion Threshes, Covetousness Whoords up
the grain or gain; there youth is corrupted with Vanity, Beauty caught with
Flattery, Chastity endangered with Power, and Virtue slandered by Envy;
besides, great Persons use their Servants too unequally, making them either
Masters, or Slaves; where in an humble Cottage the industrious, and laborious
Masters command their Servants friendly and kindly, and are obeyed with love;
wherefore good Humanity, seek me out such a Place to live in, to serve.


I will, for I will never forsake you as long as I live, or at least so long as
I have legs to go.


When you cannot visit me, I will visit you, for I shall never be ungrateful.


Sir Experience Traveller, you that have been so great a traveller, pray tell
me what Nations have the rarest Beauties, and which the greatest Wits?


In all my travels, the rarest Beauty that I have seen, and the greatest Wit
that I have heard of, is your self, sweet Lady Conversation.


Then you have lost your labour; for you might have seen my Beauty, and have
heard my Wit, at less Charges, and more ease.


Tis true Madam, had I only travelled to see a fair Lady, and hear a witty
discourse.


Why, many travel to less purpose.


Tis true Madam, for some travel merely to learn to make a leg or congy with a
good grace, and to wear their clothes, or acouster themselves fashionably. But
I have observed in my travels, that very cold Countries, and very hot
Countries, have neither so many Beauties, nor so much Wit, at lest not so much
as more temperate Countries have.


What is the reason of that?


I cannot conceive the reason, unless the extreme coldness of the Climate
should congele their Spirits, and stupefy their Brains, making the Spirits
unactive to get, and the Brain too barren to breed and bear Wit.


So then you make the Spirits and the Brain the Parents to Wit.


Yes Madam.


And what reason give you for the scarcity of Beauties in very cold Climates?


Beauty, Madam, is as tender and fading in the growth, as a Flower, although it
be fresh and sweet; and the more delicate it is, the more subject to be nipped
with the hard Frost, and to be withered with raw colds.


Then hot Countries should produce good store.


No Madam, for extreme heat dries up Wit, as water in a Spring, and Sun-burns
beauty.


But hot Brains are thought to produce the greatest VVits.


Yes, if they be equally tempered with moisture; for as heat in moisture are
Generators of all Creatures, so of Wit; but if the moisture exceed the heat,
the Brain, or Mind becomes stupid, if the heat exceeds the moisture, the Brain
or Mind becomes mad.


What Nation hath the best Language?


There are but three commendable things in Language, those are to be
significant, copious, and smooth, and the English tongue hath the perfection of
all, there being an oil, or butter made of the cream of all other Languages.
Thus, what with the Temperature of the Climate, and the soft, smooth, spreading
Language, England produces rarer Beauties, and eloquenter Orators, and finer
Poets, than any other Nation in the world; and the Nobility and Gentry live not
only in greater grandeur, than in other Nations, but naturally appear or look
with a more splendid Greatness.


Tis true, they did so in former times, when the Crown kept up Ceremony, and
Ceremony the Crown; but since that Ceremony is down, their grandeur is lost,
and their splendour put out; and no light thereof remains: But they are covered
with a dark rudeness, wherein the Clown justles the Lord, and the Lord gives
the way to the Clown; the Man takes the wall of his Master, and the Master
scrapes legs with Cap in hand to the Servant, and waits upon him, not out of a
generous and noble Nature, but out of a base servile fear, and through fear
hath given the Power away.


I am sorry to hear the Nobility is so degenerated.


I wonder your Lordship should be so troubled at your Fathers commands, which
was to marry the Lady Ward, unless she had been ill-favoured and old.


O that's the misery! that she is so young, For I had rather my Father had
commanded me to marry one that had been very old, than one that is so young;
for if she had been very old, there might have been some hopes of her death;
but this young Filly will grow upon me, not from me; besides, those that are
young give me no delight, their Company is dull.


Why, she is not so very young, she is fifteen years of Age.


Give me a Lady to embrace about the years of twenty, rather than fifteen; then
is her Beauty like a full-blown Rose in June, her Wit like fruit is ripe and
sweet, and pleasant to the ear; when those of fifteen are like to green sharp
Fruit, not ripened by the Sun of Time. Yet that's not all that troubles me; but
I cannot endure to be bound in VVedlocks shackles, for I love variety, and hate
to be tied to one.


Why, you may have the more variety by marrying.


No faith, 'tis a Bar; for if I should but kiss my wives Maid^ which a
thousand to one but I shall, my wife, if she doth not beat her Maid, making a
hideous noise, with scoldings, yet she will pour, and cry, and feign her self
sick, or else she would Cuckold me, and then I am paid for all.


Faith my Lord, it is a hundred to one but a man when he is married shall be
Cuckolded, were he as wife as Solomon, as valiant as David, as fortunate as
Caesar, as witty as Homer, or as handsome as Absalom; for Women are of the same
Nature as men, for not one man amongst a thousand makes a good Husband, nor one
woman amongst a thousand makes an honest Wife.


No saith, you might well have put another Cipher and made it ten thousand.


Well my Lord, since you must marry, pray let me counsel you: This Lady Ward
being very young, you may have her bred to your own Humour.


How is that?


Why, accustom her to your ways before you marry her; let her see your
several Courtships to several Mistresses, and keep wenches in your house; and
when she is bred up to the acquaintance of your customs, it will be as natural
to her.


What, to be a whore?


No, to know your humours, and to be contented thereat.


Well, I will take your advice, although it is dangerous: And as the old
saying is, the Medicine may prove worse than the disease.


Why, the worst come to the worst, it is but parting.


You say true; but yet a divorce will not clearly take off the disgrace of a
Cuckold.


I have found out a service, a Farmer which hath the report of an honest
labouring man, and his wife a good huswifely woman; they have only one
daughter about your years, a pretty Maid truly she is, and seems a modest one;
but how you will endure such rough and rude work, which perchance they will
employ you in, I cannot tell, I doubt you will tire in it.


Do not fear, for what I want in strength, my industry shall supply.


But you must be fitted with clothes according, and proper to your service.


That you must help me to.


That I will.


Sweet Lady Contemplation, although your thoughts be excellent, yet there are
fine curiosities and sweet pleasures to be enjoyed in the use of the world.


Perchance so, but would not you think that man a Fool that hath a great
estate, a large convenient house, well situated, in sweet and healthful Air,
pleasant and delightful, having all about for the eyes to view Landscapes, and
Prospects; beside, all the inside richly furnished, and the Master plentifully
served, and much company to pass his time with, as a resort of men of all
Nations, of all Ages, of all qualities or degrees, and professions, of all
humours, of all breedings, of all shapes, of all complexions: Likewise a
recourse for all Wits, for all Scholars, for all Arts, for all Sciences; Also
Lovers of all sorts Servants of all use, and employments; Thus living
luxuriously with all rarities and varieties, and yet shall go a begging,
debasing himself with humble crouching, inslaving himself to Obligations,
living upon cold Charity, and is denied often times unkindly, or kicked out
scornfully, when he may be honoured at home, and served in state, would not you
think that this man had an inbred baseness, that had rather serve unworthily,
than command honourably; that had rather be enslaved, than free? Besides, that
mind is a fool that cannot entertain it self with it's own thoughts; a wandering
Vagabond, that is never, of seldom at home in Contemplation; A Prodigal to
cast out his thoughts vainly in idle words, base to enslave it self to the
Body, which is full of corruption, when it can create bodiless Creatures like
it self in Corporalities; with which self Creatures, it may nobly, honestly,
freely, and delightfully entertain it self. With which, the mind may not only
delight it self, but improve it self; for the thoughts, which are the actions
of the mind, make the soul more healthful and strong by exercises; for the mind
is the souls body, and the thoughts are the actions thereof.


After what manner will you form this Body?


Thus, Understanding is the Brain, Reason the Liver, Love is the heart, Hate
the Spleen, Knowledge the Stomach, Judgement the Sinews, Opinions the Bones,
Will the Veins, Imaginations the Blood, Fancy the Spirits, the Thoughts are
the Life, and Motion, or the Motions of the Life, the outward Form is the Mind
it self, which sometimes is like a Beast, sometimes like a Man, and sometimes
like a God.


And you my fair Goddess.


My Lord, you are too covetous to take a wife merely for her riches.


Believe me Madam, I do esteem of such Riches as Money, as I do of Marriage,
and in my nature I do hate them both; for a man is enslaved by either:
wherefore I would shun them if I could, and turn them out of doors, but that
some sorts of necessity and convenience enforce me to entertain them; the one
for Posterity sake, the other for subsistence of present life, besides
convenient pleasures.


The Lady Ward, who is to be your wife, seems of a very dull disposition.


She is so, but I like her the better for that, for I would have a deadly dull
Wife, and a lively Mistress, such a sprightly Lady as you are.


In truth my Lord, I am of a melancholy Nature.


Certainly Madam, you only know the Name, not the Nature, for your Nature is
always fresh, and sweet, and pleasant, as the Spring.


O no, my mind is like to Winter, and my thoughts are numb and cold.


If your thoughts were so cold, your words would be as if they were frozen
between your lips, all your discourse would melt by drops, not flow so smoothly
and swiftly into men's ears, as they at all times do.


Tis true, I am merry when I am in your company, but in your absence I am as
dull as a cloudy day, and as melancholy as dark night.


I cannot believe so well of my self, as that my company can be the light of
your mirth, but I know that your company is the Sun of my life, nor could I
live without it.


This is a barren Country, for in all this progress I have not seen a pretty
Country wench.


Nor I.


Nor I.


If an person can tell, it is Tom Purveyer.


Now Tom Purveyer, are there no pretty wenches in this part of the Country?

Yes that there are, an it please your Lordship, and not far off, two as pretty
wenches as are in the Kingdom, and no dispraise to the rest.


Where? where?


Hard by here, at a Farmers House, the one is his Daughter, the other is his
Servant-Maid.


Prithee Tom show us the house.


Not all at once; but one after another.


Nay faith Tom, let us all see them at once; but we will Court them apart.


Content.


What is the reason that Mercury is feigned to be the patron of Thieves?


That is to be the patron of Scholars, for Scholars are the greatest Thieves,
stealing from the Authors they read, to their own use.


And why are Scholars counted the greatest Thieves?


Because that they steal the Spirits, or life of renown, out of the treasury of
Fame; when all other sorts of Thieves steal but the goods of Fortune, which is
nothing but a Corporal dross.


And why is he feigned the talkative God?


Because Scholars talk more than other men, and most commonly so much, as they
will let none speak but themselves; and when there is a Company of Scholars
together, they will be so fierce in disputes, as they will be ready to go to
cuffs for the Prerogative of their opinion.


The Prerogative of the tongue you mean; but why are Scholars apt to talk most?


Because they overcharge their heads with several Authors, as Epicures do their
Stomachs with variety of meats, and being overcharged, they are forced to vent
it forth through the mouth, as the other through the gut; for the tongue, as a
Feather, tickles the throat of Vainglory, vomiting out the slime of Learning,
into the ears of the hearers; but some heads, as Stomachs which are naturally
weak, are so grip'd, by reason it doth not digest well, as they vent nothing
but windy Phrases; and other brains which are hot and moist, by reason of a
facil memory, digest so fast, as they do nothing but purge loose Sentences;
and other brains that are too dry and Incipid, are so costive, as their
restringency strains out nothing but strong lines.


What is that, Non-sense?


Indeed they are hard words without sense.


What makes a good Poet?


A quick Fancy.


What makes a good Orator?


A ready Tongue.


What makes a good Physician?


Much Practice.


What makes a good Divine?


A Holy Life.


What makes a good States-Man?


Long experience, great observance, prudent industry, ingenuous wit, and
distinguishing judgment.


What makes a good Soldier?


Change of Fortune, Courage, Prudence, and Patience.


What makes a good Courtier?


Diligence, Flattery, and time-serving.


What makes a good Prince, or Governor?


Justice, Clemency, Generosity, Courage, and Prudence mixed together.


What makes a good Woman?


A Poet.


Why a Poet?


By reason the Poetical wits convert their natural defects into sweet graces,
their follies to pure innocencies, and their Vices into Heroic Virtues.


By these descriptions, you make as if women were more obliged to Poets than to
Nature.


They are so; for where Nature, or Education, makes one good, or beautiful
Woman, Poets make ten; besides, Poets have not only made greater numbers of
beautiful women, but perfecter beauties than ever Nature made.


Then let me tell you, that women make Poets; for women kindle the masculine
brains with the fire of Love, from whence arises a Poetical flame; and their
Beauty is the fuel that feeds it.


I confess, were there no women, there would be no Poets; for the Muses are of
that Sex.


Truly Husband our Maid Poor Virtue is a very industrious Servant as ever I had
in my life.


Yes wife, but you were angry with me at first because I persuaded you to take
her.


Why, she seemed to be so fine a feat, as I thought she would never have
settled to her work.


Truly Wife, she does forecast her business so prudently, and doth every thing
so orderly, and behaves her self so handsomely, carries her self so modestly,
as she may be a Pattern to our Daughter.


I am a better Pattern my self.


Fair Maid, may I be your Shepherd to attend you.


I am but a single Sheep that needs no great attendance, and a harmless one,
that strayes not forth the ground I am put to feed.


Mistake me not fair Maid, I desire to be your Shepherd, and you my fair
Shepherdess, attending loving thoughts, that feed on kisses sweet, folded in
amorous arms.


My mind never harbors wanton thoughts, nor sends immodest glances forth, nor
will enfold unlawful love, for chastity sticks as fast unto my Soul, as light
unto the Sun, or heat unto the fire, or motion unto life, or absence unto
death, or time unto eternity, and I glory more in being chaste, than Hellen of
her beauty, or Athens of their learning and eloquence, or the Lacedemonions of
their Laws, or the Persians of their Riches, or Greece of their Fables, or the
Romans of their Conquests; and Chastity is more delightful to my mind, than
Fancy is to Poets, or Music to the Ears, or Beauty to the Eyes, and I am as
constant to Chastity, as truth to Unity, and Death to life; for I am as free,
and pure from all unchastity as Angels are of sin.


I wonder not so much at Fortunes gifts, as Natures curiosities, not so much at
Riches, Tittle and power, as Beauty, Wit, and Virtue, joined in one; besides,
she doth amaze me by expressing so much learning, as if she had been taught in
some famous Schools, and had read many histories, and yet a Cottager, and a
young Cottager, tis strange.


My Lord, doth my Counsel take good effect?


Yes faith, for she seems to take it very patiently, or elce she is so dull a
Creature as she is not sensible of any injury that's done her.


How doth she look when you address, and salute your Mistress?


She seems to regard us not; but is as if she were in a deep contemplation of
another world.


I think she is one of the fewest words, for I never heard her speak.


Faith so few, as I am in good hope she is tongue-tyed, or will grow dumb.


That would be such a happiness, as all married men would envy you for.


They will have cause, for there is nothing so tedious as talking women, they
speak so constraintly, and utter their Nonsense with such formality, and ask
impertinent questions so gravely, or else their discourse is snip snap, or so
loud and shrill, as deafs a mans ears, so as a man would never keep them
Company, if it were not for other reasons.


Your Lordship speaks as if you were a woman-hater.


O Pardon me, for there is no man loves the Sex better than I; yet I had rather
discourse with their beauty than their wits; besides, I only speak of
generalities, not particularities.


Lady, pray make me partaker of some of your conceptions.


My conceptions are like the tongue of an extemporary Orator, that after he
hath spoke, if he were to speak upon the same subject he could hardly do it, if
it were not impossible just to speak as he did, as to express the same subjects
in the same expressions, and way of his natural Rhetoric; for the sense may be
the same, but the expressions, way of Rhetoric will hardly be the same; but
'tis likely will be very different, and so differing, as not to be like the
same, but the same premeditated Rhetoric, will many times serve to many
several designs, or preaching, pleading, or speaking, the Theme or cause being
altered; This is the difference betwixt extemporary Oratory, and premeditated
Oratory, the one may be spoke, as many times as an Orator will, and make the
same Oratory serve to many several Subjects; the other being not fixed, but
voluntary, vanishes out of the remembrance, the same many times do my
conceptions.


But I hope all are not vanished, some remain; wherefore pray express or
present any one of your conceptions after what manner of way you please.


Why then I will tell you, I had a conception of a Monster, as a Creature that
had a rational soul, yet was a Fool: It had had a beautiful and perfect shape,
yet was deformed and ill-favoured; It had clear distinguishing senses, and yet
was senseless; It was produced from the Gods, but had the nature of a Devil;
It had an eternal life, yet dyed as a Beast, It had a body, and no body.


What Monster call you this?


I call him Man.


This is a Man of your own conception.


A man of Natures creating is as monstrous for though man hath a rational soul,
yet most men are fools, making no use of their reason; and though Man hath a
beautiful and perfect shape, yet for the most part, they make themselves
deformed and ill-favoured with antic postures, violent passions, or brutish
vices; and man hath clear distinguishing Senses, yet in his sleep, or with
sumes, or drink, he is senseless: Man was produced immediately from the Gods,
yet man being wicked, and prone to evil, hath by evil wickedness the nature of
a Devil; Man 'tis said, shall live for ever, as having an eternal life, yet
betwixt this life and the other, he dyes like a Beast, and turns to dust as
other Creatures do; but the only difference between the man Nature creates, and
the man my Conceptions create is, that Natures man hath a real substance as a
real body; whereas my conceptive man is only an Idea, which is an incorporal
man, so as the body of my concepted man, is as the soul of Natures created man,
an incorporality.





But soft, here's Loves game, and I'll fly at her. Fair One, for so you are.

Truly Sir I am but a Blouse.


Think better of your self, and believe me.


My Father hath told me, I must not believe a Gentleman in such matters.


Why sweetest? I am a Lord.


A Lord; Lord bless your Worship then, but my Father gave me warning of a
Lord, he said they might nay, say and swear too, and do any thing, for they
were Peers of the Realm, there was no meddling with them he said, without a
Rebellion, bless me from a Lord, for it is a naughty thing, as they say, I
know not.


Do you value me so little, when I can make you an Apocryphal Lady?


The Apocrypha forsooth is out of my Book, I have been bred purer than to
meddle with the Apocrypha, the Gods bless us from it, and from all such ill
things.


Well, in short, will you love me?


I am so ashamed to love a Lord forsooth that I know not how to behave my self.


I will teach you.


If your Honour will take the pains to teach a poor ignorant Country Maid, I
will do the best I can to learn forsooth; but will it not be too much pains for
your Honour, do you think?


No no, it will be both for my Honour, and my pleasure, and for the pleasure of
my Honour.


Bless us, how the Lords do. It backward and forward at their pleasure, the
finest that ever was; but what would your Honour have of me?


By this kiss I'll tell you.


O fie, fie, good your Honour, do not scandalize your lips to kiss mine, and
make me so proud as never to kiss our Shepherd again.


No fie.


I will and must kiss you.


Nay, good your Honour, good your Honour.

What are you the better now? But I see there is no denying a Lord, forsooth it
is not civil, and they are so peremptory too, the Gods bless them, and make
them their Servants.


This kiss hath so inflamed me, therefore for Loves sake, meet me in the
Evening, in the Broom close here.


I know the Close forsooth, I have been there before now.


Well, and when we meet I will discover more than yet I have done.


So you had need forsooth, for nothing is discovered yet, either on your side,
or mine, but I will keep my promise.


There spoke my better Angel; so adieu.


An Angel, I will not break my word for two angels, and I hope there will be no
dew neither, God shield you forsooth.


Fair Maid, stay and look upon my person.


Why, so I do.


And how do you like it?


As I like a curious built house, wherein lives a vain and self-conceited
owner.


And are not you in love with it?


No truly, no more than with a pencilled Picture.


Why, I am not painted.


You are by Nature, though not by Art.


And do you despise the best and curiousest Works of Nature?


No, I admire them.


If you admire them, you will admire me, and if you admire me, you will yield
to my desires.


There may be admiration without love, but to yield to your desires, were to
abuse Natures Works.


No, It were to enjoy them.


Nature hath made Reason in man, as well as Sense, and we ought not to abuse
the one, to please the other; otherwise man would be like Beasts, following
their sensualities, which Nature never made man to be; for she created Virtues
in the Soul, to govern the Senses and Appetites of the Body, as Prudence,
Justice, Temperance, and Conscience.


Conscience? What is that, natural fear?


No, it is the tenderest part of the Soul, bathed in a holy dew, from whence
repentant tears do flow.


I find no such tender Constitution, nor moist Complexion in my Soul.


That is, by reason the Fire of unlawful Love hath drunk all up, seared the
Conscience dry.


You may call it what Fire you will, but I am certain it is your Beauty that
kindles it, and your Wit that makes it flame, burning with hot desires.


Pray Heaven my Virtue may quench it out again.


I am sure Nature requires a self-satisfaction, as well as a self-preservation,
and cannot, nor will not be quiet without it, esteeming it beyond life.


I wonder my Lord Courtship, he being counted a wise man; should make me his
Baud, if he intends to make me his Wife, and by my troth Nurse, I am too young
for that grave Office.


How ignorantly you speak Child? it is a sign you have been bred obscurely, and
know little of the world; or rather it proves your Mother dyed before you could
speak, or go, otherwise you would be better experienced in these businesses.


My Mother, Nurse, Heaven rest her soul, she would never have made me a Baud.


No, why then she would not do as most Mothers do now a days; for in this age
Mothers bring up their daughters to carry Letters, and to receive messages, or
at lest to watch at the door left their Fathers should come unawares, and when
they come to make some excuse, and then the Mother laughs, and says her
daughter is a notable witty Girl.


What, for telling a lye?


Yes, when it is told so, as to appear like a truth.


But it is a double fault, as to deceive the Father, and be a Baud to the
Mother.


Why, the Mother will execute the same Office for the daughter when she is
married, and her self grown into years; for from the age of seven or eight
years old, to the time they are married, the Daughter is a Baud to the Mother;
and from the time of their marriage, to the time of their Mothers death, the
Mother is a Baud to the Daughter; but if the Mother be indifferently young, and
hath a young tooth in her head, as the old saying is, they Baud for each other.


But why doth not the Mother Baud for her Daughter, before she is married.


O there is reason for that, for that may spoil her fortune, by hindering her
marriage: for marriage is a Veil to cover the wanton face of adultery, the
like Veil is Baud-mothers, and Baud-daughters; for who would suspect any
lewdness, when the Mother and the Daughter is together?


And are not Sons Pimps for their Fathers, as Daughters are for their Mothers?


No saith, Boys have facility, or ingenuity as Girls have; besides, they are
kept most commonly so strictly to their Books, when Girls have nothing else
to do; but when they have cast away their Books, and come to be married men,
then they may chance to Pimp for their Wives.


O fie Nurse, surely a man will never play the Pimp to Cuckold himself.


O yes, if they be poor, or covetous, or ambitious; and then if they have a
handsome woman to their wife, they will set her as a bait to catch their
designs in the trap of Adultery; or patient, quiet, simple, fearful men will,
if they have a Sprightly wise, they will play the Pimp, either for fear, or
quiet; for such men to such wives, will do any thing to please them, although
it be to Cuckold themselves.


But surely Nurse no Gentleman will do so.


I know not who you call Gentleman, but those that bear up high and look big,
and vant loud, and walk proud, and carry the out-side of a Gentleman, will do
so.


Certainly Nurse they are but Bastard Gentry, or else they are degenerated.


An incipid Branch may spring from a sound Root, many a withered and rotten
Plum may hang on a good Tree.


And do Wives play the Bawds for their Husbands, as the Husbands play the Pimps
for their Wives?


Most often; for they will make Gossiping meetings, on purpose for their
Husbands to Court other women; for they know when their Husbands minds are
filled with amorous love, they will not muse upon their actions, nor examine
their ways; besides, when as the Husband would take his liberty without
disturbance, he will wink at the liberty his wife takes, and so will be
procures for each other, and the Ladies acquaintance are Confidents.


Confidents, what is that, Nurse?


Why it is thus, two Ladies make friendship, or at least call Friends, and if
any man desires to be a Courtly Servant to one of them, he addresses himself to
the other, and expresses what Passions and Affections he hath for her friend,
and so makes his complaints and affections known to her; whereupon she
recommends his addresses and service to her Friend; thus doing a friendly
Office by carrying and declaring his professions, and returning her Friends
civil answers, appointing places for each others love-meetings, the other will
do as much for her.


Why this is a Baud.


O peace Child, for if any body heard you say so, they would laugh at you for a
Fool, but 'tis a sign you never was a Courtier, for I knew a young Lady that
went to Court to be a Maid of Honour; and there were two young Ladies that were
Confidents to each other, and a great Prince made love to one of them, but
adddrest himself to the other, as being her Friend; this young Maid asked why he
did so, it was answered, she was the Princes Mistress Confident; and just as
you ask me, what said she, is a confident a Baud; whereupon the whole Court
laughed at her, and for that only question condemned her to be a very Fool, nay,
a mere Changeling.


Well Nurse, say what you will, Confident is but a Courtly name for a Baud.


Those wandering Stars that shine like brightest day, are fixed on me, the
Center of your love.


O Heavens!


Happy to touch those Lillies in your cheeks mingled with Roses, loves perfumed
bath.


They grow forsooth in our Garden.


You are the Garden of all sweets for love, your blushing lips of the
Vermillion die, and those twin cherries,give me leave to taste.


Truly Sir, I understand no Latin, but I will call our Vicar to you, and he
shall expound.


No dearest Dear, my lovely Dear, my dearest Love, my lovelyest Dear.


I never cost you any thing as yet, Sir.


Why, then no Lady of Arcadie bred.


Truly Sir, this is as our Vicar saith, like Hebrew without points, to be read
backwards; say any thing forward in Notthingham-shire; speak, that I may guess
at, and I will answer your Worship, though truly, it is as fine as ever I
understood not.


Why then sweet heart I love you, and would gladly enjoy you.


O sie, enjoy is a naughty word forsooth, if it please you.


It would please me, your thoughts of what you mince.


Thoughts are free forsooth, and I love whole joints without mincing.


Why then in plain English, I would have your Maiden-head.


O dear, how will you get it, can you tell? Truly, truly, I did not think
such naughty words would come forth of so fine a Gentleman's mouth.


But tell me truly, do you think me fine?


You will make me blush now, and discover all; so fine clothes, the Taylor of
Norton never made such, and so finely made, unbuttoned and untrust doth so
become you; but I do hang down my head for shame; and those Linen Boot-hose
(as if you did long to ride,) do so become you, and your short Coat to hang on
your left arm; O sweet, O sweet, and then your Hat hid with so fine a Feather,
our Peacocks tails are not like it; and then your hair so long, so finely
curled, and powdered in sweets, a sweeter Gentleman I never saw. My love's
beyond dissembling, so young, so fresh, so every thing, I warrant you; O Sir,
you will ravish me, but yet you cannot.


O how you have made me thankfulness all over for this your bounty to me;
wherefore my earthly Paradise, let us meet in the next Close, there under some
sweet Hedge to taste Loves aromatic Banquet at your Table.


O Sir, you blushes I consent; farewell; do not betray me then, you must not
tell.

Farewell my sweetest, granting of my suit,
Shall still enslave me, and be ever mute.

Stay lovely Maid, and receive a Fortune.


I am Fortune proof Sir, she cannot tempt me.


But she may persuade you to reason.


That she seldom doth, for she is always in extremes, and

Extremes are out of Reason's Schools,
That makes all those that follow Fortune Fools.

What do you Rime, my pretty Maid?


Yes Rich Sir, to end my discourse.


I will make you Rich, if you will receive my gifts.


I love not gifts Sir, because they often prove bribes to corrupt.


Why, what do you love then?


I love Truth, Fidelity, Justice, Chastity; and I love obedience to lawful
Authority, which rather than I would willingly and knowingly infring, I would
suffer death.


Are you so wilful?


No, I am so constant.


But young Maid, you ought not to deny all gifts, for there are gifts of pure
affection, Love-gifts of Charity, gifts of Humanity, and gifts of Generosity.


They are due debts, and not gifts; For those you call gifts of pure Love, are
payments to dear deserving friends; and those of Charity are payments to
Heaven; and those of Humanity are payments to Nature, and those Generosity, are
payments to Merit, but there are vain-glorious gifts, covetous gifts, gifts of
fear, and gifts that serve as Bawds to corrupt foolish young Virgins.


Are you so wise to refuse them?


I am so virtuous as not to take them.


What still musing, O thou idle creature?


I am not idle, for I busy my self with my own fancies.


Fancies are like dust, soon raised, and suddenly blown away.


No, they are as fire-works that sparkling fly about; or rather stars, set
thick upon the brain, which gives a twinkling delight unto the mind.


Prithee delight thy friends with thy conversation, and spend not thy time with
dull thoughts.


Pray give me leave to delight my self with my own thoughts, since I have no
discourse to entertain a hearer.


Why, your thoughts speak in your mind, although your tongue keeps silence.


'Tis true; but they disturb not the mind with noise, for noise is the greatest
enemy the mind hath: and as for my part, I think the most useless sense that
Nature hath made, is hearing: the truth is, that hearing and smelling might
well have been spared, for those two senses bring no materials into the brain;
for sound and scent are incorporal.


Then put out all the senses.


There is no reason for that, for the eyes bring in pictures which serve the
mind for patterns to draw new fancies by, and to cut, or carve out figurative
thoughts, and the last serves towards the nourishment of the body, and touches
the life.


But wisdom comes through the ear by instruction.


Wisdom comes through the eye by experience; for we shall doubt of what we
only hear, but never doubt of what we see perfectly: But the ground of wisdom
is Reason, and Reason is born with the soul, wherefore the ear serves only for
reproof, and reproof displeases the mind, and seldom doth the life any good;
nay many times it makes it worse, for the mind being displeased, grows angry,
and being angry, malicious, and being malicious, revengeful, and revenge is
war, and war is destruction.


But if you were deaf, you would lose the sweet harmony of music.


Harmony becomes discord by often repetition, and at the best it doth but rock
the thoughts asleep; whereas the mind takes more pleasure in the harmony of
thoughts, and the music of fancy, than in any that the senses can bring into
it.


Prithee let this harmonious music cease for a time, and let us go and visit
the Lady Conversation.


It seems a strange humour to me, that all mankind in general should have an
itching tongue to talk, and take more pleasure in the wagging thereof, than a
beggar in scratching where a louse hath bit.


Why, every part of the body was made for some use, and the tongue to express
the sense of the mind.


Pardon me, tongues were made for taste, not for words, for words wa an art
which man invented: you may as well say, the hands were made to shuffle cards,
or to do juggling tricks, when they were made to defend and assist the body; or
you may as well say, the leg were made to cut capers, when they were made to
carry the body, and to move, as to go from place to place; for, though the
hands can shuffle cards, or juggle, and the legs can cut capers, yet they were
not made by Nature for that use, nor to that purpose; but howsoever, for the
most part, the sense and reason of the mind is lost in the number of words; for
there are millions of words for a single figure of sense, and many times a
cyphre of nonsense stands instead of a figure of sense: Besides, there are more
spirits spent, and flesh wasted with speaking, than is got or kept with eating,
as witness Preachers, Pleaders, Players, and the like, who most commonly die
with Consumptions; and I believe, many of our effeminate Sex do hurt the lungs
with over-exercising of their tongues, not only with licking and tasting of
Sweet-meats, but with chatting and prating, twitling and twatling; for I cannot
say speaking, or discoursing, which are significant words, placed in a
methodical order, then march in a regular body upon the ground of Reason, where
sometimes the colour of Fancy is flying.


Now the Flag of your wit is flying, is the fittest time to encounter the Lady
Conversation; and I make no question but you will be Victorious, and then you
shall be Crowned the Queen of Wit.


I had rather bury my self in a Monument of Thoughts, than sit in the Throne of
Applause for Talking.


Sweet, why sit you so silently here?


My speech is buried in my thoughts.


This silent place begets melancholy thoughts.


And I love melancholy so well, as I would have all as silent without me, as my
thoughts are within me; and I am so well pleased with thoughts, as noise begets
a grief, when it disturbs them.


But most commonly Shepherds and Shepherdesses sit and sing to pass away the
time.


Misfortunes have untuned my voice, and broke the strings of mirth.


Misfortunes? what misfortunes art thou capable of? Thou hast all thou were
born to.


I was born to die, and 'tis misfortune enough I live, since my life can do no
good: I am but useless here.


You were born to help increase the world.


The world needs no increase, there are too many creatures already, especially
mankind; for there are more than can live quietly in the world; for I
perceive, the more populous, the more vicious.


'Tis strange you should be so young, so fair, so witty as you are, and yet so
melancholy; thy poverty cannot make it, for thou never knew the pleasure of
riches.


Melancholy is the only hopes I do rely upon, that though I am poor, yet that
may make me wise; for fools are most commonly merriest, because they understand
not the follies that dwell therein, nor have enough considerations of the
unhappiness of man, who hath endless desires, unprofitable travels, hard
labours, restless hours, short pleasures, tedious pains, little delights,
blasted joys, uncertain lives, and decreed deaths; and what is mirth good for?
it cannot save a dying friend, nor help a ruined Kingdom, nor bring in plenty
to a famished Land; nor quench out malignant Plagues; nor is it a ward to keep
misfortunes off, though it may triumph on them.


But you a young Maid, should do as young Maids do, seek out the company of
young Men.


Young Maids may save themselves that labour, for Men will seek out them, or
else you would not be sitting here with me.


And are you not pleased with my company?


What pleasure can there be in fears?


Are you afraid of me?


Yes truly; for the ill example of men, corrupts the good principles in women:
But I fear not the perverting of my Virtue, but men's incivilities.


They must be very rudely bred, that give you not respect, you being so very
modest.


'Tis not enough to be chastely modest and honest, but as a servant to my Mr.
and Mrs. I must be dutiful, and careful to their commands, and on their
employments they have put to me: wherefore I must leave you Sir, and go fold my
sheep.


I will help you.


Sweet-heart, I have no Sonnets, Golden Riches, which hath force in all things,
and then in Love; for Cupid being blind, he is for feeling, and look here my
We^ch, this purse is stuffed with Gold, a hundred pounds.


Let me see, pour it on the ground.


I will obey thee: Look here my Girl.


O dear, how it doth shine forsooth! it almost blinds mine eyes; take it away,
yet pray let it stay: truly I know not what to do with it.


No? why it will buy you rich Gowns, ap'd in the Silk-worms toils, with
stockings of the softer silk, to draw on your finer legs, with rich lace
shoes, with roses that seem sweet, and garters laced with spangles like
twinkling Stars, embalm your hair with Gessimond Pomaetums, and rain
Odoriferous Powders of proud Rome.


O Heaven! what a Wench shall I be, could I get them! But shall we have fine
things of the Peddler too?


Buy all their packs, and send them empty home.


O mighty! I shall put down all the Wenches at the May-pole; then what will the
Bag-piper say, do you think? Pray tell me, for he is a jeering knave.


Despise the Rural company, and that windy bag, change it for Balls with
greatest Lords to dance, and bring the Jerkin Fiddles out of frame.


Then I shall have a Mail-Pillion, and ride behind our Thomas to the dancing.


No, you shall ride in rich gilt Coaches, Pages and Lackeys in rich Liveries,
with Gentlemen well clothed, to wait upon you.


And be a Lady; then I will be proud, and will not know Thomas any more, nor
any Maid that was acquainted with me.


You must forget all those of your Fathers house too; for I'll get a Pedigree
shall fit you, and bring you Lineally descended from Great Charlemain.


No, I will have it from Charls wain my Fathers Carter; but I would so fain be
a Lady, and it might be: I will be stately, laugh without a cause, and then I
am witty, and jeer sometimes, and speak nonsense aloud. But this Gold will not
serve for all these fine things.


Why then we will have hundreds and thousands of pounds, until you be pleased,
so I may but enjoy you in my Arms.


No Maid alive can hold our these Assaults, Gold is the Petarr that breaks the
Virgins gates, a Soldier told me so. Well then, my Lord Title, farewell, for
you are an empty name; and Sir Effeminate Lovely, go you to your Taylor, make
more fine clothes in vain.

I'll stick to Riches, do then what you will,
The nearest way to pleasure buy it still.

Why should Lord Courtship dislike me? Time hath not ploughed wrinkles in my
face, nor dug hollows in my cheeks, nor hath he set mine eyes deep in my
head, nor shrunk my sinews up, nor sucked my veins dry, nor fed upon my flesh,
making my body insipid and bate; neither hath he quenched out my wit, nor
decayed my memory, nor ruined my understanding; but perchance Lord Courtship
likes nothing but what is in perfection; and I am like a house which Time hath
not fully finished, nor Education thoroughly furnished.


Sweet-heart, refuse not Riches, it will buy thee friends, pacify thy enemies;
it will guard thee from those dangers that throng upon the life of every
creature.


Heavenly Providence is the Marshal which makes way for the life to pass
through the crowd of dangers, and my Virtue will gain me honest friends, which
will never forsake me, and my humble submission will pacify my enemies, were
they never so cruel.


But Riches will give thee delight, and place thee in the midst of pleasures.


No, it is a peaceable habitation, a quiet and sound sleep, and a healthful
body, that gives delight and pleasure, and 'tis not riches; but riches many
times destroy the life of the body, or the reason in the soul, or, at least,
bring infirmities thereto through luxury; for luxury slackens the Nerves,
quenches the Spirits, and drowns the Brain, and slackened Nerves make weak
Bodies, quenched Spirits, timorous Minds, a drowned Brain, a watery
Understanding, which causes Sloth, Effeminacy, and Simplicity.


How come you to know so much of the world, and yet know so few passages in it,
living obscurely in a Farmers house?


The Astronomers can measure the distance of the Planets, and take the compass
of the Globe, yet never travel to them; nor have they Ambassadors from them,
nor Liegers to lie therein to give Intelligence.


How come you to be so learnedly judicious, being so young, poor, and meanly
born and bred?


Why, Fire, Air, Water, and Earth, Animals, Vegetables, and Minerals, are
Volumes large enough to express Nature, and make a Scholar learn to know the
course of her works, and to understand many effects produced therefrom. And as
for Judgment and Wit, they are brother and sister; and although they do not
always, and at all times agree, yet are they always the children of the
Brain, being begot by Nature. Thus what Wit or Knowledge I have, may come
immediately from Nature, not from my Birth or Breeding; but howsoever, I am not
what I seem.


What makes you look so sad?


Why Monsieur Amorous's visit hath been the cause of the death of one of the
finest Gentlemen of this Age.


How, pray?


Why thus; my Imagination (for Imagination can Create both Masculine and
Feminine Lovers) had Created a Gentleman that was handsomer and more beautiful
than Leander, Adonis, or Narcissus; more valiant than Tamberlain, Scanderbeg,
Hannibal, Caesar, or Alexander; sweeter-natur'd than Titus, the delight of
mankind; better-spoken, and more eloquent than Tully, or Demosthenes; wittyer
than Ovid, and a better Poet than Homer. This man to fall desperately in love
with me, as loving my Virtues, honouring my Merits, admiring my Beauty,
wondering at my Wit, doting on my Person, adoring me as an Angel, worshipping me
as a Goddess; I was his Life, his Soul, his Heaven. This Lover courted my
affection: with all the industry of Life, gifts of Fortune, and actions of
Honour; sued for my favour, as if he had sued to Heaven for mercy; but I, as
many cruel goddesses do, would neither receive his obligations, nor regard his
vows, nor pity his tears, nor hearken to his complaints, but rejected his
Suit, and gave him an absolute denial; whereupon he was resolved to dye, as
believing no torments could be compared to those of my disdain; and since I
would not love him living, he hoped by dying, his death might move my pity, and
so beget a compassionate remembrance from me; whereupon he got secretly near my
chamber-door, and hung himself just where I must go out, which when I saw, I
starred back in a great fright, but at last running forth to call for help to
cut him down, in came Monsieur Amorous, which hinderance made me leave him
hanging there, as being ashamed to own my cruelty; and he hath been talking, or
rather prating here so long, as by this time my kind Love is dead.


O no, for Lovers will hang a long time before they dye; for their necks are
tuff, and their hearts are large and hot.


Well, pray leave me alone, that I may cut him down, and give him Cordials to
restore life.


Faith you must let him hang a little time longer; for I have undertaken to
make you a sociable Lady this day; wherefore you must go abroad to a friends
house with me.


Who I? what do you think I will go abroad, and leave my Lover in a twisted
string? his legs hanging daugling down, his face all black and swelled, and his
eyes almost started out of his head; no, no, pray go alone by your self, and
leave me to my Contemplation.


Well, if you will not go, I will never see you, nor be friends with you
again.


Pray be not angry, for I will go, if you will have me, although I shall be but
a dull companion; for I shall not speak one word; for wheresoever I am, my
thoughts will use all their Industry to cut the string, and take him down, and
rub and chafe him against a hot fire.


Come, come, you shall heat your self with dancing, and let your Lover hang.


That I cannot; for active bodies and active brains are never at once, the one
disturbs the other.


Then it seems you had rather have an active brain, than an active body.


Yes; for when the brain doth work, the understanding is enriched, and
knowledge is gained thereby: whereas the body doth oft-times waste the life
with too much exercise.


Take heed you do not distemper your brain with too much exercising your
thoughts.


All distempers proceed from the body, and not from the mind; for the mind
would be well, did not the humours and appetites of the body force it into a
distemper.


Well, upon the condition you will go, you shall sit still, and your wit shall
be the Music.


Prithee let me rest at home; for to day the strings of my wit are broken, and
my tongue, like a fiddle, is out of tune: Besides, Contemplative persons are at
all times dull speakers, although they are pleasant thinkers.



