(...)twelvemoneth, thou hast lost thy complexion, by too much study. Why thou
shale be an heir and rule the roast of half a shire, if thy Father would
but dye once, come to the Assises with a band of Ianisaries to equal the grand
Signior, all thy tennants shall at their own charge make them selfes fine
march, like Cavaliers with tyltinge feathers gaudy as Agamemnons in the play
after whom thou like a St George on horse back, or the high Sheriff, shalt
make the Country people fall down in Adoration of thy crupper silver sturrup,
my right worshipful. A pox on buckoram and the luggage in it, papers defild
with court hand and long dashes or secretary lines, that straddle, more then
Frenchmen, and less wholesome to the client! Is thy head to be filled with
P^olamations Rejoyndere hard words beyond the Alkemist? Be ruled, and live like
a fine Gentleman, that may have hawks, and hounds, and whores; and horses, and
then thou art fit Company.


You talk wildly; I would you saw your error; that plaee all your happiness
upon such course delights I should degenerate, and too much forfeift my
education.


Education? he has got a tune; I do not think but thou wilt leave thy law,
And exercise thy talent in compassing some Treatises against long-hayre
drinking that most unchristian weed, yclept Tobacco: preach to the Punies of
the Inn sobriety abstinence from shaving of leawd Bailiffs that will com
shortly to your chamber doors there with reverence entreat your worships come
forth and be arrested: precious tad-poles: I would not willingly despair of
thee; for thy Lands sake and cause I am thy Countryman: one generous vagary, if
thou were w^se, would break some bodies heard, within a seven night, then thou
art lord of all; have but the grace to dine with me at the Tavern, and I'll
tell thy Friends, there is some hope.


My Friends.


Thy Father is in Essex, if he live, he will, purchase Rumford if he dye
sooner, then the Town's our own, Spend but an acre a day and thou may live
till all the world be weary of thee; between, us too, what think you of a
wench?


Nothing.


You mean, one wench between us too is nothing; I know a hundred Leverett^;
things that will bound like a dancer on the rope, and kiss thee in thy
natural Complexion; a sinner that will climb thee like a squirrel.


And crack me as a nutt; I have no kirnell to spare for her sweet tooth.


That was a metaphor; he is not desqerate.


Buy' my dear Captain.


Why farewell Countryman. I may live to see thy conversion.


How does my Uncle.


He desires presently to speak with you at his lodging.


I'll attend him.


And hast thou been careful of all those things I gave in charge to be
provided?


There is a noate of the particulars.


Tis very well done, Thomas, let me see, Inprimis.


The Captain will not faileto be with you Sir, he was not at his lodging,
and enquiring at the horne Tavern, I heard he had bin there with two or three
citizens that owed him money.


That he owed money too.


Tis all one I think; Sir; for when Captains have not pay, Creditors may pay
themselves, here they said, he did mollify the heart of the haberdasher,
drank himself a little mellow ere they parted which gave me some hope I might
find him ere night, at the devil, where indeed I fetched him out of the
fire, and gave him your letter.


And the gold too.


That was the first word He read, if you had writ it in text, he could not
have fownd it out so soon, his eye was no sooner on the inside, but his arm
flew out with an open month, and his very fingers ends cried give me the gold
which presuming to be weight he put into his hocus ^ocus a little dormer under
his right skirt, and so taking his word to come down and turning over your
horse to him, with some caution, not to be drunk and forget your, worship, I
took my leave and went about my Inventory.


These things are very right Thomas, let me see now the books of Martial
discipline.


I bought up all that seem to have relation to war and fighting.


That was well done; well done; Item the Sword-salve.


Sir if you be hurt you need go no further then the blade for A surgeon.


The Buckler of faith.


You had the sword before, Sir.


A book of Mortification.


I Sir, that is A kind of killing, which I thought very necessary for A
Captain.


Item the Book of Cannons; Shakspeares works. Why Shakspeares works?


I had nothing for the Pike men before.


They are plays.


Are not all your musteringes in the Country so, Sir? pray readon.


Bellarmines Controversies, in Six Tomes.


That I took upon the stationers word, who had been Apretty scholar at
Paules; for the word Bellarmine, he said, did comprehend war, weapons words of
defiance (...) words provoake men to draw their swords and fightinge makes an
end of the business and all this is controversies, pray go on Sir.


Two pair of Tables; Tables? for what?


Oh Sir for Ticktack; you know it was in my note, which though I doubted at
first yet considering you were newly made A Captain I conceave it was fit
you should learn to set order your men.


Tackticks man; thou did mistake: they are books of war.


You cannot know these from books as they are painted I warrant you.


Why doest thou think these will make A Soldier.


Not of them selves, Sir, and therefore I provided; please you read on Sir.


P^rsons resolutions; Felthams Resolves.


All is nothing, I know Sir without resolution.


Somma totalis 23. 19. and 7. thou hast undone me.


If you do not like the penny worthes; Tis but the charges of my self and a
horse again to London: I will loose but the three odd pownds nynteene
shillings seavenpence. It may be you do not understand these Authors; when
the Captain comes, he will expound them to you.


What a Coxcomb have I to my man? but I dare not be angry with him, well,
carry them into my study; Thoma^.


My most honoured Captain.


My complete Monsieur Device: This is a grace to us; you come to visit your
Mistress my cousin:

And see as if by instinct, she had knowledge of your approach, she is come
to meet you: shall I never get opportunity with that she waiter. If I get
her with child my man Thomas shall marry her.


Sir the Captain is newly alighted.


Get a botle of sack up to my chamber presently.


You are a Gentleman of your word.


And such a Gentleman is to be trusted:


He is an Infidel Madam, that will break his word with A Lady.


I suspect servant you have many Mistresses.


Nor by this white hand, I must acknowledge there are some Ladies in the court
in whose eyes opinions I am favored; I cannot obscure my self from their
observations: but my heart with contempt of all other indeerements, is only
devoted to your service.


Is it not a charge to dress your self in such varieties of Ribbands every
day?


Is that your scruple? tis the mode to express our fancy upon every occasion;
to show the turn, or present state of our hopes or fears in our affections.
Your colours, to an understandinge lover, carry the interpretation of the
heart, as plainly as we express our meaning one to an other in Characters.
Shall I decipher my colours to you now; here is Azure peach. Azure is
constant, and peach is love; which signifies my constant affection.


A pretty Moral.


It saves the trouble of writing, where the Mistress and servant are learned
in this Amorous Blazon, yesterday I wore fuillemote; greedeline; and Isabella;
fuille-mote is withered, greedeline is absent, and Isabella is beauty: which
put together exprest'd, I did wither or languish for your absent beauty.


But is thereany reason for their distinctions?


Yes Lady for example, your fuillemote is a withered leaf; which does
morrallize decay; your yellow is joy, because: --


Why yellow Sir is jealous.


No it is your lemon colour, a pale kind of yellow is jealous; your yellow
is perfect joye: your white is death, your milk white Innocent, your Black
moorninge, your orange spiteful, your flesh colour ^ascivious, your
maid-blush envy, your red is defiance, your gold avaricious, your straw,
plenty, your grass green, hope; your sea green Innocent, your violett,
religious; your willow, forsaken.


We may then committ a solecisme be strangely interpreted by some curious
expounders in the rash election and wearing of our colours, I perceave.


Tis pity but there should be some books written for our instructions in
this Art.


Your Hieroglyphic was the Egyptian wisdom. Hebrewes had their Cabal; the
Romans had their symbolle* and Imprese, Emblem, but these are absolute. Your
modern Invention of Character, an Alphabetical key trite and conspicuous your
motto or rebus, too open, and demonstrative but the science and curiosity of
your Ribbands, is not only instructive but an ornament, and the nearest
comentator of love, for as love is entertained first by the eye, or, to speak
more plain, as the object affected is took in first by these optics, which
receave the species of things coloured beautified, so it is answerable to
nature that in the progress of our passion we should distingvish by our eye
the change or constancy of our affections, in Apt, and significant colours.


You have taken pains, to study this learned Blazon.


It is the only gentile knowledge; or Philosophy in the world: I willundertake
to open any man or woman's heart: --


Heaven for bid.


Tell the most secret imaginations designs, conclude every passion and
scruple if they be but careful to observe the Artificial Method of their
Colours.


Why this may be a way of fortune ^llinge too.


You say right Lady. Physiognomy Chiromancy are but mere tri^es your geomancy
mere conjectural, the erection of your scheme circumstantial, and fallible:
but your quaint a la Mode wear of your fancy, more then Astrological.


Tis a kind of divinity.


You say true Madam, comes near to prophetical, if the minds of Ladies and
Gentlemen were elevated to the sublime consideration.


What pains he takes to be ridiculous?


This Gentleman has a notable fancy, and talks Poetically.


Yes; yes; he can make Verses.


Well I have red Authors in my days and knew the length of the Poets in my
time too which was an Hexameter, and which A Pentameter, but the wits are not,
as they have been, right and straight.


Why D^rothey.


Why because wind is the cause of many things, now if the wind be not in the
right corner, it is, the ill wind, the proverb speaks of, which blows no
body good; for when vapors and wind fly up into the head it cannot be in two
places at one time and that is the reason your men of most wit do seldom
love A woman. But here coms my Master and Sir Francis.


This is a double honour to us Sir Francis; I shall want Langvage, but not A
friendly heart, to entertain you and your noble Kinsman. What my exquisite
Cavalier Device? Tis to no purpose. I see, to remove into the Country, to save
charges and be quiet, the whole City will come hither, if I stay: I have no
stomach to my court knight.


I hope Madam, you will be no Enemy to my Kinsman.


Sister I present this Gentleman; observe cherish him; he has bin in the
universitie.


Any degree Sir?


Only bachelor, forsooth.


If he win you to marriage; Lady Quickfillver.


He will be Master of his Art.


My vote is for him.


I like not the induction of this Rival.


He studies the law: and that is the next high way to preferment, Sister.


Indeed it is the high way in which some deliver up their purses: he may
climb to searlett, but that he has to good a face:


Sir, I hope --


Troth do not Sir; I mean trouble your self, he is to bashful to prevail
upon your spirited Mistress. let's leave them.


Sir Richard.


More Customers; Master Engine, welcome. your presence was expected in the
Country.


Twas my Ambition with some intents to serve you, Sir, please you vouch safe
your privacy, I bring affairs worth your entertainment; I have rid hard.


What Cavalier is this uncle?


He is the inventor of new projectes ^ouzen, they say, and pattents; one that
lives like a moth upon the common wealth.


He looks like one.


You will excuse me gentlemen. Make much of Sir Francis Madame.


Wee'le leave my Nephew and your Sister Madame: And take A turn in the garden.



You may be confident.


I do not like the fancy in his hat: that Gules is war and will be ominous.


I must seem a modest coxcomb now to preserve my uncles Character.


The Gentleman is turned Statue, bless me how he stares upon me, and takes
root? I think it moves, and now to earth is fixed again; oh how it walks
and sadly marches this way? Is't not a ghost? hee'le fright me; oh; sweet Sir,
speak if you can and say who murdered you: it points at me: my eyes,
ungentle eyes to kill so at first sight, I'll have my looks Arraigned for it
small cupid shall be judge who for your sake will make me blind, as he is.


Lady


The man is a live again and has A tongue, discretion guide it; he but sent
his soul forth of an Errant; tis returned; now we shall have some sentences.


Such, are the strange varieties of love, Such heates, such desperate colds --


No more winter if you love me; unless you can command the coal pitts; we
have had a hard time of it already, for want of fuel


I'm all turned ears, and, Lady, long to hear you;
But, pressing to you, doubt I am to near you.
Then I would speak but cannot, nought affords
Expression, the Alphabet's to poor in words.
He that knows love knows well that every hour
Lo^e^s glad; love's sweet --

And some times sower;

These words would go well to a Tune, pray let's hear you singe: I do not
think but you can make; me A Jointure of four Nobles a year in ballads, in
lamentable ballads, for your wit lies Tragical, did not you make the Ladies
downfall? you express a passion rarely, but pray leave your couppletts, and
say something in blank verse before you go.


Before I go; breath not that killing Langvage;

There is no Sun but in your eyes: and when I once take leave of those
Celestial beams Tis darkness through the world.


Oh; pitiful; if I were a widow then youl'd keep me waking for fear I shut
my eyes, and your discretion loose the way home.


Where strech'don sable ground, I down shall lay
My mournful body, and with folded Arms:
Hear sadder notes upon the Irish harp;
And while my Footman plays; sigh out my part,
And drop division with my brinish tears.

This must be lamentable musique sure.


But I will find an Art to cure this wound;
For I with fancies pencil, will so draw
Your picture in the table of my heart
Your absence shall but like dark shadows stand,
To set you of, and see you, Lady better
Then love will let me when I look upon you.

Could this be true and meant, sweet Sir, to me;
I should be kinder then the gentlest spring
That warmes the world, makes feirce beasts so tame
And trees to swell themselves to cheerful green
More jocund then the proudest Quire of birds,
What ere they be, that in the woods so wide
Do singe their merry catches.
Sure he does but counterfeit.

Oh now I see that love
Is sweet; as flowers in their fragrant birth,
Gentle as silk; and kind as clouds to earth.

One rithme more and you undo my love for ever, out upon it; Peddlers French
is a Christian language to this. I had rather you should put me a case out of
Littleton: they say you are a pretty lawyer.


Tenant par la courtesy d'Angliterre, est son home prent samme self en see
simple est fee tail general en self comme heir de la tail especial ad Issu
per la mesme feme male ou female ^pes on knife soit Issue apres mort ou en diu
de la feme debie la baron tiendra la terra durant sa vie per le ley
d'Angliterre.


Nay here is enough in conscience: what a noise this confusion of Languages
makes; this is almost as good as A bear baytinge, hark you Sir, you are never
like to recover me by law.


You are not the first sweet Lady^; has ben overcome in common law.


Not by ten thousand, Sir: Confessed, but I have no mind to come to Issue with
A lawyer: when he should consider my case at home, hee'le be at West minster
teaching men their statutes! no; no; I will not marry a Judge.


Why Lady.


They are casual things and men that hold such strange opinions, they are not
safe; no, not in their own lambskins.


Lady you may be misinformed; Astraea hath not quite left the earth and the
Abuses of some, which shame the calling, are but like patches of beauty on
the face of law to set the Native whiteness off.


Farewell; Sir; you are in love with a bared Gown, not beauty; if you will
follow my learned counsel, leave it. This young thing is a fool or a fine
fellow.


She kicks and stings out like a colt unwayd. Her witt's a better portion
then her money I would not love her, yet, if I could help it. (My Uncle and
his Mistress) I'll not hinder them.


It is no honour, Sir, if Armed with so much eloquence, you overcome A woman; I
blush to say I love you now too much. I wish you would release what your Sweet
charms won from my toungue: I shall repent my promise.


Make me not miserable after so much blessing. Why, Madame, it is upon
honourable terms since not upon the first attempt, but, after a tedious seige
to your fair love, you give up what shall enrich us both: It were A sin to
fear you can retract what both our lips have sealed, and loose a happiness so
near so secure; your husband holds his pleasure of early hunting constant,
and when he pursues his timorous hart to morrow morning, Cupid will wait, to
bring me to Elizium, your bed, where every kiss will new create us.


You must be wise in your excuse to quit his importunity.


Leave that to me. I were not worth the name of him that served you to lose my
glorious hope for want of such a thin Device; In your thought wish me
prosperous I am fortified against the power of fate to separate us; and when
thou art with in the Amorous Circle of mine Arms, we will make laws to love,
teach time new Actions, or chain him with the cordadge of his hair; like a
tame thing to wake and watch our pillow; and be our pleasures centenell.


I see my husband, tis not safe he should observe us. Be wise constant.


All that's sweet attend thee. So; I am saylinge now to my own Indies: and
see the happy coast too; how my wings do spread to catch the wind which
coms to cover them. And the green sea enamord on my bark, doth leap to see
how cupid sits, at the helm steers my soul to his new world.


A monopoly, say you, for periwiggs?


Bin visiting your grounds?


My hounds rather, Sir Francis, and some horses, that takes up my Country
recreations; tis Supper time.


Is't not a rare design? and by such Art and reasons I can name most
beneficial to the common wealth, preventing the diseases which some
unwholesome hair breeds in men's heads. It will be worth our agitation Sir,
you after the rate of every thousand per Annum milkt out of the common purse
into your own, may easily defalke to me a hundred for my first projection; did
I not love you, Sir, I could make coin of other Able men that would be glad
to multiply their money.


Sir I thank you, but have no mind to thrive upon abuse of my princes favour,
nor the Peoples curse. Here is a Gentleman; Sir Francis Courtwell, perhaps,
will undertake it.


What; Sir Richard?


A monopoly for composing and sellinge of periwiggs.


Excuse me Sir, I dare not deal in them; do not you hear things of this
nature questioned?


How Sir questioned?


There's one among the rest, I cannot hit upon his name in fair election to
be hanged, one Engine.


Oh Sir.


What aisle you Sir?


A meagrim in my head.


Who's there? look to Master Engine here, he faints, send to your Lady for
some cordial waters presently.


There is a soveraine well hard by, has done strange cures, please you; I'll
throw him into that.


Though I distaste his business, I would not he should miscarry here, you
frighted him. Tis supper time, I shall expect your company in the morning, Sir
Francis: I have a pack of dogs will make the forest ringe.


I'll carefully attend Sir: as early as you please I love the sport too.


I wish we had all pleasures to delight you; but nothing wants in my true love
to serve you.


Yet I must cuckold him, I cannot help it.


Sir.


Who is that? Thomas?


The Sun is up before you Sir, here be your boots.


That's well.


Prithee do not rise, it is hardly day, Sir, who bid you call him so early?
Sir Richard will not rise yet.


I cannot help it, tis none of my fault.


Where is Dorothy.


Here, Madame; what make you up so soon, Thomas.


Oh Mistress Dorothy tis even lunge of you for between sleep and wake your
remembrance came to me this morning, and Thomas was up presently.


You must excuse me; I mean to kill a brace of hares before you think tis
day. Come, on with my boots. Thomas; And Dor thy go you to Sir Francis
chamber tell him the day grows old I am ready: our horses our merry hounds
expect us.


Any excuse to leave me.


You may take your ease in bed still Madam, I'll not loose one morning, that
invites so pleasantly, to hear my Dogs, for a new mayden-head. Twas for
these sports and my excess of charge I left the Town; besides the City
fogs and steam of brickhills almost stifled me. This Air is pure, and all
mine own.


My Lady means she would have you get an other Heir Sir for your land,
though, it be against my Master the young Captain yet she speaks but
reason and now, I talk of the Captain, Sir. would you had given him council.


To what.


Before he took this huffinge trade upon him to have been a man of peace, I
mean, a Justice, nature has made him fits for both a like; he is now at
charge to keep a Captain Schoolmaster: he might have saved the Quarteridge
of his Tutor if I had been his clarke, and then the in come that broken heads
bring in; and New years gifts from soadred virgins and their she
Provincialls whose warren must be licenced from our Office. --


Away you prating knave; what is he ready?


Alas he's almost dead.


How dead?


He has bin troubled with a fit of the stone Sir, all this night poor
Gentleman, he groans sweates cannot: --


What?


Make urine Sir.


I heard my Lady has an excellent receipt to cure the stone. She is a piece of
a rare surgeon.


Well-away and get the horses ready; sir; or I shall ride you and your wit
together.


Alas any fool may ride me, but I would fain see any man ride Mistress
Dorothy.


How Sir.


I am sorry I must leave such a companion but more lament the cause, I wish him
health: my presence cannot serve him, morrow wife, I will not lose my sport.


Nor she; when you are gone; my Lady does expect an other bunts up


Now I must trust thy service.


You shall not doubt me; Madam; and to assure you my faith, I have a suite to
your ^adiship, whose grant, were there no other bonds upon me, would tie me to
everlastinge silence.


What is't; but name it and I shall soon consirme thee


Our Captain of the train band has bin offering to chaffer Mayden-heads with
me; I must confess I can affect the fool. upon good terms, could devise to
noose my Amorous woodcock if you assist me privately, and dare trust me with
some Jewell of price, that is not known, which shall be faithfully restored,
Madame.


I that dare trust my honnour with thee, shall not suspect thy faith in any
treasure else, choose from my cabbinets, but, prithee, draw the curtains while
I expect this friend, I needs must hide my blushes thou may discover from my
gallery window when they are horsed, I tremble, to consider what I have
promised.


Tremble to meet a ghost; you are more fearful then a Virgin; Madame; why
this sets me a longing, but I'll watch: this is the timorous world of flesh
blood.


Alas what do you mean? retire for heavens sake: my husband is not gone, I
heard his voice yet, this rashness will undo my fame for ever, should he
return.


Howe's this? retire for heavens sake, my husband is not gone, I heard his
voice this will undo my same. It was my wife and this is sure my bed chamber.


I have undone my self, it is my husband.


My forehead sweates; where are you; Madame; whom did you talk too; or take me
for? Ha; a sleep already; or do I dream; I am all wonder; Madame.


Nay; nay kill him; if it please you; sweet heart, I cannot abide a
blackemoore


How's, this? wife.


Help, help, dear husband strangle him with one of my lute strings; do,
do, do.


If she be a sleep: she was nor wont to talk thus, She has had some hideous
dream, she spake to me, too. Who should I strangle sweet hart, with a lute
stringe?


The king of Moroco I think.


It is so, she dreams, what strange chymaeras we fancy in our sleep: I
were best wake her, Madame, Madame.


Oh Murder, Murder.


Sweet heart, Madame, wake.


What's that?


Tis I.


Sir Richard? oh, you have delivered me from such a dream I quake to think
upon it.


I must confess you frighted me at first.


My Master come back? if he had found the sick Sir Francis here.


How, now, art thou frighted, too.


Frighted quoth a; o Madame; the key of the closett, quickly, I must have some
cordial water for Sir Francis I fear this (...) will kill him.


Alas good Gentleman make hast.


His appearance would betray all Thus prevented.


Nay sweet heart, you shall not leave me till I told what a cruel dream I
had, me thought a king of blackamoores was in love with me, and having, by
flattering courtship drawn me to his bed chamber, by my consent, or force,
swore to en^oy me. I knew not by what reasons to dive^t the Ravisher; but told
him that I heard thy voice, I bid him if he loved his life retire, for thou
would, (dear,) revenge my honnour, but he persuinge me, I cried out murder
and having ne'er a sword, I councelld thee to strangle him with a lute stringe;
for which cruelty of mine me thought he threw an Arrow at me, which if thou
had not waked me as thou did would, as I slept; with my strong fears have
killed me.


This was the king of Moroco; well, I am glad I came to take away thy fright.


But, sweet, you left me, with a resolution to hunt this morning, have you
done already?


The thieves prevented me, my stable has bin robbed to night, two geldings my
Roane n^gg are vanished.


How?


Nay do not thou vex, I have sent Hue and cry that may overtake them; but come
I'll leave thee to thy glass, and visit Sir Francis, now she is returned. How
does your Noble guest?


He is pretty well, Sir He has voided one stone since and now finds ease.


Tis well, attend your Mistress.


Oh wench, I had almost undone my self, come on the other side, reach me that
petticoat. I le tell thee the story as I make me ready.


Is it possible you can talk thus, and be no Scholar?


I have travelled in my fancy: took the Air about the world with the muses,
and do for my recreation of wit, compose some wonders in Verse, Poetical
Essa^es: as one upon report of a heate that was in Aegipt.


Let's hear them.


In Countries I have been;
Under the Aequinoctiall, where I have seen
The Sun disperse such a prodigious heate
That made our sive-like skins to rain with sweat:
Men would have given, for an Eclipse, their lives
Or one whisper of Air, yet each man strives
To throw up grass, feathers; nay women too
To find the wind, all falls like lead, none blew,
The dog star spitts new fire, till't came to pass
Each eye became his neighbours burning glass.
Lean men did turn to As^hes presently
Fat men did roast to lean Anatomy.
Young women's heate did get them selves with child
For none but they them selves, them selves defild.
Old women naturally to witches turned
And only rubbinge one an other, burned.
The beasts were bakt, skin turned to crust they say
And fishes in the river boild away
Birds in the Air were roasted, and not burned
For, as they fell down, all the way, they turned.

Most excellent.


I have seen Larks in that motion at fire with an Engine of packthred
perpendicular.


What would they have given for a shower in those Countries.


Now you talk of a shower, you shall hear another Copy of Verses that I made
of a mighty rain which fell once in the Indies.


That you made? if you will venture your lungs let me hear some more
impossible stories to pass away the time.


Heaven did not weep, but in its swelling eye
Whole seas of rheum and moist catharrs did lye
Which so bespauld the lower world men see
Corn blasted, and the fruit of Every tree,
Air was condensed to water against their wish
And all their foul was turned to flying fish,
Like watermen they throung'd to ply a fair
And thought it had bin navigable Air.
Beasts lost the natural motion of each limb.
Forgot to go with practisinge to swim.
A trowte now here, you would not think How soon
Taken ready, dressed for the Empress of the Moon.
The fixed stars, though to our eyes were missing
We knew yet were by their continual hissinge
Women were Mermaids saylinge with the wind,
The greatest miracle was fish behind.
But men were all kept chaste against their wish
And could commit but the cold sin of fish.

And that sin would puzzell all the civil lawyers in the Kingdom. Sins of
the flesh they are perfect in, they know well enough what belongs to Adultery
simple fornication: but you would much improve and oblige the practice of the
court if you could bring this sin of fish under their commission. But now I
hope the rain is over; and we shall have fair weather.


Now can I tell you Lady, what a. strange frost was in one part of the world


I shall cry out fire if you do: I'd rather have some discourse to keep me
warm.


Or how the whole world was troubled with the wind colic.


No more Earth quakes I beseech you: some friends of mine lost a great deal of
Land the last term for ought I know, tis never to be recoverd. Why all these
Verses you have honoured me to hear, were translated out of French.


You say very true Lady.


No, no; they are out of Spanish as I remember.


I think it be out of Spanish indeed.


Or else out of the Italian.


Troth Madame; I know not which very well.


And yet you made them: some Gentlemen have the faculty to make Verses, and
forget what Language, was the Original. ^is a la Mode, I confess, Sir.


There is the mischief in Poetry; A man might have told a hundred lies in
prose upon his own name and never miscarry, but leavinge these lewd Rymes,
Lady, how do you like the Novice that Sir Richard commended.


Master Courtwell?


Is he not a pretty Chrysome; I could not Choose but laugh to observe in what
rural deportment he came to salute you that should have made his address in
these postures: --


It is enough, Sir, I apprehend what you would do: the truth is, touching that
thing in black; I do not love him.


I know tis impossible.


Why is it impossible? The man is a pretty indifferent meaning man but I must
have one of a more Active spirit: no, no; the man is a coward.


He looks like one.


I put him to it, he dares not fight, and he that expects my favour to so
high a degree as Marriage, must be none of my Lord Mayors whiffelers; he must
be valiant in Arms; I am not taken with a ringe or a Carkenett as some
avaricious Ladies: he that presents me with the sword of his rival, is more
welcome then all the silken soft natured 600. a year widgeons that will be
baffled in their best clothes; and go down into the Country every vacation,
like Attorneys to be beaten against the next tear^ me, get damages by it. But
I forget some affairs that concerns me, take my leave: your deserts upon me
are eminent and many; and for all your noble services, I will promise you
nothing, you apprehend me. --


Tis too much, sweet Lady.


I am so weary I can stay no longer with you.


You make me over happy, so; so; the matters done. I may visit my friends;
hum! well thought upon, I shall leaveher Joys with out any bound to entertain
me, if I first beat this foolish rival of mine, and present her with his
sword; she assures me he dares not fight: it shall be so, thus with one
baffeling and disarminge him I shall secure my Mistress; and get the
reputation of a fighting Cavalier, which may save me many knocks here after,
among men of strong faith, that shall hea^e how much honour I have else where
taken up upon the Tickett.


Stand right to your files, -- Make even your ranks, -- Silence -- Front to
the right hand, -- As you were, -- To the right hand about, -- By the left
hand, as you were, -- Ranks -- To the right, double -- Ranks as you were, --
Ranks to the left double, -- Middle men to the right hand double the front, --
Middle men to the right entire, double the front -- Files to the right, -- To
the left, -- To the right hand -- Counter march to the right -- To the left --
Wheel about. --


Rantan! enough, you must not, waste your lunges at once; march fair and make
a Captain. When these words of command are rotten, we will sow some other
military seeds; you bear a brain and memory.


I hope so.


And now you are chosen a Captain for the Country, you must give good example
to your soldiers, and cherish nature: after exercise you must drink sack;
sack is a fortifier. Come wee'le to the Town.


With all my heart;

Here is one Master Courtwell let us take him with us.


My costive Countryman; he's an Anabaptist, he will not drink, and yet he
kissed the cup oft; last night, me thought, when his mistress drank to him.
Wee'le try; how is't, my man of moral breeding?


My man of war, Tresbone; your servant, Captain.


Why this was spoke like one of us, can do it again? thy voice is more
Authentic, sownds as I have heard a Cavalier in a Tavern; or like the merry
Master of the dragon. Small Neptune, that comptroules the rich Canaries when
he commands the Tritons of his cellar; scud and bring wine you varletts, with
a flavour for my Nobillitie; we were conspiringe to go to the Tavern.


I'll make one Gentlemen; to wast away some melancholy.


Spoke boldly like an Argonaut.


I am not now in London; upon a hall day marching with the Puinees Twenty of
us in a Teem, to Westminster in our torn gowns embroidered with strand dirt,
to hear the law.


Is not thy Father dead? thou talke'st so well? how I was couzend' in thee;
come a way.


Here's my man Thomas.


Now the news, Sir Tristram?


Oh; the Gentleman is mad.


What Gentleman?


Why Master Engine, that did faint last night.


With fear of being hanged for his projections.


My Uncle told me of him.


Send him to Bedlam then; what makes he here? clean straw a good whipp are
held restoratives.


He walks and talks the madliest, twenty midwifes are nothing to him, he
drowns all their noyce his tongue is twenty rings of bells; and yet he seems
so merry.


Save you Gentlemen; Gallants; Cavaleires; how far travel you? me thinks you
are finely accommodated: are you a doctor Sir?


No; but I can tell you; how to purge if it please you.


You say very well; troth Gentlemen you must pardon me; cry you mercy: your
name is Captain Vnderwi^.


Yes, Sir: but my Mother came of the Overmuches by the Peak: she broke my
Fathers heart, and Sir Richard buried her. Things must be as please the
Stars.


What think you; of the Blazing Start in Germany according to Ptolomy? tis
very strange; does the race hold at Newmarkett for the cup? when is the
cookinge, Gentleman there are a parcel of rich jewels to be sold now if a
man had (...): I do mean to build a very fine hows next summer, and fish
ponds. What did you hear of the new play? I am affrayed the wits are broken,
there be men will make affidavit, they have not heard a good jest since
Ta^leton died: pray may I crave your name Sir?


My name is Courtwell Sir.


In your ear, I have a cast of the best Marlens in England: but I am resolve'd
to go no more by water, but in my coach: did you ever see the great Ship?


I have been one of the twenty that have dined in her Lantern.


It may be so, she is a good sailor; but, I'll tell you one thing, I mean
to have the best pack of hounds in Europe, Sir Richard loves the sport well,
and then if I can but find out the reason of the load stone, I were happy
and would write non ultra.


The Philosophers stone were better in my opinion: have you no project to get
that?


That has startled him; I doubt this fellow does but counterfeit.


What think you of the Dromedary, that was to be seen on the back side of
the Bell?


I have seen a stranger beast.


So have I; I have seen you before now, Sir.


Why then I'll tell you; the straingest beast that ever I saw was an Ostriche
that eat up the Iron-mines: but, now you talk of birds, I saw an Eliphant
beat a tailor in the fencing school, at his own weapon.


The Spanish needle?


He did out eat him in bread, and that was miraculous, I have seen a
cattamountaine once, but all was nothing, to the Lady, that turned round
threaded needles.


Troth Sir I think you have turned round too, and are not settled yet.


Now you talk of settelinge I knew a Gentleman, that was borne to a great
fortune, sold all his land, went to sea in a Hollander, was taken by a
Dunckercke, at 7. years and stole away in a English bottom after that, saw
both the Indies, for all this, was taken by a Turkish man of war put into the
Galleys, and, for ought I hear by credible report, is not settled yet.


Sure he is a great Scholar; a man cannot understand him.


His brains are out of tune.


Now you talk of music; there is no man in the world loves music better
then I: I'll give you the reason: I have ben deaf almost this half year; it
came with a cold sitting up at Primero.


Now you talk of a cold, it puts me in mind of the new Device of fire, for
brewing baking: had you no hand in that project?


Again he is startled: come he shall to the Tavern with us and confess
all; if he does not strip his soul stark naked to us; say I am no fortune
teller.


What think you of a cup of medium wine?


That will spoil all: please you to honnour our society? we are going to
Indulge at the Tavern.


Oh the neates tongues Asparagus that I have eaten at the Stillyarde! But of
all things in the world I do not love a black catt, next a brewers cart,
there is nothing will stay a man so much in the night as a Constable; one
word before you go and I beseech you give me your opinion clearly; was not
the Morocco Ambassador, a very fine Gentleman for a Pagan?


Yes sure; and the Lead mines in Darbysheire hold still. Marry for the Allome
businesses -- But come, will you walk?


I do use to go a foot some times, but when I ride; and then I must confess
there's no striving with the stream: you were in London lately they say the
people are more affected to Bearebaytinge then in former time.


There are some of late are drawn like bears to a stake but for your own
part the gout and the grand pox are all one to you: what price bears meat in
the shambles?


Flesh rises and fales; as it uses to do; Sir: But a Country life is the best
when all is done: are we all of one religion? what think you of a bridge from
Lyon Key to Flandres, you may guess I talk at random, Gentlemen, but you
must not interpret all foolish discourse a distemper of the brain; Lords would
take it for a scandalum magnatum, and your Ladies would be Angry too; now you
talk of Ladies.


By no means Master Engine: that Gentleman loves you not. Come, I le bring
up the Rear, where is Thomas?


I'll follow Sir; I would give my 4. marks a year that I could talk like
that mad Gentleman; he's here, and there, and every where: how will his
tongue run when his Coggs are oiled? they will drench him.


Although I missed a happiness, ^applaude your nimble wit that secured both our
honours: you have an excellent instrument to your Gentlewomen.


Oh she delivered so to the life, how you were troubled with the stone, at
first I did beleive't my self, and think of the sad consequence: but time is
precious now; although our stars have not been yet propitious to our meeting,
I'll try my Art to night to make them shine with happy influence on our loves.


Most excellent, Madam; how?


I'll not engage your visit to my chamber, since the first proved so
unfortunate, but come to yours.


This night? wo'not your husband be at home?


Yes.


You enjoy but one Bed?


Without witchcraft Sir. I have a stratagem to delude my husband and all his
jealous waking eyes: A plot that cannot fail, if you dare but expect me.


I grow immortal with my hopes, and fancy more than the worlds most glorious
Empire, in my first embrace, I should run back into an infant once again, and
by degrees and time, grow up to meet so vast a happiness: Ages in expectation
spent were poor and easy sufferings weighed against this triumph. Me thinks I
am not man, but something of a more exalted essence, humane Nature hath not
Capacity to understand and own these precious blessings.


No more rapture, but with the confidence of a lover, spread your equal
thoughts, and in your heart and Arms Prepare an entertainment for that guest
that hath no life nor name but what you give. A kiss, and leave our souls to
think upon the joys this night attends us.


Sullen day
Do not tyre now tis down hill all the way.

COme let us throw the dice who shall drink,
Thine is twelve and his sic sink.
Six and Four is a cast,
Six and three not too fast.
Come aloft sink tray,
Sic ace fair play,
Cator duce is your throw sir,
Cator ace they run low sir.
Two duces we see,
Duce Ace is but three.
Oh where is the wine, come fill up his glass,
For here is the man that has thrown Am^ace.
They are all drunk already, and such a confusion in their heads and tongues:
my Master kisses the next man and calls him Mistress Dorothy, Master Courtwell
possessed with the spirit of defiance to Cupid is ready to beat him for being in
love. My Projector's dead drunk in archaire, and the Captain peeping into his
mouth like a toothdrawer and pouring down Sack, which he feels not, but his
chapps shut again like a spring-lock, till he return with a key to open his
teeth to pour in the next health.


My Cloak and Sword Drawer.


Tis here sir.


Thou art a pretty fellow; there's half a crown, say I am gone Thomas.


You are a petty well.


What shalls do with him? this Engine burns like Etna.


Throw him into the River.


He's able to mull the Thames. Well for mine own part, would Mistress Dorothy
were here to open her files.


Did not you name a woman?
I will have no mention of any thing that's Female.

May not a man talk of sack?


Sack is a sovereign medicine.


Oh very sovereign.


It is hic hac sack, both for he and she. Stay, is my Countryman gone? come my
Apollos, my Orpheus's, or my Bachus his Minstrells; which to leave poetical
expressions, in broader phrase, is Tavern fiddlers, some of your Tunes my
masters, do you hear?


Do you mean Master Adsons new airs si^?


I sir. But they are such fantastical airs as it puts a Poet out of his
wits to rhyme to them but let me hear --


--


No I do not like that? --


--


Nor that: no, no, no, neither:


An't please your worship Master Captain our boys can sing songs to these.


No, no, saving your presence, your boys have nothing surreverence but love
songs, and I hate those things monstrously to make things appear better than
they are, and that is but Deceptio visus, which after some embracing, the
parties see presently what it is.


--


I, I, this thumping tune I like a lise; a Song, a song to it.


The Juice of Spanish squee'zd grapes is it
That makes a dull brain so full of wit,
So Lemonado's clear sparkling wine
The grosser wits too doth much refine,
Then to be fox'dit is no crime,
Since thickest and dull brains it makes sublime.
The Stilyards Rhenish wine, and Devils white,
Who doth not in them sometimes take delight?
If with mimique gestures you'll keep you from sadness
Then drink lusty Claret, twill make you in madness.
And then to settle you no hopes in beer,
But wholesome po^ts of Scotch ale though tis dear.
But hark you child, you say in your song the Devils white, you have been ill
catechiz'd boy, for a white Devil is but a Poetical fiction, for the devil
bless us child is black.


No Captain, I say white wine at the Devil.


That's true, that's a good boy indeed -- Vnderwit, lend me a piece, lend me a
piece to give these harmonious men -- The^e, -- and now be gone my masters;
without noise, for I will have no more fidle fadles for my money; no tunes of
superrogation after the musical bill is paid, --

Come hither Thomas, do you think I am drunk?


Truly Captain, I cannot tell.


You cannot tell, there's your ignorance, drink is a vice I am as little given
to as another, for I do abhor it in my self, I do wonder how any reasonable
man can be drunk, c -- man can be drunk, therefore every wise man take
counsel and example by me, and he may see very plainly what an odious thing
it is, for you must follow your Leader, and Virtue which is an ancient --


Virtue an Ancient?


I, an ancient old Gentlewoman, that is grown very poor, and no body knows
where she dwells, very hard to find her out, especially for a Captain, you
will find it very difficult for a Lieutenant, but we will endeavour the best we
can. You see my courses, I have travelled to find her out, and I could never
yet see her at a baudihouse?


Who is this to be seen at a Baudihouse?
To the righthand -- Counter-march.

He talks of virtue sir.


Virtue? she never comes there, why do you think she should be there
Captain?


Why? because she is an old Gentlewoman, and might keep the house.


Alas Captain Mistress Virtue is poor and lean.


Nay then she is not fit to be a Baud; but tell me, did you ever see her, or if
so, did you ever --


No, but 'twas none of my fault. I know not what I may do in time, when she
understands the words of command.


He does not mean Mistress Dorothy; but Captain, I would ^aine know the reason
why your Bawds are so fat still?


A plain case, they lye fallow and get hart, then they keep themselves so in
health, and so soluble with stewed prumes, and then sipping of sack is a great
matter to fatten them. But they are as good people as a man can keep company
withal, and bring up the young gentlewomen so virtuously; I came into one of
their houses the other day for a career, and I found the Baud very sick upon
her deathbed, very religious, and much given to repentance, for those poor
sins she had committed; when she had taken order for her soul, she told me
the young Gentlewoman I looked for was in the next room, desiring her upon her
blesting to give me content, she turns her to the wall, and gives up the Ghost
very privately, because she was loath to trouble us.


By your relation Captain, these appear to be very good people what if we
went to visit one of these Matrons? I have a great mind to exercise


Why you speak like an understandinge Soldier one that may come to something
in the end, therefore let us march on.


March on to venus wars.


For you know, Thomas that the spider the Be do something, but I have forget
what it is.


Tis no matter, come let us go.


Go? no more but go, though I be a Captain if I have not commission in this
employment, --


What then Captain?


Why then I cannot go.


Very right.


Do you hear Captain? for all this; I have a great mind to a wench, and a
wench I must have, if there be one above ground; oh, oh; London; London. Thou
art full of frank tennants, give me London shall we wheel about thither,
yett?


Give you London? will not cheapside serve your turn or the Exchainge?


Oh Gentlemen, Master Engine is truly bewitched.


Why, what's the matter?


Bring the witch and Master Engine before us.


He does vomitt the straingest things yonder. --


Did not I say, murder will out?


I think he has eaten and drunken nothing but monopolyes: and, being too
hard to be digested they all come up again, I must hold his head.


Did not I tell you something would come out?


Pins; Pins; they lay cross his throat, I told you he was bewitched? Hey day
cards and dice, and with them the devil is a gamester. And pays the box
soundly, now; now; now:


What's that.


Tis something clammy; oh tis Soap.


Soap? give a man leave to wash his mouth.


Does not the lime burn his throat Thomas?


Alas poor Gentleman, something now again is ready to strangle him, I think
they are Hides, the horns stuck in his gullett, well straind! what a foul
stomach he has:


Open his mouth, thrust down a pottle pot.


I have Sir; and it is come up full of medium wine. If you have any charity
come and healpe to hold his head: now again.


Oh; Oh; Oh:


Tis very strange Captain; the man is certainly enchanted.


Oh; Oh.


Master Master; hey! will you take Tobacco in the Roll? here is a whole
shipladinge, variety of Bermoda's and one little two penny paper of Verina's,
with a super subscription, to my very Friends of the custom hows.


Put up that for a relic, Thomas: and open it upon high days to clear the
fore eyes of your Spanish Merchants, Thomas; no more, but call the Drawer, an
understanding Drawer and one writes Orthography do you pay the Reckoning.

Sir I charge you set A padlock on the chamber door: there is a dangerous
fellow must be bronght to his purgation and look all the goods that he hath
vomited be forth coming. While we discreetely go and inform the
Magistrates: at your peril Sir, at your peril: Seal up the door and do
you pay the Reckoning.


Sir Richard is a Justice; there's your money, and yet we need not pay; the
Gentleman hath left enough for the Reckoning in the next room.


I have made him fast; you're very welcome Gentlemen: all is paid in the Por't
cullis.


I'll walk no further; if you have a Secret to impart, you need not fear
this place. The trees, and hedges will not listen, what is the business? I hope
your phlegmaticall stock of verse is spent.


Why then in prose the worst that I can speak; I do not love you Lady.


How? you have not trained me thus far to tell me that?


You are. --


You do not mean to quarrel, now you have betrayed me to the field, and
beat me, Sir?


What is there in your face more, to attract me, then that red cowes
complexion? why the devil do you think, I should dote upon your person?
that thing when she is stroked gives milk.


By that I understand, all this is in revenge, because you think I did neglect
you: pray, Sir, tell me, and tell me seriously; put the case that I should love
you: could you love again?


In troth, I think I could not.


Do you but think:


I will bind it with an oath before the parish.


What reasons?


I shall be loath to say your eyes are twinckelinge stars again your lips
twyn cherries, and out blu^h the rubies; your Azure veins vie beauty with the
Sapphire: or that your swelling breast are hills of ^vorie pillows for Jove to
rest his Amorous head. When my own conscience tell me that Bunn -- hill is
worth a hundred of them, and but High gate compared with them is a paradise,
no I thank you.


But how come you so cur^d? you weere a passionate, I may say, fool, in hope
you will deserve it: what physic took you, that hath thus restored you?


A little sack had power to cure this madness.


I hope you are not sober yet; the humour may chainge when you have slept.


I'll rather stich my eye lids up with Sisters-threed, and stareperpetually.


When you may see me again.


I think I shall not, unless it be to wonder when you are in that ^vie bush;
that face cut upon taffeta, that cream prunes so many plumbs in white
broth, that Scutcheon of pretence. powderd with Ermines. How sell you grapes?
your hair does curl in bunches: your lips look like the Parsons gleabe;
full of red, blue, and yellow flowers; how they are chapp'd and look like
trenches made to drain the meadows?


This rudeness is beyond the manner of a Gentleman.


I cannot help it and I hope you think so.


But if your passion have not drowned all reason; I pray let us part civilly.


With all my hart, I dare then take my leave too.


Who is that.


Where.


Behind that tree.


You have no plot t'accuse me for a rape? t'was at the worst, but felony with
cherryes, that look as if they had bin a fort night gathered:


I know you'll bring me home in courtesy.


Not I; I will not trust my self and you: fare well Lady: do you see that
bull?


Yes Sir.


That is a happy beast.


Why happy Sir?


He writes no verses to his Mistress, is not cozened nor forsworn: to get
her favour, bestows no rings, nor empties his exchequer to appear still in new
rich suites but lives free upon the stock of nature, yet loves none. Like the
great Turk, he walks in his Seraglio and doth command which Concubine best
pleases, when he has done, he falls to graze or sleep, and wakes, as he
had never known the dun, white, red, or brended Cow.


You are unmanly.


Nay, I know you will rail now: I shall like it: call me a skirvy fellow,
proud, and saucy, and ill bred crooked clown, I'll hear. This, rather then
live upon your pity, and yet do not: For if you rail too men that know you
can dissemble, may believe you love me, and tis not my Aim.


You are a fine man


I am in my best clothes.


I perceive tis true now, what the world says of you, and yet tis strange.


Tis strange it should be otherwise.


You give your tongue a licence, nor will I hope your malice should spare me a
broad, that have so prodigally abused a Ladies fame that deserves nobly from
you; but you men care not whose name you blast with a loose Character, so you
maintain your pride of Talk.


How is this? it is confessed I have talked in my time and talked too much, but
not too much of you; for I but seldom thought of such a woman, or any other.


Nay Sir I am satisfied, you can talk your pleasure.


Have I not done it, too?


Yes by your own report, and with a Lady so much in virtue in birth above
you? therefore I expect not your modest language of me.


Stay. This moves me; I never took a pleasure yet to lye with Ladies fames: or
ever thought that sport lye in the tongue; such humours are for men: that live
by Brothel offices, let me but know who hath traduced me to you thus, he
shall be known no more.


I'll not be guilty Sir: of any murder; when we meet again and you in
better humour I may tell you: so farewell Gondari^o, nothinge's lost when you
turn woman hater.


She has vexed me, if we two make a matrimony after this rate, the devil is
like to dance at our Wedding.


He's here, a lone too, and the place most opportune! how shall I begin.
Master Courtwell, do you love any friend of mine?


Not to my knowledge, Sir, I should be sorry.


Do you not love a Gentlewoman, Sir?


If she be a friend of yours, I'll take the first occasion to neglect her, for
your sake.


It will become your wisdom, and your safety.


What mischief have you done to your face?


My face?


You look so scurvily, come hither thou new monster, with more feet then a
caterpillar what time of the day is it? you that move upon so many wheels,
say Monsieur, are you not a walking clock; I have a mighty mind to see you
took in pieces.


I do not like this: you cannot put me, Sir, together again.


I will not take the pains, why do you smile now?


At your conceit, to think I was a clock I am a watch; I never strike, He's
valiant.


You have pretty colours their are these your Mistresses.


If you did know the mystery you would applaud them: you have read Lievre de
B'azon^, what mean you?


I will bestow them upon some forehorse; they will become a Country ^eeme
rarely.


Morr*d^e^! why you dare fight it seems, and I was told, you were no Cavalier:
A very dream, a wedge for men to break their swords upon, I shall never trust
fame again for your sake.


Thou never did^st cousin me. --


I was never so Illitterate in a man.


For (...) did ever think thou durst not fence but at a coplexion,
aglisteringe vapour: a thing of clothes, and fit for Chambermaydes to whett
their wits upon: but now resolve either to have your skine flayed off; or fight
with me for troubling my present meditations.


Why Sir if you be serious I shall quit that prejudice you have upon my
valour look you Sir I can draw, thus provoke'd I dare chastise you, too cause
I was merry I am not bound to feed your spleane eternally with laughter, yet I
am not Ignorant what an advantage, Sir, your weapon gives you in length.


Wee'le change why this is honnour in thee.


Now, Sir, keep of.


Sure thou art not so base.


I never cozend you, do you remember? these two will guide me on the rope.


You mean to dance then.


Yes but with quicker time then you I hope can follow. Thus I begin; fa la, la.



What a heathen coward is this? how the rogue tripps like a fayrie: to the
town with them, he has bin a footman sure I have not breath enough to overtake
him, 'twill be dark presently if I loose the sight of him; I'll search the
Town and if I find him not there, pursue him with hue and cry, and after
hang him.


The sun, whose busy eye is still Employed a spy upon our Actions, tire'd
with waytinge is drowsy gon to bed, about whose pillow night hath hung all her
wings, set up Tapers as if the day were timorous like a child and must have
light to sleep by, welcome all the hours that govern pleasure, but be slow
when you have blessed me with my wishes, time and love shall dwell like
twins, make this your bower and charm the air to sweetness, and to
silence: favour me now, and you shall chainge your states: Time shall be old
no more, I will contract with destiny, if he will spare his wings, to give
him youth and beauty, that we may find every minute a fresh child of
pleasure: love shall be proud to be no more a boy but grow to perfect
strength and hold consistance: for when two active lovers meet so happy as
we whose equal flames do light Embraces twill be no weight to number many
years in our delights and think all age a blessing: but language is too
narrow to express what I expect, tis fit my soul retire till she present her
self, and if it can measure my hop'd-for Joys with thoughts prepare to
entertain the happiness.


I have set already my design a moving to take my Captain, Vnderwit, who in
wine was late more feirce upon me; in the mean time I cannot choose but laugh
at the Device we hope to cheat my Master with sure the devil is agreat
friend to women that love men! He doth so furnish us with quainte inventions:
presently after supper, she began her sit of tooth atch, and did counterfeit so
naturally; but since she went to bed she almost raved by turns; I heard her
at it.


Oh oh; whose there.


Tis I for sooth, I heard you groan and I have not the heart to sleep, shall
I watch by you?


Oh no! get you to bed, make fast the chamber: I cannot endure. --


Dear heart, be patient.


I, you have your homilyes of patience, but if you had my pain, it would make
you mad, oh; oh.


I'll send for the french tooth drawer in the morning.


There is no rack nor torture like it, oh; what shall I do; I shall never
sleep again.


Which tooth is it.


The sweet one you may be sure troubles her


This, this; oh that there. --


They are happy that are old and have no teeth.


Oh take heed; now it shoots up to my head.


Thou make my headake with thy noise.


If you knew what I suffer, your head would ache, in deed, I must rise and
walk in the chamber, there's no remedy.


You'll catch more cold.


Oh no; dear life do not cross me; if you weere in my torment, you would
rise; and try any thing, for a little ease It cannot be worse the pain sure
came with a cold and who knows but an other cold may cure me.


I prithee come to bed again.


So, so do not trouble me. I am now in some little ease it is a heavenly
thing to be going.


Doest thou hear?


Your noise will bring my pain back again, if you knew what a vexation it is
for me to speak you would not put me to it so, if you do talk I will not
answer a word more.


Well! by this no light I'll to London to morrow. I see tis possible a woman's
Tooth may be as trouble so me, as her tongue


Oh; oh.


I cannot choose but pity her: that any woman should hold so much pain in a
hollow Tooth!


If my Master touched with so much compassion should rise and force me to bed
to him, I must not cry out a rape. Tis at the worst on my side, but fornication
in my own defence.


Prithee come to bed.


Oh; oh; oh:


The music at a convocation of cats, at a witches upsittinge is the spheres
to this catterwawlinge. I will thrust my head into the pillow, as Diana did, in
the bush when the bear was coming, and then I shall not hear her.


Oh! this is a kind of purgatory for the sines of the flesh: if she should
fall a sleep with the other knight; it is not possible I should hold out till
morning that which would fright away an ague hath put me into a fever: I
shall have the tooth atch in deed with counterfeitinge. I have known some men
taught the Stammers so, my gumes do murmur, there is fear all over my flesh
she will stay too long, and then, --


Vh; uh:


Oh; oh; I'll shift places to show more distraction at the worst my noise
shall be within his reach it may give her warning to return too.


I am full of fears and my own motion frights: me this furious love is a
strange Pilott: Sir where are you, ha; a sleep? can any dullness that is not
death possess a Gentleman so valiant in desires, when he expects to meet his
Mistress? how I blush to raise him? was I not worth thy waking expectation,
farewell: yet something like a chain that's fastened to my poor heart
restrains me, ink and paper:

I'll leave him a short monument of his shame my neglected love. He knows my
hand, farewell forgetful lover.


What? have I slept? some witchcraft did betray my eyes to so much darkness,
yet my dream was full of rapture such as I with all my waking sense would sly
to meet; me thought I saw a thousand cupids slyde from heaven and landing
here made this there scene of Revels clappinge their golden feathers, which
kept time while their own feet struck music to their dance as they had trod
and touched so may Lutes: This done with in a cloud formed like A throne, she
to whom love had consecrate this night my Mistress, did descend, and coming
towards me my soul that ever wakes, angry to see my body made a prisoner, so
mocked, shook of the chains of sleep, least I should loose essential
pleasures for a dream. Tis happy: I will not trust my self with ease and
silence. But walk and wait her coming that must bless me. Forgive me you
bright Stars, and do not frown that I have not attended as became one that
must live by your kind Influence. Not yet appear? she did command I should
with confidence expect her; Ha! what's here? this Character was not visible
before; " That man's too much composed of phlegm
" Will loose his Mistress, for a dream.
Tis hers. I know she has ben here; Oh fatal! and finding me a sleep
scorned to uncharme my dull and cursed silence, this distracts me. Have I so
long, with so much Art and Study labourd this hour and obtained, what my
ambition looked at, her consent, and when the tree itself bowed down Its
golden fruit and tempted me to gather, must I make my self incapable be
guilty of so black so base a forfeit? I could tear my eye lidds off, that
durst let in a mist so dark and so destroying: must I sleep at such a time?
that the devil must be over watched too? this howre hath blasted such a hope
as the Earth never teem'd with nor the spring gave up in smiling blossoms to
the breath of those sweet winds that whisper from the west, a tale of triumph
to the year, I could dissolve, with cursinge of my Le^hargie. How shall I
look upon her face, whose love and bold adventure I have thus rewarded? but
passion will not cure my wound which must bleed till I see her, and then
either cease blessed by her pardon; or dismiss a life though just, too poor
a sacrifice to her Anger. Where shall I hide my self and shame for ever?


I cannot forget my careless Gentleman; his neglect reproaches have wrought
strangely upon me; he's here.


Is there not a weazle crept in to your chamber, Lady.


A weazle Sir?


Yes, a Monsieur suckegg.


Do you take my chamber for a hens nest, Sir?


There's a Thing that calls him self Device, one that will break the heart of
a post-horse to continue a hand gallop with him, your a la mode, your fightinge
fayrie, fethered footed servant, when saw you him?


My fightinge servant, has he beaten you Sir? perhaps he thought you were
his rival: surely I saw him not since yesterday.


Be'e Lady how many mile is it to the next Cutler? the rogue has pawnd or sold
my sword.


Do you hear Sir? I can tell you now what Lady; it was you did abuse so


I abuse a Lady? Tell me the slave reported it; I hope it will prove this
Monsieur if ere we meet again; -- Who was it?


Upon condition Sir you will requite me but with one Gentle favour.


Any thing.


You must sit down and hear me then, while lat a distance, thus deliver.


Tis more state.


I am most unfortunate.


For what dear Damsel?


And wrong d by a Gentleman I loved.


Can he be a Gentleman that dares wrong so much love and beauty? what s the
offence?


He will not love again.


And you would have the stubborn man corrected?


I would be revenged, if I know how, and honour him, should do me ^ustice.


Name the man: I'll do it.


I cannot.


How.


Yet turn your face: alas! it is your self: I have your word to punish him.


Sweet Lady I am well acquainted wi^h the worthy Gentleman, but will not kill
nor strike him: for I know he has just reason not to love you, you, of all
your sex; he told me so.


His reason?


Was in these words, suppose you hear him speak it. Now do you sit; Lady;
when I consider you to a perfect form of what we can call hands^me with all
your attributes of soul and body where no Addition or detraction can by
cupids, ^icer critics find a fault, or Mercury with your eternal frame then
consider what a thing I am to this high Character of you; so low so lost to
noble merits, I despair to love a Mistress cannot love again.


This is as much dissembled modesty.


No let it all alone, I have other reasons, Lady, among my papers, to love, or
to be in love is to be gulled, that's the plain English of cupids latin
besides, all reverence to the calling, I have vowed never to marry: and you
know, love may bring a man to*t at last and therefore my fine gewgaw, do not
abuse me.


How can I when you will neither love me nor marry me?


I was not made for a husband.


But I would make you.


I know what you would make me.


Monsieur Device if you be alone would present his service to you.


Is he come?


Do me but one favour, I'll recant my love, I will not have so much as one
good thought of you, I will neglect you, Sir, but for three minutes.


I'll have patience so long.


Admit him. I will be revenged on somebody? now Sir:


I'have broug'ht you a weapon Lady.


Me, what to do Sir.


Tis justice I present it to your feet, whose love Armed me to vindicate your
honour.


My honour?


This is but the first of my valour in your cause; if you affect these
monuments, I'll make you up an Armoury: mean time receive my service with this
sword; if he provoake me to fight with him again; I'll cut his hand off and
bring it with me, to present the next.


Whose hand dear Servant?


He is not worth the naminge, alas; this does not deserve your knowledge; only
think what I dare do, when your bright name is questioned: and I in time may
merit to be called the darling of your Virgin thoughts.


Pray stay; my name traduced? who was so impudent? do me the grace to let me
know on whom your valour has bin exercised.


Why upon the formal thing, called Courtwell, I would call him Gentleman, but
that I have baffled him; you need no other witness then his sword:


Look you Sir I have made fast the door because I mean before you go, to
have a satisfaction for the base Injury you have done me.


I done you Injury?


Not that I value Courtwell whom you would pretend has bin too saucy with my
honour, but cause I scorn to own a goodness should depend upon your sword or
vindication: I'll fight with thee my self in this small volume against your
bulk in folio.


Excellent wench.


I was your champion, Lady.


I had rather have no fame then have thee name it; thou fight for a Ladies
honour, and disarm a Gentleman? thou fence before the Pageants make room for
the porters, when like Elephants they carry once a year the Cyttie Castles: or
go a feasting with the drum or school boys to the bank side save the bears
a whippinge that day: come Sir I mean to have about with you.


At what weapon?


This, and none other, Sir.


I'll rather bleed to death then lift a sword in my defence* whose
inconsiderate brightness may fright the roses from your Cheeks, leave the
lyllyes to Lament the rude divorce: but were a man to dare me, and your enemy,
my rage more nimble then the M^dian shaft should fly into his bosom, and your
eye change Anger into smiles, to see me fight and cut him into a ragged staff.


I cannot hold no longer; you have got a stomach Sir with running, I'll try how
you can eat a Sword.


Have you an ambush Lady; I'll cry out murder, tis two to one. Fair play!


Let me but cut one leg off to mar his running.


Hold: let me speak.


What can thou say for thy baseness?


Some men love wit, and can without dishonour endure a Ieast; Why? do you
think I knew not you were here but observed to see my humour? I came to wait
upon you with your sword.


How came you by it? Confess before this Lady.


Doest think her witt's so lymber to believe I could compel it from thee,
twas a trick, a mere conceit of mirth, thou shalt have mine: Doest think I
stand upon a sword? I'll give thee a case of pistols, when we come to London;
and shoot me when I love thee not: pox on it, thou apprehend me well
enough.


But I am not satisfied, do you love this Gentlewoman?


Hum;


You will resolve Sir.


As may become a stranger; I will not lose thy friendshipp for all woman kind.


He dares, not own you.


I easily forgive him: I should hate my self if I depended on his pity.


Thou art a noble wench: shall we leave of these Jiggs, and speak our minds
in earnest by these twyn lips, I love thee extremely.


Swear by your own.


They shall be mine: Monsieur, for your penance you shall a long witness.


What I pray.


The priest shall tell you, come, we have both dissembled, we do love one an
other.


Tis not possible.


Unless you will deny me in the church. I have vowed to lye with you this
night: Device, amble before, and find the Parson out; we will be friends, and
thou shalt be her Father.


I must maintain my honour, or be beaten.


Com we will have no more acquaintance.


Very pretty! I may deceave you yet for all your confidence.


If the sky fall, wee'le have the darkes to supper.


It was a strange neglect, Sir.


I confess it, and not deserve to live for it, yet if you but knew my
sufferings.


Let her be Judge.


By no means Madame.


You may trust her knowledge.


This is worse then a whippinge now, these Ladies have no mercy on a
delinquent; I must stand to it; there is no tyrant to a chambermaid, made
judge in such a case; I'll give a limb to be quit now; but if she choose, I
am a cripple for this world.


Is it possible? A man and such a beast?


So: I must to the shambles.


What punishment can be equal to the offence?


He looks with some compunction for his fault, troth, Madame, such an other
night: and try whether hee'le sleep again.


Merciful wench; if we piece again; it shall be a good turn in thy way.


My husband is resolved this day for London. It is his humour, or else worse,
suspicion: there's no pretence for him to stay behind.


You have made ill use of your time Sir Francis; I know not how to help you;
seven years hence you may have such an other opportunity.


Watch if my husband come not this way, Dorothy, well Sir, though your
transgression deserve no pardon, yet I am charitable upon condition.


Any thing, Madame: this shows excellent in you. No penance shall displease,
so you absolve me. Bid me to climb some rock or pyramid, upon whose narrow
spear you have advanced my peace, and I will reach it, or else fall lost to
the world in my contempt.


You speak gloriously, the condition that assures your pardon, is only this,
that you conclude, here, all your loose desires, with a resolve never to
prosecute or hope to enjoy me:


Call you this charity, let me rather loose your pardon, then ever be thus
Divorced: bind me never to see you, (and yet that were cruelty) then, charm
me to forget that I am man, or have a heart, and you a beauty which your
absence can as well make nothing, as divide from my adoring It is not cure
but killing to prescribe I never must enjoy you, if you have resolved death
upon me, let it be when we like lovers have embraced.


It is not possible.


nothing in love can be impossible to willing minds. I'll tell you, Madame,
Sure the devil has forsworn the flesh, there may be a plot, I have it. An
excellent rare Dovice, if you but favour it: your husband is immediately for
London I must in modesty ride with him; you are left behind.


How can that proffit you?


What a deal of submission these foolish men trouble us women with, that are
more forward to be friends again, then they?


I will counterfeit a fall.


A fall?


I, from my horse, observe me then.


My confederate I hope by this time is at the gate enquiring for Sir Richard
very formally from the old Knight his Master good Lady: the follow has wit to
manage it.


My F^o man shall pretend himself the surgeon to attend me; I'st not rare?
stand but to it fate in this and if I fail I will sit down a convert and
renownce all wanton hope hereafter. Dearest Madame if you did mean this honour
to me before let not your loving thoughts freeze in a minute; my genius is a
prophet.


Sir Richard, Madame, is coming this way.


Shall I hope again


I will not say you shall despair.


You bless me.


My business is on foot, your Jewell Madame will credit much the cause.


We will with draw; and let me know how you, have cast the plot.


From thy Master? his name?


Sir William Litleland.


I do not know him.


His name is well known in Lincolneshire near the Fenns; there were of his
family Ancient Gentlemen before the conquest, some say, ever since the flood,


Little Land?


But he has now more land then 3. of the best of the sheer, thank the dutch
men that have drunk up al the water.


They water -- drinkers?


Why not, as well as eat dry land? they are lyn'd with butter; Sir; they fear
no dropsies.


She has bin absent these two years, the occasion her dislike and
disaffection to a Gentleman whom I confess, I did severely urge her to marry,
if she have lived with you, as my late intelligence informs me in the nature
of a Servant, which is be^ath my wish and her condition, I hope upon this
knowledge, you will with consider of her qualittie she being my only child
and heir to my fortunes, use her like a Gentlewoman: and though my pears have
made me unfitt for travel I do Intend upon the return of my daughter, whom
I shall receive as a new blessing from you, to express my self for your
favour

Your true Friend and Servant WILLIAM LITTELAND.

My maid Dorothy A knights daughter heir? do you know your young Mistress?


I shall be happy to see her, with a Letter and token from her Lady Mother.


I pray trust me to deliver it.


I, With all my heart, Sir; you may command.


T^omas, pray entertain this Footman in the buttery: let him drink refresh
him self and set the cold chine of beef before him he has run hard.


That will stay his stomach indeed; but claret is his only binder.


Sack while you live after a heate, Sir.


Peas you, I'll show you the way to be drunk.


To my lovinge daughter? may not this be a trick?

By your favour Madame; Captain, gather you the sense of that Letter, while I
peruse this, you know Mistress Dor^thy?


I have had a great desire to know her, I confess, but she is still like the
bottom of the mapp, Terra la, I have ben a long time hoveringe about the
Magellan straytes but have made no new discoveryes.


Ha! This is no counterfeit; I dare trust my own Judgment; tis a very rich one
I am confirmed, and I will seal them up again. My Ladies Woman Sir William
Littelands daughter and heir? what say you now of Mistress Dorothy?


A great deal better then I did, and yet I have loud her this half year in a
kind of way, of my conscence, why may not I marry her?


This Jewell was sent by her Mother to her.


Dear Uncle conceal it till I have talk with her, oh for some witchcraft to
make all sure.


I like this well: she's here.


I vow, Mistress Dorothy; if I were immodest, it was the mere impudence of my
sack, and not my own disposition but if you please to accept my love now by
the way of marriage I'll make you satisfaction, like a Gentleman in the point
of honour.


your birth and estate is to high and unequal for me, Sir.


What care I for portion or a face, she that has good eyes, has good -- Give
me virtue.


You are pleased to make your mirth of me.


By this ruby nay; you shall wear it in the broad eye of the world; doest
think I jest?


Sir Richard: --


If he were ten Sir Richards, I am out of my wardship


How he flutters in the lyme-bush: it takes rarely.


What a necessary thing were a household chapline?


So; so; the wench inclynes, I will hasten my jornie that I may appear with
more excuse, when they are married in my absence.


Come we are fast enough, and now I have thee, I'll tell the all the fault I
find, thou hast a little two much wit, to be a wife: it could not be too
nimble for a Mistress. There is a part of your penance still behind Device;
you would pretend to be a poet, I'll not disgrace the name to call thee one,
but let me have times against we go to bed, Two Anagrames that weigh an ownce
with comment, and after that, in verse your affidavitt that you do wish us
joye, and I'll discharge you.


Tis time I were at study then.


About them, your double congie, and depart with silence: now prithee tell me
who reported I had wronged a Lady? Was it not thy revenge to make me Angry?


It was indeed Now tell me; why at the first approach seemed you so modest? you
have confidence to spare, now.


Troth I came not with any wooing purpose: only to please my Uncle, and try
thy wit and that converted me.


Did you see my Master Captain Vnderwit?


Yes he's talking with a priest and Mistress Dorothy.


Her Fathers Footman is here, she is a Knights daughter and heir, but she
doth not know it.


I think so?


Where's my Uncle?


A mile on his way to London, by this time with Sir Richard, I lunge to see my
Master.


We shall want Company to dance.


My Sister.


If you please Madame, you may call me, Brother, we have ben at, I Iohn take
thee Elisabeth, a possett and four naked thighs in a bed to night, wee'le bid
fair earnest for a boy too.


Tis even so Madame; the Priest has done it


Nay then all joys attend you; if this had bin known, it might have, stayed
Sir Richard, and your Uncle one day more.


Room for an other couple.


In hell, my Master is married.


My husband left some letters, and a token was sent you Mistress Dorothy, you
did Ill to obscure your self so much, you shall not want hereafter all
respects that may become you.


Madame I know not what you mean.


She will not take it upon her, yet.


There is the sport


Oh Madame, news; Ill news; an Accident which will blast all your mirth, Sir
Francis; --


What of him.


Has broke; --


His neck?


You guess very near it, tis but, his shoulder has saved that Joint; a fall
from his horse they say hath much endangerd him.


My Uncle hurt?


He has kept his word; now if he counterfeyte handsomely.


Monsieur Device, I must entreat a courtesy: you have wit and I will have a
Masque to entertain my new Father in Law Sir William Littleland; Mistress
Dorothy now my wife is his only daughter heir


Who has gulled you thus? I am no Knights daughter.


Give you Joy Captain


She is still loath to confess it.


If you love charity; a bone setter.


He counterfeits rarely, where is Sir Richard.


He rid before, but I sent my Footman, to tell him my misfortune; oh; Madame.


This is better then the tooth atch; he carries it excellently.


Ask me no torturinge questions, I desire Madame a little conference with you,
I'll thank the rest if they will with draw.


Lett's leave him.


Wee'le to my chamber, Captain.


You have a mind to examine the business privately.


No, good Captain you may be present, come; Thomas, thou shalt be witness
too.


They are gone, you fain most Artificially, let me embrace you.


Oh take heed.


What's the matter.


Tis no dissembling, Madame; I have had a fall indeed: a dreadful fall, I
feel it, I think my horse saw the devil in some hedge, ere I had rid three
furlongs: gave a start, pitched me off his back like a bar and broke a flint
with my shoulder, I think; which struck fire too there was something like it
in my eyes; I am punished.


But is this serious, are you hurt indeed?


Hurt? I have broke my shoulder, feelingly, and I am of opinion when I do
enjoy you, Madame, I shall break my neck: that will be the next; I'll take
this for a warning and will leave of in time.


It makes me tremble.


I will be honest now, and so forgive me, is not the surgeon come yet?


Heaven hath cured us both.


I am not cured yet, oh for the bone setter, if ever I counterfeit again.


There is a blessing fallen upon my blood: your only thoughts charm had power
to make my thoughts wicked, and your conversion disenchants me: may both our
lives be such as heaven may not greeve, to have showed this bounty.


Sir Richard; Madame:


You may enter now, Sir.


I do not like this Stratagem, Sir Francis must not here practice his court
tricks, I will not trust my wives surgery:

He's come;

How is it noble Sir Francis; best with draw, I'll see him dressed my self.


Madame and Gentleman; Mistress D^rothy will not acknowledge she is a Knights
daughter she swears she knows no Littleland.


Till it appear to whom, this ^emm was meant, deaf Madame, be you
treasurer, I confess I have wealth enough in such a noble husband.


It shall belong to thee; be honest Dorothy, and use him well.


With my best study^, Madame;


Where is this Foo^man you talk of?


He p^etended letters to carry two miles off to a Kinsmans of his Masters and
return presently: he drunk 3. or 4. beer glasses of Sack and he rune away
so lightly.


His reward shall overtake him.


Will you have her; she'll do you service, Captain at a low Country leaguer
or thou Thomas I le give thee a coppihold.


You have one life to come in that lease yet, I thank you I am free, and that
is Inheritance. For ought I know she may serve us both.


Come you may persuade her to take it upon her for your creditt, the gullery is
yet with in these walls let your shames go no further, the wench may prove
right; she may.


What news from Sir Francis.


Wife I heartily ask thy forgiveness: I had jealous thoughts, but all is right
again.


I will deserve your confidence.


No great danger, his blade bone dislocated: the man has put every thing in
his right place


Do you hear Sir Richard, we are married.


Tis well done it is to my mind, send you Joy;


Come hither Dorothy.


My Mother dyed, I have it by tradition, so, as soon as I was borne my Father
but no Knight, is now in the Indies a poor Merchant that broke for 20000.


The ships may come home, ha;


You had best use me well now we are married, I will be sworn you forced me
to the church and thrice compelled me there to said, I Dorothy -- The Parsons
oath and mine, for ought I know may make it half a rape.


There is no remedy we can prove no conspiracy; and because I have bin gulled
my self, get her with child; my Do is barren, at birth of her first baby
I'll give thee a hundred pieces.


That's somewhat yet: when charge coms on, thy hand, a wife can be but a wife:
it shall cost me 500. but I'll make thee a Laay in earnest.


How is it Sir Francis.


My Surgeon says no danger: when you please I may venture Sir to London.


No hast now.


Not to night, Sir, we must have revels, and you salute my bride.


And mine.


A Knights daughter and heir.


May all Joys thrive upon your Ioues; then you are cozened of your Mistress
Monsieur, but your nephew knows I have met with my match if not put to the
worst.


Come we loose time.


Preserve your Marriage faith: a full increase of what you wish confirm your
happiness.



