I would my Parents had kept me up as birds in darkness, when they are taught
to sing Artificial Tunes, that my ears only might have been employed; and as
those Teachers whistle to birds several times, so would I have had Tutors to
have read to me several Authors, as the best Poets, the best Historians, the
best Philosophers, Moral and Natural, the best Grammarians, Arithmeticians,
Mathematicians, Logicians, and the like. Thus perchance I might have spoke as
eloquently upon every subject, as Birds sing sweetly several tunes; but since
my Education hath been so negligent, I wish I might do some noble Action, such
as might raise a monumental Fame on the dead Ashes of my Fore-fathers, that my
Name might live everlastingly.


I hate to be compared to an inferior, or to have an inferior compared to me:
wherefore if I were Jove, I would damn that creature that should compare me to
any thing less than my self.


Your Ladyship is like a Goddess, above all comparison: wherefore I think there
is none worthy to match in Marriage with you, unless there were some Masculine
Divine Creature on Earth to equal you, as surely there is none.


I shall not willingly marry, unless it were to have a command over my Husband.


But Husbands, Madam, command Wives.


Not those that are Divine Creatures.


Husbands, Madam, are Reprobates, and regard not Divinity, nor worship Earthly
Deities.


Whilst they are Suitors, they worship, and women command their wooing servants.


The truth is, all Suitors do worship with an Idolatrous zeal, but their zeals
tire at length, as most zeals do, and men are content to be commanded, whilst
they are Courting servants, and do obey with an industrious care, and with an
humble and respectful Demeanour, a submissive and awful Countenance, with an
admiring and listening Ear, pleasing and applausing Speech, insomuch as their
Mistress might think they commanded not only their Senses, but also their Souls;
yet after they are married, they become from being servants, to be Masters, and
they are so far from obeying, as they command, and instead of an humble and
respectful demeanour, and an awful countenance, they will be haughty and surly,
and their faces will be clothed in frowns, and instead of an admiring eye and
a listening ear, they will neither regard nor take notice of their Wives, unless
it be to throw a scornful glance, and instead of a pleasing and applausing
speech, they will reprove, discommend, or threaten. Thus, although they serve
as Slaves when they are wooing Suitors, yet they rule as Tyrants when they are
Husbands, as all Slaves do that come to rule, prove Tyrants, like as the most
fierce zealous Supplicants oft-times prove Atheists, or Reprobates.


Then I must never marry; for I cannot endure to be commanded, but must be
admired and adored.


'Tis fit you should, being a Divine Creature, Madam.


Women that love the Courtship of men, must change themselves into as many
several humours as Protheus shapes; as sometimes gay and merry, sometimes grave
and majestic, sometimes melancholy, sometimes bashful and coy, sometimes free
and confident, sometimes patient, and sometimes choleric, sometimes silent,
and sometimes discoursive, according as they find those humours they meet with.


Let me tell you, Wanton, they must love Courtship well, that will take such
pains to transform themselves so often, to please, or rather to get Lovers.


You say well, Ease, but they rather lose than gain by the bargain; for the
charge of troublesome observance, is more than the profit they receive
therefrom.


Truly, Mistress Temperance, there is no delight in pains-taking, ask my Lady
Pleasure.


No truly Ease; but a sweet civility, a modest behaviour and countenance, and a
pleasing speech, gains more Lovers than a metamorphosed humour.


In truth a well-temper'd humour is easy to themselves, and delightful to
others.


You speak for Lovers, but there is a difference betwixt Courtship and Love;
for dull Love is contented to be entertained only with plain truth, and is
constant to an honest heart, but sprightly Courtship delights in
extravagancies, lives in varieties, but dies in particulars or singularities.


True delight lives in true love.


And true Love lives in Temperance.


And Temperance lives in Ease.


And Ease lives in Idleness.


And Idleness lives in Wantonness, and Wantonness lives in Pleasure.


Let me tell you, Wanton, that Pleasure doth not live in Wantonness nor
Idleness; for Pleasure lives in Peace, maintained by Plenty, instructed by
Prudence, protected by Justice, and governed by Grave Temperance here.


All the Ladies in the City are in love with me, and that woman thinks her self
happy that can receive a Courtship from me; but I mean to marry none but
Mademoiselle Ambition, nor would I marry her but for my particular ends, for
she is rich.


She is so, if they be rich that have vast desires. But are you sure you shall
have her?


Yes, for her Friends and I am agreed, and I know she cannot deny me; for what
woman would not be proud to marry me?


'Tis said she is a Noble Lady.


Faith she will be but a trouble to me; but I will only keep her for breed, and
entertain myself, and lead my life with Mademoiselle Pleasure, and she shall
share of the riches that Mademoiselle Ambition brings.


Now you talk of riches Sir, what shall we do with the rich Cabinet you bought?
must that be carried to Mademoiselle Pleasure?


Yes, but I have other presents to send along with it, which I will give order
for.


Live under these laws? I will sooner live under the Turks.


What makes thee such an enemy to these laws, Monsieur Sensuality?


Why Monsieur Censure, I am fined a hundred pounds for kissing a Mistress, and
getting a child.


Indeed the Turks government is the only government for such men as would have
many Wives, Concubines, and Slaves.


Why, he is a slave that lives not under such government; for what greater
slavery is there than to be tied to one woman? I am sure our Fore-fathers, who
were godly men, were not tied to such slavery; they had their liberty as the
Turks, and such like wise governments, a to have as many Wives and Mistresses
as they please, or at least as many as they can maintain.


Although you may think that government wise, because it fits your Appetite,
yet well-tempred men, 'tis likely, will be of another opinion, as to think the
strict Canon-Laws of Europe are better for the good of Commonwealths, and
every particular Family, by restraining one man to one woman, than to let them
have more, or as many as they will.


If well-temperd men be of that opinion, they are fools, which I will soon
prove them to be. As first for the Common-wealth, there is nothing more
disadvantageous; for those Commonwealths flourish with greatest glory, that are
fullest populated, by reason populated Kingdoms are strongest, both for their
own defence, and against Foreign Enemies, as being able to conquer others by
Invasions, enlarging their Dominions with their numbers, increasing their
numbers with their numerous issues, begot and born from their many Wives,
Concubines, and Slaves: when by our niggardly laws Kingdoms become uninhabited
and barren for want of men to till and manure the ground: And as for our Wars,
they'd seem as private Challenges, and our Armies as particular Duellers, being
met with their Seconds to decide their petty quarrels, and to show their valour
by the hazard of their lives, and our Battles seem slight Skirmishes, or like a
Company or Rout that kill each other in an idle Fruy. Thus in comparison of
other Empires, all Europe is but as one Kingdom, for numbers of men, and
Martial Forces, when by the Extent it may be accounted the fourth part of the
known World. And as for particular Families, want of children breeds
discontent, and not only destroys industry, but makes spoil and unthrifts; for
those that have no children, they care not what becomes of their goods, lands,
or livings, spending them through cluelesness, or through riot: And as for
Women, it spoils them from being good wives; for being sole Mistresses, having
no Co-partners, nor Shares, neither of their Husbands, children, or estates,
and being the only She that is served or attended, embraced, loved, or
maintained, grows proud, imperious, insults and domineers, and disputes with
her Husband for preheminency, and the truth is, for the most part, obtains it.
Thus men become slaves to the distaff for quietness sake, otherwise there is
such quarrels and brawleries, that his house and home, that should be his Couch
of Ease, his Bed of Rest, his peaceable Haven, or haven of Peace, is for the
most part his couch of thorns, his bed of cares, his hell of torments, or
tormenting hell, and his whole Family are like a tempestuous Sea, where
Passions hurl into Factions, and rise in waves of discontent: But when men have
an absolute power over their wives, they force them into quiet obedience; and
where men have many Wives, Concubines, and Slaves, the women are humbled into a
submission, each woman striving which should be most serviceable, and who can
get most love and favour; and as for Bastards, they are as much the Fathers
children, as those that are got in Wedlock.


But it is likely that Concubines and slaves will be false, and father their
children on those that never begot them.


Why so may Wives, and 'tis most probable they do so; but as other Nations do
allow many Wives, Concubines, and slaves, so they give men power and rule to
govern and restrain them; and the men are so wise in other Nations, as they
suffer no other men but themselves to come near them, hardly to look at the
outside of their Seraglio's, as that part of the house they are lodged in.


Thou hast spoke so well, and hast made so learned a Speech for many Wives,
Concubines, and slaves, as I am converted, and will, if thou wilt, travel into
such Kingdoms as allow such numbers and varieties, that I may be naturalliz'd
to their liberties.


What is the reason, Monsieur Satirical, you do not marry?


The reason, Monsieur Inquisitive, is, that I cannot find a wife fit for me.


Why, there are women of all Ages, Births, Humours, Statures, Shapes,
Complexions, Features, Behaviours, and Wits. But what think you of marrying the
Lady Nobilissimo?


She is a Lady that out-reaches my Ambition.


What think you of the Lady Bellissimo?


She is a Lady for Admiration, and not for use.


What think you of marrying the Lady Piety?


She is a Lady to be prayed unto as a Saint, not to be embraced as wife.


What think you of the Lady Modesty?


She is a Lady that will not only quench amorous love, but the free matrimonial
love.


What do you think of the Lady Sage?


She is a Lady to rule as a Husband, and not to be ruled as a Wife.


What think you of the Lady Politic?


She is a Lady fitter for Counsel than for Marriage.


What say you to the Lady Ceremony?


She is a Lady fitter for a Princely Throne, than the Mariage-bed.


What say you to the Lady Poetical?


She is a Lady fitter for Contemplation than Fruition.


What say you to the Lady Humility?


She is a Lady sooner won than enjoyed.


What say you to the Lady Sprightly?


She is a Lady that will disquiet my rest, being fitter for dancing than
sleeping.


What say to the Lady Prodigal?


She is a Lady I might feast with, but could not thrive with.


What say you to the Lady Vanity?


She is a Lady too various and extravagant for my humour.


What say you to the Lady Victoria?


She is a Lady I had rather hear of, than be enslaved by.


What say you to the Lady Innocent Youth?


She is a Lady that may please with embracing, but not with conversing; she is
fitter for love than for company, for Cupid than for Pallas, for sport than for
counsel.


What say you to the Lady Wanton?


She is fitter for an hour than for an Age.


What say you to the Lady Poverty?


She is fitter for my Charity than my Family.


What say you to the Lady Ill-favoured?


She is a Lady fitter for a Nunnery than a Nursery; for Beads, than for
Children.


What say you to the Lady Weakly?


She is fitter for Death than for Life; for Heaven, than the World.


By your Answers I perceive you will not Marry.


Have I not reason, when I can find such Answers from the Sex?


But the Gods have commanded Marriage?


But Saints do choose a single life, and in case of Marriage, I will sooner
follow the Example of the Saints, than the commands of the Gods.


Ladies, what think you of good Husbands?


I think well of good Husbands.


But it is a question whether good Husbands will think well of us.


I think good Husbands may be in our thoughts, but not actually in the World.


I am of your opinion, they may be mentioned in our words, but not found in our
lives.


Faith we may hear of good husbands, and read of good wives, but they are but
Romances.


You say right; for we may as soon find an Heroic Lover, and see all his
impossible Actions out of a Romance Book, as a good Husbands; but as for Wives,
I will not declare my Opinion.


Nor I; but were there such men that would make good husbands, it were as
difficult to get them, as for a Romantic Lover to get his Mistress out of an
Enchanted Castle.


For my part I had rather die a Maid, than take the pains to get a good
Husband.


I wonder our Sex should desire to Marry; for when we are unmaried, we are sued
and sought to, and not only Mistress of our selves, but our Suitors: But when we
are married, we are so far from being Mistresses, as we become slaves.


The truth is, there is no Act shows us, or rather proves us to be so much
fools as we are, as in marrying: for what greater folly can there be, than to
put our selves to that condition which will sorce us to sue to power, when
before that voluntary slavery we were in a condition to use power, and make men
sue to us.


We must confess, when we well consider, it is very strange, since every
Creature naturally desires and strives for preheminency, as to be superior,
and not inferior; for all Creatures endeavour to command, and are unwilling to
obey; for it is not only Man, but even the Beasts of the Field, the Birds of
the Air, and the Fishes in the Sea; and not only Beasts, Birds, and Fish, but
the Elements those creatures inhabit in, strive for superiority; only Women,
who seem to have the meanest souls of all the Creatures Nature hath made; for
women are so far from endeavouring to get power, as they voluntarily give away
what they have.


Talk not of women's souls, for men say we have no souls, only beautiful bodies.


But beautiful bodies are a degree of souls, and in my Conscience please men
better than our souls could do.


If anything prove we have no souls, it is in letting men make such fools of
us.


Come, come Ladies, by Women's Actions they prove to have more, or at least
better souls than Men have, for the best parts of the Soul are Love and
Generosity, and Women have more of either than Men have.


The truth is, that although Reason and Understanding are the largest parts of
the Soul, yet Love and Generosity are the delicatest parts of the Soul.


Goodmorrow young Ladies, you appear this morning like sweet-smelling flowers,
some as Roses, others as Lillies, others as Violets, Pinks, and Primroses, and
your associating in a company together, is like as a Posy which Love hath
bound up into one Bucket, which is a sit Present for the Gods.


If you would have us presented to the Gods, we must die; for we are never
preferred to them but by Death: wherefore we must be given to Death, before the
Gods can have us; they may hear us whilst we live, and we may hear of them,
but partake of neither until we die.


O that were pity, Ladies; for there is nothing more sad in Nature, than when
Death parts a witty Soul from a young beautiful Body, before the one hath built
Monuments of Memory, and the other gained Trophies of Lovers: And as for the
Gods, you will be as acceptable to them when you are old, as when you are
young.


As nothing could make me so sad as untimely death of Youth, Wit, and Beauty,
so there is nothing could anger me more, as for Fortune to frown upon Merit, or
not to advance it according to its worth, or to bury it in Oblivion, hindering
the passage into Fames Palace.


For my part, I believe Death will neither call nor come for you before his
natural time, if you do not send Surfeit and Excess to call him to take you
away.


Indeed Mankind seem as if they were Deaths Factors; for they do strive to
engross and destroy all other creatures, or at least as many as they can; and
not only other creatures, but their own kind, as in Wars; and not only their
own kind, but themselves, in idle and unprofitable Adventures, and gluttonous
Excess, thus as I said, they are Deaths Factors, buying sickness with health,
hoping to gain pleasure, and to make delight their profit, but they are
cozened, for they only get Diseases, Pains, and Aches.


Pray Ladies mark how far you are gone from the Text of your discourse, as from
sweet-smelling flowers to stinking carrion, which are dead carcasses; from a
lively good-morrow, to a dead farewell; from mirth to sadness.


You say right, Mother Matron; wherefore pray leave off this discourse, for I
hate to hear off death; for the thoughts of death affright me so, as I can take
no pleasure of life when he is in my mind.


Why Ladies, the thought of death is more than death himself; for thoughts are
sensible or imaginable things, but Death himself is neither sensible nor
imaginable.


Therefore I would not think of him; and when I am dead, I am past thinking.


Let us discourse of something that is more pleasing than Death.


Then by my consent, Ladies, your discourse shall be of Venus and Cupid, which
are Themes more delightful to your Sex, and most contrary to death; for Love is
hot, and Death is cold; Love illuminates life, and Death quenches life out.


Let me tell you Sir, Love is as apt to burn life out, as Death is to quench it
out, and I had rather die with cold, than be burnt with heat; for cold kills
with a dead numness, when heat kills with a raging madness.


But Lovers are tormented with fears and doubts, which cause cold sweats,
fainting of spirits, trembling of limbs; it breaks the sweet repose of sleep,
disturbs the quiet peace of the mind, vades the colours of beauty, nips or
^lasts the blossom of youth, making Lovers look withered, before Time hath
made them old.


It is a sign, Lady, you have been in love, you give so right a Character of a
Lover.


No, there requires not a self-experience to find out a Lovers trouble, for the
outward Actions will declare their inward grief and passion.


Certainly she is in love, but conceals it, she keeps it as a Secret.


Love cannot be secret, the passion divulges it self.


Confess, Are you not in love?


Nay she will never confess a Secret, unless you tell her one; for those that
tell no secrets, shall hear none.


O yes, for a Secret is like a child in the womb; for though it be concealed
for a time, it will come out at last, only some comes out easier than others,
and some before their time.


Nay whenever a secret comes out, it's untimely.


Secrets are like Coy Ducks, when one is flown out, it draws out others, and
returns with many.


Then like a Coy Duck I will try if I can draw all you after me.


She shall see she is like a Duck, which is like a Goose, and we like her, for
we will follow her.


Have you been at Monsieur Busie's house, to tell him I desire to speak with
him?


Yes, I have been at his house.


And will he come?


Faith Sir the house is too unwieldy to stir, and Monsieur Busy is too Active
to stay at home: but the truth is, I went at four a clock this morning, because
I would be sure to find him and his servants, and their Master was flown out of
his nest an hour before: Then I told his servants I would come about
dinner-time, and they laughed, and asked me what time was that? I said I
supposed at the usual time, about Noon, or an hour before or after, but they
said their Master never kept any certain time of eating, being full of
business. Then I asked them what time that would be when he would come home to
bed: They answered, that his time of Resting was as uncertain as his time of
Eating. Then I prayed them to tell me at what time they thought I might find
him at home: They said it was impossible for them to guess, for that their
Master did move from place to place, as swift as thoughts move in the Mind.
Then I prayed them that they would tell him when he came home, that you would
desire to speak with him: They told me they would, but they did verily believe
he would forget to come to you, by reason his head was so full of busy
thoughts, or thoughts of business, as there was no room more for a thought to
stay in. So I went away in despair, but coming home, I chanced to see him at a
little distance, so I made all the haste I could to overtake him, placing my
Eyes fixedly upon him, because I would not lose him; but his pace was so swift,
and his several turnings in several Lanes and Allies were so many, as it was
impossible for me to keep my measure, pace, or sight, for like a Bird, he did
not only fly out of my reach, but out of my view; but by a second good fortune,
I met him just at your Gate, and I stopped his way until I had told him your
Message, which was, you would speak with him: He answered me, he could not
possibly stay, for his business called him another way. I told him, that if he
did not come and speak with you, or stay until you did come and speak with him,
his Law-sute, which was of great Importance, would be lost, for you could not
do him any further service to your Friends, that should help him, until he had
resolved you of some questions you were to ask him; besides that, you wanted a
Writing that he had. He told me that he was very much obliged to you for your
favour to him, but he could not possibly stay to speak with you, for he had
some business to do for two or three other men, and he must of necessity go
seek those men out whom the business concerned; so that I could not persuade
him by any means, although for his own good, to come in, or to stay till you
went to him.


Faith he is so busy, that he will neither do himself good nor any other man;
for he runs himself out of the Field of Business, being over-busy, neither
holding the Reins of Time, nor sitting steady in the Seat of Judgment, nor
stopping with the Bit of Discretion, nor taking the Advantages of Opportunity;
but totters with Inconstancy, and falls with Loss. Thus his busy thoughts do
tire his Mind, so that his life hath a sorry, sore, and weary Journey.


I think he is a man that is full of Projects.


So full, as his head is stuffed with them, and he begins many designs, but
never finishes any one of them; for his designs are built upon vain hopes,
without a Foundation: But were his hopes solid with probability, yet his
inconstancy, and unsteady doubts, and over-cautious care, would pull down, or
ruin his designs before they were half built.


Monsieur Sensuality, let us examine you, What company have you met withal,
that hath caused you to break your Word with us, when you had promised you
would come, and carry us to a Play?


If he carry us all, he will carry a very heavy load.


Ladies should be heavy, and not light.


But Monsieur Sensuality, pray tell us where you have been, and with whom.


Why I have been with as proper a Lady as any is in this City.


What do you mean by a proper Lady?


He means a propped Lady.


I mean a Tall, Proportionable Lady, which is a comely sight.


Not to my Eyes; for I never see a tall big woman, but I think she rather
proceeds from the race of Titan than Jove, for she seems to be more Body than
Soul, more Earth than Flame.


For my part, I think there cannot be too much of a fair Lady; and if I were to
choose, I would choose her that had more body than soul, for her soul would be
useless to me, by reason souls cannot be enjoyed as bodies are.


Yes, in a spiritual conversation they may.


I hate an incorporeal Conversation.


Why then you hate the Conversation of the Gods.


I love the Conversation and Society of fair young Ladies, such as you are.


That is not the Answer to my question.


Then let me tell you, Ladies, that most of our Sex do venture Heaven for your
sakes, and will sooner disobey the Gods than you.


So you make as if Women commanded Men against the Gods.


No Lady, but we serve Women, when we should serve the Gods, and pray to your
Sex, when the Gods would have us pray to them.


The more wicked creatures are men.


No, the more tempting creatures are women.


So you will make us Devils at last; for the original of temptation came from
Pluto.


Temptation, Lady, was bred in Nature, born from Nature, and inhabits with all
your Sex, as with Natures self, whom I have heard is a most beautiful Lady, and
that is the reason, I suppose, she hath favoured women more than men, being her
self of the Effeminate Sex: And the truth is, Nature hath been cruel to our
Sex; for she hath not only made you so beautiful, as to be admired and desired,
but so cruel, as to despise, reject and scorn us, taking pleasure in our
torments.


If all Women were of my mind, we would torment you more than we do.


We have tormented him enough with talking, therefore let us leave him.


Nay Ladies, I will wait upon you.


Monsieur Satirical, I can tell you sad News.


Let sadness sit upon the grave of Death, for I defy it.


But that man is in danger that stands as a Centre in a Circumference from
whence all the malignant passions shoot at him, as Suspicion, Spite, Envy,
Hatred, Malice, and Revenge; and the more dangerous, by reason their Arrows are
poisoned with Effeminate Rage.


Let them shoot, for I am armed with Carelessness, and have a Spell of
Confidence, which will keep me safe. But who are they that are mine Enemies?


No less than a dozen Ladies.


If I can attain to fight with them apart, hand to hand, I make no question but
to come off Conqueror; and if they assault me altogether, yet I make no doubt
but I shall so skirmish amongst them, as I shall be on equal terms. But what
makes the breach of peace betwixt me and the Ladies, and such a breach as to
proclaim Open Wars?


The Cause is just, if it be true as it is reported.


Why what is reported?


It is reported you have divulged some secret favours those Ladies have given
you.


It were ungrateful to conceal a favour: for favours proceed from generous and
noble Souls, sweet and kind Natures.


But Ladies favours are to be concealed and locked up in the Closet of
secrecy, being given with privacy, and promise not to divulge them; and it
seems by report you have broke your promise, for which they swear to be
revenged.


Faith all Women, especially Ladies, their natural humour is like the Sea,
which will be neither quiet it self, always ebbing and flowing, nor let any
thing be at rest on it: I know not what the Fishes are that are in it, but for
any thing I can perceive to the contrary, they live in a perpetual motion: So
do Ladies; for their Passions and Affections ebb and flow from object to
object; for one while they flow with love, then ebb with hate, sometimes they
are rough with anger, and stormy with rage, then indifferent calm with
patience, but that is seldom: But in the Spring-tide of Beauty they overflow
all with pride, and their thoughts, like Fishes, are in a perpetual motion,
swimming from place to place, from company to company, from one meeting to
another, and are never at rest.


Thou deserve to die the death of Orpheus.


'Tis likely I shall, by reason I am a Satirical Poet, and Women hate Satire in
Poetry, although not Wood or Forest Satyrs; and the most extravagant and
maddest Actions that ever were done, were done or acted by Women, and the truth
is, Women are not only Batchelling some parts of the year, but all their
life-long, for they drink vanity, and are mad-drunk with wantonness.


Let me tell you, that if I should be brought as a Witness, and should declare
the truth, there were no hopes of mercy for thee.


I grant it, if Women were to be my Judges.


Where shall we go for pastime to day? for our Lady hath left us to our own:
pleasures to day.


Let us go and swim in a Boat upon the River.


That is but a waterish Recreation; besides it is very dangerous, for many have
been drowned in their idle pastimes.


If you will take my Counsel, let us go to the Lodge in the Park, and drink
Sullybubs.


Yes, let us go, for the Lodge puts me into a good humour, and Sullybubs make
me merry.


You have reason, for it is a cheerly Cup, and a Cup of good fellowship, for we
may all eat and drink together.


Yes by spoonfuls.


I love to be drunk by spoonfuls, for then I am drunk by degrees, and not at
one draught, as a pint, or a quart at a draught, as men do; besides, though it
be allowable for the sobrest noblest Women to be drunk with Wine-caudles,
Sullybubs, Sack-possets, and the like, so it be by spoonfuls, yet it were
abominable and most dishonourable for Women to be drunk with plain Wine, and
great draught, as men are; besides, in great draughts there is not that
pleasure of taste, as in a little at a time.


I believe that is the reason that Flemmings love to sip their Wine, because
they would have the pleasure of Taste.


No question but they learned that of the Effeminate Sex, who love to taste of
every thing.


I do believe it; for all women love spoon-meat.


'Tis true, and to drink in spoons.


Talk no more of eating and drinking, but eat and drink without talking, and
afterwards talk to digest it.


And after it is digested, let's eat and drink again.


So we shall do nothing but eat, drink, and talk.


Women do nothing else all their life-long.


By your favour but we do.


Come, come, let us go.


O that I might enjoy those pleasures which Poets fancy, living in such delight
as nature never knew; nor that all Poets did write of me, not only to express
their Wit, but my Worth, and that I might be praised by all mankind, yet not
vulgarly, as in a crowd of others praises, but my praises to be singularly
enthroned above the rest, and that all others commendations might have no other
light but what proceeds from the splendour of my Fame: Also I wish that Nature
had made me such a Beauty, as might have drawn the Eyes of the whole World as a
Loadstone to gaze at it, and the splendour thereof might have inlightned every
blind eye, and the beams therefrom might have comforted every sad heart, and
the pleasing Aspect therein might have turned all passions into love; then
would I have had Nature, Fortune, and the Fates, to have given me a free power
of the whole World, and all that is therein, that I might have pressed and
squeezed our the healing Balsomes, and sovereign Juices, and restoring Simples
into every sick wounded and decayed body, and every disquieted or distempered
mind: Likewise, that I might have been able to have relieved those that were
poor and necessitous, with the hidden riches therein, and that by my power I
might not only have obliged every particular creature and person, according to
their worth and merit, but to have made so firm a peace amongst mankind, as
never to be dissolved.


I wonder you should be an Enemy to Women.


I am so far from being an Enemy to the Effeminate Sex, as I am the best friend
they have: for I do as a friend ought to do, which is, to tell them truth, when
other men deceive them with flattery.


But they complain, and say you exclame and rail against them.


Their complaints proceed from their partial Self-love and Luxury: for they
love pleasing flattery, as they do Sweet-meats, and hate rigid truth, as they
do a bitter potion, although the one destroys their health, the other prolongs
their life.


But they are so angry, as they all swear, and have made a vow to be revenged
on you.


Let them throw their spleens at me, I will stand their malice, or dart forth
Amorous glances, they will not pierce my heart: for Pallas is my Shield, and
Cupid hath no power.


If they cannot wound you with their Eyes, they will sting you with their
Tongues, for Women are like Bees.


If they are like Bees, their stings lie not in their Tongues.


I can tell you News, Ladies.


What News, Mother Matron?


Why there is a rich young Heir come to Town.


Some foolish Son of a miserable Father, who hath spared from his back and
belly, to make his Son vain and prodigal. But what shall we be the better for
this rich Heir?


Why marry if you can get him, you will be so much the better as a rich Husband
can make you.


He will first be got by the Cheats in the Town, which Cheats have more
subtilty, and will be more industrious to get him, than the youngest and
beautifullest, and wittyest Lady of us all; so as there is no hopes of gaining
him, until he is so poor, as he is not worth the having.


But if he could be had whilst he were rich, it were no great victory; for I
dare say his Mothers Landry-maid might be as soon a Conqueress, as a great
Lady: But if we could conquer and imprison Monsieur Satirical in Loves Fetters,
that would be a Conquest worthy Fames Trumpet.


O that would be such an Exploit, as it would be an Honour to our Sex.


There is nothing I desire more, than to be she that might infetter him.


I long to ensnare him.


So do I.


Faith I will lay an Ambuscado for him.


Fie Ladies, sie, I am ashamed to hear the Designs you have no catch Monsieur
Satirical; such Fair, Young, Noble Ladies to be so wanton, as none will content
you but a wild, rough, rude Satyr.


If I were sure there were no other ways to get him, I would become a
Wood-nymph for his sake.


You have forgot the Nymph that was turned into a Bear.


O she was one of cruel Diana's Nymphs; but I will be none of her Order.


No, I dare swear you will not; for 'tis unlikely you should, when you desire
to embrace a Satyr.


I do not desire to embrace him, but to enamour him.


Well, Ladies, your Parents gave you to my Care and Charge; but since you are
so wild, to talk of nothing but Nymphs, Woods, and Satyrs, I will resign up
the Trust which was imposed on me, to your Parents again; for I will not
adventure my Reputation with such wanton young Ladies.


Mother Matron, let me tell thee, thy Reputation is worn out of thee, Time hath
devoured it, and therefore thou hast no Reputation to lose.


Fath Tom. I have emptied thy pockets.


Thou hast picked my pockets with thy juggling Dice, for which, if thou were a
woman, and in my power, I would be revenged for my loss.


Why, what would you do if I were a Woman?


I would condemn thee to a solitary silent life, which to a woman is worse than
Hell; for company and talking is their Heaven, and their Tongues are more
restless than the Sea, their Passions more stormy than the Winds, and their
Appetites more unsatiable and devouring than fire; they are lighter than Air,
more changing than the Moon.


What makes thee thus rail at the Effeminate Sex?


Have I not reason, when Fortune is of the same gender?


Faith Tom, I must tell.


What will you tell?


Why I will tell you, Lady, he hath railed most horribly against your Sex.


That is usual: for all those men which never received, nor hope to receive any
favour from our Sex, will rail against it.


Those men have no reason, Lady, to commend you, if they never received neither
profit nor pleasure from you; and those that have been cruelly used by your
Sex, may lawfully rail against it.


The Laws of Honour forbid it.


But the Laws of Nature allow it, and Nature is the most prevailing law.


Natures law is for Men to love Women, and Women Men, but in you and I there is
not that Sympathy; for I dislike your Sex, as much as you do ours, and could
rail with as free a will against it. The truth is, that although I do not hate
men, yet I despise them; for all men appear to me either Beasts or
Butter-flies, which are either sensual or vain: Indeed most men are worse than
beasts; for beasts are but according to their kind, when men are degenerated by
beastly Sensualies, from which they were made; for as most men are worse than
beasts, so you are worse than most men.


It is a favour, Lady, from your Sex, to rail against ours; for it is a sign
you have considered us, and that we live in your memory, although with your ill
opinions; yet it is better to live with Enemies, than not to be; and of all
men, I have received the greatest favour from the chiefest of your Sex, which
is your self, in that you have considered me most, though you have found me
worst, yet it proves you have thought of me.


If those thoughts and dispraises be favours, I will bind so many together,
until they become as thick and hard as steel, of which you may make an Armour,
to keep your Reputation from wounds of reproach.


There Tom. she hath paid thee both for thy Railings and Complements.


She hath not paid me in current coin.


It will pass for disgrace, I'll warrant thee.


There are but three things a gallant man requires, which is, a Horse, a Sword,
and a Mistress.


Yet a gallant man wants Generosity; for the greatest honour for a man, is to
be generous; for Generosity comprises all Virtues, good Qualities, and sweet
Graces; for a generous man will never spare his life, purse, nor labour, for
the sake of just Right, plain Truth, Honest Poverty, Distress, Misery, or the
like; for a generous man hath a courageous, yet compassionate Heart, a constant
and noble Mind, a bountiful Hand, an active and industrious Life; and he is one
that joys more to do good, than others to receive good.


There are few or none that have such noble Souls, as to prefer another good
before their own.


The truth is, men have more promising Tongues, than performing deeds.


For all I can perceive, mans life is composed of nothing but deceit,
treachery, and rapine.


Indeed mans mind is like a Forest, and his thoughts, like wild beasts,
inhabit therein.


Mans Mind is like a Sea, where his Thoughts, like Fishes, swim therein, where
some Thought are like huge Leviathans, others like great Whales, but some are
like Sprats, Shrimps, and Minnues.


What is like a Minnues?


A mans Soul.


It is better have a soul, although no bigger than a Minnues, than none at all,
as Women have; but if they have, I dare swear it is no bigger than a pins
point.


Very like, which point pricks down thoughts into the Brain, and Passions in
the heart, and writes in the Brain witty Conceits, if the point be sharp.


No, no, it serves only to raise their brains with Vanity, to engrave their
hearts with Falsehood, and to scratch out their lives with Discontent.


We oftner scratch out men's lives than our own.


Nay, you oftner scratch out our honour than our lives.


For my part, I have an itch to be scratching.


I believe you, for you have a vexatious soul.


It hath cause to be vexatious, for the point of my soul is whetted with Aqua
Fortis against your Sex.


I'm sure, Lady, your tongue is whetted with Aqua Fortis.


So is yours.


If it be, let us try which point is sharpest.


I will leave the Trial to Time and Occasion.


Madam, I am an humble Suitor to your Ladyship.


What is your suit?


That you will be pleased to take a young Maiden into your service of my
preferring.


In what place?


To wait and attend on your person.


Let me tell you, that those servants that attend on my person, do usually
accompany me in all my Pastimes, Exercises, and sometimes in Conversation:
Wherefore they must be such as are well born, well bred, well behaved, modest,
and of sweet dispositions, virtuous, and of strict life, otherwise they are not
for me; and if I find them not so, I shall soon turn them away.


Why Madam, even Diana her self, as severe and strict as she was, had some
wanton Nymphs, that would commit errors; although they seemed all sober and
modest, and professed chastity, yet they would slip out of the way and her
presence sometimes.


But she never failed to turn them out of her service, and some she cruelly
punished; so that what her severity could not prevent, yet her severity did
punish; for Diana's practice was not to watch her wanton Nymphs, nor to hunt
out their evil haunts, or lurking-places, to see their evil actions, but her
practice was to hunt the more modest and temperate creatures, which were the
beasts of the Fields and Forests: So, like as Diana, I shall not watch my
Maids, nor pardon their rude or dishonourable actions.


Pray Madam try this Maid, for she is very honourably born, and well bred, but
poor.


I shall not refuse her for poverty: But as I will have some bound for the
truth and trust of my vulgar servants, so I will have some bound for the
behaviour, virtue, and modesty of my honourable servants, or else I will not
take them.


Monsieur Frisk, you are well met, for I was even now sending a Footman for
you.


For what, good Mother Matron?


Marry to come to a company of young Ladies, who do half long for you.


They shall not lose their longing, if I can help them.


Now by my Troth, and that is spoke like a Gentleman; but let me tell you,
there is a great many of them.


Why then there is the more choice.


But there is no choosing amongst Ladies, you must take better for worse.


There is no worst amongst Ladies, they are all fair and good.


In faith I perceive now why the Ladies desire your company so much as they do.


Why my dear Mother Matron?


Because you speak well of them behind their backs, and promise them much to
their faces; and I will assure you, they have as promising faces as you can
promise them; but great Promisers are not good.


Will you say the Ladies faces are not good?


I say men's promises are not good. But you are very quick with me, Monsieur
Frisk, to take me upon the hip so suddenly; but, beshrew me, your sudden
frisking Answer hath put me into a Passion, which hath percurbed the sense of
my Discourse. Lord, Lord, what power a villainous word hath over the passions!


If you please, Mother Matron, a kiss shall ask pardon for your villainous word.


And now, by my troth, I have not been kissed by a young Gentleman above this
twenty years; but now I am in haste, and cannot stay to receive your gift,
wherefore I will refer it until another time.


But I may forget to give it.


Never fear that, for I shall remember you of it, when time shall serve: But
come away, for the Ladies will be horrible angry I have stayed so long, for they
were all going to dance, for the Fiddles were tuned, Tables and Stools removed,
room made, and they in a dancing posture, only they stay for you to Frisk them
about.


Madam, you behaved your self more familiar to day, than your Ladyship was wont
to do.


'Tis true, because those I conversed with to day were but inferior persons,
and I speak more familiar to such persons as are below my quality, than those
that are equal to me, to do them grace and favour; and if they take it not so,
I can only say my Civility was ignorantly placed on foolish and ignorant
persons.


Some say Poems are not good, unless they be gloriously Attired.


What do they mean by glorious Attire?


Rhetoric.


Why gay words are not Wit, no more than a fair Face is a good Soul; and it is
Wit which makes Poems good, not words.


Indeed Rhetoric is no part of the Body of Wit, no more than of the Soul, only
it is the outward garment, which is Taylors work.


Then it seems, as if the Grammarians, Logicians, and Rhetoricians, are the
Taylors for Oratory, who cut shapes, sit places, seam and few words together to
make several Eloquent Garments, or Garments of Eloquence, as Orations,
Declarations, Expressions, and the like worditive work, as they please, or at
least according to the fashion.


They are so.


Why then those that say Verse is not good, unless gloriously Attired, do as
much as to say a man is a fool that hath not a fine Suit of Clothes on, or,
that a Curled Hair, sweetly powdered, is a wise, or witty Brain, powdered with
Fancies. This surely is an unpardonable mistake, or rather an incurable
madness, for there is neither Sense nor Reason in it.


It is not so much a madness, nor that we call Natural Fools, but Amorous
Fools, or Finical Fools, or such as are Opinionated Fools, or Self-conceited
Fools, or High-bound Fools.


High-bound Fools? What do you mean by High-bound Fools?


Strong-lin'd Fools.


Those are Learned Fools.


No, they are Conceited Fools; for their strength of Wit lies in a Conceit.


Those, for the most part, their Wit is buried in Oblivion.


If there be any Wit to bury.


Who is so foolish to bury Wit?


You, in the rubbish of words.


The only Grave to Wit is a foolish Ear.


Let me tell you, Ladies, that Wit is so far from lying in a Grave, as it
hardly settles any where; for it is so Agile, and flies so swiftly, and yet
extends in breadth so far, as it spreads the wings of Fancy, not only over all
the World, and every particular thing in the World, but one Infinite and
Eternal Nature, and with the Bill of Conception picks a hole, whereby the Eyes
of Imagination spy out the dark Dungeons of Pluto, and the glorious Mansions of
Jove.


Then Poems need not the garments of Rhetoric.


No more than a Fair Lady: And as for my part, I like Poems as I like a Woman,
best uncloathed, for then I am sure they cannot deceive or delude me with false
and feigned Shows.


Madam, will you please to go abroad, and take the cool refreshing Air to day?


Yes, Temperance, if you will; but I had rather stay and entertain Monsieur
Serious Contemplations company.


Indeed Madam I will forbid his frequent Visits; for otherwise you will bury
your self in his melancholy Conversation.


Pray do not, for he is the greatest delight in life.


And then he brings such a numerous Train of Fancies and Opinions, as fills up
your Head, which is the largest room in your bodily house; insomuch, as none of
your domestic Thoughts, which are the Minds usefullest servants, can stir
about your lifes ordinary affairs.


Why Temperance, Fancies are pretty youths, which make harmless and innocent
sport, to pass the time away.


We have so little time, as we shall not need to pass it idly away.


As much as we complain of want of time, we have more than we can tell well how
to spend.


Then pray forbid Monsieur Serious Contemplation not to bring his wild,
stubborn, and useless Opinions; for they make more disorder, and louder noise,
and greater Factions, than if all the Dogs and Bears in the Town were set
together by the ears, and more mischief comes thereby, than I can rectify.


Now Liberty, you are a Fore-runner of Visitants.


Yes Madam, for there are the five Sistres, the five Senses, come to visit you.


They are the troublesomest Visitants that are; they are so extravagant, so
impertinent, so various, and so humoursome, as I know not how to entertain
them: But pray Liberty usher them into the Gallery where my pictures hang,
drawn by the Rarest and most Famous Masters; and let the Room be sweetly
perfumed, and bring a Banquet of the most delicious and choicest Drinks and
Meats, and let there be sine linen Napkins, and spread all the Floor over with
downy Carpets, and set soft Cushions on the Couches, and whilst they are
there, let the Music sound harmoniously, with soft strokes, pleasing notes,
and gentle strains: And Temperance, I desire you to Order the rest of the
Entertainment, and let Ease wait upon you: As for you, Wanton and Surfeit, I
forbid you, as not to come into their Company.


Always when my Lady makes a great Entertainment, we are forbid to appear.


Although my Lady forbids me, yet the Company never leaves until they have
found me out, so that I am still at the end of the Entertainment, like an
Epilogue to a Play.


And I sometimes come in like a Chorus.


O that I might have my wish!


What would you wish?


I would wish to be the only Beauty.


And if I might have my wish, I would wish to conquer all the World, and then
to divide it to the Meritorious, and not to rule it my self: for I desire not
the Power, but the Fame.


And if I might have my wish, I would wish to be the Supremest Wit in Nature.


You three are sympathetical in Ambition; for one desires to incaptive all
Hearts with her Beauty; the other desires to conquer all the World with his
Valour; the third desires to confute all Mankind with her Wit.


And what do you wish, Mademoiselle Ambition?


I wish I were Destiny, to link you all three together.


Come leave your wishing, and let us go to see the Monster that is to be seen.


The most mostrous Creature I imagine, is a headless Maid.


What is that, a devirginated Maid?


Yes.


When she is devirginated, she is no Maid.


O yes; for as a Wife is one that is married, a Widow one that hath been married,
so a Maid is one that was never married, and a Virgin is one that never knew
man, and a headless Maid is one that hath lost her Virginity, and yet was never
married.


If a devirginated Maid be a headless Monster, in the World there are many
headless Monsters.


But the best of it is, Lady, their Monstrosity is invisible.


You say true; but they are not monstrous in Nature, but in Vice, for they are
transformed by their Crimes.


So are Drunkards.


They are so; for all Curtezans and Drunkards are beasts: For though a Drunkard
is not a headless beast, yet he is a brainless beast.


But what Monster is that you would have us to see?


Why a woman with a Hogs face.


Then 'tis likely she hath a Sows disposition. But howsoever let us go.


One witty word, or saying from a fool, is, for the most part remembered, and
often repeated, when from a Wit it would be hardly taken notice of.


There is reason for that: for wit is more remarkable from fools, than those
that have natural wits.


Monsieur Satirical, I am come with a Message from a company of fair young
Ladies; the Message is this: They desire that you would do them the favour to
come to them, to judge of a Poem which they have made amongst themselves.


Women make Poems? burn them, burn them; let them make bone-lace, let them make
bone-lace.


You are an unjust Judge, to condemn their Poems to the fire, before you have
examined them.


The best trial of a Ladies wit is the fire; besides, the fire will supply that
want of Poetical heat which should make Poems, which heat women's brains cannot
suffer.


You are mistaken Sir, and mis-inform'd: for we women have as hot brains as any
of the Masculine Sex of you all have.


I grant your Sex have an unnatural heat, which makes them all mad.


I think the Ladies were mad when they sent me for you.


No doubt of it, and you are mad for coming.


Your words will make me mad before I go away, although I came well-temper'd
hither: beshrew me my very bones do quiver in my flesh to hear you.


If thy bones quiver so much as to shake, they will soon powder into dust: for
Age hath almost dissolved thee into ashes already, and Time hath eaten off thy
flesh, as Crows do carrion.


Out upon thee Satyr, a beastly man you are by my Troth, and so I will deliver
you to the Ladies.


You shall not deliver me to the Ladies, I will deliver my self to Death first.


Thou art so bad, Death will refuse thee: but I will do your Errand I'll
warrant you, I'll set a mark upon you that shall disgrace you.


Thou can not set a fouler mark than thy self upon me, therefore come not
near me.


Worse and worse, worse and worse. O that I were so young and fair, as my
Beauty might get me a Champion to revenge my quarrel! But I will go back to the
Ladies, they are fair and young enough, as being in the Spring of Beauty,
although I am in my Autumnal years.


Thou art in the midst of the Winter of thine Age, and the Snow of Time is
fallen on thy head, and lies upon thy hair.


They that will not live until they are old, the Proverb says, They must be
hanged when they are young, and I hope it is your Destiny.


I am come to tell you, Wanton and Surset, that my Lady is gone to receive the
Visit of Monsieur Tranquillities Peace, who is come to see her, and old Matron
Temperance is gone to wait upon her; wherefore you may go, for there is none
left with the five Senses but Excess.


I wonder Mother Matron should stay so long.


I cannot guess at the reason.


She might have delivered her Message twice in this time.


Mother Matron, Welcome, welcome, welcome: What News? what News?


What says Monsieur Satirical?


Will he come?


Or will he not come? pray speak.


Are you dumb, Mother Matron?


Pray Ladies give me some time to temper my passion; for if a house be set on
fire, there is required sometime to quench it.


But some fires cannot be quenched.


Indeed my fire of Anger is something of the nature of the unquenchable fire of
Hell, which endeavours to afflict the Soul, as well as to torment the Body.


Jove bless us, Mother Matron! Are you inflamed with Hellfire?


How should I be otherwise, when I have been tormented with a Devil?


Jupiter keep us! What have you done, and with whom have you been?


Marry I have been with a cloven-tongu'd Satyr, who is worse, far worse, than a
cloven-footed Devil.


Is all this rage against Monsieur Satirical?


Yes marry is it, and all too little, by reason it cannot hurt him.


How hath he offended you?


As he hath offended you all, railed against you, most horribly railed against
you: He says you are all mad, and hath condemned your Poems to the fire, and
your employment to the making of bone-lace.


Why these sayings of his do not offend me.


Nor me.


Nor me.


Nor me.


But if he had said you had been old, and ill-favour'd, carrion for Crows, dust
and ashes for the grave, as he said to me, then you would have been as angry as
I.


No truly, I should have only laughed at it.


By your favour, I should have been as angry as Mother Matron, if I had been as
old as she; so I should have been concerned in the behalf of my Age.


Marry come up, are you turned Lady Satirical, to upbraid me with my Age? Is
this my reward for my jaunting and trotting up and down with your idle Message
to more idle persons, men that are mere Jackstraws, flouting companions,
railing detractors, such as are good for nothing but to put people together by
the cars?


By the Effects it proves so, for you and I are very near falling out: But I
thought you would have given me thanks for what I said, as taking your part,
and not inveterates your spleen.


Can you expect I should give you thanks for calling me old? Can the report of
Age be acceptable to the Effeminate Sex? But Lady, let me tell you, if you live
you will be as old as I, and yet desire to be thought young: For although you
were threescore, yet you would be very angry, nay in a furious rage, and take
those to be your mortal Enemies that should reckon you to be above one and
twenty, for you will think your self as beautiful as one of fifteen.


I do not think so, although I believe our Sex have good opinions of
themselves, even to the last gasp; yet not so partial, as to imagine themselves
as one of fifteen at threescore.


It is proved by all Experience, that all Mankind is self-conceited, especially
the Effeminate Sex; and self-conceit doth cast a fair shadow on a foul face,
and fills up the wrinkles of Time with the paint of Imagination.


But the Eyes must be blind with Age, or else they would see the wrinkles Time
hath made, in the despite of the paint of Imagination.


By your favour, Self-conceit doth cause the Eyes of Sense to be like false
glasses, that cast a youthful gloss, and a fair light, on a withered skin: For
though the deep lines in the face cannot be smoothed, yet the lines, or
species, in, or of the sight, may be drawn by self-conceit so small as not to
be perceived: And were it not for the Eyes of Self-conceit, and the Paint of
Imagination, as Mother Matron says, which preserves a good Opinion of our
selves, even to the time of our Death, wherein all remembrance is buried, we
should grow mad, as we grow old, for the loss of our Youth and Beauty.


I by my faith you would grow mad, did not Conceit keep you in your right wits.


The truth is, our Sex grow melancholy, when our Beauty decays.


I grow melancholy at the talking of it.


Let us speak of some other subject that is more pleasing than Age, Ruin, and
Death.


Let us talk of Monsieur Satirical again.


He is a worse subject to talk of than Death.


As bad as he is, you shall carry another Message to him.


I will sooner carry a Message to Pluto; for in my Conscience he will use me
more civilly, and will send you a more respectful Answer than Monsieur
Satirical.


Indeed I have heard that the Devil would flatter; but I never heard that a
Satirical Poet would flatter.


But a Satirical Poet will lye, and so will the Devil; and therefore talk no
more of them, but leave them together.


O Temperance, I am discredited for ever, the Ladies the Senses are all sick:
What shall I do?


You must send for some Doctors.


What Doctors shall I send for?


Why Old Father Time, he hath practiced long, and hath great Experience; then
there is Rest and Sleep, two very good safe Doctors.


Send Ease presently to fetch them, bid her make haste.


Temperance, are the Doctors come?


Yes, and gone again.


And what have they prescribed?


Abstinence.


And will that cure them?


They say it will prove a perfect cure: Probatum est.


The next act I do, shall be to turn away Wanton, Idle, Excess, and Surfeit.


You will hardly get them out of your Service, although you should beat them
out.


Madam, me thinks Monsieur Vain-glorious is a very proper man, and would be a
fit Match for your Ladyship.


Let me tell you, I will never marry a man whose Soul hath Vacuum; but that man
I would marry, should have a soul filled with Natures best Extractions; his
Head the Cabinet of Natures wisest Counsels, and curiousest Fancies; his Heart
the Treasury of Natures purest, currentest, and Heroic Virtue: For if ever I
marry, I will have a Husband that is able to govern Kingdoms, to Marshal
Armies, to Fight Battles, and Conquer Nations; and not a self-conceited Fool,
or fantastical Gallant, such as speaks ta^ing Words, wears slanting Clothes,
walks with a proud Garb, looks with a disdainful Countenance, Courts
Mistresses, loves Flatteries, hates Superiors, and scorns Inferiors, keeps a
greater Retinue than his Revenue will maintain, who like moths, eat through the
cloth of his Estate, and he like another ^, plays so long in his Vain-glorious
Flame, until he is consumed therein, spanding with an open purse, and prodigal
vanity, and yet receives with a covetous hand: So Vanity flies and flutters
about in the heat of Prosperity, and dies in the Winter of Adversity. No, I
will have a Husband, if ever I have any, whose Mind is settled like the
Centre, which can neither rise nor fall with good or bad Fortune; and not a
little Soul in a narrow Heart, and witless Brain.


Sir, I desire you will pardon me; but I am commanded to bring you here a
Challenge.


Are you the Second, Sir?


No Sir.


Are you a Pimp, Sir?


I scorn your base words, for I am a Gentleman.


Many a Gentleman scorns base words, but not base Actions.


I scorn both base words, and base Actions.


It doth not seem so by the Challenge you have brought.


Why, what is the Challenge?


The Challenge is from a Woman, and I will read it to you.


Monsieur Satirical, I Challenge you, and am resolved to fight,
Not in the Field of Mars, as Champion Knight,
Nor in the Court of Venus will I be,
But to the Lists of Mercury Challenge thee:
Where all the Muses will Spectators sit,
To Judge which is the greatest Victor of Wit.
The Weapons which we fight with must be Words,
For I a woman am, not used to Swords:
Custom and Education leaves us bare
To Natures Arms, the Arms of Death we fear.
Your Servant, Bon' Esprit.

These two last Lines make you a Pimp, Sir.


I must be contended, for there is no Revenge to be taken against Ladies: But
Mother Matron had been a more properer Messenger than I for this Challenge.


I shall send my Answer by a more inferior person than you are, and so shall
take my leave for this time.


Your Servant.


All Poets and Musicians are mad, more or less: for Madness is caused by a
distemper of the Brain, like as the Pulse, which beats quicker than the natural
motion.


You mistake madness; for madness is not caused by the quickness of motion, but
by the irregularity of the motion: And as for Poetical and Musical Motions,
although they are quick, yet they keep Time, Time and Order, when those Motions
that cause madness do not: But the quick-moving brains of Poets are caused by
their lively elevated Spirits, which are Active and Industrious, always
creating for delight or profit, as Verses, Fancies, Scenes, Sonnets, or
inventing Arts: And if you account these Ingenious and Divine Spirits to be
mad, I shall desire to be mad too, as they are.


But some Spirits are so quick, that they out run all Invention.


Those are neither the spirits of Poets nor Musicians; not but that Poets and
Musicians may be mad as other men, but their madness is not caused by the
Poetical and Harmonical spirits, but some other defects of the brain, or
distemper of the spirits; but there are many mad, that are so far from Poetical
Fancies, or Musical skill, or Inventions, as they can neither conceive the one,
or learn the other, or understand either; but Music and Poetry have oft-times
cured madness, and certainly are the best and most excellent Physicians for
that disease: For though madness is but one and the same disease, as madness,
yet the Causes and Effects are divers.


A Fever in the Brain causes madness.


It rather causes madness to have outragion: Effects; but a cold brain may be
mad: But it is neither heat nor cold that causes madness, but the irregularity
of the Spirits.


But heat and cold may cause the irregularity of the Spirits: for as cold
Livers make the Veins like standing ponds, which putrifies the blood for want
of motion; so very cold Brains may be like Snow or Ice, to obstruct or bind the
Spirits, hindering the regular motions.


You say right, and that is a stupid madness: And as a hot Liver may boil and
inflame the blood, so hot Brains may inflame the Spirits, causing Combustious
Motions, as Thundering, which is a raging madness.


Who is raging-mad?


A despairing Lover.


Hang him in his Mistress Frowns, or strangle him in the Cords of her Cruelty.


Would you be served so?


Yes, when I am a mad Lover: For I had rather die than be in love with a
hard-hearted Mistress; for of the two I had rather embrace death than Court her,
in which Courtship I should be Transformed, or Metamorphosed into many several
things: As I should be a River of Lovers Tears, a Ventidock of Lovers Sighs, an
Aquaduct of Lovers Griefs, and a Chilling grotto of Lovers Fears; and rather
than I would endure these Transformations, I would be well contended to be
annihilated.


O fie, had you rather be nothing than a Lover?


I had rather be nothing, than a thing worse than nothing.


Well, I hope to see you a desperate Lover at one time or other.


I hope not, for I have no cause to fear: for my Mind cannot be persuaded by my
Fancy, or forced by my Appetites, nor betrayed by my Senses; for Reason governs
my Brain, Temperance rules my Appetites, Prudence guards my Senses, and
Fortitude keeps the possession and Fort of my Heart.


Love will unthrone Reason, corrupt Temperance, bribe Prudence, and bear
Fortitude out of the Fort of your Heart.


For fear of that I will leave you, Ladies.


News; News, Monsieur Satirical hath vouchsafed to return you an Answer to your
Challenge.


Who brought it?


A scrubbed fellow in a thred-bare cloak, the rest of the Ladies say. Read it,
read it, Mademoiselle Bon' Esprit.

Lady, you Challenged me in Arms to fight,
Appoint the place, the best time is at night
For Natural Duellers; yet I submit,
And shall obey to what hour you think fit:
I am content my Health for to engage,
And venture Life to satisfy your rage.
I am no Coward, I am not afraid
To fight a Duel with a young fair Maid,
Although old Mother Matron she should be
Your Second, for the Judge what she doth see.

He makes me the scurvy burden of his more scurvy Verse, and scurrilous
Answer: But I hope this Answer of his to your Challenge, will inveterate your
spleen as much as his upbraiding my Age did mine.


I have not such reason to be so concerned as you are; for I am honest, though
you are old.


May the Infamy of Vice wither the Blossoms of Youth, as Age doth the Flowers
of Beauty, that there may be an equal return of Reproach.


Indeed there is some Reciprocalness in Vice and Age.


No, Vice and Youth are Reciprocal.


But I see no Reciprocalnesse betwixt Love and Monsieur Satirical.


I make no doubt but to bring Monsieur Satirical into Cupid's snare.


You may sooner bring your self into Vulcan's Net.


Well, mark the end and success.


Nay, rather we shall mark the endless folly.


Lady Pleasure, you are the sweetest young Lady in the World, and the only
delight in life.


O Sir, you give a Wooers sentence, and self-love hath bribed your Judgment:
for most speak partially, according to their Affections, and not according to
Truth.


Truth is a prating, preaching, tattling, twatling Gossip, and tells many times
that which would be better concealed.


Truth is the Eye of Knowledge, which brings men out of Ignorance: It is the
Scale of Justice, the Sword of Execution, the Reward of Merit: It is the Bond
of Propriety, and the Seal of Honesty.


Truth is a Tyrant, condemning more than she saves.


She condemns none but Fools, Knaves, Cowards, Irreligious, Licentious, and
Vain-glorious persons, to be unworthy, base, false, and wicked.


She condemns Pleasure; for truly there is no such thing as Pleasure.


I must marry, or bury succession in my Grave; but it's dangerous, very
dangerous. O Nature, Nature, had thou no other way to Create a man, unless
thou made a woman! But if thou were forced by the Fates to make that Sex, yet
thou had liberty to make her of a constant Mind; but thou art inconstant thy
self, as being of female kind: But since I must marry, Discretion shall make
the Choice, which will choose Virtue before Wealth, Wit before Beauty, Breeding
before Birth; if she hath Virtue, she will be Chaste; if she hath Wit, she will
be Conversable, if she hath good Breeding, she will be modest and well-behav'd.
But where is that woman that is virtuously Chaste, wittily Conversable, and
Modestly-behav'd? If any woman be thus, as I would have her, it is Mademoiselle
Bon' Esprit, she seems to have a Noble Soul by her Honourable Actions, which
women, for the most part, are so far from, as they seem, for the most part, to
have no souls at all, by their mean and petty actions: Also she hath a
Supernatural Wit, I mean supernatural, as being a woman; and her Wit is not
only Ingenious, but Judicious, by which she will set a value on subjects of
Merit and Worth, and despise those that are base; when fools know not how to
prize the best, but choose that is bad, not knowing what is good, so walk in
Errors ways, which leads unto dishonour; but she, having Wit and Honour, knows
the benefit of Honesty so well, as she will be Chaste for her own sake, were it
not for her Husbands. But I most satyrically have translated her sweet and
harmless mirth, which was presented in her Elevated Verse into a wanton
Interpretation. Diana, thou Goddess of Chastity, pardon me! But stay thoughts,
whither wander you? let me examine you before you pass any farther, as whether
or no you are not led by the bow-string of Cupid, or the girdle of Venus, into
the foul paths of vain desires, and del^ding beauty, to the labyrinth of
destruction, there to be kept and incaptivated by the entanglements and subtle
windings, and turnings, and various passages of Amorous Love? But a strict
Examination requires Time, and a just Judge decides not a Cause without Debate;
therefore I will have another Contemplation of Consideration, before I address
my Suit, or make known my Desires.


Madam, why should you refuse me?


Because I cannot love.


Not love me? why I am Valiant, Wise, Witty, Honest, Generous, and Handsome:
And where will you find a man where all these Excellencies do meet in one?


Now you have bragged of your self, I will plainly prove to you, that you are
neither perfectly Valiant, nor Wise, nor Witty, nor Generous, nor truly Honest.


You cannot.


I can: And first for Valour. Have you gone to the Wars, and fought? why,
millions do the like, and a poor Common Soldier will venture for sixpence on
that which a vain Cavalier will hardly do to gain an immortal Fame: Or
peradventure you have fought Duels, why every Drunkard will do as much, who in
their drink they not reason to consider Valour, which is only to fight for the
sake of Honour; but most commonly Duels are fought through Anger, or Fear, or
Scorn, or Revenge, or the like, which is not true valour, but they fight rather
like beasts than men, as with Force, Fury, or Appetite, caused by natural
Antipathies, or through the heat of the blood, or desires or dislikes of the
Senses: whereas true Valour is just, temperate, patient, prudent, and is the
Heroic part, or Virtue of the Soul: And to be valiant, is to fight for the
right of Truth, and the defence of Innocence, without Partiality, Covetousness,
or Ambition: Also to prove your self Valiant, have you received misfortunes
with patience, and suffered torments with fortitude? Have you forgiven your
Enemies, or spared a bloody Execution for humanities sake, or released rich
prisoners without Ransom, and poor without slavery? Have you heard your self
slandered with Patience, justified your wrongs with Temperance, fought your
Enemies without Anger, maintained your Honour without Vain-glory, then you are
Valiant.

And for Wisdom, what do you call Wisdom? to speak Hebrew, Greek, and
Latin, and not understand them? or to understand them, and cannot speak them?
Or to cite dead Authors? Or to repeat their Learned Opinions? Or to make
Sophisterian Disputes? Or to speak Latin Sentences? Or to tell stories out of
Histories? Or to write several Hands? Or to spell with true Orthography? Or to
talk of the Sciences, but study none? Or to talk of Morality, but practice
none? This you may call Learned, but not Wisdom. But to be Wise, Have you
settled a Kingdom in peace, and put it in order, when it was imbrovled with
Civil Wars, or ensnared with confused and entangled Laws? Or have you appeased
a mutinous and half-starv'd Army? Have you led an Army with Order, pitchd a
Field with Art, fought a Battle with Prudence, or have made a safe and
honourable Retreat? Or have you been so provident, as to relieve Famine with
fore-stor'd provisions? Or to prevent misfortunes with fore-sight? Or have you
distinguished a Cause clearly, or given an upright Judgment? Or have you
delivered judicious Counsel, and given seasonable and suitable Admonitions?
Have you composed a Common-wealth, or made profitable Laws to uphold a
Common-wealth? Have you defended a Common-wealth from Enemies, or purged a
Common-wealth from Factions? Have you made Officers worthy of Employments,
Magistrates able to Govern, Soldiers skilful to Command? Have you sitly
matched men and business, and offices with men? Have you employed the idle, and
given light to the ignorant? Have you discharged a Common-wealth of
Superfluity, or superfluous Commodities, and brought in those which are more
useful, such as they have wanted? Have you Manured a barren Country, or
enriched a poor Kingdom? Have you made honest Associates, faithful Agreements,
and safe Traffiques? Then you may think your self Wise, and be silent; for the
Actions will proclaim it.

Also what do you call Wit? Imitating Extravagancies like a Jackanapes, or a
Buffoon, to extort the Countenance with making wry faces? Or with much laughter
to show the teeth, which perchance are all rotten in the head? Or foolishly to
divulge the infirmities of particular persons in an open Assembly? Or putting
Innocence or Youth out of Countenance? Or to disturb the Serious with idle
Sports? Or disorder the Wise with foolish and rude Jests? Or do you all Wit
affected Dresses, affected Garbs, affected Countenances, or vain-straind
Complements, or useless Words, or senseless Speeches, or cross Answers, or
impertinent Questions? But for your Wit, Hath your Fame flown beyond Euripides,
Homer, or Ovid, your Descriptions beyond Horace, or your Verse beyond Virgil?
Have you Oratory to equal the Orators of Athens, Lacedaemonians, or Rome? or
have you devised any Ingenious Inventions, or produced any profitable Arts, or
found out any new Sciences? Then you are Witty.

Likewise what do you call Honesty? to live luxuriously to your self, not
meddling, nor intermingling your self and home-Affairs with the public Affairs
of the World? To keep open House at Christmas? To give your scraps to the
poor? To pay Wages duly, Debts justly, Taxes quietly? To kiss your Maids
privately? And although all this is good and commendable, but the kissing of
your Maids, yet it is not enough to make a perfect honest man: But to be
perfectly honest, Have you tempered your unfatiable Appetite with Abstinency,
moderated your violated passions with Reason, governed your unruly actions with
Prudence? Have you not exacted unjustly, judged partially, accused falsely,
betrayed treacherously, kept wrongfully, took forcibly? but have you advanced
Virtues, defended the Innocent? Have you witnessed for Truth, pleaded for
Right, and stood for the defenceless? Then you are perfectly Honest.

Also what do you call Generosity? To give a present to a lewd Mistress? To
bribe a corrupted Judge? Or fee a subtle Lawyer? Or feast the vain Courtiers?
Or maintain Sycophants and Flatterers? Or Bail a just Arrest? Or to be bound
for the Deboist? Or to give Ladies Collations? Or to lend or give idle drunken
fellows money? Or to give when you think to hear of it again? This is
Prodigality, not Generosity. But to be Generous, Have you set your prisoner
free, Ransomed the Captives, or bought off the chains of the Gally-slaves? Have
you maintained young Orphans, or helped poor Widows? Have you cheered the Aged,
nourished the Hungry, succoured the Infirm, relieved the Distressed, comforted
the Sorrowful, and guided the Ignorant? Or have you upheld an Ancient Family
from sinking? Then you are Generous.

As for your Person, the more Handsome and Beautiful you are, the more
Effeminate you seem. But to conclude, That man that hath a narrow Heart, and a
mean Soul, that only seeks his own delights, which all vain-glorious persons
do, I will not marry: For Noble Ambition hath a heart, whose veins with bounty
flow, and wears her life only for Honours use and Virtues need.


There is no behaviour so inconvenient, or so unfitting a woman, especially a
young beautiful Lady, as to be familiar: for that gives way and liberty for men
to be rude and uncivil.


Why how would you have a young Lady to behave her self?


Modestly, reservedly, and civilly, which behaviour will keep men in order, and
at a distance.


To seem very modest, is to appear simple; to be much reserved, is to be
formal, which is only fit for State-Ladies; to be very civil, is to be too
humble, and appears mean, and only fit for Country wives.


No Lady, for those that give no respect, will receive none; but those that are
civil to others, others will be civil to them: for they will be ashamed to be
rude to those that are civil: And as for Gravity, it puts Boldness out of
countenance, and Modesty quenches unlawful desires, converting the beholders to
Purity, Love, and Esteem.


There is no behaviour like to the French Mode, to be careless and free, to
discourse in Raillery.


To be careless, is to be rude; to be free, is to be wanton; to raillery, is to
reproach under the protection of wit, it is a reproachful Wit, and a wit of
Reproach.


All wit is commendable.


No Lady, a Jesters wit is not fit for a grave Judge, or a great Prince, he may
keep a Fool, or make a Fool to make him merry, and to laugh at their Jests and
Gestures, but not to be a Buffoon or Jester himself.


Let me advise and counsel you, Temperance, which is, to condemn no kind of
Wit, but especially a Mode-Wit, lest you should be accounted a foolish Judge.


Let me tell you, they will be the greatest Fools that judge the Judge.


I am resolved, yet being a Criminal, how to address my Suit, I am in doubt: To
ask pardon for my faults, were to make my faults seem greater than they are; to
excuse them, were to make my judgment seem weaker than I think it is; to
justify them, were to condemn her. Well, I will neither ask pardon, nor make
excuse, nor yet justify them; but in plain language declare my pure
Affections, honest Desires, and honourable Requests; if she believes the first,
approves the third, and consents to the second, I hope to be happy, if not, I
must be content: for it is a folly to mourn, when it brings no remedy.


The Lady Variety, now she is a Widow, she tricks and dresses up her self in
her Mourning, and is more fond of the company of men, than we that are Maids.


'Tis a sign she knows by Experience that the Masculine Sex are better, and
more pleasurable company than any of her own Sex, which Maids do not know, by
reason they are for the most part restrained.


Why should you find fault with Widows, when married Wives endeavour by all the
Arts they can to get the company of men, and do strive by enticements to allure
them to Courtships, as much as Widows or Maids to lawful and honest Marriage?


One would think that married women, by their neglect and disrespect to their
Husbands, they loved not the company of men.


They may love the company of men, though not the company of one man, as their
Husbands.


Come, come, Ladies, Maids are always spiteful to Married Women, because they be
preferred in Marriage before them, and are jealous of Widows, for fear that they
should get their Servants and Suitors from them.


I should sooner be jealous of a Widow, than spiteful to a Married Wife: for
most Wives are in a condition to be pitied rather than envied; but Widows have
such a magnetic power, as one Widow will draw away the Servants and Suitors
from a dozen Maids.


Indeed Widows are very prevalent; for a poor widow shall have more Suitors, and
better Choice, than a rich Maid, and an ill-favour'd Widow, than a handsome
Maid, an old Widow, than a young Virgin.


I wonder at it.


Why should you wonder at it? since they know the humours, weaknesses, and
strengths of men, better than Maids do, by which they know how to work and draw
them to their bent and design.


No, that's not the Cause.


What's the Cause then?


Why men think VVidows wiser than Maids, as being more known and experienced.


Indeed they have more knowledge than Maids, or else they have very ill luck.


Why, Maids are more desirous to marry VVidowers than Batchelours.


What is the reason of that?


I know not, except it be the former reason.


No, no, it is because it is said that VVidowers love their second wives better
than the first.


And what their third wife?


I suppose Love increases with the number.


But women, 'tis said, love their first husband better than the second.


That's only an excuse to marry a third, and so a fourth Husband.


Indeed Death and Hymen are great friends to VVidows and VVidowers: for if once
a woman buries her husband, or a man his wife, they never leave marrying and
burying, until they have had five or six husband and wives.


If it were always so, I would I had been married, and had buried my husband; O
what a Gossipping life should I have had! Gossipping at my husbands Funerals,
and Gossipping at my Married Nuptials, besides the pleasure of being wooed.


But you would have more trouble and vexation in the time between your
Mariage-day and your Husbands Death, than pleasure betwixt your Husbands Death
and Mariage-day.


O no: for I suppose if Death be a friend, he will take away every Husband as
soon as that time is past they call Hony-moneth.


Ladies, I will tell you News.


What News?


The young Widow, the Lady Variety, hath the Small Pox.


That's no News; for all sorts of Diseases are too frequent to be News; If
they were, it would be happy for all animal creatures, if diseases were
strangers.


But it is News that she should have them.


It is in respect of a new face, or otherwise not: for all mankind in these
parts of the World have that disease at one time or other, if they live to it.


Truly I pity her.


I hope she is not in such a condition to be pitied: for pity is a kin to
scorn, as near as Cousin-germans, for reproach and shame are brother and
sister, and scorn is the son of reproach, and pity is the daughter of shame:
But although the Small Pox may set marks of deformity, they set none of
dishonour; they only mark the Body, not the Soul; and that is only to be
accounted shame, and to be ashamed of, as the infirmities of the Soul, for
which they may be pitied.


That deserves scorn.


Baseness only deserves scorn, and not infirmities, loss, or misfortunes; but
there is a difference betwixt infirmities, loss, misfortunes, baseness, and
wickedness. Infirmities proceed directly from Nature, Loss from Possession,
Misfortunes from Interpositions, Baseness from that creature called Man, and
Wickedness from Devils: The first is caused by the carelessness of Nature, the
second by the lack of Power, the third by the necessity of Fate, the fourth by
the corruption of Man, the last by the persuasion and temptation of the Devil.
The first, second, and third are not to be avoided, the fourth not to be
practised, the fifth not to be followed nor fostered. The first is to be
pitied, the second to be grieved for, the third to be lamented for, the fourth
to be scorned, and the fifth to be hated and abhorred. Thus we may grieve for
the loss of her Beauty, but not pity her, having no natural defect in the Soul,
which is the Understanding, and the Rational part.


But Sickness is a natural defect.


No, Sickness is no more a natural defect, than Time, or Death, Life, or
Growth: for they are only Natural Effects, but not Natural Defects.


Pray turn us not out of your Service for one fault.


Why you are the ground wherein all Mischief is sown, and whereon all Vice
grows; besides, you are the only Bawds for Adultery.


No indeed, the chief Bawds to Adultery, are public Meetings of all kinds,
either Divine, Customary, Triumphant, or Recreative: Also Bravery, whether
Ceremonious Gallantry, or Magnificency: Likewise Beauty, Wit, Diligence,
Observance, and rich Presents: besides Jealousy and Covetousness.


No, Wanton, it is your glancing Eyes, simpering Countenance, and toyish
Tricks.


Truly Madam, Idle and I are fitter to make Wenches than Bawds, 'tis your
Ladyship that is the Lady of Pleasure, which persuades more to Adultery than we
poor harmless creatures.


Go get you out of my house, for I will not keep such bold rude Wenches as you
are.


Pray Madam pardon them for this time.


How shall we pass our time to day?


For us men we cannot pass our time better, or more pleasanter, than in the
company of fair young Ladies.


To avoid tedious Complements and Discourses to particular cars, or the
confusion of many Tongues speaking at once, let us sit and discourse in
Dialogues.


Agreed; but shall we discourse in Rhyme or in Prose?


In Rhymes by any means: for Rhymes many times hide and obscure that Nonsense
that would be discovered in Prose.


Then it seems Rhyme is a Veil to cover the face of Nonsense.


They are so: for one can never discover an ill Poem, until the Rhymes be
dissolved into Prose, which shows whether there be Sense, Reason, Wit, or Fancy
in them.


But to be turned into Prose, the Poems will lose the Elegance of the Style,
and the Eloquence of the Language.


Why, if a man should lose his Hat and Feather, and be stripped of a fine and gay
Suit of Clothes, he would neither have the less brain nor blood, nor soul, nor
body, beauty nor shape; and though gay and glorious Apparel may allure the Eyes
of a young Lady, or a Novice Gentleman, or may draw the ignorant vulgar to
Admiration, and so to an Esteem and Respect; yet those that have clear
Understandings, solid Judgments, quick Wits, and knowing Wisdoms, will be so
far from admiring the man for the sake of his gay Clothes, or esteeming him for
his glorious Attire, as they will be apt to condemn him as a vain man.


Then you reject the clothing of Poems in fine Language.


No; but I despise those Poems that have nothing but Language and Rhymes.


Then it is a folly to write in Verse, if Rhymes be not accounted of.


Verse is to be accounted of for the sake of Numbers, which is harmonious; yet
neither Harmonious Numbers, nor Chyming Rhymes, nor Gay Rhetoric, is Reason,
Wit, nor Fancy, which is the Ground, Body, or Soul of a good Poem.


Yet no Poem is esteemed, but condemned, that is not in gay and new-fashion'd
clothing.


Then Chaucer's Poems, which are in plain and old-fashion'd garments, which is
Language, is to be despised, and his Wit condemned; but certainly Chaucer's
Witty Poems, and Lively Descriptions, in despig^ of their Old Language, as they
have lasted in great Esteem and Admiration these three hundred years, so they
may do Eternally amongst the Wise^ every Age.


Gentlemen, leave off your Disputes, for the Ladies will be too hard for us:
for they are always Conquerors in peace and war, both in the Schools and in the
Fields, in the City and in the Court.


Pray leave off this particular Dispute, and let us discourse in general.


Agreed.


Begin.


Who shall begin?


I will begin; for a woman's Tongue hath privilege and preheminency in the
first place.


Old brains are like to barren ground,


Or like a wilderness forlorn,


Or like cracked bells that have no sound,


Or like a child Abortive born:


For Time the fire of Wit puts out,


And sills the brain with vapour cold,


And quenches Fancy without doubt,


For Wit is feeble when 'tis old.


Wit neither fails, weakens, decays, nor dies,


Though bred and born, as other creatures are,


Only the Brain, the Womb wherein it lies:


But when 'tis born, Fame nurses it with care,


And to Eternity doth it prefer.


Wit makes the brain sick when it breeding is,


And painful throws before, and at its birth;


But when 'tis born, if good, a Comfort 'tis,


The Parent Poetry creates with mirth,


He joys to see his Issue fairly spring,


And hopes with time in numbers may increase,


And being multiplied may honours bring,


As a posterity that never cease.


Wit, the Issue, and Off-spring of the Soul,


From which the Nature sublimely is Divine,


Dimensions hath, and parts, yet in the whole,


United is, of breaches there's no sign.


Wit, like the Soul is, which no body hath,


No latitude, yet hath a perfect form,


Yet flies all several ways, yet keeps a path,


A path of Sense, which never turns therefrom.


But wondrous strange, and monstrous is Wit,


That all contrarieties in it do dwell:


For it all Shapes, Employments, Humours fit,


Like Beasts, Men, Gods, or terrible Devils in Hell.


O fie, O fie, this discourse is like dancing the Hay, or dancing a Scotch Gig,
which will put you out of breath strait.


You would have us discourse in the measure of a Spanish Pavin.


No, but the measure of a French Galliard would do very well.


For my part, Lady, I like Gigs best, and therefore, if you please, begin
another Gig.


The Spring is dressed in buds and blossoms sweet:


The Summer laughs until her Cheeks look red,


The plenteous Autumn warm under our feet.


The Winter shaking cold, is almost dead.


Go on with the twelve Months.


Fierce furious March comes in with bended brows,


Commanding storms and tempests to arise,


Beating the trees and clouds, as if it meant


To make them subject to his tyrannies.


Then follows April, weeping for her buds,


For fear rude March had all her young destroyed;


But when she thought her tears might rise to floods,


With Sun-beams dried her Eyes, his heat her joyed.


Then wanton May came full of Amorous Sports,


Decking her self with gaudy Colours gay,


And entertaining Lovers of all sorts,


In pleasure she doth pass her time a way.


Then enters June with fair and full fat face,


Her Eyes are bright and clear as the Noon-Sun,


And in her carriage hath a Majestic grace,


In Equinoctial pace she walks, not run.


But Iuly's sultry hot, Ambitious proud,


And in a fiery Chariot she doth ride,


When angry is, she thundering speaks aloud,


Shoots Lightning through the clouds on every side.


Jove bless us! what Designs have you Ladies and Gentlemen that you sit so
gravely together in Council.


Our chief Design is Wit.


A witty Design: But really, what are you doing?


They are idly Rhyming.


Hang idle Rhyming, give me Reason.


Although our Rhymes are not good, yet they are not foul, by reason they are
made on fair and pure Subjects.


Why, what are the Subjects they are made on?


They are made of the several Seasons and Months of the Year.


By your favour, Lady, there be some of the Seasons and Months very foul.


But we have Rhym'd of none but the fair Months as yet.


Then let me advise you to stop your Poetical Vein: for if you go farther, you
will meet with foul weather and rain.


Out, out of our company.


Do you come here to rail at our Rhymes, and yet Rhyme your self, and worse
than any of the company?


I only Rhyme to make my self Free of the Company, though not of the Wits.


So you will call us fools by and by.


No faith, your Rhymes have named you already, and so prevented me.


Why this is worse and worse.


Let us seek a revenge.


What revenge shall we take?


We will tie him to an Asses head.


No, we will tie him to a Foxes tail.


Ladies tie me to what you please, so you do not tie me to a Horn.


Yes, to Altheas Horn, the Horn of plenty.


'Tis a sign Althea is a Woman, that she gives her gifts in a Horn; but I had
rather starve, than receive plenty in such a thing.


Let us transform him as Acteon did.


And follow him as his hounds did.


Young Ladies, be not so wild and fierce, to be the hounds your selves to
follow in pursuit.


No, no, we will be as Diana, that transformed him.


Then you must be liable to the same Censure, which is, to be thought cruel.


The more Cruel our Sex is, the more Chaste we are thought to be.


OUr Auth'ress bids me tell you She thought fit
For to divide this Fair CABAL of WIT.
For one Play 'twas too long, which was her sorrow,
The other half, if come, you'll see to morrow.
You'll thank her then, dividing it to make
You rise with Appetites, no Surfeits take.
WIT'S Surfet's dangerous: Take the Fruition
Of new-born Fancies without Repetition.
But hold your hands, as you are men to day,
And as our Friends to morrow Clap our Play.

