NOble Spectators, you have spent this day;
Not only for to see, but judge our Play:
Our Authoress says, she thinks her Play is good,
If that her Play be rightly understood;
If not, 'tis none of her fault, for she writ
The Acts, the Scenes, the Language and the Wit;
Wherefore she says, that she is not your Debtor,
But you are hers, until you write a better;
Of even terms to be she understands
Impossible, except you clap your hands.
This dumb Lower is the most diligent'st servant that ever was, and methinks my
Lady is somewhat more confident than she was; for she will sit and read whilst
he sits by.


Doth she read to him?


No, she reads to herself.


There comes abundance of Gallants to visit my Lady every day, and they have
all one answer, that is, she is not willing to receive visits, and they all go
civilly away, unless Sir Humphrey Bold and he rails horribly.


I have received from several Gentlemen, above 20. Letters a day, and as fast
as they come, she makes me burn them.


But she reads them first.


No, I read them to her.


And doth she answer all those Letters?


She never answered one in her life, and I dare swear, she never will.


Madam! --


Affectionata. Hast thou forgiven me my fault of doubting of thy virtue, so
much as to put it to a Trial.


My Noble Lord, have you forgiven my facility and wavering, faith that could so
easily, and in so short a time believe you could be wicked, although you did
accuse your self.


Nay Affectionata, I did not accuse my self, though I did try thee.


Then I have committed a treble fault through my mistake, which requires a
treble forgiveness.


Thou art so virtuous, thou can not commit a fault, and therefore needs no
forgiveness.


Madam, You have been pleased to profess a friendship to me, and I shall desire
you will do a friendly part for me.


Any thing that lies in my power, good Sir Humphrey Bold.


Then pray, Madam, speak to the Lady Bashful in my behalf, that I may be her
Husband.


I will Sir Humphrey, but she is bashful, yet I was there Yesterday, and she
entertained me indifferently well, but seemed to be wonderful coy; but
howsoever I will do my poor endeavour, Sir Humphrey.


Pray do, Madam.


My Affectionata, Why walks thou so melancholy?


The cause is not that I lye under an aspersion, by reason I lye not under a
crime; But truly, my Lord, I am troubled that I am threatened to be tormented,
for I would not willingly endure pain, though I could willingly receive death;
but as for the aspersions, I am no ways concerned; for I make no question, but
my honest life, my just actions, and the truth of my words, will so clear me at
the last, as I shall appear as innocent to the World, as Angels doth in Heaven.


Comfort your self, for I will rather suffer death, than you shall suffer pain.


Heaven defend you, my Lord, whatsoever I suffer,


Pray Mistress Reformer, be Sir Humphrey Bold's friend to thy Lady, and I
protest to thee, he shall be thy friend, as long as he and you live, and I do
not see any reason your Lady should refuse him; for he is both as proper and
stout a man, as any is living this day in the Land.


Indeed Madam, I dare not mention it to my Lady, for she is so adverse against
marriage, as she takes those for her enemies as doth but mention it.


Then surely she is not a woman, for there is none of the efseminate Sex, but
takes it for a disgrace to live an old maid, and rather than dye one, they will
marry any man that will have them; and the very fear of not marrying, is so
terrible to them, as whilst they are so young, as they are not fit to make
wives, they will miserably cast away themselves to the first that makes a
proffer, although they be poor, base or mean, rather than venture to try out
their fortunes.


But my Lady is not of that humour.


Come, come, I know thou can persuade thy Lady if thou would, and if you
will, Sir Humphrey Bold will give thee 500 l. to buy thee a Husband, for thou
hast lived too long a maid I faith.


I am not a maid, Madam, I am a widow.


What, a musty widow!


I know not whether I am musty, but I am a widow.


Let me tell thee, that it is as great a disgrace to live a widow, as an old
maid; wherefore take thee 500 l. to get thee a second Husband.


Truly I would not sell my Lady for all the World, much less, for 500 l.
neither would I marry again, if I were young, and might have my choice.


Lord bless me, and send me out of this house, least it should infect me; for
let me tell thee, were my Husband dead to morrow, I would marry the day after
his Funeral, if I could get any man to marry me, and so I would serve 20.
Husbands one after another.


Your best way were to have 20. Husbands at one time, so that your Ladyship
might not be a day without.


O fie! If women might have twenty Husbands, they would have no room for
courtly Servants; but prithee help Sir Humphrey Bold, and take his offer, and let
me speak with the Lady my self.


That your Ladyship cannot at this time, for my Lady is not well.


Then pray remember my most humble service, and tell her, I will come to
morrow, and if she be sick, I will talk her well.


Dead you would talk her, for thou hast an endless tongue; Oh! what man is so
miserable that is her Husband.


It is reported that our Generals Page hath behaved himself so handsomely, spoke
so wittily, defended his cause so prudently, declared his innocence so clearly,
and carried his business so wisely, as the Venetian States have not only
quitted him freely, but doth applaud him wonderfully, extolls him highly, and
offers him any satisfaction for the injury and disgrace that hath been done
him; but he only desires, that the man that had accused him, which man, was one
of the Generals men, should be pardoned, and not punished.


I hope our General is well pleased, that his beloved boy is not only cleared,
but applauded.


O! He doth nothing but embrace him, and kiss him, as if he were his only son,
yet he did gently chide him that he asked pardon for his accusers; for said he,
if all false accusers should be pardoned, no honest man would escape free form
censure.


But I hear the States have given order to our General to meet the Turks
again, for it is reported by intelligences that they have recruited into a
numerous body.


Faith I think the Turks are like the tale of the Giant, that when his head
was cut off there rise two in the place.


I think they are like the vegetable that is named threefold, the more it is
cut the faster it grows.


I would the Devil had them for me.


We do what we can to send them to Hell; but whether they will quit thee, I
cannot tell.


My Affectionata I wonder you could suffer an accusation so patiently knowing
you were accused falsely.


The clearness of my innocence needed not the fury of a violent passion to
defend it, neither could passion have rectified an injury.


Tis true, yet passion is apt to rise in defence of innocence, and honour.


And many times passion (my Lord) destroy; the life in striving to maintain
the truth, and defend the innocent; but I find a passionate sorrow that your
Lordship must go to endanger your life in the wars again.


The wars is pastime to me, for I hate idleness, and no employment pleases me
better than fighting, so it be in a good cause, but you shall stay.


Why my Lord, are you weary of my service?


Know I am careful of thy safety, thy rest and peace, for should thou not
come near danger, yet the very tragical aspect will terrefie thee to death,
thou art of so tender a nature, so soft and sweet a disposition.


Truly my Lord, if you leave me behind you, the very fear of your life will
kill me, where if your Lordyship will let me go, love will give me courage.


Then let me tell you, you must not go, for I have adopted you my Son, and I
have settled all my Estate upon thee, where, if I am killed, you shall be my
Heir, for I had rather virtue should inherit my Estate than birth, yet I charge
thee take my Name upon thee, as well as my Estate unto thee.


My noble Lord, I should be prouder to bear your name, than to be Master of the
whole World, but I shall never be so base to keep my self in safety, in hope of
your Estate, wherefore must entreat your leave to go with you.


I will not give you leave, but command you to the contrary, which is to stay.


I cannot obey you in this, for love will force me to run after you.


I will have you lashed, if you offer to go.


Stripes cannot stay me!


I will have you tied, and kept by force.


By Heaven, my Lord, i'll tear my flesh, and break my bones to get lose, and if
I have not legs to run, i'll creep thorough the Earth like worms, for though I
shall move but slowly, yet it will be a satisfaction to my soul, that I am
travelling after you,


Affectionata, You anger me very much.


Indeed my Lord, you grieve me more than I can anger you.


What, do you cry! and yet desire to be a soldier?


A valiant heart, my Lord, may have a weeping eye to keep it company.


If no persuasion can stay you, you must go along with me.


Faith Lady Bashful, we will have you abroad to Balls and public meetings, to
learn you a confident behaviour, and a bold speech; Fie! You must not be
bashful.


Our visiting her sometimes, hath made her so, as she is not altogether so
bashful as she was.


Surely Sir Serious Dumb is a domestic servant here, he stands and waits as
one.


If she will entertain such servants as he, she is not so modest as she appears.
Lady, perchance if I had come privately alone, I had been entertained with more
freedom, and not have had my suit denied, and my person neglected with scorn,
and he received with respect.


For Heaven sake! fight not here, to affright me with your quarrels.


I will have his heart-bloud.


Good Sir Serious Dumb, and Sir Humphrey Bold, leave off fighting.


Pray Sir Humphrey Bold, give me your sword, that I may be sure you will not
fight.


What, yield my sword up! I will dye first.


All speak at one time, who is killed, who is killed.

Good Ladies, hold Sir Humphrey Bold, and I will try to persuade Sir Serious
Dumb.


What, you shall not stir, I am sure you will not oppose us women.


Noble Sir, to give me an assurance you will not fight, give me your sword.


What, are you not ashamed to assault an unarmed man.


Let the sword alone, for it is my prize; and by Heaven, if you touch it, I
will run you thorough with this sword in my hand.


Hell take me, but I will be revenged: Lady, I hope you will give me my sword
again.


Never to fight against a woman, but my victorious spoils, I will deliver to
this gallant Gentleman, who delivered up his life and honour into my hand, when
he gave me his sword, and I endangered the loss of both by taking it, for which
my gratitude hath nothing to return him but my self and fortunes, if he please
to accept of that and me.


Sir, I wish my person were more beautiful than it is, for your sake, and my
fortune greater, with more certainty of continuance, as neither being subject
to time or accident, but this certainly I will promise you, which is, my chaste
and honest life; Now Sir, pray take these two swords,


I will be revenged.


Affectionata, I hear thou hast bought Arms, I am sure thou can not fight.


I am sure I will do my endeavour, my Lord.


Why, the very weight of thy Arms will sink thee down.


O no, my Lord; my desire shall beat them up.


Alas, thou halt no strength to fight?


What strength my active body wants, my vigorous spirits shall make good.


Prithee, my boy, do not adventure thy self, but stay in my Tent.


That would be a shame for me, and a dishonour to you, since you have adopted
me your son, wherefore the World shall never say, you have bestowed your favour
and your love upon a coward.


I well perceive I have adopted a very wilful boy?


Indeed, my Lord, I have no will, but what doth follow you.


The time I vowed to silence is expired, and though my thoughts not gloriously
attired with Eloquence, for Rhetoric I have none, yet civil words, sit for to
wait upon a modest Lady, and to entertain an honest mind with words of truth,
though plain? For 'tis not Rhetoric makes a happy life, but sweet society,
that's void of strife.


Sir Rhetoric is rather for sound than sense, for words than reason.


Yet my sweet Mistress, I wish my voice were tuned to your ear, and every word
set as a pleasing note to make such music as might delight your mind.


Your words slow thorough my ears, as smooth, clear, pure water from the spring
of Hellicon, which doth not only refresh, but enrich my dull insipid brain.


The Turks never received such a blow, as they have this time?


A pox of them, they have made us sweat?


Why Captain, sweating will cure the Pox, and though you curse the Turks, yet
it is we that live in Italy, that is diseased with them.


The truth is, we lost more health in the Venetian service, than we gain
wealth.


Nay faith Captain, we do not only lose our health, but wast our wealth, for
what booties we get from the Turks, the Courtesans gets from us.


For that cause now I have gotten a good booty, I will return into mine own
Country, and buy a --


A what Captain?


An Office in civil Government.


But you will never be civil in your Office.


That needs not to be, for though all Magisterial Offices bears a civil
Authority, yet the Officers and Magistrates therein, are more cruel and
ravenons than common soldiers.


Verily Captain, I think common Soldiers are more merciful and just than
they.


Verily Corporal, I think you will become a Puritan Preacher.


Why should you think so, Captain.


First, because you have got the Pox, and that will make you Preach in their
tone, which is, to speak thorough the nose; the next is, you have left the
ranting Oaths that Souldier's use to swear, and use their phrases; as verily my
beloved brethren, which brethrens souls, they care not for, nor thinks thereof,
for though they speak to the brethren, they Preach to the sisters, which
edifies wonderfully by their Doctrine, and they gain and receive as wonderful
from their female Hocks, for those Puritan Preachers have more Tithes out of
the Marriage-bed, than from the Parish-stock.


If it be so beneficial, Captain, I had rather be a Puritan Preacher, than an
Atheistical States-man.


Faith Corporal, I think there is not much Religion in either, but if there be,
it lies in the States-man, for he keeps Peace, the other makes War.


If they make wars; they are our friends, for we live by the spoils of our
enemies.


'Tis true, when as we get a victory, or else our enemies lives on the spoil of
us, for though we have no goods to lose, yet we venture our lives, neither do
we live on the spoil of our enemies, but only in foreign wars, for in civil
wars we live by the spoil of our Friends, and the ruining of our Country.


Then we are only obliged to Preachers for civil wars.


Faith Corporal, we are obliged to them for both; for as their faetious
Doctrine causes a Rebellion by railing on the Governors and Governments, so
their flattering Sermons sets a Prince on fire, who burns in hot ambition to
conquer all the World.


These latter Preachers you mention, Captain, are not Puritan Preachers, but
Royal Preachers.


You are right Corporal, for they are divided in two parts, although their
Doctrine meets at one end, which is in war.


Captain, you have discovered so fully of Preachers, that if you will give me
leave, I will preach to our Company.


Out you rogue, will you raise a war amongst our selves, causing a mutiny to
cut one another throats?


Why Captain, it is the fashion and practice for Soldiers to Preach now
adays.


That is amongst the Rebel party to keep up their faction, and to strengthen
the flank thereof, but amongst the Royal party, the Preaching Ministers turn
fighting Soldiers, encouraging with their good example, as by their valiant
onsets, and not the Soldiers Preaching Ministers.


Why Captain, the Royal party needs no encouragement, the justice of their
cause is sufficient.


You say right, they want not courage to fight, but they want conscience to
plunder; Besides, the Royal party is apt to give quarter, which should not be,
for Soldiers should destroy all they take in Civil-wars, by reason there is no
gain to be made of their Prisoners, as by the way of Ransoms, but if we stay
from our Company, our General will preach such a Sermon, as may put us into
despair of his favour, and endanger our lives at the Council of war.


I think our Generals new made son is a spirit; for when the General was
surrounded with the Turks, this adopted Son of his flew about like lightening,
and made such a massacre of the Turks, as they lay as thick upon the ground, as
if they had been mushromes.


Certainly the General had been taken Prisoner, if his Son had not rescued him,
for the General had adventured too far into the enemies body.


'Tis strange, and doth amaze me with wonder, to think how such a Willow-twig
could bore so many mortal holes in such strong timbered bodies as the Turks.


By him one would believe miracles were not ceased.


Well, for my part I will ask pardon of my General for condemning him privately
in my thoughts, for I did think him the most fond, (I will not say what) for
adopting a poor Beggar-boy for his son, and settled all his Estate, which is, a
very great one upon him.


The truth is, he is a very gallant youth, and if he lives and continues in the
wars, he will prove a most excellent Soldier.


Certainly he sprung from a Noble Stock, either by his Fathers side, or by his
Mothers.


By his behaviour he seems Nobly born from both.


And by his poverty, Nobly born from neither.


Mean persons may have wealth, and Noble births be Beggars.


Gentlemen, I beseech you, use not this ceremony to me, it belongs only to my
Lord General.


Your merits and gallant actions deserves it from us; Besides, it is your due,
as being the Generals adopted Son.


My Lords favour may place a value on me, though I am poor in worth, and no
ways deserves this respect.


Faith Sir, had it not been for you, we had lost the battle.


Alas, my weak arm could never make a conquest, although my will was good, and
my desire strong to do a service.


Sir, the service was great, when you rescued our General, for when a General
is taken or killed, the Armies are put to rout, for then the common Soldiers
runs away, never stays to fight it out.


I beseech you Gentlemen, take not the honour from my Lord to give it me, for
he was his own defence, and ruin to his enemies; for his valiant spirits shot
thorouh his eyes, and struck them dead, thus his own courage was his own
safety, and the Venetians victory.


Noble Sir, the Venetian-States hath made you Lieutenant General of the whole
Army, and one of the Council of War, where they desire your presence.


The honours they have given me, is beyond my management.


Good your Honour, speak in the behalf of my Petition.


And mine.


And mine.


Good women, I cannot do you service, for if your Petitions are just, my Lord
the General will grant your request, and if they be unjust, he will not be
unjust in granting them for my intrearie, nor will I entreat therefore.


If it please your Honour, we implore Mercy, not Justice.


Where Justice and Wisdom will give leave for Mercy, I am sure my Lord will
grant it, otherwise, what you call mercy, will prove cruelty, and cause ruin
and destruction.


We beseech your Honour then, but to deliver our Petitious.


For what are they?


For the lives of our Husbands.


Are they to be executed?


They are condemned, and to be hanged to morrow, unless the General gives them
pardons.


What are their crimes?


My Husband is to be hanged for plundering a few old rotten Houshold-goods.


Give me your Petition, necessity might enforce him.


My Husband is to be hanged for disobeying his Captain when he was drunk.


When which was drunk? your Husband or his Captain?


My Husband.


Disobedience ought to be severely punished, yet because his reason was drowned
in his drink, and his understanding smothered with the vapour thereof, whereby
he knew not what he did, I will deliver your Petition.


And what is yours?


My Husband is to be hanged for ravishing a Virgin.


I will never deliver a Petition for those that are Violaters of Virginity, I
will sooner act the Hang-mans part my self to strangle him.


And what is your Husbands crime?


My Husband is to be hanged for murder.


O horrid! They that murder, ought to have no mercy given to them, since they
could give no mercy to others.


Good your Honour.


Nay, never press me, for I will never deliver your Petition.


Noble Sir, I come to entreat you to be my friend, to speak to the General in
my behalf, that I may remain in my place, for I am to be cashierd.


For what?


For a small fault, Sir, for when the battle was begun, I had such a cholick
took me in the stomach, as I was forced to go aside, and untruss a point.


It had been more for your honour, Captain, to had let nature discharge it self
in your breeches. And what, are you cashiered Captain?


Marry, for my good service, for when the battle begun, my Soldiers run away,
and I run after to call them back, they run, and I rid so long, as we were
gotten ten miles from the Army, but I could not get them, until such time as
the battle was won.


It had been more honour for you to have fought single alone without your
Soldiers, than to have followed your Soldiers, although to make them stay,
and you would have done more service with your standing still than your
running; and what, are you to be cashiered?


Why Sir, my company wanted Powder, and I went to fetch or give order; for some
to be brought, and before I returned to my Company, the battle was won.


It had been more for your honour and good service, to have stayed and
encouraged your Soldiers by your example with sighting with your sword, for
the sword makes a greater execution than the shot; but since they were not
wilful, nor malicious faults, I shall do you what service I can, for fear
sometimes may seize the valiantest man. And what were your faults Colonel?


Mine was for betraying a Fort.


O base! He that betrays a Fort, ventures to betray a Kingdom, which is
millions of degrees worse than to betray a life, or a particular friend; for
those that betrays a Kingdom, betrays numbers of lifes, and those that betrays
their native Country, betrays that which gave them nourishing strength, and you
have had great mercy in giving you your life, although you lose your place. And
what was your fault?


Mine was for neglecting the Watch.


That is as bad as to give leave for the enemy to surprise, only the one
betrays through carelessness, the other through covetousness. And what was your
fault Colonel?


Mine was for disobeying the Generals Orders.


Let me tell you Colonel, he that will not obey, is not fit to command; and
those that commits careless, stubborn, malicious and wicked crimes; I will
never deliver their Petition, nor speak in their behalf.


Good your Honour save me from punishment.


What are you to be punished for?


I am to be punished, because I said my Captain was a coward.


What reason had you to say so?


The reason was, because he sung and whistled when he went to fight.


That might be to show his courage.


O no, it was to hide his fear.


But you ought not to have called your Captain coward, had he been so; for the
faults of Superiors are to be winked at, and obscured; and not to be divulged:
Besides, yours was but a supposition, unless he ran away.


No Sir, he fought.


Then you were too blame for judging so.


I confess it, Sir, wherefore pray speak for me.


Indeed I cannot, for to call a man coward, is to kill, at least to wound his
reputation, which is far worse, that if you had killed the life of his body; by
how much honour is to be preferred before life; but if you can make your peace
with your Captain by asking his pardon; I will then speak to the General, that
the sentence for your punishment may be taken off, wherefore let me advise you
to go to your Captain, and in the most humblest and sorrowfulst manner ask
forgiveness of him.


I shall, and it please your Honour.


HOw happy is a private life to me;
Wherein my thoughts ran easily and free;
And not disturbed with vanities and joys,
On which the senses gazes, as young boys
On watery bubbles in the air blown,
Which when they break, doth vanish and are gone.

I doubt I disturb your Poetry?


No wife, you rather give life and fire to my muse, being chaste, fair and
virtuous, which are the chief themes for Poets fancies to work on.


But that wife that is despised by her Husband, and not loved, is dejected in
her own thoughts, and her mind is so disquieted, as it masks her beauty, and
vails, and obscures her virtues.


The truth is, wife, that if my affections to you, had not been firmly settled;
your indiscretion and effeminate follies had ruined it, but my love is so true,
as you have no cause to be jealous; but I confess you made me sad, to think
that your humour could not sympathize with mine, as to walk in the same course
of life as I did, but you were ignorant and would not believe me, until you
had found experience by practice, by which practice you have found my words to
be true, do you not?


Yes, so true, as I shall never doubt them more; But pray Husband, tell me what
discourse you had with the Ladies, when you went abroad with them?


Why, they railed against good Husbands, called them Uxorious Fools, Clowns,
Blocks, Stocks, and that they were only fit to be made Cuckolds through their
confident fondness, and that kind Husbands appeared like simple Asses; I
answered, that those Husbands that were Cuckolds, appeared not only like silly
Asses, but base Cowards, that would suffer their wives to be courted, and
themselves dishonoured when they ought to destroy their wives Gallants, if
visibly known, and to part from their wives, at least to mancor them, and not
only for being falfe, but for the suspicion caused by their indiscretions;
otherwise said I, a kind Husband shows himself a Gallant, Noble, Generous,
Just, Wise man, and contrary, he is a base man, that will strive to disgrace
himself, by disgracing his wife with neglects and disrespects; and a coward, to
tyrannize only over the weak, tender, and helpless Sex; for women being tender,
shiftless, and timorous creatures by nature, is the cause they join themselves
by chaste Wedlock to us men for their safety, protection, honour and
livelihood, and when a man takes a woman to his wife, he is an unworthy and
treacherous person, if he betrays her to scorns, or yields her to scoffs, or
leaves her to poverty; and he is a base man that makes his wife sigh and weep
with unkindness either by words or actions, wherefore said I, it is wisdom for
men to respect their wives with a civil behaviour, and sober regard, and it is
heroic to defend, protect and guard their lives and virtues, to be constant to
their vows, promises and protestations, and it is generous to cherish their
health, to attend them in their sickness, to comply with their harmless
humours, to entertain their discourses, to accompany their persons, to yield to
their lawful desires, and to commend their good graces, and that man which is
a Husband, and doth not do thus, is worthy to be shamed, and not to be kept
company with, which is not called an Uxorious Husband; for said I, an Uxorious
Husband I understand to be, a honest, careful and wise Husband.


And what said they, after you said this?


They laughed and said, my flowery Rhetoric was strewed upon a dirty ground; I
answered, it was not dirty where I lived, for my wife was beautiful, chaste
and cleanly, and I wished every man the like, and after they perceived that
neither the railing, nor laughing at good Husbands could not temper me for
their palats, they began to play and sport with one another, and sung wanton
songs, and when all their baits failed, they quarreled with me, and said I was
uncivil, and that I did not entertain them well, and that I was not good
Company, having not aconversable wit, nor a gentle behaviour, and that I was
not a gallant Cavalier, and a world of those reproaches and idle discourses, as
it would tire me to repeat it, and you to hear it.


Pray resolve me one question more, what was it you said to the Lady Amorous,
when she threatened to tell me?


I only said nature was unkind to our Sex, in making the beautiful females
cruel.


Was that all, I thought you had pleaded as a courtly Suitor for loves favours.


No indeed, but let me tell you, and so inform you, wife, that those humoured
women, take as great a pleasure to make wives jealous of their Husbands, and
Husbands jealous of their wives, and to seperate their affections, and to make
a disorder in their Families, as to plot and design to entice men to court
them, Cuckold their Husband, also let me tell you, that much company, and
continual resort, brings great inconveniences for its apt to corrupt the mind,
and make the thoughts wild, the behaviour bold, the words vain, the discourse
either flattering, rude or tedious, their actions extravagant, their persons
cheap, being commonly occompanyed, or their company common. Besides, much
variety of Company, creates amorous luxury, vanity, prodigality, jealousy,
envy, malice, slander, envy, treachery, quartels, revenge and many other
evils, as laying plots to ensnare the Honourable, to accuse the Innocent, to
deceive the Honest, to corrupt the Chaste, to deboyst the Temperate, to pick
the purse of the Rich, to enslave the poor, to pull down lawful Authority, and
to break just Laws; but when a man lives to himself within his own Family, and
without recourse, after a solitary manner, he lives free, without control, not
troubled with company, but entertains himself with himself, which makes the
soul wise, the mind sober, the thoughts industrious, the understanding learned,
the heart honest, the senses quiet, the appetites temperate, the body
healthful, the actions just and prudent, the behaviour civil and sober; He
governs orderly, eats peaceably, sleeps quietly, lives contentedly, and most
commonly, plentifully and pleasantly, ruling and governing his little Family to
his own humour, wherein he commands with love, and is obeyed with duty, and who
that is wise, and is not mad; would quit this heavenly life to live in hellish
Societies, and what can an honest Husband and wife desire more, than love,
peace and plenty, and when they have this, and is not content, 'tis a sign they
stand upon a Quagmire, or rotten Foundation, that will never hold or endure,
that is, they are neither grounded on honesty, nor supported with honour.


Well Husband, I will not interupt your studies any longer, but as you study
Philosophy, Wisdom and Invention, so I will study obedience, discretion and
Houswifery.


Affectionata, Were you never bred to the Discipline of War?


Never, my Lord, but what I have been since I came to you.


Why, thou did speak at the Council of War, as if thou had been an old
experienced soldier, having had the practice of forty years, which did so
astonish the grave Senators and old Soldiers, that they grew dumb, and for a
while did only gaze on thee.


Indeed, my Lord, my young years, and your grave Counsel did not suit together.


But let me tell thee, my boy, thy rational and wise speeches, and that grave
counsels was not mis-match'd.


Pray Heaven I may prove so, as your favours, and your love may not be thought
misplaced.


My Love thinks thee worthy of more than I can give thee, had I more power than
Caesar had.


I hear that the Duke of Venice is so taken with our Generals adopted Son, as
he will adopt him his Son.


Hay-day! I have heard that a Father hath had many Sons, but never that one Son
hath had so many Fathers; but contrary, many Sons wants fathering.


'Tis true, some Sons hath the misfortune not to be owned, but let me tell you
Lieutenant, there be few children that hath not many such Fathers; as one
begets a child, a second owns the child, a third keeps the child, which
inherits as the right Heir; and if a fourth will adopt the child; a fifth, or
more may do the like, if they please.


So amongst all his Fathers, the right Father is lost.


Faith, the right Father of any child is seldom known, by reason that women
takes as much delight in deceiving the World, and dissembling with particular
men, as in the cuckolding their Husbands.


The truth is, every several Lover cuckolds one another.


Perchance that is the reason that women strives to have so many Lovers; for
women takes pleasure to make Cuckolds.


And Cuckolds to own children.


Noble Sir, the great Duke of Venice hath sent us to let you know he hath
adopted you his Son, and desires your company.


Pray return the great Duke thanks, and tell him those favours are too great
for such a one as I; but if he could, and would adopt me, as Augustus Caesar
did Tiberius, and make me master of the whole World; by Heaven I would refuse
it, and rather chose to live in a poor Cottage, with my most Noble Lord.


But you must not deny him; Besides, he will have you.


I will dye first, and rather chose to bury my self in my own tears, than build
a Throne with ingratitude.


But it is ungrateful to deny the Duke.


O no, but I should be the ingrate of ingratitude, should I leave my Noble
Lord, who from a low despised poor mean degree, advanced me to Respect and
Dignity:

Whose favours I will keep close in my heart,
And from his person I will never part.
For though I dye, my soul will still attend,
And wait upon him, as his faithful friend.

Noble Sir, will not you send the Duke an answer?


Have not I answered? Then pray present my thanks in the most humblest manner
to the great Duke, and tell him he may force the presence of my person, but if
he doth, it will be but as a dead carcase without a living soul; for tell him,
when I am from my Lord,

I withering vade, as flowers from Sun sight;
His presence is to me, as Heavens light.

'Tis strange that such an honour cannot persuade a boy!


That proves him a boy, for if he had been at mans estate, he would not have
refused it, but have been ambitious of it, and proud to receive it.


Indeed youth is foolish, and knows not how to chose.


When he comes to be a man, he will repent the folly of his youth.


Pray Madam, let me persuade you, not to cast your self away, to marry a dumb
man; for by my troth, all those that are dumb, are mere fools; for who can be
witty or wise that cannot speak, or will not speak, which is as bad.


Why Madam? wisdom nor wit, doth noth not live not lye in words, for prudence,
fortitude and temperance, expresses wisdom and capacity; ingenuity and fancy
expresses wit, and not words.


But let me advise you to chose Sir Humphrey Bold, he is worth a thousand of Sir
Serious Dumb; besides, he is a more learned man by half, and speaks several
Languages.


Perchance so, and yet not so wise; for Parrots will learn Languages, and yet
not know how to be wise, nor what wisdom is, which is to have a found
judgement, a clear understanding, and a prudent forecast.


Faith all the World will condemn you to have no forecast, if you marry Sir
Serious Dumb.


Let them speak their worst, I care not, as not fearing their censures.


You were fearful and bashful.


'Tis true, but now am grown so confident with honest love, I care not if all
the World did know of it; nay, I wish it were published to all ears.


Nay, you must not go, until you have granted my suit in the behalf of Sir
Humphrey Bold.


Pray let me go, for I hate him more, than Heaven hates Hell.


Nay, then I will leave you.


Why weepest thou Affectionata?


Alas, my Lord, I am in such a passion, as I shall dye, unless it flows forth
thorough mine eyes, and runs from off my tongue.

For like as vapours from the Earth doth rise,
And gather into clouds beneath the skies;
Contracts to water, swelling like moist veins,
When over-fill'd, falls down in showering rains:
So thoughts, which from a grieved mind are sent,
Arises in a vaporous discontent.
Contracts to melancholy, which heavy lies
Until it melts, and runs forth through the eyes;
Unless the Sun of comfort, dry doth drink
Those watery tears that lies at the eyes brink;
Or that the rays of joy, which streams bright out
With active heat disperses them about.

Faith Affectionata, I am no good Poet, but thy passion moves so sweetly in
numbers and stops, so just with rhymes, as I cannot but answer thee,

Like as the Sun beauty streams rays about,
A smiling countenance like day breaks out:
And though a frown obscures sweet beauties sight,
Yet beauties beams makes cloudy frowns more bright:
But melancholy beauty doth appear
As pleasing shades, or Summers evenings clear.
So doth thine Affectionata, but prithee do not wast thy breath into sighs, nor
distill thy life into tears.


I wish I might here breath my last, and close my eyes for ever.


I perceive Affectionata, you take it unkindly I did persuade you to take the
Dukes offer; But if you think I did it out of any other design than a true
affection to you; By Heaven, you do me wrong by false interpretation.


If you, my Lord, did love but half so well as I, you would rather chose to
dye, than part with me.


I love thee beyond my own interest or delight, for what is best for thee, I
account as the greatest blessing, should it bring me any other ways a curse.


Then let me still live with you, for that is best for me.


Here I do vow to Heaven, to do my endeavour with my life to keep thee with me,
or to be always where thou art.


O! what a weight you have taken from my soul, wherein my thoughts like
wer-winged-birds sate heavy; my senses like as blinking Lamps which vaporous
damps of grief had near put out.


Let me tell thee Affectionata, I have travelled far, observed much, and have
had divers encounters, but I never met such virtue, found such truth, nor
encountered such an affection as thine.

And thus I do embrace thee, and do wish our souls may twine,
As our each bodies thus together join.

Dear Mistress, do not you repent your favours, and wish your promise were
never made; doth not your affection vade?


No, it cannot, for never was any love placed upon a Nobler soul than my love
is, which is on yours, insomuch, as I do glory in my affection, and grow
self-conceited of its judgement.


And will you be constant?


Let not your humble thoughts raise a doubt of jealousy; for I am fixed, as
time is to eternity.


Then I thank nature for your Creation, honour for your Breeding, and heaven
for your Virtue, and fortune that hath given you to me, for I can own nothing
of that worth that could deserve you.


I cannot condemn jealousy, because it proceeds from pure love, and love melts
into kinds on a constant heart, but flames like Oil on a false one, which sets
the whole life on fire.


But now I cannot doubt your love nor constancies, since you have promised your
heart to me; for true Lovers are like the light and the Sun, inseparable.


Come fellow-souldiers, are you ready to march?


Whether?


Into our own native Country, for our General is sent sol home.


Except there be wars in our own Country, we cannot go with him.


I know not whether there be wars or peace, but he obeys, for he is preparing
for his journey.


Who shall be General when he is gone?


I know not, but I hear the States offers to make our young Lieutenant-General,
General, but he refuses it.


Would they would make me General?


If thou were General, thou would put all method out of order.


Faith Gentlemen, I would lead you most prudently, and give you leave to
plunder most unanimously.


And we would fight courageously, to keep what we plunder.


Come, let us go, and inquire how our affairs goes.


Now Affectionata, we have taken our leave of the States: I hope thy mind is at
peace, and freed from fears of being staid.


Yes my my Lord.


They did persuade thee much to stay.


They seemed much troubled for your Lordships departure.


Truly I will say thus much for my self, that I have done them good service,
and I must say thus much for them, that they have rewarded me well.


I have heard, my Lord, that States seldom rewards a service done; wherefore I
believe, they hope you will return again, and sees you for that end.


I shall not be unwilling when my Country hath no employment for me.


Methinks, my Lord, since you have gotten afame abroad, you should desire to
live a settled life at home.


A settled life would seem but dull to me that hath no wife nor children.


You may have both, If you please, my Lord.


For children I desire none, since I have thee, and wives I care not for, but
what are other men's.


From whence come thou friend?


From Rome, my Lord.


If you please to stay in the next room, I shall speak to you presently.


Affectionata, From whence do you think this Letter comes?


I cannot guess, my Lord.


From the Pope, who hath heard so much of thy youth, virtue, wit and courage,
as he desires me to pass thorough Rome im my journey home, that he might see
thee.


Pray Heaven his Holiness doth not put me into a Monastery, and force me to
stay behind you.


If he should, I will take the habit, and be incloistered with thee; but he
will not enforce a youth that hath no will thereto.


Truly my Lord, I have no will to be a Fryer.


Indeed it is somewhat too lazy a life, which all heroic Spirits shames, for
those loves liberty and action: But I will go and dispatch this Messenger, and
to morrow we will begin our journey.


Faith Amorous, it had been a victory indeed worth the bragging off, if we
could have taken Sir Peaceable Studious Loves prisoner, and could have
infettered him in Cupid's bonds.


It had been a victory indeed, for I will undertake to enslave five Courtiers,
and ten Soldiers, sooner, and in less time than one studious Scholar.


But some Scholars are more easily taken than the luxurious Courtiers, or
deboist Soldiers.


O no! for Luxury and Rapine begets lively Spirits, but a study quenches them
out.


One would think so by Sir Peaceable Studious, but not by some other Scholars
that I am acquainted with.


But confess, Lady Wagtail, do not you find a studious Scholar dull company, in
respect of a vain Courtier, and a rough Soldier.


I must confess, they that study Philosophy, are little too much inclined to
morality, but those that study Theology, are not so restringent.


Well, for my part, since I have been acquainted with Sir Peaceable Studious, I
hate all Scholars.


TIs a wonder such a youth as the Lord Singularity's Son is, should have so
great a wit, as to be able to dispute with so many Cardinals.


The greater wonder is, that he should have the better of them!


'Tis said the Pope doth admire him! and is extremely taken with him.


If Jove had so much admired him, he would have made him his Ganimed.


He offered to make him a living Saint, but he thanked his Holiness, and said,
he might Saint him, but not make him holy enough to be a Saint, for said he, I
am unfit to have Prayers offered to me, that cannot offer Prayers as I ought,
or live as I should; then he offered him a Cardinals hat, but he refused it;
saying he was neither wise enough, nor old enough for to accept of it; for said
he. I want Ulisses head, and Nestors years to be a Cardinal, for though less
devotion will serve a Cardinal than a Saint, yet politic wisdom is required.


Pray Neighbours tell me which way, and by what means I may see this wonderful
youth; for I have been out of the Town, and not heard of him.


You cannot see him now, unless you will follow him where he is gone.


Why, whether is he gone?


Into his own Country, and hath been gone above this week.


Nay, I cannot follow him thither.


Affectionata, you have promised me to be ruled by me in every thing, so that
you may not part from me.


I have, my Lord, and will obey all your commands, so far as I am able.


Then I am resolved now I am returned into my own Country, to get thee a wife,
that thy fame and worthy acts may live in thy Posterity.


Jove bless me, a wife! by Heaven, my Lord, I am not man enough to marry!


There is many as young as you, that have been Fathers, and have had children.


If they were such as I am, they might father Children, but never get them.


Thou art modest, Affectionata, but I will have you marry, and I will chose
thee such a wife, as modest as thy self.


Then we never shall have children, Sir.


Love and acquaintance will give you confidence; but tell me truly,
Affectionata, did thou never court a Mistress?


No truly, Sir.


Well, I will have you practice Courtship, and though I will not directly be
your Band or Pimp, yet I will send you amongst the effeminate Sex, where you
may learn to sport with Ladies, as well as fight with Turks.


I can tell you news?


What news?


Sir Serious Dumb can speak again!


I am sorrow for that, for now he may tell tales out of School.


If he do, we will whip him with the rods of tongues, which is more sharp than
the rods of wire.


We may whip him with words, but we our selves shall feel the smart of reproach.


How simply you talk, as if reproach could hurt a woman; when reproach is born
with us, and dyes with us.


If reproach have no power of our Sex, why are all women so careful to cover
their faults, and so fearful to have their crimes divulged.


Out of two reasons; first, because those of the masculine Sex, which have
power, as Fathers, Uncles, Brothers and Husbands; would cut their throats, if
they received any disgrace by them; for disgrace belongs more to men than
women; The other reason is, that naturally women loves secrets; yet there is
nothing they can keep secret, but their own particular faults, neither do they
think pleasure sweet, but what is stolen.


By your favour, women cannot keep their own faults secret.


O yes, those faults that may ruin them if divulged, but they cannot keep a
secret that is delivered to their trust; for naturally women are unfit for
trust, or council.


But we are fit for faction.


The World would be but a dull World, if it were not for industrious factions.


The truth is, that if it were not for faction, the World would lye in the
cradle of Peace, and be rocked into a quiet sleep of security.


Pr^thee talk not of quiet, and peace, and rest, for I hate them as bad as
death.


Indeed they resemble death, for in death there is no wars nor noise.


Wherefore it is natural for life, neither to have rest nor peace, being
cantrary to death.


My Lord, I hear the King hath invited you to attend him in his progress this
Summer.


Yes, but I have made my excuse, and have got leave to stay at home; for I will
tell thee truly, that I had rather march ten miles with an Artillery, than
travel one with a Court; and I had rather fight a battle, than be bound to
ceremony, or flattery, which must be practised if one live at Court: Besides, I
have been bred to lead an Army, and not to follow a Court; And the custom of
the one have made me unacquainted, and so unfit for the other; for though I may
truly say I am a good Soldier, yet I will confess ingenuously to thee, I am a
very ill Courtier.


I think they are the most happiest, that are least acquainted with a great
Monarchs Court.


I will tell thee a discourse upon this theme in the time of Henry the eighth
of England, there were many Courtiers of all degrees about him, and the theme
of their discourse was, who was the happiest man in England; So all the Nobles
and inferior Courtiers agreed unanimously it was his Majesty, and it could be
no man else; and they all said, that their judgements was so clear in that
point, that it could not admit of a contradiction, or dispute: Said Henry the
eighth, by the body of our Lord, you are all mistaken; then said one of the
Courtiers, I beseech your Majesty to tell us who is the happiest man; By the
Lord, said the King, that Gentleman that lives to his profit, and dare
moderately spend for his pleasure, and that neither knows me, nor I know him,
he is the happiest man in the Kingdom; and I am of Henry the eights opinion;
but howsoever, it were better to be such a one that goes with the bag and
baggage of an Army, than one of the tail of a Court.


But your Lordship would not refuse to be as the chief, as to be a Favourite;
for a Favourite is more sought, feared and flattered, than the King himself.


I think I should not refuse to be a Favourite, by reason a Favourite is a
General to command, Martial and Conduct in all affairs, both at home and
abroad, in peace and in war, and all by the power and authority of the
commission of Favourites.


Which Commission hath a greater and larger extent than any other Commission.


You say right, for it extends as far as the Kings power.


Madam, shall your wedding be private, or public?


Private.


I wonder you will have it private.


Why do you wonder?


Because the wedding-day is the only triumphant day of a young maids life.


Do you call that a triumphant day, that inslaves a woman all her life after;
no, I will make no triumph on that day.


Why, you had better have one day than none.


If my whole life were triumphant, it would be but as one day when it was past,
or rather as no day nor time; for what is past, is as if it never were; and for
one day I will never put my self to that ceremonious trouble, which belongs to
feasting; revelling, dressing and the like.


I perceive your Ladyship desires to be undressed upon the Wedding-day.


No, that I do not, but as I will not be carelessly undressed, so I will not be
dressed for a Pageant show.


I think there is no Family more methodically ordered, prudently governed than
your Lordships.


It were a disgrace to my profession, if I should not well know how to command;
for a good Commander in the field, can tell how to be a good Manager in his
private Family, although a prudent Master of a Family knows not how to be a
skilful Commander in the field; but a prudent Master must have a trusty
Steward, so a knowing General must have a careful and skilful
Lieutenant-General, or else he will be very much troubled; also both Master and
General must have other Officers, or else they will not find their Accounts or
Conquests as he hopes or expects; For neither General nor Master can order
every particular command, nor rectify every particular error himself; for a
Generals Office, is only to direct, order and command the chief Officers, and
not the common Soldiers: So the Master of a Family, is only to direct, order
and command his Steward, he the rest of the Officers, and the common servants,
every one must order those that belongs to their several Offices.


Then the common Servants are like the common Soldiers.


They are so, and are as apt to mutiny, if they be not used with strict
discipline: Thus, if a Master of a Family have the right way in the management
of his particular affairs, he may thrive easily, have plenty, live peaceably,
be happy, and carry an honourable port with an indifferent Estate, when those
of much greater Estates, which knows not, nor practices the right method, or
rules and governs not with strictness, his servants shall grow factious,
mutinous, and be always in bruleries, by which disorders his Estate shall
waste invisible, his servants cozen egregiously; he lives in penury, his
servants in riot, always spending, yet always wanting, forced to borrow, and
yet hath so much, that if it were ordered with prudence, might be able to lend,
when by his imprudence, he is troubled with stores, yet vexed with necessity.


I should think that no man ought to be a Master of a Family, but those that
can govern orderly and peaceably.


You say right, for every Master of a Family are petty-Kings, and when they
have rebellions in their own small Monarchies, they are apt to disturb the
general Peace of the whole Kingdom or State they live in; for those that cannot
tell how to command their own Domestics, and prudently order rheir own
affairs, are not only useless to the Common-wealth, but they are pernicious
and dangerous, as not knowing the benefit and necessity of obedience and
method.


The Lord Singularity hath brought home the sweetest, and most beautifullest
young Cavalier, as ever I saw.


Faith he appears like Adonas.


Did you ever see Adonas?


No, but I have heard the Poets describe him.


Venus and Adonas are only two poetical Ideas, or two Ideas in poetical brains.


Why, Ideas hath no names.


O yes, for Poets christens their Ideas with names, as orderly as Christians
Fathers doth their children.


Well, I wish I were a Venus for his sake.


But if you were only a poetical Venus, you would have little pleasure with
your Adonas.


Hay ho! He is a sweet youth.


And you have sweet thoughts of the sweet youth.


My thoughts are like Mirtle-groves to entertain the Idea of the Lord
Singularity's Son.


Take heed there be not a wild-boar in your Myrtle Imagenarie Grove, that may
destroy your Adonas Idea.


There is no beast there, only sweet singing-birds called Nightingales.


Pray, my Lord, what Lady is that you make such inquiry for?


She is a Lady I would have thee marry; One that my Father did much desire I
should marry, although she was very young, and may be now about thy years, I
hear her Father is dead, but where the Lady is, I cannot find out.


Perchance she is married, my Lord.


Then we should find her out, by hearing who she hath married.


But if she be not married, she being as old as I, I am too young for her, for
Husbands should be older than their wives.


But she is one that is well born, well bred, and very rich; and though thou
art young in years, yet thou art an aged man in judgment, prudence,
understanding, and for wit, as in thy flourishing strength.


Perchance, my Lord, she will not like me, as neither my years, my person, nor
my birth.


As for thy years, youth is always accepted by the effeminate Sex; and thy
person she cannot dislike, for thou art very handsome, and for thy birth,
although thou art meanly born, thou hast a noble nature, a sweet disposition, a
virtuous soul, and a heroic spirit; Besides, I have adopted thee my Son, and
the King hath promised to place my Titles on thee, and hath made thee Heir of
my whole Estate, for to maintain thee according to those Dignities.


But I had rather live unmarried, my Lord, if you will give consent.


But I will never consent to that, and if you be dutiful to me, you will marry
such a one as I shall chose for you.


I shall obey whatsoever you command, for I have nothing but my obedience to
return for all your favours.


Well, I will go and make a strict inquiry for this Lady.


Hay ho! what will this come to, I would I were in my Grave; for love and fear
doth torture my poor life; Heaven strike me dead! or make me this Lords wife.


How shall we compass the acquaintance of the Lord Singularity's Son?


Faith Amorous, thou love boys, but I love men; wherefore I would be
acquainted with the Lord Singularity himself; Beside, his adopted Son was a
poor Beggar-boy 'tis said, and I cannot love one that is basely born.


His birth may be honourably, though poor, and of low and mean descent; for if
he was born in honest wedlock, and of honest Parents, his birth cannot be base.


O yes, for those that are not born from Gentry, are like course brown bread,
when Gentry of ancient descent, are like flower often bolted to make white
mancher.


By that rule, surely he came from a Noble and Ancient Race; for I never saw
any person more white and finely shaped in my life than he is; and if fame
speaks true, his actions have proved he hath a Gentleman's soul; But say he were
meanly born, as being born from a Cottager, yet he is not to be despised nor
disliked, nor to be less esteemed, or beloved, or to be thought the worse of,
for was Lucan less esteemed for being a Stone-Cutter, or his wit less
esteemed; or was King David less esteemed or obeyed, for being a Shepherd; or
the Apostles less esteemed or believed, for being Fisher men, Tent-makers or
the like; or the man that was chosen from the Plough, to be made Emperor; I
say, was he less esteemed for being a Plough-man? No, he was rather admired
the more; or was Horace esteemed, or his Poems thought the worse, for being Son
to a freed man, which had been a slave; or was Homer less admired, or thought
the worse Poet, for being a poor blind man; and many hundred that I cannot
name, that hath gained fame, and their memories lives with Honour and
Admiration in every Age, and in every Nation, Kingdom, Country and Family, and
it is more worthy, and those persons ought to have more love and respect, that
have merit, than those that have only Dignity, either from favour of Princes,
or descended from their Ancestors; for all derived Honours, are poor and mean,
in respect of self-creating honour, and they only are to be accounted mean and
base, that are so in themselves; but those that are born from low and humble
Parents, when they have merits, and have done worthy actions, they are placed
higher in fames Court, and hath more honour by fames report, which sounds their
praises louder than those of greater descent, although of equal worth and
merit, and justly, for it is more praise-worthy, when those that were the
lowest, and are as it were trod into the earth, or was born, as the phrase is,
from the Dunghill, should raise themselves equal to the highest, who keeps but
where they were placed by birth; but many times they keep not their place, but
fall from the Dignity of their birth, into the myer of baseness, treachery and
treason, when the other rises as the Sun out of a cloud of darkness, darring
forth glorious beams thorough all that Hemisphere.


I perceive by your discourse, Lovers are the best Disputers; Orators, and as I
have heard, the best Poets; But I never heard you discourse so well, nor speak
so honourably in all my life, wherefore I am confident, 'twas love spake, not
you.


My child, we can no longer conceal you, for we are accused of murthering you,
and are summoned to appear before a Judge and Jury.


For Heaven sake, conceal me as long as you can; for if I be known, I shall be
utterly ruined with disgrace.


Whose fault was it? I did advise you otherwise, but you would not be ruled,
nor counselled by me; and my Husband like an unwise man, did assist your
childish desires.


Well wife, setting aside your wisdom, let us advise what is best to be done in
this case.


In this case we are either to be hanged, or she is to be disgraced; and for my
part, I had rather be hanged, for I am old, and cannot live long.


If you were a young wench, thou might chance to escape hanging, the Judges
would have taken pity on thee, but being old, will condemn thee without mercy.


If I were not a pretty wench, and the Jurie amorous men, at least the Judges
so, I should be hanged nevertheless.


Come, come, Foster Father, and Nurse, let us go and advise.


Pray tell me, what manner of Country is Italy?


In short, Madam, there is more Summer than Winter, more Fruit than Meat, and
more meat than Hospitality.


Why Captain, fruit is meat.


I mean flesh-meat.


Out upon that Country, that hath neither Flesh nor Hospitality! But Captain,
what are the natures, dispositions, and manners of the Italians?


In general, Madam, thus, their natures, dispositions, and manners are, as
generally all other people of every other Nation are, for the generality of
every Nation are alike, in natures, dispositions and persons; that is, some are
of good, and some are of bad, some handsome, and some ill-favoured; but for the
most part, there are more ill-favoured than handsome, more soul than fair, and
the general manner of the whole World is, to offer more than present, to
promise more than perform, to be more feigning than real, more courtly than
friendly, more treacherous than trusty, more covetous than generous, and yet
more prodigal than covetous; but as for the Italians, they are more luxurious
than gluttonous, and they love pleasures more than Heaven.


They have reason, by my troth; for who can tell whether in Ioves Mansion,
there are so many sweet and delightful pleasures, as in this World: But
Captain, you do not tell me what pleasure the women have in Italy?


Those women that are married, are restrained and barred from all courtly
pleasure, or as I may say, the pleasure of Courtships; but the Courtesans have
liberty to please themselves, and to be their own carvers.


And there is nothing I love so well, as to carve both for my self and others.


And there is no Nation in the World, so curious, and ingenuous in the art of
carving, as the Italians.


I am resolved to go into Italy, if it be but to learn the art of carving, but
I will leave my Husband behind me; for you say, wives have not that free
liberty of carving, and if I leave my Husband, I may pass for a Widow, though
not for a maid.


But Madam, you are past your travelling years, for the best time for women to
travel, is about twenty.


By your favour, Sir, a woman never grows old, if she can but conceal her age,
and say she is young.


But she must often repeat it.


She must so, which she may easily do, talking much, for women wants not words,
neither are we sparing of them; But Captain, I must entreat your company, for
you are acquainted with the Country, and hath the experience of the humours and
natures of that people, and having been a Soldier and a Traveller, will not be
to seek in the ways of our journey.


I shall wait upon you, Madam.


No Captain, you shall be as Master, to command, and I will be your Servant to
obey.


You shall command me, Madam.


O! How my soul is tormented with love, shame, grief and fear ( she stops a
little) I am in love, but am ashamed to make it known, Besides, I have given
the World cause to censure me, not only in concealing of my Sex, and changing
of my habit, but being always in the company of Men, acting a masculine part
upon the Worlds great Stage, and to the public view; but could I live thus
concealed, I should be happy, and free from censure: But O cursed fortune! that
pleasure takes in crossing Lovers, and basic time that makes all things as
restless as it self, doth strive for to divulge my acts, when I have no
defence, or honest means for to conceal them; for if I do oppose, I shall
become a Murderer, and bear a guilty conscience to my grave, which may torment
my soul, when as my body is turned to dust.


But since there is no remedy, i'll weep my sorrows forth, and with the water of
my tears, i'll strive to quench the blushing heat, that like quick lightening,
flashes in my face.

My dear Affectionata, What makes thee so melancholy, as to be always
weeping?


I must confess, my Lord, here of late my eyes have been like Egypt, when it is
over-flown with Nilus, and all my thoughts like Crockodiles.


What is the cause?


Alas, my Lord, causes lies so obscure, they are seldom found.


But the effects may give us light to judge what causes are.


Effects deceives, and often cozens us, by reason one effect may be produced
from many several causes, and several effects proceeds from one cause.


But thy tears seems as if they were produced from some passion.


Indeed they are produced from passions and appetites, for passions are the
rays of the mind, and appetites the vapour of the senses, and the rays of my
mind hath drawn up the vapour of my senses into thick moist clouds, which falls
in showering tears.


Tell me thy griefs, and thy desires, that I may help the one, and ease the
other.


Alas, my Lord, I cannot, for they lye in the conceptions; and conceptions
arises like mysts, and my thoughts like clouds, lies one above another.


Come, come, let reason the Sun of the soul verify those misty conceptions,
and disperse this dull humour, that the mind may be clear, and the thoughts
serene.


I will strive to bring in the light of mirth.


Good Sir Humphrey Bold, carry us to the Court of Iudicatures, to hear the great
Trial, which is said to be to day.


You would go to hear the condemnation of an old man, and his old wife.


No, we would go to hear the confessions, as whether they have murdered the
young Lady that is missing, or not.


Why, that you may hear from other relations, as well as from their own mouths,
and so save you so much pains and trouble, as you will have to get a place, and
to stand so long a time, as the examining, accusing, confessing, freeing, or
condemning, which will require so long a time, as Ladies will find great
inconveniences, and be put mightily to it.


But I long to hear and see the manner of it.


I will wait upon you, but you will be very much crowded.


I had rather see them hanged, if they be guilty, than hear them judged and
condemned.


Why, a condemning Judge is the chief Hang-man, for he hangs with his word, as
the other with a cord.


Will the Lord Singularity be there?


Yes certainly, for he is the man that doth accuse them.


And will his Son be there?


I know not that.


Who accuses these persons of murder?


I, my Lord.


We beseech your Honours, not to condemn us before you have found us guilty.


It is a proof sufficient, my Lord, they cannot clear themselves, or produce
the party that was delivered to their trust and care.


Jurie, do you find them guilty or not?


Guilty, my Lord.


Then from the Jurie, we can --.


Hold, condemn not these innocent persons for their fidelity, constancy and
love; I am that maid they are accused to murder, and by good circumstances can
prove it.


Sure it is that face.


Shame stops my breath, and chokes the words I should utter.


For Heaven sake speak quickly, release my fears, or crown my joys.


My Lord, pray pardon loves follies, and condemn not my modesty for dissembling
my Sex; for my designs were harmless, as only to follow you as a servant: For
by Heaven, my Lord? my only desire was, that my eyes, and my ears might be fed
with the sight of your person, and sound of your voice, which made me travel to
hear, and to see you: But since I am discovered, I will otherwise conceal my
self, and live as an Anchorite from the view of the World.


Pray let me live with you.


That may not be, for an Anchorite is to live alone.


If you will accept of me for your husband, we shall be as one.


You have declared against marriage, my Lord.


I am converted, and shall become so pious a devote, as I shall offer at no
Alter but Hymens, and since I am your Convert, refuse me not.


I love too well to refuse you.


Here on my knee I do receive you as a blessing, and a gift from the Gods.


Most Reverend Judges, and Grave Jury, sentence me not with censure, nor
condemn me to scandals, for waiting as a Man, and serving as a Page; For though
I dissembled in my outward habit and behaviour, yet I was always chaste and
modest in my nature.


Now Lady Amorous, is your mind a Mirtel-grove, and your thoughts Nightingales
to entertain the Idea of your Adonas.


Her discovery hath proved the boar that killed him; but I desire much to be
army Adonas Funeral, which is the Lady Orphants wedding.


I am acquainted with some of the Lord Singularity's Captains and Officers, and
I will speak to some of them to speak to the Lord Singularity to invite us.


I pray do, for since my Adonas is dead, I will strive to inamour Mars, which
is the Lord Singularity himself.


Faith, that is unfriendly done, for I have laid my designs for himself.


I fear both of our designs may come to nothing, he is so enamoured with his
own She-Page, or female Son.


O Husband! This is the joyfullest day that ever I had in my whole life, except
at mine own wedding.


Indeed, this day is a day of Iubile.


Of Iuno, say you; but Husband, have you provided good cheer, and enough; for
here are a world of Guests come, more than was invited, and you being Master
Steward, will be thought too blame, if there be any thing wanting.


If you be as careful to dress the Brides Chamber, as I to provide for the
bridal Guest, you nor I shall be in a fault.


I saith, if you have done your part, as I have done my part, we shall deserve
praise.


I saith, we are almost so old, that we are almost past praise.


None can merit praise, but those in years; for all Worthy, Noble and Heroic
Acts requires time to do them, and who was ever wise, that was young?


And few are praised that are old, for as fame divulgeth merits, so time wears
out praise, for time hath more power than fame, striving to destroy what fame
desires to keep. The truth is, time is a Glutton, for he doth not only strive
to destroy what fame divulgeth, but what himself begets and produces.


We desire your Excellence will give us leave to present you with a Song
written by my Lord Marquess of New-Castle.


Your present could have never been less acceptable, by reason it will retard
my marriage.


Pray, my Lord, hear them.


Come, come, dispatch, dispatch.

Love in thy younger age,
Thou then turned Page;
When love then stronger grew,
The bright sword drew.
Then Love it was thy fate
To advise in State.
My Love adopted me
His child to be.
Then offered was my hap
A Cardinals Cap.
Loves juglings thus doth make
The Worlds mistake.

By Heaven, Musitioners, you are all so dillotarie with your damnable and harsh
prologue of tuning before you play, as the next Parliament will make it felony
in Fiddlers, if not treason, when your Great Royal Ears; begin with a F^ to
you.


Why, my Noble Lord, we have done.


By Heaven, there spake Apollo! Give them ten Pieces.


Madam, an Eppilanian! we have more to express our further joy, and then we
will pray for blessings on you both.


O! It will be my funeral song, you rogues, know all delays doth kill me; and
at this time your best Music sounds harsh, and out of tune.


Pray let them sing that one song more; so ends your trouble of them.


Begin, quick, quick.

O Love, some says thou art a Boy!
But now turned Girl, thy Masters joy.
Now cease all thy fierce alarms,
In circles of your loving arms.
Who can express the joys to night,
'Twil charm your senses with delight,
Nay, all those pleasures you'll control,
With joining your each soul to soul.
Thus in Loves raptures live, till you
Melting, dissolv into a dew;
And then your aerie journey take,
So both one constellation make.


