NOble Spectators, this play that you'll see,
Is taken out of Britains History;
It is not pleasant, nor yields much delight,
But it did serve the Poetress to write;
She bids me tell you, she was glad to take
Any dull plot, so she a play could make,
Her vacant idle time for to employ;
For she loves writing more than Company;
But if it pleases not your Eyes or sight,
She doth not care, since it pleased her to write;
For she endeavours, tries all that she may
To please her self in every honest way;
Wherefore a praise, or yet applause from you,
She expects not, nor challenges as her due.
DEar Madam, why doth your Highness weep?


As fear frights tears from the Eyes, so grief doth send them forth.


Why should your Highness grieve?


Have I not cause, when I am married to a person which doth not love, but
rather hate me?


Certainly he hath reason to love you, and he were worse than a Devil if he
should hate you; as first to love you for your virtue and sweet disposition;
next for the honour, dignity, and Kingdom, he hath got by his marring you: for
he hath no right to the Dukedom but by your Highness, and by your Highness he
is become an absolute Prince, and injoyes a rich Kingdom.


But he hath taken the power from me, and strives to disposess of me of my
right.


He cannot, the Kingdom will never suffer him, for your title is so just, as
he can make no pretence to disposess your Highness from your Princely Throne.


But I being his Wife, he takes the power of a Husband, and by that power, the
power of my Kingdom, and those that have the power can frame their titles as
they please, none dare oppose them.


The truth is, Madam, that might overcomes right.


The Factions and divisions that are in this Kingdom will be a means to
deliver it into the power of the Enemy.


This Duke is young, wild, deboist and inconstant, wherefore there is but
little hopes it should be better governed.


But the Duchess who is the true owner of it, is discreet, wise, and virtuous,
and having more years than he, she might help to rule and order state affairs.


But neither her discretion, wisdom, nor virtue hath power, for marriage hath
enthralled her, for she is become her Husbands Slave, who ought to be his
Sovereign, but he laughs and doth despise her, because she is somewhat elder
than himself.


Heaven will revenge her wrongs.


Have you been with the Lady I sent you to?


Yes.


And doth she listen to Loves Suit?


She seems well pleased to hear her Beauty praised, but will not hear of
Amorous embraces as yet.


But it is a good Omen when as a Lady will nimblingly bite at a bait of
flattery; but did you see her Husband?


No Sir.


Well, you must go again, and present her with a Letter, and a present from me;
for Ladies must be plied though they deny, yet most do yield upon a treaty,
they cannot long hold out loves fierce assaults.


Indeed the Female Sex is tender and weak, although they are delicate and
sweet.


They are false and oft betray themselves.


O Madam, Madam, news is come that the Enemy hath got into the heart of the
Kingdom; wherefore sweet Lady fly, for they will possess themselves of this
City soon.


I will not fly, for I cannot meet a worse Enemy than the Duke himself, should
worse than Mankind Conquer it; but I wish my Sister were safe.


The young Princess I hear is fled to the Dukes Brother.


I am glad of it, for he is discreetly temperate, although his Brother is not.


Sir, what will your Highness do?


I will go and oppose the Enemy.


Alas Sir you have no forces to oppose them withal, you may go to be
destroyed, but not to destroy; wherefore you with your small forces had better
fly than fight.


Whither shall I go?


To any Prince that will receive you into pay, by which you may maintain your
self, and live with some respect and same abroad, though you have lost your
Kingdom; whereas if you stay, you will lose your self and Kingdom too.


Your Counsel I will take.


But what will your Highness do with your Duchess?


Let her do what she will with her self, I care not now, for since her Kingdom
is lost, I have no use of her.


Not as concerning the Kingdom Sir, but yet she is your Highnesses Wife, and
as a Husband you ought to regard her.


She will follow me, for Wives stick so close to their Husbands as they cannot
be shaken off.


Pray Madam do not marry so much below your self.


Why? what matter whom I marry, since I can create my Husband to Honour.


But Madam, that Honour will do him no good, nor will it take off your
disgrace; for none will give your Husband, if he be an inferior person, the
Place and Respect that is due to Great Princes Titles.


No, but he shall take Place, and my Servants shall give him the Respect and
Homage that is due to great Titles: For I will make him a Prince; and who dare
call him any other, but Prince?


There is none will call him Prince, unless your own Servants; and none will
give him Place, that are above the degree of his Birth: no, nor he durst not
take it of Gallant Noble Men; for if he offers thereat, they will beat him
back, and force him to give way, and to be only a Prince in his own House, and
not abroad, is no better than to be a Farmer, nay, a Cobbler, or a Tailor, or
any the like are Kings in their own Houses, although they be but thatched, if
they have but a Servant subject, or Subject Servant.


Well, say what you will, I will make him a Prince.


Sir, doth not your Highness hear that your Duchess is gone with your Enemies
into the Country?


Yes, and though I might curse my Enemies for dispossessing me of the Kingdom I
enjoyed, yet I give them thanks for carrying my Wife away with them: for now I
have more room and liberty to Woo and Court my Mistress.


Sir, the Lady Beauties Husband's dead.


So I perceive Fortune will be my Friend some ways, although she is my Foe
other ways: for she will Crown me with Love, although she uncrowns me with
Power: wherefore return presently back to my Mistress, and tell her, that now
her Husband is dead, and my Wife gone into another Country, We may marry.


But your Highness cannot marry, as long as the Duchess is alive.


I mean to be like the Great Turk, have many VVives.


Why, the Great Turk hath but one chief Wife, the rest are but as Concubines:
for only the Sons of that chief Queen shall be Successors to the Emperor,
unless she hath none; neither can his other Children inherit, unless he be
Right and Lawful Emperor: So, that unless your Highness had been Duke by
Inheritance, as an Inhereditary Duke, no Children, by any other Lady, can be
Inheritors, nor indeed Princes, unless they were begot on the Right Owner to
that Title.


Well, since I have no Power, but only an empty Title, I cannot disadvantage
my self, or children: for I have no children as yet, and I have neither Power,
nor Kingdom now: Wherefore, if I can enjoy her upon these terms, as the name
of Wife, it will be well.


But Sir, this part of the World allows but of one wife, wherefore if you
should marry this Lady, the Clergy will excommunicate you, as an Adulterer, and
the Lady, as an Adulteress, out of the Church.


I had rather be in the Ladies bed, than in the Church: But I have money,
although I have lost my Dukedom, and that will help me.


But not make your Marriage lawful.


I care not; for if the marrying, and the name of wife will satisfy the Lady,
I care not whether it be Good or Bad, Lawful or unlawful, Wife or Concubine,
'tis all one to me; for I willl marry a hundred women, if they will marry me,
and let me lye with them.


Your Highness bears afflictions more courageously than I thought your Highness
would have done.


Truly, I find I am more happy since I am amongst my Enemies (if they may be
termed so) than I was in my own Country with an unkind Husband: for they allow
me a Noble and Princely Pension: and I live Free, Easily and Peaceably, which I
did not before.


I hear your Sister is married to the Dukes Brother.


I wish she may be more happy with her Husband, than I have been with mine.


If they have Children, and your Highness none, they will be Heirs to the
Dukedom.


They will so, but there is no Dukedom now to heir, 'tis made now a Province.


But times may change.


Now you are an absolute Duchess, you must carry your self in State, and live
Magnificently, like as an Absolute Princess as you are.


Yes, but it is a great affliction for the Duke and I to be banished, and
driven out of our Kingdom.


Alas Madam, great Princes have many times great misfortunes; but you must
bear your misfortunes with a Princely magnaminity.


But if I have Children, alas what shall they do?


But those that did never enjoy the possession, cannot repine, nor grieve for
the loss.


You say true.


Pray Madam do not marry so meanly, for you cannot entitle him a Prince.


Well, well, say what you will, I will make him a Prince; for why may not I as
well make my Husband lawfully a Prince, as well as the Duke of Inconstancy
makes the Lady Beauty a Duchess, and yet hath another Wife?


In truth it will be just like a poor Beggar Woman in Engl. being mad she said
she was Queen Elizabeth of Engl., and all the Boys, Girls, and Common people
would run after her, and call her Queen Elizabeth in sport and jest; the like
was a poor mad Beggar Man in France, which said he was King Henry the 4th. of
France; but the only difference will be, that you and the Comical Duchess have
means and wealth enough to live in Principy, and they had none, but were so
poor they were forced to beg, so could not Act their parts.


You are a bold rude wench, therefore get you out of my service.


Truly I would not stay in it if I might, for I should be ashamed.


Madam, doth your Highness here of the Apocriphal Duchess?


What Apocriphal Duchess?


Why the Duke hath married another Lady.


That he cannot, until I dye, 'tis true a Mistress may take the name of a
Wife, but cannot possess the right of a Wife.


She will be as a Duchess in a Play, she will only act the part of greatness.


Indeed most Stage-Players are Courtesans.


And most Courtesans are good Actors.


I make no question but she will now have enough Spectators.


But I hope they will hiss her from off the Stage.


Have I married you who was a mean fellow, and have not I made you a Prince,
and you to deny to pay my Debts?


But I thought you would have rather enriched me, than have made me poorer than
I was.


Have I not enriched you with Titles? do not all my Servants call you Prince?
and do not all the Trades-men where we buy all our Commodities, when they come
to our Palace do the same, call you Prince, and do you reverence?


Yes for hopes of gain.


I am sure you will gain little reputation or respect if you carry your self so
sneakingly as you do, whereas you should carry your self like a Prince,
bravely.


Put when all our money is gone we shall be but poor Princes: I had better have
keep to my Trade than to have been a Prince, where if I had I should have been
rich, now I shall be a Beggar.


You are so mean a fellow as you cannot be sensible of the honour and dignity I
have bestowed upon you.


All the great Ladies are so envious at your Highness, as there will none of
them come near you.


I like the Company of Bourgers Wives better, for they are my Slaves.


Yes Madam, but your Highness is forced I think to present them with some
presents now and then; for the World is so wicked, that they will not give true
honour it's due, unless they are bribed.


You say true, but men will give Ladies their due right.


Yes, men are more generous and bountiful to Ladies; but yet they must be
bribed with hopes of obtaining some favours, otherwise, I fear me they would
be as reserved, and retired from your Highnesses Court as the great Ladies are.


I wonder they should, I being an absolute Princess.


Yes, but since your Titles, Rights and Marriage is renounced against, they are
not so civil, dutiful, and obedient as they were, not considering as they
ought to do, that right cannot be renounced against.


But her Highness doth show them their error, and that she shows them it cannot
be taken from her; for she keeps the same State she did, and is as Merry, Gay
and Frolic, to let the World see, she understands her own Greatness best.


But yet there are but few of any Nation, but the inferior sort, that come to
her Highness Court, unless it be the Red Oker Knights and Ladies, and if it
were not for them, this Court would be empty.


Indeed I am obliged to them more than any other Nation, for they give me all
the due Respects and Homage to my Greatness; for which I love that Nation very
well.


You have reason, but I do observe there is nothing doth keep up a Court more
than Dancing, and several sorts and kinds of merry pastime; for wheresoever
there is Dancing and Sport, Company will flock together.


You say true.


I find my self full of pain; I believe I shall fall in Labour.


I hope then we shall have a young Prince, or Princess soon.


I Saw Prince Shadow.


What Prince is he?


Why he is the Creating Princess's Husband, who made him a Prince.


I thought no women could give Title to their Husbands, unless they had been
Sovereigns.


O yes, all women can give their Husbands Titles, if they please.


What Title?


Why the title of Cuckolds.


Indeed most women do magnify their Husbands by those Titles.


But let me tell you, that those women that have Inheritary Honours, although
not Sovereigns, may endue their Husbands with the same Honour: but it is not
generally so; but his Children begot on her are endued, and not the Husband,
yet some Husbands are. As for Example; a Lord, Vicoun^, Earl, Marquess, Duke,
King, or Emperor, if the Honour, as Title, goes to the Female, for default of
a Male, in some Nations their Husbands are endued with their Titles, but not
commonly known to be so in England; as a Wife with her Husband, which is only
during life, and not Inhereditary: but if their Titles are only during life,
and not Inhereditary, it cannot derive to another, that i^ not an Successor^
for Inhereditary Honour go like Entailed Lands, it goes only to the next
Heir; but those that are the dignified, are like those that have Joynters, or
Annuitles for life; so when a Husband receives a Dignity from a Wife, or a
Wife from a Husband, it is but so much Honour for life.


But if they have Children, those Children inherit the Honour.


Yes, as having a right from that Parent that is the Dignifyer, but if there be
none of the line of the Dignifyer, the Honour dies, neither is the root of the
Honour left to any more than one: for though the branches of Honour spread to
all the Children, yet the root remains but with one: For, say a King have many
Children, they are all Princes, but yet there can be but one that can inherit
the Crown and Royalty: So if a Marquess, or Duke have many Children, they are
all Lords and Ladies, if they be lawfully, and in true VVedlock born, otherwise
they are not: neither doth any more but one of the Legitimate Children inherit
the Root, as to be Marquess or Duke, Duchess or Marchioness: neither do the
Daughters inherit, if there be Sons.


But cannot a Dukes Daughter make her Husband a Prince?


No, not except she hath the Inhereditary Honour: for if a Kings Daughter
should marry a private Gentleman, he would remain as only in the Title of a
Gentleman, unless the King did create a Title for him, or bestow a Title on
him.


Why? put case the Inhereditary Honour lay in the people, and they elect a
King, hath that King no power to Create, or to give Honour?


No, they may choose Officers, but not give Titles, unless the people did
dispossess them of their hereditary power, and give it to any man, and then the
root of Honour lies in him.


Nor doth his Children receive no Titles from their Father?


No, for the Title he hath, is none of his, he hath it but during life, unless
the people will give a Lease, as for two or three Lives, yet they nominate
those two or three Lives: So neither can they dispose of their Leases, or alter
them, but at the peoples pleasure; like as those that are made Governors, they
cannot dispose of their Governments to whom they please, as without the leave
of those that placed them in the Government, neither do his Children receive
any Titles therefrom; like as a Lord Mayor, his Son is not my Lord Mayor after
him, unless he is made one; nor his children have no place by his Office, and
an elective Prince, is but as a Lord Mayor, or rather like as a Deputy
Governor, who as I said, may dispose of Places or Offices, but not give
Dignities, Honours, or Titles.


I thank you for your Information, for I was so ignorant, as I knew nothing of
Heraldry.


HAve you seen the Imaginary Queen yet?


What Imaginary Queen?


Why a Great Queen, that every one goes to kiss her hand.


From what parts of the World came she?


From the North parts.


And do so many go to kiss her hand?


Yes, throngings of Common people.


They would kiss the Dogs Tail if it were turned up and presented to them: but
do any of the Nobles and Gentry kiss her hand?


Some few that are newly come out of the Country to see sights in the City.


Pish, in this Age there are so many of these kind of Bedlams, as I am weary to
hear of them, as the Comical Duchess, the Creating Princess, and the Created
Prince, Prince Shadow, and now the Imaginary Queen.


Why Faith it is as good a sight as to see a Play.


A puppet Play you mean; but the truth is, it is a disgrace to all noble
persons, and great dignities, and true titles, to be thus mocked by imitators,
it is a sign that all Europe is imbroiled in Wars so much as every one doth
what they list.


Why they are so far from being checked or discountenanced for it, as there are
many true Princes, great and noble persons as give the same respect and homage
as if they were real Princes indeed and in truth.


Then it if it were in my power I would divest those that had the right, and
true dignities, and titles, and put them upon those that only acted princely
and royal parts, since the Actors bear up so nobly, and the Spectators do creep
and crouch so basely: but indeed both sides are Actors, both the Spectators and
Players, only the one side Acts noble parts, the other side base parts, the one
Acts the parts of Princes, the other of Servants; but I am sorrow to see True
Honour wounded as it is.


The truth of it is, True Honour lies a bleeding, and none doth offer to power
in Balsimum.


Faith Neighbour methinks a Queen is not such a brave and glorious thing as I
did imagine it.


I will tell you truly Neighbour, that if I had thought a Queen had been no
finer a sight than this Queen is, I would have stayed in my house.


And so would I, I tell you truly Neighbour.


I perceive Queens are no finer Creatures than other women are.


Lord what a ridiculous sight it is to see the Imaginary Queen act the part of
Majesty?


Faith she is so far from Majesty, as she cannot act the part, for she appears
like a good Country Huswife.


She is but a Gentlewoman, and that is all.


We may see the difference of true Greatness, and that which is forced, there
was the Queen Masculine; what a natural Majesty did she appear with? for all
she had given up her Crown and Kingdom, yet her Royal Birth was seen in her
Princely Carriage.


It was a generous Act: But was it in her power to dispossess her self of her
natural Inheritance?


It seems so; and it seems by her actions that she had rather see the World
abroad, than rule a Kingdom at home, for she hath travelled most of all Europe
over.


She appears to be a Royal Lady.


The Comical Duchess is brought to bed or the sweetest Princess that ever was
bore.


Indeed it is the sweetest Princess that ever was born.


We are glad we hope her Highness will sleep well to night.


Pray present our most humble and obedient duty to her Highness.


Will you not go in and see her, and kiss the young Princesses hand?


If we may be so much honoured, we shall be very proud of that Grace and
Honour.


Come, come, we will prefer you to that Grace and Favour.


welcome Mistress Ink-pot, whether are you going so hastily?


Truly Mistress Paper, I am going to her Highness the Comical Duchess, for I
hear she is brought abed of a sweet young Princess.


Is she so? I am glad her Highness pain is past, with all my heart.


So am I, for now we shall have Dancing again, as soon as her Month is past.


Yes, for she will send for us all, as soon as she is able to dance.


Yes that she will, and give us all Favours to wear for her sake.


But to some she gives her Picture too.


Yes, but those she gives her Picture too, are of a higher Degree.


By your favour, we are of as high a Degree as most that visit her.


Yes, of the female Sex, but not of the Masculine Sex; for there are great
Persons that visit her.


Very few, but only of the Red Oker Nation, or some Strangers that are
Travellers, that visit her, as they pass other ways, else the men that visit
her, are of as inferior degree as we, as Fiddlers, Dancers, Players, and the
like.


By your favour, there are sometimes Burgers and Gentlemen.


Yes sometimes, when she sends for to invite them to dance, or entreats them to
come and visit her; and then she presents them with her Colours.


Lord, Madam, I was asked to day, why your Honour doth not visit the Comical
Duchess, nor the Imaginary Queen?


Why, should I that am Entitled with True Honour, and Princely Dignity, which
Titles were created from an Absolute and Divine Power, give place to mock
Honours, and feigned Dignities? shall Princes in Royal Courts, give place to
Princes in Plays?


But every one doth not rightly understand a Princely Dignity.


I will instruct you in the degrees of Princes, and their derivation; but
first, let me tell you, the Princely Arms, or Seal, is a Crown; for a Crown is
the General Arms, or Seal of all Princely Dignities, and every degree is known
and distinguished by the several fashions of their Crowns; for a Vicounts
Crown, which is the first degree of a Prince, is not like the Earls Crown,
which is the second degree; nor an Earls Crown is not like a Marquesses Crown,
which is the third degree; that is, t^ere is some difference in the Crown; nor
a Marquesses Crown is not like a Dukes Crown, which is the fourth degree; nor a
Dukes Crown is not like a close Imperial Crown, which is the last and highest
degree; that is, there is some difference in the Crown of each degree: Now
there are Absolute Princes, Tributary, and Subject Princes, but none can be
wholly called Absolute Princes, but those that have the Imperial Crown, which
are Absolute Kings and Emperors, being the only chosen of God, and by that the
only Creators of Titles; for they only are the Fountain, or Springs of Honour.


How comes it that Subjects are made Princes?


By Adoption: for all Subject Princes are Princes by Adoption: that is, they
are adopted to their Princely Dignity, so that by Adoption, they are the Cousins
to Royalty, and are called by their Sovereigns, Kings Cousins, and are adorned
with Royal Robes, endued with Royal Power, and observed with Royal Ceremony,
and are allowed some Customs and Imposts out of the Revenue of the Kingdom, and
many privileges which belong to the Princely Dignities: Thus Kings call their
Subject Princes, Cousins, as being adopted to their Princely Royalty, like as
all Absolute Monarchs call each other Brother, as in relation to each others
Royalty: and being all of them Gods anointed, and appointed Deputies on Earth,
for Government and Honour, they are the sacred Magistrates of God, the divine
Fountains of Honour: Thus true Honour is derived from Heaven, and ought to be
respected, and bowed too, as being divine: but in this age Honour is used, or
abused, as other divine things are: this is the reason I will not visit the
Apocriphal Ladies: for my Honour is derived from the sacred Spring of Honour,
and is not a self-given Honour and Dignity, which ought to be punished as a
Presumption and Usurpation: but I have so much Honour, as not to abase the
Honour and Dignity that my Husband, and his Fore-fathers were adopted too: And
I by Marriage, being one with my Husband; for man and wife are but one, and my
Husbands Honour being Inhereditary, succeeds to his Children; wherefore his
Wife will never give place to Mountebanks.


Indeed the strange ridiculousness, and folly, and mad presumption is, that the
Apocriphal Ladies take more State, or at least as much as sacred Royalty.


But if Royalty will suffer such Heresies, and Heretics in the Court of
Honour, they are not to be lamented, if their Courts fall to utter ruin; for
it is with Titles and Dignities, as with Laws; if there were no Laws, there
would be no Government, and if there were no Degrees and dignities, there would
be no Royalty; so likewise if the Laws be corrupt and abused, Government will
fall to ruin, and if Honour be abused and usurped, Royalty will fall from its
Throne; but howsoever, I keep up the Right of my place, because it is the cause
and interest of all the Nobility of my Country, so that if I should give place,
I should be a Traitor to true Honour, and dignified Persons.


well, now the Duke of Inconstancy hath forsaken our Lady, his Comical
Duchess, all our State must down.


Yes, and we must lose our places, in going before others, as being Dutchess's
women.


The Duchess cried all night.


2. She had no more reason to cry, than she had, for the matter of Dignity;
for, pray consider, her Highness may keep the same State, as being Duchess
still, as well as she did before; for she possessed the Honour no more than she
doth now, and so now no less than she did then.

That is true, but the Duke did help to countenance her State, so long as he
did live with her, as a Husband, whereas now she will be hist off the Stage.


Faith Confidence, and a Resolution will bear her up, wherefore let us persuade
her not to be daunted, or put out of countenance, and she having the same
Estate she had, may maintain her self as high as she hath done.


You say true, and the flaunting show will dazzle the eyes, and delude the
understanding of the Spectators.


Yes, of the Vulgar.


HOnour goes a begging.


Why?


Why there is an Ale Wife made a Countess.


As how?


Why the Earl Undone hath married Mistress Tip-tape.


But he hath a Wife living.


That is all one, for did not the Duke of Inconstancy marry a Lady, and made
her a Duchess, although he had a Duchess to his Wife before, by whom he was a
Duke.


I perceive Great Noble Persons may do what they will: for if a poor mean man
should have two Wives at one time, they would be surely punished; nay, in some
Kingdoms they would be hanged.


DO you hear that the Duke of Inconstancy hath forsaken his Comical Duchess?


Yes, but that is nothing.


Have you been with her Highness since?


Yes.


And how looks she upon her misfortunes?


Why she appears the same, and keeps greater State than ever she did; yea, even
her Children are served more royally than ever.


Faith she is to be commended, if it will hold out.


As long as she hath money, it will hold.


O, money doth all things.


Noble Spectators,
IN Britain Land, long, long ago, I say,
There were such persons, as are in my Play;
In Chronicle you'll find a story plain,
A Britain Queen that happily did Reign.
At last did marry one below her State,
Which merited not a Crown, or Kinly Fate;
Fos he, when Power got, did put away
His Royal Wife; and married, as they say,
Another Lady; She and he did live
Like lawful King and Queen, till God did give
The ronged Queen, her Kingdom back again;
For in a Battle, she her husband slain.
And of the rest, in Stories you shall read,
Such persons as my Play presents indeed.
