Great Fame my Prayers I direct to thee,
That thou wilt keep me in thy memory;
And place my Name in the large brazen Tower,
That neither Spite, nor Time may it devour;
And write it plain, that every age may see,
My Names inscribed to live eternally:
Let not Malice obstruct my Wit with spite,
But let it shine in its own clear light.
Noble and Right Honourable,

I divide my discourse into three parts, as namely Vanity, Vice, and
Wickedness; Vanity lives in the Customs and Manners of men, and Wickedness in
the Souls of men, Vices in the Senses of men, as vain habits, evil appetites,
and wicked passions; as for Vanity and Vice, they are commodities that are sold
out of the Shops of Idleness; Vice is sold by wholesale, but Vanities are sold
by retail; the Buyers of these Commodities are Youth, the Merchants, are evil
Customs, and ill examples; the Masculine youth buys more Vice than Vanity, and
the Effeminate youth buys more Vanity than Vice; but they all buy, as salt as
they can be sold; they will spare for not cost, and will give any prices,
although it be their Healths, Lives, Fortunes, or Reputations; as for
Wickedness, it is inlayed into the soul like as Mosaic work, and so close it
is wrought therein, as it makes it appear to be the soul it self; but evil
Education and Custom, are the Artificers of this work, and not natural
Creation, or divine infusion, or inspiration, from whence the Soul proceeds, or
is produced, for neither the Gods, nor Nature, is the Author of Wickedness; but
Vanity, Vice, and Wickedness, are soon caught, and like the Plague, they infect
all they come near, and Vanity, Vice, and Wickedness is soon learned, when
Virtue, Goodness, and Piety, are hard Lessons; for though Divines and natural
Philosophers, Preaches, and so teaches them, yet they are seldom understood;
for if they were, the benefit would be known, and men would pious and virtuous
be, for profits sake; for Commonwealths that are composed, and governed by
Virtue, Religion, and good Life, they are so strongly united by honest love, as
they become inpregnable against Foreign Foes, or home factions, or temptations,
so live in peace and plenty, which breeds both pleasure and delight; for life
doth never truly enjoy it self, but in rest, ease, and peace; but to conclude
most Noble and Right Honourable, the Soul, Se^se, and Education, should be
plain with Truth, smooth with Virtue, and bright with Picty, or Zeal; that the
Body may live Easily, the life Peaceably, and that the Soul may be blessed with
Everlasting Glory.


The Ladies of this Age, are as inconstant as a fevourish pulse, and their
affections have more sainting sits, than those are troubled with Epilepses.


Faith they will hang about ones neck one hour, and spit in his Face the next.


That is because they would have variety, for they respect Strangers more than
friends; for they will entertain Strangers with the civillest Behaviours,
fairest Faces, and costliest Garments they have, and make them welcome with
their best Cheer, when as their best Friends, lovingest Servants, and oldest
Acquaintance, they will neglect, despise, scorn, command, and rail against, and
quarrel with.


O Gentlemen, brave Cavaliers as you all are, you must never complain,
discommend, not condemn the Actions of the Effeminate Sex; for that we are apt
to call their Cruelty, is their Justice, our Sex meriting not their favours;
and whenever we receive the least favours from that Sex, we ought to give
thanks, as proceeding from a compassionate Goodness, gentle Nature, sweet
Dispositions, and generous Souls, and not as a due, or a debt for our service:
for we are bound by Nature, not only to be their Servants, but their Slaves, to
be lashed with their frowns, if we be not diligent to their commands, present at
their calls, industrious in their service, and our neglects ought to be
severely punished; for we wear our lives only for their sakes, as to defend
their Honours, to protect their Persons, to obey their Commands, and to please
and delight their humours; also the Estates we manage is theirs, not ours, we
are but their Stuards, to Husband and increase their Stores, to receive their
Revenues, and lay out their Expenses, for we have nothing we call our own,
since we our selves are theirs; wherefore it is enough for us to admire their
Beauties, to applaud their Wit, to worship their Virtues, and give thanks for
their Favours.


Wife, why art thou all undressed to day?


The truth is, I am become negligent in dressing, since you only esteem my
Virtue, not my Habit,


I would have you change into as many several dresses, as Protheus shapes; for
it is not the dress can make me Jealous now, for I am confident no Vanity can
corrupt thy Virtue, but that thy Virtue can convert Vanity to a pious use or
end.


Well Husband, I shall study to form my self, and fashion my dress, both to
your fancy and desire.


Do so Wife.


Ha, is my Husband so confident of me, it is an ill sign from extreme Jealousy,
to an extreme Confidence, the next will be a Carelessness, and then a Neglect,
and there is nothing my Nature doth more abhor than neglect, for Jealousy
proceeds from Love, but Neglect proceeds from a despising, if not a hating;
besides, he desires variety of dresses, which shows my Beauty is vaded, or he
is weary in viewing of one object often; but I sit^d his humour is wandering,
and seeks for change, if he should prove false, O how unhappy should I be, for
I am naturally honest, also my birth and education hath been honest; besides my
affections are so fixed as not to be removed: thus I am tied, and cannot take
liberty which other women do, for no divert the sorrows of my heart, or to
revenge my wrongs; but I shall mourn, and weep my self to Water, and sigh my
self to Air.


The bond of our Love is written in large profession, but not sealed with the
contracting kiss yet.


So Sister, are not you ashamed?


No truly; for my love is so honest, and the subject of my love so worthy, as I
am so far from being ashamed to own it, as I glory in my affection.


I only wonder that with so small acquaintance, such a familiar friendship
should be made.


You have no cause to wonder, for Innocence is easily known, tis craft and
subtilty that is obscure, and treacherous falsehood with leering Eyes, doth at a
distance stand, when honestly and truth straight joins in friendships bonds.


My Sweet, Innocent, Virtuous, Wise, Mistress.


I pity poor Mademoiselle Bon.


Why so?


Because she is forsaken.


I cannot pity a Fool.


Why, she is no Fool.


Yes Faith but she is, to be constant to an unconstant man.


The truth is, I think that woman wisest that forsakes before she is forsaken.


But how and if she meets with a constant man?


That she cannot do, for there is no man constant; for they are all false, and
more changing than women are.


If any should prove unconstant to me, I would Pistol him.


Yes with the Gunpowder breath, the Bullets of words, and the Fire of anger,
which will do them no hurt.


The best revenge I know against an Inconstant Man is, to despise him.


He will not care for your despisements, but Patience, Patience is the best
remedy, for then a woman will be content, although she hath not her desires.


Can any Creature be content without the fruition of desire?


Those that cannot, must be unhappy all their Life.


Then all Mankind is unhappy, for I dare I swear, there is not any that can be
content without the fruition of desire; for desire is so restless, as it gives
no time for content.


The truth is, content only lives in words, but never lives in deeds; for I
never heard, or saw any one truly content in my life.


The truth is, Content is like the Shadow of a Substance, or the Thought of an
Act, and therefore let us leave it, as we would idle, or vain Thoughts, or
vading, or vanishing Shadows.


Sir, it is reported you are a Servant to my Mistress.


I am a Servant to the whole Effeminate Sex, and to her, if she be a woman.


Yes, she is a woman, and the fairest of her kind.


Why then I am her Slave.


I desire you will enslave your self to some other, and not to her.


You must pardon me if she be the fairest, for I am bound to the absolutest
Beauty.


Draw.


Nay, I am not so rash; for by your favour I will view her with mine own Eyes,
and take the opinion of my own Judgment, and not venture my life on your bare
word.


I say draw.


I shall, but know, I only fight in mine own defence, not for her Beauty,
unless I saw her, and approved her such as you affirm her to be: for though I
am Servant to all, yet tis impossible all should be an absolute Beauty.


Know, I account all those my Enemies that question it; besides you give me the
lye in doubting the truth.


I perceive it is your violent passion that persuades you, or rather forces you
to fight, and not your Reason; and if your passion were to be counselled, I
would counsel you to stay, until we choose our Seconds, to witness how we
fought, not in a furious rage, but when our spirits are fresh and cool, our
Minds as equal tempered as our Blades, and that our valours are not ashamed to
own the quarrel; so shall we sight on just and honest grounds, and honour will
be the purchase we shall gain.


He hear no more but fight.


Nature, I ask thy pardon, I must engage thee to a furious rage, of sudden fit,
or frantic humour, which are for thee to scorn, and flight, and not to fight.


Monsieur Poverty, shall I never have the honour of your Company?


My Poverty will disgrace you my Noble Lord.


I were no noble Lord, if virtuous Poverty could disgrace me.


Howsoever, your Servants, Friends, and Acquaintance will forsake you, if I
should wait upon your Lordship.


They may be my Acquaintance, but neither my Friends, nor Servants that will
forsake me, for the sake of virtuous Poverty: for though I would not have thee
entailed to my line and posterity, nor to live constantly in my family; yet, I
am neither ashamed, nor afraid to shake thee by the hand, as long as thou art
an honest man; and I desire to take Plenty in own hand, but to serve Poverty
with both hands.


May Plenty be always your Lordships Hand-Maid.


And your Reliever Sir.


Sister, be not jealous of me, for I have no design to rob you of your Servant,
I study not those Amorous allurements; for I would not be otherwise known unto
the Masculine Sex, than Angels are to one another; yet I may respect honour,
and admire without a doteing fondness, or a surprised affection, or an
incaptivated love.


Yes Sister, when I consider your Virtue, I cannot be Jealous of you, but when
I look on your Beauty, I cannot be Confident of my Servant; for Beauty is
victorious, and most commonly triumphs in all hearts, binding the Passions, and
leading the Affections as Prisoners; and the Thoughts run a-long as Slaves, and
Constancy, if it be not killed in the Battle, yet it is sore wounded, and if
it should recover, yet never to the former strength again.


My Lord what say you, hath your Mistress my Sister Amor any reason to be
Jealous?


Yes, if my Mistress were any other but her self.


I thank you; for I had rather be killed with civil although dissembling
words, than live with rude Inconstancy.


Why, do you think I speak not truth?


I hope your words are marks of truth, for all belief to shoot at.


But Hopes are built on Doubts and Fears, and do you Doubt and Fear my Love?


How can I love without attending Fear, being inseparable?


Pray do not fear; for though there is none that sees your Sister La Belle,
but must confess she is most beautiful, yet all fancy not Beauty alike; but
were she above what she is, as much as Heaven to Earth, or Gods to Men, yet I
am fixed, and not to be removed, no more than is Eternity.


Am not I very fine to day?


Yes very fine.


Do I look handsome to Day?


Yes very handsome.


If I were a Stranger, should I attract your Eyes to take notice of me?


As you are my Cousin, and intimate Friend, and known acquaintance, and see you
every day, yet I cannot choose but look on you, and take notice of your rich
Garments; but why do you ask, for you do not use to make such questions?


I will tell you, when I was new Married, my Husband took so much notice of my
Dress, that the least alteration he observed; nay he grew jealous at it, and
thought each curl a snare set to catch Lovers in; after I had been Married some
little space of time, he condemned me for carelessness, and desired me to
various dresses; and now dressed, or undressed, he never observes; for were I dressed
with splendrous light, as glorious as the Sun, or Clouded like dark Night, it
were all one to him; neither would strike his Sense; yet I observe he doth
observe my Maids, as that one hath a fine Petticoat, and another hath handsome
made Shoes, and then he pulls up their Pettycoats a little way, to see what
stockings they have, and so views them all over, and commends them, saying,
they are very fine, when all these Garments he commends on them, were mine,
which I had cast off, and given to them; when those Garments though fresh and
new, when I did wear them, he never took notice of; besides, when my Maids do
come into the Room where he and I are, he strives to talk his best, as if he
wished, and did endeavour their good opinion, when only alone with me the
rubbish of his discourse doth serve the turn.


Madam, I perceive you do begin to be Jealous.


Have I not reason?


No truly; for a Man may do such light actions, or speak merrily, or solidly,
without an evil design, only to pass a way idle time.


Lord how idly you speak Cousin, as to think men might idly pass away their
time, when Nature allows life no idle time; for all things are growing, or
decaying, feeding life, or getting food for to nourish life, or bearing, or
breeding for increase; and man which only by his shape exceeds all other
Creatures in Reason, Knowledge, and Understanding, and will you have him cast
away these supreme gifts of Nature with idle time? would you have men follow
the Sense only, like a Beast, and not to be guided by reason to some noble
study, or profitable action? would you have them yield to their surfeting
Appetites, and not endeavour to temper them? is Sickness less painful than
Health? is Disorder to be preferred before Method, or Inconveniency before
Convenience, Wars before Peace, Famine before Plenty, Vice before Virtue? all
which would be if idle time weary allow'd; for Idleness never found out Arts nor
Sciences, or rules of Government, nor the ease of Temperance, nor the profit of
Prudence, nor the commands of Fortitude, nor the peace of Justice, which
Industry produces; but Idleness brings Confusion.


What hast thou been doing, that thy sword is bloody?


Fighting.


With whom?


I know not.


For what did you fight?


For nothing, or at least as bad as nothing; for that I never saw, nor heard
of, nor knew where to find.


This is a strange quarrel, that you neither know the man, nor the cause, it
was a mad quarrel.


You say right; for as for my part I had little reason to fight, I know not
what my opposite had: but prithee friend go help him, for he lies yonder, and I
doubt he is deadly wounded, the whilst I will seek a Surgeon to send to him.


You had need seek one for your self, for you bleed I see by your shirt.


Yes so I will, but it shall be the Lady that was cause of the wounds, and I
will try if her Beauty can heal them.


My sweet Mistress, what is the cause you look so pale and Melancholy?


I hear you have forsaken me, and making love to another; which I no sooner
heard, but shook with fear, like to a tender Plant blown by a Northern wind,
wherewith my blood congealed with cold, my thoughts grew sad, and gathered like
black Clouds, which makes my head hang down, my face all withered pale and dry:
but did I love, as many do, for Person, not for Mind, your Inconstancy would be
a less Crime; but were your Body as curious made, as Natures skill could form
you, and not a Soul answerable, I might Admire you, but not Love you with
adoration as I do.


Fear no^: for as thy Tongue unlocks my Ears, so it locks up my Heart from all
thy Sex but thee, and as a Cabinet doth keep thy Picture there.


Heaven grant my Tongue may never rust, but move with words, as smoothed with
Oil, turned by the strength of Wit, easy and free.


Dear Mistress banish this Jealousy, it may in time corrupt pure love, and be
you confident of my Affection, as of your own Virtue.


Your kind words I will take for a sufficient Seal, and never doubt the Bond
that Love hath made.


I will go fetch more help and Chirurgions.


I am wounded more with thoughts of Sorrow, than with my opposites Sword, and
wish that Death would strike me in thy Arms, that I might breath my last there,
offer up my Soul upon the Altar of thy Breast, and yield my life a Sacrifice
unto thy Constancy.


May Death exchange, and take my life that is useless to the World, and spare
yours, for noble actions to build a fame thereon.


Speak not so.


If my words offend you, my tongue for ever shall be Dumb.


No, it is your Wish offends, and not your Words; for they are Music to my
Ears, or like to drops of Balsom powered therein to heal my wounded Soul.


If that my words could cure your wounds that bleed, rather than want, i'll
speak till all my breath were spent, no life to form words with.


Why do you weep?


To see you bleed; but if you bleed to Death, I will weep to Death; and as life
issues through your Wounds, so shall life issue through my Eyes, and drown it
self in floods of tears.


Forbear, let not the Earth drink up those tears, those precious tears the Gods
thirst after.


Venus thou Goddess fair, for thy Sons sake,
Cupid the God of Love, O let me make
A Banquet of sweet Wit to entertain
This Noble Company, and feast each brain;
And let each several Ear feed with delight,
Not be disturbed with foul malicious spite.
Noble and Right Honourable,

I shall take my discourse at this time out of Beauty, the ground of which
discourse is Eyes; Eyes are the Beauty of Beauty; for if the Eyes be not good,
the face though ne'er so fair, or otherwise well featured, cannot be pleasing;
the truth is, Eyes are the most Curious, Ingenious, Delightful; and Profitable
work in Nature; Curious in the Aspect and Splendour; Ingenious in the form and
fashion, Delightful in the Society, and Profitable in their Commerce, Trade,
and Traffic, that they have with all the rest of Natures works: for had not
Nature made Eyes, all her works had been lost, as being buried in everlasting
darkness; for it is not only Light that shows her works, but Eyes that see her
works: wherefore if Nature had not made Eyes she had lost the glory of
Admiration and Adoration, which all her Animal Creatures give her, begot,
raised, or proceeding from what they see; besides, not only Light the presenter
of objects would have been lost, but Life would have been but only a dull
Melancholy Motion for want of sight, and for want of sight life would have
wanted knowledge, and so would have been ignorant both of its self and Nature;
but now life takes delight by the fight, through the Eyes, and is inamor'd with
the Beauties it views; and the Eyes do not only delight themselves and life
with what they receive, but with what they send forth; for Eyes are not only
passages to let Light, Colours, Forms, and Figures in, but to let Passions,
Affections, Opinions out; besides, the Eyes are not only as Navigable Seas, for
the Animal Spirits to Traffic on, and Ports to Anchor in; but they are the
Gardens of the Soul, wherein the Soul sits and refreshes it self, and Love the
Sun of the Soul, sends forth more glorious Rays than that Sun in the Sky, and
on those objects they do shine, they both comfort and give a nourishing
delight; but yet when the light of love doth reflect, the heat doth increase by
double lines, and quickness of motion, which causes many times a Distemper of
the Thoughts, which turns to a Feavor in the Mind; but to conclude most Noble
and Right Honourable, Eyes are the Stars which appear only in the Animal
Globe, to direct the life in its Voyage, not only to places that life knows,
but to new discoveryes; and these Animal Stars do not only guide the Animal
life, but have an influence and various effects on the Soul, and are not only
to view the Beauties of all the other works of Nature, but are the chiefest
Beauties themselves; and if that Reason that is the Educator of the Life, and
chief Ruler and Commander of the Soul, did not cross and hinder the influence
of these Animal Stars, they would prove very fatal to many a one: Wherefore
Right Honourable, my Application is, that you obey Reason, and pray unto it as
to a Deity, that it may divert the Malignant influences, and cause them to
point to a Happy Effect.

For which my good wishes shall attend you,
That the Gods of these Stars may defend you.

Brother, I may bid you welcome home, for I have not seen you these two years;
methinks between Brothers as you and I are should never be absence.


No faith Brother; for we never have good fortune when we are asunder; for
since I patted I hear you are to be Married, and I must tell you, I am like to
be Hanged.


Heaven forbid you should be hanged.


And do not you make the same Prayer against your Marriage?


No, for that prayer would prove a Curse, if Heaven should grant it, but I hope
Brother you speak of this but merrily, and not as a truth to believed that you
are like to be hanged.


Yes faith, I met with a man that was resolved to fight with the next he met, I
think, for he forced a quarrel, and we fought, and I fear I have killed him.


What was the cause of the quarrel?


Why about a Beauty, that none must admire but himself, and yet they must
maintain she is the absolutest Beauty of her Sex; and such a Beauty, I hear of
every where, but I cannot see her any where.


Let me tell you Brother she is worth the seeing.


And is she worth the blood and life that is lost and spilt for her?


Yes, if it had been to maintain her Beauty against rude Despisers, or her
Virtue against base Detractors, or her Honour against wicked Violators; for her
Soul hath as many beautiful graces and Virtues, and her mind as many noble
qualities, as her body hath beautiful Parts, Lineaments, graceful Motions,
pleasing Countenances, lovely Behaviour, and courteous Demeanours.


Certainly Brother you are very well acquainted with her, that you know her so
well, as to speak so confident of her.


Yes Brother, I do know her very well, for she is Sister to my Mistress.


So, I thought she had some relation to you, that you spake so much in her
praise; this Self-love bribes all our Tongues; but Brother, you have so fired
my Spirits, as I am almost as mad as the Gentleman I fought with, before I see
her, merely with the report, and since I must lose my Wits with the rest of
Mankind, for I find all are mad that come within the list of her Name, pray let
me part with my Wits on Honourable terms, as at the view of her Beauty.


I shall make it a request to her that you may see her, and she being a person
who is very obliging, I make no question but she will receive your civil and
humble respects.


Husband do you love me?


Yes.


Better than any other Woman?


I can make no comparison.


Why do you then neglect me so much, as to take no notice whether I be fine and
brave, or ragged, or patched, or ilfavoured, or handsome, and yet you take notice
of every other woman, from the stranger abroad, to the Kitchin-Maid at home?


By my troth Wife I do so just as I would do of a Tree, or a Bush, or a Stone,
or a Brake, or a Fox, or an Ass, and no otherwise.


Yet it is a sign you have them in your mind, and I had rather be hated than
forgotten; wherefore pray let me be sometimes in your thoughts, although as a
Bryar, and not to be flung out Root and Branch.


Heaven forbid Wife you should become a Thorn in my Mind, but thou art there as
my Soul, nor do I love you at a common rate: for were thy person more deformed
than ever Nature made, either by Sickness or Casualty, I still should love thee
for thy Virtuous Soul; and though your person is very handsome, yet I consider
not your Beauty but your Health, so you be well, I care not how you look; for
my love is at that height as it is beyond the body grown; for should I only
love you for your Beauty, when that is decayed, my love must of necessity die,
if Beauty were the life.


So then I am only your spiritual love, and you will choose a temporal one
elsewhere.


Prithee be not Jealous of me, because I am become assured of your Chastity;
for know. I could sooner hate my self, than love, or amorously affect any other
woman but thy self; and when I prove false to you, may Iupiter cast me to
Plutoes Court, there to be tormented Eternally.


Well, pardon this sit of Jealousy, for I shall never question your affection
more, nor doubt your Constancy.


To quarrel and fight for me is strange, for as for the one I never saw, and
the other I have no acquaintance with; but had I favoured the one, or affronted
the other, or had favoured them both, it might have raised a dispute, from a
dispute to a quarrel, from a quarrel to a duel; but many times men make a
seeming love the occasion to show their courage, to get a fame; but what fame
soever men get, the woman loses, as being thought either too kind, or cruel.


Sister, this Gentleman never saw you, only fought in his own defence; he
desires you would give him leave to come and kiss your hands, he is a very
gallant man, and an experienced Soldier.


A Soldier? why he never lead an Army, nor pitched a Field, nor fought a
Battle; he never Entrenched, nor Incampt; he never guarded, kept, nor took Fort,
Town, or City; perchance he hath studied as most Gentlemen do, so much of
Fortification, as to talk of Trenches, Lines, Ramparts, Bullworks, Curtains,
Wings, Faces, Forts, Centuries; And of Ammunition, Cannon, Muskets, Carabines,
Pistols, Slings, Bows, Arrows, Darts, Pikes, Bills, Halberds, Bolts, Poleaxes,
Swords, Cimeters, Shot, Bullets, Powder, Drums, Trumpets, Waggons, Tents and
the like; and for Arms, Pot, Back, Breast, Gantlets, Corselers, Gorgets and the
like, thus they learn the Names, but seldom practice the use.


Yes, this Gentleman hath lead Armies, pitched Fields, fought Battles, where
those he won were won by his Prudence and Conduct, and those he lost were by
Fortunes spite, whose changing power, and inconstant humour, no Mortal can
withstand.


Nay Sister, if he be so gallant a person, I shall not refuse his visits, nor
deny my self his Company, but entertain him as civilly as he may deserve.


Well met, I was going to your Lodging.


Faith if you had gone to my Lodging you had mist of my Company.


But howsoever, I should have been entertained by thy old Landlady, for she
makes me welcome in thy absence.


The truth of it is, that my Landlady as old as she is, loves the Company of
men, especially of young men; for if a young man will trouble himself to stay
in her Company, and talk to her, she is so pleased, as she makes more wrinkles
with her smiles, than Time hath made, and she will simperingly put in her Chin,
as if she were but fifteen.


Faith I commend women, for they will never yield to ages humours, though they
are forced to yield to ages infirmities; for their minds are always young,
though their bodies be old.


Indeed their minds are Girls all their life time; but leaving old women, will
you go see Monsieur Fantasy?


Is he so well as to admit of Visitors?


Yes, for he is in a recovering condition, and state of Health.


Come let us go then.


Madam, the fame of your Beauty and Virtue hath drawn me hither, to offer my
service on the altar of your commands.


You are so great a favourite to Nature and Fortune, and are so splenderous
with their gifts, as you are able to put the confidence of our Sex out of
Countenance, especially I, that am by Nature bashful; wherefore it is unlikely
I should command you.


I had rather be commanded by you Lady, than to command the whole World, and
should be prouder to be your Slave, than to be that sole Monarch.


I should be sorry so gallant a man as fame reports you to be; should have so
sick a Judgment, and so ungoverned a Passion, as to yield up your liberty to a
woman, and to tie your life to her vain foolish humours.


It is impossible that in so heavenly a form, a foolish Soul should be; for I
perceive by your beautiful person, Nature hath outwrought her self, having not
Art or skill to make a Second, and what man would not be proud to serve the
only she?


O Sir, take heed you wrong not your noble worth and merit, in being over
civil; for complements are all dissembling, and dissembling runs in the ways
of perjury.


Pray Madam construe not my love-service and admiration to an idle Visit, a vain
Discourse, and false Profession; for if you appear not so beautiful to all the
World, as you appear to me, yet I dare boldly tell the world, I think you so,
and will maintain it with my life.


I believe then I am more beholding to your Eyes that have contracted me into a
beautiful form, than unto Nature that hath made me of a vulgar shape.


Your Tongue Lady hath the power of Circes wand, to charm the Senses, and
transform the shape, making all men it speaks to, either to appear Monsters or
Gods.


You have Enthroned me with your Favours, and Crowned me with your
Commendations.


My desire is, that you will Crown me with your Love.


I hear that Mademoiselle Bon shall marry her unconstant Servant, Monsieur
Fantasy.


Faith that is a comfort, that any woman can get a Husband, whilst the Graces
are young and in being.


The Graces never grow old.


Let me tell you, Time decays and withers all things.


No, not the Gods.


But Time doth waste Devotion, wears out Religion, burns up the Sacrifice of
Praise, puts out the Lamp of Charity, and quenches out the Vestal fire of Zeal.


But then there are new Religions brought in the place or room of the old


Yes, and new Gods with new Religions, and new Religions and Opinions are like
young beautiful Ladies when they appear first to the view of the World; they
are followed, admired, worshipped, sought, sued, and prayed to; but when they
grow old, all their Servants and followers forsake them, and seek out those
that are younger: so the last and newest Opinions and Religions, are accounted
the best, and stuck to for a time the closest, and followed by the greatest
numbers, and have most zealous supplicants; thus the Gods die in effect.


The truth is, that all things that are young, are Strong, Vigorous, Active and
Flourishing; and whatsoever is old, is Weak, Faint, Sick, and witheringly
dyes.


I can tell you news.


What news?


Why Monsieur Nobilissimo to is marry Mademoiselle Amor, and his Brother
Monsieur Heroic is to marry her Sister Mademoiselle La Belle.


And who is to marry the third Sister Mademoiselle Grand Esprit.


She is resolved to live a single life.


I am glad they have chose Husbands out of the numbers of there Suitors; for
when they are married, I hope out of the number of there remainders, we may
have some offers for Husbands.


For my part I shall despair, unless the third Sister Mademoiselle Grand Esprit
would marry also; for the whole bulk of Mankind will sue to her, and never
think of any other woman, whilst she is indisposed of.


But she it seems hath declared she will never marry.


That is all one, for men will pursue their desires, and live of Hopes so long,
as there is any left.


Well, the worst come to the worst, we shall only live old Maids.


But not old Virgins.


Great Hymen, I do now petition thee,
To bless my Sisters, not to favour me;
Unless I were thy subject to obey,
But I am Diana's and to her do pray;
But give me leave for to decide the cause,
And for to speak the truth of marriage laws;
Or else through ignorance each man and wife,
May rebels prove by Matrimonial strife.
Noble and Right Honourable,

From the root of Self-love grows many several Branches; as Divine, Love, Moral
Love, Natural and Sympathetical Love, Neighbourly and Matrimonial Love; Divine
Love is the Love to the Gods, Moral Love is the Love to Virtue, Natural Love is
the Love to Parents and Children, Sympathetical Love is of Lovers, or
Friendships, Neighbourly Love is the Love of Acquaintance, and true Matrimonial
Love is the Love of United Souls, and Bodies; but I shall only insist or
discourse at this time for my Sisters sakes, of Matrimonial Love; this
Matrimonial Love, is the first imbodyed Love that Nature created; for as for
Divine Love, and Moral Love, they are as incorporeal as the Soul, and
Sympathetical and Matrimonial Love, which I will join as Soul and Body, were
before Natural, or Neighbourly Love, for Marriage beget, Acquaintance, and none
lives so near nor converses so much as man and wife; and there was a Sympathy
and Conjunction of each Sex, before there were Children, and there could be no
Parents before there were Children; thus Matrimonial Love was the first
substantial Love, and being the Original and producing Love, ought to be
honoured and preferred as the most perfect and greatest Love in Nature; but
mistake me not Noble and Right Honourable, when I say the greatest Love in
Nature, I mean not the Supernatural Love, as Divine Love as to the Gods; but
this Matrimonial Love, I say is to be the most respected, as the Original Love,
like as Nature is to be honoured and preferred before the Creatures she makes;
so Matrimonial Love ought to be respected first, as being the cause of
Friendly, Sociable, Neighbourly, and Fatherly Love; wherefore man and wife
ought to forsake all the world, in respect of each other, and to prefer no
other delight before each others good or content; for the Love of Parents and
Children, or any other Love proceeding from Nature, ought to be waved when as
they come in Competition with the Love man and wife; for though Matrimonial
Love is not such a Divine Love as from man to the Gods, yet it is as the Love
of Soul and Body, also it is as a Divine Society, as being a Union; but Right
Honourable, to tell you, my opinion is, that I believe very few are truly
married; for it is not altogether the Ceremony of the Church nor State that
makes a true marriage; but a Union and indissoluble Conjunction of Souls and
Bodies of each Sex; wherefore all those that are allowed of as man and wife, by
the Church, State, and Laws, yet they are but Adulterers, unless their Souls,
Bodies, and Affections, are united as one; for its not the joining of hands,
speaking such words by Authentical persons, nor making of vows, and having
Witnesses thereof, that makes a true marriage, no more than an Absolution
without a Contrition, makes a holy man: wherefore dear Sisters, and you two
Heroic Worthies, marry as you ought to do, or else live single lives,
otherwise your Children will be of a Bastard kind, and your associating but as
Beasts, which are worse than Birds, for they orderly choose their Mates, and
lovingly fly and live together, and equally labour to build their nest, to feed
their young, and Sympathetically live, and love each other, which order and
love few married persons observe, nor practice; but after all this, even those
marriages that are the perfectest, purest, lovingest, and most equallest, and
Sympathetically joined, yet at the best marriage is but the womb of trouble,
which cannot be avoided, also marriage is the grave or tomb of Wit; for which I
am resolved for my part to live a single life, associating my self with my own
Thoughts, marrying my self to my own Contemplations, which I hope to conceive
and bring forth a Child of Fame, that may live to posterity, and to keep a-live
my Memory; not that I condemn those that marry, for I do worship married
persons, as accounting them Saints, as being Martyrs for the good cause of the
Common-wealth, Sacrificing their own Happiness and Tranquillity, for the weal
public; for there is none that marries that doth not increase their Cares and
Pains; but marriage Unites into Families, Families into Villages, Villages into
Cities, Cities into Corporations, Corporations into Commonwealths; this
increase keeps up the race of Mankind, and causes Commerce, Trade, and
Traffic, all which associates men into an Agreement, and by an Agreement men
are bound to Laws, by Laws they are bound to Punishments, by Punishments to
Magistrates, and by Magistrates and Punishments to Obedience, by Obedience to
Peace and Defence, in which Center of Peace my dear Sisters, I wish you may
live, and be guarded with the Circumference of Defence, that nothing may
disturb or endanger you or yours; and that you may live in true marriage,and
increase with united love, blessed with Virtuous Children, and enriched with
prudent Care, and Industry: also I wish and pray that Jealousy may be banished
from your Thoughts, Pains and Sickness from your Bodies, Poverty from your
Families, evil Servants from your Employments, Disobedience from your
Children.

And that Death may not rob you of your breed,
But after your life your Children may succeed.

O How my heart doth ache when think I do,
How I a modest Maid a man did woo!
To be so confident to woo him here,
Upon the public Stage to every Ear;
Men sure will censure me for mad, if not
To be in some unlucky Planet got,
Or else will tax me of dishonesty,
As seeming like a bold immodesty;
Well, I have wooed, yet am I not despised,
But am by Virtuous honour highly prized;
Because my Love was spotless, pure, and Chaste,
And on a noble worthy man was placed;
Then why should I blush, weep, or yet repent,
Or shun the wooing part to represent,
But rather joy and glory in my choice?
If you approve my Act pray gived a voice^
