My Masters Nephew, and my Ladies Daughter, are the kindest lovers, for so
young ones, as that ever I knew.


I believe you never knew such young ones; for she is not above ten years of
age, and (...) thirteen or fourteen.


He addresses himself in that Country manner, and pleads his Love-sure with
such affectionate respect, and she gives Audience with such modest attention,
as one would think they were older by a dozen years apiece than they are.


They have been bred together, and they have not been acquainted with the
Vanities and Vices of the World, which makes love the more pure.


My Lady desires my Master that he would give consent his Nephew may marry her
Daughter.


She hath reason, for he is the only Son of his Father, my Masters Brother the
Lord Dorato, who is very rich, and is in great favour with the Arch-Prince of
the Country.


Why so is my Ladies Daughter the only Child of her Parents, and she is Heir to
her Fathers Estate.


Yes, but her Father left so many Debts when he dyed, as the Estate will not be
so great as it is thought to be.


But by that time she is of Age, the Debts may be paid.


But my Lady hath a great Jointure out of it, that will be a hindrance to the
payment of Debts.


Well, I believe whether they have their friends consent or not, they will
marry, they love so very much each other.


Perchance so, and then repent when they come to elder years, that they married
so young.


Faith that they may do if they were double their Age; for few marry that
repent not:


Well come away, and leave them to repentance.


Nay stay, they are not married yet.


Pray Husband give your Nephew leave to marry my Daughter.


Time enough Wife, they are young, and may stay this seven years, and indeed
they are so young as it is not fit they should marry; besides, I have not
absolute power to dispose of my Nephew: for though my Brother left him to my
care and breeding when he went Ambassador to the Emperor, because his Wife
was dead, and none so fit to leave him with as I; yet to marry him without his
Fathers Knowledge, or Consent, will not be taken well, nay perchance he may be
very angry.


Come, come, he will not displease you with his anger, for fear he may lose
that you have power to give from him, which is your Estate, which you may leave
to him, or his Son, having no Children of your own; wherefore pray Husband
grant my request.


Well wife, I will consider it.


Nay if you consider, you will find so many excuses, as you will deny my
request with excuse.


Faith if I do consent to this marriage, it will be to be rid of my Nephews and
your importunity.


You may be sure we will never let you be quiet.


I believe you.


Nan, give me my work, and my little armed Chair.


Lord Mistress, you take great pains to crowd into that Chair, I wonder you can
take delight to sit so uneasily.


O, custom is a second Nature; for I using to sit in this Chair from my
Childhood, I have a Natural Love to it, as to an old acquaintance; and being
accustomed to sit in it, it feels easier


Yes, you would part with your little old Chair for a proper young Husband, who
would set you on his knees.


By my faith but I would not, for I should find more trouble and less case on a
young Husbands knees, than on my old Chairs Seat.


But if you should sit in this Chair when you were married, your Husband must
kneel down if he would kiss you.


Why then this Chair will learn a Husband humble submission and obedience,
which Husbands never knew; but Nan, prithee fetch me some of my old Ballads to
sing, for I am weary of working.


Mistress, your Mother calls you.


I had as lieve be whipped as stir.


You have reason, you labour so much, and ring your self so hard, as whipping
would be less pain; for your Chair is now sitter for your Head, than your
Britch.


Not unless to break my head; for a Chair is not a fit rest for the head, for
then the heels would be upwards, and so I might be thought a Light-heeld wench;
for light things fly, or lie upwards.


Why the head, that is the uppermost part of the body, is not light.


Yes, when 'tis mad or drunk.


How doth my Brother and my Son?


Very well my Lord.


How is this? my Son married to my Brothers Wives Daughter, without my
Knowledge or Consent? to a Girl whose Estate hath more Debts than Lands? and
who knows how she will prove when she is a woman; and my Son to marry a wife,
before he hath wit to govern a wife; to put a clog to his heels to hinder his
Travel for Knowledge; sure my Brother is mad, dotingly mad, to be persuaded by
a foolish woman his wife; for I know it was her insinuating persuasions that
made him agree to the marriage; O I could curse the time I sent my Son to him!
and my self for trusting him to educate and govern him, who hath bred him to be
as foolish as himself. O foolish Son, and more foolish Brother, by how much
being older! but I will break the marriage-knot asunder, or disinherit my Son,
or marry and get another that may prove more wise and happy to me; Do you know
of my Sons marriage?


Yes Sir, for tis much talked of, and of the extraordinary love betwixt the
young couple.


A couple of young Puppyes, and their Uncle an old Als; O the very thought
doth almost make me mad; especially when I remember the hopes I had to advance
my Son by marriage; but you shall go back to carry Letters that shall declare
my anger, and my command, for my Sons repair unto me, since I cannot return
home as yet; i'll dispatch you strait.


It is a very pleasing sight to see the new married Children I may say, for so
are they; yet they behave themselves so gravely, and so formally, as if they
were an Ancoret couple; for there is no appearance of Childishness in their
behaviour.


But I wonder my Master and Lady will suffer them to bed together.


My Master did persuade his Nephew to lie by himself, but he would not be
persuaded.


Truly he is a very fine youth, and she a very pretty young Lady; I dare say
she will, make a very handsome woman.


I believe she will and a virtuous woman, and he a handsome and gallant man.


So Wife, by your persuasions to this marriage, I have lost the love of my only
Brother.


And I am like to lose my only Child, through the grief of the departure of her
Husband; for she looks so pale, and is so weak with crying, and fasting; for
she feeds only on grief, and her tears quenches her droughth: I think she will
die.


It is your own fault; for you would never be quiet, nor let be at rest until
they were married.


Would I and my Child had never seen your Nephew.


All the hopes we have is, that my Brother will be pacified with time.


I never saw so much affectionate grief, as at the parting of the young married
couple.


O, passionate tears flow naturally from Childrens Eyes.


When they were to part, they did kiss, weep, and embrace so close, as their
tears mixed together.


They will weep as much for joy when they meet again, as they do now for grief
at parting.


But absence and time doth waste Love.


Absence doth rather put out the flame of Love, than waste the Lamp; but their
Love was lighted so soon, that if it be not put out, it will last a long time.


Nay faith, the sooner it is lighted the sooner it will burn out; but to make
Love last long, is sometimes to put it out, and then to re-inkindle it; for a
continual fire doth waste the fuel, and a Candle will soon burn out, although
it be lighted but at one end; but absence is an extinguishet, which saves it,
and return is relighting it.


Are Lovers like Candles?


Yes faith; for as there are Candles of all sorts and sizes, so there are
Lovers of all degrees; some are like Torch-light that flame high and bright,
but soon waste out, others like watch Candles that give but a dim dull light,
but will last a long time, and some that give but a little light, and are
strait burnt out.


But what is a snast in a Candle, which is like a blazing Star with a stream or
tail, that mels a Candle, and makes it run out.


Faith a snast is like a Mistress, as a Courtesan, or servant, that makes waste
of Matrimonial Love, it makes Matrimonial Love fall into a snuf; but prudent
discretion, and chaste kisses, are as snuffers to clip of those snasts before
they get power, or are in a blaze, or like a Bodkin that picks or pulls them out
with the point of a sharp tongue.


By your similizing, you make love Grease.


You say right, for there is nothing so apt to flame and melt, as Grease and
Love, it is there natural properties to waste in flame.


Well, but let us not waste our time in idle talk, but go about our
employments.


Why, talking is the greatest, or most employment women use; but indeed love is
idle.


My Lord is extremely troubled for the marriage of his Son.


He is so, and so very angry with his Son, as he would not give him his
blessing when he came, although he hath not seen him in seven years; for so
long hath my Lord been Ambassador here.


Sometimes Ambassadors are many years employed out of there own Country.


They are so, but my Lord is sent for home, which I am very glad of.


Doth his Son return home with him?


No, for he sends him to travel into several Countries, for as many years as my
Lord hath been from his Country.


Why doth he command him so long a time to Travel, having no more Sons?


To have him Travel out the remembrance of his Wife, at least his affections to
her.


Why, would not my Lord have his Son love his Wife, now he is married?


No, for my Lord saith that the marriage is not a true marriage; for the Lady
is not of marrigable years, and that is not until the Female is past twelve.


Why so?


I know not, but so it is according to our Canon, and Common Laws.


I hear my Brother hath sent his Son to Travel for seven years.


Pray do not let my Daughter know it, for it will kill her, if she hears it.


I hear also, that he will endeavour to break the marriage.


The Devil break his heart.


Why do you say so?


Have I not reason to say so, when he endeavours to break my Child's heart, and
so my heart? a dishonest man he is, to offer to part man and wife.


But if the marriage will not hold good in law, they are not lawful man and
wife.


I perceive you will take your Brothers part against me.


Mistress, I hear there is a Suitor preparing to come a wooing to you.


What preparations doth he make?


Why he hath been with your Father, to treat with him concerning your Portion.


That is not a Suitors preparation, that is a Merchants Trafficking, that is to
make a bargain, not to woo a Mistress; but the preparations of a Suitor, are
fine Clothes, Coaches, and great Attendance, with rich presents; otherwise a
woman is not wooed, but a Husband bought.


Or a Wife sold.


No, the woman or her friends are the purchasers; for Husbands never give any
thing for a Wife, but the woman or her friends, pay down ready money for a
Husband, although they sell Land for it: Portions, portions undo a Family Nan.


But for all that, you had rather undo a Family than want a Husband.


Self-love is prevalent Nan; but what manner of man is this man that my Father
is treating with? is he handsome, or rich, or famous, or honoured with title?
for I would not put my father to charges, and not have a Husband worth my
Portion.


He is rich, and a thriving man.


That is to say a rich miserable man, and when I am married to him, I shall be
his poor miserable wife; for he will not allow me any thing to spend, hardly to
eat.


Then your Chair will be big enough for you.


Or I shall be little enough for my Chair, for a spare diet will make bare
bones.


If you be lean you will want a Cushion, unless your Husband will allow you
one.


A miserable Husband will never do that, for they think ease breeds Idleness.


If he be miserable, he will be pleased you shall be idle; for exercise doth
cause a hungry Stomach; but if he be a jealous Husband, he will not be pleased
you should be idle; for idleness breeds wantoness.


A jealous Husband and a miserable, is to a woman much a-like; for the one bars
a wife from Company, the other from Meat; the one will not allow her fine
Clothes, the other dares not let her wear fine Clothes; the one will not
maintain Servants to wait on her, the other dares not trust Servants to wait
upon her, lest they should be corrupted to be Pimps or Bawds; also a miserable
Husband, and a Prodigal one is a-like to a wife; the one keeps all his wealth
and spends none, the other spends all and keeps none; the one will give his
wife none, the other will spare his wife none from himself, and Vanities and
Vices; thus a wife is poor, or unhappy, either in a spender, or a sparer; but
if my Father would not cast me and my Portion away, is to marry me to a man
whose bounty or liberality is within one part of his wealth, as three parts
liberality, and four parts wealth; and one that hath more love than jealousy,
more merit than title, more honesty than wealth, and more wealth than
necessity.


But if you never marry till your Father get you such a Husband, you will die an
old Maid.


I had rather die an old Maid, than be an unhappy Wife.


Why are you angry with me? because my Brother is an enemy to the marriage, I
was a Friend to it, and did my part, consenting to what you desired, and why
are you angry with me? because the Laws have disanulled the marriage, I cannot
alter the Laws.


But your Brothers power with the Arch-Prince, and the Arch-Princes power on
the Judges and Lawyers, Divines and Church-men, hath corrupted the Laws, and
caused Injustice.


That's none of my fault, I have not power to mend them; but let me have so
much power with you, as to persuade you to be patient, in matters where your
impatience will do you no good; also let me Counsel you to advise your Daughter
to endeavour to forget my Nephew, at least not to love him as a Husband, but to
place her affections upon some other man; for she being freed by the law, may
marry again who she shall think best to choose: And to draw her off from her
Melancholy humour, you must persuade her to divert her self and thoughts with
variety of Company, and to take delight in such things as other Ladies use, as
fine Dressing, rich Clothing, sportful Dancing, merry Meeting, and the like;
and she being very handsome, since she is grown to woman's years, will be
admired, praised, and sued too, in which admirations and praises, women take
glory, and are proud to be wooed; for it is the pleasure of their life, and the
life of their pleasure.


But how if I cannot persuade her to associate her self with young Company like
her self, or to wear fine Clothes, or to take pleasure in sports and plays?


Command her to adorn her self bravely, and to go to Balls, Plays, and Masks,
and those pleasures will steal on her unawares; and no question but a little
time will make her take such delight therein, as she will be so fond of Company
and Bravery, as you will find it difficult, if not impossible to persuade her
from it.


I will take your Counsel, and follow your advice.


My Lord hath sent for his Son to come home, for to marry with the
Arch-Prince's Niece.


She is a Lady that hath more Wealth than Beauty, and more Title than Wit.


My Lord cares not to marry his Son to Beauty or Wit, but to Riches and Honour.


My Lord is Covetous and Ambitious.


So are all wise men: for they know that Wealth and Honour are the Pillars and
Supporters, to hold up their Families; that makes Fathers desirous, and
industrious to marry their Sons to great Fortunes, and not to great Beam^yes,
that their successors may not be buried in Poverty; for Beauty is only for
delight, but not for continuance, Beauty lives only with fond Youth, Riches
with wife Age, and Dignity Crowns ancient Riches; for along and rich
succession, is a Gentleman's Pedigree.


I thought Merit had been the foundation of a Gentleman.


So it is sometimes, but not always: for where Merit Dignified one Family,
Riches Dignified a hundred; poor Merit is buried in Oblivion, unless Fame
builds him a Monument, whereas Riches build Monuments to Fames Palace, and
bring Fame down to his Palace; but Merit without the assistance of Riches, can
neither feed, nor cloth, nor sustain, nor cannot buy Houses to live in, nor
Lands to live on, it cannot leave anything for Antiquity but the memory of it
self: wherefore my Lord is wise to ch^se Riches for his Son.


But 'tis a question whether his Son will take them, and leave the Lady be once
was married too; for 'tis said that she is grown an extraordinary Beauty.


Will not you obey my commands?


Yes Madam, so far as it is my duty.


Then do as I command you, dress fine, and keep Company.


Gay Cloths Madam, and my mind will not be suitable; my indisposed humour, and
Company will not be agreeable; neither know I how to behave my self in this
condition I am in, nor how to associate my self; for since my marriage is
disanull'd, I am neither Maid, Virgin, Widow, nor Wife.


Come, come, you are my Daughter, that's sufficient.


Faith I pity my young Lord, for since he is returned from his tedious
travels, he is kept Prisoner at the Court, for the Arch-Prince and his Father
will not suffer him to stir out, no not so much as out his Lodgings; but that's
not all, for they will not suffer him to think, for their Tongues disturb all
his Meditations, the one fills his Ears and Head with promises, the other rants
in threats; the Prince strives to hire him with Wealth and Honour, to marry his
Niece, and his Father stands ready, if he denies, to load him with Curses.


The Princes Hire will sooner bring him to consent than the Fathers Load.


Son, if you disobey my commands concerning this marriage, as to refuse it, by
heavens fair light I swear I will load you with so many Curses, as shall sink
you down to Hell.


By Heavens fair light I swear, I wish I were covered with the darkness of
Death; but my Fathers Curses may exclude me from Heavens blessings.


My Lord, your Father desires your presence.


O Nan, I have had such a misfortune as never was.


What misfortune?


Why, I was sitting in that little Chair you know I take delight to sit in, and
was singing of Ballads, not expecting that any stranger would come into my
Chamber without my notice; but as I was sitting and singing, in comes my Father
and the Gentleman you told me of, that was to be my Husband, whereat I was so
surprised, as I forgot the Chair was so little I could not readily part from
it; I started up in a fright, and run away, the Chair being so little in the
seat, stood so close to me, as it went a-long with me, and my back being
towards my Father and the Gentleman, saw the Chair as it stuck to me; the
Gentleman seeing the Chair hanging there, told my Father, that he p^rceived
that I his Daughter was of so lazy a Nature, that rather than stay or want a
seat, I would have a Chair tied to my breech; whereupon he hath broke the
agreement he made with my Father, and my Father for anger hath vowed to break
or burn my Chair. O Nan, what shall I do to save my Chair? for to lose both
Chair and Husband will be too great a loss.


Which had you rather lose, the Gentleman or the Chair?


O the Gentleman Nan, for he will not do me half so much service as the Chair
hath done me; he will never bear with me as the Chair hath bore me; and I
perceive by his she humour, and Courteous Nature, that he would sooner break my
head with a Chair, than ease my hips with a Seat, therefore good Nan devise
some way to save my Chair from Execution, and the fates I hope as a blessing to
me, have made the Chair a means to break the marriage betwixt this Gentleman
and me.


It seems he loves an active wife.


Faith all Fools love busy women.


The best way, is to speak to your Mother to pacify your Father.


I will take your advice.


And is he married? Heavens send him joy, and me patience; Heaven Crown his
life with Happiness, and mine with Peace; and may he have posterity that may
live long, and flourish high, that may keep alive his memory, though I should
be forgotten in the grave, yet Heaven grant his fame may live eternally.


Daughter, have you heard of your Husbands marriage?


Yes Madam.


'Tis reported that the Princess whom he is married to, is ill-favoured,
foolish, and peevish.


He is too wise to consider outward favour, and for wit he hath enough for
himself and his wife, and his sweet and noble Nature and behaviour will
equalise her peevish humour.


There are Balls, Masks, and Plays, to be extraordinary, for the joy of this
marriage; wherefore Daughter I desire you to adorn your self, and appear in
those Assemblies.


I shall obey you Madam.


I wonder your Lordship should be so Melancholy, that hath wealth at will, it
is enough for such poor men as I to be Melancholy.


I would thou had my wealth, so I had thy freedom.


O Sir, there is no Freedom in Poverry.


Nor no Poverty in Freedom, for freedom is the wealth of the Gods.


If it pleased the Gods, would I was bound to Riches.


I wish thou were, so I was free of my Princesses Shackels.


Husband, the Arch-Prince hath sent a Messenger to give us notice he will come
and visit my Daughter.


I hear he is much enamoured with your Daughters Beauty, since he saw her at the
last Ball.


I will go to her, and make her dress her self fine to entertain him.


Her Beauty is bravery enough, wherefore she needs no other adornment but what
Nature hath dressed her in.


But Art gives additions.


The Emperor I hear is sending Ambassadors to the Arch-Prince, to treat of a
marriage betwixt the Arch-Prince and the Emperors Daughter.


The report is, that she is a fair and Virtuous Lady, and the Prince will have
great advantages by the alliance with the Emperor.


He will so, wherefore I hope and pray, that the match may be for the good of
this Kingdom.


Fair Lady, grant me your love and I will ask no more, but what accompanies it,
your person, which I will make an equal to my self.


Gracious Sir, had I a Virgins Love, and Person pure to equal it, I would
present it to your Highness; but both my Love and Person have been wedded unto
another m^n, and though the Law hath made a divorce, yet Death hath not
dissolved the marriage.


Heaven hath given you Virtue, which keeps your person pure, and like a
precious Diamond doth remain; for though it hath or should have several
purchasers, yet doth it lose nothing of its value or worth; and though you have
been wedded to another man, your Virtuons Chastity; is still as pure as in your
Virgins Estate, and by the Laws your person is set free; and for the Love you
gave, may be called back, or drawn away, since 'tis not entertained.


'Tis true, I am Chaste, and so I will remain, and though the law hath set my
person free, my conscience is not yet ^t liberty, nor will that love I gave
away return, no more than life that's past rise from the Urn; wherefore most
noble Sir, ask me not for that which I have not to give you.


Equal consent, makes a happy marriage; wherefore I desire your free consent;
but know, if you refuse, it tis in my power to have you without your consent,
either for a Mistress, or for a Wife.


You have no power, the power lives within my self; for I can take away my
life, and a dead Mistress, or a dead Wife, would neither be conversable nor
pleasurable, death is not amiable, 'tis rather a terror than a delight.


I will leave my Suit to your consideration, ponder on it well, and take good
advice, my Suit is honest and just, a denial may inveterate my passion, and
turn my pure love into a raging flame.


Why how now Son, shall I never find you with Company, but always alone, in a
musing Melancholy posture?


I never did love much Company Sir.


But methinks in honesty, you might love the Company of your Wife.


Were my liberty equal to my Love, I should not be o^ten from her.


Why, who bars you from that liberty?


The Laws Sir.


So, I perceive you are discontented, because you are barred from your Whore.


You are my Father, but should another man have said so much, I would make him
prove it with his blood.


Why, the Laws have proved it.


Oh Heavens, that Fathers should be so cruel! have not you made me unhappy, by
forcing me to those actions that neither Conscience, Honesty, nor Honour can
approve of; and yet will you disturb my Life, trouble my Thoughts, and torture
me with words?


No, no, I love you so well, as I would have you so happy, as to be delighted
with mirth, and not to bury your self in Melancholy, and despise those
blessings Heaven bestows upon you, as Wealth and Honour, besides the blessing
of Posterity; for your Lady proves to be fruitful, being big with Child.


I am so unhappy my self, I desire none but to please you.


Come, come, pray let me persuade you to go to your wife the Princess, and sit
and talk with her, for she is displeased she hath no more of your Company, she
complains and says she seldom sees you.


Her humour and mine are so different, that we are happiest when we are fardest
asunder.


Let me tell you Son, that all women love to be flattered, and when they are
not, they are peevish, cross, and froward, and therefore you must flatter her.


I must have a Tutor first to teach me Sir, for I understand not the Art of
flattery, I never practise it.


Time and Company, Ambition and Covetousness, will teach you that; but the best
Tutor is Cupid, and the best Tutoress is Venus, and you have been a lover Son.


Yes Sir, in Hymens Court, and there they use not much flattery.


Not so much as in Venus, and Cupids Courts; but yet there are flatterers
enough in Hymens, both Male and Females, but pray Son go to the Princess your
wife.


Nurse, I hear the Arch-Prince is resolved to have me, if not by fair
persuasions, by force.


And what woman would not be persuaded to be an Arch-Princess? they need no
enforcement.


Not I, unless I could be persuaded to be an Arch-Whore, and if you went about
to persuade me, you would be an Arch-Bawd.


Come, come, there is none durst call you so, is you were the Arch-Princesses,
nor call me Bawd neither.


But they would think me so, and think you a Bawd.


Thoughts are free, and every one may think their pleasure, and therefore let
me persuade you in spite of thoughts, to be an Arch-Princess.


If I thought you did not speak in jest, I should hate you in earnest.


What, for giving you good Counsel?


No, for giving me wicked Counsel: but I will give you better Counsel, and my
self too.


What Counsel is that?


To forsake the World, and to go to Heaven.


Faith I would not go to Heaven, unless the Gods call me; I love this World
very well, I have been long acquainted with it, and I would not willingly part
from an old friend.


The World did never befriend any Body, besides thou art so old, as thy friend
the World is run away from thee.


But howsoever, I will stay in it as long as I can.


Daughter I am come to persuade you not to reject a good fortune, for Fortunes
favours are not proffered every day.


Nor are her favourites surer to continue in her favour long.


But if I should command you to receive the Arch-Princes addresses, and to
consent to be his wife, I hope you will not be less obedient to me than the
Lord Melancholy hath been to his Father.


If he to obey his Father forgot, or neglected his obedience to Heaven, you
must pardon me if I do not follow his precepts, not that I accuse him, for
perchance his Conscience hath acquitted him, and set him free, from fault, and
so from blame, but mine doth not acquit me; wherefore dear Mother, do not
persuade me against my Conscience, I have had misfortunes enough to trouble my
life, I shall not need to add the guilt of Conscience, and what can outward
Title do me good? what pleasure can I take, when that my Mind, or Soul, is
tortured with black guilt?


No, Heaven forbid I should persuade you against your Conscience; but how will
you avoid, or escape the Princes enforcement?


I have thought of a way, that best suits with my Condition and Disposition,
which is to take a Religious habit, and enter into a Religious Order; for
though I cannot vow Virginity, nor a single life, having a Husband, and been
used as a Wife, yet I can vow Chastity and retirement; and if I could be
permitted into an Nunnery, as perchance I cannot, yet I would not go into any
of them, for there is too much Company in ordinary Nunneryes, and I love
solitariness; wherefore I will live a kind of a Hermits life, only my Nurse and
I; and that-little Tower my Father built for pleasure, shall be my Cloister,
and before it is publicly known, I will send or go to the Fathers of the
Church, and acquaint them, and strait Incloyster my self, and there I shall be
safe; for the Prince dares not commit Sacrilege, for Gods and men would rise
against him if he did.


Nor I dare not oppose your holy design.


Dear Mother, speak not of it whilst I am in.


I shall not betray the trust of my Child.


Nan, have you saved the life of my Chair?


Yes Mistress, but I was forced to tell a lie for it.


God forgive thee Nan, for I do, and thank thee for my Chair; but my Father
doth so chide me, as he makes me half a weary of my life, and swears I have got
the Green-Sickness with sitting lasily on that Chair.


Truly Mistress I think you have a spice of it, for they that have the
Green-Sickness have Odd-Humours; for I know one that had it, and the greatest
pleasure she took in the World was to smell musty Bottels, and I knew another
that took the like to smell old Shoes, and I knew another that would eat the
Leather of old Shoes, and another that would eat Coals, and they would refuse
the best meat that could be eaten, to eat such like things; and the strangeness
is of that Disease, that every several person in that Disease, hath a several
Odd-Humour or Appetite, to several tastes and smells, and they are never quiet,
or pleased, but when they are eating, or smelling such meats, or scents, they
think of nothing else.


Faith Nan, I doubt then I have a spice of that Disease, for when I am a broad,
I long to be at home, to sit in my Chair.


Indeed all of that Disease, are like longing women with Child, and they will
be sick if they have not their longing, only those in the Green-Sickness, take
more delight in extravagant Appetites, or Humours, than women with Child
usually do.


Nay some Childing women are as extravagant, as those in the Green-Sickness:
for some long to eat Tar, and the like meats; and I heard of one woman who
coming from Market, wherein she had bought Butter, as she was going home she
followed a man with a Bald head, and it did appear to her to be so smooth and
flick, as she longed to clap on a pound of her Butter upon that Bald Crown, and
was sick until she had done so, and then was well; and some Childing women
long to give their Husbands boxes, or blows on the Ears, or Cheeks.


'Tis dangerous for Husbands to have their Childing wives apt to long, for fear
they should long to make them Cuckolds.


Faith women will long to make their Husbands Cuckolds whether they are with
Child or not.


But they dare not make known their longing, no more than you dare sit in your
Chair, for fear your Father should discover it.


I will take such times as wives do to Cuckold their Husbands, as in their
Husbands absence: so I will sit in my Chair when my Father is abroad, and you
shall be the spy to watch his coming home, then give me warning or notice
thereof.


So I shall be as the Bawd between the Chair and you.


Why Nan? a Bawd is one of the most thriving professions that is, and let me
tell thee, that Pimping and Bawding is in such esteem and respect in this age,
as great persons do not scorn to be of that profession, nay they will bawd and
pimp gratis rather than not be employed.


It seems then they take delight in the employment.


Oh yes, those that take delight in secrecy take delight in bawdery, the same
delight Adulterours take; for 'tis not so much out of love to each others
person, as to meet by stealth, and to have obscure entercourses, as to lay
their designs subtly, to make excuses readily, to meet privately; for all the
pleasure is in lying, designing, and abusing, and if it were not for the
delight to deeds of darkness, there would not be an Adultery committed in any
Age; but every one takes delight to act the part of a Mountebank, or Juggler, to
cousin, deceive, or delude.


But some take delight to act the Fool.


Oh that's a natural part to most of the World, they need no art to reach them^
but come Nan, lets go see if my Father be gone abroad.


But if your Father be abroad, your Mother will be at home.


She will be no hinderance, for my Mother will wink at my Extravagant follies,
and my Childish humours.


I wonder the Messenger is not returned from the Lady Perfection.


I hope your Highness doth not intend to marry her?


Why not? she is a virtuous Lady.


She is but my Sons leavings.


Virtue cannot be sullyed.


But Sir, pray consider the advantages that you will lose by refusing the
Emperors Daughter; besides, the Emperor will take it as an affront, and will
endeavour to revenge it with Fire and Sword, for certainly he will make a war
with you.


Why, if he should, I make no question but I shall be able to encounter him, at
least to resist him.


But now Sir you live in a happy peace, wherein all your Subjects grow rich,
and your Kingdom flourishes with plenty, and your Highness lives in pleasure
and magnificence, all which a War may bring to ruin; there is nothing got by
VVars Sir, the venturers are losers; wherefore good Sir consider what danger,
at least trouble, you will bring upon your self by this Marriage.


How comes it you staid so long?


I could no see the Lady.


Would no she be seen?


No Sir, but after a long stay the Lady her Mother came to me, to receive your
Highnesses Letter, and the Message your Highness sent by me, which when I had
delivered, she bid me present her humble duty to your Highness, and to pray you
to put her Daughter out of your thoughts, at least not to think of her for a
Wife, for she had taken a Religious Habit, and had put her self into a
Religious Order, wherein she would pray for your Highness as long as she lived.


Oh Fool that I was, that I did not prevent it.


Your Highness did not know she would enter into a Religious Habit and Order.


But I might have mistrusted it by her refusal, but I will endeavour to get her
out; perchance she hath not made her Vows yet.


And is she entered into a Religious Order? I am glad of it, for it will be
some ease, and rest unto my restless Soul, that she is safe and well secured.


My Lord, the Princess desires your Company, for she hath grumbling pains as if
she would fall in labour.


Have you seen the new Devote yet?


Yes, with much ado: for she will not be seen, unless to some particular
persons, or near friends.


And how doth she become her Religious Habit?


So handsomely, as she is far handsomer in her Peas habit, than when she was
dressed with all the Arts of Vanities.


What manner of Habit is it?


Somewhat like the Normetanes, but much more becoming.


Well, I will go to the Lady her Mother, and entreat her to let me go with her
to see her Daughter.


'Tis said that now the Lady Perfection is incloistered, that the Treaty goes
on betwixt the Arch-Prince and the Emperor.


What's the matter you run so hastily?


I am running to give the Arch-Prince notice, that his Niece is in labour, and
is so ill she is like to die.


We will not stay you shen.


It's said the Lady Perfection hath entered into a Religious Order, she is
happy, would I were so.


It is a question whether you would think your self so, if you were as she is.


I think the happiest life is to be a Devote.


Faith Mistress you wish to be a Devote, not so much out of a devotion, as for
a change in life, as many wish to be married out of a desire to alter their
course of life, and when they are married, they wish to be unmarried again, so
would you do if you were a Devote.


Oh no: for though those that are married wish to be unmarried, by reason
Marriage is the most troublesome, unquiet life that is, but a Devotes life is
the most peaceable and quiet life that is; so as there is as much difference in
the course of a Married life and an Incloistered life, as between Heaven and
Hell.


Then the most part of the World prefers Hell before Heaven, for more are
Married than are Incloistered.


Truly by the course of the World, and the action of men, one would think
there would be more Devils in Hell than Saints in Heaven.


You hear the news of the Princess delivery, and her Death.


Yes I heard she died as soon as delivered, but she hath left a Son and Heir to
her sorrowful Husband.


I do not believe her Husband is much troubled or grieved for her Death, as his
Father is.


Indeed I think the young Lord had no great affections for her.


No surely, for he loves the Lady he was first married to so well, as he could
spare no love for any other woman^


If that Lady had not entered into a Religious Order, he might have remarried
her, but now he cannot.


I believe that if the other Lady had known the Princess should have died so
soon, she would not have been so Religious as to have Incloistered her self
from the World, and to ha'bard up her liberty with Vows.


'Tis like when she hears of the Princesses Death she will repent the acts of
devotion.


Then Repentance is not always for acts of evil, but sometimes of good.


There is Repentance of all sorts and degrees, and there are more enter into
Religious Orders out of Discontent, than for Love to God.


That is an uncharitable opinion.


Nay 'tis not a bare Opinion, that may be proved, nor uncharitable to speak the
truth.


Oh Nan I am undone for ever.


As how Mistress?


Why by your neglect and carelessness; for your not watching my Fathers coming
home, to give me notice, my Father hath found my Chair: for I hearing him come,
run to hide away my Chair, he coming and seeing me scuttle about the room,
imagined I desired to hide something from him, for which he searches all my
Chamber over, at last he went and looked into the Cole-hole where I had flung
my Chair, and finding it, he carried it away in one hand, and led me a-long in
the other hand, and causing a fire to be made of the Chair, made me stand by to
see the Martyrdom, whereat I was so afflicted, as I lost my fight in tears,
which tears I let run on the fire, hoping to quench it out, but they were so
brind with grief, as they did rather augment the fury of the fire, than abate
the rage of the flame; so that which I thought would have been a preserver did
hasten the destruction.


Faith Mistress it is none of my fault, for your Mother sent me of an errand,
and whilst I was absent by your Mothers commands, it seemed your Father came
home.


This is an excuse.


You may believe it 'tis no excuse, but truth; for I that ventured the loss of
my Soul by telling a lie to save your Chair, would not neglect the watch, had
not I been commanded away.


I am of an opinion you were bribed to betray the life of my Chair, and bribes
are so powerful as they corrupt promises and vows, even the Soul its self;
though the Soul makes no use of bribes, yet it will venture to be damned for a
bribes sake.


Well Mistress, since a mistrust is all my reward, you shall tell the next lie
your self.


No prithee Nan let us be friends, for I shall never get a Servant that will so
readily tell lies for me as you do; wherefore let us shake hands and be
friends.


Well Mistress, let me tell you, that my hand and tongue is at your service,
the one to work, the other to lie for your service.


I thank you Nan, for many Servants will lie, but few will work.


The Lord Melancholy hath such a sober, sad Countenance, as I never saw any
young man have the like.


Indeed I never saw him smile in my life.


I asked a Gentleman that waits on him, whether his Lord did ever smile, he said
he never saw him smile since he parted from his first Lady.


Then he hath not smiled this nine years, for so long it is since he parted
from his first Lady.


If the siege last one year more, it will be as long a siege as the siege of
Troy.


Indeed the causes of either siege resembles each other, as both for the love
of fair Ladies; I know not whether the effect will prove alike, as whether it
will be the destruction of his heart, as the siege of Troy wa^ the destruction
of Troy.


But the Lord Melancholy is rather like Hellen than Menelaus, for he hath had
two wives, and the Lady Perfection is as Menelaus, for her Husband is taken
away from her, as his wife was from him; but leaving this siege let us return
to our own homes.


Madam, yesterday when you were pleased to speak with me, as now through this
Grate, you were pleased to tell me your Vows were so binding as they could not
be dissolved; wherefore I am not now come to examine, or persuade, nor to
trouble your Devotions, or to hinder your Meditations, but to take my last
leave, for I shall never see you more, at least not in this World.


Are you going to Travel?


I cannot say my body is going a far Journey, I know not what my Soul may do.


Shall not they go together?


No, Death will make a divorce, as the Law did betwixt you and I.


Are you resolved to dye?


Yes.


Why so?


To be at rest and peace: for know, that ever since I was last married, my life
hath been a Hell, my Mind was tortured with thoughts of discontent, and though
I am releast from what I did dislike, my mind is restless still for what it
would enjoy; this resolution is not new, it hath been long considered; for
since I cannot live with that I love better than life, i'll try whether the
passions of the Soul do with the Body dye, if so, Death will be happy, because
it hath no sense nor feeling.


How long have you been resolved of leaving life?


I have pondered of it ever since I was last Married, but was not resolved
until you entered into this Order.


Can I not persuade you to live?


Not unless you break your Vow.


That I may not do.


Nor can I persuade you, for I love your Constancy.


Will you grant me one request before you die?


Yes, any thing but what may hinder my dying.


Swear to me you will.


I swear by Heaven and Love I will.


Then the time you are resolved to dye, come hither and dye here, that I may
bear you Company, dying the same minute if I can that you do.


How?


Nay, you have sworn it, and if it be best for you, it will be so for me; for
when you are dead I shall possess those torments that you in life feel now, and
if you love me so well as you express you do, you will not desire to leave me
to endure that you cannot suffer.


'Tis fit you should live to be a President to the World.


Were I a President fit for the World to follow, yet the World would not
practice my precepts, it is too bad to follow what is good, and since my life
cannot better the World, and Death will ease my life of that which will trouble
and afflict it, I am resolved to dye. And in the grave will bear you Company.


I do accept of thy dear Company, Heaven so join our Souls they never may be
separated, and to morrow we will leave the World.


Let me advise you concerning the manner of our Deaths, get a Sword pointed
sharp at both ends, and when we are to dye put one end of the Sword through
this grate, and just when you set your heart to the end towards you, I will set
mine to the end towards me, and thrusting forward as to meet each other, the
several points will make several passages or wounds into our several or rather
our own united hearts, and so we dye just together.


I shall follow your advice, and be here to morrow at the time.

Which time will seem to me like as an Age,
Till that our Souls be fled forth from their Cage.

My Soul will fly your Soul to embrace,
And after Death may hope a resting place.

You here the match is concluded betwixt the Emperors Daughter and our Prince.


Yes, and I hear that the Lord Dorato was a great Instrument to help the match
forward.


Methinks they should need no other Instrument to forward the match than the
Princes interest.


'Tis true: but the Princes affection being placed upon another Lady, it was
hard first to draw off those affections, and then to place them anew; besides,
the Death of his Niece was some hinderance.


All great Princes do soon cast off all Funeral sadness: but the Lord Dorato
methinks takes the Death of his Daughter to heart.


'Tis a doubt whether he will continue in such great favour with the Prince,
now his Niece is dead.


There is no likelihood he should be in less favour since the Princess Death,
for it was the favour he had with the Princess that caused the match with his
Son; besides he hath left a Son, which the Prince no doubt will favour the
Grandfather the more, for the Childes sake.


I wonder whether the Lord Melancholy the Princesses Husband will marry again,
for he had ill fortune with his Wives.


Methinks he hath had good Fortune, for the Laws have quitted him of one, and
Death of the other; but that Husband hath ill fortune, that neither Law nor
Death will free him from.


Sweet, here's that will quit us of all trouble.


Indeed life is a trouble, and nothing is at rest but what lies in the grave.


Are you not afraid of the sight of a murthering Sword?


No more than you are afraid of the sight of the glorious Sun.


You seem to have a courage above you Sex.


My love is above Life, as far as my Courage is beyond Fear; I neither fear
Death, nor consider Life, but can embrace the one, and fling away the other for
Loves sake.


Then dear Wife, for so you are, my heart did never own another, I wish our
breaths and bloods might intermix together, and as Deaths Ceremonies might join
our Souls.


They are joined already by love, and Death's sufficient to bring them both
together, and our bloods 'tis like will run in trickling streams upon this
Sword, to meet and intermix.


These Buttons are like troublesome guests at Marriage Nuptials, but are you
ready Wife for our second Marriage?


I am now ready to go into the Bed of Earth.


Hold, and stain not this sacred places with murderers blood. Lady, is this the
Devotion profess, wickedly to murder your self?


Father, know I accounted self Death no wickedness, and I will venture on my
own belief.


But the Church hath power to absolve you now, if you desire personly to meet.


Yes, such power as the Laws had to dissolve our Marriage; but the Churches
absolving can no more acquit my Conscience from my Devoted Vow, than the Laws
could from my Marriage Vow.


Pray give us leave to plead.


Take it.


You have vowed Chastity, and a retired Incloistered life.


I have so.


Why, then marry this Lord again, and let him make the same Vow, and enter into
the same Cloister, and into the same Religious Order of Chastity, and being Man
and Wife you are but as one person, so that if you be constant and true to your
selves, you keep the Vow of Chastity; for what is more Chaste than lawful
Marriage, and Virtuous Man and Wife?


Husband, are you willing to make the Vow of Chastity, and to live an
Incloistered life?


I am all will to that Vow and life, for so I shall enjoy thy Soul and Body;
and good Father re-marry us, and then I will thank you for Life and Wife.


First you shall make your Vow, then take a Religious Habit, and then be
re-married, and go along with us and we will order you fixed for to enter into
this Religious Order of Chastity, and if you be both happy in life, as sure you
will, thank your Nurse, who hearing your cruel, and as I may say irreligious
design, informed us, and placing us within a Loby, we heard you, and saw you,
though you knew not that we did so, for you had barred the outward Door, but
being within we were ready to come forth and hinder you as we did.


Well Father, since you have hindered our Deaths, pray make me sit to enjoy
Life; my Heaven of Life, or Life of Heaven.


Come then.


Why do you weep Mistress?


Because my Father will have me marry.


Many young Maids weep because they cannot get Husbands, but few weep to enjoy
one.


I do not cry because I shall have a Husband, but because I shall have a Foot
to my Husband.


There are few wise Husbands, and fewer wise Men.


What difference is betwixt a wise Husband, and a wise Man.


Why a wise Husband is to rule and govern his Wife, well, but a wise Man is to
rule and govern himself, well, and there is more that can tell how to rule and
govern others than themselves, like as there may be good Kings and not good
Men, and good Men and not good Kings, or as there may be good Teachers as
Preachers, and not good practisers; so this Gentleman you are to marry may be a
wise Husband, although not a wise Man.


But he will be both a foolish Husband, and a foolish Man.


If he prove a foolish Husband you have no reason to cry, for then you will
have the more Liberty.


The more liberty to be a Fool you mean.


Indeed liberty to women makes them rather foolish than wise: for women know
not how to use liberty discreetly, for when they have liberty they run beyond
the bounds of discretion.


Faith if I marry this same Gentleman that my Father says I shall, I shall run
beyond the bounds of Matrimony.


That is to run into your Neighbours Bed.


Do you hear of the new Religious Order?


What new Religious Order?


Why the Order of Chastity in marriage.


That's a new Order indeed, never heard of before, at least not practised; but
this Order, if it continue, will make marriage as Religious in life as the
marriage of Saints.


Why the marriage of men and women is a type of the marriage of Saints.


But the type often commits Adultery, and for my part I would not be one of
that Religious Order.


No, for on my Conscience I believe you would disorder the Order.


But who hath brought up this foolish new Order?


The Lord Melancholy and the Lady Perfection, who are re-married, and have both
vowed Chastity in marriage, and an Incloistered life, and have taken a
Religious Habit.


The more unwise they, that will bind themselves so strictly.


So honestly.


I hate honesty that way, or that way of honesty.


You hate that way of honesty, because you love the ways of Adultery.


I come not to complain, nor reprove your Chaste wife for denying my Suit, nor
am I come only to give you joy of your new marriage, but your new Religious
Order of Chastity in marriage, which Order, I believe that few besides your
self will enter into.


Then few will be so happy Sir as we are.


Indeed happiness lives more in Cloisters than in Courts, or Cities, or private
families; but my Lord Dorato your Father here will want the comfort of your
Company, which should be a Partner with him in the Rule and Government of his
Family and Fortunes.


I have left him a Grand-Son Sir to be a comfort to him in my absence, and I
wish he may prove as obedient to him as I have done.


Faith Son the first time of your marriage, was without my knowledge or
consent, but howsoever now I wish you joy, and for your sake I will never cross
Matrimonial Love whilst I live, and I hope God will bless you both, so as that
you may beget a Religious Generation.


All the Children they beget and bring up must be of the Religious Orders.


If they will follow their Parents purities and precepts they will.


There may proceed from these two a great Generation, which may spread all over
the World, and be famous for Piety and Acts of Devotion.


I hope your Highnesses words are Prophecies of what is to come.


I wish they prove so; farewell, all happiness dwell with you both.


Long may your Highness live and flourish.


My blessing on you both.



