Come Tom will you go to a play?


No


Why?


Because there is so many words, and so little wit, as the words tire me more
than the wit delights me; and most commonly there is but one good part or
humour, and all the rest are forced in for to enterline that part, or humour;

Likewise not above one or two good Actors, the rest are as ill Actors as the
parts they Act, besides their best and principle part or humour is so redious,
that I hate at last what I liked at first, for many times a part is very good
to the third Act, but continued to the fifth is stark nought.


The truth is, that in some Plays the Poets runs so long in one humour, as he
runs himself out of breath.


Not only the Poet but the humour he writes of seems to be as broken-winded.


I have heard of a broken-winded Horse, but never heard of a broken-winded
Poet, nor of a broken-winded Play before.


I wonder why Poets will bind themselves, so as to make every humour they
write, or present, to run quite through their Play.


Bind say you? they rather give themselves line and liberty, nay they are so
far from binding, as for the most part they stretch the Line of a humour into
pieces.


Let me tell you, that if any man should write a Play wherein he should present
an humour in one Act, and should not continue it to the end: although it must
be stretched, as you say, to make it hold out, he would be condemned, and not
only accounted an ill Poet, but no Poet, for it would be accounted as ill as
wanting a Rhyme in a Copy of Verses, or a word too short, or too much in a
number, for which a Poet is condemned, and for a word that is not spelled
right, he is damned for ever.


Nay, he is only damned if he doth not write strictly to the Orthographie.


Scholars only damn Writers and Poets for Orthographie, but for the others,
they are damned by the generality: that is, not only all readers, but all that
are but hearers of the works.


The generality for the most part is not foolishly strict, or rigid as
particulars are.


Yes faith, they are led by one Bell-weather like a company of silly Sheep.


Well, if I were to write a Play, I would write the length of a humour
according to the strength of the humour and breadth of my wit. Let them judge
me and condemn as they would; for though some of the past, and present ages be
erroniously or maliciously foolish in such cases; yet the future Ages may be
more wise, and better natured as to applaud what the others have condemned.

But prithee Tom let us go.


No, I will not go for the reasons before mentioned, which is, they tire me
with their empty words, dull speeches, long parts, tedious Acts, ill Actors;
and the truth is, there's not enough variety in an old play to please me.


There is variety of that which is bad, as you have divided it, but it seems
you love youth and variety in plays, as you do in Mistresse^.


Plays delights A^sorous men as much as a Mistress doth.


Nay, faith more, for a man and his Mistress is soon out of breath in their
discourse, and then they know not what to say, and when they are at a
Non-pluss, they would be glad to be quit of each other, yet are ashamed to part
so soon, and are weary to stay with each other long, when a Play entertains
them with Love, and requires not their answers, nor forces their brains, nor
pumps their wits; for a Play doth rather fill them than empty them.


Faith most Plays doth rather fill the spectators with wind, than with
substance, with noise, than with news;


This Play that I would have you go to, is a new Play.


But is there news in the Play, that is (is there new wit, fancies, or new
Scenes) and not taken our of old stories, or old Plays newly translated.


I know not that, but this Play was writ by a Lady, who on my Conscience hath
neither Language, nor Learning, but what is native and natural.


A woman write a Play!

Out upon it; out upon it, for it cannot be good, besides you say she is a
Lady, which is the likelier to make the Play worse, a woman and a Lady to write
a Play; fie, fie.


Why may not a Lady write a good Play?


No, for a woman's wit is too weak and too conceived to write a Play.


But if a woman hath wit, or can write a good Play, what will you say then.


Why, I will say no body will believe it, for if it be good, they will think
she did not write it, or at least say she did not, besides the very being a
woman condemns it, were it never so excellent and care, for men will not allow
women to have wit, or we men to have reason, for if we allow them wit, we shall
lose our prehemency.


If you will not go Tom, farewell; for I will go set this Play, let it be
good, or bad.


Nay stay, I will go with thee, for I am contented to cast away so much time
for the sake of the sex. Although I have no saith of the Au^esses wit.


Many a reprobate hath been converted and brought ^repentance by hearing a good
Sermon, and who knows but that you may be converted from your erroneous
opinion; by seeing this Play, and brought to coconfesse that a Lady may have
wit.


NOble Spectators, you are come to see,
A Play, if good, perchance may clapped be;
And yet our Authoresse says that she hath heard,
Some plays, though good, hath not been so preferred;
As to be mounted up on high raised praise,
And to be Crowned with Garlands of fresh hayes:
But the contrary have been hissed off,
Out from our Stage with many a censuring scoff;
But afterwards there understanding cleared,
They gave the praise, what they before had jeered.
The same she says may to her Play befall,
And your erroneous censures may recall:
But all such Plays as take not at first sight,
But afterwards the viewers takes delight:
It seems there is more wit in such a Play,
Than can be understood in one whole day:
If for, she is well content for her wits sake,
From ignorance repulses for to take;
For she had rather want those understanding brains,
Than that her Play should want wits flowing veins.
Pray, Sir, do not force me to marry a child, before you know whether she will
prove virtuous, or discreet; when for the want of that knowledge, you may
endanger the honour of your Line and Posterity, with Cuckoldry and Bastardry.


Son, you must leave that to fortune.


A wise man, Sir, is to be the maker or spoiler of his own fortune.


Let me tell you Son, the wisest man that is, or ever was, may be deceived in
the choosing a wife, for a woman is more obscure than nature her self,
therefore you must trust to chance, for marriage is a Lottery, if you get a
prize, you may live quietly and happily.


But if I light of a blank, as a hundred to one, nay a thousand to one but I
shall, which is on a Fool or a Whore, her Follies or Adulteries, instead of a
praise, will found out my disgrace.


Come, Come, she is Rich, she is Rich.


Why Sir, gilded I ^o^ns are most visible.


'Tis better, Son, to have a rich whore than a poor whore, but I hope Heaven
hath made her Chaste, and her Father being an honourable, honest, and wise man,
will breed her virtuously, and I make no question but you will be happy with
her.


But Sir, pray consider the inequality of our ages, she being but a Child, and
I at mans Estate; by that time she is ready for the marriage bed: I shall be
ready for the grave, and youths sharp appetites, will never relish Age,
wherefore she will seek to please her palate else where.


Let me tell you, Son, should you marry a woman that were as many years older,
than she is younger than you; it were a greater hazard, for first old women are
more intemperate than young: and being older than the husband, they are apt to
be jealous, and being jealous, they grow malicious, and malice seeks revenge,
and revenge disgrace, therefore she would Cuckold you merely to disgrace you.


On the other side, those Women that are married young, Cuckholds there
Husbands fames dishonouring them by their ignorant follies, and Childish
indiscretions, as much as with Adultery. And I should as soon choose to be a
Cuckhold, as to be thought to be one: For my honour will suffer as much by the
one as the other, if not more.


Heaven bless the, Son, from jealousy, for thou art horrible afraid of being
a Cuckold.


Can you blame me, Sir, since to be a Cuckhold is to be despised, scorned,
laughed, and pointed at, as a Monster worse than nature ever made, and all the
Honour that my birth gave me and my education endued me, my virtue gained me,
my industry got me; fortune bestowed on me, and fame enthroned me for: may not
only be lost by my wives Adultery, but as I said by her indiscretion, which
makes me wonder, how any man that hath a Noble Soul, dares marry since all his
honour lies or lives in the light heels of his wife, which every little passion
is apt to kick away, wherefore good Sir, let me live a single life.


How Son, would you have me consent to extinguish the light of my Name, and to
pull out the root of my posterity.


Why Sir, it were better to lye in dark oblivion, than to have a false light to
devulge your disgrace; and you had better pull out the root, than to have a
branch of dishonour ingrafted therein:


All these Arguments against Marriage is because you would enjoy your
Mistresses with freedom; fearing you should be disturbed by a wife.


That needs not, for I observe, married Men takes as much liberty, if not more
than Batchellors; for Batchellors are afraid they should challenge a promise
of Marriage, and married Men are out of that danger.


Then that is the reason that Batchellors Court Married wives, and Married Men
Courts Maids; but howsoever Son, if all Men should be of your mind, there
would be no Marring nor giving in Marriage; but all must be in Common.


That were best Sir, for then there could be no Adultery committed, or Cuckolds
made.


For shame take courage, and be not a afraid of a Woman.


By Heaven Sir, I would sooner yield up my life to death, thau venture my
honour to a woman's management.


Well Son, I shall not force you with threats or commands to marry against
your will and good liking; but I hope Heaven will turn your mind towards
marriage, and sent thee a loving, virtuous and discreet wife.


Bright beauty, may I be Servant.


If I have any beauty, it was begot in your Eyes. And takes light from your
commendations.


You are Lady, the Star of your Sex.


No truly, I am but a Meteor that soon goes out.


Preethy Sir Timothy Compliment, and Lady Amorous, do not stand prating here,
but let us go a broad to some place to devert the time.


Dear Wagtail, whether shall we go?


Faith let us go to a Play.


Let's go to a Tavern.


What with Ladies!


Why, Ladies have been in Taverns before now.


It were as good to carry them to a Bawdy-house.


As good say you, faith now I think of it, better; it were the only place to
pass a way idle time. Come Ladies shall we go.


Whether?


To a Bawdy-house.


O sve! sve! Sir Humphrey Bold; how wantonly you talk?


But would you carry us in good earnest to a Bawdy-house?


Why, do you question it, when every house is a secret Bawdy-house. Na! Let me
tell you, there be many Right Worshipful, Nay, Right Honourable, and most
Noble Palaces made Bawdy-houses.


Some perchance that are old and ruinous, and the right owners out.


No, some that are new, large, and finely furnished; and the owners stately,
proud, scornful, and jeering, living therein.


They should take heed of jeering, least they be jeered, and of being
scornful, least they be scorned.


What say you Ladies, are you resolved.


No, No, we will not go with you to such places now; but I will carry you to a
young Lady whose Father is newly dead, and hath left her all his Estate; and
she is become a great heir.


Perchance Lady she will not receive our visit, if her Father be newly dead.


I perceive you are ignorant of Funeral customs, for widows, heirs, and
heiresses receives visits whilst the Corpse lies above ground: And they will
keep them so much the longer, to have so many more visitants: nay, sometimes
they will keep them so long, as there dissembling is perceived, or so long as
they stink above ground; for if they bury not the Corpse and set empty Coffins
for want of imbalming, their miserableness will stench up the Nostrils of their
vanity.


Nay by your savour Lady, there are some that are buried whilst they are
steaming hot.


Those are only such whose Executors, widows, or widowers, seares they may
revive again, and rather than that they should do so, they will bury them
alive.


You say rightly true, Sir Humphrey Bold.


Sweet beauties, let us go to see this Rich heiress.


Content.


But Ladies are you acquainted with her.


O no! But you may know that all women rather than want visits, they will go to
those they never saw, nor spoke to: but only hears of them; and where they
live, and I can direct the Coachman to this Ladies Lodging, wherefore let us
go.


I shall not deny to visit a Rich heiress.


I shall wait upon you Ladies, but --


Nay, never make buts, but let's go.


Pray let us call Sir Serious Dumb, to go along with us.


Faith Amorous you love his Company, because he can tell no tales.


Pray call him not, but let him alone: for I dare swear he is inventing of
some useless and foolish Art.


Is he so inventive say you, but if his inventions is useless, he invents in
vain.


Why may not a Dumb mans Inventions be as good as a blind, for the most
usefullest Arts were invented, as the learned saith, by one born blind.


Me thinks a dumb man should not have much wit, for by my troth one that is
dumb seems to me like a fool; nay, one that speaks but little: I cannot for
my life but condemn him, or her for an Ass.


He may be a fool, although he may chance to light on some inventions; for
Arts are oftner produced from chance than wit, but let us go and leave him.


Faith Sir Humphrey Bold, we must call him, or otherwise my friend Amorous will
be out of humour.


Doth she love silence so well.


No, no, it is that she loves secrecy so well.

In a minutes time is flown
From a Child, to Woman grown;
Some will smile, or laughing say;
This is but a foolish Play;
By Reason a Comedy, should of one days action be,
Let them laugh and so will I
At there great simplicity;
I as other Poets brings
Several Nations, Subjects, Kings
All to Act upon one stage,
So several times in one Age.

How do you know the Lord Singularity is such a gallant man? For he hath been
out of the Kingdom this 7. years; wherefore, you could have no acquaintance,
you being yet very young.


Although I have no acquaintance by sight, or experienced knowledge; yet by
report I have: for I remembered I heard my Father say, he was the honour of the
Age, the glory of our Nation; and a pattern for all mankind to take a sample
from, and that his person was answerable to his merits, for he said he was a
very handsome man, of a Masculine presence, a Courtly garb, and affable and
courteous behaviour; and that his wit was answerable ^ his merits, person, and
behaviour, as that he had a quick wit, a solid judgment, a ready tongue and a
smooth speech.


And did your Father proffer you to be his wife.


Yes, and I remember my father sighing said, he should have died in peace, and
his soul would have rested in quiet, if he had been pleased to have accepted of
me.


When did your Father proffer you.


When I was but a Child:


He is not married, and therefore he may chance to accept of you now, if you
were proffered.


That were but to be refused again, for I hear he is resolved never to marry,
and it will be a greater disgrace to be refused now I am grown to woman's
Estate, than when I was but a Child, besides my Father is dead, and my marring
can give him no content in the grave; unless his soul could view the world and
the several actions therein.


So, is his Father dead.


Yes, and I here that is the cause he cares not to return into his native
Country.


I have a friend that hath his picture.


Is it a he or a she friend.


A she friend.


Pray be so much my friend, as to get your friends consent to show me the
Picture.


Perchance I may get it to view it my self, but I shall never persuade her to
lend it you, jealousy will forbid her.


She hath no cause to fear me, for I am not one to make an Amorous Mrs. and I
have heard he will never marry.


That is all one; woman hath hopes as much as fears, or doubts what ever men
doth vow for, or against.


Pray send to her to lend it you, and then you may show it me.


I will try if she will trust me with it.


O Heaven, grant that the praise my Father gave this Lord whilst in the world
he lived, prove not as curses to me his Child, so grieve his soul with my
unhappy life.


Madam, now you are become a Mrs. of a Family, you must learn to entertain
visitants, and not be so bashful as you were wont to be, insomuch as you had
not confidence to look a stranger in the face, were they never so mean persons.


Alas Reformer, it is neither their birth, breeding, wealth, or title, that
puts me out of Countenance; for a poor Cobbler will put me as much out of
Countenance as a Prince; or a poor Semestress, as much as a great Lady.


What is it then?


Why there are unacustomated faces, and unacquainted humours.


By this reason, you may be as much out of countenance as an unaccustomed Dog,
or Cat, that you never saw before; or any other beast.


O no, for mankind is worse natured than boasts, and beasts better natured than
men; besides beasts looks not with censuring eyes, nor hears, or listens with
inquisitive cares, nor speaks with detracting tongues, nor gives false
judgment, or spiteful censures, or slandering reproaches, nor jeeres, nor
laughs at innocent or harmless Errors, nor makes every little mistake a crime.


Madam, there is a Coachfull of gallants alighted at the gate.


For heavens sake, say I have no desire to be seen.


No, say my Lady is full of grief and is not fit to receive visits.


Where is the Lady Bashful, pray Gentlewoman tell her we are come to kiss her
hands.

Will you do us the favour old Gentlewoman, as to let the Lady know we are
here.


If I am not so old as to be insensible, this is she.


Is this she, alas good Lady, she is not well, for surely she hath a sit of an
Ague upon her, she doth so shake; you should give her a Carduus-possit and put
her to bed.


Lady, are you sick.


She is sick indeed, if she be speechless.


Madam, pray pull up your spirits, and entertain this honourable Company.


Why is the defect in her spirits.


She is young and bashful. --


No she is angry, because we are strangers unknown unto her; and she takes it
for a rudeness that we are come to visit her, therefore let us be gone.


Let me tell you, it is mere shamefacedness.


I say no, for those that are angry will shake extremely, and turn as pale as
death.


Lady, take courage, and look upon us with a confident brow.


Lord, Madam I will you make your self ridiculous.


I cannot help it, for my thoughts are consumed in the fiery flame of my
blushes; and my words are smothered in the smoke of shame.


O! she speaks, she speaks a little.


Pray Madam leave her at this time, and if you honour her with your Company
again, she may chance to entertain you with some confidence.


Pray let me and Sir Humphrey Bold come and visit her once a day, if it be but
half an hour at a time, and we shall cure her I warrant thee.


I wish she were cured of this imperfection.


She must marry, she must marry, for there is no cure like a husband, for
husbands beget confidence, and their wives are brought a bed with impudence.


By your favour Sir Humphrey Bold, marriage must give way or place to courtship,
for there are some wives as simply bashful as Virgins; but when did you ever
see, or know, or hear of courtly lovers, or Amorous courtships, to be bashful:
Their eyes are as piercing as light, and twinckles as Stars, and their
countenance as confident as day; and the discourses is freer than wind.


And your embraces are wondrous kind.


In troth we women love you men but too well, that is the truth of it.


Pray Madam let us go, and not stay to anger this young Lady as we do.


Farewell friend, Sir Humphrey Bold and I will visit your Lady to morrow.


Pray what may I call your name.


My name is Reformer.


Good Mrs. Reformer, I am heartily glad to see you well.


I thank you Ladyship.


O in what a torment I have been in; holl is not like it.


Have you got the Picture?


Yes, but I have seen handsomet men in my opinion than this Picture doth
represent.


I perceive you have no judgment in the Original, nor skill in the Copy; for
this Picture is most naturally penselled, the Painter hath drawn it so lively.
That one may perceive his noble Soul to appear through his lovely, and lively
Countenance; do but observe it well, and you will see as much as I.


That is impossible, unless I had your heart, for though my skill of the Copy,
or shadow, may be as much as yours, yet my affections to the Original is less;
which makes my eyes not partial.


What will the owner take for that Picture?


She will not sell it at any rate:


I wish she would, for I would buy it at any price.


She prizes it as highly as you, loving him as much; or well (as you do.)


How know you that?


Because I know she hath given him proofs of her love, which I believe you
never did.


You mistake lust for love, ambition, for merit, I love not for the bodies
sake, but for the souls pure spirit.


I hear the Lord Singularity hath given the Turks a great defeat, he is both a
wise, prudent, and valiant man.


Methinkes our Nation should not suffer such a person as he, to hazard his life
in the service of other Countries.


O it is an honour to our Nation, to let the world know what gallant men it
breeds, besides our Nation is in peace with all the world; and he being active,
hates to live idly, and dully at home, although he have a great estate, and is
well beloved in his Country.


What command doth the Venetians give him?


He is a General, for he commands a great Army.


Is he married?


No, and it is reported he never will marry, but he loves Mistresses well,
which all Soldiers doth for the most part.


Then Italy is the best Country in the world for a soldier, there being the
greatest store and most variety of Curtezans, for many of the Italians are, as
many are in other Nations, rather Carpet-Knights, then fighting soldiers, they
have more skill in setting musical notes, than pitching a battle; in kissing a
Mistresses hand with a good grace, than shooting of a Cannon bullet with a
great courage; they can take better aim at a window, than of an enemy. And
though they often receive wounds, yet they are from fair Venus, not from
cruel Mars.


But Mars soldiers when they skirmish in loves duels, receives wounds as
often from fair Venus, as other men, and Italy hath as many gallant valiant
men, bred and born in her, as any other Nation; and there are as many
Carpet-Knights in other Nations, as in Italy; and if valiant, and gallant men
be endued with virtue, they are not the less to be esteemed; and as for
Courtesans, all Nations is stored as much as Italy, but they do not so openly
prefess it, as those in Italy doth.


For my part, I cannot think they are so good Soldiers as they were in Caesars
time.


That may be, for there is no such soldiers as Caesars soldiers were, no not
in the world; that is, there are no men so patient, obedienz, careful,
industrious, laborious, daring, adventurous, resolute, and active, in these
Wars, in this age, as the Romans were in Caesars time; and of all the
soldiers, Caesars soldiers were the best, and of all commanders Caesar
himself, yet those warriors was not less courtly to the feminine sex, than
these of this age; and if you did talk with an understanding Soldier, he would
tell you that Amors gave an edge to courage, and that it is a mark of a gallant
man, and a brave soldier to be an Amarato; and as for the Courtesans of Italy,
if there can be an honest act in a dishonest life, it is that the Courtesans in
Italy professes what they are; so that men are, not deceived by them, nor
betrayed into marriage; wherein other Nations men are cozened with counterfeit
modesty, and drawn into marriage by pretended chastity, and then dishonoured by
soul adultery, or shamed by marrying a private Courtesan, not knowing she was
so.


I perceive by thee, that Merchants loves a Mistress as well as a Soldier.


Surely by thy talk thou art ignorant of thy own profession, which is to trade,
and traffic into all Nations, and with all sorts; but yet, Merchants may be
Soldiers if they will, and Soldiers may be Merchants if they please; but the
truth is all men in the world are Merchants.


No, beggars are not.


But they are, for they traffic with prayers and praises for alms.


The best Merchants I know are Priests, for they trade into Heaven; and
traffic with Jove.


That makes them so poor, for heavens commodity are not saleable on earth.


Dear Nurse and Foster Father, grant to my desires and assist my designs.


What to let you wander about the world like a Vagabond, besides it is against
the modesty of your Sex.


Are holy Pilgrims Vagabonds, or is it immodest for the bodies of devout
souls to travel to the sacred Tomb to offer penetentiall tears.


Why, you are no Pilgrim, nor is your journey to a godly end.


My journey will be to an honest end, for though I am loves Pilgrim, yet I
shall travel to an honest heart; there to offer my pure affections.


To a deboist man, there to offer your Virginity.


Mistake me not, for though I love beyond a common rate, even to an extreme
degree, yet I am chastely honest, and so shall ever be; my grave shall witness
my constancy.


Beshrew your tongue wife for speaking so sharply to our young Lady, she was
left to our trust, care, and tender usage, and not to be snapped and quarrelled
with.


Yes, and you would betray your trust to her childish folly.


No that I would not, neither would I venture or yield up her life to loves
melancholy.


Come, Come husband, you humour her too much, and that will spoil her I am
sure.


Lord Husband! I can never have your company, for you are at all times writing,
or reading, or turning your Globes, or peaking thorough your Prospective
Glass, or repeating Verses, or speaking Speeches to your self.


Why wife, you may have my company at any time, Nay, never to be from me if you
please, for I am always at home.


'Tis true, your person is always at home, and fixed to one place, your Closet
as a dull dead statue to the side of a wall, but your mind and thoughts are
always abroad.


The truth is, my mind sometimes sends out my thoughts like Coy ducks, to
bring more understanding in.


You mistake Husband, for your thoughts are like vain, or rather like false
Scouts that deceives your understanding, imprisons your senses, and betrays
your life to a dull solitariness.


'Tis better to live a quiet solitary life, than a troublesome and an uneasy
life.


What is a man born for, but to serve his Country, side with his friends, and
to please the esseminate Sex.


You say right wife, and to serve his Country, is to find out such inventions
as is useful either in Peace or War; and to form, order and settle
Commonwealths by Denizing Laws, which none but studious brains e're did, or
can do. Tis true, practice doth polish beauty and adorn, but neither lays the
Foundation, nor brings the Materials, nor builds the walls thereof; and to side
with friends, is to defend Right and Truth with sound arguments and strong
proofs, from the tyrannical usurpation of false opinions, vain phantasines,
malicious satires, and flattering oratory, and to please the effeminate Sex,
is to praise their beauty, wit, virtue and good graces in soft Numbers, and
smooth Language, building up Pyramids of poetical praises, Printing their fame
thereon, by which they live to After-ages.


Prithee Husband mistake us not, for women cares not for wide mouthed fame; and
we take more delight to speak our selves whilst we live, than to be talked of
when we are dead, and to take our present pleasures, than to abstain our selves
for After-ages.


Well wife, what would you have me do?


Why, I would have you so sociable, as to sit and discourse with our friends
and acquaintance, and play the good fellow amongst them.


What need we to have any other friends than our selves; our studies, books and
thoughts.


Your studies, books and thoughts, are but dull acquaintance, melancholy
companions, and weak friends.


You do not wife consider their worth; for books are conversable, yet silent
acquaintance, and study, is a wise Counsellor; and kind friends, and poetical
thoughts are witty Companions, wherein other Societies and Companies are great
inconveniences, and oftimes produces evil effects, as Jealousy, Adultery,
Quarrels, Duels, and Death, besides slanders, back^itings and the like.


Truly Husband, you are strangely mistaken; for those Societies as I would have
you frequent, doth Sing, Dance, Rally, make Balls Masks, Plays, Feasts, and
the like, and also makes Frolics or Rubices, or Plays, at Questions and
Commands, Purposes or Ridles, and twenty such like Pastimes and fine sports
they have.


But surely Wife you would not like this kind of life, nor I neither;
especially if we were in one and the same Company; for perchance you may hear
wanton Songs sung, and see amorous glances, or rude or immodest Actions, and
when you dance, have a secret nip, and gentle gripe of the band silently to
declare their amorous affections; and when you are at Questions or Commands,
you will be commanded to kiss the men, or they you, which I shall not like,
neither should you; or if they are commanded to pull of your Garter, which no
chaste and modest woman will suffer, nor no gallant man, or honourable husband
will endure to stand by to see, and if you refuse, you disturb the rest of the
Company, and then the women falls out with you in their own defence, and the
men takes it as an affront, and disgrace, by reason none refuses but you; This
causes quarrels with Strangers, or quarrels betwixt our selves.


'Tis true, if the Company were not Persons of Quality which were civilly bred;
but there is no rude Actions, or immodest behaviours offered or seen amongst
them; Besides, if you do not like those sports, you may play at Cards or Dice
to pass away the time.


But Wife, let me examine you, have or do you frequent these Societies that you
speak so Knowingly, Learnedly and Affectionately of?


No otherwise Husband, but as I have heard, which reports makes me desire to be
acquainted with them.


Well, you shall, and I will bear you company, to be an Eye-witness how well
you behave your self, and how you profit thereby.


Pray Husband do, for it will divert you from your too serious studies, and
deep thoughts, which feeds upon the health of your body, which will shorten
your life; and I love you so well, as I would not have you dye, for this I
persuade you to, is for your good.


We will try how good it is.


How shall I keep your Journey secret, but that every body will know of it.


We will give out that such a deep melancholy have seized on her, since her
Fathers death, as she hath made a vow not to see any creature besides your self
for two years; As for me, that I have lived so solitary a life with my solitary
Master, this Ladies Father, that I have few or no acquaintance; besides, I will
pretend some business into some other parts of the Kingdom, and I having but a
little Estate, few will inquire after me.


So in the mean time I must live solitary, all alone, without, my Husband, or
Nurse-childe, which Child, Heaven knows, I love better, than if I had one
living of my own.


I am as fond of her, as you are, and Heaven knows, would most willingly
sacrifice my old life, could it do her any service.


But we endanger her life, by the consenting to this journey, for she that hath
been bred with tenderness and delicateness, can never endure the coldes and
heats, the dirt and dust that Travellers are subject to; Besides, to be
disturbed and broken of her sleep, and to have ill Lodging, or perhaps none at
all, and then to travel a foot like a Pilgrim: Her tender feet will never
endure the hard ground, nor her young legs never able to bear her body so long
a journey.


Tis true, this journey may very much incommode her, yet if she doth not go to
satisfy her mind, I cannot perceive any hopes of life, but do foresee her
certain death; for her mind is so restless, and her thoughts works so much upon
her body, as it begins to waste, for she is become lean and pale.


Well! Heaven bless you both, and prosper your journey, but pray let me hear
often from you, for I shall be in great frights and fears.


If we should write, it may chance to discover us, if our Letters should be
opened, wherefore you must have patience.


Reformer, I am little beholding to you.


Why Madam.


Why, you might have told a lye for me once in your life, for if you had not
spoke the truth by saying I was the Lady, they came to see; they would never
have guest I had been she, for they expected me to have been a free bold
Entertainer, as they were Visitors, which is, as I do perceive, to be rudely
familiar at first sight.


But to have told a lye, had been to commit a sin.


In my conscience tto please the effeminate Sex, is to praise their beauty,
wit, virtue and goa most pious and charitable act in helping the distressed;
Besides, you had not only helped a present distress, but released a whole life
out of misery; for as long as I live my thoughts will torment me: O! They wound
my very soul already, they will hinder my pious devotions; For when I pray, I
shall think more of my bashful behaviour, and the disgrace I have received
thereby, than of Heaven; Besides, they will starve me, not suffering the meat
to go down my throat, or else to choke me, causing it to go awry, or else they
will cause a Fever; for in my conscience I shall blush even in my sleep, if I
can sleep; For certainly I shall dream of my disgrace, which will be as bad as
a waking memory: O! that I had Opium, I would take it, that I might forget all
things; For as long as I have memory, I shall remember my simple behaviour, and
as for my Page, he shall go, I am resolved to turn him away.


Why madam?


Because he let them come in.


He could not help it, for they followed him at the heels, they they never
stayed for an answer from you, or to know whether you were within or no, and
there were a great many of them.


I think there was a Legion of them.


You speak as if they were a Legion of Angels.


Nay, they proved a Legion of Devils to me.


There was one that seemed to be a fine Gentleman, but he spake not a word.


They may be all what you will make them, or describe them, for I could make no
distinction whether they were men or women, or beasts nor heard no articulated
sound, only a humming noise.


They spake loud enough to have pierced your ears, if strength of noise could
have done it, but the Gentleman that did not speak, looked so earnestly at you,
as if he would have looked you thorough.


O that his eyes had that piercing faculty, for then perchance he might have
seen; I am not so simple as my behaviour made me appear.


I have lost 500. pounds since you went in with the Ladies.


500. Pounds in so short a time.


'Tis well I lost no more: But yet, that 500. pounds would have bought you a
new Coach, or Bed, or Silver Plate, or Cabinets, or Gowns, or fine
Flanders-laces, and now its gone, and we have no pleasure nor credit for it,
but it is no matter, I have health for it, therefore I will call to my Stewards
to bring me some more.


No, do not so, for after the rate you have lost, you will lose all your Estate
in short time.


Faith let it go, 'tis but begging or starving after it is gone, for I have no
trade to live by, unless you have a way to get a living, have you any.


No truly Husband, I am a shiftless creature.


Yes, but you may play the Whore, and I the Shark, so live by cozening and
cheating.


Heaven defend Husband.


Or perchance some will be so charitable to give us sucked bones from stinking
breaths, and rotten teeth, or greasy scraps from fowl hands; But go wife,
prithee bid my Steward send me 500. pounds more, or let it alone, I will run on
the score, and pay my losings at a lump.


No dear Husband, play no more.


How! not play any more say you, shall I break good Company with sitting out;
Besides, it is a question whether I have power to leave off, now I have once
begun; for Play is Witch-craft, it enchants temperance, prudence, patience,
reason and judgment, and it kicks away time, and bids him go as an old
bald-pated fellow as he is, also it chains the life with fears, cares and
griefs of losing to a pair of Cards and set of Dice.


For Heaven sake pity me! If you consider not your self.


Can you think a Husband considers his wife, when he forgets, or regards not
himself, when all love is self-love, for a man would have his Wife to be loving
and chaste for his honours sake, to be thrifty for his profit sake, to be
patient for quiet sake, to be cleanly, witty and beautiful for his pleasure
sake, and being thus, he loves her; For if she be false, unkind, prodigal,
froward sluttish, foolish, and ill-favoured, he hates her.


But if a Husband loves his wife, he will be careful to please her, prudent
for her, subsistence, industrious for her convenience, valiant to protect her,
and conversable to entertain her, and wise to direct and guide her.


To rule and govern her, you mean wife.


Yes, but a Husbands follies will be but corrupt Tutors, and ill Examples for a
wife to follow; wherefore dear Husband, play no more, but come amongst the
effeminate Society, you will find more pleasure at less charges.


Well wife, You shall persuade me for this time.


I thank you Husband.


My child, you were best sit and rest your self, you cannot chose but be very
weary, for we have travelled a great journey to day.


Truly I am as fresh, and my spirits are as lively, as if I had not trod a step
to day.


I perceive love can work miracles.


Are not you Father a weary?


It were a shame for me to be weary, when you are not; But my child, we must
change these Pilgrims weeds, when we are out of our own Country; as when we
are in Italy, otherwise we cannot pretend to stay in the Venetian Army, but
must travel as Pilgrims do to Jerusalem: But it were best we put our selves
into Beggars garments until we come into the Army, for fear we should be
stripped by Thieves; for I have heard, Thieves will strip Travellers, if their
cloths be not all rags.


'Tis true, and Thieves as I have heard, will rob Pilgrims soonest, finding
many good Pilladge, wherefore we will accoutre our selves like to ragged
Beggars.


Lord Madam! I hope you are not seriously troubled for being out of
Countenance.


Yes truly.


What? as to make you melancholy!


Yes, very melancholy, when I think I have made my self a scorn, and hath
endangered my reputation.


Your reputation! Heaven bless you, but your life is so innocent, harmless,
chaste, pure and sweet, and your actions so just and honest, as all the Devils
in Hell cannot endanger your reputation.


But spiteful tongues, which are worse than Devils, may hurt my reputation.


But spite cannot have any thing to say.


Spite will lye, rather than not speak, for envy is the mother to spite, and
slander is the Mid-wife.


Why, what can they say?


They will say I am guilty of some immodest act, or at least thoughts, or else
of some heinous and horrid crime, otherwise I could not be ashamed, or out of
countenance, if I were innocent.


They cannot say ill, or think ill, but if they could, and did, what are you
the worse, as long as you are innocent.


Yes truly, for I desire to live in a pure esteem, and an honourable respect
in every breast, and to have a good report spoke on me, since I deserve no
other.


There is an old saying, that opinion travels without a Passe-port, and they
that would have every ones good opinion, must live in every mans age: But I am
very confident, there is none lives or dyes without censures, or detraction;
even the Gods themselves, that made man, hath given man power and free will to
speak, at least to think what they will; That makes so many Athiests in
thought, and so many several factions by disputation, and since the Gods
cannot, or will not be free from censures, why should you trouble your self
with what others say, wherefore pray put off this indiscreet and troublesome
humour, for if you would not regard censure, you would be more confident.


I will do what I can to mend.


Child, you must beg of every one that comes by, otherwise we shall not seem
right Beggars.


If our necessities were according to our outward appearance, we were but in a
sad condition; for I shall never get any thing by begging, for I have neither
learned the tone, nor the Beggars phrase to more pity or charity.


Few Beggars move pity, they get more by importunity, than by their oratory,
or the givers charity.


Noble Gentlemen, pity the shiftless youth, and infirm old age that hath no
means to live, but what compassionate charity will bestow.


You are a young boy, and may get your living by learning to work.


But my Father being very old, is past working, and I am so young, as I have
not arrived to a learning degree of age, and by that time I have learned to get
my living, my Father may be starved for want of food.


Why, your Father may beg for himself whilst you learn to work.


My Father's feeble legs can never run after the flying speed of pitiless
hearts, nor can he stand so long to wait for conscience aims, nor knock so
hard to make devotion hear.


I perceive you have learned to beg well, though not to work, and because you
shall know my devotion is not deaf, there is something for your Father and you.


Nay, faith boy, thou shalt have some of the scraps of my charity to, there is
for thee.


Heaven bless you; and grant to you, all your good desires.


Honourable Lady, let the mouth of necessity suck the breast of your charity to
feed the hungry Beggars.


Away you rogue, a young boy and beg! You should be stripped, whipped, and set to
work.


Alas Madam, naked poverty is always under the lash of misery, which forces
us to work in the quarries of stony hearts, but we find the mineral so hard,
as we cannot get out enough to build up a livelihood.


Employ your selves upon some other work then.


Good Sir relieve a poor beggar.


Faith boy, I am so poor, as I want relief my self; yet of what I have, thou
shalt share with me; there is a penny of my two pence, which is all I have, and
Heaven do thee good with it.


I perceive poverty pities poverty, as feeling the like misery, where riches
is cruel, and hard-hearted, not knowing what want is.


I perceive wit can work upon every thing, and can form it self into what shape
it please, and thy wit plays the Beggar so well, as we needed not to have
stored our selves from our own Stocks, but have lived upon the Stocks of
others.


But if all Stocks were as insipid as the Ladies, we should have starved, if we
had not brought sap from our own home; But Father, I am weighed down with the
penny the poor Trades-man gave me.


Why, it is not so heavy.


It is so heavy, as it burdens my conscience, and I shall never be at ease,
not be able to travel any farther, until I have restored the penny to the giver
again.


How should we do that, for it is as hard and difficult to find out that man,
as to find out the first cause of effects.


Well, I will play the Philosopher, and search for him.


But if you should meet him, perchance you will not know he was he.


O yes, for his extraordinary charity made me take particular notice of him.


Most charitable and --


What boy, would thou have the other penny,


Most Noble Sir, I have received from a bountiful hand, a sum of money, and
since you were so charitable to divide the half of your store to me, so I
desire I may do the like to you.


No boy, keep it for thy self, and thy old Father; I have a Trade, and shall
get more.


Pray take it for luck-sake, otherwise I shall never thrive.


Faith I find boy, thou art not as most of the World are; the more riches they
get, the more covetous they grow.


Sir, pray take this.


What do you give me here, a piece of Gold?


Yes Sir.


That were extortion, to take a pound for a penny.


No, it is not extortion, since I can better space this pound now, than you
could your penny, when you gave it me; wherefore it is but justice,


Well, I will keep it for thee, and when you want it, come to me again, and you
shall have it: I live in the next street, at the sign of the Holy-lamb.


Pray make use of it, for I may chance never to see you more.


Faith Wife, with sipping of your Gossiping-cups, I am half drunk.


Lord Husband! There were some of the Ladies that drank twice as much as you
did, and were not drunk, and to prove they were not drunk, was that they talked
as much before they drunk, as after; For there was such a confusion of words,
as they could not understand each other, and they did no more, when they had
drunk a great quantity of Wine.


That was a sign they were drunk, that they talked less, but how chance that
you drank so little.


Truly, Wine is so nauseous to my taste, and so hateful to my nostrils, as I
was sick when the cup was brought to me.


I know not what it was to you, but to me it was pleasant, for your Ladies were
so gamesome, merry and kind, as they have fired me with amorous love ever
since.


Madam, the Lady Wagtail, and other Ladies, have sent to know if your Ladyship
were within, that they might come and wait upon you.


Faith Nan, thou art a pretty wench.


What Husband? Do you kiss my maid before my face.


Why not Wife, as well as one of your sociable Ladies in a frolic, as you
kiss me, I kiss Nan.


So, and when Nan kisses your Barber, he must kiss me.


Right, this is the kissing frolic, and then comes the stricking frolic,
for you strike Nan, Nan gently strikes me, and I justly beat you, and end the
frolics with a --


What? a man and his Wife dully alone together! Fie for shame.


Lawful love is the dullest and drouziest companion that is, for Wives are
never thought fair, nor Husbands witty.


Your Ladyship is learned in loves Societies.


Yes that I am, for I have observed, that if there be a matched company, every
man having a woman, their conversation is dull, every mans tongue whispering in
his Mistress ear, whilst the women are mute, listening to that which is
whispered unto them; but let there be but one man amongst a company of women,
and then their tongues runs races, striving with each other, which shall catch
that one man, as the only prize, when the weaker wits runs themselves strait
out of breath.


And must not one man run against them all.


O yes? and many times his wit beats them all.


Faith Lady? They must not be such strong winded wits as yours is, which is
able to beat a dozen Masculine wits out of the field.


You are pleased to give me a complement.


The merry God have mercy on you? What makes you so melancholy.


I am not well to day.


If you are troubled with melancholy vapours, arising from crude humours, you
must take as soon as you wake after your first sleep, a draught of
Wormwood-wine, then lye to sleep again, and then half an hour before you rise,
drink a draught of Jelly-broth, and after you have been up an hour and half,
eat a White-wine-caudle, then a little before a dinner, take a Toste and Sack,
and at your meals, two or three good glasses of Clarret-wine; as for your
Meats, you must eat those of light digestion, as Pheasant, Partridges, Cocks,
Snipes, Chickens, young Turkeys, Pea-chickens and the like; And in the
After-noon, about four or five a clock, you must take Naples-bisket dipped in
Ippocrass, which helps digestion much, and revives the spirits, and makes one
full of discourse, and not only to discourse, but to discourse wittily, and
makes one such good company, as invites acquaintance, and ties friendship.


Faith I will tell your Wife what you say.


That is fowl play, and not done like one of the Society, especially when my
Lady is not well.


What? Is she sick! I lay my life she hath eat too much Bran Sturgeon, or
Sammon without muskadine or Sack, or N^ats-tongues, Bakon and Anchoves,
Caveare, or Lobsters, without Rhenish-wines, or Oysters, or Sausages without
Clarret-wine, or hath she eaten Potatoe-pies without dates, Ringo-roots, Marrow
and Chestnuts, have you not? i saith confess.


No indeed.


Why? I hope you have not taken a surfeit of White-meats, those childish meats,
or with Water-grewel, Ponado, Barley-grevvel, those Hodge-podgely meats.


Neither.


Why, then you have over-heated your self with dancing or fretting and vexing
your self at your ill fortune at Cards; or your Tailor hath spoiled some Gown,
or your Coach-man was out of the way when you would go abroad; is it not so.


No.


Why? Then your Husband hath crossed some design, or hath angered you some other
way.


Faith Amorous, thou hast found it out! Sir Peaceable Studious you are to be
chidden to anger your Wife; wherefore tell us how you did anger her, when you
did anger her, and for what you did anger her.


Dear, sweet, sine, fair Ladies! be not so cruel to me, as to lay my Wives
indisposition to my charge.


But we will, and we will draw up an Accusation against you, unless you
confess, and ask pardon.


Will you accuse me without a Witness?


Yes, and condemn you too.


That were unjust! if Ladies could be unjust.


O Madam! we have a witness? her blushing is a sufficient witness to accuse
him; Besides, her melancholy silence will help to condemn him.


Pardon me Ladies, for when any of our Sex are offended, or angered, whether
they have cause or not, they will rail louder than Ioves thunder.


So will you in time.


Let us jumble her abroad; Come Madam! we will put you out of your dull humour.


No Madam? Pray excuse me to day; in truth I am not well.


No, let us let my Lady alone, but let us take her Husband, and tutor him


Ladies, give me leave to praise my self, and let my self, and let me tell you?
I am as apt a Scholar, as ever you met with, and as willing to learn.


Farewell Madam, we will order Sir P. Studious, and try what disposition he is
of, and how apt to be instructed.


Pray do Madam, he promises well.


Now we are come into the Army, how shall we demean our selves like poor
Beggars.


By no means, for though you beg well, yet you will never get what you come for
with begging, for there is an old saying, that although all charity is love,
yet all love is not charity.


It were the greatest charity in the World, for him to love me; for without his
love, I shall be more miserable than poverty can make me.


But poverty is so scorned and hated, that no person is accepted which she
presents; Nay, poverty is shunned more than the Plague.


Why? it is not infectious.


Yes faith, for the relieving of necessity, is the way to be impoverished.


But their rewards are the greater in Heaven.


'Tis true, but their Estates are less on earth.


But blessings are more to be desired than wealth.


Well? Heaven bless us, and send us such fortune, that our long journey may
prove successful, and not profitless, and because Heaven never gives
blessings, unless we use a prudent industry; you shall put your self into good
clothes, and I will mix my self with his followers and servants, and tell them,
as I may truly, that you are my Son, for no mans Son but mine you are, was so
importunate, as you would never let me rest, until I brought you to see the
Lord Singularity, and they will tell him, to let him know his fame is such, as
even young children adore him, taking a Pilgrimage to see him, and he out of a
vain-glory will desire to see you.


But what advantage shall I get by that.


Peace! here is the General.


The enemy is so beaten, as now they will give us some time to breath our
selves.


They are more out of breath than we are, but the States are generous enemies,
if they give them leave to fetch their wind, and gather strength again.


Father, stand you by, and let me speak.


From whence come thou boy?


From your native Country.


Came thou lately?


I am newly arrived.


Pray how is my Country, and Countrymen, live they still in happy peace, and
flourishing with plenty.


There is no noise of war, or fear of famine.


Pray Jove continue it.


It is likely so to continue, unless their pride and luxury be gets a factious
child, that is born with war, and fed with ruin.


Do you know what faction is?


There is no man that lives, and feels it not, the very thoughts are factious
in the mind, and in Rebellious passions arises warring against the soul.


Thou can not speak thus by experience boy, thou art too young, not yet a
mans Estate.


But children have thoughts, and said to have a rational soul, as much as those
that are grown up to men; but if souls grow as bodies doth, and thoughts
increases with their years, then may the wars within the mind be like to
School-boys quarrels, that falls out for a toy, and for a roy are friends.


Thou speak like a Tutor, what boyish thoughts so ever thou hast; but tell
me boy? what made thee travel so great a journey.


For to see you.


To see me boy!


Yes, to see you Sir; for the Trumpet of your praise did sound so loud, it
struck my ears, broke open my heart, and let desire forth, which restless grew
until I travelled hither.


I wish I had merits to equal thy weary steps, or means for to reward them:


Your presence hath sufficiently rewarded me.


Could I do thee my service boy?


A bounteous favour you might do me Sir?


What is that boy?


To let me serve you, Sir.


I should be ungrateful to refuse thee, chose thy place.


Your Page, Sir, if you please.


I accept of thee most willingly.


But Sir? may not this boy be a lying, cozening, flattering dissembling,
treacherous boy.


Why Captain, there is no man that keeps many servants, but some are liars, and
some treacherous, and all flatterers; and a Master receives as much injury
from each particular, as if they were joined in one.


I can bring none that will witness for my truth, or be bound for my honesty,
but my own words.


I desire none, boy, for thy tongue sounds so sweetly, and thy face looks so
honestly, as I cannot but take, and trust thee.


Heaven bless your Excellence, and fortune prosper you, for your bounty hath
been above my hopes, and equal to my wishes.


What is thy name?


Affectionata my Noble Lord.


Then follow me Affectionata.


Madam, there was a Gentleman gave me this Letter, to deliver to your Ladyships
hands.


A Letter I pray Reformer open it, and read it, for I will not receive Letters
privately.


The superscription is for the Right Honourable, the Lady Bashful; these
present.


MADAM, Since I have had the honour to see you, I have had the unhappiness to
think my self miserable, by reason I am deprived of speech, that should plead
my suit, but if an affectionate soul, chasle thoughts, lawful desires, and a
fervent heart can plead without speech, let me beg your favour to accept of me
for your servant; and what I want in Language, my industrious observance, and
diligent service shall supply; I am a Gentleman, my breeding hath been
according to my birth, and my Estate is sufficient to maintain me according to
both; As for your Estate, I consider it not, for were you so poor of fortunes
goods, as you had nothing to maintain you, but what your merit might challenge
out of every purse; yet if you were mine, I should esteem you richer than the
whole World, and I should love you, as Saints love Heaven, and adore you equal
to a Deity; for I saw so much sweetness of nature, nobleness of soul, purity
of thoughts, and innocence of life, thorough your Bashful countenance, as my
soul is wedded thereunto, and my mind so restless; therefore, that unless I may
have hopes to enjoy you for my Wife; I shall dye,

Your distracted Servant, SERIOUS DUMB.

Now Reformer, what say you to this Letter?


I say it is a good honest, hearty affectionate Letter, and upon my life, it is
the Gentleman I commended so; he that looked so seriously on you; and your
Ladyship may remember, I said he viewed you, as if he would have looked you
thorough, and you made answer, that you wished he could, that he might see you
were not so simple, as your behaviour made you appear, and now your wish is
absolved.


What counsel will you give me in this cause?


Why? write him a civil answer.


Why should I hold correspondence with any man, either by Letter, or any other
way, since I do not intend to marry.


Not marry?


No, not marry.


Why so?


Because I am now Mistress of my self, and fortunes, and have a free liberty;
and who that is free, if they be wise, will make themselves slaves, subjecting
themselves to another humour, unless they were fools, or mad, and knew not how
to chose the best and happiest life.


You will change this opinion, and marry, I dare swear.


Indeed I will not swear, but I think I shall not, for I love an easy,
peaceable and solitary life, which none enjoys but single persons; for in
marriage, the life is disturbed with noise and company, troublesome
employments, vexed with crosses, and restless with cares; Besides, I could not
endure to have Parteners to share of him, whom my affections had set a price
upon, or my merit, or beauty, or wealth, or virtue had bought.


So, I perceive you would be jealous, if you were married.


Perchance I might have reason, but to prevent all inconveniences, and
discontents, I will live a single life.


Do what likes you best, for I dare not persuade you any way, for fear my
advice should not prove to the best.


Now you are placed according to your desire, what will you command me to do?


Dear Foster Father, although I am loath to part from you, yet by reason I shall
suffer in my estate, I must entreat you to return home, for my Nurse your wife,
hath not skill to manage that fortune my Father left me; for she knows not how
to let Leases, to set Lands, to receive Rents, to repair Ruins, to disbursed
Charges, and to order those affairs as they should be ordered, which your
knowledge, industry and wisdom will dispose and order for my advantage.


But how if you be discovered.


Why, if I should, as I hope I shall not, yet the Lord Singularity is so noble
a person, as he will neither use me uncivily, not cruelly.


All that I fear is, if you should be discovered, he should use you too
civilly.


That were to use me rudely, which I am confident he will not do, and I am
confident that you do believe I will receive no more civility (if you call it
so) than what honour will allow and approve of.


But jealousy will creep into the most confident breasts sometimes, yet I dare
trust you, though I fear him.


I hope there is no cause to fear him, or doubt me, wherefore dear Father, let
us go and settle our affairs here, that you may return home to order those
there.


In truth wife, it is a great misfortune you should be sick this Term-time,
when the Society is so much increased, as it is become a little Common-wealth.


If there be so many, they may the better spare me.


'Tis true, they can spare your company, but how can you want their companies.


You shall be my Intelligencer of their pastimes.


That I will wife, but it will be but a dull recreation, only to hear a bare
relation.


As long as you partake of their present pleasures, and pleasant actions, what
need you take care for me.


Yes, but I must in Justice, for since you have cured me of a studious
Lethargy, I ought to do my endeavour to divert your melancholy; and there is
no such remedy as the Society; wherefore dear wife, fling off this melancholy
sickness, or sick melancholy, and go amongst them; for surely your sickness is
in your mind, not in your body.


What, do you cry Wife, who hath angered you?


Why you.


Who, I angered you I why I would not anger a woman, no, not my Wife for the
whole World, If I could possible avoid it, which I fear cannot be avoided, for
if I should please out of your Sex, I should be sure to displease another: --
But that is my comfort, it is not my fault; but dear Wife, how have I offended
you.


Why did you kiss my maid before my face.


Why did you persuade me.


Did I persuade you to kiss my maid.


No, but you did persuade me to be one of the Society and there is kissing, and
I thought it was as well to kiss your maid before your face, as a sociable Lady
before your face.


And why do you make love to the Ladies, since I suffer none to make love to
me.


No, for if you did, I would fling you to death, to be embraced in his cold
arms; Besides, those actions that are allowable and seemly, as manly in men,
are condemned in women, as immodest, and unbecoming, and dishonourable; but
talking to you, I shall miss of the pleasant sports, and therefore, if you will
go, come, the Coach is ready.


No, I will not go ^u.


Then I will go without you.


No, pray Husband go no more thither.


How! not to go? nor to go no more, would you desire me from that which you
persuaded me to; Nay, so much as I could never be quiet, disturbing my harmless
studies, and happy mind, crossing my pleasing thoughts with complaining words,
but I perceive you grow jealous, and now you are acquainted, you have no more
use of me, but would be glad to quit my company, that you may be more free
abroad.


No Husband, truly I will never go abroad, but will inancor my self in my own
house, so you will stay at home, and be as you were before, for I see my own
follies, and am ashamed of my self, that you should prove me such a fool.


Do you think me so wise and temperate a man, as I can on a sudden quit vain
pleasures, and lawful follies.


Yes, or else you have studied to little purpose.


Well, for this day I will stay at home, and for the futuretime I will
consider.


This boy that came but the other day, hath got more of my Lords affection,
than we that have served him this many years.


New-comers are always more favoured than old waiters; for Masters regards old
Servants no more, than the Imagery in an old suit of Hanging, which are grown
threed-bare with time, and out of fashion with change; Besides, new Servants
are more industrious and diligent than old; but when he hath been here a little
while, he will be as lazy as the rest, and then he will be as we are.


I perceive my Lord delights to hear him talk, for he will listen very a
tentively to him, but when we offer to speak, he bids us to be silent.


I wonder he should, for when we speak, it is with gravity, and our discourse
is sententious, but his is mere squibs.


Gentlemen, my Lord would have one of you to come to him.


Why, I thought you could supply all our places, for when you are with him, he
seems to have no use of us.


It shall not be for want of will, but ability, if I do not serve him in every
honest office.


So you will make some of us knaves.


I cannot make you knaves, unless you be willing to be knaves your selves.


What, do you call me knave?


I do not call you so.


Well, I will be revenged, if I live.


Madam, I have inquired what this Sir Serious Dumb is, and 'tis said he is one
of the finest Gentlemen in this Kingdom, and that his valour hath been proved
in the wars, and that he is one that is very active and dexterous in all manly
exercises, as riding, fencing, vaulting, swimming, and the like, Also that he
is full of inventions, and a rare Poet, and that he hath a great Estate, only
that he is dumb, and hath been so this twelve years and upwards.


Reformer. What makes you so industrious to inquire after him, surely thou art
in love within.


In my conscience I liked him very well, when he was to see you.


The truth is, he cannot weary you with words, nor anger you in his discourse,
but pray do not inquire after him, nor speak of him; for people will think I
have some design of marriage.


I shall obey you, Madam.


Affectionata, Thou art one of the diligent'st boys that had.


How can I be otherwise, Sir, since you are the Governor of my soul, that
commands the Fort of my passion, and the Castle of my imaginations, which are
the heart, and the head.


Do you love me so much?


So well my Lord, as you are the archetectour of my mind, the foundation of my
thoughts, and the gates of my memories, for your will is the form, your
happiness the level, and your actions the treasury.


Thy wit delights me more, than thy flattery persuades: for I cannot believe a
boy can love so much; Besides, you have not served me so long, as to beget
love.


I have loved you from my infancy, for as I sucked life from my Nurses breast,
so did I Love from fames, drawing your praises forth, as I did milk, which
nourished my affections.


I shall strive; boy, to require thy love.


To requite, is to return love for love.


By Heaven? I love thee, as a Father loves a son.


Then I am blessed,


What is this boy that our General is so taken with.


A poor Begger-boy!


Can a poor Begger-boy merit his affections?


He is a pretty boy, and waits very diligently.


So doth other boys, as well as he, but I believe he is a young Pimp, and
carries, and conveys Love-letters.


Like enough to, for boys are strangely crafty in those employments, and so
industrious, as they will let no times nor opportunities slip them, but they
will find ways to deliver their Letters and messages.


Sir, I dare not direct you to my Lady, as you desire me in this Note, and if I
should tell her, here is a Gentleman that desired to visit her, she would
refuse your visit.


I will direct you to the room wherein my Lady is, but I must not be seen, nor
confess I showed you the way.


Come Affectionata, sit down and entertain me with thy sweet discourse, which
makes all other company troublesome, and tedious to me, thine only doth delight
me.


My Noble Lord? I wish the plat-form of my brain were a Garden of wit, and then
perchance my tongue might present your Excellencies with a Posy of flowery
Rhethorick, but my poor brain is barren, wanting


Thou hast an eloquent tongue, (and a gentle soul.)


My Noble Lord, I have hardly learned my native words, much less the eloquence
of Language, and as for the souls of all mankind, they are like Commonwealths,
where the several virtues, and good graces are the Citizens therein, and the
natural subjects thereof; but vices and follies, as the thievish Borderers, and
Neighbour-enemies, which makes inroads, factions, mutinies, intrudes and usurps
Authority, and if the follies be more than the good graces, and the vices too
strong for the virtues, the Monarchy of a good life falls to ruin, also it is
endangered by Civil-wars amongst the passions.


What passions indangers it most?


Anger, malice, and despair.


Were you never angry?


I am of too melancholy a nature, to be very angry.


Why? are melancholy persons never angry?


Very seldom, my Lord, for those that are naturally melancholy, doth rather
grieve, than fret, they sooner wast into sighs, than fly about with fury; more
tears flows thorough their eyes, than words pass thorough their lips.


Why should you be melancholy?


Alas, nature hath made me so; Besides, I find there is not much reason to joy,
for what we love, perchance it loves not us, and if it doth, we cannot keep it
long, for pleasures passes like a dream; when pains doth stay, as if eternal
were.


Thou art composed with such harmony, as thy discourse is as delightful
music, wherein the soul takes pleasure.


Madam, now the Gentleman is here, you must use him civilly, and not strive to
run away from him, wherefore pray turn, and entertain him.


Pray speak to him, Madam, and not stand trembling, as if you were like to
fall.


My spirits is seized on by my bashful and innocent fears, insomuch, as they
have not strength to support my body without trembling.


Sweet Madam, try not speak to him?


Honourable Sir? give me leave to tell you, that my bashfullness doth smother
the senses and reason in my brain, and chokes the words in my throat I should
utter, but pray do not think it proceeds from crimes, but an imperfection of
nature, which I have strove against, but cannot as yet rectify

Madam,

He hath writ here, that had his tongue liberty to speak, all that he could
say, would be so far below, and inferior to what might be said in your praise,
as he should not adventure to presume to speak.


I will presume to break my brain, but I will invent some ways to be rid of his
company.


What makes thee look so sad, my boy?


To see you sit so melancholy.


Clear up thy countenance, for its not a deadly melancholy, though it is a
troublesome one.


May I be so bold to ask the cause of it.


The cause is, a cruel Mistress.


Have you a Mistress, and can she be cruel?


O! Women are Tyrants, they daw us on to love, and then denies our suits.


Will not you think me rude, If I should question you?


No, for thy questions delights me more, than my Mistress denials grieves me.


Then give me leave to ask you, whether your suit be just?


Just, to a Lovers desires.


What is your desire?


To lye with her.


After you have married her?


Marry her say thou, I had rather be banished from that Sex for ever, than
marry one, and yet I love them well.


Why have you such an adversion to marriage, being lawful and honest.


Because I am afraid to be a Cuckold!


Do you think there is no chaste women?


Faith boy, I believe very few, and those that are men, knows not where to find
them out, for all that are not married, professes chastity, speaks soberly, and
looks modestly, but when they are martyed, they are more wild than Bachalins,
far worse than Satyrs, making their Husbands horns far greater than a Stags,
having more branches sprouts thereon.


And doth he never cast those horns?


Yes, if he be a Widower, he casts his horns, only the marks remains, otherwise
he bears them to his grave.


But put the case you did know a woman that was chaste; would not you marry
her?


That is a question not to be resolved, for no man can be resolved, whether a
womam can be chaste or not.


Why do you sigh, my boy?


Because all women are false, or thought to be so, that wise men dares not
trust them.


But they are fools, that will not try, and make use of them, if they can have
them; wherefore I will go, and try my Mistress once again.


What a noise they make below, they will disturb my Husbands study; go and tell
those of my Servants, that I will turn them away for their carelessness, as that
they cannot place, set, or hold things sure, but let them fall to make such a
noise.


I shall.


It shall be my study how to order my house without noise, wherefore all my
Servants shall be dumb, although not deaf, and I will take none, but such as
have corns on their feet, that they may tread gently, and all my
Houshold-vessel shall be of wood, for wood makes not such a noise when it
chance to fall, or is hit against a wall, as metal doth, which rings like
bells, when it is but touched, neither will I have Houshold-vessels of Earth,
for earthen-pots, pans and the like; when they fall and break, sounds as if a
stonewall fell.


On my soul Gentlemen, the boy is an honest boy, and no ways guilty of this
you tax him for.


Pardon us, my Lord, for giving your Excellence notice that the States are
jealous of him for a Spy, but we do not any ways accuse him.


Will the States examine him, say you?


So we hear, my Lord.


Well Gentlemen, pray leave me for this time, and I will take care the boy
shall be forth-coming, whenever the State shall require him.


Your Lordships humble Servants --


A Spy, it cannot be, for he is neither covetous, nor malicious, revengeful,
nor irreligious, but I will try him.


Mrs. Reformer, pray tell me who that handsome Gentleman is, which follows my
Lady about?


He is one that is Noble, and Rich, and is in love with my Lady.


Truly it is the strangest way of wooing, that ever was, for my Lady goes
blushing out of one room into another, and he follows her at the heels: In my
conscience my Lady is ashamed to sit down, or to bid him leave her company, and
surely they must needs be both very weary of walking, but sure he will leave
her, when it is time to go to bed.


It is to be hoped he will.


Madam, you will tire your self and the Gentleman, with walking about your
house, wherefore pray sit down.


What! To have him gaze upon my face.


Why, your face is a handsome face, and the owner of it is honest, wherefore
you need not be ashamed, but pray rest your self. --


Pray persuade him to leave me, and then I will.


Sir, my Lady entreats you to leave her to her self.


He writes he cannot leave you, for if his body should depart, his soul will
remain still with you.


That will not put me out of countenance, because I shall not be sensible of
its presence, wherefore I am content he should leave his soul, so that he will
take his body away.


He writes, that if you will give him leave once a day to see you, that he will
depart, and that he will not disturb your thoughts, he will only wait upon your
person for the time he lives, he cannot keep himself long from you.


But I would be alone.


But if he will follow you, you must endure that with patience, you cannot
avoid.


You see he is so civil, as he is unwilling to displease you.


Rather than I will be troubled thus; I will go to some other parts of the
World.


In my conscience, Madam, he will follow you, wheresoever you go.


But I will have him shut out of my house.


Then he will lye at your gates, and so all the Town will take notice of it.


Why so, they will howsoever, by his often visits.


But not so public.


Affectionata. Thou must carry a Letter from me, to my Mistress.


You will not marry her, you say.


No.


Then pardon me, my Lord, for though I would assist your honest love by any
service I can do, yet I shall never be so base an Instrument, as to produce a
crime.


Come, come, thou shalt carry it, and I will give thee 500. pounds for thy
service.


Excuse me, my Lord.


I will give thee a thousand pounds.


I shall not take it, my Lord.


I will give thee five thousand, nay ten thousand pounds.


I am not covetous, my Lord.


I will make thee Master of my whole Estate, for without the assistance, I
cannot enjoy my Mistress, by reason she will trust none with our Loves, but
thee.


Could you make me Master of the whole World, it could not tempt me to do an
action base, for though I am poor, I am honest, and so honest, as I cannot be
corrupted, or bribed there-from.


You said you loved me?


Heaven knows I do above my life, and would do you any service that honour did
allow of.


You are more scrupulous than wise.


There is an old saying, my Lord, that to be wise, is to be honest.


Where is your Lady?


In her Chamber, Sir.


Pray her to come to me?


Yes Sir.


Lord, Lord! What a creature my Master is become; since he fell into his musing
again, he looks like a melancholy Ghost, that walks in the shades of
Moon-shine, or if there be no Ghost, such as we fancy, just such a one seems
her, when a week since, he was as fine a Gentleman as one should see amongst a
thousand.


That was because he kissed you, Nan.


Faith it was but a dull clownish part, to meet a Maid that is not
ill-favoured, and not make much of her, who perchance have watched to meet him,
for which he might have clapped her on the cheek, or have chucked her under the
chin, or have kissed her, but to do or say nothing, but bid me call my Lady,
was such a churlish part? Besides, it seemed neither manly, gallantly, nor
civilly.


But it showed him temperate and wise, not minding such frivilous and
troublesome creatures as women are.


Prithee, it shows him to be a miserable, proud, dull fool.


Peace, some body will hear you, and then you will be turned away.


I care not, for it they will not turn me away, I will turn my self away, and
seek another service, for I hate to live in the house with a Stoic.


By your face, Sir, there seems a trouble in your mind, and I am restless until
I know your griefs.


It is a secret I dare not trust the air with!


I shall be more secret than the air, for the air is apt to divulge by
retorting Ecohes back, but I shall be as silent as the Grave.


But you may be tortured to confess the truth.


But I will not confess the truth, if the confession may any ways hurt, or
disadvantage you; for though I will not belie truth by speaking falsely, yet I
will conceal a truth, rather than betray a friend. Especially, my Lord and
Master: But howsoever, since your trouble is of such concern, I shall not with
to know it, for though I dare trust my self, yet perchance you dare not trust
me, but if my honest fidelity can serve you any ways, you may employ it, and
if it be to keep a secret, all the torment that nature hath made, or art
invented, shall never draw it from me.


Then let me tell thee, that to conceal it, would damn thy soul.


Heaven bless me! But sure, my Lord, you cannot be guilty of such sins, that
those that doth but barely hear, or know them, shall be damned.


But to conceal them, is to be an Actor.


For Heaven sake then keep them close from me, if either they be base or
wicked, for though love prompt me to inquire, hoping to give you ease in
bearing part of the burden, yet Heaven knows, I thought my love so honourable
placed on such a worthy person, and guiltless soul, as I might love and serve
without a scandal, or a deadly sin.


Come, you shall know it.


I'll rather stop my ears with death.


Go, thou art a false boy.


How false a boy howsoever you think me, I have an honest soul and heart that
is ready to serve you in any honest way, but since I am deceived, and cozened
into love by false reports, finding the best of man-kind basely wicked, and all
the World so bad, that praise nothing good, and strives to poison virtue, I
will inancor my self, and live on Antidotes of prayers, for fear of the
infection.


And I will not you pray for me?


I cannot chose, my Lord, for gratitude enforces me; First, because I have
loved you, next, because I have served you; and give me leave to kiss your
hand, and then there drop some tears at my departure.


Rise, you must not go away until you have cleared your self from being a spy.


I fear no accusations,



