The Lady Natures Daughters are the only Ladies that are admired, praised,
adored, worshipped, and sued to; all other women are despised.


We may go into a Nunnery; for we shall never get Servants, nor Husbands, as
long as they live.


Why there are but three of them, and three women cannot serve and content all
the men in the World.


No, but they may discontent all the men so much, as to make them all to be
Male-contented Lovers, who will reject all, because they cannot have what they
desire.


Let us make a Faction against them.


Alas what Faction against them, can hurt and destroy Love, Wit, and Beauty?


Jealousy will weaken Love, Dispraise will disgrace Wit, and Beauty, Time will
soon bring that to decay.


But Jealousy cannot weaken true and virtuous Love, nor Dispraise cannot
disgrace pure Wit, nor Time cannot decay the Beauty of the mind; wherefore all
the faction you can make against them, will do them no hurt; besides, you will
be condemned by all the Masculine Sex, if not punished with infamy, for your
treachery; and since you cannot do them harm, your best way will be to imitate
them for your own good.


So we shall be laughed at, and stared on as Monkeys, and scorned; forasmuch as
we offer at that which is beyond our abilities, and whatsoever is forced, and
constrained, appears ridiculous.


Come let us leave speaking of them, and thinking of them, if we can.


Surely Wife you do not love me, you are not any way kind to me.


True Love Husband, is not so fond as serviceable.


But true Love will express it self sometimes: for if you did truly Love me,
you would hang about my Neck, as if you meant to dwell there.


If I thought my kindness might not Surfeit your affection, I would hang about
your Neck, as the Earth to the Center, and as you move should bear me still
about you; but I am afraid if over fond, you should be weary of me, and account
me a trouble, and I had rather starve all my delights, than make you loath my
Company.


This is but an excuse Wife.


Why are you Jealous, that you think my words speak not my thoughts? have I
behaved my self so indiscreetly, or have my actions been so light, as you
believe I shall be wanton?


No, I do not fear your Virtue.


Do you fear my Indiscretion?


I hope you will give me no cause to fear, although Husbands are oftner
dishonoured by their Wives Indiscretions, than their Inconstant affections.


Pray be confident, that I shall have a greater care of your Honour, than of my
own Life.


The Lady Natures three Daughters, namely Wit, Beauty, and Love, are the
sweetest, and most Virtuous Ladies in the World.


I have heard so much of their fame, as I have a great desire to see them.


You may see the Lady Wit, for she doth discourse often in public; but for
the other two Sisters, they are somewhat more retired.


How shall we know the time, that the Lady Wit discourses in public?


I am now going to see if I can get a place, where I may


I will go with you, if you will give me leave.


With all my Heart.


My Noble Lord, I am a Gentleman, one that is ruined by Fortunes spite, and
not by my own Carelessness, Vanity, Luxury, or Prodigality; for my Poverty is
honest: but though my Poverty hath an honest face, yet it is ashamed to appear
in the open sight of public knowledge, which makes me whisper my wants to your
Lordships private Ear.


Sir, if your necessities can conceal themselves, they shall never be divulged
by me; and what I can honestly give you out of my Estate, and not very
imprudently from my self, I shall freely, and secretly, distribute to you, and
such as are in your condition.


Your Lordships Servant.


The mind is the best Tutor, and ought to instruct the Senses how to choose;
for the Senses are but as the working Labourers, to bring Lifes materials in;
but O my Senses have betrayed my mind, in bringing through my Ears, and Eyes,
Beauty, and Wit, which like as creeping Serpents, got passage to my heart, and
winding round about with flattering embraces, yet sting the peace, and quiet of
my mind, raising therein blisters of discontent, causing an anguish of restless
thoughts, which work, and beat like pulsive pa^n.

But O had I been born both Deaf and Blind,
Then might I escape this Hell tormenting mind;
His Wit like various Music pierced my Ear,
Some being solemn, and some pleasant were
And when he spake, his person did appear
Like to the Sun, when no dark Clouds were near;
Fame of his valour, like a trumpet sound,
Through Ears from Heart, unto the Eyes rebound;
And then his person, like Mars did appear,
Yet so, as when fair Venus Queen was near.
O Love forbear, use not this cruelty,
Either bind him, or give me liberty.

What are you all alone sweet Mistress?


No Sir, I have the Company of thoughts.


Those are Melancholy Companions.


Indeed mine are so at this time; yet thoughts with thoughts may discourse
wittily, and converse pleasantly together, without articulate words.


Certainly your thoughts must needs be pleasant, your words are so witty.


No truly, for my thoughts lie in my brain like a Chaos in a confused heap, and
my brain being young, hath not enough natural heat to digest them into a
Methodical order; neither hath Time cookt them ready for the Mind to dish out,
or the Tongue to carry to the Ears of the hearers.


The oftner I hear, and see you, the more I wonder at you.


Why, I hope Sir I am no Monster?


No, for you seem to me something divine.


Then you should rather admire me: for Admiration proceeds from things
excellent, Wonder from things strange and unusual.


So you are strange, and unusual: for things divine are not common; and
certainly you are a thing illuminated beyond Natures Art, and are the only
delight of Mankind.


Men take no worldly delight in Celestial Creatures, but with Earthly;
wherefore the most refined and illuminated, is oftenest rejected.


No Lady, they are not rejected, but as Angels, they will not reside with us.


Sir, for fear I should lose the Angelical opinion you have of me, I will
depart soon as Angels do.


Come, will you go to hear the Lady Wit discourse?


Not I.


Will you go?


I will not go to hear a prating preaching woman.


O that all the Masculine Sex would say as much.


Let us go to learn Wit.


I had rather be a Dunce all my Life.


So had I, if I must have none but a Woman instructor.


Indeed women should learn, not teach.


It's a sign Men want Wit, when they go to hear a Woman preach.


But let us go, if it be but to censure; for an hundred to one, but she will
say something which may be contradicted.


Then let us agree to be her contradictors: for whatsoever she saith we will
confute.


Nay by your favour, that you cannot do; for though you may contradict any
argument, yet not confute it: for though Envy and Spite have bred Sophistry,
yet Envy and Spite cannot confute the Truth.


Well, let us go howsoever, if it be but to see, and be seen of those men as
will be there to hear her.


Content.


Great Fortune, I at this time do implore,
That thou wilt open every hearing door,
Which are the Ears: let not my Wit be lost,
For want of bearing, nor my words be crossed,
Nor yet destructed by a busling noise,
Or gazing, or observing some light toys:
But let their Ears be sixth, as if their sight
Did view my words, till on their Ears they light.
Noble and Right Honourable,

I shall take my discourse at this time out of Ignorance, which discourse, I
shall divide into Five Parts, the Gods, Fates, Nature, the World, and Man; for
although Ignorance be obscure, and hard to be discovered, yet it is printed in
a general Language, being spread and communicated over all the World. I begin
with the First, and prime Creature, Ignorant Man. Man takes himself to be the
most knowing Creature, for which he hath placed himself next to the Gods; yet
Man is ignorant: for what Man is, or ever was created, that knows what the Gods
are, or how many there are? Or what power they have, or where they reside? What
Man did ever know the Mansions of Glory, the Bowers of bliss, or the Fields of
pleasure? What Man ever knew whether the Gods were Eternal, or bred out of
infinite, or rule, or govern, infinite Eternally?

Secondly the Fates. What Man is, or ever was, that knows the Fates? As whether
they are Gods or Creatures, or whether the Fates are limited, or decree as they
please? Or what Man is, or ever was, that knows the decrees of Fate, the links
of Destiny, or the chance of Fortune, or the lots of Chance.

Thirdly. What Man is, or ever was, that knows what Nature is, or from whence
her power proceeds? As whether from the Gods, or Eternity, or infinite, or from
the Fates? Or whether the Gods, or Fates, proceed from her? Or what at first
set her to work? Or whether her work is prescribed, or limited? Or of what she
works on? Or what instruments she works with? Or to what end she works for?
Or whether she shall desist from working, or shall work Eternally? Or whether
she worked from all Eternity? Or whether her work had a beginning, or shall
have an ending? What Man knows the beginning of Motion, or the Fountain of
Knowledge, or the Spring of Life, or Gulf of Death? Or what Life is? Or what
Death is? Or whether Life, Motion, and Death, had a beginning, or shall have an
ending?

Fourthly the World. What Man is, or ever was, that knows how the World was
made? Or for what it is made? Or by whom it was made? Or whether it had
beginning, or shall have end?

The Fifth and last is Man. What Man is, or ever was, that knows how he was
formed, or of what composition, or what is that he calls a Rational Soul?
Whether it is imbodyed, or not imbodyed? Whether it is Divine, or Mortal?
Whether it proceeds from the Gods, or was created by Nature? Whether it shall
live for ever, or shall have a period? Whether it shall live in Knowledge, or
lie in Ignorance? Whether it be capable of pain, or pleasure? Whether it shall
have a residing place, or no certain place assigned? Or if it have none, where
it shall wander? Or if it have, where that residing place is.

As for the Body, who knows the perfect Sense of each Sense, or what mistake,
or illusions, each Sense is apt to make, or give, or take? What Man knows how
the Body dissolves, or to what it shall dissolve? What Man knows whether there
be Sense in Death, or not? What Man knows the motion of the thoughts, or
whether the thoughts belong only to the Soul, or only to the Body, or partly to
both, or of neither? What Man is there that knows strength of passion? As what
Faith may beget? Or what Doubts may dissolve? Or what Hopes may unite? Or what
Fears may disorder? Or what Love can suffer? Or what Hate can act?

What Man is there that knows the Circumpherence of Admiration, the rigour of
Adoration, the hight of Ambition, or the bottom of Covetousness? Or what Man
knows the end of Sorrow, or beginning of Joy? And as for the Appetites, what
Man knows the length and breadth of desire? As for the Senses, what Man is
there, that knows the true Sense of Pleasure, or the uttermost bounds of Pain?
Who can number the varieties of Taste, Sent, Touch, Sound, and Sight? What Man
knows the perfect effects of each Sense? Or what Man is there that knows any
thing, truly as it is? Yet certainly there cannot be an Athest; for though men
may be so irrelligious, as to be of no Religion; yet their can be none so
wilful, and utterly void of all Sense, and Reason, as not to believe there is
a God; for though we have not the true light of knowledge, yet we have as it
were a perpetual twilight; Man lives as at the poles of knowledge; for though
we cannot say it is truly day, yet it is not night. Man may perceive an
Infinite power, by the perfect distinctions of all particular varieties, by the
orderly production of several Creatures, and by the fit, and proper shapes of
every several kind of Creature; by their orderly Births, by the times and
Seasons, to produce, flourish, and decay; by the distinct degrees, qualities,
properties, places and motions of all things, and to, and in every thing, by
the exact form of this World; by the prudent seperations, and situations of
the Heavens and Earth; by the Circumferent lines, and poyzing Centers; by their
bounds and limits; by their orderly, and timely motions; by their assigned
tracts, constant Journies, convenient distances; by their intermixing, and well
tempering of the Elements; by the profitable Commerce, betwixt the Heavens and
the Earth; by the different kinds, several sorts, various Natures, numerous
numbers of Creatures; by their passions, humours, appetites; by their
Sympathies, and Antipathies; by their wars and parties; by the Harmony that is
made out of discord, shows that there is only one absolute power, and wise
disposer, that cannot be opposed, having no Copartners, produces all things,
being not produced by any thing, wherefore must be Eternal, and consequently
infinite; this absolute, wise, and Eternal power Man calls God; but this
absolute power, being infinite, he must of necessity be incomprehensible, and
being incomprehensible, must of necessity be unknown, yet glimses of his power
is, or may be seen; yet not so, but that Man is forced to set up Candels of
Faith, to light them, or direct them to that they cannot perfectly know, and
for want of the clear light of knowledge, Man calls all Creations of this
mighty power Nature; his wise decrees, Man calls Fates; his pointed will, Man
calls Destiny; his several Changes, Man calls Fortune; his Intermixing Man
calls Life; his separating, Man calls Death; the Sympathetical, and
Antipathetical motions of the Senses, and their Objects, Humours, and their
Subjects, Man calls Pleasure, and Pain; the interchanging motions in Man, Men
call Sense, and Knowledge; the separating motions, Man calls Ignorance,
Stupidity, and Insensibility; my application is, that this absolute Power, wise
Disposer, and decreeing Creator, hath created himself Worship, in making
Creatures to worship him; and it is probable, Truth decreed Judgment,
Punishment, and Bliss, to such of his Creatures as shall omit, or submit
thereunto: my exhoration to you is, to bough humbly, to pray constantly, to
implore servently, to love truly, to live awfully to the worship of this
incomprehensible power; that you may enjoy bliss and avoid torment.


I wonder who brought up that careless fashion, to go without their Swords; and
I wonder more, how gallant valiant men, came to follow that fashion; for a
Sword is a valiant mans trusty friend, to whose protection, he delivers his
Honour, his Safety, and his Peace; for a Sword is a Mans Guardian, to maintain
his Right, to revenge his Wrongs, or Disgraces, and his Mistress, for whole
service he wears his Life, and studies the worth and use thereof, and takes
delight in the Honourable, and allowable practices therein.


Faith my Lord I believe it was some Lover that brought up that fashion, who
was loath to affright his Mistress, with so dangerous a weapon.


Some Carpet Knight upon my life my Lord.


It was no true Lover; for certainly he would be sure to provide a safeguard,
lest his Mistress might be taken from him, or lest he should be affronted in
her sight, which a Man of Honour, and a true Lover, will rather die than part or
suffer; and as for my part, I commend the Man that would neither eat, drink,
nor sleep, without his Sword were by him, and made it his Bedfellow, and Board
Companion; as a friend that held to his side, and would sight in his quarrel.


My Lord, if a man should do so in these times, his Neighbours would say it was
out of fear, not courage.


O no, for a Coward is afraid to use a Sword, and a Valiant man is afraid to
be without the use, otherwise a strong sturdy Clown, might cuff him down, and
kick him like a Football on the ground, which a Sword, and skill to use it,
will prevent; for a Clown hath not skill to defend, or assault a Sword, having
no practice therewith, nor ought they to have; for the use of this kind of Arms
makes a Clown a Gentleman, and the want of skill makes a Gentleman a Clown; for
a Right bred Gentleman, is to know the use of the Sword, and it is more manly
to assault, than to defend; also to know how to manage Horses, whereby we know
how to assault our Enemy as well as to defend our selves; for it is not playing
with a Fidle, and dancing a Measure, makes a Gentleman; for then Princes should
dub Knighthood with a Fidle, and give the stick, and a pair of Pumps, instead
of a Sword, and a pair of Spurs.


My Lord, we are so far from wearing our Swords our selves now a days, as we
give them our Footmen to carry, as if it were a disgrace to carry a Sword our
selves.


Tis true, and we are well beaten for our follies, for disarming our selves,
and arming our Slaves; for now a Groom is made a Gentleman's equal, nay his
Superior sometimes; for if a Groom kills a Gentleman, the Gentleman dyes in
disgrace, and the Groom lives with Honour, and gets the Fame of a gallant
Person; for that is the phrase to all those that have fought, although they
were forced thereto as Slaves, not distinguishing true valor, which is
voluntary, temperate and just.


Why then there should be a Decree, of Law, that none should wear Swords but
Gentlemen, nor Arms allowed, but to those of approved merit.


You say right, unless in time of Foreign Wars, and then there should be a
difference in their Arms; for if there be no difference of Arms, no difference
of persons, and if there be no difference of persons, there will be no
Supremacy of Power, if no Supremacy, no Royal Government; for as the Sword
maintains the Prerogative of the Crown, so it doth the Honour of a Gentleman;
and as the Sword keeps up the dignity of the Crown, so a Sword keeps up the
Heraldry of a Gentleman; and no man ought to be accounted a Gentleman, that
knows not how to use his Sword, and manage his Horse; for the one defends
himself, and kills his Enemies; the other, doth front and charge his Enemy, and
pursues him if need require.


Lord Wife you are very brave to day.


I strive to be so every day.


For whose sake.


For yours.


For mine? why sure that is not so, for certainly you would not take that
pains, and bestow so much cost, for one you do enjoy already, for a Husband
that is tied to you for life, and cannot quit on Honourable terms; wherefore it
is for one is loose and free, which you do strive by setting forth your self
with garments rich, for to attract, and draw to your desires.


The Circumference of my desires is only your delight.


Why, my delight is in your Virtue, youth, and Beauty, not in your Clothes.


But Virtue is best acceptable, when Beauty doth present it; and Beauty finds
most favour, when well attired; but were I sure you would like me better in
mean Garments, and careless dresses, I then should Cloth my self in Freeze,
like a Hermit my loose course Garments tie with single cord about my waste; but
I will go and pull these Clothes off, since they are thought a crime, and I
thought false for wearing them.


No, I like them very well, if I were sure they were worn only for love to me.


I never gave you cause to think I wear them for the love of any other.


Mademoiselle La Belle is cried up to be the only Beauty in the Kingdom.


Lord that is nothing, for sometimes opinion will carry a black Blowse up to
Fames high Tower.


Yes faith, and most commonly they are cast down in disgrace.


Why should she be cried up so? for she is neither well featured, nor well
shaped, nor well fashioned, nor well dressed, nor well bred, nor good natured;
for she is of a brown Complexion, a heavy Eye, a sad Countenance, a lazy Garb;
she dresses Phantastically, speaks Childishly, looks shamefastly; she is proud,
reserved, coy, disdainful, and self-conceited.


Let me tell you, it is reported that she hath most lovely features, a clear
Complexion, a modest Countenance, a bashful Eye, a pleasing Speech, a winning
behaviour, a Majestic presence; besides it is reported that her disposition
is civil, courteous, and obliging, her Nature sweet and gentle, her Education
virtuous, her life temperate and Chaste, her actions noble and wise, her
discourse witty and delightful.


Hey day, hey day, good Mistress Tell-truth run not so fast in the ways of
vain Reports, lest your judgment fail into a Quagmire.


Monsieur Fantasy, tis said you are one of Mademoiselle La Belles admirers.


All the World would admire her, if they saw her, she is so Heavenly a
Creature.


If she be so Heavenly a Creature, she would be known to the whole World by the
splendour of her Beams.


Heaven is not made known to all; neither can the glories be suddenly
comprehended, by weak Mortals.


Good Lord, if she hath such an infinite Beauty, that it cannot be
comprehended, it is obscure.


But those that comprehend least will be astonished, and struck with deep
amaze.


I believe you are struck with Love, which makes you Blind, or Mad, that makes
you think you see your own imaginations: wherefore fare you well, until you
are sober.


I am struck indeed, for I am wonded deeper than Swords can pierce, or Bullets
shoot at.


Your Lordship rid to day beyond Perseus on his Pegasus.


No Monsieur, he went (if Poets speak truth) in higher Capreols than ever I
shall make my Horse go.


He might go higher my Lord, but never keep so just a time, and place, as to
pitch from whence he riss, his feet in the same Circle, his legs in the same
lines, and your Lordship in the same Center.


The truth is, my Horses went well to day; they were like Musical Instruments,
fitly strung, and justly tuned.


And your Lordship, like a skilful Musician, played rarely thereon.


Come Gentlemen, let us to Dinner, for I have uncivilly tyred your Stomachs
with a long fast.


Sir, you may very well start to see me here, I do not use modesty, pardon me
to be so bold to visit Men; it is the first visit I ever made your Sex, and
hope it will be the last, but I am come, since neither Letter, nor Messenger,
could have access to be resolved by your own Confession, whether you have
forsaken me or not.


No, I have not forsaken you.


But your affection prefers another before me.


If I should say I did not, I should belly Truth, which baseness I abhor.


I am glad for your own sake you keep so much Honour, though sorry, that you
are no constanter, and more sorry for the Oaths you took, and Vows you made to
me, since they became the witnesses of your perjury. I was not suddenly, nor
easily brought to draw a Supreme Love to one; for before such time my Love was
placed on you, my affections run equally in purling Brooks of Pity, and
Compassion, and clear fresh Rivulets of Charity and Humanity, from the pure
Springs of good Nature and Religion; and hard it will be for me to turn this
River to each stream again, if not, yet I shall be a rest, 'twill overflow my
heart and drown me.


Oh I must curse my Fortune, and my Fate; lament my own condition to love
without return, and only pity what I loved most.


Great Mercury to thee I now address,
Employ thy favour, help me in distress;
Thou God of Eloquence, so guide my tongue,
Let all my words on even sense be slrung,
And let my Speech be tuned to every Ear,
That every Ear each several word may hear:
That every passion may in measure move,
And let the figure of the Dance be Love.
Noble and Right Honourable,

I will discourse at this time of Love, not of the superfluous Branches, or
withered leaves, or rotten fruits, but of the Root of Love, which is Self-love;
It is the Root and Original Love in Nature; it is the Foundation of Nature, it
is the Fountain from whence issues all the several Springs; Self-love was the
cause of the Worlds Creation; for the Gods out of love to themselves, caused
Creatures to be Created, to worship them: thus all Creatures being created out
of self-love, and their chief being proceeding out of self-love, is the cause
that every particular Creature loves themselves in the first place, and what
Love is placed on any other, or to any other, from any particular, is derived
from self-love; for we love the Gods but out of self-love, as believing the
Gods love us; we adore the Gods but out of self-love, because we think we
proceed from them, or were produced by their commands; we pray to the Gods but
out of self-love, because we hope the Gods will help us in distress; we bless
the Gods but out of self-love, because we do verrily believe the Gods will
exalt, and Crown us with everlasting glory; and to show that we Love the Gods,
not as they are Gods, but for our own sakes, as believing they will or can do
us good, is, that we are apt to murmure at the Gods, when we have not our own
desires; we are apt to accuse the Gods, when any wordly thing crosses us; we
are apt to curse the Gods at ill Accidents, Misfortunes, or Natural losses; we
are apt to forget the Gods in the midst of pleasure; we are apt to think our
selves Gods in the pride of prosperity; we strive to make our selves Gods in
the hight of worldly power; and we do not only strive to make our selves equal
with the Gods, but to raise our selves above the Gods, taking, or commanding to
our selves more worship than we give unto the Gods; nay, those that are
accounted the most holy and devout Servants of the Gods, belie the Gods, taking
the name of the Gods to cover their own follies; as for example, whenever any
eminent person hath had ill success, either in, or after their Foolish,
Ambitious, and Vain-glorious actions, they charge the Gods Decrees and
pleasure, as it was the Gods will it should be so; like as she that
Vaingloriously had her two and only Sons to draw her Chariot, like two Horses,
or Dogs, or Slaves, and being both found Dead the next day, she had prayed to
the Gods to reward them with that which was best for them, and being both dead,
she said the Gods accounted Death as the best reward, when they no doubt dyed
with over heating themselves, striving beyond their natural power and strength;
yet these two Sons that drew the vain Mother in a Chariot, drew and died out
of self-love; either like as vain Sons like their vain Mother, vaingloriously
to get a fame, or believing the Gods would reward them for their Act, either
with extraordinary prosperity, power, or blessedness in the Life to come; and
many the like examples may be given; for how ordinary is it in these our times,
and in former times, for the politics to persuade the people, with promises
from the Gods, or to tell them it is the Gods commands they should do such and
such acts, even such acts as are unnatural, wicked, and most horrid? thus Men
belly the Gods to abuse their fellow Creatures. But most Noble and Right
Honourable, my explanation of this discourse is, that since Self-love is the
Fountain of and in Nature from whence issue out several Springs to every
several Creature, wherein Mankind being her chiefest and Supreme work, is
filled with the fullest Springs from that Fountain, which is the cause that
Mankind is more industrious, cruel, and unsatiable, to and for his self ends,
than any other Creature, he spares nothing that he hath power to destroy, if he
fears any hurt, or hopes for any gain, or finds any pleasure, or can make any
sport, or to employ his idle time; he melts metalls, distills and dissolves
plants, dissects animals, substracts and extracts Elements, he digs up the
bowels of the Earth, cuts through the Ocean of the Sea, gathers the winds into
Sails, fresh waters into Mills, and imprisons the thinner Air; he Hunts, he
Fowls, he Fishes for sport, with Guns, Nets, and Hooks; he cruelly causes one
Creature to destroy another, the whilst he looks on with delight; he kills not
only for to live, but lives for to kill, and takes pleasure in torturing the
life of other Creatures, in prolonging their pains, and lengthening their
Deaths; and when Man makes friendship of Love, it is for his own sake, either
in humouring his passion, or feeding his humour, or to strengthen his party, or
for Trust, or Counsel, or Company, or the like causes; if he dies for his
friend, it is either for fame, or that he cannot live himself happy without his
friend, his passion, and grief, making him restless; if Man loves his Children,
Wife, or Parents, tis for his own sake; he loves his Parents, for the honour he
receives by them, or for the life he received of them; if he loves his Wife, or
the Wife the Husband, it is for their own sakes, as their own pleasure, as
either for their Beauties, Wits, Humours, or other Graces, or for their
Company, or Friendships, or because they think they love them; if they love
their Children, it is for their own sakes, as to keep alive their memory, and
to have their duty, and obedience, to bow and do homage to them; If Masters
love their Servants, it is for their own sakes, because they are trusty,
faithful and industrious in their affairs, employments, or for their own
profit, or ease; and if Servants love their Masters, it is for their own sakes,
as either for their power to protect them, or for the regard they have to them,
or for the gain they get from them, or for their lives that are nourished, and
maintained by them; if Amorous Lovers love, it is for their own sakes, as to
please the Appetite, and to satisfy their desires; if Subjects love their
Sovereigns, it is for their own sakes, as that they may have Law and Justice,
Peace and Unity; If Sovereigns love their Subjects, it is for their own sakes,
because they bear up his Throne with their Wealth and Industry, and fight to
maintain, or get him power. My Application, most Noble and Right Honourable,
is, that since we do all, and in every act for our own sakes, we should
endeavour, and study, for that which is best for our selves, and the ground of
our endeavour is to learn, and know our selves, every particular person must
learn and know himself, not by comparative, as observing others, for every man
is not alike; but by self study, reading our own Natures and Dispositions,
marking our own Passions, mours, and Appetites, with the Pen of Thought, and
Ink of Examination; and let the Truth be the Tutor to instruct you in the
School of Reason, in which you may Commence Master of Art, and go out Doctor of
Judgment, to practise Temperance; for Temperance keeps in its full strength,
prolongs Beauty, quickens Wit, ripens Youth, refreshes Age, restores Decays,
keeps Health, maintains Life, and hinders Times ruins; but Temperance is not
only a Doctor of Physic; a Physician to the Body, but a Doctor of Divinity, a
Divine for the Soul; It preaches and teaches good Life, it instructs with the
Doctrine of Tranquillity, and guides to the Heaven of Happiness; also
Temperance is the Doctor of Music, it tunes the Senses, composes the Thoughts,
it notes the Passions, it measures the Appetites, and plays a Harmonious Mind.
Thus Most Noble and Right Honourable, I have proved that Self-love is the
Fountain of Nature, and the Original Springs of her Creatures, and that
Temperance is the strongest Foundation of Self-love, although few build
thereupon, but upon Intemperance, which is a hugh Bulk of Excess, the substance
of Riot, worm eaten with Surfers, rotten with Pain, and sinks down to death
with Sickness and Grief, not being able to bear and uphold Life; wherefore
build your Lives upon Temperance, which is a strong and sure Foundation, which
will never fail; but will uphold your Lives as long as Time and Nature permits
them, and your Souls will dwell peaceably, and happily therein.


I will confess to him my Love, since my designs are Noble; but O for a woman
to woo a man is against Nature, and seems too bold, nay impudent, only by a
contrary custom; but why should not a woman confess she loves before she is
wooed, when after a seeming coyness gives consent, as being won more by a
Treaty than by Love, when her obscure thoughts know well her heart was his at
first, bound as his prisoner, and only counterfeits a freedom; besides, it
were unjust although an ancient custom, if dissembling should be preferred
before a Modern Truth, for length of Time and often practices makes not
Falsehood Truth, nor Wrong Right, nor Evil Good; then I will break down Customs
Walls, and honest Truth shall lead me on.

Love plead my Suit, and if I be denied,
My heart will break, and Death my Face will hide.

Wife, whither do you go? when I come near you, you always turn to go from me.


I saw you not; for I had rather be fixed as a Statue, than move to your
dislike.


Why do you blush? surely you are guilty of some crime.


'Tis said blushing comes unsent for, and departs without leave; and that it
oftner visits Innocence than guilt.


What do you weep?


How can I otherwise choose, when my Innocent Life, and True Love is suspected,
and all my pure affections are cast away like dross, and the best of all my
actions condemned as Traitors, and my unspotted Chastity blemished with soul
Jealousy, and defamed with slandering words?


Prethy Wife do not weep, for every tear wounds me to Death, and know it is my
extreme Love, which creates my fears; but you might have had a Husband with
more faults.


'Tis true, but not so many noble qualities as you have, which makes me weep,
doubting you Love me not, you are so Jealous.


By Heaven I love thee beyond my Soul, wherefore forbear to weep if thou can
stop thy tears.


Tears may be stopped, unless they flow from an unrecoverable loss, which Heaven
forbid mine should: yet sorrow oft doth stop the Spring from whence tears rise,
or else the Eyes do weep themselves quite blind.


Pray dry yours.


O Man! O Man! How various and Inconstant are you all, how cruel to betray our
faint and unexperienced Sex, bribing our Judgments with flattering words,
obscure our reasons with Clouds of Sighs, drawing us into belief with
protestations, bind us with promises and vows, forcing us to yield up our
affections; then murder us with scorn, and bury us in forgetfullness? but O
how happy was I, before I was betrayed by Love? my heart was free, my thoughts
were pleasant, and my humour gay; but now my mind is a Garrison of cares, my
thoughts like runaways are wanderers.

Grief on my heart his heavy taxes lays;
Which through my Eyes, my heart those taxes pays.

Love and Discretion sight duels in my mind, one makes me Mute, the other doth
persuade me to prefer my Suit; but why should I be nice to speak, or be ashamed
to woo with words, when all our Sex doth woo with several dresses and smiles?
each civil courtesy doth plead Loves Suit; then I will on, Love give me
Courage, and Mercury guide my tongue.


Noble Sir, impute it rather as a folly to my Sex and Youth, and not any
impudence of Nature, if that my Innocence discovers my passion and affection,
not having Craft, or subtilty to conceal them; but I must plainly tell you, no
sooner did I see you, and hear you speak, but loved: but yet mistake me not, I
dote not on your person, but your mind; for sure your Noble Soul shot fire
through my Eyes into my Heart, there flames with pure affection, but for this
confession, perchance you will set me as a mark of scorn, for all to shoot
their scofs at, and in derision pointing, will laugh and say, there is the Maid
that wooed a Man.


Is this to me Lady?


It cannot be to any other, Nature could make but one, and that was you.


If this be real you do profess, the Gods, should they have sent an Angel down
to offer me their Heavenly Mansion, it had not been so great a gift as your
affection.


Do you not hate me then?


Nothing I Love so well.


And will you Love me ever?


Yes ever; for when my Body is dissolved, Love shall live in my dust in spite
of Death.


And will you love none but me?


An entire and undivided affection, can be placed but upon one, and that is
you.


May your constancy be as firm, as my Love pure.


Dear Mistress stay, that I may gaze upon you,
Then bow my knee, as to the rising Sun;
Heave up my hands, as when to Heaven I pray,
But being amazed, know not one word I say:
Yet superstitiously, I shall adore,
As my chief Goddess, shall thy love implore;
And being worshipped, you are deified,
Your Godhead in your Beauty doth recide.

Thou absolute Beauty, for thy dear sake,
Of Lovers hearts, a foot-stool shall be made;
A Cushion soft, with Hopes filled full, then laid,
For thee to stand, and triumph on, fair Maid;
And Lovers Souls shall from their bodies fly,
For thee a Couch, when weary on to lie.

Thy Lovers tears for to invite thy rest,
In murmuring streams, fall on thy marble breast;
And gentle sighs, like whispering winds shall blow,
And fan thy Cheeks, that Poets fire may glow:
Loves Melancholy thoughts, like Clouds of night,
Like as thy Curtains, drawn before thy sight;
For fear the Sun should trouble out of spite,
Thy Eyes repose, being the greater light.

Sweet Beauty, thou in a glorious Throne shall set,
The spangled Heaven, seems but thy Counterfeit;
Thy Chariot shall be stuck with Eyes all gazing,
And oyld with Eloquent tongues, that runs with praising:
Drawn by large strong well shaped Commendations,
Guided by Fame, about two several Nations.

Admiration, Vainglory, Pride, and Ambition,
Why do you woo Beauty, that is Deaf and Dumb,
That hears no praise, nor adoration;
It sees no hands heaved up, nor tears that fall,
It hath no tongue to answer Love withal;
It hath no Life, no Soul where passion lies,
It neither gives, nor takes instructions wise:
It is no solid Body you admire,
No substance, but a shadow you desire.


