O Ladies, there is the rarest Beauty come to the City, out of the Country,
that ever was seen, she surpasses Hellen of Troy, or AEneas Mother Queen
Venus.


If she surpasses their Appetites, as you say she doth their Beauties, she may
chance to fire this City with flames of Love, or cause a War to destroy it.


Have you seen her, Mother Matron?


No, but a friend of mine hath seen her.


Perchance your friend's a fool, and knows not how to judge.


Indeed my friend's a woman, and women have none of the best judgments.


But there is more probability that she hath a surpassing beauty if a woman
praise her, than if a man had praised her: for men have a partial love to the
Effeminate Sex, which multiplies their beauties to their sight, and makes a
candle in the night seem like a Blazing Star.


In truth and Love is dark: for 'tis said he is blind.


But Envy is quick-sighted, and therefore I am afraid the Lady you speak of is
surpassing, since those of her own Sex can find no blemish or imperfection to
cloud her from a praise.


Ladies, I am come to give you intelligence of a rare Beauty that is come to
this City.


Her Fame hath out-run your Intelligence, Sir; but have you seen her?


No Lady, not I.


Ladies, there is a rare Beauty come to this Town to increase the number of
your Cabal.


Our Cabal is of Wit, not of Beauty.


It's a Cabal of both, Lady.


Have you seen her?


No Lady, but I have heard of her Beauty.


Ladies, there is such a Beauty come to Town, that now or never you will be
out-shin'd.


Iupiter bless us, and grant that she may not engross to her self all Mankind,
and so leave all the rest of her Sex destitute and forlorn!


It is to be hoped she will humble you, as to bring you to be more complyant to
us men than you have been.


Have you seen her, Monsieur Sensuality?


No not I.


Why then she is a Miracle, that every one hears of, but no body sees.


May she continue a Miracle still: for I had rather that she should only be
heard of, than be visibly seen.


But I will do my endeavour to see her.


So will I.


I long to see her as much as the men do.


So do I.


And I.


And I.


And I.


But how shall we compass the sight of her?


Faith let's go to a Play, I'll warrant you she'll be there.


If she be, we shall only see her Mask, not her Face: for at the common
Play-houses all the Effeminate Sex sit masked and muffled.


Why then let us go to that Church which is most frequented, as where some
Famous Preachers preach; and certainly, if she be such a Beauty, she will be
there: Besides, there our Sex sit to the full View, to Attract the Eyes of the
Gods.


No, no, Lady, they sit to the full View, to tempt the Appetites of men: for
they think not on the Gods, nor care the Gods should think of them.


Fie, fie, Mother Matron, you will make Women damnable creatures, if they could
be made so by your Description: But Women go to Church to present their prayers
of Request, and praises of Thanksgiving, and not to show themselves to men, nor
to tempt their Appetites, as you say.


Come, come, Ladies, search your own Consciences, and you will find I have
spoke the truth: for if you only went to present your prayers to the Gods, you
would go as humble petitioners, or sorrowful penitents, clothed in sackcloth,
and ashes on your head; and not attired in gold and silver, painted, patched,
and curled, unless you think the Gods are like to men, to be delighted and
enamoured with Vanity, Beauty, and Bravery: for you make the Church a
Masking-room, rather than a place of Devotion.


No, we rather strive to make it like Heaven, which is glorious and splendrous;
and the Heavenly Society is said to be beautiful.


Yes, such a Heaven, where Maskers are instead of Saints.


Why, Angels are described by Painters to have fine-colour'd wings, and by
Preachers, to hold fine gold branches in their hands, and the Heavens are
described to us to be most gloriously adorned, with Diamonds, Rubies, Pearl,
Emeralds, Gold, and Crystal, which shows the Gods delight in braveries:
Wherefore we, to delight the Gods, make our selves fine and gay.


No, no, Ladies, you strive not to delight the Gods, but to be Adored and
Worshipped as Goddesses by the Masculine Sex, whom you would have to be your
Saints.


I know not whether we desire to be Goddesses, or not; But I am sure, if women
be as irreligious as you make them to be, they will prove Devils.


And Mother Matron here will prove the chief She-Devil amongst our Sex.


No, no, Lady, I'm devour, for I say my prayers every night and every morning.


May be so you do, and all the time you are saying your prayers, you are
thinking of your snarled Periwig, or how you shall trim up your old Gown that
was given you by some of our Cabal.


Faith I must confess I have had some such thoughts when I have been at my
prayers, God forgive me for it.


And for all you exclame against young Beauties, for there is your spite now
your beauty is gone; yet I have observed, that when you are at Church, you will
cast your eyes about, and mop and mew, and simpering, bridlde in your Chin, in
hopes to catch some beardless boy; and when you look up on the Preachers face,
if he be a young Lecturer, it is not out of Attention, of what he preaches, but
in hopes to persuade him to marry you, as thinking he would imagine you would
make a good Virtuous Religious woman, sit to make a Parsons Wife.


No faith, I will never be a Parsons Wife: for Preachers are given so much to
Contemplation, as they seldom speak but in the pulpit; but if they do, it will
be of subjects I understand not, as of such subjects as they have read out of
dead Authors.


Why then you will have the more liberty to speak your self, if your Husband
speak but seldom.


That's true; but those which love to speak much, are like drunkards, which is,
they love company: for Questions and Answers are like drinking and pledging,
and Arguing is like drinking Healths, and quarrels and friendships, and
friendships and quarrels proceed from the one as often as from the other.


Then it seems you are both kind and quarrelsome, both in your talk and drink:
for you speak very experienced of both.


So much experience I have, living long in the World, as to know that drink
makes one talk, and talking makes one dry.


Well, leaving this dry discourse, Mother Matron, you must find out some way or
means whereby we may be acquainted with the rare Beauty which every one talks
of,


I will do my endeavour, and employ the wisdom of my brain to compass it.


Madam, there is Monsieur Satirical come to visit you.


Cupid and Venus possess him, and Pallas guard me. Conduct him hither.


Monsieur Satirical, you appear like a Comet to our Sex.


If all your Sex had been like you, I should have been as conversant as one of
the Planets.


I hope you have not that Influence on our Sex, as the Planets have on Earthly
Creatures.


I wish I had, for then I might cast such an Influence of Love, as might cause
you to love me.


But you are like the Planet of Saturn, and not of Venus: for you frown, when
Venus smiles.


I shall not do so when you smile.


You will when I quarrel with you.


I hope you will not quarrel with me; but if you do, I will receive your anger,
as subjects receive the punishments of Laws, obediently, although it ruins me.


I will make you Judge of the Cause, as of the Laws. Have I not reason to
quarrel with you, when I Challenged you to an Honourable Fight, and you
returned my Challenge back with scorn and slight?


Whatsoever my Answer was, I confess I am conquered, and yield my self your
prisoner, to dispose of me as you please: But if you will, take a Ransom of
current Love, which I have brought you in the Chest of my Heart, wherein it is
so fast locked, that nothing but your Acceptance can open it.


If it be capable of being taken forth, I may leave your heart empty.


Your Virtue will still furnish it with more,
Your pure Chastity increase the store.

Your Wit is very apt to take your part,
To keep your own, yet strives to steal my heart:
But if you do not use it nobly well,
It will complain to Gods, the truth will tell.

May I be cursed, my Wit be quenched out,
If I give you a cause my Love so doubt,
Or I your. Virtues highly not admire,
Preferring them before a loose desire,
May all the Gods their vengeance on me cast,
And may their punishments for ever last.

I was in jest at first; but since I find
Your Love so honest, and your words so kind,
I cannot doubt, nor yet my self deny
The union Friendship in firm bonds to tie
Of everlasting love; and if I break,
May Gods be deaf when I in prayers do speak.

Madam, the Poetical Duel hath ended in Friendship, and if you please, in
Marriage.


I consent; but do not prize me the less for being soon won for I loved you
before you asked my Love; and being asked, I could not deny you.


I value your love as Saints do Heaven, and prize it as highly as Gods their
power; and for my crimes committed against you and your Sex, I offer up my
heart on the Altar of Repentance, as a sacrifice to you my Goddess for an
Atonement of your Anger.


I accept of thy Offering, and shall receive it as a Trophy of my Victory.


I am your slave.


It is said that Women are the greatest Conquerors, because they conquer
conquering men, and make them become slaves: For it is said, that Women have
conquered the wisest man, as Solomon, the wittiest man, as David, the strongest
man, as Sampson, the fairest man, as Paris of Troy, the valiantest man, as
Achilles, the subtilest man, as Ulysses, the power-fullest men, as Alexander
and Caesar.


By your favour, Women never made a Conquest of the two latter, and therefore
cannot be said to be absolute Conquerors: for none are absolute Conquerors but
those that conquer power, that is, those that get absolute dominion over all
the World, which Alexander and Caesar are said to have done by their Valour and
Conduct; and never any Woman or Women conquered those men, as to get them to
yield up their power for a woman's sake, which shows they were not ruled by
women, although they loved women; by which it is to be proved, that women never
made an absolute Conquest of men, because they could never conquer absolutely
those two absolute Conquerors and Masters of the World.


But Livia Conquered Augustus Caesar, and Ruled his Power; and he was as
absolute a Master of the Worlds Power, as Iulius Caesar and Alexander.


He was rather to be said the Possessor of the Worlds power, than the absolute
Conqueror of the Worlds power.


It is as good to be a Conqueress of the possessor of power, as to conquer the
Conqueror of power.


It is as good for the Benefit, but not so much for the Honour of it.


But Alexander nor Caesar lived not so long a time, as to be Conquered by
women: for women must have time and opportunity for to gain the Conquest in, as
well as men have.


If Alexander and Caesar must have been old before they possibly could have
been conquered, it proves that women do rather conquer Age, than power weakens
the strength; and the truth is, women conquer nothing but the vices,
weaknesses, and defects of men: As they can conquer an unexperienced Youth, and
doting Age, ignorant Breeding, effeminate Natures, wavering Minds, facile
Dispositions, soft Passions, wanton Thoughts, unruly Appetites, and the
luxurious Lives of men; but they cannot conquer men's fixed Resolutions, their
heroic Valours, their high Ambitions, their magnificent Generosities, their
glorious Honours, or their conquering or over-ruling Powers: Nor can women
conquer their moral Virtues, as their Prudence, Fortitude, Justice, and
Temperance. But put the case a man had the power of the whole World, and could
quit that power for the enjoyment of any particular woman, or women, yet he
quits not that power for the woman's sake, but for his minds-sake, his
pleasure-sake, as to satisfy his Fancy, Passion, or Appetites: And what
Conpuest soever Women make on Men, if any Conquest they do make, is more by the
favour of Nature, than the Gods.


Well, I wish I may be the Conqueress of one man, let the favour proceed from
which it will.


There hath been such a Skirmish, or rather a Battle.


How, and betwixt whom?


Why, betwixt Grave Temperance and Mother Matron.


What was the cause of their falling out.


Why Mother Matron had a spiced pot of Ale in her hand, so she set it to her
mouth, and drank a hearty draught of it, and finding it very good and
refreshing, drank another draught. By my faith, said she, this is a cheerly cup
indeed, and a comfortable drink, and with that drank another draught, and so
long-winded she was, as she drank up all the Ale therein: Whereupon, Grave
Temperance rebuked her for drinking so much, saying, that though a little, as
one draught, or so, might refresh the Spirits, yet a great quantity would make
her drunk: Whereupon Mother Matron, who could not then suffer a reproof, in
anger she flung the pot, which was still in her hand, at Grave Temperance's
head.


It was a sign she had drank all the good liquor out, or otherwise she would
not have throvvn the pot away.


It was a sign she was drunk, or else she would not have done so outrageous an
act, as to have broke Grave Temperances head.


Reprove me! teach me! Have not I lived long enough in the World to be able to
govern my self, but Temperance must govern me? Am I a Child? am I a Novice,
that I must be governed by Temperance? No, no, let her go to Nunneries, and let
her be the Lady Prioress to govern Nuns, for in faith she shall not Prior me.


Not Friar you, do you say?


No nor Nunn me neither: for I will be neither Fryerd, nor Nunn'd.


Why what will you be?


Why what should I be, but as I am, a wise, sober, and discreet Governess to a
company of young Ladies? Ladies that love the World better than Heaven, and
hate a Nunnery worse than Death; and by my Faith they have reason, for liberty
is the joy of life, and the World is the place of sensual pleasures, and
sensual pleasures are substantial, and in being, when the pleasures aftee death
are uncertain; but if they were certain, yet I had rather have a draught of Ale
in this World, than a draught of Nectar in the next.


This Ale hath heat her into a Poetical height.


What do you say, into a pots head?


No, I say your head is a pot, filled with the fume of Ale.


What have you to do with my head?


What had you to do with Grave Temperances head?


I would Temperances grave head were in your throat, and then there would be
two fools heads one within another.


Come, let's leave her, or she will talk her self into a fit of madness.


A couple of Gill-flirts, to heat me thus.


Dear Mistress, have you freely pardoned and forgiven me my faults?


Yes.


But will you not reprove me for them hereafter?


In a pardon all faults ought to be forgiven, if not forgotten, and no
repetitions ought to be made of the same: for a clear pardon, and a free
forgiveness, blots out all offences, or should do so. But you imagine your
offences greater than they are, and by your doubts, I to be of less good nature
than I am.


There are none that have offended what they love, but fears, and hopes, and
doubts, sight Duels in their Minds.


Banish those doubts, and let the hopes remain to build a confident belief to
keep out jealousy, otherwise it will take possession, and destroy, at least
disturb affection.


Not my affection to you.


For Heavens sake let's go see Mother Matron: for 'tis said she's mad-drunk.


If she be mad-drunk, she's rather to be shunned than sought after.


Why, do not we give money to see mad people in Bedlam? and we may see her for
nothing.


Those people are not madly drunk, nor drunkly mad: for they, poor creatures,
drink nothing but water.


Perchance if they did drink strong drink, it might make them soberly in their
right wits.


Where is Monsieur Frisk? O that Monsieur Frisk were here!


What would you have with Monsieur Frisk?


I would challenge Monsieur Frisk.


What, to sight?


Yes, in Cupids Wars.


By Venus I swear, thou hast been Cashiered from Cupids Wars this thirty years.


Come, come, Ladies, for all your frumps, you are forced to make me General, to
lead up the Train, and Generalissimo, to set the Battalia, so that though I am
too old to be a common Soldier, I am young enough to be a Commander.


Thou art at this time but a drunken Commander.


If I am drunk, I am but as a Commander ought to be, or as a Commander usually
is.


Pray do not accuse Mother Matron: for though her Brain may be a little
disturbed, yet her Reason is sober, and governs her Tongue orderly.


O sweet Monsieur Frisk!


If her Reason governs her Tongue, I do not perceive it governs her Humour.


Her Humour, say you, you mean her Appetites.


Passions are begot betwixt the Soul and the Body, the Reason and the Sense;
and the Habitation of the Passions is the Heart, which is in the midst of man,
as betwixt the Rational part, the Head, and the Sensual Part.


What part is that, Madam?


The bestial part.


What part is the bestial part? for I cannot perceive but beasts and men are
alike in most parts.


I am not a Lectural Reader of parts.


One would think you were by your former Discourse.


Why, I may mention parts, without Preaching on parts.


But if Women would Preach of the parts of the Body, and leave Preaching of the
Spirit and Soul, it would be better for themselves, their Husbands, Friends,
and Neighbours, than it is: And if men would do the like, it would be better
for themselves, their wives, and neighbours: But they preach altogether of the
Soul, and yet know not what the Soul is.


How would you have them preach of the Body?


First, as for themselves, if they would consider: for they must consider
before they Preach, which is, to Teach: If they would consider, I say, how
frail the parts of Mankind are, how tender and weak every part of the body is,
how apt they are to sickness diseases, how they are subject more to pain than
to pleasure, how difficult it is to keep the body from harm, how soon the body
withers, decays, and dies: If Mankind did consider this of the body, they would
study what was the guard, and the preservation of every part of the body; in
which study they would find Temperance the only preservation of parts, and life
of pleasure: for in Excess pleasure dies, and pains possess the body. Thus we
can destroy the body sooner by Excess, and preserve it longer by Temperance,
than otherwise it would be.

Secondly, for those that are married, temperance keeps both man and wise
chaste, patient, and healthful, because gluttony, debauchery, and intemperate
anger, hurts the body, and destroys the body. Thus temperance keeps the place
of Wedlock: for a Wife being patient, the Husband lives peaceably, being
chaste, he lives honourably, being healthful, he lives comfortably; and the
Husband, being temperate, he will neither be a Glutton, a Drunkard, an
Adulterer, nor Gamester: for gaming hurts the body, with vexing at the losses,
and sitting still, which hinders the Exercise of the body, or keeping
unseasonable hours, which is pernicious to the health of the Body, as to the
quiet of the Mind, and waste of their Estates. Thus a man and wife lives free
from jealousies and fear of poverty

Thirdly, for their Neighbours: If they be temperate, they will neither be
covetous, quarrelsome, nor envious, which will keep them from doing injury or
wrong, and will cause them to be friendly and kind: for if they covet not their
neighbours goods, they will not strive to possess their neighbours right; if
they be not envious, they will be sociable, and helpful to each other, as good
neighbours ought to be: thus they will not vex each other with Lawsutes, and
quarrelling Disputes, nor Adulteries, and the like: And if men live peaceably,
it is good for the Common-wealth, as being free from faction and tumult:
Besides, Peace and Love are the ground whereon all the Commands of the Gods are
built on.


You may preach temperance, but few will follow your Doctrine.


Yes, Pleasure will: for without temperance there can be no lasting pleasure.


Yonder's Mother Matron so metamorphosed, as at first I did not know her.


How metamorphosed is she?


Most strangely attired for her Age, and as strangely behaved.


How, for Iupiters sake?


Why she hath a green Satin gown on, but it is of an ill-chosen green, for it
is of the colour of goos-dung, and an Orange-yellow Feather on her head.


I hope she is not jealous.


Then is she beset with many several coloured Ribbons, as Hair-colour, Watchet,
Blush-colour, and White.


What, to express her Despair, Constancy, Modesty, and Innocence?


I think she may despair, but for her constancy, I doubt it, and for modesty, I
dare swear she never had any; but if she had, it was so long since, as she hath
quite forgot it; as for her innocence, I will leave it to the Examination or
Accusation of her own Conscience.


But how is her behaviour?


Why she simpers, and draws the deep lines in her face into closes, and her
wrinkles are the quick-set hedges; then she turns her Eyes aside in coy
glances, and her Body is in a perpetual motion, turning and winding, and
wreathing about, from object to object, and her Gate is jetting, and sometimes
towards a dancing pace; besides, she is toying and playing with every thing,
like a Girl of fifteen, and now and then she will sing quavering, as a Note or
two betwixt a word or two, after the French and Courtly Mode.


Surely she is mad.


Who's mad?


Mother Matron.


No otherwise than all Amorous Lovers use to be.


Why is she an Amorous Lover?


Yes, a most desperate one.


Who is she so amorously affected with?


With Monsieur Frisk.


Why he is not above one and twenty years of Age.


That's the reason she's in love with him: for it is his youth, and his
dancing, she amorously affects him for, for she swears that the very first
time she saw him dance, Cupid did wound her, and shot his golden Arrows from
the heels of Monsieur Frisk.


Why she is threescore and ten, at least.


That's all one: for Cupid wounds Age as well as youth.


But I had thought that an old woman's heart had been so hard Love could not
have entered.


Old Mother Matron proves it otherwise: for her Heart is as tender as the
youngest Heart of us all.


While I am young I will be a Lover, because I will not be a Fool when I am
old.


That's the way to be a Fool whilst you are young, and a Lover when you are
old.


No, that is to be a Courtesan whilst she is young, and a Bawd when she is old.


Nay faith, when I can no longer traffic for my self, I will never trade for
any other.


Covetousness will tempt your reverent Age.


How shall we entertain our time?


Let us sit and choose Husbands.


What, in the Ashes?


No, in our Speeches.


Content.


Begin; but let your Maids, Lady Pleasure, sit and choose Husbands with us.


If I were to choose a Husband, I would choose a man that was honourably born,
nobly bred, wisely taught, civilly behaved; also I would have him to speak
rationally, wittily, and eloquently; to act prudently, valiantly, justly, and
temperately; to live freely, magnificently, and peaceably. I would have him
honourably born, because I would not have him a Boor by Nature, which is surly^
rude, grumbling, and miserable: I would have him nobly bred, because I would
not have him a Shark, a Cheat, or a Sycophant: I would have him wisely taught,
because I would not have him an ignorant fool, nor a pedantical fool: I would
have him civilly-behav'd, to please my Eyes: I would have him to speak
rational, witty, and eloquent, to please my Ears: I would have him valiant, to
defend his Country, to guard his Family, and to maintain his Honour: I would
have him prudent, to foresee misfortunes, and to provide for the future, that I
may never want for the present: I would have him temperate, lest Excess should
ruin his Fortune, Health, or Esteem: I would have him just, because others
should be just to him; to live freely, as not to be enslaved; to live
magnificently, for to be respected; to live peaceably, to avoid brawl^ries. And
such a man as this, will be kind to his Wife, loving to his Children, bountiful
to his Servants, courteous to his Friends, civil to Strangers, faithful to his
Trust, and just to his Promise.


If I were to choose a Husband, I would choose a man that were Rich, honoured
with Titles, and were Powerful. I would have him Rich, because I would have him
live plentifully, to feed luxuriously, to be adorned gloriously: I would have
him to have Titles of Honour, because I would take place of my Neighbours, to
have the chief place at a Feast, and to have the first and choicest meats
offered me: I would have him Powerful, to oppose my Opposers, to insult over my
Enemies, and to neglect my Friends; which, if I be poor and helpless, they will
do me: Thus I shall be honoured by my Superiors, crouch'd to by Inferiors,
flattered by Sycophants, bragged of by my Friends, obeyed by my Servants,
respected by my Acquaintance, envied by my Neighbours, sought to by my Enemies.
Thus I might advance my Friends, punish my Enemies, tread down my Superiors,
enslave my Inferiors, insult over my Foes, and enthrone my self.


If I were to choose a Husband, I would choose a man whom all other men are
slaves to, and he mine. And what can I desire more than to be absolute?


If I were to choose, I would choose a man for a Husband that were an honest
and plain-dealing man, patient and wise, that I might neither be deceived by
his falsehood, nor troubled with his quarrels, nor vexed with his follies.


If I were to choose a Husband, I would choose a subtle crafty Knave, that can
cheat an honest Fool, with which cheats I can entertain my time, like those
that go to see Jugglers play tricks.


If I were to choose a Husband, I would choose a man that were blind, deaf, and
dumb, that he might neither trouble me with his impertinent Questions, nor see
my indiscreet Actions, nor hear my foolish Discourses: Thus I may say what I
will, and never be crossed, do what I will, and never be hindered, go where I
will, and never be watched, come when I will, and never be examined, entertain
whom I will, and never be rebuked. Thus I may Govern as I will, Spend as I
will, Spare as I will, without Controlment.


If I were to choose a Husband, I would choose a man that were industrious,
thrifty, and thriving: for the pleasure is not so much to enjoy, as getting,
like those that are hungry, have more pleasure in eating their meat, than when
their stomachs are full.


If I were to choose a Husband, I would choose a man that were a busy Fool,
which would continually bring me fresh, although false News: for his busy
mind, which fills his Head with Projects, which Projects will feed my excessive
Ambition, with his high Designs, although improbable, and set my thoughts at
work with his several Achievements, although there is no leading-path therein:
But howsoever, this will furnish my Imagination, employ my Thoughts, please my
Curiosity, and entertain my time with Varieties, wherein, and wherewith, I may
pass my life with fine Phantasms, or like a fine Dream.


It is a sign you love sleep excessively well, so as you would have your life
pass as a dream.


Why, Madam, sleeping is the lifes Elizium, and our dreams the pastime therein,
and our beds are our living graves, to the greatest part of our life, and most
are best pleased therein: for it gives rest to our wearied and tired limbs, it
revives the weak and fainting spirits, it eases the sick and pained, it
pacifies the grieved, it humours the melancholy, it cherishes age, it nourishes
youth, it begets warmth, it cools heat, it restores health, it prolongs life,
and keeps the mind in peace.


I will not choose, but wish and pray, which is, if ever I marry, I pray Jove
that I may out-live my Husband.


O sie, Women pray that their Husbands may out-live them?


If they do, in my Conscience they dissemble, but howsoever I will never pray
so: for I perceive when men are Widowers, they are more hasty to marry again
than Batchellors are, and the last love blots out the first, and I should be
sorry to be blotted out.


But if men do marry after they have buried their first Wife, yet perchance
they will not love their second Wife so well as the first.


I know not that, but yet to the outward view I perceive a man seems to forget
his first Wife in the presence of his second Wife.


By your favour, a second Wife puts a Husband in remembrance of his first Wife,
either for goodness or badness.


For my part, I would not be kept in remembrance by one in my room; but
howsoever, I shall love my self better than I'm sure I shall love my Husband,
and therefore I desire to live long: for I had rather live and have him in
remembrance, than die and to forget him; and I had rather remember than be
remembered.


O Temperance, I heard say that you have seen the rare Beauty, Mademoiselle la
Belle.


And is she so handsome as she is reported to be?


Truly she is a pretty young Lady.


Is she only a pretty Lady?


Why she is young, and those that are very young, are only pretty; but those
that are at full growth are beautiful and handsome, and those in their Autumnal
years are Lovely, and those that are old are ill-favour'd.


No, no, those Women that have been once handsome, never grow ill-favour'd.


Well, setting aside old women, what say you to the young Lady?


I say she is handsomer at a distance than neer-hand.


That's well, for then her praises will be only at a distance.


No by'r Lady, she hath Beauty enough to be praised to her face.


I had rather appear handsomer at a distance than at a near view, than seem
worse at a distance, and handsomer at a near view.


Why so?


By reason there is no Woman but is seen more by strangers than acquaintance;
besides, whole streets of people view Ladies as they pass through in their
Coaches, when perchance not above half a dozen neighbours and acquaintance see
them near hand.


So you may have many Admirers, but few Lovers.


Faith the rarest Beauties that ever were, the more they were known and seen,
the less Esteemed and Admired they were: for an unacquainted face appears, or
at least pleases better, although but an indifferent Beauty, than a common
face, although it excels with Beauty.


Did you not hear Mademoiselle la Belle speak?


No faith, she may be dumb for any thing I know.


How is she behaved?


After the Country Mode.


What manner of Woman is her Mother?


A Country Lady.


Faith if Mademoiselle la Belle hath neither Wit nor Behaviour, her Beauty will
be dim'd for the want of either: for Wit and Behaviour are the Polishers of
Beauty, otherwise Beauty is but like a Diamond unfil'd, or unpolished, or like
gold untried, or unresin'd.


Nay Ladies, she may have a great Wit for all that I know: for she did not
express either simplicity or ignorance, whilst I was in her company she spake
not one word.


Let us examine no more, but let us go see her, and then discourse with her.


Pretty Maid, would you speak with me?


Yes, and if it please your Worship.


From whom come you?


From my Mistress.


Who is your Mistress?


Mother Matron.


What Message hath Mother Matron sent to me?


She hath sent your Worship a Letter, and desires your Worship to send her an
Answer.


Go and stay within, and I will give you an Answer.


This Letter is concerning some of the young Ladies that are in Love with me.

Blessed Letter, that art the Messenger of Love, the Presenter of Youth, Beauty
and Wit, and the Inviter to Pleasure.


Sweet Monsieur Frisk, O Dear Monsieur Frisk, since I last saw you, and heard
you speak so wisely, as that you would wait upon the Ladies, and proffer so
kindly, as to proffer me a kiss, meeting you in the Lane called Loves Folly. O
that Lane, that fortunate or unfortunate Lane! for as my wishes succeed, the
Lane proves good or bad: for since that time of meeting, I have loved you, or
rather, I may say, I have been in Love with you, or rather, I may say, I have
Fancied you beyond all other young Gentlemen, and I hope you will return the
like to me: For though I am not in my blooming Beauty, yet I am not quite
decayed, but there remains some fresh colour, wherewith a young Gentleman may
take delight; and let me tell you, the Autumn is more pleasant than the Spring,
for the Spring is raw and cold, the Autumn is warm and comfortable: wherefore
let me persuade you, sweet Monsieur Frisk, to choose the Autumnal fruits, and
reject the Springing buds, which are incipid and tasteless: Ripe fruit's are
better than green, and VVinter-fruits more lasting than the fruits of the
Summer: Staid Gravity is more happy to live with, than wild Inconstancy; the
wisdom of Age is more profitable than the follies of Youth; not that I say
I'm old, nor pray think me not so, but that I am as wise as Age can make me,
and Wisdom is not a portion that is given to every one, yet what wisdom I
have, I will impart to you, sweet Monsieur Frisk, you shall be the Receiver;
the Treasurer, and the Disposer; also with my wisdom I give my heart, with my
heart I give you my person, which wisdom, heart, and person, is not to be
despised: for by my wisdom you will receive Counsel, with my heart Love, and
with my person that Beauty Time hath left me, who like a cheating knave, hath
robbed me of some, but yet there is enough left, dear Monsieur Frisk, to delight
your view: for although I am not like Hellen of Greece, yet I am like Hellen,
when she was Hellen of Troy, for then, by my faith, she was in her Autumnal
years, as I am, which was about fifty, or by'r Lady, somewhat more, and then
she was as dear to her Paris, witness Troy, and as much desired of her
of....witness the Greeks, as when she was but fifteen. Wherefore, dear Frisk,
let me be thy Hellen, and be thou my Paris, and let our Loves be as bright as
the fire of Troy, but not so consuming; but if thou deny'll me, I shall consume
in mine own flames, and be buried in mine own ashes, which will fly in the face
of thy cruelty, to revenge me thy

Languishing Lover, namely Mother Matron.

A pox of her luxurious Appetite, to be Amorous at fourscore, one might have
thought, nay sworn, that Cupids fire had been put out with Times Extinguisher;
but I perceive by Mother Matron, that time hath no power over that Appetite,
but I am forty time hath made her such a creature, as not to be capable of
curses, for she is her self a curse beyond all I could give her; but if she
were capable, I would bury her under a mountain of curses, for raising up my
hopes to the height of young beautiful Ladies by the outside of the Letter, and
then frustrating my expectation by the inside, causing me to fall from the
bower of bliss, into the grave of life, the habitation of death; from a young
Beauty, to an old doting Woman: Oh, I will tear this letter that hath deceived
me; but stay, I will keep this letter to make sport amongst the young Ladies,
which sport may perchance insinuate me into some favour with the young Ladies:
for as idle and ridiculous pastime, or means as this is, hath got many times
good success amongst Ladies: wherefore I will, for their sport-sake, jestingly
Court Mother Matron, and in the mean time of the Progress, write her a letter.


I hear, Mademoiselle Ambition, you are to marry Monsieur Vain-glorious.


No, for I am too honest to marry one man, and love, admire, and esteem another
man beyond him; but when I marry, I will marry such a one as I prize, honour,
love, and admire above all other men, or else I will never marry.


What man could you esteeem, honour, and love most?


He that I thought had the noblest Soul, and had done the most worthiest
Actions.


But put the case that man that were as you would have him, were so engaged as
you could not enjoy him in lawful marriage?


I could lawfully enjoy him, although I could not lawfully marry him.


As how?


As in Contemplation, for I could enjoy his Soul no otherwise, if I were married
to him: for if I were married, I could but contemplate of his Merits, please my
self with the thoughts of his Virtues, honour his generous Nature, and praise
his Heroic Actions: And these I can do as much, although I should live at
distance from him, nor never be his Wife: for the marriage of Bodies, is no
enjoyment of Souls.


This would only be an opinion of delight, but no true enjoyment of pleasure:
for though an Opinion may affright the Soul, yet the Opinion cannot pleasure
the Body. But say an Opinion could delight the Soul without the Senses, yet the
pleasures of the Senses are to be preferred before the delight of the Soul: for
the truth is, that the spirits of life take more delight in sensual pleasures,
than in the Souls imagination: for life lives in the Senses, not in the Soul:
for were there no Senses, there would be no Life.


By your favour, there is life in the Soul, when Death hath extinguished the
Senses.


That's more than you know, you believe it only upon report; but who hath had
the trial or experience of the truth of it? So that the report is upon an
unknown ground, and your belief is built upon an unsure Foundation.


What belief is for my advantage, I will strive and endeavour to strengthen it,
on what foundation soever it's built upon.


You will pardon me, pretty Maid, for causing you to stay so long, for an
Answer of your Mistris's Letter.


There requires no pardon Sir, for I have been very well entertained by your
man, I thank him.


I perceive my man hath had better fortune than his Master, for he hath had
youth to entertain; but I hope if you receive the mans entertainment so
thankfully, you will not refuse the Masters.


My Mistress would be jealous of your Worship, if you should entertain me.


Why, doth your Mistress love me so much?


So much, as she cannot sleep quietly for dreaming of you; nor lets me sleep:
for she wakes me every night to tell me her dreams.


What dreams she?


One dream was, she dreamed that she was Diana, and you Acteon.


What, to set horns on my head?


No, my Mistress said, that she in her dream did more as a Godess ought to have
done, than Diana did: for she was generous in her dream, and not cruel, for
instead of horning you, she invited you into her Bath.


I hope you were one of her Nymphs.


Another time she dreamed you were Mercury, and she Herce; and another, that
she was Venus, and you Adonis; but the last night she awaked out of a fearful
dream.


What dream was that?


She dreamed that she was Queen Dido, and you the Prince AEneas, and when you
were shipped and gone away, she stabbed her self.


If she were Dido, I should prove AEneas.


On my Conscience she fetched as many sighs when she awaked, and made as many
piteous complaints and lamentations, as if her dream had been true, and she
really bad been Queen Dido, insomuch as I was afraid that she would have killed
he self indeed, and was running forth the Chamber to call in company to hinder
her, but that she commanded me to stay, saying, that it was but the passion of
her dream, for she hoped that you would prove a more constant and faithful
Lover, than to leave her to despair.


The next time she is in the same passion, tell her I will be like AEneas, meet
her in Hell: In the mean time carry her this Letter.


Lord, Lord, she will be a joyed woman, to receive a letter from you, and I
shall be a welcome Messenger unto her, and the letter will be worth a new gown
to me.


I wish it may be a gown of price to thee.


How shall I pacify my companions, or qualify their spleens? who will be in a
furious rage, when they perceive and know my real love to you: for they made me
as their hook to the line of their Angle, and hope to catch you like a Gudgion.


All that Angle do not catch; yet you have drawn me forth of the salt Satirical
Sea.


But their desire is, that you should lie gasping on the shore of Love.


Would they be so cruel, as not to throw me into a fresh River?


No: for they joy in the thought of your torments, and their general prayers
are to Cupid, imploring him to wound you with a golden-headed Arrow, and she
you love, with an Arrow headed with lead: As for their particular prayers, they
are after this manner.

One prays you may sigh your self into Air, and the Air so infectious, as it
may plague all the Satirical of your Sex.

Another prays you may weep tears of Vitriol, and that the sharpness of those
tears may corrode your soul.

Another prays that your passion of love may be so hot, as it may torment you,
as Hell-fire doth the damned; but Mother Matron, besides saying Amen to all
their prayers, makes her prayers thus, That she for whose sake you must endure
all these torments, may be the oldest, and most ill-favour'd deformed woman
that ever Nature, Accident, and Time made.


She would have me in Love with her self, it seems by her prayer.


If she did hear you, she would die for want of Revenge.


But Mistress, what prayer made you for me?


Not a cursing prayer: for though Mother Matron would have carried me up to the
top of the Hill of Rage, and instead of a prayer for you, there to have made
curses against you, yet she could neither force me up the one, nor persuade me
to the other: for I told her I would give a blessing instead of a curse, and
for fear of that, she left persisting.


I perceive I had been in danger, had not you saved me, and like a merciful
Godess kept me from their fury; but I'm afraid, that for my sake they will
curse you now.


No doubt of it; but the best of't is, that their cursing prayers, or prayers
of curses, go no farther than their lips.


For all their furious rage, self-conceit persuades me, that if I had addressed
my self as a Suitor to any one of them, they would have been more merciful than
to have denied my suit.


I can think no otherwise: for I shall judge them by my self.


Pray let's go, and invite them to our Wedding.


By no means: for they will take that as ill, as if you did indid invite them
to a poisoned Banquet: But if I may adv^se, it is not to tell them our Design,
but let them find it out themselves.


I shall agree to your Counsel.


Come, come, I have watched and longed for your Return above two hours, I may
say above two years, for so the time did seem to me. O Venus, thou Fair and
Amorous Godess, send me a comfortable Answer, if it be thy will!


I have brought you a Letter from Monsieur Frisk; but for my part I know not
what comfort he hath sent you.


O Cupid, O Cupid, be my friend!


Amorous Mother Matron; THough Time hath made you sit for Heaven, having worn
out your body, a substance for Love to work upon, converting or translating it
all into Soul, an incorporeal shadow, which none but the Gods can employ to any
use; yet since you Esteem and Love me as a God, to resign up that
incorporality, I can do no less than return you thanks, although I never did
merit such a gift: But my sins, I confess are many, and deserve great
punishments, yet I hope the Gods will be more merciful, than to leave me void
of reason, or to suffer Nature to make me to have extravagant appetites, or
Heaven to leave me to extravagant appetites; but howsoever, as occasions fall
out, I shall show reverence to your Motherly Gravity, and in the mean time
rest

Your Admirer, FRISK.

I know not by this Letter whether he will be my Lover, or not; yet I will kiss
it for his sake.

O sweet Letter, thou happy Paper, that hast received the pressure of this
hand! What did he say when he gave you this letter to bring me?


He talked of Pluto, and of Hell.


How, of Hell!


Yes, but it was concerning AEneas and Dido.


I hope he will not make me such an Example as Queen Dido, nor himself so false
a Lover as AEneas; but if he should, I will cry out, O thou my cruel AEneas
hast slain me!


Now I have seen Mademoiselle la Belle, I perceive Fame gives more praise than
Nature Beauty.


To some she doth.


Nay faith, for the most part, to all.


O Ladies, there is the greatest loss befallen me, that ever befell man!


What loss?


Why Mademoiselle la Belle is gone.


How gone? Is she married, or dead?


Faith she's as bad as dead to me, and worse than if she were married: for if
she were a Wife, there would be some hopes; but her careful Father hath carried
her away into the Country, being jealous of the much company that came to visit
her.


It seems he knew she was apt to be caught, that he durst not trust her: But
how came you to receive a greater loss than the rest of the Masculine Visitors?


Because I had greater hopes than I perceive the rest had.


Why, had you a design to get her for a Wife?


No faith, mine was a better design, which was to get her for a Mistress.


But it was likely she would never have been your Mistress.


It was likely she would have been my Mistress: for she was fair and foolish,
kind and toyish, and had an inviting Eye.


Why you may follow her into the Country.


No, the City is so well stored, as I shall not need to put my self to that
trouble, as to journey after her.


O Love! thou tormenter of soft hearts, or a melter of hard ones, soften the
hard heart of Monsieur Frisk, and ease my soft and tender heart, inflame his
spirits to love, and refresh mine with his kindness: O Venus, persuade thy Son
in my behalf, and consider me by thy self! Ha, ho!


I would never have an extraordinary Beauty seen but once, and that should be
in a public Assembly.


It is a sign, Temperance, your beauty is past: for would you have an
extraordinary Beauty to be buried in oblivion?


No: for I would have all the World see, if it could be shown to the whole
World; but I would have it shown but once, and no more.


Why so?


Because what is common, is never highly prized, but rather despised, or at
least neglected by continuance: for that which is at first admired as a wonder,
when it comes to be as domestic, is not regarded: for it is an old saying,
That the greatest wonder lasts but nine days.


But there is such a sympathy betwixt beauty and sight, that as long as beauty
doth last, sight will take delight to look thereon; and the Design, End, or
Fruition of Beauty, is to be gazed upon: for from the sight it receives Praise,
Love, and Desire, and by reflection sets all hearts on fire.


O that I had such a Beauty as would burn every Masculine heart into cinders!


Why are you so cruel, Lady, to wish such a wish to the Masculine Sex?


My wish proceeds out of love to my self, and mercy to men. First, out of love
to my self: for as I am a woman, I naturally desire Beauty, and there is no
woman that had not rather have beauty, although attended with an unfortunate
life, than be ill-savour'd, to enjoy prosperity.

The last wish is out of mercy to men: for their hearts are so false and foul,
as no way but burning can purify them.


That were the way to try their constancy.


For my part, if it were in my power to choose, I would rather have Wit than
Beauty: for Wit pleases the Ear, both longer and more, than Beauty pleases
the Sight, and the sound of the one, spreads farther than the sight of the
other: Besides, Wit recreate^ the Mind, and entertains the Reason, Beauty only
the Sense, and but one sense, as the sight, when Wit is a companion not only to
the sense of Hearing, but the soul of Understanding; and it is not only a
delightful Companion, but a subtle Observer, an ingenious Inventer, an
excellent Artificer, a politic Counsellour, a powerful Commander, a prudent
Ruler, and a divine Creator; it observes all natures works; it invents all
useful Arts, it frames all Commonwealths, it guides the Senses, rules the
Appetites, commands the Passions, counsels the Thoughts, regulates the
Opinions, creates the Conceptions, Imaginations, and Fancies; it builds
Potiecal Castles, and makes Gardens of Rhetoric, and makes the sound
Harmonical, playing with words, as on musical Instruments: Besides, Wit
continues to old Age, when Beauty vades in a year or two.


Come, come, Temperance, if you were young, you would prefer Beauty before a
Wit, by which you might get more pleasure by the one, than profit by the other:
But all our Sex, when they grow in years, desire to be thought Wits, when they
can no longer be thought Beauties, which makes them dispute for Wit, and
dispraise Beauty, by undervaluing it.


Mademoiselle Bon' Esprit, you are welcome: for we long to hear the success of
your design, since we have heard that Monsieur Satirical hath been to visit
you, hath he not?


Yes.


But have you caught him?


Sure enough.


Then strangle him with Cupids bow-string.


Hang him, that's not punishment enough.


No; but when he's a confirmed Lover, report he's mad.


We shall not need to report that: for when he is a confirmed Lover, he will do
such ridiculous actions, and behave himself so extravagantly vain, and so
constrainly foolish, and speak such non-sense, in striving to speak beyond the
power of words, insomuch as all that hear and see him, will swear he's mad.


They will swear nothing but the truth; for all Lovers are mad, more or less.
But Mademoiselle Bon' Esprit, are you sure you have him in Cupids snare?


I do verily believe I have him in Loves bonds.


O how I joy, to think how we shall triumph!


What shall our Triumphant-Chariot be?


Scorns, scorns, set on the wheels of laughter, drawn by a company of lame,
sore, scurvy words.


Will you have your Triumphant-Chariot drawn by a company of foolish words?
that will be as bad, and as much disgrace, as lean-jaded horses in a brave
gilded Coach.


No, no, sprightly jests were better.


They may chance to run you out of the field of Civility, at least out of the
right ways of Wit.


Let them run where they will, so they carry his reproach with them.


Will you carry this reproach along with you, and leave him behind you?


We will carry his reproach about the World.


While you bear the burden, he will rest at home in ease and peace in his
mind.


Good Lord, what makes you thus to contradict our Designs?


I do not contradict your Designs, but show you the Error of your Conduct.


Why then conduct us better.


So I shall, if you will give me leave: for I shall conduct you through the
fair ways: of peace, and not through the foul ways of malice, which are myery
and deep with revenge, in which you may stick, or be thrown in disgrace; but I
will carry you through the sweet Meadows of good Nature, wherein runs clear
Rivulets of Charity, in which you may bathe your selves under the fruitful
trees of good works, and take the fresh Air of Applause, and be cooled with the
soft winds of Praise. Thus washed, cleansed, and refreshed, you will be fit to
enter into the Palace of Fame.


Heyday, where will your Tongue carry us?


As high as it can, even to the House of Fame, which stands on the highest
pinnacle of Heaven.


Let me examine you, Are you not carried by love to the top of Parnassus Hill?


By Iupiter, she that went to catch Love, is caught by Love her self.


Venus forbid: for that would be such a disgrace, as we shall be never able to
pull off, or rub out.


What you cannot rub out, or pull off, you must be content to wear with
patience.


I suspect her.


I confess I doubt her.


I fear your doubts.


I am confident we have lost her, striving to catch him.


Let us follow her, and examine her.


I hear that thou intend to be a married man shortly.


Yes faith, I am going to put my neck into the noose.


Nay, if you noose it, hang it; for the noose of marriage is ten times worse
than the halter of death.


I am not of your Opinion.


Why then thou art not of a wise opinion: for in Death there is no trouble, and
in Marriage no quiet.


A single life is melancholy, being solitary.


So I perceive rather than you'll want company, thou wilt associate thy self
with cares and vexations.


No, I will associate my self with Wife and Children.


Well, let me tell you, if that thou marry, a hundred to one but thou wilt
be a Cuckold.


I hope not.


How can thou have hopes, when that the Gods are Cuckolds? wherefore 'tis
impossible mortal men should escape.


All the Gods are not so, it is but only limping Vulcan that is one.


Pardon me: for if their divine Wives make them not Cuckolds, yet their humane
Wives do.


But the Gods marry not humane creatures.


But humane creatures marry the Gods, and that is all one: for in all Religions
there are Nuns are the Gods humane wives; and did not Cataline Cuckold the
Gods, when he lay with a Vestal Nun? And many more are mentioned in Story, and
you may well believe all are not Recorded.


Well, if the Gods be Cuckolds, I may have the less cause to murmur, if I
should be one: for it is an honour to be like the God.


Well, I wish as thy friend, that thou may flourish in that Honour.


We do not like your dark Answers: for Truth is clear.


Confess, have you deceived us, or not?


I have not deceived you: for you did entrust me to draw him to Love, and to be
in love as a Lover, and I have discharged your trust, and have brought your
designs to pass.


But our designs were not that he should be beloved of you, but hated of all
our Sex.


Why then you did spread your designs beyond your reach: for do you think you
have the power of Fate, to rule, govern, and dispose of the passions of Mankind
as you please, when alas you are so powerless, as you cannot rule, govern, and
dispose of your own passions, and so ignorant, that you know not your own
destinies, nor how, nor to what your passions will lead you to: Besides, you
enjoined not my passions, you did not forbid me to love him, but only employed
my Wit to make him a Lover, and so I have.


And you have proved your self a Fool, in becoming a Lover.


Losers may have leave to speak any thing, and therefore I will not quarrel
with you.


We are not losers by the loss of you.


But we are, for with the loss of her, we have lost our sweet revenge: for by
her we thought to have caught him like a Woodcock in a Net, and then to have
cut off his wings of Fancy, and to have pulled out his feathers of Pride, or
else to have enticed him like a fool with a rattle, and then to have tossed him
on Satirical Tongues, as in a blanket of shame: But now, instead of a blanket
of shame, he will lie in the Arms of Beauty, and instead of being tossed with
satirical tongues, he will be flattered with kisses, for which we may curse the
Fates.


But it is strange to me, that she can love such a railing ill-natur'd man as
Monsieur Satirical.


I wonder she doth not blush at her choice! Are you not out of countenance, to
be in love with such a man, that is the worst of men?


Confess, do not you repent?


So far am I from repenting, as I love him so well, as he seems to me to be
such a person, as to be so much above the rest of Mankind, as he ought to be
adored, worshipped, kneeled down and prayed to, as to a Deity; and the beginning
of those prayers offered to him should be, O thou worthiest, meritoriousest,
and hest of men!


She's mad, she's stark mad: wherefore let us bind her with chains, and whip
her with cords, to bring her to her wits again.


Oh Sir, you are a person born to relieve the distressed, and comfort the
afflicted: for you are come in a timely hour, to release me from a company of
Furies that threaten me.


These Ladies appear too fair to be the daughters of Night, who are said to be
the Furies. But Ladies, I hope you will pardon me for taking away so pleasing a
companion from you as my Mistress is; but by her I shall be made Master of a
world of happiness, and I shall not only enjoy a world, but a Heavenly
Paradise, wherein all Goodness, Virtues, Beauties, and sweet Graces are
planted: And what man would not challenge or claim Heaven, if Heaven could be
gained by claiming; wherefore I challenge and claim this Lady, as being mine to
enjoy.


If you had challenged or claimed any other Lady, in my conscience you would
have been refused.


I desire no more than what I have.


I could cry with anger.


Ladies, take my counsel, which is, to be friends with Madam Bon' Esprit, and
Monsieur Satirical, otherwise they will laugh at you to see what fools they
have made you.


She gives us good advice; wherefore let us follow it, and be friends.


I may be seemingly friends, but never really friends.


Why seeming friendship passes and traffiques as well in the world, as those
that are real.


You say well: wherefore let us seem to be friends.


My fair Maid, what Message have you brought me now?


My Mistress remembers her loving love unto you, and bids me tell you, that she
takes it wondrous unkindly that you showed the young Ladies the Letter, and
that she heard you mocked and jeered at her.


Tell her I did but as all Lovers use to do, vaunt of their Mistris's love, and
boast of their Mistris's favours.


She doth not like your boasting; but howsoever, to show and express her
constant love and affectionate heart, she hath sent you two hundred pounds to
buy you a Nag.


I accept of the Present, and tell her I will ride the Nag for her sake.


My Mistress will be a joyed Woman, to hear that you will ride for her sake.


But is thy Mistress rich?


Yes by my truth is she; for she hath store of bags in her Chests.


But are they full of gold and silver?


Yes: for I have seen her tell the money in the bags, bag after bag.


Is it all her own?


Yes certainly it is all her own.


How came she to be so rich?


Why the young Ladies Parents give her money or moneys worth to Govern and
Educate their Daughters, and the young Ladies bribe her to keep their counsels,
and fee her to be their Agent, and their Courtly Servants present her with rich
gifts to prefer their Suits, and to speak in their behalfs to the young Ladies;
and thus she gains on every side, and takes gifts on both hands, and she being
miserable and sparing, must needs be rich; but now she is become a Lover, she
begins to grow prodigal, as all Lovers are; but if she had a million, she says,
nay swears, she could bestow it all on her beloved, which beloved is your
Worship.


I could be well content to marry her wealth, and lie with her Maid, but I
would not be troubled with the Mistress.


My Mistress, I believe, will be a very fond Wife.


And that fondness is the second obstacle I stick at: for first to be old, and
then to be fond, will be a double misery, as being an intolerable trouble, and
a nauseous vexation; for there is nothing more hateful, than an amorous fond
old woman: But if thou wilt be fond of me, I shall like it well; and if any
thing could persuade me to marry thy Mistress, next to her wealth, will be in
hopes of thy kindness. What say you, will you be kind?


I shall not be undutiful: when you are my Master, I shall deny no service I
can do your Worship.


That's well promised: In the mean time remember me to thy Mistress, and thank
her for her Present, and tell her, the more such Presents she sends, the
welcomer they shall be.


Mademoiselle, you may do a charitable Act.


As how?


As to marry me.


If it be a Charity to you, it would be none to my self, but the contrary: I
should prove cruel to my self, in making my life unhappy.


Yet it will be a meritorious Act: for what is more meritorious than to save a
soul?


So I shall rob Pluto of his due and just right.


He will never miss his loss: for on my Conscience he is not so good an
Arithmetician, as he could count and number the Millions of souls he hath in
Hell, or those he hath right to; nay, if he had the skill of Utlick, he could
not number them, for they surmount all Accounts.


But the torments he puts souls, to will ^ind them out.


It is a question whether souls are capable of torments; but howsoever; to put
it out of question, pray marry me: for I am become of a sudden very
consentious.


But there will be another question, which is, Whether Marriage will save you,
or not?


O yes: for the Purgatory of Marriage doth purify Souls, and make them fit for
Heaven.


But I fear, if I should marry you, I should do like those that strive to save
a drowning man; so I, endeavouring to save you, should lose my self.


There is no Honourable Act, without some danger to the Actor.


But all wise Actions have security.


There is no security in Nature.


I will consider, although after a wise consideration I do a foolish action, as
most considerers do.


Madam, I hear I live in your good Opinion.


Your merits do.


I hope if you do esteem my merits, if I have merits to be esteemed, you will
not despise my Person, nor deny my Suit.


I esteem of your person for your merits sake, and those that have merits, and
are worthy, will make no ignoble Suit: wherefore I may grant it before I know
it.


My Suit is, to accept of me for your Husband.


I shall not deny to be your Wife.


Well met, Monsieur Heroical, and Mademoiselle Ambition.


Now we are all met, how shall we pass the time away?


Nay rather, how shall we recreate our time?


Let us sit and declare what we love or hate.


Agreed,


Shall we declare our love or our hate first?


Our love first.


Nay faith let love close up our discourse.


Then let hate be the Gentleman-Usher.


She will usher you into foul ways.


Let her usher us into as foul ways as she will, we will follow her.


Begin, begin.


I hate poverty: for that dejects the Spirits, and oppresses the Life.


I hate falsehood: for that deceives my Reason, and blind-folds my Senses.


I hate a fool, because he obstructs my Understanding, and sets my Brain on the
Rack.


I hate noise, because it disturbs my thoughts, hurts my hearing, and buries
sense, reason, and auricular words.


I hate sickness, because it is a friend to Death.


I hate vain follies, because they bring neither content, pleasure, nor profit.


I hate a Court, because it puts Modesty out of countenance, Patience out of
humour, and Merit out of favour.


I hate a slavish Peace, because there is no employment for noble active
spirits.


I hate truth, because it tells me my faults.


I hate truth, because it hinders my search thereof.


I hate motion, because therein there is no rest.


I hate rest, because it makes no Inquiries.


I hate life, because therein is more pain and trouble than pleasure or peace.


I hate restraint, because it inslaves life.


I hate a Nunnery, because it doth not only restrain, but bar out Sex from the
sight of men.


Thou love men well, that their very sight delights thee.


I hate light, because it discovers Lovers.


I hate darkness, because it conceals Adulteries.


I hate a chaste Beauty, because she quenches my hopes, and inflames my
desires.


I hate Mademoiselle la Belle, because Monsieur Sensuality did like her.


I hate Age: for that vades Beauty, and banishes Lovers.


No more of Age and Hate, take Love without Beauty.


Mother Matron would have you take her.


Nay faith we will leave Mother Matron, and begin with Love.


I love plenty: for in plenty lives happiness.


I love freedom: for in freedom lives pleasure.


By your favour, Plenty may want happiness, and Freedom pleasure.


I love to go to Church.


What, to hear a Sermon?


No, to meet a Mistress.


Out upon thee thou Reprobate, would you make a Church a Bawdy-house?


No, I would make that place where Beauties were, a Church, and the fairest
should be the Godess I would pray to.


There are not any that are fair will hear you.


And those that are foul I will not pray to.


Follow Love: for that makes all things fair and pleasing.


I love silence: for in silence my life lives easily, my thoughts freely, and
my mind harmoniously.


Sometimes the thoughts disturb the mind, and so the life, more than noise
disturbs the thoughts.


I love Honour: for in Honour lives Respect.


I love Beauty: for in Beauty lives admiration.


I love Fame: for in Fame lives the memory of the best of my Actions.


I love power: for in power lives Adorations.


I love Wit: for that delights my self, and recreates my friends.


I love Eloquence: for that delights my Ear.


But Eloquence will deceive your Judgment, delude your Understanding, and
flatter your Passions with insinuating persuasions, and will draw you into an
Erroneous Belief, and by that unto unjust actions.


I love Mademoiselle Portrait.


I love Monsieur Sensuality.


I love Mademoiselle Ambition.


I love Monsieur Heroic.


I love Mademoiselle Bon' Esprit.


I love Monsieur Satirical.


I love Mademoiselle Superbe.


I love Monsieur Vain-glorious.


I love Mademoiselle Pleasure.


I love Monsieur Tranquillitous Peace.


I love Mademoiselle Faction.


I love Monsieur Censure.


I love ma filia Excess.


I love Monsieur Busy.


I love ma filia Wanton.


I love Monsieur Liberty.


I love a single life: for in Marriage lives too much trouble to live in Ease.


I love to continue a Widow: for Temperance is banished from most places and
persons.


I love Monsieur Frisk; but Monsieur Frisk loves not me.


Faith I'll persuade him to love, if not thy person, yet thy wealth; for thou
art rich, and he hath hardly enough means to bear up his Gentility: Besides,
one Maid and one Widow is enough, more would be too much.


And one Bachelor.


Who's that?


Monsieur Inquisitive.


Faith 'tis fit and proper he should live a Bachelor: for an Inquisitive
Husband would not be good, neither for his own sake, nor his Wives.


But Gentlemen and Ladies, although you all say you love such a Lady, and such
a Lady loves such a Gentleman, yet you do not say you will marry each other.


You may be sure, if we do publicly profess love, we intend to marry: for
though we may love and not marry, or marry and not love, yet not profess it in
an open Assembly; for Love without Marriage lives incognito.


But marriage without love is visible enough: for it lies to the view of all
their neighbours knowledge.


Well, noble Gentlemen, and virtuous Ladies, if you resolve all to marry, I
would advise you to marry all in one day.


O Madam Temperance, you are sick.


Why?


By reason healthful temperance never gives such surfeiting counsel: for there
are as many of us as might be marrying a year, and keeping their Festivals, and
you would have all married in one day.


Madam Temperance means, she would have a whole year as one Wedding-day


And one Wedding-day to the Bride and Bridegroom, is as one whole year.


Not to every Bride and Bridegroom: for on my Conscience Monsieur Frisk, if he
should marry Mother Matron, will think his Wedding-day but a minute long.


But Mother Matron will think the day an Age.


You speak so loud, she'll hear you.


O no, for the most part she is deaf: for she many times stops wool into her
ears to keep out the cold.


I hear that Wits Cabal is removing out of Cupids Court into Hymens prison, and
there to be bound in bonds of Matrimony.


Faith I pity the Cabal, and condemn their Wit, by reason it did not keep them
out of slavery.


Wit is both a Pander and a Traitor: for Wit is a Pimp in Cupids Court, and
betrays his Court to Hymens Prison.


There are no prisoners look so dejectedly as Hymens prisoners.


There is great reason for it: for they are almost starved for want of variety,
and they have less liberty than other prisoners have.


You hear of the great Marriages that are concluded on, and they are to be
dispatch'd out of hand.


Hear of them (say you) I must stop my Ears, and shut my Eyes, if I did not
both hear and see their preparations: for all the Tradesmen are so busily
employed, as if they were never to sell or work more after these Marriages.


What Tradesmen are those?


Why Taylors, Shoemakers, Hosiers, Seamstresses, Feather-men, Periwig-makers,
Perfumers, Clothiers, Linnengers, Silk men, Mercers, Milliners, Haberdashers,
Curlers, Spurriers, Sadlers, Coach-makers, Upholstorers, besides Confectioners,
Cooks, Bakers, Brewers, Butchers, Poulterers, and twenty more I cannot think
of.


They will kill and destroy so many creatures for their Feasts, that they will
make a massacre.


A Famine I think:


But there will be great dancings at the Court they say: for three will be
Masks, Plays, Balls, and such braveries as never was.


These public Weddings, and such public Revellings, put the Gentry to more
charges, than many times they are able to spare; which if it were not for
Revelling, there would be no need of such vain and idle Expenses.


I mean to be at some charges, as to make me a new Suit or two of Clothes.


Faith I will spare my purse, and stay at home.


Where will you keep your Wedding-Feast?


We will keep ours at the Court.


So will we.


And so will we.


And so will we.


If you please, Mistress, we will keep ours in the Country.


I approve of it.


If my Mistress agree, we will keep ours at the Play-house, and feast and dance
upon the Stage.


I agree and approve of your Choice.


An Ordinary, or Tavern, is a more commodious place for the Society of the
Wits: for I am sure all the Wits will meet there.


But if an Ordinary, or Tavern, be more commodious, yet they are not so public
places as the Theaters of Players; so that Wits may be merrier and freer in a
Tavern, but not so divulged as on a Stage in a Play-House.


The truth is, an Ordinary or Tavern is a more proper place for Monsieur
Sensuality and his Mistress to keep their Wedding-Feast, than for Monsieur
Satirical and his Mistress.


By your favour, the most proper place for us is the Court.


I think that an Hospitable Gentleman's House in the Country, is most proper for
Monsieur Sensuality to keep his Wedding-Feast in.


That is a more proper place for Liberty and Wanton.


Nay, by your favour, another House (which shall be nameless, for fear of
offending) is fitter for them.


My Honey sweet Love, where shall we keep our Wedding-Feast?


For your sake, my Sugar-sweeting, we will keep it in Bedlam, and Monsieur
Busy and his Bride shall keep us company.


Thou art a very wag, my Love.


W' are all agreed.


Pray Jove we speed.



