Good Master Priest go comfort my old Lady.


If you will Comfort me, I will strive to Comfort her.


So we shall prove the Crumbs of Comfort.


But is my Lady so sad still?


Faith to day she hath been better than I have seen her, for she was so patient
as to give order for Blacks; but I commend the young Lady Madam Iantil, who
bears out the Siege of Sorrow most Courageously, and on my Conscience I believe
will beat grief from the fort of her heart, and become victorious over her
misfortunes.


Youth is a good Soldier in the Warfare of Life, and like a valiant Cornet or
Ensign, keeps the Colours up, and the Flag flying, in despite of the Enemies,
and were our Lady as young as Madam Iantil, she would grieve less, but to lose
an old Friend after the loss of a young Beauty is a double, nay a trible
affliction, because there is little or no hopes to get another good Husband,
for though an old woman may get a Husband, yet ten thousand to one but he will
prove an Enemy, or a Devil.


It were better for my Lady if she would marry again, that her Husband should
prove a Devil than a Mortal Enemy, for you can free her from the one though
not from the other, for at your words, the great Devil will avoid or vanish,
and you can bind the lesser Devils in Chains, and whip them with holy Rods
until they roar again.


Nay, we are strong enough for the Devil at all times, and in all places,
neither can he deceive us in any shape, unless it be in the shape of a young
Beauty, and then I confess he overcomes us, and torments our hearts in the fire
of love, beyond all expression.


If I were a Devil I would be sure to take a most beautiful shape to torment
you, but my Lady will torment me if I stay any longer here.


Sir, you being newly come from the Army, pray what news?


I suppose you have heard how our Army was forced to fight by the Enemies
provocations, hearing the Lord General lay sick, whereupon the Generals Lady
the Lady Victoria, caused her Amazonians to march towards the Masculine Army,
and to entrench some half a mile distance therefrom, which when the Masculine
Army heard thereof, they were very much troubled thereat, and sent a command
for them to retreat back, fearing they might be a disturbance, so a destruction
unto them by, doing some untimely or unnecessary action; but the Female Army
returned the Masculine Army an Answer, that they would not retreat unless they
were beaten back, which they did believe the Masculine Sex would not, having
more honour than to fight with the Female Sex; but if the men were so base,
they were resolved to stand upon their own defence; but if they would let them
alone, they would promise them upon the honour of their words not to advance
any nearer unto the Masculine Army, as long as the Masculine Army could assault
their Enemies, or defend themselves, and in this posture I left them.


Noble Heroickesses, I have intelligence that the Army of Reformations begins
to flag, wherefore now or never is the time to prove the courage of our Sex, to
get liberty and freedom from the Female Slavery, and to make our selves equal
with men: for shall Men only sit in Honours chair, and Women stand as waiters
by? shall only Men in Triumphant Chariots ride, and Women run as Captives by?
shall only men be Conquerors, and women Slaves? shall only men live by Fame,
and women die in Oblivion? no, no, gallant Heroics raise your Spirits to a
noble pitch, to a deaticall height, to get an everlasting Renown, and infinite
praises, by honourable, but unusual actions: for honourable Fame is not got
only by contemplating thoughts which lie lasily in the Womb of the Mind, and
prove Abortive, if not brought forth in living deeds; but worthy Heroickesses,
at this time Fortune desires to be the Midwife, and if the Gods and Goddesses
did not intend to favour our proceedings with a safe deliverance, they would
not have offered us so fair and fit an opportunity to be the Mothers of
glorious Actions, and everlasting Fame, which if you be so unnatural to
strangle in the Birth by fearful Cowardice, may you be blasted with Infamy,
which is worse than to dye and be forgotten; may you be whipped with the
torturing tongues of our own Sex we left behind us, and may you be scorned and
neglected by the Masculine Sex, whilst other women are preferred and beloved,
and may you walk unregarded until you become a Plague to your selves; but if
you Arm with Courage and fight valiantly, may men bow down and worship you,
birds taught to sing your praises, Kings offer up their Crowns unto you, and
honour enthrone you in a mighty power.

May time and destiny attend your will,
Fame be your scribe to write your actions still;
And may the Gods each act with praises fill.

Fear us not, fear us not, we dare and will follow you wheresoever and to what
you dare or will lead us, be it through the jaws of Death.


GReat Mars thou God of War, grant that our Squadrons may like unbroaken Clouds
move with entire Bodies, let Courage be the wind to drive us on, and let our
thick swelled Army darken their Sun of hope with black despair, let us power
down showers of their blood, to quench the fiery flames of our revenge.

And where those showers fall, their Deaths as seeds
Sown in times memory sprout up our deeds;
And may our Acts Triumphant gat lands make,
Which Fame may wear for our Heroics sake.

Doll, how doth our Lady since the burying of my Patron?


Faith she begins now to have regard to her health, for she take Iackalato
every Morning in her Bed falling, and then she hath a mess of Gelly broth for
her Breakfast, and drinks a Cup of Sack before Dinner, and eats a White wine
Caudle every afternoon, and for her Supper she hath new laid Eggs, and when she
goes to Bed, she drinks a hearty draught of Muskadine to make her sleep well;
besides, if she chances to wake in the Night, she takes comfortable Spirits, as
Angelica, Aniseeds, Besor, aquamirabilis, and the like hot waters, to comfort
her heart, and to drive away all Melancholy thoughts.


Those things will do it if it be to be done, but I am sorry that my Lady hath
sold all my Patrons Horses, Saddles, Arms, Clothes, and such like things at the
Drums head, and by out-cryes, to get a little the more money for them, I fear
the World will condemn her, as believing her to be covetous.


O that's nothing, for what she loses by being thought covetous, she will
regain by being thought rich, for the World esteems and respects nothing so
much as riches.


Pray Sir what news from the Army? you are newly come from thence.


I suppose you have heard how the Effeminate Army was some half a mile from the
Masculine Armies; but the Masculine Army being very carnest to fight, not only
to get Victory and power, but to revenge each others losses, as their Friends
slain in the former B^ttel, which thoughts of revenge did so fire their minds
and inflame their Spirits, that if their Eyes had been as much illuminated as
their flaming Spirits were, there might have been seen two blazing Armies thus
joining their Forces against each other; at last began a cruel fight, where
both the Armies fought with such equal Courages and active Limbs, as for a long
time neither side could get the better, but at the last the Army of Faction
broke the Ranks and Files of the Army of Reformation, whereupon every Squadron
began to fall into a Confusion, no order was kept, no chardge was heard, no
command obeyed, terror and fear ran maskerd about, which helped to rout our
Army, whereupon the Enemy killed many of our men, and wounded many more, and
took numbers of Prisoners; but upon this defeat came in the Female Army, in the
time that some of the Enemy was busy in gathering up the Conquered spoils,
others in pursuit of the remainders of our men, others were binding up the
Prisoners, others driving them to their Quarters like a Company of Sheep to a
Market there to be sold; but when as some of the Commanders perceived a fresh
Army coming towards them, their General commanded the Trumpets to sound a
Retreat to gather them together, and also made haste to order and settle his
men in Battle Array, and desirous their General was to have all the Prisoners
slain; but the Female Army came up so fast and so close to prevent that
mischief, as they had not time to execute that design; but their General
encouraged his Soldiers, and bid them not to be disheartened, persuading them
not to lose what they had got from an Army of men to an Army of boys, for said
he they seem to be no other by the appearance of their shapes and statures; but
when the Female Army came to encounter them, they found their charge so hot and
furious as made them give place, which advantage they took with that prudence
and dexterity, as they did not only rout this Army of Faction, killing and
wounding many, and set their own Countrymen at liberty, and recovered their
losses, and gained many spoils, and took numbers of Prisoners of their Enemies
with Bag and Baggage, but they pursued those that fled into their Trenches, and
beat them out of their works, and took possession thereof, where they found
much riches; these Trenches being taken, the Lady Victoria took possession, and
made them her Quarters, calling all her Female Soldiers to enter therein by
the sound of Flutes, which they always used instead of Trumpets, and their
Drums were Kettel-Drums; but upon this Victory the Masculine Sex of the Army of
Reformation was much out of Countenance, being doubly or trebly overcome, twice
by their Enemy, and then by the gallant actions of the Females which out-did
them, yet they thought it best to take their advantage whilst the Victory was
fresh and flourishing, and their Enemies weak and fearful, to lay siege to the
next Towns in the Enemies Country; whereupon the Lady Victoria and her Female
Soldiers hearing of the Army of Reformations designs, for they had sent the
men to their own Quarters as soon as the Battle was won and Victory got; Also
the Masculine Prisoners they sent to the men's Quarters, not intermixing
themselves with the men, but as I said they hearing the design they had to
besiege the Towns were much enraged for not making them of their Councils,
whereupon they sent a Messenger like as an Ambassador to tell the Masculine
Army they did wonder at their ingratitude, that they should forget so much
their relievers as to go upon any Warlike design without making them acquainted
therewith, striving as it were to steal the Victory out of their hands, but
said they, since we are become victorious over our Enemies, and Masters, and
Mistresses of the Field, by our own valiant actions and prudent conducts, we
will maintain our power by our own strengths, for our Army is become now
numerous, full and flourishing, formed, and conformable by our Discipline,
skilful by our practice, valiant by our resolutions, powerful by our
victory, terrible to our Enemies, honourable to our Friends, and a subject of
Envy to the Masculine Sex; but your Army is weak and decrepit, sitter for an
Hospital than for a Field of War, your power is lost, your courage is cold,
your discipline disorderous, and your command slighted, despised by your
Enemies, pitied by your Friends, forsaken of good Fortune, and made subject
unto our Effeminate Sex, which we will use by our power like Slaves. But when
our Lord General who was recovered out of sickness, and all his Commanders
about him heard this message, which was delivered in a full assembly, according
as the Lady Victoria had commanded the message should be, the men could not
chose but smile at the women's high and mighty words, knowing they had all sweet
and gentle dispositions and complying Natures, yet they were at a stand which
to be pleased at most, as in hearing them disparage their Masculine Sex, or in
advancing their own Female Sex by their self Commendations, but howsoever so
well pleased the men were with the women's gallant actions, that every man was
proud that had but a Female acquaintance in the Female Army; but our Lord
General was mightily taken with their bravadoes, and much mirth amongst the
Commanders was about it; but when they were to advise what to do in the affairs
of War, and the warring women, the General told them he made no question but
that most men knew by experience that women were won by gentle persuasions and
fair promises, and not by rigid actions or angry frowns, besides said he, all
noble natures strive to assist the weakest in all lawful actions, and that he
was no gallant man that submits not to a woman in all things that are
honourable, and when he doth dissent it must be in a Courtly manner, and a
Complemental behaviour and expression, for that women were Creatures made by
nature, for men to love and admire, to protect and defend, to cherish and
maintain, to seek and to sue to, and especially such women which have out-done
all their Sex, which nature ever made before them; wherefore said he, 'tis fit
to these women above all others we should yield our selves Prisoners, not only
in love but in Arms; wherefore let us treat fairly with them, and give them
their own conditions. But in the mean time the Lady Victoria thought it best
not to lose ^y opportunity with talking out the time, wherefore she besieged a
considerable Fort, a place which was at it were the Key that unlocked the
passage into the heart of the Enemies Kingdom, and at this siege they were
when became away, but the General and his Council had sent a Messenger unto
them, but what his message was I cannot give you an account.


Now my Lord is Entombed, our Lady will enanchor her self by his Ash.


'Tis strange so young and beautiful a Lady should bury her self from the
World, and quit all the pleasures thereof, to live with dead Ashes.


A grieved Mind, Melancholy Thoughts, and an Oppressed Heart, considers not the
Body, nor the World.


But yet I think 'tis an example that few of her Sex will imitate.


Because few of the Female Sex can truly Grieve or be Melancholy.


No, it is that few of the Female Sex can truly and constantly Love.


Pallas and Mercury at thy Death mourned,
So as to marble Statues here they are turned;
Mars sheaths his Sword, and begs of thee a room,
To (...) all his courage in thy Tomb;
Hymen amazed stands, and is in doubt,
Thy Death his holy fire hath put out;
What various shape of Fortune thou did meet,
Thou scorn her frowns and kicks he with thy feet,
Now sound aloud the Trumpet of good Fame,
And blow abroad his everlasting name.
The Cardinal Virtues Pillars of thy fame,
Weep to see now each but an empty name
Only for Painters and for Carvers be,
When thy life sustained them more than they Thee;
Each Capital a sadder Virtue bears,
But for the Graces would be drowned in tears;
Faith strengthens Fortitude lest she should faint,
Hope comforts Prudence as her only Saint;
And Charity to Justice doth advance
To Counsel her, as Patience Temperance;
But woeful Counsellors they are each one,
Since grief for thy Death turned them all to stone.
Now I depose my self, and here lay down,
Titles, not Honour, with my richer Crown;
This Crimson Velvet Mantle I throw by,
There case and plenty in rich Ermins lie;
Off with this glittering Gown which once did bear
Ambition and fond pride lie you all there;
Bracelets and Pendants which I now do wear,
Here I divest my Arms and so each Ear;
Cut off these dangling Tresses once a crime,
Urging my Glass to look away my time;
Thus all these Worldly vanities I wave,
And bury them all in my Husbands grave.

Put on that pure and spotless garment white,
To show my chaster thoughts, my Souls delight;
Cord of Humility about my waste,
A Veil of obscure Mourning about me cast;
Here by this sadder Tomb shall be my Station,
And in this Book my holy Contemplation.
Farewell my Servants, farewell every one,
As you all love me pray leave me alone.
No dust shall on thy marble ever stay,
But with my sadder sighs i'll blow 't away;
And the least spot that any Pillar bears,
I'll wash it clean with grief of dropping tears;
Sun fly this Hemisphaer, and feast my Eyes,
With Melancholy night, and never rise,
Nor by reflection, for all light I hate,
Therefore no Planet do illuminate;
The twinkling Stars that in cold nights are seen,
Clouds muster up and hide them as a Screen,
The Centrick fire raise vapours from the Earth,
Get and be Midwife for those fogs their birth;
Then chilling colds freeze up thy pores without,
That trembling Earth-quakes no where may get out;
And that our Mother Earth may nothing wear,
But Snow and Icicles to curl her hair;
And so Dame Nature Barren nothing bring,
Wishing a Chaos, since despairs a Spring;
Since all my joys are gone, what shall I do,
But with the whole World ruined with me too?

May it please your Excellence, our Lord General and the rest of the Commanders
have sent you and your Heroics a Letter, desiring it may be read in a full
Assembly.


One of you take the Letter and read it.


To the most Excellent of her Sex, and her most worthy Heroickesses. YOu
Goddesses on Earth, who have the power and dominion over men, 'tis you we
worship and adore, we pray and implore your better opinions of us, than to
believe we are so unjust as to take the Victory out of your fair hands, or so
vain-glorious as to attribute it to our selves, or so ungrateful as not to
acknowledge our lives and liberties from your valours, wisdoms, and good
fortune, or so imprudent as to neglect your power, or so ill-bred as to pass by
you without making our addresses, or so foolish as to go about any action
without your knowledge, or so unmannerly as to do anything without your leave;
wherefore we entreat you and pray you to believe that we have so much honour in
us, as to admire your beauties, to be attentive to your discourses, to do^e on
your persons, to honour your virtues, to divulge your sweet graces, to praise
your behaviours, to wait your commands, to obey your directions, to be proud of
your favours, and we wear our lives only for your service, and believe we are
not only taken Captives by your Beauties, but that we acknowledge we are bound
as your Slaves by your valours: wherefore we all pray that you may not
misinterpret our affections and care to your persons, in believing we sent you
away because we were weary of you, which if so, it had been a sin unpardonable,
but we sent you away for your safety, for Heaven knows your Departure was our
Hell, and your Absence our Torments; but we confess our errors, and do humbly
beg our pardons, for if you had accompanied us in our Battles, you had kept us
safe, for had we fought in your presence, our Enemies had never overcome us,
since we take courage from your Eyes, life from your smiles, and victory from
your good wishes, and had become Conquerours by your encouragements, and so we
might have triumph in your favours, but hereafter your rules shall be our
methods, by which we will govern all our actions, attending only wholly your
directions, yet give us leave humbly to offer our advise as Subjects to their
Princess if you think ^it, we think it best to follow close the victory, lest
that our Enemies recruit their forces, with a sufficient strength to beat us
out of what we have gained, or at least to hinder and oppose our entrance, and
hopes of Conquering them, where if you will give us leave we will besiege and
enter their Towns, and race their Walls down to the ground, which harbour their
disorders, offending their Neighbours Kingdoms; yet we are not so ambitous as
to desire to be Commanders, but to join our forces to yours, and to be your
assistants, and as your Common Soldiers; but leaving all these affairs of War
to your discretion, offering our selves to your service,


Noble Heroickesses, by your valours, and constant, and resolute proceedings,
you have brought your Tyrants to be your Slaves; those that Commanded your
absence, now humbly sue your presence, those that thought you a hindrance have
felt your assistance, the time is well altered since we were sent to retreat
back from the Masculine Army; and now nothing to be done in that Army without
our advise, with an humble desire they may join their forces with ours: but
gallant Heroickesses, by this you may perceive we were as ignorant of our
selves as men were of us, thinking our selves shifdels, weak, and unprofitable
Creatures, but by our actions of War we have proved our selves to be every way
equal with men; for what we want of strength, we have supplied by industry, and
had we not done what we have done, we should have lived in ignorance and
slavery.


All the knowledge of our selves, the honour of renown, the freedom from
slavery, and the submission of men, we acknowledge from you; for you advised
us, counselled us, instructed us, and encouraged us to those actions of War:
wherefore to you we owe our thanks, and to you we give our thanks.


What answer will you return to the Masculine Army?


What answer you will think best.


We shall not need to write back an answer, for this Messenger may deliver it
by word of mouth; wherefore Sir pray remember us to your General and his
Commanders, and tell them, that we are willing upon their submissions to be
friends, and that we have not neglected our good Fortune, for we have laid
siege to so considerable a Fort, which if taken, may give an easy passage into
the Kingdom, which Fort we will deliver to their forces when they come, that
they may have the honour of taking it; for tell them, we have got honour enough
in the Battle we fought, and victory we did win.


We are bound to curse you Monsieur Gravity, for retarding our visits to the
Widows, for I told you we should come too late if we did not go before their
Husbands were buried


But I do not hear they have made a promise to marry any as yet.


That's all one unto us, but the noblest, youngest, richest, and fairest Widow
is gone; for though she is not promised or married, yet she is incloistered,
and that is worse than marriage; for if she had been married there might have
been some hopes her Husband would have died, or been killed, or some ways or
other Death would have found to have taken him away.


Let us comfort our selves with hopes, that it is but a Ladies humour, which
she will be soon weary of, for when her Melancholy ^it is over, she will come
forth of her Cloister, and be fonder to marry than if she had never gone in.


Well, since she is gone, let us assault the other.


What, the old woman that hath never a Tooth in her head?


Why, she is rich, and she will kiss the softer for having no Bones in her
mouth.


The Devil shall kiss her before I will; besides, an old woman is thought a
Witch.


Pish, that is because they are grown ill-favoured with Age, and all young
people think whatsoever is ill-favoured belongs to the Devil.


An ancient man is a comely sight, being grave and wise by experience, and what
he hath lost in his person, he hath gained in his understanding; besides,
beauty in men looks as unhandsome as age in women, as being effiminate; but an
old woman looks like the picture of Envy, with hollow Eyes, fallen Checks, lank
Sides, black pale Complexion, and more Wrinkles than time hath Minutes.


Nay by your favour, some old women look like the full Moon, with a red,
swelled, great, broad face, and their Bodies like as a spungy Cloud, thick and
gross, like our fat Hostess.


Gentlemen, why do you rail against ancient women so much, since those that are
wise will never marry such Boys as you?


It is to be observed, that always old Girls match themselves with young
Boys.


None but Fools will do so.


Why did you or any man else ever know a wise old woman, or a chaste young
woman in their lives? for the one dotes with Age, the other is corrupted with
Flattery, which is a Bawd to self-conceit.


Grant it be so, yet it is better to marry an old doting Fool, than a wanton
young Fille.


For my part, I think now it is the best way to marry none, since Madam Iantil
is gone, but to live like the Lacedaemonians, all in Common.


I am of another opinion, wherefore if you will go along with me to the old
Widow Madam Passionate, and help to Countenance my Suit, I shall take it as an
act of Friendship.


Come, we will be thy Pillars to support thee.


What, doth thy Lady resolve to live an Anchorite?


I think so.


How doth she pass away her time in her solitary Self?


Why, as soon as she rises she goes to my Lords Tomb, and says her Prayers,
then she returns and eats some little Breakfast, as a Crust of Bread and a
Draught of Water, then she goes to her Gallery and walks and Contemplates all
the Forenoon, then about twelve a Clock at Noon she goes to the Tomb again and
says more Prayers, then returns and eats a small Dinner of some Spoon-meats,
and most of the Afternoon she sits by the Tomb and reads, or walks in the
Cloister, and views the Pictures of my Lord that are placed upon the Walls,
then in the Evening she says her Evening Prayers at the Tomb, and eats some
light Supper, and then prays at the Tomb before she goes to Bed, and at
Midnight she rises and takes a white waxen Torch lighted in her hand, and goes
to the Tomb to pray, and then returns to Bed.


Faith she prays often enough in the day, she shall not need to pray at
Midnight; but why doth she rise just at Midnight?


I know not, unless she is of that opinion which some have been of, which is
that the Souls or Spirits of the dead rise at that hour out of their Graves and
Tombs, to visit the face of the Earth, and perhaps my Lady watches or hopes to
converse by that means with my Lords Ghost: for since she cannot converse with
him living, she desires to converse with him dead, or otherwise she would not
spend most of her time at this Tomb as she doth; but how doth thy Lady spend
her time now?


Faith as a Lady should do, with nourishing her Body with good hear^y meats and
drink. And though my Lady doth not pray at Midnight, yet she converses with
Spirits at that time of Night.


What Spirits?


Marry Spirits distilled from Wine and other Cordials, which she drinks when
she wakes, which is at Midnight; but do you watch fast and pray as thy Lady
doth?


No truly, for I feed with the rest of my Ladies Servants, which live within
the House without the Cloister, and they eat and drink more liberally.


Sir, we come to kiss the hands of the Lady Passionate, if you please to inform
your Lady of us.


I shall, if it please you to enter into another Room.


Madam, there are three Gentlemen come to visit you, desiring you would give
them leave to kiss your hands.


Shut down the lid of the Seller of Strong-waters, and rid away the loose
things that lie about, that my Chamber may appear in some order.


Bring in those Gentlemen?


I marry Sir, here is a comfortable smell indeed.


Faith the smell of these Spirits overcomes my Spirits, for I am ready to
swooned.


Pray Gentlemen sit down.

Truly I have had so great a wind in my Stomach as it hath troubled me very
much.


Which to express the better, she rasps at every word to make a full stop.


Perchance Madam you have eaten some meat that disgests not well.


A Toad.


No, truly I cannot gess what should cause it, unless it be an old pipin, and
that is accounted a great restorative.

But I believe it is the drugs of my Sorrow which stick in my Stomach: for I
have grieved mightily for my dead Husband rest his Soul; he was a good Man, and
as kind a Husband as ever woman had.


But the destinies Madam are not to be controlled, Death seizes on all, be it
early or late; wherefore every one is to make their life as happy as they can;
since life is so short; and in order to that, you should choose a new Companion
to live withal; wherefore you must marry again.


'Tis true, the Destinies are not to be controlled as you say, wherefore if my
Destiny be to marry, I shall marry, or else I shall dye a Widow.


She will lay the fault of her second Marriage on Destiny, as many the like
foolish actions are laid to Destinies charge, which she was never guilty of.


If I should gess at your destiny, I should judge you will marry again, by the
quickness of your Eyes which are fair and lovely.


O Sir you flatter me.


He be sworn that he doth.


But my Eyes were good, as I have been told, both by my Glass and Friends, when
I was young, but now my face is in the Autumal.


Nay faith, it is in the midst of Winter.


But now you talk of Eyes, that young Gentleman's Eyes ( points to Compagnion)
do so resemble my Husbands as I can scarce look off from them, they have a good
Aspect.


I am glad they have an influence upon your Ladyship.


By my faith wittily answered, I dare say he is a notable youth.

Sir, for resemblance of him which is dead, I shall desire your continued
Acquaintance.


She woos me with her Husbands dead skull.

I shall render my Service to your Ladyship.


Those young youths I perceive will be my ruin if not prevented. Madam, will
your Ladyship honour me so much as to give me the private hearing of a few
words.


Yes Sir.


Madam, although I am not such a one as I could wish my self for your sake, yet
I am a Gentleman, and what I want in person or estate, my affection, respect,
and tender regard to your person, worth, and merit shall make good; besides
Madam, my years suiting to your Ladyships will make the better agreement in
marriage.


Sir you must excuse me; for though you merit a better wife than I, yet I
cannot answer your affections; wherefore I desire you will desist in your Suit,
for I am resolved, if I do marry, to please my fancy.


If your Ladyship cannot love me, Heaven forbid I should marry you; wherefore I
wish your Ladyship such a Husband as you can fancy best, and love most.

Madam your most humble Servant.


Where is our Coach?

Call the Coach to the Door?


Sir, pray give me leave to speak a word or two with you.


As many as you please.


Sir, my Lady desires your Company to morrow to Dinner, but she desires you
will come alone.


Pray give your Lady thanks for her favours, and tell her if I can possibly I
will wait on her Ladyship.


Now what encouragement have you from the old Lady?


Faith so much as I am ashamed of it, for she invites me to come alone.


On my life if thou wilt not woo her, she will woo thee.


Like enough; for there is nothing so impudent as an old woman, they will put a
young man be he never so deboist out of Countenance.


But faith consider of it, for she is rich.


So is the Devil, as Poets say, Pluto the God of riches.


I grant it, and is not he best served? for every one bows with respect, nay
worships and adores riches, and they have reason so to do, since all are
miserable that have it not, for Poverty is a torment beyond all sufferance,
which causes many to hang themselves, either in the Chain of Infamy, or in a
Hempen rope, or to do act; against the strict Laws of a Commonwealth which is
to commit self-murther; besides, Poverty is the Slave and drug, the scorn and
reproach of the World, it makes all younger Brothers Sherks, and mere Cheats,
whereas this old Ladies riches will not only give you an honest mind, and
create noble thoughts, but will give you an honourable reputation in the
World: for every one will think you Wise although you were a Fool, Valiant
although you were a Coward, and you shall have the first offers of all Offices,
and all Officers will be at you devotion, they will attend you as Slaves, the
Lawyers will plead on your side, and Judges will give sentence according as you
desire, Courtiers will flatter you, and Divines will pray for you in their
Pulpits, and if your old Lady die, and leave you her wealth, you shall have all
the young beautiful Virgins in the Kingdom gather to that City, Town, or
Village where you live, omitting no Art that may prefer them to your affection.


You say well, and I could approve of your Counsel, if she would die soon after
I had married her.


Why, put the case she should live a great while, as the truth is old women
are tough, and endure long, yet you will have her Estate to please your self
withal, which Estate will buy you fine Horses, great Coaches, maintain
Servants and great Retinues to follow you.


But she is so divellish old.


Why, let her keep her Age to her self, whilst you keep a young Mistress to
your self, and it is better to have an old Wife that will look after your
Family, and be careful and watchful therein, and a young Mistress, than a
young Wife, which will be a Tyrannical Mistress, which will look after nothing
but Vanities, and love Servants, whilst you poor wretch look like a contented
Cuckold, and so out of Countenance as you dare not show your face, whilst she
spends your Estate running about with every vain idle fellow to Plays, Masks,
Balls, Exchanges, Taverns, or meets at a private Friends private Lodging, also
making great Feasts and Entertainments, where after Dinner and Supper, there
must be gaming at Cards and Dice; where for her honour, or at least seeming so,
to lose five hundred or a thousand pounds away, and when they rise with or from
their losses, singing with a feigned voice, as if it were a trifle not to be
considered or considerable, thus if you marry an old and rich Lady you may live
and spend her Estate, but if you marry for youth and beauty, your wife will
live and spend your Estate; besides, the Husband of an old Lady lives like the
great Turk, having a Seraglio, but marrying a young wife you live like a
Prisoner never durst show your head.


He gives you good Counsel, and let me advise you to go to this Lady as she
hath invited you, for I perceive she hath a young Tooth in her old head by
refusing me, and there is none so fit to pull it out as you are, wherefore go.


Well Gentlemen, I will try if my Reason and your Counsel can prevail in my
choice.


Welcome sad thoughts that's heaped up without measure,
They're joys to me and wealthy Sons of treasure;
Were all my breath turned into sighs 'twould ease me,
And showrs of tears to bath my griefs would please me;
Then every groan so kind to take my part,
To vent some sorrows still thus from my heart;
But there's no Vacuum, O my heart is full,
As it vents sorrows new griefs in doth pull;
Is there no comfort left upon the Earth?
Let me consider Vegitable birth;
The new born virgin Lilly of the day,
In a few hours dyes, withers away;
And all the odoriferous flowers that's sweet,
Breath but a while, and then with Death do meet;
The stouter Oak at last doth yield, and must
Cast his rough skin and crumble all to dust;
But what do Sensitives? alas they be,
Beasts, Birds and flesh to die as well as we;
And harder minerals though longer stay
Here for a time, yet at the last decay,
And dye as all things else that's in this World,
For into Deaths Arms every thing is hurll'd;
Alas poor man you're in the worst Estate,
Thou die as these, yet an unhappier fate;
Thy life's but trouble still of numerous passions,
Torments thy self in many various fashions;
Condemned thou art to vexing thoughts within;
When Beasts both live and dye without a sin;
O happy Beasts than grazing look no higher,
Or are tormented with thoughts Flaming fire;
Thus by thy self and others still annoid,
And made a purpose but to be destroyed
Poor Man.

What news Sir of our Armies abroad?


Why Sir thus, in the time of our Masculine Armies recruiting, the Female Army
had taken the Fort they besieged, where upon the taking of that Fort, many
considerable Towns and strong holds surrendered, and submitted to the Female
Army; whereupon the Lady Victoria sent to her Husband to bring his Army, when
the General and all the Masculine Army came to the Female Army, much mirth and
jesting there was betwixt the Heroics and Heroickesses, and so well they did
agree, as the Female Army feasted the Masculine Army, and then gave the
possession of the surrendered Towns to the Lord General, and the Lady Victoria,
and all her Army kept themselves in and about the Fort, laying all their
victorious spoils therein, and whilst the Masculine Army is gone to Conquer the
Kingdom of Faction, they stay there upon the Frontiers, passing their time in
Heroic sports, as hunting the Stags, wild Boars, and the like, and those that
have the good Fortune to kill the Chase, is brought to the Fort and Trenches in
Triumph, and is Queen until another Chase is killed; but we hear the Masculine
Army goes on with victorious success.


I am very glad to hear it.


O Doll, I hear thy Lady is married, and not only married, but she hath married
a very young man, one that might be her Grand-Son, or Son at least.


Yes, yes, my Lady doth not intend to live with the dead as your Lady doth, but
to have the Company and pleasure of that which hath most life, which is a young
man.


Her marriage was very sudden.


So are all inconsiderated marriages, but happy is the wooing that is not long
a doing.


If I had been your Lady, I would have prolonged the time of my wooing, for the
wooing time is the happiest time.


Yes, if she had been as young as you or your Lady, but time bids my Lady make
haste.


Do you hear the news.


What news?


Why the news is that all the Kingdom of Faction hath submitted to the
Kingdom of Reformation, and that the Armies are returning home.


I am glad of it.


O unfortunate woman that I am, I was rich, and lived in plenty, none to
control me, I was Mistress of my self, Estate and Family, all my Servants
obeyed me, none durst contradict me, but all flattered me, filling my Ears with
praises, my Eyes with their humble bow; and respectful behaviours, devising
delightful sports to entertain my time, making delicious meats to please my
palate, sought out the most comfortable drinks to strengthen and increase my
Spirits, thus did I live luxuriously, but now I am made a Slave, and in my old
Age which requires rest and peace, which now Heaven knows I have but little of,
for the minstrels keep me waking, which play whilst my Husband and his Whores
dance, and he is not only contented to live riotously with my Estate, but sits
amongst his Wenches and rails on me, or else comes and scoffs at me to my face;
besides, all my Servants slight and neglect me; following those that command
the purse, for this idle young fellow which I have married first seized on all
my goods, then let Leases for many lives out of my Lands, for which he had
great fines, and now he cuts down all my Woods, and sells all my Lands of
Inheritance, which I foolishly and fondly delivered by deed of gift, the first
day I married, devesting my self of all power, which power had I kept in my own
hands I might have been used better, whereas now when he comes home drunk, he
swears and storms, and kiks me out of my warm Bed, and makes me sit shivering
and shaking in the Cold, whilst my Maid takes my place; but I find I cannot
live long, for age and disorders bring weakness and sickness, and weakness and
sickness bring Death, wherefore my marriage Bed is like to prove my grave,
whilst my Husbands Curses are my passing Bell, hay ho.


I hear the Army is returning home.


Yes, for they are returned as far back as to the Effeminate Army, and all the
Masculine Commanders have presented all the Female Commanders with their spoils
got in the Kingdom of Faction, as a tribute to their heroical acts, and due
for their assistance, and safety of their lives and Country.


And do not you hear what privileges and honours the King and his Counsel hath
resolved and agreed upon to be given to the Female Army, and the honours
particularly to be given the Lady Victoria?


No.


Why then I will tell you some, the Lady Victoria shall be brought through the
City in triumph, which is a great honour, for never any one makes triumphs in a
Monarchy but the King himself^ then that there shall be a blank for the Female
Army to write their desires and demands; also there is an Armour of gold and a
Sword a making, the hilt being set with Diamonds, and a Chariot all gilt and
embroidered to be presented to the Lady Victoria, and the City is making great
preparation against her arrival.


Certainly she is a Lady that deserves as much as can be given either from
Kings, States, or Poets.


Where is my Secretary?


Here Madam.


Read the Will I caused you to write down.


I Jantil the Widow of Seigneur Valeroso, do here make a free gift of all these
following.

Item, All my Husbands Horses and Saddels and whatsoever belongs to those
Horses, with all his Arms, Pikes, Guns, Drums, Trumpets, Colours, Waggous,
Coaches, Tents, and all he had belonging to the War, to be distributed amongst
his Officers of War, according to each degree, I freely give.

Item, All his Library of Books I give to that College he was a Pupil in when
he was at the University.

Item, To all his Servants I give the sum of their yearly wages to be yearly
paid them during their lives.

Item, I give two hundred pounds a year pension to his Chaplin Doctor Educature
during his life.

Item, I give a hundred pound a year pension to his Steward during his life.

Item, I give fifty pound a year pension to his Secretary during his life.

Item, I give a hundred pound per annum, for the use and repair of this Tomb of
my dead Husbands.

Item, I give a thousand pounds a year to maintain ten religious persons to
live in this place or House by this Tomb.

Item, I give three thousand pounds to enlarge the House, and three thousand
pounds more to build a Chapel by my Husbands Tomb.

Item, Two hundred pounds a year I give for the use and repair of the House and
Chapel.

Item, I give my Maid Nell Careless a thousand pound to live a single life.

Item, I give the rest of my Estate which was left me by my Husband Seigneur
Valeroso to the next of his name.


So 'tis well
O Death hath shook me kindly by the hand,
To bid me welcome to the silent grave;
'Tis dead and nuns sweet Death how thou doest court me,
O let me clap thy fallen Cheeks with joy,
And kiss the Emblem of what once was lips,
Thy hollow Eyes I am in love withal,
And thy balled head beyond youths best curled hair,
Prithee embrace me in thy colder Arms,
And hug me there to sit me for thy Mansion;
Then bid our Neighbour worms to feast with us,
Thus to rejoice upon my holy day;
But thou art sylow, I prithee hasten Death,
And linger not my hopes thus with thy stay,
'Tis not thy fault thou say, but fearful nature
That hinders thus Deaths progress in his way;
Oh foolish nature thinks thou can withstand,
Deaths Conquering and inevitable hand;
Let me have Music for divertisement,
This is my Mask, Deaths Ball, my Soul to dance
Out of her frail and fleshly prison here;
Oh could I now dissolve and melt, I long
To free my Soul in Slumbers with a Song;
In soft and quiet sleep here as I lie,
Steal gently out O Soul, and let me die.

O You Gods pure Angels send her,
Here about her to attend her;
Let them wait and here condoul,
Till receive her spotless Soul;
So Serene it is and fair,
It will sweeten all the Air;
You this holy wonder hears,
With the Music of the spheres;
Her Souls journey in a trice,
You'll bring safe to Paradise;
And rejoice the Saints that say,
She makes Heavens Holy-day.
Death hath not finished yet his work, h'is slow,
But he is sure, for he will do it at last;
Turn me to my dear Lord, that I may breath
My last words unto him, my dear,
Our marriage joined our flesh and bone,
Contracted by those holy words made one;
But by our Loves we joined each others heart,
And vowed that death should never us depart;
Now death doth marry us, since now we must,
Ashes to ashes be mingling our dust,
And our joyed Souls in Heaven married then,
When our frail bodies rise, we'll wed again;
And now I am joyed to lie by thy loved side,
My Soul with thy Soul shall in Heaven reside.
For that is all my
She is dead; she is dead, the body hence convey,
And to our Mistress our last rights we'll pay.

Where shall we stand to see this triumphing?


I think Neighbour this is the best place.


We shall be mightily crowded there.


For my part I will stand here, and my Apprentice Nathaniel shall stand by me,
and keep off the crowd from crowding me.


Truly Mistress that is more than I am able to do.


Well Neighbour if you be resolved to stand here, we will keep you Company.
Timothy stand by me.


If you stand here Mistress the Squibs will run under your Clothes.


No matter Timothy, let them run where they will.


I hope Neighbour none will stand before us, for I would not but see this Lady
Victoria for any thing, for they say she hath brought Articles for all women to
have as many Husbands as they will, and all Trades-mens Wives shall have as
many Apprentices as they will.


The Gods bless her for it.

She is coming, she is coming.

Stand up close, make way.

The Lady Victoria was adorned after this manner; she had a Coat on all
embroidered with silver and gold, which Coat reached no further than the Calves
of her legs, and on her legs and feet she had Buskins and Sandals embroidered
suitable to her Coat; on her head she had a Wreath or Garland of Laurel, and
her hair curled and loosely flowing; in her hand a Crystal Bolt headed with
gold at each end, and after the Chariot marched all her Female Officers with
Laurel Branches in their hands, and after them the inferior she Soldiers,
then going through the Stage, as through the City, and so entering again, where
on the midst of the Stage as if it were the midst of the City, the Magistrates
meet her, so her Chariot makes a stand, and one as the Recorder speaks a Speech
to her.

VIctorious Lady, you have brought Peace Safety and Conquest to this Kingdom
by your prudent conduct and valiant actions, which never any of your Sex in
this Kingdom did before you. Wherefore our Gracious King is pleased to give
you that which was never granted nor given to any before, which is to make you
Triumphant, for no triumph is ever made in Monarchies, but by the Kings
thereof; besides our Gracious King hath caused an act to be made and granted to
all your Sex, which Act I have order to declare, as

First, That all women shall he^after in this Kingdom be Mistress in their own
Houses and Families.

Secondly, They shall sit at the upper end of the Table above their Husbands.

Thirdly, That they shall keep the purse.

Fourthly, They shall order their Servants, turning from, or taking into their
service what number they will, placing them how they will, and ordering them
how they will, and giving them what wages they will or think fit.

Fiftly, They shall buy in what Provisions they will.

Sixtly, All the Jewels, Plate, and Household Furniture they shall claim as
their own, and order them as they think good.

Seventhly, They shall wear what fashioned Clothes they will.

Eightly, They shall go abroad when they will, without control, or giving of
any account thereof.

Ninthly, They shall eat when they will, and of what they will, and as much as
they will, and as often as they will.

Tenthly, They shall go to Plays, Masks, Balls, Churchings, Christenings,
Preachings, whenever they will, and as fine and bravely attired as they will.

Lastly, That they shall be of their Husbands Counsel.

AS for you most gallant Lady, the King hath caused to be enacted, that

First, All Poets shall strive to set forth your praise.

Secondly, That all your gallant acts shall be recorded in story, and put in
the chief Library of the Kingdom.

Thirdly, That your Arms you fought in, shall be set in the Kings Armoury.

Fourthly, That you shall always wear a Laurel Garland.

Fiftly, You shall have place next to the Kings Children.

Sixtly, That all those women that have committed such faults as is a dishonour
to the Female Sex, shall be more severely punished than heretofore, in not
following your exemplary virtues, and all those that have followed your example
shall have respective honour done to them by the State.

Seventhly and lastly, Your figure shall be cast in Brass, and then set in the
midst of the City armed as it was in the day of Battle.


Worthy Sir, the honour and privileges my Gracious King and Sovereign hath
bestowed upon me, is beyond my merit.

OUr gracious King hath caused to be enacted, as

First, All the Chief Female Commanders shall have place, as every Lords Wife
shall take place of an Earls Wife that hath not been a Soldier in the Army;
every Knights Wi^e before a Barons Wife that hath not been a Soldier in the
Army; an Esquires Wife before a Knights Wife; a Doctors Wife before an Esquires
Wife that hath not been Soldiers in the Army; a Citizens Wife before a Doctors
Wife; a Yeomans Wife before a Citizens Wife that hath not been a Soldier in
the Army; and all Trades-mens Wives that have been Soldiers in the Army shall
be free in all the Corporations in this Kingdom, these Acts during their
lives, and all the Chief Commanders shall be presented according to their
quality and merit.


O Nell, I hear thy Lady is dead, and hath left thee a thousand pound.


What doest thou weep for joy of thy thousand pound, or for grief of thy Ladies
Death?


I wish my Lady had lived, although I had begged all my life.


I am not of your mind, I had rather live well my self, as to live in plenty,
than to live poor for the life of any body, and if upon that condition my Lady
would leave me a thousand pound, I care not if she died to morrow; but my young
Master hath robbed me of all: but Nell, for all thou art left a thousand pound,
it is upon such a condition, as for my part, had it been to me, I should not
thank the giver, for they say it is given thee upon condition to live a single
life.


Truly I have seen so much sorrow in my Lady, and so much folly in your Lady
concerning Husbands, that had not my Lady enjoined me to live a single life, I
would never have married; wherefore my Ladies generosity did not only provide
for my bodily life, and for my plentiful living, but provided for the
tranquillity of my mind, for which I am trebly obliged to reverence her memory.


The Lady Victoria hath been at Court, and hath had public Audience.


Yes, and the Lady Victoria and her she Officers and Commanders have
distributed all their spoils got in these Wars amongst the Common she
Soldiers.


All the Ladies that went not with the Army look most pitifully out of
Countenance.


Yes, and they are much troubled that the Heroics shall take place.


The Lord General seems to be very proud of his Lady, methinks he looks upon
her with a most pleased Eye.


He hath reason, for never man had so gallant and noble a Lady, not more
virtuous and loving a Wife than the Lord General hath.



