I Ack Manly, well met.


Noble Sir William the humblest of your servants.


Come, thou shalt along with me.


Whither?


To see my Mistress.


May you thrive in your courtship to her: at this time I am engaged to other
business.


Can any thing concern a Gentleman equal with a handsome Lady?


Yes, the receiving of money is more considerable with me at this time, than
all the women in the world. But who is your Mistress Knight?


I dare tell thee, Madam Beaufield, the Lady of spirit, and entertainment, the
only Magnetic widow in the Town.


They talk her a wit, and a most superstitious observer of persons, and their
garbes; I never had the happiness to kiss her hand, or be known to her, but I
converse with some who are very high and loud in her character; another time


In what grotto hast thou spent thy time, that thou art ignorant of these
people? These two are held the wits; That is the remarkable Jeerer of the Town,
and 'has purchased to himself the title of a Jeer Major.


Why, Is there a Regiment of Jeerers?


You shall pardon me, there are sets of them, as there are of Fiddlers; there is
first a set of Court Jeerers, spruce half-witted men, confident, and fierce in
their opinions; these are men that make themselves music, and their cloths
make room for their wic; and go before in all companies: Then there is the
town Jeerers, like Hoboyes or Waits of the City, that think they are wise when
they are loud, and make a noise when they come to Plays, to distract the next
mans understanding. There are Jeerers at time of the year that go down into the
Country, and infect Wakes, and Fairs, and the Sizes, with their impudence,
with which they save charges, and are never without the name of a great Lord,
to whom they are cousin Germane.


But what has he deserved to be called (...) Jeer Major, and to bear such a
title? I have seen the Rooke.


An excellent ill nature has preferred him to opinion: the other has merited but
the name of a Jeer minor; yet they can see me pleasant in their reproaches,
and laugh in their own defence, which many times keeps off the cudgel.


Nay, Jeering is a blessing that every man may have if he give his mind to it:
but wit (if I remember what I was taught) happens not to one amongst five
hundred on 'em. But I forget my affair.


Shall's meet and be merry this Evening.


There's no music in me without my singing birds about me, then I am a Lord,
and when I put on my habit of Leister, I am his own excellence.


Dost thou preserve that him or still?


I may chance by the false light of the Evening march to thy Lodging.


Dost know where tis? I am removed.


So, no discoveries what Prince I am.


A match: that shape will beget us some mirch.


Your most humble servant.


My Mistress is somewhat melancholy, if he come in that fantastical habit, we
shall have rare sport beyond his expectation, to have the Ladies laugh at him.


This is very fine wit ysaith, and soon learned I think; a little more on it
sweet Gentlemen.


Suppose you were foxd last night; thus I come to you, and accost; Save you
Sir; you must know I must laugh all the while; how fare you Sir? Do not some
fumigations remain, some vapours not dissipated, a kind of Vertigo, a weakening
of the Nerves, or so? Ha, ha, ha, what thinks your Worship of milk now, thin
broth, or a Julip of pitiful Six for a penance to settle you, or a hair of
the same whelp? Ha, ha, ha, there's wit for you.


There's no harm in the world in it, nor no exceptions if you laugh in the
right place.


Now imagine you met an honourable Gentleman that had got a hurt in the groine;
thus I invade you; but the laugh must hold me too.


By any means, I cannot choose but laugh my self.


There is no safe jeering without it.


Sir, you have been at push of pike and received a hurt, upon some unslaught in
some female service, Ha, ha, ha; your breath is Aromatic since you kissed your
Mistress, and your water out-smells the violet, ha, ha, ha; by the powerful --
yclipped Turpentine, tis true; what pity tis you went without a charm, or had
no acquaintance with a Laplander, to make you Venus-shot-free? Ha, ha, ha; and
how many french tennistalls have you in your flank now? ha, ha, ha.


You sate up at play all night, and lost your money; another now.


Not I a penny, I sent a buff Gentleman that looked big upon me, after an ill
hand, twenty pieces upon half a dozen oaths.


A good pawn, keep his oaths, if he do not pay your money, take the forfeit,
and if he be a Gamester he'll be undone for want of swearing.


Suppose it lost?


Me thinks Cavalier you look pale since you came from the charnelhouse, did
the bones affright you? you are a most religious Gentleman when you are at
dice, and do so pray for 3 fives 3 foures at in and in: with what devotion you
look on the seven of Spades and eight of Diamonds at cribbish? ha, ha; how
zealouly you invoke the Saints to fit you with cards at picket, or lebet.


I invoke the Saints?


I speak to the catholic gamester, that understands all games.


By the way though, do you think there are any gamesters in heaven?


It is to be feared, they may lose so much upon earth, they will hardly
purchase a place there, or if any get thither, (which must be excellent
throwing) he would be more called upon, and perhaps pulled down again, upon every
dispute at play to be Groom porter.


How like you these?


You shall both with me to my Mistress, and help to Jeer my rivals.


Your Mistress?


I Mistress Luoy, Lady Beaufeilds daughter, my Landlady Mistress Voluble has
commended me to her, and I hope to carry her, if one Gentl. that she loves
better do not get her away?


We'll jeer him to death.


That were an excellent way, I think there is no statute against that, I care
not what becomes on him, he put bitter jests upon me the other day before the
Ladies, and I making use of your wit Gentlemen, he told me to my face, that I
talked nothing but clinches; as I am a Gentleman he did.


Oh barbarous!


You shall wound him with his own weapon, and by a direction we can give you,
you shall so jeer him, that he shall offer boot to change understandings with
you.


We'll make him so ridiculous, he shall laugh at himself.


That will be rare; I have sent for my Mother to town to be acquainted with
Ladies, and learn dressing; my Landlady, hath promised to commend a Gentlewoman
to wait upon her, and teach her the art of painting, and all the postures of a
great woman; I do mean she shall marry some Knight or other, and be Ladified.


It will be necessary.


Though I say it, the woman is flexible, and has been in her days -- My Father
might have been a Knight, and he had not been an Ass, and loved his money; but
we lose time, let's to my Mistres Gentlemen.


We attend sir.


The same day, a Dolphin taken in a net at Woolidge, and ten live Pilchards in
a Salmons belly -- strange things! the 13. of July, the Caramountaine kittend
in the Tower: an Eeleship spring a leak shooting the Bridge, -- here are
prodigious things.

Mr. Newman.


Mr. Usher, how does your Lady?


She is in health.


And Mistress Lucy?


Both in the Garden. Sir you have good intelligence, what news abroad? a touch
to your servant.


Alas you are acquainted with the state mysteries.


Troth Sir, I know little, or if I did, I would be loath to speak it, but to a
friend, the times are dangerous.


You're right Mr. Formal, but be not nice, I know you are furnished with news,
as well as some that give pensions, though 'twere to a Captain in these
warlike-times, to have it made for 'em; you being a quotidian ambler upon
impertinent visits, must needs glean the secrets of the court and state.


Sir I dare trust you with any thing, but pray do not speak on it; there is a
great man in the world --


Think you so?


That --


What has he done?


You shall excuse me; but --


What his name?


You shall excuse me for that too; a word to the wise; you can guess what I
mean, and let that pass; and now we talk of state affairs, there is a
packet come out of the North, and abox -- in your ear sir.


What is said to be in that packet?


There's the business, but that no body knows.


Is't possible?


Tak't upon my word; you are a friend, I hear further at Mr. Secretaries, but
you must say nothing of it, you undo me if you do, the King goes to Hampton
Court next week, but how long he stays is uncertain. Sir, you see I put my
self into your hands.


But is this done like a wiseman to reveal these mysteries, to trust these
secrets to one you have not known above 7 Year, if I should inform what will
become of you, and your estate? oh you must be cautious, though for my part --


Oh Sir! I know to whom I speak, and will tell you more, for I dare trust you
with my soul; they say the Northern progress holds this year, and that the
Elke is dead in the new great park


I hope not.


Tis as I tell you, by the fall of a tree, do not you remember a tempest four
nights ago? then 'twas, blustering times Mr. Newman.


That makes Van Trump so troubled with the wind colicke, but now the
Hollanders, as they report, have many Engineers and Mathematitians set a work,
how to keep and vent it at their pleasure, and so to serve in Navigation for
their ships, that there may be ventus liber, as well as ventus clausus,
answerable to the two Seas.


Ha, ha! that's news indeed, alas mine is but domestic, but what do you hear
of London Bridge? it is whispered by some it will, and some again point blank
say it will not be repaired; but make not me the Author.


And I do hear the Camells decay at Tiballs: but pray no more of it from me.


You shall not doubt me Sir, you do not hear of the Dolphin --


Of France?


Taken as Woolidge in a net.


Of Italian cutworke.


The news is not common of the Pilchards, the Catamountaine, nor the Eeleship?


Not a word.


You shall hear more; I am your servant. Here is Mistress Lucy Sir, and Mistress
Voluble.


I confess he has no overcharge of wit, that will be your happiness, he has a
good estate, and you may live with more delight than a court Lady, he is a
handsome man too, I am bound to give you my advise, for your mothers sake,
whose servant I am by many obligations, she has been my customer for
face-water, and pomatum these many years.


But if you be so skilful, as you are professed, and read in the secrets of
nature, you can tell by your art where I shall fix my affection, do not you
know Mr. Newman.


I never see the Gentleman, but I am not ignorant that he matches in the Vanne,
and leads the file of your amorous servants, but --


But what?


If you love your self. --


He is a well-bred Gentleman, and one deserves my good opinion, he's here.


They observe me --

I kiss your hand fair Mistress Lucy: whats she that looks so like one of the
Sibills?


Is this the Gentleman you declare so civil, and well-bred, Lady? If I have
any skill take heed on him, he has an unlucky countenance.


This Gypsy will but cozen you.


She is excellent cunning, and has foretold str ange things, believe it.


If my Mistress have an opinion of her Art, she may do me a displeasure; I have
heard much talk of this woman, some say she is a Witch too, and wears the
Devil in her thumb Ring, I would not anger one of her Familiars. Take no
offence Mistress at the rudeness of my Language, this Lady shall give a very
fair pawn, the word of a Gentlewoman, that I shall be of good behaviour, if
you please not to interpret me too hastily.


There is some texs in your forehead Sir that wants a comment, but I'll not so
much study your satisfaction.


Nay, thou shalt not be displeased with him.


Alas, I am not angry; here's my Lady and Sir William.


You are Master of an excellent language Sir.


You honour me too much, it is because you are the excellent Subject Madam, and
being the perfection of your Sex, an argument to create Eloquence in every
tongue.


Then I must think you flatter; these praises are misplaced. I shall suspect
you love me not, or are not wise.


Why Madam?


You take such pains, and make a pilgrimage to that's within your reach; I must
confess I like Discourse, but think not all my soul placed in my ear;
although I love a Lute well, it follows not I should dote upon a Cimball.


A Cimball?


And dance as I were story with a Tarantula, when you are at it, rosting of a
Galliard? You overdo this instrument, give me your courtship in a phrase is fit
to own and understand.


Your pardon Madam; I affect not bold and over-rack'd Hyperboles, although I
might insist upon the wealth and fulness of your merits, to which, all praise,
that can flow from me, is Justice, such command you have upon your humble
Servant, I rather wish my tongue a forfeit to perpetual silence, then with one
harsh sound offend your ear; you'll give me leave I hope to say I love you.


This is English Sir, and some do call it sense; 'tis fair, and fit, when any
Lady's private with her Servant; 'tis what I learned a child, I have not yet
outgrown the knowledge.


Did you love so young?


I understand the meaning of your language, 'tis not perplexed, and you may love
me too, and tell me so, and I may understand you; what need compartments here,
freeses, and words of Architecture, that will make things hard to the
understanding? As you could not build a sense in love without 'em? Yet I bar
not the freedom of Discourse, and use of Metaphors: And you may praise us too
in Verse, or Prose, to show the exaltation of your wit in company, but 'tis the
worst discourse when we are private.


If I had confidence she would direct me -- action I believe when opportunity
Invites --


To what good Knight? be not mistaken, I commend courtship in words, that are
made round like pills fit to be swallowed, and not ragged bullets.


'Tis a strange Lady, I know not how to take her.


My Lady? Madam --


Art thou come?


Is it your Ladyships pleasure I shall read to day?


By any means, the Ladies will not fail, we should forget our Academy: Sir
William we must entreat your patience, and Master Newman.


Madam, the Ladies.


Say I wait upon 'em.


I'll take my opportunity.


You will engage him to credulity, and prepare some mirth.


Monsieur Galliard the Dancer attends Madam.


He must give way to another exercise; Sir William you shall do us a favour if
you please to entertain a little time with him in the next Chamber, our
Lecture will not be long, and sweet Mr Newman the French-man will delight you
with his discourses, he has a tongue as confident as his feet, if you can but
humour him.


You shall command us Madam.


That Done we'll join societies and mirth. Come Mrs Voluble.


I hope you will excuse my imperfections.


IT is an infinite favour, (most excellent Ladies) and must needs speak the
sweetness of your nature and dispositions, that you're pleased to hear me, so
weak and unworthy of the Chair, rather deserving to be in the number of
Disciples, than a professor in any of the female sciences; but as your virtues
are more exemplary, in this honour to me, the humblest of your Servants, it
will become me, in the gratitude to so noble a bounty, not to waste time, but
succinctly to deliver, what I could not finish without trespass on your
patience; at my last reading I did conclude with old Ladies, that will cozen
Nature, and Time, and abuse the men they love best; to these I only add, it is
not Mercury to change their skins like Snakes, but they must fill up wrinkles
as well as hide gray hairs: your red leather is for Country Wenches, your
white wash, or Spanish Fucus is the best, but a tire woman, or coverer of time
or nakedness must be kept in pension: sor it is now fashionable to buy one of
her apprencice Girls out of her time, as Lords and Gentlemen do Barbers boys.
Amongst other ornaments, Ribbands challenge no mean place, the variety, and
blazon of these, I have elsewhere examined. For your finest Laces, the Angel in
Cheap, but they must be dearer then others, because they come in Coaches, for
pride or stateliness in any thing adds charges. Touching Gloves, might I
advise, I would have a few selected Ladies, to procure some ingenious Gentleman
at a reasonable pension to lye Lerger for them at Rome for Frangepane Gloves,
and such other correspondent things as may be of moment and great consequence
to your Ladyships: But then I must advertise, and most seriously, that he may
be a man of parts, and somewhat smelling toward the Roman Wash, that he may
give you intelligence of that State, and humours of the Gardinals, or those
that pretend to it, be they little or great, for this concerns the state
Ladies here: For your swarfie Mountebank Italian, he utters sophisticated
Holborn Gloves for Frangepane, Esse^ Cheese for Parmesan, rotten post for
sweet powder, pickled white Leather for Mushromes, and cozens more with his
broken English, then the wits can get honesily with their best language.


The Merchant of Italian Saulsages, A meet Quack.


But then I would advise your Ladyships to have another Gentleman sent into
Spain for perfumes, pocket Fans, orange flower water, Orange flower butter
beauty, Aqua de Chedrey, and many provocatives, as Contra yerua, and Joco lata.


It is a very learned Gentlewoman.


For Holland, 'tis too dear in Spain, therefore for a conscionable cozenage
over and above, here are honest Dutchmen will serve you most faithfully. For
Jewels, you may buy them at what rates you please, they add lustre to a Lady,
and you may sell them at a fifth or sift part, which is very well for a great
Madam, if you would put them off at the best rate, you must get some Doctor of
Physic, or broking Apocriphall Captain, to show them (as if there were
fornication in it) behind the door, hanging or curtain, which makes his
fingers like Jewellers cards to set rings on, for there are bawds for rings
and Jewels, as well as for other commodities.


What do you think of this caution Madam?


For your Linen, it must be fine, and fresh every day, therein consists humane
delight. For linen breeches, though some think them cleanly, in my opinion
they imitate a Dutch Stove too much. For Aprons, plain Holland is most
becoming, starched Lawn was in Queen Elizabeths time, and will not endure
rumpling, every thing must be squared by use and elegance; but for your white
Shoes, rich Roses, light-coloured silk Stockings, and such variety below
stairs, they are great Inducers, as a learned man told me, (I will not say a
Divine) for Love, most excellent Ladies, doth sometimes ascend, as well as
descend.

But still remember Ladies, that your Fan be so little, as not to lose the
least smirke, or grace of your countenance for it, for then being so small,
when you put it to your face, some Courtiers may take it for a black patch.
Then for your oaths, I protest is out of fashion, I profess for a Justice of
Peaces Wise, I vow too masculine, in faith for a Chambermaid, In truth for a
Landerer, As you hope to live, too like a Prayer; Never stir, would
disadvantage a Lady many ways, besides visits; For the active wenches of the
time, May they be damned eternally, and lose all their designs if it be not so;
Upon my honour sounds well, which in a great Lady can never be forfeited if she
be in love, for great women have their privilege of Nobility, and can never be
forsworn like the Common people.


Is Perjury in women no breach of Laws?


You have the Doctors opinion.


One touch, if you grow old, which I omitted formerly, When time, which is the
mouth of beauty, creeps upon you, you must be sure to have so many leaves and
curtains before your windows, that you may show your selves at more varions
lights than the most cozening Mercer his faded and deceitful Wares, for the
youth of your white Satin will be then but pearl colour at the best, it may be
but ash-colour, and therefore refuse no advantage to give it gloss, according
to the conclusion of a modern Poet, which at this present shall be mine.

Wise Ladies must refuse no Art
For age will snow upon their heart:

You have done us a great honour, and Ladies you shall not deny me this favour
to taste of a small banquet that waits upon you in the next room, shall I
show the way.


Me be content to have de little patience, and be my trot, me tell you, vat me
have seen a to day, de fine sport in devarle, me come into de great man to
day, me make de reverence Alamode, come ill faut, and he make me de estrange a
Sir reverence de tird time, dat ever you saw.


That was not civil.


Oh Monsieur, every man has not the activity of your feet.


By my fat, 'tis very estrange a ding, dat they will suffer a des men to be
near a de King, a de Queen, de Prince, or de Princess, they will marra de
understanding very mush.


Why Mounsieur that lies at the other end.


Begar you shall excuse a me, for de Courtier Alamode, dere de vit lie in de
foot, begar dere is nobodie can be viseman, dat does no make a de most
excellent reverence, dat is most certain, dat is the best ting in de hole
varle.


I am clear of his opinion.


But do you think Caesar Sir, or most of the Emperors or worthies of the world,
studied the liberal science of the foot, or puissant toe?


No, but begar dat make them dye all unfortunate, for if they had tinke of noting
but de reverence, they might ha live a great a while.


Excellent well argued, and very clear in my understanding.


I confess the wisdom of it Sir, but for the wit do you think that lies
there?


Dat be de best vit can be possible, for your vit, vat is your vit? your vit is
to break a de jest, vel, look you now a me, me will break a de jest, dat is
like dat a me lor, dat is like dat of de Knight, dat is like dat of de
Ientilman, ha, ha, ha! dere is now one, two, tree very good jeasts, by my trot
they are so very good jest, dat make a me sick wide laugh, and begar me will
make a de page, de lackey, all de fool in de court, break a des very good
jest, very quickly, dat is a noting.


To any purpose?


What do you think of the grave Aldermen? they are wise, and yet they do not
trouble themselves much about legs.


Be my trot, me speak a to de King, and to de Queen, to give me a patten, dat
none shall teach a de Aldermen to make a de reverence but my self, and me will
undertake dat vid in one 12 a mont, but den they must do nothing else, they
shall make a de reverence, vid de Aldermen in de paris, and dance a Coran, a
Cereban, a Mountague, and dat will be very brave.


What faculties some men have?


But what shall business do in the mean time Mounsieur?


Is not dis very great a business? may begar, me will undertake to de King and
to de Queen to make a my Lor Mayre de Sheriff and de Aldermen very fine a mask.


And to write it Mounsieur?


Awe, de write? dat is noting alamode, your speesh two, tree, yard long, pshaw?
give a me de quick a spirit, de fancy, de brave scene, de variety of de
Antimasque, de nimble a foot, no matre de sense, begar it vole be de braveting
in de christian varle.


There is no question to be made.


And be my trot if me have a noder patten for de counsel learned in the law,
for to teach them de reverence, dat will be very great varke, but my diligence,
and skill in dat matre, have no despair, to effect in time dis great benefit,
and dat will make a de law flourish; and Englan a brave Englan, begar.


I won't doubt your abilityes, but I fear the capacity of the Gentlemen you
undertake.


But what will you look for now, for your pains Mounsieur? that is
considerable.


Begar me look for very mush, for tis mush pain, and tis brave ting, beside
me look for a statur of de brass, in de palace yard, ven me go out of dis
varle.


You will deserve it as a rare patriot; but what manner of reverence would you
have the grave lawyers to Imitate, you must consider their robes:


Observe a me.


Such a reverence under your favour, would not become men of their gravity, one
always looks for a Coranto after it, and provokes a man to whistle, or fing
when he sees it, and makes one think still, what you would have a month, a
little too much of the activity.


Begar you no understand de matre, vere is your breine? dere is noting in de
varle like a dat motion, for de Ientillman, and for de Ientilvoman.


Yes by your leave sir there is something else that is as good for them.


I will tell you now, begar, here is a de kinsman dat is a me, and he live here
very much time, before he come, they vent in vid deir toes, and hold der cloak
just a dere, and de hat so, fie, le diable! and now they valk vid deir toes out
for brave genty, you call dat a de splay foot, but me vonder dat de Lady no
come, begar me no use to dis patience, and de vaite, pray tell you Madam dat me
have autre business vid de Lor, and de autre Lady have de use of my foot begar.


Oh Monsieur by no means.


Let us prevail.


Tis no good you hold a me, begar, me no stay two minute to save a your soul,
dat is de resolution of de Cavalier de France. --


Would any man believe there should be so much folly in this Cubit square?


Do you think he is a French Dancer? let that answer you, and wonder he has no
more Caprichios. But these Ladies are very tedious, we must have this Lecture
put down.


They are more like to purchase Gresham College, and enlarge it for public
Professors, you may live to see another University built, and only women
commence Doctors.


But now we talk of learned women, you have been acquainted with Mistress
Voluble, has she the abilities the women talk of? they say she is a
Fortune-teller.


She is for more then Artificial White and Red, some think her guilty of the
Black-Art, she has foretold so many strange things; she has had two Husbands,
and prophesied long before, how, and when they should give up the Ghost, if she
be not a Witch she has the more wrong, for she is believed a devilish cunning
woman.


Possible!


There's no^ a Lady with child but consults her Astrology, whether it shall be
male or female; and the waiting women how long they shall keep their
maidenheads, and who shall father the first borne, the Master or the
serving-man; she is held a Sibill in the City, and tells oraculously whether the
Husband or the Wife shall die first, how, when, and where, and all this
sometime by observation of the hand, or forehead; she can see a maid through a
mask, and is excellent at stolen goods, for she can see a thief through a
millstone as well as a conjuring glass; in brief, she is held prodigious at
Divination, and most specially seldom fails in her Judgment of the two
destinies, Matrimony, and Hanging, this I have heard Sir.


Sr William Your Servant, Master Newman? that's he.


Jeer him soundly.


What Gentlemen are these?


He has betrayed his ignorance already, he does not know us.


What, not the Major, and the Minor?


Not the Major, nor the Minor.


Cede majori Sir, Cede majori.


Parce minori Sir, Parce minori.


Here will be a fine conclusion from these premises, and they were worth
considering.


These two are wits.


Are they your wits? Pray heaven you may not lose 'em.


If you love wit observe a little, and if I do not make you laugh, never laugh
while you live.


I thank you Sir.


You shall here how I will jeer Newman, my Rival now; such wit, wit of the
last Edition: Let me have fair play, and these most ingenious friends of mine
shall be judges.


I think so, 'twill pass time till the Ladies come.


Mr Newman, you are a pretty Scholar, pray what is wit?


A thing you want.


A very pretty Problem.


Will you or these Gentlemen be bound to understand me?


Ha, ha, ha, that's a clinch, to understand me.


A clinch?


I understand none.


Oh sir, a palpable clinch; Ha, ha, ha, ask my friend.


Is that your opinion?


There's another clinch in faith, ha, ha, ha.


Pray sir, what is't a clock?


The mystery of this?


What is a clinch sir, do you know what 'tis?


I neither know, nor care what 'tis, so I laugh, and swear 'tis a clinch,
that's disgrace and reproach enough to any man. With what ease can we cry up
our own wit and another down, only by saying that's a clinch. I think I ha
jeerd him.


Oh the ways to wit are much shortened in these latter times, 'tis a picant
age.


They have a gunpowder-plot to blow up sense; pray Gentlemen take truce with
your spleens, and the wisest of you three inform me what is wit; you have; no
patience to hear me; or if you will not define it, speak something that is
witty, and in fashion.


I'll tell you then:


You speak English to be understood, O base!


What language is your wit?


English, but elaborate, for example -- now beat up your kettle drums.


Sir, if my optics fail not, I have read

Each mystic line within your brow, my Genius

Is much exalted at your gaudy Physiognomy;

Shal's to the house of mighty noise and surfeits,

There tinctiour souls with blood of purple grape?


What's all this?


Ha, ha, I thought you were ignorant.


Give him the Paraphrase.


All this is, he remembers perfectly he has seen you before.


And desires you but to go to the Tavern, and drink a pint of wine; here's
language!


Is't possible?


What a deal of Embroidery is spent upon I am glad to see you well; How long
has this been a vulgar language? You would court a Mistress rarely in this
Cabale.


But how shall a man beget such high conceits?


Have you a desire to know Sir William? shall I tell him?


If he will make it a secret.


Why, turn your self round as fast as you can, and the first things you
speak, your head being dissie, will be these.


What a heavy of Buffoons have we here?


We are at your mercy Gentlemen; but you that had a patience to expect so
long, cannot want virtue to forgive, since we had no intent to make so great a
trespass; where's Monsieur Galliard?


Madam, he's gone, something displeased you had no more regard to a Gentleman
of his quality; his time was precious, and some other Lords and Ladies expected
him.


His absence will admit of easy pardon, 'tis a most superstitious fool; what
Gent. are these?


They are things were meant by nature, Madam, a cure for melancholy, we have
had such sport and non-sence with 'em


We shall lose time upon 'em, please you, we'll take a turn in the Gallery.


Mistress Lucy be tender-hearted to these Gentlemen.


They are only fit for your compassion.


They are worth your acquaintance, Master Newman knows 'em; have not their wits
a pretty edge?


Dismiss your Beagles I shall beat you all three else, and monstrously, indeed
I shall; be ruled, and keep your wits warm, I shall sling out like winter.


I thank you sir and you be in earnest; I

protest Major, and Minor, the man's in wrath, away.

How now Iames.


I am glad I ha found you sir, your mother's come to town, she rode behind me.


Not too loud, where is she? I would not have it known till she have other
clothes, and better breeding.


She's at your Lodging sir.


Mistress Voluble, my mother's come by directions, mum, and make haste; sweet
Mistress Lucy, I beseech you take it not unkindly if I depart.


By no means noble sir.


This is my man that has brought me news out of the Country forsooth.


None of your Tenants dead I hope?


Some are Coppyholders, and I hope you wish me no harm, but I vow 'tis not my
fault that I must take my leave so abruptly.


You have a cheerful licence sir.


As I hope to make new Leases, and sell a hundred Acres of wood this Term, I
am very sorry, but I will wait upon you in the Evening. Noble Mr. New.


Ha, ha, that's a clinch.


I am your humble Servant.


Another Clinch I protest.


Now we have opportunity I preethee Mrs Voluble for my sake tell him his
Fortune; I have been a s^tor to know your destiny.


It will be a favour, it was in my ambition to desire it.


My Lady desires your presence in the gallery.


I must observe her command, but you may satisfy the Gentleman in my absence,
and Mr: Newman when you know how the stars have determined of you, make not
me a more stranger.


I shall be only fortunate to be yours.

Now Mistress Voluble, if you be acquainted with my stars, and know what
fortune they decree me, I stand full prepared; what lines are in my forehead,
you observe so?


Pray let me see your hand.


Freely command it.


Some that do make a trade of fortunetelling (which is beneath my practise)
flatter mea for their base end of profit, I'll be plain.


Truth loves no other habit, you prepare me to give you the more faith.


Tis very strange, but this is most prophetical, you are --


What?


In love.


'Tis very likely.


It may not prove so lucky, love is a malanchoy business.


I think it be. Is this all you can tell by your art?


You would know your destiny.


What please my stars and you?


Take this for oracle then, you will do something in a melancholy humour will
enda^ger your neck.


My neck? shall I be hanged? better the witch were burned.


Fare you well Sir.


A pox a your prognostic, she has put me

Into a sweat, and I do more than half

Believe she is a witch, or worse, in a melancholy humour; must I do something
to endanger my neck? unth? I shall put my self into a desperate melancholy
with thinking on it; I will be mercy, 'tis time to laugh and sing, thoughts do
not vex me to a new tune, there's no way but to a Tavern, I'll seek out
company.

Love by your leave a while, and lazy folly,
Sack is the Antidote to melancholy.

I Have obeyed you son, but I shall never sadge with these things you talk
of.


Then you're an ass, every child can do it.


I, if I had been a Gentlewoman of a child, much might ha been done.


Alas after a little time, you will take pride every day of your self; I wonder
this wench comes not! what? your son has a care of you, and 'tis never too
late to learn to be a Lady; this maid I commend to you, is a very rare
dresser to a pin, and will keep your linen with all variety of sweet bags
and powders, that can be imagined; and for your rich gowns, she will preserve
'em with the new fashion-sereclothes, and make them outlast Egyptian bodies.


But must my old Mistress be a Lady? that will be fine in faith.


The Taylor has taken measure for a Lady I am sure, and three or four yards
of Satin, more than will serve for a Gentlewoman.


Then she mun be kirstned, and called Madam.


Peace and harken to my Landlady.


Besides she has the rarest receipts to destroy moathes, and such a sovereign
medicine against fleas, that your maids need never to squeak as if they were
ravished, peeping into their smocks before they go to bed.


That will be fine.


The weneh I tell you on, knows how to consume Corns too, and for fidelity
about your box of teeth, false hair, your glass eye. --


My Mother has two eyes of her own, but that one squints.


Then for all manner of Caudles, Aleberries, Possets, and preserves in all
kinds, and should you lye in this maid will be the most diligent creature about
warming of clothes, and for brothes and gellies most excellent, and for all
strengthners of nature; then if any of your women be to apt to conceive any
thing that is ill, she hath her drinks of retention, and expulsion -- but
Madam


She is no Lady yet.!


Sir I speak what I foresee, and therefore among our selves, Madam again, this
maid is very discreet, you will know what that means, not troublesome when your
Ladyship would be private, nor suffer any else to trouble you, and beside she
will never be in love, which is no small matter for a waiting woman; she is
here already -- Nice you are fortunate to be recommended, to attend this, (but
a Gentlewoman yet.).


She is too fine.


Hold your prating, and hear my Landlady, have not you clothes to come home?


I shall think my stars have been careful of me, if I may have the
happiness to show my duty to so noble a Lady.


She calls me Lady too.


They know what will become on you.


Oh that I could speak so gainely; I am but new come out of the Country, but
if you please to be as good as your word, I will do the best I can, to be
thankful, as they say.


My mothers very raw, you must coddle her, you will have but a foul hand with
her, do you think she will ever come to any good? the truth is, I am ashamed
on her, and therefore be not a known that she is my mother, till you have
disciplined her, she must live very privately.


How shall her name, person and estate be published? do not you mean to have
her a Lady?


By any means sir, and let me be one of her Gentlemen.


I have it; do you observe the maid I commended to her? She is a Gentlewoman
always bred among Ladies, and knows how to talk, and carry her self, before
any Knight or Lord in the Court: What, if for the more expedite way to your
mothers instructions this wench should take upon her sometime to be her
Mistress, and in her name, before strangers, exercise some pride and courtship?
'tis a nearer way by example than precept to arrive at any thing; and by
observing her Fashion, Garb, and Language, your mother may be sooner ripe for
a Ladyship by at least two months, beside all the rules she may receive from us
in private.


Admirable! My mother is a towardly old woman.


Old? you do not know how painting may transform Age; and the wench is not so
young as she seems; howsoever this will be only to strangers, and you may with
more reputation own her for your mother among Gallants, 'tis but saying she was
married at twelve, and you pop'd into the world before thirteen.


I will leave her to your tuition, and this Gentlewoman's education.


Then 'tis thus Madam, come hither Nice.


Iames, thou shalt wait upon me to my Mistress when thou hast better clothes.


I have a new suite coming up from top to toe.


I'll never live in the Country again, such another clod was I when I came to
London; mother you must be dutiful, 'tis for your own good; but do you hear
Landlady, have you spoke the powerful word to my Mistress? Shall I have her
from Newman?


I have read his destiny, and if things hit with his credulous nature, he will
make himself incapable of her affection; you are the next in preferment, never
fear it, and leave your mother to our method and government, we will both
edify, and Ladifie her.


With all my heart: buoy Lady mother.


If please you we'll withdraw; you must be secret Iames.


What have we here?


The Ghost of Leister?


Thus I have seen him painted,
'Tis some humorous Gentleman.

A proper fellow?


It is not dark enough; how they gape at me?


Let's make sport with him, he shows admirably by twilight, he has not
travelled far sure; such a shape would get money in Bartholomew Fair.


Are you a high German sir?


Yes, 'tis a Fencer; did you not hear of a Swisse that came over to be beaten
at eight several weapons?


By your favour sir, no, 'tis no high German, those breeches are not worn in
Switzerland, there is something of the codpiece --


'Tis not His Majesties Operatour for the Teeth, that hangs about Fleet-bridge.


He's not so handsome.


Were not you one of the brothers that guarded the Dial at Bow Church, and
used to put Cheapside in mind of their quarters?


No, he wants a Pollaxe; do you think he came not off some Conduit?


I am sure he came not off of the saltseller, He is a size too tall.


These rogues will draw a Regiment of Prentices about me presently, and then
shall I be apprehended for some sea monster, and thrown into the Thames at the
next Stairs, to show their worships how well I can swim -- have you any thing
to say to me?


'Tis English that he speaks, he is one of us.


I am one that will venture to beat you both in the same language, if you leave
me not the sooner.


'Tis some that skulkes in this disguise for debt; we will say we are Officers,
and pretend to arrest him.


Nay then have at you bandogs --

A reskue?


Hold.


Down with the Bayliffes, arrest a Gentleman in the Kings high way --


So, so, he is escaped.


You cursed tadpoles, cannot a Gentleman walk in the streets, but such
Tenterhookes must catch him by the cloak?


Noble Master Newman, we are your servants; do not you know us? we are no
officers.


Ha? If my optics err not, I have read
Each mystic line within your brows,
Ye shall both --

Have our skins cut into measures.


To the Tavern with me.


With all our hearts.


We will be drunk together.


You shall command us..


At my new Tavern where the wine shall flow as at a Coronation; fifty Fiddles,
and a noise of Trumpets come along with me; you two shall send your tickets out
for wenches.


Of all complexions, and degrees, from the Madam Alamode, to the humble
Wastcoteere.


I beseech you Mrs Lucy make not me the Author, I affect Mr Newman, but this I
received from good intelligence.


I am miserable; I did not think his nature could degenerate into so wild a
change, it is some witchcraft, I must grieve for him though I dare not show it.


There is a report, I would be loath you should name me in it, but they
confidently say; I dare not justify upon my knowledge, that he has killed --


Good heaven defend; then I am more undone.


Nay, these are the fruits of wine and surfeits; I did not see him bleed, but I
heard it from a man of quality, and one that had been Collector in the Parish,
who told me for certain that Mr Newman did kill him.


Whom? my afflicted heart.


It was an Ossicer that was slain.


The more unpardonable. -- Where?


In the Parish of Alhallowes Barking, the Bell man never dawnd since, coming
drunk out of a Tavern at twelve -- he made no more ado -- there was not such
another dog within the VVals; it waited upon the foresaid Bell-man a nights in
His Majesties service, to waken the Parish, and all day was hired out by a
Blind-man, that begged, with a Bell about his neck.


Is that all the murder he has committed?


All? you do not consider the blind Beggar that's undone by it, or who shall
carry the Lantern at midnight, to light Gentlemen to the best Ale, and a
Bawdy-house; but for my part I'll be no evidence, if the City will suffer such
an injustice within their Walls I can be silent, and think.


Would this were all the danger, but I sear since he took up this rudeness
and strange carriage he may deserve more sorrow.


I love not to meddle in other men's affairs, but I know something.


I prithee tell me all.


The Tavern he frequents he has made his Pheater at his own charge to act
intemperance; over the great Room be uses to be drunk in, they say, he has
built a heaven, a Players heaven, and thence a Throne's let down, in which,
well heated, successively they are drawn up to the clouds to drink their
Mistress health, while the mad mortals adore their God of Grape, and gaping look
like earth that's chap'd with heat, although before within three minutes they
were drenched.


Dost know that place?


You shall excuse me, I know nothing.


Prithee be not so cautious, I am his friend, and pity him; if for my sake thou
woo't but find him out, and tell him I desire to change but a few words, trust
me, I may amply requite this service.


You must then keep secret what I undertake, I'll do it. Be cautious to whom you
speak, we must be circumspect. I will go off invisible.


Monsieur Galliard, my Lady expects you.


Begar me no like a dat reverence, me will change a dat:


'Tis the French fashion as you taught Me Monsieur.


Ouy, tis de French fashion, but de French fashion is always to change, and
dis reverence displease a me very mush, because you go back, back vid your
buttock, as if some vod take you by dat, to vat me will give a no name.


Monsieur Galliard my Lady will be here presently.


Sweet Mrs Lucie.


Dat de reverence is no good of de man, me must change dat too; by me trot me
doubt dat dis great business will almost break a my brain, dis great varke, and
before a mask of de King and de Queen, me can eat a no meat, no drink, no
sleep, and me grow so very a lean, vid de contemplation, a so much, by my
trot de privy counsel is no so much troubled as me be vid dis, oh, le Diable!
deirs is noting, they sit all the vile they do deir business, me bissey bo'te
head, and de foot cap a pie, in de french tune, and dat is great matre begar.


You esteem it highly Mounsieur.


Me tell you, and me tell you no tale, tis great matre to make a de Lor, to
make a de Lady, to make a de Gentleman, to make a de Gentilvoman, and de autre
man to dance, and to make a de good reverence, for begar dat will make a de
King, de great kin in de varle.


How can that be Sir?


Me tell you, ven they are so bissey, to learn a de dance, they will never tinke
of de Rebellion, and den de reverence is obedience to Monarchy, and begar
obedience is ale de ting in de varke.


I'll swear your state affairs lie in your foot, and you are wifer there, than
some heads are, and may be a president for after ages; but what music would
you govern the people by?


Begar by de best french fiddles can be got?


What think you of an Irish harp, a state organ, or a pastionate voice to a
lovers lute?


Des dull tings make a de men melancholic, and den they tinke on de Devil,
and de treason, and do any ting dat is no good, but begar des french fiddles do
fidle all deis tings out of deir head, vid such a Jearke, as ma foy make a them
so fantastical, and make a them as good subject, as any is in de France begar.


I must wait upon my Mother.


She will be here immmediately. --

She is not right yet.


Here be one of my coliers, Mounsieur Simplaton, say you no dat de french fidle
make a de brave government in de varle?


I say any thing becomes a Gentleman.


Observe you dat? he have been but two are mont and he say any thing, dat is
very brave? he have de grand understanding in de foot; tell a me, ven you hear
a de little fidell, vat is your tinke? is your head no free from de treason,
and plot of de rebel, as your leg? begar you no stand upon de ground for Joy
of de Coran, de Cerebran, de Marquess, de Mountague, ha!


My Lady.


Me be your humble servant Madam, and stay one two tree hour.


I am now ready for you Mounsieur, come Lucy the practise of the last he taught
us.


The Gentleman you expect Sir VVilliam is come.


Madam prepare your self for mirth, 'twill be a sight beyond the pageants.


We'll not be seen at first, Lucy withdraw. --


What means this flourish? have you a play in hand?


To bid your excellence welcome to this lodging.
Fore Jove he looks prodigiously, vouchsafe
Us the honour of your hand.

Ha!


Vat Antic be dis?


One of the supporters of the Brewers Arms.


Ha, ha, ha, does he take upon him to be a Prince too, and will he speak?


These Ladies have ambition to kiss your hand, and have a great desire to
know, how fares the camp at Tilbury, and please your Excellency.


'Tis one of Arthurs Knights of the round Table.


With his circular sippets; would you think that a pigmy poisoned should
swell thus?


I am betrayed, there's no retreat with honour, I must be confident.


Laugh and Jeer him handsomely.


Oh that the Major, and the Minor had been here now, they would teeze him
in faith, Mounsieur, ask that Maypole and he can dance.


Plait il Mounsieur? a la Galliard, de Goran, la Princess, le Buckingham,
heigh!


Put up your rosin, and your catsguts presently and be gon, or I shall find a
grave for you in the pocket of my sleeve, and this shall be your winding sheet.


Me no play dat lesson, pocket de sleeve, dat is no tune de France, poket, le
grand pock: -- Mounsieur: me put up my fidell and be gon, adieu Madam,
Serviteur gentilhomes; pocket de sleeve?


But I must not seem angry, Lady, my business is to you.


Business to me?


I am bold to present a suit to you, I confess it was not made by a French
Tailor, I can make a leg and kiss my hand too after the fashion of my clothes,
this served in those honest days, when Knights were Gentlemen, and proper men
took the walls of dwarfs; here's a belly piece, that looks like armour, with
what comeliness may a man unbutton his doublet, when he seems to take the wall
to make urine? your sleeve so near your nose, with a handkerchief, which I
take out thus with a grace, after Emunction, I put up again, with the corianders
hanging out, Geometrical breeches in several slises, in which a man is not
ashamed of his thighs, nor hides his bow legs, which at the bottom
surrounded with points make him look like a roughsooted Pigeon, these things
were worn when men of honour flourished, that tamed the wealth of Spain, set
up the States, helped the French King, and brought Rebellion to reason
Gentlemen.


So they do now.


Peace pepper corn; and all this at less charge than a masque comes to now,
with the rare and new invention of hobbiehorses; which of our two habits (be
you Lady, but the indifferent Judge, and squint not,) is the more grave and
manly, his lean upper chin, or this goodly promontory? my Trunks with a
round walk paved with gold and silver, or your trouses, cut close to your
dock, and drawn on with a screw? in which if you venture but half a crown,
looks like a poltisse, or a swelling in the groine; your habit is
fantastical as the time, you squirt into your doublet, which you wear so
careless as you had not buttoned it since you came from a bawdy house, where
men of this garb, coming from the stews, march with that gravity as they came
from a conventicle, so soherly they would carry it.


I see whoring was equal in all times, only the carrying of it.


Why that's all?


But surely I do wonder, how my Grandfather could kiss my Grandmother, or
embrace in that strange apparel.


They made a shift Knight, or else your wise worship had not been here; but
that I want so much beard, I could show how your Grandfather stroked his three
or four handful of hair, to the terror no doubt of the standers by, and
could stab I warrant you, with his two handed beard then, as well as you with
your dagger beard now. It was never a good time since these clothes went out of
fashion; oh, those honourable days and persons!


Is't possible?


As how?


I pray enlarge your self.


To have seen but a St. Georges feast then.


Why, what difference sir?


When they were installed, to see the twenty mile to Windsor strewn with
blewcoates, feathers and cognizances, as they do country towns with boughs,
and flowers for Princes Entries, and not to go privately in a coach, with a
page and a barber to cut off charges.


How do you like this Gentleman, Is't not a pretty humour?


Then you should have the best knight of the Country, with the ragged staff
on their sleeves.

The Bear, the Boar, and Talbot with his tuskish white,
Oh so sore that he would bite,
The Talbot with his Tuskish white
Soudledum Soudledum;
The Talbot with his Tuskish white Soudledum, bell.
The Talbott with his Tuskish white
Oh so sore that he would bite
Orebecke soudledum, sing orum bell.
Every Knight had his hundreds, and these would take up all the Taverns in the
Town, be druoke to the honour of their Lords, and rather than not pay their
reckoning, pawn their chains, though they pawned something for them the night
before, and such merry catches then, as

The Hart loves the high wood,
The Hare loves the hill,
The Knight loved his bright sword,
And the Lady loved her will.

So the Ladies do still.


It may be so, but for your Knights bright Sword 'tis at pawn, or at home in
his Armoury; then we had, God bless the Duke of Norfolke, there was a jest,
and another Song.

The great Choe bent,
The little Choe bent,
Sir Piercy leigh under the line;
God bless the good Earl of Shrewsbury
For he's a good friend of mine.

He's very confident.


Alas, he is compelled to it.


How do you like this Mrs Lucy, is he not a pretty ill-favour'd Gentleman in
this habit?


He sings rarely.


No question he can dance too, in that disguise he looks like famous Cardell
the dancing. Master in Queen Elizabeths time, I have seen his Picture.


And he with your Worships favour, was held a wise man, and for his gravity he
might have been Treasurer, he went with that settled and solid Pian-piano.


And when he danced a measure, you should have had him with his Rapier, short
Cloak, his black Cap, and his white Feather, his single and double, both
backward and forward, with that excellency --


And now he must be in Cuerpo, or like a fellow on the ropes, or a Tumbler when
he shoots his body through a hoop; there was music then, and a Heaven and
Earth, beyond your brawls, or your Mountague, with a la, la, la, like a
Bachanalian dancing the Spanish Morisce, with knackers at his fingers.


It must needs be a rare sight.


He plaid to himself on a grave Lute, or a modest Citterne, with a politic
quill, far beyond your Geofrey fiddle, or your French kit, that looks like a
broken faggot stick, at the biggest, and sounds as if it had got the French
disease, when it snivels out a Coranto, or so hoarse with a cold, as if some
great base Fiddle had filenc'd it.


What misery is it, the Monsieur is gone now? here had been a French Duel.


But had you seen my Lord Lofty dance the Galliard, with such capers, such
half capers, such turns o'th toe, and above ground, you would have sworn 'em
sound for nine Generations, and for Lavaltoes, La, la, la, c. and then the
Lady.


How did he use her?


With wonderful skill, he put his right arm about her, and took her lest hand
in his, and then he did so touse her with his right thigh and leg, and list
her up so high, and so fast, and so round --


As what I pray, be courteous.


Marry as soon as he had ended his dance she would lye down as dead as a
swinged chicken, with the head under the wing, so dissie was she, and so out of
breath; and all these wonders were extant Knight when this old Cap was new.


Is not this very fine sport Madam?


Sir, you're welcome; pray excuse me, if being prepared for some folly, your
garb and person seemed at first ridiculous; you have changed my opinion, and
there wants but such a noble leader to reduce, and make this habit fashionable;
it shows a proper man, and if I were worthy to advise, or could lay an
obligation upon you, I should take it for an honour if you would often visit me
in these ornaments, I like 'em infinitely, and the Wearer shall be ever
welcome; please you we'll walk and talk a turn in the Gallery.


You too much grace me Madam.


How's this?
I have wound my self into a pretty business,
She neglects me.

In my judgment 'tis an indifferent pretty fellow, but that his clothes are out
of fashion.


They are most becoming; I do not like your new fantastical shapes, that
transform a man from his masculine aspect; you appear to me like a Jackanaps;
there's a waste, and a Long lane cut close to your hanches.


Hum! she takes after the old one, I will try and shift my self, if the mother
be taken with the habit in Qu. Elizabeths days, why may not the daughter
affect that in K. Jameses, and so the humour run in a blood? I am resolved; she
loves singing too, I am furnish' with Ballads, o'my conscience this will do it;
I'll fit her with a fashion, and about it presently.


They are here again, and laugh at me: How familiar the Turtles are?


Ha, ha, ha.


We'll taste some air in the garden, ha, ha, ha.


So, so, if I did love this widow for her self, what a case were I in? but I
must not sit down thus, and something must be thought on for my honour.


SO, so, thou dost carry it excellently, it spreads like a Proclamation, what a
rich widow lies at my house, her wealth, and wit, must be exercised.


She must not appear to be herself yet but in private, and the Chiause her Son
has bestowed this Jewell upon me for expedition, for he dares not yet
acknowledge her; she wonders at herself now she is painted, swears in her
conscience she looks by her glass like one of four and twenty, and simpers,
and licks her leathern lips as she had eaten Marmalade.


Sir William has heard of her, and (upon some affront, as I conjecture received
from my Lady) has writ to me, and articled already to dispose her affections, I
expect him every minute.


He will discover us.


He shall never see thee act her part.


Do you think he can affect her?


Courtiers do not marry into the City for love, and this Farmers wife has
wealth enough to


They'll fit you as well as my self for whom they were made in the Country.


How now sir, preparing for a race?


Is no body else with you? Do not enquire what stratagem is in hand, there be
more ways to catch a Mistresses heart; how does my mother?


She is pretty apt for one of her years: I can tell you news, there is a
Knight about her already.


She shall have him.


Not with your favour if a greater person Interpose, I have so much care of her
honour, now she is my charge.


Mistress Voluble, here's a Footman, laced all over, enquires for you, he serves
a French Lord, he says he must needs speak with you, he has a letter.


What if this Lord come hither for the same purpose?


Tis too much happiness; I'll not be seen thus, nor let my Mother appear in
her roughcast, use the Footman kindly, if his message concern us, away --

And will this Fashion become me, dost think? I prithee tell me some old
stories in to'ther reign, thou can talk and make me ready too.


Ah sir, I knew a time, when two and twenyeares was but a merry Christmas,
nothing but Ambassadors, Masques, Plays, Entertainments, Hawking, Hunting,
Winter and Summer, New-Market and Roiston morn now, ha! had you seen the
Court foxed upon Gouries night, and the Gunpouder treason began then; oh we had
rare sport, and then every body was knighted, they hardly lest a Gentleman in
those days; and afterward they got a trick of making Lords.


For what?


I know not that, but they hardly left a Knight, man, woman, and child were
made right honourable.


Right honourable, right worshipful, and well beloved, I have heard that in
the Countr^y.


But the fashion of welbeloved is left off, for we do not now love one
another.


But had you no misfortunes?


Faith Sir, a rainy day was the worst, and that had but made the ground more
soluble the next day for hunting.


No complaints James?


Oh yes sir! I hard a Gentleman complain mightily that he had lost the highest
flying tassell gentle, that ever was seen, another that he had pricked his
grey Nag, that was an excellent buckhunter; a third, that he had fretish'd his
best hound, Beauty, and that Lilly was killed at a Bay a stag-hunting, it had
almost cost the Genleman his life.


And what else James?


By my troth sir, a Gentleman waiter, that shall be nameless, removing a pasty
of Venison, spilt it all, on a new satin doublet, and spoiled it utterly,
there was such laughing, but his Master being gracious gave him a suit for his
doublet, I think it was a Knight; but the Knight market is risen now.


I and the Lord Market too, James.


And please your worship, they say, the Herald would not make a Gentleman now,
under ten pound.


Oh yes, they'll take reason to my knowledge, and give the prettiest
fantastical arms, I have all the colours of the Rainbow in my new coat,
every fool may be a Gentleman of three generations now.


I can derive my self knave three descents under your ancesters.


Then thy children may write themselves knaves of blood, take that upon my
Heraldry; but had not you brave songs then James?


In those days was the quintessence of ballads, you went to school with 'em,
I remember and learned no other books, I shall never forget the Lord of Lornes
son in Scotland and the false steward, to the tune of green sleeves, those
were the days indeed, oh there was then such a company for dancing singing and
fooling, I do not mean the wits, for sooling is another thing clear from it;
It does so bravely in company, when there is a great many that care not for
wit, and pleases better than all the wit in the world; and then there was such
brave jeasts, at the death of a Stag, and Buck; to throw blood up and down,
upon folks faces; the very Footn en and Pages understood those Jeasts then;
there was a time; and the Landerers were as well Employed in a progress then
as now, and the Surgeons got as much by 'em too; oh, I shall never forget those
times.


So, so, how do I look in this transformation? will any body know me dost
think? Mistress Lucy, shall have the first sight of my shape; some body is gone
into the dining room, let us out at the back door James.


'Tis well done Nice to be careful about your Mistress.


I am giving her some instructions about dressing, and was saying, she must not
go above once to court in black, it would be very scandalous without
intermixing colours, in her petticoat, sleeves, and stomacher, and the colours
now in fashion are blew, pincke, and incarnadine, yellow is much worn too.


But 'tis very material, what lace you will choose, as silver and gold for
blew, (Tha^'s a court maxim) and plain silver for incarnadine, single or mixed
will serve for pincke colour.


I shall never remember all this.


It is your Gentlewoman's duty to remember.


Let me alone Madam. When you will keep house, a long handkercheife, or a
round one with a quaife tied under your chin, and a little hair curled, with a
black taffa ta hood, or white sarfenet.


When you pretend to have a cold, you must show no hair, but wear a forehead
cloth, with a pinner over that, these clothes are much worn by old Ladies,
with which they bind down a piece of sea recloth upon their forehead, to
keep wrinkles in obedience. How is her hair?


That little that she has is crazie.


She has enough to curl, and you have the discretion to know what proportion
is to be lest out, according to the latitude of her face; and to be curled with
pins and orrice powder, which will neither hurt nor break it, and then in
the Morning to let the comb pass through it once, and open it, between a
curl and a freeze, and draw up some of the curls with a bodkin within the
other hair.


My hair will never endure all this.


You must endure more, if you mean to be a Lady of fashion, and attractive;
where be the pendants?


Must she not wear a Feather?


Not without a diamond bodkin; have you no Jewels?


Yes, In the knot of my handkerchief.


Oh fie, you must buy a Cabinet. What's here? a Toad stone, two Turkeys, six
thumbrings, three Aldermens seals, five Gemmals, and four Deaths-heads; these
are Alehouse ornaments -- Yet these Diamonds are tolerable, and these Pearls
will make a half Chain.


Would she were hanged in the fellow, condition we had the rest.


They must be changed, but Nice may wear these till you get new, they will serve
to practice in.


There's a Coach at door.


I'll pawn my ability the French Lord, 'tis about the time I gave directions to
his Footman; for his entertainment, you must take upon you the rich widow, and
be you careful to observe Mrs Nices Language, garb, and behaviour, to men of
his quality; your Rings and Jewels upon her will credit the cause, and person
he comes to visit, which is your self, but under a veil. I'll prepare his
Lordship.


This is all for your instruction; these rings fit me excellent well, and
hereaster you may take pride upon you by my example.


I hope I shall learn in time; but I shall be more than a Lady if I marry with
a Lord.


Alas, I am but the Lady in the Play.


Now you put me in mind, I have seen pretty harlotry Ladies in a Country Play,
so proud, and so knavish, one would have sworn they had been women indeed.


He's here, you must be modest, and observe your distance now; Is this the
Lord? He looks like an over-grown Monkey.


What pretty foolish things some of these young Lords are?


Your Lordship is bountiful; that is she whom fame hath delivered to you; your
honour may advance.


Begar dis rish viddow look young as my self.


If my eyes be not in a mist this is the French Dancer.


Vat is your name?


He means to catechise her.


I shall be happy if your Lordship please to own me by the title of your
servant.


You must learn to complement thus -- 'Tis Galliard sure.


She kiss very vel begar, she have de Alamode touch of de lip ma foy; can you
dance Madam?


I am now confirmed.


Will he kiss me too?


Vat is she?


A Gentlewoman that attends me for the present.


Dat is a de reverence for de divel, she look like a de wihch Madam, but me
tell you Madam, for me love you very mush in the little time, as any man in de
varle; me be French Lor, and me have lodging in de autre street, Duke de
Memorency my kinsman, and two tree hundred great Lors have lose deir head in
France begar for no matre, and me fly to Englan to save a me neck by me trot.


Were you guilty of any treason?


No more begar than your little self.


What is your estate?


Begar very grand estate in Orleance, me have two tree Lettre from de Cardinal,
and he write a me, dat de King send for me to kiss his hand: Now as me was in
de resolution to take a de ship for France, me hear of you Madam in de Strand,
and me very glad to marry you before me go presently.


Your Lordship is very brief, but I find not my self inclined to cross the
Seas.


The Sea, mary shield, I'll not see the salt water for any Lord in Christendom,
I, I'll rather be no Lady.


Who, how now insolence, how dare you interpose?


Will you be ridiculous, and betray your self now?


Begar you have de Gypsy complexion, and look like de sign of-de Robin Hood
and maid a Marian.


Robin Hood in thy face, does he maid a Marian me?


She is not worth your Lordships passion, I shall teach you better manners.


Begar you shall have mush need of dat.


My Lord, you did ask me if I could dance.


The wench has found him.


Dere is noting in de varle for de Lady, like a de understanding in de foot.


I cannot praise my own ability, but I admire the excellency of other Ladies,
and should be fortunate to meet with some Master in thafaculty, that would
Instruct, and exercise me in private.


Me love you de better for da^, begar no body exercise you in private but my
self, me teach you Alamode de Court dance, hold up your little fingre you
command a my foot.


Your Lordship is too humble, it is an office would become one that is
mercenary; I affect dancing infinitely, oh that we had but some music here;
la, la, ra.


^is coming out.


What's that a bedstaffe?


It is a French pocket-pistoll.


Will he shoot it oft here? I could never endure a gun.


Forboon, brave, ah, dat is like a de Princess, Allez.


You shall not be so public in your graces to me; conceal your Fiddle
tillsome private oppo^runity.


Me understand.


How does your Lordship like her? You have her in an excellent humour.


Kiss a me madam -- hah? 'tis heaven? de Poet talk of de Nectar, begar here
is it; me never drink de^vine blank or de Claret, so me have but two tree drop
divine from your lip -- Metresse speak a for me.


The fool is extasied; in his worst condition he will serve for a husband; how
he dances in a Net?


He has money, and a Trade, he will serve wench.


If me get dis rish widow, me cozen 'em both begar.


Do you think he loves me indeed.


You no tinke madam dat me be so hot in love, and do burn, dat my reine a do
melt, as me vere in de oven, me need a go into de river presently to cool and
vater my heart, vere is de Mistress de la Maison? Gone? dat is vel, dere is no
honour like a dat, as you take a de little air in my Coach.


I have not been abroad to day, but I dare trust my self with your Lordship.


Oh Madam, a vostre service, now if me get a de Priest all is perfect.


Be all these Trunks hers?


We ha not stowage enough for half, she is infinitely rich.


Hast thou prepared her?


I find her very apt, 'tis her only ambition to be a Lady, a French Lord has
her in chase, but I have delivered your character, and what privilege she may
have by charter of her Knight.


I long to see her, is she handsome?


What she wants in beauty and breeding, she has in estate Sir.


That, that's enough, I can have beauty in other places, and will exceed what I
conditioned for, if I prosper. I will have this Widow in spite.


How Sir William?


To spite the Lady Beaufield, and her Magog that affronted me; I would lose no
opportunity, a widow must be taken in the pick; say I am come and commend me to
the heavens, I'll make all good.


To the heavens? will you dye before her?


For that we must take our chance; thou shalt be sure of a good lease for thy
life, and destiny agree upon us afterward.


Shall I direct you?


Shall it be my evening, and my morning star.


You too much afflict your self Mistress Lucy, 'tis but some humour he put on to
try the strength of your affection.


He is lost; not for my sake, but for his own I pity him, and I am confident,
if I were so happy to speak with him again, I should prevail to win him to his
first and noble temper; my end being so just, I could dispense with modesty to
find him out, and perfect the act of charity.


You have employed Formoll, from whom you may expect to hear such an account,
as may dry up your sorrows.


I see Sir you preserve your confidence.


I dare be just in your commands, and in a service you but smile upon, despise
the censure of the world.


Saw you not the Knight since?


The sweet hopes that he swallowed, to prepare me a ridiculous object to you
Madam, was gall upon his stomach, when he found you had mercy on my confidence;
he dares not converse with so unlicked a bear, as this shape must present


When Robin came to Nottingham dairy, dairy down,
His dinner all for to dine:
There met him fifteen ^olly Foresters,
Were drinking Ale, and Wine, hey down.
Madam your most humble servant; there be other men, and manners, and garbes as
fashionable in the eyes of discreet Ladies.


Have we got Adam Bell, and Clim o'th Clough?


We be three, good Mr William of Cloudesly.


'Tis so.


And how, and how show matters Mistress Lucy? every mans Cap is not made of the
same matter.

Have you felt the wool of Beaver?

-- Or sheep down ever?

-- Have you smelt of the bud of the Rose?

-- In his pudding hose.

-- Or have tasted the bag of the Be?
Oh so fine!

-- Oh so fond!

-- Oh so brave!

-- Such a knave!

-- Such a knave is he.

Sir, this is most uncivil, and your rashness, beside the forfeit of your own
discretion, will lay an imputation to wound my fame; within my presence, and
beneath my roof, which should protect all strangers, to affront a Gentleman
that visits me --


How's this?


Be bold sir, and presume you have my favour, you never appeared handsome till
this minute; bear up, your mirth becomes you rarely.


Dos't isaith?


What does my mother mean?


Spit of thy hand, and clap me of the shoulder Iames, the widow her self is in
love with me.

She cast an eye on little Musgrave
As bright as the summers sun.
I may turn over the Daughtet to thee.


I would I had her in an Embroiderd clout.


Sure my Lady is but in jest.

Show me said he whose men ye be
That hunt so boldly here,
That without my consent do chase
And kill my follow Dear. --

His follow Dear?


Ere thus I will out braved be
One of us two shall dye,
I know thee well an Earl thou art,
Lord Percy, so am I.

Thou Douglas?


This Lady has but fooled me all this while; make much of your new Antic
Madam, I can shift into my self again, and if that thing were worth my anger,
or my envy, beat him; you have a pretty humour, cherish it, and that William
of the Wisp, till I visit you again. --


The Gentleman is jealous.


I protest Madam if it had hot been not your sake, and that it had been pity
to have spilt any blood, in your Dining room, I would ha done something


In his breeches.


But I shall report your nobleness abroad.


Do not play the fool to much, I am out of the humour to laugh at you; he
cannot leave me thus. --


This was no trick to catch the old one.


How came you into this habit Simpleton?


By reading Ovids Metamorphosis, and to show the variety of my wit.


Let me entreat you hold your feet together, -- now you put me mind of a Smiths
bellows, your body is not all of a piece sure, but several limbs thrust into
several pudding bags, you would show terrible to the crows in a wheat field,
you are no living creature.


Persuade me to that, am I not sensible?


He that does that cure upon you, will deserve a chronicle; so desiring you
would take home your flail there, for here is like to be no thrashing work, I
commit you to the Barn, where like another Orpheus, you will draw the horse,
and sheep, to the melody of your voice, and ravish all the Cowes in the
Country, to hear you sing Packingtons pound. --


She has made a coxcomb on you.


Hum? I wo'not out of the pit for all this, I have another devise, and thou
shalt assist me, if that fail, I'll dye a bachelor, and make thee my heir.


I shall but pray for your death sir.


Back again, back again quoth the Pindar,
The wrong way have you go^, c.

So, so, I'll dance no more, a song, lets have a song now.


Take heed of the old ballads, eccliped, Like Hermit poor, eyes hide my love,
or Panae in the brazen Tower.


Or the lamentable complaint of Ariadne, and Theseus, and the more lamentable
for being so long.


Do you hear Madam virtue, Lady modesty cannot you play your part?


Not upon the violin.


They are both for the Gambo.


You shall play the part of my Mistress, you must be witty then, and extreme
coy and scurvy, in your answers; go behind that hanging, I will suppose it your
chamber; now Boy the Song I made to the window, while I mustle my self with
the fiddlers, to bid my Mistress good morrow in the street, observe the
conjuration.


I conjure thee, I conjure thee, by thy skin that is so fair,
Thy dainty curled hair,
And thy favour and thy grace,
With the patches on thy face,
And thy hand that doth invite
The cold, dullest appetite,
-- Appear appear,
Upon these terms I do invite thee,
And if thou come I will delight thee.
If not so, I do not care,
Though thy breasts be ne'er so bare,
Roses rich, with shoe that's white,
Or thy Venus best delight,
If not touch thy softer skin
What care I for thee a pin,
Appear appear.
For to hear, and not to see
Is a dull flat history,
And to see and not to touch
If you think the last too much,
Know all woman's but one joy
If we men not them enjoy,
Appear appear.
She's not awake, play a rattling tune that may startle her; where's this whore?
ha! --


She's gone.


Vanished? so he might have sung away his lungs.


It may be, she is retired, for you know what Lady; come let us drink.


Was your Muse at all this expense to the fiddles? do you write to no other
company sir?


Till they have my liveries; I'll maintain 'em in songs, wind up your voice
again*


Thine eyes to me like suns appear
Or brighter stars their light;
Which makes it summer all the year,
Or else a day of night:
But truly I do think they are
But eyes, and neither sun nor star.
Thy brow is as the milky way,
Whereon the gods might trace:
Thy lips Ambrosia I dare say
Or Nectar of thy face:
But to speak truly I do vow
They are but women's lips and brow.
Thy check it is a mingled bath
Of Lillies and of Roses;
But here there's no man power hath
To gather loves fresh posies:
Believe it here the flowers that bud
Are but a woman's flesh and blood.
Thy nose a promontory fair,
Thy neck a neck of land;
At natures gifts that are so rare
All men amazed do stand:
But to the clearer judgement those
Are but a woman's neck and nose.
For four lines in passion I can dye
As is the lovers guise,
And dabble too in Poetry
Whilst love possessed, then wise
As greatest States-men, or as those
That know love best, yet live in Prose.
The pure spirit of Sack in it.


The wits Elixar.


No jeering Gentlemen, I shall grow loud and break the peace.


These Gentlemen are for nothing but song and drink, I see no market all this
while; I'll get me hence too; if please you, I'll see if I can find out my
sister.


There's but one stool in the counting house, and Lady you shall stay till she
return; Gentlemen there's no life in you; I cannot do this roaring and whoring
handsomely; little thinks Lucy what Comrades I have got.


I have a precious confidence in you Gentlemen, to trust my single modesty
amongst so many.


What would you give to be ravished now? thou hast an excellent complexion
for it.


Ravished? preserve the Gentleman's dear wits Sack I beseech thee.


You would not lose by it if he ravish you.


another Song, and direct your voice to this Lady.


I'd have her merry, laugh, and smiles
And then look grave and sad:
In every humour but a while,
Make love as 'tis, that's made
I'd have your dress of sever all shapes,
Like Proteus carved, not he,
In humour a she coy Jackanapes
Then a grave Monkey be.
Discourse of all that comes to sense,
But speak none, yet still speak,
No matter here is no offence,
But to speak matter weak.
With thy soft voice sing me asleep,
Then startle me awake,
With Loves notes-passion make me weep,
Then merry for thy sake.
A discovery?


What new-found Land?


The Pigeon that left us hath been in another room with Mr Formal my Lady
Beaufields Gentleman Usher, there he sits like the picture of a Harry
Sovereign in a chair, while she is picking on's pocket.


Fetch him, and his Fairy hither, but for his Mrs sake usher him with loud
music.

We'll have some sport.


Where's the wench?


The wench has made an escape, she had a glimpse before and suspected me, but
here's the wicked Elder.


What says my wise* Lu^ullus?


Sir, my business was to you, though I met a Remera that is already sunk, I
was sent by a Gentlewoman, but no body must know it.


We hear no business till he have wound up a bottle, and then he shall have
audience.


That's but your fee for entrance, your garnish only; come sir there's no
remedy.


I hope you will conceal it Gentlemen.


Why then let us drink,
Away skurvy think,
And do it till we wink;
Which is just to be
So drunk not to see.
First Maudlin to weep,
Then after to sleep;
Why they let us drink,
And do it till we wink,
Away skurvy' think.
VVhar will become of me? would you and I Lady were in a back room.


So now speak my Lord Ambassador, I know your sovereign Lady greets us well.


Alas sir, my Lady does not know of my coming; I would speak with you from one
that shall be nameless, who thinks you are a debauched Gentleman, under the
Rose, and desires to talk with you when you are sober: I would be loath to
disgrace you before this good company, neither was I willing to tell her what I
heard about your drinking and whoring.


To the point.


I, I, to the point.


The principal matter then, and indeed my whole employment at this time to you
is --


What in the name of circumspection?


You shall excuse me sir, filence is a virtue; but if you knew who sent me --


He would make a costive Statesman.


It is sufficient one desires to speak with you, I name no time, nor person, I
know my office; Mistress Lucy is not to be named at all times.


Mistress Lucie, I am her servant; come drink this narrow sea to her health, you
must be drunk insallibly, I'll give a reason; I swear by Muscadell That I do
love her well; come ye Mermaids --


I'll do you reason then; but is this Muscadell? Mr Newman has sworn; for my
own part, Gentlemen, I desire it should go no further.


I swear by Muscadell
That I do love thee well,
And more than I can tell.
By the White, Claret, and Sack
I do love thy Black, black, black,
I do love thy black, black, black.
No Goddess amongst them all
So slender, and so tall,
And grateful too with all,
Which makes my smews to crack
For thy black, black, black,
For thy dainty black, black.
So lovely, and so fair,
Though shaddow'd with thy hair,
So nimble, just like air;
All these set me on loves wrack
For thy black, black, black,
For thy dainty black, black.
Thy kind and cunning eye,
When first it did espy,
Our love it did descry,
Dumb speaking, what do you lack?
Mine answered, thy black, black,
Thy dainty black, black, black.
Excellent!


Now give Mr Formal his cup.


I have had the narrow sea, I cannot drink an Ocean.


His the other cup; you had my wench as I remember, and I'll prescribe you a
penance; there's another whore for you, drink to her and she shall pledge.


Give me thy hand, and set thy foor to mine.


You may trust your single modesty with him.


For my own part, I had rather do things privately; come kiss me first --
here's to thee, my flesh tingles --


A word with you two Squires.


Any thing for a shelter, I foresee a storm; and what is one Cat among so many
Mastives?


You are melancholy.


You lye, you that say nothing lye, if you be of his opinion.


Me thinks we are very merry.


We are exceeding merry.


Have you discharged your Culvering? where's the paraquito?


I drunk it off.


She is vanished too.


Then we are our selves, and make me your example; you know your Province
Sir, make ready for an Angel, sing the design of honour, and of fancy.


But first in Fancy we will fool,
Pull off our Dublets, drink more cool,
Our hats upon our heads not stay,
For each health we'll throw them away
So Periwig, or Fringe, or Border,
The naked truth we'll drink in order.
And to the Music as they play
A Fancy Piece we'll throw away,
Until we are drein'd, can draw no more,
And the next day all cry therefore.
Off With Formalls Doublet, off with his Doublet, throw't into the fire, that's
a good phansic; now he is Formal right.


I did not drink hard, for I am cold, the wench would keep me warm, she's a
notable firedrake; will it please you sir to go to the party?


Now does he betray what a Bawd he would be.


Does no body know where to get a Serpent with two legs that hath never a
sting?


I have a great mind to drink a health in one of my boots.


I drink no beer glasses, if a shoe will serve turn --


His shoe, my scabberd, a match.


My glove.


His cap.


Fill brimmers, every man to his Mistress; now do not I like this fancy.


We ha don't.


There's wool in my scabbard, which is a spungious matter, and when I ha done


What's that?


From the roof a Throne?


This room is mine, and called the field of Tempe; Because I woonot stay while


As I singing now came down,
I do bring you Bacchus Crown:
From the plump Lord of the vine
Clusterd grapes to make you wine,
Your swelled Temples circling in,
Crowned with this, and bathed within;
Therefore your best wishes bring,
Place this Garland on your King.
Is not Bacchus the best good fellow God on 'em all? Let me see, Formal shall
be King, and he sent to heaven presently.


Send me to heaven? why should I be sent thither before another man?


Ret, Ret, verily Ret, here's the Fartridge under the Table.


They'll be good company, they shall both be immortal together, help
Gentlemen. Boy you must be deposed.


Alas what shall I do?


You shall to heaven Lady?


What before my time? and whether I will or no?


It shall be with as much ease, as if it were in a Featherbed.


Let us sleep together.


Ah pity a poor Gentlewoman, if you have hearts of flesh, do not use me worse
than heathen Prentices.


So crown 'm, and give to each a glass of wine, for a sceptre.


Gentlewoman, if we must mount, 'tis none of our seeking, we are but Angels in
our own defence, for my own part, I desire to go thither in no better
company.


Up with 'em, and preserve your sceptre glasses, do not spill your blood
royal.


Alas, hold there for heavens sake, I must meet three Innes of court Gentlemen
at the Stillyard to night, it may be out of my way 20. pound, consider your
own cases.


Peace gentle Queen of grapes.


Thou art a traitor too, oh!


Do not jog the chariot, let us take our preserment patiently, and drink a
health to the humble mortals, that turn up their whites to us, this is pretty
high drinking.


Drunkards, devils? oh that I were upon earth again. --


Is this the Gentlewoman's wine, or water?


He mounts insensibly.


They have a heavenly time on it; you know me sir.


Noble Mr. Newman.


There's for your attendance.


What's to pay?


They shall pay you the reckoning in the other world, you know the back way
thither; come my boys to the departed, having paid all rites

We now return.


Like woeful Adamites.


Jam resolved, since fair means cannot prevail with Mistress Lucy, to steal
her away, this is the key of the back-gate of the garden, to the fields, be
ready when I give the sign to hurry her into the coach, and when I have her at
my Countrey-House, I'll take in her maiden town, upon my own composition.


You wo'not ravish her.


There are twenty ways to deal with a woman, and never ravish her; no, I have
plaid the fool too much.


I am of your opinion.


But she shall find if I get possession. --


The Coachman is a lusty fellow too, and will help to clap her abroad; the
curtains being close she cannot be heard, and the horses will run, as the
devil were in the poop, for he drives like a Tamberlaine.


Holla ye pamperd Jades.


One Traitor more were not amiss for al that.


Thou say right, for though she be a little woman, her voice may be too
strong for us.


Let us alone, mind your own part.


Be resolute James.


The course I am in, hath brought some men to the Gallows, and do I take it
for prevention?


What desperate fellow's that?


I am weary of wine and noise, is there no other cure for melancholy? I do
not love the cramp in my neck.


He looks like a Gentleman that were in debt; my friend do you come hither to
find a tree? you are a proper fellow, dost want employment, for though your
clothes have a good gloss, they look as they were ill lined, they want
money.


I suffer that which made the old woman mend her pace fir.


Do as I'll direct thee.


Whom do you serve?


I serve my self; my Master is a fool; did you never hear of Simpleton?


That worshipful puppy?


He knows him. I have seen you before, but 'tis no matter where; I like thy
countenance; can keep counsel? walk o'this hand o'me.


Nay a little further Mistress Lucy, it seems Mrs Voluble told him no great
good fortune, she saw it in his stars, for you know she wears Astrology at
her apron strings; but she told me in private who should be the man, your dear
Endymion.


Who I beseech you?


The object is presented, and 'tis in vain to oppose the Constellations, what
must be must be, and there were no more Ladies in the world, I am the man.


To steal her away?


My Master is resolved. They are here; close.


She is betrayed. --


Now. --


Help; thieves.


Stop her mouth.


Then every man take his chance.


Murder, murder.


Are you so cunning sir? you shall along with us.


Worried by Hedghogs!


Are you not killed outright sir?


I am not certain, be sure you hold him fast; to the next Justice; I must get
a Surgeon. You are my rival, I know you well enough, if I miscarry, it shall
cost me a hundred pound, but I'll ha thee hanged for it.


I understand you perfectly Mistress Voluble, and like your proposition; but a
word more of the widow that is at your' house, she is very rich you say?


Not in understanding.


Tis the better.


Her's all your worship must promise her, to be knighted, for she hath a great
mind to be a Lady.


I know where a blank lies dormant for a Baronet, it will carry more noise and
authority on the bench too.


You have done me some discourtesy here tofore, in believing the complaints of
Intemperate tongues against me, but you see my charity I desire to live in your
worships fair opinion (...) a neighbour.


I will make you amends sweet Mistress V^luable, you're a virtuous Gentlewoman on
my conscience: but how shall this widow be wrought?


That's done already. The truth is she inquired of me, (for we women use to open
our secrets one to another) for some stayed Gentleman that was a Lawyer,
(because she has so great an estate, and many suits to follow) on whom she
might bestow her self, for the security of her fortune, and I have already
prepared her, and such a commendation of your person, and learned gravity, a
Justice of Peace and Quorum, out of my private respects to you, without desire
or expectation of any bribe or reward.


I understand that very well.


I know you do.


How much I am bound to your virtue?


The widow has a great mind to see you, but I will contrive it for your
honour, she shall come hither, as to her learned Counsel.


The invincible wit of a woman! how I honour it.


There can be no loss in it if you get a Chaplain in readiness, widows are
taken in the opportunity.


A Gentleman brought to be examined, that has wounded one Master Simpleton.


Simpleton? that's the widows son.


Richard, send to the Curate of the Parish, say I would speak with him
presently.


Alas who hurt you?


My rival Master Newman, Is this the ^ustice?


A former quarrel; if you die, I have ^aw enough to make it murder, for your
good Mothers sake.


Cannot you make it manslaughter, and let me live? for I desire but his death.


He shall make it what you please. This Gentleman is to be Knighted, and
loves your mother above all the world, things meet as close, as if they went to
engender.


My Mother is worth six thousand pound, if you will promise to make her a Lady,
and do your best to hang the Gentleman, you shall be my Father in Law, when my
Landlady says the word.


Sir I'll take my leave.


Sweet Mistress Voluble, leave your friend to me, I understand the matter
perfectly, and it shall go hard, but we will have all the Law on our side.
Call in the offender; please you sit; Richard be ready with your Ammunition,
Pen, Ink and Paper.


What is your name sir?


My name is Sear.


He is the Surgeon sir.


I'll teach you ^o follow your profession sir, I'll make you an example to all
Phlebotomers; how often have you been indicted for letting of blood firra?


I understand you nor.


But I understand you sir; how durst you vi armis, feloniously assault this
noble Gentleman in contempt of peace, and the Kings Law, his Crown and
dignity? answer me sir to that. I'll seeze him.


You Worship is mistaken, I never see the Gentleman before, I was sent for --


He is the Surgeon sir, that is come to take measure of my Masters wounds, it
was that Gentleman that let him blood.


Why do they not change faces then? away you knave, and look to the
Gentleman; you stand idling here to stumble authority with a felonious
countenance.


Let us be for sworn both in a tale.


Sir, you are one that should do Justice; where is my poor friend? be not so
much dejected, you did but rescue me sir from dishonour.


I was in a melancholy humour; 'tis come about as the wise woman concluded.


VVher's Simpleton? I may accuse him for a Rape.


Take heed what you say.


Or some such black intent; this Gentleman but interposed to save me from their
surie, and with his sword punished a bold offender by letting out some blood
that was corrupted.


That's not material; will you confess you wounded Master Simpleton? come to
the matter.


I confess it sir, but hear the reason.


I will hear no reason, that were simple justice; take him aside, and you may
follow your business. Stay young Gentlewoman, I must examine you.


Shall I withdraw, and shut the door?


What Justice ^ir, or Law is this?


It is not Polton, Crompton, nor Fitzerhert, A Justice ought to have some
discretion without book, especially in these cases. I grant you are the root
and cause of this misfortune.


I ^ir?


Be wise, and understand me; nd being endued with such gifts of nature, native
beauty and favour, (come a little nearer) and you to abuse your self --


How sir?


Or suffer your self to be abused (come a little nearer) is not to be
thankful for those excellent benefits.


Will you translate an Insolence in others upon my guilt?


You accuse an honest Gentleman for an intent of rape; alas poor soul, it was
pure affection in him, he would have ravished you no doubt, with your own
consent, the fault was your Ingratitude, (a little nearer) Seneca doth write
much of Ingratitude, that I may come (a little nearer) or else Nero had not let
him blood, (yet nearer) this Nero was a most wicked Tyrant, for all he could
play upon a fidle, make ballads, and sing them himself, and therefore take
heed of cruelty, and be gentle, Nero died a violent death.


My Mother.


Lucy you made haste.


Your pardon Madam.


I understand she is a Lady.


In the defence of my own virtue, and the noble Gentleman that suffers for his
charity to me --


I came to assist you. It were an injury to doubt your justice. My name is
Beaufield. If my credit may be interposed security for Newman my daughters
knowledge in the cause will


Richard, call in the delinquent, this Lady has spoken very much to the matter,
as I understand it. Has the Surgeon done yet?


They are coming down.


Now sir, how many of his wounds are mortal?


There is not one considerable, the Gentleman is in no danger.


But have not you authority to hang him? I'll take my oath, he had an intent to
kill me. My Lady and Mistress Lucie? Iames, I'll stay no longer, since I am not
mortally wounded, sneak after me.


My hanging ^it is over, and the witchcraft, I am now my self again, if you
can pardon


How now? what saucy fellow's this?


She's here too. I am bold Cozen to visit you, they say, there's a Gentleman
brought before you, for breach of the peace, I come to bail him.


We take no foreigners; what outlandish thing are you, pray?


You know me sir, my name is Manley, you ca^ld me cozen yesterday.


I never saw you before. I know that name, and a Gentleman that owns it, a
kinsman of mine too, but he is no such Brandemart. Richard, do you know this
Mahound? he calls himself my cozen Manly.


Why in this habit?


Transmigration?


Is it not some spy ^ir?


Constable take him to your charge. I'll teach you sir, to usurp a Gentleman's
name; tis felony ipso facto, write his mittimus.


By what statute? Trigesimo Secundo of King Phillip? I do not Madam desire
your cer^ificate.


Y'ar^ a stranger sir to me, yet I dare be engaged for his forth coming, he
has an honest face.


Come hither Richard, there's half a piece, rub thy eyes woo't, are they open
yet?


I see you plainly now ^ir, you're my Masters cozen, 'tis Master Manley.


'Tis your best course to own me too; is it so long since you took bribes,
since you divided and manumisd a crooked chambermaid that robbed her Mistress of
old Gold? there was a Lancepresado stripped a hedge, when you were out of Linen;
Peuter has been left at the back-doore, when you did study Alchemy; I leave
the trick you showed the Sailors wife in your Closet, when you promised a
reprieve to her goodman from Wapping; I know not that you have run your
withered motley face into a prem^nire; do not know me, why do ye no^ charge the
constable?


What is a Justice without eyes, I mean spectacles? 'tis he indeed, I
understand, and see him perfectly; welcome, a Chair for my Cousin?


So then. Madam a word with you, I'll make you know me too, ere I have done.


There is a matted Chamber a Couch -- More business?


Vere is de matre Justice? begar they have put de shear upon me, me expect de
rish vidow, and have marry the chambermaid, she confess dat, Maitre Justice,
pray take her to your self, me desire your varrant, for Metresse Voluble, dat
she bring the vidow Simplaton to marry me sans ceremoine, dat is your
commission, or begar me complain of you to de King.


Did you expect the rich widow Simpleton? h^, ha! I know this trifle, my Clarke
knows her better


Bergar Matre Justice, and Matre Clarke make your division, dat is all you see.


Sir I have only cause to complain, he told me he was a French Lord, Mistress
Voluble shall make affidavit, and courted me to be his Lady, and now we are
married, he proves but a cinquepace. I looked for thousands per annum, and he
is but one, two, three, four, and five.


How, did he pretend himself to be a Lord? 'tis Scandalum Magnatum in the
highest degree: and by a statute quinquagesimo of the Queen, if she prosecute,
he is to be whipped, and lose his ears three several market days.


How will you divide his Ears into three equal portions?


Me give a de whip, and me Iose a mine 'ares!


You hear the law, if I complain.


Sir -- Mistress Voluble --


Is the widow come?


The Gentlewoman is come, and desires to speak with your worship in private.


The Curat's in the Hall sir.


So, so, I must entreat your patience for a few minutes; how I am blessed!


Tell a me de trot, have you no Argent, no portion?


But I have a trade.


I dare be sworn thou hast.


Awe dat is someting, here is my hand, you no tell a de tale, a me, and me keep
your secret by my trot.


I took boldness Madam upon sight of your Ladyships new Coach at the door,
to entrude and present a poor forsaken servant; give you joy of your old
fashioned young Gentleman.


Your companion wants no antiquity, if she have no Vizard on.


I hope you are not married Sir?


The matters done, and tis more honourable to make a Lady than to marry one.
Does any body know this Gentlewoman, she was a widow till this morning, and a
rich one I thank my stairs, and wants the subtle art, some Ladies have to
make themselves ridiculous, by doting upon antics.


What name has your most reverend Lady?


She was called the wealthy widow of old Simpleton, before I married her.


Ha, ha, ha!


What Is't makes you so merry Mounsieur?


Begar some body make arrant ass of de Knight, hold a me, or me shall crack a
my rib wi'de laugh, dat is no Simplaton, but an autre Chambermaid, de servant
to my wife, begar he be sheated too.


I must confess she waited upon me.


How?


Ha, ha, ha!


Ma foy dat is certain, ha, ha, ha!


I desie her, that was but a plot.


Begar it was very fine a plot, me have patience, dat dere be more fool in de
comedy.


Mistress Voluble can justify what I am, that I am, or would I might ne'er be, a
Lady, and I be'nt, that I be'nt.


I will have Justice.


You may have him sir.


The reason of this noise my right worshipful?


Give me a warrant presently.


Against whom?


Vol^ble, I'll have her whipped.


Wrong not the virtuous Gentlewoman.


Virtuous? vexation.


Why do you take on so, of my conscience she is honest enough; does this woman
look like a whore?


I thank you Gentleman.


She has gravity enough to be a bawd, and then the worst is past.


Is not the widow weight, not perfect sterling?


This is not the widow.


What widow?


The rich widow Simpleton.


I do believe it, did she promise you marriage?


The devils proctor Mistress Voluble made me believe so.


Do not wrong I say again that virtuous Gentlewoman Mistress Voluble, I know
her, and know her virtuous, but the rich widow Simpleton, you talk of (thanks
be to providence) is newly married, the Priest hath scarce wiped his oraculous
lips, since they pronounced us, Man


Why does she veil her face.


It is her modesty, to hide her blushes, that I should so soon prevail upon
her: and thus the morning breaks out of the clouds.


By your leave Landlady, wher's my mother.


Mistress Voluble?


Here's my son, he shall be a witness I am his mother, I am married to this
Knight, and they would persuade me out of my self.


'Tis come about again, Is this your mother?


I have asked her blessing in my days.


There is no remedy, 'twas your own Curate did it.


Give you joy Mr. Justice.


Conspiracy, is there no law for this?


Yes, yes, the canon law, and you must keep her.


Let me obtain Madam your fair construction, Sir William you are sped to your
desires, and you are fitted Mounsieur Galliard, but Nice, the Jewels must
return to their right owner.


Excuse a moy.


It must be so, I keep my wedding ring for thee sweet heart.


I ask you pardon sir, and Mistress Lucy, I had a plot upon your loves, to
endear young Simpleton, in hope your credulous nature, to avoid melancholy,
might have been engaged to some licentious rudeness, and so made your self
unworthy of her affection, but here I must confess I have no skill in stars
nor fortune telling, and am but one among the rest that have deceived your easy
faith, forgive me, as I wish you may thrive in your affections.


I am confirmed.


Nay then let marriages go round, with this take both possession of my heart
and fortunes.


You but enlarge my power to do you service.


Your love, and joys be constant. Mr. Justice you must embrace Mistress
Voluble.


Well, I will love thee for thy wit; but no more wandering.


You wholly sir shall steer me, and to invite more welcome from you sir, I
have not lived upon the common charity, I have a state is not to be despised.


Say thou so, we'll put our stocks together and live merrily.


Will they not take his word? alas poor Formal, there, there's their ransom,
bid the whore be honest, I'll plead his reconcilement to my Lady.


I am gone.


But do ye hear, must I have no wench, at the end of the play? that have taken
all this pains? what will you do with me?


Well remembered, this Lady did accuse him; though I missed of the Mother, I
will make sure of the son, make his warrant for Newgate presently.


How Sir?


I know how very well Sir.


You called it love before, I freely pardon him.


Let this Day be consecrate to peace, and Hymen.


And the Night to Venus; let it be so, and thank this Gentlewoman.


I thank you all, and will never trust a witch for your sake, I'll go seek
out my wits.


Let no man part, so many hearts here tid'd,
Stay till we drink a health to every Bride.
Flourish --


