OUr Auth'ress says to make a Play is hard,
To censure freely men are not afraid;
Opinions easily do pass upon
The wit of others, though themselves have none;
And envy rounds the sense, and words about,
Hoping some errors it may soon find out.
But streams of wit do not so often flow,
As salt rough censures, which to billows grow;
And swell so big, till they in pieces fall,
In their own ruins they are buried all.
But if our Authors Play deserves a praise,
She will not thank you, though you give her bays;
Because she knows it is her right and due,
And justice to receive the same from you.
Wherefore she says, if you do take delight
To read her Play, or acted to your sight,
The bounty doth proceed from her alone;
Her wit doth pleasure give to every one.
The Play, if bad, she doth desire no praise,
The Cypress will receive instead of bays.
'Tis reported that the great Mogul hath War with the Parthians, and a man of
our Nation is General of all his Forces.


Me thinks it is too great an Honour and Trust to give to a stranger.


But it is reported he hath behaved himself so wisely, honestly, nobly, and
valiantly, as he hath gained the favour of the Emperor, and love of the
Soldiers, and also respect from all the inferior Princes.


Who should this man be?


I cannot learn: for the Merchants from whom I had this report, know not what
his right name is; for they think he goes by a covered name.


Surely he is of a very mean Birth, that he is ashamed to own his name.


It seems so; but let his Birth be poor or great, he hath a Generous Soul: for
they say he is very bountiful, and lives in great magnificence, and carries
himself as if he were Princely born: He is the whole discourse upon the
Exchange, and the Merchants do cry him up like to another Iulius Caesar.


It seems they fare the better for his being their Countryman, and he to be the
Emperors Favourite.


'Tis like enough.


Nay you may be assured they have a Fee of Obligation, if they praise him so
much. Of what Age do they say he may be?


They say is in the prime of his years, a very handsome man, well-behav'd, and
of a ready wit.


'Tis strange it should not be known of what Parentage he is of.


It is not known as yet.


Sir, were not you a servant to the Lord of Sage?


Yes Sir.


He was a Wise, and a Noble Person.


He was so, Heaven rest his Soul.


'Tis said he hath left but one only Child, and she a Daughter, which Daughter
is sole Heir to all his Estate.


She is so.


And it is also reported she will be wooed in public, or else she'll never wed.


The Report is true, Sir: for I am now going to invite all her Friends and
acquaintance, to whom she desires to publish her resolutions.


Is she resolved of it?


She hath vowed it.


Pray favour me so much, as to give me a Character of her.


She is Virtuous, Young, Beautiful, Graceful, and hath a supernatural Wit; and
she hath been bred and brought up to all Virtuosus, which adorns her Natural
Gifts; she lives magnificently, yet orders her Estate prudently.


This Lady may be a sample to all her Sex.


Mistress Simple is the very'st Fool that ever I tutored or instructed.


Do you mean a fool by imprudence, or a fool that speaks improperly?


I do not know what her imprudence may be; but in her words there is no
coherence.


Alas she is young; and youth is a Cage of Ignorance, and boys and girls are
like birds, which learn from their tutors and tutoresses artificial tunes,
which are several Languages, Sciences, Arts, and the like: But the truth is, of
all sorts of Birds, the Cocks are more apt to learn than the Hens.


If she can be taught sense, I am much mistaken: for she hath not a reasonable
capacity to learn.


Why then she hath a defect in Nature, as a Changeling.


I think so.


Why should you think so, since youths capacity cannot be measured by their
Educators? for Time is the only measure of the rational capacity: And to prove
it, some boys and girls will be so dull, as to seem stupid to Learning, and yet
in their strength of years may prove very rational understanding, and wise men
or women; besides, the Brain is like to the Air, 'tis sometimes thick with
mysty Errors, sometimes dark with clouds of Ignorance, and sometimes clear
with Understanding, when as the Sun of Knowledge shines; and perchance you
heard her speak when her Brain was cloudy and dark.


So dark, as her words could not find the right way to sense.


Perchance if you hear her speak some other times, when her Brain is clear, you
may hear her speak wisely.


It is so unlikely she should ever speak wisely, as it is near to impossible.


Indeed unlikely and impossible do some way resemble each other: But let me
tell you, the Brain is like the Face, it hath its good days and its bad: for
Beauty and Wit have not only their times and seasons, but their foul and fair
days.


You say true: for the choicest Beauties that ever were, or are, will sometimes
look worse than at other times; nay so ill they will look sometimes, as they
might be thought they were not Beauties.


The like for Wit: for certainly, the greatest Wit that ever was, or is, may
sometimes be so dull and unactive, as it might be thought they were so far from
being Wits, as they might be judged Fools: And certainly, the most Eloquent
Orators that ever were, have spoke at some times less Eloquently than at other
times; insomuch, that at some times, although the subject of their Discourse is
so full of Matter and Reason, as might have oiled their Tongues, smoothed their
Words, and enlightened their Fancy, yet they will speak as if their Wits had
caught cold, and their Tongues had the numb Palsy, on which their words run
stumbling out of their mouths as insensible; when as at other times, although
the subject of their discourse be barren or boggy, woody or rocky, yet their
Wit will run a Race without stop or stay, and is decked and adorned with flowery
Rhetoric: And certainly, the wisest men that ever were, have given both
themselves and others worse counsel sometimes, than at other times; and
certainly the valiantest man that ever was, had sometimes more courage than at
other times: But yet although a valiant man may have more courage at one time
than another, yet he is at no time a coward, nor a wise man a fool.


But Orators may chance to speak non-sense.


They may so, and many times do.


Why then may not a Valiant man be at some times a Coward, and a Wise man a
Fool, as well as Orators to speak non-sense?


Because Valour, Judgment, and Prudence are created in the Soul, and is part of
its Essence; I do not mean every soul, but the souls of Valiant and Wise men:
for souls differ as much as bodies, some are created defective, others perfect;
but words are only created in the mouth, and are born through the lips, before
the soul of sense is entered or inbodied therein.


An Orators tongue is powerful.


An Orators tongue doth rather play on Passions, than compose the Judgment, or
set notes to the Reason; like as a Fiddler, that can play tunes on musical
Instruments, but is no Musician, to compose and set tunes: But there are many
men that have eloquent tongues, but not witty souls; they have the Art of
words, but not the Spirit of wit.


Kind Friends, and worthy Acquaintance, you may think it strange, and perchance
take it ill, I invite you only to a simple Discourse, for to declare a vain
Vow, as you may judge it so to be, which Vow I made since my Father the Lord
Sage's death. The Vow is, never to receive a Lovers Address, or to answer a
Lovers Suit but in a public Assembly; and 'tis likely the World will laugh at
this as ridiculous, or condemn it for pride, or scorn it as self-conceit: But
if they will be pleased to weigh it in Judgements Scales, they will find it
poised with a good Intention, and make a just weight of Convenience against
unaccustomariness: for though it is not usual, yet it is very requisite,
especially to such young women which are Orphans, who like small and weak
Vessels, that are destitute of Guide or Pilot, are left on the wide Sea-faring
World to ruinous waves, and inconstant weather; even so young women are to the
Appetites of greedy men, and their own inconstant and changing Natures, and
want of Experience to guide them, run on Rocks, Shelves, and Quick-sands of
Troubles, Misery, and Disgrace, not knowing what safe Port or Home to sail to;
whereupon, and in which danger, I considering with my self, at last I thought
it the safest way to swim in the full Ocean, and not in the narrow Channels,
Creeks, or obscure Corners, lest I should be crushed to pieces, or drowned for
want of Sea-room; and surely were there a Law to forbid all private meetings of
young men and women, and that no women should marry, unless they be wooed in
public, there would not be so many unequal matches, so many perjured
Consciences, so many devirginate and forsaken Maids; neither would there be
such floods of tears from sorrowful Parents Eyes, for their undutiful childrens
Actions that will choose without their good liking, and marry against their
good wills: But they will be ashamed in public to choose dishonourably or
indiscreetly: for the Ears and Eyes of a public Assembly will be as Reigns, to
curb their unruly Passions, and their Applause and Commendation will be as
spurs to force them to a wise, choice, when in private Wooings their Passions
become wild, and run loosely about, without bridle or check: Wherefore I desire
my Friends and Acquaintance to be as witnesses of my behaviour and words to my
loving and Matrimonial Suitors; and in this you will be as Parents to the
Fatherless, as Judges to Pleaders, and Gods to Men.

We approve of your discreet and honest Resolutions, and shall wish you happy
days.


Mistress, there is a Woman at the door that can tell Fortunes.

O let her come in, let her come in.

God bless you young Ladies.


Can you tell Fortunes?


Yes that I can Lady.


Tell me mine.


Tell me mine first.


No, tell me mine first.


Nay, tell me mine first.


Have patience Ladies, and let her tell your Fortunes by degrees, one after
another: for she cannot tell them all at once.


I must look in your hand, Lady.


By your hand you should marry richly, and keep Open-House; you will have many
Children, and your Husband will love you dearly.


But will no body love me but my Husband?


Yes, you will be well beloved, if you be kind and loving to others.


Now tell me my Fortune.


You, Lady, will have two Husbands.


You did not tell me I should have two Husbands.


No Lady, your Fortune is to have but one.


How long will it be ere I shall have one of my Husbands?


Not long, Lady.


Will my Husbands be handsome men?


Your first Husband will be a tall men, with a brown hair and complexion.


That complexion and stature I like very well.


Your second Husband will be of a middle stature, and of a fair hair and
complexion.


O I like that stature and complexion better.


Tell me mine, tell me mine.


You will have many courting Servants, and two will fight for you.


And which shall have me?


He that out-lives the other.


Why, shall one of them be killed?


Yes.


I am sorry for that: for I could please them both. But look again, perchance
he may be only sore wounded, and not killed out-right.


Your hand doth portend death to one.


And will he live long that I shall marry?


I do not perceive his death in your hand.


I am sorry for that; for I shall not love him, by reason he killed one that
loved me so well as to die for my sake.


'Tis only his fortune to live; but he ventures as much for your sake as the
other.


That's all one: for I shall love him that's killed, more than he that lives,
especially after I am married: for I shall love a dead servant better than a
living Husband.


You are so long a talking to the woman, as you hinder her from telling me my
fortune. Come woman, read the fortune in my hand.


You, Lady, will die a Maid.


Out upon the Witch, what Devil told you that lye?


I do not say you will die a Virgin.


I hope you do not see any children in my hand.


There are many lines that do foretell children; but some are so small, and
others so crossed and broke, as I cannot find a strait or perfect line: But here
are lines that do foretell many Suitors.


That's some amends: for it had been a hard case, and very ill fortune, if I
should have neither Husband nor Suitors.


Come, come, Ladies, pay the poor woman, and let her go.


Give her a crown for me.


And one for me.


And one for me.


Heaven bless you Ladies: for you will make me rich.


Give her half a crown for me.


Will not you give her a whole crown?


There is no reason I should: for she hath given me never a Husband.


Well, good woman, let this be a warning to you, that when you come to tell
young Ladies their Fortunes, that you be sure to give them all one Husband a
piece, if not two or three: for the more Husbands you give them, the more money
they will give you.


I shall take your counsel, Mistress.


To die a Maid, it cannot be, it must not be, it shall not be.


Madam, I am come here to offer you a Man, a Gentleman, and a Soldier, three
Titles in me, the Person that loves you, honours you, and will serve and obey
you, and think it no disgrace thus to alter the Carechism of our old written
Matrimony: If you command the breeches, you shall not only have them, but the
coat too; and when you are pleased to change the name of the Sex, the gray Mare
shall be the better Horse: for 'tis ashame for a man to control a woman, but
always to obey and please them from the least to the greatest of their
commands: for man never seems so much man, nor masculinely enthroned under the
cloth of State, in his Royal Chair of Courage, as when he is taken prisoner,
and led captive by the Female Sex. Thus, fair Divine Lady, conquered, thus I
beg, thus I yield, thus submit: Wherefore Lady, take me, and make your self
happy and me.

No Musk nor Civet courtly words I use,
Nor Frenchez-pan promises to abuse
Your softer Sex, nor Spanish sweets to tell,
And bribe your quicker nostrils with the smell,
Or let a false tear down my cheek to fall,
And with dissembling kneeling therewithal,
Sigh my self into Air: these fools disdain,
These quarter-wits, O kick them back again:
Nor am I like a Justice of the Peace,
That woo's you just as he would buy a lease;
Nor like an Heir, whose Tutor for his sake
So many lies of Joynter-houses make;
Nor like a Lawyer that would fain entail,
And when he's tried, doth make a Jeofail;
Nay thousands more, that always do dissemble
For your sake, make my loving heart to tremble,
Lest you should be deceived.
Admired Lady, fear not my Profession,
All my Drum-heads, I'll beat them to soft silence,
And every warlike Trumpet shall be dumb:
Our feared Colours now shall be torn off,
And all our Armour be condemned to rust,
Only my Sword I'll wear, the badge of man,
Por to defend you and your Honour-still.
Then Madam take me thus your loving Vassal,
When lying bragging Castrils will forsake you.
Oh take a man, and joy in him for life,
A Sword-man knows the virtue of a Wife.

Gallant Sir, should I accept of your Suit, I should be either an Enemy to my
self, or you, or my Country: As for my self, should I marry a Soldier, I
should be tormented with the cruellest passions: for if I love my Husband, as
sure I shall, I shall be perpetually frightened with his dangers, grieved for
his absence, despair of his life: Every little misfortune will be as his
Passing-Bell; I shall never be at rest asleep nor awake; my Dreams will present
him to my view, with bleeding wounds, mangled body, and pale visage; I shall be
widowed every minute of an hour, in my own thoughts: for as the Senses are to
the Body, so the thoughts are to the Mind, and Imaginations in these, or the
like cases, are as strong as a visible presence: for passions live in the Soul,
not in the senses; for a man is as much grieved when he hears his friend is
dead or killed, as if he saw him dead or slain: for the dead friend lives in
the mind, not the mind in the dead friend: But with these Dreams and
Imaginations I shall grow blind with weeping, weak with sighing, sick with
sorrowing, and deaf with listening after reports: And should you desist from
that noble Profession for my sake, I should prove as a Traitor to my Country,
by taking away part of the strength and support, leaving the weakness to the
force of the Enemy: for a good Soldier is a strong Fort and Bulwark of
Defence: Indeed a skilful Commander is to be preferred before a numerous Army:
for a number of men without Order, are like dust, which the least puff of wind
blows about; so an Army, not being well commanded, is quickly dispersed, and
suddenly routed upon the least error; besides, should you desist, you would
bury your name in Oblivion, when by your valiant Actions, and prudent Conduct,
your memory will be placed in Fames high Tower, and writ in large Characters of
praise. 'Tis true, should I marry, I should prefer my Husbands honour before
his life, yet would I not willingly marry a man, whose life shall be set at the
stake, and Fortune still throwing at it, for that would make me live miserably:
And who would wilfully make themselves miserable, when Nature forbids it, and
God commands it not?


Shall we go and visit the Lady Gravity?


No, she lives so solitary a life, as we shall meet no company there: for none
go to visit her.


Then let us go to the Lady Liberty, there we shall meet company enough: for
all the Ladies in the Town go to visit her.


If she hath no men-visiters, I will not add to the number of her Lady
visitors.


You may be sure she hath Masculine Visitors, or else the Ladies would never go
to see her: for it is to meet the men the Ladies go to see her, and not for her
own sake.


And the men go to see the Ladies.


I believe some do; yet men are better company in the company of their own Sex,
than in the company of women.


By your favour, the contrary Sex agree best, and are better pleased together,
than men with men, or women with women: But if the Lady Liberties House be the
General Rendezvous for Men and Women, let us go.


Content.


O my dear Heart!


O my dear Joy, how glad am I to see thee! But where have you been, that you
came later than you promised? for if you had not sent me word you would come to
me to day, I had gone to you.


Why, where do you think I have been?


I know not where to think.


I have been at a Silk-mans shop to buy me a new Gown; but I would not choose
it before I had shown thee my patterns.


Let me see them.


What do you think of this stuff?


This is out of Fashion; besides, 'tis not a Mode-colour.


What think you of this Tabby?


The colour is good, but it is not of a good water.


What think you of this Satin?


The Satin is a good glossy Satin, but the colour is too pale.


But pale colours, 'tis said, are Allamode in France.


Who says so?


A Gentleman told me so which is newly come out of France.


Then he perchance could have told you all the French Fashions.


So he did most particularly: for he said he went into France for no other
purpose but to see and observe Fashions.


I believe he only observed men's Fashions, being a man, and not women's
Fashions.


Nay, he swore he observed the women's Fashion more than the men's, by reason he
knew it would make him more acceptable to our Sex at his return, not only for
Discourse-sake, but for the kind rewards he should have for his Intelligence;
which rewards he hath found so full and plentiful, as he hath made such a
beneficial Journey, as he will go once every year, and stay a month or two,
and then return.


For Ioves sake send him to me.


I will; but prithee choose my Gown.


Let the Gentleman that came out of France choose your Gown: for he can put you
into the French Fashion.


Sweet Lady, your Beauty hath wounded my heart, imprisoned my senses, and hath
enslaved my soul, so as I am wholly in your power.


I will mask my beauty, and set you free.


A mask may shadow your beauty, but cannot extinguish it, no more than a dark
cloud can the bright Sun: And as the Sun begets life, and gives light; so your
beauty begets love, and gives delight to all that do behold it.


And as Time brings Death, Darkness, and Obscurity; so Age brings wrinkles,
and Absence forgetfulness, burying love in the ruins of Beauty.


My love can never die, nor hath time power to vade your beauty.


Nothing escapes Times tyranny, but what the soul possesses.


You are the soul of beauty, and beauty the soul of love.


Such souls have no Eternity, but die as bodies do.


O save my soul, and love me.


'Tis not in my power: for love is free and resolute; it can neither be
commanded nor entreated.


Ladies, you are become melancholy of a sudden: I hope you are not tired with
dancing?


Yes saith, we want divertisements: wherefore prethy Sir Thomas Letgo, send for
thy affianced Mistress to make sport.


I am ashamed she should be seen, or made known to this noble company.


O divulge her by all means, that the World may know you do despise her, and
that you will marry her only because she is rich, and to obey your Fathers
commands.


I will obey your commands, and send for her.


Sir Thomas Letgo, your wise Mistress is come to welcome your Guests.


She wants words to express her self, and Wit to entertain them.


Your Father knew you wanted not Wit so much as Wealth.


Many Fathers leave their sons nothing but their follies and vices for their
Inheritance: But my Father not having Vices or Follies enough of his own, hath
left me another mans Fool for an Annuity.


Is she a fool?


O yes: for she seldom speaks.


That's a great sign of simplicity indeed.


She is a mere Changeling: for when she doth speak, it is but, when she is
questioned, and then for the most part she gives but one answer to all sorts of
questions.


What Answer is that?


Her Answer is, she cannot tell.


Lady, there may be such questions asked, as are beyond a wise mans
understanding to resolve: But perchance she is sceptic, that doubts all
things.


What do you judge the scepticks fools?


A man may judge all those to be fools that are not scepticks.


I judge all those that think her not a fool, are fools.


Then Lady I am condemned: for I cannot give sentence against any of your Sex,
neither in thoughts or words.


Country Gentleman, Madam, though I no Courtier am by Education,
Yet I more truth may speak, and here declare,
Your charming Eyes turn wanton thoughts to virtue;
Each modest smile converts the sinfull'st soul
To holy Matrimony, and each Grace and Motion,
Takes more than the fairest Face.
I am not young, not yet condemned to age,
Not handsome, nor yet (I think) ill-favour'd;
I do not swell with riches, nor am poor,
No Palaces, yet have Conveniences.
What though Poetic Raptures I do want,
My Judgment's clearer than those hotter brains,
To make a Jointure out of verse and songs,
Or thirds in Oratory to endow you;
The Mean betwixt Extremes is Virtue still:
If so, then make me happy, and your self.
Courtiers may tell you that you may enjoy,
And marry pleasure, there each minutes time,
There is all freedom for the female Sex,
Though you are bound, yet feel not, you are tied,
For liberty begins when you're a Bride:
Your Husband, your Protection, and the Court,
Doth cure all jealousy, and fonder doubts,
Which there are laughed at as the greatest follies,
If not by most, yet they are thought mortal sins:
'Tis Heaven on Earth for Ladies that seem wise.
But you are virtuous, and those ways despise,
Therefore take me, that honour you for that.

Worthy Sir, could I persuade my Affection to listen to your sure, you should
not be denied; but it is deaf or obstinate; it will neither take your counsel,
nor be entreated. But since you woo so worthily, I shall esteem you
honourable, as well you deserve.


Sweet Madam, I could not pass by your house for my life, but I must enter to
see you, although I was here but yesterday.


Dear Madam, I am very much joyed to see you: for I am never well but in your
company.


When did you see the Lady Gravity?


I have not seen her these two days.


Lord, she is the strangest Lady that ever I knew in my life, her company is so
uneasy, and let me tell you as a secret, she hath a very ill Reputation.


If I thought that, I would not keep her company.


Since I heard that Report, I have shunned her company as much as I could.


Even so will I: for I would not keep any body company that I thought were not
chaste for a World. But who is her servant, can you tell?


'Tis commonly reported Sir Henry Courtly is her servant.


Out upon him, he is the veriest Whoremaster in all the Town; nay, if she keeps
him company, I will not come near her, I'll warrant you.


Nor I, although she would fain be dear with me, and seeks all the ways she can
to be great with me, sending her Gentleman-Usher every day to me with a How do
you.


No, pray do not be dear nor great with her, but let you and I be dear and
great, and that will anger her to the heart.


That it will faith, therefore let us go to morrow together and visit her, to
let her see how dear and great friends we are.


Content.


Agreed.


Lord, Sir Henry Courtly, I have not seen you these three days.


I was here yesterday, Madam, to wait upon you, but you were abroad, then I
went to wait upon you my Lady Parrot, but you were also from home.


So then I had but the reversions of the Lady Minions Visit.


I can be but in one place at one time, Madam.


Why should you take it ill, Madam, that he should visit me first?


Because I know no reason but that he should visit me before you.


Why, my place is before yours.


But the love and esteem I have for him, is to be preferred before your place.


How do you know but that I have as much Affection for him as you have? And I
am sure I have, and more.


Don't you believe her, Sir Henry Courtly: for faith she said but even now,
that you were the veriest Whoremaster in all the Town, and cried, Out upon you.


And she said she would forbear the Lady Gravitie's company, by reason you did
visit her, which was scandalou^.


What, do you betray me in your own house, when you said the same, and if I be
not mistaken, before me?


If you tell what I say, I will tell what you say.


Ladies, whatsoever you have said, or will say of me, I shall take it well: for
it is an honour to be mentioned by fair Ladies, although in the severest sense
or manner, or sharpest words.


What, do you take her part against me?


No, no, I perceive well enough that he takes your part against me, for which
he is a most unworthy man.


No, he partially takes your part, which is base.


I will assure you, Ladies, it is not my nature or disposition to delight in
your displeasures; but my desire is to please all your Sex, and I endeavour in
my practice and behaviour to that end: wherefore, if I cannot please, it is not
my fault.


So you make us Women strange creatures, as not to be pleased.


No, Madam, men want those excellent Abilities, or good Fortunes, which should
or could please you.


Faith Madam, he will have much to do to desend himself against us both.


Nay if you will join with me, we shall be too hard for him.


That I will, and help to beat him with Arguments.


For fear I should argue my self more out of your favours than I am already, I
will take my leave of your Ladyships for this time.


Lady, you are the Sun of Beauty, from whence all your Sex receive a light,
which without that would sit in darkness; you only give them lustre; you are
the only Godess men adore, and those men which do not so, if any such men be,
they are damned to censure: As for my self, Ladies have judged me handsome, and
for my persons sake have given me favours; nay, they have wooed my love with
great Expenses, maintained my Vanities, and paid my Debts, ruined their own and
Husbands Honour and Estate, and all for love of me; yet do I sue to you with
great Humility, though many of your Sex have courted me; and let me tell you,
fair Lady, that Courtiers Wives have freer Access to Masks, Plays, Balls, and
Courtly Pleasures, than other Ladies have, who beg and strive, and often are
beaten back in rude disgrace.

All which, fair Lady, if you sum up right,
You'll find a Courtiers Wife hath most delight.

Fair Sir, could Person, Courtship, Garb, or Habit win my love, you should nor
could not be denied: But since my Affection is not to be won by any outward
Form, or Courtly Grace, I cannot grant your suit; besides, the lives that
Courtiers live, agree not with my humour: for I had rather travel to my Grave
with ease, than inconveniently Progress about, tiring my body out, lying in
nasty lodgings, feeding on ill dressed meat that's got by scrambling; but at the
best, a Courtiers life to me is most unpleasant, to sit up late at Masks and
Plays, to dance my time away in Balls, to watch for Grace and favour, and
receive none; to gape for Preferments, Offices, and Honours, but get none; to
waste my Estate with Fees, Gifts, and Braveries, to run in debt prodigally, to
receive Courtships privately, to talk loud foolishly, to betray friendship
secretly, to profess friendship commonly, to promise readily, to perform
slowly, to slatter grossly, to be affected apishly; no Prudent Brain, or Noble
Heart, would interweave the thread of life with such vain Follies, and
unnecessary Troubles; besides, I had rather be Mistress of my own House, were it
a Cottage poor, than serve the Gods, if Gods were like to men.


My dear Comrade, what think thou? will the Gentleman we met at Madam
Gravities lodging marry me, think you?


I know not.


I verily believe he will.


What reason have you to believe he will?


A very good reason, which is, he looked upon me two or three times, and at one
time very steadfastly.


If a man should marry all the women he looks on, he will have more Wives than
Solomon and the great Turk, adding the number of their Concubines. But the more
earnestly the Gentleman looked on you, the greater sign he thought not of you:
for thoughts are buried in fixed eyes.


You speak out of spite, because I am thought handsomer than you.


I had rather your Beauty should lie in your own others thoughts, than it
should be visible to the view of the World, or to be inthrown on a multitude of
Praises; but howoever, I am not spiteful, and therefore pray think not so for
telling you my opinion of your no-lover.


You love your Jest better than your Friend.


That's an old saying; but I love a plain truth better than a flattering lye.


Madam, Madam, Madam.


Speak Sir, what is't you would say?


Madam, his Love and Modesty doth check his speech.


Then speak you for him.


Madam, your Presence, with you sparkling Eyes,
Hath dazel'd him, and struck him dumb with Love;
Like to a bottle too much filled, I doubt,
Though's mouth's turned downward, nothing will come out.
Or like a Bag-pudding in love he's cursed,
So stuffed, so swelled, and yet he cannot burst:
Or like a glass with Spirits of high price,
No drop can fall when 'tis congealed to Ice.
Sweet Lady thaw him then, take him apart,
And then his Tongue will tell you all his Heart,
And gush it forth with more force far than those
Who dribble all their love away in Prose.

I'm all for Public Wooing, so no stain
Upon my Reputation will remain.
With a dumb Husbands curse I'll ne'er be caught,
But a dumb Wife a blessing may be thought.
And so farewell.

Sir Thomas Letgo's Mistress, that he is to marry, is a pretty Lady.


But I do not perceive he is very hasty to marry her.


If she were mine, I would not prolong my Wedding-day.


For fear she should die, and you should lose her Estate.


No, I am not covetous: for my Estate will maintain a Wife according to my
quality, although she bring no Portion; and upon that condition I might have
her, I would give a Portion for her, so much I like and fancy her.


And would you marry her if you might have her?


Yes.


Pray tell me, what would you do with a Fool? she would be neither good for
Breed nor Conversation: for she might bring you a Race of Fools, and vex you
with ignorant Follies.


Why should you think her a Fool? she neither appears froward, peevish, or
spiteful; she hath a sober Face, a bashful Countenance, a natural Garb; she is
silent and pensive, which shows she is no Fool; but if she were always
laughing, or toying, or singing, or dancing, or simpering, or prating, or had
an affected countenance, or affected garbs or postures, I should conclude her
to be a Fool. But certainly she must needs have a wise Wit: for she seems
melancholy and contemplative, which no fool is; she hears much, and speaks
little, which no fool doth: wherefore I judge she hath Wit, but either she is
careless, and cares not to express it, or thinks the company fools, and
therefore will not express it, or is so bashful, as she cannot express it; and
there is nothing shows, or discovers Wit so much as Bashfulness, which shows
the Mind and Thoughts so sensible, as they apprehend beyond another
perceivance, and so fearful lest they should commit Errors in their Actions and
Expressions, as they obscure their Virtues and natural Excellencies, for want
of a confident Assurance, and a good Opinion of their own Abilities; besides,
Bashfulness thinks the least natural defect a Crime, and every little error a
Disgrace, never to be rubbed out; they will blush at their own thoughts, and
will pine almost into a Consumption, if two or three idle words should slip out
of their mouths, or that they should mistake an Argument, or that their
Behaviour was not so or so: The truth is, they never think their Actions or
their Words well enough done or spoken; they are the first that shall condemn
themselves, and the last that shall give themselves a pardon: But prithee Ned,
as thou art my Friend, see if you can procure me, or watch for an opportunity,
that I might speak with her alone.


I think that were not difficult to be done; but I will enquire a way.


Do not forget it.


No, it is so remarkable you should be in love with so simple a creature, as I
shall remember it.


Madam, I should not thus presume, did not my Profession dignify me to a
Spiritual Office, wherefore a fit Suitor to a Divine Lady: And since my Suit is
holy, by reason Marriage is sacred, despise me not.


Worthy Sir, all of your Profession require a solitary Habitation for studious
Contemplation to a holy life, wherein their Thoughts are Consecrated to
Devotion, that their Doctrine may flow from a pure Mind, in Eloquent words, to
the ears of their Flock, to instruct them with the light of Knowledge, and to
lead them into the ways of Truth; whereas Marriage, although it be sacred in it
self, yet it is rather apt to disturb than unite, especially a double Marriage,
which are of different Natures: for there are two sorts of Marriages, as a
Spiritual, and a Corporal: The first is betwixt the Gods and Mankind; the other
is betwixt Man and Woman: The one is by a Consecration and Communion of
Spirits, the other is by a Combination and Communication of Persons; wherefore
those that are married to Jove, ought to keep themselves pure in that Unity: As
for the marriage of Combination and Communication of Persons, although it is
requisite for the continuance of Mankind, and civil Commonwealths, yet to
spiritual Elevations is is a great hinderance: for though a woman, especially a
Wife, be accounted as a Helper and Comfort to man by her diligent attendance,
and loving service, yet women are accounted not only unprofitable in learned
Schools, but obstructers to a studious life, for which women are not suffered
to inhabit in Universities, Schools, or Colleges; indeed we are in a manner
banished from the sight or entrance thereinto, and men have reason so to do;
since learning, especially Divine learning, requires study, and study requires
a quiet, solitary, and silent life; and certainly there can be neither
solitariness nor silence where women and children are: for Nature hath made
women and children to have restless spirits, unquiet minds, busiless active,
and such voluble tongues, as it is impossible they should be silent, whilst
life gives them motion; so that a woman is a very unfit companion for
Contemplations, wherein there should be no other company but thoughts, which
thoughts in a Divine, should be only such as are the Inquirers and Searchers of
Ioves divine Mysteries, and Scholars to Ioves divine Schools, and Orators to
explain plead in Ioves divine Laws, and servants to Ioves divine Orders, that
they may be Instructers and Intelligencers of Ioves divine Commands: And though
women ought to be instructed in Divinity, yet for the most part, women are
obstructers and disturbers of Divinity and Divines; besides, the Original Woman
was a Tempter to Sin, which all her Effeminate Posterity inherit as a Natural
Right and Gift from their great Grandmother: And though Divines ought to be
industrious to cut off the Entail of that Original Inheritance with their holy
Doctrine, quenching the fire of Temptation with the spiritual dew of Divine
Instructions, yet ought they not to run themselves into that fire they should
quench, serving as fuel to increase it: Wherefore those that dedicate
themselves to Ioves Church, ought to live separated from Natures daughters,
lest they should yield to humane frailties, and become slaves to the Effeminate
Temptations.


Friend, I am come to ask thy counsel.


Concerning what?


Concerning Marriage.


I will give you the best I can; but it is both difficult and dangerous to give
counsel in so weighty a Concernment as Marriage.


You say very true; and being so weighty a Concernment as you say, I am come
for thy Advice, not trusting to my own judgment, and thus it is: There is a
Gentleman that hath come two or three times thorough out street, and the last
time he came, he looked up to my Chamber-window; wherefore I conceive he will
come a wooing to me, therefore I desire thee to instruct me how I shall receive
his Addresses.


Do you know who he is?


No.


Nor where he dwells?


No.


Nor from whence he came, nor whither he will go?


No.


What makes you think he will be a Suitor to you then?


Because he comes so often thorough our street, and by our door, and hath
looked up to my Chamber-window; and these are sufficient Reasons to believe it:
for you may be sure he comes thorough our street for my sake.


Truly I know not what counsel to give you; but as occasion shall offer it
self, I shall think of you.


Prithee do; but I am in haste, and therefore cannot stay with you any longer:
wherefore farewell.


O my sweet Parle, I was told thou were ^ot at Home, and I have been at all my
Acquaintances Louses to seek thee out, to tell thee a secret.


What secret?


Why there hath been a Gentleman this day at my Fathers house, to Treat with my
Father about marrying me; and when I marry, I'll bid thee to my Wedding.


You must bid me before you are married, if you will invite me to your Wedding.


Yes so I will, I'll warrant thee: for I will not forget thee of all my
Acquaintance: But prithee tell me what my Wedding-Gown shall be of.


Of white Satin, or cloth of Silver. But of what quality is the person whom
you shall marry?


I cannot tell.


What Estate hath he?


I know not.


How often hath he been with your Father?


He never was with my Father before this morning.


Hath your Father concluded the match with him?


I cannot tell.


Hath your Father spoke to you of him?


No.


Then how came you to know he came to Treat of Marriage?


My Fathers man told me he thought the Gentleman came about such a business,
because my Father and he were very earnest in their Discourse, and in private.


If you know no more, perchance it is about some other business.


It cannot be about any thing else, because they were earnest and private.


Perchance it was about borrowing of money, and borrowers use to be earnest,
and desire their desires may not be known: wherefore they draw aside, and
whisper out their wants.


No, no, I am confident it was about me.


I wish you may do well.


I thank thee for thy good wishes, and I hope he will prove a good Husband.


Madam, although there is a certain and set Form of making Deeds, Wills, and
Leafes, and a Form of Marriage, yet I know no certain nor set form of VVooing,
but every one woos after what manner or form he pleases or thinks best, having
no set rules to woo by: But I am come here to woo, and so to plead my own
cause at the Bar of Affection, and you, as the Judge, are to give the Sentence,
and to determine the Suit: But as all other Judges are to be free from
partiality, or self-interest, as neither to be oversw^yd with either fear,
pity, love, or covetousness, or the like; yet such a Judge as you, and in the
like Causes as mine, may have the freedom of partiality or self-interest:
wherefore, if no other plea can persuade you, take me for pity: for I am
miserably in Love, manacled in Cupids Fetters, bound with his Bow-strings, and
wounded with his golden Arrows, from which nothing but your favour and
compassionate sentence can release me, otherwise I must lie under the Arrest of
a wretched life, till such time as Death set me free, or cast me into Oblivion.


Worthy Sir, as there is no certain nor set form of wooing, so there is no
certain nor set form for the wooed to give a direct Answer: And though pity may
move a Judge to give a favourable sentence, yet there is no Judge will, or
ought to make himself a slave, to set a prisoner free; but if such a chance
should be, it must be by a stronger motive or passion than pity, to make them
yield up their liberty: And Marriage is a bondage, especially when as Sympathy
doth not match the pair; and if Cupid hath wounded you with his golden Arrows,
he hath shot me with those that are headed with lead, from which wounds proceed
nothing but cold denials: But howsoever I shall give you part of your desires,
which is, I shall pity you, although I cannot persuade my Affections to love
you so much as to consent to marry you.


Husband I hear you have a Mistress, but I do not wonder at it, for you have
taught me (although not by the former, yet by your present practice) to foresee
the future event. First, our loves have grown to their full maturity, and
therefore in Nature, as Vegetables, must shed their leaves, or like Animals, at
such a growth their strength decays, and in old age dyes; thus we may guess by
Natures Revolution, the revolution of our love, though at first we could not
dream, but we must discover our dreams to each other, and whatsoever we had
heard or seen in each others absence, when we met, we recounted to each other
each object, and repeated each subject and discourses that our Senses had
presented to our knowledge; and not only what our Senses had presented, but
what our Conceception had conceived, or our Imaginations had created: Also we
took delight to confer in our Household Affairs, and we were unquiet, uneasy,
and restless, until we met, and had discoursed thus unto each other; and if
either of us had been sick, or had perceived the least distemper in each others
health, our grief was expressed by our tears, and by our sighs, which from our
Hearts did rise, and flowed with grief, which poured through our eyes. But now
we begin to cast shadows of dissimulation, which shows our love is in an
Eclipse, and from a pretence of the confidence and assurance we have of each
other, we begin to be careless of each others discourse or action, giving our
selves freedom and liberty to wander, not only from our Home-affairs, but from
our professed Affections, to seek for pleasures and delights abroad, and only a
seeming affection and delight remains at home: And thus by a juggling deceit,
and false-glac'd love, we shall in the discovery become enemies, and by a
seeming wisdom, we shall become fools, and our follies, as well as our crimes,
will destroy the unity of Love, and the peace of Matrimonial Government; And
though we should not break out into open War, yet we shall live factious, and
our servants will be as Commoners, siding with each Party: But it seems your
Mistress hath learned your mind so perfectly, and knows your humour so exactly,
and can match your appetites with pleasure so justly, as she hath worked out
her designs skilfully, which is, to displace me, and to place her self in your
Affections, by which she can make a subtle advantage of your Estate and
Fortune, I mean good Fortune: for in bad Fortune she may chance; nay, 'tis most
likely she will desert you for those that will and do forsake Virtue, Chastity,
and Honour, are not likely to stick to misfortunes, as to follow Banishment, or
to live with Poverty, to bear injury, to endure Scorn, and to die in Misery.
True Love may do it; but for those Affections that are produced by
Incontinency, and not bound to Honesty, and settled by Constancy, will change
more often than the wind, wavering from person to person.


Wife, I confess the Amorous Addresses I have made to other Women; but though I
have strayed in my Actions, yet not in my Affections: for my love is
unalterably constant to you, as believing you are unatterably virtuous, and I
do not only love your Chastity, prize your Virtue, honour your noble Soul and
sweet Disposition, but I take delight in your Wit, am pleased with your Humours,
admire your Beauty, and esteem and believe you to be the most perfect and best
of your Sex. But Wife, know, that my Appetites, and not my Affections, seek
after variety: for the kissing of a Mistress lessens not the Love to a Wife, but
rather increases it, comparing the falseness and beastliness of the one, to the
Virtue and Purity of the other.


And shall my Virtue and Chastity be only rewarded with your good Opinion?


Virtue, Wife, is a sufficient Reward in it self, and the Chastity of your Sex
is crowned with Honour; but the Reward I give you, is the free use as a
Co-partner of my Estate, and the Mistress of my Family: Besides, I make you the
chief care of my Industry, the chief subject or object of my Valour, the
Treasure of my Life, the only Possessor of my Heart, and for your sake I shall
neither refuse Death or Torment. Thus you are the Soul of my Soul; and since
you have my whole soul to you self, you may be well contented to lend my person
to your Neighbours Wife, Daughter, Sister, Niece, or Maid.


And will you be contented that I shall likewise borrow of your Neighbour?


No Wife: for you can neither lend nor borrow without the loss of Honour.


Nay, rather than lose so great a loss as Honour, I'll strive to be content,
Husband.


Do you so, Wife, and I will strive and endeavour to be contented with my own
Wife.


Madam, although I cannot Woo in Eloquent Orations, or Courtly Solicitations,
or Learned Definitions, being only bred to Industrious actions, thrifty
savings, gainful gettings, to enrich me with worldly wealth, and not to
studious Contemplations, Poetical Fictions, Divine Elevations, Philosophical
Observations, State-Politicians, School-contradictions, Laws Intrications, by
which (perchance) I might have gained Fame, but not Wealth: But Fame neither
clothes the naked, nor feeds the hungry, nor helps the distressed, neither doth
it maintain a Wife in Bravery, where, if you will be mine, you shall sit in a
shop all furnished with gold, and great sums shall be brought you for exchange
of my Wares; and while you sit in my shop, all street-passengers will stand and
gaze on your Beauty, and Customers will increase, and be prodigal to buy,
whilst you sell, not for the use of what they buy, but for the delight to buy
what you sell; besides, of all saleable curiosities varieties that are brought
to the City, you shall have the first offer, and the first fruits and meats
each Season doth produce, shall be served to your taste; your clothes, though
of the City-fashion, yet they shall rich and costly be; besides, to every Feast
the City and each Citizen doth make, they will invite you, and place you as
their chiefest guest; and when you by your Neighbours doors do pass, their
Prentice-boys and Journey-men will leave their shop-boards, and run to view you
as you go. Thus shall you live, if you will be mine, in Plenty, Luxury, Pride,
and Ease.


Rich Sir, I may sit in your shop, and draw Customers, but shall get no honour
by them; I may sell your Wares, but lose my Reputation; I may be adored,
worshipped, sought and prayed to, as for and to a Mistress, but shall never be
counted as a Saint; I may be rich in wealth, but poor of the Worlds good
Opinion; I may be adorned with silver and gold, but blemished with censure and
slander; I may feed on luxurious Plenty, yet my good name starve for want of a
good Fame: for a Citizens Wife is seldom thought chaste, and the men for the
most part accounted Cuckolds. I know not whether it be a Judgment from Heaven
for their Cozening, or decreed by the Fates for their Covetousness, or bred by
a natural Effect of their Luxury, which begets an Appetite to Wantonness; but
from what cause soever it comes, so it is: wherefore I will never be a Citizens
Wife, though truly I do verily believe there are as many virtuous and chaste
women, and understanding men that belong to the City, as in the Country; and
were it not for the Citizens wealth, more Ancient Families would be buried in
poverty than there hath been, where many times a rich City-widow, or daughter,
gives a dead Family a new Resurrection: wherefore, it is more prudent for men
to marry into the City, than it is advantageous for women, especially such
women that esteem a pure Reputation before wealth, and had rather live in
poverty, than be mistrusted for dishonesty.


Madam, although I cannot draw a Line of Pedigree from Gentility, yet I can
draw a Line of Peasantry five hundred years in length; and if Antiquity is to
be esteemed, my Birth is not to be despised: As for my wealth, I am not poor,
but rich for my degree and quality; and though it is not sit I should maintain
my Wife in silver and gold, yet I may maintain her with plenty and with store,
cloth her in fine smooth soft cloth, spun from the fleeces of my Flocks: But
if you will be mine, you shall be crowned with Garlands made of Lillies, Roses,
Violets, Pinks, and Daffidillies, and be as Queen of all these Downs, where all
the Shepherds and Shepherdesses shall give you homage, and worship you as
Godess of the Plains, bringing you Offerings of their mornings Milk, their
Butter, Curds, and soft pressed Cheese, and various Fruits fresh gathered off
their Trees; also my Kids and Lambs shall sport and play, and taught to know
your voice, and to obey, and every Holiday you shall in Arbors sit, shadowed
from hot Sun-beams, whilst Country Maids and Country Men which Lovers are,
shall dance upon the grassy Green to the sound of the Horn-pipe, Bag-pipe, and
such breathing Music, whose pleasant Strains, and plain-set Notes, rebound in
Echoes from the high-cast Banks, the lofty Hills, hollow Woods, and murmuring
Streams, besides other Rural sports, to entertain your Eyes and Ears, and
recreate your Mind with Mirth and harmless Plays, to pass your Time withal.

No life so pleasant as the Country Life,
No woman so happy as the Farmers Wife.

Honest Friend, could I as easily persuade my Affections to your Person, as I
could to the condition of a Shepherdesses life, or Farmers wife, you should be
the only man I would choose; but since I cannot, I must only return you thanks
for your good liking, in that you have preferred me in your choice, for which,
may neither nipping Frost, nor burning Sun, nor blasting winds, nor weeds, nor
snails, nor worms destroy your Labours, nor ravenous Wolves, nor crafty Foxes
nor Polcats, Weesels, Kites, or any such like Vermin, fright or rob you of your
young tender breed; may all your grounds and flocks increase a treble-fold,
your fleeces long and thick, your corn firm and full-car'd, your grass sweet
and broad-bladed, your trees so full of fruits, that every branch may bow under
its load; and may your plenty store all the Kingdom, that neither want nor
famine may be feared or felt; may all your Country Neighbours, and labouring
Swains, respect you as their Chief, obey you as their Lord, and worship you as
their God Pan.


Lady, you are in a serious Contemplation. Pray what are you thinking of?


I have heard that thoughts are free; but I perceive they cannot pass without
questioning.


I would not boldly intrude upon them, my humble desire is I might partake of
the Excellency of them.


I suppose you think my Contemplation is of Heaven, and not of the World: for
there is no subject which can make Thought excellent, but what is Divine: for
the World corrupts them, Nature deceives them, and Speech betrays them.


If your speech never betrays more than it doth now, which only expresses your
Wit, you may well pardon it; but I now find you are not so ignorantly simple
as you are thought to be through your silence.


I confess I have practised silence: for I am of years fitter to learn than to
talk; and I had rather be thought ignorantly simple for being silent, than to
express folly by too much speaking.


But I wonder you will suffer you self to be laughed at for a Natural Fool,
when your wit is able to defend you from scorns and scoffs, and is able to
maintain its own Arguments.


If I had Wit, there would be no Honour in the Arguing, no more than for a
Valiant man to fight with Cowards; so wit to dispute with fools: But I had
rather they should laugh at me, than I should weep for my self; yet there were
none in that company that laughed at me, but were older than I, and the older
they are, the more faults they have committed; and if they laugh at me for my
little wit, I will scorn them for their many faults, and hate them for their
vices.


The truth is, 'tis only fools that commit many faults, and take delight in
their own follies, and do themselves hurt with their own errors; and not those
that have Wit: for they have Ingenuity and Prudence to foresee, and so escape
errors, and the mischiefs that may follow: But you appear, by not expressing
your self, to your disadvantage, and your silence doth you wrong.


I care not how I appear in my outward Aspect, so my Life be honest, my Actions
just, my Behaviour modest, my Thoughts pure, and that I obey to the utmost of
my power the Laws and Customs of Duty, Morality, Divinity, and Civility. But
'tis a sign of a foolish Age, when silence is thought ignorant simplicicitie,
and modesty accounted a crime; when in Ancient Times Youth was taught sober
Attention, and it was imposed upon Scholars to keep silence five years before
they were suffered to speak, that they might afterwards be able to Teach, and
not always live to learn as School-boys, which they would always be, if they
spent their time in words, and not study and observe: And silence is a
discretion that few women practise, being more apt to talk than men; for women
are fuller of words than thoughts: but words should be weighed by Judgment, in
the balance or scales of Sense, and delivered by the tongue through the lips
by Retail, which cannot be if they throw them out so fast: for there is
required Reason, Time, and Understanding, besides unstopped Ears to hear them:
But though mine Enemies laugh at me for a Fool, yet I have so much Honesty,
Innocence, and Modesty, to guard and defend my Reputation, as they cannot
wound that with their sharp words, nor laughing faces.


Lady, I come not now to plead with flourishing Rhetoric, to make that which
is false to appear like truth, or paint a foul cause with fair smooth words:
But my cause of request is honest, and what I shall speak is truth; nor do I
strive to hide my Deformities or Vices: As for my outward deformities, they are
visible to your Eyes; but Vices live in the Appetites, Passions, and
Affections, which are only expressed by the Actions, and therefore the easier may
be dissembled from the most part of the World, yet not from Heaven, to whom I
am to make a just account: And since my sins are only to the Gods, and not you,
fair Godess, I shall not at this time make a public confession of them; but I
am come here to present you with my love, which love is as pure as unspotted
Angels, it hath no by-respects unto your Wealth, Beauty, or Birth, but barely
and merely to your Virtue: in truth I come a wooing to your Soul, not to your
Body, but yet mistake me not, I would not have them parted. I cannot say my
Estate or Birth deserves you, nor have I merits equal to your worth; but since
my love is as pure as your virtue, it will be an equal Match: And though you
see my body a deformed bulk, yet I am not ashamed of it, because the owner,
which is my Mind, is honest: for I never betrayed my King, or Country, Mistress,
or Friend, nor any Trust that was imposed unto me by any, although a Foe; I
never shut my purse, nor sheathed my sword from helping the distressed, nor
turned my back upon my assaulting Enemy; I never stole good Fame, nor robbed
good Names, nor stabbed Innocence with slander; I never scorned those below my
self, nor envied those above me; I never infringed the Laws of Honour, nor
disturbed civil Society; and though I cannot suffer an injury patiently, yet I
never did omit a duty willingly: As for the truth of what I say, I have none to
witness for me, as being a stranger, but my own words, from which this company
(perchance) may think self-love and great desire hath bribed my Tongue; but if
they do, their thoughts make Truth no less, no more than Eyes that are blind,
Ears that are deaf, can rob you of your Wit and Beauty: for though your Wit
they do not hear, nor Beauty see, yet you passess them no less, their want only
robs you of their Admiration, not of the Possession; and say I am blind of one
eye, my other eye doth see, and I have Hearing perfectly, which doth inform my
Knowledge and Understanding, with that which makes my Admirations and
Adorations perfect and sound within my Heart, wherein your Picture is printed
on, which my Soul doth view, and gazing, kneels with wonder and astonishment,
that so much Wit, Wisdom, and Virtue should be in one so young fair: And if
you cannot love me, despise me not; for my pure Love is Divine, as being
divinely placed on you; and it would grieve my Soul, to have the zealous fire
and immaculate flame of my Affection extinguished with your neglecting
Thoughts, and raked up in the ashes of your Forgetfulness: But if any of my Sex
shall seem to jest, or scorn me for my outward form or shape,

My Courage and my Sword shall take my bodies part,
To cut their Limbs, or thrust them through their Heart.

Worthy Sir, you must excuse me from answering you at this time: for I am taken
on the sudden very sick.


I wish you health, although it were to be only purchased by my death.


What is the cause you weep?


Because my Father will not get me a Husband, and Mistress Fondly will have a
Husband before I shall have one: for I hear she is to be married, she is happier
in her Parents than I am: for my Parents are unnatural, and take no care how to
get me a Husband, and to see me married.


You may marry soon enough to repent.


I am sure I shall not repent: for to be a Wife, is a condition I am most
desirous of, and cannot be happy any other way.


And Wives think Maids only happy, because they are not vexed nor troubled with
a Husband.


Such women deserve no Husbands: for certainly a Husband is a joy and a
comfort, as being a companion and a friend.


But Husbands seldom keep in the company of their Wives, and many times,
instead of a friend, prove an enemy.


What, have you been at Mistress Fondly's House?


Yes.


And have you inquired of her Maid as I bid you, whether the Report is true,
that her Mistress is to be married?


Yes.


And what said she?


She said that a Gentleman did Treat with her Mistresses Father, but they could
not agree: for the Gentleman would have more portion than her Father would
give, whereupon the Match is broke off.


I am glad of that: for I would not have her married before me for all the
World. But did you not see mistress Fondly?


No: for her Maid said her Mistress, at the breaking off her Marriage, almost
broke her heart: for she hath so afflicted her self, and hath so wept and
sighed, as she is fallen sick, and keeps her Chamber.


Alas good Friend, I pity her extremely, but I will go with her, and try if I
can comfort her.


Noble Sir, the Wit wherewith Nature, Time, and Education hath endued my tender
brains, is like new kindled fire, that sparkling flies about, the fuel being
green, and newly laid to burn, there is more smoke than flame: But since the
time I heard you speak, a newer fire is kindled in my Heart, which equally doth
burn with your professed Affections; and though your Person is none of Natures
exactest Pieces, yet your Mind doth seem to be composed with all her best
Ingredients; and sure your Thoughts set notes of Honour, Honestly, and Love, by
which your Tongue plays Harmony. 'Tis not the satin Skin, that's painted white
and red, nor near-carv'd Bodies, can win my Love, nor Wealth, Titles, Birth,
nor crowned Power; but Truth, Sincerity, Constancy, Justice, Prudence, Courage,
and Temperance, by which, as Magistrates, your life seems to be governed, which
life I wish the Gods may Crown with happy days, and in Fames Tower long live
your praise. I will not ask you from whence you came, nor what you are: For
though you seem but poor and mean, Your Soul appears to me sublime.


And will you choose me for your Husband, Lady?


I shall be proud to be your Wife, Sir.


The Gods are just to my pure Love, rewarding it with your acceptance; but I
must beg your leave for some short time of Absence, and then I shall return,
and claim your Promise.


You have the liberty, Sir.


Lady, surely you are in a High Fever.


Why, Madam?


As to do so extravagant an Action, as to marry a man you know not what he is,
nor from whence he came, and may prove as deformed in Mind as in Body, as mean
of Birth, as poor in Parse, as beggars that live on cold dry Charity.


If he be poor, my Estate will make him rich; if humbly born, his Merits make
him Honourable; from whence he comes I do not care, and where he will have me
go, I will wait upon him, never questioning to what place.


Her Courage is beyond her Wit.


For the Example of this Lady, I would have a Law made, that there should be no
more Public Wooing.


She hath cast away her self.


Who can help it?


Lady, why seem you so melancholy?


My melancholy disposition is apt to catch hold on my evil Fortunes, and both
joining together, help to multiply my sad thoughts.


Why should you be sad?


How can I be merry, when I am left destitute of Friends, and unacquainted with
Experience.


Nature hath furnished you with all store, you need none.


If she had, yet all the good seeds that Nature and Education hath sown in me,
and sprouted forth in bud, are nipped with Misfortunes, withered with Sorrows,
blasted with Sighs, and drowned in Tears.


For what?


For being enslaved unto an unworthy person, who neither loves Virtue, nor
values Honour, but laughs at my youth, and flings scorns on my Innocence, which
makes me almost murmur at Heaven, and apt to think the Gods unjust, to let
Fortune betray me to Power and Tyranny.


Trouble not your self: for certainly your bondage may be taken off, if it be
discreetly handled: for he seems willing to part with you upon easy terms; for
you heard him offer to sell you.


I wish I were worth your Purchase.


Would you willingly change him for me?


I cannot be worse; and you seem so noble a person, as persuades me to hope I
may be happy.


And if I had the whole World, I would give it for you, rather than not have
you; and I should think my self more enriched by the enjoyment, than if the
Gods made new Worlds to present me.


I have heard Heaven protects the Innocent, defends the Harmless, and provides
for the Helpless; which if it doth, the Gods will give me you.


Ha, ha, ha, Is this the young wife Lady that all the World admired for her
Prudence and Judgment?


Faith her Judgment hath erred in her choice.


I am glad: for now I may marry to whom I will, for I cannot choose worse; and
my Father and Mother did bid me, nay charged me to imitate her.


So did mine.


And mine.


Well, for my part I rejoice: for now we shall have the old way of Wooing
again, to embrace and kiss in corners, to hear amorous and wanson discourse.


That way of wooing is best.


You say true: for I hate this way of wooing, there is no pleasure in it:


No 'saith, to stand gazing and prating a mile asunder.


You make short miles.


Why, two inches is a Lovers mile, and three a long league.


It was not likely she should choose well, or ever be happily married.


Why so?


By reason she was cursed by all the maids, back-holders, widows and widowers
in the Town.


But she had the prayers of all the married women.


But she had the curses of all the married men: for they crowd in amongst the
back-holders sometimes.


Sweet Madam, you are the Godess which my Thoughts adore,


You flatter.


Love cannot flatter: for Lovers think all their praises truth.


The Lady Mute is your Godess.


If there were no other Godess of your Sex but she, I should become an Insidel
to love, nay an Atheist, believing there were no such Deity as Love.


Madam, all the Town condemns you.


And do you condemn me too?


No, Madam: for I am bound, as being your servant, to submit to your will,
liking, and pleasure.


Why, the choice is honest: for they may swear I am not enamoured with his
Person: But had he been a fair Youth, or known to be a debanch'd Man, they
might have justly condemned me, either for my fond Affection and amorous Love,
or wild Choice.


Faith they may thiak your Choice is wild, by reason you have chosen out of a
Labyrinth, not knowing where his beginning or end is.


Why Virtue is the Beginning, and Happiness, I hope, will be the End.


I wish it may prove so Madam.


But pray tell me, Did you ever hear me speak worse than I did to him?


How do you mean, Madam, in that you gave your self away?


No, in that I did not present my self more Eloquently.


Methought your Speech did not flow so smooth as it was used to do, as if your
Tongue did know you did commit a fault in granting to his Suit.


No truly; for my desire did out-run my speech: for desiring to speak best to
him I loved most, obstructed my Tongue, which made my words run unevenly.


That's a common misfortune: for when any one strives to speak wisely, they
most often speak foolishly.


'Tis true; for strife is an enemy to speech: for those that speak not free and
easy, never speak well.

For when as Passion wrestles with the Tongue,
The Sense is weak, and down the words are slung,

'Tis strange the Lady Prudence, that is so beautiful, rich, and nobly born,
and hath so great a wit, should choose a man so poor and mean, and so
ill-favour'd.


In my opinion it is not strange: for certainly there is a sympathy between the
spirits of virtuous souls, which begets love, although in deformed persons: And
this is the true Love; for that which proceeds from Covetousness, or Ambition,
or is produced by the Senses, is rather an Appetite, which is apt to surfeit, or
dies as soon as enjoyed, or turns with Fortunes wheel.


Well, I wish for the Ladies sake, who is known to be Virtuous, her Husband may
prove as Virtuous as she.


Ladies, do you hear the News?


What News?


Why Mistress Simple is gone very early this morning out of Town with Sir
Anthony Gosling; and 'tis said they will be married before they return.


I cannot believe it: for she was the most unlikely to be married of any of us
all.


I perceive that Maid that can have Fortune to be her friend, shall not want a
Husband.


You say true; and Fortune is a better friend than our Parents are: for our
Parents are contented we should live Maids all the time of our lives, when
Fortune (most commonly) gives Maids Husbands at one time or other.


Ladies, why do you complain of your Parents for their wary care? who would not
have you marry, but to such Husbands as you may be happy withal, and therefore
are cautious how to choose, when Fortune makes Matches at Random.


I had rather marry at Random, than not marry at all.


Why then (perchance) in stead of a worthy person, you may marry a base fellow;
and in stead of a rich husband, a beggar.


Those women that are curious in their Choice, may chance to die old Maids.


'Tis better to die an old Maid, than to live a miserable life, which will be,
if an unhappy Wife.


There is no misery like being an old Maid.

O that I were so happy once to be a wedded Wife,
I would fulfil my Husbands will all the days of my life.



I doubt I may sing the Song that says, O pity take upon me now some gentle
Body,
And give me the Willow-Branch, for no man will have me.



And I may sing this old Song.

I wander up and down,
And no body cares for me:
Although I be but poor and brown,
Yet constant will I be.



And I may sing this old Ballad.

Every Bird can choose his Mate,
The Wren can do the same,
The Fish and Fowl their pleasures take,
They follow after Game.
But I, poor I, poor silly I,
Do sigh and sorrow still,
Yea night and day I wear away,
Wanting my wished will.



Come, come, Ladies, you are all so desirous to marry, and so impatient because
you are not married, as I doubt when you are married, your Husbands may sing the
Song of Cuckolds all a row.


It were better for us that our Husbands should be Cuckolds, than we lead Apes
in Hell.


Why do you weep, Madam?


Have I not reason, when one I chose for Honesty proves false, and publicly
strives for to disgrace me, by breaking of his Promise, and Appointed day of
Marriage?


Perchance he could not come, some Accident hath hindered him.


He might have sent me word the reason of his stay.


It is likely he is not so rich, as to hire a Messenger.


Some would have done it for Charity.


Faith Charity is lazy, and will not go without Reward.


If he had loved Me or Honour, he would have found some means or ways.


My Virtuous sweet Mistress, what makes such showrs of Tears in Sun-shine Eyes?


O Sir, I thought you had forsaken me, and left me to the Worlds wild scorn.


I should sooner forsake Life, Fame, and Heaven, than forsake you.


Will you have your Friends to your Wedding, Mistress?


If you please, Sir: for I am not ashamed of my Choice, nor shall I be ashamed
of my Marriage.


Nor I, of my self; and for you, the Gods may envy me.


Shall we go to visit Mistress Simple? she that is now my Lady Gosling, and bid
her joy.


Yes, if you will: for I long to see how she looks, now she is a Wife.


So do I, and to see how she behaves her self, since she is married.


She is now, Ladies, for the conversation of Wives, and not for the society of
Maids; her discourse will be now of Household Affairs, as of Housewifery, and of
her Husband, and of Children, and hired servants, and not Suitors and Courtiers,
not Fashions, nor Dressings; neither will she return your Visits: for her
Visitings will be to other married Wives, and her time will be spent at Labours,
Christenings, Churchings, and other Matrimonial Gossippings and Meetings.


Howsoever we will go visit her.


I wish we may see her Husband with her, to see if he be kind to her, or not.


If he be not kind to her, and hath been married but two or three days, he will
never be kind.


I wonder whether he will kiss her when we are by.


Yes certainly: for new-maried men and their wives take a pleasure to kiss
before company.


Hey ho, that married Wives should have such pleasures, when Maids have none.


O unfortunate villain! that I should be such a Coxcomb, such a Fool, to lose
five thousand pounds at Dice! Those bones spotted with the small Pox, the great
Pox take them for me, and the Plague to boot: for they have plagued me, and yet
I have not a token left about me.


You may borrow more.


Borrow, you Puppy, you, my land's entailed, a perpetuity, I have nothing but
for life, like a Serving-mans Annuity, or an old Ladies Jointure, no body will
lend me any thing; and now I must eat grass and hay: for we are all mortal they
say, and they choke me with that. Pox of my Grandfathers and Fathers provident
Wisdoms, with their learned Counsels in the Law; but I hope all their souls
fry in Hell for it, that's my comfort.


'Tis a hard case, that a young Gentleman cannot undo himself for those
Fetters and Bonds of Parchment; truly it is cruel.


I, is it not Jack, to be tied thus, like a dog to a cup-board, and in chains
too, that he cannot gnaw or bite them asunder?


Faith Sir, 'tis a strange thing, that a man should venture to play his money,
whether it should be his or another mans.


No Dick, you are deceived, I play whether his money should be mine or his. O
unfortunate Rogue that I am! and that foolish Star-gazer, the Astrologer, never
to see it in my Nativity neither when he cast it! Those Knaves and Fools, to
talk of things that they have no guess at what they are, as if the seven
Planets, or the twelve Houses, had to do with a cast of Dice, a sine nimble
Cheater is worth a thousand of them. Rogue that I am! And now comes in such a
consideration into my brain upon my Repentance.


As how pray?


As how? why if I had this current running money, nay rather, it hath wings,
and flies beyond the Fiction of Pegasus: why, if I had it, how I would bestow
it for the good of the Common-wealth, as thus: What rich Apparel, with
Imbroyderies of gold, and silver, and silk? what Feathers and Mistresses? what
gilt Paris Coaches, Pages, and Lackeys, sa^s number, in rich liveries? what
Coachmen, Pos^ilions, with six Flanders Horses, to strike with amazement the
whole street as I pass? what running Horses, Hounds, Hawks, Cocks, Greyhounds?
what delicious Banquets, Spanish Perfumes, most odoriferous, soft Music, that
should lull the soul asleep, sumptuous Furnitures, so as I would surfeit the
Senses, and make the seven Deadly Sins live like Princes?

And set up Sin and Vanity to the hight,
Since those are still the Gentlemen's delight.
But O my money is gone, which cuts off all my hopes of exercising all those
virtuous ways! well, let me cogitate, and boy, give me a melancholy Pipe to
cloud all hopes of joys with sadder thoughts.


Truly 'tis pity he hath lost his money: for you hear how Religiously he would
have spent it.


Most like a Gentleman, I must needs say that for him.


Most piously indeed; but prithee let us walk for a while, lest we should
disturb his Thoughts: no more Discourse, but let us tie our Tongues.


Content, till his be loose.


What Contemplation now?


Pious and charitable ones. But this damned money, this runnagado, this
vagabond money!


But if you had a statute to whip her home to her own Parish, it would do well.


I Jack, but there is no such law, the more the pity; but this abominable money
disorders all the World. What work makes it betwixt Parents and Children,
Husbands and Wives, Brothers and Sisters, Masters and Servants, Landlords and
Tenants, Citizens and their Prentices, Mistresses and their Maids, and between
Kings and their subject? Corrupts all the World, breaks Friendship, betrays
Friends, raises Rebellions, commits Treason, and corrupts Virgins: It is the
Pander and Bawd to all business; the States-man is fed by this damned Lady
Pecunia, the Lawyer serves her, the Merchants her slave, the Shop-keeper her
vassal, and the Countryman her Tenant, Lords and Ladies her pensioners, and
greatest Monarchs pay tribute to her; the Logician argues for her, the Orator
pleads for her, and many Ecclesiasticals preach for her, the Vicar General and
his Conclave are ruled by her, and the poor Poet, she draws his copperas from
his ink, and makes him flatter her. This horrid Lady Sorceress, so to bewitch
the World! Is there no law against this Enchantress, that thus doth still abuse
the World, and all that's in it? The very Soldiers sword is charmed by her,
and all his guns are silent at her presence. This she-devil!


But I would you had your she-devil again for all that: But what Pious and
Charitable Consideration had you, if you had your money again?


Marry Sir, First I would build an Hospital for decayed Ladies that were maimed
in Venus's wars, losing a nose, or so, never yet any care taken of them, the
more is the pity.


Very good: and what next?


Next I would buy such a piece of ground, and build a Bedlam, and then put in
all such Divines as preach themselves out of their power and riches; and I would
put all such Lawyers in, as pleaded themselves out of practice; and all such
Citizens as petitioned themselves out of trade.


These are good and pious Acts: But would not you provide a place or means for
such as were undone by playing at Dice and Cards, and the like.


No, they should have only Fools Coats to be known by, and I would be the
Master of them.


How doth your Husband, Madam?


I hope he's well, he's gone abroad.


You look pale since you were married.


I was not very well this morning: for I could not eat my Breakfast; truly I
have lost my stomach since I have been married.


Perchance you are breeding.


Oh sie, no surely; but yet my Maid laughs, and tells me I am.


I hope, Lady, you are not breeding already? for you have not been married above
three days.


I have heard that some have been with Child as soon as they were married; and
my Maid told me she served a Mistress, who, the next day she was married was with
Child.


By my Faith that was very soon.


Me thinks it is strange to see you have a Wedding-ring on your Thumb.


You will come to wear a Wedding-ring on your Thumb one of these days.


What is the Posy?


I like too well to change.


'Tis well you do: for if you did not, you could hardly change, unless your
Husband dies.


Heaven forbid: for I would not have him die for all the World; for he is one
of the lovingest and fondest Husbands that ever was.


The first Month is a fond Month, Lady.


And are you fond of him?


Yes truly: for I hang about his neck when he is at home.


But you will weary your Husband, Lady, if you hang a long time.


I would very sain you did see my Husband.


We much desire so to do.


Is your Master, Sir Anthony Gossing, come home yet?


No, Madam.


In truth he is too blame to stay out so long, knowing I am not well when he is
away.


Are you sick in his absence?


I am best pleased when he is with me.


New-maried Wives are always so; but after they have been married some time,
they are worst pleased when their Husbands are with them.


Me thinks it is a strange sight to see such a Bride, and such a Bridegroom. I
do imagine them to be like Pluto and Proserpine.


Nay rather, they are like Venus and Vulcan.


But she is too chaste to entertain a Mars to Cuckold him.


It is to be hoped she will take her liberty with variety: for extravagant love
is seldom constant.


If that rule prove true, he may be a Cuckold indeed.


'Tis likely he will: for women choose to marry such deformed men a purpose;
first to excuse their fault, thinking the World will never condemn them, their
Husbands being ill-favour'dly mis-shapen, or thinking their Husbands will be
well content, knowing their own infirmities, to be a sharer.


But I wonder she did not new-cloath him: for though he is not so rich to buy
himself a Wedding-Suit, yet she hath means enough to buy him many several
suits, and rich.


There was no time to make him Wedding-cloaths, because he came not till his
Wedding-day.


Well, let us go see them married, and wish them joy.


Since my losses, I have such a desire of Revenge, as my fingers itch to be at
it, and the Palsy is in my eldow with the imagination of throwing those
partial bones, called by the Vulgar, Dice; they say they are square fellows,
but I doubt it: Well, have at them, whatsoever comes on it; for I long more for
them, than the great Belly that longed to bite her Husbands Nose, or to give
him a box on the Ear; or she that threw her loas into a barrel of Tar; and if I
have not my longings, in my Conscience I shall miscarry.


Take heed Sir, that you do not miscarry, if you have the Dice.


How can he do that? for he hath nothing to miscarry withal, not a farthing,
his pockets swell not; 'tis but an imaginary Child, a windy or watery Mole, or a
Moon-calf; he needs no Dice to be his Midwife for the Lady Pecunia, a mere
Timpany of the Fancy, and nothing else.


O Jack, thou art cruel! there is nothing so horrid as truth to a Gentleman,
and such truths too. I know not what to do with my self: for I cannot be alone,
those are such foolish fellows that have parts, as they call them, and I hate
both them and their parts.

Look here is my foolish Mistress, by the Gods I'll play her, I'll set her you,
Sir William Holdfast, what will you stake against her?


Sir, a Lady, and such a Lady, is beyond price unvaluable.


Come, come, leave your Courtship to Ladies, and throw, and have at her.


Why Sir, with the Ladies leave, I will set you five thousand pound.


Five thousand pound? why she hath two thousand pound land a year man, and is
an Heir.


But I consider a Wife is chargeable: for I shall maintain her according to her
Birth, and my own Honour; besides, children will come on, and they are
chargeable.


For her charge, I will maintain her as cheap as a Changeling, a Dairy-maid, or
a Kitchin-wench: why, she is a fool, and for children, you will not have them
the first day certainly; but her Estate will maintain her, and make thee rich;
besides, a witty Wife is a curse, and a fool but a Trouble.


But I consider there are two Jointures go out of her Estate.


Why, they are so old, they will both pick over the Perch the next Fall, and
die of the Frownsies; or if not, I will present thee with a little Ratsbanc for
them, to put in their Caudles.


Well Sir, I honour the Lady so much, as I will set ten thousand pound against
her.


By the Gods, make it but fifreen thousand, and here I set her.


Content, and we will take one another words, and these Noble Gentlemen shall
be the witnesses.


With all my Soul. Give me the Dice, they that throw most at three throws with
three dice, let them win: for three is the Ladies number But first let me
invoke them.

Thou Lady Fortune, here I do implore thee,
Now metamorphosed into Dice that's three
My better Fate with Sixes to be crowned,
Thy Favourite winning fifteen thousand pound.

Throw Sir, without any more Invocation of this various Godess.


Come, you Fool, stand here on my side, and now have at your money Sir. Two
fives and a six? 'tis well; again, two fixes and a five? I thank thee Lady
Fortune, if I win, thou shalt never be called a whore again, but a virtuous and
pious Lady; once again, three sixes? Sweet Lady Fortune, how have they wronged
thee heretofore, in laying their own follies to thy charge! Malicious lying
Detractors, that defame Ladies thus.

Here take the Dice, which are so square and new,
And bid your fifteen thousand pound adieu.

You will give me leave to throw Sir ( Throws) what is that, three sixes?


Well, again.


Three sixes again? I vow I believe she is a Virtuous Lady indeed.


I cannot tell yet, I will not take upon me for the noblest Lady in the World,
throw again, and I will tell you.


Why then have at your Mistress; three sixes again? O Virtuous Lady Fortune!


By the Gods, Jack, the Lady Fortune is a whore, a pocky whore.


Why did you meddle with her then? I knew you would get a Clap.


Nay I have got two; but now I shall have a strict Diet that will cure me.


Are you pleased with my Fortune?


Yes.


It is an injury to Nature to whisper out your words, but rather they should be
blown abroad by Fames loud Trumpet.


Had I Rhetoric, as I have none, the loudness of the voice would take away the
Elegance of the Speech, and drown the sense of the Subject: But I desire you,
and all the rest of this Company may know, I am so well pleased with the
Change, as for this Act of Fortunes savour, I shall become a Votaress to Her
Deity, for whom I will build an Altar more famous than Mausolus's Tomb; it
shall be built with Rhetoric, polished with Eloquence, carved with Allegories,
pensil'd with Fancies, and gilded with Praise; the Materials shall be wise
Brains, honest Hearts, and eloquent Tongues; on this Altar shall burn the Fire
of Life, and all the Actions of Industry shall be offered thereon.


What, can you speak?


I am not dumb, although my name is Mute.


You were almost as silent as if you were dumb, all the time you were mine.


'Tis true; but now I am set at liberty, my Tongue can run freely.


Why, you are as much bound to him now, as you were to me before.


I account this bondage a freedom: for none can be a slave that is bound to a
worthy person, who hath a noble nature.


Pray Sir Thomas Letgo do not Court my fortunate Mistress: for though you
thought her a fool, I know her to be both wise, and also to have a great Wit.


I fear my wit is but an Infant-wit, and lies in swathling-clouts asleep in the
cradle of obscurity: But Time may give it growth, and practice strength, and
experience may bring it into the light of knowledge.


If you had no Affection for me, yet you might have had so much civility, as to
have expressed your self sociable.


Civility doth not bind any one to divulge their own infirmities, as to express
their ignorance by their discourse; besides, for my part, I was so bashful and
fearful, lest I should cause errors, and make such defects as were not
naturally in me, but only produced by innocent ignorance, which made me choose
silence to shun scorns; but I found it was not a sufficient defence.


Here is a Miracle, not only that the dumb speaks, but she that was thought a
natural Fool, proves a great Wit.


That word, Wit, that those Ladies return in scorn, I with Industry will make
it like a reflection, to cause a double light, and give a greater heat of
Sense, Reason, and Judgment, Fancy and Phrase.

Sir, if I behave my self indiscreetly, impute it to an over-flowing joy; and
those follies I commit, are not by Nature born, nor yet by Education bred in
me.


Sweet Mistress, you can no more be guilty of a fault, than Angels in Ioves
Mansion. Fare you well, Sir Thomas Letgo, the Lady Liberty will counterpoise
your losses.


Let her go, Sir Thomas Letgo: for if she be not a Fool, for certain she is
wanton, or otherwise she would not be so well pleased with change.


He hath affronted me.


There is no change so visible, as the most opposite: but Sir Thomas Letgo is
both troubled and angry: wherefore Lady Liberty, you had best try to pacify
him.


He is like little children, which despise what they have, but cry when they
are taken from them.


Ha, ha, ha, prithee teach me something to keep in laughter, or I shall
disgrace my self for ever.


Are you so loosely set together, that you cannot hold?


No, I shall burst out laughter at this ridiculous Wedding, before all the
Bridal Company, and so be thought rude.


If you burst out nothing else, the company will excuse you: for Weddings are
composed of mirth and jollity, and every one hath liberty and leave to sport
and play, to dance and skip about.


But if the Bridegroom limping should come to take me out to dance, I shall
laugh in his face, which he will take as an Affront, and then will kick me with
his wooden stump.


O no, he seems too wise to take Exception, and too civil to kick a Lady; he
will rather kiss you, than kick you.


I had rather he should kick me thrice, than kiss me once, by Iupiter. I would
not be his Bride, to be the Empress of the whole World.


It is probable, nor he your Bridegroom.


Come away, the Bride is going to bed, and you stand talking here?


To bed, say you? If I were she, I would first choose to go to my Grave. Hymen
and Cupid bless me from such a bed-fellow as the Bridegroom.


Prithee let us watch, to see if we can descry whether he hath cloven feet or
not?


Should he have no Cloven Feet, yet certainly the Original of his shape came
from Hell: for surely he was begot by the Devil, on some witch or another, and
his Clothes were spun by the Devils Dam.


The truth is, he hath damnable old clothes on, they seem as if they were made
of old rags, scraped out of dunghills.


I perceive, Ladies, you prefer Beauty and Clothes, before Virtue and Merit.


Faith Virtue is too rigid to be beloved, and Merit is but an incorporeal
Spirit, and an incorporeal Spirit is no good bed-fellow.


Wherefore I would have a Handsome, Personable, Fashionable, Courtly man.


Nay, if I could have my wish, I would wish for more than one man.


The truth is, that one man would have too much by either of those Ladies.


Was it not enough to win, but to affront me with my losses?


Its true; they say Losers have only leave to speak, but Winners may be merry.


Was there no subject for his mirth but I?


You are a false cheating fellow.


You are a base lying Villain, for saying so.


You have cozened me of my Mistress, and I will have her again.


I have won her saitly and honestly, and I will keep her with my Life.


For Heaven-sake leave off to sight for me, I am not worth the life you hazard
for me.


Sweet Mistress, fear not, Death hath no power on me, so long as you stand by.


O let my sad complaints, like murmuring Rivers, flow thorough your Ears, that
running into your Heart, may move it to a gentle pity.


You should have let them fight, to see whether Portune hath the same power on
their Swords, as she hath on the Dice? whether she can dispose of Life and
Death, as of Honour and Riches?


You may part us now, but we shall meet again.


My dear Mistress, what makes your eyes to flow?


As my tears flow thorough my eyes, so I wish my life may flow thorough my
tears, then might you live in safety.


Let not your love to me make waste of such Tears, that every drop might save a
Life, nay save a Soul, they are so pure and penetrating. But your fears do
apprehend my Foe more dangerous than he is.


Faith confess to us your Maiden-companions, do not you repent?


So fat am I from repentance, as I should repent, were I not as now I am.


You will repent before seven years.


Seven years? you mean seven days: for seven years to our Sex, is seven Ages;
for Maids and Widows account it so before their marriage, and married Wives do
account time so until their Husbands die.


Faith I think there are few women, but when they marry, hope to be Widows.


That's certain; and were it not for such hopes, men would hardly get Wives.


Fair Ladies, as other men strive to adorn themselves, to mend their broken
Bodies, and patch up their decays with false and feigned shows, to cozen
credulous women, that think them such as they appear, when they abuse your
sweet gentle natures: But lest my Wife should think me better than I am, or
expect more than I could give her, I formed my self far worse than Nature made
me; nor have I promised more than well I can perform.

And if she loved me crooked, lame, and blind,
Now I am perfect, she'll not be less kind.

Heyday, Riddle me, riddle me, what's this? A man blind, and not blind, lame,
and not lame, crooked, and not crooked, ill-favour'd, and handsome.


Faith it is like the Tale of the great Bear of warwick.


What Tale was that?


Why of a King that had three Daughters, and when they were of mariageable
years, the King their Father asked them whether they had rather to have a
Husband that were a man a days, and a beast at nights, or a Husband that was a
beast at days, and a man at nights? and if they would marry, they must choose
one of those that were sometimes men, and sometimes beasts, or otherwise they
must never marry; but they, rather than to live old Maids, were resolved to
marry, were their Husbands at all times beasts: so the two eldest chose to have
their Husbands men a days, and beasts at nights; for, said they, we can conceal
their beastliness at nights, but not a days, for the light will divulge them to
the public view of the World; but the youngest chose a Husband, one that was a
beast a days, and a man at nights: for, said she, I will please my self, not
caring what the World thinks or says: for I am sure, said she, the World cares
not what I think or say; whereupon they were all three married, and the youngest
Ladies Husband was a great Bear a days, but a very handsome man at nights.


O that every woman were so well matched! for then they would be always
pleased, and never jealous: for in the day-time, when men do Court and plead
Loves Suit, and point out private meetings,

They have no words to woo, nor persons for to win,
And in the night their Wives their Arms do circle in.

But say your Husband the He-bear, should meet a Mistress She-bear, I believe
you would be jealous then.


I confess I should be somewhat lumpish.


Hey, ho!


What is the cause you sigh?


Nature never made so handsome a man as the Bridegroom.


And you sigh because you are not the Bride.


Faith the Devil tempts me to break a Commandment.


What Commandment?


To covet my Neighbours goods.


Why he is no part of your Neighbours goods, unless he be a good man.


Well, he is a goodly man, and whether he is a man that is good, I cannot tell:
But howsoever I will never trust the outside more, I will never believe a
patched eye is blind, nor a bunch'd back is crooked, nor a wooden leg lame, as
long as I live.


And if you will not believe it whilst you live, when you are dead, I doubt you
will forget it; but howsoever the Devil tempts me as much as you to covet him
that's none of mine.


Pray Ladies give me leave to remember you, in that you said you would not be
his Bride, were it the way to make you Empress of the whole World.


'Tis true; but then we were blind of one eye as he was; but now we see with
both our eyes as he doth.


Come, let us go into the Bride-chamber, and out-dare his beauty on the
forfeiture of our hearts.


You need not go to seek Love: for he will catch you, although you run away.


And you will catch Love, if with the Bridegroom stay.


I doubt that.


Let me persuade you to be friends: for if you seem to mourn for that which you
made slight of, and to quarrel unjustly, and sight for for that you cannot
have, nor is not rightly yours, you will be thought imprudent, shunned as a
wrangling Gamester, and accounted a Ranting Disturber, and laughed at for a
fool, for setting such a Mistress at a stake you thought too much to lose; but
if you will save your Reputation, you must seem to rejoice you are quit of her.


Well, I will take your counsel; and I have this satisfaction, That I am not
the first man that hath been deceived by Women, nor shall not be the last.


That's true; and so generally it is known, as 'tis become an ordinary saying,
and the saying will be made good as long as mankind lasts: for though men may
dissemble to women, yet it is women that deceive men, and we glory in it.


Do you hear the News?


What News?


Why the Bridegroom is proved to be the Great Duke of Grandy's Son.


How so?


Why you have heard that the old Prince of Grandy had two Sons, and the younger
Son would not be persuaded from going to Travel, and it was reported he was
drowned in a Voyage by Sea, for which his Father mourned a long time, as loving
him extremely; and you know, to add to his afflictions, his Eldest Son dies, so
as he became as childless, until this time that his Son is returned safe, for
which he is the most joyed man that ever was, and is so fond of the Prince his
Son, as he continually embraces and kisses him, and hangs about his neck like a
fond Bride.


Why did he come so privately, and in a disguise?


As for his private coming home, the reason was, That having oftentimes asked
the Magor, to return into his own Country, and being as often denied, and at
last threatened to be destroyed if he should offer to go away, and quit the
Magor's Service: for this Prince was General of all his Forces, and was the man
that the Merchants cried up to be another Iulius Caesar, although they knew not
of what birth or quality he was of; but to get away, he was forced to steal
away in a disguise, in which disguise he wooed and won his Lady, the now
Princess: for whilst he lay privately in the City, until such time as he could
handsomely conveniently discover himself, he hearing the talk of the Public
Wooing, and also of the Virtue, Beauty, and Wit of the young Lady, went to hear
and to see her, whom he no sooner heard and saw, and being taken with her good
Fame, honouring her Virtue, admiring her Beauty, and being extremely delighted
with her Wit, became a Lover, and also a VVooer; but for the better trial of
her Virtue, he wooed her in his disguised, deformed shape, and unknown quality,
left his Dignity and Wealth might have enticed her Ambition, and not his
Merit, to have won her Love, or his Person might have caught her Eye, but not
his Love her Heart.


The Gods are just, rewarding in the end the good intentions with good success,
and Virtue with felicity.


Virtue and Honour you did take,
And Beauty scorned as vading;
Thus you a Godess it doth make,
'Rove mortal Ladies trading.
They love the Body, you the Soul,
They Shape, but you the Mind,
Your Love those grosser loves control,
Which shows their Love is blind.
His wooden Leg is thrown away,
The black Patch for the blind,
The Bunch on's back assuaged to day,
As handsome as his Mind.
This now is your reward, Sweet Madam,
The Gods they are not lath
To give you one, handsome as Adam,
And thus enjoy them both.
Loves Miracles not ceased be,
The Lame to walk, the Blind to see,
The Crooked is made straight, 'tis true,
And these Loves Wonders made by you.
His Body metamorphosed is,
By your Ambrosia sweeter kiss;
Such power hath Love when you do sip
The Gods pure Nectar from your Lip.
All Joys attend you night and day,
Be each to other fresh as May,
Renewing pleasures everyhower,
And sweeter than the sweetest Flower.
Envious Ladies now repine,
Since you are crossed,
In having lost
A Prince so handsome and so fine.
Mourn in black patches for your sins,
Despair each Curl,
And every Purl,
And throw away your dressing-pins.
Lay by your richer Gowns of State,
For now you'll faint,
For all your paint,
When 'think of your unhappier Fate.
For these Love-pitfals they are stale,
And all despise
Your glancing Eyes,
For all forced Arts in Love they'll fail.
Now let your specious gliding pass,
Or your Lips fed
With biting red,
Despair, and break each Looking-glass.
What, Ladies, are you Thunder-struck with the Princes Honour, or are you
blasted with the Lightning of his Splendour, or crushed with the wheel of her
good Fortune?


Lord, Lord, how blindly Fortune throws her gifts away!


One would think she had clear Eyes, when she bestowed her Favours upon the
Princess.


She is become so proud, since she is become a Princess, as she will not look
on us that were her companions; and she thinks scorn to speak to us: for she
said not one word to any of us.


She had no occasion to speak to you; but I am confident, If you speak to her,
you will find her as civil and obliging, as ever she was.


Faith we care not: for we can live without being obliged to her.


They are not the happiest that have the greatest Titles.


Pride will have a Fall.


I perceive it is hand to get the good opinion of the World: for you railed at
her Course, laughed at her Choice, condemned her Marriage, and now you envy her
good Success.


We envy her? you are mistaken: for she must be of greater value, and we less
worthy than we are, to raise an Envy.


Nay Ladies, if you are angry, I will leave you.


Then we shall be rid of a prattling fool.


O, wisdom in youth is a wonder.


Happy is that Parent that hath a discreet Child.


Such Children give their Parents Honour in their Graves.


Pray let us Petition that a Law may be Enacted for this Public Wooing.


We shall not need to Petition: for the Princess, I dare warrant you, will get
the Prince to Enact a Law for this Public Wooing for her Fame, she being the
only first that hath been wooed so.


Well, Daughters, make her your Pattern.


Yesterday, that was the Wedding-day, my Parents did condemn the Bride, calling
her Fool, and saying she was mad, and forbid me to imitate her.


'Tis no wonder our Natures are so various, when as our Education are so
inconstant: for we are instructed to imitate Fortune, which is to be restless,
and to spoil that good we have done.


Or to better the worse.


No faith: for I perceive Fortune hath more power to do hurt than good; for
Fortune ruins, or at least disturbs Virtuous Acts, and frustrates Wisedom's
Counsels.


Ladies, the Princess desires your company to dance.


Pray excuse me Sir: for I have so great a pain on my left side, as I can
hardly fetch my breath.


And I have such a pain in my head, as I date not dance, for fear it should ache
more.


And truly I have so straight a shoe, as it is a pain for me to tread a step.


And I am not well in my stomach: wherefore excuse us Sir to the Princess.


God give you Joy, I have not seen you since you were married.


You are welcome into the married Society.


I thank you Madam. Truly I am so tired.


With what, Madam?


With helping my Neighbour the Lady Breeder to hold her back.


Why, is she in Labour?


She is brought to Bed; but on my word she hath had a hard bargain: for she
hath had a sore Labour.


What hath God sent her?


A lusty boy. Indeed it is one of the goodliest children that ever I saw.


But how chance she did not send for me to her Labour?


She came on such a sudden, as she had hardly Time to send for the Midwife; but
she was mightily troubled you were not there, she doubts you will take it ill.


We have reason: for if we could not have come time enough to her Labour, we
might have come time enough to the cup of Rejoicing.


But she will bid you to the Christening.


That's some amends: But this hard labour of the Lady Breeders will fright you.


No: for I have as much courage as other married Wives have, though truly, Sir
Anthony Gosling, my Husband, was very loath I should go: for (said he to me)
prithee sweet Duck do not go: I answered and said to him, my hony-love I must
go, for it is the part of one wife to help another; besides, a gossipping
company doth help to ease the women's pains; and if I go not to their Labour,
they will not come to mine.


Why, are you with Child?


No, but I hope I shall be shortly.


Come, we will go and chide your Husband, that he hath been married a week, and
his Wife not with child.


Yes, pray go chide him, and I will bear your company.


Sir, pray persuade the unmaried Ladies to dance: for I cannot entreat them.


That's strange: for Ladies will dance without entreating; for no entreating
will make them sit still.


It seems they are not in their dancing-humour to day: for every one finds some
excuse for to deny.


Let them alone, and take no notice of their reserved humours, and they will
dance without entreating; nay, they will entreat you they may dance.


If it please your Highness, the Ladies desire you would give them leave to
Celebrate your Marriage with their Mirth, and to express their Joy with their
Dancing.


We shall take it as a Favour to our Nuptials.


Did not I tell you they would desire to dance?


Truly I was so ignorant, as I knew not so much the nature of our Sex.


You knew not so much of their follies.


Let us strive to make the Bride jealous.


That's impossible now; but you may not work to good effect some a half a year
hence.


Why I have known a Bridegroom leer her the next day he was married.


Perchance a Bridegroom may: for men are sooner cloyed than women; but a Bride
will fondly hang about her Husbands neck a week at least.


A week? nay a month: for a woman is fond the first month, sick the second
month, peevish the third month, coy the fourth month, false the fifth
month, and Cuckolds her Husband the sixth month.


Then a married man sprouts Horns in half a year.


Yes: for they are set the day of his marriage, and some half a year after they
are budded, but not so fully grown as to appear to the public view.


But will nothing hinder the growth?


No faith, but Death; and Death, like a Frost, doth nip those tender buds.


Which death, the mans, or the woman's?


The woman's: for if the man dies, and his Widow marries again, the dead Husband
is horned in his Grave, and the living Husband is horned in his Bed.


Then their Horns may be put together, as Stags in Ruttingtime.


I had rather make Horns, than talk of Horns; therefore I'll go dance.


Where have you been?


At Church.


Did a sit of Devotion hurry you to the Church to pray?


No faith, I went not to pray, but to join a pair of Lovers hands in Wedlocks
Bonds: for they chose me to be their Father, to give them in the Church.


What Lovers were they, that were so foolish to marry?


So honest, you mean.


There is more folly in it than honesty, in my opinion.


Thou art an Infidel, nay a very Atheist.


I am a Naturalist. But who are they that are married?


Why Sir William Holdfast and the Lady Mute.


The truth is, he is a worthy Person, and she is a virtuous and sweet Lady:
wherefore they deserve each other; besides, she is an Heir, and he hath a great
Estate.


He hath so.


What, is the Wedding kept private?


Yes, there are only two or three Friends; but I must go dine with them,
therefore fare thee well, unless you will go with me: for you know you shall be
welcome.


I know I shall, therefore I shall go with you.


OUr Auth'ress here hath sent me for her pay,
She's at the Charge of Wit to make the Play;
But if you think it not worthy of Praise,
Nor an Applause of Hands, her Fame to raise,
She doth desire that it in pawn may lie,
Till redeemed by a better Comedy.
